1

Impact of Resin Molecular Weight on Drying Kinetics and Sag of 

Coatings 

Marola W. Issa1, Steve V. Barancyk2, Reza M. Rock2, James F. Gilchrist3, and Christopher L. 

Wirth1

1Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Case School of Engineering, Case

Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 44106, United States

2PPG Industries, Inc. Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15272, United States

3Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA 

18015, United States

Corresponding author

Christopher L. Wirth

Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering Department

Case School of Engineering

Case Western Reserve University

Cleveland, OH 44106

wirth@case.edu

MWI Orchid: 0000-0002-8099-0459

CLW Orchid: 0000-0003-3380-2029


2

Abstract

Coating performance is influenced by factors inherent to formulation design and processing 

conditions. Understanding the complex interplay of these attributes enables for mitigating defects, 

such as sag, which is a gravity-driven phenomenon that impacts the aesthetic and functionality of 

a coating. The work herein investigates the impact of resin molecular weight and solvent choice 

on drying kinetics and sag velocity in polymer films. These films, ranging in thickness from ~60 

m to ~120 m were formulated with 45% by weight polymer resin in one of two solvent packages 

with different relative evaporation rates (RER). Gravimetry was initially used to track drying 

kinetics and a one-dimensional diffusion model was utilized to compute the apparent solvent 

diffusivity. In addition, the film thickness was tracked with optical profilometry. Results from 

these measurements showed that for fixed molecular weight the drying kinetics increased by 

approximately two-fold for the high RER solvent, whereas the apparent diffusivity tended to 

increase with increasing polymer molecular weight. Films formulated from higher molecular 

weight resins had greater initial viscosities and thicknesses for identical draw down blade 

clearance. By extension, the higher apparent diffusivities at greater molecular weights were 

attributed to effects of prolonged evaporation times for the thicker films. The sag velocity was 

measured through the thickness of the film for these systems at a 5° incline using the Variable 

Angle Inspection Microscope (VAIM). Measurements showed an increase in sag velocity for 

thinner and less viscous films, which was somewhat surprising both because a thinner film will 

experience lower gravitational stress and quicker drying times as compared to a thicker film. From 

these data we conclude that formulating a coating with higher molecular weight resin, although 

likely to increase drying time, will tend to deter sag because of the large impact of viscosity on 

these phenomena.


3

1.
Introduction

Coatings are a ubiquitous technology, extending from surfaces we see and touch to those we 

consume (i.e., pharmaceutical coatings)1–5. Coatings serve various purposes, contributing to both 

functionality and durability while enhancing aesthetics6–8. These complex, multi-component 

systems are formulated with a precise balance of materials to address specific application needs.  

For instance, many coatings provide essential protection, contributing to the longevity of the 

underlying substrates9. As an example, coatings are used for offshore oil and gas operation 

facilities, marine pipeline, ships, and bridges to minimize corrosion, in addition to meeting a broad 

range of application-specific requirements such as fire protection, long-term durability, and 

reduction of biofouling10–13. Automotive coatings are specifically formulated to include ultraviolet 

light-resistive and water-repellent components ensuring durability and aesthetic appearance8. 

Additionally, coatings can impart diverse functionalities to a surface, contributing to properties 

such as its electrical conductivity, catalytic activity, and wetting properties14–18. 

Efforts to advance formulations are primarily motivated by performance improvement, 

enhanced functionality, new manufacturing processes, or sustainability goals19. Notably, 

improving the sustainability of formulations, for example through reduction of volatile organic 

compounds (VOCs), is increasingly important to corporate entities and policy makers20,21. Given 

the complexity of a typical coating formulation and the key role that VOCs and other substances 

of concern may play in mediating coating properties, one common challenge associated with 

engineering new formulations to meet these needs is that of defect mitigation. Defects arise due to 

various factors and often materialize during the solvent flash stage. This post-application phase

precedes the curing of the coating through UV, IR, or heat exposure. Local nonuniformities in the 

coating and surface tension gradients can lead to various defects22,23, including orange peel and 


4

crater formation. Another common defect is coating sag, which is characterized by a gravity-driven 

flow on vertical or inclined substrates resulting in an uneven surface24. Potential causes include 

excessive film thickness, insufficient degree of atomization during spray application resulting in 

large droplets and higher degrees of solvent retention, or poor choice of solvent. Sag not only 

compromises the aesthetic functionality of the finish, but also demands re-work in manufacturing 

lines, which can be energy and time intensive25,26.

Minimizing sag defects requires a comprehensive understanding of the various factors at play. 

Parameters inherent to formulation design such as viscosity and solvent choice, as well as 

processing conditions including substrate geometry and film thickness, work together to impact 

performance8. Automotive clear coats typically consist of three essential components, namely, 

solvents, binders, and additives27. Immediately following application, the solvents begin to 

evaporate. Evaporation is influenced by the application conditions and the physicochemical 

properties of the polymeric coating28. Further, drying kinetics are governed by two fundamental 

processes: solvent volatility and diffusive transport through the film29. Recognizing the importance 

of formulation choice and its impact on drying kinetics, various studies have explored solvent 

diffusion, emphasizing mass and heat transfer30–33. In polymer-solvent systems, solvent diffusivity 

was seen to decrease by several orders of magnitude as the solvent concentration decreases34–36. 

Further, in a multicomponent system, preferential loss of a solvent can result in the polymer being 

left in a system with an incompatible solvent. This could lead to polymer precipitation and coating 

failure. Earlier work concluded that for lower polymer concentrations, the diffusion coefficient 

changes significantly with the molecular weight, whereas at higher polymer concentrations, the 

diffusion coefficient was indistinguishable and independent of the molecular weight37. Several 

models were developed to help interpret drying kinetics. Solvent diffusivity in binary solutions of 


5

varying polymer concentrations were understood using free volume theory38,39, Flory Huggins 

theory, kinetic theory40, and entanglement theory41. These studies concluded that the diffusion 

coefficient decreases with increasing polymer concentration. Also, the solvent self-diffusion 

coefficient decreases with increasing the molecular size of the solvent29,41. Further, the effects of 

polymer molecular weight and interactions between the polymer and solvent on film thickness and 

topography were investigated. The studies showed that increasing polymer molecular weight 

results in thicker films during spin coating42. Additionally, there are several studies suggesting that 

the transport properties and solvent diffusion in nanofilms are dependent on the thickness and 

substrate chemical structure43–45. Further, increased polymer concentration leads to reduced chain 

mobility and solvent evaporation39. These studies offer in-depth insights into the impact of coating 

properties, and drying conditions on solvent diffusion.

Given the importance of minimizing sag to improve coating operation efficiency and quality, 

a variety of optical and non-optical methods have been developed to quantify this phenomenon, 

including the indicator band method, the falling wave technique, and particle-based microscopy 

techniques24,46–50. Further, sag evaluation in industry relies on a visual technique developed by the 

American Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM D4400). This method, which employs an anti-

sag meter, generates a series of parallel films with variable thickness. Measurements provide an 

index value corresponding to the largest thickness at which paint lines do not merge due to sag. 

While these measurement techniques have practical importance for quickly testing many different 

formulations, it is difficult to obtain physicochemical understanding of the sag process because of 

their simplistic and qualitative nature. To address these limitations, we recently developed a 

particle-based microscopy technique called Variable Angle Inspection Microscopy (VAIM), 


6

designed for real-time quantitative measurements of the transient flow-fields in films (see Section 

3). 

The aim of this work is to experimentally investigate the impact of formulation properties and 

processing conditions on sag in drying coatings. The effort integrates the study of drying kinetics, 

influenced by resin molecular weight and application conditions, with real-time sag evaluation via 

VAIM. The systems described herein consist of model solvent borne liquid automotive coatings 

that form a soft solid via evaporation. These model clearcoat solutions, composed of 45% polymer 

by weight, behaved as Newtonian fluids over the range of shear rates relevant to this study before 

evaporation commenced. The formulation of each coating was systematically adjusted via resin 

molecular weight and by incorporating high and low Relative Evaporation Rate (RER) solvents. 

Drying kinetics was evaluated via gravimetry. A one-dimensional diffusion model, with dynamic 

thickness measurements, was utilized to compute the solvent diffusion coefficients. The model 

assumes constant diffusion, which is a reasonable approximation for short intervals51. We further 

measure the velocity distributions in such films and assess sag as a function of resin molecular 

weight. This allowed for investigating the molecular weight dependence of diffusivity, providing 

insights into sag performance in drying automotive coatings. Our results suggested competing 

contributions of viscosity and processing lead to a complex sag response.


7

2.
Theory

2.1.
Solvent Diffusivity. Solvent diffusivity was obtained from experimental measurements by 

applying an existing model for transport in a plane sheet. The model is based on the one-

dimensional equation for mass diffusion in a film with a thickness L(t)51 (eq. 1). 

𝜕𝐶(𝑥,𝑡)

𝜕𝑡
= 𝐷

𝜕2𝐶(𝑥,𝑡)

𝜕𝑥2
, where 0 ≤ 𝑥 ≤ 𝐿(𝑡)
(1)

Where 𝐶(𝑥, 𝑡) is the solvent concentration as a function of position and time and D is the solvent 

diffusion coefficient. The solution assumes constant diffusion at early drying times, negligible 

advection for a quasi-stationary phase, uniform initial concentration, 𝐶0, and a boundary condition 

such that the substrate is impermeable (zero solvent flux through the solid interface),  

𝜕𝐶(0,𝑡)

𝜕𝑥
= 0. 

The second boundary condition is set by the mass flux, J, which is proportional to the concentration 

gradient at the upper surface, 𝐽 = 𝜌𝑣 𝐷𝑣

𝜕𝐶(𝐿,𝑡)

𝜕𝑥
= 𝑘(𝑐(𝐿, 𝑡) − 𝑐∞) and is also assumed 

proportional to the concentration difference between the surface and the bulk vapor phase, where 

𝜌𝑣 is the density of solvent vapor and 𝑘 is a proportionality constant. The model assumes no 

transport resistance in the vapor phase and that the atmospheric concentration, 𝑐∞, is zero. Solving 

via these boundary conditions yields the following expression (eq. 2).

𝐶0 − 𝐶

𝐶0
= 1 −

4

𝜋 ∑

(−1)𝑛

2𝑛+1 𝑒𝑥𝑝 {−𝐷(2𝑛 + 1)2𝜋2
𝑡

4 𝐿(𝑡)2} 𝑐𝑜𝑠

(2𝑛+1)𝜋𝑥

2 𝐿(𝑡)

∞
𝑛=0
(2)    

Evaluating the volume integral of the above mathematical equality for thickness values ranging 

between 0 and 𝐿(𝑡) results in an expression of the normalized amount of solvent that has 

evaporated from the polymer film with respect to the total amount present initially (eqs. 3, 4, 5).       

∫

𝐶0 − 𝐶

𝐶0
𝑑𝑉 = ∫
[ 1 −

4

𝜋 ∑

(−1)𝑛

2𝑛+1 𝑒𝑥𝑝 {−

𝐷 𝜋2𝑡(2𝑛+1)2

4 𝐿(𝑡)2
} 𝑐𝑜𝑠

(2𝑛+1)𝜋𝑥

2 𝐿(𝑡)

∞
𝑛=0
] 𝑦 𝑧 𝑑𝑥

𝐿(𝑡)
0
(3)

𝑀𝑡 𝐶0
⁄

𝐿(𝑡) 𝑦 𝑧 = [𝑥 −

4

𝜋 ∑

(−1)𝑛

2𝑛+1 𝑒𝑥𝑝 {−

𝐷 𝜋2𝑡(2𝑛+1)2

4 𝐿(𝑡)2
}

2

(2𝑛+1)𝜋 sin

(2𝑛+1)𝜋𝑥

2 𝐿(𝑡)

∞
𝑛=0
] 𝐿(𝑡)

0
(4)


8

𝑀𝑡
𝑀∞ = 1 − ∑
8

(2𝑛+1)2 𝜋2 𝑒𝑥𝑝 {−𝐷(2𝑛 + 1)2𝜋2
𝑡

4 𝐿(𝑡)2}
∞
𝑛=0
(5)

Where the volume is equal to the product of thickness, 𝐿(𝑡), width, 𝑦, and film length, 𝑧. 𝑀𝑡 is the 

amount of solvent that had evaporated at a given time, and 𝑀∞is the total amount of solvent that 

can be lost at the end of the drying process. The model described above requires an instantaneous 

measure of film thickness L(t) to furnish predictions. The present expression was modified to 

capture changes in film thickness within a finite liquid volume, accounting for leveling and 

evaporation effects. Further, film thinning was measured and subsequently incorporated into the 

desorption model to enhance the goodness of fit. As will be described in detail in the experimental 

section, the mean film thickness for each scan was evaluated at a distance from film edge on the 

order of one capillary length, 𝑙𝑐𝑎𝑝 = (𝜎 𝑔𝜌
⁄
)1 2
⁄ ,  is surface tension and  the fluid density. The 

capillary length was approximately ~ 1 mm. Lastly, the desorption model was evaluated for seven 

summation terms (i.e., n = 0 to n = 6) based on the plateauing of the value of diffusivity (see Fig. 

S1 in Supplemental Information). 

2.2.
Drying Kinetics and Sag of Polymer Films. Liquid coatings during the flash stage exhibit 

evaporation-induced drying. This phenomenon occurs as the solvent diffuses out through the 

polymer matrix, increasing polymer concentration and decreasing in film thickness. Experiments 

were conducted to track the mass loss over the first 5000 seconds of flash. Shortly after film 

casting, a roughly constant drying rate was observed. The rapid decrease in coating mass was 

followed by a gradual tapering off around the ~ 2-hour mark. The coating mass is observed to have 

an exponential decrease with time, thus fit by eq. 6. The time constant associated with the 

exponential function, , was then used to compare formulations of varying molecular weights and 

solvent volatilities. 

𝑀(𝑡) = 𝐴 ∗ 𝑒−𝛼𝑡 + 𝑀0
(6) 


9

Where 𝑀(𝑡) is the sample mass at time t. 𝐴 is the mass of material undergoing evaporation, 𝑀0 is 

the offset of the exponential curve, which represents the material that does not evaporate, and 𝛼 is 

the exponential rate constant in dimensions of inverse time. Although experimental data were fit 

with equation 6 allowing all adjustable parameters , A, and M0 to float, note the total mass at t = 

0 (𝑀(0) = 𝐴 + 𝑀0) was typically within 1% - 0.1% of the experimental value. Although the mass 

of material that will not evaporate is known a priori, M0 may include trapped solvent at the end of 

the experiment.

For steady, one-dimensional flow down an incline, liquid films experience competing 

effects of gravitational and viscous forces. Gravity works to pull the liquid downstream, whereas 

viscosity opposes flow. The maximum velocity is at the coating free surface, with subsequent 

decrease in magnitude as the region of interest (ROI) approaches the substrate (see Fig. S2 in 

Supplemental Information). The velocity flow field is influenced by competing effects of material 

properties (i.e., viscosity and density) and film thickness1. Further, we expect from previous work 

conducting blade application of polymer films that formulation viscosity impacts the applied film 

thickness52. The data collectively suggests that for coatings with the same initial thickness, 

𝐿(𝑡)1 = 𝐿(𝑡)2, an increase in viscosity leads to decreased average velocity. Though, the 

application conditions herein were kept constant, resulting in viscosity-dependent film thickness 

such that higher viscosity samples resulted in thicker films. Thus, the sag velocity measured across 

formulations exhibits variable viscosity and thickness contributions, resulting in a complex sag 

response. 


10

3.
Materials and Experimental Methods

3.1. 
Materials. Fluorescent silica particles (~ 1 µm) were synthesized through the Stober 

method53.  A detailed description of this process was highlighted in previous work1. Briefly, 

tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) was combined with a mixture of ethanol (200 Proof, 99.5% purity) 

and ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH). This initiates a hydrolysis and condensation polymerization 

reaction which generates monodispersed silica spheres. Rhodamine-B Isocyanate (RBTC) was 

added to impart fluorescence. Formulations containing probe particles (~ 0.1 % by volume) were 

transferred to a bath sonicator to ensure homogenous mixing.        

Twelve acrylic-based model clear coats with known polymer molecular weights, 

polydispersity index, and compositions were utilized. The polymers are based on different ratios 

of acrylic, methacrylic, and styrene monomers that have different glass transition temperatures Tg.

All twelve polymers were free-radical polymerized with a PPG-standard procedure, producing 

statistical copolymers with linear architecture. The molecular weights were measured with a gel

permeation chromatographer with tetrahydrofuran (THF) as the eluent at room temperature. 

Reported values are weight averaged molecular weights (Mw) calculated relative to a polystyrene 

standard. They will differ from absolute values depending on the structural chemical differences 

between each statistical copolymer and the polystyrene standard. The model clear coats were 

composed of 45% resin by weight and 55% solvent mixtures (PPG Industries), consistent with 

established standards for automotive formulations. The resin molecular weights varied from 1744

to 16735 g/mol (see Table 1). The copolymer resins were formulated to have calculated Fox Tg of 

0 or 30 °C, below and above the experimental temperature, by pairing low, medium, or high Mw.

The solvents used in this work consisted of mixtures with high relative evaporation rate 

(RER = 87, Butyl Acetate = 100) and low relative evaporation rate (RER = 27).  The corresponding 


11

vapor pressures were calculated to be 0.739 Kpa and 0.252 Kpa for the High and Low RER solvent 

mixtures respectively54. The formulations were prepared by transferring the polymer-solvent 

suspensions in tightly sealed glass scintillation vials and placing them on a roller mixer 

(Benchmark Scientific R3005 Tube Roller). Further, samples were allowed to gently mix for a few 

hours and were then left to sit overnight before proceeding with measurements.

3.2.
Coating Preparation and Characterization. Film application was performed with an 

automatic drawdown machine (Byko Drive G. 2122), 3-inch adjustable blade coater, and a custom-

made plate designed to hold a 25 X 75 mm microscope slide. A set volume of polymer solution 

(80 µL) was carefully dispensed on the microscope slide via a micropipette. The automatic film 

applicator, positioned at a zero-incline angle, was then set to motion at velocity of 25 mm/s. The 

casting knife gap thickness was set at 254 µm application thickness, with the wet film thickness 

varying with the polymer molecular weight. Following application, the samples were immediately 

transferred to an automatic microbalance, which auto-logged the sample mass at 3-second 

increments for two hours. Five to six experimental repeats were carried out for each formulation 

at the laboratory temperature of ~ 22 ± 1 °C .

Further, the film thickness was measured via an optical surface topography apparatus 

NANOVEA ST400. The profilometer has a lateral resolution of 2.6 µm and a 1.1 m depth-range. 

Samples were placed at 0° and 5° incline planes and were allowed to dry at the laboratory 

conditions. The film thickness was measured at a rate of one scan per minute for a total of 10 

minutes corresponding to flash stage. The scans were conducted at the center of the film along the 

direction of the blade during application of the coating. The mean thickness was evaluated with a

MATLAB script and an average of three experimental repeats was utilized in the desorption model.  


12

This allowed for examining the effect of solvent evaporation and gravitational force on the 

apparent film thickness.

Rheological characterization of the model clear coats was carried out via a stress-controlled 

rheometer (HAAKE MARS III). The measurements utilized a cone-plate geometry (diameter: 35 

mm, cone angle: 1°) and a solvent trap to minimize solvent evaporation. The samples were sheared 

at 100 s-1 for 200 sec and the shear rate was then varied and reduced to 0.1 s-1. Further, solution 

densities were measured via a density meter (Anton Paar DMATM 4500 M). Tabulated data, 

measured at 22 °C, are provided in the results section. 

3.3.
Video Capture and Particle Tracking. Sag was characterized via VAIM with epi-

fluorescence measurements of tracer particles dispersed in the model coatings with sufficiently 

low number concentration to not induce deviations from Newtonian rheology (data not shown). 

VAIM was previously benchmarked and described1, but briefly, the main components of this 

microscope are a CMOS digital camera (Thorlabs DCC1240C-HQ), 20x objective (Olympus 

UPLFLN20X), tube lens, light source (white light), fluorescence filters (Thorlabs TXRED 

MF559-34), and a goniometer which enables for positioning the VAIM at any desired angle. The 

fluorescence components include a white light input, excitation and emission filters, and a dichroic 

filter.  Emission (630 ± 34.5 nm) and excitation (559 ± 17 nm) filtering was achieved with a Texas 

Red filer. Further, the setup includes a 3D-printed holder to secure the sample during 

measurements. 

Sag measurements were conducted using five formulations containing high RER solvent 

and 45% polymer by weight. The samples exhibited viscosities ranging from 0.026 – 0.11 Pa s, 

allowing the assessment of sag performance across a range of viscosities. Three individual runs 

were performed for each formulation. Immediately after film application, the coated substrates 


13

were transferred to the VAIM, positioned at 5° angle, for sag measurements that consisted of fluid 

flow in response to gravitational stress and solvent evaporation (see Fig. 1).  Experiments were 

conducted at a laboratory temperature of ~ 22 ± 1 °C. As was done in previous work, the scan path 

for the objective was controlled with a piezo and defined based on film thinning data from optical 

profilometry1. This approach enabled the path of the objective to maximize the number of 

measurements between the dynamic boundary (i.e., free surface) and substrate. Although the initial 

film thickness varied with viscosity, the scanning process followed the same steps. Namely, a 

given ROI was observed for 5 seconds and the piezo then moved to a different vertical position 

located 10 µm away. The objective was scanned in an oscillatory pattern, which was set to start at 

the free surface, go down to the substrate, and then back up to the free surface. Hence, the measured 

velocity displays a distinct sawtooth shape (see Fig. S2 in Supplemental Information). 

RGB color images with dimensions of 1280 x 1024 pixels were collected during the 

experiments. Data was converted to an 8-bit format and the dimensions were reduced to 900 x 800 

pixels. This allowed for including most of the captured tracer particles. All videos were collected 

at a rate of 10 frames per second (FPS) with exposure time of 70 ms. Videos were analyzed with 

a particle tracking algorithm executed in MATLAB and the average velocity in each plane was 

recorded55. 


14

Figure 1: Schematic of an evaporating film with known initial viscosity and 
thickness. The VAIM was positioned at an inclined angle, θ, allowing for velocity 
measurements as the coating flows. The piezoelectric objective scans the various 
depths of a falling liquid film and tracks the local velocity as the film flows and 
dries. Note the angle c is the complement to the angle of inclination reported 
herein,  = 90 – c.


15

4.
Results and Discussion

4.1.
Characterizing the Model Clear Coat Systems. Rheological and density measurements 

were conducted with the aim to better understand how physicochemical features of the model clear 

coats varied. Figure 2(a) displays the viscosity flow curves as a function of shear rate for the 

model clear coats in the absence of solvent evaporation. The figure shows samples with varying 

molecular weights, formulated with 45% polymer by weight and a high RER solvent. The shear 

rates selected for rheology measurements aimed to simulate the shear experienced by the coating 

during sag  (~ 1 s-1). As can be seen from these data, the model clear coats exhibited Newtonian 

behavior for shear rates ranging between 0.1 s-1 and 100 s-1.  In addition, model clear coat samples 

containing tracer particles were also measured and displayed no change in the average viscosity 

suggesting that the addition of particles had no discernible impact on bulk rheology. As expected, 

the average viscosity increased with increasing the polymer molecular weight (see Figure 2(b)). 

Larger polymer chains with higher molecular weights tend to increase viscosity and resistance to 

flow56. Notably, the increase in viscosity may not be linear, as it depends on several factors 

including entanglement and intermolecular forces57,58. We anticipate that viscosity will play an 

important role in the processing conditions explored herein, including film thickness and 

wettability. Further, low viscosity enhances capillary-induced spreading, while increasing 

viscosity is one strategy for preventing sag49. 


16

Figure 2: Rheological behavior of model clear coats. The viscosity flow curves 
(Pa s) as a function of (a) shear rate (s-1) for samples with varying molecular weights 
formulated with a high RER solvent and 45% polymer by weight. The error bars 
represent the standard error obtained from three experimental repeats. These 
measurements suggest a Newtonian response in the sag regime probed herein. (b) 
The average shear viscosity, obtained from three experimental repeats. Viscosity 
increased with increasing polymer molecular weight.

Formulations were further characterized by measuring the density of the model clear coats. 

Previous work has shown that density can significantly impact diffusivity and drying kinetics59. 

Table 1 summarizes the densities and their corresponding polymer volume fractions, φ. The 

computed volume fractions based on the measured densities and known molecular weights were 

observed to be nearly identical but displayed a very slight decrease with increasing the polymer 

molecular weight. These values were ~ 42% v/v and ~39% v/v for the low and high RER systems 

respectively.


17

Table 1: Physical properties of the polymer-solvent formulations at 21°C

4.2.
Drying Kinetics. As described in preceding sections, the exponential rate constant for the 

experimental systems was obtained from gravimetry by measuring mass as a function of time while 

the solvent evaporated. During the main period of evaporation the sample mass displayed an 

exponential decrease that was subsequently fit (see eq. 6) to obtain a value of  for each 

combination of resin and solvent. Representative data, consisting of five repeats of a coating with 

a resin molecular weight of 4470 g/mol, are shown in Figure 3. 


18

Figure 3: Gravimetry plot for films with a 4470 g/mol polymer molecular 
weight and a high RER solvent. Data shown here represent five experimental 
repeats. The x-axis is the observation time (seconds), and the y-axis is the sample 
mass (grams). Data collection was automated with the microbalance to capture data 
at 3-second intervals over 5000 seconds. Mass loss kinetics displayed an 
exponential decrease for all samples of varying polymer molecular weights. The 
rapid decrease in coating mass was followed by a gradual tapering off around the ~ 
2-hour mark where a second plateau is reached. This value amounts to ~ 95% 
solvent loss for these systems indicating the presence of ~5% residual solvents in 
the film. The percentage of residual solvents displayed a strong dependence on the 
resin molecular weight and solvent volatility in early drying times. However, in the 
later stages of drying, the rate exhibits strong molecular weight dependence (i.e., 
viscosity) and weak dependence on volatility. The black solid line corresponds to a 
fitted curve from one experimental run. 

Residual solvent content Mprs was defined as the percentage of solvent from the initial 

formulation that was retained in the coating at a given time point. Herein, we analyze this quantity 

at both short (~10 minutes) and long (~2 hrs) times (see Fig. S5 & S6 in Supplemental 

Information). Analysis of the residual solvent content at short times corresponding to the flash 

stage showed different retention percentages for low and high molecular weight resins in both high 

and low RER. Coatings formulated with high RER solvents displayed retention percentages of 


19

45% and 65% for low and high molecular weight resins, respectively. Further, solvent retention 

increased for low RER solvents with percentages ranging from 68% for low molecular weight 

resin to 80% for high molecular weight resins (see Fig. S5 in Supplemental Information). These 

initial results suggest the drying kinetics are a strong function of both the resin molecular weight 

and vapor pressure of the solvent. Increasing the resin molecular weight tended to increase retained

solvent at short times consistent with the flash stage, whereas increasing the vapor pressure of the 

solvent tended to decrease solvent retention at short times relevant to the flash stage. 

Interestingly, although the impact of resin molecular weight on retained solvent remained 

at long times (~2 hrs), the effect of solvent volatility did not. At the end of drying, approximately 

5% and 14% of solvent was trapped in the coating for the limits of low and high molecular weight 

resins, respectively (see Fig. S6 in Supplemental Information). However, the solvent content 

trapped exhibited similar values, irrespective of the solvent’s RER at these longer times. As the 

focus of this work is to assess the impact of formulation properties and processing conditions on 

sag performance during the flash stage, with subsequent thermal curing, we limited our 

investigation to the first 10 minutes. However, those such considerations may be relevant when 

considering the sustainable formulation and manufacturing of coatings. These data suggest the 

solvent retention levels beyond the initial flash stage primarily depend on the resin molecular 

weight and not the vapor pressure of the solvent. Other polymer properties could also play a role 

at these later stages, for instance the glass transition temperature Tg, the effects of which were not 

explored herein. Note that Tg may primarily impact the later stages of drying such that initial 

solvent loss is independent of resin Tg58. Gravimetry data was further analyzed by obtaining the 

exponential decrease  for all formulations.


20

Figure 4: Evaporative exponential rate constant, α (s-1), as a function of 
polymer molecular weight (g/mol). The black squares represent data obtained 
from formulation with a solvent characterized by a low relative evaporation rate. 
The red squares correspond to formulations that utilize a higher relative evaporation 
rate solvent. The error bars indicate the standard error calculated from six 
experimental repeats. These data suggest a dependence of rate constant on polymer 
molecular weight, demonstrating a decrease in rate as the molecular weight 
increases due to heightened viscosity. Formulations containing a higher RER 
solvent displayed a two-fold increase in the exponential rate constant.

Figure 4 shows  as a function of polymer molecular weight. These initial data suggest 

that formulations containing higher polymer molecular weight dry at slower rates at fixed mass 

fraction. This trend was observed for both solvent systems with different values of RER. Further, 

coatings made with high RER solvent displayed a shift, approximately two-fold, corresponding to 

the vapor pressure of the solvent mixtures, which were calculated to be 0.739 Kpa and 0.252 Kpa 

for the High and Low RER solvent mixtures, respectively. The upward shift in data suggests faster 

drying kinetics with increased RER. This is in part attributed to the increased volatility, assuming 

the polymer solubility in the two solvent mixtures is similar57. The shift is also likely influenced 


21

by the density difference in the two solvent mixtures which was measured to be ~ 5%. Increased 

solvent molecular size and density leads to reduced diffusivity and drying rate58. Hence, the data 

shift can be attributed to these combined effects.

These data begin to suggest a physical picture of solvent evaporation during flash that is 

dependent on the unique combination of resin and solvent. As molecular weight increases or vapor 

pressure decreases, solvent tends to evaporate more slowly at short times (~10 minutes) 

corresponding to the flash step of a coating process. At longer times, the effect of solvent vapor 

pressure diminishes, but the impact of molecular weight remains such that higher molecular weight 

resin more effectively retains solvent. One would expect an increase in radius of gyration as 

molecular weight increases, which potentially could lead to an increase in polymer free volume in 

which the solvent can be retained60,61. The effect of solvent choice is more subtle. At short times, 

the higher RER solvent more quickly evaporates, increasing solids weight fraction and likely 

increasing the viscosity of the film. The rapid kinetics of drying at short times is then diminished 

such that later stages at long times are dominated by transport through a large viscosity fluid or 

semi-solid material, and desorption becomes a weak function of solvent volatility61. At this later 

stage, the physiochemical nature of the polymer itself, namely the molecular weight, primarily 

impacts this characteristic associated with drying.

4.3.
Film Thinning, Solvent Diffusivity, and Sag. Film thickness of model clear coats was 

measured with optical profilometry during solvent evaporation and in response to a gravitational 

stress. The thickness was evaluated over an area near the center of the film on the order of one 

capillary length away from edges where a finite volume of film is uniform in thickness. In general, 

we expected the thickness of films to decrease over time considering the limited material volume 

and solvent evaporation. While the mean thickness exhibited an exponential decrease in 


22

magnitude, film edges tended to increase in thickness in time because of surface energy and the 

accumulation of solids because of the coffee ring effect62,63. Figure 5 shows representative data of 

a full profilometer scan for a model clear coat formulation with 12105 g/mol Mw polymer,

positioned at 0°. These data show wet film thickness decreased from an initial value of 130 µm to 

around 50 µm exclusively because of solvent evaporation. Mostly pinned contact lines tended to 

enhance the coffee ring effect, as material was transported outward towards the edges. 

Interestingly, this phenomenon becomes more pronounced with increased material accumulation 

in the direction of drawdown. Note the progression of peaks upstream (left) with peak value ~ 70 

µm and downstream (right) where it reaches ~ 150 µm.

Figure 5: Surface topography scans for formulations containing 12105 g/mol 
Mw polymer, positioned at 0° incline. The initial scan at time t = 0 is represented 
by the light blue line with an average thickness ~ 140 µm. Consecutive scans 
collected at 1 min interval are shown by color progression to dark blue at t = 10 
min with average thickness ~ 55 µm. The x-axis depicts the position along the 
length (mm) where x = 0 represents the initial analyzed point with the scan direction 
in the positive x-direction. The drawdown direction is along the x-axis. As the 


23

solvent evaporates, material accumulation on the outer edge of the film becomes 
more pronounced. This is seen in the progression of peaks at the upper end of the 
scan with peak value ~ 70 µm and downstream where it reaches ~ 150 µm. Edge 
effects, on the order of the capillary length, were excluded from mean thickness 
measurements. Film mean thickness exhibits an exponential decrease as the solvent 
evaporates. Error bars represent the standard deviation associated with profilometry 
measurements for three experimental repeats. Note, similar profilometry scans 
were performed for coatings positioned at a 5° inclined plane. Those were utilized 
in the scan design to optimize sag measurements. Sag velocities were tracked in the 
region at ~ one-third of the distance from the coating upstream to minimize 
distortions in measurements. 

The qualitative trends associated with the ‘wet’ film thickness described above were 

consistent across all measurements and formulations; note the ‘wet’ film thickness refers to the 

actual thickness of the film, whereas the drawdown clearance (of 10 mils or 254 m) was identical 

for all films. Figure 6(a) displays the initial wet film thickness for the different polymer molecular 

weights. The applied film thickness was seen to increase with increasing the polymer molecular 

weight. This phenomenon was ascribed to effects of viscosity, which impacts the total mass flow 

rate during film application52. Often a simplified relationship is assumed where the film thickness 

is roughly half of the gap set by the blade. However, it is essential to recognize that variations in 

viscosity can significantly affect the applied film thickness and, consequently, the anti-sag 

predictions using the standard ASTM test. Herein, the viscosity-dependent thicknesses displayed 

an approximately linear trend with an increase in thickness as the viscosity increased (see Fig. 

6(b)). Additionally, samples containing a low RER solvent displayed a slight increase in initial 

thickness as molecular weight of the resin increased. This is ascribed to the increased solvent 

viscosity which was measured to be ~ 0.01 cP and 1.3 cP for high and low RER solvents, 

respectively. Figure 6(b) displays the impact of viscosity on applied film thickness for the high 

RER model paints. Considering sag measurements utilize a fixed volume, we anticipate changes 

in thickness and viscosity to contribute greatly to flow performance.  


24

Figure 6: Influence of molecular weight on wet film thickness. (a) Initial mean 
wet thickness (µm) as a function of average polymer Mw (g/mol). The black circles 
represent samples formulated with a low RER solvent. The red circles represent 
systems with a high RER solvent. The error bars denote the standard deviation 
obtained from three experimental repeats. Samples with low RER solvent exhibit a 
slight increase in initial mean thickness compared to those with high RER solvent, 
across different molecular weights. The shift in data was attributed to differences 
in solvent choice which contributes to the overall formulation viscosity. (b) The 
applied film thickness increased with increasing the molecular weight (i.e., 
viscosity). This is attributed to effects of viscosity which impacts the total mass 
flow rate and applied film thickness. 

These data were used to determine the apparent solvent diffusivity from the one-

dimensional desorption model described by the system of eqs. (1) – (5). Diffusivity values were 

determined by measuring the normalized solvent loss over the total available solvent,

𝑀𝑡
𝑀∞, as a 

function of time over the initial 10-minute period. These data were then fit with eq. 5 to obtain 

apparent diffusivity 𝐷. Though true for assumptions of constant film thickness, eq. 5 was modified 

to account for the change in the coating’s mean thickness obtained via optical profilometry.

Further, it provided better agreement between the measured variations and those predicted by the 

model (see Fig. S3 in Supplemental Information). For illustration purposes, Figure 7 displays the 

drying kinetics for coatings with 4470 g/mol molecular weight resin and high RER solvent. 


25

Figure 7: Desorption curves for polymer solutions with 4470 g/mol molecular 
weights. The y-axis represents the mass ratio of evaporated solvent to the total 
solvent mass in a 45% polymer composition by weight.  The blue curves are six 
experimental repeats determined from gravimetry. The average fraction of solvent 
loss reported ~ 50% is seen by the highest value reached at the 10 minutes mark. 
The red lines are theoretical predictions based on a known polymer thickness. The 
thickness decrease was incorporated into the fitting model to improve the goodness 
of the fit. Drying kinetics were evaluated for the first 10 minutes following coating 
application. This corresponded to the flash stage during which sag measurements 
were conducted. 

Apparent solvent diffusivity was determined in this manner for different formulations of 

model clear coat. Figure 8 shows the apparent diffusivity as a function of initial mean thickness. 

As expected, the apparent diffusivity displayed an increase for formulations containing high RER 

solvent as compared to low RER solvent. As was the case with the rate constant shown above, the 

shift in data is attributed primarily to the difference in solvent volatility, but could also be impacted 

by polymer volume fraction40,56. High RER solvents displayed a two-fold increase in vapor 

pressure compared to low RER solvents. In addition, there is a 3% reduction in polymer volume 


26

fraction for the high RER systems (φ ~ 42% v/v and ~39% v/v for the low and high RER systems 

respectively). Figure 8 also shows the somewhat surprising impact of initial wet film thickness. 

Namely, that the apparent diffusivity, for the same initial polymer weight percent, increased with 

increasing film thickness. This effect has been previously attributed to thicker films taking longer 

to harden after which solvent diffusion is hindered64.

Figure 8. Dependence of apparent diffusivity on initial mean thickness of the 
wet film. The apparent diffusivity (cm2/s) as a function of initial mean thickness 
(µm). The red circles represent formulations containing high RER solvent. The 
black circles are samples with low RER solvent. The error bars are standard error 
associated with six experimental repeats. The diffusion coefficient, for the same 
initial polymer weight percent, increases with increasing the film thickness. The 
increase in apparent diffusivity is attributed to thickness effects where thicker films 
take longer to dry. Further, formulations containing a high RER solvent displayed 
enhanced diffusivity. This shift in data is primarily due to the increase in volatility, 
but a ~ 3% reduction in polymer volume fraction for the high RER systems also 
plays contributes.


27

Note the important connection between molecular weight and the resulting viscosity, film 

thickness, and ultimately solvent mass transport through the film. As revealed with the modeling 

approach used for this work (see eq. 5), the characteristic time scale for transport of solvent through 

a film of thickness L is ~L2/D. Experimental data was found to follow a master curve after scaling 

time with the quotient of the square of film thickness and apparent diffusivity (i.e. dimensionless 

time Dt/L2). These data were subsequently averaged across all molecular weights for low and high 

RER solvents (see Fig. 9). This master curve guides our understanding on this relationship. For 

example, if one takes a standard level of film dryness (see Fig. 9 inset), for instance Mt/M∞ = 0.5, 

this corresponds to a dimensionless time of Dt/L2 ≈ 0.2, and one can see that a thicker film would 

require longer to achieve this level of ‘dryness’. Herein, our experiments showed that despite 

having slower evaporation as measured through  (see Fig. 4), the apparent diffusivity D increased 

as a function of molecular weight. Recall that coatings with higher molecular weight resin had a 

greater viscosity and by extension a larger wet film thickness (see Fig. 8). This feature, namely

larger thickness with molecular weight, seemingly artificially increased the apparent diffusivity 

obtained from the model from ~L-2. The diffusion length √𝐷𝑡 evaluated at the conclusion of flash 

tf = 600 s provides further support. The diffusion length √𝐷𝑡𝑓 ≈ 15 𝜇𝑚 indicates that the diffusion 

gradient has propagated only ~10% - 25% into the thickness of the film at tf, suggesting that for 

the initial flash stage the dominant mechanism of drying is near surface evaporation. This is further 

reinforced by data summarized in Figure 9, in which experimental data only reaches a 

dimensionless time of Dt/L2 ≈ 0.05 and Dt/L2 ≈ 0.14 for coatings with low and high RER, 

respectively. These dynamics arising from the connection between molecular weight choice, 

viscosity, film thickness, and mass transport through the film are critically important to film 

processing, especially when considering the formation of defects, such as skinning and sag. 


28

Figure 9. Dimensionless drying curve. Scaled mass loss is plotted as a function 
of dimensionless time for the model (eq. 5) and the average values for all molecular 
weights for both low (black circles) and high (red circles) RER solvents. Note the 
model diverges at short dimensionless times because the number of summation 
terms was truncated at n = 6. Drying occurs moving along the black curve to longer
dimensionless times. The inset shows that are a dimensionless time value of 0.2, 
the expectation is that 50% of solvent will have been lost. Experiments described 
herein proceed to a dimensionless time value ~0.15 and ~0.05 for high and low 
RER solvent, respectively, indicating that most solvent has yet to evaporate in
experiments mimicking the flash period of the coating process.

Sag velocity, obtained via VAIM, was measured for formulations exhibiting a systematic

variation in molecular weight. The velocity of many probe particles was measured and the average 

velocity in the y-direction was calculated (see Figure 1 for axis direction). Although the 

fundamental dependence of material flowability (sag velocity) on viscosity is known, there are 

process-dependent factors (i.e., film thickness) which contribute to the overall performance. For 

instance, increased viscosity is expected to increase flow opposition and mitigate sag65, yet our 

work has thus far shown that increasing viscosity leads to a larger wet film thickness that would 


29

be thought to increase sag because of increased gravitational stress. Beyond the resin molecular 

weight, solvent volatility will also play a role. As coatings dry, the viscosity increases 

monotonically as the polymer concentration increases66 and increasing the rate at which solvent 

escapes a film can lead to a more rapid change in viscosity42. This is expected to help mitigate sag 

as the viscous forces dominate46,49,65. While this work did not include comparative studies 

accounting for the influence of solvent volatility, sag velocity is expected to increase in 

formulations with Low RER solvent. 

Figure 10 displays the impact of resin molecular weight on sag velocity. Sag velocity 

decreased over time as depicted by the color gradient representative of the magnitude of velocity. 

The monotonic decrease in sag velocity as a function of time while drying is attributed to the 

combined effects of reduced film thickness and increased viscosity. Interestingly, thicker films 

tended to experience a reduction in sag velocity despite experiencing a higher gravitational stress 

and (based on our results from previous sections) a less dry state. Although our previous work 

suggested that thicker films would experience increased sag, those films were at fixed viscosity. 

Herein, the thicker films were a consequence of greater viscosity from higher molecular weight 

resin. This suggests that viscous forces as mediated via formulation choice may be more effective 

than film build when aiming to mitigate sag.


30

Figure 10. Sag velocity as measured by the VAIM positioned at 5° incline. (a) 
Five formulations with viscosities of 0.026, 0.033, 0.068, 0.087, 0.106, and 0.115 
Pa s were evaluated with viscosity (i.e., molecular weight) increasing left to right 
as depicted by the arrow. (b) The y-axis is the average velocity (µm/s). The z-axis 
represents the average film thickness (µm) as measured with profilometry. Particle 
tracking was conducted for regions ~ 1/3 from the coating upstream. Each velocity 
point presented herein correspond to an average velocity over a 5 second period. 
Sag velocity is seen to decrease over time as depicted by the color gradient 
representative of the magnitude of velocity. Film thickness over time. (c) Increasing 
the formulation viscosity led to increased applied film thickness for the same blade 
gap (i.e., 10 mils), but decreased the surface velocity more rapidly in time. 


31

5.
Summary and Conclusions

Work presented herein describes the impact of resin molecular weight on drying kinetics 

and sag in polymer films. The systems contained 45% polymer by weight with systematic variation 

in resin molecular weight and solvent volatility. These systems were drawn down at fixed 

clearance and subsequently measured for changes in film thickness, mass, and sag as solvent 

evaporated. Wet film thickness was observed to increase as a function of molecular weight, an 

effect that was attributed to the increase in shear viscosity for increasing molecular weight. 

Gravimetry experiments were used to measure the evaporative mass loss for films and was 

parametrized by the evaporation rate constant and residual solvent for both short (~600 s) and long 

(~2 hrs) times. As molecular weight increases or vapor pressure decreases, solvent tends to 

evaporate more slowly at short times (~10 minutes) corresponding to the flash step of a coating 

process. At longer times, the effect of solvent vapor pressure diminishes, but the impact of 

molecular weight remains such that higher molecular weight resin more effectively retains solvent.

Apparent diffusivity of the solvent was also obtained to characterize the drying process. 

Interestingly, the apparent diffusivity of solvent was found to increase as molecular weight 

increased, which would be in apparent contradiction to the trend obtained from the evaporation 

rate constant. However, analysis of the diffusion length suggests that the concentration gradient 

driving evaporation only reaches a shallow depth of the film during the flash portion (~600 s) of 

drying, such that these data are primarily driven by near surface solvent evaporation. Inclusion of 

the thickness of the film in the analysis artificially enhances the apparent diffusivity. Finally, sag 

velocity was measured for these films and found to decrease over time as the films flow and dry. 

This monotonic decrease was due to reduced film thickness and increased viscosity. Surprisingly, 

thicker films (i.e., high resin molecular weight), displayed a more rapid reduction in sag velocity


32

as compared to thinner films over initially lower viscosity. Hence, we conclude for these systems 

the effect of viscosity plays a more significant role than gravitational stress for sagging films. This 

work highlights the importance of formulation properties and their impact on coating 

processability, especially for coating applications that rely on blade or brush coating. We 

concluded from our work the wet film thickness is far more sensitive to viscosity than what 

conventionally is thought, and this dependence will extend to drying rate.


33

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) award nos. 1931636 (C.L.W.

and R.M.R.) and 1931681 (J.F.G.). We thank Professor João M. Maia (CWRU) and Professor 

Burcu Gurkan (CWRU) for laboratory facility use. We thank Dr. Yangming Kou (PPG) for helpful 

discussions.


34

References

1.
Issa MW, Yu H, Roffin MC, et al. Three-Dimensional Sag Tracking in Falling Liquid 
Films. Langmuir. 2022;38(38):11581-11589. doi:10.1021/acs.langmuir.2c01232

2.
Zaid AN. A comprehensive review on pharmaceutical film coating: past, present, and 
future. Drug Des Devel Ther. Published online 2020:4613-4623.

3.
Holten-Andersen N, Fantner GE, Hohlbauch S, Waite JH, Zok FW. Protective coatings on 
extensible biofibres. Nat Mater. 2007;6(9):669-672.

4.
Film Defects. In: Organic Coatings. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd; 2017:342-356. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119337201.ch24

5.
Tracon AA. Coatings Technology-Fundamentals, Testing, and Processing techniques. 
Coatings Technology-Fundamentals, Testing, and Processing techniques. 2007;238:284.

6.
Ulaeto SB, Rajan R, Pancrecious JK, Rajan TPD, Pai BC. Developments in smart 
anticorrosive coatings with multifunctional characteristics. Prog Org Coat. 2017;111:294-
314.

7.
Sørensen PA, Kiil S, Dam-Johansen K, Weinell CE. Anticorrosive coatings: a review. J 
Coat Technol Res. 2009;6:135-176.

8.
Akafuah NK, Poozesh S, Salaimeh A, Patrick G, Lawler K, Saito K. Evolution of the 
automotive body coating process—A review. Coatings. 2016;6(2):24.

9.
Richey B, Burch M. Applications for decorative and protective coatings. Polymer 
dispersions and their industrial applications. Published online 2002:123-161.

10.
Olajire AA. Recent advances on organic coating system technologies for corrosion 
protection of offshore metallic structures. J Mol Liq. 2018;269:572-606.

11.
Montemor MF. Functional and smart coatings for corrosion protection: A review of recent 
advances. Surf Coat Technol. 2014;258:17-37.

12.
Mariappan T. Recent developments of intumescent fire protection coatings for structural 
steel: A review. J Fire Sci. 2016;34(2):120-163. doi:10.1177/0734904115626720

13.
Verma S, Mohanty S, Nayak SK. A review on protective polymeric coatings for marine 
applications. J Coat Technol Res. 2019;16(2):307-338. doi:10.1007/s11998-018-00174-2

14.
Peela NR, Mubayi A, Kunzru D. Washcoating of $γ$-alumina on stainless steel 
microchannels. Catal Today. 2009;147:S17--S23.

15.
Nijhuis TA, Beers AEW, Vergunst T, Hoek I, Kapteijn F, Moulijn JA. Preparation of 
monolithic catalysts. Catalysis Reviews. 2001;43(4):345-380.


35

16.
Shao F, Ng TW, Fu J, Shen W, Ling WYL. Electrical circuits from capillary flow driven 
evaporation deposition of carbon nanotube ink in non-porous V-grooves. J Colloid 
Interface Sci. 2011;363(1):425-430.

17.
Mahajan A, Hyun WJ, Walker SB, Lewis JA, Francis LF, Frisbie CD. High-resolution, 
high-aspect ratio conductive wires embedded in plastic substrates. ACS Appl Mater 
Interfaces. 2015;7(3):1841-1847.

18.
Reynolds TD, Kalpathy SK, Kumar S, Francis LF. Dip coating of charged colloidal 
suspensions onto substrates with patterned wettability: Coating regime maps. J Colloid 
Interface Sci. 2010;352(1):202-210.

19.
Feng W, Patel SH, Young MY, Zunino Iii JL, Xanthos M. Smart polymeric coatings—
recent advances. Advances in Polymer Technology: Journal of the Polymer Processing 
Institute. 2007;26(1):1-13.

20.
Streitberger HJ. Automotive Paints and Coatings. Wiley Online Library; 2008.

21.
Jiménez-López AM, Hincapié-Llanos GA. Identification of factors affecting the reduction 
of VOC emissions in the paint industry: Systematic literature review-SLR. Prog Org 
Coat. 2022;170:106945.

22.
Scriven LE, Sternling C V. On cellular convection driven by surface-tension gradients: 
effects of mean surface tension and surface viscosity. J Fluid Mech. 1964;19(3):321-340.

23.
Howison SD, Moriarty JA, Ockendon JR, Terrill EL, Wilson SK. A mathematical model 
for drying paint layers. J Eng Math. 1997;32:377-394.

24.
Bosma M, Brinkhuis R, Rensen E, Watson R. A new method for the quantitative 
determination and prediction of sag and levelling in powder coatings. Prog Org Coat. 
2011;72(1-2):26-33.

25.
Feng L, Ulutan D, Mears L. Energy consumption modeling and analyses in automotive 
manufacturing final assembly process. In: 2015 IEEE Conference on Technologies for 
Sustainability (SusTech). ; 2015:224-228.

26.
PPG. Paint Defects. https://uk.ppgrefinish.com/en/paint-defects/.

27.
Weiss KD. Paint and coatings: A mature industry in transition. Prog Polym Sci. 
1997;22(2):203-245.

28.
Chen BT. Investigation of the solvent-evaporation effect on spin coating of thin films. 
Polym Eng Sci. 1983;23(7):399-403.

29.
Waggoner R, Blum FD. Solvent diffusion and drying of coatings. Journal of Coatings 
Technology. 1989;61(768):51-56.

30.
Velaga SP, Nikjoo D, Vuddanda PR. Experimental studies and modeling of the drying 
kinetics of multicomponent polymer films. AAPS PharmSciTech. 2018;19:425-435.


36

31.
Noorjahan A, Tan X, Liu Q, Gray MR, Choi P. Study of cyclohexane diffusion in 
athabasca asphaltenes. Energy \& fuels. 2014;28(2):1004-1011.

32.
Balik CM. On the extraction of diffusion coefficients from gravimetric data for sorption of 
small molecules by polymer thin films. Macromolecules. 1996;29(8):3025-3029.

33.
Nguyen T, Bentz D, Byrd E. Method for measuring water diffusion in a coating applied to 
a substrate. JCT, Journal of coatings technology. 1995;67(844):37-46.

34.
Duda JL, Ni YC, Vrentas JS. An equation relating self-diffusion and mutual diffusion 
coefficients in polymer-solvent systems. Macromolecules. 1979;12(3):459-462.

35.
Vrentas JS, Vrentas CM. A new equation relating self-diffusion and mutual diffusion 
coefficients in polymer-solvent systems. Macromolecules. 1993;26(22):6129-6131.

36.
Cohen C, Hwang DH. DIFFUSION AND RELAXATION IN POLYMER-SOLVENT 
SYSTEMS BY PHOTON CORRELATION SPECTROSCOPY. Physical Optics of 
Dynamic Phenomena and Processes in Macromolecular Systems: Proceedings, 27th 
Microsymposium on Macromolecules, Prague, Czechoslovakia, July 16-19, 1984. 
Published online 1985:49.

37.
Vrentas JS, Duda JL. Diffusion in polymer--solvent systems. II. A predictive theory for 
the dependence of diffusion coefficients on temperature, concentration, and molecular 
weight. Journal of Polymer Science: Polymer Physics Edition. 1977;15(3):417-439.

38.
Vrentas JS, Duda JL. Molecular diffusion in polymer solutions. AIChE Journal. 
1979;25(1):1-24.

39.
Vrentas JS, Duda JL. Diffusion in polymer—solvent systems. I. Reexamination of the 
free-volume theory. Journal of Polymer Science: Polymer Physics Edition. 
1977;15(3):403-416.

40.
Waggoner RA, Blum FD, MacElroy JMD. Dependence of the solvent diffusion coefficient 
on concentration in polymer solutions. Macromolecules. 1993;26(25):6841-6848.

41.
Graessley WW. Molecular Entanglement Theory of Flow Behavior in Amorphous 
Polymers. J Chem Phys. 1965;43(8):2696-2703. doi:10.1063/1.1697198

42.
Spangler LL, Torkelson JM, Royal JS. Influence of solvent and molecular weight on 
thickness and surface topography of spin‐coated polymer films. Polym Eng Sci. 
1990;30(11):644-653. doi:10.1002/pen.760301104

43.
Kislitsin V, Choi P. Thickness Dependence of the Diffusivity and Solubility of 
Cyclohexane in Nanoscale Bitumen Films. ACS Omega. 2019;4(25):21578-21586. 
doi:10.1021/acsomega.9b03331

44.
Buss F, Göcke J, Scharfer P, Schabel W. From Micro to Nano Thin Polymer Layers: 
Thickness and Concentration Dependence of Sorption and the Solvent Diffusion 


37

Coefficient. Macromolecules. 2015;48(22):8285-8293. 
doi:10.1021/acs.macromol.5b01648

45.
Vogt BD, Soles CL, Lee HJ, Lin EK, Wu W li. Moisture absorption into ultrathin 
hydrophilic polymer films on different substrate surfaces. Polymer (Guildf). 
2005;46(5):1635-1642. doi:10.1016/j.polymer.2004.11.114

46.
Croll SG, Kisha LW. Observations of sagging in architectural paints. Prog Org Coat. 
1992;20(1):27-52. doi:10.1016/0033-0655(92)85002-D

47.
Overdiep WS. The effect of a reduced solvent content of solvent-borne solution paints on 
film formation. Prog Org Coat. 1986;14(1):1-21. doi:10.1016/0033-0655(86)80013-9

48.
Frisch HL, Scopazzi C. Sag equation for coatings on rotating substrates. J Appl Polym Sci. 
1991;43(6):1067-1070. doi:10.1002/app.1991.070430605

49.
Wu S. Rheology of high solid coatings. II. Analysis of combined sagging and leveling. J 
Appl Polym Sci. 1978;22(10):2783-2791. doi:10.1002/app.1978.070221006

50.
Lade RK, Song JO, Musliner AD, et al. Sag in drying coatings: Prediction and real time 
measurement with particle tracking. Prog Org Coat. 2015;86:49-58. 
doi:10.1016/j.porgcoat.2015.04.005

51.
John Crank. The Mathematics of Diffusion. 2nd ed.; 1980.

52.
Gartaganis PA, AJ C, Wairegi T. BLADE MECHANICS OF EXTENDED BLADE 
COATERS. THEORY AND PRACTICE. Published online 1978.

53.
Stöber W, Fink A, Bohn E. Controlled growth of monodisperse silica spheres in the 
micron size range. J Colloid Interface Sci. 1968;26(1):62-69. doi:10.1016/0021-
9797(68)90272-5

54.
Wypych G, ed. Handbook of Solvents. Vol Second. Third.

55.
Crocker JC, Grier DG. Methods of Digital Video Microscopy for Colloidal Studies. J 
Colloid Interface Sci. 1996;179(1):298-310. doi:10.1006/jcis.1996.0217

56.
J. Desbrieres. Viscosity of Semiflexible Chitosan Solutions: Influence of Concentration, 
Temperature, and Role of Intermolecular Interactions. Biomacromolecules. 2002;3:342-
349.

57.
Graessley WW. Viscosity of Entangling Polydisperse Polymers. J Chem Phys. 
1967;47(6):1942-1953. doi:10.1063/1.1712222

58.
WATSON BC; WICKS ZW JR. Popping of water-soluble acrylic coatings. JOURNAL OF 
COATINGS TECHNOLOGY. 1983;55:59-65.

59.
P. Gall T, Lasky RC, Kramer EJ. Case II diffusion: effect of solvent molecule size. 
Polymer (Guildf). 1990;31(8):1491-1499. doi:10.1016/0032-3861(90)90156-S


38

60.
Eriksson M, Goossens H, Peijs T. Influence of drying procedure on glass transition 
temperature of PMMA based nanocomposites. Nanocomposites. 2015;1(1):36-45. 
doi:10.1179/2055033214Y.0000000005

61.
Lodge TP, Muthukumar M. Physical Chemistry of Polymers: Entropy, Interactions, and 
Dynamics. J Phys Chem. 1996;100(31):13275-13292. doi:10.1021/jp960244z

62.
Oliver JF, Huh C, Mason SG. Resistance to spreading of liquids by sharp edges. J Colloid 
Interface Sci. 1977;59(3):568-581. doi:10.1016/0021-9797(77)90052-2

63.
Sefiane K. Patterns from drying drops. Adv Colloid Interface Sci. 2014;206:372-381. 
doi:10.1016/j.cis.2013.05.002

64.
Curak M, Saranjam N, Chandra S. Colour variation in drying paint films. Prog Org Coat. 
2019;136:105173. doi:10.1016/j.porgcoat.2019.06.019

65.
Bosma M, Brinkhuis R, Coopmans J, Reuvers B. The role of sag control agents in 
optimizing the sag/leveling balance and a new powerful tool to study this. Prog Org Coat. 
2006;55(2):97-104. doi:10.1016/j.porgcoat.2005.08.008

66.
Holl Y, Keddie JL, McDonald PJ, Winnik WA. Drying Modes of Polymer Colloids. In: ; 
2001:2-26. doi:10.1021/bk-2001-0790.ch001


39

Supplemental Information

Impact of Resin Molecular Weight on Drying Kinetics and Sag of 

Coatings 

Marola W. Issa1, Steve V. Barancyk2, Reza M. Rock2, James F. Gilchrist3, and Christopher L. 

Wirth1

1Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Case School of Engineering, Case

Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 44106, United States

2PPG Industries, Inc. Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15272, United States

3Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA 

18015, United States

Corresponding author

Christopher L. Wirth

Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering Department

Case School of Engineering

Case Western Reserve University

Cleveland, OH 44106

wirth@case.edu

MWI Orchid: 0000-0002-8099-0459

CLW Orchid: 0000-0003-3380-2029

Number of Figures: 6

Number of pages: 7


40

List of Figures

S1
Enhanced fit for desorption curves. As explained in text, seven summation terms 
were carried out to enhance the fit. Diffusion coefficient as a function of summation 
terms. The convergence of diffusivity where two consecutive predictions varied by 
~ 0.06% at n = 7.

S2
Sag velocity measurements via VAIM. The data displayed a sawtooth shape due to 
scan design. Further, the piezoelectric objective scans the film starting from the free 
surface, down to the substrate, and back up to the free surface in an oscillation 
fashion. 

S3
Desorption model with assumptions of constant thickness vs. variable thickness. 
Incorporating thickness decay into the model helped increase the goodness of the 
fit.   

S4
Desorption curves for coatings formulated with the same molecular weight resin 
but variable RER solvents. After drying concludes, the residual solvents displayed 
similar values, irrespective of the solvent RER. 

S5
Percent residual solvent at the end of flash stage. Formulations containing high 
RER solvents displayed reduction in residual solvent due to increased evaporation 
rate. The residual solvent displayed a dependence on resin molecular weight such 
that an increase in molecular weight led to increased percent of trapped solvent.

S6
Percent residual solvent at the end of drying (i.e., 2 hours). Formulations displayed 
similar percentages of trapped solvent irrespective of solvent volatility. The 
molecular weight dependence holds true for extended evaporation times such that 
larger molecular weights retained larger percentages of solvent.


41

Solvent desorption curve 

Figures 1 is an example of a desorption curve with enhanced fit and the diffusion coefficient 

obtained with variable summation terms.

Figure S1. Desorption curves for a polymer solution with 4470 g/mol molecular 
weight. The y-axis represents the mass ratio of evaporated solvent to the total 
solvent mass in a 45% polymer composition by weight.  The blue curve represents 
experimental data as determined from gravimetry. The red lines are theoretical 
predictions based on the number of summations used in the model. As the number 
of summations was increased, the fit lines are seen to approach the values measured 
experimentally (left). Seven summation terms were carried out for the diffusion 
coefficient estimate. Diffusivity values were seen to converge around n = 7 (right). 
The difference in two consecutive predictions for diffusivity was seen to decrease 
with increasing n. A value of convergence criterion of ~ 0.06% is thought 
acceptable and summations were terminated at seven terms. 


42

Sag velocity measurements via VAIM 

Figures 2 presents three experimental repeats for a VAIM sag velocity measurement.

Figure 2: Three experimental repeats for the measured particle velocity (µm/s) over 
time (s). Samples with molecular weight of 13000 g/mol, containing a high RER 
solvent were positioned at 5° incline. The highest velocity was measured at the free 
surface, represented by the peaks. The velocity decreased deep into the film and 
reached zero at the substrate. Each peak represents one scan cycle in and out of the 
film starting at the free surface and then returning to the free surface. The peaks 
progressively decreased in size indicating a decrease in particle velocities as the 
film thickness decays. Error bars represent the standard deviation associated with 
measured velocity obtained via the particle tracking algorithm. 


43

Constant thickness vs. variable thickness fit evaluation 

Figures 3 Represents an experimental sample modeled with a constant thickness assumption and 

variable thickness assumptions. Incorporating variable thickness as obtained from profilometry, 

increased the goodness of the fit. 

Figure 3: Formulation with 1129 g/mol molecular weight modeled with constant thickness 
assumption (dashed red line) and variable thickness assumption (solid red line). The black line 
represents experimental data of normalized solvent loss (x-axis) over time (y-axis). Incorporating 
the profilometry measurements for height decay into the desorption model increased the goodness 
of the fit. The R-Squared values for the fit was 0.95 and 0.99 for constant thickness and variable 
thickness assumptions, respectively. 


44

Solvent Desorption at the End of Drying 

Figures 4 Represents three experimental desorption repeats for coatings formulated with the 

same molecular weight resin but variable RER solvents. 

Figures 4 Represents an experimental Desorption curve for coatings formulated with the same 
molecular weight resin but variable RER solvents. The residual solvents retained in the film 
displayed variable drying rates depending on the solvent volatility. Further, high RER solvents 
reach a plateau around 3000 seconds whereas low RER take longer to taper off. At the later stages 
of drying, the residual solvents displayed similar values, irrespective of the solvent RER.


45

Residual Solvent After 10 Minutes 

Figures 5 Represents the residual solvent remaining after 10 minutes of drying.

Figure S5: Percent residual solvent at the end of flash stage. Formulations containing high RER 
solvents displayed reduction in residual solvent due to increased evaporation rate. The residual 
solvent displayed a dependence on resin molecular weight such that an increase in molecular 
weight led to increased percent of trapped solvent. 


46

Residual Solvent at the End of Drying 

Figures 6 Represents the residual solvent remaining after 2 hours of drying

Figure S6: Percent residual solvent at the end of drying (i.e., 2 hours). Formulations displayed 
similar percentages of trapped solvent irrespective of solvent volatility. The molecular weight 
dependence holds true for extended evaporation times such that larger molecular weights retained 
larger percentages of solvent. 


