1

Modelling Response Time Contrasts in Superconductor 

Nanowire Single Photon Detectors

Souvik Haldar, Arun Sehrawat, and Krishna B. Balasubramanian

Abstract— Superconducting Nanowire Single Photon Detector 

(SNSPD) emerges as a potential candidate in the multiple fields 
requiring sensitive and fast photodetection. While nanowires of 
low temperature superconducting detectors are mature with 
commercial solutions, other material options with higher 
transition temperature and faster responses are currently being 
explored. Towards this goal, we develop a generalized numerical 
model that incorporates the thermodynamic properties of the 
superconducting material and identifies the minimum resolvable 
photon count for a given bias and device parameters. A phase 
diagram of detection and latching phases with the minimum 
number of photons as a function of biasing current and biasing 
temperature for each material system is presented. We show 
using the developed model that while low temperature 
superconducting (LTS) nanowires are more sensitive to the 
incident photon at different wavelengths, the ultimate limit of a 
single photon can be achieved using high temperature 
superconducting (HTS) material such as YBa2Cu3O7-δ, albeit at 
stringent biasing conditions. On the contrary, ultrafast response 
time with three orders of magnitude smaller response times can 
be achieved in select HTS materials making it an appealing for 
several practical applications.

Index 
Terms—
Superconducting nanowire 
single photon 

detector, 
conventional 
superconductor, 
unconventional 

superconductor, two temperature electro-thermal model

I. INTRODUCTION

Superconducting 
Nanowire 
Single 
Photon 
Detector 

(SNSPD) is an important device with applications in multiple 
disciplines such as light detection and ranging, single-
molecule detection, quantum metrology largely due to its near 
unity system detection efficiencies (SDEs), low dark count 
rates (DCRs), short timing jitters, high maximum count rates, 
and photon number resolution capabilities [1,2]. Although 
numerous research activities were carried out over the past 
two decades to improve the efficiencies of the SNSPD, 
choosing the right material systems for designing SNSPD is 
still an open question. Conventional LTS such as NbN, 
NbTiN, Nb or WSi are currently employed in many SNSPD 
applications [2-6] with detection efficiency reaching over 98% 
at 1550 nm [4-6], dark counts lesser than 10-4 per second has 

The authors acknowledge the Defense Research and Development 

Organization (DRDO), Government of India and Industrial Research and 
Development Unit (IRD), Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 
110016, India for financial support.

Souvik Haldara, Arun Sehrawat, Krishna B. Balasubramanian are with 

Department of Material Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of 
Technology Delhi, New Delhi 110016, India. (aemail (Corresponding author): 
ird600280@mse.iitd.ac.in)

been observed [7] with time jitters lesser than 100 ps [8]. 
Nevertheless, ultralow operating temperatures in the range of 
120 mK – 5 K requiring liquid He cryogens [3,4-6], and 
systemic material restrictions leading to longer response times 
and higher dark count rates has motivated search for other 
unconventional materials. HTS with short coherence length, 
intrinsic fast-quasiparticle recombination time, and the higher 
transition temperatures are recently emerging alternatives for 
SNSPD applications [2]. However, HTS are also not without 
issues. Nano structuring the complex composite materials is a 
challenge. It has been observed that at size scales required for 
a 
SNSPD, 
HTS 
such 
as 
YBa2Cu3O7-δ
experiences 

inhomogeneity in oxygen stoichiometry [9]. The order 
parameter 
degradation, 
resulting 
in 
broadened 

superconducting 
transition, 
reduced 
critical 
currents, 

anisotropy in other physical properties such as thermal 
conductivity, electron-phonon interactions lead to several 
complications [10]. In addition, thermally activated phase-slip 
centers, unbinding of vortex-antivortex pairs, quantum 
mechanical tunneling of vortices or thermal excitation of 
single vortices across the HTS nanostripe-edge barrier can 
also significantly influence the detection mechanism in HTS 
SNSPD [11]. Thus, with the increasing advent of newer 
materials and unconventional options for SNSPD devices, 
there is an increasing need to have a performance prediction 
for choosing the superconductor for a desired SNSPD 
response. This requires accurate predictive modelling schemes 
that can incorporate various aspects of superconducting 
thermodynamic properties as well as the properties of the 
incident photon. Such models can also be incorporated in 
artificial intelligence/machine learning algorithms for material 
selection.

Superconductors 
have 
strong-temperature 
dependent 

physical properties that controls the detector response. 
Different materials tend to show orders of magnitude 
difference in the SNSPD response times making careful 
choice crucial. Particularly, in recent experiments HTS show 
low jitter times and ultra-fast response times in the order of 
few 100 ps [12-15], while LTS nanowires typically show 
about 10 – 40 ns. To understand the fundamental operating 
principles, numerous models, such as normal core hotspot 
model, diffusion-based hotspot model, photon triggered vortex 
entry model, diffusion-based vortex entry model, one 
temperature model, two temperature model etc., have been 
reported 
to 
describe 
single 
photon 
interaction 
with 

superconducting nanowires and the emergence of a potential 
pulse [16]. Of the list, two temperature model (TTM) is 
widely used to study the hotspot dynamics due to its simplicity 
and its ability to closely match with experimental results. The 


2

models explain several aspects of SNSPD response such as the 
photon number sensitivity, total response time, timing jitter 
and the effect of hotspot dynamics on the final response [17]. 
However, to the best of our knowledge, the crucial influence 
of superconducting properties on the SNSPD response has 
been 
largely 
ignored. 
Many 
of 
the 
non-elemental 

superconductors such as WSi, MgB2, and such, demonstrate 
radically 
different 
dependence 
of 
thermodynamic 

superconducting properties (such a specific heat capacity, 
thermal conductivity, and inter-particle interaction timescales) 
with temperature demanding accurate modelling of the particle 
dynamics to effectively predict device performance. Even for 
the more mature LTS SNSPDs, a comprehensive model that 
takes all the thermodynamic properties of the superconductor 
and that includes the spatio-temporal variations of the photon 
pulse including the emergence of the normal state resistance 
and subsequent Joule heating is not yet available. For the 
emerging HTS materials, no predictive models have been 
reported yet, thus motivating this research.

In this work we develop a generic theoretical model to 

illustrate the response contrasts to a single photon from two 
different superconductors. The model predicts the temperature 
evolution of the hotspot in a generic superconducting material. 
Taking the example of Nb for a LTS and YBCO for HTS, we 
illustrate 
the 
effect 
of 
material 
properties 
and 
the 

superconducting parameters on the SNSPD response when the 
devices is irradiated with a Gaussian photon pulse with two 
different wavelengths (𝜆 = 1550 nm, 830 nm). Using an 
accurate description of the specific heat capacity, thermal heat 
capacity, order parameter values and the interfacial particle 
dynamic rates, we have extracted the variation of electronic 
temperature, the phonon effective temperatures and finally the 
overall external potential response for LTS and HTS biased at 
similar conditions for a single photon pulse. Our calculations 

match closely with several reported results. We compare and 
contrast the crucial aspects of photon detection and particle 
dynamics difference between the two largely different 
superconducting systems and determine the smallest photon 
detection capability for a chosen nanowire under different 
biasing conditions. We observe that while LTS has better 
photon resolution HTS based SNSPD under similar bias 
conditions, single photon detection is possible with HTS under 
slightly different biasing conditions. In contrast, under all 
biasing conditions, the HTS is at least three orders of 
magnitude faster than LTS materials. This makes the high 
temperature unconventional superconductors an important 
option for future SNSPD devices.

II. MODEL

A typical detector has a superconducting nanowire realized 

on a suitable substrate which is biased at an appropriate 
current density and temperature for maximum sensitivity and 
low dark count rates. To elucidate the carrier dynamics 
resulting in a potential signal upon photon incidence, we 
consider a thermal model accounting for all relevant electron-
photon interactions including joule heating. A long 
meandering nanowire on a substrate where the photon of 
wavelength, 𝜆, incidents is shown in the schematic (Fig. 1(A)). 
The carrier dynamics and the temperature profile of the cross 
section is solved in a simplified one-dimensional scheme with 
length (𝑙 = 100 μm). The width (𝑤 = 50 nm) and thickness (𝑑
= 5 nm) is assumed to have no variation in temperature or 
carrier density as 𝑤, 𝑑 ≪ 𝜆. The schematic diagram of the 
device geometry as well as the working principle of SNSPD is 
shown in Fig. 1(A).

Fig. 1. (A) Schematic diagram of interaction between a photon pulse and a Superconducting Nano-wire. We have shown a 
magnified image of a cross section of the nano-wire. The Gaussian photon pulse breaks the Cooper pair and creates energized 
quasiparticles. The quasiparticles transfer energy to phonon system; eventually the phonons lose the energy through substrate. 
(B) A practical circuit arrangement for using SNSPD.


3

The photon of energy greater than the superconducting 

energy gap initially breaks down the Cooper pairs and the 
biasing current leads to additional Joule heating due to 
emergence of resistance in certain parts of the nanowire. The 
TTM represents the perturbed system using a set of two 

temperatures, (𝑇𝑒) and (𝑇𝑝ℎ) which are associated with 
electron and phonon systems respectively [17].  For the 
electron subsystem, the heat equation can be written as,

𝑪𝒆(𝑻𝒆) 𝝏𝑻𝒆

𝝏𝒕 − 𝒌𝒆(𝑻𝒆)𝛁𝟐𝑻𝒆 + 𝑪𝒆(𝑻𝒆)

𝝉𝒆−𝒑𝒉

(𝑻𝒆 − 𝑻𝒑𝒉) = 𝒇(𝒙, 𝒕)

1

where, 𝐶𝑒 is the temperature dependent electronic specific 
heat, 𝑘𝑒 is the electron thermal conductivity, 𝜏𝑒−𝑝ℎ is the 
electron-phonon coupling constant. The heat source 𝑓(𝑥, 𝑡)
varies with time and space and accounts for heat generation 
from incident photon pulse and Joule heating. The electron 
specific heat 𝐶𝑒 of the superconductor varies strongly with the 

temperature. The thermal conductivity, 𝑘𝑒 depends on the 
specific heat capacity and is given by 𝑘𝑒(𝑇𝑒) = 𝐷𝑒𝐶𝑒(𝑇𝑒), 
where 𝐷𝑒 is the diffusion coefficient of the electron.

The spatio-temporal variance of the heat injected into the 

nanowire by the photon source (𝑓𝑝(𝑥, 𝑡)) to be

𝑓𝑝(𝑥, 𝑡) = 𝑛𝑝

ℎ𝑐

2𝜋𝜆𝑥𝑝ℎ𝑤𝑑𝑡𝑝ℎ

exp (−

(𝑥 − 𝑥0)2

2𝑥𝑝ℎ

2
) exp (−

(𝑡 − 𝑡0)2

2𝑡𝑝ℎ

2
)

2

where 𝑛𝑝 is the number of photons at the designated 

wavelength 𝜆, 

ℎ𝑐

2𝜋𝜆𝑥𝑝ℎ𝑤𝑑𝑡𝑝ℎ is the height of the curve peak, 𝑥0

is the spatial position of the center of the peak, 𝑥𝑝ℎ is the 
spatial standard deviation or Gaussian root mean square width, 
𝑡0 is the temporal position of the center of the peak and 𝑡𝑝ℎ is 
the temporal standard deviation.

With the onset of electrical resistance upon photon 

incidence, the Joule heating is included in the source term as 
𝑓𝑗(𝑡) = 𝐽𝑏

2𝜌(𝑇𝑒), where, 𝜌(𝑇𝑒) is the temperature dependent 

resistivity of the superconductor. 
Following the electron subsystem, the phonon subsystem 
equation can be written as below,

𝐶𝑝ℎ(𝑇𝑝ℎ) 𝜕𝑇𝑝ℎ

𝜕𝑡 − 𝑘𝑝ℎ(𝑇𝑝ℎ)∇2𝑇𝑝ℎ − 𝐶𝑒(𝑇𝑒)

𝜏𝑒−𝑝ℎ

(𝑇𝑒 − 𝑇𝑝ℎ) + 𝐶𝑝ℎ(𝑇𝑝ℎ)

𝜏𝑒𝑠𝑐

(𝑇𝑝ℎ − 𝑇𝑠𝑢𝑏) = 0

3

Where 𝐶𝑝ℎ, 𝑘𝑝ℎ are phonon specific heat, and phonon thermal 
conductivity. The heat exchange with the electron sub-system 
is expressed via the 𝜏𝑒−𝑝ℎ and the heat loss to the substrate is 
expressed via phonon escape time to the substrate with a rate 
proportional to 

1

𝜏𝑒𝑠𝑐. The substrate temperature is taken to be 

𝑇𝑠𝑢𝑏. The electron and phonon subsystems equations are 
solved simultaneously to obtain the relevant time and spatial 
dependence of the 𝑇𝑒 and 𝑇𝑝ℎ.

Using the temperature evolution based on the photon 

incidence, we obtain the temporal characteristics of the 
detector electrical signals. The nanowire resistance emergence 
leads to potential pulses in the shunt resistor according to the 
electrical circuit in Fig. 1(B). The total kinetic inductance of 
the superconducting nanowire is extracted from the nanowire 
geometry using 𝐿𝑘(𝑇) = 𝜇0𝜆2(𝑇) (

𝑙

𝐴), where 𝜇0
is the 

magnetic permeability in vacuum, 𝜆(𝑇) is the London 
penetration depth, 𝐴 is the area of the nanowire geometry [18]. 
The governing equation for the electrical response is written as 
below (refer supplementary material Section 1 for further 
details).

[
 
 
 
 
 𝑑𝐼1

𝑑𝑡
𝑑𝐼2
𝑑𝑡
𝑑𝑉
𝑑𝑡 ]

 
 
 
 
 

=

[
 
 
 
 
 
 −

(𝑅3 + 𝑅2)

𝐿1

𝑅3
𝐶
− 1

𝐿1

𝑅3
𝐿2

−

(𝑅3 + 𝑅4)

𝐿2

1
𝐿2

1
𝐶
− 1

𝐶
0 ]

 
 
 
 
 
 

[
𝐼1
𝐼2
𝑉

] + [

𝐼0𝑅2
𝐿1
0
0

]

4

The model developed till now is generic. Custom functions 

for 
various 
superconducting 
properties 
such 
as 

𝐾𝑒, 𝐶𝑒, 𝐶𝑝ℎ, 𝐾𝑝ℎ, 𝜏𝑒𝑠𝑐 and Δ(𝑇) can be defined for specific 
superconductor permitting response calculations. Custom 
finite difference numerical codes using Crank-Nicholson 

scheme was employed to solve the coupled equations and 
obtain rise, fall and the response time of the nanowire for 
varying photon number and superconducting material 
properties.


4

III. RESULTS

We first calculate the response from a conventional LTS. 

Parameters of Nb is taken here as a representative material. 
The superconducting thermodynamic variables of niobium for 

simulating the equations 1 and 4 are listed in the following 
TABLE I.

TABLE I

MACROSCOPIC THERMODYNAMIC SUPERCONDUCTING VARIABLES OF LTS AND HTS

Thermodynamic 

variables
Symbols
Values

Nb
YBCO

Transition 
temperature
𝑇𝑐
9.6 K
92 K

Critical current 
density (𝐻 =

0, 𝑇 = 0)

𝐽𝑐
6 × 1010 A/m2 [19]
1 × 1012 A/m2 [24]

Normal state 

resistivity
𝜌𝑁
1 × 10−7 Ωm [20]
1 × 10−6 Ωm [25]

Superconducting 

energy gap
Δ
1.76𝑘𝐵𝑇𝑐√1 −

𝑇

𝑇𝑐 J … 𝑇 < 𝑇𝑐 [21]
16.3 meV at 𝑇 = 𝑇𝑐 [26]

Electronic heat 

capacity
𝐶𝑒

0.92 × 106 exp (−

Δ(𝑇)

𝑘𝐵𝑇) J/m3K … 𝑇 < 𝑇𝑐
[21]

0.058 × 106𝑇 J/m3K … 𝑇 > 𝑇𝑐 [21]

425.628

𝑇3

𝑇𝑐2 J/m3K … 𝑇 < 𝑇𝑐 [27]

141.876𝑇 J/m3K … 𝑇 > 𝑇𝑐 [27]

Phonon heat 

capacity
𝐶𝑝ℎ
9.8𝑇3 J/m3K [21]
3.84𝑇3 J/m3K [28]

Electron diffusion 

coefficient
𝐷𝑒
1 × 10−4 m2/s [21]
4 × 10−5 m2/s [29]

Phonon diffusion 

coefficient
𝐷𝑝ℎ
1 × 10−5 m2/s [21]
1.5 × 10−5 m2/s [30]

Electron – phonon 
coupling constant
𝜏𝑒−𝑝ℎ
2 (

6.5

𝑇 )

2

ns [22]
1 – 2 ps at 80 – 90 K [31]

Phonon escape to 

substrate
𝜏𝑒𝑠𝑐
40 ps [22]

𝑅𝑏𝐶𝑝ℎ(𝑇)𝑑

where, 𝑅𝑏 = 5 × 10−8 m2K/W is the 
thermal boundary resistance between 

YBCO and MgO substrate. [31]

The prominent discontinuity for the electronic specific heat 

closes to 𝑇𝑐 is noted; while the phonon thermodynamic 
properties show conventional variation with the temperature, 

𝐶𝑝ℎ ∝ 𝑇3. The detailed variations of 𝐶𝑒(𝑇𝑒), 𝐶𝑝ℎ(𝑇𝑝ℎ), 𝑘𝑒 =
𝐷𝑒𝐶𝑒(𝑇𝑒)
and 
𝑘𝑝ℎ = 𝐷𝑝ℎ𝐶𝑝ℎ(𝑇𝑝ℎ)
are 
given 
in 

supplementary material Section 2.

Fig. 2. (A) Variation of electron-phonon coupling constant, 𝜏𝑒−𝑝ℎ with normalized temperature 𝑇/𝑇𝐶, the variation of 𝜏𝑒−𝑝ℎ has 
been represented in log scale. (B) Variation of resistivity, 𝜌 of LTS with 𝑇/𝑇𝐶; the fit parameters are 𝑎 = 0.0583 K, 𝑏 = 0.194 K 
and 𝑐 = 0.263 K.

In clean ultrathin (< 20 nm) superconducting films electron-

phonon interaction time (𝜏𝑒−𝑝ℎ)  is observed to vary as 

𝜏𝑒−𝑝ℎ ∝ 𝑇−2from relaxation time measurements of resistance 
and the rise of the electron temperature [22]. The exact 


5

relation for Nb is shown in Fig. 2(A). The resistance variation 
with temperature for Nb close to 𝑇𝐶 is modeled as [23]

𝜌(𝑇𝑒) = 𝜌𝑁

2 (1 + tanh ((𝑇𝑒 − 𝑇𝑠𝑤

2𝑎
) (1 − tanh (𝑇𝑒 − 𝑇𝑠𝑤

𝑏
))

+ (𝑇𝑒 − 𝑇𝑠𝑤

2𝑐
) (1 − tanh (𝑇𝑒 − 𝑇𝑠𝑤

𝑏
))))

5

With 𝑎, 𝑏 and 𝑐 values obtained from fits to measured data. 𝜌𝑁
is the normal state resistivity of the superconducting 
nanowires, 𝑇𝑠𝑤 is the current dependent switching temperature 

and has a functional form of 𝑇𝑠𝑤(𝐽𝑏) = 𝑇𝑐√1 − (

𝐽𝑏
𝐽𝑐)

2
3, The 

temperature dependence is plotted in Fig. 2(B) showing a 
close-to-ideal sharp resistance drop with temperature.

Fig. 3. (A) The spatial and temporal variation of hotspot in LTS, the vertical and horizontal lines represent the temporal and 
spatial positions for respective variations of 𝑇𝑒(𝑥) and 𝑇𝑒(𝑡); (B) Temporal variation of 𝑇𝑒 of LTS at different spaces; (C) Spatial 
variation of 𝑇𝑒 of LTS at different times, we have offset the x-axis so that 𝑥 = 0 be the center of photon incidence; (D) Variation 
of 𝑅(𝑡) and 𝑉(𝑡) for LTS, the red dashed line represents the thermal noise potential across the 50 Ω shunt resistance.

The biasing conditions is defined by 𝑟 and 𝑠 parameters. The 

wire is taken to be current biased at 𝐽𝑏 = 𝑟 ∗ 𝐽𝑐 when the entire 
sample is set at a temperature 𝑇𝑏 = 𝑠 ∗ 𝑇𝑠𝑤. A Gaussian 
photon pulse of width 1 ps with a spatial FWHM of 2 μm is 
taken to be incident on nanowire such that the focal center of 
the light source falls at the middle of the wire. The 
temperature variation with space and time when the nanowire 
is biased at 𝑟 = 0.25 and 𝑠 = 0.95 is shown in Fig. 3(A) for a 
representative incident pulse strength of 500 photons at 1550 
nm. The temporal variation of electron temperature at different 
spatial positions of the hotspot as marked in Fig. 3(B). The 
central point of the photon incidence (taken at 𝑥 = 0) reaches a 
maximum temperature (𝑇𝑒,𝑚𝑎𝑥) of about 7.81 K. While 
different regions of the wire return to the substrate set 
temperature at different times, the maximum temporal width 
of hotspot (Δ𝑡) is found to be 28.28 ns at the photon incidence 

spot. In Fig. 3(C), we have shown the spatial variation of 
𝑇𝑒(𝑥)
at different times. The hotspot always remains 

symmetric around the photon incident point. The maximal 
spatial width (Δ𝑥) of the hotspot is found to be 14.08 µm at 
1.02 ns from the photon incidence. The resistance changes in 
the nanowire calculated using the equation 5 is presented in 
Fig. 3(D). The hotspot resistance rise time is about 10 ps for a 
1 ps photon pulse and decays slowly to the superconducting 
state in 5 ns. The potential response in the electrical circuit 
due to the resistance change is calculated using the equation 4 
and is presented as a function of time in Fig. 3(D). An 
oscillating potential pulse with a peak value of 2.5 mV is 
obtained due to the kinetic inductance and parasitic 
capacitances in the circuitry (nanowire dimensions are 
presented in Table I).  The reset time (𝜏𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑒𝑡), defined as the 
time duration after one photon incidence to the detector 


6

recovering superconductivity is found to be 7.68 ns for Nb 
thin nanowire biased at the said conditions. Experimental 
measurement on a 10 nm thick Nb nanowire biased at 𝑟 = 0.5 
and 𝑠 = 0.63 under the irradiation of 404 nm photon source 
had a reset time of 2 ns. Several other Nb nanowire had been 

observed to have reset times in the range of 2 – 30 ns [32].
The closeness to our calculated values provides the confidence 
that the model with accurate thermodynamic properties can 
faithfully predict the SNSPD responses.

Fig. 4. (A) The variation of heat escape time, 𝜏𝑒𝑠𝑐(𝑇), through phonon to substrate for HTS SNSPD with MgO substrate; (B)
Variation of HTS resistivity, 𝜌(𝑇), as a function of temperature, the fitted parameters are 𝑎 = 0.9 K, 𝑏 = 1.08 K and 𝑐 = 1.18 K.

We now proceed to investigate the responses of a 

representative HTS for SNSPD applications. YBa2Cu3O7-δ
(YBCO) nanowire is among the popular choices for SNSPD 
due to the maturity in thin film growth processes and 
nanostructure fabrications [33]. We have chosen a YBCO 
nanowire grown on MgO substrate as our model HTS-SNSPD, 
because MgO substrate is commonly used for YBCO thin film 
growth. These give us flexibility for future correlation 
between experimental and theoretical results. The geometry of 
the nanowire, characteristics of the incident photon are taken 
to be same for the two materials. The biasing conditions were 
scaled by the transition conditions. As the pairing mechanism 
is 
different 
in 
LTS 
and 
HTS 
[34], 
the 
different 

superconducting thermodynamic variables of YBCO are listed 

in preceding TABLE I. The electronic specific heat and 
thermal 
conductivity of HTS 
are 
presented 
in 
the 

supplementary material Section 2. The HTS thermal
propagation characteristics as well as the resistivity transitions 
vary significantly with the LTS one (compare Fig. 4 with Fig. 
2). Notably, the thermal conductivity is found to be smaller in 

HTS material
(

𝐶𝑒𝑠,𝑁𝑏

𝐶𝑒𝑠,𝑌𝐵𝐶𝑂|

𝑇=𝑇𝑐

~23.49), and the interface 

thermal loss factor in the YBCO shows a strong temperature 
dependence while the Nb is largely invariant. While these 
aspects are specific details corresponding to Nb and YBCO, it 
is mentioned to illustrate the capability of the code to handle 
complex temperature dependences.


7

Fig. 5. (A) The spatial and temporal variation of hotspot in HTS, the vertical and horizontal lines represent the temporal and 
spatial coordinates for respective variations of 𝑇𝑒(𝑥) and 𝑇𝑒(𝑡); (B) Temporal variation of 𝑇𝑒 of HTS at different spaces; (C)
Spatial variation of 𝑇𝑒 of HTS at different times. We have offset the x-axis so that 𝑥 = 0 be the center of photon incidence; (D)
Variation of 𝑅(𝑡) and 𝑉(𝑡) for HTS, the red dashed line represents the thermal noise potential across the 50 Ω shunt resistance.

Similar to the LTS, we consider a specific case where the 

HTS is biased with 𝐽𝑏 = 0.25𝐽𝑐 and the initial temperature is 
being fixed at 𝑇𝑏 = 𝑠𝑇𝑠𝑤 where 𝑠 = 0.96. The variation of 
𝑇𝑒(𝑥, 𝑡) of HTS is shown in Fig. 5(A) for the HTS parameters 
presented in TABLE I at a strength of 1200 photons at 1550 
nm. In Fig. 5(B), we have shown the temporal variation of 
𝑇𝑒(𝑡) at different spatial points. The maximum temperature, 
𝑇𝑒,𝑚𝑎𝑥 = 70.64 K, has been observed the photon incidence 
point (taken to be 𝑥 = 0). The incidence point takes 11.2 ps to 
achieve the maximum temperature from the base temperature 
of 68.45 K. Different special points of the nanowire reaches 
the base temperature at different time, the middle of the 
nanowire returns back to the base temperature 14.49 ps after 
the photon incidence for the same conditions. The maximum 
temporal width of hotspot (Δ𝑡) is found to be 17.68 ps at 𝑥 = 0 
μm. The variation of 𝑇𝑒(𝑥) at different time has been shown in 
Fig. 5(C). The maximum special width (Δ𝑥) of the formed 
hotspot in the HTS SNSPD is found to be 13.69 μm at 𝑡 = 11 
ps. In Fig. 5(D), we show the change of resistance of the HTS 
nanowire and the corresponding voltage pulse as a function of 
time. An exceptionally fast resistance change is observed with 
the total resistance/potential pulse falling extremely fast to the 
superconducting state.  The reset time 𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑒𝑡 is found to be 
about 10.25 ps. These numbers match closely with 

experimental reports. The voltage response of the YBCO 
photosensor (100 nm thick) when irradiated with a femto-
second laser pulse (𝜆 = 790 nm, 100 fs) is found to recover 
superconductivity in 1.5 ps [35]. In MgB2 nanowires (35 nm × 
120 μm) under a 1560 nm laser irradiation (pulse width = 50 
fs, 100 MHz repetition rate) a reset time of about 130 ps is 
observed [15]. Recently reset time for YBCO microwires (50 
nm thick) is reported to be less than 2 ns at 850 nm (4 ps pulse 
width) [14]. We therefore show for the first time a numerical 
model that can faithfully reproduce the responses from both 
LTS and HTS nanowires for arbitrary material properties and 
incident photon incidence characteristics.

We address the larger question of the fundamental limit on 

the sensitivity of the nanowires in terms of capability to detect 
a single photon at different bias points and its dependence on 
the thermodynamic properties of the material. Towards that, 
we calculate the sensitivity of the SNSPD in terms of the 
minimum number of photons required to produce a potential 
value above the thermal noise floor under different bias 
conditions. The thermal noise potential over the 50 Ω shunt 
resistor line is indicated by the dashed red line in the potential 
plot (Fig. 3(D) and 5(D)). The photon sensitivity as a function 
of the bias conditions is presented in Fig. 6.


8

Fig. 6. A phase diagram of 𝑛𝑝 as a function of 𝑇𝑏 𝑇𝑐
⁄
and 𝑟 = 𝐽𝑏 𝐽𝑐
⁄
for (A) Nb LTS SNSPD and (B) YBCO HTS SNSPD

A bias set point in terms of the current and temperature can 

lead to two different states: (a) detecting stage where an
observable potential pulse is measured for some defined 
number of photons over the thermal noise floor, (b) latched 
stage where certain parts of the superconductor get latched in 
a normal state and never recovers back to photon detection 
stage. For any sample temperature  𝑇 < 𝑇𝐶, as the biasing 
current is increased the minimum number of photons (𝑛𝑝) to 
create a detectable hotspot decreases as noted in the Fig. 6(A). 
In Fig. 6(A), for LTS-SNSPD we have observed that at a 
constant 𝑇𝑏, with the increase of 𝑟 , the number of photons 𝑛𝑝
decreases monotonically (indicated by a dashed line with 
numbers). The most sensitive current bias point at any 
temperature can then be obtained for any temperature at the 
cross-over between the two phases. Similarly at constant 𝑟, 𝑛𝑝
decreases with increase in 𝑇𝑏 till the phase interface line is 
reached. Lastly, when the current bias is increased (increasing 
𝑟), the temperature of cross-over from detection to a latching 
phase reduces. The slope of the maximum sensitivity line for 
the LTS is observed to be 𝑑(𝑇𝑏/𝑇𝑐 )/𝑑𝑟 = 0.67 at 𝑟 = 0.25 
and 0.69 at 𝑟 = 0.8. For a representative Nb thin film taken 
with a thickness of 5 nm achieves single photon detection 
capability at 1550 nm for 𝑟 = 0.85, 𝑠 = 0.95 for LTS. The HTS 
phase diagram also resembles the LTS one. The detection 
phase and the latching phases are observed with the maximal 
sensitivity point at its boundary. The maximal sensitivity line 
has some minor variations. The minimum number of photons 
required to show a response in a HTS is consistently larger 
than the LTS case with similar biasing conditions (𝑟 and 𝑇𝑏/
𝑇𝑐). The slop of the maximal sensitivity line also is not as 
‘linear-like’ as the LTS case and shows drastic changes in the 
region nearing single photon resolution.
A 100 μm YBCO 

wire is found to achieve a maximum sensitivity an overall 
maximum sensitivity at a bias condition 𝑟 = 0.95 and 𝑠 = 0.96. 
There is no recent paper that presents the sensitivity of the 
photon counting range of a SNSPD, we believe our model will 

help the designers to design different SNSPD in achieving the 
maximal sensitivity.

IV. DISCUSSION

The photon sensitivity is a complex interplay between the 

thermodynamic variables (𝐶𝑒𝑠, 𝑘𝑒𝑠), width of the resistivity 
transition, the electron-photon relaxation constants, and 
several other superconducting parameters.
The spatial 

variation of hotspots is found to be 14.08 μm and 13.69 μm for 
𝑟 = 0.25 and 𝑠 = 0.95 for LTS and HTS respectively. Although 
the special variation of hotspot remained almost same, 
whereas the temporal variation (Δ𝑡) of the hotspot for LTS and 
HTS were found to be 28.28 ns and 17.68 ps respectively. The 
higher 𝑘𝑒𝑠 of the LTS and poorer 𝜏𝑒𝑠𝑐 allows for trapping the 
photo generated heat inside the superconductor. and driving 
hotspot growth, on contrary relatively lower 𝑘𝑒𝑠 and faster 
𝜏𝑒𝑠𝑐 and 𝜏𝑒−𝑝ℎ of HTS promotes faster growth of hotspot and 
dissipate the excess heat into substrate which helps the device 
to return to its base condition, which results the HTS SNSPD 
to show smaller Δ𝑡 than LTS SNSPD.

The spatial variation of hotspot (Δ𝑥) is a complex interplay 

between 𝐶𝑒𝑠, 𝑘𝑒𝑠, Δ𝑥, Δ𝑇, Δ𝐻 and Δ𝑡; where Δ𝑇 = 𝑇𝑒,𝑚𝑎𝑥 − 𝑇𝑏
and Δ𝐻 is the heat required for temperature raise, Δ𝑇. The 
relationship is known to follow, 𝑘𝑒𝑠𝐴Δ𝑇 Δ𝑥
⁄
= Δ𝐻 Δ𝑡
⁄
. The 

temperature differences (Δ𝑇) for LTS and HTS SNSPD for the 
aforesaid conditions are found to be 0.46 K and 2.19 K 
respectively. As 𝐶𝑒𝑠,𝐿𝑇𝑆 > 𝐶𝑒𝑠,𝐻𝑇𝑆, the heat required the 
temperature is higher for LTS than HTS, but the amount of 
heat
transferred
(Δ𝐻/Δ𝑡)
is higher for HTS SNSPD. 

Therefore, the competitions between the thermodynamic 
variables make the approximate hotspot size Δ𝑥 to be almost 
same for both the materials.

Lastly, we address sensitivity and the response times. To 

illustrate the information, we calculated the maximum 
sensitivity plots for an additional excitation wavelength (𝜆 = 
830 nm) for comparison.  


9

Fig. 7. Number of photons (𝑛𝑝) as a function of the ratio between biasing and critical current densities (𝑟 = 𝐽𝑏 𝐽𝑐
⁄ ) for LTS (𝑠 = 

0.95) and HTS (𝑠 = 0.96) based SNSPD at (A) 𝜆 = 1550 nm and (B) 𝜆 = 830 nm. 𝜏𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑒𝑡 as a function of the ratio between biasing 
and critical current densities (𝑟 = 𝐽𝑏 𝐽𝑐
⁄ ) for LTS (𝑠 = 0.95) and HTS (𝑠 = 0.96) based SNSPD at (C) 𝜆 = 1550 nm and (D) 𝜆 = 

830 nm.

The 𝑛𝑝(𝑟) variation at bias temperature of (𝑠 = 0.95) for 

LTS and HTS is presented in Fig. 7(A) and 7(B) for two 
different wavelengths respectively. Under all conditions, the 
LTS always had a better photon number sensitivity than the 
HTS. The sharper resistivity transition of the LTS (HTS 
transition width is four times the LTS width) is largely 
responsible for the higher sensitivity. As the biasing current 
density increases, 𝑛𝑝 decreases for both LTS and HTS 
monotonically. Even though, we observed the ultimate photon 
sensitivity for both the SNSPDs at higher biasing current(𝐽𝑏 ≥
0.8𝐽𝑐), the variations of 𝑛𝑝(𝑟) was found to almost similar 
between LTS and HTS for the 1550 nm while there is 
noticeable difference for the smaller wavelength photon. The
number 
of 
photons 
needed 
for 
destroying 
localized 

superconductivity is roughly proportional to ℎ𝑐/𝜆Δ(𝑇). The 
photon associated with 830 nm wavelength has almost two 
times higher energy than the 1550 nm-photon, whereas the 
order parameter of Nb is about an order of magnitude smaller 
than YBCO. Hence, the lower wavelength photon with a 
higher energy generates significantly higher number of excited 
carriers in the smaller order parameter Nb than in the YBCO 
thin film making it more noticeably sensitive. On the other 
hand, the reset times as seen in Fig. 7(C) and 7(D) show no 
much variation either with the bias condition nor with the 

wavelength of the incident photon. However, the important 
observation is that the HTS SNSPD has three order of 
magnitude faster response than its LTS counterpart. The 
SNSPD temporal response depends strongly on the Δ𝑡, 𝜏𝑒−𝑝ℎ, 
and the kinetic inductance in addition to the thermodynamic 
variables mentioned above [18]. The HTS has a much smaller 
kinetic inductance value due to the smaller magnetic 
penetration depths (Nb and YBCO are found to be 39 nm and 
26 nm respectively [36,37]).  The calculated kinetic 
inductance (from equation 4) for LTS and HTS are 0.19 pH 
and 0.085 pH respectively. The smaller inductance of the HTS 
in conjunction with the much faster thermal escape rates into 
the substrate plays a crucial rule in the temporal response of 
HTS SNSPDs. Under the excitation of different wavelengths, 
the HTS-SNSPD is always found to be faster than LTS-
SNSPD. Therefore, the aforesaid observations support that our 
modified model can handle a range of diverse experimental 
scenarios and we believe that it can be used as a primary tool 
to quantify performance of basic different SNSPDs.

V. CONCLUSION

A generalized two temperature model developed here 

calculates the the hotspot dynamics of different SNSPDs. We 


11

have calculated the hot-spot dynamics of both LTS and HTS 
SNSPD numerically and find the results to match closely with 
the experimental results. We show a phase-diagram like plot 
to estimate the minimum photon count required to observe a 
signal above the noise limit in Nb and YBCO as an example. 
Our calculations show that both LTS and HTS can resolve 
single photons. Even though the HTS nanowire is three orders 
of magnitude faster than the LTS nanowire, the LTS is more 
sensitive for the same nanowire dimension and bias 
conditions.  We believe that with appropriate expressions for 
the various physical properties, the sensitivity and response of 
different superconducting nanowires can be calculated apriori 
using the numerical treatment mentioned here.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The authors also acknowledge the members of the Neos Lab, 

Department of Material Science and Engineering, Indian 
Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 110016, India for 
meaningful academic discussions.

REFERENCES

[1] I. E. Zadeh, J. Chang, J. W. N. Los, S. Gyger, A. W. Elshaari, S. 

Steinhauer, S. N. Dorenbos, V. Zwiller, “Superconducting nanowire 
single-photon detectors: A perspective on evolution, state-of-the-art, 
future developments, and applications”, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 118, pp. 
190502, 2021.

[2] G. N. Gol’tsman, O. Okunev, G. Chulkova, A. Lipatov, A. Semenov, K. 

Smirnov, B. Voronov, A. Dzardanov, C. Williams, R. Sobolewski, 
“Picosecond superconducting single-photon optical detector”, Appl. Phys. 
Lett., vol. 79, pp. 705 – 707, 2001.

[3] F. Marsili, V. B. Verma, J. A. Stern, S. Harrington, A. E. Lita, T. Gerrits, 

I. Vayshenker, B. Baek, M. D. Shaw, R. P. Mirin et al., “Detecting single 
infrared photons with 93% system efficiency”, Nat. Photonics, vol. 7, pp.
210 – 214, 2013.

[4] D. V. Reddy, R. R. Nerem, S. W. Nam, R. P. Mirin, V. B. Verma, 

“Superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors with 98% system 
detection efficiency at 1550 nm”, Optica, vol. 7, pp. 1649 – 1653, 2020.

[5] P. Hu, H. Li, L. You, H. Wang, Y. Xiao, J. Huang, X. Yang, W. Zhang, 

Z. Wang, X. Xie, “Detecting single infrared photons toward optimal 
system detection efficiency”, Opt. Express, vol. 28, pp. 36884–36891,
2020.

[6] J. Chang, J. Los, J. Tenorio-Pearl, N. Noordzij, R. Gourgues, A. 

Guardiani, J. Zichi, S. Pereira, H. Urbach, V. Zwiller et al., “Detecting 
telecom single photons with 99.5 – 2.07 + 0.5% system detection 
efficiency and high time resolution”, APL Photonics, vol. 6, pp. 036114,
2021.

[7] Y. Hochberg, I. Charaev, S. -W. Nam, V. Verma, M. Colangelo, K. K. 

Berggren, “Detecting sub-GeV dark matter with superconducting 
nanowires”, Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 123, pp. 151802, 2019.

[8] B. Korzh, Q. -Y. Zhao, J. P. Allmaras, S. Frasca, T. M. Autry, E. A. 

Bersin, A. D. Beyer, R. M. Briggs, B. Bumble, M. Colangelo et al., 
“Demonstration of sub-3 ps temporal resolution with a superconducting 
nanowire single-photon detector”, Nat. Photonics, vol. 14, pp. 250–255,
2020.

[9] F. Tafuri, D. Massarotti, L. Galletti, D. Stornaiuolo, D. Montemurro, L. 

Longobardi, P. Lucignano, G. Rotoli, G. Pepe, A. Tagliacozzo, F. 
Lombardi, 
“Recent 
achievements 
on 
the 
physics 
of 
high-Tc 

superconductor Josephson junctions: Background, perspectives and 
inspiration”, J. Supercond. Nov. Magn., vol. 26, pp. 21 – 41, 2013.

[10]D. Golubev, F. Lombardi, T. Bauch, “Effect of heating on critical current 

of YBCO nanowires”, Physica C, vol. 506, pp. 174 – 177, 2014.

[11]L. N. Bulaevskii, M. J. Graf, V. G. Kogan, “Vortex-assisted photon 

counts and their magnetic field dependence in single-photon 
superconducting detectors”, Phys. Rev. B, vol. 85, pp. 014505, 2012.

[12]P. Probst, A. Semenov, M. Ries, A. Hoehl, P. Rieger, A. Scheuring, V. 

Judin, S. Wünsch, K. Il’in, N. Smale, Y.L. Mathis, R. Müller, G. Ulm, G. 
Wüstefeld, H.W. Hübers, J. Hänisch, B. Holzapfel, M. Siegel, A.S. 

Mueller, “Nonthermal response of YBa2Cu3O7–x thin films to picosecond 
THz pulses”, Phys. Rev. B, vol. 85, pp. 174511, 2012.

[13]R. Arpaia, M. Ejrnaes, L. Parlato, F. Tafuri, R. Cristiano, D. Golubev, R. 

Sobolewski, T. Bauch, F. Lombardi, G.P. Pepe, “High-temperature 
superconducting nanowires for photon detection”, Physica C, vol. 509, 
pp. 16 – 21, 2015.

[14]A. Kumar, D. Panna, S. Bouscher, A. Koriat, Y. Nitzav, R. Jacovi, A. 

Kanigel, A. Hayat, “Ultrafast low-jitter optical response in high-
temperature superconducting microwires”, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 122, pp. 
192604, 2023.

[15]S. Cherednichenko, N. Acharya, E. Novoselov, V. Drakinskiy, “Low 

kinetic inductance superconducting MgB2 nanowires with a 130 ps 
relaxation time for single-photon detection applications”, Supercond. Sci. 
Technol., vol. 34, pp. 044001, 2021.

[16]A. G. Kozorezov, C. Lambert, F. Marsili, M. J. Stevens, V. B. Verma, J. 

A. Stern, R. Horansky, S. Dyer, S. Duff, D. P. Pappas, A. Lita, M. D. 
Shaw, R. P. Mirin, S. W. Nam, “Quasiparticle recombination in hotspots 
in superconducting current-carrying nanowires”, Phys. Rev. B, vol. 92, 
pp. 064504, 2015.

[17]J. K. W. Yang, A. J. Kerman, E. A. Dauler, V. Anant, K. M. Rosfjord, K. 

K. Berggen, “Modeling the electrical and thermal response of 
superconducting nanowire single photon detectors”, IEEE Trans. Appl. 
Supercond., vol. 17, pp. 581, 2007.

[18]A. J. Annunziata, D. F. Santavicca, L. Frunzio, G. Catelani, M. J. Rooks, 

A. Frydman, D. E. Prober, “Tunable superconducting nanoinductors”, 
Nanotechnology, vol. 21, pp. 445202, 2010.

[19]R. P. Huebener, R. T. Kampwirth, R. L. Martin, T. W. Barbee Jr., R. B. 

Zubeck, “Critical current density in superconducting niobium films”, J. of 
Low Temp. Phys., vol. 19, pp. 247-258, 1975.

[20]Q. D. Jiang, Y. L. Xie, W. B. Zhang, H. Gu, Z. Y. Ye, K. Wu, Z. L. 

Zhang, C. Y. Li, D. L. Lin, “Superconductivity and transport properties in 
ultrathin epitaxial single-crystal niobium films”, J. Phys.: Condens. 
Matter, vol. 2, pp. 3567, 1990.

[21]A. J. Anuunziata, O. Quanranta, D. F. Santavicca, A. Casaburi, L. 

Frunzio, M. Ejraes, M. J. Rooks, R. Cristiano, S. Pagano, A. Frydman, D. 
E. Prober, “Reset dynamics and latching in niobium superconducting 
nanowire single photon detectors”, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 108, pp. 084507,
2010.

[22]E. M. Gershenzon, M. E. Gershenzon, G. N. Gol’tsman, A. M. Lyul’kin, 

A. D. Semenov, A. V. Sergeev, “Electron-phonon interaction in ultrathin 
Nb films”, Sov. Phys. JETP, vol. 70, pp. 505, 1990.

[23]J. P. Allmaras, “Modelling and developement of superconducting 

nanowire single-photon detectors”, Ph. D. Thesis (California Institute of 
Technology, May 2020).

[24]S. Nawaz, R. Arpaia, T. Bauch, F. Lombardi, “Approaching the 

theoretical depairing current in YBa2Cu3O7−x nanowires”, Physica C: 
Superconductivity, vol. 495, pp. 33-38, 2013.

[25]E. Andersson, R. Arpaia, E. Trabaldo, T. Bauch, F. Lombardi, 

“Fabrication and electrical transport characterization of high quality 
underdoped YBa2Cu3O7-δ nanowires”, Supercond. Sci. Technol., vol. 33, 
pp. 064002, 2020.

[26]Y. Dagan, R. Krupke, G. Deustcher, “Determination of the 

superconducting gap in YBa2Cu3O7-δ by tunnelling experiments under 
magnetic fields”, Phys. Rev. B, vol. 62, pp. 146, 2000.

[27]T. Atake, Y. Takagi, T. Nakamura, Y. Saito, “Heat capacity of the high-

temperature superconductor Ba2DyCu3O7”, Phys. Rev. B, vol. 37, pp. 552,
1988.

[28]K. A. Moler, D. L. Sisson, J. S. Urbach, M. R. Beasley, A. Kapitulnik, D. 

J. Baar, R. Liang, W. N. Hardy, “Specific heat of YBa2Cu3O7-δ”, Phys. 
Rev. B, vol. 55, pp. 3954, 1997.

[29]H. Fujishiro, M. Ikebe, T. Naito, K. Noto, S. Kohayashi, S. Yoshizawa, 

“Anisotropic thermal diffusivity and conductivity of YBCO(123) and 
YBCO(211) mixed crystals. II”, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., vol. 33, pp. 6157,
1994.

[30]S. J. Hagen, Z. Z. Wang, N. P. Ong, “Anisotropy of the thermal 

conductivity of YBa2Cu3O7-y”, Phys. Rev. B, vol. 40, pp. 9389(R), 1989.

[31]B. S. Karasik, W. R. McGrath, M. C. Gaidis, “Analysis of high-Tc hot-

electron superconducting mixer for terahertz applications”, J. Appl. Phys.,
vol. 81, pp. 1581, 1997.

[32]T. Jia, L. Kang, L. Zhang, Q. Zhao, M. Gu, J. Qiu, J. Chen, B. Jin, 

“Doped niobium superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors”, 
Applied Physics B, vol. 116, pp. 991, 2014.

[33]R. Arpaia, D. Golubev, R. Baghdadi, R. Ciancio, G. Drazic, P. Orgiani, 

D. Montemurro, T. Bauch, F. Lombardi, “Transport properties of 


11

ultrathin YBa2Cu3O7-δ nanowires: A route to single-photon detection”, 
Phys. Rev. B, vol. 96, pp. 064525, 2017.

[34]D. Pines, “dx2-y2 pairing and spin fluctuations in the cuprate 

superconductors: 
Experiment 
meets 
theory”, 
Physica 
C: 

Superconductivity, vol. 235-240, pp. 113-121, 1994.

[35]M. Lindgren, M. Currie, C. Williams, T. Y. Hsiang, P. M. Fauchet, R. 

Sobolewski, S. H. Moffat, R. A. Hughes, J. S. Preston, F. A. Hegmann, 
“Intrinsic picosecond response times of Y–Ba–Cu–O superconducting 
photodetectors”, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 74, pp. 853, 1999.

[36]B. W. Maxfield, W. L. McLean, “Superconducting Penetration Depth of 

Niobium”, Phys. Rev., vol. 139, pp. A1515, 1965.

[37]C. Ostrove, L. E. Reichl, “Local and nonlocal shot noise in high-Tc 

superconducting nanowires”, Physica B: Condensed Matter, vol. 561, pp. 
79 – 89, 2019.


