OH− ions can reduce the iodide migration in MAPI

R. E. Brophy∗, M. Kateb†, I. Ghitiu‡§, N. Filipoiu‡∥, K. Torfason∗, H. G. Svavarsson∗,
G. A. Nemnes‡¶∥, I. Pintilie∗∗, A. Manolescu∗

Email: Rachel18@ru.is
∗Department of Engineering, Reykjavik University, Menntavegur 1, IS-102 Reykjavik, Iceland
†Department of Physics, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-412 96 Gothenburg, Sweden
‡University of Bucharest, Faculty of Physics, 077125 Magurele-Ilfov, Romania
§National Institute for Laser, Plasma and Radiation Physics, 077125 Magurele-Ilfov, Romania
¶Research Institute of the University of Bucharest (ICUB), Mihail Kogalniceanu Blvd 36-46, 050107 Bucharest, Romania
∥Horia Hulubei National Institute for Physics & Engineering, 077126 Magurele-Ilfov, Romania
∗∗National Institute of Materials Physics, 077125 Magurele-Ilfov, Romania

Abstract—One of the main degradation mechanisms of methy-
lammonium lead iodine (MAPI), which is an important material
for perovskite based solar cells, is the migration of iodide ions.
It is believed that this phenomenon is in fact dominated by
the diffusion of iodide vacancies. In this paper, we suggest that
the addition of a small amount of OH− ions can help suppress
the migration of iodide and increase the overall stability of the
material. Through the use of molecular dynamics simulations,
we show that the OH− ions can bind to the positively charged
iodide vacancies and can block the access of the negative iodide
ions into those vacancies.

Index Terms—MAPI material, iodide migration, molecular
dynamics simulations

I. INTRODUCTION

The hybrid organic-inorganic perovskite materials, and in
particular the methylammonium lead iodine (CH3NH3PbI3,
or MAPI), have become a significant topic of interest in
the last decade due to their photovoltaic properties. Since
2013, perovskite based solar cells have increased in efficiency
from 13% to roughly 25%, making this category one of the
fastest-growing photovoltaic devices. The main interest in the
perovskite material is that it is able to convert light into
electricity within its natural structure, significantly lowering
the manufacturing costs [1], [2]. Also adding to the lower
manufacturing cost is that it only requires modest fabrication
equipment, much simpler than needed for conventional silicon-
based solar cells. However, the perovskite based solar cells
have the disadvantage of a limited stability. One main reason
for that is the degradation caused by ionic migration within the
perovskite material, especially the diffusion of iodide [3], [4].
Another consequence is a long relaxation time of the photo-
induced current leading to a hysteresis of the current-voltage
characteristic when the voltage is varied in time [5]–[8].
Quantitative data about the dynamics of the iodide diffusion
is difficult to extract from experiments since it depends on
several factors, such as temperature, boundaries, various types
of defects, intrinsic electric field, etc. Nevertheless, molecular
dynamics (MD) simulations have shown that, at least in the ho-
mogeneous MAPI material, the dominant diffusion mechanism

is the migration of the iodide vacancies, with an estimated
diffusion coefficient between 2.5−4.3×10−6 cm2/s, whereas
the diffusion coefficient of iodide interstitial ions is smaller
by one order of magnitude or more [9], [10]. Hence, since the
iodide ion is negative, once an iodide vacancy is formed, it
will be positively charged, and a nearby iodide will migrate
toward it and attempt to fill it up, and simultaneously creating
a new vacancy. Therefore, since the vacancy appears to move
faster than the iodide ion, it is tempting to think that blocking
the vacancy would reduce the overall diffusion of the iodide.
Another known cause of degradation of the perovskite-based
solar cells is the introduction of humidity (water) into the
device. Water molecules can have multiple effects. Depending
on the amount of H2O molecules, the absorption factor may
significantly decrease [11], iodide ions may be dislocated [12],
and other detrimental phenomena may occur. Still, a small
amount of water can be beneficial for the photovoltaic proper-
ties, for example by delaying the electron-hole recombination
events [13], with negligible changes of the band gap [12].
Atomistic calculations based on the density functional
theory (DFT) have shown that the dissociation of a water
molecule into H+ and OH− ions in MAPI requires an energy
of 0.75 eV in dark, and 0.57 eV in the presence of photo
generated electrons [14]. Therefore, if a small amount of water
is present in the light-harvesting perovskite material, we can
assume the existence of some OH− (hydroxyl) ions therein.
One possibility can be that the hydroxyl is generated at the
surface and enters in MAPI along grain boundaries. Another
possibility is a controlled adsorption during the preparation of
MAPI. Other ways to obtain OH− in MAPI may also exist.
In this paper we use MD simulations to show that an OH−

interstitial can reduce the migration of the iodide ions inside
MAPI, by binding to an iodide vacancy, and blocking the path
of the iodide ions through that site. We have also tested, using
density functional theory (DFT) based calculations, that the
presence of hydroxyl ions at the interfaces of MAPI with
the electron and hole transporter materials (TiO2 and Cu2O,
respectively) does not have a significant effect on the energy
gaps and band alignment.

arXiv:2403.04188v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  7 Mar 2024


II. METHODS

We utilize MD simulations to describe the movement of all
atoms in the MAPI system. The simulations were performed
using the LAMMPS software package [15] which solves New-
ton’s equations of motion for each atom or molecule, based on
interatomic effective forces. We used the perovskite structure
with CH3NH3PbI3 stoichiometry in which the methylammo-
nium (MA) molecule has a 1:1 ratio with Pb, and is located
in the middle of a cubic cell (or cage) made of PbI3.
To describe the interatomic forces we used the MYP po-
tential derived by Mattoni et al. [16]. This potential considers
bonded interactions in MA and non-bonded for the PbI cage
and PbI–MA link. This combination allows the computation
of the local movement or diffusion of all iodide, lead, and
MA constituents. The random rotation of the MA molecule at
300 K gives a cubic phase. The intra-MA interactions were
modeled using a bounded generalized AMBER force field
(GAFF), and the Buckingham force field was used for Pb-Pb,
I-I, Pb-I, and Pb/I-C/N interactions Pb/I-H interactions were
modeled with Lennard-Jones potential. For the hydroxyl we
used TIP3P parameters with charges -0.8476 and 0.4238 e on
O and H, respectively. This gives the hydroxyl group a total
-0.4238 e as compared to +1.13 e for iodide vacancy.
The simulated system was made of 256 unit cells (MAPbI3),
with a total of 3072 atoms, which were relaxed by energy
minimization followed by ramping up and maintaining its
temperature at 300 K and the constant pressure of 1 bar
for 1 ns. This produces samples from an isothermal-isobaric
(NPT) ensemble controlled by the Nose-Hoover thermostat
and barostat. Once the system was relaxed, a single iodide was
removed, theoretically making the system positively charged.
However, due to the large size of the system, there are no
artificial implications on the simulations. To see if there was
a way to mediate the migration, the hydroxyl group was
placed within the system at varying positions and distances
from the initial vacancy, and each case was run as a separate
simulation. The positions of all iodine atoms in the NPT
ensemble as function of time were recorded during each
simulation. Further justification on the choice of the ensemble
and other calculation details can be found elsewhere [10]. The
average computation time was about 22 CPU hours for each
nanosecond on a high-performance computer cluster of AMD
EPYC processors 2300 MHz.
DFT based simulations were also performed to test the
impact of OH substitutions on the band gap and band align-
ment at the interfaces between MAPI and hole and electron
transporter materials, respectively. They were carried out using
the SIESTA software [17], a code that employs the local
density approximation with the inclusion of Hubbard correc-
tion (LDA+U) to treat the electron-electron interactions, and
numerical atomic orbitals as a basis set to solve the Kohn-
Sham equations. Since this ab-initio method operates with
atoms, and not with ions like the force based method of
LAMMPS, neutral OH groups were used to substitute random
iodine atoms in the MAPI layer.

In the case of the hole transporter, the simulation cell
consisted of 218 atoms, grouped in 2x2x6 unit cells of Cu2O,
and 1x1x3 tetragonal MAPI. The Brillouin zone was sampled
using a Monkhorst-Pack k-point mesh of 7×7×1. The system
was then allowed to relax until the forces on each atom were
less than 0.04 eV/ ˚A. The resulting optimized structures were
further utilized to determine the electronic states. The partial
densities of states (PDOS) were analyzed to determine the
band gap and band alignment, using the same Monkhorst-Pack
k-point mesh. The energy cutoff for the basis set was 100 Ry.
A similar computational setup was used to check the
influence of OH substitutions of iodine atoms at the interface
between the MAPI and a TiO2 layer which has the role of
electron transporter in the solar cell device. This time the
interface contained 198 atoms, and it was composed from a
rutile TiO2 layer, obtained by multiplying the unit cell with
2x2x5, and a MAPI 1x1x3 tetragonal layer.

III. RESULTS

We computed with LAMMPS the mean square displacement
(MSD) of all iodide ions included in the simulation cell, as a
function of the time t,

MSD(t) = 1

N

N
�

i=1
|ri(t) − ri(0)|2 ,
(1)

with N being the total number of iodides and ri the position of
the particular ion i. The diffusion coefficient associated with
the mobile ions can be obtained as

D = 1

6 lim
t→∞
MSD(t)

t
,
(2)

which in practice is calculated using the slope of the MSD vs.
time, divided by the double of the spatial dimension [18].
The numerical results of the MSD are shown in Figure 1.
We first consider a simulation cell that in the initial state
includes the reference case of an iodide vacancy (IVAC) and
no hydroxyl, at room temperature and normal pressure. The
corresponding MSD is shown in blue, and the slope is as
expected from previous studies [9], [10]. Then, in Test 1 we
repeat the simulation by adding an OH− group in the same
unit cell as the IVAC. Further, in Tests 2, 3, and 4, we increase
the initial distance between the IVAC and the OH− group to
one, two, and three unit cells, respectively. It can be seen
that when the OH− group is within three unit cells from the
vacancy, there is a significant drop in the MSD compared to
the IVAC only simulation. To make sure that we observe a
real trend of the MSD slope, and not simply random effects,
we repeated several simulations by using different seeds of
the random number generator, which correspond to different
initial positions and velocities of the iodide ions, and indeed,
the trend was confirmed. This is because the vacancy migration
tends to go toward the OH− group and once it is within one
unit cell distance, the migration of the IVAC is blocked.
As we have shown in a previous study [10], when a
vacancy defect is placed in the material, another iodide atoms


Fig. 1. MSD of all atoms at 300K for 1 ns. From ascending order, each test
represents the vacancy and OH− group are initially placed further apart. In
Test 1 they are placed within the same unit cell, in Test 2 they placed one unit
cell apart, and so on. The IVAC case corresponds to the MSD of all atoms
without the addition of the OH− group.

Fig. 2. An example of migration path of both the iodides (white arrows) and
hydroxyl group (red arrow) in the presence of a vacancy. The initial position
of the iodide vacancy is indicated by the dashed circle. The iodides are shown
as dark blue spheres, and the OH− as a light blue-violet group.

will migrate to fill the vacancy, consequently creating a new
vacancy in its place. This process will continue throughout
the simulation domain until the vacancy reaches the boundary
lines. However, in the presence of the hydroxyl group, the
initial migration of iodide atoms will still occur, but, once the
newly created vacancy is within roughly one unit cell from the
hydroxyl group, this group will migrate toward the vacancy
and will remain very close to it, or possibly fill it itself. Thus,
the hydroxyl is capable of stopping the migration of the iodide
and allowing the system to return to stability. Specifically, in
Figure 2, the white dashed circle indicates the initial placement
of the IVAC, and the white arrows show the path of the iodides
that have migrated and created new vacancies behind them.
The red arrow indicates the migration of the hydroxyl group
that has joined with the final vacancy, stopping the migration.
A natural question is whether the presence of hydroxyl ions
in the MAPI does not harm other properties of the solar cell.
While only an experimental study can have a definite answer
to this question, here we check if the band alignments of MAPI
with the electron and hole transporter layers are affected.
The band alignment at the interface between MAPI and
Cu2O, seen as a hole transporter material, was determined us-

Fig. 3.
Top: PDOS of MAPI/Cu2O interface: Solid lines represent Cu2O,
while dotted lines represent MAPI. The red lines show the ideal MAPI/Cu2O
interface, and the blue/green lines have one iodine atom replaced with
OH−. The blue line represents the interface-close substitution, the green line
represents the interface-far substitution, and the magenta line a substitution
in the middle. The substitution lines have been shifted upwards for clarity.
Bottom: Analog results of the PDOS for MAPI/TiO2 interface.

ing ab initio DFT calculations with SIESTA software. Initially,
the band alignment of the ideal interface was computed, and
the PDOS for each material was determined for the bulk-like
regions, i.e. excluding the layers in the immediate vicinity
of the interface and of vacuum, which introduce additional
states. Next, a random iodine atom was replaced with OH, and
this procedure was repeated 10 times, each time substituting
a different iodine. The results for the ideal interface and three
cases with OH are presented in the upper part of Figure 3.
The calculations showed a slight shift in energy, but the band
alignment appeared to be mostly unaffected, and the placement
of OH did not have a significant impact on the band alignment.
We performed similar tests on the MAPI/TiO2, TiO2
being a known electron transporter material for MAPI. Four
situations were simulated, with the OH group replacing the
iodine atoms, to be compared with the case without iodide
vacancies. A picture qualitatively similar to the case of the
hole transporter emerges, as shown in the lower part of
Figure 3, again indicating that the band alignment in the
presence of (few) OH− ions remain practically unchanged.
Notably, we also found that an uncompensated iodine vacancy
shifts the MAPI bands downwards in energy (not shown),


meaning that the OH− can efficiently compensate for this
effect.

IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

The binding of OH− to positively charged iodine vacancy
is in principle possible in the context of humid environments.
Previously, it was shown that, under ambient conditions,
superoxide (O−
2 ) can be generated at the position of iodine
vacancies, which triggers perovskite degradation, leading to
the formation of lead iodide, molecular iodine, gaseous methy-
lammonium and water [19]. On the other hand, the formation
of OH− ions can also trigger the deprotonation of the methy-
lammonium, resulting in neutral water and CH3NH2 molecules
[20]. Therefore, negative ions containing oxygen can passivate
iodine vacancies, and likely inhibit iodine migration, but may
also prompt the perovskite degradation. However, recent stud-
ies have shown that small amounts of coordinating water can
have a beneficial effect against degradation, acting as a barrier
and preventing the formation of additional hydrates [21]. In a
similar way, a stability improvement of formamidinium based
solar cells was achieved using ambient air additive during
fabrication [22]. Therefore, the potential benefits of the small
water amounts should be further investigated experimentally.
The proton H+ resulting from the dissociation of water, be-
ing very light, should be harmless to MAPI. Still, it might bind
strongly to iodide, neutralizing and blocking the migration of
the slow iodide interstitial ions, or eventually can create iodide
vacancies which can be immobilized by the OH−.
In conclusion, we have shown that a negatively charged
hydroxyl ion present in MAPI can form a neutral complex
with a positively charged iodide vacancy, thereby reducing
the migration of the iodide ions via their vacancies.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The research leading to these results has received funding
from the EEA Grants 2014–2021, under Project contract
no. 36/2021 (project code: EEA-RO-NO-2018-0106). The
computational resource was sponsored by EGI and the
EGI-ACE H2020 project (GA no. 101017567) with the
dedicated support of CLOUDIFIN.

REFERENCES

[1] N.-G. Park, M. Gr¨atzel, and T. Miyasaka, eds., Organic-Inorganic Halide
Perovskite Photovoltaics. From Fundamentals to Device Architectures.
Springer Cham, 2016.

[2] Y. Zhan, M. Khalid, P. Vivo, and N. Arshid, eds., Low-Dimensional
Halide Perovskites; Structure, Synthesis, and Applications.
Elsevier,
2023.

[3] C. Eames, J. M. Frost, P. R. Barnes, B. C. O’regan, A. Walsh, and
M. S. Islam, “Ionic transport in hybrid lead iodide perovskite solar cells,”
Nature communications, vol. 6, no. 1, p. 7497, 2015.

[4] C. Besleaga, L. E. Abramiuc, V. Stancu, A. G. Tomulescu, M. Sima,
L. Trinca, N. Plugaru, L. Pintilie, G. A. Nemnes, M. Iliescu, H. G.
Svavarsson, A. Manolescu, and I. Pintilie, “Iodine migration and degra-
dation of perovskite solar cells enhanced by metallic electrodes,” J. Phys.
Chem. Lett., vol. 7, no. 24, pp. 5168–5175, 2016.

[5] R. S. Sanchez, V. Gonzalez-Pedro, J.-W. Lee, N.-G. Park, Y. S. Kang,
I. Mora-Sero, and J. Bisquert, “Slow dynamic processes in lead halide
perovskite solar cells. Characteristic times and hysteresis,” J. Phys.
Chem. Lett., vol. 5, no. 13, pp. 2357–2363, 2014.

[6] W. Tress, N. Marinova, T. Moehl, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeerud-
din, and M. Gr¨atzel, “Understanding the rate-dependent J–V hysteresis,
slow time component, and aging in CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells:
the role of a compensated electric field,” Energy Environ. Sci., vol. 8,
p. 995, 2015.

[7] G. A. Nemnes, C. Besleaga, A. G. Tomulescu, I. Pintilie, L. Pintilie,
K. Torfason, and A. Manolescu, “Dynamic electrical behavior of halide
perovskite based solar cells,” Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, vol. 159,
pp. 197 – 203, 2017.

[8] N. Filipoiu, A. T. Preda, D.-V. Anghel, R. Patru, R. E. Brophy,
M. Kateb, C. Besleaga, A. G. Tomulescu, I. Pintilie, A. Manolescu,
et al., “Capacitive and inductive effects in perovskite solar cells: the
different roles of ionic current and ionic charge accumulation,” Physical
Review Applied, vol. 18, no. 6, p. 064087, 2022.

[9] P. Delugas, C. Caddeo, A. Filippetti, and A. Mattoni, “Thermally
activated point defect diffusion in methylammonium lead trihalide:
Anisotropic and ultrahigh mobility of iodine,” The Journal of Physical
Chemistry Letters, vol. 7, no. 13, pp. 2356–2361, 2016.

[10] R. E. Brophy, M. Kateb, K. Torfason, G. A. Nemnes, H. G. Svavarsson,
I. Pintilie, and A. Manolescu, “Effect of pressure on the dynamics of io-
dide defects in methylammonium lead iodide: An atomistic simulation,”
The Journal of Physical Chemistry C, vol. 127, no. 17, pp. 7938–7943,
2023.

[11] D. Wang, M. Wright, N. K. Elumalai, and A. Uddin, “Stability of
perovskite solar cells,” Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells, vol. 147,
pp. 255–275, 2016.

[12] E. Mosconi, J. M. Azpiroz, and F. De Angelis, “Ab initio molecular
dynamics simulations of methylammonium lead iodide perovskite degra-
dation by water,” Chemistry of Materials, vol. 27, no. 13, pp. 4885–4892,
2015.

[13] R. Long, W. Fang, and O. V. Prezhdo, “Moderate humidity delays elec-
tron–hole recombination in hybrid organic–inorganic perovskites: Time-
domain Ab initio simulations rationalize experiments,” The Journal of
Physical Chemistry Letters, vol. 7, no. 16, pp. 3215–3222, 2016.

[14] C. Peng, J. Chen, H. Wang, and P. Hu, “First-principles insight into
the degradation mechanism of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite: Light-induced
defect formation and water dissociation,” The Journal of Physical
Chemistry C, vol. 122, no. 48, pp. 27340–27349, 2018.

[15] S. Plimpton, “Fast parallel algorithms for short-range molecular dynam-
ics,” Journal of computational physics, vol. 117, no. 1, pp. 1–19, 1995.

[16] A. Mattoni, A. Filippetti, M. I. Saba, and P. Delugas, “Methylammonium
rotational dynamics in lead halide perovskite by classical molecular
dynamics: The role of temperature,” The Journal of Physical Chemistry
C, vol. 119, no. 30, p. 17421–17428, 2015.

[17] J. M. Soler, E. Artacho, J. D. Gale, A. Garc´ıa, J. Junquera, P. Ordej´on,
and D. S´anchez-Portal, “The siesta method for ab initio order-n materials
simulation,” Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter, vol. 14, p. 2745, mar
2002.

[18] M. P. Allen and D. J. Tildesley, Computer simulation of liquids. Oxford:
Oxford university press, 1989.

[19] N. Aristidou, C. Eames, I. Sanchez-Molina, X. Bu, J. Kosco, M. S.
Islam, and S. A. Haque, “Fast oxygen diffusion and iodide defects
mediate oxygen-induced degradation of perovskite solar cells,” Nature
Communications, vol. 8, p. 15218, May 2017.

[20] L. Zhang and P. H.-L. Sit, “Ab initio study of interaction of wa-
ter, hydroxyl radicals, and hydroxide ions with CH3NH3PbI3 and
CH3NH3PbBr3 surfaces,” The Journal of Physical Chemistry C,
vol. 119, no. 39, pp. 22370–22378, 2015.

[21] L. Contreras-Bernal, C. Aranda, M. Valles-Pelarda, T. T. Ngo, S. Ramos-
Terr´on, J. J. Gallardo, J. Navas, A. Guerrero, I. Mora-Ser´o, J. Id´ıgoras,
and J. A. Anta, “Homeopathic perovskite solar cells: Effect of humidity
during fabrication on the performance and stability of the device,” The
Journal of Physical Chemistry C, vol. 122, no. 10, pp. 5341–5348, 2018.

[22] K. M. M. Salim, S. Masi, A. F. Gualdr´on-Reyes, R. S. S´anchez, E. M.
Barea, M. Kreˆcmarov´a, J. F. S´anchez-Royo, and I. Mora-Ser´o, “Boosting
long-term stability of pure formamidinium perovskite solar cells by
ambient air additive assisted fabrication,” ACS Energy Letters, vol. 6,
no. 10, pp. 3511–3521, 2021.


