Flat-band hybridization between f and d states near the Fermi energy of SmCoIn5

David W. Tam,1, ∗ Nicola Colonna,2, 1, 3 Fatima Alarab,4 Vladimir N. Strocov,4

Dariusz Jakub Gawryluk,5 Ekaterina Pomjakushina,5 and Michel Kenzelmann1, †

1Laboratory for Neutron Scattering and Imaging,
Paul Scherrer Institut, 5232 Villigen, Switzerland
2Laboratory for Materials Simulations, Paul Scherrer Institut, 5232 Villigen, Switzerland
3National Centre for Computational Design of Novel Materials (MARVEL),
Paul Scherrer Institut, 5232 Villigen, Switzerland
4Photon Science Division, Paul Scherrer Institut, 5232 Villigen, Switzerland
5Laboratory for Multiscale Materials Experiments,
Paul Scherrer Institute, 5232 Villigen, Switzerland
(Dated: March 8, 2024)

We present high-quality angle-resolved photoemission (ARPES) and density functional theory
calculations (DFT+U) of SmCoIn5. We find broad agreement with previously published studies of
LaCoIn5 and CeCoIn5 [1, 2], confirming that the Sm 4f electrons are mostly localized. Nevertheless,
our model is consistent with an additional delocalized Sm component, stemming from hybridiza-
tion between the 4f electrons and the metallic bands at “hot spot” positions in the Brillouin zone.
The dominant hot spot, called γZ, is similar to a source of delocalized f states found in previous
experimental and theoretical studies of CeCoIn5 [1, 3]. In this work, we identify and focus on the
role of the Co d states in exploring the relationship between heavy quasiparticles and the magnetic
interactions in SmCoIn5, which lead to a magnetically ordered ground state from within an inter-
mediate valence scenario [4–6]. Specifically, we find a globally flat band consisting of Co d states
near E = −0.7 eV, indicating the possibility of enhanced electronic and magnetic interactions in the
“115” family of materials through localization in the Co layer, and we discuss a possible origin in
geometric frustration. We also show that the delocalized Sm 4f states can hybridize directly with
the Co 3dxz/3dyz orbitals, which occurs in our model at the Brillouin zone boundary point R in a
band that is locally flat and touches the Fermi level from above. Our work identifies microscopic
ingredients for additional magnetic interactions in the “115” materials beyond the RKKY mecha-
nism, and strongly suggests that the Co d bands are an important ingredient in the formation of
both magnetic and superconducting ground states.

The origin of heavy quasiparticles with f electron char-
acter is of fundamental interest due to their participation
in unconventional superconductivity. In heavy fermion
metals with a valence band of metallic s, p, and d elec-
trons, the conduction electrons can turn into heavy quasi-
particles by hybridizing with the localized f electrons.
Hybridization of this type, involving the formation of en-
tangled Kondo singlets that screen the f magnetic mo-
ments, has been observed in a variety of Ce-based in-
termetallics [1, 3, 7–14]. Microscopically, the Kondo hy-
bridization mechanism depends on the details of the elec-
tronic wavefunctions, and it has been argued that hy-
bridization is driven by the shape of the f orbital wave-
functions as they are determined by the crystal electric
field [15, 16].
The single-ion properties of Sm3+ (4f 5, S = 5/2, L = 5,
J = 5/2) make it an analogue of Ce3+ in CeCoIn5 (4f 1,
S = 1/2, L = 3, J = 5/2) with the same nominal J,
while exhibiting similar single-ion properties, including
the crystal field environment and atomic spin-orbit cou-
pling. The case of SmCoIn5 presents with predominantly
localized f electrons, as well as an additional delocal-
ized f component [6], similar to the case of CeCoIn5.
However, unlike CeCoIn5, the ground state of SmCoIn5
exhibits several antiferromagnetic (AF) ordered phases,
with three phase transitions observed in specific heat at

TN,1 ≈ 11 K, TN,2 ≈ 8 K, and TN,3 ≈ 6 K [4, 5]. Mag-
netic ordering in rare earth intermetallics is expected to
be dominated by the RKKY mechanism [8, 17, 18]. In
case of an additional Kondo hybridization, the RKKY
interactions are reduced by the Kondo screening cloud,
which typically prohibits the formation of long-range
magnetic order. Therefore, the microscopic differences
between CeCoIn5 and SmCoIn5, especially changes in
their most dominant magnetic interactions, may hold the
key to understanding how magnetic ground states can
emerge from within a system exhibiting Kondo screen-
ing.
To develop a microscopic picture of the Kondo screen-
ing environment in SmCoIn5, we conducted ARPES mea-
surements at T=12 K and built an electronic structure
model using DFT+U calculations. Our results confirm
that SmCoIn5 is dominated by the Sm3+ configuration
[5, 6] and is highly similar to other “115” materials, where
the f electrons remain mostly localized and play only a
small role in the overall characteristics of the band struc-
ture. Specifically, we find that the f electrons of Sm3+

sit near a binding energy of EB ≈ 6 eV, with good agree-
ment between ARPES and our DFT+U results, show-
ing little hybridization of the Sm3+ states. In addition,
a second band of Sm states sits above this position by
a value EB + U, which happens to nearly overlap the

arXiv:2403.04097v1  [cond-mat.str-el]  6 Mar 2024


2

FIG. 1.
(a) Tetragonal unit cell of SmCoIn5, showing the position and orientation of the In(2) px orbital (yellow) and Co dxz/dyz
orbitals (light and dark blue, respectively). (b) Sketch of the density of states of SmCoIn5 relative to EF . (c) Conventional
labels within the P4/mmm Brillouin zone, highlighting two positions of interest γZ (k = [0.25, 0, 0.2]) and R (k = [0.5, 0, 0.5]).
(d) ARPES intensity at T = 12 K, parallel to the Γ-X direction, while varying photon energy hν, demonstrating the coupling
of photon energy to the out-of-plane kz direction and identifying the energies corresponding to two high-symmetry planes along
the kz axis. (e) Fermi surface of SmCoIn5 in the Γ-X-M plane (kz=0) using circularly polarized light with photon energy
hν = 602 eV, and (f) Z-R-A plane (kz = π) using circularly polarized light with photon energy hν = 564 eV.

Fermi energy EF since U ≈ 6 eV. We interpret this band
loosely as an “upper Hubbard band” of Sm, because it
comprises a situation where an s, p, d conduction electron
tunnels onto the localized Sm3+ site, leading to an instan-
taneous Sm2+ configuration. To show that this picture
is correct, we also conducted separate DFT calculations
within a strictly Sm2+ configuration, which confirm that
the Sm2+ states appear close to the Fermi energy (see
supplementary information), although the details of that
calculation also show that the Sm2+ configuration cannot
be the ground state of SmCoIn5. A partial Sm2+ charac-
ter is also in agreement with previous experiments that
show a slight admixture of the Sm2+ valence state at low
temperatures below T=60 K [6], similar to the interme-
diate valence state found in a variety of other Sm- and
Yb-based materials [19–21].
Therefore, we believe the
origin of the intermediate valence scenario in SmCoIn5 is

captured by our DFT calculations.

Looking in more detail, we first show (Fig. 1-3) that
the band structure observed by ARPES agrees very well
with the DFT+U calculations, giving us a high degree
of confidence in our model. The model reveals the “hot
spots” in the Brillouin zone where the Sm f states hy-
bridize with the conduction electrons near the Fermi en-
ergy EF , and we find two spots of interest which we label
γZ = (0.25, 0, 0.2) and R = (0.5, 0, 0.5) (Fig. 1c; Fig. 4).
The γZ spot sits midway along the Γ − X cut direction
with nonzero kz = 0.2, which is similar to a large hot spot
position previously found in ARPES, DFT, and DMFT
studies of CeCoIn5 [1, 3, 12]. In SmCoIn5, our model
shows a smaller hot spot, which we argue may be related
to the different single-ion properties of Ce3+ and Sm3+.

The second “hot spot” for f hybridization in SmCoIn5
is the high-symmetry R position (Fig. 3-4), located at


3

FIG. 2.
ARPES EB-kx maps showing the band structure of SmCoIn5. (a) Γ-X-Γ cut for E − EF > -7 eV. The data has been
partially background-subtracted using a line-derivative method in order to enhance the visibility of the bands. (b) X-M-X
cut. (c) Z-R-Z cut.

the Brillouin zone boundary along both kx and kz, which
was also previously identified as weakly important for
CeCoIn5 [3] but more important for Sn-doped CeCoIn5
[13], which is in the limit of higher f electron itinerancy
(higher EF ). Our model calculations (Fig. 3-4) unam-
biguously show that the R point contains only Sm-f and
Co-d states, indicating that a direct hybridization mecha-
nism is possible. Moreover, orbitally resolving the model
(Fig. 5) shows that the R point contains only the Co 3dxz
orbital (or the equivalent 3dyz orbital at the R point ro-
tated 90 degrees about the origin). Since the d-f band
is highly flat at the R point, it is likely that a large van
Hove peak of Sm/Co states suddenly appears in the den-
sity of states, pinning the Fermi energy at the bottom
of this band. The appearance of this singularity exactly
at EF suggests the R point plays a role in the ground
state of SmCoIn5, even though we do not observe it in
our experiments. More importantly, due to the direct f-d
hybridization within this band, our model shows gener-
ally that magnetic interactions of the Co d states can
directly influence the magnetic degree of freedom of the
heavy quasiparticles, whether through interactions at the
R = (0.5, 0, 0.5) wavevector or elsewhere.

Finally, our model shows unambiguously that a glob-
ally flat band appearing at E = −0.7 eV in SmCoIn5, as
well as in LaCoIn5 and CeCoIn5 [1, 2], consists of Co d
states. Since our experiments and calculations both in-
dicate that the band is globally flat, we suggest that the
flatness of this band arises from a geometric frustration
mechanism in the quasi-2D Co-In(2) layer. Specifically,
we point out several square lattice models, including the
checkerboard and Lieb lattices, that could apply to a sub-
group of the Co d orbitals (see Discussion). Our results
show microscopically that this flat band, where electronic
and magnetic correlations are expected to be enhanced,
can influence the heavy quasiparticles, either through di-
rect exchange (such as at the R point) or via superex-
change across the In(2) sites. We argue then that geo-

metric frustration and the resulting flat d band may help
explain the appearance of magnetic order within a sys-
tem where the f states favor a delocalized ground state
and, more broadly, that it might play an important (and
until now overlooked) role in understanding magnetism
and superconductivity in the “115” materials.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Fermi surface and band structure of SmCoIn5

Fig. 1 shows the Fermi surface of SmCoIn5 in the Γ-X-
M and Z-R-A planes. ARPES intensity maps were taken
as a function of the in-plane momentum (kx,ky) at the
Fermi energy EF using two photon energies correspond-
ing to the Γ and Z points (Fig. 1d). Using the standard
notation used for “115”s, e.g.
of Ref.
[2], we observe
three electron-like bands at the M point (α, β, and γ).
The α and β sheets are visible around the M point with
circular and cloverleaf shapes, respectively. The γ sheet
is visible as parallel lines around the X point, as well as
in some of the features close to Γ. In a DMFT study
of CeCoIn5, the γ sheet structure near X was shown to
exhibit an in-plane curvature that pinches the pocket to
a narrow point directly on the line between Γ and X. In
SmCoIn5, we observe that the γ sheet is highly parallel,
with no in-plane curvature visible until the intersection
of the β and γ pockets very close to the Γ point. The
absence of such a pinch point suggests that the Sm f
electrons do not enter the Fermi surface here, whereas
they do in CeCoIn5 [3, 12]. Instead, our model shows
the f electrons in SmCoIn5 only enter the Fermi sur-
face at the γZ and R positions, as we discuss below.
The absence of an in-plane hot spot might imply a more
three-dimensional character to the Kondo screening in
SmCoIn5.
In Fig.
2, we show ARPES intensity maps (EB-


4

FIG. 3.
Comparison between DFT+U model calculations and ARPES within 1 eV of EF . (a) DFT calculated band structure
and density of states along the Γ-X-Γ cut, and (b) comparison with ARPES data that has been enhanced using the background
subtraction method of Fig. 2. The lines that are drawn in by hand over the DFT panel are copied directly onto the ARPES
panel below, signifying good agreement, and the colored labels specify the band names discussed in the text. Note that the
colors of these bands are not related to the colors indicated in the density of states plots on the right-hand side of each DFT
plot. (c-d) X-M-X cut. (e-f) Z-R-Z cut.

kx) showing the band structure of SmCoIn5 along high-
symmetry cuts between EF and binding energy EB =
7 eV. The flat band near EB =-5.6 eV is from Sm3+, and
its flatness reflects the predominantly localized nature of
Sm3+, wherein the f electrons cannot hybridize strongly.
The band structure near EF is accurately captured by
our DFT calculations in minute detail, as shown in Fig.
3. In Fig. 3(a,c,e) we zoom in to the band structure near
EF along the same high-symmetry cuts adopted in Fig.
2. Around the M point, shown in Fig. 3(c-d), electronic-
like α, β, and γ sheets are highly consistent with the
band structure of LaCoIn5 and CeCoIn5 [1, 2]. At the
Brillouin zone boundary at Z, shown in Fig. 3(e-f), the
γ sheet creates an open pocket at EF near Z, while the
lower δ sheet is closed at both Γ and Z and exhibits an
inversion from concave down to concave up between Γ
and Z. In a previous ARPES study of CeCoIn5 [12], it
was reported that depending on the surface termination,
some bulk features could appear in different layers of the
experimental data. In our data, we observe such an extra
band in the Γ-X-Γ cut (Fig. 3[b], about 0.2 eV above the
δ band and forming an open pocket at Γ), which closely
resembles the the γ sheet that is found by our bulk DFT
calculations only along the Z-R-Z cut (Fig. 3[e-f]). Since
this is precisely the same termination state proposed for
a Ce-In(1) surface in CeCoIn5 (cf. Fig. 2a of Ref. [12]),
we attribute this feature in our data to a 2D termination
state containing the Sm-In(1) crystallographic layer.
In all cuts shown in Fig.
2 and 3, we observe the
presence of a very strong and flat band near E − EF =
−0.7 eV, which we label with the archaic Greek letter
𭟋 (digamma). A similar flat band was also observed in
LaCoIn5 and CeCoIn5 [1, 2], but it was not clearly de-
termined if this band arises from an ionization state of

the localized rare earth ion, or if it is part of the p and d
metallic bands. From our DFT calculations on SmCoIn5,
we can confirm that the origin of this flat band is from Co
3d orbitals, as can be seen in the density of states in Fig.
3(a,c,e), shown on the right side of each subpanel. By
comparing the experimental ARPES data to the calcula-
tions in Fig. 3(b,d,f), we note several unusual properties
of the 𭟋 band. Firstly, its strong intensity (on par with
the Sm flat band at E-EF =-5.6 eV), overall flatness
throughout the Brillouin zone, and lack of any observ-
able hybridization points (anti-crossings) with any other
metallic band, suggests that it represents a significant
and relatively isolated subsystem of Co d states. Second,
we note the possibility that the band is even flatter than
the model calculations predict, which would indicate the
presence of electronic correlations in the d band beyond
the DFT+U level of approximation. The flat band may
arise from geometric frustration in a sublattice of Co or-
bitals, as we show in the following sections, and therefore
give rise to additional magnetic interactions. Moreover,
since the Co d-shell is unfilled and therefore has a mag-
netic degree of freedom, the 𭟋 band can additionally cou-
ple magnetically to the entangled Kondo states, which
are magnetic singlets. In general, the presence of the 𭟋
band shows that strong correlations in the d states can
directly influence the magnetic properties of the heavy
quasiparticles near EF .

Hybridization points between f states and metallic
bands

To understand the details of the hybridization between
Sm f electrons and the other bands, we projected our


5

FIG. 4.
Atomically resolved DFT calculated band structure of SmCoIn5 parallel to the Γ-X-Γ high-symmetry cut, with (a-c)
kz = 0.2 and (d-f) kz = 0.5 (Z-R-Z). Panels (a,d) show spectral weight of the In(2) site 5p orbitals, (b,e) show Co 3d, and
(c,f) show Sm 4f. Each sub-panel shows our calculations for SmCoIn5 (left side) along with a nonmagnetic calculation with
the 4f electrons frozen in the core (right side). In the left sub-panels, the intensity of the bands is proportional to the specific
atomic orbital content of each band, and is multiplied by the scale factor written in light blue at the bottom of the plot. For
example, in panel (a), the band colors for In(2) 5p have been multiplied by a factor 3.5 compared to the density of Co 3d
states in panel (b). For the nonmagnetic calculations in the right sub-panels, the specific orbital content is proportional to the
thickness of the red lines superimposed on the bands. The differences between the magnetic and nonmagnetic calculations is
evidenced by slight changes to the position of the bands due to the presence of Sm f electrons. Two “hot spots” of interest
at γZ and R (highlighted in panels [a] and [e]) show a large density of Sm 4f states, as shown in panel (c) and panel (f). In
the supplementary information, we additionally show similar plots with projections into the In(1) 5s, In(1) 5p, and In(2) 5s
orbitals.

DFT calculations into the basis of different atomic shells
and studied the “hot spots” near the Fermi energy that
contain Sm states. In Fig. 4, we show projections along
two high symmetry cuts parallel to the Γ-X-Γ direction,
for kz = 0.2 (a-c) and kz = 0.5 (d-f), both with ky = 0.
In panel (a), we use a yellow box to highlight the γZ
hot spot position k = (0.25, 0, 0.2), which contains sig-
nificant Sm weight (panel [c]). We find that the In(2)
5p orbitals dominate the shallow band extending from
γZ up to kx = 0.5 (the X point), while the γZ posi-
tion itself contains a mixture of In(1) and In(2) states,
with the In(2) 5p states providing the largest contribu-
tion (contributions from the other orbitals In[1] 5s, In[1]
5p, and In[2] 5s are shown in the supplementary informa-
tion). The existence of Sm states near the X point below
EF represents another difference between CeCoIn5 and
SmCoIn5.
From both the model calculations and experimental
data, the γZ = (0.25, 0, 0.2) hot spot in SmCoIn5 is
smaller and more isolated compared to CeCoIn5. Specif-
ically, we find no evidence that the f states at γZ are dis-
tributed over the larger Z-centered Fermi surface pocket
at EF (see supplementary figure 4(g); cf. Ref. [3]), and

we find no significant f contributions in the middle of
the Z-R cut (Fig. 4(f); cf. Ref. [3, 7]). Instead, our
DFT+U model shows that the states near the Z point are
dominated by the conduction electrons, and we find no
experimental evidence of any deviations from the model
along the Z−R−Z cut that would show the presence of f
states. However, we have retained the notation γZ in this
work to refer to the hybridization hot spot (0.25, 0, 0.2),
and to avoid confusion with the Fermi surface γ sheet.
The observation of a small γZ hot spot in SmCoIn5 could
be related to different hybridization conditions between
the relatively anisotropic Ce3+ ground state wavefunc-
tions [15, 16], compared to the highly isotropic wave-
functions of Sm3+ [6]. The lower anisotropy would also
explain why a DFT+U approach results in a very realis-
tic model for SmCoIn5 without the need to take into fully
account for the effects of the small crystal field splitting
of the lowest f manifold, which is beyond a mean field ap-
proach. Our model shows that the γZ position hybridizes
slightly with the 5s and 5p orbitals of both In sites, but is
dominated by Sm3+ spectral weight. Since the In(2) site
was also shown to have a strong effect on the ground state
superconductivity in Ce-based “115” compounds [7, 16],


6

we show the In(2) character in Fig. 4 while noting that
there is an admixture of other orbitals at γZ. Within the
In(2) atom, we find the most important contribution is
from the 5px orbital (or with the equivalent 5py orbital
at the position rotated 90 degrees about the origin), as
is expected from the shape of the 5px orbitals.
Turning to the hot spot at the R point k = (0.5, 0, 0.5),
in Fig. 4(d-f) we show the presence of a shallow band
which appears pinned to the Fermi level and consists of
Co d and Sm f states. This R-centered hot spot does
not appear to be smoothly connected to the γZ hot spot,
but is instead a separate feature with a distinct set of
associated quasiparticles. In supplementary figure 4, we
show constant-energy slices plotting kz against kx, which
show that two minima can be clearly distinguished from
one another up to energies at least 20 meV above EF .
Furthermore, the absence of In(2) states in this band
(Fig.
4[d]) shows that the Sm and Co states exhibit
magnetic coupling through a direct exchange mechanism,
which is relevant not only for this locally flat band at R,
but also more generally shows that direct exchange can
be achieved between the rare earth and transition metal
electrons in the “115” materials. Since the d+f band at
R is very shallow, spanning nearly ∼0.2 reciprocal lat-
tice units before deviating significantly from E=EF , the
R point allows a flat band of d states to directly hybridize
with the heavy f quasiparticles. Moreover, the local flat-
ness of this band suggests that the van Hove singularity in
the density of states is responsible for pinning the Fermi
energy to the bottom of this band at R. Therefore, al-
though Sm f states are already present at γZ at energies
below EF , we find that the hybridized flat band at R is
probably touching the Fermi energy.

FIG. 5.
Orbital-resolved Co 3d orbitals from a DFT calcu-
lation of SmCoIn5 with f electrons frozen into the core. The
orbitals hybridizing with Sm f states are found to be dx2−y2
at Z, and dxz/dyz at R. The flat 𭟋 band contains dxy and
dz2.

To further study how hot spots develop at the γZ and
R hot spots, we conducted separate DFT calculations
with the f electrons frozen into the core, shown on the
right side of each sub-panel in Fig.
4.
Qualitatively,
the two calculations are highly consistent, although one

important difference is at the R point, where the Co
d band does not dip down low enough to reach EF in
the nonmagnetic case, showing that the interaction be-
tween Sm and Co states is the driving mechanism be-
hind creating an interaction between Sm and Co at R.
Since the nonmagnetic calculations do not require the
use of a magnetic supercell, we also use them to show
the proper projection of the In and Co bands onto the
orbitals within the crystallographic unit cell illustrated
in Fig. 1(a). In the case of the γZ position (see supple-
mentary information), we find that the In(2) 5px orbital
dominates the shallow band between kx = 0.3 and 0.5
where the Smf states occur, while exactly at γZ it is still
the most important of the s, p, d orbitals but by a smaller
margin. Hence, quasiparticles at γZ exhibit largely Sm-
Sm interactions, and could support a Fermi surface nest-
ing instability between neighboring γZ points—e.g., with
wavevector q = (0.5, 0, 0.4)—driven by the Sm electrons.
On the other hand, at the R point, shown in Fig.
5,
we find that the dxz orbital completely dominates the
d+f band at EF . This result shows that the hybridiza-
tion between Sm and Co at R is orbitally selective, such
that the interactions affecting the heavy quasiparticles
there are related to the symmetry of the Co dxz/dyz
orbitals.
In the magnetically ordered ground state of
SmCoIn5 [4, 5], zone folding and reconstruction of the
electronic bands may further increase the weight of the
R point below EF . Therefore, from a magnetic point of
view, the orbital-selective magnetic exchange pathways
in SmCoIn5 involving the dxz/dyz orbitals may be an im-
portant mechanism competing with Sm-Sm interactions,
with consequences for the magnetically ordered ground
state of the Sm sublattice.

Localization in the Co layer of “115” materials

In our DFT+U calculations, the density of states of
the Co 3d electrons appears predominantly between EF
and about EB = 3 eV, and exhibits a strong flat band
(𭟋) near E = −0.7 eV. Flat bands in general are hosts
of electronic localization (e.g. [26, 27]), and they have
been previously shown to have a strong effect on mag-
netic ground states in transition metal systems [28–33].
Moveover, since our 𭟋 band is globally flat throughout
the entire Brillouin zone, we are inclined to search for
explanations in terms of a robust symmetry-protected
mechanism. To this end, flat bands arising from geomet-
ric frustration have been identified in a variety of square
or square-like lattices [34–41], many of which can also
host unconventional superconductivity, posing a deeper
connection between the 𭟋 band and the phenomenology
of the 115s.
If the 𭟋 band is globally flat because of geometric frus-
tration, analysis of the 115 crystal structure can elucidate
how this occurs. In the 115 structure, Co atoms occupy


7

a square lattice. Therefore, one possibility is that the
band structure of the 115s hosts a very specific hierar-
chy of couplings involving the square lattice, such as the
checkerboard lattice proposed in [34]. On the other hand,
as we show in Fig. 1a, the Co site is also coordinated
by four In(2) sites just above the plane of Co, and four
below. This Co-In(2) sublattice bears a resemblance to
the Lieb lattice, a bipartite square lattice where the cen-
tral site of the square is coordinated by four neighbors
of another species.
Phenomenologically, studies of the
Hubbard model on the Lieb lattice have focused on its
relationship with both magnetism [36, 42, 43] and su-
perconductivity [35, 37], including as a model for orbital
selective superconductivity in the cuprates [39].
Since
both checkerboard and Lieb lattice models also contain
the ingredients for topologically nontrivial band cross-
ings [34, 41, 44], the 𭟋 band may be important to the
115s in yet another way, since such a crossing was pre-
viously proposed in a study of CeCoIn5 [45]. In general,
the possibility of a specific square lattice model or a Lieb
lattice model shows that SmCoIn5 can easily contain the
ingredients for geometric frustration in the square-like
sublattice of Co d states.
The appearance of geometric frustration does not nec-
essarily imply that the ground state of the frustrated
sublattice is the ground state of SmCoIn5.
Since the
𭟋 band in the 115s is not situated at the Fermi energy,
its quasiparticles are not thermally activated. However,
since the Co d-shell is partially unfilled, the magnetic in-
teractions within the 𭟋 band can nevertheless directly
influence the itinerant quasiparticles. Also, as we have
shown in SmCoIn5, direct hybridization can occur be-
tween heavy quasiparticles with specific Co d orbitals (in
our model, with dxz/dyz at the R-point), proving that
the effects of the Co flat band can be felt directly by
the partly delocalized f states. Therefore, in CeCoIn5,
where the delocalized f states participate in a superfluid
condensate, interactions arising from the 𭟋 band of d
states might also influence the superconducting pairing
mechanism.

f-Multiplet-Driven Hybridization

In a DMFT study of CeCoIn5, different multiplets of
the Ce f electrons were shown to selectively hybridize
with the β band between X and M, and with the γ band
between Γ and X [3]. With the much richer multiplet
structure of Sm [6, 46], the hybridization in Sm is more
complex, and may contain charge-like degrees of freedom
in addition to the typical magnetic Kondo hybridization
[6]. In addition to the spin-orbit coupling, which splits
the Sm f levels into multiplets with different J, the multi-
f-electron configuration in Sm also contains Coulomb re-
pulsion between f electrons, a situation not present in the
single-f-electron case of Ce. This additional term cou-

ples multiplets of different J, leading to a vastly larger
subspace of f multiplet levels compared to the case of Ce,
which is limited to just 14 f states with definite splittings
set by the single-ion properties. Therefore, with Sm it is
possible for even a tiny amount of curvature in a nomi-
nally flat band to encompass many multiplet states of the
Sm ion. For example, within 0.3 eV of EF , the ground
state of Ce3+ contains the 14 multiplet levels of differ-
ent mJ, whereas Sm3+ exhibits nearly 200 different levels
that are mixtures of different J and mJ [6]. Significantly,
the various multiplets may have different Kondo coupling
strengths that exhibit different hybridization strengths
with the itinerant valence band electrons. This dramati-
cally increases the likelihood of a Kondo-like interaction
between at least one of the multiplet states with the va-
lence band, at an energy close enough to EF to exhibit
a Kondo resonance.
The large subspace of f levels in
a multi-f-electron system may therefore present a natu-
ral explanation for why many Sm-based materials exhibit
high effective masses [19], and is of particular interest in
cases such as SmCoIn5 where the Sm/Co d+f band is
already locally flat at the R point. It would therefore be
interesting to conduct further photoemission studies on
SmCoIn5 or doped SmCoIn5 with high resolution, which
could possibly show if f multiplet wavefunctions other
than the ground state are directly involved in the Kondo
coupling, a complexity less likely to be encountered in
Ce-based materials.

Magnetic Exchange

Finally, we address the magnetic exchange in the Sm-
Sm, Sm-Co, and Co-Co subsystems. In the tetragonal
lattice structure of SmCoIn5, the Sm and Co atoms both
form two-dimensional square lattices parallel to the basal
ab plane, as shown in Fig. 1(a-b). The Sm and Co layers
alternate along the c axis with a direct stacking struc-
ture, such that a Co atom sits directly between two Sm
atoms. The nearest neighboring Sm atoms in the ab plane
are separated by the a lattice parameter of 4.5 ˚A and con-
tain an In(1) ion in the same plane, while the In(2) ions
sit between the Sm and Co layers. If the Sm and Co ions
have a direct magnetic exchange pathway between them,
it could also involve the In(2) sites, which could create
a magnetic superexchange-like interaction. An interac-
tion involving In(2) is plausible because the wavefunction
shapes of the Co dxz/dyz orbitals lie closest to the In(2)
sites, as shown in Fig. 1(a-b). Depending on the details
of hybridization with the In(2) px, py, or pz orbitals, the
magnetic superexchange mechanism could support mul-
tiple pathways with different ferromagnetic (FM) or an-
tiferromagnetic (AF) exchange constants, in addition to
the in-plane exchange pathway coupling Sm to Sm across
the In(2) px orbital. Therefore, the In(2) site may pro-
vide another degree of freedom in tuning the magnetic


8

exchange pathway between Sm and Co, and through it,
the proportion of heavy quasiparticles entering the Fermi
surface at the γZ point versus those entering at R. Since
it was previously shown that hybridization between the
rare earth and In(2) site is an important factor in control-
ling superconductivity in the CeCoIn5-CeRhIn5-CeIrIn5
series [15, 16], the complexity of the interactions that we
observe in SmCoIn5 may hold a key to understanding
the origin of the ground state. Specifically, the existence
of competing magnetic exchange pathways involving the
rare earth (R) sites, specifically, R-In(2)-R (in plane), R-
Co-R (out of plane), and R-In(2)-Co-In(2)-R, may have
consequences for how magnetic and/or superconducting
ground states form in the 115s.
In addition to the RKKY mechanism, the role of direct
magnetic exchange and magnetic superexchange can be
generally important for d and f electrons in rare earth in-
termetallics. For instance, in (La,Tb)Mn2Si2, it was pro-
posed that an R-Mn-R interlayer superexchange mecha-
nism is responsible for stabilizing AF order, while the Si
atoms could act as mediators for superexchange between
neighboring planes of Mn atoms along the c axis [47, 48].
In SmCoIn5, hybridization of the Sm f and Co d orbitals,
possibly involving superexchange across the In(2) sites,
suggests that these exchange mechanisms have more than
one way to affect the magnetic Hamiltonian, particu-
larly along the c-axis. Such magnetic exchange pathways
would therefore compete with the RKKY mechanism,
and could play a destabilizing role in the magnetic ground
state, particularly for interactions along the c axis. Com-
petition between these magnetic interactions may there-
fore help explain the complicated magnetic phase dia-
gram of SmCoIn5 [5]. Therefore, our observation of flat
d bands interacting with states near the Fermi energy
suggests a mechanism for FM and AF interactions to
compete in SmCoIn5 beyond the RKKY model, and also
suggests that because of this competition, fine tuning by
strong correlation effects among the d states may have an
outsize effect on the ultimate ground state of the material
and the ordered structure of Sm local moments.

Summary

In summary, close agreement between ARPES mea-
surements and DFT+U calculations shows that the band
structure of SmCoIn5 exhibits coupling of the localized
Sm f states at the Fermi level via hybridization with spe-
cific In 5p and Co 3d metallic states. Our model shows
that heavy quasiparticles containing Sm f character can
hybridize at multiple positions in the Brillouin zone, in-
cluding a position supporting Sm-In(2)[5px] hybridiza-
tion that is similar to previous results on CeCoIn5, and
a second position at the zone boundary supporting Sm-
Co[3dxz] hybridization (simultaneously with the equiva-
lent orbitals 5py and 3dyz, respectively, along the other

in-plane direction in the crystal). Meanwhile, the Co d
orbitals exhibit a globally flat band (𭟋), which has a
likely origin in geometric frustration.
The magnetic interactions arising from coupling of the
itinerant quasiparticles to the Co layer, whether through
direct hybridization (e.g. at R), through mean field in-
teractions (because of a partly unfilled Co d shell), or
through superexchange interactions involving the In(2)
sites, all point to the importance of the Co d states in
determining the ground state. Since the d shell is com-
mon to all “115” materials, electronic localization may
play an overlooked role in the ground states found in
this family, including unconventional superconductivity.
In SmCoIn5, the delocalized nature of Sm states at the
hot spots shows how magnetic interactions can go beyond
the typical RKKY mechanism, and may explain why the
Sm f states in SmCoIn5 exhibit both a delocalized com-
ponent and localized magnetic order.

METHODS

Sample growth

SmCoIn5 single crystals were grown using an indium
flux method that we described previously [6]. Crystals
were separated from the flux by centrifugation and later
etched in hydrochloric acid. The SmCoIn5 samples ex-
hibited a plate-like habit corresponding to the basal plane
of the crystal.

ARPES experiments

Angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES)
experiments were carried out at the soft-x-ray endsta-
tion [22] of the ADRESS beamline [23] at the Swiss Light
Source, PSI, Switzerland. Single crystals were mounted
using the natural basal plane on copper plates using high-
strength H20E silver epoxy. Posts made of small stainless
steel screws were attached onto the top surfaces of the
samples with Torr-Seal epoxy. The samples were cleaved
in ultrahigh vacuum of about 10−10 mbar. We used cir-
cularly polarized light with a beam spot of about 60 x
100 µm on the sample. We determined the coupling of
beam energy to the out-of-plane kz direction by scan-
ning the beam energy over hν =480 to 700 eV, shown
in Fig.
1(d).
We identified hν = 602 eV as the en-
ergy where the in-plane iso-EB maps correspond to the
Γ − X − M plane, and hν = 564 eV as the energy cor-
responding to the Z − R − A plane. The use of soft-x-
ray photon energies results in large photoelectron mean
free paths, and the latter translates, by the Heisenberg
relation, to sharp definition of the out-of-plane momen-
tum kz [24, 25]. Maps as a function of two-dimensional
in-plane momentum (kx,ky) were then collected at these


9

energies to observe the Fermi surface and band structure,
where we found broad similarity to published results of
CeCoIn5 that use DFT [1, 12] and dynamical mean-field
theory [3].

DFT calculations

All the density functional theory (DFT) calculations
were carried out using the Quantum ESPRESSO pack-
age [49–51]. Exchange and correlation effects were mod-
elled using the PBEsol functional [52], augmented by a
Hubbard U term to better describe the physics of the
localized Sm 4f electrons. The scalar-relativistic pseu-
dopotentials are taken from the SSSP library [53]. To
sample the Brillouin zone, we used a 7x7x7 Monkhorst-
Pack grid, a 10x10x10 grid was used for the calculation
of the projected density of states. The wave-functions
(charge densities and potentials) were expanded using a
kinetic energy cutoff of 70 Ry (560 Ry). We used the
experimental lattice constants and internal atomic po-
sitions [54, 55] throughout this work. The values of U
used in this work (U=6.18 eV and U=6.26 eV for Sm3+

and Sm2+ calculations, respectively) were computed fully
ab-initio by using the linear response approach [56] as
implemented in Ref. [57, 58]. In order to “nudge” the
self-consistent-field calculations to converge to the Sm3+

solution, we prepared the systems in initial configura-
tions that have 5 electrons in the Sm f shell. Some of
these initial configurations eventually converge to a self-
consistent solution that exhibit the desired 3+ oxidation
state for the Sm atoms.
At the level of DFT+U this
solution is always metastable, i.e. its energy is slightly
higher then that of the Sm2+ (6 electrons in the Sm f
shell) solution. However it is the one that best repro-
duces the ARPES data. Also, we did not use any +U
corrections for the Co 3d states as this deteriorates the
agreement with the ARPES data. Finally, in the mag-
netic calculations including the f electrons, the unfolding
of the bands in the 7-atom Brillouin zone was performed
using the unfold-x code [59, 60].

DATA AVAILABILITY

The data used to produce the simulation results pre-
sented in this work are available at the Materials Cloud
Archive [61]. Experimental datasets are available from
the corresponding author on reasonable request.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research was supported by the Swiss National
Science Foundation (SNSF) under grant 200021 184983

(M.K.), and by the NCCR MARVEL, a National Cen-
tre of Competence in Research, funded by the Swiss
National Science Foundation (grant number 205602)
(N.C.).
D.W.T. acknowledges funding from the Euro-
pean Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation pro-
gramme under the Marie Sk�lodowska-Curie grant agree-
ment No 884104 (PSI-FELLOW-III-3i). F.A. acknowl-
edges support by Swiss National Science Foundation
Project No. 206312019002.

COMPETING INTERESTS

The authors declare no competing financial or non-
financial interests.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

D.W.T. and M.K. conceived the work and guided the
project. D.J.G. and E.P. prepared samples, D.W.T. and
F.A. prepared and conducted ARPES experiments with
guidance from V.N.S., and N.C. performed density func-
tional theory calculations. D.W.T, M.K., and N.C. pre-
pared the manuscript with input from all authors.

∗ david-william.tam@psi.ch
† michel.kenzelmann@psi.ch

[1] Chen, Q. Y. et al. Direct observation of how the heavy-
fermion state develops in CeCoIn5. Phys. Rev. B 96,
045107 (2017).

[2] Chen, Q. Y. et al. Electronic structure study of LaCoIn
5 and its comparison with CeCoIn 5. Phys. Rev. B 100,
035117 (2019).

[3] Jang, S., et al. Evolution of the Kondo lattice electronic
structure above the transport coherence temperature.
PNAS 117, 23467–23476 (2020).

[4] Inada, Y., Hedo, M., Fujiwara, T., Sadamasa, T. & Uwa-
toko, Y. Physical properties of SmMIn5 (M=Co, Rh, Ir).
Physica B: Condensed Matter 378–380, 421–422 (2006).

[5] Pouse, N., et al. Temperature versus Sm concentration
phase diagram and quantum criticality in the correlated
electron system Ce 1 - x Sm x CoIn 5. Phys. Rev. B 97,
235149 (2018).

[6] Tam,
D.
W.
et
al.
Charge
fluctuations
in
the
intermediate-valence ground state of SmCoIn5. Commun
Phys 6, 1–11 (2023).

[7] Shim, J. H., Haule, K. & Kotliar, G. Modeling the
Localized-to-Itinerant Electronic Transition in the Heavy
Fermion System CeIrIn5. Science 318, 1615–1617 (2007).

[8] White, B. D., Thompson, J. D. & Maple, M. B. Un-
conventional superconductivity in heavy-fermion com-
pounds. Physica C: Superconductivity and its Applica-
tions 514, 246–278 (2015).

[9] Fujimori, S. et al. Direct observation of a quasiparticle
band in Ce Ir In 5 : An angle-resolved photoemission
spectroscopy study. Phys. Rev. B 73, 224517 (2006).


10

[10] Koitzsch, A. et al. Observing the heavy fermions in Ce-
CoIn5 by angle-resolved photoemission. Physica C: Su-
perconductivity and its Applications 460–462, 666–667
(2007).

[11] Patil, S. et al. ARPES view on surface and bulk hy-
bridization phenomena in the antiferromagnetic Kondo
lattice CeRh2Si2. Nat Commun 7, 11029 (2016).

[12] Kurleto, R. et al. Photoemission signature of momentum-
dependent hybridization in CeCoIn 5. Phys. Rev. B 104,
125104 (2021).

[13] Maksimovic, N. et al. Evidence for a delocalization quan-
tum phase transition without symmetry breaking in Ce-
CoIn5. Science 375, 76–81 (2022).

[14] Xu, C., Cao, C. & Zhu, J.-X. Pressure-induced con-
comitant topological and metal-insulator quantum phase
transitions in Ce3Pd3Bi4. npj Quantum Mater. 7, 1–5
(2022).

[15] Willers, T. et al. Crystal-field and Kondo-scale investiga-
tions of Ce M In 5 ( M = Co , Ir, and Rh): A combined
x-ray absorption and inelastic neutron scattering study.
Phys. Rev. B 81, 195114 (2010).

[16] Willers, T. et al. Correlation between ground state and
orbital anisotropy in heavy fermion materials. PNAS
112, 2384–2388 (2015).

[17] ˇCerm´ak, P., et al. Magnetic structures of non-cerium ana-
logues of heavy-fermion Ce2RhIn8: case of Nd2RhIn8,
Dy2RhIn8 and Er2RhIn8. Phys. Rev. B 89, 184409
(2014).

[18] Mazzone, D. G. et al. Evolution of Magnetic Order from
the Localized to the Itinerant Limit. Phys. Rev. Lett.
123, 097201 (2019).

[19] Higashinaka, R., Yamada, A., Matsuda, T. D. & Aoki, Y.
Relationship between specific heat, valence and effective
magnetic moment of Sm ions in strongly correlated Sm
compounds. AIP Advances 8, 125017 (2018).

[20] Kummer, K. et al. Similar temperature scale for valence
changes in Kondo lattices with different Kondo temper-
atures. Nat Commun 9, 2011 (2018).

[21] Liu, H. et al. f-electron hybridised Fermi surface in mag-
netic field-induced metallic YbB12. npj Quantum Mater.
7, 1–7 (2022).

[22] Strocov, V. N., et al. Soft-X-ray ARPES facility at the
ADRESS beamline of the SLS: concepts, technical reali-
sation and scientific applications. J Synchrotron Rad 21,
32–44 (2014).

[23] Strocov, V. N. et al. High-resolution soft X-ray beamline
ADRESS at the Swiss Light Source for resonant inelastic
X-ray scattering and angle-resolved photoelectron spec-
troscopies. J Synchrotron Rad 17, 631–643 (2010).

[24] Strocov, V. N., et al. Three-Dimensional Electron Realm
in VSe2 by Soft-X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy: Ori-
gin of Charge-Density Waves. Phys. Rev. Lett. 109,
086401 (2012).

[25] Strocov, V. N. Intrinsic accuracy in 3-dimensional pho-
toemission band mapping. Journal of Electron Spec-
troscopy and Related Phenomena 130, 65–78 (2003).

[26] Tang, L. et al. Photonic flat-band lattices and uncon-
ventional light localization. Nanophotonics 9, 1161–1176
(2020).

[27] Puntel,
D.
et
al.
Photoinduced
dynamics
of
flat
bands
in
the
kagome
metal
CoSn.
http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.09531 (2023).

[28] Kang, M. et al. Topological flat bands in frustrated
kagome lattice CoSn. Nat Commun 11, 4004 (2020).

[29] Lin, Z. et al. Flatbands and Emergent Ferromagnetic Or-
dering in Fe 3 Sn 2 Kagome Lattices. Phys. Rev. Lett.
121, 096401 (2018).

[30] Yin, J.-X. et al. Negative flat band magnetism in a
spin–orbit-coupled correlated kagome magnet. Nat. Phys.
15, 443–448 (2019).

[31] Li, Y. et al. Flat-band magnetism and helical magnetic
order in Ni-doped SrCo 2 As 2. Phys. Rev. B 100, 094446
(2019).

[32] Melzi, R., Carretta, P., Lascialfari, A., Mambrini, M.,
Troyer, M., Millet, P., & Mila, F. Li 2 VO ( S i , G e
) O 4 , a Prototype of a Two-Dimensional Frustrated
Quantum Heisenberg Antiferromagnet. Phys. Rev. Lett.
85, 1318–1321 (2000).

[33] Melzi, R. et al. Magnetic and thermodynamic properties
of Li2VOSiO4: A two-dimensional S = 1 / 2 frustrated
antiferromagnet on a square lattice. Phys. Rev. B 64,
024409 (2001).

[34] Sun, K., Gu, Z., Katsura, H. & Das Sarma, S. Nearly
Flatbands with Nontrivial Topology. Phys. Rev. Lett.
106, 236803 (2011).

[35] Iglovikov, V. I., H´ebert, F., Gr´emaud, B., Batrouni, G.
G. & Scalettar, R. T. Superconducting transitions in flat-
band systems. Phys. Rev. B 90, 094506 (2014).

[36] Noda, K., Inaba, K. & Yamashita, M. Magnetism in the
three-dimensional layered Lieb lattice: Enhanced transi-
tion temperature via flat-band and Van Hove singulari-
ties. Phys. Rev. A 91, 063610 (2015).

[37] Julku, A., Peotta, S., Vanhala, T. I., Kim, D.-H. &
T¨orm¨a, P. Geometric Origin of Superfluidity in the Lieb-
Lattice Flat Band. Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 045303 (2016).

[38] Nunes, L. H. C. M. & Smith, C. M. Flat-band supercon-
ductivity for tight-binding electrons on a square-octagon
lattice. Phys. Rev. B 101, 224514 (2020).

[39] Yamazaki, K. et al. Superconducting mechanism for the
cuprate Ba2CuO3+δ based on a multiorbital Lieb lattice
model. Phys. Rev. Res. 2, 033356 (2020).

[40] Xu, F., Zhang, L. & Jiang, L.-Y. Temperature and dop-
ing dependent flat-band superconductivity on the Lieb-
lattice. Chinese Phys. B 30, 067401 (2021).

[41] Fan, R., Sun, L., Shao, X., Li, Y. & Zhao, M. Two-
dimensional Dirac materials: Tight-binding lattice mod-
els and material candidates. ChemPhysMater 2, 30–42
(2023).

[42] Tasaki, H. From Nagaoka’s Ferromagnetism to Flat-Band
Ferromagnetism and Beyond: An Introduction to Ferro-
magnetism in the Hubbard Model. Progress of Theoreti-
cal Physics 99, 489–548 (1998).

[43] Noda, K., Koga, A., Kawakami, N. & Pruschke, T. Fer-
romagnetism of cold fermions loaded into a decorated
square lattice. Phys. Rev. A 80, 063622 (2009).

[44] Yang, B., Zhang, X. & Zhao, M. Dirac node lines in two-
dimensional Lieb lattices. Nanoscale 9, 8740–8746 (2017).

[45] Shirer, K. R. et al. Dirac fermions in the heavy-fermion
superconductors
Ce(Co,Rh,Ir)In5.
arXiv:1808.00403
[cond-mat] (2018).

[46] Denlinger, J. D., et al. SmB 6 Photoemission: Past and
Present. in Proceedings of the International Conference
on Strongly Correlated Electron Systems (SCES2013)
(Journal
of
the
Physical
Society
of
Japan,
2014).
doi:10.7566/JPSCP.3.017038.

[47] Korotin, Dm. M., et al. Magnetic ordering in intermetal-
lic La1-xTbxMn2Si2 compounds. Journal of Magnetism
and Magnetic Materials 454, 144–149 (2018).


11

[48] Korotin, Dm. M., et al. Origin of magnetic phase transi-
tion in RMn2Si2 (R = rare-earth ion or Y) intermetallics.
Computational Materials Science 184, 109901 (2020).

[49] Giannozzi, P. et al. QUANTUM ESPRESSO: a modular
and open-source software project for quantum simula-
tions of materials. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 21, 395502
(2009).

[50] Giannozzi, P. et al. Advanced capabilities for materials
modelling with Quantum ESPRESSO. J. Phys.: Con-
dens. Matter 29, 465901 (2017).

[51] Giannozzi, P. et al. Quantum ESPRESSO toward the
exascale. J. Chem. Phys. 152, 154105 (2020).

[52] Perdew, J. P. et al. Restoring the Density-Gradient Ex-
pansion for Exchange in Solids and Surfaces. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 100, 136406 (2008).

[53] Prandini, G., Marrazzo, A., Castelli, I. E., Mounet,
N. & Marzari, N. Precision and efficiency in solid-state
pseudopotential calculations. npj Comput Mater 4, 1–13
(2018).

[54] Kalychak, Ya M., et al. Russian Metallurgy 1 213-215
(1989).

[55] ICSD collection code 623940 (https://icsd.products.fiz-
karlsruhe.de/)

[56] Cococcioni, M. & de Gironcoli, S. Linear response ap-
proach to the calculation of the effective interaction pa-
rameters in the LDA + U method. Phys. Rev. B 71,
035105 (2005).

[57] Timrov, I., Marzari, N. & Cococcioni, M. Hubbard pa-
rameters from density-functional perturbation theory.
Phys. Rev. B 98, 085127 (2018).

[58] Timrov, I., Marzari, N. & Cococcioni, M. HP – A code
for the calculation of Hubbard parameters using density-
functional perturbation theory. Computer Physics Com-
munications 279, 108455 (2022).

[59] https://bitbucket.org/bonfus/unfold-x/src/master/
[60] Pacil`e, D. et al. Narrowing of d bands of FeCo layers in-
tercalated under graphene. Applied Physics Letters 118,
121602 (2021).

[61] Tam,
D.
W.
et
al.
Flat-band
hybridization
be-
tween
f
and
d
states
near
the
Fermi
energy
of
SmCoIn5.
Materials
Cloud
Archive
2023.196
http://doi:10.24435/materialscloud:zc-45 (2023).


