Slepičková Kasálková et al., Surface activation of Hastalex by vacuum argon plasma for cytocompatibility enhancement

1

Surface activation of Hastalex by vacuum argon plasma for 

cytocompatibility enhancement

Nikola Slepičková Kasálkováa, Silvie Rimpelováb, Cyril Vaceka, Dominik Fajstavra, 

Václav Švorčíka, Petr Sajdlc, Petr Slepičkaa,*

aDepartment of Solid State Engineering, University of Chemistry and Technology Prague, 166 

28 Prague, Czech Republic 

bDepartment of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Chemistry and Technology 

Prague, 166 28 Prague, Czech Republic

cDepartment of Power Engineering, University of Chemistry and Technology Prague, 166 28 

Prague, Czech Republic

Abstract

Here, we present surface analysis and biocompatibility evaluation of novel composite 

material based on graphene oxide traded as Hastalex. First, the surface morphology and 

elemental analysis of the pristine material were examined by atomic force and scanning electron 

microscopies, and by energy-dispersive and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopies, respectively. 

The Hastalex surface was then modified by plasma (3 and 8 W with exposure times up to 240 s), 

the impact of which on the material surface wettability and morphology was further evaluated. 

In addition, the material aging was studied at room and elevated temperatures. Significant 

changes in surface roughness, morphology, and area were detected at the nanometre scale after 

plasma exposure. An increase in oxygen content due to the plasma exposure was observed both 

for 3 and 8 W. The plasma treatment had an outstanding effect on the cytocompatibility of 

Hastalex foil treated at both input powers of 3 and 8 W. The cell number of human MRC-5 

fibroblasts on Hastalex foils exposed to plasma increased significantly compared to pristine 

Hastalex and even to tissue culture polystyrene. The plasma exposure also affected the 

fibroblasts’ cell growth and shape.

Keywords: carbon composite; surface modification; pattern; nanostructure; polymer stability; 
surface chemistry; morphology; cytocompatibility; 

*) Corresponding author:

P. Slepička, tel.: +420 220 445 162; E-mail address: petr.slepicka@vscht.cz


Slepičková Kasálková et al., Surface activation of Hastalex by vacuum argon plasma for cytocompatibility enhancement

2

1. Introduction

In nature, carbon predominantly exists in two allotropes with vastly different physical 

properties, namely graphite and diamond. However, due to its stability in three hybridizations 

(sp, sp2, and sp3), carbon can also form numerous other amorphous and crystalline structures

[1]. The most promising materials for research are those that have at least one dimension smaller 

than 100 nm. They are categorized based on their dimensionality as follows: 0D nanostructures

including nanoparticles and fullerenes [2], 1D nanofibers and nanotubes comprising carbon 

nanofibers and carbon nanotubes [3], 2D graphene and nanodots containing graphene, a single 

layer of carbon atoms, as a prominent example, along with carbon nanodots [4], and 3D 

structures encompassing carbon foam and carbon aerogel, among others [5]. These carbon 

nanostructures offer great potential for exploring new materials and their unique properties and 

applications.

Graphene, which is the fundamental building block of more complex carbon structures, 

was first successfully prepared in 2004 by graphite exfoliation [6]. Other methods of graphene 

synthesis include epitaxial growth on silicon carbide [7], chemical vapour deposition (CVD)

[8], or dissolution of graphite in organic solvents [9,10]. Nevertheless, a significant limitation 

of graphene use is its tendency to agglomerate (cluster formation) caused by its high 

hydrophobicity [11,12]. This property complicates the dispersion of graphene in composite 

matrices. For practical applications, graphene oxide (GO) [13] and its reduced form (rGO) [14]

are often preferred due to their improved dispersibility compared to pristine graphene [15].

GO is prepared by oxidizing graphite [16]; monoatomic layers with oxygen-containing 

functional groups are formed [17]. The commonly used method for GO preparation is the 

Hummers method. In this method, flake graphite is treated with sulphuric acid in the presence 

of sodium nitrate and potassium permanganate [18]. Through this process, graphene enriched 

in hydroxyl, epoxide, and carboxyl groups is obtained. These functional groups on GO can react 

with other functional groups and form covalent bonds, thus enabling its incorporation into a 

matrix during polymerization, for instance [19]. However, during the oxidation process, 

graphene loses some of its properties [20,21]. As the number of oxygen-containing groups 

increases, its electrical conductivity decreases. This effect can be partially reversed by chemical

[22] or thermal [23] reduction (chemically or thermally reduced graphene oxide, CrGO, and 

TrGO, respectively).

With the advancing development of carbon nanostructures, they have begun to be 

considered ideal reinforcements for polymer matrix composites (PMCs) [24,25]. Among them, 


Slepičková Kasálková et al., Surface activation of Hastalex by vacuum argon plasma for cytocompatibility enhancement

3

carbon nanofibers, graphene, and carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have proven to be particularly 

successful [26-28]. These structures were discovered in 1991, and their tensile strength was 

measured to be 63 GPa, which is an order of magnitude higher than that of carbon fibers [29]. 

Polymer composites with CNTs are the most extensively researched composite materials to 

date, as evidenced by the abundance of scientific publications [30-34]. Due to the strong 

interfacial interactions of both graphene and CNTs, achieving their dispersion within the matrix 

is challenging, especially when aiming for higher weight percentages. For graphene, this issue 

is addressed by using graphene oxide (GO) [17,35,36]. CNTs, on the other hand, are 

functionalized with carboxylic acid groups to prevent intertwining and bundling [37]. However, 

some degree of entanglement still occurs. The one-dimensional nature of CNTs leads to inferior 

material properties when they are freely dispersed, falling short of their theoretical potential. 

To improve the material properties in a specific direction, methods are being developed to align 

nanotubes in that direction, such as mechanical stretching [38] or the application of electric [39]

or magnetic fields [40]. In the synthesis of carbon-based polymer nanocomposites (PNCs), three 

main methods are employed depending on the nature of the polymer [41]. These include solvent 

casting [42], where the polymer is dissolved, and the solvent is subsequently evaporated; melt 

processing [43], followed by in situ polymerization, in which the monomers are polymerized 

in the presence of the reinforcement, resulting in covalent bonding between the matrix and the 

reinforcement [42,44]. This is also the case with the GO-based composite material, on which 

we report in this study.

This new nanocomposite material, traded as Hastalex, is an invention of Prof. A. 

Seifalian, marketed by NanoRegMed [45]. It is a polymer composite, specifically 

poly(carbonate-urea) urethane, reinforced with GO. This novel material is being compared to 

GORE-TEX since both are suitable for medical applications, such as artificial heart valves [46]. 

Thus far, Hastalex seems to outperform GORE-TEX in this particular application, exhibiting 

2.5 times higher tensile strength in one direction and 3.5 times higher tensile strength in the 

other direction than GORE-TEX. Additionally, it demonstrates better biocompatibility and 

enhanced resistance to calcification [45,47].

Hastalex has been designed as a biocompatible material for the human body. The last 

mentioned property is useful for the production of implants that are intended to be present in 

the body only temporarily, e.g., stents [48]. Hastalex enables gradual tissue healing and 

subsequent absorption, thus reducing the need for additional implant removal surgeries [49]. 

Moreover, Hastalex might have potential for further medicinal applications, such as implant 

manufacturing in orthopaedics, prosthetics production in dentistry, or wound healing support 


Slepičková Kasálková et al., Surface activation of Hastalex by vacuum argon plasma for cytocompatibility enhancement

4

in regenerative medicine [50]. However, importantly, even though Hastalex offers numerous 

advantages and potential applications, scientific research and clinical studies on this material to 

assess its efficacy, safety, and long-term success in various settings are still ongoing. At present, 

only limited research focusing on Hastalex has been done; therefore, the main contribution of 

this study is to deepen the knowledge about this novel material.

Previously, we have reported some excellent properties of polymer-carbon composite 

materials, in which the carbon material has been incorporated into the bulk polymer matrix [51-

53], grafted onto the polymer surface [54,55], or the carbon layers have been deposited onto 

the polymer surface and subsequently treated [56,57], which led in all cases in 

cytocompatibility enhancement and change in cell growth and proliferation as well as cell 

directionality. In this study, we have focused on a new carbon-polymer composite, which has 

been studied only for the last two years, and its surface properties induced by several potential 

surface treatments are still to be discovered. Even a simple surface modification induced by 

direct current argon plasma with different input power has been applied, the outstanding surface 

of surface chemistry and moderate changes in surface morphology were observed, while the 

cytocompatibility of such treated surfaces has been remarkably enhanced.

2. Experimental

Materials and modification

The studied material was a nanocomposite film (20×20 cm, a thickness of 500 µm) with 

a polymer matrix and GO reinforcement called Hastalex supplied by Goodfellow. From this 

film, samples of 1.5×1.5 cm2 were cut and modified by plasma for 10, 40, 80, 120, 160, 200, 

and 240 s at 3 and 8 W. The material surface exposure to the plasma was done by the BAL-

TEC Sputter coater SCD 050 instrument. The exposure was performed using DC cold Ar 

plasma (gas purity was 99.997%). Process parameters were: Ar flow 0.3 l s-1, Ar pressure 10 

Pa, electrode area 48 cm2, the inter-electrode distance of 60 mm, chamber volume 1000 cm3.  

Further, the samples were subjected to thermal stress at 60 and 100 °C using a BINDER drying 

oven with the fan speed set to level 30/100. The samples were placed onto glass Petri dishes 

during the thermal exposure.


Slepičková Kasálková et al., Surface activation of Hastalex by vacuum argon plasma for cytocompatibility enhancement

5

Analytical methods

Gravimetry was used to determine the amount of material removed by the plasma 

exposure. The prepared samples were weighed five times before and after plasma modification

at Mettler Toledo UMX2 automated microbalances with a precision of 0.1 µg.

Next, sample wettability and surface energy were determined by measurement of a 

contact angle between the substrate and a liquid droplet. For this, SEE System optical device 

and Advex Instruments software were used. Droplets of water (5 µl) and glycerol (8 µl) were 

deposited onto the material surface, and photographs of the droplets were taken. The images 

were then analyzed using a three-point analysis method to obtain the contact angle values. The 

surface energy values were evaluated by the Owens-Wendt method.

For the study of surface morphology and roughness, the samples were further subjected 

to atomic force microscopy (AFM) using a Dimension ICON microscope from BrukerCorp. 

The measurements were conducted in ScanAsyst mode using a silicon tip. The specific probe 

used was the Scan Asyst Air probe with a spring constant of 0.4 N·m-1. Image sizes were 

captured for an area ranging from 0.3×0.3 μm² to 30×30 μm².

The surface morphology of the substrates was examined and analyzed using a scanning 

electron microscope (SEM) in a secondary electron mode, specifically, the TESCAN LYRA3 

GMU instrument manufactured by TESCAN in the Czech Republic. The SEM analysis was 

conducted at an accelerating voltage of 5 kV. Additionally, energy-dispersive spectroscopy 

(EDS) was performed using the same instrument.

Detailed information regarding the elemental composition of the sample surfaces was 

obtained by energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) using the F-MaxN analyzer and a silicon 

drift detector (SDD) from Oxford Instruments, UK. The applied acceleration voltage during 

EDS measurements was 10 kV. 

The surface chemistry of the samples was characterized using an X-ray photoelectron 

spectroscopy (XPS) instrument, specifically the Omicron Nanotechnology ESCAProbeP. 

Monochromatic X-ray radiation with an energy of 1486.7 eV was used as the excitation source. 

A surface area of 2×3 mm² was analyzed. The relative abundance of elements was determined 

from the intensity of peaks in the XPS spectra using CasaXPS software.

To determine the mechanical properties of the Hastalex film, a Discovery DMA 850 

instrument from TA Instruments, an American company, was used. This instrument applies a 

force ranging from 0.1 mN to 18 N, making it suitable for measuring both rigid and soft 

materials. The device operates in a temperature range of -160 to 600 °C, thus enabling 

mechanical testing over a wide temperature range.


Slepičková Kasálková et al., Surface activation of Hastalex by vacuum argon plasma for cytocompatibility enhancement

6

Cell Cultivation

To evaluate the material cytocompatibility, human fetal lung fibroblasts (MRC-5; 

Merck, USA) were chosen. The cells were regularly passaged using trypsinization and 

maintained at the exponential phase of growth. Cultivation media consisted of Minimal 

essential medium (MEM; Merck, USA) supplemented with 2 mM L-glutamine, 1 % (v/v) non-

essential amino acid solution, and 10 % (v/v) fetal bovine serum (all from Thermo Fisher 

Scientific, USA). The MRC-5 cells were kept in a cell culture incubator at 37 °C, an atmosphere 

with 5 % CO2 and 95 % humidity.

Cell Seeding

The cytocompatibility measurement was done similarly to the refs. [58] and [59], the 

MRC-5 cells were used from passages 3rd to 5th (from defrosting after delivery). First, the tested 

materials were sterilized in 70 % (v/v) ethanol in water for 1 h, which was followed by rinsing 

with sterile phosphate-buffered saline (PBS; pH of 7.4). After that, the samples were put into 

wells of 12-well plates for cell culture (VWR, USA), and hollow PMMA cylinders (Zenit, The 

Czech Republic) were placed onto them. The MRC-5 cells were then seeded into the individual 

wells in 1 mL of media containing 1.5·104 cells per 1 cm2 in three replicates. The cells were 

then cultivated at standard conditions for 1, 3, and 6 days. As controls, pristine material and 

tissue-culture polystyrene (TCPS) were used.

Cell fixation and staining

After the endpoint incubation periods of the MRC-5 cells on the tested materials, cell 

fixation by a crosslinking method occurred similarly as described in ref. [60]. First, the cell 

cultivation medium was discarded, and, then, the cells were washed two times with PBS, after 

which fixation with a 4 % (v/v) formaldehyde in PBS followed for ca. 20 min. at 23 °C. After 

this period, the formaldehyde solution was removed, and the cells were washed with PBS and 

subjected to staining.

Fluorescent staining

To visualize inner cell structures as cell cytoskeleton and the nucleus, a phalloidin 

conjugate and 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI ) were used, respectively, as described in 

ref. [61]. Briefly, a solution of 3 µg·mL−1 of phalloidin-Atto 488 (AttoTec GmbH, Germany) 

and 1 µg·mL−1 of DAPI (Merck, USA) was added to cells and kept for 20 min. in the dark at 

23 °C. After this period, the labeling solution was discarded, and the samples were washed 


Slepičková Kasálková et al., Surface activation of Hastalex by vacuum argon plasma for cytocompatibility enhancement

7

twice with PBS, turned bottom-up since the material was not translucent, and subjected to 

microscopy.

Fluorescence microscopy

The fixed MRC-5 cells were examined using a wide-field inverse fluorescence 

microscope Olympus IX-81 (Olympus, Japan; xCellence software). The samples were 

monitored at 100× magnification using a 10× objective with a numerical aperture of 0.30. For 

fluorescence, a triple, quad filter DAPI/FITC/TRITC (Olympus, Japan) and a high-stability 

150-W xenon arc burner (100 % intensity) were utilized. From each sample, at least ten regions 

of interest were taken, and the images were captured by an EM-CCD camera C9100-02 

(Hamamatsu, Japan). Then, the fluorescence images were background-corrected, and the two 

fluorescence channels (DAPI and FITC) were merged.

Image processing

From the images, the number of cells was evaluated based on the nuclei counting using 

ImageJ 1.54d. First, the images were binarized and thresholded; then the watershed was applied,

and the nuclei were counted by “analyze particles”. For each sample, ten regions per sample 

replicate were analyzed. The data were averaged, and the standard deviation was calculated.

3. Result and discussion

3.1 Surface wettability and aging

First, we prepared a series of samples, which were modified by plasma at 3 and 8 W for 

0-240 s, after which their surface wettability and energy were examined using glycerol and 

water. The contact angles are presented in Fig 2.


Slepičková Kasálková et al., Surface activation of Hastalex by vacuum argon plasma for cytocompatibility enhancement

8

Figure 1: Dependence of contact angles between evaluated samples and drops of water or

glycerol on the exposure time of plasma at 3 and 8 W.

The graph in Fig. 1 shows that after the initial (plasma) treatment of the material surface, 

there was a significant change in the contact angle, which became apparent after 10 s. With 

longer exposure times, the values did not change much; they remained in the range of 15-35 °. 

Plasma modification at 8 W resulted in a more pronounced change and surfaces with higher 

wettability compared to the 3 W surfaces. The data in Fig. 2 reveal the dependence of the surface 

energy of the film on the modification time. As it can be seen, after the plasma treatment with 

even short exposure time, the surface energy increased from ca. 28 mJ·m-2 to values exceeding 

60 mJ·cm-2.

With longer exposure time, the energy even moderately increased to values slightly 

above 70 mJ·m-2 for an input power of 8 W. It can also be concluded, especially for the higher 

exposure times, that the input power did not affect the surface energy. With increasing exposure 

time, this difference disappeared, which was probably due to the surface ablation, which 

periodically “renews” the surface after a certain period. Therefore, similarly to the trend of 


Slepičková Kasálková et al., Surface activation of Hastalex by vacuum argon plasma for cytocompatibility enhancement

9

wettability data, the surface energy of the films modified with plasma at 8 W was higher than 

that at 3 W.

Figure 2: Dependence of material surface energy on the exposure time of plasma at 3 and 8 W.

3.2 Surface morphology

Next, we have focused on the analysis of surface morphology of pristine Hastalex foil. 

We have analyzed different surface areas, up to 30 x 30 µm2, and we have chosen to present 

the data for the four squares of different scales in order to present the morphology of Hastalex 

from "micro" to "macro" scale. From Fig. 3 A-D, it is apparent that, on the nanoscale, pristine 

Hastalex is formed by small clusters with extremely low surface roughness (Fig. 3 A); on the 

basis of our analysis, we also confirm that the plasma treatment induces uniform changes over 

the treated Hastalex surface. The foil is very flat, and the surface irregularities do not exceed 

200 nm in general (on larger scans). The surface roughness (Ra) of the film for the examined 

area of 10×10 m2 was equal to 22.2 nm (RMS = 29.2 nm).


Slepičková Kasálková et al., Surface activation of Hastalex by vacuum argon plasma for cytocompatibility enhancement

10

Figure 3: AFM images of pristine Hastalex foil (A 300 × 300 nm2, B 1 x 1 m2, C 3 x 3 m2, 

and D 10 × 10 m2) are shown. Ra indicates arithmetic roughness, and RMS indicates root mean 

square roughness. S represents an effective surface area with SAD in % (surface area 

difference).

The AFM scans of the modified material revealed differences in surface morphology 

between its modifications at 3 and 8 W. In the case of the 3 W/240 s sample, a worm-like 

structure, characteristic of certain perfluorinated polymers such as perfluoroethylenepropylene 

(FEP), was already formed on the surface at this applied power and modification time. The 

presence of these structures was particularly evident in the high-resolution AFM image of 

300×300 nm². It can be observed that plasma modification led to an increase in the Hastalex 

roughness even at a lower power of 3 W. As it is apparent from Fig. 4, after sample exposure 

to plasma at a power of 8 W, the surface detail exhibited the form of spherical clusters. The 

Ra = 0.6 nm; RMS = 0.7 nm

S = 112467 nm2 (25.0 %)

Ra = 1.6 nm; RMS = 2.0 nm

S = 1.04 µm2 (3.60 %)

Ra = 4.1 nm; RMS = 5.3 nm

S = 9.08 µm2 (0.90 %)

Ra = 22.2 nm; RMS = 29.2 nm

S = 100 µm2 (0.48 %)

A
B

C
D


Slepičková Kasálková et al., Surface activation of Hastalex by vacuum argon plasma for cytocompatibility enhancement

11

higher-power plasma treatment resulted in a more pronounced surface disruption associated 

with ablation (following section), which led to an increase in surface roughness compared to 

both the original polymer and the polymer plasma modified at 3 W. Even the lower roughness 

for higher exposure power was observed, and the effective surface area was dramatically 

increased. We had in mind that we were still on the very “zoom” on the surface, however, it 

might still affect cell adhesion to the surface, in combination with altered surface chemistry, 

which will be discussed further.

Figure 4: AFM 3D images of a Hastalex foil - pristine and modified by plasma at a power of 3 

and 8 W for 240 s. A square of 300×300 nm is shown. Ra indicates the arithmetic roughness, 

and RMS indicates the root mean square roughness, S is the effective surface area.

For further material surface investigation, we employed SEM
analysis,
the 

representative images of which are shown in Fig. 5. It is apparent that the samples modified 

with plasma at both 3 and 8 W exhibited higher roughness and significant morphological 

changes, which aligns with the results obtained from AFM analysis. We have also determined

the surface area up to 30 µm2 by AFM technique, but for the sake of clarity, we present results 

from SEM analysis for larger scanning areas. As it is obvious from SEM and Fig. 5, plasma 

treatment also induced an increase in surface roughness for Hastalex treated with both 3 and 

8 W, but the spheroidal clusters remained on the surface. However, the induced changes in 


Slepičková Kasálková et al., Surface activation of Hastalex by vacuum argon plasma for cytocompatibility enhancement

12

terms of increased surface effective area are also visible on SEM images for plasma-treated 

samples.

Power / 

Exposure 

time

250 µm
100 µm
10 µm

Pristine

3 W / 240

s

8 W / 240

s

Figure 5: SEM images of pristine Hastalex foil and plasma-modified foil with 8 and 3 W with 

240 s exposure time. Squares of 10×10 m2 to 250×250 m2 are shown.


Slepičková Kasálková et al., Surface activation of Hastalex by vacuum argon plasma for cytocompatibility enhancement

13

3.3 Surface Chemistry

To determine the elemental composition of the surface layer of both the original and 

plasma-modified Hastalex samples (up to a few hundred nanometers), energy-dispersive 

spectroscopy (EDS) was employed. We were particularly interested in the carbon-to-oxygen 

ratio, which was affected by the material surface exposure to the plasma treatment. We found 

that the plasma modification led to an increase in the oxygen content, with a more pronounced 

effect observed at an 8 W power level. Since EDS examines the composition of a material to a 

greater depth, the difference/impact of plasma between pristine and plasma-treated Hastalex

was not as pronounced as it would be if only a few atomic layers were considered (the analysis 

using XPS will be presented in the following paragraph). The EDS results are shown in Fig. 6.

Figure 6: EDS spectra of pristine Hastalex foil (A) and Hastalex foil modified with plasma at 

3 for 240 s (B) and 8 W for 240 s (C). Carbon and oxygen concentrations in [wt %].

It is evident that the plasma exposure leads to the increase in oxygen surface 

concentration of Hastalex foil; a more pronounced effect was observed for foils treated with 

8 W for 240 s. From Figure 6, it is evident that the argon plasma exposure leads not only to the 

increase in the atomic concentration of oxygen on the Hastalex foil surface but at the same time 

A
B
C


Slepičková Kasálková et al., Surface activation of Hastalex by vacuum argon plasma for cytocompatibility enhancement

14

to a decrease in the atomic concentration of carbon. It can be concluded that the increase of 

oxygen-to-carbon ratio confirms the increase of oxygen containing polar functional groups on 

the Hastalex sample surface. Furthermore, the formation of the oxygen-containing polar 

functional groups on the Hastalex material surface results in the increase in surface free energy, 

making the surface hydrophilic at the same time, which explains the decrease in the contact 

angle after plasma treatment. It is also very important to mention that during plasma surface 

exposure, ablation took place, as described further in this manuscript. Therefore, partial removal 

of already modified material was removed from the surface in the form of larger polymeric 

clusters.

Next, to characterize the composition of the surface-modified layer more accurately, we

have applied the XPS analysis for surface chemistry change determination. It was crucial to 

analyze the surface chemistry of the modified samples as soon as possible after the plasma 

modification due to rapid changes occurring during surface aging, which may further alter both 

surface chemistry and/or wettability. The XPS results are presented in Fig. 7. The XPS results 

indicate a similar phenomenon observed in the contact angle measurements. Differences in the 

intensities of O1s and C1s spectra peaks were observed. Plasma modification leads to a change 

in the surface layer. After the modification, the amount of detected O increased slightly, with a 

more pronounced effect observed at 8 W power. The measurements revealed that plasma 

treatment enriches the surface layers with oxygen during the modification process.

These outcomes are in good agreement with those observed by the EDS analysis 

introduced in the previous paragraph. Also, the oxygen concentration was higher than those 

values determined by EDS since only up to 10 nm of the surface in depth was analyzed, which 

was more affected by the plasma exposure. Also, the induced difference, the increase in surface 

oxygen concentration, was significantly higher in the upper layers, which was confirmed by the 

XPS.


Slepičková Kasálková et al., Surface activation of Hastalex by vacuum argon plasma for cytocompatibility enhancement

15

Fig. 7: XPS results for unmodified Hastalex foil (A) and Hastalex foil after plasma modification 

with a power of 3 W for 240 s (B), 8 W for 40 s (C) and 8 W for 240 s (D). Oxygen 

concentration in at. %.

3.3 Mechanical analysis

To assess Hastalex's suitability as a material for heart valves, given its remarkable 

strength, a dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA) was performed over a temperature range of -

100-200 °C at a heating rate of 3 °C per min. The analysis revealed that the glass transition 

temperature (Tg) of the material occurred at -10 °C based on the peak of the tangent delta and 

-17 °C based on the peak of the loss modulus E``. The elastic component of the modulus of 

elasticity (E`) reached values of 103 MPa in the glassy region and 101 MPa in the rubbery 

region, which are typical for this type of material. No melting temperature or secondary 

transitions were detected within the temperature range used. The results of the DMA are 

summarized in Fig. 8.

A
B

C
D


Slepičková Kasálková et al., Surface activation of Hastalex by vacuum argon plasma for cytocompatibility enhancement

16

Figure 8: DMA analysis of unmodified Hastalex material

3.4 Gravimetry

As outlined in the description of the methods, calculating the thickness of the ablated 

layer was challenging due to the lack of knowledge about the material density during the 

measurements. To estimate its density, we used the known sample area, accurate mass 

measurements, and the approximate thickness of the foil, which was provided by the 

manufacturer with an accuracy of ±10%. We considered this value to be constant, enabling us 

to obtain a rough idea of the relationship between the thickness of the ablated layer and the 

exposure time. However, the actual thickness values should be regarded as approximate. This 

relationship is depicted in Fig. 9.


Slepičková Kasálková et al., Surface activation of Hastalex by vacuum argon plasma for cytocompatibility enhancement

17

Figure. 9: Dependence of foil layer ablation on exposure time for 3 and 8 W input power

Especially after the 3 W modification, it is evident that the initial depletion of the 

polymeric layer was greater than for longer exposure times. Thus, it is possible to consider the 

creation of a "passivation coating" on the surface of Hastalex film. As a result of the 

modification of the plasma, bonds can be cleavage, highly reactive radicals can be formed, and 

reactions with, e.g., air oxygen can occur. These processes can lead to a change in chemical 

composition, wettability, morphology, mechanical properties, etc. Some of these parameters 

are constant over time (they no longer change over time), and some (e.g., wettability) change 

over time due to the so-called aging of polymers. Elevated temperatures also contribute to this 

process by acting as accelerators.

3.5 Heat treatment and aging

To assess the stability in surface properties, mainly in terms of surface wettability, we 

heated the Hastalex foil for plasma-treated foil with 8 W for 240 s since these more pronounced 

changes in both surface chemistry and wettability were detected. After plasma treatment, we

analyzed the induced changes in surface wettability. Additionally, such treated foils have been 

kept in standard conditions (RT) to evaluate the changes in surface contact angle during aging 

time. 


Slepičková Kasálková et al., Surface activation of Hastalex by vacuum argon plasma for cytocompatibility enhancement

18

Figure 10: Dependence of contact angle on aging time for Hastalex modified 8 W for 240 s 

and aged  under RT (25° C) and 60° C (first 4 hours of aging) (A) and aged under RT in 14 

days period (B).

It was found that a temperature of 100 °C was sufficient to fully restore the material 

surface wettability to the original level of the unmodified material within 1 h, specifically to 

the value of 81.1 ± 3.7°. Therefore, we reduced the temperature and repeated the measurements 

at 60 °C, taking a sample every 20 min. and conducting the measurements for 1 h. The results 

of surface aging at room temperature and elevated temperature are summarized in Fig. 10 A-B. 

The aging progression during the the initial hours (A) and the 14 days (B) are shown. All these 

measurements were performed on the most modified film, i.e., with an input power of 8 W for 

240 s. It was observed that the wettability returned to the unmodified material value after ca. 

125 h continued to decrease.

3.6 Cytocompatibility

The interaction of a material with cells can significantly affect its cytocompatibility,

which is mostly driven by the material properties, such as roughness, wettability, and 

composition of functional chemical groups present on the surface. These parameters can be 

efficiently and economically feasibly modified by plasma and/or laser treatment to obtain a 

material with tailor-made properties in a controllable manner. This is especially advantageous 

in the case of inert polymers, such as Hastalex.

Therefore, in this study, human fibroblasts (MRC-5) were chosen as a cell line model to 

evaluate the cytocompatibility of a Hastalex material before and after its modification with 

plasma aiming to achieve a material of wettability and surface chemistry which would support 

A
B


Slepičková Kasálková et al., Surface activation of Hastalex by vacuum argon plasma for cytocompatibility enhancement

19

cell growth. As a control, tissue culture polystyrene (TCPS) was chosen since it is used as a 

gold standard for cell cultivation. The material cytocompatibility, cell morphology, and growth 

of MRC¬5 cells were examined after 1, 3 and 6 days of cultivation, see Figs. 11, 12 and 13, 

respectively. Cell morphology was monitored based on cytoskeleton staining, and as it is 

apparent from Fig. 11, after 1 day of cultivation, the MRC-5 cells growing on modified Hastalex 

were adhered to the material, nicely stretched, and elongated, thus bearing fibroblast-like shapes 

that corresponded to cells on the TCPS control. In contrast, the cells were mostly round or 

triangular on the untreated (pristine) Hastalex samples, and only a few were slightly elongated. 

The shape of these cells was not elongated enough (as in the control) and did not bear the 

physiologically relevant morphology of fibroblasts. This shape was likely due to the high 

hydrophobicity of the substrate surface preventing cells from adequately adhering to the 

material in combination with the “smooth” surface morphology (a surface with very low 

roughness at the nanometer scale). The change of surface morphology, formation of a surface 

with higher roughness and globular morphology at the nanometer scale, in combination with 

the increase in oxygen-containing groups, had a positive effect on cell adhesion on Hastalex 

polymer, which is apparent from the blue charts in Fig. 12. The adhesion, and the number of 

cells one day after seeding was similar to control samples on those foils which were treated by 

plasma. Nevertheless, this positive effect was missing on pristine Hastalex, at which low cell 

number was determined one day after seeding.


Slepičková Kasálková et al., Surface activation of Hastalex by vacuum argon plasma for cytocompatibility enhancement

20

Figure 11: A panel of fluorescence microscopy images of human fibroblasts (MRC-5) 

cultivated for 1, 3, and 6 days on Hastalex and its plasma-modified (3 W) foils. Nontreated 

Hastalex (pristine) and tissue culture polystyrene (TCPS) served as controls. In green - cell 

cytoskeleton labeled with phalloidin-Atto488, in blue - cell nuclei stained with DAPI. The scale 

bar represents 100 μm.


Slepičková Kasálková et al., Surface activation of Hastalex by vacuum argon plasma for cytocompatibility enhancement

21

Figure 12: A panel of fluorescence microscopy images of human fibroblasts (MRC-5) 

cultivated for 1, 3, and 6 days on plasma-modified (8 W) Hastalex foils. Nontreated Hastalex 

(pristine) and tissue culture polystyrene (TCPS) served as controls and are introduced in Fig 12. 

In green - cell cytoskeleton labeled with phalloidin-Atto488, in blue - cell nuclei stained with 

DAPI. The scale bar represents 100 μm.


Slepičková Kasálková et al., Surface activation of Hastalex by vacuum argon plasma for cytocompatibility enhancement

22

Figure 13: The number of human fibroblasts (MRC-5) grown on Hastalex and its plasma-

modified variants after 1, 3 and 6 days per 4 µm2. Nontreated Hastalex (pristine) and tissue 

culture polystyrene (control, TCPS) served as controls. The values are averages of three sample 

replicates, and the error bars represent standard deviations.

Later, after 3 days of cultivation, the MRC-5 cells growing on modified Hastalex 

samples still kept their elongated stretched shape and were interconnected with each other. 

Moreover, dividing cells were also detected on the modified samples. These all were in 

coherence with cells growing on TCPS control but in big contrast with pristine Hastalex, on 

which there were only a few cells of irregular shape, mostly triangular and nonelongated. The 

positive effect of the nanometer scale roughness increase with the oxygen-containing group 

augmentation is further visible after 3 and 6 days from seeding. Plasma treatment had a positive 

effect on the number and shape of cells. A higher exposure time of 240 s of argon plasma led 

to better cell spreading even after three days of inoculation, while samples treated for only 40 s 

showed lower cytocompatibility. Six days from seeding, the plasma effect on Hastalex 

cytocompatibility was outstanding, and significantly higher cell numbers were detected even 

for lower times and powers of plasma exposure compared to a control sample. The 

cytocompatibility of plasma-treated foils was also maintained after their heat treatment, which 

is important for different types of sterilization procedures. As for the last cultivation point 

measured, day 6, the cells formed a confluent 2D layer on all tested samples as well as on 

control TCPS, except pristine Hastalex, on which there were significantly fewer cells. However, 

0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

Control
Pristine
3W 40s 3W 240s 3W 240s

100°C

8W 40s 8W 240s 8W 240s

100°C

Number of Cells [4 m-2]

Day 1
Day 3

Day 6


Slepičková Kasálková et al., Surface activation of Hastalex by vacuum argon plasma for cytocompatibility enhancement

23

interestingly, the cells were probably already partially adapted to the pristine Hastalex 

properties since, in addition to a portion of cells growing in clusters of roundish cells, they were 

mostly of elongated morphology similar to that observed for control TCPS the first day of 

cultivation, which might be caused by altered surface morphology at the nanometer scale with 

a lot of adhesion points for filopodia attachment.

4. Conclusion

This study is focused on the characterization of a new nanocomposite material based on 

GO traded as Hastalex. The surface of the unmodified material and the effect of the plasma 

modification on its properties and morphology were examined. The positive effect of plasma 

modification on Hastalex surface wettability was demonstrated at both input power but was 

more pronounced at 8 W. The most significant change in contact angle values occurred within 

the first 10 s, and the effect of a passivating layer was considered. Next, AFM enabled the 

detection of material surface roughening after the plasma treatment, and at 3 and 8 W, the 

formation of worm-like structures and spherical clusters occurred, respectively. To investigate 

this phenomenon further, we employed SEM, the results of which confirmed that of AFM. XPS, 

in particular, enabled the composition analysis of the topmost layers of the film. As expected, 

plasma modification led to an increase in the oxygen content on the material surface. The input 

power had a greater effect on the oxygen content than the length of the exposure time. Finally, 

changes in wettability over time following plasma modification were investigated, representing 

the aging phenomenon. It was observed that wettability decreased to the value of the 

unmodified material within 125 h at room temperature, and the contact angle continued to 

increase up to 90° within 14 days. The plasma treatment had an outstanding effect on the 

cytocompatibility of Hastalex foil for both input power of 3 and 8 W. The cell number on 

plasma-exposed Hastalex foils increased significantly compared to pristine Hastalex and even 

to TCPS. The plasma exposure also affected the cell growth and shape; after 6 days from 

seeding, a dense net of MRC-5 cells was formed.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported from the grant of Czech Science Foundation under project 22-04006S, 

the support of the Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic under grant No. NU20-08-00208 

is also gratefully acknowledged. This work was also supported by the Project OP JAK 


Slepičková Kasálková et al., Surface activation of Hastalex by vacuum argon plasma for cytocompatibility enhancement

24

EXRegmed, No CZ.02.01.01/00/22_008/0004562, of the Ministry of Education, Youth and 

Sports, which is co-funded by the European Union.

Data Availability Statement

The data presented in this study are available at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10700584. 

References

1.  Sheehan, J. E.;  Buesking, K.; Sullivan, B., Carbon-carbon composites. Annual Review of 

Materials Science 1994, 24 (1), 19-44.

2. Zhu, C.;  Mu, X.;  van Aken, P. A.;  Maier, J.; Yu, Y., Fast Li storage in MoS2‐graphene‐

carbon nanotube nanocomposites: advantageous functional integration of 0D, 1D, and 2D 

nanostructures. Advanced Energy Materials 2015, 5 (4), 1401170.

3. Zhang, L.;  Aboagye, A.;  Kelkar, A.;  Lai, C.; Fong, H., A review: carbon nanofibers from 

electrospun polyacrylonitrile and their applications. Journal of Materials Science 2014, 49, 463-

480.

4. Magesa, F.;  Wu, Y.;  Tian, Y.;  Vianney, J.-M.;  Buza, J.;  He, Q.; Tan, Y., Graphene and 

graphene like 2D graphitic carbon nitride: Electrochemical detection of food colorants and toxic 

substances in environment. Trends in Environmental Analytical Chemistry 2019, 23, e00064.

5. Lee, J.-H.; Park, S.-J., Recent advances in preparations and applications of carbon aerogels: 

A review. Carbon 2020, 163, 1-18.

6. Novoselov, K. S.;  Geim, A. K.;  Morozov, S. V.;  Dubonos, S.;  Zhang, Y.; Jiang, D., Room-

temperature electric field effect and carrier-type inversion in graphene films. arXiv preprint 

cond-mat/0410631 2004.

7. Mishra, N.;  Boeckl, J.;  Motta, N.; Iacopi, F., Graphene growth on silicon carbide: A review. 

physica status solidi (a) 2016, 213 (9), 2277-2289.

8. Wang, L.;  Zhang, X.;  Chan, H. L.;  Yan, F.; Ding, F., Formation and healing of vacancies 

in graphene chemical vapor deposition (CVD) growth. Journal of the American Chemical 

Society 2013, 135 (11), 4476-4482.

9. Pénicaud, A.; Drummond, C., Deconstructing graphite: graphenide solutions. Accounts of 

chemical research 2013, 46 (1), 129-137.

10. Kang, J.;  Ko, Y.;  Kim, J. P.;  Kim, J. Y.;  Kim, J.;  Kwon, O.;  Kim, K. C.; Kim, D. W., 

Microwave-assisted design of nanoporous graphene membrane for ultrafast and switchable 

organic solvent nanofiltration. Nature Communications 2023, 14 (1), 901.


Slepičková Kasálková et al., Surface activation of Hastalex by vacuum argon plasma for cytocompatibility enhancement

25

11. Fang, H.;  Geng, Z.;  Guan, N.;  Zhou, L.;  Zhang, L.; Hu, J., Controllable generation of 

interfacial gas structures on the graphite surface by substrate hydrophobicity and gas 

oversaturation in water. Soft Matter 2022, 18 (43), 8251-8261.

12. Slepičková Kasálková, N.;  Slepička, P.; Švorčík, V., Carbon nanostructures, nanolayers, 

and their composites. Nanomaterials 2021, 11 (9), 2368.

13. Gao, W., The chemistry of graphene oxide. Graphene oxide: reduction recipes, 

spectroscopy, and applications 2015, 61-95.

14. Guex, L. G.;  Sacchi, B.;  Peuvot, K. F.;  Andersson, R. L.;  Pourrahimi, A. M.;  Ström, V.;  

Farris, S.; Olsson, R. T., Experimental review: chemical reduction of graphene oxide (GO) to 

reduced graphene oxide (rGO) by aqueous chemistry. Nanoscale 2017, 9 (27), 9562-9571.

15. Xie, M.;  Zhang, F.;  Peng, H.;  Zhang, Y.;  Li, Y.;  Xu, Y.; Xie, J., Layer-by-layer 

modification of magnetic graphene oxide by chitosan and sodium alginate with enhanced 

dispersibility for targeted drug delivery and photothermal therapy. Colloids and Surfaces B: 

Biointerfaces 2019, 176, 462-470.

16. Hou, Y.;  Lv, S.;  Liu, L.; Liu, X., High-quality preparation of graphene oxide via the 

Hummers' method: understanding the roles of the intercalator, oxidant, and graphite particle 

size. Ceramics International 2020, 46 (2), 2392-2402.

17. Al-Gaashani, R.;  Najjar, A.;  Zakaria, Y.;  Mansour, S.; Atieh, M., XPS and structural 

studies of high quality graphene oxide and reduced graphene oxide prepared by different 

chemical oxidation methods. Ceramics International 2019, 45 (11), 14439-14448.

18. Chen, J.;  Yao, B.;  Li, C.; Shi, G., An improved Hummers method for eco-friendly 

synthesis of graphene oxide. Carbon 2013, 64, 225-229.

19. Zaaba, N.;  Foo, K.;  Hashim, U.;  Tan, S.;  Liu, W.-W.; Voon, C., Synthesis of graphene 

oxide using modified hummers method: solvent influence. Procedia engineering 2017, 184, 

469-477.

20. Yu, H.;  Zhang, B.;  Bulin, C.;  Li, R.; Xing, R., High-efficient synthesis of graphene oxide 

based on improved hummers method. Scientific reports 2016, 6 (1), 36143.

21. Yu, W.;  Sisi, L.;  Haiyan, Y.; Jie, L., Progress in the functional modification of 

graphene/graphene oxide: A review. RSC advances 2020, 10 (26), 15328-15345.

22. Cao, N.; Zhang, Y., Study of reduced graphene oxide preparation by Hummers’ method 

and related characterization. Journal of Nanomaterials 2015, 2015, 2-2.

23. Alam, S. N.;  Sharma, N.; Kumar, L., Synthesis of graphene oxide (GO) by modified 

hummers method and its thermal reduction to obtain reduced graphene oxide (rGO). Graphene 

2017, 6 (1), 1-18.


Slepičková Kasálková et al., Surface activation of Hastalex by vacuum argon plasma for cytocompatibility enhancement

26

24. Das, B.;  Prasad, K. E.;  Ramamurty, U.; Rao, C., Nano-indentation studies on polymer 

matrix composites reinforced by few-layer graphene. Nanotechnology 2009, 20 (12), 125705.

25. Ismail, A. M.;  AL-Oqla, F. M.;  Risby, M.; Sapuan, S., On the enhancement of the fatigue 

fracture performance of polymer matrix composites by reinforcement with carbon nanotubes: 

a systematic review. Carbon Letters 2022, 32 (3), 727-740.

26. Feng, T.;  Liu, N.;  Wang, S.;  Qin, C.;  Shi, S.;  Zeng, X.; Liu, G., Research on the 

dispersion of carbon nanotubes and their application in solution-processed polymeric matrix 

composites: A review. Advances in nano research 2021, 10 (6), 559.

27. Jagannatham, M.;  Chandran, P.;  Sankaran, S.;  Haridoss, P.;  Nayan, N.; Bakshi, S. R., 

Tensile properties of carbon nanotubes reinforced aluminum matrix composites: A review. 

Carbon 2020, 160, 14-44.

28. Kumar, A.;  Sharma, K.; Dixit, A. R., A review on the mechanical properties of polymer 

composites reinforced by carbon nanotubes and graphene. Carbon Letters 2021, 31 (2), 149-

165.

29. Harris, P. J., Carbon nanotube composites. International materials reviews 2004, 49 (1), 

31-43.

30. Andrews, R.; Weisenberger, M., Carbon nanotube polymer composites. Current opinion in 

solid state and Materials Science 2004, 8 (1), 31-37.

31. Byrne, M. T.; Gun'ko, Y. K., Recent advances in research on carbon nanotube–polymer 

composites. Advanced materials 2010, 22 (15), 1672-1688.

32. Prusty, R. K.;  Rathore, D. K.; Ray, B. C., CNT/polymer interface in polymeric composites 

and its sensitivity study at different environments. Advances in colloid and interface science 

2017, 240, 77-106.

33. Arash, B.;  Wang, Q.; Varadan, V., Mechanical properties of carbon nanotube/polymer 

composites. Scientific reports 2014, 4 (1), 6479.

34. Nurazzi, N.;  Sabaruddin, F.;  Harussani, M.;  Kamarudin, S.;  Rayung, M.;  Asyraf, M.;  

Aisyah, H.;  Norrrahim, M.;  Ilyas, R.; Abdullah, N., Mechanical performance and applications 

of CNTs reinforced polymer composites—a review. Nanomaterials 2021, 11 (9), 2186.

35. Li, X.;  Ma, L.;  Zhang, H.;  Wang, S.;  Jiang, Z.;  Guo, R.;  Wu, H.;  Cao, X.;  Yang, J.; 

Wang, B., Synergistic effect of combining carbon nanotubes and graphene oxide in mixed 

matrix membranes for efficient CO2 separation. Journal of Membrane Science 2015, 479, 1-

10.

36. Agarwal, V.; Zetterlund, P. B., Strategies for reduction of graphene oxide–A 

comprehensive review. Chemical Engineering Journal 2021, 405, 127018.


Slepičková Kasálková et al., Surface activation of Hastalex by vacuum argon plasma for cytocompatibility enhancement

27

37. An, H.;  Noh, C.;  Jeon, S.;  Shin, M.;  Kwon, Y.; Chung, Y., The effect of low‐defected 

carboxylic acid functional group–rich carbon nanotube–doped electrode on the performance of 

aqueous vanadium redox flow battery. International Journal of Energy Research 2022, 46 (9), 

11802-11817.

38. Nam, T. H.;  Goto, K.;  Nakayama, H.;  Oshima, K.;  Premalal, V.;  Shimamura, Y.;  Inoue, 

Y.;  Naito, K.; Kobayashi, S., Effects of stretching on mechanical properties of aligned multi-

walled carbon nanotube/epoxy composites. Composites Part A: Applied Science and 

Manufacturing 2014, 64, 194-202.

39. Zhu, Y.-F.;  Ma, C.;  Zhang, W.;  Zhang, R.-P.;  Koratkar, N.; Liang, J., Alignment of 

multiwalled carbon nanotubes in bulk epoxy composites via electric field. Journal of Applied 

Physics 2009, 105 (5), 054319.

40. Klinovaja, J.;  Schmidt, M. J.;  Braunecker, B.; Loss, D., Carbon nanotubes in electric and 

magnetic fields. Physical Review B 2011, 84 (8), 085452.

41. Bae, M.;  Woo, S.;  Lee, J. M.;  Lee, W.; Yoon, S.-H., A prediction model for 

photopatternable thickness of photocurable polymer nanocomposites containing carbon-based 

high-aspect-ratio fillers. Composites Science and Technology 2022, 218, 109207.

42. Díez-Pascual, A. M., Carbon-based polymer nanocomposites for high-performance 

applications. MDPI: 2020; Vol. 12, p 872.

43. Abbasi, H.;  Antunes, M.; Velasco, J. I., Recent advances in carbon-based polymer 

nanocomposites for electromagnetic interference shielding. Progress in Materials Science 2019, 

103, 319-373.

44. Panahi-Sarmad, M.;  Noroozi, M.;  Abrisham, M.;  Eghbalinia, S.;  Teimoury, F.;  

Bahramian, A. R.;  Dehghan, P.;  Sadri, M.; Goodarzi, V., A comprehensive review on carbon-

based polymer nanocomposite foams as electromagnetic interference shields and piezoresistive 

sensors. ACS Applied Electronic Materials 2020, 2 (8), 2318-2350.

45. Ovcharenko, E. A.;  Seifalian, A.;  Rezvova, M. A.;  Klyshnikov, K. Y.;  Glushkova, T. V.;  

Akenteva, T. N.;  Antonova, L. V.;  Velikanova, E. A.;  Chernonosova, V. S.; Shevelev, G. Y., 

A new nanocomposite copolymer Based on functionalised Graphene oxide for Development of 

Heart Valves. Scientific Reports 2020, 10 (1), 1-14.

46. Singh, S. K.;  Kachel, M.;  Castillero, E.;  Xue, Y.;  Kalfa, D.;  Ferrari, G.; George, I., 

Polymeric prosthetic heart valves: A review of current technologies and future directions. 

Frontiers in Cardiovascular Medicine 2023, 10, 1137827.

47. Seifalian, A.;  Basma, Z.;  Digesu, A.; Khullar, V., Polypropylene Pelvic Mesh: What Went 

Wrong and What Will Be of the Future? Biomedicines 2023, 11 (3), 741.


Slepičková Kasálková et al., Surface activation of Hastalex by vacuum argon plasma for cytocompatibility enhancement

28

48. Bui, H. T.;  Khair, N.;  Yeats, B.;  Gooden, S.;  James, S. P.; Dasi, L. P., Transcatheter 

heart valves: a biomaterials perspective. Advanced Healthcare Materials 2021, 10 (15), 

2100115.

49. Zare, P.;  Aleemardani, M.;  Seifalian, A.;  Bagher, Z.; Seifalian, A. M., Graphene oxide: 

Opportunities and challenges in biomedicine. Nanomaterials 2021, 11 (5), 1083.

50. Bagher, Z.;  Asgari, N.;  Bozorgmehr, P.;  Kamrava, S. K.;  Alizadeh, R.; Seifalian, A., 

Will tissue-engineering strategies bring new hope for the reconstruction of nasal septal 

cartilage? Current Stem Cell Research & Therapy 2020, 15 (2), 144-154.

51. Žáková, P.; Slepičková Kasálková, N.; Kolská, Z.; Leitner, J.; Karpíšková, J.; Stibor, I.;

Slepička, P.; Švorčík, V., Cytocompatibility of amine functionalized carbon nanoparticles 

grafted on polyethylene, Material Science and Engineering C 2016, 60, 394–401.

52. Žáková, P.; Slepičková Kasálková, N.; Slepička, P.; Kolská, Z.; Karpíšková, J.; Stibor, I.;

Švorčík, V., Cytocompatibility of polyethylene grafted with triethylenetetramine functionalized 

carbon nanoparticles, Applied Surface Science 2017, 422, 809–816.

53. Slepicka, P.; Siegel, J.; Lyutakov, O.; Slepickova Kasalkova, N.; Kolska, Z.; Bacakova, L.;

Svorcik, V., Polymer nanostructures for bioapplications induced by laser treatment, 

Biotechnology Advances 2018, 36, 839–855.

54. Slepička, P.; Slepičková Kasálková, N.; Pinkner, A.; Sajdl, P.; Kolská, Z.; Švorčík, V.,

Plasma induced cytocompatibility of stabilized poly-L-lactic acid doped with graphene 

nanoplatelets, Reactive and Functional Polymers 2018, 131, 266–275.

55. Lišková, J.; Slepičková Kasálková, N.; Slepička, P.; Švorčík, V.; Bačáková, L., Heat-treated 

carbon coatings on poly (L-lactide) foils for tissue engineering, Material Science and

Engineering C 2019, 100, 117–128.

56. Fajstavr, D.; Neznalová, K.; Švorčík, V.; Slepička, P., LIPSS Structures Induced on 

Graphene-Polystyrene Composite, Materials 12 (2019) 3460.

57. Fajstavr, D.; Frýdlová, B.; Rimpelová, S.; Slepičková Kasálková, N.; Sajdl, P.; Švorčík, V.;

Slepička, P., KrF Laser and Plasma Exposure of PDMS–Carbon Composite and Its 

Antibacterial Properties, Materials 2022, 15, 839-856.

58. Fajstavrová, K.; Rimpelová, S.; Fajstavr, D.; Švorčík, V., Slepička P. PLLA Honeycomb-

Like Pattern on Fluorinated Ethylene Propylene as a Substrate for Fibroblast Growth. Polymers 

(Basel). 2020, 12(11), 2436. 

59. Slepička, P.; Michaljaničová, I.; Rimpelová, S.; Švorčík, V., Surface roughness in action -

Cells in opposition. Material Science and Engineering C 2017, 76, 818-826. 


Slepičková Kasálková et al., Surface activation of Hastalex by vacuum argon plasma for cytocompatibility enhancement

29

60. Rimpelová, S.; Slepičková Kasálková, N.; Slepička, P.; Lemerová, H.; Švorčík, V.; Ruml,

T., Plasma treated polyethylene grafted with adhesive molecules for enhanced adhesion and 

growth of fibroblasts. Material Science and Engineering C 2013, 33(3), 1116-1124. 

61. Slepička, P.; Stýblová, S.; Slepičková Kasálková, N.; Rimpelová, S.; Švorčík, V.,

Cytocompatibility of polyhydroxybutyrate modified by plasma discharge., Polymer

Engineering and Science 2014, 54, 1231-1238. 


