Theoretical Study on Optoelectronic properties of Layered In2O3 and Ga2O3

Chrislene Lionel, Shubham Das, Diparnab Banik, S. Koley1∗

1 Department of Physics, Amity Institute of Applied Sciences, Amity University, Kolkata, 700135, India

Composite oxides have been indeed proved to be valuable materials in optoelectronic applications.
The combination of indium oxide and gallium oxide and other materials can lead to enhanced optical
and electronic properties, making them suitable for a variety of optoelectronic devices. Meticulous
analysis of the various optical properties helped to draw conclusions about the heterostructure of
Indium and Gallium oxide and its use as a suitable semiconducting material in the medium bandgap
range. The density of states and the band structure have been obtained from the density functional
theory calculations. Real frequency phonon density of states supports dynamical stability of the
crystal structure. A favorable energy band gap is achieved in the visible region of the spectrum,
indicating that this mixed oxide is well suited for optoelectronic devices such as LEDs and solar
cells.

Keywords: Optical Properties, Oxides, Density Functional Theory, Band Gap, Density of States, Phonon
Density of states

∗ sudiptakoley20@gmail.com

arXiv:2403.11619v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  18 Mar 2024


2

I.
INTRODUCTION

Nanomaterials have various electrical and optical properties that offer interesting applications in biomedicine (MRI
contrast agents), cosmetics, batteries, textiles, paints, storage devices and optoelectronics (low-power LEDs)[1]. Semi-
conductors usually have unusual band structures that allow them to be used in various applications. Following the
discovery of new materials or the use of composite materials, great progress can be made in the area of optoelectron-
ics. Nanomaterials enhance chemical reactivity of materials, which alters their strength. Oxides such as titanium
dioxide and zinc oxide are transparent at the nanoscale, absorb and reflect ultraviolet rays and are therefore used in
sunscreens[2–7]. Iron oxide, a nanomaterial, helps as a pigment in lipsticks[8].
In recent studies conducted about semiconductor oxides, the doped oxides have shown significant and promising
features, and applications in low-power electronics, memories, gas sensors, electrochromics and display applications[9].
Nickel oxide played a vital role in the development of resistive memories, as well as a hole-transporting layer in
photovoltaic and optoelectronic devices. Transparent p-n junctions also have been employed using p-type oxides with
magnificent characteristics, although there have been challenges in implementing these in transparent electronics.
Outstanding characteristics such as better mobility and retention have been observed in transparent ferroelectric
memory devices which are composed of doped oxides, in turn exhibiting good stability[9].
Indium oxide itself has a wide band gap of around 2.1 eV, which makes it a transparent material in the visible
range that can be used in many areas for advantageous applications[10]. On the other hand, gallium oxide has a band
gap of 2.04 eV[11, 12], which corresponds to the ultraviolet range. It is used in Schottky barrier diodes and field
effect transistors, optoelectronic electroluminescent devices, spintronic devices and resistive random access memories,
as a photocatalyst and many more[13, 14]. Indium oxide, a transparent semiconducting oxide, has been studied over
the years and has been used as an active gas sensor material after detailed investigation of its various properties
as a semiconductor[15].
These have a wide band gap and when a vapor-deposited indium layer was oxidized at
high temperatures in air, the resulting polycrystalline indium oxide was found to be transparent and conductive.
Nanometer-sized crystalline indium oxide grains together form a polycrystalline film that is used today[16], and even
monocrystalline nanowires are being researched. Its applications are also characterized by changing the band gap and
forming heterostructures in the alloy system in combination with gallium oxide or even aluminum oxides.
For advanced semiconductor applications, when indium oxide is combined with another semiconducting oxide, a
new path is made for bipolar devices with enhanced conductivity. Doping, tunable mobility and contact properties
will act as the key requirements for further use [17].
Transparent conductive oxides are generally used as bold
screens in optoelectronic devices, and in architectural and window glass. Composite oxides are used today in various
optoelectronic applications such as photodetectors, optical modulators, polarizers, waveguides and lasers, as well as
in batteries[18].
In this field of optoelectronics, researches are still exploring the various properties of these composite materials.
The dynamical stability of this structure is determined using phonon density calculation. This paper aims to first
geometrically optimize the heterostructure and then perform the energy bandgap and density of states calculations
for this composite oxide of Indium oxide and Gallium oxide. An in-depth analysis of the optical properties has been
carried out using density functional theory and optical constants. All of the optical properties including the refractive
index, absorption and dielectric function are estimated.

II.
METHODOLOGY

The van der Waals heterostructure of the indium oxide and gallium oxide was formed theoretically, in which the
layers of indium oxide are stacked over gallium oxide in (001) direction. Here, the ground state of the compound
oxide containing indium oxide and gallium oxide is investigated for its optimized electronic structure (FIG.1) using
density functional theory[19]. The Tkatchenko-Scheffler method[20] (DFT-TS) with self-consistent screening was cho-
sen to evaluate the vdW interactions and interlayer distance is chosen from minimum energy. Self-consistent field
calculations are performed until a minimum energy value of 3.0x10−5 eV/atom is reached. The crystal is structurally
relaxed until the maximum force that can be exerted on it is less than 1.2 eV/˚A. The PBE(Perdew Burke Ernz-
erhof)+GGA(generalized gradient approximation) functional[21] and the relativistic Koelling-Harmon treatment[22]
with an energy range of 3 eV. The band structure and density of states (DOS) are analyzed after the self-consistent
field calculations have been performed. To structurally optimize the heterostructure, a fine k-set with 10 × 10 × 10
k-mesh is used[23]. Optical calculations of the imaginary and real parts of the dielectric tensor, reflectivity, conduc-
tivity, absorption and refractive index are performed using CASTEP software[24]. The computational calculation of
the phonon spectra is also carried out using norm-conserving pseudopotentials[25] at a cut-off energy of 600eV. In
the phonon spectra (FIG.2b), it is observed that density of states lies only in the positive energy range, indicating
dynamical stablity of the material.


3

FIG. 1. (Color Online) Single unit crystal structure of layered indium oxide and gallium oxide. The atoms are marked and
colored for reference.

(a)
(b)

FIG. 2. (Color Online) (a) Electronic band structure of layered oxide which shows a band gap starting from Fermi Level. A
3 eV gap in the band structure is a consistent phenomena in all the electronic properties.(b) phonon density of states shows
stability of the material.

III.
RESULTS

The results of density functional theory are discussed in this section. This compound crystal has a P-1 symmetry
with lattice parameters a=b=c 13.9981˚A and α = β = γ = 90◦. The atom’s stability hinges on the self-consistent field-
calculated energy, and we opt for the structure with the minimum energy to get insight into its other properties[26].
In the band structure calculation, the k-points are taken according to the first Brillouin zone from Γ: (0.000 0.000
0.000) through F: (0.000 0.500 0.000), Q: (0.000 0.500 0.500), Z: (0.000 0.000 0.500), and back to Γ: (0.000 0.000
0.000) (FIG.2a). According to density functional theory, our results show a direct band gap of 3.097 eV.
A visual voyage into the band structure reveals a vivid picture of the electronic structure of a material, highlighting
the valence band and conduction band, two key concepts in understanding basic physical properties. The valence
band, spanning from -5 eV to 0 eV, represents the energy levels occupied by electrons that are tightly bound to their
respective atoms. These electrons are involved in chemical bonding and are not free to move about the material with
the illustrious Fermi level demarcated by a dotted line. On the other side, the conduction band takes center stage on the
right, showcasing its energy states from 0 eV to 5 eV. The band ranges from -5 eV to 5 eV is considered because all the
important phenomena are considered to be observed in this range. The interplay between the valence band, conduction
band, and Fermi level governs the electronic behavior of materials, shaping their electrical conductivity, optical


4

(a)
(b)
(c)

FIG. 3. (Color Online) Plot of (a) absorption spectra, (b) frequency dependent imaginary and real part of dielectric function
and (c) reflectivity of the composite oxide. In the dielectric function plot red line shows real part and green line shows imaginary
part. All the opto-electronic properties reveal a band gap of 3 eV

properties, and thermal characteristics. Understanding these concepts is essential in fields such as semiconductor
physics, materials science, and device engineering while proposing a new material. The band gap found here is new
and improved from its component layers. While the indium oxide shows a lower band gap around 2 eV and gallium
oxide shows a band gap of about 5 eV the compound shows a gap of around 3 eV. Our observations of direct band
gap is important because it makes the material sufficiently bright and electron-hole radiative lifetime is small.
This section delves into the optical properties (FIG.3 and FIG.4) of the material, highlighting their potential
applications in both the electronic and optical domains. The tetrahedron method is used for integrating over the
Brillouin zone to calculate the optical properties. The absorption spectra (FIG.3a) reveals a prominent peak in the
visible spectrum, centered around 4eV. The first peak in the absorption spectra starts around 3 eV coinciding with
the previously determined direct band gap of approximately 3.097 eV. This suggests a favorable absorption window
where light in this range encounters minimal reflection, making these materials promising candidates for visible range
light-emitting devices or photodetectors.
The real part of the dielectric function (FIG.3b) further unveils intriguing features. The static dielectric constant of
the material is calculated from the value at zero frequency which is around 1.1 which gives a measure of the refractive
index of the material. Here we have plotted in-plane dielectric constant, however dielectric constant will show different
behavior in the x-z direction proving the optical anisotropy of the material. In the dielectric function plot first there
is a region of slow increase with energy followed by a peak around 4 eV. Then the dielectric function decreases with
energy till 15 eV. This fascinating interplay of frequencies underscores the intricate relationship between optical and
electronic properties in these materials.
These findings suggest promising avenues for exploration in the field of optoelectronics. The materials’ ability to
absorb and emit light in specific frequency ranges could lead to the development of novel light sources, detectors, and
other optical components. Further research is warranted to fully unlock the potential of these materials and harness
their unique optical properties for practical applications.
The intricate results of optics indeed reveal captivating insights into the material’s properties.
The refractive
index, a measure of how light bends as it passes through a material, is observed from the refractive index vs energy
graph (FIG.4b). The intensity here reaches its peak between the infrared and visible spectrum, indicating a strong
interaction of light with the material in this range. As we move towards the ultraviolet range, the refractive index
gradually decreases, suggesting weaker interactions with higher-energy photons[22]. In the realm of visible light, the
refractive index pirouettes around 1.1. This value is crucial for applications such as lens design and optical coatings, as
it determines how light gets refracted and transmitted. Optical conductivity (FIG.4a), another key optical property,
describes how a material responds to light by allowing the movement of carriers. The conductivity vs. energy graph
reveals a peak around 5 eV, indicating a significant response to light in this energy range. This peak appears above
the material’s band gap energy, suggesting strong interactions between photons and electrons. Meanwhile, the loss
function (FIG.4c), which accounts for the energy absorbed by the material as light passes through, takes center stage
with its own peak, belonging to the region with shorter wavelengths. This peak suggests that the material is more


5

(a)
(c)
(b)

FIG. 4. (Color Online) (a) Optical conductivity, (b) imaginary and real part of the refractive index (red line shows real part
and green line shows imaginary part)and (c) loss function is shown.

effective at absorbing higher-energy photons.

IV.
CONCLUSION

In conclusion, the composite crystal studied here unfurls a lot of possibilities in the opto-electronic fields. The union
of Indium oxide and Gallium oxide in a heterostructure holds the promise of elevated optical prowess, and the results
echo the potential for substantial contemporary value. Delving into the depths of dynamical stability adds another
layer of comprehension to this crystal’s stability.
The strategic use of a heterostructure emerges as a key player, and putting together all the results shows both
electrical and optical properties, culminating in a commendable band gap energy value. This, in turn, opens doors
to a plethora of applications, particularly in the field of solar cells and other opto-electronic devices. The dielectric
function and optical conductivity shows a peak after 3 eV proving the existence of a band gap. The refractive index
and the static value of dielectric constant is having a value of 1.1 which is a promising value for designing optical
materials.
Armed with a favorable band gap nestled in the visible spectrum of the electromagnetic realm, these materials
promise towards the construction of innovative opto-electronic devices. The meticulous exploration of this crystal’s
structure, guided by the results from the DFT method, adds a possible optoelectronic material made of two oxides.

V.
DATA AVAILABILITY

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable
request.

[1] E. Roduner, Size matters: why nanomaterials are different. Chem. Soc. Rev., 35, 583 (2006); A.M. Smith, S. Nie, Semi-
conductor Nanocrystals: Structure, Properties, and Band Gap Engineering. Acc. Chem. Res., 43, 190 (2010).

[2] Wang, Xinzhuo, The Comparison of Titanium Dioxide and Zinc Oxide Used in Sunscreen Based on Their Enhanced
Absorption. Applied and Computational Engineering., 24, 237 (2023).

[3] Choi Y-S, Kang J-W, Hwang D-K , Park S-J, Recent advances in ZnO-based light emitting diodes. IEEE Trans. Electr.
Dev., 57, 26 (2010).

[4] V.M. Bermudez, The structure of low-index surfaces of β-Ga2O3. Chemical Physics, 323, 193 (2006).


6

[5] Q.H. Wang, et al., Electronics and optoelectronics of two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides. Nat. Nanotechnol.,
7, 699 (2012).

[6] J. Pascual, J. Camassel, H. Mathieu, Fine structure in the intrinsic absorption edge of TiO2. Phys. Rev. B., 18, 5605
(1978).

[7] H. Tang, F. L´evy, H. Berger, P.E. Schmid, Urbach tail of anatase TiO2. Phys. Rev. B., 52, 7771 (1995).
[8] Juliya Khanam, Md. Rashib Hasan, Bristy Biswas, Shirin Akter Jahan, Nahid Sharmin, Samina Ahmed, Sharif Md.
Al-Reza, Development of ceramic grade red iron oxide pigment from waste iron source, Heliyon., 9, e12854 (2023).

[9] Wang, Z., Nayak, P. K., Caraveo-Frescas, J. A., and Alshareef, H. N. Recent Developments in p-Type Oxide Semiconductor
Materials and Devices.Advanced Materials, 28, 3831-3892 (2016).

[10] Ma, Zhizhen, Li, Zhuoran, Liu, Ke, Ye, Chenran and Sorger, Volker J, Indium-Tin-Oxide for High-performance Electro-
optic Modulation. Nanophotonics.,4, 198 (2015); Hillier, J.A., Patsalas, P., Karfaridis, D. et al., Photo-engineered opto-
electronic properties of indium tin oxide via reactive laser annealing. Sci Rep 12., 12, 14986 (2022).

[11] Jamwal NS, Kiani A, Gallium Oxide Nanostructures: A Review of Synthesis, Properties and Applications, Nanomaterials
(Basel)., 12, 2061 (2022).

[12] D.Guo,Q. Guo, Z. Chen, Z. Wu, P. Li, W. Tang, Review of Ga2O3-based optoelectronic devices. Materials Today Physics.,
11, 100157 (2019).

[13] Oreibi, I., Habeeb, M.A. and Hamza, R.S.A, Tailoring the Structural and Optical Features of PVA/SiO2-CuO Polymeric
Nanocomposite for Optical and Gamma Ray Shielding Applications. Silicon, 1-13 (2023).

[14] Hashim A, Habeeb MA, Jebur QM, Structural, dielectric and optical properties for (Polyvinyl alcohol-polyethylene oxide
manganese oxide) nanocomposites. Egypt J Chem, 63, 735-749 (2020).

[15] Hadeel Salih Mahdi, Azra Parveen, Mawlood Maajal Ali, Ameer Azam, Microstructural and Optical properties of Indium
Oxide Nanoparticles. Materials Today: Proceedings.,18, 704 (2019).

[16] Lee, Jong Hoon, Kim, Young, Ahn, Sang, Ha, Tae, Kim, Hong Seung, Grain-size effect on the electrical properties of
nanocrystalline indium tin oxide thin films. Materials Science and Engineering., 199, 37 (2015).

[17] Bierwagen, Oliver, Indium oxide - A transparent, wide-band gap semiconductor for (opto)electronic applications. Semi-
conductor Science and Technology., 30, 024001 (2015).

[18] Nicolas Barreau, David Duche, Carmen M. Ruiz, Ludovic Escoubas, Jean-Jacques Simon, Judikael Le Rouzo, Veronica
Bermudez, Chapter 16 - Innovative approaches in thin-film photovoltaic cells. Woodhead Publishing, 595 (2018).

[19] Nidhin Kurian Kalarickal, Siddharth Rajan, Chapter Three - β- (AlxGa(1−x))2O3 epitaxial growth, doping and transport,
Editor(s): Yuji Zhao, Zetian Mi, Semiconductors and Semimetals,Elsevier., 107, 49 (2021).

[20] A. Tkatchenko and M. Scheffler, Accurate Molecular Van Der Waals Interactions from Ground-State Electron Density and
Free-Atom Reference Data, Phys. Rev. Lett., 102, 073005 (2009).

[21] Xiaoping Han and Noureddine Amrane and Maamar Benkraouda, A GGA + vdW study on electronic properties and
optoelectronic functionality of Cd-doped tetragonal CH3NH3PbI3 for photovoltaics. Chemical Physics, 556, 111461 (2022).

[22] Koelling, Dale Harmon, Bruce, A technique for relativistic spin-polarised calculations. Journal of Physics C: Solid State
Physics., 10, 3107 (2001).

[23] S. Koley, Saurabh Basu, Superconductivity induced by Ag intercalation in Dirac semimetal Bi2Se3. Computational Mate-
rials Science., 210, 110989 (2022).

[24] S. Koley, Engineering Si doping in anatase and rutile TiO2 with oxygen vacancy for efficient optical application. Physica
B: Condensed Matter., 602, 412502 (2021).

[25] D. R. Hamann, M. Schl¨uter, and C. Chiang, Norm-Conserving Pseudopotentials. Phys. Rev. Lett., 43, 1494 (1979).
[26] S. Koley, Theoretical study on spintronic and optical property prediction of doped magnetic Borophene, Computational
Condensed Matter., 34, e00783 (2023).


