Metasurface-based planar microlenses for 

SPAD pixels

Jérôme Vaillant

Univ. Grenoble Alpes

CEA, LETI

38000 Grenoble, France
jerome.vaillant@cea.fr

Quentin Abadie

Univ. Grenoble Alpes 

CEA, LETI

38000 Grenoble, France
quentin.abadie@cea.fr

Mickaël Cavelier

Univ. Grenoble Alpes 

CEA, LETI

38000 Grenoble, France
mickael.cavelier@cea.fr

Lucie Dilhan

STMicroelectronics

Imaging division
Grenoble, France

lucie.dilhan@st.com

Lilian Masarotto

Univ. Grenoble Alpes

CEA, LETI

38000 Grenoble, France
lilian.masarotto@cea.fr

Cyril Bellegarde

Univ. Grenoble Alpes

CEA, LETI

38000 Grenoble, France
cyril.bellegarde@cea.fr

Alain Ostrovsky

STMicroelectronics

TR&D

Crolles, France

alain.ostrovsky@st.com

Romain Paquet

Univ. Grenoble Alpes

CEA, LETI

38000 Grenoble, France
romain.paquet@cea.fr

Abstract— In this paper we present two design 

generations of metasurface-based planar microlenses
implemented on Front-Side Illumination SPAD pixels. 
This kind of microlens is an alternative to conventional 
reflow microlens. It offers more degrees of freedom in 
term of design, especially the capability to design off-axis 
microlens to gather light around the SPAD photodiode. 
The two generations of microlenses have been fabricated
on STMicroelectronics SPAD and characterized. We 
validated the sensitivity improvement offered by 
extended 
metasurface-based 
microlens. 
We 
also 

confirmed the impact of lithography capability on 
metasurface performances, highlighting the need have 
access to advance deep-UV lithography.

Keywords— metasurface, planar microlens, pixel, 

SPAD

I. INTRODUCTION

Planar microlenses are well suited for SPAD pixels, 

which usually work under monochromatic illumination 
(Time-of-Flight or Fluorescence-Lifetime applications) 
and exhibit rather large pixel size with lower fill-factor 
compared to state-of-the-art CMOS pixels. We 
previously demonstrated Fresnel Zone Plate lenses[1] 
and proposed metasurface based[2] microlenses[3], [4]. 
In this paper, we present the design, fabrication and 
characterization results of 
two 
generations of 

metasurface-based 
planar 
microlenses 
on 

STMicroelectronics SPAD[5] array.

II. META-ATOM AND PLANAR MICROLENS

DESIGN

Our unitary structure, or meta-atom, is a nanoscale 
pillar of high refractive index material (amorphous 
silicon) embedded in a low refractive index medium 
(silicon oxide). The phase shift induced by a pillar is 
controlled by its geometry which is defined by the pitch, 

the capping thickness and the pillar’s parameters: 
height and diameter (see Fig. 1). 

Fig. 1. Geometry of meta-atom defined by the meta-atom pitch, the 
thickness of silicon oxide capping and the pillar height and diameter

We have also considered the paving strategy. For 

the first generation of metasurface-based microlens, we 
considered square paving for meta-atom arrangement.
In order to improve the spatial sampling, triangular 
paving (see Fig. 2) was also implemented in the second 
generation.

Fig. 2. Paving geometries used to design metasurface: square 
paving (left) and triangular paving (right)

We defined pillar libraries as sets of pillar with the 

paving and the first three parameters fixed and the 


pillar’s diameter varies inside the range achievable by 
lithography: the minimal diameter is defined by the 
minimal Critical Dimension (CD) and the maximal 
diameter is defined as meta-atom pitch minus the 
minimal space. Among all possible libraries, we select 
the ones that cover a phase shift from 0 to 2 while 
offering the best transmission (see Fig. 3).

Fig. 3. Library generation and selection workflow

First generation of libraries is based on 500nm and 

420nm pitches whereas the second generation is more 
aggressive with meta-atom pitch of 370nm. In both 
case, the minimum CD and space considered are 
100nm.

III. PLANAR MICROLENS DESIGNS

A. SPAD pixel

For this development, we consider 32 × 32 SPAD 

arrays. SPAD are sharing N-well and thus are grouped 
4 × 4 into a 86.4 × 86.4𝜇𝑚2 cell (see Fig. 4). The SPAD 
itself has a dimension of 10.5 × 11.5𝜇𝑚2. So, we use the 
capability 
to 
design 
off-axis 
microlens 
with

metasurface to extend the footprint compared to 
conventional refractive reflow-based microlens (i.e. 
10.5 × 11.5𝜇𝑚2) and thus collect more light.

Fig. 4. Layout of 4x4 SPAD cell sharing the same N-well

B. Planar microlens

We divide the 32 × 32 array of SPAD into 8 areas 

of 8 × 16 SPAD. Each area is covered by a given design 
of microlens (see Fig. 5):


One area without any microlens, to get the bare 
SPAD sensitivity as reference


One area with a microlens having the same 
footprint as
the reflow one ( 𝑆1 = 10.5 ×

11.5𝜇𝑚2 ). This will be used for direct 
comparison with refractive microlens.


Three area with microlens having intermediate 
footprint 𝑆2.25 = 16.5 × 16.5𝜇𝑚2, which is 2.25 
times larger than the reference surface.


Three area with microlens having the largest 
possible footprint 𝑆3.86 = 21.6 × 21.6𝜇𝑚2, 3.86
times larger than the reference.

Fig. 5. Views of 32x32 SPAD array coverd by microlenses, with a 
focus on microlens footprint x2.25

It should be noted that for microlenses with 

footprint larger than the reference, the design differs 
according to their position inside the 4x4 group of 
SPAD (see bottom left picture in Fig. 5). Considering 
layout symmetry, we distinguish four different pixels: 
center, top, corner and side (see Fig. 6). 

Fig. 6. Naming of SPAD and microlens according to their position 
in the 4x4 group

Microlens optical axis is centered on the SPAD of 

interest. When microlens and SPAD have the same 
footprint the optical axis is centered on it. But when the 
microlens surface extends outside SPAD footprint, the 
optical axis is offset (see bottom left image on Fig. 5). 
The target phase profile of the metasurface corresponds
to a perfect lens bending a plane wave into a spherical 
one:

𝜑(𝑥, 𝑦) =

2𝜋

𝜆 √(𝑥 − 𝑥0)2 + (𝑦 − 𝑦0)2 + 𝑓2 − 𝑓


Spatial coordinates are denoted x and y, the offset of the 
optical axis of the microlens x0 and y0, the focal length 


of the microlens f, and the wavelength of interest λ 
(940nm in our case). To encode this phase profile we 
consider the classical look-up table method[4].

IV.
METASURFACE FABRICATION

The process flow starts on 40nm CMOS Front-Side 

Illumination SPAD wafers[5] with the optical pedestal 
(SiO2) deposition and planarization. Then, a low-stress 
layer of amorphous silicon (aSi) is deposited and 
planarized. The meta-atom are defined by dry deep-UV 
lithography and etching. Finally, SiO2 deposition and 
planarization ensure the pillar’s encapsulation and the 
capping thickness is tuned to minimize the reflection of 
the metasurface (see Fig. 7).

Fig. 7. Schematic of process flow (left) and SEM tilted view of 
planar metasurface based-microlens (right)

V.
ELECTRO-OPTICAL CHARACTERIZATION 

A. Experimental setup

The electro-optical characterization of the SPAD 

arrays are done at wafer-level with dedicated probe 
station based on Accretech 300mm prober. The light 
source is a Thorlabs M940L3 LED filtered with a 
Thorlabs bandpass filter  FBH940-10 ( 𝐹𝑊𝐻𝑀 =
10𝑛𝑚). Uniform illumination over the array is ensured 
by a LabSphere integrating sphere. Fixed distance 
between the sphere output and the wafer emulate an 
f/10 angular distribution. The light intensity is recorded
using calibrated radiometer (UDT 221).

To evaluate microlens performances, we calculate

the Photon Detection Efficiency (PDE), i.e. the 
quantum efficiency:

𝑃𝐷𝐸 =

LCR−DCR

Φ940nm×𝑎𝑆𝑃𝐴𝐷

2


With Φ940𝑛𝑚 the optical flux in 𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜𝑛. 𝑚−2 . 𝑠−1 at the 
surface of the wafer, 𝑎𝑆𝑃𝐴𝐷

2
the surface of the SPAD 

pixel (i.e. 21.6 × 21.6𝜇𝑚2), LCR the Light Count Rate 
and DCR the Dark Count Rate, which are the frequency 
of SPAD triggering respectively under illumination and 
in darkness. As these count rates usually depend of the 

excess bias, above the breakdown voltage of the SPAD, 
we first evaluate the mean breakdown voltage of each 
circuit. The excess bias is set to 1.5V above the 
breakdown voltage for LCR and DCR measurement.

B. Experimental results

Both generation of metasurface-based microlens 

have been characterized as well as SPAD with 
refractive microlens (process of reference) and bare 
SPAD without microlens. The Fig. 9 shows the PDE for 
all of these configurations. 

As expected, for bare SPAD and for microlens with 

unitary surface ( 𝑆1 = 10.5 × 11.5𝜇𝑚2 ) the PDE are 
almost the same whatever the SPAD. Indeed, the layout 
of the 4 kind of SPAD (center, top, corner, side) are 
almost the same over this surface
S1. In this 

configuration, the refractive microlens leads to higher 
sensitivity than metasurface-based microlens as it 
bends the phase in a continuous way, contrary to 
metasurfaces that sample the phase profile, spatially 
and in phase value.

For extended surfaces (S2.25 and S3.86), we clearly see 

that the PDE depends on the position (center, top, 
corner, side): the central ones (dots in Fig. 9) are more 
sensitive than the corner ones (diamons in Fig. 9). There 
are two root causes to this effect. Firstly, the layout 
under a given microlens depends on its position: corner 
microlens is mainly above metallic interconnections 
that surround the 4 × 4 photodiodes, and layout below 
top and side microlenses are not exactly identical. 
Secondly, for the phase given by (1), the greater the 
distance to optical axis, the greater the slope of the 
phase. So as the meta-atom spatially sample the phase, 
this leads to possible aliasing. With the more aggressive 
design rules (smaller pitch and CD and use of triangular 
paving) the second generation of metasurfaces have 
higher and less dispersed performances.

Fig. 8. PDE measurement for for bare SPAD (No lens), with 
refractive microlens (Refractive) and metasurface-based microlens 
with footprint of 𝑆1, 𝑆2.25 and 𝑆3.86

Compared to reflow microlens, the PDE is 

improved whatever the metasurface-based microlens. 
The sensitivity is improved by 30% with small 
dispersion for our first extended design. For the largest 


microlens  (S3.86) we improve the PDE by × 2.3 for the 
center microlens, and in any case the PDE is higher than 
reference (reflow microlens). 

VI.
CONCLUSION

This work validates the interest and the feasibility 

of metasurface-based microlens at pixel level. We 
demonstrate 
our 
capability 
to 
process 
deep-

subwavelength 
pillars
of 
amorphous 
silicon 

encapsulated in silicon dioxide on top of Front-Side 
Illumination CMOS wafer to generate microlenses.
Measurement on 32x32 SPAD array confirms the 
interest of such technology. With the capability to 
design off-axis microlenses, we take advantage of space 
available around the 4x4 SPAD group to improve the 
PDE compared to the classical reflow microlenses.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The 
authors 
would 
like 
to 
thanks 

STMicroelectronics and CEA-Leti people involved in 
the fabrication of CMOS wafers and metasurface-based 
microlens.

REFERENCES

[1]
J. Vaillant et al., « SPAD array sensitivity improvement 

by diffractive microlens », présenté à International Image Sensor 
Workshop, 2019, p. 4.
[2]
P. Genevet, F. Capasso, F. Aieta, M. Khorasaninejad, et 

R. Devlin, « Recent advances in planar optics: from plasmonic to 
dielectric metasurfaces », Optica, vol. 4, no 1, p. 139‑152, janv. 2017, 
doi: 10.1364/OPTICA.4.000139.
[3]
L. Dilhan, J. Vaillant, A. Ostrovsky, L. Masarotto, C. 

Pichard, et R. Paquet, « Planar microlenses for near infrared CMOS 
image sensors », Electron. Imaging, vol. 2020, no 7, p. 144-1-144‑7, 
janv. 2020, doi: 10.2352/ISSN.2470-1173.2020.7.ISS-144.
[4]
L. Dilhan et al., « Planar microlenses applied to SPAD 

pixels », in IISW proceedings, 2021.
[5]
S. Pellegrini et al., « Industrialised SPAD in 40 nm 

technology », in 2017 IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting 
(IEDM), 
déc. 
2017, 
p. 
16.5.1-16.5.4. 
doi: 

10.1109/IEDM.2017.8268404.


