Nanojet Visualization and Dark-field Imaging of Optically Trapped Vaterite 

Capsules with Endoscopic Illumination

Andrei Ushkov1,2*, Andrey Machnev1,2, Denis Kolchanov1,2, Toms Salgals3,4, Janis 

Alnis5, Vjaceslavs Bobrovs3, Pavel Ginzburg1,2

1Department of Electrical Engineering, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, Tel Aviv 69978, 

Israel

2Light-Matter Interaction Centre, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, 69978, Israel

3Institute of Telecommunications, Riga Technical University, 12 Azenes Street, 1048 Riga, 

Latvia

4Nanophotonics research laboratory (NANO-Photon Lab.), Riga Technical University, 

Azenes street 12, LV-1048, Riga, Latvia

5Institute of Atomic Physics and Spectroscopy, University of Latvia, 3 Jelgavas Street, 1004 

Riga, Latvia

Abstract
Optical responsivity grants biomedical capsules additional capabilities, promoting them 
towards multifunctional theragnostic nanodevices. In this endeavor, screening candidates 
under conditions that closely resemble in situ environments is crucial for both the initial 
optimization and the subsequent inspection stages of development and operation. Optical 
tweezers equipped with dark-field spectroscopy are among the preferable tools for 
nanoparticle imaging and refractometry. However, the effectiveness of conventional 
illumination and light collection arrangements for inspecting anisotropic complex inner 
composition particles is quite limited due to reduced collection angles, which can result in the 
omission of features in scattering diagrams. Here we introduce an endoscopic dark-field 
illumination scheme, where light is launched on an optically trapped particle from a single-
mode fiber, immersed into a fluid cell. This arrangement disentangles illumination and 
collection paths, thus allowing the collection of scattered light with a very high numerical 
aperture. This methodology is applied to vaterite nanocapsules, which are known to possess 
strong anisotropic responses. Tweezer configuration allows revealing optical properties for 
different crystallographic orientations of vaterite, which is complex to do otherwise. 
Furthermore, endoscopic dark-field images reveal the emergence of polarization-dependent 
long-range photonic nanojets, which are capable of interacting with nearby particles, 
demonstrating a new pathway for nanojet image formation. 

*corresponding author


1. Introduction

Optically responsive capsules find use in various drug delivery scenarios, where a high level 
of targeting, in situ imaging capabilities, and controlled release alongside a remote activation 
are among the properties demanded for implementing frontier theranostic devices1,2. 
Significant preliminary efforts must be devoted to optimizing and characterizing particles at 
the initial design stage. Single particle characterization offers more precise and detailed 
information about individual particle properties3, leading to a better understanding of their 
behavior and performance, compared to bulk assembly characterization which may mask 
individual variations and unique characteristics4,5. The ability to screen individual particles 
enables the construction of more accurate statistics and accounts for side effects, which might 
otherwise be overlooked in assembly studies6. In these endeavors, optical tweezers offer a 
versatile solution, enabling the trapping of a single particle while keeping the flexibility in 
characterization methods7,8 and allowing for a high degree of automation 9,10. Propulsion and 
sorting capabilities can be attained using adaptive optics (such as holographic tweezers 11, 
diffractive structures 12, or setups with steerable mirrors 13) when integrated with a processing 
unit in a closed feedback loop or manually 14,15. Optical tweezers enable the noninvasive 
manipulation of particles in natural biological environments, such as cell cultures, thereby 
reducing the constraints and limitations associated with the use of substrates 16. After trapping, 
nanoparticles can be subjected to spectroscopic measurements. While fluorescent imaging 
remains a prevalent technique in bioimaging, label-free spectroscopy offers the advantage of 
extracting essential optical properties of particles, including detailed information on their 
refractive index tensor, without the need for labeling 17,18. Refractometry allows deducing 
information on the internal particle properties and anisotropy, given the structure is 
birefringent. The latter property is beneficial for cross-polarization imaging and for inducing 
optomechanical particle rotation 19. The rotary degree of freedom can be utilized for fluid 
mixing and for controlling particle dissolution rates among other possible applications 9. All 
those factors facilitate a need to perform quantitative spectroscopy of optically trapped 
nanoparticles. The imaging methodology will be outlined first, followed by its application to a 
drug delivery-relevant vaterite nanoparticle, a leading candidate for creating optically-
responsive drug delivery capsules.

Direct imaging of particles with bright-field techniques is diffraction-limited and thus is typically 
restricted to investigating larger-scale entities, spanning several microns in size 20. On the 
other hand, dark-field spectroscopy allows capturing the optical properties of nanoscale 
particles by assessing their scattering field effectively isolating it from the illumination 
background 21. Imaging of silver nanoparticles, as small as 20 nm in radius was reported via 
hyperspectral darkfield microscopy22, while 5 nm particles can be also optically trapped in a 
gap of plasmonic nanoantenna and monitored via the nonlinear optical signal23. Very small 
(5.4 nm in diameter) gold nanoparticles were managed to optically trap for a short time (2-3 s) 
in a single-beam optical trap24. However, implementing dark-field spectroscopy with optical 
tweezers is far from being a trivial task. Existing implementations employ back focal plane 
(Fourier) filtering to differentiate between illumination and collection angles, thereby 
maintaining a dark background. To reveal the complexity of implementing this technique within 
optical tweezers, dark-field imaging strategies will be revised next. Figure 1 surveys the main 
techniques, shown here in the order of increasing the dark field illuminating incidence angle 
(from (a) to (d)).


The most commonly used dark field arrangement, shown in Fig.1b 25, is widely implemented 
on commercially available microscopes. Incident light is passed through a darkfield filter cube 
to achieve grazing angle illumination. The scattered light is collected through a complementary 
spatial filter. The main disadvantage of this though very practically useful implementation is 
the comparatively low numerical apertures (NA) (~0.9) in imaging, in contrast to the oil 
objectives. The problem of the limited collection NA is partially solved in a vertical illumination 
setup (Fig. 1a), where only close-to-vertical angles are “reserved” for illumination. Thus, the 
high-NA oil objectives can be used, which improves the resolution and image contrast. Being 
convenient for performing standard assessments, the previously mentioned techniques 
cannot recover the entire scattering diagram, as they block certain collection angles, reserved 
for the illumination. For example, the investigation of scattering patterns of plasmonic 
antennas 26,27,28,6 and photonic nanojets 29,30 demands collecting light from a broad range of 
angles. This issue is addressed by physical decoupling of the illumination and scattering 
collection paths (Fig.1c) 31, which unblocks highly inclined incident angles appropriate for both 
dark field measurements. The main complexity of this appealing scheme comes from a need 
to align the setup not only along optical axes. Another practical limitation arises from the form 
factor of long working distance objectives, which often presents challenges in integrating into 
the setup. All those upright microscope configurations can be upgraded with optical tweezers, 
given a high-NA immersion objective is introduced underneath the sample (inverted 
microscope scheme). However, a critical limitation of this seemingly advantageous setup is 
the optical thickness of the fluid cell where the trapped particle is located. In this scenario, at 
least one of the objectives must focus light through a fluid volume, unless the sample is thin, 
thus presenting an additional experimental challenge. While all the previously mentioned 
methods can be successfully implemented alongside their constraints, hereinafter we 
demonstrate a methodology that aims to bypass several limitations. 
Here we develop a dark field spectroscopy scheme, integrated within the optical tweezer setup 
to resolve both alignment and collection cone issues (Fig.1d). The illumination scheme here 
is different and is achieved with a bent optical fiber, immersed into the colloidal solution. 
Therefore, the light directly impinges on the pre-selected particle, trapped with the tweezer. 
This arrangement allows direct white light illumination at ultra-high incidence angles (~90🇴). 
Moreover, the optical trap keeps the particle well above the surface (hundreds of microns 
distance), thus disentangling it both from optical and electrostatic interactions with the sample. 
Furthermore, possible substrate impact on biological species is eliminated. It enables the 
deterministic alignment of anisotropic nanoparticles relative to optical access and the 
visualization of optical nanojets, which is challenging otherwise. It is also worth mentioning 
that the interpretation of darkfield spectroscopy results, considering optically anisotropic 
particles (i.e., vaterite spherulites), becomes challenging. The difficulty with standard 
methodologies (Fig. 1(a, b)) arises from the excitation of additional dipole components owing 
to a nontrivial polarization state of the illumination cone. The endoscopic illumination in 
combination with optical tweezer is free of such difficulties, as it ensures a proper particle self-
orientation in an optical trap and a fixed incident polarization. The developed optical tool is 
transformative and can be applied for the inspection of biological species (i.e., bacteria) 16, cell 
imaging32, and light-sheet microscopy33. Considering darkfield capabilities in imaging 
nanoscale particles22, the tool can be applied for the examination of a wide range of inorganic 
object sizes in situ. Finally, the setup allows for the direct measurement of rotation frequencies 
in trapped anisotropic particles through nanojet 'blinking', instead of the traditional quadrant 
photodiode (QPD) technique34. Worth noting that mapping of photonic nanojets was previously 


done via postprocessing, using z-stuck images acquired by a fast-scanning confocal 
microscope35, or via the nanojet observation in a highly scattering medium36. Furthermore, the 
effect of photonic nanojets bending (photonic hook) was proposed and observed in a 
microwave emulation experiment via scanning-probe imaging in geometrically asymmetric 
structures37. In sharp contrast to previous studies, the direct real-time observation of nanojet 
bending for a spherically symmetric microparticle in optically transparent non-scattering 
medium is reported.
The manuscript is organized as follows: the experimental setup is described first and then 
used to acquire dark-field spectra from optically trapped anisotropic vaterite particles. Dark-
field images revealed the emergence of polarization-dependent long-range photonic nanojets, 
which are capable of interacting with nearby particles. This phenomenon is comprehensively 
studied and verified with a full-wave numerical model, demonstrating a new pathway for 
nanojet image formation. 

Figure 1. (a)-(c) Examples of existing dark field principal schemes with different 
illuminating light incidence angles. (d) Endoscopic illumination scheme. The setups 
from a) to d) are sorted in ascending order of the incidence angle.

2. Results

2.1 Vaterite particle
Vaterite nanoparticles were selected as a case study for applying our methodology to entities 
relevant to the field of biomedicine. Considerable efforts are dedicated to the development of 
particles for drug delivery. Broadly, these approaches can be categorized as organic-based 
or inorganic, each with numerous subsections for classifying the carrier’s designs. Inorganic 
approaches might be preferable for implementing optically-responsive functionalities and thus 
will be favored here over their counterparts. The calcium carbonate (CaCO3) nanoparticles 
have three crystalline forms- vaterite, calcite, and aragonite. Vaterite, a metastable polycrystal 
also termed spherulite, features high porosity, facilitating a high payload capacity, and is 
noteworthy for its practical, straightforward, and low-cost self-assembly synthesis. All of these 
indicate its potential as a biocompatible container for targeted delivery of therapeutic 
compounds into living cells and tissues. Vaterite particles also possess a moderately high 


optical anisotropy (Δn≈0.1 in the visible range), which promotes using them in microrheology 
and microfluidics. For example, micron-scale particles rotate under a circularly polarized 
illumination and can attain GHz angular velocity, being trapped in a vacuum38. Thereby, 
vaterite encompasses a great variety of promising photonics-based applications alongside its 
clear biomedical relevance. Considering chemical self-assembly, leading to not always 
deterministic outcomes, our goal is to conduct near-to-in-situ inspections of optically 
responsive capsules. In this paper, we use two diameters Dparticle of vaterite particles: ~1 
micron and ~3 micron. The 1µm particles are employed in the dark-field spectroscopy (see 
Section 2.3), whereas 3µm particles are used for the nanojets observation (see Section 2.4).
In addition, we demonstrate the darkfield imaging capabilities of our setup for vaterite particles 
down to 250 nm in radius (see Supplementary Materials).

2.2 Experimental Setup

The basic underpinning idea of the measurement principle appears in Fig. 2(a), demonstrating 
an optically trapped particle, locally illuminated with a single-mode fiber approaching the 
particle at ~90° angle. The scattered field is collected with the same objective (Olympus 
UPlanFL N 100x Oil, NA 1.30), which is used for trapping. The schematics of the optical setup 
appear in Fig. 2(b). The trapping diode laser (980 nm wavelength, output power 300 mW) is 
launched through λ/2 and λ/4 waveplates for polarization control. The vaterite particle 
(elaborated on below, SEM image in Fig. 2(a), inset) is trapped in a confocal dish filled with 
ethanol to prevent particle dissolution. After being scattered on the optically immobilized 
particle, the trapping laser signal is collected by 20x objective (Mitutoyo M Plan Apo NIR 20x 
Dry, NA 0.4) for further focusing on the quadrant photodiode (QPD). The QPD, commonly 
used for trapped particle rotation measurements, Brownian motion tracking, and trap stiffness 
calibration, is mounted at the upper arm of the confocal scheme34. To illuminate the 
microscopic field of view, a white mounted LED (Thorlabs MCWHL5) is used as a bright-field 
source (it can be switched off to get a better contrast for nanojet imaging). A supercontinuum 
laser (YSL Photonics SC-PRO) is used for dark-field illumination through a single-mode fiber. 
The optical fiber is mounted on a piezo XYZ stage to control the fiber tip. A micromanipulator 
(Scientifica PathStar), granting a micron-scale precision, is used for this purpose (Fig. 2(c)). A 
single-mode fiber SMF patch-cable compliant with the ITU-T G.652 standard was used for the 
white light illumination. In the fiber preparation process, the end of the patch cable was cleaved 
at 90°, and then, to get a constant bending angle, the prepared fiber was inserted into the SiO2 
capillary (outer diameter 0.8mm). The burning temperature of the propane-butane gas flame 
from the micro torch melted and softened the capillary with fiber slowly within the flame touch 
point. As a result, the capillary end with a fiber output was bent at an angle of ~45° with respect 
to the rest of the capillary tube, which was mounted on the micromanipulator.
Although the micromanipulator-controlled fiber movements create liquid flows in the vicinity of 
the trapped particle, they do not sweep trapped particles away due to the relatively slow speed 
(~1 mm/s). The light from both the dark- and bright-field sources, interacting with the particle, 
is collected with the high-NA objective (Olympus UPlanFL N 100x Oil, NA 1.30) and goes to 
the spectrophotometer (Avantes AvaSpec ULS2048L) and CCD camera (Teledyne FLIR 
Grasshopper3). For an accurate dark-field acquisition the bright-field source is switched off.
Due to the endoscopic fiber illumination, a full NA=1.30 of the microscope objective is used 
for the signal collection. It should be noted, that in the case of the hollow-cone darkfield 
illumination by the same objective, a smaller effective NAcollecting≈1.1 would be used for 


darkfield imaging, as the rest should be reserved for the illumination channel. In addition, a 
hollow-cone illumination leads to the averaging of scattering diagrams of multiple electric 
dipoles, excited from different azimuthal orientations. Taking these two factors into account, 
we estimated a twofold increase in signal-to-noise ratio in our setup (see Supplementary 
Materials).

Figure 2. Optical tweezer-based dark-field setup with endoscopic illumination. (a) The 
basic principle behind the dark-field spectroscopy of locally illuminated particles. The 
inset shows a SEM photograph of a typical ≈1 μm diameter vaterite, the white scale bar 
denotes 1 μm. (b) Schematics of the experimental setup. (c) Photograph of the 
experimental setup: optical fiber mounted on the 3D micromanipulator illuminates the 
optically trapped microparticle in the confocal dish.

2.3 Dark-field spectroscopy of a trapped vaterite particle
A vaterite particle with a diameter Dparticle=0.9 μm was trapped with the setup. The optical trap 
was characterized with the aid of QPD. Fig. 3(a) demonstrates the sum of all four quadrants, 
which enables revealing the trapping effect - no fluctuating signal is observed prior to the 
particle capture, and the particle stays stable within the trap after being captured (fluctuation 
statistics is steady). The inset shows the bright-field image of vaterite. The trap stiffness is 
characterized by analyzing the position fluctuations of a trapped particle, undergoing Brownian 
motion. The power spectral density of the fluctuations allows extracting the trap stiffness as: 
𝜅 = 2𝜋𝑓𝑐𝛾 ≈ 12 𝑓𝑁/𝑛𝑚, where 𝛾 = 3𝜋𝜂𝐷𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑙𝑒 is the particle friction coefficient, 𝜂 the ethanol 
dynamic viscosity (1184*10-6 Pa*s at 20℃), 𝐷𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑙𝑒=0.9 μm the particle radius, 𝑓𝑐≈200 Hz is 


the corner frequency obtained from the fitting of the experimental Power Spectrum Density 
function with a Lorentzian 𝑃𝑆𝐷(𝑓) = 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡/(𝑓𝑐2 + 𝑓2) (PSD curve is shown in Fig. 3b)34. 
Considering the details of the implemented optical path, 12 𝑓𝑁/𝑛𝑚 is a relatively high 
measured stiffness, which allows a stable manipulation of particles, minimizing the escape 
probability.   
After trapping the particle, the dark-field spectra were recorded. The vaterite major axis is 
aligned with the trapping light polarization, thus enabling to obtain the particle orientation 
control. The experimental dark-field setup shown in Fig.2b is designed to provide the s-
polarized dark field illumination with an incidence angle of 80°. The incident wavevector kx in 
the inset in Fig.3c shows the in-plane xy-projection of the total wavevector k.
Figure 3c demonstrates significant differences in dark-field spectra, which strongly depend on 
the particle’s orientation. The spectra are relatively noisy, which is the result of the instabilities 
caused by Brownian motion. The results can be smoothed by increasing the data acquisition 
time. Experimental data was fit with full-wave numerical simulation, which takes into account 
the internal vaterite crystallinity39 and the illumination/collection arrangement. The details of 
the numerical analysis will follow in the next section.    

Fig. 3. Optical trap data and dark-field spectroscopy results. (a) QPD signal (sum of 4 
quadrants), demonstrating the particle trapping event. Inset - bright field microscope 
image of a trapped vaterite particle with 0.9 μm diameter. (b) Measured Power Spectrum 
Density function of the particle in the optical trap and its Lorentzian fitting with the 
corner frequency fc=197 Hz. fc is proportional to the trap stiffness. (c) The measured 
and simulated dark field spectra of vaterite microparticle. Blue and red spectra 
correspond to different orientations of the optically anisotropic particle with respect to 
the incident plane wave.

2.4 Nanojet blinking and inter-particle nanojets observation
During the dark-field data acquisition for vaterite size Dparticle=3 micron, optical imaging was 
performed and revealed a set of peculiar phenomena. Specifically, a formation of nanojets 


was observed, which, in principle, are not expected to appear in the far-field image of the 
sample area.  
Photonic nanojets are intense near-fields that emerge due to the interaction between light and 
micron-scale particles. Electromagnetic hot spots can be controlled by a particle’s refractive 
index and shape thus tailoring near-fields quite efficiently. The nanojet bridges the gap 
between small-scale plasmonic nanoparticles, which offer near-field enhancement at the 
expense of optical loss40, and large-scale dielectric lenses, where a wider aperture is traded 
for improved focusing34. Nanojets can enhance performance in many applications, including 
optomechanical manipulation, Raman spectroscopy, and bioimaging, to name just a few. In 
the context of developing optically responsive capsules, vaterite nanocarriers that support 
tunable nanojets can provide an additional advantage over low-contrast capsules, e.g., 
polymeric.
Nanojects, being a near-field phenomenon, require extra care in visualization. Typically, the 
imaging is done with either near-field (SNOM)41, confocal scanning methods35, or via 
scattering on imperfections42. In microfluidic applications, the jets scatter from substrates and 
are subsequently visualized with a microscope. In any case, an auxiliary structure is needed 
to map near-field properties to the far-field detection. 
Here, we demonstrate that using our illumination scheme, granting ultra-high incident angles 
of incidence, alongside high NA oil objective, enables performing the nanojets visualization 
from the far field. Nanojet observation will be presented first and then followed by detailed 
analyses of the interaction scenarios. Figure 4 demonstrates experimental photographs in 
near-infra-red (NIR) of vaterite and silica microparticles with similar diameters Dparticle~3 
micron, generating photonic nanojets.
At first, orientation-sensitive nanojets, generated by vaterite particles, were observed (Fig. 4(a) 
and (b)). Vaterite, being a strongly anisotropic particle, aligns in an optical trap along the 
polarization of the laser. Switching the linear polarization of the trapping laser with a half-wave 
plate causes the rotation of the particle. This allows us to observe nanojets for two mutually 
orthogonal arrangements of the particle with respect to the incident (from the fiber) light. As 
can be seen, the nanojet intensity strongly depends on the particle's orientation, as it is also 
verified with the full-wave numerical model, which accounts for the vaterite internal anisotropy 
(Fig. 4(c) and (d)). The maximal field enhancement, as the function of the angle between the 
incident light polarization and the major axis of the particle, appears in Fig.4(e). A 2-fold 
difference is observed, nevertheless, the anisotropy neo/no=1.65/1.55≈1.06 is relatively low. If 
vaterite rotates in a circularly polarized optical trap, the nanojet blinks. 
In the set of experiments, we also found that nanojets can mitigate intermediate-range 
photonic interactions between the particles. It was found that nanojets bend towards the 
secondary particle, as it is shown in Fig 4(f-k), at the specific spatial scale: those interactions 
are neither near- nor far-field, but rather intermediate on the wavelength scale. Reference 
measurements without the second particle present possess no bending. While the bending 
phenomenon is rather universal and observed for both vaterite and silica particles under 
similar conditions, anisotropic vaterite demonstrates more confined and stronger jets. Those 
differences will be revealed next. 


Fig. 4. Photonic nanojets from vaterite and silica microparticles with diameters of 
Dparticle=3 μm. (a), (b) Vaterite orientation-dependent nanojets. The nanojet lengths, 
imaged with the CCD camera, depend on the mutual orientation between the incident 
field polarization and the vaterite major axis, as verified numerically - (c) and (d), 
respectively. Dashed white lines in (a) and (b) denote the visual impression of the 
corresponding nanojets lengths. The incident wavevector kx in the inset in (c)-(d) shows 
the horizontal xy-projection of the total wavevector k. (e) The vaterite photonic nanojet 
field enhancement as the function of the vaterite major axis angle with respect to the 
incident wave polarization. Photonic nanojets are produced by the (f-h) vaterite and (i-
k) silica particles. Nanoject bending towards a nearby particle (f), (h), (i), and (k). (g) and 
(j) - reference jets without a secondary particle present. The photographs (a)-(b), (f)-(k) 
were recorded in NIR. Numerical calculations are CW at 1.1 μm. Scale bar in (h) denotes 
3 μm.

2.5 Theory of Nanojet Image Formation

After observing the jets, the physical mechanism behind their direct visualization will be 
revealed. In this endeavor, we performed full wave finite difference time domain (FDTD) 

simulations of the particles, illuminating them with a plane wave at a high 80º incident angle. 
The schematic layout of the simulation appears in Fig. 5(a).


Fig. 5. The numerical analysis – main steps. (a) The principal scheme - FDTD model 
with two particles. The plane wave (CW, 1.1 μm wavelength) source has an incidence 
angle of 90°- α = 80°. (b) The calculated electromagnetic fields in Plane 1 (located 
beneath the particles in isotropic medium) are used for angular spectrum 
decomposition and subsequent field calculations for a set of planes around the 
particles (i-th planes in (c)). Planes 2 and 3 in (a) are central cuts of the FDTD simulation 
box. To simulate the images on the CCD camera (i.e., Figs. 6(a-f)), a set of intensity 
distributions in i-th planes is averaged (see details in text).

Two spherical particles with diameters Dparticle=3 μm are placed at a distance sx=4D and sy=-
2*D..2*D (varying value) from each other. Vaterite particles are modeled with their complex 
position-dependent anisotropic tensor, accounting for the internal crystallinity39. neo=1.65 and 
no=1.55 are the local principal axis refractive indexes. The principal central high-index optical 
axis of the particle is considered to be directed along sx. For isotropic silica particles, the 
tabulated values were used43. The embedding medium is ethanol (n≈1.36 in visible44). The 
plane wave with grazing angle α=10° (and incident angle 80°) is used as a source (see Fig.5 
(a)). Owing to computational capabilities, the full wave simulation allows considering relatively 
small computation volumes, which cannot exceed several wavelengths in each dimension. 
This is especially relevant to vaterite, which has to be accurately meshed to account for its 
internal anisotropy. However, the plane-wave decomposition method45 allows projecting near-
field distribution to the far-field propagating waves. Those can be directly linked to form a 
microscope image, considering the available NA. 
The scattering field data E(xn, ym, z) from ‘Plane 1’ is used for the angular spectrum 
decomposition. The plane is located beneath the particles and does not intersect with dielectric 
structures (i.e., the refractive index at each point on the plane is uniform and isotropic. Thus, 
following the 2D Fourier transform on a discrete mesh45:

𝐄̂(𝑘𝑥, 𝑘𝑦, 𝑧) = ∑
𝑛,𝑚 𝐄(𝑥𝑛, 𝑦𝑚,𝑧)
exp(−𝑖𝑘𝑥𝑥𝑛 − 𝑖𝑘𝑦𝑦𝑚) Δ𝑥𝑛 Δ𝑦𝑚

(2𝜋)2 ,                                                   (1)


where (xn, ym) is the spatial coordinate mesh in ‘Plane 1’ and (kx, ky) is the mesh in reciprocal 
space. kz is calculated from the wave dispersion within the homogeneous material (ethanol in 
this case).
A set of wavevectors (kx, ky, kz) after the decomposition is depicted by coloured arrows in Fig. 
5(b). Note, that for the sake of visualization (kx, ky, -kz) is presented, i.e., the arrows are 
depicted upwards nevertheless the propagation is downwards to the objective. On this plot, 
red arrows denote the waves inside the microscope objective NA cone (NA=1.3, medium is 
ethanol), while blue arrows - outside it. Thus, only wavevectors depicted in red pass through 
the microscope objective and form an image on the camera.
To model the camera image, the light intensity distributions E(xn, ym, zi) are reconstructed on 
a set of horizontal planes zi (called i-th planes in Fig.5c) using the free-space propagator (see 
Fig. 5(c)):

𝐄(𝑥𝑛, 𝑦𝑚, 𝑧𝑖) = ∑
𝑘𝑥,𝑘𝑦 𝐄̂(𝑘𝑥, 𝑘𝑦, 𝑧𝑖)
exp(𝑖𝑘𝑥𝑥𝑛 + 𝑖𝑘𝑦𝑦𝑚)Δ𝑘𝑥 Δ𝑘𝑦,                                                  (2)

where

𝐄̂(𝑘𝑥, 𝑘𝑦, 𝑧𝑖) = 𝐄̂(𝑘𝑥, 𝑘𝑦, 𝑧Plane 1) exp([𝑖𝑘𝑧(𝑧𝑖 − 𝑧Plane 1)]),

𝑘𝑧 = −√(2𝜋

𝜆 𝑛𝑚𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑢𝑚)

2

− 𝑘𝑥

2 − 𝑘𝑦

2,                                                                                               (3)

The “-” sign in equation (3) for kz shows the direction of scattered energy flux, opposite to the 
Z-axis direction.
A set of horizontal zi planes is chosen in the range zparticle 1-Dparticle/2<zi<zparticle 1 +Dparticle/2 to 
cover Particle 1 (see Fig.5a), and the corresponding scattered field intensity maps 
𝐼(𝑥𝑛, 𝑦𝑚,𝑧𝑖) = |𝑬(𝑥𝑛,𝑦𝑚, 𝑧𝑖)|2 are calculated.
To simulate the depth of field effect, a Gaussian blur filter is applied to every map, with the 
standard deviation σ=ω(z)/2, where ω(z) is the Gaussian beam waist46, see Fig.5c. The 
Gaussian beam Rayleigh range zR is defined by its waist radius ω0 via the objective NA: 
zR=nmediumω0/NA. Finally, the simple average field intensity map is calculated over the full set 
of zi planes. 
Figure 6 summarizes the numerical results of photonic nanojets, generated under conditions 
of experimental dark field setup. Colormaps show the camera images, modeled with the 
previously described approach. The main objective here is to compare the field intensity 
distribution in the plane, containing the Particle 1 and the real image, observed with the 
microscope objective. Figs. 6 (a and c) compare the scenarios when particles are aligned with 
the propagation direction of the illumination. In this case, the near-field (panel c) has fast-
oscillating components, which do not make it to the camera image (panel a). It is rather 
expected as the fast oscillations are mapped to evanescent fields, which do not propagate to 
the objective. In the “lens view”, the second particle appears brighter, as it scatters the jet. 
Figures 6 (b and d) represent the scenario when the second particle is displaced. Here the 
difference between the total field in the particles’ plane and the real image differ dramatically. 
While no bent jet appears in the near-field map, the far-field image clearly demonstrates the 
field attraction, which was indeed observed in the experiment. 
Similar effects are predicted for silica particles, demonstrating lesser confined jets, as 
expected owing to a lower refractive index contrast. This modeling also confirms the 
experimental observation (Fig. 4).


To further investigate the bending effect and attribute it to the particle’s refractive index, the 
following numerical study has been done. Two dielectric particles are located in 
correspondence with Fig.5a setup at a distance sx=4Dparticle=12 micron along X-axis and at a 
varying offset sy along Y-axis (see also an inset in Fig.6g). The characteristic jet bending (Max 
sy) was calculated as a function of the particle's refractive index, see Fig.6g. The value of Max 
sy corresponds to the transverse offset sy when a nanojet tail intensity decays by a factor of 
1/e in comparison to the aligned situation sy=0 (see Supplementary Materials). It can be clearly 
seen that Max sy monotonically grows with the optical density. Several representative dielectric 
particles, made from silica, BK7, vaterite, and MR174 (a high refractive index n=1.74 optical 
lens material) are indicated in the inset. Overall, the results verify that the photonic nano-jet 
bending is the result of the near-field particles interaction, observed via the far-field mapping 
on the camera. The mechanism of bending observation inherently relies on the near-to-far 
field transformation performed by the microscope objective.

Figure 6. Numerical analysis of inter-particle photonic nano-jet bending effect. 
Numerical analysis of inter-particle photonic nano-jet bending effect. (a), (b) Images of 
nanojets through the objective - “lens view”, as elaborated in Fig.5. Vaterite particles 
with their central optical axes aligned with incident wavevector kx are used, as shown 
in the inset to (a). (c), (d) FDTD-calculated scattered near field intensity colormaps. No 
nanojet bending is found, in contrast to (a) and (b). (e),(f) The same as (a),(b), but with 
silica particles instead of vaterite ones. The particle's diameter in (a)-(f) is 3 μm. (g) 
Characteristic nanojet bending (Max sy) as the function of the particle’s refractive index. 
The mutual arrangement of representative particles is in the inset.


3. Outlook and Conclusion

The illumination endoscopic dark-field spectroscopy method has been developed and 
demonstrated on several types of optically trapped particles. Optical tweezers enable the 
investigation, screening, and sorting of single particles in solutions based on their 
spectroscopic signatures. A special notion can be devoted to anisotropic and/or nonspherical 
particles, which can be rotated in the trap and thus investigated from several nontrivial 
directions. We have demonstrated this capability on vaterite nanoparticles, verifying its strong 
anisotropic response. Furthermore, the endoscopic architecture enables untying the spectra 
from substrate contributions, which might be important in several microfluidic arrangements. 
A distinctive advantage of this spectroscopic technique is the capability to collect scattered 
light from an optically trapped particle at an extremely broad range of angles. In typical widely-
used arrangements, angular limitations come from a demand to grant high NA and light 
intensity for stable particle trapping. Furthermore, interpreting results from darkfield 
spectroscopy, especially when dealing with optically anisotropic particles like vaterite 
spherulites, presents its own set of challenges. These complexities are primarily due to the 
excitation of additional dipole components, which occur because of the nontrivial polarization 
state of the illumination cone, as illustrated in standard methodologies. The reported 
configuration is free of those limitations.  
The endoscopic illumination allows to excite particles at enormously large grazing angles, 
approaching 90o. On top of the previously mentioned advantages, this arrangement enables 
the observation of photonic nanojets. Taking advantage of high-NA collection, we have 
demonstrated the direct observation of nanojets and inter-particle nanojet bending. In the latter 
case, the microscope image demonstrates the nanojet bending towards a nearby particle. The 
nature of this peculiar effect was revealed and is solely attributed to the image formation 
dynamics, as the near-field maps lack bending properties.
The focus of the studies was made on vaterite nanoparticles, which are among the most 
promising platforms for realizing theragnostic nanodevices. In this endeavor, developing 
optically-responsive drug capsules can grant additional advantages. The demonstrated 
methodology enables fast screening of capsules, thus providing a level of determinism to 
colloidally fabricated nanodevices.


References

1.
Choukrani, G., Maharjan, B., Park, C. H., Kim, C. S. & Kurup Sasikala, A. R. 

Biocompatible superparamagnetic sub-micron vaterite particles for thermo-chemotherapy: 
From controlled design to in vitro anticancer synergism. Mater. Sci. Eng. C Mater. Biol. Appl. 
106, 110226 (2020).

2.
Calcium carbonate vaterite particles for drug delivery: Advances and challenges. 

Materials Today Advances 14, 100214 (2022).

3.
Arita, Y. et al. Cooling the optical-spin driven limit cycle oscillations of a levitated 

gyroscope. Communications Physics 6, 1–7 (2023).

4.
Permyakov, D. et al. Probing magnetic and electric optical responses of silicon 

nanoparticles. Appl. Phys. Lett. 106, 171110 (2015).

5.
Koshelev, K. & Kivshar, Y. Dielectric Resonant Metaphotonics. ACS Photonics 

(2020) doi:10.1021/acsphotonics.0c01315.

6.
Nguyen, T. M. et al. Ultralow-Loss Substrate for Nanophotonic Dark-Field 

Microscopy. Nano Lett. 23, 1546–1554 (2023).

7.
Gilad, H. et al. Gilded vaterite optothermal transport in a bubble. Sci. Rep. 13, 1–11 

(2023).

8.
Samek, O., Zemánek, P., Jonáš, A. & Telle, H. H. Characterization of oil-producing 

microalgae using Raman spectroscopy. Laser Phys. Lett. 8, 701 (2011).

9.
Ushkov, A., Machnev, A. & Ginzburg, P. Optically Controlled Dissolution Kinetics of 

Vaterite Microcapsules: Toward Novel Crystal Growth Strategies. Cryst. Growth Des. 23, 
8009–8017 (2023).

10.
Kim, K. & Park, Y. Tomographic active optical trapping of arbitrarily shaped objects 

by exploiting 3D refractive index maps. Nat. Commun. 8, 15340 (2017).

11.
Markovich, H., Shishkin, I. I., Hendler, N. & Ginzburg, P. Optical Manipulation along 

an Optical Axis with a Polarization Sensitive Meta-Lens. Nano Lett. 18, 5024–5029 (2018).

12.
Bogdanov, A. A., Shalin, A. S. & Ginzburg, P. Optical forces in nanorod 

metamaterial. Sci. Rep. 5, 15846 (2015).


13.
Fällman, E. & Axner, O. Design for fully steerable dual-trap optical tweezers. Appl. 

Opt., AO 36, 2107–2113 (1997).

14.
Kumar, A. & Bechhoefer, J. Nanoscale virtual potentials using optical tweezers. Appl. 

Phys. Lett. 113, 183702 (2018).

15.
Landenberger, B., Yatish & Rohrbach, A. Towards non-blind optical tweezing by 

finding 3D refractive index changes through off-focus interferometric tracking. Nat. Commun. 
12, 1–11 (2021).

16.
Altindal, T., Chattopadhyay, S. & Wu, X.-L. Bacterial Chemotaxis in an Optical Trap. 

PLoS One 6, e18231 (2011).

17.
Fiore, A., Bevilacqua, C. & Scarcelli, G. Direct Three-Dimensional Measurement of 

Refractive Index via Dual Photon-Phonon Scattering. Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 103901 (2019).

18.
Knöner, G., Parkin, S., Nieminen, T. A., Heckenberg, N. R. & Rubinsztein-Dunlop, H. 

Measurement of the Index of Refraction of Single Microparticles. Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 
157402 (2006).

19.
Parkin, S. J. et al. Highly birefringent vaterite microspheres: production, 

characterization and applications for optical micromanipulation. Opt. Express 17, 21944–
21955 (2009).

20.
Wayne, R. O. Light and Video Microscopy. (Academic Press, 2013).

21.
Fang, W. et al. Quantizing single-molecule surface-enhanced Raman scattering with 

DNA origami metamolecules. Sci Adv 5, eaau4506 (2019).

22.
Théoret, T. & Wilkinson, K. J. Evaluation of enhanced darkfield microscopy and 

hyperspectral analysis to analyse the fate of silver nanoparticles in wastewaters. Anal. 
Methods 9, 3920–3928 (2017).

23.
Yoon, S. J. et al. Non-fluorescent nanoscopic monitoring of a single trapped 

nanoparticle via nonlinear point sources. Nat. Commun. 9, 1–8 (2018).

24.
Brzobohatý, O. et al. Non-spherical gold nanoparticles trapped in optical tweezers: 

shape matters. Opt. Express 23, 8179–8189 (2015).

25.
Noskov, R. E. et al. Golden Vaterite as a Mesoscopic Metamaterial for Biophotonic 

Applications. Adv. Mater. 33, e2008484 (2021).

26.
Jiang, W., Hu, H., Deng, Q., Zhang, S. & Xu, H. Temperature-dependent dark-field 

scattering of single plasmonic nanocavity. Nanophotonics 9, 3347–3356 (2020).

27.
Li, G.-C., Zhang, Y.-L. & Lei, D. Y. Hybrid plasmonic gap modes in metal film-coupled 

dimers and their physical origins revealed by polarization resolved dark field spectroscopy. 
Nanoscale 8, 7119–7126 (2016).


28.
Fan, J. A. et al. Near-normal incidence dark-field microscopy: applications to 

nanoplasmonic spectroscopy. Nano Lett. 12, 2817–2821 (2012).

29.
Minin, I. V., Liu, C.-Y., Yang, Y.-C., Staliunas, K. & Minin, O. V. Experimental 

observation of flat focusing mirror based on photonic jet effect. Sci. Rep. 10, 8459 (2020).

30.
Liu, C.-Y. & Yeh, M.-J. Experimental verification of twin photonic nanojets from a 

dielectric microcylinder. Opt. Lett. 44, 3262–3265 (2019).

31.
Barhom, H. et al. Biological Kerker Effect Boosts Light Collection Efficiency in Plants. 

Nano Lett. 19, 7062–7071 (2019).

32.
Zhao, J. et al. Deep-learning cell imaging through Anderson localizing optical fiber. 

AP 1, 066001 (2019).

33.
Plöschner, M. et al. Multimode fibre: Light-sheet microscopy at the tip of a needle. 

Sci. Rep. 5, 1–7 (2015).

34.
Jones, P. H., Marag-, O. M. & Volpe, G. Optical Tweezers: Principles and 

Applications. (Cambridge University Press, 2015).

35.
Ferrand, P. et al. Direct imaging of photonic nanojets. Opt. Express 16, 6930–6940 

(2008).

36.
Chen, X. et al. Subwavelength imaging and detection using adjustable and movable 

droplet microlenses. Photon. Res., PRJ 8, 225–234 (2020).

37.
Minin, I. V. et al. Experimental observation of a photonic hook. Appl. Phys. Lett. 114, 

031105 (2019).

38.
Ahn, J. et al. Ultrasensitive torque detection with an optically levitated nanorotor. Nat. 

Nanotechnol. 15, 89–93 (2020).

39.
Noskov, R. E., Shishkin, I. I., Barhom, H. & Ginzburg, P. Non-Mie optical resonances 

in anisotropic biomineral nanoparticles. Nanoscale 10, 21031–21040 (2018).

40.
Li, K. et al. Balancing Near-Field Enhancement, Absorption, and Scattering for 

Effective Antenna–Reactor Plasmonic Photocatalysis. (2017) 
doi:10.1021/acs.nanolett.7b00992.

41.
Minin, I. V. et al. Plasmonic nanojet: an experimental demonstration. Opt. Lett., OL 

45, 3244–3247 (2020).

42.
Characterization of photonic nanojets in dielectric microdisks. Physica E 73, 226–234 

(2015).


43.
Malitson, I. H. Interspecimen Comparison of the Refractive Index of Fused Silica*,†. 

J. Opt. Soc. Am., JOSA 55, 1205–1209 (1965).

44.
Moreels, E., de Greef, C. & Finsy, R. Laser light refractometer. Appl. Opt., AO 23, 

3010–3013 (1984).

45.
Novotny, L. & Hecht, B. Principles of Nano-Optics. (Cambridge University Press, 

2012).

46.
Yariv, A. & Yeh, P. Optical Waves in Crystals: Propagation and Control of Laser 

Radiation. (Wiley-Interscience, 1984).

Acknowledgments
TAU Team acknowledges ERC StG "In Motion" (802279) and the Israel Science Foundation 
(ISF grant number 1115/23). RTU Team acknowledges the Latvian Council of Science project: 
Novel complex approach to the optical manipulation of Nanoparticles (PHOTON), No. lzp-
2022/1-057. A.U. acknowledges the support of the Azrieli Foundation’s Postdoctoral 
Fellowship.

Contributions
A.U. performed the experiments and analyzed the data
A.M. built the setup and helped with the experiments
D.K. provided the microparticles and performed SEM analysis
T.S. built the fiber optics part of the setup
J.A. conceived the idea, supervised the study
V.B. participated in valuable discussions
P.G. conceived the project, supervised the study, and wrote the manuscript

Figure legends

Figure 1. (a)-(c) Examples of existing dark field principal schemes with different 
illuminating light incidence angles. (d) Principal scheme considered in this study.

Figure 2. Optical tweezer-based dark-field setup. (a) Basic principle behind the dark-
field spectroscopy of locally illuminated particles. The inset shows a SEM photograph 
of a typical ≈1 μm diameter vaterite, the white scale bar denotes 1 μm. (b) Schematics 
of the experimental setup. (c) Photograph of the experimental setup: optical fiber 
mounted on the 3D micromanipulator illuminates the optically trapped microparticle in 
the confocal dish.

Fig. 3. Optical trap data and dark-field spectroscopy results. (a) QPD signal (sum of 4 
quadrants), demonstrating the particle trapping event. Inset - bright field microscope 
image of a trapped vaterite particle with 0.9 μm diameter. (b) Measured Power Spectrum 
Density function of the particle in the optical trap and its Lorentzian fitting with the 
corner frequency fc=197 Hz. fc is proportional to the trap stiffness. (c) The measured 
and simulated dark field spectra of vaterite microparticle. Blue and red spectra 


correspond to different orientations of the optically anisotropic particle with respect to 
the incident plane wave.

Fig. 4. Photonic nanojets from vaterite and silica microparticles with diameters of 
Dparticle=3 μm. (a), (b) Vaterite orientation-dependent nanojets. The nanojet lengths, 
imaged with the CCD camera, depend on the mutual orientation between the incident 
field polarization and the vaterite major axis, as verified numerically - (c) and (d), 
respectively. Dashed white lines in (a) and (b) denote the visual impression of the 
corresponding nanojets lengths. The incident wavevector kx in the inset in (c)-(d) shows
the horizontal xy-projection of the total wavevector k. (e) The vaterite photonic nanojet 
field enhancement as the function of the vaterite major axis angle with respect to the 
incident wave polarization. Photonic nanojets are produced by the (f-h) vaterite and (i-
k) silica particles. Nanoject bending towards a nearby particle (f), (h), (i), and (k). (g) and 
(j) - reference jets without a secondary particle present. The photographs (a)-(b), (f)-(k) 
were recorded in NIR. Numerical calculations are CW at 1.1 μm. Scale bar in (h) denotes 
3 μm.

Fig. 5. The numerical analysis steps. (a) The principal scheme of the numerical analysis 
- FDTD model with two particles. The plane wave (CW, 1.1 μm wavelength) source has 
an incidence angle of 90°- α = 80°. (b) The calculated electromagnetic fields in Plane 1 
(located beneath the particles in isotropic medium) are used for angular spectrum 
decomposition and consequent field calculations for a set of planes around the 
particles (i-th planes in (c)). Planes 2 and 3 in (a) are central cuts of the FDTD simulation 
box. To simulate the images on the CCD camera (i.e., Figs. 6(a-f)), a set of intensity 
distributions in i-th planes is averaged (see details in text).

Figure 6. Numerical analysis of inter-particle photonic nano-jet bending effect. (a), (b) 
Images of nanojets through the objective - “lens view”, as elaborated in Fig.5. Vaterite 
particles with their central optical axes aligned with incident wavevector kx are used, 
as shown in the inset to (a). (c),(d) FDTD-calculated scattered near field intensity 
colormaps. No nanojet bending is found, in contrast to (a) and (b). (e),(f) The same as 
(a),(b), but with silica particles instead of vaterite ones. The particle's diameter in (a)-(f) 
is 3 μm. (g) Characteristic nanojet bending (Max sy) as the function of the particle’s 
refractive index. The mutual arrangement of representative particles is in the inset.


Nanojet Visualization and Dark-field Imaging of Optically Trapped 

Vaterite Capsules with Endoscopic Illumination

Andrey Ushkov1,2*, Andrey Machnev1,2, Denis Kolchanov1,2, Toms Salgals3,4, Janis 

Alnis5, Vjaceslavs Bobrovs3, Pavel Ginzburg1,2

1Department of Electrical Engineering, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel

2Light-Matter Interaction Centre, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, 69978, Israel

3Institute of Telecommunications, Riga Technical University, 12 Azenes Street, 1048 Riga, Latvia

4Nanophotonics research laboratory (NANO-Photon Lab.), Riga Technical University, Azenes street 12, 

LV-1048, Riga, Latvia

5Institute of Atomic Physics and Spectroscopy, University of Latvia, 3 Jelgavas Street, 1004 Riga, 

Latvia

Supplementary material

Darkfield imaging and jet visualization of several particles
To illustrate the broader applicability of our method, we examined a variety of particles, 
encompassing different sizes and materials. Images of vaterite and SiO2 particles appear in 
Fig.S1. 

Fig.S1. Darkfield images of optically trapped particles of different sizes. The fiber endoscopic 

illumination comes from the left side. The nanojet pattern is clearly seen in all images, because of the 

high (~80°) incidence angle.

For the minimal radius of synthesized vaterite particles (250 nm), the optical setup 
demonstrates a strong darkfield signal. Fabricating vaterite particles of smaller sizes remains 
challenging. 

Conventional vs. Endoscopic Illumination – NA Analysis 
The quality of dark-field analysis is primarily determined by the amount of light that reaches 
the detector. This factor is, in turn, contingent on the numerical aperture of the collection optics.
Here we will demonstrate that endoscopic illumination allows for collecting light from a 
broader NA. To estimate the improvement, we consider a 100 nm radius dielectric particle with 
refractive index n=1.6 (a mean of vaterite anisotropic indices of 1.55 and 1.65 for the sake of 
simplicity). Those parameters are relevant to nanomedical studies in the field, i.e., [1,2]. From 


an optical standpoint, such particles (and smaller) obey the Rayleigh regime, where only the 
electric non-resonant dipole contributes to scattering (see Fig.S2):

Fig.S2. The scattering cross-sections for a spherical dielectric particle (R=100 nm, n=1.6). The blue 
area denotes the spectral area, where the Rayleigh scattering regime occurs, and where electric dipole

scattering is >10 times larger than magnetic dipole scattering.

Using Rayleigh approximation, we theoretically compare two optical darkfield setups: standard 
darkfield hollow-cone illumination, realized with a high-NA microscope objective, and our 
scheme with a fiber illumination, see Figure S3 for details:

Fig.S3. The comparison of two darkfield illumination schemes: the standard hollow-cone illumination 

via the high-NA microscope objective (on the left) and our setup with a fiber illumination (on the 

right). Orange shapes around the particles (denoted as white dots above the objectives) represent the 

far-field scattering diagrams. The particles are immersed in ethanol (n=1.36).

We consider the monochromatic illumination at a wavelength > 500 nm. In this case, only 
electric dipoles oriented along the incident polarization are excited. In our setup, it leads to the 
single dipole excitation with a well-known toroidal shape scattering diagram in the far field 
(see Fig.S3), as the illumination has a well-defined linear polarization state. The hollow-cone 
illumination, however, leads to a more complex diagram because of the simultaneous excitation 


of multiple dipoles, corresponding to a span of azimuthal directions. Note, that in the case of 
anisotropic particles, several modes can be exited, making this spectroscopic assessment less 
‘clean’.  
In a conventional dark-field setup, the objective plays the role of a condenser and refracts the 
light into the hollow-cone, which illuminates the particle. Consequently, this scheme cannot 
use its full NA=1.3 for the scattered light collection and an effective collecting NAcollecting≈1.1. 
In contrast, in our setup, the whole NA=1.3 is used solely for the scattered signal collection. 
For the sake of comparison, the incident light intensity in both cases is normalized to unity. 
The integration of the scattered signal into effective NA for both cases lead to the following 
intensity ratio: Iendoscopic-fiber/Ihollow-cone=2.14. In the calculation, the far-field scattering diagrams 
(different for both cases, as discussed above) are integrated within the collection angles. The 
estimate shows that a two-fold improvement is obtained owing to the endoscopic illumination. 

Estimating the nanojet bending capability
The photonic nano-jet bending is the result of the near-field particle interaction, observed via 
the far-field mapping on the camera. The bending is visible both in experimental (Fig.4(f-k)) 
and numerical (Figs.6(a-b,e-f)) results when two particles are misaligned with respect to the 
incident field wavevector projection kx on the horizontal plane (see, for example, the inset in 
Fig.6(a)). The particles and nanojet mutual arrangement is sketched in Figs.S4a (for the case 
of a straight nanojet) and Fig.S4c (for the case of a bent nanojet). When the particle offset sy
changes, the nanojet tail (defined arbitrarily as a part of the nanojet in region x>3Dparticle, where 
Dparticle=3 µm is the particle diameter) tends to follow the misaligned particle (see Figs.S4a,c).

Fig.S4. (a),(c) The geometry of the nanojet formation. (b),(d) The nanojet intensity along the X-axis 
for two mutual arrangements of particles. Vertical lines demonstrate the transversal coordinate, where 
the intensity integration is made to obtain the value of Ptail. (e) The integrated nanojet tail power along 

the X-axis as a function of the secondary particle displacement. Color lines - different types of 


particles of the same 3 micron diameter. The maximum value of the particle offset sy is chosen at the 

1/e level of the normalized power in the nanojet tail Ptail (see details in the text).

To quantify the nanojet bending, the following approach has been used. For a set of sy values 
(from 0 µm to the arbitrarily chosen max value of 2Dparticle=6 µm) the nanojet intensity profiles 
along the X-axis were obtained, see Figs.S4b,d. Then, these intensity profiles were integrated 
within the tail region (x>3Dparticle) only, to exclude the almost constant contribution of the 
brightest nanojet region near the particle boundary. The resulting curves Ptail(sy) are shown in 
Fig.S4e for a set of representative materials: SiO2, BK7, vaterite, and MR174 (a high refractive 
index n=1.74 optical lens material). We characterize the nanojet bending by the value of the 
particle offset Max sy, such that Ptail(Max sy)=Ptail(0)/e, see Fig.6g of the main text.

References
[1] Sun, Ning, et al. "pH-dependent and cathepsin B activable CaCO3 nanoprobe for targeted 
in vivo tumor imaging." International Journal of Nanomedicine (2019): 4309-4317.
[2] Liu, Depeng, et al. "Oral delivery of insulin using CaCO3-based composite nanocarriers 
with hyaluronic acid coatings." Materials letters 188 (2017): 263-266.


