Science Advances
Manuscript Template                                                                                          Page 

1 of 20

Grain boundary metastability controls irradiation resistance in nanocrystalline metals 

Osman El-Atwani1,2, Annie K. Barnett6, Enrique Martínez12,Jian Han3,4, Asher C. Leff2,5, Chang-
Yu Hung6, James E. Nathaniel2,7, Sicong He8, Emily H. Mang6, Larissa M. Woryk4, Khalid 
Hattar9,10, Blas P. Uberuaga11, David J. Srolovitz4,13,14, Michael L. Falk6, Jaime Marian9, and Mitra 
L. Taheri2,6*

1Energy and Environment Division, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, WA

2Dept. of Materials Science & Engineering, Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA

3Dept. of Materials Science & Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, 
CHINA

4Dept. of Materials Science & Engineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA

5Army Research Laboratories, Adelphi, MD

6Dept. of Materials Science & Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD

7Sandia National Laboratories, Livermore, CA

8University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA

9Center for Integrated Nanotechnologies, Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, NM

10 Department of Nuclear Engineering, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN

11Materials Science and Technology Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM

12Dept. of Mechanical Engineering, Clemson University, Clemson, SC 29623 USA

13Dept.of Mechanical Engineering, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, CHINA

14International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA), Shenzhen, CHINA

* M.L. Taheri

Email: mtaheri4@jhu.edu

Abstract
Grain boundaries (GBs) in polycrystalline materials are powerful sinks for irradiation defects. 
While standard theories assume that a GB’s efficiency as a sink is defined solely by its character 
before irradiation, recent evidence conclusively shows that the irradiation sink efficiency is a highly 
dynamic property controlled by the intrinsic metastability of GBs under far-from-equilibrium 
irradiation conditions. In this paper, we reveal that the denuded (i.e., defect-free) zone, typically the 
signature of a strong sink, can collapse as irradiation damage accumulates. We propose a radiation 
damage evolution model that captures this behavior based on the emergence of a series of irradiation 
defect-enabled metastable GB microstate changes that dynamically alter the ability of the GB to 
absorb further damage. We show that these microstate changes control further defect absorption 
and give rise to the formation of a defect network that manifests itself as a net Nye-tensor signal 
detectable via lattice curvature experiments.

Teaser


Science Advances
Manuscript Template   
Page 2 of 20

Experimental and simulation results elucidate outstanding questions on how nanocrystalline 
materials respond to irradiation extremes. 

Introduction

Controlling microstructural evolution to tailor properties, such as radiation damage 

tolerance [1–29], is a key goal of materials design [29]. Under irradiation, materials are driven far 
from equilibrium through a sequence of transient states that determine the ability of a material to 
continue to accommodate damage without losing integrity. As such, harnessing this metastability 
is key to understanding properties and routes to effect damage accommodation brought about by 
the evolving microstructure. Crystalline interfaces or grain boundaries present an opportunity for 
tuning non-equilibrium states. Indeed, grain boundaries exhibit metastable structures during 
irradiation [30–32]. Understanding and controlling nonequilibrium interfacial behavior represents 
a critical step forward for materials innovation in a wide variety of applications, including nuclear 
power [2,20,33], catalysis [34,35], and thermoelectric performance [36]. Future materials will be 
designed and optimized to account for otherwise “unseen” grain boundary structures for realizing 
key outcomes, such as damage tolerance. 

To date, no material is known to be fully immune to radiation damage, especially beyond a 

dose level of several hundred displacements per atom1 (dpa). Although a large fraction of the point 
defects produced by damage cascades recombine immediately following a damage event, the 
residual defects can lead to the accumulation of various forms of radiation damage and the evolution 
of the microstructure, ultimately leading to failure. Among various proposed methods [6,17,18] for 
achieving radiation damage resistance, the adoption of predesigned sinks to reduce or eliminate 
radiation-induced defects has become particularly promising [20,37,38]. Specifically, designing a 
microstructure with an increased density of specific types of grain boundaries (GBs) is known to 
benefit a wide range of properties, such as corrosion resistance [28] or fatigue resistance [10]. A 
microstructure with a predetermined distribution of specific GB types (GB engineering) may 
promote recombination or annihilation of irradiation-induced point defects at GBs and also control 
segregation of elements critical to the chemical and mechanical stability of structural alloys [2,21].

GBs act as sinks for point defects during irradiation and hence modify the distribution of 

point and other defects (dislocations, stacking fault tetrahedra, etc.) within the grains. If the rate of 
defect annihilation at the boundary is high relative to the defect generation rate, then a (relatively) 
defect-free, or denuded, zone can form adjacent to the boundary. This phenomenon has been 
thoroughly studied in literature [9, 37, 78-81] and aids in understanding the response of materials 
under irradiation. The width of the denuded zone is proportional to the sink efficiency of the 
boundary and the rate of defect generation (a function of the incident particle type, flux, and energy, 
and temperature). However, this relationship is not straightforward and the GB sink efficiency may 
be related to both point defect mobility and disconnection dynamics within the boundary, as well 
as processes in the grain interior, such as defect recombination within the grains [26,39]. Each point 
defect absorption event inherently changes the structure of the GB (new atoms are being added 
to/removed from the structure. If line defects, such as those created from the accumulation of point 
defects (e.g., dislocation loops) are absorbed at GBs, they too modify the GB structure, either by 
interacting with the native disconnections (line defects characterized by a Burgers vector and a step 
height that give GBs their character) that form the intrinsic GB structure or forming extrinsic 
disconnections that alter the microscopic GB character and/or the macroscopic GB bi-
crystallography. The formation of extrinsic defects could have significant effects on GB structure 
and point defect mobility within the GB, and hence, its sink efficiency. The sink efficiency, η, is a 
measure of the ability of an interface to absorb point-defects [19,33,35–37]; it is frequently defined 

1 Equivalent to ~100 years in existing light water reactors, but only 10-20 in Generation IV designs, and 1-2 
in fusion reactor designs.


Science Advances
Manuscript Template   
Page 3 of 20

as the ratio of the actual point defect flux into the interface to that for a perfect sink, η = 
Jmeasure/Jperfect. Therefore, an interface with high η can remove defects from its surroundings at a 
higher rate than one with low η. Beyerlein et al. [37] proposed the following relationship between 
denuded zone width λ and sink efficiency

𝜆v,i√

𝐾sv,i
𝐷v,i = ln 𝜂v,i − ln (1 − 𝑐v,i

∗
𝐾sv,i

𝐾0 ),          
(1)

where λv,i is the width of the denuded zone, Ksv,i is the defect-sink reaction rate coefficient, 

K0 is the defect production rate, Dv,i is the defect diffusivity within the grain, 𝑐v,i

∗ is the critical defect 

concentration to nucleate loops or voids, and ηv,i is the sink efficiency describing the ability of the 
sink to absorb point defects; the subscript “v” denotes vacancies and “i” denotes interstitials. η may 
be between 0 (no defect absorption) and 1 (perfect sink) and is an overall GB sink figure of merit. 

In general, no solid/solid interfaces exist which are perfect sinks. Although earlier studies 

treated GBs as perfect sinks, recent works [2,7–9,26,37,42–44] demonstrate that some GBs more 
effectively absorb defects than others. For example, experimental observations [6,8,42,45] have 
shown a dependence of denuded zone widths on GB type, although these trends do not reveal a 
consistent relation and can thus only be viewed as suggestive. As denuded zone width is a direct 
consequence of sink efficiency, we infer that varying denuded zone widths imply varying sink 
efficiency (at fixed thermodynamic and irradiation conditions). Despite a history of research linking 
GB structure to its effect on properties (such as radiation-induced segregation) [3], defect 
absorption rates do not follow a clear trend with macroscopic GB descriptors (misorientation, 
inclination) [4,7–9,27]. Theories were proposed to explain these variations, including local tensile 
strain [4,15,16], GB stability, GB free volume [26], and GB microstates [25], but no unifying theory 
has been able to explain the variation in sink efficiency even for similar interfaces or GB types. 
Recent simulations [8,19] that classify GBs according to microstates, or phases, present an 
opportunity to improve our understanding of sink efficiency, to explain the resulting denuded zone 
variations, and to glean a predictive understanding of interfaces to realize radiation tolerant 
microstructures. GB stability may be defined as the ability of a GB to continue to absorb point 
defects without becoming saturated and without changing its macroscopic degrees of freedom 
(DOFs), e.g., misorientation and inclination. To maintain stability, we hypothesize that GBs evolve 
via metastable microstates as point defects are added to the boundary [12]. The idea of metastable 
GB states has been discussed over many years [1,5,12,14,22,25], and while it has been shown that 
adding or removing atoms can change the GB microstate [11,12,19,23,24], the impact of a GB 
microstate change on the sink efficiency, or, importantly, how irradiation itself leads to evolution 
of the micro-states, remains unanswered [13,25,26]. 

Most GBs exhibit multiple metastable structural states (even in pure materials). While the 

number of such states tends to be small in systems with high-symmetry GBs (i.e., coherent twins), 
the number may be large for most other GBs [1,12,22,23,46,47] (even many with small coincident 
site densities, Σ). Different states can emerge when different regions/domains of the GB may be in 
different structural states separated by line defects (disconnections, GB dislocations, partial GB 
dislocations, etc.) [11,12,48]. We assert that when a GB experiences a microstate change, it no 
longer possesses the same absorption efficiency for defects [26]. This could lead to several events, 
including defect pileups, saturation of defects in the GB region and change in denuded zone width.

Through a combination of quantitative in situ electron microscopy and atomistic modeling, 

we define a relationship between GB sink efficiency limits and the local defect landscape created 
by the irradiation dose. GBs are revealed to “shut down” as sinks at particular doses of irradiation, 
as evidenced by denuded zone collapse and a related mesoscale “signature” of dislocation density 
within the GB. Interestingly, the change in sink efficiency, and increased dislocation density in the 
GB region due to denuded zone collapse, contributes to a complex defect network adjacent to the 


Science Advances
Manuscript Template   
Page 4 of 20

GB. While we connect the change in sink efficiency to microstate changes in the GB, we note that 
denuded zone collapse may, of course, be enhanced by local defect bias, accelerating changes in 
the GB state (supporting simulations added in the Supplementary Information). Critically, this 
finding reveals an ability to tune GB response not only by their innate structure or state, but also by 
external factors that control local defect environments. 

Results

We begin with a series of striking experimental observations that emanate from our in situ

10 keV-He+ irradiation TEM experiments of polycrystalline Fe films (see Methods for experimental 
details). While denuded zone evolution was found to be GB-dependent, with denuded zones 
developed at different He+ doses around different GBs, a particularly remarkable observation was 
that the denuded zone width evolves with time (dose) (in agreement with the observations by Yang 
et al. in a different material system [49]), and several denuded zone collapse events are seen to 
occur (Figure. 1).

Figure 1. Microstructure of the Irradiated Sample. (a) Bright-field TEM image of a free-

standing nanocrystalline pure Fe film prior to irradiation. (b-d) Bright-field TEM image of the Fe 
film irradiated up to 18.3 dpa. At high irradiation doses of 18.3 dpa, Defect denuded zones were 
found to collapse. (e) The defect volume density against distance away from the left bottom GB is 
plot. Blue line represents the sample irradiated at 6.1 dpa. Orange line represents the sample 
irradiated at 12 dpa. Green line represents the sample irradiated at 18.3 dpa.

Lending credibility to the notion that metastable forms of a GB result from irradiation is the 

striking observation that, at certain doses, some GBs exhibit denuded zone collapse, or shrinkage 
occurs with no observable changes in the GB macroscopic DOFs nor GB migration (Figure. 2(a)). 
While the measured macroscopic DOFs shown in Fig. S1 and Table S1 do not provide an 
explanation for the GB-dependent denuded zone collapse, analysis of the geometrically necessary 
dislocation (GND) in the GB region using Nye tensor mapping, described in the Methods section 
as well as in ref. [50], reveal a trend of increasing GND density with shrinking denuded zone 
(Figure. 2(b)). Clearly, then, to understand the time-dependent nature of the denuded zone near a 


Science Advances
Manuscript Template   
Page 5 of 20

GB, one needs to connect the internal structure of the GB, defined by a series of potentially 
metastable microstates/disconnection distribution with its ability to absorb damage.

Figure 2. Texture and Nye Tensor Mapping. (a) ACOM maps of Fig. 2(a-d). (b) GND 

maps using calculation of Nye Tensor signals in the grain irradiated from 0 to 18.3 dpa. The 
variation of Nye tensor signals as increasing irradiation dose

Several models have been proposed to describe the mechanisms by which grain boundaries 

absorb vacancies and self-interstitial atoms (SIA) during irradiation. These include (1) enhanced 
vacancy/SIA recombination at the grain boundary, (2) climb of dislocations in the GB plane, and 
(3) point defect enhanced change of GB thermodynamic (micro)states. A ‘micro-state’ corresponds 
to a rigid translation of the two grains meeting at the GB. The first model is predicated on the 
preferential segregation of point defects to GBs and enhanced diffusion along the GB [19,51]. The 
second has been widely investigated for low-angle tilt GBs [52,53], and only recently for high-
angle ones [54]. The third is associated with the recent realization that GBs usually exhibit a large 
number of metastable structures [12] and that point defect absorption can lead to transitions between 
these metastable states [11,19,23,25,55]. While each model implies that GBs change during 
irradiation/sink-operation, the difference in the underlying mechanisms has a profound effect on 
how the GB evolves under different conditions and the subsequent influence on the point defect 
field within a polycrystal. For example, the first two classes of models can only capture ‘monotonic’ 
GB property evolution, i.e., changes in the same direction of the capacity of GBs to absorb damage. 
We build on the flexibility afforded by model (3) to derive a model of GB evolution by interactions 
with irradiation defects. We note that this does not, necessarily, exclude the possibility that the other 
mechanisms may also operate, possibly modifying some details of the model presented here. 

While bi-crystallography depends on the five macroscopic DOF that define a GB, these do 

not constrain GBs microscopic DOFs. Figure 3 shows an example of a Σ5 (310) [001] symmetric 
tilt GB in W at 1500 K before and after a large number of SIAs are placed into the GB and annealed. 
This necessarily involves displacing one crystal relative to the other in the direction normal to the 
GB to accommodate the extra volume incurred by defect absorption; this leads to an “elastic 
transfer” of much of this excess volume to the outside of the sample, as occurs in sintering large 
polycrystalline structures [55]. Recent atomistic simulations and statistical mechanics analyses 
have demonstrated that the number of metastable states increases with the reciprocal density of 
coincident sites Σ of the GB [12]. Σ is determined by the crystal structure and the misorientation of 
the grains (3 macroscopic DOFs). Another example of the atomistic changes in GB microstates 
brought about by the sustained absorption or emission of point defects is shown in Supplementary 
Fig. S2.


Science Advances
Manuscript Template   
Page 6 of 20

Figure 3. Grain Boundary Structure and Microstates. (a) Three stable/metastable states 

of a Σ5 (310) [001] symmetric tilt GB in W (labeled I, II, III). The colors label classes of topological 
type and are arbitrary. (b) Typical snapshot of GB structure during insertion of SIAs. Atoms are 
colored by same scheme as (a). (c) Time evolution of the areal fractions of the three states in (a). 
The dashed lines delimit the period. (This figure is reproduced from [55].)

Because all these processes are eminently atomistic in nature, next we provide evidence 

from molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of internal GB transitions mediated by point defect 
absorption/emission processes. As we will show, these transitions represent quantized energy jumps 
through different microstates that do not alter the global macro GB descriptors. The simulations are 
carried out by loading Σ5 and Σ29 boundaries with point defects at different rates to analyze the 
relaxation dynamics of these GBs as a function of the defect fluence. A detailed description of other 
important simulation parameters such as the interatomic potential used, the crystallographic 
structure of the simulation supercell, and the MD simulation conditions are given within the 
Methods section at the end of the paper.

To reflect a realistic scenario in irradiated metals, where an unbalanced flux of SIA and SIA 

clusters arrive to the GB, in the simulations we load the grain boundary with single-interstitials at 
different prescribed rates at a fixed temperature. Figures 4a and 4b shows the number of defects 
absorbed vs. emitted as a function of exposure time (dose) at different rates in the ∑5 and ∑29 
boundaries. Figures 4c and 4d show the associated ‘excess’ GB energies (defined as the increase 
in GB energy with respect to the lowest energy microstate of the unirradiated GB). Considering the 
known shortcomings of MD simulations in terms of deposition rates (much faster than in any 
experiment), the simulations show that grain boundaries attempt to accommodate point defects by 
adopting metastable states compatible with the extra atomic density. Slower deposition rates allow 
more time for boundaries to structurally accommodate point defects and energetically minimize the 
new configuration into a metastable state. Conversely, increasing the rate of bombardment may 


Science Advances
Manuscript Template   
Page 7 of 20

force the grain boundary to reject point defects through emission events, due to insufficient time to 
find the next allowable metastable state before the next deposition event takes place. As Figures 4a 
and 4b illustrate, after a rapid energy increase upon the first few absorption events, the GB embarks 
on a dynamic relaxation process characterized by discrete energy jumps. Ostensibly, these jumps 
represent transitions between metastable states, which can be viewed as the minimum energy 
configuration of the combined ground state GB plus the corresponding number of absorbed defects. 
Generally, slower loading rates allow the boundary to accommodate higher concentrations of 
defects by assimilating them into allowable microstates characterized by higher GB energies. In 
contrast, fast defect arrival rates cannot be assimilated into the GB structure by internal relaxation 
processes, leading to point defect rejection and keeping the boundary closer to its original pristine 
structure. 

The oscillations seen in the curves for the lower defect injection rates (125 and 250) in Figs. 

4c and 4d are the signature of a spectrum of internal relaxation times, 𝜏R, required by the GB to 
settle into a given microstate. This spectrum is GB and material dependent but effectively connects 
the internal relaxation dynamics to (which is governed by atomistic processes) to the evolution of 
the denuded zone. Effectively, the inverse of the defect arrival rate acts as a cutoff for longer 
structural relaxation times, preventing grain boundaries from accessing microstates that are only 
reachable through those longer transformations. Relaxation kinetics in GBs has been likened to 
glassy dynamics in disordered materials described by the Adam-Gibbs theory of structural glasses 
[12,23,57-60].

Figure 4(e-f) shows a comparison between the Σ29 and Σ5 grain boundaries for a fixed 

defect exposure rate and temperature. Based on this partial comparison, our results suggest that
higher misorientation angles accelerate structural rearrangement, i.e., GB misorientation angles 
directly affect how point defects are accommodated under irradiation.


Science Advances
Manuscript Template   
Page 8 of 20

Figure 4. Grain Boundary Response to Irradiation Defects. (a-b) Defect counts as a 

function of time/dose, demonstrating the ability of a grain boundary to maintain constant absorption 
at lower rates of deposition. At high rates of deposition (1,000-2,000 atoms/ns), stagnated rates of 
absorption are exhibited, and the resultant emission of point defects is observed for both the (a) ∑5 
and (b) ∑29 GBs. (c-d) Excess grain boundary energy as a function of time/dose, demonstrating 
the immediate spike in GB energy upon initial defect injection followed by the fluctuation of GB 
energy during continuous absorption for (a) ∑5 and (b) ∑29 GBs. Note the stark decrease in GB 
energy at the instant of GB absorption rate change and defect emission in (a-b). (e) Σ29 grain 
boundaries experience defect emission before Σ5 boundaries, suggesting an earlier saturation of 
microstates in Σ29. (f) Σ5 boundaries are able to reach much higher energies than Σ29, indicating 
the existence of a wider range of allowable metastable energy states.

In summary, the MD simulations confirm that each GB (as defined by its macroscopic 

descriptors) displays a different hierarchy of microstates/relaxation times, and so different 
responses are to be expected from different boundaries.

Discussion

The results presented here provide a global picture for the interaction between GBs and 

irradiation defects under irradiation. In particular, point defect absorption modifies the structure of 
the boundary, that is, it affects GB microstates and thus likely the ability of the GB to absorb 
additional point defects. Without necessarily excluding other potential mechanisms, our work is 
general enough to explain the relationship between GB structure, irradiation conditions, material 
microstructure, and evolution of the denuded zone. In the following, we discuss the most salient 
features of our results and their connection to experimentally observable features of the 
microstructure.


Science Advances
Manuscript Template   
Page 9 of 20

A unified picture of denuded zone onset and collapse: Our analysis shows that the interplay 

between defects and GBs is governed by a relaxation time that reflects the instantaneous metastable 
structure of the grain boundary. In reality, this relaxation time is one of several time constants 
characterizing transitions between different microstates upon the absorption of point defects and 
defect clusters by the GB. Within this picture, when the characteristic times describing the 
irradiation process, e.g., the damage production rate and the GB absorption rate, are shorter than 
the corresponding GB relaxation times, the GB cannot adjust its structure (i.e., transition to a 
different metastable microstate) sufficiently fast to accommodate the damage internally. The 
implications of this picture as it relates to irradiation processes are:

(i)
In general, each GB displays a specific 𝜏R-spectrum representing the different relaxation 
times required to (meta) stabilize different microstates throughout its internal evolution with 
irradiation.

(ii)
Zero microstates implies no defect absorption, i.e., zero sink strength, and thus the 
impossibility of denuded zone onset. An infinite number of microstates means that the GB 
behaves as a perfect absorber, which precludes the possibility of denuded zone collapse. 
Real boundaries fall between these two limits, dynamically shifting from one metastable 
state to another as dictated by transitions induced by irradiation. 

(iii)
When the irradiation process exhausts the short time region of the 𝜏R-spectrum, the longer 
relaxation times reduce the admissible (absorbable) defect flux, gradually transitioning the 
system towards DZ collapse.

(iv)
Because each GB type (defined by its macro-DOFs) displays its own set of characteristic 
relaxation times, they will respond differently to the same irradiation conditions. This 
explains why under identical irradiation conditions, e.g., particle type, dose rate, irradiation 
temperature, etc., denuded zone onset and collapse occur at different doses for different 
boundaries.

(v)
Finally, an alternative scenario can be contemplated whereby –even if the GB can 
dynamically absorb defects– the resulting microstates may be too high in energy to be 
favored thermodynamically. This is further discussed below.

We find all of these points to be qualitatively consistent with our experimental observations.

Connection to Nye-tensor measurements: As discussed, once a given GB can no longer 

absorb arriving irradiation defects, the DZ begins to shrink until its eventual collapse. At that point, 
defects cannot be absorbed at a pace sufficiently fast to allow the GB to switch to other metastable 
microstates. This leads to two potentially distinct scenarios:

1. The first scenario directly comes from consideration of the different intrinsic relaxation times 

in the corresponding GB structure. Once the relaxation time is no longer short enough to evolve 
microstates before the next defect arrival time, defects will start to pile up against the GB and 
form clusters (when defect concentration is above the critical concentration for dislocation loop 
formation).

2. As advanced in point (v) above, the second scenario is one where the denuded zone can be 

interpreted as a thermodynamic structure where the free energy of the combined (GB + defect 
cluster) system is higher than the free energy of the GB in a different microstate that results 
from the prior microstate plus the absorption of the defect. Within this picture, the next
absorption of an irradiation defect may result in a microstate that has a higher energy than the 
energies of the separate GB and defect structures. This crossover signals the transition towards 
the collapse of the DZ by accumulation of defects in the region adjacent to the GB.


Science Advances
Manuscript Template   
Page 10 of 20

The common consequence of these two scenarios is that the accumulation of defect clusters 

near the GB will inevitably result in reactions among these defects, giving rise to a stable ‘network’ 
of defects that contributes a measurable GND signal that can be observed experimentally. An 
example of the equivalence between dislocation segments and GND fingerprints is provided in 
Figure. 5 (see Methods for details). In this fashion, the existence of a Nye tensor signal is directly 
and intimately linked to fundamental GB properties and the kinetics of defect absorption by the GB 
in the context of the existing irradiation conditions. In other words, detection of a Nye-tensor signal 
next to a GB is unequivocally indicative of the collapse of the DZ.

Figure 5. GND Fingerprint of Defect Network. Line (top) and equivalent GND scalar 

fingerprint (bottom) of a schematic dislocation network abutting a grain boundary (shaded band on 
the right).

Role of ‘bulk’ bias and other in-grain irradiation processes: The difference between the 

arrival rates of SIAs and vacancies to the GB may be associated with bulk bias, i.e., a differential 
feature in how SIAs and vacancies behave. The MD simulations have been carried out only with 
SIAs but no vacancies, which represents the ideal case of an infinite bias. However, in metallic 
materials the realistiuc bias emerges due to a number of different processes, whether working in 
isolation or in conjunction with one another, such as:

(i)
The intrinsic defect diffusion dimensionality: SIAs and SIA clusters in BCC transition 
metals are known to move almost athermally (stages I and II in isochronal annealing) in one 
dimension. This allows them to rapidly move away from the cascade region (where they are 
produced in equal numbers to vacancies). By itself, this intrinsic bias is weak, and leads to 
small values of c.

(ii)
Helium (or, more generally, ‘noble gas atom’) bias: This effect is caused by the presence of 
insoluble noble gas atoms (e.g., from direct ion implantation or neutron transmutation), 
which quickly segregate to vacancy-type defects, creating very stable immobile vacancy-
He complexes that trap vacancies in the cascade region, limiting recombination and favoring 
SIA-defect escape from the cascade region towards sinks. This represents a very strong bias, 
and would naturally lead to a relatively high excess concentration c. In the Supplementary 
Information we provide additional simulations in support of this mechanism 
(Supplementary Fig. S3). Note that when the He concentration is too large to be 
accommodated into vacancy-type defects, He atoms can migrate directly to GBs, resulting 
in other types of modification of the GB structure/properties. However, the results from the 


Science Advances
Manuscript Template   
Page 11 of 20

kMC study described in the Supplementary Information section confirm self-interstitial 
atoms arrive at a GB in much larger proportions than vacancies, supporting the existence of 
a bulk bias favoring the arrival of SIAs to the boundary through simulated observation 
consequent to the He atom energetic properties within the Fe lattice. Experimentally, small 
He bubbles are witnessed within the microstructure at uniform distribution among the grains 
and grain boundaries, described in detail in El-Atwani et al. [7]. Bubble formation enhances 
loop formation through the process of loop-punching and trap-mutation, especially when 
helium vacancy complexes have limited mobility at the current experimental temperature.

(iii)
Solute atom bias: substitutional solute atoms can be mobilized by coupling to point defect 
fluxes in what is known as radiation enhanced diffusion (RED). This coupling can be direct 
(point defects and solutes moving in the same direction) or inverse (opposite direction). This 
bias is behind radiation enhanced segregation; as non-equilibrium vacancy fluxes march 
towards sinks, depositing solute atoms in enhanced concentrations there. The coupling of 
vacancies and solutes can ‘free’ self-interstitials from recombination, contributing 
positively to the bias.

All of these potential biases, however, do not physically dictate, to first order, GB properties 

and how they contribute to sink efficiency.

Using GB engineering to increase irradiation resistance: Although the majority of the 

considerations are qualitative in nature, they provide both understanding and design guidelines for 
the development of materials with enhanced radiation tolerance. For example, a pre-
characterization using atomistic models of the catalog of available microstates for a given set of 
(five-dimensional) macro DOFs can provide relative relaxation time spectra to gain an 
understanding what GBs are desirable and under what conditions to prevent DZ collapse. 
Conversely, one may design a thermomechanical process that favors the formation of 
microstructures with GBs known to bolster the GB sink efficiency. This can conceivably be 
achieved by directional solidification, rolling or extrusion of pre-formed internal microstructures 
(e.g., after achieving a target nanocrystalline structure). 

Ultimately, while some microstructures containing GBs with line defect (disconnection) 

content structures can alter sink efficiency, to some extent; these are unlikely to be the controlling 
factors for establishing materials design protocols. The present study helps clarify the principles 
under which materials can be actively designed for radiation tolerance.

This work defines a relationship between GB sink efficiency limits and the local defect 

landscape created by the irradiation dose. The combined quantitative in situ electron microscopy 
and atomistic simulations reveals a picture in which GBs negotiate a metastable energy landscape 
under irradiation, transitioning through a set of quantized structural microstates characterized by a 
spectrum of internal relaxation times. When the defect arrival rate is slower that the intrinsic 
relaxation time, the GB acts as an efficient absorber, whereas in the opposite scenario it behaves as 
if having zero sink efficiency. Our atomistic simulations, consistent with our experimental 
observations, conclusively show that when the defect flux overwhelms the internal relaxation 
dynamics, the GB acts as a saturated absorber, rejecting defects back into the bulk and signaling 
the collapse of the denuded zone. 

The proposed picture based on GB microstate changes controlling further defect absorption, 

extends our understanding of the principles under which materials can be actively designed with 
radiation tolerance as a design criterion. 


Science Advances
Manuscript Template   
Page 12 of 20

Materials and Methods

Film Growth, Irradiation, and Characterization: 

Polycrystalline iron films with a target thickness of 100 nm were deposited using magnetron 

sputtering onto sodium chloride substrates to create nanocrystalline iron specimens suitable for 
transmission electron microscopy (see Ref. [61] for details). The samples were irradiated using 10 
keV He+ at Sandia National Laboratories via a 10 kV Colutron source. The final He/Fe atomic ratio 
of 0.41 within the implanted region as reported in El-Atwani et al. [27] based on SRIM simulations 
given a 40 eV displacement damage energy threshold [62]. Specifically, in situ irradiation was 
performed on a well-characterized, columnar, polycrystalline Fe film [61]. GBs were monitored at 
the microscale level (~ 100 nm) throughout irradiation using a combination of in situ bright field 
imaging by a highly modified JEOL 2100 LaB6 TEM videos were captured at 200kV and a frame 
rate of 30 frames per second. Precession-electron-diffraction-enhanced automated crystallographic 
orientation mapping (ACOM) was taken intermittently at each dose step [7]. In order to track GB 
structure, sequences of TEM images were taken at an unchanging two-beam diffraction condition 
(see supplementary Fig. S4.) during in situ irradiation, allowing that the defect density at different 
irradiation stages can be estimated under the same imaging condition. The orientation data acquired 
by ACOM-TEM systems [63,64] was used as the input for GND density calculations [50]. GB 
planes were determined by observing the projected inclined GB trace in TEM coupled with the 
ACOM data [65]. Denuded zones were determined from the bright field TEM images/videos, 
visualized in the supplementary Fig. S5 following methodologies outlined in [7,9,27]. ACOM 
[63,64] was performed in steps throughout He+ implantation up to ~18 dpa to deduce the five 
macro-DOFs of the GBs [66]. 

Molecular Dynamics Simulations:

We have used the Large-Scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator (LAMMPS) 

[67] to construct two pure iron grain boundaries of different misorientation angle. These angles 
were 36.9° and 43.6°, corresponding to Σ5 and Σ29 grain boundaries, respectively. The 
computational supercell was constructed as a bcc bi-crystal using a lattice constant of a = 2.8665 Å 
and cell dimensions of about 28 nm x 38 nm x 38 nm, resulting in approximately 2.5 million atoms. 
The grain boundary area in this system made up around 4% of the total supercell (34,500 atoms). 
After both systems were equilibrated at 550K, self-interstitial atoms were deposited into the 
boundaries to observe the effect of point defect loading rate on boundary accommodation. Five 
independent boundary loading simulations were performed for each grain boundary at a finite 
temperature of 550K, with the rate of deposition changing between each simulation. The rates were 
125, 250, 500, 1,000, and 2,000 [atoms/ns]. Grain boundary emission and absorption counts were 
tracked as the depositions reached proper timescales, demonstrating the stability of defect 
absorption until a boundary approaches an overloaded state. The potential energy of each boundary 
was computed throughout each deposition to observe a lowering of energy with grain boundary 
accommodation of the newly introduced point defects.

In all MD simulations, we used the interatomic potential for bcc Fe developed by Dudarev 

and Derlet [68], which is formulated as an embedded-atom method (EAM) that captures magnetic 
effects while retaining its functionality for large scale MD simulations. The Dudarev-Derlet 
potential was specifically developed for irradiation damage simulations and is fitted to DFT 
calculations of point defect energies for both the ferromagnetic and non-magnetic phases of 𝛼-Fe 
at zero temperature.

Atomistic Parameterization of the Kinetic Monte Carlo Simulations

We also have used atomistic simulations to provide insight into how changing microstates 

impact the interaction of defects with grain boundaries, essentially to address the assumptions made 


Science Advances
Manuscript Template   
Page 13 of 20

in the kinetic Monte Carlo (kMC) modeling. Specifically, two effects were probed for one specific 
grain boundary (Σ13 [111](134) symmetric tilt). First, the highest and lowest energy structures 
found by mapping the gamma surface were examined, representing different translational 
relationships between the two grains. Second, the lowest energy structure was modified (“loaded”) 
by adding 10 SIAs, one at a time, with 2.0 picosecond anneals at 750 K and minimizations between 
each insertion. In all three resulting structures, the segregation energy of vacancies was calculated 
by removing atoms, one-by-one, and minimizing the energy of the structure.

Kinetic Monte Carlo Simulations:

The results shown in Fig. S3 pertain to an object kMC model in which single defects are 

treated explicitly. The grain boundary is modeled as a region in which the defect properties are 
modified. While in principle both the thermodynamic and kinetic properties of defects can vary at 
the boundary plane, in the kMC calculations only the binding energy was changed, meaning that 
defects had an attractive binding energy to the boundary plane as a higher activation energy for the 
defect to exit the boundary compared to the barrier to enter, implying boundaries are saturable as 
there is a finite probability for defects to exit. The kMC model was used to study two scenarios, 
one in which the only mechanisms for defect removal was interstitial-vacancy recombination, 
whether in the bulk or the boundary, and a second in which there was a bulk bias for vacancies 
(vacancies in the bulk were annihilated at an enhanced rate compared to interstitials). All the 
parameters in the kMC model are given in [69,70]. Most notably, self-interstitials had a binding 
energy of 0.8 eV to the GB, while vacancies were characterized by no attraction to the boundary. 
Vacancies were eliminated at a rate of k2DvNv, with k2 = 1012 cm-2, Nv the number of vacancies in 
the system, mimicking the Heint + Vacancy → Hesub reaction. We used a dose rate of 10-2 dpa/s for 
the generation of Frenkel pairs and a temperature of 500 K.

Grain Boundary Structure and Nye Tensor Analysis:

One of the principal signatures of denuded zone collapse is the emergence of a nonzero 

GND signal. Experimentally, GNDs are detected by mapping the gradient in lattice curvature to 
Nye’s definition of the GND tensor [50,71,72]: 𝜶 = 𝜿𝑇 − Tr(𝜿)𝑰, where 𝜿 = 𝜕𝝎 𝜕𝑥
⁄
is the lattice 

curvature tensor and 𝝎 is the local orientation matrix. The challenge when interpreting these signals 
emerges from reconciling crystal orientation measurements with the dislocation-based definition of 
𝜶, i.e., 𝜶 = ∑
𝑚 b𝑚⨂𝒕𝑚
, where b and t are the Burgers vector and line direction of a dislocation 

segment m, which runs over the entire set of discrete dislocation segments representing a given 
dislocation substructure. This formula represents an unambiguous definition of the GND, as it 
represents the net Burgers vector of specific dislocation configurations whose structure is known. 
Accordingly, a nonzero signal must necessarily correspond to a set of unbalanced loops, i.e., loops 
that have partially lost part of their perimeter owing to some absorption and/or reaction mechanism. 
While this is reasonable in the vicinity of saturated or near-saturated grain boundaries, our 
calculations show unequivocally that the discretization of space used to compute 𝜶 in either of its 
two versions (curvature-based in experiments or dislocation-segment based in the simulations) also 
can drastically alter the final GND signal. This introduces an extra dimensional complexity that 
must be accounted for. In other words, full prismatic loops that overall contribute no GND signature 
can indeed yield nonzero values for sufficiently fine pixelations of the microstructure. As such, 
several scenarios must be contemplated when comparing both definitions of 𝜶 on a discrete grid to 
assess the practical loop/grain boundary configurations that may give rise to a nonzero signal:

(i)
First, we look at atomistic configurations of bulk, partially absorbed, and fully-
absorbed loops, and obtain their corresponding Nye tensor signals. For consistency 
with the structure of irradiation defect clusters in bcc metals, we consider 1/2 〈111〉
loops arriving at a virgin grain boundary (full defect absorbance) via diffusion from 
the grain’s interior. Our main observation is that indeed partially absorbed loops do 


Science Advances
Manuscript Template   
Page 14 of 20

yield a nonzero GND signal, regardless of the discretization resolution [73]. This 
suggests that nonzero GND footprints must be due to loop structures that have been 
partially absorbed or that have suffered Burger’s vector reactions such that an 
unbalanced total Burgers vector is produced.

(ii)
Second, we analyzed full closed prismatic loops with various degrees of resolution. 
The conclusion is that nonzero GND signals can indeed be produced for sufficiently 
fine discretizations. This requires a careful evaluation of the expected or measured 
loop size vis-à-vis the microscopy pixelation resolution, to ensure that nonzero 
signals are properly interpreted. This also suggests that a scalar metric representing 
the Nye tensor (such as the L1 norm) may not be suitable for identifying GNDs [74–
77].

We employ models to distinguish between these two possibilities, to construe Nye tensor 

information and to analyze Nye tensor data [50] in order to understand the connection between GB 
defects and the denuded zone.


Science Advances
Manuscript Template   
Page 15 of 20

References

1. G.J. Wang, A.P. Sutton, V. Vitek, A computer simulation study of <001> and <111> tilt 
boundaries: the multiplicity of structures, Acta Metallurgica. 32 (1984) 1093–1104. 
2. G.A. Vetterick, J. Gruber, P.K. Suri, J.K. Baldwin, M.A. Kirk, P. Baldo, Y.Q. Wang, A. 
Misra, G.J. Tucker, M.L. Taheri, Achieving Radiation Tolerance through Non-Equilibrium 
Grain Boundary Structures, Scientific Reports. 7 (2017) 12275. 
3. C.M. Barr, G.A. Vetterick, K.A. Unocic, K. Hattar, X.-M. Bai, M.L. Taheri, Anisotropic 
radiation-induced segregation in 316L austenitic stainless steel with grain boundary character, 
Acta Materialia. 67 (2014) 145–155. 
4. M. Samaras, P.M. Derlet, H. Van Swygenhoven, M. Victoria, Atomic scale modelling of 
the primary damage state of irradiated fcc and bcc nanocrystalline metals, Journal of Nuclear 
Materials. 351 (2006) 47–55. 
5. J. Wang, R.G. Hoagland, J.P. Hirth, A. Misra, Atomistic modeling of the interaction of glide 
dislocations with “weak” interfaces, Acta Materialia. 56 (2008) 5685–5693. 
6. S.J. Zinkle, L.L. Snead, Designing Radiation Resistance in Materials for Fusion Energy, 
Annual Review of Materials Research. 44 (2014) 241–267. 
7. O. El-Atwani, J.E. Nathaniel, A.C. Leff, K. Hattar, M.L. Taheri, Direct Observation of Sink-
Dependent Defect Evolution in Nanocrystalline Iron under Irradiation, Scientific Reports. 7 
(2017) 1836. 
8. W.Z. Han, M.J. Demkowicz, E.G. Fu, Y.Q. Wang, A. Misra, Effect of grain boundary 
character on sink efficiency, Acta Materialia. 60 (2012) 6341–6351. 
9. O. El-Atwani, J.E. Nathaniel, A.C. Leff, J.K. Baldwin, K. Hattar, M.L. Taheri, Evidence of 
a temperature transition for denuded zone formation in nanocrystalline Fe under He irradiation, 
Materials Research Letters. 5 (2017) 195–200. 
10. A. Das, Grain boundary engineering: fatigue fracture, Philosophical Magazine. 97 (2017) 
867–916. 
11. T. Frolov, W. Setyawan, R.J. Kurtz, J. Marian, A.R. Oganov, R.E. Rudd, Q. Zhu, Grain 
boundary phases in bcc metals, Nanoscale. 10 (2018) 8253–8268. 
12. J. Han, V. Vitek, D.J. Srolovitz, Grain-boundary metastability and its statistical properties, 
Acta Materialia. 104 (2016) 259–273. 
13. A. Dunn, R. Dingreville, E. Martínez, L. Capolungo, Identification of dominant damage 
accumulation processes at grain boundaries during irradiation in nanocrystalline α-Fe: A 
statistical study, Acta Materialia. 110 (2016) 306–323. 
14. R. Sutton, A.P., Ballufii, Interfaces in Crystalline Materials. Oxford, Clarendon Press; 
Oxford University Press, New York, 1995.
15. M. Samaras, W. Hoffelner, M. Victoria, Irradiation of pre-existing voids in nanocrystalline 
iron, Journal of Nuclear Materials. 352 (2006) 50–56. 
16. R.E. Stoller, P.J. Kamenski, Yu.N. Osetsky, Length-scale Effects in Cascade Damage 
Production in Iron, MRS Proceedings. 1125 (2008) 1105–1125. 
17. R. Yamada, S.J. Zinkle, G. Philip Pells, Microstructure of Al2O3 and MgAl2O4 
preimplanted with H, He, C and irradiated with Ar+ ions, Journal of Nuclear Materials. 209 
(1994) 191–203. 
18. S.J. Zinkle, Microstructure of ion irradiated ceramic insulators, Nuclear Instruments and 
Methods in Physics Research Section B: Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms. 91 
(1994) 234–246. 
19. Q. Zhu, A. Samanta, B. Li, R.E. Rudd, T. Frolov, Predicting phase behavior of grain 
boundaries with evolutionary search and machine learning, Nature Communications. 9 (2018) 
467. 


Science Advances
Manuscript Template   
Page 16 of 20

20. X. Zhang, K. Hattar, Y. Chen, L. Shao, J. Li, C. Sun, K. Yu, N. Li, M.L. Taheri, H. Wang, 
J. Wang, M. Nastasi, Radiation damage in nanostructured materials, Progress in Materials 
Science. 96 (2018) 217–321. 
21. G. Meric de Bellefon, I.M. Robertson, T.R. Allen, J.-C. van Duysen, K. Sridharan, 
Radiation-resistant nanotwinned austenitic stainless steel, Scripta Materialia. 159 (2019) 123–
127. 
22. Y. Oh, V. Vitek, Structural multiplicity of ∑ = 5(001) twist boundaries and interpretation 
of X-ray diffraction from these boundaries, Acta Metallurgica. 34 (1986) 1941–1953. 
23. T. Frolov, D.L. Olmsted, M. Asta, Y. Mishin, Structural phase transformations in metallic 
grain boundaries, Nature Communications. 4 (2013) 1899. 
24. J. Han, V. Vitek, D.J. Srolovitz, The grain-boundary structural unit model redux, Acta 
Materialia. 133 (2017) 186–199. 
25. J. Han, V. Vitek, D.J. Srolovitz, The interplay between grain boundary structure and defect 
sink/annealing behavior, IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering. 89 (2015) 
12004. 
26. B.P. Uberuaga, L.J. Vernon, E. Martinez, A.F. Voter, The relationship between grain 
boundary structure, defect mobility and grain boundary sink efficiency, Scientific Reports. 5 
(2015) 9095. 
27. O. El-Atwani, J.E. Nathaniel, A.C. Leff, B.R. Muntifering, J.K. Baldwin, K. Hattar, M.L. 
Taheri, The role of grain size in He bubble formation: Implications for swelling resistance, 
Journal of Nuclear Materials. 484 (2017) 236–244. 
28. C.M. Barr, S. Thomas, J.L. Hart, W. Harlow, E. Anber, M.L. Taheri, Tracking the evolution 
of intergranular corrosion through twin-related domains in grain boundary networks, Npj 
Materials Degradation. 2 (2018) 14. 
29. K. Beierschmitt, M. Buchanan, A. Clark, I. Robertson, P. Britt, A. Navrotsky, P. Burns, P. 
Tortorelli, A. Misra, J. Wishart, P. Fenter, A. Gewirth, B. Wirth, B. Mincher, I. Szlufarska, J. 
Busby, L. Horton, B. Garrett, J. Vetrano, P. Wilk, K. Runkles, S. Kung, S. Lesica, B. Wyatt, D. 
Counce, K. Jones, Basic Research Needs for Future Nuclear Energy: Report of the Basic Energy 
Sciences Workshop for Future Nuclear Energy, August 9-11, 2017, 2017. 
30. Z. Bai, G.H. Balbus, D.S. Gianola, Y. Fan, Mapping the kinetic evolution of metastable 
grain boundaries under non-equilibrium processing, Acta Materialia. 200 (2020) 328–337. 
31. C.M. Barr, O. El-Atwani, D. Kaoumi, K. Hattar, Interplay Between Grain Boundaries and 
Radiation Damage, JOM. 71 (2019) 1233–1244. 
32. J. Wei, B. Feng, R. Ishikawa, T. Yokoi, K. Matsunaga, N. Shibata, Y. Ikuhara, Direct 
imaging of atomistic grain boundary migration, Nature Materials. 20 (2021) 951–955. 
33. C. Sun, M. Song, K.Y. Yu, Y. Chen, M. Kirk, M. Li, H. Wang, X. Zhang, In situ Evidence 
of Defect Cluster Absorption by Grain Boundaries in Kr Ion Irradiated Nanocrystalline Ni, 
Metallurgical and Materials Transactions A. 44 (2013) 1966–1974. 
34. P. Yan, J. Zheng, J. Liu, B. Wang, X. Cheng, Y. Zhang, X. Sun, C. Wang, J.-G. Zhang, 
Tailoring grain boundary structures and chemistry of Ni-rich layered cathodes for enhanced 
cycle stability of lithium-ion batteries, Nature Energy. 3 (2018) 600–605. 
35. P.-J. Chang, K.-Y. Cheng, S.-W. Chou, J.-J. Shyue, Y.-Y. Yang, C.-Y. Hung, C.-Y. Lin, 
H.-L. Chen, H.-L. Chou, P.-T. Chou, Tri-iodide Reduction Activity of Shape- and Composition-
Controlled PtFe Nanostructures as Counter Electrodes in Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, Chemistry 
of Materials. 28 (2016) 2110–2119. 
36. K.S. Il, L.K. Hyoung, M.H. A, K.H. Sik, H.S. Woo, R.J. Wook, Y.D. Jin, S.W. Ho, L.X. 
Shu, L.Y. Hee, S.G. Jeffrey, K.S. Wng, Dense dislocation arrays embedded in grain boundaries 
for high-performance bulk thermoelectrics, Science. 348 (2015) 109–114. 
37. I.J. Beyerlein, M.J. Demkowicz, A. Misra, B.P. Uberuaga, Defect-interface interactions, 
Progress in Materials Science. 74 (2015) 125–210. 


Science Advances
Manuscript Template   
Page 17 of 20

38. M. Nastasi, N. Michael, J. Mayer, J.K. Hirvonen, M. James, Ion-solid interactions: 
fundamentals and applications, Cambridge University Press, 1996.
39. O. El-Atwani, E. Martinez, E. Esquivel, M. Efe, C. Taylor, Y.Q. Wang, B.P. Uberuaga, S.A. 
Maloy, Does sink efficiency unequivocally characterize how grain boundaries impact radiation 
damage?, Physical Review Materials. 2 (2018) 113604. 
40. H. Gleiter, Grain boundaries as point defect sources or sinks—Diffusional creep, Acta 
Metallurgica. 27 (1979) 187–192. 
41. M. Rose, A.G. Balogh, H. Hahn, Instability of irradiation induced defects in nanostructured 
materials, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section B: Beam Interactions 
with Materials and Atoms. 127–128 (1997) 119–122. 
42. C.M. Barr, L. Barnard, J.E. Nathaniel, K. Hattar, K.A. Unocic, I. Szlurfarska, D. Morgan, 
M.L. Taheri, Grain boundary character dependence of radiation-induced segregation in a model 
Ni–Cr alloy, Journal of Materials Research. 30 (2015) 1290–1299. 
43. J. Li, K.Y. Yu, Y. Chen, M. Song, H. Wang, M.A. Kirk, M. Li, X. Zhang, In situ study of 
defect migration kinetics and self-healing of twin boundaries in heavy ion irradiated 
nanotwinned metals, Nano Letters. 15 (2015) 2922–2927. 
44. M.J. Demkowicz, R.G. Hoagland, B.P. Uberuaga, A. Misra, Influence of interface sink 
strength on the reduction of radiation-induced defect concentrations and fluxes in materials with 
large interface area per unit volume, Physical Review B. 84 (2011) 104102. 
45. R.W. Siegel, S.M. Chang, R.W. Balluffi, Vacancy loss at grain boundaries in quenched 
polycrystalline gold, Acta Metallurgica. 28 (1980) 249–257. 
46. W. Krakow, Structural multiplicity observed at a Σ = 5/[001] 53·1° tilt boundary in gold, 
Philosophical Magazine A. 63 (1991) 233–240. 
47. G. Henkelman, B.P. Uberuaga, H. Jónsson, A climbing image nudged elastic band method 
for finding saddle points and minimum energy paths, The Journal of Chemical Physics. 113 
(2000) 9901–9904. 
48. A.P. Sutton, Models of the atomic and electronic structures of grain boundaries in silicon, 
Structure and Properties of Dislocations in Semiconductors 1989. (1989) 13.
49. Y. Yang, C.A. Dickerson, H. Swoboda, B. Miller, T.R. Allen, Microstructure and 
mechanical properties of proton irradiated zirconium carbide, Journal of Nuclear Materials. 378 
(2008) 341–348. 
50. A.C. Leff, C.R. Weinberger, M.L. Taheri, Estimation of dislocation density from precession 
electron diffraction data using the Nye tensor, Ultramicroscopy. 153 (2015) 9–21. 
51. X.-M. Bai, A.F. Voter, R.G. Hoagland, M. Nastasi, B.P. Uberuaga, Efficient Annealing of 
Radiation Damage Near Grain Boundaries via Interstitial Emission, Science. 327 (2010) 1631–
1634. 
52. Y. Gu, J. Han, S. Dai, Y. Zhu, Y. Xiang, D.J. Srolovitz, Point defect sink efficiency of low-
angle tilt grain boundaries, Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids. 101 (2017) 166–
179. 
53. Y. Zhu, J. Luo, X. Guo, Y. Xiang, S.J. Chapman, Role of Grain Boundaries under Long-
Time Radiation, Physical Review Letters. 120 (2018) 222501. 
54. S. Chu, P. Liu, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, S. Song, T. Zhu, Z. Zhang, X. Han, B. Sun, M. Chen, 
In Situ Atomic-Scale Observation of Dislocation Climb and Grain Boundary Transformation in 
Nanostructured Metal, Research Square. PREPRINT ( (2021).
55. E.A. Lazar, J. Han, D.J. Srolovitz, Topological framework for local structure analysis in 
condensed matter, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America. 112 (2015) E5769–E5776.
56. F. Thümmler, W. Thomma, The sintering process, Metallurgical Reviews. 12 (1967) 69–
108. 


Science Advances
Manuscript Template   
Page 18 of 20

57. H. Zhang, D.J. Srolovitz, J.F. Douglas, J.A. Warren, Grain boundaries exhibit the dynamics 
of glass-forming liquids, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 106 (2009) 7735–
7740. 
58. S.R. Phillpot, D. Wolf, H. Gleiter, A structural model for grain boundaries in nanocrystalline 
materials, Scripta Metallurgica et Materialia. 33 (1995) 1245–1251. 
59. P. Keblinski, D. Wolf, S.R. Phillpot, H. Gleiter, Structure of grain boundaries in 
nanocrystalline palladium by molecular dynamics simulation, Scripta Materialia. 41 (1999) 
631–636. 
60. T. Brink, K. Albe, From metallic glasses to nanocrystals: Molecular dynamics simulations 
on the crossover from glass-like to grain-boundary-mediated deformation behaviour, Acta 
Materialia. 156 (2018) 205–214. 
61. G. Vetterick, J.K. Baldwin, A. Misra, M.L. Taheri, Texture evolution in nanocrystalline iron 
films deposited using biased magnetron sputtering, Journal of Applied Physics. 116 (2014). 
62. J.-P. Crocombette, T. Jourdan, Cell Molecular Dynamics for Cascades (CMDC): A new 
tool for cascade simulation, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section B: 
Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms. 352 (2015) 9–13. 
63. J. Portillo, E.F. Rauch, S. Nicolopoulos, M. Gemmi, D. Bultreys, Precession Electron 
Diffraction Assisted Orientation Mapping in the Transmission Electron Microscope, Materials 
Science Forum. 644 (2010) 1–7. 
64. E.F. Rauch, J. Portillo, S. Nicolopoulos, D. Bultreys, S. Rouvimov, P. Moeck, Automated 
nanocrystal orientation and phase mapping in the transmission electron microscope on the basis 
of precession electron diffraction, Zeitschrift Für Kristallographie. 225 (2010) 103–109. 
65. M.I. Hartshorne, A.C. Leff, G.A. Vetterick, E.M. Hopkins, M.L. Taheri, Grain Boundary 
Plane Measurement in Atom Probe Tomography and Transmission Electron Diffraction 
Specimens Using Precession Electron Diffraction, Microscopy and Microanalysis. (2022) 
Submitted.
66. J.E. Nathaniel, A.C. Lang, O. El-Atwani, P.K. Suri, J.K. Baldwin, M.A. Kirk, Y. Wang, 
M.L. Taheri, Toward high-throughput defect density quantification: A comparison of 
techniques for irradiated samples, Ultramicroscopy. 206 (2019) 112820. 
67. LAMMPS - a flexible simulation tool for particle-based materials modeling at the atomic, 
meso, and continuum scales, A. P. Thompson, H. M. Aktulga, R. Berger, D. S. Bolintineanu, 
W. M. Brown, P. S. Crozier, P. J. in 't Veld, A. Kohlmeyer, S. G. Moore, T. D. Nguyen, R. 
Shan, M. J. Stevens, J. Tranchida, C. Trott, S. J. Plimpton, Comp Phys Comm, 271 (2022) 
10817.
68.   Chiesa S, Derlet PM, Dudarev SL, Swygenhoven HV. Optimization of the magnetic 
potential 
for α-fe. Journal of physics. Condensed matter. 2011;23(20):206001-14.
69. O. Senninger, F. Soisson, E. Martínez, M. Nastar, C.-C. Fu, Y. Bréchet, Modeling radiation 
induced segregation in iron–chromium alloys, Acta Materialia. 103 (2016) 1–11. 
70. E. Martínez, O. Senninger, C.-C. Fu, F. Soisson, Decomposition kinetics of Fe-Cr solid 
solutions during thermal aging, Physical Review B. 86 (2012) 224109. 
71. R. Matsutani, S. Onaka, Representation of Nye’s Lattice Curvature Tensor by Log Angles, 
MATERIALS TRANSACTIONS. 60 (2019) 935–938. 
72. C. Begau, J. Hua, A. Hartmaier, A novel approach to study dislocation density tensors and 
lattice rotation patterns in atomistic simulations, Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of 
Solids. 60 (2012) 711–722. 
73. T.J. Ruggles, D.T. Fullwood, J.W. Kysar, Resolving geometrically necessary dislocation 
density onto individual dislocation types using EBSD-based continuum dislocation microscopy, 
International Journal of Plasticity. 76 (2016) 231–243. 


Science Advances
Manuscript Template   
Page 19 of 20

74. L.M. Woryk, S. He, E.M. Hopkins, C.-Y. Hung, J. Han, D.J. Srolovitz, J. Marian, M.L. 
Taheri, Geometrically necessary dislocation fingerprints of dislocation loop absorption at grain 
boundaries, Physical Review Materials. 6 (2022) 83804. 
75. S. Das, F. Hofmann, E. Tarleton, Consistent determination of geometrically necessary 
dislocation density from simulations and experiments, International Journal of Plasticity. 109 
(2018) 18–42. 
76. A. Nye, A.C. Leff, C.M. Barr, M.L. Taheri, Direct observation of recrystallization 
mechanisms during annealing of Cu in low and high strain conditions, Scripta Materialia. 146 
(2018) 308–311.
77. A.C. Leff, M.L. Taheri, Quantitative assessment of the driving force for twin formation 
utilizing Nye tensor dislocation density mapping, Scripta Materialia. 121 (2016) 14–17. 
78. Yan-Ru Lin, Arunodaya Bhattacharya, Steven J. Zinkle, Analysis of position-dependent 
cavity parameters in irradiated metals to obtain insight on fundamental defect migration 
phenomena, Materials & Design, Vol. 226 (2023) 111668.
79. Yu.V. Konobeev, A.V. Subbotin, V.N. Bykov, V.I. Tscherbak, Grain boundary void 
denuded zone in irradiated metals, Physica Status Solidi (a) 29 K121 (1975).
80. Zinkle SJ, Farrell K. Void swelling and defect cluster formation in reactor-irradiated 
copper. J Nucl Mater. 1989;168(3):262-267.
81.  Wadsworth, J., Ruano, O.A. & Sherby, O.D. Denuded zones, diffusional creep, and grain 
boundary sliding. Metall Mater Trans A 33, 219–229 (2002).

Acknowledgments

The authors acknowledge funding in part from the US Department of Energy, Office of 
Basic Energy Sciences through contract DE-SC0008274 (M.L.T., O.E, A.C.L, J.E.N.) and 
contract DE-SC0020314 (M.L.T., C-Y.H., E.M.H., J.M., S.H. L.W.). Initial work by DS 
was supported by BES with follow-on research supported by Hong Kong Research Grants 
Council Collaborative Research Fund C1005-19G. JH acknowledges support from the Early 
Career Scheme (ECS) of Hong Kong RGC Grant 9048213 and Donation for Research 
Projects 9229061. K.H. was supported by the DOE-BES Materials Science and Engineering 
Division under FWP 15013170. This work was performed, in part, at the Center for 
Integrated Nanotechnologies, an Office of Science User Facility operated for the U.S. 
Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Science. Sandia National Laboratories is a multi-
mission laboratory managed and operated by National Technology and Engineering 
Solutions of Sandia, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of Honeywell International, Inc., for 
the U.S. DOE’s National Nuclear Security Administration under contract DE-NA-0003525. 
The views expressed in the article do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. DOE 
or the United States Government. The authors acknowledge J. Kevin Baldwin of the Center 
for Integrated Nanotechnologies at Los Alamos National Laboratory for film growth for this 
study. B.P.U., who performed the atomistic calculations, acknowledges support by 
FUTURE (Fundamental Understanding of Transport Under Reactor Extremes), an Energy 
Frontier Research Center funded by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), Office of 
Science, Basic Energy Sciences (BES). Los Alamos National Laboratory is operated by 
Triad National Security, LLC, for the National Nuclear Security Administration of U.S. 
Department of Energy (Contract No. 89233218CNA000001)

Funding:

US Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences DE-SC0008274, DE-
SC0020314


Science Advances
Manuscript Template   
Page 20 of 20

Hong Kong Research Grants Council Collaborative Research Fund C1005-19G
Early Career Scheme (ECS) of Hong Kong RGC Grant 9048213
Donation for Research Projects 9229061
DOE-BES Materials Science and Engineering Division FWP 15013170
U.S. DOE’s National Nuclear Security Administration DE-NA-0003525
National 
Nuclear 
Security 
Administration 
of 
U.S. 
Department 
of 
Energy

89233218CNA000001

Author contributions:

Conceptualization: MT, DS, JM, OE
Methodology: OE, CYH, EH, AB, AL, JN, LW, JH, EM
Investigation: MT, JM, OE, JH, BU, EM, DS
Visualization: AB, OE, JN
Supervision: MT, JM, BU, KH, DS
Writing—original draft: OE, JM, JH, BU, EM, DS
Writing—review & editing: MT, JM, AB, OE, BU, KH

Competing interests:
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Data and materials availability:
All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and/or the 
Supplementary Materials. Additional data related to this paper may be requested from the 
authors.


1

Supplementary Materials for

Grain boundary metastability controls irradiation resistance in 

nanocrystalline metals  

Osman El Atwani et al.

*Corresponding author. Mtaheri4@jhu.edu

This PDF file includes:

Supplementary Text
Figs. S1 to S5
Tables S1
References (1 to 8) 


2

Supplementary Text
Orientation/GB character and Nye tensor analysis
Automated Crystallographic Orientation Mapping (ACOM) was performed via NanoMEGAS 
ASTAR precession diffraction [4]. A spot size of 5 nm and a step size of 2 nm were used. The 
experimental electron diffraction spot patterns were acquired and compared to one or several sets 
of thousands of computer-generated electron diffraction spot patterns to obtain information of 
nanocrystal orientation/GB character at varying doses of 0, 6.1, 12.2, and 18.3dpa in the TEM 
[5]. The software technique for the comparisons is based on optimal template matching using 
cross-correlation. ACOM map was used to identify grains with compatible diffraction condition 
for dislocation loop imaging and to ensure diffraction conditions to be constant during 
irradiation. 
The Nye tensor defined in Eq. 1 is described in terms of the contortion K, as follows [6]:

𝛼𝑖𝑗 = 𝐾𝑗𝑖 − 𝛿𝑖𝑗𝐾𝑘𝑘
(1)

where Kkk is in the Einstein summation notation implying that Kkk =  ∑ 𝐾𝑖𝑗
𝑖
∙ 𝛿𝑖𝑗 = 1 for 𝑖 = 𝑗

and 𝛿𝑖𝑗 = 0 for 𝑖 ≠ 𝑗. Nye defined the contortion as a second-rank tensor

𝐾𝑖𝑗 =

𝜕𝜑𝑖
𝜕𝑥𝑖 =

∆𝜑𝑖
∆𝑥𝑖
(2)

, where 𝜕𝜑𝑖is the three-dimensional rotation vector and 𝜕𝑥𝑖 is the displacement vector. These are 
generated using ACOM-TEM. First, the axis-angle pair for the disorientation between each point 
and its neighbors is calculated. The rotation vector 𝜕𝜑𝑖 is approximated as the product of the axis 
and angle according to infinitesimal rotation theory [7]. 𝜕𝑥𝑖 is the displacement between the 
steps being compared. Eq. 2 is undefined whenever 𝑗 = 3 because the displacement along the z-
axis is zero. There are undefined values for 𝐾𝑖3 will carry through when K is plugged into Eq. 1 
[8], which is written explicitly as

𝛼𝑖𝑗 = [

−𝐾22 − 𝐾33
𝐾21
𝐾31

𝐾12
−𝐾11 − 𝐾33
𝐾32

𝐾13
𝐾23
−𝐾11 − 𝐾22

]


3

Fig. S1.
Six GBs attached to three grains of interest were extracted from the Figure 1(b) for GB character 
analysis. The GB misorientation and the GB normal are listed in Table S1.


4

Fig. S2.
Role of microstate on defect interactions. (a, middle) The structure of the S13 [111] 
(134) symmetric tilt GB as determined by mapping the gamma surface and identifying the lowest 
energy structure. The microstate was modified in two ways: (right) by choosing the highest 
energy minimum on the gamma surface and (left) by adding ten interstitials to the lowest energy 
structure. Red atoms indicate Fe atoms with BCC coordination, as identified by OVITO [1], 
while blue atoms indicate atoms with other coordination. (b) The relative energy of vacancies at 
and near the three grain boundary structures, highlight the significant impact of the boundary 
microstate on the vacancy energetics. Each panel in (b) corresponds to the panel in (a) directly 
above.


5

Fig. S3.
Time evolution (measured in kMC steps) of the interstitial concentration profiles near a grain 
boundary. (a-b) without and (c-d) with a bulk bias for vacancies. The results shown in (a) and (b) 
are identical; they are just rendered differently for clarity. The same is true of the results in (c) 
and (d). The concentrations at the grain boundary plane itself are clipped in some of the figures 
for clarity. (e) Average denuded zone width as found from the kMC simulations for conditions in 
which a bulk bias exists. The width is an average of the two values measured on each side of the 
grain boundary plane. The time over which this width is measured is focused on the time in 
which the profiles transition from the quasi-steady state region highlighted in blue in (d) to the 
purple/red region in which the interstitial concentration profiles are flat. (f) denuded zone width 
near-GB region in Grain I and VII (labeled in Fig. 1(a)) as a function of irradiation fluence is 
experimentally determined.


6

Fig. S4. 
Sequence of TEM images taken throughout 10 keV He+ irradiation, with corresponding 
diffraction information for each image. Certain boundaries were monitored throughout the 
irradiation process. For the right-hand GB in grain I, a DZ develops at 6.1 peak dpa (fluence of 
0.93x1021m-2), is clearly present at 12.1 peak dpa (fluence of 1.86x1021m-2), and then disappears 
by a dose of 18.3 peak dpa (fluence of 2.8x1021m-2). The figure is reproduced from [2].


7

Fig. S5.
Sequence of bright field TEM images taken throughout 10 keV He+ irradiation (a-c) at 6.1, 12.2, 
and 18.3 dpa, respectively. Each image includes denuded zones indication as noted in Fig. S3(f) 
for the Grain I left/right GBs, and Grain VII top/bottom GBs. The grain I right GB is not labeled 
in (c), indicating denuded zone collapse.


8

Table S1.
Misorientation (angle/ axis) and GB plane normal for GBs labeled in Fig. S1 are listed. Analysis 
method is based on ref [3].

GB
Misorientation angle
Rotation Axis
GB plane normal

1
44.1°
[8 9̅ 7̅]
[3̅,13,1]A ; [18
̅̅̅̅,0,10]B

2
39°
[12,15
̅̅̅̅,5]
[26,1,14
̅̅̅̅]A ; [22,72,5̅]B

3
52.7°
[1,3̅,2̅]
Curved GB

4
47.1°
[21,12,1̅]
[53
̅̅̅̅,24
̅̅̅̅,10]A ; [14,22
̅̅̅̅, 5]B

5
55.5°
[21,22
̅̅̅̅,1̅]
[9,16
̅̅̅̅,5]A; [13
̅̅̅̅, 5,1]B

6
42.2°
[4,1,4̅]
[12
̅̅̅̅,8̅,1]A; [1,10
̅̅̅̅, 0]B


9

Supplementary Information References
1.
A. Stukowski, Visualization and analysis of atomistic simulation data with OVITO–the 
Open Visualization Tool, Model. Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng. 18 15012 (2009).

2.
O. El-Atwani, J.E. Nathaniel, A.C. Leff, K. Hattar, M.L. Taheri, Direct Observation of 
Sink-Dependent Defect Evolution in Nanocrystalline Iron under Irradiation, Sci. Rep. 7 
1836 (2017).

3.
A.C. Leff, B. Runnels, A. Nye, I.J. Beyerlein, M.L. Taheri, Determination of minimal 
energy facet structures in Σ3 and Σ9 grain boundaries: Experiment and simulation, 
Materialia. 5 100221 (2019).

4.
P. Moeck, S. Rouvimov, E.F. Rauch, M. Véron, H. Kirmse, I. Häusler, W. Neumann, D. 
Bultreys, Y. Maniette, S. Nicolopoulos, High spatial resolution semi-automatic crystallite 
orientation and phase mapping of nanocrystals in transmission electron microscopes, 
Cryst. Res. Technol. 46 589–606 (2011).

5.
J. Portillo, E.F. Rauch, S. Nicolopoulos, M. Gemmi, D. Bultreys, Precession Electron 
Diffraction Assisted Orientation Mapping in the Transmission Electron Microscope, 
Mater. Sci. Forum. 644 1–7 (2010).

6.
J.F. Nye, Some geometrical relations in dislocated crystals, Acta Metall. 1 153–162 
(1953).

7.
W.M. Lai, D.H. Rubin, D. Rubin, E. Krempl, Introduction to Continuum Mechanics, 
Elsevier, .

8.
A.C. Leff, C.R. Weinberger, M.L. Taheri, Estimation of dislocation density from 
precession electron diffraction data using the Nye tensor, Ultramicroscopy. 153 9–21 
(2015).


