1

Influence of Auger heating and Shockley-Read-Hall recombination on 

hot carrier dynamics in InGaAs nanowires

Hamidreza Esmaielpour*, Nabi Isaev, Jonathan J. Finley, Gregor Koblmüller*

Walter Schottky Institut, TUM School of Natural Sciences, Technical University of Munich, 85748 

Garching, Germany.

Abstract – Understanding the origin of hot carrier relaxation in nanowires (NWs) with one-dimensional 
(1D) geometry is significant for designing efficient hot carrier solar cells with such nanostructures. Here, 
we study the influence of Auger heating and Shockley-Read-Hall recombination on hot carrier dynamics 
of catalyst-free InGaAs-InAlAs core-shell NWs. Using steady-state and time-resolved photoluminescence 
(PL) spectroscopy the dependencies of hot carrier effects on the degree of confinement of photo-
generated carriers induced by the nanowire diameter are determined at different lattice temperatures. 
Analysis of excitation-power dependent data and temperature-dependent PL linewidth broadening reveal 
that at low temperatures, strong Auger recombination and phonon-bottleneck are responsible for hot 
carrier effects. Our analysis gives also insights into electron-phonon and ionized impurity scattering, 
showing opposing trends with NW diameter, and it allows to estimate the Fröhlich coupling constant for 
the InGaAs NWs. Conversely, with increasing lattice temperature, hot carrier relaxation rates increase due 
to enhanced Shockley-Read Hall and surface recombination. Time-resolved spectroscopy reveals a 
fourfold increase in the rate of Shockley-Read-Hall recombination from 6 ns at 10 K to 1.5 ns at 150 K. The 
findings suggest that minimizing defect densities in the bulk and surfaces of these NWs will be key to 
enhance hot carrier effects towards higher temperatures.

I.
INTRODUCTION

To boost the efficiency of photovoltaic solar cells beyond their theoretical limit in single-junction solar 
cells, it requires to suppress one of the main energy loss mechanisms in these devices, called
thermalization of hot carriers. Understanding the origin of hot carrier relaxation in solar cells and 
inhibiting thermalization pathways is essential to fabricate efficient hot carrier solar cells.

One of the main relaxation pathways of hot carriers in polar (group III-V) semiconductors is via electron 
interactions with longitudinal optical (LO) phonons, known as Fröhlich interactions [1]. This process occurs 
quickly after photo-generation (~ 𝑝𝑠), however, it is possible to inhibit the dissipation of excess kinetic 
energy of hot carriers via creating a phonon-bottleneck effect [2,3]. Through this mechanism non-
equilibrium distributions of phonons, i.e., hot phonons, are generated, which can slow down the rates of 
hot carrier relaxation by exchanging energy with these particles [4,5].

Nanostructures have been reported as one of the promising materials for the generation of hot carriers 
via phonon-bottleneck effects [6,7,8,9]. Nanowires (NWs), in particular, are a class of nanostructures that
have shown evidence of strong hot carrier effects, given their spatial confinement in two dimensions and 
creation of even more significant phonon-bottleneck effects [10,11,12]. In addition, due to their large 
surface-to-volume ratio, they can enhance internal light reflection in their structures, which can increase 

* Email address: hamidreza.esmaielpour@wsi.tum.de
Email address: gregor.koblmueller@wsi.tum.de


2

photo-absorption and the density of hot carriers in the system [13,14]. Evidence of hot carrier effects in 
NWs was studied by steady-state photoluminescence (PL) [15,16], time-resolved pump-probe 
spectroscopy [17,18,19], and electrical measurements [20,21,22]. It has been shown that by reducing the 
diameter of the NWs and increasing the confinement of carriers in the system, the temperature of hot 
carriers increases due to the suppression of energy dissipation via phonon-mediated channels [15,16,23].

Another mechanism, that can lead to hot carrier generation is Auger recombination, or Auger heating
[18,24,25]. This effect can be even more pronounced in nanostructures due to the low dimensionality of 
these structures [26]. By increasing the excitation power, the probability of Auger recombination 
increases due to the large excess carrier densities generated. Although this recombination mechanism is 
non-radiative and reduces the density of carriers, it is considered as one source of hot carrier generation, 
which can improve the efficiency of hot carrier photovoltaic solar cells [27].

Despite significant advantages of nanostructures for the generation of hot carriers, the proximity of 
interfaces and surfaces can affect the relaxation rates of hot carriers by surface recombination, strain, and 
alloy fluctuations at the interface [28,29]. It has been shown that by passivating dangling bonds on the 
surface using lattice-matched compounds, it is possible to reduce the rates of hot carrier relaxation in the 
system and improve the yield of luminescence in these structures [18,30,31]. To what extent non-radiative 
processes, such as Auger heating and surface recombination, influence the hot carrier effects in NWs, is 
however largely unknown.

Here, we study the properties of hot carriers in core-shell InGaAs/InAlAs NWs via steady-state and time-
resolved micro-photoluminescence (µPL) spectroscopy
to reveal the impact of non-radiative 

recombination processes. We first show from steady-state PL experiments performed at various lattice 
temperatures how the hot carrier properties are described by the temperature-dependent PL linewidth 
broadening and the associated scattering mechanisms for a variety of different NW diameters. The results 
are further correlated by a comprehensive study of carrier recombination dynamics via time-resolved PL 
spectroscopy to elucidate the influence of Auger and Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH) recombination 
mechanisms on the dynamics of hot carriers.

II.
EXPERIMENTAL METHODS AND DISCUSSIONS

The NWs studied in this work consist of closely lattice-matched In0.2Ga0.8As/In0.2Al0.8As core-shell NWs, 
that were grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) using a catalyst-free, selective-area epitaxial growth 
method. Different sets of NW samples were explored with varying InGaAs core diameter (110-200 nm), 
under otherwise fixed InAlAs shell thickness (~10 nm). Details of their growth is presented elsewhere
[16,30,32]. Figure 1(a) shows the PL spectra emitted by the NWs (160 nm InGaAs core diameter in this 
case) at various lattice temperatures. A characteristic redshift behavior is observed by increasing 
temperature, as expected due to thermally induced lattice expansion and reduction of the band-gap 
energy. As a measure for the hot carrier effect, the temperature of photo-generated hot carriers is 
determined by fitting the PL spectra using the absorptivity method [26] with the generalized Planck’s 
radiation law, as given by [33,34]:

𝐼𝑃𝐿(𝐸) = 2𝜋 𝐴(𝐸) (𝐸)2

ℎ3𝑐2
[𝑒𝑥𝑝 (𝐸 − ∆𝜇

𝑘𝐵𝑇 ) − 1]

−1

.
(1)


3

Here, "𝐼𝑃𝐿" is the PL intensity, "𝐴(𝐸)" the energy-dependent absorptivity, "ℎ" the Planck constant, "𝑘𝐵"
the Boltzmann constant, "𝑐" the speed of light. "𝑇" and "∆𝜇" are the carrier temperature and the quasi-
Fermi level splitting, respectively. The results of the hot carrier temperature (∆T: temperature difference 
between the hot carrier and the lattice temperature) versus the lattice temperature at 6 kW/cm2

absorbed power density are shown in Figure 1(b) and compared with various other NW-diameters. It is 
seen that at 10 K, the maximum of hot carrier temperature is observed in the NWs of 160 nm diameter. 
In addition, it is seen that by increasing the lattice temperature, the effect of hot carriers reduces. This 
behavior is observed in all NWs; however, the thinner NWs lose their hot carrier effects faster than the 
thicker NWs. To identify the origins for this intriguing behavior, and especially the different dissipation 
strengths of the hot carrier effect with diameter, a closer investigation of the dominant recombination 
mechanism is performed.

Figure 1. (a) Temperature-dependent PL spectra of the InGaAs/InAlAs NWs of 160 nm diameter recorded at 6
kW/cm2 absorbed power density. (b) Corresponding ∆T versus the lattice temperature for NWs of various 
diameters.

To study the dynamics of hot carriers under steady-state condition, we therefore explore the 
recombination mechanisms using the rate equation, as given by [35]:

𝑃𝐴𝑏𝑠. = 𝐴 𝐼𝑃𝐿

1 2
⁄ + 𝐵 𝐼𝑃𝐿 + 𝐶 𝐼𝑃𝐿

3 2
⁄ ,
(2)


4

where "𝐴", "𝐵", and "𝐶" are the coefficients attributed to Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH), radiative, and Auger 
recombination mechanisms, respectively. The dominant recombination mechanism in the system can be 
determined by finding the slope of the natural logarithm of the absorbed power density versus the natural 
logarithm of the integrated PL intensity [26]. Such analysis is performed in Figure 2(a) for the InGaAs NWs 
of 115 nm, 135 nm, and 180 nm diameter. It is seen that at 10 K under high excitation power density, 
where hot carrier effects are most evident, Auger recombination has the highest contribution in carrier
recombination in the NWs given the large slope of ~1.5. The associated plots at higher lattice 
temperatures are shown in the supplementary information.

Figure 2(b) presents the dependence of the slopes extracted at high absorbed power densities, see the 
highlighted region, versus the lattice temperature. It is seen that by increasing the lattice temperature, 
the magnitude of the slope decreases rapidly, and at elevated temperatures, it shifts towards dominant 
SRH recombination (slope approximating ~ 0.5). The results indicate that by increasing the lattice 
temperature, the contribution of Auger heating reduces, leading to weaker hot carrier effects in the NWs, 
in agreement with Figure 1(b).

Figure 2. (a) Natural logarithm of absorbed power density versus the natural logarithm of integrated PL intensity 
at 10 K for NWs of 115 nm, 135 nm and 160 nm diameter. The dashed lines indicate the slopes of the data. (b) 
Slopes of the power-law analysis indicated in panel (a) at high excitation powers (highlighted region).


5

The increased contribution from SRH-recombination at elevated temperature motivates to take a closer 
look at the scattering dynamics of hot carriers and to identify the underlying defect-mediated and 
electron-phonon coupling effects. Such information about the scattering mechanism in the system can be 
assessed by analysis of the temperature-dependent PL linewidth broadening, Γ(T), as given by [36]:

𝛤(𝑇) = 𝛤0 + 𝛤𝐿𝐴𝑇 +
𝛤𝐿𝑂

[𝑒𝑥𝑝(ℎ𝜔𝐿𝑂 𝑘𝐵𝑇
⁄
) − 1] + 𝛤𝑖𝑚𝑝𝑒𝑥𝑝 [− 𝐸𝐵

𝑘𝐵𝑇] ,
(3)

where "𝛤0" is the inhomogeneous (defect) broadening, "𝛤𝐿𝐴" the coefficient due to longitudinal acoustic 
scattering, "𝛤𝐿𝑂" the Fröhlich coupling constant, "ℎ𝜔𝐿𝑂" the energy of longitudinal optical (LO) phonons, 
"𝑇" the lattice temperature, "𝛤𝑖𝑚𝑝" the ionized impurity coefficient, and "𝐸𝐵" the impurity binding energy. 
The contribution of each scattering mechanism can be analyzed by fitting the experimental results with 
Equation 3.

The results of temperature-dependent PL linewidth broadening are plotted in Figure 3(a). The magnitude 
of the spectral linewidth is taken from the half-width-at-half-maximum (HWHF) of the low-energy side of 
the PL spectra emitted under low-excitation powers in order to exclude the contribution of hot carriers 
on the linewidth broadening. By fitting the experimental results with equation 3, it is possible to 
determine the contribution of various scattering mechanisms in the InGaAs NWs. The solid lines in Figure 
3(a) indicate the best fits to the data of the temperature-dependent PL linewidth broadening for the NWs 
of various diameters. It is seen that by increasing the NW diameter, the magnitude of the inhomogeneous 
broadening reduces. The origin of this effect is attributed to a reduction of the defect density in the NWs
grown by the catalyst-free growth technique at larger diameters [37,38].

Figure 3(b) shows the results of the ionized impurity coefficient and the Fröhlich coupling constant of the 
NWs determined by the linewidth fitting versus their diameter. In this analysis, the coefficient of 
longitudinal acoustic phonon scattering is found to be 0.02 meV/K, the LO-phonon energy, 36 meV, and 
the binding energy, 8.2 meV, for the InGaAs NWs with various diameters, which agree with reported 
values for similar compounds in literature [39,40]. It is observed that by increasing the diameter of the 
NWs, the coefficient of carrier scattering via ionized impurities reduces, while the Fröhlich coupling 
constant increases. The larger contribution of the ionized impurities for the thinner NWs is attributed to 
their higher density of defects [16], which are expected to introduce larger amounts of residual impurities 
due to segregation effects [41,42]. By increasing the lattice temperature, the impurities in these trap 
states will be ionized via receiving thermal energy and interact with photogenerated carriers, resulting in 
larger linewidth broadening of the PL spectrum versus temperature [43,44]. However, by increasing the 
diameter of the NWs and improving the crystal quality, the electron-phonon coupling increases via 
Fröhlich interactions. This effect is important for hot carrier absorbers, as it leads to higher probability of 
energy exchange between electrons (or holes) with LO-phonons, which can provide the conditions for the 
creation of the phonon-bottleneck effect in the system [2,45]. These results agree with the ab initio 
simulations on electron-phonon coupling in CdSe quantum dots, which showed that the introduction of
defects into this structure can alter the electron-phonon scattering rates, leading to weaker phonon-
bottleneck effects in the system [28]. In addition, the dependence of hot carrier relaxation rates on the 
density of defects was also studied in AlGaN/GaN heterostructures by Hall measurements and it was 
found that strong scattering of electrons with impurities and defects accelerates carrier relaxation rates, 
resulting in weaker hot carrier effects [29]. Theoretical and experimental results indicate that to design 


6

an efficient hot carrier absorber with robust phonon-bottleneck effects, it is necessary to improve the 
crystal quality and to reduce the density of structural defects in the system.

Figure 3. (a) Temperature-dependent PL linewidth broadening for the InGaAs NWs of different diameters. The 
dashed lines indicate the fitting results of the PL linewidth broadening versus the lattice temperature. (b) 
Dependence of ionized impurity scattering and electron-LO phonon coupling constant versus the NW diameter.

So far, steady-state PL spectroscopy has shown evidence of strongest hot carrier effects in the NWs of 160 
nm. The origin of this effect is attributed to the competition between the phonon-bottleneck and Auger 
heating, on the one hand – resulting stronger hot carrier effects by reducing the NW diameter – and on 
the other hand, the increase of hot carrier relaxation rates due to higher density of defects in the thin 
NWs. Therefore, it is expected that by reducing the NW diameter, the rate of carrier recombination via 
the SRH mechanism increases. To underpin these expectations, we performed time-resolved PL (TRPL) 
spectroscopy at various lattice temperatures and excitation powers on the InGaAs NWs with various 
diameters. To determine the contributions of various recombination mechanisms, we apply the common
rate equation for time-dependent carrier concentrations (n(t) and p(t) for electrons and holes, 
respectively), which is given by [46]:

𝑑Δ𝑛
𝑑𝑡 = − 𝐶𝑛 𝑛(𝑛𝑝 − 𝑛𝑖

2) − 𝐶𝑝 𝑝(𝑛𝑝 − 𝑛𝑖

2) − 𝑘𝑟𝑎𝑑 𝑝(𝑛𝑝 − 𝑛𝑖

2) − 𝑛𝑝 − 𝑛𝑖

2

𝜏𝑝𝑛 + 𝜏𝑛𝑝,
(4)


7

where "𝐶𝑛" and "𝐶𝑝" are the Auger coefficients for electrons and holes, "𝑘𝑟𝑎𝑑" is the radiative 
recombination coefficient, "𝑛𝑖" the intrinsic carrier density, and "𝜏𝑝" and "𝜏𝑛" are the non-radiative SRH 
recombination lifetimes, respectively. Under the approximation of high-excitation powers and 
considering 𝑛 = 𝑝, Equation 4 can be written as [47],

𝑑Δ𝑛
𝑑𝑡 = − (𝐶𝑛 + 𝐶𝑝)𝑛3 − 𝑘𝑟𝑎𝑑 𝑛2 −
𝑛

(𝜏𝑝 + 𝜏𝑛),
(5)

where the first term is due to the Auger recombination, the second one due to the radiative 
recombination and the third one due to the SRH recombination mechanism. In this relationship, under 
the absence of Auger and radiative recombination, a mono-exponential decay of the TRPL signal occurs 
under relatively low excitation power densities and the signal follows a linear dependence between the 
natural logarithm of the TRPL intensity and the delay time [46]. Figure 4(a) examines these expectations 
by recording excitation power-dependent TRPL spectra at 10 K for InGaAs NWs (diameter of 160 nm), 
using a 780 nm Ti-Sapphire pulsed laser excitation with an 80 MHz repetition rate. The TRPL signal is 
recorded by a time-correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) system, which consists of a single-photon 
avalanche diode (SPAD) connected to a PicoHarp300 detector. The instrument response function (IRF) of 
the system is shown by a dashed line in Figure 4(a). It is seen that by increasing the absorbed power 
density, the slope of the TRPL spectrum at earlier decay times becomes steeper. 

To quantitatively assess the contribution of various recombination mechanisms and Auger heating on hot 
carrier dynamics, one can determine the time constant of the TRPL signal by taking the derivative of the 
natural logarithm of the intensity (𝜙𝑇𝑅𝑃𝐿) versus the delay time, as given by [46]:

𝜏𝑇𝑅𝑃𝐿 = (− 𝑑 𝑙𝑛(𝜙𝑇𝑅𝑃𝐿)

𝑑𝑡
)

−1

.
(6)

According to Equation 6, under a mono-exponential decay, the lifetime determined by this equation 
represents the SRH recombination lifetime. Under high excitation powers, the contributions of Auger and 
radiative recombination increases, and the decay profile of the TRPL signal will not be mono-exponential; 
in other words, the spectrum cannot be described by only one time-constant. Therefore, by determining 
the power-dependent carrier lifetime, it is possible to study the impact of Auger and radiative processes 
on the carrier dynamics. It is expected that in a system with stronger Auger recombination, the slope of
the TRPL decay becomes steeper, leading to shorter carrier lifetimes [48]. Since the rate of carrier 
recombination due the Auger mechanism has a cubic dependence on the carrier concentration, one 
should determine the lifetime right after the decay starts. Therefore, the dependence of lifetime on the 
excitation power is determined after 650 ps, as shown by the shaded area in Figure 4(a), which is larger 
than the FWHM of the IRF profile, to exclude its contribution from the TRPL signal. 

The results of the power-dependent decay rate (inverse of the lifetime) versus the excitation power 
density for the InGaAs NWs of various diameters are plotted in Figure 4(b) for the case of low temperature 
(10 K). We observe that the decay rate of the 160 nm thick NWs has the largest values as a function of 
excitation power density. Recalling Figure 1(b), it was found that the InGaAs NWs of 160 nm diameter 
show the strongest hot carrier effects compared with other NWs, and the contribution of Auger heating 
determined from steady-state PL spectroscopy was dominant in these NWs (see Figure 2). To compare 
the results of steady-state and time-resolved PL data, the decay rate of carriers under 5 kW/cm2 absorbed 


8

power density and the slope of the rate equation found by steady-state PL experiments for the Auger 
recombination versus the NW diameter are plotted in Figure 4(c). Both results exhibit the same trends, 
i.e., largest decay rates and strongest Auger heating effect for intermediate NW-diameter of 160 nm. This 
good agreement confirms the contribution of dominant Auger recombination on hot carrier dynamics at 
intermediate NW diameters in the limit of low lattice temperature. 

Figure 4. (a) TRPL spectra for the InGaAs NWs with 160 nm diameter at 10 K under various excitation powers. The 
shaded area indicates the region, where the contribution of Auger decay rate is determined. (b) Decay rate 
(inverse of lifetime) of carriers versus the excitation power at 10 K for the InGaAs NWs with various diameters. (c) 
Dependence of carrier decay rates at 5 kW/cm2 extracted from the TRPL data and the slope of the rate equation 
determined by steady-state PL experiments versus the NW diameter.


9

The situation changes when increasing the lattice temperature, as the contribution of SRH recombination
increases (cf. Figure 2(b)), resulting in higher rates of hot carrier relaxation. To determine the dependence 
of carrier lifetime due to the SRH recombination versus the lattice temperature, the TRPL spectra under 
low-excitation powers are analyzed, where the contribution of the SRH recombination is dominant [46].
The results of the SRH recombination lifetime versus the lattice temperature are plotted in Figure 5(a). It 
is seen that by increasing the lattice temperature, the recombination lifetime reduces from 6.5 ns at 10 K 
to 1.5 ns at 150 K for the NWs with 160 nm, indicative of higher rates of the SRH recombination at elevated 
temperatures. Similar behavior is observed for other InGaAs NWs with different diameters. At elevated 
lattice temperatures (> 150 K), the SRH recombination lifetime for the NWs could not be determined due 
to the IRF of the TRPL setup. These results agree with the drop of the integrated steady-state PL intensity 
versus the lattice temperature, see Figure S2 in the supporting information. In addition, Figure 5(a) 
indicates that the NWs with larger diameters, whose density of defects is less, have longer carrier 
lifetimes, indicative of their lower SRH recombination rates compared to the thinner NWs.

Figure 5. (a) Carrier lifetime of the InGaAs NWs for various diameters under low-absorbed power densities
(10 W/cm2) versus the lattice temperature. (b) Surface recombination velocity of the InGaAs NWs versus the 
lattice temperature. The inset of the graph shows the inverse of the TRPL lifetime under low-excitation power
density, taken from panel (a), versus the inverse of the NW diameter at 10 K. The dashed line is a best fit to the 
data.


10

In nanostructures with small dimensions, surface recombination at the heterointerfaces or with dangling 
bonds at the surface can have large contributions to the carrier recombination rates [49]. It is expected 
that by reducing the dimensions of the NWs, the rates of carrier recombination at the surface increases. 
Concurrently, a system with large surface recombination velocities can increase the rates of hot carrier 
relaxation, leading to weaker hot carrier effects [50,51]. The carrier lifetime under low-excitation powers, 
𝜏𝑇𝑅𝑃𝐿, consists of a combination of the carrier lifetime in the bulk, 𝜏𝐵𝑢𝑙𝑘, and the surface recombination 
velocity. To determine the contribution of the surface recombination velocity (𝑣𝑠), one can fit the 
experimental results by [52]:

𝜏𝑇𝑅𝑃𝐿−1 = (4

𝑑) 𝑣𝑠 + 𝜏𝐵𝑢𝑙𝑘−1.
(7)

In this relationship, by plotting the inverse of TRPL time constant under low-excitation powers versus the 
inverse of the NW diameter, the slope indicates the surface recombination velocity, as shown by the inset 
of Figure 5(b). The resulting surface recombination velocity in the InGaAs NWs, that is independent of the 
NW diameter, versus the lattice temperature is plotted in Figure 5(b). It is observed that by increasing the 
lattice temperature, the surface recombination velocity increases from 1×103 cm/s at 10 K to ~ 3×103

cm/s at 150 K. These values agree with reported literature data for passivated GaAs/AlGaAs NWs [53] and 
about seven times larger than the ultralow surface recombination velocity reported for InGaAs/InP NWs 
[54] and InP NWs [55]. The increased surface recombination velocity at higher temperature indicates that
more carriers can reach the surface of the NWs and recombine there, which leads to weaker the hot 
carrier effects.

III.
CONCLUSION

In summary, we studied the dynamics of hot carriers in core-shell InGaAs/InAlAs NWs influenced by Auger 
heating and SRH recombination at various lattice temperatures and excitation power densities using 
steady-state and time-resolved PL spectroscopy. The results indicate that at 10 K, Auger heating in the 
NWs is dominant and it shows strong dependencies on the NW diameter, following a non-monotonic 
behavior from thick to thin NWs. Such strong Auger heating can enhance hot carrier temperature and 
improve the efficiency of hot carrier solar cells fabricated from such core-shell NWs. However, by 
increasing the lattice temperature, the contribution of SRH recombination becomes higher, resulting in
increased rates of hot carrier relaxation. In addition, our results indicate that by raising the lattice 
temperature, the surface recombination velocity of carriers increases, which can further enhance the 
thermalization rates of hot carriers. As such, reduced hot carrier effects are observed at elevated lattice 
temperatures, and to mitigate this it will be important to optimize both the bulk and interface quality of 
the core-shell NWs towards minimized defect and impurity densities in the future. 

IV.
REFERENCES

[1] H. Fröhlich, H. Pelzer, S. Zienau. "XX. Properties of slow electrons in polar materials." The London, 
Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science 41.314 (1950): 221-242.


11

[2] Y. Zhang, G. Conibeer, S. Liu, J. Zhang, and J‐F Guillemoles. "Review of the mechanisms for the phonon 
bottleneck effect in III–V semiconductors and their application for efficient hot carrier solar cells." 
Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications 30, no. 6 (2022): 581-596.

[3] Y. Zou, H. Esmaielpour, D. Suchet, J-F Guillemoles, and S. M. Goodnick. "The role of nonequilibrium LO 
phonons, Pauli exclusion, and intervalley pathways on the relaxation of hot carriers in InGaAs/InGaAsP 
multi-quantum-wells." Scientific reports 13, no. 1 (2023): 5601.

[4] A. S. Vengurlekar, S. S. Prabhu, S. K. Roy, and J. Shah. "Large reduction in hot-carrier energy-loss rates 
in cdse caused by nonequilibrium optical phonons." Physical Review B 50, no. 20 (1994): 15461.

[5] H. Esmaielpour, V. R. Whiteside, H. P. Piyathilaka, S. Vijeyaragunathan, B. Wang, E. Adcock-Smith, K. P. 
Roberts, T. D. Mishima, M. B. Santos, A. D. Bristow, and I. R. Sellers, "Enhanced hot electron lifetimes in 
quantum wells with inhibited phonon coupling." Scientific reports 8, no. 1 (2018): 12473.

[6] J. Shah. "Hot carriers in quasi-2-D polar semiconductors." IEEE journal of quantum electronics 22, no. 
9 (1986): 1728-1743.

[7] Y. Rosenwaks, M. C. Hanna, D. H. Levi, D. M. Szmyd, R. K. Ahrenkiel, and A. J. Nozik. "Hot-carrier cooling 
in GaAs: Quantum wells versus bulk." Physical Review B 48, no. 19 (1993): 14675.

[8] L. C. Hirst, H. Fujii, Y. Wang, M. Sugiyama, and N. J. Ekins-Daukes. "Hot carriers in quantum wells for 
photovoltaic efficiency enhancement." IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics 4, no. 1 (2013): 244-252.

[9] H. Esmaielpour, V. R. Whiteside, J. Tang, S. Vijeyaragunathan, T. D. Mishima, S. Cairns, M. B. Santos, B.
Wang, and I. R. Sellers. "Suppression of phonon‐mediated hot carrier relaxation in type‐II InAs/AlAsxSb1− 
x quantum wells: a practical route to hot carrier solar cells." Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and 
Applications 24, no. 5 (2016): 591-599.

[10] J. Fast, U. Aeberhard, S. P. Bremner, and H. Linke. "Hot-carrier optoelectronic devices based on 
semiconductor nanowires." Applied Physics Reviews 8, no. 2 (2021).

[11] R. Hathwar, Y. Zou, C. Jirauschek, and S. M. Goodnick. "Nonequilibrium electron and phonon 
dynamics in advanced concept solar cells." Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 52, no. 9 (2019): 093001.

[12] A. K. Sivan, L. D. Mario, Y. Zhang, D. Catone, P. O’Keeffe, S. Turchini, V. Mussi, H. Liu, and F. Martelli. 
"Influence of diameter on temperature dynamics of hot carriers in photoexcited GaAsP nanowires." 
Physical Review B 104, no. 4 (2021): 045423.

[13] J. Wallentin, N. Anttu, D. Asoli, M. Huffman, I. Åberg, M. H. Magnusson, G. Siefer, P. Fuss-Kailuweit, 
F. Dimroth, B. Witzigmann, and H. Q. Xu. "InP nanowire array solar cells achieving 13.8% efficiency by 
exceeding the ray optics limit." Science 339, no. 6123 (2013): 1057-1060.

[14] J. Treu, X. Xu, K. Ott, K. Saller, G. Abstreiter, J. J. Finley, and G. Koblmüller. "Optical absorption of 
composition-tunable InGaAs nanowire arrays." Nanotechnology 30, no. 49 (2019): 495703.


12

[15] D. Tedeschi, M. De Luca, H. A. Fonseka, Q. Gao, F. Mura, H. H. Tan, S. Rubini, F. Martelli, C. Jagadish, 
M. Capizzi, and A. Polimeni. "Long-lived hot carriers in III–V nanowires." Nano Letters 16, no. 5 (2016): 
3085-3093.

[16] H. Esmaielpour, N. Isaev, I. Makhfudz, M. Döblinger, J. J. Finley, and G. Koblmüller. "Strong 
Dimensional and Structural Dependencies of Hot Carrier Effects in InGaAs Nanowires: Implications for 
Photovoltaic Solar Cells." ACS Applied Nano Materials (2024).

[17] L. Wittenbecher, E. V. Boström, J. Vogelsang, S. Lehman, K. A. Dick, C. Verdozzi, D. Zigmantas, and A.
Mikkelsen. "Unraveling the ultrafast hot electron dynamics in semiconductor nanowires." ACS nano 15, 
no. 1 (2021): 1133-1144.

[18] D. Sandner, H. Esmaielpour, F. del Giudice, S. Meder, M. Nuber, R. Kienberger, G. Koblmüller, and 
Hristo Iglev. "Hot Electron Dynamics in InAs–AlAsSb Core–Shell Nanowires." ACS Applied Energy Materials 
(2023).

[19] T. Heilpern, M. Manjare, A. O. Govorov, G. P. Wiederrecht, S. K. Gray, and H. Harutyunyan. 
"Determination of hot carrier energy distributions from inversion of ultrafast pump-probe reflectivity 
measurements." Nature communications 9, no. 1 (2018): 1853.

[20] S. Limpert, A. Burke, I-J Chen, N. Anttu, S. Lehmann, S. Fahlvik, S. Bremner, G. Conibeer, C. Thelander, 
M. E. Pistol, and H. Linke. "Single-nanowire, low-bandgap hot carrier solar cells with tunable open-circuit 
voltage." Nanotechnology 28, no. 43 (2017): 434001.

[21] I-J Chen, S. Limpert, W. Metaferia, C. Thelander, L. Samuelson, F. Capasso, A. M. Burke, and H. Linke. 
"Hot-carrier extraction in nanowire-nanoantenna photovoltaic devices." Nano Letters 20, no. 6 (2020): 
4064-4072.

[22] H. Wang, F. Wang, H. Xia, P. Wang, T. Li, J. Li, Z. Wang, J. Sun, P. Wu, J. Ye, and Q. Zhuang. "Direct 
observation and manipulation of hot electrons at room temperature." National Science Review 8, no. 9 
(2021): nwaa295.

[23] I. Makhfudz, N. Cavassilas, M. Giteau, H. Esmaielpour, D. Suchet, A-M Daré, and F. Michelini. 
"Enhancement of hot carrier effect and signatures of confinement in terms of thermalization power in 
quantum well solar cell." Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 55, no. 47 (2022): 475102.

[24] J-N. Fehr, M-A. Dupertuis, T. P. Hessler, L. Kappei, D. Marti, F. Salleras, M. S. Nomura, B. Deveaud, J-
Y. Emery, and B. Dagens. "Hot phonons and Auger related carrier heating in semiconductor optical 
amplifiers." IEEE journal of quantum electronics 38, no. 6 (2002): 674-681.

[25] M. Achermann, A. P. Bartko, J. A. Hollingsworth, and V. I. Klimov. "The effect of Auger heating on 
intraband carrier relaxation in semiconductor quantum rods." Nature Physics 2, no. 8 (2006): 557-561.

[26] H. Esmaielpour, L. Lombez, M. Giteau, J‐F. Guillemoles, and D. Suchet. "Impact of excitation energy 
on hot carrier properties in InGaAs multi‐quantum well structure." Progress in Photovoltaics: Research 
and Applications 30, no. 11 (2022): 1354-1362.


13

[27] Y. Takeda, S. Sato, and T. Morikawa. "Effects of impact ionization and Auger recombination on hot-
carrier solar cells and hot-carrier photocatalysts." Japanese Journal of Applied Physics 62.SK (2023): 
SK1003.

[28] S. V. Kilina, A. J. Neukirch, B. F. Habenicht, D. S. Kilin, and O. V. Prezhdo. "Quantum zeno effect 
rationalizes the phonon bottleneck in semiconductor quantum dots." Physical review letters 110, no. 18 
(2013): 180404.

[29] C. E. Martinez, N. M. Stanton, A. J. Kent, M. L. Williams, I. Harrison, H. Tang, J. B. Webb, and J. A. 
Bardwell. "Energy relaxation by hot 2D electrons in AlGaN/GaN heterostructures: the influence of strong 
impurity and defect scattering." Semiconductor science and technology 21, no. 12 (2006): 1580.

[30] J. Treu, T. Stettner, M. Watzinger, S. Morkötter, M. Döblinger, S. Matich, K. Saller, M. Bichler, G. 
Abstreiter, J. J. Finley, and J. Stangl. "Lattice-matched InGaAs–InAlAs core–shell nanowires with improved 
luminescence and photoresponse properties." Nano letters 15, no. 5 (2015): 3533-3540.

[31] I. A. Shojaei, S. Linser, G. Jnawali, N. Wickramasuriya, H. E. Jackson, L. M. Smith, F. Kargar, A. A. 
Balandin, X. Yuan, P. Caroff, and H. H. Tan. "Strong hot carrier effects in single nanowire heterostructures." 
Nano letters 19, no. 8 (2019): 5062-5069.

[32] J. Treu, M. Speckbacher, K. Saller, S. Morkötter, M. Döblinger, X. Xu, H. Riedl, G. Abstreiter, J. J. Finley, 
and G. Koblmüller. "Widely tunable alloy composition and crystal structure in catalyst-free InGaAs
nanowire arrays grown by selective area molecular beam epitaxy." Applied Physics Letters 108, no. 5 
(2016).

[33] G. Lasher, and F. Stern. "Spontaneous and stimulated recombination radiation in semiconductors." 
Physical Review 133, no. 2A (1964): A553.

[34] P. Wurfel. "The chemical potential of radiation." Journal of Physics C: Solid State Physics 15, no. 18 
(1982): 3967.

[35] V. Babentsov, J. Riegler, J. Schneider, M. Fiederle, and T. Nann. "Excitation dependence of steady-
state photoluminescence in CdSe nanocrystal films." The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 109, no. 32 
(2005): 15349-15354.

[36] J. Lee, E. S. Koteles, and M. O. Vassell. "Luminescence linewidths of excitons in GaAs quantum wells 
below 150 K." Physical Review B 33, no. 8 (1986): 5512.

[37] D. Ruhstorfer, M. Döblinger, H. Riedl, J. J. Finley, and G. Koblmüller. "Role of twin defects on growth 
dynamics and size distribution of undoped and Si-doped GaAs nanowires by selective area epitaxy." 
Journal of Applied Physics 132, no. 20 (2022).

[38] M. Yao, C. Sheng, M. Ge, C-Y. Chi, S. Cong, A. Nakano, P. D. Dapkus, and C. Zhou. "Facile five-step 
heteroepitaxial growth of GaAs nanowires on silicon substrates and the twin formation mechanism." ACS 
nano 10, no. 2 (2016): 2424-2435.


14

[39] M. K. Saker, M. S. Skolnick, P. A. Claxton, J. S. Roberts, and M. J. Kane. "The effects of free carriers on 
the photoluminescence and photoluminescence excitation spectra of InGaAs-InP quantum wells." 
Semiconductor science and technology 3, no. 7 (1988): 691.

[40] S. Gupta, P. K. Bhattacharya, J. Pamulapati, and G. Mourou. "Optical properties of high‐quality 
InGaAs/InAlAs multiple quantum wells." Journal of applied physics 69, no. 5 (1991): 3219-3225.

[41] W. Chen, L. Yu, S. Misra, Z. Fan, P. Pareige, G. Patriarche, S. Bouchoule, and P. R. I. Cabarrocas. 
"Incorporation and redistribution of impurities into silicon nanowires during metal-particle-assisted 
growth." Nature communications 5, no. 1 (2014): 4134.

[42] E. R. Hemesath, D. K. Schreiber, E. B. Gulsoy, C. F. Kisielowski, A. K. Petford-Long, P. W. Voorhees, and 
L. J. Lauhon. "Catalyst incorporation at defects during nanowire growth." Nano letters 12, no. 1 (2012): 
167-171.

[43] J. Feldmann, G. Peter, E. O. Göbel, P. Dawson, K. Moore, C. Foxon, and R. J. Elliott. "Linewidth 
dependence of radiative exciton lifetimes in quantum wells." Physical review letters 59, no. 20 (1987): 
2337.

[44] O. Brandt, C. Pfüller, C. Chèze, L. Geelhaar, and H. Riechert. "Sub-meV linewidth of excitonic 
luminescence in single GaN nanowires: Direct evidence for surface excitons." Physical review b 81, no. 4 
(2010): 045302.

[45] H. Esmaielpour, V. R. Whiteside, L. C. Hirst, J. G. Tischler, C. T. Ellis, M. P. Lumb, D. V. Forbes, R. J. 
Walters, and I. R. Sellers. "Effect of occupation of the excited states and phonon broadening on the 
determination of the hot carrier temperature from continuous wave photoluminescence in InGaAsP 
quantum well absorbers." Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications 25, no. 9 (2017): 782-790.

[46] L. Krückemeier, B. Krogmeier, Z. Liu, U. Rau, and T. Kirchartz. "Understanding transient 
photoluminescence in halide perovskite layer stacks and solar cells." Advanced Energy Materials 11, no. 
19 (2021): 2003489.

[47] M. T. Trinh, X. Wu, D. Niesner, X. Y. Zhu. "Many-body interactions in photo-excited lead iodide 
perovskite." Journal of Materials Chemistry A 3, no. 17 (2015): 9285-9290.

[48] A. W. Cohn, A. M. Schimpf, C. E. Gunthardt, and D. R. Gamelin. "Size-dependent trap-assisted auger 
recombination in semiconductor nanocrystals." Nano letters 13, no. 4 (2013): 1810-1815.

[49] X. Liu, Q. Zhang, G. Xing, Q. Xiong, and T. C. Sum. "Size-dependent exciton recombination dynamics 
in single CdS nanowires beyond the quantum confinement regime." The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 
117, no. 20 (2013): 10716-10722.

[50] C. Zhou, T. Zhang, C. Zhang, X. Liu, J. Wang, J. Lin, and X. Chen. "Unveiling Charge Carrier 
Recombination, Extraction, and Hot‐Carrier Dynamics in Indium Incorporated Highly Efficient and Stable 
Perovskite Solar Cells." Advanced Science 9, no. 11 (2022): 2103491.


15

[51] J. Christen, and D. Bimberg. "Recombination dynamics of carriers in GaAs-GaAlAs quantum well 
structures." Surface Science 174, no. 1-3 (1986): 261-271.

[52] D. Ren, Z. Rong, S. Somasundaram, K. M. Azizur-Rahman, B. Liang, and D. L. Huffaker. "A three-
dimensional insight into correlation between carrier lifetime and surface recombination velocity for 
nanowires." Nanotechnology 29, no. 50 (2018): 504003.

[53] C-C. Chang, C-Y. Chi, M. Yao, N. Huang, C-C. Chen, J. Theiss, A W. Bushmaker, S. LaLumondiere, T. W. 
Yeh, M. L. Povinelli, and C. Zhou. "Electrical and optical characterization of surface passivation in GaAs 
nanowires." Nano letters 12, no. 9 (2012): 4484-4489.

[54] Z. Azimi, A. Gopakumar, L. Li, F. Kremer, M. Lockrey, A. A. Wibowo, H. T. Nguyen, H. H. Tan, C. Jagadish, 
and J. Wong‐Leung. "Effective Passivation of InGaAs Nanowires for Telecommunication Wavelength 
Optoelectronics." Advanced Optical Materials 10, no. 18 (2022): 2200739.

[55] H. J. Joyce, J. Wong-Leung, C-K. Yong, C. J. Docherty, S. Paiman, Q. Gao, H. H. Tan, C. Jagadish, J. Lloyd-
Hughes, L. M. Herz, and M. B. Johnston. "Ultralow surface recombination velocity in InP nanowires probed 
by terahertz spectroscopy." Nano letters 12, no. 10 (2012): 5325-5330.


