Single electron self-coherence and its wave/particle duality in the electron 

microscope

C. Kisielowski1, P. Specht2, J.R. Jinschek3,4, S. Helveg4

1 The Molecular Foundry, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, One Cyclotron Rd., Berkeley, CA 

94720, USA

2 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 

94720, USA

3 National Centre for Nano Fabrication and Characterization (DTU Nanolab), Technical University of 

Denmark, 2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark

4 Center for Visualizing Catalytic Processes (VISION), Department of Physics, Technical University of 

Denmark, 2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark

* Correspondence: cfkisielowski@sbcglobal.net

Abstract 

Intensities in high-resolution phase-contrast images from electron microscopes build up 

discretely in time by detecting single electrons. A wave description of pulse-like coherent-

inelastic interaction of an electron with matter implies a time-dependent coexistence of coherent 

partial waves. Their superposition forms a wave package by phase decoherence of 0.5 - 1 radian 

with Heisenbergs energy uncertainty ΔEH = ħ/2 Δt-1 matching the energy loss ΔE of a coherent-

inelastic interaction and setting the interaction time Δt. In these circumstances, the product of 

Planck’s constant and the speed of light hc is given by the product of the expression for temporal 

coherence λ2/Δλ and the energy loss ΔE. Experimentally, the self-coherence length was 

measured by detecting the energy dependent localization of scattered, plane matter waves in 

surface proximity exploiting the Goos-Hänchen shift. Chromatic-aberration Cc-corrected 

electron microscopy on boron nitride (BN) proves that the coherent crystal illumination and 

phase contrast are lost if the self-coherence length shrinks below the size of the crystal unit cell 

at ΔE > 200 eV. In perspective, the interaction time of any matter wave compares with the 

lifetime of a virtual particle of any elemental interaction, suggesting the present concept of 

coherent-inelastic interactions of matter waves might be generalizable.


Keywords: Coherence, Wave / particle duality, Inelastic scattering, Heisenbergs Uncertainty 

Principle, Time-dependent Schrödinger equation

Introduction

The year 2024 marks the 100th anniversary of L. de Broglie’s dissertation (de Broglie, 1924) 

introducing the duality of particles and matter waves by the wavelength λ = h / mv where 

h is Planck’s constant, m is the particle mass and v its velocity. Successively, this discovery 

stimulated the first manufacturing of an electron microscope (Ruska & Knoll, 1931). Ever since, 

instrument performance steadily improved to reach nowadays a spatial resolution beyond half the 

diameter of a hydrogen atom (Kisielowski et al., 2008) in high resolution transmission electron 

microscopy (HRTEM). 

For decades, Dirk Van Dyck helped guiding the development and applications of the tool by 

establishing suitable theories to understand the contrast formation in the recorded HRTEM 

images (Van Dyck 1985, 2022). His view is consistent with the Copenhagen Convention of 

Quantum Mechanics (Bohr, 1958; Van Dyck et al., 2000) and formed the groundwork for rich 

progress. 

Specifically, work at the National Center for Electron Microscopy (NCEM) in Berkeley, USA, 

benefitted from procedures to reconstruct electron exit wave functions (Coene et al. 1992, 

Kisielowski et al. 2001), the development of a S-state model for electron channeling (Geunes & 

Van Dyck, 2002), and the description of electron scattering as being mainly inelastic (Van Dyck 

et al. 2015). This contributed to a further development of discrete tomography (Jinschek et al., 

2008) and the ‘big bang’ theory (Van Dyck et al., 2012) providing a fully quantitative description 

of atomic structures in 3D including electron beam-induced atom dynamics (Chen et al., 2016, 

2021). 

Today there are many opportunities for advancements, particularly in the context of quantum 

electron microscopy (Kruit et al., 2016) or electron microscopy with ultra-fast time resolution 

(Flannigan & Zewail, 2012; Feist et al., 2015, Kisielowski et al., 2019). Surprisingly, they are 

intertwined with Young’s double slit experiment (Young, 1802), which laid the foundation for 


understanding the wave/particle duality of electrons and is often seen as a window into quantum 

physics. Traditionally, the observed intensity distribution of a double slit is explained by 

applying Huygens Principle (1690) to infinite, optical wave functions. It considers every point of 

a scattered wavefront to be the source of a secondary spherical wave and their envelop function 

describes the new wavefront (eg. Alonso M & Finn ER, 1983). The principle is also a basic 

building block for the successful deployment of multi-slice calculations to solve Schrödinger’s 

static equation for matter waves (Cowley & Moody, 1957) because crystalline materials can be 

modeled by periodic arrays of empty channels and filled atom columns (Geunes & Van Dyck, 

2002). Such calculations are widely applied to describe the coherent-elastic scattering of matter 

waves (e.g. Kilaas, 2024). However, the electron detection process is particle-like because an 

interference pattern is formed by detecting discrete electron scattering events over time (e.g. 

Tonomura et al., 1989) and it includes unsolved reservations about the concept of a wave 

function collapse. In particular, the validity of this wave/particle duality remains debated because 

the discrete nature of the intensity build-up from a double slit also occurs if photons are detected 

instead of electrons (Rueckner & Titcomb, 1996) and the intensity distribution can be described 

only by wave functions (Hobson, 2013) or only by particles (Parra, 2018) without the need for 

wave/particle duality.

Fortunately, technologies have evolved to the point where electron emissions can be manipulated 

one electron at a time and registered one by one to study single electron scattering events in 

electron microscopes with spherical and chromatic aberration correction (Haider et al., 2010). 

Hence, the build-up of image intensity by wave interferences in HRTEM images or diffraction 

patterns can be routinely studied in ultra-low dose rate conditions reaching 0.01 eÅ-2s-1 

(Kisielowski et al. 2021). Statistically, only one electron is present in the microscope column 

during such experiments. Therefore, it is now feasible to investigate any discrete sequence of 

electron scattering events while striving to describe the resulting interference pattern in a wave 

description, as schematized in Figure 1. It distinctly complements the current state-of-the-art 

(Van Dyck et al., 2000) by considering, both, electron self-interferences and electron ensemble-

interferences while it embraces a concept of decoherence to form wave packages with the width 

ls from infinite incident plane waves during time-dependent, coherent-inelastic interactions with 

the sample instead of invoking a wave function collapse at the detector. 


Here, we discuss how the self-coherence length ls can be accessed experimentally and that it 

shrinks dramatically with increasing energy loss ΔE (Table I) while wavelength changes Δλ are 

negligible. For Coulomb scattering, numerical ls values are large enough to coherently illuminate 

micro-fabricated double slits (Tavabi et al., 2017) or crystal structures to investigate the 

dependence of self-interferences on electron energy losses in energy-filtered EF-HRTEM 

experiments. Using the wave model of Figure 1 for any energy exchange ΔE = ħ/2 Δt-1 in the 

Heisenberg limit during coherent-inelastic scattering processes, we derive the equation:

hc = (λ2/Δλ) ΔE
(1)

where h is Planck’s constant and c is the speed of light. Equation (1) reveals that the universal 

constant hc is given by the product of a temporal coherence length λ2/Δλ and the energy 

exchange ΔE of an inelastic interaction in the Heisenberg limit. In this paper we show how the 

validity of this relationship can be tested using advanced phase contrast, chromatic-aberration 

Cc-corrected electron microscopy.

Background

Heisenberg’s Uncertainty Principle is the central element in our considerations. The two forms

Δx Δp ≥ ħ/2
(2)

ΔEHΔt ≥ ħ/2
(3)

are commonly applied where ħ=h/2π is the reduced Planck constant, Δt and ΔEH are 

Heisenberg’s time and energy uncertainties. Δx and Δp the corresponding position and 

momentum uncertainties, respectively. In electron optics, it is established practice to attribute the 

uncertainties of energy and position of the electron ensemble to the finite geometrical size Δxgun 

and the energy spread ΔEgun of the electron gun. Their influence on image formation is modeled 

by integrating two damping functions A1 and A2 (aperture functions) to the contrast transfer 

function (CTF) of the microscopes, which describes the impact of spatial and temporal ensemble 

decoherence on resolution: 

CTF(g) = sin( χ(g)) *A1* A2
(4)

with χ(g) = 1/2π (2f λ2g3+ Csλ3g4 + O(λ)…) 
(5)

g are spatial frequency vectors, Cs is the spherical aberration coefficient, f is the defocus and 

O(λ) are higher order contributions. Thus, it is established knowledge that the coherence of the 


entire electron ensemble used for imaging (ensemble-coherence) limits the spatial resolution of 

HRTEM and considerable efforts are made to improve on the coherence of electron optics 

(Hawkes PW, 2023).

However, there is no exclusivity to set ΔEH = ΔEgun in equation (3) because electron optical 

considerations for electron ensembles are not the only source of uncertainty. For example, in 

high energy physics interactions are explained in particle descriptions by exchanging a “virtual 

particle” of energy uncertainty ΔE and lifetime Δt = ħ/2 ΔE-1 in the Heisenberg limit (e.g. 

Workman et al., 2022). Here, Figure 1 introduces a wave description for coherent-inelastic 

scattering by adapting any energy loss ΔE to the Heisenberg uncertainty ΔEH = ΔE = E0-E1 and 

postulating the coexistence of coherent partial waves of wavelength spread Δλ = λ0(E0) - λ1(E1) 

during the brief interaction time Δt. A restoration of the total electron wave function requires the 

superposition of n scattered partial wave functions (e.g. n=2 in Figure 1), which creates a wave 

package in real space (or a pulse in the time domain) because of the existing energy differences 

ΔE that cause related wavelength differences Δλ. Describing the loss of the phase relation 

among the partial waves by a decoherence phase 𝜑 = 0.5  radian gives:

0.5 = (2π/λ0 - 2π/(λ0+Δλ)) ls
(5)

In Figure 2, the calculated ls describes the energy dependent width of the created wave packages 

for 𝜑 = 0.5 radian (black line in figure 2), which is linked to the Heisenberg equation (3) by 

dividing ls with the speed of light c to obtain the self-coherence time ts = ls/c (red line in Figure 2, 

Kisielowski et al., 2021). The self-coherence time ts can be interpreted as the interaction time Δt. 

Substituting ls = ħc / 2ΔE in equation (5) yields hc ≃ (λ2/Δλ) ΔE omitting the term (1+Δλ/λ). If it 

attributed to the phase decoherence 𝜑 = 𝜑(λ),  𝜑(λ) varies between 0.5 and 1 radian and the 

equality in equation (1) is obtained, which defines self-coherence. 

Experimentally, values for the self-coherence length ls (blue squares in Figure 2) were determined 

by EF-HRTEM measurements with the chromatic-aberration Cc-corrected TEAM I microscope 

detecting the exponential decay of an evanescent field at an abrupt sample/vacuum interface 

(Kisielowski et al. 2023). The measured decay lengths show the close agreement of calculated 

and measured self-coherence length in Figure 2. It is critical for the experiments that a parallel 

electron beam of low convergence angle (α = 0.09 mrad) is used because this allows maintaining 

a grazing incident angle in conditions of total reflection, where the coherently illuminated sample 


area determines the extension of the measured transversal evanescent field caused by the Goos-

Hänchen shift (Carter & Hora, 1971, Kisielowski et al. 2023). In addition the presence of a Cc-

corrector is needed to maintain a high spatial resolution in EF-HRTEM because it eliminates a 

focus dependence from the energy loss region ΔE < 600 eV (Haider et al., 2010). As previously 

reported (Kisielowski et al., 2023), slight differences between measurement and calculation in 

Figure 2 can be explained by the lower speed of the accelerated electrons at 300 kV of v = 0.77 c 

and a minor non-linearity of the average refraction index n=1.4 for GaN in the measured energy 

range. As for previously published literature data, it is satisfactory that our measurements exactly 

reproduce the available delocalization measurement by electron holography at 300 kV (Röder & 

Lichte, 2011) and systematically exceed the preceding delocalization measurements by scanning 

transmission electron microscopy (STEM) (Rez et al., 2017; Egerton 2017) because they were 

acquired by lower electron acceleration voltages (60 kV - 100 kV) with larger beam convergence 

angles around 20 mrad (gray symbols in Figure 2). A reduction of the acceleration voltage to 80 

kV reduces the relativistic electron velocity to v = 0.50 c and the measured ls values by a factor 

v(80 kV)/v(300 kV) = 0.65, which is neglected in this work because it does not alter our 

conclusions.

Measurements and results

Here, we present the verification that ls determines the ability to form the interference pattern of 

HRTEM images. Our experiments used the Cc-corrected TEAM I microscope (Dahmen et al., 

2009). Its electron optical parameters are given by Tiemeyer et al. and they provide a parallel 

electron beam of only 0.09 mrad beam convergence in a Nelsonian illumination scheme 

(Tiemeyer et al., 2012). The illumination takes advantage of the low energy spread ΔEgun = 0.1 

eV of a monochromator and irradiates a field of view of only 105 nm2. Such electron optical 

parameters provide an achievable resolution of better than 0.5 Å for electron ensembles 

(Kisielowski et al., 2008).

We acquired focus series of 10 - 30 images in EF-HRTEM mode at 80 keV from free-standing 

hexagonal boron nitride (BN) along the c-axis (space group #186, a = 0.25 nm, c = 0.67 nm) 

Specific energy losses ΔE were selected from the energy loss range 0 eV ≤ ΔE  ≤ 410 eV for 

recording the EF-HRTEM image series.  To recover exit wave functions, equidistant defocus 


steps fs = - 2.18 + 0.04 nm generated the required phase relation between successive images of a 

recorded image series (equation 5) to apply the Gershberg & Saxton (1972) algorithm. All 

computation and analysis were performed by the Tempas software package (Kilaas, 2024). 

The BN sample itself was a few monolayers thick < 7 nm, which ensures that multiple scattering 

is absent. Moreover, the choice of the specific energy losses ΔE marked by triangles in Figure 2 

allows studying how phase contrast is affected when fine-tuning the electron self-coherence 

length ls to approach values close to the lattice parameter a = 0.25 nm of the BN crystal.

Figure 3 shows single EF-HRTEM images from the focus series and their Fourier Transform 

acquired with the zero-loss beam (a), at the low loss region (b), at the plasmon peak (c), at the 

boron K-edge (d), and the nitrogen K-edge (e), respectively. In case of imaging with the zero-

loss beam (Figure 3a), the presence of unscattered electrons creates a bright field image while all 

other images (Figures 3b-e) are dark field images. A zero-loss beam width of 0.7 eV sets a 

resolution of ~ 1.2 Å at 80 kV for electron ensembles by equations (4) and (5) while the self-

coherence lengths would vary between infinity and 100 nm (Figure 2). Hence, under such 

conditions ensemble-coherence and self-coherence coexist (degradation) with a resolution 

defined by an infinite plane wave. In contrast, EF-HRTEM at ΔE > 0 eV lifts this degeneracy.

When visually inspecting the images in Figures 3a to 3c, it is, however, challenging to recognize 

that different energy losses were used for image acquisition: all images exhibit the distinctive 

features of phase contrast imaging including the formation of Fresnel fringes or fringes from the 

strain fields around vacancies. The presence of these features in the loss region is known as an 

“extension of phase contrast into the loss region” (Kabius et al., 2009; Forbes et al., 2014). They 

become less pronounced in images from the boron K-edge at ΔE = 200 eV and cannot be 

recognized in the image taken from the nitrogen K-edge at ΔE = 410 eV where a long exposure 

time (10 s) is used while maintaining a high spatial resolution at a finite sample drift. The fading 

contrast in images from the core loss region already suggests that the self-coherence length drops 

below the size of the BN lattice parameter (Figure 2) where the coherent illumination of the 

crystal unit cell fails.

Simulating the image contrast in the images recorded at the nitrogen K-edge (N-core loss: ΔE = 

410±12 eV, Figure 3e) is key to prove that coherence is lost and not impacted by noise 

limitations. The argument exploits the difference between linear (0, gi) interferences of scattering 


vectors from an entire crystal unit cell and the detection of non-linear (gi, gj) cross transfer 

interferences of densely spaced lattice planes that have a shorter distance than the length of a unit 

cell vector (Bals et al., 2005). Relevant multi-slice simulations of thickness-defocus maps - still 

assuming coherent-elastic image formation - are shown in Figure 4. The linear interferences (0, 

gi) dominate the varying intensity pattern of the simulated HRTEM images in Figure 4a that are 

used for exit wave reconstructions where diffraction spots are sampled to the resolution limit 

(Figure 4a’). However, to simulate the non-linear images of Figure 4b and compare with the 

experimental EF-HRTEM image of Figure 3e we need to insert an opaque aperture of 0.7 Å-1 

radius that matches the self-coherence length ls-1= 0.7 Å-1 at the energy loss of ΔE = 410 eV. The 

aperture excludes low spatial frequencies from diffraction (Figure 4b’) and creates the 

characteristic image pattern of non-linear (gi, gj) interferences. The match of experiment and 

simulation in Figure 4c shows indeed that the self-coherence length ls acts as an aperture for low 

spatial frequencies even though they are detected in the Fourier transform of Figure 4c’. Hence, 

ensemble-coherence sets the resolution at high spatial frequencies while self-coherence 

modulates the low frequency limit at high energy losses. 

In general, the match of experiment with simulation in Figure 4c implies the existence of a 

decoherence phase of 0.5 - 1 rad. Certainly, non-linear imaging occurs in any material (Bals et 

al., 2005). For example, multi-slice simulation of non-linear interferences explain the published 

EF-HRTEM images of core losses from strontium titanate (SrTiO3) more convincingly than the 

introduction of a double channeling transition potential as previously published (Forbes et al., 

2014). 

Further support for our argument that the phase contrast depends on the self-coherence length is 

obtained by reconstructing the phase of the electron exit wave function from EF-HRTEM focal 

series that were recorded at the various energy losses (Figure 5). Figures 5a through 5d depict the 

reconstructed phase images of BN showing the atomic structure of BN with a dumbbell 

separation of 0.145 nm. This image resolution is maintained up to at least ΔE = 27 eV of energy 

loss but noise becomes relevant for a determination of resolution in images recorded at ΔE = 200 

eV (boron K-edge). Exit wave reconstructions from images recorded at ΔE = 410 eV are not yet 

possible because at ΔE > 200 eV the value of the self-coherence length ls shrinks below the BN 

lattice parameter, therefore only non-linear (gi, gj) interferences are present and current 


reconstruction algorithms required the presence of linear interferences (0, gi). An extraction of 

line profiles (Figure 5d) reveals a monotonic decrease of the phase contrast difference ΔΦ (max 

to min) with increasing energy loss that obeys a power law including a quadratic decay with 

inverse energy losses (Figure 5e). Such behavior is to be expected if the square of the self-

coherence length ls2 defines the coherently illuminated sample area.

The result also supports our empirical finding that the use of a ~ 105 nm2 small area for sample 

irradiation in the Nelsonian illumination scheme with ΔEgun = 0.1 eV produces best results for 

phase contrast imaging (Kisielowski et.al, 2021). In this case, the square of the self-coherence 

length from Figure 2 is at least ls2 = 6x105 nm2 in size, which ensures that in our experiments 

with the TEAM I microscope the entire irradiated sample area is self-coherently illuminated.

Relevance 

Surely, material sciences benefit from a better understanding of wave function localization in 

pulse-like energy exchanges during interactions with samples. For example, a structured 

temporal illumination with picosecond time resolution impacts beam-sample interactions in 

electron microscopy (Kisielowski et al., 2019) and can explain the retardation of beam-induced 

damage by time-temperature transformations. Moreover, self-coherence enables a critical dose 

estimate for the onset of beam-induced damage treating radiation soft and hard matter in exactly 

the same manner (Kisielowski et al., 2021).

Here, however, we focus on the relevance of our measurements to quantum mechanical aspects. 

Specifically, we address the wave/particle duality of matter waves, using electron waves as our 

model system. Principally, both particle and wave descriptions provide excellent explanations for 

physical processes in nature, while contradicting conclusions only arise when both pictures are 

mixed. Undoubtedly, the great success of field theories rests on the use of wave descriptions 

(Hobson, 2013) but there remain many unanswered questions. Hence, we seek a better 

understanding of the equivalence of wave and particle descriptions and what phenomena - if any 

- may only be explained by one of them. 

In standard applications of electron microscopy, it often suffices to only consider the ensemble 

coherence of electron optics: For example, in multi-slice calculation an electron wave of 2 pm 

wavelength oscillates 10 000 times before exciting a 20 nm thick crystal and a decoherence 


phase of 𝜑 = 0.5 rad produces an equivalent wave package width of 20 nm at an energy loss of 5 

eV (Figures 1, 2). Thus, inelastic scattering may be ignored for scattering events with ΔE < 5 eV 

in HRTEM because wave packages cannot be distinguished from infinite wave functions. In fact, 

a scattered wave package of energy loss < 10-7 eV would extend over a distance of about 1 meter 

and ensure entanglement of sample and detector in the same way as would be the case with 

coherent-elastic scattering (ΔE = 0). Thus, it is established praxis to choose a coherent-elastic 

description of electron scattering in combination with a time-independent Schrödinger equation. 

The restricted validity of this reasonable approximation, however, becomes obvious in 

experiments that explore the time domain (Kisielowski et al., 2021, 2023) and if the degeneration 

of ensemble-coherence and self-coherence from the zero-beam region is lifted by recording in 

the energy loss region, as shown in this paper.

Our approach (Figure 1) addresses pulse-like Coulomb interactions in a wave picture. In 

literature, however, the Coulomb force is only one of the four fundamental forces. In fact, forces 

and interactions are commonly described in particle pictures, often in combination with Feynman 

diagrams where the exchange of a virtual particle mediates the interaction. They are bosons for 

weak interactions, gluons for strong interactions, virtual photons for coulomb interactions, and 

gravitons for gravitational interactions (Workman et al., 2022). A comparison with our results 

mandates expanding the scale of Figure 2 substantially. The scale expansion in Figure 6 is truly 

bold but intriguingly because the Heisenberg relation is a mathematical necessity that does not 

depend on the specific nature of any interaction and the decoherence phases 𝜑 of 0.5 - 1 radian is 

set by the universal constant hc = 1.24 10-6 eVm, which is valid for any coherent-inelastic 

interaction.

The apparent validity of equation (1) is revealed by comparison with existing literature (in Fig 

6): By default, the Heisenberg limit is used for the determination of virtual particle lifetimes. For 

example, experimental data exist for the energy (80.4 GeV) and the energy uncertainty (2.1 GeV) 

of the W-boson (Workman et al., 2022) yielding ΔE/E ~ 3%. The Heisenberg limit links its 

energy uncertainty to its accepted lifetime of 10-25 s (Figure 6a). Data about gluons are hardly 

available but Wang & Boyanovsky (2001) reported the lifetime of a quark-gluon plasma of ~ 3 

10-23 s, which gives an energy uncertainty of 12.5 MeV that is 6% of the provided total energy 

value of 200 MeV (Figure 6a). An independent measurement of energy uncertainty and lifetime 


of a virtual photon was successful by its detection at 0.11 eV of energy, which allows estimating 

a ΔE/E ~ 5% energy uncertainty of 5 meV (de Aguiar Júnior et al., 2020) to give a lifetime of 50 

fs. The time resolution of their instrument was limited to Δt > 400 fs. Nonetheless, it closely 

confirms the lifetime estimate of a virtual photon by the Heisenberg limit (Figure 6a). 

Remarkably, ultrafast measurements open up the possibility of independently measure energy 

uncertainty and lifetime, even in conditions that approach or even exceed the Heisenberg limit 

(Feist et al., 2015). To include gravitational interactions, the considered scale needs further 

expansion (as shown in Figure 6b) because the ratio of the coupling constants between e.g. 

gravitational and strong interactions is tiny (10-39). Currently, the graviton is a theoretical 

construct of energy that is estimated to be smaller than 6 10-32 eV (Olive et al., 2014) with an 

even smaller energy uncertainty. Therefore, when applying the Heisenberg limit, a lifetime of ≈ 

1017 s can be expected.

Figure 6 highlights the equivalence of particle lifetime and the interaction time, which is 

interpreted in a wave picture as the duration of an interaction in the Heisenberg limit. It is 

astounding how many quantum-mechanical aspects are touched upon by establishing this 

equivalence: First, the gradual localization of wave functions with energy loss eliminates 

discussing their abrupt collapse. Both, the lifetime of virtual particles and the self-coherence of 

partial waves vary by more than 40 orders of magnitude because the Heisenberg limit does not 

depend on the nature of inelastic interactions. However, decoherence only exists in a wave 

picture and provides the expression for the temporal self-coherence length ls of equation (1). This 

remarkable length scale characterizes the range of possible interferences and entanglements and 

can be compared to distinctly different objects (Figure 6a): Interferences driven by weak 

interactions occur within the size of a proton; the strong interaction includes interferences of the 

size of atom nuclei; and the Coulomb interaction applies to the size of atoms and above, which is 

why it can be investigated by electron microscopy. Therefore, the localization of interferences by 

coherent-inelastic scattering is consistent with the established range of particle interactions and 

the small width of the wave packages at high energy loss allows them to be perceived as particles 

with wave/particle duality by humans. Understandably, the gravitational interaction is perceived 

to be fundamentally different because the self-coherence length vastly exceeds human 

dimensions in space and time (Figure 6b). Specifically, the interaction time in the Heisenberg 

limit is no longer a “brief” moment in time but reaches the age of the universe. Despite its tiny 


strength if compared to the other fundamental interactions, it must still produce self-coherences 

in a wave picture. They entangle the universe in space and time by forming wave packages that 

propagate at the speed of light because the Heisenberg relation remains valid. Gravitational 

waves have already been detected that originated somewhere in the universe (Weiss, 2018). 

Summary and Conclusion

In addition to being an indispensable tool in material sciences, electron microscopy is uniquely 

suited to study fundamental quantum mechanical aspects including a pulse-like description of 

energy exchange in the Heisenberg limit ΔE = ħ/2 Δt-1 that forms wave packages by decoherence 

and yield equation (1). Self-coherence is the connection between the time-dependent 

Schrödingers equation (Kisielowski et al. 2023) and Heisenberg’s energy uncertainty. The time 

uncertainty Δt can be interpreted as an interaction time in a wave picture or a lifetime in a 

particle picture. This equivalence rationalizes the wave/particle duality. The width of wave 

packages is described by a self-coherence length ls that can vary by over 40 orders of magnitude. 

For Coulomb interactions, ls explains the vanishing phase contrast from EF-HRTEM images 

when the energy loss exceeds values of ΔE > 200 eV. A procedure to experimentally determine 

the self-coherence length was established earlier by measuring the energy dependent localization 

of scattered matter waves in surface proximity. Therefore, electron microscopy can be used as a 

general tool to measure the self-coherence length in real space images. 

Importantly, our interpretation is consistent with the established praxis that the formation of 

intensities in high-resolution images can be approximated by multi-simulations assuming 

coherent-elastic scattering of electron ensembles because in the case of zero-loss images (ΔE = 0 

eV) ensemble coherence and self-coherence coexist. 

Technologically, the integration of a monochromator, chromatic aberration-corrector, and a direct 

electron detector into one instrument, provided by the TEAM project (Dahmen et al. 2009), made 

these measurements possible. Further emerging technologies, e.g. ultrafast electron microscopy, 

open opportunities to independently measure uncertainties in energy and in time. Concerning 

theoretical considerations, multi-slice calculations do not yet address decoherence or self 

coherence despite operating on wave functions. 

Acknowledgements


The authors are thankful for many years of stimulating discussions and scientific explorations 

with Dirk van Dyck and congratulate him for his extraordinary career in the field of electron 

microscopy. Further, the authors acknowledges stimulating discussions with Dirk Van Dyck and 

Hannes Lichte in preparation of this paper. The Center for Visualizing Catalytic Processes is 

sponsored by the Danish National Research Foundation (DNRF146). Electron microscopy was 

funded by the Molecular Foundry, which is supported by the Office of Science, the Office of 

Basic Energy Sciences, the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-

AC02-05CH11231. 

 

References

Alonso M & Finn ER (1983). Fundamental University Physics II, 2. Edition, Addison Wesley 

Publishing Co. p. 563 ff. 

Bals S, Kilaas R & Kisielowski C (2005). Nonlinear imaging using annular dark field TEM. 

Ultramicroscopy 104, 281-289. 

Bohr N (1958). Atomic Physics and Human Knowledge. Wiley: New York, USA

Carter JL & Hora H (1971). Total reflection of matter waves: The Goos-Haenchen effect for 

grazing incidence. J. Optical Society of America 61, 1640-1645. 

Chen FR, Van Dyck D & Kisielowski C (2016). 3D reconstruction of nanocrystalline particles 

from a single projection. Nature communications 7, 10603.

Chen FR, Van Dyck D, Kisielowski C, Hansen LP, Barton B & Helveg S (2021). Probing 

atom dynamics of excited Co-Mo-S nanocrystals in 3D, Nature communications 12, 5007.

Coene W, Janssen G, de Beeck OM &Van Dyck D(1992). Phase retrieval through focus 

variation for ultra-resolution in field-emission transmission electron microscopy. PRL 69, 3743.

Cowley JM & Moody FM (1957). The scattering of electrons by atoms and crystals. I. A new 

theoretical approach, Acta Cryst.10, 609.

Dahmen U, Erni R,  Radmilovic V,  Kisielowski C, Rossell MD & Denes P (2009). 

Background, status and future of the Transmission Electron Aberration-corrected Microscope 

project. Phil. Trans. Royal Soc. A 367,  3795-3808.


de Aguiar Júnior FS,  Santos MF, Monken CH & Jorio A (2020). Lifetime and polarization 

for real and virtual correlated Stokes-anti-Stokes Raman scattering in diamond. Phys. Rev. 

Research 2, 013084.

de Broglie L (1924). Researches on the Quantum Theory. Ph.D. Thesis, Paris

Feist A, Echternkamp KE, Schauss J, Yalunin SV, Schaefer S & Ropers C (2015). Quantum 

coherent optical phase modulation in an ultrafast transmission electron microscope. Nature 512, 

200.

Forbes BD, Houben L,  Mayer J, Dunin-Borkowski & Allen LJ (2014). Elemental mapping 

in achromatic atomic-resolution energy-filtered transmission electron microscopy. 

Ultramicroscopy 147, 98–105.

Egerton RF (2017). Scattering delocalization and radiation damage in STEM-EELS. 

Ultramicroscopy 180, 115-124 

Flannigan DJ & Zewail AH (2012). 4D electron microscopy: Principles and applications. Acc. 

Chem. Res. 45, 1828–1839. 

Gerchberg RW & Saxton WO (1972). A Practical Algorithm for the Determination of Phase 

from Image and Diffraction Plane Descriptions. Optik 35, 237-246.

Geuens P & Van Dyck D (2002). The S-state model: a work horse for HRTEM. 

Ultramicroscopy 93, 179-198 (2002)

Haider M, Hartel P, Müller H, Uhlemann S & Zach J (2010). Information transfer in a TEM 

corrected for spherical and chromatic aberration. Microsc. Microanal. 16, 393–408.  

Hawkes PW (2023). Chapter Three - Coherence in electron optics. Advances in imaging and 

electron physics 228, 57-148 

Hobson A (2013). There are no particles, there are only fields. Am. J. Physics 81, 211. 

Huygens C (1690). Tratě de la Lumiere. Pierre Vander Aa, Ghent University. 

Jinschek JR, Batenburg KJ, Calderon HA, Kilaas R, Radmilovic V & Kisielowski C (2008). 

3-D reconstruction of the atomic positions in a simulated gold nanocrystal based on discrete 

tomography: Prospects of atomic resolution electron tomography. Ultramicroscopy 108, 

589-604C. 

Kabius B, Hartel P, Haider M, Müller H, Uhlemann S, Loebau U, Zach & Rose H (2009). 

First application of Cc-corrected imaging for high-resolution and energy-filtered TEM. J. 

Electron Microsc 58, 147–155. 


Kilaas R (2024). Available at https://www.totalresolution.com. 

Kisielowski C, Hetherington CJD, Wang YC, Kilaas R, O’Keefe MA & Thust A (2001). 

Imaging columns of the light elements carbon, nitrogen and oxygen with sub Angstrom 

resolution. Ultramicroscopy 89, 243-263.

Kisielowski C, Freitag B, Bischoff M, van Lin H. Lazar S, Knippels G, Tiemeijer P, van der 

Stam M, von Harrach S, Stekelenburg M, Haider M, Uhlemann S, Mueller H,  Hartel P, 

Kabius B, Miller D, Petrov I, Olson EA, Donchev T, Kenik EA, Lupini AR, Bentley J, 

Pennycook, SJ, Anderson IM, Minor AM, Schmid AK, Duden T,  Radmilovic V, Ramasse 

QM, Watanabe M, Erni R, Stach EA, Denes P & Dahmen U (2008). Detection of single 

atoms and buried defects in three dimensions by aberration-corrected electron microscope with 

0.5-angstrom information limit. Microscopy and  Microanalysis 14, 469-477.

Kisielowski C, Specht P, Freitag B, Kieft ER, Verhoeven W, van Rens JFM, Mutsaers P, 

Luiten J, Rozeveld S, Kang J, McKenna AJ, Nickias P & Yancey DF (2019). Discovering 

hidden material properties of MgCl2 at atomic resolution with structured temporal electron 

illumination of picosecond time resolution. Adv Func Mater 29, 1807818. 

Kisielowski C, Specht P, Rozeveld SJ, Kang J, Fielitz AJ, D. Barton,  Salazar AC, Oscar D. 

Dubon OD, Van Dyck, D & Yancey DF (2021). Modulating electron beam–sample interactions 

in imaging and diffraction modes by dose fractionation with low dose rates. Microscopy and 

Microanalysis 27, 1420-1430. 

Kisielowski C, Specht P, Helveg S, Chen FR, Freitag B, Jinschek JR & Van Dyck, D (2023). 

Probing the boundary between classical and quantum mechanics by analyzing the energy 

dependence of single-electron scattering events at the nanoscale.  Nanomaterials 13, 971. 

Kruit P,  Hobbs RG, Kim CS, Yang Y, Manfriando VR, Hammer J, Thomas S, Weber P, 

Klopfer B, Kohstall C, Juffmann  T, Kasevich MA, Hommelhoff P & Berggren KK (2016). 

Designs for a quantum electron microscope. Ultramicroscopy 164, 31–45. 

Olive KA et al. (2014). Review of particle physics. Chin. Phys. C. 38, 090001, p.27.

Parra JL (2018). Corpuscular point of view to explain light’s properties. Optics and Photonics 

Journal 8, 135-145.

Rez P, Aoki T,  March K, Gur D,  Krivanek OL, Dellby N, Lovejoy TC, Wolf SG & Cohen 

H (2016). Damage-free vibrational spectroscopy of biological materials in the electron 

microscope. Nat. Commun. 7, 10945. 


Röder F, & Lichte H (2011). Inelastic electron holography - first results with surface plasmons. 

Eur. Phys. J. Apple. Phys. 54, 33504.

Rückner W & Titcomb P (1996). A lecture demonstration of single photon interference. Am J. 

Phys. 64, 184–188.

Ruska E & Knoll M (1931). Die magnetische Sammelspule für schnelle Elektronenstrahlen. Z. 

techn. Physik 12 389–400.

Tavabi AH, Boothroyd CB, Yücelen E, Frabboni S, Gazzadi GC, Dunin-Borkowski R & 

Pozzi G (2017). TheYoung-Feynman controlled double-slit electron interference experiment. 

Scientific Reports 9, 10458.

Tiemeijer PC, Bischoff M, Freitag B & Kisielowski, C (2012). Using a monochromator to 

improve the resolution in TEM to below 0.5Å. Part I: Creating highly coherent monochromated 

illumination. Ultramicroscopy 114, 72 -81. 

Tonomura A, Endo J, Matsuda T, Kawasaki T & Ezawa, H. (1989). Demonstration of Single-

Electron Buildup of an Interference Pattern. Am. J. Physics 57, 117-120.

Van Dyck D (1985). Advances in Electronics and Electron Physics 65, 295-355 (1985).

Van Dyck D, Lichte H & Spence JCH (2000). Inelastic scattering and holography. 

Ultramicroscopy 81, 187–194. 

Van Dyck D, Jinschek JR, Chen FR (2012). ‘Big Bang’ tomography as a new route to atomic-

resolution electron tomography, Nature 486, 243 -246

Van Dyck D,  Lobato I, Chen FR & Kisielowski C (2015). Do you believe that atoms stay in 

place when you observe them in HREM? Micron 68, 158-163. 

Van Dyck D, Van Aert & Croitoru M (2022). Atomic resolution electron tomography: a 

dream? Int. J. of Mat. Research 97, 872 - 879.

Wang SW & Boyanovsky D (2001). Enhanced photon production from quark-gluon plasma: 

Finite-lifetime effect. Phys. Rev. D 63, 051702(R).

Weiss R (2018). Nobel Lecture: LIGO and the discovery of gravitational waves. Rev. Mod. 

Phys. 90, 040501(15).

Workman RL et al. (2022). Review of particle physics. Prog. Theor. Exp. Phys. 083C01, p.25

Young T (1802). The Bakerian Lecture. On the theory of light and colors, Philosophical 

Transactions of the Royal Society. 92, 1-16 


Table I:

The impact of energy loss on non-relativistic wavelength and self-coherence length for an 

electron acceleration by 300 kV.

Voltage  

eV

Energy loss 

eV

Wavelength  

pm

Self-coherence 

length nm

300000
0
2.239284
infinity

299999
1
2.239287
200

299990
10
2.239321
20

299900
100
2.239657
2


.Figure 1: Intensity builds up at a double slit by a time sequence of pulse-like, coherent-inelastic 

interactions of single matter waves. 

An incoming matter wave of wavelength λ (black) experiences an energy loss ΔE = E0 - E1. The 

pulse-like interaction occurs at the object site in the Heisenberg limit ΔE = ħ/2 Δt-1. During the 

related interaction time Δt (red space), Huygens Principle describes the resulting envelope 

function by the interference of the two coherent, secondary partial waves of wavelengths λ0(E0), 

gray and λ1(E1), blue. Their coherent superposition creates a wave package of width ls by 

decoherence (black), which is set by the number of secondary wave oscillations (5 are assumed). 

ls has longitudinal and transversal components. a is an atom column spacing or a lattice 

parameter. 10 nm is a typical sample thickness for HRTEM and 1 m is a typical sample-detector 

distance. Low loss Coulomb interactions yield ls values comparable to sample thickness during 

Δt. Sample and detector are entangled during the interaction time if ΔE* ≲ 10-7 eV as shown in 

this paper (red line texture).   


Figure 2: Energy dependence of the electron self-coherence length ls and self-coherence time ts = 

ls/c in the Heisenberg limit for a decoherence phase of 0.5 radian (Kisielowski et al. 2021). The 

red area separates quantum space from real space (white). Literature data as indicated. The black 

triangles mark energy losses where focus series of EF-HRTEM images are acquired in this work. 

The a-lattice parameter of BN is indicated. 


Figure 3: Single EF-HRTEM images and their Fourier Transform acquired at 80 kV across the 

energy loss region. (a) Zero loss, ΔEgun = 0.7 eV, ∞ > ls ≥ 100 nm, 645 e/pixel. The resolution 

limit is indicated (b) Low loss, ΔE = 8±4 eV, ls = 10 nm, 245 e/pixel, (c) Plasmon loss, ΔE = 

27±4 eV, ls = 2.5 nm, 495 e/pixel, (d) B-core loss, ΔE = 200±12 eV, ls = 0.35 nm, 385 e/pixel, (e) 

N-core loss:  ΔE = 410±12 eV, ls = 0.15 nm, 9 e/pixel. The inverse self-coherence length is 

indicated.


Figure 4: Multislice calculation of thickness (d) / defocus (f) maps of BN, 80 kV. a) Thickness/

defocus map of boron nitride and a’) simulated diffraction pattern with the resolution of 12 nm-1 

indicated by dotted line. b) Non-linear image simulations (Bals et al., 2005) by inserting an 

opaque aperture of 1.5 Å  (= 7 nm-1) in the diffraction plane (full line in b’). c) The non-linear 

simulation is matched to the Fourier filtered EF-HRTEM image of Figure 3e recorded with ls= 

1.5 Å.  The Fourier transform c’ of the simulation c exhibits the low spatial frequencies that were 

excluded from detection by the opaque aperture in the diffraction plane of Figure 4b’.


Figure 5: EF-HRTEM electron exit wave functions of BN, reconstructed from image focal series 

recorded at energy losses of a) 0 eV, b) 8 eV, c) 27 eV, and d) 200 eV (at the B-K edge), 

respectively. a-d) reconstructed phase images showing the atomic structure of BN with no 

evidence for resolution loss. e) Line profiles extracted from the measurements as indicated in 

Figure 5a. Local phase changes ΔΦ vary between an average minimum and a maximum phase 

value. f) The decay of the measured ΔΦ obeys a power law as indicated.


Figure 6: Comparison of lifetime measurements of virtual particles with self-coherence data. a) 

Weak, Strong and Coulomb interactions. b) Further scale expansion to include gravitational 

interaction. Red circles are lifetime data and blue symbols are self-coherence values of matter 

waves. Horizontal arrows capture the differences between energy and energy uncertainty. The 

vertical arrow is caused by instrumental limitations. The self-coherence scales are commented by 

selected physical objects.


