Phase Binarization in Mutually Synchronized Bias Field-free 

Spin Hall Nano-oscillators for Reservoir Computing

Sourabh Manna1, Rohit Medwal2, John Rex Mohan3, Yasuhiro Fukuma3,4, Rajdeep Singh Rawat1#

1Natural Sciences and Science Education, National Institute of Education, Nanyang 

Technological University, 637616, Singapore.

2Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, 208016, India.

3School of Computer Science and System Engineering, Kyushu Institute of Technology, Iizuka, 

820-8502, Japan.

4Research Center for Neuromorphic AI hardware, Kyushu Institute of Technology, Kitakyushu 

808-0916, Japan.

# Correspondence: rajdeep.rawat@nie.edu.sg

Keywords: Spin Hall nano-oscillator, Magnetic anisotropy, Micromagnetic simulation, 

Reservoir computing


Abstract

Mutually coupled spin Hall nano-oscillators (SHNO) can exhibit binarized phase state, offering

pathways to realize Ising machines and efficient neuromorphic hardware. Conventionally, phase 

binarization is achieved in coupled SHNOs via injecting an external microwave at twice of the 

oscillator frequency in presence of a biasing magnetic field. However, this technology poses

potential challenges of higher energy consumption and complex circuit design. Moreover, 

fabrication-induced mismatch in SHNO dimensions may hinder mutual synchronization. 

Addressing these challenges, we demonstrate purely DC current-driven mutual synchronization 

and phase binarization of two non-identical nanoconstriction SHNOs without biasing magnetic 

field and microwave injection. We thoroughly investigate these phenomena and underlying 

mechanisms using micromagnetic simulation. We further demonstrate the bias field-free 

synchronized SHNO pair efficiently performing a reservoir computing benchmark learning task: 

sin and square wave classification, utilizing current tunable phase binarization. Our results 

showcase promising magnetization dynamics of coupled bias field-free SHNOs for future

computing applications.


Introduction

Reservoir computing1,2 (RC) is a promising computing paradigm that harnesses the nonlinear

dynamics of complex systems for efficient information processing. RC comprises a time-

dependent recurrent neural network (RNN) known as the “reservoir” and a time-invariant 

“readout” that connects the reservoir to the output. Unlike traditional neural networks, only the 

readout is trained in RC using linear regression that significantly reduces the training cost3. On-

chip RC hardware can be designed by exploiting the rich nonlinear dynamics of coupled nano-

oscillators4,5. Parametrically driven oscillator networks are already established to implement phase 

logic operation via subharmonic injection lock-in (SHIL) method in Boolean computing6–8. In such 

oscillators, two possible phase states are observed (phase binarization) which represent the binary 

“0” and “1” in phase logic. This phase binarization can modulate the coupling between the 

oscillators and enhance the nonlinearity in the dynamic variables9. Therefore, phase-binarized 

coupled nano-oscillators hold significant potential for RC hardware implementation.

Recently, ferromagnet (FM)/heavy metal (HM) bilayer-based spin Hall nano-oscillators 

(SHNO) have emerged as one of the top-tier CMOS compatible high frequency nano-oscillators10

for realizing RC hardware, owing to their inherent nonlinear magnetization dynamics11–14, 

miniature footprint14–16, straightforward fabrication and low-power operation17. Additionally, 

efficient control of magnetization dynamics through bias-current, magnetic field, voltage 

controlled magnetic anisotropy and microwave injection lock-in make them suitable for

neuromorphic hardware design13,16,18–21. Multiple nanoconstriction (NC) SHNOs can be mutually 

coupled through propagating spin wave, exchange interaction and magnetodipolar interaction, 

eliminating the need for electrical interconnects in SHNO arrays22–26. The current state-of-the-art 

demonstrates SHIL induced phase binarization in a two-dimensional NC SHNO array where the 

inter-SHNO coupling is primarily mediated by magnetodipolar interaction27, paving a way towards

realizing spin Hall Ising machine for efficiently solving computationally hard combinatorial 

optimization problems. Therefore, phase binarization in mutually coupled SHNOs can be a 

promising way for designing RC hardware as well. Nevertheless, practical implementation of this 

route poses major challenges. The reliance on external biasing magnetic field for typical SHNO 

operation and external microwave source for implementation of SHIL lead to complexity in circuit 

design process, increased circuit area and higher energy consumption. Hence, exploring phase 


binarization routes that exploit intrinsic magnetization dynamics in coupled SHNOs systems 

without external biasing magnetic field or microwave sources is imperative.

Recent studies on bias field-free single SHNO have demonstrated nontrivial auto-

oscillation properties including in-plane to out-of-plane transition of auto-oscillation trajectory28–

30, reduction of threshold current31 and tunable spiking behavior29,32. Investigating mutual 

synchronization of bias field-free NC SHNOs, therefore, can unveil intriguing magnetization 

dynamics for realization of efficient RC hardware. However, challenges arise due to fabrication-

induced mismatch in nanoconstriction widths causing a difference in characteristic frequencies of 

individual SHNOs in an NC array. This frequency mismatch is detrimental for their mutual 

synchronization. This issue can be resolved by introducing a gradient in the biasing magnetic

field24 which is technically not allowed for bias field-free SHNOs . Therefore, exploring routes for 

mutual synchronization of bias field-free SHNOs with non-identical NC widths is crucial for 

practical applications.

In this report we demonstrate purely DC current-driven phase binarization in a mutually 

synchronized NC SHNO pair without any biasing magnetic field as well as external microwave 

injection. The SHNO pair is designed by defining two NCs with non-identical widths, representing 

two different SHNOs separated by a distance (𝑑) as shown in Fig. 1a. We comprehensively 

investigate the mechanism of mutual synchronization and DC current-driven phase binarization in 

bias field-free condition. More importantly, we demonstrate that the phase binarized bias field-free 

SHNO pair can efficiently perform an RC benchmark learning task: sin and square wave 

classification. 

In our previous work, we demonstrated that an in-plane uniaxial anisotropy can induce bias 

field-free auto-oscillation of magnetization in a NiFe/Pt bilayer-based NC SHNO device31. Such a 

magnetic anisotropy can be induced in NiFe by implementing suitable growth schemes33–36. 

Hence, we chose a similar NiFe/Pt bilayer-based NC pair as shown in Fig. 1a. We defined the in-

plane uniaxial anisotropy in the NiFe layer with the easy-axis oriented at an angle 𝜙 measured 

from the 𝑥-axis (Fig. 1a). The uniaxial anisotropy gives rise to the anisotropy field given as,

𝑯𝑎𝑛𝑖𝑠 =

2𝐾𝑢
𝑀𝑠 (𝒖̂ ⋅ 𝒎)𝒖̂ , where 𝐾𝑢, 𝑀𝑠, 𝒎 and 𝒖̂ are the uniaxial anisotropy constant, saturation 

magnetization of NiFe, reduced magnetization vector (𝒎 = 𝑴/𝑀𝑠) and the unit vector along the 


easy axis respectively. In the stable equilibrium, the orientation of magnetization is determined by 

the cumulative effect of magnetic anisotropy, magnetostatic field and exchange interaction. As we 

pass a charge current through the SHNO device, it induces a transverse spin current via spin Hall 

effect in Pt. The spin current exerts spin-orbit torque (SOT) on the magnetization in NiFe and 

destabilizes it from the stable equilibrium. The SOT may enhance or oppose the intrinsic damping 

torque in the ferromagnet based on the mutual orientation of the magnetization and the spin 

polarization (𝝈) of the injected spin current. In the latter case, a large enough SOT can completely 

compensate the intrinsic damping torque and lead to the limit cycle auto-oscillation of 

magnetization about the effective internal field (𝑯𝑒𝑓𝑓). In absence of any biasing magnetic field, 

𝑯𝑒𝑓𝑓 is given as:

𝑯𝑒𝑓𝑓 = 𝑯𝑎𝑛𝑖𝑠 + 𝑯𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑔 + 𝑯𝑒𝑥𝑐ℎ + 𝑯𝑂𝑒,
(1)

where 𝑯𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑔, 𝑯𝑒𝑥𝑐ℎ and 𝑯𝑂𝑒 denote the magnetostatic field, the exchange field and the DC 

current induced Oersted field respectively. The SOT driven magnetization dynamics can be 

quantitatively formulated in terms of the LLG equation with additional SOT term as follows37,38.

𝒎̇ = −𝛾𝒎 × 𝑯𝒆𝒇𝒇 + 𝛼𝒎 × 𝒎̇ + 𝛾|𝑱𝑐|ℏ𝜃𝑆𝐻

2𝑒𝑡𝐹𝑀𝜇0𝑀𝑠

𝒎 × (𝝈 × 𝒎).
(2)

In equation 2, 𝛼 denotes the intrinsic damping parameter, 𝜃𝑆𝐻 is the spin Hall angle of Pt which is 

taken as 0.0819,22,23 in the present study. The quantities in the SOT term, 𝛾, ℏ, 𝑒, 𝜇0, 𝝈 and 𝑡𝐹𝑀

represent the gyromagnetic ratio, reduced Planck’s constant, electronic charge, permeability of 

vacuum, spin-polarization direction, and thickness of the NiFe layer respectively. Notably, the 

field-like component of SOT arising from the bulk of Pt and interfacial Rashba effect has been 

found to be significantly smaller than the damping-like component of SOT in NiFe/Pt system38,39. 

Therefore, the SOT driven magnetization dynamics in such system is efficiently modelled 

considering only the damping-like component of SOT. We have employed the micromagnetic 

modelling approach to numerically solve equation 2 (see Method) and obtained the oscillatory 

magnetization dynamics in bias field-free condition.


Results

Device design and auto-oscillation properties

We consider a NC SHNO pair consisting of a 5 nm thick NiFe layer possessing uniaxial anisotropy,

interfaced with a 5 nm thick Pt layer (Fig. 1a). The two NCs of widths 100 nm (left NC) and 150 

nm (right NC) are separated by a center-to-center distance, 𝑑 = 200 nm. From here on, we will 

refer to this NC SHNO pair as “NC pair”. Figure 1a schematically represents the device structure

of the NC pair and the spatial distribution of current density (𝑱𝑐) in the Pt layer for 1 mA input 

current (𝐼𝐷𝐶), as obtained from Multiphysics simulation using COMSOL (see Methods). We 

explicitly consider the dominant 𝑥-component of 𝑱𝑐 for computing the current-induced spin-orbit 

torque as the 𝑦 and 𝑧-components are order of magnitude smaller than the 𝑥-component (see 

supplementary information, Fig. S1). Therefore, we defined 𝝈 = −𝒚̂ considering the orthogonality 

of 𝑱𝑐, 𝝈 and the spin current (𝑱𝑠) along −𝒛̂. As obvious from Fig. 1(a), 𝑱𝑐 at the left NC is higher 

as compared to the right NC. This essentially leads to lower threshold current for auto-oscillation 

in the left NC.

We numerically solved equation 2 using the GPU accelerated micromagnetic solver 

MuMax340 to obtain the SOT driven magnetization dynamics in the NC pair (see Methods for 

details of micromagnetic simulation). We explicitly defined 𝐾𝑢 = 7.5 kJ/m3 to account for the 

uniaxial anisotropy31. The solver computes 𝑚𝑥 as a function of time (𝑡) at each micromagnetic 

cell. In the auto-oscillation state, the frequency of limit cycle oscillation has been extracted by 

performing fast Fourier transform (FFT) of the spatial average of 𝑚𝑥(𝑡) obtained from the entire 

geometry. In experiments, the oscillation of 𝑚𝑥(𝑡) gives rise to oscillating anisotropic 

magnetoresistance (AMR) which is coupled with 𝐼𝐷𝐶 and subsequently converted into a 

longitudinal microwave voltage across the SHNO. The 𝑚𝑦(𝑡) and 𝑚𝑧(𝑡) are not associated with 

this AMR based detection technique. Therefore, we analyze the 𝑚𝑥(𝑡) to find out the auto-

oscillation characteristics.


Figure 1. | Schematic of the device geometry and auto-oscillation characteristics. (a) The NC pair geometry 
designed in COMSOL and the spatial distribution of current density in the Pt layer. (b) FFT Spectrum of the auto-
oscillation obtained from the entire NC pair geometry for 𝐼𝐷𝐶 = 1.8 mA. (c) FFT spectra of the local auto-oscillation 
at individual NCs in the NC pair. (d) Current tunability of the 1st harmonic of auto-oscillation in the NC pair. (e) 
Current tunability of the 2nd harmonic of the auto-oscillation in the NC pair.

A typical FFT spectrum corresponding to the limit cycle auto-oscillation for 𝐼𝐷𝐶 = 1.8 mA

is shown in Fig. 1b. The sharp peak at 3.3 GHz is accompanied by a weak 2nd harmonic of 6.6 

GHz. We further obtained the local auto-oscillation characteristics of individual NC SHNO within 


the NC pair by averaging 𝑚𝑥(𝑡) over 170nm × 170 nm area around the center of each NC and 

applying FFT. Figure 1c shows the frequency and phase extracted from the FFT of the local 

magnetization auto-oscillation profile in individual NCs. It is clear from Fig. 1c that both SHNOs 

in the NC pair exhibit the same auto-oscillation frequency and phase at 1.8 mA current, denoting 

mutual synchronization. Therefore, the auto-oscillation frequency of individual NC SHNOs (Fig. 

1c) match with the auto-oscillation frequency of the entire NC pair (Fig. 1b). We further observe 

the current-tunability of the auto-oscillation frequency and amplitude, obtained from the entire NC 

pair for both 1st harmonic (Fig. 1d) and 2nd harmonic (Fig. 1e). The red shift behavior of the 

frequency as a function of 𝐼𝐷𝐶 is consistent with our previous study on bias field-free single NC 

SHNO31. We notice from Fig. 1d and 1e that, despite the difference in the NC widths, the NC pair

exhibits auto-oscillation synchronously for each 𝐼𝐷𝐶 value at 1st harmonic as well as 2nd harmonic. 

This persistent mutual synchronization of both NC SHNOs for more than 1.5 mA span of 𝐼𝐷𝐶 is 

comparable with the state-of-the-art in-plane field assisted SHNO pair23. For both harmonics, the 

NC array exhibits red shift in auto-oscillation with increase in FFT amplitude for 𝐼𝐷𝐶 from about 

1.1 to 2.2 mA. A sudden nonlinear blue shift is observed around 2.2 mA for both harmonics, which 

is explained later. For 𝐼𝐷𝐶 ≥ 2.25 mA, both harmonics show the red shift again with increasing 

𝐼𝐷𝐶. However, while the FFT amplitude of 1st harmonic decreases significantly in this 𝐼𝐷𝐶 regime, 

the amplitude of 2nd harmonic continues to increase.

To gain a deeper insight into the mutual synchronization phenomenon, we separately

simulated and analyzed the bias field-free auto-oscillation in single NC SHNOs with 100 nm and 

150 nm constriction widths. Figure 2a shows the comparison of the current tunability of 

characteristic auto-oscillation frequency (the dominant 1st harmonic) for 100 nm single NC SHNO 

(blue), 150 nm single NC SHNO (red) and the NC pair (green). We observe that for lower value 

of 𝐼𝐷𝐶 (< 1.45 mA) the auto-oscillation in the NC pair is purely driven by the auto-oscillation of 

100 nm wide NC (left NC). Therefore, the auto-oscillation frequency of the NC pair overlaps with 

the auto-oscillation frequency of 100 nm single NC SHNO. However, at 𝐼𝐷𝐶 ≥ 1.45 mA, the 

magnetization auto-oscillation takes place at the 150 nm wide NC (right NC) as well. At this point

both SHNOs couple with each other. Therefore, the auto-oscillation frequency of the NC pair 

deviates from the characteristic auto-oscillation frequencies of single NC SHNOs. This coupling 

is identified as negative coupling9,41 as the auto-oscillation frequency in mutually synchronized 

state is lower than the individual frequencies of single NC SHNOs. However, above 2.2 mA, the 


auto-oscillation frequency at mutually synchronized state rapidly shifts towards higher frequency, 

as compared to the characteristic frequencies of single NC SHNOs. This indicates a positive 

coupling41 between the SHNOs at higher current.

Figure 2 | Mutual synchronization of NC SHNOs and phase binarization. (a) Comparison of the current-tunability 
of auto-oscillation frequency in the NC pair at mutually synchronized state, with the singel NC SHNOs. The inset 
figure shows the current density distribution at the vicinity of the NCs in single NC SHNO and NC pair. (b) Phase 
difference for the 1st harmonic between the two NC SHNOs in the NC pair as a function of 𝐼𝐷𝐶. The phase binarization 
threshold current 2.2 mA has been denoted by the pair. (c) Temporal profile of the local magnetization auto-oscillation 
in the individual NCs for input current of 1.5 mA (in-phase auto-oscillation) and 2.5 mA (out-of-phase auto-
oscillation).


It should be noted that the frequency of auto-oscillation in such anisotropy-assisted bias 

field-free SHNO is primarily determined by the anisotropy field 𝑯𝑎𝑛𝑖𝑠 =

2𝐾𝑢
𝑀𝑠 (𝒖̂ ⋅ 𝒎)𝒖̂ as 

discussed in our previous report31. At higher input current, stronger SOT leads to increase in the 

amplitude of magnetization precession. Hence, 𝒎 moves away from the easy axis (along 𝒖̂) 

resulting in a reduction of 𝑯𝑎𝑛𝑖𝑠 ,which in turn reduces the auto-oscillation frequency. This 

explains the red-shift behavior of the auto-oscillation frequency in such bias field-free SHNOs. 

Therefore, the sudden blue-shift at 𝐼𝐷𝐶 > 2.2 mA can be attributed to the reduction of auto-

oscillation amplitude which is also evident from the diminishing FFT amplitude in Fig. 1d. This 

could be possible if there is a substantial phase difference between the local magnetization auto-

oscillation at the NCs. Despite the high amplitudes of local magnetization auto-oscillation at the 

NCs at higher 𝐼𝐷𝐶, this phase difference would lead to a reduction of the resultant oscillation 

amplitude of 𝒎 in the NC pair. Hence, the NC pair exhibits a non-monotonic frequency variation 

as a function of 𝐼𝐷𝐶 unlike the single NC SHNOs.

Phase binarization in mutually synchronized state

Now we proceed to investigate the behavior of the phase difference (𝛿) for the 1st harmonic

between the two SHNOs in the NC pair at mutually synchronized state. Figure 2b shows the 

behavior of 𝛿 as a function of 𝐼𝐷𝐶. We notice that up to 2.2 mA, 𝛿 is quite small (within 𝜋/9 rad). 

That indicates both the NC SHNOs exhibit (nearly) in-phase auto-oscillation at this range of 𝐼𝐷𝐶. 

In contrast, for 𝐼𝐷𝐶 ≥ 2.25 mA current, 𝛿 becomes significant (𝛿~8𝜋/9 rad) indicating (nearly)

out-of-phase auto-oscillation in both NCs. Figure 2c shows the local 𝑚𝑥(𝑡) in both the NCs 

exhibiting in-phase auto-oscillation at 𝐼𝐷𝐶 = 1.5 mA and out-of-phase auto-oscillation at 𝐼𝐷𝐶 = 2.5 

mA.

We observe that the NC pair exhibits two discrete auto-oscillation states in terms of phase 

difference (𝛿) between the local magnetization auto-oscillation at both NCs. In the out-of-phase 

auto-oscillation state, the discretization of individual phases of the two NCs to two distinctive 

phase states is known as the “phase binarization”27,42. Of course, the phase binarization observed 

in our NC pair is not exactly the ideal case i.e., 𝛿 = 𝜋. The reason will be explained later in this 

section. However, the phase difference between the individual NCs is large enough to classify the 


individual phases as binarized. Typically, the phase binarization in coupled oscillator system is 

realized through SHIL method42, where the oscillation frequency (𝑓) of the system is “locked” by

an external periodic signal (referred as the “locking signal” later on) of frequency 2𝑓27. We 

emphasize that the phase binarization in our NC pair has been achieved in absence of any biasing 

magnetic field and external locking signal, therefore it is purely driven by the input DC current.

Figure 3 | Spatial profile of auto-oscillation amplitude and phase in the NC pair. The left colum shows a typical 
in-phase auto-oscillation (𝐼𝐷𝐶 = 1.5 mA) and the right column shows a typical phase-binarized auto-oscillation state
(𝐼𝐷𝐶 = 2.5 mA). The spatial profiles of auto-oscillation amplitude have been shown for 1st harmonic in (a) and (b), and
for 2nd harmonic in (c) and (d). The spatial profiles of phase at the 1st harmonic are shown in (e) and (f).


To understand the underlying mechanism of phase binarization in the NC pair, we first look 

at the spatial profile of auto-oscillation amplitude. We look for the interaction between spin wave 

modes particularly in the vicinity of the constrictions. Figure 3 depicts these spatial profiles for an 

in-phase (𝐼𝐷𝐶 = 1.5 mA) and a phase-binarized (𝐼𝐷𝐶 = 2.5 mA) auto-oscillation states. In both cases, 

the 1st harmonics are localized spin wave edge modes19. These edge modes overlap between the 

NCs for 𝐼𝐷𝐶 = 1.5 mA (Fig. 3a), reinforcing the in-phase synchronization of the local auto-

oscillations in both NCs. On the other hand, the edge modes of the two NCs are discrete in space 

for 𝐼𝐷𝐶 = 2.5 mA (Fig. 3b) as observed by well demarcated existence of nearly zero FFT amplitude 

region in-between the two NCs. Therefore, in this case, the 1st harmonics (the dominant harmonics)

of the auto-oscillation in both NCs hardly drive each other for in-phase synchronization. In contrast 

to the 1st harmonic, the 2nd harmonic is a propagating spin wave mode that creates the interference-

like pattern in the spatial profile of auto-oscillation amplitude as seen in Fig. 3c and 3d (see 

supplementary information, Fig. S2 as well). Hence, the phase binarization in the 1st harmonic is 

possibly being mediated by the 2nd harmonic through SHIL mechanism, where one NC serves as 

the source of the locking periodic signal for the other NC. This is possible because of the 

characteristic frequency matching of the individual single NC SHNOs at higher input current (see 

Fig. 2a).

We confirm the 2nd harmonic mediated phase-binarization in our NC pair SHNO by 

analyzing the magnetization auto-oscillation obtained from a similar NC pair with 𝑑 = 800 nm. 

Figure 4 summarizes these results. In Fig. 4a we observe that the two NC SHNOs exhibit auto-

oscillation at their free-running frequencies at lower currents unlike the 𝑑 = 200 nm NC pair. For 

𝐼𝐷𝐶~ 2.1 mA onwards they mutually synchronize as their characteristic frequencies match in that 

range (see Fig. 4a and 1a). The phase binarization (Fig. 4c) and its effect on auto-oscillation 

amplitude (Fig. 4b) have been clearly observed in the synchronized auto-oscillation state. Note 

that the out-of-phase state is quite close to the ideal case of phase binarization i.e., 𝛿 ~ 𝜋 rad. 

However, the other phase state corresponds to 𝛿 ~ 2𝜋/5 rad is weakly binarized. The difficulty of 

in-phase synchronization is due to the longer separation between the NCs resulting in no 

overlapping of the localized edge modes as shown in Fig. 4d. In contrast to the localized 1st

harmonic, the 2nd harmonic spin wave modes propagate from one NC to the other, resulting in 

generation of interference-like pattern as shown in Fig. 4e. Therefore, the propagating 2nd harmonic 

reinforces the out-of-phase auto-oscillation (see the spatial phase map in Fig. 4f) through SHIL. 


Figure 4 | Auto-oscillation characteristics in NC pair with 𝒅 = 800 nm. (a) Current-tunability of auto-oscillation 
frequency obtained from the entire NC pair geometry. (b) Variation of FFT amplitude as a function of 𝐼𝐷𝐶 in the 
mutually synchronized state. (c) Phase difference between the local auto-oscillation in the NCs. The phase binarization 
threshold current is denoted as 2.36 mA. (d), (e) Spatial profile of auto-oscillation amplitude at 1st and 2nd harmonic 
respectively in phase binarized state. (f) Spatial profile of phase of 1st harmonic at the phase bianrized state.

We further note that the spin waves exhibit amplitude decay as they propagate due to the 

damping present in the ferromagnet. When the 2nd harmonic spin wave travels over 800 nm 

distance between the NCs, it experiences relatively higher decay in intensity as compared to the 


previous case of 200 nm separation between the NCs. Consequently, for identical input current, 

the SHIL induced phase binarization takes place at higher threshold current. As seen from Fig. 2b

and Fig. 4c, the phase binarization threshold is 2.2 mA for 𝑑 = 200 nm NC array, and 2.36 mA for 

𝑑 = 800 nm NC array.

Lastly, we would like to mention that the SHIL induced phase binarization strongly 

depends on the power of the locking signal. SHIL induced stable phase binarization in bias field 

assisted SHNO array is achieved above a certain threshold power of the locking signal. However, 

these SHNOs may switch between in-phase and out-of-phase auto-oscillation states below the 

threshold power of the locking microwave27. In the present bias field-free SHNO pair, the intensity 

of the 2nd harmonic is an order of magnitude smaller than the 1st harmonic. This intensity can only 

be enhanced by increasing the 𝐼𝐷𝐶. However, change in 𝐼𝐷𝐶 leads to variation in the spatial profile 

of the spin wave modes in the vicinity of the NCs (see supplementary information, Fig. S5) which 

may or may not favor the out-of-phase auto-oscillation43. Therefore, the phase binarization in our 

bias field-free NC SHNO pair is current tunable which is later utilized for implementation of RC 

scheme.

Reservoir computing with phase-binarized SHNO pair

We now demonstrate how the phase binarization can be utilized to perform efficient binary 

classification task using the NC SHNO pair as a reservoir. The learning task we choose is the 

classification of points that belong to randomly sequenced sin and square waveforms with identical 

period and amplitude. This is a standard RC benchmark task that requires significant nonlinearity 

as well as short-term memory. Notably, the points belonging to the extrema of sin and square waves 

are completely identical, therefore, the classification of these points are not trivial. One must 

remember the previous points to classify the extrema points. It has been observed that the phase

binarization in the NC pair strongly depends on the recent history of input current in a continuous 

sweep of 𝐼𝐷𝐶. This has been demonstrated in Fig. 5a and 5b. Here we observe the auto-oscillation

in the full NC pair geometry at 2.3 mA input current pulse which follows an input current of 1 mA 

(Fig. 5a) and 1.5 mA (Fig. 5b) separately. We find that, in the first case, phase binarization is 

achieved at 2.3 mA as expected, which results in the reduced auto-oscillation amplitude in steady 

state (Fig. 5a). However, in stark contrast to the first case, the phase binarization is not achieved 


at 2.3 mA in the second case which results in distinctively higher auto-oscillation amplitude in 

steady state (Fig. 5b). Therefore, the phase binarization depends on the previous auto-oscillation 

state. The stable in-phase auto-oscillation state is reinforced by the spatial overlapping of the 

localized spin wave edge modes corresponding to the stronger 1st harmonic. Therefore, it is 

difficult for the weaker 2nd harmonic to induce phase binarization through SHIL. Hence, if the 

initial state is a steady in-phase auto-oscillation state, higher input current is required for phase 

binarization as compared to the stable initial state of 𝒎. We utilize this phenomenon as a short-

term memory feature where the auto-oscillation state associated to the “present” input (𝐼𝐷𝐶 = 2.3 

mA in Fig. 5a and 5b) is dictated by the “recent past” input (𝐼𝐷𝐶 = 1 mA or 1.5 mA in Fig. 5a and 

5b). We further notice that the initial auto-oscillation state is restored once the input current is 

reduced back to 1 mA (Fig. 5a) or 1.5 mA (Fig. 5b), indicating the memory is not a long-term

memory.


Figure 5 | Towards sin and square wave classification with phase binarized NC pair. The time evolution of 𝑚𝑥 in 
the NC SHNO pair (𝑑 = 200 nm) is shown for sequential excitation. (a) The time evolution of 𝑚𝑥 (top subfigure) 
corresponding to the 𝐼𝐷𝐶 sequence 1mA→2.3mA→1mA (bottom subfigure). The auto-oscillation amplitude at 2.3 mA 
reduces at the steady state due to phase binarization. (b) Time evolution of 𝑚𝑥 for a slightly different 𝐼𝐷𝐶 sequence: 
1.5mA→2.3mA→1.5mA. Higher auto-oscillation amplitude at 2.3 mA at the steady state denotes in-phase auto-
oscillation. The bottom subfigures in both (a) and (b) show the spatially averaged 𝑱𝑐 as function of time. (c) Temporal 
profile of 𝑚𝑥 for 𝐼𝐷𝐶 sequence defined by randomly arranged sin and square waveforms.

Now we define a temporal sequence of randomly arranged sin and square waveforms of 

equal amplitude and period. Each waveform consists of eight points equally spaced in time. This 

input-time series is encoded in the magnitude of 𝐼𝐷𝐶 as shown in Fig. 5c. For every single point in 

the time-series, the associated 𝐼𝐷𝐶 is kept fixed for 50 ns to record the steady-state auto-oscillation 

profile. The time evolution of 𝑚𝑥 obtained from a continuous simulation for the entire sequence 


of 𝐼𝐷𝐶 consisting of 104 input points (13 waveforms) is shown in Fig. 5c. We clearly observe the 

substantial difference in the auto-oscillation profiles corresponding to the sin and square 

waveforms. The phase binarization takes place only for points belong to the square waveform 

resulting in lower amplitude of 𝑚𝑥(𝑡). Therefore, the maxima points can be well classified despite 

the degeneracy in their values. However, the points in the lower half of the waveforms including 

the minima points do not produce any auto-oscillation as the 𝐼𝐷𝐶 is lower than the threshold 

excitation current (~1.1 mA for 𝑝 = 200 nm as seen from Fig. 1d). Therefore, these points cannot 

be classified using the present NC pair SHNO.

This issue could be resolved by adding two NiFe layers with uniaxial anisotropy, at both 

sides of the Pt layer (Fig. 6a). In this modified structure, the auto-oscillation can be induced in 

either one of the NiFe layer by altering the polarity of 𝐼𝐷𝐶. As shown in Fig. 6a, the orientation of 

spin polarization and 𝒎 in the bottom NiFe layer is such that the SOT opposes the damping torque. 

Hence, the bottom NiFe layer can exhibit auto-oscillation. On the other hand, in the top NiFe layer,

the 𝒎 and the spin polarization direction are oriented such a way that the SOT and the damping 

torque act parallel to each other. This leads to an enhancement of the effective damping in the FM 

layer and eventually relaxation of 𝒎 to a stable equilibrium state. The scenario reverses for 𝐼𝐷𝐶 < 

0, where only the top NiFe layer can exhibit auto-oscillation of 𝒎. Therefore, the auto-oscillation 

can be obtained in such a trilayer SHNO irrespective of the polarity of input current.

We now reconstruct the 𝐼𝐷𝐶 sequence in line with the main time-series such that the 

amplitudes of the sin and square waves span symmetrically about 𝐼𝐷𝐶 = 0. In addition, we modulate 

the 𝐼𝐷𝐶 values through a standard time-multiplexing algorithm44,45 (see supplementary note 7 for 

details). The time-multiplexing enables us to simulate multiple virtual neurons randomly 

connected to each other from a single dynamic node, which is the trilayer NC SHNO pair in our 

case. This essentially maps each point in the input to a higher dimensional space as per the 

requirement of the reservoir in RC. Here we simulate 20 virtual nodes (neurons). Therefore, each 

input point can be represented by the combined auto-oscillation state of all 20 nodes in the so 

called higher dimensional space. 


Figure 6 | Modified trilayer SHNO geometry for RC. (a) Schematic of the trilayer NC SHNO pair and the 
magnetization auto-oscillation under the change in polarity of 𝐼𝐷𝐶. The yellow arrow in the trilayer NC SHNO pair
geometry represents the easy axis that primarily decides the orintation of 𝑯𝑒𝑓𝑓. (b) and (c) Time evolution of 𝑚𝑥 under 
the modulated 𝐼𝐷𝐶 representing the time multiplexed inputs corresponding to the four consecutive points in the positive 
half of sin and square wave respectively. The “Base” represents the 𝐼𝐷𝐶 values corresponding to the actual input data 
points. The time multiplexed i.e., pre-processed input for the RC is represented by the “Modulated” 𝐼𝐷𝐶.

Figure 6b and 6c show the auto-oscillation profile for the positive half-cycles of sin and 

square waveform respectively, each consisting of four points. In Fig. 6b, the constant “base” 𝐼𝐷𝐶

value representing a single point belonging to the sin waveform is shown in blue dash-dotted line. 

The corresponding “modulated” 𝐼𝐷𝐶 values representing inputs for the virtual nodes are shown in 

continuous red line. Note that the oscillation amplitude fluctuates due to the modulation in 𝐼𝐷𝐶

values, showing the randomness in the system. A similar auto-oscillation data obtained for the 

points in the positive half of the square-wave, are shown in Fig. 6c. We observe the noticeable 

difference in the auto-oscillation amplitude for sin and square wave points. The same auto-


oscillation profiles have been obtained for the negative half of the waveforms due to auto-

oscillation in the top NiFe layer. However, we still need to achieve a finite and relatively higher 

auto-oscillation amplitude for 𝐼𝐷𝐶 = 0 mA, to classify the zero-value points in the sin wave 

category. This can be achieved by connecting an oscillator of comparable frequency and amplitude

preceded by a NOT gate, in parallel to the NC pair (see supplementary information, Fig. S8).

Figure 7 | Performance of trilayer NC SHNO pair in sin and square wave classification task. (a) The input points 
belonging to randomly sequenced sin and square waveforms. First 80 points have been used for training the reservoir. 
The RC performance in the classification task has been tested with the remaining 160 datapoints. The binary labels 
assigned to the input points are shown in dashed line. (b) Comparison between the true classifier labels of the points 
and the prediction by the NC SHNO pair as a reservoir. The match between the true labels and the predicted labels 
show 100% classification accuracy.


Finally, to demonstrate the classification performance of our NC pair SHNO as a reservoir, 

we define the time-series with 240 points (30 waveforms) as shown in Fig. 7a. We use the first 80 

points for training and rest 160 points for testing. We further define the binary target labels to the 

points: “1” for the points in square wave and “0” for the points in sin wave (the black dotted line 

in Fig. 7a). Figure 7b shows the efficient prediction of the target labels by the reservoir which are 

100% accurate with the true labels. The classification task has been performed with different 

random sequences of sin and square waves consisting of same periodicity and number of points. 

A few of the results have been shown in the supplementary information. Notably, in all these cases 

100% accurate classification have been achieved.

Discussion

We have demonstrated purely DC current-tunable mutual synchronization and phase binarization 

in a NC SHNO pair in absence of biasing magnetic field as well as external microwave for injection 

locking. The coupling between the two non-identical SHNOs is mainly mediated by the 

magnetodipolar interaction that leads to coherent synchronization of the SHNOs (see 

supplementary note 6). However, the characteristic frequencies of the single NC SHNOs are tens 

of MHz apart at lower input current. Therefore, mutual synchronization of such non-identical 

SHNOs is apparently difficult to achieve at low current regime (1.5 mA ≤ 𝐼𝐷𝐶 ≤ 1.75 mA, see Fig. 

2a). Nevertheless, both the NC SHNOs in our NC pair with 𝑑 = 200 nm, exhibit mutually 

synchronized auto-oscillation state in this regime. This has been possible through the modulation 

of the local anisotropy field at the NCs by the overlapping of the localized spin wave edge modes 

corresponding to the 1st harmonic. We recall that the local anisotropy field is directly determined 

by the instantaneous orientation of magnetization. The magnetodipolar coupling as well as 

overlapping of the localized spin wave edge modes regulate the orientation of instantaneous 

magnetization and reinforces coherent auto-oscillation. This, in turn modulates the local anisotropy 

field such a way that leads to similar instantaneous auto-oscillation frequencies in both SHNOs in 

the NC pair. In contrast to 𝑑 = 200 nm NC pair, there is no overlapping in the spin wave mode 

profile of the 1st harmonic in 𝑑 = 800 nm NC pair (Fig. 4d). Therefore, in that case, both the NCs 

exhibit auto-oscillation at their characteristic frequencies in unsynchronized state for low input 

current (see Fig. 4a). At higher values of input current, similar characteristic frequencies of both 


NC SHNOs lead to mutual synchronization for both 𝑑 = 200 nm and 𝑑 = 800 nm NC pairs (Fig. 

1d and 4a). In addition, we observe the phase binarization phenomena at mutually synchronized 

auto-oscillation state and its strong dependence on the recent history of dynamic magnetization. 

This phenomenon has been utilized for performing an RC benchmark classification task as 

demonstrated in this paper. It should be noted that, the RC scheme demonstrated here, is not to 

contrast different algorithm and propose a better alternative, but to highlight the physical 

phenomena of DC current-driven phase binarization in realizing a simple RC network.

While all the simulation results presented here are obtained without considering any 

thermal effect to focus more on understanding the physical origin and impact of the observed 

phenomena as well as to reduce simulation time, the effect of finite temperature (T = 300 K) has 

been presented in the supplementary information (Fig. S4). Similar phenomena of mutual 

synchronization and subsequent phase binarization have been observed for T = 300 K as well in 

the NC SHNO pair. Hence, our results hold promises to pave the way for overcoming challenges 

in synchronizing non-identical bias field-free NC SHNOs and utilize them for designing efficient 

RC hardware.

Methods

Device design in COMSOL. The NC SHNO pair has been designed considering a bilayer 

stack of 5 nm thick NiFe layer interfaced with a 5 nm thick Pt layer. Both the round-edged NCs in 

the NC pair have been defined with 50 nm radius of curvature and 22° opening angle. The widths 

of the left and right NCs are defined as 100 nm and 150 nm (Fig. 1a). The centers of both NCs are 

colinear and equally apart from the longer sides of the device. The geometry of this bilayer NC 

SHNO pair has been designed in COMSOL Multiphysics software. In addition, the spatial 

distribution of 𝑱𝑐 in the Pt layer and the Oersted field in the NiFe layer corresponding to 1 mA 

input current (𝐼𝐷𝐶) have been simulated in COMSOL considering the standard conductivity values 

of 8.9 MS/m for Pt and 1.74 MS/m for NiFe.

Micromagnetic simulation. The micromagnetic simulations have been performed using the 

GPU-accelerated open source software MuMax340 that employs a finite difference discretization 

of space. A 2048 nm × 1024 nm × 5 nm simulation area has been uniformly discretized into 


1024×512×1 rectangular grid. The relevant SHNO device geometry (NC Pair or single NC 

SHNOs) for micromagnetic simulation was extracted from COMSOL as a black and white image 

to define the NiFe region. MuMax3 solves the LLG equation (Eq. 2) in a ferromagnet. Therefore, 

only the NiFe layers of the SHNO devices have been simulated explicitly considering the 

Slonczewski-like spin-orbit torque term. The material parameters have been defined as 

follows19,31: 𝑀𝑠 = 600 kA/m, exchange stiffness constant, 𝐴𝑒𝑥 = 10 pJ/m, intrinsic damping 

parameter, 𝛼 = 0.02, gyromagnetic ratio, 𝛾 = 29.53 GHz/T and uniaxial magnetic anisotropy 

constant, 𝐾𝑢 = 7.5 kJ/m3. To avoid the staircase effect at the circular edges of the NCs, the 

“edgesmooth” function of MuMax3 has been used. Finally, absorbing boundary condition46 has 

been implemented to avoid the spurious reflection of spin wave from the boundaries.

The SOT term has been implemented in MuMax3 using the built-in Slonczewski spin-transfer 

torque (STT) model and disabling the Zhang-Li torque, following the approach of Dvornik et. al19. 

The spin Hall angle of Pt has been defined as 𝜃𝑆𝐻 = 0.0819,22,23 and assigned to the variable “Pol” 

in the Slonczewski STT model in MuMax3. The spin polarization direction (𝝈 = −𝒚̂) has been 

implemented by setting the “Fixedlayer = vector (0, −1, 0)” command. In addition, the 

“epsilonprime” variable in the Slonczewski STT model has been set to “0” to neglect the field-like 

component of SOT in our simulation. To simulate only SOT driven magnetization dynamics, the 

initial magnetization has been relaxed into the ground state. Thereafter, a 5 ns initial delay has 

been introduced in the SOT to simulate the transient dynamics of magnetization in absence of any 

SOT and Oersted field and finally relax to a stable magnetization state. For each value of 𝐼𝐷𝐶, the 

simulation has been carried out for 70 ns and the 𝑚𝑥(𝑡) of the last 30 ns (steady state auto-

oscillation) has been analyzed. In case of T = 300 K, the simulation time has been fixed to 140 ns 

for each 𝐼𝐷𝐶 value, while the 𝑚𝑥(𝑡) obtained from last 40 ns has been analyzed. The post-

processing of the data has been done using custom built MATLAB and Python codes.

Acknowledgement

S.M. acknowledges the support from the NTU-Research Scholarship (NTU-RSS). R.S.R. 

acknowledges the support from the National Research Foundation (NRF), Singapore through grant 

number NRF-CRP21-2018-0003 and the Ministry of Education, Singapore, through its Academic 


Research Tier 1 grant number RG76/22. Any opinions, findings and conclusions or 

recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not reflect the views 

of the Ministry of Education, Singapore.

Author Contribution

S. M. conceived the original idea. S. M. performed all the micromagnetic simulations. S. M. did 

all the analysis of the simulation results. S.M. drafted the manuscript. R.M., J.R.M., Y.F., and R. 

S. R. reviewed the manuscript and provided valuable inputs. R. S. R. supervised the project.

Data Availability

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon 
reasonable request.

Code Availability

The MuMax3, Python and MATLAB codes used in this study are available from the corresponding 
author upon reasonable request.

Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

Additional information

See the Supplementary Information for additional details.


References

1. Tanaka, G., Yamane, T., Heroux, J. B., Nakane, R., Kanazawa, N., Takeda, S., Numata, H., 

Nakano, D. & Hirose, A. Recent advances in physical reservoir computing: A review. Neural 
Networks 115, 100–123 (2019).

2. Jaeger, H. & Haas, H. Harnessing Nonlinearity: Predicting Chaotic Systems and Saving Energy 

in Wireless Communication. Science 304, 78–80 (2004).

3. Marinella, M. J. & Agarwal, S. Efficient reservoir computing with memristors. Nat Electron 2, 

437–438 (2019).

4. Torrejon, J., Riou, M., Araujo, F., Tsunegi, S., Khalsa, G., Querlioz, D., Bortolotti, P., Cros, V., 

Yakushiji, K., Fukushima, A. et al. Neuromorphic computing with nanoscale spintronic 
oscillators. Nature 547, 428–431 (2017).

5. Popescu, B., Csaba, G., Popescu, D., Fallahpour, A., Lugli, P. & Porod, W. Simulation of 

coupled spin torque oscillators for pattern recognition. J. Appl. Phys. (2023).

6. Goto, E. The Parametron, a Digital Computing Element Which Utilizes Parametric Oscillation. 

Proceedings of the IRE 47, 1304–1316 (1959).

7. Mahboob, I. & Yamaguchi, H. Bit storage and bit flip operations in an electromechanical 

oscillator. Nature Nanotechnology 3, 275–279 (2008).

8. Csaba, G. & Porod, W. Coupled oscillators for computing: A review and perspective. Applied 

Physics Reviews 7, 011302 (2020).

9. Garg, N., Hemadri Bhotla, S. V., Muduli, P. K. & Bhowmik, D. Kuramoto-model-based data 

classification using the synchronization dynamics of uniform-mode spin Hall nano-oscillators. 
Neuromorph. Comput. Eng. 1, 024005 (2021).

10.
Zahedinejad, M., Mazraati, H., Fulara, H., Yue, J., Jiang, S., Awad, A. A. & Akerman, J. 

CMOS compatible W/CoFeB/MgO spin Hall nano-oscillators with wide frequency tunability. 
Applied Physics Letters 112, 132404 (2018).

11.
Slavin, A. & Tiberkevich, V. Nonlinear Auto-Oscillator Theory of Microwave Generation 

by Spin-Polarized Current. IEEE Trans. Magn. 45, 1875–1918 (2009).

12.
Mohan, J. R., Mathew, A., Nishimura, K., Feng, R., Medwal, R., Gupta, S., Rawat, R. S. 

& Fukuma, Y. Classification tasks using input driven nonlinear magnetization dynamics in spin 
Hall oscillator. Scientific Reports (2023).

13.
Fulara, H., Zahedinejad, M., Khymyn, R., Dvornik, M., Fukami, S., Kanai, S, Ohno, H. & 

Akerman, J. Spin-orbit torque–driven propagating spin waves. Sci. Adv. 5, eaax8467 (2019).

14.
Awad, A. A., Houshang, A., Zahedinejad, M., Khymyn, R. & Åkerman, J. Width dependent 

auto-oscillating properties of constriction based spin Hall nano-oscillators. Applied Physics 
Letters 116, 232401 (2020).

15.
Dürrenfeld, P., Awad, A. A., Houshang, A., Dumas, R. K. & Åkerman, J. A 20 nm spin Hall 

nano-oscillator. Nanoscale 9, 1285–1291 (2017).

16.
Demidov, V. E., Urazhdin, S., Zholud, A., Sadovnikov, A. V. & Demokritov, S. O. 

Nanoconstriction-based spin-Hall nano-oscillator. Applied Physics Letters 105, 172410 (2014).

17.
Grollier, J., Querlioz, D. & Stiles, M. D. Spintronic Nanodevices for Bioinspired 

Computing. Proc. IEEE 104, 2024–2039 (2016).

18.
Rajabali, M., Ovcharov, R., Khymyn, R., Fulara, H., Kumar, A., Litvineko, A., 

Zahedinejad, M., Houshang, A., Awad, A. A. & Akerman, J. Injection Locking of Linearlike and 
Soliton Spin-Wave Modes in Nanoconstriction Spin Hall Nano-oscillators. Phys. Rev. Applied
19, 034070 (2023).


19.
Dvornik, M., Awad, A. A. & Åkerman, J. Origin of Magnetization Auto-Oscillations in 

Constriction-Based Spin Hall Nano-Oscillators. Phys. Rev. Applied 9, 014017 (2018).

20.
Kumar, A., Rajabali, M., Gonzalez, V., Zahedinejad, M., Houshang, A., & Akerman, J.

Fabrication of voltage-gated spin Hall nano-oscillators. Nanoscale 14, 1432–1439 (2022).

21.
Zahedinejad, M., Fulara, H., Khymyn, R., Houshang, A., Fukami, S., Kanai, S., Ohno, H.

& Akerman, J. Memristive control of mutual spin Hall nano-oscillator synchronization for 
neuromorphic computing. Nat. Mater. 21, 81–87 (2022).

22.
Awad, A. A., Durrenfield, P., Houshang, A. Dvornik, M., Lacocca, E., Dumas, R. K. & 

Akerman, J. Long-range mutual synchronization of spin Hall nano-oscillators. Nature Phys 13, 
292–299 (2017).

23.
Mazraati, H., Muralidhar, S., Etesami, S. R., Zahedinejad, M., Banuazizi, S., Chung, S., 

Awad, A. A., Khymyn, R., Dvornik, M. & Akerman, J. Mutual Synchronization of Constriction-
Based Spin Hall Nano-Oscillators in Weak In-Plane Magnetic Fields. Phys. Rev. Applied 18, 
014026 (2022).

24.
Kendziorczyk, T. & Kuhn, T. Mutual synchronization of nanoconstriction-based spin Hall 

nano-oscillators through evanescent and propagating spin waves. Phys. Rev. B 93, 134413 
(2016).

25.
Kumar, A., Fulara, H., Khymyn, R., Litvineko, A., Zahedinejad, M., Rajabali, M., Zhao, 

X., Behera, N., Hushang, A., Awad, A. A. & Akerman, J. Robust Mutual Synchronization in 
Long Spin Hall Nano-oscillator Chains. Nano Lett. 23, 6720–6726 (2023).

26.
Zahedinejad, M. Awad, A. A., Muralidhar, S., Khymyn, R., Fulara, H., Mazraati, H., 

Dvornik, M. & Akerman, J. Two-dimensional mutually synchronized spin Hall nano-oscillator 
arrays for neuromorphic computing. Nat. Nanotechnol. 15, 47–52 (2020).

27.
Houshang, A., Zahedinejad, M., Muralidhar, S., Chesinski, J., Khymyn, R., Rajabali, M, 

Fulara, H., Awad, A. A., Dvornik, M. & Akerman, J. Phase-Binarized Spin Hall Nano-Oscillator 
Arrays: Towards Spin Hall Ising Machines. Phys. Rev. Applied 17, 014003 (2022).

28.
Shirokura, T. & Hai, P. N. Bias-field-free spin Hall nano-oscillators with an out-of-plane 

precession mode. Journal of Applied Physics 127, 103904 (2020).

29.
Manna, S., Medwal, R. & Rawat, R. S. Reconfigurable neural spiking in bias field free spin 

Hall nano-oscillator. Phys. Rev. B 108, 184411 (2023).

30.
Taniguchi, T. Out-of-plane magnetization oscillation in spin Hall device assisted by field-

like torque. Applied Physics Letters 118, 142406 (2021).

31.
Manna, S., Medwal, R., Gupta, S., Mohan, J. R., Fukuma, Y. & Rawat, R. S. Anisotropy-

assisted bias-free spin Hall nano-oscillator. Applied Physics Letters 122, 072401 (2023).

32.
Marković, D., Daniels, M, Sethi, P., Kent, A., Stiles, M. & Grollier, J. Easy-plane spin Hall 

nano-oscillators as spiking neurons for neuromorphic computing. Phys. Rev. B 105, 014411 
(2022).

33.
Ito, M., Ono, S, Fukui, H., Kogirima, K., Maki, n., Hikage, T., Kato, T., Ohkochi, T, 

Yamaguchi, A., Shima, M. & Yamada, K. Uniaxial in-plane magnetic anisotropy mechanism in 
Ni, Fe, and Ni-Fe alloy films deposited on single crystal Y-cut 128° LiNbO3 using magnetron 
sputtering. Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials 564, 170177 (2022).

34.
Park, E. B., Kim, Y., Jang, S., Kim, J., Han, S. 7 Kwon, S. Induced magnetic anisotropy in 

permalloy films annealed with magnetic field. Met. Mater. Int. 19, 129–133 (2013).

35.
Medwal, R., Gupta, S., Rawat, R. S., Subramanian, A. & Fukuma, Y. Spin Pumping in 

Asymmetric Fe 50 Pt 50 /Cu/Fe 20 Ni 80 Trilayer Structure. Physica Rapid Research Ltrs 13, 
1900267 (2019).


36.
Takanashi, K., Mizuguchi, M., Kojima, T. & Tashiro, T. Fabrication and characterization 

of L 1 0 -ordered FeNi thin films. J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 50, 483002 (2017).

37.
Liu, L., Lee, O. J., Gudmundsen, T. J., Ralph, D. C. & Buhrman, R. A. Current-Induced 

Switching of Perpendicularly Magnetized Magnetic Layers Using Spin Torque from the Spin 
Hall Effect. Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 096602 (2012).

38.
Liu, L., Moriyama, T., Ralph, D. C. & Buhrman, R. A. Spin-Torque Ferromagnetic 

Resonance Induced by the Spin Hall Effect. Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 036601 (2011).

39.
Nan, T., Emori, S., Boone, C, Wang, S., Oxholm, T, jones, J., Howe, B., Brown, G. & sun, 

N. Comparison of spin-orbit torques and spin pumping across NiFe/Pt and NiFe/Cu/Pt 
interfaces. PHYSICAL REVIEW B (2015).

40.
Vansteenkiste, A., Leliaert, J., Dvornik, M., Helsen, M., Sanchez, F. & Waeyenberge, B. V.

The design and verification of MuMax3. AIP Advances 4, 107133 (2014).

41.
Izhikevich, E. M. (2000). Computing With Oscillators.

42.
Neogy, A. & Roychowdhury, J. Analysis and Design of Sub-Harmonically Injection 

Locked Oscillators.

43.
Kumar, A., Chaurasiya, A. K., Gonzalez, V., Behera, N., Khymyn, R., Awad, A. A. & 

Akerman, J. Spin wave-driven variable-phase mutual synchronization in spin Hall nano-
oscillators. Preprint at http://arxiv.org/abs/2402.00586 (2024).

44.
Markovic, D., Leroux, N., Araujo, F., Torrejon, J., Querlioz, D., Fukushima, A., Yuasa, S., 

Trastoy, J., Bortolotti, P. & Grollier, J. Reservoir computing with the frequency, phase, and 
amplitude of spin-torque nano-oscillators. Applied Physics Letters (2023).

45.
Millet, L., Jeon, H., Kim, B., Bhoi, B. & Kim, S.-K. Reservoir computing using photon-

magnon coupling. Applied Physics Letters 119, 182405 (2021).

46.
Venkat, G., Fangohr, H. & Prabhakar, A. Absorbing boundary layers for spin wave 

micromagnetics. Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials 450, 34–39 (2018).


Supplementary Information

Phase Binarization in Mutually Synchronized Bias Field-free Spin Hall Nano-

oscillators for Reservoir Computing

Sourabh Manna1, Rohit Medwal2, John Rex Mohan3, Yasuhiro Fukuma3,4, Rajdeep Singh Rawat1#

1Natural Sciences and Science Education, National Institute of Education, Nanyang 

Technological University, 637616, Singapore.

2Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, 208016, India.

3School of Computer Science and System Engineering, Kyushu Institute of Technology, Iizuka, 

820-8502, Japan.

4Research Center for Neuromorphic AI hardware, Kyushu Institute of Technology, Kitakyushu 

808-0916, Japan.

# Correspondence: rajdeep.rawat@nie.edu.sg


1. Spatial profile of current density

Figure S1 below shows the spatial distribution of the x and y components of current density vector 
𝑱𝑐 (𝑱𝑐 𝑥 and 𝑱𝑐 𝑦 respectively) along with its magnitude |𝑱𝑐| in the NC pair with 𝑑 = 200 nm.
Comparing the 𝑱𝑐 𝑥 and 𝑱𝑐 𝑦 with |𝑱𝑐|, it is evident that 𝑱𝑐 𝑥 is the dominant component of 𝑱𝑐. 
Therefore, 𝑱𝑐 𝑥 has been considered to formulate the SOT term in the simulation.

Figure S1 | Spatial distribution profile of the x-component (a), y-component (b) of the current density vector (𝑱𝑐) and 
(c) the magnitude of 𝑱𝑐 for 𝐼𝐷𝐶 = 1 mA.


2. Phase profile of the 2nd harmonic

Figure S2 shows the spatial profile of the phase of the 2nd harmonic of the magnetization auto-
oscillation for (a) 𝐼𝐷𝐶 = 1.5 mA and (b) 𝐼𝐷𝐶 = 2.5 mA. The propagating nature of the associated 
spin wave mode is clear from the figure.

Figure S2 | Spatial profile of the phase of 2nd harmonic for (a) 𝐼𝐷𝐶 = 1.5 mA and (b) 𝐼𝐷𝐶 = 2.5 mA showing the 
propagating nature of the spin wave mode.


3. Phase binarization for different values of 𝑲𝒖

Micromagnetic simulation has been carried out for different values of 𝐾𝑢 to observe the 
dependence of phase binarization phenomena on different uniaxial anisotropy field in the NC pair 
with 𝑑 = 200 nm. Figure S3 presents the results. We observe that for 5 kJ/m3 ≤ 𝐾𝑢 ≤ 8 kJ/m3, the 
phase binarization threshold current shifts towards higher input current as 𝐾𝑢 increases. However, 
for 𝐾𝑢 = 9 kJ/m3 and 10 kJ/m3, the phase binarization threshold shifts towards lower input current. 
Notably, the best discretization has been achieved for 𝐾𝑢 = 7 kJ/m3. The dependence of phase 
binarization on 𝐾𝑢 values can be explained considering the effect of demagnetization field that 
depends on the NC width. However, this is beyond the scope of this paper where we mainly focus 
on the mutual synchronization, phase binarization and their application in a ferromagnet with fixed 
uniaxial anisotropy.

Figure S3 | Phase difference between the NC SHNOs in the NC pair (𝑑 = 200 nm) as a function of 𝐼𝐷𝐶 for different 
values of 𝐾𝑢.

4. Phase binarization at room temperature (T = 300 K)

Figure S4 depicts the auto-oscillation spectra at room temperature (T = 300 K), obtained from the 
NC pair with 𝑑 = 200 nm (see Fig. 1a in the main text). The mutual synchronization and subsequent 
phase binarization have been observed in this case as well. The spectra exhibit a broader linewidth 
due to finite temperature. Notably, the phase binarization has been observed at lower threshold 
current as compared to T = 0 K case (see Fig. 1d in the main text). Therefore, we conclude that the 
random thermal fluctuation in the magnetization dynamics favors phase binarized state which 


results in lower threshold current for phase binarization. This can be useful for realizing the RC 
benchmark classification task of sin and square wave at lower input currents.

Figure S4 | Auto-oscillation spectra obtained from the NC pair (𝑝 = 200 nm) as function of 𝐼𝐷𝐶 at (a)1st harmonic and 
(b) 2nd harmonic at T = 300 K. The mutual synchronization and phase binarization have been observed here as well, 
denoting the consistency with the T = 0 case presented in the main text. (c) Phase difference (𝛿) between the NC 
SHNOs in the NC pair as function of 𝐼𝐷𝐶. The two discrete states in 𝛿 shows the phase binarization at higher values 
of 𝐼𝐷𝐶.


5. Spatial profiles of the 1st harmonic at different values of 𝑰𝑫𝑪

Here we show the spatial profiles of the spin wave modes and associated phase map of the 1st

harmonic for NC pair with 𝑑 = 800 nm. As seen from the figure, the spin wave mode profile, 
especially for the propagating 2nd harmonic changes with 𝐼𝐷𝐶 in the vicinity of the NC as well as 
in the bridge between the NCs. This variation in the spin wave mode profile may favor strong or 
weak phase binarization in the mutually synchronized auto-oscillation state. For example, weak 
phase binarization (𝛿~0.4𝜋) is observed for 𝐼𝐷𝐶 = 2.3 mA and 2.7 mA. However, strong phase 
binarization (𝛿~𝜋) is observed for 𝐼𝐷𝐶 = 2.5 mA.

Figure S5 | Spatial profile of the spin wave modes corresponding to the 1st and 2nd harmonic along with the associated 
phase at 1st harmonic in the NC pair with 𝑑 = 800 nm.


6. Magnetodipolar coupling between the NC SHNOs in the NC pair.

The long-range magnetodipolar coupling is majorly responsible to mediate mutual synchronization 
of NC SHNOs in a chain or 2D pair of NCs1–4. We carried out micromagnetic simulations to 
understand the role of magnetodipolar coupling in our bias field-free NC SHNO pair. The 
simulation has been performed in the NC pair with 𝑝 = 800 nm to ensure that there is no 
overlapping of the localized spin wave edge modes corresponding to the 1st harmonic. Firstly, we 
defined a 20 nm wide discontinuity in the NiFe region along the y-axis to separate the two NCs as 
shown in Fig. S6a. This essentially creates two separate material regions which cannot interact by
exchange interaction as the separation is much larger than the exchange length of NiFe (~ 5 nm). 
In addition, we explicitly turned off the exchange interaction between the left and right regions 
using “ext_ScaleExchange()” function in MuMax3. We further employed absorbing boundary 
condition at the rectangular boundaries of both regions to stop the spin wave propagation between 
the two regions. Lastly, we deliberately turned off the current and SOT in the left region as shown 
in the inset of Fig. S6b. Therefore, the left NC should not exhibit any auto-oscillation of local 
magnetization. However, we have observed magnetization auto-oscillation locally at both left and 
right NCs. Figure S6b and S6c demonstrate the auto-oscillation characteristics. Notably, the auto-
oscillation at the left NC is entirely driven by the auto-oscillation in the right NC as obvious from 
the exactly similar behavior of the FFT amplitude and frequency as function of 𝐼𝐷𝐶 (in the right 
NC only) as observed from Fig S6b and S6c respectively. One can notice that the auto-oscillation 
frequency and the linewidth (Δ𝑓) are same for both NCs (Fig. S6c) that match with the 
characteristic behavior of auto-oscillation frequency of single NC SHNO with 150 nm NC width 
(see Fig. 2a). Hence, the local auto-oscillation in the left NC of 100 nm NC width is driven by the 
right NC. This also explains the smaller FFT amplitude of the auto-oscillation in the left NC (Fig. 
S6b). Since, there is no spin wave propagation or any exchange interaction between the NCs, they 
can interact only through the magnetodipolar coupling which induces magnetization auto-
oscillation in the left NC in absence of any SOT.

In both NC pairs with 𝑝 = 200 nm and 𝑝 = 800 nm, the magnetodipolar interaction helps to establish 
mutual synchronization of the two NC SHNOs. However, the overlapping of the localized edge 
spin wave modes corresponding to the 1st harmonic locally modulates the anisotropy field to 
reinforce synchronization of the non-identical NC SHNOs. In addition, the spatial overlapping 
drives both the NC SHNOs towards the in-phase synchronization state.


Figure S6 | Testing for magnetodipolar coupling between the NCs. (a) NC pair (𝑝 = 800 nm) with the 20 nm wide 
discontinuity in the material region. (b) FFT amplitude obtained from the local magnetization auto-oscillation at the 
two NCs as function of 𝐼𝐷𝐶 considering no current and SOT in the left NC region (inset). (c) Variation of the auto-
oscillation frequencies obtained from the local magnetization auto-oscillation at both NCs as function of 𝐼𝐷𝐶. The 
variation of corresponding linewidth (Δ𝑓) is shown in the inset.


7. Preprocessing the input data for the classification task

Here we use the NC SHNO pair as a single dynamical node5 for performing the RC benchmark 
classification task: sin and square wave classification. The next step is, therefore, to emulate virtual 
temporal neurons for constructing the reservoir which is a randomly interconnected recurrent 
neural network. This is implemented through a standard time-multiplexing of the input data as 
shown in the Figure S7. We multiplied each value (or point) in the input data sequence by a random 
binary vector with 20 elements, each of value +1 or −1. This masking of the input data generates 
the “pre-processed inputs”. This process has been shown for four consecutive points in the sin 
wave (Fig. S7a) and square wave (Fig. S7b). Hence, each point in the input sequence is represented 
by the sequence of 20 points in the pre-processed input. The absolute values of these 20 points are 
same as the absolute value of the parent input point, as can be seen by comparing the pre-processed 
input with the input data in Fig. S7. Each point of this 20-point sequence act as the input to an 
individual node (neuron) in the reservoir. This way, one single point of input data is sent to all the 
nodes in the reservoir with random interconnection among themselves. Notably this random 
connection remains fixed for all the points in the input sequence as the random interconnection 
between the nodes in the reservoir should be time-invariant. Finally, we encode the pre-processed 
input into 𝐼𝐷𝐶 by modulating its magnitude as shown in the “Input current” subfigures in Fig. S7. 
The “Base” 𝐼𝐷𝐶 denotes the primary 𝐼𝐷𝐶 value corresponding to the individual points in the input 
data whereas, the “Modulated” 𝐼𝐷𝐶 denote the encoding of pre-processed input. The temporal 
evolution of 𝑚𝑥 corresponding to this modulated input current has been shown in Fig. 6b and 6c 
in the main text.


Figure S7 | Steps for encoding the main input data into the modulated 𝐼𝐷𝐶 as the reservoir input, shown for (a) sin 
wave and (b) square wave. Similar steps are followed for the negative half of both waveforms.  

8. Schematic of the proposed experimental arrangement for classification with trilayer 

NC SHNO pair.

Figure S8 illustrates the experimental setup for classifying sine and square waves. The NOT gate 
triggers the electronic oscillator when 𝐼𝐷𝐶 = 0, generating an oscillatory voltage signal with an 
amplitude matching the auto-oscillation amplitude at the input points in the sine waveform.


Figure S8 | Schematic of a proposed circuit to implement the RC classification task with trilayer NC SHNO pair. The 
𝐼𝐷𝐶-source generates the modulated 𝐼𝐷𝐶 values as the input of the reservoir.

9. Sin and Square wave classification for six different sequences of sin and square 

waveforms

Figure S9 below shows the classification performance of the NC pair for six different sequences 
of sin and square waveforms. We observe the 100% classification accuracy for all the sequences.



Figure S9 | Examples of the sin and square wave classification task performed by the modified NC SHNO pair (𝑑 = 
200 nm) for six different sequences of sin and square waveforms. The black dashed black line shows the assigned 
binary labels for classifications. The matching between the true labels of the testing data and the labels predicted by 
the RC shows 100% accuracy in the classification.


References

1. Mazraati, H. et al. Mutual Synchronization of Constriction-Based Spin Hall Nano-Oscillators 

in Weak In-Plane Magnetic Fields. Phys. Rev. Applied 18, 014026 (2022).

2. Awad, A. A. et al. Long-range mutual synchronization of spin Hall nano-oscillators. Nature 

Phys 13, 292–299 (2017).

3. Kumar, A. et al. Robust Mutual Synchronization in Long Spin Hall Nano-oscillator Chains. 

Nano Lett. 23, 6720–6726 (2023).

4. Zahedinejad, M. et al. Two-dimensional mutually synchronized spin Hall nano-oscillator arrays 

for neuromorphic computing. Nat. Nanotechnol. 15, 47–52 (2020).

5. Appeltant, L. Information processing using a single dynamical node as complex system. 

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS (2011).


