Precision frequency tuning of tunable transmon qubits using alternating-bias assisted annealing

Xiqiao Wang,1, ∗ Joel Howard,1 Eyob A. Sete,1 Greg Stiehl,1 Cameron Kopas,1 Stefano
Poletto,1 Xian Wu,1 Mark Field,1 Nicholas Sharac,1 Christopher Eckberg,1 Hilal Cansizoglu,1

Raja Katta,1 Josh Mutus,1 Andrew Bestwick,1 Kameshwar Yadavalli,1 and David P. Pappas1

1Rigetti Computing, 775 Heinz Avenue, Berkeley, CA 94710, USA
(Dated: May 1, 2024)

Superconducting quantum processors are one of the leading platforms for realizing scalable fault-tolerant
quantum computation (FTQC). The recent demonstration of post-fabrication tuning of Josephson junctions using
alternating-bias assisted annealing (ABAA) technique and a reduction in junction loss after ABAA illuminates
a promising path towards precision tuning of qubit frequency while maintaining high coherence. Here, we
demonstrate precision tuning of the maximum |0⟩ → |1⟩ transition frequency ( 𝑓 max
01
) of tunable transmon
qubits by performing ABAA at room temperature using commercially available test equipment. We characterize
the impact of junction relaxation and aging on resistance spread after tuning, and demonstrate a frequency
equivalent tuning precision of 7.7 MHz (0.17%) based on targeted resistance tuning on hundreds of qubits, with
a resistance tuning range up to 18.5%. Cryogenic measurements on tuned and untuned qubits show evidence
of improved coherence after ABAA with no significant impact on tunability. Despite a small global offset, we
show an empirical 𝑓 max
01
tuning precision of 18.4 MHz by tuning a set of multi-qubit processors targeting their
designed Hamiltonians. We experimentally characterize high-fidelity parametric resonance iSWAP gates on
two ABAA-tuned 9-qubit processors with fidelity as high as 99.51 ± 0.20%. On the best-performing device,
we measured across the device a median fidelity of 99.22% and an average fidelity of 99.13 ± 0.12%. Yield
modeling analysis predicts high detuning-edge-yield using ABAA beyond the 1000-qubit scale. These results
demonstrate the cutting-edge capability of frequency targeting using ABAA and open up a new avenue to
systematically improving Hamiltonian targeting and optimization for scaling high-performance superconducting
quantum processors.

I.
INTRODUCTION

Scaling of fault-tolerant quantum computing using super-
conducting quantum information processors requires two-
qubit gates with fidelities 99% or better across the device [1].
Among major classes of qubit architectures, square lattices
of tunable qubits with a tunable coupler between each pair
of qubits represent a promising architecture for their ability
to provide isolation for single-qubit gates while enabling fast
two-qubit gate control with dynamic coupling [2–9]. A key
challenge for scaling tunable coupling lattice architecture is
precise tuning of the tunable qubit’s maximum |0⟩ → |1⟩ tran-
sition frequency ( 𝑓 max
01 , the flux sweet spot) to the designed
Hamiltonian pattern where qubit-qubit detuning is carefully
optimized to within a tight distribution range to (1) allow ac-
tivating a target gate (iSWAP or CZ) on each two-qubit edge
without parking the qubits off of 𝑓 max
01 , (2) enable shallow
flux modulation to suppress pulse distortion and leakage, and
preserve qubit coherence under modulation, and (3) avoid fre-
quency collision between nearest and next-nearest-neighbor
qubits while parking qubits at 𝑓 max
01 [8]. However, typical fre-
quency variations in the as-fabricated transmon qubits are lim-
ited to a few percent due to challenges in controlling junction
critical dimensions in the nanometer scale [10–12].
Previ-
ously, laser annealing [13–16], thermal annealing [17–19],
and e-beam annealing [20] on fixed-frequency transmon qubits
have been reported for frequency tuning, among which laser
annealing demonstrated the state-of-the-art frequency tuning

∗ xwang@rigetti.com

precision of 18.5 MHz (empirical) and 4.7 MHz (frequency-
equivalent resistance precision) with no measurable impact on
qubit coherence. Recently, alternating bias assisted annealing
(ABAA) of amorphous oxide tunnel junctions [21] emerged as
a promising, alternative technique for scalable precision fre-
quency tuning offering a unique combination of advantages,
which includes reduction of junction loss and two-level de-
fects in Josephson junction barriers, a large resistance tuning
range (> 70% at 80◦𝐶), and ease of implementation requiring
only conventional test equipment. However, precise frequency
tuning and Hamiltonian targeting using ABAA have not been
reported till now.

In this paper, we adapt the ABAA technique for post-
fabrication trimming of 𝑓 max
01
to the desired Hamiltonian pat-
terns and demonstrate high-fidelity two-qubit gates on ABAA-
tuned multi-qubit quantum processors. We characterize the
impact of junction relaxation and aging on resistance spread
following ABAA tuning for resistance targeting calibration.
Combining baseline statistics of targeted resistance tuning on
hundreds of qubits and cryogenic frequency prediction charac-
terization, we demonstrate a frequency-equivalent resistance
tuning precision of 7.7 MHz, which corresponds to a fre-
quency spread of 0.17% around the predicted average qubit
frequency. On cooling down both ABAA-tuned and untuned
tunable transmon qubits, we observe evidence of improved co-
herence after ABAA frequency trimming with no measurable
impact on tunability. We tune a set of multi-qubit processors
targeting their designed Hamiltonians and show an empiri-
cal frequency tuning precision of 18.4 MHz in 𝑓 max
01 , including
additional deviations from pre-cooldown processes, frequency
prediction, and 𝑓 max
01
measurement conditions. We experimen-
tally demonstrate high-fidelity parametric resonance two-qubit

arXiv:2407.06425v1  [quant-ph]  8 Jul 2024


2

(a)

(b)

FIG. 1. Relaxation and aging after active ABAA tuning. (a) Re-
sistance distributions of the same set of qubits at different stages of
resistance tuning. The initial distribution (pink, 7.5Ω bin width) is
tuned by ABAA on a qubit-by-qubit basis to the blue distribution
(0.5Ω bin width), which consists of the resistance measured at each
qubit once a pre-set threshold (4496Ω) is surpassed, which also trig-
gers the termination of the active tuning pulse sequence. The blue
distribution then evolves into the distribution in cyan (3Ω bin width)
by the time when ABAA tuning is completed on all components and
the tuned resistances are probed within the same day. (b) Time evolu-
tion of the tuned resistance distribution (6.7Ω bin width) monitored
on a subset of the population shown in (a) at 4 days, 8 days, and 11
days after the tuned resistance is first measured on day 0. Inset: a
power-law fit (𝑦 = 3.18 × 𝑥0.11) to the time evolution of the mean
values of the tuned distribution. Error bars represent one standard
deviation of the distributions.

iSWAP gates on two ABAA-tuned 9-qubit processors with fi-
delity as high as 99.51 ± 0.20%. We calibrated iSWAP gates
on all edges of both devices achieving a median fidelity (gate
time) of 99.00% (68 ns) and 99.22% (80 ns), respectively.
We discuss the implications of the improved 𝑓 max
01
targeting
precision to detuning edge yield and scaling.
We envision
that the ABAA technique will be broadly applied as an easy-
to-implement, high-precision frequency tuning approach for
scaling high-performance superconducting quantum proces-
sors.

II.
RELAXATION AND AGING AFTER ABAA

In this work, we perform ABAA adaptively to incremen-
tally adjust the qubit resistance. An ABAA pulse sequence

FIG. 2. Change in resistance monitored on three qubits during junc-
tion relaxation following ABAA tuning to the same threshold resis-
tance (7711 Ω). Inset: same dataset plotted in log-log scale. Arrows
in the inset mark the 2 distinct kinks that approximately divide the re-
laxation curves into short (𝑡 < 0.2 hr), intermediate (0.2 < 𝑡 < 2 hr),
and long (𝑡 > 2 hr) sections. The slopes in the log-log plot can be
characterized by the exponent of power-law fit (𝑦 = 𝛽𝑥𝛼 with 𝛽 and
𝛼 the fitting parameters). The fitted exponents (𝛼) for the three qubits
are 0.30±0.02, 0.24±0.01, and 0.16±0.01 for short, medium and long
times, respectively.

[21] is applied simultaneously to both Josephson Junctions
(JJ) within a tunable transmon qubit. Qubit resistance is mon-
itored at each ABAA tuning pulse cycle to determine if a pre-
determined threshold resistance has been reached. The sample
is kept at room temperature during the entire tuning operation
to avoid parasitic conductance through the substrate for precise
resistance measurement, and to suppress Josephson Junction
(JJ) aging and resistance drifting during active ABAA tuning
[19]. A typical ABAA tuning workflow starts with probing
the as-fabricated resistance (𝑅untuned) of all qubits on a quan-
tum processor. The fabrication target is set to be below the
designed target and within the suitable range for ABAA tun-
ing. The tuning target resistance 𝑅𝑇 is determined from the
designed Hamiltonian of a qubit lattice using a previously cal-
ibrated frequency prediction relation, also reserving a global
aging budget (typically 2%) in anticipation of continued aging
after ABAA tuning until the cooldown test. ABAA tuning
is then performed sequentially on a qubit-by-qubit basis till
all qubits are tuned. Finally, all qubits on the processor are
re-probed, denoting as 𝑅tuned, and compared with the tuning
target for evaluating the resistance tuning precision.
To assess the impact of junction relaxation and aging be-
havior on resistance tuning, as shown in Fig. 1(a), we tune a
set of qubits (61 in total) to the same threshold resistance of
4496 Ω. For each qubit, we stop the ABAA pulsing sequence
immediately after detecting the last monitor resistance 𝑅𝑎 sur-
passing the 4496 Ω threshold and move on to tune the next
qubit. After tuning a batch, we measure the distribution of the
tuned resistance 𝑅tuned. The average waiting time between the
last tuning pulse on each component and the time when 𝑅tuned


3

is probed is approximately 5 hours for the tuned population
shown in Fig. 1(a). The distributions of 𝑅untuned, monitor
resistance 𝑅𝑎 at the last tuning pulse, and 𝑅tuned are plotted in
pink, blue, and cyan, respectively. 𝑅𝑎 centers on 1.9 Ω above
the 4496 Ω threshold with a standard deviation of 1.7 Ω, rep-
resenting an ultimate tuning precision set by the finite tuning
step size. The distribution in 𝑅tuned exhibits a 127.7 Ω shift
to the right of the blue distribution with a standard deviation
of 17.1 Ω. As will be discussed in the following section, this
global shift in mean value results from the relaxation behavior
within JJ barrier, and the increase in spread is dominated by
the slight difference in relaxation at each component by the
time when 𝑅tuned is probed.

A subset of ABAA-tuned qubits (28 in total) from Fig. 1(a)
is monitored during a prolonged aging period covering the
typical period between fabrication and a cryogenic cooldown,
up to 11 days after ABAA tuning [see Fig. 1 (b)]. The global
mean shift in the aging of the tuned distribution slows down
quickly with a power-law exponent fit of 0.11, as shown in
the inset log-log plot. However, the distribution spread does
not increase over time. This is consistent with the expectation
from the exponential slow-down of glassy relaxation [22] and
barrier oxidation [23] processes that most relaxation/aging oc-
curs within the first few hours and the rate of change quickly
approaches zero afterward. Meanwhile, witness components
(untuned) from the same wafer over the same period do not ex-
hibit appreciable aging, attributing the observed global aging
shift in Fig. 1(b) to ABAA tuning.

We examined the temporal behavior of resistance relax-
ation following the ABAA pulse sequence to probe the in-
herent uncertainty associated with targeting precision and to
identify potential factors contributing to variability in tuned
resistance levels. Figure 2 illustrates our continuous moni-
toring of resistance over 15 hours immediately following the
final tuning pulse for three ABAA-tuned qubits. Even though
these three qubits were tuned to the same threshold resistance
𝑅𝑎 = 7711 Ω, they settled to slightly different values with sim-
ilar time dependencies over time. When plotted on a log-log
scale, inset in Fig. 2, it can be seen that they exhibit linear
behavior with slightly different time constants over short, in-
termediate, and long time scales.
This indicates that there
may be different relaxation mechanisms that depend strongly
on the nano-structure of the junctions. While identification of
the specific mechanisms in these windows of time is out of the
scope of this study, possible mechanisms in the Al and junc-
tion include 1) stress and relaxation in the junction in the bulk
AlO𝑥 or at the Al/AlO𝑥 interfaces [22, 24]; and 2) oxygen
diffusion back and forth between the junction and electrodes
into the bulk Al or grain boundaries [25–27]. Further work to
investigate these effects, for example, using functional TEM,
modifying the junction interfaces and aluminum grain struc-
ture, and applying stress to the junctions, may help elucidate
the origin of the spread in relaxation.

III.
ABAA TUNING PRECISION

To evaluate the resistance tuning precision for targeting the
resistance values assigned based on design Hamiltonians, as
shown in Fig. 3 (a), we perform baseline statistical analysis
on a set of 221 tuned qubits whose tuning target (𝑅𝑇) is set
to 98% of their design values, reserving a pre-cooldown aging
budget of 2%. Normalized to the target resistance on the x-axis
in Fig. 3 (a), the untuned (as-fabricated) resistance distribu-
tion (pink) is on average 8.7% below the target (intentional
under-targeting in fabrication for post-fabrication tuning) with
a spread (1-𝜎) of 3.5%, a spread that is typical to the state-of-
the-art JJ fabrication variation [10]. After ABAA tuning, the
tuned resistance is approximately normally distributed with a
mean value of 0.17% above the target and a spread (1-𝜎) of
0.34%, showing a ∼10-fold reduction in spread from the un-
tuned distribution. We demonstrate a tuning range of up to
18.5% with this sample set, which is sufficient to cover the
typical range of qubit fabrication variations.
When performing targeted ABAA tuning at each qubit,
we reserve a pre-calibrated percentage for junction relaxation
and determine the threshold resistance upon which to stop
the ABAA pulse sequence at each component. The inset in
Fig. 3 (a) shows the distribution of the measured resistance
𝑅𝑎 at the last tuning pulse with respect to 𝑅tuned, which cor-
responds to the relaxation percentage experienced by qubits
after the last ABAA tuning pulse till when the tuned resis-
tance is probed. This distribution in 𝑅𝑎 effectively represents
a calibration on when to terminate the ABAA pulse sequence
for the resistance to evolve through relaxation to the target
resistance 𝑅𝑇. We find the relaxation carries the resistance
by an average distance of 2.89% with a standard deviation of
0.30% before reaching 𝑅tuned, with no appreciable dependence
on the total amount of ABAA tuning and the initial or final
resistance values during the active ABAA tuning. The close
agreement between the precision in 𝑅tuned (0.34% against the
tuning target) and the variation in relaxation (0.3%) highlights
the junction-dependent relaxation behavior as a dominant fac-
tor to resistance tuning imprecision in this study.
To correlate the resistance tuning precision characterized
at room temperature to its equivalent frequency tuning pre-
cision of 𝑓 max
01
at cryogenic temperatures, we experimentally
measure the 𝑓 max
01
of a set of tuned and untuned tunable trans-
mon qubits and extract the frequency prediction relation us-
ing an empirical power law fit, as shown in Fig. 3(b). We
found that both the tuned and untuned qubits fit well to a sin-
gle power-law curve, indicating no appreciable impact from
ABAA tuning on the frequency prediction used for assign-
ing target resistance. The fitted exponent is ∼ 0.51, in good
agreement with the 0.5 exponent expected from the trans-
mon theory and Ambegaokar-Baratoff relation [28, 29]. The
standard deviation of the fitting residues is 12.4 MHz, rep-
resenting an empirical frequency prediction imprecision that
includes potential variations in the superconducting gap as well
as resistance deviations arising from additional pre-cooldown
processes, such as chip cleaning and packaging [15]. Com-
bining the resistance tuning precision (0.34%) from Fig. 3 (a)
and the empirical power law fit from Fig. 3(b), we derive the


4

(a)
(b)

FIG. 3. Statistics on targeted resistance tuning precision and its frequency-equivalent precision. (a) Resistance distributions of a set of 221
qubits before and after ABAA tuning. The x-axis represents the normalized distance from the measured resistance to the post-tuning target
resistance, which is set to 98% of the design resistance values. The distribution in pink (0.16% bin width) and the distribution in cyan (0.06%
bin width) represent, respectively, untuned (as-fabricated) and tuned resistance distributions. The inset plots the distribution of the percentage
difference between the resistance measured at the last trimming pulse and the resulting tuned resistance (𝑅tuned), characterizing the distribution
of the relaxation distances by the time when 𝑅tuned is measured. (b) Experimentally measured qubit frequency ( 𝑓 max
01
) versus room-temperature
resistance on a set of tuned and untuned tunable transmon qubits. The room-temperature resistance for both tuned and untuned qubits is probed
right before packaging (3 days before the cryogenic cooldown date). The black line represents an empirical power-law fit to all data points.

frequency equivalence of the ABAA resistance tuning preci-
sion to be 𝜎𝑓 = 𝛿 𝑓 max
01 /𝛿𝑅 · 𝜎𝑅 = 7.7 MHz (0.17% of the
predicted mean frequency 4556MHz), which is comparable
to the state-of-the-art equivalent frequency tuning precision
(4.7MHz) demonstrated by IBM using laser annealing on fixed
frequency qubits. [15]

IV.
QUBIT COHERENCE AND TUNABILITY

Aside from precision frequency tuning to the designed
Hamiltonian patterns, maintaining high coherence and desired
tunability range is essential for achieving high 2-qubit gate fi-
delity. To evaluate the impact of ABAA tuning on coherence,
we perform the coherence comparison using a coherence test
vehicle chip design where qubits are coupled to frequency-
multiplexed feedlines through readout resonators without tun-
able couplers in between nearest neighbor qubits. We mea-
sured the qubit relaxation time 𝑇1, qubit Ramsey decoherence
time 𝑇∗
2 , and qubit pure dephasing time 𝑇𝜙 while parking at
𝑓 max
01
on a set of tuned and untuned tunable transmon qubits
(from the same wafer) and plot them side-by-side for compar-
ison in Fig. 4 (a, b, c). While the improvement in 𝑇∗
2 and
𝑇𝜙 is statistically significant, the improvement in 𝑇1 is less
obvious within the error range. Nevertheless, ABAA-tuned
qubits show higher median coherence values across all three
coherence indicators. We calculate the frequency normalized
loss tangent (1/(𝑇1 · 2𝜋 𝑓 max
01 )), and observe a reduction in me-
dian loss from 9.8e-7 on untuned qubits to 7.4e-7 on tuned
qubits, which is consistent with the loss reduction that we
have previously observed on ABAA tuned qubits at elevated
temperatures [21].

FIG. 4. Impact of ABAA tuning on the coherence and tunability of
tunable transmon qubits. The first three panels show box plots com-
paring (a) qubit relaxation time 𝑇1, (b) qubit Ramsey decoherence
time 𝑇∗
2 , and (c) qubit pure dephasing time 𝑇𝜙 on tuned and untuned
qubits from the same wafer. All coherence data points were measured
at 𝑓 max
01
. (d) shows box plots comparing qubit tunability on tuned and
untuned qubits with nominally identical tunability designs from the
same wafer (a different wafer from the one for the coherence com-
parison). The tunability ( 𝑓 max
01
− 𝑓 min
01 ) is calculated from measured
𝑓 max
01
and 𝑓 min
01
values at each qubit.


5

FIG. 5. Frequency tuning precision on 9-qubit processors. (a) Box
plots of the distance from the measured 𝑓 max
01
to the design values.
Pink boxes represent data from untuned (as-fabricated) processors.
Cyan boxes represent data from ABAA-tuned processors. (b) Statis-
tical aggregates of data from (a) after subtracting the global offset on
each processor. (bin size = 10 MHz, dashed lines are Gaussian fit)

To empirically determine the impact of ABAA on the tun-
ability of tunable transmon qubits, we experimentally measure
the 𝑓 max
01
and 𝑓 min
01
values of a set of ABAA-tuned and un-
tuned qubits with identical tunability design and from a same
wafer, and calculate the tunability ( 𝑓 max
01
− 𝑓 min
01 ) of each qubit.
See box plots in Fig. 4 (d). The tunability variations of un-
tuned qubits are dominated by fabrication variation of the two
JJs in each tunable transmon qubit. Previous ABAA study
on single junctions [21] has shown that the junction size de-
pendence has relatively small (few %) correction on ABAA
tuning rate over nearly an order of magnitude in junction area,
however, as shown in Fig. 4 (d), the difference in tunability
between ABAA-tuned qubits and untuned qubits is statistically
insignificant within the statistical error of fabrication variation.
This result serves as an empirical demonstration that, within
an integrated process flow, the ABAA tuning introduces no
statistically significant change in tunability.

V.
HAMILTONIAN TARGETING AND TWO-QUBIT GATE
PERFORMANCE

To demonstrate ABAA’s frequency tuning capability in an
integrated workflow for improving detuning edge yield and
achieving high two-qubit gate fidelity on full lattices, we trim
the tunable qubits on a set of 9-qubit processors targeting the
designed Hamiltonian frequency. Qubits on each 9-qubit pro-
cessor are arranged in a 3 × 3 square lattice with a tunable
coupler between each pair of neighboring qubits. Figure 5(a)
plots the deviation from the measured 𝑓 max
01
to the design val-
ues on three tuned (cyan) and three untuned (pink) processors.
The typical measurement uncertainty in 𝑓 max
01
is ∼4 MHz due to
variations in flux bias conditions at adjacent tunable couplers
when operating within normal parameter regimes. Despite
chip-specific global offsets that are common on both tuned
and untuned processors, the tuned processors exhibit a sig-
nificant reduction in frequency spread compared to untuned
processors. The chip-level global offset observed on tuned
chips is likely originating from a combined effect of (1) an
operational mismatch between the reserved aging budget for
tuning targeting and the actual aging amount until the start of
the cooldown, and (2) offset in target resistance assignment
due to a systematic error in empirical frequency prediction.
However, we emphasize that a global offset of an order of a
few percent is typically not a concern for arriving at the de-
sired Hamiltonian pattern on a single-chip quantum processor
because it does not affect achieving desired detuning between
neighboring qubits for high-fidelity two-qubit gates. To empir-
ically quantify the frequency tuning precision on real quantum
processors, in Fig. 5(b), we plot the statistical aggregates of
the data shown in Fig. 5 (a) after subtracting the global offset
from each tuned and untuned chip. The distributions outlined
by Gaussian fit give a standard deviation of 18.4 MHz on tuned
and 93.5 MHz on untuned quantum processors, corresponding
to 0.40% and 2.02% of the average design frequency (4628
MHz). The appearance of symmetric frequency distribution
after ABAA tuning also indicates that the tuned spread is inde-
pendent of the amount of ABAA tuning and the time elapsed
after tuning.
We characterized two-qubit gate fidelity on ABAA-tuned
9-qubit processors with design Hamiltonians optimized for
iSWAP gates. To minimize the impact of flux noise on the
dephasing time of the modulated qubit, qubit frequencies are
designed such that the nearest neighbor qubit-qubit detuning
is centered around ∼ 50 MHz. This ensures the modulated
qubit will have less frequency excursion from its maximum
frequency to bring it into resonance with its neighbors. In ad-
dition, the Hamiltonian is designed to make the qubit-qubit de-
tunings large enough that the residual ZZ interaction is minimal
at zero-coupling bias. Figure 6 (a) shows the design Hamil-
tonian of one of the ABAA-tuned 9-qubit processors [tuned
#3 in Fig. 5(a)], where the qubit-qubit frequency detunings
range from 20-80 MHz, with a median qubit-qubit detuning of
50.5 MHz. The yellow arrows show which qubit’s frequency
is modulated among two neighboring qubits in resonance to
activate the iSWAP gate. We allocate the qubit frequencies
such that there are no more than two edges (or gates) activated


6

Designed qubit-qubit detunings
Measured qubit-qubit detunings
(a)
(b)
iSWAP iRB fidelities (%): median = 99%
(c)

FIG. 6. Two-qubit gate performance on an ABAA-tuned 9-qubit device. (a) Designed qubit-qubit detunings in 𝑓 max
01
between nearest neighbors.
(b) Measured qubit-qubit detunings (at 𝑔 = 0 tunable coupler flux bias condition, where g is the qubit-qubit coupling) that are used for two-qubit
gate operations in (c). Only qubit-0 is parked off of 𝑓 max
01
(by -27 MHz) to arrive at the detunings shown in (b), where detunings at all edges
fall within the desired small detuning range. All detunings in (a) and (b) are in MHz. The yellow arrows show the directions of the modulated
qubits being moved to enact the iSWAP gate. For example, qubit 3 has a higher frequency than qubits 4 and 6 and thus iSWAP gates are
activated by moving its frequency down to bring it in resonance with qubits 4 or 6. As shown in (b), the direction of the gate operations changed
only on two edges [black arrows in (b)] from (a). (c) Edge distribution of the iSWAP interleaved randomized benchmarking (iRB) fidelity for
detuning conditions as shown in (b), reaching median iRB fidelity of 99.00% on the 9-qubit device. The median iSWAP gate time is 68 ns.

by modulating the same qubit. This minimizes the number of
frequency collisions between neighboring qubits during gate
operation. Figure 6 (b) shows the qubit-qubit detunings that
are measured after ABAA at 𝑔 = 0 tunable coupler flux bias
conditions, with detunings at all edges within the desired small
detuning range and a median detuning of 49 MHz, and used for
two-qubit gate characterization in Fig. 6 (c). Only one qubit
(qubit 0) needs to be parked off of 𝑓 max
01
(by -27 MHz) to arrive
at the desired frequency configuration shown in Fig. 6 (b),
highlighting the excellent frequency allocation after ABAA
tuning. Without parking any qubit off of its 𝑓 max
01 , the dif-
ference between the measured and designed detunings is on
average -10.8 ± 22.5 MHz across the lattice, which is con-
sistent with the statistical detuning error of ± 26.0 MHz that
is expected from the measured single-qubit frequency tuning
precision of 18.4 MHz. We calibrated parametric resonance
two-qubit iSWAP gates [8] on each edge of the 9-qubit device.
Parametric resonance gates are activated by modulating the
frequency of the higher-frequency qubits to bring the qubits
into resonance. We benchmark the iSWAP gates with inter-
leaved randomized benchmarking (iRB) [30].
Figure 6 (c)
shows the distribution of the iSWAP iRB fidelities, with fi-
delity as high as 99.51±0.20% and a median fidelity reaching
99.00%. The median two-qubit gate time is 68 ns, including a
total of 16 ns padding before and after the flux pulse.

We also characterized a second ABAA-tuned 9-qubit device
where we moved two qubits off of 𝑓 max
01
to avoid frequency col-
lisions and measured qubit-qubit detunings with a median of
48 MHz, which is very close to the design qubit-qubit detuning.
On this device, we characterized parametric resonance iSWAP
gates on each edge and benchmarked their performance with
iRB, getting a median fidelity of 99.22% and mean fidelity of
99.13 ± 0.12%.

VI.
YIELD ANALYSIS AND SCALING

To illustrate the impact of ABAA frequency tuning on yield-
ing tunable qubit lattices at scale, we perform statistical yield
modeling analysis as a function of qubit number and frequency
tuning precision. We apply the simulation to a scalable Hamil-
tonian with edge (qubit-qubit) 𝑓 max
01
detunings designed in
the 40 − 110 MHz range and define yield as the probabil-
ity of all nearest neighbor 2-qubit edges at 𝑓 max
01
falling in the
20 − 130 MHz detuning range (i.e., desired for high-fidelity
iSWAP gates). Here the Hamiltonian is constructed by tiling
a 9-qubit (3×3 lattice) unit-cell design that ensures detunings
fall within the 40−110 MHz range within the 9-qubit lattice as
well as along stitching edges, allowing 20 MHz buffer zones
from the yield boundaries on both ends. This Hamiltonian
is scalable because it enables up-scaling quantum processors
by stitching yielded 9-qubit chips via inter-module couplers
[9, 31]. Figure 7 (a) shows the simulated chip yield as a func-
tion of the number of qubits on the chip, over a range of fre-
quency tuning precision. Figure 7 (b) assumes a layout of 212
dice of 9-qubit chips on a 6” wafer and plots the predicted num-
ber of yielded 9-qubit chips (left y-axis) and the corresponding
number of yielded qubits (right y-axis) per wafer as a function
of frequency tuning precision. The three curves with markers
in Fig. 7 (a) and the three color-coded data points in Fig. 7
(b) correspond to the relevant tuning precisions demonstrated
in this study. (1) With the frequency spread of 93.5 MHz on
as-fabricated devices, it is virtually impossible to yield any
chip beyond the few-qubit chip scale. The number of yielded
9-qubit chips per wafer is approximately zero. (2) With the em-
pirical frequency tuning precision of 18.4 MHz demonstrated
using ABAA in an integrated process flow, there is a ∼ 17%
chance for a 9-qubit chip to meet the detuning range while


7

FIG. 7. Statistical yield analysis as a function of qubit number and
frequency spread.
Yield here is defined as the probability of all
qubit-qubit edges at 𝑓 max
01
falling in the 20-130 MHz detuning range,
desired for high-fidelity iSWAP gates. (a) Simulated chip yield as a
function of the number of qubits per chip over a range of frequency
tuning precision. The design Hamiltonian is constructed by tiling a
9-qubit lattice design that ensures all detunings fall within the 40-110
MHz range both within the 9-qubit lattice and along the stitching
edges. Curves with markers are relevant to measured quantities -
93.5 MHz is the spread observed in untuned devices, 18.4 MHz is the
empirical spread measured in ABAA-tuned devices, and 7.7 MHz is
the projected spread in ABAA-tuned devices based on the resistance
tuning precision without other sources of uncertainties. (b) Number
of yielded, tileable 9-qubit chips (left y-axis) per 6” wafer assuming
a total of 212 9-qubit dice per wafer. The right y-axis corresponds to
the total number of qubits on the yielded 9-qubit chips per wafer.

parking at 𝑓 max
01 . This corresponds to yielding approximately
35 tileable 9-qubit chips (315 yielded qubits total) per 6” wafer.
(3) With the frequency-equivalent resistance tuning precision
of 7.7 MHz of ABAA, a 9-qubit chip yield of 86% can be
achieved, which corresponds to yielding 182 tileable 9-qubit
chips per 6” wafer, sufficient for tiling into a scaled-up quantum
processor of over 1500 qubits. We also note that the chip yield
at 7.7 MHz frequency spread [green curve in Fig. 7 (a)] does
not drop to zero till surpassing the 100-qubit chip scale, indi-
cating possibilities of yielding monolithic chips of 100-qubit.
These results demonstrate ABAA as a viable post-fabrication
frequency tuning technique for achieving high detuning-edge

yield beyond the 1000-qubit scale on modular superconducting
quantum processors.
VII.
CONCLUSION

In this work, we characterized the qubit relaxation behavior
during ABAA and demonstrated the cutting-edge frequency
tuning capability using ABAA. Baseline statistics of hundreds
of ABAA-tuned tunable transmon qubits yield a frequency-
equivalent resistance tuning precision of 7.7 MHz in 𝑓 max
01 ,
sufficient for achieving high detuning-edge-yield beyond the
1000-qubit scale. Cryogenic cooldown measurements of tuned
and untuned qubits showed evidence of improved qubit co-
herence after ABAA with no measurable impact on tunabil-
ity. Despite a global shift due to calibration offset and ag-
ing, we experimentally demonstrated an empirical frequency
tuning precision of 18.4 MHz when targeting the designed
Hamiltonians on multi-qubit quantum processors. We demon-
strated high-fidelity parametric resonance two-qubit iSWAP
gates on two ABAA-tuned 9-qubit processors with a median
two-qubit fidelity of 99.00% and 99.22%, respectively. The
results demonstrated in this study prove that the ABAA tech-
nique is an easy-to-implement and efficient method for preci-
sion frequency tuning and Hamiltonian targeting on scaled-up
superconducting quantum processors. Future work includes
improving frequency prediction precision and a better under-
standing of the junction relaxation and aging mechanism to
explore the ultimate tuning precision using ABAA, improv-
ing control of the global frequency offset at the chip level for
improving scaling yield in a modular quantum processor ar-
chitecture [31], and simultaneous tuning of multiple qubits in
parallel for throughput improvement.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank the Rigetti Fab-1 team for junction process devel-
opment and sample fabrication.

CONTRIBUTIONS

X.Wang
conceived
and
implemented
the
precision
freuqency tuning using ABAA and wrote the manuscript; J.H.
performed frequency prediction calibration and yield simula-
tion; E.S. designed the iSWAP-optimized Hamiltonian, char-
acterized the two-qubit gates, and ran the data analysis; X.Wu,
S.P., G.H., and C.E. performed qubit frequency characteri-
zation, and data analysis; C.K. performed qubit coherence
characterization; M.F. and J.H. helped develop the measure-
ment apparatus; H.C. and N.S. developed the JJ fabrication
process; R.K., J.M., and K.Y. provided important suggestions
and leadership; A.B. and D.P.P. are co-PIs who supervised the
project. All authors contributed to the writing and editing of
the manuscript.


8

[1] A. G. Fowler, A. M. Stephens, and P. Groszkowski, High-
threshold universal quantum computation on the surface code,
Phys. Rev. A 80, 052312 (2009).

[2] F. Yan, P. Krantz, Y. Sung, M. Kjaergaard, D. L. Campbell, T. P.
Orlando, S. Gustavsson, and W. D. Oliver, Tunable coupling
scheme for implementing high-fidelity two-qubit gates, Phys.
Rev. Appl. 10, 054062 (2018).

[3] F. Arute, K. Arya, R. Babbush, D. Bacon, J. C. Bardin,
R. Barends, R. Biswas, S. Boixo, F. G. S. L. Brandao, D. A.
Buell, B. Burkett, Y. Chen, Z. Chen, B. Chiaro, R. Collins,
W. Courtney, A. Dunsworth, E. Farhi, B. Foxen, A. Fowler,
C. Gidney, M. Giustina, R. Graff, K. Guerin, S. Habegger, M. P.
Harrigan, M. J. Hartmann, A. Ho, M. Hoffmann, T. Huang,
T. S. Humble, S. V. Isakov, E. Jeffrey, Z. Jiang, D. Kafri,
K. Kechedzhi, J. Kelly, P. V. Klimov, S. Knysh, A. Korotkov,
F. Kostritsa, D. Landhuis, M. Lindmark, E. Lucero, D. Lyakh,
S. Mandr`a, J. R. McClean, M. McEwen, A. Megrant, X. Mi,
K. Michielsen, M. Mohseni, J. Mutus, O. Naaman, M. Nee-
ley, C. Neill, M. Y. Niu, E. Ostby, A. Petukhov, J. C. Platt,
C. Quintana, E. G. Rieffel, P. Roushan, N. C. Rubin, D. Sank,
K. J. Satzinger, V. Smelyanskiy, K. J. Sung, M. D. Trevithick,
A. Vainsencher, B. Villalonga, T. White, Z. J. Yao, P. Yeh,
A. Zalcman, H. Neven, and J. M. Martinis, Quantum supremacy
using a programmable superconducting processor, Nature 574,
505 (2019).

[4] J. Stehlik, D. M. Zajac, D. L. Underwood, T. Phung, J. Blair,
S. Carnevale, D. Klaus, G. A. Keefe, A. Carniol, M. Kumph,
M. Steffen, and O. E. Dial, Tunable coupling architecture for
fixed-frequency transmon superconducting qubits, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 127, 080505 (2021).

[5] Y. Sung, L. Ding, J. Braum¨uller, A. Veps¨al¨ainen, B. Kannan,
M. Kjaergaard, A. Greene, G. O. Samach, C. McNally, D. Kim,
A. Melville, B. M. Niedzielski, M. E. Schwartz, J. L. Yoder,
T. P. Orlando, S. Gustavsson, and W. D. Oliver, Realization of
high-fidelity cz and 𝑧𝑧-free iswap gates with a tunable coupler,
Phys. Rev. X 11, 021058 (2021).

[6] P. Mundada, G. Zhang, T. Hazard, and A. Houck, Suppression
of qubit crosstalk in a tunable coupling superconducting circuit,
Phys. Rev. Appl. 12, 054023 (2019).

[7] E. A. Sete, A. Q. Chen, R. Manenti, S. Kulshreshtha, and S. Po-
letto, Floating tunable coupler for scalable quantum computing
architectures, Phys. Rev. Appl. 15, 064063 (2021).

[8] E. A. Sete, N. Didier, A. Q. Chen, S. Kulshreshtha, R. Manenti,
and S. Poletto, Parametric-resonance entangling gates with a
tunable coupler, Phys. Rev. Appl. 16, 024050 (2021).

[9] M. Field, A. Q. Chen, B. Scharmann, E. A. Sete, F. Oruc, K. Vu,
V. Kosenko, J. Y. Mutus, S. Poletto, and A. Bestwick, Modular
superconducting qubit architecture with a multi-chip tunable
coupler (2023), arXiv:2308.09240.

[10] J. M. Kreikebaum, K. P. O’Brien, A. Morvan, and I. Siddiqi,
Improving wafer-scale josephson junction resistance variation
in superconducting quantum coherent circuits, Superconductor
Science and Technology 33, 06LT02 (2020).

[11] A. Osman, J. Simon, A. Bengtsson, S. Kosen, P. Krantz,
D. P Lozano, M. Scigliuzzo, P. Delsing, J. Bylander, and A. Fa-
davi Roudsari, Simplified josephson-junction fabrication pro-
cess for reproducibly high-performance superconducting qubits,
Applied Physics Letters 118 (2021).

[12] A. A. Pishchimova, N. S. Smirnov, D. A. Ezenkova, E. A.
Krivko, E. V. Zikiy, D. O. Moskalev, A. I. Ivanov, N. D. Kor-
shakov, and I. A. Rodionov, Improving josephson junction re-

producibility for superconducting quantum circuits: junction
area fluctuation, Scientific Reports 13, 6772 (2023).

[13] C. Granata, A. Vettoliere, L. Petti, M. Rippa, B. Ruggiero,
P. Mormile, and M. Russo, Localized laser trimming of critical
current in niobium based josephson devices, Applied physics
letters 90 (2007).

[14] J. B. Hertzberg, E. J. Zhang, S. Rosenblatt, E. Magesan, J. A.
Smolin, J.-B. Yau, V. P. Adiga, M. Sandberg, M. Brink, J. M.
Chow, and J. S. Orcutt, Laser-annealing josephson junctions
for yielding scaled-up superconducting quantum processors, npj
Quantum Information 7, 129 (2021).

[15] E. J. Zhang, S. Srinivasan, N. Sundaresan, D. F. Bogorin,
Y. Martin, J. B. Hertzberg, J. Timmerwilke, E. J. Pritch-
ett, J.-B. Yau, C. Wang, W. Landers, E. P. Lewandowski,
A. Narasgond,
S. Rosenblatt,
G. A. Keefe,
I. Lauer,
M. B. Rothwell, D. T. McClure, O. E. Dial, J. S. Or-
cutt, M. Brink, and J. M. Chow, High-performance su-
perconducting quantum processors via laser annealing of
transmon qubits, Science Advances 8, eabi6690 (2022),
https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/sciadv.abi6690.

[16] H.
Kim,
C.
J¨unger,
A.
Morvan,
E.
S.
Barnard,
W. P. Livingston,
M. V. P. Alto´e,
Y. Kim,
C. Song,
L. Chen, J. M. Kreikebaum, D. F. Ogletree, D. I. San-
tiago, and I. Siddiqi, Effects of laser-annealing on fixed-
frequency
superconducting
qubits,
Applied
Physics
Let-
ters 121, 142601 (2022), https://pubs.aip.org/aip/apl/article-
pdf/doi/10.1063/5.0102092/16484380/142601 1 online.pdf.

[17] P. Koppinen, L. V¨aist¨o, and I. Maasilta, Complete stabilization
and improvement of the characteristics of tunnel junctions by
thermal annealing, Applied physics letters 90 (2007).

[18] J. V. Migacz and M. E. Huber, Thermal annealing of nb/al-
alo/sub x//nb josephson junctions, IEEE transactions on applied
superconductivity 13, 123 (2003).

[19] N. D. Korshakov, D. O. Moskalev, A. A. Soloviova, D. A.
Moskaleva, E. S. Lotkov, A. R. Ibragimov, M. V. Androschuk,
I. A. Ryzhikov, Y. V. Panfilov, and I. A. Rodionov, Aluminum
josephson junction microstructure and electrical properties
modification with thermal annealing (2024), arXiv:2403.02179
[quant-ph].

[20] Y. Balaji, N. Acharya, R. Armstrong, K. G. Crawford, S. Danilin,
T. Dixon, O. W. Kennedy, R. D. Pothuraju, K. Shahbazi,
and C. D. Shelly, Electron-beam annealing of josephson junc-
tions for frequency tuning of quantum processors (2024),
arXiv:2402.17395 [quant-ph].

[21] D. P. Pappas, M. Field, C. Kopas, J. A. Howard, X. Wang,
E. Lachman, L. Zhou, J. Oh, K. Yadavalli, E. A. Sete, A. Best-
wick, M. J. Kramer, and J. Y. Mutus, Alternating bias as-
sisted annealing of amorphous oxide tunnel junctions (2024),
arXiv:2401.07415 [physics.app-ph].

[22] J. R. Nesbitt and A. F. Hebard, Time-dependent glassy behavior
of interface states in Al−Alo𝑥−Al tunnel junctions, Phys. Rev.
B 75, 195441 (2007).

[23] N. Cabrera and N. F. Mott, Theory of the oxidation of metals,
Reports on Progress in Physics 12, 163 (1949).

[24] H. Hashimoto, Y. Onodera, S. Tahara, S. Kohara, K. Yazawa,
H. Segawa, M. Murakami, and K. Ohara, Structure of alumina
glass, Scientific Reports 12, 516 (2022).

[25] J. Schafer and C. Adkins, Annealing effects and oxide structure
in alumina tunnelling barriers, Journal of Physics: Condensed
Matter 3, 2907 (1991).


9

[26] X. Zhang, P. Zheng, Y. Ma, Y. Jiang, and H. Li, Atomic-scale
understanding of oxidation mechanisms of materials by compu-
tational approaches: A review, Materials& Design 217, 110605
(2022).

[27] Z. Xu, K. M. Rosso, and S. Bruemmer, Metal oxidation kinetics
and the transition from thin to thick films, Phys. Chem. Chem.
Phys. 14, 14534 (2012).

[28] J. Koch, M. Terri, J. Gambetta, A. Houck, D. Schuster, J. Majer,
A. Blais, M. Devoret, S. Girvin, and R. Schoelkopf, Charge-
insensitive qubit design derived from the cooper pair box, Phys.
Rev. A 76, 042319 (2007).

[29] V. Ambegaokar and A. Baratoff, Tunneling between supercon-
ductors, Phys. Rev. Lett. 10, 486 (1963).

[30] E. Magesan, J. M. Gambetta, B. R. Johnson, C. A. Ryan, J. M.
Chow, S. T. Merkel, M. P. da Silva, G. A. Keefe, M. B. Rothwell,
T. A. Ohki, M. B. Ketchen, and M. Steffen, Efficient measure-
ment of quantum gate error by interleaved randomized bench-
marking, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 080505 (2012).

[31] A. Gold, J. Paquette, A. Stockklauser, M. J. Reagor, M. S.
Alam, A. Bestwick, N. Didier, A. Nersisyan, F. Oruc, A. Razavi,
et al., Entanglement across separate silicon dies in a modular
superconducting qubit device, npj Quantum Information 7, 142
(2021).


