Drone based superconducting single photon detection system with detection 
efficiency more than 90%
Ruoyan Ma1,2, Zhimin Guo1,2,3, Dai Chen3, Xiaojun Dai1,2, You Xiao1,2, ChengJun 
Zhang3, Jiamin Xiong1,2, Jia Huang1,2, Xingyu Zhang1,2, Xiaoyu Liu1,2, Liangliang 
Rong1,2,4, Hao Li1,2,4, Xiaofu Zhang1,2,4,5, Lixing You1,2,4,6

1National Key Laboratory of Materials for Integrated Circuits, Shanghai Institute of 
Microsystem and Information Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 
200050, China
2Shanghai Key Laboratory of Superconductor Integrated Circuit Technologies, 865 
Changning Road, Shanghai 200050, China
3Photon Technology, 11 Guigu 2nd Road, Jiashan, Zhejiang 314100, China
4Center of Materials Science and Optoelectronics Engineering, University of Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
5zhangxf@mail.sim.ac.cn
6lxyou@mail.sim.ac.cn

Bounded by the size, weight, and power consumption (SWaP) of conventional 
superconducting single photon detectors (SSPD), applications of SSPDs were 
commonly confined in the laboratory. However, booming demands for high 
efficiency single photon detector incorporated with avionic platforms arise with 
the development of remote imaging and sensing or long-haul quantum 
communication without topographical constraints. We herein designed and 
manufactured the first drone based SSPD system with a SDE as high as 91.8%. 
This drone based SSPD system is established with high performance NbTiN 
SSPDs, self-developed miniature liquid helium dewar, and homemade integrated 
electric setups, which is able to be launched in complex topographical conditions. 
Such a drone based SSPD system may open the use of SSPDs for applications that 
demand high-SDE in complex environments.

1. INTRODUCTION

Superconducting nanowire single photon detectors (SSPDs), constituted by meander 

nanowires with dimensions of sub-100 nm in width and a few nanometers in thickness, 
have been widely applied in various fields due to their superior detection performance
[1-10]. However, owing to the relatively low superconducting critical temperature of 
conventional superconducting thin films, the high efficiency SSPDs can only be 
operated at relatively low temperatures, commonly below 2.5 K. Therefore, these SSPD 
systems are commonly incorporated with Gifford-Mcmahon (GM) cryocoolers or 
dilution refrigerators. Due to the relatively large size, weight and high-power 
consumption (SWaP) of the cooling system, the high efficiency SSPDs can hardly be 
deployed on airborne or spaceborne platforms, let alone a drone based versatile
platform [11-15]. Besides the necessary cryocooler, the operation of avionic platforms
based SSPDs also necessitates reliable and stable electric bias modules and 
amplification modules, as well as fast pulse counters with low power dissipations [15]. 
Due to these requirements, currently, it is still out of reach to launch a SSPD system out 


of the laboratory.

Recently, there are booming demands for high SSPDs that can be operated with 

mobile systems [16-20]. For instance, SSPDs have been successfully applied for the 
light detection and ranging (LiDAR) with extraordinary and temporal resolutions [20-
22], due to their high detection efficiency and low timing jitter. Once the SSPDs can be 
deployed on drone or airborne platforms, it would significantly facilitate the recent 
airborne single-photon LiDAR systems [23]. Besides, SSPDs are also highly desirable 
for the deep space optical communication (DSOC) applications [16,17,24-26]. By 
encoding data in photons at near-infrared wavelengths rather than radio waves, it is 
expected to increase the data transmission rate by one or two orders of magnitude, 
completely revolutionize the DSOC technology and facilitating the deep space 
explorations. In the DSOC demonstration of the Psyche mission, an ultra-high-
definition streaming video was sent from Mars with a maximum data downlink rate of 
267 Mbps, which is based on 64-pixel SSPD array [27]. Due to the lack of SSPDs that 
can be equipped on a spacecraft, the uplink rate, however, was limited around 1.6 kbps, 
leading to an asymmetric space-to-ground communication.

A feasible way to realize these avionic applications is to apply miniature liquid dewar 

to provide the necessary low temperature operation environment, which is able to get 
rid of the SWaP limitations. Therefore, high efficiency SSPDs that can be operated at 
liquid helium temperature become the keystone for drone-based applications [15]. 
Generally, the operation temperature of SSPDs is an overall effect between the critical 
temperature 𝑇𝑐 and the photoresponse performance of superconducting nanowires. 
Despite of the higher 𝑇𝑐 of superconducting nanowires with lower disorder level or 
larger film thickness, the single photon detection performances of these nanowires are 
actually suppressed by the relatively low photon energy transformation efficiency [28-
30]. In superconducting nanowires with low disorder, the critical temperature and the 
critical current can be significantly enhanced, but the photon energy is fastly transferred 
into the substrate due to the strong electron-phonon interactions, leading to a relatively 
poor intrinsic detection efficiency (IDE) [30,31]. To simultaneously enhance the IDE 
and operation temperature of SSPDs, an effective way is to reduce the nanowire width
[32]. However, the fabrications of constriction-free narrow nanowires (sub 50 nm) with 
relatively large sensitive area (with diameter larger than 15 μm) still remains 
challenging. Another method to improve the IDE at finite operation temperature is to 
fabricate more sensitive nanowires by increasing the disorder level [33]. Anyway, the 
strong disorder can significantly suppress the superconducting properties of two-
dimensional superconducting films, which may even drive the superconductor into 
insulators at the quantum critical disorder level [34]. Consequently, the key to improve 
the operation temperature and detection efficiency of SSPDs is to balance the disorder 
level and superconducting properties of superconducting thin films.

In this letter, we successfully demonstrated the fabrications of high efficiency SSPDs

based on highly disordered NbTiN films. The NbTiN-SSPD shows a SDE more than 
90% operated at liquid helium temperature. To get rid of the conventional cryocoolers 
and build a lightweight detection system, we also designed and manufactured a 
miniature liquid helium dewar, which is compatible with commercial drones and other 


airborne platforms. Incorporating with home-made electric setup for biasing and data 
storage, we successfully constructed a high efficiency drone-based SSPD system, 
which is applicable for remote imaging and sensing, or long-distance quantum 
communications.

Fig. 1 (a) The transmission electron microscope image of the involved NbTiN 
superconducting thin film. (b) The superconducting to normal transitions for a 55-nm-
wide detector. (c) The scanning electron microscope image of the fabricated SSPDs, 
where the diameter of the sensitive area is 18 μm. (d) The uniformity of the nanowire 
width.
2. DEVICE DESIGN AND FABRICATION

Based on the recently reported disorder-tuning method [33,35], we further optimized 

the deposition conditions of NbTiN films to realize more sensitive superconducting 
nanowires. Figure 1(a) shows a transmission electron microscope (TEM) image for the 
7-nm-thick granular NbTiN films, in which the average granule size of the resulting 
NbTiN films is around 5 nm. Moreover, some of the NbTiN granules are even close to 
the non-crystalline states (Inset of Fig. 1(a)). After the deposition of highly disordered 
NbTiN films on an alternative SiO2/Ta2O5 dielectric mirror (optimized for the telecom 
wavelength photons), the narrow nanowires are defined by a 100 keV electron beam 
lithography system by using the positive ZEP520 e-beam resist, and the pattern was 
then transferred by dry etching using reactive ions of CF4 plasma, as shown in Fig. 1(c) 
and (d). To guarantee a sufficient coupling efficiency of the devices, the sensitive area 
of the detector is designed to be 18 μm in diameter (which is two times larger than the 
beam waist of the fiber). To assure the sensitivity and yields of constriction-free 
detectors, the nanowire width and pitch are still respectively designed to be 55 nm and 


120 nm, leading to a filling factor around 46%. The inner corners of meander turns are 
elliptically optimized to reduce the dark count rate [36,37], as it is shown in Fig. 1(d).
Figure 1(b) presents the temperature dependence of resistance 𝑅(𝑇) for the fabricated 
devices. The 𝑅(𝑇) dependence of the NbTiN devices can be well-described with the 
one-dimensional superconducting fluctuation mode [38], and the zero-resistivity 
critical temperature is around 8 K.

To characterize the detection performance of the fabricated SSPDs at liquid helium 

temperature, we here firstly measured the SDE as a function of temperature in a 
Gifford-McMahon (GM) cryocooler. Figure 2 presents the measured bias current 
dependence of SDE at temperatures of 2.2 K, 3 K, 3.5 K, and 4.2 K, respectively. Due 
to the increased disorder level, the critical current at 2.2 K is slightly lower than the 
previous reported devices with the same device configuration [15,33]. At 2.2 K, the 
detector shows a saturated SDE, with a maximum SDE more than 95% for 1550 nm 
photons. With the increasing temperature, due to the gradually decreasing switching 
current, the maximum SDE is suppressed to 91.8% at 4.2 K. Compared with the 
previously reported SSPDs operated at liquid helium temperature [15,33,39,40], 
although the critical current is suppressed, the SDE more than 90% demonstrates that 
the SSPD system can be applied for building drone-based or avionic high efficiency 
single photon detection platform without significantly degrading its sensitivity.

Fig. 2 The temperature dependence of the system detection efficiency as a function of 
bias current.

3. DRONE-BASED SYSTEM DESIGN AND MANUFACTURE

To realize a drone-based superconducting single photon detection system that can be 

launched readily, a commercial drone with finite size and power consumption was 
adopted as the airborne platform. Due to the finite space for mounting the whole SSPD
system, the size, weight, and power consumption (SWaP) of the cryostat that supporting 
the necessitated low temperature working environment for SSPDs must be low enough. 


To this end, a miniaturized liquid helium Dewar was designed and manufactured based 
on our previously developed mobile SSPD system [15]. For easy attachment to the 
drone, the Dewar's height and diameter were specifically designed to be 450 mm and 
250 mm respectively, with a maximum helium capacity of 3 liters, and an overall weight 
of approximately 12 kg. To ensure a relatively long operational time, an intercalation 
shielding layer made of thin aluminum is connected to the neck of the inner liquid 
helium vessel and is positioned in the vacuum space between the inner and outer vessels, 
despite of the limited space. Additionally, 45 layers of multilayer insulation were 
wrapped around the inner vessel wall to further enhance insulation. To minimize 
conduction heat loss along the neck of the inner vessel, a specially designed bellows 
tube was welded between the bottom and top of the neck. The combined weight of the 
inner vessel and the intercalation shielding layer is less than 2 kg. 

For the installation of SSPDs, we designed a dipstick made from a glass fiber 

reinforced plastic tube with baffles and polyurethane foam, which is able to install two 
SSPDs simultaneously. It is noteworthy that the baffles and polyurethane foam were 
strategically positioned at a height that aligns with the neck of the inner vessel. This 
arrangement helps to effectively distribute the helium vapor and minimize radiation and 
convection heat loss. To reduce the heat load from the room temperature end and 
maintain constant pressure inside the inner vessel, a leakage capillary tube for the 
evaporated helium gas was welded onto the dipstick.

Fig. 3 (a) A sketch for the electrical setup integrating the bias circuit, the amplification 
circuit, and pulse-converter and counter. (b) The manufactured electrical setup.

With respect to the bias and readout circuit of the SSPD system, we here designed 

and manufactured an integrated electrical setup, which combines the bias circuit, 
amplification module, pulse-counting module, and the data storage module. Figure 3 
shows manufactured electric setup, which is power supplied by two NCR18650A
lithium-ion batteries. The bias current on the SSPD is generated by the 𝑉bias through an 
adjustable resistor (100 kΩ), where the programable 𝑉bias is modulated by the main 
control unit (MCU) and a digital-to-analog converter. The detection signal from the 
SSPDs is amplified by two low-power amplifiers, with a total gain more than 50 dB. 
Then, these pulse voltage signals are converted into transistor-transistor logic signal by 
a high-speed comparator, which either can be outputted to a standard counter or be 
directly counted by the Timer module of the MCU. Finally, the bias current dependence 


of the SDE, or the counts at a fixed bias current, are saved in a text file. Figure 3(b) 
shows the manufactured electric setup, which is 150 mm in length and 100 mm in width. 
With fully charged lithium-ion batteries, the electric setup is able to sustain for more 
than 30 hours, with a total weight around 1 kg.

4. DRONE-BASED SSPD SYSTEM AND RESULTS

Based on the manufactured miniature liquid helium dewar, we here constructed the 

drone-based SSPD system based on the T40 drone (AGRAS T40, DJI agricultural 
drone), as it is shown in Fig. 4(a). Firstly, two aluminum arms are fixed on the drone, 
and the dewar is then mechanically mounted on the two arms. The electrical setup for 
testing and data-recording is also fixed on the aluminum arm. After the establishment
of the whole system, we then compared the measured bias current dependence of SDE 
on the ground for the drone-based SSPD system with the measured SDE from standard 
measurement setups, as it is shown in Fig. 4(b). The SDE in the liquid helium dewar is 
well consistent with that measured in the GM cryocooler, demonstrating the robust 
detection performance of the NbTiN SSPDs. Moreover, the completely consistent 
optical and electric response also demonstrate the reliable electrical supports of the 
home-made SSPD electrical measurement setup. 

Fig. 4 (a) The drone-based superconducting nanowire single photon detection system. 
(b) The bias current dependence of the SDE measured in a GM cryocooler (light green), 
and in the miniature liquid helium dewar (light blue). The measured IDE as a function 
of bias current of the drone-based SSPD system, with a height of 30 m. (c) The dark 
count rate as a function of bias current under different operation environment.

To characterize the detection performance on the drone, we here measured the 

intrinsic detection performance of the system since currently a receiver is absent on the 


drone. The SSPDs are illuminated with a semiconductor laser diode with a fixed 
attenuation factor, where the laser source is also mounted on the drone. Before 
launching the drone, the attenuation factor was set to assure that the count rate (CR) 
exceeded 1.5 million counts per second, which is roughly three orders of magnitude 
more than the dark count rate (DCR), ensuring the accuracy of the IDE, which is defined 
by 𝐼𝐷𝐸 = (𝐶𝑅 − 𝐷𝐶𝑅) 𝐶𝑅
⁄
 . The drone based SSPD system was then launched and 

hovered at an altitude of 30 m from the ground (which is limited by the local statutory 
regulations in Shanghai), and the IDE was simultaneously measured under both flight 
conditions and hovering conditions. The measured IDE as a function of bias current is 
presented in Fig. 4(b), which is also coincide well with the measured data on the ground, 
further demonstrating the reliability and stability of the NbTiN detector and the drone-
based SSPD system.

The most significant challenge for the operation of the drone-based SSPD system is 

the relatively high dark counts. Figure 4(c) compares the bias current dependence of 
the DCR under different operation conditions. In a dark operation environment, the 
DCR of the drone-based SSPD system is consistent with that operated in a standard 
GM cryocooler, where the DCR was measured by blocking the fiber and turning off the 
laser source.  The DCR is around 1 cps when the bias current is relatively low, and 
increase exponentially in the intrinsic regime. However, under a bright sunlight 
environment with a ground temperature more than 50 degree centigrade, the DCR was 
increased to around ten thousand cps, which is due to the strong stray photons and the
black-body radiation from the high temperature terminal of the optical fiber. It is also 
interesting to note that when hovering the drone in a shadow environment (where the 
bright sunlight is shaded occasionally by the cloud), the DCR was then effectively 
reduced by an order of magnitude. As a consequence, by optimizing the design of the 
receiving and coupling components of the drone-based SSPD system, the system dark 
count rate can be significantly lowered, even operating the drone-based SSPD system 
at a relatively high altitude with strong sunlight.

Finally, to further improve the detection performance of a drone-based SSPD system, 

one possible way is to continuously optimize the nanowire geometrics, where the
superconducting properties can be optionally tunned. By slightly varying the film 
thickness, nanowire width, and the filling factor of SSPDs, the detection efficiency and 
the optimal operation temperature can be further enhanced. With respect to the 
relatively high dark counts, a narrow-band pass filter can be applied to filter out the 
stray photons and the blackbody radiations outside the targeted wavelength [41]. Such 
a narrow-band pass filter can be deposited either directly on the SSPD chips or on the 
end-face of the fiber. Concerning the miniature liquid helium dewar, currently most of 
the weight is still concentrated on the steel outer vessel, which provides the necessary 
strength against harsh operation environments. Anyway, the weight can be further 
reduced by applying spaceflight aluminum-titanium alloy.

5. CONCLUSION
In summary, we successfully constructed a commercial drone-based superconducting 
nanowire single photon detection system. By optimizing the deposition condition and 


nano-fabrication process, we have fabricated NbTiN-SSPDs with near-saturated system
detection efficiency. At liquid helium temperature, the system detection efficiency is as 
high as 91.8%. Furthermore, a specially designed miniature liquid dewar is 
manufactured, which can be directly incorporated in the T40 drone. To resolve the 
readout and data-storage of SSPDs, we also designed and manufactured special 
electrical setups. The whole system except the drone is merely power-supplied by two 
lithium batteries. Such a high efficiency drone-based SSPD system is promising for 
applications of three-dimensional high-resolution imaging and sensing, or avionic
quantum communications. Moreover, such lightweight and low power systems are even 
able to be installed on spaceborne platforms, further facilitating the deep space optical 
communications and space explorations.

Funding. National Key Research and Development Program of China (No.
2023ZD0300100, 2023YFB3809600, & 2023YFC3007801) and the National Natural 
Science Foundation of China (No. 62301543).
Acknowledgment. The fabrication was performed in the Superconducting Electronics 
Facility (SELF) of SIMIT, CAS. We thank Danhua Wu for technical assistance and Lu 
Zhang for assisting in thin film depositions.
Disclosures. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Data availability. Data underlying the results presented in this paper may be obtained 
from the authors upon reasonable request.

REFERENCES
[1] G. N. Gol’tsman, O. Okunev, G. Chulkova, et al., “Picosecond superconducting 

single-photon optical detector,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 79, 705 (2001).

[2] F. Marsili, V. B. Verma, J. A. Stern, et al., “Detecting single infrared photons with 

93% system efficiency,” Nat. Photonics 7, 210 (2013).

[3] D. Reddy, R. R. Nerem, S. W. Nam, et al., “Superconducting nanowire single-

photon detectors with 98% system detection efficiency at 1550nm,” Optica 7, 1649 
(2020).

[4] P. Hu, H. Li, L. X. You, et al., “Detecting single infrared photons toward optimal 

system detection efficiency,” Opt. Express 28(24), 36884 (2020).

[5] J. Chang, J. W. N. Los, J. O. Tenorio-Pearl, et al., “Detecting telecom single 

photons with (99.5+0.5−2.07)% system detection efficiency and high time 
resolution,” APL Photon. 6, 036114 (2021).

[6] L. Chen, J. A. Lau, D. Schwarzer, et al., “The Sommerfeld ground-wave limit for 

a molecule adsorbed at a surface,” Science 363, 158 (2018).

[7] F. Xia, M. Gevers, A. Fognini, et al., “Short-Wave Infrared Confocal Fluorescence 

Imaging of Deep Mouse Brain with a Superconducting Nanowire Single-Photon 
Detector,” ACS Photonics 8, 2800 (2021).

[8] F. Wang, F. Ren, Z. Ma, et al., “In vivo non-invasive confocal fluorescence imaging 

beyond 1,700 nm using superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors,” Nat. 
Nanotechnol. 17, 653 (2022).

[9] Y. Liu, W. J. Zhang, C. Jiang, et al., “Experimental Twin-Field Quantum Key 


Distribution over 1000 km Fiber Distance,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 130, 210801 (2023).

[10] Y. Deng, S. Gong, Y. Gu, et al., “Solving Graph Problems Using Gaussian Boson 

Sampling,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 130,190601 (2023).

[11] V. Kotsubo, R. Radebaugh, P. Hendershott, et al., “Compact 2.2 K Cooling System 

for Superconducting Nanowire Single Photon Detectors,” IEEE T Appl. Supercond. 
27(4), 1 (2017).

[12] N. R. Gemmell, M. Hills, T. Bradshaw, et al., “A miniaturized 4 K platform for 

superconducting infrared photon counting detectors,” Supercond. Sci. Technol. 30, 
11LT01 (2017).

[13] L. X. You, J. Quan, Y. Wang, et al., “Superconducting nanowire single photon 

detection system for space applications,” Opt. Express 26, 2965 (2018).

[14] L. X. You, “Miniaturizing superconducting nanowire single-photon detection 

systems,” Supercond. Sci. Technol. 31, 040503 (2018).

[15] X. Zhang, R. Ma, Z. Guo, et al., “Mobile superconducting strip photon detection 

system with efficiency over 70% at a 1550 nm wavelength,” Opt. Express 31(19), 
30650 (2023).

[16] D. M. Boroson and B. S. Robinson, “The Lunar Laser Communication 

Demonstration: NASA’s First Step Toward Very High Data Rate Support of 
Science and Exploration Missions,” Space Sci. Rev. 185, 115 (2014).

[17] D. M. Boroson, B. S. Robinson, D. V. Murphy, D. A. Burianek, and F. Khatri, 

“Overview and results of the lunar laser communication demonstration,” Proc. 
SPIE 8971, 89710S (2014).

[18] J. W. Qiu, H. Y. Xia, X. K. Dou, et al., “Micro-pulse polarization lidar at 1.5 μm 

using a single superconducting nanowire single photon detector,” Optics Letters 
42(21), 4454-4457 (2017).

[19] H. Y. Liu, X. H. Tian, C. S. Gu, et al., “Optical-Relayed Entanglement Distribution 

Using Drones as Mobile Nodes,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 126, 020503 (2021).

[20] R. H. Hadfield, J. Leach, F. Fleming, et al., “Single-photon detection for long-range 

imaging and sensing,” Optica 10, 1124 (2023).

[21] H. Zhou, Y. He, L. You, et al., “Few-photon imaging at 1550 nm using a low-

timing-jitter superconducting nanowire single-photon detector,” Opt. Express 23, 
14603 (2015).

[22] M. Shangguan, H. Xia, C. Wang, et al., “Dual-frequency Doppler lidar for wind 

detection with a superconducting nanowire single-photon detector,” Opt. Lett. 
42(18), 3541 (2017).

[23] Y. Hong, S. Liu, Z. Li, et al., “Airborne single-photon LiDAR towards a small-

sized and low-power payload,” Optica 11, 612 (2024).

[24] D. M. Boroson and B. S. Robinson, “Status of the lunar laser communication 

demonstration,” Proc SPIE 8610, 861002 (2013).

[25] W. Weiren, C. Ming, Z. Zhe, L. Xiangnan, and D. Yuhui, “Overview of deep space 

laser communication,” Sci. China Inf. 61, 7 (2018).

[26] H. Hao, Q. Zhao, Y. Huang, et al., “A compact multi-pixel superconducting 

nanowire single-photon detector array supporting gigabit space-to-ground 
communications,” Light Sci. Appl. 13, 25 (2024).


[27] https://www.nasa.gov/mission/deep-space-optical-communications-dsoc/
[28] X. Zhang, A. Engel, Q. Wang, et al., “Characteristics of superconducting tungsten 

silicide WxSi1−x for single photon detection,” Phys Rev. B 94, 174509 (2016).

[29] X. Zhang, A.E. Lita, M. Sidorova, et al., “Superconducting fluctuations and 

characteristic time scales in amorphous WSi,” Phys. Rev. B 97, 174502 (2018).

[30] D. Yu. Vodolazov, “Single-Photon Detection by a Dirty Current-Carrying 

Superconducting Strip Based on the Kinetic-Equation Approach,” Phys. Rev. 
Applied 7, 034014 (2017).

[31] R. Cheng, J. Wright, H. G. Xing, et al., “Epitaxial niobium nitride superconducting 

nanowire single-photon detectors,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 117, 132601 (2020).

[32] F. Marsili, F. Najafi, E. Dauler, et al., “Single-Photon Detectors Based on 

Ultranarrow Superconducting Nanowires,” Nano Lett. 11, 2048 (2011).

[33] R. Ma, Q. Huan, J. Huang, et al., “Disorder enhanced relative intrinsic detection 

efficiency in NbTiN superconducting nanowire single photon detectors at high 
temperature,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 124, 072601 (2024).

[34] V. F. Gantmakher and V. T. Dolgopolov, “Superconductor-insulator quantum phase 

transition,” Phys. Usp. 53, 1 (2010).

[35] R. Ma, R. Shu, X. Zhang, et al., “Single photon detection performance of highly 

disordered NbTiN thin films,” J. Phys. Commun. 7(5), 055006 (2023).

[36] J. R. Clem and K. K. Berggren, “Geometry-dependent critical currents in 

superconducting nanocircuits,” Phys. Rev. B 84(17), 174510 (2011).

[37] D. Henrich, P. Reichensperger, M. Hofherr, et al., “Geometry-induced reduction of 

the critical current in superconducting nanowires,” Phys. Rev. B 86(14), 144504 
(2012).

[38] W. J. Skocpol and M. Tinkham, “Fluctuations near superconductingphase 

transitions,”Rep. Prog. Phys. 38, 1049 (1975).

[39] R. Gourgues, J. W. N. Los, J. Zich, et al., “Superconducting nanowire single photon 

detectors operating at temperature from 4 to 7 K,” Opt. Express 27(17), 24601 
(2019).

[40] G. L. He, L. Xue, C. Wu, et al., “Miniaturized superconducting single-photon 

detection system for airborne platform,” Acta Phys. Sin. 72(9), 098501 (2023)

[41] W. J. Zhang, X. Y. Yang, H. Li, et al., “Fiber-coupled superconducting nanowire 

single-photon detectors integrated with a bandpass filter on the fiber end-face,” 
Supercond. Sci. Technol. 31, 035012 (2018).


