1 Observation of superconductivity in 3D Dirac semimetal Cd3As2 crystal He Wang1,2†, Huichao Wang1,2†, Haiwen Liu1,2†, Hong Lu1,2, Wuhao Yang1,2, Shuang Jia1,2, Xiong-Jun Liu1,2*, X. C. Xie1,2, Jian Wei1,2*, and Jian Wang1,2* 1International Center for Quantum Materials, School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China 2Collaborative Innovation Center of Quantum Matter, Beijing, China †These authors contributed equally to this work. *e-mail: jianwangphysics@pku.edu.cn; weijian6791@pku.edu.cn; xiongjunliu@pku.edu.cn Lately, the three-dimensional (3D) Dirac semimetal, which possesses 3D linear dispersion in electronic structure as a bulk analogue of graphene, has generated widespread interests in both material science and condensed matter physics1,2. Very recently, crystalline Cd3As2 has been proposed and proved to be one of 3D Dirac semimetals which can survive in atmosphere3-9. Here, by controlled point contact (PC) measurement, we observe the exotic superconductivity around point contact region on the surface of Cd3As2 crystal. The observation of zero bias conductance peak (ZBCP) and double conductance peaks (DCPs) symmetric to zero bias further reveal p-wave like unconventional superconductivity in Cd3As2 quantum matter. Considering the topological property of the 3D Dirac semimetal, our findings may indicate that the Cd3As2 crystal under certain conditions is a candidate of the topological superconductor10-13, which is predicted to support Majorana zero modes or gapless Majorana edge/surface modes in the boundary depending on the dimensionality of the material14-17. The 3D Dirac semimetal state is located in the topological phase boundary and can potentially 2 be driven into other topological phases including topological insulator, topological metal, Weyl semimetal and even topological superconductor states. The realization of topological superconductivity and Majorana fermions is of great interest due to both the exploration of fundamental physics and the potential applications in fault-tolerant topological quantum computation18,19. Nevertheless, so far the experimental demonstration is still under debate despite significant progresses having been achieved in this direction20-28. The discovery of new and reliable topological superconductor candidates is strongly called for. In our experiment, single crystal of Cd3As2 is synthesized from a Cd-rich melt with stoichiometry Cd8As2 in the evacuated quartz ampoule9. The observed unusual physical properties such as ultrahigh mobility, low carrier density, huge linear magnetoresistance and the sophisticated geometry of Fermi surface have made Cd3As2 crystal a promising quantum material6-9. In this paper, the transport results are mainly from two typical Cd3As2 samples (S1, S2) from different batches. As shown in Fig.1a, the standard four-electrode measurement demonstrates the metallic like behavior of S1, which is consistent with previous reports7-9. Besides, the non-superconducting behavior down to 2 K is further confirmed by magnetization measurement for the same sample (See Supplementary Information). Point contact spectroscopy (PCS) measurements are conducted with the most common “needle-anvil” configuration29. Tungsten wire of 0.25 mm diameter is etched to form a sharp tip, and is fixed on top of the (112) surface plane of the Cd3As2 single crystal sample mounted on an Attocube nanopositioner stack (the inset of Fig. 1b). Since the tip and sample are both fixed to the same housing, which is suspended with springs at the bottom of the probe of a Leiden dilution fridge, relative vibration and displacement between the tip and sample is small during field and temperature ramping, ensuring a stable contact and repeatable 3 PCS. One advantage of our customized setup is that we can measure PCS at different locations on the surface of the same sample in one run, and this helps to confirm that the measured PCS is intrinsic to the sample surface. Differential resistance (dV/dI) spectra are measured by standard lock-in technique in quasi-four-probe configuration. Figure 1b shows the PC transport results between tungsten tip and Cd3As2 single crystal. A significant resistance drop is observed in the process of zero field cooling down. The onset temperature (Tonset) of this resistance drop is 3.9 K, which is considered to be a signature of superconductivity since resistance vs. temperature measurement in a perpendicular magnetic field of 625 Oe shows Tonset decreases to 3.7 K (Fig. 1b). ‘Soft’ PC measurement29 is also performed but no superconducting behavior is observed (See Supplementary Information). Thus, the observed superconductivity is likely induced by the pressure of the tip contact, rather than an intrinsic property of Cd3As2. A set of point contact spectra (normalized dI/dV vs. bias voltage) of 5 Ω PC resistance at different temperatures is shown in Fig.1c. The PC spectrum of 0.28 K is marked with bold blue line, in which DCPs can be observed at ± 0.9 meV and disappear as the temperature is increased above 2.0 K. Double conductance dips at 0.28 K locate at ± 1.5 meV symmetrically around the zero bias and disappear for temperatures above 3.6 K. We also notice that there is a small ZBCP in the PCS at lower temperatures than 2.8 K (Figs. 1c and d). The presence of ZBCP in PCS could be due to unconventional superconductivity. The observed DCPs and double conductance dips features, which exist independently of the ZBCP (See Supplementary Information), cannot be fitted with the conventional Blonder-Tinkham-Klapwijk (BTK) theory30. Similar DCP features were investigated for the possible p-wave superconductor Sr2RuO4 using point contact31 and in- plane tunnel junctions32. On the other hand, the ZBCP may relate to the Majorana zero modes 4 which are predicted to exist in the ends of a one-dimensional (1D) topological superconductor or the vortex cores of a two-dimensional (2D) topological superconductor12. The observed superconductivity behavior is further confirmed by another 7.5 Ω PCS measurement at a different position on the same surface of S1. An onset PC resistance drop temperature of 3.9 K is apparent for this point contact too (inset of Fig. 2a). The PCS under different perpendicular magnetic field has also been examined at 3.8 K to identify the superconductivity feature (Fig.2a). We can see an obvious suppression of the superconducting conductance peak around zero bias voltage with the applied perpendicular magnetic field increasing from 0 Oe to 625 Oe. The temperature dependence of the PCS is shown in Fig. 2b. Similar DCP features locating at ±1 meV is also observed at 0.28 K, which disappear as the temperature increases above 2.5 K. The weak ZBCP is also observed below 0.8 K (inset of Fig. 2b). To further demonstrate our observation of superconductivity in 3D Dirac semimetal Cd3As2, the PCS of another sample (S2) was studied. Figure 3 shows the temperature dependence of the PC resistance and a set of normalized PCS at different temperatures. A Tonset of 7.1 K is observed in this sample (Fig. 3a) indicating a critical temperature TC up to 7.1 K. A wide zero bias conductance hump can be clearly observed in the spectra (Fig. 3b), which gradually disappears with increasing temperature. Complete suppression of the conductance hump occurs around 7 K, corresponding to the onset temperature of 7.1 K and representing the superconducting behavior. As the temperature is decreased below 1.2 K, a ZBCP as well as DCPs appears (Fig. 3c), qualitatively consistent with our observation in S1 (Fig.1d). The ZBCP becomes sharper with decreasing temperature. 5 The main features of dI/dV spectra can be classified into two types: (i) a ZBCP observed at low temperature; (ii) DCPs and double conductance dips both symmetric to zero bias, with the peaks smearing into a broad hump at high temperature. These exotic spectra features can be attributed to the possible Majorana modes of the superconducting Cd3As2. The system may exhibit profound topological superconducting phases in the surface and bulk, as summarized into the schematic phase diagram shown in Fig. 4a. For the sake of brevity, we firstly give out the phase diagram along kz , and the phase diagram along can be resolved by projection of the kz onto the direction. The phase diagram consists of three regions which are separated by gapless nodal points: quasi-1D chiral orthogonal13 or BDI class topological superconductor (BDI- SC) (region I) obtained in the surface, quasi-2D helical p-wave superconductor (HPSC) in the bulk coexisting with normal s-wave superconductor (NSC) ( region II) and normal insulator (NI) ( region III). For each fixed 3 zk and - 3 zk in region I, the Cd3As2 system without superconductivity is captured by a quasi-2D quantum spin Hall insulator (QSHI) with helical edge states, which are Fermi arc states (FAS) of the Dirac semimetal crossing the Fermi energy (see Fig. 4b and 4e). The presence of an s-wave pairing opens a gap in the helical edge states (FAS) which renders a quasi- 1D BDI-SC with Majorana zero modes localized in the boundary of the superconducting area (see Fig. 4f)12. On the other hand, in region II, both intra-valley and inter-valley pairings can exist in the bulk states of the Dirac semimetal (see Fig. 4b). Specifically, the intra-valley paring between slice zk 1 and slice zk 2 in this region occurs between two states belonging to a quasi-2D QSHI and quasi-2D NI (see Fig. 4c), respectively. The resulted effective Hamiltonian resembles a quasi- 2D HPSC with helical Majorana edge modes. The total number of Majorana zero modes corresponding to region I and branches of helical Majorana edge modes for region II is determined 6 by the number of momenta zk taken in the two regions, and all these Majorana modes contribute to the dI/dV spectra. The phase boundary between quasi-2D HPSC (region II) and quasi-1D BDI-SC (region I) or NI (region III) is   2 2 2 2 2 1 + F = 4 z E M K k  , here  zk denotes the mometum along direction measured from the Weyl point K , and 1 M denotes certain parameter of Cd3As2 (See Supplementary Information). Meanwhile, for the inter-valley paring between slices zk 1 (QSHI) and 1 - zk (QSHI), the effecive pairing gives a NSC (See Supplementary Information). In order to compare with the experimental observation of (112) surface, we project the above phase diagram onto the one versus the momentum. Since the projection covers all the FAS, the Majorana zero modes of the quasi-1D BDI-SCs for each paired zk 3 channel contribute to the ZBCP. For the quasi-2D HPSCs, the total number of Majorana edge modes of energy E in region II is maximized at E=0 and decreases with increasing energy, implying that these Majorana zero edge modes also contribute to ZBCP. Note that the projection onto the direction can deform the quasi-2D HPSCs to be anisotropic due to the anisotropy of Ferimi surface2. Thus the helical Majorana edge modes with finte energy may account for the DCPs in the dI/dV spectra by examing the angle-resolved conductance spectra with an anisotropic pairing32. Moreover, the double conductance dips in dI/dV spectra may be attributed to the quasi-2D HPSCs with the extended BTK theory taking into account of order parameter symmetries32. Note that the DCPs might also correspond to the quasiparticle gap of the NSC, and the double conductance dips may possibley explained by the critical current effect due to the heating in the contact region33. However, due to the high mobility of single crystal Cd3As2, the PC is close to the ballistic limit with the Sharvin resistance RS much larger than Maxwell resistance RM, which is not well consistent with the critical current effect scenario. 7 In summary, by point contact measurement using “needle-anvil” configuration we observe the unexpected superconducting behavior in 3D Dirac semimetal Cd3As2 crystal. The observed ZBCP and DCPs features in PCS indicate the superconductivity we found is unconventional. Our further theoretical analyses reveal that the exotic features may originate from topological superconductivity in the surface FAS and bulk states. In particular, the surface of the superconducting Dirac semimetal renders quasi-1D BDI-SCs which support Majorana zero modes associated with the ZBCP, while the bulk can exhibit as the quasi-2D HPSCs which support helical Majorana edge modes that may contribute to both the ZBCP and DCPs. So far, most experiments are still focused on demonstrating or exploring the existence of topological superconductors. Our discovery of superconductivity in 3D Dirac semimetal which is of ultrahigh mobility may offer an ideal candidate or platform for studying topological superconductivity. Note added: We noted that another group also studied PCS of polycrystalline Cd3As2 and showed an indication of superconductivity in this compound34. 8