1 Tripling the critical temperature of KFe2As2 by carrier switch Jian-Jun Ying1,2, Ling-Yun Tang1, Viktor V. Struzhkin2, Ho-Kwang Mao2,1, Alexander G. Gavriliuk3, Ai-Feng Wang4, Xian-Hui Chen4 & Xiao-Jia Chen1,2 1Center for High Pressure Science and Technology Advanced Research, Shanghai 201203, China 2Geophysical Laboratory, Carnegie Institution of Washington, Washington, D.C. 20015, USA 3Institute of Crystallography, Russian Academy of Sciences, Leninsky pr. 59, Moscow 119333, Russia 4Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Science at Microscale and Department of Physics, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230026, China Superconductivity of high critical temperature (Tc) superconductors is usually realized through chemical dopant or application of pressure in a similar way to induce charge carriers of either electrons or holes into their parent compounds1,2. For chemical doping, superconductivity behaves asymmetrically with the maximum Tc often higher for optimal hole-doping than that of optimal electron-doping on the same parent compound1,3-5. However, whether electron carriers could be in favour of higher Tc than holes in such high-Tc superconductors is unknown but attractive. Here we show that the application of pressure can drive KFe2As2 from hole- to electron-superconductivity after passing the previously reported V-shape or oscillation regime6-8. The maximum Tc in the electron-dominated region is tripled to 2 the initial value of 3.5 K or the average in the low-pressure hole-dominated region. The structural transition takes place from the tetragonal to collapsed tetragonal phase when the carrier characteristic is changed upon compression. Our results unambiguously offer a new route to further improve superconductivity with huge Tc enhancement for a compound through carrier switch. The strong electronic correlations9-11 in KFe2As2 are suggested to account for the unexpected enhancement of superconductivity in the collapsed tetragonal phase. KFe2As2 is considered as the ideal laboratory for investigating the superconducting and normal states of the iron-based superconductors due to the following important facts: (i) Single crystals of this material can be synthesized in extremely high purity. Some external effects such as cation distortion, disorder, and impurities are therefore safely avoided, contributing it as the cleanest sample of iron pnictides. This ensures the investigation of physical properties from the solely intrinsic aspect. (ii) Because KFe2As2 is located at the end of the overdoped region of Ba1-xKxFe2As2 (ref. 3), the concern of the effects on superconductivity from the complicated structural and magnetic transitions, quantum criticality, and electronic nematicity arisen for the underdoped compounds can be removed, which simplifies the study only focusing on the superconducting property itself. (iii) KFe2As2 possesses the strongest electronic correlations amongst all the iron- based superconductors, classifying it as an electron correlated material9-11. This feature might be the origin for its non-disappeared superconductivity even at the ending overdoped position. (iv) Nodal gap symmetry observed in KFe2As2 is similar to those in 3 cuprates but differs from the nodeless gap structure observed in underdoped iron pnictides12,13. Finding a way to tune the structural and physical properties of KFe2As2 is important not only for understanding all of these interesting features but also for exploring the underlying mechanism of superconductivity for iron-based superconductors. Maintaining the same chemical composition while applying pressure to change the lattice of a solid has proven to be very effective and powerful in tuning its structural and physical properties in a rather clean way. This method has brought about the superconductivity of many parent iron pnictides including the starting member BaFe2As2 of hole-doped Ba1-xKxFe2As2 and electron-doped BaFe2-xAxAs2 (A=Ni, Co) systems3-5. A comparison study revealed that both the carrier doping through element substitution and the application of pressure changed the lattice in a similar way2. Heavy compression on the lattice always drives these superconductors change from the initial tetragonal (T) to collapsed tetragonal (cT) phase14-17. The dense cT phase was found to lose superconductivity, which was suggested to result from the suppression of antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations and/or the absence of electronic correlations18-21. High-pressure experiments on KFe2As2 indeed revealed a anomaly of the Tc evolution in either a V- shape or oscillation with pressure, which was explained by the possible change of the pairing symmetry or superconducting gap structure6-8. Currently, there has been no report for the existence of the cT phase in KFe2As2. Examining such a possibility and its relation to superconductivity is highly desired. Interestingly, we indeed observe a 4 cT phase for KFe2As2 at high pressure. To our surprise, a huge enhancement of Tc in the cT phase is found instead of the generally thought destruction of superconductivity14-17. This unexpected finding provides a shortcut for synthesizing superconductors with better performance in dense electronic correlated systems. We have measured the resistivity of a single crystal of KFe2As2 at various pressures up to 30 GPa. Figure 1 shows the temperature dependence of the resistivity at pressures between 12.2 and 16.0 GPa where Tc reaches a maximum of 12 K. The inset presents the enlarged temperature range for the normalized resistivity to 25 K for comparing the superconducting transitions at ambient pressure and 12.9 GPa. Tc is tripled from its initial value of 3.5 K at ambient pressure to the maximum of 12 K at pressure around 12 GPa. All the early measurements revealed that Tc is no more than 4.0 K at ambient pressure or at pressures below 8 GPa (refs. 6-8). The obtained Tc of 12 K is apparently the record for KFe2As2 and three times larger than the ambient value. This is the main finding of our current work. squares) to 30 GPa and the second run including both the decompression (open symbols) and re-compression (solid uptriangles) processes after releasing pressure from 30 GPa. The insets denote the detailed process of changing pressure. Besides the V-shape behaviour below 3 GPa reported previously6-8, we also observed another dip around 7.5 GPa (Fig. S1 of Supplementary Information (SI), we can not detect superconductivity below 2 K at pressure of 7.3 GPa due to the equipment limitation). The first 5 superconducting phase (SC1) persists up to the critical pressure P1 around 16 GPa and Tc behaves in a wave with an average value of 3 K. The obtained Tc’s below 7 GPa are consistent with the previous results6-8. Further increasing pressure, another superconducting phase (SC2) suddenly appears, and its Tc decreases with increasing pressure. Figure 2(b) is the phase diagram in the second run when releasing pressure from 30 GPa. The SC2 phase maintains down to the critical pressure P2 around 5 GPa. A typical dome-like behavior of Tc with a maximum of 12 K at around 11 GPa of the SC2 phase was observed. The maximum Tc is 3 times higher than those in the SC1 phase. Below P2, the system is recovered to the beginning SC1 phase. The large difference between P1 and P2 clearly indicates the hysteretic character of the two superconducting phases. This suggests that the first order transition should take place in this compound under pressure. The superconducting transition in the SC2 phase is weak when initially increasing pressure in the first run, while in the second run, it becomes much sharper (SI, Fig. S1). This implies that the SC2 phase is slowly stabilized above P1 in the initial compression run. KFe2As2 is classified as the ending compound of the hole-doped Ba1-xKxFe2As2 superconductors. Applying pressure on the parent compound BaFe2As2 has induced superconductivity with Tc variation in a dome-like shape and then destroyed it upon heavy compression2. This behavior is very similar to the electron doping in BaFe2As2 with Ni or Co in the Fe site4,5. In both cases, the disappeared superconductivity was considered as the loss of electronic correlations or the suppression of the spin 6 fluctuations18-21. If the similar effect is also held for iron-based superconductors, inducing electron carriers should be expected in KFe2As2 upon compression. This idea has been confirmed for KFe2As2 from the high-pressure Hall resistivity measurements and thus provides a new understanding for the huge enhancement of superconductivity in this material. the compression and decompression runs. The RH value is positive below 16.5 GPa in the compression run but becomes negative after that. This pressure is just the position P1 for separating SC1 and SC2. The opposite signs of RH signal the different kinds of charge carriers of SC1 and SC2 with a hole character for the former and an electron feature for the latter. The hole character of the SC1 phase is consistent with the initial carrier character because KFe2As2 has been well identified as a hole heavily overdoped superconductor22. The negative value of RH in the SC2 phase indicates the electron character of its dominative carriers. For the decompression run, RH maintains negative before a pressure level near P2 but changes to positive after that. This result indicates the electron and hole character for the SC2 and SC1 phase, respectively. Note that the crossover pressures are exactly the same as P1 and P2 which separate two different SC phases. Such significant changes of RH resemble the Tc variation with pressure in both the compression and decompression runs. It is apparent that the electronic feature of the charge carriers is in favour of high Tc in the SC2 phase compared with the much lower Tc in the hole-doped SC1 phase. The Tc behavior is clearly controlled by the carrier 7 character of KFe2As2. The obvious changes of RH across the pressures P1 and P2 for the compression and decompression runs follow the possible reconstruction of the electronic structure. The higher Tc observed in the SC2 phase is possibly due to the Fermi surface topology change in which the dominative carriers become electrons, thus the doping level and the Fermi surface nesting would be totally different with the initial SC1 phase. This can be examined from the electrical transport properties in the normal states of the two SC phases. We found that all the resistivity data below 30 K can be well fitted by using the formula: ρ=ρ0+AT2 (Fig. S1 of SI) Figure S2 shows the pressure dependence of the parameter A, the black line indicates the initial compression run and the red line indicates the second run of both the decompression and re-compression processes after releasing pressure from 30 GPa. A was found to first decrease with increasing pressure in the SC1 phase but suddenly changes its tendency around P1, at which it gradually increases and then slightly decreases. The sudden change of A reflects the reconstruction of the Fermi surface topology. This behaviour was again observed in the second run in which the critical pressure around P2 for the sudden change of A is much lower than P1 in the compression run. The anomaly of the A behaviour under pressure serves the good detector of the reconstruction of the electronic structure. The consistent pressure levels for P1 and P2 determined from the superconducting transition, Hall coefficient, and transport parameter in the normal state together support the two SC phases with different charge carriers. 8 Although A monotonously increases with decreasing pressure in SC1, A shows a dome-like behaviour in SC2 which is similar to the Tc evolution with pressure in this phase. Interestingly, the pressure for the maximum A is coincident with that for the maximum Tc in the SC2 phase. In strongly correlated electron systems, the coefficient A of the T2 is often scaled as the strength of the electronic correlations23,24. While the complicated behaviour of Tc in the SC1 phase is still under debate6,7,25, the consistent variation of both Tc and A with pressure indicates that the driving force for superconductivity at least in the SC2 phase might be the electronic mechanism. To obtain more insight into these findings, we examined the structural properties of KFe2As2 by single-crystal X-ray diffraction at high pressures. Our data indeed confirmed the existence of the first order structural transition of this compound under pressure. In Fig. 4, we show the pressure dependence of the lattice parameters a and c in a compression run. Although both parameters decrease with increasing pressure before 15 GPa, they behave in a distinct way after that with a clear decrease in c and a gradual increase of a. The similar behaviour has been observed in the parent compound BaFe2As2 and many electron-doped systems14, in which a usually exhibits intermediate anomalous expansion with a S shape and c suddenly decreases around the critical pressure. The large decrease in c is ascribed to As-As hybridization in 122-type compounds15,16, i.e., the As ion below the top Fe-plane forms a bond with the As ion above the lower Fe-plane, or the onset of 4pz interlayer bond formation17. The abrupt change of the lattice parameters has been considered as a signature of the first order structural transition from the T to cT 9 phase. The axial ratio c/a exhibits different features across the critical pressure close to P1. In the T phase, c/a is almost constant at 3.6 below 13 GPa and then rapidly decreases with increasing pressure. Upon further compression, the axial ratio abruptly changes by as much as nearly 33% between the T phase and cT phases. The c/a ratio of the cT phase maintains a constant of 2.4. The pressure-induced cT phase has been thought to be non- superconducting due to the suppression of the spin fluctuations18-21. Contrary to this belief, our results show enhanced superconductivity in the ending compound KFe2As2 with a Tc three times higher than its initial value or the average value of the SC1 phase. This surprising discovery of such high-Tc might result from the strong electronic correlations in this material. This finding offers a shortcut to study the asymmetry of electron- and hole-doped superconductivity in an iron-based superconductor with the same chemical composition. It also points to a new route to search for higher Tc in iron- based superconductors. The observed cT structure of the SC2 phase also sheds light on the mystery of the second superconducting phase in iron chalcogenides26. METHODS SUMMARY Sample preparation and electrical transport measurements: High-quality single crystals of KFe2As2 were grown by conventional solid-state reaction using KAs as self- flux27. We took out the high-pressure resistivity and Hall coefficient measurements on 10 these crystals by using the four probe method in the PPMS-9 T (Quantum Design). Single crystals with typical dimensions of 70×70×10 μm3 were loaded in sample chambers made by c-BN gasket in diameter of around 130 μm of a miniature diamond anvil cell28 with 300 μm culets. Four Pt wires were adhered to the sample using the silver epoxy. Daphne oil 7373 was used as a pressure transmitting medium. Pressure was calibrated by using the ruby fluorescence shift at room temperature. Hall coefficient was measured by sweeping the field from -5 T to 5 T at 20 K which is slightly higher than the maximum Tc. Hall resistivity is linear with the magnetic field for all the measurements. Synchrotron X-ray diffraction: High-pressure single-crystal diffraction was carried out with the angle-dispersive X-ray diffraction experiments at the synchrotron beam line, sector 13 of the Advanced Phonon Source (APS) of the Argonne National Laboratory. The sample-to-detector distance and the image plate orientation angles were calibrated using LaB6 standard. A monochromatic X-ray beam with a wavelength of 0.3344 Å was used. A symmetric DAC with a pair of 500 μm culet size anvils was used to generate pressure. A stainless steel gasket preindented to 35 microns thick with a 200 μm diameter hole was used as the sample chamber. A small piece of a single crystal with a ruby ball was loaded in the gasket hole. Argon was used as pressure-transmitting medium to ensure better hydrostatic pressure condition. The pressures were also monitored by the ruby fluorescence shifts29.