1 Superconducting NbRuB derived through the fragment formalism Weiwei Xie, Huixia Luo, K. Baroudi, J. W. Krizan, B. F. Phelan and R. J. Cava Department of Chemistry, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA, 08540 Abstract We employ the chemical fragment formalism to perform a targeted superconductor search in the Nb-Ru-B system, yielding the orthorhombic metal-rich boride NbRuB, which displays BCS-like superconductivity with a Tc = 3.1 K. NbRuB is derived from the chemical fragments Nb3B2 + Ru3B, in which the Nb3B2 fragment contains B-B dimers and the Ru3B fragment contains isolated B atoms. A charge transfer occurs between the fragments. The results indicate that the fragment formalism is a useful chemical tool for the design of new intermetallic superconductors much the same way as the charge reservoir concept has been a useful chemical tool for the design of new copper oxide superconductors. 2 Introduction Borides are an important class of non-molecular solids. Due to the light mass of boron, borides can sometimes display high superconducting transition temperatures; MgB2 (Tc = 39 K) and YB6 (Tc = 7 K) are important examples. Here, motivated by the fragment formalism widely used when viewing the structures of inorganic and organometallic molecules, we describe the discovery of a new superconductor made through manipulating the valence electron concentration in a boride – not through doping via atom substitutions, but by doping through the combination of electron-donating and electron-accepting structural fragments. We find that the metal-rich boride, NbRuB, whose existence and structure have also recently been described by others , displays BCS-like superconductivity with a Tc = 3.1 K. The crystal structure of this material, shown in Figure 1, is built up by two types of boron-centered trigonal prisms: an uncapped boron-centered trigonal prism with the formula Ru3B whose structure is as found in Re3B, a known superconductor with a Tc of 4.8 K, and a B-B dimer-containing face- sharing double trigonal prism of formula Nb3B2. Given these fragments, and the electron count of the Re3B superconductor, we start with the hypothesis that in the optimal case for superconductivity the structural fragments in NbRuB would be combined to yield (Ru3B)3+(Nb3B2)3- (i.e. Nb3Ru3B3). This is because Ru3B has 3 electrons in excess of Re3B and we wish its electron count to be equivalent to that of Re3B to favor superconductivity; the (Ru3B)3+ fragment, with isolated B atoms, would then be both isostructural and isoelectronic with Re3B, and the (Nb3B2)3- fragment, with B-B dimers, would be isoelectronic with NbB (Nb3B3); the Nb3B2 fragment would thus be an electron acceptor, and the Ru3B fragment would be an electron donor. We show from electronic structure calculations that this is indeed the case, and although the degree of charge transfer is less than optimal, superconductivity is none-the-less observed. This type of donor-acceptor structural fragment analysis has been used to explain the relative stabilities of the ThCr2Si2 and CaBe2Ge2 structure types ; here we have extended its use to the search for new superconductors. Synthesis and crystal structure The samples were synthesized by arc melting elemental starting materials in a water-cooled copper hearth. Niobium (99.9%, Alfa Aesar), ruthenium (99.95%, Aldrich), and boron (99.999%, J&M) were weighed in the NbRuB stoichiometric ratio with 10% molar excess B added in order 3 to balance the light element B loss during the arc melting. The buttons were turned and melted several times to ensure good homogeneity. Weight losses during the melting process were less than 1%. Annealing the as-cast products below 1400 °C yielded Nb3Ru5B2 as the dominant phase, indicating that the NbRuB compound is stable only at higher temperatures. The as-cast arc- melted NbRuB sample was examined by powder X-ray diffraction for identification and phase purity on a Rigaku powder diffractometer employing Cu Kα radiation with aid of a full-profile Rietveld refinement using LHPM RIETICA. The major phase in the powder pattern was a good fit to the NbRuB structural model we obtained from our single crystal study (described below). The quantitative analysis of the powder diffraction pattern showed that the polycrystalline sample employed for the bulk property characterization consisted of 79(1)% NbRuB, 18(1)% Nb3Ru5B2 and 3(1)% NbB (See Figure 2.) For the purposes of property comparison, Nb3Ru5B2 was prepared as a pure phase by arc melting Nb, Ru and B in a 3:5:2 ratio and annealing the product at 1400 °C for 48 hours. To specify the structure of NbRuB, single crystals were investigated on a Bruker Apex II diffractometer with Mo Kα1 radiation. The crystal structure was solved using direct methods and refined by SHELXTL. This material has an orthorhombic structure with space group Pmma, as shown in Figure 1. It is a layered structure containing planes of Ru-B interleaved with planes of Nb-B, alternating along the b axis. The detailed crystallographic data is shown in Tables 1 and 2; it is in agreement with the data reported in reference 11. Calculation and electronic structure To gain further insights into the electronic character of NbRuB, TB-LMTO-ASA calculations were carried out to evaluate and analyze the electronic density of states (DOS) and the band structure. Within the local density approximation (LDA) , the corresponding DOS curves and band structure for NbRuB are illustrated in Figure 3, which emphasizes contributions from the Nb and Ru valence orbitals. In the LDA DOS curve, the Nb + Ru 4d band exhibits little fine structure except for a noticeable pseudogap at approximately –0.75 eV and a broad, intense peak at 0 eV. According to the corresponding -COHP curves, this latter peak is strongly Ru-Ru and Ru-Nb antibonding in character. Thus, according to the LDA-DOS curves, due to its relatively high DOS at EF derived from antibonding interactions, NbRuB is electronically unstable with respect to a structural distortion, itinerant magnetism, or, possibly, superconductivity. Applying 4 spin polarization via the local spin density approximation (LSDA) splits the DOS curves for the spin-up and spin-down wavefunctions, but the summed DOS curves in LSDA are the same as the DOS curve in LDA. Integration of the spin-up and spin-down DOS curves yields a total magnetic moment of ~0 μB per formula unit. Thus itinerant magnetism is not expected, and the electronic structure calculations therefore support the possibility for superconductivity in NbRuB. In intermetallic compounds like these, without clear formal differences in element electronegativity, metallic characteristics may appear to exclude the possibility for charge transfer between atoms, but this does not discount the possible presence of differences between the orbital occupations of the atoms in the compound from those of their ground state neutral gaseous atoms. To quantify the charge transfer in this material, we have used Bader charge analysis based on density functional theory calculations performed by VASP . Using this method, we find that the electronic distribution in the Nb3B2 fragment, which came with 21 intrinsic electrons, yields 23.18 e-, (in other words this fragment is ~ (Nb3B2)2-) and the electronic distribution in the Ru3B fragment, which came with 27 intrinsic electrons, yields 24.82 e-/f.u. (in other words this fragment is ~(Ru3B)2+). These electron distributions are consistent with what is obtained when calculating the integrated DOS of the Nb3B2 (22.06e-) and Ru3B (25.94e-) fragments obtained from the LDA calculations. Thus, as hypothesized, the Nb3B2 part of the structure has accepted electrons (between approximately 1 and 2 electrons depending on the calculation used) from the Ru3B part of the structure, while the Ru3B part has lost a corresponding number of electrons, showing that the fragment formalism is a valid way to consider the electron distribution in NbRuB. Although the calculated charge transfer is less than the amount hypothesized as optimal for superconductivity, a new superconductor indeed occurs as described below. Electronic Characterization The temperature (T) dependent electrical resistivity () of NbRuB in the vicinity of the superconducting transition, measured by a four-probe technique using silver paste electrodes in a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS), is shown in Figure 4. The resistivity undergoes a drop to zero at 3.1 K, characteristic of superconductivity. In correspondence with (T), the magnetic susceptibility (mol(T)), measured in a field of 10 Oe after zero field cooling using a Quantum Design, Inc. Superconducting Quantum Interference Device (SQUID) magnetometer starts to decrease at 3.1 K and shows large negative values, 5 characteristic of an essentially fully superconducting sample, on lowering the temperature. The zero resistivity and the large diamagnetic susceptibility indicate that NbRuB becomes a bulk superconductor at 3.1 K. To prove that the superconductivity is intrinsic to NbRuB, and is not a consequence of the impurity phases present, the superconducting transition was characterized through heat capacity measurements. The heat capacity for NbRuB in the temperature range of 1.9 to 40 K is presented in Figure 5. The main panel shows the temperature dependence of the zero-field heat capacity Cp. The good quality of the sample and the bulk nature of the superconductivity are supported by the presence of a large anomaly in the heat capacity at Tc= 3.0 ~ 3.1 K in the plot of Cp /T, at a temperature that is in excellent agreement with the Tc determined by (T) and . The electronic contribution to the specific heat, γ, measured in a field of 5 T to suppress the superconductivity (inset to Figure 5), is 10 mJ/mol-K2. The value of the specific heat jump at Tc is thus found to be consistent with that expected for a weak-coupling BCS superconductor; Cp/γTc per mole NbRuB in the 78% pure sample = 0.85. This ratio is not at the BCS superconductivity weak coupling limit of 1.43 but is in the range observed for many superconductors. The superconductivity property parameters are summarized in Table 2. As an added check, we tested pure Nb3Ru5B2 (present at the 18% level in the tested sample) down to 0.4 K and found that it is not superconducting; that compound therefore could not give rise to the observed heat capacity feature. Finally NbB is reported to be either antiferromagnetic or superconducting depending on preparation method , but even if superconducting, at only 3% of the tested sample it could not possibly give rise to a heat capacity anomaly of the size observed (Cp/γTc per mole NbB would be about 22, a physically impossible value). Thus the observed superconductivity originates from NbRuB. Conclusion In conclusion, we report the results of a directed search for superconducting borides through the use of the chemical fragment formalism. This search yielded NbRuB as a candidate superconducting material based on the donor-acceptor relationship of the structural fragments present and the understanding of the structure and electron count of the Re3B superconductor. Although they do not address the complexity of the root physical causes of the superconductivity in copper oxide and iron arsenide superconductors, the analogous chemically-based charge reservoir concept has been a useful in designing new superconducting compounds in those 6 families. The work described here shows that the fragment formalism, typically applied to molecules rather than solids, is a useful concept for the design of new non-molecular superconductors. Comparison between the fragment formalism and the charge reservoir concept is shown in Figure 6. Acknowledgement This research was supported by the Department of Energy, grant DE-FG02-98ER45706. 7 Nominal composition NbRuB Refined Formula Nb3Ru3B3 F.W. (g/mol); Space group; Z Pmma (No.51); 2 a (Å) b (Å) c (Å) V (Å3) Absorption Correction Multi-Scan Extinction Coefficient μ(mm−1) θ range (deg) hkl ranges –14≤ h ≤ 13 –4≤ k ≤ 4 –8≤ l ≤ 8 No. reflections; Rint No. independent reflections 336 No. parameters 33 R1; wR2 (all I) Goodness of fit Diffraction peak and hole (e−/Å3) as refined from single crystal diffraction data. Ueq is defined as one-third of the trace of the orthogonalized Uij tensor (Å2). Atom Wyckoff. Occupancy. x y z Ueq Ru1 2f 1 1⁄2 Ru2 4j 1 1⁄4 1⁄2 Nb1 2e 1 0 Nb2 4i 1 1⁄4 0 B1 2e 1 1⁄2 B2 4i 1 1⁄4 0 8 NbRuB Tc (K) -- 3.1 γ(mJ/mol-K2) β (mJ/mol-K4) Cp ⁄T = γ + β T2 γ= 9.97 β =0.057 θD (K) ΘD = (12π4nR/5β)1/3 468 λep λep = 1.04+μ∗ln( ΘD 1.45Tc) (1−0.62μ∗) ln( ΘD 1.45Tc)−1.04 (μ*=0.15) N(EF) experiment (states/eV NbRuB) N(EF) = 3 π2kB 2(1 + λep) γ 2.74 N(EF) calculation (states/eV NbRuB) 1.65 ΔC/γTc 0.85 9