Disordered Fe vacancies and superconductivity in potassium-intercalated iron selenide (K2-xFe4+ySe5) Chih-Han Wang1,2*, Ta-Kun Chen1*, Chung-Chieh Chang1, Chia-Hao Hsu1, Yung-Chi Lee1,3, Ming-Jye Wang4, Phillip M. Wu5 and Maw-Kuen Wu1,3,6† Affiliations: 1Institute of Physics, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan 2Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering, National Taiwan University of Science and Technology, Taipei, Taiwan 3Department of Physics, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan 4Institute of Astrophysics and Astronomy, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan 5Deparment of Applied Physics and Geballe Laboratory for Advanced Materials, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA 6National Donghwa University, Hualien, Taiwan *These authors contributed equally to this work. † Corresponding author. E-mail: mkwu@phys.sinica.edu.tw Abstract: The parent compound of an unconventional superconductor must contain unusual correlated electronic and magnetic properties of its own. In the high-Tc potassium intercalated FeSe, there has been significant debate regarding what the exact parent compound is. Our studies unambiguously show that the Fe-vacancy ordered K2Fe4Se5 is the magnetic, Mott insulating parent compound of the superconducting state. Non-superconducting K2Fe4Se5 becomes a superconductor after high temperature annealing, and the overall picture indicates that superconductivity in K2-xFe4+ySe5 originates from the Fe-vacancy order to disorder transition. Thus, the long pending question whether magnetic and superconducting state are competing or cooperating for cuprate superconductors may also apply to the Fe-chalcogenide superconductors. It is believed that the iron selenides and related compounds will provide essential information to understand the origin of superconductivity in the iron-based superconductors, and possibly to the superconducting cuprates. One Sentence Summary: Our studies unambiguously show that the Fe-vacancy ordered K2Fe4Se5 is the magnetic, Mott insulating parent compound of the superconducting state, and non-superconducting K2Fe4Se5 becomes a superconductor after high temperature annealing, strongly indicating that superconductivity in K2-xFe4+ySe5 originates from the Fe-vacancy order to disorder transition. Main Text: The superconducting transition temperature, Tc, of the Fe chalcogenide superconductors, first discovered in 2008 (1), now rivals those of some cuprates. Many new exciting results (2-5) have transpired since the initial report in a relatively short amount of time, indicating the extreme interest in this system. Tc was enhanced dramatically by applying pressure (6), and then stabilized in bulk with Tc up to 46 K after alkali-intercalation between the iron selenide layers (A1-xFe2-ySe2) (7-10). The high-Tc in this system is accompanied by an intrinsic multiphase nature, with the presence of iron vacancy order in the non-superconducting regime (11-14). More recently, the observation of superconducting energy gap of ~20 meV in monolayer FeSe on SrTiO3 (STO) substrate (15) puts Tc of Fe-chalcogenide higher than other Fe-based superconductors. Despite extensive studies, many critical issues remain unresolved. It is generally accepted that there exists many competing states, such as orbital order, magnetic order, nematic electronic phases, structural distortion and superconductivity in the Fe-based superconductors. However, which interaction is at the root of observed phenomena and superconductivity? The large anisotropy of properties found below the structural phase transition experimentally (16-19) suggests the structural phase transition is driven by electron correlation (20, 21), and the corresponding fluctuations might also be related to the pairing mechanism of superconductivity (22, 23). One candidate responsible for the structural phase transition is the electronic nematicity (24-26). Another candidate as the underlying common mechanism for the structural and antiferromagnetic transitions in the Fe-based superconductors is the orbital ordering (27). Another issue is the controversy of the superconducting phase in A1-xFe2-ySe2 system. Apart from the stable A2Fe4Se5 non-superconducting matrix in superconducting crystals, a separated phase with an expanded c-axis and a composition close to AxFe2Se2 (28-34) was assigned to be the superconducting phase with TC ~ 29–32 K. Others attribute the superconductivity to originate from a parent phase of semiconducting antiferromagnetic A2Fe3Se4 with rhombus (√2 ×2√2) Fe-vacancy order (35), of A2Fe7Se8 parallelogram structure (36), or of A3Fe4Se6 instead of the insulating antiferromagnetic A2Fe4Se5 with √5 × √5 Fe-vacancy order. Pinpointing the parent compound will help to address the issue of competing states and mechanisms for superconductivity. ARPES investigations on alkaline-metal iron selenides (AxFe2-ySe2) reveal the absence of hole pockets at the Fermi surface (FS) (37, 38). This striking result challenges the widely believed FS nesting picture. In their ARPES study on AxFe2-ySe2 (A = K, Rb), Yi et al. (39) concluded that their results could be consistently understood as a temperature- induced crossover from a metallic state at low temperatures to an orbital-selective Mott phase at high temperatures. They further pointed out that the superconducting state of AxFe2-ySe2 is near the boundary of such an orbital-selective Mott phase constrains the system to have sufficiently strong on-site Coulomb interactions and Hund’s coupling, highlighting the nontrivial role of electron correlation in this family of iron-based superconductors. Zhang et al. showed that the presence of abundant Raman modes in AxFe2-ySe2 (40) is the consequence of the superstructure with ordered iron vacancies. They further identified in AxFe2-ySe2 a broad, asymmetric peak around 1600 cm-1 as process involving optical magnons (41). The intensity of this two-magnon peak falls sharply on entering the superconducting phase suggesting a complete mutual proximity effect occurring within a microscopic structure based on nanoscopic phase separation. A recent study on the non-superconducting Fe4Se5 (36), which exhibits the √5 × √5 Fe-vacancy order and is magnetic, shows that it becomes superconducting after high temperature annealing. This observation strongly indicates that the long pending question whether magnetic and superconducting state are competing or cooperating may also apply to the Fe-chalcogenide superconductors. Consequently, the question whether the Fe-vacancy order to disorder transition can be associated with the presence of superconductivity becomes essential. Addressing this question in pure FeSe may be complicated by issues of different stoichiometry. Here we report a systematic study of K2-xFe4+ySe5 compounds with controlled stoichiometry, and we unambiguously demonstrate the appearance and disappearance of superconductivity in the same sample depending on preparation processes. Our measurements clearly show the correlation between the Fe-vacancy disorder and superconductivity in these compounds. Furthermore, we pinpoint the exact phase that is the parent compound from which superconductivity can emerge. These results along with recent theories provide a framework for better understanding the origin of superconductivity in Fe-chalcogenides. A novel synthesis approach developed in this report is to combine the mechanical ball milling and high temperature calcination processes to the formation of polycrystalline KxFe2-ySe2 samples with homogenous chemical composition and crystal phase (Supplement Materials and Method). As we discuss below, our samples maintain the 245 stoichiometry, with no presence of other phases such as the 122 phase. We treated the sealed powder material with K2Fe4Se5 stoichiometry (we denote as 2(Fe4)5) into furnace by slowly heating to 700 oC in 7 hours, kept at the same temperature for 24 hours and then slowly cooled to room temperature. These as grown samples (-AG) were further heat treated with two processes. The first is a low temperature post-annealing at 300 oC for 12 hours followed by ice water quench (-LT). The second is a high temperature (with furnace already at 750 oC) treatment for 3-6 hours followed by quenching in ice water (-HT). In Fig. 1(a) we show the evolution of the temperature dependent magnetic susceptibility for 2(Fe4)5 samples, the powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) data are shown in Supplementary Fig. S1. The as-grown sample, 2(Fe4)5-AG, shows no feature below 300 K. After low temperature post-annealing at 300 oC, the sample (2(Fe4)5-LT) exhibits an anomalous transition at 125 K, which we discuss more in depth below. This transition could be completely eliminated by further high temperature heat-treatment at 750 oC (2(Fe4)5-HT) and quenched to ice water. The 2(Fe4)5-HT sample reveals no magnetic feature in between 50–300 K. Instead, two diamagnetic-like transitions were observed at 29 K and 11 K, suggesting the presence of minor superconducting phases. Importantly, the observed 125 K transition and the superconducting-like transitions can be switched back and forth in the same 2(Fe4)5 sample by cycling through the LT, HT heat-treatment process. Since the stoichiometric 2(Fe4)5 sample has intrinsic 20% Fe-vacancy, it is difficult to completely suppress the √5 × √5 Fe-vacancy order, explaining the low superconducting volume fraction observed. We introduce extra iron and intentionally reduce the potassium in an attempt to fill the vacant sites and allow additional iron to go into the crystal structure. The nominal compositions for these samples are K2Fe4.1Se5 (2(Fe4.1)5), Similar to 2(Fe4)5, the other samples can be switched from the state with 125 K transition to superconducting by the heat treatment cycle, as shown for 2(Fe4.1)5 in Fig. 1(b). Supplementary Fig. S2 displays the comparison of the magnetic behavior of 2(Fe4)5, 1.9(Fe4.1)5 and 1.9(Fe4.2)5 high temperature annealed then ice water quenched samples. The superconducting volume increases with reduced potassium and increased iron, with bulk superconductivity emerging in the K1.9Fe4.2Se5 as grown samples after keeping it at 750 oC for several hours. We note that for the HT process, it is important to place samples in a pre-heated furnace. We also found that longer annealing time (>10 hours) resulted in poorer superconducting volume ratio, which is likely due to the degradation of the sample from the reaction between potassium and quartz tube. Additionally, extra iron such as 1.9(Fe4.3)5 also does not increase the superconducting volume ratio, as shown in Supplementary Fig. S3. We performed structural analyses with XRD and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) in order to understand the influence of the preparation process on the crystal structure and Fe-vacancy. Supplementary Fig. S4 shows the XRD patterns obtained from four K2-xFe4+ySe5 samples. The XRD pattern for 2(Fe4)5-LT is consistent with the result reported (42), with clear superstructure peaks fit to the √5 × √5 Fe-vacancy order and no superconductivity observed. When the nominal composition is altered to less potassium and more iron, a drastic reduction of the intensity of the superstructure peaks is observed in the inset of Fig. S4. For the 1.9(Fe4.2)5-HT-6h sample, the superstructure peaks are no longer visible, and a superconducting transition is measured in susceptibility. The most important feature in our measurements is that there is no second phase from different stochiometry observable in all samples studied within the instrument resolution, unlike the previously reported superconducting crystals where phase separation is inevitable (34). Based on the main Bragg peaks we calculated the lattice parameters using I4/m symmetry for samples with superstructure peaks (in 2(Fe4)5-LT and 1.9(Fe4.1)5-HT samples) and I4/mmm symmetry for samples without superstructures (1.9(Fe4.2)5-HT). The results are summarized in Table 1 of Supplementary and Fig. S5. The data reveals clearly the reduction of lattice constant a (and b) and the elongation of lattice constant c in the superconducting samples. Our observations of the lattice parameter variation in the superconducting samples are consistent with those reported in phase-separated superconducting crystals, which apart from non-superconducting 2(Fe4)5 phase, contain extra phase with a compressed a-axis and an extended c-axis (12, 29). We stress again that our crystals do not contain phases with different stoichiometry. Furthermore, the XRD patterns of the HT and LT phases for the same sample 1.9(Fe4.2)5 are compared in Supplementary Fig. S6. The √5 × √5 superstructure peaks are present for the sample annealed at 300 oC, but are absent for the HT treatment, when bulk superconductivity emerges. Therefore, we believe that superconductivity is highly related to a situation without Fe-vacancy order, but not necessarily without Fe vacancies. The relative intensity of (123) and (002) peaks is significantly changed from the non-superconducting to superconducting samples, as shown in Figs. S4 and S6. This can be understood if the Fe-4(d) vacant sites are gradually filled in the superconducting sample when the vacancies become more disordered so that the material becomes more two-dimensional. This picture is consistent with the SEM observation that the superconducting samples contain larger layer-type grains, whereas granular-type grains exist in the non-superconducting samples, see Supplementary Fig. S7. This grain morphology evolution certainly contributes to the peak intensity change between (123) and (002). Though a superconducting phase KyFe2Se2 (y~0.5), which has been reported from Rietveld structural refinement and electron diffraction studies (29), can also account for the increase in (002)/(123) ratio with superconducting volume, we do not observe the presence of the KyFe2Se2 phase in our sample with highest superconducting volume fraction. observed in this sample as shown in Fig. 2(b-d): a typical √5 × √5 Fe-vacancy order and a K-vacancy order that could be attributed to two possible origins (13). Although we do not determine which order, 2(Fe4)5-AG clearly has local inhomogeneity of composition resulting in the formation of K-vacancy order. Post annealing of the as-grown sample eliminates the extra K-vacancy order. Supplementary Fig. 8 shows two grains of a 2(Fe4)5-LT sample exhibiting only superstructure reflections corresponding to the √5 × √5 Fe-vacancy order without any K-vacancy order. In Fig. 2(h), the TEM for 1.9(Fe4.2)5 is shown. The c-axis zone-pattern, easily obtained in TEM, corroborates the picture from SEM that the superconducting samples have more layered crystal morphology. The SAED pattern in Fig. 2(i) clearly shows no vacancy order. This is in very good agreement with the XRD analysis, that the Fe-vacancy order is successfully suppressed in samples with a stoichiometric composition close to the parent K2Fe4Se5 phase. In other words, there is an order to disorder transition without a change in stoichiometry. The features in the susceptibility as a function of temperature can be correlated to those in the resistivity versus temperature. The resistivity of the studied samples are shown in Fig. 3. Both 2(Fe4)5-LT and 2(Fe4)5-HT behave like a semiconductor, as shown in Fig. 3(a). We note that 2(Fe4)5-HT shows superconducting-like transitions in susceptibility but with low volume fraction. The resistivity suggests a picture of extremely low density of disconnected superconducting puddles. The inset of Fig. 3(a) demonstrates that the temperature dependence of resistivity follows the Mott variable-range-hopping behavior, carriers are localized, at the temperature close to the transition observed in susceptibility in Fig. 1(a). Annealing the sample at high temperature and then quenching, 2(Fe4)5-HT, reduces the sample resistivity. Extra iron that fills the vacancies also reduces the resistivity. For 1.9(Fe4.1)5-LT sample that exhibits Fe-vacancy order, the temperature dependence of resistivity resembles data in the literature, showing a semiconducting to metallic behavior at intermediate temperature before the onset of superconducting weaker superlattice peaks shows metallic behavior without a clear resistive peak at high temperature and becomes superconducting at an onset of 31 K (red curve in Fig. 3(b)). For the (1.9(Fe4.2)5)-HT sample with highest superconducting volume ratio, its resistivity is essentially metallic, with temperature dependence similar to that observed in the FeSe superconductor, but with higher and sharp superconducting temperature at 31 K, the red curve in Fig. 3(c). Interestingly, the semiconducting-to-metallic behavior appears again after annealed at low temperature, (blue curve in Fig. 3(c)). Our results clearly demonstrate that the intrinsic resistivity of the superconducting sample of the K2-xFe4+ySe5 system is metallic without the resistive peak at high temperature. The observed resistive peak is due to the presence of a semiconducting phase that has ordered Fe-vacancy. These results unambiguously resolve the controversy of the exact parent phase in K2-xFe4+ySe5 system. The K2Fe4Se5 with Fe-vacancy order is the parent semiconducting phase for the Tc ~ 30 K superconducting phase. Superconductivity emerges after the removal of the vacancy order, which can be easily achieved by thermal processing. Our results also suggest the reduction in the Fe-vacancy density alone by adding extra irons into the lattice is not sufficient to induce bulk superconductivity. Introducing extra irons in the lattice makes the Fe-vacancy in the sample more disordered and leads to higher volume fraction of superconductivity. An important question that arises is what is the role of the interface between the disordered and ordered phases, and whether stabilizing the proper nanoscale interface is related to the very high Tc observed in monolayer FeSe. This picture associating the superconducting transition with the Fe-vacancy order– disorder transition provides the basis to understand the results of the high-pressure study on the mixed phase AxFe2-ySe2 (43). Sun et al. observed in their samples the suppression of superconductivity with increasing pressure. At high pressures, a second superconducting transition with higher Tc was induced. These observations can be understood in terms of the presence of two phases that have different Fe-vacancy order in the sample. Our results also support the viewpoint that AxFe2-ySe2 tends towards mesoscopic phase separation into superconducting, semiconducting or AFM insulating phase proposed by Chen et al. (44) based on their KxFe2-ySe2 ARPES study. It certainly will be essential to study in detail how the Fermi surface evolves from the non-superconducting parent state with Fe-vacancy order to the disordered superconducting state in the well-characterized K2-xFe4+ySe5 samples. The mechanism behind the 125 K transition in samples with vacancy order is not well understood at the moment and requires further study. Preliminary magnetic susceptibility measurements indicate this transition is phenomenologically similar to that of the Verwey transition observed in Fe3O4, suggesting the possibility of charge/spin order in the non-superconducting parent compound. This is consistent with the electronic nematicity, which is associated with the C4 rotational symmetry breaking that has been observed in the Fe-based superconductors. In summary, our studies on the K2-xFe4+ySe5 superconductors show that the magnetic, non-superconducting K2Fe4Se5 phase with iron-vacancy order is a Mott insulator. Non-superconducting K2Fe4Se5 becomes a superconductor after high temperature annealing, which disorders the Fe vacancy order but with no stoichiometry change. These results settle two issues: 1) that the Fe-vacancy ordered K2-xFe4+ySe5 is the insulating parent compound of the superconducting state and 2) superconductivity in K2-xFe4+ySe5 originates from the Fe-vacancy order to disorder transition. The similarities for this system to the cuprates are striking. Thus, the long pending question whether magnetic and superconducting state are competing or cooperating for cuprate superconductors may also apply to the Fe-chalcogenide superconductors. It is believed that the iron selenides and related compounds will provide essential information to understand the origin of superconductivity in the iron-based superconductors, and possibly to the superconducting cuprates.