Proximity Induced Vortices and Long-Range Triplet Supercurrents in Ferromagnetic Josephson Junctions and Spin Valves Mohammad Alidoust1, 2, вҲ— and Klaus Halterman3, вҖ  1Department of Physics, University of Basel, Klingelbergstrasse 82, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland 2Department of Physics, Faculty of Sciences, University of Isfahan, Hezar Jerib Avenue, Isfahan 81746-73441, Iran 3Michelson Lab, Physics Division, Naval Air Warfare Center, China Lake, California 93555, USA (Dated: September 5, 2018) Using a spin-parameterized quasiclassical Keldysh-Usadel technique, we theoretically study supercurrent transport in several types of diffusive ferromagnetic(F)/superconducting(S) configurations with differing mag- netization textures. We separate out the even- and odd-frequency components of the supercurrent within the low proximity limit and identify the relative contributions from the singlet and triplet channels. We first con- sider inhomogeneous one-dimensional Josephson structures consisting of a uniform bilayer magnetic S/F/F/S structure and a trilayer S/F/F/F/S configuration, in which case the outer F layers can have either a uniform or conical texture relative to the central uniform F layer. Our results demonstrate that for supercurrents flowing perpendicular to the F/F interfaces, incorporating a conical texture yields the most effective way to observe the signatures of the long-ranged spin-triplet supercurrents. We also consider three different types of finite- sized two-dimensional magnetic structures subjected to an applied magnetic field normal to the junction plane: a S/F/S junction with uniform magnetization texture, and two S/F/F/S configurations with differing F/F bilayer arrangements. In one case, the F/F interface is parallel with the S/F junction interfaces while in the other case, the F/F junction is oriented perpendicular to the S/F interfaces. We then discuss the proximity vortices and corresponding spatial maps of currents inside the junctions. For the uniform S/F/S junction, we analytically calculate the magnetic field induced supercurrent and pair potential in both the narrow and wide junction regimes, thus providing insight into the variations in the Fraunhofer diffraction patterns and proximity vortices when transitioning from a wide junction to a narrow one. Our extensive computations demonstrate that the induced long-range spin-triplet supercurrents can deeply penetrate uniform F/F bilayers when spin-singlet supercurrents flow parallel to the F/F interfaces. This is in stark contrast to configurations where a spin-singlet supercurrent flows perpendicular to the F/F interfaces. We pinpoint the origin of the induced triplet and singlet correlations through spatial profiles of the decomposed total supercurrents. We find that the penetration of the long-range spin-triplet supercurrents associated with supercurrents flowing parallel to the F/F interfaces, are more pronounced when the thickness of the F strips are unequal. Lastly, if one of the S terminals is replaced with a finite-sized normal metal, we demonstrate that the corresponding experimentally accessible S/F/F/N spin valve presents an effective platform in which the predicted long-range effects can be effectively generated and probed. PACS numbers: 74.50.+r, 74.25.Ha, 74.78.Na, 74.50.+r, 74.45.+c, 74.78.FK, 72.80.Vp, 68.65.Pq, 81.05.ue I. INTRODUCTION The interaction between the different order parameters in proximity coupled nanostructures comprised of ferromagnets (F) and superconductors (S) has attracted considerable atten- tion from numerous scientific disciplines in both the theoret- ical and experimental communities.1вҖ“9 The interplay between ferromagnetism and superconductivity at low temperatures has constituted a unique arena for researchers in condensed matter studying superconducting spintronics in the clean, dif- fusive and non-equilibrium regimes.10вҖ“21 Interest in supercon- ducting electronics involving S/F hybrids has substantially increased during the past decade due to considerable advances in nanofabrication techniques. This consequently has led to more possibilities for S/F heterostructures playing a prac- tical role in nanoscale systems including, quantum comput- ers and ultra-sensitive detectors.2вҖ“6,8,12,22вҖ“28 Several interest- ing and important effects have been found and studied both theoretically and experimentally, such as 0-ПҖ transitions29вҖ“32, and the existence of triplet correlations4,5,33вҖ“41. When a single quantization axis can be defined through- out the system, such as in a simple S/F bilayer with a uniformly magnetized ferromagnet, the Cooper pair wave- function is composed of singlet and opposite-spin triplet components.4,33,34 These components have zero spin projec- tion along the quantization axis, which is the same direc- tion as the magnetization. These two types of supercon- ducting correlations oscillate and strongly decay inside the F layer over length scales determined by ОҫF . In the diffu- sive regime studied here, ОҫF = пҝҪ D/h, where D and h rep- resent the diffusion constant and exchange field magnitudes, respectively. In the ballistic regime, ОҫF = Д§vF /2h, where vF is the fermi velocity. Due to these relatively small length scales, the zero-spin triplet correlations are often referred to as short-ranged.4,5,33,39 However, if the magnetization of the F layer possesses an inhomogeneous pattern, equal-spin triplet correlations can be generated.4,5,35вҖ“38 These types of corre- lations have non-zero spin projection along the quantization axis. The equal-spin correlations penetrate into a uniform dif- fusive F media over a length scale that is the same as singlets in a normal metal.34,42вҖ“44 For instance, it has been theoreti- cally shown that in the diffusive regime, a particular trilayer S/F/F/F/S Josephson junctions with non-collinear magne- tizations may host triplet supercurrents that are manifested arXiv:1503.07530v1 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 25 Mar 2015 2 in a slowly decaying critical current as a function of junc- tion thickness42. It has also been demonstrated that to reveal the long-ranged nature of proximity triplet supercurrents in the diffusive regime, a simple uniformly magnetized S/F/F/S junction may not possess the requisite magnetic inhomogene- ity, and consequently a counterpart layered S/F/F/F/S junc- tion is necessary45. In contrast to the diffusive regime, it has recently been shown in the ballistic regime that it is possi- ble to generate long-range odd-frequency triplet correlations in S/F/F/S Josephson junctions containing two uniform F layers with misaligned magnetization orientations and differ- ing thicknesses (dF 1 Мё= dF 2).46вҖ“48 The signature of these long-ranged triplet correlations are theoretically predicted to be revealed in the second harmonic term of the Josephson current46,47,49. The signatures of the equal-spin triplet corre- lations have been observed in experiments as well40,41,43,50,51. When the magnet is fully spin polarized, as in half-metallic systems, these type of triplet correlations can be produced when there are spin-active interfaces present.21,35,41,52 A sig- nificant thrust of these works is the formulation of simple and optimal conditions to detect the odd-frequency pairings in S/F heterostructures. To this end, spin-valve S/F/F het- erostructures have recently attracted interest from both the theoretical and experimental communities26,44,51,53вҖ“66. The ad- vantages of such spin valves are their less complicated experi- mental implementation and greater control of their magnetiza- tion state compared to layered magnetic Josephson junctions. In this paper, we make use of a spin parametrization scheme for the GreenвҖҷs function, the Usadel equation, and associ- ated boundary conditions. This method provides a suitable framework for separating the supercurrent into spin singlet, opposite-spin triplet, and equal-spin triplet components, us- ing the spin parametrization technique outlined for a generic three dimensional system. Our model allows for investi- gations into a broad range of realistic finite-size ferromag- net/superconductor hybrids with arbitrary magnetization pat- terns subject to an external magnetic field7,72,73. The spin de- composed supercurrent accurately pinpoints the contribution from different superconducting pairings, their influence upon the total supercurrent, and their spatial variations within the magnetic regions.8 We first consider three types of one-dimensional Joseph- son junctions and study the critical supercurrent spin decom- posed components for differing F layer thicknesses. Our results demonstrate that in the low proximity regime of the diffusive limit, the most effective way to observe signatures of the long-ranged spin-triplet supercurrents (where the su- percurrent flows perpendicular to F/F interfaces) involves the use of inhomogeneous magnetic structures comprised of combinations of rotating exchange interactions (e.g. conical texture in Holmium [Ho]) and uniform ferromagnets. We find that the supercurrent spin decomposed component corre- sponding to the rotating component of magnetization is long- ranged in such a situation and dominates the behavior of to- tal supercurrent. Trilayer S/F/F/F/S structures with uni- form ferromagnets42,67 are shown to weakly display long- range spin-triplet signatures in this low proximity limit. Next, we consider three different types of finite-sized two- dimensional magnetic Josephson junctions subject to an ap- plied magnetic field.7 Our general analytical and numerical framework permits the study of magnetization textures with highly intricate patterns.72,73 Our methodology also allows for rather general geometric parameters, including arbitrary ratios of the side lengths describing the ferromagnet strips. We first consider a S/F/S Josephson junction with a uniform magnetization texture, thus extending the results of a normal S/N/S Josephson junction.68 In doing this, we employ simpli- fying approximations that permit explicit analytical solutions to the anomalous GreenвҖҷs function. This consequently leads to tractable and transparent analytical expressions for the spa- tial dependence to the current density and pair potential. In particular, we implement the so-called wide and narrow junc- tion limits, which results in considerable simplifications to the Usadel equations. In the wide-junction limit, the Fraunhofer diffraction pattern appears with ОҰ0 (the magnetic flux quan- tum) periodicity in the critical supercurrent as a function of external magnetic flux, whereas a narrow-junction transitions from an oscillating Fraunhofer pattern to a monotonically de- caying one, similar to its normal metal counter part68. As- sociated with these signatures of the supercurrent is the ap- pearance of arrays of proximity vortices68,71вҖ“74 which provide useful information regarding the Fraunhofer response of the supercurrent to an external magnetic field. By initially consid- ering uniformly magnetized structures with a single F layer, the nature of the proximity vortices and current flow mappings in more complicated magnetically inhomogeneous junctions discussed below are better understood in addition to the 0-ПҖ transition influences on the critical supercurrent responses72. To explore the possibility of induced long-range triplet ef- fects, additional magnetic inhomogeneity is introduced by the addition of another ferromagnet layer, thus establishing dou- ble magnet S/F/F/S Josephson junctions. These types of structures comprise the main focus of the paper. Two types of S/F/F/S configurations are considered: In one case, the F/F interface is parallel to the interfaces of the S leads, while in the other case, the F/F junction is oriented perpendicular to them. In either scenario, when an external magnetic field is present, it is applied normal to the junction plane. Our findings demon- strate that a diffusive S/F/F/S Josephson junction in the low proximity limit can generate long-ranged triplet supercurrents depending on the direction of charge supercurrent with respect to the F/F interface orientation. In particular, if charge su- percurrent flows parallel with the F/F interface, spin-triplet components generated in one ferromagnetic wire deeply pen- etrate the adjacent ferromagnet with relative orthogonal mag- netizations. For these types of structures, we find that the long-ranged effect manifests itself when the thickness of the ferromagnetic strips are unequal.7 With the goal of demon- strating the generality of the introduced scenario above, iso- lating the predicted equal-spin triplet component to the su- percurrents flowing parallel to F/F interfaces, and motivated by recent experiments involving S/F/F spin-valves26,51,60вҖ“66, we turn our attention to S/F/F/N spin-valves subject to an external magnetic field (N denotes a normal metal layer). Our results show that indeed for certain geometric and material pa- rameters, diffusive S/F/F/N spin valves can isolate purely 3 equal-spin odd-triplet correlations arising from the Meissner response, following the parallel transport scenario above, even in the low proximity limit. The supercurrent moving parallel to F/F contact, in this case is long-ranged, extends consid- erably into the N layer, and can be experimentally probed through direct local measurements of the current inside the relatively thick normal layer. We find that an equal-spin triplet supercurrent appears when the thickness of the two F layers are unequal: dF 1 вү« dF 2, and vanishes when dF 1 = dF 2, consistent with the behavior of the ferromagnet Josephson junctions mentioned above. Therefore, our extensive study demonstrates the generality of our proposed scenario to ef- fectively generate long-ranged supercurrents independent of geometry implemented. The paper is organized as follows: We present a succinct review of the theoretical framework, spin-parametrization scheme, and parameters employed in Sec. II. In Sec. III, the one-dimensional spin-parameterized GreenвҖҷs function is dis- cussed, and in Sec. III.1 we present the approach taken to evaluate the corresponding decomposed supercurrents. In Sec. III.1, we discuss the critical supercurrent, 0-ПҖ transi- tions and equal-spin triplet components of the supercurrent for structures. Next, in Sec. IV we expand our investigations into two-dimensional hybrid junctions. In Sec. IV.1, the pertinent technical points and parameters used to study the proposed heterostructures theoretically are presented, and which are chosen to be aligned with realistic experimental conditions. In Sec. IV.2, we consider i) the wide-junction limit, and ii) the narrow-junction limit of a uniform S/F/S junction. Cor- responding analytical expressions are given for the pair poten- tial and supercurrent response when the system is subject to an applied magnetic field. In part iii) we compliment our analyt- ical expressions with a full numerical treatment that does not resort to the previous simplifying assumptions. In Sec. IV.3, we present the spin-parameterized Usadel equation, supple- mentary boundary conditions, and separate out the contribu- tions from the odd and even frequency components of the net supercurrent describing these two-dimensional systems. In Sec. IV.4, we study one of the main structures, a magnetic S/F/F/S junction, where the double layer F/F interfaces are aligned with the interfaces of the S terminals. In Sec. IV.5, the remaining structure is discussed, where the F/F interfaces are orthogonal to the interfaces of the S terminals. For both configurations, we study the pair potential, charge supercur- rent, and its odd or even frequency decomposition. We show also how an external magnetic flux can induce vortex phenom- ena and modifications to the singlet and triplet correlations responsible for supercurrent transport. We also study the in- fluence of ferromagnetic strip thicknesses on the long-range spin-triplet contributions to the charge supercurrent. Finally, in Sec. IV.6, we study the long-range spin-triplet supercur- rents in S/F/F/N valves. These results are then compared with those obtained for their S/F/F/S counterparts. The ex- perimental implications of our findings for these structures are also discussed. Finally, we summarize our findings in Sec. V and give concluding remarks. II. GENERAL APPROACH AND FORMALISM Here we first outline the theoretical approach for generic three-dimensional systems. The corresponding reduced one- dimensional and two-dimensional cases are presented in the subsequent sections. II.1. Theoretical methods The coupling between an s-wave superconductor and a ferromagnet leads to proximity-induced triplet correlations in addition to the usual singlet pairings.4,33 The correspond- ing coherent superconducting quasiparticles inside a diffusive medium can be described by the Usadel equations,75 which are a set of coupled complex three-dimensional partial dif- ferential equations. A general three-dimensional quasiclassi- cal model for such diffusive ferromagnet/superconductor het- erostructures subject to an external magnetic field is given by the following Usadel equation;4,75,76 in which ЛҶПҒ3 and Пғ are 4 Г— 4 and 2 Г— 2 Pauli matrices, respectively, and we denote the diffusive constant of the medium by D. Here, the exchange field of a ferromagnetic region, вғ—h(x, y, z) = пҝҪ hx(x, y, z), hy(x, y, z), hz(x, y, z) пҝҪ , can take arbitrary directions in configuration space. We have defined the 4Г—4 version of partial derivative, ЛҮвҲӮ, by ЛҶвҲӮ вүЎ вғ—вҲҮЛҶ1 вҲ’ ie вғ—A(x, y, z)ЛҶПҒ3 in which вғ—A(x, y, z) stands for a vector potential producing the applied external mag- ie[ вғ—A(x, y, z)ЛҶПҒ3, ЛҶG(x, y, z)]. We have denoted the quasipar- ticlesвҖҷ energy by Оө which is measured from the fermi surface ОөF . In the low proximity limit, the normal and anomalous com- ponents of the GreenвҖҷs function can be approximately written as, F no(x, y, z) вүғ 1 and F(x, y, z) вүӘ 1, respectively. In this regime therefore, the advanced component of the GreenвҖҷs function can be directly expressed as: ЛҶGA(x, y, z, Оө) вүҲ пҝҪ вҲ’1 вҲ’F(x, y, z, вҲ’Оө) F вҲ—(x, y, z, Оө) 1 пҝҪ , (2) where the underline notation reflects 2Г—2 matrices. Thus, the advanced component, ЛҶGA(x, y, z), of total GreenвҖҷs function ЛҮG can be written as: ЛҶGA(x, y, z) = пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈӯ вҲ’1 0 вҲ’fвҶ‘вҶ‘(вҲ’Оө) вҲ’fвҲ’(вҲ’Оө) 0 вҲ’1 вҲ’f+(вҲ’Оө) вҲ’fвҶ“вҶ“(вҲ’Оө) f вҲ— вҶ‘вҶ‘(Оө) f вҲ— вҲ’(Оө) 1 0 f вҲ— +(Оө) f вҲ— вҶ“вҶ“(Оө) 0 1 пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈ· пЈё . (3) In general, when a system is in a nonequilibrium state, the Usadel equation must be supplemented by the appropriate distribution functions.77 In this paper, however, we assume 4 equilibrium conditions for our systems under consideration, and hence the three blocks comprising the total GreenвҖҷs function are related to each other in the following way: tanh(ОІОө)( ЛҶGR(x, y, z) вҲ’ ЛҶGA(x, y, z)), where П„3 is the Pauli matrix, and ОІ вүЎ kBT/2. The resulting nonlinear complex partial differential equa- tions should be supplemented by appropriate boundary conditions to properly capture the electronic and trans- port characteristics of S/F hybrid structures. We employ the Kupriyanov-Lukichev boundary conditions at the S/F interfaces78 and control the induced proximity correlations us- ing the parameter О¶ as the barrier resistance: (4) where ЛҶn is a unit vector denoting the perpendicular direction to an interface. The parameters GS and GT introduce spin- activity at the S/F interfaces.25 The solution for a bulk even- frequency s-wave superconductor ЛҶGR BCS reads,76 ЛҶGR BCS(Оё) = пҝҪ 1 cosh Оё(Оө) iП„2eiОё sinh Оё(Оө) iП„2eвҲ’iОё sinh Оё(Оө) вҲ’1 cosh Оё(Оө) пҝҪ , (5) where, Оё(Оө) = arctanh(| вҲҶ | Оө ). Here we have represented the macroscopic phase of the bulk superconductor by Оё. To have more compact expressions, we define the following piecewise functions: s(Оө) вүЎ eiОё sinh Оё(Оө) = вҲ’вҲҶ пҝҪ sgn(Оө) вҲҡ Оө2 вҲ’ вҲҶ2 Оҳ(Оө2 вҲ’ вҲҶ2) вҲ’ i вҲҡ вҲҶ2 вҲ’ Оө2 Оҳ(вҲҶ2 вҲ’ Оө2) пҝҪ , c(Оө) вүЎ cosh Оё(Оө) = | Оө | вҲҡ Оө2 вҲ’ вҲҶ2 Оҳ(Оө2 вҲ’ вҲҶ2) вҲ’ iОө вҲҡ вҲҶ2 вҲ’ Оө2 Оҳ(вҲҶ2 вҲ’ Оө2), where Оҳ(x) denotes the usual step function. In the situations where an external magnetic field is applied, it is directed along the z-axis. We also use the Coulomb gauge вғ—вҲҮ В· вғ—A(x, y, z) = 0 throughout our calculations for the vec- tor potential. In a magnetic junction the vector potential is composed of two parts: a) a part due to the magnetic field associated with the exchange interaction in the ferromagnetic layer вғ—h(x, y, z), and b) a part due to the external magnetic field вғ—H(x, y, z). The contribution due to the exchange in- teraction measured in experiments reveals itself as a shift in the observed magnetic interference patterns41,50. However, as this has found good agreement with experiments, one can safely neglect the part of вғ—A(x, y, z) arising from the exchange interaction.50,72 Thus, we assume that the external magnetic flux contribution dominates, and the vector potential can be determined entirely by the external magnetic field вғ—H(x, y, z). In this paper, we consider the regime where the junction width WF is smaller than the Josephson penetration length О»J 68,71. Therefore, screening of the magnetic field by Josephson cur- rents can be safely ignored.79 In general, the external magnetic field strongly influences the macroscopic phases of the super- conducting leads. To avoid such effects in our considered sys- tems, we assume that the external magnetic field passes only across the nonsuperconducting sandwiched strips. These as- sumptions lead to results that are in very good agreement with those found in experiments.68,71,72,79вҖ“81 This will be discussed in more detail in Sec. IV. One of the most important quantities in the context of quantum transport through Josephson junction systems is the charge supercurrent, which provides valuable information about the superconducting properties of the system and the associated favorable experimental conditions under which to detect them. Under equilibrium conditions, the vector current density can be expressed by the Keldysh block as follows: вғ—J(x, y, z) = J0 пҝҪ +вҲһ вҲ’вҲһ dОөTr пҝҪ ПҒ3 пҝҪ ЛҮG(x, y, z)[ЛҮвҲӮ, ЛҮG(x, y, z)] пҝҪKпҝҪ , (6) where J0 = N0eD/4, N0 is the number of states at the Fermi surface, and e is the electron charge. The vector current den- sity, вғ—J(x, y, z), provides a local spatial map and measure of the charge supercurrent flow through the system. To obtain the total Josephson charge current flowing along a particular direction inside the junction, it is necessary to perform an ad- ditional integration of Eq. (6) over the direction perpendicular to the transport direction. For instance, the total charge current flowing along the x direction can be obtained from, Ix = I0 пҝҪ WF dy вғ—J(x, y, z) В· ЛҶx, (7) in which WF is the junction width (see e.g., Fig. 5). Likewise, the charge supercurrent flow in the y direction can be obtained via integration of Jy(x, y, z) over the x coordinate. Another physically relevant quantity which gives additional insight into the local behavior of the singlet correlations throughout the Josephson structure is the spatial maps of pair potential, Upair(x, y, z). This pair correlation function is defined using the Keldysh block of the total GreenвҖҷs function, ЛҮG(x, y, z)76; Upair(x, y, z) = U0Tr пҝҪ ЛҶПҒ1 вҲ’ iЛҶПҒ2 2 ЛҶП„3 пҝҪ +вҲһ вҲ’вҲһ dОөЛҮG K(x, y, z) пҝҪ , (8) where we normalize the pair potential as, МғUpair(x, y, z) = Upair(x, y, z)/U0, where U0 = вҲ’N0О»/8, and О» is a constant inside the superconducting regions. We note that although the pair potential must vanish outside of the intrinsically super- conducting regions, the pair amplitude, МғUpair(x, y, z), is gener- ally nonzero in the ferromagnetic regions due to the proximity effect. II.2. Spin-parametrization and parameters Due to the possible appearance of triplet pairings in such hybrid structures4, we assume a fixed quantization axis and 5 (Color online) Schematic of three experimental sets up. (a) simple S/F/F/S Josephson junction with ferromagnetic layersвҖҷ widths dF 1, dF 2 and magnetization orientations вғ—h1 = h0(0, sin ОІ1, cos ОІ1), вғ—h2 = h0(0, 0, 1), respectively. (b) trilayer S/F/F/F/S junction where the magnetization of middle F layer, with width dF 2, is fixed in the z direction. The other layers have dF 1, dF 3 widths with magnetization orientations вғ—h1,3 = h0(0, sin ОІ1,3, cos ОІ1,3), respectively. (c) trilayer of ferromagnets where the outer F layers have Holmium-like magnetization patterns namely, вғ—hHo = h0(cos Оұ, sin Оұ sin Оіx/a, sin Оұ cos Оіx/a). The length of middle F layer is labeled by dF while the two outer Holmium-like F layers are assumed to have equal lengths dHo. The x axis is normal to the junction interfaces and the systems have infi- nite sizes in the y and z directions. employ a spin-parametrization scheme. In this scheme, the GreenвҖҷs function is decomposed into the even and odd fre- quency components, taking the spin-quantization axis to be oriented along z direction. Since we consider the low prox- imity limit, the anomalous component of the GreenвҖҷs function takes the following form in terms of even- (S) and odd- (T) frequency parts: F(x, y, z, Оө) = i пҝҪ S(x, y, z, Оө) + вғ—П„ В· вғ—T(x, y, z, Оө) пҝҪ П„y, (9) where вғ—П„ = (П„x, П„y, П„z) is a vector comprised of Pauli ma- trices and вғ—T(x, y, z, Оө) = (Tx, Ty, Tz). Thus, the probabil- ity of finding odd-frequency triplet superconducting correla- tions with zero spin projection along the z-axis is |Tz|2.83,84 Likewise, if Tx or Ty are finite, there exists triplet corre- lations with Вұ1 spin projections along the spin quantization axis.35,36,82вҖ“84 We have normalized all lengths by the superconducting co- herence length ОҫS. The quasiparticlesвҖҷ energy Оө and the ex- change energy intensity are normalized by the zero tempera- ture superconducting order parameter, вҲҶ0. We also assume a low temperature of T = 0.05Tc, where Tc is the critical tem- perature of the bulk superconducting banks. We use natural units, with Д§ = kB = 1, where kB is the Boltzmann con- stant and define ОІ = kBT/2. We consider weak exchange field strengths of |вғ—h| = 5вҲҶ0 corresponding to that found in ferromagnet alloys26 such as, e.g., CuxNiy. A barrier resis- tance of О¶ = 4.0 ensures sufficiently opaque S/F interfaces leading to appropriate solutions to the Usadel equations within the low proximity limit, F(x, y, z, Оө) вүӘ 1. Having now out- lined the Keldysh-Usadel quasiclassical formalism and spin- parametrization framework employed in this work, we now proceed to present our analytical and numerical findings in the next sections. III. ONE-DIMENSIONAL HYBRID STRUCTURES In this section, we consider the effectively one-dimensional hybrid structures sketched in Fig. 1. We first derive the Us- adel equations and boundary conditions. We then decompose the supercurrent into its singlet and triplet components using the three-dimensional spin-parametrization scheme discussed in Sec. II.2. Utilizing this singlet-triplet decomposition, we analyze and characterize the supercurrent behavior based on the individual components involved. III.1. Spin-parameterized supercurrent Upon decomposing the GreenвҖҷs function via Eq. (9), the Usadel equation, Eq. (1), transforms into the following eight coupled complex partial differential equations for one- dimensional systems, D пҝҪ вҲ“вҲӮ2 xTx(вҲ’Оө) + iвҲӮ2 xTy(вҲ’Оө) пҝҪ (10a) D пҝҪ вҲ“вҲӮ2 xS(вҲ’Оө) + вҲӮ2 xTz(вҲ’Оө) пҝҪ (10b) D пҝҪ вҲ“вҲӮ2 xTвҲ— x(Оө) вҲ’ iвҲӮ2 xTвҲ— y(Оө) пҝҪ + i пҝҪ Вұ2(hx Вұ ihy)SвҲ—(Оө) вҲ’ 2Оө(вҲ“TвҲ— x(Оө) вҲ’ iTвҲ— пҝҪ = 0 (10c) D пҝҪ вҲ“вҲӮ2 xSвҲ—(Оө) + вҲӮ2 xTвҲ— z(Оө) пҝҪ + i пҝҪ 2(вҲ’Оө Вұ hz)(вҲ“SвҲ—(Оө) + TвҲ— z(Оө)) Вұ 2hxTвҲ— x(Оө) Вұ 2hyTвҲ— y(Оө) пҝҪ = 0 (10d) The Kupriyanov-Lukichev boundary conditions at the left S/F interface, Eq. (4), are transformed in the same way, lead- ing to the following differential equations: (11a) (11b) (О¶вҲӮx вҲ’ cвҲ—(Оө))(вҲ“TвҲ— x(Оө) вҲ’ iTвҲ— y(Оө)) = 0, (11c) (О¶вҲӮx вҲ’ cвҲ—(Оө))(вҲ“SвҲ—(Оө) + TвҲ— z(Оө)) = ВұsвҲ—(Оө). (11d) 6 Similarly, the Kupriyanov-Lukichev boundary conditions at the right F/S interface are also transformed as, (12a) (12b) (О¶вҲӮx + cвҲ—(Оө))(вҲ“TвҲ— x(Оө) вҲ’ iTвҲ— y(Оө)) = 0, (12c) z(Оө)) = вҲ“sвҲ—(Оө). (12d) By solving this coupled set of complex differential equations with the boundary conditions [Eqs. (11) and (12)], the rel- evant physical quantities can be obtained. We consider the x-axis be normal to the interfaces, as shown in Fig. 5. The de- composition introduced above leads to the following expres- sion for the supercurrent density within the junction [Eq. (6)]: J(x) = J0 пҝҪ вҲһ вҲ’вҲһ dОө { S(вҲ’Оө)вҲ—вҲӮxS(Оө) вҲ’ вҲӮxTx(вҲ’Оө)TвҲ— x(Оө) + вҲӮxTx(Оө)TвҲ— x(вҲ’Оө)вҲ’ вҲӮxTвҲ— x(вҲ’Оө)Tx(Оө) + вҲӮxTвҲ— x(Оө)Tx(вҲ’Оө) вҲ’ вҲӮxTy(вҲ’Оө)TвҲ— вҲӮxTy(Оө)TвҲ— y(вҲ’Оө) вҲ’ вҲӮxTвҲ— y(вҲ’Оө)Ty(Оө) + вҲӮxTвҲ— y(Оө)Ty(вҲ’Оө)вҲ’ вҲӮxTz(вҲ’Оө)TвҲ— z(Оө) + вҲӮxTz(Оө)TвҲ— z(вҲ’Оө) вҲ’ вҲӮxTвҲ— вҲӮxTвҲ— z(Оө)Tz(вҲ’Оө)} tanh(ОөОІ). (13) The current through the junction can be easily obtained by integration of the current density along the y and z directions over the F junction widths W and L, respectively (corre- sponding to the cross section of the wire). We assume that our system is very wide in the y direction, so that the one- dimensional approximation is valid, and therefore the current density remains constant in the y and z directions. It is con- venient to define the normalization constant, I0 вүЎ LWJ0, for the supercurrent, I(x). To extract the contributions to the total supercurrent from the even frequency singlet, and odd frequency triplet correlations, we have also decomposed the supercurrent accordingly into four components: IS0(x) = I0 пҝҪ вҲһ вҲ’вҲһ (14a) ISx(x) = I0 пҝҪ вҲһ вҲ’вҲһ dОө {вҲ’вҲӮxTx(вҲ’Оө)TвҲ— x(Оө) + вҲӮxTx(Оө)TвҲ— x(вҲ’Оө) вҲ’вҲӮxTвҲ— x(вҲ’Оө)Tx(Оө) + вҲӮxTвҲ— x(Оө)Tx(вҲ’Оө)} tanh(ОөОІ), (14b) ISy(x) = I0 пҝҪ вҲһ вҲ’вҲһ dОө пҝҪ вҲ’вҲӮxTy(вҲ’Оө)TвҲ— y(Оө) + вҲӮxTy(Оө)TвҲ— y(вҲ’Оө) вҲ’вҲӮxTвҲ— y(вҲ’Оө)Ty(Оө) + вҲӮxTвҲ— y(Оө)Ty(вҲ’Оө) пҝҪ tanh(ОөОІ), (14c) ISz(x) = I0 пҝҪ вҲһ вҲ’вҲһ dОө {вҲӮxTz(вҲ’Оө)TвҲ— z(Оө) + вҲӮxTz(Оө)TвҲ— z(вҲ’Оө) вҲ’вҲӮxTвҲ— z(вҲ’Оө)Tz(Оө) + вҲӮxTвҲ— z(Оө)Tz(вҲ’Оө)} tanh(ОөОІ), (14d) where the total supercurrent is thus the sum of decomposed terms, namely, (15) This decomposition allows for pinpointing the exact behavior of the even- and odd-frequency supercurrent components. Results and discussions Various analytical or numerical schemes with varying ap- proximations have been employed to investigate the structures with magnetization patterns shown in Fig. 115,24,25,42вҖ“45. In the analytical treatments42,85, limiting approximations were em- ployed. For example, to study the noncollinear S/F/F/F/S structures42,45, transparent boundaries are employed at the S/F interfaces together with the assumption that the anoma- lous GreenвҖҷs function varies enough slowly through the mag- netic trilayer to warrant its Taylor expansion. Our full numeri- cal results involve no such approximations, and hence reveals cases where the inclusion of such effects may be important. One of the main aspects that our numerical approach reveals is the crucial role that each of the different types of super- conducting correlations play in the total supercurrent, given by Eq. (6). The supercurrent is composed of different com- ponents of even-frequency singlet and odd-frequency triplet correlations S, вғ—T, respectively. Such a decomposition is often neglected in Josephson structures that involve intricate mag- netic textures. For comparison purposes, we first consider the simpler S/F/F/S heterostructure15 shown in Fig. 1(a). Most of the results have dF 1 Мё= dF 2, and in all cases shown, the magne- tization of the right F layer is fixed along the z-axis while the left F layer magnetization rotates in the yz plane, that is, вғ—h1 = h0(0, sin ОІ1, cos ОІ1). The magnetization orientation of the left F is thus characterized by the angle ОІ1, since the mag- netization is entirely in-plane. The top row of Fig. 2 illustrates the total critical supercurrent Itot and its decomposed com- ponents (IS0, ISx, ISy, ISz) versus the thickness of right F layer, dF 2. The current components generally vary with posi- tion x, so in order to display an overall view of their behavior as a function of magnetization orientation, we spatially aver- age [denoted by вҹЁ...вҹ©] each component over dF 2. The thick- ness of the left F layer is set typically at dF 1 = 0.15ОҫS, and its magnetization has two components hy, and hz, using a rep- resentative angle of ОІ1 = 0.2ПҖ (these values are chosen to in part support our comparison purposes in Subsec. IV.6). To show the fine features of the 0-ПҖ transition profiles, we have used a logarithmic scale for the magnitude of the critical su- percurrent and its decomposed components. The critical cur- rent (far left panel) undergoes multiple 0-ПҖ transitions when varying dF 2. The decomposed current components вҹЁIS0вҹ© and вҹЁISzвҹ© also show the same behavior as seen in the remaining panels. Next, in the bottom row of Fig. 2, we plot the max- imum current and its components as a function of position for two representative values of the right F layerвҖҷs thickness (dF 2 = 0.25ОҫS, and dF 2 = 1.05ОҫS). The current compo- nents, in contrast to the total current, often vary inside the magnetic layers: IS0, and ISz are shown to propagate within the two F layers. The spin-1 triplet component, ISy, is how- ever localized within the left F layer where ОІ2 = 0.2ПҖ and thus hy Мё= 0. We have investigated a wide range of parameter sets, involving ОІ1, dF 1, and the superconducting phase differ- ences. The ISy component, does not propagate into the right F region where the exchange field is directed along z, demon- strating consistency with previous studies45. As discussed in 7 0 1 2 10 -5 10 0 Itot/I0 0 1 2 10 -5 10 0 0 1 2 -1 0 1 0 0.5 1 0 0.05 0.1 Itot(x)/I0 x/ОҫS 0 0.5 1 0 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 IS0(x)/I0 x/ОҫS 0 0.5 1 -4 -2 0 x 10 -4 ISy(x)/I0 x/ОҫS 0 1 2 10 -5 10 0 0 0.5 1 0 0.02 ISz(x)/I0 x/ОҫS dF2= 0.25ОҫS dF2= 1.05ОҫS dF2/ОҫS dF2/ОҫS dF2/ОҫS dF2/ОҫS S/F/F/S junction (see Fig. 1(a)). The width of the first magnetic layer is fixed at dF 1 = 0.15ОҫS. The current components are calculated Josephson current and its components as a function of position x inside the junction for two typical values of dF 2 = 0.25ОҫS, and d = 1.05ОҫS. The magnetization orientation in the left F layer is fixed at a representative value of ОІ1 = 0.2ПҖ, while the magnetization in the right F layer always points along z, corresponding to ОІ2 = 0. the introduction, recent theoretical works showed that signa- tures of the triplet supercurrent may be detected by the ap- pearance of a second harmonic in the supercurrent in ballis- tic S/F/F/S Josephson junction, provided that dF 1 вү« dF 2. The higher harmonics were shown to decay exponentially (faster than the first harmonic) when varying the system pa- rameters such as the thickness of the magnetic layers, and exchange field intensities, in the full proximity limit of the diffusive regime.3 Therefore, in the low proximity limit we consider in our manuscript, the higher harmonics are absent.3 It has been suggested that a trilayer42,45 of uniform magnetic materials with noncollinear magnetizations can reveal the sig- natures of long-ranged spin-triplet correlations where the two outer layers produce nonzero spin projections which can be detected in the middle F layer with orthogonal magnetiza- tion. To elucidate the source of the long-range triplet behavior in these types of trilayer configurations42, we investigate next the details of the individual components comprising the total supercurrent. We therefore consider a S/F/F/F/S trilayer structure, as depicted in Fig. 1(b). The magnetization of the central F layer is pinned in the z orientation, coinciding with the spin- quantization axis. The relative in-plane magnetization direc- tions in the surrounding left and right F layers are described simply by the angles ОІ1, and ОІ2, respectively. We denote the thicknesses of the left, middle, and right F layers by dF 1, dF 2, and dF 3, respectively. In the top set of panels in Fig. 3, the spatially averaged supercurrent and its singlet and triplet constituents are shown as a function of dF 2. We here show the results for dF 1 = dF 3 = ОҫS, which is representative of the nu- merous equal-width cases investigated numerically. The bot- tom set of panels illustrate the spatial behavior of the super- current and its components. To isolate the spin-1 triplet con- tribution, ISy, to the supercurrent in the middle F layer, we set ОІ1 = ОІ3 = ПҖ/2. In this case, the magnetization of the two outer F layers are strictly along y and orthogonal to the ex- change field direction of middle F. Such a magnetization con- figuration has been suggested as optimal for detecting the sig- natures of the spin triplet supercurrents42. As seen in the fig- ure, the critical supercurrent versus the middle F layer thick- ness shows multiple 0-ПҖ transitions, corresponding to points where the current nearly vanishes and then eventually changes sign. The averaged components of the total supercurrent, IS0 and ISz demonstrate short-range signatures as exhibited by the multiple cusps compared to the equal-spin triplet compo- nent ISy. The total critical current behavior is dominated by the triplet term, ISy, which undergoes fewer sign changes than the other components, and consequently fewer 0-ПҖ transitions, when changing dF 2. Thus for the regime considered here, the supercurrent does not exhibit a very slow monotonic decay as a function of the central magnetic junction thickness, as re- flected in the absence of long-ranged behavior in ISy vs dF 2. To further explore the behavior of the current throughout the junction, we next examine (bottom row, Fig. 3) the spa- tial dependence to the total supercurrent and its singlet and triplet components for representative values of unequal mid- dle F layer thicknesses, dF 2 = 0.55ОҫS, and dF 2 = 1.15ОҫS. We immediately observe from the left panel that as expected, the maximum total supercurrent is a constant in all parts of the junction, reflecting conservation of current there. The triplet component with zero-spin projection, ISz, is localized in the middle F layer where the magnetization is directed along z. In contrast, the singlet component IS0 oscillates throughout the junction while the triplet component, ISy, propagates without decay in the middle ferromagnet, which has its magnetiza- tion direction orthogonal to the spin orientation of ISy. Thus, we observe that ISy is long-ranged in the middle F layer. Although ISy is spatially constant throughout the middle F layer, it changes sign, depending on dF 2. This characteristic is seen in the top row of Fig. 3. We have investigated with our 8 0 1 2 10 -10 10 -5 0 1 2 10 -6 10 -4 0 1 2 10 -10 10 -5 0 1 2 10 -5 Itot/I0 0 1 2 3 -1 0 1 2 x 10 -4 Itot(x)/I0 x/ОҫS 0 1 2 3 0 5 10 -5 IS0(x)/I0 x/ОҫS 0 1 2 3 0 5 10 -5 ISy(x)/I0 x/ОҫS 0 1 2 3 0 5 10 x 10 -5 ISz(x)/I0 x/ОҫS dF2= 0.55ОҫS dF2 = 1.15ОҫS dF2/ОҫS dF2/ОҫS dF2/ОҫS dF2/ОҫS structure shown in Fig. 1(b). The thickness of the outer F layers, dF 1 and dF 3, are equal and fixed at ОҫS. The components are spatially inside the junction x for two different thicknesses of the middle F layer, dF 2 = 0.55ОҫS, and dF 2 = 1.15ОҫS. The magnetization of the middle F layer is fixed along the z direction, ОІ2 = 0, while the magnetization is oriented towards the y direction in the outer F layers (ОІ1 = ОІ3 = ПҖ/2). full numerical method several different geometrical parame- ter sets, including, e.g., much smaller dF 1, and dF 3, as well as other ОІ1, and ОІ3. We typically found that the results pre- sented in the top row of Fig. 3 are quite representative of the singlet and triplet supercurrent behavior for the low proximity regime. In a recent experiment50 involving Ho/F/Ho trilayers with inhomogeneous magnetization patterns, a long-ranged Josephson supercurrent through the ferromagnet was detected. We here fully characterize the long-ranged triplet correlations in such S/Ho/F/Ho/S Josephson junctions (see Fig. 1(c)). The sandwiched central F layer represents a material with uniform magnetization, e.g., Cobalt, while the outer two Ho layers represent ferromagnets with a conical magnetization texture, such as that found in Holmium (Ho). As with the previous structures, we focus the study on the supercurrent behavior as a function of the central F layer thickness. We find that the supercurrent decays uniformly without any sign change when varying the middle F layer thickness, in agree- ment with other works43. However, the precise underlying role of the singlet and triplet components in the overall super- current behavior has been lacking. In Fig. 4, we exhibit the total current and its decomposition for a variety of parameters appropriate for the inhomogeneous conical magnetic junction. The middle F layer is magnetized along z, while the con- ical magnetization patterns of the Holmium layers have the adopted form: with the following material parameters: a = 0.02d is the dis- tance of interatomic layers, d denotes the junction thickness, Оұ = 4ПҖ/9 is the apex angle, and Оі = ПҖ/6 is the rotation angle of the cone structure, consistent with experimental values38. The magnitude of the exchange field is unchanged through- out the F regions. The top set of panels in Fig. 4 shows the critical total current and its components as a function of the middle uniform F layer thickness dF . The components IS0, ISy, and ISz are averaged over the middle F layer [denoted by вҹЁ...вҹ©]. We assume the two Ho layers have identical magnetiza- tion patterns43, and both thicknesses equal dHo = 1.4ОҫS. The first panel on the left shows the total critical supercurrent ver- sus dF and exhibits the expected decay over a few coherence lengths. Examining the signatures of the other components in the top panels, we see that the opposite-spin singlet and triplet components, IS0 and ISz respectively, demonstrate well de- fined oscillatory behavior and corresponding sign changes as a function of dF . We can also conclude that the net super- current arises mainly from the spin-1 projection of the triplet components, ISy, which is long-ranged in the middle F with an exchange field direction orthogonal to the spin-orientation of ISy. For the Holmium magnetization profile, hx does not vary in space, and therefore ISx behaves similarly to the ISy component in the S/F/F/F/S structure (see Fig. 3). Al- though ISx undergoes fewer sign changes when varying dF , the 0-ПҖ transitions are clearly present for this component. The triplet component, ISy, the main contributor to the total cur- rent, does not switch directions when increasing the middle F layer thickness dF , and its magnitude often dominates the other components. Its nearly monotonic decay can be traced back to the corresponding component of the magnetization profile: in the Ho layer, hy rotates sinusoidally as a func- tion of position, generating long-ranged odd-frequency cor- relations that are not subject to the spin-splitting effects of the magnet responsible also for the oscillatory behavior of su- 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 10 -6 10 -4 10 -2 Itot/I0 0 1 2 3 4 5 10 -4 10 -6 10 -8 0 1 2 3 4 5 10 -8 10 -6 10 -4 0 1 2 3 4 5 10 -6 10 -4 0 1 2 3 4 5 10 -4 10 -6 10 -8 0 2 4 0 2 4 x 10 -4 ISz(x)/I0 x/ОҫS dF = 0.45ОҫS dF = 1.20ОҫS 0 2 4 -1 -0.5 0 x 10 -3 ISy(x)/I0 x/ОҫS 0 2 4 -2 -1 0 1 x 10 -4 ISx(x)/I0 x/ОҫS 0 2 4 -10 -5 0 5 x 10 -4 IS0(x)/I0 x/ОҫS 0 1 2 3 4 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 x 10 -4 Itot(x)/I0 x/ОҫS dF/ОҫS dF/ОҫS dF/ОҫS dF/ОҫS dF/ОҫS where the outer F layersвҖҷ magnetization pattern is Holmium (Ho)-like . The configuration is illustrated schematically in Fig. 1(c). The thicknesses of the outer F layers are fixed at dHo = 1.4ОҫS, whereas the magnetization is fixed along the z direction in the middle F layer, ОІ2 = 0. The components of the critical supercurrents are calculated by spatially averaging over the thickness of the middle F layer ness of middle F layer has two values dF = 0.45ОҫS, 1.2ОҫS. perconducting correlations. We have also found consistency with previous studies43, where the monotonic decay of the su- percurrent appears when dHo is large enough to contain at least one spiral period. On the other hand, the sign chang- ing behavior emerges for small dHo, so that the Ho layers effectively mimics a uniform ferromagnet. This aspect was revisited in a recent work employing a lattice model.86 The bottom row of Fig. 4 illustrates the decomposed components of the maximum total supercurrent as a function of position throughout the ferromagnet regions. Two representative thick- nesses of the middle F layer are considered: dF = 0.4ОҫS, and dF = 1.2ОҫS. Similar to the S/F/F/F/S junction above, the triplet components with spin projection m = Вұ1 on the z-axis (ISx and ISy), are constant over the entire middle F region and therefore can be classified as long-ranged. To summarize this section, we studied the behavior of the critical supercur- rent through low-proximity one-dimensional structures shown in Fig. 1. By directly decomposing the supercurrent using the spin-parametrization technique given in the theoretical meth- ods section, we numerically studied the origins of the super- current behavior in terms of its short-ranged and long-ranged components. Our results showed that S/F/F/S structures do not support any long-ranged supercurrent components, reaf- firming the findings of , while S/F/F/F/S junctions host long-ranged supercurrent components42 that are more prominent in the inhomogeneous S/Ho/F/Ho/S structures as experimentally observed in and verified theoret- ically by numerical studied of full proximity regime in . We showed that the long-ranged supercurrent component corresponds to the rotating component of the magnetization texture, and is the main contributor to the total supercurrent. The numerical results presented in this section shall be used for later comparisons when we categorize structures into two classes based on the supercurrent direction with respect to the F/F interface orientation: parallel or perpendicular. The one- dimensional structures in Fig. 1 belong to the latter class. We now direct our attention to two-dimensional hybrids, includ- ing the possibility of an applied magnetic field. The singlet- triplet decompositions discussed above shall be employed to pinpoint exactly the spatial behavior of the associated compo- nents of the total charge supercurrent. IV. TWO-DIMENSIONAL HYBRID STRUCTURES In this section we present the main results of the paper. We first consider a two-dimensional magnetic S/F/S system subject to an external magnetic field for two regimes: the wide junction WF вү« dF , and the narrow junction WF вүӘ dF regimes. The magnetic strips are sandwiched between two s- wave superconducting reservoirs, where the exchange field in the F strips is spatially uniform. This permits analytical solu- tions that are capable of accurately predicting the behavior of relevant physical quantities such as charge and spin supercur- rents, as well as the pair potential. The analytical results are complemented with full numerical investigations, including studies of the dependence of the critical charge supercurrent on the external magnetic field, and the corresponding appear- ance of proximity vortices. The current density spatial map is also investigated, giving a global view of the distribution of supercurrents throughout the junction. We next consider two kinds of finite-sized magnetic S/F/F/S Josephson junc- tions subject to an external magnetic field. For these systems, analytical routes are scarce, and we must in general resort to 10 numerical approaches. In one case, we assume the double layer magnetic F strips comprising the F/F junction are par- allel with the S interfaces. In the other case, however, we assume that the F strips are perpendicular to the S interfaces. Using the spin-parametrization introduced in Sec. II.2, we can then study the even and odd frequency components of the total charge Josephson current inside the proposed structures. IV.1. Technical assumptions and parameters In this subsection, we discuss the assumptions used in our calculations, along with the parameters and notations used throughout. As was previously mentioned, the exter- nal magnetic field is confined within the non-superconducting regions68,71,72 (see Fig. 5). We restrict the magnetic field to be oriented perpendicular to the junction plane, which for our coordinate system corresponds to the z-axis. Thus, su- percurrent flow resides in the xy plane. The situation where the external magnetic field is parallel to the current direc- tion has been studied both experimentally and theoretically.40 We can therefore represent the magnetic field as, вғ—H(x) = вғ—HОҳ(x)Оҳ(dF вҲ’ x), where dF is the junction length and вғ—H = (0, 0, Hz). This assumption also ensures that the macroscopic phases of the two superconducting electrodes are unaffected by the external magnetic field. This widely used assumption has demonstrated good qualitative agreement with experimen- tal measurements.68,71,72,79 The Josephson junctions investi- gated in this work therefore are assumed to have negligible magnetic field screening.79,80 If on the contrary, the magnetic field is not restricted to the F regions, it becomes necessary to solve a set of partial differential equations, Eq. (1), self- consistently in tandem with MaxwellвҖҷs equations and the su- perconducting order parameter вҲҶ(x, y, T). Hence, a suitable choice for the vector potential вғ—A that we use satisfying the Coulomb gauge, вғ—вҲҮ В· вғ—A = 0, is, вғ—A(x) = (вҲ’yHz(x), 0, 0). an external magnetic field вғ—H. The magnetic wire (F) with rectan- gular dimensions, dF and WF , is sandwiched between two s-wave superconducting (S) leads. The exchange field of the magnetic layer, вғ—h = (hx, hy, hz), can take arbitrary orientations. The external mag- netic field is oriented along the z direction. The two-dimensional system resides in the xy plane so that the interfaces are along the y direction and x axis is normal to the junction. In normalizing our equations, we write the external magnetic flux as ОҰ = МғОҰ/ОҰ0, where МғОҰ вүЎ WF dF Hz, WF is the junction width, and ОҰ0 = Д§/2e is the magnetic flux quantum. IV.2. Uniform S/F/S heterostructures We here consider a two-dimensional ferromagnetic S/F/S Josephson junction where the magnetization of the magnetic strip is homogeneous. Although our theoretical approach al- lows for completely general patterns in the magnetization tex- ture, we restrict our focus here to a specific case where the exchange field has only one component along the z direction, вғ—h(x, y, z) = (0, 0, hz), thus permitting analytical solutions to the Usadel equation. The two-dimensional junction resides in the xy plane so that the S/F interfaces are parallel with the y axis (see Fig. 5). The corresponding system of coupled partial differential equations [Eq. (1)], now reduces to a smaller set of decoupled partial differential equations. We are then able to derive analytical expressions for the anomalous component of the GreenвҖҷs function and therefore the charge supercurrent and pair potential. Using this simplified system of decoupled partial differen- tial equations, we consider two regimes: In the first case, we assume the junction width WF вү« dF , thus, terms involving the ratio dF /WF can be dropped, leading to further simplifi- cations. In the second regime, the junction width WF вүӘ dF , corresponding to a narrow magnetic nanowire. To be com- plete, we also implement a full numerical investigation, with- out the simplifying assumptions above and with arbitrary val- ues of ratio WF /dF . This requires numerical solutions to a complex system of partial differential equations [see Eqs. (1)]. Several checks on the numerics were performed, including reproducing previous results involving nonmagnetic S/N/S Josephson junctions, where the exchange field of the F layer is equal to zero.68,71 The full Usadel equations in the presence of an external magnetic field вғ—H, and corresponding vector potential, вғ—A, are written: вғ—вҲҮ2fВұ(вҲ’Оө) вҲ’ 2ieвғ—вҲҮ В· вғ—AfВұ(вҲ’Оө) вҲ’ 4ie вғ—A В· вғ—вҲҮfВұ(вҲ’Оө) вҲ’ 4e2A2fВұ(вҲ’Оө) вҲ’ 2i(Оө вҲ“ hz) D f R Вұ(вҲ’Оө) = 0, (17a) вғ—вҲҮ2f вҲ— Вұ(Оө) + 2ieвғ—вҲҮ В· вғ—Af вҲ— Вұ(Оө) + 4ie вғ—A В· вғ—вҲҮf вҲ— Вұ(Оө) вҲ’ 4e2A2f вҲ— Вұ(Оө) вҲ’ 2i(Оө Вұ hz) D f вҲ— Вұ(Оө) = 0, (17b) where вғ—вҲҮ вүЎ (вҲӮx, вҲӮy, вҲӮz). The above decoupled partial differ- ential equations appear only for a magnetic junction where the magnetization has one component вғ—h = (0, 0, hz). If we now expand the boundary conditions given by Eq. (4), at the left S/F interface, we find, пҝҪ О¶(вғ—вҲҮ вҲ’ 2ie вғ—A) вҲ’ cвҲ—(Оө) Вұ iGS GT пҝҪ fвҲ“(вҲ’Оө) = вҲ“sвҲ—(Оө)eвҲ’iОёl, (18a) пҝҪ О¶(вғ—вҲҮ + 2ie вғ—A) вҲ’ cвҲ—(Оө) вҲ“ iGS GT пҝҪ f вҲ— вҲ“(Оө) = ВұsвҲ—(Оө)eiОёl,(18b) 11 while the boundary conditions at the right interface take the following form: пҝҪ О¶(вғ—вҲҮ вҲ’ 2ie вғ—A) + cвҲ—(Оө) вҲ“ iGS GT пҝҪ fвҲ“(вҲ’Оө) = ВұsвҲ—(Оө)eвҲ’iОёr, (19a) пҝҪ О¶(вғ—вҲҮ + 2ie вғ—A) + cвҲ—(Оө) Вұ iGS GT пҝҪ f вҲ— вҲ“(Оө) = вҲ“sвҲ—(Оө)eiОёr.(19b) The simplifying geometric approximations mentioned above can now be applied to the above equations, while adhering to the requirement that the corresponding regimes are experi- mentally accessible. Wide junction limit, WF вү« dF : Analytical results If we assume that the width of junction is much larger than its length, terms involving dF /WF in Eq. (17) can be ne- glected, yielding the following decoupled Usadel equations: вҲӮ2 xfВұ(вҲ’Оө) + 4iОҰyвҲӮxfВұ(вҲ’Оө) вҲ’ 4ОҰ2y2fВұ(вҲ’Оө) вҲ’2iОөвҲ“ ОөT fВұ(вҲ’Оө) = 0, (20a) вҲӮ2 xf вҲ— Вұ(Оө) + 4iОҰyвҲӮxf вҲ— Вұ(Оө) вҲ’ 4ОҰ2y2f вҲ— Вұ(Оө) вҲ’2iОөВұ ОөT f вҲ— Вұ(Оө) = 0. (20b) Here, we define ОөВұ вүЎ Оө Вұ hz(x, y, z), and the Thouless energy ОөT = D/d2 F . Note that all partial derivatives in Eqs. (20) are solely with respect to the x coordinate. In other words, the original two-dimensional problem is now reduced to a quasi one-dimensional one. These uncoupled differential equations can be solved analytically thus permitting additional insight into the transport properties of ferromagnetic Joseph- son junctions. The Kupriyanov-Lukichev boundary condi- tions, Eq. (4), at the left S/F interface located at x = 0 re- duces to: пҝҪ О¶(вҲӮx + 2iyОҰ) + c(вҲ’Оө) вҲ“ iGS GT пҝҪ fВұ(вҲ’Оө) = вҲ“s(вҲ’Оө)eiОёl, (21a) пҝҪ О¶(вҲӮx вҲ’ 2iyОҰ) + c(вҲ’Оө) Вұ iGS GT пҝҪ f вҲ— Вұ(Оө) = Вұs(вҲ’Оө)eвҲ’iОёl. (21b) Similarly, the boundary conditions at the right S/F interface located at x = dF can be written as follows: пҝҪ О¶(вҲӮx + 2iyОҰ) вҲ’ c(вҲ’Оө) Вұ iGS GT пҝҪ fВұ(вҲ’Оө) = Вұs(вҲ’Оө)eвҲ’iОёr, (22a) пҝҪ О¶(вҲӮx вҲ’ 2iyОҰ) вҲ’ c(вҲ’Оө) вҲ“ iGS GT пҝҪ f вҲ— Вұ(Оө) = вҲ“s(вҲ’Оө)eiОёr.(22b) The macroscopic phases of the left and right superconducting terminals are labeled Оёl and Оёr, respectively. The magnetic strips are assumed isolated in the y direction so that physi- cally no current passes through the boundaries at y = 0, and y = WF . Thus, to ensure that the supercurrent does not pass through the vacuum boundaries in the y direction, we have the following conditions: вҲӮyfВұ(ВұОө) = 0, (23a) вҲӮyf вҲ— Вұ(ВұОө) = 0. (23b) With the solutions to Eq. (20) at hand, we are now in a po- sition to calculate the current density and the pair potential for a given magnetic flux. The current density, given by Eq. (6), can thus be expressed as: вғ—J(x, y) = J0 пҝҪ вҲһ вҲ’вҲһ dОө tanh(ОөОІ) пҝҪ fвҲ’(вҲ’Оө)вғ—вҲҮf вҲ— +(Оө) +f+(вҲ’Оө)вғ—вҲҮf вҲ— вҲ’(Оө) вҲ’ f+(Оө)вғ—вҲҮf вҲ— вҲ’(вҲ’Оө) вҲ’ fвҲ’(Оө) вғ—вҲҮf вҲ— +(вҲ’Оө) + f вҲ— вҲ’(вҲ’Оө)вғ—вҲҮf+(Оө) + f вҲ— +(вҲ’Оө)вғ—вҲҮfвҲ’(Оө) вҲ’f вҲ— +(Оө)вғ—вҲҮfвҲ’(вҲ’Оө) вҲ’ f вҲ— вҲ’(Оө)вғ—вҲҮf+(вҲ’Оө) + 4ie вғ—A пҝҪ f вҲ— вҲ’(Оө)f+(вҲ’Оө) вҲ’ f вҲ— +(вҲ’Оө)fвҲ’(Оө) вҲ’ f вҲ— + f вҲ— пҝҪпҝҪ . (24) The normalized pair potential, Eq. (8) now reads: МғUpair = пҝҪ вҲһ вҲ’вҲһ пҝҪ f+(Оө) вҲ’ f+(вҲ’Оө) + fвҲ’(вҲ’Оө) вҲ’ fвҲ’(Оө) пҝҪ tanh(ОөОІ)dОө. (25) If we solve the Usadel equations Eqs. (20) using the boundary conditions (21) and (23), we arrive at the following solutions to the anomalous component of the GreenвҖҷs function: fВұ(вҲ’Оө) = вҲ“N Вұ DВұ , (26) where the numerators N Вұ and denominators DВұ are given by N Вұ = sвҲ—(Оө)eвҲ’ 1 2 i(4xyОҰ+ПҶ)пҝҪ e2iyОҰпҝҪ О¶О»вҲ“ cosh(xО»вҲ“) + пҝҪ cвҲ—(Оө) Вұ iGS GT пҝҪ sinh(xО»вҲ“) пҝҪ + eiПҶпҝҪ О¶О»вҲ“ Г— cosh(О»вҲ“ вҲ’ xО»вҲ“) + пҝҪ cвҲ—(Оө) Вұ iGS GT пҝҪ sinh(О»вҲ“ вҲ’ xО»вҲ“) пҝҪпҝҪ , DВұ = sinh(О»вҲ“) пҝҪ О¶2О»2 вҲ“ + пҝҪ cвҲ—(Оө) Вұ iGS GT пҝҪ2пҝҪ + 2О¶О»вҲ“ пҝҪ cвҲ—(Оө) Вұ iGS GT пҝҪ cosh(О»вҲ“). Similar solutions can be found for f вҲ— Вұ(вҲ’Оө). In order to sim- plify notation, we have defined О»Вұ = 2i(Оө Вұ hz)/ОөT , and the macroscopic phase difference of the superconducting ter- minals is denoted by ПҶ = Оёl вҲ’ Оёr. The charge current den- sity expressed by Eq. (24) involves eight terms, fВұ(ВұОө), and f вҲ— Вұ(ВұОө), which should be derived to obtain an analytical ex- pression for the supercurrent flow. In our calculations thus far, the interfaces are assumed spin-active, namely, GS/GT Мё= 0. To maintain tractable analytic solutions, we drop the c(Оө)- terms in addition to the spin-active contributions, which is appropriate for experimental conditions involving highly im- pure superconducting terminals. These widely used approx- imations lead to intuitive and physically relevant analytical solutions.3,4,24 Substituting the solutions to the Usadel equa- tions into Eq. (24), we find the charge supercurrent density in the x direction: I(ПҶ) = J0 пҝҪ вҲһ вҲ’вҲһ dОө2i tanh(ОөОІ)N О¶2О»вҲ’О»+ пҝҪ 1/2 вҲ’1/2 dy sin(ПҶ вҲ’ 2yОҰ), (27) 12 where, N = sвҲ—2(вҲ’Оө) пҝҪ О»+ csc(О»вҲ’) + О»вҲ’ csc(О»+) пҝҪ + sвҲ—2(Оө) пҝҪ О»+csch(О»вҲ’) + О»вҲ’csch(О»+) пҝҪ . Integrating the junction width over the y-direction, we end up with the total charge supercurrent across the junction: I(ПҶ, ОҰ) = I0 sin ПҶsin ОҰ ОҰ , (28) where we have extracted the phase and flux dependent terms and absorbed the remaining coefficients into I0. The max- imum charge supercurrent occurs when the superconducting phase difference equals |ПҶ| = ПҖ/2. From Eq. (28), we see immediately that the critical charge current exhibits the well- known Fraunhofer interference diffraction pattern as a func- tion of the externally applied flux ОҰ. We also recover the re- sults of a normal S/N/S junction68, where hz = 0. Thus, our analytical expressions for wide S/F/S Josephson junctions experiencing perpendicularly directed external magnetic flux yields the same critical current response as a normal S/N/S junction68). Here, however, there are additional, experimen- tally tunable physical quantities which can cause sign changes in I0(hz, GS/GT ), and consequently I(ПҶ, ОҰ). When present- ing a global view of the current density, it is illustrative to examine a spatial map of its behavior. By utilizing Eq. (6), it is possible to calculate the charge current density throughout the xy plane for a wide magnetic S/F/S Josephson junction. If we now insert the recently obtained solutions to the Us- adel equations into the pair potential equation, Eq. (25), we arrive at the following analytical formula which provides a spatial map of Upair for a wide junction: МғUpair = пҝҪ +вҲһ вҲ’вҲһ dОө пҝҪ eвҲ’ i 2 (ПҶ+4xyОҰ)пҝҪпҝҪ sвҲ—(вҲ’Оө)О»+ cos(xО»вҲ’) Г— пҝҪ e2iyОҰ + пҝҪ пҝҪ eiПҶпҝҪпҝҪ tanh(ОөОІ). (29) If we restrict the proximity pair potential profile above by con- sidering a fixed x position, corresponding to the middle of the junction (x = 1/2), we arrive at an expression which is now x independent: МғUpair = пҝҪ +вҲһ вҲ’вҲһ dОөcos пҝҪ [ПҶ вҲ’ 2yОҰ]/2 пҝҪ О¶О»вҲ’О»+ пҝҪ sвҲ—(вҲ’Оө)О»+ csc(О»вҲ’/2) + sвҲ—(Оө)О»вҲ’csch(О»+/2) пҝҪ tanh(ОөОІ). (30) As seen, the cos пҝҪ [ПҶвҲ’2yОҰ]/2 пҝҪ term is zero at ПҶвҲ’2yОҰ = mПҖ, for m an odd integer. Therefore, the zeros of the proxim- ity pair potential at the middle of magnetic strip are located at y = (ПҶ вҲ’ mПҖ)/2ОҰ so that вҲ’1/2 < y < 1/2. Setting hz = 0, recovers the nonmagnetic S/N/S junction result for the proximity pair potential.68 Comparing with the current density, Eq. (27), we see that the current density and prox- imity pair potential both vanish at the same locations, how- ever the current density vanishes at additional positions cor- responding to sin пҝҪ ПҶ вҲ’ 2yОҰ пҝҪ = 0, or, when ПҶ вҲ’ 2yОҰ = mПҖ for m = 0, Вұ1, Вұ2, Вұ3... . The origin of these extra zeroes in the current density arises from the cancellation of counter- propagating currents from the orbital motion of the quasipar- ticles. These paths are visualized using spatial mappings, pre- sented below. Narrow junction limit, WF вүӘ dF : Analytical results The next useful regime that leads to analytical results is that corresponding to a narrow junction, that is, WF вүӘ dF . In this case, we assume that the width of the ferromagnetic layer WF вүІ ОҫH, where ОҫH is the characteristic length de- scribing the GreenвҖҷs function oscillations in the ferromagnetic layer. This assumption permits averaging the relevant equa- tions over the junction width. Therefore, making the substi- tutions вҹЁвҲ’HyЛҶxвҹ©y = 0 and вҹЁH2y2вҹ©y = H2/12, where вҹЁ. . .вҹ©y denotes spatial averaging over the y direction, results in the modified Usadel equations: вҲӮ2 xfВұ(вҲ’Оө) вҲ’ 2(О“H + iОөВұ ОөT )fВұ(вҲ’Оө) = 0, (31a) вҲӮ2 xf вҲ— Вұ(Оө) вҲ’ 2(О“H + iОөВұ ОөT )f вҲ— Вұ(Оө) = 0, (31b) where we define О“H вүЎ DПҖ2H2W 2 F /6, and thus, О“H/ОөT = ОҰ2/6. The quantity, О“H, is known as the magnetic depairing energy68. As can be seen, the above assumptions have consid- erably simplified the Usadel equations, and we are now able to efficiently solve the differential equations and derive ana- lytical expressions for useful physical quantities. After some straightforward calculations, we arrive at the following solu- tions to the Usadel equations for the anomalous GreenвҖҷs func- tion: fВұ(вҲ’Оө) = вҲ“N Вұ DВұ , (32) where the numerators N Вұ and denominators DВұ are now de- fined by the following expressions; N Вұ = sвҲ—(Оө)eвҲ’ iПҶ 2 пҝҪпҝҪ cвҲ—(Оө) Вұ iGS GT пҝҪ Г— пҝҪ sinh(xО»+ вҲ“) + eiПҶ sinh(О»+ вҲ“ вҲ’ xО»+ вҲ“) пҝҪ + О¶О»+ вҲ“eiПҶ Г— cosh(О»+ вҲ“ вҲ’ xО»+ вҲ“) + О¶О»+ вҲ“ cosh(xО»+ вҲ“) пҝҪ , and, DВұ = sinh(О»+ вҲ“) пҝҪ О¶2О»+ вҲ“ 2 + пҝҪ cвҲ—(Оө) Вұ iGS GT пҝҪ2пҝҪ + 2О¶О»+ вҲ“ пҝҪ cвҲ—(Оө) Вұ iGS GT пҝҪ cosh(О»+ вҲ“). 13 Here, we have introduced a simplified notation, where we de- fine: О»+ Вұ 2 вүЎ О“H+2iОөВұ ОөT and О»вҲ’ Вұ 2 вүЎ О“HвҲ’2iОөВұ ОөT . If we substitute these solutions to the anomalous GreenвҖҷs function, Eq. (32), into the Josephson current relation, Eq. (24), we arrive at the flow of charge supercurrent through a narrow S/F/S junction in the presence of an external magnetic flux ОҰ: пҝҪ вҲһ вҲ’вҲһ dОө 2i tanh(ОөОІ)N О¶2О»вҲ’ вҲ’О»вҲ’ +О»+ вҲ’О»+ + sin(ПҶ), (33) N = вҲ’О»вҲ’ вҲ’ пҝҪ sвҲ—(вҲ’Оө)2О»+ вҲ’О»+ +csch(О»вҲ’ +) вҲ’ sвҲ—(Оө)2О»вҲ’ + пҝҪ О»+ +csch(О»+ вҲ’) + О»+ вҲ’csch(О»+ +) пҝҪпҝҪ вҲ’ sвҲ—(вҲ’Оө)2О»вҲ’ +О»+ вҲ’О»+ +csch(О»вҲ’ вҲ’), where the junction characteristics are obtained via averaged values. The critical supercurrent thus shows a monotonic de- caying behavior against the external magnetic flux ОҰ in the narrow junction regime. This fact can be understood by not- ing the role of О“H in the Usadel equations. In the narrow junction limit, the external magnetic field breaks the coher- ence of Cooper pairs and the Fraunhofer diffraction patterns for the critical current in the wide junction limit turns to a monotonic decay. The proximity vortices, which are closely linked to the Fraunhofer patterns, vanish in this regime due to the narrow size of junction width. This finding is also in agree- ment with the nonmagnetic S/N/S junction counterpart68,71. If we substitute the solutions from Eq. (32) into the pair po- tential, Eq. (25), we find that the zeros which appeared in the wide junction limit have now vanished in the narrow junction regime. We now proceed to compliment our simplified ana- lytical results with a more complete numerical investigation. -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 ОҰ/ОҰ0 Ic(ОҰ)/max Ic WF=10ОҫS WF=2.0ОҫS WF=0.2ОҫS tion (see Fig. 5). The critical supercurrent Ic(ОҰ), is shown normal- ized by its maximum value, max(Ic), and plotted against the exter- nal magnetic flux ОҰ. Three values of the magnetic layer width WF are considered: 10ОҫS, 2.0ОҫS, and 0.2ОҫS, whereas the length of F is assumed fixed at a representative value of dF = 2.0ОҫS. Interference patterns, proximity vortices, and current densities: Numerical investigations Previously we utilized various approximations to simplify situations and permit explicit analytical solutions. To inves- tigate the validity of our analytic results, we solve numeri- cally the Usadel equations, Eq. (17) with appropriate bound- ary conditions found in Eqs. (18) and (19). We now retain the c(Оө) terms, and include a broader range of junction widths, not only those that are very narrow or very wide, but also interme- diate widths that are not amenable to an analytical treatment. We shall present results for the current density and for spa- tial maps of the pair potential in the junction subjected to an external magnetic field. critical supercurrent response to an external magnetic flux, ОҰ, in a S/F/S junction with a variety of ratios WF /dF . The junction length and exchange field intensity are fixed at par- ticular values of dF = 2.0ОҫS and |вғ—h| = 5.0вҲҶ0 respectively. The interface resistance parameter is set to О¶ = 4.0. These choices ensure the validity of the GreenвҖҷs functions in the low proximity limit: F(x, y, z, Оө) вүӘ 0.1F no(x, y, z, Оө). To more clearly see the effects in the scaled plots, we normalize the critical charge supercurrent by the maximum of this quan- tity max(Ic) for each case separately. The figure clearly re- veals a full Fraunhofer pattern for the case of a wide junction WF = 10ОҫS. This pattern is consistent with the analytic ex- pression for the critical current given by Eq. (28). The critical supercurrent decays with increasing magnetic field and un- dergoes a series of cusps, indicating that Ic changes sign. The observed sign-change reflects aspects of the orbital motions of the quasiparticles, while the decaying behavior is indicative of the pair breaking nature of an external magnetic field as we presence of an external magnetic field applied normally to the plane of an S/F/S Josephson junction (see Fig. 5). We assume the junction is relatively wide, WF = 10ОҫS, while its length is sufficiently short to allow for current transport across the x axis, namely, dF = 2.0ОҫS. The external magnetic flux is ОҰ = 3ОҰ0, and the macroscopic phase difference is corresponds to |ПҶ| = ПҖ/2. 14 explained previously. A relatively narrower junction width of WF = 2.0ОҫS is also investigated. As shown, the ideal Fraun- hofer pattern is now modified, yet still retains its trademark signature. This diffraction pattern transitions to a uniformly decaying behavior for the sufficiently narrow junction with width WF = 0.2ОҫS. This narrowest junction confines the or- bital motion of the quasiparticles and thus the pair-breaking by the external field plays a dominant role in the critical su- percurrent response. In Fig. 7 we plot the 2D spatial dependence of the pair po- tential and charge current density for a wide junction, where the larger width can more effectively demonstrate the orbital paths as they relate to the pair correlations and supercurrent response. To be consistent with Fig. 6, we set ОҰ = 3ОҰ0, WF = 10ОҫS, and |ПҶ| = ПҖ/2. As shown, three zeros in the pair potential appear at the middle of the junction (at x = 0) as was found analytically in Sec. IV.2. The intensity of the external magnetic flux ОҰ determines the number of zeros and distance between neighboring zeros. The panel on the right corresponds to a spatial and vector map of the charge cur- rent density, revealing the circulating paths of the quasipar- ticles. If we set |ПҶ| = ПҖ/2 in Eq. (30), with the constraint responds precisely to the zeroes of the pair potential found from the general numerical treatment, shown in Fig. 7. Like- wise, y = Вұ1/12, y = Вұ3/12, and y = Вұ5/12 gives the zeroes of the current density. As seen, the additional zeros in the current density corresponds to locations where the trajec- tories of two opposing circular paths overlap, thus canceling one another. The other y values giving zeroes, which corre- late with the same locations as the pair potential, are at the cores of the circulating paths. Such behavior is reminiscent of Abrokosov vortices, where the supercurrent circulates around normal state cores. The zeros in the pair potential may thus be viewed as proximity vortices.68,87вҖ“90 Abrikosov vortices, which carry a single magnetic quantum flux ОҰ0, are however intrinsic to type II superconductors.87вҖ“90 One of the criteria for categorizing the superconducting state of a material is the nature of these intrinsic vortices.91 Nonetheless, such proxim- ity vortices are generally geometry-dependent and rely on the mutual interaction between a magnetic field with the super- conductor, in contrast to intrinsic Abrikosov vortices.68 IV.3. Spin-parametrization The Usadel equations in this section have dealt solely with the even-frequency superconducting correlations with spin- zero projection along the spin-quantization axis. This is due to the fact that we have only considered ferromagnetic strips with a uniform magnetization texture. For inhomo- geneous magnetization textures, the complex partial differ- ential equations become coupled and increase in number to eight in the low proximity limit. This number is doubled if the full proximity limit25 is considered. Fortunately, it has been well established that the low proximity limit is suffi- cient to capture the essential physical properties of proximity systems such as the ones proposed in this paper. To inves- tigate the behavior of even- and odd-frequency correlations, we employ a spin-parametrization technique36,83,92 that has been frequently used to study the characteristics of magnetic If we now substitute this decomposition of the anomalous GreenвҖҷs function into the Usadel equation, Eq. (1), and con- sider a two-dimensional system, we end up with the following coupled set of differential equations in the presence of an ex- ternal flux ОҰ: D пҝҪ вҲ“ вҲӮ2 xTx(вҲ’Оө) вҲ“ пҝҪ dF WF пҝҪ2 вҲӮ2 yTx(вҲ’Оө) + iвҲӮ2 xTy(вҲ’Оө) + i пҝҪ dF WF пҝҪ2 вҲӮ2 вҲ’ 4ОҰ2y2(вҲ“Tx(вҲ’Оө) + iTy(вҲ’Оө)) пҝҪ + id2 F пҝҪ пҝҪ = 0, (34a) D пҝҪ вҲ“ вҲӮ2 xS(вҲ’Оө) вҲ“ пҝҪ dF WF пҝҪ2 вҲӮ2 yS(вҲ’Оө) + вҲӮ2 xTz(вҲ’Оө) + пҝҪ dF WF пҝҪ2 вҲӮ2 вҲ’ 4ОҰ2y2(вҲ“S(вҲ’Оө) + Tz(вҲ’Оө)) пҝҪ + id2 F пҝҪ пҝҪ = 0, (34b) D пҝҪ вҲ“ вҲӮ2 xTвҲ— x(Оө) вҲ“ пҝҪ dF WF пҝҪ2 вҲӮ2 yTвҲ— x(Оө) вҲ’ iвҲӮ2 xTвҲ— y(Оө) вҲ’ i пҝҪ dF WF пҝҪ2 вҲӮ2 yTвҲ— y(Оө) вҲ’ 4iОҰy(вҲ“вҲӮxTвҲ— x(Оө) вҲ’ iвҲӮxTвҲ— вҲ’ 4ОҰ2y2(вҲ“TвҲ— x(Оө) вҲ’ iTвҲ— пҝҪ + id2 F пҝҪ Вұ 2(hx Вұ ihy)SвҲ—(Оө) вҲ’ 2Оө(вҲ“TвҲ— x(Оө) вҲ’ iTвҲ— пҝҪ = 0, (34c) D пҝҪ вҲ“ вҲӮ2 xSвҲ—(Оө) вҲ“ пҝҪ dF WF пҝҪ2 вҲӮ2 ySвҲ—(Оө) + вҲӮ2 xTвҲ— пҝҪ dF WF пҝҪ2 вҲӮ2 yTвҲ— z(Оө) вҲ’ 4iОҰy(вҲ“вҲӮxSвҲ—(Оө) + вҲӮxTвҲ— вҲ’ 4ОҰ2y2(вҲ“SвҲ—(Оө) + TвҲ— пҝҪ + id2 F пҝҪ 2(вҲ’Оө Вұ hz)(вҲ“SвҲ—(Оө) + TвҲ— z(Оө)) Вұ 2hxTвҲ— x(Оө) Вұ 2hyTвҲ— y(Оө) пҝҪ = 0. (34d) 15 The spin parameterized boundary conditions at the left S/F interface, Eq. (4), now reads: пҝҪ О¶(вҲӮx + 2iОҰy) вҲ’ cвҲ—(Оө) пҝҪпҝҪ вҲ“ Tx(вҲ’Оө) + iTy(вҲ’Оө) пҝҪ = 0, (35a) пҝҪ О¶(вҲӮx + 2iОҰy) вҲ’ cвҲ—(Оө) Вұ iGS GT пҝҪпҝҪ вҲ“ S(вҲ’Оө) + Tz(вҲ’Оө) пҝҪ Вұ sвҲ—(Оө)eiОёl = 0, (35b) пҝҪ О¶(вҲӮx вҲ’ 2iОҰy) вҲ’ cвҲ—(Оө) пҝҪпҝҪ вҲ“ TвҲ— x(Оө) вҲ’ iTвҲ— y(Оө) пҝҪ = 0, (35c) пҝҪ О¶(вҲӮx вҲ’ 2iОҰy) вҲ’ cвҲ—(Оө) вҲ“ iGS GT пҝҪпҝҪ вҲ“ SвҲ—(Оө) + TвҲ— z(Оө) пҝҪ вҲ“ sвҲ—(Оө)eвҲ’iОёl = 0, (35d) and for the right S/F interface, we have: пҝҪ О¶(вҲӮx + 2iОҰy) + cвҲ—(Оө) пҝҪпҝҪ вҲ“ Tx(вҲ’Оө) + iTy(вҲ’Оө) пҝҪ = 0, (36a) пҝҪ О¶(вҲӮx + 2iОҰy) + cвҲ—(Оө) вҲ“ iGS GT пҝҪпҝҪ вҲ“ S(вҲ’Оө) + Tz(вҲ’Оө) пҝҪ вҲ“ sвҲ—(Оө)eiОёr = 0, (36b) пҝҪ О¶(вҲӮx вҲ’ 2iОҰy) + cвҲ—(Оө) пҝҪпҝҪ вҲ“ TвҲ— x(Оө) вҲ’ iTвҲ— y(Оө) пҝҪ = 0, (36c) пҝҪ О¶(вҲӮx вҲ’ 2iОҰy) + cвҲ—(Оө) Вұ iGS GT пҝҪпҝҪ вҲ“ SвҲ—(Оө) + TвҲ— z(Оө) пҝҪ Вұ sвҲ—(Оө)eвҲ’iОёr = 0. (36d) Using Eq. (6), the spin-parameterized current density through the junction (along the x direction) in the presence of an external magnetic field is: Jx(x, y) =J0 пҝҪ вҲһ вҲ’вҲһ dОө пҝҪ x(Оө) + вҲӮxTx(Оө)TвҲ— x(вҲ’Оө) вҲ’ вҲӮxTвҲ— x(вҲ’Оө)Tx(Оө) + вҲӮxTвҲ— x(Оө)Tx(вҲ’Оө) вҲ’ вҲӮxTy(вҲ’Оө)TвҲ— y(Оө) + вҲӮxTy(Оө)TвҲ— y(вҲ’Оө) вҲ’ вҲӮxTвҲ— y(вҲ’Оө)Ty(Оө) + вҲӮxTвҲ— y(Оө)Ty(вҲ’Оө) вҲ’ вҲӮxTz(вҲ’Оө)TвҲ— z(Оө) + вҲӮxTz(Оө)TвҲ— z(вҲ’Оө) вҲ’ вҲӮxTвҲ— z(вҲ’Оө)Tz(Оө) + вҲӮxTвҲ— z(Оө)Tz(вҲ’Оө) вҲ’ 4iОҰy пҝҪ S(Оө)SвҲ—(вҲ’Оө) вҲ’ S(вҲ’Оө)SвҲ—(Оө) +Tx(вҲ’Оө)TвҲ— x(Оө) вҲ’ Tx(Оө)TвҲ— x(вҲ’Оө) + Ty(вҲ’Оө)TвҲ— y(Оө) вҲ’ Ty(Оө)TвҲ— y(вҲ’Оө) + Tz(вҲ’Оө)TвҲ— z(Оө) вҲ’ Tz(Оө)TвҲ— z(вҲ’Оө) пҝҪпҝҪ tanh(ОөОІ). (37) The y component of the supercurrent density, Jy(x, y), takes the same form as Jx(x, y), with the partial-x derivatives replaced by derivatives with respect to y, and also the inclusion of the appropriate component of the vector potential. Incorporating the spin-parametrization, Eq. (9), into the expression for the pair potential, Eq. (8), we end up with the following compact equation: МғUpair = пҝҪ +вҲһ вҲ’вҲһ dОө пҝҪ S(Оө) вҲ’ S(вҲ’Оө) пҝҪ tanh(ОөОІ). (38) The ferromagnetic layers and s-wave superconducting terminals are labeled by F1, F2, and S, respectively. Our theoretical technique allows consideration of exchange fields with arbitrary orientations. We thus denote the magnetization of each F layer by вғ—hi = (hx i , hy i , hz i ), for i = 1, 2. The width of the rectangular F strips are equal and denoted by WF , while the length of each magnetic layer can differ and are denoted dF 1, and dF 2. The junction is located in the xy plane and all interfaces are along the y axis. An external magnetic field вғ—H points along the z axis, normal to the junction plane. 16 the configuration depicted in Fig. 8. The supercurrent is decomposed into its even (Js0 x,y(x, y)) and odd-frequency (Jsy x,y(x, y), Jsz x,y(x, y)) components. The two ferromagnetic layers have unequal lengths: dF 1 = 0.2ОҫS, and dF 2 = 1.8ОҫS, while their widths are equal: WF 1 = WF 2 = 2.0ОҫS. The vertical lines identify the two ferromagnetic regions labeled F1 and F2. In part (a), there is no applied magnetic field, while in part (b) the external magnetic field corresponds to a flux of ОҰ = 3ОҰ0. The critical current components in both cases, (a) and (b), are plotted as a function of x-position at four different locations along the junction width: y = 0.25ОҫS, 0.50ОҫS, 0.75ОҫS, 1.0ОҫS. Thus, the pair potential involves only even-frequency compo- nents of the parameterized GreenвҖҷs function, consistent with the presence of a singlet order parameter in the left and right superconducting banks. In the next subsections, we solve the above equations for two different magnetization config- urations, with and without an external magnetic field. The spin-parametrization outlined here will then delineate the var- ious contributions the singlet and triplet correlations make to the supercurrent. IV.4. S/F/F/S heterostructures: parallel F/F and S/F interfaces Employing the spin-parametrization with the Usadel equa- tions together with the boundary conditions given in the pre- vious section, we numerically study the proximity induced triplet correlations in a two-dimensional magnetic S/F/F/S Josephson junction. Here the F/F interface is parallel with the outer S interfaces. The configuration is depicted in Fig. 8. The system is subject to an external magnetic field вғ—H and we study the behavior of the corresponding spin-triplet cor- relations. We also compare these results with the case of no external magnetic field. As exhibited in Fig. 8, the external magnetic flux is directed along the z direction, normal to the junction face which resides in the xy plane so that the S/F and F/F interfaces are parallel to the y axis. We consider a rather general situation for the lengths and magnetization di- rections of the F strips. The lengths of the F strips can be unequal and are labeled by dF 1 and dF 2 (dF 1 Мё= dF 2). The strength of the exchange fields in both F regions are equal | вғ—h1| = | вғ—h2| = 5.0вҲҶ0, while their orientations take arbitrary directions вғ—h1,2 = (hx 1,2, hy 1,2, hz 1,2). Also, the junction width is equal to the width of the F stripes, i.e., WF 1 = WF 2 вүЎ WF . The charge supercurrent given by Eq. (37) is comprised of even-frequency singlet terms, S, and the triplet odd-frequency components, вғ—T. To study exactly the behavior of each compo- nent of the Josephson charge current, we introduce the follow- ing decomposition scheme which is based on the discussions 17 Spatial maps of the critical current density and pair potential as well as the critical charge current components for a junction configuration shown in Fig. 8. The same investigation as Fig. 9(b) is done here except we set dF 1 = dF 2 = 1.0ОҫS. The junction width and external magnetic flux are WF = 2.0ОҫS and ОҰ = 3ОҰ0, respectively. The vertical lines in the panels for the critical charge current components show the spatial separation of the two magnetic regions labeled F1 and F2. The quantities JОІ x (x, y) show the current components for flow along the x direction whereas JОІ y (x, y) represents the components for flow along the y direction. Here ОІ denotes a specific component of the decomposed charge supercurrent namely, s0, sx, sy, and sz. and notations in the previous sections: terms involving S вҮ’ Js0 x,y, (39a) terms involving Tx вҮ’ Jsx x,y, (39b) terms involving Ty вҮ’ Jsy x,y, (39c) terms involving Tz вҮ’ Jsz x,y. (39d) In order to explicitly study the influence of each component of the decomposed charge supercurrent, we fix the magnetization of the F1 wire to be in the y-direction: вғ—h1 = (0, hy, 0). Simi- larly, the magnetization of F2 is orthogonal to that of F1, and oriented in the z direction: вғ—h2 = (0, 0, hz). This orthogonal magnetization configuration is an inhomogeneous magnetic state that results in effective generation of equal-spin triplet correlations4. We show the spatial behavior of the total charge super- current density, pair potential, and the supercurrent compo- nents for a phase difference of |ПҶ| = ПҖ/2 in Fig. 9 for the S/F/F/S junction depicted in Fig. 8. The geometric dimen- sions correspond to dF 1 = 0.2ОҫS, dF 2 = 1.8ОҫS, and the junc- tion width WF is set equal to 2.0ОҫS. The selected values of dF = dF 1 + dF 2 and WF are useful towards understand- ing and analyzing the spin-triplet correlations in the different S/F/F/S Josephson junctions considered here. For the panels found in (a), the external magnetic flux is absent, while for those in (b), a magnetic flux ОҰ = 3ОҰ0 is applied to the sys- tem. In panels (a), the charge current density is conserved as exhibited by its spatial uniformity throughout the ferromag- netic wire regions. There is also no y variations due the lay- ered system exhibiting translational invariance in that direc- tion. Without an external magnetic field, the charge supercur- rent (and pair potential) thus have no components along the y direction. The pair potential is shown to be an asymmetric function of position along the junction, which is simply due to the unequal length of each F wire and their differing magne- tizations. The charge supercurrent density components, Js0 x , Jsy x , and Jsz x , are also shown. These quantities can only vary spatially in the x-direction too since in the absence of an ex- ternal field, the total supercurrent is generated from the phase difference ПҶ between the S terminals, which vary only along the junction length (x direction). The odd-frequency triplet components of the supercurrent are localized in the F1 or F2 regions depending on the specific magnetization orientation in each region (see also the discussion in Sec. III). It is evident that Jsy x disappears in the right F while Jsz x is zero inside F1 segment where вғ—h1 = (0, hy 1, 0),вғ—h2 = (0, 0, hz 2), respec- tively (вғ—h1 вҶ’ Jsy, вғ—h2 вҶ’ Jsz). Thus Jsy is generated in F1 and at the F/F interface is converted into Jsz in F2, or vice versa. The two components are generated in one F and do not penetrate into the other F with orthogonal magnetization. Turning now to Fig. 9(b), a finite magnetic flux of ОҰ = 3ОҰ0 results now in a nonuniform supercurrent response that varies in both the x and y directions. Examining now the singlet cor- relations, the pair potential asymmetry is again present due to the spatially asymmetric magnetization regions, while the ex- ternal magnetic field induces vortices with normal state cores along the junction width. The singlet and triplet components of the supercurrent are plotted as well. The external magnetic field makes the problem effectively two dimensional, as it in- duces nonzero current densities in the y direction. The am- plitude of the equal-spin triplet component in the x-direction, Jsy x (x, y), is somewhat smaller than the other components due in part to the small F1 width, dF 1 = 0.2ОҫS. However, compar- ing Jsy x (x, y) in panels (a) and (b), we see that the presence of a magnetic field can result in this triplet component now existing in F2, and it can also be more prominent in F1. Turning now to the y components of the currents, we see that the magnitudes have increased in most instances by almost an order of magnitude or more. Although 18 Spatial maps of the maximum total charge current, pair potential, and the even- (Js0 x,y(x, y)) and odd-frequency (Jsx x,y(x, y), Jsy x,y(x, y), Jsz x,y(x, y)) components of the charge current. The configuration of the S/F/F/S Josephson junction considered here is shown in Fig. 12. The F/F interface is now perpendicular to the S/F interfaces. The external magnetic flux is zero, ОҰ = 0, and the junction length dF is equal to 2.0ОҫS. The width of each ferromagnetic strip are unequal, i.e., WF 1 = 0.2ОҫS and WF 2 = 1.8ОҫS. The current components are plotted against the lateral y coordinate, i.e., along the junction width. Four various locations along the junction length are considered: x = 0.25ОҫS, 0.50ОҫS, 0.75ОҫS, and 1.0ОҫS. Vertical lines in the panels for the current components separate the two ferromagnetic regions along the y direction (see Fig. 12). Js0 y (x, y), Jsy y (x, y), and Jsz y (x, y) vary little at the differ- ent y locations, the overall spatial behavior is different for the odd and even frequency triplet components: The equal spin Jsy y (x, y) penetrates considerably more into the ferro- magnetic regions compared with its x-component counterpart and compared with the spin-0 triplet Jsz y (x, y). These results are consistent with the generation of a Meissner supercurrent in S/F/F/N structures.44. To study the effects of varying the system geometry and its corresponding effects on the triplet supercurrents, we con- sider more symmetric F regions with equal lengths dF 1 = dF 2 = 1.0ОҫS. All other parameters are identical to the pre- vious S/F/F/S junction in Fig. 9(b). The first two panels on the left of Fig. 10 illustrate 2D spatial maps of the total su- percurrent density and pair potential. The remaining panels contain the spatial behavior of the singlet and triplet contri- butions to the total current. The effect of equal layer widths is reflected in the regular array of vortex patterns and circu- lating currents in the junction. The pair potential at x = 0 exhibits three zeros when ОҰ = 3ОҰ0. This is in accordance with the analytic expression in Eq. (30) and Eq. (38) which demonstrates the actual behavior of singlet correlations, con- stituting the spatial profile of proximity pair potential. To re- veal the even and odd frequency contributions to the contour plots, we examine in the remaining panels the supercurrent components as a function of x. The vertical lines separate the two ferromagnetic regions labeled by F1 and F2, as shown in the schematic of Fig. 8. We see that the formerly long- ranged Jsy y (x, y) and Jsz y (x, y), in Fig. 9 now vanish here when dF 1 = dF 2 = 1.0ОҫS. This demonstrates the crucial role that geometry can play in these type of junctions, in particu- lar the existence of odd-frequency correlations tend to favor configurations where the length of the ferromagnetic layers are unequal, for instance, dF 2 вү« dF 1 can further enhance the effect. This finding is also consistent with the results of a S/F/F/N configuration subjected to an external magnetic field,44 where the Jsy x component of the Meissner current is optimally anomalous if dF 2 вү« dF 1. The behavior of the sin- glet and triplet correlations discussed here are typically highly dependent on the magnetization of the double F layer, as well as the presence of an external magnetic field. In the next section, we therefore proceed to investigate another type of S/F/F/S Josephson junction with a different double F layer arrangement. Schematic of the S/F/F/S Josephson junction where the interface of the double ferromagnet region is oriented perpendicular to the S/F interfaces. The junction is located in the xy plane and the S/F interfaces are along the y axis while the F/F interface is along the x axis. The width of the rectangular F strips WF 1, and WF 2 are generally unequal, i.e., WF 1 Мё= WF 2. The lengths of the F strips, dF , however, are the same and correspond to the junction length. An external magnetic field вғ—H is applied normal to the junction plane along the z axis. 19 Fig. 12. The remaining line plots correspond to the charge supercurrent components: the singlet, Js0 x,y(x, y), and triplets, Jsy x,y(x, y), Jsz x,y(x, y). Here the system parameters are identical to those used previously in Fig. 11, except the width of the ferromagnetic strips here are equal: WF 1 = WF 2 = 1.0ОҫS. The junction length dF is equal to 2.0ОҫS and there is no external magnetic flux, ОҰ = 0. The vertical lines indicate the locations of the F/F interfaces in between the two ferromagnetic regions F1 and F2. IV.5. S/F/F/S heterostructures: F/F interface perpendicular to S/F interfaces Here we consider a type of S/F/F/S Josephson junction where the previous ferromagnet double layer system is rotated by ПҖ/2, so that the F/F interface is normal to the outer S/F interfaces. This layout is shown in Fig. 12. As before, we take the length of the ferromagnetic strips to be equal, dF 1 = dF 2 вүЎ dF . We first consider ferromagnets where the width of the F1 and F2 regions are unequal: WF 1 Мё= WF 2. When an applied magnetic field, вғ—H, is present, it is directed along the z- axis, normal to the plane of the system. To be consistent with the previous subsection, we study two regimes of ferromag- netic widths namely, WF 1 вүӘ WF 2 and WF 1 = WF 2, and investigate how the results vary for a finite external magnetic flux ОҰ. In Fig. 11, we show the results for WF 1 = 0.2ОҫS, and WF 2 = 1.8ОҫS, in the absence of an applied magnetic field (ОҰ = 0). First, the spatial map of the total maximum charge supercurrent shows that the current near the F/F junction has a non-zero y-component. This is in contrast to the uniform supercurrent shown in Fig. 9(a) for a вҖңparallelвҖқ F/F segment. The induced y component is present over the entire junction width as exhibited by the distorted quasiparticle paths. The pair potential shows a symmetric behavior along the junction length (the x direction). However, similar to the previous case, the pair potential is an asymmetric function of y coor- dinate. This again arises from the unequal ferromagnetic wire widths (WF 1 Мё= WF 2) and their different magnetization ori- entations. The spatial behavior of the triplet and singlet con- tributions to the supercurrent is also shown as a function of position along the junction width (the y direction) at four x locations: x = 0.25ОҫS, 0.5ОҫS, 0.75ОҫS, 1.0ОҫS. The amplitude of Js0 y is around вүҲ 1/10 of Jsy y and Jsz y but comparable with |Jsy y + Jsz y |. These components of Jy, and hence Jy itself, vanish at y = Вұ0.5, corresponding to the vacuum boundary, and consistent with the boundary conditions given by Eq. (4). The vector plot of the charge supercurrent in Fig. 11 reveals no current flow along y in the middle of the junction, x = 0, throughout the junction width. The x component, Js0 x , is most negative at x = 0 along the y axis while Jsy x and Jsz x are maximal. Therefore, the singlet-triplet conversion with WF 2 вү« WF 1 is maximal at x = 0. Another important as- pect of this S/F/F/S junction is seen in the behavior of Jsy x and Jsz x as a function of y: the two components are gener- ated in one F region and penetrate deeply into the adjacent F segment. By comparing these plots with those of a S/F/F/S configuration where F/F interface is parallel with the S/F in- terface subjected to an external magnetic field, presented in Fig. 9(b), one concludes that the spin-1 triplet components of charge supercurrent can penetrate the ferromagnetic regions when they flow parallel to the junction interfaces. In Fig. 13, we investigate the geometrical effects on the su- perconducting properties for a system with F1 and F2 of equal width. We have WF 1 = WF 2 = 1.0ОҫS, and all previous pa- rameters remain intact. The current density map shows that the the induced y-component is equally distributed with re- spect to y = 0, the location of the F/F interface. The pair po- tential is a symmetric function of both the x and y coordinates about the origin, reflecting the symmetric geometric configu- ration. The panels representing the current components reveal that the y-component to the current density originates mainly from the singlet term, Js0 y , since it is evident that the odd- frequency components Jsy y and Jsz y are of opposite sign so that Jsy y + Jsz y вүҲ 0. Note that Js0 y is an odd function of y for each fixed x-location. This reflects the fact that the junc- tion is symmetric along the y direction (see Fig. 11). From the current density spatial map the same functionality appears for the x coordinate. The integration пҝҪ 0.5 вҲ’0.5 dxJs0 y gives the total charge supercurrent flowing in the y direction which is 20 Spatial maps of total critical charge current density and pair potential and the decomposed components of charge supercurrent Js0 x,y(x, y), Jsx x,y(x, y), Jsy x,y(x, y), Jsz x,y(x, y). The same parameter set as Fig. 11 are used except we now assume the system is subject to an external magnetic flux ОҰ = 3ОҰ0. The vertical lines in the current componentsвҖҷ panels separate the two ferromagnetic segments, labeled by F1, and F2, with orthogonal magnetization orientations. The current components are plotted as a function of positions along the junction width i.e. y direction at four locations along the junction length i.e. x = 0.25ОҫS, 0.50ОҫS, 0.75ОҫS, and 1.0ОҫS. therefore zero due since Js0 y is antisymmetric in y. For the previous case shown in Fig. 11, both triplet components Jsy y and Jsz y contributed to the induced y component in the total current density. Considering now the flow of current along the x direction, the top panels display the behavior of the odd- frequency triplet components with spin-1 and spin-0 projec- tions on the z quantization axes (Jsy x and Jsz x , respectively). Interestingly, the generation of each of the two triplet compo- nents tends to mirror each others behavior. Since the ferro- magnetic regions are symmetric, the singlet-triplet conversion of charge supercurrent components at the middle of junction (x = 0) across the junction is not as extensive compared to the previous case where WF 2 вү« WF 1. It is clear that the total current passing through the junction must be conserved along the junction length (Itot(x) = const.). However, the singlet- triplet conversion in the charge supercurrent density is maxi- mal at x = 0 and increases as the condition WF 2 вү« WF 1 is fulfilled. In the previous two figures, the source of the driving current was the macroscopic phase differences between the S termi- nals in the Josephson structures. We now introduce an addi- tional source and associated triplet correlations by applying an external magnetic field (with corresponding flux ОҰ = 3ОҰ0), normal to the junction plane along the z-axis (see schematic, Fig. 12). Therefore, Fig. 14 exhibits our results for a junction with the same parameters used in Fig. 11 but now, ОҰ = 3ОҰ0. The magnetic field causes the quasiparticles to undergo cir- cular motion as shown in the vector plot for the supercurrent density. The pair potential also vanishes at particular loca- tions, which now form a nontrivial pattern. The charge su- percurrent components are clearly modified by the external magnetic field compared to ОҰ = 0 (Fig. 11). We have found that the behavior of the supercurrent components along y are similar to the corresponding components along x when the F/F junction is parallel with the S/F interfaces (Fig. 9(b)). In both cases, the supercurrent flows normal to the F/F junc- tion. Likewise, the Jx component as a function of y in Fig. 11 is similar to the Jy component vs. x as seen in Fig. 9(b). Re- call that in Fig. 14, we have ОҰ = 3ОҰ0, while in Fig. 9(b) ОҰ = 0. Here we find also that the triplet components of the charge supercurrent generated in one F strip, flowing parallel with the F/F interface deeply penetrate the adjacent F com- pared to when the current flows normal to the F/F interface. It is also evident that the total net supercurrent in the y direc- tion is zero, i.e., пҝҪ +0.5 вҲ’0.5 dx(Js0 y + Jsy y + Jsz y ) = 0. Upon changing the width of the F layers to WF 1 = WF 2 = 1.0ОҫS, Fig. 15 shows that the circular paths observed in the current density and zeroes in the spatial map of the pair po- tential have reverted back to a more symmetric configura- tion compared to Fig. 14. Here the magnetization orienta- tions in the F regions are orthogonal: вғ—h1 = (0, hy, 0), and вғ—h2 = (0, 0, hz). The panels containing the current compo- nents Jsy x and Jsz x as a function of y are now much more lo- calized in the F regions, in contrast to the previous case where WF 2 вү« WF 1 (Fig. 11). Considering the current density along the y direction, the triplet components are also localized in the F regions. Similarities are observed when comparing their y dependence with the x dependence of the triplets Jsy x and Jsz x in Fig. 10. This comprehensive investigation into the different S/F/F/S structures has shown that an applied magnetic field can result in the appearance of odd-frequency triplet compo- nents to the charge transport when the supercurrent is paral- lel to the F/F interface. These odd-frequency correlations can exhibit extensive penetration into ferromagnetic regions with orthogonal magnetizations. These findings are in stark contrast to those cases where the supercurrent flows normal to uniform F/F double layers with orthogonal magnetization orientations (see also the discussions of one-dimensional sys- tems in Sec. III). 21 15. Spatial maps of the total charge supercurrent and pair potential in addition to the current components Js0 x,y(x, y), Jsx x,y(x, y), Jsy x,y(x, y), Jsz x,y(x, y), at maximum charge current flowing across the junction. The same investigations as Fig. 13 are presented here. The junction length is fixed at dF = 2.0ОҫS while the width of each ferromagnetic strip, labeled by F1 and F2, are WF 1 = WF 2 = 1.0ОҫS. Unlike Fig. 13, the external magnetic flux is ОҰ = 3ОҰ0. The two ferromagnetic regions with orthogonal magnetization orientations are separated by vertical lines and labeled F1 and F2. IV.6. Spin valve structure probing of equal-spin triplet supercurrent Having analyzed in detail the singlet-triplet contributions to the supercurrent in various situations, we now proceed to demonstrate an experimentally accessible structure that can directly detect our predictions involving parallel transport in F/F bilayers. We convert one of the outer S terminals to a finite sized normal layer, so that in effect we consider a simple S/F/F/N spin valve (Fig. 16). This structure gener- ates pure odd-frequency spin-1 triplet correlations, and can be a more experimentally accessible system for generating and controlling triplet correlations in supercurrent transport.7 The basic structure is made of two uniform ferromagnetic layers with thicknesses dF 1, and dF 2, and a relatively thick nor- mal layer dN, which is connected to a superconducting ter- minal. The N layer assists in probing the equal-spin compo- nent of the supercurrent efficiently since the exchange field there is zero, and this component of supercurrent decays very slowly in the normal metal. The magnetization of the left F is determined by a rotation angle ОІ1 with respect to the z axis (вғ—h1 = h0(cos ПҖ/4 sin ОІ1, sin ПҖ/4 sin ОІ1, cos ОІ1)) while the magnetization of right F layer is assumed to be fixed along the z axis. The non-superconducting part of the spin-valve is subject to an external magnetic field вғ—H oriented along the z axis, Hz. The external magnetic field leads to a diamag- netic supercurrent вғ—J, which depends on x and flows along the y direction [denoted by Jy(x)] parallel to the interfaces. In the presence of an external magnetic field, we make the usual substitution ЛҶвҲӮ вҶ’ вғ—вҲҮ + e вғ—A/c, where вғ—A is the vector potential, related to the external magnetic field ( вғ—H) via вғ—вҲҮ Г— вғ—A = вғ—H. In the linear response regime93вҖ“99, the supercurrent density can be expressed by: Jy(x) = вҲ’J08ieAy(x) Г— пҝҪ вҲһ 0 Tx(вҲ’Оө, x)TвҲ— x(Оө, x) вҲ’ Tx(Оө, x)TвҲ— x(вҲ’Оө, x)+ Ty(вҲ’Оө, x)TвҲ— y(Оө, x) вҲ’ Ty(Оө, x)TвҲ— y(вҲ’Оө, x)+ Tz(вҲ’Оө, x)TвҲ— z(Оө, x) вҲ’ Tz(Оө, x)TвҲ— z(вҲ’Оө, x)} . (40) Strictly speaking, to determine Ay(x), it is necessary to solve MaxwellвҖҷs equation incorporating the Coulomb gauge in conjunction with the expression for Jy(x) and appropri- ate boundary conditions for H93вҖ“99. We have found however tion. The magnetization orientation of the middle F layer with width dF 2 is fixed along the z direction. The left F layer, with width dF 1, has a misaligned magnetization direction correspond- ing to вғ—h1 = h0(cos ПҖ/4, sin ПҖ/4 sin ОІ1, cos ОІ1). The normal metal layer has width dN. An external magnetic field is applied to the sys- tem in the z direction parallel to the interfaces: вғ—H = (0, 0, Hz). Due to the external magnetic field, a diamagnetic supercurrent flows in the y direction вғ—J(x) = (0, Jy(x), 0) and varies along x. The junction interfaces lie in the yz plane. 22 junction for various magnetization orientations in F1: вғ—h1 = h0(cos ПҖ/4 sin ОІ1, sin ПҖ/4 sin ОІ1, cos ОІ1) for ОІ1 = 0, 0.1ПҖ, 0.2ПҖ, 0.3ПҖ, 0.4ПҖ, and 0.5ПҖ. The thickness of the left F layer is fixed at dF 1 = 0.15ОҫS, while the thickness of the right F layer is equal to dF 2 = 1.85ОҫS. Bottom row: The left and right thicknesses in the F layers are now equal to dF 1 = dF 2 = ОҫS. The sum of dF 1 and dF 2 is identical for both cases investigated in the top and bottom rows. The normal layer thickness is also fixed at 2.5ОҫS in both cases. The logarithmic scales on the x-axes permits easier visualization of the long-ranged spatial behavior of the odd-triplet components that have spin projections normal to the z quantization axis. that through our extensive numerical investigations, Ay(x) is typically a linear function of x and weakly varies with the magnetization alignment, ОІ1. Therefore, it is the en- ergy and spatial dependence of the GreenвҖҷs function com- ponents in Eq. (40) which governs the supercurrent density. To study the supercurrent behavior, and similar to what was done above for Josephson structures, we separate out the even- and odd-frequency components of the total supercur- rent the same as Sec. III.1. We achieve this by first defin- ISx(x), ISy(x), and ISz(x) are given by, IS0(x) = пҝҪ вҲһ 0 (41a) ISx(x) = пҝҪ вҲһ 0 dОө {Tx(вҲ’Оө)TвҲ— x(Оө) вҲ’ Tx(Оө)TвҲ— x(вҲ’Оө)} tanh ОөОІ,(41b) ISy(x) = пҝҪ вҲһ 0 dОө пҝҪ Ty(вҲ’Оө)TвҲ— y(Оө) вҲ’ Ty(Оө)TвҲ— y(вҲ’Оө) пҝҪ tanh ОөОІ,(41c) ISz(x) = пҝҪ вҲһ 0 dОө {Tz(вҲ’Оө)TвҲ— z(Оө) вҲ’ Tz(Оө)TвҲ— z(вҲ’Оө)} tanh ОөОІ. (41d) Also the boundary conditions at the right far end interface of the normal metal should be modified accordingly (see Fig. 12): вҲӮx(вҲ“Tx(вҲ’Оө) + iTy(вҲ’Оө)) = 0, (42a) вҲӮx(вҲ“S(вҲ’Оө) + Tz(вҲ’Оө)) = 0, (42b) вҲӮx(вҲ“TвҲ— x(Оө) вҲ’ iTвҲ— y(Оө)) = 0, (42c) вҲӮx(вҲ“SвҲ—(Оө) + TвҲ— z(Оө)) = 0. (42d) Having now established the method in which to determine the spatial behavior of the supercurrent and its decomposi- tions, we present in Fig. 17 our findings for the proposed nanovalve subject to an external magnetic field. Several val- ues of the left magnetization orientation ОІ1 are investigated (the right F magnetization is fixed along the z axis), corre- sponding to ОІ1/ПҖ = 0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5. In the top row, the thickness of the left F layer is much smaller than the thickness of the adjacent F layer: dF 1(= 0.15ОҫS) вүӘ dF 2(= 1.85ОҫS). The thickness of the normal metal is of moderate size, set equal to dN = 2.5ОҫS. The total non-superconducting region thus has a thickness of 4.5ОҫS. To demonstrate the long- ranged nature of the spin-1 triplet components ISx(x) and ISy(x) in this simple structure with only two magnetic regions with uniform and non-collinear magnetization orientations, we introduce a three dimensional magnetization in the left F region: вғ—h1 = h0(cos ПҖ/4 sin ОІ1, sin ПҖ/4 sin ОІ1, cos ОІ1). To clearly show the spatially long-ranged components, we use a logarithmic scale for each x-axis. It is seen that the triplet component with zero spin projection on the z-axis, ISz(x), is short-ranged and becomes suppressed at positions approx- imately greater than x вҲј 0.5ОҫS. This is in drastic contrast to the ISx(x), and ISy(x) components, which propagate over the entire non-superconducting region. The singlet compo- nent, IS0(x), vanishes around x вҲј ОҫS, which is about half the thickness of the magnetic layers (dF 1 + dF 2 = 2ОҫS). Thus, the long-ranged components can strongly influence the total supercurrent, Itot(x), and be the primary source of nonzero supercurrent in the normal metal. These findings are there- fore suggestive of an experimentally accessible S/F/F/N spin valve with long-ranged triplet correlations controllable by magnetization rotation in one of the F layers. It turns out that the the pure spin-1 odd-frequency spin- valve effect is optimal for asymmetric F layer thicknesses. To illustrate this, we consider a symmetric configuration with dF 1 = dF 2 = ОҫS, which ensures the same total thickness of the ferromagnet regions (the normal metal thickness is un- changed at dN = 2.5ОҫS). The results of this configuration 23 are represented in the bottom row of Fig. 17. The total cur- rent and its components are plotted as a function of position inside the non-superconducting regions for the same magneti- zation orientations in the asymmetric case (top row). We find that in contrast to the panels in the top row, the triplet compo- nents ISx(x), ISy(x), and ISz(x) are now all short-ranged in the sense that they vanish near x вҲј 0.5ОҫS. In particular, the spin-1 components, ISx(x), and ISy(x) do not propagate in F2, where the magnetization is orthogonal to the correlationsвҖҷ spin orientations. The singlet contribution, IS0(x), for both the dF 2 вү« dF 1 and dF 2 = dF 1 cases shows similar behavior, where it vanishes at around x вҲј ОҫS. This can be understood by noting that the spin-splitting effects of ferromagnetism de- stroy opposite-spin paring correlations. The total current also vanishes at x вҲј ОҫS for all magnetization orientations, ОІ1, in contrast to what was observed in the dF 2 вү« dF 1 structure above. We are now able to compare the behavior of various su- percurrent components in the S/F/F/N and the S/F/F/S Josephson structures presented in Sec. III. As seen, our in- vestigations for a wide range of parameters, including mis- aligned S/F/F/S structures with dF 2 вү« dF 1, illustrate local- ized spin-1 components, ISx(x), ISy(x), whereby their spin orientation follows the local magnetization orientation. These components of supercurrent are unable to propagate through- out the bilayer F/F junctions where there is a relative orthog- onal magnetization. This comparison immediately reveals the efficiency and advantages of a S/F/F/N nanovalve for de- tecting proximity spin-1 triplet superconducting correlations experimentally. The pure spin-1 triplet diamagnetic response discussed here for the S/F/F/N spin valves might be mea- sured using a local probe such as the density of states or cur- rent density. As is well understood, the triplet correlations can alter the induced minigap in the local density of states in the nonsuperconducting regions. For example, the traditional s-wave minigap profile can become peaked due to the emer- gence of triplet correlations which cause a resonance near the Fermi surface. Also, as seen, our findings demonstrate that only spin-1 triplet components of the diamagnetic current sur- vive in the N region if dF 2 вү« dF 1, for sufficient magne- tization misalignment. Therefore, these results suggest that currents measured experimentally within the N wire for such systems should be comprised of purely equal-spin triplet cor- relations that are odd-frequency in character. Therefore, the spin-parameterized technique reveals the spatial profile of the odd and even frequency components of the total supercurrent and provides additional insight into their behaviors. The general three-dimensional approach which we outlined can then be employed for two-dimensional finite-size magnetic/superconducting proximity hybrids with arbitrary magnetization patterns. In this paper we categorized S/F hy- brids with layered F regions into two classes: configurations hosting supercurrent transport 1) parallel and 2) perpendicular to the F/F interface. The one-dimensional structures studied in Sec. III belong to class 2), while the two-dimensional con- figurations discussed in this section are examples of class 1). For the fairly wide range of configurations considered in this paper, we demonstrated that singlet supercurrent flow вҖңpar- allelвҖқ to uniformly magnetized F/F interfaces can generate substantial long-range triplet supercurrents regardless of the specific configuration and geometry7,16,48. This is of course in stark contrast to their counterparts where the singlet supercur- rent flows вҖңperpendicularвҖқ to the F/F cross sections and fully discussed in Sec. III. V. CONCLUSION In conclusion, we have employed a quasiclassical method and spin-parameterization technique in both the Usadel equa- tions and associated boundary conditions. This approach pro- vides a suitable computational and analytical framework to pinpoint the spatial behaviors of the decomposed odd and even frequency supercurrent components in layered ferro- magnetic junctions. We have studied the transport characteris- tics of the spin decomposed supercurrent components for two generic scenarios and several experimentally relevant struc- tures: systems with 1) parallel or 2) perpendicular charge su- percurrent flow relative to the magnetic interfaces. Two types of finite-size two-dimensional magnetic S/F/F/S Josephson junctions subject to an external magnetic field, and support- ing supercurrents flow parallel to the F/F interface, are con- sidered. In one type, we assume the F/F interface is parallel to the S/F interfaces, while in the other type, the F/F in- terface is perpendicular to the S/F interfaces. Our studies revealed that when a supercurrent flows parallel to the F/F junction, the long-ranged spin-triplet supercurrent will be ef- fectively generated and it will propagate deeply into the fer- romagnetic regions independent of junction geometries. This phenomenon is more pronounced when the thickness of fer- romagnetic strips are unequal (dF 2 вү« dF 1 or WF 2 вү« WF 1), depending on the junction type under consideration. This effect disappears when the supercurrent direction is perpen- dicular to the F/F interface. To gain more insight and to have explicit comparisons, we also studied the various aspects of the spin-decomposed supercurrent components in one- hybrids using the spin-parametrization scheme. We studied the spatial maps of each supercurrent component and found that the total supercurrent is dominated by the long-range triplet component, which also governs the behavior of total supercurrent. Our results demonstrated that structures with inhomogeneous magnetization patterns generate long-ranged supercurrents stronger than their uniform counterparts and that the component of supercurrent corresponding to the ro- tating magnetization component is long-ranged in such struc- tures. Finally, we proposed an S/F/F/N spin-valve, which represents an experimentally accessible platform to probe the predicted phenomena in the parallel supercurrent transport scenario. We have studied the spatial maps of the singlet and triplet supercurrent components of this spin-valve when subjected to an external magnetic field. Our findings demon- strated that for misaligned magnetizations and different thick- nesses of the F layers, dF 2 вү« dF 1, a long-ranged odd-triplet component of the supercurrent response arises and populates the adjacent normal metal N. 24 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to thank G. Sewell for his valuable instruc- tions in the numerical parts of this work. We also appreciate N.O. Birge and F.S. Bergeret for useful discussions and com- ments. K.H. is supported in part by ONR and by a grant of supercomputer resources provided by the DOD HPCMP. вҲ— phymalidoust@gmail.com вҖ  klaus.halterman@navy.mil 1 I. Zutic, J. Fabian, and S.D. Sarma, Rev. Mod. Phys.76, 323 2 A.A. Golubov, M.Yu. Kupriyanov, E. Ilichev, Rev. Mod. Phys. 3 A. Buzdin, Rev. Mod. Phys. 77, 935 (2005). 4 F.S. Bergeret, A.F. Volkov, K.B. Efetov, Rev. Mod. Phys. 77, 5 K.B. Efetov, I.A. Garifullin, A.F. Volkov,K. Westerholt, Mag- netic Heterostructures,Advances and Perspectives in Spinstruc- tures and Spintransport. ed. by H. Zabel, S.D. Bader, Series. Springer Tracts in Mod. Phys. vol 227 (Springer, New York, 2007), P. 252. 6 M. Eschrig, Phys. Today 64, 43 (2011). 7 M. Alidoust and K. Halterman, Appl. Phys. Lett. 105, 202601 8 M. Alidoust and K. Halterman, Phys. Rev. B 89, 195111 (2014). 9 K. Halterman, O. T. Valls, and M. Alidoust, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 10 A.M. Bobkov and I.V. Bobkova, Phys. Rev. B 84, 054533 (2011); Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 197002 (2012). 11 A.G. Malshukov, and A. Brataas, Phys. Rev. B86, 094517 (2012). 12 L.B. Ioffe, V.B. Geshkenbein, M.V. Feigelman, A.L. Fauchere, and G. Blatter, Nature (London) 398, 679 (1999). 13 Y.S. Barash, I.V. Bobkova, and T. Kopp, Phys. Rev. B 66, 14 A. Cottet, T. Kontos, W. Belzig, C. Schonenberger, C. Bruder, Europhys. Lett. 74, 320 (2006). 15 B. Crouzy, S. Tollis, and D.A. Ivanov, Phys. Rev. B 76, 134502 16 Ya.V. Fominov, A.F. Volkov, and K.B. Efetov, Phys. Rev. B 75, 17 Z. Pajovic, M. Bozovic, Z. Radovic, J. Cayssol, and A. Buzdin, Phys. Rev. B 74, 184509 (2006). 18 H. Sellier, C. Baraduc, F. Lefloch, and R. Calemczuk, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 257005 (2004). 19 N.G. Pugach, M.Yu. Kupriyanov, A.V. Vedyayev, C. Lacroix, E. Goldobin, D. Koelle, R. Kleiner, and A.S. Sidorenko Phys. Rev. 20 L.-J. Jin, Y. Wang, L. Wen, G.-Q. Zha, and S.-P. Zhou Physics Letters A 376, 2435 (2012). 21 M. Eschrig, J. Kopu, J.C. Cuevas, and G. Schon, Phys. Rev. Lett. 22 M.N. Baibich, J.M. Broto, A. Fert, F. Nguyen Van Dau, F. Petroff, P. Eitenne, G. Creuzet, A. Friederich, and J. Chazelas, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 2472 (1988). 23 G. Binasch, P. Grunberg, F. Saurenbach, and W. Zinn, Phys. Rev. 24 M. Alidoust, G. Sewell, and J. Linder Phys. Rev. B 85, 144520 25 M. Alidoust, J. Linder, G. Rashedi, T. Yokoyama, and A. Sodbo, Phys. Rev. B81, 014512 (2010). 26 V.I. Zdravkov, J. Kehrle, G. Obermeier, D. Lenk, H.-A. Krug von Nidda, C. Muller, M.Yu. Kupriyanov, A.S. Sidorenko, S. Horn, R. Tidecks, and L.R. Tagirov, Phys. Rev. B 87, 144507 (2013). 27 S.V. Bakurskiy, N.V. Klenov, I.I. Soloviev, M.Yu. Kupriyanov, and A.A. Golubov, Phys. Rev. B 88, 144519 (2013). 28 Y. Makhlin, G. Schoen, A. Shnirman, Rev. Mod. Phys. 73, 357 29 V.V. Ryazanov, V.A. Oboznov, A.Yu. Rusanov, A.V. Vereten- nikov, A.A. Golubov, and J. Aarts, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 2427 30 L.N. Bulaevskii, M.J. Graf, C.D. Batista, and V.G. Kogan, Phys. Rev. B 83, 144526 (2011). 31 A.I. Buzdin, L.N. Bulaevskii, S.V. Panyukov, JETP Lett. 35, 178 32 K. Halterman, and O.T. Valls, Phys. Rev. B 69, 014517 (2004). 33 F.S. Bergeret, A.F. Volkov, K.B. Efetov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 4096 34 Y. Asano, Y. Tanaka, T. Yokoyama, and S. Kashiwaya, Phys. Rev. 35 M. Eschrig, T. Lofwander, Nat. Phys. 4, 138 (2008). 36 T. Lofwander, T. Champel, J. Durst, M. Eschrig, Phys. Rev. Lett. 37 T. Kontos, M. Aprili, J. Lesueur, X. Grison, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 38 I. Sosnin, H. Cho, V.T. Petrashov, and A.F. Volkov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 157002 (2006). 39 K. Halterman, P.H. Barsic, and O.T. Valls Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 40 T.S. Khaire, M.A. Khasawneh, W.P. Pratt Jr., N.O. Birge, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 137002 (2010). 41 R.S. Keizer, S.T.B. Goennenwein, T.M. Klapwijk, G. Miao, G. Xiao and A. Gupta, Nature 439, 825 (2006). 42 M. Houzet and A.I. Buzdin, Phys. Rev. B 76, 060504(R) (2007). 43 M. Alidoust, and J. Linder, Phys. Rev. B82, 224504 (2010). 44 M. Alidoust, K. Halterman, J. Linder, Phys. Rev. B 89, 054508 45 M. Houzet, A.I. Buzdin, Phys. Rev. B74, 214507 (2006). 46 M. Knezevic, L. Trifunovic, Z. Radovic, Phys. Rev. B 85, 094517 47 L. Trifunovic, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 047001 (2011). 48 T.Y. Karminskaya, M.Y. Kupriyanov, and A.A. Golubov, JETP Lett. 87, 570 (2008); A.I. Buzdin, A.S. Melnikov, and N.G. Pu- gach, Phys. Rev. B 83, 144515 (2011). 49 S. Hikino and S. Yunoki, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 237003 (2013). 50 J.W.A. Robinson, J.D.S. Witt, M.G. Blamire, Science 329, 5987 51 C. Wu, O.T. Valls, and K. Halterman Phys. Rev. Lett.108, 117005 52 K. Halterman and O. T. Valls Phys. Rev. B 80, 104502 (2009). 25 53 V.A. Oboznov, V.V. Bolginov, A.K. Feofanov, V.V. Ryazanov, and A.I. Buzdin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 197003 (2006). 54 G.A. Ovsyannikov, A.E. Sheyerman, A.V. Shadrin, Yu.V. Kislin- skii, K.Y. Constantinian, and A. Kalabukhov JETP Letters 97, 55 T.Yu. Karminskaya, A.A. Golubov, and M.Yu. Kupriyanov, Phys. Rev. B 84, 064531 (2011). 56 C. Wu, O.T. Valls, and K. Halterman, Phys. Rev. B 86, 014523 57 A.S. Melnikov, A.V. Samokhvalov, S.M. Kuznetsova, and A.I. Buzdin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 237006 (2012). 58 S. Oh, D. Youm and M.R. Beasley, Appl. Phys. Lett. 71, 2376 59 Y.V. Fominov et al., JETP Lett. 91, 308 (2010). 60 P.V. Leksin, N.N. Garifyanov, I.A. Garifullin, Ya.V. Fominov, J. Schumann, Y. Krupskaya, V. Kataev, O.G. Schmidt, and B. Bch- ner, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 057005 (2012). 61 P.V. Leksin, N.N. Garifyanov, I.A. Garifullin, J. Schumann, V. Kataev, O.G. Schmidt, and B. Bchner, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 62 P.V. Leksin, N.N. Garifyanov, I.A. Garifullin, J. Schumann, V. Kataev, O.G. Schmidt, and B. Bchner, Phys. Rev. B 85, 024502 63 B. Li, N. Roschewsky, B.A. Assaf, M. Eich, M. Epstein-Martin, D. Heiman, M. Mnzenberg, and J. S. Moodera, Phys. Rev. Lett. 64 P.V. Leksin, N.N. Garifyanov, I.A. Garifullin, J. Schumann, H. Vinzelberg, V. Kataev, R. Klingeler, O.G. Schmidt and B. Bch- ner, Appl. Phys. Lett. 97, 102505 (2010). 65 A.A. Jara, C. Safranski, I.N. Krivorotov, C. Wu, A.N. Malmi- Kakkada, O.T. Valls, and K. Halterman, Phys. Rev. B89, 184502 66 M.G. Flokstra, T.C.Cunningham, J. Kim, N. Satchell, G. Bur- nell, S.J. Bending, P.J. Curran, S.J. Langridge, C. Kinane, J.F.K. Cooper, N. Pugach, M. Eschrig, S.L. Lee, arXiv:1404.2950. 67 V. Braude, Yu.V. Nazarov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 077003 (2007). 68 F.S. Bergeret and J.C. Cuevas, J. Low Temp. Phys., 153 304 69 J.M. Rowell, Phys. Rev. Lett. 11, 200 (1963). 70 B.D. Josephson, Phys. Lett. 1, 251 (1962). 71 J.C. Cuevas and F.S. Bergeret, Phys. Rev. Lett., 99 217002 72 M. Alidoust, G. Sewell, and J. Linder, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 73 M. Alidoust, and J. Linder, Phys. Rev. B 87, 060503(R) (2013). 74 U. Ledermann, A.L. FaucheвҖҳre, and G. Blatter, Phys. Rev. B 59, 75 K. Usadel, Phys. Rev. Lett. 25, 507 (1970); A.I. Larkin and Y.N. Ovchinnikov, in Nonequilibrium Superconductivity, edited by D. Langenberg and A. Larkin (Elsevier, Amesterdam, 1986), P. 493. 76 J.P. Morten, M.S. thesis, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, 2003. 77 W. Belzig, F.K. Wilhelm, C. Bruder, G. Schn, A. D.Zaikin, Su- perlattices and Microstructures, Vol. 25, Iss. 56, Pg. 1251 (1999). 78 A. V. Zaitsev, Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 86, 1742 (1984) (Sov. Phys. JETP 59, 1015 (1984); M. Y. Kuprianov et al., Sov. Phys. JETP 79 L. Angers, F. Chiodi, G. Montambaux, M. Ferrier, S. Gu`eron, H. Bouchiat, and J.C. Cuevas, Phys. Rev. B 77, 165408 (2008). 80 F. Chiodi, M. Ferrier, Gu`eron, J.C. Cuevas, G. Montambaux, F. Fortuna, A. Kasumov, H. Bouchiat, Phys. Rev. B 86, 064510 81 J.R. Clem, Phys. Rev. B 81, 144515 (2010). 82 A.F. Volkov and K.B. Efetov, Phys. Rev. B 81, 144522 (2010). 83 T. Champel, M. Eschrig, Phys. Rev. B 72, 054523 (2005). 84 M. Eschrig, T. Lofwander, T. Champel, J.C. Cuevas, J. Kopu, G. Schon, J. Low Temp. Phys. 147, 457, (2007). 85 G.B. Halsz, J.W.A. Robinson, J.F. Annett, and M.G. Blamire, Phys. Rev. B 79, 224505 (2009) 86 D. Fritsch and J.F. Annett, New J. Phys. 16, 055005 (2014). 87 H. Suderow, I. Guillamon, J.G. Rodrigo, S. Vieira, arXiv:1403.5514. 88 A.A. Abrikosov, Fundamentals of the Theory of Metals (North- Holland, Amsterdam, 1988). 89 T. Yamashita, L. Rindereer, J. Low Temp. Phys. 21, 153 (1975). 90 A.A. Abrikosov, Sov. Phys. JETP 5, 1174 (1957). 91 M. Tinkham, Introduction to Superconductivity (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1996). 92 T. Lofwander, T. Champel, M. Eschrig, Phys. Rev. B 75, 014512 93 Higashitani and K. Nagai, Physica B 194, 1385 (1994). 94 W. Belzig, C. Bruder, and G. Sch МҲon, Phys. Rev. B 53, 5727 95 P. Visani et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 1514 (1990). 96 F. Bernd, Muller-Allinger and A. Celia Mota, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 97 F. Bernd Muller-Allinger and A. Celia Mota, Phys. Rev. B 62, 98 C. Bruder and Y. Imry, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 5782 (1998). 99 T. Yokoyama, Y. Tanaka, and N. Nagaosa, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 100 K. Halterman, O. T. Valls, and M. Alidoust, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111,