Broken translational and rotational symmetry via charge stripe order in underdoped YBa2Cu3O6+y R. Comin,∗,1,2 R. Sutarto,3 E. H. da Silva Neto,1,2,4,5 L. Chauviere,1,2,5 R. Liang,1,2 W. N. Hardy,1,2 D. A. Bonn,1,2 F. He,3 G. A. Sawatzky,1,2 and A. Damascelli∗,1,2 1Department of Physics & Astronomy, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia V6T 1Z1, Canada 2Quantum Matter Institute, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia V6T 1Z4, Canada 3Canadian Light Source, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan S7N 2V3, Canada 4Quantum Materials Program, Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1Z8, Canada 5Max Planck Institute for Solid State Research, Heisenbergstrasse 1, D-70569 Stuttgart, Germany ∗To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: r.comin@utoronto.ca (R.C.); damascelli@physics.ubc.ca (A.D.) 1 arXiv:1503.08209v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 27 Mar 2015 Following the early discovery of stripe-like order in La-based copper-oxide superconductors, charge ordering instabilities were observed in all cuprate families. However, it has proven difficult to distinguish between uni- (stripes) and bi-directional (checkerboard) charge order in Y- and Bi-based materials. Here we use resonant x-ray scattering (RXS) to measure the two-dimensional structure factor in YBa2Cu3O6+y, in reciprocal space. Our data reveal the presence of charge stripe order, i.e. locally unidirectional density waves, sug- gesting it as the true microscopic nature of charge modulations in cuprates. At the same time, we find that the well-established competition between charge order and superconductivity is stronger for charge correlations across than along the stripes, which provides additional evidence for the intrinsic unidi- rectional nature of the charge order. Recent studies of Y-based copper oxides have highlighted the importance of a charge- ordered electronic ground state, also termed charge-density-wave (CDW), as a central ele- ment within the phenomenology of high-temperature superconductors (1–14). The family of YBa2Cu3O6+y (YBCO) compounds have yielded a wealth of experimental results that enabled advancements in our understanding of CDW instabilities and their interplay with superconduc- tivity (9–11,15–22). YBCO is a layered copper-oxide-based material where hole doping is controlled by the oxy- gen stoichiometry in the chain layer – characterized by uniaxial CuO chains running along the crystallographic b axis. In addition to ordering within the chain layer – attained via the periodic alternation of fully-oxygenated and fully-depleted CuO chains – recent experiments have ex- tensively shown the presence of charge ordering in the CuO2 planes, with an incommensurate wavevector Q∼0.31 reciprocal lattice units (23), corresponding to a period of approximately 3 unit cells in real space (9–11). Although the stripy nature of La-based cuprates has been long 2 established (1–3), the local symmetry of the CDW in YBCO has not yet been resolved as both charge stripes (in the presence of 90◦ rotated domains)and checkerboard are consistent with the globally bidirectional structure of the CDW – characterized by wavevectors along both the a and b axes, at Qa ∼(0.31, 0) and Qb ∼(0, 0.31), respectively (10,11,24–26). This leaves open the fundamental question as to whether stripes are the underlying charge instability in the whole class of hole-doped cuprates. Here we study the local density correlations of the charge-ordered state, and the interaction of the latter with superconductivity (SC) in underdoped YBCO, using resonant x-ray scatter- ing (RXS). This technique, which is now at full maturity, represents a unique combination of diffraction (to probe reciprocal space) and resonant absorption (allowing element-specificity and therefore site-selectivity), and directly measures the structure factor S(Qx, Qy), where Qx and Qy represent the momenta along the reciprocal axes H and K, respectively. The structure factor is linked to the density-density correlation function, and therefore to the CDW order parameter in momentum space (see Materials and Methods in ). Here, in order to recon- struct the two-dimensional (2D) structure factor with high resolution, we utilize a specifically devised RXS probing scheme whereby a charge-ordering peak is sliced along different direc- tions, parametrized by the azimuthal angle α (Fig. 1). The resulting 2D shape of the CDW peaks rules out checkerboard order and is instead consistent with a stripy nature of charge modulations in YBCO (28). We carry out RXS measurements around the CDW wavevectors Qa ∼(0.31, 0) and Qb ∼ (0, 0.31) for three detwinned, oxygen-ordered YBCO samples – YBa2Cu3O6.51 (Y651, with hole doping p ∼ 0.10), YBa2Cu3O6.67 (Y667, p ∼ 0.12), YBa2Cu3O6.75 (Y675, p ∼ 0.13). In our experimental scheme the CDW peaks are scanned in a radial geometry via control of the azimuthal angle α (29) (Fig. 1A). At the Cu-L3 edge, the measured signal is mainly sensitive to periodic variations in the Cu-2p → 3d transition energy (30, 31), i.e. to a scalar quantity, even though the detailed contribution of a pure charge modulation vs. ionic 3 displacements to the RXS signal cannot be decoupled (32). In addition, the poor coherence of the CDW across the CuO2 planes (11, 24, 26) qualifies this electronic ordering as an exquisite two-dimensional phenomenon, thus motivating our focus on the structure factor in the (Qx, Qy) plane. Representative scans of the CDW peak for different α values and at the superconducting critical temperature T ∼ Tc are shown in the insets to Fig. 1,A for the Qb and Qa CDW peaks of a Y667 sample, respectively. A change in the peak half-width-at-half-maximum (HWHM) ∆Q between α = 0◦ and 90◦ is already apparent, but is even better visualized in the color map of Fig. 1B, which shows the sequence of Q-scans vs. azimuthal angle and the corresponding variation of ∆Q for Qb in the range α = −90◦ to 90◦. This same procedure is applied to all three YBCO doping levels, for both the Qa and Qb CDW peaks; polar plots of ∆Q vs. α are shown in Figs. 1,C-E for Y651, Y667 and Y675, respectively. With the aid of the ellipse fits to the CDW profiles (continuous lines), four key aspects of these data stand out: (i) all peaks show a clear anisotropy between the two perpendicular directions α = 0◦ and 90◦; (ii) for each doping, the Qa and Qb peaks have different shapes, and in the case of Y651 and Y667 this is even more evident as the peaks are elongated along two different directions; (iii) the departure from an isotropic case, quantified by the elongation of the CDW ellipsoids, increases towards the underdoped regime and is opposite to the evolution of orthorhombicity, which is instead maximized at optimal doping (see Supplementary Materials and Fig. S4 for a more detailed discussion); (iv) the peak elongation at Qa and Qb, evolving from biaxial (Y651 and Y667) to uniaxial (Y675), is inconsistent with the doping-independence of the uniaxial symmetry of the CuO chain layer, which rules out the possibility that the observed CDW peak structure is ex- clusively controlled by the crystal’s orthorhombic structure – however, the uniaxial anisotropy observed for Y675 might reflect a more pronounced interaction between the Cu-O planes and chains, possibly due to the increase in orthorhombicity upon hole doping (see more detailed discussion in the Supplementary Materials). 4 The observed 2D peak structure directly bears the signatures of a breaking of fourfold (C4) symmetry at both the macro- and nano-scale, and therefore of the emergence of a stripe-ordered state. In fact, under the fourfold symmetry the electronic density would be invariant under a 90◦ rotation in real space (x → y, y → −x), which is equivalent to a 90◦ rotation in momentum space (Qx → Qy, Qy → −Qx). Instead, the CDW structure factor S(Qx, Qy) is clearly not invariant under such operation, as shown in the bottom-right diagrams in Figs. 1, C-E which compare the original S(Qx, Qy) to their 90◦ rotated version S(Qy, −Qx). This finding demon- strates an unambiguous breaking of global C4 symmetry in all investigated samples, and might elucidate the origin of the anisotropy observed in the Nernst effect (20) and in optical birifren- gence measurements (33). The real-space representation of charge order branches off into two possible scenarios: (i) a biaxial anisotropy, where both x- and y-elongated domains (34) are present (Figs. 2, A and C); (ii) a uniaxial anisotropy, where only y-elongated (or, equivalently, x-elongated) domains are found (Figs. 2, B and D). Note that these domains need not necessar- ily lie in the very same layer, but they need to be present at the same time within the bulk of the material (e.g., they can be present in alternating layers, while still leading to the same momen- tum structure). The momentum-space representation of the order parameter – and therefore of the electronic density fluctuations – is shown in the corresponding panels in Figs. 2, E-H. Here Sa(Q) (red ellipses) and Sb(Q) (blue ellipses) represent the structure factor associated to charge modulations along a and b, respectively. The profile of a single structure-factor peak is com- pounded with two contributions: the underlying CDW symmetry as well as its 2D correlation length, which can also be anisotropic. As a net result, the anisotropy of a single peak in Q-space cannot be used to discriminate between different CDW symmetries. Instead the latter can be resolved by probing the 2D CDW structure factor, i.e. by comparing the CDW peak shape for both Qa and Qb. By inspecting the diagrams in Figs. 2, E-H, one can recognize a common trait of checkerboard structures in momentum space, in that the following conditions (Figs. 2, 5 G and H) must always be verified by symmetry: ∆Qa x = ∆Qb x and ∆Qa y = ∆Qb y – i.e. the peak broadening along a given direction must coincide for ∆a and ∆b (see bottom of Figs. 2, E-H for case-specific conditions on the peak linewidths). Intuitively, this follows from the fact that – for the checkerboard case – the charge modulations along a and b axes must be subject to the same correlation lengths within each domain – irrespective of its orientation – and therefore lead to an equivalent peak broadening along the same direction in reciprocal space, in contrast to our findings for the CDW linewidths (see Supplementary Materials for more details). From this symmetry analysis, we can conclude that for both uniaxial and biaxial anisotropy it is in prin- ciple possible (35) to discriminate between a pure checkerboard and a pure stripe charge order, even in presence of a distribution of canted domains (see Tables S1-S3 for a complete classifi- cation). Ultimately, the inequivalence of the peak broadening ∆Q along different directions for all studied YBCO samples, combined with the macroscopic C4 symmetry breaking, provide a clear cut evidence for the unidirectional (stripe) intrinsic nature of the charge order (28). Having established the underlying stripe-like character of charge modulations in the CuO2 planes, we turn to the temperature dependence of the longitudinal and transverse correlation lengths, respectively parallel and perpendicular to the specific ordering wavevector. These can be extrapolated by inverting the momentum HWHM ∆Q, as illustrated in Fig. 3A. Longitudinal (transverse) correlations are then given by ξ∥ =∆Q−1 ∥ (ξ⊥ =∆Q−1 ⊥ ), where ∆Q∥ (∆Q⊥) repre- sents the momentum linewidth in the direction parallel (perpendicular) to the ordering wavevec- tor. We subsequently study the temperature dependence of ξ∥ and ξ⊥ for both the Qa and Qb ordering wavevectors (Figs. 3, B-F). First we observe the rise of correlation lengths below the CDW onset near 150 K, followed by their suppression below the SC transition temperature Tc, which confirms the competition between these two orders, in agreement with recent energy- integrated as well as energy-resolved RXS studies (10,11,24,25,30). However, the drop in the correlation lengths below Tc (∆ξ) is in all instances larger for the longidutinal correlations, or 6 ∆ξ∥ > ∆ξ⊥. In particular, the discrepancy between ∆ξ∥ and ∆ξ⊥, while small for Y675, is quite substantial for the more underdoped Y667 and Y651. This anisotropy provides additional evidence for the unidirectional nature of the charge ordering and thus the breaking of C4 sym- metry, since a bidirectional order would exhibit an isotropic drop in correlation length across Tc. This anisotropy has an opposite doping trend from the crystal orthorhombicity whose associated anomalies across Tc increase with hole doping [as revealed e.g. by lattice espansivity measure- ments (36)]. The inferred real-space representation of the evolution across Tc is schematically illustrated in Figs. 3, G and H, where nanodomains are used to pictorially represent a charge- ordered state with finite correlation lengths. We conclude that the largest change occurs along the direction perpendicular to the stripes. This reflects the tendency of the SC order to gain strength, as temperature is lowered, primarily at the expense of longitudinal CDW correlations, suggesting that the mechanism responsible for the density fluctuations across the periodically modulated stripes might be the main one competing with the Cooper pairing process. Our results may explain many common aspects between CDW physics in YBCO and the stripy cuprates from the La-based family, such as: thermoelectric transport (37, 38); strength of the order parameter (39); out-of-equilibrium response (40, 41); energy-dependent RXS re- sponse (30,31). The nanoscopic nature of the stripe instability and the presence of both a- and b-oriented domains also clarify why this broken symmetry has been difficult to disentangle from a native bi-directional order (10, 11, 42), therefore requiring a tailored experimental scheme to resolve the 2D CDW structure factor S(Qx, Qy). The pronounced directionality in the com- petition between superconductivity and stripe order reveals new key aspects of the underlying interplay between particle-particle and particle-hole pairing in high-temperature superconduc- tors, and provides novel insights for an ultimate understanding of these materials. 7