1 Quantum oscillations of the critical current and high-field superconducting proximity in ballistic graphene M. Ben Shalom1, M. J. Zhu1, V. I. Fal’ko2, A. Mishchenko1, A. V. Kretinin1, K. S. Novoselov1, C. R. Woods1, K. Watanabe3, T. Taniguchi3, A. K. Geim1, J. R. Prance2 1School of Physics & Astronomy, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, M13 9PL Manchester, UK 2Department of Physics, University of Lancaster, Lancaster, UK 3National Institute for Materials Science, 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba, 305-0044 Japan Graphene-based Josephson junctions provide a novel platform for studying the proximity effect1-3 due to graphene’s unique electronic spectrum and the possibility to tune junction properties by gate voltage3-16. Here we describe graphene junctions with a mean free path of several micrometers, low contact resistance and large supercurrents. Such devices exhibit pronounced Fabry-Pérot oscillations not only in the normal-state resistance but also in the critical current. The proximity effect is mostly suppressed in magnetic fields below 10 mT, showing the conventional Fraunhofer pattern. Unexpectedly, some proximity survives even in fields higher than 1 T. Superconducting states randomly appear and disappear as a function of field and carrier concentration, and each of them exhibits a supercurrent carrying capacity close to the universal quantum limit17,18. We attribute the high- field Josephson effect to mesoscopic Andreev states that persist near graphene edges. Our work reveals new proximity regimes that can be controlled by quantum confinement and cyclotron motion. The superconducting proximity effect relies on penetration of Cooper pairs from a superconductor (S) into a normal metal (N) and is most pronounced in systems with transparent SN interfaces and weak scattering so that superconducting correlations penetrate deep inside the normal metal. Despite being one atom thick and having a low density of states, which vanishes at the Dirac point, graphene (G) can exhibit low contact resistance and ballistic transport on a micrometer scale19-21, exceeding a distance between superconducting leads by an order of magnitude. These properties combined with the possibility to electrostatically control the carrier density n offer tunable Josephson junctions in a regime that can be referred to as ballistic proximity superconductivity22. Despite recent intense interest in SGS devices3-16 that can show features qualitatively different from the conventional SNS behavior1, the ballistic proximity regime remains little studied. Our SGS devices are schematically shown in Fig. 1 and described in further detail in Supplementary Section 1. The essential technological difference from the previously studied SGS junctions3-15 is the use of graphene encapsulated between boron-nitride crystals20,21 and a new nanostrip geometry of the contacts. This allows a high carrier mobility, low charge inhomogeneity and low contact resistance. More than twenty SGS junctions with the width W between 0.5 and 8 μm and the length L between 0.15 and 2.5 μm were studied, showing reproducible behavior and consistent changes with L and W. First, we characterize the devices above the transition temperature TC ≈7 K of our superconducting contacts. Figure 1b shows examples of the normal-state resistance Rn as a function of back gate voltage Vg that changes n in graphene. The neutrality point (NP) was found shifted to negative Vg by a few V, with the shift being consistently larger for shorter devices. This is due to electron doping induced by our contacts. For ballistic graphene, such doping is uniform over the entire device length23, and the observed smearing of such Rn(Vg) curves near the NP allows an estimate for charge inhomogeneity as ≈2×1010 cm- 2. For consistency, data for devices with different L are presented as a function of ∆Vg, the gate voltage counted from the NP. 2 For positive ∆Vg (electron doping) and n >1011 cm-2, devices with the same W exhibit the same Rn(∆Vg) dependence, independently of L (Fig. 1b). This shows that the mean free path in graphene is limited by the contact separation and yields charge carrier mobility >300,000 cm2 V-1 s-1, in agreement with the quality measured for similarly made Hall bar devices. The dashed curve in Fig. 1b indicates the behavior expected in the quantum wavelength and the factor 4 corresponds to graphene’s degeneracy. The difference between RQ and the experimental curves yields a record low contact resistivity of ≈35 Ohm μm. This value corresponds to an angle- averaged transmission probability Tr ≈0.8 (Supplementary Section 2). junctions with different L. A few nm-wide graphene ledge (top drawing) is referred to as a nanostrip contact. b, Typical behavior for SGS junctions with different L but same W =5 μm. To avoid an obscuring overlap between four oscillating curves at negative ∆Vg, we plot Rn only for the two shortest junctions. For electron doping higher than ∼1011 cm-2, the four curves overlap within the line width. The dashed curve shows RQ. Inset: Changes in the differential conductance dI/dV. L =0.25 μm. Color scale: -1 to 1 mS. For hole doping, Rn becomes significantly higher indicating smaller Tr because of pn junctions that appear at the Nb contacts and lead to partial reflection of electron waves. This effectively creates a Fabry-Pérot (FP) cavity24,25. The standing waves lead to pronounced oscillations in Rn as a function of both Vg and applied bias Vb (see Fig. 1b). The oscillatory behavior indicates that charge carriers can cross the graphene strip several times preserving their monochromaticity and coherence. Some FP oscillations could also be discerned for positive ∆Vg but they were much weaker because of higher Tr. The observed FP behavior in the normal state agrees with the earlier reports24,25. Its details can be modelled accurately if we take into account that the position of pn junctions varies with Vg so that the effective length of the FP interferometer becomes notably shorter than L at low hole doping (Supplementary Section 3). After characterizing our SGS devices at temperatures T above TC, we turn to their superconducting behavior. All of them, independently of L, exhibited the fully developed proximity effect as shown in Figs. 2a,b. The critical current Ic remained finite at the NP and rapidly increased with |∆Vg|, reaching densities >5 μA/μm for high electron doping, notably larger than previously reported3-16. Such high Ic are due to ballistic transport and low contact resistance. Indeed, Ic can theoretically reach a value1,26 3 Ic =α∆/eRn (1) with α ≈2.07. Because in our devices Rn ≈ RQ = h/4Ne2 the equation implies that we approach the quantum limit Ic ≈(e∆/h)4N where the supercurrent is determined solely by the number of propagating Cooper-pair modes each having the supercurrent carrying capacity2,17, IQ ≈ e∆/h (2). superconducting state. The data are for the device in Fig. 1 with L =0.25 μm. The arrows explain notions Ic and Ie. b, Absolute voltage |Vb| across the SGS junction in (a) for a wide range of doping. The black region corresponds to the zero-resistance state, and its edge exhibits FP oscillations. c, IcRn and IeRn for a device with L =0.3 μm; W =6.5 μm. Each data point is extracted from a trace such as in (a). Upper inset: Oscillatory part of IcRn is magnified. Similar behavior was observed for other devices including the one in (b). d, Differential resistance calculated from I-V curves such as in (a). The expected peak positions due to multiple Andreev reflection are shown by dashed lines, using ∆ found from TC. 4 Eq. (1) suggests that IcRn should be a constant. This holds well in our SGS devices away from the NP (Fig. 2c) and indicates that external noise, fluctuations and other mechanisms3-16 whcih are dependent on n or Rn do not limit Ic. However, Fig. 2c shows α ≈0.3-0.4, roughly six times smaller than α in eq. (1). One of the reasons is multiple Andreev reflections1,27,28 that lead to an earlier onset of dissipation (Fig. 2d) and are not accounted for26 in deriving eq. (1). In the absence of multiple Andreev processes, Ic should be close to the excess current Ie, which is determined as shown in Fig. 2a. Figure 2c presents IeRn which yields α ≈1. The remaining disagreement is attributed to the fact that our devices are not in the limit of short L. This is evidenced from the fact that IcRn continues to grow with decreasing L down to 0.15 μm, our shortest junctions (Supplementary Section 4). The L dependence reflects decoherence of Cooper pairs and can be associated with an energy scale ET* = vF/Λ, analogous to the Thouless energy in diffusive junctions1,26. The distance Λ that Cooper pairs cover during their transport through graphene can be estimated as L/Tr ∼1μm, yielding ET* ∼1 meV comparable with ∆. In this intermediate regime, smaller IeRn are expected26. This explanation is also consistent with somewhat larger Ic,eRn observed for electron doping where Tr and, hence, ET* are larger (Fig. 2c). As a consequence of quantized transport in the normal state (Fig. 1), the supercurrent also exhibits quantum oscillations that are seen in Fig. 2b for negative ∆Vg. Note that Eq. (1) suggests that such FP oscillations should occur simply because Rn oscillates. Indeed, Rn and Ic are found to oscillate in antiphase, compensating each other in the final products Ic,eRn. However, oscillations in the critical current are roughly 3 times larger in amplitude than those in Rn. Therefore, the quantization appears in both IcRn and IeRn (Fig. 2c) and is not a trivial consequence of oscillating Rn. Also, the observed oscillations cannot be explained by changes in ∆ (Supplementary Section 4). We attribute the effect to changes in ET* which are caused by oscillating transparency of our FP resonators. Indeed, Cooper pairs are expected to spend less time in graphene at transmission resonances, that is, when Rn exhibits minima. This leads to an increase in ET* and effectively shifts the SGS conditions closer to the short-L limit of eq. (1). This explanation agrees with the observed phase of the oscillations in Fig. 2c. In magnetic field B, our ballistic junctions exhibit further striking departures from the conventional behavior (Fig. 3). In small B such that a few flux quanta φ0 = h/2e enter an SGS junction, we observe the standard Fraunhofer dependence1 (3) where Φ = S×B is the flux through the junction area S = L×W. Marked deviations from eq. (3) occur in B >5 mT (Fig. 3a). Figures 3b-e show that, in this regime, the supercurrent no longer follows the oscillatory Fraunhofer pattern but pockets of proximity superconductivity can randomly appear as a function of n and B. At low doping, the pockets can be separated by extended regions of the normal state where no supercurrent could be detected with accuracy of a few nA << IQ (Figs. 3c,e). Within each pocket, I-V characteristics exhibit a gapped behavior (inset of Fig. 3d) with Ic ≈ IQ ≈40 nA, although the exact value depends on doping and Ic falls down to ≈10 nA close to the NP, possibly due to a rising contribution of electrical noise that suppresses apparent Ic (Fig. 3c). These proximity states persist until B as large as ≈1 T (Φ/φ0 ∼103) and are highly reproducible, although occasional flux jumps in Nb contacts can reset the proximity pattern (Supplementary Section 5). Correlation analysis presented in Supplementary Section 6 yields that, to suppress such superconducting states, it requires changes in Φ of ≈φ0 and changes in the Fermi energy of ≈1 meV. 5 regions correspond to the zero-R state and their edges mark the critical current Ic. The map is symmetric in both I and B. The white curve is given by eq. (3). The low-B periodicity is ≈0.4 mT, smaller than expected from the device’s area, which is attributed to the Meissner screening that focuses the field into the junction30. b, Continuation of the map from (a) above 0.1 T. Intervals with finite Ic continue randomly appear, despite the Fraunhofer curve is indistinguishable from zero. c, Another high-B example but as a function of ∆Vg in 0.5 T. d, Examples of low-bias resistance (I =2 nA) in different B. The dashed curve for 0.5 T shows that I =150 nA > IQ completely suppresses superconductivity. The arrows mark the expected onset of edge state transport. e, Local map of fluctuating superconductivity. T ≈10 mK; all color scales are as in (c). Inset in (d): Typical I-V characteristics for high-B superconducting states. f-i, Andreev states in ballistic junctions in zero (f), intermediate (g,h) and quantized B (i). The states are suppressed by cyclotron motion in the bulk (g,h) but persist near edges (h). To explain the fluctuating superconductivity pattern at large B, we take the view1,26-28 that the proximity is mediated by Andreev bound states that consist of electrons and holes travelling along same trajectories but in opposite directions (Fig. 3f). In low B, interference between many Andreev states results in the oscillatory suppression of Ic as described by eq. (3) and seen in Fig. 3a. Although not observed before, the Fraunhofer pattern in ballistic devices can be expected to break down because cyclotron motion deflects electrons and holes in 6 opposite directions so that they can no longer retrace each other (Fig. 3g). We estimate the field required to suppress Andreev states in the bulk as B*∼ ∆/eLvF (Supplementary Section 7). For the devices in Fig. 3, this yields B* ≈5 mT, in agreement with the field where strong deviations from eq. (3) are observed. The random pockets of superconductivity found for B >> B* are unexpected because cyclotron motion strictly forbids Andreev bound states, beyond the suppression mechanism described by eq. (3). Although Andreev states cannot exist in the ballistic bulk at high B, the transfer of Cooper pairs is still possible near graphene edges that diffusively scatter charge carriers (Supplementary Section 7). An example of trajectories responsible for such near-edge Andreev states is depicted in Fig. 3h. These states are a natural candidate for explaining the observed Josephson effect with Ic ∼e∆/h, characteristic of a single Andreev bound state17. Such states are expected to be suppressed by changes in Φ of ≈φ0, the scale at which interference patterns alter in phase-coherent devices18,29,30. Similarly18, a favorable interference pattern should change with changing the Fermi energy by ET * ≈1 meV. Both scales are in good agreement with the experiment. The near-edge proximity effect is expected to be terminated only if the cyclotron radius rc becomes shorter than L/2. This condition is marked in Fig. 3d and seen more clearly in the data of Supplementary Section 8. Finally, we note that that the edge superconductivity was not observed for hole doping, which can be attributed to the fact that Klein tunneling in graphene collimates trajectories perpendicular to the pn interface24, making it essentially impossible to form closed-loop Andreev states shown in Fig. 3h (Supplementary Section 7). In principle, the effect of near-edge Andreev states could be further enhanced by presence of extended electronic states at graphene edges but no evidence for the latter could be found experimentally (Supplementary Section 9). Methods The measurements were carried out in a helium-3 cryostat for T down to 0.3 K and in a dilution refrigerator, for lower T. All electrical connections to the sample passed through cold RC filters (Aivon Therma) and additional ac filters were on the top of the cryostats. The differential resistance was measured in the quasi-two-terminal geometry (using 4 superconducting leads to an SGS junction) and in the current-driven configuration using an Aivon preamplifier and a lock-in amplifier. To probe the superconducting proximity, we used an excitation current of 2 nA.