1 Copyright 2015. All rights reserved. Hotspot Relaxation Dynamics in a Current-Carrying Superconductor F. Marsili1*, M. J. Stevens2, A. Kozorezov3, V. B. Verma2, Colin Lambert3, J. A. Stern1, R. Horansky2, S. Dyer2, S. Duff2, D. P. Pappas2, A. Lita2, M. D. Shaw1, R. P. Mirin2, and S. W. Nam2 1Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, 4800 Oak Grove Dr., Pasadena, California 91109, USA 2National Institute of Standards and Technology, 325 Broadway, Boulder, CO 80305, USA 3Department of Physics, Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK, LA1 4YB *corresponding author: francesco.marsili.dr@jpl.nasa.gov Abstract. We experimentally studied the dynamics of optically excited hotspots in current-carrying WSi superconducting nanowires as a function of bias current, bath temperature and excitation wavelength. We discovered that: (1) the hotspot relaxation is a factor of ~ 4 slower in WSi than in NbN; (2) the hotspot relaxation time depends on bias current, and (3) the current dependence of the hotspot relaxation time changes with temperature and wavelength. We explained all of these effects with a model based on quasi-particle recombination. When a photon is absorbed in a superconductor, it creates a non-equilibrium region referred to as a hotspot 1. The optical excitation of hotspots underpins the operation of most superconducting single photon detectors, such as microwave kinetic inductance detectors (MKIDs) 2,3, superconducting tunnel junctions (STJs) 4, and superconducting nanowire single photon detectors (SNSPDs) 5. If hotspot dynamics were understood and controlled, many of the current limitations of these detectors would be overcome, thus enabling disruptive technologies. Here we report a combined experimental and theoretical study of hotspots excited by single photons in current-carrying WSi superconducting nanowires. We observed for the first time that: (1) the hotspot relaxation time (tHS) depends on the current carried by the nanowires; and (2) the current dependence of tHS changes with bath temperature and excitation wavelength. The agreement between theory and experiment provides new insight into the quasiparticle dynamics in superconductors and the photodetection mechanism of superconducting single photon detectors. 2 Copyright 2015. All rights reserved. Hotspot formation is initiated when one photon is absorbed in a thin superconducting film, creating a non-equilibrium distribution of quasiparticles (QPs). The excited QPs down-convert from higher-energy states by exchanging energy with the electron and phonon systems. During the decay, further Cooper pairs are broken, increasing the number of QPs 1,6. Previously, the relaxation of optically excited superconductors was studied with optical and THz pump-probe techniques 7-9. These techniques offer sub-ps time resolution, but are not sensitive enough to study the evolution of a single hotspot, and are difficult to perform below ~ 5 K. We used a different technique that combines the single-hotspot sensitivity of electrical readout with the high time resolution of ultrafast optical pump-probe spectroscopy 10,11. We measured the dependence of tHS on bias current (IB), bath temperature (TB), and excitation wavelength (λ) using a fiber-coupled WSi SNSPD 12,13 based on ~ 5 nm thick, 130 nm-wide nanowires spaced on a 200 nm pitch, meandering over an 11 μm-diameter circular active area. The SNSPD was operated in an adiabatic demagnetization refrigerator, in the temperature range TB = 0.25 - 2 K. The source of optical excitation was a fiber-based ultrafast pulsed supercontinuum source (1200 - 1650 nm wavelength range, ~ 5 ps pulse duration, frep = 36 MHz repetition rate). We selected a given excitation wavelength with one of several band-pass filters (each ~ 12 nm bandwidth) placed between the supercontinuum source and the detector. To measure the hotspot relaxation time we produced optical pulse pairs separated by a variable delay by coupling the laser to a Mach-Zehnder interferometer 10. If an SNSPD produces an output pulse when a single photon creates a single hotspot, the detector operates in the single-photon detection regime. When the bias current is lowered to a point that a response pulse can be efficiently triggered only if two photons generate two overlapping hotspots 5,10,14, the SNSPD operates in the two- photon detection regime. We measured the hotspot relaxation time by biasing an SNSPD in the two-photon detection regime and exciting it with two successive light pulses separated by a variable time delay (tD). To isolate the bias range for two-photon detection, we coupled the filtered supercontinuum source to a bank of calibrated attenuators and then to the detector 13. We measured the probability of detection per optical pulse (Pclick) as a function of the mean photon number per pulse (μ, which was determined as described in ) at several fixed values of IB (see section 1 of Supplemental Material). We defined Pclick as the ration between the 3 Copyright 2015. All rights reserved. photoresponse count rate (PCR) and frep. PCR was calculated as the difference between the count rate measured with the light source coupled to the detector (CR) and the count rate measured with the light source blanked with a shutter (background count rate, BCR) 13. In the limit where only one- and two-photon detection events lead to a measureable count rate, the click probability can be written as 15: PPclick (μμ) = 1 − ee−μμ ∑ μμnn nn! ∞ nn=0 (1 − ηη1)nn(1 − ηη2)nn(nn−1) 2 ⁄ (1) where η1 is the single-photon system detection efficiency (which we defined as the probability that a photon coupled in the SNSPD fiber created a response pulse), η2 is the two-photon system detection efficiency (which we defined as the probability that two photon coupled in the SNSPD fiber created a response pulse), and n is the number of photons per pulse coupled to the detector system. η1 and η2 depend on the bias current, bath temperature, and excitation wavelength. Equation (1) ignores the effect of dark counts, since BCR had already been subtracted from the data. In the single-photon detection regime, η1 >> η2 and Equation (1) simplifies to Pclick(μ) ~ η2 · μ2 / 2. Following the method described in we extracted the bias dependence of η1 and η2 (see section 1 of Supplemental Material). For 1.9 μA ≤ IB ≤ 3.5 μA, the SNSPD operated in the two-photon-detection regime, with η1 ≪ η2. To measure the hotspot relaxation time we illuminated the detector with the pulse-pair source and measured PCR as a function of tD over a range of 1 ns. Figure 1 a shows PCR vs tD curves measured at different bias currents. The PCR vs tD curves had a Lorentzian shape except in the range -5 ps ≤ tD ≤ 5 ps, where the PCR exhibited oscillations due to the optical interference of overlapping pulse pairs (the region enclosed by a dashed square in Figure 1 a). Surprisingly, the PCR vs tD curves became broader as the bias current increased. The dependence of PCR on tD can be correlated with the hotspot relaxation dynamics using a simple argument 10,11, 4 Copyright 2015. All rights reserved. valid only if the detector operates in the two-photon detection regime and η2 · μ2 << 1. If the time delay between pulses is longer than the hotspot relaxation time (tD > tHS), Pclick is approximately equal to the sum of the probabilities from each pulse acting independently: PPclick (ttDD ≫ ttHHHH) ≈ ηη2μμ2. Close to zero delay (tD << tHS), the two pulses do not overlap but act as a single pulse with twice the mean photon number, so the click probability doubles: PPclick (ttDD ≪ ttHHHH) ≈ ηη2(2μμ)2 2 ⁄ = 2ηη2μμ2. As a result, we expect PPclick (ttDD ≪ ttHHHH)/PPclick (ttDD ≫ ttHHHH) ≈ 2 , which is in agreement with the data shown in Figure 1 a. black arrow indicates the direction of increasing IB. The dark gray arrow indicates the half width at half maximum (HWHM) of the PCR vs tD curve measured at IB = 1.9 μA. Each of the PCR vs tD curves was normalized so that the maximum value of the corresponding Lorentzian fit curve was 2. The supercontinuum source was attenuated so that probability of detection per optical pulse (or click probability, Pclick) Pclick < 10 % in each individual pulse. b. tHS vs IB curve extracted from fits to the data in panel a. These measurements were performed at λ = 1550 nm, and TB = 0.25 K. The switching current of the device, which is defined as the maximum current the device can be biased at without switching to the normal, non-superconducting state, was ISW = 8.8 μA. To extract tHS from the PCR vs tD data, we fit the experimental curves with Lorentzians, ignoring data in the range of the optical interference. We defined tHS as the half width at half maximum (HWHM) of the fitting curves. IB = 1.9 μA to IB = 3.5 μA, tHS increased by one order of magnitude from tHS ~ 80 ps to tHS ~ 800 ps. To our 5 Copyright 2015. All rights reserved. knowledge, this effect had not been observed before. Our discovery suggests that the quasiparticle relaxation time of MKIDs based on disordered materials 3,16 may be increased by DC-biasing the MKID inductor, which would increase the MKID sensitivity. Furthermore, the shortest hotspot relaxation time measured in our WSi SNSPD is a factor of ~ 4 longer than that measured with NbN (15-30 ps 1,10,11,17), indicating a significant difference in material properties that was not well understood and not previously predicted. The longer tHS of WSi may limit the maximum count rate of WSi SNSPDs to a lower value than NbN SNSPDs, due to latching 18,19 or afterpulsing 20. To gain insight into the mechanism that caused tHS to increase when IB was increased, we investigated how the bias dependence of tHS changed when changing TB and λ. As shown in Figure 2 a, tHS increased when TB was increased at fixed wavelength (squares). As shown in Figure 2 b, tHS decreased when λ was increased at fixed temperature (squares). The shape of the tHS vs IB curves measured at different temperatures and wavelengths shows a correlation with the temperature and wavelength dependence of the cutoff current Ico 21, which represents the current above which SNSPDs operate in the single-photon detection regime (see section 2 in Supplemental Material). As shown in Figure 2 c, while the tHS vs IB curves measured at different temperatures and wavelengths differ significantly, the tHS vs IB / Ico curves (squares) closely follow the same trend, indicating a correlation between hotspot dynamics and device sensitivity. 6 Copyright 2015. All rights reserved. (violet). The excitation wavelength was λ = 1550 nm. The black arrow indicates the direction of increasing TB. The values of the fitting parameters are: γ = 0.3, indicating that non-equilibrium phonons deposit energy into the electronic system before escaping to the substrate; τ0 = 497 ps, which is commensurate to the τ0 of materials with order parameter similar to WSi 22; δ = 325 meV-1,indicating that only a small fraction (χ = 0.13) of the energy of the photon is deposited into the electronic system (likely due to: (1) the energy partition between QPs and non-pair-breaking phonons, and (2) the loss of athermal phonons 23); and ΔTB = 0.5 K, which may be due to the laser heating the sample. b. Experimental tHS vs IB curves measured at different wavelengths (squares) and fitting curves (lines). The excitation wavelength The black arrow indicates the direction of increasing λ. The values of the fitting parameters are: γ = 0.3, τ0 = 439 ps, δ = 325 meV-1. The values of the fitting parameters agree with those used to fit the data in Figure 5 a. c. Blue squares (cyan lines): experimental (simulated) tHS vs normalized bias current measured at different temperatures (TB = 0.25 – 2 K) and fixed wavelength (λ = 1550 nm), as shown in panel a. Red squares (magenta lines): experimental (simulated) tHS vs normalized bias current measured at different wavelengths 7 Copyright 2015. All rights reserved. (λ = 1200 -1650 nm) and fixed bath temperature (TB = 250 mK), as shown in panel b. The bias current of the curves measured at each temperature and wavelength were normalized by the corresponding cutoff current (see section 2 in Supplemental Material for the Ico vs T and Ico vs λ curves). We have developed a theoretical model for the bias dependence of tHS in which QP recombination is the dominant hotspot relaxation mechanism and QP diffusion is ignored. Since neglecting QP diffusion is in contrast with the traditional theory of hotspot dynamics 1,24-26, our model provides new insight into the physics of non-equilibrium superconductivity. Our model quantitatively reproduces the experimentally observed decrease in tHS when: (1) decreasing the bias current, (2) decreasing the bath temperature, and (3) increasing the excitation wavelength. Furthermore, our model provides an estimate for the tHS of NbN close the experimental values 10,11,17 (see section 6 of Supplemental Material). The details of our model are discussed elsewhere 27 (see section 3 of Supplemental Material). Our model simulates the time evolution of the QP temperature (TQP) after the absorption of two subsequent photons under a variety of conditions (changing tD, IB, and TB). As shown in Figure 3 a, after absorption of the first photon, TQP instantly increases from TB to the excitation temperature (Tex) and then starts relaxing back to TB. When the second photon is absorbed in the hotspot (after a delay time tD1), TQP exceeds the critical temperature (TC, which depends on the bias current 27), so the hotspot switches to the normal state, resulting in an output pulse (or click). Figure 3 b shows the time evolution of TQP for the same conditions as in Figure 3 a, except for a longer delay time (tD2 > tD1). In this case, absorption of the second photon does not cause TQP to exceed TC and no click is produced. We defined a cutoff temperature (Tco) as the lowest QP temperature at which absorption of the second photon causes a click (TQP = TC). We defined the theoretical hotspot relaxation time (tHS t) as the time required for TQP to reach Tco. 8 Copyright 2015. All rights reserved. tD1 = 200 ps. The parameters of the simulation are: TB = 2 K, TC = 3.4 K, IB = 2.4 μA, λ = 1500 nm. The blue line represents TB, the red line represents TC and the green line represents Tco = 2.4 K. The range of temperatures for which the hotspot is superconducting is colored in blue; the range for which the hotspot is normal (resistive) is colored in red. The critical temperature of the nanowire at zero bias is 4.5 K. b. Simulated time evolution of TQP for the same parameters as panel a, except for a longer delay time tD2 = 375 ps. The theoretical hotspot relaxation time is tHS t = 310 ps. c. Simulated time evolution of TQP for the same parameters as panel a, except for a lower bias current IB = 2 μA. The theoretical hotspot relaxation time decreases to tHS t = 125 ps. d. Simulated time evolution of TQP for the same parameters as panel a, except for a lower bath temperature TB = 0.25 K. The theoretical hotspot relaxation time decreases to tHS t = 110 ps. The orange arrows highlight the theoretical hotspot relaxation time (tHS t). We attributed the dependence of tHS on IB shown in Figure 1 to the increase of Tco when IB is decreased. As shown in Figure 3 c, since TC increases when IB is decreased 27, Tco also increases. Tex and the relaxation transient of TQP are not significantly affected by the change in bias current. Therefore, if IB is decreased, TQP relaxes from Tex to Tco in a shorter time, in agreement with the results in Figure 1. 9 Copyright 2015. All rights reserved. The dependence of tHS on TB shown in Figure 2 a can be attributed to the temperature dependence of the relaxation rate of TQP. As shown in Figure 3 d, while TB does not affect Tco, TB does affect Tex and the relaxation transient of TQP. Our model predicts that: (1) at lower TB, Tex is lower, and (2) the relaxation rate of TQP is higher when TQP is further away from TB. Consequently, tHS t decreases when the TB is decreased, in agreement with the experimental results in Figure 2 a. We attributed the dependence of tHS on λ shown in Figure 2 b to the dependence of Tex and Tco on the photon energy. According to our model, with longer-wavelength photons: (1) the increase of TQP after the absorption of a photon (Tex - TB) is smaller, and (2) Tco is higher. At longer excitation wavelengths, Tex is lower and Tco is higher, so TQP decreases from Tex to Tco more quickly, in agreement with the experimental results shown in Figure 2 b. The solid curves in Figure 2 a and b show fits to the experimental data (squares) calculated with our model. We fit all the experimental data in Figure 2 a using four fitting parameters: (1) the phonon bottleneck parameter γ = τesc / τph-e, where τesc is the phonon escape time to the substrate and τph-e is the phonon-electron scattering time; (2) the characteristic quasiparticle time of WSi (τ0, as defined in ); (3) the energy deposition factor δ = χ / εc, where χ = Eex / Eλ is the photon yield, which we defined as the ratio between the energy deposited in the hotspot after the absorption of the photon (Eex) and the photon energy (Eλ), and εc is the energy of the condensate in the hotspot volume; and (4) a temperature offset (ΔTB), which we defined as the difference between the simulated and experimental bath temperatures. We fitted all of the experimental data in Figure 2 b using three fitting parameters: γ, τ0, and δ. Our model can also accurately predict the temperature and wavelength dependence of Ico. Using the values of the fitting parameters obtained from the fits shown in Figure 2 a and b, we could reproduce the shape of the experimental Ico vs TB and Ico vs λ curves (shown in section 2 of Supplemental Material) 27. Figure 2 c shows the experimental and simulated tHS vs IB / Ico curves at different temperatures and wavelengths. The four families of curves closely follow the same trend. The correlation between the hotspot dynamics and SNSPD sensitivity is discussed in detail in . In summary, we observed for the first time that the hotspot relaxation time of a superconducting nanowire can be increased by increasing the bias current. We developed a model that explains and quantitatively reproduces all 10 Copyright 2015. All rights reserved. the experimental data. The effect we discovered provides new insight into non-equilibrium superconductivity and has important implications for superconducting detectors. Acknowledgements Part of the research was carried out at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, under a contract with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. AK and CL gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council. Copyright 2015. All rights reserved. 11 Copyright 2015. All rights reserved.