Synthesis, crystal structure and physical properties of quasi-one-dimensional ACr3As3 (A = Rb, Cs) Zhang-Tu Tang1,3, Jin-Ke Bao1,3, Liu Yi1,3, Hua Bai1,3, Hao Jiang1,3, Hui-Fei Zhai1,3, Chun-Mu Feng1, Zhu-An Xu1,2,3 and Guang-Han Cao1,2,3 Abstract Recently, new Cr-based superconductors, A2Cr3As3 (A = K, Rb, Cs), have gained a strong interest because of their one-dimensional crystal structures and electron correlations. Here we report the crystal structure and physical properties of two related materials ACr3As3 (A = Rb, Cs) which are synthesized via a soft-chemical A+ deintercalation in A2Cr3As3. The new compounds remain one-dimensional (Cr3As3)∞ linear chains, and the interchain distance can be tuned by the incorporation of the alkali-metal cations with different sizes. The physical-property measurements indicate a local-moment behavior at high temperatures, and the moments freeze into a cluster spin-glass state below 5~6 K. No superconductivity was observed in both materials. We also found that, with increasing the interchain distance, the Cr effective moments increase monotonically, accompanied with the enhancement of semi-conductivity. Our results shed light on the understanding of occurrence of superconductivity in A2Cr3As3. * 1 Department of Physics, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China 2 Stat Key Lab of Silicon Materials, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China 3 Collaborative Innovation Centre of Advanced Microstructures, Nanjing 210093, China * Corresponding author (email: ghcao@zju.edu.cn) INTRODUCTION The recent discovery of superconductivity in quasi-one dimensional compounds A2Cr3As3 (A = K, Rb, Cs) has aroused immediate research interest primarily because of the significant electron correlations as well as the quasi-one-dimensional crystal structure. A2Cr3As3 crystallizes in a hexagonal lattice, comprising of [(Cr3As3)2−]∞ double-walled subnano-tubes that are separated by columns of the A+ counterions. Both experimental investigations and theoretical calculations/analyses indicate novel properties in the new superconductors. The A2Cr3As3 superconductors are very air sensitive, probably due to the existence of "crowded" A1 atoms in the crystal structure . By topologically removing one K in K2Cr3As3, we very recently succeeded in obtaining an air-stable compound KCr3As3 . This new material crystallizes in a different space group of P63/m (No. 176), yet containing the similar (Cr3As3)∞ linear chains. Thus it is regarded as a “cousin” of K2Cr3As3. The physical property measurements indicate that KCr3As3 does not show superconductivity, but exhibits a cluster spin-glass state instead. Here we report the synthesis and characterizations of two new members in the ACr3As3 series with A = Rb and Cs. Our measurements show that all the "133" compounds, including previously synthesized KCr3As3, have similar physical properties with a cluster spin-glass ground state, just like that the "233" family all superconduct at low temperatures. Nevertheless, some variations of some physical quantities, such as the resistivity value and magnitude of the local moments, are also evident, which suggests the importance of dimensionality (or interchain coupling). Our results supply helpful references, which may shed light on understanding of the superconductivity in A2Cr3As3. EXPERIMENTAL Polycrystalline samples of ACr3As3 were synthesized by reacting A2Cr3As3 polycrystals with water-free ethanol, similar to the previous report . First, the A2Cr3As3 polycrystalline pellets were prepared by multi-step solid-state reactions in evacuated containers . The resultant products are single phase, as checked by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD). The as-prepared pellets were immersed into water-free ethanol at room temperature, and bubbles of hydrogen gas were found to release from the liquid. After the reaction for two days, the pellets were washed by ethanol, and then evacuated in vacuum to remove the remaining ethanol. In order to get the pure "133" phase, the process was repeated several times. We note that the obtained CsCr3As3 sample is much loose and friable, compared with RbCr3As3. By weighing a regularly-shaped sample, the density of RbCr3As3 (CsCr3As3) was measured to be 82(3)% [73(3)%] of the theoretical one based on the XRD results. Powder XRD experiments were carried out at room temperature on a PANalytical x-ray diffractometer (Empyrean Series 2) with a monochromatic CuKα1 radiation. The electrical resistivity was measured using standard four-terminal method. The polycrystalline samples were cut into a thin rectangular bar, and silver paste was used to attach gold wires onto the samples’ surface. The magnetizations were measured on a Quantum Design Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS-5). The specific-heat capacity was measured by a relaxation technique on a Quantum Design Physical Properties Measurement System (PPMS-9) using a thin square-sharp sample. The heat-capacity addenda from the sample holder and grease were deducted. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Based on the previous studies , the two-step chemical reactions associated with the synthesis can be written as follows, (1) 2A + 3Cr + 3As → A2Cr3As3 (~700°C in vacuum); (2) A2Cr3As3 + C2H5OH → ACr3As3 + AOC2H5 + 1/2H2↑. The second reaction keeps the identical (Cr3As3)∞ linear chains (see below). Therefore, the reaction is actually a deintercalation process, which is in general a topotactic transformation without breaking the main framework of the crystal structure. Thus it is expected to produce single crystals using the similar route in the future. double-walled subnano-tubes. Rietveld analysis of the X-ray diffraction data collected at room temperature for ACr3As3. The atomic coordinates are (x, y, 0.25). RbCr3As3 CsCr3As3 Space group P63/m (#176) P63 /m (#176) a (Å) c (Å) Coordinates As (6h) x y Cr (6h) x y A (2c) x=1/3 y=2/3 Cr−Cr Bond distances (Å) Inter-plane Cr−Cr In-plane Cr−Cr Fig. 1 shows the room-temperature XRD patterns for the ACr3As3 powder samples. Both can be well indexed by a hexagonal lattice with unit-cell parameters close to those of KCr3As3 , and no obvious impurity phase can be identified. Using the same structure (space group P63/m) as the starting point, we successfully made the Rietveld structural refinements , with a reliable factor of Rwp=4.9%, a goodness of fit χ2 =2.3 for RbCr3As3 and Rwp=4.4%, χ2 =2.3 for CsCr3As3, respectively. The resulting crystallographic data are listed in Table 1. The crystal structure of the ACr3As3 system is shown in Fig. 1c and 1d. The quasi-one-dimensional (Cr3As3)∞ double-walled subnano-tubes are kept, although half of the Rb+ or Cs+ was deintercalated. The linear chains comprise face-sharing Cr6 octahedra, which are surrounded by As3- ions. There is only one equivalent site for the A+ cation. Each A+ cation is coordinated to nine As3- anions in a tricapped triangular prisms. Notably, compared with the A2Cr3As3 superconductors, the (Cr3As3)∞ chains rotate a small angle along the c axis, which leads to a change in space group and point group. Such rotations could lead to significant changes in band structures, as shown by a very recent calculation for KCr3As3 . Fig. 2 shows the change in crystal structure as functions of the ionic radii of the alkali-metal cations. The a axis increases remarkably and almost linearly, while the c axis hardly changes. This reflects that the (Cr3As3) ∞ chains basically remains unchanged, and the interchain distance (the same as the a value) can be modified by the alkali-metal elements. Indeed, the Cr-Cr bond distances have only a slight change, as shown in Fig. 2b. crystal structure of ACr3As3 (A=K, Rb, Cs). ACr3As3 (A=Rb, Cs) polycrystalline samples. The insets plot the derivative of resistivity, showing an anomaly at ~50 K. Fig. 3 shows the temperature dependence of electrical resistivity, ρ(T), for the ACr3As3 polycrystalline samples. Similar to that in KCr3As3 , the resistivity of ACr3As3 has a weak temperature dependence above 100 K. Below 100 K, the resistivity shows a semiconducting-like behavior. However, the ρ(T) data do not obey a follow the variable-range hopping formula originally proposed by Mott . The room-temperature resistivity of RbCr3As3 is ~2 mΩ cm, comparable to that of KCr3As3 (~1 mΩ cm). CsCr3As3 shows a much higher room-temperature resistivity (~60 mΩ cm), which seems to be related to the sample's looseness. Nevertheless, the resistivity ratio, ρ4K/ρ300K, also has the largest value in CsCr3As3. The remarkable difference in ρ(T) does not seem to be ascribed to a grain boundary effect. It is expect that the intrinsic electrical transport is highly anisotropic, given the quasi-one-dimensional crystal structure. Namely, the conductivity along the chain direction would be larger, and the conductivity perpendicular to the c axis would be relatively small. Assuming metallic conductions along the chains (because of non-zero density of state at the Fermi level evidenced by the related band-structure calculations and specific-heat measurements below), the measured high resistivity as well as the semiconducting-like temperature dependence could represent the interchain transport property. Another possibility of the pronounced semiconductivity may be associated with an enhanced Anderson localization due to the weakened interchain coupling. Note that the dρ⁄dT data show a dip at Tρ ~ 50 K, which is slightly lower than that of KCr3As3 . This anomaly is probably related to the formation of Cr-spin clusters . Fig. 4a shows the temperature dependence of dc magnetic susceptibility (χ=M/H) under an external field of 1 kOe for the bulk sample of RbCr3As3. The high-temperature χ(T) curve exhibits a Curie-Weiss paramagnetic behavior. We thus fit the data (100 K− 280 K) by an extended Curie-Weiss formula, χ=χ0+C/(T−θp), where χ0 is a temperature-independent term, C represents the Curie constant, and θp is the paramagnetic Curie-Weiss temperature. The fitted C value gives an effective magnetic moment of 1.22 μB/Cr, twice as large as that of KCr3As3 (0.68 μB/Cr ) . Besides, the fitted θp value is −78.8 K, implying dominantly antiferromagnetic interactions between the Cr local moments. Low-temperature magnetic susceptibility with zero-field-cooled (ZFC) and field-cooled (FC) procedures under different external fields. (c) Isothermal magnetizations at different temperatures. (d) An enlarged plot of field dependence of magnetization at 2 K. The data of 1/(χ−χ0) obviously deviates from linearity below Tχ ~ 60 K, below which a broad transition appears, corresponding to the broad anomaly in dρ⁄dT shown in Fig. 3a. The Curie-Weiss fit for low-temperature (8 K− 50 K) data yields a reduced effective moment of 0.67 μB/Cr, which suggests formation of spin clusters. If the spin clusters are composed of six nearby Cr atoms (a Cr6 octahedron), the effective moments become 1.64 μB/Cr6, equivalent to a localized S=1/2 spin. Additionally, the paramagnetic Curie-Weiss temperature changes into 1.5 K, indicating a weak ferromagnetic interaction between the spin clusters. At lower temperatures, the spin clusters freeze, as indicated in Fig. 4b-4d. The χ(T) data at low magnetic fields show an obvious bifurcation at Tf = 6 K between the zero-field cooling (ZFC) and field cooling (FC) data. With increasing field, the divergence tends to diminish, and Tf shifts to lower temperatures. The isothermal magnetization, M(H), shows non-linear relation at low temperatures. An obvious magnetic hysteresis can be seen below Tf, in accordance with the spin freezing. Meanwhile, the magnetization does not saturate even under a magnetic field of 5 T, where the magnetization is less than 0.05 μB/Cr. This suggests absence of long-range ferromagnetic ordering. different temperatures. (c) An enlarged plot of field dependence of magnetization, showing the magnetic hysteresis. We also measured the dc magnetic susceptibility and isothermal magnetization for CsCr3As3, as shown in Fig. 5. Very similar behavior was observed, which points to the spin cluster freezing below 5 K. The high-temperature susceptibility (not shown here) indicates a larger effective moment of 1.6 μB/Cr, which is consistent with the weakest interchain coupling in CsCr3As3. Fig. 6 shows the temperature dependence of specific heat data of RbCr3As3 and CsCr3As3, plotted in C/T vs T2. No specific-heat jump associated with a superconducting transition can be seen, consistent with the above electrical and magnetic measurements. The prominent feature is the broad round-shape C/T vs T2 relation, instead of an essentially linear region in their superconducting "cousins" A2Cr3As3 . As argued in our previous report , this anomaly probably results from the cluster spin-glass state described above. RbCr3As3 and CsCr3As3, plotted with C/T vs T2. of the unit-cell constants a for ACr3As3 (A=K, Rb, Cs). If we make a linear fit for the data below 4 K, a zero-temperature specific-heat coefficient can be extrapolated, which is 89 mJ K−2 mol-fu−1 and 185 mJ K−2 mol-fu−1 for RbCr3As3 and CsCr3As3, respectively. Given the existence of cluster spin glass, the extrapolated specific-heat coefficient does not represent the Sommerfeld coefficient, since the magnetic contribution Cm of a spin glass is basically linear with temperature for T < Tf . Nevertheless, the "real" Sommerfeld coefficient would not go to zero, otherwise the magnetic entropy becomes unphysically large. This means that there is still appreciably high density of states at the Fermi level of RbCr3As3 or CsCr3As3, irrespective of their apparent semi-conductivity Fig. 7 summarizes some physical-property parameters as functions of the lattice constants a that measures the interchain distance. From A = K, Rb, to Cs, the magnitude of effective magnetic moments for Cr increases significantly, nevertheless, the paramagnetic Neel temperature which reflects antiferromagnetic interactions hardly changes. The characteristic temperatures Tf, Tρ and Tχ are also insensitive to the interchain distance. Meanwhile, the semi-conductivity, here characterized by the resistivity ratio of ρ4K/ρ300K, also increases with the interchain distance. Notably, the C/T value at 2 K shows the similar tendency. Given the same "doping level" in ACr3As3 (the apparent Cr valence is +2.67), such changes should be mainly ascribed to the interchain coupling. In general, the reduced interchain coupling enhances spin fluctuations, Anderson localizations, and electron correlations (the related bandwidth is narrowed). Therefore, the results can be qualitatively interpreted in terms of an enhanced one dimensionality. The latest first-principles calculations for KCr3As3 indicate an "interlayer antiferromagnetic (IAF)" ground state where the Cr spins in the planar Cr triangles align ferromagnetically to form a larger "block spin". It was found that there is a strong quasi-one-dimensional van Hove singularity near the Fermi energy. The pronounced C/T value at 2 K might be related to the van Hove singularity. CONCLUDING REMARKS In summary, two new quasi-one-dimensional Cr-based compounds, RbCr3As3 and CsCr3As3, were successfully synthesized. The crystal structure remains the characteristic (Cr3As3)∞ linear chains. Meanwhile, the interchain distance increases appreciably owing to the large size of Rb+ and Cs+ cations. Like their sister compound KCr3As3, both materials do not superconduct, but show a cluster spin-glass state below 5~6 K. Importantly, the Cr localized moment increases with the expansion of interchain distance. This further confirms the existence of Cr local-moment components in the "133" system, which implies the relevance of spins to the novel superconductivity in "233" materials.