R.Monaco et al. Elliptic Annular Josephson Tunnel Junctions in an external magnetic field: The dynamics Roberto Monaco†1 and Jesper Mygind2 1)CNR-ISASI, Institute of Applied Sciences and Intelligent Systems ”E. Caianello”, Comprensorio Olivetti, 80078 Pozzuoli, Italya) 2)DTU Physics, B309, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Lyngby, Denmarkb) (Dated: 25 September 2021) We analyze the dynamics of a magnetic flux quantum (current vortex) trapped in a current-biased long planar elliptic annular Josephson tunnel junction. The system is modeled by a perturbed sine-Gordon equation that determines the spatial and temporal behavior of the phase difference across the tunnel barrier separating the two superconducting electrodes. In the absence of an external magnetic field the fluxon dynamics in an elliptic annulus does not differ from that of a circular annulus where the stationary fluxon speed merely is determined by the system losses. The interaction between the vortex magnetic moment and a spatially homogeneous in- plane magnetic field gives rise to a tunable periodic non-sinusoidal potential which is strongly dependent on the annulus aspect ratio. We study the escape of the vortex from a well in the tilted potential when the bias current exceeds the depinning cur- rent. The smallest depinning current as well as the lowest sensitivity of the annulus to the external field is achieved when the eccentricity is equal to −1. The presented extensive numerical results are in good agreement with the findings of the perturba- tive approach. We also probe the rectifying properties of an asymmetric potential implemented with an egg-shaped annulus formed by two semi-elliptic arcs. a)Electronic mail: r.monaco@isasi.cnr.it b)Electronic mail: myg@fysik.dtu.dk 1 arXiv:1510.02254v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 8 Oct 2015 R.Monaco et al. CONTENTS I. Introduction 2 A. Elliptic annular junctions 4 II. The sine-Gordon modeling 5 A. PSGE for an elliptic annulus 6 III. Fluxon dynamics 7 A. The profile of the first Zero Field Step 7 B. Fluxon depinning currents 9 IV. Egg-shaped annular junctions 11 A. Deterministic ratchet potential 12 V. Conclusions 13 Acknowledgments 14 APPENDIX τ(s) 14