1 Evidence for a Gapped Spin-Liquid Ground State in a Kagome Heisenberg Antiferromagnet Mingxuan Fu1, Takashi Imai1, 2,*, Tian-heng Han3,4, Young S. Lee5, 6 1Department of Physics and Astronomy, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON L8S4M1, Canada. 2Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, Toronto, ON M5G1Z8, Canada. 3James Franck Institute and Department of Physics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637. 4Materials Science Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, IL 60439. 5Department of Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139. 6Department of Applied Physics and Department of Photon Science, Stanford University and SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Stanford, CA 94305. *Correspondence to: imai@mcmaster.ca The kagome Heisenberg antiferromagnet is a leading candidate in the search for a spin system with a quantum spin liquid ground state. The nature of its ground state remains a matter of great debate. We conducted 17O single crystal NMR measurements of the spin S =1/ 2 kagome lattice in herbertsmithite ZnCu3(OH)6Cl2, which is known to exhibit a spinon continuum in the spin excitation spectrum. We demonstrate that the intrinsic local spin susceptibility χkagome deduced from the 17O NMR frequency shift asymptotes to zero below temperature T ~ 0.03J , where J ~ 200 K is the Cu-Cu super-exchange interaction. Combined with the magnetic field dependence of χkagome we observed at low temperatures, these results imply that the kagome Heisenberg antiferromagnet has a spin liquid ground state with a finite gap. 2 The realization and characterization of a kagome Heisenberg antiferromagnet (KHA) with a corner-shared triangle structure (Fig.1A) is crucial for the search for a quantum spin liquid ground state (1,2). Spin-liquids consist of entangled pairs of spin-singlets, and do not undergo a magnetic phase transition. The successful synthesis of the structurally ideal kagome lattice of major milestone (4). ZnCu3(OH)6Cl2 remains paramagnetic at least down to ~50 mK (5,6). Moreover, inelastic neutron scattering measurements (7) on single crystals (8) demonstrated that the spin excitation spectrum does not exhibit conventional magnons, but rather a spinon continuum. Despite the recent progress, fundamental issues regarding the nature of the ground state of the KHA remain to be understood. For example, the central question on the existence of a gap in the spin excitation spectrum has not been settled. This information is critical to distinguish between the leading theories for the ground state of the S =1/ 2 KHA: a gapped spin liquid, gapless spin liquid, or valence bond solid (1,2,9-14) In ZnCu3(OH)6Cl2, weakly interacting Cu2+ defects occupy the non-magnetic Zn2+ sites between the kagome-layers with ~15% probability (15). Their contributions dominate bulk- averaged thermodynamic properties at low temperatures (3,5,8,16,17), making it difficult to measure the intrinsic low energy properties of this material. Similarly, the Cu2+ impurity moments can contribute to the inelastic neutron scattering, obscuring the response of the intrinsic kagome spins at low energies (< 2meV) (7). NMR is an ideal local probe to investigate the intrinsic magnetic behavior under the presence of magnetic defects, as demonstrated by successful investigations of Kondo-oscillations and analogous phenomena in metals (18), high- temperature superconductors (19), and low-dimensional spin systems (20). Our primary goal here is to uncover the intrinsic behavior of the spin susceptibility, χkagome, separately from the 3 defect-induced local spin susceptibility, χdefect, using 17O NMR measurements of an isotope- enriched ZnCu3(OH)6Cl2 single crystal. We demonstrate that the spin excitation spectrum exhibits a finite gap Δ = 0.03J ~ 0.07J between a S = 0 spin-liquid ground state and the excited states, where J ~ 200 K represents the Cu-Cu super-exchange interaction (5,21). A major advantage of using a single crystal for NMR is that we can achieve high resolution by applying an external magnetic field Bext along specific crystallographic directions. In Fig. 2A we present the 17O (nuclear spin I = 5 / 2 , gyromagnetic ratio γn / 2π = 5.772 MHz/T) NMR lineshape measured at 295 K in Bext = 9 T applied along the c-axis; the temperature dependence of the lineshape is presented in Fig.2C. Unlike previously measured powder-averaged 35Cl and 17O NMR lineshapes (22,23), we can clearly resolve the five Iz = m frequency νQ (c). In addition, the central peak frequency f for the Iz = −1/ 2 to +1/ 2 transition is shifted from the bare resonance frequency fo = (γn / 2π)Bext by the effects of the hyperfine magnetic fields from nearby Cu2+ sites, and the shift of the peak (marked as Main in Fig. 2A) is proportional to χkagome. Such a NMR frequency shift may be expressed in terms of the Knight shift, 17K (c) = f / fo −1= Ahf χkagome , where Ahf is the hyperfine coupling constant between the 17O nuclear spin and the Cu2+ electron spins. We can fit the lineshape in Fig. 2A with three sets of five peaks with three distinct values of 17K(c) and νQ (c). That is, the presence of the Cu2+ defects at the Zn2+ sites results in three distinct 17O sites in ZnCu3(OH)6Cl2. Taking into account the difference in the transverse relaxation that affects the apparent signal intensities (Fig. S1), we estimated the population of the three sites as 13(4)%, 28(5)%, and 59(8)%, in agreement with 4 earlier 2D NMR observation of three corresponding sites in a deuterated ZnCu3(OD)6Cl2 single crystal (24). It is straightforward to assign these 17O signals to the nearest neighbor (NN) of the Cu2+ defects, the next-NN (NNN) of the Cu2+ defects, and the intrinsic Main sites located far from defects, respectively, for the following reasons. First, we recall that the Cu2+ defects occupying the Zn2+ sites with ~15% probability (15) is the cause of a large Curie-Weiss contribution χdefect in the bulk magnetic susceptibility data at low temperatures (24). This means that ~15% of 17O (and 2D) at the NN sites experience an additional, transferred-hyperfine coupling Ahf defect with these Cu2+ defect spins polarized by Bext. As shown in Fig. 2B, the large Curie-Weiss contribution Ahf defectχdefect to 17K(c) at the NN 17O sites overwhelms the intrinsic contribution Ahf χkagome at low temperatures, similar to the defect induced Curie-Weiss behavior of 2KNN (c) at the NN 2D sites reported earlier (24). Both 17K(c) and 2KNN (c) are negative at low temperatures simply because Ahf defect < 0 . Second, since the abundance of the NNN 17O sites should be twice of the NN as shown in Fig.1C and 1E, we can naturally assign the 28(5)% signal to the NNN. The remaining 59(8)% arises from the intrinsic Main sites. We emphasize that our high resolution single crystal NMR data show no evidence for the presence of Zn2+ anti-site defects occupying the Cu2+ sites within the kagome-plane, in disagreement with earlier powder-averaged 17O NMR data, which were obtained from lower-resolution measurements (23). The previous powder work (23) misidentified the NN peaks as arising from singlet “D-sites” induced by anti-site defects in the kagome plane, as explained in detail in (25). The NMR properties at the NNN and main sites are very similar, and we could clearly distinguish them only near 295 K where the NMR lines are narrow. Their similarity suggests 5 that the spin polarization induced by the Cu2+ defects decays very quickly within the kagome plane, unlike the long-range nature of the Kondo oscillations in metals (18). Our observation is consistent with the expectation that the spin-spin correlation length is comparable to the Cu-Cu distance in the KHA (7,26,27). The primary effects of the quenched randomness of the Cu2+ defects on the Main peaks are therefore the magnetic line broadening in proportion to χdefect (Fig.S2). The broad high frequency tail of the Main peak observed below 4.2 K in 9 T (Fig.2C, Fig.S3-S4), however, may also indicate that the Cu2+ defects induce a short-range spin density oscillation within the kagome plane, and some NNN sites have a large positive 17K (Fig. S4). In the field geometry of Bext || c, accidental superposition of the NN peaks prevented us from resolving the central part of the Main peak below ~70 K (Fig.2C). Instead, we found that Bext || a* is the ideal geometry for investigating χkagome at low temperatures. For the Bext || a* geometry(Fig.1B), the direction of Bext is at a 60° angle to the Cu-O-Cu bond of two 17O sites (“Main1”) within each triangle, and is orthogonal to the bond of the remaining 17O site (“Main2”). As a consequence (Fig.3A), the 17O NMR signals from the Main1 and Main2 sites appear separately with the integrated intensity ratio of 2 :1 and different magnitudes of 17K(a*) and the quadrupole splitting (νQ (a*)~ 8 kHz for Main1 and νQ (a*)~ 520 kHz for Main2). Normally, the partitioning of the 17O NMR lines into Main1 and Main2 would merely complicate the overall spectrum. Here, thanks to the small value of νQ (a*)~ 8 kHz, all five of the Iz = m to m +1 transitions of Main1 are bundled into a large peak that we could resolve down to 1.8 K (~0.01J). Moreover, we were able to selectively measure the Main1 lineshape (Fig. 3B) by exciting all five transitions at once with longer radio-frequency pulses (25); the isolated Main1 peak frequency in Fig.3B agreed well with that of Fig.3A, providing extra confidence in our line assignment. 6 In Fig.4A, we summarize the temperature dependence of 17K(a*) of the Main1 sites nearly identical, except below ~10 K as discussed below. The superposition of the large Main1 peak made accurate measurements of 17K(a*) at the central transition of Main2 difficult, but the frequency shift of the isolated uppermost satellite peak of Main2 shows a similar trend with temperature (Fig. 3A and Fig. S5). Unlike the bulk averaged magnetic susceptibility data (3,5,8), 17K(a*) decreases below ~60 K. Moreover, 17K(a*), and hence χkagome, asymptotes to zero below ~5 K (~0.03J), implying the absence of thermally accessible excited states. The results of the 17O nuclear spin-lattice relaxation rate 1/T1 are also consistent with diminishing intrinsic spin excitations toward T = 0 (Fig. S6). Combined with the fact that the structural analysis at low temperatures based on Rietveld refinement revealed no hint of the formation of a large unit cell expected for valence bond solids (15), we conclude that ZnCu3(OH)6Cl2 has a quantum spin liquid ground state with the total spin S = 0 , and its excitation spectrum has a finite gap. To estimate the magnitude of the gap Δ, we fitted 17K(a*) below 4.2 K to an exponential function with a pre-factor T, 17K(a*) ~ T ⋅exp(−Δ /T), as shown in Fig.4B; we obtained Δ ~ 6.8 K for Bext = 3.2 T. The constant background term 17Kchem arising from the chemical shift is generally negligibly small (~± 0.02 %) at the 17O sites in copper-oxides (28), and does not affect our estimation of Δ significantly. We included the pre-factor T to phenomenologically account for the effects of antiferromagnetic spin correlations that tend to suppress the spin susceptibility even without a gap. The same pre-factor T also arises for the uniform Pauli spin susceptibility of spinon excitations in the gapped Dirac Fermion model (11). It is important to realize that the magnetic Zeeman energy gμBSBext of the Cu2+ electron spins is comparable to Δ, hence the magnetic field reduces the energy gap as Δ(Bext) = Δ(0)− gμBSBext (29), where the g-factor of the 7 Cu2+ is g ~ 2.2 (30); we expect S =1/ 2 for spinons, while S =1 for spin-triplets or two bound- spinons. As shown in Fig.4C, the peak frequency of the NMR lineshape plotted as a function of the normalized frequency f / fo −1 (= 17K(a*)) shows a systematic dependence on Bext at low temperatures, implying that Δ, and hence 17K(a*), indeed depends on Bext. We compare 17K(a*) observed for various Bext in Fig.4B and summarize the resulting fitted values of Δ(Bext) in Fig.4D. From the linear fits in Fig.4D, we estimate the zero-field gap as Δ(0) ~10(3) K. Large uncertainties in the slope of the linear fits prevented us from discerning the total spin of the excited state, S =1/ 2 or S =1. Our estimation of Δ(0) / J = 0.03 ~ 0.07 is comparable to the theoretical prediction based on the DMRG calculations Δ(0) / J = 0.07 ~ 0.12 (9). Our results also imply that the Dzyaloshinskii -Moriya interaction is not strong enough to induce appreciable non-zero susceptibility at the lowest measured temperatures. Thus NMR on the single crystal provides strong quantitative evidence for a spin gap in ZnCu3(OH)6Cl2. In addition, the ability to distinguish the behavior from different sites near and far from Cu2+ defects allows us to conclude that the gapped behavior is intrinsic to the kagome lattice. 8