Non-adiabatic effects in the phonon dispersion of Mg1−xAlxB2 Matteo d’Astuto,1, ∗ Rolf Heid,2 Burkhard Renker,2 Frank Weber,2 Helmut Schober,3 Omar De la Pe ̃na-Seaman,4 Janusz Karpinski,5 Nikolai D. Zhigadlo,5, † Alexei Bossak,6 and Michael Krisch6 1IMPMC, UMR CNRS 7590, Sorbonne Universit ́es-UPMC University Paris 06, MNHN, IRD, 4 Place Jussieu, F-75005 Paris, France 2Institut f ̈ur Festk ̈orperphysik, Karlsruher Institut f ̈ur Technologie, P.O. 3640, D-76021 Karlsruhe, Germany 3Institut Laue-Langevin, BP 156 X, F-38042 Grenoble Cedex, France 4Instituto de F ́ısica, Benem ́erita Universidad Aut ́onoma de Puebla, Apartado Postal J-48, C.P. 72570 Puebla, Puebla, M ́exico 5Laboratory for Solid State Physics, ETH Z ̈urich,8093-Z ̈urich, Switzerland 6European Synchrotron Radiation Facility, BP 220, F-38043 Grenoble cedex, France (Dated: April 15, 2016) Superconducting MgB2 shows an E2g zone center phonon, as measured by Raman spectroscopy, that is very broad in energy and temperature dependent. The Raman shift and lifetime show large differences with the values elsewhere in the Brillouin Zone measured by Inelastic X-ray Scattering (IXS), where its dispersion can be accounted for by standard harmonic phonon theory, adding only a moderate electron-phonon coupling. Here we show that the effects rapidly disappear when electron- phonon coupling is switched off by Al substitution on the Mg sites. Moreover, using IXS with very high wave-vector resolution in MgB2, we can follow the dispersion connecting the Raman and the IXS signal, in agreement with a theory using only electron-phonon coupling but without strong anharmonic terms. The observation is important in order to understand the effects of electron- phonon coupling on zone center phonons modes in MgB2, but also in all metals characterized by a small Fermi velocity in a particular direction, typical for layered compounds. MgB2 is a superconductor1 where the mechanism for pairing is conventional electron-phonon coupling. It shows an unexpectedly high transition temperature of 39 K, almost twice that of most conventional sys- tems at ambient pressure2, and close to those of high- temperature superconductors such as cuprates and iron pnictides. The phonon mode involved in the coupling is the transverse E2g mode, propagating along the c* di- rection with the atomic displacement parallel to the ab plane (–5 and references therein). Understand- ing the physics in MgB2 is fundamental as it is the first and archetypal electron-phonon mediated superconduc- tor with high-frequency phonons at ambient pressure6. This is very important in the search of high temper- ature superconductivity, as these systems can be well modeled6,7 and have potential for extremely high transi- tion temperatures8. MgB2 shows an anomalously low isotopic effect, sur- prising for a conventional pairing mechanism9. It has been suggested that a strong anharmonic term, in the E2g mode energy, may explain this anomaly10. The proposed strong anharmonicity seems in good agreement with the Raman data11–16 , but it is in contrast with IXS phonon dispersion results4,5, which are in good agreement with ab-initio models employing the quasi-harmonic approx- imation. However, a direct comparison is not possible as Raman spectroscopy only probes phonons close to the Brillouin zone center, Γ, where the IXS signal is domi- nated by elastic scattering. In a previous work5, it has been shown, from a close comparison of the temperature dependence of the IXS and Raman shift, that the apparent dichotomy between the two measurements could be reconciled taking into account non-adiabatic effects17 appearing only close to Γ. In that frameworks, anomalies in the Raman spectra have their origin in a very steep dispersion where the Landau-damping of phonons, induced by the electrons, disappears, as the phonon wave-vector is shorter than the Landau-damping threshold5. This effect, which is very small and difficult to detect in most metals18,19, would induce spectacular, temperature dependent, changes of the Raman width and shift in MgB2. Although the above explanation is quite reasonable, there is no complete proof of it, as the calculations are only qualitative, and we lack a direct observation of the suggested steep, anomalous dispersion close to Γ. Here we show, using high Q resolution Inelastic X-ray Scatter- ing, that a very steep phonon dispersion can be detected in Mg1−xAlxB2 at very small x substitution, and rapidly disappears at higher Al content. The result is important for the theory of superconductivity of MgB2, as an al- ternative interpretation of the Raman shift and broaden- ing, in terms of anharmonicity, could explain the anoma- lous isotopic effect of MgB220, but not the IXS shift and broadening5. Moreover, there are very few experimental confirmations of non-adiabatic effects in solids, in partic- ular their effect in the phonon dispersion, even if they can be relevant in the interpretation of vibrational data and the electron-phonon coupling of various layered metals such as intercalated graphite and graphene and, in gen- eral, for metals characterised by a small Fermi velocity in a particular direction in the Brillouin Zone18. For the crystal growth and characterization, see Sup- plemental Material at [URL will be inserted by APS] as well as for the MgB2 samples. Note that in the text we rounded the precise stoichiometry given in Sup- arXiv:1512.07065v5 [cond-mat.supr-con] 14 Apr 2016 2 with colors coding the content x. Error bars can be inferred from the data dispersion. Lines are models of the data, with pseudo-Voigt fits (dashed, as in ) or simple Gaussian (continuous lines) profiles. Right panel: Energy shift for the phonon at q=(0 0 0.2) as a function of the Al content x, from the fit of the data in the left panel (error bars from fit, mostly smaller than symbols), as well as from calculations in the Virtual Crystal Approximation (VCA). plemental Material [URL will be inserted by APS] as fol- lows for the Al content: 0.93 → 1 (note that there is no Mg in that sample); 0.71 → 0.7 and 0.37 → 0.4. Inelastic X-ray Scattering (IXS) experiments were per- formed on the ID28 beam line of the European Syn- chrotron Radiation Facility. The Mg1−xAlxB2 samples (0.37 ≤ x ≤ 1.0) were mounted in a vacuum chamber at room temperature such that the 110 and 001 directions were contained in the scattering plane. This orientation allowed for measure- ments of transverse and longitudinal branches along the Γ-A and Γ-M direction. For these samples, the back- scattering monochromator was set at the Si (8 8 8) re- flection order21,22, corresponding to a wavelength λ = 0.7839 ̊A (photon energy: 15 817 eV) , and a resolution of ∆E of 5.5 meV. IXS measurements in stoichiometric MgB2 crystal were realized using higher energy resolution ( ∆E = 3 meV) at the Si (9 9 9) reflection order of the back-scattering monochromator, in a very similar instrumental configu- ration of a previous experiment5 with the notable dif- ference that we benefitted of 9 instead of five analyzers, allowing finer steps in the reciprocal space in particu- lar for the in-plane direction Γ-M, and taking particular care of adjusting the slit opening in front of the analyzers to maximize the spectrometer brilliance while optimizing the Q resolution as detailed in Supplemental Material at [URL will be inserted by APS]. All measurements were guided by calculations of in- elastic structure factors resulting from first principles cal- culations. The spectra were analyzed by a fitting pro- gram which automatically accounted for the experimen- tal resolution taken from measurements or a model as described in . Typical scan times were about 2 hours. Details of the ab-initio simulation in the Virtual Crystal Approximation (VCA) used in the present work are described in . (Color online) Calculated and measured dispersion of Mg0.6Al0.4B2. Most of our data have been collected for the MgB2 and Mg0.6Al0.4B2 single crystals and the Γ-A direction which is of particular interest. In Fig. 1, left panel, we show typical IXS spectra along the Γ-A line, at a reduced wave-vector q=(0 0 0.2), for several Al contents spanning from 0 to 1. in Fig. 1, right panel, the energy of the E2g phonon as determined from the fit of these data is com- pared to the ones calculated for the same phonon using the Virtual Crystal Approximation approach (from and present work for x=0.4). In Fig. 2 we show a complete dispersion calculated for Al content x=0.4 along 3 Γ-A and Γ-M high symmetry directions, in the VCA ap- proach. The dispersion is compared with our IXS and Raman data for the sample with x=0.37 (Mg0.6Al0.4B2). In Fig. 3, left panel, we show the results of our present IXS measured dispersion for Al content x=0 (blue mark- ers) and 0.4 (white filled markers) along Γ-A and Γ-M directions. We also add Raman data at x=0 (cyan and yellow filled symbols, from ) and 0.4 (black filled symbols). We compare with DFT calculations (red lines) for x=0 only, taken from . The agreement is quite well overall, except for the the zone center Raman data at x=0. Calculation in and are quite similar for x=0. An important difference, apart from the Virtual Crystal Approximation that allows to change x, is that the authors of use relaxed lattice param- eters from the DFT calculation itself, while calculations in use experimental lattice parameters, that give in general energies closer to the experimental ones, while relaxed lattice parameters tend to push some modes to higher energies, about 6 meV in the present case. This made the E2g mode energy calculated in to match well the zone center energy but is about 6 meV higher at the zone boundary (point A). Instead the E2g mode en- ergy calculated in5 with experimental lattice parameters match well at the zone boundary (point A), as shown in Fig. 3. To them, we added also an empirically renor- malized dispersion (black lines) as guide to the eye of the zone center anomaly. The overall evolution of the phonon modes along Γ-A and Γ-M in function of x, going from x=0.0 to 0.4 quali- tatively follows what it is expected according to for Al substitution in the x=0.3-0.5 range: a large hard- ening for the E2g mode (∼ +35 meV) and a reduction for the A2u and longitudinal acoustic ones (few meV en- ergy increase) with a concurrent moderate softening of the B1g mode (few meV decrease), with the E1u staying approximately at the same energy. A similar behavior is also experimentally observed for the E2g mode in carbon doped Mg(B1−xCx)2 by IXS24. Dispersion calculations for x=0.4 show a good quantitative agreement with our data; in particular we note that the frequency for the E2g mode at the zone center measured by Raman lies on an almost straight line between the point at small q in the Γ-A and Γ-M directions, as in the VCA simulation. As mentioned, this is not the case for x=0.0, for which there is a disagreement between the DFT calculations extrapolated to the zone center and the Raman data for the E2g mode, as can be appreciated in Fig. 3, left panel. This was first ascribed to anharmonic effects10, and seemed to be corroborated by the larger width of the Raman peak at room temperature, a factor two com- pared to the mode width measured by IXS along Γ-A, and with a large temperature effect that was not observed in IXS measurements4. In turn, IXS data seemed to fit quite well with the DFT calculation. Alternatively, it was later suggested that the effect could be ascribed to the cross- ing of the Landau damping threshold25, meaning that, below a certain q wave-vector q0 in the Brillouin Zone, the electron-phonon coupling cannot take place anymore, so that the phonon energy recovers from its value with electron-phonon coupling E to the bare one at q=0, E0, which would be about 93 meV for the E2g mode. It follows that in the region 0< q < q0, where the phonon modes decouple from the electrons, the system is not adi- abatic anymore. This leads to a strong modification of the Raman spectral function, which probes the polariz- ability variation very close to (but not exactly at) q = 0 as shown by , with a larger broadening compared to the intrinsic one of the phonon modes, and a tem- perature dependence of such broadening in qualitative agreement with the measured one. The latter explana- tion also predicts an energy hardening with temperature, which was experimentally confirmed in . The re- verse behavior would be expected from an anharmonic effect. However, the proof was only qualitative, lacking a di- rect numerical comparison with data. The above men- tioned recovery of E0 would also induce a very steep dis- persion as q0 should be small (in the order of 0.1 of the BZ or less) while the energy shift is as large as ∆ E = E-E0 ∼35 meV as shown in . Previous attempts to complete the dispersion close to the zone center Γ were unsuccessful (see Fig. 5 in ). In the present work we came back to perform measurements with a very high Q resolution and very fine step in Q close to Γ, from both the Γ-M and Γ-A directions. The data clearly bend up towards Γ from both sides departing from the calculated dispersion. We stress again that this is not the case at all for the sample with x=0.4, where the Raman data falls exactly on a line going from Γ-M to Γ-A at small q, as expected from calculations at x∼0.4 in Fig. 2. To high- light the effect on E2g at x=0, in Fig. 3 we modified the DFT calculated dispersion, multiplying it with an em- pirical exponential function c∗(1+e(−q/q0)) (black lines, with q0 ≈ 0.1), as guide to the eye . We note here that the function is symmetric in q units of the Brillouin Zone, but appears bending faster on the Γ-M side. This is due to the fact that the bare DFT calculated dispersion itself is already bending upwards close to Γ. We also note that a very steep phonon dispersion, known as the waterfall effect, was reported for relaxor perovskites materials27 and explained in terms of mode-mode interference close to the zone center28. However, in this scenario the two phonon modes involved have to have the same symme- try. As the only energy phonon branch in MgB2 above the E2g has B1g symmetry, we can exclude a similar ori- gin of the steep dispersion near Γ in MgB2. Moreover in Mg0.6Al0.4B2 there is no steep dispersion at all, although the two modes are even closer in energy. In order to see if our observations are compatible with crossing the Landau damping threshold, and the cor- responding modifications of the dispersion, we compare with the calculations in . In that work a modified dispersion along Γ-M is shown, including non-adiabatic effects mentioned above (see Fig. 3 left panel of ). But the E2g dispersion was a simplified, analytical one, 4 (Color online) Left panel: Mg1−xAlxB2 phonon dispersion along Γ-A and Γ-M directions: IXS data for x=0 (blue diamonds symbols) and 0.4 (white filled diamonds); Raman data for x=0 (filled squares, cyan, average values for T ≤ 100 K, and yellow, at ambient temperature, from ) and 0.4 (black square). Errorbars from the fit are smaller or of the same order as the symbol size. DFT calculation (red lines) for x=0 only (taken from ). The black line represents an empirical renormalization of the DFT calculation (see text). Right panel: zoom on the E2g dispersion along the Γ-M direction. The dashed red line corresponds to the DFT calculation (red continous line in Fig. 3). The black continuos line represent the ”non-adiabatic” correction to the DFT calculations as explained in the text. and, although quite close to the E2g dispersion calculated by DFT, not accurate enough for a direct comparison with data, being e.g. about 5 meV below the data for q ∼ 0.3 − 0.4 × Γ-M, a shift about as large as the one we are looking for at Γ. This approximate dispersion was used because DFT can be performed neither exactly at the zone center, nor with enough q resolution to es- timate the corrections of the self-energy for 0< q < q0. Conversely, the DFT calculated dispersion is much closer to the data, if we exclude the E2g mode in the q region close to the zone center. In Fig. 3, right panel, we zoom on the same E2g data as in the left panel, along Γ-M, with the red dashed line corresponding to the E2g disper- sion calculated by DFT as in the left panel. We extract then the correction due to a frequency dependence of the phonon self-energy from the dispersion in , as the ratio between the ”adiabatic” (εadiabatic qE2g ) and ”non- adiabatic” (εqE2g) dispersion εqE2g εadiabatic qE2g . This is a rather crude approximation in principle, but the corrections are rather small in absolute values, so a posteriori valid to first order. We apply the corrections to the DFT calculated disper- sion (black line in Fig. 3, right panel). This is justified by the fact that the analytic calculated εadiabatic qE2g in is already a rather good approximation of the real one. The result is astonishingly close to the data, hence supporting the view that the effect comes indeed from the inclusion of non-adiabatic effects, by computing the phonon self energy at finite phonon frequency when in- cluding the electron-phonon coupling as explained in . Note that, while the zero temperature calculation recovers the unperturbed frequency (without electron- phonon coupling) at the zone center, finite temperature, and resolution, shift the Raman energy to lower values, with a positive temperature dependence that can not be explained by anharmonic effects as first pointed out in and 17. In conclusion, we experimentally reconciled the IXS dispersion for the E2g mode in MgB2 to the Raman data at the zone center, showing that the apparent difference can be explained without invoking any experimental arti- fact, but is connected to a very steep dispersion, as fore- seen by theory based on anomalous effects of the electron- phonon coupling near the zone center17,18,26, and does not require any strong contribution from phonon-phonon scattering (anharmonicity). This zone center anomaly disappears when the electron density-of-states at the Fermi level is depleted, by Al substitution x∼0.4, con- currently with the loss of superconducting properties29, a further indication that this anomaly arises from electron- phonon coupling effects. The observation is important to understand the ef- fects of electron-phonon coupling on zone center phonons modes in MgB2, and its relevance to its superconducting properties. Moreover, this is relevant in all metals charac- terized by a small Fermi velocity in a particular direction, and for which the temperature dependence of the Raman shift is often measured in order to detect electron-phonon coupling effects18. 5 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We wish to acknowledge the ESRF for the support un- der his the non-propretary research program. We are very grateful to D. Gambetti for technical help during IXS measurements. We acknowledge very useful discus- sion with F. Mauri, M. Calandra and M. Lazzeri, and we thanks J. Hlinka for detailed clarification about the waterfall effect. F.W. was supported by the young inves- tigator group VH-NG-840 of the Helmholtz Society. ∗ matteo.dastuto@impmc.upmc.fr † Permanent address: Department of Chemistry and Bio- chemistry, University of Berne, Freiestrasse 3, CH-3012 Berne, Switzerland 1 J. Nagamatsu, N. Nakagawa, T. Muranaka, Y. Zenitani, and J. Akimitsu, Nature 410, 63 (2001). 2 I. I. Mazin, Nature 525, 40 (2015). 3 K. P. Bohnen, R. Heid, and B. Renker, Phys. Rev. Lett. 4 A. Q. R. Baron, H. Uchiyama, Y. Tanaka, S. Tsutsui, D. Ishikawa, S. Lee, R. Heid, K.-P. Bohnen, S. Tajima, and T. Ishikawa, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 197004 (2004). 5 M. d’Astuto, M. Calandra, S. Reich, A. Shukla, M. Lazzeri, F. Mauri, J. Karpinski, N. D. Zhigadlo, A. Bossak, and M. Krisch, Physical Review B (Condensed Matter and Ma- terials Physics) 75, 174508 (2007). 6 A. Floris, G. Profeta, N. N. Lathiotakis, M. L ̈uders, M. A. L. Marques, C. Franchini, E. K. U. Gross, A. Con- tinenza, and S. Massidda, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 037004 7 A. Linscheid, A. Sanna, A. Floris, and E. K. U. Gross, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 097002 (2015). 8 A. P. Drozdov, M. I. Eremets, I. A. Troyan, V. Kseno- fontov, and S. I. Shylin, Nature 525, 73 (2015). 9 D. G. Hinks, H. Claus, and J. D. Jorgensen, Na- ture(London) 411, 457 (2001). 10 H. J. Choi, D. Roundy, H. Sun, M. L. Cohen, and S. Louie, Nature (London) 418, 758 (2002). 11 K. Kunc, I. Loa, K. Syassen, R. K. Kremer, and K. Ahn, J. Phys. Cond. Matt. 13, 9945 (2001). 12 J.Hlinka, I. Gregora, J. Pokorny, A. Plecenik, P. Kus, L. Satrapinsky, and S. Benacka, Phys. Rev. B 64, 13 J. W. Quilty, S. Lee, A. Yamamoto, and S. Tajima, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 087001 (2002). 14 J. W. Quilty, S. Lee, S. Tajima, and A. Yamanaka, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 207006 (2003). 15 K.-P. Bohnen, R. Heid, and M. Krauss, Europhys. Lett. 16 H. Martinho, C. Rettori, P. G. Pagliuso, A. A. Martin, N. O. Moreno, and J. L. Sarrao, Solid State Comm. 125, 17 E. Cappelluti, Phys. Rev. B 73, 140505R (2006). 18 A. M. Saitta, M. Lazzeri, M. Calandra, and F. Mauri, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 226401 (2008). 19 M. P. M. Dean, C. A. Howard, S. S. Saxena, and M. Ellerby, Phys. Rev. B 81, 045405 (2010). 20 T. Yildirim, O. G ̈ulseren, J. W. Lynn, C. M. Brown, T. J. Udovic, Q. Huang, N. Rogado, K. A. Regan, M. A. Hay- ward, J. S. Slusky, T. He, M. K. Haas, P. Khalifah, K. Inu- maru, and R. J. Cava, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 037001 (2001). 21 R. Verbeni, F. Sette, M. Krisch, U. Bergmann, B. Gorges, C. Halcoussis, K. Martel, C. Masciovecchio, J. Ribois, G. Ruocco, and H. Sinn, J. Synchrotron Radiation 3, 62 22 R. Verbeni, M. d’Astuto, M. Krisch, M. Lorenzen, A. Mer- met, G. Monaco, H. Requardt, and F. Sette, Rev. Sci. Instrum. (2008). 23 O. De la Pe ̃na Seaman, R. de Coss, R. Heid, and K.-P. Bohnen, Phys. Rev. B 79, 134523 (2009). 24 A. Q. Baron, H. Uchiyama, S. Tsutsui, Y. Tanaka, D. Ishikawa, J. P. Sutter, S. Lee, S. Tajima, R. Heid, and K.-P. Bohnen, Physica C 456, 83 (2007). 25 M. Calandra and F. Mauri, Phys. Rev. B 71, 064501 26 M. Calandra, M. Lazzeri, and F. Mauri, Physica C 456, 27 P. M. Gehring, S.-E. Park, and G. Shirane, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 5216 (2000). 28 J. Hlinka, S. Kamba, J. Petzelt, J. Kulda, C. A. Randall, and S. J. Zhang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 107602 (2003). 29 J. Kortus, O. V. Dolgov, R. K. Kremer, and A. A. Gol- ubov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 027002 (2005).