1 Superconductivity in CaSn3 single crystal with a AuCu3-type structure X. Luo1†, D. F. Shao1†, Q. L. Pei1, J. Y. Song1, L. Hu1, Y. Y. Han2, X. B. Zhu1, W. H. Song1, W. J. Lu1* and Y. P. Sun1,2,3* 1 Key Laboratory of Materials Physics, Institute of Solid State Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei, 230031, China 2 High Magnetic Field Laboratory, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei, 230031, China 3 Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Microstructures, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210093, China Abstract We report the superconductivity of the CaSn3 single crystal with a AuCu3-type structure, namely cubic space group Pm3̅m . The superconducting transition temperature TC=4.2 K is determined by the magnetic susceptibility, electrical resistivity, and heat capacity measurements. The magnetization versus magnetic field (M-H) curve at low temperatures shows the typical-II superconducting behavior. The estimated lower and upper critical fields are about 125 Oe and 1.79 T, respectively. The penetration depth λ(0) and coherence length ξ(0) are calculated to be approximately 1147 nm and 136 nm by the Ginzburg-Landau equations. The estimated Sommerfeld coefficient of the normal state γN is about 2.9 mJ/mol K2. ΔC/γNTC =1.13 and λep=0.65 suggest that CaSn3 single crystal is a weakly coupled superconductor. Electronic band structure calculations show a complex multi-sheet Fermi surface formed by three bands and a low density of states (DOS) at the Fermi level, which is consistent with the experimental results. Based on the analysis of electron phonon coupling of AX3 compounds (A=Ca, La, and Y; X=Sn and Pb), we theoretically proposed a way to increase TC in the system. †X. Luo and D. F. Shao contributed equally to this work. *Author to whom correspondence should be addressed. Electronic mail:wjlu@issp.ac.cn and ypsun@issp.ac.cn 2 I. Introduction LnM3 (Ln=Y and rare-earth elements, M=Pb, Tl, In, Ga, and Sn) compounds crystallized in a cubic AuCu3-type structure have attracted much attention due to their interesting physical properties, such as superconductivity, heavy fermion behavior, quantum critical point and so on. LnSn3 compounds are particularly intriguing as they are found to have relatively higher superconducting transition temperature TC. For instance, the TC of LaSn3 is 6.5 K and that of YSn3 is 7.0 K, whereas Pb, Tl, In, and Ga related compounds have lower TC. On the other hand, some LnSn3 compounds show additional interesting physical phenomena. For example, PrSn3 has been reported to be a heavy fermion compound with an antiferromagnetic order at TN=8.6 K and CeSn3 is categorized as a dense Kondo compound with valence fluctuation. However, the isostructural ASn3 (A=alkaline earth metal) compounds are seldomly explored; the ion-ratio mismatch between the alkaline earth metal ions and Sn one, it is difficult to crystallize into a AuCu3-type structure. For instance, BaSn3 and SrSn3 with superconducting transition temperature TC=2.4 K and 5.4 K distort into hexagonal and rhombohedra structures, respectively. Different from the distorted BaSn3 and SrSn3 compounds, CaSn3 with smaller Ca ion can be crystalized into a AuCu3-type structure and it has the same structure with CaPb3 and CaTl3 superconductors. Although the polycrystalline CaSn3 was synthetized thirty years ago, the physical properties of CaSn3 have been rarely reported because the CaSn3 is a decomposition product of highly air-sensitive. To the best of our knowledge, the de Has-van Aplhen effect has only been observed in polycrystalline CaSn3 powder. In order to get a deeper insight into the physical properties of CaSn3 single crystal, further research is needed. Herein, we have successfully grown the bulk single crystals of CaSn3 for the first time and discovered that it shows superconductivity with TC=4.2 K. We have performed electrical resistivity, magnetic susceptibility, and heat capacity measurements to determine the superconducting parameters of CaSn3 single crystal. Furthermore, electronic band structure calculations suggest a complex, multi-sheet Fermi surface formed by three bands. The calculated low density of states (DOS) at the Fermi level is almost consistent with the value derived from the small electron specific coefficient measured. Finally, based on the analysis of electron phonon coupling (EPC) of AX3 compounds (A=Ca, La, and Y; X=Sn and Pb), we theoretically proposed a way to increase TC in the 3 system. II. Experimental details Single crystalline specimens of CaSn3 were prepared through Sn-self flux. Ca pieces (99.99 %, Alfa Aesar) and Sn powders (99.99 %, Alfa Aesar) with mole ratio 1:28 were weighted and loaded into a 2 mL alumina crucible, which was sealed in an evacuated quartz tube. All were done in an Ar-filled glove box. The sealed quartz tubes were slowly heated to 800 oC for 24 hours, and dwelled for 24 hours, then slowly cooled down to 270 oC with 2 oC/h. Finally, the quartz tubes were inverted and quickly spun into a centrifuge to remove the excess Sn flux. More detail can be found in the Supporting information. Rectangular single crystals with shining surface were observed. The size was about 1.5*1.5*1 mm3. The single crystals were air-sensitive and thus they were kept inside the glove box until characterization. Such handling was necessary to avoid decomposition. Powder X- ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were taken with Cu Kα1 radiation (λ=0.15406 nm) using a PANalytical X’pert diffractometer at room temperature. Heat capacity and electrical transport properties were measured using the Quantum Design physical properties measurement system (PPMS-9T) and magnetic properties were performed by the magnetic property measurement system (MPMS-XL5). The electrical transport measurements were performed by a four-probe method to eliminate the contact resistance. The measurement of specific heat was carried out by a heat-pulse relaxation method on PPMS-9T. Electronic structures were obtained from first-principles density functional theory in the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) according to the Perdew-Burke- Ernzerhof. The QUANTUM-ESPRESSO package was used with ultrasoft pseudopotentials generated by Garrity, Bennett, Rabe, and Vanderbilt (GBRV). The energy cut off for the plane-wave basis set is 40 Ry. Brillouin zone sampling is performed on the Monkhorst-Pack (MP) mesh of 16×16×16. III. Results and Discussion CaSn3 shows a cubic structure with space group Pm3̅m, as present in Fig. 1 (a). Ca ions set in the corner and six Sn ions are octahedrally coordinated without atoms inside. Figure 1(b) shows the powder X-ray of CaSn3 single crystals which were ground in a glove box. The sample powder was sealed by Kapton film during the measurement to protect it from oxidation. As shown in Fig. 1 (b), 4 it presents a cubic structure with little Sn-flux impurity, which may be due to the decomposition of CaSn3 powder during the grinding and data collection. The high intensity in the low degree zone is the background from the Kapton film. The lattice constant a calculated from indexes is about 4.742 Å, which matches well with the previously reported value. K to 2 K. The electrical resistivity data show a metallic behavior ( dρ dT > 0) with the large residual resistivity ratio (RRR): ρ300 K ρ5 K ~73, which indicates the CaSn3 single crystal is of high quality. A clear superconducting transition can be observed at 4.2 K. We applied the Fermi-liquid model ρ(T) = ρ0 + AT2, where ρ0 and A are the residual resistivity and a constant, respectively, to the curve below 20 K as shown in the inset of Fig. 1 (c). The model analysis yielded the residual resistivity ρ0 of 1.3 μΩ cm and the coefficient A of 0.00227 μΩ cm/K2, indicating Fermi-liquid- like behavior for CaSn3 single crystal. The ρ versus T curve of CaSn3 single crystal was further analyzed over the whole temperature range by the Bloch-Grüneisen-Mott (BGM) model, which is expressed as ρBGM(T) = ρ0 + 4RT ( T ΘR) 4 ∫ x5 (ex−1)(1−e−x) dx ΘR/T 0 , (1) where ρ0 is the residual resistivity and R is a constant. The second term represents contributions from the electron-phonon interaction and ΘR is the Debye temperature. Least-squares fit of the ρ(T) data by Eqs. (1) for 5 K≤T≤300 K is shown in Fig.1 (c). Fig. 1S shows the fitting data at low temperature. The parameters were estimated to ρ0=1.5 μΩ cm, R=0.17 μΩ cm/K , and ΘR=211 K. cooling (ZFC and FC) modes under applied magnetic field 10 Oe. The bulk superconducting transition temperature TC=4.2 K can be clearly seen in the left inset of Fig. 1 (d), which is consistent with the resistivity result. The magnetization as a function of magnetic field at 2.5 K is shown in the right inset of Fig. 1 (d). The clear hysteresis is observed, which indicates a typical type-II superconducting behavior of CaSn3 single crystal. The little element Sn may be left on the CaSn3 single crystal surface, we compared the magnetization as a function of magnetic field curves of CaSn3 single crystal and element Sn at T=3.6 K, as shown in Fig. 2S. The CaSn3 single crystal shows 5 a typical type-II superconductor, which is different from the element Sn with type-I superconducting behavior. In order to gain further insights into the superconducting state, the magneto-resistivity and the magnetic field dependence of magnetization at various temperatures were performed. Figure 2 (a) shows the resistivity under different magnetic fields. TC at different magnetic field is determined at a 50 % decrease from the normal-state resistivity value, and transition width is taken as the temperature interval between 10% and 90 % of the transition. Figure 2 (b) presents the HC2-T phase diagram of the superconducting state of CaSn3 single crystal. We estimate the upper critical field, HC2(0), from the Werthamer-Helfand-Hobenberg (WHH) expression A nearly linear relationship is obtained in the measured temperature range, which leads to a μ0Hc2(0) value of 1.79 T. The value of μ0Hc2(0) is lower than the Pauli-limiting field μ0HPauli = 1.24kBTC/μB . (3) Expected within the same weak-coupling BCS theory, it is about 7.6 T for TC=4.2 K. The empirical formula: HC2(T) = HC2(0) [1 − ( T TC) 3 2] 3 2 , (4) which is usually used to calculate the upper critical field for a variety of intermetallic and oxide superconductors. The value of upper field is about μ0Hc2(0)=1.86 T, which agrees well with the μ0Hc2(0) obtained from WHH method. The upper critical field value μ0Hc2(0) can be used to estimate the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) coherence length ξ(0) = √ Φ0 2πHC2(0) = 136 Å, where Φ0=hc/2e is the flux quantum. below TC. μ0Hc1(0) as a function of T is present in the Fig. 2 (d). The lower critical field is analyzed using the equation: HC1(T) = HC1(0) [1 − ( T TC) 2 ] . (5) The value of μ0HC1(0) is about 125 Oe. In addition, we may estimate the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) parameter κ = 1 √2[HC2(0)/HC(0)] ⁄ ~8.4, where the thermodynamic critical field 6 from λ(0)=кξ(0). The temperature dependence of specific heat CP also presents more information about the superconducting properties. Figure 3 (a) shows the temperature dependence of the heat capacity CP of CaSn3 single crystal at H=0 and 5 T. At H=0 T, the specific heat data show the bulk superconducting feature as indicated by the clear jump of CP around TC. At H=5 T, the specific heat jump of superconductivity in CaSn3 single crystal is completely suppressed. CP/T varies almost linearly with T2 above TC. The Sommerfeld constant γN is obtained from the fit CP/T=γN+βT2 (γN and β are T-independent coefficients), where γN is the normal-state electronic contribution and β is the lattice contribution to the specific heat. The fitting results yield γN =2.9 mJ/mol K2 and β=1.45 mJ/mol K4. The Debye temperature ΘD can be determined from the coefficient of the T3 term β = N(12/5)π4RΘD −3, where R=8.314 J/mol K and N=4 for CaSn3 single crystal. ΘD is about 175 K, which is little lower than that of YSn3. The Debye temperature ΘD obtained from the low temperature heat capacity CP was slightly lower than the Debye temperature ΘR=211 K derived from the resistivity data because the ΘR obtained from the resistivity was averaged over the whole temperature range. It is known that the ratio ΔCP/γNTC can be used to estimate the coupling strength. As shown in the inset of Fig. 3, ΔCP/γNTC of CaSn3 single crystal from the CP data is about 1.13, which is slightly lower than the expected BCS value with ΔCP/γNTC ~1.43 for superconductors within the weak-coupling limit. This suggests that the CaSn3 single crystal is a weakly coupled superconductor. An estimation of the strength of the EPC can be derived from the McMillan formula: λep = μ∗ ln( 1.45TC ΘD )−1.04 1.04+ln (1.45TC ΘD )(1−0.62μ∗) . (6) The EPC constant λep is estimated to be 0.65, assuming the Coulomb pseudopotential μ*=0.1, which supports the weakly coupling scenario. The determined superconducting parameters of CaSn3 single crystal are listed in Table I. theory calculations. Figure 4(a) presents the band structure in the vicinity of Fermi energy (EF). According to the calculated band structure, CaSn3 is a three-dimensional (3D) metal. The bands 7 near EF are predominately contributed by p electrons of Sn ions (Fig. 4 (b)). Three bands with large dispersion cross the Fermi level, forming the complex 3D Fermi surfaces (shown in Figs. 4 (c)-(e)). From the calculated DOS (Fig. 4 (b)), one can notice that EF locates at a valley of DOS, leading to a small N(EF) of 0.82 states/eV. The resulted γcal= 1 3 π2kB 2N(EF) = 1.93 mJ/mol K2. Such value is lower than that of our measured CaSn3 (γexp = 2.9 mJ/mol K2) obtained from the specific heat data. The enhancement of γ should be attributed to EPC with the factor of γexp γcal = 1 + λep, where λep is derived to be ~0.5, which is qualitatively in agreement with the weakly coupling scenario proposed above. In order to understand the superconductivity of CaSn3 single crystal, herein, we compare CaSn3 superconductor with other AuCu3 type alloys. As we know, researchers usually want to find a general rule to guide the exploration of the superconductors with higher TC in the AuCu3 type alloys. For example, the oscillation of TC with respect to numbers of valence electrons n was suggested. On the other hand, a recent study shows that TC monotonically increases with when the lattice constant a decrease for AX3 (A=Y, La; X=Sn, Pb) compounds in AuCu3 structure. However, we found those rules are be applied to other AuCu3-type alloys. For example, our present CaSn3 single crystal has smaller lattice parameter a but much lower TC than that of LaSn3 (TC~6.5 K). Moreover, the oscillation of TC with respect to numbers of valence electrons n seems to be only effective for the AX3 alloys in which the X atoms are from the same period. Therefore, we should reconsider the superconductivity in AX3 (X is metal elements in IVA group) with AuCu3 structure. which are of good agreement with previous reports. The shapes of DOS curves near EF for ASn3 (A=Ca, Y, and La) are very similar except for the EF that decided by the number of valence electrons n. YSn3 and LaSn3, which can be seen as one electron doped CaSn3, have higher EF locates at a small DOS peak (Fig. 5 (a)). Due to the large atomic number of Pb ion, the spin-orbit coupling is considered in the calculation of APb3. One can notice that the spin-orbit coupling makes the peaks of DOS sharper (Fig. 5 (b)). We summarize the N(EF), lattice parameter a, and TC of the reported ASn3 and APb3 (A=Ca, Y, La) superconductors in Fig. 6. The simple monotonic relationships between TC and the lattice 8 parameter a or numbers of valence electrons n cannot be obtained. As we known, the EPC strength λep for a material can be qualitatively expressed as: λep = ∑ 〈Iα2〉Nα(EF) α Mα〈ωα2〉 , (7) where the 〈Iα 2〉, Mα, and 〈ωα 2〉 are the mean square EPC matrix element averaged over Fermi surface, atomic mass, and averaged squared phonon frequency of the αth atom in the unit cell, respectively. Since the N(EF) of AX3 (X=Sn and Pb) is predominately contributed by X, we can qualitatively propose that the total EPC is mainly decided by λx = 〈IX 2〉N(EF) MX〈ωX 2 〉 , (8) where X=Sn and Pb. Therefore, though La has a much larger atomic mass, when X is fixed, the TC differences between YX3 and LaX3 are small (less than 1 K), since the N(EF) of those two are close. Meanwhile, when X is fixed, YX3 and LaX3 have higher N(EF) than that of CaX3, which leads to a higher TC of YX3 and LaX3. On the other hand, when X is changed from Sn to Pb, the EPC was strongly suppressed by the large increase of mass in the denominator of Eq. (8). For example, YPb3 and LaPb3 have the N(EF) three times larger than that of CaSn3. However, the TC of the three compounds are on the same level (~4 K). The N(EF) of CaPb3 is 50% higher than that of CaSn3. However, the TC of CaPb3 (TC ~ 1 K) is only one fourth of that of CaSn3. According to the above analysis we can choose the suitable doping elements to increase N(EF) or decrease the mass of X atom to enhance the EPC and hence increase TC. Moreover, compared to other cubic superconductors, such as MgCNi3 (TC ~ 7 K) with N(EF) of ~5 states/eV and La3Al (TC ~ 6 K) with N(EF) of ~4 states/eV, CaSn3 with superconductivity at the liquid helium temperature has a very small N(EF), which is unexpected. This indicates a large 〈I2〉 in the system. If AX3 compounds with a lighter X atom in IVA group (i.e., AGe3, ASi3) can be obtained, the superconductivity with a much higher TC might probably be achieved. IV. Conclusion In summary, we have investigated the physical properties of CaSn3 single crystals. The electrical resistivity, magnetic susceptibility, and specific heat confirm that the superconductivity transition temperature of CaSn3 is 4.2 K. Both ΔCe/γNTC and λep value magnitudes indicate that the CaSn3 is a weakly coupled superconductor. Furthermore, electronic band structure calculations are 9 consistent with experimental data and show the complex and multi-sheet Fermi surfaces. Based on the analysis of electron phonon coupling of AX3 compounds (A=Ca, La, and Y; X=Sn, Pb), we theoretically concluded a way to increase TC in the system. Acknowledgments This work was supported by the Joint Funds of the National Natural Science Foundation of China and the Chinese Academy of Sciences' Large-Scale Scientific Facility under contracts (U1432139, U1232139), the National Nature Science Foundation of China under contracts (11304320, 51171177), the National Key Basic Research under contract 2011CBA00111, and the National Nature Science Foundation of Anhui Province under contract 1508085ME103. The authors thank Dr. Chen Sun for her assistance in editing the manuscript.