Simultaneous emergence of superconductivity, inter-pocket scattering and nematic fluctuation in potassium-coated FeSe superconductor Z. R. Ye1, †, C. F. Zhang2, 3, †, H. L. Ning1, W. Li2, 3, L. Chen1, T. Jia2, 3, M. Hashimoto4, D. H. Lu4, Z.-X. Shen2, 3, and Y. Zhang1, 5, * 1International Center for Quantum Materials, School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China 2Stanford Institute for Materials and Energy Sciences, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, 2575 Sand Hill Road, Menlo Park, California 94025, USA 3Geballe Laboratory for Advanced Materials, Departments of Physics and Applied Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA 4Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, 2575 Sand Hill Road, Menlo Park, California 94025, USA 5Collaborative Innovation Center of Quantum Matter, Beijing 100871, China † These authors contribute equally to this work. * To whom correspondence should be addressed: yzhang85@pku.edu.cn Superconductivity originates from pairing of electrons. Pairing channel on Fermi surface and pairing glue are thus two pivotal issues for understanding a superconductor. Recently, high-temperature superconductivity over 40 K was found in electron-doped FeSe superconductors including KxFe2-ySe2, Li0.8Fe0.2OHFeSe, and 1 monolayer FeSe thin film. However, their pairing mechanism remains controversial. Here, we studied the systematic evolution of electronic structure in potassium-coated FeSe single crystal. The doping level is controlled precisely by in situ evaporating potassium onto the sample surface. We found that the superconductivity emerges when the inter-pocket scattering between two electron pockets is turned on by a Lifshitz transition of Fermi surface. The nematic order suppresses remarkably at the same doping and strong nematic fluctuation remains in a wide doping range of the phase diagram. Our results suggest an underlying correlation among superconductivity, inter-pocket scattering, and nematic fluctuation in electron-doped FeSe superconductors. Most iron-pnictide superconductors share the same Fermi surface topology. The Fermi surface consists of both hole and electron pockets at the center and corner of the Brillouin zone (BZ) and the inter-pocket scattering between the hole and electron pockets is believed to be critical for the high-Tc superconductivity1-3. However, in electron-doped FeSe superconductors, the heavy electron doping pushes the hole bands well below the Fermi energy (EF) and the Fermi surface consists only of electron pockets at the BZ corner4-7. Surprisingly, high-Tc superconductivity emerges on such a Fermi surface. The Tc is over 30 K in KxFe2-ySe2 and Li0.8Fe0.2OHFeSe8, 9, and possible superconductivity over 65 K was observed in 1 monolayer (ML) FeSe thin film6, 7, 10. The discovery of high-Tc superconductivity in electron-doped FeSe superconductors challenges our previous understanding on iron-based superconductor. It is still not clear how the pairs of electron scatter on the Fermi surface and what fluctuation mediates the superconductivity. The answer to these questions immediately connects to the pairing mechanism of high-Tc superconductivity in electron-doped FeSe superconductors and needs to be settled experimentally. One effective way to understand a superconductor is to characterize its phase diagram. However, the doping level is difficult to control in electron-doped FeSe superconductors. Discrete phases are found in KxFe2-ySe2 due to its intrinsic phase separation11. The electron doping of 1ML FeSe is believed to originate from the oxygen vacancy in SrTiO3 substrate and its fine control has not been achieved so far7. On the other hand, efforts have been made to dope electrons into iron-pnictide compounds in order to remove the central hole pockets and reproduce the Fermi surface topology that is similar to electron-doped FeSe superconductors. However, superconductivity has not been realized in most electron-doped iron-pnictide compounds12, 13. Candidates such as LaO1-xHxFeAs and Ca1-xLaxFe2As2 are rarely studied due to the lack of high-quality single crystal and possible low superconducting volume14, 15. Recently, potassium evaporation has been found to be an effective method that can dope electrons into a sample16. Utilizing such a method, electron doping is realized in FeSe thin film and the emergence of superconductivity associated with the suppression of nematicity was observed16-18. Here, we performed angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) measurements on potassium-coated FeSe single crystals. By in situ evaporating a small amount of potassium onto the sample surface step by step, we successfully doped electrons into FeSe single crystal with unprecedented precision (See details in Methods section). We found that the Fermi surface goes through two Lifshitz transitions with electron doping. The hole pocket first vanishes at BZ center which triggers the first Lifshitz transition. Then, by further electron doping, one electron band sinks below EF at the BZ corner resulting in the second Lifshitz transition. Intriguingly, the superconductivity emerges at the second Lifshitz transition when the inter-pocket scattering between the electron pockets is turned on Meanwhile, the nematic order suppresses remarkably and the residual nematic order is observed penetrating deeply into the superconducting dome. Our result provides crucial clues for understanding the high-Tc superconductivity in electron-doped FeSe superconductors. The pairing of electron occurs through inter-pocket scattering between two electron pockets and the nematic fluctuation plays an important role in mediating the superconducting pairing. Result Evolution of band structure with electron doping. The doping process is divided into 15 fine steps (D0-D14). The doping dependence of the second derivative photoemission spectra is shown in Fig.1. The sharpness of the spectra indicates the high quality of our sample surface during the evaporation. At zero doping (D0), two hole-like bands (β1 and β2) are observed around the BZ corner, the (π, π) point. They correspond to the split dxz and dyz bands stemming from the band reconstruction in the nematic state19-21. Around the BZ zone center, the (0, 0) point, three hole-like bands (α, β, and γ) are observed. They are constructed by the dxz, dyz, and dxy orbitals respectively21. Similar to the β1/β2 bands at (π, π), the β band splits near EF due to the presence of nematic order. The γ band disperses across the α and β bands. Hybridization gap opens at the band crossing between the β and γ bands. When doping electrons into the system, bands shift downwards to higher binding energy as expected (Fig. 1). However, one set of bands remains unchanged and resembles the bulk FeSe bands even in heavily doped sample (Fig. 1h). One possible explanation is the potassium inhomogeneity on the sample surface. However, the doping inhomogeneity usually generates multiple sets of bands with different doping levels, which is inconsistent with the observation of only two sets of bands. On the other hand, because the probing depth of ARPES can reach several layers below the sample surface, our results suggest that potassium evaporation only dose the topmost layer, while the layers beneath remain undoped (Fig. 1i). The invariant bands are thus attributed to the undoped bulk state. potassium-coated FeSe single crystal. For the hole bands at the (0, 0) point, the band tops of α and β move to higher binding energy as characterized by the energy distribution curves (EDCs) taken at the (0, 0) point (Fig. 2a and 2b). We note that, all the data were taken with 23 eV photons. The corresponding kz is around the Z point of BZ21, where the band tops of the hole bands are the highest. Therefore, when the β band sinks below EF at D3, the entire hole pocket disappears and the first Lifshitz transition of Fermi surface occurs. Comparing with the α and β bands, the γ band shows weak photoemission intensity and therefore cannot be tracked directly from the spectra. However, we can determine the energy position of the γ band through the hybridization gap between the γ and β bands. As shown in Figs. 1b, 1e, and 1h, the energy position of the hybridization exhibits no observable change implicating that the γ band remains unchanged during the doping process (Fig. 2c). We then turn to the bands around the (π, π) point. The energy splitting between the β1 and β2 bands reflects the strength of nematic order. As shown in Fig. 2d and 2e, the β1 and β2 bands shift to higher binding energy and meanwhile their energy splitting decreases. A kink is observed for the band shift of β2, which indicates a remarkable suppression of nematic order at D5. Besides the β1 and β2 bands, three electron bands are observed during the doping process (Fig. 1 and 2f). The δ and ζ bands construct the highly anisotropic electron pocket at the BZ corner (Fig. 2g) and are originated from the dyz and dxy orbitals respectively20. As shown in Figs. 1b, 1e and 1h, when doping electrons, the δ band shifts downward and eventually merges with the ζ band. As a result, the ζ/δ electron pocket becomes isotropic and circular-like in heavily doped samples (Fig. 2g). Besides the δ and ζ bands, the η band is above EF and thus cannot be observed in the lightly doped samples. With electron doping, the η band sinks below EF at D5 (Figs. 1, 2e and 2d), triggering the second Lifshitz transition of Fermi surface. The η band constructs a circular-like electron pocket and is originated from the mixing of dxz and dxy orbitals20. The η electron pocket emerges at the second Lifshitz transition and overlaps with the δ/ζ electron pockets at the BZ corner (Fig. 2g). The band structure of heavily electron-doped FeSe single crystal resembles that observed in KxFe2-ySe2, Li0.8Fe0.2OHFeSe, and 1 monolayer FeSe thin film7-10. The band bottom of all electron bands degenerates at around 50meV below EF, which implicates that the ζ band bottom does not shift during the electron doping process. The invariability of γ and ζ suggests that the occupation of dxy orbital is barely affected by the electron doping in contrast to the dxz and dyz orbitals. Such orbital-selectivity may originate from the orbital-selective correlation effect in FeSe22, 23. In contrast to the strongly correlated dxy orbital, electrons prefer to fill in the more itinerate dxz and dyz orbitals. Evolution of superconductivity with electron doping. After characterizing the band structure, it is then intriguing to study how superconductivity evolves during the doping process. The EDCs are taken at the Fermi crossing (kF) of the ζ band along (0, 0) to (π, π) direction. To remove the effect of Fermi distribution function near EF, we symmetrize the EDCs as shown in Figs. 3a and 3b. The superconducting gap opening is characterized by the emergence of an intensity dip at EF and two coherence peaks in the symmetrized EDCs. The gap magnitude is determined by the gap fitting using a phenomenology spectral function24. The superconducting gap emerges at D5, then increases to its maximum around 8 meV at D11, and finally decreases to around 7 meV at D14. The Tc is characterized by the onset temperature of gap opening and the suppression of spectral weight at EF as shown in Figs. 3c-3h. The Tc correlates with the gap magnitude showing dome-like behavior. Specifically, it is 18.5 K at D8, 25 K at D11, and 20 K at D14. Phase diagram. Considering that most microscopic models of iron-based superconductors are constructed in one-iron BZ1-3, we unfolded the Fermi surface into one-iron BZ and the transition of Fermi surface topology is more transparent. The disappearance of β hole pocket and the emergence of η electron pocket trigger two Lifshitz transitions of Fermi surface (Fig. 4a). For the type I Fermi surface, the inter-pocket scattering connects the hole and electron pockets through a (π, 0) momentum transfer, while for the type III Fermi surface, the inter-pocket scattering occurs between the two electron pockets. Its scattering vector is (π, π) in one-iron BZ, which corresponds to a small momentum transfer in two-iron BZ. In the middle, the inter-pocket scattering is strongly suppressed and only intra-pocket scattering presents. electron doping level by counting the Fermi surface volume. The nematic transition temperature (Tnem) is calculated from the energy splitting between the β1 and β2 bands (Δnem ). The Δnem/kBTnem is 6.22 as determined by the Δnem and Tnem in undoped FeSe single crystal. The doping dependence of Δnem/kBTnem is ignored. Similarly, the Tc is calculated from the superconducting gap magnitude (Δsc) and the 2Δsc/kBTc is 7.74 as determined from the data in Fig.3. When doping electrons, a dome-like superconducting phase (SCe-e) emerges at the second Lifshitz transition. Its optimal doping is around 0.1 electrons per iron and the maximal Tc is around 25K. Note that, the gap is not observed in lightly doped samples due to the limitations of the energy resolution and the lowest achievable sample temperature in our experiment. The SCh-e dome is illustrated according to the recent scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) study on FeSe thin film grown on graphitized SiC whose properties resemble the bulk FeSe26. The Tnem decreases remarkably at the second Lifshitz transition but does not reach zero (Fig 4b). The residual nematic order shows a tail-like behavior penetrating deeply into the SCe-e dome. When the nematic fluctuation is strong in a system, an external uniaxial pressure can stabilize the fluctuation resulting in an emergent nematic order. This has been observed near the nematic transition along the temperature axis in detwinned iron-pnictides19. Here in potassium-coated FeSe single crystal, the doping dependence of Tnem can be explained by a smearing of nematic transition along the doping axis due to the presence of uniaxial pressure (inset of Fig. 4b). As discussed in Fig. 1i, the bottom layers are undoped and therefore remain C2 symmetric. The symmetry breaking of the bottom layers applies a uniaxial pressure on the topmost layer, which smears the sharp suppression of nematic order at around 0.03 electron doping resulting in a tail-like residual nematic order. Such emergent nematic order can be observed until 0.1 electron doping, which implicates that strong nematic fluctuation presents in a wide doping range in the topmost layer of potassium-coated FeSe single crystal. Discussion The Lifshitz transition of Fermi surface, the emergence of superconductivity and the suppression of nematic order all occurs at the same doping level, which suggests an underlying correlation among them. The SCe-e phase emerges when the inter-pocket scattering between two electron pockets is turned on by the second Lifshitz transition. This suggests that the inter-pocket scattering is crucial for the superconducting pairing in the SCe-e phase. Such inter-pocket scattering can be mediated by spin fluctuation as proposed in both weak- and strong-coupling theories27, 28. However, the long-range magnetic order has not been observed in FeSe. It is still not clear how strong the spin fluctuation is and whether the absence of magnetic order in FeSe is due to quantum fluctuation or not29. Alternatively, the nematic fluctuation may mediate the inter-pocket scattering through a small momentum transfer in two-iron BZ. Our result suggests that strong nematic fluctuation presents in potassium-coated FeSe single crystal when the nematic order is suppressed by electron doping. Intriguingly, when the nematic order at zero doping is enhanced from FeSe single crystal (Tnem = 90K) to FeSe thin film (Tnem = 160~180K), the optimal doping Tc increases from 25 K to around 44~48 K and the superconducting gap increases from 8 meV to 12~14 meV19-21. All these suggest that the nematic order is most likely the parent phase for electron-doped FeSe superconductors. It is expected that Tc would be further increased if the nematic fluctuation can be further enhanced. Due to its distinctive Fermi surface topologies, the potassium-coated FeSe single crystal serves as a model system for further experimental and theoretical studies. The SCh-e dome ends at the first Lifshitz transition where the central hole pocket vanishes implying that the inter-pocket scattering between hole and electron pockets is critical for the SCh-e phase. Furthermore, the SCh-e phase coexists with the nematic order and its superconducting dome is well beneath the nematic transition. This suggests that, unlike the SCe-e phase, the nematic fluctuation is absent above Tc for the SCh-e phase due to the formation of long-range nematic order. Therefore, our result suggests possible different pairing mechanisms for the SCe-e and SCh-e phases in potassium-coated FeSe single crystal. The two superconducting phases (SCe-e and SCh-e) represent two distinct superconducting pairing channels in iron-based superconductors. It is intriguing to further study how they interplay in iron-pnictide superconductors when both hole-electron and electron-electron inter-pocket scatterings exist on the Fermi surface. Methods High quality FeSe single crystal was synthesized using vapor transport method25. The superconducting transition temperature is 8.4 K and the nematic transition temperature is 90K as characterized by magnetic susceptibility measurements. The potassium was evaporated onto the cleaved sample surface in-situ. The pressure is less than 5×10−10 torr during the evaporation. ARPES measurements were performed at the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource Beamline 5-4. All the data were taken with 23 eV photons. The temperature was maintained at 6 K for the low temperature measurement. The overall energy resolution was 5 meV, and the angular resolution was less than 0.3 degree. All the samples were measured in ultrahigh vacuum with a base pressure better than 3×10−11 torr.