Gapless Andreev bound states in the quantum spin Hall insulator HgTe E. Bocquillon,1, ∗ R.S. Deacon,2, 3, ∗ J. Wiedenmann,1, ∗ P. Leubner,1 T.M. Klapwijk,4 C. Br ̈une,1 K. Ishibashi,2, 3 H. Buhmann,1 and L.W. Molenkamp1 1Physikalisches Institut (EP3), Universit ̈at W ̈urzburg, Am Hubland, D-97074 W ̈urzburg, Germany 2Advanced Device Laboratory, RIKEN, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako-shi, Saitama, 351-0198, Japan 3Center for Emergent Matter Science, RIKEN, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako-shi, Saitama, 351-0198, Japan 4Kavli Institute of Nanoscience, Faculty of Applied Sciences, Delft University of Technology, Lorentzweg 1, 2628 CJ Delft, The Netherlands 1 arXiv:1601.08055v1 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 29 Jan 2016 In recent years, Majorana physics has attracted considerable attention in both theoretical and experimental studies due to exotic new phenomena and its prospects for fault-tolerant topological quantum computation. To this end, one needs to engineer the interplay between superconductivity and electronic properties in a topological insulator, but experimental work remains scarce and ambiguous. Here we report experimental evidence for topological super- conductivity induced in a HgTe quantum well, a two-dimensional topological insulator that exhibits the quantum spin Hall effect. The ac Josephson effect demonstrates that the supercurrent has a 4π-periodicity with the supercon- ducting phase difference as indicated by a doubling of the voltage step for multiple Shapiro steps. In addition, an anomalous SQUID-like response to a perpendicular magnetic field shows that this 4π-periodic supercurrent origi- nates from states located on the edges of the junction. Both features appear strongest when the sample is gated towards the quantum spin Hall regime, thus providing evidence for induced topological superconductivity in the quan- tum spin Hall edge states. The realization of Majorana bound states is theoretically expected in a one-dimensional p-wave superconducting phase without spin-degeneracy1,2. A convenient experimental implementation of this exotic phase can be obtained by combining recently discovered topological states with conventional s-wave superconductivity3,4. Most of the experimen- tal focus has been to date on 1D InAs or InSb nanowires which may undergo a topological phase transition under an appropriate applied magnetic field. Although first results5,6 have been obtained, the topological origin of the observed phenomena remains unclear partly because the helical transport in the normal state has not been demonstrated. A potential alternative platform is provided by quantum spin Hall insulators, in which electrons flow in two counter-propagating one-dimensional edge states of opposite spins7,8 (see Fig.1A). Unlike nanowires, this topological state is present in the absence of magnetic field, thus alleviating the requirements for high critical field superconductors9. Ideally, a Josephson 2 junction formed from a quantum spin Hall (QSH) insulator and conventional s-wave su- perconducting contacts is expected to emulate spinless px +ipy-wave superconductivity10. On each edge, it contains one Andreev doublet with a topologically protected crossing for a superconducting phase difference φ = π (Fig.1B). The two states of this gapless topo- logical Andreev doublet (usually called Majorana bound states) have a 4π-periodicity in the superconducting phase difference φ and can thus carry a 4π-periodic supercurrent I4π sin φ/2 along the edges of the sample11. This contrasts with conventional 2π-periodic Andreev bound states, carrying a current I2π sin φ (+higher harmonics). This theoretical expectation for unconventional Josephson effect motivates our experiment. Here we report on the realization of a device that follows the proposal of Fu and Kane10 using HgTe, the first material to be identified as a topological insulator8. Due to their inverted band structure7, HgTe quantum wells of suitable thickness are a quantum spin Hall insulator in which superconductivity can be induced by means of e.g. Al electrodes12. The anticipated presence of gapless Andreev bound states on the edges of such a device should be evidenced by two remarkable signatures, which we present as simulations in Fig.1 (C and D). First, a 4π-periodic supercurrent is expected in the ac Josephson effect (Fig.1C). When phase locking occurs between the junction dynamics and an external rf excitation, Shapiro steps13 appear at discrete voltages given by V = nhf/2e, where n is the step index (blue line, left panel). In the presence of a 4π-periodic supercurrent, an unconventional sequence of even steps (red line), with missing odd steps, is expected, reflecting the doubled periodicity of the Andreev bound states14–16. The exact sequence of visible steps can be highlighted by plotting a histogram of the voltage distribution as presented (right panels). In this research, we report on the experimental observation of an even sequence, with missing odd steps up to n = 9 (Fig.3). The estimated amplitude of the 4π-periodic supercurrent is compatible with the presence of two gapless Andreev doublets. By changing the electron density, we find that the observed effect is predominant near the expected quantum spin Hall regime. In contrast, a non-topological HgTe quantum well is found to a conventional Shapiro response. Second, the response of the critical 3 A Phase di↵erence ' π 0 2π 3π 4π Energy " [∆] -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 QSH edge states s-wave superconductor induced 1D p-wave superconductivity B DC voltage V [ hf 2e ] DC current I [Ic] -2 0 2 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 4⇡ 2⇡ -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 0.00 0.25 0.50 DC voltage V [ hf 2e ] Step amplitude [Ic] -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 0.0 0.5 1.0 4⇡ 2⇡ 0.0 0.5 1.0 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 0.0 0.5 1.0 Crit. current Ic Magnetic field B [Φ0] SQUID Fraunhofer C D Josephson junction with induced p-wave superconductivity. A superconducting weak link in the QSH regime contacted by two superconducting s-wave electrodes hosts induced p-wave superconductivity. B) Andreev spectrum of a topological p-wave Josephson junction (in the short junction limit). The Andreev bound states, located on the edges of the samples, have a protected crossing at zero energy and a 4π-periodicity in the superconducting phase difference φ (blue line), in contrast with conventional 2π-periodic Andreev bound states (red dashed line). C) Simulated I-V curves in the presence of rf excitation for a 2π-periodic (blue line) and 4π- periodic (red line) supercurrents. Shapiro steps of quantized voltages Vn = nhf/2e (with n integer) occur in the first case, but only the sequence of even steps is visible in the latter case. Histograms of the voltage distribution (in bins of 0.25hf/2e) indicates the presence of a given Shapiro step as a peak in the histogram. The two bar plots for the two previous curves highlight the absence of odd steps in the case of 4π-periodicity. D) Simulated critical current Ic as a function of the magnetic field (in units of the number of flux quanta through the junction area). For a uniform planar current, a Fraunhofer pattern (blue line) is depicted. For current flowing on the edges, a (dc) SQUID pattern (red line) is expected. 4 current to a perpendicular-to-plane magnetic field provides information on the spatial dependence of the current density (Fig.1D). When a junction is dominated by planar bulk modes, the uniform flow through the plane of the quantum well results in a standard Fraunhofer pattern (illustrated by a blue line in Fig.1D). When current flows only on the edges, a dc SQUID response is expected12 (red line). Our measurements exhibit a crossover between these two regimes suggesting that the 4π-periodic current indeed flows along the edges (Fig.5). Additionally, in the SQUID regime, strong modulations of the odd lobes are observed, yielding an apparent doubling of the periodicity in the magnetic flux from Φ0 to 2Φ0. Together, these sets of features strongly point towards the existence of topological gapless Andreev bound states with 4π-periodicity flowing on the edges of the sample. Fig.2C summarizes the evolution of these signatures on the gate voltage axis, and we detail our experimental observations in the remainder of the article. The junctions are fabricated from epitaxially grown quantum wells of HgTe of thickness d = 8 nm, sandwiched between barrier layers of Hg0.3Cd0.7Te on a CdZnTe substrate. In such wells (with a thickness larger than a critical thickness d > dc = 6.3 nm7), the existence of topological edge channels in the absence of magnetic field has been predicted and experimentally demonstrated via resistance quantization8, non-local transport17, spin polarization measurements18 and scanning-SQUID imaging19. The layout of the Josephson junctions is presented in Fig.2A. A rectangular mesa of HgTe sandwiched in Hg0.3Cd0.7Te is first defined. After locally etching the cap layer, aluminium contacts are then deposited in-situ on the HgTe layer, using standard evaporation and lift-off techniques. A metallic gate (Au) is placed between the Al contacts to control the electron density. The Al superconducting stripes have a width of 1 μm. The HgTe mesa has a width of 4 μm, corresponding to the width of the weak link. With this design, the overlap of edge channels on opposite edges is suppressed as the estimated edge channel20,21 width is around 200 nm. The length of the junction presented in this paper is nominally L = 400 nm. Given an estimated mean free path l > 2 μm, and a coherence length ξ ≃ 600 nm, we estimate that our junction is in an intermediate length regime L ∼ ξ < l (see Supplementary 5 HgTe Hg0.3Cd0.7Te 2μm A B C DC current I [μA] DC voltage V [μV] -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 -400 -200 0 200 400 Gate voltage Vg [V] Fraunhofer 2Φ0 SQUID Φ0 SQUID 4π Shapiro 2π Shapiro n-type bulk Resistance Rn [Ω] Crit. current Ic [nA] p-type bulk F. -2.0 -1.5 -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 and colorized SEM picture of a junction. The HgTe QSH insulator (in mauve) is sandwiched between two layers of Hg0.3Cd0.7Te (in blue). The Al superconducting contacts are in dark purple while the gate is in yellow and lies on a thin dielectric layer of HfO2 (dark green). B) I-V curve measured at a gate voltage of Vg = 0 V. It exhibits a critical current Ic = 1.1 μA, with a weak hysteresis visible between forward and reverse sweep (blue and red lines). For high biases, the asymptotes (grey lines) yield the normal state Rn and signals the presence of an excess current Iexc. D) Critical current Ic (red line), and normal state resistance Rn (blue line) as a function of gate voltage Vg. The red arrows summarize the ranges where we observe the anomalous Josephson effect properties. Information). A typical I-V curve (measured at 30 mK) is presented in Fig.2B. The junction exhibits a Josephson supercurrent with a critical current Ic = 1.1 μA (here for a gate voltage 6 Vg = 0 V). Hysteresis is observed between forward and reverse sweeps, with a retrapping current Ir < Ic. For voltages larger than the energy gap of the aluminium, the I-V curve reaches an asymptote that does not go through the origin (grey line). The slope indicates the normal state resistance of the device Rn, while the intercept is the excess current Iexc. The excess current22 stems from Andreev reflections in an energy window near the superconducting gap. It thus signals the presence of Andreev reflections at the S-TI interfaces and underlines the quality of our junctions. In order to identify the QSH regime, it is instructive to plot the normal state resistance Rn and the critical current Ic as a function of the gate voltage Vg (Fig.2C). We observe three regimes. For gate voltages between Vg = −1.1 V and 0 V, Rn is low (below 300 Ω) and Ic is large (above 200 nA) thus characterizing high mobility n-type conduction. For gate voltages below Vg = −1.7 V, the normal state resistance decreases again slowly, indicating the p-conducting regime. Due to a lower mobility in this region, the critical current Ic lies below 50 nA. In between, Rn exhibits a peak with a maximum around 1.5 kΩ (for Vg = −1.45 V), for which Ic is almost suppressed. This indicates the region where the QSH edge states should be most visible. However, the peak value of Rn is lower than the expected quantized value h/2e2 ≃ 12.9 kΩ, thus suggesting the presence of residual bulk modes in the junction12, possibly due to Al diffusion23 into the HgTe material. Additionally, local n-doping caused by Al may result in p-n barriers at the interface between the Al capped- and gated areas. This would contribute to the two-point normal state resistance Rn and could obscure a correct identification of the QSH transition. The presence of gapless Andreev bound states can in principle be detected via the 4π-periodic contribution to the supercurrent. In practice such detection in dc transport can be complicated by additional contributions from conventional 2π-periodic modes24,25 carrying a current I2π sin φ and by relaxation processes which can restore a 2π-periodic supercurrent2,16,26. In order to reveal possible the 4π-periodic characteristics, the dynam- ics of the junction is most conveniently probed by studying the ac-Josephson effect. In a previous work27, we identified anomalous features in the Shapiro response of a weak 7 link made of the 3D TI strained HgTe (namely a missing 1st Shapiro step) which we at- tributed to a fractional ac Josephson effect consistent with the presence of a 4π-periodic Andreev doublet. In the present report, we apply the same method to the more interest- ing case of a 2D TI. The current-voltage characteristic of the sample is measured using a dc current bias with the addition of an rf driving current, coupled to the device via a nearby antenna27. Fig.3A shows a series of histograms of the voltage distribution obtained when lowering the excitation frequency (at Vg = −1.1 V, see Supplementary Information for typical I-V curves). For a high frequency excitation (f = 6.6 GHz), we observe a ’conventional’ sequence of Shapiro steps at V = nhf/2e, n ∈ Z. As the frequency is low- ered to f = 0.8 GHz, we observe the progressive vanishing of all odd steps up to n = 9. To our knowledge, the only mechanism resulting in the suppression of odd steps is the presence of a 4π-periodic contribution in the supercurrent. While a pure 4π-periodic su- percurrent should lead directly to an even sequence of Shapiro steps (as a direct effect of the substitution φ → φ/2 in the Josephson equations), it is in our experiment only visible at low rf frequency. Our junction may in practice contain both gapless bound states and a number of residual conventional modes such that the supercurrent Is could be written as Is(φ) = I4π sin φ/2 + I2π sin φ (+higher harmonics). Even in the presence of a strong 2π-periodic contribution, a 4π-periodic response can be observed when the time dependence of the voltage V to the current bias I is most anharmonic, namely at a low frequency27,28 (see SI). Odd steps are then missing if the rf excitation frequency f is lower than a frequency f4π = 2eRnI4π h . An estimate of the crossover frequency f4π then yields the amplitude of the 4π-periodic supercurrent I4π. Estimating the crossover frequency f4π by a fully suppressed n = 3 step, we find that I4π ≃ 20 nA. The presence of two gapless Andreev bound states carrying a current of 10 nA is compatible with the maximum current e∆i ħ for the estimated induced gap ∆i ≥ 80 μeV (see SI) and the gap of the Al contacts (∆Al ≃ 150 μeV). Apart from gapless Andreev states, gapped An- dreev bound states with high-transparency could also result in a 4π-periodic contribution in the supercurrent in the presence of Landau-Zener transitions at the avoided crossing 8 φ = π, 3π, ...28,29. However Landau-Zener transitions have increasing probabilities with dc voltage or frequency. Given our observations of missing steps only at low frequencies, this possibility appears unlikely. Recently it has been proposed that Coulomb interaction and coupling of Andreev bound states to the continuum can result in a quantum spin Hall system in the appearance of 8π-periodic Josephson effect30. In this experimental work, we observe no sign of such an effect in the response of our devices. We now address the dependence of the Shapiro steps on the rf power. Fig.3B shows as an example the behaviour at f = 1.8 GHz (see Supplementary Information for additional data sets). A two-dimensional map of the voltage histogram is shown as a function of voltage and excitation power Prf. For low power levels, the steps progressively appear (starting from low step indices) as the power is increased. While maxima are seen for n = 0, 2, 4, the first and third Shapiro steps are fully suppressed (as illustrated previously by the histogram of Fig.3A taken along the red dashed line). As visible here, hysteresis is occasionally found to induce a weak asymmetry at low power, affecting the n = ±1 step at low frequency and low power. For high power, an oscillatory pattern (reminiscent of Bessel functions in the voltage bias case31) is observed. However the pattern is deeply modified (when compared with that seen for higher frequency excitation) with dark fringes27 (white dotted lines) which develop from the suppression of the first and third maxima of the oscillations. In our opinion these features signal the progressive transformation from a 2π- to a 4π-periodic pattern with halved period of oscillations corresponding to a halved number of steps. Next we investigate the dependence of the Shapiro response on gate voltage Vg. A general observation is that odd steps vanish at low frequencies for a very wide range of gate voltages, from about Vg ≥ −1.3 V up to 0.5 V. The visibility of an even sequence is in agreement with the previously introduced criterion f < f4π, and demonstrates that a 4π-periodic contribution is present in addition to a conventional 2π-periodic component. The latter most likely originates from the bulk signaling the expected coexistence of topological edge states with modes from the conduction band32. The 4π-periodic modes 9 -2.0 -1.5 -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 A C B -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 0 30 60 0 10 20 30 40 0 5 10 15 0 5 10 15 0 10 20 30 40 DC voltage V [ hf 2e ] Step amplitude [nA] f = 6.6 GHz f = 0.8 GHz f = 3.5 GHz f = 1.8 GHz f = 1 GHz Gate voltage Vg [V] Ratios Q12 and Q34 4π Q12 Q34 2π RF power Prf [dBm] DC voltage V [ hf 2e ] T ' 25 mK f = 1 GHz Vg = −1.1 V 15 0 5 10 Counts [nA] Counts [nA] for different frequencies. For a high frequency f = 6.6 GHz, all steps are present. For lower frequencies, we observe the disappearance of steps n = 1 and 3 (f = 1.8 GHz), and up to n = 9 at f = 0.8 GHz. Missing steps are highlighted by red arrows. B) Map of the voltage distributions with voltage bins in normalized units hf/2e indicated on the abscissa and the RF excitation power on the ordinate. Steps n = 1, 3 are completely suppressed in the low power regime. In the oscillatory high power regime, dark fringes (white dotted lines) develop as the first and third oscillations are suppressed. The red dashed line indicates the linecut taken in the low power regime used to compute the histogram in A). C) Ratios of step amplitudes Q12 (blue line) and Q34 (red line), measured for f = 3.1 GHz as a function of gate voltage Vg. Both ratios exhibit a dip in the range −1.3 V-−0.9 V. 10 are progressively unveiled as the number of bulk modes is decreased for negative voltages. In Fig.3C, we show a plot of the ratios Q12 (resp. Q34) of the maximum amplitude of the n = 1 to n = 2 steps (n = 3 to n = 4 steps respectively) for measurements at f = 3.1 GHz. Simulations using the RSJ model27,28 predict ratios Qi,i+1 which are close to unity for a conventional junction, as indicated by the shaded grey area. Ratios approaching zero indicate the suppression and disappearance of the odd Shapiro step. Both ratios Q12 and Q34 indicate that the visibility of the even sequence of steps is improved between Vg = −1.3 V to −0.9 V. Thus, the ac response of our junctions strongly signals the presence of a strong 4π-periodic contribution from the supercurrent appearing more clearly in this range close to the QSH transition. Furthermore, we emphasize that these observations are fully consistent with our previous work on the 3D topological insulator strained HgTe27, in which a single gapless Andreev doublet is expected33. However observation is in this case less favorable due to the presence of a greater number of conventional modes, displacing the crossover to lower frequencies in which the visibility of Shapiro steps is reduced, making it difficult to see more than one missing odd step. To assess the topological origin of the 4π-periodic supercurrent, we now briefly examine a narrower HgTe quantum well (thickness of d = 5 nm < dc, see SI), that does not exhibit the quantum spin Hall effect8. The measurement of the critical current Ic enables the identification of the n- and p- conduction regimes though the gap in between around Vg ≃ −1 V is not very pronounced (see Fig.4A). When measuring the Shapiro response to an rf excitation, we do not observe any missing odd step for any of the gate voltage, neither in n- nor p- regimes, nor close to the gap. As an example, we show in Fig.4B a measurement taken close to the gap at Vg = −1 V and f = 0.6 GHz. For such a frequency close to our detection limit, all steps are still visible. Finally we detail the response of the junction to a magnetic field perpendicular to the plane of the junction, and show that the previous observations are compatible with edge transport in the same range. With application of a magnetic field, the superconducting phase difference φ becomes position dependent34. This in turn reveals properties of the 11 A B DC voltage V [ hf 2e ] RF power Prf [dBm] -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 -46 -44 -42 -40 -38 -36 -34 -32 -30 Gate voltage Vg [V] Resistance Rn [⌦] -2.0 -1.5 -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 -6 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 Crit. current Ic [nA] Vg = −1 V f = 0.6 GHz T ' 25 mK Vg = −1 V f = 0.6 GHz T ' 25 mK Vg = −1 V f = 0.6 GHz T ' 25 mK and normal state resistance Rn of a non-topological device as a function of gate voltage Vg. B) 2D maps of the voltage distribution as a function of the voltage (in normalized units) and the RF excitation power. It is taken at gate voltage Vg ≃ −1 V and frequency f = 0.6 GHz. At this frequency close to our resolution limit, all steps are still visible. spatial supercurrent distribution through modulations of the critical current Ic with a pe- riod given by the magnetic flux quantum Φ0 = h/2e. In Fig.5A, we present the differential resistance dV/dI as a function of dc current I and magnetic field B for different gate volt- ages corresponding to four different behaviours that we identify. First for Vg = 0 V, the junction exhibits a conventional Fraunhofer pattern of the critical current versus magnetic field, that rapidly decays as the magnetic field increases. In this regime, the electron den- sity is high and current flows uniformly in the 2D plane of the quantum well. We obtain a period of circa 0.41 mT which, given the dimensions of our device, corresponds to an effective area W(L + 2λ) = 5.1 μm2 yielding a penetration length λ ≃ 430 nm (similar to ). The minima are then identified as points where the magnetic flux Φ through the junction is a multiple of the flux quantum Φ0 (Φ = nΦ0, n ∈ Z). As the gate voltage is decreased, the critical current decreases, and the diffraction pattern is similar to that of 12 a (dc) SQUID for Vg = −1.3 V and Vg = −1.6 V. The presence of maxima at multiples Φ = nΦ0, n ∈ Z is a signature of a SQUID-like behavior and demonstrates that a size- able part of the supercurrent flows along the edges of the sample12, as expected in the presence of QSH edge channels. In addition, the narrowing of the central lobe is clearly visible at Vg = −1.6 V. However, very strong odd/even modulations are observed in both cases : the first and third lobes are substantially smaller than the second and fourth. In particular at Vg = −1.35 V, the first and third lobes are completely suppressed, yielding an apparent doubling of the period (from Φ0 to 2Φ0) at low fields, before a conventional period is recovered for larger fields. Finally for more negative gate voltages (Vg = −2 V), the pattern progressively returns to a Fraunhofer one, with some strong distortions, es- pecially at high fields. This suggests that the current flow returns to a two-dimensional configuration, with inhomogeneities likely to stem from the lower mobility of the charge carriers in this gate voltage range. In Fig.5B, we present a two-dimensional plot of the normalized critical current Ic(B)/Ic(B = 0) when the gate voltage Vg and magnetic field B are varied. For Vg = 0 V to Vg = −0.8 V the pattern remains close to a Fraunhofer pattern, but the first and third lobes progressively disappear and are missing between −1 V and −1.5 V, as emphasized by the thin red guides to the eye. A progressive shift of the position of the second and fourth maxima is also visible towards Φ/Φ0 ≃ 2 and 4 in the SQUID-like regime. For −1.6 V, the first and third lobes reappear. When driving the gate from Vg = −1.6 V to Vg = −2 V, a standard Fraunhofer pattern is progressively recovered. It is tempting to associate our observations of the anomalous doubled period to a SQUID-like pattern | cos( πΦ 2Φ0)| with periodicity 2Φ0 originating from the 4π-periodicity previously identified. But dc measurements are sensitive to relaxation processes that in principle restore a conventional Φ0 periodicity15,35,36, and it is unlikely that our devices are free of quasiparticle poisoning during the timescale of the experiment. Several models37,38 have explained odd-even patterns and small deviations in a previously observed SQUID pattern39 via skewed current phase relations or additional coupling between edges. Neither 13 B A 0 1 2Φ0-SQUID Φ0-SQUID Fraunhofer Fraunhofer Gate voltage Vg [V] Magnetic field B [mT] C Magnetic field B [mT] -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 0 20 40 60 80 100 Crit. current Ic± [nA] Vg = −1.35 V Ic+ Ic− DC current I [nA] Vg = −1.3 V Vg = −1.6 V Vg = 0 V Vg = −2 V Magnetic field B [mT] resistance dV/dI as function of magnetic field B and dc current bias I for four different gate voltages. For Vg = 0 V and −2 V, the patterns are close to Fraunhofer diffraction ones, while at Vg = −1.3 V and Vg = −1.6 V, a SQUID-like pattern is observed. Vertical grey lines indicate minima of the Fraunhofer pattern where Φ is a multiple of Φ0, that correspond to maxima of the SQUID pattern. For Vg = −1.3 V, the first and third side lobes are suppressed, yielding an apparent doubling of the period of the interference. B) Map of normalized critical currents as function of magnetic field B and gate voltage Vg. The disappearance of first and third lobes as well as shifts in position of second and fourth lobes are highlighted by red dashed lines. C) Critical current as a function of magnetic field at Vg = −1.35 V, for the two sweep directions (positive as a blue line, negative as a red line), following the symmetry relation Ic+(B) = Ic−(−B). 14 the lobe pattern nor the effect of temperature (see Supplementary Information) favour such models. An alternative mechanism to explain the interference pattern is the interplay of Zeeman effect and spin-orbit coupling, which should occur in our material system40,41. The interference pattern shows a peculiar symmetry relation of the critical current : Ic+(B) = Ic−(−B), where ± indicates the sweep direction of the bias current and ±B the magnetic field direction (see Fig.5C). In contrast, it is asymmetric both in magnetic field and sweep direction. Further investigation in a more suitable geometry is required to clarify the role of these mechanisms. Finally, we return to Fig.2C. The response to rf irradiation strongly suggests the pres- ence of a 4π-periodic supercurrent in the device with a contribution compatible with two modes. It is most visible when the bulk bands are depleted (as indicated by the Fraun- hofer interference pattern). In this region, the current flow is mostly along the edges of the sample (as indicated by the SQUID features, with possible indications of spin-orbit and Zeeman effects). Though the QSH regime is not clearly identified by its quantized conductance, it appears that the 4π-periodic contribution is also detected in the whole n-conduction band but is rapidly suppressed when driving the gate voltage towards the p- conduction regime. This suggests that the 4π-periodic edge modes coexist in parallel with bulk modes of the conduction band, consistently with previous predictions32 and observa- tions in our material system12,19. In contrast, a Josephson junction made of a topological trivial quantum well exhibits a conventional Shapiro response. Together, this set of obser- vations strongly point towards the existence of topological gapless Andreev bound states predicted by Fu and Kane10 in Josephson junctions produced on the well-characterized QSH insulator HgTe. Though further developments are required to fully comprehend the richness of the observed phenomena, Josephson junctions in HgTe quantum wells and at zero magnetic field appear promising for the future realization of Majorana end states and possibly scalable Majorana qu-bits. 15