Rashba versus Kohn-Luttinger: Evolution of p-wave superconductivity in magnetized two-dimensional Fermi gases subject to spin-orbit interactions Ethan Lake, Caleb Webb, D. A. Pesin, and O. A. Starykh Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA (Dated: September 18, 2018) We study how the Rashba spin-orbit interaction influences unconventional superconductivity in a two dimensional electron gas partially spin-polarized by a magnetic field. Somewhat surprisingly, we find that for all field orientations, only the larger Fermi surface is superconducting. When the magnetic field is oriented out-of-plane the system realizes a topological p + ip pairing state. When the field is rotated in-plane the order parameter develops nodes along the field direction and finite center-of-mass-momentum pairing is realized. We demonstrate that the pairing symmetry of the system can be easily probed experimentally due to the dependence of various thermodynamic quantities on the magnetic field geometry, and calculate the electronic specific heat as an example. I. INTRODUCTION The idea that a superconducting state can arise from direct repulsive interactions between electrons was first introduced in a celebrated paper by Kohn and Luttinger1 (see2,3 for recent reviews on this topic). Even though the bare interaction U between electrons is repulsive, an effective attraction arises at O(U 2) which forms a p-wave superconducting state in three dimensions. Un- fortunately this type of pairing is much weaker in two dimensional systems, and in the weak-coupling regime only a fragile superconducting state at O(U 3) exists4. However, partially polarizing a two dimensional elec- tron gas (2DEG) with an in-plane magnetic field can dra- matically increase the strength of the effective pairing interaction at O(U 2), as has been shown by a perturba- tive diagrammatic expansion5 and more recently by an asymptotically exact renormalization group approach6,7. It was found that a non-unitary p + ip superconducting state forms, in which the larger of the 2DEGвҖҷs two energy bands superconducts, while the smaller one does not. This interesting result represents one of the conceptu- ally simplest illustrations of the Kohn-Luttinger mech- anism of superconductivity. The natural association of the Sz = +1 order parameter with the majority (spin up) band ensures its вҖҳexoticвҖҷ nature - the spatial part of the pair wave function must be an odd function of the momentum (an odd angular harmonic). The fact that the highest critical temperature is achieved for the smallest possible l = 1 harmonic8 brings this idealized set-up very close to the forefront of modern research in topological states of matter9. However, any physical discussion of two-dimensional superconductivity requires one to account for an om- nipresent spin-orbit interaction26вҖ“28,34вҖ“36,39. In this pa- per, we extend previous studies by investigating the ef- fects of Rashba spin-orbit coupling (SOC) on unconven- tional triplet superconductivity, mediated by repulsive electron interactions, in a partially spin-polarized 2DEG. We treat the SOC strength perturbatively with respect to the magnetic field strength, while allowing the magnetic field to point at an arbitrary angle with respect to the plane of the electron motion. As an example, such a sce- nario arises naturally at the boundary between LaAlO3 and SrTiO310,11, where the spin-orbit interaction can be tuned by controlling an applied gate voltage12вҖ“14. The addition of SOC breaks spin conservation and in- duces coupling between spin-up and spin-down states. It was speculated previously7 that SOC would therefore in- duce a superconducting state on the minority band due to the additional inter-band interactions it generates. How- ever, we find that no superconductivity is induced on the minority band to the leading order in the spin-orbit coupling strength, regardless of the mutual orientation of the magnetic field and spin-orbital axes. A state where momentum-space Josephson coupling induces supercon- ductivity on the minority band does exist, but it is ener- getically disfavored compared to a decoupled phase where only the majority band is superconducting. We analyze the pairing symmetries realized on the ma- jority band as a function of the magnetic field orientation. For as long as the magnetic field possesses a finite out-of- plane component the majority band is fully gapped with p + ip symmetry, albeit with an angle-dependent, mod- ulated gap. When the field is oriented strictly in-plane, the order parameter develops nodes along the field di- rection. Moreover, we find that quite generally the emer- gent superconducting state is of FFLO kind, with a finite center-of-mass pair momentum15вҖ“17, which is determined by the vector product of the spin-orbital and magnetic fields. Studying the details of the band structure and the direction of the nodes has been an area of intensive focus in recent experimental studies of unconventional superconductivity18вҖ“21. We show that the dependence of the pairing symmetry on the magnetic field orientation allows the nodal symmetries of the system to be read- ily probed by measurements of various thermodynamic quantities. To illustrate this, we compute the electronic specific heat of the system as a function of the magnetic field orientation. The structure of this paper is as follows. In section II we introduce the Hamiltonian and perform a unitary transformation which brings it into a form diagonal in arXiv:1602.02741v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 30 Jun 2016 2 the band indices. Self-consistent equations of the the- ory are derived in section III. In section III A we detail the resulting order parameter symmetries for different magnetic field orientations. Calculation of the electronic specific heat in section III B is followed by the discussion of our results in section IV. A complementary discussion of finite center-of-mass momentum pairing is presented in Appendix A. II. MODEL AND HAMILTONIAN A. Hamiltonian The geometry of the system we consider is shown in We let the 2DEG lie in the xy plane, with the magnetic field H inclined by a polar angle Оҙ relative to the ЛҶz axis with azimuthal angle ПҶ = 0. The non- interacting part of the Hamiltonian H0 describes elec- trons with parabolic dispersion k2/(2m) subject to the external Zeeman field вҲ’gОјBH В· ПғПғПғ/2, where g is the g- factor and ОјB is Bohr magneton, and the spin-orbit in- teraction of Rashba type ОұRkГ—ПғПғПғ В· ЛҶz = ОұR(kxПғy вҲ’kyПғx). We set Д§ = c = 1 throughout the paper. In order to conveniently treat SOC in perturbation the- ory, we choose to align the spin quantization axis parallel to the magnetic field. This is done with the help of a unitary rotation about the ЛҶy axis, Ry = exp[вҲ’iОҙПғy/2], which transforms H0 into H0 = пҝҪ kПғПғвҖІ EПғПғвҖІ(k)cвҖ  kПғckПғвҖІ, (1) where the matrix E(k) is given by E(k) = k2 2mПғ0 вҲ’ hПғz + ОұR(kxпҝҪПғy вҲ’ kyпҝҪПғx) (2) and пҝҪПғ = (Пғz sin Оҙ + Пғx cos Оҙ) ЛҶx + ПғyЛҶy + (Пғz cos Оҙ вҲ’ Пғx sin Оҙ)ЛҶz represents the rotated spin ПғПғПғ. The Zeeman coupling strength is given by h = eg|H|/2m. We neglect the effect of the external field on the orbital motion of the electrons, an approximation which is jus- tified if the g-factor is sufficiently large or if the orbital coupling term is absent. This is the case in systems of cold neutral atoms, which have been the subject of several recent experimental studies of SOC22вҖ“24. The electrons repel each other via the short-ranged (contact) interaction HI = пҝҪ d2r U ЛҶnвҶ‘(r)ЛҶnвҶ“(r) written in terms of electron spin densities ЛҶnПғ(r). Therefore the full Hamiltonian for our system in momentum space is H = H0 + HI, H0 = пҝҪ kПғПғвҖІ EПғПғвҖІ(k)cвҖ  kПғckПғвҖІ HI = U V пҝҪвҖІ k1k2k3k4 cвҖ  k1вҶ‘cвҖ  k2вҶ“ck3вҶ“ck4вҶ‘ (3) where the primed sum is subject to the momentum con- servation k1 + k2 = k3 + k4. Оҙ z H 2DEG x y Geometry of the system. We align the spin quanti- zation axis along magnetic field H. B. Schrieffer-Wolff transformation In this Section we describe the single particle spec- trum of Hamiltonian (3), and construct a canonical (Schrieffer-Wolff) transformation, which brings the inter- action Hamiltonian into a form convenient for mean-field analysis. The Hamiltonian (3), for general values of ОұR, h and U, is extremely complicated, and is amenable only to numerical treatments. In what follows we make several physically-motivated simplifying assumptions, which re- strict the generality of the obtained results, but make the problem analytically solvable. Throughout, we assume the spin-orbit interaction to be weak compared to the Zeeman coupling, allowing us to treat the ratio ОұRkf/h perturbatively, where kf is the Fermi momentum of ei- ther Fermi surface. The particle-particle interaction, U, is assumed to be weak, mU вүӘ 1. As far as quantities of higher order of smallness are concerned, we will keep terms of order O(mUОұ2 Rk2 f/h2) while discarding those of order O(m2U 2ОұRkf/h), which is permissible for not too small Rashba SOC, ОұRkf вү« mUh. The utility of these approximations will become clear in what follows. We begin with the single-particle part of the Hamil- tonian, H0. The problem of finding the spectrum and eigenstates of H0 can be easily solved exactly; however, for our purposes we specialize to the case of weak SOC from the outset. To diagonalize H0, we perform a unitary transforma- tion from the operators ckПғ to band operators akО», where the index О» вҲҲ {1, 2} labels the two bands, with 1 denoting the larger (majority) band and 2 the smaller (minority) ones. To the required order in ОұR, the transformation to band operators is given by ckвҶ‘ = пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ Оұ2 Rk2 8h2 (cos2 ПҶk + sin2 ПҶk cos2 Оҙ) пҝҪ ak1 вҲ’ ОұRk 2h (i cos ПҶk + sin ПҶk cos Оҙ)ak2, ckвҶ“ = вҲ’ОұRk 2h (i cos ПҶk вҲ’ sin ПҶk cos Оҙ)ak1 + пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ Оұ2 Rk2 8h2 (cos2 ПҶk + sin2 ПҶk cos2 Оҙ) пҝҪ ak2, (4) where ПҶk is the azimuthal angle of k. 31 kx ky +Q вҲ’Q magnetic field has a finite in-plane component along ЛҶx. Fermi surface of the majority (minority) bands is shown in solid/blue (dashed/red). Filled points denote the location of their cen- ters. The exact band dispersion is calculated from Eq. (2) as ОөО»(k) = k2 2m вҲ’ О¶О» пҝҪ Оұ2 Rk2 + h2 + 2ОұRhk sin ПҶk sin Оҙ (5) with О¶О» denoting the helicity of each band defined with respect to the ЛҶz axis. We use О¶1 = 1 (О¶2 = вҲ’1) for the majority (minority) band. It is worth noting that to the leading order in the ex- pansion parameter r = ОұRkf/h вүӘ 1 the obtained band dispersion can be approximated as ОөО»(k) вүҲ k2 x + (ky вҲ’ О¶О»Q)2 вҲ’ Q2 2m вҲ’ О¶О»h, (6) where Q = mОұR sin Оҙ describes the center-of-mass mo- mentum shift of the two bands. Observe that to this order the dispersion retains circular shape, and that the bands shift in the opposite directions, see Figure ??. Fi- nally, note that vector Q = QЛҶy вҲқ ЛҶzГ—H/|H| is orthogonal to the ЛҶz вҲ’ ЛҶx plane. Next we turn to the interaction Hamiltonian HI. Our approach is motivated by the observation that in the ab- sence of SOC, short-range repulsion is of purely interband character: particles with the same spin orientation feel no local interaction due to the Pauli exclusion principle. One may then utilize the Schrieffer-Wolff transformation25 to get rid of this interband interaction in favor of an effec- tive intraband one. We will accomplish a similar program in the presence of SOC. It is known that without SOC, the effective intraband interaction leads to p-wave super- conductivity on the majority Fermi surface4,7. We show below that in the presence of the Rashba SOC the in- traband attraction is supplemented by two more terms: an intraband repulsion as well as an interband Josephson coupling. As a first step, we recast the interaction Hamiltonian HI in terms of the band operators akО». As was mentioned before, we keep the leading interactions that go as O(U 2), and O(UОұ2 R), but drop those that go as O(U 2ОұR). With this prescription we find that H = H0+H1+H2, H0 = пҝҪ О» пҝҪ k ОөkО»aвҖ  kО»akО», (7) and where, schematically, H1 contains all terms of the form aвҖ  О»aвҖ  О»aОјaОј, and H2 contains all terms of the form aвҖ  О»aвҖ  вҲ’О»aвҲ’О»aО» вҲқ nО»nвҲ’О» (with вҲ’О» denoting the opposite to О» band index) as well as those with three operators of the same band index. Since we are only concerned with the interaction in the Cooper channel, the interaction Hamiltonian H1 de- scribes intraband interaction in this channel вҖ“ repulsion (for Ој = О»), as well as interband Josephson coupling (for Ој = вҲ’О»). Both types of terms are of O(UОұ2 R) order. The interaction terms in H2 are off-diagonal in the band index, but give effective intraband attraction at O(U 2) order4,7. Therefore, our strategy is to perform a unitary transformation on the Hamiltonian in order to eliminate H2 from the resulting expression, in favor of an effective intraband interaction. The transformed Hamiltonian is пҝҪH = eвҲ’SHeS (8) where S = вҲ’SвҖ  is anti-Hermitian, leaving the eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian unchanged. We choose the ansatz [S, H0] = H2, and to the level of approximation stated earlier we obtain пҝҪH = H0 + H1 + [H1, S] + 1 2[H2, S]. (9) It is straightforward to show that S is given by the sum of each term in H2 divided by the energy exchange mediated by each term. For example, for the term in H2 of the form U V пҝҪ k1k2k3 aвҖ  k1,О»aвҖ  k2,вҲ’О»ak3,вҲ’О»ak4,О» (10) S contains the corresponding term U V пҝҪ k1k2k3 aвҖ  k1,О»aвҖ  k2,вҲ’О»ak3,вҲ’О»ak4,О» Оөk4,О» + Оөk3,вҲ’О» вҲ’ Оөk2,вҲ’О» вҲ’ Оөk1,О» . (11) Using the fact that H1 вҲқ O(UОұ2 R), as explained above, we observe that [H1, S] вҲқ O(U 2Оұ2 R) and as such repre- sents a higher order correction to our leading order ap- proximation. Hence we are allowed to drop it. Commut- ing (11) with H2 in (9) we generate three-particle (six a) terms where four a operators belong to the band О», while the other two are from the opposite, вҲ’О», band. Therefore the effective intraband interaction in the О»- band is obtained by projecting all aвҲ’О» operators to the non-interacting вҲ’О» band. Such a projection turns out to be equivalent to the replacement of number conserv- ing operator products by the appropriate Fermi distribu- tions: aвҖ  k,вҲ’О»akвҖІ,вҲ’О» вҶ’ Оҙk,kвҖІf(Оөk,вҲ’О»), where f denotes the Fermi distribution. Specializing next to the BCS (pair- ing) channel in the О»-band, we find that the last term 4 in (9) produces an effective interaction between electron pairs on the Fermi surface of the О» band, HKL = U 2 2V пҝҪ О» пҝҪ k,kвҖІ ПҮвҲ’О»(k вҲ’ kвҖІ)aвҖ  вҲ’kвҖІ,О»aвҖ  kвҖІ,О»ak,О»aвҲ’k,О». (12) HKL captures the Kohn-Luttinger physics, and describes the О»-band pairing interaction generated by the particle- hole fluctuations in the opposite, вҲ’О», band. This result is fully equivalent to previous diagrammatic calculations4,7 and is graphically described by the diagram in Figure 3. The functions ПҮО»(k вҲ’ kвҖІ) are the particle-hole suscepti- bilities for each band, defined by ПҮО»(q) = 1 V пҝҪ p f(Оөp+q,О») вҲ’ f(Оөp,О») Оөp+q,О» вҲ’ Оөp,О» . (13) Adding H1 contributions to (12) we finally obtain for the transformed Hamiltonian (9) пҝҪH = H0 + пҝҪ О»Ој пҝҪ k,kвҖІ gО»Ој(k, kвҖІ)aвҖ  вҲ’kвҖІ,О»aвҖ  kвҖІ,О»ak,ОјaвҲ’k,Ој, (14) where the full interaction matrix, gО»Ој(k, kвҖІ), is given by gО»Ој(k, kвҖІ) = UОұ2 Rkf,О»kf,ОјО¶О»О¶Ој 4V h2 (cos ПҶk вҲ’ iО¶О» cos Оҙ sin ПҶk) Г— (cos ПҶkвҖІ + iО¶Ој cos Оҙ sin ПҶkвҖІ) + U 2ПҮвҲ’О»(k вҲ’ kвҖІ) 2V ОҙО»Ој (15) where kf,О» is the Fermi momentum on each band, ПҶk is the angle momentum k makes with ЛҶx-axis, and, as before, О¶О» = 1 (вҲ’1) for О» = 1 (О» = 2) is the helicity of each band. The first term in gО»Ој(k, kвҖІ) represents the interactions generated by SOC and comes from H1 contributions. The factor of О¶О»О¶Ој tells us that the intra-band interactions generated by SOC are repulsive, while the inter-band Josephson terms are attractive. In writing the Hamiltonian (14) we neglected the shifts of the Fermi surfaces away from their zero-momentum centers, О¶О»Q. Keeping these shifts leads to small correc- tions beyond the assumed approximation described in the beginning of this subsection. A more complete form of the Hamiltonian, which takes into account these shifts, is derived in Appendix A (see (A.3)), where details of pairing with finite momentum are discussed. To compute the susceptibility, we set ОұR = 0 in (13), which is permissible since ПҮО» is multiplied by U 2 in the interaction matrix, and therefore the SOC-induced cor- rections are O(U 2ОұR) and can be dropped. This is one of the major simplifications that come from our assump- tions. At the same time, it is worth noting that the rather special (circular) form of the dispersion (6) guarantees that the SOC-induced corrections to ПҮО»(q) can only ap- pear in O(Оұ2 R) or higher order because the transferred momentum q = k вҲ’ kвҖІ does not depend on the overall momentum shift О¶О»Q as long as the momenta k, kвҖІ belong to the Fermi surface of the same band. p + k вҲ’ k0, вҲ’О» p, вҲ’О» вҲ’k0, О» вҲ’k, О» k, О» k0, О» The diagram responsible for creating a pairing in- stability at second order in the particle-particle interaction strength. Two electrons on band О» with momenta Вұk scatter to momenta ВұkвҖІ, creating a particle-hole pair on the opposite band вҲ’О». Integrating (13) gives an explicit expression for the charge susceptibility7: ПҮО»(q) = вҲ’ПҒО» пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ Re пҝҪ q2 вҲ’ (2kf,О»)2 q пҝҪ (16) where ПҒО» is the density of states of the band О». Again, the exact expression for ПҒО» is band and momentum de- pendent, but the corrections to ПҒО» = m/2ПҖ are O(ОұR) and hence need to be dropped when they meet the factor of U 2 present in the interaction matrix. The fact that ПҮО»(q) reduces to a constant for q вүӨ 2kf,О» is of major importance for our problem. It implies that electrons on the minority (О» = 2) Fermi surface do not experience any attractive potential from the particle-hole fluctuations produced by the majority (О» = 1) electrons. Indeed, the triplet nature of the electron pair on the ma- jority/minority Fermi surface (the total spin of the pair is Sz = +1/ вҲ’ 1, correspondingly) requires the coordi- nate part of the pair wavefunction to be an odd angular harmonic which, at the very minimum, requires that the interaction which mediates the attraction is momentum- dependent. However, the maximum momentum transfer that minority electrons may experience is 2kf,2 which, by virtue of the finite magnetization M вҲқ kf,1 вҲ’ kf,2 > 0, is always less than the вҖҳcriticalвҖҷ 2kf,1 value needed in or- der for ПҮ1(q) to acquire momentum dependence. The same argument, when applied to the electron pairs on the majority Fermi surface, shows that ПҮ2(q) is certainly momentum dependent for 2kf,2 < q < 2kf,1. Therefore, triplet pairing is possible on the majority surface. Furthermore, calculations5,7 show that the pairing is strongest for the p-wave, l = Вұ1, harmonic ПҮ(l=Вұ1) 2 of ПҮ2. One finds ПҮ(1) 2 = ПҮ(вҲ’1) 2 = вҲ’ПҒ2О·(1 вҲ’ О·), where О· = kf,2/kf,1 < 1 is the ratio of the Fermi momenta. We note that ПҮ(1) 2 is most negative, i.e. most attractive, for О· = 1/2.5,7 5 III. MEAN FIELD THEORY The mean-field approximation is formulated by intro- ducing the order parameters for each band as вҲҶО»(k) = пҝҪ Ој пҝҪ kвҖІ gО»Ој(k, kвҖІ)вҹЁaвҲ’kвҖІОјakвҖІОјвҹ©. (17) Using the Nambu spinor notation ОЁkО» = (akО», aвҖ  вҲ’kО»)T , (18) the mean-field approximation for the Hamiltonian (14) reads as H = 1 2 пҝҪ О» пҝҪ k пҝҪ ОЁвҖ  kО»HО»(k)ОЁkО» + ОҫkО» пҝҪ вҲ’ пҝҪ О»Ој пҝҪ kkвҖІ вҲҶвҖ  О»(k)gвҲ’1 О»Ој(k, kвҖІ)вҲҶОј(kвҖІ) (19) where ОҫkО» = ОөkО»вҲ’Ој and the matrix HО»(k) is represented by О»(k)(Пғx вҲ’ iПғy). (20) The diagonalization of HО»(k) is accomplished by a straightforward Bogolyubov transformation, which at zero temperature gives a thermodynamic potential of О© = 1 2 пҝҪ О» пҝҪ k (ОҫkО» вҲ’ EkО») вҲ’ пҝҪ О»Ој пҝҪ kkвҖІ вҲҶвҖ  О»(k)gвҲ’1 О»Ој(k, kвҖІ)вҲҶОј(kвҖІ), (21) where the quasiparticle dispersion is EkО» = пҝҪ Оҫ2 kО» + 4|вҲҶО»(k)|2. (22) We then derive the self-consistent equations for the theory by minimizing О© with respect to each order pa- rameter, obtaining вҲҶО»(k) = вҲ’ пҝҪ Ој пҝҪ kвҖІ gО»Ој(k, kвҖІ)вҲҶОј(kвҖІ) EkвҖІОј . (23) The condensation energy of the system Ec =1 2 пҝҪ О» пҝҪ k (|ОҫkО»| вҲ’ EkО») вҲ’ пҝҪ О»Ој пҝҪ kkвҖІ вҲҶвҖ  О»(k)gвҲ’1 О»Ој(k, kвҖІ)вҲҶОј(kвҖІ) (24) can be significantly simplified further by using the ex- plicit form of (23): Ec = вҲ’ пҝҪ О»=1,2 ПҒО»|вҲҶО»(kf,О»)|2. (25) A. Solutions and their symmetries Making use of (15) and (23), the self-consistent equa- tions read as вҲҶО»(k) = вҲ’ пҝҪ Ој,kвҖІ вҲҶОј(kвҖІ) пҝҪ Оҫ2 kвҖІОј + 4|вҲҶОј(kвҖІ)|2 пҝҪОҙО»ОјОҙО»1 2 U 2ПҮ2(k вҲ’ kвҖІ) + UОұ2 Rkf,О»kf,ОјО¶О»О¶Ој 4h2 (cos ПҶk вҲ’ iО¶О» cos Оҙ sin ПҶk)Г— Г— (cos ПҶkвҖІ + iО¶Ој cos Оҙ sin ПҶkвҖІ) пҝҪ (26) Note that, as discussed in the end of section II, the Kohn- Luttinger mechanism provides only for the pairing in the majority (О» = 1) band. The ПҮ2(k вҲ’ kвҖІ) term is han- dled by restricting both momenta to the О» = 1 Fermi surface, which is allowed due to the presence of ОҫkвҖІ is the denominator of the right-hand side, and expanding ПҮ2(kf,1 вҲ’ kвҖІ f,1) = пҝҪ lвҲҲodd ПҮ(l) 2 cos[l(ПҶk вҲ’ ПҶkвҖІ)] in relative azimuthal angle. The strongest pairing is in the l = 1 channel to which we restrict ourselves in the following. (The coupling between different l channels occurs only in higher orders of ОұR expansion.) We find that (26) admits two distinct kinds of solutions which we call coupled and decoupled. The coupled solution involves both bands and is char- acterized by the following angular structure вҲҶО»(k) = вҲҶО»(cos ПҶk вҲ’ iО¶О» cos Оҙ sin ПҶk), (27) where the вҲҶО» Мё= 0 are constants that must be solved for self-consistently. In this solution both bands are gapped, with momentum-space Josephson coupling (вҲқ UОұ2 R) in- ducing a superconducting gap on the minority band. In addition, however, this solution is also characterized by the presence of a repulsive intra-band interaction on each band (вҲқ UОұ2 R(cos2 ПҶвҖІ+cos2 Оҙ sin2 ПҶ) > 0) that diminishes the attraction due to ПҮ(1) 2 and the Josephson coupling. Since вҲҶО» is exponentially sensitive to the magnitude of the overall attractive interaction, we are prompted to look for a pairing symmetry that minimizes their influ- ence in the self-consistent equations. Observe that the repulsive intra-band interactions on the majority band will vanish if вҲҶ1(k) satisfies пҝҪ kвҖІ (cos ПҶkвҖІ + i cos Оҙ sin ПҶkвҖІ)вҲҶ1(kвҖІ) пҝҪ Оҫ2 kвҖІ1 + 4|вҲҶ1(kвҖІ)|2 = 0. (28) It is not difficult to see that (28) is satisfied if вҲҶ1(k) = вҲҶ1(cos Оҙ cos ПҶk + i sin ПҶk). (29) In addition, if вҲҶ1(k) satisfies (29), then the inter- band Josephson coupling term in the minority-band self- consistent equation vanishes as well. Since the only other term in the minority band self-consistent equation is re- pulsive, the energetically favorable solution is to have 6 вҲҶ2(k) = 0 everywhere. This decoupled solution thus re- alizes a phase where the minority band is not supercon- ducting, with the amplitude of the order parameter вҲҶ1 on the majority band determined by solving вҲҶ1(k) = вҲ’ пҝҪ kвҖІ U 2ПҮ(1) 2 вҲҶ1(kвҖІ) cos(ПҶk вҲ’ ПҶkвҖІ) 2 пҝҪ Оҫ2 kвҖІ1 + 4|вҲҶ1(kвҖІ)|2 . (30) By combining (29) and (30) we find вҲҶ1(k) = вҲҶ1 пҝҪ cos Оҙ cos ПҶk + i sin ПҶk пҝҪ , вҲҶ1 = 2Пүce 1вҲ’cos Оҙ 2(1+cos Оҙ) 1 + cos Оҙ exp[вҲ’2/(U 2ПҒ1|ПҮ(1) (31) where Пүc is the standard upper-limit cutoff in the Оҫ inte- gration. To determine which of the two found solutions is re- alized, we compare their condensation energies using Eq. (24). We find that for all values of the spin-orbit strength and all magnetic field orientations, the decoupled solution has the lower condensation energy, and hence is physically realized. The basic reason for that is the aforementioned exponential sensitivity of the energy gap to the magnitude of the attractive potential. This turns out to be a much stronger effect than the power-law gain (вҲқ UОұ2 R) of the condensation energy due to the induced superconductivity in the minority band. It is interesting to note that the self-consistent solution for the majority-band order parameter (31) in the decou- pled phase has no explicit dependence on the spin-orbit interaction. This means that for small ОұR the presence of a spin-orbit interaction affects the type of pairing sym- metry that is realized in the system, while the actual magnitude of the spin-orbit coupling does not influence the strength of the superconducting phase. At the same time, вҲҶ1 does depend on the magnetic field orientation via the cos Оҙ dependence in (31), and is larger when the magnetic field is in-plane (at Оҙ = ПҖ/2). A less-obvious feature of the found decoupled solution is that it is actually of the FFLO kind. Thanks to Eq.(6) each member of the superconducting pair carries finite momentum QЛҶy, resulting in the Qpair = 2QЛҶy momentum of the pair. The fact that ПҮ2(k) is not sensitive to Q, as previously mentioned in the discussion above (16), makes the issue of the center-of-mass momentum вҖҳhiddenвҖҷ in the described analysis. A two-particle Schrodinger equation re-formulation of the problem, outlined in the Appendix, makes this important point much clearer. Our finding of finite Qpair is quite similar to that in Refs.26,27 which considered the opposite from ours limit of strong SOC, ОұRkf/h вү« 1. Note that the fact that the two bands shift in opposite directions makes the coupled solution even more unfavorable вҖ“ under this condition the Josephson coupling term does not conserve momentum, which has the effect of further suppressing it. It is instructive to critically compare the symmetries of the decoupled and coupled phases for the limiting cases of completely out-of-plane (Оҙ = 0) or completely in-plane (Оҙ = ПҖ/2) magnetic fields. For Оҙ = 0 the coupled solution (27) has вҲҶ1(k) вҲқ eвҲ’iПҶk, вҲҶ2(k) вҲқ eiПҶk while the decoupled one (31) has вҲҶ1(k) вҲқ eiПҶk, вҲҶ2(k) = 0. Thus the effect of the spin-orbit interaction is to lift the degeneracy between states. We see that in the coupled solution, each order parameter has a chirality opposite to that of its parent band (О¶О»), while in the decoupled one the chirality of вҲҶ1 matches that of its parent band, О¶1 = 1. The fact that the decoupled solution is favored suggests that the chi- rality of the order parameters likes to match the chirality of their respective bands. For in-plane fields (Оҙ = ПҖ/2), the order parameters de- velop nodes. In the coupled phase both order parameters go as cos ПҶk with nodes along the normal to the magnetic field direction, while in the decoupled phase the majority- band order parameter goes as sin ПҶk and has nodes along the field direction. Before moving on, it is helpful to examine the spin structure of the pair. Because of the spin canting provided by the spin-orbit interaction, we expect that a singlet pairing component will be mixed into each band, along with along with admixtures of spin triplet pairing28. Inverting (4), we find that amplitude for cre- ating a majority-band Cooper pair in the spin basis is вҹЁaвҖ  k1aвҖ  вҲ’k1вҹ© = пҝҪ пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ Оұ2 R 4h2 (k2 x + k2 y cos2 Оҙ) пҝҪ | вҶ‘вҶ‘вҹ© + Оұ2 R 4h2 пҝҪ k2 x вҲ’ k2 y cos2 Оҙ + 2ikxky cos Оҙ пҝҪ | вҶ“вҶ“вҹ© + i пҝҪОұR 2h вҲ’ Оұ3 R 16h3 пҝҪ k2 x + k2 y cos2 Оҙ пҝҪпҝҪ Г— (kx + iky cos Оҙ)(| вҶ‘вҶ“вҹ© вҲ’ | вҶ“вҶ‘вҹ©) пҝҪ Г— (cos ПҶk cos Оҙ + i sin ПҶk) (32) When the magnetic field is oriented along the SOC axis (Оҙ = 0), the dominant | вҶ‘вҶ‘вҹ© pairing shares the p + ip symmetry of the majority band order parameter. Triplet pairing of opposite spin | вҶ“вҶ“вҹ© is admixed with magni- tude Оұ2 Rk2/h2, possessing a fx3вҲ’3xy2 + if3x2yвҲ’y3 pairing symmetry. Additionally, singlet pairing of magnitude ОұRk/h + Оұ3 Rk3/h3 and dx2вҲ’y2 + id2xy symmetry is re- alized, and so even in the decoupled phase all types of spin pairing except triplet pairing with Sz = 0 exist in the system. From this, we see that the total angular mo- mentum of the system is jz = 2. We also note that as expected, increasing the strength of SOC increases the amount of | вҶ“вҶ“вҹ© and | вҶ‘вҶ“вҹ© вҲ’ | вҶ“вҶ‘вҹ© pairing that is admixed. When the magnetic field is completely in-plane, the dominant spin-up triplet pairing state has two nodes along the magnetic field direction, while the minority spin-down triplet state has four nodes with dx2y sym- metry and the singlet state also has four nodes, obeying a dxy symmetry with a small admixture of dx3y. Thus the triplet states share the Оө(kx, ky) = Оө(вҲ’kx, ky) sym- metry of the larger Fermi surface, while the singlet state 7 The majority-band contribution to the specific heat C1 as a function of the magnetic field inclination an- gle, shown for a few different values of the ratio T/Tc in the low-temperature regime. Here, Оі denotes the coefficient of the minority bandвҖҷs contribution to the total specific heat, which is linear in T. does not. To summarize, when the magnetic field is normal to the 2DEG plane the majority band has an isotropic gap with px + ipy type pairing. As the field inclines, the cos ПҶk component of the order parameter decreases in strength with the inclination angle Оҙ, causing the angu- lar modulation of the superconducting gap around the Fermi surface. Eventually, at Оҙ = ПҖ/2, the order param- eter acquires a pure py symmetry and develops nodes in the directions parallel to the magnetic field. The minor- ity band remains in the normal state independent of the magnetic field orientation. B. Specific heat The dependence of the pairing symmetry on the mag- netic field orientation provides an ideal way for connect- ing our work with experiment, since the field orientation is easily tuned in the lab simply by rotating the sample. The fact that the gap develops nodes when the magnetic field is oriented in-plane produces signatures in a handful of experimentally accessible quantities (e.g. the T depen- dance of the London penetration depth18, the thermal conductivity29, the electronic specific heat30, etc). We focus on the electronic specific heat as an example, and calculate C(T) as a function of the magnetic field orientation. The electronic specific heat is calculated by (setting kB = 1) пҝҪ О» пҝҪ ku,О» kl,О» dk k пҝҪ 2ПҖ 0 dПҶ 2ПҖ пҝҪ Оҫ2 kО» + 4|вҲҶО»(k)|2 вҲӮfkО» вҲӮT . (33) Here, kl,О» (ku,О») is the momentum corresponding to the energy at which we impose a lower (upper) cutoff to the energy integration. Although the full calculation must be carried out nu- merically, we can estimate the behavior of C(T) in the low temperature limit. For all magnetic field orienta- tions, the contribution from the gapless minority band is linear in T as вҲҶ2 = 0. The contribution to the spe- cific heat from the majority band depends on the type of pairing symmetry realized, and consequently on the magnetic field orientation. When the magnetic field is parallel to the SOC axis the integral over ПҶ can be done easily, and the total specific heat is approximated by C(T)H||ЛҶz вҲј ПҒ1вҲҶ5/2 1 T 3/2 eвҲ’вҲҶ1/T + ПҒ2T, (34) where as before, ПҒО» is the density of states of the band О». When the magnetic field is completely in-plane the or- der parameter of the majority band has nodes along the field direction, which affects the temperature dependence of the specific heat. The dominant contribution to the specific heat occurs near the nodal points at ПҶk = 0, ПҖ where the gap vanishes, from which we can estimate that at low temperature, C(T)HвҠҘЛҶz вҲј ПҒ1T 2 вҲҶ1 + ПҒ2T. (35) The dependence of the specific heat on T 2 is a character- istic feature of order parameters with nodal symmetry, as has been pointed out in18,31. It is worth noting here that T 2 behavior will also be present for the almost in- plane orientation of the magnetic field, ПҖ/2 вҲ’ Оҙ вүӘ 1, when the minimal value of the superconducting gap, вҲҶmin = вҲҶ1 cos Оҙ is much smaller than its maximum value вҲҶmax = вҲҶ1. In this case (35) will hold in the inter- mediate temperature regime вҲҶmin вүӘ T вүӘ вҲҶmax. For T вүӘ вҲҶmin the specific heat will crossover to the expo- nentially suppressed regime of (34). For general magnetic field orientations we resort to in- tegrating (33) numerically. Figure 4 shows the contribu- tion to the specific heat from the majority band, plotted against Оҙ for several different values of the ratio T/Tc and normalized by Оі, the coefficient of the (gapless) minority bandвҖҷs contribution to the specific heat. The contribution from the minority band is linear in T, and does not affect the shape of the curves in figure 4. The difference in specific heat between the two limiting field orientations is a factor of a few, which should be easily observable in an experimental setting. In addition to the specific heat, thermal conductivity measurements offer another way of connecting our work 8 to experiments. As in the case of the specific heat, the thermal conductivity will be exponentially suppressed when the magnetic field is out-of-plane and assume a power-law dependence on T when the field is in-plane. Fi- nally, the thermal conductivity will be anisotropic when the field has an in-plane component, making the thermal conductivity an effective probe of the pairing symmetryвҖҷs dependence on the field orientation. IV. DISCUSSION To summarize, we have investigated the role that the spin-orbit interaction plays in unconventional super- conductivity in spin-polarized two-dimensional electronic gases. We showed that the spin-majority band has p+ip pair- ing when the Zeeman field is out of plane of the 2DEG and parallel to the SOC axis, but develops nodes along the field direction when the field is rotated in-plane. This physics of the system can be readily probed by a mea- surement of the electronic specific heat. Somewhat surprisingly, for not too large spin-orbit coupling (as compared to the Zeeman coupling), the mi- nority band remains gapless for all magnetic field geome- tries, turning the considered system into an unusual non- unitary half-superconductor. Because only the majority band is gapped, this system realizes an effectively вҖңspinlessвҖқ superconducting state, even though both bands have non-zero occupation. This is in contrast with other ways of engineering spinless su- perconductors, which usually involve carefully tuning the chemical potential so that only a single band intersects the Fermi level9. Further, the system considered here support Majorana modes at its edges32. When the field has a non-zero out- of-plane component, the superconducting states possess chirality fixed by the SOC-induced lifting of the p Вұ ip pairing degeneracy, which is inherited by the edge modes. Purely in-plane fields lead to a nodal p-wave order pa- rameter, having non-chiral flat-band edge states33. Im- portantly, in the present case the surface states should be thought of as surface resonances. Indeed, due to the pres- ence of gapless states on the minority band and Rashba spin-orbit coupling, the two Fermi surfaces are in general coupled by potential disorder, of which a sample bound- ary is an example. Therefore, the edge states formed by the majority band are in general hybridized with the bulk states from the minority band, and thus are not sharply defined. Our treatment is limited to the leading, O(U 2), order in the electron-electron interaction strength U. It has been shown in that the minority band becomes superconducting in the next, O(U 3), order of the pertur- bative expansion. This minority band superconductiv- ity appears due to interaction-induced corrections to the susceptibility which violate the flatness of ПҮ for q < 2kf, and does not require any critical threshold value of U. These considerations imply that, strictly speaking, our findings apply at temperatures above the critical one for the minority band, which is parametrically smaller than the critical temperature for the majority band. A study with arbitrary SOC strength and an in-plane magnetic field was carried out in . There and in , it was found that inter-band coupling can allow for a small gap on the minority band to be energetically favored for stronger SOC, suggesting that there may exist a phase transition between the coupled and decoupled solutions at ОұRkf вҲј h. As such, it would be valuable to formulate SOC non-perturbatively within our model in order to better understand these phase transitions. Despite being of a rather model nature, the considered Kohn-Luttinger-Rashba problem suggests an interesting possibility of purely electronic mechanism of supercon- ductivity in LAO/STO oxide interfaces. Given the re- ported co-existence of the superconducting and ferromag- netic orders in this interesting system, one can imagine that a spontaneously developed ferromagnetic order pro- motes an exotic p-wave superconductivity considered in our work. While it does appear that the prevailing view of the topic consists in ferromagnetism and supercon- ductivity originating from different electronic bands, and in addition the superconductivity originating from the standard phonon mechanism36, the possibility of a more exotic physics along the lines of our study should cer- tainly be kept in mind. We would also like to note that the relative strength of Zeeman (вҲј 0.1eV36), and Rashba (вҲј 0.01eV37) spin splittings at magnetized LAO/STO in- terfaces places them in the regime considered in this pa- per, and our treatment would be applicable for not too strong electron-electron repulsion, mU вүІ 0.1. Regarding perhaps the most studied p-wave candidate superconductor, Sr2RuO438, our work offers cautionary tale as far as the question of effectiveness of the inter- band Josephson coupling is concerned. Our finding that the dominant superconducting order parameter вҖҳinheritsвҖҷ chirality of the respective band appears to be quite gen- eral and is expected to apply to a more realistic models of multi-band superconductivity in systems with strong spin-orbit interactions.