Superconductivity in multiple phases of compressed GeSb2Te4 E. Greenberg 1† , B. Hen 1†, Samar Layek 1†, I. Pozin 2, R. Friedman 3 ,V. Shelukhin 1, Y. Rosenberg 4, M. Karpovski 1, M. P. Pasternak1, E. Sterer 3, Y. Dagan 1, G. Kh. Rozenberg 1 and A. Palevski 1* 1 Raymond and Beverly Sackler School of Physics and Astronomy, Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel 2 Department of Material Science and Engineering, Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel 3 Physics Department, Nuclear Research Center Negev, P.O. Box 9001, Beer-Sheva 84190,Israel 4 Wolfson Applied Material Research Center, Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel Here we report the discovery of superconductivity in multiple phases of the compressed GeSb2Te4 (GST) phase change memory alloy, which has attracted considerable attention for the last decade due to its unusual physical properties with many potential applications. Superconductivity is observed through electrical transport measurements, both for the amorphous (a-GST) and for the crystalline (c-GST) phases. The superconducting critical temperature, TC, continuously increases with the applied pressure reaching a maximum Tc =6K at P=20 GPa for a-GST, whereas the critical temperature of the cubic phase reaches a maximum Tc =8 K at 30 GPa. This new material system, exhibiting a superconductor-insulator quantum phase transition (SIT) has an advantage over disordered metals since it has a continuous control of the crystal structure and the electronic properties using pressure as an external stimulus, which was lacking in SIT studies until today. PACS numbers: 74.10.+v; 74.62.Fj; 61.50Ks; 73.43.Nq In conventional metals and alloys coulomb interactions are screened by the conducting electrons but an attraction between electrons due to the electron-phonon interaction results in Superconductivity, which appears at a critical temperature Tc determined by the Debye frequency and the electron-phonon coupling constant. A system where the crystal structure can be tuned and the material can undergo a transition from a metallic to an insulating state by applying an external stimulus can therefore become a laboratory for studying fundamental questions about superconductivity. GeSb2Te4 (GST) is a phase change material whose unusual physical properties promise many potential applications in the electronics industry . GST can undergo a reversible change from an amorphous phase (a-GST) to a crystalline (c-GST) one at elevated temperatures , but also by elevated pressure at ambient temperature . This transition is accompanied by a significant change of over 4 decades in resistance. The observed resistance changes, as well as reversible a-GST to c-GST phase transition, have been explained using numerical simulations . The corresponding metal-to-insulator transition (MIT) in GST is often explained as a disorder-induced Anderson localization . Superconductivity near a metal-to-insulator transition has been reported in disordered metals and has been studied intensively. Nevertheless, a continuous control of the crystal structure and the electronic properties using external stimuli was lacking until today. Here, using pressure as an external stimulus, we show that GST becomes superconducting at low temperature. We study the superconducting transition in the temperature-pressure phase diagram and demonstrate that superconductivity is observed both for the amorphous (a-GST) and for the crystalline (c- GST) phases. In our transport studies of GST material under the pressure in a wide temperature range, we used as grown amorphous (a-GST) and as prepared crystalline (c-GST) powders; pressure was generated using diamond anvil cells (DACs); electrical transport measurements were performed using a physical property measurement system (for details see Supplementary methods). The lattice of c-GST is hexagonal at ambient temperature and atmospheric pressure, and therefore the crystalline samples are denoted as h-GST in their initial conditions. The X-ray diffraction analysis of our amorphous and crystalline samples, shown in the supplementary materials, supplementary Fig. 1, confirms the amorphous structure of as-prepared a-GST and the hexagonal structure of h-GST. Upon application of the pressure at ambient temperature we observe, in agreement with Ref. , a gradual structural transformation from the amorphous phase into a high density amorphous phase at around 10 GPa followed by the crystallization into a bcc lattice at pressures above 20 GPa. We also observe, all phases of crystallographic transitions reported in Ref. for the initially crystalline h-GST (see supplementary Fig. 1) Two cells of a-GST were prepared (samples 1 and 2), one made of nonmagnetic materials to enable measurements at various magnetic fields (sample 1). Two cells with h-GST sample were also measured as a function of temperature for various pressures. In Fig. 1(a), we show the typical contact configuration for measuring resistance at various pressures as a function of temperature. At ambient temperature, the a-GST samples show a dramatic, over five orders of magnitude, drop in the resistance, when it is compressed applying quasi-hydrostatic pressure, followed by saturation above 9 GPa as shown in Fig. 1(b). The behavior of h-GST also saturates above 10 GPa as seen Fig. 1(c), however, the overall change in resistance is much smaller. The dramatic drop in resistance for a-GST sample is corroborated with the corresponding change of the mechanism of conductivity. For low pressures, below 5 GPa the variation of the resistance versus temperature indicates that the a-GST is an Anderson insulator with a typical transition from a simply activated to Mott variable range hopping mechanism of the electronic transport. (For more information see supplementary material, supplementary Fig. 2). At pressures exceeding 9.5 GPa, when the resistivity drops below approximately 1 mΩ- one of the measurement set-ups. (b) Resistance as a function of pressure of a-GST. (c) Pressure dependence of resistance of c-GST. Shaded regions in different colors (in both (b) and (c)) are according to previously published XRD data and our resistance measurements. cm, the value reported previously as a precursor of the metal insulator transition (MIT), the a-GST becomes a superconductor. In Fig. 2 we show the resistance versus temperature for both samples. The plots in Fig. 2 show that for pressures below P=21 GPa, there is a monotonous increase of the superconductor transition temperature with pressure, accompanied with a decrease of the normal state resistance. The behavior changes drastically when the pressure is increased above 21 GPa. One can clearly see that the curves have two distinct transitions, signifying the appearance of an additional phase with a higher transition temperature. This double transition is observed in both samples. As demonstrated by our XRD data in the supplementary material, and as was also reported previously by others , at this range of pressure, a crystallographic phase transition occurs forming the bcc ordered phase, bcc-GST. We can, therefore, interpret the double transition as coexistence of a-GST with the bcc-GST, both being superconductors with a higher value of Tc for the crystalline phase. In Fig. 3(a), we show magnetoresistance measurements at 2 K for sample 1 at different pressures. From these curves we can extract the upper critical field HC2 defined as the field for which the resistance attains half of the normal state resistance value. A closer inspection of the curves shown in Fig. 3(b) reveals a double transition versus magnetic field. These double transitions in the magnetic field appear at somewhat higher pressure than corresponding double transitions observed in R(T) curves. For these pressures, exceeding 40 GPa, only single bcc phase is expected to remain. This inconsistency is the subject for further investigation. The values of the corresponding upper critical field are plotted in Fig. 3(c). different pressures using four probe geometry (Sample 1). (b) (Sample 2) using quasi four probe geometry. Two distinct superconducting transitions are observed. 0 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0 0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 10 20 30 40 50 0 1 2 3 4 × 2.5 × 2 c T = 2 K Magnetic Field (Oe) Resistance (Ω) 18.0 14.9 12.0 P (GPa) 10.0 21.5 25.0 30.0 34.3 40.6 45.2 T = 2 K BCC b T = 2 K Magnetic Field (Oe) Resistance (Ω) 34.3 GPa 40.6 45.2 a Hc (Tesla) Pressure (GPa) Our definition of HC2 is not appropriate for the pressure range where we observe a double transition (coexistence regime). In the latter case we estimated HC2 as the mid-point value of each transition for each phase. Using the typical value of HC2=2.8 T within the Ginzburg Landau and BCS formalism we estimate the following microscopic parameters as follows. The Ginzburg Landau coherence length, ξξGGGG(TT) ≈ 30 nnnn at T≈ 2 KK. Assuming that our samples are in a clean limit, l ≥ ξξ0 , which is a reasonable assumption for the metallic GST with the resistivity ρ ≤ 10 μΩ ccnn we can estimate the Pippard coherence length at low temperatures to be ξξ0 ≈ 40 nnnn. If we assume that superconducting gap follows BCS theory, Δ = 3.5 kkBBTTcc, then we can estimate the Fermi velocity using the relation: ξξ0 = ħvvff ππ∆ , taking TRC R=7 K for bcc-GST, we find, vvff ≈ 3 ∙ 105nn/ss . Additional current-voltage measurements can be found in the supplementary information, supplementary Fig. 3. of a-GST (sample 1). (a) Resistance as a function of magnetic field at different pressures. (b) Zoomed portion of the transitions from (a) for 34.3, 40.6 and 45.2 GPa showing two transitions in the last two pressures. (c) Variation of the critical field as a function of pressure. at different pressure. (b) Same measurements using two wires after subtracting residual resistance values (1.329 Ω and 1.564 Ω for 14.2 and 30.7 GPa, respectively). 0 2 4 6 8 10 0 4 8 12 16 20 0 2 4 6 8 10 0 50 100 150 200 a Resistance (mΩ) Temperature (K) 21.6 12.3 P (GPa) 7.8 32.3 27.5 b Resistance (mΩ) Temperature (K) 30.7 P (GPa) 14.2 We also performed low temperature studies on two samples prepared in the hexagonal phase, which were measured in different DACs. As we already mentioned, the behavior of h-GST under pressure is quite different: First, the resistivity changes by less than an order of magnitude at 300 K when compressed, see Fig. 1(b) and second, it exhibits normal metallic behavior at pressures below 10 GPa. The first crystalline sample was compressed at room temperature to 28 GPa, decompressed and recompressed again. The variation of the room temperature resistance upon this cycle is depicted in supplementary Fig. 4. Since our as prepared a-GST were superconducting when transformed into the bcc phase, one could expect that as prepared h-GST sample will also exhibit superconductivity upon compression following decompression from 28 GPa, where bcc-GST is formed according to supplementary Fig. 1 and Ref. . We indeed observe the appearance of the superconductivity upon recompression at pressures above 14 GPa as shown in Fig. 4 (b). There are two separate transitions in the R(T) curve, which are quite distinct. We attribute the highest Tc to the bcc phase, since it is very close to the value of TC observed in as prepared a-GST samples undergoing the crystallographic transition to bcc phase, whereas the lower transition is attributed to the superconductivity in the orthorhombic phase (see supplementary Fig. 1 and Ref. ). The measurements of the second h-GST sample were performed only in the compression mode. These measurements reveal similar behavior to the first sample behavior, i.e. they do not exhibit superconductivity at temperatures around 4 K for pressures below 14 GPa (Fig. 4(a)). At higher pressures, where h-GST transforms into different crystallographic phases (supplementary Fig. 1), we observe superconductivity at the same temperatures as the first sample upon recompression, see Fig. 4(b). colors are according to our superconductivity measurements. Since the superconducting transition is not completed at 12.3 GPa which is the first point in (b), only onset temperature is given. The points inside rectangles in (b) are measured during re-compression cycle. 0 10 20 30 40 50 0 5 10 15 20 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 0 5 10 15 20 SC (High-density Amorphous) b a BCC High-density Amorphous + BCC High-density Amorphous Amorphous High-density Amorphous (Sample # 1) BCC (Sample # 1) High-density Amorphous (Sample # 2) BCC (Sample # 2) TC (K) Pressure (GPa) SC (BCC) SC (BCC) Tonset Orthorhombic BCC Orthorhombic Orthorhombic + BCC Hexagonal TC (K) Pressure (GPa) SC (Orthorhombic) We use a similar definition for the critical temperature, TC as we used for defining HC2, namely as the temperature for which the value of the resistance is one half of its value at the normal state, prior to the transition. We can get a T-P phase diagram, which summarizes our findings for both as prepared a-GST and h-GST samples, by plotting the variation of the TC versus P in Fig. 5 for both measurement sets. At the range presented in our phase diagram it appears that the low density amorphous and the hexagonal phases are not exhibiting superconductivity. Much lower temperatures than those available in our current experimental set up are needed to complete the phase diagram. In conclusion, we have demonstrated superconductivity in both amorphous and a few crystalline phases of GeSb2Te4 compound with the maximum transition temperature of Tc=8 K at a pressure of 30 GPa. The different superconducting transitions are well correlated with the observed structural transitions. We believe that in addition to being a phase change material, GST becomes a laboratory for studying superconductor-to-insulator transitions with the pressure being an external tuning parameter. It also provides a unique opportunity to correlate the quantum phase transition with crystallographic transformations.