Kreula et al. RESEARCH Few-qubit quantum-classical simulation of strongly correlated lattice fermions Juha M Kreula1*, Laura GarcГӯaвҖ“ГҒlvarez2, Lucas Lamata2, Stephen R Clark3,4, Enrique Solano2,5 and Dieter Jaksch1,6 *Correspondence: j.kreula1@physics.ox.ac.uk 1Clarendon Laboratory, Department of Physics, University of Oxford, Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PU, UK Full list of author information is available at the end of the article Abstract We study a proof-of-principle example of the recently proposed hybrid quantum-classical simulation of strongly correlated fermion models in the thermodynamic limit. In a вҖңtwo-siteвҖқ dynamical mean-field theory (DMFT) approach we reduce the Hubbard model to an effective impurity model subject to self-consistency conditions. The resulting minimal two-site representation of the non-linear hybrid setup involves four qubits implementing the impurity problem, plus an ancilla qubit on which all measurements are performed. We outline a possible implementation with superconducting circuits feasible with near-future technology. Keywords: Quantum simulation; Dynamical mean-field theory; Superconducting circuits 1 Introduction Using highly controllable quantum devices to study other quantum systems, i.e., quantum simulation , offers a means to tackle strongly correlated fermion models that are intractable on classical computers. This is vital for understanding complex quantum materials with strong electronic correlations that exhibit a plethora of exciting physical phenomena of immediate technological interest. Ex- amples of such effects include the Mott metal-insulator transition , colossal magnetoresistance , and high-temperature superconductivity . Classical numerical methods have limited ability to study even significantly simpli- fied toy models of strongly correlated fermions. For instance, exact diagonalization faces exponential scaling with the system size, while quantum Monte Carlo meth- ods are often crippled by the infamous fermionic sign problem . Tensor network methods are powerful in one spatial dimension where they track strong correlations accurately. However, in higher dimensional systems, correlations tend to grow more quickly with system size, making these methods computationally challenging. Another well-established approach to the study of strongly correlated fermionic lattice systems is dynamical mean-field theory (DMFT) . It reduces the com- plexity of the original problem, e.g., the Hubbard model in the thermodynamic limit, by mapping it onto a simpler impurity problem that is subject to a self- consistency condition relating its properties to those of the original model. Since an impurity problem is local, the mapping corresponds to neglecting spatial fluc- tuations. In the limit of infinite spatial dimensions this mapping is exact, but for arXiv:1606.04839v1 [quant-ph] 15 Jun 2016 Kreula et al. Page 2 of 20 finite dimensions it is an approximation. Nonetheless for lattice geometries with a large coordination number, self-consistently solving the impurity problem can yield an accurate approximate solution to the original Hubbard problem. The вҖҳimpurityвҖҷ itself consists of a single lattice site taken from the original prob- lem, and so inherits on-site interactions from the Hubbard model. This impurity site is then immersed into a time-dependent, self-consistent mean-field with which it can dynamically exchange fermions. The mean-field thus attempts to model the rest of the lattice and by being dynamical can describe retardation phenomena. Overall the impurity problem can be represented by a Hamiltonian in which the interacting impurity site is coupled to a discrete set of non-interacting вҖҳbathвҖҷ sites. The bath sites represent the mean-field and if there is an infinite number of them then the self-consistency condition is guaranteed to be satisfied. However, in prac- tical implementations only a finite number of bath sites are used, which restricts the frequency resolution of the bath so self-consistency condition can only be ful- filled approximately. Nevertheless, many strongly-correlated features, e.g., the Mott transition, are still be captured correctly . Although DMFT maps a Hubbard model to an impurity model this is still a non-trivial quantum many-body problem to solve because of the interactions at the impurity site. It is usually solved by classical numerical methods, e.g., specialised versions of those used to tackle the original problem, which attempt to keep track of the quantum correlations between impurity and bath sites. Again this limits the number of bath sites that can be treated accurately. Here, we consider an alternative approach where the impurity problem is solved with a quantum simulator, thus avoiding many issues that are inherent to the clas- sical methods. Quantum simulation of fermionic models has so far been mostly restricted to the analogue paradigm, especially with ultracold atoms in optical lat- tices . Digital simulation approaches, akin to universal quantum simulators , have started to emerge in recent years, for example based on superconducting cir- cuits . The number of qubits in these digital simulators is, however, presently rather small. A direct implementation of the Hubbard model would suffer from severe finite size effects. It is nevertheless still possible for a digital quantum simulator with a restricted number of qubits to describe fermionic models directly in the thermodynamic limit when the DMFT approach is adopted. To demonstrate this method we focus on the minimal incarnation of DMFT, the so-called вҖңtwo-siteвҖқ DMFT , where the impurity model consists of one impurity site and only one bath site, both with local Hilbert space dimension four, subjected to two specially chosen self-consistency conditions. Since two-site DMFT considers only the smallest possible impurity model, the approach cannot match the accuracy of full DMFT, but it can still give a qualitatively correct description of the infinite- dimensional Hubbard model, and its simplicity makes it a good starting point before advancing to more accurate schemes. For explicit details of two-site DMFT and its features compared to full DMFT we refer to Ref. . The two-site system corresponds to four qubits, two for the impurity site and two for the bath site, while a fifth, ancillary qubit is used for measurements. This number of qubits is readily available in current digital quantum simulator platforms, with IBM having made a five-qubit quantum processor available to the public . A Kreula et al. Page 3 of 20 nine-qubit processor has already been demonstrated in superconducting circuits . Trapped-ion technologies also allow for digital quantum simulations with up to six qubits . Being commensurate with current state-of-the-art technology is a further justification for studying this minimal model. Our scheme is readily generalisable to a larger number of qubits allowing for more accurate simulations and potentially offering an exponential speed-up over classical Hamiltonian-based DMFT methods . The self-consistency conditions are taken care of iteratively in a classical feed- back loop, which thus completes the non-linear, hybrid quantum-classical device we introduce. Dynamical mean-field simulations have already been proposed for such hybrid devices . Quantum gates similar to the ones needed in the two-site scheme have been used in demonstrating digital quantum simulation of fermionic models with superconducting circuits . We thus focus on superconducting circuits as a candidate platform, although, e.g., trapped ions could also be considered. This paper is organised as follows. In Section 2, we further elucidate the framework of DMFT applied to the Hubbard model in infinite dimensions. Section 3 introduces the two-site DMFT scheme in detail. Section 4 discusses the implementation of this two-site scheme with special attention to superconducting circuits. In Section 5, we show the results of our analysis. We end with a summary in Section 6 and give an outline of the single-qubit interferometry measurement scheme in the Appendix. 2 Hubbard model in infinite dimensions and dynamical mean-field theory A standard model to describe strongly correlated electron systems in thermody- namic equilibrium is the Hubbard Hamiltonian ЛҶH = вҲ’t пҝҪ вҹЁj,kвҹ©Пғ пҝҪ ЛҶcвҖ  j,ПғЛҶck,Пғ + H.c. пҝҪ + U пҝҪ j ЛҶnj,вҶ“ЛҶnj,вҶ‘. (1) In this model, electrons with spin projections Пғ =вҶ“, вҶ‘ вҖҳhopвҖҷ between adjacent lattice sites with tunnelling energy t. This process is described in the first term, where вҹЁj, kвҹ© denotes the sum over all nearest-neighbour sites j and k, and ЛҶcвҖ  j,Пғ and ЛҶck,Пғ denote the fermionic creation and annihilation operators, respectively. The electrons interact with on-site Coulomb repulsion U > 0, described in the latter term by the product of the local number operators ЛҶnj,вҶ“ = ЛҶcвҖ  j,вҶ“ЛҶcj,вҶ“ and ЛҶnj,вҶ‘ = ЛҶcвҖ  j,вҶ‘ЛҶcj,вҶ‘. Here, we consider the paramagnetic Hubbard model in an infinite-dimensional Bethe lattice in the thermodynamic limit at zero temperature. This setup has very simple self-consistency relations, which makes it an ideal test-bed for a proof-of- principle demonstration of a hybrid quantum-classical scheme. The DMFT approach to solving this model consists in neglecting spatial fluctuations around a single lattice site and replacing the rest of the many-body lattice in the thermodynamic limit by a time-translation-invariant, self-consistent mean-field вҲҶ(П„вҲ’П„ вҖІ) (or вҲҶ(Пү) in the frequency domain), as illustrated in Fig. 1a. The isolated lattice site can dynamically exchange fermions with the mean-field at time instants П„ вҖІ and П„. This allows one to include retardation effects that are important Kreula et al. Page 4 of 20 lattice site j and replaces the rest of the lattice with an effective mean-field вҲҶ(П„ вҲ’ П„ вҖІ) with which the isolated site dynamically exchanges fermions, subject to the self-consistency condition GR imp(Пү) = GR latt,jj(Пү). Here, GR imp(Пү) is the impurity Green function and GR latt,jj(Пү) is the local part of the lattice Green function. (b) In Hamiltonian-based DMFT methods, one considers an impurity model which describes the local part of the Hubbard model directly and represents the mean-field as a set of non-interacting bath sites that are connected to the central, interacting impurity site. (c) The minimal representation of DMFT involves the impurity site, with on-site interaction U and chemical potential Ој, coupled via the hybridization energy V to only one bath site. The bath has on-site energy Оөc that corresponds to the mean-field вҲҶ(П„ вҲ’ П„ вҖІ) and is subject to two self-consistency conditions. in the presence of strong correlations. In short, the dynamical mean-field approach reduces the complexity of the full Hubbard model to an effective single-site system which is a slightly more benign many-body problem to solve. In infinite dimensions, DMFT becomes exact as the irreducible self-energy of the lattice model becomes strictly local in space, ОЈlatt,jk(Пү) = ОҙjkОЈlatt,jj(Пү), and its skeleton diagrams agree with those of a single-site, or impurity, model . The solution of the effective single-site, or impurity, problem also yields the solu- tion of the infinite-dimensional Hubbard model due to the self-consistency condition. This leads to the retarded single-particle impurity Green function in the frequency domain being given by GR imp(Пү) = 1 Пү + Ој вҲ’ вҲҶ(Пү) вҲ’ ОЈimp(Пү), (2) where Ој is the chemical potential, and ОЈimp(Пү) denotes the impurity self-energy. We set Д§ = 1 throughout the paper. The impurity Green function describes the response of the many-body system after a localized removal or addition of a particle on the impurity site and is defined in the time domain and at zero temperature as iGR imp(П„) = Оё(П„)вҹЁ{ЛҶcПғ(П„), ЛҶcвҖ  Пғ(0)}вҹ©, (3) where i is the imaginary unit, П„ is real time, {В·, В·} denotes the anticommutator, Оё(П„) is the Heaviside step function, and the average is computed in the ground-state |GSвҹ© of the impurity model. The fermionic creation and annihilation operators are given in the Heisenberg picture. In the paramagnetic phase the Green function Kreula et al. Page 5 of 20 is spin symmetric and we therefore only need to work out GR imp(Пү) for one spin configuration. The initially unknown mean-field вҲҶ(Пү) has to be chosen such that GR imp(Пү) matches the local part of the retarded lattice Green function GR latt,jj(Пү), i.e., GR imp(Пү) = GR latt,jj(Пү), (4) where j is the (randomly chosen) lattice site from which the removal or addition of a particle occurs in the translationally invariant lattice model. The DMFT self- consistency condition Eq. (4) implies ОЈimp(Пү) = ОЈlatt,jj(Пү), (5) i.e., the impurity self-energy matches the local self-energy of the Hubbard model in the infinite-dimensional Bethe lattice. In the general case, the DMFT self-consistency loop is iterated as follows (see also Ref. ). (i) First, guess the local self-energy ОЈlatt,jj(Пү). (ii) The local lattice Green function can be computed as GR latt,jj(Пү) = пҝҪ вҲһ вҲ’вҲһ dОө ПҒ0(Оө)/ [Пү + Ој вҲ’ Оө вҲ’ ОЈlatt,jj(Пү)], where ПҒ0(Оө) = вҲҡ 4tвҲ—2 вҲ’ Оө2/2ПҖtвҲ—2 is the non-interacting density of states of a Bethe lattice. The constant tвҲ— emerges from the requirement that the Hubbard hopping needs to be scaled as t вҲј tвҲ—/вҲҡz to avoid a diverging kinetic energy per lattice site in the limit of infinite coordination, z вҶ’ вҲһ . (iii) With Eqs. (4) and (5), we obtain вҲҶ(Пү) from Eq. (2) and the impurity model is then defined. (iv) Compute the impurity Green function and obtain the impurity self-energy ОЈimp(Пү). There are several means to do this . (v) Set ОЈnew latt,jj(Пү) = ОЈimp(Пү). (vi) Check if the self-energy has converged. If not, go to step (ii) and repeat. Once self-consistent, the solution of the impurity problem then gives access to local single-particle properties of the original lattice model. For example, the local lattice spectral function is given by Alatt,jj(Пү) = вҲ’Im[GR latt,jj(Пү + iО·)]/ПҖ = вҲ’Im[GR imp(Пү + iО·)]/ПҖ, where О· is a positive infinitesimal. In Hamiltonian-based impurity solvers, one parameterizes вҲҶ(Пү) by a set of bath sites (see Fig. 1b). For any finite number of bath sites, the self-consistency condi- tion (4) can only be approximately satisfied and in the extreme вҖңtwo-siteвҖқ DMFT it turns out to be more suitable to reformulate Eq. (4) in a manner specially focused on this minimal representation (see Section 3). Note that two-site DMFT is only able to provide a qualitatively correct description of the Hubbard model even in infinite dimensions . 3 Quantum simulator based on two-site DMFT In terms of the single-impurity Anderson model (SIAM), the smallest impurity problem involves one fermionic site corresponding to the impurity and only one fermionic site corresponding to the entire mean-field as described in the previous section. Since two qubits are needed to encode the local Hilbert space of a fermionic Kreula et al. Page 6 of 20 site, we only require four physical qubits to implement this representation in the lab. The SIAM Hamiltonian for only one bath site reads ЛҶHSIAM =U ЛҶn1вҶ“ЛҶn1вҶ‘ вҲ’ Ој пҝҪ Пғ ЛҶn1Пғ + пҝҪ Пғ ОөcЛҶcвҖ  2ПғЛҶc2Пғ + пҝҪ Пғ V пҝҪ ЛҶcвҖ  1ПғЛҶc2Пғ + H.c. пҝҪ . (6) Here, U is the Hubbard interaction at the impurity site 1, and Ој is the chemical potential that controls the electron filling in the grand canonical ensemble. Further- more, Оөc and V describe the on-site energy of the non-interacting bath site 2 and hybridization between the impurity and the bath site, respectively, and give the mean-field as V 2 Пү вҲ’ Оөc . (7) See Fig. 1c for illustration of the two-site SIAM. The parameters Оөc and V are initially unknown and they need to be determined iteratively such that two self- consistency conditions are satisfied. For details of the derivation and motivation of these conditions we refer to Ref. . The first condition is that the electron filling nimp of the impurity site and the filling n = вҹЁnjвҶ“вҹ© + вҹЁnjвҶ‘вҹ© of the lattice model match, i.e., nimp вүЎ n. (8) The second self-consistency condition is given by V 2 = ZM (0) 2 = Z пҝҪ вҲһ вҲ’вҲһ dОө Оө2ПҒ0(Оө) = ZtвҲ—2, (9) where quasiparticle weight reads Z = пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ dRe[ОЈimp(Пү + iО·)] dПү пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ Пү=0 пҝҪвҲ’1 . (10) In Eq. (9), M (0) 2 is the second moment of the non-interacting density of states, and the final equality follows from the semicircular density of states of the Bethe lattice. 3.1 Two-site DMFT protocol The hybrid quantum-classical device implementing two-site DMFT consists of a few- qubit digital quantum simulator in which the impurity Green function is measured and of a classical feedback loop in which the parameters of the two-site SIAM are updated. The two-site DMFT protocol is summarized in Fig. 2 and proceeds as follows (see also Ref. ). 1. First fix U and Ој to the desired values in the SIAM and set the unknown parameters Оөc and V equal to an initial guess. 2. Measure the interacting Green function iGR imp(П„). This can be done using, e.g., single-qubit interferometry (see details in the Appendix). Kreula et al. Page 7 of 20 V, Оөc Quantum вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҶ’ gates ЛҶU(П„) min |nimp вҲ’ n| вҶ’ Оөc Classical computer V, Оөc GR imp(П„) Digital quantum simulator GR imp(П„) F T вҲ’вҶ’ GR imp(Пү) Dyson вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҶ’ ОЈimp(Пү) вҶ’ V conjunction with a classical feedback loop to perform a proof-of-principle demonstration of a two-site DMFT calculation. 3. After Fourier-transforming the impurity Green function, the impurity self- energy is obtained classically from the Dyson equation ОЈimp(Пү) = GR(0) imp (Пү)вҲ’1 вҲ’ GR imp(Пү)вҲ’1. (11) Here, the non-interacting impurity Green function is given by GR(0) imp (Пү)вҲ’1 = Пү + Ој вҲ’ вҲҶ(Пү). (12) From the derivative of the self-energy one obtains the quasiparticle weight Z which directly yields the updated hopping parameter V via Eq. (9). The update for Оөc is found by minimizing the difference |nimp вҲ’ n| . 4. Steps 2 and 3 need to be repeated until V and Оөc are self-consistent, and nimp = n. The self-consistent Green function GR imp(Пү) and self-energy ОЈimp(Пү) thus obtained are used to calculate approximations to local single-particle properties of the Hub- bard model. 4 Quantum algorithm for the single-impurity Anderson model with superconducting circuits Here, we consider the quantum gates of the digital quantum simulator part in Fig. 2, with special focus on superconducting circuits as the platform of choice . 4.1 JordanвҖ“Wigner transformation of the SIAM To implement the two-site SIAM with qubits, the fermionic creation and annihila- tion operators need to be mapped onto tensor products of spin operators which then act on the qubits via quantum gates. In order to obtain as simple quantum gates as possible in Section 4.3 and in the Appendix, we consider an ordering of the qubits where the first two qubits encode the spin вҶ“ for both fermionic sites while the last two correspond to spin вҶ‘. This is achieved via the JordanвҖ“Wigner transformation Kreula et al. Page 8 of 20 given explicitly as ЛҶcвҖ  1вҶ“ = ЛҶПғвҲ’ 1 = 1 2 (ЛҶПғx 1 вҲ’ iЛҶПғy 1) , (13) ЛҶcвҖ  2вҶ“ = ЛҶПғz 1 ЛҶПғвҲ’ 2 = 1 2 ЛҶПғz 1 (ЛҶПғx 2 вҲ’ iЛҶПғy 2) , (14) ЛҶcвҖ  1вҶ‘ = ЛҶПғz 1 ЛҶПғz 2 ЛҶПғвҲ’ 3 = 1 2 ЛҶПғz 1 ЛҶПғz 2 (ЛҶПғx 3 вҲ’ iЛҶПғy 3) , (15) ЛҶcвҖ  2вҶ‘ = ЛҶПғz 1 ЛҶПғz 2 ЛҶПғz 3 ЛҶПғвҲ’ 4 = 1 2 ЛҶПғz 1 ЛҶПғz 2 ЛҶПғz 3 (ЛҶПғx 4 вҲ’ iЛҶПғy 4) , (16) and ЛҶcjПғ = пҝҪ ЛҶcвҖ  jПғ пҝҪвҖ  . With this mapping the hybridization terms in the SIAM de- scribed in Eq. (6) transform into V пҝҪ ЛҶcвҖ  1вҶ“ЛҶc2вҶ“ + H.c. пҝҪ = V 2 (ЛҶПғx 1 ЛҶПғx 2 + ЛҶПғy 1 ЛҶПғy 2) , (17) and V пҝҪ ЛҶcвҖ  1вҶ‘ЛҶc2вҶ‘ + H.c. пҝҪ = V 2 (ЛҶПғx 3 ЛҶПғx 4 + ЛҶПғy 3 ЛҶПғy 4) . (18) The number operators become ЛҶn1вҶ“ = 1 2 пҝҪ ЛҶI вҲ’ ЛҶПғz 1 пҝҪ , (19) ЛҶn2вҶ“ = 1 2 пҝҪ ЛҶI вҲ’ ЛҶПғz 2 пҝҪ , (20) ЛҶn1вҶ‘ = 1 2 пҝҪ ЛҶI вҲ’ ЛҶПғz 3 пҝҪ , (21) ЛҶn2вҶ‘ = 1 2 пҝҪ ЛҶI вҲ’ ЛҶПғz 4 пҝҪ , (22) and thus the interaction term can be written as U ЛҶn1вҶ“ЛҶn1вҶ‘ = U 4 (ЛҶПғz 1 ЛҶПғz 3 вҲ’ ЛҶПғz 1 вҲ’ ЛҶПғz 3), (23) up to a constant. The total Hamiltonian then reads ЛҶHSIAM =U 4 (ЛҶПғz 1 ЛҶПғz 3 вҲ’ ЛҶПғz 1 вҲ’ ЛҶПғz 3) + Ој 2 (ЛҶПғz 1 + ЛҶПғz 3) вҲ’ Оөc 2 (ЛҶПғz 2 + ЛҶПғz 4) + V 2 (ЛҶПғx 1 ЛҶПғx 2 + ЛҶПғy 1 ЛҶПғy 2 + ЛҶПғx 3 ЛҶПғx 4 + ЛҶПғy 3 ЛҶПғy 4) , (24) where we have dropped constant terms. 4.2 Quantum gates in superconducting circuits We now consider how the JordanвҖ“Wigner transformed SIAM in Eq. (24) can be im- plemented in an experimental arrangement based on superconducting circuits. We present two alternative approaches. The first one couples the qubits with a trans- mission line resonator, which leads to the so-called XY gate between the qubits. The second approach is the Controlled-ZПҶ (CZПҶ) gate, which can be obtained via Kreula et al. Page 9 of 20 a capacitive coupling of nearest-neighbour transmon qubits without using a res- onator. These CZПҶ gates have been implemented with high fidelities of above 99% for a variant of transmon qubits called вҖҳX-monвҖҷ qubits . XY gates with resonators вҖ” The basic Hamiltonian coupling a set of qubits to the resonator has the form of a detuned Jaynes-Cummings model. By adiabatically eliminating the resonator one obtains, when the resonator is in the vacuum state, the well-known XY model for a pair of qubits l and m as ЛҶHXY = glgm 2вҲҶ (ЛҶПғx l ЛҶПғx m + ЛҶПғy l ЛҶПғy m). (25) Here, вҲҶ is the detuning between the qubit level-spacing and the resonator mode, gl is the coupling constant between qubit l and the resonator, and ЛҶПғx and ЛҶПғy are Pauli operators. The XY gate is universal for quantum computation and simulation in combination with single qubit gates, and is the natural interaction customarily employed in superconducting circuits. CZ-ПҶ gates with capacitive couplings вҖ” To perform the CZ-ПҶ gate, one qubit is kept at a fixed frequency while the other carries out an adiabatic trajectory near an appropriate resonance of the two-qubit states. By varying the amplitude of this trajectory one can tune the conditional phase ПҶ. The unitary for the CZПҶ is given by CZПҶ = пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈӯ 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 eiПҶ пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈё . (26) 4.3 Quantum gate decomposition of the time-evolution operator In order to use quantum gates for time-evolution, we utilize a Trotter decomposition of the time-evolution operator corresponding to ЛҶHSIAM in Eq. (24). The first order Trotter expansion is given by ЛҶU(П„) = eвҲ’i ЛҶ HSIAMП„ вүҲ пҝҪ eвҲ’i V 2 (ЛҶПғx 1 ЛҶПғx 2 +ЛҶПғy 1 ЛҶПғy 2 ) П„ N eвҲ’i V 2 (ЛҶПғx 3 ЛҶПғx 4 +ЛҶПғy 3 ЛҶПғy 4 ) П„ N eвҲ’i U 4 ЛҶПғz 1 ЛҶПғz 3 П„ N Г— ei пҝҪ U 4 вҲ’ Ој 2 пҝҪ ЛҶПғz 1 П„ N ei пҝҪ U 4 вҲ’ Ој 2 пҝҪ ЛҶПғz 3 П„ N ei Оөc 2 ЛҶПғz 2 П„ N ei Оөc 2 ЛҶПғz 4 П„ N пҝҪN . (27) Here, N is the number of Trotter (i.e., time) steps and П„ N is the size of the time step. In what follows, we use the two alternative approaches for quantum gates outlined in Section 4.2 to implement Eq. (27). XY gates вҖ” As shown in Section 4.2, the XY gate, given by the expression XY = exp пҝҪ вҲ’i V 2 (ЛҶПғx l ЛҶПғx m + ЛҶПғy l ЛҶПғy m) П„ n пҝҪ , naturally appears when considering the use of a resonator quantum bus . The quantum circuit for a single Trotter step with these gates is shown in Fig. 3a. Kreula et al. Page 10 of 20 k вҮЈ вҢҳ вҮЎ вң“ ei V 2 (Пғx 1 Пғx 2 +Пғy 1 Пғy 2 ) t n ei V 2 (Пғx 3 Пғx 4 +Пғy 3 Пғy 4 ) t n eвҲ’i U 4 Пғz 1Пғz 3 t n В· eвҲ’i пҝҪ U 4 вҲ’ Ој 2 пҝҪ Пғz 1 t n eвҲ’i пҝҪ U 4 вҲ’ Ој 2 пҝҪ Пғz 3 t n eвҲ’i вңҸc 2 Пғz 2 t n eвҲ’i вңҸc 2 Пғz 4 t n в—Ҷn . (6) a. Method XY and quantum bus We consider a quantum algorithm based on the XY interaction or exchange gate, which naturally appears in cQED when considering the use of a quantum bus . The quantum circuit for a single Trotter step is 1 XY B C 2 D 3 XY C 4 D Here, XY is the exchange gate XY = exp пҝҪ i V 2 (Пғx i Пғx j + Пғy i Пғy j ) t n пҝҪ , and B is the entangling gate B = exp пҝҪ вҲ’i U 4 Пғz i Пғz j t n пҝҪ . The quantum gates C and D are single qubit Пғz-gates, C = exp пҝҪ вҲ’i пҝҪ U 4 вҲ’ Ој 2 пҝҪ Пғz i t n пҝҪ , and D = exp пҝҪ вҲ’ i вңҸc 2 Пғz i t n пҝҪ . b. Method CZ-ПҶ gate Moreover, it is also possible to describe the digital simulation in terms of Trotter steps involving the optimised gates (CZ-ПҶ) . We first consider the Hamiltonian in terms of Пғz-Пғz interactions. We take into account that Пғx i Пғx j = Ri y( вҮЎ 2 )Пғz i Ri y(вҲ’ вҮЎ 2 )Rj y( вҮЎ 2 )Пғz j Rj y(вҲ’ вҮЎ 2 ) Пғy i Пғy j = Ri x(вҲ’ вҮЎ 2 )Пғz i Ri x( вҮЎ 2 )Rj x(вҲ’ вҮЎ 2 )Пғz j Rj x( вҮЎ 2 ), (7) 3 where Ri вҶө(вң“) = exp(вҲ’i вң“ 2ПғвҶө) is the rotation along the вҶө-axis of the ith qubit. The evolution operator of the Hamiltonian in Eq. (5) in terms of Пғz-Пғz interactions is eвҲ’iHSIAMt вҮЎ Y k вҮЈ eвҲ’iHk t n вҢҳn вҮЎ вң“ R1 y( вҮЎ 2 )R2 y( вҮЎ 2 )R3 y( вҮЎ 2 )R4 y( вҮЎ 2 )ei V 2 Пғz 1Пғz 2 t n ei V 2 Пғz 3Пғz 4 t n R1 y(вҲ’ вҮЎ 2 )R2 y(вҲ’ вҮЎ 2 )R3 y(вҲ’ вҮЎ 2 )R4 y(вҲ’ вҮЎ 2 ) В·R1 x(вҲ’ вҮЎ 2 )R2 x(вҲ’ вҮЎ 2 )R3 x(вҲ’ вҮЎ 2 )R4 x(вҲ’ вҮЎ 2 )ei V 2 Пғz 1Пғz 2 t n ei V 2 Пғz 3Пғz 4 t n R1 x( вҮЎ 2 )R2 x( вҮЎ 2 )R3 x( вҮЎ 2 )R4 x( вҮЎ 2 ) В· eвҲ’i U 4 Пғz 1Пғz 3 t n eвҲ’i пҝҪ U 4 вҲ’ Ој 2 пҝҪ Пғz 1 t n eвҲ’i пҝҪ U 4 вҲ’ Ој 2 пҝҪ Пғz 3 t n eвҲ’i вңҸc 2 Пғz 2 t n eвҲ’i вңҸc 2 Пғz 4 t n в—Ҷn . (8) The sequence of gates for one Trotter step in the digital simulation of the SIAM model with four qubits is 1 Y вҮЎ 2 A YвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 XвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 A X вҮЎ 2 B C 2 Y вҮЎ 2 YвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 XвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 X вҮЎ 2 D 3 Y вҮЎ 2 A YвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 XвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 A X вҮЎ 2 C 4 Y вҮЎ 2 YвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 XвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 X вҮЎ 2 D The gates A and B are two qubit gates in terms of Пғz-Пғz interactions, A = exp пҝҪ i V 2 Пғz i Пғz j t n пҝҪ and B = exp пҝҪ вҲ’i U 4 Пғz i Пғz j t n пҝҪ . The quantum gates C and D are single qubit Пғz-gates, C = exp пҝҪ вҲ’i пҝҪ U 4 вҲ’ Ој 2 пҝҪ Пғz i t n пҝҪ , and D = exp пҝҪ вҲ’ i вңҸc 2 Пғz i t n пҝҪ , as in the previous algorithm. And XвҶө and YвҶө are вҶө-rotations along the x and y axis, respectively. A single Trotter step contains 5 ZZ two-qubit gates between nearest-neighbour qubits, 2 SWAP gates, and 20 single-qubit rotations. We note that a SWAP-gate amounts to three CZ-ПҶ gates, and a ZZ-gate amounts to two CZ-ПҶ gates, in general. This number can optimised further if we consider different order- ings for odd and even Trotter steps, in which subsequent gates may be suppressed. This reorganisation of interactions do not affect in principle the digital theoretical error. That way, an odd Trotter step reads 1 XвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 A X вҮЎ 2 B C Y вҮЎ 2 A YвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 2 XвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 X вҮЎ 2 D Y вҮЎ 2 YвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 3 XвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 A X вҮЎ 2 C Y вҮЎ 2 A YвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 4 XвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 X вҮЎ 2 D Y вҮЎ 2 YвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 and one even Trotter step is 1 Y вҮЎ 2 A YвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 XвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 A X вҮЎ 2 B C 2 Y вҮЎ 2 YвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 XвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 X вҮЎ 2 D 3 Y вҮЎ 2 A YвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 XвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 A X вҮЎ 2 C 4 Y вҮЎ 2 YвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 XвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 X вҮЎ 2 D (a) (b) method and (b) the CZ method. Here, B is the entangling gate B = exp пҝҪ вҲ’ i U 4 ЛҶПғz 1 ЛҶПғz 3 П„ N пҝҪ , A is a two-qubit gate given by A = exp пҝҪ вҲ’ i V 2 ЛҶПғz l ЛҶПғz m П„ N пҝҪ , acting on qubits l and m, and the quantum gates C and D are single qubit ЛҶПғz-gates, given by C = exp пҝҪ i пҝҪ U 4 вҲ’ Ој 2 пҝҪ ЛҶПғz l П„ N пҝҪ and D = exp пҝҪ i Оөc 2 ЛҶПғz l П„ N пҝҪ , acting on qubit l. Finally, XПҶ and YПҶ are ПҶ-rotations along the x and y axis, respectively. CZ-ПҶ gates вҖ” To be able to utilize the CZ-ПҶ gates, we write the time-evolution operator in Eq. (27) in terms of ЛҶПғz-ЛҶПғz (ZZ) interactions, taking into account that ЛҶПғx l ЛҶПғx m = R(l) y ( ПҖ 2 )ЛҶПғz l R(l) y (вҲ’ ПҖ 2 )R(m) y ( ПҖ 2 )ЛҶПғz mR(m) y (вҲ’ ПҖ 2 ), (28) and ЛҶПғy l ЛҶПғy m = R(l) x (вҲ’ ПҖ 2 )ЛҶПғz l R(l) x ( ПҖ 2 )R(m) x (вҲ’ ПҖ 2 )ЛҶПғz mR(m) x ( ПҖ 2 ), (29) where R(l) Оұ (Оё) = exp(вҲ’i Оё 2 ЛҶПғОұ l ) is the rotation along the Оұ-axis of the lth qubit. Note that in the computational basis, one can write, e.g., exp пҝҪ вҲ’i ПҶ 2 ЛҶПғz 1 ЛҶПғz 2 пҝҪ = пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈӯ 1 0 0 0 0 eiПҶ 0 0 0 0 eiПҶ 0 0 0 0 1 пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈё , (30) where we have neglected global phases. Thus, we have the decomposition exp пҝҪ вҲ’i ПҶ 2 ЛҶПғz 1 ЛҶПғz 2 пҝҪ x (ПҖ) CZПҶ R(1) x (ПҖ)R(2) x (ПҖ) CZПҶ R(2) x (ПҖ), (31) where the tunable CZПҶ-gate is given by Eq. (26). Kreula et al. Page 11 of 20 The gates A and B are two qubit gates in terms of Пғ -Пғ interactions, A = exp пҝҪ i 2 Пғi Пғj n пҝҪ and B = exp пҝҪ вҲ’i U 4 Пғz i Пғz j t n пҝҪ . The quantum gates C and D are single qubit Пғz-gates, C = exp пҝҪ вҲ’i пҝҪ U 4 вҲ’ Ој 2 пҝҪ Пғz i t n пҝҪ , and D = exp пҝҪ вҲ’ i вңҸc 2 Пғz i t n пҝҪ , as in the previous algorithm. And XвҶө and YвҶө are вҶө-rotations along the x and y axis, respectively. A single Trotter step contains 5 ZZ two-qubit gates between nearest-neighbour qubits, 2 SWAP gates, and 20 single-qubit rotations. We note that a SWAP-gate amounts to three CZ-ПҶ gates, and a ZZ-gate amounts to two CZ-ПҶ gates, in general. This number can optimised further if we consider different order- ings for odd and even Trotter steps, in which subsequent gates may be suppressed. This reorganisation of interactions do not affect in principle the digital theoretical error. That way, an odd Trotter step reads 1 XвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 A X вҮЎ 2 B C Y вҮЎ 2 A YвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 2 XвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 X вҮЎ 2 D Y вҮЎ 2 YвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 3 XвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 A X вҮЎ 2 C Y вҮЎ 2 A YвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 4 XвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 X вҮЎ 2 D Y вҮЎ 2 YвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 and one even Trotter step is 1 Y вҮЎ 2 A YвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 XвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 A X вҮЎ 2 B C 2 Y вҮЎ 2 YвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 XвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 X вҮЎ 2 D 3 Y вҮЎ 2 A YвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 XвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 A X вҮЎ 2 C 4 Y вҮЎ 2 YвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 XвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 X вҮЎ 2 D exp пҝҪ вҲ’i U 4 Пғz i Пғz j t n пҝҪ . The quantum gates C and D are single qubit Пғz-gates, C = exp пҝҪ вҲ’i пҝҪ U 4 вҲ’ Ој 2 пҝҪ Пғz i t n пҝҪ , and D = exp пҝҪ вҲ’ i вңҸc 2 Пғz i t n пҝҪ , as in the previous algorithm. And XвҶө and YвҶө are вҶө-rotations along the x and y axis, respectively. A single Trotter step contains 5 ZZ two-qubit gates between nearest-neighbour qubits, 2 SWAP gates, and 20 single-qubit rotations. We note that a SWAP-gate amounts to three CZ-ПҶ gates, and a ZZ-gate amounts to two CZ-ПҶ gates, in general. This number can optimised further if we consider different order- ings for odd and even Trotter steps, in which subsequent gates may be suppressed. This reorganisation of interactions do not affect in principle the digital theoretical error. That way, an odd Trotter step reads 1 XвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 A X вҮЎ 2 B C Y вҮЎ 2 A YвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 2 XвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 X вҮЎ 2 D Y вҮЎ 2 YвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 3 XвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 A X вҮЎ 2 C Y вҮЎ 2 A YвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 4 XвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 X вҮЎ 2 D Y вҮЎ 2 YвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 and one even Trotter step is 1 Y вҮЎ 2 A YвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 XвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 A X вҮЎ 2 B C 2 Y вҮЎ 2 YвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 XвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 X вҮЎ 2 D 3 Y вҮЎ 2 A YвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 XвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 A X вҮЎ 2 C 4 Y вҮЎ 2 YвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 XвҲ’ вҮЎ 2 X вҮЎ 2 D (a) (b) and (b) an even Trotter step in the CZ method. The gates depicted in red can be omitted as they cancel out during a sequence of time steps. The time-evolution operator in Eq. (27) in terms of ZZ interactions is given by ЛҶU(П„) = eвҲ’i ЛҶ HSIAMП„ вүҲ пҝҪ y ( ПҖ 2 )eвҲ’i V 2 ЛҶПғz 1 ЛҶПғz 2 П„ N eвҲ’i V 2 ЛҶПғz 3 ЛҶПғz 4 П„ N R(1234) y (вҲ’ ПҖ 2 ) Г— R(1234) x (вҲ’ ПҖ 2 )eвҲ’i V 2 ЛҶПғz 1 ЛҶПғz 2 П„ N eвҲ’i V 2 ЛҶПғz 3 ЛҶПғz 4 П„ N R(1234) x ( ПҖ 2 ) Г— eвҲ’i U 4 ЛҶПғz 1 ЛҶПғz 3 П„ N ei пҝҪ U 4 вҲ’ Ој 2 пҝҪ ЛҶПғz 1 П„ N ei пҝҪ U 4 вҲ’ Ој 2 пҝҪ ЛҶПғz 3 П„ N ei Оөc 2 ЛҶПғz 2 П„ N ei Оөc 2 ЛҶПғz 4 П„ N пҝҪN , (32) where R(1234) Оұ Оұ (ПҶ)R(2) Оұ (ПҶ)R(3) Оұ (ПҶ)R(4) Оұ (ПҶ). The sequence of gates for one Trotter step is depicted in Fig. 3b. A single Trotter step contains 5 ZZ two-qubit gates (corresponding to the A and B gates in Fig. 3b) between nearest-neighbour qubits, 2 SWAP gates (for the B gate which acts on qubits 1 and 3), and 20 single-qubit rotations. We note that a SWAP-gate amounts to three CZ-ПҶ gates, and a ZZ-gate amounts to two CZ-ПҶ gates (see Eq. (31)). This number can be optimised further if we consider different orderings for odd and even Trotter steps as in Fig. 4, such that subsequent gates may be suppressed. This reorganisation of interactions does not in principle affect the Trotter error. Hence, for a pair of Trotter steps, the number of gates is reduced, and we may only consider 10 ZZ two-qubit gates between nearest-neighbour qubits, 4 SWAP gates, and 32 single-qubit rotations. 5 Results We focus on the half-filled case, i.e., Ој = U 2 and Оөc = 0, which requires the least amount of quantum gates, since the C and D gates in Section 4 vanish. Note that since the value of Оөc is fixed in this case, it need not be updated in the self-consistency loop. We use tвҲ—, the Hubbard hopping in infinite dimensions, as our unit of energy, hence time П„ is measured in units of 1/tвҲ—. Note that П„ refers here to the time in the evolution operator ЛҶU(П„), not to the actual time to run the experiment. Kreula et al. Page 12 of 20 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 П„tвҲ— 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 F (a) XY CZ 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 П„tвҲ— 0.94 0.96 0.98 1 F (c) XY CZ 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 П„tвҲ— 0.85 0.9 0.95 1 F (b) XY CZ 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 П„tвҲ— 0.97 0.98 0.99 1 F (d) XY CZ XY method (blue diamonds, line is to guide the eye) and CZ gates (red stars, dashed line is to We set U = 4tвҲ— and V = tвҲ—. the state obtained with exact time-evolution using the full, non-Trotterized oper- ator ЛҶU(П„) = exp(вҲ’iП„ ЛҶHSIAM) corresponding to the two-site SIAM in Eq. (6), and |ОЁT (П„)вҹ© is the state evolved using either the XY or CZ-ПҶ quantum gates, for various Trotter steps N up to time П„ = 6/tвҲ—. Note that the number of qubits correspond- ing to the two-site SIAM is fixed, leaving only N as the parameter to be varied for increased accuracy. We use the initial state |ОЁ(П„ = 0)вҹ© = ЛҶcвҖ  1вҶ“|GSвҹ©/||ЛҶcвҖ  1вҶ“|GSвҹ©||, where |GSвҹ© is the ground-state of the two-site SIAM in Eq. (6), which is a relevant state for obtaining the impurity Green function at zero temperature (see Eq. (3)). As expected, using XY gates displays superior fidelities, since CZ-ПҶ gates require an extra factorization of the hybridization term (see Section 4). For N = 24 steps, the state fidelity using XY gates remains over 99% throughout the evolution. In what follows, we use only XY gates for the time-evolution for concreteness. As shown in Section 3, the main object of interest is the retarded impurity Green function. One possibility to measure iGR imp(П„) is single-qubit interferometry (see the Appendix for details), which raises the total number of qubits in the experimental arrangement to five. In Fig. 6 we plot the impurity Green function obtained from evolving the state with XY gates compared to exact evolution of the two-site SIAM for different N. We see that the Green function from the XY approach starts to follow the curve of the exact Green function better for increasing N. In our Kreula et al. Page 13 of 20 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 П„tвҲ— -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 iGR imp(П„) (a) XY Exact 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 П„tвҲ— -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 iGR imp(П„) (c) XY Exact 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 П„tвҲ— -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 iGR imp(П„) (b) XY Exact 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 П„tвҲ— -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 iGR imp(П„) (d) XY Exact iGR the XY method (blue diamonds). Comparison is given to the exact Green function (red dashed line). We set U = 4tвҲ— and V = tвҲ—. subsequent analysis, we use N = 24 up to П„ = 6/tвҲ— to study what two-site DMFT physics can be captured with the digital approach. To obtain the impurity Green function in the frequency domain, we first con- sider some known and general analytic properties of the retarded Green function in Eq. (3). This Green function can be written as a sum of the particle and hole contributions as iGR imp(П„) = Оё(П„) пҝҪ j пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪвҹЁj|ЛҶcвҖ  1Пғ|GSвҹ© пҝҪпҝҪ2eвҲ’iПүjt + пҝҪпҝҪвҹЁj|ЛҶc1Пғ|GSвҹ© пҝҪпҝҪ2eiПүjtпҝҪ , (33) where |jвҹ© is an eigenstate of ЛҶHSIAM with eigenenergy Ej, and Пүj = EjвҲ’EGS. In two- site DMFT, the interacting Green function is a four-pole function , which limits the number of terms in the above summation to four. Moreover, in the presence of particle-hole symmetry, we have пҝҪпҝҪвҹЁj|ЛҶcвҖ  1Пғ|GSвҹ© пҝҪпҝҪ2 = пҝҪпҝҪвҹЁj|ЛҶc1Пғ|GSвҹ© пҝҪпҝҪ2, and Eq. (33) can be written as iGR (34) Kreula et al. Page 14 of 20 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 П„tвҲ— -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 iGR imp(П„) (a) XY Fit -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 Пү/tвҲ— -15 -10 -5 0 5 10 15 Re[GR imp(Пү + iО·)] (b) XY Exact -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 Пү/tвҲ— -100 -50 0 50 100 Re[ОЈimp(Пү + iО·)] (c) XY Exact The residues and poles of the Green function can be obtained from a fit of the form in Eq. (34) (red dashed line) to the GR imp(П„) data from the XY method with 24 Trotter steps (blue diamonds). (b) The real part of the impurity Green function, Re пҝҪ GR imp(Пү + iО·) пҝҪ (blue line), with residues and poles obtained from the fit from (a), compared to the exact Green function (red dashed line). (c) Same as in (b), but for the self-energy Re пҝҪ ОЈimp(Пү + iО·) пҝҪ . We set U = 4tвҲ— and V = tвҲ—. In (b) and (c), we have broadened the peaks with О· = 0.01 for clarity. where Оұj = пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪвҹЁj|ЛҶcвҖ  1Пғ|GSвҹ© пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ 2 . Thus, to obtain the impurity Green function in the frequency domain as GR imp(Пү + iО·) =Оұ1 пҝҪ 1 Пү + iО· вҲ’ Пү1 + 1 Пү + iО· + Пү1 пҝҪ + Оұ2 пҝҪ 1 Пү + iО· вҲ’ Пү2 + 1 Пү + iО· + Пү2 пҝҪ , (35) we need to extract the unknown residues Оұj and poles Пүj by fitting an expression of the form in Eq. (34) to the measurement data of iGR imp(П„), as shown in Fig. 7a. This method to determine Оұj and Пүj is far more reliable and requires fewer time steps than numerically Fourier-transforming the iGR imp(П„) data. It can also be readily generalised to larger systems by including more terms in the sum in Eq. (33). domain, Re пҝҪ GR imp(Пү + iО·) пҝҪ , with residues and poles obtained from the fit in Fig. 7a, while in Fig. 7c we plot the real part of the impurity self-energy, Re [ОЈimp(Пү + iО·)], obtained utilizing the Dyson equation (11). We clearly see the four-pole structure of the Green function, while the self-energy has two poles. The results are in excellent agreement with the exact solution of the two-site SIAM, with the poles of the self- energy using fitted Оұj and Пүj differing from the exact solution by 2%. Kreula et al. Page 15 of 20 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 Пү/tвҲ— 0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 A(Пү) (a) XY Exact -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 Пү/tвҲ— 0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 A(Пү) (b) XY Exact with the XY method with 24 Trotter steps (blue line) and exact solution of the two-site SIAM (red dashed line). The parameters of the two-site SIAM are iterated to self-consistency with (a) U = 5tвҲ— and (b) U = 8tвҲ—. 0 2 4 6 8 10 U/tвҲ— 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 Z XY , N = 24 XY , N = 36 XY , N = 48 Exact 5 5.5 6 U/tвҲ— 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 Z weight Z obtained from the XY method with 24 (blue diamonds), 36 (red circles), and 48 Trotter steps (yellow squares), compared to the exact solution of the two-site SIAM (purple stars). Inset: Same plot zoomed into the region around the critical interaction, Uc = 6tвҲ—. Once we have obtained the impurity Green function, and thus the impurity self- energy, we proceed according to the two-site DMFT protocol in Section 3 until self-consistency has been reached. In DMFT we are interested in the local lattice spectral function Alatt,jj(Пү) which, at self-consistency, is given by the impurity spectral function Aimp(Пү). In the paramagnetic phase of the infinite-dimensional Hubbard model, the spectral function has a three peak structure with an upper and a lower Hubbard band, corresponding to empty and doubly occupied sites, respectively, and a quasiparticle peak with integrated spectral weight Z between the bands . In two-site DMFT, since the self-energy has two poles, this three peak structure can be qualitatively reproduced with the spectral function A(Пү) = ПҒ0 [Пү + Ој вҲ’ ОЈimp(Пү)] , (36) Kreula et al. Page 16 of 20 where ПҒ0 is the non-interacting density of states of the Bethe lattice. Figure 8 shows the spectral function in Eq. (36) where the impurity self-energy has been obtained both from the XY method and from exact numerics of the two-site SIAM using the interactions U = 5tвҲ— and U = 8tвҲ—. We notice that for U = 5tвҲ—, the Hubbard bands from the XY method are slightly dislocated and the quasiparticle peak is slightly narrower compared with the exact solution of the two-site SIAM, but the agreement is still very good. The overall shape of the spectral function from the XY method is unchanged compared to the exact case. This underestimation of the width of the quasiparticle peak stems from the fact that the fitting procedure in Fig. 7a causes the negative of the derivative of the self-energy in the XY method to be a bit larger than the exact value from the two-site SIAM, i.e., вҲ’ dRe[ОЈXY imp(Пү+iО·)] dПү пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ Пү=0 вүі вҲ’ dRe[ОЈexact imp (Пү+iО·)] dПү пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ Пү=0, which leads to Z in Eq. (10) from the XY method to be slightly smaller than in the exact solution of the two-site SIAM, i.e., ZXY вүІ Zexact. For U = 8tвҲ—, the two spectral functions agree with maximum relative error of 10вҲ’8, since in this case V = 0 is found to be the self-consistent solution, whence the Trotterized evolution operator in Eq. (27) matches full evolution operator of the two-site SIAM, and thus there is no Trotter error. We observe that in Fig. 8 the central quasiparticle peak vanishes, which is characteristic of insulating behaviour. See Ref. for a discussion of the artifacts of the spectral functions in two-site DMFT compared to full DMFT. To study the transition between the two types of spectral functions in Fig. 8, we plot in Fig. 9 the self-consistent quasiparticle weight Z obtained from the XY method as a function of the interaction U for different Trotter steps N. We also show Z from the exact solution of the two-site SIAM for comparison. We see that the digital approach captures the correct trend of the curve, but in the metallic side underestimates to a small degree the values of Z for interactions close to U = Uc = 6tвҲ—, which is the critical interaction for Mott transition in two-site DMFT at half- filling . These results are consistent with the spectral functions in Fig. 8. The underestimation of Z can be diminished by increasing N, as shown in Fig. 9. It is noteworthy to mention that two-site DMFT overestimates the quasiparticle weight compared to full DMFT for interactions U < Uc, as demonstrated in Ref. . Above Uc, we find Z = 0 to be the self-consistent solution, corresponding to the insulating phase. 6 Summary We have proposed a quantum algorithm for two-site DMFT to be run on a small digital quantum simulator with a classical feedback loop, allowing the qualitative description of the infinite-dimensional Hubbard model in the thermodynamic limit. We have considered two alternative quantum gate decompositions consistent with state-of-the-art technology in superconducting circuits for the time-evolution oper- ator. We found that an increasing number of Trotter steps improves the fidelity of our digital scheme to qualitatively describe the Mott transition. Our work therefore provides an interesting application for small-scale quantum devices. It also paves the way for more accurate quantum simulations of strongly correlated fermions in various lattice geometries, which are relevant to novel quantum materials, when the general self-consistency condition and larger number of qubits are used. Kreula et al. Page 17 of 20 Appendix: Single-qubit interferometry for the impurity Green function Here, we present a measurement scheme for the retarded impurity Green function. Definitions The retarded zero temperature impurity Green function in the time domain can be written as GR imp(П„) = Оё(П„) пҝҪ G> imp(П„) вҲ’ G< imp(П„) пҝҪ , (37) where the вҖңgreaterвҖқ and вҖңlesserвҖқ Green functions are given by G> imp(П„) = вҲ’iвҹЁЛҶc1Пғ(П„)ЛҶcвҖ  1Пғ(0)вҹ©, (38) G< imp(П„) = iвҹЁЛҶcвҖ  1Пғ(0)ЛҶc1Пғ(П„)вҹ©, (39) respectively. The average is computed in the ground-state |GSвҹ© of the two-site SIAM in Eq. (6). Here, Пғ can be either вҶ“ or вҶ‘ since we are considering a spin-symmetric case (i.e., GR вҶ“ = GR вҶ‘ ), and the ЛҶc-operators are given in the Heisenberg picture with respect to ЛҶHSIAM, i.e., ЛҶc1Пғ(П„) = ЛҶU вҖ (П„)ЛҶc1Пғ ЛҶU(П„) = eiП„ ЛҶ HSIAMЛҶc1ПғeвҲ’iП„ ЛҶ HSIAM. (40) One possibility to measure the impurity Green function GR imp(П„) is to use a single- qubit Ramsey interferometer which was used in Ref. in the more general non-equilibrium case. To this end, we introduce an ancilla qubit in addition to the вҖҳsystemвҖҷ qubits, raising the total number of qubits needed to implement the two-site DMFT scheme to five. JordanвҖ“Wigner transformation The greater and lesser components, G> imp(П„) and G< imp(П„), must be written in terms of spin operators by again mapping the ЛҶc1Пғ and ЛҶcвҖ  1Пғ operators onto Pauli operators via the JordanвҖ“Wigner transformation. For concreteness, we focus on the case Пғ =вҶ“. We obtain G> imp(П„) = вҲ’ i 4 пҝҪ вҹЁ ЛҶU вҖ (П„)ЛҶПғx 1 ЛҶU(П„)ЛҶПғx 1вҹ© + iвҹЁ ЛҶU вҖ (П„)ЛҶПғx 1 ЛҶU(П„)ЛҶПғy 1вҹ© вҲ’ iвҹЁ ЛҶU вҖ (П„)ЛҶПғy 1 ЛҶU(П„)ЛҶПғx 1вҹ© + вҹЁ ЛҶU вҖ (П„)ЛҶПғy 1 ЛҶU(П„)ЛҶПғy 1вҹ© пҝҪ , (41) and G< imp(П„) = i 4 пҝҪ вҹЁЛҶПғx 1 ЛҶU вҖ (П„)ЛҶПғx 1 ЛҶU(П„)вҹ© вҲ’ iвҹЁЛҶПғx 1 ЛҶU вҖ (П„)ЛҶПғy 1 ЛҶU(П„)вҹ© + iвҹЁЛҶПғy 1 ЛҶU вҖ (П„)ЛҶПғx 1 ЛҶU(П„)вҹ© + вҹЁЛҶПғy 1 ЛҶU вҖ (П„)ЛҶПғy 1 ЛҶU(П„)вҹ© пҝҪ . (42) Kreula et al. Page 18 of 20 вҹЁЛҶПғzвҹ© |0вҹ© вҹЁЛҶПғyвҹ© ЛҶПғH Ancilla ЛҶU(П„) 3 4 1 2 ЛҶПғОІ 1 ЛҶПғОұ 1 ЛҶПғH UвҖ (П„)ЛҶПғОұ 1 ЛҶ U(П„)ЛҶПғОІ 1 |GSвҹ© contribution to the Green function GR imp(П„). The time-evolution operator ЛҶU(П„) is composed of a set of quantum gates according to the main text. Measurement protocol Each of the terms of the form вҹЁ ЛҶU вҖ (П„)ЛҶПғОұ 1 ЛҶU(П„)ЛҶПғОІ 1 вҹ©, where Оұ, ОІ вҲҲ {x, y}, can be mea- sured in the interferometer. This can be seen as follows. We denote the state of the system qubits by ЛҶПҒsys = |GSвҹ©вҹЁGS|, where |GSвҹ© is the ground-state of the system. We initialize the ancilla qubit in the state |0вҹ©, yielding the total density operator ЛҶПҒtot = |0вҹ©вҹЁ0| вҠ— ЛҶПҒsys. The total system then undergoes the following evolution: 1. At time t = 0, a Hadamard gate ЛҶПғH = 1 вҲҡ 2 (ЛҶПғz + ЛҶПғx) is applied on the ancilla qubit, creating the superposition |0вҹ©ancilla вҶ’ (|0вҹ©ancilla + |1вҹ©ancilla) / вҲҡ 2. 2. A Controlled-Pauli gate ЛҶПғОұ 1 is applied on the impurity qubit 1 if the ancilla qubit has state |0вҹ©. 3. The system qubits undergo time evolution according to the unitary ЛҶU(П„) which is decomposed into quantum gates. 4. Another controlled Pauli gate ЛҶПғОІ 1 is applied on the impurity qubit 1 if the ancilla qubit has state |1вҹ©. 5. Another Hadamard gate is applied on the ancilla qubit. Denoting the total unitary in steps 2-4 by ЛҶT, the state of the ancilla qubit after this evolution is given by ЛҶПҒancilla = Trsys пҝҪ ЛҶПғH ЛҶT ЛҶПғH ЛҶПҒtotЛҶПғH ЛҶT вҖ ЛҶПғH пҝҪ = 1 + Re[F(П„)] 2 |0вҹ©вҹЁ0| вҲ’ iIm[F(П„)] 2 |0вҹ©вҹЁ1| + iIm[F(П„)] 2 |1вҹ©вҹЁ0| + 1 вҲ’ Re[F(П„)] 2 |1вҹ©вҹЁ1|, (43) where F(П„) = Trsys пҝҪ ЛҶT вҖ  1 (П„) ЛҶT0(П„)ЛҶПҒsys пҝҪ . We have denoted the controlled unitaries as ЛҶT1(П„) = ЛҶПғОұ 1 ЛҶU(П„) and ЛҶT0(П„) = ЛҶU(П„)ЛҶПғОІ 1 . Note that since the same ЛҶU(П„) appears in both unitaries, only the Pauli gates ЛҶПғОұ/ОІ 1 need to be controlled, as described above. Note also that F(П„) = вҹЁ ЛҶU вҖ (П„)ЛҶПғОұ 1 ЛҶU(П„)ЛҶПғОІ 1 вҹ©. We can rewrite the state of the ancilla qubit as ЛҶПҒancilla = 1 2 пҝҪ пҝҪ , (44) Kreula et al. Page 19 of 20 repeated measurements of the ЛҶПғz and ЛҶПғy components of the ancilla qubit yield the real and imaginary parts of the term вҹЁ ЛҶU вҖ (П„)ЛҶПғОұ 1 ЛҶU(П„)ЛҶПғОІ 1 вҹ©. See Fig. 10 for the quantum network of the scheme. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. AuthorвҖҷs contributions JMK conceived the project and performed the numerical simulations. LG-ГҒ, LL and ES worked out the superconducting circuit implementation. All authors contributed to interpreting the results and writing of the manuscript. Acknowledgements We acknowledge Anna-Maija Uimonen as well as Ian Walmsley and his group members for useful discussions. JMK acknowledges financial support from Christ Church, Oxford and the Osk Huttunen Foundation. LG-ГҒ, LL and ES acknowledge support from a UPV/EHU PhD grant, Spanish MINECO FIS2015-69983-P, UPV/EHU UFI 11/55 and Project EHUA14/04, and RamГіn y Cajal Grant RYC-2012-11391. DJ was supported by the EPSRC National Quantum Technology Hub in Networked Quantum Information Processing (NQIT) EP/M013243/1. Author details 1Clarendon Laboratory, Department of Physics, University of Oxford, Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PU, UK. 2Department of Physical Chemistry, University of the Basque Country, Apartado 644, 48080 Bilbao, Spain. 3Department of Physics, University of Bath, Claverton Down, Bath BA2 7AY UK. 4Max Planck Institute for the Structure and Dynamics of Matter, Hamburg, Germany. 5IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science, Maria Diaz de Haro 3, 48013 Bilbao, Spain. 6Centre for Quantum Technologies, National University of Singapore, 3 Science Drive 2, 117543 Singapore.