Page 1 of 22 Controlling many-body states by the electric field effect in a two-dimensional material L. J. Li1,2,3*, E. C. T. O’Farrell1,2*, K. P. Loh1,3, G. Eda1,2,3, B. Özyilmaz1,2 & A.H. Castro Neto1,2,# 1Centre for Advanced 2D Materials and Graphene Research Centre, National University of Singapore, 117546, Singapore. 2Department of Physics, National University of Singapore, 117542, Singapore. 3Department of Chemistry, National University of Singapore, 117543, Singapore. *These authors contributed equally to this work. # Corresponding author: phycastr@nus.edu.sg . To understand the complex physics of a system with strong electron–electron interactions, it is ideal to control and monitor its properties while tuning an external electric field applied to the system. Indeed, complete electric-field control of many-body states in strongly correlated electron systems is fundamental to the next generation of condensed matter research and devices1–3. However, the material must be thin enough to avoid shielding of the electric field in the bulk material. Two-dimensional materials do not experience electrical screening, and their charge carrier density can be controlled by gating. 1T-TiSe2 is a prototypical two-dimensional material that shows charge density wave (CDW) and superconductivity in its phase diagram4, presenting several similarities with other layered systems such as copper oxides5, iron pnictides6, and crystals of rare-earth and actinide atoms 7. By studying 1T-TiSe2 single crystals with thicknesses of 10 nanometres or less, encapsulated in two-dimensional layers of hexagonal boron nitride, we achieve unprecedented control over the CDW transition temperature, tuned from 170 kelvin to 40 kelvin, and over the superconductivity transition temperature, tuned from a quantum critical point at 0 kelvin up to 3 kelvin. Electrically driving TiSe2 over different ordered electronic phases allows us to study the details of the phase transitions between many-body states. Observations of periodic oscillations of magnetoresistance induced by the Little–Parks effect show that the appearance of superconductivity is directly correlated to the spatial texturing of the amplitude and phase of the superconductivity order parameter, Page 2 of 22 corresponding to a two-dimensional matrix of superconductivity. We infer that this superconductivity matrix is supported by a matrix of incommensurate CDW states embedded in the commensurate CDW states. Our results show that spatially modulated electronic states are fundamental to the appearance of two- dimensional superconductivity. The charge carrier density— or equivalently, the Fermi energy—strongly controls phase transitions in correlated systems. Traditionally, charge carrier density can be controlled by doping, that is, by chemical modification of the material. Unfortunately, the alteration of the system’s chemical composition leads to the unavoidable introduction of disorder. In strongly correlated systems, owing to their exponential sensitivity to the local electronic environment, disorder can have a profound impact that masks the intrinsic many-body behaviour8. Hence, there is a growing need to change the charge carrier density of strongly correlated systems without chemical means. The application of an electric field is one of the cleanest ways to address many-body states since it is intrinsically homogeneous. However, electric fields are screened by the bulk material in three-dimensional metals, making its use difficult. The Fermi energy not only controls the number of electric carriers but also the screening of external electric fields and internal electron–electron interactions9. In two- dimensional (2D) systems the electrons move in a plane while the electric field propagates in three-dimensional space. Hence, 2D electrons are unable to screen electric fields, external or their own. Therefore, we chose to work with a 2D material, TiSe2, of nanometre-scale thickness, and we used an ionic gel electrolyte gate to apply the electric field. In addition, the flake of TiSe2 was encapsulated by a 2D dielectric, hexagonal boron nitride, to avoid external disorder and chemical oxidation and degradation caused by both air and the electrolyte. Electrical transport measurements under electric-field-induced doping enabled us to construct the phase diagram shown in Fig. 1. Electron doping suppresses the CDW transition from 170 K to 40 K and superconductivity appears with a dome that peaks at 3 K. We show that the emergence of superconductivity is directly associated with the inhomogeneous electronic states that correspond to a periodic structure of the amplitude and phase shifts of the superconductivity order parameter. This periodic structure must be stabilized and pinned to the lattice, so we can infer the presence of an Page 3 of 22 incommensurate CDW (ICDW) matrix surrounding commensurate CDW (CCDW) regions. TiSe2 nanosheets with thicknesses of 10 nm or less were prepared by mechanical exfoliation of a high-quality single crystal (Extended Data Fig. 1). The device fabrication and measurement details are described in the Methods and the Supplementary Information. In Fig. 2a we sketch the electric-field double layer transistor device used in our experiments, Fig. 2b shows a typical top-gate sweep at 285 K and the variation of the electron density as measured by the Hall effect (see Methods and Extended Data Fig. 2a, b). Using an electrolyte top gate and an electrostatic doped-Si bottom gate we could control the electron density up to about 1015 cm2 and thereby explore the phase diagram of this 2D material. Variation of the charge carrier density leads to strong variations of the electrical resistance of the device as shown in Fig. 2c, d. At low charge carrier densities, one can clearly see a peak in the resistivity versus temperature. The CDW transition temperature10, TCDW, corresponds to the inflection point of the resistance and was also measured by using the Hall effect (Extended Data Fig. 2c), to detect the reconstruction of the Fermi surface. On increasing the charge carrier density, TCDW decreases from 170 K to 40 K before becoming undetectable around n = 7.5 × 1014 cm2. On increasing the electron density we observe the superconductivity state as shown in Fig. 2d. The superconductivity transition temperature, TC, increases from 0 K at the quantum critical point (QCP) at n = 1.2 × 1014 cm2 up to approximately 3 K at an optimal density of n = 7.5 × 1014 cm2. We note that this is exactly the density at which the CDW signal vanishes, indicating a scenario of two competing orders11. A further increase in density suppresses TC, giving rise to the formation of a superconductivity dome, as shown in Fig. 1 together with representations of the inferred structure in each region of the phase diagram (discussed below). When the superconducting coherence length (T) becomes larger than the sample thickness close to TC we expect the material to behave as a 2D system and the superconducting transition is anticipated to be of the Kosterlitz–Thouless (K–T) type with vortex–antivortex unbinding12. One of the trademarks of the K–T transition is the broadening of the resistance with lowering of the temperature, as shown in Fig. 2d. For the K–T transition the resistivity is expected to scale with the coherence length as: Page 4 of 22    K-T  exp / T a b T T     (1) where TK–T is the K–T transition temperature, and a and b are material parameters. The experimental result reproduces this relation close to TK–T, as shown in Fig. 3a for a charge carrier density of n = 2.67 × 1014 cm2. We also observe current–voltage scaling13 in the superconductivity phase (V  I) with  = 5 for n = 5.9 × 1014 cm2 at the lowest temperature (Extended Data Fig. 3a). By fitting to equation (1), the K–T transition temperatures can be extracted for each doping level. In Fig. 3b we show the behaviour of TK–T close to the QCP as a function of electron density. Quantum critical scaling14 predicts TK–T  (n  nc)z, where z is the dynamical exponent and  is the correlation length exponent. As shown in Fig. 3b and Extended Data Fig. 3b and c, we find z  2/3. The same scaling was observed in other systems15–17, and indicates that the superconductivity transition is of the classical three-dimensional XYor, equivalently, 2D quantum universality class16,17. In the absence of a specific screening or dissipation mechanism18,19, z is expected to be 1, so that v = 2/3, which implies that our system is in the clean limit by the Harris criterion20. The temperature dependence of the sheet resistance can be written as RS = RS0+CT (where RS0 is the residual resistance at 3 K), which decreases monotonically with carrier density as shown in Fig. 3c, in accordance with the above conclusion regarding the Harris criteria. In an ordinary metal (or Fermi liquid) we expect  = 2, independent of doping. Nevertheless, in Fig. 3c we find 1 <  < 2 (Extended Data Fig. 4a and b) over the entire phase diagram. Notice that at around 7.5 × 1014 cm2,   1.5 extends down to temperatures close to the superconductivity transition, which would seem to indicate the presence of another QCP, owing to suppression of the CDW, inside the superconductivity dome. In what follows we show that this is not the case. The presence of the competing orders in this 2D system has striking consequences for the electronic transport. In Fig. 4a we show the magnetoresistance as a function of magnetic field for a density of n = 5.9 × 1014 cm2. The magnetoresistance in the superconductivity phase is positive, as expected, but we clearly observe the presence of plateaus and oscillations in the data. By taking the derivative dR/dB, in Fig. 4b we observe that these features are temperature-independent and have well defined periods. The periodicity in magnetic field reflects a spatial periodicity given by the cyclotron Page 5 of 22 is the magnetic field periodicity. We have analysed the magnetoresistance data as a function of electron density (or gate voltage). (Magnetoresistance data for other electron densities is shown in Extended Data Fig. 5.) One can see a clear trend in the data: the length scale decreases monotonically with electron density from (n)  450 nm at n  1.3 × 1014 cm2 to (n)  170 nm at n  5.9 × 1014 cm2. It is clear that the well defined structure of the magnetoresistance reflects spatial fluctuations of the electronic pairing. A consistent explanation for these features is based on the Little–Parks effect21, whereby Cooper pairs are constrained to move in loops in the material—that is, pairing is local and constrained to well defined regions. The length scale we observe is associated with the trapping of magnetic flux quanta by the Cooper pairs. The existence of such a superconductivity matrix over a range of temperature and charge carrier density in a single crystal is remarkable, leading us to suggest that the superconductivity matrix must be pinned and stabilized by an underlying matrix of inhomogeneous electronic states. Fluctuations of an underlying charge or spin order parameter have led to the discovery of superconductivity in a wide range of systems; the suppression of the CDW transition from 170 K to 40 K, concomitant with the appearance of superconductivity and non-Fermi-liquid behaviour, strongly indicates that the CDW plays a part. We now consider how local variations of the CDW can stabilize the superconductivity matrix. The CDW corresponds to a spatial modulation of the charge density    . δ e i         Q r r r , where  is the CDW order parameter, r is the position in the 2D plane and Q is the CDW ordering vector. On the basis of symmetry alone, the Ginzburg–Landau free energy for  can be written as22:         2 2 3 4 2 * 2 1 d 2 F a b c Q iQ Q m Q                            r (2) where a, b, c, m* and  are phenomenological parameters that determine the energy scale for the spatial variation of . Variations in the amplitude  are energetically very costly since the CDW has to be locally destroyed. However, variations in the CDW phase are energetically allowed and can be expressed as:     0exp 2 i                  K r r r (3) Page 6 of 22 where 0 is the CDW order parameter in the uniform CCDW, K is a reciprocal lattice vector in the direction of Q, (r) is a spatially varying phase and we have included the known CCDW wavevector for TiSe2 (1/2, 1/2, 1/2). When  = n (where n is an integer) we again have a CCDW, whereas if (r) = Q.r we have an ICDW. For illustrative purposes, we assume that the variation in (x) is one-dimensional in nature and substitute equation (3) into equation (2) to obtain:       2 x 1 δ d 1 1 cos2 2 F x x g x                 (4) where g depends on the Ginzburg–Landau parameters and x = |K/2  Q| r is the dimensionless length scale. The last equation reflects how the free energy changes locally with the phase. Minimizing equation (4) with respect to  we obtain:   2 2 d 2 sin 2 d g x     (5) the differential equation for the pendulum (x plays the part of ‘time’), which has periodic solutions with period ICDW  /(g1/2|K/2  Q|). These spatially periodic variations of the phase represent Neél-like domain walls of ICDW between CCDW regions with different phase where ICDW is the thickness of the domain wall. McMillan described23 how these defects allow a uniform ICDW with slowly varying phase to break apart into domains of CCDW separated by ICDW domain walls that have more rapidly varying phases. The domain wall density is /Q to match the homogeneous ICDW state. A full solution to this problem in 2D is lacking, but we speculate that domain walls form a periodic matrix illustrated schematically in Fig. 1; blue CCDW regions with constant phases are embedded in a periodic ICDW matrix. We note that a similar structure was observed by scanning transmission microscope measurements of the closely related 1T-TaS2, in which the ICDW state exists at ambient conditions24. The self-organizing principle is that repulsive interactions occur between domain walls owing to higher-order terms in the free energy23. Therefore the ICDW domains will form a matrix, breaking the CCDW into domains with fixed area, as required by the Little–Parks effect. As shown by ref. 23, ICDW dynamic phase fluctuations—that is, phonon modes of the ICDW (not the lattice)—can exist in these domain walls. It is conceivable that these Page 7 of 22 ICDW phonons induce superconductivity pairing and localize Cooper pairs in one- dimensional regions of the 2D system. Another intriguing aspect of our results is displayed in Fig. 4d, which shows the point-contact conductance spectra measured at each density, in which we observe a clear zero bias conductance peak (ZBCP) in the superconductivity state. Extended Data Fig. 6 shows its temperature and magnetic field dependence at a density of n = 2.1 × 1014 cm2. ZBCPs are observed in a wide range of unconventional superconductors and are understood to arise by Andreev reflection from a Cooper pairing potential having an internal phase shift of the superconductivity order parameter25. These results are therefore in stark contrast to the experimentally determined single-gap s-wave superconductivity observed in the Cu-intercalated CuxTiSe2 (ref. 26]. It is unlikely that our 2D samples would develop a superconductivity order parameter that is qualitatively distinct from that of CuxTiSe2 (for example, d- wave). The existence of the ZBCP therefore suggests that, together with the spatial modulation of the superconductivity amplitude (which is demonstrated by the Little– Parks effect), 、there may also be a modulation of the superconductivity phase, although the correspondence between the amplitude variation and the phase variation cannot be determined from our measurements. The observed state in 1T-TiSe2bears some similarity to the pair density wave (PDW) superconducting CDW phases. However, further experiments are required to substantiate the PDW hypothesis. Although one-dimensional PDW states have attracted more attention within the context of the cuprate superconductors27, more general PDW states having phase and amplitude variations in 2D are expected to be possible28. The coexistence of CCDW and ICDW was first observed by recent X-ray measurements of TiSe2 at pressures close to where the superconductivity phase was expected29. ICDW domain walls with a periodicity along the c-axis of ~300 nm were observed, similar to the length scale determined in this experiment. While the periodicity was most pronounced along the c-axis, a weak in-plane signal of incommensurability was observed that might correspond to the electronic microstructure observed here in the superconducting order (Abbamonte, P., personal communication, 15 January 2015). In summary, we studied samples of TiSe2 a few nanometres in thickness and tuned the material through the CDW and superconductivity phases using the electric field Page 8 of 22 effect. This technique allowed us to study in great detail the QCP in the material and classify its universality class. We also identified the interplay between superconductivity and CDW through the formation of an inhomogeneous many-body state which we identify with the localization of Cooper pairs along a matrix of incommensurate dislocations surrounding regions of CCDW. We conjecture that the superconductivity has in its origin in the coupling of the McMillan phonon modes of the ICDW with the electrons. These results open a new era of electric-field tuning of many-body states in condensed matter research. 1. Ueno, K. et al. Electric-field-induced superconductivity in an insulator. Nature Mater. 2. Bollinger, A. T. et al. Superconductor–insulator transition in La2 xSrxCuO4 at the pair quantum resistance. Nature 472, 458–460 (2011). 3. Yu, Y. et al. Gate-tunable phase transitions in thin flakes of 1T-TaS2. Nature Nanotechnol. 10, 270–276 (2014). 4. Wang, Q. H., Kalantar-Zadeh, K., Kis, A., Coleman, J. N. & Strano, M. S. Electronics and optoelectronics of two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides. Nature Nanotechnol. 7, 699–712 (2012). 5. Shen, K. M. & Davis, J. C. S. Cuprate high-Tc superconductors. Mater. Today 11, 14– 6. Stewart, G. R. Superconductivity in iron compounds. Rev. Mod. Phys. 83, 1589–1652 7. Stewart, G. R. Heavy-fermion systems. Rev. Mod. Phys. 56, 755–787 (1984). 8. Castro Neto, A. H. & Jones, B. A. Non-Fermi-liquid behavior in U and Ce alloys: criticality, disorder, dissipation, and Griffiths-McCoy singularities. Phys. Rev. B 62, 9. Kotov, V. N., Uchoa, B., Pereira, V. M., Guinea, F. & Castro Neto, A. H. Electron- electron interactions in graphene: current status and perspectives. Rev. Mod. Phys. 84, 10. Fisher, M. E. & Langer, J. S. Resistive anomalies at magnetic critical points. Phys. Rev. Lett. 20, 665–668 (1968). Page 9 of 22 11. Castro Neto, A. H. Charge density wave, superconductivity, and anomalous metallic behavior in 2D transition metal dichalcogenides. Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 4382–4385 12. Minnhagen, P. The two-dimensional Coulomb gas, vortex unbinding, and superfluid- superconducting films. Rev. Mod. Phys. 59, 1001–1066 (1987). 13. Reyren, N. et al. Superconducting interfaces between insulating oxides. Science 317, 14. Sachdev, S. Quantum Phase Transitions (Cambridge Univ. Press, 1999). 15. Caviglia, A. D. et al. Electric field control of the LaAlO3/SrTiO3 interface ground state. Nature 456, 624–627 (2008). 16. Parendo, K. A. et al. Electrostatic tuning of the superconductor-insulator transition in two dimensions. Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 197004 (2005). 17. Aubin, H. et al. Magnetic-field-induced quantum superconductor-insulator transition in Nb0.15Si0.85. Phys. Rev. B 73, 094521 (2006). 18. Mason, N. & Kapitulnik, A. Superconductor-insulator transition in a capacitively coupled dissipative environment. Phys. Rev. B 65, 220505 (2002). 19. Yazdani, A. & Kapitulnik, A. Superconducting-insulating transition in two- dimensional a-MoGe thin films. Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 3037–3040 (1995). 20. Harris, A. B. Effect of random defects on the critical behaviour of Ising models. J. Phys. Chem. 7, 1671 (1974). 21. Tinkham, M. Introduction to Superconductivity (McGraw-Hill, 1975). 22. McMillan, W. L. Theory of discommensurations and the commensurate- incommensurate charge-density-wave phase transition. Phys. Rev. B 14, 1496–1502 23. McMillan, W. L. Time-dependent Laudau theory of charge-density waves in transition-metal dichalcogenides. Phys. Rev. B 12, 1197–1199 (1975). 24. Burk, B., Thomson, R. E., Zettl, A. & Clarke, J. Charge-density-wave domains in 1T- TaS2 observed by satellite structure in scanning-tunneling-microscopy images. Phys. Rev. Lett. 66, 3040 (1991). 25. Kashiwaya, S. & Tanaka, Y. Tunnelling effects on surface bound states in unconventional superconductors. Rep. Prog. Phys. 63, 1641–1724 (2000). Page 10 of 22 26. Li, S. Y., Wu, G., Chen, X. H. & Taillefer, L. Single-gap s-wave superconductivity near the charge-density-wave quantum critical point in CuxTiSe2. Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 27. Fradkin, E., Kivelson, S. A. & Tranquada, J. M. Theory of intertwined orders in high temperature superconductors. Rev. Mod. Phys. 87, 457 (2015). 28. Agterberg, D. F. & Tsunetsugu, H. Dislocations and vortices in pair-density-wave superconductors. Nature Phys. 4, 639–642 (2008). 29. Joe, Y. I. et al. Emergence of charge density wave domain walls above the superconducting dome in 1T-TiSe2. Nature Phys. 10, 421–425 (2014).