Half-Metallic Superconducting Triplet Spin Valve Klaus Halterman1, вҲ— and Mohammad Alidoust2, вҖ  1Michelson Lab, Physics Division, Naval Air Warfare Center, China Lake, California 93555 2Department of Physics, Faculty of Sciences, University of Isfahan, Hezar Jerib Avenue, Isfahan 81746-73441, Iran (Dated: September 25, 2018) We theoretically study a finite size SF1NF2 spin valve, where a normal metal (N) insert separates a thin standard ferromagnet (F1) and a thick half-metallic ferromagnet (F2). For sufficiently thin superconductor (S) widths close to the coherence length Оҫ0, we find that changes to the relative magnetization orientations in the ferromagnets can result in substantial variations in the transition temperature Tc, consistent with experiment [Singh et al., Phys. Rev. X 5, 021019 (2015)]. Our results demonstrate that, in good agreement with the experiment, the variations are largest in the case where F2 is in a half-metallic phase and thus supports only one spin direction. To pinpoint the origins of this strong spin-valve effect, both the equal-spin f1 and opposite-spin f0 triplet correlations are calculated using a self-consistent microscopic technique. We find that when the magnetization in F1 is tilted slightly out-of-plane, the f1 component can be the dominant triplet component in the superconductor. The coupling between the two ferromagnets is discussed in terms of the underlying spin currents present in the system. We go further and show that the zero energy peaks of the local density of states probed on the S side of the valve can be another signature of the presence of superconducting triplet correlations. Our findings reveal that for sufficiently thin S layers, the zero energy peak at the S side can be larger than its counterpart in the F2 side. PACS numbers: 74.45.+c, 74.78.Fk,75.70.-i In the field of superconducting spintronics, there is in- terest in spin-controlled proximity effects for manipulat- ing the superconductivity in ferromagnet (F) and super- conductor (S) layered systems . When an S layer is in contact with two ferromagnets, creating a supercon- ducting spin valve, the superconducting state can be con- trolled by changing the relative magnetization directions [3вҖ“5]. The basic superconducting spin-valve involves SFF structures where switching between relative parallel and antiparallel magnetizations modifies the os- cillatory singlet pairing in the F regions. For strong fer- romagnets, these oscillations have limited extent, as they become damped out over very short distances . If how- ever, the mutual magnetizations vary noncollinearly, the broken time reversal and translation symmetries induces a mixture of spin singlet and odd-frequency (or odd-time) spin-triplet correlations with 0 and Вұ1 spin projections along the magnetization axis . The triplet pairs with nonzero spin projection can naturally penetrate ex- tensively within the ferromagnet layers [10вҖ“16] and result in an enhancement of the DOS at low energies . This long-range triplet component in SF1F2 type spin valves can be manipulated by changing the relative ori- entations of the magnetizations in F1 and in F2, which creates opportunities for the development of new types of spin-valves and switches for nonvolatile memory appli- cations [19вҖ“21]. Because of their simplicity in pinpoint- ing fundamental phenomena and promising prospects in spintronics devices, the SF1F2 spin valve continues to attract broad interest [3, 6, 14, 21вҖ“25, 27, 30]. For ex- вҲ— klaus.halterman@navy.mil вҖ  phymalidoust@gmail.com ample, an anomalous Meissner effect has recently been observed that is consistent with the generation of an odd-frequency superconducting state . Recent experiments involving superconducting spin valves have investigated variations in the critical tem- perature, Tc when varying the relative in-plane magnetization angle. The suppression in Tc for nearly orthogonal magnetizations reflects the increased presence of equal-spin triplet pairs . A spin valve like effect was also experimentally realized in FeV superlattices, where antiferromagnetic coupling between the Fe layers permits gradual rotation of the relative magnetization direction in the F1 and F2 layers. Most experiments in- volve standard ferromagnets, leading to вҲҶTc sensitivity of several mK. When the outer F2 layer is replaced by a half-metallic ferromagnet, such as CrO2, a very large вҲҶTc has been reported, which is indicative of the presence of odd-frequency triplet superconducting correlations . Besides through studying Tc, the existence and type of superconducting correlations in superconducting spin- valves can be identified through signatures of the proximity-induced electronic density of states (DOS) . When triplet correlations are present in an F layer, it has been shown that a zero energy peak (ZEP) in the DOS can arise . The situation where pair corre- lations from both the spin-0 and spin-1 triplet channels are present can however make its unambiguous detection difficult. Nonetheless, this difficulty can be alleviated if one of the F layers is half-metallic (supporting one spin direction), creating an effective spin-filter that can isolate the spin-1 triplet component due to the large exchange splitting present. Thus it is of interest to investigate SF1F2 structures containing a half-metallic ferromagnet, where the modified triplet proximity effects can result in arXiv:1607.03899v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 13 Jul 2016 2 F1 F2 N S z y x h2 Оҳ2 h1 Оҳ1 dS dF1 dF2 dN multilayer, where Оё1 and Оё2 characterize the magnetization orientation of ferromagnets F1 and F2 with thicknesses dF1 and dF2, respectively. The normal metal (N) insert with thickness dN is a nonmagnetic layer such as Cu. The ex- change field in each magnet is written hi = hi(cos Оёi, 0, sin Оёi), for i = 1, 2. Here, Оёi is measured relative to the x-axis. The ferromagnet F2 is half-metallic (e.g., CrO2) so that |h2| = EF , and its magnetization is fixed along the z direction (Оё2 = ПҖ/2), whereas the magnetization in F1 can rotate in the xвҲ’z plane. We thus define the angle Оё to describe the out-of-plane relative magnetization between the two magnets, with Оё вүЎ Оё1 вҲ’ Оё2. strong spin valves with high sensitivity to magnetization changes and a corresponding Tc suppression. To realistically and accurately model these systems, where h вүғ EF , we use a fully microscopic microscopic framework, the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) equations, to determine the singlet and triplet pair correlations self- consistently. This approach naturally supports the study of a broad range of intermediate ferromagnetic exchange energies, including the half metallic phase, by simply setting the exchange field value close to the Fermi en- ergy. The half metallic regime is also accessible within the quasiclassical approximation by considering the case when the energy splitting of the the spin-up and spin-down bands greatly exceed the Fermi energy, i.e., h вү« EF . Using the BdG formalism, we show how to identify the existence of the equal-spin triplet compo- nents by probing the S side of the proposed valve with an STM, revealing signatures in the form of peaks in the density of states (DOS) at zero energy . I. METHODS A schematic of the spin valve configuration is depicted in Fig. 1. We model the nanostructure as a SF1NF2 layered system, where S represents the superconducting layer, N denotes the normal metallic intermediate layer, and F1, F2 are the inner (free) and outer (pinned) mag- nets, respectively. The layers are assumed to be infinite in the y вҲ’ z plane with a total thickness d in the x di- rection, which is perpendicular to the interfaces between layers. The ferromagnet F2 has width dF2, and fixed di- rection of magnetization along z, while the free magnetic layer F1 of width dF1 has a variable magnetization di- rection. The superconducting layer of thickness dS is in contact with the free layer. The magnetizations in the F layers are modeled by effective Stoner-type exchange fields h(x) which vanish in the non-ferromagnetic layers. To accurately describe the physical properties of our systems with sizes in the nanometer scale and over a broad range of exchange fields, where quasiclassical ap- proximations are limited, we numerically solve the mi- croscopic BdG equations within a fully self-consistent framework. The general spin-dependent BdG equations for the quasiparticle energies, Оөn, and quasiparticle wave- functions, unПғ, vnПғ is written: пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈӯ H0 вҲ’ hz вҲ’hx 0 вҲҶ(x) вҲ’hx H0 + hz вҲ’вҲҶ(x) 0 0 вҲ’вҲҶ(x) вҲ’(H0 вҲ’ hz) вҲ’hx вҲҶ(x) 0 вҲ’hx вҲ’(H0 + hz) пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈё Г— пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈӯ unвҶ‘ unвҶ“ vnвҶ‘ vnвҶ“ пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈё = Оөn пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈӯ unвҶ‘ unвҶ“ vnвҶ‘ vnвҶ“ пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈё , (1) where hi (i = x, z) are components of the exchange field. In Eqs. (1), the single-particle Hamiltonian H0 = вҲ’1/(2m)d2/dx2 вҲ’ EF + U(x) contains the Fermi energy, EF , and an effective interfacial scattering potential de- scribed by delta functions of strength Hj (j denotes the different interfaces), namely: U(x) = H1Оҙ(x вҲ’ dS) + H2Оҙ(x вҲ’ dS вҲ’ dF1) + H3Оҙ(x вҲ’ dS вҲ’ dF1 вҲ’ dN), where Hj = kF HBj/m is written in terms of the dimensionless scattering strength HBj. We assume hx,i = hi cos Оёi and hz,i = hi sin Оёi in Fi, where hi is the magnitude of ex- change field, and i denotes the region. To minimize the free energy of the system at temperature T, the singlet pair potential вҲҶ(x) is calculated self-consistently : 2 пҝҪ n пҝҪ пҝҪ tanh пҝҪ Оөn 2T пҝҪ , (2) where the sum is over all eigenstates with Оөn that lie within a characteristic Debye energy ПүD, and g(x) is the superconducting coupling strength, taken to be con- stant in the S region and zero elsewhere. The pair po- tential gives direct information regarding superconduct- ing correlations within the S region only, since it van- ishes in the remaining spin valve regions where g(x) = 0. Greater insight into the singlet superconducting correla- tions throughout the structure, and the extraction of the proximity effects is most easily obtained by considering the pair amplitude, f3, defined as f3 вүЎ вҲҶ(x)/g(x). To analyze the correlation between the behavior of the superconducting transition temperatures and the exis- tence of odd triplet superconducting correlations in our system, we compute the induced triplet pairing ampli- tudes which we denote as f0 (with m = 0 spin projection) and f1 (with m = Вұ1 spin projection) according to the following equations : f0(x, t) = 1 2 пҝҪ f1(x, t) = вҲ’ 1 2 пҝҪ 3 is the time difference in the Heisenberg picture. These triplet pair amplitudes are odd in t and vanish at t = 0, in accordance with the Pauli exclusion principle. The quantization axis in Eqs. (3a) and (3b) is along the z direction. When studying the triplet correlations in F1, we align the quantization axis with the local exchange field direction, so that after rotating, the triplet ampli- tudes f0 and f1 become linear combinations of the f0 and f1 in the original unprimed system : f вҖІ 0(x, t)= f0(x, t) cos Оё вҲ’ f1(x, t) sin Оё, and f вҖІ 1(x, t)=f0(x, t) sin Оё + f1(x, t) cos Оё. Thus, when the exchange fields in F1 and F2 are orthogonal (Оё = ПҖ/2), the roles of the equal-spin and opposite-spin triplet correlations are reversed. The singlet pair amplitude however is naturally invariant un- der these rotations. The study of single-particle excitations in these sys- tems can reveal important signatures in the proximity induced singlet and triplet pair correlations. A useful experimental tool that probes these single-particle states is tunneling spectroscopy, where information measured by a scanning tunneling microscope (STM) can reveal the local DOS, N(x, Оө), as a function of position x and energy Оө. We write N(x, Оө) as a sum of each spin compo- where, NПғ(x, Оө) = пҝҪ n пҝҪ u2 nПғ(x)Оҙ(Оө вҲ’ Оөn) + v2 nПғ(x)Оҙ(Оө + Оөn) пҝҪ . (4) II. RESULTS We now proceed to present the self-consistent numer- ical results for the transition temperature, triplet am- plitudes, and local DOS for the spin-valve structure de- picted in Fig. 1. We normalize the temperature in the calculations by T0, the transition temperature of a pure bulk S sample. When in the low-T limit, we take T = 0.05T0. All length scales are normalized by the Fermi wavevector kF , so that the coordinate x is writ- ten X = kF x, and the F1 and F2 widths are written DFi = kF dFi, for i = 1, 2. The thick half-metallic ferro- magnet F2 has width DF2 = 400, and F1 is a standard ferromagnet with h1 = 0.1EF . We set dF1 = ОҫF , where ОҫF = vF /(2h1) is the length scale describing the propaga- tion of spin-0 pairs. In dimensionless units we thus have, DF1 = (h1/EF )вҲ’1 = 10, which optimizes spin mixing of superconducting correlations in the system. The S width is normalized similarly by DS = kF dS, and its scaled co- herence length is taken to be kF Оҫ0 = 100. Natural units, e.g., Д§ = kB = 1, are used throughout. A. Critical Temperature and Triplet Correlations We first study the critical temperature of the spin valve system. The linearized self-consistency expression near пҒұпҖ (degrees) 0 90 180 Tc /T0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1 h2/EF (Color online). Critical temperature Tc as a function of the relative exchange field orientation angle Оё at differing values of the ratio of the exchange field in the F2 region, h2 to the Fermi energy EF . The legend depicts the range of h2/EF considered, ranging from a relatively weak ferromagnet with h2/EF = 0.1, to a fully spin polarized half-metallic phase, corresponding to h2/EF = 1. пҒұпҖ (degrees) 0 90 180 | f1|avg 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 пҒұпҖ (degrees) 0 90 180 | f0|avg 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.8 1 h2/EF 20o 20o (a) (b) пҒұпҖ (degrees) 0 90 180 | f3|avg 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 (c) пҒұпҖ (degrees) 0 90 180 | f1|avg 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 пҒұпҖ (degrees) 0 90 180 | f0|avg 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 130 150 200 300 DS (d) (e) пҒұпҖ (degrees) 0 90 180 | f3|avg 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 (f) (Color online). The magnitudes of the normalized triplet (f0, f1) and singlet (f3)components are shown averaged over the S region and plotted as a function of the relative magnetization angle Оё. The temperature is set at T = 0.05T0. The top panels (a)-(c) depict differing values of the exchange field in the F2 region as shown. All other system parameters are the same as those used in Fig. 2. Panels (d)-(f) correspond to F2 with an optimal exchange field of h2/EF = 1, and various S widths, as labeled. Tc takes the form, вҲҶi = пҝҪ q GiqвҲҶq, where вҲҶi are the expansion coefficients for вҲҶ(x) in the chosen basis. The Giq are the corresponding matrix elements, which involve sums of the normal state energies and wavefunctions. To determine Tc, we compute the eigenvalues О», of the cor- responding eigensystem вҲҶ = О»GвҲҶ. When О» > 1 at a given temperature, the system is in the superconducting state. Many of the computational details can be found 4 in , and are omitted here. It was experimentally observed that a SF1F2 spin valve is most effective at converting singlet Cooper pairs to spin polarized triplet pairs when F2 is in a half-metallic phase. To examine this theoretically, we investigate the critical temperature and corresponding triplet pair gener- ation as a function of h2/EF and Оё (h1/EF = 0.1 remains fixed). The width of the superconducting layer is main- tained at DS = 130, and the nonmagnetic insert has a set width corresponding to DN = 5. The exchange field h2 varies from 0.1EF to EF where h2 = EF corresponds to the situation where only one spin species exists in this region (i.e. the half-metallic phase). As seen in Fig. 2, Tc is nearly constant over the full range of Оё when both fer- romagnets are of the same type, i.e., when h2/EF = 0.1. Upon increasing h2 towards the half-metallic limit, it is apparent that the spin valve effect becomes dramat- ically enhanced, whereby rapid changes in Tc occur when varying Оё. This result therefore clearly supports the as- sertion that the use of a half-metal generates the most optimal spin-valve effectiveness . Large variations in Tc have also been found using a diffusive quasiclassical approach involving SF1F2 heterostructures lacking the normal layer insert . When comparing Tc in the two collinear magnetic orientations, the self-consistently calculated critical temperatures in Fig. 2 reveal that the parallel state (Оё = 0в—Ұ) has a smaller Tc compared to the antiparallel state (Оё = 180в—Ұ) for moderate exchange field strengths. For these cases, the two magnets can counter one another, leading to a reduction of their effective pair- breaking effects. This creates a more favorable situation for the superconducting state, causing Tc to be larger. The situation reverses for stronger magnets with h вүі 0.8, and the maximum Tc now arises for parallel relative ori- entations of the magnetizations. In between the parallel and antiparallel states, Tc undergoes a minimum that occurs not at the orthogonal orientation (Оё = 90в—Ұ), but slightly away from it. This behavior has been observed in ballistic and diffusive systems where the mini- mum in Tc arises from the leakage of Cooper pairs that are coupled to the outer F layer via the generation of the triplet component f1 that is largest near Оё = 90в—Ұ. To demonstrate the correlation between the strong Tc variations and the generation of triplet and singlet pairs, Fig. 3 shows the magnitudes of the equal-spin triplet am- plitudes (f1), opposite-spin triplet amplitudes (f0), and the singlet pair amplitudes (f3), each averaged over the S region. For the triplet correlations, a representative value for the normalized relative time П„ is set at П„ вүЎ ПүDt = 4. When the ferromagnet (F2) possesses a large exchange field, and the relative magnetization angle between F1 and F2 approaches an orthogonal state, superconductiv- ity becomes severely weakened. Indeed, as Fig. 2 demon- strated, the singlet pair correlations can become com- pletely destroyed at low temperatures (T вүғ 0.05), and orientations in the vicinity of Оё вүғ 90в—Ұ, whereby the sys- tem has transitioned to a normal resistive state. This is consistent with Fig. 3(c), where the f3 amplitudes van- ish in the neighborhood of Оё вүҲ 90в—Ұ and h2/EF = 1. As Fig. 3(a) and (b) illustrates, the triplet amplitudes also vanish due to the absence of singlet correlations at those orientations. For weaker magnets however, the supercon- ducting state never transitions to a normal resistive state over the entire range of Оё, and the well known situation arises whereby the equal-spin triplet pairs are largest for orthogonal magnetization configurations, i.e., when the misalignment angle is greatest (Оё вүғ 90в—Ұ). In all cases however, the f1 components must always vanish at Оё = 0 and Оё = 180в—Ұ, where the relative collinear magnetization alignments are either in the parallel or antiparallel state respectively. It is clear from Figs. 3(a) and 3(b) that the average behavior of |f0| and |f1| exhibits their most ex- treme values when Tc undergoes its steepest variations around Оё вүҲ 20в—Ұ [see Fig. 2]. In particular, at the half- metallic phase, f1 is greatly enhanced while f0 is dramat- ically suppressed. Therefore, the considerable variations in Tc is correlated with the fact that 100% spin-polarized compounds such as CrO2 result in the optimal genera- tion of spin triplet correlations . The suppression of f0 at Оё вүҲ 20в—Ұ is fairly robust to changes in the size of the S region. As the bottom panels in Figs. 3 illustrate, increasing DS by several coherence lengths causes very little change in the location of the first minimum in f0 at Оё вүҲ 20в—Ұ. The angle Оё that corresponds to a peak in f1 however, noticeably shifts to larger Оё, so that at Оё вүҲ 20в—Ұ, f1 is no longer at its peak value. Therefore, the thinnest S layer width considered here, DS = 130, leads to the most favorable conditions for the generation of f1 triplet pairs in the superconductor and limited coexistence with the f0 triplet correlations. Next, Fig. 4 shows Tc as a function of the out-of-plane misalignment angle Оё for differing (a) superconductor widths DS, (b) normal layer widths DN, and (c) spin- independent interface scattering strengths HB. If the relative magnetizations were to rotate in-plane, the Tc behavior discussed here would be identical, thus provid- ing additional experimental options for observing the pre- dicted effects. In (a), the sensitivity of Tc to the S layer width is shown. The importance of having thin S layers with dS вҲј Оҫ0 (100 in our units) is clearly seen. In essence, extremely narrow S boundaries restrict Cooper pair for- mation, causing the ordered superconducting state to ef- fectively become more вҖңfragileвҖқ, consistent with other F/S systems containing thin S layers . Indeed, for the thinnest case, DS = 100, superconductivity com- pletely vanishes for most magnetization configurations, except when Оё is near the parallel or antiparallel orienta- tions. At the thickest DS shown (DS = 200), the sensi- tivity to Оё has dramatically diminished, as pair-breaking effects from the adjacent ferromagnet now have a lim- ited overall effect in the larger superconductor. For all S widths considered, the minimum in Tc occurs when Оё lies slightly off the orthogonal configuration (Оё = 90в—Ұ), consistent with some quasiclassical systems . Next, in Fig. 4(b) the S layer thickness is set to DS = 130, while several nonmagnetic N metal spacer widths are 5 0 90 180 Tc /T0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 100 115 120 130 140 150 200 DS пҒұпҖ (degrees) 0 90 180 Tc /T0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0 0.05 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.5 0 90 180 Tc /T0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0 2 3 5 7 10 20 30 100 HB DN (a) (b) (c) (Color online). Critical temperature Tc as a function of the relative exchange field orientation angle Оё. In (a) the normal metal insert has a width of DN = 5, and the S width varies as shown in the legend, from DS=100 to DS = 200. In (b) the S width is fixed at DS = 130, while the N spacer is varied. In (c) the effects of interfacial scattering are examined, with DS = 130, DN = 5. The legend depicts the various scattering strengths HB considered. considered. The presence of the N layer clearly plays a crucial role in the thermodynamics of the spin valve. Indeed, an optimum DN вүҲ 5 exists which yields the greatest вҲҶTc(Оё): Increasing or decreasing DN around this value can significantly reduce the size of the spin valve effect. Physically, this behavior is related to the spin-triplet conversion that takes place in the ferromag- nets and corresponding enhancement of the equal-spin triplet correlations in the N layer. This will be discussed in greater detail below. For DN much larger than the optimal width, a severe reduction in magnetic interlayer coupling occurs and Tc exhibits little variation with Оё. Finally, in Fig. 4(c), we incorporate spin-independent scattering at each of the spin valve interfaces. A wide range of scattering strengths are considered. We assume Hj вүЎ H (j = 1, 2, 3), so that interface scattering can be written solely in terms of the dimensionless param- eter HB = H/vF . Overall, the general features and trends for Tc seen previously are retained. With mod- | f1|avg 0 1 2 3 | f0|avg 0 2 4 6 8 F1 N F2 S | f0|avg 0 2 4 6 8 10 пҒұпҖ (degrees) 0 90 180 | f0|avg 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 | f1|avg 0 2 4 6 пҒұпҖ (degrees) 0 90 180 | f1|avg 0 5 10 15 | f3|avg 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 | f3|avg 0.0 0.2 0.4 пҒұпҖ (degrees) 0 90 180 | f3|avg 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 (Color online). Normalized triplet (f0, f1) and singlet (f3) amplitudes versus the relative magnetization an- gle Оё. The magnitude of each pair correlation is averaged over a given region in the SF1NF2 spin valve, as identified in the legend. The top, middle, and bottom rows correspond to DS = 130, DS = 150, and DS = 300 respectively. erate amounts of interface scattering, HB = 0.1, we find вҲҶTc вүЎ Tc(Оё = 0в—Ұ) вҲ’ Tc(Оё = 90в—Ұ) вүҲ 0.3T0. It is im- mediately evident that samples must have interfaces as transparent as possible : the variations in Tc with Оё become severely reduced with increasing HB, as the phase coherence of the superconducting correlations be- comes destroyed. In all cases, we observe some degree of asymmetry in Tc as a function of Оё, similar to what has been reported in both diffusive and clean spin valves lacking half-metallic elements. If it is assumed that the band splitting in F2 is sufficiently large so that only one spin species can exist, a quasiclassical approach has shown that Tc becomes symmetric with respect to Оё in the diffusive regime . To correlate the large spin-valve effect observed in Fig. 4 with the odd-time triplet correlations, we employ the expressions in Eqs. (3a) and (3b), which describe the spatial and temporal behavior of the triplet ampli- tudes. We normalize the triplet correlations, computed in the low T limit, to the value of the singlet pair am- plitude in the bulk S. The normalized averages of |f0| and |f1| are plotted as functions of Оё in Fig. 5, at a di- mensionless characteristic time of П„ = 4. For compar- ison purposes, the singlet pair correlations, f3, are also shown (third column). In each panel, spatial averages over different segments of the spin valve are displayed as separate curves (see caption). Each row of figures cor- responds to different DS: DS = 130, 150, 300 (from top to bottom). One of the most striking observations is the effect of the normal metal spacer, which contains a sub- stantial portion of the equal-spin triplet pairs. We will see below that the f1 triplet correlations within the nor- 6 X 50 100 150 200 250 Pair Correlations -4 -2 0 2 4 f0 f1 f3 (Color online). Normalized triplet (f0, f1) and sin- glet (f3) amplitudes versus the dimensionless coordinate X. The relative magnetization orientation is set to Оё = 20в—Ұ. The dashed vertical lines identify the locations of the interfaces for the SF1NF2 structure. Each segment corresponds to the following ranges: X < 130 (S region), 130 вүӨ X вүӨ 140 (F1 region), 140 < X вүӨ 145 (N region), and X > 145 (F2 region). The singlet component has been reduced by a factor of 10 for comparison purposes. mal metal tend to propagate into the adjacent regions of the spin valve as time evolves. Examining the top two panels of Fig. 5, the equal-spin f1 triplet component in S clearly dominates its opposite spin counterpart when Оё вүҲ 20в—Ұ. Thus, only slight deviations from the parallel state (Оё = 0в—Ұ) generates triplet correlations within S that have spin projection m = Вұ1. For each DS case stud- ied, the singlet f3 amplitudes are clearly largest in the S region where they originate, and then decline further in each subsequent segment. It is evident also that the f1 triplet pair amplitudes are anticorrelated to Tc (governed by the behavior of the singlet amplitudes), which indi- cates a singlet-triplet conversion process. Therefore as more singlet superconductivity leaks into the ferromag- net side, Tc is suppressed, and triplet superconductivity is enhanced. It is evident that both triplet components van- ish around Оё = 90в—Ұ, as was also observed in Fig. 3. This is due to the highly sensitive nature of the gapless super- conducting state that arises in thin S systems, whereby the singlet pair correlations become rapidly destroyed as the magnetization vector in F1 approaches the orthogonal configuration. Increasing the size of the superconductor causes the superconducting state to become more robust to changes in Оё, and consequently the system no longer transitions to a resistive state at Оё вүҲ 90в—Ұ. The triplet correlations reflect this aspect as seen in the middle and bottom panels of Fig. 5, whereby both triplet compo- nents have finite values for the orthogonal orientation. Overall, there is a dramatic change in both triplet com- ponents when the S part of the spin valve is increased in size. For example, the f1 triplet correlations in N and in F2 evolve from having two peaks two a single maximum at Оё = 90в—Ұ. The DS trends also reflect the importance of self-consistency of the pair potential вҲҶ(x) for thinner superconductors, where a self-consistent sin- glet component f3(x) can substantially decline, or vanish altogether, in contrast to simple step function. Indeed, the observed disappearance of the singlet and triplet pair correlations for thin superconductors at Оё вүғ 90в—Ұ (see top panels), can only occur if the pair potential is calculated self-consistently [Eq. (2)], thus ensuring that the free en- ergy of the system is lowest . As will be seen be- low, this important step permits the proper description of the proximity effects leading to nontrivial spatial be- havior of вҲҶ(x) in and around the interfaces for both the superconductor and ferromagnets . In common non self-consistent approaches, where вҲҶ(x) is treated phe- nomenologically as a prescribed constant in the S region, this vital behavior is lost. Next, in Fig. 6 we present the spatial behavior of the real parts of the triplet and singlet pair correlations throughout each segment of the spin valve. We choose Оё = 20в—Ұ in order to optimize the f1 triplet component in S. The other parameters used correspond to DS = 130, DN = 5, and T = 0.05. Proximity effects are seen to result in a reduction of the singlet f3 correlations in the S region near the interface at X = 130. As usual, this decay occurs over the coherence length Оҫ0. The singlet amplitude then declines within the F1 region before un- dergoing oscillations and quickly dampening out in the half-metal. Thus, as expected, the singlet Cooper pairs cannot be sustained in the half-metallic segment where only one spin species exists. Within the half-metal, the triplet component, f0 (also comprised of opposite-spin pairs), undergoes damped oscillations similar to the f3 correlations. It is notable that the triplet f0 component is severely limited in the S region, in stark contrast to the singlet correlations. Therefore, the f0 correlations in this situation are confined mainly to the F1 and N regions. The equal-spin f1 triplet component on the other hand, is seen to pervade every segment of the spin valve: The f1 correlations are enhanced in the N region, similar in magnitude to f0, but then exhibit a slow decay in both the S and half-metallic regions. To further clarify the role of the triplet correlations in the spin valve, we now discuss the explicit relative time evolution of the triplet states in Fig. 7. Snapshots of the real parts of the triplet amplitudes are shown in equal in- crements of the relative time parameter П„. The angle Оё is fixed at Оё = 20в—Ұ, again corresponding to when the triplet correlations with m = Вұ1 projection of the z-component of the total spin in the superconductor is largest (see Fig. 5). The spatial range shown permits visualization of both triplet components throughout much of the sys- tem. Starting at the earliest time П„ = 0.8, we find that f1 mainly populates the nonmagnetic N region, and then as П„ increases, propagates into the F1 and F2 regions before extending into the superconductor (left of the dashed ver- tical line). Meanwhile, f0 is essentially confined to the F1 and N regions, with limited presence in the S and F2 lay- ers. Since the characteristic length ОҫF over which the f0 correlations modulate in F2 is inversely proportional to 7 X 50 100 150 200 250 300 Re[f1] 0 1 2 3 4 0.8 1.6 2.4 3.2 4.0 4.8 5.6 X 50 100 150 200 250 300 Re[f0] -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 X 140 145 Re [ f1] 0 1 2 3 4 X 140 145 Re [ f0] -8 -6 -4 -2 0 (a) (b) time (пҒҙпҖ ) N layer N layer (Color online). Time evolution of the localized spa- tial dependence of the f0 and f1 triplet correlations. The in- sets depict magnifications of the N regions (140 вүӨ X вүӨ 145). The dimensionless time parameter П„ вүЎ ПүDt varies from 0.8 to 5.6 in increments of 0.8. Initially, the f1 component predom- inately populates the N region, and then progressively moves outward into each segment of the spin valve with increasing time. The f0 component initially occupies the F1 and N lay- ers, and then remains confined to those regions at higher П„. Each dashed vertical line identifies the S interface. h2, f0 declines sharply in the half-metallic region. Also, in agreement with Fig. 5, for Оё = 20в—Ұ and DS = 130, there is also a limited presence of f0 in the superconduc- tor. The superconductor therefore has |f1| вү« |f0|, which by using the appropriate experimental probe, can reveal signatures detailing the presence of equal-spin pairs f1 . B. Density of States To explore these proximity induced signatures further, we investigate the experimentally relevant local DOS. An important spectroscopic tool for exploring proximity ef- fects on an atomic scale with sub-meV energy resolution is the scanning tunneling microscope (STM). We are in- terested in determining the local DOS in the outer S segment of the SF1NF2 spin valve. By positioning a non- magnetic STM tip at the edge of the S region, the tun- neling current (I) and voltage (V ) characteristics can be measured . This technique yields a direct probe of the пҒҘпҖҜпҒ„пҖ° -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 DOS 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 0o пҒҘпҖҜпҒ„пҖ° -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 DOS 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 30o пҒҘпҖҜпҒ„пҖ° -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 50o пҒҘпҖҜпҒ„пҖ° -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 80o пҒҘпҖҜпҒ„пҖ° -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 10o пҒҘпҖҜпҒ„пҖ° -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 20o (Color online). Signatures of equal-spin triplet corre- lations: The normalized local DOS in the superconductor for various relative magnetization orientations, Оё. In the range 0в—Ұ вүӨ Оё вүӨ 20в—Ұ, the DOS possesses peaks at zero energy which grow until they become inverted at Оё = 30в—Ұ. The well de- fined, prominent ZEP at Оё = 20в—Ұ corresponds to the maximal generation of equal-spin triplet amplitudes in the S region, as shown in Fig. 5. available electronic states with energy eV near the tip. The corresponding differential conductance dI(V )/dV over the energy range of interest is then proportional to the local DOS. The vast majority of past works only considered the DOS in the ferromagnet side where the f1 correlations were expected to dominate . However unavoidable experimental issues related to noise and thermal broadening can yield inconclusive data. As we have shown above, with the proper alignment of rel- ative magnetizations, one can generate a finite f1 in S accompanied by relatively limited f0, thus presenting an opportunity to detect the important triplet pairs with spin s = Вұ1. By avoiding comparable admixtures of the two triplet components, experimental signatures of the equal-spin triplet correlations should be discernible. To investigate this further, the six panels in Fig. 8 show the normalized DOS evaluated near the edge of the su- perconductor for a wide variety of orientation angles Оё. All plots are normalized to the corresponding value in a bulk sample of S material in its normal state. As shown, each panel ranges from a mutually parallel (Оё = 0в—Ұ) to a nearly orthogonal magnetization state (Оё = 80в—Ұ). In each case considered, we again have DN = 5 and DS = 130. Examining the top row of panels, traces are seen of the well-known BCS peaks that have now been shifted to subgap energies due to proximity and size effects. There also exists bound states at low energies that arise from quasiparticle interference effects. By sweeping the angle Оё from the relative parallel case (Оё = 0в—Ұ) to slightly out of plane (Оё = 20в—Ұ), the zero energy quasiparticle states be- come significantly more pronounced. This follows from the fact that strong magnets tend to shift the relative magnetizations leading to maximal f1 generation away 8 (Color online). Top panels: The normalized spatially and energy resolved DOS at three different orientations of the S layer of width DS = 130. The spatial region extending from X = 0 to 130 therefore corresponds to the superconducting region, and X > 130 pertains to the remaining layers of the spin valve. Bottom panels: the DOS is shown for three different identify the interface between S and F1. from the expected orthogonal alignment at Оё = 90в—Ұ . The top panels reflect the gapless superconducting state often found in F/S heterostructures , superimposed with the triplet induced zero-energy peaks. The modi- fications to the superconducting state in the form of a subgap DOS in the superconductor is another signature that is indicative of the presence of spin-triplet pair cor- relations . Finally, as Оё rotates further out of plane (Оё > 20в—Ұ), the former ZEPвҖҷs become inverted and vanish when Оё = 80в—Ұ, exhibiting a relatively flat DOS where the system has essentially transitioned to the normal state (see Fig. 4). A complimentary global view of the above phenomena is presented in Fig. 9, where both the spatially and en- ergy resolved DOS is shown at various Оё (top panels) and DS (bottom panels). The top panels (a)-(c) depict the DOS for the same parameters and normalizations used in Fig. 8, and at three orientations: Оё = 0в—Ұ, 10в—Ұ, 20в—Ұ. It is evident that increasing the misalignment angle Оё, causes the ZEP in the S region to become enhanced, reaching its maximum at Оё вүҲ 20в—Ұ. At this angle the ZEP extends through much of the system, including to a small extent, the F2 side. However, within S, the ZEP is clearly more dominate . For the bottom panels, (d)-(f), the rela- tive magnetization orientation is fixed at Оё = 20в—Ұ, and three larger S layers are shown: DS = 150, DS = 200, and DS = 300. Increasing the S layer widths illustrates the ZEP evolution towards a familiar gapped DOS of a BCS form. As seen, the ZEP is maximal in the super- conducting region near the S/F1 interface. By increasing DS, the ZEP in the S side becomes diminished until for sufficiently large DS, that is, DS вүҲ 200, the well-known singlet superconducting gap begins to emerge through- out much of the superconductor. At an even larger DS (DS = 300), the ZEP has clearly weakened even fur- ther. Finally, for the experiment reported in , a peak in the resistive transitions at external fields of B > 0.25 T was observed immediately before the criti- cal temperature whereby the system has transitioned to the superconducting phase. This peak in the transition curves was believed to be caused by the influence of the external field, effectively creating a SF1F вҖІF2 type of con- figuration. We investigated such a configuration for vari- ous strengths and orientations of the F вҖІ ferromagnet, and no evidence was found that was suggestive of anomalous behavior near Tc for F вҖІ with weak exchange fields. Note that the system under consideration is translationally in- variant in the yz plane (see Fig. 1). Therefore, the spin valve structure may experience a Fulde Ferrell-Larkin- Ovchinnikov phase during its phase transition from the superconducting to normal phase, although in a narrow region of parameter space . C. Spin Currents To reveal further details of the exchange interaction which controls the behavior and type of triplet correla- tions present in the system, we next examine the char- acteristics of the spin currents that exist within the spin 9 valve. When the magnetizations in F1 and F2 are non- collinear, the exchange interaction in the ferromagnets creates a spin current S that flows in parts of the sys- tem, even in the absence of a charge current. If the spin current varies spatially, the corresponding nonconserved spin currents in F1 and F2 generate a mutual torque that tends to rotate the magnetizations of the two ferromag- nets. This process is embodied in the spin-torque conti- nuity equation which describes the time evolution of the spin density О·: вҲӮ вҲӮtвҹЁО·i(x)вҹ© + вҲӮ вҲӮxSi(x) = П„i(x), i = x, y, z, (5) where П„(x) is the spin transfer torque (STT): П„(x) = is the Bohr magneton (see Appendix A). The spin current tensor here has been reduced to vector form due to the quasi-one dimensional nature of the geometry. We calcu- late S(x) by performing the appropriate sums of quasi- particle amplitudes and energies [see Eq. (A10)]. In the steady state, the continuity equation, Eq. (5), determines the torque by simply evaluating the derivative of the spin current as a function of position: П„i(x) = вҲӮSi(x)/вҲӮx. The net torque acting within the boundaries of e.g., the F1 layer, is therefore the change in spin current across the two interfaces bounding that region: Sy(dS + dF1) вҲ’ Sy(dS) = пҝҪ F1 dxП„y. (6) In equilibrium, the net П„y in F2 is opposite to its coun- terpart in F1. Since no spin current flows in the super- conductor, we have Sy(dS) = 0, and the net torque in F1 is equivalent to the spin current flowing through N. In our setup, the exchange field in F1 is directed in the x вҲ’ z plane, and therefore the spin current and torque are directed orthogonal to this plane (along the inter- faces in the y direction). Likewise, if the magnetizations were varied in the yвҲ’z plane, the spin currents would be directed along x. Figure 10 thus illustrates the normal- ized spin current Sy as a function of the dimensionless position X. The normalization factor S0 is written in terms of nevF , where ne = k3 F /(3ПҖ2), and vF = kF /m. Several equally spaced magnetization orientations Оё are considered, ranging from parallel (Оё = 0в—Ұ), to orthogo- nal (Оё = 90в—Ұ). Within the two F regions, Sy tends to undergo damped oscillations, while in N there is no ex- change interaction (h = 0), and consequently the spin current is constant for a given Оё. The main plot shows that when Оё = 0в—Ұ, Sy vanishes throughout the entire sys- tem, as expected for parallel magnetizations. By varying Оё, spin currents are induced due to the misaligned mag- netic moments in the F layers. If the exchange field is rotated slightly out of plane, such that Оё вүІ 30в—Ұ, it gener- ates on average, negative spin currents in the N and F1 regions. As shown, these spin currents reverse their po- larization direction for larger Оё. This behavior is consis- tent with the inset, which shows how tuning Оё affects Sy X 120 130 140 150 160 170 180 Sy/S0 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 пҒұ 0 45 90 135 180 Sy/S0 -0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 S F1 N F2 пҒұ (Color online). Spin current Sy as a function of po- sition X in the spin valve. Several magnetization orientations Оё are considered as shown in the legend. The dashed vertical lines identify the interfaces of each layer as labeled. The inset corresponds to the spin current within the N region. (or equivalently, the net torque) in N. Thus, by manipu- lating Оё, the strength and direction of the spin current in the normal metal can be controlled, or even eliminated completely at Оё вүҲ 34в—Ұ. By varying Оё about this angle, the overall torque, which tends to align the magnets in a particular direction, can then reverse in a given mag- net. For Оё вүҲ 15в—Ұ and Оё вүҲ 160в—Ұ, the inset also clearly shows an enhancement of the magnitude of the spin cur- rents, which coincides approximately to the orientations leading to an increase in the spin-polarized triplet pairs observed in Fig. 5. In conclusion, motivated by recent experiments , a hybrid SF1NF2 spin valve containing a half- metallic ferromagnet has been theoretically investigated, revealing a sizable spin-valve effect for thin supercon- ductors with widths close to Оҫ0. Through self-consistent numerical calculations, the contributions from both the equal-spin (f1) and opposite-spin (f0) triplet correlations have been identified as the relative magnetization angle Оё varies. We found that when the magnetization in F1 is directed slightly out-of-plane, the magnitude of f1 in S is maximized, while for f0 it is very small. By investigat- ing the DOS in the superconductor over a broad range of Оё, we were able to identify the emergence of zero en- ergy peaks (ZEPs) in the DOS that coincide with peaks in the averaged |f1|. Our results show, to a large extent, good agreement with experimental observations as well as the physical origins of these effects. We have thus es- tablished a clear, experimentally identifiable role that the triplet correlations play in this new class of half-metallic spin valve structures. For future work, it would be in- teresting to study the transport properties of these types of spin valves by investigating the self-consistent charge and spin currents as they pertain to dissipationless spin- tronics applications. 10 III. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This work was supported in part by ONR and a grant of HPC resources from the DOD HPCMP. We thank N. Birge for a careful reading of the manuscript and helpful comments. Appendix A: Spin Currents In order to calculate the spin currents flowing within the spin valve, it is convenient to employ the Heisenberg picture to determine the time evolution of the spin den- sity, О·(r, t), вҲӮ вҲӮtвҹЁО·(r, t)вҹ© = iвҹЁ[Heff, О·(r, t)]вҹ©, (A1) where О·(r) is the spin density operator defined as, О·(r) = ПҲвҖ (r)ПғПҲ(r). (A2) We define the effective BCS Hamiltonian , Heff, via Heff = пҝҪ d3r пҝҪ + вҲҶ(r)ПҲвҖ  вҶ‘(r)ПҲвҖ  пҝҪ , (A3) where ПҲвҖ  Пғ(r), ПҲПғ(r) denotes the fermionic field operators with spin projections Пғ =вҶ‘, вҶ“ along a given quantization axis, and Пғ is the usual vector of Pauli matrices. In- serting the Hamiltonian, Eq. (A3), into (A1) yields the following continuity equation: вҲӮ вҲӮtвҹЁО·(r, t)вҹ© + вҲӮS вҲӮx = П„, (A4) where S is the spin current which in our geometry is a vector (in general it is a tensor). The spin-transfer torque, П„, is given by: (A5) Recalling the expression for the local magnetization, m(r), m(r) = вҲ’ОјB вҹЁО·(r)вҹ©, (A6) this permits the torque in Eq. (A5) to be written as, П„ = 2вҹЁПҲвҖ (r)ПғПҲ(r)вҹ© Г— h = вҲ’ 2 ОјB m Г— h. (A7) In the steady state, and when a torque is present, the spin current therefore must have at least one spa- tially varying component. After taking the commutator in Eq. (A1), the explicit expression for the spin-current is found to be, S = вҲ’ i 2m пҝҪ ПҲвҖ (r)Пғ вҲӮПҲ(r) вҲӮx вҲ’ вҲӮПҲвҖ (r) вҲӮx ПғПҲ(r) пҝҪ , (A8) where for our quasi-one-dimensional systems, the vec- tor S represents the spin current flowing along the x direction with spin components (Sx, Sy, Sz). To write the spin current in terms of the calculated quasiparticle amplitudes and energies, the field operators are directly expanded by means of a Bogoliubov transformation : ПҲвҶ‘(r) = пҝҪ n пҝҪ unвҶ‘(r)Оіn вҲ’ vвҲ— nвҶ‘(r)ОівҖ  n пҝҪ , (A9a) ПҲвҶ“(r) = пҝҪ n пҝҪ unвҶ“(r)Оіn + vвҲ— nвҶ“(r)ОівҖ  n пҝҪ , (A9b) where unПғ and vnПғ are the quasiparticle and quasihole amplitudes, and Оіn and ОівҖ  n are the Bogoliubov quasi- particle annihilation and creation operators, respectively. By directly considering the commutation relations for the quantum mechanical operators, the following expec- tation values must be satisfied throughout our calcula- tions: вҹЁОівҖ  nОіmвҹ© = Оҙnmfn, вҹЁОіmОівҖ  nвҹ© = Оҙnm(1 вҲ’ fn), and вҹЁОіnОіmвҹ© = 0. Here fn is the Fermi function which de- pends on the temperature T and quasiparticle energy Оөn: spin component of the spin current in terms of the quasi- particle amplitudes to obtain : Sx =вҲ’ i 2m пҝҪ n пҝҪ fn пҝҪ uвҲ— nвҶ‘ вҲӮunвҶ“ вҲӮx + uвҲ— nвҶ“ вҲӮunвҶ‘ вҲӮx вҲ’ unвҶ“ вҲӮuвҲ— nвҶ‘ вҲӮx вҲ’ unвҶ‘ вҲӮuвҲ— nвҶ“ вҲӮx пҝҪ вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ fn) пҝҪ vnвҶ‘ вҲӮvвҲ— nвҶ“ вҲӮx + vnвҶ“ вҲӮvвҲ— nвҶ‘ вҲӮx вҲ’ vвҲ— nвҶ‘ вҲӮvnвҶ“ вҲӮx вҲ’ vвҲ— nвҶ“ вҲӮvnвҶ‘ вҲӮx пҝҪпҝҪ , (A10) Sy =вҲ’ 1 2m пҝҪ n пҝҪ fn пҝҪ uвҲ— nвҶ‘ вҲӮunвҶ“ вҲӮx вҲ’ uвҲ— nвҶ“ вҲӮunвҶ‘ вҲӮx вҲ’ unвҶ“ вҲӮuвҲ— nвҶ‘ вҲӮx + unвҶ‘ вҲӮuвҲ— nвҶ“ вҲӮx пҝҪ вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ fn) пҝҪ vnвҶ‘ вҲӮvвҲ— nвҶ“ вҲӮx вҲ’ vnвҶ“ вҲӮvвҲ— nвҶ‘ вҲӮx + vвҲ— nвҶ‘ вҲӮvnвҶ“ вҲӮx вҲ’ vвҲ— nвҶ“ вҲӮvnвҶ‘ вҲӮx пҝҪпҝҪ , (A11) Sz =вҲ’ i 2m пҝҪ n пҝҪ fn пҝҪ uвҲ— nвҶ‘ вҲӮunвҶ‘ вҲӮx вҲ’ unвҶ‘ вҲӮuвҲ— nвҶ‘ вҲӮx вҲ’ uвҲ— nвҶ“ вҲӮunвҶ“ вҲӮx + unвҶ“ вҲӮuвҲ— nвҶ“ вҲӮx пҝҪ вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ fn) пҝҪ вҲ’vnвҶ‘ вҲӮvвҲ— nвҶ‘ вҲӮx + vвҲ— nвҶ‘ вҲӮvnвҶ‘ вҲӮx + vnвҶ“ вҲӮvвҲ— nвҶ“ вҲӮx вҲ’ vвҲ— nвҶ“ вҲӮvnвҶ“ вҲӮx пҝҪпҝҪ . (A12) 11 In the case of F layers with uniform magnetization, there is no net spin current. The introduction of an inhomo- geneous magnetization texture however results in a net spin current imbalance that is finite even in the absence of a charge current. M. Eschrig, Spin-polarized supercurrents for spintron- ics: a review of current progress, Reports on Progress in Physics 78, 104501 (2015). J. Linder, J.W.A. Robinson, Superconducting Spintron- ics, Nat. Phys. 11, 307 (2015). Ya. V. Fominov, A. A. Golubov, T. Yu. Karminskaya, M. Yu. Kupriyanov, R. G. Deminov, L. R. Tagirov, Su- perconducting triplet spin valve, JETP Letters 91, 308 T. Y. Karminskaya, A. A. Golubov, and M. Y. Kupriyanov, Anomalous proximity effect in spin-valve su- perconductor/ferromagnetic metal/ferromagnetic metal structures, Phys. Rev. B 84, 064531 (2011). C. T. Wu, O. T. Valls, and K. Halterman, Prox- imity effects and triplet correlations in Ferromag- net/Ferromagnet/Superconductor nanostructures, Phys. Rev. B 86, 014523 (2012). P.V. Leksin, N. N. GarifвҖҷyanov, I. A. Garifullin, Ya. V. Fominov, J. Schumann, Y. Krupskaya, V. Kataev, O. G. Schmidt, and B. B МҲuchner, Evidence for Triplet Supercon- ductivity in a Superconductor-Ferromagnet Spin Valve, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 057005 (2012). M. Eschrig, T. Lofwander, Triplet supercurrents in clean and disordered half-metallic ferromagnets, Nat. Phys. 4, F. S. Bergeret, A. F. Volkov, and K. B. Efetov, Odd triplet superconductivity and related phenomena in superconductor-ferromagnet structures, Rev. Mod. Phys. A. I. Buzdin, Proximity effects in superconductor- ferromagnet heterostructures Rev. Mod. Phys. 77, 935- R. S. Keizer, S. T. B. Goennenwein, T. M. Klapwijk, G. Miao, G. Xiao and A. Gupta, A spin triplet supercurrent through the half-metallic ferromagnet CrO2 Nature 439, I. V. Bobkova and A. M. Bobkov, Long-range prox- imity effect for opposite-spin pairs in superconductor- ferromagnet heterostructures under nonequilibrium quasiparticle distribution, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 197002 A. Moor, A. F. Volkov, K. B. Efetov, Nematic versus ferromagnetic spin filtering of triplet Cooper pairs in su- perconducting spintronics, Phys. Rev. B 92, 180506(R) Y.N. Khaydukov, G.A. Ovsyannikov, A.E. Sheyerman, K.Y. Constantinian, L. Mustafa, T. Keller, M.A. Uribe- Laverde, Yu.V. Kislinskii, A.V. Shadrin, A. Kalabukhov, B. Keimer, D. Winkler, Evidence for spin-triplet su- perconducting correlations in metal-oxide heterostruc- tures with noncollinear magnetization, Phys. Rev. B 90, M. Alidoust and K. Halterman, Proximity induced vor- tices and long-range triplet supercurrents in ferromag- netic Josephson junctions and spin valves, J. Appl. Phys. K. Halterman, O. T. Valls, and P. H. Barsic, In- duced triplet pairing in clean s-wave superconduc- tor/ferromagnet layered structures Phys. Rev. B77, K. Halterman, P. H. Barsic, and O. T. Valls, Odd Triplet Pairing in Clean Superconductor/Ferromagnet Heterostructures Phys. Rev. Lett.99, 127002 (2007). I. Baladie, A.I. Buzdin, Local quasiparticle density of states in ferromagnet/superconductor nanostructures, Phys. Rev. B 64, 224514 (2001). F.S. Bergeret, A.F. Volkov, K.B. Efetov, Local density of states in superconductorstrong ferromagnet structures, Phys. Rev. B 65, 134505 (2002). S. V. Bakurskiy, N. V. Klenov, I. I. Soloviev, M. Yu. Kupriyanov and A. A. Golubov, Superconducting phase domains for memory applications, Appl. Phys. Lett. 108, S.V. Bakurskiy, N.V. Klenov, I.I. Soloviev, V.V. Bolgi- nov, V.V. Ryazanov, I.V. Vernik, O.A. Mukhanov, M.Yu. Kupriyanov and A.A. Golubov, Theoretical model of su- perconducting spintronic SIsFS devices, Appl. Phys. Lett. T. Yu. Karminskaya, M. Yu. Kupriyanov, S. L. Prischepa, and A. A. Golubov, Conductance spectroscopy in ferro- magnetsuperconductor hybrids, Supercond. Sci. Technol. Y. Kalcheim, O. Millo, A. Di Bernardo, A. Pal, and J. W. A. Robinson, Inverse proximity effect at superconductor- ferromagnet interfaces: Evidence for induced triplet pair- ing in the superconductor, Phys. Rev. B 92, 060501 G. Nowak, H. Zabel, K. Westerholt, I. Garifullin, M. Marcellini, A. Liebig, and B. Hj МҲorvarsson, Supercon- ducting spin valves based on epitaxial Fe/V superlattices, Phys. Rev. B 78, 134520 (2008). S. Kawabata, Y. Asano, Y. Tanaka, and A. A. Golubov, Robustness of Spin-Triplet Pairing and Singlet-Triplet Pairing Crossover in Superconductor/Ferromagnet Hy- brids, J. Phys. Soc. Jap. 82, 124702 (2013). A. Singh, S. Voltan, K. Lahabi, and J. Aarts, Colossal Proximity Effect in a Superconducting Triplet Spin Valve Based on the Half-Metallic Ferromagnet CrO2, Phys. Rev. X 5, 021019 (2015). V. Braude and Yu. V. Nazarov, Fully Developed Triplet Proximity Effect, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 077003 (2007). M. Alidoust, K. Halterman, and O. T. Valls Zero Energy Peak and Triplet Correlations in Nanoscale SFF Spin- Valves, Phys. Rev. B 92, 014508 (2015). T. Yokoyama, Y. Tanaka, A. A. Golubov, Manifestation of the odd-frequency spin-triplet pairing state in diffusive ferromagnet/superconductor junctions, Phys. Rev. B 75, M Eschrig, A Cottet, W Belzig. and J Linder, General boundary conditions for quasiclassical theory of supercon- ductivity in the diffusive limit: application to strongly spin-polarized systems, New. J. Phys. 17, 083037 (2015). 12 S. Mironov, A. Buzdin, Triplet proximity effect in su- perconducting heterostructures with a half-metallic layer, Phys. Rev. B 92, 184506 (2015). A. Di Bernardo, Z. Salman, X.L. Wang, M. Amado, M. Egilmez, M.G. Flokstra, A. Suter, S.L. Lee, J.H. Zhao, T. Prokscha, E. Morenzoni, M.G. Blamire, J. Linder and J.W.A. Robinson, Intrinsic Paramagnetic Meissner Effect Due to s-Wave Odd-Frequency Superconductivity, Phys. Rev. X 5, 041021 (2015). M. Alidoust, K. Halterman and J. Linder, Meissner effect probing of odd-frequency triplet pairing in superconduct- ing spin valves, Phys. Rev. B 89, 054508 (2014). J. Zhu, I. N. Krivorotov, K. Halterman, and O. T. Valls Angular Dependence of the Superconducting Transition Temperature in Ferromagnet-Superconductor- Ferromagnet Trilayers, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 207002 A. A. Jara, C. Safranski, I. N. Krivorotov, C.-T. Wu, A. N. Malmi-Kakkada, O. T. Valls, and K. Halterman, An- gular dependence of superconductivity in superconductor / spin valve heterostructures, Phys. Rev. B 89, 184502 (2014)s. K. Westerholt, D. Sprungmann, H. Zabel, R. Brucas, B. Hj МҲorvarsson, D. A. Tikhonov, and I. A. Garifullin, Super- conducting Spin Valve Effect of a V Layer Coupled to an Antiferromagnetic [Fe/V] Superlattice, Phys. Rev. Lett. P.G. de Gennes, Superconductivity of Metals and Alloys, (Addison-Wesley, reading, Massachussetts, 1989). J. Wang, M. Singh, M. Tian, N. Kumar, B. Liu, C. Shi, J. K. Jain, N. Samarth, T. E. Mallouk, and M. H. W. Chan, Interplay between superconductivity and ferromagnetism in crystalline nanowires Nat. Phys. 6, 389 (2010). C. Visani, Z. Sefrioui, J. Tornos, C. Leon, J. Briatico, M. Bibes, A. Barthelemy, J. Santamar МҒДұa, and Javier E. Ville- gas, Equal-spin Andreev reflection and long-range coher- ent transport in high-temperature superconductor/half- metallic ferromagnet junctions Nature Phys. 8 539 Z. Radovi МҒc, M. Ledvij, L. Dobrosavljevic-Grujic, A. I. Buzdin, and J. R. Clem, Transition temperatures of superconductor-ferromagnet superlattices , Phys. Rev. B J. S. Jiang, D. Davidovi МҒc, Daniel H. Reich, and C. L. Chien, Oscillatory superconducting transition tempera- ture in Nb/Gd multilayers, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 314 Y Blum, A Tsukernik, M Karpovski, A Palevski, Oscil- lations of the superconducting critical current in Nb-Cu- Ni-Cu-Nb junctions, Phys. Rev. Lett., 89, 187004 (2002). J. Y. Gu, C.-Y. You, J. S. Jiang, J. Pearson, Ya. B. Bazaliy, and S. D. Bader, Magnetization-Orientation Dependence of the Superconducting Transition Temper- ature in the Ferromagnet-Superconductor-Ferromagnet System: CuNi/Nb/CuNi, Phys. Rev. Lett., 89, 267001 L. R. Tagirov, Low-field superconducting spin switch based on a superconductor/ferromagnet multilayer, Phys. Rev. Lett., 83, 2058 (1999). K. Halterman and O.T. Valls, Proximity effects at ferromagnet-superconductor interfaces, Phys. Rev. B65, K. Halterman and O. T. Valls, Energy gap of ferromagnet-superconductor bilayers, Physica C 397 151 T. Tokuyasu, J. A. Sauls, and D. Rainer, Proximity effect of a ferromagnetic insulator in contact with a supercon- ductor, Phys. Rev. B38, 8823 (1988). C. T. Wu, K. Halterman, and O. T. Valls, Prox- imity effects and triplet correlations in ferromag- net/ferromagnet/superconductor nanostructures, Phys. Rev. B. 86, 014523 (2012). M. S. Anwar, M. Veldhorst, A. Brinkman, and J. Aarts, Long range supercurrents in ferromagnetic CrO2 using a multilayer contact structures, Appl. Phys. Lett. 100, K. Halterman and O. T. Valls, Emergence of Triplet Cor- relations in Superconductor/Half Metallic Nanojunctions with Spin Active Interfaces, Phys. Rev B 80, 104502 K. Halterman, O.T. Valls, and C.-T. Wu, Charge and spin currents in ferromagnetic Josephson junctions, Phys. Rev B 92, 174516 (2015). K. Halterman, and M. Alidoust, Josephson currents and spin-transfer torques in ballistic SFSFS nanojunctions, Supercond. Sci. Technol. 29, 055007 (2016). Y. Kalcheim, O. Millo, M. Egilmez, J. W. A. Robinson, and M. G. Blamire Evidence for anisotropic triplet super- conductor order parameter in half-metallic ferromagnetic La0.7Ca0.3Mn3O proximity coupled to superconducting Pr1.85Ce0.15CuO4, Phys. Rev. B 85, 104504 (2012). E. Katzir, S. Yochelis, F. Zeides, N. Katz, Y. Kalcheim, O. Millo, G. Leitus, Y. Myasodeyov, B. Ya. Shapiro, R. Naaman, and Y. Paltiel Increased Superconducting Tran- sition Temperature of a Niobium Thin Film Proximity Coupled to Gold Nanoparticles Using Linking Organic Molecules, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 107004 (2012). S. Mironov, A. Melnikov, and A. Buzdin, Vanishing Meissner effect as a Hallmark of inPlane Fulde-Ferrell- Larkin-Ovchinnikov Instability in SuperconductorFerro- magnet Layered Systems, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 237002 I. V. Bobkova and A. M. Bobkov, In-plane Fulde-Ferrel- Larkin-Ovchinnikov instability in a superconductornor- mal metal bilayer system under nonequilibrium quasipar- ticle distribution, Phys. Rev. B 88, 174502 (2013).