1 Superconducting Order from Disorder in 2H-TaSe2-xSx Lijun Li1,2,†, Xiaoyu Deng3, Zhen Wang1, Yu Liu1, A. M. Milinda Abeykoon4, E. Dooryhee4, A. Tomic5, Yanan Huang1,*, J. B. Warren6, E. S. Bozin1, S. J. L. Billinge1,5, Y. P. Sun2,7, Yimei Zhu1, G. Kotliar1,3 and C. Petrovic1,† 1Condensed Matter Physics and Materials Science Department, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York 11973, USA 2Key Laboratory of Materials Physics, Institute of Solid State Physics Chinese Academy of Sciences Hefei 230031 China 3Department of Physics & Astronomy, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey - Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA 4Photon Sciences Directorate, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton NY 11973 USA 5Department of Applied Physics and Applied Mathematics, Columbia University, New York NY 10027 USA 6Instrumentation Division, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York 11973, USA7 7High Magnetic Field Laboratory, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei 230031 China We report on the emergence of robust superconducting order in single crystal alloys of TaSe2-xSx (0 ≤ x ≤ 2) . The critical temperature of the alloy is surprisingly higher than that of the two end compounds TaSe2 and TaS2. The evolution of superconducting critical temperature Tc (x) correlates with the full width at half maximum of the Bragg peaks and with the linear term of the high temperature resistivity. The conductivity of the crystals near the middle of the alloy series is higher or similar than that of either one of the end members 2H-TaSe2 and/or 2H- TaS2. It is known that in these materials superconductivity (SC) is in close competition with charge density wave (CDW) order. We interpret our experimental findings in a picture where disorder tilts this balance in favor of superconductivity by destroying the CDW order. 2 Introduction The interplay of disorder and interactions is a fruitful area of investigation. In the absence of electron-electron interactions, disorder can turn a metallic system into an Anderson insulator (1), but can remain metallic when interactions are important. The additional complexity of competing orders such superconductivity with charge density wave (CDW) or magnetism makes this problem one of the most challenging frontiers in physics (2-5). A large body of literature is devoted to this interplay in nearly magnetic materials (6). The interplay of disorder and superconductivity in CDW materials has been less explored than its magnetic analog. Superconductivity and CDW are traditionally viewed as weak-coupling Fermi surface instabilities due to electron-phonon coupling (7). Arguments have been made both for their cooperation and competition (8, 9). Hexagonal transition metal dichalcogenide 2H-TaSe2 (P63/mmc space group) undergoes a second-order transition to an incommensurate CDW at 122 K followed by a first-order lock-in transition to a commensurate CDW (CCDW) phase at 90 K, eventually becoming superconducting below 0.14 K upon cooling (10, 11). 2H-TaS2 has Tc = 0.8 K below an in-plane CCDW at 78 K (10, 12). The CDW mechanism in 2H-TaSe2 involves an electron instability in the bands nested away from the Fermi surface, whereas 2H-TaS2 features a polar charge and orbital order (13, 14). CDW in 2H-TaSe2 is dominated by hopping between next-nearest neighbors that creates three weakly coupled triangular sublattices (15). It is of interest to note that the 2H-TaSe2 is quasi-two dimensional (2D) metal with pseudogap and with c-axis resistivity 3 Here we report that in the 2H-TaSe2-xSx alloy series the CDW is suppressed and the superconductivity is maximized with crystallographic disorder. The Tc(x) evolution is correlated with the high temperature linear resistivity ρ(T)=aT+b. The constant term b can be attributed to impurity-like carrier scattering off the local CDW fluctuations, and it also appears in dynamical mean field theory (DMFT) of bad metals at high temperature (19-22). On very general grounds (Anderson theorem) s-wave superconductivity is immune to weak disorder (23), on the other hand disorder is detrimental to CDW. We argue that the increase in superconducting Tc in the alloy is a direct result of disorder induced suppression of CDW order. In a weak coupling picture, CDW suppression results in an increase in number of carriers available for superconductivity pairing at Fermi surface, thus enhancing Tc. The physical scenario that in systems where CDW competes with superconductivity disorder promotes the latter is very general and extends to a strongly coupled situation as long as disorder remains weak (Supplement). Results Powder patterns for all samples have been successfully indexed within the P63/mmc space group. Representative refinement is shown in Fig. 1(a) and the unit cell is shown in Fig. 1(b). Single crystal x-ray diffraction patterns for a subset of single crystals used in this study [Fig. 1(c)] show (00l) reflections. Reflections shift to higher scattering angles with increasing S indicating decrease of the unit cell volume. Evolution of unit cell parameters with S, obtained from fits to the powder patterns [Fig. 1(d) and (e)], is consistent with the single crystal data. 4 The resistivity of all single crystals [Fig. 2(a)] is metallic. The curves for 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.25 increase in ρ(T) at TCDW the slope change is attributed to CDW transition that leaves the bands associated with the undistorted sublattice ungapped (14-17). The hump shifts to lower temperature with S doping and vanishes for x ≥ 0.52, but appears again for x = 1.98 at about 70 K, somewhat below the TCDW = 75 K for pure 2H-TaS2 [Fig. 2(c)]. The resistivity decreases to zero at lower temperatures, implying superconductivity [Fig. 2(d)]. The magnetic susceptibility transitions and the large values of -4πχ at 1.9 K imply bulk superconductivity [Fig. 3(a)]. Specifically, the anisotropic M(H) curves [Fig. confirm type-2 superconductivity for TaSe1.48S0.52 and imply anisotropic critical current density. The lambda anomaly in the specific heat jump around T = 4 K [Fig. 3(c)] is suppressed significantly in 4 T. A rough estimate of the average electron phonon coupling λe−ph~ 0.73(1) can be obtained from the McMillan equation assuming the empirical value of the Coulomb pseudopotential μ*=0.15 and taking the Debye frequency as the relevant phonon energy (24): ( ) * * 1 ln 04 .1 ln μ θ θ μ λ  −      +  −      = D C D C T T (1) When compared to the parent 2H-TaSe2 with electronic specific heat coefficient γ = 4.5 mJ mol−1 K−2, γ is larger for 50% S-doped sample [Fig. 3(d), Table I]. The electron- phonon coupling λe−ph= 0.73 is somewhat larger than for 2H-TaSe2 and 2H-TaS2 (Table I). 5 The ratio of the gap at the critical temperature 2∆/kBTc = 2.17 can be obtained by linear In a multiband electronic system with local CDW fluctuations (15-17,20) above TCDW, such as 2H-Ta(Se,S)2, the carrier scattering mechanism arises from collective excitations below the CDW and from local CDW fluctuations above the CDW (19). Above TCDW ρ(T)∼aT+b, immediately below TCDW ρ(T)∼dT2 and at temperatures below about 15 K -20 K ρ(T)∼cT5. The T5 is due to normal electron-phonon scattering whereas the T2 arises due to scattering of electrons by collective excitations of CDW; the rapid drop just below CDW is due to CDW phase ordering. The linear terms a, b above TCDW arise due to electron- phonon scattering and phase disorder impurity-like scattering due to local CDW fluctuations. The fits of resistivity for the entire single crystal alloy series of 2H-TaSe2-xSx (0 ≤ x ≤ 2) are satisfactory [Fig. 4(a-c), Table II]. In all samples resistivity is linear at high temperatures. Just above the superconducting Tc interband scattering is negligible and individual s- and d-band normal electron phonon scattering dominates (19). The constant term b for such crystals is much smaller than for CDW samples, because disorder suppresses the CDW therefore increases the number of carriers and thus the conductivity. We present the evolution of superconducting Tc in 2H-TaSe2 with S substitution x (normalized to Tc value for x = 0) in Fig. 4(d). The Tc shows 30-fold increase and anticorrelation with the evolution of the high temperature local charge fluctuation Tc near x = 1 coincides with weak increase in normalized b(x) near the same S content. It appears that the considerable increase and evolution of Tc(x) is related to an increase in available carrier concentration or mobility. These changes are matched [Fig. 4(d)] with the 6 nearly identical evolution of the crystallographic disorder as shown by the width of diffraction peaks taken on single crystals (FWHM) normalized to width of x=0 crystal. The linear resistivity aT+b in the high-Tc crystals without CDW is rather close to the Bloch- Grüneisen phonon resistivity (Fig. 4(c), Supplement), suggesting that the strong suppression of parameter b(x) in 2H-TaSe2-xSx can be attributed to suppression of local CDW fluctuations for high-Tc crystals. transition of 2H-TaSe2 is suppressed, whereas the superconducting transition temperature Tc increases up to 4.2 K for x = 0.52 where CDW disappears. Further sulfur increase shows weak but well resolved minimum in Tc(x) for x = 1.10 up to the second maximal value of 4.28 K for x = 1.65 sulfur content in 2H-TaSe1-xSx. Signature of a CDW state, most probably CDW of the pure 2H-TaS2, appears in ρ(T) for higher S content up to x=2. The two Tc maxima in the double-dome appear at the critical doping where CDW orders vanish similar to 1T-Se2 and 2H-NbSe2 (25,26). Discussion It should be noted that electron-irradiated 2H-TaSe2 shows enhancement of superconducting Tc up to about 2.5 K (27). Irradiation introduces defects, i.e. changes in stoichometry similar to chemical substitutions. Cu-intercalated 2H-TaS2 shows enhancement of Tc up to 4.7 K (28). Copper behaves as n-type dopant and therefore its intercalation brings both disorder and charge transfer (29). Similar doping and disorder interplay is expected with Na intercalation in 2H-TaS2 where Tc was raised up to 4.4 K (30). In contrast, isoelectronic substitution in 2H-TaSe2-xSx single crystal alloy series allows for 7 clear separation of disorder from doping-induced changes. The basic electronic structure of 2H-TaSe2, 2H-TaSeS and 2H-TaS2 is quite similar as shown in the LDA calculations (Supplementary material), leaving disorder as the origin of the increase in Tc. The intense variation of physical properties at low energy is a prime example of emergent phenomena. Below the CDW transition temperature a gap opens in 2 H-TaSe2 on two distorted sublattices in contrast to undistorted sublattice (15). This makes for a small density of states at the Fermi level and consequently low superconducting Tc (10). Sulfur substitution could introduce different Ta-S and Ta-Se bond lengths, disorder and puckering of metal plane. This would suppress CDW and increase density of electronic states, electron-phonon coupling and superconducting Tc (31). The lattice defect disorder increases superconducting Tc in CDW superconductor ZrTe3 by factor of only 2-3 (32). Furthermore, in 2H-TaSe2−xSx (0 ≤ x ≤ 2) whereas increased conductivity in high-Tc crystals argues against the change of the amplitude of ionic vibrations as in disordered films or amorphous lattices (33,34). The normal state properties of this material are not well understood theoretically. Our experimental results indicate that the low temperature specific heat coefficient of the alloy is very close to that computed in LDA (please see Supplementary Material), suggesting that the correlations due to Coulomb interactions are weak, while the electron phonon coupling couples strongly to a few states not too close to the Fermi surface, which is consistent with the results of ref 35. Alternatively, strong correlations are invoked in the exciton liquid model of 2H-TaSe2. This model of CDW in 2H-TaSe2 provides an explanation of some anomalous normal state properties such as linear resistivity above CDW transition, 8 pseudogap, optical conductivity σ(ω,T) and incoherent metal features (20,36). Within that model and in contrast to ZrTe3 (32), emergence of CDW reduces incoherent scattering, i.e. CDW-related bump in ρ(T) is a coherence restoring transition that enables higher conductivity below TCDW. The reduction in interband mixing dispersion that mixes the small number of dz2 electrons and pz holes should remove the CDW, maximizing strong scattering off preformed incoherent excitons and enabling linear resistivity to progress to lower temperatures (20). The observation of wide temperature range of linear resistivity in high- Tc crystals [Fig. 2(a)] suggests the rapid reduction in conduction and valence band mixing within that model. This calls for photoemission studies our newly synthesized alloy to test these theoretical models and to clarify the measure of the correlation strength. Pressure should bring phonon hardening following the contraction of lattice parameters from 2H-TaSe2 to 2H-TaS2 (Fig. 1) (23,37,38). Assuming similar bulk modulus to WSe2 (72 GPa) (39), the estimated chemical pressure differences of 2H-TaSeS (Tc = 3.7 pressure/contraction) and 2.8 GPa (negative pressure/expansion). Positive pressure increases considerably superconducting Tc in both 2H-TaS2 and 2H-TaS2; 6 GPa brings Tc in 2H-TaSe2 up to about 3 K (40). CDW is robust, surviving up to 20 GPa (2H-TaSe2) and up to 16 GPa (2H-TaS2). Clearly, chemical pressure may influence the rise of superconducting Tc in S-doped 2H-TaSe2, but it cannot explain the absence of CDW in high-Tc samples in the phase diagram [Fig. 4(e)], the increase of superconducting Tc with lattice expansion in 2H- conduction and valence band mixing within DMFT framework facilitates not only the reduction of incoherence and stabilization of pseudogap characterized by linear ρ(T), but 9 also an increase in density of states at the Fermi level thus highlighting the effect of disorder, incoherent states and the importance of local dynamical correlations (20). In summary, we show that disorder-induced superconducting states arise by isoelectronic substitution in 2H-TaSe2. In contrast to all known charge-density-wave CDW superconductors that have hitherto featured only a single dome of Tc with variation of any external parameter, the electronic phase diagram we present features a weak double dome in Tc(x). The increase in superconducting Tc and changes in Tc(x) are directly correlated with crystallographic disorder and disorder-induced scattering off the local CDW fluctuations. Our experimental findings can be understood on more general grounds without relying on a specific microscopic theory. For a given band structure, weak disorder does not affect the superconductivity of an s-wave superconductor (Anderson's theorem, Supplement) (1,23), but it is detrimental to the competing CDW order. The combination of these effects, results in an enhanced superconducting critical temperature and a reduction of the CDW. Materials and methods Single crystals of 2H-TaSe2-xSx (0≤x≤2) were grown via iodine vapor transport method. The source and growth zone were set at 900◦C for 3 days and then kept at 900◦C and 800◦C, respectively, for 10 days. Black plate- like single crystals with a typical size of 3 • 3 • 0.2 mm3 were obtained. The element analysis was performed using an energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDX) in a JEOL LSM-6500 scanning electron microscope. Electrical resistivity, specific heat and magnetization measurements were performed in a Quantum Design PPMS-9 and MPMS XL-5. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns on single crystals were 10 taken using a Rigaku Miniflex. Room temperature powder XRD measurements were carried out at the X-ray Powder Diffraction (XPD, 28-ID-C) beam line at National Synchrotron Light Source II. The raw room temperature powder X ray 2D data were integrated and converted to intensity versus scattering angle using the software Fit2D (41). The average structure was assessed from raw diffraction data using the General Structure Analysis System (GSAS) operated under EXPGUI utilizing P63/mmc model from the literature (42-45). Acknowledgements: Work at Brookhaven is supported by the U.S. DOE under Contract No. DE-SC00112704. Work at Institute of Solid State Physics of CAS is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China, Grant No. 11404342. Use of the National Synchrotron Light Source II, Brookhaven National Laboratory, was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, under Contract No. DE-SC0012704. X. Deng is supported by AFOSR MURI program. Y. L. and G. Kotliar are supported by U.S. Department of energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences as a part of the Computational Materials Science Program. Additional Information: †To whom correspondence may be addressed. E-mail: petrovic@bnl.gov and lilijun@issp.ac.cn; *Present address: Key Laboratory of Materials Physics, Institute of Solid State Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei 230031, China. Author Contributions: C. P. designed research. L. L. and Y. L. made crystals and carried out transport, magnetization and thermal measurements. L. L. and Y. P. S. contributed single crystal X ray diffraction data. Y. L., Y. H. and J. W performed SEM measurements. Z. W. and 11 Y. Z. performed TEM measurements. A. M. M. A., E. D, A. T., E. S. B and S. J. L. B. carried out and analyzed crystal powder X ray diffraction data. C.P. supervised the project, analyzed the transport data with Y. L. and wrote the paper with L. L and with contributions from G. K. and Y. P. S.. X. D performed the LDA calculations and contributed to the theoretical interpretation of results. The manuscript reflects contribution and ideas of all authors. Competing Interests: The authors declare no competing interests. 12 (a) Powder x-ray diffraction pattern for 2H-TaSe2 at 300 K, shown as scattering intensity versus momentum transfer Q, indexed within P63/mmc space group. Crosses are data, solid red line is the model, green solid line is the difference (offset for clarity), and vertical ticks mark are the reflections. (b) Structural motif of the P63/mmc model. Red dashed box depicts the unit cell. (c) Single crystal x-ray diffraction patterns at the room temperature. Patterns are offset for clarity. (d,e) Room temperature evolution of a and c lattice parameters, respectively, as obtained from powder diffraction data. Shaded is the range where CDW cannot be detected in resistivity. (a) Temperature dependence of the resistivity for single crystals in the absence of magnetic field. (b,c) Temperature dependence of ρ(T)/ρ(200 K) near CDW transitions. (d) ρ(T) curves near superconducting transitions, indicating large enhancement of superconductivity. (a) Magnetic susceptibility after zero-field-cooling (ZFC, filled) and field-cooling (FC, open symbols). The smaller magnetization value for FC is likely due to the complex magnetic flux pinning effects. 13 (b) Magnetization hysteresis loops M(H) of TaSe1.48S0.52 for H ∥ ab (solid) and H ∥ c (open symbols). (c) Low temperature specific heat of TaSe1.48S0.52 measured at H = 0 (solid) and in 4 T (open symbols). (d) The electronic specific heat in the superconducting state Ce for 2H-TaSe1.48S0.52 is obtained by subtracting the lattice contribution from the total specific heat: Ce = C-Cph = γT formula unit. Inset: below the superconducting transition temperature, electronic specific heat temperature dependence follows an exponential decay, as Ce ∼ exp[−∆(T )/kBT]. The solid line shows Ce/T calculated by assuming an isotropic s-wave BCS gap with 2Δ=kBTc = Low temperature phonon scattering, scattering off collective excitations of CDW and high temperature scattering off the local CDW fluctuations are shown by blue, green and red solid lines respectively. Dashed violet line shows the phonon resistivity approximated by the Bloch-Grüneisen formula (see text and supplement). (d) Note that the weak double dome evolution of superconducting Tc(x) coincides with similar evolution of crystallographic disorder with sulfur content as revealed by full width at half maximum of Bragg peak in Fig. 1(c). The intensity was normalized to 1 for each value of x. Moreover, Tc(x) is in close correlation with disorder-induced changes in the high- temperature local charge fluctuations as seen by the changes in parameter b; all normalized to values of 2H-TaSe2 (x=0). The parameter b is shown from fits without (open) 14 and with phonon subtraction from Bloch-Grüneisen formula (full symbols) (Supplement). The error bars are about 0.01 for x, up to 0.04 for normalized Tc and up to 0.01 for the normalized parameter b and FWHM (also see Table 1). (e) Phase diagram indicating the evolution of charge density wave (incommensurate ICCDW and commensurate CCDW) and SC states with the change of x. Parameters 2H-TaSe2 2H-TaSe1.48S0.52 2H-TaS2 Tc(K) 0.14 0.8 γ (mJ/moleK2) 4.5 7.5 β(mJ/moleK4) 0.72 0.44 δ(mJ/moleK6) - - λe-ph θD(K) 202 236 2Δ/kBTc - - Reported by: Ref 12 This work Ref 12 density wave TCDW transition temperatures [defined as peak in resistivity; Fig. 2 (b, c)] and fitting parameters of the CDW phase fluctuations scattering model for resistivity (see text). Considerable change in local CDW fluctuation scattering for crystals without CDW strives to increase conduction and is concomitant with the greatly enhanced superconducting Tc 15 respectively. The units for b and ρ0 are in (mΩcm). For crystals near the middle of the alloy series where CDW cannot be detected in resistivity the highest crystallographic disorder and consequently a substantial increase of ρ0 [i.e. total ρ(T) when T → 0] are expected. However, the impurity-like scattering due to local CDW fluctuations (phase disorder scattering) term b becomes negative for that range of x, making the overall resistivity ρ0 smaller or similar to x = 0 and x = 2 crystals (Table II, columns b and ρ0.). L range denotes the temperature range of linear aT+b fit. x Tc(K) TCDW(K) c crange (K) d drange (K) a b Lrange (K) ρ0 0 0.14 3-20 2.2(1) 3-20 3.0(5) 5-20 4.2(1) − 5-20 − 1.6(1) 3.9(1) − 0.6(1) 5-20 − 3.7(2) − 5-20 − 4.1(2) − 5-20 − 4.3(1) − 5-20 − 4.0 (1) 5-20 0.8 3-20 16