1 Direct Meissner Effect Observation of Superconductivity in Compressed H2S Xiaoli Huang1†, Xin Wang 1†, Defang Duan1, Bertil Sundqvist1, 2, Xin Li1, Yanping Huang1, Fangfei Li1, Qiang Zhou1, Bingbing Liu1, and Tian Cui1* 1State Key Laboratory of Superhard Materials, College of Physics, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, People’s Republic of China. 2Department of Physics, Umeå University, SE-90187 Umeå, Sweden *Corresponding author, E-mail: cuitian@jlu.edu.cn, Tel. / Fax: +86-431-85168825 †These authors contribute equally to this work Abstract Recently, an extremely high superconducting temperature (Tc) of ~200 K has been reported in the sulfur hydride system above 100 GPa. This result is supported by theoretical predictions and verified experimentally. The crystal structure of the superconducting phase was also identified experimentally, confirming the theoretically predicted structure as well as a decomposition mechanism from H2S to H3S+S. Even though nuclear resonant scattering has been successfully used to provide magnetic evidence for a superconducting state, a direct measurement of the important Meissner effect is still lacking. Here we report in situ alternating-current magnetic susceptibility measurements on compressed H2S under high pressures. It is shown that superconductivity suddenly appears at 117 GPa and that Tc reaches 183 K at 149 GPa before decreasing monotonically with a further increase in pressure. This evolution agrees with both theoretical calculations and earlier experimental measurements. The idea of conventional high temperature superconductivity in hydrogen-dominant compounds has thus been realized in the sulfur hydride system under hydrostatic pressure, opening further exciting perspectives for possibly realizing room temperature superconductivity in hydrogen-based compounds. 2 Since the discovery of superconductivity slightly more than a century ago (1), the quest for ever higher critical onset temperatures, Tc, has remained a great challenge and an important topic for experimental and theoretical research. Ashcroft proposed that hydrogen-dominated materials with high Debye temperatures might show high-Tc superconductivity under pressures lower than those expected for metallic hydrogen (2, 3). This proposal has been supported by numerous calculations, for example, ref. 4 ‒ 6. Some hydrides have been predicted theoretically as good candidates to realize high temperature superconductivity, but in spite of great experimental efforts the field showed no significant breakthroughs for a long time. Very recently, however, the highest known values for the superconducting transition temperature Tc were observed in a newly discovered hydrogen sulfide system with a record Tc of 200 K (6), exceeding the highest values found for the cuprates which have held the record for nearly 30 years. The high Tc was indicated by a sharp drop of the resistance to zero and confirmed by a strong isotope effect in D2S (7, 8). Similar experiments performed by Shimizu et al. further verified a resistance drop in the sulfur hydride system above 90 GPa (9), the predicted structures and a predicted decomposition of H2S to H3S+S (10). These results have kindled an intense search for room-temperature superconductivity in hydrogen-dominated materials. The Meissner effect is considered the most important feature to prove the presence of a superconducting state, although Troyan et al. reported the observation of an expulsion of the magnetic field in compressed H2S at 153 GPa (11). Here we have used a highly sensitive magnetic susceptibility technique adapted for a megabar-pressure diamond anvil cell to explore and demonstrate the existence of a superconducting Meissner effect in sulfur hydrides and to verify the superconductivity phase diagram of the material. The details of the loading procedure for the H2S sample are described in Methods. With different thermodynamic routes, the sample undergoes different phase transitions, especially at different temperatures. The sample was compressed to at least 100 GPa at T < 100 K after loading. The magnetic susceptibility measurement setup in the diamond anvil cell is shown in 3 Fig. 1A. The alternating-current susceptibility was detected with a lock-in amplifier (LIA). The target sample was loaded into the hole of the non-magnetic gasket at about 2.0 GPa and 200 K, and the sample at 155 GPa and 300 K is shown in Fig. 1B. The signal coil is wound around one of the diamond anvils with a compensating coil connected in opposition (Fig. 1C). The basic principles of the magnetic-susceptibility technique for measuring the superconductivity are described in previous works (12, 13). We have extended this technique to study samples in the megabar pressure range, using a technique similar with that used by Deemyad et al. (13). The value of Tc is taken to be the onset of superconductivity, defined by the intersection of a line drawn through the steep slope of the curve and the region of zero slope above the transition. Two extensive experimental runs have been performed and are summarized in Fig. 2. In the first experiment the sample was compressed up to 149 GPa, above which the diamond failed. Below 100 GPa, no superconducting transition was observed in the sample, but at 117 GPa a characteristic transition into the superconducting state was observed as shown in Fig. 2A. The Tc, identified as the onset of the steep drop, is found to be 38 K. At 130 GPa, the superconducting onset temperature is 55 K (Fig. 2B). The pressure was then increased to 149 GPa at 300 K, where the sample was kept for about seven days, waiting out the possible transition kinetics in H3S as reported in previous works (7, 9). When the temperature was finally decreased at this pressure the superconducting transition was observed at 183 K (Fig. 2C), which is qualitatively compatible with our theoretical predictions and, within the experimental uncertainties, with previous electrical resistance measurements (6, 7). In the second run, the pressure was increased monotonically from 155 GPa to 171 GPa. At 155 GPa, a well-defined and reproducible superconducting signal was triggered at about 168 K (Fig. 2D). However, when the pressure was increased further, there was an abrupt decrease in Tc which shifts down to 140 K at 171 GPa. The pressure dependence of Tc in our two experiments is summarized in Fig. 3, where we have plotted our new data together with all previous experimental measurements and the results from our previous theoretical calculations (6-9). The errors in the measured critical 4 temperature and pressure are also displayed. The error in the pressure is estimated from the difference between the initial and final pressures during each temperature cycle, while the error in the temperature is estimated from the difference between the onset and completion temperatures. The uncertainties in determining Tc are especially large above 150 GPa. To reach ultrahigh pressure the diameter of the diamond anvil culets is reduced, leading to a reduction of the magnetic signal which is proportional to the volume of the sample. The signal-to-noise ratio is thus reduced, resulting in the larger uncertainty in Tc upon further compression. From the plot of Tc versus pressure in Fig. 3 it is clearly seen that the diagram can be divided into two regions. Below 140 GPa the onset temperature Tc is lower than 100 K, which was also observed in previous experiments reported by Eremets et al. (7). Near 149 GPa high Tc superconductivity appears and simultaneously H3S becomes the dominant component in the sample, as shown by the reported X-ray diffraction data (9). It should be noted that there is a difference between the critical temperatures deduced from electrical resistance data and from our magnetic susceptibility measurement, and this difference increases by 30 K with increasing pressure up to 170 GPa. Still, there is no doubt that we have identified high temperature superconductivity in the sulfur hydride system from its Meissner effect. A quick overview of previous superconductivity experiments under high pressure also shows that the superconducting critical temperature observed in electrical resistance measurements is always higher than that found from magnetic susceptibility data (13, 14). Part of this difference could be due to the fact that the magnetic measurements are sensitive to the bulk fraction of superconductive material only, while the resistance measurements may also react to small amounts of superconducting material inside or between grains, creating percolation paths through the material. A close study of Fig. 3 shows that there is a pronounced kink in the dependence of Tc on pressure at about 149 GPa. This was also observed in the reported electrical resistance measurements (7, 9). Our earlier theoretical calculation could give the rational explanation for this kink (6), since the predicted R3m and Im-3m phases have different pressure dependences 5 of Tc. However, the R3m and Im-3m phases cannot be distinguished from the powder X-ray diffraction patterns (9), since these two crystal structures differ only by a single different hydrogen atom position. Further neutron scattering studies are necessary to confirm the transition between the R3m and Im-3m phases. In summary, the excellent superconducting properties of compressed sulfur hydride have been confirmed by magnetic susceptibility measurements. With increasing pressure, superconductivity appears at 38 K for 117 GPa, Tc rises rapidly to 183 K at 149 GPa and then decreases to 140 K at 171 GPa. The pressure dependence of Tc suggests a phase transition, which is consistent with both theoretical calculations and electrical resistance measurements. The present results, showing a true Meissner effect, provide enormously important evidence for a superconducting state with extremely high critical temperature in hydrogen sulfide. This should stimulate a great deal of future experimental and theoretical studies to explore possible high-temperature superconductivity in other hydrogen-dominated materials. 6