Topological transitions in Ising models Somenath Jalal,∗ Rishabh Khare, and Siddhartha Lal† Department of Physical Sciences, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research-Kolkata, W.B. 741246, India The thermal dynamics of the two-dimensional Ising model and quantum dynamics of the one- dimensional transverse-field Ising model (TFIM) are mapped to one another through the transfer- matrix formalism. We show that the fermionised TFIM undergoes a Fermi-surface topology- changing Lifshitz transition at its critical point. We identify the degree of freedom which tracks the Lifshitz transition via changes in topological quantum numbers (e.g., Chern number, Berry phase etc.). An emergent SU(2) symmetry at criticality is observed to lead to a topological quantum number different from that which characterises the ordered phase. The topological transition is also understood via a spectral flow thought-experiment in a Thouless charge pump, revealing the bulk-boundary correspondence across the transition. The duality property of the phases and their entanglement content are studied, revealing a holographic relation with the entanglement at criti- cality. The effects of a non-zero longitudinal field and interactions that scatter across the singular Fermi surface are treated within the renormalisation group (RG) formalism. The analysis reveals that the critical point of the 1D TFIM and the 1D spin-1/2 Heisenberg chain are connected via a line of SU(2)-symmetric theories. We extend our analysis to show that the classical to quan- tum correspondence links the critical theories of Ising models in various dimensions holographically through the universal effective Hamiltonian that describes the Lifshitz transition of the 1D TFIM. We obtain in this way a unified perspective of transitions in Ising models that lie beyond the tra- ditional Ginzburg-Landau-Wilson paradigm. We discuss the consequences of our results for similar topological transitions observed in classical spin models, topological insulators, superconductors and lattice gauge-field theories which are related to the Ising universality class. PACS numbers: 05.30.Rt, 75.10.Hk, 11.15.-q, 03.65.Vf CONTENTS I. Introduction 1 II. Preliminaries: T-matrix mapping between 2D IM and 1D TFIM 3 A. TFIM mapped to theory of 1D massive Dirac fermions 4 III. Lifshitz transition and topological phase of the TFIM 6 A. Order parameters, critical exponents and the nature of criticality 7 B. Topological properties of the ordered phase 10 IV. Lifshitz transition as spectral flow 12 A. Adiabatic charge pumping on a two-torus: the integer quantum Hall effect 13 B. Thouless adiabatic charge pump in 1D 14 C. Anomaly cancellation and the Chern number 15 D. Thouless Charge Pump as CUT-RG 17 V. Duality, SPT order and entanglement in the TFIM 18 VI. Symmetry breaking and the RG Phase diagram 22 VII. Universality and Holography of topological transitions in Ising models 25 A. The T = 0 phase transition of the 1D Ising model 25 B. Phase transition in the infinite-range Ising model 26 C. Topological transitions in the 2D TFIM 28 VIII. Summary and Outlook 33 Acknowledgements 34