Isotope effect in superconducting n-doped SrTiO3 A. Stucky, G. Scheerer, Z. Ren, D. Jaccard, J.-M. Poumirol, C. Barreteau, E. Giannini, and D. van der Marel∗ Department of Quantum Matter Physics, Universit ́e de Gen`eve, CH-1211 Gen`eve 4, Switzerland (Dated: November 8, 2018) Abstract We report the influence on the superconducting critical temperature Tc in doped SrTiO3 of the substitution of the natural 16O atoms by the heavier isotope 18O. We observe that for a wide range of doping this substitution causes a strong (∼ 50%) enhancement of Tc. Also the magnetic critical field Hc2 is increased by a factor ∼ 2. Such a strong impact on Tc and Hc2, with a sign opposite to conventional superconductors, is unprecedented. The observed effect could be the consequence of strong coupling of the doped electrons to lattice vibrations (phonons), a notion which finds support in numerous optical and photo-emission studies. The unusually large size of the observed isotope effect supports a recent model for superconductivity in these materials based on strong coupling to the ferroelectric soft modes of SrTiO3. ∗ Correspondence to dirk.vandermarel@unige.ch 1 arXiv:1610.10045v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 2 Nov 2016 SrTiO3 is a para-electric insulator which becomes ferroelectric when 35% or more of the oxygen is substituted with the isotope 18O [1–3]. Due to electron-phonon coupling doped charge carriers form a polaronic liquid at small concentration [4–13] and the material becomes superconducting with a doping dependent critical temperature (Tc) below ∼ 1 Kelvin both for bulk [14–19] and interfaces . Several aspects of this material are not usually encountered in conventional superconducting metals. These include a multi- valley bandstructure (however presently known not to apply to SrTiO3), the structural transition at around 100 K, and the low density of charge carriers[4, 24–27]. More recently a connection between the near ferroelectric instability and the superconductivity of SrTiO3 has been conjectured. Here we report on the superconducting properties of doped SrTiO3−y with partial 18O/16O isotope substitution, and observe that substituting 35% of the heavier 18O for 16O increases Tc by a factor of approximately 1.5. The sign of the observed isotope effect is opposite to one in conventional superconductors and the magnitude much stronger. The unusual size and sign of the isotope effect may be caused by the near ferroelectric instability, the polaronic nature of the charge carriers, or a combination of those. Undoped SrTiO3 crystals were annealed under pure 18O2 atmosphere. During this pro- cedure, part of the 16O atoms in the structure is substituted by 18O atoms. The isotope substitution ratio has been quantified by three independent and complementary experimen- tal techniques. We estimate the amount of isotope substitution to be x(18O)/x(16O) ≃ 0.35 (see Methods). N-type doped samples were prepared by subjecting the samples to a re- duction process. Three samples were made with charge carrier density of n=0.004 nm−3, n=0.02 nm−3 and n=0.07 nm−3 representative of a large portion of the phase diagram. At each doping level of SrTi18O3−y, one parent SrTi16O3−y sample was annealed under the same conditions and at the same time, thus providing a reference for the isotope effect on the superconducting properties. Details of preparation and characterization can be found in Methods. The samples were cooled down to 25 mK in a 3He-dilution refrigerator. A current between 10 and 50 mA (corresponding to a density between 1.6 and 8 A/cm2) was flowing in the sample. The longitudinal voltage was acquired to probe the intrinsic resistivity; the resulting ρ(T) curves are reported in Fig. 1 (a-c). The ”onset” transition temperatures are extracted from this data as the crossing point between the linear extrapolation of the normal state resistivity above Tc and the linear extrapolation of the resistivity drop at the 2 transition. The error bar is estimated as the temperature range over which the derivative dρ(T)/dT changes. Fig. 1 (e) shows the extracted transition temperatures as a function of the charge carrier density for all samples. The values of Tc indicate a systematic increase of the superconducting transition temperature with the presence of the heavier isotope. Fig- ure 1(d) shows the magnetic AC-susceptibility for the two highly doped samples. This was measured in a two-coil set-up whose pick-up coil voltage change was amplified by a stan- dard lock-in (feeding current 0.05 mA at a frequency of 977 Hz, providing a magnetic field of 0.014 mT). The transition temperatures, obtained from transport (panel (c)) and AC-susceptibility measurements (panel (d)), well agree with each other. The BCS weak coupling limit gives an isotope coefficient α = −d(ln Tc)/d(ln M) = 0.5 (where M is the oxygen isotope mass), corresponding to a Tc shift of −5% as opposed to approximately +50% in the data presented here. The first main observation is therefore that, contrary to most superconducting materials, the isotope coefficient in SrTiO3 is negative. In some other rare cases α < 0 has been observed: the pure uranium (α = −2.2) , the high-Tc superconductor Bi2Sr2Ca2Cu3O10 (α = −0.1) , and the metal hydride PdH(D)x (−0.3 < α < −0.1). Controversial sign changes of the isotope coefficient have been observed in (Ba,K)Fe2As2 (α = −0.2) (due to differences in the sample composition), and in pure lithium under high pressure (α changes with increasing pressure ). We will not dwell on the physical origins of the isotope effect in these cases, which are certainly different in the case of uranium, and possibly different in the other examples as well. Our second main observation is, that also the magnitude of the isotope effect is remarkable: an overall enhancement of Tc of a factor 1.5 is observed at all doping levels, which corresponds to a negative and large coefficient α ∼ −10. This is possibly the strongest isotope enhancement of Tc observed in any material so far. From the measurement of the electrical resistivity at the superconducting transition in magnetic field, we could estimate the upper critical field Hc2(T) and the effect that the isotope substitution can have on it. These results are summarized in Fig. 2. For each sample we plot the onset of ρ(T, H), defined as the crossing point of the linear extrapolations of the normal state resistance and the slope of the resistance at the transition. The Hc2(T) line of 18O-substituted SrTiO3 is far above that of the pristine sample, at each doping level. The isotope effect does not only enhance the critical temperature, but strengthens the superconductivity in a magnetic field as well, up to a maximum μ0Hc2(T = 0) ≃ 0.25 3 tesla at optimal doping. For all dopings the observed isotope effect on Hc2 corresponds to β = −d ln Hc2/d ln M ≈ −19. We notice that the samples with lower charge carrier density exhibit a higher critical field, despite of the lower critical temperature. This is not surprising and it is expected on the basis of the band structure reported in and the two- gap superconductivity reported for SrTi1−xNbxO3 (since gap anisotropy is in general affected by impurity scattering, this may a priori depend on the kind of doping, e.g. oxygen depletion, Nb substitution or La substitution). As a matter of fact, the different doping levels shown here correspond to the occupation of different bands , which contribute differently to the superconducting pairing. The temperature dependence of the critical field does not change even when the critical temperature and field are enhanced by the isotope substitution. We measured the resistivity under a magnetic field in both orientations perpendicular to the current (with the current always in the same direction in the ab-plane of the crystal). Both measurements provide the same result, thus ruling out any possible surface effect on the superconducting behavior. The lowermost panel of Fig. 2 shows the two identical Hc2(T) transition lines measured in the two different field orientations. There are three infrared active modes in SrTiO3, having transverse frequencies 67, 21 and 2 meV and Fr ̈ohlich coupling constants αep = 1.6, 0.45 and 0.02, respectively (see Table 1 of ). The (Fr ̈ohlich type) electron-phonon coupling in SrTiO3 is dominated by coupling to the optical phonons at 67 and 21 meV ; these phonons are to a large extend responsible for the twofold mass-enhancement of the charge carriers observed with optics. Note that the coupling constant of the soft ferroelectric mode at 2 meV can not be correctly estimated from the Fr ̈ohlich mode; it is certainly larger, among other things due to the strong anharmonicity of this mode. The doping dependence of the effective mass in units of the bare band-mass is described by the phenomenological expression m∗/m = 2.0 + 1.2 exp (−n/n0), where n0 = 0.084 nm−3 is an empirical factor. For all doping concentrations where superconductivity is observed the quasiparticles are slow compared to the vibrational degrees of freedom , which corresponds to the anti-adiabatic limit. The quasiparticles in this limit are commonly referred to as “polarons”. In case the interactions are not too strong the polarons form a Fermi-liquid. Alexandrov has pointed out in this context that the critical temperature of the superconducting transition is determined by a BCS-like formula, but with the renormalized density of states replacing the 4 bare one. In conventional models of electron-phonon coupling the effective coupling constant describing the pairing interaction, λ, is invariant under isotope substitution. (We use a single parameter λ to describe the combined phonon mediated and Coulomb interaction.) However, this does not take into account aforementioned band-renormalization, due to which it should be replaced with the effective parameter λ∗ = λm∗ m (1) The corresponding expressions for the isotope coefficient are detailed in Eqs. 4 and 9 of the Methods section. The parameters in Table I imply that α ∼ −1.7±0.3, which is larger than the BCS result and of opposite sign. For the isotope coefficient of the upper critical field the model gives β = −d(ln Hc2)/d(ln M) ∼ −3.9 ± 0.5. n ε∗ F λ∗ ωo/ε∗ F d ln m∗/d ln M α β nm−3 meV 17 0.25 -2.0 -4.5 7 0.24 -1.8 -4.1 20 2.5 0.20 -1.3 -3.0 for the values of εF as a function of carrier concentration. The the log-derivatives of the mass and the α- and β-coeffients and were calculated with Eqs. 9, 4 and 6 (Methods) respectively. Hence the unusual isotope effect that we observe in the experiments is in principle not unexpected given the polaronic nature of the charge carriers. Note that Tc is a very sensitive function of λ∗ due to the fact that in STO this parameter (and consequently also Tc) is very small. The situation is quite different in this respect from that in cuprate high temperature superconductors, for which the 18O isotope substitution causes Tc to become smaller. The fact that in SrTiO3 the experimental isotope coefficients α ∼ −10 and β ∼ −19 are still considerably larger than expected from aforementioned band-renormalization, calls for deeper theoretical analysis of the electronic structure and the effective polaron-polaron interactions in these materials. A possible clue comes from the recent theoretical study by Edge et al. , whom postulated that pairing of electrons in SrTiO3 is driven by the ferroelectric soft mode fluctuations in the proximity of a quantum critical phase transition. 5 Following Kedem et al. the coupling parameter close to the ferroelectric quantum critical point is λ ∝ α2 ep ωs M zν |Mc − M|zν (2) where αep is the electron-phonon coupling constant, ωs a vibrational energy scale, Mc the mass at the critical point and zν the critical exponent of the system having the mean-field value zν = 0.5. For harmonic modes α2 ep ∝ M −1/2, which leads to a mass independent λ = α2 ep/ωs since also ωs ∝ M −1/2. Following the description of Edge et al. the effect of doping is to increase Mc, which for the relevant doping range (> 1019 cm−3) falls above the mass of 18O. Consequently at these doping levels there is no ferroelectric instability (corresponding to a zero in the denominator) for any (partial or complete) 18O isotope substitution. Yet, according to Eq. (2), even far from the ferroelectric instability λ is a sensitive function of the isotope mass. Based on these considerations Edge et al. predicted a 30 % increase of Tc for 35% isotope substituted samples. Note that the renormalization of λ due to polaronic band narrowing occurs regardless of the pairing mechanism, hence Eqs. (1) and (2) need to be combined. Taken together these two effects do indeed account -with a large margin- for the observed value, α ∼ −10, of the isotope coefficient. We have studied the critical temperature Tc and the upper critical field Hc2 of partially (35 %) 18O isotope substituted doped SrTiO3. We observe a strong (factor ∼ 1.5) en- hancement of Tc and (factor ∼ 2) of Hc2. Both the sign and the size of these two effects are unusual, and indicate that the superconductivity is not of the conventional BCS variety. The effect may be the consequence of a combination of two effects: polaronic band-narrowing and coupling to soft phonons responsible for the ferroelectric instability in these materials.