Towards phase-coherent caloritronics in superconducting circuits Antonio Fornieri1, ∗ and Francesco Giazotto1, † 1NEST, Istituto Nanoscienze-CNR and Scuola Normale Superiore, Piazza S. Silvestro 12, I-56127 Pisa, Italy (Dated: July 27, 2017) The emerging field of phase-coherent caloritronics (from the Latin word "calor", i.e., heat) is based on the possibility to control heat currents using the phase difference of the superconducting order parameter. The goal is to design and implement thermal devices able to master energy transfer with a degree of accuracy approaching the one reached for charge transport by contemporary electronic components. This can be obtained by exploiting the macroscopic quantum coherence intrinsic to superconducting condensates, which manifests itself through the Josephson and the proximity effect. Here, we review recent experimental results obtained in the realization of heat interferometers and thermal rectifiers, and discuss a few proposals for exotic non-linear phase-coherent caloritronic devices, such as thermal transistors, solid-state memories, phase-coherent heat splitters, microwave refrigerators, thermal engines and heat valves. Besides being very attractive from the fundamental physics point of view, these systems are expected to have a vast impact on many cryogenic microcircuits requiring energy management, and possibly lay the first stone for the foundation of electronic thermal logic. In the last decades, the impressive evolution of modern electronics has reached a point where quantum effects and phase coherence are ordinarily exploited to study exotic phe- nomena at the nanoscale under controlled and adjustable con- ditions. Only very recently, instead, scientists have started to exploit the great potentialities offered by nanotechnology for the investigation and control of heat currents (the branch of science called "caloritronics"). Interesting advances in the understanding of fundamental properties of thermal transport have been obtained in experiments involving atomic or molec- ular junctions . A few works [2–4] have shown that heat flow has a quantum limit - just as the electric current - and that this limit does not depend on the nature of heat carriers. Furthermore, a remarkable amount of theoretical and exper- imental studies has been focused on the interaction between heat and spin currents in thermoelectric devices . From the point of view of applications, the largest effort has been put into electronic and phononic thermometry or refrig- eration [6–8], but the most intriguing and ambitious goal has always been the full control of heat currents, aiming to em- ulate the accuracy regularly obtained for charge transport in modern electronic devices. This attracting possibility was first envisioned by a conspicuous amount of theoretical works de- signing non-linear phononic devices . However, the prac- tical realization of these structures still appears challenging, hampering significant improvements of the first promising re- sults . An appealing alternative is represented by the notable ingredient of phase coherence, whose role in ther- mal transport was almost unknown until ten years ago, with just the exceptions of Refs. 12–14. This gap was filled by the birth of phase-coherent caloritronics , a young field of nanoscience that takes advantage of the long-range phase coherence of the superconducting condensate to manip- ulate electronic and photonic heat currents in solid-state meso- scopic circuits. As we shall argue, superconducting phase co- herence represents a unique control knob for heat flows and ∗ antonio.fornieri@sns.it † francesco.giazotto@sns.it allows to design several non-linear caloritronic devices to ob- tain an unprecedented thermal management at the nanoscale. The physical picture at the basis of phase-coherent caloritronics is represented schematically in Fig. 1a. The fun- damental idea is to exploit a suitable physical effect that de- pends on the superconducting phase difference φ to control the electronic heat flow (Jleft and Jright) between two electronic thermal reservoirs residing at temperatures Thot > Tcold. To- wards this end, three main different approaches can be fol- lowed. As shown in Fig. 1b, the first possibility consists in the phase control of heat transported by electrons in a temperature-biased Josephson tunnel junction (JJ), since the electronic thermal current JSIS flowing through the junction depends on the macroscopic phase difference between the su- perconducting electrodes S . Although this method has been the most prolific from the experimental point of view [15, 19–22], it allows to only partially modulate JSIS, as it will be discussed in the following. The second approach, instead, is sketched in Fig. 1c and relies on the phase manipulation of the electronic ther- mal conductivity and the electron-phonon coupling in phase- engineered superconducting proximity systems. Here, two normal metal (N) reservoirs are tunnel-coupled to an other normal layer (S’) in which superconducting correlations are induced thanks to the proximity effect. As we shall ar- gue, S’ can be inserted in a superconducting loop forming a superconducting quantum interference proximity transistor (SQUIPT) [23–25], which can be used to tune the phase dif- ference across the proximized layer and therefore its density of states (DOS) N(φ) . The latter directly affects the thermal properties of S’, leading to the phase manipula- tion of the electronic heat currents exchanged with the reser- voirs JS′IN(φ) and with the lattice phonons Je−phon(φ). Even though an experimental proof is still lacking, this method could in principle provide variations of the thermal conduc- tance of several orders of magnitude . Last approach is sketched in Fig. 1d and is based on the reg- ulation of the energy exchanged between electrons and pho- tons thanks to the phase tuning of the coupling with the elec- tromagnetic environment. In contrast to the previous cases, arXiv:1610.01013v4 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 25 Jul 2017 2 JSIS (j) j/2 - j/2 S S I Thot Tcold Jleft Jright j a b d c N ! (j) JS’IN (j) N I S’ I Je-phot (j) N N F electromagnetic environment ZSQUID (F) Superconducting phase Je-phon (j) residing at different temperatures (Thot > Tcold) can exchange energy by means of a physical mechanism controlled by the superconducting phase difference φ. The latter is used as a knob to control the electronic heat currents Jleft and Jright flowing from the hotter to the colder reservoir. This principle can be implemented through the following approaches. b. The first one exploits the Josephson effect: the electronic heat current JSIS(φ) flowing through a Josephson tunnel junction depends on the macroscopic phase difference between the superconducting condensates. c. The second approach consists in the phase manipulation of the density of states N(φ) in a superconducting proximity layer S’ by means of a SQUIPT (see text). This possibility enables the phase control of thermal currents exchanged with the reservoirs JS′IN(φ) and with the lattice phonons Je−phon(φ). d. Last approach relies on the electron-photon coupling to exchange energy between two electronic reservoirs not in galvanic contact. The resulting heat current Je−phot(φ) can be regulated via an intermediate phase circuit, such as DC SQUID with a magnetic-flux-dependent impedance ZSQUID(Φ). In all panels S stands for superconductor, N for normal metal and I for insulator. in general the reservoirs are not in galvanic contact and the photonic heat current Je−phot(φ) is controlled by an interme- diate superconducting circuit [for instance, a direct current su- perconducting quantum interference device (DC SQUID)] in- ductively or capacitively coupled to the reservoirs . The SQUID is characterized by a magnetic-flux-dependent impedance ZSQUID(Φ) that can act as a contactless knob for Je−phot(φ). This method has been already demonstrated ex- perimentally , but its potential is far from being fully ex- ploited. All the options listed above can be implemented in the framework of quasiequilibrium regime : since the electron- phonon coupling in metals is strongly suppressed at tempera- tures below 1 K, one can inject a Joule power in the structure, thereby driving the electronic system into a Fermi distribution function characterized by a temperature Te that can be signif- icantly different from that of the lattice phonons. In our case, the latter are fully thermalized with the substrate phonons re- siding at the bath temperature Tbath, thanks to the vanishing Kapitza resistance between thin metallic films and the sub- strate [15, 19–22, 31]. Typically, the superconducting parts are implemented by aluminum (Al) electrodes, which are well known to form high-quality tunnel junctions. At low temper- atures, the heat current Je−phon released by the electrons to the phonon bath is exponentially suppressed by the supercon- ducting energy gap . On the other hand, N electrodes are usually made of copper (Cu) or manganese-doped aluminum (Al0.98Mn0.02) [3, 15, 19–22]. The former material is particu- larly suited to be coupled to Al leads in order to form super- conducting proximity structures [23–25] and is characterized by Je−phon ∼ (T 5 e − T 5 bath) . In Al0.98Mn0.02, instead, Je−phon ∼ (T 6 e − T 6 bath) , thus reducing phononic losses at low temperatures. Moreover, its good oxidation properties make Al0.98Mn0.02 very useful to realize NIN and NIS struc- tures [19–21]. In the following sections, we shall analyze more deeply each different approach, reviewing the major experimental achievements and the existing proposals for novel caloritronic devices. JOSEPHSON TUNNEL CIRCUITS Just three years after the prediction of the Josephson ef- fect , Maki and Griffin calculated the expression accounting for the electronic heat current flowing through a temperature-biased SIS JJ (where S stands for superconductor 3 -2 -1 0 1 2 320  (0) Tdrain (mK) 300 -4 -2 0 2 4 340 330  (0) Tdrain (mK) N N S2 S1 S1 S2 I  H H JSIS () N N S1  S2 JSIS () a b -2 -1 0 1 2 130 140 Tdrain (mK) 1 (0) -1 0 1 0.5 0.6 T1 (K)  (0) S1  S3 S2 JSIS () JSIS () 1 N N S1 2 S2 c d e f g h Thot T1 Tdrain Tbath Tunnel barrier composed by two superconducting electrodes S1 and S2 residing at temperatures T1 and Tbath, respectively, and forming a loop with two JJs in parallel. The upper branch S1 is heated by the N source (residing at Thot) and the resulting thermal gradient across the SQUID generates a tunable heat current JSIS. b. Drain temperature Tdrain modulations as a function of the magnetic flux Φ threading the loop of the DC SQUID for Thot = 675 mK and Tbath = 235 mK. c. Schematics of a thermal diffractor. The core of the interferometer consists of an extended rectangular JJ pierced by a flux Φ controlled by an in-plane magnetic field H. d. Fraunhofer-like interference pattern of Tdrain as a function of Φ for Thot = 720 mK and Tbath = 240 mK. e. Sketch of a Josephson heat modulator. The central part of the structure consists of a double-loop SQUID threaded by the magnetic fluxes Φ1 and Φ2, with Φ2 ≃ 2Φ1. f. Interference pattern of Tdrain for Thot = 560 mK and Tbath = 25 mK. g. Scheme of a "pseudo" radio-frequency SQUID able to polarize the JJ between S1 and S2 from φ = 0 to φ = π, thereby realizing a 0 − π controllable thermal JJ. h. Electronic temperature T1 of the electrode S1 vs. Φ for an injected Joule power of 112 pW at Tbath = 25 mK. In all schematics we assumed Thot > T1 > Tdrain > Tbath, while the green arrows represent the direction of the flux-controlled heat current JSIS. In all graphs, circles represent the experimental data, whereas solid black lines are the fits obtained from the thermal model of each structure (see text). Data are taken from Refs 15, 19, 21, 22. and I for insulator) : JSIS(φ) = Jqp −Jint cosφ. (1) Equation 1 contains interesting information about the impact of the Josephson effect on thermal transport. First of all, JSIS consists of two components: the former accounts for the heat carried by quasiparticles and represents an incoherent flow of energy from the hot to the cold reservoir . On the other hand, Jint is the thermal counterpart of the "quasiparticle-pair interference" term that contributes also to the electrical cur- rent tunneling through a JJ . It stems from energy- carrying tunneling processes involving concomitant creation and destruction of Cooper pairs on both sides of the junc- tions and is therefore regulated by the phase differ- ence φ between the two superconducting condensates. De- pending on φ, this phase-coherent component can flow in the opposite direction with respect to that imposed by the tem- perature gradient, although the total JSIS follows the second principle of thermodynamics, i.e., Jqp is always greater than Jint. As mentioned in the introduction, this inequality rep- resents the main limit of this approach based on Josephson tunnel junctions, which can only partially modulate electronic heat currents. All these features have been investigated and confirmed ex- perimentally in different interferometer-like structures, which are schematically depicted in Fig. 2. The first three devices have a similar structure: two normal metal electrodes N are used as electronic thermal reservoirs connected by a super- conducting central part that forms the core of the interferom- eter. The reservoirs are also connected to superconducting wires that create SINIS junctions, which can be used as Joule heaters or thermometers (not shown) . By injecting a Joule power, one can heat the electrons in the source up to a temper- ature Thot, so as to elevate the quasiparticle temperature T1 of the upper branch S1 of the interferometers above Tbath. On the contrary, the lower branch S2 is thermally anchored to the bath temperature, thanks to its large volume. In this way, it is possi- ble to obtain a substantial thermal gradient between S1 and S2, thereby generating finite heat currents JSIS flowing through the JJs that form the central part of the structure. By applying an external magnetic flux Φ one can tune the phase polarization of the JJs and therefore manipulate Jint, leading to phase- coherent oscillations of the drain temperature Tdrain. of a symmetric DC SQUID, which offered the first experi- mental proof of Eq. 1 . By imposing a thermal gra- dient across the device and varying Φ, the authors observed modulations of Tdrain as large as 21 mK at Tbath = 235 mK and ⟨Tdrain⟩ ≃ 310 mK, as shown in Fig. 2b. These modula- tions stem from the interference between the phase-coherent components of the heat currents flowing across the JJs of the SQUID, and can be fitted with a thermal model accounting for the predominant energy-exchange mechanisms present in the system (see black line in Fig. 2b). The model is based on the conservation of energy and imposes that in stationary condi- tions the sum of the incoming and outgoing thermal currents 4 0.4 0.6 -60 -40 -20 0 20  Thot (K) T (mK) 1 10 100 200 0.50 0.75 1 0 40 80 Jdrain (pW) T1/Tc1   /2 0 0.75 1.00 -5 0 5 10 I II J (pW) Tgate / Tc1 Jsource Jdrain Jgate e b a c d N1 N3 S N2 N4 Jfw N N S1 S2 Jdrain Tgate TN Thot T1 Tdrain Tbath Tunnel barrier Tfw Jsource Jgate S3 F with Thot ∼ Tgate > T1 > Tdrain. The phase difference φ across the S1IS2 JJ can be tuned form 0 to π thanks to a "pseudo" rf SQUID as the one presented in Figs. 2g and 2h. b. Calculated electronic heat current Jdrain ≡ JSIS flowing through the JJ as a function of T1 for different values of zero-temperature energy gaps of S1 and S2. c. Calculated Jsource, Jgate and Jdrain ≡ JSIS vs. Tgate for Thot = 0.96Tc1, Tdrain = 0.03Tc1, φ = π and δ = 0.75. The horizontal dashed line indicates J = 0, while the shadowed regions I and II correspond to different regimes of amplification (see text). d. Sketch of a hybrid thermal rectifier in the forward temperature bias configuration, i.e., for Thot > TN > T1 > Tfw > Tbath. The reverse configuration is obtained by heating the N3 reservoir up to Thot > T1 > TN > Trev > Tbath, where Trev is the temperature of the N1 reservoir. e. Experimental temperature difference δT = Trev −Tfw as a function of Thot at Tbath = 50 mK (scatter, left axes) and corresponding rectification efficiency R (red line, right axes on a logarithmic scale) extracted from the theoretical fit (blue line). Data are taken from . for each electrode of the structure must be equal to zero . The excellent agreement between the experiment and the the- ory confirms the physical picture described above. The complementary demonstration of the phase-coherent nature of Jint was obtained one year later, with the observa- tion of a thermal diffraction pattern in an extended rectangu- lar JJ , as depicted in Fig. 2c. The temperature-biased JJ between S1 and S2 is threaded by a magnetic flux controlled by an in-plane magnetic field H. This generates quantum diffraction for the heat current JSIS and produces an archetypal Φ0 is the superconducting flux quantum ] for the electronic drain temperature, as shown in Fig. 2d . In analogy to what was done in the ’60s for the electrical Joseph- son current, this experiment confirmed unequivocally the ther- mal current-phase relationship expressed by Eq. 1. Although these interferometers embody the simplest struc- tures to obtain the experimental demonstration of the predic- tion by Maki and Griffin, they are not ideal systems to achieve the full control of Jint. Indeed, unwanted structural asymme- tries (for instance, a difference in the normal-state resistance of the JJs) can reduce severely the visibility of the oscilla- tions of a conventional single-loop SQUID . To avoid this, one can replace one of the JJs with an additional SQUID, thereby realizing the Josephson thermal modulator sketched in Fig. 2e , in which in principle two magnetic fluxes Φ1 and Φ2 can be driven independently. This device enables the generation of exotic thermal interference patterns, which are characterized by large oscillation amplitudes, high sensitivi- ties to magnetic flux variations, and a 99 % modulation of Jint despite the presence of a non-negligible junction asym- metry . Figure 2f shows a detail around Φ = 0 of the tem- perature oscillations resulting from the double loop geometry. Foremost, this system showed a perfect correspondence in the phase engineering of charge and thermal transport , open- ing the way for the conception of more sophisticated phase- coherent caloritronic devices where thermal currents can be manipulated at will. In this perspective, the Josephson mod- ulator could be the core of a thermal splitter , able to control the amount of energy transferred among several termi- nals residing at different temperatures. Or even more interest- ing, the magnetic fluxes threading the loops could be driven independently with the help of superconducting on-chip coils. This would allow to control separately the phase-biasing of the loops, with the possibility to perform closed cycles in the flux parameter space. Combining this possibility with the thermal rectifying properties of a JJ formed by S leads with different energy gaps would open many opportunities to 5 realize heat pumps , microwave coolers or time- dependent thermal engines [48–50]. The most recent achievement in mastering Jint is repre- sented by a 0 − π phase-controllable thermal JJ. As depicted in Fig. 2g, the latter is embedded in a "pseudo" radio fre- quency (rf) SQUID containing three JJs, one of which sup- ports a lower Josephson critical current with respect to the others . This configuration enables the phase-biasing of the S1IS2 JJ from 0 to π (when the flux is varied from 0 to Φ0/2), thereby allowing to minimize or maximize JSIS and to obtain unprecedented temperature modulation amplitudes (∼ 100 mK at Tbath = 25 mK and ⟨T1⟩ ≃ 570 mK, as shown in Fig. 2h) and sensitivities to the magnetic flux exceeding 1 K/Φ0 . The fully superconducting nature of the device allows to efficiently suppress the influence of the electron- phonon coupling, leading to a remarkably high maximum op- erational temperature of 800 mK. Yet, as it will be clear from the next paragraphs, this structure realizes the fundamental re- quirement to obtain negative differential thermal conductance (NDTC) which is at the basis of non-linear thermal devices, such as tunnel heat diodes , thermal switches and tran- sistors . in particular for a thermal modulator. The latter consists of a three-terminal device in which two N electrodes acting as source and gate are tunnel coupled to the S1IS2 JJ and re- side at temperatures Thot and Tgate, respectively. The phase polarization of the JJ can be controlled from 0 to π by the "pseudo" rf SQUID that we just discussed. We also define Jsource as the thermal current flowing from the source to S1, Jgate as the heat current flowing from the gate to S1 and, lastly, Jdrain ≡ JSIS represents the thermal flow across the JJ. Now, it is worth noting that besides phase-coherence the heat cur- rent Jdrain exhibits another important feature. Figure 3b shows the calculated behavior of Jdrain as a function of T1 for a set drain temperature Tdrain and δ = ∆2(0)/∆1(0) = 0.75 [being ∆1,2(T1,2) the temperature-dependent energy gaps of S1 and S2, respectively ]. When ∆1(T1) = ∆2(T2), the heat cur- rent presents a sharp peak for φ ̸= 0, which is due to the matching of the singularities in the superconducting densities of states . At higher values of T1 we reach the condition in which ∆1 < ∆2 and the thermal transport across the JJ is reduced, giving rise to a region of NDTC. This effect is maxi- mum for φ = π, while the peak is perfectly canceled by Jint for φ = 0 . However, we can notice that the value of Jdrain is always positive, confirming that Jqp is always greater than Jint. A realistic system able to detect NDTC is the thermal coun- terpart of a tunnel diode (as the one envisioned in ), which could also serve as a solid-state thermal memory de- vice. Here, we just show how NDTC in a thermal modulator can generate heat amplification: changes in Jgate can induce a larger change in Jsource and Jdrain, leading to a heat amplifi- cation factor α ≡ |∂Jsource,drain/∂Jgate| > 1. Figure 3c shows the predicted behavior of Jsource and Jdrain when Thot > Tdrain and Tgate is varied as a control knob. It is clear how in region I the device can significantly reduce both Jsource and Jdrain while Jgate remains close to zero and almost constant. A more quan- titative analysis tells us that in this region the heat amplifica- tion factor tends to infinity, but α turns out to be greater than 1 also in region II, which is several hundreds of mK wide . Alternatively, it was shown that a thermal amplifier (able to increase both Jsource and Jdrain as Tgate is raised above Tdrain) can also be designed by simply switching the position of the JJ and the N source electrode . Even though the varia- tions of Jsource and Jdrain appear to be smaller than their abso- lute values, these devices represent the most accessible sys- tems in order to obtain the first experimental demonstration of heat amplification. In the last section, we will show how a more sophisticated device based on thermoelectric effect can represent a further step towards the realization of an efficient phase-coherent thermal amplifier . The last structure we wish to present in this section is a hy- brid thermal rectifier, a device that allows heat to flow pref- erentially in one direction. Even though the system is not phase-coherent, it proves the potential of superconducting hy- brid circuits as one of the best platforms to manipulate heat currents. The structure (whose schematic is shown in Fig. 3d) consists of a N1IN2ISIN3 chain that joins two theoretical pro- posals , and exhibits two different regimes of rectifi- cation. The first is based on the different temperature depen- dence of the DOSes of the N2 and S electrodes. Indeed, the temperature dependence of the superconducting energy gap breaks the directional symmetry of thermal transport through the simple N2IS junction . The second and most ef- ficient mechanism relies on the asymmetric release of energy from the device to the thermal bath thanks to the N4 probe acting as a cooling fin . In the experiment, the authors imposed a temperature gradient across the device by setting the electronic temperature of N1 and N3 to Thot in the forward and reverse thermal bias configuration, respectively (in Fig. 3d the device is depicted in the forward configuration). After- wards, they measured the output temperature of the struc- ture Tfw (Trev) of the electrode N3 (N1) in the forward (re- verse) configuration . As shown in Fig. 3e, a maximum δT = Trev −Tfw exceeding 60 mK was observed at Tbath = 50 mK and Thot ≃ 360 mK (full circles, left axis). The analysis of the data provided a rectification ratio R = Jfw/Jrev (solid line, right axis), where Jfw and Jrev are the heat currents flowing from S to N3 and from N2 to N1 in the two different tem- perature bias configurations. A significant maximum value of R ≃ 140 was obtained, which outscored previous experimen- tal results by more than two orders of magnitude . Fi- nally it is worthwhile to emphasize that this device can be eas- ily modified and combined with the interferometers discussed above to realize phase-coherent thermal rectifiers . SUPERCONDUCTING PROXIMITY STRUCTURES As mentioned in the introduction, the second approach to phase-coherent caloritronics is based on the superconducting proximity effect . When a normal metal (S’) is brought in contact with a superconductor, the superconducting order pa- rameter leaks out to the normal side. The main consequences of this effect are the changes in the local DOS and the induction of a finite pair amplitude in the normal metal. 6 -1 0 1 0.1 0.2 0.3 T1 / Tc 0 Jin norm = 1000 100 10 1 0.1 Je-phonon ()  S S’ -1 0 1 0.1 0.2 0.3 T1 / Tc 0 Thot / Tc = 0.77 0.46 0.30 0.15 0.07 S N JS’IN ()  Thot T1 Tbath Tunnel barrier S’ b a c d e f 0.01 0.1 1 10 -4 10 -2 10 0 T/Tc  N 0 0 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.5 1 10 0 10 1 10 2 10 3 10 4 T/Tc  0 0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 a system that can be exploited to detect the phase-cherent modula- tion of the heat current Je−phon due to the electron-phonon coupling in a proximity wire S’ (made of Cu) inserted in a superconducting loop S (made of Al with Tc = 1.3 K). The electrode S’ can be tun- nel coupled to other superconducting electrodes that can be used as Joule heaters and thermometers (not shown) . b. Calculated elec- tronic temperature T1 of the S’ electrode as a function of the mag- netic flux Φ threading the loop for different values of the normalized injected Joule power Jnorm in (for details, see ) at Tbath = 50 mK. c. Schematic representation of a proximity heat valve. The structure is similar to the one shown in panel a, but with a normal metal probe N (made of Al0.98Mn0.02) connected to S’ by means of a tunnel junction. When S and S’ are heated up to the electronic tem- perature Thot, the heat current JS′IN flows across the tunnel junction S’IN and its amplitude depends on the magnetic flux Φ. d. Calcu- lated electronic temperature T1 of the N electrode vs. Φ for different values of Thot at Tbath = 20 mK. In panels a, b, c and d, we assumed Thot > T1 > Tbath. e. Normalized thermal conductance κ/κN of the S’IN junction vs. T ≡ (Thot +T1)/2 calculated for Thot −T1 ≪ T and for different values of Φ. Here, κN is the normal state conductance. f. Normalized thermal conductance κ/κ0 as a function of T for dif- ferent values of Φ, where κ0 is the thermal conductance calculated for Φ = 0. In panels e and f, the Dynes parameter in S’ is assumed to be Γ = 10−4Eg . For instance, in a SS’S JJ the proximity effect generates a phase-tunable minigap Eg(φ) in the DOS of the weak-link that has a maximum for φ = 0 and vanishes for φ = π . This offers the opportunity to manipulate in a continuous fash- ion the thermal properties of the S’ electrode, including its electronic entropy and specific heat , which can be varied from those of a superconductor to those of a normal metal. Even more interesting, also the relaxation mechanisms existing in S’ can be controlled by tuning the value of Eg . Indeed, as noted in the introduction, the presence of the energy gap in the DOS exponentially suppresses the electron-phonon coupling in a superconductor . modulation of the electron-phonon coupling in a S’ weak-link assumed to be made of Cu. The latter interrupts an Al loop S (with Tc = 1.3 K) that is used to phase-polarize the JJ by means of an external magnetic flux Φ . When |Φ| = kΦ0 (being k an integer), Eg is maximum and by heating S’ the heat current Je−phon released by electrons to the phonon bath is minimized. Thus, for these values of Φ the S’ electronic temperature T1 reaches a maximum, whereas it shows a min- imum for semi-integer values of the flux quantum (i.e., for Eg = 0), as shown in Fig. 4b. The periodic modulations of T1 can exhibit a remarkable maximum amplitude of ∼ 30 mK at Tbath = 50 mK and for ⟨T1⟩ = 90 mK , but it is possible to envision an even more efficient way to exploit the phase- dependence of Eg. Indeed, one can think of the superconducting energy gap as a barrier for energy-carrying quasiparticles. The possibility to tune phase-coherently the height of this barrier leads promptly to the design of a valve for electronic heat currents . The proposed structure is shown on Fig. 4c, and consists of a SQUIPT [23–25], i.e. an Al loop S interrupted by a normal wire S’ (made of Cu), which is tunnel coupled to a normal metal probe N (made of Al0.98Mn0.02). If the electronic tem- perature of S and S’ is raised up to Thot, we can obtain mod- ulations of the N temperature T1 with amplitudes exceeding 100 mK at Tbath = 20 mK and ⟨T1⟩ = 100 mK. We stress that, although not yet experimentally proven, the approach described in this section has the potential to be very effective thanks to the ability to vary the thermal conductance of the S’IN junction by several orders of magnitude, as shown in Figs. 4e and 4f. This is in contrast to previous realizations of thermal Andreev interferometers [12–14] and to the Joseph- son circuits analyzed in the previous section, which are not able to control the incoherent component of the heat current Jqp. PHOTONIC HEAT TRANSISTORS Last approach to obtain phase control of heat currents is through the transport of thermal photons, which becomes the dominant mechanism when the phononic and the electronic channels are frozen . Figure 5a shows the first experi- mental configuration that was used to detect and phase control the photonic thermal transport between two N reservoirs with finite resistances R1 and R2 . When the electronic temper- ature of the left reservoir is raised up to T1 > Tbath, the elec- tromagnetic noise power radiated from this resistor generates a net photonic power Je−phot flowing towards the other reser- voir residing at temperature T2 (with T1 > T2 > Tbath). Since the dimensions of the circuit are typically much smaller than the photon thermal wavelength (λphot > 1 cm at temperatures 7 -1 0 1 90 100 110 120 160 60 75 102 114 T1 (mK) /0 Tbath (mK) = 147 -1 0 1 0 100 200 300 Thot (mK) 100 300 500 T2 (mK) /0 700 a  Je-phot () N N S c d b S   Je-phot () N N Thot T1 Tbath Tunnel barrier T2 used to demonstrate phase-coherent photonic heat conduction and its quantum limit. Two N reservoirs (made of palladium-gold) residing at T1 > T2 > Tbath are coupled by an intermediate circuit consisting of two DC SQUIDs made of Al, connected by superconducting lines in clean contact with the reservoirs. These lines act as ideal insula- tors for galvanic thermal transport between the N electrodes at low temperatures, thanks to the Andreev reflection mechanism and the presence of the energy gap. The magnetic flux Φ piercing the loops can vary the Josephson inductance of the SQUIDs, thus regulating the electromagnetic coupling between the N electrodes, and modulating the photonic heat current Je−phot(Φ). b. Electronic temperature T1 modulations as a function of Φ for a parasitic in- jected power of 1 fW and for different values of Tbath. Data are taken from . c. Sketch of a non-galvanic photon thermal transis- tor. In this case, the intermediate circuit is a DC SQUID (made of Al) inductively or capacitevily coupled to the N reservoirs (made of Al0.98Mn0.02). The temperature of the right reservoir T2 can be con- trolled by the change of the Josephson inductance when Φ is varied. d. Calculated magnetic interference pattern of T2 for different values of Thot at Tbath = 10 mK in the case of an inductive coupling. Here, we set a mutual inductance of 500 pH, the capacitance of the SQUID JJs of 2 fF and the maximum Josephson inductance of 250 pH. In all the panels we assumed Thot > T1 > T2 > Tbath. below 1 K) , it is possible to consider the structure as a lumped series of equivalent circuits . It has been shown that this circuital approach is equivalent to the analy- sis employing nonequilibrium Green’s functions . It can be demonstrated that Je−phot is proportional to a frequency- dependent transfer function : |Ztot(ω)|2 , (2) where Z1,2(ω) are the impedances of the N reservoirs, is the total series impedance of the circuit and Zc(ω) is the impedance of the coupling circuit. In the case depicted in Fig. 5a, the coupling circuit consists of two DC SQUIDs connected to the N elec- trodes [made of palladium-gold, with Je−ph ∼ (T 5 e − T 5 bath)] through superconducting Al lines, which act as ideal ther- mal insulators at low temperatures, thanks to the Andreev re- flection mechanism and the presence of the energy gap. The SQUIDs are equivalent to two LC circuits with a variable Josephson inductance that depends on the magnetic flux Φ piercing the loops. Thus, also T and Je−phot become flux-dependent, allowing a phase control of the photonic heat flux across the circuit. In this way, modulations of T1 (up to ∼ 6 mK of amplitude) as a function of Φ have been observed up to Tbath ≃ 150 mK and for ⟨T1⟩ slightly higher than Tbath, as shown in Fig. 5b. This experiment was one of the first demonstrations of phase-coherent caloritronics, and proved that photonic heat conduction can reach the quantum limit when Z1 = Z2 and Zc is minimized . One step beyond this experiment is based on the concept of a fully contactless photonic heat transistor , schematically represented in Fig. 5c. In this case, the N reser- voirs (assumed to be made of Al0.98Mn0.02) are inductively or capacitively coupled to the intermediate circuit, which is based on a DC SQUID. The latter can be treated as a purely reactive LC circuit with a variable Josephson inductance. By heating the left reservoir up to Thot yields flux-dependent T2 modulations in the other remote N electrode, as displayed by the calculated curves in Fig. 5d. These theoretical curves have been obtained by assuming an inductive coupling with a mutual inductance of 500 pH for different values of Thot at Tbath = 10 mK and show remarkably large modulations up to 200 mK for Thot = 700 mK and ⟨T2⟩ = 170 mK. Similar re- sults can be obtained via a capacitive coupling, which turns out to be even more efficient and accessible from the fabrica- tion point of view . The photonic method opens the way to the investigation and exploitation of non-galvanic thermal transport, which would lead to wireless electronic cooling and to the remote control of noise and decoherence in mesoscopic quantum circuits. Al- though its effectiveness is maximized in the case of N leads, it has been predicted that the photonic coupling between S leads could still produce a significant thermal flow (two orders of magnitude higher than that produced by the electron-phonon coupling) . This possibility could lead to non-galvanic refrigerators for superconducting quantum circuits, in which a precise qubit initialization is required. For instance, a SI- NIS cooler could be capacitively coupled by means of a DC SQUID to a part of the superconducting qubit struc- ture. For the same purpose, a notable alternative approach has been experimentally demonstrated by exploiting photon assisted tunneling in a NIS junction, which can be used as a quantum circuit refrigerator . It is also worth mentioning recent experimental results that proved quantum-limited heat conduction over macroscopic distances (up to a meter) , leading to even more possibilities for remote cooling. Finally, the same kind of systems could also be the basis of photonic thermal rectifiers . 8 a d b IT M S N F S’ N S JS’IN (F) S1 F (t) S2 Ibias JSIS,AC (t) T1 Tbath Tunnel barrier Ferromagnetic Insulator Tin Tout Tsupply c 70 140 210 Tin (mK) 0 90 60 30 Tout (mK) M G 0 10 30 Tin (mK) 90 60 30 20 M crowave Josephson refrigerator, which consists of a DC SQUID formed by two superconductors S1 and S2 biased by a small cur- rent Ibias. The superconducting loop is pierced by a time-dependent magnetic flux Φ(t) that can induce a finite voltage bias across the device, which generates a heat current JSIS,AC flowing through the JJs. The latter is used to cool the electronic temperature T1 of S1 below Tbath. In order to obtain an efficient cooling power, it is neces- sary to have δ ≡ ∆2(0)/∆1(0) > 1 and a finite capacitance of the JJs forming the SQUID to rectify JSIS,AC . b. Sketch of a phase-coherent thermal amplifier based on the thermoelectric effect in a normal metal-ferromagnetic insulator-superconductor junction (assumed to be made of Cu-europium sulfide-Al). When the input temperature Tin is increased above Tbath, a finite thermoelectric cur- rent can flow through a closed circuit including a superconducting coil. By means of the mutual inductance M, the latter generates a finite flux Φ that can control the thermal current flowing across a temperature-biased heat valve (presented in Fig. 4c). The S and S’ parts of the valve are biased at Tsupply, while the N electrode resides at the output temperature of the amplifier Tout . c. Calculated Tout vs. Tin for different values of M at Tbath = 10 mK and Tsupply = 250 mK. d. Temperature differential gain G = dTout/dTin as a function of Tin calculated for the curves shown in panel c. In panels c and d the arrows indicate increasing values of M. APPLICATIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS All the structures discussed above can be implemented by conventional nanofabrication techniques, i.e., electron beam lithography, shadow mask evaporation of metals and in-situ oxidation [3, 15, 19–22]. They would join the well-known systems used for heating, cooling and thermometry in meso- scopic superconducting circuits , which now embody a unique playground for investigating heat transport at the nanoscale. Moreover, this platform has already demonstrated that high levels of thermal isolation from the environment are achievable , showing significant room for improve- ment in the performance of caloritronic devices. Phase-coherent caloritronics would offer many new possi- bilities to this field, as for instance the microwave Joseph- son refrigerator shown in Fig. 6a. The latter consists of a DC SQUID made of two different superconductors S1 and S2 characterized by δ > 1 (indicating the thermal asym- metry in the system) and pierced by a time-dependent mag- netic flux Φ(t). The latter induces phase oscillations across the JJs, which generate a finite voltage bias across the device and leads to the active cooling of S1. The simplicity and the scalability of this system make it attractive for many super- conducting quantum circuits that could be cooled at distance, thanks to high frequency modulations of Φ(t). Together with thermal rectifiers and non-galvanic photonic refrigerators, this system could be useful to evacuate unwanted hot quasiparti- cles from qubit architectures in preparation for quantum oper- ations, thus improving their performance against decoherence. Beyond quantum information , phase-coherent caloritron- ics would certainly benefit many fields of nanoscience requir- ing an accurate administration of heat, including solid-state cooling , energy harvesting, thermal isolation and radia- tion detection . The advent of heat transistors and thermal memories could also pave the way to a new field called ther- mal logic , in which information is transferred, processed and stored under the form of energy. The latter could represent one of the most intriguing opportunities to exploit the (other- wise wasted) power dissipated by electronic circuits. In this context, another interesting proposal is an Al DC SQUID with a non-negligible inductance L. For significant values of L, the temperature interference pattern generated by the SQUID should exhibit a remarkable hysteresis, that could be used to obtain a thermal memory device . Furthermore, caloritronic superconducting circuits might be combined with hybrid platforms based on, e.g., semicon- ducting nanowires , graphene , ferromag- nets or ferromagnetic insulators (FI) [77–80], topological in- sulators [81–85] or low dimensional electronic devices to en- hance their functionalities. For instance, theoreti- cally analyzes a photonic heat transistor based on graphene reservoirs, whose carrier densities can be independently tuned thanks to two electrostatic gates. The latter can therefore con- trol the photonic transfer function and the electron-phonon coupling in each reservoir, leading to increased temperature modulation amplitudes . Even more interesting, Fig. 6b shows how the combination of a N-FI-S junction (assumed to be made of Cu-europium sulfide-Al) and a proximity heat valve, as the one discussed previously, can be used to design a very efficient temperature amplifier . When the input temperature Tin of the N elec- trode is increased above Tbath, a finite thermoelectric current IT can flow through a closed circuit including a superconducting coil. By means of the mutual inductance M, the latter gener- ates a finite flux Φ that can control the thermal current flowing across a temperature-biased heat valve (presented in Fig. 4c). The S and S’ parts of the valve are biased at Tsupply > Tbath, while the N electrode resides at the output temperature of the amplifier Tout. Fig. 6c displays the behavior of Tout as a func- tion of Tin for different values of M between the coil and the heat valve at Tbath = 10 mK and Tsupply = 250 mK. While the minimum and the maximum values of Tout are determined by 9 Tbath and Tsupply, the value of Tin corresponding to the maxi- mum output temperature decreases as the inductive coupling is raised. The temperature differential gain G = dTout/dTin is shown in Fig. 6d and exceeds 10 in a large range of parame- ters. Although appearing more challenging from a fabrication point of view, this device can provide output temperatures in the same range as its input temperatures, thus representing a crucial element for the realization of thermal logic gates . Finally, phase-coherent caloritronics can shed light on sev- eral fundamental energy- and heat-related phenomena at the nanoscale, such as quantum thermodynamics , heat trans- port in topological states of matter [81–85] and give rise to phase-coherent thermoelectric effects in superconducting hy- brid circuits [87–89].