Observation of the spin-polarized surface state in a noncentrosymmetric superconductor BiPd Madhab Neupane*,1 Nasser Alidoust*,2 M. Mofazzel Hosen*,1 Jian-Xin Zhu,3 Klauss Dimitri,1 Su-Yang Xu,2 Nagendra Dhakal,1 Raman Sankar,4 Ilya Belopolski,2 Daniel S. Sanchez,2 Tay-Rong Chang,5 Horng-Tay Jeng,5, 6 Koji Miyamoto,7 Taichi Okuda,7 Hsin Lin,8, 9 Arun Bansil,10 Dariusz Kaczorowski,11 Fangcheng Chou,4 M. Zahid Hasan,2 and Tomasz Durakiewicz12, 13 1Department of Physics, University of Central Florida, Orlando, Florida 32816, USA 2Joseph Henry Laboratory and Department of Physics, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08544, USA 3Theoretical Division and Center for Integrated Nanotechnologies, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA 4Center for Condensed Matter Sciences, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan 5Department of Physics, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan 6Institute of Physics, Academia Sinica, Taipei 11529, Taiwan 7Hiroshima Synchrotron Radiation Center, Hiroshima University, 2-313 Kagamiyama, Higashi-Hiroshima 739-0046, Japan 8Centre for Advanced 2D Materials and Graphene Research Centre, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117546 9Department of Physics, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117542 10Department of Physics, Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA 11Institute of Low Temperature and Structure Research, Polish Academy of Sciences, 50-950 Wroclaw, Poland 12Condensed Matter and Magnet Science Group, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA 13Institute of Physics, Maria Curie - Sklodowska University, 20-031 Lublin, Poland (Dated: November 13, 2021) 1 arXiv:1610.03431v1 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 11 Oct 2016 Abstract Recently, noncentrosymmetric superconductor BiPd has attracted considerable re- search interest due to the possibility of hosting topological superconductivity. Here we report a systematic high-resolution angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) and spin-resolved ARPES study of the normal state electronic and spin properties of BiPd. Our experimental results show the presence of a surface state at higher-binding energy with the location of Dirac point at around 700 meV below the Fermi level. The detailed photon energy, temperature-dependent and spin-resolved ARPES measurements complemented by our first-principles calculations demonstrate the existence of the spin polarized surface states at high-binding energy. The absence of such spin-polarized surface states near the Fermi level negates the possibility of a topological superconducting behavior on the surface. Our direct experimental ob- servation of spin-polarized surface states in BiPd provides critical information that will guide the future search for topological superconductivity in noncentrosymmetric materials. 2 Recently, noncentrosymmetric (NCS) superconductors (SCs) have attracted considerable research interest due to the possibility that they host several exotic states [1–3]. The lack of inversion symmetry creates an asymmetric potential gradient, which may split the electron bands by lifting the spin degeneracy, allowing hybrid-pairing of spin-singlet and spin-triplet states within the same orbital channel [1, 3–5]. Furthermore, with the advent of topological insulators [2, 3, 7–15, 18], it was recently proposed that NCS SCs with a strong spin-orbit coupling are potential candidates for realizing topological superconductivity [19–22], holding promise for hosting protected Majorana surface states . But so far, evidence of topological surface states in noncentrosymmetric materials is still lacking. Such convincing evidence may be obtained by angle- and spin-resolved photoemission, which provides an energy- and momentum-resolved probe of the electronic and spin structure. A NCS system provides a good platform to look for exotic states such as the Weyl semimetal in TaAs and the topological nodal-line phase in PbTaSe2 . Another NCS SC BiPd can provide a platform to study the interplay of spin-orbit coupling (SOC) effects with superconductivity. This compound undergoes a structural transition from β - BiPd (orthorhombic) to α - BiPd (monoclinic) at 210 ◦C and then becomes superconducting at the transition temperature (Tc) ∼ 3.7 K . In comparison to many other NCS SCs, BiPd is a weakly correlated compound possessing a heavy atom, Bi. Measurements by point-contact spectroscopy and nuclear quadrupole resonance (NQR) indicate a complex gap structure in BiPd, which might be caused by the lack of inversion symmetry . Recent scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) measurements reveal that the superconducting state of BiPd appears to be topologically trivial, consistent with Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer theory with an s-wave order parameter . Further momentum and spin-resolved experimental evi- dence is highly desirable in order to establish the presence of topological Dirac surface states, and to study the underlying microscopic mechanism of superconductivity. A detailed high- resolution angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) and spin-resolved ARPES study is necessary to prove or disprove the topological nature of the surface states in the normal state of BiPd. Such a characterization of the normal state is currently missing, but necessary and needed as a first step towards opening a discussion on the relationship between superconductivity and the topological properties of NCS systems. In this paper, we report the experimental observation of spin-polarized surface states in the NCS material BiPd using ARPES and spin-resolved ARPES. Our experimental results 3 show the presence of a surface state at higher-binding energy, with the Dirac node located at around 700 meV below the Fermi level. Furthermore, the Dirac node located at around 650 meV below the Fermi level is also observed for different surface cleaving, providing direct evidence for the noncentrosymmetic crystal structure presented in BiPd. Our measurements suggest that the observed states may be topological in nature. Our results are further supported by our first-principles calculations. The absence of spin-polarized surface states near the Fermi level of BiPd negates the possibility that this system might host topological superconductivity on the surface. Results Crystal structure and sample characterization. The crystal structure of BiPd at low temperatures (< 210 ◦C) has a monoclinic unit cell with a = 5.63 ̊A, b = 10.66 ̊A, c = 5.68 ̊A, α = γ = 90◦, and β = 101◦ with the b axis being as its unique axis (see Fig. 1a; Ref. ). Detailed characterization of the single crystals used in our study indicated their high quality (see Supplementary Figure 1-7; Supplementary Note 1-4; Supplementary