A full superconducting dome of strong Ising protection in gated monolayer WS2 J. M. Lu1, O. Zheliuk1, Q. H. Chen1,2, I. Leermakers3, N. E. Hussey3, U. Zeitler3, and J. T. Ye1* 1 Device Physics of Complex Materials, Zernike Institute for Advanced Materials, Nijenborgh 4, 9747 AG, Groningen, The Netherlands 2 Department of Physics, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong, China 3 High Field Magnet Laboratory (HFML-EMFL), Radboud University, Toernooiveld 7, 6525 ED Nijmegen, The Netherlands Many recent studies show that superconductivity not only exists in atomically thin monolayers but can exhibit enhanced properties such as higher transition temperature and stronger critical field. Nevertheless, besides being air unstable, weak tunability in these intrinsically metallic monolayers has posed a severe limitation in exploring monolayer superconductivity, hence hindering possible applications in electronic devices. Using field effect gating, we prepared monolayer superconductivity in easily accessible CVD-grown WS2, a typical ambient stable semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD). Here, we present a complete set of competitive electronic phases over an unprecedented range from band insulator, superconductor, to an unexpected re-entrant insulator. Throughout the superconducting dome, the Cooper pair spin is pinned by a strong internal spin-orbit interaction, making this material arguably the most resilient superconductor in a magnetic field. The re-entrant insulating state at positive high gating voltages is plausibly attributed to localization induced by the characteristically weak screening of the monolayer, providing the key insight into many dome- like superconducting phases observed in field induced quasi-2D superconductors. *email address: j.ye@rug.nl Reducing the dimensionality from three (3D) to two (2D) often conserves the fundamental electronic properties while simplifies theoretical approaches, making 2D a fruitful dimensionality allowing exact solutions of many important physical models1,2. Physically, although quantum confinement increases gradually with reduced thickness, significant modification of electronic states is often observed when approaching the monolayer limit: e.g. producing a massless Dirac band in graphene3 and changing the band gap from indirect to direct in MoS2 4. On the other hand, the dimensionality of a system is not an invariable but rather related to specific microscopic regimes5 since it is determined by comparing the geometrical thickness d with fundamental electronic length scales such as the phase coherence length, the Fermi wavelength λ! and the superconducting coherence length ξ. For instance, 2D superconductivity is well established in amorphous films of superconducting metals6 far thicker than a single atom because ξ can easily exceed d. However, due to large carrier density in metals, λF of diffusive electrons appearing after a quantum phase transition is typically only a few angstroms, which is usually smaller than d. This means that the transition is associated with a dimensional crossover from a 2D superconductor to a quasi-2D diffusive system. Similarly, this dimensional crossover has been widely observed in interface superconductors and cuprates approaching the optimal gating and doping, respectively7,8. These imposed requirements have motivated the search of truly monolayer superconductors. Recently, epitaxial growth on optimized substrates for single-atomic thick metal films9–11 (Pb, In, Ga etc.), monolayer FeSe12, monolayer cuprates13,14, Heavy Fermion15 systems and organic superconductors16 can satisfy the requirements whereas they show strong interaction with the substrates, making the truly 2D systems still in debate. In particular, the electronic and vibrational couplings in the third dimension are responsible for a reduced critical temperature Tc in metallic monolayers and a significant enhanced Tc in FeSe, respectively. Naturally, van-der-Waals layered materials17,18 are 2D systems where electrons are mainly confined in a covalently bonded crystalline plane. Therefore, by breaking the van-der-Waals stacking, monolayer superconducting TMD (such as NbSe2 19,20) and high-temperature superconductor cuprate14 could exhibit truly 2D characteristics. However, due to the large intrinsic carrier density, switching electronic phases in these superconductors appears difficult21,22. Here we demonstrate that semiconducting TMD monolayers WS2, where both carrier tunability and true 2D characteristics are accessible, provide the unique all-round option for field effect control of various quantum phases. By field effect gating, WS2 flakes evolve from a direct band insulator to metallic states, which develop into Ising superconductivity20,23,24 at low temperatures. The significant spin-orbit coupling in the conduction band leads to the robust Ising superconductivity against external in-plane magnetic fields. Beyond the peak of the superconducting dome, with increasing gate bias normal state becomes more resistive and insulating behavior emerges, which grows to be more pronounced and eventually quenches the superconducting dome. Monolayer WS2 is grown by chemical vapor deposition. The high quality of the as-grown crystalline sheets is confirmed by strong photoluminescence (PL) and mobility of μ ~300 cm2/Vs at 10 K and the optimal gating, which are comparable or higher than cleaved counterparts25 (Fig. S1). An electronically homogeneous part showing a uniform PL is isolated by etching a standard Hall-bar from a pristine triangular monolayer (see Method) and we fabricated a device with a dual gate configuration composed of an ionic liquid as a top gate (VTG) and a dielectric back gate (285 nm SiO2, VBG) as shown in Fig. 1a. This dual-gating method allows the coarse and fine electrostatic control of quantum phases: applying firstly a maximal ionic gate at T ~220 K we can introduce the strongest electrostatic field effect, which is subsequently fixed by freezing the ionic liquid below its glass transition temperature Tg ~190 K. By grounding the ionic gate and sequentially warming the device slightly above Tg, we are then able to create dense coarse doping states (colour coded in Fig. 1b), which can then be seamlessly linked at low temperatures by VBG. The quasi-continuous transfer curve thus obtained (black curve in Fig. 1b) determines electronic phases as a function of effective gate voltage Veff (Methods). Note that on the two sides of the optimal doping, the dependence of Hall carrier density on the Veff are opposite: positive on the left while negative on the right. Around optimal doping, there is a crossover linking two monotonic correspondences (as elaborated in Fig. S2 and S3). Therefore, we use Veff instead of Hall carrier density for labeling states for the whole spectrum of their variation. Although a simple capacitance model cannot be applied straightforwardly in our dual gated device26, the Veff generally corresponds to the charge carriers injected into the sample, which is equivalent to the nominal stoichiometry of intercalated/doped bulk compound. The Veff dependence of the square resistance Rs whole spectrum of electronic states. Amid two insulating phases, metallic transport appears at medium Veff with a superconducting ground state. At Veff = 1130 V, optimal transport shows the lowest Rs and the highest superconducting transition temperature Tc. The sheet resistance Rs as a function of temperature at the left and the right sides of optimal doping is shown in Fig. 1c and d, respectively. The curves show that superconducting ground states emerge from an insulating state (dRs/dT < 0, Fig. 1c) when approaching optimal doping from low gating and quench into another re-entrant insulating state at high gating (Fig 1d). This exemplifies how a full spectrum of electronic phases can be prepared using a single tuning parameter Veff, where properties of quantum phases such as quantitative dependence of superconductivity on the Veff (insets in Fig. 1c and d) can be analyzed in detail. The critical temperature Tc is determined by widely used 50% of normal state resistance. A full phase diagram is shown in Fig. 2, with a superconducting dome ranging from Veff = 0.8 to 1.6 kV. The Veff dependence of Hall carrier density nHall (lower panel, Fig. 2) show a clear correlation to the superconducting dome indicating Tc is mainly driven by nHall. Nevertheless, the discrepancy in Veff between maxima of Tc = 4.15 K and nHall (10 K) = 3.3×1013 cm-2 may indicate Tc is affected by electron-impurity scattering rate as wellwhich can be inferred from the opposite Veff dependence of carrier mobility μ (T = 10 K, right axis in lower panel of Fig.2) extracted from Rs (Fig.1b) below and above the Tc maxima. Notably in MoS2 27, the similarly gated superconducting dome shows Tc ∝ (n2D- n0)zv, where zv ~ 0.6 are the product of exponents for correlation length and correlation time in scaling theory5,28,29, in analogy to that for LaSrO3/SrTiO3 interfaces7. In the present monolayer superconductor, limited temperature range cannot resolve the scaling exponents and exact locations of two quantum critical points (QCPs, denoted roughly by two dashed circles); nevertheless, the voltage dependence of Tc does not contradict the relationship in the above two systems. In many quasi-2D superconductors7,30,31 quasi-metallic (qM) regions are speculated5, in which Rs shows temperature dependence weaker than exponential although overall dR! dT < 0. Here, we define Tmin as temperature when Rs reaches a minimum (Fig. 1c, d) plausibly resulting from competition between electron-phonon (e–ph) scattering and Anderson localization. In Fig. 2, the trace of Tmin (empty square, upper panel) marks the boundary of the qM regime. It is worth noting that the qM region here is identified from a finite-size sample at finite temperatures which might crossover to an insulator at lower temperatures and/or in larger samples7. We leave this question open to the future experiments at ultralow temperatures. The unique feature of 2D superconductivity in monolayer WS2 is the Ising pairing20,23,24 originated from valley coupled spin texture of monolayer TMDs. Here, the spins in Cooper pairs are pinned by strong out-of-plane effective magnetic field, originated from an intrinsic Zeeman type spin- orbit interaction (SOC) pointing oppositely in K/K’ valleys (inset to Fig. 3b). Hence, a Zeeman field – normally the universal pair breaking mechanism in other superconductors – strongly protects the Cooper pair against the orthogonal in-plane external magnetic field. Compared with other quasi-2D Ising superconductors such as ion-gated multilayer MoS2 23,24 where the electronic wave function is confined in the uppermost layer and Ising pairing is protected by SOC ~ 6 meV, a much heavier transition metal in WS2 monolayer provides a five times larger SOC32 (~30 meV) suggesting even higher in-plane upper critical field Bc2 due to stronger Ising protection. Guided by the established phase diagram shown in Fig. 2a, we induced superconductivity in another sample B (inset of Fig. 3a, optimal Tc = 3.15 K using 50% of RN criteria) and measured Bc2 of three representative states at the left side (upper panel, Fig. 3a), peak (middle panel), and right side (bottom panel) of the dome, respectively. For all measurements, the 50% of RN standard was used for determining Bc2. Near the left QCP, where relatively weak electric fields cause a minimum Rashba effect23, the strongest Ising protection was measured (Fig. 3a, upper panel): Tc = 1.54 K only shifted by ΔTc = 0.08 K for an in-plane field as high as B = 35 T. Following mean-field theory23 (also Methods), we can estimate the contribution of Zeeman type SOC and Rashba effect to the enhancement of Bc2 (relative to the Pauli limit Bp = 1.86 Tc,); the comparison to the experimental data (solid red points) is shown in Fig. 3b (red line) Considering Rashba effect created by the strong field of ionic gating in the order of 0.7 meV, which is similar to that found near the left QCP of MoS2 23, the obtained Zeeman type SOC equals to 30 meV, consistent with theoretical calculation. Neglecting Rashba contribution, our data sets the lower bound of 19.5 meV for Zeeman SOC. Because of the very large Bc2, for the states at the peak (Fig. 3a, middle panel) and right side (Fig. 3a, bottom panel) of the dome, the change of Tc at maximum B = 12 T is below the measurement accuracy for extracting quantitative values of the SOC. In Fig. 3b, we compared the Bc2/Bp of other superconductors where the very large Bc2 violating significantly the Pauli limit was also observed. For the gated monolayer WS2, the Bc2/Bp is at least as large as in the UCoGe33 and the sub-monolayer Pb film34 protected by triplet pairing and Rashba effect, respectively. It is much larger than other recently discovered Ising-protected superconductors such as multilayer MoS2 23 and monolayer NbSe2 20. It is noteworthy that the Zeeman SOC in the NbSe2 (~70 meV, valence band) is even larger than that in both MoS2 (~ 6 meV) and WS2 (~30 meV), whereas the effect of protection in the monolayer NbSe2 and the bulk (LaSe)1.14(NbSe2)35 (approaching decoupled monolayers at low temperature) merely approaches Bc2 of the gated MoS2. A similar mismatch also appears in the TaS2(Py)0.5 where pairing is also in valence band36. This discrepancy could be influenced by a competing charge density wave (CDW) phase and the contributions from a spin degenerate Γ point37, which might effectively weaken the strong Ising pairing formed at the K/K’ valleys of NbSe2 and TaS2. The highly unexpected feature is the reversible re-entrance into a strongly insulating state at high Veff. The signature of this fully insulating state has been observed in many systems manifesting as mobility peaks2,38–40. Especially, in ion-gated devices, universal conductivity peak under strong gating has been observed in a narrow band (rubrene38 and ReS2 41) and wide band materials (silicon inversion layer39 and multilayer WSe2 40). This material-independent characteristic may rule out many exotic mechanisms such as the opening of Mott42, CDW43, Kondo44 gaps or strong correlation45,46 that might cause insulating behaviors as well. To address this universal insulator, we focus on the common fact that all the above examples involve ionic gating. A direct comparison in Arrhenius plots (Fig. 4a) yields similar behavior at high temperature for the insulator (left to the dome) and the most insulating states of re-entrant insulator (right to the dome). Without knowledge of underlying transport mechanisms, we extract characteristic energy scale using activation model. As shown in Fig. 4b, although the two energy scales are similar in magnitude, the signs of their dependencies on the Veff are opposite. The temperature dependence of nHall also confirms insulating behavior at large Veff, manifesting as freeze-out of carriers for a large range of gate voltages including the whole superconducting range (Veff from 0.8 to 1.6 kV, Fig. 4c). In contrast, a nearly temperature independent nHall is observed only in the qM region near the left QCP at low Veff. To account for the anomalous re-entrant insulator, we propose a scenario of a Veff dependent band variation as sketched in Fig. 4d. In our truly 2D system, weak out-of-plane screening2 exposes induced carriers directly to the potential of ions lying on the surface. The localization effect depends on the distance l between induced carriers and charge centers of the cations (Fig. 4d). At low Veff << 1.1 kV, ions accumulated by weak electric field create a uniform average potential, while at large Veff >> 1.1 kV, the discreteness of ions at a reduced l due to the strong electric field can no longer be averaged out by characteristically weak screening in 2D. Hence, the increased randomness enlarges the band tail (Fig. 4e) where more carriers localize, reducing the number of free carriers available for band transport. In the high gating limit, every induced carrier is localized/bounded on site by the potential of an adjacent ion, i.e., forming electrons-cation pair mimicking hydrogen impurity model (Fig. 4e, right panel). Strongly localized electrons in the re-entrance regime would form impurity band reducing Fermi level with the increase of gate voltage. When the temperature is sufficiently low, instead of thermal activation to the conduction band, hopping between localization centers is more plausible to dominate the transport. With this physical picture in mind, we can understand the shift in maxima between nHall (10K) and Tc (Fig. 2) in the phase diagram. Starting from Veff ~ 1130 V where Tc peaks, nHall decreases from 160 to 10 K with increasing ΔnHall, due to the increasing localization at higher Veff. The localization of induced carriers forms neutralized Coulomb traps (Fig. 4d, dashed line) as short-range scattering centers causing a suppression of Tc at a relatively high carrier density and a decrease in mobility (Fig. 2 lower panel). As a result, the interplay between carrier and disorder shapes the superconducting dome versus Veff. Considering that electrostatic gating by polarising dielectrics (polarised dipole) and ionic media (cation–anion pair) are equivalent, the competing quantum phases induced in the present study represents the high field limit in respect of superconducting domes reported previously7,27,47–49 (Fig. S5), where either a very strong field effect or an isolated monolayer crystal is missing. In this truly 2D system, localized states can now be easily formed because of the slow decay of ion potential as ~1/r3 at a distance r from the ion indicating that any disorder in the potential landscape has a long-range effect2. In contrast, in quasi-2D cases, gate induced carriers always extend to a finite thickness; strong gating populates multiple sub-bands causing crossover to 3D, which enhances screening thus reduces carrier localization. In this sense, the present mechanism of quantum phases evolution provides a clear understanding of the power law/logarithmic correction in the normal state of ion-gated rubrene38 and silicon39 as the precursor of re-entrance and universally observed superconducting dome in gated KTaO3 47, multilayer MoS2 27, ZrNCl48 and TiSe2 49, as well as LaAlO3/SrTiO3 7,31 interface, where accessing the right QCP and the insulating state subsequent to the superconducting dome are prohibited by the enhanced screening in these quasi-2D systems.