Enhancement of the upper critical field in disordered transition metal dichalcogenide monolayers Stefan Ili МҒc, Julia S. Meyer, and Manuel Houzet Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CEA, INAC-PHELIQS, F-38000 Grenoble, France We calculate the effect of impurities on the superconducting phase diagram of transition metal dichalcogenide monolayers in the presence of an in-plane magnetic field. Due to strong intrinsic spin- orbit coupling, the upper critical field greatly surpasses the Pauli limit at low temperatures. We find that it is insensitive to intravalley scattering and, ultimately, limited by intervalley scattering. Introduction.- Transition metal dichalcogenide (TMDC) monolayers are recently discovered two- dimensional (2D) semiconductors of the form MX2 (M=Mo, Nb, or W, and X=S, Se, or Te), with a hexag- onal lattice structure similar to graphene, but with two inequivalent sites in the unit cell . Like graphene, these materials exhibit a valley degree of freedom and have minima/maxima of conduction/valence bands at the corners K and вҲ’K of the Brillouin zone . Unlike graphene, however, the absence of inversion symmetry allows for a large, direct band gap, making them promising candidates for a new generation of transistors . Due to the heavy constituent atoms, TMDC mono- layers exhibit a very large intrinsic spin-orbit coupling (SOC), often called Ising SOC , which acts as an effec- tive Zeeman field perpendicular to the plane of the ma- terial with opposite orientations in the two valleys [6вҖ“8]. As a consequence, a large valley-dependent spin-splitting occurs in the valence band as well as in the conduction band, though with a much smaller magnitude (due to the predominant dx2вҲ’y2 Вұ idxy and dz2 orbital character of carriers, respectively). Recent optical investigations have confirmed that electrons from different valleys can be ex- cited selectively with circularly polarized light . These properties open the door for novel applications in spintronics and so-called valleytronics . The coupling between the spin and valley degrees of freedom has remarkable repercussions for the supercon- ducting properties that have been reported in these ma- terials. In heavily n-doped ionic-gated MoS2 flakes, a 2D superconducting phase with a critical temperature Tc around 10 K has been observed . Interestingly, the in-plane upper critical field Hc2 reaches up to 60 T, thus greatly surpassing the Pauli limit, HP = вҲҡ 2вҲҶ0/(gОјB), where вҲҶ0 вүғ 1.76kBTc, ОјB is the Bohr magneton, and g the g-factor. This is interpreted as a consequence of the interplay of Ising SOC and the 2D nature of the materials. Namely, in 2D materials the orbital pair- breaking effect is largely suppressed for an in-plane mag- netic field . On the other hand, due to the Ising SOC, the in-plane magnetic field is also not efficient for breaking Cooper pairs by the paramagnetic effect, as they are formed of electrons in opposite valleys with strongly pinned out-of-plane spins. Related results have also been reported in superconducting NbSe2 monolayers in the p- doped regime . Existing theories only considered the clean case and do not describe all the experimen- tal observations. In this work, we establish the theory of the upper crit- ical field for Ising superconductors at arbitrary disorder strength, assuming a conventional s-wave Cooper pair- ing. The enhancement of the in-plane upper critical field above the Pauli limit is a general feature of supercon- ductivity in the presence of SOC. It has been predicted in disordered 2D superconductors with spin-orbit scat- tering or Rashba SOC . The latter has been invoked to interpret recent experiments on oxide inter- faces and Pb monolayer films . Ising SOC leads to qualitatively different effects. Using a simple model, we show that Ising superconductivity results in a much larger enhancement and exhibits several new and inter- esting properties. Namely, Hc2 diverges at low tempera- ture вҖ“ a phenomenon which is robust to intravalley scat- tering. On the other hand, intervalley scattering provides an effective spin-flip scattering mechanism and leads to the saturation of Hc2, consistent with the experimental findings. Furthermore, we show that, in contrast with Rashba SOC , Ising SOC does not stabilize a spa- tially non-uniform superconducting phase. Understanding the role of impurities is important for future applications of TMDCs and their incorporation into van der Waals heterostructures . The doping techniques used to prepare the superconducting samples, as well as the defects in the crystal lattice could be the source of significant disorder. Recent weak localization measurements in MoS2 monolayers suggest substantial intervalley scattering, attributed to a high concentration of sulfur vacancies in the monolayer . Our result will contribute to identifying the superconducting properties of these materials in the presence of disorder and assess their potential for applications such as in superconduct- ing spintronics. The model.- The Hamiltonian describing the normal state of TMDC monolayers in the vicinity of the ВұK points in the presence of a parallel magnetic field is (we use units, where М„h = kB = 1): Hq = v(qxПғxО·z + qyПғy) + EgПғz (1) arXiv:1705.01865v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 16 Jun 2017 2 Here, q = (qx, qy) is a small momentum measured from ВұK, v is the velocity associated with the linearized ki- netic dispersion, Eg is the difference in on-site energy responsible for the opening of a band gap, and вҲҶA and вҲҶB are spin-splitting parameters on two different sub- lattices. Furthermore, Пғx,y,z, sx,y,z, and О·x,y,z are Pauli matrices acting in sublattice, spin, and valley spaces, re- spectively, and the Zeeman energy h = 1 2gОјBB is related with the amplitude of the magnetic field and the in-plane g-factor. Schematic representation of the conduction band of TMDC monolayers in the vicinity of the corners of the Brillouin zone as described by Eq. (2). The spin splitting in the two valleys is opposite due to the so-called Ising SOC. We proceed by projecting the Hamiltonian (1) to the conduction band (n-doped regime). The spin- independent part of the Hamiltonian (1) gives the dominant contribution to the energy of the system and has a simple spectrum Оҫq = пҝҪ v2|q|2 + E2g. It is diagonalized by the unitary transformation Uq = tan(2ОІq) = qy/qx. By assuming Оҫq вү« вҲҶA, вҲҶB and by projecting UqHqU вҖ  q onto the conduction band, we obtain HО·q = Оҫq + О·вҲҶso(q)sz + hsx, (2) where О· = Вұ1 represents the valley index and вҲҶso(q) = 1/2[вҲҶA вҲ’ вҲҶB + (вҲҶA + вҲҶB)Eg/Оҫq] is an effective SOC parameter . A Hamiltonian similar to Eq. (2) with Оҫq вҶ’ вҲ’Оҫq holds in the valence band (p-doped regime). Below, we will assume that the chemical potential Ој is sufficiently far above Eg on the relevant en- ergy scales determining the superconducting properties (h, вҲҶ, T, В· В· В· вүӘ |Ој вҲ’ Eg|), so that вҲҶso can be taken as a constant. The energy spectrum of Hamiltonian (3) is illustrated in Fig. 1. Superconductivity is described using a standard BCS Hamiltonian, where the singlet pairing of electrons into Cooper pairs is necessarily intervalley. The correspond- ing mean-field Hamiltonian reads HBCS = пҝҪ О·q cвҖ  О·qHО·qcО·q + вҲҶ пҝҪ О·q cвҖ  О·qвҶ‘cвҖ  М„О· М„qвҶ“ + h.c., (3) where cО·q = (cО·qвҶ‘, cО·qвҶ“)T is an annihilation operator for spin-up and spin-down electrons, and вҲҶ is the supercon- ducting order parameter. For compactness, we use the abbreviations М„О· = вҲ’О· and М„q = вҲ’q. In the vicinity of the second-order superconducting phase transition, вҲҶ solves the linearized self-consistent gap equation вҲҶ = О»T 4 пҝҪ О·,q,|Пү|<О© Tr[isyG+ М„О· М„qПүвҲҶisyGвҲ’ О·qПү], (4) where О» is the BCS pairing amplitude and О© is a cut-off frequency. The particle and hole GreenвҖҷs functions are given as GвҲ’ О·qПү = (iПүвҲ’HО·q)вҲ’1 and G+ О·qПү = (вҲ’iПүвҲ’HT О·q)вҲ’1, respectively, with Matsubara frequencies Пү = (2n+1)ПҖT, n вҲҲ Z, at temperature T. Scattering potential.- The effect of impurities in 2D hexagonal lattices was extensively studied in the case of graphene . Here we study the dominant scat- tering terms, namely spin-independent intra- and inter- valley scattering, which may originate from long-range Coulomb interactions or defects in the lattice. Their con- tribution, expressed in the same basis as the normal state Hamiltonian (1), reads HD(q вҲ’ qвҖІ) = V1(q вҲ’ qвҖІ) + пҝҪ i=x,y V2i(q вҲ’ qвҖІ)О·i. (5) The random disorder potentials are characterized by the Gaussian correlators вҹЁVОұ(q)VОІ( М„qвҖІ)вҹ© = w2 ОұОҙОұ,ОІОҙq,qвҖІ, where Оұ, ОІ = 1, 2x, 2y, and the brackets denote disorder aver- aging. The ratio w2i/w1 вҲј 1/(|K|2R2), which is related with the range R of the potential created by a single impurity, is typically small for remote impurities and of order 1 for lattice defects. Then, projecting the Hamiltonian UqHD(q вҲ’ qвҖІ)U вҖ  qвҖІ onto the conduction band, we find that Eq. (3) has to be supplemented with the disorder term HD = пҝҪ О·qqвҖІ V1qqвҖІcвҖ  О·qcО·qвҖІ + V2qqвҖІcвҖ  О·qc М„О·qвҖІ + h.c., (6) where V1qqвҖІ = V1(q вҲ’ qвҖІ) cos ОёвҲ’ОёвҖІ 2 and V2qqвҖІ = [iV2x(q вҲ’ qвҖІ) + V2y(q вҲ’ qвҖІ)] sin Оё+ОёвҖІ 2 with q(вҖІ) = The disorder-averaged GreenвҖҷs function can be calcu- lated from the Dyson equation represented diagrammat- ically in Fig. 2. That is, вҹЁGВұ О·qПүвҹ© = (GВұ О·qПү вҲ’1 вҲ’ ОЈВұ О· )вҲ’1, where the self-energy ОЈВұ О· is obtained using the self- consistent Born approximation. As a result, we find ОЈВұ 1 and 1/П„2 = ПҖОҪ(w2 2x + w2 2y) are the intra- and intervalley elastic scattering rates, respectively, ОҪ = Ој/(2ПҖv2 F ) is the density of states per spin at the Fermi level, and vF is the Fermi velocity. Upper critical line.- The upper critical field hc2(T) = 1 2gОјBHc2(T) can be calculated from the disorder- averaged gap equation (4). This involves finding the av- erages of the products of two GreenвҖҷs functions, which 3 Diagrammatic representation of the Dyson equation and the self-energy in the self-consistent Born approximation. The thin arrow represents the вҖңbareвҖқ, disorder-free GreenвҖҷs function GВұ О· , while the thick arrow is the disorder-averaged GreenвҖҷs function вҹЁGВұ О· вҹ©. The dashed and dot-dashed impurity lines represent intra- and intervalley scattering events, respec- tively. we do in the standard ladder approximation, as shown in Fig. 3(a). The first diagram represents the bare ver- (a) Diagrammatic representation of the disorder- averaged self-consistency condition given by Eq. (4). (b) Bethe-Salpeter equation for the renormalized vertex functions О ssвҖІ О· . For the definition of diagram elements, see Fig. 2. We use the abbreviation М„s = вҲ’s. tex, while the second one is a ladder diagram, expressed in terms of eight vertex functions О ssвҖІ О· (4 combinations of spin indices and 2 values of the valley index), which solve coupled Bethe-Salpeter equations, see Fig. 3(b). Solv- ing these equations yields a remarkably simple expres- sion : ln T Tc = 2ПҖT пҝҪ Пү>0 пҝҪ Пү(Пү + 1 П„2 ) + вҲҶ2 so (Пү + 1 П„2 )(Пү2 + h2 c2 + вҲҶ2so) вҲ’ вҲҶ2so П„2 вҲ’ 1 Пү пҝҪ , (7) where we used the standard BCS result Tc вүғ 1.13О©eвҲ’1/(О»ОҪ). Note that Eq. (7) holds for arbitrary val- ues of the intravalley scattering rate. Below we analyze this equation, which is the main result of this Letter. Without intervalley scattering.- In the absence of in- tervalley scattering, 1/П„2 = 0, the critical line given by Eq. (7) does not depend on disorder (Anderson theorem). In that case, Eq. (7) can be alternatively expressed as ln Tc T = h2 c2 h2 c2 + вҲҶ2so R пҝҪ ПҲ пҝҪ1 2 + i пҝҪ h2 c2 + вҲҶ2so 2ПҖT пҝҪ вҲ’ ПҲ пҝҪ1 2 пҝҪпҝҪ , (8) where ПҲ(z) is the digamma function. In this form, it ressembles вҖ“ and generalizes to arbitrary disorder вҖ“ an expression derived by Frigeri et al. in the clean case. It also reproduces the results of Ref. , where the linearized gap equation was solved numerically in the disorder-free case, using a complex multi-band model. The result can be understood as follows. The ef- fective magnetic field in the two valleys is given by heff О· = hex + О·вҲҶsoez, where ei is a unit vector in the i- direction. Electrons that are both aligned or anti-aligned with their respective вҖңlocalвҖқ field have the same energy when their momenta are opposite and, thus, their contri- bution to pairing is not affected by the field. As at finite h the local fields are not along the same axis, however, they enter the gap equation with a suppressed weight вҲҶ2 so/(h2 + вҲҶ2 so), determined by the overlap of their spin directions. If one electron is aligned whereas the other electron is anti-aligned with their respective вҖңlocalвҖқ field, they have an energy difference of 2 пҝҪ h2 + вҲҶ2so when their momenta are opposite and, thus, their contribution to pairing is suppressed by the field. Here the weight is given as h2/(h2 +вҲҶ2 so), which is what appears in Eq. (8). Since intravalley scattering does not allow for spin flips, it does not change the result. Upper critical field as a function of temperature in the absence of intervalley scattering for different values of Ising SOC, as described by Eq. (8). The plot on the right shows the same result but with a different scale for the x-axis to illustrate the logarithmic divergence at low temperature when вҲҶso Мё= 0. As seen in Fig. 4, hc2 is enhanced in the presence of spin-orbit coupling, especially at low temperatures. In fact, it diverges in the zero-temperature limit for finite вҲҶso. Physically, this can be understood as a consequence of the inability of the Zeeman field to completely align the electron spins in the in-plane orientation, due to the anti-parallel out-of-plane field provided by the Ising SOC. For weak Ising SOC (вҲҶso вүӘ вҲҶ0), the critical curve hc2(T) significantly deviates from the conventional one 4 Upper critical field as a function of the temperature for various strengths of Ising SOC and intervalley scattering: (a) (c)] gives a good fit of the experimental data from Ref. taking the g-factor to be g = 2. only at very low temperature, where it diverges (in loga- rithmic accuracy) as hc2 вҲқ вҲҶso пҝҪ ln Tc T for T Tc вүӘ exp пҝҪ вҲ’c вҲҶ2 0 вҲҶ2so пҝҪ , (9) where c is a constant of order 1. Close to Tc, one obtains the standard result hc2 вүҲ 2.16Tc пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ T/Tc. In the more interesting case of large Ising SOC, вҲҶso вү« вҲҶ0, Eq. (8) yields a logarithmic divergence starting at higher temperatures, hc2 вүҲ вҲҶso пҝҪ ln Tc T / ln 2вҲҶso вҲҶ0 for T Tc вүӘ вҲҶ0 вҲҶso . (10) Close to Tc, the critical field exhibits a standard square- root dependence on temperature, but with an enhanced prefactor, hc2 вүҲ вҲҶso 1 пҝҪ ln 2вҲҶso вҲҶ0 пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ T Tc . (11) With intervalley scattering.- At finite magnetic field, intervalley scattering provides an effective spin-flip mech- anism, since electrons scattered between two valleys вҖңfeelвҖқ opposite values of the Ising SOC field. This pair- breaking effect leads to a saturation of hc2 at zero tem- perature, as illustrated in Fig. 5. For weak intervalley disorder, 1/П„2 вүӘ вҲҶ0 вүӘ вҲҶso, we estimate the zero- temperature critical field as hc2 вүҲ вҲҶso пҝҪ ln(вҲҶ0П„2)/ ln 2вҲҶso вҲҶ0 (12) in logarithmic accuracy. In the vicinity of Tc, the criti- cal line is still described by Eq. (11) in that parameter regime. On the other hand, the standard expression for the second-order paramagnetically-limited critical line, given by Eq. (8) at вҲҶso = 0, is recovered at large disorder strength, 1/П„2 вү« вҲҶ2 so/вҲҶ0. In this regime, electrons are frequently scattered between two valleys and do not вҖңfeelвҖқ the effect of valley-dependent Ising SOC anymore. Nature of the transition.- In the absence of SOC, the phase transition is a second-order transition into a uniform superconducting state only at sufficiently high temperature. A non-uniform (Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin- Ovchinnikov, or FFLO) phase could possibly contribute to the enhancement of hc2, as it was recently discussed in clean bilayer TMDC superconductors . In order to study the nature of the transition in the clean case, we generalize the expression for the gap equation (4) by adding quadratic corrections in a finite modulation wavevector and cubic corrections in the gap amplitude вҲҶ . We find that both do not affect the transition when вҲҶso >вҲј вҲҶ0. Moderate disorder is not expected to change these conclusions . Discussion and conclusion.- Experiments revealed superconductivity in TMDC well above the Pauli limit. The measured fields remained, however, be- low the values expected in the clean case with Ising SOC only. In Ref. , Rashba SOC was considered as a pos- sible mechanism for the suppression of hc2 at low tem- perature. However, the model required an irrealistically large amplitude for the Rashba SOC. Our work shows that moderate intervalley scattering, which has already been invoked in Ref. in the normal state, could pro- vide an alternative scenario for the saturation. The curve corresponding to 1/(П„2Tc) = 1.5 shown in Fig. 5(c) gives a good fit of the experimental data from Ref. using their estimate for вҲҶso/Tc. In conclusion, we have studied the effect of disorder on TMDC monolayer superconductors. We have pre- dicted that the large enhancement of the upper critical magnetic field is robust to intravalley scattering. Fur- thermore, we have identified intervalley scattering as a likely mechanism for the more moderate enhancement of hc2 observed in experiment. Interestingly, TMDCs have been identified as a possible platform for topological su- perconductivity and Majorana fermions provided that unconventional pairing takes place. The role of dis- order within these scenarios can be investigated within the theory frame provided by our work. We acknowledge funding from the Laboratoire 5 dвҖҷexcellence LANEF in Grenoble (ANR-10-LABX-51-01) and by the ANR through the grant ANR-16-CE30-0019. Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman, and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotech. 7, 699 (2012). K. F. Mak and J. Shan, Nat. Photonics 10, 216 (2016). K. F. Mak, C. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan, and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 136805 (2010). B. Radisavljevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, I. V. Gia- cometti, and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotech. 6, 147 (2011). B. T. Zhou, N. F. Yuan, H.-L. Jiang, and K. T. Law, Phys. Rev. B 93, 180501 (2016). Z. Zhu, Y. Cheng, and U. Schwingenschl МҲogl, Phys. Rev. A. Korm МҒanyos, G. Burkard, M. Gmitra, J. Fabian, V. Z МҒolyomi, N. D. Drummond, and V. Fal?ko, 2D Mat. D. Xiao, G.-B. Liu, W. Feng, X. Xu, and W. Yao, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 196802 (2012). K. F. Mak, K. He, J. Shan, and T. F. Heinz, Nat. Nan- otech. 7, 494 (2012). H. Zeng, J. Dai, W. Yao, D. Xiao, and X. Cui, Nat. Nanotech. 7, 490 (2012). Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman, and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotech. 7, 699 (2012). Y. Saito, Y. Nakamura, M. S. Bahramy, Y. Kohama, J. Ye, Y. Kasahara, Y. Nakagawa, M. Onga, M. Toku- naga, T. Nojima, et al., Nat. Phys. 12, 144 (2016). J. Lu, O. Zheliuk, I. Leermakers, N. F. Yuan, U. Zeitler, K. T. Law, and J. Ye, Science 350, 1353 (2015). M. Tinkham, Introduction to superconductivity (Courier Corporation, 1996). X. Xi, Z. Wang, W. Zhao, J.-H. Park, K. T. Law, H. Berger, L. Forr МҒo, J. Shan, and K. F. Mak, Nat. Phys. P. Frigeri, D. Agterberg, A. Koga, and M. Sigrist, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 097001 (2004). K. Maki, Phys. Rev. 148, 362 (1966). R. A. Klemm, A. Luther, and M. Beasley, Phys. Rev. B V. Barzykin and L. P. GorвҖҷkov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, N. Reyren, S. Gariglio, A. Caviglia, D. Jaccard, T. Schneider, and J.-M. Triscone, App. Phys. Lett. 94, T. Sekihara, R. Masutomi, and T. Okamoto, Phys. Rev. V. M. Edelstein, Sov. Phys. JETP 68, 1244 (1989). A. K. Geim and I. V. Grigorieva, Nature 499, 419 (2013). H. Schmidt, I. Yudhistira, L. Chu, A. C. Neto, B. МҲOzyilmaz, S. Adam, and G. Eda, Phys. Rev. Lett. Similar considerations in graphene, where вҲҶB = вҲҶA and Eg = 0, lead to the suppression of Ising SOC in the projected basis. Ref. analyzes the effect of disorder on a distinct topo- logical superconducting phase when Ој lies in the vicinity of Eg. I. Aleiner and K. Efetov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 236801 A. Altland, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 236802 (2006). See the Supplemental Material, which contains technical details of the derivation of Eq. (7), its analysis in the limits T вҶ’ 0 and T вҶ’ Tc, and considerations about a possible transition into a non-uniform (FFLO) phase and/or a change of the order of the transition. C. X. Liu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 087001 (2017). As at large enough intervalley scattering Ising SOC be- comes irrelevant, we expect to recover the standard first- order transition at low temperatures in this regime. E. Sosenko, J. Zhang, and V. Aji, Phys. Rev. B 95, 1 Supplemental Material for вҖңEnhancement of the upper critical field in disordered transition metal dichalcogenide monolayersвҖқ This supplemental material contains technical details on the derivation and analysis of the upper critical field hc2 in transition metal dichalcogenide monolayers that were omitted in the main text. In Sec. I, we provide more information on the evaluation of the equations shown in diagrammatic form in Fig. 3 in the main text, used to obtain Eq. (7). In Sec. II, we provide the derivation of asymptotic formulas for the dependence of hc2 on temperature T, when T вҶ’ 0 and T вҶ’ Tc, given by Eqs. (9)-(12) in the main text, and we compare them with the numerical evaluation of hc2(T). In Sec. III, we give evidence that the transition is indeed a second-order transition into a homogeneous state, as assumed in the main text, if spin-orbit coupling is sufficiently large, вҲҶso >вҲј 0.52вҲҶ0. In particular, in the clean case, we rule out a possible spatially modulated (Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov, or FFLO) state as well as a first-order transition by generalizing the gap equation (4). I. EVALUATION OF DIAGRAMS In Fig. S1, we show the Feynman rules for the ladder diagrams used in the main text. The upper and lower line for intervalley scattering. Оё and ОёвҖІ are polar angles associated with the momenta before and after the scattering event, as introduced in Eq. (6), and w2 2 = w2 2x + w2 2y. branch in all the ladder diagrams represent the GreenвҖҷs functions G+ and GвҲ’, respectively, and all internal momenta (in-between scattering events) are integrated over. The diagrams for the disorder-averaged self-consistent gap equation, Fig. 3(a) in the main text, translate to 1 = О» 4 T пҝҪ d2 q (2ПҖ)2 пҝҪ О·ПүssвҖІsвҖІвҖІ sвҹЁG+,ssвҖІ О·qПү вҹ©вҹЁGвҲ’, М„ssвҖІвҖІ М„О· М„qПү вҹ© пҝҪ sвҖІОҙ М„sвҖІsвҖІвҖІ + О sвҖІsвҖІвҖІ О· (Оё) пҝҪ . (S1) We evaluate the integrals over the momenta using the residue theorem with the substitution пҝҪ d2q (2ПҖ)2 вүҲ ОҪ 2ПҖ пҝҪ dОҫq пҝҪ dОё, valid in the regime of chemical potentials specified in the main text. In particular, we obtain ОҪ пҝҪ d ОҫqвҹЁG+,s1s2 О·qПү вҹ©вҹЁGвҲ’,s3s4 М„О· М„qПү вҹ© = ПҖОҪ sgn(Пү) 2 МғПү( МғПү2 + h2 + вҲҶ2so) пҝҪ (S2) вҲ’h(i МғПү вҲ’ s1О·вҲҶso)Оҙs1s2(1 вҲ’ Оҙs3s4) + (2 МғПү2 + h2 + вҲҶ2 soОҙs1 М„s3 + s12i МғПүО·вҲҶsoОҙs1s3)Оҙs1s2Оҙs3s4 пҝҪ , We note that, in general, the renormalized vertex function О О· is dependent on the polar angle Оё, due to the anisotropy of the projected disorder potential, Eq. (6). The О О· are determined by a system of Bethe-Salpeter equations [corresponding to diagrams in Fig. 3(b) in the main text]: О s1s2 О· пҝҪ d2 qвҖІ (2ПҖ)2 пҝҪ ssвҖІ пҝҪ w2 1 cos2 пҝҪОё вҲ’ ОёвҖІ 2 пҝҪ вҹЁG+,s1s О·qвҖІПү вҹ©вҹЁGвҲ’,s2sвҖІ М„О· М„qвҖІПү вҹ©[sОҙ М„ssвҖІ + О ssвҖІ +w2 2 sin2 пҝҪОё + ОёвҖІ 2 пҝҪ вҹЁG+,s1s М„О· М„qвҖІПү вҹ©вҹЁGвҲ’,s2sвҖІ О·qвҖІПү вҹ©[sОҙ М„ssвҖІ + О ssвҖІ М„О· (Оё)] пҝҪ . (S3) We readily check that О О·(Оё) is fully determined by its first harmonics in Оё: О s1s2 О· (Оё) = О s1s2 О·0 + О s1s2 О·1 cos Оё + О s1s2 О·2 sin Оё. (S4) Namely, by combining Eqs. (S4) and (S3), after integration over ОёвҖІ, we verify that no higher harmonics are generated. Furthermore, the equation for the constant part of the vertex functions О О·0 is decoupled from the angle-dependent 2 parts О О·1 and О О·2. Replacing the О О·(Оё) in Eq. (S1), we see that the angle-dependent contributions vanish after the integration over momenta. Therefore, it is sufficient to compute only О О·0. The eight different О О·0 are determined from the linear system of equations obtained after integrating (S3) over angles: О s1s2 О·0 = пҝҪ d ОҫqвҖІ 2ПҖ пҝҪ ssвҖІ пҝҪ 1 П„1 вҹЁG+,s1s О·qвҖІПү вҹ©вҹЁGвҲ’,s2sвҖІ М„О· М„qвҖІПү вҹ©[sОҙ М„ssвҖІ + О ssвҖІ О·0 ] + 1 П„2 вҹЁG+,s1s М„О· М„qвҖІПү вҹ©вҹЁGвҲ’,s2sвҖІ О·qвҖІПү вҹ©[sОҙ М„ssвҖІ + О ssвҖІ М„О·0 ] пҝҪ . (S5) Inserting the vertex functions that solve Eq. (S5) into Eq. (S1) yields Eq. (7) in the main text. II. LIMITING CASES In the following, starting from the full expression for the critical curve hc2(T), given by Eqs. (7) and (8) in the main text, we derive simple analytical expressions in the zero-temperature limit as well as close to the transition temperature Tc, for various strengths of the intervalley scattering rate. We compare them with the results of the numerical calculations of hc2 for arbitrary disorder strength in the same temperature regimes. A. Limit T вҶ’ 0 In the absence of intervalley scattering, 1/П„2 = 0, the critical curve hc2(T) is described by Eq. (8) in the main text. At low temperatures, using the asymptotic behavior of the digamma function ПҲ(z) вүҲ ln |z| for |z| вү« 1, Eq. (8) in the main text thus yields ln Tc T = h2 c2 ПҒ2 ln 4eОіПҒ 2ПҖT , (S6) where Оі вүҲ 0.577 and we introduced ПҒ = пҝҪ h2 c2 + вҲҶ2so. In the limit T вҶ’ 0, hc2 diverges, as illustrated in Fig. 4 in the main text. Thus, we can approximate our results assuming hc2 вү« вҲҶso, вҲҶ0. Then, Eq. (S6) yields ln 2hc2 вҲҶ0 вүҲ вҲҶ2 so h2 c2 ln Tc T . (S7) In the limit of strong Ising SOC, вҲҶso вү« вҲҶ0, the condition hc2 вү« вҲҶso allows one to simplify Eq. (S7) in the temperature regime T/Tc < вҲҶ0/вҲҶso to Eq. (10) in the main text, in logarithmic accuracy. In the limit of weak Ising SOC, вҲҶso вүӘ вҲҶ0, we see that the condition hc2 вү« вҲҶ0 is fulfilled for (вҲҶso/вҲҶ0)2 ln(Tc/T) вү« 1. Then, we are able to give a rough estimate provided by Eq. (9) in the main text. At weak disorder, 1/П„2 вүӘ вҲҶso, вҲҶ0, the poles in the Пү-dependent terms in Eq. (7) in the main text can be evaluated perturbatively to yield: ln Tc T = вҲҶ2 so ПҒ2 пҝҪ ПҲ пҝҪ1 2 + h2 c2 2ПҖП„2ПҒ2T пҝҪ вҲ’ ПҲ пҝҪ1 2 пҝҪпҝҪ + h2 c2 ПҒ2 R пҝҪ ПҲ пҝҪ1 2 + iПҒ 2ПҖT пҝҪ вҲ’ ПҲ пҝҪ1 2 пҝҪпҝҪ . (S8) By comparing with Eq. (8) in the main text, we see that the main effect of weak intervalley scattering is to provide an effective pair-breaking rate for pairs of electrons that are both aligned or anti-aligned with their respective local fields, which yields an additional mechanism for the suppression of hc2. As a consequence, hc2 now saturates at T вҶ’ 0. Assuming 1/П„2 вүӘ вҲҶ0 вүӘ вҲҶso such that hc2 вү« вҲҶso still holds, we find from Eq. (S8) that ln 2hc2 вҲҶ0 вүҲ вҲҶ2 so h2 c2 ln П„2hc2, (S9) which evaluates to Eq. (12) in the main text, in logarithmic accuracy. For weak Ising SOC, 1 П„2 вүӘ вҲҶso вүӘ вҲҶ0, similar estimates for hc2 can be made up to a constant factor, in the same manner as in Eq. (9). For large disorder strength, Eq. (7) in the main text evaluates to ln T Tc = 2ПҖT пҝҪ Пү>0 пҝҪПү + П„2вҲҶ2 so Пү2 + h2 c2 вҲ’ 1 Пү пҝҪ = R пҝҪ ПҲ пҝҪ1 2 пҝҪ вҲ’ ПҲ пҝҪ1 2 + ihc2 2ПҖT пҝҪпҝҪ + ПҖвҲҶ2 soП„2 2hc2 tanh hc2 2T , (S10) 3 obtained from Eq. (S12) and from Eq. (12), calculated up to the second order in the logarithmic approximation. The black dash-dotted line corresponds to the result in the absence of SOC, hc2 = вҲҶ0/2. (b) Behavior of hc2 close to Tc: we plot 1/ вҲҡ C = [вҲ’(dh2 1/ вҲҡ C = 2ПҖ/ пҝҪ 7О¶(3) вүҲ 2.16 in the absence of SOC. provided that only Matsubara frequencies Пү <вҲј hc2 вүӘ 1/П„2 contribute to the sum. At T вҶ’ 0, Eq. (S10) simplifies to ln 2hc2 вҲҶ0 = ПҖвҲҶ2 soП„2 2hc2 . (S11) Thus, at large Ising SOC, вҲҶso вү« вҲҶ0, we find the standard paramagnetic limit hc2 = вҲҶ0/2 for the second-order phase transition if 1/П„2 вү« вҲҶ2 so/вҲҶ0. At weaker disorder, вҲҶso вүӘ 1/П„2 вүӘ вҲҶ2 so/вҲҶ0, we obtain hc2 = ПҖП„2вҲҶ2 so/[2 ln(П„2вҲҶ2 so/вҲҶ0)]. Further decreasing disorder, the condition hc2 вүӘ 1/П„2 breaks down and Eq. (S10) cannot be used anymore. To compare these results with the numerical evaluation of hc2(0), it is convenient to obtain the later from the following equation: ln 2hc2(0) вҲҶ0 = пҝҪ вҲһ 0 dПү пҝҪ Пү(Пү + 1 П„2 ) + вҲҶ2 so (Пү + 1 П„2 )(Пү2 + h2 c2 + вҲҶ2so) вҲ’ вҲҶ2so П„2 вҲ’ Пү Пү2 + h2 c2 пҝҪ . (S12) We plot hc2(0) obtained this way in Fig. S2(a) as a function of 1/П„2. We verify that Eq. (12) is in good agreement with these results in the relevant parameter regime and that hc2(0) reaches вҲҶ0/2 for strong disorder. B. Limit T вҶ’ Tc Close to Tc, the critical field hc2 is small, and the assumptions вҲҶso вү« hc2 and ln Tc T вүҲ TcвҲ’T Tc hold. Expanding Eq. (7) in the main text in this regime yields a square-root behavior hc2 вүғ пҝҪ Tc(Tc вҲ’ T) C (S13) with C = 2ПҖT 3 c пҝҪ Пү>0 Пү + 1 П„2 Пү2[Пү(Пү + 1 П„2 ) + вҲҶ2so] (S14) and weak Ising SOC, 1/П„2, вҲҶso вүӘ вҲҶ0, as well as at large disorder, 1/П„2 вү« вҲҶ2 so/вҲҶ0 вү« вҲҶso. Outside those ranges of disorder, C is suppressed вҖ“ and, thus, hc2 is enhanced. For instance, C = (Tc/вҲҶso)2 ln(2вҲҶso/вҲҶ0) at weak disorder and large Ising SOC, 1/П„2 вүӘ вҲҶ0 вүӘ вҲҶso, and C = ПҖTc/(4П„2вҲҶ2 so) in an intermediate disorder range and at large Ising SOC, вҲҶ0 вүӘ 1/П„2, вҲҶso вүӘ вҲҶ2 so/вҲҶ0. We explore a wider window of disorder strengths numerically using Eq. (S14), as shown in Fig. S2. The results match the approximate formulas close to Tc given above at weak and strong disorder. 4 III. FFLO PHASE AND THE FIRST-ORDER PHASE TRANSITION In the main text, we only considered the second-order transition into a homogeneous superconducting state. In the following, we examine the conditions for realizing a FFLO phase and/or first-order phase transition in clean Ising superconductors. We show that both are absent for вҲҶso >вҲј 0.52вҲҶ0. We do not expect moderate disorder, 1/П„2 вүӘ max(вҲҶ0, вҲҶ2 so/вҲҶ0), to lead to a reappearance of the FFLO phase and/or first-order phase transition. A. FFLO phase In the FFLO phase, the superconductor is spatially modulated. At the second-order transition into that state, we account for an exponentially modulated order parameter вҲҶ(x) = вҲҶpeip.x, where p is the modulation wavevector, by modifying the pairing term in the BCS Hamiltonian, HF F LO = пҝҪ О·q cвҖ  О·qHО·qcО·q + вҲҶp пҝҪ П„q cвҖ  П„q+p/2вҶ‘cвҖ  М„П„ М„q+p/2вҶ“ + h.c.. (S15) Then, in the vicinity of the phase transition, the amplitude of the order parameter should solve the linearized self- consistent gap equation вҲҶp = О»T 4 пҝҪ О·,q,|Пү|<О© Tr[isyG+ М„О· М„q+ p 2 ПүвҲҶpisyGвҲ’ О·q+ p 2 Пү]. (S16) In order to consider the instability toward an FFLO state along the upper ciritcal line hc2(T), we further assume that the modulation wavevector is small, vF |p| вүӘ вҲҶ0. The small momentum shift p/2 in the GreenвҖҷs functions can be accounted for by shifting the energy Оҫq+ p 2 вүҲ Оҫq + vF p.ЛҶq/2, where we introduced ЛҶq = q/|q|. Then, integration over the momenta can be carried out using the results given in Eq. (S2) by taking МғПү вҶ’ Пү вҲ’ ivF p.ЛҶq/2. After summing over Matsubara frequencies, we obtain ln T Tc = пҝҪ dОё 2ПҖ R пҝҪвҲҶ2 so ПҒ2 пҝҪ ПҲ пҝҪ1 2 пҝҪ вҲ’ ПҲ пҝҪ1 2 вҲ’ ivF p.ЛҶq 4ПҖT пҝҪпҝҪ + h2 c2 ПҒ2 пҝҪ ПҲ пҝҪ1 2 пҝҪ вҲ’ ПҲ пҝҪ1 2 + 2iПҒ вҲ’ ivF p.ЛҶq 4ПҖT пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ . (S17) Expanding the above expression in small p and integrating over angles yields ln T Tc = вҲ’h2 c2 ПҒ2 R пҝҪ ПҲ пҝҪ1 2 + iПҒ 2ПҖT пҝҪ вҲ’ ПҲ пҝҪ1 2 пҝҪпҝҪ + v2 F |p|2T 2 c c2T 2 F1(T, вҲҶso), (S18) where F1(T, вҲҶso) = вҲ’ пҝҪhc2 Tc пҝҪ2 пҝҪ ПҲ(2) пҝҪ1 2 пҝҪ + h2 c2 ПҒ2 R пҝҪ ПҲ(2) пҝҪ1 2 + iПҒ 2ПҖT пҝҪ вҲ’ ПҲ(2) пҝҪ1 2 пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ . (S19) Here, ПҲ(2)(z) is the second derivative of the digamma function. The last term in Eq. (S18) is the correction to the result in the uniform case, Eq. (8), due to the modulation. The instability toward the FFLO state is determined by the sign of F1 along the line hc2(T) for the uniform state. Namely, if F1 > 0 (resp. F1 < 0), hc2 decreases (resp. increases) when the order parameter is modulated. We evaluate F1 along the upper critical line derived for the uniform state in Fig. S3(a). At вҲҶso = 0, F1 changes sign at T вҲ— = 0.56Tc, signaling a transition into the FFLO state below that temperature. At small вҲҶso, we find that F1 changes sign at two temperatures T вҲ— 1 and T вҲ— 2 , with T вҲ— 1 < T < T вҲ— 2 . The range of temperatures T вҲ— 1 < T < T вҲ— 2 , where the FFLO state can be expected shrinks as вҲҶso increases, and it eventually disappears at вҲҶso >вҲј 0.30вҲҶ0, thus excluding the possibility of an FFLO phase at larger вҲҶso. B. First-order phase transition In order to study the possibility of a first-order phase transition, the linearized self-consistency equation is not sufficient and we need to include higher order terms in вҲҶ. Thus, we write the self-consistent gap equation for the uniform phase [described by Eq. (3)] up to third order in вҲҶ, вҲҶ = О»T 4 пҝҪ О·,q,|Пү|<О© Tr[isyG+ М„О· М„qПүвҲҶisyGвҲ’ О·qПү + isyG+ М„О· М„qПүвҲҶisyGвҲ’ О·qПүвҲҶisyG+ М„О· М„qПүвҲҶisyGвҲ’ О·qПү]. (S20) 5 Temperature-dependence of F1/2(T, вҲҶso) for various values of the Ising SOC. (a) FFLO: F1(T, вҲҶso) defined in Eq. (S19), evaluated along the upper critical line in the uniform state. The dashed black line corresponds to the critical value of the Ising SOC, вҲҶF F LO so = 0.53Tc вүғ 0.30вҲҶ0, above which the function F1 remains positive for all temperatures. (b) First order phase transition: F2(T, вҲҶso) defined in Eq. (S22), evaluated along the upper critical line in the uniform state. The dashed black line corresponds to the critical value of Ising SOC вҲҶ1вҶ’2 so = 0.92Tc вүғ 0.52вҲҶ0, above which the function F2 remains positive for all temperatures. After evaluating the integrals over the products of four GreenвҖҷs functions using the residue theorem [in a similar fashion as in Eq. (S2)], and summing over Matsubara frequencies, we obtain ln T Tc = вҲ’h2 c2 ПҒ2 R пҝҪ ПҲ пҝҪ1 2 + iПҒ 2ПҖT пҝҪ вҲ’ ПҲ пҝҪ1 2 пҝҪпҝҪ + вҲҶ2T 4 c 16ПҖh4csT 2 F2(T, вҲҶso), (S21) where F2(T, вҲҶso) = 4h4 c2 ПҖT 4c (2ПҖT)3 пҝҪ Пү>0 (вҲҶ2 so + Пү2)[h2 c2(вҲҶ2 so вҲ’ 3Пү2) + (вҲҶ2 so + Пү2)2] Пү3(h2 c2 + вҲҶ2so + Пү2)3 . (S22) The last term in Eq. (S21) is the correction to the linearized gap equation (8) due to a finite amplitude of the order parameter in the vicinity of the transition. The order of the transition is determined by the sign of F2 along the change of the order of the transition occurs). At вҲҶso = 0, we find that F2 = (hc2/Tc)2F1. Thus, the sign change occurs at the same temperature and, as a consequence, for T < T вҲ— = 0.56Tc the transition into the FFLO state is in competition with a first-order transition. At finite вҲҶso, we evaluate F2 along the upper critical line derived for the uniform state in Fig. S3(b). We find that its temperature dependence is qualitatively similar to, though quantitatively different from F1. Thus, a change of the transition order may occur in a finite temperature range, if Ising SOC is weak. On the other hand, F2 remains positive at all temperatures if вҲҶso >вҲј 0.52вҲҶ0, and therefore the transition remains a second-order transition at larger Ising SOC.