High temperature pairing in a strongly interacting two-dimensional Fermi gas P. A. Murthy,1, ∗ M. Neidig,1 R. Klemt,1 L. Bayha,1 I. Boettcher,2 T. Enss,3 M. Holten,1 G. Z ̈urn,1 P. M. Preiss,1 and S. Jochim1 1Physics Institute, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany 2Department of Physics, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada 3Institute for Theoretical Physics, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg Germany (Dated: Wednesday 31st May, 2017) We observe many-body pairing in a two-dimensional gas of ultracold fermionic atoms at tem- peratures far above the critical temperature for superfluidity. For this, we use spatially resolved radio-frequency spectroscopy to measure pairing energies over a wide range of temperatures and in- teraction strengths. In the strongly interacting regime where the scattering length between fermions is on the same order as the inter-particle spacing, the pairing energy in the normal phase signifi- cantly exceeds the intrinsic two-body binding energy of the system and shows a clear dependence on local density. This implies that pairing in this regime is driven by many-body correlations, rather than two-body physics. We find this effect to persist at temperatures close to the Fermi tempera- ture which demonstrates that pairing correlations in strongly interacting two-dimensional fermionic systems are remarkably robust against thermal fluctuations. Fermion pairing is the key ingredient for superconduc- tivity and superfluidity in fermionic systems . In a system with s-wave interactions, two fundamentally dif- ferent scenarios can occur: In the first one, as realized for weakly attractive fermions that are described by the the- ory of Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS), formation and condensation of pairs both take place at the same criti- cal temperature (Tc) . While the mean-field BCS pic- ture successfully describes a large class of superconduct- ing materials, strongly correlated electron systems may follow a different pattern. In this second case, preformed pairs suppress the density of states at the Fermi sur- face at temperatures exceeding the critical temperature. Finding a description of this so-called ’pseudogap’ phase, especially for two-dimensional (2D) systems, is thought to be a promising route to understanding the complex physics of unconventional superconductivity . This is of particular interest in the context of recent ARPES experiments on Iron Chalcogenide films , where the combined effect of strong s-wave interactions and reduced dimensionality has been shown to result in preformed pairing and superconductivity at remarkably high tem- peratures. The Bose–Einstein Condensation (BEC)-BCS crossover of ultracold atoms constitutes a versatile framework to explore the normal phase of strongly correlated fermions (Fig. 1 A). The crossover smoothly connects two distinct regimes of pairing: the BEC regime of tightly bound molecules and the BCS regime of weakly bound Cooper pairs. In 2D (unlike 3D) systems with contact interactions, a two-body bound state with binding energy EB exists for arbitrarily small attraction between the atoms. The interactions in the many-body system are captured by the dimensionless parameter ln (kFa2D) where kF is the Fermi momentum and a2D is the 2D scattering length. As we tune the interaction strength from the BEC (large negative ln (kFa2D)) to the BCS side (large positive ln (kFa2D)), the behavior of the system smoothly changes from bosonic to fermionic character . The fascinating strongly interacting region lies in between these two weakly interacting limits where a2D is on the same order as the inter-particle spacing (∼ kF −1). In our previous works, we used a matter- wave focusing method to measure the pair momentum distribution of a 2D Fermi gas across the crossover and observed the Berezinskii–Kosterlitz–Thouless (BKT) transition to a superfluid phase at low temperatures . An outstanding question concerns the nature of the normal phase above the critical temperature - is it a gapless Fermi Liquid of quasiparticles or a gapped liquid of preformed pairs ? While previous cold atom experiments have explored this regime both in 3D [11–15] and 2D systems, a consensus is yet to emerge. Here, we address these questions by studying the nor- mal phase of such a 2D ultracold Fermi gas trapped in a harmonic potential. The underlying potential leads to an inhomogeneous density distribution and by making use of a local density approximation, we can directly mea- sure the density dependence of many-body properties. We perform our experiments with a two-component mix- ture of 6Li atoms with approximately 3 × 104 particles per spin state that are loaded into a single layer of an anisotropic harmonic optical trap. The trap frequencies ωz ≈ 2π × 6.95 kHz and ωz ≈ 2π × 22 Hz in the axial and radial directions result in an aspect ratio of about 300:1. The kinematic 2D regime is reached by ensuring that the thermodynamic energy scales, temperature (T) and chemical potential (μ), are smaller than the axial confinement energy. We tune the scattering length a2D by means of a broad magnetic Feshbach resonance . To investigate fermion pairing in our system, we use radio–frequency (RF) spectroscopy. The idea underlying this technique is that the bare atomic transition frequen- arXiv:1705.10577v1 [cond-mat.quant-gas] 30 May 2017 2 T/ TF ln(kFa2D) -2 -3 3 0.4 0.8 0 0 1 -1 2 0.2 0.6 A B C D Fermi Liquid Bose Liquid Superfuid (BKT) TC ? Bound Free c b a RF Imaging Without RF: n0(r) With RF: n‘(r, ωRF) Diference δn(r, ωRF) 70 μm BEC BCS 30 60 90 120 150 Radius, r (μm) 5 4 3 2 1 0 -1 RF frequency, ωRF/2π (kHz) 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 Response, I(r, ωRF) I(r, ωRF) = δn(r, ωRF) / n0(r) BCS crossover. In this work we investigate the nature of pairing in the normal phase of the crossover regime between the weakly interacting Bose and Fermi liquids. B: Illustration of radio-frequency (RF) spectroscopy of a 2D two-component Fermi gas. Pairing and many-body effects shift the atomic transition frequencies between the hyperfine states |b⟩ − |c⟩, which results in observable signatures in the RF response of the system. C: Absorption images of the cloud without RF (reference) and with RF at a particular frequency, and the difference between the two images. The ring feature in δn(r) reveals the density dependence of the RF response. D: Spatially resolved spectral response function reconstructed from absorption images taken at different RF frequencies. At low temperatures in the spin-balanced sample, the occupation of the free particle branch is too low to be observable, which makes it difficult to distinguish between mean-field shifts and pairing effects. cies between distinct hyperfine states are shifted due to interactions or pairing between atoms in an ensemble (see Fig. 1 B). For this we start with a mixture of atoms in hyperfine states |a⟩ and |b⟩. An RF pulse transfers atoms from state |b⟩ to a third unoccupied hyperfine state |c⟩, and we subsequently image the remaining density distri- bution in |b⟩. By measuring the spectral response to an applied RF pulse, we gain insight into pairing and corre- lations in the many-body system. The response functions are affected by interactions between atoms in the initial and final states during the RF pulse. In 6Li gases, this is due to overlapping Feshbach resonances between the three lowest hyperfine states (labeled |1⟩|2⟩ and |1⟩|3⟩). We perform our measurements on two different initial ing them in such a way that the final state interactions are small for each given interaction strength . In our inhomogeneous 2D system, the Fermi energy depends on the local density n(r) in each spin state according to EF = ħ2kF 2/2m = (2πħ2/m)n(r), where m is the mass of a 6Li atom . As a consequence, the thermodynamic quantities T/TF and ln (kFa2D) also vary spatially across the cloud. We apply the thermom- etry developed in our previous work to extract these local observables. We measure the local spectral re- sponse by choosing a RF pulse duration (τRF = 4 ms) that is sufficiently short to prevent significant diffusion of transferred atoms, but also sufficiently long that we obtain an adequate Fourier limited frequency resolution δωRF ≈ 2π ×220 Hz (see for details). In Fig. 1 C, we show a typical absorption image of the 2D cloud which is used as a reference and one with a RF pulse applied at a particular frequency. The difference between the two images features a spatial ring structure, which qualita- tively shows that for a given frequency, the depletion of atoms in initial state |b⟩ occurs at a well-defined den- sity/radius. By performing this measurement for a range of RF frequencies, we can tomographically reconstruct the spatially resolved spectral response function (1) where n0(r) and n′(r, ωRF) are the density distribution of atoms in state |b⟩ without and with the RF pulse. An example of the tomographically reconstructed spec- tra is shown in Fig. 1 D. We see that the frequency of maximum response depends smoothly on the radius and thereby the local density. These density-dependent shifts may arise either from pairing in the system or from inter- action induced mean-field shifts. One way to distinguish between the two contributions is to measure the RF tran- sitions from both paired and unpaired atoms to the free particle continuum . However, we find that in the temperature regime (T/TF < 1.5) explored in our exper- iments, the thermal occupation of the free branch is too small to observe. 3 F r e e Co nt in uu m Δ RF 0 0 B o u n d ΔE EB Momentum Energy RF 0 0 kF kF Bo un d Fre e Co nt in uu m EB 0 0 Δ BCS EB 0 0 RF Frequency Response BEC EB ΔE μ μ B C D E A 0 100 200 300 Radius (μm) 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 Density (1/μm2) Majority Minority 0 50 100 Radius (μm) 0 0.1 0.2 Imbalance Quasiparticle spectroscopy in the BEC and BCS limits. A: We create a slightly imbalanced mixture of hyperfine states to artificially populate the free particle branch. The density distributions of the majority and minor- ity spins are shown, and the corresponding local imbalance (inset). B, C: Schematic illustration of single particle disper- sion relations in the BEC and BCS limits at zero temperature. Paired atoms reside in the lowest branch (bound), and are transferred to the continuum of unoccupied states. The ex- cess majority atoms are unpaired and occupy the upper quasi- particle (free) branch in the spectrum at k ∼ 0 (BEC) and k ∼ kF (BCS). D, E: The transition of paired atoms into the continuum yields an asymmetric response with a sharp thresh- old in the RF spectral function. The quasi-particle transition contributes another peak. Their relative difference yields the pairing energy ∆E which reveals the distinction between two- body (∆E ∼ EB) and many-body pairing (∆E > EB) in the two limits. In order to achieve a sufficient population of the un- paired branch, we apply the quasiparticle spectroscopy method pioneered in for the measurement of the su- perfluid gap of a 3D Fermi gas. Although our system is in the normal phase, the same technique can be used to de- termine the pairing gap. The key idea of this method lies in creating a slightly spin-imbalanced mixture so that the excess majority atoms necessarily remain unpaired due to the density mismatch. These unpaired atoms (or dressed quasiparticles) contribute a second absorption maximum in the RF response function besides the one from pairs. Since mean-field interactions shift the whole spectrum , the difference ∆E between the two branches is man- ifestly independent of it and corresponds only to the pair- ing energy of the system. In our experiments, we create a using a sequence of Landau-Zener sweeps, where n|b⟩ and n|a⟩ are densities in hyperfine states |b⟩ and |a⟩. We show typical density profiles of majority and minority compo- nents in Fig. 2 A. The pairing energy ∆E between the two branches dis- tinguishes between two different pairing scenarios. If ∆E coincides with the two-body bound state EB, we are in the two-body regime. In contrast, we associate the situa- tion of a density (EF)-dependent ∆E exceeding EB with many-body pairing. In Fig. 2 B and C, we illustrate these two scenarios using idealized single-particle dispersion re- lations in the BEC and BCS limits at zero temperature. We provide a brief theoretical account of pairing in these two limits in . The crucial difference between the two cases lies in the occupation of the quasiparticle branch which occurs preferentially at k ∼ 0 in the BEC and at k ∼ kF in BCS regimes. While the corresponding RF spectra, shown in Fig. 2 D and E, appear qualita- tively similar, the value of ∆E reveals the fundamental difference in the nature of pairing in the two regimes. We note that the actual dispersion relations at strong in- teractions and high temperatures which determine the RF response in the experiment do not necessarily follow this mean-field description . However, the general criteria to distinguish two-body and many-body pairing scenarios using ∆E remain valid. In Fig. 3 A and B, we show the measured spectra I(r, ωRF) for magnetic fields 670 G and 690 G using a |1⟩|3⟩ mixture, which corresponds to central values of ln (kFa2D) ∼ −0.5 and ln (kFa2D) ∼ 1, respectively. The response from unpaired quasiparticles appears at frequency ωRF ∼ 0, while the pairing branch with an asymmetric lineshape appears at larger frequencies. Ex- amples of spectra at fixed radii are shown in Fig. 3 C and D. We fit these local spectra with a combined fit function that includes a symmetric Gaussian (for the quasiparti- cle peak) and an asymmetric threshold function (for the paired peak) that is convolved with a Gaussian to account for spectral broadening arising from finite RF frequency resolution and final state effects . The choice of fit function has a systematic effect on the quantitative re- sults presented here, which cannot be eliminated at this point since a reliable theoretical prediction of the shape of the spectral function only exists in the weakly coupled BEC and BCS limits. We present a detailed account of our data analysis in . At a qualitative level, the main observations from Fig. 3 are the following. Both branches in the spectra show density dependence, which can partially be attributed to a mean-field shift. Adding the binding energy EB to the quasi-particle branch yields the two-body expectation for the threshold position. This picture is applicable to the whole spectrum in Fig 3 A, which corresponds to a mea- 4 RF frequency, ωRF/2π (kHz) Radius (μm) Response 0.3 0.2 0.1 0 0 60 180 120 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 RF frequency, ωRF/2π (kHz) Response Response RF frequency, ωRF/2π (kHz) -5 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 A B C D 0 0 30 25 10 0.1 60 20 30 15 90 0 5 35 0.2 120 5 0.3 RF frequency, ωRF/2π (kHz) Radius (μm) Response EB EB T/ TF ~ 0.7 T/ TF ~ 1 ΔE ΔE tively different behavior for two different scattering lengths. A, B: I(r, ωRF) for central ln (kFa2D) ∼ −0.5 and 1.0, respectively. The 3D visualization is obtained using a linear interpolation between 3000 data points each of which is an average of 30 realiza- tions. The black solid line is the peak position of the free branch, the orange line is the threshold position of the bound branch and the black dashed line is displaced from the free peak by the two-body binding energy EB. The energy difference between free and bound branches is the pairing energy ∆E, which is seen to agree with EB in A (BEC regime), but signigicantly exceeds EB in B (crossover regime). In addition,∆E is strongly density dependent in B, implying that it originates from many-body correlations. C, D: Local spectra at a fixed radius corresponding to a homogeneous system with T/TF ∼ 0.7 and 1 respectively (gray region). The solid blue curves are the fits to the data; the black and red curves are gaussian and threshold fits to the two branches. surement on the BEC side of the crossover. In contrast, for the spectrum displayed in Fig 3 B, corresponding to the crossover regime, we observe ∆E ∼ EB only in the outer regions of the cloud where the density is low enough that only the two-body bound state plays a role. To- wards the center of the cloud, ∆E begins to significantly exceed EB and shows a strong dependence on the local density (EF), indicating that pairing in this regime is a many-body phenomenon. At very low temperatures, the measurement of ∆E is difficult since the occupation of the free branch is too low, as seen in Fig. 1 D. However, we qualitatively observe that the threshold position of the bound branch increases continuously with decreasing temperature, even as we cross the superfluid transition. This indicates that in the crossover regime, a many-body gap opens up far in the normal phase rather than at Tc as expected from BCS theory. This observation is the first main result of this work. To quantitatively study the change in the nature of pairing from the BEC to the BCS side, we measure the spectra at different magnetic fields and extract ∆E in units of the two-body binding energy EB. In Fig. 4 A, we plot the temperature dependence of ∆E/EB for different interaction strengths, and Fig. 4 B shows the variation of ∆E/EB as a function of ln (kFa2D) for a fixed ratio T/TF ≈ 0.5. This constitutes an extremely high temperature regime even in the context of ultracold fermion superfluidity, where the largest observed critical temperatures are Tc/TF ≈ 0.17 . We perform our measurements with both |1⟩|2⟩ and |1⟩|3⟩ mixtures (blue and red points in Fig. 4 B) in an overlapping interac- tion regime. The two mixtures differ vastly in their final state interaction strengths and the fact that we observe consistent behavior with both mixtures demonstrates the robustness of the quantity ∆E against these final state effects. Details of the experimental parameters used for the two mixtures are tabulated in . In Fig. 4, we observe that for ln (kFa2D) ≲ 0.5 the spectra are well-described by two-body physics. In contrast, the pronounced density-dependent gap signif- icantly exceeding EB for ln (kFa2D) ≥ 0.5 signals the crossover to a many-body pairing regime. In particular, we observe that ∆E/EB peaks at ln (kFa2D) ∼ 1, where ∆E ≈ 2.6EB and is a significant fraction of EF (0.6EF). The identification of this strongly correlated many-body pairing regime and the observation of many-body induced pairing at temperatures several times the critical temper- ature is the second main result of this work. For larger ln (kFa2D), we see a downward trend in ∆E/EB, and for ln (kFa2D) ≥ 1.5, we observe only a single branch in the 5 A B 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.0 1.4 1.8 2.2 2.6 -0.2 0.6 0.9 1.1 T/ TF ΔE/ EB central ln(kFa2D) Two-Body Pairing Many-Body Pairing -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 1.0 1.4 1.8 2.2 2.6 ΔE/ EB ln(kFa2D) T/ TF ~ 0.5 regime. A: Pairing energy ∆E in units of EB plotted as a function of T/TF for different interaction strengths (central ln (kFa2D)) . B: Many-body induced high temperature pair- ing. We plot ∆E/EB as a function of ln (kFa2D) for fixed ra- tio T/TF ∼ 0.5. Red and blue circles correspond to measure- ments taken with |1⟩|3⟩ and |1⟩|2⟩ mixtures. The dashed black line is a guide to the eye. The errors indicated as shaded bands in A and bars in B are obtained from the fitting procedure explained in . For ln (kFa2D) ≤ 0.5 (strong attraction) we have ∆E/EB ∼ 1 with negligible density-dependence, indicat- ing two-body pairing. For larger ln (kFa2D) (less attraction), ∆E/EB significantly exceeds 1 and reaches a maximum of 2.6 before showing a downward trend. At ln (kFa2D) ∼ 1, we have a critical temperature of Tc ≈ 0.17 TF , which indicates the onset of many-body pairing at temperatures several times Tc. spectra near ωRF ∼ 0, suggesting the absence of a gap larger than the scale of our experimental resolution . Our qualitative observation of a vanishing gap for weaker attraction is consistent with the picture of the normal phase in the BCS limit being a gapless Fermi liquid . We now turn to a discussion of our results in the context of current theoretical understanding and previous experimental work. In , Sommer et al. performed trap-averaged RF spectroscopy in the 3D-2D crossover and found good agreement with mean-field BCS theory in the regime ln (kFa2D) ≤ 0.5. In , Feld et al. observed pairing in the normal phase using momentum-resolved (but trap-averaged) spectroscopy also mostly in the regime ln (kFa2D) ≤ 0.5. Beyond this previously explored interaction regime where pairing is purely described by two-body physics , our measurements reveal that many-body effects enhance the pairing energy far above the critical temperature. In fact, we show that the most strongly correlated region where many-body pairing occurs in the normal phase lies where ln (kFa2D) is close to unity rather than zero. With regard to the long-standing question concerning the nature of the normal phase of a strongly interacting Fermi gas , our experiments reveal the existence of a large region in the phase diagram where the behavior deviates from both Bose Liquid and Fermi liquid descriptions. Finding a complete description of this strongly correlated phase is an exciting challenge for both theory and experiment.