1 Superconductivity at 5 K in quasi-one-dimensional Cr-based KCr3As3 single crystals Qing-Ge Mu†,‡, Bin-Bin Ruan†,‡, Bo-Jin Pan†,‡, Tong Liu†,‡, Jia Yu†,‡, Kang Zhao†,‡, Gen-Fu Chen†,‡,§, and Zhi-An Ren*,†,‡,§ †Institute of Physics and Beijing National Laboratory for Condensed Matter Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China ‡School of Physical Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China §Collaborative Innovation Center of Quantum Matter, Beijing 100190, China ABSTRACT: Recently a new family of Cr-based A2Cr3As3 (A = K, Rb, Cs) superconductors were re- ported, which own a rare quasi-one-dimensional (Q1D) crystal structure with infinite (Cr3As3)2- chains and exhibit intriguing superconducting characteristics possibly derived from spin-triplet electron pair- ing. The crystal structure of A2Cr3As3 is actually a slight variation of the hexagonal TlFe3Te3 prototype although they have different lattice symmetry. Here we report superconductivity in a 133-type KCr3As3 compound that belongs to the latter structure. The single crystals of KCr3As3 were prepared by the dein- tercalation of K ions from K2Cr3As3 crystals which were grown from a high-temperature solution growth method, and it owns a centrosymmetric lattice in contrast to the non-centrosymmetric K2Cr3As3. After annealing at a moderate temperature, the KCr3As3 crystals show bulk superconductivity at 5 K revealed by electrical resistivity, magnetic susceptibility and heat capacity measurements. The discovery of this KCr3As3 superconductor provides a different structural instance to study the exotic superconduc- tivity in these Q1D Cr-based superconductors. 2 The recently discovered Cr-based superconductors A2Cr3As3 (A = K, Rb, Cs) have attracted much in- terest besides the enthusiasm on Fe-based high-Tc superconductors.1-6 This is partly because there have been very few Cr-containing compounds exhibiting superconductivity for a century. Except for several binary Cr alloys,7-11 the only superconductors are the lately reported ternary boride Cr2Re3B which has a non-centrosymmetric -Mn-type crystal structure and a Tc of 4.8 K,12 and the binary CrAs which exhib- its superconductivity at 2 K by suppressing the antiferromagnetic order via the application of external high pressures above 8 kbar.13-14 Furthermore, these 233-type A2Cr3As3 compounds crystalize in a very particular quasi-one-dimensional (Q1D) hexagonal crystal lattice with a space group of P-6m2 (No. 187), which can be regarded as infinite Q1D (Cr3As3)2- linear chains separated by alkali-metal cations that act as charge reservoir.1-3, 15 When replacing the K+ ions with larger Rb+ or Cs+ ions, the supercon- ducting Tc decreases dramatically from 6.1 K to 4.8 K and 2.2 K respectively,1-3, 15-16 and the Tc also monotonically decreases under external pressures in K2Cr3As3.16-17 Theoretical calculations on K2Cr3As3 predict complex multi-band electronic structure with a three-dimensional Fermi-surface pock- et in addition to two Q1D Fermi-surface sheets mainly contributed by the Cr-3d electrons.18-22 Experi- mental results show strong electron correlations and magnetic fluctuations but very diverse pictures of ground states, and both spin-triplet and spin-singlet electron pairing are proposed to explain the exotic superconductivity.23-30 As a rare case of Q1D superconductors, the A2Cr3As3 is significantly different from previously reported Q1D superconductors such as Li0.9Mo6O17,31-32 Tl2Mo6Se6 33 and organic su- perconductors (TMTSF)2X (TMTSF = tetramethyltetraselenafulvalene, X = PF6 or ClO4) .34-37 By deintercalating half of the K ions from K2Cr3As3 lattice, a new type of Q1D compound KCr3As3 can be obtained.38 This 133-type KCr3As3 has a hexagonal TlFe3Te3-type crystal structure with the space group P63/m (No. 176) .38 Unlike its 233-type cousins which lack of inversion symmetry, the KCr3As3 has a centrosymmetric crystal lattice. Although the characteristic Cr3As3 linear chain structures are simi- lar between the two compounds except a small-angle rotation along the c-axis, the removing of a K+ ion per formula from K2Cr3As3 increases the chemical valence state of Cr and turns the Q1D chains into (Cr3As3)- type in KCr3As3 lattice. Previous experimental studies on polycrystalline KCr3As3 showed cluster spin-glass ground state without superconductivity at low temperature,38 and the DFT first- principle calculations exhibited a magnetic Fermi surface involving only three one-dimensional sheets with much reduced dimensionality and the emergence of the interlayer antiferromagnetic order.39 In this communication, we report the discovery of superconductivity in the single crystals of KCr3As3 with a Tc of 5 K. 3 The 133-type KCr3As3 single crystals were prepared by the deintercalation of K+ ions from K2Cr3As3 precursors. At first, high quality single crystals of K2Cr3As3 were grown out of KAs and CrAs mixture using a high-temperature solution growth method as previously reported.1 Then the as-grown rod-like K2Cr3As3 single crystals were immersed in pure dehydrated ethanol and kept for one week for the dein- tercalation of K+ ions at room temperature. The obtained samples were washed by ethanol thoroughly and labeled as sample #A. To further improve the sample quality, the crystals of sample #A were im- mersed in ethanol in a Teflon liner and loaded into an autoclave. The autoclave was tightly sealed, and sintered at 353 K for 100 h. After cooled down to room temperature, the obtained samples were washed with ethanol again and annealed in an evacuated quartz tube at 373 K for 12 h. These final post- annealed KCr3As3 crystals were labeled as sample #B. All the experimental procedures were carried out in a glove box filled with high-purity Ar gas to avoid introducing impurities. The obtained KCr3As3 crystals are stable in air at room temperature, but it decomposes above a moderate temperature at 473 K. Due to this reason, our direct synthesis of KCr3As3 polycrystals from solid state reaction or single crys- tal growth from high-temperature solutions all failed. For comparison, we also reproduced polycrystal- line KCr3As3 samples by the deintercalation process from K2Cr3As3 powders which were synthesized by a solid state reaction method as reported.38 age of KCr3As3 crystal. (c) The XRD patterns for three KCr3As3 samples: (1) crystals of sample #B, (2) 4 ground powder of sample #B mixed with Si, (3) polycrystalline sample. The triangles represent Bragg peaks from Si, and the vertical bars represent the position of calculated Bragg peaks. The crystal structure of all samples was characterized by powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) at room temperature with a PAN-analytical X-ray diffractometer using Cu-Kα radiation. The electrical resistivity and heat capacity were measured in a Quantum Design physical property measurement system (PPMS) by the standard four-probe method and relaxation method respectively. The dc magnetization was meas- ured in a Quantum Design magnetic property measurement system (MPMS) under zero-field-cooling (ZFC) and field-cooling (FC) modes. The hexagonal crystal structure of the 133-type KCr3As3 is illustrated in Figure 1a. Due to the obvious lattice shrinkage along the a-axis during the ion deintercalation process (about 8.9% from the K2Cr3As3 precursor), the crystals of KCr3As3 split into threadlike filaments with micrometer-size diameters and millimeter-size lengths as shown by the scanning electron microscope image in Figure 1b, differing from the solid rod-like K2Cr3As3 crystal. This crystal morphology makes it incapable for a fully single- crystal X-ray diffraction analysis for structural determination; hence PXRD is employed for structural study. Figure 1c shows the XRD patterns for three samples, which reveal consistent diffraction peaks with identical crystal structure. The XRD patterns of polycrystalline sample indicate a pure single phase of the 133 structure, as indicated by the vertical bars of theoretical calculations for Bragg peak positions. space group, close to the previous results.38 For the annealed single crystals of sample #B, the XRD pat- terns on the crystal side surface only shows the peaks of (hk0) since the sample is thread-like along c- axis. To determine the lattice parameters, the sample #B was ground together with silicon powder (which acts as both of abraser and internal standard) and the PXRD patterns show several additional dif- fraction peaks relevant to the c-axis. We note that the KCr3As3 crystal has good ductility and it is diffi- cult to make fine powder, therefore the diffraction peaks still have highly preferred orientation. The re- fined lattice parameters for sample #B are a = 9.090(8) Å and c = 4.182(9) Å, which are very close to the results of polycrystalline samples. In addition, no obvious difference in XRD patterns for sample #A and sample #B was observed; and in all deintercalated samples, no diffraction peak from possible rem- nant K2Cr3As3 phase was detected. 5 (both sample #A and #B). (b) Enlarged view for the resistive superconducting transitions. (c) The super- conducting transitions under different magnetic fields for sample #B from 0 T to 9 T. (d) Derived upper critical field and the Pauli paramagnetic limit for sample #B. The temperature dependence of electrical resistivity was characterized from 1.8 K to 300 K for all samples and the data are shown in Figure 2. In our experiments, all batches of KCr3As3 single crystals show superconducting transitions with resistivity dropping to zero at low temperatures. But for the pol- ycrystalline samples, no superconductivity was observed as previously reported.38 In Figure 2a, we compared the resistivity behavior between the single crystals of K2Cr3As3 and KCr3As3 (both sample #A & #B). The room temperature resistivity values are close for all these samples, but the residual re- sistance ratio (RRR) of the KCr3As3 (~ 3 for sample #B) is much smaller than that of K2Cr3As3 (~ 60), indicating the poor crystalline quality of KCr3As3 crystals. This can be explained by the crystal defects and lattice deformation in the KCr3As3 crystal induced by the deintercalation process around room tem- perature, which also make the sample #A semiconducting-like behavior below 100 K. While after an- nealing, the crystal quality becomes better and it shows a metallic resistivity behavior for sample #B. This can be further illustrated by the superconducting transition as shown in Figure 2b. The sample #A shows a wide superconducting transition and an onset Tc ~ 4.5 K, while the sample #B shows a much narrower superconducting transition with a higher onset Tc ~ 5.0 K, and both values are lower than the Tc ~ 6.0 K of K2Cr3As3. 6 To further characterize the superconducting properties, we performed resistivity measurements on sample #B under different magnetic fields from 0 T to 9 T to study the upper critical field Hc2 (with the field perpendicular to the c-axis and electrical current along the c-axis), and the normalized data for /6K vs. T are shown in Figure 2c. With magnetic field increasing, the Tc shifts to lower temperatures systematically. We define the 0Hc2 as the field determined by 50% of the normal-state resistivity at Tc, and it was depicted as a function of temperature in Figure 2d. Considering Ginzburg-Landau (GL) theo- estimated to be 20.8 T. This value is much higher than the Pauli paramagnetic limited upper critical field 0Hp = 1.84Tc  8.6 T,40 which gives an evidence for unconventional superconductivity in KCr3As3, and similar phenomenon was also reported in Li0.9Mo6O17,41 Sr2RuO4 42 and K2Cr3As3 super- conductors.1 (c) Isothermal magnetization for sample #B at 2 K. (d) Low temperature heat capacity for sample #B depicted as Cp/T vs. T2 with a normal state linear fit. To demonstrate whether the observed superconductivity is the bulk nature of the K-133 phase or from possible minor remnant K-233 phase which cannot be detected by XRD, the temperature dependence of magnetic susceptibility and heat capacity were characterized and shown in Figure 3. Under a magnetic field of 10 Oe (perpendicular to the c-axis), the sample #A and #B show clear diamagnetic supercon- 7 ducting transition at 3.7 K and 4.7 K respectively. While the shielding volume fraction at 2 K from the ZFC data is only about 9% for sample #A, and it is significantly enhanced to nearly 98% for sample #B. This is consistent with the behavior of resistive superconducting transition. The results indicate that the sample #A only shows very poor superconductivity with a small superconducting fraction, while after annealing, as the crystal lattice is reformed, the sample #B becomes a good bulk superconductor. For the normal state susceptibility of sample #B, it roughly coincides with the Curie-Weiss behavior with no magnetic ordering transition. In Figure 3c we show the isothermal magnetization curve of sample #B with respect to magnetic field from -5 T to 5 T at 2 K, and it reveals typical type-II superconductivity in single crystalline KCr3As3. The temperature dependence of heat capacity is plotted in Figure 3d as a relationship for Cp/T vs. T2. The normal state data are linearly fitted with both electron and phonon contributions by Cp/T =  + T2 with T above Tc, from which we obtain the Sommerfeld coefficient  as 81.31 mJ/(mol K2) , and Debye temperature D as 319 K calculated according to D = [(12/5)NR4/ ]1/3. Comparing with K2Cr3As3, the close  values indicate similar strong electron correlations, while the higher D is reasonably originated from the condensed crystal lattice for KCr3As3.1,16 The clear heat capacity jump in the Cp curve happens at about 5 K. This indicates the occurrence of superconducting transition and further confirms the bulk superconductivity of KCr3As3 single crystals, which is consistent with the results of resistivity and mag- netization measurements. The similar superconducting and electronic characteristics in KCr3As3 and K2Cr3As3 possibly indicate same electron pairing mechanism that derives from different lattice sym- metry, and the lack of superconductivity in polycrystalline KCr3As3 and the annealing effects for single crystals reveal the extreme sensitivity of superconductivity by disorders in the crystal lattice. In summary, we synthesized the 133-type KCr3As3 single crystals, and found bulk superconductivity at a Tc of 5.0 K. This compound has a centrosymmetric crystal structure differing from its non- centrosymmetric counterpart K2Cr3As3. Considering similar superconducting characteristics but differ- ent crystal symmetry between the two superconductors, this KCr3As3 provides another platform to ac- quire deep insight into the unconventional superconducting mechanism in these Q1D Cr-based super- conductors. Corresponding Author * renzhian@iphy.ac.cn 8 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors are grateful for the financial supports from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 11474339), the National Basic Research Program of China (973 Program, No. 2016YFA0300301) and the Youth Innovation Promotion Association of the Chinese Academy of Sci- ences.