arXiv:1707.08491v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 29 May 2018 Direct Observation of Orbital Hybridisation in a Cuprate Superconductor C. E. Matt,1, 2 D. Sutter,1 A. M. Cook,1 Y. Sassa,3 M. M ̊ansson,4 O. Tjernberg,4 L. Das,1 M. Horio,1 D. Destraz,1 C. G. Fatuzzo,5 K. Hauser,1 M. Shi,2 M. Kobayashi,2 V. N. Strocov,2 T. Schmitt,2 P. Dudin,6 M. Hoesch,6 S. Pyon,7 T. Takayama,7 H. Takagi,7 O. J. Lipscombe,8 S. M. Hayden,8 T. Kurosawa,9 N. Momono,9, 10 M. Oda,9 T. Neupert,1 and J. Chang1 1Physik-Institut, Universit ̈at Z ̈urich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, CH-8057 Z ̈urich, Switzerland 2Swiss Light Source, Paul Scherrer Institut, CH-5232 Villigen PSI, Switzerland 3Department of Physics and Astronomy, Uppsala University, SE-75121 Uppsala, Sweden 4KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Materials Physics, SE-164 40 Kista, Stockholm, Sweden 5Institute of Physics, ́Ecole Polytechnique Fed ́erale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne CH-1015, Switzerland 6Diamond Light Source, Harwell Campus, Didcot OX11 0DE, UK. 7Department of Advanced Materials, University of Tokyo, Kashiwa 277-8561, Japan 8H. H. Wills Physics Laboratory, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1TL, United Kingdom 9Department of Physics, Hokkaido University - Sapporo 060-0810, Japan 10Department of Applied Sciences, Muroran Institute of Technology, Muroran 050-8585, Japan The minimal ingredients to explain the es- sential physics of layered copper-oxide (cuprates) materials remains heavily debated. Effective low- energy single-band models of the copper-oxygen orbitals are widely used because there exists no strong experimental evidence supporting multi- band structures. Here we report angle-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy experiments on La- based cuprates that provide direct observation of a two-band structure. This electronic struc- ture, qualitatively consistent with density func- tional theory, is parametrised by a two-orbital (dx2−y2 and dz2) tight-binding model. We quan- tify the orbital hybridisation which provides an explanation for the Fermi surface topology and the proximity of the van-Hove singularity to the Fermi level. Our analysis leads to a unification of electronic hopping parameters for single-layer cuprates and we conclude that hybridisation, re- straining d-wave pairing, is an important optimi- sation element for superconductivity. Identifying the factors that limit the transition temper- ature Tc of high-temperature cuprate superconductivity is a crucial step towards revealing the design principles underlying the pairing mechanism1. It may also provide an explanation for the dramatic variation of Tc across the known single-layer compounds2. Although supercon- ductivity is certainly promoted within the copper-oxide layers, the apical oxygen position may play an impor- tant role in defining the transition temperature3–7. The CuO6 octahedron lifts the degeneracy of the nine cop- per 3d-electrons and generates fully occupied t2g and 3/4-filled eg states8. With increasing apical oxygen dis- tance dA to the CuO2 plane, the eg states split to cre- ate a 1/2-filled dx2−y2 band. The distance dA thus de- fines whether single or two-band models are most ap- propriate to describe the low energy band structure. It has also been predicted that dA influences Tc in at least two different ways. First, the distance dA controls the charge transfer gap between the oxygen and copper site which, in turn, suppresses superconductivity5,9. Second, Fermi level dz2-hybridisation, depending on dA, reduces the pairing strength6,10. Experimental evidence, how- ever, points in opposite directions. Generally, single layer materials with larger dA have indeed a larger Tc2. How- ever, STM studies of Bi-based cuprates suggest an anti- correlation between dA and Tc11. In the quest to disentangle these causal relation between dA and Tc, it is imperative to experimentally reveal the orbital character of the cuprate band struc- ture. The comparably short apical oxygen distance dA makes La2−xSrxCuO4 an ideal candidate for such a study. Experimentally, however, it is challenging to determine the orbital character of the states near the Fermi energy (EF). In fact, the dz2 band has never been identified directly by angle-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy (ARPES) experiments. A large majority of ARPES studies have focused on the pseudogap, superconducting gap and quasiparticle self-energy properties in near vicinity to the Fermi level12. An exception to this trend are studies of the so-called waterfall structure13–17 that lead to the observation of band structures below the dx2−y2 band14,16. However, the origin and hence orbital character of these bands was never addressed. Resonant inelastic x-ray scattering has been used to probe excitations between orbital d-levels. In this fashion, insight about the position of dz2, dxz, dyz, dxy states with respect to dx2−y2 has been obtained18. Although difficult to disentangle, it has been argued that for LSCO the dz2 level is found above dxz, dyz, dxy19,20. To date, a comprehensive study of the dz2 momentum dependence is missing and therefore the coupling between the dz2 and dx2−y2 bands has not been revealed. X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) experiments, sensitive to the unoccupied states, concluded only marginal hybridisation of dx2−y2 and dz2 states in La2−xSrxCuO4(LSCO)21. Therefore, the role of dz2-hybridisation remains ambiguous22. Here we provide direct ultra-violet and soft-xray 2 map (EDM) along cut 1 as indicated in c. Dashed green line indicates the position of MDC displayed on top by turquoise circles. A linear background has been subtracted from the MDC which is fitted (blue line) by four Lorentzians (red lines). intensity, shown in false colour scale, is integrated over ±10 meV. Black (red) lines indicate the position of dx2−y2 (dz2) bands. The curve thickness in b and e is scaled to the contribution of the dz2 orbital. Semitransparent lines are guides to the eye. dz2 and dxy-derived bands. All data has been recorded with hν = 160 eV. ARPES measurements of the dz2 band in La-based single layer compounds. The dz2 band is located about 1 eV below the Fermi level at the Brillouin zone (BZ) corners. From these corners, the dz2 band is dispersing downwards along the nodal and anti-nodal directions, consistent with density functional theory (DFT) calculations. The experimental and DFT band structure, including only dx2−y2 and dz2 orbitals, is parametrised using a two-orbital tight-binding model23. The presence of the dz2 band close to the Fermi level allows to describe the Fermi surface topology for all single layer compounds (including HgBa2CuO4+x and Tl2Ba2CuO6+x) with similar hopping parameters for the dx2−y2 orbital. This unification of electronic parameters implies that the main difference between single layer cuprates originates from the hybridisation between dx2−y2 and dz2 orbitals. The significantly increased hybridisation in La-based cuprates pushes the van-Hove singularity close to the Fermi level. This explains why the Fermi surface differs from other single layer compounds. We directly quantify the orbital hybridi- sation that plays a sabotaging role for superconductivity. Results Material choices: Different dopings of La2−xSrxCuO4 spanning from x = 0.12 to 0.23 in addition to an overdoped compound of La1.8−xEu0.2SrxCuO4 with x = 0.21 have been studied. These compounds represent different crystal structures: low-temperature orthorhom- bic (LTO), low-temperature tetragonal (LTT) and the high-temperature tetragonal (HTT). Our results are very similar across all crystal structures and dopings (see Supplementary Fig. 1). To keep the comparison to band structure calculations simple, this paper focuses on results obtained in the tetragonal phase of overdoped La2−xSrxCuO4 with x = 0.23. Electronic band structure: A raw ARPES energy distribution map (EDM), along the nodal direction, is displayed in Fig. 1a. Near EF, the widely studied nodal quasiparticle dispersion with predominately dx2−y2 char- acter is observed12. This band reveals the previously reported electron-like Fermi surface of La2−xSrxCuO4, x = 0.2324,25 (Fig. 1b), the universal nodal Fermi veloc- ity vF ≈ 1.5 eV ̊A26 and a band dispersion kink around 70 meV26. The main observation reported here is the second band dispersion at ∼ 1 eV below the Fermi level EF (see Fig. 1 and 2) and a hybridisation gap splitting the two (see Fig. 3). This second band – visible in both raw momentum distribution curves (MDC) and constant energy maps (CEM) – disperses downwards away from the BZ-corners. Since a pronounced kz-dependence is 3 soft-xray ARPES EDMs recorded on La2−xSrxCuO4, x = 0.23 along in-plane high-symmetry directions for kz = 0 and kz = π/c′ as indicated in g. White lines represent the two-orbital (dz2 and dx2−y2) tight-binding model as described in the text. The line width in b and d indicates the orbital weight of the dz2 orbital. (e),(f), Corresponding in-plane DFT band structure at kz = 0 and kz = π/c′, calculated for La2CuO4 (see methods section). The colour code indicates the orbital character of the bands. Around the anti-nodal points (X or R), strong hybridisation of dz2 and dx2−y2 orbitals is found. In contrast, symmetry prevents any hybridisation along the nodal lines (Γ–M or Z–A). (g), Sketch of the 3D BZ of LSCO with high symmetry lines and points as indicated. observed for this band structure (see Figs. 2 and 4) a trivial surface state can be excluded . Subtracting a background intensity profile (see Supplementary Fig. 2) is a standard method that enhances visualisation of this second band structure. In fact, using soft x-rays (160 eV - 600 eV), at least two additional bands (β and γ) are found below the dx2−y2 dominated band crossing the Fermi level. Here, focus is set entirely on the β band dispersion closest to the dx2−y2 dominated band. This band is clearly observed at the BZ corners (see Figs. 1–3). The complete in-plane (kx, ky) and out-of-plane (kz) band dispersion is presented in Fig. 4. Orbital band characters: To gain insight into the or- bital character of these bands, a comparison with a DFT band structure calculation (see methods section) of La2CuO4 is shown in Fig. 2. The eg states (dx2−y2 and dz2) are generally found above the t2g bands (dxy, dxz, and dyz). The overall agreement between the experiment and the DFT calculation (see Supplementary Fig. 3) thus suggests that the two bands nearest to the Fermi level are composed predominately of dx2−y2 and dz2 orbitals. This conclusion can also be reached by pure experimen- tal arguments. Photoemission matrix element selection rules contain information about the orbital band char- acter. They can be probed in a particular experimen- tal setup where a mirror-plane is defined by the incident light and the electron analyser slit12. With respect to this plane the electromagnetic light field has odd (even) parity for ̄σ ( ̄π) polarisation (see Supplementary Fig. 4). Orienting the mirror plane along the nodal direction (cut 1 in Fig. 1), the dz2 and dxy (dx2−y2) orbitals have even (odd) parity. For a final-state with even parity, selec- tion rules12 dictate that the dz2 and dxy-derived bands should appear (vanish) in the ̄π ( ̄σ) polarisation chan- nel and vice versa for dx2−y2. Due to their orientation in real-space, the dxz and dyz orbitals are not expected to show a strict switching behavior along the nodal di- rection27. As shown in Fig. 1f-g, two bands (α and γ) appear with ̄σ-polarised light while for ̄π-polarised light bands β and γ′ are observed. Band α which crosses EF is assigned to dx2−y2 while band γ has to originate from dxz/dyz orbitals as dz2 and dxy-derived states are fully suppressed for ̄σ-polarised light. In the EDM, recorded with ̄π-polarised light, band (β) at ∼ 1 eV binding en- ergy and again a band (γ′) at ∼ 1.6 eV is observed. From the orbital shape, a smaller kz dispersion is expected for dx2−y2 and dxy-derived bands than for those from dz2 or- bitals. As the β band exhibits a significant kz dispersion (see Fig. 4), much larger than observed for the dx2−y2 band, we conclude that it is of dz2 character. The γ′ band which is very close to the γ band is therefore of dxy character. Interestingly, this dz2-derived band has stronger in-plane than out-of-plane dispersion, suggest- ing that there is a significant hopping to in-plane px and py oxygen orbitals. Therefore the assumption that the dz2 states are probed uniquely through the apical oxy- 4 Left panel: Ultravio- let ARPES data recorded along the antinodal direction using 160 eV linear horizontal polarised photons. Solid white lines are the same tight-binding model as shown in Fig. 2. Right panel: Tight-binding model of the dx2−y2 and dz2 bands along the anti-nodal direction. Gray lines are the model prediction in absence of inter-orbital hopping (tαβ = 0) between dx2−y2 and dz2. In this case, the bands are crossing near the Γ-point. This degeneracy is lifted once a finite inter-orbital hopping pa- rameter is considered. For solid black lines tαβ = 210 meV and other hopping parameters have been adjusted accord- ingly. Inset indicates the Fermi surface (green line) and the Γ − X cut directions. coloured background displays the am- plitude of the hybridisation term Ψ(k) that vanishes on the nodal lines. gen pz orbital21 has to be taken with caution. Discussion Most minimal models aiming to describe the cuprate physics start with an approximately half-filled single dx2−y2 band on a two-dimensional square lattice. Exper- imentally, different band structures have been observed across single-layer cuprate compounds. The Fermi surface topology of La2−xSrxCuO4 is, for example, less rounded compared to (Bi,Pb)2(Sr,La)2CuO6+x (Bi2201), Tl2Ba2CuO6+x (Tl2201), and HgBa2CuO4+x (Hg1201). Within a single-band tight-binding model the rounded Fermi surface shape of the single layer compounds Hg1201 and Tl2201 is described by setting r = (|t′ α| + |t′′ α|)/tα ∼ 0.46, where tα, t′ α, and t′′ α are nearest, next nearest and next-next nearest neighbour hopping parameters (see Table I and Supplementary Fig. 4). For La2−xSrxCuO4 with more flat Fermi surface sections, significantly lower values of r have been reported. For example, for overdoped La1.78Sr0.22CuO4, r ∼ 0.2 was found24,25. The single-band premise thus leads to varying hopping parameters across the cuprate families, stimulating the empirical observation that T max c roughly scales with t′ α 2. This, however, is in direct contrast to t-J models that predict the opposite correlation28,29. Thus the single-band structure applied broadly to all single-layer cuprates lead to conclusions that challenge conventional theoretical approaches. The observation of the dz2 band calls for a re- evaluation of the electronic structure in La-based cuprates using a two-orbital tight-binding model (see methods section). Crucially, there is a hybridisation term dz2 orbitals, where tαβ is a hopping parameter that char- acterises the strength of orbital hybridisation. In princi- ple, one may attempt to describe the two observed bands independently by taking tαβ = 0. However, the prob- lem then returns to the single band description with the above mentioned contradictions. Furthermore, tαβ = 0 implies a band crossing in the antinodal direction that is not observed experimentally (see Fig. 3). In fact, from the avoided band crossing one can directly estimate tαβ ≈ 200 meV. As dictated by the different eigenval- ues of the orbitals under mirror symmetry, the hybridi- sation term Ψ(k) vanishes on the nodal lines kx = ±ky (see inset of Fig. 3). Hence the pure dx2−y2 and dz2 orbital band character is expected along these nodal lines. The hybridisation Ψ(k) is largest in the anti-nodal region, pushing the van-Hove singularity of the upper band close to the Fermi energy and in case of overdoped La2−xSrxCuO4 across the Fermi level. In addition to the hybridisation parameter tαβ and the chemical potential μ, six free parameters enter the tight-binding model that yields the entire band structure (white lines in Figs. 2 and 4). Nearest and next-nearest in-plane hopping parameters between dx2−y2 (tα, t′ α) and dz2 (tβ, t′ β) orbitals are introduced to capture the Fermi surface topology and in-plane dz2 band dispersion (see Supplementary Fig. 4). The kz dispersion is described by nearest and next-nearest out-of-plane hoppings (tβz, t′ βz) of the dz2 orbital. The four dz2 hopping parameters and the chemical potential μ are determined from the exper- imental band structure along the nodal direction where Ψ(k) = 0. Furthermore, the α and β band dispersion in the anti-nodal region and the Fermi surface topology provide the parameters tα, t′ α and tαβ. Our analysis re- veals a finite band coupling −tαβ = 0.21 eV resulting in a strong anti-nodal orbital hybridisation (see Fig. 2 and a significantly larger value r ∼ −0.32 is found and hence a unification of t′ α/tα ratios for all single-layer compounds is achieved. Finally, we discuss the implication of orbital hy- bridisation for superconductivity and pseudogap physics. First, we notice that a pronounced pseudogap is found in the anti-nodal region of La1.8−xEu0.2SrxCuO4 with x = 0.21 – consistent with transport experiments30 (see Supplementary Fig. 5). The fact that tαβ of La1.59Eu0.2Sr0.21CuO4 is similar to tαβ of LSCO sug- gests that the pseudogap is not suppressed by the dz2- hybridisation. To this end, a comparison to the 1/4-filled 5 and dz2 bands (along gray plane in b). Whereas the dx2−y2 band display no kz dependence beyond matrix element effects, the dz2 band displays a discernible kz dispersion. The iso-energy map below the cube has binding energy E −EF = −1.3 eV. White surface (−1.3 eV) of the β band. The colour code indicates the k-dependent orbital hybridisation. The orbital hybridisation at EF is largest in the antinodal region of the kz = π/c′ plane where the dz2 admixture at kF amounts to ∼ 1/3. eg system Eu2−xSrxNiO4 with x = 1.1 is interesting31,32. This material has the same two-orbital band structure with protection against hybridisation along the nodal lines. Both the dx2−y2 and dz2 bands are crossing the Fermi level, producing two Fermi surface sheets31. De- spite an even stronger dz2-admixture of the dx2−y2 de- rived band a d-wave-like pseudogap has been reported32. The pseudogap physics thus seems to be unaffected by the orbital hybridisation. It has been argued that orbital hybridisation – of the kind reported here – is unfavourable for superconducting pairing6,10. It thus provides an explanation for the varying T max c across single layer cuprate materials. Although other mechanisms, controlled by the apical oxygen distance, (e.g. variation of the copper-oxygen charge transfer gap4) are not excluded our results demonstrate that orbital hybridisation exists and is an important control parameter for superconductivity.