arXiv:1710.08173v3 [cond-mat.supr-con] 5 May 2018 Comment on ”No Evidence for Orbital Loop Currents in Charge Ordered YBa2Cu3O6+x from Polarized Neutron Diffraction” P. Bourges∗ and Y. Sidis† Laboratoire L ́eon Brillouin, CEA-CNRS, Universit ́e Paris-Saclay, CEA Saclay, 91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France L. Mangin-Thro Institut Laue-Langevin, 71 avenue des martyrs, 38000 Grenoble, France (Dated: May 8, 2018) Intra-unit cell magnetic order has been observed in four different families of high-temperature superconductors from polarized neutron diffraction experiments and supported by several other techniques. That order, which does not break translation symmetry, is consistent with the predicted orbital moments generated by two microscopic loop currrents in each CuO2 cell. Recently, using polarized neutron diffraction, Croft et al [Phys. Rev. B 96, 214504 (2017)] claim to find no evidence for such orbital loop currents in charge ordered YBa2Cu3O6+x. Their experiment is done with detwinned samples at least 100 times smaller than in previous experiments without counting much longer. We show by a detailed quantitative analysis of their data that contrary to their conclusion, the magnetic signal falls below their threshold of detection. None of the data reported by Croft et al challenge the universality of the intra-unit cell order in cuprates. I. INTRODUCTION In an extensive series of papers [1–10], we and our col- laborators demonstrated using polarized neutron diffrac- tion (PND) that the pseudogap state of under- doped cuprate superconductors is characterized by a Q=0 magnetic order, also referred to as an intra unit cell (IUC) magnetic order. That encompasses results in four different cuprates families with a large variety of hole doping (p): YBa2Cu3O6+x (YBCO) [1–5], HgBa2CuO4+δ , La2−xSrxCuO4 and Bi2Sr2CaCuO8+δ . Two reviews were written to give more experimental and technical details and put the different neutron results in perspective with the other physical properties of high-temperature cuprates . The PND experiment we discuss here is very challenging. The earlier results revealed for the first time the IUC magnetic signal in five different YBCO samples and its stricking evolution with hole doping, fol- lowing the pseudogap physics. Gradually, the data anal- ysis was more quantitative in the subsequent publica- tions in YBCO [2–5]. Over the years, the data analysis has been improved for quantitative accuracy (see for in- stance, the refined analysis on the sample C in Mangin- Thro et al compare to our original report in Fauqu ́e et al). This has important consequences on the magnetic signal amplitude and the confidence one can get from it. In a recent paper, Croft et al claim that they found no evidence for the appearance of magnetic order below 300 K in two YBCO samples. We show that they could not observe the magnetic signal owing to the insufficient detection capability of their measurements (see for details). ∗Electronic address: philippe.bourges@cea.fr †Electronic address: yvan.sidis@cea.fr • First, the neutron intensity is proportional to sample mass. By using samples at least ∼ 100 times smaller than ours on a spectrometer with about 3 times larger neutron flux (at the used wavelength), Croft et al face about 30 times more experimental limitations. The counting times in previous reports[1–10] could reach 2 hours/point. Even after a counting time of 4 hours/point in some of their data, their experiment does not reach the required accuracy. • Second, Croft et al erroneously overestimate by a factor ∼ 3 the magnetic signal that Fauqu ́e et al have previously reported. This seems to be related to multiple simplifications of their analysis, spanning incorrect data calibration, misleading sample comparison, ignorance of the impact of detwinning. Additional experimental lim- itations have been overlooked in . Indeed, not deter- mining the spin-flip reference line properly, not doing a polarization analysis and inadequate control of the flip- ping ratio of the neutron beam add to uncertainties in their measurements . • Third, the comparison with local probes results in is outdated and partial as it dismisses the recent liter- ature about muon spin resonance results . Recent muon spin rotation measurements report magnetic corre- lations at T* with finite time-scales (∼ 10 ns), which are fluctuating slowly enough to appear static to neutrons. This observation is in disagrement with the conclusion of Croft et al, but fully consistent with our observation of IUC order [1–10]. Finite time scale magnetic correla- tion can be associated with slowly fluctuating magnetic domains, such short range correlations have been actu- ally reported in nearly optimally doped YBCO using PND. This would have the effect to reduce the magnetic signal by another factor of ∼ 3 in the experiment of Croft et al . The claimed upper bound for a possible magnetic mo- ment is therefore not correct and should be disregarded. None of the data reported by Croft et al disprove 2 (color online) Inverse of the measured flipping ra- tio, R−1 meas, for two detwinned underdoped YBCO samples at two Bragg reflections (top panel) Q=(010) and (lower panel) Q=(011). The black full symbols corresponds to the data of Croft et al (sample YBCO6.54 with p=0.104) and the open red squares ones are those for sample C YBCO6.6 (p=0.115), of Fauqu ́e et al(ref. for the (010) reflection and refs. for (011)). For the open symbols, the error bar is lower than the size of the point. All blue lines correspond to incorrect estimates reported by Croft et al of the data of Fauqu ́e et al (see for details). that the IUC magnetic order is universal in all cuprates. II. RAW DATA COMPARISON First, we compare the raw experimental data obtained by Fauqu ́e et al and Croft et al. In , we have studied an array of co-aligned high-quality twin- free single crystals. As the samples studied by Croft et al, each single crystal was synthesized using the same self-flux method using a BaZrO3 crucible as described in previous reports and on which charge density wave order has been observed as well. As the IUC magnetic order does not break the symme- try of the lattice, one should study the inverse flipping ratio R−1 meas at a Bragg position where the signal is ex- pected to highlight a possible magnetic intensity at low temperature. The inverse flipping ratio R−1 meas reads: R−1 meas = ISF INSF = Imag INSF + R−1 0 (1) where INSF and ISF stand for the non-spin-flip and spin- flip intensities, respectively. As regularly emphasized[3– 5, 9, 10, 12, 14], R−1 meas is essentially a ratio of measured quantities and does not depend on any assumptions on nuclear structure factor or flipping ratio. Changes in R−1 meas for the same Bragg peak should be comparable among the different studies. The second part of Eq. 1 shows how the magnetic intensity Imag can be extracted by comparison with the bare inverse flipping ratio R−1 0 (background baseline) as it has been shown in several reports [3–5, 9, 10]. We report in Fig. 1 the raw R−1 meas at a Bragg positions (010) and (011) for two detwinned samples: sample H1 with p=0.104 of Croft et al and sample C of Fauqu ́e et al (see for samples description). Within er- ror bars, there is no disagreement between both data for the (010) reflection (Fig 1.a). However, Fig 1.b shows a certain difference between both datasets for the (011) re- flection whose possible origins can be understood as dis- cussed below in the next section (see also ). For both reflections, a more surprising discrepancy occurs between the actual data of Fauqu ́e et al and the alleged ones estimated by Croft et al (the dashed and dotted lines in their figures 8d and 8e). Obviously, both quantities should exactly match but they do not. That underlines the erroneous analysis performed by Croft et al, and this for both Bragg peaks. We give in the supplemen- tal material a discussion on possible origins of this discrepancy. Before showing alternative analyses of Croft et al data, two remarks are necessary: • First, the ratio ∆R−1 mag = Imag/INSF in Eq. 1 does not change appreciably versus doping for the Bragg peak (011) in the doping range of interest here (p=0.1-0.12). INSF corresponds to the nuclear structure factor |FN|2 where FN is given for instance by Eq. (12) in . A simple calculation shows that nuclear structure factor for the Bragg reflection (011) versus oxygen content are de- creasing with increasing oxygen content similarly than the IUC magnetic intensity. Therefore, it cannot be objected that the ratio ∆R−1 mag should decrease upon dop- ing as does the magnetic intensity like it is considered in . As a result, similar ∆R−1 mag is expected for both samples in Fig. 1 within a 20% difference. • Second, it should be noticed that the data shown for the Bragg peak (011) of sample C is the best example of a IUC magnetic signal ever reported in YBCO. That corresponds to the highest experimentally reported ratio of the magnetic intensity compared to the nuclear intensity in Eq. 1: ∆R−1 mag=0.25 % at 70K for the (011) reflection. All other reports in twinned samples are lower [1–4]; this is due to a larger nuclear intensity of the (101) Bragg intensity which is averaged with the (011) peak in twinned samples. 3 (color online) 1/R=ISF /INSF data for sample H1 (p=0.104) reproduced from Croft et al . The data points are exactly the same as those reported in Fig. 8 in (re- produced as well in Fig. 1) but here we zoom on the data. The dashed lines are calculated for the three different scenar- ios considered in the text. The top right panel represents A3 rocking scans convoluted by the resolution function (blue) for the scenario B (red) for the scenario C. Based on comparison of raw data in Fig. 1, we demon- strate that the analysis of Croft et al is highly ques- tionable. As shown in Fig. 1, Croft et al allegedly estimate ∆R−1 mag=0.75 % (see Fig. 1) at odds with our results. III. ALTERNATIVE DATA ANALYSIS In , we show various points which can explain the discrepancy of Fig. 1 between the raw data of Fauqu ́e et al and the alledged estimate made by Croft et al . For the Bragg peak (011), the main error in comes from improper data calibration. For the (010) Bragg position, the magnetic structure in twin-free sam- ple should be properly acknowledged. As a result, the full and dashed lines in the figures 8,9 and 11, of Croft et al are all erroneous. Another global overestimated factor of 20% has been neglected. Finally, a close com- parison of the data analysis of both measurements reveal numerous limitations with the PND experiments in . Next, the dynamical nature of IUC magnetic signal as shown by recent muon spin resonance data have been ignored in (see for details). Such low frequency fluctuations are necessarily related to the for- mation of finite-size magnetic domains , correspond- ing to finite correlation lengths of the magnetic order observed in neutron diffraction. Such a short range cor- relation length of the IUC order has been observed near optimally doped YBCO sample. In underdoped samples (for dopings p∼0.1-0.11), one can simply give an upper limit of the correlation length along the c axis ξc ≥ 75 ̊A as the observed magnetic peak is resolu- tion limited due to large crystals mosaicity of ∼ 1◦ in . In contrast, the measurements carried out by Croft et al are performed on tiny samples with mosaic spread at least 10 times smalller. As shown in the top-right panel of Fig. 2, a magnetic signal with a correlation length ξc ∼ 75 ̊A would exhibit a significantly broader rocking scan (A3) peak than for a long range magnetic order as- sumed in . The magnetic amplitude at the Bragg po- sition would be reduced accordingly ∼3 times compared to the one of true long range ordered state. Clearly, this factor 3 can be invoked to explain the difference in Fig. 1 between the data of Fauqu ́e et al and those of Croft et al due to the different mosaicity of the samples. Further, we turn to a consistent comparison of the magnetic signal reported by Fauqu ́e et al to the ex- perimental data of Croft et al . In Fig. 2, we zoom R−1 meas = ISF /INSF data for the sample p=0.104 of Croft et al . The same treatment can be found in for the other sample (p=0.123) of Croft et al with the same conclusion. The inverse of flipping ratio at the reflection (020) is linear in temperature with a positive slope as it has been shown to exist . As discussed in , this slope is inevitable as the sample drifts in the neutron beam upon changing temperature. Croft et al arbitrarily describe it with a flat horizontal line only. At the accu- racy required to observe the IUC magnetic signal, this is not a correct approximation. With the large grey shaded area, we next represent the zone of the limit of detection, corresponding to δR−1 ≃ ±0.001 , on both sides of an average sloping line. This area is due to combined effects of the statistical errors of each points, occurence of off-statistical points (possibly related to mechanical errors in positioning) and the scarce number of points (especially above T*). This area is simply deduced from the measurements at the Bragg (020) reflection where no magnetic signal is expected for the IUC order. For clarity, the same error of δR−1 ≃ ± 0.1% is used for all plots. That error is typically equivalent to an error of ≃ ±2 on the flipping ratio or δISF ≃ ±4% of the spin- flip intensity. This uncertainty is not negligible as our best report of a magnetic signal is ∆R−1 mag ≃ 0.25% (Fig. 1). The error on the spin-flip intensity in previous PND 4 experiments leads to an estimate of δR−1 ≃ ± 0.01-0.02 % (see e.g. Fig. S1 in the Supplemental mate- rials of Mangin-Thro et al for an example of measured error bars). In Fig. 2, the detection limit of δR−1 ≃ ±0.1% is next reported for the Bragg reflections (010) and (011) where the magnetic signal is expected. To compare that set of data, with those of Fauqu ́e et al, we then consider three different scenarios which are plotted in Figs. 2: A) no magnetic signal is present, B) a long range magnetic order is present C) a magnetic order with short range correlation along the c-direction is present (with the same integrated intensity of scenario (B)). The amplitude in scenario (B) corresponds to the amplitude expected for a detwinned sample with the appropriate doping level. That basically corresponds to our best experimental evidence of a magnetic signal ∆R−1 mag ≃ 0.25% as plotted in Fig. 1. The top right panel of Fig. 2 simulates the A3 rocking scan for the scenario B in blue and the scenario C in red where both hypothetical curves have been convoluted by the resolution function given by the Fig. 6.a in . Following the various points discussed above and in line with the Fig. 1, one clearly sees that the expected signal from is only marginally larger than the exper- imental uncertainty (error area). For all the three scenar- ios presented above, only one parameter, the overall level of the background of the baseline, is fitted. All the other parameters are given from the literature and the dis- cussion above. Clearly, for all cases, scenarios A (of Croft et al ) and C (a short range along c∗ IUC magnetic order compatible with the report of ref. ) cannot be distinguished at all. Even for a true long range magnetic order along c∗ (scenario B), the data are insufficient to eliminate with confidence the existence of IUC order due to indetermination of the baseline. Clearly, the sensitiv- ity of the experiment is insufficient to observe the IUC order contrary to the claim of Croft et al . IV. CONCLUSION In conclusion, Croft et al do not have the experi- mental accuracy to observe the IUC signal that we have been reporting for the last decade in YBCO [1–5]. Dif- ferent factors applied: first, the accuracy limit of the ex- periment of Croft et al is represented by the shaded areas which indicate the uncertainty of δR−1 mag ≃ ± 0.1% on the thermal dependence of the baseline for the ratio R−1 0 in Eq. 1. Second, the purported level of intensity of Fauqu ́e et al has been erroneously and systematically overestimated by a factor ∼ 3 (see Fig. 1). That corre- sponds to the scenario B of figs. 2, where a long range IUC order is assumed. Third, an additional factor 3 oc- curs if the signal is short ranged along L with ξc ≃ 75 ̊A (scenario C of Figs. 2). The most plausible scenario for the magnetic intensity lies in between scenarios B and C in Fig. 2. This is clearly below the detection limit of the data of Croft et al . The claimed upper bound for a possible magnetic moment in is therefore baseless and should be disregarded. The IUC magnetic signal has been well documented for the last decade using polarized neutron diffraction[1–10]. The magnetic signal, observed in four cuprate familiees, is seen only at specific Bragg positions. Data in YBCO and in HgBa2CuO4+δ are nearly indistinguishable with a systematic doping dependence. In all cuprates, impor- tant polarization analysis has been conducted and the polarization sum rule, which demonstrates the magnetic nature of the signal, always nicely obeyed. The experiment is highly non-trivial with many tech- nical pitfalls to miss the genuine signal. Among other features, it requires sufficient data at high temperature for a proper knowledge of the background. The IUC magnetic signal falls below the experimental sensitivity of the experiment of Croft et al predominantly be- cause too tiny YBCO samples were studied (at least 100 times smaller than in previous reports). Further, a large number of flaws and inaccuracies in their data analysis invalidates their comparison with the previous data. Their estimate of the magnetic signal previously reported could be incorrect up to an order of magnitude. None of the data shown invalidate that the IUC magnetic order is an intrinsic property of the pseudogap state of cuprates. acknowlegments We wish to thank Gabriel Aeppli, Victor Bal ́edent, Dalila Bounoua, Johan Chang, Niels-Bech Christensen, Benoit Fauqu ́e, Martin Greven, Jaehong Jeong, Steve Kivelson, Yuan Li, Tasutomo Uemura and Chandra Varma for stimulating discussions on different aspects related to this work. We acknowledge financial supports from the project NirvAna (contract ANR-14-OHRI-0010) of the ANR French agency. B. Fauqu ́e, Y. Sidis, V. Hinkov, S. Pailh`es, C. T. Lin, X. Chaud, and P. Bourges, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96 197001 H. A. Mook, Y. Sidis, B. Fauqu ́e, V. Bal ́edent, and P. Bourges, Phys. Rev. B 78 020506 (2008). V. Bal ́edent, D. Haug, Y. Sidis, V. Hinkov, C.T. Lin, P. Bourges, Phys. Rev. B 83, 104504 (2011). L. Mangin-Thro, Y. Sidis, A. Wildes, and P. Bourges, Nature Comm. 6, 7705 (2015). L. Mangin-Thro, Yuan Li, Y. Sidis, and P. Bourges, Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 097003 (2017). Y. Li, V. Bal ́edent, N. Barisic, Y. Cho, B. Fauqu ́e, Y. Sidis, G. Yu, X. Zhao, P. Bourges, and M. Greven, Nature Yuan Li, V. Bal ́edent, N. Barisic, Y. C. Cho, Y. Sidis, G. Yu, X. Zhao, P. Bourges, and M. Greven, Phys. Rev. B 5 V. Bal ́edent, B. Fauqu ́e, Y. Sidis, N.B. Christensen, S. Pailh`es, K. Conder, E. Pomjakushina, J. Mesot, and P. Bourges, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105 027004 (2010). S. De Almeida-Didry, Y. Sidis, V. Bal ́edent, F. Giovan- nelli, I. Monot-Laffez and P. Bourges, Phys. Rev. B (RC) L. Mangin-Thro, Y. Sidis, P. Bourges, S. De Almeida- Didry, F. Giovannelli and I. Monot-Laffez Phys. Rev. B The measurements have been performed using various polarized neutron instruments: triple-axis spectrometers, 4F1 at Laboratoire L ́eon Brillouin and IN22 Institut Laue Langevin (ILL), as well as a diffractometer D7 at ILL. P. Bourges, and Y. Sidis, C. R. Physique, 12, 461, (2011). Y. Sidis, and P. Bourges, Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 449, 012012 (2013). T. P. Croft, E. Blackburn, J. Kulda, Ruixing Liang, D. A. Bonn, W. N. Hardy, and S. M. Hayden, Phys. Rev. B 96, 214504 (2017). A critical comment on the original manuscript of Croft, et al (arXiv:1709.06128v1) can be found at The latter versions of the manuscript (arXiv:1709.06128v2 and arXiv:1709.06128v3) do not fully adress the issues high- lighted in the original comment. See Supplemental Material [to appear at https://journals.aps.org/prb/supplemental/.... ] for sample comparison, data calibration, data collec- tion strategy and analysis and comparsion with local probes results (reproducing the previous longer version of that comment which can be found at https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.08173v2). Jian Zhang, Z. F. Ding, C. Tan, K. Huang, O. O. Bernal, P.-C. Ho, G. D. Morris, A. D. Hillier, P. K. Biswas, S. P. Cottrell, H. Xiang, X. Yao, D. E. MacLaughlin, Lei Shu, Sci. Adv., 4, eaao5235 (2018) (arXiv:1703.06799). A. Pal, S.R. Dunsiger, K. Akintola, A. Fang, A. Elhosary, M. Ishikado, H. Eisaki, J.E. Sonier arXiv:1707.01111 V. Hinkov, S. Pailhes, P. Bourges, Y. Sidis, A. Ivanov, A. ‘ Kulakov, C. T. Lin, D. P. Chen, C. Bernhard, and B. Keimer, Nature (London) 430, 650 (2004). S. Blanco-Canosa, A. Frano, E. Schierle, J. Porras, T. Loew, M. Minola, M. Bluschke, E. Weschke, B. Keimer, and M. Le Tacon, Phys. Rev. B 90, 054513 (2014). C. M. Varma, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 26, 505701