1 Superconductivity of Cobalt in Thin Films Nasrin Banu1, M. Aslam2, Arpita Paul3, Sanjib Banik4, S. Das2, S. Datta2, A. Roy5, I. Das4, G. Sheet2, U. V. Waghmare3 and B. N. Dev1* 1Department of Materials Science, Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, 2A & 2B Raja S. C. Mullick Road, Kolkata 700032, India. 2Department of Physical Sciences, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research Mohali, Sector 81,S. A. S. Nagar, Manauli, PO 140306, India. 3Theoretical Sciences Unit, Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research, Jakkur, Bangalore 560 064, India. 4Condensed Matter Physics Division, Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics, 1/AF Bidhannagar, Kolkata 700064, India. 5Microelectronic Research Center, The University of Texas at Austin, 10100 Burnet Road, Bldg 160, MER 1.606J, Austin, Texas 78758, USA. *msbnd@iacs.res.in, *bhupen.dev@gmail.com Abstract: Due to competing long range ferromagnetic order, the transition metals Fe, Co and Ni are not superconductors at ambient pressure. While superconductivity was observed in a non- magnetic phase of Fe, stabilized under pressure, it is yet to be discovered in Co and Ni under any experimental conditions. Here, we report emergence of superconductivity in the recently discovered high-density nonmagnetic face centered cubic phase in Co thin films below a transition temperature (Tc) of ~5.4 K, as revealed in experiments based on point-contact spectroscopy and resistance, and four-probe measurements of resistance at ambient pressure. We confirm the non-magnetic nature of the dense fcc phase of Co within first-principles density functional theory, and show that its superconductivity below 5 K originates from anomalous softening of zone-boundary phonons and their enhanced coupling with electrons upon biaxial strain. Main Text: Normal metals possessing strong long-range magnetic order do not exhibit superconductivity (1). However, superconductivity can arise in some of these elements when subjected to pressure. Among the ferromagnetic transition metals, Fe is known to be non- magnetic at pressures above 10 GPa and exhibit superconductivity at temperatures below 2 K at 2 pressures between 15 and 30 GPa (2). However, superconductivity has not been hitherto observed in Co and Ni under any conditions. It was predicted theoretically that, face-centered cubic (fcc) cobalt would lose its magnetic moment at a density of about 1.4 times the normal density (3). Recently, a high density non-magnetic (HDNM) cobalt with fcc structure was discovered in polycrystalline cobalt thin films of varied thickness, grown on silicon (4, 5). In direct lattice imaging by high resolution transmission electron microscopy, high-density fcc Co grains with (111) planar spacing of 1.83 Å, representing about 11% lattice (30 % volume) contraction, were observed (4) (see also Fig. S3 in (6)). Assuming an isotropic contraction, this corresponds to an fcc lattice parameter of 3.17 Å. Electronic structure of fcc Co with this lattice parameter, obtained here using first-principles calculations based on density functional theory with a local spin density approximation, confirms its non-magnetic ground state (see Fig. S5A in (6)) as observed experimentally. Stimulated by the discovery of the HDNM - cobalt, we took up an exploration of superconductivity in HDNM Co, and report here its superconducting ground state that remains stable up to unusually high Tc of about 9.5 K at ambient pressure. Superconductivity is revealed in the zero-bias conductance enhancement and its systematic evolution with magnetic field in mesoscopic point-contacts between normal non-superconducting elemental metals and the HDNM Co sample. An independent confirmation of superconductivity is obtained from the resistance drop at Tc and the suppression of Tc with applied magnetic field in both point contact measurement and standard four-probe measurement under ambient pressure. A thin film (nominal thickness 25 nm) of Co was deposited on HF-etched clean Si(111) wafer substrate at room temperature by electron-beam evaporation. Exposure of the film to air has produced a thin (~ 2 nm) cobalt oxide on top of the film. The sample used in the present 3 study is a part of what has been used for the discovery of HDNM cobalt (4). The Co film is polycrystalline and the sample structure, as obtained in Ref. (4), is CoO(2nm)/HDNM- Ref (6). We have used mesoscopic point contacts between normal metals (non-superconducting) like Ag and Pd and the HDNM Co sample. The physical contacts have been made on the top surface and microscopic cracks developed on the oxide surface made electrical contacts of mesoscopic dimension. We employed a lock-in based modulation technique to measure the differential conductance (dI/dV) of the point contacts as a function of applied DC bias voltage V (see Fig. S2, Ref (6)). These measurements have been carried out at different temperatures and different applied magnetic fields. In addition, temperature dependent resistance measurement was carried out at different applied magnetic fields. Existence of a superconducting phase of a material can be identified through such measurements (7). The structure of the sample along with experimental arrangement is available in Figs. S1- S2 of Ref. (6). In the resistance versus temperature (R-T) data, obtained in point-contact measurements on a Ag-tip/HDNM-Co contact (Fig. 1A), resistance drops abruptly at 9.2 K. Upon application of external magnetic field, the resistance drop shifts to lower temperatures, and practically disappears above the field of 35 kG. This magnetic field dependence of resistance indicates a superconducting transition in the HDNM Co. The resistance below transition temperature does not go to zero for several reasons (7), among them is the contact resistance. The dI/dV spectra, obtained in the point contact spectroscopy (PCS) measurements, of the HDNM-Co/Ag contact (Fig. 1B) show a sharp conductance peak at V = 0 at T=0.5 K. Usually a zero-bias conductance peak is observed for contacts between a normal (N) metal and a superconducting (S) metal. The observed conductance peak at V = 0 in Fig.1B is similar to that 4 obtained for (N/S) point contacts between normal metal Cu and the superconducting Nb (7), and clearly indicates that the HDNM-Co is superconducting. The superconducting transition temperature (Tc) can be identified to be below 9.5 K, as the conductance peak vanishes at T = 9.5 K (Fig. 1B). The R-T plot (Fig. 1A) provides the value of Tc to be 9.2 K. The dI/dV spectra (Fig. 1C) show a systematic change with increasing applied magnetic field (H) and the spectral features nearly disappear at 35 kG (Fig. 1C), an additional verification of the superconducting nature of HDNM-Co. A theoretical fit (Fig. 1D) to temperature dependent critical field HC(T) = measurements, although the data (Fig. 1D) deviate from the fitted curve. This is not unexpected because the sample contains nanoscale grains (6) of different sizes with a density variation and presumably with different strains. The dimension of contact on the sample and the number of such grains within the contact region may introduce some variation which is not clearly understood. As we will see later that the experiments with a Pd tip show a Tc of 9.8 K, as measurements with a different tip involve a variation in contact size and different spots on the sample. The critical magnetic field at 0 K is 35 kG (Fig. 1D).(Figs. 1A and 1C). It should be noted here that Andreev reflection could not be observed in our PCS experiment due to low mean free path of the film, which prohibited us from making point contacts in the ballistic regime. 5 Fig. 1 A. R-T characteristics of the contact under different applied magnetic fields. B. Normalized conductance versus voltage characteristics of a nonmagnetic-Co/Ag contact at different temperatures at zero applied field. C. Normalized conductance versus voltage characteristics under different fields at T = 0.5 K. D. Hc–T plot shows the critical field, Hc(0), to be about 35 kG. 6 We have repeated the experiments with a Pd (N) contact with the HDNM-Co sample confirming the superconducting transition of HDNM-Co. In zero external magnetic field, a sharp drop in resistance as a function of temperature (Fig 2A) occurs at T=9.8 K. The peak in conductance as a function of bias voltage (Fig. 2B) gradually diminishes with increasing temperature. A systematic change in the conductance vs voltage is observed with increasing applied field (Fig. 2C), and the disappearance of the spectral features occurs at 40 kG. In Fig. 2B and Fig. 2C, we notice the presence of conductance dips symmetric about V = 0, in addition to the conductance peak at V = 0. These features have also been observed in Ag(N)/Pb(S) N/S contacts (7), and our observations on Pd/HDNM-Co contacts clearly identify the superconducting state of HDNM-Co. The dI/dV spectral features in Fig. 2B do not disappear even at 9.3 K, implying that the Tc is above this temperature. 7 Fig. 2 A. R-T characteristics of a HDNM-Co/Pd contact at zero field. B. Normalized conductance - voltage characteristics of the contact at different temperatures at zero applied field. C. Normalized conductance-voltage characteristics under different fields at T = 2.7 K. D. Critical current - temperature derived from the positions of the symmetrical dips in Fig. 2B. E. Critical current - applied magnetic field derived from the symmetrical dips in Fig. 2C. 8 The symmetrical dips in the dI/dV spectra around V=0 carry information about the critical current. The value of the voltage at the dip position divided by the normal state resistance gives the critical current. (Figs. 2D and 2E). We observe some variation in the results for the Ag tip and the Pd tip, for example in the width of the peak and the value of Tc. This is not unexpected as there is a dependence on the junction-type, and the junction size which include the tip material and the type of contact (7-9). As our nonmagnetic superconducting Co layers are polycrystalline with relatively small grains (typically ~ 10 nm) (4) (Fig. S3 in (6)), depending on the contact size and the region of the film where the contact has been made, there can be some variation in these results. Grain boundary regions with normal density (see Fig. S3) are expected to be normal metal. Inter-grain Josephson tunnelling may also be partly responsible for the observed differences (10). The T-dependent resistance obtained from the four-probe measurements under ambient pressure (see Fig. 3A, with the inset showing two transition temperatures under vanishing magnetic field) shows that TC2 (3.7 K) is related to superconductivity of In in the InxAgy contact material. This is also observed in control experiments, where the sample has no superconductivity (Fig. S5B). Measurements at fields (500 Oe or larger) above the critical field do not show this transition. Our estimate of the superconducting transition in the HDNM Co is TC1 =5.4 K, which reduces with applied field as indicated by arrows in Fig. 3A. The reason for resistance below TC not going to zero is explained in SM . Here too, we find some deviation of the data from the theoretical fit to T-dependent Hc (Fig. 3B). 9 Fig. 3 A. R-T plots for various applied magnetic fields. See details in the text. The data for different fields are shown with a vertical offset for clarity. B. Critical field (HC) vs temperature plot, obtained from A. We estimated superconducting TC of nonmagnetic Co (aexp(fcc) = 3.17 Å) within the BCS theory using first-principles Eliashberg function in Mcmillan’s equation (11-13). From the peaks in Eliashberg function (details in S6B (6)), we find that the phonon modes at X (ω=333 cm-1 and strongly with electrons. Our estimate of the dimensionless electron-phonon coupling of the 10 HDNM cubic phase of Co (λ) is 0.32, and the consequent superconducting TC of nonmagnetic Co is 0.3 K, which is much smaller than its experimental value (TC(exp) = 9.2 K - 9.8 K from point-contact and 4.4 K – 5.4 K from four-probe measurement), and it is due to weak electron- phonon coupling (small λ). It should be mentioned here that loss of magnetism in bulk Co under high pressure has been reported (14); however, no investigation was made regarding superconductivity. To connect closer with the HDNM fcc phase of Co in the thin films studied here, we determined the effects of volume preserving anisotropic strain in the HDNM fcc structure that is expected to occur in a film. We used a body centered tetragonal unit cell (Fig. 4A) containing two Co atoms, strained biaxially (ex'x'= ey'y' =e, ezz= -2e) so as to preserve the atomic volume of the observed HDNM fcc structure. From the phonon spectra of Co calculated as a function of e, we find anomalous softening of phonon modes (Fig. 4B, see Fig. S7) at N and X points (Δω ≈ 35-50 cm-1) (6), as a result of their strong coupling with electronic states. Concurrently, the electron-phonon coupling constant (λ) increases sharply (Fig. 4C) with e, and consequently results in strongly nonlinear enhancement in superconducting TC (Fig. 4C) with strain near e ~ 11 Fig. 4 A. The fcc crystal structure of Co, with a unit cell enclosed by red (dashed) lines representing the body centered tetragonal unit cell used as a reference while applying volume preserving biaxial strain (e). B. Phonon dispersion curves for e = 0.4, 0.5 and 0.6 showing anomalous softening of phonon modes at X and N points of the Brillouin zone. C. Electron- phonon coupling constant (λ) and superconducting transition temperature (TC) as a function of strain (e). Superconducting TC exceeds 5 K (Fig. 4C) at e=0.06 (λ=0.62), which is comparable to the observed TC ( ~ 5 to 9.5 K). This significant enhancement in superconducting TC of Co is governed by (a) enhanced electron-phonon coupling, accompanied by (b) unusual softening of phonon modes at N and X points with strain e, and (c) decrease in the electronic density of states at the Fermi level (see Table S1 in (6)). A strong dependence of the electron-phonon coupling (λ) on volume preserving strain e is partly due to the nesting between the electronic states in the neighbourhood of the Fermi energy. We have observed superconductivity in a Co thin film containing high-density nonmagnetic (HDNM) Co. The superconducting state has been identified via observations of (i) field dependent transition in R-T, (ii) zero-bias conductance peak and its field evolution and (iii) 12 conductance dips symmetric about V = 0 and their field evolution. The Co film is polycrystalline and the HDNM Co is in the form of nanoscale grains. There is a density, and possibly strain, distribution among the grains. That is why measurements of superconducting transition temperature on different spots on the sample show little variation in results (TC: 9.2-9.8 K). Four- probe measurements have provided somewhat smaller value of TC (4.4 – 5.4 K). In point contact measurement, generation of some nonhydrostatic pressure on the sample at the point contact cannot be avoided. This might be the reason for the higher value of TC compared to the four- probe measurement. Our first-principles calculations confirm the nonmagnetic nature of Co (in the dense fcc phase) and show that a volume conserving strain in the HDNM fcc Co results in a remarkable enhancement in its superconducting TC ( > 5 K) due to anomalous softening of zone boundary phonons and their enhanced coupling with electrons.