1 Anisotropy of the Seebeck and Nernst coefficients in parent compounds of the iron-based superconductors Marcin Matusiak1,*, Michał Babij1, Thomas Wolf2 1. Institute of Low Temperature and Structure Research, Polish Academy of Sciences, ul. Okolna 2, 50-422 Wroclaw, Poland 2. Institute of Solid State Physics (IFP), Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, D-76021, Karlsruhe, Germany PACS 72.15.Jf, 74.25.fg, 74.70.Xa In-plane longitudinal and transverse thermoelectric phenomena in two parent compounds of iron-based superconductors are studied. Namely, the Seebeck (S) and Nernst (ν) coefficients were measured in the temperature range 10 – 300 K for BaFe2As2 and CaFe2As2 single crystals that were detwinned in-situ. The thermoelectric response shows sizeable anisotropy in the spin density wave state (SDW) for both compounds, while some dissimilarities in the vicinity of the SDW transition can be attributed to the different nature of the phase change in BaFe2As2 and CaFe2As2. Temperature dependences of S and ν can be described within a two-band model that contains a contribution from highly mobile, probably Dirac, electrons. The Dirac band seems to be rather isotropic, whereas most of the anisotropy in the transport phenomena could be attributed to “regular” hole-like charge carriers. We also observe that the off-diagonal element of the Peltier tensor αxy is not the same for the a and b orthorhombic axes, which indicates that the widely used Mott formula is not applicable to the SDW state of iron-based superconductors. 2 Introduction In solid state physics nematicity is understood as a tendency of an electronic system to organize itself in a way that breaks rotational symmetry. This is caused by correlations rather than the anisotropy of the underlying crystal lattice . Evidence for a nematic phase is found in both copper- as well as iron-based superconductors with some suggestions of an intimate relation between the nematicity and superconductivity . This relation is particularly interesting because of a possible enhancement of superconductivity by nematic fluctuations . In this Rapid Communication we report anisotropic behaviour of the thermoelectric response in parent compounds of the iron-based superconductors above and below their magnetic/structural transitions at Ttr. The thermal gradient was applied in turn along the a or b orthorhombic axes of the BaFe2As2 and CaFe2As2 single crystals. They were detwinned by cooling below Ttr under uniaxial pressure and the transport coefficients determined for these two configurations are clearly distinct. However, we do not see a nematic behaviour above Ttr in CaFe2As2. Changes below Ttr are consistent with a multiband picture where one of the bands is characterized by the Dirac-fermion energy spectrum. Such a Dirac cone was postulated to occur in the spin density wave (SDW) state of iron based superconductors and it was recently confirmed experimentally for BaFe2As2 and SrFe2As2 . Moreover, our results indicate that the conduction bands are not equally anisotropic which has some implications for possible origins of this anisotropy. Another conclusion stemming from the asymmetric magneto-thermoelectric response is the violation of the Mott formula commonly used to interpret thermoelectric data. Experimental The high-quality BaFe2As2 single crystals were grown using a self-flux method , whereas CaFe2As2 was grown from Sn flux . For the experiment, square shaped samples were cut out from as grown plate-like single crystals with edges rotated by 45 degree in relation to the tetragonal axes. The sides of the square were about 2 – 2.5 mm and its thickness 0.1 – 0.3 mm. During the experiment a sample, which was mounted between two clamps made of phosphor bronze, was subjected to a uniaxial pressure by a beryllium copper spring controlled with a stepper motor. For the resistivity (ρ) measurements, the electrical contacts were placed at the corners of a sample and the orientations of the voltage and current leads were switched repetitively during the experiment. This allowed the electrical resistivities ρa and ρb to be 3 determined using the Montgomery method . The Seebeck (S) and Nernst (ν) coefficients along and across the strain direction were measured in two separate runs. The temperature difference along a sample was determined using two Cernox thermometers and a constantan – chromel thermocouple pre-calibrated in magnetic field attached to the sample through 100 μm thick silver leads. Signal leads were made up of long pairs of 25 μm phosphor bronze wires. Results Changes in the temperature dependences of the electrical resistivity along a (long) and b (short) orthorhombic axes resulting from the increasing uniaxial pressure along b are in good agreement with previously reported data . The anisotropy of ρ rises with the stress and the degree of twin ordering can be judged by the size of the anomaly in the resistivity at the structural/magnetic transition at Ttr. The uniaxial pressure was increased step-by-step and measurements of the resistivity were repeated until a saturation of the anomaly, indicating maximal detwinning, was achieved. The main difference between BaFe2As2 and CaFe2As2, as seen in Fig. 1, is a nematic behaviour above Ttr that is present only in the first compound and absent in the latter. This is likely related to the type of the transition which seems to be second order in BaFe2As2 and first order in CaFe2As2 . Accordingly, the anisotropy of the resistivity is only detectable above Ttr in BaFe2As2 (up to about 50 K above Ttr), similarly to fluctuations of the SDW phase in RFeAsO1−xFx ), whereas the electronic system in the tetragonal phase of CaFe2As2 shows no sign of broken rotational symmetry. Another difference between the two parent compounds studied also manifests itself below Ttr. Namely, figure 1 shows the variation of the resistivity when a sample is cooled down under uniaxial pressure, which is subsequently released at T = 3 K and measurements are continued on warming for a stress-free crystal. While changes of ρ between the down and up ramps in CaFe2As2 are minimal, BaFe2As2 clearly goes back to the twinned state deeply in the orthorhombic phase. The Seebeck coefficient presented in Fig. 2 shows a substantial anomaly in the SDW phase for both parent compounds. In either case, this anomaly is more pronounced along the b axis, but both Sa and Sb seem to share the same characteristic features. As expected, previously reported results for the thermopower in a twinned samples lie between Sa and Sb measured here with exemption of the low temperature minimum in BaFe2As2 that turns out to be somewhat deeper in the present work. In order to verify this we repeated measurements for another BaFe2As2 crystal (marked with open points in Fig. 2) and the results obtained were basically the same. A probable reason for small discrepancies is the multiband nature of 122 iron pnictides , where samples of different origin may exhibit different scattering ratios and 4 different inter-band compensations. Nevertheless, the thermoelectric power measured along a axis differs significantly from one measured along b axis. And as previously suggested this anisotropy in the SDW phase is much more pronounced than that one observed for the resistivity. To account for small differences between separate measurements of Sa and Sb, these two were matched in the high temperature region (270 – 300 K) by multiplication with a suitable correction factor in the region 0.9 – 1.1. Figure 3 compares the normalized anisotropy of the thermoelectric power ΔS = (Sb – Sa)/(Smax – Smin) for both samples. ΔS in BaFe2As2 is similar to that reported for EuFe2(As1-xPx)2 , i.e. it is slightly negative just above Ttr and rapidly turns positive just below the transition. However, ΔS in BaFe2As2 clearly changes sign back to negative at low temperatures, which was not the case of EuFe2(As1-xPx)2. This also does not happen in CaFe2As2, where ΔS stays positive in the entire SDW phase and, in agreement with the resistivity data, there is no sign of anisotropy above Ttr. The Nernst coefficient presented in Fig. 4 also shows as a sizeable anisotropy, with νa and νb exhibiting a large anomaly below Ttr. The development of such a maximum in ν(T) in the SDW phase of iron pnictides was already reported for CaFe2As2 , EuFe2As2 and was attributed to the possible influence of highly mobile Dirac fermions . It is worth noting that the Nernst coefficient at the maximum is about an order of magnitude larger in BaFe2As2 than in CaFe2As2. Measurements of the Nernst effect were carried out for two BaFe2As2 crystals and both sets of data are much alike, as can be seen in Fig. 4 (results obtained for the first sample (solid points) were multiplied by the factor of ~0.85 to account for errors in determining geometrical factors). As was done for the thermopower, νa and νb were matched in the high temperature region by applying a small correction. The normalised anisotropy of the Nernst coefficient Δν = (νb – νa)/(νmax – νmin) presented in Fig. 5, is substantial in the SDW phase. Δν(T) in BaFe2As2 is positive (νb > νa) and roughly proportional to the average Nernst signal, whereas Δν in CaFe2As2 is negative just below Ttr, then Δν becomes positive at low temperature i.e. νb > νa. Analogously to the resistivity and thermopower, there is no anisotropy of the Nernst effect in the tetragonal phase of CaFe2As2, whereas in BaFe2As2 a contribution from fluctuations appears below ~200 K. Discussion There is a kind of incongruity between the Nernst and resistivity results. Namely, at low temperature both quantities are larger along b axis, i.e. νb > νa as well as ρb > ρa (thus the electrical conductivities σb < σa). This might seem contradictory, since within the semi- 5 classical approximation ν = π2kB 3e kBT εF μ , where kB is the Boltzmann constant, e is the electronic charge, εF is the Fermi energy and μ is the mobility and since σ = neμ (n is the charge carrier concentration), one can expect a proportional relation between σ and ν for a single band. Nevertheless, the situation can be different in a multiband case and the iron- arsenides are known to be multiband conductors . Furthermore, band calculations predict that one of the conducting bands in the SDW phase is a topologically protected Dirac cone , whose presence in the 122 iron pnictides was repeatedly confirmed by angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy , quantum oscillations , and recently by infrared studies . Temperature dependences of the transport coefficients are in good agreement with calculations performed within a simplified model consisting of a hole band (denoted below with index h) with a conventional energy spectrum, and an electron band (index e) with the Dirac- fermion energy spectrum . The total Nernst coefficient is the sum of contributions from different bands weighted by the respective electrical conductivities (under assumption that an ambipolar term is small) and σ = σe + σh: ν = σeνe+σhνh σe+σh . (1) Because of a high mobility of Dirac fermions, which was observed for example in EuFe2As2 , one can expect that νe ≫ νh. In such a case there are three possibilities: i) If in-plane anisotropy of both bands are comparable then decreasing σe and σh along with decreasing νe and νh will cause total ν along b axis to be smaller than ν along a axis (νb < νa), as in a single band scenario; ii) If anisotropy of the Dirac (electron-like) band is more pronounced then again one will observe νb < νa, since the numerator of Eqn. 1 will be dominated by the varying σeνe term; iii) In contrast, if the Dirac band is isotropic, whereas anisotropy can be attributed to the hole- like band than for νe ≫ νh (and independently of the signs of νe and νh) the denominator in Eqn. 1 will decrease faster than the numerator leading to the “reverse” relation, i.e. σb < σa and νb > νa. Therefore, our results not only indicate a presence of at least two bands in the SDW phase of 122 compounds, but primarily suggest that the Dirac band is rather isotropic, whereas anisotropy should be attributed to the regular hole-like carriers. Subsequently, since the Dirac band seems to be very sensitive to a shift of the chemical potential , this would point towards anisotropic scattering rather than orbital polarization as a main reason for the anisotropy below Ttr. 6 Here we would like to focus on another important conclusion having general repercussions for analysis of the thermoelectric data in the iron-based superconductors. We start with realisation that the Nernst coefficient is in fact composed of two contributions. This is sometimes called the Sondheimer cancellation, that in an anisotropic material takes a form: νB = − αyx σyy ⁄ − S σxy σyy ⁄ (αyx is the off-diagonal element of the Peltier tensor, σxy is the Hall conductivity), as long as σxx ≠ σyy, σyy ≫ σxy and σxy = −σyx. The last condition results from the Onsager reciprocal relation σxy(B) = σyx(−B) in a system obeying the reflection symmetry (which applies also to the SDW phase of the iron-pnictides). The S σxy σyy ⁄ term can be calculated using previously reported data for the Hall coefficient and its temperature dependences are presented in Fig. 4. Consequently, these data allow one to determine αyx for a and b orientations and the results are shown in Fig. 6. For both compounds there are clear differences between αyx determined for ΔT ∥ a and for ΔT ∥ b, which in inset in Fig. 6 were normalised analogously to the Seebeck and Nernst anisotropy, i.e. ∆αyx norm = 1 B ⁄ (αyx b − αyx a )/(αyx max − αyx min). Evidently in either case ∆αyx norm increases significantly at low temperature, which means that αxy ≠ −αyx. This in turn indicates that the generalised Mott relation αij = − π2kB 3e ( ∂σij ∂ε ) εF , which is commonly used to interpret thermoelectric data, fails. There may be several potential reasons for such a violation, since the Mott formula is strictly valid only for non-interacting particles. First thing to note is that the nematic order itself can be a manifestation of strong electronic correlations . On the other hand, the ground state of iron-pnictides seems to be well described as a Fermi liquid, showing conventional quantum oscillations and obeying the Wiedemann-Franz law in the low and high temperature limits . Another possibility is related to the very small Fermi energy in 122 compounds where the Fermi temperature (TF) can be as low as about 100 K, since the Mott formula relies on a Sommerfeld expansion and is only valid for T ≪ TF . Such a scenario might be supported by the tendency that αxy = −αyx in the low temperature limit for CaFe2As2. This is not observed in BaFe2As2 perhaps because the estimate TF ≈ 115 K for BaFe2As2 is about two times smaller than TF for CaFe2As2 (TF ≈ 230 K ). The very large value of the Nernst coefficient below Ttr in BaFe2As2 also suggests extremely small TF since, as mentioned above, ν should be roughly proportional to 1 εF ⁄ . However, the decrease of ∆αyx norm with increasing temperature, which goes to zero in the tetragonal state without any obvious anomaly, suggests that the reason for violation of the Mott formula might 7 be different. A likely candidate is the electron-electron (e-e), or more generally inelastic, scattering that can cause deviations from the Mott formula and such e-e processes were suggested to play an important role in iron-pnictides . Summary We studied the in-plane anisotropy of magneto-thermoelectric phenomena in single crystals of the parent compounds of iron-based superconductors. For both compositions the Seebeck and Nernst coefficients were measured along the a and b crystallographic axes and the anisotropies observed are much larger than those in the electrical resistivity. However, there are some differences in the thermoelectric response between BaFe2As2 and CaFe2As2, perhaps because there are SDW fluctuations only for the first compound. The results are consistent with the scenario in which electronic transport in the SDW state consists of two contributions – one from the electron-like Dirac cone and another one from a regular hole-like band. We are able to conclude that the first, highly mobile one, is rather isotropic, whereas the hole-like band is mostly responsible for the observed anisotropy. This also suggests that the nematicity observed in 122 iron-based superconductors may be related to scattering rather than band polarisation. Another important observation, that αxy ≠ −αyx, indicates that the Mott relation fails in the SDW phase of the iron-pnictides. Acknowledgments The authors would like to thank D. Orgad and V. Oganesyan for helpful comments. This work was supported financially by the National Science Centre (Poland) under the research Grant No. 2014/15/B/ST3/00357. 8 (Color online) The temperature dependences of the normalised resistivity anisotropy when a sample is cooled under pressure which is released at low temperature and afterwards another set of data is collected on warming. T (K) 50 100 150 200 ( b - a + b) 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 under pressure released under pressure released BaFe2As2 CaFe2As2 9 (Color online) The temperature dependences of the thermoelectric power in BaFe2As2 (solid points: sample #1, open points: #2) and CaFe2As2 along the orthorhombic a and b axes. BaFe2As2 T (K) 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 S ( V K-1) -30 -20 -10 0 10 CaFe2As2 T (K) 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 S ( V K-1) -20 0 20 40 60 Sa Sa Sb Sb Smax Smin Smax Smin 10 (Color online) The temperature dependences of the normalised thermopower anisotropy in BaFe2As2 (solid points: sample #1, open points: #2) and CaFe2As2. T (K) 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 (Sb - Sa) / (Smax - Smin) -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 BaFe2As2 CaFe2As2 11 (Color online) The temperature dependences of the Nernst coefficient (points) and the Sσxy/σyyB−1 term (solid lines) along the orthorhombic a and b axes for BaFe2As2 (solid points: sample #1, open points: #2) and CaFe2As2. CaFe2As2 T (K) 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 , S xy/ yy B-1 ( V K-1 T-1) -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 BaFe2As2 T (K) 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 S xy/ yy B-1 S xy/ yy B-1 T II b T II a T II a T II b 12 (Color online) The temperature dependences of the normalised Nernst effect anisotropy in BaFe2As2 (solid points: sample #1, open points: #2) and CaFe2As2. Inset shows the high temperature BaFe2As2 data in enlarged scale to highlight an onset of the anisotropy. BaFe2As2 T (K) 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 b - a)/( max - min) -0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 150 200 250 300 0.00 0.02 0.04 CaFe2As2 13 (Color online) The temperature dependences of the off-diagonal Peltier element −αyx along the orthorhombic a and b axes. Inset shows the normalised anisotropy of αyx for BaFe2As2 and CaFe2As2. BaFe2As2 T (K) 0 50 100 150 200 250 0 10 20 30 CaFe2As2 T (K) 0 50 100 150 200 250 - yx/B (V K-1 T-1) 0.0 0.5 1.0 T (K) 0 50 100 150 yx norm 0.0 0.2 0.4 T || a T || b T || b T || a BaFe2As2 CaFe2As2 14