Reentrant superconductivity in a composite formed by YBa2Cu3O7−δ and Ammonium Terbium Oxalate. Rodolfo E. L ́opez-Romero and Dulce Y. Medina Divisi ́on de Ciencias B ́asicas e Ingenier ́ıa, Universidad Aut ́onoma Metropolitana-Azcapotzalco, Av. San Pablo No 180, Col. Reynosa-Tamaulipas, C.P. 02200 M ́exico D.F., M ́exico. R. Escudero Instituto de Investigaciones en Materiales, Universidad Nacional Aut ́onoma de M ́exico. A. Postal 70-360. M ́exico, D.F. (Dated: November 20, 2021) We present a study of reentrant behaviour in a composite formed by a Hight-Tc superconductor, YBa2Cu3O7−δ and Ammonium Terbium Oxalate, Tb(H2O)(C2O4)2 ·NH4. The composite has a transition temperature about 92 K, and it presents a reentrant behaviour resulting of the coexistence between superconductivity and magnetism. According to this study the values and shape of the critical magnetic fields were dramatically reduced in a similar form as in other known reentrant superconductors. PACS numbers: 74.70.Tx,74.80.Fp Superconductivity, Reentrant Superconductors, Luminescent Materials I. INTRODUCTION Among the many interesting characteristics of some su- perconductors, reentrant behaviour in superconductivity is a quite important topic of study. Some superconduc- tors displaying this behaviour are those that have a mag- netic ion in its crystal structure. A classical example very well known is ErRh4B4, it is a reentrant compound found by Ferting many years ago . Many others were discov- ered with this characteristic [2–4]. The physics related to the reentrant process occurs because the competition between superconductivity and magnetism. This phe- nomenon is actual and important topic of study, it was first addressed by Ginzburg , he studied the possibil- ity of coexistence of superconductivity and ferromagnetic materials. Quite important to mention is that in BCS theory these two phenomena are antagonist and mutu- ally excludents. In BCS the phenomenon arises by the creation of Cooper pairs mediated by virtual phonons connecting the two electrons and resulting in ordered an- tiparalel spins; the BCS manner of Cooper pairs forma- tion. If paramagnetic impurities are in the superconduct- ing bulk those magnetic ions could break Cooper pairs, destroying superconductivity, depending on the strength of the magnetic interactions, then a new spins ordering will be arises. This new arrange causes breaking of pairs because a type of ferromagnetic order; parallel spins, and the resulting parallel configuration will bring the destruc- tion of the superconducting state; thus, reentrant super- conducting behaviour will arise. In a possible reentrant superconductor, if the intensity of the magnetic interactions are strong enough will af- fect and influence the behavior of the superconducting state. Accordingly, the magnetic interactions could give additional information to have a better understanding of a superconductor and in that manner to obtain more insight into the microscopic mechanisms and electronic properties. Then some of the basic phenomena related to the coupling and formation of the Cooper pairs will be related to this elementary excitations. The reentrant behavior in superconductors is well know since early times. As mentioned it may occurr when a superconductor is doped with paramagnetic impurities, the interplay results in pair breaking and total destruc- tion of superconductivity. This phenomenon has been explained by Abrikosov and Gor’kov , they study the interplay introducing the form that magnetic ions play an important role in the exchange interaction of both conducting electrons an magnetic ions . As was mentioned, in BCS theory the two phe- nomenons are mutually excludents. In many compound, however recently it has been observed that more types of superconductors involved different forms of pair for- mation, meaning that the nature of pair coupling will be different to the mediated by phonons. Thus, the super- conducting state will be different as in the BCS model. Among those new materials, the Fe-Based compounds are a type of the new materials . New studies by differ- ent researchers in the superconducting field have discov- ered many new example of these materials not following BCS theory, with different manners to form the Cooper pairs mediated with different processes of coupling. The effect of the influences of a magnetic field in a su- perconductor is most notable at temperatures below the superconducting transition. In this situation the influ- ence of the magnetism is quite clear because the tran- sition temperature decreases due to the diminution of the number of Cooper pairs. The most clear conse- quence of these interactions between superconductivity and magnetic field results in the reentrant superconduct- ing behavior. These interactions create a competition be- tween both, magnetism and superconductivity, growing and reinforcing with decreasing temperature, although those changes will be at different rates. Depending of the strengths and magnitude of those processes, one or the other could be predominant. In some cases the super- conducting state could be destroyed or simply reduced. arXiv:1712.02764v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 4 Dec 2017 2 In other situations the two interacting energies, one to create Cooper pairs, the other to energize magnetic in- terchanges could be in equilibrium . Those processes are very dependent on temperature. Normally, the en- ergy for Cooper pairs formation increases when the tem- perature decreases, but this is not always the case for the ferromagnetic interactions, it can be decreases, or in- creases depending on many factors; i.e. type of crystal structure, type of different transitions, and or other mod- ification related with temperature. Accordingly in some materials the superconducting pair will be only reduced. The reentrant characteristic in superconducting materi- als was for the first time observed by Ferting in the compound ErRh4B4. Posteriorly it was seen in other compounds as HoMo6Se8 , also in HoNi2B2C , and in others. In this research we present a study of the reentrant behaviour in a composite formed by a ceramic super- conductor and a luminescent material. The experi- ments were carried out using YBa2Cu3O7−δ particles and two luminescent materials; Tb(H2O)(C2O4)2 · NH4, or Y2O3:Eu3+. Two composites to different proportions in weight between its components were prepared. Both were characterized by magnetic susceptibility as function of temperature and magnetic field applied. Only the com- posite YBCO - Tb(H2O)(C2O4)2 · NH4 presents reen- trant superconductivity. The critical fields were eval- uated in the composite 10% superconductor - 90% Tb oxalate and we found a drastic reduction of them due to the coexistence between superconductivity and mag- netism. Initially idea of the research was to study the influence of the luminescent materials into the supercon- ductor under UV illumination at low temperatures. A. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE The materials used for this investigation were a ce- ramic superconductor and two different luminescence materials. The ceramic superconductor, YBCO, presents a high transition temperature, TC = 92 K, and the amount of superconducting material was determined by two modes of measurements, Zero Field Cooling (ZFC) and Field Cooling (FC) under small magnetic field, 100 Oe. The two luminescence compounds were Ammonium Terbium Oxalate, Tb(H2O)(C2O4)2 · NH4, and Yttrium- Europium Oxide, Y2O3:Eu3+ . The use of these two compounds is because they are excellent photolumi- nescence materials. The composites were prepared using the ceramic su- perconductor and one luminescent material; YBCO - Tb(H2O)(C2O4)2 · NH4, and YBCO -Y2O3:Eu3+. Only the composite with ammonium terbium oxalate gave a reentrant characteristic. The preparation of the ceramic superconductor was us- ing a known procedure as already published in the liter- ature, starting from BaCO3, Y2O3, and CuO . Sub- sequently, the ceramic was grounded and suspended in Top figure is the characteristic of the pure superconductor, with TC = 92 K determined by measurements in ZFC and FC modes and H = 100 Oe. The other two figures show the reentrant behaviour in the composite superconductor - Tb ox- alate at two proportions of superconducting material; 10 and 15 %. Note the reentrance behaviour as the % of supercon- ductor and Tb oxalate decreases and increases respectively. high pure acetone to evaluate the particle size according to precipitation time. Only we used particles in range about 500 and 350 nm. The composites were prepared by homogeneous precip- itation method, starting from a aqueous solution of rare- earth nitrates, ammonium oxalate and a certain amount of superconducting particles. This solution was ultrason- ically dispersed for 30 minutes in a sealed flask. After, the solution was heated at 75◦ C for two hours with magnetic stirring. The resulting mixture was washed three times with 30 ml of pure acetone to remove the ammonium ox- alate excess. Finally, the resulting compounds were dried at 60◦ C. Only in the case of YBCO@Y2O3:Eu3+ com- posite it was heated at 400◦ C for five minutes. With this procedure both, yttrium and europium nitrates, trans- 3 0 50 100 150 200 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 -0.6 -0.3 0.0 0.3 0.6 YBCO@Tb(H2O)(C2O4)2NH4 % Super:Tb Oxalate TC= 92 K χ (cm 3/mol) T (K) χ (cm 3/mol) T (K) YBCO - Tb(H2O)(C2O4)2 · NH4 at 100 Oe. The amounts of superconducting material are 10, 15, 100%. 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 -400 -300 -200 -100 0 100 200 YBCO@Tb(H2O)(C2O4)2NH4 M (10 -3 emu/g) T(K) 2 3 6 10 20 30 50 70 80 90 110 % Super:Tb oxalate H(KOe) M − H, in mode ZFC from 2 to 110 K for composite Su- per:Tb oxalate 10:90%. This figure shows the decreasing of the critical fields HC1 and HC2 with temperature. forms to oxides. II. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION As above mentioned the main idea of this research was to study the influence of luminescent compounds in the superconducting properties. The characteristics of the ceramic superconductor are shown in Fig. 1, top figure. There we also display the 0 20 40 60 80 100 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 HC2 HC1 μ0HC (T) T (K) with 10% superconductor and 90% Tb oxalate. The graphs were plot using data of Fig 3. The critical fields were deter- mined in a conventional manner. Note the dramatic reduction and shape of them. This is clearly due to the coexistence be- tween supercondutivity and magnetism in the composite. In this case the calculation of κ was quite reduced at a value around 1.6 in comparison to κ ≥ 70 in YBa2Cu3O7−δ single- crystal . The dotted lines are a guide for the eye. 0 50 100 150 200 -0.5 -0.4 -0.3 -0.2 -0.1 0.0 0 20 40 60 80 100 0.00 YBCO@Y2O3:Eu 3+ % Super: Oxide χ (cm 3/mol) T (K) χ (cm 3/mol) T (K) ZFC mode at H=100 Oe in YBCO - Y2O3:Eu3+ composite. This composite is not reentrant as mentioned in the main text. Note also that in this figure in black dots, the pure ceramic superconductor has an upturn at low temperatures which is due to ferromagnetism because surface oxygen vacancies, as was mentioned by other authors [14–16] . characteristics of the composite formed with the Tb ox- alate at different compositions Superconductor - Tb ox- alate; 10:90 and 15:85 (in weight). In these three figures the data was obtained in two modes of measurements, ZFC and FC. At low temperature is seen the reentrant behaviour, both middle and bottom figure show in the 4 YBCO - Tb(H2O)(C2O4)2 · NH4 composite. White area show the superconducting ceramic, the gray area is the ammonium Tb oxalate. two modes of measurements the reentrance characteris- tic. In Fig. 2, the main figure and the inset shows only the ZFC measurement. The three curves show three dif- ferent compositions in the composite. The inset shows that 10, and 15 % of superconductor are reentrant. istics from 2 to 110 K for the composite YBCO - Tb(H2O)(C2O4)2 · NH4 with composition 10:90%. From this figure we obtained the variation with temperature and magnitudes of the critical fields HC2 and HC1. Fig. 4 presents the behaviour of the critical fields, note the curvature at low temperatures. These curvatures marks the temperature when the external magnetic field energy initiate the breaking the superconducting behavior. This shape is the remarkable characteristic in reentrant su- perconductors and is when both phenomenons coexist; superconductivity and magnetism [17–19]. It is interesting to mention that these results extracted from Fig. 3 and plotted in Fig. 4 indicate that the mag- nitude of the critical fields shows a dramatically reduc- tion, with magnitudes as small as ≈ 300 Oe and 2 kOe for HC1 and HC2, respectively. Accordingly, the critical second magnetic field is enormously reduced. This is per- haps the most important discovery in this new reentrant superconducting composite. Evaluating the Ginzburg- Landau parameter from Fig. 4, it was quite reduced at around 1.6 in comparison to the κ ≥ 70 in YBa2Cu3O7−δ single-crystal . On the other hand, in Fig. 5 is shown the χ(T) charac- teristic in the YBCO - Y2O3:Eu3+ composite. In it was not seen reentrant behaviour. In this composite we show different proportions of superconducting material from 10 to 100% and it never becomes reentrant, perhaps because the magnetic response of the Y oxide is smaller than in (Color on-line) Tb(H2O)(C2O4)2 ·NH4 magnetic characteristic. Top figure shows χ(T) determines in ZFC and FC with magnetic field of 5 T. The bottom figure shows Mag- netization - Magnetic field from 1.7 to 300 K. Note the Tb oxalate shows superparamagnetism with a blocking tempera- ture ≈ 18 K. Right axis shows χ(T), whereas the left axis is in M − T scale. the Tb oxalate. An additional observation related to the behavior in the pure ceramic superconductor, black dots of Fig. 5, is that at low temperatures it seen an upturn in χ(T) which we attributed to defects and oxygen va- cancies on the surface of the superconductor, this has been also observed by other researchers [14–16]. Lastly in Fig. 6 is displayed a electron microscopy picture of the composite YBCO - Tb oxalate. In there, white areas are particles of YBCO, while the grey areas are the Tb oxalate. In order to have a better information of the Tb oxalate, in Fig. 7 we show the magnetic characteristics. Top fig- ure is the magnetic susceptibility, χ − T determined at 5 Tesla in ZFC and FC modes. The bottom figure dis- plays isothermal measurements determined at tempera- tures from 1.7 to 300 K. Tb oxalate is superparamagnetic with a blocking temperatura ≈ 18 K. III. CONCLUSIONS We found a new reentrant superconductor formed by a Hight-Tc superconductor and a luminescent material. 5 Two composites were prepared with different luminescent compounds, the composite with ammonium terbium ox- alate presented reentrant behavior. According to this study values and shape of the critical magnetic fields, HC1 and HC2, were dramatically reduced, implying that the Ginzburg - Landau parameter (κ) has a small value of 1.6 in the composite 10:90%. We concluded that the reen- trant behavior is because the coexistence between super- conductivity and magnetism in the composite. As men- tioned before the main idea of this study was to see the influence of a superconductor in the luminescent proper- ties, as already published by other authors in MgB2 , but however the investigation was deviated to study this new characteristics.