1 Evolution of Anisotropic Displacement Parameters and Superconductivity with Chemical Pressure in BiS2-Based REO0.5F0.5BiS2 (RE = La, Ce, Pr, and Nd) Yoshikazu Mizuguchi1, Kazuhisa Hoshi1, Yosuke Goto1, Akira Miura2, Kiyoharu Tadanaga2, Chikako Moriyoshi3, Yoshihiro Kuroiwa3 1. Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Tokyo Metropolitan University, 1-1, Minami-osawa, Hachioji 192-0397, Japan. 2. Faculty of Engineering, Hokkaido University, Kita-13, Nishi-8, Kita-ku, Sapporo, Hokkaido 060-8628, Japan. 3. Department of Physical Science, Hiroshima University, 1-3-1 Kagamiyama, Higashihiroshima, Hiroshima 739-8526, Japan. * Corresponding author: Yoshikazu Mizuguchi (mizugu@tmu.ac.jp) Abstract In order to understand the mechanisms behind the emergence of superconductivity by the chemical pressure effect in REO0.5F0.5BiS2 (RE = La, Ce, Pr, and Nd), where bulk superconductivity is induced by the substitutions with a smaller-radius RE, we performed synchrotron powder X-ray diffraction, and analyzed the crystal structure and anisotropic displacement parameters. With the decrease of the RE3+ ionic radius, the in-plane disorder of the S1 sites significantly decreased, very similar to the trend observed in the Se-substituted systems: LaO0.5F0.5BiS2-xSex and Eu0.5La0.5FBiS2- xSex. Therefore, the emergence of bulk superconductivity upon the suppression of the in-plane disorder at the chalcogen sites is a universal scenario for the BiCh2-based superconductors. In addition, we indicated that the amplitude of vibration along the c-axis of the in-plane chalcogen sites may be related to the Tc in the BiCh2-based superconductors. 2 BiS2-based layered compounds have been extensively studied owing to the discovery of superconductivity in electron-doped phases and their relatively high transition temperatures (Tc), as high as 11 K [1–3]. A typical parent phase of the BiS2-based superconductor is REOBiS2 (RE: rare earth element), which has a layered structure composed of alternate stacks of REO insulating (blocking) layers and BiS2 electrically conducting layers; it has a band gap of ~1 eV [2–5]. Electron carriers can be introduced in the BiS2 layers by partial substitutions of the elements of the blocking REO layers [6–11]. For example, in LaO1-xFxBiS2, the partial substitutions of O2- sites with F- generate electron carriers; the carrier concentration can be manipulated by varying the amount of substituted F . Bulk superconductivity with a large shielding fraction in the magnetization measurements was not observed in electron-doped LaO1-xFxBiS2 samples prepared using the solid-state reaction method at ambient pressure; however, filamentary superconducting states with a small shielding volume fraction were observed at Tc ~2.5 K . In addition, the observed temperature dependence of the electrical resistivity was not metallic-like; it showed a weakly localized behavior in LaO1-xFxBiS2, although band calculations suggested that the electron-doped LaO1-xFxBiS2 should be metal . These results suggested that the doped electrons were localized by the effect of structural disorder. In order to induce bulk superconductivity in LaO1-xFxBiS2, high pressure effects can be employed. The application of an external pressure induces bulk superconductivity with a Tc of ~10 K [13–15]. In addition, samples annealed under a high pressure (~2 GPa) also exhibit bulk superconductivity with a Tc of ~10 K [2, 16–18]. The emergence of bulk superconductivity and increase of Tc in the high- pressure phase can be attributed to the structural phase transition from the tetragonal low-Tc phase to the monoclinic high-Tc phase . Another approach to induce bulk superconductivity in the LaO1-xFxBiS2 system is to introduce a chemical pressure by an isovalent substitution, such as Ch (Ch: S, Se) and/or RE site substitutions. In LaO0.5F0.5BiS2-xSex, the substitutions of Se for the S sites induces bulk superconductivity with a Tc of ~3.8 K . Another isovalent substitution is the RE site substitution. With the decrease of the RE3+ (mean) ionic radius in REO0.5F0.5BiS2, the BiS2 layer becomes compressed, in particular along the ab-plane direction, and bulk superconductivity is induced . As the isovalent substitution does not significantly affect the carrier concentration, the structural optimization induces superconductivity in the Ch- and RE-substituted systems. In order to analyze the essential factor for the emergence of the superconductivity, we considered the commonality of the chemical pressure effects between the Ch- and RE substitutions, by introducing the concept of an in-plane chemical pressure . The emergence of the bulk superconductivity in the LaO0.5F0.5BiS2-xSex system was explained by the decrease in the in-plane disorder of the chalcogen sites with the increase of the Se content, which was detected through a crystal structure analysis of the synchrotron X-ray diffraction (SXRD) pattern and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) . A similar relationship between the in-plane disorder and emergence of superconductivity was observed in Eu0.5La0.5FBiS2-xSex [25–27]. 3 For both systems, the Se substitutions induced a metallic electrical conductivity. Therefore, the in- plane disorder of the in-plane chalcogen sites is the factor that prevented the emergence of superconductivity and metallic conductivity in LaO1-xFxBiS2. Therefore, we expect that a similar suppression of the in-plane disorder at the in-plane S sites (S1 site in Fig. 1(b)) can be attributed with the emergence of superconductivity in the RE-substituted systems. Neutron diffraction and pair distribution function analysis revealed the presence of the in-plane disorder and its relationship with the superconductivity, where RE is La or Nd . In addition, EXAFS measurements reveled a suppression of the Bi-S1-bond-disorder with the decrease of the RE3+ radius . Therefore, in this study, we investigated the atomic displacement parameters of REO0.5F0.5BiS2 with RE = La, Ce, Pr, and Nd using SXRD and Rietveld refinement. Anisotropic analyses of the displacement parameters revealed that the in-plane displacement of S1 was very large for RE = La and gradually decreased with the decrease of the RE3+ ionic radius. This behavior is equal to that of the Se substitution. Therefore, the suppression of the in-plane disorder at the in-plane S1 (or Ch1) sites and emergence of superconductivity by the chemical pressure effects are universal for BiCh2-based superconductors. As unconventional superconductivity states are likely to appear in both Ch-substituted La(O,F)Bi(S,Se)2 and RE-substituted REO0.5F0.5BiS2 systems [31–33], the universality revealed in this study could be employed to further understand the mechanisms of the superconductivity in the BiCh2-based superconductors. Polycrystalline samples of REO0.5F0.5BiS2 with RE = La, Ce, Pr, and Nd were prepared using the solid-state-reaction method [2, 6–9]. A mixture of the starting materials was pressed into a pellet and annealed at 700 °C for 20 h in an evacuated quartz tube. SXRD was performed at the beamline BL02B2, SPring-8 at a wavelength of 0.49559 Å (proposal No.: 2017B1211). The SXRD experiments were performed with a sample rotator system at room temperature; the diffraction data were collected using a high-resolution one-dimensional semiconductor detector (multiple MYTHEN system ) with a step size of 2 = 0.006o. The crystal structure parameters were refined using the Rietveld method with the RIETAN-FP program . Images with schematic models of the crystal structures were produced using VESTA . RE3+ ionic radius. The filamentary superconducting states observed for La are suppressed for Ce. A polycrystalline sample of CeO0.5F0.5BiS2 with 50% F substitution does not show superconductivity; however, CeO0.3F0.7BiS2 with 70% F substitution shows bulk superconductivity upon the effect of high pressure . As reported in , bulk superconductivity of REO0.5F0.5BiS2 appears at an RE3+- radius of ~113 pm, which corresponds to RE = Pr or Ce0.5Nd0.5. Tc increases with the decrease of the RE3+ radius. The temperature dependences of the magnetization for the samples used in this study are 4 shown in Figure S1 of the Supplemental Material . Tc values estimated from the magnetization measurements are represented with the larger circles in Fig. 1(a), which are in agreement with the results of a previous study . and (d) Nd. The Rietveld refinements were performed using a tetragonal P4/nmm model. For RE = La, Ce, and Pr, a small portion (smaller than 4%) of REF3 impurity phases was detected, and a two-phase analysis was performed. For RE = Nd, unidentified impurity peaks were observed; hence, we analyzed the data for RE = Nd by a single-phase analysis. For all data, excellent fitting was also obtained at higher angles, required for a precise refinement of the displacement parameters. RE3+ ionic radius. The lattice constant a linearly decreases with the decrease of the RE3+ radius. However, the lattice constant c does not exhibit a clear correlation with the RE3+ radius. Figure 3(c) shows the dependences of the Bi-S1 and Bi-S2 bond distances as a function of the RE3+ ionic radius (See Fig. 1(b) for the labeling of the S sites). It can be noticed that the in-plane Bi-S1 distance decreases with the decrease of the RE3+ radius, owing to the linear decrease in the lattice constant a. In contrast, Bi-S2 and interplane Bi-S1 distances do not decrease upon the introduction of chemical pressure, which may be related with the nonlinear change in the lattice constant c. However, as reported in , the essential factor for the emergence of superconductivity in the REO0.5F0.5BiCh2 systems is the in-plane chemical pressure. In the considered REO0.5F0.5BiS2 system, the amplitude of the in-plane chemical pressure is directly determined by the in-plane Bi-S1 distance. Therefore, we can analyze the relationship between the chemical pressure, superconductivity, and in-plane disorder using the considered samples. We performed Rietveld refinements with anisotropic displacement parameters U11 and U33 for the in-plane Bi and S1 sites. Figure 4(c) illustrates U11 and U33 using a schematic model with RE = Pr. For the other sites, isotropic displacement parameters were assumed for the refinements. The obtained U11 and U33 for the Bi and S1 sites are plotted in Figs. 4(a) and 4(b), respectively. As expected, U11 for the S1 sites is very large for RE = La, and decreases with the decrease of the RE3+ radius, a very similar trend with that observed for U11 for the in-plane chalcogen sites in LaO0.5F0.5BiS2-xSex . Therefore, the large suppression of the in-plane disorder at the in-plane chalcogen sites can be universally attributed with the emergence of bulk superconductivity in the REO0.5F0.5BiCh2 systems. It is worth noting that U11 for the Bi sites slightly increases with the decrease of the RE3+ radius. Recently, Athauda et al. proposed that the increase in the in-plane displacement of Bi may be attributed with the superconductivity in NdO1-xFxBiS2, while the in-plane displacement of S1 would induce carrier localization . Our analysis also suggests that the increase of the in-plane displacement of the Bi sites may be related with the enhanced Tc for RE = Pr and Nd. Similar trend is observed for U33 in Fig. 4(b). Although U33 for the Bi sites does not considerably change with the decrease of the RE3+ radius, 5 U33 for the S1 sites dramatically changes with the replacement of the RE. It is worth noting that the evolution of U33 for the S1 sites seems to be linked with the enhancement of Tc. A similar evolution of the displacement ellipsoids is observed in Se-substituted LaO0.5F0.5BiSSe, as shown in Fig. 5. Both RE and Ch substitutions suppress U11 for the Ch1 sites; however, they enhance U33 for the Ch1 sites. This trend may suggest that the amplitude of the one-dimensional large vibration of S1 is correlated with the Tc in this system. If this is valid, then the Tc increases when the phonon frequency decreases with the increase of the amplitude of the S1 vibration along the c-axis. This scenario is not consistent with the conventional phonon-mediated mechanisms. It is consistent with the isotope effect; no isotope effect was observed for the LaO0.6F0.4Bi(S,Se)2 samples with 76Se and 80Se isotopes . If such large vibrations of Ch1 are related with the enhancement of Tc, charge fluctuation should occur in the superconducting Bi-Ch1 plane. Then, the pairing phenomena mediated by charge fluctuations, proposed by theoretical and experimental studies , may occur in the BiCh2-based system. In conclusion, we investigated the crystal structure and anisotropic displacement parameters of REO0.5F0.5BiS2 with RE = La, Ce, Pr, and Nd, where bulk superconductivity is induced by substitutions with a smaller-radius RE, such as Pr or Nd. With the decrease of the RE3+ ionic radius, the lattice constant a and in-plane Bi-S1 distance monotonically decreased, which generated the in-plane chemical pressure effect. With the decrease of the RE3+ radius, the in-plane disorder of the S1 sites significantly decreased. This trend is very similar to those observed for Se-substituted LaO0.5F0.5BiS2- xSex and Eu0.5La0.5FBiS2-xSex. Therefore, the emergence of bulk superconductivity upon the suppression of the in-plane disorder at the Ch1 sites seems to be a universal scenario for the BiCh2- based superconductors. The analyses of the displacement parameters along the c-axis indicated that the amplitude of the one-dimensional vibration of S1 (or Ch1) along the c-axis was correlated with Tc in the BiCh2-based superconductors. Acknowledgements We would like to thank O. Miura for his experimental support. This study was partially supported by the Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research (Nos. 15H05886, 16H04493, 16K17944, 17K19058, and 17H04950) and JST-CREST (No. JPMJCR16Q6), Japan. 6