1 Superconductor Electronics Fabrication Process with MoNx Kinetic Inductors and Self-Shunted Josephson Junctions Sergey K. Tolpygo, Senior Member, IEEE, Vladimir Bolkhovsky, D.E. Oates, Fellow, IEEE, R. Rastogi, S. Zarr, A.L. Day, T.J. Weir, Alex Wynn, and L.M. Johnson, Senior Member, IEEE Abstract—Recent progress in superconductor electronics fabri- cation has enabled single-flux-quantum (SFQ) digital circuits with close to one million Josephson junctions (JJs) on 1-cm2 chips. In- creasing the integration scale further is challenging because of the large area of SFQ logic cells, mainly determined by the area of resistively shunted Nb/AlOx-Al/Nb JJs and geometrical induc- tors utilizing multiple layers of Nb. To overcome these challenges, we are developing a fabrication process with self-shunted high-Jc JJs and compact thin-film MoNx kinetic inductors instead of ge- ometrical inductors. We present fabrication details and properties of MoNx films with a wide range of Tc, including residual stress, electrical resis- tivity, critical current, and magnetic field penetration depth λ0. As kinetic inductors, we implemented Mo2N films with Tc about 8 K, λ0 about 0.51 μm, and inductance adjustable in the range from 2 to 8 pH/sq. We also present data on fabrication and electrical characteri- zation of Nb-based self-shunted JJs with AlOx tunnel barriers and Jc = 0.6 mA/μm2, and with 10-nm thick Si1-xNbx barriers, with x from 0.03 to 0.15, fabricated on 200-mm wafers by co- sputtering. We demonstrate that the electron transport mecha- nism in Si1-xNbx barriers at x < 0.08 is inelastic resonant tunnel- ing via chains of multiple localized states. At larger x, their Jo- sephson characteristics are strongly dependent on x and residual stress in Nb electrodes, and in general are inferior to AlOx tunnel barriers. Index Terms—Josephson junctions, kinetic inductors, London penetration depth, superconducting Mo2N, Nb/AlOx/Nb junc- tions, Nb/Si1-xNbx/Nb junctions, resonant tunneling, supercon- ductor electronics fabrication, superconducting integrated circuit I. INTRODUCTION HERE has been a continuing progress in superconductor electronics fabrication towards increasing the number of superconducting layers and reducing the minimum size of cir- cuit features -. A breakthrough into a very large scale in- tegration (VLSI) of superconducting digital circuits has re- cently been made as a result. For instance, single flux quantum (SFQ) circuits containing close to one million Josephson junc- This research is based upon work supported by the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity, via Air Force Contract FA872105C0002. All authors are with Lincoln Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technolo- gy, Lexington, MA 02421 (e-mail: sergey.tolpygo@ll.mit.edu). Submitted to IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. on Sept. 13, 2017; revised version on Dec. 29, 2017. tions (JJs) and having circuit density over 1.3∙106 JJs per cm2 have been demonstrated , using the 350-nm fabrication process SFQ5ee developed at MIT Lincoln Laboratory (MIT LL) . This process utilizes resistively shunted Nb/AlOx- Al/Nb Josephson junctions with critical current density Jc = 0.1 mA/μm2 and geometrical inductors formed on multi- ple superconducting wiring layers of niobium. Currently it is perhaps the most advanced fabrication process for supercon- ductor electronics, with a theoretical maximum circuit density of about 4∙106 JJs per cm2 ,. However, further increase of the integration scale of SFQ circuits is challenging because of the large area of individual SFQ cells, mainly determined by the area of JJ shunt resistors and geometrical inductors . There are a few fabrication technology development paths for growing the SFQ integration scale. For instance, staying with resistively shunted JJs and geometrical inductors, we can continue to decrease the minimum feature size and to increase the number of superconducting layers and layers of Josephson junctions. Transitioning to a 250-nm process for resistors, in- ductors, and interlayer vias would give a theoretical maximum circuit density of about 107 JJs per cm2 with a single layer of junctions and proportionally higher with two layers of active devices . On this route, no significant increase in the densi- ty of geometrical inductors is possible below about 250-nm linewidth and spacing because of a nearly exponential growth in the mutual inductance and cross talk between the inductors. Also, no further increase in JJ density is possible without in- creasing the Jc of the junctions, which is required in order to reduce their area. A more promising way is to replace externally shunted junctions with self-shunted junctions and replace geometrical inductors with kinetic inductors, and then continue to decrease the minimum feature size and increase the number of junction layers. In kinetic inductors, most of the energy is stored in ki- netic energy of the supercurrent, not in the magnetic field around the inductor. Therefore, the mutual inductance between kinetic inductors remains much lower than their self- inductance even at deep submicron spacings and linewidths. T 2 The goal of this work is to develop a superconductor elec- tronics fabrication process utilizing kinetic inductors and high- Jc self-shunted Josephson junctions. We mainly concentrate here on high-Jc Nb/AlOx-Al/Nb junctions because so far they have shown better characteristics for SFQ digital circuits than other potential types of self-shunted JJs, e.g., Nb/Si1-xNbx/Nb -. For kinetic inductors, in this paper we concentrate only on MoNx thin films, leaving other potential materials, e.g., NbN and NbTiN for another publication. II. KINETIC INDUCTORS FOR SFQ CIRCUITS A. Thin Films or Josephson Junctions? There are two options for replacing geometrical inductors by more compact inductors with low cross talk: use the kinetic inductance of the supercurrent in a thin, d << λ, superconduct- ing film Lk = μ0λ2/d; or use the kinetic inductance of the Jo- sephson current through a junction LJ = Φ0/(2πIc cos φ), a so- called Josephson inductance. Here, λ is London magnetic-field penetration depth, d the film thickness, Ic the junction critical current, φ the Josephson phase difference, and Φ0 the flux quantum. Being the same in nature, these two types of induc- tors utilize different structures. The former is a planar thin- film device whereas the latter is formed by a vertical stack of multiple layers. The difference practically disappears in mi- crobridge-type thin-film JJs. So the choice of kinetic inductors should be based on technological considerations. For a process with the minimum feature size F, the smallest area of a planar inductor that can be made is F2. Forming an SFQ cell inductor Lcell from a film with inductance per square Lk requires Lcell/Lk squares of the film. The area occupied by a this kinetic inductor is Ak = (Lcell/Lk)F2 if Lk < Lcell, and Ak = (Lk/Lcell)F2 if Lk > Lcell. The density of inductors is maximized when Lk ≈ Lcell. Typically, Lcell ~ Φ0/Ic is about 20 pH, where Ic ~ 100 μA is the typical critical current of the cell junctions. The latter value is set from the cell bit error rate considera- tions. Therefore, the practical upper value of Lk above which there is little benefit for circuit density is about 20 pH/sq and, respectively, λ2/d about 17 μm. If we select a material with λ of about 0.5 μm, we can get (w/λ)2 ~ 0.5 using w = F in the current F = 350 nm technology node, where w is the film width. Then, the typical inductor ar- ea Ak ≈ (Φ0d/μ0Ic)(w/λ)2 in μm2 can be less than 10d, where d is in micrometers, and getting Ak < 1 μm2 and inductor density over 108 cm−2 would require only modestly thin films with d less than about 100 nm. There are many suitable amorphous and crystalline materials, e.g., NbN, NbTiN, MoNx, and such thin-film inductors can be fabricated with very high uniformi- ty, yield, and repeatability. The critical current of the inductor film, Icf, has to be much larger than the cell junction Ic ~ 100 μA. This constrains the film’s width, inductance per square Lk, and the ultimate circuit density. Indeed, the fundamental critical current of supercon- ductors is the pair breaking, Ginzburg-Landau (GL) depairing critical current , IGL = wdΦ0/(3√3λ2ξμ0); where ξ is the GL coherence length, and the current distribution in the film is assumed to be uniform. Hence, the depairing critical current and the kinetic inductance are inversely proportional to each other. Their product is IGLLk = Φ0w/(3√3ξ). In real films with w/ξ >> 1, the critical current is smaller than the IGL and determined by the entry and motion of Abrikosov vortices from the film edges, which depend on the edge defects and current distribution. Setting Icf =αIGL with α < 1, the Icf > Ic requirement results in a restriction on the film width w > (3√3ξ/α)Lk/20, where Lk is in pH/sq. That is, the larger Lk the wider film we need to use. Assuming α ~ 0.1 and ξ ~ 10 nm, this condition becomes w/Lk > 25 nm/pH. If we use w = F to maximize the circuit density, the film kinetic induct- ance should be Lk < 14 pH/sq at F = 350 nm and < 10 pH/sq if we transition to F = 250 nm process node. If, to be on the safe side, we use a material with Lk = 4 pH/sq, the inductor area at F = 350 nm can be made as low as Ak ~ 0.6 μm2. For thin-film inductors, LkIcf is adjustable by w. Therefore, the condition LkIc > 1 required for making quantizing kinetic inductors can be easily satisfied. However, this is not the case for junction-based inductors. Making a quantizing loop com- prised of only usual Josephson junctions requires more than four serially connected JJs, N > 4, in order to satisfy the flux quantization condition ∑φi = 2π before reaching the critical current of the JJs, i.e., φi < π/2, where φi is the phase differ- ence across the i-th junction. It would be more practical to use N = 6 nearly identical JJs, e.g., in a vertical stack, so that φi ≈ π/3 and the loop current Icir = Icsin(π/3) ≈ 0.87Ic is suffi- ciently lower than the critical current. However, even for a 6- JJ loop, the LJIc product (parameter βL) is only about 2Φ0, a much lower value than can be obtained by using thin-film ki- netic inductors. Replacing the passive JJs with the so-called π-junctions, providing a π phase shift across their ferromagnet- ic barrier, can dramatically reduce the number of required JJs , but creates additional technological difficulties for inte- grated circuit fabrication. The Josephson critical current of the inductor JJs must be larger than the Ic of the active (switching) JJs. An example of a possible fabrication process was described in . There is no advantage in using a JJ stack from the point of view of the cir- cuit density unless its area can be made smaller than the area of the thin-film inductor. From a fabrication standpoint, fabri- cation of thin-film inductors is much simpler and expected to have a much higher yield than fabrication of multi-junction stacks of submicron Josephson junctions. For these reasons, we concentrated in this work on the development of thin-film kinetic inductors. DEPOSITION PARAMETERS AND NITROGEN CONTENT IN MONX FILMS Wafer # Power (kW) Dep. Temp. (oC) N2/Ar (%) N content in Mo1-xNx (at. %) 1 1 35 3 28.6 2 1 35 4 33.3 3 1 100 4 27.3 4 1 100 4 29.0 5 1 300 4 26.3 3 B. Fabrication of MoNx Thin-Film Kinetic Inductors NbN and NbTiN films, typically used for kinetic inductance detectors, have magnetic field penetration depth values about 200 nm in thick films, increasing to ~ 500 nm as the thickness decreases to 3 nm; see - and references therein. In this work, we studied the fabrication and properties of MoNx films. Our rationale for using MoNx films was explained in . It is the convenience of using the same material and deposition equipment for making both high sheet resistance films for cir- cuit resistors and kinetic inductors by using films with differ- ent concentration of nitrogen. Previously, MoNx shunt resis- tors were used in superconducting circuit fabrication in . In our previous work we introduced MoNx kinetic induc- tors into our SFQ5ee process for use in SFQ circuit biasing network as large choke inductors with L > 100 pH required for ERSFQ biasing scheme . These inductors just need to have large L, but the exact value and variations are not very critical. In this work, we want to implement kinetic inductors in SFQ cells where accurate targeting of the value and small parameter spread within the circuit and on wafers are very im- portant. Therefore, we performed a careful optimization of MoNx fabrication process and characterization of MoNx induc- tors. MoNx films were deposited on 200-mm wafers in a Con- nexion cluster tool using reactive sputtering of a Mo target in Ar/N2 mixture. For process optimization, we used a fixed sput- tering power, fixed Ar flow, and varied the N2 flow to study a range of N2/Ar ratios from 0.01 to 0.15 in order to obtain films with different nitrogen content, critical temperature Tc, and re- sistivity. A few nanometers of titanium were used as an adhe- sion layer. The range of sputtering powers from 0.5 kW to 3 kW was studied. We also varied the substrate temperature from 35 oC to 400 oC. For simplicity, we targeted approxi- mately the same film thickness, about 40 nm, for all deposi- tions. The actual thickness was measured, and the sheet re- sistance data were corrected for the actual thickness. The obtained films were studied by x-ray diffraction and secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) to determine nitro- gen content. Films deposited at 35 oC were found to be amor- phous with a very small amount of a cubic phase with crystal- lite size about 2.6 nm, likely inclusions of highly disordered molybdenum and/or cubic γ-Mo2N phase. The sharpness, posi- tion, and intensity of the observed x-ray diffraction lines move closer to elemental Mo, and the crystallite size increased to about 3.7 nm and about 5.1 nm with increasing deposition temperature to 200 oC and 400 oC, respectively. The results of the SIMS measurements of nitrogen content in the deposited films are given in Table I. The composition of films with the highest Tc ≈ 8 K obtained in this work is close to Mo2N, ap- parently corresponding to an amorphous, or a very small grain size, version of the cubic γ-Mo2N. Increasing the deposition temperature decreases nitrogen content in the films and de- creases Tc and electrical resistivity of the films. Therefore, room temperature depositions were mostly used to obtain more uniform amorphous films. Electrical resistivity ρ of the deposited films increases sharply with increasing N2 content in the sputtering gas mix- Fig. 1. (a) Sheet resistance Rs = ρ/d at 300 K of deposited MoNx films with 40-nm thickness as a function of nitrogen content in (N2+Ar) sputtering gas mixture at a fixed deposition power of 1 kW and fixed deposition pressure of 3 mTorr. (b) Superconducting critical temperature Tc of deposited MoNx films with 40-nm thickness as a function of nitrogen content in (N2+Ar) sputtering gas mixture. Data for a few deposition temperatures are shown. (c) Depend- ence of Tc of deposited MoNx films on their sheet resistance. Since all films have the same thickness, this plot represents Tc dependence on electrical resis- tivity ρ, shown as top axis. A plateau region near maximum Tc is used as the kinetic inductance process target range. Deposition temperature was 35 oC. The dashed curves are shown only to guide the eye. 4 ture above ~ 2%. It changes from values ~ 30 μΩ∙cm, typical for a polycrystalline molybdenum with impurities, to values ~ 120 μΩ∙cm typical for amorphous metals with very short mean free path, indicating a sharp onset of amorphization; see Fig. 1(a). The resistance ratio R300/R10 also drops in the same range of N2 contents from about 3 in films with no nitrogen to about 1 above 3% N2 in the flow, also indicating a transition to amorphous films. The critical temperature of MoNx films also increases sharply in the same range of N2 concentrations as does the sheet resistance Rs; see Fig. 1(b). The Tc increases to about 8 K at approximately 4% N2 and then remains nearly constant, slightly above 7 K, in a very broad range of N2 contents in the sputtering gas mixture. At a fixed power and N2 flow, both the Tc and Rs (film resistivity) decrease with increasing deposition temperature, as shown by a few points in Fig. 1(b). The critical temperature of MoNx films correlates very well with their electrical resistivity, or sheet resistance, as shown in Fig. 1(c). The Tc increases nearly linearly with ρ and plateaus at the highest value in the range from about 100 μΩ∙cm (25 Ω/sq) to about 120 μΩ∙cm (30 Ω/sq). This range was set as the process target range for kinetic inductors due to a weak sensitivity of Tc to small changes in the deposition parameters. At a fixed N2 content, the film resistivity decreased with in- creasing the sputtering power, as shown in Fig. 2; Tc decreased accordingly, as summarized in Fig. 1(c). Additional optimiza- tion of the deposition parameters was done to minimize the re- sidual film stress. The main trends are shown in Fig. 3. At a fixed sputtering power and N2/Ar flow ratio, the residual stress in MoNx films changes with deposition pressure from com- pressive stress at low pressures to tensile stress at high pres- sures. At fixed power and deposition pressure, the stress changes from tensile at low N2/Ar ratios to compressive with increasing the N2/Ar ratio. Optimized films had compressive stress less than 100 MPa. Wafers were rotated during the deposition to improve the film thickness and sheet resistance uniformity to about 2% (one standard deviation), measured at 49 points across 200- mm wafers. Fine adjustments of film thickness were made based on measurements of kinetic inductance in unpatterned and patterned films and their critical currents. Thermal stability of the MoNx films and their suitability for integration into a multilayer process stack with PECVD SiO2 interlayer dielectric was verified by depositing 200 nm of SiO2 at 150 oC on top of the MoNx films with a 5-nm Ti adhesion layer. This sandwich was then annealed at 200 oC for 30 and 60 minutes in N2 at 2.5 Torr, and electrical characteristics were remeasured; see Fig. 4. We will refer to the films pre- pared this way as “annealed”. The annealing temperature was set a bit higher than the maximum temperature of 190 oC used in our SFQ fabrication processes. The annealing time was also longer than the maximum cumulative exposure time to 190 oC temperature in our 9-metal layer process of about 40 min. Amorphous Mo2N films in the optimum range of resistivity corresponding to the Tc plateau in Fig. 1(c) were stable at 200 oC and showed very small, less than 2%, change (in- crease) in resistivity. We attribute this increase to an interac- Fig. 3. (a) The typical dependences of the residual stress in deposited MoNx films on the sputtering dc magnetron power at a fixed N2/Ar flow ratio for two deposition pressures. (b) Residual stress dependences on the nitrogen content in the sputtering gas mixture at a fixed power of 1 kW and pressures of 3 mTorr and 6 mTorr, respectively. The films target thickness was 40 nm. Fig. 2. The typical dependence of the sheet resistance of MoNx films on the sputtering dc magnetron power. Films of the same 40-nm thickness were de- posited at a fixed pressure of 3 mTorr using various concentrations of N2 in Ar shown as N2/Ar flow ratio in percent. 5 tion of Mo2N films with Ti adhesion layer. MoNx films with resistivities below ~ 100 μΩ∙cm showed a progressive de- crease of resistivity with annealing time, up to ~ 10%, which was larger for lower-ρ films, possibly a result of partial recrys- tallization. C. Microwave Measurements of λ(T) in MoNx films Magnetic field penetration depth and its temperature de- pendence λ(T) of unpatterned MoNx films were measured us- ing a dielectric-resonator technique shown schematically in Fig. 5; see, e.g., -. For these measurements, 200-mm wafers with deposited MoNx films were diced into multiple octagonal-shaped wafers with 2-inch inscribed diameter. These smaller wafers were attached to the flat sides of a sap- phire cylindrical resonator with 6.35-mm height and 12.7-mm diameter. The resonator quality factor and the resonant fre- quency fr were measured in the T-range from T0 = 4.24 K to Tc. The dielectric resonator TE011 mode was used with the res- onance frequency about 10.7 GHz and quality factor Q over 34,000. The inductance of the superconducting films shifts the resonant frequency down, and microwave losses in the film reduce the Q-factor. The relative change of the resonance fre- quency with temperature is proportional to the change in the inductance of two films L(T) = 2μ0λeff(T) and, since the fre- quency shifts are very small, can be expressed as (1) where g is a geometric factor of the resonator and λeff(T) is the effective penetration depth. In general, λeff = λcoth(d/λ), which gives λeff = λ2/d for a very thin d << λ and λeff = λ in the oppo- site case. In the simplest two-fluid model, the T-dependence of the penetration depth is (2) Then, the fr(T) change with respect to the fr at the liquid He temperature, fr(T0), is given by Fig. 6. (a) Dielectric resonator measurements of a 200-nm niobium film. Solid curve is the fit to (3) giving λ0 = 81 nm. (b) Dielectric resonator meas- urements of the typical as-prepared MoNx film. Fit to (4) is shown by the solid black curve, giving Tc = 7.95 K and λ0 = 576 nm. The film was also measured after annealing in N2 at 200 oC for 30 min, resulting in Tc = 7.68 K and λ0 = 567 nm (blue dashed curve), and 60 minutes, resulting in Tc = 7.63 K and λ0 = 563 nm (red dotted curve). Fig. 4. Relative change (in percent of the initial value) in electrical resistivi- ty of MoNx films deposited at 35 oC, then coated with 200-nm layer of SiO2 at 150 oC and annealed at 200 oC for 30 and 60 minutes. A 5-nm adhesion layer of Ti was used between MoNx and PECVD oxide. Fig. 5. Dielectric resonator test setup for measuring microwave properties of superconducting films. The resonance frequency was 10.7 GHz. The copper housing was placed in a vacuum can with He exchange gas. Temperature was varied from 4.2 K to Tc of the films. 6 in the thick film λ(T) << d limit, and in the thin-film λ(T) >> d limit. The geometrical factor of the resonator was calculated, and an additional calibration was done using deposited 200-nm Nb films. The zero-T penetration depth λ0 ≡ λ(0) and Tc were de- termined by fitting the experimental data to (3) or (4). Thus obtained Tc values agreed within ±0.1 K with the values ob- tained from the dc resistive transitions measured on the same films. Fig. 6 shows the typical results of the measurements on Nb films and on the typical MoNx films. The 200-nm Nb films are in the thick-film regime, except for very near to Tc, and (3) fits the T-dependence of the resonance frequency exceptionally well, as shown in Fig. 6(a). In contrast, thin MoNx films with large λ0 are in the thin-film regime in the entire temperature range, and (4) fits the experimental data very well as shown in Fig. 6(b). We measured films deposited at different conditions and annealed films. We have found that MoNx films with the max- imum Tc, corresponding to films with composition Mo2N and electrical resistivity around 110 μΩ∙cm in Fig. 1(c), have the lowest penetration depth λ0 ≈ 0.54 μm. The λ0 increases as Tc decreases on both sides of the maximum, i.e., either with in- creasing electrical resistivity to higher values or decreasing the resistivity. This indicates that the concentration of supercon- ducting electrons ns is maximized in Mo2N films with the maximum Tc since the London magnetic field penetration depth λL scales inversely with the Cooper pair density λL2 = m/(μ0nse2). Apparently, ns decreases on both sides of the opti- mum independent of whether the resistivity of the films in- creases or decreases. We noted larger variation of λ0 in films with reduced Tc than in the optimal, “stoichiometric” Mo2N films, apparently indi- cating larger sensitivity of the Cooper pair density ns to the ni- trogen content and other film fabrication details. Similarly, 60- min anneals of nonoptimal films at 200 oC sometimes resulted in increased value of the measured λ0, suggesting some chang- es in the morphology of the films because changes in Tc and resistivity were minor. The resonator quality factor Q at T = 4.24 K decreased strongly with decreasing Tc of the films, as shown in Fig. 7, likely a result of an exponential growth in concentration of normal quasiparticles with increasing T/Tc ratio. The low Q values were making measurements of λ in lower-Tc films less accurate than in the films with the highest Tc and Q. In order to compare the penetration depth data in different MoNx films, we recall that λ0 in the microscopic theory of su- perconductivity is given by λ02 ≈ λL2(0)(ξ0/l) in the dirty limit l << ξ0, which is certainly applicable to our amorphous super- conducting films. Here, l is the mean free path and ξ0 ≡ ħvF/πΔ0 is the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) coher- ence length, and Δ0 the energy gap; see, e.g., . Then, sim- ple transformations and the BCS relationship Δ0 = 1.76kBTc give (5) where λ0 is in micrometers, ρ in μΩ∙cm, and Tc in Kelvin. The measured values of λ0 are shown in Fig. 8 as a function of (ρ/Tc)1/2 for the as-prepared and annealed films with various Tc values. Surprisingly, we observe the opposite dependence of λ0 on (ρ/Tc)1/2 to the BCS relationship (5) shown by the dashed line. The penetration depth λ0 decreases with increas- ing (ρ/Tc)1/2 instead of increasing. Because Tc grows approxi- mately linearly with ρ, Tc = αρ with α ~ 0.08 K/(μΩ cm), as shown in Fig. 1c, we would expect λ0 to be the same in all films λ0 ≈ 105/√α, and independent of (ρ/Tc)1/2 since Tc de- pendence cancels out. This is clearly not the case. For the films with the optimum value ρ = 110 μΩ∙cm and Tc = 8 K, we get λ0 = 390 nm from (5), a value about 30% lower than the measured. This may indicate that ns is almost a factor of two lower than the normal electron number density entering into ρ, e.g., due to some pair breaking effects. Fig. 8. Dependence of magnetic field penetration depth extrapolated to zero temperature, λ0, in MoNx films on their electrical resistivity and Tc. The BCS theory dependence (5) is shown by the dashed line. Solid line is to guide the eye. Some of the films annealed at 200 oC for 60 min showed large changes in λ0, as shown by one of the red circle located above the solid line. The data are from the dielectric resonator measurements, see text. Fig. 7. Dependence of the quality factor Q at T = 4.24 K of a sapphire reso- nator used for magnetic field penetration depth measurements on Tc of the at- tached MoNx films. Q diminishes nearly exponentially with lowering Tc due to the exponential growth of the concentration of normal quasiparticles with in- creasing T/Tc. 7 A reduction in the superfluid density with respect to the BCS values was also observed in polycrystalline MoN films obtained by atomic layer deposition, using terahertz frequen- cy-domain spectroscopy . Usually, increased values of the penetration depth in thin films are attributed to formation of a Josephson network of weakly coupled grains; see, e.g., and references therein. In this case, the effective penetration depth and kinetic inductance are determined by the Josephson penetration depth λJ = Φ0/(2πμ0Ic) between the grains and Jo- sephson inductance, respectively. Josephson junction networks are usually formed in thin films because of the columnar growth, e.g., in transition-metal films and their nitrides such as Nb and NbN, and/or grain boundary oxidation, e.g., in Nb and Al films, and high-Tc su- perconductors; see for a review and references. The evi- dence for Josephson network behavior in granular MoNx films deposited by thermal evaporation was presented in . How- ever, critical currents in MoNx films formed by reactive sput- tering, see below and , and our SEM data partially pre- sented in do not indicate granular structure in our MoNx films, although do show it in NbNx films. However, further discussion of these issues goes beyond the scope of this paper. D. Lk and Critical Current of Patterned MoNx Films Mo2N films with the target thickness of 40 nm were incor- porated into SFQ5ee process stack with eight Nb metal layers . The films were patterned using 248-nm photolithography and etched using SF6/O2 mixture with 60/40 sccm flow at 10 mTorr in a high-density plasma etcher at 600 W rf power and 60 W bias power. For inductance measurements, a dc-SQUID based technique described in was used. Patterned Mo2N strips of various widths from 0.5 to 2 μm and various lengths formed inductors of dc SQUIDs. The film inductance was calculated from the period of SQUID modulation. We verified that unshielded films of different width and length, as well as films placed un- der a Nb ground plane to form inverted microstrips, gave near- ly the same inductance per square Lk, indicating negligible contribution of the geometrical inductance of the films. The average sheet inductance obtained on 40-nm films at 4.2 K was 8.2 pH/sq, corresponding to λ(4.2 K) = 511 nm and λ0 = 490 nm, about 10% lower value than the one we obtained from microwave measurements on unpatterned films; see II.C. The average Lk values obtained on wafers fabricated during the two-year period since the launch of the SFQ5ee process are shown in Fig. 9. In the actual process stack, Mo2N film thickness was adjusted to get the required sheet inductance value. The observed run-to-run variations of Lk are about 4% (one standard deviation) and apparently represent a cumulative effect of run-to-run variations of the Mo2N films thickness and Fig. 10. The typical critical currents of patterned MoNx films as a function of width w. The LkJcf product is about 9.1 pH mA/μm or about 4.4Φ0/μm. Fig. 11. Critical current of patterned 1-μm wide MoNx films with different values of Tc. The targeted film thickness is 40 nm. The maximum critical cur- rent density observed is 3.8∙106 A cm−2, a factor of 10 lower than the critical current of Nb films with the same thickness. This reduction is caused by a much lower concentration of Cooper pairs ns in MoNx than in Nb, which fol- lows from a much larger penetration depth λ0. Fig. 9. Wafer-averaged kinetic inductance of patterned Mo2N films from SQUID-based measurements. The wafers were fabricated during a two-year period since the launch of the SFQ5ee process and represent the regular pro- cess runs. The targeted film thickness is 40 nm. 8 composition. The critical current of patterned MoNx films, Icf was meas- ured on the same chips as used for SQUID measurements of Lk. The films were patterned as meanders with length to width ratios Nsq from about 100 to 500 squares. The typical Icf versus width dependences are shown in Fig. 10. From the linear slopes we determined the critical current density per unit width Jcf shown in Fig. 11. From a circuit design standpoint, the important characteris- tic of a kinetic inductor is the LIcf product, which for the in- ductor with length l is LIcf = lLkJcf. From II.A, we expect the LkJcf product to be the film material property independent of the film thickness and width LkJcf = αΦ0/(3√3ξ), (6) where α < 1 characterizes reduction of the critical current with respect to the Ginzburg-Landau depairing current. We have found the product LkJcf = 4.4Φ0/μm for our films and indeed independent of Lk. This value gives ξ/α = 44 nm. Hence, a 1-μm square of Mo2N film provides a factor of two larger product of inductance and critical current than a stack of six JJs. The critical current of the films correlates with Tc, as shown in Fig. 11, and reaches a maximum in the same range of film resistivities as does the Tc. However, the maximum critical current density observed in Mo2N films is a factor of 10 lower than in Nb films with the same thickness. This difference is caused by a much lower concentration of Cooper pairs ns in Mo2N than in Nb as indicated by a much larger penetration depth λ0. III. SELF-SHUNTED JOSEPHSON JUNCTIONS A. High-Jc Nb/AlOx-Al/Nb Junctions It is well known that the most commonly used Nb/AlOx- Al/Nb Josephson junctions become self-shunted at sufficiently high values of Jc ~ 1 mA/μm2 . This self-shunting is caused by a greatly enhanced subgap conductance by multiple Andreev reflections via defects in the tunnel barrier . The Jc required to achieve self-shunting is fabrication dependent. In we investigated a range of Jc from 0.1 to 1 mA/μm2 for our technology. We selected a Jc ≈ 0.6 mA/μm2 as the process target. This Jc is high enough to provide sufficient self- shunting with McCumber-Stewart parameter βc from about 2 to 3, but still gives JJs with sufficiently low parameter spreads and good uniformity on 200-mm wafers to be suitable for VLSI circuits. The typical current-voltage (I-V) characteristics are shown in Fig. 12; see also . More detailed results will be published elsewhere. B. Nb/Si:Nb/Nb Josephson Junctions Another group of self-shunted JJs are junctions of an SNS or SSmS type using a normal-metal or semiconductor barrier. In order to get IcRN product values high enough to be suitable for high-speed SFQ circuits, highly disordered metals or doped semiconductors are used as a barrier, usually with composi- tions close to the metal-insulator transition ,. Some promise was shown by Nb-based JJs with amorphous Si (a-Si) barriers doped by Nb, W, or other dopants forming deep impu- rity levels close to the middle of Si band gap. They were pro- posed and investigated a long time ago; see, e.g., ,, and references therein to even earlier work. Recently, JJs with a-Si:Nb barriers , found applications in programmable Josephson voltage standards and waveform synthesizers de- veloped at NIST USA and PTB Germany. These applications require very large-area junctions with critical currents over 1 mA and low IcRN products ~ 0.1 mV, JJ counts in only a few hundred thousand range, and do not require fabrication on large-size wafers. The requirements for superconducting digital circuits are quite different: submicron-size junctions with Ic ~ 0.1 mA and lower, IcRN products over 1 mV, low JJ parameters spread, JJ counts over a million, and good uniformity over large-size wa- fers. Therefore, we investigated fabrication of JJs with doped- Si barrier on 200-mm wafers in order to evaluate their uni- formity and suitability of their parameters to VLSI SFQ cir- cuits. Nb/Si1-xNbx/Nb trilayers were deposited on 200-mm oxi- dized Si wafers in-situ in a Canon-Anelva deposition system. Nb-doped Si barriers were deposited using co-sputtering of Si and Nb targets with 100-mm diameters. Wafers were rotating during the deposition; the obtained thickness uniformity was better than 1%. The obtained uniformity of Nb and Si1-xNbx sheet resistance ρ/d was in the range from 0.4% to 0.9% de- pending on Nb film stress, and 1.7% and 1.4% for Si1-xNbx films with x = 0.09 and 0.1, respectively. Full optimization of JJs’ deposition requires optimization of the barrier thickness and Nb content because the critical current of SSmS and SNS Fig. 12. Current-voltage characteristics, from left to right, of 0.5 and 0.7-μm diameter Nb/AlOx-Al/Nb junctions, and 0.7-μm-diameter Nb/Si1-xNbxNb/Nb junctions with deposited 10-nm barrier of Si doped with x=0.09. The AlOx- based JJs are nearly self-shunted with a small hysteresis corresponding to βc range from ~ 2 to 3. The JJs with Si1-xNbx barrier at x = 0.09 are overdamped and nonhysteretic. Note a very large difference in the characteristic voltage Vc = IcRN of these two types of JJs, making JJs with doped Si barriers less attrac- tive for applications in high-speed SFQ circuits. 9 junctions exponentially depends on the barrier thickness d and coherence length of the barrier material ξN, which in turn de- pends on the doping level and temperature. Instead, we set the barrier thickness at 10 nm, because it was estimated as the lowest thickness that could provide better than 2% run-to-run reproducibility of the barrier thickness on 200-mm wafers. The amount of Nb doping x in Si was varied from 3 to 15 atomic percent, based on the results of the prior work ,,-. After deep-UV photolithography, junctions were etched us- ing Cl2-based chemistry and planarized using CMP of a PECVD SiO2 interlayer dielectric as described in . Circular junctions with design diameters from 350 nm to a few mi- crometers were fabricated and studied. The junction resistance uniformity was characterized at room temperature using a wa- fer prober, measuring resistance of 440 JJs with diameters 0.5, 0.7, 1, and 1.4 μm per 5-mm chip, and from 9 to 45 chips per wafer. A much smaller subset of JJs was characterized at 4.2 K by I-V measurements. Nb/Si1-xNbx/Nb junctions with Nb concentration in the bar- rier of 8 at. % and below do not show any signs of Josephson current at 10 nm barrier thickness and 4.24 K. Instead, current- voltage I(V) characteristics of the junctions are highly nonlin- ear, as shown in Fig. 13. The observed I(V) characteristics are indicative of electron transport by resonant tunneling via chains of localized states, so-called Lifshitz’ resonance-percolation trajectories - . For instance, at x = 0.05 and 4.24 K, the I(V)s are very well described by a polynomial form I = G0V + G2V 7/3 (7) in the range of voltages |V| < 40 mV studied; see Fig. 13. The second term in (7), which dominates at V > 10 mV, is due to inelastic tunneling via chains consisting of two localized states as had been predicted a long time ago and since then ob- served experimentally in numerous types of junctions with disordered insulators, including metal-insulator-metal struc- tures with a-Si . Fits to (7) give the specific tunneling conductance G0A−1 of about 7 mS/μm2, close to the value in Nb/AlOx-Al/Nb tunnel junctions with Jc ~ 10 μA/μm2 and ~ 1- nm thick barriers, where A is the junction area. Junctions with x = 0.03 display a much stronger nonlineari- ty than (7). Their I(V) dependences at 4.24 K can be described well by I = G0V + G2V 7/3 + G3V 7/2, (8) where the third term, which becomes dominant at V > 25 mV, represents a contribution of inelastic resonant tunneling via chains with three localized states . Due to a larger average distance between Nb impurities, the first term in (8) becomes almost negligible at x = 0.03, G0A−1 ~ 7 μS/μm2. The two- impurity chains contribution G2A−1 also decreases from about 3 A V−7/3 μm−2 at x = 0.05 to about 0.05 A V−7/3 μm−2 at x = 0.03. That is, with decreasing doping, electron transport through a-Si barrier favors chains with larger number of reso- nant impurities. More details on the current transport through a-Si:Nb barriers at low doping will be given elsewhere. Si1-xNbx barriers with Nb concentration of 9 at. % resulted in Jc ~ 0.6 mA/μm2. Higher doping levels, x > 0.1, resulted in Jcs too high and not suitable for SFQ circuits. Using the sheet resistance of deposited Si1-xNbx films, we determined in-plane resistivity ρ = Rsd to be 4.27 mΩ cm and 3.14 mΩ cm at x = 0.09 and 0.1, respectively. Hence, the specific barrier re- sistance (in the direction perpendicular to the junction plane) Rsq = Rsd2 was expected to be about 0.43 and 0.31 Ω μm2, re- spectively, i.e., a factor of 10 lower than for AlOx-based tun- nel barriers at Jc = 0.6 mA/μm2. The fabricated junctions showed a factor of 2x higher specific resistances of 0.78 and 0.7 Ω μm2 for x = 0.09 and 0.1, respectively. The on-chip and on-wafer resistance uniformities were found to be nearly the same and equal to 1.2% and 1.5% for 0.7-μm and 1-μm JJs, respectively. Despite relatively small changes in junction resistance with doping at these levels of x, the Josephson critical current den- sity Jc was found to strongly depend on the composition x and the residual stress in Nb electrodes. The Jc changes from 0.62±0.05 mA/μm2 to 1.42±0.07 mA/μm2 with x increasing from 0.09 to 0.10. We have found that residual stress in Nb films has a pro- found effect on Jc of Nb/Si1-xNbx/Nb junctions. For instance, a change in residual stress of Nb films from about −100 MPa to −700 MPa resulted in the Jc reduction from 1.12 to 0.62 mA/μm2 at x = 0.09 and from 2.07 to 1.42 mA/μm2 at x = 0.10, a 60% reduction on average. A similar change in the stress results in only about 10% change in the Jc of Nb-based junctions with AlOx tunnel barriers. These results indicate that accurate Jc targeting and reproducibility needed for a stable VLSI process with Nb/Si1-xNbx/Nb junctions require a very Fig. 13. The typical current-voltage characteristics of 0.7-μm-diameter junc- tions with 10-nm thick Si1-xNbx barriers at low levels of Nb doping: x = 0.03 (blue open circles) and 0.05 (black solid points). Note the scale difference: current was multiplied by 10x to show the I(V) for x=0.03 in this scale. Solid red curve is the best fit to (7), which is indistinguishable from the data points. The dashed line shows the cumulative contribution of direct tunneling and elastic resonant tunneling, G0V term in (7). Dotted blue curve is the best fit to (8) for the junction with x=0.03; see text. Note a much stronger I(V) nonline- arity in the junction with lower doping level. 10 precise process control over both Nb doping within a 0.1% or better level and over Nb film deposition parameters. The typical I-V characteristics of a 0.7-μm-diameter JJ with 9% doping is shown in Fig. 12 for a comparison with AlOx- based tunnel junctions with about the same Jc. The characteris- tic voltage Vc = IcRN is only 0.2 mV, which is a factor of 8 less than in Nb/AlOx-Al/Nb JJs. This indicates that the maximum clock frequency of SFQ circuits utilizing JJs with Si1-xNbx bar- rier will be much lower than in circuits with Nb/AlOx-Al/Nb JJs. By inspecting the published I-V characteristics of junctions with doped Si barriers, we noted that IcRN products reported for nonhysteretic JJs with various barrier thicknesses, doping types and levels in -,- and other publications do not exceed 0.36 mV, the same value as the IcRN of critically damped Nb/AlOx-Al/Nb junctions at Jc = 10 μA/μm2. There- fore, it appears to be not possible to optimize junctions with doped Si barriers by varying d and x to produce nonhysteretic junctions with values of Jc in the practical range, Jc ≤ 2 mA/μm2, and IcRN products comparable to values ob- tained in self-shunted tunnel junctions, about πΔNb/2 ≈ 2 mV. Indeed, getting close to the latter value requires barriers with d < ξN. At x = 0.09, ξN ≈ 5.6 nm according to our esti- mate. Making barriers thinner than that would increase Jc to unpractically high values requiring nanoscale junctions. Their properties would be similar to nano-constrictions considered in -, which by the way do not require any barrier. Thinning the barrier would also dramatically compromise JJ uniformity and reproducibility. Reducing the doping level would decrease ξN to the resonant tunneling length in Si, about 1 – 2 nm, driving JJs towards the tunneling regime realized in AlOx barriers, and making them hysteretic. Moreover, nm- thick deposited Si barriers are expected to be less uniform and reproducible than AlOx grown by self-limiting oxidation. Note also the presence of a large excess current, Iex, in I-V characteristics, as indicated by dashed lines in Fig. 12. The ex- cess current in SSmS junctions also follows from a current transport mechanism by resonant tunneling via chains of local- ized impurity centers ,. Fluctuations in the number of these resonant centers and transparency of these trajectories due to compositional fluctuations are responsible for sample- to-sample variations of the junction conductance and Joseph- son critical current. The Ic variation of 0.7-μm and 1-μm junctions with deposit- ed Si1-xNbx barriers on-chip and on-wafer have been found so far to be a factor of about 3x larger than for Nb/AlOx-Al/Nb JJs with the same sizes and the same average Jc of 0.6 mA/μm2. Similarly, the run-to-run repeatability of Ic was inferior to AlOx-based junctions. A more detailed description of the results on Nb/Si1-xNbx/Nb junction fabrication and char- acterization will be published elsewhere, whereas we also plan to do more experiments with submicron JJs with doped Si bar- riers. For the process integration with kinetic inductors, we concentrated on using Nb/AlOx-Al/Nb due to their superior characteristics. To conclude, we note that there are other types of junctions which exhibit self-shunting, have sufficiently high Jc, and rela- tively high IcRN values, e.g., SINIS , SNIS ,, etc., see a recent review . However, discussion of their pros and cons goes beyond the scope of this manuscript because we are not considering them for the use in our fabrication pro- cesses. IV. PROCESS INTEGRATION A. Mo2N Kinetic Inductor Layer Placement In the SFQ5ee process, kinetic inductors are used for circuit biasing and, as a result, are placed as the first layer in the pro- cess stack and interconnected by the first layer of Nb . In our new process we want to use kinetic inductors as SFQ cell inductors. This requires placing them as close to JJs as possi- ble in order to minimize parasitic inductance of interlayer vias. Therefore, we are completely changing the process stack and layer sequence, as shown in Fig. 14, while preserving planari- zation and other features of the SFQ5ee process. The first superconducting layer in the process is a Nb ground plane. It is followed by a Nb/AlOx-Al/Nb trilayer. For placing and interconnecting kinetic inductors, we are investi- gating two options: a) right below the trilayer base electrode (BE) and using BE interconnections, shown as layer K0; b) above JJs with interconnections by the next Nb layer, shown as layer K1. In the SFQ5ee process, the latter place is occu- pied by the shunt resistors, but it is available in this newer process node due to the use of self-shunted JJs. Depending on the circuit design requirements, we could implement two lay- ers of kinetic inductors K0 and K1. Alternatively, we can use a layer of resistors instead of K0 to facilitate additional JJ shunt- ing if required. For circuit biasing, we implement the regular layer of resistors, R4 in Fig. 13, which is identical to the SFQ5ee process, but placed differently in the stack. Finally, if bias kinetic inductors are required, they will be placed above the shown stack and two more Nb layers will be added to in- terconnect them and provide a sky plane (top ground plane) for circuits. All layers in our process are fully planarized. This allowed us successfully fabricate two fully independent layers of Josephson junctions, similar to the double-JJ-layer process Fig. 14. The target process cross section, showing two possible positions of the Mo2N kinetic inductors, labeled K0 and K1, in the process stack. The sim- plified version has six planarized niobium layers and one layer of resistors. The full process stack is expected to have eight planarized niobium layers and an additional layer of bias kinetic inductors near the top of the stack. 11 demonstrated in . Availability of multiple junction layers should enable increasing the integration scale of superconduc- tor electronic circuits in a 3D manner. B. Kinetic Inductance Target Since many components of SFQ circuits may use relatively low inductances, e.g., about 2 pH in Josephson transmission lines (JTLs), implementing 8-pH-per-square kinetic inductors would not make much sense. Therefore, we increased the tar- get thickness of our Mo2N films to 120 nm in order to de- crease Lk below 3 pH/sq and, accordingly, increase Jcf by a factor of 3x to about 3 mA/μm. This should allow us to use 0.35-μm-wide inductors and have enough margin in their criti- cal current. V. CONCLUSION We presented a detailed investigation of the superconduct- ing properties of thin MoNx films, such as critical temperature, critical current, magnetic-field penetration depth and its T- dependence, as well as a detailed optimization of the fabrica- tion parameters in order to implement amorphous Mo2N kinet- ic inductors in superconducting integrated circuits. We have found that the product of kinetic inductance and critical cur- rent of a 1-μm2 Mo2N film is about 4.4Φ0, which is a factor of 28 larger than the LIc product for Josephson junctions, Φ0/2π. This makes thin Mo2N films more attractive for integration in- to VLSI circuits as kinetic inductors than stacked Josephson junctions requiring a much more complex fabrication process. We investigated Nb/Si1-xNbx/Nb junctions with 10-nm thick barriers deposited by co-sputtering and x in the range from 0.03 to 0.15. We showed that electron transport through Si1- xNbx barriers at low doping levels x and low temperatures is due to inelastic resonant tunneling via chains of localized states with two and three localized states. At x above about 0.08, Nb/Si1-xNbx/Nb junctions become nonhysteretic Joseph- son junctions with relatively low IcRN products, a few times lower than in Nb/AlOx-Al/Nb Josephson junctions at the same critical current density Jc. Strong dependence of Jc on Nb dop- ing level x and residual stress in Nb electrodes was also ob- served. We compared Nb/Si1-xNbx/Nb junctions to self-shunted Nb/AlOx-Al/Nb Josephson junctions at the Jc value used in our current SFQ5vhs process node , about 0.6 mA/μm2. Based on a limited set of Josephson junctions with deposited amor- phous Si1-xNbx barriers studied thus far (about a dozen 200- mm wafers) with 10-nm thickness and x = 0.09 and 0.1, we concluded that AlOx-based tunnel junctions have superior pa- rameters, at the same Jc, for applications in high-speed SFQ digital circuits. We developed an integration scheme and a process stack to implement Mo2N kinetic inductors in SFQ logic/memory cells along with up to eight planarized Nb layers. ACKNOWLEDGMENT We are very grateful to Corey Stull for his help in develop- ing deposition of MoNx films, and to Mr. Hideki Fujii and many colleagues at Canon-Anelva for depositing Nb-doped Si films and Nb/Si1-xNbx/Nb trilayers used in this work. We would also like to thank Eric Dauler, Marc Manheimer, and Scott D. Holmes for their interest in and support of this work. The views and conclusions contained in this publication are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as necessari- ly representing the official policies or endorsements, either expressed or implied, of the ODNI, IARPA, or the U.S. Gov- ernment. The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Governmental purposes notwithstanding any copyright annotation thereon.