arXiv:1803.10708v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 28 Mar 2018 Sign reversal superconducting gaps revealed by phase referenced quasi-particle interference of impurity induced bound states in (Li1‚àíxFex)OHFe1‚àíyZnySe Qiangqiang Gu, Siyuan Wan, Zengyi Du, Xiong Yang, Huan Yang‚àó, Hai Lin, Xiyu Zhu, and Hai-Hu Wen‚ÄÝ National Laboratory of Solid State Microstructures and Department of Physics, Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Microstructures, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China By measuring the spatial distribution of differential conductance near impurities on Fe sites, we have obtained the quasi-particle interference (QPI) patterns in the (Li1‚àíxFex)OHFe1‚àíyZnySe su- perconductor with only electron Fermi surfaces. By taking the Fourier transform on these patterns, we investigate the scattering features between the two circles of electron pockets formed by folding or hybridization. We treat the data by using the recent theoretical approach [arXiv:1710.09089] which is specially designed for the impurity induced bound states. It is found that the supercon- ducting gap sign is reversed on the two electron pockets, which can be directly visualized by the phase-referenced QPI technique, indicating that the Cooper pairing is induced by the repulsive inter- action. Our results further show that this method is also applicable for data measured for multiple impurities, which provides an easy and feasible way for detecting the gap function of unconventional superconductors. I. INTRODUCTION The discovery of iron based superconductors1 provides us a second example of unconventional high tempera- ture superconductors. It is categorized as ‚Äúunconven- tional‚Äù because a lot of unique features have been found. For example, the parent phase of RFeAsO (R = rare earth elements) and AEFe2As2 (AE represents the alka- line earth metals Ba, Sr, Ca, etc.) have the long range antiferromagnetic (AFM) orders2,3. The superconduc- tivity emerges when this long range AFM order is sup- pressed. Plenty of evidence indicates that superconduc- tivity has been mediated by AFM spin fluctuations in the pairing process4. Theoretically it was proposed that the pairing may be established by the pair-scattering of two electrons with opposite momenta between the hole and electron pockets5,6 leading to the so-called sign reversal s-wave gap, namely the s¬±-pairing manner. This picture, originally proposed for the FeAs-based system with both electron and hole pockets, has been actually supported by several important experiments, such as the quasipar- ticle interference (QPI) in FeTe1‚àíxSex7 and the inelas- tic neutron scattering8. We have also done the exper- iments of scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy (STM/STS) measurements on the non-magnetic Cu im- purities in Na(Fe0.96Co0.03Cu0.01)As and found clear ev- idence of the in-gap bound states providing strong sup- port of the s¬±-pairing9. In addition, a bosonic mode was observed outside the superconducting coherence peaks in at least two systems10 with the mode energy Œ© scaling with the superconducting transition temperature Tc in the way Œ© ‚âà 4.3kBTc. This has been naturally explained as the consequence of the s¬±-pairing gap. It seems that the model of s¬±-pairing is so far so good for the systems with both electron and hole pockets. However, new challenges come out for some later dis- covered FeSe-based systems, such as the FeSe monolayer thin film11, (Li1‚àíxFex)OHFeSe12,13, etc., which seem to show the absence of hole pockets in the center of the Brillouin zone14,15. The key question is whether we still have sign reversal gaps among the electron pockets. If it exists, what is the configuration of the gap pattern, two candidates would be the nodeless d-wave pairing16,17 and the bonding-anti-bonding s¬± pairing18. Recently we have adopted a proposal19 for measuring the gap sign and found the evidence of sign-reversal gaps20 in the system (Li1‚àíxFex)OHFe1‚àíyZnySe. This method is re- lying on the determination of a sophisticated quantity associated with the real part of antisymmetrized inter- band Fourier transformed (FT-) QPI. It is expected that this quantity will be coherently enhanced in the region between two gaps. Furthermore a careful calibration is needed to obtain the phase message by implementing the phase-correction method21. Very recently, another method is proposed to judge the gap sign problem in LiFeAs with both electron and hole pockets. Namely the phase information can be validly extracted from the impurity induced bound states22,23. It seems that this new method is sensitive and straightforward. In present work, we operate QPI measurements around one single impurity in Zn-doped (Li1‚àíxFex)OHFeSe and also in a large area with multi- ple impurities in (Li1‚àíxFex)OHFeSe. Applying this new method for one single impurity, we find out the robust proof of gap sign reversal directly visualized on the two electron pockets. Furthermore, in a system with multi- ple and identical impurities, we can recover the similar results as the case of one single impurity when carry- ing out the phase-correction of these impurities. Our results indicate that the unconventional Cooper pair- ing in (Li1‚àíxFex)OHFeSe is originated from the on-site Coulomb interaction, as previously proposed in the FeAs- based superconductors. 2 II. EXPERIMENTAL METHOD The single crystals of (Li1‚àíxFex)OHFeSe and (Li1‚àíxFex)OHFe1‚àíyZnySe are synthesized by hydrother- mal ion-exchange method12,20,24. The value of y in (Li1‚àíxFex)OHFe1‚àíyZnySe analyzed by X-ray energy dispersive spectrum is about 2%. The DC magnetiza- tion at 20 Oe shows that the critical temperatures of (Li1‚àíxFex)OHFeSe and Zn-doped samples are 36.4 K and 33.4 K respectively. STM/STS measurements are carried out by a scanning tunneling microscope (USM-1300, Unisoku Co., Ltd.) with the ultra-high vacuum, low-temperature and high- magnetic field. All the samples were cleaved at room temperature in an ultra-high vacuum of 1√ó10‚àí10 Torr, and then transferred into the low-temperature micro- scope head immediately. The electrochemically etched tungsten tips were used during all the measurements. To raise the signal-to-noise ratio in dI/dV spectra, a typical lock-in technique was used with an ac modulation of 0.4 mV at 987.5 Hz. All data in the paper were taken at 1.5 K. III. RESULTS A. Theoretical model of bound-state based phase-referenced QPI The Bogoliubov quasi-particles with the momentum and energy (k,E) can be elastically scattered by defects to another state (k‚Ä≤,E), forming a standing wave with the wave vector q = k‚Ä≤ ‚àí k. Such standing waves can be easily observed by STM in the real space from QPI mea- surement. The measured differential conductance map- ping g(r, E) is proportional to the local density of state LDOS, neglecting the spatial variations of the tunneling matrix. Then the detailed information in q-space can be obtained by applying the Fourier transformation to QPI data, which reflects the scatterings in k-space. The obtained FT-QPI g(q, E) is a complex value, and can be expressed as g(q, E) = |g(q, E)|eiŒ∏q,E with Œ∏q,E the phase. Recently a phase-referenced QPI method was proposed to determine the gap symmetry, and the model is based on the phase-referenced QPI near one single impurity (1) (2) As one can see, Œ∏q,E in the above equations is used as a referenced phase when compared to Œ∏q,‚àíE. Then the phase difference term can be expressed as cos(Œ∏q,‚àíE ‚àí Œ∏q,+E) = cos Œ∏q,‚àíE cos Œ∏q,+E + sin Œ∏q,‚àíE sin Œ∏q,+E = Re[g(q, ‚àíE)] |g(q, ‚àíE)| Re[g(q, +E)] + Im[g(q, ‚àíE)] |g(q, ‚àíE)| Im[g(q, +E)] |g(q, +E)| , (3) where Re represents the real part of the complex function g(q, E), and Im represents imaginary part. According to the newly suggested treatment method22,23, gr(q, +E) is always taken as positive (see Eq. (1)). Specially, for the nonmagnetic impurity within s¬± paring symmetry, the integral signal of gr(q, ‚àíE) from sign reversed scattering will change into negative values, with the intensity peak emerging near the impurity induced bound state energy as well. Furthermore, this method can be also used in a system with multiple impurities22, and here the measured dif- ferential conductance mapping g(r, E) can be converted into g(r, E) = ÔøΩ j gs(r ‚àí Rj, E), (4) where Rj is the location of the jth impurity, and then gs(r ‚àí Rj, E) is the differential conductance mapping by moving the center of the jth impurity to the origin. Here the subscript s means for single impurity. After a brief mathematical operation22, we can recover gs(q, E) from g(q, E), namely gs(q, E) = g(q, E) ÔøΩ j e‚àíiq¬∑Rj . (5) From the equation above, with no need of complicated calculation concerned, the denominator ÔøΩ j e‚àíiq¬∑Rj is only a complex parameter determined by the location of each impurity and can be calculated from experimental data. As a result, it could be a practical way to obtain gs(q, E) directly from g(q, E), then gr(q, ¬±E) can be calculated from Eqs. (1) and (2) by replacing the infor- mation of g(q, E) by that of gs(q, E). Above all, we can conclude that this phase sensitive method is applicable both for the case of one single impurity and also for a system with multiple impurities, if a careful calibration is done. B. The bound-state based phase-referenced QPI method applied on one single impurity situation raphy of a (Li1‚àíxFex)OHFe1‚àíyZnySe sample after cleav- age, and the Se terminated surface shows a square lattice with lattice constant close to 3.7 ÃäA. The single impurity on Fe sites shows a topography with a dumbbell shape20. 3 Se terminated layer in (Li1‚àíxFex)OHFe1‚àíyZnySe measured with bias voltage Vb = 30 mV and tunneling current It = 50 pA. The arrow indicates a well-isolated Fe-site impurity, and the inset shows the rescanned image with higher resolution around this impurity (Vb = 30 mV, It = 100 pA). (b) Tun- neling spectra measured at the center of the impurity marked by the arrow in (a) and far away from impurities. (c) The schematic Fermi surfaces in 2-Fe Brillouin zone. The two elec- tron pockets with moderate hybridization are located around each M point, and the sizes of the electron pockets are de- termined from the measured FT-QPI results20. (d) The sim- ulation of FT-QPI intensity by using self-correlation for (c). For clarity, only the central pattern with small-q is presented here. The selected region between the two solid circles is in the region of 0.37œÄ/aSe‚àíSe < q < 0.74œÄ/aSe‚àíSe, which is used as the integral region for bound-state based phase-referenced QPI (see text). The inset of Fig. 1(a) shows the topographic image with a well-isolated impurity in the center. The spectrum mea- sured at an impurity-free position is shown in Fig. 1(b), and the spectrum is featured by a standard ‚ÄúU‚Äù shape in- dicating an s-wave pairing without any nodes crossing the Fermi surfaces. One can also easily distinguish two gaps ‚àÜ1 ‚âà 14 meV and ‚àÜ2 ‚âà 8.5 meV from the spectrum, therefore, the material behaves as a multi-gap supercon- ductor like Ba0.6K0.4Fe2As226, LiFeAs27, etc. Moreover, the impurity induced bound state peaks appear at around EB = ¬±4 meV, although the peak has a very weak and almost negligible amplitude at the negative energy. This impurity is proved to be a nonmagnetic one evidenced by the non-shift of the peak energy under the magnetic field of 11 T20. As revealed by previous angle resolved photo-emission (ARPES)14,15 and STM/STS measurements25, the hole pockets are absent near Œì point of the Brillouin zone in (Li1‚àíxFex)OHFeSe or (Li1‚àíxFex)OHFe1‚àíyZnySe20. The schematic Fermi surfaces are shown in Fig. 1(c). The QPI patterns gr(q, E) at different energies. These data ob- tained from the QPI images measured with 64 √ó 64 pixels in the area with the topography shown in the inset of Fig. 1(a). The integral process in each figure is carried out in the region between two solid circles which are the same as those shown in Fig. 1(d). intensity is assumed as a constant everywhere around the Fermi surfaces and then we simulate the FT-QPI pattern by using self-correlation for Fig. 1(c), and present the small-q results in Fig. 1(d). The two electron pockets can give rise to two sets of the intra-pocket scattering and one set of the inter-pocket scattering. The region between the solid circles in the figure contains the main scattering intensity of the intra- and inter-pockets scattering, which will be used as the integral area in the bound-state based phase-referenced QPI calculations. The QPI patterns were measured at different energies between ‚àí24 meV and +24 meV in the region whose topography is shown in the inset of Fig. 1(a), and the nonmagnetic impurity is located in the center of the im- age. After carrying out some mathematical procedures based on Eqs. (1) and (2), we can get a series of phase- referenced QPI patterns from the raw data. In Fig. 2, we present resultant patterns of gr(q, E) at typical en- ergies ¬±E = ¬±4 meV and ¬±8.5 meV, which are at the impurity bound state energies and the smaller gap ¬±‚àÜ2, respectively. Obvious twofold symmetry can be observed in the resultant bound-state based phase-referenced FT- QPI images . The reason is that the Fe-site impurity sits just under the midpoint between the two nearest neigh- bored Se atoms on the surface, which naturally lowers down the fourfold symmetry of the square lattice and this can get support from the topographic image near the impurity. The two circles in each figure have the same sizes as those in Fig. 1(d), and the region between them contains the main scattering intensity of the intra- or inter-pockets scattering. It is not strange that gr(q, E) 4 -20 -10 0 10 20 -100 0 100 200 300 400 +E B positive energy negative energy Integral signal (a.u.) E (meV) -E B (Color online) The calculated integral signal of gr(q, E) versus energy. The integrated area in q-space is re- stricted between the two circles shown in Fig. 2. at some positive energy is positive everywhere, because it is the absolute value according to Eq. (1). However, negative values seem to be dominant in the concerned region between two circles at E = ‚àí4 meV, which in- dicates that the selected area contains the sign reversal inter-pocket scattering. The area with negative value of gr(q, E < 0) shrinks when |E| increases, and then the positive and negative areas are almost mixed and bal- anced near ‚àí8.5 meV. By the way, we have a feeling that the phase-referenced method based on the bound states22,23 may be only applicable at and near by the bound state peak energy, not effective like the method sensitive to the energies between two gaps19 since there are some differences between the two methods. Inferred from the theoretical models and previous experimental results22,23, the absolute value of phase- referenced QPI signal is enhanced significantly when the energy is close to the in-gap bound state. The major difference is the sign of the phase-referenced QPI sig- nals near the bound state peak at the negative energies for different kinds of impurities in superconductors with different gap symmetries, i.e., negative for nonmagnetic impurity in a superconductor with sign reversal gaps and positive for magnetic impurity in a superconductor with sign preserved gaps23. To quantitatively describe the fea- ture of phase-referenced QPI in the sample, we calculate the integrals of gr(q, E) over the selected area at differ- ent energies ranging from ‚àí24 meV to +24 meV, and plot the experimental result in Fig. 3. The peaks for integral signal near the impurity bound states ‚Äú¬±EB‚Äù energies have a clear sign reversal from the positive to negative energy sides, which is consistent with the re- sult from nonmagnetic impurity in s¬± model23. Accord- ingly, we believe this is another proof of sign reversal superconducting gaps between the two electron pockets in (Li1‚àíxFex)OHFe1‚àíyZnySe, which is totally consistent with our previous conclusion20. purity located at the center of the image with the FOV of 6 nm √ó 6 nm (Vb = 30 mV, It = 100 pA). (b) Tunneling spectra measured on the impurity site under the magnetic fields of 0 T and 11 T, respectively. (c)-(f) Phase-referenced QPI pat- terns at E = ¬±3 meV and ¬±5 meV. The two circles adhered to each figure are the same sizes as depicted in Fig. 1(d). C. Control experiment on another kind of single impurity In order to reinforce the reliability of the analyzing method and also conclusions above, we have carried out a control experiment on another kind of impurity. Fig- ure 4(a) shows a single impurity which is well located at the center in a field of view (FOV) with dimensions of 6 nm √ó 6 nm. The impurity pattern is dumbbell shaped as well. In Fig. 4(b), we show the spectra measured at the impurity site under magnetic fields of 0 T and 11 T, respectively. At zero field, one can see that two pairs of bound states peaks emerge at ¬±EB1 = ¬±2.7 meV and ¬±EB2 = ¬±5.6 meV, which is different from the impurity in the previous subsection with only one pair of impu- rity bound states. The high magnetic field does not shift the peak positions of the in-gap states, manifesting the non-magnetic character of this impurity20. Subsequently, a set of differential conductance map- pings were measured in the region shown in Fig. 4(a). The phase-referenced QPI patterns can be calculated from the measured data, and four of them are presented in Figs. 4(c)-(f). One can clearly see that most of the val- 5 -20 -10 0 10 20 -200 0 200 400 600 +E B2 -E B2 -E B1 positive energy negative energy Integral signal ( a.u. ) E (meV ) +E B1 ing from ‚àí25 meV to +25 meV for the impurity shown in Fig. 4(a). The two pairs of peaks located at ¬±EB1, ¬±EB2 are attributed to the impurity induced bound states. ues between the two circles are negative at the energies of ‚àí3 meV and ‚àí5 meV, which are close to the in-gap bound state energies. Then we calculated the integral signals over the area between the two circles, and the en- ergy evolution of the signal is plotted in Fig. 5. From the resultant curve, these two pairs of the integral sig- nal peaks are located near in-gap state energies marked by ‚Äú¬±EB1‚Äù and ‚Äú¬±EB2‚Äù, with a sign changing at the positive and negative energy sides. Clearly, the experi- mental results of the two different impurities are consis- tent with the theoretical calculation in which there exists a sign reversal gap between the two electron pockets in (Li1‚àíxFex)OHFe1‚àíyZnySe. D. Same method applied on multiple impurities In the next, we present the data of a new round of experiments on a Zn-free sample with multiple impu- rities. As shown in Fig. 6(a), plenty of impurities are witnessed in a FOV of 28 nm √ó 28 nm and all defects show similar dumbbell-shapes. Tunneling spectra mea- sured at the centers of the two different impurities and at an impurity-free position are presented in Fig. 6(b). The tunneling spectrum measured at the impurity-free posi- tion is featured by a ‚ÄúU‚Äù shape, which indicates a node- less gap feature. The clear and sharp coherence peaks reveal the double gaps in the Zn-free samples, and the feature is also very close to the one measured on the Zn-doped samples. Impurities in FOV can be mainly categorized into two kinds, and the symbols for these two kinds are impurity 1 (marked by yellow circle) and impurity 2 (marked by black circle), respectively. As for impurity 1, the impurity-induced bound state peaks at the positive energies are much stronger than those at the negative energies, and the situation is reversed (Color online) (a) Topography of a 28 nm √ó 28 nm area with plenty of dumbbell shaped impurities in (Li1‚àíxFex)OHFeSe sample (Vb = 40 mV, It = 100 pA). (b) Spectra measured at the centers of two different impurities [marked as 1 and 2 in (a)] and at an impurity-free position. (c),(d) Differential conductance mappings measured at ¬±3.6 mV in the same area as the topography shown in (a). As one can see, impurities in (a) can be mainly categorized into two kinds. with respect to impurity 2. In Figs. 6(c,d), we display differential conductance mappings measured at energies close to the in-gap state with the smaller peak energy. One can clearly see that there exists an obvious differ- ence between the QPI patterns induced by impurity 1 and impurity 2. Arising from the synthesis procedure of hydrothermal ion-exchange method with many kinds of elements in (Li1‚àíxFex)OHFeSe, these two different kinds of impurities may come from the vacancies of Fe or the substitution of Fe-sites by atoms of other elements, prob- ably the Li atoms. Therefore, if we want to recover gs(q, E) from the QPI measurements for the large area with multiple impurities, it is necessary to mask out one kind of impurities with another kind left. Thus we need to deduct the contri- bution of that kind of impurities. For that purpose, the values in the circle surrounding one kind of impurity (1 or 2) with a radius 1.6 nm are substituted by the average value of the whole differential conductance mapping, as a result there exist only one kind of identical impurities of interests in the masked mapping. Then we can get a se- ries of phase-referenced QPI patterns referring to Eq. (5) and then Eqs. (1) and (2). In order to figure out the en- ergy evolution of gr(q, E), we present a series of patterns at the negative energies varying from ‚àí2.5 meV to ‚àí16 meV for impurity 1 as shown in Fig. 6(a). The patterns at positive energies are not presented here because they are nothing but the absolute values of FT-QPI without ex- tra phase-related information. As we know, the FT-QPI 6 gs(q, E) at negative energies for impurity 1. The side length and the selected region between the two circles for integration are the same as those shown in Fig. 1(d). results have some diffuse weight arising from the long- range disorders in real space, so that the pattern with very small q which is concentrated within the inner circle could be complex and difficult to analyse. As mentioned above, the selected region between two circles will cover the main scattering intensity of the intra- or inter-pockets scattering. One can clearly see that most of the values in the selected area are negative when the energies are close to impurity-induced in-gap state energies of impurity 1 [Fig. 7(b-d)]. In Fig. 7(f), it is obvious that there are two neighbored contours with positive and negative values re- spectively in the selected region, which may be from the different kinds of scatterings if the gap changes its sign for the two electron pockets. When the energy exceeds the larger gap, the positive signals begin to dominate, which can be easily understood as due to the signal from the normal state. We then plot the energy dependent integral signals of gr(q, E) for these two kinds of impu- rities in Fig. 8. As one can see, the signal reaches its extrema at the energies close to the bound state peaks, meanwhile, it does have a sign change for positive and negative energies. This is consistent with the theoreti- cal prediction for the nonmagnetic impurities in an s¬± pairing superconductor23. Thus we have successfully re- covered the gs(q, E) in a system with multiple impurities, giving strong support for the sign reversal gaps between the two electron pockets in (Li1‚àíxFex)OHFeSe. -20 -10 0 10 20 0 4000 8000 Integral signal (a.u.) E (meV) negative energy for impurity 1 positive energy for impurity 1 negative energy for impurity 2 positive energy for impurity 2 QPI for impurity 1 and impurity 2. The extrema emerge at the energies close to the impurity bound states. IV. DISCUSSION Compared to the case of one single impurity, QPI mea- surements for a large area with multiple impurities can give us a high resolution in q-space and we can obtain more details of the QPI scatterings from the Fermi sur- faces. Between the two circles in Fig. 1(d), there are three scattering channels, and two of which are sign-reserved and one is sign-changed. Roughly speaking, these three scattering channels will mix together and then it may hin- der us from identifying the sign-changed scattering. In fact, specially for the bound state peak at ‚àí3.6 meV, the selected region is almost covered by the negative sign, thus indicating the existence of sign-reversal gaps. As we understand, the scattering of the Bogoliubov quasi- particles with energy Ek and wavevector k in a supercon- ductor can be characterized by the coherence factors28, namely uk = ‚àÜk |‚àÜk| ÔøΩ 1 2 ÔøΩ 1 + Œµk Ek ÔøΩ , vk = ÔøΩ 1 ‚àí |uk|2, (6) where |uk|2 and |vk|2 are the probabilities that Cooper pairs unoccupy and occupy the ¬±k state, and Œµk is the kinetic energy. Within the Fermi‚Äôs golden rule, the scat- tering probability from k to k‚Ä≤ is roughly proportional to C(k, k‚Ä≤) = |ukuk‚Ä≤ ‚àí vkvk‚Ä≤|2 for the scalar potential28,29. Provided that the scatters are non-magnetic, the value of C(k, k‚Ä≤) for the sign-changed scattering will be much larger than the one for the sign-reserved scattering at the low excited energy within superconducting gap. There- fore, we can get the strong signal mainly from the sign- changed inter-pockets scattering channel, the other two scattering channels within the sign-reserved gap should be very weak. 7 From the experimental data of phase-referenced QPI, we can find that the integral of gr(q, E) has a sign chang- ing of the signal peak between the positive and negative energies near the impurity bound states. We can also notice that the signals at the high energies become posi- tive disregard in the positive or negative energy sides, as shown in Figs. 3, 5 and 8. It should be noted that the sign reversal of phase-referenced QPI signal is based on the phase change originated from the scattering of Bo- goliubov quasi-particles within the superconducting gap. However, the situation for the normal state should be different, i.e., the phase angles of Œ∏q,‚àíE and Œ∏q,E should be similar for normal state quasi-particles. In another words, at high energies beyond superconducting gaps, C(k, k‚Ä≤) will tend to be a constant 1 for scattering of both sign-reversed and reserved processes. Hence, it is not strange that the integral signals of gs(q, ¬±E) become a positive value when |E| is much larger than gap values, as in the normal state. In our recent work20, we have obtained an elusive quan- tity, the real part of antisymmetrized FT-QPI, which is defined as Œ¥g‚àí(E) = ÔøΩ q Re[g(q, +E) ‚àí g(q, ‚àíE)], and is coherently enhanced within the energy region between two gaps19. It provides us a robust evidence of the sign reversal gaps on the two electron pock- ets in (Li1‚àíxFex)OHFe1‚àíyZnySe20. This phase-sensitive method is designed for the case of one isolated impu- rity, as a result that the phase message can not be easily affected by other neighbored impurities in the investi- gated FOV. Back to the recently proposed approach22,23 used in this paper, namely the bound-state based phase- referenced QPI for one single impurity, it is also very helpful to judge the sign problem of the order parame- ters near the energy of the impurity state. Furthermore, this new approach is applicable for the system with mul- tiple impurities as well and we have successfully recov- ered the similar result as the measurements of one single impurity. Both methods are quite useful and they can play as a mutual double check. Our results indicate that the phase referenced QPI can provide an easy and fea- sible way to detect the gap function of unconventional superconductors. V. SUMMARY We performed QPI measurements around a single im- purity in (Li1‚àíxFex)OHFe1‚àíyZnySe at a series of ener- gies. Adopting the newly proposed method of bound- state based phase-referenced QPI, we demonstrate that there exists a sign reversal gap between the two electron pockets, namely the inner and outer circles after fold- ing or hybridization. Furthermore, for the situation in (Li1‚àíxFex)OHFeSe with multiple impurities, the similar results are also obtained, which proves the validity of the method and conclude again the sign reversal gaps in the system. Considering a practical case, sometimes it may not be easy to find out one well-isolated impurity, so that the phase-referenced QPI measurements applied for multiple impurities seem to be more realistic and thus provide a practical way to detect the gap function of un- conventional superconductors. Our results suggest that the FeSe-based superconductors without the hole pock- ets have a sign reversal of gaps between the two electron pockets, being consistent with the picture of unconven- tional Cooper pairing mediated by exchanging antiferro- magnetic spin fluctuations.