Observation of a superconducting glass state in granular superconducting diamond G. M. Klemencic,1, ∗ J. M. Fellows,2 J. M. Werrell,1 S. Mandal,1 S. R. Giblin,1 R. A. Smith,3 and O. A. Williams1 1School of Physics and Astronomy, Cardiff University, Queen’s Buildings, The Parade, Cardiff, CF24 3AA, UK 2School of Physics, HH Wills Physics Laboratory, University of Bristol, Tyndall Avenue, Bristol, BS8 1TL, UK 3School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK (Dated: March 6, 2018) The magnetic field dependence of the superconductivity in nanocrystalline boron doped diamond thin films is reported. Evidence of a glass state in the phase diagram is presented, as demonstrated by electrical resistance and magnetic relaxation measurements. The position of the phase boundary in the H-T plane is determined from resistance data by detailed fitting to zero-dimensional fluctuation conductivity theory. This allows determination of the boundary between resistive and non-resistive behavior to be made with greater precision than the standard ad hoc onset/midpoint/offset criterion. I. INTRODUCTION Historically, the experimental observation of a pro- posed superconducting glass state was first made by M ̈uller, Takashige and Bednorz in powder samples of La2CuO4−y:Ba1. The authors noted the existence of frustration in granular systems that gives rise to a “su- perconductive glass” that is equivalent to an XY spin- glass2, demonstrating the existence of degenerate states. In line with the essential features of the analogous spin- glass system, the authors reported a logarithmic decay of the remanent magnetization, and an irreversibility line – the boundary in the H-T plane between reversibil- ity and irreversibility in magnetization – which obeyed H ∝ (1 − T/Tc)3/2. This observed power law of the irreversibility line was thus likened to the de Almeida- Thouless line which separates the metastable and stable regions of the phase diagram in related models of spin- glasses3. Similar behavior regarding the irreversibility line and magnetic relaxation was subsequently observed in single crystal Y-Ba-Cu-O, and an alternative interpretation was proposed by Yeshurun and Malozemoff in the form of a thermally activated flux-creep model4. Tinkham then ex- tended this work to propose a phenomenological model that includes the effects of pinning and reproduces the observed power law5. Other theories purporting to ex- plain the form of the irreversibility line in this kind of su- perconductor include vortex-lattice melting6 and the ex- istence of a disordered vortex glass7–9 state arising from random pinning sites. Importantly, these competing the- ories share in common the idea of frustration of the super- conducting order parameter, leading to a ubiquitous 3/2 power law in the irreversibility line, so one may in gen- eral term this behavior “glassy superconductivity” with- out understanding the nature of the correlations specific to each. Whilst the majority of reports of irreversible mag- netic behavior have focused on high-Tc compounds, Op- permann10 has pointed out that the signatures of a glassy state should also be expected in the vicinity of a metal-insulator transition, regardless of the magnitude of Tc. Additionally, the existence of an irreversibility line has been studied in low-Tc type II materials such as Nb3Sn and Nb-Ti11, Nb12, MgB213, PbMo6S8 and Ba0.25Pb0.75BiO314. The irreversible behavior in these metallic films has mainly been attributed to flux lat- tice melting. The boron-doped nanocrystalline diamond (BNCD) films studied here have a granular morphol- ogy15–18 similar to sintered powders, and are close to a metal-insulator transition19–21, so that the observation of glassy superconductivity is perhaps not surprising. It is a novel observation for this material nonetheless, explic- itly using the understanding of our previous work which used fluctuation spectroscopy to probe material proper- ties that are governed by the morphological granularity18. In this paper, we describe the measurement of the mag- netic field-dependence of superconductivity in BNCD films, where the granularity may be controlled by the film thickness. We have found evidence in support of a su- perconducting glass in the phase diagram which we have confirmed with electrical resistivity and magnetic relax- ation measurements. We observe a quasi de Almedia- Thouless-type line in Hc2(T), and confirm the proposed glassy superconductivity by observing a logarithmic de- cay in the magnetization over time. Such glassy dynam- ics can be attributed to frustration in a system of weakly coupled superconducting clusters, each of which acts as an individual U(1) ∼= O(2) spin2. II. MATERIAL GROWTH AND EXPERIMENTAL METHOD The BNCD films, described in detail elsewhere18, are grown on SiO2-buffered (100) silicon wafers by microwave plasma assisted chemical vapour deposition22. Prior to growth, the substrates were seeded by ultrasonification in a monodisperse aqueous colloid of 5 nm diameter nanodi- amond particles23. During growth, the substrate temper- ature was ∼720◦C in a plasma composed of 3% methane in hydrogen, with trimethylboron as the source of boron (B/C ratio of 12800 ppm). The chamber pressure and mi- arXiv:1803.01637v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 5 Mar 2018 2 crowave power were 40 Torr and 3.5 kW respectively. In this paper, we have focused our attention on the thickest sample, though other samples show qualitatively simi- lar behavior. Scanning electron micrographs showed the thickness of this sample to be 564 nm, with a mean grain diameter of 102 ± 24 nm. All temperature dependent measurements relating to the magnetic field dependence of the superconductiv- ity were made using a Quantum Design physical prop- erty measurement system with a base temperature of 1.9 K. Resistance measurements were performed using silver paste contacts made to the sample surface in a four-wire Van der Pauw configuration. Vibrating sample magnetometry was used to measure the magnetization. All measurements were made with the magnetic field ap- plied perpendicularly to the samples. III. RESULTS A. Electrical resistance Fig. 1 displays the resistance as a function of temper- ature measured in an applied magnetic field in the range 0–4 T with field increments of 0.2 T. Closely spaced field increments of 0.02 T (not shown in Fig. 1 for clarity, but present in Fig. 2) were also used below 0.2 T. In order to make a more rigorous determination of Tc, we have fitted the fluctuation part of the conductivity to the quasi-zero dimensional scaling behavior, σfl ∼ (T −Tc)−3, discussed in detail elsewhere18. The critical temperatures so deter- mined give a precise measure of the temperature at which the conductivity diverges for a given field. This is more accurate than determining critical behavior through the more common onset-midpoint-offset (90%-50%-10%) cri- terion13. Indeed, each R(T) trace in Fig. 1 is displayed along with the associated fit line, showing a remarkable agreement between the theoretical prediction and the ex- perimental data. The resulting field induced transition temperature is shown in Fig. 2. It has been shown that this can be interpeted as the irreversibility line, Hirr(T)11,14,24,25; as the magnetization becomes reversible, a supercurrent is no longer supported, and a finite resistance is measured. There is a clear upturn in the Hirr(T) curve, which closely follows the quasi de Almeida-Thouless H2/3 power law, as shown more clearly in the inset. B. Magnetic relaxation To confirm the observation of glassy superconductivity in this system, we have also measured the relaxation of the magnetization, and observed the logarithmic decay that is expected from the analogous frustrated model. The procedure for measuring the magnetic relaxation described by Yeshurun, Malozemoff and Shaulov26 was followed. The sample was cooled to the measurement magnetic fields in the range 0–4 T in 0.2 T increments. Fit lines (solid) through the data follow the analysis technique discussed in the text. for a 564 nm thick BNCD film. Inset: rescaled H(T) clearly showing the H2/3 power law behavior. temperature in zero applied field. A magnetic field smaller than the irreversibility field, but larger than the minimum sample magnetization, was then applied, fol- lowed by a step decrease that ensured a reversal of the flux profile. The values of these fields were determined by measurement of a magnetic hysteresis loop at the ap- propriate temperature. The magnetic moment was then monitored as a function of time by vibrating sample mag- netometry, where the amplitude of sample translation was minimised to avoid possible field inhomogeneity. The normalised magnetic relaxation at 2.2 K is shown in Fig. 3. For this measurement, after cooling in zero field, an initial applied field of 96 Oe was followed by a step change to 33 Oe. The dashed line is a linear fit to the normalised magnetic moment as a function of ln t. We observe a logarithmic decay of the magnetic moment 3 thick BNCD film. The vertical dotted line indicates that fit- ting to a logarithmic decay is performed after a transient pe- riod of 10 minutes. Similar logarithmic decay is observed over a range of temperatures up to Tc. BNCD film as a function of temperature. as expected for the analogous frustrated model to which we liken the observations. The slope of the magnetization M(t) vs ln t is plotted as a function of temperature in Fig. 4; we see that the relaxation rate increases as the superconducting transi- tion is approached. The non-linearity of this curve means that the present data set cannot be directly compared to the Anderson-Kim model, in which one expects the mag- netization M(t) to be proportional to 1− kbT U0 ln(t/t0)26,27 i.e. the slope should be linear in temperature. Further investigation will be required to determine which model is able to explain the glassy behavior of this system, and thus provide more insight into its microscopic origin. IV. DISCUSSION Generally, reports of the field dependence of the re- sistive transition in BNCD to date have shown that the transition width broadens with applied magnetic field; the onset of the superconductivity has been shown to be less sensitive to the field than the tail in the resis- tance that grows with increasing field28–30. Scanning tunnelling microscopy of CVD-grown BNCD films well below Tc has shown that the temperature dependence of the energy gap in polycrystalline31 and epitaxial32 boron doped diamond samples both broadly agree with BCS- like superconductivity. In BNCD films, a strong correla- tion between the local superconductivity and the granu- lar structure has been shown, with grain boundaries per- pendicular to the direction of film growth31. The energy gap showed a smooth variation across a grain, which is believed to be indicative of slowly varying doping con- centration. The grain boundaries, however, are reported as having predominantly metallic-like conductance. It is therefore appropriate to consider our BNCD sample as a disordered collection of coupled superconducting grains. We thus interpret the results presented here as likely be- ing due to a superconducting glass arising from frustra- tion in a model of weakly linked superconducting clusters, as described by Ebner and Stroud2. The samples studied here are not unique in terms of the existence of a quasi de Almeida-Thouless line in the H(T) diagram; there is some evidence in the literature that other BNCD samples show similar behavior under the influence of a magnetic field19,28,29,33, but this fea- ture has never before been commented upon. While dis- cussion of, and experiments pertaining to, glassy states in superconductors are common for high-Tc compounds, they are also expected to be observable in granular mate- rials, or materials near the metal-insulator transition10. The BNCD samples studied here fall into both of these categories, and so it is perhaps unsurprising that this glassy behavior manifests itself here, but this has not previously been recognised. As an important side-note, it is common practice throughout the literature to calculate the coherence length in films such as these by comparing the H(T) curve to the Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg (WHH) the- ory34 of the upper critical field29,35 . According to WHH theory, the H(T) curve should be linear near to Tc, which is evidently not the case in samples displaying this glassy behavior due to the curvature of the quasi de Almeida- Thouless line. It follows that fitting to WHH may not be a reliable way to determine the coherence length, and studies doing this may need to be reconsidered. Finally, the signature of glassy superconductivity ob- served here has potential consequences for the use of BNCD in low temperature device engineering. The high Young’s modulus of diamond – even in the form of nanocrystalline films36 – makes it a good candidate for the fabrication of high frequency nanoelectromechanical resonators with which to study the fundamentals of quan- 4 tum mechanics in a macroscopic object37,38. Recently, an anomalous temperature dependence of the dissipa- tion in a superconducting nanoresonator was observed, and was suggested to arise from the dynamical vortex be- havior below Tc39. It is possible, therefore, that careful measurement of the temperature-dependent dissipation of a glassy superconducting nanoresonator40 would show complementary behavior to that observed in this study. V. CONCLUSIONS We have examined the magnetic field dependence of the superconductivity in BNCD. We extract values of the transition temperature in increasing magnetic fields, and clearly observe the behavior H ∝ (1 − T/Tc)3/2. This observed power law, coupled with a logarithmic decay of the remanent magnetization, is attributed to a super- conducting glass state resulting from the morphological granularity of our BNCD samples. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors gratefully acknowledge support by the European Research Council under the EU Consolidator Grant ‘SUPERNEMS’. ∗ KlemencicG@cardiff.ac.uk 1 K. A. M ̈uller, M. Takashige, and J. G. Bednorz, Physical Review Letters 58, 1143 (1987). 2 C. Ebner and D. Stroud, Physical Review B 31, 165 (1985). 3 K. H. Fischer and J. A. Hertz, Spin glasses, Vol. 1 (Cam- bridge University Press, 1993). 4 Y. Yeshurun and A. P. Malozemoff, Physical Review Let- ters 60, 2202 (1988). 5 M. Tinkham, Physical Review Letters 61, 1658 (1988). 6 G. Blatter, V. Geshkenbein, A. Larkin, and H. Nordborg, Physical Review B 54, 72 (1996). 7 M. P. A. Fisher, Physical Review Letters 62, 1415 (1989). 8 D. A. Huse, M. P. A. Fisher, and D. S. Fisher, Nature 9 C. L. Lin, T. Mihalisin, N. Bykovetz, Q. Zhu, and J. E. Fischer, Physical Review B 49, 4285 (1994). 10 R. Oppermann, Zeitschrift f ̈ur Physik B Condensed Matter 11 M. Suenaga, A. K. Ghosh, Y. Xu, and D. O. Welch, Phys- ical Review Letters 66, 1777 (1991). 12 M. F. Schmidt, N. E. Israeloff, and A. M. Goldman, Phys- ical Review B 48, 3404 (1993). 13 G. Fuchs, K.-H. M ̈uller, A. Handstein, K. Nenkov, V. N. Narozhnyi, D. Eckert, M. Wolf, and L. Schultz, Solid State Communications 118, 497 (2001). 14 D. N. Zheng, P. L. Lang, J. Y. Xiang, and Z. X. Zhao, Physica C: Superconductivity 386, 14 (2003). 15 W. Gajewski, P. Achatz, O. A. Williams, K. Haenen, E. Bustarret, M. Stutzmann, and J. A. Garrido, Physi- cal Review B 79, 045206 (2009). 16 J. J. Mareˇs, P. Hub ́ık, J. Kriˇstofik, and M. Nesl ́adek, Physica Status Solidi (a) 205, 2163 (2008). 17 S. D. Janssens, P. Pobedinskas, J. Vacik, V. Petr ́akov ́a, B. Ruttens, J. D’Haen, M. Nesl ́adek, K. Haenen, and P. Wagner, New Journal of Physics 13, 083008 (2011). 18 G. M. Klemencic, J. M. Fellows, J. M. Werrell, S. Mandal, S. R. Giblin, R. A. Smith, and O. A. Williams, Physical Review Materials 1, 044801 (2017). 19 Y. Takano, M. Nagao, T. Takenouchi, H. Umezawa, I. Sak- aguchi, M. Tachiki, and H. Kawarada, Diamond and Re- lated Materials 14, 1936 (2005). 20 T. Klein, P. Achatz, J. Kacmarcik, C. Marcenat, F. Gustafsson, J. Marcus, E. Bustarret, J. Pernot, F. Omnes, B. E. Sernelius, C. Persson, A. F. da Silva, and C. Cytermann, Physical Review B 75, 165313 (2007). 21 P. Achatz, W. Gajewski, E. Bustarret, C. Marcenat, R. Pi- querel, C. Chapelier, T. Dubouchet, O. A. Williams, K. Haenen, J. A. Garrido, and M. Stutzmann, Physical Review B 79, 201203 (2009). 22 O. A. Williams, M. Nesladek, M. Daenen, S. Michaelson, A. Hoffman, E. Osawa, K. Haenen, and R. B. Jackman, Diamond and Related Materials 17, 1080 (2008). 23 O. A. Williams, O. Douh ́eret, M. Daenen, K. Haenen, E. ̄Osawa, and M. Takahashi, Chemical Physics Letters 24 K. Watanabe, Japanese Journal of Applied Physics 31, 25 D. N. Zheng, N. J. C. Ingle, and A. M. Campbell, Physical Review B 61, 15429 (2000). 26 Y. Yeshurun, A. P. Malozemoff, and A. Shaulov, Reviews of Modern Physics 68, 911 (1996). 27 P. W. Anderson and Y. B. Kim, Reviews of Modern Physics 36, 39 (1964). 28 Y. Takano, M. Nagao, I. Sakaguchi, M. Tachiki, T. Hatano, K. Kobayashi, H. Umezawa, and H. Kawarada, Applied Physics Letters 85, 2851 (2004). 29 G. Zhang, S. Turner, E. A. Ekimov, J. Vanacken, M. Tim- mermans, T. Samuely, V. A. Sidorov, S. M. Stishov, Y. Lu, B. Deloof, B. Goderis, G. Van Tendeloo, J. Van de Von- del, and V. V. Moshchalkov, Advanced Materials 26, 2034 30 Z. L. Wang, Q. Luo, L. W. Liu, C. Y. Li, H. X. Yang, H. F. Yang, J. J. Li, X. Y. Lu, Z. S. Jin, L. Lu, and C. Z. Gu, Diamond and Related Materials 15, 659 (2006). 31 F. Dahlem, P. Achatz, O. A. Williams, D. Araujo, E. Bus- tarret, and H. Courtois, Physical Review B 82, 033306 32 B. Sac ́ep ́e, C. Chapelier, C. Marcenat, J. Kaˇcmarˇcik, T. Klein, M. Bernard, and E. Bustarret, Physical Review Letters 96, 097006 (2006). 33 V. A. Sidorov, E. A. Ekimov, E. D. Bauer, N. N. Mel’Nik, N. J. Curro, V. Fritsch, J. D. Thompson, S. M. Stishov, A. E. Alexenko, and B. V. Spitsyn, Diamond and Related Materials 14, 335 (2005). 34 E. Helfand and N. R. Werthamer, Physical Review Letters 35 E. A. Ekimov, V. A. Sidorov, E. D. Bauer, N. N. Mel’Nik, N. J. Curro, J. D. Thompson, and S. M. Stishov, Nature 5 36 O. A. Williams, A. Kriele, J. Hees, M. Wolfer, W. M ̈uller- Sebert, and C. E. Nebel, Chemical Physics Letters 495, 37 S. Etaki, M. Poot, I. Mahboob, K. Onomitsu, H. Yam- aguchi, and H. S. J. Van der Zant, Nature Physics 4, 785 38 A. D. O’Connell, M. Hofheinz, M. Ansmann, R. C. Bial- czak, M. Lenander, E. Lucero, M. Neeley, D. Sank, H. Wang, M. Weides, J. Wenner, J. M. Martinis, and A. N. Cleland, Nature 464, 697 (2010). 39 K. Lulla, M. Defoort, C. Blanc, O. Bourgeois, and E. Collin, Physical Review Letters 110, 177206 (2013). 40 T. Bautze, S. Mandal, O. A. Williams, P. Rodiere, T. Me- unier, and C. B ̈auerle, Carbon 72, 100 (2014).