arXiv:1803.05142v1 [cond-mat.str-el] 14 Mar 2018 Anomalous change in the de Haas-van Alphen oscillations of CeCoIn5 at ultra-low temperatures Hiroaki Shishido1,2,∗ Shogo Yamada3, Kaori Sugii3, Masaaki Shimozawa3, Youichi Yanase4, and Minoru Yamashita3† 1Department of Physics and Electronics, Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka Prefecture University, Sakai, Osaka 599-8531, Japan. 2Institute for Nanofabrication Research, Osaka Prefecture University, Sakai, Osaka 599-8531, Japan. 3The Institute for Solid State Physics, The University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, 277-8581, Japan 4Department of Physics, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan. (Dated: March 15, 2018) We have performed de Haas-van Alphen (dHvA) measurements of the heavy-fermion supercon- ductor CeCoIn5 down to 2 mK above the upper critical field. We find that the dHvA amplitudes show an anomalous suppression, concomitantly with a shift of the dHvA frequency, below the transi- tion temperature Tn = 20 mK. We suggest that the change is owing to magnetic breakdown caused by a field-induced antiferromagnetic (AFM) state emerging below Tn, revealing the origin of the field-induced quantum critical point (QCP) in CeCoIn5. The field dependence of Tn is found to be very weak for 7–10 T, implying that an enhancement of AFM order by suppressing the criti- cal spin fluctuations near the AFM QCP competes with the field suppression effect on the AFM phase. We suggest that the appearance of a field-induced AFM phase is a generic feature of un- conventional superconductors, which emerge near an AFM QCP, including CeCoIn5, CeRhIn5, and high-Tc cuprates. The competition between distinct quantum states at a quantum critical point (QCP), where the second-order transition temperature is suppressed to absolute zero, prevents the ground state from attaining either state and enhances quantum fluctuation in the vicinity of the QCP . The fate of electronic states influenced by the en- hanced quantum fluctuations near a QCP has been a central issue of modern physics. Many anomalous states such as non-Fermi liquid (NFL) behavior and unconven- tional superconductivity have been observed near QCPs in various materials including high-Tc cuprates , iron- pnictides , and heavy fermions (HFs) . These uncon- ventional superconductors often show a maximum tran- sition temperature near the QCP, suggesting that the en- hanced quantum fluctuation is the key to understanding their superconductivity. HF systems have emerged as prototypical systems for studying QCPs, because the strong mass renormalization that occurs through hybridization of f-electrons with conduction electrons lowers the relevant energy scale on which the effects take place. Thus, the ground state can be easily tuned at experimentally accessible pres- sures or magnetic fields. In particular, unconventional superconductivity in HFs has been most extensively stud- ied in CeCoIn5 because a d-wave superconducting state emerges at ambient pressure without chemical substitu- tion . The d-wave superconductivity has been shown to be located in the vicinity of an antiferromagnetic (AFM) QCP . Various measurements have further revealed a crossover of NFL behavior at zero field to FL behavior at high fields, indicating the presence of a field-induced QCP near the upper critical field, Hc2 [7–10]. Despite the accumulating evidence for field-induced QCP, no AFM state corresponding to the QCP has been observed outside the superconducting phase. This ap- parent absence has been attributed to the AFM state being hidden at an inaccessible negative pressure or superseded by the superconductivity . For H//ab, a spin-density-wave order is induced inside the supercon- ducting phase near Hc2, which is recently discussed in terms of a condensation of the spin resonance in the su- perconducting phase . This coexisting “Q-phase” , however, vanishes when the field is tilted from the ab plane whereas the NFL behaviors are observed regardless of the field direction. Thus, it is necessary to search for an ordered state for H//c at lower tempera- tures to clarify the origin of the field-induced QCP and its interplay with the unconventional superconductivity of the material. In this Letter, we report de Haas-van Alphen (dHvA) measurements for H//c down to 2 mK using our home- made nuclear-demagnetization cryostat. We find that the dHvA amplitudes deviate from the conventional Lifshitz- Kosevich (LK) formula and show an anomalous de- crease with a shift of the dHvA frequency below a tran- sition temperature Tn, suggesting an emergence of the putative AFM state. High-quality single crystals of CeCoIn5 were grown by the In-flux method . Measurements of the magnetic torque were performed using a capacitance cantilever technique up to 10 T. The lowest temperature of the cryostat was measured by a melting curve thermometer calibrated by the transition points of 3He . To ensure the lowest temperature of the samples, the samples were immersed in liquid 3He of which the temperature was monitored by a vibrating wire thermometer placed in the same liquid 3He (see Supplemental Material (SM) for details). The dHvA oscillation for H//c and the corresponding fast Fourier transformation (FFT) spectrum are shown 2 in Figs. 1(a) and 1(b), respectively. The fundamental branches are assigned as α1, α2, α3, β2, ε, and γ as indi- cated in Fig. 1(b), which agree with those of the previous report . As shown in Fig. 1(b), the dHvA amplitudes of the all branches increased as temperature was lowered to 20 mK in accordance with the LK formula . The temperature dependence of the dHvA amplitudes of all α branches above 20 mK can be well fitted by the LK for- mula (the solid lines in Fig. 1(c)), enabling us to estimate the effective cyclotron mass m∗ c for each α branch which is also in good agreement with the previous report . However, the dHvA amplitudes of all α branches devi- ated from the LK formula below ∼ 20 mK and decreased as lowering the temperature (Fig. 1(c)). This anoma- lous decrease was also observed in γ branch but not in ε branch . (c) α3 α2 α1 m* = 12.6 m0 c 250 200 150 100 50 0 T (mK) dHvA Amplitude (arb. unit) 8 6 4 2 0 dHvA Frequency (kT) ε γ α α2 α1 β2 T = 20 mK 2 mK 100 mK 149 mK 250 mK (b) 3 H // c T = 2 mK CeCoIn5 9.9 T 7.6 T 1/μ0H (a) Quantum oscillations of CeCoIn5. (a) dHvA oscilla- tion at 2 mK for 7.6–9.9 T after subtracting the background signal. (b) FFT spectra of the dHvA oscillations obtained in the same field range as (a) at 20, 2, 100, 149, and 250 mK in descending order of the signal size. Note that the spectrum at 2 mK is smaller than that at 20 mK. See the main text and SM for details . (c) The temperature dependence of the dHvA amplitudes of α1(black triangles), α2 (blue squares), and α3 (red circles) obtained in the same field range of (a). The open (filled) data were taken by using nuclear demagne- tization (dilution refrigeration). The solid lines show fits for the data above Tn from the standard Lifshitz-Kosevich for- mula . The cyclotron effective mass (m∗ c) estimated from the LK fit for each α branch is indicated with the data. To analyze the field dependence in detail, the dHvA signal of α3 branch, which showed the largest signal, was isolated by a steep bandpass filter. The tempera- ture dependence of the dHvA amplitude at different field strengths is shown in Fig. 2(a). The decrease of the am- plitude below Tn was most clearly observed at ∼ 8 T and became less pronounced at higher field strengths. Below 7.4 T, Tn slightly decreased and the decrease in the dHvA amplitudes became smaller. The decrease was not clearly resolved at 6.0 T because of the small dHvA signal. Further, we analyzed the temperature dependence of the dHvA frequency by using a phase shift analysis . The phase shift of a dHvA oscillation, ∆P(T, H) = P(T, H) − P(T0, H), is proportional to the shift of the dHvA frequency ∆F(T, H) = F(T, H) − F(T0, H) P(T, H) is the peak field of the dHvA oscillation and T0 is a reference temperature. As shown in Fig. 2(b), the temperature dependence of ∆F(T, H) is found to show a kink at T ∼ Tn, which was followed by a slight decrease of the frequency at lower temperatures. A similar suppression of the dHvA amplitude of α3 has been reported below 100 mK and at 13–15 T , which was discussed in terms of a strong spin dependence of the effective mass. We applied the spin-dependent LK formula to our results at various fields (the blue dashed lines in Fig. 2(a)). As shown in Fig. 2(a), the spin- dependent LK formula reasonably reproduces the data at 9.5 T, which is consistent with the previous report at higher fields . However, the spin-dependent LK for- mula clearly fails to reproduce the rapid decrease of the dHvA signal below Tn observed for 7.6–9.0 T, even by as- suming a very large difference between the effective mass of the spin-up electrons and that of the spin-down ones (see SM for details of these fittings). Moreover, this model cannot explain the change in the dHvA frequency below Tn. These results indicate that a drastic change in the electronic state of the material occurs below Tn, leading us to suggest that the anomalous change in the dHvA amplitudes corresponds to a phase transition. The revised H–T phase diagram of CeCoIn5 with the field-induced phase is shown in Fig. 3(a). We found that the field dependence of Tn was very weak for 7–10 T, al- though we have to note that determining Tn has a large ambiguity of ∼ 20% because the dHvA measurements were performed by sweeping fields at a constant temper- ature. We have observed similar anomalies of the dHvA amplitude in a different single crystal . An anoma- lous reduction has also been observed in the magneto resistance at ∼ 20 mK and at 8 T . It should also be noted that the absence of the anomaly at low field is consistent with the previous work done at 6–7 T . Here, we suggest that a field-induced AFM order pro- vides the most plausible explanation for the anomaly observed in our dHvA measurements. An AFM tran- sition in the simple tetragonal structure of CeCoIn5 (P4/mmm) modifies the dHvA frequencies by a folding of the Brillouin zone. However, the paramagnetic Fermi surface can still be observed in the AFM phase with a larger attenuation by magnetic breakdown , as ob- 3 344 564 544 764 744 64 4 $-&82 a3 m4!$9$:06$; $:04$; $<06$; $<04$; =0>$; =0?$; =04$; >06$; >04$; "@A"4 7505 750: 7306 7?05 7?0> 7=07 7>0: 7>06 7>0> B D !!""#$ %&'"()!""# %'' *' +' ,' -' ' !" ()# """ """ """ &.%' /& (b) (a) (Color online) (a) Temperature dependence of the dHvA amplitudes of α3 at different fields. The data are shifted for clarity. The open (filled) data were taken by using nuclear demagnetization (dilution refrigeration). A clear suppression of the dHvA amplitude from the standard Lifshitz-Kosevich (LK) formula (solid lines, m∗ c/m0 used for the fits are shown right) was observed. The transition temperature Tn is determined as the onset temperature where the dHvA amplitude starts to deviate from the LK formula (shown by the arrows). The blue dashed lines show the fits for the spin-dependent LK formula (see the main text). The saturation observed at the lowest temperature may be caused by a saturation of the AFM energy gap or non-equilibrium of the sample temperature (see SM for details). (b) The temperature dependence of the normalized shift of the dHvA frequency ∆F(T, H)/F(150 mK, H) of α3. The data are shifted for clarity. The dashed lines are guides to the eye. served in NdIn3 . The magnetic breakdown proba- bility (PMB) is given by PMB = exp(−ǫ2 g/ħωcǫF ), where ǫg is the energy gap for the magnetic breakdown, ωc is the cyclotron frequency, and ǫF is the Fermi energy . Because Tn is two or three orders magnitudes smaller than that of typical 4f-electron AFM materials (where the AFM transition typically takes place at a few K or higher e.g. ∼ 6 K for NdIn3 ), the magnetic moment would be much smaller than these AFM materials, re- sulting in a tiny energy gap at the magnetic zone bound- ary. As a result, majority of electrons undergo magnetic breakdown and the new dHvA branches from the folded Brillouin zone in the AFM phase may not be observable within our experimental accuracy. This explains the sup- pression of the dHvA amplitudes below Tn without new dHvA signals from the folded Brillouin zone. The appearance of the AFM order is also supported by the slight change of the dHvA frequency below Tn (Fig. 2(b)). It is known that the measured dHvA frequency fm is given by the zero-temperature extrapolation of the true dHvA frequency ft as fm = ft−H (∂ft/∂H). Either the change of the slope (∂ft/∂H) and/or the Fermi sur- face size (∝ ft) cause a change of fm. Even if magnetic breakdown occurs, fm can be modified by a change of the slope of ft caused by the AFM ordering. Therefore, al- thought the change in the dHvA frequency is very small, the field dependence of the dHvA frequency is consistent with the field-induced AFM order. The absence of the anomalous suppression in ε branch is also consistent with the AFM transition because ε branch corresponds to a small pocket located at the zone center and thus is hardly affected by the band fold- ing. In addition, a kink in the temperature dependence of the resistivity at 8 T has been observed at tempera- tures very close to Tn (see the left column of Fig. 3 in ref. ). Although the origin of the kink is not discussed in ref. , the kink can be consistent with a reduction of the magnetoresistance in the AFM phase. Therefore, we conclude that the anomalous change of the dHvA am- plitudes below Tn is most consistent with the emergence of an AFM phase. We note that splitting of the dHvA frequency typically expected for an AFM phase was not observed simply because our field range of 6–10 T was too narrow to allow the detection. A change of the torque signal by AFM order was also not resolved at Tn, which was probably hindered by the change of the dHvA sig- nal. The possibilities of multipole ordering, Lifshitz tran- sitions and nuclear spin ordering can be safely excluded as described in SM . The revised H–T phase diagram of CeCoIn5 (Fig. 3(a)) reveals that the field-induced AFM phase is located at the boundary of the unconventional superconductiv- ity. A similar H–T phase diagram has been observed in the sister compound CeRhIn5 where an AFM ground state at ambient pressure changes to a superconducting state under pressure . The pressure dependence of the H–T phase diagram of CeRhIn5 can be summa- rized in a schematic H–T –x phase diagram (Fig. 3(b)) where x denotes pressure for CeRhIn5. Given that the field-induced phase is observed at very low temperature, the H–T phase diagram of CeCoIn5 at ambient pressure may be considered to be a cross section at the vicinity of the AFM QCP in the H–T –x phase diagram. Thus, CeCoIn5 is a prominent superconductor where the inter- play of unconventional superconductivity, magnetic or- der, and non-Fermi liquid behaviors near the QCP can be studied without ambiguity caused by the application of pressure or chemical doping. Such H–T –x phase dia- grams (x = pressure or chemical substitution) have not only been observed in HFs but also in high-Tc cuprates . These similarities suggest that the H–T –x phase diagram is generic to unconventional superconductors, which emerge in the vicinity of an AFM 4 μ0H (T) CeCoIn5 c FL SC 1st 2nd 0 0 5 10 1 2 3 T (K) FL NFL NF NF NF NF NFL FL FL FL FL AFM x H T L SC CeCoIn5 QCP FI-QCP 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 Normal BCS FFLO + AFM FFLO AFM 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 (a) (b) (c) (Color online) Phase diagrams of CeCoIn5. (a) H–T phase diagram. Field-induced phase found by our measurements phase (yellow) are shown. Both Tn (red circles) and TFL are multiplied by 4 for clarity. The black dashed and solid lines represent the first- and the second-order SC transitions, respectively. (b) A schematic H–T –x phase diagram near the AFM QCP, where x denotes pressure or chemical substitution. The cross section corresponds to the H–T phase diagram of CeCoIn5, in which a presumed field-induced QCP (FI-QCP) is also shown at the intersection with the AFM boundary. (c) A calculated phase diagram near Hc2 by a mean field approximation (solid symbols and solid lines) and a FLEX approximation (open symbols and dashed line) . The temperature and the magnetic field are normalized by the transition temperature Tc and the Pauli limiting field Hp = 1.25Tc, respectively. The lines are guides to the eye (see SM for details). QCP, including CeCoIn5. Remarkably, the transition temperature of the field- induced AFM phase depended on field only weakly for 7–10 T even though the Zeeman energy at 10 T is about three orders of magnitude larger than kBTn. This weak field dependence implies that an enhancement effect on AFM order by the magnetic field competes with the sup- pression effect. If the critical spin fluctuation near the QCP [5–10] suppresses AFM order, the magnetic field suppresses the critical spin fluctuation, giving rise to an enhancement effect on AFM order. To take into account the spin fluctuation effect near an AFM QCP, we ex- amined the AFM transition line in the normal state of CeCoIn5 by adopting the fluctuation exchange (FLEX) approximation . We also calculated the H–T phase diagram in the superconducting phase of CeCoIn5 with a neighboring AFM phase by the mean field approxima- tion and plot them in Fig. 3 (c). Whereas the mean field method can reproduce the first order superconduct- ing transition near Hc2, the critical spin fluctuation can be included only in the FLEX method. As shown in Fig. 3 (c), the AFM transition temperature calculated by the FLEX approximation (dashed line) is found to increase as field increases, in contrast to the transition line with a negative slope by the mean field approximation (solid line above Hc2). This difference demonstrates the field enhancement effect on the AFM transition temperature by suppressing the critical spin fluctuation as consistent with our results. In fact, such a transition line has been reported in CeIrSi3 near an AFM QCP under pressure of ∼ 2.3 GPa , where the Zeeman energy is also much larger than the energy scale of the AFM transition, sug- gesting that the field independence of the transition line is a common feature near an AFM QCP. We suggest that the field-induced AFM phase is pos- sibly related to the high-field superconducting (HFSC) phase for H//c, which has been discussed as a spatially inhomogeneous superconducting state termed as a Fulde–Ferrell–Larkin–Ovchinnikov (FFLO) state . In the case of d-wave superconductivity located in the vicinity of an AFM QCP, such as that found in CeCoIn5, calculations by the FLEX approximation have indicated that an FFLO state is stabilized , which is also con- sistent with NMR measurements . For H//ab, AFM order coexists with the superconductivity in the Q-phase . This Q-phase has also been discussed in terms of an FFLO state because an FFLO state enhances AFM order through the appearance of an Andreev bound state localized around the gap nodes in real space and by cou- pling between AFM order and pair-density-wave . As shown in Fig. 3 (c), the transition temperature of the AFM phase increases in the FFLO phase. Therefore, we speculate that, if a field-induced AFM phase is also hid- den at ultra-low temperatures for H//ab, the AFM phase is enhanced in the FFLO state, as shown in Fig. 3(c), and is observed as the Q-phase. Confirming AFM order for both H//c and H//ab and identifying the q vector by local probe measurements such as nuclear magnetic res- onance or muon spin resonance will be important future issues to clarify the relation between these phases. In summary, we have observed anomalous changes in the dHvA oscillations in the normal state of CeCoIn5 be- low Tn = 20 mK. We attribute these anomalies to the emergence of an AFM state which is the origin of the AFM QCP in CeCoIn5. We suggest that CeCoIn5 shares a phase diagram with other materials near an AFM QCP. We also suggest that AFM order is enhanced by sup- pressing the critical spin fluctuations in the vicinity of the AFM QCP in high field, which gives rise to the weak field dependence of Tn as supported by the FLEX cal- 5 culation. We believe that the development of the dHvA measurements under ultra-low temperature has extensive potential to shed a new light on unexplored phenomena at ultra-low temperatures. We thank D. Aoki, S. Kambe, Y. Matsuda, Y. Mat- sumoto, Y. ̄Onuki, H. Sakai, T. Shibauchi, Y. Tada, and H. Tokunaga for discussions. This work was performed under the Visiting Researcher’s Program of the Institute for Solid State Physics, University of Tokyo, and was sup- ported by the Toray Science Foundation, and KAKENHI (Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research) Grant Numbers ∗ shishido@pe.osakafu-u.ac.jp † my@issp.u-tokyo.ac.jp S. Sachdev, Phys. Status Solidi B 247, 537 (2010). T. Shibauchi, A. Carrington, and Y. Matsuda, Annual Review of Condensed Matter Physics 5, 113 (2014). P. Gegenwart, Q. Si, and F. Steglich, Nature Physics 4, 186 (2008). K. Izawa, H. Yamaguchi, Y. Matsuda, H. Shishido, R. Settai, and Y. ̄Onuki, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 057002 (2001). Y. Kawasaki, S. Kawasaki, M. Yashima, T. Mito, G. qing Zheng, Y. Kitaoka, H. Shishido, R. Settai, Y. Haga, and Y. ̄Onuki, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 72, 2308 (2003). Y. Tokiwa, E. D. Bauer, and P. Gegenwart, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 107003 (2013). A. Bianchi, R. Movshovich, I. Vekhter, P. G. Pagliuso, and J. L. Sarrao, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 257001 (2003). J. Paglione, M. A. Tanatar, D. G. Hawthorn, E. Boaknin, R. W. Hill, F. Ronning, M. Suther- land, L. Taillefer, C. Petrovic, and P. C. Canfield, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 246405 (2003). L. Howald, G. Seyfarth, G. Knebel, G. Lapertot, D. Aoki, and J.-P. Brison, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 80, 024710 (2011). S. Zaum, K. Grube, R. Sch ̈afer, E. D. Bauer, J. D. Thompson, and H. v. L ̈ohneysen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 087003 (2011). J. L. Sarrao and J. D. Thompson, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 76, 051013 (2007). C. Stock, C. Broholm, Y. Zhao, F. Demmel, H. J. Kang, K. C. Rule, and C. Petrovic, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 167207 (2012). S. Raymond and G. Lapertot, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 037001 (2015). M. Kenzelmann, T. Str ̈assle, C. Niedermayer, M. Sigrist, B. Padmanabhan, M. Zolliker, A. D. Bianchi, R. Movshovich, E. D. Bauer, J. L. Sarrao, and J. D. Thompson, Science 321, 1652 (2008). V. F. Correa, T. P. Murphy, C. Martin, K. M. Purcell, E. C. Palm, G. M. Schmiedeshoff, J. C. Cooley, and S. W. Tozer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 087001 (2007). D. Shoenberg, Magnetic oscillations in metals (Cam- bridge University press, Cambridge, 1984). H. Shishido, R. Settai, D. Aoki, S. Ikeda, H. Nakawaki, N. Nakamura, T. Iizuka, Y. Inada, K. Sugiyama, T. Takeuchi, K. Kindo, T. C. Kobayashi, Y. Haga, H. Harima, Y. Aoki, T. Namiki, H. Sato, and Y. ̄Onuki, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 71, 162 (2002). D. S. Greywall, Phys. Rev. B 31, 2675 (1985). D. C. Carless, H. E. Hall, and J. R. Hook, Journal of Low Temperature Physics 50, 583 (1983). See Supplemental Material at http://yamashita.issp.u- tokyo.ac.jp/arXiv/Shishido.pdf for more information. R. Settai, H. Shishido, S. Ikeda, Y. Murakawa, M. Nakashima, D. Aoki, Y. Haga, H. Harima, and Y. ̄Onuki, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 13, L627 (2001). A. McCollam, S. R. Julian, P. M. C. Rourke, D. Aoki, and J. Flouquet, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 186401 (2005). A. McCollam, J.-S. Xia, J. Flouquet, D. Aoki, and S. Ju- lian, Physica B: Condensed Matter 403, 717 (2008). R. Settai, T. Ebihara, H. Sugawara, N. Kimura, M. Takashita, H. Ikezawa, K. Ichihashi, and Y. ̄Onuki, Physica B: Condensed Matter 201, 102 (1994). R. Settai, K. Katayama, D. Aoki, I. Sheikin, G. Knebel, J. Flouquet, and Y. ̄Onuki, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 80, 094703 (2011). K. Kumagai, M. Saitoh, T. Oyaizu, Y. Furukawa, S. Takashima, M. Nohara, H. Takagi, and Y. Matsuda, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 227002 (2006). Y. Yanase and M. Sigrist, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 78, 114715 (2009). Y. Yanase, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 77, 063705 (2008 T. Park, F. Ronning, H. Q. Yuan, M. B. Salamon, R. Movshovich, J. L. Sarrao, and J. D. Thompson, Nature 440, 65 (2006). B. Lake, H. M. Ronnow, N. B. Christensen, G. Aep- pli, K. Lefmann, D. F. McMorrow, P. Vorderwisch, P. Smeibidl, N. Mangkorntong, T. Sasagawa, M. Nohara, H. Takagi, and T. E. Mason, Nature 415, 299 (2002). P. Fulde and R. A. Ferrell, Phys. Rev. 135, A550 (1964). A. I. Larkin and Y. N. Ovchinnikov, Sov. Phys. JETP D. F. Agterberg, M. Sigrist, and H. Tsunetsugu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 207004 (2009).