The silver route to cuprate analogs Commercial AgF2 is shown to mimic the electronic structure of the parent high-Tc superconducting cuprates. Jakub Gawraczy ́nski,1,2 Dominik Kurzydłowski,1,3 Wojciech Gadomski,2 Zoran Mazej,4 Giampiero Ruani,5 Ilaria Bergenti,5 Tomasz Jaro ́n,1 Andrew Ozarowski,6 Stephen Hill,6,7 Piotr J. Leszczy ́nski,1 Kamil Tok ́ar,8 Mariana Derzsi,1 Paolo Barone,9 Krzysztof Wohlfeld,10 Jos ́e Lorenzana,11∗ Wojciech Grochala1∗ 1 Center of New Technologies, University of Warsaw, ̇Zwirki i Wigury 93, 02089 Warsaw Poland 2 Faculty of Chemistry, University of Warsaw, Pasteur 1, 02093 Warsaw Poland 3 Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences, Cardinal Stefan Wyszy ́nski University in Warsaw, W ́oycickiego 1/3, 01938 Warsaw Poland 4 Department of Inorganic Chemistry and Technology, Joˇzef Stefan Institute, Jamova 39, SI-1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia 5Institute of Nanostructured Materials, ISMN-CNR, via Gobetti 101, 40129 Bologna, Italy 6 National High Magnetic Field Laboratory, Florida State University, 1800 E. Paul Dirac Drive, Tallahassee, Florida 32310, USA 7 Department of Physics, Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida 32306, USA 8 Institute of Physics, Slovak Academy of Sciences, D ́ubravsk ́a cesta 9, Bratislava, Slovakia 9 Superconducting and other Innovative Materials and Devices Institute, SPIN-CNR, via Vetoio, 67100 L’Aquila, Italy 10 Faculty of Physics, University of Warsaw, Pasteur 5, 02093 Warsaw Poland 11 Institute for Complex Systems, ISC-CNR, Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit`a di Roma “La Sapienza”, Piazzale Aldo Moro 5, 00185 Roma, Italy ∗To whom correspondence should be addressed; E-mail: jose.lorenzana@cnr.it,w.grochala@cent.uw.edu.pl. 1 arXiv:1804.00329v1 [cond-mat.str-el] 1 Apr 2018 The parent compound of high-Tc superconducting cuprates is a unique Mott state consisting of layers of spin-1/2 ions forming a square lattice and with a record high in-plane antiferromagnetic coupling. Compounds with similar characteristics have long been searched for. Nickelates and iridates had been proposed but have not reached a satisfactory similarity. Here we use a com- bination of experimental and theoretical tools to show that commercial AgF2 is an excellent cuprate analog with remarkably similar electronic parameters to La2CuO4 but larger buckling of planes. Two-magnon Raman scattering reveals a superexchange constant reaching 70% of that of a typical cuprate. We argue that structures that reduce or eliminate the buckling of the AgF2 planes could have an antiferromagnetic coupling that matches or surpasses the cuprates. Cuprates are said to be unique materials in that they combine layers of spin-1/2 magnetic moments coupled by a record high antiferromagnetic interaction, strong covalence between transition-metal (TM) and ligands and no orbital degeneracy. Since the discovery of high-Tc cuprate superconductors, there have been several attempts to replicate these characteristics with different TM ions (1). One proposal has been to use nickel(I) in place of copper(II) (2, 3). While LaNiO2 is isoelectronic and isostructural with the infinite layer parent cuprates it lacks the strong covalent character between the TM and ligand (4), and antiferromagnetic order has not been found (5, 6). Sr2IrO4 has many similarities with cuprates including a robust antifer- romagnetic order of spin-1/2 pseudospins. However, the correlated insulator character is much weaker, and spin-orbit coupling effects dominate (7,8). Another obvious possibility is to move down the periodic table from copper to silver (Fig. 1). The electronic structure of silver oxides was explored in the early times of high-Tc (9). However, the second ionization potential of silver is nearly 1.2 eV larger than the one of Cu. Therefore, 2 for a compound like AgO (which is formally d9) it is convenient to transfer electrons from the filled oxygen shells to the TM (Fig. 1b). Thus, AgO shows no magnetic ordering as opposed to the formally isoelectronic CuO (Fig. 1a). The larger ionization energy of silver can be compen- sated by a right step in the periodic table replacing oxygen by the more electronegative fluorine (Fig. 1c). Fluoroargentates have been scrutinized some years ago (10, 11). Cs2AgF4 is structurally similar and isoelectronic with La2CuO4 (the so called “214” family). However, alternating or- bital ordering stabilized by small structural distortions leads to ferromagnetic intra-sheet inter- actions instead of the robust antiferromagnetic order of cuprates (12,13). Large superexchange constants have been predicted in many fluorargentates (14) and static susceptibility measure- ments in a quasi-one-dimensional system suggest a superexchange constant of the order of that found in the cuprates (15). On the other hand, direct access to excitation energies from spec- troscopy has not been available to date. A bonus property of F− in place of O2− is that, unlike CuO2 planes, neutral AgF2 planes are possible, so the simplest compound is not of the 214 kind but simply 012. Unexpectedly, as we show here, the binary and commercially available AgF2 compound turns out to be an excellent cuprate analog. Figure 2a,b and Supplementary Fig. S1 show the structure (16) and stacking of planes in AgF2. The topology is the same as in La2CuO4 which, in the low-temperature orthorhombic phase (LTO), has also the same pattern of displacements of the ligands out of the plane (+ or -) but with a much smaller magnitude. Also, as in parent cuprates, the ground state of AgF2 is antiferromagnetic (16) with a staggered moment of 0.7 μB (0.6 μB), a weak ferromagnetic component of 1 × 10−2μB (2 × 10−3μB) per TM ion and a N ́eel temperature of 163K (325K), where parentheses enclose reference values (17) in La2CuO4. Density functional theory (DFT) computations show that the electronic structure of AgF2 is very similar to that in cuprates. Fig. 2c shows hybrid-DFT calculations comparing the character 3 of the density of states (see also ). Both compounds have well separated Hubbard bands of dominant dx2−y2 character (indicated by red arrows) while the first ionization states are of dominant p character, so both compounds are predicted to be charge-transfer insulators accord- ing to the Zaanen-Sawatzky-Allen (19) classification scheme. The small charge-transfer gap is considered a key characteristic of cuprates. Our unbiased computations in Fig. 2c predict that AgF2 should have an even smaller charge-transfer energy than the cuprates which can provide a test platform for theories based on the smallness of this parameter (20). As a minimal model of the electronic structure we consider one dx2−y2 orbital centered on the TM (as in cuprates (21)) and two p orbitals on the F-sites (one more than the cuprates). p∥ indicates the p-orbital parallel to the TM-TM bond, while pz is perpendicular to the bond but also mixes with the dx2−y2-orbitals because of the substantial buckling (see Methods and Sup- plementary Fig. S2). From unpolarized DFT computations we find that the hopping integral of an hypothetically straight Ag-F-Ag bond with the same interatomic distances is tpd = 1.38 eV, practically the same value as the cuprates (22) (see Supplementary Figs. S3 and S4, and Meth- ods). However, due to the increased corrugation of the planes, and the destructive interference of the p∥ and pz orbitals, the effective hybridization is smaller, which explains the narrower UHB of AgF2 in Fig. 2c (see Supplementary Table S1). The similar splitting between Hubbard bands shown in Fig. 2c for AgF2 and La2CuO4 (9.4 eV, 10.7 eV respectively) suggests that the Hubbard Ud parametrizing the Coulomb repulsion on the dx2−y2 orbitals is similar in the two compounds. However, this estimate does not take properly into account the polarizability of the environment. An empirical estimate of Ud can be obtained from Auger experiments in compounds with similar ions but a filled d shell. Thus, for Cu2O (Cu d10) Sawatzky and collaborators (23) obtained U3d = 9.2 eV, which is close to the accepted value for Cu d9 in CuO2 planes. For Ag2O (Ag d10) they obtained U4d = 5.8 eV which is smaller than for 3d, as expected for the more diffuse 4d orbitals but still quite large. 4 This value, however, can not be directly transposed to AgF2 because the difference in screening has to be taken into account. Screening of the free-ion Hubbard U0 to the value U in the solid is determined by the relaxation energy R of the environment according to U = U0 − R. For TM compounds, R is expected to scale with the polarization of the ligands and to be inversely proportional to the ligand-TM distance to the fourth power (24). For copper oxides typical values of the oxygen polarizability are in the range αO = 1.9 ∼ 3.2 ̊A3. Instead, in AgF2, the ligand-TM distance is larger and the polarizability of the ligand is much smaller αF = 0.64 ̊A3 leading to less efficient screening. This allows for values of Ud in AgF2 similar to the cuprates (see Methods). Interestingly, from a different perspective, the computations of Fig. 2c suggest the same conclusion. The similarity of the DFT electronic structures confirms the conclusions of the simplistic picture of Fig. 1a and c. From the point of view of the strength of the correlation, the narrower upper Hubbard band of AgF2 suggests a more correlated system, but the similar or smaller Ud and smaller charge-transfer gap point in the opposite direction. Our present results imply that AgF2 is very covalent, probably more so than the cuprates, which is consistent with core and valence level spectroscopy results (25) but in contrast with the prevailing view that fluorides are ionic compounds. The more interesting parameter for a cuprate analogue is the magnetic exchange interaction which determines the scale of magnetic fluctuations in magnetically mediated mechanisms of superconductivity in doped compounds. Not surprisingly, AgF2 is antiferromagnetic (16) as predicted by Anderson superexchange. A perturbation theory analysis shows that the buck- ling tends to reduce the superexchange interaction, both because of the reduction of the direct hybridization of p∥ with the dx2−y2 orbitals, and because of the destructive interference of the pz orbital (see Methods). Unfortunately, the present lack of precise parameters does not al- low to obtain an accurate value of the magnetic interactions with this method. An alternative 5 estimate can be obtained from hybrid-DFT computations which yield J = 52 meV for the nearest-neighbor interaction (see Methods and ). This value is 50% of the typical values in cuprates. As in La2CuO4, the TM in one plane coincides with the center of the four TM plaquette in the next plane which tends to frustrate interplanar magnetic interactions in an antiferromagnet- ically ordered state. In both compounds, the frustration is partially relieved by the orthorhom- bicity but the effect is much larger in AgF2. For the ratio of interlayer to intralayer couplings our DFT computations predict values of the order of 10−2 (See Supplementary Table S2), a larger ratio than the experimental (17) one in cuprates (10−5) but still well in the regime of a quasi two-dimensional quantum antiferromagnet. We used the full set of exchange constants from the hybrid-DFT computations to estimate the N ́eel temperature with classical Monte Carlo computations (see Methods). Correcting ap- proximately for quantum effects, we found a value higher than the experimental one (by 27%) but of the same order. Given the approximations involved, this fair agreement validates the hybrid-DFT computations of exchange constants. As shown below, Raman experiments reveal an even larger value of the effective nearest-neighbor exchange. We believe uncertainties in the interplanar coupling and extra terms in the Hamiltonian like four-site cyclic exchange can explain the mild difference in strength between the DFT estimates and Raman (see Methods). In order to further test the analogy we have experimentally studied high quality powder samples of freshly prepared AgF2 (see Methods). Crystallinity was verified with powder X-ray diffraction which resulted in a spectrum with similar characteristics but less impurity signatures than a commercial sample (see Methods and Supplementary Fig. S5). Specific heat measurements reveal that only about 5 % of the maximum possible entropy change R ln(2) occurs around the Ne ́el temperature (see Methods and Supplementary Fig. S6). This is consistent with a quasi two-dimensional antiferromagnet where short range in-plane 6 correlations set in at much higher temperatures than the three-dimensional N ́eel temperature. An electron pramagnetic resonance signal was searched for over a wide range of temperatures. However, despite several efforts, it was not found. This is also analogous to the situation in the cuprates and points to strong antiferromagnetic interactions (see Methods). Vibrational spectroscopy (Raman and infrared) shows phonon modes in good agreement with the prediction of hybrid-DFT, validating the latter computations (Supplementary Fig. S7). In addition, the detailed phonon assignment (see Supplementary Methods and Supplementary Table 1) allowed us to check the integrity of the sample under the laser spot and to exclude impurity phases or photochemistry byproducts . For high Raman shifts, we detected a broad band centered at 1750 cm−1 at room tempera- ture which hardens and becomes narrower on cooling Fig. 3a. The temperature dependence is very similar to the one for two-magnon Raman scattering in cuprates (26). This allows to iden- tify unambiguously this line as due to two-magnon Raman scattering in AgF2. Comparing with cuprates we deduce that the antiferromagnetic exchange in this compound is JAF = 70 meV, confirming the expected large antiferromagnetic interaction. The robustness of two-magnon Raman scattering well above the N ́eel temperature confirms also strong short range antiferro- magentic correlations, also like in cuprates. Fig. 3b shows the two-magnon Raman line recorded with three different apparatuses (see Methods). The line shape is clearly visible with an excitation energy of 1.17 eV and 1.58 eV. The feature at 970 cm−1 is assigned to a two-phonon process. For 2.41 eV the two-magnon feature is weak at high temperature (compared to the two-phonon feature) but becomes stronger upon cooling, similar to the behavior for 1.17 eV (panel a) and for cuprates. Unfortunately a detailed line shape analysis is not possible in this case due to a strong energy dependent background (dashed lines). The dependence on the excitation energy suggest that the resonance profile of the two-magnon line is shifted to lower laser excitation energies with respect to what 7 is found in cuprates (27), which is consistent with the smaller charge-transfer gap found in DFT. The above results clearly indicate that AgF2 is an excellent cuprate analog with a very sim- ilar electronic structure. Historically, the superconducting temperature in cuprates has been optimized starting from simple ternary compounds and increasing the number of chemical ele- ments. In argentates, starting from a binary compound that is already stable leaves substantial freedom for such optimizations. Clearly, a high-priority is to produce doped AgF2 planes. This should allow studying how antiferromagnetism disappears, what is the role of the electron- phonon interaction (28), and which other states of the correlated electrons arise (pseudogap, charge-density wave, superconductivity, etc.). The cuprate family of parent high-Tc superconductors is made of materials very similar to each other. Indeed, changes in key parameters like J are smaller than 15% (29). This severely hampers the identification of clear trends in physical properties. A close cuprate analog but with important differences (less marked two-dimensional character, smaller J, narrower bands, smaller charge-transfer gap) opens the way to the clarification of the mysterious cuprate phase diagram by revealing clear trends. Another priority is to produce compounds with flat AgF2 planes. We have estimated using DFT that such compounds should have an antiferromagnetic J which is more than twice the one of commercial AgF2 (see Methods and Supplementary perconducting critical temperatures higher than those exhibited by cuprates.