Direct Evidence of Superconductivity with Twofold Symmetry in Bi2Te3 Thin Film Deposited on FeTe0.55Se0.45 Minyang Chen,1 Xiaoyu Chen,1 Huan Yang,1,2* Zengyi Du,1 Hai-Hu Wen1,2* 1 National Laboratory of Solid State Microstructures and Department of Physics, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China 2 Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Microstructures, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210093, China *Corresponding author. Email: huanyang@nju.edu.cn (H. Y.); hhwen@nju.edu.cn (H.H.W.) Abstract: Topological superconductor is a timely and frontier topic in condensed matter physics. In superconducting state, an order parameter will be established with the basic or subsidiary symmetry of the crystalline lattice. In doped Bi2Se3 with a basic threefold symmetry, it was predicted however that superconductivity may have a twofold symmetry of odd parity. Here we report the proximity effect induced superconductivity in Bi2Te3 thin film on top of an iron-based superconductor FeTe0.55Se0.45. By using the quasiparticle interference technique, we demonstrate clear evidence of twofold symmetry of the superconducting gap. The gap minimum is along one of the main crystalline axis following the so-called Δ4y notation. This is also accompanied by the elongated vortex shape mapped out by the density of states within the superconducting gap, with probably the Majorana mode within the vortex core. Our results reveal the direct evidence of superconductivity with odd parity in Bi2Te3 thin film. One Sentence Summary: Superconductivity with twofold symmetry is observed by scanning tunneling microscopy in Bi2Te3 thin film, yielding the direct evidence of odd parity. Superconductivity with order parameters of odd parity is highly desired because of the expectation of Majorana Fermions and potential applications in quantum computation (1,2). The topological superconductors are supposed to have order parameters with odd parity, which has become a hot topic in nowadays condensed matter physics. One of the signatures of odd parity is the existence of a superconducting (SC) order parameter with a twofold symmetry, such as px- or py-wave pairing. But in reality it is extremely rare. In some compounds with self-doping, such as MxBi2Se3 (M = Cu, Nb and Sr), theoretically it was predicted that two dimensional topological SC state (3,4) may occur. Some traces of this long sought topological superconductivity have been reported together with the observation of the signatures of Majorana fermions or modes (5,6). Proximity effect may be another way to induce possible topological superconductivity (7), which has been well demonstrated in Bi2Se3 thin film on top of 2H-NbSe2 (8) and with the possible evidence of Majorana mode within the vortex core on Bi2Te3/NbSe2 heterostructure (9). In the doped materials MxBi2Se3 (M = Cu, Nb and Sr), bulk superconductivity were observed (10-12) and full gaps have been reported on the surface through scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy (STM/STS) measurements (13,14). Recently, Knight-Shift of NMR measurements (15) and angle-resolved specific heat (16) reveal a twofold feature of superconductivity when the magnetic field rotates within the ab-plane. Theoretically Fu (17) did a quantitative assessment by taking account the spin orbital coupling and the multi-orbital effect in MxBi2Se3 and predicted that it could be possible to have a fully gapped order parameter but with odd parity, namely a twofold symmetry. Beside the NMR and specific heat measurements (15,16), the c-axis resistivity also exhibits a twofold symmetry when the applied magnetic field is rotated within the basal plane in SrxBi2Se3 (18,19). However, to extract the information of gap structure from these data we inevitably need some models to relate the gap minimum with the crystalline lattice. We are lacking of a direct evidence for this very unique pairing order parameter with odd parity. In this work, based on the STM/STS measurements on superconductivity induced by proximity effect in Bi2Te3 thin film on top of the iron-based superconductor FeTe0.55Se0.45 we present the clear evidence of a twofold symmetry of the SC order parameter and pin down the gap form of 4y from several candidates (16,17). We also observe elongated vortex structure associated with this effect. Single crystals of FeTe0.55Se0.45 with the transition temperature Tc of about 13.3 K are used as the substrates. After cleaving the FeTe0.55Se0.45 crystal in a high vacuum, we obtain a fresh and clean surface on which we grow the topological insulator (TI) Bi2Te3 film (20) by using the molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) technique. As shown in Fig. 1A, the surface topography of FeTe0.55Se0.45 shows a structure of square lattice. The white and dark atoms were supposed to be the Te and Se atoms respectively (21). The atomic-resolved topographic image of the resultant Bi2Te3 film is shown in Fig. 1B, and it is clear that the top Te-terminal surface has a hexagonal structure. With the deposition rate of about 0.5 QL/min, we obtain the Bi2Te3 thin film with very good connectivity. The thickness changes from place to place, a typical case is shown in Fig. 1C. The height difference between two sides of a step is about 1 nm, which corresponds to the thickness of a single QL of Bi2Te3. The exact thickness of Bi2Te3 film in local area is determined by the tunneling spectra (9) with wide-range of bias voltage, which is shown in Fig. 1D. The general shape of the spectrum measured on the Bi2Te3 film with the local thickness larger than 1 QL is similar to that measured on Bi2Te3/NbSe2 heterostructure (9), as indicated by the arrow reflecting the kinky position. However, it should be noted that the features of conduction band minimum seem to be absent on the spectra, and the energy position of the kink for the 1 QL film is very different from that for 1 QL Bi2Te3/NbSe2 heterostructure. In regions with different thickness, superconductivity is successfully induced by proximity effect, which can be observed on the tunneling spectra in lower-energy range, and the typical spectra are shown in Fig. 1E. The spectra measured on the FeTe0.55Se0.45 substrate show a full gapped feature with some non-uniform shape, which was described in our previous work (22). The typical feature of the spectra on the FeTe0.55Se0.45 substrate is that one or two pairs of coherence peaks can be observed with peak energies varying from 1.1 to 2.1 meV. As shown in Fig. 1E, the tunneling spectrum measured on 1 QL Bi2Te3 also has the trace of such feature of coherent peaks of FeTe0.55Se0.45. However, the homogeneity of tunneling spectra becomes much better on Bi2Te3 films with thickness larger than 2 QLs, which is presented fig. S1. Meanwhile, with increasing the thickness of Bi2Te3 thin film, the energy difference between two coherent peaks shrinks, and the density of states (DOS) at zero- bias also become higher. This indicates that the superconductivity in the Bi2Te3 thin film is induced by proximity effect. Interestingly, on the surfaces with the thickness of and larger than 2 QL, the spectra show a V-shape near the Fermi energy. The general shape and the evolution of the spectra with thickness are similar to previous results on Bi2Te3/NbSe2 heterostructure (9). Since the proximity effect induced superconductivity has been well formed in the 2 QL Bi2Te3/FeTe0.55Se0.45 heterostructure, it is worth to detect the pairing symmetry of superconductivity. The quasiparticle interference (QPI) technology is a useful tool to detect the SC gap structure (23,24), hence we do the measurement on the 2 QL Bi2Te3/FeTe0.55Se0.45 heterostructure in order to see whether we have the twofold SC gap. The standing waves of the electrons for the QPI measurements, which contains information in k-space, are scattered by impurities and they interfere each other forming a certain pattern in space. In our sample, generally it is difficult to find a place with enough impurities because of the good quality of the film. However, successful QPI measurements were carried out in places with some Te vacancies, and the topography of a typical case is shown in fig. S2A. Figure 2, A to J, show the corresponding Fourier transformed (FT) real-space QPI patterns (fig. S2) in q-space. When the bias voltage reaches the SC gap energy of about 2.0 meV and above, the FT-QPI pattern shows a frame of hexagon. The FT-QPI at 2.0 mV shows very clear feature of sixfold symmetry, which is consistent with the auto-correlation simulation result from a 2D hexagonal Fermi surface (fig. S3). We refer this sixfold FT-QPI pattern measured at 2 mV and above as the normal state one, which is reasonable by considering the crystal structure of Bi2Te3. The stronger intensity shows up at the position near every Γ-K direction, while the intensity near the Γ-M directions is much weaker, this is consistent with the self-correlation simulation (see fig. S3). If the measuring bias voltage is below 0.5 mV, no clear intensity can be observed along the hexagon from the FT-QPI comparing with that at 2.0 mV. It suggests that the SC gap is nodeless, and the gap minimum, if existing, is larger than 0.5 meV. When the bias voltage is between 1.0 to 1.5 mV, one can find that the intensity of FT-QPI first emerges along one pair of Γ-K directions marked by double arrowed green line in Fig. 2A. This feature can also get support from the real-space QPI images (fig. S2, B to J) as some parallel standing waves are clearly observed. The same feature appears at the negative bias of −1.0 to −1.5 mV. When the bias voltage exceeds 1.5 mV, the other four sides of the hexagon show up. The hexagon becomes complete when the bias voltage is about 2.5 mV (not shown here). Based on the Bogoliubov theory of DOS in the superconducting state, a reasonable explanation for the evolution of FT-QPI pattern is a twofold superconducting gap with gap minima along one pair of Γ-K direction. The twofold symmetry feature is better illustrated in the angular dependence of averaged intensity per pixel, as shown in Fig. 2K. The intensity peaks near one pair of opposite Γ- K directions ( = 60° and 240°) obviously break the rotation threefold symmetry of the crystal structure. If we compare the result with the Te-terminal surface, the gap minima locate along one of the crystallographic axis. We also tried to use the twofold SC gap functions Δ = Δmax[(1 − x)cos2φ + x] to fit the tunneling spectra, and the fitting results are shown in fig. S4. Obviously the models with only one twofold SC gap can fit the spectra well when they are measured on Bi2Te3 with thickness larger than 2 QLs. The spectrum measured on 1 QL Bi2Te3/FeTe0.55Se0.45 heterostructure (fig. S4A) should be fitted by using the model two anisotropic gaps, and this may suggest that the spectrum measured on 1 QL Bi2Te3/FeTe0.55Se0.45 carries still some feature from the substrate FeTe0.55Se0.45. To illustrate the gap structure from our FT-QPI measurements, in Fig. 2M, we plot the resultant angle dependent SC gap for the 2 QL Bi2Te3 in the same coordinate plane of the schematic contour of the Fermi surface. The gap structure shows a twofold symmetry in k-space with minimum in one of the Γ-K directions. The twofold paring symmetry has been studied theoretically (17), and the direction of the gap minimum found here is consistent with one of the predicted results. According to our experimental results, the notation Δ4y (Fig. 2N) is the only correct paring symmetry among all the proposals raised in . This set of experiments have been repeated in three rounds and all lead to the same observation, without exception. The structure of a single vortex in a type-II superconductor usually gives rise to the information of the SC gaps (25). For example, we can obtain the SC gap Δ by the coherence length extracted from the STM image via ξ = ħvF πΔ ⁄ , and here vF is the Fermi velocity. Since the tunneling spectra look very similar to the ones on Bi2Te3/NbSe2 heterostructure when the film is thicker than 2 QLs, it is quite curious to know whether we have the elongated vortex core due to this odd-parity superconductivity with twofold symmetry. We thus measure the vortex image on the 2 QL Bi2Te3/FeTe0.55Se0.45 heterostructure and show the main results in Fig. 3. One can see that the vortices are elongated along one principal crystalline axis, namely a-axis here (Fig. 3, A and B), which is very different from the vortex measured on the bare FeTe0.55Se0.45 crystal without Bi2Te3 (fig. S5B) (22). By a fitting to the spatial evolution of the zero-bias differential conductance with a model of exponential decay we obtain the anisotropy γ of the vortex, which is about 2.6. The fitting results are given in section I of (20) and shown in fig. S6. Intuitively, the elongated vortices reflect the in-plane anisotropy of coherence length, which is resulted from the anisotropic SC gap structure in k-space. The gap-minimum direction, which is determined simply from the longer coherence length, is consistent with the conclusion from the QPI measurement, i.e., along crystalline a-axis of the sample. Such elongated shape of vortices can be observed in superconductors with twofold symmetric crystal structure (26,27). However, for Bi2Te3, the Fermi velocity is roughly isotropic (28,29), and obviously it is difficult to understand such elongated vortices in a system with a threefold symmetry. We also investigate the vortex bound states at the center of the vortex core in these elongated vortices on the 2 QL Bi2Te3/FeTe0.55Se0.45 heterostructure. The anisotropic spatial evolution of the CdGM state can reflect the information of the SC gap (30). The spatial evolutions of vortex core state along and perpendicular to the a-axis are shown in Fig. 3, C and D. One can find very different vortex bound state features when the STM tip moves crossing the elongated vortex. The spectra along the direction with short vortex core size shows a central peak at the vortex center, then it evolves into two symmetric peaks when moving away from the center. This is very similar to the case in a conventional s-wave superconductor with large EF (31). However, we must mention that, this feature is already very different from the case in the bare FeTe0.55Se0.45 crystals in which we observed a round vortex core with the discrete energy levels of Caroli-de Gennes-Matricon (CdGM) states due to the small Fermi energy (22). Thus we can conclude that the vortex core states on the 2 QL Bi2Te3/FeTe0.55Se0.45 heterostructure are very different from that of FeTe0.55Se0.45 due to very different values of Fermi energies. We need to emphasize that the superconductivity observed in Bi2Te3/FeTe0.55Se0.45 heterostructure here is intrinsic although it comes from the proximity effect. If we go along the elongated direction of the vortex, namely the a-axis direction, the evolution of spectra looks very spectacular. A central peak appears at the core center, stays at zero energy and does not split at all when moving away from the center. At this moment we still don’t have a definite explanation of these contrasting behaviors along the two perpendicular directions. However, combining the evidence of odd parity superconductivity with two fold symmetry shown above, we would propose that this frozen zero-bias conductance peak along the elongated vortex direction may be induced by the complex mixture of a Majorana mode with the CdGM states. Actually a small bound state peak appears and remains at zero energy on the spectra measured in the direction of short vortex core size together with the two CdGM splitting peaks away from the vortex center, as marked by a mauve arrow in Fig. 3D. This interesting picture is highly desired for theoretical efforts. The elongated vortex image along a-axis strongly suggest that the gap minima presents along one of the crystal lattice directions. We also repeat the measurements at different places and different samples (fig. S7), elongated vortices are always observed. In the following we demonstrate the twofold superconductivity via measuring the vortex image at different energies. As shown above, the vortices have elongated shapes as evidenced by the measurements of the zero-bias conductance mapping. It is very interesting to see how the vortex image evolves with the measuring bias energy if the superconductor has indeed a very anisotropic SC gap. We try to image the vortices at different energies in the area whose topography is shown in Fig. 4A. One can find that there is an edge-like dislocation in the upper right corner which comes probably from the substrate. The elongated vortices can be observed at zero-bias mapping, as shown in Fig. 4B. The elongated direction is again along the a-axis and has no angular relationship with the direction of the edge-like dislocation. Thus the elongated vortices or twofold superconducting gaps are intrinsic properties of the sample and not the effect of external causes. If the measuring bias voltage is increased but still below the maximum gap of about 2 meV, the two fold image feature appears still, but the vortices change their single elongated shape to pairs of parallel-elongated patterns, as shown here by Fig. 4, C to F, which may be originated from the different spatial evolution of the CdGM bound state peaks along two directions. We are aware of that, by increasing the measuring bias voltage from zero to a subgap value in LiFeAs, the vortex image changes from a bright spot to a hollow square with fourfold symmetry (32), which may share the same reason as our present case. When the bias voltage is 2.5 mV and above the SC gap maximum, as shown here by Fig. 4, G and H, the vortex image looks like a roughly isotropic dark disk without a twofold shape. The dark disk feature of the vortices measured at 2.5 mV can be understood by the relative reduction of DOS within a certain region in the center compared with that outside that region. When the energy is larger than the gap maximum, the spatial distribution of DOS along the two characteristic directions does not show clear difference, hence it is reasonable that we find such roughly isotropic image of vortices. This is a proof that the superconducting gap has the twofold symmetry. This interesting evolution of vortex images clearly warrants further theoretical investigations. The elongated vortices have been observed in all designed experiments on the same and different samples, without exception. By doing STM/STS measurements and detailed QPI analysis on the 2 QL Bi2Te3/FeTe0.55Se0.45 heterostructure, we observe the twofold SC gap with the gap minima along one of the principal crystal axes, which is well consistent with the theoretical prediction (17). We regard this as a direct observation of the twofold symmetry of superconductivity in the related systems. Since our measurements are done in areas of microscopic scale with atomic resolution, this naturally removes the concern of possible inhomogeneity in bulk samples (15,16). According to the theory, this twofold symmetry is a natural consequence of the pairing with odd parity of the Δ4y notation. Thus it is very helpful to understand the properties of the possible topological superconductivity in the system. One interesting issue is that, why such twofold symmetry of superconductivity and the elongated vortices haven’t been observed on the Bi2Te3/NbSe2 heterostructure (9). We argue that this may be attributed to the large scale of penetration depth and coherence length of 2H-NbSe2 which makes the vortex shape on the substrate transmitted to the top Bi2Te3 surface. For the Bi2Te3/FeTe0.55Se0.45 heterostructure in our experiment, the influence from the substrate may be greatly suppressed because of the short coherence length in FeTe0.55Se0.45, and the vortices have their intrinsic shape which reflects its SC order parameter. The freezing of the central peak of vortex core states along the elongated direction when moving away from the vortex center may suggest the mixture of a Majorana mode and the CdGM states, which is certainly a very interesting proposal and needs further efforts to verify. Our experimental results bring about deep insight to the understanding of topological superconductivity in this system.