Extreme Sensitivity of the Superconducting State in Thin Films I. Tamir,1 A. Benyamini,2 E. J. Telford,3 F. Gorniaczyk,1 A. Doron,1 T. Levinson,1 D. Wang,3 F. Gay,4 B. Sac ́ep ́e,4 J. Hone,2 K. Watanabe,5 T. Taniguchi,5 C. R. Dean,3 A. N. Pasupathy,3 and D. Shahar1 1Department of Condensed Matter Physics, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel.∗ 2Department of Mechanical Engineering, Columbia University, New York, New York 10027, USA. 3Department of Physics, Columbia University, New York, New York 10027, USA. 4Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, Institut N ́eel, 38000 Grenoble, France 5National Institute for Materials Science, 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba, 305-0044 Japan. All non-interacting two-dimensional electronic systems are expected to exhibit an insulating ground state . This conspicuous absence of the metallic phase has been challenged only in the case of low-disorder, low density, semiconducting systems where strong interactions dominate the electronic state. Unexpectedly, over the last two decades, there have been multiple reports on the observation of a state with metallic charac- teristics on a variety of thin-film superconductors [3–9]. To date, no theoretical explanation has been able to fully capture the existence of such a state for the large variety of superconductors exhibiting it. Here we show that for two very different thin-film superconductors, amorphous indium-oxide and a single-crystal of 2H-NbSe2, this metallic state can be eliminated by filtering external radiation. Our results show that these superconducting films are extremely sensitive to external perturbations leading to the suppression of superconductivity and the appearance of tem- perature independent, metallic like, transport at low temperatures. We relate the extreme sensi- tivity to the theoretical observation that, in two- dimensions, superconductivity is only marginally stable . It is theoretically accepted that in realistic two- dimensional systems, with the unavoidable disorder and at a finite T, superconductivity exists only marginally and finite resistivity is always expected . The value of this residual resistance is extremely sensitive to the state of the system and it usually depends exponen- tially on experimental variables such as T, B, measure- ment current (I) and the level of microscopic disorder. An exception is the case of exactly zero magnetic field (B), which can effectively be attained in experiments, where true superconductivity, with R ≡ 0 at a finite T, is expected. For such thin-film systems the superconducting state can be dramatically terminated with a transition to an in- sulating phase . In this superconductor-insulator transition (SIT), metallic behavior is expected to be re- stricted to an unstable point at the transition . This point of view is often supported by experiments using a variety of ways to drive the SIT including thickness variation, disorder, magnetic field (B) and carrier con- centration (for a review, see ). There is, however, a growing number of independent studies [3–9] where the observation of an unexpected metallic state, intervening between the superconducting and insulating phases, has been reported. The unique characteristic attributed to this ’anomalous metal’ is that the superconducting transition, signaled by an exponen- tial decrease below a well-defined critical T (TC) of the sheet-resistance (R) from its normal state value (RN) is terminated, upon further cooling, with a crossover to a T-independent R that persists down to the low- est T’s. This behavior, seen in thin films for which RN is significantly lower than the quantum of resis- tance RQ ≡ h/e2 ≃ 25.8kΩ, is observed over a wide range of experimental parameters and extends to rela- tively high T’s . Unlike ordinary metals this state exhibits a vanishing Hall-effect that was associated with a new particle-hole symmetric ground-state , its microwave response shows no cyclotron resonance and it reveals the existence of short-range superconducting cor- relations . The physical origin of this anomalous metallic state remains controversial with experimental measurements variously interpreted as evidence of a Bose-metal phase or dissipation arising from collective vortex tunnel- ing . Although several theoretical groups have ad- dressed this state [17, 20–29], its robustness and ubiq- uitous nature pose difficulties in the development of a comprehensive model . The purpose of this Letter is to show that the apparent metallic behavior can result from an unforeseen sensitivity of these marginal super- conductors to external perturbations. Our data were obtained from two very different su- perconducting systems. The first is amorphous Indium Oxide (a:InO) thin film (Fig. 1a,b), known for its high level of disorder reflected by high RN (≲ h 4e2 ≃ 6.4 kΩ). The second system we investigated is made of sheets ex- foliated from a single-crystal of 2H-NbSe2 (Fig. 1c,d), which are of high purity and are characterized by low RN (< 100 Ω) . Within the field of thin-film supercon- ductors these two systems represent opposite limits with respect to structure and disorder. Moreover, while 2H- NbSe2 is a purely 2D superconductor having a thickness d ≪ ξ, ξ being the superconducting coherence length, d arXiv:1804.04648v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 12 Apr 2018 2 of the a:InO films is approximately 5 times larger than its ξ . We begin by showing that the superconducting phase into which our samples transition at TC, and which is interrupted as saturation sets in at lower T’s, is com- pletely restored by introducing low-pass filters into the measurement setup (see Supplementary Fig. S1). This is illustrated by plotting R as a function of T −1 ob- tained from an a:InO film (Fig. 1e) and a 2H-NbSe2 film (Fig. 1f). In both samples R obtained from the unfiltered measurements (red traces) initially decreased exponentially with an approximate activated behavior energy and kB the Boltzmann constant. The exponential decrease then terminated with a transition to a saturated regime that persisted down to our lowest T’s. It is this saturated behavior of R that was previously interpreted as indicating the novel metallic state . When we repeated the measurements, this time with low-pass filters installed (blue traces), we found that R continued to follow the activated trend down to much lower T’s, and, as T was further lowered, R continued to decrease to our noise level without saturating. The lowest R we now measure can exceed two orders of mag- nitude below the corresponding saturated values of the unfiltered measurements. We note that with filtering, we continue to observe deviation from activated behavior in the lowest T ranges measured. However, we believe this results from imperfect filters. Indeed, additional mea- surements of a:InO film in a second fridge with improved low-T filters show no deviation from activated behavior over the full range of achievable T’s (Fig. 2). We con- clude that our data do not support the existence of quan- tum corrections to the well-known transport due to thermally activated vortices . Although the effect the filters have on both systems is qualitatively similar it is important to point out that, while for a:InO it is only seen well below TC, for 2H- NbSe2 filtering has a measurable effect right from TC, and at B = 0. In Fig. 3a we show the thermody- namic superconducting-normal transitions of 2H-NbSe2, at B = 0 in the left panel, and, near Hc2 for several T’s in the right. The common theme in these figures is that a significant effect of the filters is measured very close to the transition into superconductivity. In con- trast, for a:InO initial differences between filtered and unfiltered measurements are only seen much below TC. This is summarized in Fig. 3b where we present the B−T phase diagram for our samples. For 2H-NbSe2 the initial effect of the filters, indicated by green triangles, over- laps within error with the superconductor-normal phase boundary (defined by R=0.9RN), while for a:InO the fil- ters significantly influence the results only well within the superconducting phase, blue and red triangles. While filtering external radiation effectively eliminates the apparent metallic behavior, we found that satura- tion can be re-introduced by increasing the current used in our four-terminal measurements. For this purpose we used both DC and AC currents (IDC and IAC, see Meth- ods) with similar results. The saturation induced by in- creasing IAC is demonstrated in Fig. 4a, where we present data obtained from an a:InO film measured with filters at B = 10 T, using increasing levels of I0 (the amplitude of IAC). While at I0 = 1 nA the measured V/I, where V is the voltage drop along the sample, followed an activated behavior with deviations that are barely noticeable over our noise level, for I0 ≥ 50 nA the data significantly de- viated from its low-I0 value and saturation set-in at low T’s with the saturated value increasing with I0. For refer- ence we include one trace (red) measured without filters and at I0 = 1 nA, which exhibits the low-T saturation. We note that, since R is an equilibrium value defined by limI→0 V/I, the data presented in Fig. 4a strictly equals R only in the Ohmic regime (I0 ≲ 1 nA). Similar results are obtained while increasing IDC , see Fig. 4b where we present data obtained from a 2H-NbSe2 film. The saturation induced by increasing I (either AC or DC) can naturally be attributed to Joule heating. Under the application of a higher power (P = I ·V ) by the mea- surement circuit, the electronic system is unable to equi- librate with its low-T environment. This leads to an out- of-equilibrium steady-state where the electrons are held at an elevated T, Teff, higher than the surrounding T . The I-induced deviations from activated behavior, as well as the saturation regions, can therefore be attributed to Teff> T. We can, self-consistently, extract these Teff’s by fitting the R(T) data, obtained from the filtered measure- ments in the Ohmic regime, with an activated form and then using this fit as our thermometry calibration curve: for each value of V/I, in the elevated-I measurements, we associate a Teff corresponding to V/I = R in the calibra- tion curve. Using this procedure we conveniently define Tsat as Teff in the R saturation regime. We now wish to suggest that the R saturation observed in our unfiltered experiments, and which bears a striking resemblance to the I-driven saturation (see Fig 4a,b), can also be associated with heating. While in this case the source of heating is less obvious, the fact that filtering the electrical lines connected to the sample effectively elimi- nates the saturation suggests that the culprit is ambient radiation that propagates down the lines and couples di- rectly to the low-T electronic system. We can estimate the power density delivered to the electronic system by this radiation (pr) by comparing Tsat obtained during the application of known power density (p) in our filtered, elevated-I, measurements (T I sat) to the Tsat obtained in the unfiltered, Ohmic, measurements (T r sat). To do this we plot, in Fig. 4c, the p dependence of T I sat for two of our samples and use it as our p-meter. Red diamonds in- dicate T r sat values corresponding to the unfiltered curves of each sample. We find pr = 4 and 4000 W/cm3 for the a:InO the 2H-NbSe2 samples, respectively. 3 Although our results clearly show that our a:InO and 2H-NbSe2 films do not exhibit an intermediate metallic phase, we can not rule out the existence of such a phase in other superconducting systems for which a metallic state was previously reported . We can, however, naively extended our effective-temperature analysis to these sys- tems. In Fig. 4d we present Tsat vs. B obtained from our data (blue and green symbols), together with Tsat val- ues that we extracted from published data (black sym- bols). Whenever comparisons between results obtained from filtered and unfiltered measurements are not avail- able (empty symbols), we fitted the data measured at higher T’s with activated behavior and used these fits as our thermometry calibration curves. This procedure, in- troduced in this context in Ref. , only provides a lower bound for Tsat because the filtered measurements can also exhibit higher U(B) (Supplementary Fig. S2). While the data in Fig. 4d represent several very different systems, measured over a wide range of T’s, they all share a sim- ilar B dependence: we found that Tsat∼ log(HC2/αB), where HC2 is the upper critical field terminating super- conductivity and α is a fit parameter of order 1, works reasonably well. Before we proceed to discuss the implication of this simple elevated effective-temperature scenario, we wish to point out that there are other possible mechanisms that would lead to I-dependent transport in thin-film superconductor such as ours. Non-linear vortex related response may be relevant at finite-B’s, and BKT vortex- antivortex unbinding may be at work at B = 0. At this stage we are unable to rule out that such mechanisms play a significant role in the I-response of the system, and may even lead to saturated, T-independent R as T → 0. We are not aware of a model that accounts for the stark difference between the results of the filtered and unfiltered measurements. The data we are presenting here show that the metal- lic behavior, often observed in thin-film superconductors, results from the exposure of the superconducting phase to unwanted radiation or high I’s. While these can be easily eliminated, it is still worthwhile to consider why these superconductors so readily respond to excitations that leave other systems, under similar conditions, unaf- fected. We point out that Tsat is routinely around a few K, where it is unlikely that the cryogenic environment will limit the sample’s ability to cool. Since the external power couples only to the electronic system it is reason- able to conclude that the bottleneck in the heat-transfer process is between the electrons and the host phonons . This is not surprising since in superconductors the electron condensate is decoupled from the heat-carrying phonons. If such a limiting mechanism is at play a much more thorough theoretical analysis is necessary before we can go any further with quantitative tests. In this study we were able to compare two very differ- ent systems under virtually identical measurement con- ditions. It is reasonable to assume that, without filters, the radiation delivered to both types of samples would be the same. Surprisingly we find that their Tsat are very different: < 0.4 K for a:InO and ∼ 2 K for 2H- NbSe2. Similarly the corresponding pr’s are different. If the effective-temperature picture is correct, we need to understand why two samples under similar external ra- diation end up responding in such a different manner. The reason, we believe, is rooted in the energy balance maintained by the electrons. Even if the radiation is the same, it is very likely that different systems will ab- sorb this energy in different ways reflecting the specific details of their electronic state. Compounding this are possible differences between the strength of the coupling to the phonon system to which the electrons can trans- fer the energy absorbed from the radiation. A detailed understanding of this scenario awaits further theoretical developments. In summary, we showed that two very different thin- film superconductors are extremely sensitive to external perturbations, and exhibit metallic-like, saturated, T- dependence in response to such perturbations. We sug- gested two possible mechanisms, one based on vortex de- pinning and in the other we assume that an overheated state exists where the electronic system is unable to equi- librate with its surrounding. In the latter case one should theoretically address not only the external power dissi- pated but also the heat flow away from the electronic system. METHODS In this work we studied several different a:InO and 2H- NbSe2 samples. Their relevant parameters are presented in Table S1 of the Supplementary information. Details of the growth and fabrication were previously published, see Ref. for 2H-NbSe2 , and Ref. for a:InO. Our data was measured utilizing a standard four- terminal lock-in technique, see sketch in Supplementary Fig. S1. A low-frequency (f ∼ 10 Hz) AC voltage (VAC) generated by a lock-in oscillator is transformed into I using a large resistor (Rs = 10-1000 MΩ). This results in a probing current of the following form: IAC = I0 ·cos(2πft), where t is time and I0 = |VAC|/Rs. At low enough I0’s, where the systems is in its Ohmic regime, R = V/IAC, where V is measured at the same AC fre- quency along the sample. On to this AC signal we can superimpose a DC bias I (IDC). The total current in such setup is: Itot = IAC + IDC. Since the lock-in measures only the AC component V/IAC , in this configuration, is a measurement of the differential resistance. The data presented in Fig. 2 were measured in a dilution refrigerator equipped with heavily filtered DC lines comprising feedthrough pi-filters at room T, low resistance twisted-pairs (∼8 Ω) from 300 K to 4 K 4 to reduce Johnson noise, lossy shielded twisted-pairs (∼500 Ω) from 4 K to the mixing chamber (MC) stage, copper-powder filter on the MC stage, and cryogenic- compatible 47 nF capacitor-to-ground on the sample holder. Furthermore, as thermometry below 0.1 K is del- icate, a RuO2 thermometer calibrated by 60Co nuclear orientation thermometry has been installed on the sam- ple holder close to the sample, thus subjected to the same cooling power from the wiring. This additional on-chip thermometry suppresses the very last deviations from ac- tivated transport at the lowest T’s. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We are grateful to I. Aleiner, B. Altshuler, M. Feigel- man, D. Kennes, S.A. Kivelson, K. Michaeli, A. Mil- lis, P.W. Phillips, and B. Spivak for fruitful discus- sions. This research was supported by The Israel Sci- ence Foundation (ISF Grant no. 556/17), the Minerva Foundation with funding from the Federal German Min- istry for Education ad Research, the NSF MRSEC pro- gram through Columbia in the Center for Precision As- sembly of Superstratic and Superatomic Solids (DMR- 1420634), the Global Research Laboratory (GRL) Pro- gram (2016K1A1A2912707) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning via the National Re- search Foundation of Korea (NRF), and Honda Research Institute USA Inc. AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS All authors participated in all aspects of this work. COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS The authors declare no competing financial interests. ∗ idan.tamir@weizmann.ac.il.; Corresponding author Abrahams, E., Anderson, P. W., Licciardello, D. C. & Ramakrishnan, T. V. Scaling theory of localiza- tion: Absence of quantum diffusion in two dimensions. Phys. Rev. Lett. 42, 673 (1979). Kravchenko, S. V., Kravchenko, G. V., Furneaux, J. E., Pudalov, V. M. & D’Iorio, M. Possible metal-insulator transition at b=0 in two dimensions. Phys. Rev. B 50, Ephron, D., Yazdani, A., Kapitulnik, A. & Beasley, M. R. Observation of quantum dissipation in the vortex state of a highly disordered superconducting thin film. Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 1529 (1996). Qin, Y., Vicente, C. L. & Yoon, J. Magnetically in- duced metallic phase in superconducting tantalum films. Phys. Rev. B 73, 100505 (2006). Crauste, O., Marrache-Kikuchi, C., Berge, L., Stanescu, D. & Dumoulin, L. Thickness dependence of the superconductivity in thin disordered nbsi films. In Journal of Physics: Conference Series, vol. 150, 042019 Ye, J. et al. Superconducting dome in a gate-tuned band insulator. Science 338, 1193 (2012). Garcia-Barriocanal, J. et al. Electronically driven superconductor-insulator transition in electrostatically doped la2cuo4+δ thin films. Phys. Rev. B 87, 024509 Saito, Y., Kasahara, Y., Ye, J., Iwasa, Y. & Nojima, T. Metallic ground state in an ion-gated two-dimensional superconductor. Science 1259440 (2015). Tsen, A. et al. Nature of the quantum metal in a two- dimensional crystalline superconductor. Nature Physics Fisher, M. P. A. Quantum phase transitions in disordered two-dimensional superconductors. Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, Feigel’man, M., Geshkenbein, V. & Larkin, A. Pinning and creep in layered superconductors. Physica C: Superconductivity 167, 177 – 187 (1990). Haviland, D. B., Liu, Y. & Goldman, A. M. On- set of superconductivity in the two-dimensional limit. Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 2180 (1989). Hebard, A. F. & Paalanen, M. A. Magnetic-field-tuned superconductor- insulator transition in two-dimensional films. Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 927 (1990). Sondhi, S. L., Girvin, S. M., Carini, J. P. & Shahar, D. Continuous quantum phase transitions. Rev. Mod. Phys. Gantmakher, V. F. & Dolgopolov, V. T. Superconductor- insulator quantum phase transition. Phys.-Usp. 53, 1 Kapitulnik, A., Kivelson, S. A. & Spivak, B. Anomalous metals–failed superconductors. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.07215 (2017). Mulligan, M. & Raghu, S. Composite fermions and the field-tuned superconductor-insulator transition. Phys. Rev. B 93, 205116 (2016). Breznay, N. P. & Kapitulnik, A. Particle-hole sym- metry reveals failed superconductivity in the metal- lic phase of two-dimensional superconducting films. Science advances 3 (2017). Wang, Y., Tamir, I., Shahar, D. & Armitage, N. A bose metal has no cyclotron resonance. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.01908 (2017). Stauffer, D. & Aharony, A. Introduction to percolation theory (CRC press, 1994). Shimshoni, E., Auerbach, A. & Kapitulnik, A. Trans- port through quantum melts. Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 3352 Das, D. & Doniach, S. Existence of a bose metal at t = 0. Phys. Rev. B 60, 1261 (1999). Kapitulnik, A., Mason, N., Kivelson, S. A. & Chakravarty, S. Effects of dissipation on quantum phase transitions. Phys. Rev. B 63, 125322 (2001). Phillips, P. & Dalidovich, D. The elusive bose metal. Science 302, 243–247 (2003). 5 Larkin, A. & Varlamov, A. Theory of fluctuations in superconductors (Claren- don Press, 2005). Galitski, V. M., Refael, G., Fisher, M. P. A. & Senthil, T. Vortices and quasiparticles near the superconductor- insulator transition in thin films. Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, Spivak, B., Oreto, P. & Kivelson, S. A. Theory of quan- tum metal to superconductor transitions in highly con- ducting systems. Phys. Rev. B 77, 214523 (2008). Raghu, S., Torroba, G. & Wang, H. Metallic quantum critical points with finite bcs couplings. Phys. Rev. B 92, Mulligan, M. Particle-vortex symmetric liquid. Phys. Rev. B 95, 045118 (2017). Telford, E. et al. Via method for lithography free contact and preservation of 2d materials. Nano letters (2018). Sac ́ep ́e, B. et al. High-field termination of a cooper-pair insulator. Phys. Rev. B 91, 220508 (2015). Percher, I. M., Volotsenko, I., Frydman, A., Shklovskii, B. I. & Goldman, A. M. Vortex variable range hopping in a conventional superconducting film. Phys. Rev. B 96, Altshuler, B. L., Kravtsov, V. E., Lerner, I. V. & Aleiner, I. L. Jumps in current-voltage characteristics in disor- dered films. Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 176803 (2009). Shahar, D. & Ovadyahu, Z. Superconductivity near the mobility edge. Phys. Rev. B 46, 10917–10922 (1992). Martinis, J. M., Devoret, M. H. & Clarke, J. Experi- mental tests for the quantum behavior of a macroscopic degree of freedom: The phase difference across a joseph- son junction. Phys. Rev. B 35, 4682 (1987). 6 and a 2H-NbSe2 (024) film respectively. e,f, R vs T −1 obtained from an a:InO film at B = 7, 8 T, and a quad-layer 2H-NbSe2 at B = 2.3, 3.5 T respectively. Blue traces are measured with, and red traces without, filters. The top axis indicates the corresponding T’s. The black dashed lines in e, are guides to the eye indicating activated behavior. The data was measured applying a standard four-terminal lock-in technique with I0 = 1 (a:InO) and 100 (2H-NbSe2) nA. (see Methods for details) at different B values. Activated behavior, straight line in an Arrhenius plot, is apparent down to our noise floor or lowest measurement T’s, see e.g. dashed black lines at B =10.75 and 12.3 T. 7 transition in a 2H-NbSe2 film (024). Blue traces are measured with, and red traces without, filters. b, B−T phase diagram. The black line separating the superconducting and normal phases, defined by R=0.9·RN, obtained from the 2H-NbSe2 sample, and includes data which were left out from a for visibility. The T and B values where ∆R/RF = (RUnfiltered−RFiltered)/RFiltered=3%, are marked, in both a and b, by green triangles. Both TC and HC2 are defined at R=0.9·RN. For our a:InO films, blue and red triangles, we used TC=2.5 K (Ad12a) and 3 K (IT1b5). 8 increasing I0’s. b, dV/dI vs T −1 obtained from a 2H-NbSe2 film, measured at B = 2.3 T with an increasing level of IDC (see methods). In both a and b, we include one trace (red) measured, at our lowest I, without filters. c, T I sat vs. p extracted from the a:InO data presented in a (circles), and the 2H-NbSe2 data presented in b (triangles), adopting the same color scale for the different I’s. The red symbols represent T r sat extracted from the unfiltered measurements. The a:InO data include IAC’s left out of a for visibility. These curves are used as p-meters to estimate pr = 4 and 4000 W/cm3 for the a:InO the 2H-NbSe2 sample, respectively. d. Tsat vs. B evaluated for several samples. Our data is plotted in blue (a:InO) and green (2H-NbSe2). The MoGe , Ta , ZrNCl data (black symbols) were extracted from the cited references. Full symbols represent data that were calculated using filtered measurements as a thermometer, while data plotted with empty symbols were estimated following the procedure in Ref. . All samples exhibit similar logarithmic B dependence, see dashed black lines. Supplementary Information of the Letter - Extreme Sensitivity of the Superconducting State in Thin Films I. Tamir,1 A. Benyamini,2 E. J. Telford,3 F. Gorniaczyk,1 A. Doron,1 T. Levinson,1 Da Wang,3 F. Gay,4 B. Sac ́ep ́e,4 J. Hone,5 K. Watanabe,5 T. Taniguchi,5, 2 C. R. Dean,3 A. N. Pasupathy,3 and D. Shahar1 1Department of Condensed Matter Physics, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel.∗ 2Department of Mechanical Engineering, Columbia University, New York, New York 10027, USA. 3Department of Physics, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. 4Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, Institut N ́eel, 38000 Grenoble, France 5National Institute for Materials Science, 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba, 305-0044 Japan. arXiv:1804.04648v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 12 Apr 2018 2 Schematics of the measurement circuit. The filter illustrated in the filter stage (FS) represent either an homemade RC filter, a commercial low-pass (Pi) filter, or an attenuator, all with similar effect. The dashed black square represents our cryogenic system. without (red) filters. System Name RN TC (K) HC2 (T) Width (μm) Thickness (nm) (# of layers) Structure a:InO IT1b5 0.07 > 2 13.9 5 30 amorphous IT1b20 0.09 20 30 GMET1 0.16 > 2 > 12 100 30 AD12a 0.23 > 2 11 333 22 2H-NbSe2 003 1.4 · 10−3 5.7 4.67 1 2 single crystal 6.9 · 10−4 4.3 3.2 1 1 1 2 019 1.3 · 10−3 6 4.12 3 2 024 1.2 4 films we note the number of layers, rather than thickness, in the 7th column. The uncertainties in the a:InO films parameters is due to our setup limited T and B ranges. ∗ idan.tamir@weizmann.ac.il.; Corresponding author