1 Comments on ‘Revisiting building block ordering of long-period stacking ordered structures in Mg-Y-Al alloys’ Xin-Fu Gua, b*, Tadashi Furuharab, Leng Chena, Ping Yanga a School of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, 100083, China b Institute for Materials Research, Tohoku University, Sendai, 980-8577, Japan *Corresponding author: Xin-Fu Gu, xinfugu@ustb.edu.cn Abstract In a recent paper, Zhang et al. [Acta Materialia 152 (2018) 96] studied the in-plane ordering of the long-period stacking ordered (LPSO) structure in Mg-Al-Y alloys. In addition to the well-known L12 type building cluster, they proposed three new types of metastable building clusters. However, we will show that these new types of building clusters are caused by the superimposition of L12 type clusters located in different domains. In addition, the experimental evidence for domain structures in a similar alloy system Mg-Al-Gd is provided. Keywords: Magnesium alloy; LPSO; Domain; HAADF-STEM Submitted to Scripta Mater. 2018/5/18 2 In a recent work, Zhang et al. studied the building block ordering of the long-period stacking ordered (LPSO) structure in Mg-Al-Y alloy . As a main conclusion, they claimed that at least three new types of metastable building clusters enriched of Al and Y atoms exist in the as-casted alloy in addition to a well-known L12 (Al6Y8) cluster based on their observations by high angle annular dark field (HAADF)-scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM). These three metastable building clusters will be transformed to the stable L12 cluster after further annealing at 530-550C, and this evolution was validated by first-principles calculation. However, it will be shown here that these new clusters in their work could be rationalized by overlapped L12 clusters. The four-layers height fcc structural unit (SU for short hereafter) is a building block for the LPSO structures . The fcc SUs in a LPSO structure are separated by several (0001) Mg (hcp) layers, and the separation varies with different types of LPSO structures. Figure 1(a) shows the projection of ideal SU along  in Mg matrix, where the SU enriches with rare earth (RE) and metallic elements (M) and contains ordered distributed M6RE8 clusters with L12 type structure . The L12 cluster in Figure 1(a) is shown in Figure 1(b). The atoms in “ABCA” stacking layers are denoted by circles, downward-pointing triangle, upward-pointing triangle, and circles, respectively. The <111> view of the L12 structure forms a cluster in Figure 1(a), the neighboring clusters in a rhombic lattice are separated by 2√3a along <10-10>, where a is lattice parameter of Mg matrix. Figure 2(c) and (d) show the <11-20> and <10-10> view of the SU, respectively. The corresponding HAADF-STEM image taken from our recent studied Mg-3Al-5Gd alloy is shown at the right side of each atomic model for reference (same for the rest). The bright dots in the images indicates the locations of Gd enriched columns according to Z-contrast principle . The ordered pattern in Figure 2(d) is denoted as“R1”type cluster according to Ref. . For the L12 clusters in Figure 1(a), if we move the clusters within the dashed hexagon relatively to their original positions, a domain structure will be generated. 3 The possible translation positions could be classified into four types as indicated by different symbols in the rhombic unit cell in Figure 2(a). The nodes of the grid in the figure are the positions of Mg atoms in stacking layer A. The original position for Gd atoms in the clusters in layer A is denoted as t1 position, and translation to such positions will not generate domain boundaries. Therefore, there are three crystallographic inequivalent positions to generate a domain structure, i.e. t2, t3 and t4. Due to the overlap of the domain structures, the <11-20> and <10-10> view of the SU will be different from Figure 1(b-c). Figure 2(b) shows an example of domain structure with a translation of t = t4 = a. This kind of translation will result in two types of <11-20> view of Figure 2(b) as shown in Figure 2(c), and two types of <10-10> view as shown in Figure 2(d). The ordered patterns in Figure 2(d) are denoted as “R4” and “R2” in Ref. , respectively. The formation of “R4” and “R2” is due to the overlap of the L12 clusters in two domains. Moreover, the cluster “R3” in Ref. can be obtained from a <10-10> view with translation to t3 positions. Table 1 summarizes the possible <10-10> view of a SU contain a domain structure with the inequivalent translation positions specified in Figure 2(a), and the observed cluster R1~R4 is marked with “” in the table. It appears possible to explain all of the four clusters R1~R4 in Ref. based on the overlap of L12 clusters due to the domain structures. Indeed, the domain structures in LPSO structure have been directly observed by Scanning Tunneling Microscopy . In considering of the focal depth during HAADF-STEM imaging, the overlap of domain structures is possible. If several domain structures are overlapped, more complex ordered patterns could be observed. It should be noted that the present analysis is pure geometry, and the relaxed structures may vary a little from the geometrical models. The tilted views of the SU containing domains in a similar alloy system Mg-3Al-5Gd are also consistent with above analysis. The LPSO or SU usually has a large aspect ratio, and it is hard to find the same position during tilting of zone axis. However, there are steps during growth of LPSO structure , and these steps can be used as a mark for finding the same position during the tilted trails. Figure 3 shows such an example. Figure 3(a) and (b) show the LPSO structure at  and 4  zone axis, respectively. With the aid of the steps as a marker, the nearly the same positions could be located in Figure 3. In the area marked with dashed box, the ordered pattern in Figure 3(b) is “R2” type, and the possible translation position for the domain structure is t2 or t4 according to Table 1. Based on Figure 3(a), the translation position could be further narrow to be t4, since the <11-20> view of t2 domain is the same as Figure 1(c) and different from Figure 3(a). Besides, Figure 3(a) is similar to the second atomic model in Figure 2(c) with t4 domain. It shows that our analysis is self-consistent, and further experimental results are also consistent using similar analysis. distributions of the clusters in three areas are indicated by grid lattices. As is noted, these three lattices deviate from each other and form domains of clusters in local areas. These domain structures may happen during ordering of the planar segregation . Nevertheless, the direct observation of domain structures further supported our argument that the new clusters in Ref. are possibly caused by overlapped L12 structures. Although Zhang et al. considered the overlap of L12 structures, they rule out this possibility. The deficiencies in their analysis are as follows. Firstly, three possible shift vectors r1~r3 are considered in their study, but the translational vectors r1~r3 are crystallographically equivalent, and equal to t4 in our study. However, the projections in Figures 8(f-h) in Ref. are different, and only Figure 8(f) is consistent with our study. Secondly, the vectors r1~r3 are the translational vectors in basal plane, and it is unreasonable that the projections of atoms in <11-20> directions will create extra positions as in subplots 3 and 4 in Figure 8(g) and 8(h) in Ref. . Finally, as shown in Figure 1 and 2, our clearer HAADF-STEM images are in reasonable good agreement with the atomic models despite of the small deviation possibly due to the atomic relaxation. Moreover, the evolution of R2~R4 clusters to R1 may be due to the growth of the domain structures and the elimination of the domain boundaries. In summary, our analysis shows that three new clusters observed in Ref. may be possibly due to the overlap of the well-known L12 clusters in different domains. There 5 are four crystallographically inequivalent translational positions to generate the domain structure. The analysis of overlapped L12 clusters in Ref. is incomplete, and only one type of translation position is considered. Furthermore, our analysis is supported by the HAADF-STEM images at different zone axis in a similar alloy system Mg-Al-Gd, and the domain structure in this alloy is directly observed. Acknowledgement This work was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research on Innovative Areas, "Synchronized Long-Period Stacking Ordered Structure", from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Japan (No.23109006) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (No. FRF-TP-17-003A1). The Mg alloy used in this study was provided by Kumamoto University. Special thanks to Mr. Y. Hayasaka at Electron Microscopy Center (Tohoku University) for technical supports.