The role of interstitial hydrogen in SrCoO2.5 antiferromagnetic insulator Li Liang,1, 2, 3 Shuang Qiao,1, 2 Shunhong Zhang,1, ∗ Jian Wu,4, 5, † and Zheng Liu1, 5, ‡ 1Institute for Advanced Study, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China 2State Key Laboratory of Low Dimensional Quantum Physics and Department of Physics, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China 3Institute of Electronic Engineering, China Academy of Engineering Physics, Mianyang 621999, China 4State Key Laboratory of Low Dimensional Quantum Physics, Department of Physics, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China 5Collaborative Innovation Center of Quantum Matter, Beijing 100084, China (Dated: March 21, 2022) Hydrogen exhibits qualitatively different charge states depending on the host material, as nicely explained by the state-of-the-art impurity-state calculation. Motivated by a recent experiment [Na- ture 546, 124 (2017)], we show that the complex oxide SrCoO2.5 represents an interesting example, in which the interstitial H appears as a deep-level center according to the commonly-used transition level calculation, but no bound electron can be found around the impurity. Via a combination of charge difference analysis, density of states projection and constraint magnetization calculation, it turns out that the H-doped electron is spontaneously trapped by a nonunique Co ion and is fully spin-polarized by the onsite Hund’s rule coupling. Consequently, the doped system remains insulating, whereas the antiferromagnetic exchange is slightly perturbed locally. The brownmillerite SrCoO2.5 is known to be a high- temperature antiferromagnetic (AFM) insulator (TN > 500 K), reducing from the perovskite SrCoO3 ferromag- netic (FM) metal (Tc ∼ 250 K) via a long-range ordering of 0.5 oxygen vacancies per formula unit [1–3]. The or- dered oxygen vacancies form hollow channels, in which interstitial ions can diffuse with a high mobility . Re- cent ionic liquid gating experiment has demonstrated re- versible insertion and extraction of interstitial hydrogen ions into the hollow channels, reaching a new HSrCoO2.5 insulating phase that exhibits magnetic hysteresis below 125 K . A schematic summary of these rich elec- tronic and magnetic transitions is shown in FIG. 1, which presents SrCoO2.5 as a useful platform for applications such as magnetoelectric devices and solid-state fuel cells. Despite a number of studies on SrCoO2.5+δ (0 ≤ δ ≤ 0.5) , the physics of hydrogenated SrCoO2.5 re- mains largely unexplored, because this new phase was not accessed before via traditional growth methods. In con- trast to the oxidation side, where an insulator-to-metal transition occurs, the insulating gap of SrCoO2.5 appears intact upon hydrogenation. More peculiarly, according to the magnetization and soft X-ray magnetic circular dichroism measurements, HSrCoO2.5 is a weak FM insu- lator , which is rather rare in nature. Here, we aim to present a theoretical understanding of the role of interstitial hydrogen in SrCoO2.5. Based on first-principles calculations, we show that the inserted hydrogen acts as an electron donor, but the doped elec- tron is not mobile. Instead, it is spontaneously trapped around a Co site, reducing the local Co valence state from +3 to +2. Due to the multivalent nature of Co ions, this Co2+ state is stable. The consequences are: (a) no im- purity state is introduced around the band edge; and (b) the AFM order is slightly perturbed locally. These re- A schematic summary of the tri-state phase tran- sitions of SrCoO2.5 upon oxidation and hydrogenation as demonstrated in Ref. . sults not only put forth a theoretical basis to understand the experimental observations on HSrCoO2.5, but also shed new light on the impurity calculation methodology when strongly-correlated electrons are involved. First-principles calculations are performed within the framework of density functional theory (DFT) as im- plemented in the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Pack- age (VASP) . We employ projector augmented wave method to treat the core electrons, and the general- ized gradient approximation as parametrized by Perdew, Burke, and Ernzerhof (PBE) for the exchange- arXiv:1805.11766v2 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 31 May 2018 2 correlation functional of the valence electrons. A ki- netic energy cutoff of 500 eV is found to achieve nu- merical convergence. The strong on-site Coulomb re- pulsion of Co-3d orbitals are treated by the simplified DFT+U method . An effective U-J value of 6.5 eV is used for all calculations following Ref. . The initial magnetic moments of any two neighboring Co ions are set anti-parallel, which reproduces the so-called G-type AFM configuration as determined by previous neutron scattering measurements . The spin density is then treated self-consistently in the DFT calculation. The self-consistent electronic iteration are performed until the total energy change is smaller than 10−5 eV. The crystal structure of SrCoO2.5 is shown in in a tetrahedral CoO4 coordination (denoted as CoTet) and the other is in an octahedral CoO6 coordination (de- noted as CoOct). Accordingly, the O atoms can be classi- fied into three types: O in the tetrahedral plane (OTet), O in the octahedral plane (OOct), and O in the inter-layer space (OInt). Both the lattice and atomic positions are fully relaxed without subjecting to a specific symmetry group, until the forces are smaller than 10−2 eV/ ̊A. The optimized structure is found to fit best to the Ima2 space group. We note that some ambiguity remains in the experi- mentally refined structure data, primarily implying slight differences in the arrangement of the CoO4 tetrahe- dra . We do not intend to address this controversy here, considering that it is a minor effect compared to the H-induced distortion of the CoO4 tetrahedra [FIG. 2(c)]. To simulate hydrogen doping, we construct a supercell containing 32 Sr, 80 O and 32 Co atoms, and introduce one H within, corresponding to a low H-concentration case (marked by the red dot in FIG. 1). The distance between two nearest H atoms under the periodic bound- ary condition is larger than 10 ̊A and a single Γ point is used to sample the mini Brillouin zone. The atomic posi- tions in the supercell are relaxed again, while the lattice constants are fixed to the primitive-cell optimized values. We first determine the most stable H position. Pre- vious study suggests that the ions under liquid gating are preferably inserted into the hollow channels . We have tested several different initial positions, and the low- est total energy is obtained when the H binds with an OInt [FIG. 2(c)]. In comparison, the total energy is 0.19 eV higher when the H binds with an OOct, and 0.45 eV higher when the H binds with an OTet. Our structural relaxation does not find any local energy minimum for the H to bind with a Co or Sr. The formation of an H- OInt bond is found to induce distortion of the associated CoO4 tetrahedron and weaken the associated OInt-CoOct bond. We then calculate the electronic band structures be- fore and after H doping. Figure 2(b) clearly reveals a band gap of the size ∼ 1.4 eV of the pristine SrCoO2.5. Crystal structures of SrCoO2.5 (a) before and (b) after H doping. Red circle marks the lowest-energy position of the interstitial H locating in the hollow channel. (c) and (d), the corresponding DFT+U band structures. This gap value is larger than the previous DFT+U re- sults, which varied the onsite Coulomb repulsion U from 3 to 5 eV , yet smaller than the experimental value ∼ 2 eV determined optically . Considering that the Co ion nominally has a +3 valence state, leaving 6 d-electrons per Co site, an insulating ground state naturally fits in the band theory. The spin-up and spin-down bands are completely degenerate, as expected for an ideal AFM spin density, which is invariant under the combination of time reversal and sublattice inversion. The magnetic moments of both CoOct and CoTet converge to ∼ 3.1 μB, slightly larger than the previous calculation results obtained with a smaller U . The previous neutron scattering data showed temperature dependence and a small difference of the magnetic moment values for CoOct and CoTet - at T = 10K, the values are 3.12 μB and 2.88 μB, respec- tively . These values roughly coincide with a Co3+ S = 2 high-spin state with some hybridization with the O p-orbitals . It is surprising to find that after H doping, the band- edge properties barely change [FIG. 2(d)]. In particular, we do not observe any impurity band within the gap or around the band edge, and the Fermi level remains at the valence band maximum. The most noticeable effect is a splitting of the spin degeneracy, signaling the breaking of the AFM symmetry. A quick check of the spin density shows that the supercell carries a net magnetic moment of ∼ 0.91 μB, close to the contribution of a single electron. A widely-used calculation method to charac- terize the electrical activity of impurities in conventional 3 semiconductors or insulators is to purposely change the electron number in the supercell and restore the charge neutral condition with a homogeneous charge back- ground. Such a simulation can be regarded as artificially liberating some electrons or holes into a free carrier state, leaving a charged impurity state behind [e.g. a H+ (H−) impurity state by removing (adding) one electron]. De- pending on the choice of the Fermi level that accomm- dotates the liberated electrons or holes, the energy dif- ference between such a constraint electronic system and the original fully-relaxed one defines an estimated activa- tion energy for the system becoming conductive, which is commonly termed as the defect transition level . Following this recipe, we find that the H0/H+ transition energy is 0.95 eV below the conduction band minimum and the H0/H− transition energy is 0.52 eV above the va- lence band maximum, both sufficiently deep within the gap. Although these values are subject to various uncer- tainties, e.g. band gap errors and long-range interactions between the charged impurities, it appears at the first sight that the interstitial H can be reasonably classified as a deep-level impurity, and thus the preserving of an insulating state under hydrogenation becomes natural. However, a second thought alerts that a clean band gap after H-doping is distinct from what a deep-level im- purity typically manifests. For example, interstitial H is known to be a deep-level impurity in MgO . Accord- ingly, a bound state deep inside the band gap presents, which reflects the fact that the electron is trapped by the highly localized impurity potential and thus is difficult to get activated into a free carrier. In our case, such an in- gap impurity level is always absent no matter whether the impurity is charged or not (c.f. FIG. 4). One might contend that the impurity level could lie deep inside the valence or conduction bands, but the difficulty is to sat- isfy the electron counting. Recall that the interstitial H introduces one extra electron. To keep the Fermi level within the gap, the only possibility is that the spin de- generacy of the impurity level is somehow removed, lead- ing to one spin-polarized level inside the valence bands and the other inside the conduction bands. In this way, the emergence of a net magnetic moment close to 1 Bohr magneton is clarified as well. Then, how could such a large spin splitting at least of the size of the band gap occur? This puzzle is resolved by noticing that the doped electron is trapped by a Co ion instead of the interstitial H. Consequently, the strong Hund’s rule coupling of the 3d orbitals polarize the elec- tron spin. In specific, given that the 6 d-electrons of a Co3+ form a high-spin state, the spin of the trapped electron is enforced to lie in antiparallel, effectively giv- ing rise to a Co2+ S = 3/2 state. Figure 3(a) plots the charge difference due to the introduction of an intersti- tial H with the charge state H+, H0 and H−, respectively. For the H+ case, only one proton is introduced and the electron number does not change. We observe a charge (a) Charge difference induced by an interstitial H in different charge states. (b) The electrostatic potential in- duced by the H+ ion. The isovalue contour indicates the range, within which the potential has decayed by one order of magnitude from the maximum value. Also shown is the ground-state AFM configuration of the Co ions. The spin ro- tation angle θ of a single Co ion is defined in the inset. (c) Change of total energy ∆E by rotating different Co sites be- fore and after H doping. The inset shows the ∆E-cos θ fitting . in (a) stoichiometric SrCoO2.5 and HSrCoO2.5; and (b) the H-doped supercell as shown in FIG. 3. redistribution around the H, the Oint bonded to the H, and the CoTet bonded to the hydroxyl [labeled as Co(a) in FIG. 3(a)], which is attributed to the perturbation of the proton potential. The other Co sites [e.g. Co(c) la- beled in FIG. 3(a)] are almost unperturbed. For the H0 case, the same charge redistribution around the impurity 4 also presents. In addition, one CoOct away from the H [labeled as Co(b) in FIG. 3(a)] possesses extra electron density, which is attributed to the H-doped electron. For the H− case, one more Co [labeled as Co(b’) in FIG. 3(a)] possesses extra electron density. It is intriguing that the extra electrons are bound to neither the H nor the nearest-neighbor Co, but some dis- tant Co ions. Figure 3(b) plots the electrostatic poten- tial difference due to the introduction of an interstitial H+, i.e. the proton potential. It is clear that Co(b) and Co(b’) are beyond the impurity potential range. We do not see any direct connection between the locations of Co(b), Co(b’) and H. We have observed that the doped electron can localize around another Co site when the initial conditions of the iteration slightly differ. Thus, the doped Co site picked by the self-consistent iterations may subtly depend on some finite-size effects of our su- percell. In the thermodynamic limit, we consider that this is a spontaneous symmetry breaking process - the doped electron falls into a local energy minimum ran- domly. From this perspective, interstitial H in SrCoO2.5 is not a deep-level impurity, but rather a good n-type donor, given that it has effectively donated its electron into the host lattice. It is the multivalent “goblin” - the original meaning of cobalt in German - that traps the doped carrier, giving rise to the large activation energy. We can further confirm from the atomic projected den- sity of states (PDOS) that the doped electron is absorbed into a Co3+ forming a Co2+, while the other Co3+ ions are not affected. We first reproduce the PDOS of Co in stoichiometric SrCoO2.5 and HSrCoO2.5 as the bench- mark of Co3+ and Co2+ in the brownmillerite environ- ment [FIG. 4(a)]. They exhibit distinct features - espe- cially, the gap size shown in the Co2+ PDOS is much larger than in the Co3+ PDOS. An increase of the insu- lating gap in HSrCoO2.5 was indeed observed in experi- ment . In our H-doped supercell, the PDOS of Co(b) and Co(b’) closely resembles Co2+ [FIG. 4(b), right col- umn]. All the other Co atoms, including Co(a), dis- play features similar to Co3+ [FIG. 4(b), left and central columns]. The remaining question is whether H doping frus- trates the AFM structure. It is worth mentioning that doping an AFM insulator usually spawns various ex- otic electronic phases owing to the competition between the electron kinetic energy and the AFM exchange en- ergy, as long studied in the context of high-temperature cuprate superconductors. If so, the magnetic order of HxSrCoO2.5 would become rather complicated, depend- ing on the H concentration. We analyze this problem by manually rotating the spin orientation of Co(a) and Co(b) starting from the ground state AFM configuration in a series of constraint noncollinear magnetization cal- culations [inset of FIG. 3(b)]. For the pristine SrCoO2.5, there is no doubt that the total energy change (∆E) as a function of the rotation angle (θ) reflects the over- all exchange strength of the CoTet and CoOct sites with their neighbors. Figure 3(c) shows the calculated data points. The energy is the lowest at θ = 0, and increases monotonously when the configuration deviates from the AFM ground state. A good linear relation between ∆E and cosθ is found, indicating a primary Heisenberg-type exchange. We note that the ratio between ∆E[CoTet] and ∆E[CoOct] is roughly 2/3, because of the CoO4 and CoO6 coordination. Both the previous paper and our own calculation indicate that the Co-O-Co exchange is very isotropic. We then apply the same calculation to the doped supercell. The data indicates that the lin- ear fitting still works, with only quantitative change of the ∆E-cosθ slope. The overall AFM coupling between Co(a) and its neighbors slightly increases, possibly due to the distortion of the bonding geometry. The overall AFM coupling between Co(b) and its neighbors is re- duced more remarkably, to a value close to CoTet. If we formulate the magnetic energy as ∆E = hMF · SCo(b), in which hMF is the molecular field acted on Co(b), the re- duction of the Co(b) magnetic moment from 3d6 S = 2 to 3d7 S = 3/2 accounts for a large fraction of the change, whereas hMF , i.e. the surounding magnetic order and the AFM exchange strength, is only slightly weakened. In conclusion, we show that interstitial H in the AFM insulator SrCoO2.5 is an electron donor, but the kinetic energy of the doped electron is quenched by the mul- tivalent Co ion. In this view, the robust insulating gap observed in the H1−δSrCoO2.5 sample can be understood. Also, as long as δ ̸= 0 or 1, the difference between the Co3+ and Co2+ magnetic moment will give rise to some FM signals. Nevertheless, we should point out that the present calculation cannot provide a quantitative expla- nation on the ∼125 K magnetic transition experimentally observed in H1−δSrCoO2.5 , which is only 1/5 of the Neel temperature of SrCoO2.5. It remains an open ques- tion whether additional complexities emerge when the H concentration increases, i.e. the correlation between the doped electrons becomes important. Leaving aside the intermediate doping region that is difficult for first- principles simulation, some insight could be obtained by applying our approach to the H-rich limit, studying the role of a single H vacancy in HSrCoO2.5. To carry out this calculation, further experimental input about the re- fined atomic and magnetic structures of HSrCoO2.5 is demanded. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We would like to thank J.-W. Mei, Z.-Y. Weng, M. Coey, J.Y. Zhu and P. Yu for helpful discussion. This work is supported by Tsinghua University Initiative Sci- entific Research Program and NSFC under Grant No. 11774196. L.L. acknowledges support from NSFC (Grant No. S.Z. is supported by the National 5 Postdoctoral Program for Innovative Talents of China (BX201600091) and the Funding from China Postdoc- toral Science Foundation (2017M610858). ∗ zhangshunhong@tsinghua.edu.cn † wu@phys.tsinghua.edu.cn ‡ zheng-liu@tsinghua.edu.cn R. Le Toquin, W. Paulus, A. Cousson, C. Prestipino, and C. Lamberti, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 128, 13161 (2006). A. Mu ̃noz, C. de la Calle, J. A. Alonso, P. M. Botta, V. Pardo, D. Baldomir, and J. Rivas, Phys. Rev. B 78, W. S. Choi, H. Jeen, J. H. Lee, S. S. A. Seo, V. R. Cooper, K. M. Rabe, and H. N. Lee, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 097401 C. Mitra, T. Meyer, H. N. Lee, and F. A. Reboredo, J. Chem. Phys. 141, 084710 (2014). N. Lu, P. Zhang, Q. Zhang, R. Qiao, Q. He, H.-B. Li, Y. Wang, J. Guo, D. Zhang, Z. Duan, Z. Li, M. Wang, S. Yang, M. Yan, E. Arenholz, S. Zhou, W. Yang, L. Gu, C.-W. Nan, J. Wu, Y. Tokura, and P. Yu, Nature 546, H. Jeen, W. S. Choi, M. D. Biegalski, C. M. Folkman, I. C. Tung, D. D. Fong, J. W. Freeland, D. Shin, H. Ohta, M. F. Chisholm, and H. N. Lee, Nat. Mater. 12, 1057 H. Jeen, W. S. Choi, J. W. Freeland, H. Ohta, C. U. Jung, and H. N. Lee, Adv. Mater. 25, 3651 (2013). G. Kresse and J. Furthm ̈uller, Phys. Rev. B 54, 11169 P. E. Bl ̈ochl, Phys. Rev. B 50, 17953 (1994). J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3865 (1996). S. L. Dudarev, G. A. Botton, S. Y. Savrasov, C. J. Humphreys, and A. P. Sutton, Phys. Rev. B 57, 1505 M. Chandrima, S. F. Randy, O. Satoshi, L. Ho Nyung, and A. R. Fernando, J. Phys. Condens. Matter 26, A. Glamazda, K.-Y. Choi, P. Lemmens, W. S. Choi, H. Jeen, T. L. Meyer, and H. N. Lee, J. Appl. Phys. J. H. Lee, W. S. Choi, H. Jeen, H.-J. Lee, J. H. Seo, J. Nam, M. S. Yeom, and H. N. Lee, Sci. Rep. 7, 16066 S. B. Zhang, S.-H. Wei, and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B C. G. Van de Walle, and J. Neugebauer, Nature 423, C. Kılıc and A. Zunger, Appl. Phys. Lett. 81, 73 (2002).