Native Point Defects in Antiferromagnetic Phases of CrN Tomas Rojas and Sergio E. Ulloa∗ Department of Physics and Astronomy and Nanoscale and Quantum Phenomena Institute, Ohio University, Athens, Ohio 45701-2979, USA (Dated: August 16, 2021) We present a detailed analysis of the role of native point defects in the antiferromagnetic (AFM) phases of bulk chromium nitride (CrN). We perform first-principles calculations using local spin- density approximation, including local interaction effects (LSDA+U), to study the two lowest energy AFM models expected to describe the low-temperature phase of the material. We study the for- mation energies, lattice deformations and electronic and magnetic structure introduced by native point defects. We find that, as expected, nitrogen vacancies are the most likely defect present in the material at low temperatures. Nitrogen vacancies present different charged states in the cubic AFM model, exhibiting two transition energies, which could be measurable by thermometry experiments and could help identify the AFM structure in a sample. These vacancies also result in partial spin polarization of the induced impurity band, which would have interesting consequences in transport experiments. Other point defects have also signature electronic and magnetic structure that could be identified in scanning probe experiments. I. INTRODUCTION Antiferromagnetic (AFM) materials exhibit an inter- esting long-range order that sets in below a character- istic temperature known as the N ́eel scale, TN. In this regime, there is an alternating pattern for the magnetic moment orientation throughout the crystal that results in a zero net macroscopic magnetization and is robust to external magnetic and electric fields.1 In recent years, AFM materials have been considered in spintronics ap- plications, as the development of methods to control the microscopic AFM ordering by applying electrical pulses has proven successful.2,3 Deeper understanding of these materials, including the role that pervasive defects play, would be of considerable interest, especially as possible applications appear on the horizon. Transition metal nitrides (TMNs) represent a large family of materials that play a significant role in many technological applications. They are characterized by high hardness, corrosion resistance and unusual electri- cal properties that make them useful,4 and in some cases they also exhibit interesting magnetic behavior.5 Among them, chromium nitride (CrN) possesses unusual elec- tronic and magnetic properties. Specifically, CrN has been shown to exhibit a phase transition in both crys- talline structure and magnetic ordering, as the material transitions from a paramagnet with cubic rock-salt struc- ture at high temperature to an antiferromagnet with or- thorhombic Pnma structure at TN ≃ 280K.6 The details of the AFM and structural ordering of the CrN crystal have however been subject to some contro- versy. Several first-principles calculations have shown that an orthorhombic Pnma AFM model, in which the spin changes every two layers along the direction (and denoted as AFM 2 ), is the most energetically favorable.7–10 However, as discussed by Zhou et al.,9 the set of ad hoc parameters used in LSDA+U calculations affects the energetic difference between the AFM 2 model and a competing cubic arrangement (shown in Fig. 1) in which local magnetic moments change at every layer in the direction (and denoted as AFM 1 ). The energetic difference between these two configurations is small and it is therefore likely that both phases would appear in thin film experiments. A recent study of thin films of CrN grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) detected the phase transition between the cubic param- agnet and the orthorhombic AFM 2 . However, they also find experimental evidence of a low temperature cu- bic phase, perhaps stabilized near the surface of the thin film crystal.11 , and b) orthorhombic AFM 2 structures. Silver/red spheres indicate alternating magnetic moment direction on Cr sites. Blue spheres are N atoms. Black arrows indicate different lattice directions. It is also important to mention that thin film experi- ments disagree on the intrinsic character of the electronic resistivity ρ,12,13 with some experiments showing metal- lic behavior as ρ decreases with lower temperatures,6,14 while others show semiconducting behavior, with increas- arXiv:1805.09405v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 23 May 2018 2 ing ρ as the temperature drops. This disagreement has been associated with the presence of nitrogen vacancies or other dopants that tend to complicate transport mea- surements on CrN thin films.15 A related issue is determining the presence and/or size of an energy bandgap in the material: an optical gap ≈ 0.7 eV was reported in single crystals of CrN;6 however, a much smaller band gap (≈ 90 meV) was reported from resistivity measurements in powder samples. From first principles calculations, the inclusion of a Hubbard correc- tion (LSDA+U) results in reported band gaps from 0.2 to 2.13 eV,8,9 depending on the magnitude of the U correc- tion, although a moderate gap (≲ 0.8 eV) is believed to be the best theoretical estimate. Moreover, strain also in- duces significant changes in the electronic structure,16,17 which may affect different observations. For instance, a moderate strain of ≈ 1.3% is predicted to close the gap, as well as to strongly modify the effective masses of both conduction and valence bands.16 Interestingly, the masses are changed anisotropically, with principal axes heavily influenced by the magnetic ordering.16 This points to the strong connection between structural and magnetic or- dering at low temperatures, and response of the system to external fields. As mentioned, the presence of N vacancies and the ac- companying carrier doping may have important roles in understanding the disagreements in resistivity measure- ments, and previous studies have indeed focused on this effect in CrN. Zhang et al.18 analyze structural changes and core-level shifts due to a high concentration of de- fects in high-resolution transmission electron microscopy experiments. They conclude that high N-vacancy con- centration (≳ 10%) leads to lattice distortions and overall reduction of the lattice volume. Mozafari et al.19 studied vacancies in CrN at high temperatures (the paramagnetic phase), and conclude that both N vacancies and intersti- tials act as donors in the system. As entropy facilitates the appearance of such defects, it is expected that they would naturally contribute to self-doping of films and the overall resistivity behavior away from carrier freeze out. A related issue that has not received much attention is the effect of vacancies and other point defects on the magnetic structure and response of CrN crystals. As the atomic arrangement and magnetic structure are closely intertwined in this material, it would be of interest to study how defects modify not only the charge but mag- netic moment profiles. Such effects would not only be ob- servable by local probes, such as STM and spin-polarized STM, but are also likely to affect the electromagnetic re- sponse that is now being used to control the distribution of magnetic moments in AFM materials.2,3 It is with these effects in mind that we have carried out a detailed theoretical analysis of native point defects, focusing on their effect on the electronic and magnetic properties of CrN. Utilizing the LSDA+U approach we study the formation energies of four native defects in dif- ferent expected AFM phases. We calculate band struc- tures and determine orbital weight shifts near the Fermi level produced by defects. We analyze the structural changes and its consequences on the electronic structure, charge, and magnetic moment distributions created as a consequence. We find that nitrogen vacancies with dif- ferent charge states are realistically created in different structures, as function of doping, and result in distortions of charge and spin profiles that are rather local. Differ- ent point defects have different remnant spin structures and associated partially polarized impurity bands which could be identified in transport and in experiments using local scanning probes. II. COMPUTATIONAL APPROACH We carry out density functional theory (DFT) calcu- lations in the local spin density approximation as in- cluded in the Quantum Espresso package.20 We include the LSDA+U correction on the 3d orbitals of Cr using the rotationally invariant formulation of Liechtenstein et al.21 Identification of the appropriate ad hoc constants for this system is assisted by previous work; Herwadkar et al.22 estimated U ≃ 3 to 5 eV, and J = 0.94 eV, using the Cococcoine and Gironcoli algorithm.23 Similar values were estimated by Zhou et al.9 In our calculations we se- lected J = 0.94 eV, with U = 3 eV for the AFM 2 structural model, and U = 5 eV for the AFM 1 ar- rangement. These choices represent low values of U that achieve similar energy gaps in both models. We have performed calculations in a 64 atom unit cell (2 × 2 × 2 cubic cells with 8 atoms each), with Brillouin zone sampling using 4×4×4 k-point meshes and with an energy cutoff of 410 eV. The defects are created by either adding or removing the appropriate atom in the super- cell, and performing full structural relaxation with a force convergence threshold of 10−4 a.u. (atomic units). This allows us to analyze the accompanying deformations of the lattice structure as well as the energetics and spatial distribution of the associated charge and spin distribu- tion of the defect state. We have specifically studied different native point de- fects, with the simplest being the nitrogen (VN) and chromium vacancies (VCr). We also consider antisite de- fects, replacing the atom of one species with the other, which we denote as anti-N (AN, where N is in a Cr site) and anti-Cr (ACr, for Cr in an N site). Lastly, we also consider different interstitial defects, IN or ICr, with the corresponding impurity placed in a previously hollow lo- cation. We have attempted to obtain all these point de- fects for both AFM models; however, it was not possible to reach convergence for ACr in the AFM 1 structure. A similar situation was found for IN in the AFM 2 structure, reflecting the high energy cost of the drastic change in atomic coordination for such defects. Finding equilibrium structures of different defects in- dicates the possibility of generating such configurations in real crystals, as the energetics are important in de- 3 termining abundance under different growth conditions. Knowing the formation energy of neutral species is cru- cial, although charged states are possible. For the latter, theoretical evaluation must also consider the electrostatic contributions, with obvious different energy costs for dif- ferent charged states. To this end, Freysoldt et al.24 have proposed a successful scheme to include the charge den- sity of the defect to find the corresponding short range potential generated. The method has been used in sev- eral studies to examine defects in ternary oxides, among other materials.25 In this approach, the formation energy is defined as24,26 Edefect(q) = EDF T def+bulk − EDF T bulk − Elatt[qmodel] + q∆V − � nsμs + (EF + εvbm)q, (1) where the total energy of the bulk supercell, EDF T bulk , is subtracted from the cell containing the point defect EDF T def+bulk. The next term includes the electrostatic in- teraction of the lattice of charged defects generated by the periodic boundary conditions. ∆V represents a con- stant alignment potential added to correct the long and short-range potential between defects of charge q. In the next term, μs represents the chemical potential for each reservoir for the species involved. For CrN we use the ground state energy of a N2 molecule, and an AFM bulk Cr crystal as the individual points of reference. Like- wise, the Fermi energy EF (measured from the valence band maximum εvbm) is the electronic chemical poten- tial. Notice the approach requires knowledge of the di- electric constant ε, to properly screen the charged de- fects. We estimate ε by applying a sawtooth potential to a slab of material and calculating the ratio between external and internal potential slopes;24 for CrN we have estimated ε = 1.43. As we will see below, the nature of the point defect changes the electronic structure in a variety of ways and the entire set of properties of the material. III. RESULTS A. Formation energies The formation energies were evaluated using the scheme developed by Freysoldt et al.,24,26 as discussed above, and shown in Fig. 2 for the AFM 1 structure. Our calculations indicate that only the VN vacancies in this cubic model have charged states within a reason- able range of the Fermi level. zero Fermi energy (EF = 0) the formation energy of the neutral species for the nitrogen vacancy is V q=0 N = 2.48 eV, while its charged states are at V q=−1 N = 2.63 eV and V q=1 N = 2.94 eV. Considering a Fermi energy range from −0.2 to 0.8 eV, we find two transition energies between charged states, with ε−1,0 = −0.147 eV, and ε0,1 = 0.46 eV. Both transitions are likely reachable through doping, and may be in the energy gap, as indicated by two dif- ferent gap estimates in the figure. [A vertical line at 0.79 eV indicates the gap reported by Botana et al.8 using the TB-mBJLDA functional.27] In the cubic AFM structure we also obtain VCr at 6.90 eV, ACr at 10.05 eV, and the interstitial IN at 12.01 eV. These high formation energy values suggest that their appearance is most unlikely in well relaxed crystals, although thermodynamic analysis under different growth conditions would be required to confirm this conclusion.26 Similarly, in the orthorhombic AFM 2 model, the neutral VN was also found to have the lowest formation energy at 2.13 eV, followed by VCr = 5.72 eV, ACr = 9.7 eV, and AN = 10.14eV. Charged states of any of these de- fects are at least 2 eV away, making them uninteresting. For this structure, we also found that it was not possible to obtain convergence for interstitial point defects. This is likely related to the orthorhombic distortion present in this model, which having lower symmetry makes for difficult force balance on the interstitial sites. VN nitrogen vacancy different charged states in the AFM 1 model structure. EF = 0 is set at the edge of the valence band. Over the EF range in the figure, there are two transi- tion energies at ε−1,0 = −0.147 eV and ε0,1 = 0.46 eV. Ver- tical lines at ELDA+U gap and ETB−mBJLDA gap (see ) indicate corresponding estimates of the energy gap in this phase. B. Geometry of relaxed structures relaxed structures for different point defects and AFM models. Positive and negative displacement values repre- sent atomic displacements away and towards the defect, 4 atoms with respect of the defect site in the ideal crystal. Pos- itive (negative) values indicate motion away (towards) the point defect. Model Defect Cr(↑) Cr(↓) N AFM 1 VN VCr(↑) 0.00 AN IN AFM 2 VN 0.01 VCr AN ACr respectively. Except for the interstitials and antisites, most values are relatively small, as one would expect. For the AFM 1 structure, the nitrogen vacancy pro- duces significantly smaller displacements (≲ 0.2%), re- flecting the low energies of formation, with slight differ- ences among Cr atoms, depending on their local mag- netic moment projection. The Cr(↑) neighbors move away from the defect site, while the Cr(↓) atoms move inwards slightly. Meanwhile, the nearest N atoms move closer to the defect by 0.002 ̊A. Chromium vacancies pro- duce larger deformations, with inward displacements of all neighboring N atoms and opposite spin Cr sites. The AN defects produce motion of all neighbor Cr atoms towards the defect, as well as significant displace- ment of the neighbor N atoms. In contrast, the IN defect pushes the neighbors away, with especially large shifts for the nearest N atoms. It is interesting to see that in nearly all defects the magnetic moments on the Cr atoms seem to play a role on the cell distortions, reflecting the cou- pling of magnetic and lattice structure in this material. In the AFM 2 model, the VN defects produce similar distortions as in the AFM 1 structure. However, VCr vacancies produce equal distortions towards the defect for both orientations of the magnetic moment, and a slight shift in the opposite direction for the neighbor N atoms. The anti-N defect produces a large shift (≈ 10% of the unperturbed separation) of the spin-up Cr atoms towards it, arising from the fact that the Cr atom removed was in that direction. A related situation occurs for the ACr defect, as Cr atoms of the same spin direction as the atom added show significant shifts towards the defect, and only a slight shift away for opposite-spin Cr atoms. As we will illustrate below, even the relatively small shifts produced by the VN and VCr defects in these crys- tals result in significant charge and spinful redistributions with unique characteristics. C. Electronic structure of defects In this section we analyze changes in the electronic structure introduced by the various defects in different AFM model structures. For this purpose we calculate the partial density of states (PDOS) for the atoms close to the point defect. We emphasize that the results here are for a single defect in a 64 atom supercell, correspond- ing to 3.1% concentration. We have verified, however, that results are fully converged, and that especially for the neutral vacancy species, the defect interactions across supercells is negligible. As the AFM 1 model is characterized by a cubic symmetric structure, its PDOS in the pristine case ex- hibits spin-symmetric results–even as the magnetic ar- rangement reduces that somewhat–see Fig. 3, top panel. Notice, for example, that dxy and dzx have identical PDOS, as in this AFM model two spatial directions show isotropy with respect of the magnetic ordering. Introduction of a nitrogen vacancy in the supercell has the lowest energy of formation, as discussed above. As seen in Fig. 3, second panel, the vacancy gives rise to a redistribution of d-orbitals in the neighbors, with a peak of dz2 states just below the Fermi level for one of the spins. This shallow orbital state exhibits partial spin po- larization, and would contribute significantly to mobile carriers in a typical crystal, impart a polarization to the response, and affect the measured resistivity. The spin polarization seen in this PDOS is also present in the over- all band structure, and no gap appears for the minority component. Similarly, a large spin polarization in the dzy orbital is seen, peaking at ≈ −1.5 eV, with opposite direction to that of the dz2 peak, as the nearest Cr atoms rearrange. A noticeable rearrangement of the p-orbitals in nitrogen is also seen for this VN defect. In the case of VCr, symmetrically surrounded by near- est neighbors nitrogen atoms, the vacancy produces an enhancement of p-orbitals near the Fermi level with no net spin polarization (as shown in Fig. 3, third panel). The defect, however, alters the AFM order as evidenced by the asymmetrical changes in the t2g orbitals of the nearby Cr atoms, especially dzy. The AN defect strongly suppresses p-orbitals near the Fermi level, as additional p bonds are created around the defect. In contrast, IN represents an interesting case, be- ing the only point defect that distorts the orbital distribu- tion on the neighbors while preserving spin-polarization symmetry. It also shows symmetry among dzy and ddxy orbitals. The pristine AFM 2 model displays lower orbital symmetry overall, as seen in Fig. 4, product of the or- thorhombic structure. The N vacancy produces an en- hancement of dz2 states, and just like in the cubic model, it is partially spin polarized. The VCr in this model shows also significantly enhanced PDOS at the Fermi level, but with a more complex rearrangement that has larger dx2−y2 amplitude in one spin projection and dzx on the opposite. Both antisite defects, AN and ACr main- 5 (Color online) Partial density of states in the AFM 1 structure for the nearest neighbor atoms (Cr(↑), Cr(↓) and N) surrounding each specific point defect, for up (positive) and down (negative) spin projections. Individual d-orbitals of the Cr and p-orbitals of N are shown with dif- ferent colors. The vertical line at zero energy represents the Fermi level. tain an open bandgap, although with strong orbital re- arrangement and only slight local polarization. To complement the PDOS information, Fig. 5 shows 3D representations of the charge densities near the nitro- gen and chromium vacancies in the two different struc- tures. In all cases, the local character of the induced charge is evident. (Color online) Partial density of states for the AFM 2 structure for nearest neighbor atoms surrounding each specific point defect. Spin up (down) projections are shown as positive (negative) values. Individual Cr d-orbitals and N p-orbitals shown with different colors. Vertical line at zero energy represents the Fermi level. D. Magnetic structure of defects In addition to the changes seen in the PDOS, all point defects are seen to disturb the ideal AFM ordering of the pristine crystal in either of the two models we explored. The presence of different defects results often in a net magnetic moment for the supercell even when the added or removed atom has no magnetic moment. Moreover, defects are seen to induce different spatial patters of local spin polarization in the unit cell. In Fig. 6 we present a 2D cross section of the spin polarization on the (001) plane for the cubic AFM 1 6 nitrogen vacancies for the AFM 1 and AFM 2 models. Red and green represent charge deficiency and excess, respec- tively. Blue spheres represent N atoms; gray represent Cr. The isosurface value was taken as 0.075 electron/Bohr3 structure, centered at the different point defects. The results for VN show strong spin polarization associated with the extra charge in the neighboring Cr atoms, prod- uct of the broken bonds, and clearly dominated by the dz2 orbital. It is also interesting to see the axial symme- try of the additional spin on the neighboring Cr atoms. The net magnetic moment of the VN supercell is found to be 0.69μB, reflecting the spin polarization of the or- bitals seen in Fig. 3. The chromium vacancy in this model shows also spin accumulation at the neighboring Cr atoms, having amplitudes in both spin directions with complex spatial patterns in nodules pointing towards the larization on (001) plane, for point defects in the AFM 1 structure. Red and blue amplitudes represent extremal spin projections (up and down respectively), as per color bars. No- tice the very different scale in the case of VN. x, y and spin projections given in atomic units. Images in the background represent the atom positions obtained afterfull structure re- laxations. Blue and grey spheres represent N and Cr atoms, respectively. point defect. Notice also a small remnant spin density on the vacancy site, all contributing to the net supercell magnetic moment of 1.66μB (nearly half of the Cr mag- netic moment in the pristine crystal of 2.90μB). The AN defect is also accompanied by a slight spin accumulation at the defect location, as well as clear dipolar patterns in the neighboring Cr sites. Finally, the interstitial defect in this model, IN, shows a strong dipolar spin accumulation at the defect. Notice also the alternating slight polariza- tion that extends throughout the supercell, an indication of the strong local distortion that has not fully healed over the supercell volume (and yet has zero net magnetic moment). For the orthorhombic cell, AFM 2 , we show the cor- responding spin polarization on the (001) plane in Fig. 7. In general, one finds more structured spin distributions, reflecting the lower symmetry of this structure. The VN defect shows spin concentrations in the nearest Cr atoms with amplitudes that are rather asymmetric among dif- ferent Cr neighbors, contributing to a small magnetic mo- ment of 0.3μB in the supercell. In the VCr defect we see a high spin concentration at the defect site, as well as in the neighboring Cr atoms. For VCr, the net magnetic moment of the supercell is 2.98μB, nearly the moment of the Cr sites in the pristine lattice. The antisites, with strong structural deformations, produce spin polarization not only slightly at the AN defect site, but strongly in the neighboring Cr sites for ACr. We should comment that although we are analyzing 7 point defects in the bulk, similar charge and spin polar- ization would likely be found near crystal surfaces. As such, some of these spatial characteristics and spin po- larization could be identified by scanning probes, such as a spin polarized scanning tunneling microscope. Analy- sis of the defect symmetries and spin polarizations they induce would help identify the appropriate atomic AFM model in a specific sample. on (001) plane for point defects in the AFM 2 model. Red and blue represent extremal spin projections (up and down respectively), as per color bars. Notice different scale for VN. x, y and spin projections given in atomic units. Images in the background show atom positions of fully relaxed structure. Blue/gray spheres represent N/Cr atoms, respectively. IV. CONCLUSIONS We have analyzed the presence of native point defects on two microscopic AFM models of CrN, widely believed to describe the low temperature phase of the crystal. The formation energies, including corrections to avoid super- cell artifacts, have been evaluated for the different de- fects. We have found, as suspected from general con- siderations, that the N vacancy defects are indeed those with the lowest formation energies, and therefore likely to appear in crystals in either of the AFM models. We further determine that only the N vacancies in the cubic AFM model should exhibit charged states, showing two possible transitions (to +1 and −1 charge states) within a reasonable doping range. We have found that such vacan- cies produce orbital restructuring near the Fermi level, providing significant self-doping which would affect the resistivity in real samples and may exhibit partial spin polarization of the impurity-created band. The forma- tion energy values for neutral and charged species provide predictions that could be verified from thermometry ex- periments. Identification of these transitions would fur- ther assist in the identification of the AFM model present in a specific thin film sample. We trust this would con- tribute to clarify disagreements among several studies. The changes in PDOS induced by defects have also been shown to carry interesting local structure in mag- netic moment polarizations. The symmetries of these spin clouds reflect the underlying crystal symmetries and should be detectable with the use of spin polarized scanning tunneling spectroscopy. We trust our results would motivate further theoretical and experimental ex- plorations of the microscopic details of point defects in this interesting system. We also hope that these results would contribute towards clarifying some of the contro- versial characteristics of CrN thin films. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The work was supported by National Science Foun- dation grant DMR-1508325. Most calculations were performed at the Ohio Supercomputing Center under project PHS0219. ∗ ulloa@ohio.edu 1 J. M. D. Coey, Magnetism and Magnetic Materials, 1st ed. (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2009). 8 2 T. Jungwirth, X. Marti, P. Wadley, and J. Wunderlich, Nature Nanotechnology 11, 231 (2016). 3 V. Baltz, A. Manchon, M. Tsoi, T. Moriyama, T. Ono, and Y. Tserkovnyak, Rev. Mod. Phys. 90, 015005 (2018). 4 B. Navinsek and S. Seal, The Journal of The Minerals, Metals & Materials Society 53, 51 (2001). 5 P. Zilske, D. Graulich, M. Dunz, and M. Meinert, Applied Physics Letters 110, 192402 (2017). 6 D. Gall, C.-S. Shin, R. T. Haasch, I. Petrov, and J. E. Greene, Journal of Applied Physics 91, 5882 (2002). 7 L. M. Corliss, N. Elliott, and J. M. Hastings, Physical Review 117, 929 (1960). 8 A. S. Botana, F. Tran, V. Pardo, D. Baldomir, and P. Blaha, Physical Review B 85, 235118 (2012). 9 L. Zhou, F. K ̈ormann, D. Holec, M. Bartosik, B. Grabowski, J. Neugebauer, and P. H. Mayrhofer, Phys- ical Review B 90, 184102 (2014). 10 A. Filippetti, W. E. Pickett, and B. M. Klein, Physical Review B 59, 7043 (1999). 11 K. Alam, S. M. Disseler, W. D. Ratcliff, J. A. Borchers, R. Ponce-P ́erez, G. H. Cocoletzi, N. Takeuchi, A. Foley, A. Richard, D. C. Ingram, and A. R. Smith, Physical Review B 96, 104433 (2017). 12 C. Constantin, M. B. Haider, D. Ingram, and A. R. Smith, Applied Physics Letters 85, 6371 (2004). 13 K. Inumaru, K. Koyama, N. Imo-oka, and S. Yamanaka, Physical Review B 75, 054416 (2007). 14 P. Subramanya Herle, M. Hegde, N. Vasathacharya, S. Philip, M. Rama Rao, and T. Sripathi, Journal of Solid State Chemistry 134, 120 (1997). 15 C. X. Quintela, F. Rivadulla, and J. Rivas, Applied Physics Letters 94, 152103 (2009). 16 T. Rojas and S. E. Ulloa, Physical Review B 96, 125203 17 A. Filippetti and N. Hill, Physical Review Letters 85, 5166 18 Z. Zhang, H. Li, R. Daniel, C. Mitterer, and G. Dehm, Physical Review B 87, 014104 (2013). 19 E. Mozafari, B. Alling, P. Steneteg, and I. A. Abrikosov, Physical Review B 91, 094101 (2015). 20 P. Giannozzi, S. Baroni, N. Bonini, M. Calandra, R. Car, C. Cavazzoni, D. Ceresoli, G. L. Chiarotti, M. Cococcioni, I. Dabo, A. D. Corso, S. Fabris, G. Fratesi, S. de Giron- coli, R. Gebauer, U. Gerstmann, C. Gougoussis, A. Kokalj, M. Lazzeri, L. Martin-Samos, N. Marzari, F. Mauri, R. Mazzarello, S. Paolini, A. Pasquarello, L. Paulatto, C. Sbraccia, S. Scandolo, G. Sclauzero, A. P. Seitsonen, A. Smogunov, P. Umari, and R. M. Wentzcovitch, Jour- nal of Physics: Condensed Matter 21, 395502 (2009). 21 A. I. Liechtenstein, V. I. Anisimov, and J. Zaanen, Phys- ical Review B 52, 5467 (1995). 22 A. Herwadkar and W. Lambrecht, Physical Review B 79, 23 M. Cococcioni and S. de Gironcoli, Physical Review B 71, 24 C. Freysoldt, J. Neugebauer, and C. G. Van de Walle, Physica Status Solidi (B) Basic Research 248, 1067 (2011). 25 G. Hautier, A. Miglio, G. Ceder, G.-M. Rignanese, and X. Gonze, Nature Communications 4, 2292 (2013). 26 C. Freysoldt, B. Grabowski, T. Hickel, J. Neugebauer, G. Kresse, A. Janotti, and C. G. Van De Walle, Reviews of Modern Physics 86, 253 (2014). 27 F. Tran and P. Blaha, Physical Review Letters 102, 226401