Highly Integrated Organic-Inorganic Hybrid Architectures by Non-Covalent Exfoliation of Graphite and Assembly with Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles Schönamsgruber[a], Torsten Schunk[a], Benjamin Butz[c], Erdmann Spiecker[c], Frank [a] M. Marcia, C. Vinh, Dr. G. Abellán, Dr. J. Schönamsgruber, Dr. T. Schunk, Dr. F. Hauke and Prof. Dr. A. Hirsch Department of Chemistry and Pharmacy, Chair of Organic Chemistry II Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg Henkestraße 42, 91054 Erlangen, Germany E-mail: andreas.hirsch@fau.de [b] M. Marcia, Dr. G. Abellán, Dr. F. Hauke and Prof. Dr. A. Hirsch Joint Institute of Advanced Materials and Processes (ZMP) Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg Dr.-Mack Str. 81, D-90762 Fürth, Germany [c] C. Dolle, Dr. B. Butz and Prof. Dr. E. Spiecker Institute of Micro- and Nanostructure Research Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg Cauerstrasse 6, 91058 Erlangen, Germany Abstract: Herein, we report an easy, straightforward, and versatile approach to build 0D/2D hybrid nanoparticle/graphene architectures by means of non-covalent chemistry and a modified Layer-by-Layer assembly. Three water soluble perylene diimides were employed to efficiently exfoliate pristine graphite into positively charged few- and multilayer graphene flakes. Further combination of these cationic building blocks with anionic zinc oxide nanoparticles led to the formation of tailor-made hybrid films via electrostatic and van der Waals interactions. These supramolecular hybrid nano-structures were thoroughly characterized by UV/Vis and Raman spectroscopy, AFM as well as electron microscopy, showing outstanding long-range homogeneity and high integrity in the centimetre-scale, uniform nanometric thickness between 60 – 100 nm and a close contact between the different building blocks. Due to their straightforward assembly. These architectures can be considered as promising candidates for numerous advanced applications especially in the field of energy storage and conversion. Introduction Graphene is a high performance nanomaterial, both what fundamental physical properties and practical applications is concerned. In order to fully exploit its promising potential, chemical functionalization, and integration into hybrid-architectures is of great importance. Recently, a couple of first proto-type functionalization protocols have been developed and examples for their implementation into new multilayer heterostructures have been accomplished. Among others, the construction of nanoparticles-graphene (NP/G) hybrids has been proposed allowing the combination of the complementary properties of the different counterparts as well as the generation of intriguing synergistic effects. In particular, the integration of graphene-based moieties with metal oxides such as zinc oxide-(ZnO)-NP is very appealing. As a matter of fact, ZnO is a large-band-gap semiconductor. It is photocatalytically active under UV irradiation and at the same time highly biocompatible. Therefore, novel ZnO-NP/G hybrid nano-structures have been recently proposed with the purpose of applications in the field of energy storage and conversion as well as in biosensors. Furthermore, the chemistry of ZnO-NP is very well established in our group as we have developed several methods for their chemical functionalization in solution. Up to date, the most common strategies for bottom-up synthesis of ZnO-NP/G hybrid structures, where G is generally reduced graphene oxide (rGO), rely on in situ and ex situ methods as well as on several chemical/electrochemical deposition approaches. Additionally, the formation of hierarchical architectures of ZnO-NP and rGO has been reported lately. However, the reduction of GO is never complete and this limits greatly the electronic mobility within the flakes. Moreover, the deposition density as well as the uniformity of the NP on GO are always strongly affected by the number of oxygen-containing functional groups and therefore by the quality of the GO material. Therefore, and in order to preserve the sp2-carbon network of pristine graphene layers, non-covalent exfoliation of graphite both in organic and aqueous media is an attractive choice.[2a] Along these lines our group has developed the chemistry of water-soluble perylene diimide (PDI)-based surfactants. Their successful application as dispersing candidates has been reported recently for the individualization of carbon nanotubes and exfoliation of graphite. Unfortunately, the incorporation of unoxidized exfoliated graphene within NP/G hybrid materials is not trivial, due to its very limited solubility and processability. To face this challenge, we herein present the facile and versatile formation of new graphene- based hierarchical architectures by means of non-covalent chemical functionalization of pristine graphite with tailor-made PDI surfactants followed by a modified Layer-by-Layer (LbL) assembly. Based on our easy, versatile and straightforward iterative dip-coating process, we were able to achieve functional multilayered architectures by assembling 2D-positively- charged-graphene-based building blocks with the 0D anionic ZnO-NP via electrostatic and van der Waals interactions. This conjugation leads to the formation of highly integrated organic- inorganic hybrid architectures exhibiting an intimate contact between their constituting building blocks. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report concerning the preparation of tailor- made 0D/2D NP/G hybrid nano-structures through the implementation of a modified LbL- assembly procedure starting from pristine exfoliated graphite-based nanosheets. Furthermore, the use of non-covalent functionalization with cationic PDIs allowed us to precisely control the introduction of positive charges into the exfoliated carbon material without implying the disruption of the sp2-carbon network. functionalization of graphene. Bottom: Graphical representation for the formation of PDI-functionalized few layer graphene (FLG) by PDI-assisted exfoliation of graphite – no ultrasonic treatment is needed for the graphite delamination process. Results and Discussion Our approach is straightforward and based on ubiquitously available graphite. First of all, fresh dispersions of turbostratic graphite in bi-distilled water were prepared with the aid of cationic PDIs (1–3) by gentle magnetic stirring followed by centrifugation (Figure 1). Due to the intrinsic permanent stability of the positive charges of the terminating pyridinium units, PDIs (1–3) are readily soluble in pure water. This excludes the need to employ high ionic strength buffer solutions for the exfoliation experiments, as previously reported by Englert et al., in order to avoid contamination from salt deposits which could be detrimental for the iterative dip-coating approach. The synthesis protocol of the novel ester-type dendritic PDI derivative 1 is given in the experimental section and in the SI (section 1), whereas the other water soluble, amide-type cationic pyridinium terminated PDIs (PDI 2 and 3) were synthesized according to our previously published procedure.[13d] As explained thoroughly in the SI (section 2) and as briefly highlighted in the experimental section of the manuscript, several experiments have been carried on to optimize the exfoliation process. Briefly, the ratio between the concentration of graphite and that of the PDI has been varied until the successful non-covalent functionalization was achieved for dispersions with maximized carbon uptake and absence of free-PDI molecules. By means of UV/Vis and fluorescence spectroscopy measurements, the strong energy/electronic interactions between the PDIs and the exfoliated carbon nanomaterial were investigated in solution (SI). Remarkably, PDI derivative 1 proved to be the most effective agent towards the exfoliation of graphite in comparison to PDIs 2 and 3. In particular, PDI 3 was found to be the least effective dispersing agent due to its increased solubility and reduced tendency for aggregation in comparison with derivatives 1 and 2. As a matter of fact, PDI 3 possesses longer and more flexible spacer units in its periphery, which hinder a too close packing of the PDI cores due to electrostatic repulsions and translates into a lower tendency to aggregation in comparison to PDI derivatives 1 and 2.[13d] As discussed in the SI and as reported by An et al., a more monomeric character of the exfoliation agent is generally linked to a lower exfoliation ability and therefore lower graphene content in the respective dispersions. Additionally, the fluorescence spectroscopy measurements in solution also indicated that the electronic communication for PDI 3 with the exfoliated carbon nanomaterial were less prominent with respect to those obtained for PDIs 1 and 2 (SI). Furthermore, upon exfoliation with PDI 1, the final concentration of exfoliated carbon material in solution reached values up to 0.06 mg/mL (SI), which translates into an exfoliation capability of about 5 %. This value is higher than those reported recently by Zhang et al., concerning the exfoliation of graphite with naphthalene diimide (NDI)-based surfactants in water by ultrasonication. Our approach also provides the fundamental advantage that only mild magnetic stirring is employed which avoids an excessive disruption of the exfoliated graphitic flakes, as it might happen upon prolonged sonication. After deposition by drop-casting of 1 μL of the dispersion on a Si/SiO2 wafer, the exfoliated and PDI-functionalized carbon nanomaterial was investigated in the solid state by Raman characterization (Figure 2). dispersion on a Si/SiO2 wafer and after drying: PDI 1, blue trace; PDI 2, red trace; PDI 3, black trace. A) Laser excitation at λexc = 532 nm; B) λexc = 633 nm. *Raman peaks corresponding to the PDI moiety. In both A and B pictures, the depicted Raman spectra represent the mean spectra of 1680 recorded point spectra and they were normalized with respect to the intensity of the G-band. For each sample, Raman maps containing 1680 individual spectra were collected and the mean Raman spectra were compared. The in-depth spectroscopic characterization of these hybrids revealed the presence of a strong electronic communication between the adsorbed PDI moieties and the exfoliated carbon material. The Raman analysis of the different hybrids, measured with an excitation wavelength of 532 nm (Figure 2A), shows the coexistence of the PDI spectra and that of the exfoliated material in perfect agreement with the results of Kozhemyakina et al. The observation of a minor contribution of a residual fluorescence background of the PDIs is also possible, although the electronic interaction results averagely in a significant fluorescence quenching. The non- covalent functionalization of the extended sp2-carbon π-surface by means of the formation of PDI surface adsorption also resulted in a red-shift of the positions of the G- and 2D-band of the exfoliated material and led to a p-doping of this carbon allotrope. In addition, the intensity and the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the 2D-band is also drastically affected. As a direct consequence, the 2D-band appeared to be broadened in comparison to pristine un- functionalized graphene sheets and the respective 2D/G intensity ratio yielded values smaller than 1, as usually reported for highly non-covalent functionalized graphene. In order to better account for the quality of the exfoliated graphene material and to avoid the interference of absorption/emission phenomena from the attached PDI molecules, samples were also characterized with a laser excitation of 633 nm (Figure 1B). In fact, as reported by Kozhemyakina et al., at this wavelength the absorption of the PDI core is greatly reduced and only a few of its residual Raman bands may be superimposed on the Raman profile of the exfoliated nanocarbon material. As depicted in Figure 2B, the 2D/G intensity ratio is smaller than 1 and the FWHM of the 2D-band is greater than 40 cm-1, which clearly indicates that the non-covalent functionalization driven exfoliation process led to the formation of PDI- functionalized few and multilayer graphene (PDI/FLG and PDI/MLG) hybrid nano-structures. Generally, the term FLG is attributed to aggregates consisting of less than 10 layers. Nevertheless, the thickness of MLG flakes can vary between 10 and 100 layers. Due to the fact, that the thickness of our final functionalized graphene material is comprised between 10 and 15 layers (averagely 12 layers from electron microscopy measurements, vide infra) we will define it as PDI/FLG in the following. In order to acquaint for the stability of the PDI/FLG hybrids against washing in the solid state, the wafers prepared for the Raman characterization were washed by spin coating with water (1 mL) and with methanol (1 mL). After each washing step, the samples were dried and Raman characterization was performed (λexc = 532 nm). As shown in the SI, the PDI/FLG hybrids resulted to be very stable against washing, as the characteristic Raman features of both PDI and FLG components are always present in the spectra after each washing step. This finding confirms the suitability of PDI/FLG hybrids as starting building blocks for implementation in the iterative coating-based assembly with ZnO-NP. The modified LbL assembly was performed by dip-coating a cleaned glass slide alternately into a solution of ZnO-NP in ethanol and into an aqueous dispersion of PDI (1–3)/FLG sheets. ZnO-NP of ca. 5 nm in diameter were synthesized via precipitation in ethanolic solution as previously reported by our group.[7c] The preparation protocol for the synthesis of the ZnO-NP is presented in the experimental section of the manuscript, while their characterization is given in the SI (section 3). In contrast to classical LbL approaches, no polymer layers were employed in our study in order to prevent a deterioration of the intimate contact between the different building blocks. by means of an iterative dip-coating approach: I) Cleaned glass slide; II) deposition of a layer of ZnO- NP; III) formation of the [ZnO-NP/PDI/FLG]n hybrid structure. The highlighted section depicts a schematic representation of the intricated assembly of the ZnO-NP and the PDI/FLG building blocks obtained in the course of the assembly approach – structure of the hybrid clarified by HRTEM investigations. As depicted in Figure 3, ZnO-NP were first deposited on a cleaned glass slide (I) which was subsequently rinsed with ethanol and dried with compressed air. Afterwards, the slide coated with the ZnO-NP (II) was immersed in the PDI/FLG aqueous dispersion, then rinsed with bi- distilled water and dried to obtain the first hybrid nano-structure ([ZnO-NP/PDI/FLG]1, III). After four repetitions of this procedure, a hybrid graphene-based architecture could be obtained via electrostatic and van der Waals interactions between the anionic charged ZnO-NPs and the positively charged groups of the PDI moieties, [ZnO-NP/PDI/FLG]4. The growth was stopped after 4 repetitions in order to prepare ultra-thin films which could be successfully investigated by electron microscopy. Indeed, the strong π-π stacking interactions between the PDI core and the basal plane of the extended π-carbon allotrope allowed the efficient incorporation of functionalized FLG sheets into the hybrid nanomaterial assembly. At this point, it is worth to mention that upon integration of the PDI/FLG sheets by successive coating, further re-aggregation by π-π stacking interactions might take place and lead to the presence of highly dispersed and functionalized graphitic flakes with heterogeneous thickness within the [ZnO-NP/PDI/FLG]4 hybrid nano-architectures, as observed by electron microscopy measurements (vide infra). The assembly of the [ZnO-NP/PDI/FLG]n nano-structures was monitored by UV/Vis spectroscopy. By plotting the absorption at 338 nm (ZnO-NP absorption) and at 498 nm (PDI absorption) against the number of repetitions we obtained a linear correlation. As depicted in Figure 4, the experimental values for the absorption collected for PDI 1 could be fitted linearly at both wavelengths. Such good linear correlations are generally indicative for the successful LbL-deposition and point towards the formation of highly hierarchical hybrid architectures. Similar results were obtained for PDI 2 and 3 (SI, section 4). at 338 nm (squares) and at 498 nm (dots), against the number of repetitions (PDI = 1). However, as previously depicted, the interaction of PDI 3 with the FLG sheets was less prominent in comparison with PDI 1 and 2. For this reason, the in-depth sample characterization of the [ZnO-NP/PDI/FLG]4 nano-architectures was only carried out with hybrid assemblies obtained with PDI 1 and 2 as exfoliating and dispersing agents. In order to obtain more information about the intimate structure within the hybrid nano- structures of the [ZnO-NP/PDI/FLG]4 with PDI 1 or 2, Raman spectroscopy, atomic force microscopy (AFM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) measurements have been carried out. Raman characterization was performed systematically in order to analyze the quality and homogeneity of the deposited material after the iterative dip-coating process. Raman maps were recorded which showed that the surface of the assembled hybrid nano-structures is highly homogeneous for, at least, areas of about 40 μm2. Indeed, Figure 5A shows a 19 x 20 μm2 mapping highlighting the ratio between the PDI peak located at 1383 cm-1 and the G-band from FLG (IPDI/IG)e. The mean spectra for the [ZnO-NP/PDI/FLG]4 assemblies with PDI 1 or 2 are presented in Figure 5B. In both spectra, the typical features of the PDI/FLG hybrids are clearly discernible, whereas the position of the 2D-band appears to be red-shifted of ca. 20 cm-1 in comparison to Figure 2A. of the PDI peak located at 1383 cm-1. B) Mean Raman spectra for the [ZnO-NP/PDI/FLG]4 hybrid nano- architectures: PDI 1, blue trace; PDI 2, red trace; λexc = 532 nm. *Raman peaks corresponding to the PDI moiety. The Raman spectra are the mean value of 36 recorded spectra (measured area ca. 40 μm2) and they were normalized for the intensity of the G-band. cross-section lamella prepared by focused ion beam. C) HRTEM of mixed film, FLG, and several ZnO- NP are highlighted. D) SE image and EDX mappings at 3 kV in the SEM showing the spatial distribution of C, Zn, O, and Si in the investigated area. Photo of the sample geometry highlighting the measured cross sections (A), position 1 (B), position 2 (C), position 3 (D), position 4 (E), position 5 (F), showing a remarkable homogeneity of layer thickness. To gain a deeper insight in the hybrid nano-structures, AFM characterization was performed This represents a good component distribution and sample homogeneity as the PDI/FLG flakes have a moderate dimension within the hybrid. It is also worth to take into account that films grown by LbL-like processes might lead the introduction of imperfections (such as holes) in the material, as already reported for similar oligoelectrolyte multilayer films by Rosenlehner et al. Furthermore, it was determined that the surface of the hybrids was smoother in presence of FLG sheets as the average root mean square roughness was found to be about 6.5, significantly lower than that measured without FLG sheets, i.e. 10.5 (SI). In order to further analyze the morphology and distribution of the different building blocks within the film, we used a combination of FIB/SEM and HRTEM, employing a FEI Helios NanoLab660 and a Philips CM300 as well as a FEI Titan Themis3 300 microscope. The top-view (imaging in SEM with secondary electrons, Figure 6A) of the coated glass slide reveals a homogeneous covering of the whole surface area with a certain roughness (see also AFM characterization in the SI). To evaluate the distribution of the compounds within the layered system a lift-out lamella was prepared and investigated subsequently by TEM at 300 kV (CM300) or 200kV (FEI Titan Themis3 300) accelerating voltage. To enhance the conductivity of the films and to facilitate the lamella preparation two carbon threads (ca. 14 nm thick) were evaporated onto the sample in order to minimize charging during the ion-milling. For protection of the sensitive layers a bar of Pt precursor was deposited via electron beam deposition, followed by ion beam deposition and two trenches were milled using Ga+ ions at 30 kV accelerating voltage (Figure 6B). To check the thickness of the film several trenches were milled at different positions on the glass slide confirming an outstanding homogeneous thickness between 60–100 nm (Figure 7 and SI). A lamella of the hybrid nano-structure of [ZnO-NP/PDI/FLG]4 with PDI 1 was prepared, attached to an Omniprobe-grid and thinned to a thickness of 80 nm for the HRTEM investigation (SI). A spatially resolved EDXS mapping was conducted using the SEM at 3 keV beam energy (Figure 6D), confirming the Zn-containing nanoparticles of ZnO on the SiO2 substrate. The HRTEM investigation showed a distribution of ZnO-NP with a size of approximately 5 nm with embedded graphitic flakes, supporting the model picture of the [ZnO-NP/PDI/FLG]4 hybrid nano-structure presented in Figure 3, in clear contrast with the idealized picture usually associated to films grown by classical LbL methods. Further analysis revealed the presence of an intricate structure consisting of a flake with a thickness of ca. 5 nm (~13 layers) and interlayer distance of ~0.39 nm (Figure 6C) completely surrounded by a ZnO-NP matrix (see also SI, section 4, for additional measurements). The crystalline nature of the ZnO-NP was confirmed by the HRTEM investigation, corroborating the results of the EDXS. The 5 nm size of the NP is also in good agreement with the acquired DLS data presented in the SI. Moreover, this study reveals that the assembly of the 0D NP and the non-covalent functionalized 2D FLG leads to the formation of highly homogeneous centimeter-scale thin films consisting of entangled structures with an improved interfacial contact between the different constituents in the nanometric range – a matter of utmost importance to develop new functional materials. Conclusions In summary, by the exfoliation of graphite and the attachment of tailor-made cationic PDI surfactants to FLG flakes, positively charged functionalized 2D graphene-based hybrids are formed. These building blocks can easily be conjugated with anionic 0D ZnO-NP by means of a straightforward and versatile iterative dip-coating process. The full characterization of these hybrid supramolecular architectures revealed the formation of ultra-thin films with outstanding thickness, centimeter-scale homogeneity, and with an entangled structure exhibiting a close contact between the organic and inorganic building blocks. Due to their low cost and high processability, the reported [ZnO-NP/PDI/FLG]n hybrid nano-architectures exhibit a interesting potential for application in the field of energy storage and conversion. Further work along this line is currently underway in our laboratories. Experimental Section Materials Commercially available reagents were purchased from Sigma Aldrich and, if not otherwise noted, used without any further purification. All analytical-reagent grade solvents were purified by distillation. Turbostratic graphite powder (serial nr. 2449.363) and sulfuric acid (98%) were purchased from VWR International Inc.; bi-distilled water from Carl Roth Inc. Synthesis was synthesized according to Kuhnen-Clausen et al. while the precursor PDI, whose structure is reported in Figure S1 in the SI, according to Schmidt et al.[13a] In a 50 mL round bottom flask 0.25 g (0.23 mmol) of the precursor PDI and 0.38 g (2.79 mmol) HOBt were dissolved in 20 mL dry DMF. After cooling to 0 °C, 0.57 g (2.79 mmol) of DCC were hydroxyethyl)pyridinium bromide were subsequently added and the solution was furthermore stirred for three days. Afterwards the formed precipitate of DCU was filtrated and the solvent removed under reduced pressure. The residue was dissolved in a small amount of MeOH and precipitated with acetone for several times. Yield: 0.43 g (0.17 mmol, 74 %). 1931 [M-2 branches-3 Br]+. EA: C122H156Br6N10O18.H2O: calcd. (%): C 57.51, H 6.25, N 5.50; found: C 57.12, H 6.11, N 5.72. IR (ATR): νν� = 3324, 2932, 2852, 1692, 1654, 1625, 1577, 1346, 1244, 811 cm-1. UV/Vis (H2O): λmax = 320, 475, 498, 540 nm. Synthesis of PDI 2 and 3: The synthesis of these two derivatives was performed according to Schönamsgruber et al.[13d] Preparation of the PDI-FLG hybrid: Fresh solutions of PDIs 1–3 were prepared in bi-distilled water and used to disperse turbostratic graphite by mild magnetic stirring (1400 rpm) at room temperature. Typically, 10 mL-snap cap vials were employed. By carefully controlling the ratio between the PDI and graphite, the best parameters were successfully defined where all the PDI molecules are attached to the exfoliated material in solution and no free PDI is left (cG, I = 1.2 mg/mL; cPDI = 10-5 M). The exfoliation was further optimized by time–dependent exfoliation experiments. Finally, the stability of the PDI–FLG hybrid against washing was proven by Raman spectroscopy. For detailed explanations, please refer to the SI (section 2). Synthesis of the ZnO-NP: ZnO-NP were synthesized according to a procedure previously reported by our group.[7c] Namely, 550 mg zinc acetate dehydrate was dissolved in 25 mL boiling ethanol and cooled down to 38 °C. Then, 125 mg LiOH was dissolved in 25 mL boiling ethanol and cooled down to 38 °C. Afterwards, the LiOH solution was added dropwise to the zinc acetate solution under vigorous stirring. After 20 h, the ZnO-NP were obtained with a size of ca. 5.6 nm and a zeta potential value of -7.8 mV, which is in accordance to that reported by Segets et al.[7f] For UV/Vis and DLS data, please refer to the SI (section 3). Preparation of the [ZnO-NP/PDI/FLG]4 nano-architectures by an iterative dip-coating process: First of all, the glass slides were cleaned in a solution of sulfuric acid (96%) and hydrogen peroxide (2:1) for 30 minutes. Afterwards, they were rinsed with distilled water until neutrality and then dried with compressed air. For the preparation of the assemblies, a solution of ZnO-NP (1 mg/mL) in EtOH and a fresh centrifuged dispersion of PDI/FLG in bi-distilled water were employed. The immersion time was chosen of 20 minutes, adapted to previous reports from our group. ZnO-NP were first deposited on a cleaned glass slide which was subsequently rinsed with ethanol and dried with compressed air. Afterwards, the slide coated with the ZnO-NP was immersed in the PDI/FLG aqueous dispersion, then rinsed with bi- distilled water and dried to obtain the hybrid nano-structure [ZnO-NP/PDI/FLG]1. After four repetitions of this procedure, a hybrid graphene-based nano-architecture could be obtained, [ZnO-NP/PDI/FLG]4. For additional UV/Vis spectroscopy, AFM as well as further electron microscopy characterization please refer to the SI (section 4). Characterization 1H- and 13C-NMR spectroscopy were performed on Jeol JNM EX 400 and JEOL JNM GX 400 (1H: 400 MHz and 13C: 100.5 MHz), Bruker Avance 300 (1H: 300 MHz and 13C: 75 MHz). The resonance multiplicities are indicated as s (singlet), d (doublet), t (triplet), q (quartet), m (multiplet) and br (broad signal). The raw data sets were processed using the software ACD/Labs 10.0 and MestReNova Lite 5.2.5 from Mestrelab Research S.L. Mass spectrometry was conducted on a Shimadzu AXIMA Confidence, MALDI-ToF mass spectrometer, Nitrogen UV-LASER (50 Hz, 337 nm). Matrix: 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHB). IR spectroscopy was performed on a Bruker Vector 22 with an ATR RFS 100/S detector and the compounds were measured by coating the pure solid on a diamond crystal. Elemental analysis was performed on an EA 1110 CHNS from CE Instruments. Centrifugation of the PDI-FLG dispersions was carried out in a VWR 1814 Microcentrifuge at room temperature. All samples were centrifuged 30 min at 1000 rpm prior to spectroscopic characterization. UV/Vis spectra were recorded on a Perkin Elmer Lambda 1050 spectrometer (integration time 0.24 s; slit width 2 nm). Fluorescence spectra of the dispersions were measured with a Horiba Scientific Fluorolog-3 Spectrometer with a PMT detector (integration time 0.24 s; slit width 2 nm). Raman maps were recorded with a Horiba Jobin Yvon Aramis confocal Raman spectrometer equipped with a microscope (100x objective used) and an automated XYZ-table, using laser excitations of 532 and 633 nm. The PDI/FLG dispersions were analyzed by drop- casting 1 μL of the dispersion onto a Si/SiO2 (300 nm) wafer and drying (30 min at 75 °C under vacuum), while the [ZnO-NP/PDI/FLG]4 samples were studied as prepared on the glass slides. The measurements were performed with an integration time of 1 s, filter D1 and 600 gr/mm gratings. For the analysis of the [ZnO-NP/PDI/FLG]4 samples the hole and slit were kept half opened. DLS and Zetapotential were recorded on a Zetasizer Nano series ZEN3600 (Malvern Instrument Ltd. UK) dynamic light scattering analyser. AFM analyses were performed on the [ZnO-NP/PDI/FLG]4 samples as prepared on the glass slides in a Veeco di 300, nanoscope IIIa equipment. Electron Microscopy: A dual-beam instrument (FEI Helios NanoLab 660) Focused Ion Beam (SEM/FIB) has been used for imaging and site-specific preparation of cross-sectional slices. After the ex-situ evaporation of two carbon threads (ca. 14 nm) a suitable area for cross-sectioning was selected. Afterwards, a layer of Pt (> 1 μm) was deposited in the SEM by electron beam, followed by deposition with the ion beam, in order to protect the area of interest during the lamella preparation. Two trenches were milled by FIB to obtain a lamella, which was transferred to an Omniprobe grid using an Easy-lift NanoManipulator and thinned with the ion beam. The final thickness of the lamella was kept below 100 nm, to allow its characterization by HRTEM. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was performed using a CM300 UltraTWIN (Philips, Netherlands), equipped with a LaB6 filament and a nominal point resolution of 1.7 Å at the Scherzer defocus. The microscope was operated at an acceleration voltage of 300 kV. TEM images were recorded with a charged coupled device camera (TVIPS, Germany), which has an image size of 2048 × 2048 pixels. Selected analyses were performed on an aberration corrected FEI Titan Themis3 300 TEM with a high brightness field emission gun (X-FEG) operated at 200kV. EDXS measurements were carried in a FEI Helios NanoLab 660 using a large area Oxford SDD-detector (X-MaxN). The beam energy was 3 keV allowing to probe the specific X-Ray signals of C-K (270 eV), respective signal was then used to construct spatially resolved maps showing the elemental distribution. Acknowledgements The authors thank the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG – SFB 953 “Synthetic Carbon Allotropes” – projects A1 and Z2), the Cluster of Excellence Engineering of Advanced Materials (EAM) and the Interdisciplinary Center for Molecular Materials (ICMM) for the financial support. G.A. thanks the EU for a Marie Curie Fellowship (FP7/2013-IEF-627386). In addition, the research leading to these results has received partial funding from the European Union Seventh Frame-work Program under Grant Agreement No. 604391 Graphene Flagship. Finally, the authors thank Sebastian Etschel, from the groups of Prof. M. Halik and Prof. R. Tykwinski, for measuring AFM of the ZnO/PDI/FLG hybrids (SI).