Substrate-Modulated Reductive Graphene Functionalization and Andreas Hirsch[a]* [a] Ricarda A. Schäfer, Dr. Frank Hauke, Prof. Dr. Andreas Hirsch Department of Chemistry and Pharmacy & Joint Institute of Advanced Materials and Processes (ZMP) Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg Henkestr. 42, 91054 Erlangen, Germany E-mail: andreas.hirsch@fau.de [b] Konstantin Weber, Prof. Dr. Bernd Meyer Interdisciplinary Center for Molecular Materials (ICMM) and Computer-Chemistry-Center (CCC), Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Nägelsbachstraße 25, 91052 Erlangen, Germany [c] Prof. Dr. Vojislav Krstic Department of Physics, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erwin-Rommel-Straße 1, 91058 Erlangen, Germany Abstract: Covalently functionalizing mechanical exfoliated monolayer and bilayer graphenides with λ-iodanes led to the discovery that the monolayers supported on a SiO2 substrate are considerably more reactive than bilayers as demonstrated by statistical Raman spectroscopy/microscopy. Supported by DFT calculations we show that ditopic addend binding leads to much more stable products than the corresponding monotopic reactions due to much lower lattice strain of the reactions products. The chemical nature of the substrate (graphene versus SiO2) plays a crucial role. The systematic exploration of the general principles of graphene functionalization will allow the tuning of the pro-cessibility and the properties, which is the key for the devel-opment of technological applications of this 2D nano material. In this regard, the investigation and establishment of functionalization sequences on graphene deposited on substrates constitutes a very attractive scenario, since in contrast to bulk chemistry well defined conditions for the chemical transformations themselves and a very straightforward product analysis are provided. In previous studies it has been demonstrated that on-surface modifications of graphene depend on the electronic, topological, and chemical structure of the substrate. In this study we consider three possible reaction scenarios for the chemical nature of the substrate surface (surface functionalities): a) the substrate surface is inert and only one-sided (monotopic) additions are possible (Figure 1a), b) the substrate contains surface functionalities that after the initial attack of the addend R can undergo a subsequent ditopic addition to the graphene (Figure 1b), and c) the substrate is shielded by a second graphene layer. In this case the question arises whether after an initial attack of an addend R to the outer graphene layer a subsequent covalent bond formation with the graphene layer underneath is a preferred process or not (Figure 1c). In order to investigate these three reaction scenarios de-picted in Figure 1, we choose the reductive functionalization that we have recently introduced for the functionalization of both bulk graphene and surface deposited graphene. In contrast to other routes, here, the graphene is negatively charged prior to the subsequent chemical functionalization. These activated layers, known as graphenides, are then covalently attacked by suitable electrophiles such as alkyl iodides, diazonium salts, and λ -iodane compounds. considered in this study: a) monotopic reaction sequence on an inert substrate, b) ditopic reaction sequence involving a second step binding of a reactive surface functionality X, and c) potential ditopic reaction sequence involving a C-C bond formation with a second graphene layer underneath covering the substrate. Due to the reductive activation, the Fermi level is shifted and the reactivity of the graphene layer towards radical reactions is increased. In general, radical reactions on graphene are accompanied by the formation of a dangling bond. In the case of a monolayer functionalization on a surface, it can be anticipated that the substrate, providing functional entities, can interact with this dangling bond of the deposited graphene flake, changing a monotopic addition sequence into the ditopic functionalization scenario b). Bilayer graphene, however, provides an ideal model architecture for the scenarios a) or c) (Figure 1). In this study we directly and simultaneously compare the reactivity of reduced mono- and bilayer graphene deposited on a SiO2 surface towards the reaction with bis-(4-(tert-butyl)phenyl)iodonium hexafluorophosphate (see ESI, Figure S1), which allows us for the first time to address the question raised in Figure 1. A detailed Raman spectroscopic and microscopic analysis of the reaction products was corroborated by a systematic density-functional theory (DFT) study. With the purpose to address the question of a monotopic versus a ditopic functionalization scenario and to investigate the different reactivity of mono- and bilayer graphene, we mechanically exfoliated graphene and obtained one distinct flake which exhibits a monolayer area adjacent to a bilayer region. This flake was reductively activated by the addition of a blue solution of solvated NaK3 in 1,2-dimethoxyethane (DME) (GA, Scheme 1) – experimental conditions see ESI. The activation was followed by the addition of bis-(4-(tert- butyl)phenyl)iodonium hexafluorophosphate in DME causing an arylation of the deposited graphene sheet (GB, Scheme 1). This arylation is based on the formation of an aryl radical, which is formed due to a charge transfer reaction from the charged graphene to the iodonium salt. Scheme 1. Arylation of a graphene flake (monolayer (ML) and bilayer (BL) graphene) deposited on a DME. In order to investigate the reaction product, we applied statistical Raman spectroscopy (SRS) and microscopy (SRM) before and after the reductive activation as well as after addition of the trapping reagent. The mapping of the three prominent Raman bands of graphene, namely the D-band at 1350 cm-1, the G-band at 1582 cm-1, and the 2D-band at 2700 cm-1 and their correlation, clearly allows for the identification of the mono- and bilayer areas present in the mechanical exfoliated flake (Figure 2a,b). In the I2D/IG map, the monolayer area appears yellow to red, which correlates to a I2D/IG ratio of 3.0 to 4.0. Point spectra of this area A show a Lorentzian-shaped 2D band with a FHWM of 27 cm-1 (Figure 2g), clearly demonstrating its single layer character. In contrast, the blue and green colored parts of the map in area B display a I2D/IG ratio of 0.8 to 1.2 and a broad 2D band. The ID/IG ratio map of the same flake, which can be used for the quantification of defects, illustrates the flawless carbon lattice of the starting material. After the functionalization the image has changed. Now the ID/IG ratio map displays a light blue region with a ID/IG ratio of 0.6 and a green region with a ID/IG ratio of 2.0, which can be associated with the bilayer part B and the monolayer part A of the graphene flake (Figure 2d). Based on the spectral information, the mean defect distance LD can be calculated. The respective LD map (Figure 2e) nicely confirms the results obtained from the ID/IG ratio analysis, as the LD of the area A, with a maximum intensity value of 8, is drastically lower than the values obtained for area B. The following translation of the defect distance LD into the degree of functionalization Φ exhibits values of 0.05 to 0.06 for the monolayer section A, in comparison to Φ-values of 0.02 obtained for the bilayer region B (Figure 2f). Thus, it becomes apparent that in the monolayer region A a higher amount of addends have been bound to the basal plane, in contrast to the bilayer section B where almost no functionalization has occurred, which is also nicely corroborated by the respective single point spectra presented in Figure 2g and 2h. In order to ensure that functionalization is only due to the depicted covalent binding of the electrophile or surface functionalities of the substrate, we also carried out an in situ characterization (under strict inert gas conditions) of an activated mono/bilayer graphene flake by means of SRM. The corresponding ID/IG ratio map (Figure S3) showed clearly that no defects are introduced by side reactions with the solvent since the ID/IG ratio of 0.2 for the monolayer area and a ID/IG ratio of 0.15 for the bilayer section stayed constant. Furthermore, a shift of the G-band position as well as a decrease in the 2D-band intensity has been observed. Both are known to be characteristic for doping effects. Therefore, we can safely exclude any covalent side reactions. For a better understanding of the nature of the functionalization in the case of graphene deposited on a substrate and for a comparison of the results obtained in the bulk functionalization scenario, we also applied temperature-dependent Raman spectroscopy on our samples (Figure S4). bilayer region B): a) I2D/IG and b) ID/IG map of pristine mechanically exfoliated graphene, c) I2D/IG and d) ID/IG map of functionalized graphene, e) LD map of functionalized graphene, f) Φ-map of functionalized graphene, g) Raman spectra of monolayer area A and bilayer area B of pristine graphene and h) Raman spectra of monolayer area A and bilayer area B of functionalized graphene. Starting from 40 °C, the functionalized graphene flake was mapped in intervals of 50 °C. The SRM images of the ID/IG ratio exhibit a constant value between 0 and 0.4 for the bilayer area. The small D-band vanishes at 100 °C. In the monolayer section of the flake at this temperature a very prominent D-band, indicative for a high degree of covalent functionalization, is still observed. The ID/IG values (3.0 to 3.5) in the monolayer area at 40 °C decrease to values of 1.6 to 2.0 at 150 °C and finally to 0.6 at 300 °C. The evolution of the depicted point spectra nicely visualizes the trend obtained for the whole map. In addition, this temperature-dependent ID/IG profile perfectly correlates with the thermogravimetric data of a bulk sample (Figure S5), again proving the successfully covalent binding of the aryl addends. Based on all these experimental results it becomes evident that the reductive functionalization of mono- and bilayer graphene leads to a highly preferred addend binding of the monolayers directly deposited on the Si/SiO2 substrate. But why is that the case? As mentioned above, we anticipate that the chemical nature of the substrate should play an important role and could give rise to secondary attacks antaratopic to the addends already bound. Hence, the higher degree of functionalization of the monolayer area can be attributed to scenario b), where a reactive structure delivers a possible reactant for a ditopic addition involving reactive surface functionalities of the substrate. In our case, the substrate surface contains SiOH groups and residual water. On the other hand, in the case of the graphene bilayer structure of area B, the bottom graphene layer acts as an inert/unreactive support and resembles scenario a). For a deeper understanding of the reactivity patterns we performed theoretical calculations on the DFT level (for details see ESI). For this purpose, the binding energy of the addends was calculated by taking the energy difference between functionalized and unfunctionalized graphene mono- and bilayers and the radical species. For single addends the binding energy represents the strength of the C–C bond which is formed upon covalent bond formation. To simplify the calculations, a methyl instead of the 4-(tert-butyl)phenyl group was used. Since the methyl group is the smallest organic unit to form C–C bonds with graphene, a lower limit for the proximity effects will be obtained when the degree of functionalization is increased in the calculations. For a single methyl group on a freestanding graphene monolayer (Figure 3b) we find a rather weak C–C bond strength of only 48 kJ/mol. This is considerably less than what we obtained for the C–C bond strength of methyl groups on fullerenes (155 kJ/mol) and on carbon nanotubes (179 and 100 kJ/mol for (6,0) and (10,0) tubes, respectively). Such a weak bond strength should lead to a rather low degree of monotopic (one-sided) functionalization of graphene and corresponds to scenario a). However, if the bottom of the graphene layer is simultaneously saturated at a neighboring C atom as in scenario b), for example by the adsorption of an OH group (Figure 3a), the C–C bond strength of the methyl group increases to 209 kJ/mol. Thus, the experimentally observed functionalization of monolayer graphene on Si/SiO2 is most likely accompanied by a significant addition of residual species from the Si/SiO2 substrate, enabling a strain free ditopic reaction pathway as shown in scenario b). In which particular way the bottom side of the graphene layer is attacked by the surface, be it a SiOH-group or another functionality (X, Figure 1b), plays a minor role. For systematic calculations we used a Ni(111) surface as a simple tool to guarantee that all C atoms that need to be saturated automatically have a binding partner. Since the Ni(111) surface has the same lattice constant as graphene, all C atoms of one graphene sublattice sit on-top of Ni and can form a bond to an Ni atom whenever they need to be saturated. Indeed, for the graphene monolayer on the Ni(111) substrate (Figure 3c), the C–C bond strength with 194 kJ/mol remains almost the same as for the OH-saturated freestanding layer. monolayer graphene, b) freestanding monotopic functionalized mono-layer graphene, c) functionalized monolayer graphene on Ni substrate, d) functionalized bilayer graphene on Ni substrate, e) and f) possible interconnections of functionalized bilayer graphene on Ni substrate. For the supported bilayer we obtain a C–C bond strength for the methyl group of 60 kJ/mol (Figure 3d). This is basically identical to the result for monotopic functionalization of freestanding monolayer graphene, which is exactly what is expected if it is assumed that the second graphene sheet in the bilayer shields the upper layer from being saturated at the bottom as shown in scenario a). However, also for the bilayer a saturation mechanism can, in principle, be anticipated: two C atoms with on-top stacking in the bilayer form a bond and, in turn, a neighboring C atom in the second graphene layer undergoes covalent binding to the surface (Figure 3e) as proposed in scenario c). In our geometry optimizations, however, such a scenario turned out to be unstable. The reason is the high cost in strain energy since the C– C distance in the bilayer of 3.26 Å has to reduce to typical values for a C–C bond of about 1.4– 1.6 Å. Although the sp3 hybridization of the functionalized C atom in the upper layer and the saturated C atom in the lower layer help to bring the two C atoms with on-top stacking closer together, it is not sufficient that a single C–C bond can form. This nicely explains the low degree of experimental functionalization for the bilayer graphene part. Theoretically, this limitation might be overcome at higher degrees of bilayer functionalization, when several interlayer C–C bonds could mutually stabilize each other. Indeed, for a functionalization degree of 50 % or 100 %, stable structures with interlayer C–C bonds are found in the geometry optimization (Figure 3f). However, the binding energy of the methyl groups is dramatically decreased to even negative values, i.e., the functionalized bilayer would gain energy by spontaneous repulsion of methyl groups. At a functionalization degree of 50 % or 100 %, the methyl groups are much too densely packed and repel each other. At a functionalization degree of 33 %, the highest possible coverage with no methyl groups on neighboring carbon sites (within the same sublattice), the interlayer C–C bonds are already unstable and do not form. This is reflected by a methyl binding energy of 49 kJ/mol, which is already close to the value of 60 kJ/mol for the dilute limit of bilayer functionalization. In conclusion, we have discovered that the reductive functionalization of monolayer graphene on a substrate leads to a higher degree of functionalization than the corresponding functionalization of bilayer graphene. Significantly, the chemical reactivity of the graphene monolayer supporting substrate plays a critical role. A reactive substrate can stabilize intial adducts by saturating dangling bonds antaratopic to external addends. This pathway is absent if the substrate is inert, as exemplified in bilayer graphene involving a graphene buffer layer. Our experimental results are nicely corroborated by theoretical DFT calculations. If exclusively supratopic additions are possible, a very high amount of strain energy on the C-lattice accumulates continuously. This limits the maximum amount of addend binding considerably. As a consequence, much lower degrees of functionalization can be expected compared with ditopic reactions allowing also for antaratopic addend binding. Acknowledgements The authors thank the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) for financial support through Collaborative Research Center SFB 953 “Synthetic Carbon Allotropes” (Project A1, B12, and C1). The research leading to these results has re-ceived partial funding from the European Union Seventh Framework Programme under grant agreement no.604391 Graphene Flagship. K.W. thanks the Fonds der Chemischen Industrie FCI for a Chemiefonds Fellowship.