Noncovalent Functionalization of Black Phosphorus [a] Dr. G. Abellán, V. Lloret, U. Mundloch, M. Marcia, Dr. F. Hauke, Prof. A. Hirsch, Chair of Organic Chemistry II and Joint Institute of Advanced Materials and Processes (ZMP), Friedrich-Alexander- Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Henkestr. 42, 91054 Erlangen, Germany. E-mail: *andreas.hirsch@fau.de [b] Dr. M. Varela, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Instituto Pluridisciplinar & Facultad de CC. Físicas, Madrid 28040, Spain. [c] Dr. C. Neiss, Prof. A. Görling, Lehrstuhl für Theoretische Chemie, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Egerlandstrasse 3, 91058 Erlangen, Germany. Abstract: The first non-covalent functionalization of black phosphorus (BP) is presented. The treatment of BP with electron- withdrawing 7,7,8,8-tetracyano-p-quinodimethane (TCNQ) leads to electron transfer from BP to the organic dopant. On the other hand, the non-covalent interaction of BP with perylene diimide is mainly due to van-der-Waals interactions but also leads to a considerable stabilization of the BP flakes against oxygen degradation. BP has recently emerged as a very interesting new two- dimensional material. The individual layers of BP exhibit a honeycomb structure differing to that of graphene because of a marked puckering of the sp3 P-atoms Owing to its intrinsic direct bandgap being a good trade-off between charge carrier mobility and current on/off ratios and because of its unusual in- plane anisotropy, BP exhibits a tremendous potential in both electronics and optoelectronics. Few-layer nanosheets (flakes) of BP can be obtained by mechanical exfoliation of the bulk crystals as well as through solvent exfoliation. However, so far practical applications are restricted because of the instability of BP with respect to ambient oxygen and moisture. Concepts for chemical stabilization are urgently desired. Encapsulation methods have been proposed to preserve its intrinsic properties, but the chemical control over the reactivity still remains an open challenge. Recently, in collaboration with the group of Coleman, we reported the liquid exfoliation of solvent-stabilized few-layer BP flakes. During this procedure the stability at ambient conditions increased from ca. 1h for mechanically cleaved BP to ca. 200 h for 1-cyclohexyl-2-pyrrolidone (CHP)-exfoliated few-layer BP. First appealing applications beyond electronics as gas sensors, saturable absorbers and reinforcing fillers for nanocomposites could be demonstrated. The chemistry of BP, however, remains almost unexplored. So far only single flake chemistry with diazonium salts and TiL4 complexes have been reported. We describe now for the first time non-covalent functionalization of bulk BP with TCNQ and perylene bisimides (PDI) demonstrating pronounced charge-transfer and van-der-Waals- interactions. It was possible to isolate and completely characterize functionalized few-layer BP. The experimental results were supported by quantum mechanical calculations. The chemical approach with which we propose to develop the non-covalent functionalization involves the combination of pristine BP crystals with TCNQ – an extremely versatile building block for charge-transfer compounds – under inert conditions using an argon-filled glovebox (O2 < 0.1 ppm and H2O < 0.1 ppm; see methods) and mild magnetic stirring (Scheme 1). The appropriate selection of the solvent has a tremendous influence on the process. We initially anticipated that high-boiling point solvents like NMP or CHP were expected to form tightly packed solvation shells adjacent to BP surfaces acting as a barrier to oxygen/water. However, a screening study with different solvents showed that surprisingly TCNQ is able to oxidize some of these systems creating charge-transfer complexes (see Supplementary Methods and Fig. S1). As depicted in Fig. 1a,b, TCNQ exhibits characteristic absorption spectra for the neutral (TCNQ), the aromatized anion radical (TCNQ·–) and the dianion (TCNQ2–). The generation of the TCNQ2– requires an exhaustive 2e– reduction (bulk electrolysis) and working under rigorous exclusion of O2. When the study was performed under extremely inert conditions as we did, several charge- transfer steps between the solvents and the TCNQ took place (Fig. S1). Indeed, the spontaneous formation of the monoanion TCNQ·– takes place for NMP or CHP, whose spectra reveal the presence of the aromatic form even after exposing the solutions to air. It is most likely that the corresponding radical-cation of the pyrrolidone is formed during this process. Therefore, a suitable selection of an inert solvent was required for developing the redox non-covalent functionalization of BP. To this end, THF turned out to be the most appropriate since and it does not react with BP. For the preparation of the targeted non-covalent hybrids between BP and TCNQ, a mixture of ca. 5 mg of grinded BP in 3mL of a 1E–5 M TCNQ solution in THF was vigorously stirred during a minimum of 3 days in the glovebox, carefully controlling the O2 content during all the working period. Indeed, the high quality of the solvent is also reflected in the absence of water absorption peaks in the nIR spectra at around 1430 nm (Fig. S1). Subsequently, a dark colloidal suspension exhibiting the characteristic Faraday-Tyndall effect was obtained. The first clue of the success was offered by UV/Vis spectroscopy, showing the exclusive formation of a species with a similar UV/Vis spectrum as the TCNQ dianion (hereinafter BP–TCNQ). Fig. 1c shows a titration experiment testing different TCNQ concentrations ranging from 1E– 5 to 1E–2M, keeping BP constant. The amount of TCNQ2– decreased with the concentration, exhibiting a marked shift in the bands for values higher than 1E–3M. Free TCNQ only appeared at concentrations ≥1E–3M, therefore, the optimal working range was 1E–5–1E–4M, which we then used for the sample preparation and further characterization. Additional evidence of the formation of the charge-transfer complex was provided by ATR-FTIR. In the ATR-FTIR spectrum of pristine THF suspensions of BP, TCNQ, and the functionalized BP (Fig. 1d), one can see that the parent TCNQ exhibits the characteristic vibration frequencies of the cyano group at ca. 2224 cm–1. Scheme 1. Functionalization scheme. (a) Representation of the functionalization of BP without sonication using a strong electron-withdrawing acceptor, TCNQ, and bulk black phosphorous, leading to the formation of charge transfer compounds consisting on few-layers BP decorated with TCNQ Second functionalization approach is based on a novel EDTA-ligand containing an integral perylene bisimide (PDI) core. (b) Schematic representation of TCNQ (top) and PDI molecules (bottom) adsorbed on BP. In stark contrast, the BP–TCNQ complex exhibits a doublet for the cyano group at 2199 and 2168 cm–1, indicative of the formation of the TCNQ·–, as well as a shoulder at around 2131 cm– 1, related to the TCNQ2– formation (Fig. S2). These observations are in accord with previously reported samples of TCNQ2–-containing coordination polymers,[21–23] and point towards the formation of an anionic TCNQ species on BP under inert conditions, as previously predicted by theoretical calculations.[24–26] Compound BP–TCNQ was also investigated by scanning Raman microscopy (SRM). Typical results are depicted in Fig. 1e-g. We have selected different areas using an optical microscope, and measured the corresponding spectra with an excitation wavelength of 532 nm (Fig. S3). All the spectra showed the characteristic modes of BP, labelled Ag1, B2g and Ag2. We performed a statistical Raman mapping measuring a selected flake in Fig. 1e. We therefore analysed and plotted the Ag1/Ag2 intensity ratio showing a well-defined image of the micrometric flake (with an overall thickness of ca. 20 nm subsequently determined by AFM, and corresponding to less than 35 layers), highlighting that there were no areas with Ag1/Ag2 < 0.4 confirming the basal planes to be slightly oxidized. However, significant differences can be observed if compared with CHP solvent-stabilized few-layers BP, in which Ag1/Ag2 > 0.5, indicative of the redox reaction with the TCNQ in addition to oxygen degradation. Control experiments under inert conditions revealed very similar results (average Ag1/Ag2 ratio around 0.6), showing a slight oxidation in the basal plane (see Fig. S4). Consequently, we searched for the characteristic bands of anionic TCNQ. Well-defined ν3 and ν4 modes at ca. 1580 and 1329 cm–1, respectively, were encountered at the flake edges, whereas only broad contributions 1 3 2 were measured in the basal planes, pointing towards a preferential accumulation of TCNQ at the edges. (Fig. S4b). Despite the contributions from residual solvent and adhesion effects, the apparent AFM thickness provides useful information about the exfoliation degree of BP–TCNQ. We have relocated under the AFM the same flake previously studied by SRM (Fig. S3). The inset in Fig. 1e shows a typical thickness of ca. 20 nm with lateral dimensions of several microns (see Fig. S5). structure of TCNQ, TCNQ·–, and TCNQ2–. The TCNQ molecule exhibits a quinonoid structure, with a high single–double bond length alternancy, where R and R are much shorter than R . (b) Electronic absorption spectra fingerprints of the different TCNQ species in THF solution. TCNQ·– absorption spectrum obtained by exhaustive exclusion of O2 in NMP, and TCNQ2– obtained in the presence of BP (see Methods). (c) Titration experiment with BP highlighting the exclusive formation of BP-TCNQ below 1E–3 M concentrations. The typical absorption bands of TCNQ·– and TCNQ2- are indicated as bars. (d) TCNQ (10–5 M) flake showing the corresponding A1g/A2g-band ratio mapping. (f) Mean Raman spectra (excitation 532 nm) of the areas indicated in (e). (g) Histogram of the A1g/A2g intensity ratio. The inset in (e) represents an AFM image of the same flake studied by SRM. The characteristic degradation protuberances usually ascribed to the formation of H3PO3 and/or H3PO4 were also evident in the topographic image (taken after the SRM analysis was finished, i.e. around 24h after its first contact with the oxygen), indicating that the interaction with the TCNQ molecules didn't prevent the degradation of the flakes (see Fig. S4). Thinner flakes can be encountered, but they also exhibit smaller lateral dimensions (< 1 micron), precluding its use in further statistical Raman analysis (see Fig. S5). M): low magnification HAADF (top left, scale bar is 200 nm), ABF image of a flake with the c axis perpendicular to the electron beam (bottom left), along with atomic resolution HAADF, down the axis (right panels). The top panel exhibits the raw data, while the bottom panel displays a Fourier filtered image. All images in false color, with the scale bars for the atomic resolution images representing 1 nm. (b) Compositional maps obtained on the edge of a flake. The top panel displays the area where an EEL spectrum image was acquired, marked with a green rectangle. The bottom panels show the P, C, and O maps, along with an RGB overlay following the same color scheme. The scale bar represents 50 nm. Herein, our strategy represents a milder alternative to our previously described sonication procedure and yields larger flakes (inset Fig. 1e and Fig. S5). For direct microscopic evidence of the non-covalent functionalization of the BP sheets we analyzed both, the pristine BP and BP–TCNQ samples, by real space techniques sensitive to both chemistry and structure such as atomic resolution aberration-corrected STEM-EELS at 80 kV. Crystal sizes were in the range of microns, as depicted in the low magnification high angle annular dark field (HAADF) image of Fig. 2a (left). An atomic resolution HAADF STEM image of the BP–TCNQ sample down the crystallographic direction is shown on the right panel (both raw and Fourier filtered data), acquired with the electron beam perpendicular to the platelet plane. The sample is highly crystalline showing the characteristic puckered structure that appears intact over wide regions, of the order of hundreds of nanometers. The lattice shows high uniformity with the presence of very few defects or dislocations. Depending on the zone axis used, the lattice can exhibit a “dumbbell” type configuration. The observed average thickness (estimated from low loss EELS measurements) revealed values in the 8–20 nm range in good accordance with the AFM measurements. Cross- sectional views of the crystals such as the annular bright field (ABF) image in the bottom panel of Fig. 2a show parallel fringes corresponding to interlayer distances of 0.5–0.6 nm, which is consistent with previous observations. In order to have an additional evidence of the TCNQ functionalization, the chemical composition of the flake was also analyzed by STEM–EELS. Fig. 2a displays the study of a flake (ca. 10 nm overall thick, corresponding to ca. 15–18 layers) suspended over a hole in order to avoid any contribution from the carbon-coated copper grid. Fig. 3b shows the chemical maps obtained from the L2,3– edges of P, the C K edge, and the O K edge, with onsets near 132, 284 and 532 eV, respectively. These maps, which are more sensitive to the surface molecule coating than HAADF imaging, have been produced by subtracting the background using a power-law fit and then integrating the remaining signal below the edges of interest, using 25 eV wide windows. Carbon signals can be observed on all areas, pointing to a homogeneous anionic TCNQ surface coverage. A significant accumulation of carbon can be detected on surface steps and flake edges, in agreement with the SRM results. On the other hand, the oxygen mapping reveals a residual contribution mainly located on the edges of the flakes, probably arising from the grid transfer into the TEM holder (< 30 sec.). Moreover, we excluded the presence of THF residues in the basal plane of the flakes by EELS analysis. Control experiments on pristine BP in THF also revealed the absence of carbon, discarding the presence of solvent residues. Additionally, EELS mapping showed the predominant presence of oxygen on the edges and terraces exhibiting highly degraded rims, with amorphous edges and the presence of holes. These results confirmed the predicted preferential edge degradation of BP (Fig. S6). To provide clearer experimental evidence of the non-covalent functionalization in BP, we took advantage of the chemical versatility of the family of perylene diimide (PDI)-based molecules. Indeed, our group has used these molecules for the non-covalent functionalization of carbon nanotubes, graphene or MoS2, exhibiting a strong absorption due to their large aromatic core that can get attached to the 2D layers via van-der-Waals interactions.[30–32] The structure of the selected molecule is depicted in Scheme 1, we used a protected EDTA-PDI molecule in order to avoid any preferential interaction of the carboxylic moieties (see Fig. S7 for synthetic information). Control experiments revealed that NMP can generate highly colored charge- transfer complexes with the PDI molecules, when working under strictly inert conditions, which exhibits a dramatic sensitivity against oxygen (see Fig. 3b and Fig. S8). This striking result will be fully developed and analyzed in a separate work. The first signature of the PDI functionalization can be substantiated by fluorescence spectroscopy (Fig. 3c). Upon excitation at 455 nm, the PDI emission exhibited a dramatic quenching of the fluorescence of ca. 66 % in the presence of BP, in excellent accordance with previous studies for graphene functionalization (Fig. 3c).. Although perylene diimides exhibit a very strong fluorescence – which usually prevents their investigation by Raman spectroscopy – we were able to relocate with AFM appropriate flakes and record a Raman spectrum of the BP–PDI comprising both the features of BP and PDI, when excited at 532 nm (Fig. 3d and Fig. S9). In presence of BP a complete quenching of the fluorescence takes place, exhibiting the characteristic signals of the PDI spectrum (Fig. 3e,f and Fig. S10). of the PDI and PDI·–. Electronic absorption spectra fingerprints of the different PDI species. (b) UV-Vis spectra of BP-PDI in THF and NMP. (c) Fluorescence emission spectra of PDI and BP–PDI in THF (cPDI = 10-4 M, dotted line); λexc = 455 nm. (d) Representative AFM image and its corresponding Raman A1g (e, λexc = 532 nm) and νAg intensities mappings (f) of the same BP–PDI flakes. The numbers denote the areas where the Raman spectra shown in (f) were taken. (g) Plot of the A1g versus νAg normalized intensities. The statistical analysis of Raman spectra comparing the Si- normalized intensities of the νAg mode of PDI with the A1g mode of BP revealed a comparable intensity ratio (Fig. 4e-g and Fig. S11–13 for additional AFM and Raman analyses). Strikingly, when we analysed the Ag1/Ag2 ratio after 2 days under ambient conditions, we observed an average value of ca. 0.79 similar to that shown by freshly exfoliated flakes and remarkably higher than that exhibited by BP– TCNQ, indicative of non-oxidized samples (Fig. S14). Additionally, we measured a substrate after 6 months stored in a glove box, observing that there is no degradation (Fig. S15). We also analysed the thermal stability of these flakes after air exposure by statistical temperature- dependent Raman spectroscopy (Fig. S16). The STEM-EELS analysis, summarized in Fig. 4, further confirmed the presence of the organic moiety on the surface of the exfoliated crystals, exhibiting flakes within a thickness range of 15–50 nm (estimated from low loss EELS). A low magnification image of a flake a few microns in size is displayed in the top panel. Flakes were crystalline, as shown by atomic resolution images. Fig. 4a (middle) exhibits an intermediate magnification ABF image exhibiting long-range crystalline order. The inset displays a high magnification HAADF image down the axis. Fig. 4a (bottom panel) shows a flake with the axis perpendicular to the electron beam. The interatomic spacing is of the order of 5.5–6.0 Å, and the surface appears coated with an organic layer a few nm thick. A study of the chemical composition by EELS is summarized in Fig. 4b, where P (red), C (green), and O (blue) maps are shown from top to bottom, along with an RGB superposition of the three of them. This analysis reveals a complete coverage of the flakes with C (the PDI moiety), being more pronounced in the edges. Very little oxygen signal was detected in this sample (within the experimental noise). This finding suggests that the PDI protective shell showed a thickness of a few nm (3–5 nm visible in the bottom panel of Fig. 4a), which acts as an encapsulation reagent preventing the environmental degradation of the BP. top to bottom: low magnification HAADF image (top), ABF image of a flake with the axis perpendicular to the electron beam (middle), along with atomic resolution HAADF, down the direction (in the inset), ABF image of the edge of a flake (bottom). All images in false color. The scale bars, from top to bottom, correspond to 500 nm, 20 nm (inset is 2 nm) and 10 nm, respectively. (b) Compositional maps, the top panel shows an HAADF image of the area where an EEL spectrum image was acquired, marked with a green rectangle. The scale bar represents 10 nm. The bottom panels show the P L2,3, C K, and O K maps from this area, along with an RGB overlay following the same color scheme. Finally, we systematically investigated the supramolecular interaction of TCNQ and PDI on BP by DFT calculations. In the case of TCNQ the oxidation of the BP flakes was confirmed. Significantly, increasing the number of layers of BP causes increasing of the amount of electron transfer. Due to the lower reduction potential of PDI only weak charge transfer was calculated (see Fig. S17 for detailed information). In conclusion, we have presented here for the first time a concept for the non-covalent organic functionalization of black phosphorus (BP). The wet-chemical treatment of BP with the electron poor and polarizable polycyclic aromatics, namely, 7,7,8,8-tetracyano-p- quinodimethane (TCNQ) molecules and a tailor-made perylene diimide leads to the formation of stable hybrids were the organic components cover and shield the surface of thin few layer BP flakes. Experimental and computational studies revealed the nature of the strong non- covalent interaction between these molecules and BP, provoking its exfoliation into few- layers. In the case of TCNQ electron transfer from the BP to the organic component takes place. The positive charge on the BP surface is stabilized by the layers underneath which is nicely supported by quantum mechanical calculations. As a consequence, even the formation of the TCNQ2- dianion is supported, which can be easily monitored by absorption spectroscopy. The functionalization with perylene diimide improves dramatically the resistance of the flakes against oxygen degradation. We expect that with this initiation of fundamental organic chemistry of black phosphorus, access to unprecedented 2D-materials is provided. The inherent modulation of the physical properties of black phosphorus will allow for targeting applications in electronics, optoelectronics, energy storage, sensors or fillers for composite reinforcement, to name a few.