1 Anomalous spin Hall magnetoresistance in Pt/Co bilayers Masashi Kawaguchi1, Daiki Towa1, Yong-Chang Lau1,2, Saburo Takahashi3 and Masamitsu Hayashi1,2* 1Department of Physics, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan2 2National Institute for Materials Science, Tsukuba 305-0047, Japan 3Institute for Materials Research, Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8577, Japan We have studied the spin Hall magnetoresistance (SMR), the magnetoresistance within the plane transverse to the current flow, of Pt/Co bilayers. We find that the SMR increases with increasing Co thickness: the effective spin Hall angle for bilayers with thick Co exceeds the reported values of Pt when a conventional drift-diffusion model is used. An extended model including spin transport within the Co layer cannot account for the large SMR. To identify its origin, contributions from other sources are studied. For most bilayers, the SMR increases with decreasing temperature and increasing magnetic field, indicating that magnon-related effects in the Co layer play little role. Without the Pt layer, we do not observe the large SMR found for the Pt/Co bilayers with thick Co. Implementing the effect of the so-called interface magnetoresistance and the textured induced anisotropic scattering cannot account for the Co thickness dependent SMR. Since the large SMR is present for W/Co but its magnitude reduces in W/CoFeB, we infer its origin is associated with a particular property of Co. *Email: hayashi@phys.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp 2 The spin Hall effect1-3 of heavy metals allows generation of spin current large enough to control the magnetization direction of a neighboring magnetic layer. The amount of spin current generated via the spin Hall effect is determined by the spin Hall angle and can vary depending on the strength of the spin orbit interaction, band filling and Berry curvature of particular orbitals, and the number of impurities that can cause spin dependent scattering. Significant effort has been made to study the spin Hall effect in heavy metal (HM)/ferromagnetic metal (FM) bilayer system as the spin current generated within the HM layer can induce magnetization switching and coherent precession, domain nucleation and domain wall motion in the FM layer. The spin current generated by the spin Hall effect can in turn influence the charge current4. In particular, the resistance of bilayers consisting of a HM layer and a ferromagnetic insulator (FI) or FM layer changes depending on the magnetization direction of the FI or FM layer5-8. The effect, known as the spin Hall magnetoresistance (SMR), scales with the square of the spin Hall angle of the HM layer. Importantly, the way the resistance depends on the magnetization direction is distinct from that of the anisotropic magnetoresistance (AMR) that takes place in the FM layer. These features allow one to use the SMR as a convenient means to extract the magnitude of spin Hall angle of the HM layer: the spin Hall angle obtained through SMR seem to agree with that estimated by other methods9. Recently, studies on SMR related effects have been increasing10; an unidirectional component of the SMR is found in HM/FM bilayers11, SMR has been observed in systems with antiferromagnets12-15, the observation of the spin Nernst effect is based on the SMR theory16-18 and the SMR analogue of the Rashba-Edelstein effect19,20 has been found in Bi based structures21. The magnetoresistance (MR) of heterostructures that include Pt/Co bilayer has been under focus recently. A MR that scales with the inverse of the Co layer thickness has been reported in 3 Pt/Co/Pt trilayers22-24. Such interfacial contribution to the MR was found to be anisotropic: the MR is different when the (in-plane) magnetization points along or when it is orthogonal to the current flow. Similarly proximity induced magnetic moments of the Pt layer can contribute to the MR via AMR25 Although not specific to the Pt/Co systems, it has been reported that texture induced anisotropic scattering can influence the MR26-28. Here we report on a systematic study of the MR in Pt/Co bilayers. We show that an anomalously large SMR emerges in Pt/Co bilayers: the SMR increases with increasing Co thickness and the extracted effective spin Hall angle for such structures exceeds the expected value of Pt. An extended drift diffusion model that includes spin current generation and diffusion in the Co layer cannot account for the anomalous SMR. The SMR increases with decreasing temperature and increasing magnetic field for thick Co bilayers, suggesting that magnon-related effects in the Co layer has little influence on the enhancement of the SMR. The large SMR diminishes for films without the Pt layer; it is also found for W/Co but the effect is reduced for W/CoFeB. We thus infer that there is a process in Co that causes the SMR to increase with increasing Co thickness. Samples are grown on silicon substrates coated with 100 nm thick oxide using RF magnetron sputtering. The film structure is sub.|0.5 Ta|dN Pt|tF Co|2 MgO|1 Ta (units of the thickness is nm). DN and tF represent the thickness of the HM and FM layers, respectively. A 0.5 nm thick Ta layer is used as a seed layer for the growth of the Pt layer. The MgO|Ta is used as a capping layer. Hall bars are created via shadow masking the deposition. The width of the Hall bars is ~0.4 mm and the distance between the voltage probes to measure the resistance is ~1.2-1.5 mm. Transport measurements are carried out in He-filled cryostat (Quantum Design, Physical Properties Measurement System). 4 The inset of Fig. 1(a) shows a schematic of the film structure together with the definition of the coordinate system. Current is passed along the x-direction. The Pt and Co thickness dependence of the resistivity is plotted in Figs. 1(a) and 1(b), respectively. The resistivity is obtained by measuring the layer thickness dependence of the sheet conductance (GXX). The fluctuation in the resistivity for thin Pt and/or Co layer films arises since the resistivity is estimated from the thickness derivative of the sheet conductance. (See the Supplementary Material (Fig. S1) for the details of the extraction of the resistivity.) The resistivity of the Pt and Co layers shows a significant thickness dependence most likely due to increased interface scattering when the thickness is reduced6,23,29. The MR of the Pt/Co bilayers are shown in Fig. 2. We measure the resistance (RXX) of the Hall bars while rotating the magnetic field in the y-z plane. We define the angle between the magnetic field (H) and the z-axis within the y-z plane as j (see Fig. 1(a)). The j dependence of RXX is fitted with a sinusoidal function R"" = R$ 1 − , cos 2φ + φ$ . From hereafter, we refer to ΔR456 as the SMR even though it may contain contributions from other MR effects. ΔR456 is respectively. The phase offset j0 is nearly zero for all films. R0 is used to estimate the sheet conductance GXX. For a given Co thickness, the characteristics of the Pt thickness dependence of ΔR456 is similar to what has been reported previously in similar systems5-8: |ΔR456 | takes a maximum and gradually decreases with increasing dPt. The trend is in agreement with the drift diffusion model established to describe the spin Hall magnetoresistance4,8 and can be considered as a fingerprint of SMR. In contrast, the Co thickness dependence of ΔR456 is different from what the drift 5 diffusion model predicts. ΔR456 increases with increasing tCo and the Co thickness at which |ΔR456| saturates depends on dPt. According to the model, however, |ΔR456| should roughly scale with 1/tCo due to current shunting into the Co layer. To illustrate the unusual characteristics of the ΔR456 found in the Pt/Co bilayers, we fit the Pt thickness dependence of the normalized ΔR456 with the drift-diffusion model. ΔR456 is normalized by a factor (xN) that takes into account current shunting into the Co layer: x8 = d8ρ; d8ρ; + t;ρ8 , where rN (rF) and dN (tF) represent the resistivity and thickness of the HM (FM) layers, respectively. (Note that N=Pt and F=Co in the experiments.) ΔR456/xN is plotted as a function of dN in Fig. 3(a). In the drift-diffusion model, here we assume transparent HM/FM interface and zero longitudinal spin absorption into the FM layer8, which returns the lower limit of the effective spin Hall angle qSH. The equation used for the fitting is: x8 = −θ>? , λ8 d8 tanh d8 2λ8 1 − 1 cosh d8 λ8 (1) where lN is the spin diffusion length of the HM layer. lN and qSH are the fitting parameters and the resulting fitted curves are shown in Fig. 3(a). The agreement between the experimental results and Eq. (1) are quite good. In Fig. 3(b) and 3(c), we show the Co thickness dependence of lN and qSH obtained from the fitting. We find that lN shows little dependence on tCo whereas qSH increases with increasing tCo. The estimated qSH does not seem to saturate with Co thickness of ~7 nm and the maximum value obtained at tCo~7 nm exceeds the effective spin Hall angle of Pt reported thus far30-32. We have also studied the FM layer thickness dependence of HM/FM bilayers with HM=W and found again an extraordinary large SMR (ΔR456/xN) only when the FM layer is Co (see Supplementary 6 material Fig. S2): ΔR456/xN matches the value of the drift-diffusion model for FM=CoFeB, as reported previously8,9,33. We thus consider the large ΔR456/xN found in Pt/Co bilayers is likely due to bulk spin transport in the Co layer. Since the SMR increases with increasing Co thickness, one may consider spin current generation within the Co layer via excitations of magnons. Magnon is the main carrier of spin current in ferromagnetic insulators (FI) and causes the spin Seebeck effect in HM/FI structures34. Any magnon related effect, however, will be suppressed by application of large magnetic field or by lowering the measurement temperature35. We have thus studied the field and temperature dependence of the SMR of Pt/Co bilayers for selected films. we have measured the bilayer resistance against the magnetic field directed along the y- (RXX Y) and z- (RXX Z) axes and took their difference, i.e., ΔR456=(RXX Y-RXX Z)/RXX Z. The definition of ΔR456 is similar to that described above using the sinusoidal function if one assumes RXX Z~R0. In all cases, we find |ΔR456| slightly increases with increasing |H|. (For |H| smaller than ~15 kOe, the hard axis magnetic field is not sufficient to force the magnetization to point along the field direction, thus ΔR456 decreases with decreasing |H|.) We consider the slight increase in |ΔR456| with increasing |H| above ~15 kOe may originate from contribution of the so-called Hanle magnetoresistance36,37, which causes an increase in RXX Z with increasing |H| and thus results in enhancement of |ΔR456|. Although the Hanle magnetoresistance may influence |ΔR456|, we do not find significant reduction of |ΔR456| at large |H| similar to that reported for the magnetic field dependence of the spin Seebeck coefficient in Pt/YIG35. 7 The temperature dependence of ΔR456 is plotted in Fig. 4(b). Except for Pt/Co bilayer with dN~8 nm and tF~1 nm, |ΔR456| increases with decreasing temperature. The change is more pronounced for films with larger tF and/or dN. The temperature dependence of ΔR456 is similar to what has been found in metallic bilayers: |ΔR456| increases with decreasing temperature which has been attributed to the change in the degree of spin absorption8. Since we do not find any reduction in |ΔR456| at low temperature, we consider any magnon-related effect is almost negligible for the anomalously large SMR for thicker Co bilayers. As |ΔR456| becomes larger when the Co thickness is increased, we infer the enhancement is due to an effect that takes place in the bulk of the Co layer. Since the spin diffusion length of Co is reported to be much larger than the film thickness used here38, it may be feasible to consider spin current generation within the Co layer via, e.g. anomalous Hall and/or spin Hall effects. One can include contributions from the anomalous Hall and spin Hall effects of the FM layer (as well as longitudinal and transverse spin-current absorption) into the drift-diffusion model and estimate the resulting SMR (RIJK). RIJK = − 1 − x8 x8θL? , − 1 − x8 1 − P, θ; , 2λ; t; tanh t; 2λ; − x8θ>? , λ8 d8 tanh, d8 2λ8 Re gS 1 + gS coth dN λN − 1 + ζ 2gF 1 + gF coth dN λN (2) where g> = ρ8λ8GJVW, g; = 1 − P, XYZY X[Z[ tanh \[ Z[ , ζ = θFλF ]^_` \[ ,Z[ θSHλN ]^_` bY ,ZY . GMIX is the spin mixing conductance of the HM/FM interface, qF, qAH, lF and P are the spin Hall angle, anomalous Hall angle, spin diffusion length and spin polarization of the FM layer. The first and second terms of the right-hand side of Eq. (2) represent contributions to ΔR456 from the 8 anomalous Hall and spin Hall effects of the FM layer, respectively. The second term in the curly bracket represents the longitudinal spin absorption contribution to the SMR8. This term is modified ( ζ ≠ 0 ) when the FM spin Hall effect is considered. With qF=qAH=0, diffusion length39,40 of the FM layer is assumed to be zero here. Representative values of the calculated RIJK are shown in the supplementary material (Fig. S4). In the calculations, the spin Hall angle of Pt is set to one of the largest values reported thus far (θ>?~0.2)30, the anomalous Hall angle is obtained from the measurements (the largest value of the Pt/Co bilayers is ~0.03, see Fig. S3) and the spin Hall angle of Co is estimated using the relationship θL?~Pθ;: here we use P~0.4. Although the magnitude of RIJK can be adjusted to match the experimental results of ΔR456, it is difficult to reproduce the characteristics found in the experiments shown in Fig. 2, the increasing ΔR456 with increasing Co thickness. We have also studied the MR within the x-z plane which provides information on the so-called anisotropic interface magnetoresistance22-24 (for clarity of notation, we denote such MR as IMR instead of AIMR used in ). RXX is measured while the magnetic field is rotated in the x-z plane. The angle between the magnetic field and the z-axis within the x-z plane is defined as g. We fit the g dependence of RXX using a sinusoidal function R"" = R$ 1 − , cos 2γ + γ$ . ΔRj56 is plotted as a function of Co thickness (tCo) in Fig. 5(a). The large tCo limit of ΔRj56 normalized by the current flowing in the Co layer, i.e. k5jY , gives the anisotropic magnetoresistance (AMR) of bulk Co (RAMR) whereas changes at smaller tCo reflect contribution from the interface(s). In Fig. 5(b), we plot k5jY vs. 1 tlm. The y-axis intercept of the linear 9 fitting in the appropriate tlm range, as shown in Fig. 5(b), gives RAMR. We find that RAMR for films with different Pt thickness are nearly the same (RAMR~1.6%), which is close to what has been reported previously41. IMR is obtained by the following relation, RVJK ≡ k5jY − RoJK. The Pt thickness dependence of RVJK is plotted in Fig. 5(c). As reported previously21,23,24, RVJK increases with decreasing tlm. Although the microscopic mechanism is not clear, one may assume23,24 that RVJK is isotropic within the film plane, i.e. RVJK contributes to the y-z plane MR in the same way it does in the x-z plane. Assuming a parallel circuit that includes contribution from the SMR within the HM layer (RIJK) and the IMR that takes place in the FM layer (RVJK), we obtain an expression for ∆R456, which can be rewritten as: RIJK = ∆R456 k jY − RVJK + ∆R456 lm \[ X[ XY bY (see Supplementary material for the derivation). Here we have also subtracted ΔR456 for films with dPt=0, which is denoted as ∆R456 lm . ∆R456 lm is not related to SMR and is likely associated with the textured induced anisotropic scattering (also referred to as the geometrical size effect27). In Fig. 5(d), RIJK is plotted as a function of dPt. As evident, |RIJK| increases with increasing Co thickness, which cannot be described by the extended drift diffusion model (including spin transport within the FM layer), i.e. Eq. (2). Moreover, the sign of RIJK reverses when dPt~2-3 nm and its magnitude increases with decreasing dPt: see the inset of Fig. 5(d). Such trend of RSMR, inconsistent with the dPt dependence of SMR, is largely caused by the subtraction of the RIMR term. These results show that the large ∆R456 which increases with the Co thickness cannot be described by combinations of SMR, an isotropic IMR and texture induced anisotropic scattering. Since ΔR456 increases with tCo, interface effects (e.g. spin memory loss42, proximity magnetization induced AMR25, spin orbit interface AMR43,44, Edelstein magnetoresistance20,21, 10 enhanced spin Hall effect at the interface45) may not play a dominant role in setting the SMR found here. It is also difficult to foresee thermal effects (e.g. anomalous Nernst effect46) give rise to the large SMR since we find nearly symmetric resistance levels for positive and negative magnetic field in all field directions17. It has been suggested that the magnetoresistance due to texture induced anisotropic scattering in the FM layer can be enhanced by attaching a NM layer with large spin orbit interaction (the length scale of such MR is associated with the electron mean free path of the FM layer)28. With respect to the texture of the Co layer, we find a large ΔR456 both in Pt/Co and W/Co bilayers despite the different texture of the HM underlayer. Furthermore, ΔR456 of Ta/Co bilayers (i.e. the case when dPt=0) shows a much reduced ΔR456 compared to that of W/Co bilayers. Since Ta and W are both amorphous-like9, the texture of the Co layer is expected to be similar for the two bilayers. We thus infer that the texture of the Co film has little to do with the large ΔR456. It is possible that the spin orbit coupling at the interface may be different for the three HM layers (Pt, W and Ta), as manifested by the difference in the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction47,48, and may influence the MR by means of anisotropic scattering. As the microscopic origin of the such effect remains to be identified, further investigation is required to clarify its presence. In summary, we have studied the Pt and Co thickness dependence of spin Hall magnetoresistance), the magnetoresistance within the plane transverse to the current flow, in Pt/Co bilayers. We find SMR that increases with increasing Co thickness, which cannot be fully accounted for even if the anomalous Hall and spin Hall effects of the Co layer are considered. Other effects that may contribute to the MR are evaluated to assess their influence on the SMR. We find that the so-called anisotropic interface magnetoresistance and the magnetoresistance due 11 to texture induced anisotropic scattering cannot describe the large SMR observed here. Further investigation is required to clarify the origin of the SMR in HM/Co bilayers. Supplementary Material The following topics are included in the supplementary material: description on how the thickness dependent resistivity is obtained, additional experimental results on the anomalous Hall resistance of Pt/Co bilayers and SMR of W/Co and W/CoFeB bilayers, model calculations of the SMR using the drift-diffusion model, and description of how IMR is extracted. Acknowledgements We thank S. Mitani for fruitful discussion. This work was partly supported by JSPS Grant-in- Aids for Specially Promoted Research (15H05702), Casio Foundation, and the Center of Spintronics Research Network of Japan. Y.-C.L. is a JSPS international research fellow. 12