Wireless whispering-gallery-mode sensor for thermal sensing and aerial mapping Xiangyi Xu1, Weijian Chen1, Guangming Zhao1, Yihang Li1, Chenyang Lu2 and Lan Yang1* 1Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering, Washington University, St. Louis, MO 63130, USA 2Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Washington University, St. Louis, MO 63130, USA *yang@seas.wustl.edu Internet of Things (IoT) employs a large number of spatially distributed wireless sen- sors to monitor physical environments, e.g., temperature, humidity, and air pressure, have found wide applications including environmental monitoring , health care monitoring , smart cities and precision agriculture . A wireless sensor can collect, analyze, and transmit measurements of its environment . To date, wireless sensors used in IoT are predominately based on electronic devices that may suffer from electromagnetic interfer- ence in many circumstances. Immune to the electromagnetic interference, optical sensors provide a significant advantage in harsh environments . Furthermore, by introducing optical resonance to enhanced light-matter interactions, optical sensors based on resona- tors exhibit small footprints, extreme sensitivity and versatile functionalities , which can significantly enhance the capability and flexibility of wireless sensors. Here we provide the first demonstration of a wireless photonic sensor node based on whispering-gallery- mode (WGM) optical resonators. The sensor node is controlled via a customized iOS app. Its performance was studied in two practical scenarios: (1) real-time measurement of air temperature over 12 hours and (2) aerial mapping of temperature distribution by a sensor node mounted on an unmanned drone. Our work demonstrates the capability of WGM op- tical sensors in practical applications and may pave the way for large-scale deployments of WGM sensors in IoT. High-quality WGM optical resonators that confine light in a small volume via total internal re- flection can significantly enhance light-matter interactions, which has benefited a number of ap- plications including microlasers , opto-mechanics , and non-Hermitian optics . When subject to environmental changes, WGM resonators will experience changes in their spectral properties, e.g., frequency shift/split, linewidth broadening. Based on such mecha- nisms, WGM resonators have been demonstrated for various sensing applications ranging from thermal sensor , humidity sensor , magnetometer to nanoparticle/biomolecule detec- tion and atomic ion detection . The successful laboratory demonstrations have encour- aged and advanced the practical applications of WGM sensors. However, a system must address two open challenges to fully release the power of the resonator technology for practical applica- tions: (1) the stability of the photonic resonator and its coupler such as fiber-taper waveguide, and (2) the miniaturization of bulky laboratory measurement systems. Several pioneering works along this direction have been demonstrated recently, e.g., WGM optical gyroscope and phone-sized WGM sensing system , which integrate single WGM sensor together with its coupler, laser, photodetector, and associated control components into a portable device. The po- tential of WGM sensors can be further exploited through the integration with wireless interfaces as parts of an IoT system. In this work, we demonstrated a wireless WGM sensor node that can be integrated into IoT. We also developed a customized iOS app for remote system control, collection and analysis of sens- ing signals. Through this app, the spectral properties of WGM sensors can be monitored in real time. As the key elements in WSNs, sensor nodes should have the capability to collect sensing signals, perform signal analysis, and communicate with other sensor nodes or the gateway sensor node. The architecture of our wireless WGM sensor node is shown in Fig. 1(a), consisting of sensing module, microcontroller, Wi-Fi unit, and its power supply . In the sensing module, a tunable single-mode distributed Bragg reflector (DBR) laser is used to probe a packaged WGM sensor ; the output from the sensor is received by a photodiode detector. The operation of the DBR laser is controlled via its current driver and thermo-electric cooler (TEC). A transimpedance amplifier (TIA) circuit is associated with the photodiode detec- tor and converts the photodiode current into voltage output with proper gain. An ARM Cortex- M3 processor serves as the microcontroller with main functions of laser control (e.g., voltage, current, temperature) and acquisition of transmission spectra of the WGM sensor. The communi- cation between the sensor node and smartphones is via the Wi-Fi unit. It helps to transmit the sensing signals and receive the commands from the customized app. By connecting the Wi-Fi unit to the internet, a worldwide, real-time control of this system can be realized. We also in- clude a system monitor circuit in the mainboard that monitors the key parameters such as voltage of the power supply and the microcontroller, laser diode voltage/current/temperature. A full- sized view of the mainboard is provided in Fig. 1(c). The sensor used in this system is a packaged WGM microtoroid resonator. It is fabricated by us- ing UV curable low-index polymer to package a microtoroid together with its fiber-taper wave- guide . Such a packaged WGM sensor has high quality factor and long-term stability. Light from the DBR laser with central wavelength of 976 nm and linewidth of 10 MHz is sent into the packaged WGM sensor and then received by the photodetector. The frequency of laser light can be tuned by adjusting the laser current and TEC temperature with tuning coefficients of 0.002 nm/mA and 0.07 nm/°C, respectively. By applying a saw-tooth wave with amplitude of 40 mA to the laser diode around a fixed central current, the frequency of laser light is linearly scanned to obtain the transmission spectrum of the WGM sensor. The interface of the customized iOS app is shown in Fig. 1(b). The app can monitor the key pa- rameters of the system in real time, and remotely control the mainboard, such as setting the laser diode current and temperature, tuning the laser frequency. It can also receive the transmission spectra of the WGM sensor through the Wi-Fi unit, with a waveform update rate of 50 frames per second. In addition, through the integrated mathematical algorithm, the app can perform real- time analysis such as measurement of resonance frequency, linewidth, and quality factor. De- tailed information of this iOS app as well as a step-by-step guide is provided in supplementary material. We first characterized the spectral properties of the packaged WGM sensor by using the app. Its transmission spectrum is shown in Fig. 2(a), with a frequency spanning of 450 GHz. Multiple resonance modes with different resonance frequencies, quality factors and polarizations were ob- served. The resonance mode with higher quality factor will help to resolve the smaller frequency shift, subsequently improving the sensing performance. The transmission spectrum of a high- quality mode together with a Lorentzian fit is given in Fig. 2(b), with quality factor about 4.2×105. To verify the stability of the whole system, the time trace of the linewidth of a reso- nance mode was recorded for fifteen minutes. An average linewidth of 3.15 GHz together with a standard deviation of 0.03 GHz was observed, corresponding to standard deviation about 1.0%. With this wireless sensing system, we performed a 12-hour real-time measurement of air temper- ature on Jun. 18th, 2017 in St. Louis, MO, USA. The whole system was mounted on the outside wall of a building. The packaged WGM sensor was in full contact with the surrounding air and was refrained from direct irradiance from sunlight. The optical fibers connecting the packaged sensor with the mainboard were carefully mounted to avoid polarization variations during the measurement. The variation of the resonance frequency induced by the air temperature change was monitored via the customized app. For comparison, we also mounted a commercial ther- mometer together with the packaged sensor. Through a 12-h measurement, we acquired a plot of frequency shift of the selected resonance mode. As shown in Fig. 3, the resonance frequency shift of the packaged WGM sensor matches well with the results from the commercial thermom- eter. Introducing mobility to wireless sensor nodes can improve the capability and flexibility of WSNs and helps to meet the needs of certain scenarios with complex dynamic changes . Here we used an unmanned drone to carry the whole system to measure the temperature distribution in a selected area of a city park in St. Louis on June 1, 2017 (See Fig. 4(a)). A commercial thermom- eter with Bluetooth connection was mounted together with the packaged WGM sensor for com- parison. The flight path of the unmanned drone was shown in Fig. 4(b), with the starting and ending locations marked. When the drone flied from one measurement location to another, the resonance frequency of WGM sensor shifted due to the temperature variations. The variation of resonance frequency is shown in Fig. 4(b), where the temperature gradient can be clearly seen. The measurements match well with the results from commercial thermometer (Fig. 4(c)). A vid- eo demo is provided in the supplementary material where the drone carrying the whole system flied from one location with higher temperature to another one with lower temperature. A reso- nance frequency shift can be clearly observed from the customized app. In summary, we have demonstrated a wireless WGM sensor node and exploited it for the appli- cations of thermal sensing and aerial mapping. A customized iOS app enables us to monitor and control the system parameters, acquire and analyze the sensing signals in real time. Two applica- tion scenarios have been studied: one is to measure the temperature change at a fixed location; the other one is to have the system carried by an unmanned drone to measure the temperature distribution of a selected area. The successful demonstrations show the potential applications of our wireless WGM sensor node in IoT. It is also worth noting that our sensing system is not lim- ited to thermal sensing. With proper design, the packaged WGM sensor can have various func- tionalities, e.g., WGM magnetometer with high sensitivity and large bandwidth . Another promising direction is to use a sensor array for monitoring multiple parameters simultaneously . Competing financial interests The authors declare no competing financial interests. Acknowledgements This work is supported by the ARO grant No. W911NF1710189. Author contributions L. Yang conceived the idea. X. Xu designed the hardware system and iOS software. W. Chen and X. Xu performed the sensing experiments with the help from Y. Li. G. Zhao fabricated the packaged WGM sensor. All authors contribute the analyzing and discussion of the experimental data. X. Xu, W. Chen, and L. Yang wrote the manuscript with contributions from all authors. L.Y. supervised the project.