Surface superconductivity in the type II Weyl semimetal TaIrTe4 Ying Xing1,2†, Zhibin Shao3,†, Jun Ge2, Jiawei Luo2, Jinhua Wang4,5, Zengwei Zhu4,5, Jun Liu6, Yong Wang6, Zhiying Zhao7,11, Jiaqiang Yan7,8, David Mandrus7,8, Binghai Yan9, Xiong-Jun Liu2,10,12,13,*, Minghu Pan3,4,*, Jian Wang2,10,12,13,* 1 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, School of New Energy and Materials, China University of Petroleum, Beijing 102249, China; 2 International Center for Quantum Materials, School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China; 3 School of Physics and Information Technology, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi’an 710119, China; 4School of Physics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China; 5 Wuhan National High Magnetic Field Center, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China; 6 Center of Electron Microscopy, State Key Laboratory of Silicon Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310027, China; 7 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee 37996, USA; 8 Materials Science and Technology Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee 37831, USA; 9 Department of Condensed Matter Physics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 7610001, Israel; 10 CAS Center for Excellence in Topological Quantum Computation, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China; 11 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996, USA; 12 Beijing Academy of Quantum Information Sciences, Beijing 100193, China; 13 Collaborative Innovation Center of Quantum Matter, Beijing 100871, China †These authors contributed equally to this work. *e-mail: jianwangphysics@pku.edu.cn (J.W.); minghupan@hust.edu.cn (M.P.); xiongjunliu@pku.edu.cn(X.L.) 2 / 26 ABSTRACT The search for unconventional superconductivity in Weyl semimetal materials is currently an exciting pursuit, since such superconducting phases could potentially be topologically nontrivial and host exotic Majorana modes. The layered material TaIrTe4 is a newly predicted time-reversal invariant type II Weyl semimetal with minimum number of Weyl points. Here, we report the discovery of surface superconductivity in Weyl semimetal TaIrTe4. Our scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy (STM/S) visualizes Fermi arc surface states of TaIrTe4 that are consistent with the previous angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) results. By a systematic study based on STS at ultralow temperature, we observe uniform superconducting gaps on the sample surface. The superconductivity is further confirmed by electrical transport measurements at ultralow temperature, with an onset transition temperature (Tc) up to 1.54 K being observed. The normalized upper critical field h*(T/Tc) behavior and the stability of the superconductivity against the ferromagnet indicate that the discovered superconductivity is unconventional with the p-wave pairing. The systematic STS, thickness and angular dependent transport measurements reveal that the detected superconductivity is quasi-one-dimensional (quasi-1D) and occurs in the surface states. The discovery of the surface superconductivity in TaIrTe4 provides a new novel platform to explore topological superconductivity and Majorana modes. Keywords: surface superconductivity, Weyl semimetal, topological superconductivity 3 / 26 INTRODUCTION Weyl semimetals, which possess nodal points in the bulk and Fermi arc states in the surface, have generated considerable research interest in the recent years . The chirality of Weyl fermions is responsible for a few novel transport phenomena, such as the chiral anomaly. On the surface of Weyl semimetals, universal signatures of topological Fermi arcs in quasi-particle interference were theoretically predicted and experimentally observed by STM . Moreover, the theoretical studies have shown that the presence of superconductivity in Weyl semimetal may lead to a bunch of novel topological phases, including the time-reversal invariant topological superconductor , Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov superconductors , and chiral non-Abelian Majorana fermions protected by second Chern numbers . These predictions suggest that turning a Weyl semimetal into superconducting state may provide a promising way to explore topological superconductivity and Majorana modes, which can be applied to topological quantum computation . Experimentally, superconductivity has been observed in both type I and type II Weyl semimetals, such as tip induced superconductivity on TaAs , pressure induced superconductivity on TaP , as well as Td phase WTe2 (pressure driven) and MoTe2 crystals (without pressure) . However, in these Weyl semimetals, the number of Weyl points is 8 or even 24, more than the minimal number of Weyl points allowed for a time-reversal invariant Weyl semimetal, which leads to complicated band structures and hinders further studies. Therefore, to observe superconductivity in simpler Weyl semimetals possessing minimal number of Weyl points is highly desired. Following the first-principle calculations by K. Koeperni et al. , TaIrTe4 hosts only four well-separated Weyl points, which is the minimal number in a Weyl semimetal with time-reversal symmetry. The Fermi arcs connecting Weyl nodes of opposite chirality in TaIrTe4 extend to about 1⁄3 of the surface Brillouin zone in the b direction. This large momentum-space separation makes TaIrTe4 quite favorable for exploring the Fermi arcs spectroscopically and the important transport properties. The exotic surface states supporting the quasi-1D Fermi arcs have been observed by ARPES. Fermi arcs as well as Weyl nodes in the bulk of TaIrTe4 have been identified directly by pump-probe ARPES. The Weyl points and Fermi arcs are found to live at 50 ~ 100 meV above Fermi energy. If the noncentrosymmetric Weyl material TaIrTe4 can be superconducting, it would stimulate further investigations on the superconductivity in topological materials and long-sought-after topological superconductors. In this work, we perform STM and STS and electrical transport studies of the ternary compound TaIrTe4 single crystal down to 0.06 K with a high magnetic field up to 54.5 T. The Fermi arc surface states and superconducting gap are discovered by STM and STS studies at ultralow temperatures. The 4 / 26 detected unconventional superconductivity is further verified to only occur on the surface of TaIrTe4 by electrical transport measurements. The observed unconventional surface superconductivity is found to exhibit quasi-1D and topologically non-trivial characteristics, which demonstrate that TaIrTe4 is a unique candidate for topological superconductors. RESULTS Sample characterization of TaIrTe4 crystals Single crystals of TaIrTe4 were synthesized from excess Te flux. The crystal is needle-like morphology and grows preferentially along the direction (the length direction). The width direction is along the and the cleavage surface of the crystal is the (001) plane. The high structural quality of the sample was confirmed by X-ray diffraction (XRD), high-resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy (HRSTEM) and STM. Fig. 1a shows the XRD from a TaIrTe4 crystal oriented with the scattering vector perpendicular to the (001) plane. The inset is the morphology of a representative crystal looking down from the direction. The atomic HRSTEM image (Fig. 1b) and selected area electron diffraction pattern (Fig. S1) further confirm the crystalline property of our TaIrTe4 crystals. The obtained lattice parameters a = 0.375 nm, b = 1.246 nm, c = 1.304 nm, which agree with the previous report on TaIrTe4. STM investigation shows uniform large-scaled periodical 1D stripes on a cleaved TaIrTe4 surface. Several bright spots appear on the flat Te terrace, which can be attributed to some adatoms from the upper Te plane left on the terrace during cleaving. From a zoom-in image (Fig. 1d), a unidirectional stripe was observed. The fast Fourier transform (FFT) in Fig. 1f used to calibrate the modulation of 1D pattern, reveals the periodicity of stripe is about 1.2 nm in real space. And this is in well agreement with lattice parameter of the b direction (12.421Å), which suggests no reconstruction in b direction. Fermi arc surface states and superconducting gap detected by STM/STS Quasiparticle interference (QPI) based on spectroscopic-imaging STM, has shown success in identifying the topological surface states of topological insulator and topological Fermi arc states of Weyl semimetals TaAs, MoTe2 , MoTe2-xSx and Mo0.66W0.34Te2. In the surface Brillouin zone, the extremal pairs of ki and kf on a two-dimensional constant energy contour, where ki and kf are the initial and final wavevectors, contribute dominantly to the spatial interference pattern of the local density of states. The features in Fourier transform of dI/dV mapping correspond to the scattering vector q= ki - kf of the extremal pairs. To detect Fermi arc states in our TaIrTe4 single crystals, STS mappings were performed at the (001) surface of TaIrTe4 single crystals. Fig. S2b-h show dI/dV mappings taken with various biases from 20 5 / 26 meV to 80 meV. Fig. 2a-g show the fast Fourier transform (FFT) of the dI/dV maps between 20 meV and 80 meV. Four arcs located inside the first Brillouin zone were revealed by the QPI imaging at the energy of 80 meV (Fig. 2g). For a pair of topological Fermi arcs, three scattering wavevectors (Fig. 2h), labelled q1, q2 and q3, might be expected to appear in QPI. Among them, q2 is forbidden due to the requirement of the time-reversal symmetry in the system. q3 does not correspond to the observed features discussed above because this vector has very small length in k space and stays very close to the center. The scattering wavevectors should generate visible features of four arcs. Such features are clearly resolved at 80 mV in our experiments as indicated by yellow arrows in Fig. 2g, and become obscure at lower energies (50-70 meV), eventually vanish below 40 meV. Previously theoretical study has reported that Fermi arc locates at a narrow energy range between 50 and 82.7 meV in TaIrTe4. As the energy location moves upward from 50 meV, Fermi arc partially separates out from bulk bands and completely appears at the energy of Wely nodes (82.7 meV). The mixing of Fermi arc and bulk band at lower energies will lead to the obscureness of Fermi arc imaging, which is consistent with our experimental observation. This is a direct and strong experimental evidence for the existence of the topological surface states. Fig. 3a gives the typical STM topographic image of the cleaved surface obtained at the bias of -20 mV and at temperature of 4 K. Periodical atomic chains along a direction are clearly observed on the surface, confirming the quasi-1D characteristic of TaIrTe4. Compared with 4 K, the crystal structure at 0.4 K remains undistorted, which excludes the possibility of structure phase transition occurring at low temperatures. The dI/dV spectrum taken at 0.4 K displays a clear signature of superconducting gap with two conductance peaks at gap edges, as shown in Fig. 3b. The spectrum exhibits a superconducting gap (Δ) of 2.1 meV defined by half the distance between the two conductance peaks. The superconducting gap is uniform on the whole cleaved surface (see Fig. S3 and S4). After macroscopically changing the locations of STM scanning, similar topographic images and superconductivity were observed reproducibly. Fig. 3c shows the temperature evolution of dI/dV spectra measured from 0.4 K to 1.28 K. As the temperature increases, the dip at zero bias is reduced and the gap almost vanishes near 1.28 K. The ratio Δ(0)/kBTc (kB is the Boltzmann constant) is estimated about 19.05, which is much larger than that of weak coupling BCS superconductors and reminiscent of the possibility of topological superconductivity. Magnetic field dependence of dI/dV spectra are shown in Fig. 3d. The superconducting gap decreases with the increasing field and almost vanishes near 0.25 T, exhibiting the typical feature of superconductivity. Both critical values (1.28 K and 0.25 T) match well with the results of our transport measurement (Fig. 4). Furthermore, we locate a terrace edge that is perpendicular with the direction of 1D atomic rows and perform a line spectroscopic survey along a 1D atomic row by crossing the broken end (blue dashed line in lower panel of Fig. 3f). The dI/dV spectra 6 / 26 along the 1D Ta-Ir chain show that superconducting gap becomes smaller and shallower by approaching to the broken end and finally almost vanishes (Fig. 3e). It is worth mentioning that superconductivity can be observed on every terrace of the sample. The crucial dependence of the superconductivity on defects in the Ta-Ir chains again suggests that the pairing order might be unconventional, in contrast to the conventional s-wave order which is stable against to defects. Electrical transport evidences of Quasi-1D superconductivity and quantum oscillations To further demonstrate and explore the observed superconductivity in TaIrTe4 single crystals, transport measurements at ultralow temperature were performed at the (001) surface of TaIrTe4 single crystals. The TaIrTe4 single crystal samples were cleaved to a smooth and fresh surface for transport measurements. More than 10 samples are studied and all samples exhibit consistent results. Fig. 4a shows the resistivity of sample 1 (S1) as a function of temperature (T) from 2 K to 300 K. The resistivity exhibits metallic-like behavior and tends to saturate at 10 K with a residual resistivity ratio (RRR) of 6.8 (the resistivity at room temperature over the resistivity at 2 K). Interestingly, when upon further cooling, an evident resistivity drop appears at about 1.54 K (Fig. 4b). When applying perpendicular magnetic field (B//c axis), the resistivity drop shifts to lower temperatures as the field increases and completely suppressed at around 0.4 T. This is a typical superconducting behavior although no zero resistance is observed down to 0.06 K and the proportion of resistivity drop is ~ 44% 4e) were carried out at various temperatures from 0.08 to 2.0 K. It is evident that superconductivity at B//a axis varies differently from the other two directions. For example, Bc2 is around 0.5 T at 0.1 K for This agrees well with the observed Bc2 (0.25 T at 0.4 K for B//c axis) from STS measurements (see Fig. 3d). Since zigzag Ta-Ir chains along a direction of TaIrTe4, the difference of Bc2 may originate primarily from the anisotropy of the sample, which causes quasi-1D superconductivity. Besides the observed anisotropic superconductivity, when the temperature is above Tc, the pronounced anisotropic MR at 2 K up to 15 T is also detected, which further confirms the anisotropic characteristic of TaIrTe4, as shown in Fig. S5. For quasi-1D superconductors, below Tc phase slips can give rise to broad superconducting transition with the residual resistance, which may explain our observations. Another possible scenario is that the superconductivity occurs in the surface states which are helical states for a time-reversal invariant Weyl semimetal with dispersions along a-axis, leading to the quasi-1D p-wave superconducting phases. Similar resistivity drops are observed in two other TaIrTe4 7 / 26 samples, with onset Tc (where resistivity starts to drop) from 1.19 K to 1.38 K (Fig. S6, consistent with the Tc ~1.28 K obtained from STS result), confirming the observed superconductivity in TaIrTe4 crystals. Further measurements show that the Tc of different regions in the same TaIrTe4 sample exhibits consistent superconducting behavior, which excludes the macroscopic superconducting phase which is calculated to compare with known models for s-wave superconductors (Werthamer–Helfand– Bc2 is defined as the field above which the TaIrTe4 sample becomes the normal state. Obviously, the h*(T/Tc) relation is close to that of a polar p-wave state, suggesting the possibility of unconventional superconducting paring symmetry in TaIrTe4 as shown in the inset of Fig. 4c. Critical current (Ic) is another key feature of superconductors. Fig. S8a and b depict R(I) characteristics of S3 (30 μm thick) at different temperatures and magnetic fields. At 0.3 K and 0 T, as the current increasing, the sample is gradually tuned from superconducting state to normal state. The Ic is suppressed by both temperature and magnetic field, which provides another evidence of superconductivity in TaIrTe4. In addition, the existence of p-wave superconductivity is backed by the essential symmetry consideration, in which both the bulk and surface of the studied material break the inversion symmetry and thus, allow the spin-triplet pairing. We also investigate the MR at ultrahigh pulsed magnetic field. Fig. 4g presents the magneto-resistivity of sample 4 (S4) up to 54.5 T at various temperatures from 0.3 K to 20 K. At 0.3 K, superconducting drop below 0.5 T coexisting with pronounced SdH oscillations is observed. By subtracting a polynomial background, the oscillatory components ∆ρ vs. 1/B at different temperatures are plotted in Fig. 4h, with the ∆ρ oscillations periodic in 1/B. In Fig. 4i, the oscillatory components ∆ρ are analyzed by employing FFT at various temperatures from 0.3 K to 20 K. The FFT spectrums exhibit two oscillating frequencies at 64.1 T, 104.5 T. The second harmonics 209.7 T, approximately 2 times of 104.4 T, is likely due to spin splitting. We use two independent parameters to fit the effective mass m*. The m*~0.349me and m*~0.412me are obtained for 64.1 T and 104.5 T from temperature dependence of the oscillation amplitudes fitted by Lifshitz Kosevich formula. The inset of Fig. 4i is the plot of Landau index n vs. 1/B, from which the quantum limit field is estimated to 95.32 T. The maxima of the ∆ρ are assigned to be the integer indices (solid circles) and the minima of ∆ρ are plotted by open circles in the diagram as half-integer indices. A linear extrapolation of n versus 1/B plot gives the intercept value close to -0.11. The observed results are further confirmed in sample 5 (S5) (Fig. S9). The evolution of the Fermi surface in different directions can be revealed by the angular-dependent magnetic quantum oscillations (see Fig. S10). The angle-resolved SdH FFT peaks from B to B axis give the complexity and anisotropy of Fermi surface, similar to the previous report by torque measurements. 8 / 26 Evidences for surface superconductivity The low proportion of resistivity drop in TaIrTe4 indicates the tiny superconducting volume fraction, and does not support the bulk superconductivity. Our STS results show uniform superconducting gap on the surface of TaIrTe4. More importantly, it is found that the Ic remains of same magnitude when reducing the thickness of sample 3 from 30 μm to 6 μm (see Fig. 5a and Fig. S8). In thickness control experiments, both the sample width (120 μm) and length (the distance between two voltage electrodes: 560 μm for 6 μm thick sample and 590 μm for 30 μm thick sample) are nearly consistent. This observation provides a strong evidence of the surface superconductivity, rather than the bulk superconductivity, since the Ic of a bulk superconductor decreases proportionately as the thickness decreases. Note that the surface of TaIrTe4 is sensitive to atmosphere environment and the degree of surface oxidation is not exactly the same for different samples when carrying out transport measurements. Thus, the 25% discrepancy in Ic should be from the different degradation degrees of sample surface as the surface of 6 μm thick sample is fresher than 30 μm thick sample. Fig. 5b shows the angular dependence of the upper critical field Bc2 (θ represents the angle between the a axis and applied magnetic field directions in ac plane) at 0.5 K. A cusp-like peak is clearly resolved at θ = 90° (B//a) and is qualitatively distinct from the 3D mass model but can be described by the 2D Tinkham model. Such behavior further suggests that the superconductivity in TaIrTe4 is from the surface. These results fully exclude the scenario of the bulk superconductivity and support the surface superconductivity explanation. We notice that // 2 2 C C H H    value is smaller compared with typical 2D superconductors, which could be attributed to the quasi-1D modulation on the surface superconductivity. The suppression of the superconductivity close to the terrace edge as shown in Fig. 3f is consistent with the surface superconductivity of the Fermi arc states. The terrace edge serves as the strong dislocation on the sample surface. Nearby the terrace edge the Fermi arc surface states are pushed into the deeper layers from the outmost layer, leading to a small or vanishing local density of states on the edge. For this reason, the superconductivity can be naturally suppressed. Due to the helical behavior of the Fermi arc states, the surface superconductivity is potentially p-wave type and topologically nontrivial. This p-wave feature can be further confirmed by depositing a 10 nm thick ferromagnetic Ni film on the surface of bulk TaIrTe4. The MR hysteresis of TaIrTe4 with Ni film indicates the magnetic property of the deposited Ni film (Fig. S11). Interestingly, the magnetic Ni film has little effect on the onset Tc of TaIrTe4 (Fig. 5d), which supports the p-wave like or topological superconductivity from the surface state together with the fitting for critical field vs. temperature behavior, suppression of the superconductivity at the terrace edge, and the detected Fermi arc surface state. 9 / 26 CONCLUSION In conclusion, we have observed the novel superconductivity in type II Weyl semimetal TaIrTe4 by both low temperature STM/STS and transport studies. The uniform superconducting gap on the sample surface, residual resistance below Tc, nearly thickness-independent ultralow critical current, and anisotropic upper critical field behavior indicate that the superconductivity occurs in the surface states. Moreover, the edge-sensitive superconducting gap, the critical field vs. temperature behavior, the topological Fermi arc surface states, and the stability of the superconductivity against the magnetization support the p-wave-like topological nature of the quasi-1D superconductivity. Our results suggest that TaIrTe4 is a new promising candidate of topological superconductors. reflections, which indicates the measured crystal plane of the crystal is (001) plane. Inset: optical image of a typical TaIrTe4 single crystal. The scale bar is 200 μm. (b) HRSTEM image of the TaIrTe4, showing atomic structure. (c) Schematics of crystal structure of TaIrTe4. (d) and (e) STM images of the fresh cleaved surface of TaIrTe4 with the setting parameters of Vbias = 25 mV, Iset = 300 pA and Vbias = 2.5 V, Iset = 20 pA, respectively. (f)Fast Fourier transform image of (d). taken with set point of 250 pA. The resolution is 512×512 pixels. Yellow arrows indicate the interference pattern due to topological surface states. (h) Scattering geometry of Fermi arcs in k space. TaIrTe4 (temperature: 4 K, bias voltage: -50 mV, tunneling current: 300 pA, 20 × 20 nm2), showing quasi-1D structure. (b) The normalized differential conductance dI/dV spectrum measured on the terrace of TaIrTe4 surface at 0.4 K, showing a superconducting gap, with the value of 2.1 meV. (c) Temperature dependence of dI/dV spectra from 0.4 K to 1.28 K. Spectra measured at different temperatures are shifted vertically for clarity. (d) Magnetic field dependence of dI/dV spectra from 0 T to 0.25 T at 0.4 K. (e) From top to bottom: the dI/dV spectra acquired along 1D atomic row at 0.4 K by crossing a terrace edge showing in lower panel of (f). (f) A colorful plot of the spectroscopic survey measured along blue dashed line showed in lower panel. Lower: the STM image shows the 1D atomic row with a broken end. All dI/dV tunneling spectra are measured with a bias voltage of -10 mV, a tunneling current of 500 pA. The bias modulation is set at 150 μV. function of temperature between 2 K and 300 K. Inset shows schematic structure of crystal orientation in TaIrTe4 samples. (b) ρ(T) curves at different perpendicular magnetic fields (B//c axis) from 0 T to 1.30 T. At 0 T, the sample resistivity begins to drop at 1.54 K (Tc). (c) ρ(B//c) curves at various temperatures at 0.08 K, 0.2 K, 0.3 K, 0.5 K, 0.8 K, 1.0 K, 1.2 K, 1.5 K and 2.0 K. The arrow temperature T/Tc. The red dashed line indicates the expectation for a polar p-wave state. The black dashed line indicates the WHH direction. Magnetic field (up to 54.5 T) dependence of resistivity at different temperatures with magnetic field perpendicular to the ac plane (B//b). (h) The oscillatory component of ∆ρ extracted from ρ by subtracting a polynomial background, as a function of 1/B at various temperatures. (i) FFT analysis with two major frequencies (64.1 T and 104.5 T) for ∆ρ vs. 1/B in (h). Inset: Landau index (n) as a function of 1/B. Blim is estimated to 95.32 T. samples with two different thickness (30 μm, 6 μm). These samples were obtained by mechanical exfoliation from one sample (Sample 3). (b) Angular dependence of the upper critical field Bc2 at 0.5 K. The blue and red line are the theoretical representations of Bc2(θ) using the 2D Tinkham formula (HC2(θ)sin θ /HC2 // ) 2 +|HC2(θ) cos θ/ HC2 ⊥|=1 and the 3D anisotropic mass model HC2(θ)=HC2 // /(sin2 θ +γ2 cos2 θ) 1/2with γ=HC2 // /HC2 ⊥ respectively. The inset shows a close-up of the region around 90°. (c) Superconductivity of TaIrTe4 single crystal before and after capping with 10 nm thick ferromagnetic Ni film on surface. The dashed gray line marks the temperature of onset Tc. METHODS STM and STS measurement. Samples were cleaved in situ at room temperature under the vacuum with pressure better than 1×10-10 torr. The cleaved sample was quickly transferred into a Unisoko-1300 STM system for ultralow temperature measurements down to 0.4 K. Transport measurement. The transport measurements are carried out in a PPMS-16 system (Quantum Design), a pulsed high magnetic field equipment at Wuhan National High Magnetic Field Center and anisotropic upper critical field at a dilution refrigerator with vector magnet (Leiden CF450). For electrical transport measurements of the TaIrTe4 samples on (001) plane, the standard four-probe or Hall structure configuration is used. The electric current is always applied parallel to the (001) plane along a axis in our studies. Two silver paste current electrodes (I+ and I−) are pressed on both ends and across the entire width of the sample, so that the current can homogeneously go through the sample in the length direction . The other two silver paste electrodes are pressed in the middle of crystal as voltage probes. For magnetoresistance (or Hall resistivity) measurements, any additional Hall (or resistive) voltage signals due to the misalignment of the voltage leads have been corrected by reversing the direction of the magnetic field. SUPPLEMENTARY DATA Supplementary data are available at NSR online. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We acknowledge Xincheng Xie, Ji Feng, Haiwen Liu, Cheung Chan and Yi Liu for helpful discussions. We thank Xiyao Hu for help in XRD measurements, Cong Wang for preparation of TEM samples, Liang Li, Haoran Ji, Jiawei Zhang, Yanan Li, Pu Yang and Yongjie Li for their help in electrical transport measurements. FUNDING This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (Grant No. 2018YFA0305604, No. 2017YFA0303302, and 2016YFA0301604), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 11888101, 11774008, 11574095, 11704414, No. 11574008, and No. 11761161003, No.11974430), Beijing Natural Science Foundation(Grant No. Z180010), the Science Foundation of China University of Petroleum, Beijing (Grant No. 2462017YJRC012, 2462018BJC005), and the Strategic Priority Research Program of Chinese Academy of Sciences (Grant No. XDB28000000). Z.Z. was partially supported by the CEM, an NSF MRSEC (Grant DMR-1420451). Work at ORNL was supported by the US Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences and Engineering Division (J.Y.). D.M. acknowledges support from the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation’s EPiQS Initiative through Grant No. GBMF4416. B.Y. acknowledges the financial support by the Willner Family Leadership Institute for the Weizmann Institute of Science, the Benoziyo Endowment Fund for the Advancement of Science, Ruth and Herman Albert Scholars Program for New Scientists, the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement No. 815869).