Non-Linear Photocurrent Response to Bosonic Final State Stimulation in Microcavity Diodes Aniruddha Bhattacharya1, *, Evgeny Sedov2, 3, †, Md Zunaid Baten1, Pallab Bhattacharya1, §, and Alexey Kavokin2, 4, 5, ‡ 1 The Solid-State Electronics Laboratory, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Michigan, 1301 Beal Avenue, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA 2 School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Southampton, SO17 1NJ Southampton, United Kingdom 3 Vladimir State University named after A. G. and N. G. Stoletovs, Gorky str. 87, 600000, Vladimir, Russia 4 CNR-SPIN, Viale del Politecnico 1, I-00133, Rome, Italy 5 Spin Optics Laboratory, St. Petersburg State University, Ul’anovskaya 1, Peterhof, St. Petersburg 198504, Russia * anirudb@umich.edu † evgeny_sedov@mail.ru § pkb@umich.edu ‡ A.Kavokin@soton.ac.uk ABSTRACT We report the optical excitation-dependent output photocurrent characteristics of GaN- based polariton diode lasers operated under reverse-bias at room temperature. The photocurrent demonstrates a non-linear enhancement at an incident optical power of ~ 1.6 mW, which is approximately equivalent to the value of polariton lasing threshold observed when the diodes are operated under forward bias conditions. This is explained in the framework of an Auger-like process of excitonic dissociation into its constituent electron-hole pairs, which can be stimulated by the occupation of the polariton lasing states. The observed effect is a remarkable manifestation of the bosonic final state stimulation in polariton lasers. A model based on the coupled kinetic equations for the free carriers, the excitonic reservoir and the polariton condensate shows a good agreement to the experimental data. 2 A polariton laser is one of the most important outcomes of the research field of Polaritonics: physics of strongly coupled light-matter systems . In this light source, coherent emission is produced by the spontaneous radiative recombination from a macroscopic, coherent, degenerate and non-equilibrium exciton-polariton condensate . The non-linear threshold of a polariton laser is lower than that of conventional semiconductor photon lasers usually by one to three orders of magnitude , mainly because it does not require the inversion of electronic population. Photocurrent measurements on polariton devices have been previously reported . Photocurrent spectra recorded from a reverse-biased microcavity diode can directly map the polariton dispersion characteristics . The optical nonlinearity in a similar device due to switching between strong and weak coupling has been reported by Bajoni et al. . The non- linearity in the reverse biased photocurrent due to a blue shift of the lower-polariton (LP) branch into resonance with the optical pump energy and consequent increase in injection efficiency has been reported by Winkler et al. . A change in the slope of the lateral photocurrent, measured in the in-plane direction, was reported by Brodbeck et al. and attributed to a transition from bosonic (polariton) to fermionic (photon) lasing . All these measurements were performed at cryogenic temperatures. In this Letter, we report, for the first time, the observation of a non-linear dependence of the photocurrent on pumping intensity in a microcavity diode at room temperature, as a new manifestation of bosonic final state stimulation in polariton lasers . The excitation density measured at the onset of the non-linearity coincides with the threshold current density for polariton lasing in the same device. This observation also serves as a proof of principle of an optically- controlled low-energy switching device, where the output photocurrent of a reverse-biased GaN- based microcavity diode is controllably switched between a low output current value (or, nominally OFF state) and high output current value (or, nominally ON state), by pulsed optical 3 excitation at normal incidence. A robust, ultra-fast and energy-efficient all-optical, all-electrical or an electro-optical switching device can potentially have a wide range of practical applications in information and signal processing including Application Specific Integrated Circuits (ASICs) and Systems-on-a-Chip (SOCs), on-chip communications and signal routing, control and sensing. In the present study, we have investigated the excitation-dependent output photocurrent characteristics of bulk GaN-based microcavity polariton diode lasers . The observed non- linear dependence of the photocurrent on the excitation intensity is reproduced by theoretical calculations including an Auger-like process of excitonic dissociation into its constituent electron- hole pairs, which can be stimulated by the occupation of the polariton lasing states. The present devices are identical to the polariton diode lasers characterized and reported by us previously , wherein the device processing and the measured characteristics of the lasers have been described in detail. All of these devices originate from the same epitaxial sample and have been processed identically and simultaneously. The defect density in the active region of the devices is ∼ 6.1 × 108 cm−2 . A schematic representation of the microcavity diode along with the device heterostructure is shown in Fig. 1(a). As has been highlighted in our previous publications , these devices employ a novel lateral injection architecture, wherein the directions of current flow and polariton emission are mutually orthogonal. This enables the realization of a relatively low series resistance microcavity diode along with a reasonably good quality factor cavity . This is particularly important in the context of the experiments reported in the present Letter, where the effects of polariton lasing on the diode current have been studied. To start with, let us recall some of the previously reported polariton lasing characteristics. The devices are characterized by a cavity photon-to-exciton detuning  ranging from − 4 to − 13 meV, and a strong coupling in the microcavity characterized by a Rabi splitting  of ~ 33.9 to ~ 35.5 4 meV. The microcavity quality factor Q and the cavity mode lifetime C were found to vary from ~ 1700 to ~ 2100, and from ~ 0.3 ps to ~ 0.4 ps, respectively. The polariton laser thresholds varied from ~ 125 A/cm2 to ~ 375 A/cm2 . In addition, the onset of non-linear emission was accompanied with the collapse of the LP emission linewidth and a small blueshift of the peak electroluminescence energy. The latter, which is primarily caused by the repulsive self-interaction of the lower-polaritons, is particularly important as it signifies the particulate nature of the radiative species. In contrast, photon lasers do not show any blueshift in their peak emission energy, unless they are injected at very high densities where band-filling effects become important. The redistribution of the lower-polaritons in momentum space as a function of the injection current was also studied. A random and non-thermal LP occupation below threshold was found to transform into a peaked occupancy at k||~ 0 above threshold. In addition, there was no evidence of a polariton relaxation bottleneck at any injection. At threshold, the occupancy was analyzed by a Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution to yield the effective polariton temperature of TLP ~ 270 K . It was also observed that the emission is unpolarized below the nonlinear threshold and is linearly polarized above it with a maximum polarization of ∼ 22%. Conventional cavity mode-mediated photon lasing was also observed in one of the polariton laser devices at an injected current density of ~ 36.8 kA/cm2 . All measurements had been made at room temperature. Some of these results are described in the Supplemental Material for completeness. In particular, the strong coupling characteristics are shown for a similar device having a similar value for the ground-state LP mode energy of ~ 3.37 eV, as those considered in the present study. Measurements in the present study have been done on two structurally identical microcavity diodes, which we have labeled as Device 1 and 2. The light (output)-current (L-I) characteristics of Device 2, in the normal direction (k|| ~ 0), are determined by recording the output 5 LP electroluminescence intensities by a photomultiplier tube after spectral filtering through an imaging monochromator, as a function of continuous wave injection current density are shown in Fig. 1 (b). The ground state occupation numbers, quoted in Fig. 1(b), are estimated by normalizing the recorded electroluminescence intensities to unity at the threshold. The peak emission wavelength is   367 nm (see Supplemental Material ). The polariton lasing threshold current densities of Device 1 and 2 are ~ 1993 A/cm2 and ~ 2899 A/cm2, respectively. The sub-threshold slopes of these characteristics, when plotted in a double logarithmic scale, are ~ 0.45 and ~ 0.48 respectively. These rather small values are indicative of device degradation. Nevertheless, the non- linear slopes above the threshold are ~ 2.95 and ~ 3.68, respectively, which are in reasonably good agreement with the values we have previously observed and reported, for the slopes in the polariton lasing regimes. Device 2 shows slightly stronger non-linearity as compared to Device 1. Thus, Device 2 has been described in the main text, whereas the output characteristics of Device 1 are shown in the Supplemental Material . The observation of a larger polariton laser threshold as compared to what we have previously reported in identical GaN-based devices (~ 125 A/cm2 to ~ 375 A/cm2 ) is also indicative of deterioration in the electrical injection process. The increase in the thresholds is, in all probability, a complex interplay of increased density of non-radiative recombination and trapping centers, increased carrier leakage from the active region, and reduction in the carrier injection efficiency at the contacts. This has been taken into account in our theoretical calculations. Nevertheless, as discussed later, the injected carrier density corresponding to the threshold in both of the devices is below the excitonic Mott transition as well as the transparency carrier density in the medium. Optical excitation-dependent photocurrent measurements are performed at room temperature on the polariton lasers under a very small reverse bias (see Supplemental Material 6 ). The experimental configuration is shown in Fig. 1(a). Measurements have not been done under forward bias, as the diode diffusion current would overwhelm the relatively weaker photocurrent response. The excitation-dependent output photocurrent characteristics of Device 2 are shown in Figs. 2 (a) and (b) for different values of the applied reverse bias. We observe a non- linear enhancement of the absolute magnitude of the photocurrent at incident optical pump powers Ip ~ 1.6 mW. Similar behavior has also been observed for Device 1 (see Supplemental Material ). This effect is most clearly manifested at values of reverse biases of ~ 0.1 and 0.2 V. At higher values, the non-linearity starts getting obscured by the increased magnitude of the dark current of the diode. The photocurrents plotted in Figs. 2(a) and (b), are the as-measured values. We would like to emphasize that these currents are the true reverse currents flowing through the diodes, originating from photo-generated carriers which diffuse to the depletion region, wherein they are accelerated and are finally collected at the ohmic contacts of the device. Thus, our measurements are different from those reported by Brodbeck et al. , where a lateral photocurrent, proportional to the in-plane quantum-well carrier density, is collected by Schottky contacts formed across the device active region. The pump powers at the onset of photocurrent non-linearity correspond to a LP density N3D ~ 3 X 1016 cm-3 , estimated with the relationship: N3D = (1−RNI)ANIIp ∕ (fpħωπr2L) where RNI is the cavity reflectance at normal-incidence of the strongly coupled microcavity estimated to be ~ 0.9, ANI is the overall conversion efficiency of the incident photons to intra-cavity polaritons at normal incidence estimated to be ~ 0.46 as discussed later, Ip is the incident pump power, fp is the incident optical excitation repetition rate of the mode- locked laser ~ 80 MHz, ħω is the energy of the pump photons ~ 3.378 eV at the LP ground-state energy, r is the radius of the pump spot size ~ 5 μm and L is the device cavity length ~ 690 nm. 7 This value of NLP is lower than the transparency density of ∼ 1018 cm−3 and the exciton Mott density of ~ 1019 cm−3 in GaN by two and three orders of magnitude, respectively. We believe that the observed non-linearity in the photocurrent is related to the onset of stimulated scattering and polariton lasing triggered by the optical excitation. To model the kinetics of the system for analyzing the experimental data in the most general terms, we use a set of rate equations for the occupancies of the coherent polariton state NC(t), the reservoirs of active excitons, NX(t), and free carriers, Neh(t): dNC dt = (RNX + ANX 2 )(NC +1) -g CNC, (1) dNX (2) dNOeh dt = PO + ANX 2 (NC +1)- (g eh +WO)NOeh, (3) dNJeh dt = PJ - (g eh +WJ)NJeh. (4) In Eq. (1), R is the acoustic phonon assisted relaxation rate from the reservoir to the condensate. A is the Auger scattering constant describing the Auger-like process of the scattering of the exciton to the condensate accompanied by the dissociation of one of the scattered excitons. γC, γX and γeh are the relaxation rates of the condensate polaritons, reservoir excitons and free carriers, respectively. Here we consider the reservoir of free carriers consisting of two parts, Neh = NOeh +NJeh, where NOeh and NJeh describe densities of the reservoirs created by optical and electrical pumping with the pump powers PO and PJ , respectively. Having a different origin, the reservoirs of free carriers pump the reservoir of excitons NX with different rates, WO and WJ, respectively; 8 WO > WJ. The optically pumped reservoir is also replenished by the Auger-like process. Here we leave the spatial degree of freedom beyond the scope of consideration assuming the homogeneous pumps. We also ignore the spin degree of freedom for simplicity. The steady-state solutions we are interested in are found from: PO + PJ =g CNC +g XNX +g ehNeh, (5) NX = - R 2A + (1+ NC)(R2 + 4Ag CNC + R2NC) 2A(1+ NC) , (6) NOeh = PO + ANX 2 (NC +1) g eh +WO , (7) NJeh = PJ g eh +WJ . (8) First, we consider the effect of the electrical pumping only, assuming PO=0. To be able to analyze the measured data of Device 2 in Fig. 1(b), we make the following changes. The electrical excitation term PJ is replaced by (JS ∕ q) where, J is the injected current density, S is the cross- sectional area of the device active region (having dimensions of 690 nm X 40 μm), q is the elementary charge and  is a dimensionless damping factor for the electrical excitation. We see that a value of    gives the best agreement with the measured data. This parameter accounts for the effects of non-idealities in the device performance, principally nonradiative recombination, and carrier leakage from the active recombination region. The satisfactory agreement of the modeling with the measured data is achieved for the values of the parameters listed below. The relaxation rates are γC = 1.19 ps−1, γX = 0.001 ps−1, γeh = 0.0005 ps−1. The relaxation rate to the condensate is R = 3.7x10−10 ps−1, the Auger constant is A = 3.7x10−11 ps−1. The exchange rates 9 from the reservoirs of free carriers are WO = 2 ps−1 and WJ = 0.01 ps−1. The estimations are very close to those made in . Next, we theoretically study optically triggered polariton lasing in Device 2, by analyzing the measured data in Fig. 1(b). To do so, we ignore Eqn. (4), we remove the term NJeh from equation (2) and replace PO in Eqn. (3) by the expression: (1− RNI)ANIIp ∕ ħω, where the symbols have the same meanings and values as previously described. Using the same set of values for the parameters as those used for the electrical excitation case, we obtain a polariton laser threshold Ip ~ 1.6 mW. This is in excellent agreement with the value of the incident optical power at which the photocurrent exhibits an abrupt increase in value. The polariton laser threshold, in Fig. 1(b), is defined as the value of the injection which corresponds to a ground-state occupation number of unity. To obtain this matching between the two thresholds, we have only tuned the values of two parameters to obtain RNI ~ 0.9 and ANI ~ 0.435. Both of these values are quite reasonable. The former corresponds to the averaged reflectance as seen by the incident wideband pump, while the latter is the overall absorbance inside the cavity. This gives an averaged effect because of absorption in the LP band and also probably some residual absorption in the free carrier reservoir. photocurrent as a function of the incident excitation. We use the same parameters as those have been used to analyze the measured forward-bias electroluminescence and the theoretically predicted photoluminescence data in Fig. 1(b). The photocurrent noticeably grows with the increase of the pump power above the threshold. We associate the growth of the photocurrent with the increase in the occupation number of the reservoir of optically excited charge carriers, NOeh, due to the Auger-like process. This is in agreement with our reasoning that the threshold-like behavior in the output photocurrent response is related to bosonic stimulation effects caused by 10 the occupation of the LP ground state. This behavior should not be observed at the photon lasing threshold, as the total carrier density becomes clamped at the onset of threshold. Finally, we theoretically consider the situation when both the optical and electrical pumps are present. Since the relaxation to the exciton (X) reservoir from the “optical” reservoir of carriers is faster than that from the “electronic” reservoir, WO >> WJ, the former pumps the X reservoir more efficiently. At the same time, it empties more quickly. Figure 3 (a) shows the dependence of NC on optical excitation PO at several values of the electrical pump power. We observe that the laser threshold remains essentially invariant of the value of the electrical pump power. The total occupation number of free carriers Neh calculated as a function of optical pump power for two different values of electrical pump power are shown in Fig. 3(b). The general nature of the non- linear increase in Neh, which is a measure of the photocurrent in this dual excitation case, is similar to the measured data shown in Figs. 2(a) and (b). The same general non-linear trend is expected for zero or reverse bias. The inset of Fig. 3(b) shows the variation of NOeh with optical pump power. In conclusion, we demonstrate a new manifestation of bosonic final state stimulation in a microcavity diode in the form of a non-linear increase of the photocurrent with a distinct threshold at room temperature. The measurements have been made on a bulk GaN microcavity with lateral injection. The threshold shows excellent agreement with the measured threshold of polariton lasing in the same microcavity. The experimental results are analyzed in the framework of a model based on the coupled kinetic equations for free carriers, excitons and exciton-polaritons, in which an Auger-like process of excitonic dissociation is also included. When working on this manuscript, some of us have become aware of a similar non-linear photocurrent experiment performed on a GaAs-based microcavity device. We have applied the model also implying the stimulated Auger process as the main reason of the photocurrent non-linearity to the description of that experiment 11 and obtained a good agreement with the data . A crucial difference between the present work and the experiments reported in is in the operation temperature of the polariton laser. While the data of are taken at the liquid Helium temperature, here we report the results of room temperature measurements. 12