Atom Probe Tomography of Molecular Organic Materials: Sub-Dalton Nanometer-Scale Quantification Andrew P. Proudian,† Matthew B. Jaskot,‡ David R. Diercks,‡,¶ Brian P. Gorman,‡,¶ and Jeramy D. Zimmerman∗,†,‡ †Department of Physics, Colorado School of Mines ‡Materials Science Program, Colorado School of Mines ¶Department of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering, Colorado School of Mines E-mail: jdzimmer@mines.edu Abstract In this paper, we demonstrate that atom probe tomography (APT) can be applied to small- molecule organic materials. We show that APT can provide an unprecedented combination of mass resolution of < 1 Da, spatial resolution of ∼ 0.3 nm in z and ∼ 1 nm in x-y, and ana- lytic sensitivity of ∼ 50 ppm with no evidence of molecular fragmentation. We discuss two sys- tems that demonstrate the power of APT to uncover structure-property relationships in or- ganic systems that have proven extremely dif- ficult to probe using existing techniques: (1) a previously published model organic photo- voltaic system in which we show a chemical reaction occurs at the heterointerface; and (2) a model organic light-emitting diode system in which we show molecular segregation occurs in the emissive layer bulk. These examples illus- trate the power of APT to enable new insights into organic molecular materials. Introduction Modern electronics now include a wide vari- ety of organic devices, such as organic photo- voltaics (OPVs), organic thin film transistors (OTFTs), and organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs). Compared to their inorganic coun- terparts, organic electronic devices enjoy a number of advantages, including low-cost room- temperature deposition, easy patterning at rele- vant length scales (e.g. display pixels), mechan- ical flexibility, and application-specific tunabil- ity; the broad commercial success of OLEDs in the past few years provides a clear exam- ple of this.1 However, to fully realize these ad- vantages requires more detailed knowledge of the structure-property relationships of these de- vices. As we will show, atom probe tomogra- phy (APT) is a valuable tool for advancing our knowledge of these molecular systems. The fundamental physics of inorganic semi- conductors has been well-established for over half a century, though engineering challenges remain. In contrast, there are still many de- velopments to be made in the fundamental physics of organic semiconducting materials.2–4 A major difference for organic electronics— which makes them more difficult to describe theoretically—is the strong influence of small changes to morphology on device performance and reliability.2,5,6 Many methods have been explored to determine how microstructure changes with material, deposition, and process- ing conditions;4,6–15 in addition, morphological changes and molecular degradation impact the performance and lifetime of these devices.9,16–22 These studies have led to improvements in per- 1 arXiv:1806.10650v2 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 5 Aug 2020 formance, but have largely been driven by em- pirical investigation rather than material the- ory.6–8 Improved structural characterizations of these devices in three dimensions will lead to better physical theories of organic electronics, shortening development times.5–8,23–25 Because their properties are strongly depen- dent on morphology, organic films require de- tailed nanoscale characterization.6,24 For inor- ganic systems, a wide variety of tools are avail- able for high-resolution imaging and tomogra- phy.26 Unfortunately, many of the techniques are challenging to apply to organic systems, as they are sensitive to ion, electron, and X-ray ir- radiation, and many techniques are hampered by weak scattering contrast between materi- als.23,24,27–30 This does not rule out these tech- niques, but limits the kind and quality of data they can yield. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and its derivatives (e.g. energy-filtered TEM (EF- TEM) high-angle annular dark-field scanning TEM (HAADF-STEM)) have enabled ground- breaking studies of organic nanostructures be- cause of their excellent spatial resolution— with some instruments capable of resolving sub- nanometer features—which greatly contributed to the development of organic electronic de- vices.5–7,23,24,29,31 Unfortunately, difficulty with contrast in these systems can make it challeng- ing to definitively identify composition.23–25,28 Scattering methods are also a common tool for probing organic film structure, and have been instrumental in developing our understanding of organic morphologies; however, due to the low scattering contrast or requirement for a tun- able source, they must often be performed at beamlines or user facilities.6,7,9,11,23,24,29,31,32 A variety of other methods have been used to probe nanostructure as well, such as atomic force microscopy,5,7,9,11,23,24,31,33–35 various opti- cal techniques (e.g. UV-vis/IR spectroscopy),6,7 X-rays (e.g. near edge X-ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy),6,7,23,24 and secondary- ion mass spectroscopy (SIMS).6,7,15,23,34,36 SIMS is the closest to a single measurement of chem- ical and morphological information that is widely used by the community, but still cannot answer many questions about system morphol- ogy because of its limited spatial resolution and fragmentation of molecular species. The immense effort to develop and adopt new tools has enabled innumerable advances in the field, but many questions remain that are diffi- cult to explore with existing techniques. Exist- ing imaging techniques generally have insuffi- cient resolution or chemical contrast to charac- terize the nanostructure of the material at ad- equate levels to inform better physical theories of organic electronics; measurements typically provide either high spatial or sensitive chemical information—but rarely both—requiring indi- rect correlation of information from several dif- ferent techniques.23,24 APT, which combines both high spatial reso- lution (< 1 nm) and high analytical sensitivity (< 100 ppm) in three dimensions, simultane- ously measures chemical and spatial informa- tion with high precision.37,38 This ability can help provide the structural information needed to inform the next generation of physical theo- ries for organic electronics. In APT, a sample prepared with a sub- micrometer radius of curvature is held at cryo- genic temperatures under high bias, generat- ing a large local electric field. A voltage or laser pulse of adequate intensity causes an atom or molecule on the surface to field evaporate. The electric field accelerates this ion towards a two-dimensional position- and time-sensitive detector. This process repeats until the desired thickness of sample has evaporated. The time- of-flight of each ion gives its mass-to-charge ra- tio, and its position on the detector allows the ion’s location to be reconstructed in three di- mensions.37–39 Despite APT’s excellent spatial and chemi- cal resolution and the relative maturity of the technique, the body of APT analyses of or- ganic systems is small.40–48 Most of these stud- ies looked at polymers, which must fragment to field evaporate because of their polymeric structure.44–48 In 2012, Joester et al. exam- ined a blend of poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT) and C60;48 as before, the P3HT poly- mer proved difficult to study due to uneven fragmentation, but the mass-spectrum had a clear C60 signal, suggesting that small-molecule 2 organic systems should be amenable to study with APT; this can be understood by consid- ering that the strength of the intra-molecular (covalent) bonds in small-molecule organics is roughly 2-4 times that of the inter-molecular (van der Waals) bonds.49 In this paper, we show that APT can have a mass resolution of < 1 Da, spatial resolu- tion of ∼ 0.3 nm in z and ∼ 1 nm in x-y, and an analytic sensitivity of ∼ 50 ppm for these materials with no evidence of molecular frag- mentation. This capability enables new in- sights into structure-property relationships at the nanoscale—both at interfaces and in the bulk—which we demonstrate in an OPV50 and an OLED system. This information can help drive forward the development and deployment of molecular organic electronics. Methods Sample Preparation Thin films were prepared by vacuum thermal evaporation at room temperature, using rates of 1 ̊A s−1 for the primary constituent; the film thickness and doping ratios were controlled by the deposition rate, monitored by a quartz crys- tal oscillator. 4,4’-bis(N-carbazolyl)-1,1’-biphenyl (CBP) and tris[2-phenylpyridinato-C2,N]iridium(III) (Ir(ppy)3) were from Luminescence Technology Corporation; CBP was used both as received and purified by vacuum gradient sublimation before use, while Ir(ppy)3 was used as received. Sublimed grade C60 from MER Corp. was pu- rified by vacuum gradient sublimation before use. Because of the sensitivity of organic films to electron radiation, we deposit films directly on a curved Si or W tip; we note that a W tip was used in our OPV study, while the rest of the data presented here used Si tips.50 While direct deposition is common practice for the organic electronics community, this method of sample preparation is very uncommon within the APT community, which mostly prepares tips by cut- ting samples out from a flat film using a focused ion beam (FIB).37 Because of the low evapo- ration field of molecular organic materials, we can use a tip with a comparatively large radius of curvature for APT (R = 250 nm to 500 nm) which approximates a flat surface locally. The Supporting Information provides an SEM im- age of a Si tip in Figure S1 and a reconstruc- tion cross-section showing the lenticular shape of the reconstructed film in Figure S2. Data Acquisition and Analysis APT data were taken using a CAMECA LEAP 4000X Si operated in laser pulse mode using a 355 nm laser; the multiple hit values are typi- cally below 15 %. The reconstructions were per- formed using CAMECA IVAS software (3.6.14). Because the organic molecules have much larger masses than the typical ions observed in APT, the laser pulse repetition rate must be significantly slower than usual to allow for the required time of flight to the detector. Be- yond that adjustment and the larger sample ra- dius discussed above, no special accommoda- tions are needed and good running parameters are within normal ranges for the instrument. The chosen parameter values were optimized to minimize multiple hit events and maximize mass spectral resolution; in general, higher laser pulse energies increase the multiple hit rate and decrease mass spectral resolution, and higher temperatures decrease mass spectral resolution as well. The analysis window seems relatively broad, as we did not identify any particularly sensitive parameters. The values presented be- low are typical for our specimens, and we list a table of analysis parameters for various materi- als in the Supporting Information (Table S1). The crystalline C60 sample (analyzed in Fig- ures 4, S10, and S11) used a temperature set- point of 30 K, a laser pulse energy of 12 pJ, an evaporation rate target of 1 ion per 100 pulses, a laser pulse frequency of 250 kHz, and a de- tector distance of 90 mm. It was reconstructed using voltage evolution with an image compres- sion factor (ICF) of 1.60, a detector efficiency of 0.55, and a tip radius of 315 nm. The spatial distribution map (SDM) was generated using 0.05 nm z cuts to give the best peak quality. 3 The blended CBP:Ir(ppy)3 sample (Figures 3 & 5) used a temperature set-point of 25 K, a laser pulse energy of 5 pJ, an evaporation rate target of 3 ions per 100 pulses, a laser pulse frequency of 125 kHz, and a detector distance of 160 mm. It was reconstructed using voltage evolution with an ICF of 2.00, a detector effi- ciency of 0.55, and a tip radius of 350 nm. A representative voltage curve and detector hit map are provided in the Supporting In- formation (Figures S3 & S4). Mass spectra analysis was performed using the MALDIquant package in R, using the Statistics-sensitive Non- linear Iterative Peak-clipping (SNIP) algorithm for background subtraction.51 Spatial statisti- cal analysis was performed using the spatstat package in R, or extensions available at https: //github.com/aproudian2/rapt. Results and Discussion Organic molecular materials span a wide range of structures, bond types, masses, and atomic constituents. This variety makes organic elec- tronics very versatile, but presents a challenge when trying to generalize their properties. We have successfully analyzed a number of mate- rials systems with APT that represent a rea- sonable cross-section of common organic elec- tronic molecules including organometallics such as tris-(8-hydroxyquinoline)aluminum (Alq3) and tris[2-phenylpyridinato-C2,N]iridium(III) (Ir(ppy)3), fullerenes, tetracene, and polycyclic aromatics such as 4,4’-bis(N-carbazolyl)-1,1’- biphenyl (CBP) and bis[3,5-di(9H-carbazol-9- yl)phenyl]diphenylsilane (SimCP2) as shown in Figure 1, and other materials we have successfully run include bathophenanthro- line (BPhen), diindenoperylene (DIP), and enyl-4H-pyran (DCM2); Table S1 of the Sup- porting Information provides information on various materials and their analysis parame- ters. Thus far we have confined ourselves to thermally evaporable molecules, but this is not a known limitation of the technique; in fact, in electron irradiated systems we observe field evaporation of covalently bridged C60 dimers and trimers (see Supporting Information Fig- ure S5), which are both insoluble and cannot be sublimed. The limits for applicability of APT to organic and other materials systems are not fully known, and merit further study. In applying a new technique to any system, it is important to understand the quality of infor- mation it provides. For APT, there are three major concerns: (1) species discrimination, (2) molecular fragmentation, and (3) spatial resolu- tion. We address each of these to validate APT for organic molecular materials. analyzed with atom probe tomography: (1) tris-(8-hydroxyquinoline)aluminum (Alq3), (2) 4,4’-bis(N-carbazolyl)-1,1’-biphenyl (CBP), (3) tris[2-phenylpyridinato-C2,N]iridium(III) (Ir(ppy)3), (4) bis[3,5-di(9H-carbazol-9- yl)phenyl]diphenylsilane (SimCP2), (5) C60, (6) tetracene. Validation In APT, mass resolution is typically character- ized by the mass resolving power (MRP), which is given by:52 MRP = m ∆m (1) 4 where ∆m is the full-width at half-maximum of the peak at mass m. We have demonstrated MRPs of > 1000 using a flight path length of 160 mm. Figure 2 shows part of a mass spec- trum collected on a sample of C60 (structure shown in Figure 1 (5)) in which the isotopic peaks are clearly resolved; based on the peaks shown, this this spectrum has a mass resolving power (m/∆m) of about 1000. This high MRP allows definitive identification of the molecular constituents of a sample by comparing the spec- trum to the expected isotopic distribution. 715 720 725 730 0 50 100 150 200 Mass−to−Charge Ratio (Da) Counts 60 showing iso- topic peaks; the red lines are its expected iso- topic distribution. Based on the peak separa- tion shown here, this spectrum has a mass re- solving power (m/∆m) of about 1000. blended film of 6 vol % Ir(ppy)3 in CBP (pu- rified by thermal gradient sublimation) (their molecular structures are shown in Figure 1 (2) & (3)). There is a small but clearly resolvable peak at 319 Da (marked BPC); that we can ob- serve this peak at all is a clear advantage of APT in organic systems, as it comprises only ∼ 0.5 % of the total film. This peak is near the mass of CBP missing one carbazole group, and therefore might be thought to arise from the fragmentation of the molecule during the atom probe evaporation process; however, the high MRP of APT allows us to discern that this peak is 1 Da too heavy for a fragment with a dan- gling bond, indicating that there is a hydrogen at the 4’ position of the biphenyl group. This extra hydrogen suggests this peak is the im- purity 4-(N-carbazolyl)biphenyl (BPC)53 in the material left over from its synthesis or created during film deposition, not a fragment formed during the field evaporation process; we note that the nearby Ir(ppy)++ 3 peak is at the ex- pected mass, confirming that the transforma- tion from TOF to mass-to-charge is accurate. Therefore, if any fragmentation is occurring, such as the much smaller peaks in the spectrum, they comprise only a small fraction (< 1 %) of the data. Furthermore, a run of a blended film of 6 vol % Ir(ppy)3 in as-received CBP (Figure S6 in the Supporting Information) shows this impurity comprising about 5 % of the film (with other small peaks similarly increased), further supporting the impurity interpretation of these peaks. Given the noise floor observed in these spectra, we estimate our sensitivity to be ap- proximately 50 ppm. APT provides more data than just spatial position and mass, and this ancillary informa- tion can reveal more about what has been ob- served. Because of both the dynamic distribu- tion of the electric field on the sample’s surface and the stochastic nature of field evaporation events, multiple ions can evaporate during a sin- gle pulse.54 This is sometimes reduced through the selection of run parameters, but these mul- tiple hit events can enhance our interpretation of the data. Two dimensional correlation his- tograms of double hit events during APT runs (Figures S7 & S8 in the Supporting Informa- tion) show no evidence of molecular fragmenta- tion during post-ionization of the Ir(ppy)3:CBP sample, strengthening our rejection of signifi- cant fragmentation.55 We note that similar re- sults are seen for other materials, such as Alq3 and even SimCP2, which is one of the larger evaporable small molecules (i.e. 977 Da). Because the needle-like shape of the specimen acts as the optic and we use a much larger ra- dius of curvature for our sample than typical APT specimens, it is critical to characterize our spatial resolution. To test our spatial resolu- tion, we prepared a film of C60 on DIP, which templates C60 with the (111) plane parallel to the substrate and enhances crystallinity;56 an x-ray diffraction measurement of the film shows that it is textured as expected (Figure S9 in the 5 Mass−to−Charge−State Ratio (Da) Counts (arb.) 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 101 102 103 320 325 330 101 Ir(ppy)3 ++ Ir(ppy)3 ++ BPC CBP CBP Ir(ppy)3 ++ + BPC + Carbazole+ CO2 impurity 4-N-(carbazolyl)biphenyl (BPC) showing a clear offset of 1 Da from the expected fragment location, while the Ir(ppy)++ 3 peak is at its expected mass; the vertical lines in the inset show the expected isotopic positions of the impurity. Supporting Information). The crystalline struc- ture provides an internal measure of the spatial resolution of APT for our specimens, which has been the standard method of estimating reso- lution among the APT community.57 −4 −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 ∆z (nm) Counts C60 templated on diidenoperylene (DIP) show- ing crystal lattice planes in the z direction. The sampled volume is ∼ 2600 nm3. A fit to the peaks (red) indicates the spatial resolution of this sample in the z dimension is ∼ 0.3 nm. mon analysis method for crystalline APT data that measures the distribution of z-axis compo- nents of the vectors between points in a neigh- borhood.58 We used a neighborhood of diame- ter 2.4 mm on the detector, corresponding to a sampled volume of ∼ 2600 nm3; formally, the resolution of the reconstruction is only well- defined in this region, but for the following dis- cussion we extrapolate to the entire detected region. Fitting to a model of evenly spaced Gaussian functions with equal standard devia- tions allows us to extract information about our resolution. The regular spacing of the peaks is 0.817(2) nm with this reconstruction using the model fit, which corresponds to the ex- pected (111) lattice planes of the oriented C60 at 0.817 nm.59 The width of the peaks indicates that the spatial resolution of this sample— which we define as the standard deviation of the fitted Gaussians—is 0.313(3) nm in the z- direction, or ∼ 0.3 nm taking other uncertain- ties into account. We note that this is not a physical limit of the resolution for the tech- nique, but what was achieved for this particular sample. Given this known dimension in z, we can ad- just the reconstruction parameters to return the expected density of the crystal. This recon- struction allows for estimation of the field of view, which for this sample is around 760 nm; as there are about 800 pixels across the de- tector,60 our x-y resolution is limited to about 1 nm but could be improved with different sam- ple geometries or increasing the detector path length. A real space plot of molecular locations and a three-dimensional reconstruction showing the crystal planes is provided in the Supporting Information (Figures S10 & S11). 6 Organic Electronics In 2016, we used APT to investigate the be- havior of the bilayer C60/tetracene (Figure 1 (5) & (6)) small-molecule OPV system—one of the most studied models for testing our un- derstanding of the crucial heterojunction inter- face for OPVs.50 APT revealed that the C60 and tetracene molecules chemically react at the heterojunction interface, creating a partial monolayer of a Diels-Alder cycloadduct (DAc) species that cannot be avoided using standard deposition techniques. This spatially resolved chemical resolution helps explain changes in de- vice performance due to the presence of the DAc.50,61 This problem takes advantage of APT’s strengths: there is no elemental composition change for this reaction, and its concentration and location in the film are critically impor- tant to understanding its impact on device performance. The development of this analy- sis, and the explanation that resulted, was only possible because of the unique capabilities of APT. Measuring the clear structure-property relations of an organic system moves the field closer to closing the experiment-theory loop. In fluorescent and phosphorescent systems such as OLEDs, high enough local concentra- tions of the emitter molecule can cause con- centration quenching—an issue where a suffi- cient dopant concentration allows for rapid non- radiative relaxation to the ground state, re- ducing efficiency.62,63 Additionally, changes in the overall concentration of the OLED emit- ter guest strongly affect rates of triplet-triplet annihilation and triplet-polaron quenching.64–66 These concentration effects impact both effi- ciency, peak emission wavelength, and lifetime, and are compounded for systems in which the guest emitter molecule aggregates.65 The heavily-studied, archetypal phospho- rescent OLED system of CBP:Ir(ppy)3 is suspected of this emitter aggregation, in- creasing self-quenching, exciton-exciton and exciton-polaron interaction, and device degra- dation.65,67–70 Measuring aggregation in OLED active layers is a natural problem for APT, which can easily discriminate and locate each molecule with high precision. To study aggre- gation, we deposited a blended film of 6 vol% Ir(ppy)3 in CBP—a typical blend ratio for this system;70 the measured bulk composition of the blend is 5.8 ion% Ir(ppy)3; we note that while these percentages differ in their calcula- tion (vol% versus ion%), the molecules are close in size and the variation is within the error of the crystal monitor calibration. We provide a region of the reconstruction in the Supporting Information (Figure S12). A common method of looking for clusters is to look at heat map projections (shown in Figure 5a,b) through the sample for “hot spots;” however, this does not indicate the significance of the clustering, as it relies on subjectively interpreting the data. To formally characterize clustering of Ir(ppy)3 in the sample, we used the three-dimensional K- function (K3); this function measures the num- ber of additional Ir(ppy)3 molecules contained within a sphere of radius r centered about each Ir(ppy)3 molecule, normalized by the bulk con- centration of Ir(ppy)3.71 Acceptance interval envelopes were generated for the measured K- function by randomly relabeling the molecular identities of the measured CBP:Ir(ppy)3 loca- tions 50,000 times and calculating K3(r) of the relabeled Ir(ppy)3 patterns. Deviations above this envelope indicate significant non-random clustering of the observed Ir(ppy)3 at those dis- tances. We use the square root of the K-function to stabilize the variance of the envelopes; this transformation does not change any of the un- derlying conclusions drawn about the observed data, and is commonly used in the analysis of point patterns.71,72 To make interpretation of the data easier, we also subtract the median value of the envelope, centering the plot about zero. From the transformed K-function and en- velopes shown in Figure 5c, we observe signifi- cant (deviation outside a 99.9 % acceptance in- terval) clustering of the Ir(ppy)3 in the range of about 5 nm to 12 nm. This corroborates earlier work using HAADF-STEM that suggested clus- tering of Ir(ppy)3 in 4,4’,4”-tris(N-carbazolyl)- triphenylamine (TCTA),65 but adds quantita- tive length scales in three dimensions that allow for better models of mixing and charge trans- 7 0 0.04 0.08 0.12 −20 −10 0 10 20 y (nm) Concentration (a) −20 −10 0 10 20 x (nm) 0 10 20 z (nm) (b) 0 5 10 15 20 r (nm) −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 5 K3(r) Anomaly Observed Med. Sim. 95.0% AI 99.0% AI 99.9% AI (c) box along with simulation envelopes. The excursion of the observed K-function above the envelopes indicates significant (deviation outside a 99.9 % acceptance interval) clustering of the Ir(ppy)3 in the range of about 5 nm to 12 nm. 8 port. Furthermore, this K-function analysis of APT data can be extended to general small- molecule organic systems, as it does not require a high z-contrast atom such as the Ir core in Ir(ppy)3. The effect of the observed clustering on device properties will be explored in future publications. Conclusions Morphology is inextricably linked to the be- havior of organic devices, and it is crucial to understand—and ultimately control—the structures of these systems. Using APT to study small-molecule organic semiconducting systems can potentially answer long-standing questions of device characteristics, and bolster a broader theory of organic electronic physics. The high chemical discrimination (< 1 Da), spatial resolution (∼ 0.3 nm in z and ∼ 1 nm in x-y), and analytic sensitivity (∼ 50 ppm) we have achieved with APT are unmatched for studying the morphology of small-molecule or- ganic materials; we note that these parame- ters are not fully optimized and there is still room for improvement. Some work has been done to use a FIB to lift out a section of or- ganic material from a film.30,73 If low-damage FIB lift-out of these films can be developed, it opens up many more avenues for experimen- tation. In particular, it permits observations of the morphological differences between de- vices before and after operation for extended times, and may allow for improved x-y reso- lution. The spatial information provided for working devices is particularly valuable for clos- ing the experiment-theory loop. Through chemically-specific and spatially- resolved information, APT can answer ques- tions about both bulk and interfacial struc- tures. This capability adds another power- ful characterization tool for the organic elec- tronics community, enabling new experimen- tal directions. As APT matures, it will be- come an ever more valuable technique for study- ing organic molecular materials. By provid- ing high-resolution and chemically-specific in- formation, APT can help move organic semi- conductors towards their promise of large-scale, high-versatility, and low-cost electronics. Acknowledgments Work by APP, MBJ, and JDZ was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Sci- ence, Basic Energy Sciences under Award de- sc0018021. The LEAP was supported by a Na- tional Science Foundation Major Research In- strumentation grant DMR-1040456. Supporting Information The supporting information provides: an SEM image of a Si sample tip, a cross-sectional plot of the reconstructed lenticular shape of our samples, a representative detector hit map and voltage curve from APT, a mass spectrum of electron irradiated C60 showing dimers and trimers compared to that of a pristine, unirradi- ated C60 sample, a mass spectrum of as-received Ir(ppy)3:CBP showing increased levels of the impurity peak, correlation histograms showing no fragmentation curves for the purified and as- received Ir(ppy)3:CBP samples, an XRD scan of a witness for the SDM sample film, a real-space plot of the points used for the SDM with visible lattice planes, a three-dimensional reconstruc- tion of the volume used for the SDM showing regions of high density, a three-dimensional re- construction of the volume used for the cluster- ing analysis, and a table of materials analyzed with APT process parameters.