Controlling spectral energies of all harmonics in programmable way using time-domain digital coding metasurface Jie Zhao1†, Xi Yang2†, Jun Yan Dai1†, Qiang Cheng1,3*, Xiang Li2, Ning Hua Qi1, Jun Chen Ke1, Guo Dong Bai1, Shuo Liu1, Shi Jin2*, and Tie Jun Cui1,3* 1State Key Laboratory of Millimeter Waves, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China 2National Mobil Communication Research Laboratory, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China 3Jiangsu Cyber-Space Science & Technology Co., Ltd., 12 Mozhou East Road, Nanjing 211111, China † These authors contributed equally to this work. * Corresponding author: qiangcheng@seu.edu.cn; jinshi@seu.edu.cn; tjcui@seu.edu.cn Abstract Modern wireless communication is one of the most important information technologies, but its system architecture has been unchanged for many years. Here, we propose a much simpler architecture for wireless communication systems based on metasurface. We firstly propose a time-domain digital coding metasurface to reach a simple but efficient method to manipulate spectral distributions of harmonics. Under dynamic modulations of phases on surface reflectivity, we could achieve accurate controls to different harmonics in a programmable way to reach many unusual functions like frequency cloaking and velocity illusion, owing to the temporal gradient introduced by digital signals encoded by ‘0’ and ‘1’ sequences. A theoretical model is presented and experimentally validated to reveal the nonlinear process. Based on the time-domain digital coding metasurface, we propose and realize a new wireless communication system in binary frequency-shift keying (BFSK) frame, which has much more simplified architecture than the traditional BFSK with excellent performance for real-time message transmission. The presented work, from new concept to new system, will find important applications in modern information technologies. Nonlinear effects are typically observed during the interaction of electromagnetic (EM) waves and natural materials in a wide spectrum ranging from microwave to optical frequencies (1-3). Such phenomena are usually associated with the dielectric polarization responding in a nonlinear way to the intensity of incident field, resulting in radiation fields oscillating at new frequencies or propagating to new directions (4-6). Up to now, the nonlinear properties have been witnessed profound effects on applications in communication, optical storage, and all-optical computing (7-9). However, the mainstream nonlinearity generation methods suffer from various major problems. For example, a drawback of the conventional nonlinear crystal is inaccurate phase control of the dielectric polarizability, which hinders ability to perform elaborate wave manipulations for all harmonics (10,11). In addition, the frequency conversion requires sufficiently high optical intensities to enhance the nonlinear process (12,13), which may be limited by damage threshold of materials in practice. Recent advances of metamaterials and metasurfaces have provided an unprecedented degree of freedom to manipulate the electromagnetic waves in subwavelength scale, giving rise to the enhanced nonlinearity with giant local fields, and thus offering new possibilities in controlling the intensity, phase, and polarization states of induced harmonics (14-18). Owing to the sensitivity of structural symmetry to the nonlinear susceptibilities, various shapes of meta-atoms have been employed in second-harmonic generation (SHG) by optimizing the element orientation as well as tuning the interaction between neighboring elements, making it possible to achieve the phase control over the local nonlinearity for the generated harmonics (19-21). Apart from the interesting SHG phenomena, nonlinear effects over higher-order harmonics have also received considerable attention and have been used in the third-harmonic generation (THG) and four-wave mixing (22-25). However, the efficiency of frequency conversion strongly depends on the input field intensity, forming a barrier of substantial nonlinear response to weak signals. As an alternative approach, by using time-varying metasurface, it has been proved that the normal momentum component of the incident photon makes a difference on the two sides of the metasurface (26,27), enabling spatiotemporal modulation of electromagnetic waves and frequency shifting due to temporal phase gradient28. Nevertheless, this theoretical approach on one hand is lack of simple and elegant way to realize in application (26-28), on the other hand, it still remains a significant challenge to generate arbitrary wave manipulations for both linear and nonlinear frequency components with high precision and high efficiency. Another route to achieve the nonlinear control lies in time-modulated antenna array (29,30). Through simple binary switching of diodes integrated into the array elements, one is able to tailor the radiation patterns at both central and harmonic frequencies, and thus benefit a plenty of applications in microwave engineering. However, this scheme lacks essential response to the external excitations as the natural materials since the harmonics are resulted from the Fourier components of the rapid switching over a built-in source, hereby fails to perceive and respond to external electromagnetic waves in a predefined way, limiting the application area of the method. Moreover, most of research efforts in this field are focused on amplitude modulation of the antenna element, since complicated circuit designs are usually required to implement the desired phase modulations over the high-order harmonics, which will inevitably increase the system complexity and the risk of performance degradation (31). To solve the above difficulties, here we propose a new route to produce and control the nonlinearity of waves in free space with much stronger capabilities by exploiting a time-domain digital coding metasurface with dynamic reflection features. Inspired by spatial-domain digital coding metasurfaces (32,33), complex modulation strategies are employed to tailor the wave-matter interactions and frequency spectrum simultaneously, where discrete reflection phase states of metasurface are altered in digital coding sequences with a controlled manner. We demonstrate that nonlinear process will take place from the temporal modulation of incident waves on the metasurface with accurate controls of both amplitude and phase distributions for all harmonics. A rigorous theory is presented to describe the nonlinear process. To experimentally validate the theory, we fabricate a sample composed of periodic coding element loaded with varactor diode. Driven by different combinations of output voltages from an interface of field programmable gate array (FPGA), the single metasurface can operate many functions by controlling the time- domain digital coding states. This produces a time-domain programmable coding metasurface, which have powerful capabilities to generate and manipulate the nonlinearity, and could trigger some interesting phenomena such as frequency cloaking and velocity illusion. As an application of the time-domain digital coding metasurface, a binary frequency-shift keying (BFSK) communication system is explored within a novel framework in contrast to the classical heterodyne architectures. In the new BFSK system, the two basic carrier frequencies are synthesized directly via the metasurface without using complicated mixing processes, showing great advantages of the time-domain digital coding metasurface. The proposed theory and method will pave a way for simplified and compact communication and radar systems across the frequency range from acoustic, microwave to optics. Time-domain digital coding metasurface. A coding metasurface is composed of digital units. For 1-bit coding, the two digital units ‘0’ and ‘1’ have either opposite phases or 0 and 1 transmission coefficients. However, the existing references (32-35) have only studied space-domain digital coding metasurfaces to control electromagnetic waves by using different spatial coding sequences. Here, we propose the concept of time-domain digital coding metasurface, in which the digital units are controlled by different periodic time sequences from FPGA, as shown in Fig. 1. We start to investigate interactions between the electromagnetic waves and the time-domain digital coding metasurface, which is composed of periodic coding elements loaded with varactor diodes. Then the reflectivity can be expressed as a periodic function of time and defined over one period as a linear combination of scaled and shifted pulses. Under the excitation of a monochromatic signal Ei(f) with frequency fc, the reflected signal from the time-domain digital coding metasurface can be derived as (see Supporting Online Material, SOM): Er(f) = a0Ei(f) + ∑[ak ∞ k=1 Ei(f − kf0) + a−kEi(f + kf0)] (1) in which f0 = 1/T (T is the period of the reflectivity function), and ak is the complex Fourier series coefficient at kf0: ak = 1 M Sa (kπ M ) exp (−j kπ M ) ∙ ∑ Γm M−1 m=0 exp (−j 2kmπ M ) = UF ∙ TF (2) in which, M is the length of coding sequence in one period, Γm is the reflectivity at the interval (m-1)τ < t < mτ, τ = T/M is the pulse width, and TF = ∑ Γm M−1 m=0 exp (−j 2kmπ M ) , UF = 1 M Sa (kπ M ) exp (−j kπ M ) (3) It is clear that ak can be regarded as the product of two terms: the time factor (TF) and unit factor (UF). The former is related to the modulation signal (Γm) within different time slots, while the latter is the Fourier series coefficient of the basic pulse with the pulse width τ and repeated with the period T. UF defines the basic spectrum property within one pulse, while TF represents the coding strategy. It is obvious that the time-domain digital coding metasurface is able to generate a number of harmonics fc ± kf0 by simply controlling the time-domain coding states around the central frequency. Meanwhile, it offers the possibility of nonlinear amplitude and phase manipulations for all harmonics by tuning the coefficients ak using an optimized modulation TF. We remark that the proposed method is essentially different from the traditional mixing techniques, and relies on the dynamic reflections on the coding metasurface to produce the spectral features of incident waves. Modulation methods. To illustrate the nonlinear control capability to the spectral features of reflected waves by the time-domain digital coding metasurface quantitatively, we calculate the spectral distributions of all harmonics under the illumination of monochromatic plane wave. In fact, both amplitude and phase modulations of the reflectivity on metasurface could achieve efficient controls to the nonlinearity. SOM Figure S2 presents the results of amplitude modulation (AM) on the metasurface. An important feature of AM is the symmetry of amplitude spectra with respect to the central frequency, due to the fact that both +kth and -kth Fourier series components have equal amplitude. However, in some applications like communication systems, the message signals may not be dispersed simultaneously into the upper (+kth) and lower (-kth) harmonics, which leads to waste of energy and spectrum resources. On the other hand, the AM reflectivity is usually required less than unity in many situations, and hence part of incident energy has to be absorbed by the metasurface. This should be avoided in power-limited systems. More importantly, the zeroth-order harmonic (the central frequency) cannot be eliminated totally since the reflectivity is always positive in the whole period, which makes it impossible to realize frequency cloaking. To circumvent the disadvantages, phase modulation (PM) of the time-domain reflectivity is explored to provide asymmetric spectral responses and promote the modulation efficiency. under different time coding sequences, in which the reflectivity is described as a signal with unity amplitude but digital phase states. Interestingly, we find that the zeroth-order harmonic is totally eliminated with a 1-bit coding sequence 010101... (M = 2 and T = 1μs), as the reflection phase changes between 0° and 180° periodically, as shown in Fig. 2A-B. This phenomenon can be ascribed to signal cancellation in each period from the anti-phase reflectivity, making the coefficient a0 equal zero. This feature can also make the proposed metasurface be a frequency cloak, since it transfers the incident energy at certain frequency to its higher-order harmonics completely, and the reflected and scattered energies at this frequency cannot be detected. Figure 2C-D illustrates another case with 2-bit coding 00-01-00-01-..., in which the signals of even-order harmonics (except k = 0) are totally suppressed as the phase of the reflectivity switches between 0° and 90° periodically. If more phase states are introduced in the PM signal, one can further remove unwanted harmonics and create asymmetric energy distributions in the whole spectra, as shown in Fig. are exploited to modulate the reflectivity with mirrored spectrum distributions. The reason for the observed behavior is that, when the reflectivity of the metasurface becomes complex and time-variant, the relationship a−k = ak ∗ is no longer preserved in contrast to the AM scenario, resulting in the spectral asymmetry. It is also easy to find that the anti-symmetric phase ramps in Fig. 2E and 2G will lead to mirror transformation of spectrum, thereby translating the original signals from +kth harmonic to the corresponding -kth harmonic. The flexible controls of harmonic spectra can be used to create velocity illusions and new-architecture communication systems, which will be discussed in details in the experimental section. Experiments on nonlinear reflections. For experimental demonstration, we design a PM time-domain digital coding metasurface, as illustrated in Fig. 3A, in which the zoomed-in view of the meta-atom is depicted in the inset. Two rectangular patches linked by a varactor diode (SMV-2019) are repeated periodically on the top of the substrate (F4B, εr = 2.65(1 − j0.001) and thickness=4mm). A number of narrow slots (width=0.15mm) are etched on the bottom plate for biasing the diodes through metallic via holes. To eliminate the electromagnetic leakage from slots, another ultrathin vinyl electrical tape (3M Temflex, thickness=0.13mm) backed by a metal layer is placed underneath the slots to prevent the wave penetration. Each element has the size of 18.8×16.1mm2, and the geometric dimensions are optimized to achieve continuous adjustment of the reflection phase with varied biasing voltages near 3.6GHz. Commercial software, CST Microwave Studio, is used to quantify the spectral response of the metasurface when illuminated by a plane wave polarized in the x direction. Figure 3B-C illustrates the simulated reflection amplitude and phase spectra as a function of the biasing voltage, showing high reflection amplitude and nearly 360° phase range in the spectra of interest, which is especially fit for PM in experiments. A prototype composed of 16×16 meta-atoms is fabricated and measured in a microwave anechoic chamber (SOM Fig. S3). Figure 3D illustrates the measured harmonics distributions modulated by the 1-bit time-domain digital coding 01010101... with two phase states (φ = 0° and φ = 180°) at different pulse durations, in which two voltages (0V and -9V) are chosen to bias the varactor diodes to reach ‘0’ and ‘1’ digital states. We clearly observe the harmonic generations using the time-domain digital coding metasurface as predicted. When the pulse duration τ increases from 0.8 to 6.4μs gradually, the harmonic energies are insensitive to the variance of τ since the amplitude of Fourier series is only associated with the coding sequence in modulation, as illustrated in SOM Fig. S4. Consistent to the theoretical calculations shown in Fig. 2B, the proposed metasurface transfers most of the incident energy at the central frequency to higher-order harmonics effectively, realizing good frequency cloaking performance. We remark that there is a small portion of the zeroth-order harmonic owing to the simplified modelling and measurement errors. The frequency cloaking effect can be clearly observed from the far-field scattering pattern. Concerning the on-off dependency of the modulation signal with the binary coding sequence 01010101..., the measured scattering patterns of the metasurface in H-plane are presented in Fig. 3E. As the biasing circuit is switched on, the maximum scattering directivity for the central frequency (0th-order harmonic) exhibits a significant drop by 15dB than that in the off state, corresponding to the good cloaking performance. The harmonics of the ±1st orders show nearly identical radiation patterns as a result of symmetric harmonic generations under the current coding sequence, as demonstrated in Fig. 3F. For 2-bit coding sequences containing four digital states ‘00’, ‘01’, ‘10’, and ‘11’ with the corresponding biasing voltages 0, -6, -9, and -21V, we can achieve reflection responses with the same amplitude but discrete phase states 0°, 90°, 180°, and 270°, respectively. The symmetry of the reflection spectra will be broken in the presence of time gradient. This is confirmed by the measured results shown in Fig. 3G, in which the harmonics of ±kth orders display rather large intensity contrast under the periodic coding sequence 00-01-10-11. In particular, the harmonics of +1st and -1st orders have almost the same H-plane scattering pattern but make a great difference in amplitude, as shown in Fig. 3I, due to the asymmetric spectral profile. Furthermore, the modulated spectra are easily mirrored by reversing the periodic coding sequence as 11-10-01-00, as presented in Fig. 3H, since the opposite time gradient will result in the exchange of the +kth and -kth spectral lines. Such a property can be further understood by observing the scattering pattern in SOM Figure S6, in which the ±1st harmonics exchange their roles. The large power conversion rate from carrier to the first harmonics renders the metasurface distinctive capability to realize arbitrary Doppler shift, which is especially useful for simulating echoed signals of real targets with fake Doppler frequency shift to deceive the active radar system, yielding velocity illusions. For instance, a motionless time-domain digital coding metasurface with the frequency shift of ±156.25 KHz (see Fig. 3G-H) may create an illusion of approaching or receding objects with extraordinary velocity ±6.51 km/s to the radar operating at 3.6GHz. By seeking proper pulse width or coding sequence, dynamic Doppler shifts can be realized to mimic different moving targets with varied velocities using the programmable time-domain digital coding metasurface, which brings large challenge for conventional radar to detect the movement of camouflaged targets. New-architecture wireless communication system. The time-domain coding metasurface has demonstrated excellent capability to embed the digital signals into the carrier waves at the radio frequency (RF) in free space, getting rid of the conventional mixing process, which may serve as a brand new architecture for the information transmission (36). As illustrated in Figs. efficient energy conversion from the central frequency to the +1th and -1th order harmonics, hinting that the two spectral lines can be employed as two discrete frequencies required by the traditional BFSK communication system, standing for binary information of ‘1’ and ‘0’ respectively inside the message. The schematic of the new BFSK system is illustrated in Fig. 4A, in which the time-domain digital coding metasurface is used to replace the analog-digital converter (ADC) and whole RF portion composed of filters, mixers, and amplifiers in the traditional system, as shown in SOM Fig. S7. The real-time BFSK signal transmission is carried out from the meta-transmitter to a soft-defined radio (SDR) receiver (NI USRP RIO 2943R). Following the conceptual diagram in Fig. 4A, the transmission process can be divided into three steps, as presented in Fig. 4B. Firstly, FPGA generates a bit stream (such as 01101001...) of the transmitted information (e.g. pictures and movies). Then all bit streams are mapped to the corresponding coding sequences of the metasurface, which are further extended periodically to produce a pair of discrete frequencies in BFSK. Finally the electromagnetic waves containing the digital information are transmitted. We build up the new BFSK wireless communication system, as shown in SOM Figure S8, in which the distance between the metasurface and receiver is about 6.25m. Figure S9A gives the block diagram of the receiver. All baseband algorithms for the BFSK receiver are performed on SDR platform (NI USRP RIO 2943R). The time-domain signal is transformed into the frequency domain through FFT operation and is sent to the detecting diagram to determine the spectrum intensities. The upper path in the detecting diagram is responsible for the energy detection of frequency offset f1 (related to bit ‘1’) and the lower path in the detecting diagram is responsible for the energy detection of frequency offset f2 (related to bit ‘0’). When the power value detected in the upper path is much larger than the power value detected in the lower path, the receiver judges that the current bit transmitted by the metasurface-based transmitter is ‘1’, and vice versa. After the detection and judgment, the bit stream is recovered and grouped by the receiver, and conveyed to a program for postprocessing. For the better illustration, SOM Figure S9B shows the instantaneously experimental result of the receiving spectrum after the FFT operation. The peak value is located at the lower frequency with the offset of -312.5KHz, which indicates that bit ‘0’ is transmitted in the current message symbol. SOM Table S1 shows the key parameters of the BFSK wireless communication system based on the time-domain digital coding metasurface. A color picture shown in Fig. 4C is successfully transmitted over the air and recovered by the SDR receiver with the new BSFK system, and the received messages are presented in Fig. 4D-F with the receiving angles α = 0°, 20° and 30°, respectively. We clearly observe that, even though the receiver has a large alignment angle to the metasurface, the received pictures have very good quality, verifying the feasibility and superiority of the new BFSK system. More detailed descriptions on message transmission and reception are provided in SOM Video. In summary, we have demonstrated a new theory to control nonlinearity using time-domain digital coding metasurface, whose reflection phase or amplitude can be modulated periodically with pre-defined coding sequences. This time-varying feature allows productions of high-order harmonics through the Fourier transform of the modulation signal, and hence can transfer the energy of the central frequency to harmonics of higher orders. Different from the conventional nonlinear technologies, the proposed time-domain digital coding metasurface offers substantial flexibility and accuracy in the manipulations of the harmonics by simply customizing the coding sequences in a programmable way, resulting in many unusual functions like frequency cloaking and velocity illusion. Based on the time-domain digital coding metasurface, we have proposed a novel wireless communication system with much more simplified architecture. Compared with conventional systems, the hardware complexity of the metasurface-based system is greatly simplified without degrading the system performance. The metasurface-based system also promises a significant potential to reduce the power consumption and improves the energy efficiency, and hence provides new solutions for the future wireless communication systems.