1 Nano-imaging of intersubband transitions in van der Waals quantum wells Peter Schmidt1, Fabien Vialla1,2, Simone Latini3,4, Mathieu Massicotte1, Klaas-Jan Tielrooij1, Stefan Mastel5, Gabriele Navickaite1, Mark Danovich6, David A. Ruiz-Tijerina6, Celal Yelgel6, Vladimir Fal’ko6, Kristian Thygesen3, Rainer Hillenbrand5,7, Frank H. L. Koppens1,8* 1ICFO - Institut de Ciències Fotòniques, The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, 08860 Castelldefels (Barcelona), Spain 2Institut Lumière Matière UMR5306, Université Claude Bernard Lyon1 – CNRS, 69622 Villeurbanne Cedex, France 3Center for Atomic-scale Materials Design, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark 4Max Planck Institute for the Structure and Dynamics of Matter, 22761 Hamburg, Germany 5CIC nanoGUNE Consolider, 20018 Donostia-San Sebastián, Spain 6National Graphene Institute, University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL, United Kingdom 7IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science, 48011 Bilbao, Spain 8ICREA-Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats, 08010 Barcelona, Spain *Correspondence to: frank.koppens@icfo.eu 2 The science and applications of electronics and optoelectronics have been driven for decades by progress in growth of semiconducting heterostructures. Many applications in the infrared and terahertz frequency range exploit transitions between quantized states in semiconductor quantum wells (intersubband transitions). However, current quantum well devices are limited in functionality and versatility by diffusive interfaces and the requirement of lattice-matched growth conditions. Here, we introduce the concept of intersubband transitions in van der Waals quantum wells and report their first experimental observation. Van der Waals quantum wells are naturally formed by two-dimensional (2D) materials and hold unexplored potential to overcome the aforementioned limitations: They form atomically sharp interfaces and can easily be combined into heterostructures without lattice-matching restrictions. We employ near-field local probing to spectrally resolve and electrostatically control the intersubband absorption with unprecedented nanometer-scale spatial resolution. This work enables exploiting intersubband transitions with unmatched design freedom and individual electronic and optical control suitable for photodetectors, LEDs and lasers. Nanoscale confinement of charge carriers gives rise to a rich variety of physical phenomena that are not present in bulk materials, and lies at the heart of many modern optoelectronic applications . One striking feature is that confinement leads to quantized energy levels, whose energy spacing increases with spatial confinement. Charge carriers can be confined in three dimensions (0D quantum dots ), in two dimensions (1D quantum wires ) or in one dimension (2D quantum wells). The latter is arguably the most well-known example and has led to the development of quantum well infrared photodetectors and quantum cascade lasers (QCLs) for mid infrared (MIR) to THz wavelengths. These devices rely on transitions of electrons (or holes) between the quantized states – intersubband transitions – of a semiconductor quantum well (QW). In contrast to interband transitions, these intraband transitions exhibit very large oscillator strengths close to unity . Currently, state-of-the-art quantum wells are typically grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) of different III-V semiconductor alloys. This technology suffers from fundamental material limitations: Strict lattice matching conditions limit the available material combinations and the 3 thermal growth causes atomic diffusion and increases interface roughness, restricting the performances of actual devices . Recently, 2D materials and its heterostructures have emerged as a promising platform for electronic and optoelectronic applications , with particular interest for the 2D semiconductors such as metal or transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs). Studies on hBN-encapsulated TMDs have shown appealing electrical properties such as mobilities > 30,000 cm2/Vs in MoS2 and the demonstration of the quantum hall effect in WSe2 and InSe . Unique optical features have been reported, including spin-valley locking , the valley Hall effect , near-unity excitonic reflection and photoluminescence close to the homogenous linewidth . All of these optical phenomena in monolayer 2D materials arise from interband electronic transitions. However, few-layer 2D materials also form natural QWs – van der Waals QWs – where charge carriers are confined to the nanoscale in one dimension and it is therefore natural to expect intersubband transitions to occur. Cross-section TEM images of van der Waals heterostructures have demonstrated defect free and atomically sharp interfaces , enabling the formation of ideal QWs, free of diffusive inhomogeneities. Furthermore, van der Waals QWs do not require epitaxial growth on a matching substrate and can therefore be easily isolated and coupled to other electronic systems such as Si CMOS or optical systems such as cavities and waveguides. Finally, by assembling van der Waals QWs into heterostructures, combined with metals or semimetals such as graphene, it is possible to electrically contact each QW individually , allowing for in-situ tuning of resonances and interactions as well as facile carrier injection. Here, we introduce the concept of intersubband transitions in van der Waals quantum wells, report their first experimental observation, and provide detailed theoretical calculations. We probe the transitions between the quantized states within both the valence and the conduction band by investigating the MIR optical response of doped TMDs. The TMDs were exfoliated on a Si/HfO2 substrate - specifically chosen to avoid contributions from substrate phonons - and electron or hole doping was induced by applying a gate voltage between Si and TMD. Each investigated flake comprised several 4 terraces of different layer number N, where charge carriers are quantum confined in the out-of-plane direction within the TMD flake, as illustrated in Figure 1a. As the QWs are not buried inside any material, we can perform scattering scanning near-field optical microscopy (s-SNOM) as an innovative measurement approach to spectrally resolve intersubband absorption resonances with a spatial resolution below 20 nm. We spectrally resolve intersubband resonances for the different QW thicknesses within a single TMD flake by varying the illumination photon energy, as schematically depicted in strength by electrostatically tuning the charge carrier density of the TMD flake. Finally, to show the versatility of intersubband transitions in 2D materials, we demonstrate intersubband absorption in both valence and conduction bands within a single device. First, we lay the theoretical framework for intersubband transitions in van der Waals QWs. Figure 1c shows the band structure of a 2H-WSe2 crystal with layer number N = 5, obtained by using ab-initio density functional theory (DFT) calculations including spin- orbit (SO) coupling. We confirm the validity of our calculations by using two different, independent approaches (see SI chapter I for more details). The calculations reveal the splitting of the lowest conduction (highest valence) band into several subbands. In contrast to monolayer TMD crystals, where both band edges appear at the K-points of the Brillouin zone , few layer WSe2 has the valence band edge at the Г point, and the conduction band edge at the Λ points, which are located close to the middle of the Г-K segments in the Brillouin zone . This change in the characteristics of the band structure is determined by a strong overlap between the Г and Λ points wave functions in neighboring monolayers which also determines the z-axis (out-of-plane) effective mass and the kz dispersion in the bulk layered crystal . For the edge of the valence band, which appears at the 3D Г point in 2H-WSe2, we can approximate the dispersion of holes as E ≈ ħ2kz2 2mz + ħ2kxy 2 2mxy (1 + ζkz 2), where mz ≈ 1.08 me and mxy ≈ 0.7 me are the out- of-plane and in-plane effective masses obtained by fitting the bulk dispersion, ħ is the reduced Planck constant, kxy is the in-plane wave vector and ζ ≈ −5.45 Å2 is an anisotropic non-parabolicity factor (see SI chapter I.2 for details). The splitting of the bands corresponds to the quantized states in the quantum well. The wave numbers for these standing waves in the z-direction are determined by the 5 boundary conditions ([±νd∂zψ + ψ]z=±Nd/2 = 0, with the monolayer thickness d and a phenomenological parameter ν, see SI chapter I.2 for more details) for the hole wave function ψ(z) at the top and bottom interfaces (z = ±Nd/2). Figures 1d and 1e show these (Λ and Г point) out-of-plane wave functions for electrons and holes, respectively, which represent a periodic modulation with the same periodicity as the atomic potential multiplied by an envelope function. The boundary conditions gives us kz = πj/(N + 2ν)d, with the subband index j. The energy of the j = 1 → j = 2 intersubband transition in a lightly p-doped film is then given by modified infinite square well transition energies Esub = Ej=2 − Ej=1 ≈ 1 (N+2ν)2 2mzd2. (1) This fits very well with the transition energies obtained from the DFT results, shown in Now we turn to the experimental observation of intersubband transitions in van der Waals quantum wells. We specifically chose exfoliated TMD flakes consisting of terraces (see Figure 2), in order to compare the optical response of quantum wells of different thicknesses within the same flake. Observing intersubband transitions in these flakes is highly challenging using conventional far-field illumination since the lateral size of each terrace with a constant thickness is smaller than the infrared diffraction limit, and intersubband transitions only couple to light with an out-of-plane polarization component. To overcome these challenges, we used the s-SNOM and exploited the fact that exfoliated 2D materials naturally form a bare QW. The s-SNOM consists of a metalized atomic force microscope (AFM) tip that is illuminated by a continuous-wave (cw) laser source. The nanoscale concentrated infrared field (hot spot) that is generated around the tip apex interacts in the near-field with the TMD flake underneath the tip. Importantly, the hot spot – of about 20 nm in diameter – contains out-of-plane polarization components and can therefore excite intersubband transitions inside the TMD flake. We collect the light scattered back by the tip, which carries (quantitative) information about the sample’s complex permittivity and thus its absorption at the illumination photon energy Eph. This allows us to spatially resolve intersubband transitions with an unprecedented resolution of 20 nm and a sensitivity high enough to detect the intersubband transition of a single electron (on average) under the AFM tip. By combining interferometric and tip-modulated detection (Figure 2a), we record a complex scattered optical signal s3 at the third harmonic of the AFM tip oscillation 6 frequency ftip, whose absolute value |s3| increases monotonically with N, and whose phase φ3 is – in the case of weak resonances – proportional to the optical absorption of the TMD flake (see SI chapter III). We use |s3| to identify N across the probed flake as shown in Figure 2b. In order to isolate the absorption signal of intersubband transitions from background signal and noise sources like laser and interferometer drifts, we modulate the charge carrier density of WSe2 by applying a square wave backgate voltage VBG between the Si wafer and two Cr/Au contacts evaporated on the TMD flake (Figure 2c, see SI chapter IV). Applying VBG modulates the doping of the WSe2 flake between charge neutrality and p-doping, hence populating the first subband in the valence band and allowing hole intersubband transitions. When scanning the AFM tip over a TMD flake with different N, we simultaneously monitor VBG and the gate-induced change in the third harmonic phase signal - Δφ3 - extracting the change of absorption of the WSe2 flake induced by a change in carrier density, as shown in Figure 2d. We note that this gate modulation technique improves the signal/noise ratio, but the generally observed trends presented in this work are also visible without modulation technique. A spatial map of Δφ3 for Eph = 117 meV over an area of 13x10 μm2 with a spatial resolution of ~20 nm is shown in Figure 2e. A clearly enhanced absorption is observed in the area of the flake where N = 1 and N = 5. When repeating the same scan at Eph = 165 meV, we only observe absorption in the area where N = 4 (Figure 2f). This distinct behavior originates from two different absorption contributions. i) We attribute the enhanced absorption of the N = 4 and N = 5 regions of the flake to intersubband transitions. Comparing the observed absorption energies with the ab-initio calculations from Figure 1g, we find that hole intersubband transitions occur at energies close to 165 and 117 meV for WSe2 flakes with N = 4 and N = 5, respectively. Therefore, these spatial absorption maps are a first indication that we observe intersubband transitions. ii) The absorption in the monolayer region at Eph = 117 meV corresponds to Drude absorption: Since the charge carriers induced by the applied VBG are confined within a single atomic layer, the absorption due to free charge carriers is much higher than in the few-layer regions, where the same number of charge carriers is distributed over several layers 7 (see SI chapter V). Thus, the relative contribution of Drude absorption is larger in the monolayer region. To corroborate our interpretation, we spectrally resolve the intersubband resonances by changing Eph in small steps. We average the recorded optical signals s3 over the areas of the flake with a constant thickness. Due to the interferometric detection, s3 is a complex signal and allows us to recover both the real and imaginary part of the relative permittivity of WSe2, εWSe2, by using a thin-film inversion model (see SI chapter III) . We note that the flake thickness, the effect of the substrate, as well as different measurement parameters like tapping amplitude and demodulation order are accounted for by the inversion model, but the qualitative resonance features are directly visible in the raw data. Figure 3a shows both Δφ3and the obtained Im(εWSe2) when the WSe2 flake is p-doped, assuming Im(εWSe2) = 0 for charge-neutral WSe2 in the infrared frequency range. First, we identify a general decrease of Im(εWSe2) with Eph for all layer thicknesses. We attribute this behavior to Drude absorption of holes that we account for (see SI chapter V) by a standard complex Drude term εDrude(ω) = − D ωε0 1 iτ−1 + ω, with the vacuum permittivity ε0, the Drude weight D, scattering time τ, and Eph = ħω. In order to quantitatively address the intersubband absorption resonances, we subtract the Drude contribution from the obtained Im(εWSe2) (Figure 3b). We clearly distinguish an absorption peak for N = 4, as well as enhanced absorption for N = 5 at low photon energies. A Gaussian fit to the N = 4 data yields a center energy of 167.5 ± 1.5 meV and a full width half maximum Г = 33 ± 4 meV. The obtained Re(εWSe2) shows a resonance behavior at the same energy, supporting our conclusion that we indeed observe a resonant absorption. The experimentally observed resonance energy (168 meV) is slightly higher than the theoretical prediction (145 meV and 154 meV for the two DFT calculations, respectively), which may be due to many-body effects and corrections due to interactions with the electron or hole plasma . We proceed with discussing the linewidth of the intersubband transitions. As 2D materials have atomically smooth surfaces, we expect that the linewidth of van der Waals quantum wells is not significantly broadened by interface roughness scattering, which is the dominant broadening mechanism in III-V semiconductor quantum wells . However, the linewidth can be broadened both by phonons or disorder. We 8 calculate the optical-phonon-limited linewidth at low temperatures to be 0.66 meV and therefore much smaller than in epitaxial quantum wells . At room temperature, the calculated linewidth Г ≈ 5.9 meV is much larger, which originates from the differences in in-plane effective masses in the different subbands. The holes in the second subband are heavier than in the first subband, spreading the absorption for high temperatures or strongly doped films to Г ≈ [1 − m1 m2] max{εF, kBTlog2} , where m1 and m2 are the in- plane masses in the first and second subband respectively, mj −1 = mxy −1 (1 + π2j2ζ (N+2ν)2d2), where the difference is determined by the non-parabolicity in the dispersion of holes in the bulk crystal, εF is the Fermi energy, kB Boltzmann’s constant and T the temperature (see SI chapter II for more details). The measured linewidth of Г = 33 meV is larger than these theoretical estimates for the intrinsic linewidth. An additional broadening mechanism in our experiment stems from the sharpness of the AFM tip, providing momentum for non-vertical transitions. In order to quantify this, we examine in more detail the hot spot around the AFM tip apex that excites intersubband transitions. The in-plane momenta contributing to the near-field coupling are given by a broad Bell shaped function (see SI chapter II) peaking at a k-vector that is inversely related to the tip curvature . Due to this broad momentum distribution, a wide range of non- vertical transitions with finite momentum transfer and a distribution of transition energies contribute to the signal. This leads to a broadening and blue shift of the absorption line shape. The sharpest features around the AFM tip apex determine the in- plane momentum distribution and are typically around 12 nm for the used AFM tips. Calculations for this tip radius yield Г = 24 meV (Figure 3c), indicating that tip-induced broadening plays an important role for the experimentally observed linewidth. However, we cannot exclude additional contributions to the linewidth broadening due to disorder. Another key signature of intersubband transitions is the dependence of the sheet absorption α on the carrier density n2D. α is typically obtained in far-field absorption measurements . For an ideal, infinitely deep quantum well, assuming parallel subbands and T = 0 K, calculations yield α = n2D e2ħf12 cεmzΓ , with the electron charge e, speed of light c, oscillator strength f12 = 0.96 for the transition from the first to the second subband, and ε the static out-of-plane permittivity. To experimentally study this 9 dependence, we vary n2D by changing the modulation amplitude of the backgate voltage, VBG,max, at Eph = 165 meV, which corresponds to the center energy of the N = 4 intersubband resonance. The measured (Drude-corrected) Im(εWSe2) as a function of n2D, shown in Figure 4a, displays a monotonic increase of the absorption with n2D. This is consistent with the idealized square well model, although we note that the exact function of the increase might be affected by possible contributions from many-body effects and non-parabolic bands. Experimentally, we find for the highest hole density (n2D = 9x1011 cm-2, extracted from capacitance measurements on a separate device) a maximum absorption of αexp = 0.017 ± 0.002 %, which we calculated from the measured complex value of εWSe2 (see SI chapter VII). This is in good agreement with the idealized model yielding α = 0.026% for a WSe2 crystal with N = 4 taking into account the measured linewidth Г = 33 meV. We note that the absorption will be significantly enhanced with narrower linewidths, reaching values as high as α = 1.3% for the phonon- limited linewidth Г = 0.66 meV. We further demonstrate the versatility of 2D materials by ambipolar electrical control of intersubband transitions in the valence and conduction bands. We tune the carrier density from the p-doped to the n-doped regime and observe intersubband transitions in both cases. Interestingly, at Eph = 117 meV, these transitions occur for different layer thicknesses. As we have seen before, we observe hole intersubband transitions in the N = 5 area of the flake (Figure 4b). However, when the flake is n-doped, we observe enhanced absorption due to electron intersubband transitions in the N = 6 region of the flake (Figure 4c). This observation that the electron transitions for a given Eph occur in a thicker part of the flake than the hole transitions is in excellent agreement with our theoretical ab-initio calculations (see Figures 1f-g). We note that in order to reach n- and p-doping without leakage through the underlying oxide we use the AFM tip to induce additional doping to the flake (see SI chapter VI). In conclusion, we reported the first experimental observation of intersubband transitions in few-layer WSe2 crystals with spatially and spectrally resolved measurements supported by detailed ab-initio calculations. The obtained spatial resolution of 20 nm cannot be obtained by classical far-field measurements. Intersubband transitions are not unique to WSe2; they can be found in any gapped 2D 10 material (see SI chapter VIII for similar measurements on MoS2). This study represents a first step into a vast, unexplored field. In a future study, the role of disorder and many- body interactions needs to be investigated more thoroughly in order to provide conclusions on the intrinsic linewidth. Recently, wafer-scale multilayer TMD flakes have become commercially available and progress is being made to reduce the defect density in these large area films . This provides the opportunity to also study intersubband transitions in the far-field and is promising for future experiments and applications. Our study offers a first glimpse of the physics and technology potentially enabled by van der Waals quantum wells, such as infrared detectors, sources, and lasers with the potential for compact integration with Si CMOS. Particularly appealing is the possibility of combining various 2D material QWs to any of the wide variety of different 2D crystals – including semimetals, dielectrics, topological insulators , superconductors , and ferromagnets – with any relative lattice alignment angle between different layers, giving rise to an unprecedented freedom in designing novel optoelectronic devices. This paves the way to new phenomena that are not accessible in any other material class. Data and code availability statement: The raw data of this study as well as all the code used to process this data are available from the corresponding author upon request.