Dynamical resonance quench and Fano interference in spontaneous Raman scattering from quasiparticle and collective excitations J. Zhu,1 R. B. Versteeg,1 P. Padmanabhan,1 and P. H. M. van Loosdrecht1, ∗ 1II. Physikalisches Institut, Universit ̈at zu K ̈oln, Z ̈ulpicher Straße 77, D-50937 K ̈oln, Germany (Dated: February 8, 2019) Time-resolved spontaneous Raman spectroscopy serves as a probe for incoherent quasiparticle and collective excitation dynamics, and allows to distinguish symmetry changes across a photoinduced phase transition through the inelastic light scattering selection rules. Largely unexplored is the role of the Raman resonance enhancement in the time-domain, and the transient interaction between scattering from quasiparticles and collective excitations, with the latter interaction leading to a Fano interference. In this work, we report on the observation of a phonon Raman tensor quench and Fano inter- ference after strong photoexcitation of an intrinsic semiconductor. We observed a dynamic phonon scattering rate asymmetry and spectral asymmetry through simultaneous detection of both the anti- Stokes and Stokes response. The asymmetric phonon scattering rate is ascribed to the combined effect of the transient phonon population and the reduction of the phonon Raman tensor resulting from the photoexcited hole population. This same hole population results in a strong enhancement of the Fano spectral asymmetry. Keywords: time-resolved spontaneous Raman spectroscopy, Raman tensor quench, dynamic Fano- interference A quantum-mechanical description of the nature and transport properties of the various quasiparticles and col- lective excitations in semiconductors is integral to char- acterizing the physical properties of a wide array of tech- nologically relevant materials.1,2 Hot carrier and phonon relaxation dynamics in semiconductors,3,4 for example, plays a central role in our understanding of carrier trans- port and energy dissipation in electronic and optoelec- tronic devices. As such, an accurate interpretation of the quasiparticle and collective excitation interactions and dynamics is vital not only from a fundamental perspec- tive, but also to enable new applications. Over the past four decades, a range of ultrafast spec- troscopic probes have provided us insight into carrier and phonon relaxation dynamics and their respective time- scales in semiconductors.4,5 These measurements often rely on the coherent excitation of phonons, of which the dynamics is consecutively probed in the modulation of the refractive index.6–8 A more direct view of phonon dynamics is provided by time-resolved inelastic scatter- ing techniques.9–12 This has the advantage over coherent excitation techniques that one can follow the true time evolution of a photoexcited material through its incoher- ent response, rather than the time evolution of coherent excitations. Time-resolved spontaneous Raman scattering is a rea- sonably well-established probe for incohorent phonon population dynamics in semiconductors,11,13–18 and vi- brational dynamics in molecules.11,19–25 More recently the technique has been applied to study phonon dynam- ics in a range of carbon allotropes.11,26–32 Through de- tailed balance of the anti-Stokes IAS to Stokes IS scatter- ing intensity ratio the (phonon) population number n can be directly quantified by IAS/IS ∝ n/(n+1). This relation stems from the fluctuation dissipation theorem,33 which on ultrafast timescales (≪ ps) may lose its validity due to the presence of truly non-thermal occupation statistics. The inelastic light scattering selection rules |ˆES ·χ ′′ A · ˆEI|2 for incoming electric field ˆEI and scattered field ˆES en- tail the symmetry A of the Raman-scattering channel χ ′′ A.34 This may be used to probe symmetry changes across a photoinduced phase transition, as was demon- strated for a high-to-low structural symmetry transition in antimony,35 and melting of the superconducting con- densate in a high-temperature cuprate superconductor.36 Two largely unexplored aspects to time-resolved sponta- neous Raman are the role of the Raman resonance en- hancement in the time-domain,32 and the dynamic in- teraction between quasiparticle and collective excitation scattering, with the latter interaction leading to a Fano interference. Here we demonstrate a photo-induced resonance quench, and Fano-interference in the transient phononic and electronic spontaneous Raman response of an in- trinsic indirect band gap semiconductor. An intrinsic (100) oriented silicon sample (resistivity >10000 Ω· cm) was used for the experiments. Time-resolved Raman scattering experiments were performed using a 740 nm optical pump pulse with a temporal width of 0.3 ps. The transient Raman spectra are recorded in a backscatter- ing geometry using a 512 nm, 1.5 ps probe pulse.12 The polarization of both the pump and probe beams were aligned with the crystallographic direction of the sample and the cross polarized scattered light was mea- sured. The steady-state Raman spectrum of silicon is well-known, the main features being the optical phonon peak centered at ± 520 cm−1, and, in p-doped silicon, a broad and relatively weak electronic continuum extend- ing to several hundred cm−1. This feature is attributed to inter-valence band Raman scattering between the up- permost heavy- and light-hole valence bands.37–40 Cou- arXiv:1806.05986v2 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 7 Feb 2019 2 man spectra recorded at a carrier density of ∼ 1.8×1018 cm−3. (a) Raman spectra at various delay times before and after op- tical excitation. (b) Difference spectra obtained by subtract- ing the spectra at −10 ps from the spectra in (a). pling of the optical phonon to this continuum leads to a pronounced Fano asymmetry41,42 of the optical phonon Raman response. These coupled spectral features lead to an intricate time-domain evolution following optical excitation,17,43 obscuring the pure population dynam- ics. As we will see, however, the detection of both the Stokes and anti-Stokes responses allows for the determi- nation of the transient optical phonon population dy- namics, while simultaneously yielding information on the temporal-evolution of the Raman scattering efficiency. Interestingly, the optically induced valence band hole density is found to lead to a transient enhancement of the Fano effect which can be observed in real time. tra of silicon with a photoexcited carrier density of around ∼ 1.8 × 1018 cm−3 measured at various pump- probe delay times.44 For this relatively low transient car- rier density, one observes a fast increase of the intensity near the optical phonon response at −520 cm−1 which subsequently decreases with time until it vanishes af- ter 6 - 10 ps. This corresponds to the expected creation of an optical phonon population through the electron- phonon interaction, which subsequently decays on a ps timescale through anharmonic coupling with acoustic phonons.26,27,29,30,45 However, this simple picture is incomplete, as demon- Raman difference spectra recorded at a carrier density of ∼ 1.8 × 1019 cm−3 for anti-Stokes (a) and Stokes (b) scat- tering. These spectra are obtained by subtracting the spec- tra recorded for −10 ps delay (top panels) from the spectra recorded at positive pump-probe delays. strated in Fig. 2 at higher excited carrier density (∼ 1.8× 1019 cm−3) from both anti-Stokes (left panels) and Stokes (right panel) difference Raman spectra. Particularly striking is the non-trivial substructure and the notable asymmetry between the Stokes and anti-Stokes spectra. At early delay times (1 - 2 ps) the anti-Stokes difference spectra show a positive response near the phonon fre- quency, with slight negative difference signal in the mid- dle, while a negative difference signal dominates on the Stokes side. For longer time delays, the negative signal on both sides gains strength until the Stokes and anti- Stokes signals become symmetric with a negative com- ponent in the middle and positive shoulders on the sides at ∼ 10 ps. The negative phonon difference signal per- sists for several nanoseconds, which is on the order of the carrier population lifetime. These spectral features orig- inate from mixed effects of the optically induced phonon and hole populations, spectral broadening, and a Fano interference with the hole continuum.43 We first focus on the observed changes in the overall signal intensity. The spectra from Fig. 2 were integrated over the optical phonon contribution (490 cm−1 to 550 cm−1) and corrected by subtracting the increasing electronic background.46 The resulting relaxation dynamics are shown in Fig. 3a. The Stokes signal shows an immedi- 3 ature and Raman scattering strength at a carrier density of ∼ 1.8 × 1019 cm−3. (a) Decay of the optical phonon intensity for Stokes scattering (red squares) and anti-Stokes scattering (blue squares). (b) Extracted phonon temperature evolution. (c) Time-evolution of the Raman scattering strength F · χ2. ate decrease in the scattering intensity after optical ex- citation. In contrast, the anti-Stokes signal first shows a rapid increase of scattering intensity which decreases only at later time delays. To understand this behav- ior, we note that the Raman signal for a specific phonon mode is determined by the population np, the Raman tensor χ2, and the related optical coefficient function F. It can be expressed as IS = C · FS · ω3 S · χ2 S · (1 + np) (1) and IAS = C · FAS · ω3 AS · χ2 AS · np (2) for the Stokes and anti-Stokes response, respectively.34 The factor C includes the factors which are equal for both sides, such as the excitation laser energy dependence and the excitation being scattered from (i.e. the phonon frequency). The optical coefficient function F can be written as FS = TS (αL + αS) · ηS (3) and FAS = TAS (αL + αAS) · ηAS (4) for Stokes and anti-Stokes scattering, respectively. Here T , α and η are the transmission coefficient, absorption coefficient and refractive index at the corresponding pho- ton energies. These optical constants and the Raman ten- sor are strongly resonance dependent, and usually depend on temperature, which complicates the determination of phonon population based on the above formula. How- ever, as demonstrated in , these correction fac- tors are close to unity well below the resonance energy (3.45 eV). As such, the following relation holds: FS · χ2 S ≈ FAS · χ2 AS ≡ F · χ2 (5) Using this relation and formula (1) and (2), one can now determine the phonon population and the phonon temperature from the experimental data. The result- ing phonon temperature and the scattering strength F · χ2 are plotted in Fig. 3b and 3c. Before time zero, the phonon temperature is ∼ 340 K, showing an average heating above room temperature. Upon excitation, the phonon temperature rapidly increases to ∼ 390 K after which it decays close to the average value within a few picoseconds. An exponential fit gives a lifetime of approx- imately 1.7 ps (solid line in Fig. 3b), consistent with the expected decay dynamics of optical phonons into acoustic phonons.13,17,29,45 More surprising is the rapid decrease of about 10% in the scattering strength F · χ2 upon excitation. A convo- lution of a step function and a Gaussian with half width of our setup resolution fits well (solid line in Fig. 3c) to the curve. Apparently, the reduction of the scattering strength can either originate from changes in the optical coefficient function F (which is dictated by the optical constants), or from the Raman tensor square χ2 imme- diately after photoexcitation. Generally, the change of optical constants upon excitation are small. To confirm this, we performed a reflectivity measurement with iden- tical excitation conditions, which shows that the changes of reflectivity upon excitation is less than 0.2 %.47 This small change in reflectivity, indicating a negligible change of the refractive index and thus the other derived optical constants, is not sufficient to explain the observed large change in scattering strength F · χ2. A more likely scenario for the observed decrease in scattering strength F ·χ2 arises from the resonant nature of the Raman scattering in silicon at the Raman probe excitation energies used in this study. The scattering is resonant to vertical transitions from the topmost valence band to the lowest conduction band in the Γ − L direc- tion in the Brillouin zone, and is thereby proportional to charge population.48 In addition to this, excitonic effects are thought to play a role as well.49 The pump laser pulse optically induces a hole density in the valence band, as evidenced by the observed changes in the hole contin- uum scattering (Fig. 4d).46 The optically induced charge density could lead to changes in the excitonic effects on the Raman resonance discussed in , which would lead to a strongly probe pulse energy dependent change 4 dynamics at a photoinduced density of ∼ 4.3×1019 cm−3. (a) Time dependent Raman spectra (circles) and Fano-fits (red lines). (b) Fitted line-width parameter Γ. (c) Fitted inverse Fano parameter q−1. (d) Hole scattering dynamics integrated in the spectral range from 650 cm−1 to 750 cm−1. in χ2. However, our experiments show that the optically induced changes in the Raman spectra do not depend on probe energy within our experimental accuracy.50 Exci- tonic effects therefore do not appear to play a large role in the tensor quench. Obviously the resonant enhance- ment also strongly depends on the number of available initial and final states. Here, in particular the hole popu- lation in the vicinity of the Γ-point is of interest.48 Recent quantum theoretical work on silicon has shown that a few percent of the valence band states will be unoccupied at a photoexcitation density of ∼ 1019 cm−3, which would lead to a reduction of χ2 of about 10 % (Refs. 52 and 53). This is in good agreement with our observa- tions, and we hence attribute the transient reduction of the Raman resonance to the photoinduced hole density. We now turn to the line shape of the phonon re- sponse, and hole dynamics. Fano interference between the optical phonon and the electronic hole continuum in p-doped silicon is expected to be weak for the 512 nm probe wavelength.37,38,40 However, at higher excitation densities, the changes in the Fano interference induced by the optical excitation are observable,43 as can be seen in Fig. 4a, which shows the transient Raman Stokes spec- tra (circles) at an excitation density of ∼ 4.3×1019 cm−3 for various time delays. Generally the Fano line-shape can be described by I ∝ (q + ε)2 1 + ε2 (6) where q is the so-called Fano parameter which is inversely proportional to the spectral density of the electronic con- tinuum, and ε = 2(ω − ω0)/Γ with ω0 the bare phonon frequency, and Γ the line width parameter, which apart from the bare phonon part, has a contribution due to the Fano interference proportional to the spectral density of the electronic continuum.54 The transient behavior of the inverse Fano parameter q−1 and the line-width Γ ob- tained from fits (solid lines in Fig. 4a) are depicted in Fig. 4b and 4c. Before time zero, the Raman peak resem- bles a Lorentzian line shape (q−1 ≈ 0.003), whereas after photoexcitation the line-shape shows a pronounced Fano asymmetry (q−1 ≈ 0.11). As expected, a nearly stepwise time scale of the initial response of both Γ and q−1 were observed, which are identical to the electronic continuum dynamics (Fig. 4d). Since these parameters are all gov- erned by the dynamics of the optically induced long-lived holes, no decay of these induced effects is observed within the measured time window. Finally, we note the values of the Fano parameters in our pump-probe experiments of pure silicon are consistent with results obtained from steady-state Raman scattering silicon for similar hole- doping levels.37–42,55 In summary, time-resolved spontaneous Raman scat- tering experiments on an intrinsic semiconductor show a prominent dynamic asymmetry between both the in- tensity and line-shape of the phononic Stokes and anti- Stokes responses. These asymmetries originate from the interplay between the transient phonon population dy- namics, a quench of the phonon Raman resonance due to a photoinduced hole population, and an enhanced Fano interference due to the same hole population, in line with simple expectations. The present results provide a deeper understanding of the spontaneous Raman-scattering re- sponse of semiconductors to strong optical excitation, and expand the use of of time-resolved spontaneous Ra- man scattering in the study of collective excitation and quasiparticle dynamics in solid state materials. This project was partially financed by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) through SFB-1238 project B05, and instrument grant INST217/782-1. We gratefully acknowledge fruitful discussions with Daniele Fausti. R. B. V. acknowledges partial funding through the Bonn-Cologne Graduate School of Physics and Astronomy (BCGS). J. Z. and R. B. V. contributed equally to this work. 5 ∗ Corresponding author:pvl@ph2.uni-koeln.de 1 P. Bhattacharya, R. Fornari, and H. Kamimura, Compre- hensive semiconductor science and technology, (Elsevier, Boston, 2011). 2 M. Hase, M. Kitajima, A. M. Constantinescu, and H. Pe- tek, The birth of a quasiparticle in silicon observed in time- frequency space, Nature 426, 51 (2003). 3 M. Hase and M. Kitajima, Interaction of coherent phonons with defects and elementary excitations, J. Phys. Condens. Matter 22, (2010). 4 A. Othonos, Probing ultrafast carrier and phonon dynam- ics in semiconductors, J. Appl. Phys. 83, 1789 (1998). 5 A. J. Sabbah and D. M. Riffe. Measurement of silicon surface recombination velocity using ultrafast pumpprobe reflectivity in the near infrared, J. Appl. Phys. 88, 6954 6 A. J. Sabbah and D. M. Riffe. Femtosecond pump-probe reflectivity study of silicon carrier dynamics, Phys. Rev. B 7 D. M. Riffe and A. J. Sabbah, Coherent excitation of the optic phonon in Si: Transiently stimulated Raman scatter- ing with a finite-lifetime electronic excitation, Phys. Rev. 8 K. Kato, K. Oguri, A. Ishizawa, K. Tateno, T. Tawara, H. Gotoh, M. Kitajima, H. Nakano, and T. Sogawa, Doping-type dependence of phonon dephasing dynamics in Si, Appl. Phys. Lett. 98, 141904 (2011). 9 M. Trigo, M. Fuchs, J. Chen, M. P. Jiang, M. Cam- marata, S. Fahy, D. M. Fritz, K. Gaffney, S. Ghimire, A. Higginbotham, S. L. Johnson, M. E. Kozina, J. Larsson, H. Lemke, A. M. Lindenberg, G. Ndabashimiye, F. Quirin, K. Sokolowski-Tinten, C. Uher, G. Wang, J. S. Wark, D. Zhu, and D. A. Reis, Fourier-transform inelastic x-ray scattering from time-and momentum-dependent phonon- phonon correlations, Nat. Phys. 9, 790 (2013). 10 D. C. Hannah, K. E. Brown, R. M. Young, M. R. Wasielewski, G. C. Schatz, D. T. Co, and R. D. Schaller, Direct measurement of lattice dynamics and optical phonon excitation in semiconductor nanocrys- tals using femtosecond stimulated Raman spectroscopy, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 107401 (2013). 11 D. Fausti and P. H. M. van Loosdrecht, in Chapter 14 of Optical Techniques for Solid-State Materials Characteriza- tion, edited by R. P. Prasankumar and A. J. Taylor, (CRC Press, Boca Raton London New York, 2012). 12 R. B. Versteeg, J. Zhu, P. Padmanabhan, C. Boguschewski, R. German, M. Goedecke, P. Becker, and P. H. M. van Loosdrecht, A tunable time-resolved spontaneous Raman spectroscopy setup for probing ultrafast collective exci- tation and quasiparticle dynamics in quantum materials, Struct. Dyn. 5, 044301 (2018). 13 J. A. Kash, J. C. Tsang, and J. M. Hvam. Subpicosec- ond time-resolved Raman spectroscopy of LO phonons in GaAs, Phys. Rev. Lett. 54, 2151 (1985). 14 D. Y. Oberli, D. R. Wake, M. V. Klein, J. Klem, T. Hen- derson, and H. Morko ̧c, Time-resolved Raman scattering in GaAs quantum wells, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 696 (1987). 15 K. T. Tsen and H. Morko ̧c, Population relaxation time of nonequilibrium lo phonons and electron-phonon interac- tions in GaAs−AlxGa1−xAs multiple-quantum-well struc- tures, Phys. Rev. B 34, 4412 (1986). 16 K. T. Tsen and H. Morko ̧c, Subpicosecond time- resolved Raman spectroscopy of LO phonons in GaAs − AlxGa1−xAs multiple-quantum-well structures, Phys. Rev. 17 J. J. Letcher, K. Kang, D. G. Cahill, and D. D. Dlott, Effects of high carrier densities on phonon and carrier life- times in Si by time-resolved anti-stokes Raman scattering, Appl. Phys. Lett. 90, 252104 (2007). 18 K. T. Tsen, J. G. Kiang, D. K. Ferry, and H. Morko ̧c, Sub- picosecond time-resolved Raman studies of LO phonons in GaN: Dependence on photoexcited carrier density, Appl. Phys. Lett. 89, 112111 (2006). 19 A. L. Malinovsky, A. A. Makarov, and E. A. Ryabov, Slow intramolecular vibrational redistribution: the latest results for trifluoropropyne, a comparison with the other terminal acetylenes and the mechanism, Phys. Scripta 85, 058102 20 K. Iwata, H. Okajima, S. Saha, and H. O. Hamaguchi, Lo- cal structure formation in alkyl-imidazolium-based ionic liquids as revealed by linear and nonlinear Raman spec- troscopy, Acc. Chem. Res. 40, 1174 (2007). 21 S. K. Sahoo, S. Umapathy, and A. W. Parker, Time- resolved resonance Raman spectroscopy: Exploring reac- tive intermediates, Appl. Spectrosc. 65, 1087 (2011). 22 A. Matsuda, H. Nagao, K. G. Nakamura, and K. Kondo, Time-resolved Raman spectra of ring-stretching modes of benzene derivatives under laser-driven shock compression at 1 GPa, Chem. Phys. Lett. 372, 911 (2003). 23 I. E. I. Petterson, F. W. L. Esmonde-White, W. de Wilde, M. D. Morris, and F. Ariese, Tissue phantoms to compare spatial and temporal offset modes of deep Raman spec- troscopy, Analyst 140, 2504 (2015). 24 H. Hamaguchi and T. L. Gustafson, Ultrafast time- resolved spontaneous and coherent Raman spectroscopy: the structure and dynamics of photogenerated transient species, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 45, 593 (1994). 25 S. G. Kruglik, J.-C. Lambry, J.-L. Martin, M. H. Vos, and M. Negrerie, Sub-picosecond raman spectrometer for time- resolved studies of structural dynamics in heme proteins, J. Raman Spectrosc. 42, 265 (2011). 26 K. Kang, T. Ozel, D. G. Cahill, and M. Shim, Opti- cal phonon lifetimes in single-walled carbon nanotubes by time-resolved Raman scattering, Nano Lett., 8, 4642 27 D. Song, F. Wang, G. Dukovic, M. Zheng, E. D. Semke, L. E. Brus, and T. F. Heinz, Direct measurement of the life- time of optical phonons in single-walled carbon nanotubes, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 225503 (2008). 28 H. Yan, D. Song, K. F. Mak, I. Chatzakis, J. Maultzsch, and T. F. Heinz, Time-resolved Raman spectroscopy of optical phonons in graphite: Phonon anharmonic coupling and anomalous stiffening, Phys. Rev. B 80, 121403 (2009). 29 K. Kang, D. Abdula, D. G. Cahill, and M. Shim, Life- times of optical phonons in graphene and graphite by time- resolved incoherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering, Phys. Rev. B 81, 165405 (2010). 30 I. Chatzakis, H. Yan, D. Song, S. Berciaud, and T. F. Heinz, Temperature dependence of the anhar- monic decay of optical phonons in carbon nanotubes and graphite, Phys. Rev. B 83, 205411 (2011). 31 J.-A. Yang, S. Parham, D. Dessau, and D. Reznik, Novel 6 electron-phonon relaxation pathway in graphite revealed by time-resolved Raman scattering and angle-resolved pho- toemission spectroscopy, Sci. Rep. 7, 40876 (2017). 32 J. Zhu, R. German, B. Senkovskiy, D. Haberer, F. Fis- cher, A. Gr ̈uneis, and P. H. M. van Loosdrecht, Exciton and phonon dynamics in highly aligned 7-atom wide arm- chair graphene nanoribbons as seen by time-resolved spon- taneous Raman scattering, Nanoscale 10, 17975 (2018). 33 R. Loudon, Time-reversal symmetry in light-scattering theory, J. Raman Spectrosc. 7, 10 (1978). 34 A. Compaan and H. J. Trodahl, Resonance Raman scat- tering in Si at elevated temperatures, Phys. Rev. B 29, 793 35 D. Fausti, O. V. Misochko, and P. H. M. van Loosdrecht, Ultrafast photoinduced structure phase transition in anti- mony single crystals, Phys. Rev. B 80, 161207 (2009). 36 R. P. Saichu, I. Mahns, A. Goos, S. Binder, P. May, S. G. Singer, B. Schulz, A. Rusydi, J. Unterhinninghofen, D. Manske, P. Guptasarma, M. S. Williamsen, and M. R ̈ubhausen, Two-component dynamics of the order pa- rameter of high temperature Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ supercon- ductors revealed by time-resolved Raman scattering, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 177004 (2009). 37 F. Cerdeira, T. A. Fjeldly, and M. Cardona, Interaction be- tween electronic and vibronic Raman scattering in heavily doped silicon, Solid State Commun. 13, 325 (1973). 38 F. Cerdeira, T. A. Fjeldly, and M. Cardona, Effect of free carriers on zone-center vibrational modes in heavily doped p-type Si. II. optical modes, Phys. Rev. B 8, 4734 (1973). 39 M. Chandrasekhar, J. B. Renucci, and M. Cardona, Ef- fects of interband excitations on Raman phonons in heavily doped n Si, Phys. Rev. B 17, 1623 (1978). 40 B. G. Burke, J. Chan, K. A. Williams, Z. L. Wu, A. A. Puretzky, and D. B. Geohegan, Raman study of Fano interference in p-type doped silicon, J. Raman Spectrosc. 41 U. Fano, Effects of configuration interaction on intensities and phase shifts, Phys. Rev. 124, 1866 (1961). 42 U. Fano, G. Pupillo, A. Zannoni, C. W. Clark, On the absorption spectrum of noble gases at the arc spectrum limit, J. Res. Natl. Inst. Stan. 110, 583 (2005). 43 K. Kato, Y. Hasegawa, K. Oguri, T. Tawara, T. Nishikawa, and H. Gotoh, Relationship between the Fano asymme- try parameter and time-domain spectra studied by time- resolved measurement of carriers and phonons in p-type Si, Phys. Rev. B 97, 104301 (2018). 44 The carrier density has been determined from the incident photon density and the optical properties of silicon, see Supplemental Material. 45 P. G. Klemens, Anharmonic decay of optical phonons, Phys. Rev. 148 (1966). 46 K. Tanaka, H. Ohtake, and T. Suemoto, Determination of intervalley scattering time in germanium by subpicosecond time-resolved Raman spectroscopy, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 47 See Supplemental Material for the transient reflectivity measurement. 48 J. B. Renucci, R. N. Tyte, and M. Cardona, Resonant Raman scattering in silicon, Phys. Rev. B 11, 3885 (1975) 49 Y. Gillet and M. Giantomassi, and X. Gonze, First- principles study of excitonic effects in Raman intensities, Phys. Rev. B 88, 094305 (2013). 50 See Supplemental Material for transients at 450 nm Raman probe wavelength. 51 D. Sangalli, S. D. Conte, C. Manzoni, G. Cerullo, and A. Marini, Nonequilibrium optical properties in semicon- ductors from first principles: A combined theoretical and experimental study of bulk silicon, Phys. Rev. B 93, 52 See Supplemental Material for the two-level model which relates the Raman tensor reduction to the photoinduced hole density. 53 R. W. Boyd, Nonlinear Optics, 3rd ed. (Elsevier, Amster- dam, 2008). 54 M. Cardona and G. G ̈untherodt, Light Scattering in Solids IV, in page 128 (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, Tokyo, 1984). 55 See Supplemental Material for the data of the transient versus steady-state Fano parameter comparison.