Electronic band structure of Two-Dimensional WS2/Graphene van der Waals Heterostructures Hugo Henck1, Zeineb Ben Aziza1, Debora Pierucci2, Feriel Laourine1, Francesco Reale3 and Pawel Palczynski3, Julien Chaste1, Mathieu G. Silly4, François Bertran4, Patrick Le Fevre4, Emmanuel Lhuillier5, Taro Wakamura6, Cecilia Mattevi3, Julien E. Rault4, Matteo Calandra5 and Abdelkarim Ouerghi1,* 1Centre de Nanosciences et de Nanotechnologies, CNRS, Univ. Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, C2N – Marcoussis, 91460 Marcoussis, France 2CELLS - ALBA Synchrotron Radiation Facility, Carrer de la Llum 2-26, 08290 Cerdanyola del Valles, Barcelona, Spain 3Imperial College London Department of Materials, Exhibition road London SW7 2AZ, UK 4Synchrotron-SOLEIL, Saint-Aubin, BP48, F91192 Gif sur Yvette Cedex, France 5Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ. Paris 06, CNRS-UMR 7588, Institut des NanoSciences de Paris, 4 place Jussieu, 75005 Paris, France 6Laboratoire de Physique des Solides, CNRS, Université Paris-Sud, Université Paris Saclay, 91405 Orsay Cedex, France *Corresponding author, E-mail: abdelkarim.ouerghi@c2n.upsaclay.fr Abstract: Combining single-layer two-dimensional semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) with graphene layer in van der Waals heterostructures offers an intriguing means of controlling the electronic properties through these heterostructures. Here, we report the electronic and structural properties of transferred single layer WS2 on epitaxial graphene using micro-Raman spectroscopy, angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy measurements (ARPES) and Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations. The results show good electronic properties as well as well-defined band arising from the strong splitting of the single layer WS2 valence band at K points, with a maximum splitting of 0.44 eV. By comparing our DFT results with local and hybrid functionals, we find the top valence band of the experimental heterostructure is close to the calculations for suspended single layer WS2. . Our results provide an important reference for future studies of electronic properties of WS2 and its applications in valleytronic devices. Keywords: WS2 – Spectroscopy – Electronic properties– Spin splitting – Interlayer interaction. I. INTRODUCTION Two-dimensional (2D) materials, such as graphene, h-BN, phosphorene, and transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), are an ideal platform for studying exciting physical properties not attainable in their bulk counterparts . They often exhibit a versatile electronic structure controllable by thickness , surface chemical adsorption, and strain . Of particular interest are the family of TMDs of formula MX2 (M = Mo, W; X=S, Se). They are semiconductor with unique properties in the 2D limit such as indirect to direct band gap transition, large exciton binding energy, well-defined valley degrees of freedom, and spin splitting of the valence band . Many efforts have been made to harvest these properties into practical optoelectronic, spintronic, and valleytronic devices . In addition to homogenous 2D materials, van der Waals (vdW) heterostructures have recently emerged as a novel class of materials, in which different 2D atomic planes are vertically stacked to give rise to distinctive properties and exhibit new structural, chemical, and electronic phenomena . These heterostructures, in contrast with traditional heterostructures, can be designed and assembled by stacking individual 2D layers without lattice parameter constraints. The weak interlayer coupling in vdW heterostructures offers the possibility of combining the intrinsic electronic properties of each individual 2D layers in devices. In particular, WS2/graphene vdW heterostructures are remarkable since they gather the high carrier mobility and broadband absorption of graphene , as well as the direct bandgap and extremely strong light-matter interactions of single layer WS2. The combination of these unusual characteristics led to potential applications in field-effect transistor devices and energy harvesting materials . MX2 single layer, the elementary unit to form ultrathin films by weak stacking, features a novel spin-valley coupled band structure. At the corners of the first Brillouin zone (BZ), the valence (conduction) band has two inequivalent valleys. Owing to the broken inversion symmetry in single layers, the strong spin-orbit coupling (SOC) from the d- orbitals of the metal atoms results in a valence band spin splitting at K points, with a magnitude as large as 400 meV in WS2 . The spin-splitting has opposite signs at the K and K’ valleys as they are time reversal of each other at the valence band. This spin-valley coupling forms the basis for manipulation of spin and valley degrees of freedom in these 2D semiconductors. Angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) is one of the most suitable tools to investigate the electronic structure of 2D materials with energy and momentum resolution as well as surface sensitivity , , , . There have been a number of ARPES studies either on bulk MX2 samples or few-layer samples prepared by various methods such as exfoliation, chemical vapor deposition (CVD) , and epitaxial growth . They all observe sizable splitting in the VB at the K-point, with a size of ∼150 meV for MoS2 and ∼400 meV for WS2 as tungsten induces larger SOC . Furthermore, uniform and large-area synthesis of single layer WS2 is an important subject toward applications of 2D materials in various electronic devices . I. METHODS: Single layer graphene was produced via a two-step process beginning with a starting substrate of 4H-SiC(0001). Prior to graphitization, the substrate was hydrogen etched (100% H2) at 1550 °C to produce well-ordered atomic terraces of SiC. Subsequently, the SiC sample was heated to 1000 °C and then further heated to 1550 °C in an Ar atmosphere [22–24]. WS2/SiO2 samples were grown by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) in a 1” quartz tube furnace. The growth substrate was placed in the center of the furnace and heated to 800 °C. A 25 mg sulfur pellet was placed on a piece of silicon and positioned upstream in the furnace such that its temperature was approximately 150 °C. Carrier gas (500 sccm N2) was used to bring sulfur vapor into the furnace for a 30 min growth period. The ARPES measurements were conducted at the CASSIOPEE beamline of Synchrotron SOLEIL (Saint-Aubin, France). We used linearly polarized photons of 50 eV and a hemispherical electron analyzer with vertical slits to allow band mapping. The total angle and energy resolutions were 0.25° and 10 meV. All ARPES experiments were done at low temperature (8 K). XPS experiments were carried out on the TEMPO beamline of Synchrotron SOLEIL (Saint-Aubin, France) at room temperature. The photon source was a HU80 Apple II undulator set to deliver linearly polarized light. The photon energy was selected using a high-resolution plane grating monochromator with a resolving power E/ΔE that can reach 15,000 on the whole energy range (45 - 1500 eV). During the XPS measurements, the photoelectrons were detected at 0° from the sample surface normal n⃗⃗ and at 46° from the polarization vector E⃗⃗ . I. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS In this work, TMD/graphene heterostructures were made from WS2 grown by CVD on SiO2/Si substrates that were then transferred onto graphene/SiC (more details about the transfer procedure are given in the supplementary information Section I) . A schematic of WS2 crystal structure is presented in Figure 1(a) where the lattice constants are indicated. The CVD growth of WS2 on SiO2 results in characteristic single-crystal domains shaped as well-defined equilateral triangles . These films can be nondestructively transferred to various kinds of substrates as desired. With respect to SiO2 and similar substrates, graphene layer has favorable qualities such as atomic flatness, and homogeneous charge distribution. This should enable direct investigation of the adjacent TMD’s intrinsic electronic structure and many-body effects. Graphene layer is often used as a substrate for TMD heterostructures with high device performance . Single layered WS2 flakes were then easily identified by their optical contrast with respect to the graphene substrate (Figure 1(b)) and confirmed by micro-Raman spectroscopy WS2 on the graphene layer. The graphene underlayer used in this study was obtained by annealing 4H-SiC(0001) (see Methods). After the transfer of WS2 onto graphene, an annealing process at T = 300 °C for 60 minutes in UHV was used to further clean the surface and interface of the WS2/graphene heterostructure. To investigate the structural properties of the WS2 flakes micro-Raman and photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy were used (Figure 1 (c) and (d) and supplementary information section II and III). Several Raman spectra of WS2 on graphene, collected in different flake positions, are shown in Figure 1(c). These Raman spectra are obtained with 532 nm excitation, which is in resonance with the B exciton absorption peak . Then, beside the first order modes at the Brillouin zone (BZ) center (Γ), the in-plane phonon mode E2g 1 at 356 cm-1 and the out-of-plane phonon mode A1g at 418 cm- 1 , the Raman spectra present a series of overtone and combination peaks. These different contributions are clearly separated using a multi-peak Lorentzian fit (blue lines in Figure 1 (c) top). In particular, the Raman feature around 350 cm-1 is the convolution of several components: the E2g 1 (Γ), the 2 LA (M) mode at 351.7 cm-1, which is a second-order Raman mode due to LA phonons at the M point of the BZ zone, and the E2g 1 (M) mode . Moreover, Raman peaks at 323.7 cm-1 and 297.1 cm-1 are combinations modes, which are attributed to 2LA (M) − E2g 2 (Γ) and the 2LA (M) − 2E2g 2 (Γ) modes, respectively. Raman mapping was conducted to investigate the uniformity within the single flake. The 2LA (M), E2g 1 (Γ) and the A1g (Γ) modes intensity and position mapping are shows in Figure 1(d) and S2. These Raman modes peak positions and intensity are uniform within the single crystal, indicating that the electronic properties of WS2 are uniform on the graphene substrate. From the frequency difference between the A1g (Γ) and the 2LA(M), the thickness of the WS2 flakes can be determined [34–36]. An average distance of 65.9 ± 0.1 cm-1 is obtained, as shown in figure S4. This value is consistent with monolayer WS2 as already shown by previous studies . For the following experiments, the single layer coverage was estimated to be around 20% of the total area of the sample. The high quality of the WS2 transferred on graphene layer allows investigating the electronic structure by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and ARPES. Both the feasible large-area synthesis and the reliable film transfer process can promise that WS2 ultrathin films will pave a route to many applications of 2D materials and vdW heterostructure. XPS is used to determine the chemical composition and stoichiometry of the WS2 films transferred on the graphene. The C-1s XPS spectrum of WS2/graphene heterostructure, collected at h=340 eV, is shown in These components correspond to the SiC bulk (labeled SiC), the graphene layer (labeled G), and the interface layer (labeled I), respectively. The G peak was fitted by a sum of a Gaussian function convoluted with a Doniach-Sunjic line shape with an asymmetry factor  of 0.09 and a FWHM of 0.4 eV. The low value of the FWHM indicates that only one core level peak was present and thus the carbon atoms had a unique chemical environment. Moreover, no structure appeared at 286.7 eV in the C-1s XPS spectrum, usually attributed to the contamination and/or oxidation, this means even if the samples were annealed at 300 °C, the WS2/graphene layers were very inert and did not show any contamination after WS2 transfer process. The W-4f and S-2p XPS peaks deconvolution shown in Figure 2(b) and (c), present the standard WS2 stoichiometry. The WS2 is well fitted by a doublet peaks at BE of 33.4 eV, 35.6 eV, corresponding to W-4f7/2, W-4f5/2 core energy single doublet (S 2p3/2 at a BE = 163 eV and a 2p1/2:2p3/2 ratio of 0.5 and spin-orbit splitting of 1.19 eV) corresponding to S-W bonding, and confirms the presence of WS2. The absence of the oxygen content in these samples is a result of high quality of the interface in this hybrid hetero-structure, particularly in light of the Raman characteristics that are comparable to high quality WS2 (see above and supplementary information section II and ref ). The electronic structure was also probed using ARPES measurements. The WS2 flakes are relatively well spaced on the graphene substrate, ensuring, thanks to the small spot size (50×50 m2), the mapping of a single flake. Figure 2(d) shows the photoelectron intensity as a function of energy and k-momentum around the normal emission. This is a good measure of the band structure of WS2 around Γ. The zero of binding energy (i.e. the Fermi level) was determined by fitting the leading edge of the graphene layer at the same photon energies and under the same experimental conditions. Beside the typical dispersion of the π bands of graphene around -6 to -8 eV (most intense band), a new set of bands is visible at the Γ point of the BZ, which is the signature of WS2 valence band. In the spectra, the most distinct features include the valence band maximum (VBM) at . The full width at half maximum (FWHM) of WS2 band branches is about 80 meV as shown by Energy distribution curves (EDC) in Figure S7) extracted from the ARPES map of Figure 2(d) at the  point. The sharpness of the different bands can be attributed to the high quality of the transferred flake. Figure 2(e) shows the measured band structure corresponding to the graphene underlayer. The single and robust Dirac cone confirms that the graphene monolayer at the heterostructure preserves the Dirac linear dispersion and the massless relativistic character of the graphene carriers close to the Fermi level. The Dirac point (ED) is located at 0.40 eV below the Fermi level as in the case of pristine graphene on SiC . Then, the n-type doping, close to 9×1012 cm−2, of pristine graphene was not modified by the formation of the heterostructure. This confirms, as shown also by the work function measurement (see supplementary information detail at the momentum distribution curves (MDCs) shown in figure 2 (f) a less dispersive behavior of the peaks are present around ED. Then, the presence of gap-like feature at the K point (already present in the pristine graphene) cannot be completely excluded . However, a more detail study of this feature goes beyond the scope of this paper. From a linear fitting of the MDCs a Fermi velocity vF~ 1.05 × 106 m/s was also determined. It is obvious that also the sharp and intense structure of -bands confirms the high structural quality of WS2 / graphene heterostructure. Differently from our previous work on MoS2/graphene layer and from Diaz et al. no signature of interlayer hybridization and mini-gaps opening is present on the π-band of graphene. The absence of this superperiodicity effects probably is related to the mismatch angle between the WS2 flake and the graphene underlayer. In the following discussions regarding the ARPES data, we will focus mostly on the split of the valence band feature at the K-point of the WS2 (Figures 3). In particular, in order to gain more insight on the electronic structure of WS2, we performed first principles electronic structure calculations on an isolated WS2 monolayer using the QUANTUM ESPRESSO code and PBE and HSE06 hybrid functionals within the adaptive compressed exchange implementation. More technical details are given in the supplemental materials (section IV). Figure 3(a) shows the measured band structure around the K valley. The top of the valence band at the K point is mostly formed by planar dxy and dx2-y2 orbital of tungsten, while at the  point the band is mostly composed by W dz orbitals and S pz orbitals. The observation of a single valence band at  with a higher binding energy than at K also excludes the contribution from bilayer or trilayer WS2: in bilayer TMD systems, the valence band near  shows a bonding/anti-bonding splitting that would be observable by ARPES as two bands, in contrast to what is seen here . The maximum of the valence band is located at the K point (-1.8 eV, which is 0.3 eV higher than at  point). Since the band gap of single WS2 is 2.27 eV , these measurements indicate that our sample is heavily electron doped, which is consistent with previous reports. The electronic structure in the -2 eV to -3 eV binding energy range is globally in good agreement with our electronic structure calculations (Figures 3(b) and (c)), although the energy separation between the top of the valence band at K and is slightly underestimated in PBE (Figure 3 (b)). In both theory and experiments the valence band maximum at the  point is located at higher binding energies than that at the K-point, the energy separation between the two being 0.20 eV in experiments (Figure 3(b) and (c)), 0.17 eV in PBE and 0.20 eV in HSE Figure 3 (c). The measured spin-orbit splitting at K is about 440 meV. Our theoretical calculations for the isolated WS2 monolayer lead to splittings of 440 meV (PBE) and 551 meV (HSE06 on top of PBE). Moreover, an analysis of the curvature of the bands from the ARPES measurements also allows us to deduce the effective mass of the single layer WS2 forming the heterostructure. We determined an experimentally derived hole effective mass of 0.4 m0 (upper band) and 0.5 m0 (lower band) (where m0 is the free electron mass) at K, and a hole effective mass of 1.7 m0 at . These values agree very well with the PBE calculated bands, suggesting that many body effects are not important close to the top of the valence band at K. Finally, the gap between the two highest energy valence bands and the bands at lower energies is substantially underestimated in PBE. The inclusion of the exchange interaction within the HSE06 functional on top of the PBE geometry corrects both errors but leads to a somewhat too large spin-orbit coupling. Although we cannot include explicitly the interaction with the substrate as we miss the structural orientation between WS2 and graphene, it seems that the measured ARPES data agrees well with the bands of an isolated single layer with PBE geometry and electronic structure obtained with the inclusion of the exchange interaction. In particular the exchange interaction seems to improve the agreement not only for the top of the valence band at zone center but also for the electronic structure in the binding energy region below -3 eV. IV. CONCLUSIONS In summary, we have studied the electronic structure of single layer WS2 on epitaxial graphene. We found that this heterostructure gives rise to sharp bands, in particular for the WS2 VBM near the  and K points. We directly observe the strong spin splitting of the upper VB and its value are in excellent agreement with the PBE DFT calculations. Our ARPES measurements on the heterostructure showed graphene and WS2 largely retained their original electronic structure and, in particular suspended WS2 monolayer is a good approximation of the electronic properties close to the top of the valence band. Finally, we determined experimentally spin-orbit splitting. Our results provide an important reference for future studies of electronic properties of WS2 and their applications in spintronic and valleytronic devices Acknowledgements: We acknowledge support from the Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR) under grants Labex Nanosaclay and H2DH (ANR-15-CE24-0016), from the Region Ile-de-France in the framework of C’Nano IdF (nanoscience competence center of Paris Region). Labex Nanoscalay belongs to the public funded Investissements d’Avenir program managed by ANR. WS2, b) typical optical image of the WS2 transferred onto the graphene layer. The contrast has been adjusted in order to improve the visibility of the flake. The WS2 profile is traced by white dashed lines, c) micro-Raman spectra taken on different position of the WS2/graphene heterostructure, in the top spectrum the used multi-peak Lorentzian fit is shown as blue lines, d) Raman maps images of the peak intensity and position of the 2LA(M) (top) and A1g (Γ) (bottom) modes of WS2 on epitaxial graphene core levels at h= 340 eV.d) ARPES map of WS2/graphene heterostructure around the  point in the K high symmetry direction of WS2 Brillouin zone, e) Band structure of the graphene layer in the heterostructure at the K high symmetry direction, f) corresponding momentum distribution curves (MDCs) of figure (e). between ARPES map and DFT calculations (PBE and HSE06 respectively).