Collective energy gap of preformed Cooper-pairs in disordered superconductors Thomas Dubouchet,1 Benjamin Sac ́ep ́e,2, ∗ Johanna Seidemann,2 Dan Shahar,3 Marc Sanquer,1 and Claude Chapelier1, † 1Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CEA, INAC, PHELIQS, F-38000 Grenoble, France 2Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, Institut N ́eel, 38000 Grenoble, France 3Department of Condensed Matter Physics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel (Dated: June 4, 2018) In most superconductors the transition to the superconducting state is driven by the binding of electrons into Cooper-pairs. The condensation of these pairs into a single, phase coherent, quantum state takes place concomitantly with their formation at the transition temperature, Tc. A different scenario occurs in some disordered, amorphous, superconductors: Instead of a pairing-driven transition, incoherent Cooper pairs first pre-form above Tc, causing the opening of a pseudogap, and then, at Tc, condense into the phase coherent superconducting state. Such a two-step scenario implies the exis- tence of a new energy scale, ∆c, driving the collective superconducting transition of the preformed pairs. Here we unveil this energy scale by means of Andreev spectroscopy in superconducting thin films of amorphous indium oxide. We observe two Andreev conductance peaks at ±∆c that develop only below Tc and for highly disordered films on the verge of the transition to insulator. Our findings demonstrate that amorphous superconducting films provide prototypical disordered quantum systems to explore the collective superfluid transition of preformed Cooper-pairs pairs. While a small amount of (non-magnetic) disorder weakly affects superconductivity , the situation changes radically when disorder reaches a level such that localization of electronic wave functions develops. In some amorphous materials, such an extreme situation in which the normal state electron transport is no longer metallic due to the abundant scattering, yields a fragile superconducting state at low temperature. On increas- ing disorder further or applying a magnetic field this su- perconducting state undergoes a sharp quantum phase transition to insulator . Recently a body of tunneling experiments performed on different disordered thin films [5–7, 9–12] have shown that the spectral properties of superconductivity border- ing the transition to insulator deviate significantly from the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory . The new picture drawn by these measurements is that elec- trons pre-form into Cooper-pairs well above the tran- sition temperature, Tc, leading to a deep suppression of the single-particle density-of-states (DOS) at the Fermi level, which is known as the pseudogap anomaly [5– 7]. Only at a temperature T = Tc at which resistivity vanishes and global phase coherence between these pre- formed pairs sets in, the pseudogap evolves into a hard gap, Eg. The systematic observation of an anomalously large and spatially fluctuating spectral gap Eg, with a ratio Eg/kBTc reaching up to ∼ 6 in the most disordered samples, has pointed out a dissociation between Tc and Eg, in stark contrast to BCS superconductors for which Eg/kBTc = 1.76 (kB is the Boltzmann constant). On these grounds theory predicts that a second en- ergy scale, ∆c, may be at play to drive the collective, BCS-type, superconducting transition of the preformed pairs . This collective gap is expected to scale with Tc and thus lies within the single-particle gap Eg, making tunneling measurement unable to unveil it. As earlier proposed in the context of high Tc supercon- ductors , the means to unveil ∆c consists of co- herent transfer of pairs of electrons from a normal metal (N) electrode to the superconductor (S). The mechanism that allows charge transfer through the N/S interface correlates, in the metal, an impinging electron with an- other one, having energy below the Fermi level, to form a Cooper-pair in the superconductor. This so-called An- dreev process results from the particle-hole mixing oc- curring in the superconductor within the energy inter- val of the BCS superconducting gap . On the other hand, in a superconductor with preformed Cooper-pairs, theory predicts that the energy window for particle-hole mixing no longer coincides with the single particle gap Eg but instead with ∆c . Consequently, whereas single-particle tunneling probes only Eg, two-particles spectroscopy, termed Andreev spectroscopy, enables di- rect measurement of the collective energy gap ∆c. Here we report on Andreev spectroscopy performed on superconducting thin films of amorphous indium oxide (a:InO) on the verge of the insulating state . The transfer of electron pairs being a second order process as compared to single electron tunneling, Andreev spec- troscopy requires high contact transparency. We there- fore used the metallic tip of a scanning tunneling mi- croscope (STM) to control the transparency, that is, the conductance, of the point-contact formed between the tip and the film, and perform a systematic study from single-particle tunneling to Andreev spectroscopy . The chief result of this work is presented in figure 1 arXiv:1806.00323v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 1 Jun 2018 2 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 0 1 2 3 Conductance (2e 2/h) Voltage (mV) lution of the local differential conductance G = dI/dV mea- sured at T = 0.065 K versus voltage and at different values of the point-contact conductance G(V = −3 mV) for sample InO-2. Conductance is normalized to 2e2/h. where we display a set of differential conductance curves G(V ) = dI/dV versus bias-voltage V across a point- contact on sample InO-2. For each curve the point- contact conductance is controlled by adjusting the cur- rent set-point of the STM feedback loop for a given voltage-bias (V = −3 mV). From bottom to top curve the point-contact conductance varies from e2/h to more than 4e2/h (e is the electron charge; h is the Plank con- stant). We begin by noting that for the low point-contact con- ductance (botton curve in Fig 1) G(V ) resembles that of single-particle tunneling with a gap Eg at the Fermi level bordered by single-particle peaks ( see Fig. S2 in SI). In- creasing further the conductance profoundly modifies the spectrum. While the single-particle peaks remains, the gap fills in with a significant level of conductance indi- cating the opening of new conduction channels for two- particles as the transparency rises. The Andreev spec- troscopy regime is hence clearly established. For conventional, low disorder superconductors, An- dreev process at the interface leads to a monotonous in- crease of conductance inside the gap ultimately reach- ing, for perfect transparency, twice the contact conduc- tance . Our results on a highly disordered film dis- played in figure 1 are rather different. Two peaks inside the single-particle gap emerge out of the Andreev con- ductance background as the contact conductance rises above 2e2/h. Their energies are symmetric with respect to zero-bias, at ±150 μV , and independent of the con- tact transparency. These new peaks unveiled by Andreev spectroscopy are the main focus of this work and provide, as demonstrated below, compelling evidence for the col- lective gap ∆c for the preformed Cooper pairs. -2 -1 0 1 2 1.0 1.5 2.0 Conductance (2e 2/h) Voltage (mV) 0.15 0.45 0.78 0.94 1.00 1.13 1.26 1.42 1.51 1.55 T (K) -2 -1 0 1 2 1.0 0.2 0.8 0.4 0.6 T/Tc a Voltage (mV) b -d 2G/dV 2 (a.u.) -1 0 1 troscopy. a, Differential conductance curves in unit of 2e2/h measured versus bias voltage at different temperatures. All curves except the bottom one are vertically shifted for clarity. The black dashed line corresponds to the spectrum measured at Tc. b, Colormap of −d2G/dV 2 (arbitrary unit) versus bias voltage and reduced temperature T/Tc for the whole set of data. To trace back the superconductivity-related origin of these peaks we studied the T-evolution of the Andreev spectra measured at different point-contact locations of the samples. One representative T-evolution of G(V ) measured on sample InO-2 is shown in Figure 2a. The point contact transparency is set large enough such that both Andreev and single-particle peaks are apparent. On increasing temperature the two Andreev peaks move to- wards zero-bias voltage at T ≳ 0.6 Tc and merges farther into a conductance maximum at zero-bias. This max- imum, still just visible at T = Tc, disappears beyond T ≃ 1.05 Tc. The T-evolution of the Andreev peaks is even more clearly seen in Fig. 2b by plotting −d2G/dV 2 versus T and V (see Fig. S3 in SI). The termination of the Andreev peaks at T ≃ Tc that we observe in all our samples clearly indicates that they relate to coherent superconductivity. This is in stark contrast with the T-evolution of the single-particle tun- neling gap Eg, which remains unchanged at Tc, and only vanishes further at several times Tc, resulting in the ap- pearance of the pseudogap in the single-particle density- of-states . On a theoretical standpoint a body of works on disor- dered superconductivity now converges to account for the pseudogap by the pre-formation of Cooper-pairs above Tc . The mechanism behind this relies on the delicate interplay between quantum localization of the single-particle states and the attractive pairing. As a result the anomalously large single-particle gap Eg is pre- dicted to embody two contributions. The first is the pair- ing energy gap ∆p for the pre-formation of Cooper-pairs –the energy gain to pair electrons or equivalently the en- ergy cost to add an odd number of electrons in localized orbitals– at the origin of the pseudogap. The second is the collective energy gap ∆c related to the BCS-type con- densation of the preformed pairs into the superconduct- ing state . As ∆p is not involved when transferring 3 two electrons simultaneously, ∆c only can give rise to the Andreev conductance signal that we observe in our data. 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 0 50 100 150 200 ∆c (μeV) Eg (μeV) energy gap ∆c as a function of single particle gap Eg measured at low temperature in contact and tunneling regime respec- tively. The data were obtained at different locations on three highly disordered a:InO samples. The error bars indicate the experimental accuracy in determining ∆c and Eg. Furthermore, we investigate how the values of Eg and ∆c spreads over three highly disordered samples (sam- ples InO-1, InO-2 and InO-3). All our measurements of Eg and ∆c performed on these samples are summarized in Figure 3. The value of the local gap Eg obtained by fitting the density of states of spectra in the tunneling regime (see Fig. S2 in SI) is strongly tip-position depen- dent with an an energy varying by a factor of more than three, that is, spreading between 200μeV and 650μeV , as previously reported . In contrast, ∆c scatters around an average value of 145 μeV with a variability of ±30 μeV that stems mainly from the experimental accuracy. No- tice that this observation rules out multiple Andreev re- flections at sub-multiple energies 2Eg/n, n being an in- teger, as a possible origin for the observed sub-gap struc- ture in our spectra . Importantly, this average value of ∆c that translates to 1.7 ± 0.3 K is close to the Tc’s of the samples (1.45, 1.5 and 1.9 K, see Table S1 in SI). The two energy scales discussed in this work span on two clearly distinct ranges that are illustrated in Figure 4 where we have reported the respective energy ranges for ∆c and Eg on a typical resistance curve around the tran- sition to the superconducting state. The condensation energy ∆c is of the order of the critical temperature Tc, in stark contrast with the pseudogap Eg, which extends up to ∼ 6Tc. This coincidence between ∆c and Tc to- gether with the suppression of ∆c in the close vicinity of Tc provide strong evidence that this new energy scale re- lates to the set in of macroscopic, superconducting phase coherence. Finally, to demonstrate that the Andreev peaks stem from the high level of disorder in our films and the prox- imity to the insulator, we conducted identical measure- ments on a low disorder a:InO film (sample InO-4) that behaves in all points as a conventional dirty superconduc- tor , that is, without a pseudogap above Tc (see Fig. S4 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 0 1 R (h/4e2) T (Tc) Condensation Preformation of Cooper pairs Δc Eg tance in unit of h/4e2 versus T normalized to Tc illustrating the typical superconducting transition of a nearly critical thin films in the vicinity of the superconductor-insulator transi- tion. The typical distribution of ∆c and Eg are indicated by the black arrows. in SI). The corresponding Andreev spectroscopy shows a standard, monotonous increase of the conductance within the single-particle gap, without any intra-gap peak (see Fig. S5 in SI). This evolution, which has been observed for any position of the STM tip can be accurately de- scribed by Blonder-Tinkham-Klapwijk (BTK) theory for N/S interfaces . To conclude, the scenario drawn by our observations contrasts with standard BCS superconductors. The sec- ond energy scale we uncover together with the pseudo- gap comply with a two-step transition to superconductor, which develops, first, far above Tc with the preformation of Cooper-pairs and follows at lower T by the collective condensation of the preformed pairs into a macroscop- ically phase coherent superconducting state. The na- ture of such a superconducting state that develops in disordered superconductors bordering insulators, defies conventional theories and shall inspire new theoretical paradigms for superconductivity. METHODS Samples Our samples are disordered thin films of amorphous indium oxide. The films are prepared by electron-beam evaporation of high purity (99.99%) In2O3 onto SiO2 in an O2 partial pressure. Samples were patterned into Hall bridges via a shadow mask to perform in-situ four-terminal transport measurements in the STM set-up and thus direct comparison between macroscopic and microscopic superconducting proper- ties. Measurements Tunneling and Andreev spectroscopy 4 measurements were performed with a home-built STM cooled down to 0.05 K in an inverted dilution refrigera- tor. By varying the STM setpoint current from 1 nA to 1 μA with a bias voltage of a few millivolts, we tuned the junction resistance in the range 1 − 1000 kΩ and thus explored continuously the whole transition from tunneling to contact regime. The differential conduc- tance G(V ) = dI dV of the junction was measured with a lock-in amplifier technique with a voltage modulation of 10 − 30 μV.