Solitonic State in Microscopic Dynamic Failures H.O. Ghaffari1*, M.Pec1 and W.A.Griffith2 1 Department of Earth, Atmospheric and Planetary Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA 2 School of Earth Sciences, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA. *Correspondence to: hoghaff@mit.edu Abstract: Onset of permanent deformation in crystalline materials under a sharp indenter tip is accompanied by nucleation and propagation of defects. By measuring the spatio-temporal strain field near the indenter tip during indentation tests, we demonstrate that the dynamic strain history at the moment of a displacement burst carries characteristics of formation and interaction of local excitations, or solitons. We show that dynamic propagation of multiple solitons is followed by a short time interval where the propagating fronts can accelerate suddenly. As a result of such abrupt local accelerations, duration of the fast-slip phase of a failure event is shortened. Our results show that formation and annihilation of solitons mediate the microscopic fast weakening phase, during which extreme acceleration and collision of solitons lead to non-Newtonian behavior and Lorentz contraction, i.e., shortening of solitons’ characteristic length. The results open new horizons for understanding dynamic material response during failure and, more generally, complexity of earthquake sources. Introduction: Apparent discontinuities in load–penetration depth (P–h) curves are a known characteristic of indentation tests (1-4). Such discontinuities are termed displacement bursts and usually are complemented by emission of ultrasound waves as well as charged particles and electrons (5-7). Numerical studies and post-mortem observations established that such excitations are the result of nucleation of defects, which are the carriers of plasticity and are expressed as displacement bursts in P-h curves (2-4). A burst represents a single or multiple slip events which relax accumulated stresses under the indenter and perturb the strain field. In particular, it has been suggested and supported by recent experiments in which the general process of splitting matter – in both gas and solid states - evolves over at least two main time scales due to distinct fast and slow relaxation processes (8-11). The fast relaxation is manifested as an abrupt decrease in load in a displacement rate controlled experiment or as a displacement burst in a load controlled experiment (hereafter we call it weakening phase). The weakening phase is usually followed by asymptotic relaxation to a new equilibrium state (8-9, 11). However, the dynamic role of nucleated defects in shaping the relaxation path and the mechanisms by which contact-induced plasticity leads to sharp decreases in load following a displacement bursts is still poorly understood. Here, we infer the relative change of a dynamic spatio-temporal strain field in the vicinity of the indenter tip at the onset of displacement bursts from recorded ultrasound waves. Our results show the existence of local nonlinear excitations hidden in emitted ultrasound waveforms. In particular, we uncover a peculiar mechanism in which multiple solitons propagate at different velocities but converge to collide and annihilate each other during a characteristic ᴧ-shaped collision. Such convergence occurs on a very short time scale and leads to fast acceleration of solitons. We show that the latter solitons clearly squeeze their characteristic length, satisfying Lorentz’ contraction law. Results- We indented suspended thin sheets of single crystal mica and recorded the emitted ultrasound signals (high frequency analogues to seismic waves (12-13)) using an array of 8 to 16 ultrasound sensors arranged in a ring-like pattern around the indentation site (Fig.1A; Fig.S3- see Methods section). The displacement bursts – coinciding with emission of high frequency noises – in our load-controlled experiment appear as discontinuities in the displacement record (1-4). During an indentation test of the mica sheet, we were able to record tens of ultrasound excitations well known as acoustic emissions (AEs) with different excitation levels of source energy. In Fig.1B, we show waves from a single excitation parallel to the direction of a muscovite mica specimen. To analyze the array of recorded AE signals, we use a thresholded measure of correlation between sensor activities (measured in mV) and construct a virtual “lattice” of nodes that evolve throughout the recorded time series based on the behavior of the entire system (see Methods section for details -Fig.S1). The constructed one dimensional artificial active lattice is characterized by the average of all nodes’ degree (<k> - or mean coordinate number) and evolution of the lattice topology allows us to study the complexity of the excitation sources (Fig. 1C, D). The degree ki of the ith node at a given time represents the number of connected links to the node where “links” are established based on a similarity metric, therefore representing the intensity of spatial correlation between the node and all other nodes (13-17). Calibration of k(t) with impulsive compressive and shear sources indicates that the evolution of this parameter can be closely approximated as the relative change of dynamic strain (Methods section -Fig.S3-S4). To visualize the temporal evolution of the dynamics of sites , we map the spatial evolution of the degree ki of the ith node , using polar coordinates 1,..., ( , ) i i i Nodes R   where i i R  k and i indicate the position of the node around the ring (we call this structure a k-chain-Fig.1E &F- Supplementary movie 1,2). It is convenient for our purposes to assign a state for each node by ( ) i i k s sign t    so that is  1 -see Fig.S6. Upon excitation, the emitted waves carry information regarding the local disturbances in the vicinity of indenter tip, and propagation of such disturbances is deduced from the intensity evolution of the array-recorded waves. Evaluating the spatio-temporal pattern of ki(t) as relative change of the strain field and its spatial mean trend <k(t)>, we found distinct patterns of dynamic failure characterized by phase (≈ 3-15 μs). Comparison of the Fourier transform of the recorded waveforms with <k(t)>- Fig.1D- shows that the onset of high frequency components coincide with the fast-weakening In phase I, the system is pulled from an equilibrium state to a state where all nodes polarize in the outward direction. This occurs in the rising part of <k(t)> in Fig.1C and is stable for ~200- 500 ns. After this short stable phase, the trend of correlation between nodes breaks down and one or more nodes’ states reverse; the reversed node forms a kink or domain wall in the strain field and represents a perturbation to the fully correlated state which interpolate between two fully correlated-states of the system-Fig.S6. The formation of kinks is visualized by the onset of “folding” of the k-chain, and we use the general term “soliton” to describe moving kinks (Fig.1F- supplementary movie 1,2). Solitons are non-periodic waves that can be well-described by step-like functions of the form tanh(θ-vsolitont/w) where vsoliton is the propagation velocity of a soliton with a width, w, and position, θ (20,21). From a physical point of view, a kink can be viewed as a local defect, and such defects – as we will show in detail below – affect the dynamic strain history during failure. Here we define failure as the fast drop of <k> as the indicator of the mean strain. The relevance of kinks for deformation can be track down to the pioneering work by Frenkel on the shear strength of crystalline solids and later the corresponding well-studied one- dimensional Frenkel-Kontorova (FK) model (21,34), describing a 1D chain of finite coupled sites subjected to a sinusoidal potential. Processes pertaining resistance against deformation in the FK model are governed by excitation of kinks (34). To further illuminate the evolution of moving solitons in our chain, including their interactions and resultant effects on the inferred dynamic strain field, we present the evolution of density profiles based on kinetic energy of the k-chain: 2 1 1 ( ) 2 N i i i du E m dt    where i i dk du dt  dt as the rate of normal displacement (dilatational components), N is the number of sites, and we assume a non-dimensional mass im 1 (section 2 of Supplementary Information). The above kinetic energy term only considers the radial deformation of the chain (i.e., expansion or contraction) and energies corresponding to angular deformation has been omitted. We map the angular direction along a k-chain on to a vector q with fixed magnitude and direction Ɵ. Therefore, a system with N elements is characterized by q vectors and the energy E is defined in q -space ( ( ) E q ). To characterize the energy distribution in q-space (pseudo-momentum space), we use the concept of density of states in a 1-d chain as (20,22): 1 ( ) 2 | | D E dE d    where n Na    and n=1,..., N (a is the lattice space). If 0 dE d  , ( D E ) will include singularities known as Van Hove singularities-VHS (23-24). Figure 2A shows an example of time-evolution of a k-chain in 0     at the onset of a soliton-antisoliton pair formation. Approaching nucleation of the soliton, the kinetic energy of the chain monotonically decreases and apparently is absorbed at certain points which are the points of soliton nucleation. In fact, the kinetic energy includes additional term regarding non-radial motion (i.e., shear deformation) due to motion of kinks. Interestingly, the nucleation points correspond to points with divergences in the density of states (VHS) and splitting of VHS (Fig.2B-inset) coincides with soliton-antisoliton propagation. In Figures 3 and 4, we show the time-evolution of D(E) in θ-t parameter space where several domain walls nucleate, propagate and finally annihilate. A soliton moves with a certain velocity vsoliton and perturbs the initial state of the system (Fig.3,-Fig.S7). In Fig.3, we show the nucleation, propagation and interaction of solitons which occurs in the transition from phase I to phase II. During this transition, we observe that two solitons merge into a single short-lived pulse (i.e., strong merger regime (25-27)) and annihilate each other. In particular, for the shown example, four main solitons dominate transition to the fast-slip phase and they prevailingly move with the velocity of 0.03C featuring slow propagating velocity .Here, C is the maximum allowed velocity and we use a normalized value of C≡1. For mica this is on the order of a few km/s corresponding to surface waves (see Methods section for measuring C). Tracking of soliton fronts unravels the attractive interactions of colliding solitons (Fig.4-Fig.S7). This attractive interaction leads to a “sudden” increase in the front velocity up to - in less than a few hundred nanoseconds implying an abrupt local acceleration up to ~109 m/s2, four orders of magnitude higher than reported in regular laboratory stick-slip experiments that employ low frequency load cells and gauges (28-29). The accelerated soliton fronts result in faster annihilation and eventually yield a shorter fast-slip phase (Fig.4); hence quickening the weakening phase of micro-failure events associated with displacement bursts. The observed ᴧ-shape collision of solitons and their annihilation are universal features of the studied events in our experiments and modulate the relaxation of the system across the transition between phase (I) and fast-slip (II) phases. The attractive interaction of soliton fronts may occur due to the nonlocal nonlinear nature of the medium in which the response at a certain site is transferred to the surrounding regions and induces a spatially long-range response of the medium (30-31). The lifetime of fast fronts (maximum ~ 800 ns) is shorter than the lifetime of slower fronts (maximum a few micro- seconds). Due to merging of the solitons, the evolution path of the system after crossing the peak of <k> is reversed and the system approaches another (ground) state in which all sites point inward (Fig.3B-Fig.S8). A striking feature of moving solitons as proposed using several analytical solutions (20, 21, 34), is that solitons with velocities approaching the maximum allowed velocity in a given structure exhibit relativistic features. In Figure 5 –also see Fig.S9-we show the trajectory of a soliton in transition from phase I to II where a sudden jump in the front velocity of up to 6 times the initial velocity is observed. After this sudden acceleration, the velocity of the soliton approaches ~0.8C and its width w shrinks by ~45% of the initial length. This squeezing of soliton characteristic length is consistent with Lorentz contraction and hints at the existence of relativistic features occurring during the displacement bursts. Discussion - Our results provide new fundamental insights into microscopic dynamic failure under a sharp indenter tip. We presented experimental evidence of short-term strain disturbances in the form of moving solitons in the course of displacement-bursts. Tracking the motion of single solitons unraveled their abrupt acceleration that occurs during the fast weakening phase - the most critical phase of any unstable failure. Motivated by our results, we argue that existence of solitons as the shear components to an evolving k-lattice are analogous with the observed rupture fronts moving along an active frictional interface (Fig.S3f). From this point of view, the propagated soliton along a non-deformable chain represents a single moving shear front as it has been represented in recent experiments (8,35). Therefore, we speculate that multiple nucleated fronts along an interface, in contrast with a single hypocenter, can result in a peculiar abrupt local accelerated scenario with magnitudes much higher than global observed values of the slip acceleration. Existence of a short-term relativistic state in motion of solitons implies increasing the energy of moving defects which in turn modifies the energy budget relation of the system. For a soliton moving with 0.8 C, the consumed energy is 67 % higher than for slow fronts (a few percent of C) and effectively acts as a non-trivial energy sink of the system. In summary, our work indicates that the introduced framework to analyze recorded ultrasound excitations provides a versatile platform to study displacement bursts during contact- based failures and establish novel methods for probing dynamic defects.