1 Tunneling spectroscopy of gate-induced superconductivity in MoS2 Davide Costanzo1 *, Haijing Zhang1 *, Bojja Aditya Reddy1, Helmuth Berger2 and Alberto F. Morpurgo1 **. 1DQMP and GAP, Université de Genève, 24 quai Ernest Ansermet, Geneva CH-1211, Switzerland. 2Institut de Physique de la Matière Complexe, Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne, Lausanne CH- 1015, Switzerland. *These two authors contributed equally to this work **e-mail: alberto.morpurgo@unige.ch The ability to gate-induce superconductivity by electrostatic charge accumulation is a recent breakthrough in physics and nano-electronics. With the exception of LaAlO3/SrTiO3 interfaces, experiments on gate-induced superconductors have been largely confined to resistance measurements, which provide very limited information about the superconducting state. Here, we explore gate-induced superconductivity in MoS2 by performing tunneling spectroscopy to determine the energy-dependent density of states (DOS) for different levels of electron density n. In the superconducting state, the DOS is strongly suppressed at energy smaller than the gap, , which is maximum ( ~ 2 meV) for n of ~ 1014 cm-2 and decreases monotonously for larger n. A perpendicular magnetic field B generates states at E <  that fill the gap, but a 20% DOS suppression of superconducting origin unexpectedly persists much above the transport critical field. Conversely, an in- plane field up to 10 T leaves the DOS entirely unchanged. Our measurements exclude that the superconducting state in MoS2 is fully gapped and reveal the presence of a DOS that 2 vanishes linearly with energy, the explanation of which requires going beyond a conventional, purely phonon-driven Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer mechanism. The observation of a transition to a zero-resistance state signals the occurrence of superconductivity but provides virtually no information about the microscopic nature of the superconducting state, whose determination is complex and requires the combination of multiple experimental probes. Among these, the use of tunneling spectroscopy to probe the energy- dependent density of states (DOS) has traditionally played a central role. For instance, shortly after the appearance of the BCS paper on superconductivity1, Giaever’s measurements on Al, Sn and In tunnel junctions2 3 gave a clear experimental validation of the theory. Analogous experiments4 5 on Pb and Nb tunnel junctions demonstrated that the attractive interaction leading to electron pairing is phonon-mediated, and enabled the quantitative determination of the electron-phonon coupling strength6. More recently, tunneling spectroscopy has been systematically performed on high-Tc transition metal oxides7 and iron pnictides8 9 to explore their unconventional non s-wave nature. Here, we apply tunneling spectroscopy to investigate gate-induced superconductivity in the electron accumulation layer at the surface of MoS2 10. Starting with LaAlO3/SrTiO3 interfaces11 12, the number of recently discovered material systems that allow superconductivity to be gate-induced has been steadily increasing10 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20. Several of these systems are van der Waals bonded layered compounds in which superconductivity has been induced using ionic liquid gated transistors10 14 16 17 18 19 20, among which MoS2 has attracted particular attention (see Fig. 1a). For instance, superconductivity 3 persists even when the MoS2 thickness is reduced down to an individual monolayer19 and is extremely robust against the application of an in-plane magnetic field21 22. Also, irrespective of the MoS2 thickness, superconductivity always occurs in the two-dimensional regime because the depth of the accumulation layer is limited by the electrostatic screening length ~ 1 nm21 22. However, no tunneling experiments have been performed so far because the accumulation layer is buried between the liquid gate and the MoS2 crystal and is difficult to access with a tunnel- coupled probe. Heterostructure devices for tunneling spectroscopy To perform tunneling spectroscopy of gate-induced superconductivity, we exploit nano- fabricated devices based on van der Waals heterostructures23, in the configuration schematically illustrated in Fig. 1b. The devices employ a graphene multilayer (typically 6-8 layer thick) as tunneling electrode, with the exfoliated MoS2 crystals (typically 6-10 layer thick) both hosting the gate-induced accumulation layer and acting as tunnel barrier. The ionic liquid covers the MoS2 multilayer as well as the gate consisting of a large area metallic pad, so that a positive gate bias results in the accumulation of electrons onto the MoS2 top surface. Under this condition, the band profile across the thickness of the MoS2 multilayer is schematically shown in Fig. 1c. Different device configurations have been tested –by covering the edges of MoS2 with a PMMA layer (Fig. 1d top) or leaving them exposed (Fig. 1d bottom)– to exclude that edge effects determine transport from the graphene multilayer to the accumulation layer (see supplementary information for more details). 4 The key advantage of the configuration shown in Fig. 1b is that it allows us to measure in-plane transport and to extract the DOS on a same device. The energy-resolved DOS is obtained from the voltage-dependent differential conductance measured by biasing one of the graphene strips relative to a contact attached to the top of the MoS2 layer. At low-temperature, the current injected “vertically” from a graphene electrode into the accumulation layer at the surface of MoS2 is carried by electrons tunneling through the un-doped part of the MoS2 multilayer (see Fig. 1c). That MoS2 multilayers can act as reliable tunnel barriers has been shown recently24, and here it is indicated by the temperature dependence of both the non-linear I-V curves (Fig. 1e) and of the zero-bias differential resistance (Fig. 1f). As T is lowered from room temperature, these quantities initially exhibit a thermally activated dependence (due to thermally assisted transport), followed by a saturation as T is decreased below ~70 K, confirming that at low temperature “vertical” transport is dominated by tunneling. In all devices studied saturation was seen to reproducibly occur between 60 and 100 K; the observed reproducibility suggests that this value is determined by the alignment of the Fermi level in the accumulation layer and the bottom of the conduction band in the undoped part of MoS2. Measuring the DOS in the superconducting state At the lowest temperature of our measurements (either 1.5 K or 250 mK, depending on the cryostat used), the “vertical” differential conductance exhibits a pronounced low-energy suppression, whose magnitude decreases as the temperature is increased, and disappears for T Tc > ~ , the critical temperature determined by the resistive transition (defined as the temperature for which the measured resistance is 95% of the normal state value). This behavior, originating from the suppressed DOS in the superconducting state, is illustrated in Fig. 2 with data from two 5 devices gate-biased at different values of electron density n (inferred from Hall resistance measurements). Specifically, Fig. 2a shows the temperature dependence of the in-plane resistance at n = 1.5·1014 cm-2 from which Tc is determined to be approximately 10 K, and Fig. 2b shows the normalized bias-dependent tunneling conductance recorded for different values of T ≤ 10 K (the tunneling conductance is normalized by dividing it by the tunneling conductance measured at T just above Tc –see the inset of Fig. 2a and 2c). Analogous measurements performed at n = 5.1·1014 cm-2, shown in Fig. 2c and d, exhibit a virtually identical behavior, albeit with Tc ≅ 3.5 K. We measured the tunneling conductance of 5 devices cooled down multiple times with different applied gate voltage, to investigate accumulation layers with electron density in the range between n ~ 1·1014 cm-2 and n ~ 5·1014 cm-2. The measurements exhibit common features, already visible in Fig. 2b and d. The low-energy suppression in the DOS –observed in all devices investigated –is not complete and its energy dependence is not as pronounced as it would be expected from a fully gapped system. “Side-lobes” are typically seen at finite bias (at ~1.8 mV in Fig. 2b and ~0.3 mV in Fig. 2d), with an amplitude much less pronounced than the coherence peaks expected for conventional s-wave superconductors. In a few cases a double lobe structure was seen (as in Fig. 2d). Finally, any time measurements were performed at T < ~ 0.2 Tc, kinks at sub-gap energy, symmetric around zero bias, could be clearly identified, as the ones pointed to by the purple arrows in Fig. 2b and 2d. 6 These features result from a systematic behavior that we identify by plotting quantities measured on devices gate-biased at different values of electron density n, as a function of reduced variables (eV/ and T/Tc). Fig. 3a shows the normalized tunneling conductance of devices covering the full range of electron densities, measured at T/Tc ≅ 0.2 (since Tc is different for different devices, the actual value of T/Tc may deviate from 0.2 by about 10-15%). It is clearly apparent that for eV/ ≅ 1 large sample-to-sample fluctuations are present, with the amplitude of the “lobes” that can vary from very pronounced to nearly absent. For eV/ < 0.5, however, all curves exhibit an approximately linear dependence and virtually collapse on top of each other. Such a systematic low-bias behavior insensitive to the electron density n is confirmed by the V =0 V differential conductance plotted as a function of T/Tc (see Fig. 3b). Data points measured at all values of electron density follow a common trend, which for small T/Tc is linear, with the differential conductance extrapolating to zero for T/Tc → 0. The observed systematic trends rule out that the low-energy (i.e., E < 0.5 ∆) tunneling conductance is strongly affected by inhomogeneity in electron density, whose presence is virtually unavoidable in ionic liquid gated transistor at low temperature18 19. Indeed, measurements of the Hall resistance between different pairs of contacts on a same device show that the inhomogeneity in electron density is strongly device-dependent (see supplementary information). Therefore, any physical quantity whose behavior is critically determined by this inhomogeneity should also exhibit strong sample-to-sample fluctuations. Fig. 3a shows that sample-to-sample fluctuations affect the shape of the differential conductance for eV ~  (how pronounced the side lobes are, or whether one or two lobes are seen, depends on the sample) but not at low-bias. This conclusion is further supported by the common trend followed by the V = 0 7 tunneling conductance of different devices shown in Fig. 3b, which confirms that charge density inhomogeneity does not have a dominant influence on the measured low-energy DOS. Finally, note that finding that the tunneling conductance extrapolates to zero for T/Tc → 0 (see Fig. 3b) implies that the vast majority of MoS2 is superconducting. This is an important conclusion because the non-vanishing resistance that is seen in some of the devices for T << Tc (see, e.g., Fig. 2c) may be taken as an indication that a large fraction of the accumulation layer remains in the normal state. The large suppression in the low-temperature tunneling conductance seen in Fig. 3b directly shows that this is not the case (see supplementary information for a more detailed discussion). Fig. 3c shows the evolution of Tc and with increasing n. The dependence of Tc extracted from the resistive transitions connects smoothly with data reported earlier by Iwasa’s group10, which reached up to n =1.5·1014 cm-2, and extends the study of gate-induced superconductivity to n > 5·1014 cm-2. In this yet unexplored regime Tc decreases upon increasing electron density, indeed forming a well-defined dome. Finding a smooth connection with Iwasa’s group data is noteworthy, because it demonstrates quantitative consistency of independent observations of a same phenomenon, something that had not yet been reported for ionic liquid gated superconductivity (note also that finding a systematic evolution of Tc with n implies again that it is the average density that determines the critical temperature, and not the density fluctuations due to the inhomogeneity present in ionic liquid gated devices, consistently with the considerations made above). From the differential conductance we also extract Tc (which we define as the temperature at which a V = 0 suppression becomes visible beyond the noise) and the gap . Considering that the precise value of Tc depends somewhat on the definition used, the 8 agreement between the Tc values extracted from the differential conductance and from the resistive transitions is satisfactory, and shows the consistency of transport and tunneling data. The dependence of  on n follows that of Tc, albeit with larger fluctuations (see Fig. 3c - right axis). This is because the differential conductance at larger bias (i.e., eV ~ ), from which the value of  is obtained, is more strongly affected by inhomogeneity in electron density (see Fig. 3a). Influence of magnetic field We discuss the evolution of the tunneling conductance in a magnetic field B, starting from the case of field applied perpendicularly to the MoS2 surface. The tunneling conductance of two different devices measured at increasing values of B is shown in Fig. 4a –with Fig. 4b showing the corresponding resistive transition– and Fig. 4c (the critical temperature and electron density for the two devices are respectively Tc ~10 K with n = 1.5 · 1014 cm-2, and Tc ~ 9 K with n = 1.8 · 1014 cm-2). In the Tc ~ 10 K device, the magnetic field mainly causes the appearance of low- energy states, affecting weakly the energy scale below which the DOS is suppressed –i.e., the gap (see Fig. 4a). We ascribe this effect to the vortices created in the superconductor, binding states at sub-gap energy 25. In the second device with lower Tc, the generation of low-energy states is accompanied by a more apparent gap suppression (see Fig. 4c). Irrespective of these details, a large suppression in the low-energy DOS persists in both cases well above the critical magnetic field inferred from the resistive transition (Bc, the value of B for which the resistance is 95% of the value measured at high field). For instance, for the Tc ~10K device, the critical magnetic field extracted from the resistive transition is approximately 9 T, but a large 9 suppression in the low-bias tunneling conductance is still clearly visible at the largest field used in these measurements, B = 10 T. For the Tc ~ 9 K device, Bc is approximately 7 T, and a suppression in the low-energy tunneling conductance is still clearly seen at 14 T. The large-B suppression in the DOS disappears when T is raised above Tc (see Fig. 4d), demonstrating that the phenomenon is of superconducting origin. This unexpected behavior was observed in all devices investigated. The results are summarized in Fig. 4e by the plot of the relative suppression in the DOS as a function of B/Bc, which shows that a ~20% effect persists even when B≫Bc. In the presence of a perpendicular magnetic field, therefore, a resistive state occurs in which superconducting correlations are nevertheless still present. This directly implies that the magnetic field at which the resistive transition occurs does not correspond to the upper critical field Hc2 beyond which superconductivity is completely suppressed, as assumed in past work10 21 22. It follows that the value of superconducting coherence length ξ extracted by interpreting the data using Ginzburg-Landau theory26 –i.e., the relation Hc2 = Φ0 2πξ2 – is not correct. If this relation is valid at all, our data would indicate that ξ is much shorter than anticipated. However, since our observations are not expected within a conventional Ginzburg-Landau scheme, it will be essential to first understand the microscopic nature of the observed phenomenon –with coexisting finite resistivity and superconducting correlations– before making any quantitative estimate. Examples of possible scenarios that should be considered to understand our observations are the quantum metal state recently discussed in thin NbSe2 crystals27, or motion of flux quanta causing the superconducting phase stiffness to vanish26. 10 When the magnetic field is applied parallel to the MoS2 surface, the DOS remains unchanged. This is shown in Fig. 4f with data taken at T= 1.5 K, on one of the devices discussed earlier (see Fig. 2a and Fig. 4a), upon increasing the in-plane field from 0 to 10 T (the maximum in-plane field applied in our experiments). The insensitivity of the DOS is quite striking: it can be understood that the in-plane field does not affect the orbital degrees of freedom –since the accumulation layer is only 1.5 nm thick21 22 – but changes could still occur because B couples to the spin, and the Zeeman energy at 10 T is comparable to . The phenomenon may be attributed to the strong spin-orbit interaction (approximately 10 meV in the conduction band of MoS2 28), which forces the spin to point perpendicular to the MoS2 and cause a so-called Ising superconducting state 21 22 29 30 (i.e., to influence the DOS, the Zeeman energy has to be comparable to the spin-orbit energy, which is significantly larger than ). So far, experimental evidence for Ising superconductivity was inferred from the small effect that an in-plane field has on the critical temperature, and from the correspondingly extrapolated very large in-plane critical field at low temperature21 22 (~ 60-80 T depending on the model chosen to extrapolate). Tunneling spectroscopy, however, provides more information because it shows directly that the in-plane magnetic field does not change the DOS anywhere on the Fermi surface. Conclusions The results of our tunneling spectroscopy measurements provide new information on the nature of the gate-induced superconducting state. In particular, finding that the low-bias (eV/ < 0.5) tunneling conductance measurements coincide when plotted as a function of eV/ irrespective of 11 the value of n (Fig. 3a), and that at V = 0 V all data falls on a same curve when plotted versus T/Tc (Fig. 3b), show that the superconducting state is the same throughout the density range explored. Additionally, the dependence of the tunneling conductance on V and T consistently indicates that the low-energy DOS is linearly proportional to E, the distance in energy from EF, and vanishes at E = 0. Such a linear dependence is incompatible with the presence of a full gap, which would cause a much more pronounced sub-gap suppression of the tunneling conductance over a broader bias range 26 (in the supplementary information we show that attempts to fit the data starting from a fully gapped DOS are unsuccessful). The absence of a full gap excludes several potential candidate states, such as s-wave superconductivity and an equal-sign two-band superconducting state (the same realized in MgB2 31 32 33 and possibly in NbSe2 31 34 35, whose relevance for gated MoS2 may be suggested by the double gap structure observed in several devices; see Fig. 2d). Indeed, both these superconducting states possess a complete gap, with vanishing sub-gap DOS, even in the presence of considerable density of (non-magnetic) impurities 26. The observed low-energy DOS suggests that understanding the gate-induced superconducting state in MoS2 will require going beyond a conventional, purely phonon driven BCS mechanism. More work will be needed, and it is useful to look at theoretical studies analyzing gate-induced superconductivity in mono or bilayers of MoS2 (and in other semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenides) that have recently appeared in the literature 29 36 37 38 39 40 , to see if any of the proposed superconducting states could be taken as promising candidates. In this context, we find particularly interesting the proposed possibility of a so-called s± state36 (a two-band superconducting state with opposite sign of the order parameter in each band, thoroughly 12 investigated in the context of iron pnictide superconductors 41 42 43 44), or of a nodal phase that may occur in the presence of interactions favoring spin-triplet pairing if the pocket at the M-Γ line on the conduction band of MoS2 is populated 29. In the appropriate regimes, these states could account for at least some of our experimental observations, such as the linear energy dependence of the DOS for E << , the presence of kinks inside the gap, and the double-gap structure that we observed in some of the devices. Whether experimental conditions are compatible with a description in terms of either one of these states, however, is not yet clear and remains to be established. Irrespective of these considerations, what is really worth emphasizing is that our results demonstrate a strategy to perform tunneling spectroscopy on a gate-induced superconductor, and show a wealth of interesting new information not accessible in conventional transport measurements. The relevance of this result goes beyond the specific case of MoS2, as the experimental strategies demonstrated here can be applied to explore the gate-induced superconducting states recently discovered to occur in many other layered two-dimensional materials. 13