Staggered field driven domain walls motion in antiferromagnetic heterojunctions Y. L. Zhang, Z. Y. Chen, Z. R. Yan, D. Y. Chen, Z. Fan, and M. H. Qin * Institute for Advanced Materials and Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Quantum Engineering and Quantum Materials, South China Normal University, Guangzhou 510006, China [Abstract] In this work, we study the antiferromagnetic (AFM) spin dynamics in heterostructures which consist of two kinds of AFM layers. Our micromagnetic simulations demonstrate that the AFM domain-wall (DW) can be driven by the other one (driven by field-like Néel spin-orbit torque, Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 017202 (2016)) through the interface couplings. Furthermore, the two DWs detach from each other when the torque increases above a critical value. The critical field and the highest possible velocity of the DW depending on several factors are revealed and discussed. Bases on the calculated results, we propose a method to modulate efficiently the multi DWs in antiferromagnet, which definitely provides useful information for future AFM spintronics device design. Keywords: antiferromagnetic spin dynamics, interlayer coupling, Néel spin-orbit torques PACS numbers: 75.50.Lk, 75.80.+q, 75.30.Kz 1 * Electronic mail: qinmh@scnu.edu.cn Antiferromagnets are attracting more and more attentions due to their potential applications in the field of antiferromagnetic (AFM) spintronics. On the one hand, replacing ferromagnets by antiferromagnets in spintronics devices offers insensitivity to external magnetic field perturbations and produces no perturbing stray fields due to the zero net magnetic moment in the AFM element.1-3 Thus, information stored in AFM domains or domain walls (DWs) is robust, and the AFM elements can be arranged with high density.4 On the other hand, antiferromagnets also exhibit ultrafast spin dynamics with characteristic frequencies in the THz range.5 More importantly, the velocity of AFM domain wall (DW) is only limited by the group velocity of spin waves,6-8 which is almost two orders of magnitude larger than velocity of typical ferromagnetic (FM) DW which is limited by the Walker breakdown.9-12 As a result, AFM spintronics is very promising in future storage devices, and several efficient methods of modulating AFM domains and driving DWs motion have been revealed.13-22 Recent experiments revealed that an applied electrical current can induce the local staggered effective field (or field-like Néel spin-orbit torque, NSOT)23,24 in CuMnAs25-27 and Mn2Au28 due to the spin-orbit effect and in turn modulates the orientation of the AFM moments. More interestingly, a high velocity ~ 10-100 km/s of the AFM DW motion driven by the NSOT has been predicted in theory.13 Specifically, for an AFM DW under the staggered field B1N/B2N coupling to the spin m1/m2, the torque Γ1N/Γ2N is induced and cants m1/m2 forward, as depicted in Fig. 1(a). Subsequently, a rather large precession torque from the strong exchange interaction Γ p ex is generated due to the spin deviation, and drives the DW motion. Furthermore, AFM DW motion has also been theoretically predicted by several external stimuli including spin wave excitations,7,21 spin-orbit torques,6,19 temperature gradient,15-17 and asymmetric field pulses.14,20 For example, it has been proven that the competition between the entropic torque and the Brownian force determines the AFM DW motion towards the hotter or colder region under an applied temperature gradient.15-17 It is noted that one of the major challenges in future AFM spintronics applications is fast transport of multi AFM DWs for information storage. Thus, these proposed methods do provide important information for applications, while several shortcomings deserve to be overcome. For example, NSOT only arises in these AFM materials with particular crystal structures, which is not available in most of antiferromagnets. More importantly, NSOT drives the neighboring AFM DWs approach to each other and annihilates them, which strongly hiders its application in future device where efficient motions of multi DWs are indispensable. For the other proposed driven methods, the drift velocities are not so large, and strict restrictions on the external stimuli are suggested. For example, our earlier work has demonstrated that considerable velocity of the AFM DW only can be obtained near the resonance frequency of the oscillation magnetic field in cooperation with a static field.14 In addition, it has been proven in earlier work that the interplay between AFM and FM DWs in the FM-AFM double layers can shift the AFM DW, when the FM DW is driven by a spin current.18 However, the velocity is also limited by the Walker breakdown. Thus, there is still an urgent need in searching for efficient methods of driving multi AFM DWs motion with a high speed. Based on these earlier studies, we investigate the AFM dynamics in exchange coupled AFM1-AFM2 heterojunction in which the DW in AFM1 layers is driven by the NSOT, as simplistically depicted in Fig. 1(b). We figure out that the AFM2 DW can be driven efficiently by the AFM1 DW through the interface coupling. Furthermore, the highest possible velocity of the AFM2 DW relevant to several factors has been clarified and detailed explained. Based on this property, we put forward a proposal for controlling multi-DWs in antiferromagnet. In this work, the heterojunction system is considered to be a three-dimensional cuboidal lattice with the free boundary conditions applied in the x-, y- and z-axis directions. The model Hamiltonian can be given by AF1 AF2 inter H = H + H + H , (1) where     2 2 AF1 AF1 BN , x z x i j x i z i i i,j i i i H = J d d         m m m m m (2)     2 2 AF2 AF2 x z n m x n z n n n n,m H = J D D       m m m m , (3) inter inter i n i,n H = J  m  m . (4) where JAF1/JAF2 is the antiferromagnetic exchange interaction between the nearest neighbors in AFM1/AFM2 layers, and Jinter is the interface coupling between the nearest neighbors, mk = k/s (k = i, j, m, n) is the normalized magnetic moment at site k with the saturated moment s, m r constants, BN = B1N (B2N) is the staggered field along the x (x)-axis direction on the magnetic sublattice 1 (2) in AFM1 layers. Here, the magnitudes of the anisotropies could be modulated through tuning the thickness of the heterojunction. The simulation is performed on a Lx × Ly × Lz (20 × 30 × 350, including 10 AFM1 layers and 10 AFM2 layers) lattice by solving the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation,29,30     2 1 i i i i i t                m m H m H , (5) where γ is the gyromagnetic ratio, α = α1 (α2) is the Gilbert damping constant in AFM1 (AFM2) layers, and the internal field is Hi = −∂H/∂mi. Unless stated elsewhere, JAF1 = JAF2 = J(J = 1 is the energy unit), Jinter = 0.5J, dx = Dz = 0.1J, and α1 = α2 = 0.01 are chosen. Moreover, the fourth-order Runge-Kutta method is used to solve the equation with a time step ∆t = 5.0×10−4 |μs/γJ|. After sufficient relaxation of the Néel-type DWs, we apply the staggered field and study the DWs motion. The local staggered magnetization 2n = m1 − m2 is calculated to describe the spin dynamics. First, we study the case of the uniaxial anisotropy (dz = Dx = 0). The initial spin configuration is presented in Fig. 2(a) which clearly shows two Néel-type AFM DWs. Specifically, AFM1 DW at the position z = 30a and AFM2 DW at the position z = 60a (a is the lattice constant) are observed, as clearly shown in Fig. 2(b) which gives the three components of the local magnetization n1 and n2. Furthermore, the y component of the magnetization in the whole system equals to zero n y 1= n y 2= 0, and a small n z 1 (n x 2) of the local magnetization in AFM1 (AFM2) domains is observed due to the interface coupling. The induced BN by applied electrical current can drive the motion of the AFM1 DW. The velocity of the DW increases with the increase of BN, as clearly shown in Fig. 2(c) which gives the displacements of the AFM1 DW (solid lines) and AFM2 DW (dashed lines) as functions of time for various BN. Similar to the earlier report, the AFM1 DW can also shift the AFM2 DW at the expense of its velocity through the interplay between the two DWs when they are close enough. Subsequently, the two DWs connect and shift with a same speed, as clearly shown in the supplementary material Movie.S1 which gives the motion of the DWs for BN = 0.03. In some extent, this phenomenon can be understood qualitatively by the analogue between the DWs interplay and an inelastic collision of two quasiparticles, as detailed explained in earlier work.18 Interestingly, the AFM2 DW detaches from the AFM1 DW when BN further increases above the critical value ~ 0.048, as clearly shown in the supplementary material Movie.S2 and Movie.S3 which present the local magnetization and spin configuration for BN = 0.05, respectively. It is clearly shown that the AFM1/AFM2 DW rotates by 180 degree around the x-/z-axis after the detachment. The equilibrium velocities of the DWs for various BN are summarized in Fig. 3(a). On the one hand, the velocity increases nonlinearly with the increase of BN (below the critical value) due to the spin-wave excitation as shown in Fig. 3(b) which gives the local magnetization for BN = 0.04. It is noted that the spin-wave excitation acting as an additional energy dissipation is enhanced as BN increases, resulting in the decrease of the acceleration with BN, as confirmed in our simulations. As a matter of fact, the AFM2 DW is driven by the AFM1 DW through the damping torque ~  S × (S × Hinter) resulted from the coupling between the two DWs, as depicted in Fig. 3(c). When BN is increased, the two DWs get close to each other, resulting in the increase of the damping torque. The maximum value of the torque is obtained at the critical BN with the positions of the two DWs coincide with each other (middle layer in Fig. 3(c)), and the AFM2 DW also reaches its highest possible velocity vc. For this case, the coupling energy between the two DWs is rather high, reducing the stability of the DWs. As BN further increases, the wall linking is not stable and the detachment occurs. Furthermore, the spins in the AFM1/AFM2 DW are driven out of the easy plane and rotate by 180 degree around the x-/z-axis to save the interface exchange coupling energy. Subsequently, we investigate the effects of the interaction couplings on the spin dynamics and the critical velocity vc. Fig. 4(a) gives the velocities of the DWs (solid and empty circles) under BN = 0.04 and vc (blue asterisks under labeled critical BN) for various JAF2 at Jinter = 0.5. It is well noted that the energy of the DW determines its stabilization, i. e., higher energy results in more stable DW. Thus, the AFM2 DW is further stabilized as JAF2 increases, leading to the increase of the critical BN and vc, as clearly shown in our simulations. Furthermore, for JAF2 > 1, the velocities of the DWs under BN = 0.04 slightly decrease with the increasing JAF2 due to the reduction of their mobility. Furthermore, the effects of Jinter are also studied, and the corresponding results are presented in Fig. 4(b). Both vc and the critical BN sharply increase as Jinter increases, and then slowly increase for Jinter > 0.5. Thus, it is suggested that vc is mainly determined by JAF2 for a rather large Jinter. As a matter of fact, biaxial anisotropy does exist in real materials and is believed to play an essential role in the current-induced orientation of the AFM order.31 Thus, we also studied the effects of the intermediate anisotropies dz and Dx on the AFM dynamics for integrity. Fig. 4(c) gives the simulated velocity as a function of dz for various Dx under BN = 0.04. It is clearly shown that the velocity is increased with the increasing dz and/or Dx, demonstrating the important role of the intermediate anisotropy in the motion of AFM DWs. One may note that the energy gap between the AFM DW and domain prominently determines the mobility of the DW. When the intermediate anisotropy is considered, the energy gap is reduced which enhances the reversal of the local spins in the domain and results in higher mobility of the DW. Thus, both dz and Dx can speed up the AFM DWs, as confirmed in our simulations. Furthermore, both vc (asterisks) and the critical BN increase due to the increases of the DW energy when dz and/or Dx is increased. For example, the critical velocity for dz = 0.01 and Dx = 0.05 (red asterisk) increase by ~25% comparing with the uniaxial case. At last, the effects of the damping constants on the velocities are also investigated and the simulated results are presented in Fig. 4(d) which gives the velocities as functions of α2 for various α1 under BN = 0.04. It is clearly shown that the velocity decreases as the damping constant increases. One may note that the damping torque Γ α ex (Fig. 1(a)) is enhanced with the increase of the damping constant, which reduces the precession torque Γ p ex. As a result, the effects of BN are significantly suppressed, which speeds down the AFM DWs. Furthermore, the critical BN is increased, while vc significantly decreases with the increase of the damping constant, as shown in our simulations. So far, it has been proven that the AFM2 DW can be efficiently driven by the AFM1 DW through the interface coupling, and the two DWs will be detached when BN increases above a critical value. As a matter of fact, these phenomena could be used in future AFM spintronics device design. For example, the bidirectional control of AFM2 multi DWs can be realized through elaborately modulating BN on the AFM1 layers. The proposed structure is shown in Fig. 5(a) in which the different domains (blue and red arrays in the top layer) are used to store information bits (0 or 1) and their lengths determine the bit numbers. Furthermore, the other AFM layer (bottom layer) with single DW under BN is used to be a driving bar. The multi DWs can be driven by alternately applying small and large BN, as depicted in the insert of Fig. 5. Specifically, the first AFM2 DW can be driven by the driving DW under a small BN, and detaches with the driving DW (middle layer in the inset of Fig. 5) when BN increases above the critical value. Subsequently, a small BN is used to drive the motion of the second AFM2 DW. As a result, the multi DWs can be indirectly driven by the driving AFM DW, as shown in Fig. 5(b). Then, The driving DW can shift back to the initial position by applying a large opposite BN as depicted in Fig. 5(c). Moreover, the reverse motion of the multi DWs can be driven by the opposite BN through the inverse processes, and the picture is not shown here for brevity. Up to now, there is an urgent need in modulating AFM multi DWs to provide useful information for practical applications. In this work, the AFM DW has been proven to be driven efficiently by the other AFM DW under the staggered field through the interface coupling in heterostructures. Furthermore, the highest possible velocity of the AFM DW relevant to several factors has been clarified and detailed explained. Finally, the control of multi DWs is proposed based on the detachment of the two DWs under the staggered field larger than the critical value. Acknowledgements: The work is supported by the National Key Projects for Basic Research of China (Grant No. 2015CB921202), and the Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51332007), and the Science and Technology Planning Project of Guangdong Province (Grant No. 2015B090927006), and the Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province (Grant No.