Dislocation interactions and crack nucleation in a fatigued near-alpha titanium alloy S. Joseph, T.C. Lindley, D. Dye∗ Department of Materials, Royal School of Mines, Imperial College, Prince Consort Road, South Kensington, London SW7 2BP, UK Abstract Dislocation interactions at the crack nucleation site were investigated in near-α titanium alloy Ti-6242Si subjected to low cycle fatigue. Cyclic plastic strain in the alloy resulted in dislocation pile-ups in the primary α grains, nucleated at the boundaries between the primary α and the two-phase regions. These two phase regions provided a barrier to slip transfer between primary alpha grains. We suggest that crack nucleation occurred near the basal plane of primary α grains by the subsurface double-ended pile-up mechanism first conceived by Tanaka and Mura. Superjogs on the basal ⟨a⟩ dislocations were observed near the crack nucleation location. The two phase regions showed direct transmission of a3 dislocations between secondary alpha plates, transmitted through the β ligaments as a, which then decompose into (a/2)⟨111⟩ dislocation networks in the β. The β ligaments themselves do not appear to form an especially impenetrable barrier to slip, in agreement with the micropillar and crystal plasticity investigations of Zhang et al. Keywords: titanium alloys, dislocations, TEM, fatigue 1. Introduction Near-α titanium alloys such as Ti-6242Si are used in ele- vated temperature service in aero-engines, e.g. in the com- pressor, especially in the 400–550◦C range. A wide range of temperature, stress and loading frequency combinations are ex- perienced across the flight cycle; for example during take-off stresses in the disc bore can be high before the thermal field has equilibrated, and so room temperature fatigue behaviour can be an important consideration. Titanium alloys are generally notch sensitive and so crack initiation from the microstructure is often of greater concern than in other alloy systems where lifing can mostly be considered in terms of crack growth. Extensive research on fatigue crack initiation mechanisms have been performed, including metallographic observations of crack initiation [1–7], intrusions and extrusions on the sample surface [8–11] and observations of dislocations structures by TEM [9, 11–16]. Based on these findings, theoretical models of fatigue crack nucleation [11, 17–20] have been proposed to explain the mechanism of fatigue crack nucleation. Essmann et al proposed the first such model to explain the intrusions and extrusions formed. Tanaka and Mura then modeled the formation of an embryonic crack from the dislocation pile-ups accumulated during cyclic loading. Ti-6242Si develops a wide variety of microstructures de- pending upon the thermo-mechanical history, with microstruc- ture having a significant effect on fatigue behaviour [21–26]. It is also evident that the stress evolution in dual phase titanium alloys is mainly governed by the primary alpha αp phase , because the αp is usually softer than the beta phase, β. ∗Corresponding author Email address: david.dye@imperial.ac.uk (D. Dye) However, the two-phase regions having thin secondary alpha (αs) plates in retained β also play a role. The two-phase region was found to be a barrier for slip transmission between primary alpha grains during low cycle fatigue . The slip transmis- sion within this two-phase region is mainly dependent on the orientation relation between the αs and β plates. In general, it follows the Burgers orientation relation , however, other crystallographic variants are also possible . Slip transmis- sion has been reported between α and β plates and it was more likely to be observed when the β plates are favorably oriented for slip . In lamellar microstructures fatigue cracks initiate either within slip bands in α lamellae or along prior beta grain bound- aries . In bimodal microstructures, cracking can initiate either on the interface between the lamellar microstructure and the αp or within the αp itself; initiation also depends on the frac- tion and size of the αp. In near-α alloys, such as Ti6242, with more than 50% αp, crack nucleation is expected to occur in the αp due to extensive grain boundary dislocation pile-up . Further, a recent in-situ micro-fatigue study in Ti6246 identified that crack nucleation sites are associated with microtextured re- gions favourably oriented for basal or prism slip . Despite this extensive research, very few observations have been made of the dislocation structures associated with natu- rally initiated fatigue crack initiation sites, as opposed to those associated with cyclic plasticity from gauge sections, or SEM studies of the orientations and coarse microstructural features associated with cracking. However, it has recently become possible, with focused ion beam milling, to perform such site- specific studies. In this paper, we perform such studies with the aim of eluci- dating the dislocation mechanisms near a fatigue crack origin, Preprint submitted to International Journal of Plasticity June 19, 2018 arXiv:1806.06367v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 17 Jun 2018 in order that more fatigue-resistant microstructures and alloys might be developed in future. The dislocation mechanisms as- sociated with fatigue crack nucleation and the role of the two- phase regions are discussed in detail. 2. Experimental Description The Ti-6Al-2Sn-4Zr-2Mo-0.1Si (wt.%) alloy investigated in this work was melted from elemental stock and then processed by rolling in both the β and α + β domains, recrystallized in the α+β domain at 950◦C for 5 h and air-cooled. The alloy was then aged at 593◦C for 8h and air cooled to promote nanometre- scale Ti3Al precipitation. This processing route resulted in bi- modal microstructure with 50% volume fraction of αp in the transformed β. The initial microstructure of the alloy can be found in our previous work . Very thin secondary alpha αs platelets of 50–100 nm thickness were observed in the retained β. Low cycle fatigue (LCF) tests were carried out on cylindrical plain fatigue samples with a 2.9 mm diameter and 15 mm long gauge length using a Mayes servohydraulic machine with an Instron 8800 controller. A trapezoidal waveform with a ramp up/down time of 1 s, a 1 s hold at maximum stress of 95% of yield stress (831 MPa ), 1 s hold at minimum stress and an R ratio of 0.05 was used. One sample failed after 23,914 cycles. A Zeiss Auriga field emission gun scanning electron micro- scope (FEG-SEM) in secondary electron imaging mode was used for fractography. Dislocation analysis was conducted us- ing a JEOL JEM-2100F TEM/STEM with an accelerating volt- age of 200 kV. TEM samples were prepared using the focused ion beam (FIB) lift-out technique in a dual beam FEI Helios NanoLab 600 using a 30 kV Ga ion beam. Foils were extracted near the crack origin from the fracture surface. To protect the area of interest, a gas injection system was used to deposit a Pt-containing protective layer. Samples were made electron transparent by thinning down to a thickness of 150 nm. To obtain the orientation relation between αs and β ligaments in a two phase region of the foil, Transmission Kikuchi Diffraction (TKD) was carried out. TKD data was collected on the same Auriga SEM used for fractog- raphy, at an accelerating voltage of 30 kV and at a working dis- tance of 2 mm. The stage was tilted to 30◦ to make the sample in the TKD holder normal to the electron beam. Detailed descrip- tion of the orientation relations found by TKD can be found in Tong et al . 3. Results The fracture surface was investigated and smooth, near- planar crack initiating facets were found very slightly below the sample surface, Figure 1(a). The spatial and crystallographic orientation of these facets obtained by quantitative tilt fractog- raphy and EBSD are reported in Joseph et al.. TEM foils were extracted from the two regions identified, at the crack nucleation site and, for comparison purposes, a region 50 μm away in the fatigue crack growth region. The foils are shown in Pt Pt p (1) s+ (1) s+ (2) s+ (3) p (2) (b) 2 μm 10 μm Fracture origin (a) s+ (2) (c) Pt 5 μm were extracted by FIB Ga ion milling from the fracture origin of low cycle fa- tigued Ti 6242Si. TEM BF composite micrographs showing (b) foil 1 from the crack origin and (c) foil 2, 50 μm away from the crack origin, having different regions marked. marked. Each grain in the foils was tilted to at least three differ- ent beam directions B and three different g vectors under each beam condition to analyze the dislocations. The dislocations observed in the foils are discussed in the following sections. 3.1. Dislocation activities at the crack origin Foil 1 contained three different two phase regions and two αp regions, Figure 1(b). The dislocation activities in the two-phase αs + β(1) region under a two-beam condition with B ≈ [11 ̄23] and g = [0 ̄111] are shown in Figure 2. The g.b invisibility analysis shows that these are ⟨a⟩ type dislocations with Burgers found to be of screw character, gliding on the ( ̄1100) and ( ̄1010) prism planes, respectively. Further, they are gliding on their respective planes without much interaction. The dislocations near the boundary with αp(1) are shown in Figure 2b. A high dislocation density was observed in initiating facet αp(1), Figure 3. Different illumination conditions are shown in each micrograph; intense planar pile-ups, long straight disloca- tions and random dislocation lines can be discerned. The dislo- cation bands (marked SB) are found to be of ⟨c + a⟩ type with b = (a/3)[1 ̄213], having mixed character and gliding on the first order pyramidal plane ( ̄1101), Figure 3a. The slip bands are around 350–450 nm in thickness, very much higher than clas- sical pile-ups. The dislocations in this array are also dense and tightly packed. Further, each slip band is not a single pile-up but instead consists of a double ended pile-up, Figure 3b. The long straight dislocations indicated by black arrows in Figure 3a 2 Region Types Burgers vector and habit plane Primary alpha grain αp(1) Slip bands 1-4 (a/3)[1 ̄213]( ̄1101) Long dislocation lines (a/3)[ ̄2110](0001) Random dislocation lines (a/3)[ ̄2110] αp(2) Random dislocation lines (a/3)[1 ̄213] Two-phase region αs + β(1) a2 glide (a/3)[ ̄12 ̄10]( ̄1010) a3 glide (a/3)[ ̄1 ̄120]( ̄1100) are found to be of ⟨a⟩ type with Burgers vector b = (a/3)[ ̄2110] having edge character gliding on the basal plane. The random dislocation lines in Figure 3c are found to be of ⟨a⟩ type with b = (a/3)[ ̄2110]. To investigate the nature of the dislocations in the pile-ups, the image displacement method was used. This method is one of the useful dislocation image contrasts which deter- mines whether a pair of dislocations are of same or opposite sign, by viewing them with opposite operating reflections, i.e., +g and −g. The dislocations in the double ended pile-ups were captured under two different g’s, and [000 ̄2] near B ≈ [2 ̄1 ̄10], Figure 4. One dislocation in each pile-up which could be identified without any ambiguity in both the +g and −g conditions are shown by arrows. The separation between the pair of dislocations changes upon changing the sign of g, which means that the dislocations are of opposite sign. There will be no change in separation when the dislocations are of same sign; therefore it is concluded that the dislocation on neighbouring slip planes in the double ended pile-ups are of opposite sign. The interactions between the long dislocation lines and the other dislocations resulted in the formation of superjogs in the long dislocation lines, indicated by white arrows in Figure 3d. It can be noted that the mixed component of the long dislocation lines are found to pile-up in the boundary between αs + β(1) and αp(1), Figure 3d. It is also observed that the slip bands in 0.5 μm (b) B g = 0.5 μm (a) a2 glide overall view and (b) dislocations near the boundary under two beam conditions. The two-beam condition is shown in the inset. this grain did not transfer across the boundary between the αp grain and the two phase region, even though they are intense and large. However, the slip bands were observed to shear the β plate in the αs + β (3) region, Figure 3e. two beam condition with g = near B ≈ [01 ̄10]. These dislocations are of ⟨c + a⟩ type with b = (a/3)[1 ̄213], and are not observed to pile up on a particular plane. Similar to region αs + β (1), αs + β (2) also showed prismatic glide of ⟨a⟩ type dislocations. Relatively few dislocations were observed in re- gion αs + β (3). For clarity, the dislocations in regions αs + β (2) and αs + β (3) will not be discussed further, but similar findings were obtained. The slip systems observed in foil 1 are summarised in Table 1. 3.2. Dislocation activities during fatigue crack growth, 50 μm away from the nucleation site This section discusses the dislocation activities in foil 2, Fig- ure 1(c), which consists of many similarly oriented primary al- pha grains and some two-phase regions. 3.2.1. Slip transfer across the αp grains The slip activities across the five different αp grains in foil 2 are shown in Figure 6, which is a composite micrograph of bright field images taken when each grain is tilted to its two- beam condition individually. The crystallographic orientation of these grains normal to the loading direction was obtained by TKD of the TEM foil, Table 2. Grains 1 to 4 possessed almost similar inclinations of their c-axes to the loading direction, with only grain αp(5) having its c-axis < 45◦ from the loading direc- tion. It was observed that the dislocations in the first four grains (1-4) piled-up, forming well-defined slip bands, and that those Grain Orientation of c-axis (degrees) 1 47.6 2 52.4 3 52.4 4 58.5 5 32.0 in foil 2. 3 g B g = (b) SB2 SB3 1 μm g B g = Pt SB1 SB2 SB3 SB4 (a) p (1) 1 μm B g = g (c) SB2 SB3 0.5 μm g B g = Pt SB1 SB2 (d) p (1) 0.5 μm a1 basal glide Pyramidal glide p (1) p (1) Pt g B g = (e) plate SB4 p (1) 200 nm (b) double ended dislocation pile-up, (c) random dislocation lines in the matrix, (d) jog formation and pile-up of mixed components of ⟨a⟩ dislocations near the boundary and (e) shearing of β plates by slip band SB4. The two-beam conditions are inset. slip bands underwent slip transfer across the αp grain bound- aries (indicated by arrows in Figure 6). Between grains 1/2 and 2/3, the piled up dislocations transferred across the boundary whereas between grains 3/4, just a single dislocation line was observed to transfer. In contrast, grain 5 shows neither pile up of dislocations nor slip transfer. The slip activity in primary alpha grain αp (1) is shown in and g = [10 ̄1 ̄1]. The dislocations mainly piled-up on a par- ticular slip plane and some dislocations are also observed be- tween these pile-ups. The dislocations in the pile-up are of (a/3)[ ̄2110] type and gliding on basal planes, marked as slip bands SB1, SB2 and SB3. The pile-up in SB1 was observed to be double ended. In addition to these dislocations on basal planes, the other (a/3)[11 ̄20] type dislocations are found to glide in a random way, Figure 7b. Of the three slip bands observed in this grain, SB3 was found to transfer across the boundary, forming SB4 in primary alpha grain αp(2) . mainly as pile-ups (SB4-SB8), with some random dislocations. The dislocations in this grain are shown under two different two beam conditions with B ≈ [2 ̄1 ̄13] and B ≈ [4 ̄2 ̄23]. This grain shares its boundary with grains 1, 3 and 5 and the two-phase region αs + β(2). All the slip bands observed in this grain were of (a/3)[ ̄2110] basal slip character, as observed in grain 1. SB8 was found to transfer across the boundary, forming SB9 in grain 3. Slip transfer was not observed from grain 2 to grain 5 and the neighbouring two-phase region. In addition, some random dis- location lines were also observed, of (a/3)[11 ̄20] type, Figure 8b. 4 74 nm (a) B g = 100 nm 100 nm B g = 53 nm (b) tions in slip band SB3 in primary alpha grain αp(1) of foil 1 when (a) g = and (b) g = [000 ̄2] near B ≈ [2 ̄1 ̄10]. The distance between the dislocations marked are closer in (b) than in (a), showing that the dislocations are of oppo- site sign. The slip activity in αp(3) is shown in Figure 9, which is a bright field image captured in the two-beam condition with B ≈ [10 ̄10] and g = [ ̄12 ̄10]. The various slip bands are marked. Slip bands 9, 10, 12 and 14 are (a/3)[ ̄2110] basal and slip bands 11 and 13 are (a/3)[1 ̄210] basal. Slip band 9 traversed the whole grain, indicating that it was the primarily activated defor- mation mode, while the other slip bands will be secondary slip activated after reaching a critical stress. There are other long dislocation lines in addition to the slip bands, of (a/3)[ ̄1 ̄120] and (a/3)[ ̄12 ̄10] type (dotted arrows). These dislocations were found to transfer the boundary between grains 3 and 4, where a thin β ligament was observed between the grains, Figure 6. Thus this grain showed all the three types of ⟨a⟩ dislocations, resulting in hexagonal networks of dislocations. αp(4), which was similarly found to deform mainly by pla- nar slip. All the slip bands are (a/3)[ ̄2110] basal except SB17 which was found to be of (a/3)[1 ̄210] basal character. Many dislocation loops were observed near the boundary between this grain and the two-phase region αs + β(2), Figure 10b. Disloca- tion dipoles were also observed in this grain, shown by dotted arrows in Figure 10c. These dipoles are expected to form by encounters between dislocations of opposite sign. They are ob- served to be narrow screw dislocation dipoles, which are unsta- ble and would be expected to decompose into invisible debris of near-atomic dimension. In contrast, grain 5 did not show planar slip bands; instead homogeneous deformation was observed, Figure 11. Both ⟨a⟩ B g = 0.5 μm in the two-beam condition with g = near B ≈ [01 ̄10]. 1 μm s+ (2) p (1) p (5) p (4) p (3) p (2) Pt Fracture surface primary alpha grains in foil 2. Each grain has been tilted individually to the two- beam condition to provide diffraction contrast of the dislocations. Slip transfer across the grains is highlighted by arrows. and ⟨c + a⟩ type dislocations were observed in this grain. The were not observed on particular slip plane, Figure 11a. The ⟨c + a⟩ dislocations were of (a/3)[ ̄2113] type and were few in number and density, Figure 11b. The slip systems observed in the primary alpha grains of foil 2 are listed in Table 3 5 2 μm Pt B g = (a) 0.2 μm !"! (b) g SB1 0.2 μm of foil 2. (a) overall view and (b) high magnification image showing a pile-up (SB1) and other random dislocations. The two-beam condition is shown in the inset of the figure. 1 μm B g = p (2) p (3) p (5) p (1) (a) 1 μm B g = g p (2) p (3) (b) s+ (2) The two-beam conditions are inset. near the boundaries (inclined in the foil; shadowed) of the pri- mary alpha grains in foil 2. The interaction is mostly in the form of slip transfer of piled-up dislocations, Figure 12a, with some are slip transfer of dislocation groups, e.g. Figure 12b. At the grain 2/3 boundary, the impingement of dislocations has caused nucleation of dislocations in the same impinging grain 2, Figure 12c. This might be due to the generation of dislo- cation sources in the grain boundary by the impinging disloca- tions. Alternately, grain boundary blocking of dislocations can be observed in Figure 12d. 3.2.2. Dislocation activities in two-phase region Two phase region αs + β(2) in foil 2 was selected for fur- ther study. The various αs plates and β ligaments investigated are shown in Figure 13a, which is the pattern quality map ob- tained by TKD. The phase map and the orientation map are also shown in Figures 13b-c. The orientation relation between secondary alpha plates αs1, αs2 and β1 is shown in Figure 13d, 1 μm SB9 SB10 SB11 SB14 SB13 SB12 g B ≈ g = alpha grain αp(3) of foil 2, under two-beam conditions near B ≈ [10 ̄10]. which is the pole figure obtained from this two-phase region. The (0001) plane normal and the three ⟨a⟩ directions of αs1 and αs2 plates are marked in the αs pole figures. The {110} plane normal and the ⟨b1⟩ and ⟨b2⟩ directions are marked in the β1 pole figure. The procedure for identifying these plane normals and directions is discussed in . It is found that the expected tion is obeyed . the two beam condition using the beam directions B shown. B ≈ [11 ̄20] and g = [000 ̄2]; αs3 was also in the diffraction condition due to its similar orientation to αs2. The g.b anal- ysis shows that the straight dislocations in Figure 14a are of ⟨a⟩ type with b = (a/3)[11 ̄20], having edge character and glid- ing on basal planes. The same type of dislocations can also be seen in plate αs1, but this plate is slightly misoriented and is therefore darker in contrast. It can be observed that there is a one-to-one correspondence of these dislocations in these αs plates. A number of dislocation loops are observed to nucle- ate from the αs/β boundary, Figure 14b. These are found to be [11 ̄20]-type loops, gliding on basal planes. The nucleation of numerous (a/3)[11 ̄20]-type dislocations in plate αs2 plate was observed in Figure 14c. pile-up of a small number of (a/3)[ ̄2110] type dislocations near the αs2/β1 boundary, which is shown by a dotted yellow arrow. In addition to these a3-type dislocations, some ⟨c + a⟩ disloca- tions were observed in plate αs1, Figure 14e, and a network of (a/3)[11 ̄20]-type dislocations were observed in plate αs3, Fig- ure 14f. The ⟨c + a⟩ dislocations in αs1 are of (a/3)[ ̄211 ̄3] type, gliding on a first order pyramidal plane. Both retained β ligaments β1 and β2 show similar dislocation activities, so only ligament β2 is shown here. Figure 15 shows bright field images under two beam conditions with B ≈ and g-vectors [ ̄200] and [ ̄110]. A network of dislocations are observed in this β plate under g = [ ̄200], Figure 15a. De- 6 0.5 μm g (b) s+ (2) s+ (2) Dislocation loops 0.2 μm g (c) SB15 SB16 SB17 SB18 g (a) B g = 1 μm Region Types Burgers vector and habit plane Primary alpha grain αp(1) Slip bands 1-3 (a/3)[ ̄2110]basal Random dislocation lines (a/3)[11 ̄20] αp(2) Slip bands 4-8 (a/3)[ ̄2110]basal Random dislocation lines (a/3)[11 ̄20]basal αp(3) Slip bands 9,10,12,14 (a/3)[ ̄2110]basal Slip bands 11,13 (a/3)[1 ̄210]basal Long dislocation lines αp(4) Slip bands 15,16,18 (a/3)[ ̄2110]basal Slip band 17 (a/3)[1 ̄210]basal αp(5) Random dislocation lines Two-phase region αs1 Dislocation loops (a/3)[11 ̄20]basal Straight dislocations (a/3)[ ̄211 ̄3]pyramidal αs2 Dislocation loops (a/3)[11 ̄20]basal Pile-up (a/3)[ ̄2110] αs3 Dislocation loops (a/3)[11 ̄20]basal Dislocation network (a/3)[11 ̄20] β2 Dislocation network Straight dislocations 1 μm B g = (a) B g = (b) 1 μm p (5) of foil 2 in two-beam conditions: (a) overall view showing ⟨a⟩ type dislocations under B ≈ [01 ̄11] and (b) ⟨c + a⟩ dislocations under B ≈ [11 ̄20]. The two-beam condition is shown in the inset. tailed g.b analysis shows that these are b1 (a/2)[11 ̄1] and b2 tion to these b1 and b2 dislocations, some b010 (a/2) dis- locations were also observed with g = [ ̄110], Figure 15b. It is rare to observe this type of b010 dislocation in Ti alloys. The slip systems observed in this two-phase region are summarised in Table 3. 4. Discussion We will first discuss the dislocation behaviours found in both near-origin faceted fatigue crack growth and in the initiating grain, and compare to the observations made previously for similarly-oriented grains from the gauge section . Then, we turn to examine slip transfer in the αs + β regions, before fi- nally turning to the initiation grain to ask what is different about the dislocation configurations associated with crack nucleation. 7 0.2 μm p (2) (a) p (3) 0.2 μm p (2) (c) 0.2 μm p (3) (b) p (2) 0.5 μm (d) p (1) p (2) 0.5 μm αs1 β1 αs2 αs3 β2 Titanium - alpha Pattern quality map Phase map IPFZ map 0.5 μm 0.5 μm Titanium - beta Pole figures (b) (c) (a) α β x y � z (d) x y z x y z x y z <a1> <a2> <a3> x y z <a1> <a2> <a3> x y z <b1> <b2> x y z αs1 β1 αs2 map and (d) pole figure showing the orientation of secondary alpha plates αs1 αs2 and beta plate β1. 4.1. Dislocation interactions in αp grains Isolated dislocations are rarely observed in this alloy, indicat- ing that dislocation groups or arrays are responsible for defor- mation. The two foils investigated exhibit strongly planar slip in the αp grains; due to the lack of forest hardening, this kind of planar slip leads to a low rate of work hardening. Planar slip in Al-containing hcp α-Ti is believed to be a consequence of the short range ordering of Ti and Al atoms . The passage of a single dislocation through α2-Ti3Al precipitates, possibly in pairs, makes it easier for subsequent dislocations to traverse the same plane, leading to pile-up in planar slip bands. The dense pile-ups observed indicate that, once the ordered precipitates / short range ordered regions are sheared, they no longer present a barrier to dislocation motion. Hence the local hardening rate for a slip plane is small once activity commences. The pile-ups in αp(1) of foil 1 near crack nucleation are dense, thick, double ended and non-classical, Figure 3 a and b. Following Tanaka and Mura , the intersection of this kind of large thickness pile-up with a microstructural boundary can trigger microcrack initiation. This is evidenced by the shearing of β plates by the intense slip bands, Figure 3e. As these are not classical pile-ups, extensive run-back of dislocations contained 8 g s1 s2 1 2 s3 (b) B g = g (e) s1 s2 1 B g = (c) s1 s2 1 2 s3 (c) B g = s1 s2 1 2 s3 (d) g B g = s2 s3 2 (f) g s1 s2 1 2 s3 (a) B g = B g = 0.2 μm 0.5 μm 200 nm 200 nm 0.5 μm 0.5 μm to-one correspondence of a3 dislocations within the α plates, (b) generation of dislocation loops from the αs + β boundary, (c) nucleation of several a3 dislocations in plate αs3. The two-beam conditions and g directions are shown. within the arrays does not occur. This will then lead to high stress concentration on boundaries, due to the stress generated by these dislocations. The pile-ups in foil 2 are also dense and found to be double-ended, Figure 7. The motion of dislocations in opposite directions by multiple cross-slip events has been ob- served in α-Ti during in-situ tensile testing , which provides a mechanism of formation of a double ended pile-up. We have previously observed this kind of dislocation multiplication by multiple cross-slip events, leading to double ended pile-ups, in TEM foils from the gauge section of this sample . The various slip systems in grain αp(1) in foil 1 were not observed to interact strongly, except the jogging of isolated straight dislocation lines, Figure 3c. These are jogs in edge dislocations, which can move with the parent dislocation as the Burgers’ vector of the jogs lie in the slip plane of the parent dislocation. However, a higher Peierls stress is still required to move such jogged dislocations . In foil 1, the αp grain possessing a double ended pile-up had no neighbouring αp grains, instead being bounded (in the sec- tion observed) by two-phase regions. Because of its higher crit- ical resolved shear stress (CRSS), it can be difficult to activate ⟨c + a⟩ pyramidal slip. It’s observation in the present case can be rationalised as being a consequence of constraint by the ad- joining two phase regions. The pile-ups in this grain did not transfer across the boundary and it was also observed that the mixed components of the straight dislocations also piled-up, mixed components suggests that these dislocation loops origi- 9 B g = (a) B g = (b) αs + β(2) in foil 2 under two-beam conditions near B ≈ : (a) network of b ̄111 and b11 ̄1 dislocations under g = [ ̄200] and (b) b010 dislocations under g = [ ̄110]. nated from the αp/αs + β boundary. Thus, these boundaries act both as dislocation sources as well as providing resistance to slip transfer. Many instances of slip transfer were observed between the similarly oriented αp grains in foil 2, Figure 6. It can be seen from this figure that both the dislocations in the pile-ups and single dislocations were found to transfer across the bound- aries; pile-up transferring across the boundary in grain pairs 1/2 and 2/3, and single dislocation transfer between grains 3 and 4. This suggests that the large stress concentrations associ- ated with pile-ups are not required for slip transfer across such similarly-oriented grains. Furthermore, such grain boundaries offer little resistance to dislocation motion. Among the many pile-ups, some traversed an entire grain, indicating that those are the primary slip activated. Subsequently, once stress is in- creased by a primary pile-up, secondary slip systems can be activated, Figure 9. The observation of dislocation loops originating from the αp/αs +β boundary in Figure 10b also supports that this bound- ary acted as a dislocation source. Among the five αp grains investigated in foil 2, only one, αp(5), was found to deform ho- mogeneously; this grain’s c-axis was oriented 32◦ to the loading direction whereas all the other grains were inclined by > 45◦, suggests that it is relatively rare to observe pile-ups in ‘hard- oriented’ grains, those with their c-axis near the loading direc- tion. αs αs β b010 T T a3 basal loops b111 a3 edge T observed in the αs and β plates in two-phase region αs + β(2) of foil 2. 4.2. Dislocation interactions between αs and β plates From the dislocation structures observed in the two-phase regions, sec 3.2.2, the following mechanism is suggested for the deformation of the αs/β structure. The αs and β plates follow the Burgers orientation relation, (101)β||(0001)α and [1 ̄1 ̄1]β||[2 ̄1 ̄10]α, Fig. 13. The crystallographic relations bring one of the hcp ⟨2 ̄1 ̄10⟩ close packed directions into near- coincidence with the bcc ⟨1 ̄1 ̄1⟩ slip direction. A deviation from the Burgers’ orientation relation exists between individual α and β plates, with a 0.7◦ between a1 and b1, and a misorien- tation of 11.1◦ observed between a2 and b2 . The third a-type slip direction a3 in the α plate does not have a closely aligned ⟨111⟩β direction but is relatively closely aligned with a. The misorientation between a3 in the α plate and a in β ligament is 5.96◦ and the mismatch in their lengths is 8.9% . The schematic in Fig. 16 shows a possible mechanism of de- formation in the two-phase region. Initially the a3 dislocation loops nucleate from the αs/β boundary, gliding on basal planes. These loops then slip across the β ligament to the neighbour- ing αs plate. This is expected since the slip easily traverses across the β ligaments when they are very thin. Zhang et al suggested that this slip transmission across the boundary is favoured by closely aligned slip plane normals in the two phases and the global Schmid factors are not appropriate to identify the local slip initiation in either phase. The one-to-one correspondence between ⟨a3⟩ dislocations in all three αs plates investigated shows that these dislocations transferred across the β. These are the edge components of the dislocation loops. During this slip transfer process, the β plates are also sheared, resulting in a-type dislocations. Since a3 direction in α plate has no closely matched (a/2)⟨111⟩ slip direction in the β plate, this relatively closely aligned a slip is expected. The following reaction could occur during slip transmission across the αs/β boundary a3 → b010 + ra3 (1) 10 where ra3 is a residual dislocation resulting from the misori- entation and mismatch between the a3 and b010 dislocations. Such residual matrix dislocations can be observed near the αs/β boundary, Figure 14d. The transmission of a3 dislocations into a β plate requires higher stresses since the a3 direction in the α doesn’t have a closely aligned ⟨111⟩ direction in the β. How- ever, the high interfacial stress at the αs/β interface might have caused this transmission. Further, the slip strength of β plates was found to be of the same order as that of basal slip in α plates which suggest that the β plates may not act as a significant bar- rier for slip transmission . Glide of such a⟨010⟩ dislocations is rarely reported since the mobility of a⟨010⟩ dislocations are much lower than that of the favoured (a/2)⟨111⟩ dislocations. ⟨010⟩ type slip activity has been reported in some bcc metals, e.g. in lithium and nio- bium . Furthermore, Savage et al observed this a⟨010⟩ dislocations in colony-structured Ti-6242 alloy after room tem- perature compression. Such a b010 dislocation in the β will then transfer into an a3 dislocation in the next α plate as b010 → a3 + (−ra3) (2) The two possibilities for the existence of these a⟨010⟩ disloca- tions are either (i) that the intersection of b1 and b2 dislocations might have resulted in the formation of this dislocation, as de- scribed in Nb , or (ii) they could result from the direct slip transmission of a3 dislocations in α to b010 dislocations in β. The one-to-one correspondence between the a3 dislocations in αs and b010 dislocations in the β supports the second mecha- nism. The network of b1 and b2 dislocations observed in the β plate we then expect to result from the dissociation of these a⟨010⟩ dislocations into b1 and b2 dislocations (3) This decomposition is favored under high stresses due to the much higher mobility of b1 and b2 dislocations than b010 dislocations; the high stresses will arise from the applied shear stress and the interfacial stresses naturally present be- tween the phases as a result of precipitation and cool-down from the formation temperature. Thus the β plates do not appear to form an impenetrable bar- rier to slip as observed in . An another important obser- vation was made in the work of Zhang et al where the β plates were found to show the strongest rate sensitivity, which is important in rate dependent deformation such as fatigue with a load hold. 4.3. Crack nucleation mechanism Generally, it is believed that fatigue crack initiation in Ti al- loys occurs by facet formation [44–50] and that the facets cor- respond to αp grains. Our fractographic analysis also showed facet formation near the crack initiation site with the appear- ance of αp grains. However, after FIB foil extraction, some of the facets are found to be two phase regions. This is possible when slip in αs plates transfers across the β along the closely aligned directions, i.e. ⟨a1⟩ and ⟨a2⟩ directions in αs into ⟨b1⟩ and ⟨b2⟩ in the retained β. In that case, the two phase region can be featureless, with the appearance of a smooth facet. This kind of facet with an underlying two phase microstructure has on occasion been observed, e.g by Pilchak et al. during the fatigue of fully lamellar Ti-6Al-4V. Based on the observations in foil 1 near the fatigue crack ini- tiation, the following crack nucleation mechanism is proposed. Near the crack initiation, substantial dislocation activity was observed in grain αp(1), which is adjacent to a transformed β region on either side, Figure 3a. The sketch in Figure 17a shows the overall dislocation activity in this grain. The disloca- tions were arranged as a double-ended pile-up containing dis- locations of opposite sign in the successive (stacked) pyramidal planes. This suggests that during the first half of the loading cycle, pile-up of dislocations with a positive sign occurs on the first slip plane. Then, reverse plasticity in the second half cycle causes pile-up of dislocations of negative sign on successive planes close to the first slip plane. It is also possible for the dislocations in the first plane to reverse completely during the second half of the cycle. If such complete reversal of piled-up dislocations in the first plane occurs, then there is no accumula- tion of dislocations as a double ended pile-up . Incomplete reversibility of dislocation motion could be realized if the lat- tice friction stress against dislocation motion is higher in the reverse direction than in the forward direction . This could be rationalised as follows. The back stress developed by these dislocations is negative in the vicinity of pileup in the first plane, which would cause plastic flow in the reverse direction in the neighbouring plane during subsequent reverse loading . The pile-up of nega- tive dislocations on the second plane then causes a positive back stress on the first plane. This back stress enhances the pile-up of positive dislocations during the next stage of forward loading. As the number of cycles increases the number of dislocations in each slip plane as well as the number of piled-up planes in- creases, hence resulting in the formation of a double ended pile- up, similar to the dislocation distribution near a crack subjected to a shear stress . This kind of pile-up is possible only when the dislocation sources are located very close to each other, because for an isolated dislocation source, the dislocation motion on a plane becomes reversible as there is no back stress produced by the dislocations on a neighbouring plane. There- fore, the reversibility or otherwise of dislocation motion will depend on the statistical distribution of dislocation sources. An alternative explanation for the formation of the double ended pile-up might be the occurrence of multiple cross-slip events, as observed in the grains from the gauge section of the same sample . But, the dislocation debris and loops that would be produced by such cross-slip events were not ob- served in this grain, suggesting that instead that the irreversibil- ity mechanism outlined above was responsible for the double ended pile-up in this grain. The crack might then nucleate from the accumulated dislo- cation pile-ups in the following ways: (i) along the slip band ; (ii) from the grain boundary or two phase region boundary where the slip bands intersect ; or (iii) the stress concentration due to this pile-up can nucleate a crack in the 11 Jogged basal dislocations Dislocation pile up Dislocation pile up Dislocation pile up Basal Basal Basal Pyramidal Pyramidal Pyramidal < < < < < (a) (b) Basal disloca*on loops Basal disloca*on loops T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T Pyramidal slip Pyramidal slip Jogged basal disloca*on Jogged basal disloca*on X Y T T T T T T T T Stress due to pile-up Distance Incipient crack Stress near the grain boundary Stress near the grain boundary αp grain with observed disloca*on structure grain with this double ended pile-up. Incipient crack between the slip planes having opposite dislocations along the dislocation lines is shown in the inset of (b). neighbouring grain due to load shedding [55–57]. The first two cases were not observed in the present study since the crack was not observed along the direction of slip bands or along the grain or two-phase region boundary. Case (iii) is also not possible in this case as this grain with dislocation pile-ups did not pos- sess adjacent alpha grains and is bounded by two phase regions. Further, these two phase αs + β regions are found to offer high resistance for the slip transfer of piled-up dislocations from αp grains . Instead, we suggest that the embryonic crack might have nu- cleated from this double ended pile-up as follows. The stress field in this case would be the sum of applied stress and the in- ternal stresses due to the dislocation pile-ups on successive slip planes. In addition, the mixed components of the basal disloca- tion loops were also found to pile up near the boundary (Figure 3b), causing further stress intensification. The microplasticity produced by the slip bands within indi- vidual grains has been considered as an important parameter in microstructure sensitive computational methods by D.L. Mc- Dowell et al. [58–60]. It is found to be a key driving force for fatigue crack nucleation and microstructurally small fatigue crack growth. The accumulated plastic strain can be used as a fatigue indicator parameter (FIP) for crack formation. This pa- rameter was found to be an good indicator for predicting fatigue crack nucleation in both low cycle and high cycle fatigue. The stress distribution due to this double ended pile-up to- gether with the dislocation structures in the αp grain is shown in the schematic, Figure 17b. The stress intensification takes place near the tips of the pile-up. A large tensile stress is built up between the two planes of opposite sign dislocations in the pile-up, nucleating the facet. The tensile stress at half the dis- tance between the two slip planes is given as : σxx = 3 √a n(∆τ − 2κ)/ √ 2h (4) where 2a is the grain size, n is the number of stress cycles, ∆τ is the cyclic shear stress applied to the grain, κ is the lattice friction stress and h is the slip plane interplanar spacing. The tensile stress would split the atomic planes along the dis- location lines , inset of Figure 17b. This can be observed in Figure 3a – the crack grew along the dislocation line direc- tion. Therefore the large tensile stress resulting from the dou- ble ended pile-up appears to be the mechanism responsible for crack nucleation in the αp grain. From the TEM foil, it was ob- served that the fracture plane is found to be oriented 5–8◦ from the basal plane. This near-basal plane cracking rather than true basal plane cracking might be a consequence of the observed jogging of the basal dislocations. A new microstructural level critical stored energy density cri- terion proposed by Wan et al. argued that the statistically stored and geometrically necessary dislocations played a role in developing highly localized stress states, capable of causing lo- calized cleavage. The critical plane criterion with strain based damage parameter showed that the damage was controlled by the shear strain on the crystallographic slip plane and the fatigue crack growth was assisted by the normal strains on the same planes. The fatigue indicator parameter (FIP) suggested by C.P. Przybyla et al. is formulated to capture the effect of crys- tallographic orientation of primary α grains on fatigue crack formation in α + β Ti alloys. By design of the parameter, grains oriented favourably for slip on ⟨c + a⟩ pyramidal show an ex- treme value of this FIP, similar to the present observation of crack nucleation from a primary α grain with a ⟨c + a⟩ double ended pile-up in pyramidal planes. 5. Conclusions The dislocation structures associated with the fatigue crack initiation site in aged bimodal Ti6242Si subjected to low cycle fatigue were examined, and compared to those previously found in the gauge and to those found in grains associated with crack growth. The following conclusions are drawn. 1. The alloy mainly deforms by cooperative movement of a large number of dislocations in the primary alpha grains, which predominantly deform by planar slip; interaction between the 12 different operating slip systems is relatively rare. These pile- ups are found to be localized within the grain when the grain shares its boundary with two-phase regions or dissimilarly ori- ented grains; the slip bands transfer across the boundary when the grain has similarly oriented neighbour. The boundary be- tween the primary alpha grain and a two phase region acts both as a dislocation source and as a barrier to slip transfer between primary alpha grains. 2. Dislocations in two phase α + β regions were observed to nucleate from the α/β boundaries as dislocation loops. A num- ber of basal ⟨a⟩ loops were observed on basal planes in the αs plates; the edge component of these loops were found to trans- fer across the retained β ligaments. As the a3 slip direction in the αs plates doesn’t have a closely aligned slip direction in the β, direct transmission needs higher stress. These a3 dislocations become a dislocations in the β and subsequently decom- pose into a pair of mobile (a/2)⟨111⟩ dislocations, observed as dislocation networks in the β. 3. The high dislocation density observed in one of the pri- mary alpha grains nearest the initiation site suggests that crack nucleation occurred from this grain. ⟨c + a⟩ pyramidal slip was observed in this grain, which may be a consequence of the con- straint imposed by the αs+β two phase regions on the either side of this grain, as well as the applied stress. Dislocations were ob- served to be piled up on both the ends of the grain, with positive and negative dislocations observed on neighbouring slip planes. Such structures can result from the incomplete reversibility of dislocation motion due to a slightly higher friction stress in the reverse direction than in the forward direction. This kind of double ended pile-up results in a large tensile stress between the two planes, providing a mechanism of crack initiation by plane splitting along the dislocation lines. The observation of superjogs on the basal dislocations provides a rationale for why such cracks nucleate near rather than on the basal plane. Acknowledgements The authors wish to acknowledge the contribution and useful discus- sions with Prof D Rugg at Rolls-Royce plc, Prof FPE Dunne and Dr TB Britton at Imperial, and Prof AJ Wilkinson in Oxford, with whom we are funded under the Hexmat EPSRC programme grant