1 Anomalous Nernst effect beyond the magnetization scaling relation in the ferromagnetic Heusler compound Co2MnGa Satya N. Guin1,*, Kaustuv Manna1, Jonathan Noky1, Sarah J. Watzman2, Chenguang Fu1, Nitesh Kumar1, Walter Schnelle1, Chandra Shekhar1, Yan Sun1, Johannes Gooth1,*, Claudia Felser1,* 1Max Planck Institute for Chemical Physics of Solids, 01187 Dresden, Germany 2Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA ∗Correspondence to: satyanarayanguin@cpfs.mpg.de Johannes.Gooth@cpfs.mpg.de Claudia.Felser@cpfs.mpg.de 2 Applying a temperature gradient in a magnetic material generates a voltage that is perpendicular to both the heat flow and the magnetization.1,2 This is the anomalous Nernst effect (ANE),3,4 which was thought to be proportional to the value of the magnetization for a long time. However, more generally, the ANE has been predicted to originate from a net Berry curvature of all bands near the Fermi level (EF.5,6 Subsequently, a large anomalous Nernst thermopower (Syx A ) has recently been observed in topological materials with no net magnetization but large net Berry curvature [n(k)] around EF.7–9 These experiments clearly fall outside the scope of the conventional magnetization-model of the ANE, but a significant question remains: Can the value of the ANE in topological ferromagnets exceed the highest values observed in conventional ferromagnets? Here, we report a remarkably high Syx A -value of ~6.0 μV K−1 at 1 T in the ferromagnetic topological Heusler compound Co2MnGa at room temperature, which is around 7-times larger than any anomalous Nernst thermopower value ever reported for a conventional ferromagnet. Combined electrical, thermoelectric and first-principles calculations reveal that this high value of the ANE arises from a large net Berry curvature near the Fermi level associated with nodal lines and Weyl points. 3 Conventional thermoelectric devices are based on the Seebeck effect in a two-terminal geometry, where two electronic reservoirs at different temperatures result in an electric voltage that arises in the direction of the imposed temperature gradient.1,2 For applications, however, this configuration has considerable drawbacks, as the heat reservoir is forced to be part of the electrical circuit. The problem is to achieve good thermal insulation while maintaining good electrical conduction. To circumvent this issue, multi-terminal thermoelectric devices have recently attracted increasing attention,10–13 because they allow for the spatial separation of the heat reservoir from the electric circuitry. One possible implementation of this kind13 is based on the Nernst effect, which is the generation of a transverse thermoelectric voltage by a temperature gradient and a magnetic field, applied normal to each other.14–16 Nernst devices are, in principle, also simpler to integrate technologically than conventional thermoelectrics as there is no need for both p- and n-type materials. A ferromagnetic material generates an anomalous transverse voltage mutually perpendicular to both heat current and magnetization is so-called anomalous Nernst effect (ANE).3,4,17–20 The ANE is the thermoelectric counterpart of the anomalous Hall effect (AHE) and was first observed in topologically trivial ferromagnets. Therefore, it was believed for a long time that the ANE is proportional to the magnetization of a material itself. In spite of many efforts, the maximum value of anomalous Nernst thermopower in ferromagnetic systems is limited and bound to below ~1 μV K−1.9 However, recently it was found that the AHE is not directly related to the magnetization of a material but derived more generally from the Berry curvature [n(k)] of the bands near EF.5,6 This was realized hand in hand with the discovery that the AHE is linked to the summation of n(k) over all the occupied bands below EF.21 n(k) is a local gauge field associated with the Berry phase of the band structure and determines the topological aspects of a material. In contrast to previous believes it is thus possible to control the Berry curvature and thus the intrinsic AHE and ANE by suitable manipulations of 4 symmetries and band structures, independent of the finite value of the magnetization. As a result of these considerations, the AHE and ANE have recently been tuned in a distinct manner by tailoring the distribution of n(k) in topological matter, such as in Dirac metals or chiral anti- ferromagnets.5–9,22–25 These investigations have led to the observation of an AHE and an ANE in absence of ferromagnetism. Furthermore, is has been demonstrated that by manipulating the crystal and magnetic space group symmetry and details of band structure, the anomalous Hall conductivity can be tuned from zero to a large value.26 The Berry curvature-driven anomalous Hall and Nernst effects have been measured in the non-collinear antiferromagnets Mn3Sn and Mn3Ge, without sizeable magnetization, where Berry curvature effects are generated from the non-collinear spin structure.9,22–25 Also, in the Dirac semimetal Cd3As2 the AHE and ANE were measured due to Berry curvature effects, produced by the separation of the Weyl nodes in magnetic field.7,8 The results of both experiments clearly fall outside the scope of the conventional model which scales the ANE with the magnetization of the system, but a worthy question remains: Is it possible to push the limit of ANE beyond the magnetization-scaling relation in a ferromagnet? Hence, this work desire to go beyond the recent experiments, identify a material with a large n(k) at EF and perform Nernst measurements on this system. In the present study, we have carried out thermoelectric experiments on the ferromagnetic topological Heusler compound Co2MnGa, which has previously been shown to exhibit a large AHE and a large Berry curvature-distribution around EF.26,27 Co2MnGa is a full Heusler compound, which crystallizes in the L21 structure with space group Fm3̅m and a lattice constant a = 5.77 Å (Fig.1 (a)). The structure consists of four interpenetrating fcc sub-lattices, of which two are formed by Co atoms. The other two sub-lattices are formed by the Mn and Ga atoms. The structure can also be implicitly viewed as a zinc-blende-type sub-lattice, formed by one Co and Ga in which tetrahedral and octahedral holes are occupied by the second Co and Mn atom respectively. The Co atoms occupy the Wyckoff position 8c (1/4,1/4,1/4), whereas the Mn and 5 Ga atoms occupy the Wyckoff positions 4a (0, 0, 0) and 4b (1/2,1/2,1/2), respectively. Without spin-orbit coupling, there are three nodal lines near EF (Fig. 1 (b) and (c)). The spin-orbit coupling lifts the degeneracy in two of these lines and a small gap is developed. This effect induces a large n(k) into the system at the former nodal lines, making the material a promising candidate for the study of Berry curvature related effects. A recent angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) study in Co2MnGa single crystal shows the position of the nodal lines close to the Fermi level.28 The single crystals used in this study are synthesized via Bridgman–Stockbarger crystal growth technique. Prior to the transport experiments, the as-grown crystals were characterized by Laue X-ray diffraction (XRD), where sharp spots in the pattern indicate the high crystal quality (see methods for details, Supplementary Fig. S1). The transport experiments were performed in a temperature-variable cryostat (Physical Property Measurement System from Quantum Design) in helium atmosphere, equipped with a 9 T magnet. All transport experiments are performed within the -plane of the Co2MnGa crystal, with a magnetic field 0H applied in the - direction. In particular, two measurement configurations have been used in our study: First, longitudinal measurements, where the electric voltage response is measured in the direction of the applied electrical current (I) or heat current (Q) (the corresponding transport parameters are marked with the sub-index xx); and second, transverse measurements, where the electric voltage response is measured normal to the applied electrical current or temperature gradient (the corresponding transport parameters are marked with the sub-index yx, Fig. 1 (d)). To gain deeper insights into the experimental results, ab-initio calculations were performed using density-functional theory as implemented in VASP29 as a first step, followed up by the extraction of a Wannier tight-binding Hamiltonian via WANNIER9030. With this Hamiltonian, we can evaluate the Berry curvature and consecutively the AHE and ANE (for further details see Methods section). 6 In the first set of transport experiments, we investigate the longitudinal thermoelectric magneto- transport of Co2MnGa. Fig. 2 (a) shows the electrical resistivity (ρxx) and Seebeck coefficient (Sxx) as a function of temperature T. The decreasing ρxx with decreasing T reveals the metallic behaviour of the compound with a value of 80 cm at 300 K. Consistently, the magnitude of Sxx decreases with lowering of T with a value of around -26 V K-1 at 300 K. The negative sign of Sxx indicates electron dominated transport. The magneto-Seebeck data shows almost no field dependence of Sxx within the measured temperature range (Supplementary Fig. S2). Next, we measure the magnetization (M) of our sample. The compound is known to be a ferromagnet with a relatively high Curie temperature of (TC ) = 687 K.31 In Fig. 2 (b) we present temperature-dependent magnetization data for Co2MnGa. In agreement with literature, we find ferromagnetic behavior. From the data taken as a function of sweeping magnetic field, a saturation magnetization value of around Msat = 3.9 μB f.u.-1 is measured at 50 K, which slightly decreases with increasing temperature to Msat = 3.7 μB f.u.-1 at 300 K. Further, we measure the anomalous Hall effect of Co2MnGa. We estimate the total Hall conductivity (xy) from the measured Hall resistivity yx and the longitudinal resistivity xx as: xy = yx yx 2 + xx 2 (1) In Fig. 2 (c) we present xy as a function of magnetic field at different base temperatures. As expected for a ferromagnetic material, xy increases with 0H and saturates, despite a small slope contributed from the ordinary Hall effect, when the saturation magnetization is reached (compare Fig. 2 (b)). The anomalous Hall conductivity (AHC) (xy A ) has been estimated by extrapolating the slope of the high-field data points (Supplementary Fig. S3) to the zero field value. The observed values of xy A and its temperature dependence are consistent with previous reports.26 As shown in the inset of Fig. 2 (c), a value of xy A ~ 1260 S cm-1 has been estimated at 60 K, which gradually decreases with increasing temperature and reaches ~845 S cm-1 at 7 300K. From the magnetic field-dependence, one would naively expect xy A to only scale with M. However, as shown in our ab-initio calculation of Fig. 2 (d), the AHC conductivity in Co2MnGa strongly depends on the position of the Fermi level, which is due to the Berry curvature effect discussed above. In the case of the intrinsic AHE, n(k) gives an additional term to the group velocity of the electron, which gives:5 σxy A = − e2 ћ ∑ ∫ dk (2π)3 n,xy(k)fnk (2) n where fnk is Fermi-Dirac distribution function with the band index n and the wave vector k. e denotes the elementary charge and ћ is the reduced Planck constant. The integral is performed across the whole Brillouin zone for all bands below EF. Recent results of ARPES measurements on our sample show that the sample is slightly hole-doped.28 Therefore, the actual Fermi level EF in our sample is slightly shifted towards the valence bands compared to the theoretical charge neutral point E0 that is estimated by counting the intrinsic electron number by EF – E0 = -80 meV. Based on the ab-initio calculations and ARPES results, we predict an AHC value of xy A (EF) = 1242 S cm-1 at T = 0 K. Extrapolating the measured xy A linear to T = 0 K, we obtain a reasonably close value of xy A = 1362 S cm-1 which is consistent with the experimentally measured value. We now turn to investigate the Nernst effect of Co2MnGa. In Fig. 3 (a) the field-dependence of the Nernst thermopower (Syx) is shown at different T. At all T, the Nernst signal increases rapidly at low magnetic fields (0H ) and saturates above 0H ~ 1 T despite a small remaining increase due to ordinary Nernst signal contribution. These features are consistent with the M and xy A data. We therefore attribute the saturation value of the Nernst signal to the ANE and the small increasing contribution beyond 1 T to the ordinary Nernst effect. In a similar procedure as for the Hall data, the ordinary and anomalous contributions to the Nernst thermopower can then be separated by fitting the high-field slope of the total Nernst 8 thermopower up to 0H = 9 T (Supplementary Fig. S3). Doing so, we find that the ordinary Nernst effect reaches values of Syx O = 50 nV K−1 at room temperature and 0H = 1 T as expected for metallic systems. The ANE, on the other hand, reaches remarkably high values of i.e. Syx A ~6.0 μV K−1 at 300 K, 1 T field (inset of Fig. 3 (a)). Similar to the AHE, the ANE of conventional ferromagnets is proportional to the magnetization, that is, |Syx A | = |Nyx A |0M, where |Nyx A | is the anomalous Nernst coefficient, ranging from 0.05 to 1 V K−1 T−1 at 300 K. According to this relation, Co2MnGa should maximally exhibit Syx A = 0.9 μV K−1 (see methods for details). This value is around 7-times lower value than observed in experiment and indicates that the ANE arises from a mechanism that is distinct from the linear scaling of conventional ferromagnets. To gain deeper insight into this large ANE in Co2MnGa, we calculate the transverse thermoelectric conductivity (αyx) plotted in Fig. 3 (b)). Using the measured components of the xx, yx, Sxx and Syx, we estimate αyx via: αyx = Syxxx − Sxxyx xx 2 + yx 2 (3) Based on the linear scaling relation for conventional ferromagnetic metals, one would expect that αyx increases linearly with decreasing T, following the temperature dependence of M.17 However, in Co2MnGa we observed the inverse effect: αyx increases with increasing temperature although the saturation magnetization decreases. This is another indication that the anomalous Nernst signal in ferromagnetic Co2MnGa arises from a different mechanism than the ANE in conventional ferromagnets. It is noteworthy that the AHC in Co2MnGa also does not follow the conventional scaling relation. This suggests that the ANE and the AHE in Co2MnGa may share a common origin, which is the Berry curvature effect. To evaluate this possibility, we calculate αyx, employing: 5 9 αyx A = e Tћ ∑ ∫ dk n (4) only around the Fermi energy. Therefore, while σxy is related to the summation of n(k) of the all the occupied bands below EF, αyx is related to n(k) of the all bands near EF. Our theoretical calculations show a very large ANC in the system, which is linked to the high Berry curvature induced by the gapping of the nodal lines (Fig. 3 (c)). Like the AHC, the ANC shows a strong Fermi-level dependence, which is not captured by the conventional theory for ferromagnets. Importantly, the calculations reproduce and explain the T-dependence of the experimental data as shown in the inset of Fig. 3 (d). At EF – E0 = -80 meV, the Berry curvature in the model leads to the same characteristic decrease of yx A with decreasing T that is also observed in the experiment. We note that only slight shifts in the position of EF lead to a strong modification of the T-dependence of yx A . Thus, yx A (T) is a sensitive probe for the underlying mechanism for the ANE in Co2MnGa. The coincident observation of the high values of AHE and ANE, together with the same characteristic T-dependence of yx A in experiment and theory go beyond the conventional model for the ANE in ferromagnets and can be considered as fingerprints of the Berry curvature effect associated with emerging nodal lines and Weyl points. Finally, we turn to the initial question whether the value of the ANE in such topological ferromagnets can exceed the highest values observed in conventional ferromagnets. Therefore, we compare in Fig. 4 the anomalous Nernst signal of Co2MnGa with the values of various other ferromagnetic metals,9,20,32–36 extending the plot of Ikhlas et al.9 We plot the absolute values of the Nernst thermopower in the magnetically ordered states, where 0H and T are kept as absolute parameters. The shaded area of the graph represents the linear relation of the anomalous Nernst thermopower as measured for conventional ferromagnets. The red dotted line marks the limit of the highest value of |Syx A | ever measured in a ferromagnet. As explained 10 above, according to the conventional scaling relation the expected value of Syx A for Co2MnGa at room temperature is ~0.05 to 0.9 μV K−1. Nevertheless, the Nernst signal of Co2MnGa shows a much larger value ∼ 6.0 μV K−1 at room temperature and further increases to ~6.6 μV K−1 at 340 K, the highest temperature investigated. In summary, we have observed a remarkably large ANE in the ferromagnetic topological Heusler compound Co2MnGa which is around 7-times larger than any value reported for conventional ferromagnets so far in the literature. Combined electrical, thermoelectric and first-principles calculations reveal that this high value of the ANE arises from a large net Berry curvature near the Fermi energy associated with nodal lines and Weyl points. While our results not only show that the ANE in ferromagnets originates generally from a net Berry curvature of all bands near EF rather than directly from the magnetization, the large Nernst signal at room temperature and high Curie temperature also make Co2MnGa an ideal candidate for further investigation for use in transverse thermoelectric device. In a broader sense, the flexible electronic structure of Heusler compounds can open up adequate room for the realization of a giant Nernst effect via a suitable Berry curvature design. We believe, the present study can act as a guide in search for new magnetic topologically non-trivial materials with large non-zero Berry curvature for observation of a giant anomalous Nernst effect. 11