Suppression of Surfaces States at Cubic Perovskite (001) Surfaces by CO2 Adsorption Kostiantyn V. Sopiha1, Oleksandr I. Malyi2*, Clas Persson2, Ping Wu1* 1 – Entropic Interface Group, Engineering Product Development, Singapore University of Technology and Design, 8 Somapah Road, 487372 Singapore, Singapore 2 – Centre for Materials Science and Nanotechnology, Department of Physics, University of Oslo, P. O. Box 1048 Blindern, NO-0316 Oslo, Norway E-mails: oleksandrmalyi@gmail.com (O.I.M), wuping@sutd.edu.sg (W.P) Abstract By using first-principles approach, the interaction of CO2 with (001) surfaces of six cubic ABO3 perovskites (A = Ba, Sr and B = Ti, Zr, Hf) is studied in detail. We show that CO2 adsorption results in the formation of highly stable CO3-like complexes with similar geometries for all investigated compounds. This reaction leads to the suppression of the surfaces states, opening the band gaps of the slab systems up to the corresponding bulk energy limits. For most AO-terminated ABO3(001) perovskite surfaces, a CO2 coverage of 0.25 was found to be sufficient to fully suppress the surface states, whereas the same effect can only be achieved at 0.50 CO2 coverage for the BO2 terminations. The largest band gap modulation among the AO-terminated surfaces was found for SrHfO3(001) and BaHfO3(001), whereas the most profound effect among the BO2 terminations was identified for SrTiO3(001) and BaTiO3(001). Based on these results and considering practical difficulties associated with measuring conductivity of highly resistive materials, TiO2-terminated SrTiO3(001) and BaTiO3(001) were identified as the most prospective candidates for chemiresistive CO2 sensing applications. Keywords: perovskites, CO2 adsorption, sensing mechanism, surface states, band gap modulation 2 Introduction An early discovery of gas sensing features in metal-oxides1 has triggered an intensive search for functional materials having superior gas sensing characteristics.2-4 Despite this apparent success, in general, chemiresistive sensing of chemically inert gases remains practically difficult. Specifically, measuring CO2 concentration is currently performed using optical gas detectors, which are not well suited for mass-scale applications due to their high production cost imposed by the structural complexity.5 From the chemical perspective, a majority of classical sensing oxides are practically incapable of chemiresistive CO2 detection due to high stability of the CO2 molecule.3, 4, 6 In an attempt to overcome this obstacle, research focus has gradually shifted to alternative sensing materials, including various inorganic perovskites possessing prospective CO2 sensing characteristics.7-17 The first efficient perovskite-based CO2 sensor was developed by Meyer et al., who discovered profound chemiresistive features of BaTiO3-containing composites.7, 8 Since then, the optimized composition consisting of BaTiO3, CuO, and La2O3 has long been the best-performing CO2 sensing material reported in the literature4, 8 until the recent development of BaSnO3-based chemiresistor.9 To understand the sensing phenomenon, CO2 sensing properties of the BaTiO3- CuO composites were examined by different authors.18-26 The studies revealed the formation of surface carbonate groups and proposed a CO2 sensing mechanism based on modulation of the electron energy levels at BaTiO3/CuO heterointerfaces.21-24 Although this mechanism can explain chemiresistive response for the composites, it fails to justify experimental findings revealing CO2 sensing features of pristine9-11 and doped12-17 perovskites. Moreover, despite considerable progress achieved in the field, so far, reported values of the CO2 sensing response remain too low for practical use, highlighting a need for further research and functionalization of the perovskite-based sensing materials. The main obstacle for the further development, however, lays in a poor understanding of the adsorption chemistry of perovskite surfaces and its relation to the electrical conductivity. To unveil the background surface chemistry of sensing, CO2 adsorption on stable (001) perovskite surfaces has been intensively investigated using first-principles methods. It was found that the CO2 adsorption results in the formation of highly stable CO3-like complexes for all considered materials.27-29 Despite this knowledge, the exact mechanism on how the adsorption affects the surface conductivity has long remained uncertain. Recently, it has been demonstrated 3 that molecular chemisorption on K1-yNayTa1-xNbxO3(001)29, 30 and SrTiO3(001)31 results in the suppression of surface states emergent at their clean (001) facets. Since the existence of surface states can increase the surface conductivity32-34 and even contribute to the formation of 2- dimensional electron gas (2DEG),35 this suppression might be a long-missing link between the CO2 adsorption and conductivity change during the sensing. However, since up to date the band gap modulation has only been explored for two representative perovskite materials, a wider family of the compounds should be considered to provide a better understanding and allow further generalization of the mechanism. Motivated by this, we investigated CO2 interaction with (001) surfaces of different cubic ABO3 perovskites (A = Ba, Sr and B = Ti, Zr, Hf) focusing on the adsorption-induced changes in the surface electronic properties. The material selection for this study was dictated by similar geometry and chemistry of the compounds, which can allow to reveal common adsorption trends for cubic perovskites by analyzing the roles played by different parameters (such as lattice constant, band gap, surface termination, etc.). The obtained results are expected to guide further optimization of the perovskite-based sensing materials for CO2 sensing applications, catalysis, photocatalysis, and beyond. Methods The first-principles calculations were performed using Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP)36-38 utilizing Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) functional39 and projected augmented wave (PAW) pseudopotentials.40, 41 Barium 5s25p66s2, strontium 4s24p65s2, hafnium 5s25p65d26s2, zirconium 4s24p64d25s2, titanium 3s23p63d24s2, oxygen 2s22p4, and carbon 2s22p2 were treated as valence electrons. The Brillouin-zone integrations were performed on Γ-centered 5×5×1 Monkhorst-Pack grids42 for ionic relaxations and the 10×10×1 grids for electronic structure calculations. The cutoff energies of 400 eV and atomic force threshold of 0.01 eV/Å were employed in all calculations. Since PBE is known to underestimate the band gap energies,43 electronic structures of the bulk and clean perovskite surfaces were also computed using hybrid Heyd-Scuseria-Ernzerhof (HSE06) functional with the default mixing coefficient of 0.25 for the exact exchange.44 The obtained results were analyzed using Vesta45 and pymatgen.46 Bulk unit cells of cubic perovskites were relaxed imposing Pm3m symmetry. These phases has been found experimentally in all perovskite systems considered herein, although distorted phases are often the ground states.47 The optimized lattice parameters were used to construct model 4 slabs consisting of 13 atomic layers (6.5 unit cells) of the perovskites and about 20 Å (5.5 unit cells) of vacuum. Since previous first-principles48, 49 and experimental50 observations revealed that (001) facets are the most stable for the perovskite systems, both the AO- and BO2-terminated ABO3(001) were investigated herein. Experimentally observed surface reconstructions were disregarded in this work due to their thermodynamic instability at ambient conditions.51-57 All atoms from five bulk-like middle layers were kept fixed during the relaxations to maintain the cubic symmetry of the deep atomic layers. In order to avoid dipole-dipole interaction due to the cell periodicity,58 CO2 chemisorption on both sides of the symmetrical slabs was modeled. This model was validated for SrTiO3(001) surfaces in our recent study31 and compared to the alternative approuches27, 28 therein. Stability of CO2 adsorption conformations was quantified by the E(slab + n ∙ CO2), E(slab), and E(CO2) are total energies of the slab containing n adsorbed CO2 molecules, clean slab relaxed after CO2 desorption, and free CO2 molecule, respectively. The CO2 coverage (Θ) was determined as the number of CO2 molecules per unit cell of the surface. All local density of states (LDOS) for the slabs are presented in respect to the valence band maxima (VBM) of the corresponding bulk systems, where the alignment was performed based on average electrostatic potentials in cores of B-site cations in the bulk systems and three middle bulk-like atomic layers of the slabs. To demonstrate localization of the surface states, surface state densities were computed as charge densities for the states within energy limits from the conduction band minima (CBM) or VBM levels of the slabs to those of the corresponding bulk compounds. Results and discussion Before investigating an impact of CO2 adsorption on electronic properties of the perovskite surfaces, we first established benchmarks for the bulk compounds, as summarized in Table S1. It was found that the considered compounds have lattice parameters varying from 3.95 Å for SrTiO3 to 4.26 Å for BaZrO3, following the corresponding trends in the crystal ionic radii of the cations (Sr2+: 1.32, Ba2+: 1.49, Ti4+: 0.745, Zr4+: 0.86, and Hf4+: 0.85 Å for the 6-coordinated ions).59 These systems have band gap energies between 1.69 and 3.74 eV computed on PBE level for BaTiO3 and SrHfO3, respectively (see Fig. 1a). For both Sr- and Ba-containing perovskites, the energy gaps correlate with electronegativities of B-site cations (Ti: 1.54, Zr: 1.33, and Hf: 1.30 in Pauling 5 scale).60, 61 This trend reflects different localizations of d-like orbitals of B-site cations determining CBM positions in all considered compounds, as shown in Fig. S1. As briefly mentioned in the methods section, the Pm3m crystal phases can undergo distortions at low temperatures.47 Although this tendency is largely constrained at the first- principles level by the fixation of bulk-like atomic layers (see methods), akin relaxations may still occur at the surfaces. Indeed, our first-principles analysis revealed that the ideal surfaces obtained from the ionic relaxation of as-cleaved slabs are metastable with respect to structural perturbation. Depending on the compound, several distortion patterns were found, as summarized in Fig. S2. The largest energy changes due to the distortion were computed for SrO-terminated SrZrO3(001) and SrHfO3(001), which were stabilized in respect to the ideal surfaces by 30.7 and 19.7 meV/Å2, respectively (see Fig. S3). This behavior can be understood from the analysis of the Goldschmidt tolerance factor,62 which was developed to determine relative stability and distortion of perovskite structures.47, 63 In this regard, the smallest tolerance factors were found for SrZrO3 and SrHfO3 (see Table S1), implying their low stability in cubic Pm3m phases near absolute zero. It should be noted that despite reaching the local minimum of energy, computed distortion patterns might be artificially stabilized by the imposed slab geometry constraints. However, accounting for the surface distortion is critical to separate adsorption-driven relaxations from those triggered by the broken symmetry. Therefore, the optimized slabs with the most stable distortion patterns were used as reference systems for the CO2 adsorption energy calculations and addressed as clean surfaces henceforth. By analyzing electronic properties of the stable (001) perovskite surfaces, we found that their band gaps are smaller compared to those of the corresponding bulk systems (see Fig. 1a), in agreement with previous reports.31, 35, 64, 65 Although these energy gap reductions were observed for most investigated surfaces, the underlying mechanisms differ significantly among them. For the BO2-terminated ABO3(001), the effect is originated from the surface states emerging above the VBM of the bulk systems, as evident from the layer-resolved LDOS and projected surface state density shown in Fig. 1c,e on example of HfO2-terminated SrHfO3(001). These states are populated by 2p-like electrons of O from the outermost BO2 atomic layer. Importantly, we found that magnitude of the band gap reduction is not strongly dependent on the energy gap of the bulk system, falling within a range of 0.41-0.82 eV for all BO2-terminated surfaces. In contrast, emerging surface states at the AO-terminated ABO3(001) can have two different origins. In both 6 cases, the states emerge below CBM of the bulk compounds but can be localized either at the subsurface BO2 or above the outermost AO atomic layer. The first scenario applies to SrO- terminated SrTiO3(001), where vacant 3d-like orbitals from the subsurface Ti atoms (see Fig. 1f) reduce the band gap energy by 0.24 eV. Since this change is much smaller compared to that at the corresponding TiO2-terminated surface (0.78 eV), the band gap reduction effect has less practical importance here. Similar behavior was also found for BaO-terminated BaTiO3(001), where the surface state density at CBM implies formation of the surface states (see Fig. S5), but no reduction in the overall band gap energy of the slab system was observed, as reflected in Table S2. This result indicates that surface states at BaO-terminated BaTiO3(001), if present, are within the error bar for electronic structure calculations and cannot alter the surface conductivity significantly. The second scenario leads to the band gap reductions of 0.27-0.39 eV for the Zr-containing and 0.77- 0.94 eV for the Hf-containing perovskites. These states are centered about 2 Å above the outermost AO atomic layer and dominated by the orbitals of both A-site cations and O from the outermost AO atomic layer, as shown in Figs. 1b,d for SrO-terminated SrHfO3(001). Regardless of the origin, these results indicate that the band gap reduction is indeed a common feature of the cubic perovskite family. Although LDOS in known to provide a good insight into the spatial distribution of electronic properties,31, 35, 66, 67 the computed quantity can be affected by the limitations of the projection scheme utilizing spherical approximation of the Wigner-Seitz cells.68 In particular, the surface charge densities estimated from the layer-resolved LDOS (see Fig. 1b,c) can be affected. To evince that the surface states can accommodate enough charge carriers to alter the surface conductivities considerably, we calculated cumulative charges for the surface states by integrating the surface state densities (see methods, Figs. S4 and S5) over the slab volumes and represented them per unit surface area. The obtained quantity can be interpreted as maximum number of charge carriers that can be accommodated per unit area in the states at the surface of interest. As can be seen in Fig. 1g, the cumulative charges are generally larger for the states at the BO2-terminated surfaces, with the exception of SrHfO3(001). Importantly, for all studied surfaces except BaO- terminated BaTiO3(001), the charges are greater than 5×10-3 e/Å2, which is comparable to the electron densities of 2DEG on SrTiO3 surfaces and interfaces.69-71 This result indicates that these states can indeed alter the surface conductivities of perovskites considerably and even contribute to the formation of the 2DEG, as it was previously discussed for SrTiO3(001).35 7 To identify the most stable CO2 adsorption conformations, we analyzed all configurations obtained from the screening of over 300 CO2 adsorption positions on SrO- and TiO2-terminated SrTiO3(001) surfaces presented in our recent work.31 Most of them were also found after relaxation on the other perovskite surfaces (see Figs. 2a,c and S6), as it could be anticipated from the similar geometries and chemistries of the cubic perovskites. For higher CO2 coverage of 0.50, six and two different coverage modes were analyzed at the AO and BO2 terminations, respectively (see Fig. S7). The most stable adsorption conformations and coverage modes were also investigated accounting for the reduced symmetry due to the surface distortion patterns, as well as by introducing random perturbations to the surface ions. We found that the perturbations can lead to minor stabilization of up to 5 meV/molecule, which signifies thermodynamic stability of the identified conformations and sets an error bar for the CO2 adsorption energy calculations in this work. The most stable adsorption conformations at Θ=0.25 are nearly identical for all considered materials, with minor differences originated from the surface distortion patterns, as illustrated in Fig. S8. In particular, CO2 interaction with the AO-terminated ABO3(001) results in the formation of highly stable CO3-like complexes, where C and O atoms of the adsorbed molecules are bonded to the surface oxygen (denoted by OS here) and two separate A-site cations, respectively (see Fig. 2a). From the thermodynamic perspective, molecular CO2 chemisorption on the AO- terminated ABO3(001) is highly favorable, as suggested by their low adsorption energies varying from -2.19 eV for SrZrO3 to -1.79 eV for BaHfO3 (see Fig. 2b). Interestingly, for both Sr- and Ba- containing perovskites, the strongest CO2 adsorption was found for the compounds containing Zr. Considering that optimized geometries of the CO3-like complexes are almost independent of the compound (see Table S5), higher stability of CO2 adsorption here can be associated with lower stresses due to the largest lattice constants of the Zr-containing perovskites (see Table S1). At higher CO2 coverage of 0.50, the chemisorption becomes weaker. Specifically, the molecule- molecule interaction increases the CO2 adsorption energies by 0.24-0.45 eV and even results in stabilization of alternative adsorption modes for BaTiO3 and BaHfO3 (see Fig. S9). These results suggest that the AO-terminated ABO3(001) surfaces can firmly trap atmospheric CO2 by forming a thin layer of CO3-like complexes upon exposure of as-synthesized perovskites to atmospheric air. 8 CO2 interaction with the BO2-terminated surfaces also leads to the formation of CO3-like complexes, where C and O atoms of the adsorbed molecules are bonded to the surface oxygen (OS) and B-site atoms, respectively, as shown in Fig. 2c. The C-OS bonds and O-C-O angles of the formed CO3-like complexes are larger here as compared to those at the AO terminations (see range from -1.75 eV for BaHfO3(001) to -1.24 eV for SrTiO3(001), implying less stable chemisorption compared to that on the AO terminations (see Fig. 2d). The further increase in CO2 coverage to 0.50 increases adsorption energy by less than 0.1 eV, and therefore, the interaction between the chemisorbed molecules on the BO2 terminations is weaker. The CO2 adsorption on the perovskite surfaces alters their electronic properties by suppressing the surface states. Specifically, energy gaps of the AO-terminated ABO3(001) slabs increase considerably to the corresponding bulk values at Θ=0.25 of CO2 (see Fig. 3a). This change is due to the suppression of the surfaces states at the CBM levels of the clean surfaces, as illustrated in Figs. S11-S26. It should be noted that the energy gaps of some slabs containing CO2 molecules exceed the corresponding bulk values, which can be attributed to the model geometry constraints and may be eliminated using thicker slabs. These electronic properties persist at Θ=0.50 as well, as shown in Fig. 3a,c. For the BO2-terminated surfaces, the band gap energies at Θ=0.25 are 0.31- 0.46 eV larger than those for the corresponding clean slabs but are 0.10-0.39 eV smaller than the bulk values, as shown in Fig. 3b. Instead, the surface states at CBM levels are fully suppressed at Θ=0.50 (see Fig. 3d), suggesting a more gradual change of the surface electronic properties upon CO2 chemisorption on the BO2-terminated surfaces. However, more detailed analysis within a wider CO2 coverage range is needed to predict the concentration-dependent sensing response. Since sensing response is experimentally defined as a ratio of material resistances in different environments,2, 3 a similar first-principles descriptor is needed to quantify the band gap modulation effect. Considering that CO2 adsorption leads to the complete suppression of the surface states at Θ=0.50, the absolute difference in the band gaps of the bulk and clean slab systems can be employed for such quantification. Although this parameter ignores possible changes in the carrier mobilities, it captures a dominant role played by the band gap changes and accounts for the exponential dependence of the charge carrier concentrations on the energy gap. It should be noted, however, that this approach can only be used to compare sensitivities of the surface layers, whereas electrical conductance of the bulk-like regions is implicitly neglected. 9 To examine the sensitivity of the proposed parameter to the computational approach, we also computed the band gap reductions for the cubic perovskite surfaces using the hybrid HSE06 functional. As can be seen in Fig. S10, despite the significant difference between the band gap energies of the bulk perovskites computed using PBE and HSE06, the magnitude of the band gap reduction for all investigated BO2-terminated surfaces does not strongly depend on the employed formalism. Specifically, the maximum difference of 0.15 eV only was obtained for HfO2- terminated SrHfO3(001). Furthermore, no drastic change in the surface electronic properties was found for AO-terminated BaTiO3(001) and SrTiO3(001). In contrast, surface states at all other AO- terminated surfaces reduce the band gap energies more drastically when analyzed using the HSE06 approach. Here, the computed differences in the band gap reductions were in 0.34-0.39 eV range for all four representative surfaces. Although the HSE06 approach changes the values of band gap reduction, it does not alter general trends deduced for the surface state, as evident from Fig. S10. Therefore, we can conclude that the PBE results can be employed for the analysis of chemiresistive CO2 sensing response in the considered perovskite systems. The computed band gap differences for the cubic perovskites are shown in Fig. 3e. The largest band gap modulations of 0.94 and 0.77 eV at AO-terminated SrHfO3(001) and BaHfO3(001) imply their strong potential for chemiresistive CO2 detection. It should be noted, however, that the use of these perovskites can be limited by their relatively large band gap energies, which lead to high electrical resistance, thus making conductivity measurements practically difficult.72 At the same time, TiO2-terminated BaTiO3(001) and SrTiO3(001) have the strongest CO2 detection potentials among the considered BO2-terminated surfaces, which is due to the energy gap reductions of 0.82 and 0.78 eV, respectively. It worth mentioning that BaTiO3- containing composites have already been employed as active materials for chemiresistive CO2 detection with great success,7, 8, 18-21, 23-26 while SrTiO3 nanostructures are effectively used to sense various reactive gases.73-76 Moreover, the use of Ti-containing perovskites is further promoted by their relatively small energy gaps, which can result in lower electrical resistance, and thus simplify electrical circuit needed for the future devices.72 Suppression of the surface states represents a new approach to chemiresistive CO2 detection, which may challenge classical ionization mechanism adopted for detection of reactive gases.2-4 However, to unleash its full capability, in practice, usage of nanoscale materials with high surface-to-bulk ratios is required due to the strong spatial confinement of the surface states. Apart 10 from that, when choosing optimal perovskite material for CO2 detection, low band gap perovskites might be favored as small energy gap generally leads to higher conductivity preferable for the conductivity measurements. It may also be valuable to hypothesize an impact the band gap modulation effect on the optical properties of nanostructured perovskites. Since band gap energy is among the main parameters determining light absorption characteristics of the material, the band gap reduction can also be utilized to develop optical CO2 sensors. However, such detectors may require compound with the band gap energy in the visible spectral region, whereas more research on the technical aspects of the perovskite-based optical sensors is needed. Although this work considers the band gap modulation effect from the gas sensing perspective, it can also have considerable impact in other related fields, including catalysis and photocatalysis. From one side, layer of CO3-like complexes at the most stable (001) surfaces can form a barrier preventing further molecular chemisorption, while from the other side, the formation of such complexes might be a first step in the CO2 reduction pathways.6 Moreover, adsorption- induced change in the surface electronic properties may signify a need to reconsider both concentration and localization of photoelectrons as well as overpotentials between the band gap edges of the perovskite-based catalysts and target redox potentials of the catalytic reactions. Finally, since the perovskites are often used as substrate materials for epitaxial growth,50 the presence of chemisorbed molecules and the corresponding changes in the surface electronic properties may affect the composition and band alignment at the formed interfaces. Because of this, care should be taken to control the concentration of CO2 species adsorbed on the perovskite substrates during the epitaxial growth. Conclusions In this work, the effect of band gap modulation by CO2 adsorption on (001) surfaces of six different cubic perovskites with the general formula of ABO3 (A = Ba, Sr and B = Ti, Zr, Hf) was assessed using first-principles methods. The results reveal an appearance of surface states at most clean surfaces. For the BO2-terminated ABO3(001), the states emerge above the bulk VBM levels and are confined to the outermost BO2 atomic layer, reducing the energy gaps of the slab systems by 0.41-0.82 eV. For the AO-terminated ABO3(001), the surface states appear below the bulk CBM level and are localized either at the subsurface BO2 layer or about 2 Å above the outermost AO atomic layer. The first scenario applies to TiO2-terminated SrTiO3(001) and results in the band 11 gap reduction of 0.24 eV, while the second is observed for the Zr- and Hf-containing compounds and leads to the narrowing of the band gaps by 0.27-0.39 and 0.77-0.94 eV, respectively. Moreover, the surface electronics of the studied perovskites can change upon the CO2 chemisorption, which is accompanied by the formation of stable CO3-like complexes. For most AO-terminated surfaces, Θ=0.25 coverage is sufficient to suppress the surface states completely, whereas for the BO2-terminated surface, the same effect is only achieved at the higher Θ=0.50 coverage. Based on these results, we can conclude that TiO2-terminated BaTiO3(001) and SrTiO3(001) are the most prospective CO2 sensing materials among all studied systems due to the high computed band gap reductions of 0.82 and 0.78 eV, respectively, and relatively low band gap energies of their bulk forms. The AO-terminated SrHfO3(001) and BaHfO3(001) are also promising candidates for chemiresistive CO2 detection due to even larger band gap modulations of 0.94 and 0.77 eV, respectively. However, the application of these surfaces can be limited by practical difficulties associated with measuring low conductivities inherent to the compounds with large band gaps. Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available Additional information on the surface geometry, electronic properties, and optimized slab structures of the perovskite systems are provided. Conflicts of interest There are no conflicts to declare. Acknowledgments The authors acknowledge the support from the SUTD-ZJU (ZJURP1200101), MOE Tier2 (T2 MOE1201-Singapore), and Research Council of Norway (contracts: 221469, 250346, 251131). Most of this work was performed on the Abel cluster, owned by the University of Oslo and the Norwegian Metacenter for Computational Science (NOTUR), and operated by the Department for Research Computing at USIT, the University of Oslo IT-department. The authors also acknowledge PRACE for awarding access to resource MareNostrum based in Spain at BSC-CNS. 12