Epitaxial Strain-Dependence of Band Gaps in Oxynitrides Compared to Oxides Nathalie Vonrüti and Ulrich Aschauer Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Bern, Freiestrasse 3, CH-3012 Bern, Switzerland (Dated: June 7, 2018) Perovskite oxynitrides are a promising class of material for photocatalytic water-splitting due to their small band gaps and suitably aligned band edges. Recently, epitaxially strained oxynitrides started to attract interest due to the possibility to engineer the anion order and ferroelectric dis- tortions. However, contrary to oxides there have been no studies on the band-gap evolution in oxynitrides with epitaxial strain. Here, we investigate, using density functional theory calculations, the influence of epitaxial strain on the band gap of two different oxynitrides and compare our results with oxides. As opposed to cubic oxides, where both compressive and tensile strain narrow the band gap, we find that the anion order leads to non-degenerate N 2p bands already at zero strain, which leads to opposite and anion order-dependent evolutions of the band gap under compressive and tensile strain. Further, we find that in oxynitrides polar distortions increase the band gap by up to 1 eV for 4% strain whereas for oxides the increase is only about 0.1 eV for the same amount of strain. The reason for this difference is the larger ionic radius of nitrogen leading to larger ferro- electric distortions and a stronger dependence of the band gap on the distortion amplitude. These results imply that ferroelectric distortions are strongly detrimental to light absorption and that their suppression, for example above a critical temperature, should result in a marked decrease in band gap and enhanced absorption of visible light. I. INTRODUCTION Perovskite oxynitrides have seen increased interest in recent years due to their absorption in the visible part of the solar spectrum as well as their band edges that straddle the oxygen and hydrogen evolution potentials, making them very promising photoelectrodes for photo- catalytic water-splitting1–3. The lower electronegativity of nitrogen compared to oxygen results in N 2p states that are higher in energy than the O 2p states that form the valence-band edge in oxynitrides and oxides respectively. Compared to pure oxides4 that typically have band gaps larger than 3 eV, the partial nitrogen substitution re- sults in reduced band gaps of oxynitrides that are just above 2 eV5. A further difference between oxides and oxynitrides are the additional anionic structural degrees of freedom of the latter. The anions in most oxynitrides are only locally ordered, in the bulk preferring a so called cis anion order (see Fig. 1 a), which maximizes the over- lap between the N 2p and the transition metal (TM) d orbitals1,6–9. The smaller band gap of oxynitrides compared to ox- ides is one of the main reasons behind the large interest in these materials for photocatalytic water-splitting. The band gap was shown to depend on the anion order10–13 due to differences in the covalence of the TM-X (X=O,N) π p-d interaction. This covalence is stronger in 3D ni- trogen orders leading to a stabilization and thus a low- ering of the valence band maximum (VBM) for these structures10. Octahedral rotations were also shown to affect the band gap via changes of the band dispersions as a function of TM-X-TM bond angles, a cubic structure with 180◦ bond angles having the smallest band gap14–16. Epitaxial strain was shown to alter the anion order in oxynitrides, large compressive strain leading to a trans order, where N-TM bonds form 1D chains along the out- ABO2N perovskite oxynitrides considered in this work. Color code: B site=orange, nitrogen=blue, oxygen=red. The A site is not shown. of-plane direction (see Fig. 1 b), while large tensile strain favors a cis anion order with N-TM bonds along the in- plane directions17–19. Additionally, we observed that epi- taxial strain can induce ferroelectric distortions, the di- rection of which is correlated with the anion order19 as both N-TM bonds and ferroelectric distortions prefer- entially occur along the elongated directions of the epi- taxially strained material: Nitrogen ions prefer to orient along elongated directions due to their larger radius com- pared to oxygen, while ferroelectric distortions typically occur also along the elongated direction due to the re- duced Coulomb force that counteracts the ferroelectric distortion20,21. The effect of epitaxial strain and strain-induced ferro- electricity on the band gap have however only been ex- plained for oxides so far. Berger et al.22 analyzed these effects for the case of SrTiO3 and found that 4% compres- sive strain lowers the band gap of the paraelectric phase by approximately 0.1 eV, while the band gap increases arXiv:1806.02050v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 6 Jun 2018 2 by roughly the same amount in the ferroelectric phase. This different behaviour of the paraelectric and the ferro- electric phase stems from two different effects occurring under epitaxial strain as discussed in the following para- graphs. At zero strain, the paraelectric phase is cubic (in the room-temperature phase without antiferrodistortive oc- tahedral rotations) and the energies of the TM t2g or- bitals forming the conduction band are degenerate as are the O 2p orbitals forming the valence band. Applying epitaxial strain in the xy-plane changes the energy of or- bitals containing x and y components relative to orbitals containing z components. Under compressive strain, or- bitals without a z component rise in energy, resulting in a narrowed band gap between raised O 2px/py and almost unaffected TM dxz/dyz states. Under tensile strain, the orbitals without a z component drop in energy and the gap is between almost unaffected O 2pz and lowered TM dxy orbitals. Thus both compressive and tensile strain reduce the band gap in oxides, under compressive strain by raising the valence-band edge, and under tensile strain by lowering the conduction-band edge. The ferroelectric distortion on the other hand leads to a stabilization of the O 2p orbitals forming the valence- band edge, along with a destabilization of the TM t2g π∗ orbitals forming the conduction-band edge, resulting in an opening of the band gap23. The magnitude of the band gap in a strained oxide material will hence depend on the strain-dependent existence and amplitude of the ferroelectric distortion. The same is true for rotations of the oxygen octahedra, that also lead to an opening of the band gap22. To assess the prospects of strain-engineered oxyni- trides for photocatalysis, we predict in the present work the strain dependence of the band gap in LaTiO2N and SrTaO2N oxynitrides using density functional theory (DFT) calculations. Since the band gap in oxynitrides additionally depends on the anion order, which is also affected by strain, oxynitrides are expected to exhibit a significantly more complex strain dependence of the band gap than oxides. We hence study the observed changes in band gap starting from calculations in the high sym- metry phase and increase the complexity by sequentially adding ferroelectric and octahedral distortions and com- pare our results for oxynitrides with oxides. Our results show that already at zero strain the anion order leads to non-degenerate N 2p bands that form the valence band edge, which leads to opposite evolutions of the band gap under compressive and tensile strain. We also show that strain and anion-order dependent polar distortions lead to a much larger widening of the band gap in oxynitrides than in oxides. II. COMPUTATIONAL METHODS Our DFT calculations were performed with the Quan- tum ESPRESSO package24 using the gradient corrected PBE exchange-correlation functional25 and ultrasoft pseudopotentials26 with Sr(4s,4p,5s), La(5s,5p,5d,6s), Ti(3s,3p,3d,4s), Ta(5s,5p,5d,6s,6p), O(2s,2p) and N(2s,2p) electrons as valence states. The cutoff for the plane-wave basis set was 40 Ry and 320 Ry for the kinetic energy and the augmented density respectively. Calculations for trans-ordered oxynitrides and SrTiO3 without octahedral rotations were performed using a 5-atom unit cell. All other structures with cis order and/or octahedral rotations were computed using a 40-atom unit cell. Reciprocal space integration was performed using Monkhorst-Pack grids27 of dimension 8 × 8 × 8 for the 5 atom unit cells and 4 × 4 × 4 for the 40 atom 2 × 2 × 2 supercells. For LaTiO2N we applied a Hubbard U28 of 3 eV as we did in our previous study19, while no U was applied for SrTiO3 to have a better comparison with the LDA results of Berger et al.22. We did also not apply a U for SrTaO2N as the electronic structure is not strongly affected by changes in U for the more diffuse 5d states (see supplementary Fig. S1a). These slight differences in computational setup and the general underestimation of band gaps at the semi-local level of theory will not affect our conclusions, as we are interested in relative geometry-dependent changes of band gaps that do not depend strongly on the level of theory22 and U (see sup- plementary Fig. S1b). For geometry relaxations of materials epitaxially strained perpendicular to one of the pseudocubic direc- tions, we assume a cubic substrate: We define the mag- nitude of strain with respect to the unstrained area in the strain plane of the given anion order and distortion mode(s) and set the in-plane lattice parameters to equal lengths and orthogonal to each other. We then relax the out-of-plane lattice parameter and all internal coor- dinates until the forces converge below 0.05 eV/Å and total energies change by less than 1.4 · 10−5 eV. Atomic structures were visualized using VESTA29. III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION A. Band gaps in low-energy phases of strained LaTiO2N and SrTaO2N In Fig. 2, we show the epitaxial strain-dependent GGA(+U)-band gaps in fully relaxed LaTiO2N and SrTaO2N films with different anion orders and strain di- rections. To differentiate between the combinations of anion orders and strain directions, we use the same nota- tion as in our previous work19: ab s, where a denotes the anion order (cis/trans), b the direction/plane along/in which the N-TM-N bonds are aligned and s the strain plane. For example cisac bc refers to a cis anion order as shown in Fig. S2 in the supplementary, where N-TM-N chains run in a and c direction with epitaxial strain ap- plied along b and c. We will focus here only on anion or- ders that are energetically most stable somewhere in the 3 SrTaO2N. The vertical dashed lines indicate borders between strain ranges for which a certain structure is stable. The band gap of the most stable structure in a specific strain range is colored red. Polarity of the structures is indicated by the background: A white background indicates that the most stable structure is non polar while a colored background indicates that the most stable structure is polar. In this figure a slightly different definition of strain compared to the rest of the article is used: we define strain with respect to the lowest-energy unstrained anion order (i.e. the cis structure with a rotation pattern a−b−c+ and N-TM bonds along a and b in the case of SrTaO2N). considered strain range. For LaTiO2N this is discussed in detail in our previous work19, while for SrTaO2N a similar analysis is given in the supplementary material section S2. In these strained structures, there is a simultaneous strain-dependent evolution of the octahedral rotation an- gles, polar distortions and the anion order, all of which may have an effect on the band gaps. In order to ratio- nalize the observed band gaps, we will first discuss the strain-dependent structure before we return to the evo- lution of the band gaps. Structural features such as the anion order and the ex- istence of a polarity as a function of strain are shown in Fig. 2 as labels and background shading respectively. We find that LaTiO2N and SrTaO2N behave similarly under large compressive and tensile strain, where we ob- serve respectively a trans structure with TM-N bonds and ferroelectric distortions oriented out-of-plane and a cis order with TM-N bonds and a 2D ferroelectric distor- tion oriented in-plane with half of the transition metals being displaced towards the nitrogen in one direction and the other half displaced along the other direction. In the intermediate strain range we see differences in the an- ion orders and the polarity between the two materials: In SrTaO2N, cisbc ac, which is thermodynamically stable in an intermediate strain range, shows the same 2D polar- ity as the structure that is stable in the tensile strain range. This polar distortion pattern is in agreement with previous studies of MgTaO2N13 and CaTaO2N10, where asymmetric bond lengths between consecutive Ta- X (X=O, N) bonds (i.e. Ta-X-Ta) were observed in the bulk structures. These structural features can be inter- preted as ferroelectric distortions and explained by the partial covalent nature of the Ta-X bond, mainly associ- ated with a d-p π interaction7,30–32. Recently, also in cis SrTaO2N ferroelectricity was measured experimentally in the bulk33. In the intermediate-strain range of LaTiO2N on the other hand, the low energy structures (cisac bc and cisac ac) show no polar distortions. The covalent bond of 5d TM-O 2p is generally said to be stronger than the 3d TM-O 2p bond34. We therefore argue that the stronger covalent bond formation in SrTaO2N favours the ferro- electric distortion more than the weaker covalent bond formation in LaTiO2N. Despite the similar tolerance factors35 (see supplemen- tary section S3), we observe significantly smaller octahe- dral rotation angles in SrTaO2N compared to LaTiO2N (see supplementary Fig. S4). At the same time SrTaO2N shows larger polar distortions throughout the whole range of strain (shown by shaded backgrounds in Fig. 2 and in supplementary Fig. S5), whereas polar distortions are weaker in LaTiO2N and even absent in the struc- tures that are stable at intermediate strain ranges. This inverse correlation of ferroelectricity and octahedral rota- tions is in agreement with the generally observed compe- tition of these two distortions36,37. Displacements of the structures along unstable eigenmodes confirm these ob- servations: while in LaTiO2N octahedral rotations lower the energy of the relaxed high-symmetry cell by approxi- mately the same amount (0.045 eV/f.u.) as a ferroelectric distortion (0.048 eV/f.u.), in SrTaO2N the energy lower- ing associated with octahedral rotations (0.028 eV/f.u.) 4 is clearly smaller than that of the ferroelectric distortion (0.090 eV/f.u. eV). We can thus explain the smaller oc- tahedral rotations of SrTaO2N by its larger ferroelectric distortions, which compete with the octahedral rotations. Having discussed the evolution of anion orders and po- lar distortions as well as differences in octahedral rota- tions between the two materials, we now return to the band gaps shown in Fig. 2. We want to stress here that since we applied a Hubbard U to LaTiO2N but not to SrTaO2N, the absolute values of the band gap should not be compared. Reliable values for the absolute band gap require anyway more sophisticated (but also com- putationally more expensive) methods such as hybrid functionals or quasi-particle GW approaches. Relative changes of the band gaps that are relevant for our study, are however meaningful as validated by these methods22. Overall the evolution of the band gaps is similar in the two materials, as we find larger band gaps with increas- ing compressive or tensile strain compared to smaller band gaps in the unstrained structures. The magnitude of band-gap changes in SrTaO2N is however larger than that in LaTiO2N and as opposed to LaTiO2N, we do in SrTaO2N not see any low energy structures that lead to band gaps which are fairly insensitive to strain. This dif- ferent behaviour seems to be linked to the polarity of the respective structures. In LaTiO2N (Fig. 2a) structures with rapidly changing band gap as a function of strain (transa bc and cisbc bc) are polar, while those with slowly varying band gaps (cisac bc and cisac ac) are non-polar. The kink in the band gap for cisac ac between 0% and 2% tensile strain is linked to the onset of a 2D ferroelectricity at 1% strain and further supports this hypothesis. This classifi- cation is also in agreement with our results for SrTaO2N (see Fig. 2 b), where all low energy structures are polar and rapidly change their band gap with strain. These results highlight two main differences in the strain-dependence of band gaps in oxynitrides compared to oxides. First, the band gap in non-polar oxides de- creases in both strain directions22, while in oxynitrides the band gap decreases for some non-polar phases and in- creases for others (compare cisac bc and cisac ac in LaTiO2N). Second, oxynitrides have a much larger increase of the band gap (almost 1 eV for 4% strain) for polar phases than oxides (0.1 eV for 4% strain)22. To explain these differences, we will in the following sections investigate the increase in band gaps in oxynitrides for the high sym- metry cis and trans structure before increasing the com- plexity by first considering polar distortions and then oc- tahedral rotations. With the knowledge gained in those sections we will then conclude on the origin of these dif- ferences compared to oxides. B. High-symmetry phase We start our analysis by determining the difference in band-gap evolution of epitaxially strained oxides and oxynitrides in the high-symmetry phase without octahe- cis-LaTiO2N, trans-LaTiO2N and SrTiO3, the absolute GGA(+U) band gaps at zero strain are 0.2 eV, 0.6 eV and 1.9 eV respectively. MN6 (left) and MO6 (right) octahedral complex. The TM s and p states have been omitted for clarity. (b)-(c) Schematic band-edge changes as a function of strain for the paraelectric phase of (b) a trans-ordered oxynitride with TM-N bonds only along the out-of-plane direction (c) an oxide (d) a cis-ordered oxynitride with TM-N bonds only along the two in-plane directions. dral rotations or polar distortions. To do so, we fix atoms at high symmetry positions and allow only the normal axis to relax. We will restrict our analysis to the differ- ence in band energies between the valence-band minimum (VBM) and conduction-band maximum (CBM) which are located at the R/Γ points of the Brillouin zone in oxides and at the Γ/Γ points in oxynitrides, respectively. While we confirm that for cubic oxides (i.e. SrTiO3) the band gap narrows for both compressive and tensile strain22 we find the change in band gaps of oxynitrides to depend on the anion order as shown in Fig. 3. For the cis order with N-TM bonds along the in-plane di- 5 rection, the band gap increases for tensile strain whereas for the trans order with N-TM bonds along the out-of- plane direction the band gap decreases for tensile strain. This can be explained with the simple band picture al- ready used by Berger22 for SrTiO3. By considering the simplified molecular orbital diagrams for octahedral MN6 and MO6 complexes shown in Fig. 4(a), we see that the highest occupied states are nonbonding N 2p and O 2p states, whereas the lowest unoccupied states are the π∗ states dominated by the TM t2g orbitals. We can also see that in the nitrogen complex these states are closer to the Fermi energy than in the oxygen complex. As dis- cussed by Berger22 in a cubic oxide at zero strain the nonbonding states forming the VBM as well as the π∗ states forming the CBM are degenerate in energy (see Fig. 4 c). For oxynitrides we expect a combination of the two molecular orbital diagrams shown in Fig. 4(a): the VBM will be dominated by N-derived nonbonding states that are closer to the Fermi energy than O-derived nonbond- ing states and the CBM will also contain more N than O character. Moreover the cubic symmetry is broken due to the difference between TM-O and TM-N bonds38, which further splits the non-bonding states forming the VBM and the π∗ states forming the CBM. In particular the degeneracy observed in oxides is already lifted at zero strain (band structures of the trans ordered oxynitride and the oxide showing the respective orbital contribu- tions are shown in supplementary Figs. S6 and S7). At zero strain the anion order will result in states derived from orbitals oriented along the TM-N bonds to lie higher in energy38, i.e. N 2pz states for the trans order and N 2px/y states for the cis order. As shown in Fig. 4(b) and (d) this results in band gaps between N 2pz and TM dxy derived states for the trans order as well as between N 2px/y and TM dxz/yz for the cis order. The strain-dependent change in energy of the individ- ual bands edges, however, is the same as for oxides and independent of the anion order. Energies of orbitals along the out-of-plane direction remain nearly constant since the interatomic distances along that direction are little affected as strain is applied. Interatomic distances along the in-plane directions, are increased under tensile strain, which lowers the energy of orbitals along the strained di- rections. Conversely compressive strain will increase the orbital energies. As shown in Fig. 4 (b)-(d) this places the point of degenerate VBM and CBM orbitals at com- pressive strain for the trans anion order, while it is at tensile strain for the cis anion order. As a result, we see a continuous increase in the band gap (indicated by ver- tical red arrows in Fig. 4 (b)-(d) for the trans order as we go from tensile to compressive strain, whereas the band gap continuously narrows for the cis order. This model is in qualitative agreement with the DFT data shown in Fig. 3, which implies that the points of orbital de- generacy lie outside the strain range considered in these calculations. compressive strain in SrTiO3, trans LaTiO2N and trans SrTaO2N with ferroelectric distortions. C. Ferroelectric distortions We continue by studying the change in band gap with strain in the ferroelectric phase. For simplicity, we focus on the trans anion order with N-TM bonds and a polar distortion along the out-of-plane (z) direction, which we have shown to be the energetically most stable structure under large compressive strain. The results for the cis order are similar and we will briefly comment on them at the end of this section. In agreement with Berger22 we find a mixing of the TM d and the anion 2p states as a result of the ferroelectric distortion. However, while we reproduce, as shown in Fig. 5 and in agreement with Berger22, a small widening of the band gap with compres- sive strain in SrTiO3, we observe a much larger increase in the band gap for trans-SrTaO2N and a small decrease in the band gap for trans-LaTiO2N. The large difference in band-gap changes between SrTiO3 and trans-SrTaO2N with compressive strain can be explained by the absolute displacement amplitude of the ferroelectric distortion (see Fig. 6) as well as with a stronger dependence of the band gap on the distortion amplitude in oxynitrides (see Fig. 7) as we will discuss in the following. We take the distance between the equatorial oxygen atoms and the transition metal along the polar distor- tion as a measure of the ferroelectric distortion ampli- tude, which is zero in a paraelectric material (see inset in Fig. 6). While the increase of the ferroelectric dis- tortion with strain is approximately the same for both materials, the absolute value is much larger for SrTaO2N than for SrTiO3 (0.27 Å vs. 0.1 Å at 0% strain). We note here that unstrained SrTiO3 is known to be a quan- tum paraelectric, in which small ferroelectric distortions are suppressed by quantum fluctuations39,40. Our GGA calculations for SrTiO3 are known to overestimate the strength of the ferroelectric distortion, thus leading to 6 oxygen plane (as shown in the inset) for SrTiO3, LaTiO2N and SrTaO2N as a function of compressive strain. a seizable displacement already at zero strain37. The difference in the magnitude of the ferroelectric distor- tion between SrTaO2N and SrTiO3 for a certain strain can be explained with the larger ionic radius of nitrogen compared to oxygen: The larger nitrogen atom leads to an increase in the lattice parameter and hence a reduced Coulomb force, resulting in a larger amplitude of the fer- roelectric distortion in oxynitrides. Berger et al. showed that the band gap in SrTiO3 increases exponentially with the amplitude of the fer- roelectric distortion22, which we confirm also for oxyni- trides as shown in Fig. 7. We observe two exponential regimes, linked to changes in the character of the band edges. This nonlinear dependence of the band gap on the distortion amplitude implies however that materials with a larger distortion amplitude at zero strain will exhibit larger band-gap changes even if the power of the expo- nential change is the same. Further, we find that the power of the exponential is much larger for oxynitrides than for oxides (see Fig. 7). This is likely due to the enhanced TM-N covalence that results in an even faster increase of the band gap for oxynitrides than for oxides. We therefore, propose that the larger increase in band gap of SrTaO2N compared to SrTiO3 arises from a com- bination of two factors. Firstly, the enhanced covalence in oxynitrides results in a steeper change of the band gap as a function of the distortion amplitude. Secondly, the exponential dependence of the band gap on the distortion amplitude combined with a larger ferroelectric distortion for SrTaO2N leads to a stronger change in band gap. For larger ferroelectric distortions we do not see an in- crease in the band gap anymore. For SrTaO2N we see at -4% strain a flattening of the change in band gap and for LaTiO2N, which has larger polar distortions than SrTaO2N (see Fig. 6), we even see a decrease in the band gap over the whole strain range. We can explain this ef- fect by a change of the orbitals that form the VBM for the ferroelectric phonon mode amplitude (characterized by the TM-O distance, see Fig. 6) in the polar tetragonal phases of LaTiO2N, SrTaO2N and SrTiO3. large ferroelectric distortions (see Fig. 8): The valence- band edge is dominated by the N pz orbital for small ferroelectric distortions along the c direction. As the fer- roelectric distortion increases with increasing compres- sive strain, the N pz orbital decreases in energy. At a given strain/ferroelectric distortion amplitude, the ener- gies of the N 2px/y and N 2py orbitals will cross over and result in a change from a N 2pz-TM t2g band gap to a N 2px/y-TM t2g band gap. The band gap starts to decrease slightly at this point due to the compressive strain-induced lowering of the atomic distances in the xy- plane leading to a slight increase of the N 2px/y orbital as discussed in the previous section. For SrTaO2N this change in VBM orbitals occurs between 3.5 and 4% com- pressive strain and results in a slower increase in band gap for this region. In LaTiO2N with a large polar dis- tortion already at zero strain, the N 2px/y and N 2pz orbitals are already nearly at the same energy without strain and therefore we observe a slight increase in the band gap for small compressive strain and a decrease of the band gap for large compressive strain. The observed increase in band gap is hence the result of the ferroelectric distortion but a band crossover at large ferroelectric distortions can slow this increase and even lead to a decrease with increasing compressive strain and ferroelectric distortion. The analysis of the cis struc- tures with TM-N bonds in the in-plane directions leads to a similar conclusion with the difference that, here the ferroelectric distortions are along the in-plane directions and therefore increase with tensile strain19. D. Octahedral rotations So far we studied the change in band gaps for the para- electric and ferroelectric phase without considering any rotations of the TM-O/N octahedra. However, oxyni- 7 SrTaO2N and (c) LaTiO2N without rotations. The labels of the points in reciprocal space refer in all three materials to the cubic system (R = (0.5, 0.5, 0.5), Γ = (0, 0, 0), X = (0, 0.5, 0)). trides were shown experimentally to have various rota- tion patterns6 and we therefore turn our focus on the influence of octahedral rotations on the band gap for the paraelectric as well as for the ferroelectric phase. We first start with the simpler trans order with nitrogen in the out-of-plane direction. The trans structure with octahe- dral rotations we use here has a rotation pattern that can be described as a0b0c- in Glazer notation41. In previous work we found this rotation pattern to be the energeti- cally most favorable for compressive strains19. For paraelectric LaTiO2N we observe an increase of the compressive strain for different combinations of distortions. absolute value of the band gap by introducing rotations (see Fig. 9). This is in agreement with Berger22 who found that similar to ferroelectric distortions, octahedral rotations lead to a mixing of TM and O states in oxides resulting in a widening of the band gap. On the other hand, when we compare the absolute value of the band gap of the ferroelectric phase with and without octahe- dral rotations we find that octahedral rotations decrease the band gap. Ferroelectric distortions and octahedral distortions were shown to often compete36,37 and octa- hedral rotation thus reduce the amplitude of a polar dis- tortion. Given that the polar distortion has a larger effect on the band gap than octahedral rotations, the combined effect of both distortions is still an increase, however of smaller magnitude because the amplitude of the polar distortion is reduced by the octahedral rotations. This can be also seen by looking at the relative change of the band gaps for the ferroelectric phase with and without rotations (see Fig. 10). We have seen in the previous section that for small ferroelectric distortions the band gap increases with increasing amplitude of the distortions and starts to decrease when the N pz orbital reaches the energy of the N px and N py orbital. The partial sup- pression of the polar distortion by octahedral rotations shifts this crossover to larger strains as can be seen by the similar evolution of the SrTaO2N band gap between point Y’ and Z’ without rotations compared to Y and Z with rotations. The same is true for LaTiO2N where the downturn in band gap is shifted away from zero strain to larger compressive strains (compare segment W’-X’ without rotations to segment W-X with rotations). For the cis anion order the investigation is slightly problematic since it is often not possible to let the atomic positions relax while maintaining a paraelectric structure with rotations. However, from our results we do not see any reason why the cis structure should behave differ- ently from the trans structure. 8 compressive strain for ferroelectric trans SrTaO2N and LaTiO2N with and without octahedral rotations. IV. CONCLUSIONS We find that for the paraelectric phase the magnitude of the change in band gap with strain is approximately the same for oxides and oxynitrides. However, while for oxides the band gap decreases slightly under both com- pressive and tensile strain, for oxynitrides the sign of the change depends on the anion order and the resulting alignment of the TM-N bonds with the strain axis. Fur- ther, we find that in oxynitrides, ferroelectricity increases the band gap much more than in oxides due to two rea- sons: First, oxynitrides show a larger polar displacement than oxides because the larger atomic radius of nitrogen leads to expanded lattice parameters and hence stronger polar instabilities compared to oxides. Second, there is a stronger dependence of the band gap on the amplitude of the ferroelectric distortions in oxynitrides due to larger energetic overlap of the N 2p and TM d orbitals. Octahe- dral rotations play a smaller role that manifests mostly in their partial suppression of the polar distortion and therefore a reduction of the aforementioned effects. Using this knowledge we can now explain the evolution of the band gap in the thermodynamically stable phases of SrTaO2N and LaTiO2N (see Fig. 2). SrTaO2N due to its 5d orbitals has stronger covalent TM-N bonds com- pared to LaTiO2N (3d orbitals), which will render all thermodynamical stable phases ferroelectric10,12,13. This leads to the observation of a large increase in band gap for all described phases. Contrary, LaTiO2N has in an intermediate strain range phases that are not ferroelec- tric (cisac bc and cisac ac) and which show only a slight change in band gap while the others are ferroelectric and show a large change in band gap. Since ferroelectric distortions occur in SrTaO2N for all strain ranges (including unstrained bulk) and in LaTiO2N19 for both compressive and tensile strain, the resulting increase in band gap could adversely affect the performance of oxynitride photocatalysts. The suppres- sion of ferroelectric distortions, for example by increas- ing temperature, might therefore significantly decrease the band gap and lead to an increased efficiency even for small strains or bulk samples in the case of SrTaO2N and other tantalum based oxynitrides10,13. Also while high compressive strain could enhance the carrier sepa- ration in oxynitrides17–19, it will at the same time lead to an increased band gap with detrimental effects on the photocatalysis. V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This research was funded by the SNF Professorship Grant PP00P2_157615. Calculations were performed on UBELIX (http://www.id.unibe.ch/hpc), the HPC clus- ter at the University of Bern. 1 A. Fuertes, J. Mater. Chem. 22, 3293 (2012). 2 T. Takata, C. Pan, and K. Domen, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater. 16, 033506 (2015). 3 C. Pan, T. Takata, M. Nakabayashi, T. Matsumoto, N. Shi- bata, Y. Ikuhara, and K. Domen, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 4 A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature 238, 37 (1972). 5 A. Kasahara, K. Nukumizu, G. Hitoki, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara, H. Kobayashi, and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. A 106, 6750 (2002). 6 S. J. Clarke, B. P. Guinot, C. W. Michie, M. J. Calmont, and M. J. Rosseinsky, Chem. Mater. 14, 288 (2002). 7 M. Yang, J. Oró-Solé, J. A. Rodgers, A. B. Jorge, A. Fuertes, and J. P. Attfield, Nat. Chem. 3, 47 (2011). 8 J. P. Attfield, Cryst. Growth Des. 13, 4623 (2013). 9 S. Ninova and U. Aschauer, J. Mater. Chem. A (2017). 10 A. Kubo, G. Giorgi, and K. Yamashita, Chem. Mat. 29, 11 R. Kikuchi, T. Nakamura, S. Tamura, Y. Kaneko, and K. Hato, Chem. Mat. 29, 7697 (2017). 12 A. Ziani, C. Le Paven, L. Le Gendre, F. Marlec, R. Benz- erga, F. Tessier, F. Cheviré, M. N. Hedhili, A. T. Garcia- Esparza, S. Melissen, P. Sautet, T. Le Bahers, and K. Takanabe, . 13 A. Kubo, G. Giorgi, and K. Yamashita, J. Phys. Chem. C (2017). 14 R. Aguiar, D. Logvinovich, A. Weidenkaff, A. Rachel, A. Reller, and S. G. Ebbinghaus, Dyes Pigment. 76, 70 15 S. Balaz, S. H. Porter, P. M. Woodward, and L. J. Brillson, Chem. Mater. 25, 3337 (2013). 16 M. Pichler, J. Szlachetko, I. E. Castelli, N. Marzari, M. Dö- beli, A. Wokaun, D. Pergolesi, and T. Lippert, Chem- SusChem 10, 2099 (2017). 17 D. Oka, Y. Hirose, H. Kamisaka, T. Fukumura, K. Sasa, S. Ishii, H. Matsuzaki, Y. Sato, Y. Ikuhara, and 9 T. Hasegawa, Sci. Rep. 4 (2014). 18 D. Oka, Y. Hirose, F. Matsui, H. Kamisaka, T. Oguchi, N. Maejima, H. Nishikawa, T. Muro, K. Hayashi, and T. Hasegawa, ACS Nano (2017). 19 N. Vonrüti and U. Aschauer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 046001 20 I. B. Bersuker, Chem. Rev. 113, 1351 (2013). 21 J. M. Rondinelli, A. S. Eidelson, and N. A. Spaldin, Phys. Rev. B 79, 205119 (2009). 22 R. F. Berger, C. J. Fennie, and J. B. Neaton, Phy. Rev. 23 R. A. Wheeler, M.-H. Whangbo, T. Hughbanks, R. Hoff- mann, J. K. Burdett, and T. A. Albright, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 108, 2222 (1986). 24 P. Giannozzi, S. Baroni, N. Bonini, M. Calandra, R. Car, C. Cavazzoni, D. Ceresoli, G. L. Chiarotti, M. Cococ- cioni, I. Dabo, A. Dal Corso, S. de Gironcoli, S. Fab- ris, G. Fratesi, R. Gebauer, U. Gerstmann, C. Gougous- sis, A. Kokalj, M. Lazzeri, L. Martin-Samos, N. Marzari, F. Mauri, R. Mazzarello, S. Paolini, A. Pasquarello, L. Paulatto, C. Sbraccia, S. Scandolo, G. Sclauzero, A. P. Seitsonen, A. Smogunov, P. Umari, and R. M. Wentzcov- itch, J. Phys. Condens. Matter 21, 395502 (2009). 25 J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3865 (1996). 26 D. Vanderbilt, Phys. Rev. B 41, 7892 (1990). 27 H. J. Monkhorst and J. D. Pack, Phys. Rev. B 13, 5188 28 V. I. Anisimov, J. Zaanen, and O. K. Andersen, Phys. Rev. B 44, 943 (1991). 29 K. Momma and F. Izumi, J. Appl. Crystallogr. 44, 1272 30 L. Clark, J. Oró-Solé, K. S. Knight, A. Fuertes, and J. P. Attfield, Chem. Mat. 25, 5004 (2013). 31 S. H. Porter, Z. Huang, and P. M. Woodward, Cryst. Growth Des. 14, 117 (2013). 32 A. Fuertes, Mater. Horizons 2, 453 (2015). 33 S. Kikkawa, S. Sun, Y. Masubuchi, Y. Nagamine, and T. Shibahara, Chem. Mat. 28, 1312 (2016). 34 D. M. P. Mingos, Essential Trends in Inorganic Chemistry (Oxford University Press Oxford, 1998). 35 V. M. Goldschmidt, Naturwissenschaften 14, 477 (1926). 36 N. A. Benedek and C. J. Fennie, J. Phys. Chem. C 117, 37 U. Aschauer and N. A. Spaldin, J. Phys. Condens. Matter 38 H. Wolff and R. Dronskowski, J. Comput. Chem. 29, 2260 39 K. A. Müller and H. Burkard, Phys. Rev. B 19, 3593 40 W. Zhong and D. Vanderbilt, Phys. Rev. B 53, 5047 41 A. M. Glazer, Acta Cryst. B 28, 3384 (1972).