Coexistence of Diamagnetism and Vanishingly Small Electrical Resistance at Ambient Temperature and Pressure in Nanostructures Dev Kumar Thapa1, Saurav Islam2, Subham Kumar Saha1, Phanibhusan Singha Mahapatra2, Biswajit Bhattacharyya1, T. Phanindra Sai2, Rekha Mahadevu1, Satish Patil1, Arindam Ghosh2,3 and Anshu Pandey1* Affiliations: 1Solid State and Structural Chemistry Unit, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, India 2Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, India 3Center for Nano Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, India *Correspondence to: anshup@iisc.ac.in The great practical utility has motivated extensive efforts to discover ultra-low resistance electrical conductors and superconductors in ambience. Here we report the observation of vanishingly small electrical resistance at the ambient temperature and pressure conditions in films and pellets of a nanostructured material that is composed of silver particles embedded into a gold matrix. Upon cooling below a sample-specific temperature scale ( ) as high as K, the film resistance drops below , being limited by measurement uncertainty. The corresponding resistivity ( .m) is at least four orders of magnitude below that of elemental noble metals, such as gold, silver or copper. Furthermore, the samples become strongly diamagnetic below , with volume susceptibilities as low as . We additionally describe methods to tune to temperatures much higher than room temperature. Suppressing the scattering of electrons is the key to the absence of resistance ( ) in a conductor, which may be achieved via non-trivial topological protection or macroscopic coherence. The latter is observed in a superconductor, which has diversified from simple elements such as mercury , to more recently, materials like cuprates , iron oxypnictides , bismuth , graphene and even H2S . Despite the discovery of a large number of materials that undergo normal to superconducting transitions, it is apparent that conditions of extremely low temperature ( ) and/or extremely high pressure are necessary in each case . Therefore, there remains an unfulfilled need for a material system that undergoes this transition under more conveniently attainable and pressure conditions. Nanostructured materials have been extensively investigated in the context of superconductivity as well as novel many-body phase coherent effects due to spatial confinement . For example, recent studies have shown that nanostructuring gives rise to enhancements in both critical magnetic fields and transition temperatures , over their bulk counterparts. The explanations of transition temperature rise were based on extensions of the BCS formalism as well as more unconventional pictures such as polarization waves and plasmons that may trigger non-phonon based electron pairing mechanisms (viz. plasmonic) . Metallic nanostructures have also been shown to host persistent non-dissipative current , arising from phase coherent circulation of electrons along closed loops, that can impact the magnetic response of these structures in external magnetic fields . Here we investigated the properties of nanostructures (NS) prepared from Au and Ag. Both materials have low electron-phonon coupling and are not known to exhibit a superconducting state independently. During our studies we synthesized NS comprising of silver particles (~ nm) embedded into a gold matrix. Sample preparation was done using standard colloidal techniques. Briefly, the method employed by us involves the preparation of silver particles (exemplified in Figure S1 in the Supplementary Information (SI)) and their subsequent incorporation into a gold matrix. Figure 1a and 1b show a representative transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image and a high resolution TEM (HRTEM) image of the resultant particles. The lattice planes observed in Figure 1b correspond to the plane of Au and Ag. Due to the near identical lattice constants of both constituents, lattice diffraction methods lead to a single diffraction maximum for each material. Figure S2a (SI) additionally shows the ensemble X-ray diffraction pattern of the material. The ensemble level reflections are also in excellent agreement to the standard powder patterns of either Au or Ag. To better understand their internal structure, we studied these NS using electron microscopy. Samples were deposited on a carbon coated copper grid for TEM. Figure 1c shows a high annular aperture dark field (HAADF)-elemental contrast image of these NS. The elemental occurrences of silver and gold along the red line are shown in Figure 1d. Figures S2b-e (SI) further exemplify the elemental occurrences within these NS. Figure S3 (SI) additionally shows the overall compositional analysis of the material using energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDAX). Collectively, these data confirm the successful inclusion of silver nanoparticles into the gold matrix. For electrical characterization, these NS were cast into films with thickness ranging from nm to of order hundred nm. Figure 2a shows a micrograph of a typical NS film cast on Cr/Au ( nm/ nm) leads (on a glass slide). The van der Pauw-like lead geometry allows measurements in multiple orientations of two and four-probe configurations. The details of the film casting procedure are available in Section S1 (Material and Methods) of SI. We ensured appropriate sintering of particles, which is highlighted in Figure S4 for robust electrical connectivity across the film. Following preparation, the films were often encapsulated with various passivating agents for protection against environmental contamination or exposure, especially against oxygen adsorption/oxidation. The details of over devices measured during this work can be found in Table S1 in SI. We observed that in ten of these films, drops below the measurement uncertainty at a characteristic temperature scale. While the unsuccessful results are attributed to oxygen exposure of the samples during preparation and transfer, we found that ensuring the quality of the inert environment, which involves suitable encapsulation of samples prepared in an inert environment with < 20 ppm oxygen, yields more than % successful devices in terms of exhibiting the drop in . Figure 2b shows the -dependence of in two such NS films P20519FEE_20 and P20519FEE_06 (Table S1, SI), close to their respective transitions. The transition temperatures of K (P20519FEE_20) and K (P20319FEE_06) are widely different between the two devices, and found to be sensitive to multiple factors including the oxygen exposure, optimal silver nanocluster density, ageing, and inter-NS-grain connectivity (Section S8 - S9, SI). The width of the resistive transition was found to range over ~ 0.2 – 4 K, depending also on aging, environmental exposure and thermal/electrical stress history (Section S11, SI). Figure 2c illustrates this with the broadening (and shifting of K) of the transition in P20319FEE_06 six days after preparation (See Section S19, SI, for more discussions on the nature of -dependence of ). The low resistance state was observed to be stable from a few hours to several days (Section S12 in SI), and usually stopped working due to environmental contamination or contact failure. Given the nanostructured nature of the film, we confirmed that the absence of voltage drop below the transition is not due to physical detachment of the current path from the part of the film coupled to the voltage leads . We observed two-probe  between all lead pairs, as well as a metal-like linear current ( )-voltage ( ) characteristics both above and below the transition (Section S10, SI), which eliminates the possibility of percolative decoupling of the leads. The four-probe characteristics is linear for (Figure 2d), but the voltage drop becomes immeasurably small at even at the maximum bias current of mA. The measurement uncertainty from the distribution of the voltage drop (inset of Figure 2e), sets the minimum measurable of ~ 2  in our experiment, indicating that the transition at involves nearly six orders of magnitude decrease in , which is similar to resistive transitions in conventional superconductors (Figure 2e). Importantly, the observed in the low resistance state corresponds to upper limit of resistivity .m, which is at least four orders of magnitude lower than that of elemental noble metals (i.e. Au, Ag, or Cu) at similar range. To investigate the impact of an external magnetic field ( ) on the transition, we measured the - dependence of up to Tesla. As shown in Figure 3a for film P11017FE0_02 (Table S1, SI), the transition can be observed even at a field scale of 3 Tesla, although the decreases by about ~ K from its zero field magnitude of K (Figure 3b). In addition, the width of the transition is progressively broadened with increasing , which is a known effect in high- superconducting films , where it indicates increase in thermally activated flux flow . Besides the transition in , we observed appearance of strong diamagnetism when the NS are cooled below the . To demonstrate this with direct magnetic measurements, we prepared bulk pellets (roughly μL volume) of the NS, and measured the -dependence of the susceptibility in a SQUID magnetometer. Figure 3c shows the volume susceptibility of pellet P11117PE0_01 (Table S1, SI), where a sharp decrease in susceptibility at K can be readily observed in the zero field cooled (ZFC) condition. From the mass ( mg) and density ( g/cc) of this sample we find diamagnetic susceptibilities as low as - (SI units) that are about a tenth of what we observe in the case of a mg pellet of lead at K, using the same measurement protocols (Section S20, SI). It is possible that imperfect sintering and the continued persistence of the nanoparticles within the material may have some detrimental effect on the true diamagnetic susceptibility in this class of materials. Regardless, the observed diamagnetism is far stronger than the values associated with most normal materials, as well as with previous reports of nanostructured gold or silver . We further note: (1) First, the transition to the diamagnetic state occurs at lower for higher (Figure 3c), which is consistent with the -dependence of the resistive transition (Figure 3a). We find that decreases by nearly K to as low as K at 5 Tesla (Figure 3d). (2) Second, we also observe a strong repeatable noise in susceptibility for , irrespective of . The origin of this unique ‘noise’ remains uncertain, and further details can be found in Section S21 (SI). To explore if the resistive and magnetic transitions in the NS films are concurrent, we subsequently measured the inductive response simultaneously with in several films with two- coil magnetometry as a function of (inset of Figure 4a, and Section S13, SI). The films were loaded on a ceramic holder equipped with spring-loaded electrical contacts and two coaxial coils (drive and sense), which allowed measurement of the -dependence of and inductive response simultaneously (see Section S6, SI for more detail). In a superconducting transition, the onset of diamagnetism is expected to cause screening current that reduces the mutual inductance threading the drive and sense coils below . Figure 4a shows the -dependence of in Device P20519FEE_21, and that of the mutual inductance between the drive and sense coils. The real (inductive) and the imaginary (dissipative) components of the latter are denoted by and , respectively. We observe that drops to the low resistance state at K which is closely preceded by a decrease in at K (Figure 4b). The two-step decrease in is likely due to spatial inhomogeneity in nanoparticle density or electrode proximity effects (Section S14 – S18, SI). This may also explain the small difference (up to ~ 6 – 7 K, depending of device) in the ’s for the resistive and inductive transitions because close to the center, i.e. close to the coil axis, may also differ slightly from that at the peripheral contact regions (also See Section S17 for device P20319FEE_05). From the structural characterization (Figure S1 and S2 in SI) of the nanoparticles, one estimates the Thouless temperature ( ) K, where and are the electronic diffusivity ( m2/s) and nanoparticle diameter ( nm), respectively . Although the nanoparticles may naturally host circulating persistent current because experimental , its maximum magnitude ( mA) even in the ballistic limit is at least 100 times smaller than that observed in our experiment (Figure 2d and e). Emergence of a many-body coherence that couples the single nanoparticle persistent states, however, cannot be ruled out, which will presumably accompany a macroscopic magnetic transition as well. Nonetheless, the close proximity of the resistive transition and that in inductive response may also suggest a superconducting transition, which is further supported by the change in at the transition signifying dissipative coupling (Figure 4b). Assuming such a case, we estimated the in-plane London penetration depth () to be nm in Device P20319FEE_21 from the mutual inductance below the transition (see Section 7, SI). Notably, a reliable estimate of  is difficult here due to finite size effects arising from the inhomogeneous nature of the superconducting phase, as well as strong thickness variation across the film. Additionally, observation of resistive transition up to as large as 3 Tesla (or more) in Figure 3a suggests coherence length nm, and thereby a type-II superconducting phase with Ginzburg- Landau parameter . We further studied the variation of as a function of the nanoparticle composition. In particular, Section S22 (SI) shows the transition in three samples containing different Au and Ag mole fractions. In each case the stoichiometric ratio has been altered by growing different amounts of Au over the same Au/Ag core NS. Figure 5a shows the variation of (corresponding to 95% reduction from the normal state resistance) with the Au mole fraction in these NS. It is evident that increased Au mole fraction on the NS significantly lowers , although subsequent measurements showed that can also be influenced by aging, and repeated thermal cycles (Section S5, SI). Nonetheless, in view of this observation, we focused our attention towards NS with a low Au mole fraction (Section S1 (Materials and Methods), SI). Figure 5b shows the - dependence of in film P21018FE0_02 (Table S1, SI) with low Au mole fraction ( ). While a measurable transition could not be observed in the window ( K) accessible to us, the characteristics, show no evidence of a voltage drop above the noise level of ~ 100 nV (inset of Figure 5b), even at the highest . The corresponding upper limit of resistivity ( .m) is again significantly lower than the bulk resistivity of highly conductive metals, and exhibits no dependence on . Further, we observed that pellets of such samples are significantly diamagnetic ( ) under ambient conditions (Figure 5c), strongly suggesting the existence of a superconducting state at room temperature. The data shown in cause these to be visibly repelled by hand-held permanent magnets (also see Movie S1, SI). In conclusion, we have carried out detailed electrical and magnetic characterization of nanocomposite films and pellets based on Ag nanoparticles embedded in an Au matrix. At the ambient pressure, films with Ag mole fraction > , and minimal environmental exposure, were found to undergo superconductor-like transition to vanishingly small electrical resistance ( ), corresponding to electrical resistivity .m, below a critical temperature. The transition was observed at as high as K, which could be increased beyond the experimentally accessible window ( K) by tuning the nanoparticle density. SQUID magnetometry with the pellets of the same nanostructures indicates a strongly diamagnetic phase below the critical temperature. The concurrence of the resistive and magnetic transitions was further verified using two-coil magnetometry, which provides compelling evidence for a superconducting phase in our nanostructures that can be stabilized at the ambient conditions. Acknowledgements: AP and AG acknowledge financial support from the Indian Institute of Science. AP further acknowledges use of facilities created under the DST Nanomission grant (SR/NM/NS- 1117/2012). SP acknowledges DST Swarnajayanti Fellowship. We further thank CENSE for access to their facilities. Additionally, we thank Prof. Naga Phani Aetukuri, Prof. T. V. Ramakrishnan and Prof. Vijay Shenoy for helpful discussions. DKT thanks Dr. Triloki Pandit for help with measurements. Author contribution: AP conceived the idea and designed the project. AP, DKT developed initial synthetic protocols, and carried out early measurements with help from SKS. SKS, BB, RM and DKT devised further protocols and prepared samples. SP contributed to device stabilization. AG, SI, PBS and TPS carried out electrical transport and inductive response measurements. AP and AG co-wrote the paper.