MURALI et al.: SELF-POWERED, HIGHLY SENSITIVE, HIGH SPEED PHOTODETECTION USING ITO/WSE2/SNSE2 VERTICAL HETEROJUNCTION 1 Self-Powered, Highly Sensitive, High Speed Photodetection Using ITO/WSe2/SnSe2 Vertical Heterojunction Krishna Murali and Kausik Majumdar Abstract— Two dimensional transition metal di- chalcogenides (TMDCs) are promising candidates for ultra-low intensity photodetection. However, the performance of these photodetectors is usually limited by ambience induced rapid performance degradation and long lived charge trapping induced slow response with a large persistent photocurrent when the light source is switched off. Here we demonstrate an indium tin oxide (ITO)/WSe2/SnSe2 based vertical double heterojunction photoconductive device where the photo-excited hole is confined in the double barrier quantum well, whereas the photo-excited electron can be transferred to either the ITO or the SnSe2 layer in a controlled manner. The intrinsically short transit time of the photoelectrons in the vertical double heterojunction helps us to achieve high responsivity in excess of 1100 A/W and fast transient response time on the order of 10 μs. A large built-in field in the WSe2 sandwich layer results in photodetection at zero external bias allowing a self-powered operation mode. The encapsulation from top and bottom protects the photo- active WSe2 layer from ambience induced detrimental effects and substrate induced trapping effects helping us to achieve repeatable characteristics over many cycles. Index Terms— Two dimensional layered Materials, Pho- todetector, Photoconductive Gain, Response time, WSe2, SnSe2. I. INTRODUCTION W EAK intensity light detection in the visible and in- frared range is of utmost technological importance in multiple fields encompassing remote sensing, public safety, medical instrumentation, space, military and industry applica- tions. Transition metal di-chalcogenides (TMDCs) are layered two-dimensional materials which exhibit an extraordinary light absorbtion in spite of being nanometer thick. These materials show excellent gate tunability, moderate in-plane carrier mobility, and can be deposited in an inexpensive way (for example, chemical vapour deposition) on silicon based substrates. Further, unlike bulk semiconductors, different layered materials can be seamlessly integrated in a vertical This work was supported in part by a grant under Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO), by the grants under Ramanujan Fellow- ship, Early Career Award, and Nano Mission from the Department of Science and Technology (DST), and by a grant from MHRD, MeitY and DST Nano Mission through NNetRA. K. Murali and K. Majumdar are with the Department of Electrical Communication Engineering, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, India (e-mail: kausikm@iisc.ac.in). heterojunction stack without having to worry about the lat- tice mismatch between two materials –. Consequently, TMDCs (such as MoS2, MoSe2, WS2 and WSe2) have been extensively explored in the recent past as promising candidates to achieve low cost, sensitive photodetectors –. Although photodetection with large responsivity has been demonstrated using TMDCs, there are two important bot- tlenecks that need to be overcome for these photodetection schemes to become technologically viable. First, the response time of most of the high gain photodetectors is very large owing to long lived traps –. These traps originate both from the active medium as well as the substrate supporting the active material . When one type of photogenerated carriers (either electron or hole) is captured by the traps in the active material, to maintain charge neutrality of the system, the other type of carrier experiences multiple reinjection until the trapped carrier is eliminated from the active medium either by contact or by recombination. In addition, the trapped carriers in the TMDC film or in the substrate can also lead to a photo-gating effect, and a photocurrent keeps flowing until the trapped carrier is released , . Both these effects result in a large gain, however, associated with a slow transient response of the photocurrent in response to light. The second problem arises from the ultra-thin nature of the TMDC films, providing a large surface to volume ratio. This results in exposure of the active medium to surround- ings, leading to ambience (including moisture effect) induced detrimental effects and hence poorly repeatable characteristics. In order to overcome these bottlenecks, here we demon- strate a vertical heterojunction of WSe2/SnSe2 capped with indium tin oxide (ITO) transparent electrode. The transparent ITO layer allows light to pass through it to generate photo- excited carriers in the buried WSe2 layer, while protecting the heterojunction from changing ambient conditions, allowing repeatable characteristics over many cycles. On the other hand, SnSe2 eliminates the substrate induced trapping effects by isolating the WSe2 layer from the SiO2/Si substrate. Both SnSe2 , and ITO being highly conducting material, act as closely spaced photocarrier collection medium. Such small separation of collection medium, as defined by the thickness of WSe2, is difficult to achieve in lithography limited planar structures, and reduces the transit time of the photogenerated carriers leading to fast response and high gain simultaneously. In addition, asymmetric band offsets at the SnSe2/WSe2 and ITO/WSe2 interfaces induce a strong built-in field, which en- arXiv:1807.02104v2 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 28 Aug 2018 2 ARXIV, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2018 ables high responsivity at zero external bias. We report a large zero-bias responsivity of 16.45 A/W, which increases to 1139 A/W at 0.4 V. The devices exhibit repeatable performance over many cycles with negligible persistent photocurrent, sub-10 μs rise time, and 10-30 μs fall time. The rest of the paper is organized as follows: We discuss the detailed features of the vertical design in section II. Followed by this, we explain the photoelectron transfer mechanism in the heterojunction using photoluminescence and Raman experiments in section III. The fabrication and electrical characterization details of the devices are explained in section IV and the photodetection performance is discussed in section V. We conclude the paper in section VI. II. DEVICE DESIGN: WHY VERTICAL HETEROJUNCTION? Fig. 1(a) shows a schematic diagram of the device where a vertical heterojunction is created between SnSe2 and WSe2, with a transparent conducting layer ITO on top. The wave- length dependent transmittance of ITO layer is shown in Fig. 1(b). Highly conducting ITO and SnSe2 films act as carrier (a) (b) 80 85 90 95 100 Transmittance (%) Wavelength (mm) ITO (c) (d) -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 -200 0 200 Current (μA/μm) Voltage (V) SnSe2 L=1.65μm LT SiO2 WSe2 Si SnSe2 WSe2 ITO SiO2 Si Fig. 1. (a) Schematic diagram of the proposed vertical device. (b) Wavelength dependent transmittance of ITO film. (c) Current-voltage characteristics of SnSe2 showing high conductivity. (d) Left panel: photo-excited carrier separation and trapping in SiO2 substrate in a planar structure. The dashed lines represent trap states in SiO2. Current crowding at the contact interface is represented by the red region. LT is the transfer length of the contact interface. Right panel: The vertical structure with negligible current crowding and no SiO2 induced trapping effect. collection layers. The current-voltage characteristics of a 30 nm thick SnSe2 film is shown in Fig. 1(c). The resistivity of the ITO film measured is 2.7 × 10−5 Ωm. This vertical structure provides certain unique advantages as described below. The situations are schematically illustrated in the left and right panels of Fig. 1(d). 1) Short transit time: The WSe2 active layer is sandwiched by closely separated conducting layers, where the sepa- ration is defined by the thickness of WSe2. Such a small separation is difficult to achieve using lithography in a planar structure, and allows to achieve very short transit time of electrons (τtr). On the other hand, the photo- excited holes are confined in the WSe2 layer either due to valence band confinement in the quantum well produced by the double heterojunction or due to the band-tail state induced traps inside the bandgap. The photoconductive gain, defined as G = τ τtr , where τ is the time a hole takes on an average to either recombine with an electron or flee from the quantum well. A reduced τtr helps to achieve a high gain while maintaining a fast response time. 2) Repeatable characteristics: The ITO layer on top com- pletely seals the active WSe2 layer from ambience which helps to achieve stable characteristics over many cycles without any performance deterioration. On the other hand, SnSe2 screens all the defect states of SiO2 substrate, thus eliminating the slow response tail and any persistent photocurrent. 3) Large built-in field: The asymmetric band offsets at the two interfaces of the ITO/WSe2/SnSe2 heterojunction creates a large built-in potential across WSe2. This, coupled with the small thickness of WSe2 results in a large built-in field, supporting efficient transport of photo-excited electrons. This, on one hand, allows high responsivity at zero external bias operation, and on the other hand provides a large open circuit voltage. 4) Improved carrier collection: It is important to suppress the series resistance to enhance the performance of the photodetector. The planar structure, as schematically illustrated in the left panel of Fig. 1(d), allows carrier collection only in the effective contact area of w × LT where w is the contact width and LT is the transfer length . This results in an additional series resistance degrading performance. However, in the current vertical structure, such current crowding induced resistance is suppressed as the bending of current happens at the highly conducting SnSe2 layer. This allows carrier col- lection over the entire photodetector area . III. CHARGE TRANSFER IN ITO/WSE2/SNSE2 HETEROJUNCTION The band offsets of WSe2 and SnSe2 are illustrated in Fig. 2(a) , , –. Such a large band offset, coupled with large n-type doping of SnSe2 gives rise to the WSe2/SnSe2 heterojunction band diagram in equilibrium as schematically shown in Fig. 2(b). With an ITO layer on top, the band diagram is shown in Fig. 2(c). The steep conduction band offsets at the WSe2/SnSe2 and WSe2/ITO interfaces facilitate electron transfer from WSe2 to both SnSe2 and ITO, respectively, whereas the holes remain confined in the WSe2 quantum well. In addition, the built-in electric field inside the WSe2 layer plays an important role in the electron transfer mechanism. To get insights, we perform systematic photolu- minescence (PL) experiments. First we fabricate WSe2/SnSe2 heterojunctions and record energy resolved PL emission from WSe2, both on isolated WSe2 as well as on the junction area. Next, a blanket ITO layer is coated on the sample using RF sputtering, and the PL is remeasured to see the effect of ITO. The amount of charge transfer is qualitatively inferred from the degree of quenching of the photoluminescence peaks with respect to the isolated WSe2 flake. Fig. 2(d) depicts the acquired PL spectra of > 30 nm thick WSe2 flake for the four different stacking variations using 532 nm laser. The peak around 1.6 eV, indicated by the red MURALI et al.: SELF-POWERED, HIGHLY SENSITIVE, HIGH SPEED PHOTODETECTION USING ITO/WSE2/SNSE2 VERTICAL HETEROJUNCTION 3 0 400 800 1200 WSe2 WSe2/SnSe2 ITO/WSe2 ITO/WSe2/SnSe2 1.3 1.4 1.5 0 1000 2000 3000 WSe2 WSe2/SnSe2 ITO/WSe2 ITO/WSe2/SnSe2 0 200 400 600 WSe2 WSe2/SnSe2 ITO/WSe2 ITO/WSe2/SnSe2 (a) ΔECB = 1.2 ΔEVB = 1 E (eV) ITO WSe2 SnSe2 Emission Energy (eV) (b) Emission Energy (eV) (d) (f) (c) PL Intensity (counts) Emission Energy (eV) (e) WSe2 SnSe2 WSe2 SnSe2 Fig. 2. (a) Band offset between multi-layer WSe2 and SnSe2. (b) Band diagram of WSe2/SnSe2 heterojunction with no contact on top. Degenerate doping forces negligible band bending in SnSe2. (c) Band diagram of ITO/WSe2/SnSe2 double heterojunction showing built-in electric field in WSe2, and confinement of holes in the valence band quantum well. (d)-(e) Photoluminescence spectra of the different portions of the heterojunction using 532 nm excitation with (d) > 30 nm WSe2 and (e) ≈ 10 nm WSe2. Red and black arrows indicate direct and indirect peaks, respectively. (f) Photoluminescence spectra of the different portions of the heterojunction using 785 nm excitation with ≈ 10 nm WSe2. The sharp peaks close to the excitation energy indicate Raman peaks from Si, SnSe2 and WSe2. arrow, corresponds to the direct bandgap at the K point of the Brillouin zone. The peak around 1.37 eV, shown by the black arrow, is the indirect gap. We observe that, although there is a small suppression of direct peak at the junction, the indirect peak of WSe2 remains strong in both isolated WSe2 and WSe2/SnSe2 junction. This suggests less degree of charge transfer between the two layers and is due to a larger fraction of the thick WSe2 flake residing away from the junction (top region) contribute to the PL, where charge transfer to SnSe2 is not efficient, as expected from the band diagram in Fig. 2(b). However, when ITO is deposited on top, both cases show strong quenching of PL due to an almost complete transfer of electrons from WSe2 to ITO, as favoured by the built-in field in WSe2 and the band offset at the ITO/WSe2 interface. However, the situation changes when we use ≈ 10 nm thick flake. Here, almost the entire WSe2 region is close to the SnSe2 layer, and hence the hot photoelectrons generated by 532 nm (2.33 eV) photons experience a high probability of being transferred to SnSe2, quenching the PL, as illustrated in Fig. 2(e). As expected, with ITO on top, PL intensity is again completely quenched due to efficient electron transfer to ITO. Fig. 2(f) explains the results when the experiment is per- formed on the ≈ 10 nm thick WSe2 flake using 785 nm laser excitation. Here we observe only the indirect peak in isolated WSe2, as excitation is almost resonant with the direct peak energy. Note that, unlike Fig. 2(e), we do not observe any quenching of the indirect peak in the WSe2/SnSe2 junction. This is because the excitation energy being much less (1.58 eV), we do not generate high energy photoelectrons. The photo-carriers, with energy close to the K point band edge thus are not so easily transferred to SnSe2. Rather, these carriers are preferably transferred to the lower energy indirect valley, hence a strong PL is maintained in the junction. As earlier, with ITO on top, the electrons are easily transferred to ITO and the PL is completely quenched. Note that the strong Raman peaks of WSe2 observed in the ITO/WSe2 and ITO/WSe2/SnSe2 structures in Fig. 2(f) suggest that the quality of the WSe2 remains intact after ITO deposition on top. Thus, we are able to tune the degree and direction of the photoelectron transfer from the WSe2 layer by controlling the excitation wavelength and the thickness of the WSe2 flake. Such controlled and efficient carrier transfer from the WSe2 even without the application of any external bias forms the basis of the operation principle of the proposed photodetector, as explained in the next sections. IV. DEVICE FABRICATION AND CHARACTERIZATION The photoconductive vertical detector is fabricated on Si substrate covered with 300 nm SiO2. The SnSe2 multi-layer flake is first mechanically exfoliated on the substrate. After identifying the flake of interest, a few-layer thick WSe2 flake is precisely transferred on top of the SnSe2 flake using PDMS film with the help of a micromanipulator under an optical microscope. For better adhesion, we heat this stack at 180◦ C for 3 minutes in hotplate. A transparent metal electrode (ITO) is defined on top of the heterojunction using electron beam lithography, followed by deposition of 30 nm ITO using RF sputtering and subsequent lift off. Finally, the electrodes for contacts are defined by a second electron beam lithography, followed by the deposition of Ni (10 nm)/Au (50 nm) electrodes by DC sputtering. After this, the substrate is pasted on a PCB. External wires are taken for photocurrent measurement by wire bonding these devices using Al wire from the Ni/Au contacts. Fig. 3(a) shows the optical image of a representative device (D1) after completion of fabrication. The 4 ARXIV, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2018 100 300 500 0 400 800 1200 1600 WSe2 SnSe2 Junction 0 5 10 15 20 25 Thickness (nm) (a) (b) 0 200 400 600 800 WSe2 ITO/WSe2/SnSe2 (c) (d) 23.7 nm Distance (μm) 5 μm PL Intensity (counts) Emission Energy (eV) EgSnSe2 A1g SnSe2 A1g WSe2 2LA(M)WSe2 Si Raman Intensity (counts) Raman Shift (cm-1) Fig. 3. (a) Optical image of the fabricated device (D1). Scale bar is 5 μm. (b) Thickness of the WSe2 film in device D1 obtained from AFM scanned along the white dashed line in (a). (c) Raman shift of WSe2 (purple) and SnSe2 (green) in individual isolated portions. The Raman signal from the ITO/WSe2/SnSe2 heterojunction is shown in orange, showing strong suppression of WSe2 Raman peaks. (d) PL spectra from isolated WSe2 and from the junction portion using 532 nm laser, showing strong suppression of PL intensity in the junction. thickness of the WSe2 film is found to be 23.7 nm with Atomic Force Microscopy [Fig. 3(b)]. Raman spectra of the isolated WSe2, SnSe2 and ITO/WSe2/SnSe2 junction are presented in Fig. 3(c) using the excitation of 532 nm laser. The Raman peaks corresponding to the Eg and A1g vibrational modes of SnSe2 are observed in the isolated part of the SnSe2 flake at 110 and 185 cm−1, respectively. On the other hand, Raman peaks of isolated WSe2 flake corresponding to A1g and 2LA (M) modes are observed at 251 and 258 cm−1, respectively. However, we observe that these modes are heavily suppressed in the junction area, while the SnSe2 Raman peaks remain strong. The photo-excited high energy hot carriers, instead of scattering with the zone center phonon, are transferred quickly to the SnSe2 layer due to built-in field, leading to a suppression of the Raman scattered light in the junction. Interestingly, this is in contrast with the strong Raman signal from the junction when 785 nm excitation is used in Fig. 2(f). This is possibly due to the fact that in the latter case, 785 nm laser coherently excites the K and K′ excitons, which do not experience the built-in field due to charge neutrality, and hence not so easily transferred to SnSe2. Rather these excitons scatter with WSe2 phonons, giving rise to strong Raman signal. As expected from the discussion in the previous section, we observe strong quenching of WSe2 PL intensity in the junction area of the device, indicating efficient photo-excited electron transfer [Fig. All photoresponse measurements are carried out using con- tinuous wave laser excitation with wavelength of 532 nm and 785 nm. Electrical transport measurements are conducted on several devices with varying thickness of WSe2 flakes. In this paper, all the measurements are taken in ambient air condition and applying bias on the SnSe2 contact while keeping ITO side grounded. Fig. 4(a) represents the current-voltage (I-V) characteristics of the device D1 under dark condition, as well (d) -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 5 5 5 0 3x10 5 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 5 5 5 0 3x10 5 (a) (c) (b) D1 (532 nm) J (A/m2) D1 (785 nm) Voltage (V) Voltage (V) Voc Voc ITO WSe2 SnSe2 Pop Pop -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0 1x10 4 2x10 4 3x10 4 B ITO WSe2 SnSe2 Fig. 4. (a), (c) Current density - Voltage characteristics of device D1 (area = 8.36 μm2) under illumination of (a) 532 nm and (c) 785 nm wavelength lasers with increasing optical power density. The Power density varies from 1.89 × 104 to 1.89 × 108 W/m2 for 532 nm and from 2.67 to 5.35×106 W/m2 for 785 nm. Large zero bias photocurrent (Isc) and open circuit voltage (Voc) are observed in both cases. Inset of (a): Dark current density with applied bias. (b), (d) Schematic energy band diagram for ITO/WSe2/SnSe2 heterojunction for D1 at zero bias, with electron (blue spheres) transfer mechanism for (b) 532 nm and (d) 785 nm illumination. The holes (orange spheres) are confined in WSe2. 532 nm photons create higher energy photo-excited carriers than 785 nm. as under illumination by 532 nm laser with varying light intensity. The corresponding band diagram at zero external bias is shown in Fig. 4(b). The external bias dependence of the dark current density is shown separately in the inset of Fig. 4(a). We observe from the band diagram that both under positive and negative bias conditions, the electrons need to overcome certain thermal barrier. For reverse bias (negative bias on SnSe2 side), the thermal barrier for the electrons is particularly high from SnSe2 to WSe2. The lack of large rectification ratio (only ≈ 5) in the device indicates that trap assisted tunneling through the WSe2 film plays an important role in determining the dark current of the device. The device shows strong photoresponse, as indicated in Fig. 4(a). One of the striking features of the photoresponse characteristics is the large photocurrent at zero external bias, leading to an open circuit voltage Voc = 0.14 V. This is in agreement with a large built-in field existing in WSe2 owing to the asymmetric band offsets at the ITO/WSe2 and WSe2/SnSe2 interfaces, as illustrated in the band diagram shown in Fig. 4(b). The direction of the zero bias short circuit current (Isc) suggests that the photogenerated electrons in WSe2 are transferred to the ITO layer. The photo-excited holes are confined in the WSe2 quantum well by the large valence band barriers offered by both the ITO and SnSe2 layers. In addition, the holes can also get trapped by the shallow band-tail states in the bandgap of WSe2. These effects result in a successive reinjection of the electrons until the photogenerated hole either tunnels out of the WSe2 quantum well or recombines with electrons, providing a large internal gain. MURALI et al.: SELF-POWERED, HIGHLY SENSITIVE, HIGH SPEED PHOTODETECTION USING ITO/WSE2/SNSE2 VERTICAL HETEROJUNCTION 5 Note that the photogenerated electrons in WSe2 experiences a sharp band offset on both ITO and SnSe2 sides [Fig. 4(b)]. Hence, by tuning the field inside WSe2 by an external bias around Voc, the net electron collection medium can be changed from ITO to SnSe2. The device thus exhibits a strong photoresponse to both polarities of external bias. -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 6 5 0 5x10 5 1x10 6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 6 5 0 5x10 5 1x10 6 D2 (532 nm) D2 (785 nm) Voltage (V) 5 μm Voltage (V) J (A/m2) (a) (c) (b) (d) Pop Pop ITO WSe2 SnSe2 ITO WSe2 SnSe2 Fig. 5. (a), (c) Current density - Voltage characteristics of device D2 (area = 10.9 μm2) under illumination of (a) 532 nm and (c) 785 nm wavelength lasers with increasing optical power density. The Power density varies from 1.89 × 104 to 1.89 × 108 W/m2 for 532 nm and from 26.7 to 5.35 × 106 W/m2 for 785 nm. The zero bias photocurrent reverses sign with changing photon wavelength. (b), (d) Schematic energy band diagram for ITO/WSe2/SnSe2 heterojunction for D2 at zero bias, with electron (blue spheres) transfer mechanism for (b) 532 nm and (d) 785 nm illumination. Note that the device exhibits a stronger photoresponse with near-infrared 785 nm excitation [Fig. 4(c)-(d)]. In addition, the zero-bias response is also enhanced with an increased Voc of 0.25 V. As explained earlier, photons with wavelength of 532 nm (Eph = 2.33 eV) being of much higher energy than 785 nm (Eph = 1.58 eV) generates higher energy hot elec- trons. The hot electrons generated close to the WSe2/SnSe2 interface thus have a high probability of falling into SnSe2 for 532 nm excitation. This results in a bidirectional segregation of the photoelectrons, suppressing the net photocurrent, as schematically explained in Fig. 4(b). On the other hand, 785 nm excitation generates electron-hole pair closer to the band edges [Fig. 4(d)], and hence under zero external bias, a larger fraction of the photogenerated electrons are pulled towards the ITO layer, improving the zero bias photocurrent. Note that such a strong photocurrent at zero external bias helps us to achieve completely self-powered photodetector - an important requirement for future sensing devices that target energy saving and weight reduction. The large Voc also opens up the possibility for using the device in solar energy harvesting applications. To further support the above mentioned mechanisms, we fabricate another set of devices (D2), which are identical to D1, however, but with a thinner WSe2 (≈ 10 nm), as schemat- ically shown in the inset of Fig. 5(a). As expected, the dark current is enhanced in D2, with negligible rectification, owing to enhanced tunneling current. An interesting feature observed in the photocurrent characteristics [5(a)-(d)] is the change in the sign of Isc under zero external bias when the excitation wavelength is changed from 785 nm to 532 nm. Contrary to D1, due to thin WSe2, the photogenerated electrons in WSe2 are created in the close vicinity of WSe2/SnSe2 interface. As discussed in the previous section, compared to 785 nm, for 532 nm excitation, a large fraction of the high energy hot electrons are easily transferred to SnSe2. In addition, a fraction of the photons completely penetrate through WSe2 and get absorbed in SnSe2 as well . These result in a net flow of electrons towards SnSe2 for 532 nm under zero bias, leading to positive photocurrent under zero external bias. However, the net flow remains towards ITO for the 785 nm laser due to excitation close to the band edge resulting in negative Isc. V. PHOTODETECTION PERFORMANCE We now discuss the performance of the devices D1 and D2 as near infrared detectors at 785 nm wavelength. Fig. 6(a)- (b) depict the measured Responsivity (R) of the devices as a function of input optical power density under both positive and negative external bias (Vext). Here responsivity is defined as R = Iph Pop = I−Idark Pop where I and Iph are the total current under illumination and the photocurrent, respectively. Idark is the device dark current, and Pop is the optical power incident on the device. For D1, negative Vext produces larger R, partic- ularly at higher optical power density. However, the difference is negligible for D2. We have obtained a responsivity of 1139 A/W for D1 at Pop = 2.67 W/m2 with 0.4 V external bias. For D2, the attained responsivity number reads 407 A/W at Pop = 26.7 W/m2 and |Vext| = 0.4 V. These numbers are very impressive compared with commercially available photodetectors and indicate a large internal photoconductive gain. By noting that R = Gη λ(nm) (1) where G and η are the gain and the quantum efficiency, respectively, we estimate G × η in excess of 1000 for these devices. The results in Fig. 6(a)-(b) clearly indicate that the devices are more sensitive at lower incident power density. The strong suppression of responsivity with increasing optical power density is a feature commonly observed in TMDC based photodetectors . We are able to fit the photocurrent data using a power law (Iph ∝ P γ op), where γ is in the range of 0.1-0.2 for different devices. This value is smaller than typical numbers reported for planar TMDC photodetectors , . As mentioned earlier, the gain mechanism in the device is due to (i) confinement of the photo-generated holes the quantum well produced by the heterojunction and (ii) trapping of the photo-generated holes in the band-tail states inside the bandgap of WSe2. At higher intensity of excitation, the trap filling effect gets saturated. In addition, the number density of the confined holes in the valence band of WSe2 quantum well increases leading to enhanced recombination with the photo-generated electrons, further suppressing the gain. 6 ARXIV, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2018 10 0 10 2 10 4 10 6 10 -3 10 -1 10 1 10 3 0.4 V -0.4 V Responsivity (A/W) (a) (b) (c) D1 10 1 10 3 10 5 10 7 10 -3 10 -1 10 1 10 3 0.4 V -0.4 V D2 10 0 10 2 10 4 10 6 10 -3 10 -2 10 -1 10 0 10 1 D1 @ 0 V D2 @ 0 V Power Density (W/m2) Power Density (W/m2) Power Density (W/m2) Responsivity (A/W) (d) 10 0 10 2 10 4 10 6 10 9 10 10 10 11 10 12 10 13 D1 @ 0 V D2 @ 0 V Specific Detectivity (Jones) Power Density (W/m2) Responsivity (A/W) λ=785 nm Fig. 6. (a),(b) Responsivity of the devices (a) D1 and (b) D2 under illumination of 785 nm wavelength with varying power density under ±0.4 V external bias. (c) Responsivity of D1 and D2 under zero external bias as a function of incident optical power density at 785 nm. (d) Power density dependent zero bias specific detectivity (D∗) of devices D1 and D2 at λ = 785 nm. The area used to calculate the power density is 7.2 μm2. Fig. 6(c) shows responsivity numbers for the two types of devices at Vext = 0. In particular, D1 achieves a responsivity of 16.45 A/W at the lowest power density used. The corre- sponding specific detectivity (D∗) at zero bias is shown in Fig. 6(d). D∗ is a measure of the ability to sense weak signal. Considering only shot noise from the dark current as the predominant source of noise in the device, specific detectivity for the vertical device can be expressed as: D∗ = R √2qJdark (2) where q is the absolute value of electron charge and Jdark is the dark current density. Under Vext = 0, owing to suppression of dark current, we achieve a large specific detectivity (1013 Jones for D1 and 4.5 × 1011 Jones for D2). We next discuss the transient photoresponse of the devices. A schematic diagram of the experimental setup is illustrated in Fig. 7(a). A mechanical chopper with 10 KHz maximum frequency is used to create optical pulses of 50% duty cycle from the continuous wave lasers. A dc voltage source is used to drive the device. The output is measured in a digital storage oscilloscope terminated with 10 MΩ impedance. As discussed earlier, planar 2D photodetectors exhibit residual photocurrent when the light source is turned off, due to long lived traps from the interface of SiO2 substrate. In the present vertical structure, such persistent photocurrent is completely avoided, as shown in Fig. 7(b) in a relatively longer time scale of seconds. In addition, we also observe that the usually observed slow build-up of photocurrent, again due to slow trapping effect, is eliminated. Fig. 7(c) and (d) depict the transient response of the detectors D1 and D2, respectively, when the chopper is kept at the maximum frequency of 10 KHz. The measured 10%-to-90% rise time (τr) and 90%-to-10% fall time (τf), for D1 are 8 μs and 32 μs, respectively. The numbers for D2 are 10 μs and 13 μs, respectively. The results were repeatable over many cycles without any observable ambience induced deterioration. Finally, we benchmark the performance of the devices presented with other 2-D material based photodetectors from literature in a responsivity versus fall time chart. The fall time τf after the light source is turned off provides an estimate about the duration the photogenerated hole is trapped in the WSe2 quantum well. Thus the gain can be estimated as G = τf τtr , which coupled with (1) gives rise to the following relation: R = ηλ(nm) 1243 × τtr τf (3) The parallel lines in Fig. 8 are plotted from (3) for λ = 785 nm with different τtr η . We populate different points in R versus τf chart from literature –, –, – . As expected, the devices with large R also tend to respond slowly. A reduced transit time and improved quantum efficiency can help to improve the performance of the device in the benchmarking chart. The devices reported in this work are represented by open (Vext = 0 V) and solid (|Vext| = 0.4 V) stars. Clearly, these devices exhibit an improved responsivity at a given fall time compared with reports in existing literature. VI. CONCLUSION In conclusion, using systematic optical and electrical probes, we demonstrate efficient control of the charge transfer effi- ciency and its direction in a skewed and highly staggered ITO/WSe2/SnSe2 double heterojunction. This leads to achieve- ment of high photoconductive gain and high speed photodetec- tion - a unique feature achieved by reduction of transit time of photo-excited electrons using the vertical heterojunction, while confining the photo-excited holes in the WSe2 quantum well. In addition, the built-in electric field in the proposed detector allows photodetection at zero external bias - providing a self- powering feature to the device. The device also exhibits a large open circuit voltage which is promising for solar energy harvesting applications. The device will open a pathway for a novel type of inexpensive, high performance photodetecting devices using vertical heterostructures based on two dimen- sional materials.