arXiv:1807.00777v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 2 Jul 2018 Comment on ”Evidence for absence of metallic surface states in BiO2-terminated BaBiO3 thin films” D. Rubia,b, A. M. Lloisa,b, V. L. Vildosolaa,b aDepartamento de Materia Condensada , GIyA, CNEA and Instituto de Nanociencia y Tecnolog ́ıa, 1650 San Mart ́ın, Buenos Aires, Argentina bConsejo Nacional de Investigaciones Cient ́ıficas y T ́ecnicas (CONICET), Argentina Abstract In a recent work by Ji Seop Oh et al., BaBiO3(001) thin films were grown on SrTiO3 by Pulsed Laser Deposition. It was argued that the films are BiO2- terminated from the modelling of angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy experiments. The authors claim, in opposition to previous theoretical predic- tions, that there are no metallic surface states on their films. In this short comment we question that the authors have enough evidence to make such a claim, as we consider that the large mismatch between SrTiO3 and BaBiO3 and the lack of control of their fabrication process with reflection high energy electron diffraction could unlikely give high quality films with a single BiO2- termination, which is one of the requisites for the stabilization of these surface metallic states. Keywords: BaBiO3, 2DEG Ji Seop Oh et al. have recently studied the electronic structure of (001) oriented epitaxial BaBiO3 (BBO) thin films grown on SrTiO3 (STO) single crystals . The films were grown by means of the Pulsed Laser Deposition (PLD) technique. They claim, based on the modelling of in-situ angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES), that their films are BiO2-terminated. A similar claim was previously done by Gozar et al. . According to the the- oretical work by Vildosola et al. , a (001) BiO2-termination should trigger the appearance of a metallic 2D electron gas (2DEG) at the surface. In Vil- dosola’s et al. work, ab-initio calculations show that the two outermost layers of the BiO2-terminated surface turn cubic-like and metallic, while the inner ones remain in the insulating monoclinic state that the system presents in its bulk form. On the other hand, the surface metallization is not predicted for the BaO-termination. Ji Seop Oh et al. find, instead, a surface band structure inconsistent with a metallic state, and claim that the aforementioned theoretical work is inaccurate . We consider that the claim of Ji Seop Oh et al. (and previously by Gozar et al. ) about the single BiO2 termination of their films can be seriously put into question due to several reasons that we describe below. Preprint submitted to CAP July 3, 2018 First, the lattice mismatch between BBO and STO (∼12%) is unusually large to allow high quality, single terminated, epitaxial films of BBO. Indeed, it has been shown that the structure of the BBO films on STO is similar to the bulk material , indicating the presence of a strong strain relaxation mecha- nism during the first growth states. This mechanism has been recently unveiled by Zapf et al. , who have shown by high resolution transmission electron mi- croscopy that strain relaxation occurs at the BBO/STO interface through the formation of an ultrathin layer of a different phase that accommodates the large misfit between both structures, allowing the BBO film formed on top of that layer to be unstrained. Importantly, the BBO films develop crystallographic domains, with typical sizes of 10-40nm, and antiphase boundaries. In these ex- tended defects, a lattice shift of half unit cell is found between adjacent grains in the direction perpendicular to the substrate. This indicates that a single atomic termination for BBO films grown on STO is hardly achievable. To cir- cumvent this problem, substrates with lower mismatch such as LaLuO3 should be used, or buffers with intermediate cell parameters should be sandwiched between STO and BBO, in order to allow an efficient strain accommodation, avoiding the formation of extended defects. The latter strategy was followed in . Second, the standard procedure to obtain a desired atomic termination for an ABO3 perovskite grown by PLD on TiO2-terminated STO is by using reflection high energy electron diffraction (RHEED) assisted deposition. In particular, the growth conditions should be optimized in order to get a layer-by-layer growth mechanism, and the RHEED intensity oscillations allows to control the film termination (either BO2 or AO). In their paper, Ji Seop Oh et al. do not report a growth process assisted by RHEED, so that we consider that it is highly unlikely to obtain a BBO single termination without this high control of the deposition process. In addition, they did not complement their studies with a BaO-terminated film, as one would expect. Based on these considerations, we think that the modelling of the ARPES data is not enough evidence to claim that the fabricated BBO films are BiO2-terminated and that the measured surface band structure by Ji Seop Oh et al. does not correspond to the single BiO2- terminated (001) surface. Finally, we would like to criticize the authors claim saying that the absence of a metallic surface state could be attributed to the oversimplified theoreti- cal calculation, which fails to give an accurate estimation of the band gap in BBO. It is true, as the authors say, that the theoretical value of the band gap depends strongly on the approximation done in the exchange-correlation func- tional. BBO is not an exception of this rule. This effect was studied in detailed in and confirmed by some of us in the Supplementary Material of . In addition, the authors claim that the theoretical gap values of were much smaller than the lower bound of 1.9 eV they obtained from the ARPES spectra. Here, the authors should distinguish between the direct optical gap (Eg) that, for bulk BBO, is around 2 eV, and the smaller indirect gap, Ei. While the experimental value of Eg is quite well accounted by several function- als used in the above mentioned theoretical works (regarding bulk BBO), there 2 is some dispersion in the reported experimental values of Ei, ranging from 0.2 to 1.1 eV. The functional used both in and give values of Ei that lie well within that range except for the simplest local and semilocal functionals as LDA or GGA. In any case, we want to remark that in it was demon- strated that the predicted appearance of metallic states at the BiO2-terminated surface is independent of the value of the band gap and it is robust against the functional used in the DFT calculation. In summary, we consider that the conclusions of the work by Ji Seop Oh et al. are inaccurate, as the chosen STO substrate is not the appropriate to obtain high quality single terminated BBO films due to the large mismatch between both structures. The experimental validation of the mechanism theoretically proposed by Vildosola et al. waits for the band structure characterization of highly controlled BiO2-terminated BBO films grown on lower mismatch sub- strates. The authors acknowledge finantial support from ANPCyT. In particular, D. Rubi and A. M. Llois are supported by PICT-2016-0867. D. Rubi also thanks support from PICT 2017-1836 while A. M. Llois from PICT-2014-1555. Finally, V. Vildosola thanks PICT 2015 0869 and PICTE 2014 134.