1  Abstract – Carrier Selective (CS) Silicon solar cells are increasingly explored as a low cost alternative to PN junction Silicon solar cells. While the recent trends on power conversion efficiency are encouraging, the temperature coefficient and hence the power output under elevated temperatures are not well explored for such solar cells. Here, we address this issue through detailed numerical simulations to explore the influence of interface and material parameters on the temperature coefficient. Our results indicate that irrespective of the interface quality, the temperature coefficient of CS solar cells improves with an increase in band discontinuities. Interestingly, contrary to the trends related to efficiency, our results indicate that the temperature coefficient of CS solar cells is more critically affected by the interface quality of the minority carrier extraction layer than the majority carrier extraction layer. These insights have important implications towards the choice of optimal material and processing conditions for Si based CS solar cells. Index Terms—Temperature coefficient, semiconductor device modelling, photovoltaic cells I. INTRODUCTION Si based CS solar cells are considered as a good candidate to challenge the market dominance of conventional PN junction based solar cells. The perceived competitiveness stems from a few advantages like – (a) large band gap materials used as CS layers provides carrier selectivity through appropriate band offsets, (b) it reduces the parasitic absorption as compared to the heavily doped emitter layer in PN junction solar cells or doped a-Si in HIT solar cells, (c) the intrinsic doping density of many CS materials– could be significant enough to eliminate the need for any additional intentional doping process, and (d) possibility of low temperature deposition processes for CS layers–. These aspects could lead to reduced thermal budget and hence lower the cost of fabrication - which motivates the significant recent research interest in CS based solar cells. Accordingly, different materials such as TiO2, , , a:Si, poly-Si, LiFx, KFx, PEDOT:PSS, MoOx–, ,V2O5, and WO3 have been extensively studied. Similarly, there are numerous simulations and analytical studies to understand the working of these types of solar cells , . However, all these studies were at standard test conditions which could be The authors are with Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai India (email: nithin@ee.iitb.ac.in; aldrinantony@iitb.ac.in; prnair@ee.iitb.ac.in) significantly different from the actual conditions at the place of deployment. The eventual power output from a panel at actual conditions could be significantly different from that at STC due to the strong dependence of efficiency on temperature. In this regard, the temperature coefficient of a solar cell is often treated as a critical parameter to ascertain and compare the performance of various technologies. Indeed, the temperature coefficient of PN junction, and HIT solar cells are well explored. However, such a study has not been reported yet on CS solar cells. Since diverse materials are being investigated as CS layers, a-priori knowledge of temperature coefficient as a function of material parameters would be immensely beneficial. In this manuscript, the temperature coefficient for CS based solar cells is established through detailed modeling and is then compared with the well-established HIT and PERC solar cell technologies. For this, we first develop an analytical model to predict the functional dependence of temperature coefficient on important parameters like band discontinuity and interface quality (Section II). These predictions are then validated through detailed numerical simulations (Section III). Our results indicate that the temperature coefficient is limited by Voc for smaller band discontinuities and it follows the trend of FF for larger magnitudes of band discontinuity. Additionally, unlike efficiency, temperature coefficient of CS based solar cells is dominated by the interface quality of the minority carrier collection junction. Below we first develop an analytical model to predict the temperature coefficient. II. ANALYTICAL MODEL solar cell with CS layers (the material parameters are provided in the appendix). ESL and HSL in the figure denote the electron and hole selective layers, respectively. The large valence band offset at ESL/Si interface blocks the transport of holes from Si to ESL. However, the smaller conduction band offset at the same interface aids the transport of electrons to ESL. Note that a positive value for band offset indicates that the photo-generated carriers need to overcome a barrier to reach the corresponding transport layer, where as a negative value for the offset indicates that the carrier injection from transport layer to silicon is limited by a potential barrier. Further there could be imperfections in the interface in the form of traps. Similarly, we assume that the Si/HSL interface to be perfect electron blocking with a smaller valence band offset that aids hole collection. Here we explicitly consider the temperature coefficient variations of such solar cells as a Nithin Chatterji, Aldrin Antony, and Pradeep R. Nair Temperature coefficient of Silicon based carrier selective solar cells 2 function of transport barrier and interface trap density. As such, temperature coefficient could also be influenced by parameters like the effective doping and thickness of carrier selective layers, nature of metal or TCO contact with the carrier selective layers, etc. With the aim of developing a coherent description of the various effects, here we make a few simplifying assumptions – (a) the contact layers are assumed to be doped, (b) the metal or TCO contact with selective layers are assumed to be ohmic in nature, (c) over the barrier transport is assumed as the dominant transport mechanism at Si/CS layer interface, and (d) uniform density of traps at Si/CS layer interface. With these assumptions we first develop an analytical model to predict the device performance. Later, results from detailed numerical simulations (self- consistent solution of Poisson and carrier continuity equations) are provided to further refine analytical predictions. The parameters used in this study are listed in appendix A. The temperature coefficient of the efficiency is defined as, TCη = 1 η(STC) ∂η ∂T, (1) where STC denotes the standard test conditions, which assumes T=298K in this manuscript. The efficiency of a solar cell, in turn, depends on the open circuit potential (Voc), short circuit current (Jsc), and the fill factor (FF). Accordingly, a first order estimate for TCη can be obtained in terms of the individual temperature coefficients as given below 1 η(STC) ∂η ∂T = 1 Voc(STC) ∂Voc ∂T + 1 Jsc(STC) ∂Jsc ∂T + 1 FF(STC) ∂FF ∂T . (2) Here the terms in the RHS denote temperature coefficients of Voc (TCVoc), Jsc (TCJsc), and FF (TCFF), respectively. Note that each of these temperature coefficients is defined against the respective parameter at STC. As such, good estimates for the temperature coefficient of efficiency can be obtained through detailed knowledge about the temperature variation of parameters like Voc, Jsc, and FF. With this aim, and to develop quantitative insights, we first explore the effect ESL/Si interface parameters on TCη with ideal conditions assumed for Si/HSL interface (i.e., zero band offset for holes, perfect electron blocking, and lack of any interface trap states). a ) Effect of ΔEc on 1 Voc ∂Voc ∂T : It is well known that the temperature coefficient of solar cell is dominated by the temperature sensitivity of Voc. For a solar cell the maximum achievable Voc is dictated by the detailed balance of carrier generation with various recombination mechanisms. The asymptotic limits of Voc for a CS solar cell in the presence of interface traps was recently shown as Voc,max = kT q ln (GτbNA ni 2 ), (3) Voc,min = 2kT q ln ( 2GwSi cnsDitEg,Sini ). (4) Here, Voc,max and Voc,min are the maximum and minimum values of Voc respectively, G is the carrier generation rate in Silicon, τb is the effective bulk life time in Silicon (the combined effects of SRH, radiative, and Auger recombinations), NA is the acceptor doping in Silicon, ni is the intrinsic carrier concentration in Silicon, Dit is the interface defect density at the ESL/Si interface and Eg,Si is the bandgap of Silicon. Note that Voc,max is influenced only by the bulk lifetime while Voc,min is entirely dictated by the interface recombination. Although eq. (4) considers interface recombination at Si/ESL junction only, it could be easily modified to account for the recombination in Si/HSL junction as well. Equations (3) and (4) allow us to estimate the asymptotic limits for temperature coefficient of Voc. Accordingly, the maximum and minimum values of TCVoc is determined as −0.19%/°C and −0.37%/°C, respectively for typical values of one sun generation with the Dit = 1012cm−2eV−1 and τb = 1ms. The values for radiative and auger coefficients are given in Appendix A. The dominant temperature dependence of both the limits is through ni −2 which has an exponential relation with temperature (ni 2 ~e−Eg/KT). Hence the temperature coefficient, 1 Voc(STC) ∂Voc ∂T , is negative. The smaller the magnitude of temperature coefficient for Voc, the better is its performance at high temperature. Although the above discussion allows us to estimate the asymptotic limits of TCVoc, it still lacks quantitative information of the functional dependence of TCVoc on various parameters like band offset ΔEc, interface state density Dit, etc. To obtain the same, we rely on the modified analytical model for Voc reported in ref.. The same model indicates that Voc varies almost symmetrically with ΔEc, with the minimum at ΔEc=0. This is due to the fact that interface recombination maximizes under such conditions. The model also indicates that Voc improves for large ΔEc due to the reduction in interface recombination. Further, the same model anticipates the variation with parameters like Dit, NA, εESL, etc. function of band discontinuity ΔEc between ESL and Si Fig. 1: Energy level alignments of a Si based carrier selective solar cell. Refer Table 1 for simulation parameters. 3 with Dit = 1012cm−2eV−1. As expected, the Voc decreases with temperature due to its strong dependence of ni. z of Voc with interface trap density, Dit, and ΔEc. In general, the temperature coefficient degrades with an increase in Dit as the contribution due to interface recombination becomes significant. However, for large ΔEc , the interface recombination decreases due to enhanced field effect passivation of traps which results in an increase in both Voc and TCVoc. b) Effect of ΔEc on Jsc and FF: Jsc depends on the number of absorbed photons in c-Si bulk and hence increases with temperature as Si bandgap decreases with temperature. This leads to a positive temperature coefficient of 0.0156%/0C which is very small compared to the TCVoc reported in previous section. If we further account for the fact that the parasitic absorption in the ESL also increases with temperature, then the effect of temperature on Jsc is expected to decrease further. As this effect is insignificant relative to that due to Voc, we neglect the effect of band gap variation on Jsc and assume that the effective photo-carrier generation rate is invariant with temperature. While the net carrier generation rate could be rather insensitive to temperature variation, the charge collection efficiency could show strong temperature dependence and hence influence Jsc. Over the barrier transport of carriers across the ESL/Si junction is a dominant mechanism for collection of photo-generated carriers which might introduce additional such temperature dependence on Jsc. At short circuit conditions, the interface recombination is negligible and the interface carrier density is given as ns~ ni 2 NA e+ qψSi kT , where ψSi is the band bending in Si at ESL/Si interface. Hence, the current through the ESL, which is Jsc, is given as Jsc ∝ nse−ΔEc kT . (5) The above equation can be conveniently interpreted in terms of the supply of electrons ( ns on the RHS) and the factor e−ΔEc kT denotes the probability of carriers crossing the barrier due to band offset (i.e., for ΔEc > 0. Otherwise, the current will be limited by the diffusion of electrons from bulk to Si/ESL interface). It has been recently shown that the band bending in Si (ψSi) at the Si/ETL interface increases with increase in ΔEc . Accordingly, the ns increases with increase in ΔEc and compensates for the reduction in the probability of crossing the barrier (see eq. 5) and hence Jsc remains invariant till strong inversion happens. So, the temperature coefficient will be negligible for small ΔEc . However, for large ΔEc , strong inversion conditions arise at Si interface and hence the ns will no longer increase with ΔEc . This results in a decrease in Jsc for large ΔEc , as predicted by eq. 5. However, for such cases, the probability of carriers crossing the barrier increases with temperature and as a result Jsc also improves with temperature (see eq. 5). Hence, the temperature coefficient for large band offsets will be positive. FF, which is a measure of collection efficiency at maximum power point, was shown in ref. to follow the trends of Voc for small ΔEc and Jsc for large ΔEc. Accordingly, for small ΔEc the temperature coefficient of FF will be proportional to the temperature coefficient of Voc. However, for large ΔEc, the FF follows the trend of current at maximum power point similar to that of Jsc. Accordingly, the FF improves with temperature due to the increase in probability of carriers crossing the barrier, and hence its temperature coefficient will be positive. Finally, the temperature coefficient of efficiency which is the sum of the temperature coefficients of Voc, Jsc and FF is significantly affected by the Voc for lower band discontinuities. For these cases, the FF too follows Voc trends. For larger band discontinuity (> 0.4eV) the temperature coefficient is dictated by FF, as over the barrier transport of carriers at maximum power point increases with temperature. The analysis in this section predicts that temperature coefficient of efficiency improves with increase in ΔEc. Interestingly, the temperature coefficient might become positive for large ΔEc, however, the overall efficiency could still be lower than the corresponding values for small ΔEc. Therefore, there is an optimal band offset considering both the tradeoff between efficiency and temperature coefficient, which will be explored in detail using numerical simulations. III. NUMERICAL SIMULATIONS In the previous section, we used the analytical model to explore the variation of temperature coefficient as a function of band discontinuity and interface quality. The model predicts Fig. 2: Variation of Voc with ΔEc , temperature and Dit. Part (a) shows the variation of Voc with temperature for Dit = 1012cm−2eV−1. Part (b) shows the variation of temperature coefficient with Dit. 4 that TCη closely follows the features of TCVoc. In this section we discuss the results of detailed numerical simulations. Current-Voltage characteristics of the modeled device was obtained through self-consistent solution of Poisson and drift diffusion equations . From the obtained characteristics, temperature coefficient of Voc, Jsc, FF, and efficiency were estimated. Note the TCη is estimated directly through eq. (1) and as such the numerical simulations do not rely on the simplifying assumptions made in the derivation of the analytical model (for example, validity of eq. (2), and also see the discussion on FF in previous section) and hence can be used as a test bed for analytical predictions. As before, initially we study the effect of conduction band offset ΔEc at the ESL/Si interface on the temperature coefficient while keeping Si/HSL interface perfect (ΔEv = 0eV and Dit = 0). The interface trap density at the ESL/c-Si interface is assumed to be uniform as in the analytical model. Later the effect of band offsets at Si/HSL interface and the combined effect of both the offsets are also discussed. The list of parameters used in simulations is given in Appendix A. The influence of band offset on the interface recombination is highlighted in Fig. 3. Here we consider two cases of ΔEc and the subsequent effect on interface recombination. A comparison of parts (a) and (b) of Fig. 3 indicates that the band bending in Si near Si/ESL interface increases with ΔEc. Accordingly, the corresponding minority carrier density decreases with an increase in band offset (see parts (c) and (d) of Fig. 3).As a result, the interface recombination reduces and hence Voc increases as ΔEc increases. Further, the increase in minority carrier density with temperature is also influenced by ΔEc. The increase in minority carrier density with temperature leads to an increase in interface recombination and hence reduces Voc. metrics with temperature and ΔEc. Normalization is done with respect to the corresponding value (same ΔEc) at STC conditions and then multiplying by 100. Figure 4a shows that the slope for the normalized Voc is more for ΔEc = 0 and that the slope decreases as the magnitude of ΔEc increases. This is expected from the analytical model on Voc and also supported by the simulation results provided in Fig. 3. For small ΔEc, the Voc is dominated by interface recombination whose contribution decreases as ΔEc increases. Accordingly, the Voc degradation decreases as ΔEc increases. Normalized Jsc (Fig. 4b) remains invariant with ΔEc for the temperature range under consideration due to (a) the assumption of a constant generation rate, and (b) the fact that over the barrier transport of carriers is yet to be significantly influenced by the band offsets – these arguments are consistent with those provided in the analytical section. Normalized FF (Fig. 4c) follows the trends of Voc for lower values of ΔEc. For ΔEc = 0.5eV, the FF increases with temperature initially and then saturates. This rather surprising result could be understood as follows: For large ΔEc, the current at maximum power point conditions at STC is dominated by over the barrier transport limitations due to ΔEc band offset. An increase in temperature results in larger over the barrier transport, which leads to better charge collection efficiency and hence the FF. For still higher temperatures the increase in collection efficiency is counter balanced by the decrease in Voc and this result in the saturation of FF (see Fig. 4c). While the trends indicate that it is beneficial to have large ΔEc from the perspective of temperature coefficient, we stress that the efficiency is also a function of ΔEc (see inset in Fig. 4d for effect of ΔEc on efficiency at STC with Dit = 1012cm−2eV−1). Accordingly, maximum power output at higher temperature could still be given by an optimum ΔEc. performance parameters as a function of ΔEc and Dit. The Fig. 4: The effect of the ΔEc and temperature on normalized efficiency of CS Si solar cells for Dit = 1012 cm−2eV–1. The labels represent ΔEc = −0.6eV,−0.3eV,0eV, 0.3eV, 0 and 0.5eV. The inset in (d) shows the effect of ΔEc on efficiency with Dit = 1012 cm−2eV–1. Fig. 3: The effect of ΔEc on band bending and carrier densities at ESL/c-Si interface with Dit = 1012cm−2eV−1 (numerical simulations, under illumination). Parts (a) and (b) show the energy band diagram for ΔEc = 0eV and ΔEc = 0.3eV, respectively, at short circuit conditions. Parts (c, d) show the variation in interface carrier densities ns , ps with bias and temperature. 5 trends in Fig. 5a are broadly similar to that in the analytical model for temperature coefficient of Voc (see Fig.2b). As explained already in the analytical section (see eq.4 and Fig. 3), Voc and its temperature coefficient is indeed limited by the interface traps when ΔEc is low. Further, for larger values of ΔEc, Voc improves due to the field effect passivation of the interface traps thus improving its temperature coefficient as well. As explained before, this improvement in passivation is due to the increase in band bending with increase in ΔEc between ESL/Si and the corresponding decrease in the minority carrier concentration at the interface. The temperature coefficient of Jsc (Fig. 5b) at small ΔEc is zero due to (a) insignificant variation in net carrier generation rate, and (b) the over the barrier transport is unaffected for the range of ΔEc under consideration (as predicted by the analytical model). The trends for the temperature coefficient of FF (Fig. 5c) are similar to temperature coefficient of Voc for most values of ΔEc. However, for large values of ΔEc, the current at maximum power point increases with temperature, which leads to an improvement in TCFF. Figure 5d shows the variation of temperature coefficient of efficiency which follows the trends of Voc and FF. The same figure also highlights a comparison of the temperature coefficient of CS solar cells with that of state of the art PERC and HIT solar cells. It is evident that unless the band discontinuity is small and the interface quality is very bad, temperature coefficient of CS solar cells can be better than PERC solar cells (of course, the effect of HTL/Si interface should also be accounted for a proper comparison – which will be attempted in later sections). Further, HIT cells are almost universally better than both the CS as well as the PERC cells. However, we note that for very large ΔEc, CS solar cells show better TCη than even HIT cells. This is a regime where the charge collection efficiency and hence the FF is limited by over the barrier transport. So, although the TCη is better, the efficiency of such cells is still much lower than that of comparable HIT cells. The previous section detailed the influence of minority carrier extraction interface on the temperature coefficients. Here, we extend the same to majority carrier extraction interface (i.e., c-Si/HTL). The effects of temperature and band discontinuity (i.e., ΔEv ) at c-Si/HSL interface on the normalized solar cell performance metrics are shown in Fig.6. As before, here we assume ideal conditions at ESL/c-Si interface (i.e., zero band offset and no traps). While the trends in Voc degradation with temperature (Fig. 6a) are somewhat similar to the results for minority carrier collection (as discussed in Fig. 4a), the trends for Jsc variation with temperature is distinctly different (i.e., compare Fig. 6b with Fig. 4b). Specifically, the results indicate a positive temperature coefficient for small ΔEv. As a result, the FF (Fig. 6c) and efficiency (Fig. 6d) trends are different compared to Fig. 4. The trends in Jsc can be explained by using Fig. 7. Parts (a) and (b) of Fig. 7 indicate the E-B diagrams for ΔEv = 0 eV and for ΔEv = 0.2 eV, respectively. For these two cases, the variation in majority carrier density (ps) and the net interface recombination are plotted in parts (c) and (d). Fig 7c shows that for ΔEv = 0 eV, the interface recombination remains unaffected by the temperature and that the psincreases with temperature. This improves the collection efficiency and hence leads to an increase in Jsc with temperature as observed in Fig. 6c for ΔEv = 0 eV. However, Fig. 7d shows that the interface recombination increases with temperature and leads to a decrease in ps for ΔEv = 0.2 eV. This increase in interface recombination with temperature coupled with the decrease in ps contributes to a reduction in Jsc and hence the temperature coefficient for Jsc is negative at higher band discontinuities. Fig. 5: The effect of the ΔEc on temperature coefficient of different Dit(cm−2eV–1) values. The trends are broadly consistent with the analytical model for Voc . FF follows the trends of Voc for low values of ΔEc and for high values of ΔEc it increases with temperature due to the increase in current at maximum power point. Fig. 6: The effect of the temperature on normalized efficiency of CS Si solar cells for Dit = 1012 cm−2eV–1. The labels represent ΔEv = 0eV,0.1eV,0.2eV and 0.3eV. The inset in (d) shows the effect of ΔEv on efficiency with Dit = 1012 cm−2eV–1. 6 (ΔEv, Dit) on temperature coefficient of parameters for CS solar cell. As the band offset increases, interface recombination decreases and hence the TCVoc improves. These trends are similar to the results shown in Fig. 5a. However, the temperature coefficient for Jsc (see Fig. 8b) shows significant variation at low values of ΔEv. The difference between the corresponding curves in Fig. 5b is due to lower band bending at the PP+ junction between HSL and Si for low values of ΔEv. Figure 8c and 8d show the variation in temperature coefficient of FF and efficiency respectively. We find that TCη broadly follows the trends of TCVoc. However, for small ΔEv, the trends are influenced by the TCJsc as well. The comparison with state of the art PERC and HIT cells gives similar inferences as in Fig. 5d. The combined effect of interface non-idealities at ESL/Si and HSL/Si interfaces on temperature coefficient is shown in Fig. 9. Here parts (a) and (b) show the variation in temperature coefficient when ΔEc = ΔEv = 0eV and ΔEc = ΔEv = 0.3eV, respectively. For a given interface trap density, the lower band discontinuities result in a larger temperature coefficient. Curiously, the same results indicate that the quality of minority carrier extraction layer interface with Silicon is more critical for temperature coefficient of the device than the quality of majority carrier extraction layer interface with Silicon. Finally, we note that the effect of interface traps is not cumulative on the temperature coefficient, i.e., for same Dit the sum of temperature coefficients with traps at only one interface (ESL/Si or HSL/Si) is more than the temperature coefficient with traps at both interfaces. Comparison with the state of the art cells indicates that while HIT cells may continue to boast excellent temperature coefficients, well designed CS solar cells might perform better than PERC cells. IV. CONCLUSIONS To summarize, here we addressed the temperature coefficient of Si based CS layers as a function of the band discontinuity and interface quality. Through an analytical model we explored the functional dependence of temperature coefficient on such material and interface properties. These predications were validated using detailed numerical simulations. The results show that the temperature coefficient improves with band discontinuity if the interface quality is imperfect. Further for larger band discontinuity the temperature coefficient improves due to the increase in over the barrier transport with temperature irrespective of the interface quality. In addition, our results show that the Fig. 9: The effect of traps at both the HSL and the ESL interface with c-Si on temperature coefficient for (a) ΔEc = ΔEv = 0eV and (b) ΔEc = ΔEv = 0.3eV. The quality of minority carrier extraction layer interface with Silicon is more critical for temperature coefficient of the device than the quality of majority carrier extraction layer interface with Silicon. Fig. 7: The effect of ΔEv on band bending and carrier densities at c-Si/HSL interface with Dit = 1012cm−2eV−1 (numerical simulations, under illumination). Parts (a) and (b) show the energy band diagram for ΔEv = 0eV and ΔEv = 0.2eV, respectively, at short circuit conditions. Parts (c, d) show the variation in normalized interface carrier density ps and normalized interface recombination with temperature at short circuit conditions for ΔEv = 0eV and ΔEv = 0.2eV, respectively. Fig. 8: The effect of ΔEv on temperature coefficient of efficiency in the presence of interface traps. Due to the variation in Jsc the curves for efficiency are different from the corresponding curves for ΔEc. 7 passivation quality at the minority carrier layer interface is more critical than the majority layer interface and that the temperature coefficient is not cumulative, i.e., the temperature coefficient of a structure with traps at both interfaces is better than the sum of the temperature coefficient of separate device structures with traps being present at only one interface (either ESL/Si or HSL/Si). Finally our results indicate that with appropriate design, CS solar cells can achieve temperature coefficients better than PERC solar cells – although they might still be inferior to HIT solar cells. These interesting insights could be of broad interest to the community towards the optimization of process and material considerations for Si based CS solar cells. V. APPENDIX A. Parameters used in simulations: The band offset ΔEc at the ESL/c-Si interface is varied from −0.6eV to +0.6eV, while the barrier for holes is kept fixed (2.28eV). Accordingly, in our simulations the ESL band gap varies from 2.8eV to 4eV, which is comparable to the band gap of TiO2 (~3.4eV). At the c-Si/HSL interface, ΔEv is varied from −0.1eV to +0.4eV, while the barrier for electrons is kept fixed (2.28eV). Correspondingly, the HSL bandgap varies from 3.3eV to 3.8eV. For ease of analysis, we have used same dielectric constant (6.2) for both ESL and HSL. We consider uniform distribution of traps at the interface of CS layer and Si. The capture cross section of these traps was assumed as 10−16cm−2. The rest of the parameters are provided in the table below. Parameter c-Si ESL HSL Nc(cm-3) Nv(cm-3) Mobility( cm2V−1s−1 (n, p)) τ SRH (s) 10-3 10-6 10-6 Radiative Recombination coefficient (cm3s−1) Auger Coefficients (cm6s−1) (n,p) 1 × 10−31, Doping(cm-3)n/p p - 1017 n - 1017 p - 1017 Acknowledgements: The authors acknowledge Center of Excellence in Nanoelectronics (CEN) and National Center for Photovoltaic Research and Education (NCPRE), IIT Bombay for computational facilities.