Quantum Critical Phenomena in a Compressible Displacive Ferroelectric Matthew J Coak,1 Charles R S Haines,1 Cheng Liu,1 Stephen E Rowley,1, 2 Gilbert G Lonzarich,1 and Siddharth S Saxena1, 3 1Cavendish Laboratory, Cambridge University, J.J. Thomson Ave, Cambridge CB3 0HE, UK 2Centro Brasileiro de Pesquisas Fisicas, Rua Dr. Xavier Sigaud 150, Rio de Janeiro 22290-180, Brazil 3National University of Science and Technology “MISiS”, Leninsky Prospekt 4, Moscow 119049, Russia (Dated: June 4, 2020) The dielectric and magnetic polarizations of quantum paraelectrics and paramagnetic materials have in many cases been found to initially increase with increasing thermal disorder and hence exhibit peaks as a function of temperature. A quantitative description of these examples of ’order- by-disorder’ phenomenona has remained elusive in nearly ferromagnetic metals and in dielectrics on the border of displacive ferroelectric transitions. Here we present an experimental study of the evolution of the dielectric susceptibility peak as a function of pressure in the nearly ferroelectric material, strontium titanate, which reveals that the peak position collapses towards absolute zero as the ferroelectric quantum critical point is approached. We show that this behaviour can be described in detail without the use of adjustable parameters in terms of the Larkin-Khmelnitskii-Shneerson- Rechester (LKSR) theory, first introduced nearly 50 years ago, of the hybridization of polar and acoustic modes in quantum paraelectrics, in contrast to alternative models that have been proposed. Our study allows us to construct for the first time a detailed temperature-pressure phase diagram of a material on the border of a ferroelectric quantum critical point comprising ferroelectric, quantum critical paraelectric and hybridized polar-acoustic regimes. Furthermore, at the lowest temperatures, below the susceptibility maximum, we observe a new regime characterized by a linear temperature dependence of the inverse susceptibility that differs sharply from the quartic temperature dependence predicted by the LKSR theory. We find that this non-LKSR low temperature regime cannot be accounted for in terms of any detailed model reported in the literature, and its interpretation poses a new empirical and conceptual challenge. The study of quantum phase transitions and quantum critical systems has led to the discovery of novel phases of matter and the introduction of novel conceptual frame- works for the description of emergent phenomena . A quantum phase transition reached by varying a tuning parameter such as lattice density or electronic band fill- ing fraction is imagined to separate two or more low- temperature states with qualitatively different types of order. An example is a transition from a magnetically po- larized to a paramagnetic state in a metal. In the Kondo lattice model, for instance, at suffficiently low tempera- ture the paramagnetic state is described as a Fermi liq- uid in which the elementary excitations arise from the hybridization of conduction electron states and well lo- calized f-electron orbitals. Another example involves a transition from a dis- placive ferroelectric state to an unpolarized or quantum paraelectric state in polar materials such as the per- ovskite oxides [2–21]. In contrast to the case of the mag- netic metals the nature of the unpolarized state in incip- ient ferroelectrics remains in some respects an enigma, especially in the low temperature regime. In the sim- plest model, the quantum paraelectric state is character- ized by an activated form of the temperature dependence of the inverse dielectric susceptibility in which the acti- vation temperature scale vanishes at a continuous quan- tum phase transition, i.e. at a quantum critical point. However, this picture has proved to be insufficient and in particular is contradicted by the observation of an anomalous temperature dependence - including a mys- terious minimum - in the inverse susceptibility of SrTiO3 and related incipient displacive ferroelectrics at low tem- peratures , which theoretical works have attempted to describe . The identification of the nature of the quantum para- electric states in such materials has been a key objective of the present study. This is a part of a more general goal to characterize and understand the temperature- quantum tuning parameter phase diagram of quantum critical ferroelectrics. The absence of free charge carriers (in undoped sam- ples) was expected to lead to a simpler phase diagram than that observed near to quantum critical points in metals, in which quantum critical phenomena are in many interesting cases masked by the emergence of inter- vening phases. These include unconventional supercon- ductivity and exotic textured phases, which are of great interest but stand in the way of understanding quan- tum critical behaviours in their simplest forms over wide ranges down to very low temperatures. To characterize the temperature-quantum tuning pa- rameter phase diagram in close detail and obtain a deeper understanding of the quantum paraelectric state we have carried out measurements of the dielectric response over a wide range in temperature and pressure with high pre- cision. In particular, the identification of the low tem- perature behaviour of the relative dielectric constant, εr, or dielectric susceptibility, χ = εr −1, has benefited from arXiv:1808.02428v2 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 3 Jun 2020 2 measurements of relative changes of χ as small as a few parts per billion. We first mention briefly the results of some relevant previous studies of our chosen material and then present and discuss our new findings. SrTiO3 is a well-studied incipient displacive ferroelec- tric , widely used as a dielectric in deposition tech- niques and thin-film interface devices , as well as re- cently in high-precision thermometry , and is remark- able for having an extremely high dielectric susceptibility at low temperatures. At high temperatures a good fit to the classically predicted Curie-Weiss form of the dielec- tric susceptibility is observed, with an extrapolated Curie temperature around 35 K , but this temperature de- pendence changes below approximately 50 K in the quan- tum critical regime and no ferroelectric ordering occurs down to the lowest temperatures measured. In addition, substitution of oxygen-16 for the oxygen-18 isotope re- sults in the material becoming ferroelectric, and varying the level of isotope substitution or applying pressure (to samples with suffficiently high oxygen-18 concentrations) tunes the Curie temperature Tc to zero . Uniaxial tensile strain applied to SrTiO3 again causes it to become ferroelectric and suggests a small negative critical pres- sure of magnitude of the order of one kbar . Measure- ments of the dielectric susceptibility under pressure [30– 32] show a drastic suppression of the low temperature dielectric response as pressure is increased, matching the trend seen in the oxygen isotope doping studies which see a maximum in the size of χ at a substitution level of 36%, the same point where Tc tends to zero temperature. At this quantum critical point the frequency of the polar transverse optical phonon mode responsible for the fer- roelectric ordering approaches zero at the Brillouin zone centre . Recent work has shown that the mag- nitude of the dielectric loss peak at approximately 10 K, associated with quantum critical effects , is linked to the quantum critical point in agreement with results from oxygen-18 substituted SrTiO3 . An open question in the field remains as to the quantum phase transition em- pirically not becoming first-order as temperature is low- ered and lifting the quantum criticality . Although it is reasonable to expect that a ferroelectric transition such as this would turn first order, there is overwhelming evidence that the system is indeed quantum critical. Fur- ther work in the field is needed to advance understanding on this apparent contradiction. These and related studies, including those on supercon- ductivity in doped SrTiO3 [21, 36–50], shed light on the likely broad features of the temperature-quantum tun- ing parameter phase diagram of SrTiO3. We now turn to our present findings that allow us to construct the first detailed phase diagram of this kind, with hydro- static pressure, that preserves the high degree of homo- geneity of the starting material, as the chosen quantum tuning parameter. Importantly, our results enable us to identify the physical nature of the quantum paraelectric 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 Temperature (K) 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2 Dielectric Susceptibility, 104 Ambient pressure 2.4 kbar 3.3 kbar 4.6 kbar 5.2 kbar 6.9 kbar 8.6 kbar 9.6 kbar 0 5 10 15 20 T (K) 0 5 9.6 kbar 0 kbar 3.3 kbar 0 2 4 6 8 10 Temperature (K) -5 0 5 Change in inverse dielectric susceptibility, ∆(χ-1) Ambient pressure 2.4 kbar 3.3 kbar 4.6 kbar 5.2 kbar 6.9 kbar 8.6 kbar 9.6 kbar 1.96 K 4.98 K 5.26 K 5.88 K 6.85 K 7.43 K 4.32 K 3.80 K plotted against temperature for applied pressures ranging from 0 (blue) to 9.6 (red) kbar. The magnitude of the di- electric susceptibility can be seen to be continuously reduced by the application of pressure. The inset shows the change in the low temperature values of χ from their lowest-temperature values; curves are offset for clarity. Importantly, χ initially rises with temperature and exhibits a peak that increases in position and magnitude with increasing pressure. The lower plot shows the change in the inverse of χ from its lowest- temperature values for each pressure (typically 1.6 K), where the feature is now a clearly resolved minimum. state at pressures above the critical pressure of the ferro- electric quantum critical point at low temperatures, and in particular below the ubiquitous peak in the dielectric susceptibility. RESULTS Fig. 1 shows measurements of the dielectric suscepti- bility χ = εr − 1 of SrTiO3 at ambient pressure and at increasing applied pressures. The ambient pressure data match the results of earlier work wherein the in- verse susceptibility is linear at high temperatures match- ing the expected Curie-Weiss behaviour, before cross- 3 0 2 4 6 8 10 (p - pc) (kbar) 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 103 -1(T 0) 0 5 10 15 (p - pc)1.25 (kbar1.25) 0 2 4 107( 0 4 8 (p - pc) (kbar) 0 25 50 pc = -0.7 kbar χ−1(0) = χ−1(T → 0) as a function of applied pressure. We see that χ−1(0) varies linearly with pressure and vanishes at the extrapolated critical pressure, pc, of -0.7(1) kbar, defining the ferroelectric quantum critical point. The lower and upper insets show, respectively, the temperature dependences of the position of the minimum, T ∗, and of the depth of the mini- mum, ∆χ−1(T ∗). We see that the square of T ∗ is proportional to pressure and hence also to χ−1(0). This is characteristic of the model of coupled polar and non-polar modes, i.e. the LKSR model, as described in the text. The solid lines in all three plots are guides to the eye. ing over to a quadratic power law dependence at lower temperatures attributed to quantum critical fluctuations. The low temperature dielectric susceptibility reaches a maximum at approximately 2 K with a value of around 20,000 before falling at even lower temperatures. Ob- served as a minimum in the inverse susceptibility, this ef- fect is resolved here in much clearer detail than in earlier studies and crucially is investigated as a function of pressure. In the lower plot of Fig. 1 this minimum is seen to increase in depth with increasing pressure and its position, marked with arrows, moves up in temperature. Key features of the susceptibility are brought out in Fig. 2, which shows the pressure dependences of the T → 0 K inverse susceptibility χ−1(0), (main plot), the square of the position of the minimum T ∗ (upper inset) and the depth of the minimum ∆χ−1(T ∗) = χ−1(0) − χ−1(T ∗) (lower inset). All three curves extrapolate to zero at the same critical pressure, pc = −0.7(1) kbar, i.e., at the ferroelectric quantum critical point, as suggested above. We see that χ−1(0) varies linearly with (p−pc), T ∗ varies as the square root of (p − pc) and ∆χ−1(T ∗) varies as (p − pc) to a power slightly greater than unity. The variation of χ−1(T) above a scale TQC > T ∗, which vanishes along with T ∗ at pc, is found to be quadratic, T 2, up to another scale TCL, and is linear in the classical regime above TCL (SI Appendix and Fig. 3). Pressure narrows the temperature window of the T 2 quantum critical regime between TQC and TCL while widening that below TQC, including the interesting regime below T ∗. Please see the SI Appendix and refer- ences therein for the error analysis and a full discussion of the fitting processes used in defining TQC and TCL. Combining the data for the pressure-dependent temper- atures of the low-temperature minimum, T ∗, (Fig. 1 and Fig. 2 upper inset) and the crossover temperatures from quantum paraelectric to quantum critical and from quan- tum critical to classical regimes, TQC and TCL, respec- tively, with previous data on SrTi18O3 that yields the Curie (critical) temperature, Tc, under pressure al- lows a full mapping of the temperature-pressure phase diagram of SrTiO3, which is shown in Fig. 3. The single ferroelectric quantum critical point at pc is shown to be the origin of both the T 2 region of quantum critical be- haviour, and seemingly the energy scale of the minimum feature T ∗ - suggesting this effect to emanate from the QCP. DISCUSSION The main features of this phase diagram are consis- tent with the predictions of a 3-D self-consistent Gaus- sian mean field model, also known as the self-consistent phonon model (see e.g. and references therein), which assumes that χ−1(0) is an analytic function of (p − pc) (in analogy to the assumption of analyticity in the Landau theory of phase transitions at finite temper- atures) and that the temperature dependence χ−1(T) is due to the thermal excitation of polar transverse optical modes whose gap, ∆, vanishes at the quantum critical point. The contribution of each mode depends on the inverse of their wavevector, so that in three dimensions at the quantum critical point one expects a contribution to χ−1(T) of the form (1/T)T 3, or T 2, far below the rel- evant Debye temperature, TD, and of the form T above a temperature, TCL, calculated numerically to be a size- able fraction of TD . Away from the quantum critical point where ∆ is finite the T 2 regime is cut off below a scale TQC where the temperature dependence becomes exponentially weak as expected for activated phenomena. Since ∆2 is expected to be proportional to χ−1(0), which is proportional to (p − pc), we expect TQC to be propor- tional to the square root of (p − pc), which is in keeping with observation (Fig. 3 and SI Appendix). Similar con- siderations lead us to expect Tc to also be proportional to the square root of (p − pc), which is consistent with pre- vious studies in SrTi18O3. As shown previously for am- bient pressure measurements, the self-consistent phonon model provides not only a qualitative but also quanti- tative understanding of the above behaviour in terms of independently measured model parameters. However, the self-consistent phonon model in its sim- plest form fails to account for the low temperature be- 4 -0.7 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Pressure (kbar) 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 Temperature (K) 0.7 0 the positions of proposed QCPs. Closed circles give the positions of the low temperature minimum, T ∗, in χ−1 and open circles the crossover temperature, TQC from the quantum paraelectric to quantum critical regimes. Dashed lines give fits of (p−pc)1/2 behaviour to both. Crosses show the crossover temperature, TCL, between quantum critical and classical Curie-Weiss behaviour with a dashed guide to the eye. Squares and solid line show the ferroelectric Curie temperature, Tc, of SrTi18O3 taken from . haviour presented here for T < T ∗, which suggests that the quantum paraelectric state at low T is very different from the traditionally accepted gapped state with acti- vated behaviour, e.g. as described by the Barrett theory . In the remainder of the paper we consider alter- native possible descriptions of this state and attempt to clarify its physical nature. We discuss first the role of the coupling of the elec- tric polarization with the non-polar lattice vibrations or acoustic phonons not included in the above self-consistent phonon model. As shown previously this cou- pling can account for the existence of a minimum of the inverse susceptibility with values of T ∗ and depth ∆χ−1(T ∗) that are consistent with zero-temperature model parameters inferred from other measurements. Extending measurements to include the effect of pressure tuning, however, sheds light on a particularly distinctive prediction of the model, namely that the square of T ∗ should vary linearly with χ−1(0) and hence vanish at the ferroelectric quantum critical point. This self consistent phonon theory including polarization-acoustic phonon couplings is referred to here as the Larkin-Khemelnitskii- Shneerson-Rechester (LKSR) theory . This prediction is strikingly supported by the data presented in the main plot and upper inset of Fig. 2, which show that both (T ∗)2 and χ−1(0) vary linearly with (p − pc) and hence are proportional to each other (see SI Appendix, Fig S5). Moreover, as shown in the SI Appendix, the absolute value of the slope of (T ∗)2 vs p−pc or equivalently χ−1(0) is consistent in order of mag- nitude with independently measured model parameters - in particular the results of the calculations for T ∗ vs. the square root of (p − pc) are shown in Fig. 4. Thus, at the critical pressure, pc, χ−1(T) has no minimum and is predicted to vary as the square of the temperature down to the lowest temperatures. For our model parameters the transition to the ferroelectric state is expected to be essentially continuous at low temperatures, despite the polarization-acoustic phonons coupling (electrostriction) that is often expected to lead to first order transitions. This prediction appears to be in keeping with measure- ments to date in isotopically, chemically, pressure and strain tuned samples of SrTiO3. The LKSR model also predicts that the depth ∆χ−1(T ∗) of the minimum should scale as χ−1(0), which is partly supported from a comparison of the main 5 plot and lower inset of Fig. 2. More importantly the polarization-acoustic phonon coupling model predicts that χ−1(T) should vary as (−T 4) well below the inverse susceptibility minimum, which is in sharp disagreement with the negative quasi-linear dependence observed down to the lowest temperatures investigated . The breakdown of the distinctive (−T 4) prediction of the model is particularly striking at high pressures where temperature ranges up to two orders of magnitude below T ∗ can readily be accessed - and the sytematic variation of the slope and extent of the quasi-linear term with p − pc is suggestive of an intrinsic phenomenon in some way connected with the quantum critical point. This dramatic departure from the prediction of the LKSR model leads us to consider alternative explana- tions for the susceptibility minimum. One such alterna- tive explanation involves the combined effects of long- range dipolar interactions between elementary dipoles and the short range coupling of the polarization modes (the mode-mode coupling) that can be represented in terms of an effective Euclidean action in a quantum description. It was suggested that this can lead to a susceptibility minimum qualitatively as predicted in the polarization-phonon coupling model, but crucially with a (−T) rather than (−T 4) temperature dependence of χ−1(T) below T ∗, qualitatively as observed. However, on closer examination we find that this neg- ative T-linear form only applies to a material such as SrTiO3 at relatively high temperatures, indeed at scales above that of the longitudinal polar optical frequencies, which are far above the observed T ∗ in our experiments. In the temperature range below of the order of 10 K the dipole-dipole interaction model predicts an exponen- tially weak rather than a (−T) temperature dependence of χ−1(T), which is in sharp disagreement with obser- vation. For this and other reasons the dipole-dipole in- teraction model appears to be untenable at least for the case of SrTiO3 and does not explain the pressure de- pendence of T ∗ and of the depth of the minimum. It is also unlikely to operate in other materials where the minimum has been observed, such as TSCC, which have ultra-weak, nearly neutral, dipoles . We note, how- ever, that the dipole-dipole interaction in polar doped al- kali halides, for example, can promote antiparallel align- ment of dipoles at low temperatures. This does indeed lead to a downturn in the dielectric susceptibility with decreasing temperatures at sufficiently low temperatures in these order-disorder paraelectrics that differ strongly from the displacive paraelectrics being considered here (see, e.g., ). Another alternative explanation involves a possible re- finement of the LKSR model , which, as already noted, predicts correctly the linear relationship between (T ∗)2 and χ−1(0). The chief weakness of this model, namely the predicted (−T 4) temperature dependence of χ−1(T) below T ∗, compared with the observed (−T) form, might be corrected via the inclusion of a low density of quasi- static modes of the lattice that can be treated effec- tively by classical statistics. To account for the observed (−T) temperature dependence, the concentration of such modes need only be minute (below parts per million) since the Debye temperature is much larger than T ∗, and normally outside the detection range of most probes. For example, the contribution to the specific heat ca- pacity would be a small and virtually undetectable con- stant offset. Interestingly, simple numerical checks show that the inclusion of such a low density of slow classi- cal modes, along with the acoustic phonons, leaves the pressure dependence of T ∗, which defines a stationary point expected to be relatively insensitive to perturba- tions, largely unchanged. This suggests that the observed (−T) variation of χ−1(T) is not inconsistent with the observed linear variation of (T ∗)2 vs χ−1(0). In con- trast, however, the dependence of the depth ∆χ−1(T ∗) on χ−1(0) is noticeably affected by the low density of slow modes and this too is qualitatively in keeping with observation (main plot and lower inset of Fig. 2, and SI Appendix). We now speculate on one possible origin of the pro- posed quasi-static modes. The LKSR model discussed thus far takes into account only the coupling of the po- larization to the lattice density or to the volume strain. It has been shown that the coupling to non-uniform strain can in principle give rise to long-range strain-mediated interactions between the polarization modes (i.e., long- range mode-mode coupling). These long-range interac- tions are capable of producing micro-domain structures in the polarization field under certain conditions , which may be expected to exhibit slow temporal fluctu- ations and, correspondingly, classical behaviour even at temperatures well below T ∗. Independent evidence for the possible existence of inhomogeneities comes from a number of studies and, for example, from recent mea- surements of the thermal conductivity , which reveal a surprisingly short mean-free path of phonons even in the millikelvin temperature range and in high purity single crystals of SrTiO3. These speculations notwithstanding, the breakdown of the LKSR model at temperatures be- low the inverse suceptibilty minimum remains a mystery and potentially a major subject for future study. We therefore conclude that the susceptibility minimum in SrTiO3 can be understood largely in terms of the LKSR model. An alternative explanation for the sus- ceptibility minimum in terms of the anharmonic effects of the long-range dipole-dipole interaction is found to be untenable at least for the case of SrTiO3. Thus, we may describe the quantum paraelectric state below T ∗ as a state in which the polarization field and the non-polar lat- tice field are strongly hybridized, with the emergence at still lower temperatures of a previously unknown regime characterized by a linear temperature dependence of the inverse susceptibility. This is in sharp contrast to the con- 6 T ∗ of the minimum of the inverse susceptibility. Predictions of the self-consistent phonon model including the electrostric- tive coupling (Equations 1-5 in the SI Appendix) for T ∗ vs (p − pc)1/2 of the inverse susceptibility vs temperature, for three values of the low-temperature and zero-pressure gap Appendix for the definition and determinations of the model parameters). The square of T ∗ is proportional to the pres- sure change measured from the ferroelectric quantum critical point at pc, in agreement with observation (Fig. 2). ventional picture in which a ferroelectric quantum phase transition separates a ferroelectric state from an unhy- bridized paraelectric state characterized by an activated form of the temperature dependence of the inverse sus- ceptibility. We have presented new experimental findings and, in the traditional way, compared these findings with exist- ing theoretical models. Our analysis does not allow us to claim that the LKSR model has been ‘proved’ even for the description of the origin of the inverse suceptibil- ity mimimum, only that it is more realistic than other proposals. Finally we note that a minimum of the inverse of the order parameter susceptibility is also observed in metals on the border of ferromagnetic quantum critical points. It is possible that at least in some cases the origin of this minimum can also be attributed to the coupling of the fluctuations of the order parameter field and lattice strain or to effects of magnetostriction in place of the effects of electrostriction in the ferroelectric systems. METHODS High precision capacitance measurements were carried out on single crystal samples of SrTiO3 from Crystal GmbH with gold electrodes vacuum evaporated onto the surfaces in a parallel-plate capacitor geometry. Measure- ments under hydrostatic pressure conditions were made possible by the development, in collaboration with Cam- Cool Research Ltd, of a piston-cylinder clamp cell with miniature shielded coaxial cables running into the sample region and electrically isolated from the cell body. This eliminates stray capacitances from the wiring and allows pF capacitance signals to be measured with stabilities of up to 10−18 F, a few parts in a billion. The shield conductors of the coaxial cables were joined together at the sample position and at the measurement instrument in the standard 2-point capacitance setup. The pressure transmitting medium was Daphne Oil 7373 and pressure values, determined from the superconducting transition temperature of a tin manometer, were estimated with an accuracy of 0.5 kbar. An Andeen-Hagerling 2550A ca- pacitance bridge was used, with an excitation amplitude voltage of 0.1 V at a fixed frequency of 1 kHz applied to the sample. The sample thickness, corresponding to capacitor plate separation, was 0.5 mm. Measurements were taken on a modified 1 K Dipper cryostat from ICE Oxford, allowing continuous stable temperature control down to 1.2 K. Typical heating or cooling rates were held at 0.01 K per minute to allow the large thermal mass of the pressure cell to thermally equilibrate; temperature errors are of the order 10 mK at low temperature. Typ- ical results of our measurements are shown in Figure 1 and in SI Appendix Figures S1-3. Data availability All relevant data are available as a data archive from the University of Cambridge repository: https://doi.org/10.17863/CAM.51389.