1 Laser writing of bright colours on near-percolation plasmonic reflector arrays Alexander S. Roberts1, Sergey M. Novikov1, Yuanqing Yang1, Yiting Chen1, Sergejs Boroviks1, Jonas Beermann1, N. Asger Mortensen1,2 & Sergey I. Bozhevolnyi1,2* 1Centre for Nano Optics, University of Southern Denmark, Campusvej 55, DK-5230 Odense M, Denmark 2Danish Institute for Advanced Study, University of Southern Denmark, Campusvej 55, DK-5230 Odense M, Denmark Colouration by surface nanostructuring has attracted a great deal of attention by the virtue of making use of environment-friendly recyclable materials and generating non-bleaching colours1-8. Recently, it was found possible to delegate the task of colour printing to laser post- processing that modifies carefully designed and fabricated nanostructures9,10. Here we take the next crucial step in the development of structural colour printing by dispensing with preformed nanostructures and using instead near-percolation metal films atop dielectric- metal sandwiches, i.e., near-percolation plasmonic reflector arrays. Scanning rapidly (~ 20 μm/s) across 4-nm-thin island-like gold films supported by 30-nm-thin silica layers atop 100- nm-thick gold layers with a strongly focused Ti-sapphire laser beam, while adjusting the average laser power from 1 to 10 mW, we produce bright colours varying from green to red by laser-heating-induced merging and reshaping of gold islands. Selection of strongly heated islands and their reshaping, both originating from the excitation of plasmonic resonances, are strongly influenced by the polarization direction of laser illumination, so that the colours produced are well pronounced only when viewed with the same polarization. Conversely, the laser colour writing with circular polarizations results in bright polarization-independent colour images. The fabrication procedure for near-percolation reflector arrays is exceedingly simple and scalable to mass production, while the laser-induced modification occurs inherently with the subwavelength resolution. This unique combination of remarkable features makes the approach developed for laser colour writing readily amenable for practical implementation and use in diverse applications ranging from nanoscale patterning for security marking to large-scale colour printing for decoration. *e-mail: seib@mci.sdu.dk 2 Ultrafast laser processing of materials holds important implications for both applied and fundamental research11, including novel possibilities for post-processing and reconfiguring nanophotonic structures12,13. Laser processing at the nanoscale often involves resonant (local) field enhancement and photo-thermal effects, for example, to modify the morphology of individual plasmonic resonators14 or dielectric nanoparticles (NPs)10. Fascinating applications range from the ultrafast delivery of heat at the nanoscale15 to laser writing of plasmonic colours with sub- diffraction-limit resolution9. Laser ablation, achieved typically at high radiation fluences, can also be used for colouration of plasmonic surfaces1, although with considerably lower spatial resolutions. Previous works on plasmonic colours2,3 have extensively utilised progress in nanofabrication technologies to accurately pattern surfaces with carefully designed plasmonic nanostructures4–6, using also replication techniques oriented towards mass production7,8. Considering a very large body of research conducted in the field of structural colours1-10, it seems unavoidable that high-resolution colour printing requires high-resolution fabrication of designed nanostructures, which would result in appropriate colours either immediately1-8 or after post- processing by laser writing9,10. In this work, we demonstrate a conceptually new approach to high-resolution laser printing of structural colours (Fig. 1) that eliminates the need for preformed nanostructures, using instead near-percolation metal films atop dielectric-metal sandwiches, i.e., near-percolation plasmonic reflector arrays (NPPRAs). The main idea is to take advantage of unique scattering-absorption properties of gap-surface plasmon (GSP) resonators16,17 (that make these particularly attractive for the environment-protected colour printing12) and laser-induced modification of local resonance properties in near-percolation metal films18-20. Here, the GSP back-reflector configuration is pivotal for improving the colour vibrancy, which is generally recognized as a common challenge for plasmonic colours10, while a very high NP surface-density in near-percolation metal films ensures high spatial resolution in laser-heating-induced NP reshaping and thereby in colour writing. Furthermore, due to inherent stability of GSP resonators with respect to surfactants, the fabricated colour prints can be protected with a transparent dielectric overlay (deposited before or after colour printing) for ambient use without destroying its colouring5. Finally, the NPPRA fabrication is exceedingly simple and requires only three consecutive material depositions, producing an optically thick metal back-reflector, a thin dielectric spacer and a very thin semi-continuous metal film. The NPPRA-based laser-writing platform (Fig. 1) is amenable to a variety of modifications through the rich physics involved in thermally and locally induced NP reshaping and associated dependencies on interfacial energies, surface tensions and laser (pulse) characteristics, among 3 others, and is thus intimately dependent on material and geometric choices as well as spatial and temporal properties of the laser. The thermally induced NP merging and reshaping can, in general, be viewed as a part of dewetting that describes the rupture of a thin (melted) film on the substrate and the formation of droplets. Thermally induced dewetting of a top metal film (as a whole) in metal-insulator-metal structures has been found suitable for fabrication of plasmonic broadband visible absorbers21 and solar absorbers22, replacing typically slow and expensive lithographic nano- patterning step with a straightforward and cost-effective heating procedure. Similar global dewetting of a silver film on glass has been used to fabricate a layer of plasmonic NPs producing dichroic colours when viewed in transmission/reflection23 as in the famous Lycurgus cup. Local laser-heating-induced NP reshaping in NPPRAs introduced in our work allows one not only to realize laser colour writing with subwavelength resolution but also to achieve polarization selectivity, an interesting feature that might be useful for polarization multiplexing. The NPPRA-based configuration investigated in detail in this work comprises 4-nm-thin (on average) gold films evaporated on 30-nm-thick silica (SiO2) layers atop optically thick (100 nm) gold films supported by silicon substrates (Fig. 1). The laser colour writing is performed with a strongly focused Ti-sapphire laser (750 nm wavelength) beam with linear polarization and average powers ranging from 1 to 11 mW with the power level maintained in a closed feedback loop and controlled synchronously with beam positioning via a computer interface (see Supplementary Section 1). The top island-like gold film contains differently sized NPs that are gradually merged and reshaped due to local laser-induced heating, changing thereby the colour of reflected light (Fig. 1). Viewing through an analyser that is co-polarized with the polarization of the writing beam reveals bright and deeply saturated colours that span from yellow for the pristine sample and low- power exposures to green (for intermediate powers) and red for the largest powers (Fig. 2a). Notably, the colours are uniform even when viewed through diffraction-limited optics, indicating that the density of reshaped NPs is sufficiently high to average out local variations in the optical response on scales comparable to the diffraction limit as observed in a colour print of the University of Southern Denmark (SDU) logo (Fig. 2b) fabricated using a computerized script5. Comparing these images with those viewed through a cross-polarized analyser (Figs. 2c and 2d) demonstrates a high degree of polarization selectivity for colours obtained at powers up to ~ 4 mW, indicating thereby the colour range that can be accessed independently in both linear polarisations. At higher powers, the colours seen in the cross-polarised configuration start to divert from the pristine NPPRA colour, and begin to exhibit colours seen in the co-polarized configuration for lower powers. Different colours observed in the co- and cross-polarized configurations are associated with different bright-field reflectance spectra (Figs. 2e and 2f) that can in turn be mapped on a standard 4 CIE-1931 and linear sRGB colour spaces (Figs. 2g and 2h). The colours observed without using an analyser and the reflection spectra obtained with unpolarized light represent an intermediate case as expected (see Supplementary Section 4). In general, even though the cross talk in the images written and viewed with orthogonal polarizations is substantial, the degree of their differences is still appreciable and can further be enhanced using image processing methods and recognition techniques. We believe that this interesting and important feature might be found useful for polarization multiplexing (see Supplementary Section 4). Local laser-heating-induced NP reshaping in NPPRAs and ensuing surface colouration introduced in our work is expected to feature subwavelength resolution because of very high densities of NPs (>> 100 μm-2) typical for near-percolation metal films. Similar to the colour laser printing on preformed nanostructures9,10, the NP reshaping requires a certain level of the writing laser power, a feature that opens a way to achieving, in general, deep subwavelength resolutions by properly adjusting the writing laser power. On the other hand, in the absence of well-defined unit cells (that one can immediately judge as being modified or not), it is difficult to quantify the achieved resolution using non-optical characterization, such as SEM imaging. Using optical images, even with high magnifications and numerical apertures, allows one to determine the resolution only up to the diffraction limit of half of the wavelength used. In this respect, the optical image shown in Fig. 2b indicates that the spatial resolution is close to or even better than the wavelength when imaging with the co-polarized (with respect to the writing polarization) illumination. In the course of our investigations, we have used for colour printing different NPPRA configurations, i.e., having thicknesses of both spacer SiO2 layers and thin island-like gold films, and found the effect of polarization-selective laser colour printing to be remarkably robust (see Supplementary Section 6). The practical applicability of colour printing schemes hinges on the robustness of the printed colours under often chemically and mechanically corrosive influences of the environment. While colours in the simple configuration with a laser-reshaped gold top layer can simply be wiped off with a light touch, the presented approach suggests various schemes of protection with a dielectric overlay due to the inherent stability of GSP resonators with respect to surfactants5. Thus, we have demonstrated both that the fabricated colour prints can be protected with a transparent dielectric (polymer) overlay for ambient use without destroying its colouring, and the possibility for laser colour printing on SiO2-protected NPPRAs (see Supplementary Section 7). Laser-heating induced morphological changes in near-percolation metal films have recently been considered using two-photon luminescence (TPL) imaging18,19 and scanning (amplitude-phase resolved) near-field optical micrscopy19 as well as bright-field optical microscopy along with 5 electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS)20. In general, highly localized heating, which results in NP merging and reshaping upon laser light exposure, originates from the excitation of strongly enhanced and confined (dipolar) resonant surface plasmon (SP) excitations, whose existence for thin near-percolation (island-like) metal films illuminated with practically any wavelength is well documented19,20,24-26. The presence of an optically thick metal back-reflector changes drastically both underlying physical mechanisms involved and their optical manifestation. Thus, in the case of plasmonic metasurfaces, we established that the presence of a back reflector enhances dramatically the scattering contribution from induced magnetic dipoles17 and opens thereby the possibility for controlling the reflected field phase within the whole 2π range27. In the current case of laser colour writing with NPPRAs, we have experimentally established using TPL imaging of coloured NPPRA areas intimate relationship between plasmonic resonances (see Supplementary Section 8). Further understanding of underlying physical mechanisms involved in the proposed approach for colour printing requires constructing an adequate physical system amenable to modelling of its optical properties. To this end, we have verified the correlation between the surface morphology reconstructed using the SEM images and the optical reflectance spectra calculated using three-dimensional finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations28. Using the SEM images of three different areas (pristine and illuminated with a linearly polarized 3.9 and 7.3 mW beam) of a 4-nm-thin gold island-like film showing three distinct colours, yellow, green and red (Fig. 3a), we calculated the reflectance spectra for the co- and cross-polarized illumination (Fig. 3b) and their colour representations (Fig. 3c). It is seen that the simulations reproduce qualitatively the experimental observations of spectra and colours, including the effect of polarization sensitivity (cf. Fig. 2e-h and Fig. 3b,c) that is apparently introduced by the melting-induced anisotropy in NP shapes19,20. The electric (Ex) and magnetic (Hy) field magnitude distributions (Fig. 3d) indicate the occurrence of localized SP modes (hot spots) typical for near-percolation metal films24-26 revealed by the electric field distributions as well as relatively weakly localized GSP modes (due to their scattering by random nanostructures) revealed by the magnetic field distributions. These underlying physical mechanisms responsible for both selection of strongly heated NPs and their merging and reshaping were further revealed by simulating the absorption spectra for different material compositions based on the same random nanostructure reconstructed from the SEM image of the red-coloured surface (see Supplementary Section 2). We found the absorption spectra originate from the interband absorption in the thick bottom gold layer for short (< 500 nm) wavelengths, while the direct absorption in the top gold nanostructured film contributes primarily to the total absorption for long (> 700 nm) wavelengths. In the intermediate wavelength range (500 nm < λ < 700 nm), the absorption due to the strongly localized SP and weakly localized GSP modes becomes 6 dominant. Finally, a special role played by the circumstance that NP shapes are different from spherical ones for the observed polarization sensitivity19,20 was further emphasized using simulations of reflectance spectra from regular arrays of gold ellipsoidal NPs supported by dielectric-metal sandwiches (see Supplementary Section 3). The polarization selectivity discussed at length in the previous sections becomes detrimental when targeting conventional colour printing with prints to be viewed with ambient (unpolarized) light. In order to produce polarization-independent colour images we employed circularly polarized light for laser colour printing. We found that the corresponding colour prints look identical for all polarizations as well as for unpolarised light (see Supplementary Section 5) and even exhibit a bit brighter and more intense colours than those observed with the co-polarized writing and viewing, although the difference being admittedly small (cf. Fig 2b and Fig. 4a). Polarization insensitive printing with circularly polarized light is a nontrivial feature, when taking into account the demonstration of chiral SP multiple scattering by random surface nanostructures exploited for on- chip spectro-polarimetry29. In the current configuration, random NPs involved in scattering of various SP modes as discussed above are significantly smaller, and the regime of strong multiple scattering (resulting in strong localization) required for chiral sensitivity29 is apparently not accessible. We further used the printed image for determination of the spatial resolution by superimposing optical microscopy and SEM images and highlighting thereby the correlation between structural colours and the morphology of island-like film (Fig. 4). Analysing the SEM zoom shown in Fig. 4c, one infers that the width of transition between modified (by laser writing) and pristine film surface is at the level of 400 nm, or even smaller, justifying thereby our claim of the subwavelength resolution in the considered approach for laser colour printing. In summary, we have demonstrated the usage of near-percolation plasmonic reflector arrays for laser printing of structured colours. Scanning rapidly (~ 20 μm/s) across 4-nm-thin island-like gold films supported by 30-nm-thin silica layers atop 100-nm-thick gold layers with a strongly focused Ti-sapphire laser beam, while adjusting the average laser power from 1 to 10 mW, we have produced bright colours varying from green to red by laser-heating-induced merging and reshaping of gold islands. Both polarization sensitive and independent colour writing were demonstrated using linearly and circularly polarized light, respectively. In the case of linearly polarized writing, the difference between cross-polarized images is substantial, suggesting important perspectives for polarization multiplexing. The fabrication procedure for near-percolation reflector arrays is exceedingly simple requiring only three consecutive material depositions (to produce an optically thick metal back-reflector, a thin dielectric spacer and a very thin semi-continuous metal film) and 7 thereby truly scalable to mass production. At the same time, the laser-induced modification occurs inherently with the subwavelength resolution, while the fabricated colour prints can be protected with a transparent dielectric overlay for ambient use without destroying its colouring. Moreover, we have also demonstrated the possibility for laser colour printing on polymer-protected near- percolation plasmonic reflector arrays, a procedure that allows one to separate the process of pristine sample fabrication and that of laser colour printing. The unique combination of aforementioned remarkable features makes the approach developed for laser colour writing readily amenable for practical implementation and use in diverse applications ranging from nanoscale patterning for security marking to large-scale colour printing for decoration. Methods Methods and any associated references are available in the online version of the paper as supplementary information. Acknowledgments S. I. B. acknowledges the European Research Council, Grant 341054 (PLAQNAP). N. A. M. is a VILLUM Investigator supported by VILLUM FONDEN (grant No. 16498). Centre for Nano Optics is financially supported by the University of Southern Denmark (SDU 2020 funding). Author contributions S. I. B. conceived the idea. A. S. R. and S. M. N. contributed equally to this work. A. S. R. and Y. C. fabricated the substrates. Y. C. did the SEM characterisation, while A. S. R. and S. M. N. performed the laser writing and optical characterisation. J. B. performed characterization by two- photon induced photoluminescence microscopy. Y. Y. conducted the analysis of underlying physical effects involved in NPPRA colouring. S. B. evaluated contributions to the reflection spectra of differently sized NPs using a semi-analytic model. S. I. B., J. B., and N. A. M. supervised the project and provided feedback on the experiments. All authors contributed to the interpretation of results and participated in the preparation of manuscript. Additional information Supplementary information is available in the online version of the paper. Reprints and permission information is available online at www.nature.com/reprints. Competing financial interests The authors declare no competing financial interests. 8