1 Local photo-mechanical stiffness revealed in gold nanoparticles supracrystals by ultrafast small-angle electron diffraction Giulia Fulvia Mancini1,2,*, Francesco Pennacchio3, Tatiana Latychevskaia4, Javier Reguera5, Francesco Stellacci6 and Fabrizio Carbone3,* 1 Laboratory for Ultrafast Spectroscopy, Lausanne Center for Ultrafast Science (LACUS), École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. 2 Paul Scherrer Institut, WSLA/210, 5232 PSI Villigen, Switzerland. 3Laboratory for Ultrafast Microscopy and Electron Scattering, Lausanne Center for Ultrafast Science (LACUS), École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. 4Physics Institute, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland. 5CIC biomaGUNE, Paseo de Miramón 182C, 20009 Donostia-San Sebastian, Spain. Ikerbasque, Basque Foundation for Science, 48011 Bilbao, Spain. 6Supramolecular Nanomaterials and Interfaces Laboratory, Institute of Materials, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. * Email: giulia.mancini@psi.ch; fabrizio.carbone@epfl.ch Abstract We demonstrate that highly-ordered two-dimensional crystals of ligand-capped gold nanoparticles display a local photo-mechanical stiffness as high as that of solids such as graphite. In out-of equilibrium electron diffraction experiments, a strong temperature jump is induced in a thin film with a femtosecond laser pulse. The initial electronic excitation transfers energy to the underlying structural degrees of freedom, with a rate generally proportional to the stiffness of the material. With femtosecond small-angle electron diffraction, we observe the temporal evolution of the diffraction feature associated to the nearest-neighbor nanoparticle distance. The Debye-Waller decay for the octanethiol-capped nanoparticles supracrystal, in particular, is found to be unexpectedly fast, almost as fast as the stiffest solid known and observed by the same technique, i.e. graphite. Our observations unravel that local stiffness in a dense supramolecular assembly can be created by Van der Waals interactions up to a level comparable to crystalline systems characterized by covalent bonding. 2 Main text Two-dimensional supracrystals created by self-assembly of nanoparticles (NPs) offer a route toward engineering materials with specific functionalities . The building blocks are metallic core NPs functionalized with a ligand shell of organic molecules, determining the macroscopic structural, electronic, optical and magnetic properties of these systems [3–6]. In alkanethiol-protected gold NPs supracrystals, the competition between thermodynamic driving forces can lead to structural phases ranging from crystalline to glassy by simply changing the length of the alkanethiol molecules . The structural diversity and the stabilization of these supracrystals are primarily affected by the level of ligand interdigitation . The simultaneous characterization of the NP cores and their ligands shell, as well as of the short-range properties of the NPs assembly, has proven challenging so far . Mueggenburg et al. showed that monolayers of dodecanethiol-capped gold nanoparticles display remarkable properties of mechanical strength, comparable to that of glassy polymers, accompanied by robustness and resilience at higher temperatures . In this work, however, macroscopic (i.e., long range) properties of the overall colloidal crystal were analyzed. In alkanethiol-capped NPs colloidal crystals, the local (i.e., short-range) mechanical properties are primarily affected by the local arrangement of NPs cores and organic ligands within single grains. For this, a scattering technique is required, which can combine Ångstroms (Å) spatial resolution with sensitivity to light elements. Effects of ligand chain length on NPs packing density or disorder have recently been explored in two-dimensional ligand-stabilized NPs supracrystals by Kim et al. , where equilibrated monolayers were produced by cyclic compression and relaxation in Langmuir trough, and their phase transition from crystalline to liquid through a hexatic phase was interpreted as entropy- driven phenomenon associated with steric constraints between ligand shells. Only recently, ultrafast small-angle electron diffraction has enabled to resolve both their static ordering properties and their photo-induced motions with combined femtosecond (fs) temporal and Ångstroms (Å) spatial resolution. In this work, we observe that the light-induced decay of the intensity of the diffraction feature associated to the local (nearest to next-nearest neighbor) hexagonal arrangement of the gold NPs in each supracrystal depends on the functionalizing ligands length. For the shortest ligands, we find that the rate of this decay is as fast as what is observed in a very stiff solid such as graphite, characterized by strong homonuclear covalent bonding. The transient response from supracrystals of dodecanethiol-coated gold nanoparticles, instead, is found to be significantly slower, comparable to softer systems. Our experimental results are supported by simulations which demonstrate that the local symmetry of the NPs within the supracystal grains affects the short-range degree of coupling between the electronic and lattice degrees of freedom. We conducted experiments on three different 2D nanoparticles supracrystals. Each sample is consisting of monodisperse gold NPs of the same size (∼5 nm) coated with different alkanethiols (R−SH, R = will refer to these samples as C8, C12 and C18, respectively. Each NPs supracrystal monolayer was obtained by Langmuir−Schaefer deposition [11–13] (details provided in the Supplemental Material). We 3 generated electrons at 30 keV with a frequency tripled ultrafast 800 nm laser, 50 fs pulse duration, 20 kHz repetition rate. High-brightness, ultrashort (<300 fs) bunches were obtained by radiofrequency compression and were focused with a set of magnetic lenses to a ≈160 μm spotsize onto each supracrystal . Impulsive photoexcitation of each sample is obtained with 1.5 eV light pulses with ≈220 μm spotsize at the sample plane. The supracrystals time-dependent response is probed with small- angle ultrafast electron diffraction in transmission geometry , with the diffraction patterns forming onto a phosphor screen and detected by a single-electron counting charge-coupled device (Fig. 1). Structure retrieval methods based on the calculation of the angular Cross-Correlation Function (CCF) have proved effective in retrieving the local arrangement and the symmetry of the NPs in the supracrystal . In our experiment, this information is contained in the small-angle region of the diffraction patterns from each supracrystal, at the scattering vector s1 marked in the inset of Fig. 1. For each sample, the diffraction feature at the scattering vector s1 is related to the real space distance d1 of crystallographic planes created by nanoparticles in the supracrystal (Fig. 2b). The values of s1 for each sample are reported in Table 1. As mathematically derived in Ref. , characteristic symmetries in such dense systems of identical particles can be detected in the CCF when the coherence length of the probing wave is at least comparable to the size of the single particle. The normalized CCF is defined as [16–21]: Cnorm(∆) = 〈I(s1,φ)I(s1,φ+∆)〉φ− 〈I(s1,φ)〉2 φ 〈I(s1,φ)〉2 φ , (1) where I(s1, φ) represents the scattered intensity at the scattering vector s1 and the angle ;  is the shift between the two angles, (inset of Fig. 1) and denotes an averaging over . Following the approach described in Ref. , the normalized CCF at the scattering vector s1 for each sample was obtained from the one-dimensional Fourier spectrum of the scattered intensity I(s1, φ). Details on this analysis are available in the Supplemental Material. Fig. 2a displays the CCFs retrieved at equilibrium (i.e. before photoexcitation) for the C8 (red), C12 (orange) and C18 (pink) supracrystals. The 6-fold modulation of the CCF from the C8 and C12 samples reflects the hexagonal close-packed arrangement of the NPs in the supracrystals (Fig. 2b). This suggests the presence of a crystalline structural phase in which neighboring NPs are held together within single grains by attractive Van der Waals forces that lead to the favorable interdigitation of the ligands [7–9]. Thus, NPs in each grain arrange in crystallographic-like planes with distance d1 = 2π s1 (Fig. 2b). The absence of recognizable symmetries for the C18 sample indicates a lack of short-range order in the NPs self-assembly, likely due to repulsive forces winning over Van der Waals attractive interactions , as well as to lower NPs solubility and mobility at room temperature. A simulation of a single alkanethiol- coated NP is reported in Fig. 2d. Gold NPs cores of ∼5 nm are simulated as having a polyhedral morphology, with the gold atoms arranged in a face-centered cubic (fcc) lattice . The chemical structure of each ligand (n = 8, 12, 18) is displayed for clarity. The ligand lengths and the average core- core NPs distances for each supracrystal, retrieved experimentally with electron diffraction, are summarized in Table 1.    4 We analyzed the transient changes in the NPs hexagonal arrangement at s1 for the C8 and the C12 supracrystals and compared their time responses (Fig. 2c). The radial average intensity at s1 is calculated as: I(s1) = 1 2π ∫ I(s1, φ)dφ        (2) The transient change of I(s1) for the C8 (red circles) and the C12 (orange squares) supracrystals is reported in Fig. 2c. Each intensity trace was normalized to the average value at negative times (t<t0) and fitted to a mono-exponential curve (solid lines). Photoinduced thermal disorder in the NPs hexagonal arrangement is evidenced in both samples by the transient decrease of I(s1). Remarkably, the I(s1) decay time-scale for C8, τ = 2.6 ± 0.3 ps, is significantly shorter than the one for C12, τ = 12.1 ± 0.9 ps. The I(s1) suppression for C8 and C12 is due to the energy transfer between the electronic excitation made by light and the underlying structural degrees of freedom of the supracrystal. In Fig. 2c, both decay traces are compared to the ones detected in transmission ultrafast electron diffraction in two solid state systems characterized by a vastly different electron-phonon coupling strength, namely graphite (purple asterisks) and Bismuth (grey crosses). Intuitively, in nanostructured systems such as the ones investigated in this work, the presence of attractive Van der Waals interactions among ligands should act as a glue to hold the NPs in the supracrystal together via interdigitation. Such non- covalent “bonding”, and its dynamical response to energy transfers, should lead to a disordering of the NPs local arrangement on time-scales comparable if not slower to those of a soft solid, such as Bismuth. While our observations suggest that this scenario applies for the C12 supracrystal, where the relaxation follows a timescale τ = 12.1 ps, the dynamics observed in the C8 supracrystal is dramatically different and unexpected. In the C8 supracrystal, the intensity drop of the diffracted beam follows a Debye-Waller factor comparable to the one of graphite, which is to date the fastest ever observed in ultrafast electron diffraction . In graphite, which microscopic structure is characterized by the presence of strong homonuclear covalent bonds, a bi-exponential decay of I(s110) revealed the presence of strong coupling between the electronic subset with a small subset of lattice degrees of freedom (τ = 250 fs), followed by carriers cooling through electron-phonon and phonon-phonon scattering with a timescale τ = 6.5 ps . The comparable rapidity in the suppression of the diffracted intensity for C8 suggests that in this supracrystal the interdigitation of the shorter ligands provides a very efficient channel for transferring energy between the initial electronic excitation to structural motions of the NPs. To rationalize this result, one may consider that upon photoexcitation of a metallic system, the evolution of the electronic temperature and lattice temperature can be described via the popular two temperature model , in which hot electrons exchange energy with the phonons sub-system. Consequently, such a sub-system increases its temperature. The speed of this energy transfer is directly reflected by the evolution of the Debye-Waller effect in a diffraction experiment, as phonon excitation disorders atomic position, thus affecting the diffraction intensity . In more complex solids, it is possible that only a sub-set of phonons is excited first [25,29–31], or that other bosonic subsystems can drain the excess energy from the hot electrons. In cuprates superconductors, for example, a four- temperature model was proposed to account for the energy transfer between hot electrons, phonons, 5 and spin fluctuations . Despite the rich variety of circumstances that one can encounter, it is always true that the speed of the electronic or lattice temperature decays is directly related to both the coupling between the initial excitation and the modes transferring the excess energy and their own energy. Contrarily to all systems described above, the structural modes of a self-assembled supracrystal are not an established concept. However, in the case of the gold nanoparticles assemblies investigated in this work, it is reasonable to assume that the only subsystem to which the initial electronic excitation can transfer energy to is the supracrystal structure itself. In fact, as demonstrated in , an increase in ligand length limits the possible configurations for the ligand chains interdigitation, yielding and increase in conformational disorder. As such, these systems qualify as disordered elastic media in which the ligands are the non-covalent «springs» which couple the gold cores (i.e., the «masses»), while their length affects their interpenetration, i.e. «the spring constant». Hence, the transient decay of the Debye-Waller factor we observe is a signature of a very efficient way of transferring energy from the light-induced excitation and the nanoparticle supracrystal. Since our probe is the local order of such a supracrystal, i.e. the nearest-neighbor environment of each nanoparticle, it is reasonable to assume that at that level one can expect to have similar characteristic vibrations as those of a mass coupled to another one via a spring. In this scenario, the only plausible pathway to efficiently transfer energy from the electronic excitation of the nanoparticles to the supracrystal is if the spring constant is very high. We point out that the microscopic description of the collective modes responsible for such an energy transfer between the electronic excitation and the supracrystal, supporting our assumptions, is subject of current investigation. In fact, a complete theoretical framework is still lacking to date, despite increasing interest demonstrated –for example- by the postulated existence of short-range phonons in soft matter and liquids, also termed anakeons . The photoinduced disorder observed in both C8 and C12 supracrystals is accompanied by annealing of NPs grains , evidenced by a transient increase in the signal-to-noise ratio of the CCFs at different time delays (see Supplemental Material). This behaviour indicates that local order is impulsively triggered, within the relevant time-scales, in supracrystals where the NPs distribution is stabilized by ligand interdigitation. Next, we demonstrate for each sample the presence of a direct correlation between the observed Debye-Waller decay, and the symmetry of the NPs within the supracrystal grains. Ligand length- dependent order-disorder correlations in the three supracrystals were explored in a series of simulations. The Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) images of the C8, C12 and C18 samples measured with UED are displayed in Fig. 3. The corresponding diffraction patterns are simulated as the squared amplitude of the Fourier Transform (FT) of the TEM images (see Supplemental Material). The patterns in Fig. 3 directly visualize a hexagonal order at s1 in the C8 and C12 samples. The core-core distance values extracted from the FTs of the TEM images are in agreement with the values retrieved experimentally with electron diffraction (Table 1). For the C18 supracrystal, the observed Airy pattern is created by the diffraction on randomly distributed objects, i.e. the NPs, with an aperture diameter equal to the diameter of the NP. The Airy pattern indicates a glassy structural phase of the C18 supracrystal which was experimentally demonstrated with CCF analysis (Fig. 2a). The average of the NPs in C18 was estimated to 5.4nm by fitting the radial averaged intensity I(s) with the following function: 6 J1(πρd λz ) (πρd λz ) ) 2 (3) With J1 Bessel function of the first kind, d the NPs diameter, ρ the abscissa coordinate, λ the wavelength and z the sample-detector distance. Sphere lattice model (SLM) simulations are used to assign the different local distribution of the NPs within supracrystal grains (Fig. 4). The models are created from a two-dimensional lattice of opaque spheres (∼5 nm diameter) arranged in a hexagonal lattice. The program selects round domains and rotates them by the angle where  is Gaussian distributed with the mean = 0 and standard deviation . The domains are selected to have a size of 60nm and a centre-to-centre distance between domains of 80nm. Two distributions are shown in Fig. 4: (i) = 10° with a perfectly ordered spheres arrangement preserved within each domain (left), and (ii) = 10°, with disorder of individual NPs positions introduced by adding a random shift up to r = ±1 nm (right). The location of s1 is indicated in Fig. 3 for the experimental and Fig. 4 for the simulated Fourier transforms. In each, s1 marks the first order of diffraction from the crystallographic planes with distance d1 displayed in Fig. 2b. The similarity between (i) the [10°, 0] model with the C8, C12 samples, and (ii) the [10°, ±1 nm] model with the C18, is further confirmed by the radial averaged intensity plots in Fig. 5(a, b). Multiple orders of diffraction from the s1 crystallographic planes are observed in systems characterized by the presence of local symmetry (C8, C12). These diffraction orders progressively smear into a pattern from cahotically distributed objects by increasing the randomization in the NPs positions (C18). In the C8, C12 supracrystals where a transient suppression of I(s1) is observed, the simulations confirm a direct connection between the observed photo-mechanical local stiffness with the presence of a recognizable translational symmetry of the NPs distribution within single domains. In C18, where no local symmetry is found, the randomized distribution of the scattering objects within each domain leads to the presence of a liquid-like phase, where no correlation between transient changes and NPs arrangement can be unraveled. These observations are supported by the analysis of the CCFs retrieved from the Fourier transforms of the TEM images in Fig. 5c. We point out that minor differences (for example, in contrast at s1) between the FTs from TEM experimental images (Fig. 3) and the FTs from the corresponding SLM simulations (Fig. 4), are solely due to a different degree of disorder of spheres, and to the lack of random additional noise in the SLM simulated data, as confirmed by the full agreement between the CCFs at s1 from experimental data (Fig. 2a) and FTs of TEM experimental images (Fig. 5c). In this work, we reported that local mechanical stiffness can be created in supramolecular assemblies by Van der Waals forces to an extent comparable to systems characterized by strong covalent bonding. The key to our observation is a powerful technique which combines small-angle electron diffraction (Å spatial resolution) with ultrafast (fs) temporal resolution. Moreover, we demonstrate that the local symmetry of the NPs within the supracystal grains affects the short-range degree of coupling between the electronic and lattice degrees of freedom. We point out that our small-angle scattering technique is sensitive to the short-range arrangement of a few nearest-neighbors (alkanethiol-capped gold NPs) within crystal grains, in samples that are overall characterized by the presence of discontinuities, as dislocations and grain boundaries. Thus, the transient response observed in each sample unveils 7 information about photo-mechanical local stiffness, i.e. at the nearest/next nearest neighbor level. Because of the presence of defects and dislocations in the overall colloidal crystal, we remark that the observed stiffness is not expected to directly translate into a macroscopic mechanical property. Our results provide a seed for new theoretical models of structural collective modes in soft-matter systems. Acknowledgements This work was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF) through the grant no.PP00P2- 128269/1. G.F.M., F.C. and F.S. designed research; G.F.M. and F.P. conducted the experiment; G.F.M. and T.L. analyzed the data and performed simulations; J.R. prepared the samples. All authors commented on the results and on the manuscript. The authors declare no competing financial interest.