Mott metal-insulator transitions in pressurized layered trichalcogenides Heung-Sik Kim,1, 2 Kristjan Haule,1 and David Vanderbilt1 1Department of Physics and Astronomy, Rutgers University, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854-8019, USA 2Department of Physics, Kangwon National University, Chuncheon 24341, Korea Transition metal phosphorous trichalcogenides, MPX3 (M and X being transition metal and chalcogen el- ements respectively), have been the focus of substantial interest recently because they are unusual candidates undergoing Mott transition in the two-dimensional limit. Here we investigate material properties of the com- pounds with M = Mn and Ni employing ab-initio density functional and dynamical mean-field calculations, especially their electronic behavior under external pressure in the paramagnetic phase. Mott metal-insulator transitions (MIT) are found to be a common feature for both compounds, but their lattice structures show dras- tically different behaviors depending on the relevant orbital degrees of freedom, i.e. t2g or eg. Under pressure MnPS3 undergoes an isosymmetric structural transition in monoclinic space group by forming Mn-Mn dimers due to the strong direct overlap between the neighboring t2g orbitals, accompanied by a significant volume col- lapse and a spin-state transition. In contrast, NiPS3 and NiPSe3, with their active eg orbital degrees of freedom, do not show a structural change at the MIT pressure or deep in the metallic phase within the monoclinic sym- metry. Hence NiPS3 and NiPSe3 become rare examples of materials hosting electronic bandwidth-controlled Mott MITs, thus showing promise for ultrafast resistivity switching behavior. Since the first identification of the Mott metal-insulator transition (MIT) by Mott and Peierls in 1937 and the sug- gestion of the canonical Hubbard model in 1963 , many systems showing the Mott MIT have been found. They can be broadly classified into two categories, a) the filling-controlled MITs, such as in the doped cuprates , or b) the bandwidth- controlled MITs, such as in the rare-earth nickelates RNiO3 (R being a rare-earth element) or vanadium oxides V2O3 [6–8] and VO2 . Considering applications to elec- tronic resistive switching devices, the filling-controlled MIT of type (a) is not favorable due to the inevitable strong inho- mogeneity at the atomic scale introduced by the chemical dop- ing. The bandwidth-controlled MITs of type (b), on the other hand, are typically coupled strongly to the structural degrees of freedom, as for examples in the bond disproportionation be- tween the short and long Ni-O bonds in RNiO3 [10–13] and the dimerization of vanadium atoms in VO2 . Such involvement of slow lattice dynamics in the MIT is also not favorable for fast switching. Hence, systems with electronic bandwidth-controlled MITs (i.e. weak or no lattice distortions involved) are desirable for fast resistive switching . Surprisingly, there are very few solids that are known to undergo purely electronic and bandwidth-controlled MITs, as was originally envisioned by Hubbard. From the theoretical side, there is growing evidence that starting from the metal- lic side, the MIT would not have occurred in any of above three systems (RNiO3, V2O3, and VO2) in the absence of a si- multaneous structural distortion. Even less common are such transitions in two-dimensional materials, which might be use- ful for ultrathin electronic and spintronic applications, and to our knowledge there is no known example of an electronically driven MIT among the van der Waals (vdW) materials except the recently discovered Mott phase and superconductivity in twisted bilayer graphene . Here we propose new candidates for the electronic bandwidth-controlled MIT without significant structural dis- tortion among the emerging class of two-dimensional vdW materials. Our target is a series of transition metal phospho- rous trichalcogenides MPX3 (M = Mn, Ni, X = S, Se) [20– 22]. To incorporate the electronic and structural degrees of freedom on an equal footing, we employ the state-of-the-art embedded dynamical mean-field theory combined with den- sity functional theory (eDMFT), which implements forces on atoms and allows relaxation of internal atomic coordi- nates . For the optimization of the size and shape of unit cells we use density functional theory (DFT) augmented by the on-site Coulomb repulsion U (DFT+U), after which optimizations of internal atomic coordinates are performed both in eDMFT and DFT+U yielding consistent results. We mainly focus on paramagnetic phases of MnPS3 and NiP{S,Se}3 above their N ́eel temperatures (TN = 78 and 154 K for MnPS3 and NiPS3 respectively [25–27]), with disor- ments, although the behavior of their MITs in the magnetic phases is discussed in the Supplementary Material (SM). We will show that the recently discovered MIT in MnPS3 falls un- der the family of transitions coupled to structural changes, in which the dimerization plays a crucial role, therefore bear- ing a resemblance to the MIT in VO2 . On the other hand, theoretical simulations in NiPS3 and NiPSe3 suggest that the MIT in these two vdW compounds occurs at even lower pressure, and does not involve a simultaneous structural transition. Therefore they become rare examples of electronic bandwidth-controlled transitions with a potential for very fast resistive switching. Crystal structures versus pressure. Fig. 1(a) and (b) show DFT+U results on the pressure-induced change of the three lattice parameters (a/a0, b/b0, and c/c0, where {a, b, c}0 de- note their zero-pressure values) for NiPS3 and MnPS3, respec- tively. Note that here we focus on the monoclinic C2/m struc- ture as shown in Fig. 1(c). Because both of the compounds are vdW-type layered systems, the inter-plane lattice param- eter c shows a steeper decrease compared to the in-plane a and b, and the three-fold symmetry within each layer forces arXiv:1808.09263v2 [cond-mat.str-el] 4 Dec 2019 2 0.75 0.8 0.85 0.9 0.95 1 0 20 40 60 80 a/a0 b/b0 c/c0 0 20 40 60 80 0.75 0.8 0.85 0.9 0.95 1 a/a0 b/b0 c/c0 (a) NiPS3 Pressure (GPa) (b) MnPS3 V/V0 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 0 20 40 60 80 0.75 0.8 0.85 0.9 0.95 1 a/a0 b/b0 c/c0 Insulator Metal Pc in exp. Mn dimer Mn (S~5/2) / Ni Mn (S~1/2) P S (c) (d) x y z dxy dxy a b c a c panels show results from NiPS3 and MnPS3 respectively. Inset in (b) shows a volume versus pressure plot for MnPS3, where black and gray curves represent ground-state and metastable structures respectively. Thick vertical dashed lines in both plots indicate the values of critical pressure where the MIT happens. The thin dotted line in (a) shows the pressure where the a/a0 and b/b0 begin to branch in NiPS3 (i.e. b ̸= √ 3a) due to the enhanced monoclinicity by pressure. Note that, the critical pressure for MnPS3 reported in is around 30 GPa, as depicted in the figure. (c) Crystal structures for NiPS3 and MnPS3 at the ambient pressure. (d) MnPS3 structure when P > 64 GPa, where the Mn-dimer is formed parallel to b. b ≃ √ 3a in the low-P regime. The resulting volume de- crease under pressure is substantial: 40% of volume reduc- tion at ∼50 GPa compared to the ambient pressure volume, as shown in the inset of Fig. 1(b). Both compounds show MIT and structural phase transitions under pressure, but the nature of their transition is drastically different. As shown in Fig. 1(a), the MIT and the structural transition in NiPS3 occur at very different pressures, around 31 and 57 GPa respectively, while they coincide in MnPS3. Remarkably, theoretical simulations suggest that the MIT in NiPS3 accompanies no significant structural distortion (dis- continuous structural changes, for example), and is thus a rare example of an electronically driven bandwidth-controlled MIT. On the other hand, in MnPS3 the isosymmetric struc- tural transition (i.e., structural transition within the same space group symmetry) with a volume collapse at 63 GPa is crucial for the occurrence of the MIT, hence the transition is better classified as the structurally assisted MIT (see Fig. 1(b)). We note that the theoretical critical pressure of 63 GPa is some- what overestimated compared to the experimentally reported value of ∼ 30 GPa . However, we show in the SM that within eDMFT, spinodal lines extend down to a much lower pressure of 40 GPa with a much reduced energy barrier be- tween the metallic and insulating solutions compared to the DFT+U results. Inclusion of the phonon free energy and the lattice zero-point energy, which is neglected here, could then move the position of the transition significantly (see the SM for further details). In addition to the volume collapse, mostly from the dis- continuous change of a, DFT+U simulations of MnPS3 show a Mn-Mn dimerization along the b-direction with the tilting of the P2 dimer as shown in Fig. 1(d). The Mn-Mn bond lengths between the dimer and non-dimer bonds are 2.42 and 3.10 ̊A at 63 GPa, respectively, which is a rather large differ- ence. This Mn dimer formation is attributed to the direct d-d overlap between the Mn t2g orbitals, pointing directly towards the nearest-neighbor Mn as shown in the inset of Fig. 1(d). Note that the previous experimental study suggested the for- mation of Mn zigzag chains in the high-P phase , in con- trast to our DFT+U and eDMFT results. NiPS3, on the other hand, shows no such intermetallic dimerization or chain formation at the MIT or beyond the structural transition pressure, because the partially-filled Ni eg orbitals point towards the S atoms. This makes NiPS3 more sensitive to the p-d hybridization, yielding a smaller MIT pressure in NiPS3 compared to MnPS3. Such a stark contrast between NiPS3 and MnPS3, originating from the dif- ference in their orbital physics, affects the nature of the struc- tural behavior of their MIT as shown below. Note that the structural transition in NiPS3 at 57 GPa is not orbital in nature and comes purely from the reduced interlayer distance and the large overlap between the layers. We note that the two compounds show markedly different pressure dependence of the lattice parameters even before the structural transition. By comparing Fig. 1(a) and (b) it is ev- ident that the compression of c under pressure is stronger in NiPS3 than in MnPS3; while a/a0 − c/c0 in MnPS3 at 60 GPa is about 0.03 (See Fig. 1(b)), in NiPS3 it is about 0.15 (Fig. 1(a)) despite the similar volume change. In other words, it is much easier to compress NiPS3 along the layer-normal di- rection compared to MnPS3. Because the kinetic energy scale set by the hopping integrals between the t2g (for MnPS3) and eg (for NiPS3) orbitals show different anisotropy, the t2g and eg yield strong in-plane d-d and inter-plane d-p-p-d overlaps respectively (See SM). As a result, while the t2g orbitals fa- vor in-plane compression for the larger in-plane kinetic energy 3 0 0.5 1 1.5 eg’ a1g eg 0 0.5 1 0 0.5 1 0 0.5 1 -4 -2 0 2 4 PDOS (states/eV/Ni) Energy (eV) (a) P = 0 GPa 30.4 GPa 31.8 GPa 88.0 GPa |2Sz| (μB) (c) Probability (b) 31.8 GPa 30.4 GPa Insulator Metal Pressure (GPa) 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 |2Sz| (DMFT) 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 P(d8, |Sz|=0) P(d7,9, |Sz|=1/2) P(d8, |Sz|=1) phase of NiPS3 at T = 232K, calculated by eDMFT with the in- creasing pressure from the ambient condition (top panel) to 88 GPa (lowest). (b) Monte Carlo probabilities for the d8 |Sz| = 0 (purple solid) as a function of pressure. (c) Pressure dependence of the size of PM Ni spin moment |2Sz| from PM eDMFT results at T = 232K. Note a cusp at P = 30.4 GPa where the MIT happens. gain, the eg orbitals prefer to reduce the inter-plane distance, yielding the tendency shown in Fig. 1(a) and (b). Electronic MIT in NiPS3. Below we take a closer look into the nature of the MIT in NiPS3. Note that all the spectra presented hereafter are eDMFT results, where the DFT+U- optimized cell parameters and estimated pressure values are employed. Fig. 2(a) shows projected densities of states (PDOS) of NiPS3 with varying pressure from 0 to 88 GPa. It is clear that the t2g states (ag and e′ g) are mostly occupied, while the eg states are partially filled and show a narrow dip at the Fermi level at 30.4 GPa. The self-energies of the eg orbitals show poles at the Fermi level (see SM), confirming the presence of the paramagnetic Mott phase. Previously, it was suggested that NiPS3 is a negative charge-transfer (NCT) insulator with a d9L1 configuration (L denoting a S p-ligand hole) . However, our eDMFT results show that when the Ni occupation is close to nd ≈ 9, where the d9L1 configu- ration is dominant, the Mott insulating state cannot be stabi- lized, i.e., the material is metallic. The experimentally ob- served Mott insulating behavior can only be achieved with the Ni occupancy of nd ≈ 8, where the high-spin S = 1 con- figuration is dominant, i.e., corresponding to approximately half-filled eg states (see Fig. 2(b) for the probability distribu- tion in the insulating and metallic states). This observation is corroborated by X-ray absorption spectroscopy, indicating that NiPS3 is close to the NCT regime, but is still dominated by the d8 S = 1 configuration, consistent with our eDMFT results . Fig. 2(b) shows the valence histogram for the few most im- portant Ni d configurations versus pressure at T = 232K. The Mott insulating state is stable as long as the high-spin state (|Sz| = 1) of the Ni-d8 configuration is dominant. Note that we report Sz values rather than S values, because of our choice of an Ising-type approximation of the Coulomb interaction in the eDMFT impurity solver . Around 31 GPa the |Sz| = 1/2 states (of d9 and d7 configurations) become equally probable, at which point the Mott state collapses and a narrow metallic quasiparticle peak appears (see the third panel in Fig. 2(a)). Despite the enhanced charge fluctuation, the change of Ni d- orbital occupation (nd) across the transition is negligible: nd = 8.15 and 8.19 at P = 0 and 88 GPa, respectively. The in- crease of charge fluctuations with increasing pressure has an additional effect of unlocking the |Sz| = 0 sector of the d8 con- figuration, which is favored in the itinerant low spin regime at large pressure. Note that the increase of the probability for |Sz| = 0 at the expense of the |Sz| = 1 state has a large effect on the size of the fluctuating moment |2Sz|, which is plotted in Fig. 2(c). Its zero-pressure value is around 1.6 μB, which is quite reduced from the maximum atomic value of 2 μB, and once it is reduced below 1.4 μB it drops very suddenly and takes values of ≤ 1.3 μB in the metallic state. We note that the change between 30.4 and 31.8 GPa is abrupt, which is likely associated with a first-order transition, for which a co- existence of both solutions is expected. However the hystere- sis was not observed, probably because it is too narrow at the temperature studied (T = 232 K). We mention that the MIT was carefully checked by employing beyond-Ising Coulomb interaction terms (spin-flip and pair-hopping types) at a lower temperature of T = 116 K, but neither a hysteretic behavior nor a discontinuity in the energy-volume curve were found, signifying very weak coupling between the lattice and charge degrees of freedom in NiPS3 (see Sec. III. A in the SM and Fig. S3 therein for more details). MIT driven by uniaxial pressure in NiPSe3. While the crit- 4 -1 0 1 2 =1.00c0 (P = 0 GPa) 0.88c0 (P = 8.0 GPa) 84c0 (P = 12.9 GPa) 82c0 (P = 15.4 GPa) 81c0 (P = 16.6 GPa) 80c0 (P = 17.8 GPa) c=1.00c0 (σz = 0 GPa) c=0.88c0 (σz = 8.0 GPa) c=0.86c0 (σz = 10.5 GPa) c=0.84c0 (σz = 12.9 GPa) c=0.82c0 (σz = 15.4 GPa) c=0.81c0 (σz = 16.6 GPa) eg PDOS (states/eV/Ni) Energy (eV) NiPSe3 eg-PDOS in the presence of an uniaxial stress σz along the layer-normal ˆz-direction from PM eDMFT results at T = 58 K (with varying σz from 0 to 16.6 GPa). Blue and red curves are PDOS for insulating and metallic phases, respectively, when the MIT happens between σz = 15.4 and 16.6 GPa. ical pressure for the MIT in NiPS3 can be reached in modern high-pressure experimental setups, a substitution of S by the more polarizable Se is expected to further reduce the criti- cal pressure. Therefore the recently synthesized NiPSe3 can be a better candidate for realizing the pressure-driven MIT compared to NiPS3. Moreover, the collapse of the interlayer distance is expected to be sufficient to induce the MIT, which can even be achieved by the tip of an atomic-force micro- scope . As a zeroth-order approximation, we simulate such layer-normal strain by varying the interlayer distance with fixed in-plane lattice parameters, and allowing the in- ternal coordinates to relax within eDMFT. In Fig. 3 we show the eg-PDOS of NiPSe3 where the MIT happens at the mod- est stress of 13 ≤ σz ≤ 15 GPa at T = 58 K, suggesting NiPSe3 as another promising electronic bandwidth-controlled Mott transition system among these layered vdW materials. Volume collapse and MIT in MnPS3. We now address the volume-collapse transition in MnPS3. We first checked that once the optimized lattice parameters from DFT+U are em- ployed, both DFT+U and eDMFT optimizations for the in- ternal coordinates yield practically the same result. Fig. 4(a) shows the evolution of the fluctuating Mn moment |2Sz| within the PM eDMFT at T = 580 K. We also show the or- dered magnetic moment M (per Mn) within DFT+U in the N ́eel-type antiferromagnetic ordered state (grey line in the plot). Perhaps not surprisingly, the two methods show very similar behavior: an insulating state of almost max- imum spin S = 5/2 configuration in the low-to-intermediate-P regime, and a metallic state with strongly reduced Mn mo- ments above P = 64 GPa. The inset of Fig. 4(a) schemati- cally depicts the spin-orbital configuration below and above the transition. In the presence of strong external pressure, the orbitally inert high-spin S = 5/2 configuration becomes ener- getically unstable, and the low-spin S = 1/2 with the partially filled t2g orbital is stabilized with an octahedral volume col- 0 1 2 3 4 5 0 20 40 60 80 M, |2Sz| (μB) Pressure (GPa) (a) P < 64 GPa P > 64 GPa Mn t2g eg Mn 1 Mn 2 σ σ* π/δ* π/δ eg PDOS (states/eV/Ni) (b) Energy (eV) 0 0.5 1 1.5 0 20 40 60 80 M (DFT+U) |2S| (DMFT) 1.2 1.4 25 30 35 dxy σ σ* π/δ* π/δ P = 0 GPa 62 GPa 70 GPa 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 eg’ a1g eg 0 0.2 0.4 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 -4 -2 0 2 4 xz/yz xy eg from DFT+U (gray line) and |2Sz| from paramagnetic eDMFT at T = 580K (black), where both results show the spin-state transition at 63 GPa. The schematic spin-orbital configurations below and above the transition are shown in the inset. (b) PDOS from eDMFT, at P = 0 GPa (upper panel), 62 GPa (center), and 70 GPa (lower). Note that the choice of d-orbital onto which the DOS are projected is differ- ent below and above the transition (e′ g and a1g below, and dxz,yz,xy above 63 GPa). lapse . As a result, the t2g open shell in this edge-sharing geometry leads to a strong σ-like direct d-d overlap between the nearest-neighboring (NN) Mn sites, resulting in a strong tendency toward Mn dimerization . At ambient pressure, because of the weak inter-layer coupling, the three in-plane NN bonds are essentially equivalent to each other. In the high- pressure regime, however, the monoclinicity originating from the layer stacking is no longer negligible. Therefore, the NN bond parallel to the b direction, which becomes nonequivalent to the other bonds, dimerizes as shown in Fig. 1(d) (see Sec. III. B in the SM for more details on inclusion of the beyond- Ising Coulomb terms). Summary. We report a theoretical study of the Mott MIT in- duced by external pressure in strongly correlated layered vdW materials. We comment that the Mott phases in other metal trisulfides, such as FePS3 or CoPS3 , are also of great 5 interest because of their partially filled t2g shells even under ambient conditions. Overall, this family of vdW-layered tran- sition metal trichalcogenides can be an excellent platform for the study of strong electron correlations and their cooperation with spin and lattice degrees of freedom.