Irradiation induced modification of the superconducting properties of heavily boron doped diamond D.L. Creedon,1, ∗ Y. Jiang,1 K. Ganesan,1 A. Stacey,2 T. Kageura,3 H. Kawarada,3 J.C. McCallum,2 B.C. Johnson,2 S. Prawer,1 and D.N. Jamieson2 1School of Physics, University of Melbourne, Parkville VIC 3052, Australia 2Centre for Quantum Computation & Communication Technology, School of Physics, University of Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia 3School of Science and Engineering, Waseda University, 3-4-1 Okubo, Shinjuku, Tokyo 169-8555, Japan (Dated: November 8, 2021) Diamond, a wide band-gap semiconductor, can be engineered to exhibit superconductivity when doped heavily with boron. The phenomena has been demonstrated in samples grown by chem- ical vapour deposition where the boron concentration exceeds the critical concentration for the metal-to-insulator transition of nMIT ≳ 4 × 1020/cm3. While the threshold carrier concentration for superconductivity is generally well established in the literature, it is unclear how well correlated higher critical temperatures are with increased boron concentration. Previous studies have generally compared several samples grown under different plasma conditions, or on substrates having different crystallographic orientations, in order to vary the incorporation of boron into the lattice. Here, we present a study of a single sample with unchanging boron concentration, and instead modify the charge carrier concentration by introducing compensating defects via high energy ion irradiation. Superconductivity is completely suppressed when the number of defects is sufficient to compen- sate the hole concentration to below threshold. Furthermore, we show it is possible to recover the superconductivity by annealing the sample in vacuum to remove the compensating defects. I. INTRODUCTION Superconductivity in boron doped diamond has been a topic of great interest since its discovery in 20041, with the phenomena having since been reported in both single- crystal and polycrystalline samples grown by the High Pressure High Temperature (HPHT) and Chemical Va- por Deposition (CVD) methods. A wealth of experimen- tal and theoretical investigations of the C:B system exist in the literature, ranging from transport measurements and fundamental materials science of the normal- and superconducting phase of the material, to investigations of novel non-diamond phases of carbon such as super- conducting Q-carbon2. The exceptional physical proper- ties of diamond, coupled with its robust superconducting properties, have motivated numerous applications to de- vices, including delta doped superlattice structures yield- ing visible light Bragg mirrors3, diamond-based SQUID devices for magnetometry4, and superconducting dia- mond nanostructures5 and nanomechanical resonators6. Initial theoretical estimates of the maximum critical temperature (Tc) of boron doped diamond were in the range of 140–160 K by virtue of the light atomic mass of the constituent atoms and strong covalent bonds7. By taking into account disorder, local variations of boron concentration in the diamond lattice, and local electron- phonon coupling, the Tc was later predicted to be as high as 55 K for boron concentration between 10-25 at. %, with signatures of superconductivity potentially appear- ing up to 80 K in regions of high localised order8. Yet, more than a decade of experimental work has failed to achieve a Tc higher than ∼10 K, with some indication of the onset of superconductivity as high as 25 K in boron- doped diamond9, and 36 K in a boron doped amorphous quenched phase of carbon2. More recent theoretical pre- dictions by Moussa & Cohen10 for phonon-mediated su- perconductors indicate the possibility that, in the ideal case, diamond could exhibit a maximum critical temper- ature of Tc = 290 K. Most experimental data is well described by a stan- dard Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) model of super- conductivity, with phonon-mediated Cooper pairing and a Fermi level shifted inside the valence band11,12. Boron has one fewer electron than carbon, and is readily incor- porated into the diamond lattice with an acceptor level at EA = EV + 0.37 eV. An impurity band is formed and broadens as the concentration of isolated substitu- tional boron increases towards nB ≳ 4 × 1020/cm3, at which point the material undergoes a transition from the semiconducting state to a metallic state, which is widely considered in the literature to coincide with the super- conducting transition13,14. Increasing the boron concen- tration beyond this metal-to-insulator transition (MIT) point generally corresponds to an increase in the Tc, indi- cating that superconducting boron doped diamond may presently be doped sub-optimally15 and a further increase in the active boron concentration may yield higher Tc. The push to experimentally realise the prediction of near room-temperature Tc in boron-doped diamond will re- quire the incorporation of substitutional boron at val- ues as high as 25%. Given that equilibrium processes for growth such as HPHT are limited by the solubility of boron in diamond (approximately 2.8%16) it is clear that non-equilibrium fabrication methods such as CVD growth and ion implantation must be pursued. Experi- mental data suggests that boron concentration is not the only factor in achieving superconductivity, with other au- thors previously observing significantly different Tc for arXiv:1809.01800v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 6 Sep 2018 2 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 0 10 20 30 90 100 R4term(Ω) Temperature (K) As Grown After 10 12 cm -2 Irradiation After 10 13 cm -2 Irradiation After 10 14 cm -2 Irradiation After 10 15 cm -2 Irradiation After 5x10 15 cm -2 Irradiation After 10 16 cm -2 Irradiation After 5x10 16 cm -2 Irradiation After 4hr 1150°C Anneal Superconductivity quenched Superconductivity recovered Increasing irradiation fluence the eye showing that the normal-conducting sample resistivity generally increases as a function of irradiation fluence, while the superconducting critical temperature decreases. Note the break in the vertical axis due to the significantly higher R4term after superconductivity was quenched at the highest fluence of 5 × 1016/cm2. defect concentration in the boron doped layer, measured critical temperature, anneal temperature, and hole density and mobility measured at 300 K. Irradiation fluence (He/cm2) Defect concentration (vacancies/cm3) Accumulated defect concentration (vac./cm3) Tc(mid) (K) Annealing temp. (◦C) Hole density nH (/cm3) Hole mobility μH (cm2/V.s) 0 0 0 8 - 8 - 8 - 8 - 7.7 - 7.3 - 6 - - - - - - 4 1150 - - - 2.2 1250 samples having nominally the same boron concentration - a fact attributed to improved crystallinity9. The crys- tallographic orientation of the substrate used in CVD growth also plays a role, with ⟨111⟩ oriented diamond al- ways resulting in higher Tc than ⟨100⟩ oriented diamond with the same boron concentration, which may be due to a higher concentration of electrically inactive boron dimers, or lattice strain increasing the density of states at the Fermi level15,17. Recently, Bousquet et al.18 observed for the first time, in contrast to all previous results, that an intermediate metallic non-superconducting phase exists for boron con- centrations above the MIT of nB ≳ 4 × 1020/cm3, and below nS c = 1.1 ± 0.2 × 1021/cm3, corresponding to the actual critical concentration for the onset of supercon- ductivity. This result was achieved by patterning well- defined Hall bar structures to minimise parasitic currents induced by doping inhomogeneities - i.e. percolation-like current paths through localised areas of higher boron con- centration. Whereas that work involved the growth of 26 samples of differing thickness and boron concentration, here we confirm this new result by studying a single sam- ple with fixed boron concentration and systematically compensating boron acceptors with vacancies introduced by light ion irradiation. After introducing vacancies at a density sufficient to compensate the carrier concentra- tion to below the critical level for superconductivity, we confirm that superconductivity is quenched. We then re- move the compensating defects by annealing, and show that the hole concentration and superconductivity is re- 3 covered. II. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS In order to gain further insight into the mechanism for superconductivity in boron doped diamond, and to determine its robustness to damage and the effect on critical temperature, an irradiation damage study of a superconducting sample was performed. A sam- ple was grown homoepitaxially on a 3×3 mm Type-Ib ⟨111⟩ oriented substrate via microwave plasma assisted CVD using the method described in several previous pubications12,13,15,17,19,20. The substrate was held at 850◦C with a microwave power of 400 W and cham- ber pressure of 110 Torr consisting of a dilute gas mix- ture of methane and trimethylboron (TMB) in hydrogen. The methane concentration was 5% in hydrogen with a [TMB]/[CH4] ratio of 20,000 ppm, and growth was car- ried out for 20 minutes resulting in a superconducting BDD cap layer of 200 nm thickness. The as-grown sam- ple demonstrated p-type conduction, with a hole concen- tration of 3.8 × 1021/cm3 at ambient temperature, and was measured to have a superconducting critical temper- ature of Tc = 8.0 K and critical field in excess of 9 T. We define Tc as the temperature at which the resistiv- ity of the sample was reduced to 50% of its normal-state resistivity at 15 K. After growth and initial electrical characterisation, a systematic study was carried out in which the sample was repeatedly subjected to irradia- tion with a 1 MeV helium ion beam, followed by electri- cal characterisation at cryogenic temperatures. The flu- ence of the ion beam was increased with each irradiation and measurement cycle, ranging between 1 × 1012/cm2 and 5 × 1016/cm2, at which point superconductivity was completely quenched. In each irradiation, the ion beam was raster scanned over a 4 × 4 mm2 region, ensuring the whole sample was uniformly irradiated. The irradi- ation was performed with the sample held at room tem- perature (295 K), and under vacuum of 4 × 10−6 Torr, oriented ‘face on’ to the beam at a small misalignment angle of 3◦ to avoid ion channelling. During the irra- diation, the sample was glued and wire-bonded into a ceramic chip carrier. Wire-bonds were made to evapo- rated Ti/Au electrical contact pads of thickness 100 nm and 20 nm respectively, with the bonds reinforced us- ing a generous thickness of silver paste (∼300 μm). The contact pads were evaporated in a typical van der Pauw configuration at the edges of the sample, having a diam- eter more than an order of magnitude smaller than the sample dimensions. The choice of helium as the implant species was made in order to ensure the damage distribution was nominally uniform throughout the boron doped top layer, with the end-of-range of such light ions lying deep inside the sub- strate, well beyond the doped region. This was confirmed by modelling the Stopping and Range of Ions in Mat- ter (SRIM) software (Figure 2). The heavy damage and 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 1019 1020 1015 1016 1017 1018 1019 Total vacancies (cm-3) Concentration (He.cm-3) Depth (μm) SRIM simulation of 1 MeV He ion irradiation (1 × 1014 cm−2 fluence) of pure diamond, calculated with a density and displacement energy of of 3.51 g/cm3 and 50 eV, respectively. The 200 nm thickness of the boron doped surface layer is shown with a dashed line to emphasise that the end of range of the ions lies far beyond in the undoped ⟨111⟩ dia- mond substrate. The vacancy profile within the doped layer is relatively uniform, and the end of range of the ions lies approximately 1.5 μm beyond the interface (RP = 1.72μm, ∆RP = 54 nm). amorphization of the lattice from the ions was thus placed deep in the insulating, unmeasured substrate, and only point defects from ion track damage were introduced into the superconducting surface layer. The effect of ion irra- diation damage in the contact pad regions is limited to the very surface of the thick reinforcing silver paste layer, effectively shielding the evaporated ohmic contact pads and the superconducting diamond region directly under- neath them. The sub-contact regions remaining unirra- diated does not affect the electrical measurements, as the path of the current in the van der Pauw measurement is across the bulk irradiated sample region. Each resultant vacancy acts as a donor which will com- pensate the hole introduced by a single substitutional boron atom. Thus, without changing the concentration or distribution of boron in the sample, it becomes pos- sible to progressively compensate more and more holes until the superconductivity is quenched. The effect of the strain induced by the buried damage layer (peak depth 1.72 μm) on the surface boron doped layer is not expected to be significant. Cross-sectional TEM of diamond sam- ples implanted with high energy helium ions shows that the lattice strain is well confined around the amorphized end-of-range of the ions21. After each irradiation, the sample underwent standard electrical and Hall measurements at room temperature and magnetic fields up to 0.7 T to determine resistiv- ity, mobility, and charge carrier density. The sample was then mounted in a dilution refrigerator and cooled to approximately 50 mK while undergoing four-terminal re- sistance measurement using standard low noise lock-in amplifier techniques. All measurements were made in a four-terminal van der Pauw configuration using the same pair of contacts for driving current and measuring voltage each time. 4 1x10 21 2x10 21 3x10 21 4x10 21 5x10 21 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Tc(mid) Tc(mid) (K) Hole concentration (cm -3) Superconductivity destroyed 10 12 10 13 10 14 10 15 10 16 10 17 10 21 2x10 21 3x10 21 4x10 21 5x10 21 Superconductivity destroyed Hole concentration (cm -3) Irradiation fluence (He/cm 2) Hole concentration 10 17 10 18 10 19 10 20 10 21 10 22 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Tc(mid) Tc(mid) (K) Accumulated vacancy density (vac./cm 3) Superconductivity destroyed (c) (b) (a) SRIM. The Tc is set to zero when superconductivity is completely quenched. Error bars in Tc are smaller than the data point symbols. (b) Bulk carrier (hole) concentration as determined by Hall measurements at 295 K, as a function of irradiation fluence. (c) Measured Tc(mid) as a function of hole concentration. III. RESULTS ple below 15 K as a function of irradiation fluence, and fect concentration in the 200 nm superconducting cap layer as modelled by SRIM, superconducting critical tem- perature, and the hole concentration and mobility deter- mined from electrical measurements. To within the error of the measurement, no change in Tc was seen for an ir- radiation fluence up to 1 × 1014/cm2. At fluences above this level, three general trends were observed: 1. The bulk resistivity of the sample (measured cryo- genically, above Tc) increased with increasing flu- ence, 2. The superconducting Tc decreased, as well as the charge carrier (hole) concentration nH, 3. The width of the superconducting transition, i.e. the difference between the onset of superconductiv- ity and the offset (zero resistance) was broadened. The width of the transition in particular suggests an increasingly inhomogeneous material, with the accumu- lated damage from the ion irradiation creating localised regions of differing defect density and nanoscale order, with a spectrum of critical temperatures. While the sam- ple remained superconducting at 6 K after accumulating a vacancy concentration of 8 × 1020/cm3, the final irradi- ation at a fluence of 5 × 1016/cm2 led to a large increase in the resistivity of the sample and complete quenching of superconductivity above our base temperature of 50 mK. mulated vacancy density and hole concentration, and the hole concentration as a function of irradiation fluence. The efficiency of compensation up to a fluence of 1 × 1016/cm2, that is to say the ratio of the measured post-irradiation hole concentration to the expected con- centration (pre-irradiation concentration minus the num- ber of vacancies introduced), was very high at 97%. The final implant, with fluence 5 × 1016/cm2, resulted in lower hole compensation efficiency of only 36%, but the reason for this is unclear. In any case, we found that progressively reducing the hole concentration in this su- perconducting sample also led to a reduction in Tc, with the apparent threshold hole concentration for supercon- ductivity lying in the range 1.7 − 3.1 × 1021/cm3. It has been shown previously that annealing diamond is an effective method of removing compensating point defects22. To attempt to remove the point defects introduced by helium ion irradiation, the sample was annealed in vacuum at 1150◦C for four hours, with a slow ramp up and ramp down from this temperature of approximately 10 hours each. After annealing, electrical measurements revealed the successful recovery of super- conductivity in the sample, albeit at a lower Tc. Figure 4(a) shows the same data as Figure 1 for the sample after annealing at 1150◦C, but with a vertically exaggerated aspect ratio in order to highlight an anomalous prelimi- nary transition before the bulk of the material becomes superconducting. This behaviour, which was not ob- served at any point during the irradiation study prior to annealing, suggests that the annealing strategy catalysed the separation of the material into two discrete regions with differing Tc. At such a low annealing temperature, boron is not mobile and will not diffuse in diamond, so the redistribution of boron into higher concentration areas is unlikely. We are left to conclude that domains or percolation paths through the material have had compensating defects annealed out with higher efficiency than the bulk, leading to part of the material undergoing 5 a superconducting transition at a higher Tc due to the resultant non-uniform hole density. This echoes the result of Bousquet et al.18 that highlights the need for well-defined conducting structures to avoid parasitic conduction paths and enable accurate determination of the critical carrier density for superconductivity. After electrical characterisation, the sample was an- nealed a second time using the same protocol but at a slightly higher temperature of 1250◦C. New contact pads were evaporated post-anneal and cryogenic measurement again revealed a seemingly polyphasic material, but with a lower critical temperature than after the first anneal (Figure 4(c)). The transition from the normal conducting state to superconductivity is now preceded by an initial rise in resistance, an effect which has been seen previ- ously in boron doped granular diamond23. In that case, the effect was attributed to a small degree of disorder preventing a direct transition of the material from the metallic state into global superconductivity. Instead, the material is first tuned through a bosonic insulator phase as localised disorder and the associated spatially vary- ing potential cause bosonic ‘islands’ of Cooper pairs to form. As the temperature is decreased, the bosonic is- lands grow and begin to percolate, allowing the onset of global superconductivity. Microscopic disorder has also been directly shown to cause nucleation of superconduct- ing pairing gaps in nanoscale regions above Tc in the high temperature superconductor Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ24. These localised islands of superconductivity proliferate as the temperature is lowered, resulting in a spatially distributed collection of domains with varying supercon- ducting Tc. The effect could also be indicative of that seen in disordered metals close to the MIT25,26. Additional structure is apparent in the measurement of critical field in our sample after the second anneal (Figure 4(d)), with the field for global superconductivity heavily suppressed from that measured after the first 1150◦C an- neal (Figure 4(b)). As many as six partial transitions can be seen between the metallic state at the highest mea- sured field and global superconductivity near zero field, indicating a highly non-uniform material with a distribu- tion of regions of differing Hc. IV. DISCUSSION Whereas previous work has compared CVD boron doped diamond layers of differing thickness, boron con- centration, crystallographic orientation, and almost cer- tainly differing local disorder at the nanoscale, the present work has studied a single sample of fixed boron concentration. Irradiation with high energy light ions was used to systematically compensate boron acceptors through the introduction of vacancies, with one single va- cancy capable of compensating one single substitutional boron atom. Thus, the density of states at the Fermi level EF is reduced, and correspondingly the Tc also de- 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 0 5 0 2 4 6 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 Temperature (K) 0 2 4 6 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 R4term(Ω) Temperature (K) 6 8 11.5 12.0 12.5 0 2 4 6 8 10 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 5.5 6.5 12.2 12.3 (a) T = 50 mK 4 T = 50 mK R4term(Ω) R4term(Ω) R4term(Ω) 10 15 20 25 30 35 (c) (b) (d) Magnetic Field (T) Magnetic Field (T) of (a) temperature, and (b) magnetic field after the recovery of superconductivity by annealing at 1150◦C. The exagger- ated vertical scale compared to Figure 1 is used to highlight the anomalous transition near 6.5 K. This provides evidence that the material becomes polyphasic in nature after anneal- ing, with an apparent initial superconducting transition at a temperature several degrees higher than the bulk transition of the material. The effect is repeatable, and a similar fea- ture is seen in the critical field measurement of the sample. Subfigures (c-d) show the same measurements after a second anneal at 1250◦C. creases. Our data shows good agreement with this sim- ple picture, with the measured concentration of acceptors (holes from substitutional boron) reduced by the accumu- lated number of donors (vacancies as modelled by SRIM) with each iteration of the irradiation and measurement process. At the point where the hole concentration is compensated beyond the threshold for superconductivity near the metal-to-insulator transition, superconductivity is quenched as expected. The recovery of superconductivity in the sample af- ter annealing, however, highlights that the relationship between active boron concentration and Tc is not so straightforward. After annealing at 1150◦C, the mea- 6 sured hole density at ambient temperature is the highest recorded for this sample, approximately 75% higher than the as-grown sample with Tc = 8 K. Yet despite the in- creased hole concentration, the critical temperature after annealing is only 4 K, lower than that measured at any stage of irradiation. After annealing the sample a second time at 1250◦C, the hole density increases further, though not significantly, but the critical temperature drops again to 2.2 K. Now we must reconcile the increase in the measured hole concentration and the decrease in Tc post-annealing, given that the amount of boron in the sample is fixed. The annealing process can have only either removed com- pensating defects in the sample or changed their location or bonding configuration. The increase in carrier con- centration can potentially be attributed to the removal of existing compensating defects such as hydrogen in ad- dition to the vacancies introduced during irradiation, ef- fectively activating them electrically. However, if this was the case we would expect an increase in Tc, up to a cer- tain limit. Because the only inclusion which contributes carriers to superconductivity in diamond is substitutional boron, there exists a boron concentration where Tc sat- urates due to boron clustering to form dimers. These dimers do not contribute to the density of states at the Fermi level, thereby reducing the value of Tc2. There is however some evidence to suggest that boron dimers can act as acceptors when incorporated at boron concen- trations greater than 3% (i.e. 5.2 × 1021/cm3)27. The- oretical studies of boron-based defects in diamond have shown that all substitutional boron complexes act as ac- ceptors, while complexes containing vacancies or intersti- tials typically act as donors which act to passivate holes in the valence band28. Interstitial boron are particularly effective at passivating holes, acting as donors that can compensate up to three holes per boron atom8. Because the annealing process has increased the hole density in our sample, we conclude that the anneal acts to increase the fraction of boron located in substitutional sites without being dimerized or compensated by hydro- gen or vacancy defects. This may occur either by remov- ing or reconfiguring the defects into non-boron containing defect complexes, or by enabling interstitial or dimer- ized boron to become single substitutional boron. Given that boron is not mobile in diamond at the annealing temperatures used, it is more likely that the anneal acts to effectively remove compensating defects. Boron, as a substitutional impurity, could however diffuse though va- cancies. The activation energy for this process is as high as 8.9 eV (the sum of the formation and migration en- ergy), however the presence of existing defects such as the large concentration of vacancies may allow an easy paral- lel diffusion channel29. In any case, as noted previously27 one cannot expect a simple dependence of the free carrier concentration on Tc. The apparent disconnect between the very high hole concentration and very low Tc in our sample post-anneal may be explained by localised disor- der as discussed by Moussa et al8. All valence states in boron doped diamond have strong electron-phonon cou- pling, and Moussa et al. suggest that the only way in which substitutional disorder can quench superconduc- tivity is if it is strong enough to open a gap in the valence states. After annealing, our sample exhibits clear signs of local disorder such as the broadened superconducting transition, and seemingly multiphasic transitions from the metallic to globally superconducting state includ- ing something reminiscent of an intermediate bosonic- insulator phase. It should also be noted that the hole mobility drops significantly at the point where supercon- ductivity is quenched in our sample, and further again after annealing, suggesting increased scattering of carri- ers by the defects introduced by the irradiation. V. CONCLUSION Our results indicate a threshold carrier concentration for the onset superconductivity in boron doped diamond of between nH = 1.7 − 3.1 × 1021/cm3. This result is consistent with the recent findings of Bousquet et al.18 which show that the threshold boron concentration for superconductivity does not coincide with the metal to insulator transition. Furthermore, we show that the criti- cal temperature of the material has reasonable robustness against irradiation damage, showing no degradation of Tc up to fluences of 1 × 1014/cm3, with total destruction of superconductivity at a fluences between 1−5×1016/cm3. The fact that superconductivity can be recovered in sam- ples of boron doped diamond which have suffered heavy irradiation damage is promising, and the parameters of the recovered sample suggest that localised disorder in superconducting boron doped diamond has a strong ef- fect on the density of states at the Fermi level and thus the Tc Samples grown by plasma assisted CVD currently demonstrate the highest measured Tc for boron doped diamond, but it remains an open question why super- conductivity has not been observed in samples fabricated using high energy implantation of boron into diamond, even when doped at a concentration above the MIT threshold30–32. Whilst the damage and amorphization of the lattice caused by high energy ion implantation are likely explanations for the absence of superconductivity, in-situ dynamic annealing is a promising technique31,33 for preventing significant damage and maintaining the important property of high atomic order critical for high temperature superconductivity10. Despite the use of this technique, boron implanted diamond with carrier con- centration above the MIT has still not been made to su- perconduct. The present result may explain the absence of super- conductivity in diamond doped by high energy implanta- tion of boron, which is likely to have a very large number of defects which passivate the boron and significant dis- order due to implantation damage. Given the assertion that disorder must be high enough to open a gap in the 7 valence states in order to quench superconductivity, fu- ture work should include angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) measurements of samples irradi- ated with light ions, or samples fabricated via boron im- plantation. This direct probe of the band structure may provide further insight into how higher critical tempera- tures can be achieved in this promising material. In summary, our work demonstrates for the first time the ability to directly alter the superconducting proper- ties of diamond through ion implantation, an advance which may lead to the ability to selectively write well- defined channels or regions of normal-conducting dia- mond into superconducting layers, or create the Joseph- son junction ‘weak links’ required for SQUID devices us- ing a focused ion beam. Such devices engineered fully from diamond are of interest due to the fact that in- terface and surface state noise is a major source of de- coherence for superconducting resonators and quantum devices34. The ability to create buried superconducting diamond devices through CVD growth and subsequent ion irradiation may suppress or avoid the surface and in- terface noise suffered by present qubit technology which relies on metal/semiconductor or metal/dielectric het- erostructures with complex material interfaces. Finally, the unique combination of thermal and mechanical prop- erties of diamond, combined with it’s low absorption in a large transmission window ranging from ultraviolet to infrared wavelengths lend itself well to use in integrated photonic circuits. Single photon detectors based on su- perconducting NbN nanowires integrated into diamond- based nanophotonic circuits have shown promise35,36, but the extremely high critical current of boron doped dia- mond, and the ability to grow epitaxially on diamond with lower lattice mismatch may provide performance enhancements. Using ion irradiation to define nanowire geometries could allow buried nanowires to be fabricated inside the waveguide of such photonic circuits, rather than evanescently coupled on the surface. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors wish to acknowledge that this research was funded by the Australian Research Council un- der Grant No. DP150102703, and the United States Air Force Research Laboratory under Agreement No. The U.S. Government is autho- rised to reproduce and distribute reprints for Govern- mental purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation thereon. The authors also acknowledge access to ion im- plantation and/or ion-beam analysis facilities at the ACT node of the Heavy Ion Accelerator Capability funded by the Australian Government under the NCRIS program. ∗ daniel.creedon@unimelb.edu.au 1 E. A. Ekimov, V. A. Sidorov, E. D. Bauer, N. N. Mel’nik, N. J. Curro, J. D. Thompson, and S. M. Stishov, “Super- conductivity in diamond,” Nature 428, 542–545 (2004). 2 A. Bhaumik, R. Sachan, and J. Narayan, “High- temperature superconductivity in boron-doped Q-carbon,” ACS Nano 11, 5351–5357 (2017). 3 A. Fiori, J. Bousquet, D. Eon, F. Omn`es, E. Bellet- Amalric, and E. Bustarret, “Boron-doped superlattices and Bragg mirrors in diamond,” Applied Physics Letters 4 Soumen Mandal, Tobias Bautze, Oliver A. Williams, C ́ecile Naud, ́Etienne Bustarret, Franck Omn`es, Pierre Rodi`ere, Tristan Meunier, Christopher B ̈auerle, and Laurent Sam- inadayar, “The diamond superconducting quantum inter- ference device,” ACS Nano 5, 7144–7148 (2011). 5 Soumen Mandal, C ́ecile Naud, Oliver A Williams, ́Etienne Bustarret, Franck Omn`es, Pierre Rodi`ere, Tristan Me- unier, Laurent Saminadayar, and Christopher B ̈auerle, “Nanostructures made from superconducting boron-doped diamond,” Nanotechnology 21, 195303 (2010). 6 Tobias Bautze, Soumen Mandal, Oliver A. Williams, Pierre Rodi`ere, Tristan Meunier, and Christopher B ̈auerle, “Su- perconducting nano-mechanical diamond resonators,” Car- bon 72, 100 – 105 (2014). 7 Jonathan E. Moussa and Marvin L. Cohen, “Two bounds on the maximum phonon-mediated superconducting tran- sition temperature,” Phys. Rev. B 74, 094520 (2006). 8 Jonathan E. Moussa and Marvin L. Cohen, “Constraints on Tc for superconductivity in heavily boron-doped dia- mond,” Phys. Rev. B 77, 064518 (2008). 9 Hiroyuki Okazaki, Takanori Wakita, Takayuki Muro, Tet- suya Nakamura, Yuji Muraoka, Takayoshi Yokoya, Shin- ichiro Kurihara, Hiroshi Kawarada, Tamio Oguchi, and Yoshihiko Takano, “Signature of high Tc above 25 K in high quality superconducting diamond,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 10 Marvin L. Cohen, “Conceptual progress for explaining and predicting semiconductor properties,” J. Mater. Res. 26, 11 K. Winzer, D. Bogdanov, and C. Wild, “Electronic prop- erties of boron-doped diamond on the border between the normal and the superconducting state,” Physica C 432, 12 T. Yokoya, T. Nakamura, T. Matsushita, T. Muro, Y. Takano, M. Nagao, T. Takenouchi, H. Kawarada, and T. Oguchi, “Origin of the metallic properties of heav- ily boron-doped superconducting diamond,” Nature 438, 13 Akihiro Kawano, Hitoshi Ishiwata, Shingo Iriyama, Ryosuke Okada, Takahide Yamaguchi, Yoshihiko Takano, and Hiroshi Kawarada, “Superconductor-to-insulator tran- sition in boron-doped diamond films grown using chemical vapor deposition,” Phys. Rev. B 82, 085318 (2010). 14 T. Klein, P. Achatz, J. Kacmarcik, C. Marcenat, F. Gustafsson, J. Marcus, E. Bustarret, J. Pernot, F. Omnes, Bo E. Sernelius, C. Persson, A. Ferreira da Silva, and C. Cytermann, “Metal-insulator transition and super- conductivity in boron-doped diamond,” Physical Review 8 15 Yoshihiko Takano, “Superconductivity in CVD diamond films,” J. Phys. Condens. Matter 21 (2009). 16 Yung-Hsin Chen, Chen-Ti Hu, and I-Nan Lin, “Defect structure and electron field-emission properties of boron- doped diamond films,” Applied Physics Letters 75, 2857– 17 Y. Takano, T. Takenouchi, S. Ishii, S. Ueda, T. Okutsu, I. Sakaguchi, H. Umezawa, H. Kawarada, and M. Tachiki, “Superconducting properties of homoepitaxial CVD dia- mond,” Diam. Relat. Mat. 16, 911–914 (2007). 18 J. Bousquet, T. Klein, M. Solana, L. Saminadayar, C. Marcenat, and E. Bustarret, “Phase diagram of boron- doped diamond revisited by thickness-dependent transport studies,” Phys. Rev. B 95, 161301 (2017). 19 Y. Takano, M. Nagao, T. Takenouchi, H. Umezawa, I. Sak- aguchi, M. Tachiki, and H. Kawarada, “Superconductivity in polycrystalline diamond thin films,” Diam. Relat. Mat. 20 Y. Takano, M. Nagao, I. Sakaguchi, M. Tachiki, T. Hatano, K. Kobayashi, H. Umezawa, and H. Kawarada, “Super- conductivity in diamond thin films well above liquid helium temperature,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 85, 2851–2853 (2004). 21 Barbara A. Fairchild, Sergey Rubanov, Desmond W. M. Lau, Marc Robinson, Irene Suarez-Martinez, Nigel Marks, Andrew D. Greentree, Dougal McCulloch, and Steven Prawer, “Mechanism for the amorphisation of diamond,” Advanced Materials 24, 2024–2029 (2012). 22 R. Kalish, A. Reznik, K. W. Nugent, and S. Prawer, “The nature of damage in ion-implanted and annealed dia- mond,” Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms 148, 626–633 (1999). 23 Gufei Zhang, Monika Zeleznik, Johan Vanacken, Paul W. May, and Victor V. Moshchalkov, “Metal-bosonic insulator-superconductor transition in boron-doped gran- ular diamond,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 077001 (2013). 24 Kenjiro K. Gomes, Abhay N. Pasupathy, Aakash Pushp, Shimpei Ono, Yoichi Ando, and Ali Yazdani, “Visualizing pair formation on the atomic scale in the high-Tc supercon- ductor Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ,” Nature 447, 569–572 (2007). 25 M. S. Osofsky, R. J. Soulen, J. H. Claassen, G. Trotter, H. Kim, and J. S. Horwitz, “New insight into enhanced superconductivity in metals near the metal-insulator tran- sition,” Physical Review Letters 87, 197004 (2001). 26 M. S. Osofsky, R. J. Soulen, J. H. Claassen, G. Trotter, H. Kim, and J. Horwitz, “Enhanced superconductivity in metallic oxides near the metal-insulator transition,” Phys- ical Review B 66, 020502 (2002). 27 E. Bourgeois, E. Bustarret, P. Achatz, F. Omn`es, and X. Blase, “Impurity dimers in superconducting B-doped diamond: Experiment and first-principles calculations,” Physical Review B 74, 094509 (2006). 28 J. P. Goss and P. R. Briddon, “Theory of boron aggre- gates in diamond: First-principles calculations,” Physical Review B 73, 085204 (2006). 29 T. Sung, G. Popovici, M. A. Prelas, and R. G. Wil- son, “Boron diffusion coefficient in diamond,” Materials Research Society Symposium Proceedings 416, 467–470 30 V. Heera, R. Hoehne, O. Ignatchik, H. Reuther, and P. Es- quinazi, “Absence of superconductivity in boron-implanted diamond,” Diam. Relat. Mat. 17, 383–389 (2008). 31 L. H. Willems van Beveren, R. Liu, H. Bowers, K. Ganesan, B. C. Johnson, J. C. McCallum, and S. Prawer, “Optical and electronic properties of sub-surface conducting layers in diamond created by MeV B-implantation at elevated temperatures,” J. Appl. Phys. 119 (2016). 32 Nobuteru Tsubouchi and S. Shikata, “Change of structural and electrical properties of diamond with high-dose ion implantation at elevated temperatures: Dependences on donor/acceptor impurity species,” Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms 286, 303– 33 Nobuteru Tsubouchi, Masahiko Ogura, Yuji Horino, and Hideyo Okushi, “Low-resistance p+ layer formation into diamond using heavily B ion implantation,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 89 (2006). 34 William D. Oliver and Paul B. Welander, “Materials in superconducting quantum bits,” MRS Bulletin 38, 816– 35 Patrik Rath, Oliver Kahl, Simone Ferrari, Fabian Sproll, Georgia Lewes-Malandrakis, Dietmar Brink, Konstantin Ilin, Michael Siegel, Christoph Nebel, and Wolfram Per- nice, “Superconducting single-photon detectors integrated with diamond nanophotonic circuits,” Light: Science & Applications 4 (2015). 36 Oliver Kahl, Simone Ferrari, Patrik Rath, Andreas Vet- ter, Christoph Nebel, and Wolfram H. P. Pernice, “High efficiency on-chip single-photon detection for diamond nanophotonic circuits,” J. Lightwave Technol. 34 (2016).