1 Ferroelectric switching of a two-dimensional metal Zaiyao Fei1†, Wenjin Zhao1†, Tauno A. Palomaki1†, Bosong Sun1, Moira K. Miller1, Zhiying Zhao2, Jiaqiang Yan2, Xiaodong Xu1,3, and David H. Cobden1* 1Department of Physics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA 2 Materials Science and Technology Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee 37831, USA 3Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA † These authors contributed equally *Corresponding author: cobden@uw.edu A ferroelectric is a material with a polar structure whose polarity can be reversed by applying an electric field1,2. In metals, the itinerant electrons tend to screen electrostatic forces between ions, helping to explain why polar metals are very rare3-7. Screening also excludes external electric fields, apparently ruling out the possibility of polarity reversal and thus ferroelectric switching. In principle, however, a thin enough polar metal could be penetrated by an electric field sufficiently to be switched. Here we show that the layered topological semimetal WTe2 provides the first embodiment of this principle. Although monolayer WTe2 is centrosymmetric and thus nonpolar, the stacked bulk structure is polar. We find that two- or three-layer WTe2 exhibits a spontaneous out-of-plane electric polarization which can be switched using gate electrodes. We directly detect and quantify the polarization using graphene as an electric field sensor8. Moreover, the polarization states can be differentiated by conductivity, and the carrier density can be varied to modify the properties. The critical temperature is above 350 K, and even when WTe2 is sandwiched in graphene it retains its switching capability at room temperature, demonstrating a robustness suitable for applications in combination with other two-dimensional materials9-12. The structure of a polar material effectively contains an arrow, that is, an axis along which the two directions are physically distinguishable. This is necessary for the existence of a spontaneous electric polarization. Of the 32 three-dimensional crystal classes, the ten having a polar axis are known as the pyroelectrics, because heating them changes any electric polarization along this axis to produce a voltage. When Anderson and Blount introduced3 the term ferroelectric metal in 1965, they were referring to the possibility of polar structure appearing in certain metallic crystals on cooling. They naturally assumed that, even if such polar metals exist, the polarity would not be switchable. The first definite cases of metals with polar structure have only very recently been identified4-7. Several ferroelectric insulators have been found to maintain ferroelectric characteristics in ultrathin films13-17. However, when materials with a layered structure are thinned down towards the monolayer limit their properties often change qualitatively. This is amply illustrated by graphene, which becomes a two-dimensional Dirac metal11,12; by MoS2, which changes from indirect to direct gap semiconductor10; and by CrI3, which varies between antiferromagnetic and ferromagnetic9. Another example is the topological semimetal WTe218, which becomes either a two-dimensional topological insulator19-22 or a superconductor at low temperatures in the monolayer limit, depending on the electrostatic doping level. Here we focus on another aspect of WTe2: it is a polar metal. The three-dimensional (1T′) structure has a polar space group7, Pnm21, and it remains metallic down to three layers when undoped23 or even as a monolayer when electrostatically doped20. We show here that as it approaches this limit the polarity can be switched, making it effectively ferroelectric even while it is metallic in the plane. 2 The 1T′ structure (Fig. 1a) contains b-c mirror (M) and a-c glide (G) planes, so that the polar axis, which must be parallel to both of them, is the c-axis, perpendicular to the layers7,18. We can apply an electric field along this axis using the device geometry indicated in Fig. 1b. An electrically contacted thin WTe2 flake is sandwiched between two hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) dielectric sheets, with thicknesses dt (top) and db (bottom). Above and below are gate electrodes, usually of few-layer graphene, to which voltages Vt and Vb are applied relative to the grounded WTe2 (see Methods, and Extended Data Fig. 1 and Table 1, for device fabrication and characterization). WTe2, showing mirror (M) plane, glide (G) plane and polar c-axis. b, Schematic cross-section of the device geometry used to apply electric field E⊥ normal to an atomically thin WTe2 flake. c, d, Conductance of undoped trilayer device T1 and bilayer device B1 as E⊥ is swept up and down, setting Vt/dt = −Vb/db to avoid net doping. It shows bistability associated with electric polarization up (red arrow) or down (green arrow), at temperatures from 4 K to 300 K. Here the conductance is the reciprocal of the four-terminal resistance. The undoped trilayer has a metallic temperature dependence, the bilayer an insulating one. Inset to c: optical image of a representative double-gated device. The WTe2 flake has been artificially colored red; the scale bar is 10 μm. e, Similar measurements on a monolayer WTe2 device (M1), showing no bistability. At 4 K conduction is in the quantum spin Hall (QSH) regime. Insets: location (red dot) of a center of symmetry in the monolayer, viewed along b and a axes. We define E⊥ = (−Vt/dt + Vb/db)/2, the applied electric field passing upwards through the layer, which will couple to out-of-plane polarization. When E⊥ is swept up and down the conductance of 3-layer (Fig. 1c) and 2-layer (Fig. 1d) devices shows bistability near E⊥ = 0 characteristic of ferroelectric switching, at all temperatures T from 1.6 K up to above room temperature. No bistability is seen in monolayer WTe2 (Fig. 1e), consistent with its structure having a center of symmetry (Fig. 1e inset, red dots) and hence being non-polar; this also rules out instabilities involving charge injection into the hBN. Nor is bistability seen in thicker crystals, 3 including in the situation where one is employed as a gate electrode (see Extended Data Fig. 2). This, and the larger field required to switch the trilayer than the bilayer, can be explained by screening of E⊥ on a length scale of nanometers. Similar bistability was seen in all bilayer devices (see Extended Data Fig. 3). To prove that it is associated with out-of-plane electric polarization, we made devices in which the top gate is replaced by monolayer graphene, whose conductivity is sensitive to the precise electric field Et in the upper hBN. bilayer WTe2 device (B2) having multiply contacted graphene in place of the top gate, indicating separately the electric fields in the hBN above (Et) and below (Eb) the WTe2. Scale bar: 5 μm. b, The graphene conductance Ggr is measured when a bias Vb is applied to the bottom gate with the intervening WTe2 grounded, at a series of temperatures. The two conductance states seen for the two sweep directions are associated with different out-of-plane polarization states of the WTe2 (red and green arrows). c, The behavior of Ggr (the y-axis is the same as b) when a voltage VW is applied directly to the WTe2 provides a mapping to the difference δEt = δV/dt in Et between the two states. d, Sketch indicating how the reversal of the polarization changes the electrostatic potential (from red to green) and Et (see text). e, Temperature dependence of δV , which is proportional to the polarization. with four gold contacts to the top graphene, depicted in Fig. 2a (see Extended Data Fig. 4). If the 4 WTe2 acts as a conducting sheet it will screen out any electric field due to a voltage applied to the bottom gate. Indeed, Fig. 2b shows that the conductance Ggr of the graphene depends only very weakly on Vb, except in a certain interval where it jumps between two states. The conductance of the WTe2 is bistable in precisely the same interval (see Extended Data Fig. 4). The two states must correspond to different values of Et that can occur for exactly the same set of applied bias voltages. This implies the existence of two different vertical distributions of charge in the bilayer WTe2. We deduce that sweeping the bottom gate changes E⊥ (here E⊥ = Vb/2db since Vt = 0), which at the ends of the hysteresis loop flips the polarization state (henceforth denoted by P↑ or P↓), changing Et by an amount δEt, and so changing Ggr. We can infer δEt by applying a bias VW to the WTe2 and measuring the change δV = dtδEt required to produce the same change in Ggr, as shown in Fig. 2c. For the simplified case dt = db and all voltages at zero, the electrostatic potential profile is inverted between P↑ (red) and P↓ (green), as sketched in Fig. 2d, and the areal polarization density is given by P ≈ ε0δV (see Methods). At 20 K this gives P ≈ 1 × 104 e ·cm-1, equivalent to transferring ~2 × 1011 e ·cm-2 between the two layers, a distance of ~0.7 nm. This is three orders of magnitude lower than the volume polarization density ~0.2 C·m-2 ~ 1014 e · cm-2 in the classic ferroelectric1 BaTiO3. Combined with the micron-scale device size, such a small polarization makes it very hard to detect the ferroelectricity by standard displacement current measurements. In Fig. 2e we plot δV as a function of temperature. Between ~60 K and 300 K it decreases roughly linearly with T, extrapolating to zero at roughly 450 K. However, above ~340 K the signal becomes unstable and we can no longer identify a hysteresis loop, suggesting that a transition to a nonpolar state occurs in this temperature range. We also made a simpler device with no top hBN and monolayer graphene directly encapsulating bilayer WTe2. It exhibited highly reproducible hysteresis in the conductance, visible up to 300 K (see Extended Data Fig. 5), showing that the ferroelectric switching is robust enough for applications in combination with other 2D materials at room temperature. We also investigated the effect of the gate-induced charge doping, defined by ene = εhBNε0(Vt/dt + Vb/db). The quantity ne would be the areal density of added electrons if the material were a simple metal. In Figs. 3a and b we plot the conductance at 7 K for device B1 (the same bilayer as in Fig. 1d), as a joint function of Vt and Vb, measured with Vt stepped and Vb swept up or down. Each sweep was started in the same fully polarized state. The black dashed line denotes E⊥ = 0 and the white dashed line ne = 0. The two plots differ only in the central hysteretic region, as is made clearer by plotting the difference between them (Fig. 3c). Similar behavior is seen at higher temperature (Fig. 3d, at 200 K). At E⊥ = 0, G is a similar function of ne for both P↑ and P↓ (Fig. 3e), with temperature dependence that is insulating near ne = 0 and metallic for ne > nc~2 × 1012 cm-2, as reported previously20. Figure 3f shows traces obtained by sweeping E⊥ repeatedly up and down for selected values of ne at 7 K. In each case the single conductance level at large E⊥ evolves smoothly and reproducibly into one of the two stable levels as E⊥ is reduced to zero, implying that the state remains uniformly polarized, without domain structure, at E⊥ = 0. For small or negative ne, the effect of E⊥ is large and of opposite sign for P↑ and P↓, producing butterfly-shaped hysteresis loops. For ne well above nc, E⊥ has less effect on the conductance and the hysteresis is smaller but it is still present. Hence the doped bilayer, like the trilayer, is simultaneously ferroelectric and metallic. At low temperatures (Fig. 3c) we observe an increase of the hysteresis loop width for increasingly negative ne, while at 200 K (Fig. 3d) it is almost independent of ne. When the conductance jumps there is some stochastic variation in the positions and substructure of the jumps suggesting domain dynamics. If the surrounding gates were not present to screen the depolarization field, domains would inevitably form to limit the electrostatic energy24, as observed in other ultrathin ferroelectrics13,16,25,26. In our devices, defects such as rips, bubbles and folds could 5 nucleate domains or pin domain walls. In addition, E⊥ is not completely uniform, because above and near the Pt contacts it will be reduced by screening. Indeed, the pattern of switching depends on choice of measurement contacts within a given device (see Extended Data Fig. 6). We also observe that in some bilayer devices, such as B2 (see Fig. 2), the switching field is not symmetric about E⊥ = 0. A possible explanation for this is that sometimes, despite all precautions, during device fabrication one side of the WTe2 flake is exposed to mild oxidation, producing asymmetric trapped charge. 7 K as a function of both gate voltages, for the two sweep directions of Vb as indicated. c, Difference between the above two plots at 7 K, which is nonzero in the hysteretic regime. d, Same measurement at 200 K. Dashed lines indicate contours of zero perpendicular field E⊥ and zero charge density ne. e, variation of G with ne at E⊥ = 0 for both polarization states at two temperatures. The dashed bar indicates the range of ne in a-d. f, Sweeps of E⊥ for fixed ne at 7 K. The dotted bar near the bottom indicates the magnitude of the approximate shift in E⊥ of the conductance minimum between the opposite polarization states. The fact that the conductance is sensitive to the polarization is consistent with the expectation that the polarization redistributes charge between the layers, which are inequivalent when E⊥ is 6 nonzero. While the specific mechanisms for the sensitivity to ne , E⊥, and P are still under investigation, a few remarks are in order. First, the monolayer conductance at 4 K in Fig. 1e, which is due to edge conduction since this is the established QSH regime, is almost independent of E⊥. Second, in bilayers at large positive or negative ne the reversal of P has a similar effect on the conductance to changing E⊥, by an amount ~0.15 V/nm at 7 K (indicated by dotted horizontal line in Fig. 3f). This corresponds to a change in the electrostatic potential difference between the two WTe2 layers by ~100 mV. This is of the same order as the estimated change in the potential difference associated with the polarization reverse, 2δV~ 40 mV, suggesting that the potential imbalance between the layers governs the sensitivity of the conductance to both E⊥ and P. It is also roughly the same as the width of the hysteresis loop; that is, the polarization flips roughly when the applied potential difference exceeds the potential due to the spontaneous polarization. This is another indicator that electron transfer between the layers may be involved. Third, the very sharp minimum seen in G close to ne = 0 in bilayers, visible in Fig. 3e, presumably marks the compensation point where electron and hole densities are exactly equal, suggesting that electron- hole correlation may be important. Taken together, the above observations raise the intriguing possibility that electron-hole correlation effects, rather than a lattice instability27, drive the spontaneous polarization in this layered semimetal. If this is the case, the polarization could principally involve a relative motion of the electron cloud relative to the ion cores, rather than a lattice distortion, in which case the switching would be intrinsically very fast. Ferroelectricity adds another ingredient to the intriguing combination of QSH edges, correlation effects and superconductivity already seen in this atomically thin topological semimetal. Although the QSH behavior and superconductivity are restricted to the centrosymmetric monolayer while the ferroelectricity occurs only for two or more layers, it is possible that these diverse phenomena are connected in ways which may also be relevant to understanding the properties that emerge in the 3D limit, including extreme and anisotropic magnetoresistance28,29, a polar axis, and Weyl points18,30.