Magnetic domain wall Skyrmions Ran Cheng,1, 2 Maxwell Li,3 Arjun Sapkota,4 Anish Rai,4 Ashok Pokhrel,4 Tim Mewes,4 Claudia Mewes,4 Di Xiao,1, 3 Marc De Graef,3 and Vincent Sokalski3 1Department of Physics, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA 2Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of California, Riverside, CA 92521, USA 3Department of Materials Science & Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA 4Department of Physics and Astronomy/MINT Center, The University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL 35487, USA It is well established that the spin-orbit interaction in heavy metal/ferromagnet heterostructures leads to a significant interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya Interaction (DMI), which modifies the internal structure of magnetic domain walls (DWs) to favor N МҒeel over Bloch type configurations. However, the impact of such a transition on the structure and stability of internal DW defects (e.g., vertical Bloch lines) has not yet been explored. We present a combination of analytical and micromagnetic calculations to describe a new type of topological excitation called a DW Skyrmion characterized by a 360в—Ұ rotation of the internal magnetization in a Dzyaloshinskii DW. We further propose a method to identify DW Skyrmions experimentally using Fresnel mode Lorentz TEM; simulated images of DW Skyrmions using this technique are presented based on the micromagnetic results. Introduction.вҖ”The discovery of a large Dzyaloshinskii- Moriya Interaction (DMI) in bulk magnetic crys- tals and thin films with structural inversion asym- metry [5вҖ“8] has led to a fervent rebirth of research on magnetic bubble domains in the form of smaller particle- like features called Skyrmions, which are minimally de- fined as having an integer-valued topological charge Q, computed from 4ПҖ Q = пҝҪ dxdy m В· (вҲӮxm Г— вҲӮym), where m is the unit magnetization vector. Although non-trivial to calculate, there is an inherent energy barrier associated with the annihilation of such an object when Q goes to 0 вҖ” something widely referred to as topological protection. The combination of a large DMI, which yields smaller, more stable Skyrmions, and a related spin-orbit coupling phenomenon, viz., the spin Hall effect [9вҖ“12], makes the prospect of using Skyrmions for energy-efficient memory and computing attractive . Here, we present a manifestly different type of topolog- ically protected magnetic excitation called a domain wall (DW) Skyrmion, which has previously been considered under field-theory context . It describes a 360в—Ұ wind of the DWвҖҷs internal magnetization along the wall profile and has a topological charge of Вұ1. In the absence of DMI, DWs in thin films with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy tend to form the Bloch configuration . In these walls, it is common to encounter topological defects (Q = Вұ 1 2) characterized by 180в—Ұ transitions called ver- tical Bloch lines (VBLs), as shown in Fig. 1a-b , which were once considered in their own right for com- puter memory . Adding a sufficiently strong in- terfacial DMI, however, will favor a N МҒeel-type DW with preferred chirality, known as the Dzyaloshinskii DW . Correspondingly, a VBL in the presence of DMI will become a DW Skyrmion as schematically illustrated in Fig. 1c-d. In contrast to conventional Skyrmions that can Q"="$1вҒ„2" Q"="+1вҒ„2" Q"="$1" Q"="+1" a)# b)# c)# d)# Ver*cal#Bloch#Lines#(D#=#0)# DW#Skyrmion#(D#>#0)# ЛҶx ЛҶy ЛҶz DW Skyrmions (c-d), which result from interfacial DMI. propagate along any direction in 2D and are subject to the Skyrmion Hall effect , a DW skyrmion can only move in reconfigurable 1D channels defined by the net- work of magnetic DWs. Moreover, the interfacial DMI substantially reduces the exchange length along the DW, resulting in a DW Skyrmion that is much smaller than its VBL predecessor вҖ” an observation analogous to 2D Skyrmions and magnetic bubbles. It is worth noting that unlike the conventional 2D Skyrmions that can form a lattice as the ground state , DW Skyrmions can only be metastable excitations. Their existence in systems with a strong DMI has not yet been investigated. This Letter describes the static properties of DW Skyrmions and proposes a methodology to identify them experimentally. We begin with an analytical solution of the DW Skyrmion profile obtained by energy minimiza- tion, which is found to match well with micromagnetic solutions. Based on the micromagnetic output, lorentz transmission electron microscopy (LTEM) images are arXiv:1809.02730v2 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 29 Apr 2019 2 simulated showing that DW Skyrmions should present a clear signature in the Fresnel observation mode. Analytical calculations.вҖ”We choose Cartesian coordi- nates such that the DW normal is along x and the film normal is z (Fig. 1). In the thin-film approximation, by assuming that the system is uniform in the thickness di- rection and infinite along y, we have the free energy in the continuum limit as E tF = пҝҪ dxdy пҝҪ A пҝҪ i |вҲӮim|2 + Dm В· [(ЛҶz Г— вҲҮ) Г— m] вҲ’ Km2 z + ln 2 2ПҖ tF О» Ој0M 2 s [ЛҶn(y) В· m]2 пҝҪ , (1) where tF is the film thickness, A is the exchange stiff- ness, i = x, y, z, D is the DMI, Ms is the saturation magnetization, and K = Ku вҲ’ Ој0M 2 s /2 is the effective perpendicular magnetic anisotropy with Ku the intrin- sic magneto-crystalline anisotropy. The last term rep- resents the demagnetization energy approximated in the thin-film geometry , where О» = пҝҪ A/K is the exchange length and ЛҶn(y) is a local normal vector of the DW to account for distortion in the presence of an internal topological defect. To solve for m = m(x, y), we parameterize the mag- netization vector in spherical coordinates as m = {sin Оё cos ПҶ, sin Оё sin ПҶ, cos Оё}. (2) In the absence of DMI (D = 0), minimizing the free energy leads to a standard soliton profile: Оё = 2 arctan exp(x/О») and ПҶ = ВұПҖ/2 with Вұ representing a Bloch wall of either chirality. Adding a strong DMI will overcome the demagnetiza- tion energy, leading to N МҒeel walls with either ПҶ = 0 or ПҖ. Here we choose D > 0, thus ПҶ = ПҖ at y = ВұвҲһ. As ПҶ changes, VBLs (Figure 1a-b) will gradually transi- tion into DW-Skyrmions (Figure 1c-d). Similar to con- striction of the DW profile in a VBL due to the in- creased demagnetization energy , the presence of a DW-Skyrmion also locally deforms the DW profile due to DMI. Because the internal magnetization is inevitably tilted away from the DW normal in a DW Skyrmion, there is a driving force for the DW itself to bend locally as an attempt to recover this energy; this phenomenon is similar to the spontaneous tilting of Dzyaloshinskii DWs identified in . To capture this effect, we adopt a modified Slonczewski ansatz for the profile function that involves two independent variables Оё = 2 arctan exp x вҲ’ q(y) О» , (3) ПҶ = ПҶ(y), (4) where ПҶ(y) is the azimuthal angle of the in-plane compo- nent of m and q(y) denotes the deviation of the DW center from its location in a straight homochiral DW without a VBL or DW Skyrmion; q(y) and ПҶ(y) are two collective coordinates to be solved by minimizing the to- tal energy. We have neglected a possible y-dependence of О», which is expected to become significant only for large DMI. Inserting Eqs. (3) and (4) into the energy functional Eq. (1), noting that the local normal vector ЛҶn = {1, qвҖІ, 0}/ пҝҪ 1 + qвҖІ2, and integrating out x from вҲ’вҲһ to вҲһ, we obtain the free energy E = 2tF A О» пҝҪ dy пҝҪ qвҖІ2 + О»2ПҶвҖІ2 + 2Оҫ (cos ПҶ вҲ’ qвҖІ sin ПҶ) +2О· пҝҪ cos2 ПҶ вҲ’ qвҖІ sin 2ПҶ пҝҪпҝҪ , (5) where Оҫ = ПҖD/4 вҲҡ AK and О· = (ln 2)tF Ој0M 2 s /4ПҖ вҲҡ AK are two dimensionless parameters characterizing the strengths of the DMI and the demagnetization energy relative to the DW energy 4 вҲҡ AK. In typical ferromag- nets, Оҫ and О· are small so we only keep linear order terms for these parameters in Eq. (5). Minimizing the free energy calls for two Euler- Lagrange equations. The first one ОҙqE = 0 yields qвҖІ вҲ’ Оҫ sin ПҶ вҲ’ О· sin 2ПҶ = C where the constant C can be determined by the boundary conditions. At y вҶ’ ВұвҲһ, we have qвҖІ вҶ’ 0 and ПҶ вҶ’ вҲ’ arccos(Оҫ/2О·), thus C = 0. Including the other equation ОҙПҶE = 0, we arrive at two coupled nonlinear differential equations qвҖІ = Оҫ sin ПҶ + О· sin 2ПҶ. (7) Since Eq. (5) is accurate to linear order in Оҫ and О·, we ignore quadratic terms of Оҫ and О· in Eq. (7) and Eq. (6), by which ПҶ effectively decouples from q. Then Eq. (7) reduces to a double Sine-Gordon equation that, despite high non-linearity, can be solved analytically. Defining ОІ = Оҫ/2О· as the relative strength of DMI with respect to the demagnetization energy, we obtain our central re- sults: ПҶ 2 = пЈұ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈІ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈі Вұ arctan пҝҪпҝҪ 1+ОІ 1вҲ’ОІ tanh пҝҪ 1 2 пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ ОІ2y/О»s пҝҪпҝҪ if ОІ < 1 Вұ arctan пҝҪпҝҪ ОІ ОІвҲ’1 sinh пҝҪвҲҡОІ вҲ’ 1y/О»s пҝҪпҝҪ if ОІ вүҘ 1 (8) and q О»s = пЈұ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈІ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈі 2О·(1 + ОІ) cosh пҝҪвҲҡ 1вҲ’ОІ2y/О»s пҝҪ вҲ’1 cosh пҝҪвҲҡ 1вҲ’ОІ2y/О»s пҝҪ вҲ’ОІ if ОІ < 1 4О·вҲҡОІ пҝҪ 1 + (ОІвҲ’1) cosh( вҲҡОІвҲ’1y/О»s) 1вҲ’ОІ cosh2( вҲҡОІвҲ’1y/О»s) пҝҪ if ОІ вүҘ 1 (9) where О»s = О»/вҲҡ2О· is an exchange length along y at the critical point ОІ = 1 and the + (вҲ’) sign represents the solution with positive (negative) topological charge Q. The critical condition ОІ = 1 is where the N МҒeel wall is 3 formed at y вҶ’ ВұвҲһ and a DW skyrmion with Q = Вұ1 is formed at the center. At this value, ПҶ/2 вҶ’ Вұ arctan y/О»s and q/О»s вҶ’ 4О·(y/О»s)2 1+(y/О»s)2 . For ОІ < 1, only a partial DW Skrymion with 1/2 вүӨ |Q| < 1 exists and ПҶ(ВұвҲһ) = Вұ[ПҖвҲ’ arccos(ОІ)]. For ОІ = 0, Eqs. (8) and (9) reduce to a VBL profile . When converted into original units, the critical condition becomes Dc = 2 ln 2 ПҖ2 tF Ој0M 2 s , (10) which sets a minimum DMI strength to form a full DW Skyrmion. To characterize the impact of DMI on the DW Skyrmion energy, вҲҶE (i.e. the energy cost of creating a DW Skyrmion inside a DW), we normalize by the VBL energy, вҲҶEVBL. [17вҖ“19] This leads to a rather simple form of the scaled DW Skyrmion energy. вҲҶE вҲҶEVBL = пЈұ пЈҙ пЈІ пЈҙ пЈі пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ ОІ2 + 2ОІ arctan пҝҪ 1+ОІ 1вҲ’ОІ if ОІ < 1 2вҲҡОІ вҲ’ 1 + 2ОІ arccscвҲҡОІ if ОІ вүҘ 1 (11) which is plotted in Fig. 3b along with the corresponding micromagnetic calculations to be discussed below. Micromagnetic calculations.вҖ”We used our MATLAB based finite differences code M3 . The code im- plements the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction for thin films and the corresponding boundary conditions to- gether with the exchange interaction for micromagnet- ics . As can be seen in Fig. 2 the magnetization pro- file of the analytic solutions agrees well with the full mi- cromagnetic results, including the notch-like deformation near the center which ascribes to an increasing D. Pa- rameters used in these calculations are as follows: tF = 2 nm, K = 3 Г— 105 J/m3, A = 1.6 Г— 10вҲ’11 J/m, and Ms = 600 kA/m, which are comparable to values re- ported for Co/Ni multi-layers in . The total vol- ume simulated was 128 nm x 512 nm x 2 nm and the cell size was 0.5 nm x 0.5 nm x 2 nm. In regard to future applications, the size of a Skyrmion plays an im- portant role. A conventional Skyrmion, i.e., a N МҒeel or Bloch type Skyrmion, consists of an inner and outer do- main as well as a DW separating them. The Skyrmion size is often given by its radius which is defined by the inner area bounded by the contour for which the out of plane magnetization vanishes, thereby neglecting the wall width . Because the DW Skyrmion is confined within a distorted DW (Figure 2), the conventional definition of a single Skyrmion radius is not applicable. However, one can use the DW width Wm,x at the Skyrmion cen- ter and the width of the DW substructure Wm,y along the wall to obtain an estimate of the size of the DW Skyrmion (for details, see supplemental materials). As shown in Fig. 3 both quantities decrease with in- creasing DMI. For the analytical solution, О» appearing in Eq. (3) and (4) is assumed to be independent of D. It (f)-(j) full micromagnetic solutions. Arrows indicate in-plane component of the magnetization. (k)-(o) normalized topological charge densities - here the contour lines enclose the topological charge indicated. The DMI strength is indicated at the bottom of each column. The areas shown are 100 nm Г— 250 nm. is simply given by О» = пҝҪ A/K, which provides an upper bound for the width W mic m,x from the micromagnetic sim- ulations. As shown in Fig. 3, the analytical value W ana m,y provides a good approximation for the width W mic m,y deter- mined from micromagnetic calculations. However, these two quantities do not capture the unique shape of DW Skyrmions. We therefore propose an alternative way to define the Skyrmion size and shape using the topological charge density : ПҒtop = 1 4ПҖ m В· (вҲӮxm Г— вҲӮym) . (12) The size of an arbitrary Skyrmion can now be defined as the area enclosing a certain percentage of the topologi- cal charge. Normalized plots of topological charge den- sity are shown in Fig. 2. The core of the DW Skyrmion defined by Wm,x and Wm,y contains about 20% of the topological charge of the DW Skyrmion. 4 a) b) Wm,y (red) along the domain wall as a function of DMI strength for micromagnetic (solid lines) and analytical (dashed lines) calculations. The critical DMI strength Dc is shown as a dotted magenta line. b) Corresponding DW Skyrmion energy vs DMI. Parameters used were tF = 2 nm, K = 3 Г— 105 J/m3, A = 1.6 Г— 10вҲ’11 J/m, and Ms = 600 kA/m units of kbT for T = 300K for analytical and micromag- netic calculations, which have near perfect agreement in the low D regime. For larger D, the fixed О» approxima- tion becomes less valid causing the analytical solution to deviate from the micromagnetic one. Lorentz TEM simulations.вҖ”To support future exper- imental imaging of DW Skyrmions, we employ Fresnel mode Lorentz TEM calculations on the micromagnetic output of Fig. 2. Fresnel mode Lorentz TEM is an out-of- focus imaging technique in which a through-focus series of bright field images is recorded; details regarding the simulation of relevant image contrast can be found in . Numerical profiles of an isolated VBL (D = 0 mJ/m2) and an isolated DW Skyrmion (D = 0.5 mJ/m2) are il- lustrated in Fig. 2f and i, respectively, which are used in the calculations of Fig. 4. In the absence of DMI, Bloch walls are present which display a sharp magnetic contrast b) c) e) f) a) d) and c & f) in-plane magnetic induction map of a a - c) vertical Bloch line (D = 0 mJ/m2) and d - f) DW Skyrmion (D = 0.5 mJ/m2) calculated from the micromagnetic output of figures 2f and 2i. that reverses at the location of the VBL in Fresnel mode images (figure 4a). In the presence of DMI, N МҒeel walls become the preferred configuration and do not display any magnetic contrast in Fresnel mode images without sample tilt. However, strong magnetic contrast is still observed at the location of the DW Skyrmion in Fig. 4d. This dipole-like contrast originates from the Bloch-like portions of the DW across the DW Skyrmion. Thus, DW Skyrmions would be the only contributor to mag- netic contrast in systems that exhibit DMI when exam- ined with Lorentz TEM in the absence of sample tilt. As experimental Fresnel-mode Lorentz TEM images do not offer explicit directional information regarding the magnetic induction, phase reconstruction is typi- cally employed using the Transport of Intensity Equa- tion (TIE) to calculate the integrated in-plane magnetic induction . The resultant phase map for D=0 displays contrast along the domain wall which reverses at the location of the VBL similar to that observed in the Fresnel mode image. The color map shows the direc- tion of in-plane induction matching those in the output of the micromagnetic simulation with a discontinuity at the location of the VBL. The magnetic induction takes on a distinct braid-like appearance centered around the DW Skyrmion with no signal from the surrounding DW. This signature takes on a larger footprint than that of magnetic contrast in the calculated Fresnel mode image which may assist in locating DW Skyrmions in experi- mental images. As mentioned previously, N МҒeel walls do not display magnetic contrast in the absence of a sample tilt in Fres- nel mode imaging. When a tilt is applied to the sample, an in-plane component emerges from the perpendicular induction of neighboring domains giving rise to contrast at a N МҒeel wall. This too is observed in our calculated Fres- nel mode images (Figure 5a-e); as sample tilt increases, magnetic contrast becomes more apparent along the DW surrounding the DW Skyrmion. Additionally, the con- trast from the DW Skyrmion itself remains strong with respect to the surrounding DW regardless of tilt direc- 5 a) b) c) d) e) -15В° 0В° 15В° 30В° -30В° f) g) h) i) j) corresponding in-plane magnetic induction maps of an isolated DW Skyrmion (D = 0.5 mJ/m2) at varied states of tilt calculated from micromagentic outputs illustrated in figure 2i. tion, which will be useful for confirming the presence of a DW Skyrmion experimentally. The corresponding in-plane magnetic induction maps (Figure 5f-j) further support this notion as the braid-like feature from the DW Skyrmion remains visible even at larger tilts where a strong signal is observed around the DW. In summary, we have introduced a new kind of topolog- ical magnetic excitation called a DW Skyrmion charac- terized by a 360в—Ұ transition of the internal magnetization within a Dzyaloshinski DW and defined by a topologi- cal charge of Вұ1. The DW Skyrmion analysis presented here builds off prior work on VBLs in much the same way the recent surge in Skyrmion research is rooted in decades of research on magnetic bubble memory. The static properties were calculated both analytically and micromagnetically with excellent agreement on the re- sulting size, energy, and profile. Although open ques- tions remain about their thermal stability and dynamic properties, DW Skyrmions provide an alternative strat- egy for leveraging topological protection in magnetic sys- tems with a strong interfacial DMI. The reconfigurable nature of the DWs that host these excitations could open the door to new kinds of memory and computing schemes based on topological charge. To this end, we have pro- posed an experimental methodology to unequivocally im- age DW Skyrmions using Fresnel mode Lorentz TEM to support future work in this area. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This work is financially supported by the Defense Ad- vanced Research Project Agency (DARPA) program on Topological Excitations in Electronics (TEE) under grant number D18AP00011. C.M. and A.S. would also like to acknowledge support by NSF-CAREER grant #1452670. I. Dzyaloshinsky, Journal of physics and chemistry of solids 4, 241 (1958). T. Moriya, Physical Review 120, 91 (1960). X. Z. Yu, Y. Onose, N. Kanazawa, J. H. Park, J. H. Han, Y. Matsui, N. Nagaosa, and Y. Tokura, Nature 465, 901 EP (2010). S. X. Huang and C. L. Chien, Physical Review Letters A. Thiaville, S. Rohart, E. Jue, V. Cros, and A. Fert, EPL 100 (2012). A. Hrabec, N. A. Porter, A. Wells, M. J. Benitez, G. Bur- nell, S. McVitie, D. McGrouther, T. A. Moore, and C. H. Marrows, Physical Review B 90 (2014). J. P. Pellegren, D. Lau, and V. Sokalski, Phys. Rev. Lett. D. Lau, J. P. Pellegren, H. T. Nembach, J. M. Shaw, and V. Sokalski, Phys. Rev. B 98, 184410 (2018). J. E. Hirsch, Physical Review Letters 83, 1834 (1999). L. Q. Liu, C. F. Pai, Y. Li, H. W. Tseng, D. C. Ralph, and R. A. Buhrman, Science 336, 555 (2012). S. Emori, U. Bauer, S.-M. Ahn, E. Martinez, and G. S. D. Beach, Nature Materials 12 (2013). A. Hoffmann, IEEE Transactions on Magnetics 49, 5172 W. J. Jiang, P. Upadhyaya, W. Zhang, G. Q. Yu, M. B. Jungfleisch, F. Y. Fradin, J. E. Pearson, Y. Tserkovnyak, K. L. Wang, O. Heinonen, S. G. E. te Velthuis, and A. Hoffmann, Science 349, 283 (2015). S. Woo, K. Litzius, B. Kruger, M.-Y. Im, L. Caretta, K. Richter, M. Mann, A. Krone, R. M. Reeve, M. Weigand, P. Agrawal, I. Lemesh, M.-A. Mawass, P. Fischer, M. Klaui, and G. S. D. Beach, Nat Mater P. Jennings and P. Sutcliffe, Journal of Physics a- Mathematical and Theoretical 46 (2013), Artn 465401 S. B. Gudnason and M. Nitta, Physical Review D 89 A. Thiaville, Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Mate- A. P. Malozemoff and J. C. Slonczewski, Physical Review Letters 29, 952 (1972). J. C. Slonczewski, Journal of Applied Physics 45, 2705 S. Konishi, IEEE Transactions on Magnetics 19, 1838 S. Konishi, K. Matsuyama, I. Chida, S. Kubota, H. Kawahara, and M. Ohbo, Ieee Transactions on Mag- netics 20, 1129 (1984). W. Jiang, X. Zhang, G. Yu, W. Zhang, X. Wang, M. Ben- jamin Jungfleisch, J. E. Pearson, X. Cheng, O. Heinonen, 6 K. L. Wang, Y. Zhou, A. Hoffmann, and S. G. E. te Velthuis, Nature Physics 13, 162 EP (2016). S. M МҲuhlbauer, B. Binz, F. Jonietz, C. Pfleiderer, A. Rosch, A. Neubauer, R. Georgii, and P. B МҲoni, Sci- ence 323, 915 (2009). S. Tarasenko, A. Stankiewicz, V. Tarasenko, and J. Ferr, Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials 189, 19 A. Hubert and R. Schaefer, Magnetic Domains: The Analysis of Magnetic Microstructures (Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 1998). A. V. Nikiforov and E. B. Sonin, JETP 63, 766 (1986). O. Boulle, S. Rohart, L. D. Buda-Prejbeanu, E. Ju МҒe, I. M. Miron, S. Pizzini, J. Vogel, G. Gaudin, and A. Thiaville, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 217203 (2013). вҖңMicromagnetic code M3,вҖқ http://magneticslab.ua. edu/micromagnetics-code.html. J. B. Mohammadi, K. Cole, T. Mewes, and C. K. A. Mewes, Phys. Rev. B 97, 014434 (2018). S. Rohart and A. Thiaville, Phys. Rev. B 88, 184422 M. Donahue and D. Porter, Physica B: Condensed Mat- ter 343, 177 (2004), proceedings of the Fourth Intional Conference on Hysteresis and Micromagnetic Modeling. X. S. Wang, H. Y. Yuan, and X. R. Wang, Communica- tions Physics 1, 31 (2018). See Supplemental Material at [URL will be inserted by publisher] for a definition of the DW Skyrmion widths, which includes refs [25, 38вҖ“40]. S. Heinze, K. von Bergmann, M. Menzel, J. Brede, A. Ku- betzka, R. Wiesendanger, G. Bihlmayer, and S. Blugel, Nature Physics 7, 713 (2011). M. De Graef, in Magnetic Microscopy and its Applica- tions to Magnetic Materials, Experimental Methods in the Physical Sciences, Vol. 36, edited by M. De Graef and Y. Zhu (Academic Press, 2000) Chap. 2. D. Paganin and K. A. Nugent, Physical Review Letters M. Beleggia and Y. Zhu, Philosophical Magazine 83, 1045 J. Barzilai and J. M. Borwein, IMA Journal of Numerical Analysis 8, 141 (1988). A. Cauchy, C.R. Acad. Sci. Paris 25, 536 (1847). Y. Dai and Y. Yuan, IMA Journal of Numerical Analysis