Phonon dispersion of MoS2 Hans Tornatzky,1, ∗ Roland Gillen,2 Hiroshi Uchiyama,3 and Janina Maultzsch2, † 1Institut f ̈ur Festk ̈orperphysik, Technische Universit ̈at Berlin Hardenbergstr. 36, 10623 Berlin, Germany 2Department Physik, Friedrich-Alexander-Universit ̈at Erlangen-N ̈urnberg, Staudtstr. 7, 91058 Erlangen, Germany 3Japan Synchrotron Radiation Research Institute (JASRI/SPring-8), 1-1-1 Kouto, Sayo, Hyogo 679-5198 Japan (Dated: September 11, 2018) Transition metal dichalcogenides like MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, and WSe2 have attracted enormous in- terest during recent years. They are van-der-Waals crystals with highly anisotropic properties, which allows exfoliation of individual layers. Their remarkable physical properties make them promising for applications in optoelectronic, spintronic, and valleytronic devices. Phonons are fundamental to many of the underlying physical processes, like carrier and spin relaxation or exciton dynamics. However, experimental data of the complete phonon dispersion relations in these materials is miss- ing. Here we present the phonon dispersion of bulk MoS2 in the high-symmetry directions of the Brillouin zone, determined by inelastic X-ray scattering. Our results underline the two-dimensional nature of MoS2. Supported by first-principles calculations, we determine the phonon displacement patterns, symmetry properties, and scattering intensities. The results will be the basis for future experimental and theoretical work regarding electron-phonon interactions, intervalley scattering, as well as phonons in related 2D materials. Lattice dynamics constitute one of the most fundamen- tal properties of a crystal, being the basis for mechani- cal and elastic properties, thermal transport as well as charge-carrier dynamics, phonon-assisted optical excita- tions and many more. In this view, it is highly desired to have reliable data about the phonon dispersion relation of MoS2, a layered crystal that has boosted the new research field of two-dimensional (2D) materials beyond graphene during recent years [1–4]. This is due to its fascinating physical properties in single-layer form, which it shares with related transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) like MoSe2, WS2, WSe2, or MoTe2 [5–8]. Many of their physical processes relevant for new applications , such as carrier and exciton dynamics , decay of so-called valley polarization [13–15] (the selective pop- ulation of one of the two inequivalent K points in the Brillouin zone ), electron-phonon coupling in super- conducting states , and relaxation of spins , crucially depend on phonons. For example, phonons with considerably large wave vector are required for optical absorption and emission from the indirect band gap in few-layer and bulk TMDCs. They are the relevant source for electron scattering in electron transport and are expected to play a significant role in the formation of momentum-space indirect interlayer excitons in van-der- Waals heterostructures . In MoS2 and other TMDCs, however, experimental data on the full phonon dispersion are missing. Only one high-symmetry direction of the Brillouin zone in MoS2 has been accessed so far by inelastic neutron scattering (INS) . However, the part most relevant for scat- tering with large phonon wave vectors q or between the inequivalent points K and K′ (i.e., between the valleys) is completely missing and has been addressed by calcu- lations only so far, e.g., in Refs. [24–26]. The same holds for the other TMDCs, which have in common, as an ob- stacle for INS experiments, the in-plane nature of the phonon dispersion and the lack of large single crystals. Here we present the entire phonon dispersion rela- tion of MoS2 in the high-symmetry directions Γ − K, Γ − M, K − M, and Γ − A of the Brillouin zone as determined by inelastic X-ray scattering (IXS) exper- iments. We show the existence of almost degenerate Davydov pairs throughout the Brillouin zone, as well as nearly quadratic dispersion of the out-of-plane acoustic modes (flexural modes), underlining the two-dimensional nature of MoS2. Our results are further substantiated by density-functional theory calculations and simulations of the structure factor, which determines the scattering in- tensities. They are in excellent agreement with the ex- perimental data and reveal the mixing of in-plane and out-of-plane phonon displacement directions inside the Brillouin zone. 2H-MoS2 forms a hexagonal crystal with space group P63/mmc (D4 6h in Sch ̈onfließ notation) with six atoms in the unit cell, giving rise to 18 phonon branches. At the Γ point, the phonon modes decompose into the irreducible representations Γ2H = A1g⊕2A2u⊕2B2g⊕B1u⊕E1g⊕2E1u⊕2E2g⊕E2u for the conventional definition of a 120◦ angle between the in-plane lattice vectors . If an angle of 60 ◦ between the in-plane lattice vectors is used, the irre- ducible representation B2g is interchanged with B1g and B1u with B2u. Due to the relatively weak non-covalent coupling of the MoS2 layers, the phonon branches are nearly doubly degenerate at almost all q-vectors in the Brillouin zone and can be thought of as corresponding to the 9 phonon branches of single-layer MoS2 (three atoms per unit cell, space group P ̄6m2, D3h). In Fig. 1 a, a selection of the measured IXS spectra is plotted. The displayed spectra were measured along arXiv:1809.03381v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 10 Sep 2018 2 (0 0+q 12), with the absolute value of the phonon wave vector |q| = q = 0 . . . 0.5 in units of the reciprocal lattice vector. Here, (h k l) are the Miller indices identifying the scattering vector of the elastically scattered light, i.e. a Bragg peak. The extracted peak positions thus represent the dispersion of the out-of-plane transverse modes from Γ to M, see Fig. 1 b. The IXS measurements allowed us to identify all acous- tic and almost all optical phonon branches along the A- Γ-K-M-Γ directions as shown in Fig. 2. IXS data are shown by circles together with theoretical values from DFT calculations (lines). Phonon energies obtained by Raman spectroscopy of the same sample (stars in Fig. 2) complement the IXS results with data at the Γ point. We find seemless agreement between the Γ-point frequencies and the IXS data. We observe nine phonon branches. The calculations show that they are almost doubly degenerate, as expected from the weak interlayer forces. The energy resolution in the IXS experiment, however, does not allow to distin- guish these so-called Davydov pairs: Each pair is formed by two phonon modes, where the two layers forming the bulk unit cell (i) have both the same displacement pat- tern as the single layer and (ii) the displacement of one of the layers is shifted in phase by π. At the Γ point, one of the bulk modes of such a pair is always even with respect to spatial inversion and the other one is odd . The frequency difference of the two phonons in a Davy- dov pair is very small if the interaction between the layers is weak. Only the acoustic phonons have fundamentally different behavior: one mode is still acoustic (zero fre- quency), whereas the other one has finite frequency and corresponds to a rigid-layer vibration at the Γ point. Near the Γ point, the phonon modes have well de- fined displacement direction, i.e., in-plane longitudinal a Experimental IXS spectra of MoS2 along the Γ-M direction (in the vicinity of the (0 0 12) Bragg reflection) with vertical offsets corresponding to the phonon q vector. The four spectra closest to Γ are scaled by the factor given next to the spectrum. b Extracted peak positions of the spectra shown in a. Peaks are labeled according to their symmetry and notation at the Γ point. (L), in-plane transverse (T), and out-of-plane transverse (Z). This is seen by the color of the symbols representing the IXS data, which indicates the displacement direction preferentially detected in the given scattering geometry. Towards the K and M points, we observe data points with different colors (i.e., different preferred displacement directions) on the same branch, see for instance the lon- gitudinal acoustic (LA) branch. We interpret this by an increased mixing of the displacement directions for in- creasing q. This is supported by our calculations of the phonon eigenvectors, see Fig. 3 for the example of the transverse E1g branch, and Tab. SI-III in the supple- mentary material for a compilation of all 18 eigenvectors at the Γ, K, and M points. Note that the mixing is not limited to the in-plane direction, but includes the out-of-plane modes as well, in contrast to the example of graphite . This mixing also explains why some of the phonon branches are only partially observed or show weak signal: for instance, the phonon branch with E1g symmetry at the Γ point (in-plane vibration) can- not be observed in the chosen scattering geometry (see also discussion below). However, it gains an out-of-plane component for q > 0, see Fig. 3, which results in (weak) IXS signal. Furthermore, we observe a quadratic dispersion of the ZA branch (also called flexural mode) near the Γ point, which is typical for two-dimensional atomically thin sheets and underlines the 2D nature of the MoS2 layers even within the bulk crystal. As in the case of graphite and graphene [31, 33–35], the phonon disper- sion of bulk MoS2 is thus expected to be indicative of the phonon dispersion in monolayer MoS2 as well as in related TMDCs. The phonon dispersion obtained from DFT simula- tions shows overall excellent agreement with the IXS data. As discussed in the following, the challenge for lattice-dynamics simulations in layered materials is the proper description of the effect of non-covalent interac- tions, which bind the individual layers together. This is particularly relevant for the rigid-layer, low-frequency shear and breathing-like modes in the vicinity of the Γ- point, where the force-constants are small and dominated by contributions from the non-covalent interlayer cou- pling. Therefore, we implemented the contributions from the popular DFT-D3 van-der-Waals corrections to the dynamical matrix to the density functional per- turbation theory code in the Quantum Espresso pack- age . These semi-empirical corrections introduce an additional attractive London-like interatomic potential, which compensates for the underbinding and intrinsic exponential decay of non-classical interactions in the GGA-PBE exchange-correlation approximation we used for our computations. The obtained lattice constants of a=3.158 ̊A and c=12.229 ̊A from our PBE+D3 calcula- tions are close to the lattice constants of our MoS2 sam- 3 sion of MoS2 along the high symmetry directions A-Γ-K-M-Γ. Circles in green / blue / red represent measurements probing without an error bar, the error is estimated to be smaller than the symbol size. Open symbols depict peaks with small inten- sities or larger error. Values at the Γ point are Raman and IR spectroscopy data from the literature [28–30] (diamonds) and from Raman measurements on the same sample as used in the IXS experiment (stars). Phonon branches are labeled by their symmetry within the D6h at the Γ point, as well as by their displacement (L, T, Z) and acoustic (A) or optical (O) character. For a symmetry labeling at the K and M points, see Tab. I; for a compilation of the eigenvectors see Tables. S I-III in the supplementary material. Γ (E1g) 0.5 ΓM M(B1u) the M point of the branch with E1g (TO) symmetry at the Γ point. See tables S I-III in the supplementary material for a complete overview of the phonon eigenvectors at the Γ, K and M points. ple of aexp=3.161 ̊A and cexp=12.297 ̊A, suggesting an excellent description of both covalent and non-covalent interatomic bonding in MoS2. The inclusion of non-covalent interactions leads to a noticeable improvement for the values of the low- frequency modes close to the Γ-point, which are signifi- cantly underestimated in the GGA-PBE approximation (not shown). Our calculated phonon dispersion is in good quantitative agreement with the IXS measurements for the acoustic and low-energy optical modes (Tab. I) and correctly describes the small ’bumps’ in the dispersion of the Davydov pair of the LA-derived branch [E2g (LO, shear mode) and E1u (LA) at the Γ point] along Γ-K- M-Γ, see Fig. 2. For the higher-frequency modes, our PBE+D3 approach appears to perform slightly less well compared to the Raman measurements and systemati- cally underestimates the frequencies of the Raman active modes by a few cm−1, see Tab. I. On the other hand, Molina-S ́anchez et al. have shown that phonon dispersions from calculations using the local-density approximation (LDA) offer a reasonable qualitative and quantitative description of the available data from the previous INS experiments . In gen- eral, the predicted LDA frequencies are somewhat higher than those from our PBE+D3 calculations, hence lead- ing to a slightly better agreement between theory and ex- periment for the high-energy optical modes, but a worse 4 and experiments (Raman and IR spectroscopy at Γ and IXS at K, M). The phonon modes are labeled by their irreducible representations in the factor groups D6h (Γ), D3h (K) and D2h (M). For a group theory analysis of phonons in MoS2, see also . Γ (space group D4 6h) K (D4 3h) M (D17 2h) irr. rep. Raman IR DFT irr. rep. IXS DFT irr. rep. IXS DFT E1u TA inactive →0 0.0 E′ 189 B1g 161 LA B2u E2g TO 31 – 32a inactive 32.2 A′ 2 239 Ag 235 LO A′ 1 B3u A2u ZA inactive →0 0.0 E′′ 186 B2g 176 B2g ZO inactive 56.6 B1u E2u LO inactive inactive E′′ 327 B3g TO Au E1g LO A′′ 2 334 B2g TO A′′ 1 340 B1u 338 E2g LO inactive E′ 334 Ag 353 TO B3u E1u LO inactive 384 A′ 2 384 B1g 361 TO A′ 1 B2u 364 B1u ZO inactive inactive E′ 398 Ag 410 A1g ZO B3u A2u ZO inactive 470 E′′ 373 B2g 392 B2g ZO inactive B1u ameasured with 633 nm excitation bmeasured with 457 nm excitation agreement for the acoustic and low-energy optical modes. The good agreement seems consistent for a wide range of layered crystals, but is to a certain extent fortuitous due the intrinsic overbinding of LDA causing a harden- ing of the predicted phonons at the cost of significantly lower-quality lattice constants. An improved quantita- tive agreement over the full frequency range of MoS2 and similar layered materials hence requires an exchange- correlation approximation that predicts stronger in-plane covalent bonding than PBE and sufficiently soft inter- layer non-covalent interaction. While we observed the phonon dispersion of eight of the nine Davydov pairs in the experiment, we were un- able to access the almost degenerate branches derived from the two LO modes around 35 meV (E2u and E1g at the Γ point) in the Γ-K and Γ-M directions in our scattering geometries. In order to understand this, we simulated the dynamical structure factor using data from our DFT calculations. The simulations suggest that destructive interference of the counter-phase oscil- lation of the sulfur sublayers in each MoS2 layer cause extinction of the structure factor for all q-vectors along the Γ-M and Γ-K-M directions, if a Bragg peak (h k 0) is used. Using a Bragg peak (h k l) with a suitable out-of-plane component l ̸= 0 should lead to activation of the LO E1g and E2u branches, caused by symmetry breaking of the phase factors from the atomic positions, which lifts the destructive interference. The intensity can be en- hanced through a wise choice of the Bragg peak such that it aligns the signs of the contributions from the atomic displacements and of the phase factors from the atomic positions. This is illustrated in Fig. 4 a for simulated measurements at the Bragg peak (-2 4 2) in the direction (q 0 0). Further, our simulations correctly reproduce the deactivation of the transverse E2u branch and activation of the longitudinal E1g branch in the vicinity of the K point that we observed in our IXS experiments near the (0 0 12) peak, see Fig. 4 b. This arises from a change of atomic displacement patterns of the longitudinal E2u and E1g modes from a pure in-plane to a pure out-of- plane nature close to the K-point, such that these modes behave similarly to the ZO modes. On the other hand, the transverse E2u and E1g modes adopt a mixed out- of-plane/in-plane nature in the middle of the Γ − K and Γ−M lines (thus coupling to the (0 0 12) Bragg peak) but revert back to a pure in-plane character in the vicinity of the K point, see Tab. SII in the supplementary material. An overview of the measured phonon frequencies, com- pared to Raman and IR spectroscopy data at the Γ point 5 a (h k l)=(-2 4 2) b (h k l)=(0 0 12) 250 300 350 400 450 Frequency (cm -1) Γ (0,0,0) (1/2,0,0) M (1/2,-1,0) M K (1/3,-2/3,0) E1g Γ (0,0,0) E2u the possible observation of the branches associated to the longitudinal E1g/E2u modes at the (-2 4 2) Bragg peak. b Simulation used for the assignment of the measured out-of- plane phonon energies at the (0 0 12) Bragg peak, showing the emergence of significant scattering cross section for the longitudinal E1g/E2u branches around K. and to DFT calculation at the Γ, K and M points, is given in Tab. I. A detailed comparison of our IXS data with measurements performed by electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) and inelastic neutron scatter- ing (INS) and details about our simulations of the dynamical structure factor are given in the supplemen- tary material. In conclusion, the complete phonon dispersion rela- tion of MoS2 is determined experimentally in the high- symmetry directions of the Brillouin zone. In combina- tion with DFT calculations, the data clearly show the 2D character of the lattice vibrations in this layered crystal. Therefore, the results can be immediately transferred to the monolayer form of MoS2 and the vast family of re- lated 2D materials, in particular isostructural TMDCs. The understanding and engineering of scattering pro- cesses involving phonons, such as in electron transport or optical transitions involving the indirect band gap or the two K valleys, will in future be based on the knowl- edge of the phonon dispersion relation.