1 Pair-Breaking, Pseudogap, and Superconducting Tc of Hole Doped Cuprates: Interrelations and Implications S. H. Naqib*, R. S. Islam, Ihtisham Qabid Department of Physics, University of Rajshahi, Rajshahi-6205, Bangladesh Abstract Irrespective of the class they belong to, all the hole doped high-Tc cuprate superconductors show an anti-correlation between the superconducting transition temperature and the characteristic pseudogap energy in the underdoped region. The doping dependent pseudogap in the quasiparticle spectral density is believed to remove low-energy electronic states and thereby reduce the superconducting condensate. Impurities within the CuO2 plane, on the other hand, break Cooper pairs in the unitarity limit and diminish superfluid density. Both pseudogap in pure cuprates and impurity scattering in disordered cuprates reduces Tc very effectively. In this study we have compared and contrasted the mechanisms of Tc degradation due to pseudogap and impurity scattering in hole doped cuprates. We have suggested a framework where both these factors can be treated on somewhat equal footing. Beside impurity and pseudogap dependent superconducting transition temperature, the proposed scenario has been employed to investigate the disorder and hole content dependent isotope exponent in high-Tc cuprates in this work. Keywords: High-Tc cuprates; effect of disorder; pseudogap; superfluid density; isotope exponent 1 Introduction The emergence of superconductivity in hole doped cuprates has baffled the condensed matter physics community still after over three decades since its discovery [1 ÔÇô 3]. The Mott insulating parent phase with antiferromagnetic (AFM) order becomes metallic when around 0.05 holes (p) are added to the CuO2 planes. AFM long range order disappears and a superconducting (SC) ground state is formed upon hole doping. The SC transition temperature, Tc, rises rapidly with increasing hole content, attains a maximum (Tcmax) at the optimum doping (p ~ 0.16), starts decreasing with further (over) doping , and vanishes eventually in the deeply overdoped region (p ~ 0.27). The Tc(p) of different families of hole doped cuprates exhibits a nearly parabolic dependence [5 ÔÇô 7]. *Corresponding author. Email: salehnaqib@yahoo.com 2 It is thought that various properties in the normal and SC states of these strongly correlated electronic systems are non-Fermi liquid like [8 ÔÇô 10] over a wide range of hole contents. The electronic temperature ÔÇô hole content (T-p) phase diagram shows interplay among a number of electronic ground states (e.g., AFM Neel order, spin glass state, charge and spin density orders, pseudogap (PG) region, SC phase, and a more Fermi-liquid-like metallic state as one increases the hole content) . All these pose a serious theoretical hurdle to formulate a coherent scheme describing these varied facets as doping levels are changed. The conventional BCS formalism , developed for weakly interacting metallic compounds, is unable to describe various features shown at and below the SC transition temperature in hole doped cuprates. Almost all of the normal and SC state properties are affected significantly by the magnitude of a PG in the low-energy quasiparticle (QP) spectral density of states [6 ÔÇô 9, 13 ÔÇô 15]. PG dominates the the superfluid density, pair condensation energy, electronic entropy, isotope exponent, and critical current density [13 ÔÇô 16] in the SC state. All normal state transport and magnetic properties are also dominated by the PG . It is an experimentally well established fact that the PG removes low-energy QP spectral weight which otherwise would have been available for pairing condensate . As a result, the superfluid density is diminished. At the same time, experimentally it is also found that, the SC transition temperature varies almost linearly with the superfluid density in the underdoped (UD) region of the hole doped cuprates ÔÇô the famous Uemura relation . Impurities in the CuO2 plane degrade Tc very effectively in cuprates [21 ÔÇô 23]. This is mainly because of the d-wave character of the SC order parameter. It should be noted that isovalent impurities replace the Cu atoms and do not alter the hole content. These impurities break Cooper pairs via unitary scattering and thereby reduce superfluid density, ¤üs , and Tc. Therefore, both disorder and PG reduces the superfluid density in cuprates. Albeit the mechanisms by which superfluid density is depleted are different for impurity and PG, the primary end effect is the same, a decrease of Tc. The effect of in-plane defect was demonstrated quite nicely by Nachumi et al. . It has been shown clearly that Tc varies linearly, in the same fashion, for both hole doping and impurity induced changes in the values of ¤üs /m*, where ¤üs is the superfluid density and m* is the effective mass of the Cooper pair . Validity of the Uemura relation implies that the dependence of Tc on the superfluid density does not depend significantly on the details of the mechanism via which it is changed. For example, Tc of both Zn doped Y123 and Zn free Y123 (where ¤üs and Tc are changed by varying the oxygen content) fall in the same line when plotted against ¤üs /m* . These features appear to be quite generic in hole doped copper oxide superconductors. Cuprates belonging to different families show similar qualitative behavior as a function of hole content and in-plane isovalent nonmagnetic disorder [14, 21 ÔÇô 23]. In this brief report, we have attempted to investigate the effect of in-plane impurity on Tc at a fixed hole content and that due to the p-dependent PG on Tc in pure cuprate superconductors. The effects are contrasted and compared. The doping and impurity induced variation of the oxygen isotope effect has been used as a testing ground. We have found strong circumstantial 3 evidence that, as far as Tc degradation is concerned, both in-plane impurities and the PG play qualitatively similar role. Depletion of the superfluid density by both (impurity and the PG) is the common thread that links the experimental observations. Enhancing the SC transition temperature of cuprates has been a major goal of high-Tc community. The highest Tc achieved so far stands at 164 K in triple CuO2 layer optimally doped Hg-based cuprate under high quasi-hydrostatic pressure . Despite extensive effort of the researchers, Tc of hole doped cuprates has not increased since 1994. The prime reason for this is the inability of the condensed matter community to pin-point the precise mechanism leading to hole pairing in these strongly correlated electronic systems. The optimal structure and composition giving rise to the right electronic, phononic, and magnetic excitation spectra for higher Tc remains elusive till now. Circumstantial evidence points towards significant role played by phonons and spin excitation spectrum on the emergence of superconductivity in cuprates [27 ÔÇô 30]. Several theoretical studies have been carried out within the framework of phonon mediated superconductivity for copper oxide superconductors [28 ÔÇô 30]. Recent discovery of extremely high critical temperature superconductivity above 200 K in metallic sulfur hydrides under extreme pressure and very recent study of sulfur isotope effect in H3S have demonstrated clearly the possible role that phonons can play in high-Tc systems. Isotope effect remains the most significant experimental and theoretical tool to explore phonon mediated pairing in SC systems. This provides us with additional motivation to carry out this project. Rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the framework which is used to analyze the experimental data. Section 3 consists of the discussion on the main findings and the conclusions. 2 Proposed framework and analysis of the experimental data The reduction of superconducting transition temperature due to impurity scattering can be expressed via the Abrikosov-Gorkov (A-G) equation given below. 2 )] ( 1 ) 2 ( 1 [ ) ln( 0 ´ü╣ ´üž ´üź ´ü╣ ´Çş ´Çź ´ÇŻ c c T T (1) Here, Tc0 is the SC transition temperature of the pure compound, Tc is the transition temperature of the impurity substituted compound, ╬Ę denotes the di-gamma function, ╬║ is a constant of the order of unity which depends on the symmetry of the SC gap function, ╬│ = ╬ô/2¤ÇkBTc, with ╬ô being the impurity induced pair-breaking scattering rate. For strong electronic energy density of states (EDOS) at the Fermi level (╬ÁF) and x is the impurity concentration in the CuO2 plane. Interestingly, the Uemura relation implies that Tc ~ ╬▓¤üs, where ╬▓ is a constant of proportionality (or a weakly varying parameter with hole doping). 4 This indicates that Eq.1 can be expressed approximately in terms of superfluid density instead of the superconducting transition temperature. It also suggests that as long as the Uemura relation holds, the A-G equation can be used to estimate the fractional change in the superfluid density due to impurity scattering. The PG correlation in the normal state reduces the low-energy QP spectral weight around the Fermi energy . Even though the exact physics behind the origin and evolution of the PG energy scale, ╬Ág, with hole content remains a matter of debate, it is largely agreed upon that PG competes with superconductivity . Since PG depletes the EDOS around the Fermi level, QP spectral weight is reduced and the SC pair density is diminished. This conclusion follows directly from the relation ¤üs ~ <N(╬ÁF)>╬ösc, where ╬ösc is the amplitude of the SC gap. The thermal average is usually taken over an energy window of width ┬▒ 2- 3kBTc centered at the Fermi level. Presence of the PG depletes <N(╬ÁF)> and therefore, reduces the superfluid density. It should be noted that PG is small near the optimum doping, it increases with underdoping and Tc falls in the underdoped region . An anti- correlation between Tc and ╬Ág is seen in all the hole doped cuprates. Zn is nonmagnetic and isovalent to the in-plane Cu atom that it substitutes. Effect of Zn on Tc has been studied extensively [6, 7, 21 ÔÇô 23, 34]. We focus on the Zn induced suppression of Fig.1 shows the Tc versus in-plane Zn content data for Zn-LSCO and Zn-YBCO [23, 34 ÔÇô 37]. It is seen in Fig.1 that the rate of suppression of Tc varies markedly with hole content. Nonmagnetic defects can break Cooper pairs due to the d-wave symmetry of the order parameter. The pair-breaking scattering rate is inversely proportional to the thermally averaged EDOS in the vicinity of the Fermi energy. Since this EDOS decreases as the PG energy scale becomes larger with underdoping, dTc/dy also increases with the decrease of p. [23, 34 ÔÇô 37]. The dashed lines are the least-square fits to the data. 0 10 20 30 40 0 0.01 0.02 Sr content = 0.09 Sr content = 0.15 Tc(K) In-plane Zn content (y) a 0 20 40 60 80 100 0 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 p = 0.172; ´üĄ´Çá´ÇŻ´Çá´Ç░´Ç«´Ç░´ÇÂ p = 0.131, ´üĄ´Çá´ÇŻ´Çá´Ç░´Ç«´Ç▓´Ç┤ Tc (K) In-plane Zn content (yp) b 5 The Tc values shown in Fig.1 are accurate within ┬▒ 0.5 K. The p values were obtained from the room-temperature thermoelectric power data following Refs. and also from the parabolic Tc(p) relation [5 ÔÇô 7]. The reported values of p and ´üĄ are accurate up to ┬▒ 0.005 and ┬▒ 0.02, respectively. For Zn-LSCO the Sr content, x, equals the in-plane hole content, p. It should be noted that YBCO has two CuO2 planes and a single CuO1-´üĄ chain per formula unit. Zn atoms reside in the CuO2 planes. Therefore, for this compound, the in-plane Zn content, yp = 3y/2. Next, we plot Tc versus T* data in Fig.2. T* is the characteristic PG temperature (T*´é║ ╬Ág/kB) obtained from the analysis of magnetic bulk susceptibility data and ab-plane resistivity data . It is possible to calculate the pair-breaking scattering rate from the values of Tc and Tc0 using Eq. 1. Both ╬öTc (= Tc0 ÔÇô Tc) versus the scattering rate (expressed in energy scale) and ╬öTc versus ╬Ág show approximately linear trend over an extended region in the underdoped side. Here Tc0 is taken as the maximum Tc at optimum doping for a pure compound. This again provides us with a clue that as far as Tc suppression due to in-plane defect and due to underdoping in defect-free cuprates are concerned, there is possibly a common mechanism at play. Thus far, we have seen that both in-plane impurities at a fixed hole content and the pseudogap as p is varied in impurity free compounds, have same qualitative effect on the superconductive transition temperature. Impurities reduce the superfluid density via pair- breaking and the PG reduces the superfluid density via the removal of low energy QP spectral density. The common Uemura relation for p-dependent Tc and that due to Zn substitution lends strong support to the observations presented in this paper. The p and Zn dependent variation of the isotope exponent can also shed significant light on this matter. 20 25 30 35 40 200 300 400 500 600 Tc (K) La 2-xSr xCuO 4 a 50 60 70 80 90 100 100 150 200 250 300 Tc (K) b YBa 2Cu 3O 7-´üĄ 6 In high-Tc cuprates, the isotope exponent (IE), ╬▒, depends strongly on the number of doped carriers in the CuO2 plane. In general, ╬▒(p) rises sharply in the underdoped side and can exceed the canonical BCS value of 0.5 near the so-called 1/8th anomaly [40 ÔÇô 42]. The value of IE near the optimum doping is very small and remains almost the same (or increases slightly) in the overdoped region [40 ÔÇô 44]. The problem in interpretation of the ╬▒(p) data for cuprates is extremely complicated because of the various electronic correlations present in these remarkable strongly correlated electronic materials. The IE is affected both by spin/charge ordering (the so-called stripe correlations) and PG in the QP spectrum . How these correlations are related to Cooper pairing itself is not entirely clear yet . Although, many researchers in the field believes short-range antiferromagnetic fluctuations may give rise to superconductivity, there is notable interest in possible role of lattice on the QP dynamics in cuprates following e.g., isotope dependent ARPES results . A clear understanding of the hole content and disorder dependences of the IE is important to clarify various issues regarding carrier pairing and to reveal the possible interrelations among the underlying electronic correlations present in high-Tc cuprate superconductors. The IE is defined as ╬▒(Tc) = -(dlnTc/dlnM), where M is the isotopic mass. Incorporating this expression for IE with the A-G pair-breaking equation, ╬▒ can be expressed as a universal function on Tc as follows (2) Here, ´ü╣/ is the first derivative of ´ü╣. ╬▒(Tc0) = -(dlnTc0/dlnM), IE of the pure compound. Eq. 2 shows that IE of the disordered compound is a function of IE of the pure compound and Tc. It also follows that a plot of Tc/Tc0 versus ╬▒(Tc)/╬▒(Tc0) has a universal character, independent of the details of pair-breaking mechanism or equivalently the physical process that reduces the superfluid density. We have shown ╬▒(Tc)/╬▒(Tc0) versus Tc/Tc0 for Zn doped and Zn free LSCO and YBCO in Fig. 3. It should be noted that isotope exponents are hard to determine with high degree of precision. It mainly arises from finite superconducting transition width and a subjective element involved in defining the mean-field Tc. Both disorder and underdoping tend to increase the superconducting transition width . It is seen in Fig. 3 that the trends of ╬▒(Tc)/╬▒(Tc0) versus Tc/Tc0 for La2-xSrxCu1-yZnyO4 and YBa2(Cu1-yZny)3O7-´üĄ are quite identical within the error bars, irrespective of the physical cause for Tc suppression (underdoping or Zn substitution). The experimental values lie quite close to the universal curve based on the A-G pair-breaking model. ´üž ´üž ´üź´ü╣ ´üí ´üí ) 2 (1 1 1 ) ( ) ( / 0 ´Çź ´Çş ´ÇŻ c c T T 7 dotted curve represents the universal behavior predicted by Eq. 2 (with ╬║ = 1). At this point, it is important to mention that both Eqs. 1 and 2 are derived for conventional BCS superconductors. Cuprates, though strongly unconventional, retains many gross features of BCS superconductivity . The A-G pair-breaking formula is quite general in nature it can be extended easily to d-wave superconductivity and for cases where Cooper pairing is mediated by bosons other than phonons. Questions regarding using A-G formalism for high- Tc cuprates have been raised before by Franz et al. . A careful analysis, as presented by Tallon et al. , of the mean distance among the in-plane impurities and the in-plane SC coherence length revealed that applicability of A-G formalism in Zn substituted Y123 and La214 remains valid, at least for the impurity concentrations considered in this paper. 3 Discussion and conclusions In this short communications, we have compared the effect of isovalent in-plane impurity substitution and underdoping on the superconducting Tc of hole doped cuprates. While the former breaks Cooper pairs via unitary scattering, the later removes low energy QP sates which otherwise would have been available for SC pairing condensate. It has been proposed here that the primary effect of both in-plane impurities and underdoping is the reduction of superfluid density. The experimental behavior of ╬▒(Tc)/╬▒(Tc0) versus Tc/Tc0 plot for La2-xSrxCu1-yZnyO4 and YBa2(Cu1-yZny)3O7-´üĄ compounds and their reasonable agreement with the universal theoretical trend (Fig. 3) lend support to the proposed scenario. 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 La 2-xSr xCuO 4 Universal curve YBa 2(Cu 1-yZn y) 3O 7-´üĄ La 1.91Sr 0.09Cu 1-yZn yO 4 La 2-xSr xCuO 4 ´üí´ÇĘTc)/´üí´ÇĘTc0) Tc/Tc0 8 At this point it is worth mentioning that, in a series of studies [49 ÔÇô 52] Ovchinnikov et al. have proposed a model for normal and superconducting state properties of hole doped cuprates based on inhomogeneity. Ovchinnikov et al. [49 ÔÇô 52] have suggested that an inhomogeneous distribution of hole content led to local values of superconducting transition temperatures and formation of phase incoherent Cooper pairs at temperatures above the resistive Tc which is due to a percolation threshold. This model invoked doping induced magnetic pair-breaking to describe the Tc(p) behavior and does not seem to differentiate between magnetic impurity substitution and those magnetic defects induced by hole doping. Therefore, the observation reported in this study can be accommodated within this inhomogeneous superconductivity model [49 ÔÇô 52]. The origin of the PG is an intensely debated issue [6 ÔÇô 9, 13 ÔÇô 15, 53, 54]. In the inhomogeneous superconductivity model [49 ÔÇô 52] the pseudogap arises at high temperatures due to phase incoherent pairing fluctuations. It is important to note that the results shown in this paper involves Zn substituted compounds. Zn is non-magnetic in nature and breaks Cooper pairs via unitary scattering. Nevertheless, the formalism suggested in Refs. 49 ÔÇô 52, remains relevant due to its general and broad-based nature. It should be noted that the hole content in the CuO2 plane(s) remains unaltered due to isovalent Zn substitution . The hole content, on the other hand, changes with underdoping. The effective mass of the Cooper pair, m*, may also vary with hole content . These are the factors that have not been taken into account in the simple model put forward in this study. Nevertheless, the similitude of the ╬▒(Tc)/╬▒(Tc0) versus Tc/Tc0 plots for La2-xSrxCu1-yZnyO4 and YBa2(Cu1-yZny)3O7-´üĄ, with and without in-plane impurities, is indicative that a common cause is at play. Superfluid density is the most likely common thread.