HANIFEH, ALBOOYEH, CAPOLINO: HELICITY MAXIMIZATION OF STRUCTURED LIGHT UC IRVINE SEP 2018 Helicity Maximization of Structured Light to Empower Nanoscale Chiral Matter Interaction Mina Hanifeh1, Mohammad Albooyeh, and Filippo Capolino2 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of California, Irvine, Cali- fornia 92697, USA ABSTRACT Structured light enables the characterization of chirality of optically small nanoparticles by taking advantage of the helicity maximization concept recently introduced in. By referring to fields with nonzero helicity density as chiral fields, we first investigate the properties of two chiral optical beams in obtaining helicity density localization and maximization requirements. The investigated beams include circularly polarized Gaussian beams and also an optical beam properly composed by a combination of a radially and an azimuth- ally polarized beam. To acquire further enhancement and localization of helicity density beyond the diffrac- tion limit, we also study chiral fields at the vicinity of a spherical dielectric nanoantenna and demonstrate that the helicity density around such a nanoantenna is a superposition of helicity density of the illuminating field, scattered field, and an interference helicity term. Moreover, we illustrate when the nanoantenna is illuminated by a proper combination of azimuthal and radially polarized beams, the scattered nearfields satisfy the helicity maximization conditions beyond the diffraction limit. The application of the concept of helicity maximization to nanoantennas and generating optimally chiral nearfield result in helicity enhancement which is of great advantage in areas like detection of nanoscale chiral samples, microscopy, and optical manipulation of chiral nanoparticles. I. INTRODUCTION A variety of natural and artificial materials are chiral, mean- ing their building blocks (the constituent inclusions), i.e., molecules and meta-atoms, are not superimposable to their mirror images . These materials have a broad range of ap- plications in sciences and technologies in areas like chemis- try, biology, medicine, and pharmacology–. Although each pair of mirror-imaged molecules or other natural or en- gineered nanoparticles, called enantiomers, have identical elements with the same constitutions, they show different optical properties. Conventionally, chirality is deter- mined through circular dichroism (CD) since the chiral ma- terials interact differently with circularly polarized plane waves of opposite handedness. The interaction is inferred by transmitted or absorption power when the chirality of a slab or bulk of a material is being investigated, respectively –. However, if instead of considering optically large chiral materials we consider optically small chiral samples (with sizes smaller or comparable to the illumination wave- length), CD experiments are not anymore suitable for chiral- ity characterization since the light-matter interaction be- comes weak and the detection range of power detectors may 1 M.hanifeh@uci.edu 2 F.capolico@uci.edu not cover such data. Although many studies have been per- formed to enhance the range of chirality detection, e.g., by introducing the concept of super-chiral light which were re- alized by the use of counter-propagating plane waves with circular polarization of opposite handedness or by the use of near-fields of plasmonic structures –, there is not yet a platform which determines a reliable theoretical background for the use of general electromagnetic fields in detection/characterization of chirality, not to say the best field types that enhance light-chiral matter interaction. Therefore, we found it essential to provide a suitable theo- retical platform for enhancing the possibility of detection and characterization of chiral nanoparticles (NPs) when us- ing general electromagnetic fields. In a separate work (see Ref. ), we have introduced the concept of helicity maximization and have elaborated that the chirality characterization of NPs via dissymmetry factor g is achieved only when fields with maximum helicity density are employed. In that work, we have proved that such fields satisfy a universal relation between their helicity and energy densities, and have shown how this relation ena- bles the characterization of NPs’ chirality through the dis- symmetry factor g. In this complementary work, we study in detail the proper- ties of two illustrative examples of structured lights, i.e., an arXiv:1809 [physics.app-ph] 11 Sep 2018 HANIFEH, ALBOOYEH, CAPOLINO: HELICITY MAXIMIZATION OF STRUCTURED LIGHT UC IRVINE SEP 2018 optical beam and the nearfield of a nanoantenna, both with maximized helicity density. We demonstrate how a properly engineered nanoantenna substantially improves the chirality detection by locally maximizing the helicity and energy den- sities, while enabling chirality characterization. By suggest- ing the proposed method to employ highly localized electro- magnetic fields, our findings provide a strong theoretical foundation in the study of nanoscale chirality detection and characterization of NPs using near fields and structured light. II. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS This section is devoted to developing a theoretical basis for chirality detection and characterization of NPs by utilizing structured lights. Before starting the discussion, we empha- size to distinguish between detection and characterization: while in detection our goal is to determine whether a particle is chiral, by characterization we aim at the determination of the exact strength of the particle’s chirality. A. Interaction of light with a chiral nanoparticle We consider NPs whose optical response is well approxi- mated by the fundamental electric and magnetic dipoles, and higher order multipoles are considered negligible, which is a judicious assumption for optically small NPs . Moreo- ver, we assume that the particle is isotropic, reciprocal, and is surrounded by an isotropic non-dispersive medium, and hence, the electric p and magnetic m dipole moments are linearly related to the local electric E and magnetic fields via the polarizabilities through relations ee em 1 0 em mm , ,      − = = − p E + H m E + H (1) where ee and mm are the electric and magnetic polariza- bilities, respectively, and 0 denotes the vacuum’s mag- netic permeability [see Appendix A for the definitions of di- pole moments p and m ]. Moreover, the magnetoelectric polarizability em indicates the NP’s chirality, and deter- mining this quantity is the goal in the chirality characteriza- tion. Considering that the dipole moments are not directly observable, we require to find a relation between the meas- urable rate of energy transfer to the particle, i.e., the trans- ferred power, and the particle’s magnetoelectric polarizabil- ity em 3. The measurable quantities are absorption, scatter- 3 Note that there are also other physical measurable quanti- ties such as electromagnetic force and torque, which are out ing, and extinction which are, respectively, the rates of en- ergy dissipated, scattered, and the sum of these two energies by the particle. Considering that 2 e 0 | | /4 u = E and 2 m 0 | | /4 u = H  are, respectively, the time-averaged elec- tric and magnetic energy densities at the position of the NP, the time-averaged scattered power by the NP modeled by di- poles in Eq. (1) is obtained from the Poynting theorem and reads (see Appendix A) ( ) ( )   2 3 2 ee sca em e 3 2 2 mm em m 3 1 0 ee em em 0 0 0 2 mm 0 3 , 6 H E −        = +      + + + −   ωk P u ωk c u ωk             (2) where “*” denotes complex conjugation. Moreover, 0 , 0 c , and k are, respectively, the permittivity, speed of light, and wavenumber in vacuum. Note that monochromatic electro- magnetic fields with time dependence exp( i t) −  with  being the angular frequency, are considered throughout the paper. The time-averaged extinction power is obtained as       1 2 ext 0 ee e mm m 0 em 2 2 2 , P u u c h       −    = + + (3) with 0 { ) =  E H  h c being the time-averaged helic- ity density of the local field acting on the NP, discussed in detail in the next subsection since it is one of the core quan- tities in this work. Finally, the time-averaged absorbed power abs ext sca P P P = − is obtained from Eqs. (2) and (3). Equations (2) and (3) suggest that if we would be able to manipulate the fields in a way so that we eliminate the terms which contain polarizabilities ee and mm while simulta- neously keep the terms which contain the polarizability term em , then, we are able to characterize the particle’s chirality from the corresponding measured power. However, Eq. (2) indicates that it is not a straightforward task to manipulate the local fields and eliminate the terms containing electric and magnetic polarizabilities ee and mm from the scat- tered and absorption powers while keeping the terms which contain the polarizability term em . Nonetheless, the third term in the right hand side of Eq. (3), which solely depends of the scope of the current study. For more information, the readers may refer to –. HANIFEH, ALBOOYEH, CAPOLINO: HELICITY MAXIMIZATION OF STRUCTURED LIGHT UC IRVINE SEP 2018 on magnetoelectric polarizability em and the helicity den- sity of the field, suggests that it is possible to dismiss the first two terms and keep the last term by properly engineering of the local fields. Therefore, we conclude that the extinction power, Eq. (3), is the most convenient candidate to reveal the chirality of NPs represented by dipole moments. Let us next study how to dismiss the first two terms in the expression of the extinction power, Eq. (3), hence, enable chirality detection/characterization. We consider the interac- tion of a chiral NP with two distinct excitations and denote the measured extinctions in the two “experiments” by super- scripts “ + ” and “ −”, respectively (the + and − signs are chosen since the two excitations possess helicities with op- posite signs). The difference between the extinction powers (which we call differential extinction) in these two interac- tions is ex e e t xt xt P P P + −  = − and equals       1 0 ee e mm m 2 0 e ex m t 2 2 2 , P u u c h       −   =  +   +   (4) where 0 ( { ) ( ) 2 h c + +  − −   =   −  E H E H , 2 2 e 0(| | | | ) / 4 u + −  = − E E , and 2 2 m 0(| | | | ) / 4 u  + −  = − H H . It is easy to check that the first two terms in Eq. (4) containing the electric and mag- netic polarizabilities are eliminated in the differential extinc- tion ext P when m m m e e e 0, 0. u u u u u u + − + −   = − = = − = (5) This means that the electric and magnetic local fields in the two experiments are required to be equal in magnitude, which is our suggested choice. Although conditions (5) elim- inate the contributions of the electric and magnetic polariza- bilities from the interactions, the remaining term under this condition, i.e.,  em ext 2 2 0 , P c h     =  (6) contains the fields’ property denoted by h as well as the particle’s chirality expressed by em . Equation (6) suggests that the differential extinction ext P is a suitable candidate for detection of particle’s chirality when h   0 . It is im- portant to note that higher values of h corresponds to a better chance for the detection of smaller values of chirality, i.e., { em }   according to Eq. (6). In Secs. III and IV, we extensively discuss several scenarios as the excitation fields which are capable of enhancing the possibility of chirality detection of particles. In the next step, we determine the value of { em }   inde- pendent of the field properties h  . Inspired from the works , , we consider the dissymmetry factor g defined as ext ext , P g P =  (7) where, ext e e xt xt ( ) / 2 P P P + − = + is the arithmetic average of the extinction powers in the two experiments. Now, assuming e e e ( ) / 2 u u u + − = + , m m m ( ) / 2 u u u + − = + and ( ) / 2 h h h + − = + are, respectively, the arithmetic averages of the time-averaged electric energy, magnetic energy, and helicity densities in the two experiments, ext P reads       1 2 0 ee e mm t m 0 e e m x 2 2 2 P u u c h.       −    = + + (8) Next, by introducing the new condition , h h + = − − (9) for fields, which means that fields in the two experiments possess helicity densities with equal amplitudes and oppo- site signs and implies higher possibilities of detection of NPs’ chirality for fields satisfying conditions (5) (see Ref. for discussion), the dissymmetry factor g reduces to 0 em 1 0 e ee mm m { { . { 2 } } } c h g u u     − + + +  +   = (10) Now, following Ref. we introduce the convenient condi- tions ( ) 0 , .          =      =        E H E H E H (11) for each of the two excitations, where 0  is the intrinsic im- pedance of vacuum, and call the fields satisfying these con- dition optimally chiral Conditions (11) result in two im- portant consequences: one, the time-averaged helicity and energy densities in the two experiments follow the relations | / | h u   =  since e m e m 2 2 u = u u u u      + = = and; two, the helicity density | / | h u   =  is the maximum achieva- ble helicity density for a given energy density (see Ref. for a complete discussion). Therefore, the dissymmetry fac- tor g for those fields that satisfy conditions (5), (9), and (11) reads HANIFEH, ALBOOYEH, CAPOLINO: HELICITY MAXIMIZATION OF STRUCTURED LIGHT UC IRVINE SEP 2018       0 em 1 0 ee mm 4 , c g    −   +  = (12) and it measures the particle’s chirality with respect to its electric and magnetic polarizabilities independent of the field’s property which was denoted by the field’s helicity and energy densities. Moreover, for particles with weak magnetic polarizabilities, i.e., 1 0 ee mm} } { {   −    , the dissymmetry factor g reduces to     1 0 em ee 4 / g    −   = (13) and measures the ratio between the magnetoelectric and electric polarizability, i.e., it characterizes the NP’s chirality assuming that the NP’s electric polarizability ee is known. B. Helicity in chiral fields In this subsection, the helicity of fields, which is a quantita- tive measure of the fields’ curliness and plays an important role in the chirality detection of particles, is briefly reviewed and discussed. Conservation of physical quantities such as energy and mo- mentum along with the Maxwell’s equations enable us to de- fine some properties such as linear momentum, angular mo- mentum, chirality, etc. for electromagnetic fields analogous to the mechanical and geometrical properties for matter . One of such properties which is related to the conservation of spin angular momentum, is helicity. The helicity of electromagnetic fields which, after time-averaging, reads ( ) 1 0 0 0 1 , 4 H hd d c   −  = =  +    F F A A v v (14) was introduced to show how lines of field vectors are linked , . Note that the integration is carried out over the entire space, and F and A are, respectively, the electric and the magnetic vector potentials –. To perceive the physical significance of the helicity in Eq. (14), one expands an electromagnetic field into its spectral components with right and left handed circular polarization. This illustrates that the total helicity is the average of helicities of all pho- tons, defined as the projection of their angular momenta along their linear momenta, and indeed it is the classical limit for the difference between numbers of photons with right-handed and left-handed circular polarizations and represents the fields’ handedness. Moreover, investigating the interaction of particles with electromagnetic fields as dis- cussed earlier in this section demonstrates the significance of time-averaged helicity density of fields, i.e., ( ) 1 0 0 0 1 4 h c   −  =  +  F F A A (15) in the chirality detection of particles. Note that the time-av- eraged helicity density for monochromatic fields is propor- tional to their time-averaged optical chirality ( ) 1 0 0 1 4 c   −  =  +  E E B B (16) through the relation 2 1 0 c = c h − − . However, optical chiral- ity is related to the conservation of the spin angular momen- tum associated to the curl of fields (versus the standard angular momentum associated to the electromagnetic fields). Therefore, we adopt the helicity as a measure of fields’ capability in the detection of particles’ chirality and refer to the fields with nonzero helicity density as chiral fields. III. CHIRAL OPTICAL BEAMS As mentioned earlier, in this section we discuss engineered beams that enhance the possibility of chirality detection and enable characterization of NPs’ chirality. Indeed, we inves- tigate the helicity densities of two chiral optical beams and demonstrate how they offer the possibility of enhancing he- licity densities by manipulating their field profiles and po- larizations. A. Gaussian beams with circular polarization We first consider a Gaussian beam (GB) with circular po- larization. Suppressing the time dependence exp( ) i −  t , the electric field vector of a GB which travels in the +z direc- tion under the paraxial approximation reads R 1 2 2 tan ( ) ( ) / / ˆ ˆ ( ), i z z w ik R ikz = VG e e e e i w   − − −  E x y (17) where / + − sign, represents right/left-handed circular polar- izations, and ˆx and ˆy are the unit vectors in the Cartesian coordinate system. Here, 2 R 0 / z  w  = , 2 0 1 ( / R ) w w z z = + , and 2 [1 ( R / ) ] R z z z = + with 0 w and  being, respectively, the beam parameter and the excita- tion wavelength. The beam parameter represents half a beam waist when the beam is not tightly focused. Moreover,  and VG are, respectively, the radial distance from the beam axis (here the z-axis of the Cartesian coordinate sys- tem) and the complex amplitude of the beam (with the unit of Volt). The magnitude of the electric field of a typical GB with w0 =  in the x-z plane and the electric field vectors along the propagation direction (here the z-axis) are depicted in FIG. 1 (a) and (b), respectively. HANIFEH, ALBOOYEH, CAPOLINO: HELICITY MAXIMIZATION OF STRUCTURED LIGHT UC IRVINE SEP 2018 gation of the electric field vector along the z-direction for a Gauss- ian beam with circular polarization and w0 =  propagating along the z direction. Helicity density h of the GB on the z = 0 transverse plane when (c) 0 2 w =  , and (d) w0 =  , normalized to that of a GB with the same power and 0 3 w =  . Note that the helicity den- sity at the center of the coordinate system of the beam with w0  = is approximately four times stronger than that of the beam with 0 2 w =  , confirming that the helicity density is enhanced when the beam parameter w0 decreases i.e., for tighter focused beams. The quantity | h | / u  for circularly polarized GB with (e) 0 0.65 w  = and (f) w0 =  . Next, we illustrate the helicity densities of two circularly po- larized GBs with equal total power and different beam pa- rameters w0 =  and 0 2 w =  normalized to the helicity density of a GB with the same power and 0 3 w =  , all eval- uated at the z = 0 plane in FIG. 1 (c) and (d), respectively. We recall that by increasing the beam parameter the GB looks more like a plane wave. As it is clear from these fig- ures, reducing the beam parameter 0 w results in an enhance- ment in the helicity density of the beam around its optical axis. This is due to the localization of the energy density at these points which, based on our previous discussions, im- proves the possibility of chirality detection. It is noteworthy that the GB in Eq. (17) is obtained under paraxial approximation and it optimally chiral, i.e., satisfies conditions (11), only when w0  [see Appendix C], which is a restricted area in space, since under these condi- tions the fields of a GB look more like those of a plane wave. The quantity | h | / u  , which takes the value of 1 when the conditions (11) are satisfied, is depicted in FIG. 1 (e) and (f) for circularly polarized GBs with different values of beam parameters. The deviation of this quantity from unity by moving away from the beam axis means that tightly focused GBs are not the best candidate for chirality characterization since conditions (11) are not precisely satisfied everywhere in space. Therefore, in the next step we propose to use an engineered structured light beam with the interesting prop- erty of satisfying conditions (11) everywhere in space. B. Superposition of azimuthally and radially polarized beams A GB with circular polarization is a trivial optimally chiral beam. However, it would be interesting if we could intro- duce an alternative optimally chiral optical beam with dif- ferent properties). Here we propose the superposition of an Azimuthally Polarized Beam (APB) and a Radially Polar- ized Beam (RPB), which we call ARPB, as a chiral optical beam that can be used to characterize the chirality of NPs. The APB and ARB are obtained by superposing Laguerre Gaussian beams with opposite angular momenta. Let us study the distinctive features of the ARPB compared to a GB with circular polarization. The electric field vector in an APB which is propagating along the z-direction (optical axis of the beam) is polarized along the azimuthal direction ˆ in the transverse plane and reads R 1 2 2 tan ( ) APB 2 / ( A / ) ˆ 2 i z z w ikz V = e e e w     − − −  E  (18) where VA (with the unit of Volt) is the complex amplitude of the beam and R 1 /  = −iz z . Other parameters are similar to those defined for a GB in Eq. (17). It is important to note that such a beam has a zero electric field and a nonzero lon- gitudinal magnetic field component along its optical axis. In duality with APBs, RPBs have magnetic field vectors which are polarized along the azimuthal direction and read R 1 2 2 tan ( / ) / RPB ( ) R 2 0 2 ˆ i z z ik w z V = e e e , w      − − − H  (19) with a complex amplitude R V (with the unit of Volt). Note, an RPB has a nonzero longitudinal electric field component along its axis (for the longitudinal field expressions see Refs. HANIFEH, ALBOOYEH, CAPOLINO: HELICITY MAXIMIZATION OF STRUCTURED LIGHT UC IRVINE SEP 2018 , , ).We propose the superposition of these two vortex beams, i.e., ARPB APB RPB ARPB APB RPB , = + = + , E E E H H H (20) with the same beam parameters and respective amplitudes such that * A R V = iV . Indeed, by applying the source-free Maxwell’s curl equations E = i0 H and = i 0  − H E it is easy to deduce that an ARPB pos- sesses both the electric and magnetic field components along the azimuth direction ˆ as well as along the radial and lon- gitudinal directions ˆ and ˆz . Under the above situation the proposed ARPB combination constitutes an optimally chiral chiral optical beam that satisfies conditions (11) everywhere in space. FIG. 2 (a) and (b) demonstrate magnitude of the electric fields in x-z and x-y planes, respectively. Note that the field magnitude reaches its maximum at z = 0 where 0 w = w . beam waist parameter w0 =  . Electric field magnitude in the x-z plane (a), and in the x-y plane (b). Helicity density of the ARPB in the x-y plane normalized to that of a standard circularly polarized GB with a same power and 0 3 w =  : in (c) the APRB has w0  = , whereas in (d) 0 0.65 w  = . Note that the helicity density of the ARPB with 0 0.65 w  = , on the beam axis, is 6 times stronger than that of an ARPB with w0 =  . There are two important distinctions between the ARPB and a GB with circular polarization. First, the electric and mag- netic field vectors in an ARPB are parallel, everywhere, with a phase difference of  / 2 at all points in space when choosing * A R V = iV in contrast to a GB where a circular polarization is obtainable only in a limited area around the beam axis. Second, the ARPB has field vectors at the beam axis which are exclusively longitudinal. This provides the opportunity of characterization of longitudinal chirality in contrast to a GB with circular polarization that supports the characterization of a transverse chirality . Figures 2 (c) and (d) depict the helicity densities of two ARPBs with * A R V = iV and beam waist parameter values of w0 =  and 0 0.65 w  = , respectively, in the plane z = 0 normalized to the helicity density of a circularly polarized GB with 0 3 w =  and the same power. As it is clear, this structured light satisfying conditions (11) results in the helicity density enhancement and such an enhancement will in turn improves the possibility of chirality detection of particles as discussed in Sec. II. As a final note of this subsection, by comparing other distinction between the ARPB and the GB with circu- lar polarization. That is, a GB with circular polarization reaches its maximum helicity density at the beam axis whereas an ARPB attains its maximum helicity density on an annular ring around the beam axis. So far, we have studied how to enhance the helicity density by engineering an optical beam and we have achieved about an order of magnitude enhancement [see FIG. 2 (d)]. In the next section, however, we propose an alternative route to further enhance helicity density. IV. CHIRAL NEARFIELD AND NANOANTENNAS We propose the use of specific nano-antennas (NAs) to en- hance helicity density. We show how the nearfield of a properly engineered NA, excited by a chiral beam, provides at least one extra order of magnitude helicity density en- hancement compared to the helicity of the exciting beam. The total nearfield of a NA includes the contributions from both the incident optical beam and scattered nearfields, therefore, its helicity density h reads inc sca int, h h h h = + + (21) where sca sca sca 0 { } ) / (2 h c  =   E H and inc inc inc 0 { } ) / (2 h c  =   E H are, respectively, the helicity densities of the scattered and incident fields. Moreover, int h , which we call interference helicity density, reads HANIFEH, ALBOOYEH, CAPOLINO: HELICITY MAXIMIZATION OF STRUCTURED LIGHT UC IRVINE SEP 2018   int sca inc inc sca 0 1 . 2 h c    =  +   E H E H (22) Equation (21) suggests that for an improvement of the helic- ity density we need to simultaneously boost all the helicity densities hsca , hinc , and hint . To elaborate further, we illu- minate the NA by chiral beams introduced in the previous section and devote the rest of this section to the relation be- tween the helicity density of the scattered nearfield hsca , the properties of the required NA for the optimum performance, and the influential factors on the interference helicity density hint . A. Concepts of nanoantennas for helicity enhancement Let us assume that a NA is located at the center of Cartesian coordinates and it is illuminated by a chiral beam propagat- ing along the +z direction (FIG. 3). with respect to that of an incident chiral beam. (a) An optical beam propagating along the z direction illuminates the proposed NA which is located at the center of the coordinate system. (b) The pro- posed NA is modeled by induced electric and magnetic dipole mo- ments pNA and mNA , respectively, and their scattered nearfields demonstrate high helicity density in the close vicinity of the NA. With the goal of investigating the helicity density of the NA and without loss of generality, we analyze an isotropic NA (a nanosphere) operating in its dipolar regime, and model it by the induced electric and magnetic dipole moments NA p and mNA , respectively, which are located at the origin of the Coordinate system. Following the discussions in Appen- dix B, the dominant contribution of the helicity density sca h of scattered fields in the near-zone of the NA at the radial positions r = rˆ r reads ( )( )   0 sca NA NA NA NA 2 6 ˆ ˆ 3 . 32 h r          +  r p r m p m (23) Note that in evaluating Eq. (23) in the nearfield of the NA, we only consider the dominant terms with r−3 dependence [see Eqs. (B1) and (B2) in Appendix B]. The term NA NA { }    p m in Eq. (23) not only relates helicity to the strength of induced electric and magnetic dipoles of the NA but also implies that the dipoles relative spatial orientation and phase should be controlled to maximize helicity density of the scattered nearfields. Note that at location vectors r that are parallel to both dipole moments, the term   NA NA ˆ ˆ 3( )( )     r p r m has a constructive contribution to the enhancement of the helicity density hsca . In other words, these location vectors define the regions where helicity around a NA is the strongest. The dipole moments pNA and mNA are, respectively, related to the incident electric and magnetic fields o Einc and o Hinc at the position of the NA (su- perscript “o” denotes the NA’s position which is the origin of the Coordinate system in our example) through the elec- tric and magnetic polarizabilities NA ee and NA mm of the NA as NA o NA ee inc NA o NA mm inc , .   = = p E m H (24) Since we consider optimally chiral incident fields, i.e., o o inc 0 inc = i E H , and when NA 0 NA = c m p the scattered nearfield of the proposed NA is also optimally chiral [see Appendix B], then, Eq. (24) implies the balance relation NA NA ee m 0 m   = (25) between the polarizabilities of the NA. Note that Eq. (25) ensures the relation sca 0 sca = i E H holds everywhere in space and not only in the near zone of the NA, indicating that condition (25) implies the best possible scattered nearfields everywhere. Therefore, the problem of obtaining the maxi- mum achievable helicity density of the scattered nearfields is reduced to designing a NA that satisfies the balance rela- tion (25). Such a balance relation proposes that we require a NA which simultaneously possesses both electric and mag- netic polarizabilities. Though materials with significant magnetic properties are not available at optical frequencies , “resonant magnetism” is possible for example with plasmonic clusters – or dielectric nanostructures – that supports Mie resonances. An optimum design with a high helicity density (several orders of magnitude) re- quires a separate study, however, in the next step and only with the goal of a proof of concept, we propose a very simple NA design with spherical shape which is made of a high in- dex material and demonstrate an enhancement higher than an order of magnitude in the helicity density with respect to the excitation beam. To that end, we consider a spherical silicon (Si) nanoparticle with radius a and plot the normalized (to its maximum) HANIFEH, ALBOOYEH, CAPOLINO: HELICITY MAXIMIZATION OF STRUCTURED LIGHT UC IRVINE SEP 2018 quantity NA NA ee 0 mm    −  versus wavelength  and radius a , in a logarithmic scale, in FIG. 4. The quantity NA NA ee 0 mm    −  vanishes when the balance relation (25) is satisfied. Note that for an efficient NA design, we require materials with low losses. Since for wavelengths smaller than 800 nm the material loss in amorphous Si is not negli- gible we employ crystalline Si for this wavelength range. In the following discussion on Si NA, we perform our calcula- tions in two frequency ranges and in each range with either crystalline or amorphous Si: for wavelength range from 500 nm to 800 nm we employ crystalline Si, and for wavelength range from 800 nm to 1200 nm we employ amorphous Si. normalized (to its maximum ) values of NA NA ee 0 mm | |   − , in logarithmic scale, versus the radius a of the NA and wavelength  of the excitation field for (a) crystalline silicon, and (b) amorphous silicon. Note that large nega- tive values (dark regions) indicate that the balance relation NA NA ee 0 mm   = is satisfied. The polarizabilities are calculated using the Mie scattering coefficients. Note that when condition (25) holds for the NA (e.g. on the dark regions in FIG. 4), the scattered nearfield, and conse- quently, the total fieldis optimally chiral. Moreover, alt- hough the spatial distribution of the helicity density of the scattered nearfield is non-uniform around the NA, the rela- tion / | h| u  = holds everywhere in space as long as NA NA ee 0 mm   = is valid for the proposed NA. It is now appropriate to discuss practical scenarios when the engineered NA is exposed to external illuminations and in- vestigate the enhancement of the helicity density. We first consider the case when the NA is illuminated with an ARPB since its analytical investigation is more straightforward and then consider the illumination with a circularly polarized GB. Finally, we note that full-wave analysis shows that the quadrupoles for the considered parameters  and a are neg- ligible since / 1 a  . B. ARPB illumination We consider a situation when the engineered NA is illumi- nated by an ARPB propagating in the +z direction with 0 w =  , where the electric and magnetic field vectors are oriented along the z direction, at the position of the NA, as discussed in Sec. IIIB. Since the NA is azimuthally symmet- ric, the induced electric and magnetic dipole moments NA p and mNA are parallel to the z-axis under such an illumina- tion, and the helicity density of the scattered nearfield, intro- duced in Eq. (23), at location ( , , r  ) near the NA reads ( ) ( ) NA NA sca ee m o 2 * 2 i c m n 2 6 | | 3cos 1 . 32 h r         +     E (26) Now we define the enhancement factor o n sca | / | i c | | h h , which is the ratio of scattered nearfield helicity density hsca to the helicity density of the incident field at the origin where the NA is located. Note that the selection of helicity density of the incident field at the position of the NA, o hinc , eliminates the influence of the incident field intensity from the enhance- ment factor o n sca | / | i c | | h h and consequently this enhancement shows the helicity enhancement due to the scattered near- fields of the NA. Since the electric Einc and magnetic inc H components of the incident field satisfy inc 0 inc = i E H , the helicity density of the incident field at the position of the NA reads o o o inc inc inc 0 | | || ) | h c = E H . Consequently, the helicity enhancement due to scattered nearfields of the NA is approx- imated as ( ) ( ) m * 2 sca NA o 0 i NA ee n m c 2 6 1 3cos 1 . 16 h r h           +  (27) It is clear from Eq. (27) that the maximum helicity density occurs for 0,   = , i.e., along the z direction. We also define the energy enhancement ratio o usca / inc u as the time-averaged energy density of the scattered nearfield at a desired location with respect to the incident energy density at the position of the NA. The helicity and energy density enhancements o c sca / in | | h h and o usca / inc u for various values of radius a of the spherical NA versus different wavelength  , evaluated at the surface of the NA along the z direction, i.e., aˆ r = z , for nanospheres with both crystalline and amorphous Si are il- lustrated in FIG. 5. Note that in Eq. (27) we only considered the dominant terms of the nearfield of the NA, generated by the superposition of an electric and a magnetic dipole, to pro- vide a simple analytical formula. However the values demonstrated in FIG. 5 include all the term of the spherical Greens function for completeness, and we note that these values are very close to those provided by the approximate formula given in Eq. (27). HANIFEH, ALBOOYEH, CAPOLINO: HELICITY MAXIMIZATION OF STRUCTURED LIGHT UC IRVINE SEP 2018 of the proposed NA, evaluated along the z direction, i.e., at aˆ r = z , when illuminated by an ARPB propagating along the z direction with the beam parameter w0 =  . Helicity enhancement in the scat- tered nearfield is evaluated for (a) crystalline and (b) amorphous silicon NA. Energy enhancement in the scattered nearfield is eval- uated for (c) crystalline and (d) amorphous silicon NA. Next, using the evaluated helicity and energy densities at the boundary of the NA, i.e., where aˆ r = z , in FIG. 6 we plot the required radius of the NA versus excitation wavelength  to enforce: (a) that the balanced relation (25) is satisfied [which is equivalent to having scattered nearfield satisfying the con- dition sca sca |h |=u /  ]; (b) that the maximum helicity en- hancement hmax is achieved; and (c) that the maximum en- ergy density enhancement umax is achieved. In all the cases the power of the incident field is kept constant. ment of the energy umax and the helicity hmax densities, and that the condition | h|= u /  to be satisfied, versus free space wave- length  for (a) crystalline and (b) amorphous silicon NAs. In all cases the power of the incident field is kept constant. Note that the maximum of the helicity and the energy enhancements and the con- dition NA NA ee 0 mm   = occur at different radius values of the Si NA, at each chosen operating wavelength. The maximum helicity en- hancement occurs at radial values between the other two. As it is clear from this figure, the maximum helicity and en- ergy densities hmax and umax do not occur for same NA radii choices. Indeed, the concept of helicity maximization indi- cates the maximum helicity density of the field at a fixed energy density. This means that the field may reach higher helicity density either by increasing its energy density or get- ting closer to the conditions (11). In the case of spherical di- electric NA, at the radius where the maximum of energy den- sity enhancement occurs the conditions (11) are not pre- cisely satisfied, which means that although the energy den- sity of the field is enhanced considerably, the helicity density does not reach its upper bound | h|= u /  . Consequently, the maximum of helicity density enhancement hmax curve locates between the curve of umax and that corresponding to the condition | h|= u /  . Moreover, the curve correspond- ing to the required condition | h|= u /  which is essential for the characterization of chirality of particles does not cross the curve associated to hmax . Therefore, if the goal is to characterize the chirality of a NP, it is impossible to take a full benefit from the maximum achievable helicity with a dielectric nanosphere as a NA. However, if the goal is to only detect whether the particle is chiral, we can relax the condition | h|= u /  to take a full advantage of maximum achievable helicity densities. In any case, whether the detec- tion is our goal or the characterization of the chiral polariza- bility em of a NP [see Eqs. (6) and (12)] there is always an enhancement of at least an order of magnitude in the helicity density of the scattered nearfield when employing a properly engineered Si sphere as the NA [see e.g. FIG. 8 (d)]. So far, we have discussed about the helicity enhancement due to the scattering nearfields of the NA. However, the overall helicity density of the field around the particle is de- termined by Eq. (21) which indicates that the overall helicity density sensed by the particle contains three contributions; that of the incident and scattered nearfields as well as that of the interference between these two helicity densities. There- fore, in the following, we discuss the importance of the in- terference term int h [see Eq. (22)] with mixed excitation and scattered nearfield terms in the helicity enhancement. Under the balance condition (25) for NAs and considering the optimally chiral ARPB excitation, the interference helic- ity density given in Eq. (22) reduces to HANIFEH, ALBOOYEH, CAPOLINO: HELICITY MAXIMIZATION OF STRUCTURED LIGHT UC IRVINE SEP 2018 ( )( )   NA o o int ee inc inc inc inc 3 . 1 ˆ ˆ 3 4 ikr h e r       =   −     r E r E E E (28) Enhancement of both interference helicity density o int / inc | | h h and total helicity density o / inc | | h h , evaluated at the surface of the NA along the z + direction, i.e., at aˆ r = z , is illustrated in FIG. 7 for the two cases, i.e., for nano- spheres with both the crystalline and amorphous silicon ma- terials. As it is obvious from this figure, although the en- hancement contribution due to interference helicity hint is weaker than that associated to the scattering fields, its con- tribution is not negligible in the total helicity enhancement. the total helicity enhancement. Interference helicity enhancement for (a) crystalline (b) amorphous silicon NA. Total helicity en- hancement for (c) crystalline (d) amorphous silicon NA. Finally, three illustrative NA designs, considering the oper- ational wavelength of  = 680nm , are described in FIG. 8, with three NA radii of a =85, 84, and 78 nm. These three values are chosen because they, respectively, generate: (a) the maximum enhanced energy density o max / inc u u , (b) the maximum enhanced total helicity density o / inc | | h h , and (c) the optimum condition | h|= u /  for chirality characteri- zation. The figure shows the distribution of the helicity and energy densities around the Si NA. As it is clear, an enhance- ment of 20-fold in helicity density which is localized at aˆ r = z (in z + direction) is achieved with a spherical Si NA with a radius of a = 84 nm . It is noteworthy to recall that em- ploying * A R V = iV and * A R V = −iV to measure ext P+ and ext P− when illuminating the NA with an ARPB guarantees the sat- isfaction of conditions (5) and (9). HANIFEH, ALBOOYEH, CAPOLINO: HELICITY MAXIMIZATION OF STRUCTURED LIGHT UC IRVINE SEP 2018 o | h / hinc | around the NA under ARPB illumination with w0 =  in (a-c) the x-y and (d-f) the x-z planes at  = 680nm . For the NA with radius a =78 nm the conditions (11) are satisfied while for a=84 and 85 nm we have the maximum helicity and maximum energy enhancements, respectively. C. Gaussian excitation To demonstrate the applicability of the proposed spherical NA with high dielectric constant to other illumination sce- narios, we examine the helicity enhancement by the pro- posed NA when illuminated by a Gaussian beam with circu- lar polarization. In contrast to ARPB, the GB satisfies con- ditions (11) only in limited areas in space as discussed in section III, in the case of tightly focused beams. Therefore, to satisfy conditions (11) in the nearfield of the NA, we set the beam parameter to 0 3 w =  . In this scenario, the induced dipole moments pNA and mNA have both x and y compo- nents since the electric and magnetic field vectors of the il- lumination beam are in the x-y plane. To ensure that the scat- tered nearfields is optimally chiral the induced dipole mo- ments are required to satisfy relations NA, 0 NA, x y m = −c p , NA, 0 NA, y x m = c p , and NA, NA, y x p = ip . This results in the helicity density of the scattered nearfield to take the form ( ) NA NA sca ee mm 2 o 2 * 2 inc 6 | | 3sin 1 2 32 h r           +          E . (29) Hence, the helicity enhancement o sca / inc | | h h reads ( ) NA NA sca ee mm o 2 6 2 inc * 0 | 1 3sin 1 , 2 | 16 |h |h r        +          (30) and the interference helicity density follows the same form as in Eq. (28). As it is obvious from Eq. (30) the maximum of helicity enhancement o sca / inc | | h h occurs at points such / 2  = , on the surface of the NA, i.e., at r = a. Similar to what was shown in the previous subsection, we have de- picted the total helicity enhancement o / inc | | h h for the case of crystalline and amorphous silicon spheres in FIGs. 9 (a) and (b), respectively. In FIGs. 9 (c) and (d) we show maps of helicity density enhancement for a Si NA with radius a = 80nm, i.e., for the radius that generates maximum helicity enhancement at  = 680nm in the x-y and y-z planes, respec- tively. As observed from these figures, an enhancement of an order of magnitude is achieved around the sphere at points with / 2  = . Comparing FIG. 9 (c) and (d) with HANIFEH, ALBOOYEH, CAPOLINO: HELICITY MAXIMIZATION OF STRUCTURED LIGHT UC IRVINE SEP 2018 the results in this scenario and that of the ARPB illumina- tion. Here, we have less enhancement while the area that the helicity is enhanced is more dispersed and is evenly distrib- uted, i.e., is azimuthally uniform around the sphere over 360 degrees. However, in the ARPB illumination, the helicity is more localized and hence it is more enhanced. Indeed, de- pending on the application one may chose the most suitable illumination. For instance, if we are able to control the posi- tion of the chiral nanoparticle to locate it at a particular point, then, the ARPB illumination is more efficient. However, if we do not have a full control on the position of the chiral nanoparticle to be characterized, then, the GB with circular polarization is more suitable. wavelengths and radii for (a) crystalline and (b) amorphous silicon NA under illumination of a circularly polarized GB with 0 3 w  = . The map of helicity enhancement distribution is given in (c) for the x-y plane, and in (d) for the y-z plane, for the case of a crystalline silicon NA with radius a = 80nm at the wavelength  = 651nm . V. CONCLUSION We have analyzed the interaction between small chiral na- noparticles and general electromagnetic fields and have de- termined the best field properties for chirality detection and characterization at nanoscale. We have demonstrated that any pair of electromagnetic fields with equal electric and magnetic energy densities is capable of detecting chirality if the pair constituents possess unequal helicity densities. Moreover, such pair of fields with equal electric and mag- netic energy densities may be employed for chirality charac- terization only when the two fields possess opposite handed- ness and both satisfy the universal relation | | / h = u  with h and u being the time-averaged helicity and energy densities of the field, respectively. In particular, we have investigated chiral fields of two kinds of optical beams: Gaussian beams with circular polarization, and combinations of beams with azimuthal symmetry forming an ARPB that needs to be properly engineered to satisfy the conditions in Eq. (11). Our analysis demonstrates that it is possible to enhance helicity density of chiral optical beams for the improvement of chi- rality detection by manipulating the relative phase, magni- tude, and orientation of electric and magnetic fields. For ex- ample, we have shown an order of magnitude enhancement in helicity density for a circularly polarized GB and an ARPB. Moreover, we have illustrated that nearfields of an engineered high refractive index spherical NA is optimally chiral, i.e., satisfy conditions in Eq. (11), while localizing energy and helicity densities below diffraction limit and en- hancing them for an order of magnitude. Our study confirms the fundamental limit of energy density as a determinant factor for the upper bound of helicity den- sity introduced in our concurrent work and proves that such a bound is achievable when the fields are properly en- gineered. These findings enable the design of efficient field structures for chirality detection and characterization at na- noscale. The authors acknowledge support by the W. M. Keck Foun- dation, USA.