1 Long spin coherence length and bulk-like spin-orbit torque in ferrimagnetic multilayers Jiawei Yu1, Do Bang2†, Rahul Mishra1†, Rajagopalan Ramaswamy1, Jung Hyun Oh3, Hyeon- Jong Park4, Yunboo Jeong5, Pham Van Thach2, Dong-Kyu Lee3, Gyungchoon Go3, Seo-Won Lee3, Yi Wang1, Shuyuan Shi1, Xuepeng Qiu6, Hiroyuki Awano2, Kyung-Jin Lee3,4,5*, and Hyunsoo Yang1* 1 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore, 117576, Singapore 2 Toyota Technological Institute, Tempaku, Nagoya 468-8511, Japan 3 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Korea University, Seoul 02841, Korea 4 KU-KIST Graduate School of Conversing Science and Technology, Korea University, Seoul 02841, Korea 5 Department of Semiconductor Systems Engineering, Korea University, Seoul 02841, Korea 6 Shanghai Key Laboratory of Special Artificial Macrostructure Materials and Technology and School of Physics Science and Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai 200092, China †These authors contributed equally to this work. *e-mail: eleyang@nus.edu.sg, kj_lee@korea.ac.kr Spintronics is a multidisciplinary field whose central theme is the active manipulation of spin degrees of freedom in solid-state systems. Ferromagnetic spintronics has been a main focus as it offers non-volatile memory and logic applications through current-induced spin- transfer torques1-4. Enabling wider applications of such magnetic devices requires a lower switching current for a smaller cell while keeping the thermal stability of magnetic cells for non-volatility. As the cell size reduces, however, it becomes extremely difficult to meet this requirement with ferromagnets because spin-transfer torque for ferromagnets is a surface torque due to rapid spin dephasing5,6, leading to the 1/ferromagnet-thickness dependence of the spin-torque efficiency7. Requirement of a larger switching current for a thicker and thus 2 more thermally stable ferromagnetic cell is the fundamental obstacle for high-density non- volatile applications with ferromagnets. Theories predicted that antiferromagnets have a long spin coherence length due to the staggered spin order on an atomic scale8,9, thereby resolving the above fundamental limitation. Despite several spin-torque experiments on antiferromagnets10-12 and ferrimagnetic alloys13-16, this prediction has remained unexplored. Here we report a long spin coherence length and associated bulk-like-torque characteristic in an antiferromagnetically coupled ferrimagnetic multilayer. We find that a transverse spin current can pass through > 10 nm-thick ferrimagnetic Co/Tb multilayers whereas it is entirely absorbed by 1 nm-thick ferromagnetic Co/Ni multilayer. We also find that the switching efficiency of Co/Tb multilayers partially reflects a bulk-like-torque characteristic as it increases with the ferrimagnet-thickness up to 8 nm and then decreases, in clear contrast to 1/thickness-dependence of Co/Ni multilayers. Our results on antiferromagnetically coupled systems will invigorate researches towards energy-efficient spintronic technologies. The spin-transfer torque (STT) acting on ferromagnets (FMs) is a surface torque, based on the averaging effect of STT5,6. We note that the same averaging effect occurs regardless of the spin- current source, and the spin-orbit torque (SOT)17,18, which we use in our experiment, is also a surface torque for FMs (Extended Data Fig. 1 and Methods). When a transverse spin current with a spin orientation non-collinear with the magnetization is injected into a FM, the electron spin precesses rapidly in real space because the wave vectors of the majority (↑) and minority (↓) spins at the Fermi surface are different (i.e., F F k k    ). The precession wavelengths are different for different incident angles of electrons (i.e., the direction of wave vector k), leading to rapid spin dephasing when summing over all current-carrying k-states. As a result, the k-integrated transverse spin current decays to zero within a distance from the FM surface, called the ferromagnetic 3 coherence length (spin coherence length, more generally), c F F k k       .19 As    F F k k becomes larger for larger exchange splitting, λc is only a few angstroms in strong FMs (e.g. cobalt or iron) for which the STT is almost a surface torque. Theories predicted that the spin coherence length is very long in antiferromagnets (AFMs) because of the staggered spin order on an atomic scale8,9. We use the term of “bulk-like-torque” to describe the characteristic of spin-torque for AFMs, i.e., spin-current absorption on a larger thickness, in contrast to the surface-torque of FMs. A semi-classical explanation of bulk-like- torque is that for conduction electron spins, the moments with alternating orientation on an atomic scale are seen as the exchange interactions with alternating signs. As a result, an ideal AFM has zero net effective exchange interaction when averaged over two sub-lattices and thus has an infinitely long λc, yielding the bulk-like-torque characteristic. Several experiments have investigated on STT/SOT effects in systems including AFMs10-12 and more recently on ferrimagnetic alloys13-16, but not on the long spin coherence length and associated bulk-like-torque characteristic. We qualitatively illustrate the spin coherence length in FMs and FIMs (or AFMs) based on the spin precession around the local exchange field. Neglecting the spin relaxation, dynamics of non- equilibrium spin density s is described by ex t s H s       / , where  is the gyromagnetic ratio, Hex is the effective exchange field that is aligned along the local magnetic moment m. Assuming  0,  sin ,cos   s  and z H ex  Hˆ , this equation of motion transforms to H t t          / / , where the sign of spin precession angle  follows the sign of H and thus the sign of m (Fig. 1a and b). In a FM, an electron spin propagating along the x-direction continuously precesses in the same sense because of the homogeneous exchange field (Fig. 1c). On the other hand, in a FIM, an electron spin precesses counter-clockwise on a lattice corresponding to a positive exchange field, 4 whereas it precesses clockwise on the next lattice corresponding to a negative exchange field. As a result, the period (or wavelength) of spin precession in FIMs is longer than that in FMs, resulting in much less spin dephasing. In order to verify the theoretical prediction of long spin coherence length, we perform experiments with a ferrimagnet (FIM), i.e., Co/Tb multilayers where both Co and Tb layers are atomically thin and their moments are coupled antiferromagnetically. We choose a FIM, instead of an AFM, for following two reasons. One is that Co/Tb multilayers can show a longer λc than a FM because of the antiferromagnetic alignment of Co and Tb moments (Extended Data Fig. 1 and Methods), thereby exhibiting a feature of the bulk-like-torque characteristic. As explained above, the STT efficiency of a FM is inversely proportional to the FM-thickness whereas that of an ideal AFM is independent of the AFM-thickness. As λc of FIM is located between those of FM and AFM, it is expected that the STT efficiency of a FIM first increases and then decreases with the FIM-thickness. The other reason to choose FIMs is that various measurement methods established for FMs are applicable to FIMs because of nonzero net moment13,20. However, the choice of FIM also results in a difficulty. FIMs commonly show a thickness-dependent variation of magnetic properties21, as also observed in Co/Tb multilayers (Extended Data Fig. 4 and Methods), which makes a quantitative analysis of spin transport difficult. Even with this difficulty, our thickness- dependent SOT measurements combined with spin pumping measurements support a long spin coherence length and associated bulk-like-torque characteristic in ferrimagnetic Co/Tb multilayers, as we show below. We fabricate perpendicularly magnetized ferromagnetic [Co/Ni]N and ferrimagnetic [Co/Tb]N multilayers (Fig. 2a, b; see Methods for details), where the total thickness varies with changing the repetition number N. Both Co/Ni and Co/Tb multilayers have an additional Pt layer, and an in- 5 plane current generates SOTs. We use the harmonic Hall voltage measurements to quantify the strength of SOT effective fields22,23. The longitudinal and transverse measurement schematics are illustrated in Fig. 2c and d, respectively. Representative results for the longitudinal (blue line) and are shown in Fig. 2e and f, respectively. The anomalous Nernst effect is corrected in the V2f data22. We observe a clear V2f in the longitudinal configuration (H//I), which is mostly determined by the anti-damping SOT22,23. The opposite V2f signs in the H//I case for Co/Ni and Co/Tb multilayers indicate that the Pt layer is the source of spin currents, as it is placed on top of the Co/Tb multilayer, but under the Co/Ni multilayer. In order to rule out the contribution from pure bulk Co/Tb to SOT, we conduct a control experiment without and with the spin current source, Pt (Extended Data Fig. 5, 6 and Methods). We find that there is no noticeable current-induced SOT without the Pt layer, suggesting that the Co/Tb bulk itself cannot directly contribute to SOTs. We extract the spin-orbit effective fields, HL and HT, by fitting V2f,23 where HL and HT correspond to the anti-damping (longitudinal) and field-like (transverse) components of SOTs, respectively. The planar Hall effect is considered for the fitting (Extended Data Fig. 8 and Methods). Devices with different N, corresponding to different thicknesses, tFM or tFIM, have been measured. Absolute SOT effective fields normalized by the current density in the Pt layer (HL/T/J) are presented in Fig. 3a and b for the Co/Ni and Co/Tb systems, respectively. We find that both HL and HT of Co/Ni multilayers decrease as tFM increases, consistent with the surface-torque characteristic expected for FMs. However, Co/Tb multilayers show an entirely different trend, in which both HL and HT increase up to tFIM of 7.9 nm and then decrease for thicker samples. We estimate the effective spin Hall angle  J eM t H S FM FIM L eff / 2 /   , where e is the electron charge and ħ is the reduced Planck’s constant, with considering thickness-dependent variation of 6 the saturation magnetization MS and current density J in the Pt layer. The Co/Tb multilayer shows a significant MS variation with the minimum at tFIM of 6.6 nm (inset of Fig. 3d). We find that θeff of Co/Ni multilayer is nearly constant with tFM (Fig. 3c). Similar to the tendency of HL/J, θeff of Co/Tb multilayer increases up to tFIM = 9.9 nm and then decreases for a thicker sample (Fig. 3d). Besides the distinct thickness-dependence of θeff, another interesting observation is that the Co/Tb multilayer shows a larger θeff than Co/Ni multilayer (θeff of Co/Tb multilayer = 2.1 at tFIM of 9.9 nm and the average θeff of Co/Ni multilayer = 0.2 ± 0.05). We note that a model calculation with considering a thickness-dependent variation of the sd exchange in FIMs shows qualitatively similar trends with the experimental ones (Extended Data Fig. 2 and Methods), even though the model is too simple to capture all the details of FIMs. Nevertheless, this qualitative agreement between model and experiment results indicates that the distinct behavior of θeff of Co/Tb multilayer would originate from a combined effect of long spin coherence length and thickness- dependent property variation. As an independent test, we perform SOT switching experiments with applying an external field (Hext) in the current direction (θ = 0°) for deterministic switching. The insets of Fig. 3e and f show samples, respectively. As the switching is governed by domain nucleation and propagation in large samples (i.e., Hall bar width = 10 m), we estimate the STT efficiency   H p / J , where Hp is the domain wall depinning field24. Figure 3e and f show η as a function of tFM and tFIM, respectively. For Co/Ni multilayers, η decreases with tFM, whereas for Co/Tb multilayers it increases and then decreases with tFIM, following similar trends to SOT effective fields (Fig. 3a and b). We note that recently reported fast dynamics at the angular momentum compensation condition in FIMs20 would affect the switching data, but not the harmonic Hall data. 7 As different approaches for the estimation of spin torque efficiency show qualitatively similar trends, it indicates that SOT for Co/Tb multilayers is not a surface torque. Moreover, the observed thickness-dependence of spin torque efficiency is qualitatively consistent with the model calculation (Extended Data Fig. 2 and Methods) for the bulk-like-torque characteristic in FIMs; it first increases and then decreases with the FIM-thickness. However, because of the thickness- dependent property variations in Co/Tb multilayers (inset of Fig. 3d and Methods), this result is not yet conclusive but it is still possible that another unknown mechanism is responsible for the distinct thickness-dependence observed in Co/Tb multilayers. In order to resolve this ambiguity, we perform additional spin pumping experiments to estimate the spin coherence length λc. We measure a spin-pumping-induced inverse spin Hall voltage (VISHE) Co/Ni and Co/Tb multilayers are perpendicularly magnetized, whereas the top thick Co layer has an in-plane magnetization. In the spin pumping setup (Fig. 4b; see Methods for details), the top Co layer generates a spin-pumping-induced spin current with an in-plane spin polarization (thus transverse to Co/Ni or Co/Tb magnetization direction), which passes through the Cu layer and enters the Co/Ni or Co/Tb layer. If λc of the Co/Tb multilayer is long, it is expected that a transverse spin current passes through the Co/Tb layer without much spin dephasing and reaches the bottom spin sink, Pt, and subsequently, VISHE is generated by the inverse spin Hall effect of Pt. On the other hand, VISHE is expected to be negligible for a thick Co/Ni multilayer because a transverse spin current is almost absorbed at the [Co/Ni]/Cu interface. Therefore, the measurement of VISHE versus FIM- or FM-thickness provides an estimate of λc. 8 We find that the experimental results are consistent with this expectation. In Fig. 4c, black symbols are the data from a reference Pt/Cu/Co sample, which shows the largest VISHE signal at an in-plane bias field Hb. For the Co/Ni-based structure, VISHE signal becomes negligible at a Co/Ni thickness of 0.9 nm (blue symbols). In contrast, VISHE signal for the Co/Tb-based structure is finite at a much thicker Co/Tb (red symbols, Co/Tb thickness = 5.3 nm as an example). VISHE signal disappears when excluding the top Co layer from the Co/Tb-based structure (green symbol), proving that the perpendicularly magnetized Co/Tb itself does not generate a VISHE signal. In Fig. 4d, spin pumping results are summarized for a wide thickness range of Co/Tb multilayer. It shows that VISHE signal is finite even at 13 nm-thick Co/Tb. This result evidences a long spin coherence length in ferrimagnetic Co/Tb multilayers. The spin pumping and spin torque are connected through the Onsager reciprocity25. Therefore, the long spin coherence length observed in spin pumping experiments suggests that the bulk-like- torque characteristic must be present in spin torque experiments at least partially. Given that the thickness-dependent change in the spin torque efficiency follows the trend expected for the bulk- like-torque characteristic (Fig. 3), the spin pumping experiments combined with the spin torque experiments allow us to conclude that the antiferromagnetically coupled FIMs show a long spin coherence length and associated bulk-like-torque characteristic. We note that this bulk-like-torque characteristic and equivalently long spin coherence length are also observed for FIM alloys (Extended Data Fig. 9 and Methods), which would relate to some ordering in FIM alloys26,27. The results were supported by model calculation using a ferrimagnetic alloy (Extended Data Fig. 2 and Methods) in which an ordered alloy shows a longer spin coherence length than a random alloy. These salient features make antiferromagnetically coupled FIMs attractive for low-power non- volatile applications. We expect the bulk-like-torque principle is also applicable to domain wall or 9 skyrmion devices28-30 operated by SOTs. In this respect, our findings will motivate research activities to introduce FIMs as core elements in spintronics devices, which have been so far dominated by FMs. Therefore, our result provides an important step towards “ferrimagnetic spintronics”. 10