1 Thickness-dependent self-polarization-induced intrinsic magnetoelectric effects in La0.67Sr0.33MnO3/PbZr0.52Ti0.48O3 heterostructures Xiaoqian Yu1, Lijun Wu2, Bangmin Zhang1, Hua Zhou3, Yongqi Dong3, Xiaohan Wu1, Ronghui Kou3, Ping Yang4, Jingsheng Chen1, Cheng-Jun Sun3,*, Yimei Zhu2,*, and Gan Moog Chow1,* 1Department of Materials Science & Engineering, National University of Singapore, 117576, Singapore. 2Condensed Matter Physics & Materials Science Division, Brookhaven National Laboratory, New York 11973, USA. 3Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, Illinois 60439, USA. 4Singapore Synchrotron Light Source, National University of Singapore, 117603, Singapore. *Corresponding Authors’ Email: cjsun@aps.anl.gov; zhu@bnl.gov; msecgm@nus.edu.sg. 2 ABSTRACT The self-polarization of PbZr0.52Ti0.48O3 thin film is switched by changing film thickness through the competition between the strain relaxation-induced flexoelectric fields and the interfacial effects. Without an applied electric field, this reversal of self-polarization is exploited to control the magnetic properties of La0.67Sr0.33MnO3 by the competition/cooperation between the charge-mediated and the strain-mediated effects. Scanning transmission electron microscopy, polarized near edge x-ray absorption spectroscopy, and half-integer diffraction measurements are employed to decode this intrinsic magnetoelectric effects in La0.67Sr0.33MnO3/PbZr0.52Ti0.48O3 heterostructures. With PbZr0.52Ti0.48O3 films < 48 nm, the self-polarization-driven carrier density modulation around La0.67Sr0.33MnO3/PbZr0.52Ti0.48O3 interface and the strain-mediated Mn 3d orbital occupancy work together to enhance magnetism of 14 unit cells La0.67Sr0.33MnO3 film; with PbZr0.52Ti0.48O3 layers > 48 nm, the strain-induced the change of bond length/angle of MnO6 accompanied with a modified spin configuration are responsible for the decrease in Curie temperature and magnetization of 14 unit cells La0.67Sr0.33MnO3 film. 3 I. INTRODUCTION Artificially designed multiferroic heterostructures of ferromagnetic (FM) /ferroelectric (FE) layers draw significant interests due to the rich physics of magnetoelectric (ME) coupling and potential applications . Specially, the application of electric field to the FE layer in multiferroics to control magnetism in magnetic memory storage, sensors, and spintronics is of particular interests because of reduced power consumption . For example, the reversal of FE polarization-induced electrostatic modulation in charge carrier density at La0.8Sr0.2MnO3/PbZr0.2Ti0.8O3 interface , or interfacial orbital reconstruction in La0.5Sr0.5MnO3/BaTiO3 and La0.825Sr0.175MnO3/PbZr0.2Ti0.8O3 have been reported. Most studies of multiferroic heterostructures focus on FM/FE interface due to the limited ME effects away from it. However, our previous work demonstrates the thickness dependence of interfacial coupling in perovskite SrTiO3 (STO)/Pr0.67Sr0.33MnO3 (PSMO) heterostructures . With the increase of PSMO thickness, the magnetic properties around the STO/PSMO interface changed due to the varying coupling of crystal structures with film thickness during the growth process. Considering the similarity between FM and FE materials of 3d transition-metal oxides, the structural and ferroelectric properties around the FM/FE interface may be modulated by FE film thickness, which could be exploited to study intrinsic ME effects in FM/FE heterostructures without an applied electric field. Several mechanisms, including strain-mediated effects , charge- driven screening effects and the exchange bias coupling , have been proposed to account for the ME coupling in FM/FE oxide heterostructures. As reported previously , with increasing FE thickness the direction of self- polarization may be manipulated by flexoelectric effects through strain relaxation, causing the change of interfacial charge screening in the FM layer. At the same time, the strain effects accompanied with increasing FE thickness, also influence 4 with the FM layer and modulate its crystal structure and electronic structure through the lattice mismatch, octahedral connectivity, atomic displacement, and orbital hybridization across the FM/FE interface . The competition/cooperation of the charge-mediated and the strain-mediated effects stands out, yielding a robust ME response through the change of the lattice constants and the chemical valences . However, the gross change of the lattice constants sometimes cannot adequately reveal the important atomic information such as octahedral rotation and preferential orbital occupancy , which control the electronic and magnetic properties of complex magnetic oxides. In order to have a better understanding of this entangled interaction, an in-depth investigation on the ME coupling mechanisms in FM/FE heterostructures is greatly demanded. Therefore, changing the FE thickness, which may cause the varying coupling of the charge screening at the FM/FE interface and the strain-mediated effects on local structures of FM layer, provides a viable means to study the ME effects in FM/FE thin film heterostructures. In this work, we report an integrated study on the intrinsic ME coupling in (001) SrTiO3 (STO)/La0.67Sr0.33MnO3 (LSMO, fixed at ~14 unit cells) /PbZr0.52Ti0.48O3 (PZT, 0-130 nm) heterostructures without an applied electric field. La1-xSrxMnO3, as a metallic bottom electrode, can be used to induce the self-poling of PbZr1-xTixO3 thin films , which point downward to the substrate in this study. By increasing PZT thickness, the switching of self-polarization direction is realized through the competition between the interfacial effects and the strain relaxation-induced flexoelectric fields, resulting in noticeable effects on ME coupling in LSMO/PZT heterostructures. Thin PZT films (< 48 nm) drive the holes depletion at LSMO/PZT interface and preferential Mn 3d out-of-plane orbital occupancy, enhancing magnetism of LSMO film. The strain-induced modifications of bond length/angle of MnO6 associated with a modified magnetic 5 spin configuration decrease the Curie temperature and magnetization of 14 unit cells LSMO film with thick PZT films (> 48 nm). II. EXPERIMENTAL LSMO/PZT bilayer heterostructures were fabricated by pulsed laser deposition (PLD) on (001) SrTiO3 (STO) single crystal substrates. LSMO thin film was deposited at 750°C under background oxygen pressure of 200 mTorr. The PZT thin film was grown on the top of LSMO at 550 °C under 50 mTorr oxygen pressure. The laser fluence was kept at 1~2 J/cm2 and the pulse repetition frequency was 3Hz. After deposition, the sample was cooled down to room temperature at 15°C/min in a 1 Torr oxygen atmosphere. The thickness of LSMO was fixed at ~14 unit cells (u.c.), which was determined by considering both the dead layer thickness and interfacial charge screening length. It is known that metallic La1-xSrxMnO3 has a carrier density of 1021-1022/cm3, yielding a screening length of less than 1 nm . The presence of magnetically dead layer is well known for manganite perovskite and the thickness is found to be around 2 to 5 nm depending on the substrates . Thus, LSMO of ~14 u.c. was chosen to reduce the impacts of dead layer and enhance the interface-to-volume ratio. PbZr0.52Ti0.48O3 (PZT) is a good ferroelectric candidate in FM/FE heterostructures due to its high remnant polarization and outstanding piezoelectric coefficient . The structural and ferroelectric properties of PZT depend on the film thickness, which was chosen as 4, 8, 16, 48, 96 and 130 nm. Magnetic properties were measured by a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) and x-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD), using beamline 4-ID-C of Advanced Photon Source (APS), Argonne National Laboratory, USA. Piezoelectric force microscopy (PFM) was used to measure the self-polarization of as-grown PZT thin films. Crystal structure was determined by high-resolution x-ray diffraction using synchrotron x-ray sources at the x-ray development and demonstration (XDD) beamline of Singapore Synchrotron 6 Light Source (SSLS) and beamline 12-ID-D of APS, Argonne National Laboratory, USA. The room temperature x-ray absorption near edge spectroscopy (XANES) measurement was performed using linear polarized x-ray at beamline 20-ID-B of the APS, Argonne National Laboratory, USA. The total fluorescent yield was detected and XANES normalization was conducted using the program Athena. High-angle annular dark field (HAADF) and annular bright field (ABF) in scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) and electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) were performed using the double aberration-corrected JEOL-ARM200CF microscope with a cold-field emission gun and operated at 200 kV, at Brookhaven National Laboratory, USA. The microscope is equipped with JEOL and Gatan HAADF detectors for incoherent HAADF (Z-contrast) imaging, Gatan GIF Quantum ER Energy Filter with dualEELS for EELS. 7 III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION A. Thickness-dependent self-polarization of PZT films direction near the LSMO/PZT interface for samples with three different thicknesses of PZT: (a,d) 8 nm (b,e) 48 nm (c,f) 130 nm. Pdown is denoted by  and Pup is denoted by . Panel (d)-(f) are the magnified portions of the STEM-ABF images of the PZT film near the LSMO/PZT interface (see the details in Figure S2). The arrows indicate the self-polarization direction near the LSMO/PZT interface, where LSMO in under the PZT layer. The red open circles correspond to Ti/Zr atoms and the blue open circles represent oxygen atoms. (g)-(i) Schematic illustrations of three sample configurations, showing the self-polarization induced charge screening in the interfacial LSMO. The plus sign indicates the hole and the minus sign corresponds to the electron. The large black arrows indicate the self-polarization direction of large thin film volume of PZT, while the small black arrows correspond to self-polarization direction near the LSMO/PZT interface marked by the red-dotted rectangle. Ed is the depolarization field, Eint is the built-in electric field and Eflexo is the flexoelectric field. As shown in Figures 1a-1c, the typical out-of-plane PFM poling and imaging were performed to probe the self-polarization of PZT as a function of its 8 film thickness. The negative-voltage poled region corresponds to polarization pointing away from the substrate (Pup) while the positive-voltage poled region stands for polarization pointing down towards the substrate (Pdown). The outermost part of diagram without an applied tip voltage represents the self- polarization state of as-grown PZT thin films. Therefore, the self-polarization of PZT gradually switches from Pdown to Pup with increasing film thickness from 8 nm to 130 nm. For the 48 nm PZT, a mixed-polarization (Pmix) of Pdown and Pup indicates the transition point of the switching of self-polarization. The detailed change of self-polarization as a function of PZT thickness and the experimental setup are shown in Figure S1. Since PFM results provide the ferroelectric properties in a large area, STEM was employed to study the local information of self-polarization. As shown in Figures 1d-1f, STEM-ABF images were viewed along the direction from the PZT films with three different thicknesses, showing the projection of Ti/Zr (red open circles) and oxygen (blue open circles) atoms. The detailed information may be found in Figures S2a-S2c. At the portion of film near the LSMO/PZT interface, the self-polarization direction around the interface is clearly evident. It is found that Pdown and Pup coexist in both 48 nm and 130 nm PZT, while the uniform Pdown state is presented in 8 nm PZT. These results are consistent with the out-of-plane PFM results, especially in the 8 nm and 48 nm PZT films. We notice that the probing depth in the PFM measurement dramatically depends on the dielectric permittivity of FE materials and contact conditions between the tip and sample surface . According to Kalinin et al , the tip-induced electroelastic field drops within a distance of approximately 100 nm for PbZr1-xTixO3, resulting in a finite probing depth. Hence for 130 nm film, the PFM shows the upward self-polarization in the large thin film volume of PZT, which is not in conflict with the coexistence of Pdown and Pup around the LSMO/PZT interface by STEM-ABF imaging. 9 Both PFM and STEM results reveal that the direction of self-polarization changes with PZT film thickness, as summarized in Figures 1g-1i. Several mechanisms, including the interfacial electric field induced by the bottom electrode, the evolution of the strain effects, the interface termination, and charged defects such as oxygen vacancies in FE films , have been proposed for the FE self-polarization phenomenon. In the current study, the reversal of self-polarization as a function of PZT thickness may be interpreted as follows. It is well known that PZT thin film may suffer from the non- stoichiometric concentrations due to lead or oxygen vacancies during the deposition process and may be considered as a wide band-gap semiconductor . The depletion region may form when the PZT contacts with the hole-doped metallic LSMO , which is analogous to the case of p- n/Schottky junction . A simplified band alignment for the LSMO/PZT interface is illustrated in Figure S3, based on previous studies . The depletion region would bend the band structure, forming the built-in electric field (Eint) directed from the PZT to the bottom electrode LSMO. Consequently, the Eint may polarize the PZT into the Pdown state. Due to the low concentration of charge carriers in PZT and the high density of holes in LSMO film, the depletion region is mainly located in PZT and its width ranging from 3-35 nm depending on charge carriers densities, Ti/Zr ratio, and the ground state of the bottom electrode . This built-in electric field Eint plays a dominate role in the self- poling of thin films PZT (< 48 nm), and there is an opposite depolarization field (Ed) accompanied with the self-polarization, as shown in Figure 1g. When the thickness of PZT increases, the interfacial effect gradually diminishes while the evolution of strain status has to be considered. We observe the strain relaxation in PZT with increasing film thickness, as shown in XRD results (see the details in Figures S4 and S5). The strain gradient points in the direction from the substrate to the film surface, thus generating a corresponding flexoelectric field (Eflexo) in the direction of the strain gradient, which favors the upward polarization 10 . This flexoelectric effect works in tandem with the Ed against the interfacial effect, attempting to switch the self-polarization from the downward direction to the upward direction. Finally, for thick PZT films (> 48 nm), the interfacial effect is masked by the dominant strain gradient-induced flexoelectric field, driving the self-polarization into the Pup state. The calculated changing trend of Eflexo as a function of PZT thickness (Figure S6) supports the above discussion. Combining above considerations, the changing trend of self-polarization in the whole thickness range is illustrated with a proposed competition between Eint and Eflexo in Figure S7. In the thinner PZT films, the large Eint competes with a small Eflexo and induces a downward self-polarization Pdown in 8 nm PZT. With increase of thickness, the strain relaxation occurs thus Eflexo starts to increase and reaches the highest value at a critical thickness. The large Eflexo would override the interfacial effect and turn the self-polarization orientation from pointing downwards to upwards. Therefore, a mixture of Pup and Pdown is present in the 48 nm PZT and the region near the LSMO/PZT interface in the case of 130 nm PZT sample. With a further increase in film thickness, the Eflexo begins to drop due to the totally-relaxed strain status in the thicker films and the self-polarization maintains upward, as shown in the large thin film volume of 130 nm PZT far away from the LSMO/PZT interface. Other possible effects, such as the depolarization field effect , charge on the PZT/air surface , and non- switchable layer of PZT may need to be considered together with the effects of Ein and Eflexo. These cooperative effects warrant further investigation and that is beyond the current scope of our paper. To sum up, the thickness could effectively tune the self-polarization of PZT films, and its effect on ME coupling in LSMO/PZT heterostructure is discussed in the following. B. Modulation of LSMO properties by PZT thickness La0.67Sr0.33MnO3 (LSMO) is chosen as a ferromagnetic component in the multiferroic heterostructure due to its good half-metallic behavior with a high 11 curie temperature and a high spin polarization . The PZT thickness-dependent self-polarization may electrostatically modulate the hole carrier density in LSMO and corresponding local structures across the interface, resulting in noticeable effects on LSMO properties. As shown in Figures 2a-2b, Curie temperature Tc and the saturation magnetization Ms vary coherently with increasing PZT thickness. Tc was determined by finding the temperature for which the first derivative of the temperature-dependent magnetization curve has a minimum value (the inset of Figure 2a), while Ms was acquired by the maximum magnetization under the 10 kOe magnetic field (Figure 2b). As summarized in first enhanced and then suppressed with increasing PZT thickness. Combined with above results of self-polarization, the Tc and Ms of LSMO are enhanced by 8 nm PZT in the Pdown state, whereas are weakened most by 130 nm PZT with the mixed self-polarization state at the LSMO/PZT interface. The variation of electrical properties of LSMO with increasing PZT thickness is in accordance with the changing trend of magnetism. The metal-insulator transition temperature TMI, shown by the peak in the temperature-dependent resistivity curves, decrease by 25 K from the largest value (~ 309 K) in the Pdown state to the smallest one (~ 284 K) in the mixed state (Figure 2d). The detailed change of TMI as a function of PZT thickness is summarized in Table SI. In addition, the enhanced resistivity is clearly observed in the mixed state, as compared to that in the Pdown state. The electric field control of electrical properties is consistent with the PZT thickness- dependent TMI and resistivity of LSMO, as shown in Figures S8a-S8d. It is noted that the magnetic properties are linked to the Mn sites in LSMO, since only negligible contributions from Ti are found, as shown in Ti XMCD of Figure S9. The measurement of magnetic hysteresis loops at 120 K is shown in Figure S10. The variation of Ms as a function of PZT thickness at 120 K is found to be consistent with that measured at 10 K. 12 thicknesses of PZT with an applied 100 Oe magnetic field. The inset shows the first derivative of the M-T curve with a minimum value which is defined as Curie temperature Tc. (b) Magnetic hysteresis loops of LSMO with the different thicknesses of PZT measured at 10 K with an applied 10 kOe magnetic field. The inset shows the enlarged part of the magnetic hysteresis loops at low field ranges. (c) Summary of the Tc difference (Tc) and the Ms difference (Ms) between the pure LSMO (0 nm) and the LSMO with increasing thickness of PZT. (d) Resistivity versus temperature (R-T) curves for LSMO with the different thicknesses of PZT without an applied magnetic field. The inset shows the first derivative of the R-T curve with a maximum value which is defined as metal-insulator transition temperature TMI. The reversal of FE polarization-controlled magnetic and electrical properties of FM thin films has been reported. For temperature-dependent resistance cures of La0.67Sr0.33MnO3/BaTiO3 system by Cui et al , the enhanced resistivity and suppressed TMI of La0.67Sr0.33MnO3 were observed when the overlying BaTiO3 film in the Pup state, as compared to the case of Pdown. The enhanced resistivity is correlated with a modified spin exchange coupling, where an interfacial 13 ferromagnetic metallic LSMO layer is antiferromagnetically coupled and therefore electrically decoupled from the bulk thin film layer. In our case, the interfacial charge carrier modulation driven by the self-polarization reversal and/or local structural distortions at the LSMO/PZT interface manipulated by overlying PZT films may give rise to this modified spin configuration. Meyer et al reported the nearly 70% increase in the magnetization of La0.8Sr0.2MnO3/PbZr0.2Ti0.8O3 system when La0.8Sr0.2MnO3 in holes depletion, and attributed this phenomenon to the direct control of charge carrier concentration by FE polarization. In our study, the reversal of self-polarization is realized by changing the PZT thickness, without the cumbersome design of devices required for application of an electric field. It is an attractive approach to observe intrinsic ME coupling in FM/FE heterostructures, and the origin of ME coupling in the current work is discussed as below. C. Interfacial charge-mediated effects It has been demonstrated that the out-of-plane FE polarization is screened in the manganite within a few unit cells from the interface, leading to two possible interfacial states: depletion or accumulation of charge carriers . Therefore, The PZT thickness-dependent self-polarization may electrostatically modulate the hole carrier density in LSMO, resulting in the depletion of holes at LSMO side of interface with 8 nm PZT and the mixture of electrons and holes at LSMO side of interface with 48 nm and 130 nm PZT, as illustrated in Figures 1g-1i. With a purpose of examining the interfacial-charge screening effect driven by self- polarized PZT films, we employed a room temperature XANES measurement on the entire thin film layer collected in total fluorescence yield (TFY) mode. Figure 3a shows the typical Mn K-edge XANES spectrum of LSMO thin film with different thicknesses of PZT films, consisting of a pre-edge peak (~ 6540 eV) and a sharp rising edge with a maximum resonance peak Er (~ 6555 eV). It is known that Mn K-edge main absorption edge arises from transition from the 1s core level 14 to unoccupied 4p orbitals, of which the edge position is found to be varied with the doping level x of mixed-valence manganite . In general, it shifts to the higher energy position when the Mn4+ content increase. Compared with pure LSMO sample (0 nm PZT), a measurable shift of the inflection point to a lower energy position (~ 0.2 eV) is observed in LSMO with 8 nm PZT. Correlatively, an appreciable Er shifting to a lower energy (~ 0.3 eV) is recognized in LMSO with 8 nm PZT, together with an increased amplitude of this resonance peak. These observations indicate a decrease in the averaged valence state of Mn with 8 nm PZT, as compared to that of pure LSMO. It is in line with above results that 8 nm PZT in the Pdown state would electrostatically induces the accumulation of electrons (depletion of holes) in interfacial region of LSMO (Figure 1g). Based on the reported linear relationship between the edge shift and the doping level x, E = 3.0x, an increase of 0.08  0.03/Mn is estimated in averaged valence state for LSMO in holes depletion state compared to pure LSMO film. Since the magnetic moment changes by 1 B when Mn changes from the low spin state 0.03 B/Mn is induced in LSMO in holes depletion state by valence modulation. Although the depletion interface (LSMO with 8 nm PZT) indeed enhance magnetism as supported by SQUID, this calculated change of Mn moment from the charge screening effect is smaller than that measured by SQUID (an increase of 0.46  0.12 B/Mn), as shown in Figures 2b-2c. In addition, the decrease of magnetization for LSMO with 130 nm PZT is not consistent with the overall change of chemical valence. 15 PZT, respectively. The insets show the enlarged part of the maximum peak and the position of inflection point. (b) EELS of Mn L3,2-edge of LSMO with 0 nm, 8 nm, 48 nm and 130 nm PZT, respectively. (c) The STEM-HAADF image of STO/LSMO/PZT (48 nm) sample. The inset is the EELS spectral image of Mn L3,2-edge averaged vertically from the area marked by the rectangle. The numbers indicate the position of atomic Mn columns starting from STO/LSMO interface. The number 1 corresponds to the first Mn column of LSMO at STO/LSMO interface and number 14 corresponds to the last Mn column of LSMO at LSMO/PZT interface. (d) Mn L3,2-edge and (e) O K-edge EELS spectra of LSMO with 48 nm PZT, respectively, collected at selected Mn columns of LSMO near the STO/LSMO (number 1 and 2) and LSMO/PZT interface (number 13 and 14). The pre-peak feature is denoted by the arrow. Then the detailed local information is obtained by Mn L3,2-edge EELS. The chemical shift of Mn L3,2-edge arises from the changes in the core-level energy and the effective charges on the atom . As shown in Figure 3b, the Mn L3,2- edge spectra (circles) were achieved by averaging the whole LSMO layer. The solid lines are the refinement by asymmetric Gaussian and Lorentzian function 16 with refined L3 peaks at 642.42 eV, 641.41 eV, 642.78 eV and 641.66 eV (from bottom to top) with an increase of PZT thickness, respectively. The standard error of each fitting was used to calculate the error bars ( 0.06 eV). Generally, the lower the L3 energy position, the lower the averaged valence state of Mn . Therefore, LSMO with 8 nm PZT has the lowest valence state of Mn, which is well-matched with Mn K-edge XANES results. Compared with LSMO with 8 nm PZT, a noticeable positive shift for the 48 nm PZT sample (~ 1.37 eV) and a less significant one (~ 0.25 eV) for the 130 nm PZT sample are observed. Besides the averaged EELS information, the change of interfacial valence of LSMO was also investigated. Figure 3c shows the STEM-HAADF image of STO/LSMO (14 u.c.)/PZT (48 nm) sample and the atomic scale EELS mapping of Mn L3,2-edge in the selected zone. The sharp interface may be observed with little Mn intermixing. These numbers indicate the position of atomic columns, where the Mn L3,2-edge and the O K-edge fine structures were collected from. As shown in eV, 643.03 eV, 642.72 eV and 642.05 eV from the bulk LSMO (number 1,2) to the Mn columns near the LSMO/PZT interface (number 13,14). The error bars are  0.1 eV. The L3 edge shifts to the lower energy position (~ 0.7 eV) from the bulk LSMO to the LSMO/PZT interface, indicating a lower valence state of interfacial LSMO than that of the bulk layer. This agrees with the proposed built- in electric field accompanied with the negative charge aggregation in the LSMO near the LSMO/PZT interface. Similar observations in LSMO with 8 nm and 130 nm PZT are shown in Figures S11a-S11b. In addition, the O K-edge fine structures collected from number 1,2 and number 13, 14 are shown in Figure 3e. The pre-peak feature of the O K-edge, which is correlated with the hybridization of O 2p with Mn 3d bands, is sensitive to the oxidation state of Mn . A linear relationship between the pre-peak intensity and the oxidation state of Mn in manganite oxides has been reported 17 , where the pre-peak intensity increases when the nominal valence of Mn increases. Figure 3e shows that the pre-peak feature of LSMO with 48 nm PZT gradually diminishes from the bulk LSMO (number 1,2) to the LSMO/PZT interface (number 13, 14), also indicating a lower oxidation state of interfacial Mn than that of the bulk thin film layer. The suppression of pre-peak feature is also noticed in LSMO with 8 nm and 130 nm PZT near the LSMO/PZT interface, as shown in Figures S11c-S11d. In particular, the pre-peak feature is almost missing for whole LSMO thin film with 8 nm PZT (Figure S11c). In comparison, the visible pre-peak feature in the case of 48 nm PZT sample near LSMO/PZT interface (number 13 of Figure 3e) suggests a higher valence state of Mn than that of 8 nm PZT sample. From the XANES, an averaged valence state of Mn is found to vary with PZT thickness-dependent self-polarization. LSMO with 8 nm PZT (in Pdown state) has the lowest valence state. Nevertheless, the enhanced magnetic properties from the interfacial charge screening may not be quantitatively explained by the valence-modulated spin state of Mn. In addition, the suppressed magnetic properties of LSMO with 130 nm PZT cannot be explained by the charge screening effect. The layer-resolved EELS results suggest the non-uniformity of the electronic structures in LSMO film due to the interfacial coupling. Considering the strong correlation between the electronic structure and crystal structure, additional mechanisms, such as the strain-mediated effects including the MnO6 octahedral rotation and orbital reconstruction across the LSMO/PZT interface, may be responsible for the change of magnetism in our study. D. Strain-mediated effects Due to the intrinsic strong coupling between the strain and polarization in FE materials, the strain-mediated effects may apply to LSMO through the lattice mismatch, octahedral connectivity, atomic displacement, and orbital hybridization across the LSMO/PZT interface . According to the XRD 18 results (Figures S4 and S5), all LSMO thin films are fully strained by the STO substrate. Considering the fixed thickness of LSMO, the strain effect from STO substrate is assumed to be constant for all the samples. In this study, we focus on the strain-mediated effects from overlying PZT thin films. The depth profile of the out-of-plane lattice constants of LSMO, which vary across the LSMO/PZT interface, strongly depends on the thickness of overlying PZT films (see the details in Figure S12). The averaged out-of-plane lattice constants of LSMO are slightly changed (~0.5%) with increasing PZT thickness (Figure S4). The half-integer diffraction measurement, developed by Glazer in the 1970s , was employed to characterize the MnO6 octahedral rotation with increasing PZT thickness. As illustrated in Figure 4a, the presence of octahedral tilt results in the doubling of periodicity (2d) along certain axes . The half-integer peaks due to the oxygen scattering may be separated from the strong intensity of the cations scattering, since the periodic length of the cations remain as constant d. The use of high-flux synchrotron x-ray sources enables the accurate measurement of rotation pattern and the magnitude of octahedral tilts in perovskite thin films. Figure 4b shows a series of clear half- integer peaks in STO/LSMO/PZT (8 nm) heterostructure. The half-integer diffraction results of STO/LSMO, STO/LSMO/PZT (48 nm), and STO/LSMO/PZT (130 nm) heterostructures are shown in Figures S13a-S13c, respectively. By examining the presence/absence of the specific half-integer peaks, the octahedral rotation patterns of LSMO were identified as a-a-c- in all samples with PZT films according to the Glazer notation . 19 integer peaks. Q is the transfer momentum in Bragg’s law, d is the periodic length and n is an integer number determined by the order of diffraction. (b) Room temperature half-integer diffraction measurement of STO/LSMO/PZT (8 nm) heterostructure. The x-ray energy is 20 keV. The derivative curves of polarized Mn K-edge XANES spectra of LSMO with 8 nm, 48 measurement, the E vector of incident x-ray is along the film plane; in perpendicular case, the E vector is perpendicular to the film plane. (f) Summary of the intensity ratio of B1/B2 in two polarization direction of Mn K-edge XANES spectra, normalized by the value of LSMO with 48 nm PZT for a comparison. Based on the previous studies , the experimental half-integer peak intensities were used to calculate the tilt angles and oxygen positions by the home-made codes (see the details in Table SII and Figure S14). The calculated tilt angles, bond lengths and bond angles of MnO6 with the error bars are summarized in the Table I. With an increase of PZT thickness, both the in-plane and the out-of-plane tilt angles of MnO6 gradually decrease. The thicker PZT film seems to exert a damping effect on MnO6 rotation, which induces the smallest out-of-plane bond length in LSMO with 130 nm PZT. Consistently, the ratio of 20 the out-of-plane bond length to the in-plane bond length (dout/din) is found to be smaller in LSMO with 130 nm PZT than that of LSMO with 8 nm and 48 nm PZT. In comparison, LSMO with 8 nm PZT has the largest out-of-plane bond length and dout/din ratio. The half-integer results reveal that anisotropic bond length of MnO6 is induced by the PZT thickness-dependent strain-mediated effects, which may further affect the electron hopping and magnetic properties of LSMO. rotation angle (T, T) of LSMO with 8 nm, 48 nm and 130 nm PZT, along the in-plane and the out-of-plane direction. dout/din is the ratio of the out-of-plane dMn-O to the in-plane dMn-O value. The experimentally measured Curie temperature Tc and the calculated electron hopping probability td-d between neighboring Mn sites of LSMO with 8 nm, 48 nm and 130 nm PZT, normalized by the value of LSMO with 48 nm PZT. Sample In-plane Out-of-plane out in d d ,48 c c nm T T Exp. ,48 d d d d nm t t   Cal. dMn O  (Å) B  ( ̊) T  ( ̊) dMn O  (Å)  B ( ̊) T  ( ̊) LSMO 8nm PZT ( 0.012) ( 2.8) 5.8 ( 0.4) ( 0.011) ( 3.7) 5.7 ( 0.9) ( 0.001) 1.05 ( 0.01) 1.03 ( 0.05) LSMO 48nm PZT ( 0.012) ( 2.3) 5.7 ( 0.7) ( 0.012) ( 3.4) 5.0 ( 1.3) ( 0.001) 1 1 LSMO 130nm PZT ( 0.009) ( 3.2) 5.0 ( 0.4) ( 0.008) ( 3.2) 4.8 ( 0.5) ( 0.001) 0.95 ( 0.01) 0.97 ( 0.04) The polarization-dependent Mn K-edge XANES was then utilized to probe the strain-mediated effects on the electronic structure of LSMO, due to the fact that the detailed shape of curves is associated with the strong hybridization of Mn 3d orbitals and O 2p orbitals . Figures 4c-4d show that, in two polarization directions, two sub-peaks (as denoted by B1 and B2) can be observed in the derivative curves of Mn K-edge XANES of all three samples. The lower energy peak B1 corresponds to the 3dn+1L4p1 electron configuration due to the Coulomb interaction between the Mn 1s core hole (due to the x-ray photon excitations) and extra 3d electron, whereas the higher energy peak B2 corresponds to 3dnL4p1 21 electronic state . Here, the L indicates the O ligands, and L means one hole in O ligands resulting from electron transfer from O 2p orbitals to Mn 3d orbitals. It is known that intensity ratio of B1/B2 is correlated to the strain-induced anisotropy of local structure environment, which may further make the hybridization between O 2p orbitals and Mn 3d orbitals anisotropic inside the MnO6 octahedra. In general, the higher B1/B2 intensity, the larger Mn-O charge transfer probability. As summarized in Figure 4e, LSMO with 8 nm PZT has a higher B1/B2 value in the perpendicular measurement; in the parallel case, LSMO with 130 nm PZT has a higher B1/B2 value. LSMO with 48 nm PZT is taken as a reference with the lowest B1/B2 ratio in both polarization directions. Based on our previous work , the dominant Mn-O charge transfer channel is the in- plane process (from O 2 x p , 2 yp orbitals to Mn 2 2 3 x y d  orbitals) for the perpendicular measurement and that is the out-of-plane process (from O 2 zp orbitals to Mn 2 2 3 3 z r d  orbitals) for the parallel case. Therefore, LSMO with 8 nm PZT has a higher in-plane Mn-O hopping integral whereas LSMO with 130 nm PZT has a higher out-of-plane Mn-O hopping probability. The enhancement of charge transfer is in the direction where a larger overlap (i.e. smaller Mn-O bond length) between Mn 3d orbitals and O 2p orbitals. It is supported by half-integer results that dout/din is smaller in LSMO with 130 nm PZT than that of LSMO with 8 nm PZT. The anisotropic Mn-O charge transfer is closely associated with preferential electron occupancy of Mn 3d orbital, which was taken into account for Tc calculation . According to the study of Chen et al , a larger Mn-O hopping probability results in a higher center-of-band energy and a less occupancy considering the fact that in LSMO two Mn eg states are antibonding in nature. In this context, LSMO with 8 nm PZT, with a larger dout/din and higher in-plane Mn- O hopping, relatively prefers out-of-plane orbital occupancy; LSMO with 130 nm PZT, with a smaller dout/din and higher out-of-plane Mn-O hopping, relatively 22 prefers in-plane orbital states. The polarized XANES results provide the evidences of the strain-mediated effects on the Mn-O charge transfer and the preferential electron occupancy of Mn 3d orbitals, which is not easy to be detected by X-ray linear dichroism due to thick overlying PZT layer. E. Discussion It is well-known that in the framework of double-exchange interaction, Tc in metallic manganite is proportional to the electron hopping probability between two nearest Mn sites (td-d), which is determined by the orbital overlap between the Mn 3d and O 2p orbitals. The PZT thickness-dependent strain-mediated effects on the Mn-O bond length, Mn-O-Mn bond angle and Mn 3d orbital occupancy may modulate the electron hopping and therefore Tc of LSMO, according to the following equation : 2 2 2 2 ' 2 , 2 7 2 2 2 2 2 2 , 2 7 2 2 2 2 2 2 , ( ) ( ) 1 {4 sin ( ) ( ) (3 )] 6 2 +4 sin ( ) (1 ) (3 ) (3 )] 2 c d d i j pd i j B Mn O in x y B Mn O in x y T t V d n x y x y z r d n z r x y z r                                           2 2 2 7 2 2 2 2 , +2 sin ( ) (1 ) (3 ) (3 )} 2 B Mn O out x y d n z r z r               (1) where (i) is the probability of the eg electron transferring from the i orbital of i Mn ion ( 2 2 2 2 3 3 or 3 x y z r d d     ) to an O 2p orbital, and (j) is the probability of the eg electron hopping from an O 2p orbital to the j orbital in the neighboring j Mn ion. Vpd is the matrix element between p and d orbitals and it is proportional to the 3.5 Mn O d   and nx2−y2 is the ratio of electron occupancy in Mn 2 2 3 x y d  orbital. The transfer intensity (i) and (j) may refer to previous studies . It is worth noting that td-d is determined by not only the Mn-O bond length and Mn- O-Mn bond angle along both the in-plane and out-of-plane direction, but also the electron occupancy in Mn 3d orbitals as well. Based on the above discussion that 23 LSMO with 8 nm PZT relatively prefers out-of-plane orbital occupancy while LSMO with 130 nm PZT relatively prefers in-plane orbital states, the assumptions of nx2−y2 = 0 for the LSMO with 8 nm PZT, 0.5 for the LSMO with 48 nm PZT, and 1 for the LSMO with 130 nm PZT, are used. Combined with the bond length/angle calculated from half-integer diffraction measurements, the calculated results of td-d are shown in Table I. The changing trend of calculated values is well-matched with the experimental data, where the LSMO with 130 nm PZT has the smallest td-d and LSMO with 8 nm PZT has the highest one. The small difference may result from the rough assumption of ratio of electron occupancy in Mn 3d orbitals in three samples. This calculation demonstrates that PZT thickness-dependent strain-mediated effects on bond length/angle of MnO6 and Mn 3d orbital occupancy work in synergic to modulate Tc of LSMO thin films. As well known, the magnetic configuration depends on a delicate balance between the ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic coupling. Additional effects, such as spin exchange coupling modified by the change of charge carrier density , or interfacial orbital reconstruction , could appear with the change of Curie temperature. The spin ordering in the strained manganese oxides is affected by the orbital preferential occupancy. According to the above results, the preferential Mn 2 2 3 x y d  ordering in LSMO with 130 nm PZT may stabilize the A-type antiferromagnetic (AFM) spin configuration, where spins couple ferromagnetically in the plane and antiferromagnetically along the out-of-plane direction . It may lead to the depression of double-exchange mechanism and magnetization of LSMO . In order to investigate the spin exchange coupling in LSMO/PZT heterostructures, measurements of zero field cooling (ZFC) and field cooling (FC) magnetization loops were conducted. Figures S15a-15c show no exchange bias in pure LSMO, LSMO with 8 nm and 48 nm PZT films, respectively. In comparison, a small exchange bias of ~1.7 Oe with an obvious 24 enhancement of coercivity, as a typical phenomenon associated with the exchange anisotropy induced at the interface between AFM and FM layers, is observed in LSMO with 130 nm PZT (Figure S15d) . Unlike the large exchange bias found in LSMO with antiferromagnetic BiFeO3 films , the presence of antiferromagnetic spin coupling may arise from the LSMO/PZT interface through the orbital reconstruction. Therefore, the strain-mediated effects on bond length/angle of MnO6 accompanied with a modified spin exchange coupling enables the PZT thickness-dependent modulation of magnetic properties of LSMO thin films. Apart from Tc, the decreased magnetization in LSMO with 130 nm PZT may be explained by the strain effects on the spin configuration of the Mn atoms. By use of localized techniques such as STEM imaging and EELS (as summarized in Figure S16), we find the changes in interfacial lattice constants, chemical valences, and atomic displacements, which are combined to engender noticeable effects on properties of LSMO/PZT heterostructures. Polarized XANES and half-integer diffraction measurements are employed to probe the electronic anisotropy and modified bond lengths/angles of MnO6, working in concert to illuminate the entangled interplay between the charge, spin, lattice and orbital in this strongly correlated system. Combining above strain- and charge- mediated effect, the self-polarization-driven carrier density modulation at the LSMO/PZT interface and the strain-mediated Mn 3d orbital occupancy work together to enhance magnetism of LSMO with PZT < 48 nm; the strain-induced the change of bond length/angle of MnO6 accompanied with a modified spin configuration are responsible for the decrease in Curie temperature and magnetization of LSMO with PZT > 48nm. 25 IV. SUMMARY In summary, we develop the thickness-dependent self-polarization of PZT films, leading to noticeable effects on intrinsic magnetoelectric coupling in LSMO/PZT heterostructures. The competition model of the built-in electric field and the flexoelectric field is proposed to explain the self-polarization switching. With thin PZT films (< 48 nm), the self-polarization-driven valence modulation and strain-mediated Mn 3d orbital occupancy work together to enhance magnetism of LSMO thin films; with thick PZT films (> 48 nm), the strain- induced modifications of bond length/angle of MnO6 associated with a modified spin configuration are responsible for the suppressed Curie temperature and magnetization in LSMO thin films. The study of competition/cooperation of charge-mediated and strain-mediated effects in LSMO/PZT heterostructures sheds light on the entangled interplay between the charge, lattice, orbital and spin in strongly correlated oxides. Our work provides a practicable means to induce desirable magnetoelectric effects in FM/FE heterostructures, with promising potentials in applications such as spintronic memory and logic devices. 26 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors would like to acknowledge the Singapore Synchrotron Light Source (SSLS) for providing the facility necessary for conducting the research. The Laboratory is a National Research Infrastructure under the National Research Foundation Singapore. This research is supported by the Singapore Ministry of Education Academic Research Fud Tier 2 under the project No. MOE2015-T2- 1-016 and the Singapore National Research Foundation under CRP Award No. NRF-CRP10-2012-02. Work at Brookhaven National Laboratory was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Science, Division of Materials Science and Engineering, under Contact No. DESC0012704. Use of the Advanced Photon Source, an office of Science User Facility operated for the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Science by Argonne National Laboratory, was supported by the U.S. DOE under Contact No. DE-AC02-06CH11357. We thank Dr. John W. Freeland for his kind support at beamline 4-ID-C of Advanced Photon Source. Xiaoqian Yu and Lijun Wu contributed equally to this work. 27