Tunable Flux Vortices in 2D Dirac Superconductors Sina Zeytino МҶglu,1, 2 Atac МҮImamo МҶglu,2 and Sebastian Huber1 1Institute for Theoretical Physics, ETH Z МҲurich, CH-8093 Zurich, Switzerland. 2Institute for Quantum Electronics, ETH Z МҲurich, CH-8093 Zurich, Switzerland. (Dated: October 16, 2018) The non-trivial geometry encoded in the Quantum Mechanical wavefunctions has important con- sequences for its single-particle as well as many-body dynamics. Yet, our understanding of how the geometry of the single-particle eigenstates are manifest in the characteristics of a many-particle system is still incomplete. Here, we demonstrate how the single-particle Berry curvature modifies the fluxoid quantization of a two dimensional Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) superconductor, and discuss the experimental scenarios where this anomalous quantization is expected to be realized. The realization that the Hilbert space of a quantum mechanical system can be endowed with a nontrivial ge- ometry resulted in the discovery of a plethora of novel phenomena both in single- and many-particle quantum systems. The geometric considerations associated with single-particle wavefunctions have led to the discovery and classification of non-interacting topological insula- tors (TIвҖҷs) [1вҖ“4], as well as to the investigation of the novel properties associated with defects in these phases . On the other hand, the fascinating physics of in- teracting particles occupying non-trivial single-particle states was investigated in the framework of fractional quantum Hall systems (FQHSвҖҷs) and fraction Chern Insulators (FCIвҖҷs) . However, the strongly corre- lated nature of these systems makes it difficult to es- tablish a direct relation between the role of non-trivial geometry on the single- and the many-particle level. In this Letter, we demonstrate a clear connection be- tween the non-trivial geometry of a two-dimensional (2D) single-particle band structure and the response proper- ties of a weakly interacting system. To this end, we con- sider a Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) superconductor , consisting of Cooper pairs of electrons whose single- particle states carry non-trivial geometry. We show that in a 2D system, the non-trivial Berry curvature of the single-particle states modifies the conventional fluxoid quantization associated with the superconducting order parameter, resulting in fractional flux vortices as well as in an unconventional Josephson response. The fluxoid quantization originates from the fact that deep inside a bulk superconductor, the overall phase of the order parameter is constant. In conventional su- perconductors, this overall phase has contributions from two sources: the external electromagnetic vector poten- tial and the U(1) phase of the order parameter. Hence, the fluxoid quantization can be understood as the to- tal screening of the electromagnetic vector potential by the phase of the order parameter field . However, as we show below, an additional contribution to the overall phase emerges for a BCS superconductor whose normal state Fermi surface encloses a non-trivial Berry flux ПҶB [see Fig. 1 (a)]. This additional contribution is related to the orbital currents in the superconductor and allows for screening of the electromagnetic vector potential by the Aharanov-Bohm phase associated with the internal rotation of the Cooper pair. In particular, a 2ПҖ rota- tion of the relative coordinate of the Cooper pair results in a change in the overall phase by 2ПҶB, allowing stable fractional flux vortices [see Fig. 2 (a)] . We consider the simplest model for a 2D normal state which has a rotationally symmetric dispersion and a non- trivial Berry flux enclosed by the Fermi surface. The Hamiltonian for the massive Dirac model is H0(k) = пҝҪ f вҖ  1,k f вҖ  2,k пҝҪ [d(k) В· Пғ вҲ’ Ој1] пҝҪ f1,k f2,k пҝҪ , (1) where Пғ = (Пғx, Пғy, Пғz) is the vector of Pauli matrices, 1 is the identity matrix, and f вҖ  i,k (fi,k) are the creation (an- nihilation) operators for particles with momentum k and spin or pseudo-spin label i. In the following, we let |c(k)вҹ© and |v(k)вҹ© denote the eigenvectors of H0(k), which cor- respond to conduction and valence bands, respectively. The single-particle Hamiltonian is parametrized by (i) d(k) = (vFkx, vFky, Оҙ), with 2Оҙ characterizing the min- imum energy gap between the conduction and valence bands, (ii) the Fermi velocity vF, which is taken to be unity for the rest of the Letter, and (iii) the chemical potential Ој, which we set to lie in the conduction band. We note that the single-particle Hamiltonian in Eq. (1) is a good effective low-energy description a for family of real materials, most notably transitional metal dichalco- genide (TMD) monolayers near the high symmetry K points , or surfaces of three-dimensional (3D) TIвҖҷs in the proximity of a ferromagnetic insulator . We give a more comprehensive list of experimental scenarios which can be modelled by Eq. (1) in our conclusion. The massive Dirac model in Eq. (1) exhibits non-trivial geometry for both the conduction and valence band. The non-trivial geometry can be understood as a result of the the Berry connection at momentum k k sin (Оёk/2)2eПҶ, (2) where Оёk вүЎ arccos Оҙ вҲҡ Оҙ2+k2 and eПҶ is the unit vector in the azimuthal direction. Most importantly for this work, the arXiv:1810.05737v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 12 Oct 2018 2 (a) The fractional angular momentum of single- particles on a circular Fermi surface enclosing non-zero Berry flux ПҶB. Similar to the magnetic field in real space, the Berry curvature carries an intrinsic angular momentum which is acquired by the single-particle states on the Fermi surface. The Berry flux ПҶB enclosed in the Fermi surface determines the fractional part of the angular momentum associated with the states on the Fermi surface. (b) The fractional angular momentum due to the Berry flux can be considered as the momentum space analog of the anyon construction in Ref. . non-trivial connection results in a non-zero Berry flux ПҶB enclosed in the conduction band Fermi surface ПҶB(kF) = пҝҪ FS dk В· Ac(k) = ПҖ пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ Оҙ пҝҪ Оҙ2 + kF 2 пҝҪ , (3) where kF denotes the Fermi momentum. The normal state described by the Eq. (1) has a su- perconducting instability with respect to attractive in- teractions between electrons. In general, the interaction between the electrons can be written in second quantiza- tion in the (pseudo-) spin basis (m, n вҲҲ {1, 2}) as Hint = пҝҪ k1,k2,k3,k4,m,n V n,m k1,k2,k3,k4f вҖ  m,k1f вҖ  n,k2fn,k3fm,k4, (4) where V n,m k1,k2,k3,k4 < 0 for all {ki}, and V n,m k1,k2,k3,k4 вҲқ Оҙk1+k2,k3+k4 ensures momentum conservation. For BCS superconductivity, the only relevant degrees of freedom are th zero momentum Cooper pairs consist- ing electrons on the conduction band Fermi surface . Hence, we consider only the terms where k1 = вҲ’k2 and k3 = вҲ’k4 in Eq. (4). Projecting the interaction Hamil- tonian onto the conduction band, we obtain МғHint = пҝҪ k,kвҖІ Uk,kвҖІcвҖ  kcвҖ  вҲ’kckвҖІcвҲ’kвҖІ, (5) where cвҖ  k|0вҹ© вүЎ пҝҪ Оұ(1) c,kf1,k + Оұ(2) c,kf2,k пҝҪвҖ  |0вҹ© = |c(k)вҹ©. The strength of interactions projected to the conduction band is Uk,kвҖІ = пҝҪ n,m V n,m k,вҲ’k,kвҖІ,вҲ’kвҖІОұ(n)вҲ— ck Оұ(m)вҲ— cвҲ’k Оұ(m) ckвҖІ Оұ(n) cвҲ’kвҖІ, (6) here ПҶk is the azimuthal angle of the k. In the context of our work, the most remarkable feature of the projected interaction in Eq. (5) is that when we re- strict the momenta on the Fermi surface (i.e., k = kF ЛҶk), the coefficients U (l) kF of the partial-wave expansion, de- fined through UkFЛҶk,kF ЛҶ kвҖІ = пҝҪ l U (l) kF e i(ПҶkF вҲ’ПҶkвҖІ F ), are redis- tributed with respect to the coefficients V (l) kF of the bare interaction. For example, in the massive Dirac model in Eq. (1), and s-wave interactions in the orbital basis V (l) вҲқ Оҙl,0, the partial-wave coefficients of the interaction projected onto the conduction band is purely p-wave. In particular, U (l) kF вҲқ Оҙl,1, with U (1) kF = пҝҪ V 12 kF пҝҪ(0) пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ ПҶB 2ПҖ пҝҪ ПҶB 2ПҖ , (7) where we used the constraints (V nn kF )(l) = 0 and U (l) kF = 0 for even l arising from the fermionic anti-commutation re- lations obeyed by operators fm,k, f вҖ  m,k and ck, cвҖ  k, respec- tively. In general, when the bare interaction potential has multiple partial wave components, the coefficients U (l) kR obey U (l) kF = пҝҪ V 11 kF пҝҪ(l) пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ ПҶB 2ПҖ пҝҪ2 + пҝҪ V 12 kF пҝҪ(lвҲ’1) пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ ПҶB 2ПҖ пҝҪ ПҶB 2ПҖ + пҝҪ V 22 kF пҝҪ(lвҲ’2) ПҶB 2ПҖ 2 . (8) The redistribution of the partial-wave components can be understood as a direct consequence of the non-trivial Berry phase inclosed in the single-particle Fermi surface. Eq. (7) expresses an effect that is similar to the emergence of effective p-wave pairing from s-wave interactions, as studied in TI surfaces proximity coupled to an s-wave superconductor, as well as in the spectroscopic and transport signatures of Berry curvature in 2D excitons. Furthermore, in three dimensions, the above discussion leads to the prediction of nodal superconduc- tivity in Weyl semimetals . Next, we treat the superconducting phase where the Cooper pairs consist of electrons on the conduction band Fermi surface which encloses a Berry flux of ПҶB(kF). In the weak coupling regime, we can describe the supercon- ducting ground state using the BCS ansatz |BCSвҹ© = пҝҪ k пҝҪ uk + vkcвҖ  kcвҖ  вҲ’k пҝҪ |0вҹ©, (9) where |0вҹ© is the electronic vacuum of the conduction band. The BCS ansatz parametrizes the expectation value of the Cooper pair вҹЁBCS|ckcвҲ’k|BCSвҹ© = uвҲ— kvk вүЎ Fk. 3 Given the BCS gap equation вҲҶk = пҝҪ kвҖІ UkkвҖІFkвҖІ, the ex- pectation value Fk can be written as |Fk|eil0ПҶkF , where l0 maximizes |U l0 kF ,kвҖІ F | under the constraint that the Cooper pair wavefunction in a given (pseudo-) spin representa- tion is anti-symmetric. Naively, one could conclude from the above discussion that the expectation value of the many-body angular mo- mentum operator is Д§l0nc, where we defined the number of condensed pairs as nc вүЎ пҝҪ k Fk. However, a more careful calculation shows that this conclusion is incor- rect in the presence of the non-trivial Berry curvature. The expectation value of the relative angular momentum operator is (see Supplementary Material) вҹЁLrelвҹ© вүЎ вҲ’1 2вҹЁBCS| пҝҪ iМё=j (ЛҶri вҲ’ ЛҶrj) Г— (ЛҶpi вҲ’ ЛҶpj)|BCSвҹ© = Д§ пҝҪ k F вҲ—(k) (вҲ’iвҲӮПҶ) F(k) + пҝҪ k F вҲ—(k)Д§ПҶB(kF) ПҖ F(k) = ncД§ пҝҪ l0 + ПҶB(kF) ПҖ пҝҪ . (10) We observe that the expectation value of the angular momentum operator is shifted with respect to the naive guess above by twice the angular momentum associated with ПҶB(kF) in Eq. (3). Importantly, the Berry flux con- tribution can be traced back to the fact that the second quantized position operator projected onto the conduc- tion band is ЛҶr = пҝҪ k,kвҖІ вҹЁc(kвҖІ)|ЛҶr|c(k)вҹ©cвҖ  kвҖІck = пҝҪ k,kвҖІ [вҲ’iвҲӮk + Ac(k)] Оҙk,kвҖІcвҖ  kвҖІck. (11) Equivalently, the angular momentum of the Cooper pair is given by the eigenvalue of the covariant derivative in momentum space, DПҶ = вҲ’iвҲӮПҶ + 2ПҶB(kF) 2ПҖ . This result can be intuitively understood by consid- ering the analogy between the single-particle wavefunc- tions on the Fermi surface enclosing the Berry flux ПҶB, and the wavefunctions of a particle on a ring which en- closes a magnetic flux ОҰMag (see Fig. 1). As discussed in Ref. , in both cases, the eigenfunctions have an- gular momenta whose values are shifted with respect to their conventional integer values by a fraction associated with ПҶB or ОҰMag. Thus, the unconventional expectation value of the Cooper pair angular momentum can be un- derstood as the sum of the shifted angular momenta of their constituent particles. What are the physical effects of the fractional angu- lar momentum expectation value of the Cooper pairs? We show that one interesting consequence of the frac- tional angular momentum is its effect on the orbital cur- rents. We calculate the orbital current contribution in the Ginzburg Landau (GL) free energy from the micro- scopic model using the formalism of functional integrals (Supplementary Material) . To this end, we con- sider a configuration of the order parameter where the relative orientation of the Cooper pairs is adiabatically rotated as a function of their center of mass position R [see Fig. 2 (a)]. As a result, the gradient term in the GL free energy density can be shown to be Fgrad = Д§2ПҒs 2mвҲ— пҝҪ вҲ’ 2 e Д§Ae.m.(R) + вҲҮОё(R) + пҝҪ l0 + ПҶB ПҖ пҝҪ вҲҮПҶk(R) пҝҪ2 , (12) where ПҒs вүЎ |вҲҶ|2 is the superfluid density for an isotropic superconductor, mвҲ— is the mass of the Cooper pair, Ae.m.(R) is the electromagnetic vector potential, and Оё(R) is the U(1) phase of the order parameter. We omit the kF dependence of the Berry flux for simplicity. Tak- ing the variation of the free energy with respect to Ae.m., we find that the supercurrent including the effect of a variation in the relative orientation of the Cooper pair is Js = ОҙF ОҙAe.m. = Д§2ПҒs mвҲ— пҝҪ вҲ’ 2 e Д§Ae.m.(R) пҝҪ . (13) While the first and the second term in the above expres- sion can be attributed to the charge and mass currents in a conventional superconductor, respectively, the third term contains the effect of the Berry flux enclosed in the Fermi surface. We note that because the normal state has a rotationally symmetric (isotropic) Fermi surface, the energy associated with the orbital currents goes to zero for configurations where the wavelength of the vari- ation is taken to infinity. The form of the orbital current contribution in Eq. (13), modifies the possible vortex states of the su- perconductor. As is well known, the magnetic field in- side a superconductor is screened due to the Meissner effect , resulting in the condition that away from the vortex core, the supercurrents should vanish. This statement is captured by the following equation: пҝҪ C dl В· Js = 0, (14) where C denotes a path around the vortex core, and we assumed that the distance between any point on C and the vortex core is much larger than the effective London penetration length of the 2D superconductor. In- serting (13) into (14), we find the minimum value of the magnetic flux ОҰv вүЎ пҝҪ C dl В· Ae.m. the vortex can accom- modate to be ОҰv = 2ПҖД§ 2e [p + (l0 + ПҶB/ПҖ)q] , (15) where p, q вҲҲ Z denote the winding numbers of the U(1) phase and the orientation angle ПҶk of the Cooper pairs 4 along the contour, respectively. The minimal magnetic flux ОҰmin enclosed in the vortex core in a superconductor on a band with non-trivial Berry curvature is given by setting q = 1 and p = вҲ’l0: ОҰmin = h 2eПҶB/ПҖ. (16) Given that 2ПҶB can be interpreted as the Aharanov- Bohm phase acquired by the Cooper pair wavefunction as the orientation of the pair is adiabatically rotated by 2ПҖ, the configuration with q = 1 corresponds to a vortex with fractional flux quantum ОҰmin that is stable due the screening of the electromagnetic field by the Aharanov- Bohm phase [see Fig. 2 (a)]. The modification of the flux quantization in the pres- ence of non-trivial Berry curvature and an isotropic Fermi surface also bears interesting consequences for a super- conducting quantum interference device (SQUID) [see Fig. 2 (b)]. The total current iT through the SQUID consisting of two Josephson junctions is iT = i1 + i2 = 2Ic cos пҝҪПҶ1 вҲ’ ПҶ2 2 пҝҪ sin пҝҪПҶ1 + ПҶ2 2 пҝҪ , (17) where Ic is the critical current of each junction and ПҶj denotes the phase difference between the two sides of the jth Josephson junction. When the thickness of the superconducting regions connecting the two Josephson junctions is much larger then the penetration length, we can define a contour C for which Eq. (14) is satisfied. Then the relation between the phase difference ПҶ1 вҲ’ ПҶ2 and the total flux ОҰ is ОҰ ОҰ0 = ПҶ1 вҲ’ ПҶ2 2ПҖ + p + (l0 + ПҶB/ПҖ)q, (18) where the winding numbers p, q вҲҲ Z have the same mean- ing as in Eq. (15). Inserting (18) into (17), the total current simplifies to iT = 2Ic cos пҝҪ ПҶBq + ПҖ ОҰ ОҰ0 пҝҪ sin пҝҪ ПҶ1 + ПҶBq + ПҖ ОҰ ОҰ0 пҝҪ . (19) Maximizing the driving current, we obtain imax вүҲ 2Ic пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪcos пҝҪ ПҶBq + ПҖ ОҰext ОҰ0 пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ . (20) where we neglected the self-inductance of the supercon- ducting loop (i.e., ОҰ = ОҰext). The value of the winding number q in Eq. (20) is given by the configuration which minimizes the kinetic energy of the system for a given ОҰext. As a result, the Josephson current through the SQUID has a periodicity which is a fraction of the con- ventional SQUID. Before we conclude, we discuss possible experimental realizations of the physics presented above. The exper- imental setups where the single-particle Hamiltonian in The illustration of the configuration of the super- conducting order parameter which allows stabilization of a vortex with fractional magnetic flux quantum ОҰ0 пҝҪ ПҶB ПҖ пҝҪ . The single-valuedness of the order parameter is satisfied only is the relative coordinate of the Cooper pairs rotate by a mul- tiple q of 2ПҖ around the vortex. Such a configuration realizes an adiabatic evolution of the order parameter as a function of the center of mass position. The Berry flux acquired by the order parameter contributes to the overall phase of the super- conductor, modifying the conventional fluxoid quantization. (b) The modification of the fluxoid quantization also allows for building SQUIDвҖҷs with tunable periodicity. Eq. (1) can be realized include (i) surface modes of a 3D TI in the proximity of a ferromagnetic insulator (ii) an isotropic anomalous Hall system (iii) a single K - valley of a TMD monolayer and (iv) a single K - valley of a bilayer graphene biased by an in plane electric field . The effects discussed above will also be present if each electron comprising the Cooper pair can be described by a separate massive Dirac Hamiltonian with the same Berry flux enclosed by each Fermi surface. Such sys- tems include (v) a graphene monolayer on a hexagonal anti-ferromagnetic substrate and (vi) a cold atom realization of a weakly-doped Chern insulator . For systems (i), (ii), and (v) above, the effects dis- cussed above can be in principle observed by inducing a superconducting gap via proximity effect to a con- ventional s-wave superconductor. However, this strat- egy is not viable for systems which do not break time- reversal (TR) symmetry [(iii) and (iv)] since proximity effect only allows pairing between zero total momentum Cooper pairs, and the K and вҲ’K valleys in (iii) and (iv) carry opposite Berry curvature. Consequently, the super- conducting gap in (iii) and (iv) should be opened via in- trinsic attractive or repulsive interactions which favor intravalley pairing. Lastly, in cold atom settings (vi), reliable Feshbach resonances allow greater freedom to realize pairing with desired properties. In conclusion, we have demonstrated a direct relation between a non-trivial single-particle Berry phase and the modification of the fluxoid quantization in a BCS su- perconductor. A natural extension of our treatment is to include the effects of anisotropy and disorder. We 5 also emphasize that our approach to combine the pro- jected many-body position operators and with a mean field ansatz can be applied to other weakly correlated systems consisting of excitons or polarons . We acknowledge useful discussions with Manfred Sigrist, Dima Geshkenbein, Aline Ramires, Ovidiu Cot- let, Mark Fisher, and Tomas Bzdusek , Jose Luis Lado. This work is supported by a European Research Coun- cil (ERC) Advanced investigator grant (POLTDES) and Consolidator grant (TopMechMat). Andreas P Schnyder, Shinsei Ryu, Akira Furusaki, and Andreas WW Ludwig. Classification of topological insu- lators and superconductors. In AIP Conference Proceed- ings, volume 1134, pages 10вҖ“21. AIP, 2009. Alexei Kitaev. Periodic table for topological insulators and superconductors. In AIP Conference Proceedings, volume 1134, pages 22вҖ“30. AIP, 2009. Liang Fu. Topological crystalline insulators. Physical Review Letters, 106(10):106802, 2011. Barry Bradlyn, L Elcoro, Jennifer Cano, MG Vergniory, Zhijun Wang, C Felser, MI Aroyo, and B Andrei Bernevig. Topological quantum chemistry. Nature, Dmitri A Ivanov. Non-abelian statistics of half-quantum vortices in p-wave superconductors. Physical Review Let- ters, 86(2):268, 2001. Jeffrey C.Y. Teo and Taylor L. Hughes. Topological de- fects in symmetry-protected topological phases. Annual Review of Condensed Matter Physics, 8(1):211вҖ“237, 2017. Robert B Laughlin. Anomalous quantum hall effect: an incompressible quantum fluid with fractionally charged excitations. Physical Review Letters, 50(18):1395, 1983. Steven M Girvin. The quantum hall effect: novel exci- tations and broken symmetries. In Aspects topologiques de la physique en basse dimension. Topological aspects of low dimensional systems, pages 53вҖ“175. Springer, 1999. Nicolas Regnault and B Andrei Bernevig. Fractional chern insulator. Physical Review X, 1(2):021014, 2011. Titus Neupert, Luiz Santos, Claudio Chamon, and Christopher Mudry. Fractional quantum hall states at zero magnetic field. Physical review letters, John Bardeen, Leon N Cooper, and John Robert Schri- effer. Theory of superconductivity. Physical Review, M. Tinkham. Introduction to Superconductivity: Second Edition. Dover Books on Physics. Dover Publications, Qing Hua Wang, Kourosh Kalantar-Zadeh, Andras Kis, Jonathan N Coleman, and Michael S Strano. Electronics and optoelectronics of two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides. Nature nanotechnology, 7(11):699, 2012. Xiaodong Xu, Wang Yao, Di Xiao, and Tony F Heinz. Spin and pseudospins in layered transition metal dichalcogenides. Nature Physics, 10(5):343, 2014. YL Chen, J-H Chu, JG Analytis, ZK Liu, Kyushiro Igarashi, H-H Kuo, XL Qi, Sung-Kwan Mo, RG Moore, DH Lu, et al. Massive dirac fermion on the surface of a magnetically doped topological insulator. Science, Jason Alicea, Yuval Oreg, Gil Refael, Felix Von Oppen, and Matthew PA Fisher. Non-abelian statistics and topo- logical quantum information processing in 1d wire net- works. Nature Physics, 7(5):412, 2011. Liang Fu and Charles L Kane. Superconducting proxim- ity effect and majorana fermions at the surface of a topo- logical insulator. Physical review letters, 100(9):096407, Ajit Srivastava and Ata М§c Imamo МҶglu. Signatures of bloch- band geometry on excitons: nonhydrogenic spectra in transition-metal dichalcogenides. Physical review letters, Jianhui Zhou, Wen-Yu Shan, Wang Yao, and Di Xiao. Berry phase modification to the energy spectrum of ex- citons. Phys. Rev. Lett., 115:166803, Oct 2015. Wang Yao and Qian Niu. Berry phase effect on the ex- citon transport and on the exciton bose-einstein conden- sate. Physical review letters, 101(10):106401, 2008. Shuichi Murakami and Naoto Nagaosa. Berry phase in magnetic superconductors. Phys. Rev. Lett., 90:057002, Feb 2003. Yi Li and FDM Haldane. Topological nodal cooper pairing in doped weyl metals. Physical review letters, EI Blount. Formalisms of band theory. In Solid state physics, volume 13, pages 305вҖ“373. Elsevier, 1962. Frank Wilczek. Quantum mechanics of fractional-spin particles. Physical review letters, 49(14):957, 1982. Frank Wilczek. Magnetic flux, angular momentum, and statistics. Physical Review Letters, 48(17):1144, 1982. Dieter Vollhardt and Peter W МҲolfle. The superfluid phases of helium 3. Courier Corporation, 2013. Alexander Altland and Ben D Simons. Condensed matter field theory. Cambridge University Press, 2010. C. Mudry. Lecture Notes on Field Theory in Condensed Matter Physics. World Scientific, 2014. Terry P Orlando and Kevin A Delin. Foundations of ap- plied superconductivity, volume 8. Addison-Wesley Read- ing, MA, 1991. J. Pearl. Current distribution in superconducting films carrying quantized fluxoids. Applied Physics Letters, Alexander L Fetter. Flux penetration in a thin supercon- ducting disk. Physical Review B, 22(3):1200, 1980. Naoto Nagaosa, Jairo Sinova, Shigeki Onoda, AH Mac- Donald, and NP Ong. Anomalous hall effect. Reviews of modern physics, 82(2):1539, 2010. Ajit Srivastava, Meinrad Sidler, Adrien V Allain, Do- minik S Lembke, Andras Kis, and Atac Imamo МҶglu. Valley zeeman effect in elementary optical excitations of mono- layer wse 2. Nature Physics, 11(2):141, 2015. Jeroen B Oostinga, Hubert B Heersche, Xinglan Liu, Al- berto F Morpurgo, and Lieven MK Vandersypen. Gate- induced insulating state in bilayer graphene devices. Na- ture materials, 7(2):151, 2008. Zhenhua Qiao, Wei Ren, Hua Chen, L Bellaiche, Zhenyu Zhang, AH MacDonald, and Qian Niu. Quantum anomalous hall effect in graphene proximity coupled to an antiferromagnetic insulator. Physical review letters, Monika Aidelsburger, Michael Lohse, C Schweizer, Mar- cos Atala, Julio T Barreiro, S Nascimbene, NR Cooper, 6 Immanuel Bloch, and Nathan Goldman. Measuring the chern number of hofstadter bands with ultracold bosonic atoms. Nature Physics, 11(2):162, 2015. Gregor Jotzu, Michael Messer, R МҒemi Desbuquois, Mar- tin Lebrat, Thomas Uehlinger, Daniel Greif, and Tilman Esslinger. Experimental realization of the topologi- cal haldane model with ultracold fermions. Nature, MA Rahimi, AG Moghaddam, C Dykstra, M Governale, and U Z МҲulicke. Unconventional superconductivity from magnetism in transition-metal dichalcogenides. Physical Review B, 95(10):104515, 2017. Yi-Ting Hsu, Abolhassan Vaezi, Mark H. Fischer, and Eun-Ah Kim. Topological superconductivity in mono- layer transition metal dichalcogenides. Nature Commu- nications, 8:14985 EP вҖ“, 04 2017. Meinrad Sidler, Patrick Back, Ovidiu Cotlet, Ajit Sri- vastava, Thomas Fink, Martin Kroner, Eugene Demler, and Atac Imamoglu. Fermi polaron-polaritons in charge- tunable atomically thin semiconductors. Nature Physics, Anthony J. Leggett. A theoretical description of the new phases of liquid 3He. Rev. Mod. Phys., 47:331вҖ“414, Apr