1 Supercooling-enabled giant and tunable thermal rectification ratio of a phase change thermal diode Zhaonan Meng, Raza Gulfam, Peng Zhang*, Fei Ma Institute of Refrigeration and Cryogenics, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, No. 800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai 200240, China E-mail: zhangp@sjtu.edu.cn Keywords: thermal diodes; thermal rectification; phase change materials; supercooling effect Phase change thermal diodes (PCTD) suffer from fairly low thermal rectification ratio, which hampers their widespread utilization as thermal management and control units for cutting-edge technologies, encompassing photovoltaics, thermoelectric modules, batteries and other miniaturized electronic products, etc. Herein, a PCTD prototype is theoretically designed via heat conduction and convection models, fabricated and experimentally executed, accessing an unprecedentedly giant thermal rectification ratio of 3.0 at ambient temperature. Theoretical model additionally introduces freezing temperature to address supercooling-enabled extended-convection and liquid- height-dependent effective thermal conductivity. With optimized length ratio and feasible assembly of two phase change terminals, the emerging physical states of thermal media continuously manipulate heat flux in the forward direction and reverse direction operations within temperature bias of 10‾40 ﾂｰC. The most significant finding discloses the fact that supercooling elongates the overall workable temperature bias range, while manual supercooling release allows to tune the thermal 2 rectification ratio at any temperature bias within 10‾33 ﾂｰC. Integrating the conventional asymmetric thermal transport mechanism with state-specific heat transfer hysteresis helps establish the novel governing mechanism. 1. Introduction The necessity of waste heat scavenging and mitigation of thermal emissions through environment-friendly as well as techno-economic scenarios are declared to be the universal goals. Therefore, sustainable heat recovery, either from uninterruptable waste heat sources, miniaturized electronic products or intermittent solar sources, via directional heat flux manipulation is emerging as one of the fundamental interests. In the paradigm of multi-oriented demands, thermal technology has been recently utilized to create innovative thermal diodes, which is expected to be employed for efficient thermal computing and information processing, cryogenic radiative insulation, satellite temperature control, thermal logic circuitry, and so on. By definition, thermal diode is a bi-terminal nonlinear thermal element which allows the heat flow in one direction at a forward temperature bias, while blocking the reversal heat flow at a reverse temperature bias. This unidirectional and preferential behavior is normally called thermal rectification. To further rectify the heat flow, a co- junctional thermal diode usually requires one material made up of asymmetrical structure or two entirely different materials with various temperature- dependent thermo-physical properties. Briefly, thermal diode is a unifunctional device which is capable of operating in a forward direction with heat flux qfor and in a reverse 3 direction with heat flux qrev at the same temperature bias, where qfor 竕･ qrev. And the ratio of steady-state forward heat flux to reverse heat flux at a certain temperature bias is known as thermal rectification ratio R which is always larger than or equal to 1, as given in Equation (1). Meanwhile, increasing the thermal performance, which is quantified and evaluated by the thermal rectification ratio, is still underway, and demands further novel working mechanisms and thermal media (working materials). for rev q R 隥ｽ q (1) The certain types of thermal media, i.e., phase variant or phase invariant, can generate diversified working mechanisms that are necessary for thermal rectification. For instances, phase variant (normally known as phase change materials and abbreviated as PCMs) thermal media (e.g., solid-solid and solid-liquid PCMs) allow heat conduction in solid state (lattice vibrations), and thermal convection in liquid state (buoyant motion), thus they can develop dual-nature thermal diodes based on double- phase-oriented heat transfer mechanism. Phase invariant thermal media can undergo either conduction or radiation, where single-phase-oriented heat transfer mechanism is created. Dating back to 1936, Starr presented a solid rectifier and provided the insight of directional heat transfer at the junction of copper and cuprous oxide nanostructures, which led to disclose the innovative phenomenon of asymmetrical thermal conductance in relevance with electron theory of conduction. Since then, a series of thermal diode materials have been investigated conforming to variable thermal 4 conductance triggered by means of various heat carriers. However, indulgence of phonons has surprisingly rendered the governing mechanisms to be somewhat complicated in comparison with electron heat carries. Most probably, in order to minimize the design complications due to high-frequency phonons, the utilization of two materials with almost similar phonon-bands is recommended. Such a system has been reported with thermal rectification ratio of 1.43, which is ascribed to temperature-dependent asymmetrical thermal conductivities of the interzones in the temperature range of 40-100 K. Apart from achieving the asymmetrical thermal conductance in a single material via gradual change of external temperature, this mechanism can also be realized by introducing either structural or state-change phenomena. For instance, a thermal rectification ratio of 1.14, under a temperature bias of 2 K in forward and reverse bias operations, has been reported on behalf of structural phase change in MnV2O4 bar (top terminal) bonded with phase invariant La1.98Nd0.02CuO4 bar (bottom terminal). Moreover, two juxtaposition materials have been configured to work at quite high temperatures, for example, Al-based quasicrystals coupled with silver telluride (Ag2Te) tend to operate between 300 K (cold end) and 543 K (hot end), resulting in a thermal rectification ratio of 1.63. Since a desirable thermal conductivity drop of Ag2Te occurs at around 420 K because of structural phase change, it laid down the basis that temperature lower than this limit would not yield a pronounced thermal rectification. It is therefore concluded that the most probable reason of higher operational temperature biases of previously described bulk thermal rectifiers is ascribed to the nature of employed materials. 5 While in most of the applications, maintaining such a huge temperature bias may not be feasible, urging to explore low temperature bias-driven thermal media. Although many kinds of thermal media have been employed to fabricate thermal diode terminals, the design complications, arose on the account of selected thermal media, have impeded thermal rectification ratio. For example, if thermal conductivity of the first terminal increases with the rising temperature and the second terminal also behaves in the same way, then the high thermal rectification ratio in either direction may not be achieved. Such a configuration composed of two phase change terminals has been analyzed, providing a thermal rectification ratio of only 1.23 and further suggesting to utilize alternative PCMs. In this context, PCMs are enormous and generally known on the basis of interconvertible physical states depending on the melting process or solidification process. However, before opting out a PCM, the fundamental categorization is imperative, which includes organic and inorganic materials. The best suited examples of organic PCMs are paraffin waxes and non- paraffin materials such as fatty acids, poly-alcohols and certain polymers (e.g., PANIPAM (poly-n-isopropylacrylamide), polyurethane and polyethylene glycol, etc.). While the inorganics include salt hydrates and metallics. Moreover, melting temperature ranges of PCMs have been classified by Zhang et al., i.e., low melting temperature range <100 ﾂｰC (e.g., paraffin waxes), medium melting temperature range 100‾300 ﾂｰC (e.g., salt hydrates), and high melting temperature range >300 ﾂｰC (e.g., metals/metallic alloys). The major benefit of PCMs is the variation of physical states with temperature, creating the rise or fall of thermal 6 conductivity during every emerging state, which is an integral criterion to robustly modulate the heat flux either in the forward or reverse direction operation. Meanwhile, most of the PCMs also undergo a phenomenon like supercooling, which is however avoided for the PCMs being used to erect thermal energy storage and thermal management systems. Shortly, need-based novel thermal diodes can be fabricated by taking full advantage of different melting temperatures followed by appropriate selection of PCMs. A novel phase-change-driven thermal diode has recently been fabricated using polystyrene foam impregnated with octadecane paraffin (PFH-O). The reported thermal rectification ratio of PFH-O thermal diode was up to 1.43, which was further enlarged to 2.6 upon coupling the PFH-O with PNIPAM aqueous solution. In order to jump from the highest claimed thermal rectification ratio of 2.6 to the improved magnitudes, there is an urgent need to disclose a unique mechanism of PCM-based thermal diodes. the achieved maximum thermal rectification ratios (Rmax) with respect to thermal diode materials and temperature of the cooler (Tc)/heater (Th). The table is aligned according to the thermal rectification ratio Rmax. The structural transition refers to a phase change within a single state (i.e., solid or liquid), while the state transition refers to a tranfomration of one state into another state (e.g., solid into liquid). Authors Study type Employed materials Transition Rmax Tc/Th (ﾂｰC) W. Kobayashi E and T La1.98Nd0.02CuO4/MnV2O4 Structural 1.14 -217.6/- R. Chen E and T Eicosane/PEG4000 State 1.23 7 J. Ordonez- Miranda T VO2/Sapphire Structural 1.31 S. Wang E and T PFH-O/PMMA State 1.38 7/50 W. Kobayashi E and T LaCoO3/La0.7Sr0.3CoO3 - 1.43 K. I. Garcia- Garcia E Nitinol/Graphite Structural 1.47 J. J. Martinez- Flores E Gd/Si Structural 1.62 R. S. Nakayama E and T Al61.5Cu26.5Fe12/Ag2Te Structural 1.63 E. Pallecchi E and T PNIPAM/PDMS Structural 1.96 T. Takeuchi E and T Al61.5Cu26.5Fe12/CuGaTe2 - 2.20 H. Kang T Polyethylene/VO2 Structural 2.40 A. L. Cotrill E and T PFH-O/PNIPAM State/Structural 2.60 7/44 The present work E and T CaCl2ﾂｷ6H2O/paraffin State 3.00 In the present study, a supercooling-enabled PCTD has been fabricated, experimentally tested and numerically analyzed. Two PCMs with close phase change temperatures are hand-picked, namely, calcium chloride hexahydrate (CaCl2ﾂｷ6H2O) and paraffin. The variable effective thermal conductivities resulted from the involvement of natural convection in the post-melting and supercooled regions are precisely considered in theoretical modeling. The PCTD achieves maximum thermal rectification ratio of 3.0 and outperforms the previous works as can be seen in Table 1. As a comparative implication, supercooling is predicted to be one of the potential interests to sustainably manipulate the heat flux and tune the thermal rectification ratio within easily accessible temperature biases henceforth. 8 2. Design Criteria and Thermo-Physical Properties of Thermal Media Based on the aforementioned interpretation and classification of PCMs, it is inferred that selecting the right thermal media and establishing the underlying mechanism are instantaneously painstaking as well as crucial. To date, the foremost mechanism of a thermal diode has been realized by varying the thermal conductivity with respect to temperature, as well as through structural modifications encompassing dissimilar bulk or thin interfaces. Particularly, thermal media demonstrating temperature-reliant thermal conductivities normally produce two kinds of trends which are termed as positive temperature coefficient (PTC) and negative temperature coefficient (NTC). And the similar trends have also been anticipated for PCMs, thereby suggesting to exploit them for fabrication of phase-change-driven thermal diodes. In principle, PCMs bearing PTC trend demonstrate rise of thermal conductivities upon phase change process, while contrarily, thermal conductivities decrease for PCMs having NTC trend. To fabricate the PCTD with high thermal rectification ratio, the ratio of thermal conductivities of PTC PCM in solid and liquid phases should be small, while the ratio of thermal conductivities of NTC PCM in solid and liquid phases should be large. By taking the above-mentioned criteria into account, paraffin (PCM A) with a melting temperature TmA of 35 ﾂｰC, and CaCl2ﾂｷ6H2O (PCM B) with a melting temperature TmB of 30 ﾂｰC and a freezing temperature TfB of 7 ﾂｰC, have been chosen to fabricate the PCTD. Supercooling-induced phase change hysteresis from TmB to TfB has been experimentally determined as elaborated in Section 1 and shown in Figure 9 S1c of SI. Within the region of phase change hysteresis, the value of TfB allows to achieve spontaneous supercooling release (SSR) and manual supercooling release (MSR). Paraffin bears a large ratio of thermal conductivities in solid (kAs=0.35 W m-1 K-1) and liquid (kAl=0.16 W m-1 K-1) phases, which can act as a NTC candidate only if the natural convection in liquid state becomes negligibly small. With the help of theoretical analysis, the height of paraffin terminal was chosen to be 4.8 mm, and natural convection in such a small height is negligible. Furthermore, CaCl2ﾂｷ6H2O can suitably serve as a PTC material due to its small ratio of thermal conductivities in intensified effective thermal conductivity of liquid phase (kBl_eff =4.76 W m-1 K-1 and 3.15 W m-1 K-1 at a mean temperature of 35 ﾂｰC and 20 ﾂｰC, respectively). The kBl_eff quantifies the natural convection of aqueous CaCl2 solution that is further explained in Section 2.3 of SI. 3. Theoretical Modeling of the PCTD Considering a bi-terminal PCTD sandwiched between a heater situated at the bottom and a cooler situated at the top, the heater temperature is set at Th, and the cooler temperature is set at Tc. With exception of heat losses from the boundaries, the heat flux through the PCTD is assumed to be unidirectional, flowing from the hot terminal towards cold terminal. A reasonable assumption is made that kAs, kAl, kBs and kBl are treated constant because they vary little in the temperature range of 0‾40 ﾂｰC in the present study. However, kBl_eff majorly varies with the height of liquid phase. In addition, regarding phase change temperatures with reference to analysis of Cottril et 10 al., the equivalence of the melting temperatures of two PCMs, i.e., TmA=TmB, is supposed to be an ideal condition. Theoretical modeling has been established through the Fourier窶冱 law of heat conduction theory and quantified natural convection in the corresponding forward direction and reverse direction operations. In each operation, the cooling process (performed by reducing the cooler temperature) and heating process (performed by increasing the cooler temperature) were adopted to investigate the effects of supercooling and non-supercooling of CaCl2ﾂｷ6H2O on the thermal rectification ratio, respectively. A new parameter TfB that serves to critically handle the supercooling effect has been introduced in theoretical modeling. Implementing the successive operations of the PCTD via cooling and heating processes helps configure eighteen thermal modules under various operating conditions, whose theoretical modeling is elaborated in Section 3.1 and 3.2 of SI, respectively. In the heating process, the PCTD modules for PCM A and PCM B can be configured by creating relationships between TmA and TmB through the interface temperature Ti, as schematically shown in Table S1 of SI. Likewise, in the cooling process, the PCTD modules for PCM A and PCM B can be developed by relating TmA, TmB and TfB via Ti and Tc, as schematically shown in Table S2 of SI. Herein, we explain the method of theoretical analysis by taking the most complicated module as an example, namely Forward-C3, as shown in Table S2 of SI. This module follows the operating condition of TmA<Ti竕､TfB in the forward direction of cooling process, where two PCMs exist in both solid and liquid phases simultaneously, 11 thereby generating the four thermal resistances in total. According to the Fourier's law of heat conduction, the temperature distributions in each junction of the PCTD are considered linear, which are presented as follows: mA c As B A mA A A i mA Al B i A mB i Bs B mB B B h mB Bl h B ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) T T T x x L T L T T T x x L T T T T x x T L T T T x x T 隥ｭ 難ｬ 隥ｽ 隥ｭ 隥ｭ 隥ｭ 隥ｫ 難ｯ 隥ｭ 難ｯ 隥ｭ 難ｯ 隥ｽ 隥ｭ 隥ｭ 隥ｫ 難ｯ難ｯ難ｭ 隥ｭ 難ｯ 隥ｽ 隥ｭ 隥ｭ 隥ｫ 難ｯ 隥ｭ 難ｯ 隥ｭ 難ｯ 隥ｽ 隥ｭ 隥ｫ 難ｯ難ｮ 雒､ 雒､ 雒､ 雒､ 雒､ 雒､ (2) where ﾎｴA and ﾎｴB are the heights of the PCM A and PCM B in liquid phase, respectively. Since the heat conduction is unidirectional, the heat fluxes through different junctions of the PCTD are equal, being evaluated by the temperature gradient and effective thermal conductivity of the respective PCM, which is expressed as follows: mA c i mA mB i h mB As Al Bs Bl_eff A A A B B B T T T T T T T T q k k k k L L 隥ｭ 隥ｭ 隥ｭ 隥ｭ 隥ｽ 隥ｽ 隥ｽ 隥ｽ 隥ｭ 隥ｭ 雒､ 雒､ 雒､ 雒､ (3) The heat flux q, the interface temperature Ti, and the heights ﾎｴA and ﾎｴB in liquid phase can be derived from Equations (2) and (3). The mathematical formulae are given as below: 12 Bl_eff A h mB Bs A mB mA As B mA c i mA Al B Bs A Bl_eff A h mB Bs A mB mA As B mA c A Al Al Bl_eff h mB Al Bs mB mA As Bs mA c Al B Bs A h mB B Al Bl_eff ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )( ) ( k L T T k L T T k L T T T T k L k L k L T T k L T T k L T T k k k T T k k T T k k T T k L k L T T k k 隥ｭ 隥ｫ 隥ｭ 隥ｭ 隥ｭ 隥ｽ 隥ｫ 隥ｫ 隥ｭ 隥ｫ 隥ｭ 隥ｭ 隥ｭ 隥ｽ 隥ｭ 隥ｫ 隥ｭ 隥ｫ 隥ｭ 隥ｫ 隥ｭ 隥ｽ 雒､ 雒､ Bl_eff h mB Al Bs mB mA As Bs mA c Al Bl_eff h mB Al Bs mB mA As Bs mA c Al B Bs A ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) k T T k k T T k k T T k k T T k k T T k k T T q k L k L 難ｬ 難ｯ 難ｯ 難ｯ 難ｯ 難ｯ難ｭ 難ｯ 難ｯ 隥ｭ 隥ｫ 隥ｭ 隥ｫ 隥ｭ 難ｯ 隥ｭ 隥ｫ 隥ｭ 隥ｫ 隥ｭ 難ｯ 隥ｽ 難ｯ 隥ｫ 難ｮ (4) The mathematical formulae of Ti, ﾎｴA, ﾎｴB and q for other thermal modules have been derived in the same manner, as detailed in Section 3 of SI. In experiments, the forward and reverse heat fluxes through the PCTD encounter a slight decline due to the presence of thermal contact resistance between two terminals and steel blocks. In order to simplify theoretical analysis, thermal contact resistance is neglected in the present study, but the influence of thermal contact resistance is treated as a modifying factor for heat flux and the resulting heat flux qc is calculated as follows: td c td c_td R q q R R 隥ｽ 隥ｫ (5) Where q is the heat flux without the influence of thermal contact resistance obtained from Equation (4), Rtd is the thermal resistance of the PCTD being calculated by Rtd=(Th-Tc)/q, Rc_td is the thermal contact resistance of the PCTD, which is evaluated in Section 2.2 of SI. Using the formulated heat flux qc in the forward and reverse directions, the thermal rectification ratio in each thermal module can be determined by Equation (1). 4. Design Optimization and Assembly of the PCTD Prototype 13 Design optimization of the PCTD has been executed using dimensionless length Lid and dimensionless temperature Tid, which are defined as follows: A id B L L 隥ｽ L (6) m c id h m T T T T T 隥ｭ 隥ｽ 隥ｭ (7) where mA mB m 2 T T T 隥ｫ 隥ｽ is the average phase change temperature of two PCMs. Considering the supercooling of aqueous CaCl2 solution, the relationships of both forward and reverse heat fluxes at Lid and Tid become different in the respective heating and cooling processes. Thus, the thermal rectification ratio of the PCTD can be obtained under four possible conditions, which are shown in Figure 1a to 1d. prototype in heating and cooling processes at LB=40 mm and Th=40 ﾂｰC. The thermal rectification ratios of the PCTD at different Lid and Tid have been analyzed under four 14 operating conditions. (a) Both forward and reverse directions operated in heating processes. (b) Forward direction operated in cooling process and reverse direction operated in heating process. (c) Forward direction operated in heating process and reverse direction operated in cooling process. (d) Both forward and reverse directions operated in cooling processes. The maximum thermal rectification ratio of the PCTD using paraffin and CaCl2ﾂｷ6H2O is 3.0 at Lid=0.12 and Tid=2.52. The evolutions of thermal rectification ratio under different conditions are quite different, and it is quite hard to find an optimum Lid and Tid which can result in the finest thermal rectification ratio under every condition. Therefore, choosing the maximum thermal rectification ratio of 3.0 at the optimum dimensionless length of 0.12 and optimum dimensionless temperature of 2.52 optimizes the acceptable design and fabrication guideline. Meanwhile, the theoretical results also indicate that the thermal rectification ratio decreases immediately when the Lid and Tid deviate from the optimum values under heating process, as shown in Figure 1a, while the thermal rectification ratio can retain high value for a wide range of Tid when the forward direction is under cooling process, as shown in Figure 1b, which occurs due to supercooling effect. In addition, the contours demonstrate two regions of sudden variation. The weird shapes of contours occurs due to the SSR of aqueous CaCl2 solution. In the reverse direction, when SSR occurs, thermal rectification ratio shows a sudden rise, as shown by the white dashed boxes in Figure 1c and 1d. In the forward direction, when SSR takes place, thermal rectification ratio drops suddenly which depicts sawtooth shape of contours, as shown by the black dashed boxes in Figure 1b and 1d. Subsequently, the PCTD prototype has been fabricated under the guideline of 15 the theoretical analysis, as schematized in Figure 2, depicting the general assembly in the forward and reverse directions. working principle of the PCTD. A considerable temperature bias is developed across thermal module under asymmetric thermal transport mechanism driven by physical states of thermal media, leading to a large heat flux in the forward direction, while a negligible heat flux in the reverse direction. Scaled diagram of the prototype can be seen in Figure S5 of SI. The PCTD module consists of two cylindrical containers: a paraffin terminal with a length of 4.8 mm and a CaCl2 terminal with a length of 40 mm, equaling the optimum terminal lengths ratio of 0.12. The bi-terminals with the same diameter of 50 mm are joined together using conductive thermal grease. Novel lateral cavities have been introduced to avoid the volumetric expansion/contraction of PCMs during long-term operations. In the forward direction, CaCl2 terminal was located adjacent to the bottom heater; while paraffin terminal resided close to the top cooler. In the reverse 16 direction, the positions of both terminals are opposite to those in the forward direction. The further fabrication detail and experimental procedure are mentioned in Section 5 of SI. 5. Experimental and Theoretical Results 5.1. Heat Flux in the Forward Direction Operation A series of experimental and theoretical investigations have been systematically conducted both for the forward direction and reverse direction. In the forward direction, variation of heat fluxes versus implemented temperature bias of 10‾40 ﾂｰC is shown in Figure 3a, and the physical states of thermal media at the relevant ranges of cooler temperature have been projected to interpret the underlying mechanism of heat transfer, as shown in Figure 3b. 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 400 800 1200 1600 2000 Cooling Process Heating Process 4 3 2 1 Critical Point Exp Cooling Process Exp Heating Process Num Cooling Process Num Heating Process Heat Flux (W/m2) Temperature Bias (ﾂｰC) (a) 17 a function of temperature bias in the forward direction. (a) Steady state freeze-thaw approach leading to four thermal zones in the temperature bias of 10‾40 ﾂｰC. The temperature of the heater is at 40 ﾂｰC, while the temperature of the cooler varies in the temperature range of 0‾30 ﾂｰC. (b) Inferred from theoretical results, the schematics show the physical states of thermal media within various ranges of the cooler temperature in the forward direction. The bottom red bar is the heater operated at a constant temperature of 40 ﾂｰC. The top blue bar exhibits the cooler whose temperature has been varied from 30 ﾂｰC to 0 ﾂｰC during the cooling process, and oppositely for the heating process. The cooler temperature range from 30 ﾂｰC to 0 ﾂｰC facilitates the corresponding temperature bias from 10 ﾂｰC to 40 ﾂｰC, and vice versa. The experimental and theoretical results are shown in a great agreement in Figure 3a. In addition, four prominent thermal zones have been noticed and symmetrically categorized into the cooling process: hot zone and supercooled zone, and the heating process: cold zone and hot zone. Furthermore, they are distinguished with respect to 18 temperature bias of 26 ﾂｰC as predicted from theoretical analysis, which is termed as a critical point henceforth. In the cooling process, the physical state of paraffin terminal remains solid due to its melting temperature higher than the maximum applied temperature of the cooler, so the emerged thermal zones are predominantly resulted from the alternate physical states of CaCl2 terminal. For example, hot zone entails the hot liquidus state at the cooler temperature range of 30‾14 ﾂｰC (the relevant temperature bias is 10‾26 ﾂｰC), as shown in Figure 3b-1; And supercooled zone includes supercooled state along with reserved-liquidus state at the cooler temperature range of 14‾0 ﾂｰC (the relevant temperature bias is 26‾40 ﾂｰC), as schematized in Figure 3b-2. Shown as 1 in point is characterized with an almost linear trend of the forward direction heat flux. This behavior is well-elaborated in accordance with achievable physical states of thermal media, as can be seen in Figure 3b- 1 (cooler temperature range of 30‾14 ﾂｰC). Herein, CaCl2 terminal maintains the temperature sufficiently higher than its melting temperature (30 ﾂｰC), whose effective thermal conductivity is 4.76 W m-1 K-1 (experimentally measured at 35 ﾂｰC), while the paraffin terminal is in solid state with thermal conductivity of 0.35 W m-1 K-1. As long as the temperature of the cooler is reduced to 14 ﾂｰC (the relevant temperature bias is 26 ﾂｰC), the temperature of upper part of CaCl2 terminal is anticipated to approach its phase change temperature according to the numerical results. Along with reducing the cooler temperature continuously from 14 ﾂｰC to 0 ﾂｰC (the relevant temperature bias from 26 ﾂｰC to 40 ﾂｰC), 19 supercooled zone is approached, as shown by 2 in Figure 3a, depicting the gradual conversion of hot liquidus state of CaCl2 terminal into supercooled state whose thermal conductivity is 3.15 W m-1 K-1 (experimentally measured at 20 ﾂｰC). As thermal conductivity of supercooled aqueous CaCl2 solution is still high enough to maintain the asymmetric thermal conductance path, the supercooled zone keeps fostering the natural convection until the entire aqueous CaCl2 solution becomes solid on supercooling elimination. In a word, in the cooling process of forward direction operation, the bottom liquidus, the middle supercooled and the top solidus physical states altogether proliferate the asymmetric thermal conductance on behalf of high thermal conductivities across the entire thermal module, yielding preferential heat transfer through well-defined natural convection and conduction. In the heating process, sequential cold zone and hot zone come into being, consisting of well-preserved solid state of paraffin terminal, and multiple physical states of CaCl2 terminal. For examples, fractional liquidus state and solidus state at the cooler temperature range of 0‾14 ﾂｰC (the relevant temperature bias is 40‾26 ﾂｰC), as shown by 3 in Figure 3b; and the complete liquidus state at the cooler temperature range of 14‾30 ﾂｰC (the relevant temperature bias is 26‾10 ﾂｰC), as shown by 4 in bias is decreased as depicted by 3 in Figure 3a. And alongside that, fractional solidus part of CaCl2 terminal (Figure 3b-3) keeps gradually diminishing until the hot zone (Figure 3a-4)appears at cooler temperature of 14‾30 ﾂｰC (the relevant temperature bias is 26‾10 ﾂｰC). Furthermore, with decreasing temperature bias across 20 the terminals, heat flux tends to fall down because of the reduced temperature gradient and accordingly reaches the minimum magnitude at a temperature bias of 10 ﾂｰC. In addition, it is worth mentioning that the heat flux determined by numerical analysis agrees well with the experimental results in both the cooling and heating processes, as depicted in Figure 3a, therefore validating the reliability of the adopted theoretical model. 5.2. Heat Flux in the Reverse Direction Operation In the reverse direction, the heat fluxes through the PCTD as a function of temperature bias are shown in Figure 4a, and the physical states of thermal media at the corresponding ranges of cooler temperature are shown in Figure 4b. 21 a function of temperature bias in the reverse direction. (a) Steady state freeze-thaw approach leading to five thermal zones in the temperature bias of 10‾40 ﾂｰC. The temperature of the heater is at 40 ﾂｰC, while the temperature of the cooler varies in the temperature range of 0‾30 ﾂｰC. (b) Inferred from theoretical results, the schematics show the physical states of the PCTD within various ranges of the cooler temperature in the reverse direction. The bottom red bar is the heater operated at a constant temperature of 40 ﾂｰC. The top blue bar exhibits the cooler whose temperature has been varied from 30 ﾂｰC to 0 ﾂｰC in the cooling process, and oppositely for the heating process. The cooler temperature range of 30 ﾂｰC to 0 ﾂｰC facilitates the corresponding temperature bias range of 10 ﾂｰC to 40 ﾂｰC, and vice versa. Similar to the forward direction operation, the working of the PCTD in the reverse direction has also been split into the cooling and heating processes. Corresponding to the cooling process, the supercooling effect has been particularly investigated in order 22 to find out the performance limits through which the tunability range can thus be identified. The appearance of the critical point, that is 26 ﾂｰC, is alike to that in the forward direction due to the same optimum length ratio of CaCl2 and paraffin terminals, but the origination of the asymmetric thermal transport is obviously opposite. Having the constant temperature of heater (40 ﾂｰC) higher than the melting temperature of paraffin (35 ﾂｰC), the paraffin terminal maintains both solid and liquid states throughout the reverse direction operation in either cooling or heating process, as shown in Figure 4b. But CaCl2 terminal undergoes multiple physical states at different cooler temperatures, as shown in Figure 4b. In the cooling process, the supercooled zone initially begins at the cooler temperature of 30 ﾂｰC (the relevant temperature bias is 10 ﾂｰC). As the temperature of the cooler extends down to nearly 7 ﾂｰC (the relevant temperature bias is around 33 ﾂｰC), the aqueous CaCl2 solution tends to reserve supercooled state instead of adopting solid state, as shown by 1 in Figure 4b. Since thermal conductivity of supercooled aqueous CaCl2 solution (3.15 W m-1 K-1 experimentally measured at 20 ﾂｰC) is quite large, the rising profile of heat flux has evidently been maintained, as represented by 1 in Figure 4a. With regard to the cooler temperature of approximately 7 ﾂｰC (the relevant temperature bias is 33 ﾂｰC), the freezing point of aqueous CaCl2 solution is approached at which SSR occurs, explaining the sudden drop-down trend in heat flux curve. Henceforth, the cold zone takes place as the temperature of the cooler goes down to 0 ﾂｰC (the relevant temperature bias is 40 ﾂｰC), 23 as shown by 2 in Figure 4a, at which solid state of CaCl2 terminal (Figure 4b-2) is attained. Unlike the heat flux profile in the cooling process, gradual reduction of heat flux has been witnessed in the heating process, as can be seen in 3-cold zone, 4-warm zone and 5-hot zone of Figure 4a. The physical states of CaCl2 terminal demonstrate gradual interconversion within the entire cooler temperature range of 0 ﾂｰC to 30 ﾂｰC (the relevant temperature bias is from 40 ﾂｰC to 10 ﾂｰC), as seen from the schematics 3, 4 and 5 of Figure 4b. Such a trend occurs because of decreasing temperature bias, and particularly the heat flux curve bears a distinct behavior at the critical point where the melting of CaCl2ﾂｷ6H2O is expected with a part of liquidus state. Based on the above results, it is postulated that the heat flux in the cooling process during supercooled zone is relatively large even in the reverse direction which seems to be a drawback of the PCTD. However, the supercooling effect can be conveniently controlled at any desired temperature within supercooled zone. In order to realize it, MSR is implemented by crystal seeding technique. The entire procedure is explained in Section 6 of SI and schematically shown in Figure S7 of SI. As soon as the solid crystals of CaCl2ﾂｷ6H2O are seeded into the supercooled liquid, aqueous solution tends to achieve the solid state, as shown by 5 of Figure 4b, during which the heat flux is limited to minimum magnitudes and the evidence is clear from the hot zone (5) of As a precaution in the reverse direction in the cooling process, supercooling should be preferentially avoided to limit the heat flux. Moreover, theoretical analysis finds a 24 reliable validation through a good agreement with experimental heat flux in both the cooling and heating processes. 5.3. Thermal Rectification Ratio and Tunability By using the heat fluxes of the forward direction and reverse direction operations, as shown in Figure 3a and Figure 4a, respectively, the corresponding thermal rectification ratios are calculated and numerically analyzed, as shown in Figure 5. 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 Num RFH.RH Num RFC.RH Num RFH.RC Num RRC.RC Critical Point Thermal Rectification Ratio Temperature Bias (ﾂｰC) Exp RFH.RH Exp RFC.RH Exp RFH.RC Exp RFC.RC Exp RMSR SSR obtained by using Equation (1) through various combinations of heat fluxes, such as RFH.RH: forward heating (FH) to reverse heating (RH); RFC.RH: forward cooling (FC) to reverse heating (RH); RMSR: forward cooling to reverse cooling with manual supercooling release (MSR); RFH.RC: forward heating (FH) to reverse cooling (RC); RFC.RC: forward cooling (FC) to reverse cooling (RC). Two major categories of thermal rectification ratios can be realized: the maximum thermal rectification ratios abbreviated as RFH.RH, RFC.RH and RMSR; the minimum 25 thermal rectification ratios abbreviated as RFH.RC and RFC.RC (the corresponding definitions are enlisted in the caption of Figure 5). It is eventually exposed that the physical states steadily contribute to asymmetric thermal conductance, and consequently, maximum thermal rectification of 3.0 has been achieved. In addition, the sustainability of thermal rectification ratio spreading over a wide temperature bias is no more questionable, as evidenced from red curve in supercooling effect, it is hereby uncovered that supercooled zone characterized with relatively high effective thermal conductivity acts as a leverage, ensuring a greater drive for heat flux manipulations. For example, consider RFH.RH (black curve in Figure 5) where supercooled zone is absent, it typically elucidates the convectional thermal performance. Symbolically, RFH.RH rises non-linearly within temperature bias of 10‾26 ﾂｰC due to overall high thermal conductivity of thermal media in the forward direction (aqueous CaCl2 solution: 4.76 W m-1 K-1 at 35 ﾂｰC, Paraffin: 0.35 W m-1 K-1) and low thermal conductivity of thermal media in reverse direction. Soon above the critical point, RFH.RH encounters an immediate downfall within temperature bias of 26‾40 ﾂｰC. The reason is attributed to rapidly emerging strong thermal barrier owing to overall reduced thermal conductivity of thermal media in the forward direction of heating process (FH), exemplifying the unstable thermal performance. Besides, within temperature bias of 10‾26 ﾂｰC, RFC.RH (red curve) also comes up with a rising trend as RFH.RH does, however, the trend for the former preserves the steadiness even above the critical point. The emergence of sustainable RFC.RH is supported by the supercooling 26 effect of aqueous CaCl2 solution in the forward direction of cooling process (FC) during which heat is transported by extended natural convection. In addition, the observed supercooling-enabled sustainability is advantageous to tune the thermal diode in a wide temperature bias of 10‾33 ﾂｰC. As represented by magenta color points in Figure 5, RMSR has a growing trend but tends to be marginally below as compared with RFC.RH and RFH.RH. This is most likely ascribed to the non-uniformity introduced by seeding solid crystals of CaCl2ﾂｷ6H2O, leading to the solidification of aqueous CaCl2 solution, and consequently lowering down the natural convection. Indeed, the seeded crystals create nucleation sites and compel the supercooled zone into solidus zone whose thermal conductivity is much smaller as compared with the former zone. Therefore, thermal rectification ratio increases comparatively slow, but opens up a gate to tune the thermal diode by eliminating the supercooling effect. By operating thermal diode in the cooling process, especially in the reverse direction, two thermal rectification ratios have been generated denoted as RFH.RC and RFC.RC. Both thermal rectification ratios are precisely predicted in view of the SSR, i.e., auto-conversion of supercooled aqueous CaCl2 solution into fully solid state at temperature of approximately 7 ﾂｰC. Since the entire aqueous CaCl2 solution does not change into solid state instantaneously, the part-wise change of physical state of thermal media becomes favorable to provide an approximately horizontal trend of thermal rectification ratio along the temperature bias of 10‾33 ﾂｰC, as shown by green and blue curves in Figure 5. As the temperature bias of 33 ﾂｰC is reached, solid state with low thermal conductivity appears, thereby bringing about a sudden rise in 27 thermal rectification ratio due to the low heat flux in the reverse direction. However, the abnormal trend during SSR help recommend that thermal diode should not be operated in the cooling process of reverse direction. 6. Governing Theory and Mechanism of the PCTD The present study instigates to utilize the unexplored thermo-physical properties of PCMs, as well as contributes to establish the fundamental governing theory necessary to understand the dynamics and inter-dependent parameters of a PCTD. The findings depict that not only the materials demonstrating thermal conductivity variances and length ratio of terminals are vital, but also other thermo-physical parameters such as variable intensity of natural convection, phase change hysteresis and melting temperature difference are worthy of considerations. Moreover, it is postulated that a phase change thermal medium can either undermine the maximum thermal rectification ratio or strengthen it on behalf of a gap between the state-specific thermal conductivities. Precisely, with advantage of a large gap between the (effective) thermal conductivities in solid and liquid phases, a remarkable thermal rectification ratio can be achieved. With in-depth theoretical and experimental analyses, we thus propose the overall governing mechanism, namely phase change-driven asymmetric thermal transport, as schematically shown in Figure 6. 28 of as-fabricated PCTD (not to scale) referring to the best performance in terms of maximum and sustainable thermal rectification ratio. The paraffin terminal (PCM A) and CaCl2 terminal (PCM B) mutually exhibit NTC (red curve) and PTC (blue curve) trends, respectively, and aqueous CaCl2 solution shows phase change hysteresis due to supercooling effect. State-specific thermal conductivities build up asymmetric thermal transport in the forward and reverse directions (dashed rectangles). Although temperature-dependent physical-state variations give birth to variable thermal conductivities (i.e., NTC and PTC trends), enhancement in thermal rectification ratio also depends on the intrinsic thermo-physical nature of thermal media. For example, paraffin physically undergoes phase change but is capable to keep thermo-physical properties constant in either states. Similarly, phase change hysteresis, as displayed in Figure 6, is a promising feature of aqueous CaCl2 solution 29 which has been found to be responsible for a durable as well as a tunable function of the PCTD. As illustrated in Figure 6, both PCM terminals lie in the high thermal conductive region (upper dashed rectangle) in the forward direction, while the reverse direction induces high thermal resistive region (lower dashed rectangle). Interface temperature (Ti) is a decisive factor whose monitoring makes the phase change hysteresis functional, and also imparts vigorous performance to the PCTD. Based on Ti, the proposed mechanism can be generalized to explain the performance of supercooling- enabled (advanced) and non-supercooling-enabled (traditional) PCTDs. For the latter case, once Ti reaches the phase change temperature in the forward direction, (effective) thermal conductivities of two PCMs becomes high, and in response, thermal rectification ratio also achieves the maximum value; however, this value is temporal and the PCTD performance soon faces a rigorous decline (e.g., the black curve in Figure 5). This is ascribed to the imbalance of (effective) thermal conductivities created because of progressive state-change of thermal media. Unlike that deteriorated performance, supercooling-enabled PCTD works quite efficiently by making use of phase change hysteresis where a sustainable thermal rectification ratio (e.g., the red curve in Figure 5) is attributed to Ti monitoring within a widened temperature range. For this, the phenomenological theory is based on the strong convective junction (supercooled and hot liquidus states) developed within domain of aqueous CaCl2 solution. Briefly, (effective) thermal conductivities of PCMs overall 30 become high (the upper dashed rectangle), and consequently an extensive heat flux lasts longer until Ti becomes equal to the freezing point. On the other hand, as shown in Figure 6, MSR provides a reliable control over temperature during phase change hysteresis, rendering the PCTD as a tunable thermal device. Since tunability is a factor that allows thermal diode to dynamically change the thermal rectification ratio, the possible applications to the transient processes, such as thermal logic circuitry, thermal computing and information processing, etc., can be potentially enabled. Moreover, geometrical arrangement of physical module also helps elaborate the underlying mechanism of directional heat flows. To realize the concept, we introduce the simplest vertical model consisting of phase change media sandwiched between a bottom heater and a top cooler. For the existence of natural convection, the development of temperature gradient in upward direction is imperative, and further natural convection can be adequately strengthened or extremely weakened by controlling the size of PCM chambers. Since aqueous CaCl2 solution sustains natural convection in a widened temperature range due to phase change hysteresis, the size of CaCl2 chamber is intentionally kept large. While, the smaller size of paraffin chamber assists in suppressing the natural convection and results in only conduction-dominant heat transfer. Consequently, the entire arrangement brings about asymmetrical thermal conductance, providing a considerable thermal rectification ratio. In summary, thermal performance of a thermal diode should be optimized by manipulating the state-specific heat fluxes so that the best combination of the forward 31 and reverse heat fluxes can be proposed henceforth, leading to a superior thermal rectification ratio. 7. Conclusion A novel supercooling-enabled PCTD is presented, setting forth the theoretical design guidelines and routes to optimize its performance. Theoretical hypothesis leads to fabricate a prototype thermal diode with an optimum length ratio of 0.12, consisting of NTC paraffin terminal and convection-intensified PTC CaCl2 terminal. Findings reveal that considerable heat flux in the forward direction operation is driven by convection-intensified liquid states, while conduction prevails in consecutive solid (or limited liquid) state known for high thermal resistance in reverse direction. More significantly, introduction of TfB in theoretical modeling serves as a novel parameter which provides manifold benefits, including a widened temperature range, extensive convection empowered by phase change hysteresis due to supercooling effect, sustainable thermal rectification and tunable thermal performance at any temperature between 7‾30 ﾂｰC. Consequently, a giant thermal rectification ratio of 3.0 is obtained. Cumulatively, the conclusive experimental and theoretical evidences help understand and establish the novel governing mechanism combining the state-specific asymmetric thermal conductance with phase change hysteresis of CaCl2 terminal. 8. Experimental Section Materials and characterization: Paraffin (Ruhr Tech, OP35E) and calcium chloride anhydrous (CaCl2) (SCR, AR, >96%) were purchased and employed as-received. 32 CaCl2 was dissolved in deionized water with mass ratio of 111:108 to obtain aqueous CaCl2 solution, while the frozen state of aqueous CaCl2 solution has been termed as CaCl2ﾂｷ6H2O. Phase change temperatures of both materials were determined through differential scanning calorimeter (Perkin Elmer, DSC 8000) operated at a heating rate of 5 ﾂｰC min-1 under inert atmosphere of N2. Furthermore, thermal conductivity of CaCl2ﾂｷ6H2O was determined through a steady-state method, as elaborated in Section 2 of SI. Likewise, supercooling degree of CaCl2ﾂｷ6H2O was measured with help of a customized experiment. A glass beaker filled with 30 ml aqueous CaCl2 solution was heated up to 50 ﾂｰC. Then, the heated aqueous CaCl2 solution was immersed in chilled ethylene glycol-water mixture in a thermostatic bath (DC-2020, CNSHP) maintained at -10 ﾂｰC. Having a resistive temperature detector (RTD Pt-100) inserted at the center of aqueous CaCl2 solution, the transient temperature history was measured through data acquisition system (Keithley 2700) and subsequently recorded as a function of time, as graphically shown in Figure S1c of SI. Prototype fabrication and experimental methodology: As-proposed theoretical model of the PCTD has been physically crafted into a prototype consisting of alternative paraffin (length: 4.8 mm) and CaCl2 (length: 40 mm) terminals. The process and instrumentation diagram of experimental set-up is elaborated in Section 5 of SI and schematically shown in Figure S5 (a, b and c). Temperature gradient across the PCTD was measured by adjusting the prototype into test section of a customized vertical set- up, as shown in Figure S5 (a-right). The test section was actually a sandwiched chamber clamped with outward-extended two steel blocks at the top and bottom. 33 Furthermore, the steel blocks were connected with a bottom heater and a top cooler, facilitating constant temperature hot water and cold ethylene glycol, respectively. Throughout the experimental runs, temperature of the bottom heater was kept constant at 40 ﾂｰC, while the temperature of top cooler was varied from 0 ﾂｰC to 30 ﾂｰC in the heating process, and from 30 ﾂｰC to 0 ﾂｰC in the cooling process. Therefore, the temperature bias was monitored in the range of 10‾40 ﾂｰC. To measure the temperature data across the PCTD, four equidistant resistive temperature sensors (RTD Pt-100) were centrally inserted into the top and bottom steel block. After the PCTD achieved steady-state, the temperature history was recorded using data acquisition system (Keithley 2700) with subsequent heat flux calculations according to the Fourier窶冱 law of heat conduction. Supporting Information Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from the author. Conflict of Interest The authors declare no conflict of interest. Acknowledgements This research is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under the contract No. 51676122. A part of the characterizations are conducted in AEMD of Shanghai Jiao Tong University.