1 Asymmetric Acoustic Energy Transport in Non-Hermitian Metamaterials Ramathasan Thevamaran1,=,*, Richard Massey Branscomb2,=, Eleana Makri3, Paul Anzel4, Demetrios Christodoulides5, Tsampikos Kottos3, Edwin L. Thomas2,* 1Department of Engineering Physics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706. 2Department of Materials Science and NanoEngineering, Rice University, Houston, TX 77005. 3Department of Physics, Wesleyan University, Middletown, CT 06459. 4HEB, San Antonio, TX 78204. 5Center for Research and Education in Optics and Lasers (CREOL), College of Optics and Photonics, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL 32816. *Corresponding Authors: RT (thevamaran@wisc.edu); ELT (elt@rice.edu) =These authors contributed equally to this work. Abstract The ability to control and direct acoustic energy is essential for many engineering applications such as vibration and noise control, invisibility cloaking, acoustic sensing, energy harvesting, and phononic switching and rectification. The realization of acoustic regulators requires overcoming fundamental challenges inherent to the time-reversal nature of wave equations. Typically, this is achieved by utilizing either a parameter that is odd- symmetric under time-reversal or by introducing passive nonlinearities. The former approach is power consuming while the latter has two major deficiencies: it has high insertion losses and the outgoing signal is harvested in a different frequency than that of the incident wave due to harmonic generation. Here, we adopt a unique approach that exploits spatially distributed linear and nonlinear losses in a fork-shaped resonant metamaterial. Our compact design demonstrates asymmetric acoustic reflectance and transmittance, and acoustic switching. In contrast to previous studies, our non-Hermitian metamaterial exhibits asymmetric transport with high frequency purity of the outgoing signal. 2 Controlling wave propagation using metamaterials—composite materials with a specifically tailored impedance profile—has led to many unprecedented technologies in recent years. Photonic (Joannopoulos et al., 2008; Saleh and Teich, 1991) and phononic (Deymier, 2013) crystals, negative and modulated index materials (Eleftheriades and Balmain, 2005; Lakes, 2001; Nassar et al., 2017), cloaking (Werner and Kwon, 2014) and super-resolution systems (Zalevsky and Mendlovic, 2004) are testaments to the increasing ability to design and fabricate dielectric and mechanical impedance profiles of the underlying structures that can modify the propagation of light and sound to yield exotic wave phenomena. Prospects of utilizing loss or absorption as a critical ingredient in metamaterials is emerging as a new design paradigm (El-Ganainy et al., 2018; Hodaei et al., 2017; Konotop et al., 2016; Kottos and Aceves, 2016; Suchkov et al., 2016). Tailoring loss, together with a judicious design of the impedance profile, can lead to the realization of devices with unconventional properties and novel functionalities. The best-known example of such non-Hermitian methodologies is the creation of Parity-Time (PT) symmetric materials. These materials steer light (El-Ganainy et al., 2007; Makris et al., 2008; Musslimani et al., 2008) and sound (Fleury et al., 2015a; Shi et al., 2016; Zhu et al., 2014) propagation using loss and/or gain, in stark contrast to the previous approaches in photonic and phononic devices, (Boechler et al., 2011; Liang et al., 2010) and metamaterials (Haberman and Guild, 2016; Lee et al., 2012; Milton et al., 2006) that primarily employ differences in the real part of the dielectric or mechanical impedance of their constituents or purposefully insert defect modes within a bandgap. Novel technologies that can emerge from the manipulation of loss and gain include shadow-free sensing (Fleury et al., 2015a), unidirectional transparency (Zhu et al., 2014), coherent perfect absorption (Merkel et al., 2015; Song et al., 2014), and asymmetric transmission (Popa and Cummer, 2014). Active elements are incorporated through piezoelectric and piezoacoustic effects in those systems 3 to provide gain and loss. For instance, speakers (Fleury et al., 2015a; Shi et al., 2016) and nonlinear electronic circuits (Popa and Cummer, 2014) have been used to control the flow of sound. Nevertheless, such elements face challenges in terms of energy consumption and physical size. Passive conservative nonlinearities have also been used for achieving asymmetric transmission (Boechler et al., 2011; Lepri and Casati, 2011; Lepri and Pikovsky, 2014). In many of these cases, the output signal is harvested at a different frequency than the input signal in such conservative nonlinear systems. Here, we demonstrate asymmetric acoustic reflection in a linear non-Hermitian metamaterial (LnH-MetaMater), and asymmetric acoustic reflection and transmission in a nonlinear non-Hermitian metamaterial (nLnH-MetaMater). In contrast to the majority of existing nonlinear acoustic rectifiers (see recent reviews (Fleury et al., 2015b; Maznev et al., 2013)), our design provides a compact subwavelength system with high frequency purity that utilizes the natural losses of the constituent materials without using any external power. Non-Hermitian metamaterial design. To realize asymmetric acoustic energy transport exploiting non-Hermiticity, we designed a metamaterial such that the two resonant components of the metamaterial have dissimilar imaginary parts of the complex resonance frequency while the real parts remain approximately equal. The metamaterial consists of two air-coupled tuning forks that resonate at a desired matched frequency: a metal fork made of aluminum (Al) (density r=2700 kg m-3, Young’s modulus E=69 GPa, Poisson’s ratio n=0.33) and a polymer fork made of polycarbonate (PC) (r=1200 kg m-3, E=3 GPa, n=0.4). We modify their resonance mode of interest to be at the same frequency by tailoring the geometry of each fork. We utilize both the principal and the sway modes of resonance and fabricate two pairs of forks that are frequency matched at their respective modes. At the matched frequency of resonance, the Al fork acts as the low-loss 4 element while the PC fork acts as the high-loss element. An intriguing feature of this design approach is that it permits constituents with different material properties and geometries provided the resonators resonate at the same frequency. It allows designing metamaterials with dissimilar imaginary parts without affecting the ability to maintain similar real parts. A tuning fork has two primary modes of resonance (Rossing, 1992): (i) the principal mode at which the tines of the forks move out-of-phase (Fig.1 a,b), and (ii) the sway mode at which the tines of the forks move in-phase (Fig.1 c,d). We fabricated two forks from each material employing different dimensions to have their respective resonant frequencies matched at approximately 2175 Hz for principal mode (corresponds to a wavelength in air of 159 mm) and at approximately 1925 Hz for the sway mode (corresponds to a wavelength in air of 175 mm). The principal mode is less susceptible to the fork stem mounting boundary conditions as the oscillation of the tines occurs about a node at the top of the stem (node 1 in Fig.1 a,b). The response of both the Al and the PC forks at their principal mode is linear and independent of the excitation amplitude for the range of incident sound pressure amplitudes we use in this study (node 2 in Fig.1 a,b; Fig.S2) while exciting the forks at the sway mode induces strong nonlinear behavior in the PC fork (Fig.1 c,d; Fig.S3). We characterized the loss behavior of each fork by its full-width-at-half-maximum (FWHM) of the resonance. The measured loss (FWHM) at the principal mode is 5.60±0.40 Hz for the Al fork, and 22.08±0.84 Hz for the PC fork for all excitation amplitudes (Fig.1 a,b). Our experiments also indicate that the transmittance and reflectance are not equal for Al and PC forks (Fig.S2). In contrast to the principal mode, the sway mode oscillation is about a node at the bottom of the stem and it strongly couples to the system boundary through the fork’s stem—a mechanism that leads to a strongly nonlinear response (Fig.1 c,d) at the sway-mode resonance. The strength of this nonlinear response is typically determined by the material properties. Its nature—dissipative 5 or conservative—can be quantified by a detailed analysis of the variations of the position of the resonance peak (for conservative) and of the FWHM of the resonance peak γ (for dissipative) as a function of the excitation amplitude. In the Al fork for example, we find that the FWHM of its sway-mode resonance is minimally affected by the excitation amplitude (Fig.1e). We, therefore, consider the resonance peak of the Al fork (Fig.1e) to be affected only by conservative nonlinearities present within the range of excitation amplitudes used in our experiments. 6 absorbance at the individual resonances of an Al (a) and a PC (b) forks at their principal mode (~2175 Hz); insets show the schematic illustration of the principal mode displacement of the respective tuning forks. c, d, absorbance at the individual resonances of an Al (c) and a PC (d) fork at their sway mode (~1925 Hz); insets show the schematic illustration of the sway mode displacement of the respective tuning forks. e, dependence of the peak frequencies (solid lines) and the losses (FWHM) (dashed lines) of the sway mode of resonance on the excitation amplitude (Pi). f, dependence of resonance frequency of the PC fork on its loss, g (FWHM). The PC fork, however, shows a strong increase of the FWHM of the sway mode as a function of the excitation amplitude, P#$ (Fig.1e)—a clear indication that the PC fork experiences nonlinear losses. The observed shift in the resonance peak (Fig.1e) is primarily a direct consequence of these nonlinear losses. This dependence of resonance peak frequency (ω) on the loss (γ) is modeled as ω = 'ω( ) − αγ), where ω( is the linear frequency of the PC fork, and α is a fitting parameter (Fig.1f). In the case of the PC fork, the losses are nonlinear and this is also reflected in the resonance shift and peak broadening. The agreement of the experimentally observed response with the above damped-oscillator model, allows us to exclude the existence of any other strong conservative nonlinear mechanisms in the resonance of the PC fork. Our LnH-MetaMater consists of an Al fork and a PC fork that have the same resonance frequency at their principal mode, and our nLnH-MetaMater metamaterial consists of a different pair of Al and PC forks designed to have their resonance frequency matched at the sway mode. The forks are placed at a designated gap, G, thereby forming a resonance cavity between them. We devised a two-port acoustic testing setup (Åbom, 1991; ISO 10534-2:1998(E)) to 7 experimentally investigate the acoustic transport in the LnH-MetaMater and the nLnH-MetaMater (Fig.2, Fig.S1). The forks are placed inside an impedance tube where the plane wave from a speaker is incident on the metamaterial in port-A. The incident wave is partially transmitted into port-B while the rest is absorbed and/or reflected back into port-A. Back reflections from the end of port-B are minimized by an absorbent foam. Two pressure-field impedance-tube microphones in each port are used to measure the incident and reflected sound waves. We implemented a lock- in amplification system (Molerón et al., 2015) for phase-sensitive measurements of the waves. From the measured pressure, we calculated the reflectance (R = -.-.∗ -0-0∗) and transmittance (T = -2-2∗ -0-0∗), where P# is the incident pressure wave, P3 is the reflected pressure wave, and P4 is the transmitted pressure wave, see methods section in supplementary information. We used two sample configurations of the metamaterial as shown in Fig.2 to investigate the directional wave propagation characteristics. Since the structure incorporates losses, the sound flux is not conserved, and the absorbance A is defined as A ≡ 1 − T − R. 8 transport. The metamaterial is embedded in a two-port acoustic testing system for phase- sensitive measurement of the incidence, reflection, and transmission: a, the wave incident from the left (incident first on Al fork) (inset shows a magnified view of the forks embedded in the waveguide). b, the wave incident from the right (incident first on PC fork). The linear non-Hermitian metamaterial (LnH-MetaMater). To investigate the asymmetric wave propagation in the LnH-MetaMater, we plot the degree of asymmetry in reflectance, transmittance, and absorbance characterized by Q9 = 9:;<9;: 9:;=9;:, Q> = >:;<>;: >:;=>;:, and Q? = ?:;<?;: ?:;=?;: as functions of the frequency, and the incident sound pressure level (Pi) (Fig.3). Here, the subscript MP of R, T, and A denotes that the wave is first incident on the metal (Al) fork (left incidence), and the subscript PM denotes the wave is first incident on the polymer (PC) fork (right incidence). The color density quantitatively describes the Q9, Q>, and Q? in each plot. The two forks in the LnH-MetaMater have same design frequency of ~2175 Hz, but different losses at 9 the principal mode of resonance (Fig.1 a,b). The reflectance (Fig.3c) exhibits directional asymmetry at the resonance frequency while the transmittance (Fig.3d) remains nearly symmetric. The color on the positive scale of Q9 implies that the intensity of the reflectance corresponding to the right incidence is higher than that of the left incidence (also see Fig.S4). The asymmetric reflectance is a direct consequence of non-uniform losses present in the metamaterial and their influence at various reflection paths that contribute to the left and right total reflection. Incident sound waves from the right (PC) side will have a total reflection that can be written in the form of a geometric series r4A4 r-C + t-C r?G I I<3:J3KL t-C, where t-C/?G and r-C/?G are the transmission and reflection amplitudes of the PC/Al forks respectively. Similarly, the total reflection for incident waves encountering the metamaterial from the left (Al) side can be written as r4A4 B- = r?G + t?G r-Ct?G + t?G r-Cr?Gr-Ct?G + ⋯ = r?G + t?G r-C I I<3:J3KL t?G. The convergence of the geometric series is comparison of r4A4 B- with r4A4 -B indicates that these two expressions are not the same. Their difference is already evident at the first term r4A4 -B/B- ≈ r-C/?G, which represents wave-paths associated with direct reflection from the PC/Al fork. 10 response of the LnH-MetaMater for left and right incidences. Asymmetry in c, reflectance (Q9), d, transmittance (Q>), and e, absorbance (Q?) as functions of frequency and incident sound pressure amplitude Pi for a gap between the forks, G=157 mm (~l). At the principal-mode resonance frequency, we observe that the QR>0 (Fig.3 c) and the QA<0 (Fig.3 e) indicating that the reflection is higher, and absorption is lower when the sound is incident from right (PC fork) side. Since the PC fork is a strong-loss element, the incident waves from the right side gets highly reflected immediately. This is a manifestation of an overdamping behavior. However, the waves incident on the LnH-MetaMater from the Al side (left incidence) are transmitted into the resonant cavity formed by the two forks and dwell in the cavity due to multiple scattering events between the two forks (see the various terms in the geometric series above). These multiple scattering events with the PC fork lead to an overall enhancement of the absorption and consequently decrease the overall reflection, thus resulting in asymmetric reflection 11 (and absorption) by the LnH-MetaMater. We, therefore, have an asymmetric resonance-enhanced absorption due to the non-uniform losses in the metamaterial. Although the reflectance and absorbance in the LnH-MetaMater are asymmetric, the transmittance is symmetric (Fig.3d). Similar considerations as those for the reflectance indicate that the transmission paths for both left and right incidences contain the exact same scattering events resulting in symmetric transmission. Additionally, it is evident from these color density plots that the response of the LnH-MetaMater does not show any dependence on the amplitude of the incident pressure wave, as expected for a linear system. The nonlinear non-Hermitian metamaterial (nLnH-MetaMater). The nLnH- MetaMater, on the other hand, consists of an Al fork and a PC fork having closely matched frequencies (~1925 Hz), but very dissimilar losses at the sway mode of resonance (Fig.1c,d) with the PC fork exhibiting predominantly dissipative nonlinearities (Fig.1e,f). The nLnH-MetaMater exhibits left and right asymmetry in transmittance (Fig. 4d) in addition to asymmetric reflectance (Fig.4c) and absorbance (Fig.4e). The transmission asymmetry is most pronounced in the regions near resonance, and is predominantly a result of the dissipative nonlinearity (i.e. nonlinear imaginary part of the resonance) present in the PC fork (the contrast ratio of transmission asymmetry (TMP/TPM), which reaches values above 5 within the range of amplitudes tested, can be seen in Fig.S7). Because we utilize dissipative nonlinearity, the outgoing signal has high frequency purity unlike in the use of conservative nonlinearities (Boechler et al., 2011; Lepri and Casati, 2011; Lepri and Pikovsky, 2014)—i.e. there are no significant higher harmonics observed, for example, as seen in the frequency response of the nLnH-MetaMater for the incidence at 1903 Hz and 1919 Hz (Fig.4f,g). These two incidence frequencies correspond to the highest asymmetry in transmission (Fig.4d). As shown in the frequency response measured in the empty impedance tube 12 with no forks, (Fig.4h), the higher harmonics seen in Fig.4f and g have been generated by the speaker. asymmetric response of nLnH-MetaMater for left and right incidences as a function of frequency and incident sound pressure amplitude Pi at the gap between the forks G=157 mm (~λ). Asymmetry in c, reflectance (Q9), d, transmittance (Q>), and e, absorbance (Q?). Frequency response of the nLnH-MetaMater for the f, left incidence, g, right incidence at the incidence frequencies (1903 and 1919 Hz) corresponding to the two highest transmission asymmetries. h, frequency response in the empty impedance tube for the speaker excitation at 1903 and 1919 Hz. 13 The transmission asymmetry can be understood qualitatively by using a geometric series consideration similar to that of the LnH-MetaMater. The terms that describe the sound-wave-paths for left (Al side) and right (PC side) incidences include “time-reversal” pairs such as t?Gt-C and t-Ct?G, t?Gr-Cr?Gt-C and t-Cr?Gr-Ct?G, etc., which regardless of containing the same sequence of scattering events with PC and Al, but in reverse order, are no more equal. Specifically, the transmission t?G/-C and reflection r?G/-C terms are amplitude dependent. As a result, they are affected by the direction of the sound incidence, i.e. tGST4 ?G/-C ≠ t3#VW4 ?G/-C and rGST4 ?G/-C ≠ r3#VW4 ?G/-C. The exact summation of such nonlinear (amplitude dependent due to incidence direction) series in the case of the nLnH-MetaMater is a difficult task. Nevertheless, one can get a quantitative understanding of the transmission asymmetry of the nLnH-MetaMater by modeling the system as a set of two coupled oscillators. Numerical Model. When the principal and sway modes are well-separated spectrally, the tuning fork system can be modeled as two coupled masses (Fig.5(a)). By adding a semi-infinite lead of identical coupled masses on each side we are able to investigate the scattering properties of the system. In our model, the oscillator that describes the PC fork (blue circle in Fig.5(a)) has nonlinear losses while the other oscillator that describes the Al fork (red circle in Fig.5(a)) is modeled as a linear lossless oscillator. The oscillators are coupled with a spring that has a coupling constant k, which models the distance between the forks (the shorter the distance the higher the coupling constant k). At its left and right, this system is coupled to two semi-infinite arrays of linear oscillators (black circle in Fig.5(a)) that propagate the sound in free space (Fig.5(a)). 14 The equation of motion for each of the masses shown in Fig.5(a) is given by, (1), where m$ is the nth mass, x$ is the displacement of the nth mass, v$ is the spring constant of the spring connecting the nth mass to the (n − 1)th mass, μ$ is the linear friction coefficient, and we have assumed that the masses are at a unit distance between one-another at their equilibrium points. The arbitrary functions fa$(x$) and gd$(x$) describe the lossy and real nonlinearity of the system respectively. Of these parameters, μ$, fa$, and gd$ are zero for n ≠ 1, 2. For the spring constants and masses, we have, c -1 0 1 2 3 4 vI v) v( vg vh a b labels indicate the index, n, of each mass and the spring constant, v, of each coupling, respectively), b, Asymmetry in transmittance Q> as a function of frequency and incident intensity assuming both lossy and real nonlinearity (here, aj = 0.06, and a9 = 0.02), and c, Asymmetry in transmittance Q> as a function of frequency and incident intensity assuming only the lossy nonlinearity (same aj as in b, a9 = 0). 15 v$ = nv, n = 2 v(, n ≠ 2 m$ = o mI, n = 1 m), n = 2 m(, n ≠ 1,2 (2). Dividing Eq. (1) by m( results in, pq (3), where κ$ ≡ v$/m(, γ$ ≡ μ$/m(, f$ ≡ fa$/m(, and g$ ≡ gd$/m(. By assuming harmonic solutions of the form x$ = a$e<#u4, we obtain: −ω) pq From Eq. (4) and using the lead values for κ$, γ$, f$, and g$, it can be shown that the leads can support propagating waves with a dispersion relation: ω = '2κ((1 − cos k) (5) where k is the associated wavenumber of the propagating wave with frequency ω. The transport properties of the coupled nonlinear oscillators of Eq.(2,4) can be further investigated using the backward transfer map: x$<I = − zq{| zq x$=I + }1 + zq{| zq − u~ zq pq pr − i u zq (γ$ + f$(x$)) − Vq(•q) zq € x$ (1), which super-imposed with appropriate scattering boundary conditions can allow for a unique solution of the nonlinear problem. We assume incident and transmitted plane waves of the form: x$ = •i(e#‚$ + r(e<#‚$ n ≤ 1 t(e#‚$ n ≥ 2 (2), where i(, r(, and t( are the complex amplitudes of the incident, reflected, and transmitted waves, respectively. Scattering boundary conditions Eq. (7) assume a left incident wave. For a right incident wave one needs to modify Eqs. (7) accordingly. We can obtain i( and r( in terms of xI and x) from Eq. (7): 16 i( = •|<•rS...0† S0†<S...0† , r( = •|<•rS0† S...0†<S0† (3) These relations, combined with Eq. (5,6), allow us to obtain i( and r( in terms of t( and k by recursively calculating the displacement of each of the masses, and in turn we can compute reflectance and transmittance for the system. This way of calculating the scattering properties of nonlinear systems by fixing the output scattering conditions is necessary because of the multi- stability often present in these problems (D’Ambroise et al., 2012; Hennig and Tsironis, 1999; Lepri and Casati, 2011). We evaluate the transmittance T ≡ ‡ 4r #r‡ ) and reflectance R ≡ ‡ 3r #r‡ ) using the backward map approach. First, we perform the transformation A$ ≡ •qS...0~† 4r . This allows us to simplify the form of the wave at the output. Assuming for simplicity that m( = 1, Eq. (6) becomes, A$<I = − zq{| zq A$=I + }1 + zq{| zq − pq zq ω) − i u zq (γ$ + F$(A$)) − ‰q(?q) zq € A$ (4), recursively applying Eq. (9), we obtain, ΑI = δ − zr z e#‚ Α( = − z zr + α(δ − zr z e#‚) δ = 1 + zr z − p~ z ω) − i u z (γ) + F)(1)) − ‰~(I) z α = 1 + z zr − p| zr ω) − i u zr (γI + FI }δ − zr z e#‚€) − ‰|}•<Žr Ž S0†€ zr (5), which together with Eqs. (8) allow us to obtain the transmittance and reflectance: T = ‡ 4r #r‡ ) = • S0†<S...0† Ž Žr<}•<Žr Ž S0†€•‘<S0†’• ) R = ‡ 3r #r‡ ) = • Ž Žr<}•<Žr Ž S0†€•‘<S...0†’ Ž Žr<}•<Žr Ž S0†€•‘<S0†’ • ) (6). 17 As we discussed previously, the above calculations assume left-incident scattering boundary conditions, see Eqs. (7). To evaluate the transmittance and reflectance for a right- incident wave one needs to flip the subscripts of m, γ, F, and G that appear in the expressions for α and δ in Eqs. (10), i.e. 1 → 2, 2 → 1, which is equivalent to flipping the sample. Equations (11) represent the most general solution of the non-linear scattering problem. To make a qualitative comparison with the experimental results we assume specific functions for the nonlinear functions FI,) and GI,) (associated with fI,) and gI,) respectively). From the experimental observations of the resonant behavior of the polycarbonate fork (resonant frequency and FWHM vs. SPL), we obtain the functional form of g) and f) vs. displacement respectively, mapping displacement to sound pressure. The functions used are: ⟹ (7), where aj, a9 are real numbers. Assuming that the nonlinearity of the aluminum fork and its linear losses are negligible, gI, fI and, γI are equal to zero. We also adjust mI so that the resonators 1 and 2 have the same resonant frequency in spite of the losses in resonator 2. We then obtain the transmittance from the left (T—) and right (T9) for a range of incident frequencies ω and transmitted wave amplitudes t( using Eqs. (5,11). Once we have these, we compute the incident wave intensity for a given frequency and transmitted wave amplitude as |4r|~ > . We have observed multistability (i.e. multiple possible output waves for a single input) in our results for a range of parameters (i.e. |i(|) corresponding to more than one values of However, multistabilities are suppressed for the parameter range that is presented below. To verify 18 that the model reproduces the features of the system observed in experiments, we interpolate the > ̃<>TM > ̃=>TM. Obviously, Q> can only be obtained for the parameter range where both T—/9 are single-valued functions of the incident intensity. In Fig.5(b,c), we present our computed Q> vs. the frequency in the x-axis, which is normalized by ω( = š zr p|, and as a function of the incident signal intensity in the y-axis, for two sets of parameters: (a) combination of lossy and real nonlinearities at the resonator modeling the polycarbonate fork, (b) lossy nonlinearity only. The rest of the parameters used are κ = 1.35, κ( = 1, mI = 1.26, m) = 1.20, γI = 0, γ) = 0.5. In Fig.5(b), we observe that, as the incident intensity increases and the nonlinearity becomes significant, we transition from a region of symmetry in transmission to a region of asymmetry. In the asymmetric region, for small frequencies, Q> takes small values close to zero. As the frequency increases, Q> transitions to positive, then back to zero and finally it takes negative values. We also observe a shift to the left of the lobe of positive Q> in the color-density plot with increasing incident intensity. We notice a very similar behavior in Fig.5(c), where the real nonlinearity is set to be zero in our calculations, with a slight increase in the shifting of the positive Q> lobe. This effect can be more dramatic for different nonlinear functions. This result suggests that the dominant effect that leads to asymmetric acoustic energy transmission and its switching behavior we observe in the experiment is the presence of lossy nonlinearity. To understand the source of asymmetry in transmittance, we examine the dependence of T—/9 on the nonlinearities. For simplicity, we will assume κ( = κ and mI ≈ m) = m. Starting 19 with the expression for transmittance in (11) and using the appropriate expressions from (10), we obtain, T— = ‡ ) •žŸ ‚ ) T9 = ‡ ) •žŸ ‚ ) (8), where β ≡ 2 − p z ω), η ≡ β − e#‚, γd) ≡ γ) u z, F¥)(x) ≡ F)(x) u z, and G¥)(x) ≡ ‰~(•) z . The discrepancy between these expressions stems from the arguments of the nonlinear functions. This is true for both the real and the imaginary nonlinear terms. If we assume no real nonlinearity T— = ‡ ? ©=#a‡ ) T9 = ‡ ? ©=#(a=a«)‡ ) (9), demonstrate how the asymmetry arises even in a simple case of lossy non-linearity. Discussions. From the numerical modeling, we have found that the transmittance of an incident sound wave from the right (PC) side of the nonlinear lossy oscillator is T-B = ‡ ? ©=#(°=°«)‡ ) . Similarly, the transmittance of an incident wave from the left (Al) side of the linear lossless oscillator is TB- = ‡ ? ©=#Γ‡ ) . The variables A and B contain “linear” information such as the frequency of the incident wave, the dispersion properties of the propagating medium, structural/geometric information of the resonant cavity. The variable Γ includes information about the linear and nonlinear losses associated with the lossy oscillator. Typically, Γ is an increasing function of the excitation amplitude and is responsible for the nonlinear resonant shift 20 towards lower frequencies that we observe in the transmission spectrum of the nLnH-MetaMater (Fig.5). The term that is responsible for the asymmetry in the transmittance is Γ 2, which is also an increasing function of the excitation amplitude. It incorporates nonlinear (i.e. amplitude- dependent) losses and directionality—it is zero for left-incident waves and different from zero for right-incident waves. In the latter case, it adds to the existing reciprocal losses Γ, thus ‘pushing’ the resonant transmittance for the right-incident wave further to lower frequency values. In other words, T-B/B-(ω) get their corresponding maximum values at different resonant frequencies ω = ω-B 3S3 < ωB- 3S3 respectively. The separation between ω-B 3S3, ωB- 3S3 becomes larger as the amplitude of the incident wave (and thus Γ 2) increases. Consequently, the transmittance asymmetry 3S3) > 0 as the amplitude of the incident wave increases. This behavior further verifies our experimental results shown in Fig. 4. We also find from the coupled oscillator model that the asymmetric transport can additionally be affected by the coupling strength between the oscillators. By changing the center- to-center gap, G (Fig.S1b), between the two forks in the nLnH-MetaMater, we demonstrate the effect of coupling strength (Fig.S5, S6). This suggests that the asymmetric energy transport in the nLnH-MetaMater can be controlled not only as a function of the incident amplitude, but also as a function of the gap between the constituent resonant elements. Interestingly, for a gap G=38 mm, the reflection is completely suppressed (RMP=0) for left incidence, leading to a unidirectional extraordinary absorber with absorbance greater than 80% (Fig.S6 g,h,i). Transmission asymmetry is forbidden by the reciprocity theorem in the case of linear time- reversal symmetric systems, consistent with the symmetric transmittance in LnH-MetaMater that we discussed initially. In contrast, asymmetric acoustic transport can be realized in systems with conservative nonlinearities and in the absence of mirror symmetry (Boechler et al., 2011; Lepri 21 and Casati, 2011; Lepri and Pikovsky, 2014; Liang et al., 2009). In such cases, however, the outgoing signals at the fundamental frequency are noisy because of high insertion losses due to high impedance mismatch (Lepri and Casati, 2011; Liang et al., 2009, 2010; Maznev et al., 2013). Instead, one may utilize the existence of large asymmetric frequency conversion for efficiently transmitting power from one side to the other. The obvious drawback of this approach is that the harvested signal is at different frequencies than the input signal. Use of amplifiers can overcome insertion losses (Popa and Cummer, 2014), which, however, makes the structure bulky while consuming external power. Our compact (thickness ~subwavelength) nLnH-MetaMater overcomes both of those challenges, and provides asymmetric transmission in the same frequency as the incident wave, while consuming no power. Designing a nLnH-MetaMater using different lossy materials such as polymers, domain-switching ferroelectric materials, and carbon nanotube foams where the loss can be controlled actively will enable the creation of novel devices that can control the sound propagation in desired ways for various applications. Acoustic switches, diodes, and unidirectional perfect absorbers are some of the many potential devices that can be developed using nLnH-MetaMater. Methods Details of the experimental methods, sample fabrication, and additional data can be found in Supplementary Information. Additional Information Supplementary information is available in the online version of the paper. Acknowledgements We acknowledge the financial support from the Air Force Office of Scientific Research via a Multi-University Research Initiative (Contract no. FA9550-14-1-0037). We also acknowledge 22 David Smith, Michael Bonar, and Gary L. Woods of Rice University, and Miguel Moleron of ETH Zurich for their support during the acoustic testing apparatus development. Competing Financial Interests Authors declare no competing financial interests.