arXiv:1810.07864v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 18 Oct 2018 Two-dimensional hybrid composites of SnS2 with graphene and graphene oxide for improving sodium storage: A first-principles study Kum-Chol Ria, Chol-Jun Yu∗,a, Jin-Song Kima, Song-Hyok Choea aChair of Computational Materials Design, Faculty of Materials Science, Kim Il Sung University, Ryongnam-Dong, Taesong District, Pyongyang, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea Abstract Among the recent achievements of sodium-ion battery (SIB) electrode materials, hybridization of two-dimentional (2D) materials is one of the most interesting appointments. In this work, we propose to use the 2D hybrid composites of SnS2 with graphene or graphene oxide (GO) layers as SIB anode, based on the first-principles calculations of their atomic structures, sodium intercalation energetics and electronic properties. The calculations reveal that graphene or GO film can effectively support not only the stable formation of hetero-interface with the SnS2 layer but also the easy intercalation of sodium atom with low migration energy and acceptable low volume change. The electronic charge density differences and the local density of state indicate that the electrons are transferred from the graphene or GO layer to the SnS2 layer, facilitating the formation of hetero-interface and improving the electronic conductance of the semiconducting SnS2 layer. These 2D hybrid composites of SnS2/G or GO are concluded to be more promising candidates for SIB anodes compared with the individual monolayers. Key words: Sodium-ion battery, Anode, Tin oxide, Graphene oxide, First-principles method 1. Introduction Recently, inorganic two-dimentional (2D) materials have at- tracted remarkable attention for various energy applications in- cluding energy harvesting and energy storage devices due to their unique structural and electrochemical properties . Graphene and chemically modified graphene such as graphene oxide (GO) or reduced graphene oxide (rGO) are regarded as the representative 2D materials, being character- ized by layer-stacked structures coupled by weak interlayer van der Waals (vdW) and strong in-plane covalent bonding inter- actions . Such graphene-like 2D structures can be found in elemental analogues of graphene (silicene, germanene, phosphorene, borophene), transition metal oxides (TMOs) , transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) , and tran- sition metal carbides/nitrides (MXenes) . These 2D mate- rials can be obtained by exfoliation or synthesis, and can pro- vide large surface area with abundant anchoring sites and low volume change during the de/intercalation processes of atoms or molecules. Therefore, 2D materials can be used as poten- tial electrode materials for alkali-ion batteries with remarkably large capacity, high rate capability, good cycle performance and low price. Many of 2D materials such as rGO , layered vanadium pentoxide (V2O5) and molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) have been verified to be used as efficient electrode materials for lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) and sodium-ion bat- teries (SIBs) by experimental and theoretical studies. In fact, ∗Corresponding author Email address: cj.yu@ryongnamsan.edu.kp (Chol-Jun Yu) as the most widely used and standard anode material for LIBs, graphite has the theoretical capacity of 372 mA·h·g−1, which is not high enough to satisfy the growing demand of battery capacity. For SIBs, moreover, it is almost impossible to in- tercalate sodium itself into graphite due to a big mismatch be- tween the ionic radius of Na+ cation and the interlayer distance of graphite, and thus co-intercalation with organic molecules has been devised . Alternatively, graphene and its derivatives such as GO or rGO, which can be obtained by exfo- liation from graphite, have been studied extensively, confirming the doubled capacity compared with graphite, very high sur- face area (2680 m2·g−1), high electron conductivity and excel- lent chemical stability . However, both Li and Na bind very weakly to the pristine graphene or GO, re- sulting in Li/Na clustering and dendrite growth. On the other hand, tin disulfide (SnS2) as the typical TMD is recognized as a promising anode material due to its high initial capacity with an unique mechanism of alkali cation storage reaction . The bulk SnS2 has PbI2-type layered structure and exhibits a high lithium storage capacity (average capacity 583 mA·h·g−1 after 30th cycles) and a good cycling stability (cycle life per- formance 85% after 30 cycles) , being much better perfor- mance than the conventional graphite electrodes. The lithium or sodium storage in SnS2 is performed through the two-step reactions; (1) conversion of SnS2 into metallic Sn and (2) al- loying with lithium or sodium forming Li-Sn or Na-Sn alloy. By contrast, only the conversion reaction occurs during the lithium or sodium storage in other TMDs such as MoS2, WS2 and VS2 . The reversible alloying reaction was found to give a large capacity of sodium storage in the first cycle, but to be accompanied with a large volume expansion (e.g., 420% for Preprint submitted to Inorganic Chemistry October 19, 2018 the case of Na-Sn alloying ), leading to a poor capacity after a few cycles. Designing hetero-layered architectures by coupling graphene or GO with TMD or TMO 2D materials has emerged as an ef- fective strategy to enhance the Li/Na binding strength and re- duce the volume change as well . In particular, the hybrid composites formed by coupling rGO and TMDs have been reported to show a good performance as anode materials for LIBs and SIBs . In such composite systems, graphene-based 2D materials can not only serve as a matrix to anchor the TMD layers but also improve the electrochemi- cal performance of semiconducting TMDs. As a typical exam- ple of such composites, therefore, the hybrid SnS2/rGO com- posites including the hetero-interface can be constructed and used as excellent anode materials by combining the metallic electrical conductivity of graphene with the high storage ca- pability of SnS2 . These synthesized SnS2/rGO hybrids have shown to exhibit the excellent electro- chemical performance such as high sodium storage capacity of 649 mA·h·g−1 at the current density of 100 mA·g−1, ultra-long cycle life of 89% and 69% after 400 and 1000 cycles, and supe- rior rate capability of 337 mA·h·g−1 at the higher current den- sity of 12.8 A·g−1 (28C) in only 1.3 minutes . To the best of our knowledge, no theoretical works for 2D hy- brid SnS2/G or GO composites can be found in literature in spite of such successful experiments and the great importance of clarifying the operational mechanism, motivating us to in- vestigate these hetero-interfaces in atomic scale by means of first-principles modeling and simulations. In this work, we make a modeling of hybrid SnS2/G and SnS2/GO composites, together with 2D bilayered SnS2, for conducting comparative and systematic study by using first- principles calculations within the density functional theory (DFT). Performing the structural optimizations, we analyze the detailed atomic structures of these 2D layered compounds, such as interlayer distance and bond lengths. The activation barriers for the in-plane atomic migrations of sodium atom are calcu- lated in these composite systems of SnS2/G and SnS2/GO, and in the SnS2 bilayer. The local density of states (LDOS) and electronic charge desity differences are analyzed. Based on the calculation data, we reveal the crucial role of hetero-interface behind the Na-storage enhancement of SnS2/GO hybrid. 2. Computational Methods Regarding the atomistic modeling, three kinds of 2D sys- tems, i.e., SnS2, SnS2/G and SnS2/GO, were built using the corresponding supercells. The SnS2 crystal has the hexago- nal structure (P ̄3m1 space group) with the lattice constants of a = 3.649 Å and c = 5.899 Å , characterized by the in- terlayer stacking called 2H-SnS2 polytype as recently studied with first-princples method . For modeling of the SnS2 layer, we used a AA-stacked SnS2 bilayer, employing the hexagonal (2 × 2) cells in plane, which contain 4 Sn atoms and 8 S atoms in one layer. For the composite systems of SnS2 layer with graphene or GO layer, we built sandwiched super- cells, where the SnS2 bilayer is placed in between the graphene or GO layers, giving the hybrid SnS2/G or SnS2/GO composite. Again, the hexagonal (2 × 2) cells were used for modeling of SnS2 bilayer in these composite systems, while the AA-stacked hexagonal (3 × 3) cells were employed for the graphene or GO layer that contains 18 C atoms or 18 C atoms and 9 O atoms in one layer. It should be noted that the GO layer with the C/O atomic ratio of 2:1 was formed by decorating epoxy groups (−O−) on outer side of the graphene sheet. For these super- cell models, fixed cell lengths of a = b = 7.79 Å and c = 30 Å were used throughout the work, providing the vacuum layer thickness over 15 Å (see Figure S1). All the calculations in this work were carried out using the pseudopotential plane-wave method as implemented in QUAN- TUM ESPRESSO package (version 6.2) . We utilized the projector augmented wave (PAW) method to describe the in- teraction between ions and valence electrons 1. The PBEsol functional within the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) was used for the exchange-correlation interaction be- tween valence electrons. To take into account the vdW in- teraction between the layers, the vdW energy provided by the exchange-hole dipole moment (XDM) method was added to the DFT total energy. As the major computational parame- ters, plane-wave cutoff energies were set to be 40 Ry for wave function and 400 Ry for electron density, and the Monkhorst- Pack special k-points were set to be (4 × 4 × 1) for all the su- persell models, providing a total energy accuracy of 5 meV per atom. Self-consistent convergence threshold for total energy was 10−9 Ry, and the convergence threshold for atomic force in structural relaxations was 4 × 10−4 Ry·Bohr−1. Fermi-Dirac function with a gaussian spreading factor of 0.01 Ry was ap- plied to the Brillouin-zone integration. To calculate the activation barriers for sodium migration, we applied the climbing image nudged elastic band (NEB) method . During the NEB runs, the supercell dimensions were fixed, while all the atomic positions were allowed to re- lax until the atomic forces converge within 0.05 eV·Å−1. The number of NEB images was tuned so that the distance between neighbouring NEB images was less than 1 Å. We used the im- age energies and their derivatives to make an interpolation of the path energy profile that passes through every image points, as implemented in the neb.x code of QUANTUM ESPRESSO pack- age . In order to estimate the binding strength between the lay- ers, we calculated the interlayer binding energy per atom as follows , Eb = 1 N [E(d = deq) − E(d = d∞)] (1) where E(d = deq) and E(d = d∞) are the DFT total energies of the supercells with the interlayer distance at equilibrium (deq) and infinity (d∞), respectively, and N is the number of atoms included in the supercell. Due to the numerical limitation, d∞ was approximated to be ∼15 Å, over which the total energy of 1We used C.pbesol-n-kjpaw psl.0.1.UPF, O.pbesol-n-kjpaw psl.0.1.UPF, Sn.pbesol-dn-kjpaw psl.0.2.UPF, S.pbesol-n-kjpaw psl.0.1.UPF, and Na.pbesol-spn-kjpaw psl.0.2.UPF, which are provided in the package. 2 equivalent hetero-interfaces between the SnS2 and graphene or GO layer. Various interlayer distances are denoted. the supercell is scarcely changed and the interaction between the layers becomes negligible. The possibility of interface formation can be estimated by calculating the formation energy per unit area defined as, Ef = 1 2A[ESnS2/G (GO) − (NSnS2Ebulk SnS2 + NG (GO)EG (GO))] (2) where ESnS2/G (GO) and EG (GO) are the total energies of the supercells including the hybrid SnS2/G (GO) bilayer and graphene (GO) monolayer, and Ebulk SnS2 is the total energy per for- mula unit of unit cell of the crystalline SnS2 bulk. NSnS2 and NG (GO) are the numbers of SnS2 formula units included in the layer and of the graphene (GO) monolayers, and A is the in- terfacial area in x-y plane. Since the supercell models include two equivalent interfaces between the SnS2 and graphene or GO layers as can be seen in Figure 1, the energy difference should be divided by 2 to give the formation energy of the interface. To estimate the stability of sodium-intercalated compounds, we calculated the sodium intercalation energy Eint as follows, Eint = Esub+Na − (Esub + Ebcc Na ) (3) where Esub+Na and Esub are the total energies of the supercells for the sodium intercalated compounds and the pristine sub- strates (SnS2, SnS2/G and SnS2/GO), and Ebcc Na is the total en- ergy per atom of the unit cell of the sodium crystal in body- centered cubic (bcc) phase. 3. Results and Discussion 3.1. Hybrid composites We first optimized the crystalline structure of SnS2 bulk in hexagonal phase (P ̄3m1 space group, see Figure S1) by use of different XC functionals. In accordance with the previous first-principles calculations , the PBEsol func- tional yielded slightly overestimated lattice constants (0.05% and 2% for a and c) while adding the vdW energy in the fla- vor of Grimme (−0.05% and −5%) or XDM (−0.7% and −5%) gave underestimation, when compared with the exper- imental values of a = 3.649 Å and c = 5.899 Å . Al- though XDM gave somewhat severe underestimated interlayer lattice constant for SnS2 bulk, we choose it for further calcu- lations of interface in this work, based on the established fact that XDM is especially good for modeling of surfaces and organic/inorganic interfaces . Then, we performed atomic relaxations in the supercells of the individual SnS2, graphene and GO monolayers, of which 2D x-y planes include (2 × 2) cells for SnS2 layer and (3 × 3) cells for graphene and GO layers (see Figure S1). The cell pa- rameters of these supercells were set to be identical and fixed during the atomic relaxations as a = b = 7.79 Å and c = 30 Å, allowing to make a modeling of the hetero-interfaces from these individual layers. In fact, we carried out the variable cell relaxation in only 2D x-y plane of the GO supercell to deter- mine the optimal cell size in the plane. In the graphene and GO layers, the average C−C and C−O bond lengths were de- termined to be 1.49 and 1.42 Å, which are comparable with the previous values of 1.51 and 1.42 Å obtained by first-principles calculations . 3 dSn−Sn and dS−S (inset) in SnS2, SnS2/G and SnS2/GO bilayers and (b) dC−S in SnS2/G and SnS2/GO bilayers. Using these monolayers of SnS2, graphene and GO, we made the supercells for SnS2 bilayer and hybrid SnS2/G and SnS2/GO composites with the same sizes to the monolayer supercells, and performed the atomic relaxations to determine the real atomic positions as shown in Figure 1. In these bilayers, the average Sn−S bond lengths were found to be 2.63 Å, which is a little larger than that of 2.56 Å in the bulk, while C−C and C−O bond lengths were almost same to the monolayers due to the same sizes of the supercells. In order to determine the optimal interlayer distance and the corresponding binding energy between the layers, we estimated the total energy differences of the supercells as varying the in- terlayer distance. In accordance with the variation of inter- layer distance, the supercell length c was also varied to pre- serve the vacuum layer thickness as 15 Å. Two different inter- layer bindings can be distinguished as those between the neigh- boring SnS2 layers (homo-interface) and between the SnS2 and graphene or GO layers (hetero-interface), while four different interlayer distances can be thought as dSn−Sn, dS−S, dC−S and dC−C as depicted in Figure 1. Over the interlayer distance of ∼15 Å, total energies of the supercells were confirmed to be al- most unchangeable, indicating a non-interaction or no binding between the layers. Figure 2 shows the total energy differences interface formation energy (Ef) in SnS2, SnS2/G and SnS2/GO bilayers. SnS2 SnS2/G SnS2/GO dSn−Sn (Å) 4.97 5.04 5.13 dS−S (Å) 2.18 2.28 2.37 Eb (SnS2−SnS2) (meV) −54 −22 −16 dC−S (Å) 3.19 3.10 Eb (C−SnS2) (meV) −28 −30 dC−C (Å) Ef (J/m2) 0.81 0.34 0.13 of supercells as functions of interlayer distance in reference to the total energy of supercell with the interlayer distance of ∼15 Å. binding energies, and interface formation energies. The Sn−Sn and S−S interlayer distances were found to become longer upon the formation of hybrid interfaces from 4.97 and 2.18 Å in SnS2 bilayer to 5.04 and 2.28 Å in SnS2/G, and to 5.13 and 2.37 Å in SnS2/GO. This indicates that there is an attractive inter- action between SnS2 layer and graphene or GO layer, and the strength of SnS2−GO interaction can be said to be higher than that of SnS2−G interaction due to further lengthening of dSn−Sn or dS−S in the case of GO hybrid. Accordingly, the correspond- ing interlayer binding energy per atom between the neighbor- ing SnS2 layers, Eb (SnS2−SnS2), also decreases in magnitude from −54 meV in SnS2 to −22 meV in SnS2/G, and to −16 meV in SnS2/GO. In the cases of hybrid composites of SnS2/G and SnS2/GO, the interlayer distance dC−S in the GO hybrid (3.10 Å) was determined to be shorter than that in the graphene hy- brid (3.19 Å), while the binding energy of SnS2 layer with the GO layer (−30 meV) was found to be higher in magnitude than that with the graphene layer (−28 meV). These also indicate that oxidation of graphene can enhance the interaction between the SnS2 layer and the graphene layer. It is worth noting that all the calculated interlayer binding energies are smaller than the binding energy between the graphene layers in graphite (−77 meV by PBE+vdW calculation ), and all the negative values indicate certain formations of stable interface systems from the individual monolayers. The interlayer distances between the graphene layers (dC−C) in the hybrid SnS2/G and SnS2/GO composites were calculated to be 13.96 and 13.87 Å, indicating that the epoxy groups of GO leads to a contraction of the total interlayer distance. The cal- culated formation energies of the interfaces from the SnS2 bulk and graphene or GO monolayer were turned out to be positive, suggesting an endothermic feature of the interface formations. And it can be said from the magnitudes of their formation en- ergies that the hetero-interface in SnS2/G or SnS2/GO is easier to form than the homo-interface in SnS2, and of the two hetero- interfaces the SnS2/GO is easier than the SnS2/G. 3.2. Sodium intercalation and migration To study the sodium intercalation into these SnS2 composites containing the interfaces, we considered two different scenar- ios: (1) sodium intercalation into the middle interspace between 4 and hetero interspaces of SnS2 and graphene or GO composites. Side views of relaxed atomic structures of sodium intercalated (b) SnS2, (c) SnS2/G, and (d) SnS2/GO compounds. Left panel is for the Na middle intercalations, central panel for the substrates, and right panel for the Na hetero intercalations. Typical interlayer distances in Å unit are denoted for comparison. the neighboring SnS2 layers, forming substrate-Na-mid com- pounds, and (2) sodium insertion into the hetero interspace be- tween the SnS2 and graphene or GO layers, forming substrate- Na-het compounds, as illustrated in Figure 3(a). For the case of SnS2 bilayer, only the middle intercalation is surely possible. In each way of sodium intercalation, we identified the ener- getically favorable anchoring site of sodium atom by comparing the total energies of the supercells with different sodium inser- tion sites. In the cases of middle intercalation, two different sites might be thought: (1) Na atom can sit on the top of S atom of the below SnS2 layer while at the center of S-triangle of the upper SnS2 layer, leading to a formation of NaS4 tetra- hedron (tet site), and (3) Na atom can be placed at the spher- ical center of SnS6 octahedron (oct site). In energetics the Na middle-intercalated SnS2 supercell in the tet site was found to be about 0.39 eV higher than that in the oct site, possibly due to a stronger bonding of Na atom with the surrounding S atoms (see Figure S2). Henceforth, only the oct site will be consid- ered for the middle intercalations. Furthermore, it was observed for the cases of hybrid SnS2/G (GO) composites that the SnS2 layers can be shifted in opposite way each other, resulting in the change of layer stacking from AA to AB with a lowering of total energy as 0.21 eV (0.17 eV) (see Figure S2). On the other hand, we distinguished three different sites for the sodium hetero-intercalations in the cases of SnS2/G (GO) composites: (1) Na atom can sit on the top of Sn atom placed at the center of S-triangle in the below SnS2 layer while on the side of C−C bond of the upper graphene (GO) layer (top site), (2) on the hollow site at the center of S-triangle in the below layer (hollow site), and (3) at the center of carbon hexagon ring of the upper layer (center site). Among these sodium hetero-intercalation sites, the top site was found to have the lowest total energy (see intercalated SnS2 and SnS2/G (GO) composites in the lowest energy configurations. It is clear that the volume expansion ra- tio between the Na-intercalated composite (Vint) and the sub- strate (V0), r = Vint V0 × 100%, which can be readily estimated by using the outermost interlayer distances due to the same in- plane surface area, is distinctly larger in the non-hybrid SnS2 bilayer (∼119%) than in the hybrid SnS2/G (GO) composites. This indicates that the hybrid of SnS2 with graphene or GO can effectively reduce the big volume change of SnS2 itself upon de-/sodiation process. For the both cases of hybrid SnS2/G and SnS2/GO composites, meanwhile, the volume expansion ratios upon Na middle intercalations (109%) are larger than the het- ero intercalations (105%). As presented in Table 2, the inter- layer distances such as dSn−Sn, dS−S and dC−C are clearly smaller in the Na hetero-intercalated compounds than in the middle- intercalated ones. From these results, the sodium intercalation into the hetero-interface between the SnS2 layer and graphene or GO layer is more profitable for SIB application than into the homo-interface with respect to the volume change. The in- tercalation energies were calculated to be negative, indicating an exothermic reaction of sodium intercalation from the bilayer substrate and sodium metal. The magnitude of the intercala- tion energy for the cases of hetero-interfaces was smaller than for the homo-interface, giving an expectation of good perfor- mance of Na hetero-intercalated SnS2/G (GO) as anode mate- rials, which need to possess an electrode potential as low as possible. We then investigated the diffusion of sodium atom by calcu- lating their activation barriers, which can give a suggestion of hetero ways, including the interlayer distances d, the volume expantion ratio r, the sodium intercalation energy Eint and the sodium migration energy Emig. SnS2 SnS2/G SnS2/GO mid mid het mid het dSn−Sn (Å) 6.21 5.91 4.86 6.02 4.93 dS−S (Å) 3.37 3.09 2.10 3.19 2.17 dC−S (Å) 3.26 3.87 3.19 3.65 dC−C (Å) r (%) 119 109 106 109 105 Eint (eV) Emig (eV) 0.52 0.37 0.32 0.48 0.38 5 0 5 10 15 Path (Å) 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 Energy (eV) SnS2 SnS2/G SnS2/GO 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 2 3 4 5 6 7 2 3 4 5 6 7 (b) middle interspaces of SnS2, SnS2/G and SnS2/GO composites, and (b) the cor- responding path energy profiles. the rate capability and cycling stability of electrode materials in SIB application. For the cases of middle intercalation, we con- sidered the sodium migration path from the site determined by atomic relaxation to the adjacent image site, which consists of 7 NEB image configurations. It should be noted that the interval of the neighboring image points was set to be around 1 Å, and the migration paths were determined to be almost straight line along the a direction on the x-y plane, as shown in Figure 4(a). In Figure 4(b), we show the path energy profile correspond- ing to the migration paths, from which the activation energy barriers were determined to be 0.52, 0.37 and 0.48 eV for the case of SnS2, SnS2/G and SnS2/GO, respectively. Due to the lower activation energies in the hybrid SnS2/G or GO compos- ites than in the pristine SnS2 itself, it can be said that the hybrid of SnS2 with graphene or GO layer can facilitate the diffusion of sodium. the hetero-interface between the SnS2 and graphene or GO layer. We used 5 NEB image congfigurations due to the shorter length of path. As shown in Figure 5(a), the migration paths are 2D on the x-y plane, passing the top, hollow and center sites, as described above subsection. In Figure 5(b), we show the path energy profiles in the hybrid SnS2/G and SnS2/GO com- posites, and the activation barriers as 0.32 and 0.38 eV, which are clearly lower than the corresponding sodium migrations within the middle interface. The migration barriers are also listed in Table 2. To sum up, the sodium atom can migrate more smoothly in the hetero-interspace than in the middle-interspace, and hybrid with graphene is slightly more beneficial than with graphene oxide. It is worth noting that the calculated activa- tion energies are comparable with those for sodium or lithium migration in graphite (0.40 eV) and for sodium-molecule 0 1 2 3 4 5 Path (Å) 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 Energy (eV) SnS2/G SnS2/GO 1 2 3 4 5 2 3 4 5 (b) hybrid SnS2/G and SnS2/GO composites, and (b) the corresponding path en- ergy profiles. migration (0.40 eV) . 3.3. Electronic properties To further understand such enhancement of sodium insertion by hybrid of SnS2 with graphene or GO and make it clear the role of hetero-interface, we carried out the analysis of elec- tronic properties such as density of state (DOS) and electronic charge density differneces. Such electronic properties can pro- vide us valuable insight for the interaction between the layers and charge transfer in the event of hetero-interface formation, which can be useful for understanding the enhancement of elec- trochemical properties in the 2D hybrid materials. To obtain an intuitive insight for charge transfer between SnS2 and graphene or GO layers during the interface formation, we calculated the electronic charge density difference (∆ρ) as follows, (4) where ρSnS2/G (GO), ρSnS2 and ρG (GO) are the charge densities of the hybrid composites, individual SnS2 and graphene or GO layers, respectively. In Figure 6, we show the isosurface plot of the electronic charge density differences in the hybrid SnS2/G and SnS2/GO composites at the value of ±0.0005 and ±0.0013 |e|·Å−3, respec- tively. For the case of hybrid SnS2/G composite, it is shown that the carbon atoms of graphene layer lose some electrons as rep- resented by green-colored charge depletion, while the tin atoms gain the electrons as represented by brown-colored charge accu- mulation (Figure 6(b) left panel). In Figure 6(c) for the hybrid SnS2/GO composite, we can also see the electronic charge ac- cumulation around the oxygen atoms as well as the tin atoms, 6 and integrated local density of state (right panel) in (a) SnS2 bilayer, (b) SnS2/G and (c) SnS2/GO composites. The isosurface values are ±0.0005 |e|·Å−3 in (b) SnS2/G and ±0.0013 |e|·Å−3 in (c) SnS2/GO. Brown (green) color represents the electron accumulation (loss). The Fermi level is set to be zero. while the charge depletion can be seen around the carbon atoms of GO layer as well. In these hybrid composites, therefore, it is clear that the carbon atoms play as electron donors, whereas the tin and oxygen atoms play as electron acceptors, indicat- ing the strong interaction between the SnS2 layer and graphene or GO layer and thus stable formation of the hetero-interfaces. Due to the influence of oxygen atoms of epoxy groups in the GO hybrid, the extent of charge transfer from the carbon atoms to the oxygen and tin atoms seems to be enhanced compared with the graphene hybrid, leading to the slight strengthening of interlayer interaction between the GO and SnS2 layers. When intercalating the Na atom into the bilayerd substrates, the Na and Sn atoms were found to give electrons, leading to the en- hanced interaction between the layers (see Figure S4). We present the local density of state (LDOS) integrated on x-y plane and thus along the z axis in the right panel of Fig- ure 6, where the Fermi level is set to be zero. As shown in Fig- ure 6(a), the SnS2 bilayer model was found to have a band gap of ∼1.2 eV between the valence-band maximum (VBM) and the conduction-band minimum (CBM), which is smaller than that of bulk (2.28 eV) , indicating a semiconducting feature of SnS2 bilayer. In the right panel of Figure 6(b) and (c) for the hybrid cases, however, the Fermi level can be seen to be very close to the CBM belonged to the SnS2 layer, resulting in an en- hancement of electronic conductivity upon hybrid of SnS2 with graphene or GO. Moreover, we can see the occupied valence states of graphene layer and denser LDOS of GO layer close to the Fermi level in these hybrids, indicating a good in-plane electronic conductivity due to the pz electron states as already well known before . If the sodium atom interca- lated into the hetero-interface, the SnS2 layers get fill their un- occupied states by the injected electrons from the sodium atom, and thus the Fermi level is placed on the CBM (see Figure S4). These reveal the enhancement of electrochemical properties of the hybrid SnS2/G (GO) composites compared to the pristine SnS2 bilayer by formation of hetero-interface through the elec- tron trasnfer from the graphene or GO layer to the SnS2 layer. 4. Conclusions In this work we provide a valuable understanding of mate- rial properties of 2D hybrid composites composed of SnS2 and graphene or GO layers that can be used as effective anode ma- terials of sodium-ion battery. Various supercell models of the pristine SnS2 bilayer and the hybrid SnS2/G or GO compos- ites have been suggested, and their atomic structures and ener- getics were investigated by using first-principles calculations. Through the analysis of the calculated interlayer distances and binding and formation energies, it was revealed that the hetero- interface between the SnS2 layer and graphene or GO layer can be formed, while oxidation of graphene can enhance the inter- action between the layers. Furthermore, we have devised two different models for sodium intercalation such as middle inter- calation into the interspace between the SnS2 layers and hetero intercalation into the interspace between the SnS2 and graphene or GO layers, and it was found that the hetero-intercalation is more probable due to higher intercalation energy, lower migra- tion energy and smaller volume change. To gain a deep un- derstanding of material properties of these 2D composites, the electronich charge density differences and integrated local den- sity of state were investigated, demonstrating the electron trans- fer from the graphene layer to the SnS2 layer and the improve- ment of electronic conduction by formation of hybrid compos- ites. In conclusion, the 2D hybrid SnS2/G or GO composite including the hetero-interface can be a promising candidate for anode material of sodium-ion battery. 7 Associated Content Supporting Information The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: xxx/xxx. Author information Corresponding Author *E-mail: cj.yu@ryongnamsan.edu.kp (Chol-Jun Yu) ORCID Chol-Jun Yu: 0000-0001-9523-4325 Notes The authors declare no competing financial interest. Acknowledgments This work is supported as part of the fundamental research project “Design of Innovative Functional Materials for Energy and Environmental Application” (No. 2016-20) funded by the State Committee of Science and Technology, DPR Korea. Computation has done on the HP Blade System C7000 (HP BL460c) that is owned by Faculty of Materials Science, Kim Il Sung University.