The relaxation time of OH bond for hydrogen impurity in LiNbO3 Pradipta Giri1, Arindom Biswas2 and Mrinal Kanti Mandal1* 1Department of Physics, National Institute of Technology, Durgapur 713209, India 2Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, Asansol Engineering College, Asansol 713305, India *E-mail: mrinalkanti.mandal@phy.nitdgp.ac.in Abstract: The one dimensional model for the dynamic of hydrogen in lithium niobate is explained by adopting Morse potential. The diffused hydrogen substitutes Lithium and it makes bonding with one oxygen atom of a facet of oxygen-triangle. The bonds will be stretched to set up anharmonic vibration. The damped anharmonic oscillation is derived to explain the dynamics of hydrogen as an impurity. The thermal fluctuation is studied by Fokker Planck equation has an important role to determine the diffusion constant for substitutional hydrogen. The hydrogen diffusion constant and relaxation time are calculated to support the proposed theory and existing experimental results. The concentration of substitutional hydrogens is studied with the help of Boltzmann distribution. 1. Introduction The ferroelectrics such as lithium niobate (LiNbO3) and lithium tantalite (LiTaO3) are promising materials in the field of applied physics. These have important applications in nonlinear optics, such as electro-optics, second harmonic generation and nonvolatile memory devices . Hydrogen is a very common impurity in oxides, generally associated with host O2− ions forming the OH− molecules. The formation of OH− group was explained by decay of LiNb3O8 during annealing in humid atmosphere at temperature between 400°C − 700°C. The (Li1−xHx)NbO3 molecules are produced due to the diffusion of hydrogen in LiNbO3 is used in fabrication of the optical wave guides for the use in integrated optics . One of the most promising techniques for the fabrication of such wave guides is annealed proton exchange. The hydrogen incorporation increases the resistance to the optical damage and the extraordinary refractive index of LiNbO3 crystal. The extraordinary refractive index of the birefringe of LiNbO3 will be increased that can be studied in illumination with a high intensity laser beam. The hydrogen as an impurity in LiNbO3 is used for fixing the photorefractive effect employed for hologram storage . The presence of diffused hydrogen in LiNbO3 can be monitored using infrared (IR) absorption of OH−ions which peaks at 3482 cm-1. The vibrational modes of OH−ions can be interpreted in the framework of an anharmonic oscillator model. The sufficiently broad IR band is observed in LiNbO3 in presence of hydrogen as an impurity . The broadness of IR spectra and its peak position in LiNbO3 remarkably depend on the[Li] [Nb] ⁄ ratio . With the decrease of Lithium vacancies the position of peak is shifted and band is narrowed due to disappearance of intrinsic defect. This defect is explained that Li atoms have been replaced with hydrogen atoms. The high hydrogen concentration introduced into the host lattice may induce large crystal distortions. Ferroelectric materials such as LiNbO3 and LiTaO3 show a nonlinear hysteresis in which coercive field (Ec) decreases with the smooth increase of Li concentration (mole %) . Again both Ec and internal field (Eint) decrease with the increase of temperature. The optical observation in LiNbO3 is pronounced that sideways domain wall movement is attributed to pinning of domain walls defects . One dimensional array of a ferroelectric slab of the domain with uniform polarization function of space and time is explained by Klein Gordon (K- G) equation which is used to explain the motion of domain walls. The nonlinear Schroedinger equation (NLSE) results in perturbation analysis of K-G equation. The bright soliton, resides in the vicinity of the defect and also at the domain walls, is the solution of the NLSE . The K-G equation is used to determine the refractive index which is enhanced at the presence of dark soliton . The vapor transport equilibration (VTE) technique demands that OH bonds have responded to ferroelectric switching in near stoichiometric Lithium niobate . Diffusion of hydrogen as an impurity in LiNbO3 is two types. Some diffused hydrogen atoms are employed to substitute Lithium and able to form bonding with oxygen atom of facet of oxygen triangle. These diffused hydrogen atoms are called substitutional hydrogen. Another type is interstitial hydrogen atoms which are small size and commonly observed in metal, semiconductor. Interstitial diffusion coefficient is larger than substitutional diffusion coefficient. Probability of substitutional hydrogen among the diffused hydrogen atoms in LiNbO3 changes with temperature. The Morse potential is appropriate to describe the fundamental energies of transition and higher vibrational transition of OH molecules. So Morse potential is used to study the damped anharmonic oscillation of OH bond in LiNbO3. The diffusion coefficient of substitutional hydrogen is determined from non-dimensional Fokker Planck equation. The damping constant as well as relaxation time is yielded from diffusion coefficient. Solution of Fokker Planck equation is Boltzmann distribution that predicts roughly percentage of substitutional hydrogen in LiNbO3 at different temperature. A part of the diffused hydrogen atoms are responsible to substitute the lithium and this substitutional hydrogen atoms are able to form OH bonds. The formation of OH bonds are considered first in ground state then absorb energy and get excited to higher energy level. So absorption spectra are speculated in LiNbO3. The stretching mode frequency of vibration of OH ions in LiNbO3 are in the range between 3200 cm-1and 3700cm-1. 2. The theory In oxide crystal, hydrogen ion occupies oxygen side. The substitutional hydrogen impurities in LiNbO3 are located between two oxygen atoms of a facet of one oxygen triangle. The hydrogen forms OH bond with the oxygen and it is not co-linear with the O-O bond. Actually, OH bond line slightly deviates from O-O bond line in oxygen plane perpendicular to c-axis and it makes angle θ (= 10.2°)22 with the O-O bond in ferroelectric phase. The H+ is bound to one of the O2- neighbors of a lithium vacancy (VLi). The impurity hydrogen shows localized vibration which is in the frame work of an anharmonic oscillator model. In anharmonic oscillator model the potential energy will be Morse potential: φ(r) = D(1 − ea(r−ro))2, (1) where D is the potential depth, ro is the O-H bond length with lowest potential energy and a be the stretching constant inverse of the length. The substitutional hydrogen is in the vicinity of i- th lithium vacancy at the position Q is shown in Fig. 1. The distance AQ is r and ro be the equilibrium distance denoted by AP. The i-th substitutional hydrogen is displaced along AQ line to set up anharmonic oscillation in oxygen plane. At any instant hydrogen displacement is ηi = (r − ro). The displacement of hydrogen is explained by stretching of OH bond in this context. To express the dynamics of i-th substitutional hydrogen in this potential, the Hamiltonian of the system is given by H = pi 2 2μ + φ(r), (2) where pi = μηi̇ and μ = mHmo/(mH + mo) is the reduced mass of substitutional hydrogen. The symbols mo and mH are atomic mass of oxygen and hydrogen respectively. By considering the anharmonic vibrational energy eigen value En, one can write the following Hamiltonian equation Hψ = Enψ (3) Along OH bond in ferroelectrics LiNbO3, the anharmonicity associated with Morse potential typically yields damped features. The equation of motion of i-th substitutional hydrogen with damping is given by μη̈i + μγOHη̇i + 2Da(e−aηi − e−2aηi) = 0. (4) Here γOH is the damping constant. To investigate substitutional diffusion coefficient of hydrogen, we have introduced white noise in the proposed model by including Langevin force in equation (4). Under this condition, the equation (4) may be rewritten as μη̈i + μγOHη̇i + 2Da(e−aηi − e−2aηi) = μΓ(t). (5) The Langevin force μΓ(t) is assumed to be a Gaussian random process with δ correlation. The equation (5) is rewritten as η̈i + γOHη̇i + 2Da μ (e−aηi − e−2aηi) = Γ(t). (6) To obtain the Fokker Planck equation, the above equation (6) is written as a system of two first order equations mentioned below η̇i = vi, (7a) ν̇i = −γOHη̇i + 2Da μ (e−aηi − e−2aηi) + Γ(t). (7b) The substitutional hydrogen moves with velocity vi along OH bond. The quantity Γ(t) is the rapidly fluctuating random term. The average value of Langevin force is zero (< Γ(t) >= 0) and considering white noise it can be represented as 2γOHKBT μ δ(t − t′). (7c) The Fokker Planck equation corresponding to equation (6) is given below ∂w ∂t = [− ∂vi ∂ηi + ∂ ∂vi (γOHvi + 2Da μ (e−aηi − e−2aηi)) + γOHKBT μ ∂2 ∂v i 2] w. (8) Here w(ηi, vi, t) is the distribution function in position and velocity space, KB is the Boltzmann constant. The different participating variables of equation (8) along with the spatial term are taken in the non-dimensional form as aηi = ηi̅, (9a) γOH ωo = γ̅OH, (9b) ωot = t̅, (9c) vi vo = vi̅, (9d) where ωo = √2Da2/μ is the characteristic frequency of the vibrational OH bond about ro in LiNbO3. The impurity hydrogen overcome the Morse potential depth with velocity vo = ωo/a. By using equations (9) the equation (8) is reduced to the non-dimensional Fokker Planck equation as given by ∂w ∂t̅ = [− ∂ν̅i ∂η̅i + ∂ ∂ν̅i ( γ̅OHν̅i + (e−ηi ̅̅̅ − e−2ηi ̅̅̅ )) + γ̅OH KBT μvo2 ∂2 ∂ν̅i 2]w. (10) From equation (10), the diffusion coefficient of substitutional hydrogen in LiNbO3 ferroelectrics is written as DH = γ̅OH KBT μvo2 = γOH KBTa2 μωo3 . (11) The equilibrium distribution indicates ∂w ∂t̅ = 0. Under this condition the equation (10) becomes time independent and it can be written as [− ∂ν̅i ∂η̅i + ∂ ∂ν̅i ( γ̅OHν̅i + (e−ηi ̅̅̅ − e−2ηi ̅̅̅ )) + γ̅OH KBT μvo2 ∂2 ∂ν̅i 2] w = 0. (12) The solution of equation (12) is given below w = Ae − 1 2χ(vi̅ 2+(1−e−ηi ̅̅̅ ) 2), (13) where χ = KBTa2/μωo 2. To determine the value A the normalization condition is written as A ∫ e − 1 2χ(vi̅ 2) ∞ −∞ dvi̅ ∫ e − 1 2χ(1−e−ηi ̅̅̅ ) 2 ∞ −∞ dηi̅ = 1. (14) After evaluating the integral ∫ e − 1 2χ(vi̅ 2)dvi̅ ∞ −∞ we get √ 2πKBTa2 μωo2 and the remaining integral may be written as ∫ e − 1 2χ(1−e−ηi ̅̅̅ ) 2 ∞ −∞ dηi̅ = ∫ e − 1 2χ(1−1+ηi ̅̅̅)2 ∞ −∞ dηi̅ = √ 2πKBTa2 μωo2 . Applying these results in equation (14) we get A = μωo2 2πKBTa2 . So equation (13) becomes w = μωo2 2πKBTa2 e − 1 2χ(vi̅ 2+(1−e−ηi ̅̅̅ ) 2). (15) With the use of equations (2), (8), (13) the equation (15) can be written as w = μωo2 2πKBTa2 e − En KBT . (16) This is the Boltzmann distribution equation. Where the vibrational energy levels are written as En = ħωo (n + 1 2) − ħ2ωo2 4D (n + 1 2) 2 . (17) The substitutional hydrogen makes OH bond that is initially considered to be in ground state having energy Eo for n = 0. The percentage of substitutional hydrogen atoms are that of OH bonds which are calculated by multiplying 100 with the probability w given in equation (16). The Percentage of formation of OH bond in ferroelectrics are strongly depended on temperature. The characteristic frequency for all the OH bonds in ferroelectrics are not identical. To illustrate the Fokker Planck equation (10) we introduced number of OH bonds at different temperature for finite time is expressed as ρ = e −( vi ̅̅̅2 2 +V(ηi ̅̅̅) χ )e−γ̅OHt̅, (18) where V(ηi̅) = 1 2 (1 − e−ηi ̅̅̅ )2. The distribution function w(ηi̅, vi̅, t̅) can be expressed as w(ηi̅, vi̅, t̅) = U(ρ, t̅)eγ̅OHt̅, (19) ∂W ∂t̅ = ∂W ∂t̅ + ∂W ∂ρ ρ̇ . (20) expressed through coordinate transformation in terms of ρ and t̅ as ∂U ∂t̅ = γOH ̅̅̅̅̅ vi̅ 2 χ ∂2U ∂ρ2 e −2( vi ̅̅̅2 2 +V(ηi ̅̅̅) χ )e−2γ̅OHt̅. (21) Now we introduce the new parameter θ by the following expression θ = vi̅ 2 2χ e −2( vi ̅̅̅2 2 +V(ηi ̅̅̅) χ ) (1 − e−2γ̅OHt̅). (22) With this new parameter θ the non-dimensional Fokker Planck equation (21) is reduced to Fick’s equation as ∂U ∂θ = ∂2U ∂ρ2 . (23) The solution of this equation is given by U(ρ, t̅) = 1 √4πθ e−ρ2 4θ ⁄ . (24) Using ρ and θ from equations (18) and (22) the solution can be represented as U = 1 √4π(1−e−2γ̅OHt̅) vi ̅̅̅ √2χ exp (− vi ̅̅̅2 2 +V(ηi ̅̅̅) χ ) exp (− e−2γ̅OHt̅ 2vi ̅̅̅2 χ (1−e−2γ̅OHt̅) ). (25) Next, dropping the non-dimensional parameters the equation (25) is written as equation (26) to represent the particle density as a function of time and velocity. U = 1 √4π(1−e−2γOHt)√ μv2 2 KBT exp (− En KBT) exp (− e−2γOHt 2μv2 KBT(1−e−2γOHt)). (26) The substitutional hydrogen atoms are participated in the process of the formation of OH bonds. The formation of OH bonds are distributed in such way that strongly depends on velocity of substitutional hydrogen and time as indicated in equation (26). 3. Results and discussion The diffused hydrogen in LiNbO3 produced two types of impurity defects: substitutional and interstitial. The substitutional hydrogen which substitutes lithium and forms OH bond with the oxygen of a facet of oxygen-triangle neighbors of a lithium vacancy in oxygen plane perpendicular to c-axis. On the other hand, the interstitial hydrogen which is commonly found in metal and semiconductor. The diffusion coefficient of interstitial hydrogen is greater than substitutional hydrogen since the size of the interstitial hydrogen is smaller than substitutional hydrogen . The diffusion coefficient of interstitial hydrogen is greater than that of substitutional hydrogen. The OH bond line makes an angle 10.2o with the O-O bond line. The equilibrium OH bond length is ro = 0.988Å . The stretching mode of OH bond is speculated the anharmonic oscillation. To explain this phenomenon the Morse potential is adopted in the proposed model. The Morse potential according to equation (1) is shown in Fig. 2 with the potential depth, D = 4.43 eV (7.088 × 10−12ergs) and stretching constant, a = 2.283 × 108cm-1. The reduced mass of hydrogen is μ = 1.573 × 10−24gm. The classical vibrational frequency of OH bond due to substitutional hydrogen in oxygen plane is ωo = 6.88 × 1014 Hz. The average value of Langevin force is zero as it is random in nature. Introducing white noise in Fokker Planck equation is employed to explain the thermal fluctuation. The expression of diffusion coefficient is derived from the non-dimensional Fokker Planck equation for LiNbO3. The experimentally reported value of diffusion coefficient is 2.1 × 10−12cm2/s at 3600C and 4.6 × 10−12cm2/s at 4000C. Applying the above data, the relaxation time is calculated from equation (11) as τ = 2.07 μs which is the reciprocal of damping constant. The concentration profile of hydrogen due to substitution of lithium before annealing is about 90% or more. Upon annealing for 1hour this level drops to nearly 50% . The surface concentration and diffusion coefficient of interstitial hydrogen and substitutional hydrogen in proton exchange LiNbO3 layer annealed at 4000C are nicely reported by Casey et al. and by applying their data one can calculate the percentage of substitutional hydrogen which lies in the range 73.68% to 69.69% corresponding to the annealed time 6 min to 180 min. Another experimental study shows that the structural disorders are introduced in LiNbO3 due to proton exchange where roughly 75% of lithium cations leave the layer and are exchanged by proton . The distribution of particles has been derived from non-dimensional Fokker Planck equation under equilibrium condition in equation (16). The OH bonds initially are considered in ground state having energy Eo = 0.224 eV. According to the proposed model equation (16) shows that the percentage of substitutional hydrogen is 52.35% at 4000C and 74 % at 5000C. The variation of substitutional hydrogen is shown in Fig. 3 with temperature. This analytical results agree with the experimental results reported in refs. and . The number of substitutional hydrogens (OH bonds) depended on the velocity and time as shown in Fig. 4 according to the equation (26). The damping constant of OH bond is investigate theoretically to calculate the relaxation time. The damping constant has an important role in ferroelectrics to determine the refractive index due to impurity and other properties of ferroelectrics. 4. Conclusions In the present article we have studied analytically the diffusion coefficient, relaxation time and percentage of substitutional hydrogen in LiNbO3 from damped anharmonic oscillation model by using Morse potential. The variation of substitutional hydrogen in LiNbO3 with temperature is agreed with the reported experimental values. The variation of substitutional hydrogen with velocity and time is derived from Fokker Planck equation and it has been presented graphically.