1 All-Silicon Topological Semimetals with Closed Nodal Line Zhifeng Liu,1,2 Hongli Xin,1 Li Fu,1 Yingqiao Liu,3 Tielei Song,1 Xin Cui,1 Guojun Zhao,1 Jijun Zhao2,3* 1School of Physical Science and Technology, Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot 010021, China 2Beijing Computational Science Research Center, Beijing 100094, China 3Key Laboratory of Materials Modification by Laser, Ion and Electron Beams (Dalian University of Technology), Ministry of Education, Dalian 116024, China Owing to the natural compatibility with current semiconductor industry, silicon allotropes with diverse structural and electronic properties provide promising platforms for the next-generation Si-based devices. After screening 230 all-silicon crystals in the zeolite frameworks by first-principles calculations, we disclose two structurally stable Si allotropes (AHT-Si24 and VFI-Si36) containing open channels as topological node-line semimetals with Dirac nodal points forming a nodal loop in the kz=0 plane of Brillouin zone. Interestingly, their nodal loops protected by inversion and time-reversal symmetries are robust against SU(2) symmetry breaking due to very weak spin-orbit coupling of Si. When the nodal lines are projected onto the (001) surface, flat surface bands can be observed because of the nontrivial topology of the bulk band structures. Our discoveries extend the topological physics to the three-dimensional Si materials, highlighting the possibility to realize low-cost, nontoxic and semiconductor-compatible Si-based electronics with topological quantum states. * Corresponding author. Email: zhaojj@dlut.edu.cn 2 Silicon is the backbone of modern microelectronics due to its natural abundance, nontoxicity, propensity for doping, high-temperature stability, and native oxide passivation layer . At ambient conditions, the ground state of Si crystal adopts the cubic diamond structure (d-Si) with sp3 hybridization, which is an indirect-bandgap (1.17 eV) semiconductor. Moreover, the tetrahedral bonding character of Si atoms leads to an exceptionally complex energy landscape, giving rise to numerous metastable allotropes with small energy differences from the d-Si phase. By compressing or decompressing the known phases, many compact Si allotropes have been discovered in laboratory. In addition, more and more low-density phases of Si have also been proposed and even synthesized . These allotropes with different arrangements of Si atoms possess diverse electronic band structures, offering an effective way toward the desired physical properties for Si-based electronics. For instance, a number of direct- or quasidirect-bandgap semiconducting allotropes of Si have been predicted by means of ab initio calculations, which could be utilized in the thin-film photovoltaic devices due to their modest bandgap and advanced optoelectronic properties beyond those of d-Si. Motivated by those theoretical studies, a recent experiment using a high-pressure precursor method reported the first synthesis of Si allotrope with quasidirect bandgap (1.3 eV), namely Cmcm-Si24 . On the other hand, Sung et al. proposed the first metallic phase (P/6m-Si6) of Si in open framework, featuring as a superconductor with the critical temperature of ~12 K . Notably, among the known metastable allotropes, BC8-Si was once predicted to be a semimetal , whereas recent experiment confirmed it 3 is a narrow direct gap semiconductor . Then a question arises naturally: is it possible to obtain a semimetal in the crystal structures of pure Si, especially a topological semimetal (TSM)? Ignited by the successful theoretical design and experimental observation of Weyl semimetals (WSMs), the study of TSMs has attracted significant attention recently . As new topological states of matter, TSMs are characterized by the non-accidental crossing between the conduction and valence bands near the Fermi level, and the linear energy dispersion as a function of momentum. The forming crossing-points (termed as nodes or nodal points) are either discrete or continuous. In the discrete case, according to the degeneracy of nodes, TSMs can be classified into three catalogs: (i) two-fold degenerate WSMs , (ii) triply degenerate nodal points semimetals (TDNPSMs) , and (iii) four-fold degenerate Dirac semimetals (DSMs) . For the continuous situations, the nodal points form a periodically continuous line running across the Brillouin zone (BZ) or a closed loop inside the BZ; thus the corresponding systems are called topological node-line semimetals (TNLSMs). Under specific symmetry operations, quantum phase transition may occur between these TSM states. Importantly, their nontrivial topology encoded in the bulk band structure gives rise to remarkable physical properties, such as high carrier mobility, novel surface sates (e.g., Fermi arcs and drumhead-like flat bands), and Chiral anomaly . In this regard, it is crucial to search for superb materials to realize the aforesaid TSM states for practical applications. After years of efforts, many fascinating TSM materials have been 4 proposed and even confirmed experimentally . However, most of them not only contain heavy elements that are often expensive or toxic, but also are hardly compatible with the current Si-based semiconductor industry. In this letter, we show by first-principles calculations that it is indeed possible to obtain the desired TSM in the all-silicon solids. Upon screening 230 candidate structures in zeolite framework, we identify two open-framework Si allotropes termed as AHT-Si24 and VFI-Si36, belonging to TSMs. With all sp3 bonding, these two structures show satisfactory stability, prevailing many other metastable Si allotropes. Both of them exhibit a novel TNLSM state with Dirac nodal points forming a closed loop within the kz = 0 plane of BZ, and the flat bands around the Fermi level projected on the (001) surfaces. Distinct from most of the known TNLSMs formed by heavy elements, the symmetry-protected nodal lines in these two phases are robust against the breaking of SU(2) spin rotation symmetry at temperature higher than 14 K because of the weak spin-orbit coupling (SOC) of Si element. The pioneering synthesis of Cmcm-Si24 has highlighted the possibility of unveiling new Si allotrope with zeolite structure since that Cmcm-Si24 shares the same topology with the zeolite type code CAS in the database of International Zelolite Association (IZA) . Interestingly, full examination for the lattice structures of the known Si allotropes reveals that the prominent Si clathrates i.e., Si46 and Si136, also correspond to the zeolite frameworks of MTN and MEP, respectively. Likewise, the recently predicted phase hP12-Si from particle swarm optimization algorithm search , has identical framework of the zeolite CAN. Considering these facts and 5 the four-fold-coordinated character of all zeolite frameworks, it is reasonable to search the possible TSM allotropes by screening the Si crystals constructed from the IZA database (see Fig. S1 of the Supplemental Materials for a flow of screening ). The atomic and electronic structures of these 230 all-Si candidate structures from the IZA database were computed using density functional theory as implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package . The Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof functional within the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) was employed to treat the exchange-correlation interactions. The hybrid functional HSE06 was further employed to validate the PBE band structures for the semimetallic Si phases. The core-valence interactions were described by the PAW method with a kinetic energy cutoff of 500 eV. All atoms were fully relaxed until total energy and atomic force were less than 10−6 eV and 10−3 eV/Å, respectively. Monkhorst-Pack k-point meshes with a uniform density of 2π × 0.01 Å−1 were generated to sample the BZ. To explore the nontrivial topological properties of the TSM phases, the maximally localized Wannier functions were constructed to obtain the tight-binding Hamiltonian; then the surface states were calculated by the iterative Green’s function method with the WannierTools package . Upon relaxation, all these hypothetic zeolite-like Si framework structures are well preserved. With such abundant Si crystal lattices, a rich variety of electronic properties is observed from the calculated PBE band structures, ranging from direct and indirect semiconductors, metals, to semimetals. The key data are listed in Table SI of the Supplemental Materials . For the plausible semimetallic systems, more 6 accurate HSE06 calculations were conducted to validate the PBE band structures. Finally, two zeolite-like Si structures, i.e., AHT-Si24 and VFI-Si36 with linear bands crossing near the Fermi level, are confirmed as semimetals. Hereafter, we will focus on AHT-Si24 as a representative. 17 2h D ) space group consisting of two kinds of crystallographically inequivalent atoms: Si1 (red) and Si2 (blue) at 8f (0, 0.3504, 0.9361) and 16h (0.6829, 0.1504, 0.5639) Wyckoff positions, respectively. The lattice constants of AHT-Si24: a = 12.18 Å, b = 7.52 Å, c = 6.37 Å. (b) A perspective view from crystallographic c-axis for the structure of AHT-Si24. (c) The cohesive energy as a function of volume per Si atom for AHT-S24 and VFI-Si36 in comparison with some known Si allotropes. (d) Phonon dispersion of AHT-Si24 confirming its dynamic stability. 7 Fig. 1(a) shows the crystal structure of AHT-Si24 which has two kinds of inequivalent Si atoms, marked as Si1 and Si2. All the atoms are four-fold coordinated, forming sp3-like hybridization (each Si1 atom bonds with two Si1 and two Si2 atoms, while every Si2 is connected to one Si1 and three Si2 atoms). The average bond angle is 107.58°, rather close to the perfect tetrahedral angle of 109.47° in d-Si phase. Similar to Cmcm-Si24 , AHT-Si24 is featured by periodic open channels constructed by ten-membered rings along the crystallographic c-axis [see Fig. 1(b)]. This suggests that the AHT-Si24 phase could also be synthesized by the high-pressure precursor method like Cmcm-Si24. If a precursor Na-Si system, e.g., AHT-Na4Si24 (see Fig. S3 ), is produced and retains its stability at ambient condition, the guest Na atoms could be removed from the open channels by a degassing process . The calculated cohesive energy of AHT-Si24 is 5.17 eV, which is less than that of d-Si by 0.25 eV/atom [Fig. 1(c)], due to the ring strain in the open channels. In spite of this, it is more stable than the open-framework allotropes P/6m-Si6 (5.07 eV) and Si20-T (5.14 eV) , and other synthesized compact allotropes of Si, including -Sn, Imma-Si, SH-Si, Cmca-Si and Si-VII, and Si-X (see Fig. S4 ) at zero pressure. The dynamic stability of AHT-Si24 has been confirmed by phonon dispersion calculation, as shown in Fig. 2(d). Moreover, its independent elastic constants C11, C12, C13, C22, C23, C33, C44, C55, and C66 are 134, 36, 29, 96, 24, 162, 27, 31, and 36 GPa, respectively, satisfying the mechanical stability criteria [i.e., Cii > 0 (i=1, 2, ..., 6), C11 8 C33  2C23 > 0] for an orthorhombic crystal . and (001)-surface BZ together with the high-symmetry k-points. (c) Orbital decomposed linear crossing bands around the nodal points. (d) Colorful band structure near the nodal points weighted by the contribution ratio, i.e., Si2 Si1 Si2 = W / (W + W )  , where W denotes the weight of the corresponding atom. The electronic band structure of AHT-Si24 is presented in Fig. 2(a). Along two perpendicular paths, namely ΓX and ΓY, the highest valence band (HVB) and lowest conduction band (LCB) exhibit Dirac linear dispersions in the vicinity of the Fermi energy, and cross at asymmetric Dirac nodal points D1 ( 2 1sec /4 λ θ , 2 1sec /4 λ θ , 9 0) and D2 ( λ2 /2 , λ2 /2 , 0) on the Fermi level. Here, 1 = 0.241 and 2 = 0.228 are the length ratios between Γ-D1 and Γ-X, and between Γ-D2 and Γ-Y, respectively;  = 31.69° is half of the angle between kx and ky vectors in the BZ. Note that the linear crossing also exists in the HSE06 band structure (Fig. S5 ). To further explore the origin of band crossings in AHT-Si24, we calculated the orbital and atom decomposed band structures near D1 and D2. As shown in Fig. 2(c) and 2(d), the crossing bands are mainly originated from the pxy states of Si2 atoms termed as Si2, pxy , and the s and pxy hybridized states of Si1 atoms denoted as Si1, + s pxy . Clearly, there exists exchange of energy ordering between Si2, pxy and Si1, + s pxy , resulting in a band crossing. Importantly, such band inversion is one of the key features for topological insulators as well as TNLSMs . To further reveal the pattern of the crossing nodal points in the entire BZ, we calculated the Fermi surface and 3D band structure of AHT-Si24. The results show that HVB and LCB cross with each other along a closed loop [Fig. 3(a)], which locates on the kz = 0 plane of BZ due to the mirror reflection symmetry. Hence, the AHT-Si24 is a new member of topological node-line semimetals. A closer examination shows that the nodal loop is a rounded rectangle with the long edge parallel to ΓX line and the short one parallel to ΓY line [Fig. 3(b)], which is a consequence of the orthorhombic crystalline symmetry. Naturally, one may wonder whether the low-energy Dirac Fermions along the two perpendicular directions exhibit anisotropic transport behavior? To explore this, the Fermi velocities, denoted as vF, have been evaluated by a linear fittings [ћvF ≈ dE(k)/dk] for the linear crossing bands. Along the D1→X 10 direction, i.e., the long side of the rounded rectangle, the Fermi velocities of the hole and electron carriers are 4.86×105 m/s and 5.44×105 m/s, respectively. Along the D2→Y direction, i.e., the short side of the rounded rectangle, the Fermi velocities of the hole and electron carriers are 7.76×105 m/s and 6.87×105 m/s, respectively. In other words, the carrier transport in AHT-Si24 is anisotropic. Remarkably, these velocities are comparable with that of graphene (9.42×105 m/s ) and even larger than that of silicene (5.31×105 m/s ). contour plot of the energy band gap between HVB and LCB in the kz=0 plane. The (001)-surface states along (c)   X and (d)   Y directions within the   X S 1 X  Y plane [see Fig. 2(b)]. 11 According to the classification of TNLSMs , we infer that the AHT-Si24 belongs to type-B because its closed nodal line is protected by space inversion (P), time-reversal (T), and SU(2) spin-rotation symmetries. Specifically, if we enclose the nodal line with a ring, the independent Z2 index, termed as ζ1, should be topologically invariant. Here, the explicit expression of ζ1 is the Berry phase on the ring that interlocks with the closed nodal line : ( 1) 1 = d ( ) d    ζ kA k k , where occ ( ) ( ) ( )      k A k k k n n n i u u is the Abelian Berry connection. For AHT-Si24, ζ1 is equal to 1, implying that the rounded-rectangle nodal line is topologically protected by the mentioned P, T and SU(2) symmetries. If these symmetries are partially broken, what would be the fate of the nodal line? To investigate the possible topological phase transition, we carried out first-principles calculations of AHT-Si24 with the breaking of SU(2) symmetry (or by considering SOC). As known, in the presence of SOC, the band repulsion between opposite spins is usually non-negligible, making the closed nodal line unstable . For AHT-Si24, however, like the reported TNLSM materials formed by light elements , the computed SOC splitting is remarkably small (around 0.7 meV and 0.4 meV along Γ-X and Γ-Y lines, respectively), which can be ignored completely at temperature higher than 9 K. In this sense, the topological nodal line in AHT-Si24 is rather robust against SOC under ambient temperature. Thus the needed quantum phase transitions should resort to the symmetry breakings of P, T or both of them . For a TNLSM, another key feature is the existence of flat surface bands , which provides the possibility for experimental detection by angle-resolved 12 photoemission measurement . The (001)-surface states of AHT-Si24 along   X and   Y directions are presented in Figs. 3(c) and 3(d), respectively. Around the Fermi level, two types of nearly flat bands can be observed, which nestle either inside or outside of the nodal line — rounded rectangle. In the   X direction, the outside flat band lies above the Fermi level; in contrast, the outside flat band locates below the Fermi level in the   Y direction. This means that the surface carrier transport based on these flat bands of AHT-Si24 are anisotropic, similar to that of the Dirac fermions in the bulk states. For practical application, such flat surface bands could induce interesting physical effects, e.g., two-dimensional anisotropic surface superconductivity with high critical temperature . We have also performed systematical calculations on VFI-Si36 phase, and the detailed results are shown in Figs. S6-S8 in the Supplemental Materials . Essentially, we can draw the same conclusions as those for AHT-Si24. As for VFI-Si36, the HVB and LCB linearly cross at the asymmetric points D1 along Γ-M and D2 along Γ-K, which are caused by the band inversion between Si1+Si2, pxy and Si2, + s pxy states. Due to the P63/mcm ( 3 6h D )symmetry, its nodal line winds into a closed rounded-hexagon in the kz=0 plane. The computed SOC splitting is about 1.2 meV and 0.6 meV along Γ-K and Γ-M paths, respectively, which can be ignored at temperature higher than 14 K. Moreover, the projected flat surface bands can be found around the Fermi level as well. To summarize, using first-principles calculations we have verified two Si allotropes with zeolite framework as topological semimetals, namely, AHT-Si24 and 13 VFI-Si36. Their structural stabilities were confirmed from cohesive energy, phonon dispersion and elastic constants. These two allotropes hold open channels along certain crystallographic axis, similar to the structural characteristics of the recently synthesized Cmcm-Si24; thus they can be possibly fabricated by the high-pressure precursor method. The calculated electronic band structures uncover that both AHT-Si24 and VFI-Si36 exhibit a novel TNLSM state, in which the Dirac nodal points with linear dispersion form a closed ring within the kz=0 plane of BZ. More importantly, the P and T symmetry-protected nodal lines are rather robust in the presence of SOC under room temperature. Furthermore the flat surface bands have been observed on their (001) surface, giving rise to exotic transport behavior (e.g., high-temperature anisotropic surface superconductivity) and other strong correlation physical properties . Our prediction of TNLSM Si phases may pave a way to realize the all-silicon topological devices with low-cost, nontoxic and semiconductor- compatible features. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We acknowledge useful discussions with Prof. S.-W. Gao. This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (11604165, 11574040) and Natural Science Foundation of Inner Mongolia (2016BS0104). The Supercomputing Center of Dalian University of Technology is acknowledged for providing computing resources. 14