Three dimensional collective charge excitations in electron-doped cuprate superconductors M. Hepting1, L. Chaix1, E. W. Huang1,2, R. Fumagalli3, Y. Y. Peng3,†, B. Moritz1, K. Kummer4, N. B. Brookes4, W. C. Lee5, M. Hashimoto6, T. Sarkar7, J. F. He1,‡, C. R. Rotundu1, Y. S. Lee1, R. L. Greene7, L. Braicovich3,4, G. Ghiringhelli3,8, Z. X. Shen1*, T. P. Devereaux1*, and W. S. Lee1* 1Stanford Institute for Materials and Energy Sciences, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory and Stanford University, 2575 Sand Hill Road, Menlo Park, California 94025, USA 2Department of Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA 3Dipartimento di Fisica, Politecnico di Milano, Piazza Leonardo da Vinci 32, I-20133 Milano, Italy 4European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF), BP 220, F-38043 Grenoble Cedex, France 5Department of Physics, Binghamton University, Binghamton, New York 13902, USA 6Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA 7Center for Nanophysics and Advanced Materials, Department of Physics, University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland 20742, USA 8CNR-SPIN, Politecnico di Milano, Piazza Leonardo da Vinci 32, I-20133 Milano, Italy Correspondence to: leews@stanford.edu, zxshen@stanford.edu, tpd@stanford.edu Present addresses: †Department of Physics and Seitz Materials Research Lab, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL 61801, USA ‡Department of Physics, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230026, China High temperature cuprate superconductors consist of stacked CuO2 planes, with primarily two dimensional electronic band structures and magnetic excitations , while superconducting coherence is three dimensional. This dichotomy highlights the importance of out-of-plane charge dynamics, believed to be incoherent in the normal state , yet lacking a comprehensive characterization in energy-momentum space. Here, we use resonant inelastic x-ray scattering (RIXS) with polarization analysis to uncover the pure charge character of a recently discovered collective mode in electron-doped cuprates . This mode disperses along both the in- and, importantly, out-of-plane directions, revealing its three dimensional nature. The periodicity of the out-of-plane dispersion corresponds to the CuO2 plane distance rather than the crystallographic c-axis lattice constant, suggesting that the interplane Coulomb interaction drives the coherent out-of-plane charge dynamics. The observed properties are hallmarks of the long-sought acoustic plasmon, predicted for layered systems and argued to play a substantial role in mediating high temperature superconductivity . The charge dynamics of systems with periodically stacked quasi-two dimensional (2D) conducting planes are drastically affected in the presence of poorly screened interplane Coulomb interactions. In a simple layered electron gas model with conducting planes separated by dielectric spacers , the dispersion of plasmons, the collective electronic modes of the charge dynamics, evolves from optical-like to acoustic-like as a function of out-of-plane momentum qz [Fig. 1(a)], a behavior distinct from that in either pure 2D or isotropic 3D systems. For superconducting cuprates, similar charge dynamics have been postulated since they consist of conducting CuO2 planes stacked along the c-axis with poor out-of-plane screening . While plasmons were observed in various spectroscopic studies at the Brillouin zone center and by transmission electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) typically exploring in-plane energy-momentum dispersions at qz = 0 , there is no information on the qz dependence. Experimental evidence of this previously undetected component and its characterization in energy-momentum space can shed new light on long-standing proposals that connect out-of-plane charge dynamics to superconductivity. For instance, it has been proposed that 20% of the observed value of the cuprates’ high Tc can be attributed to the presence of acoustic plasmons and that the energy stored in interplane Coulomb interactions is related to the energy savings associated with the superconducting transition . In this letter, we focus our attention on the enigmatic “zone center” excitation previously discovered by RIXS in the electron-doped cuprate Nd2-xCexCuO4 (NCCO) (x = 0.15) and Sr1-xLaxCuO4 . In a different family of electron-doped cuprates La2-xCexCuO4 (LCCO) (x = 0.175), we resolve spectral features closely similar to NCCO at representative in-plane momentum transfer positions q// [Figs. 1(b), (c)], suggesting the universality of this collective mode in electron-doped cuprates. Speculation about its origin included intra-band transitions , collective modes of a quantum phase , and plasmons . Although the mode has been suspected to be of charge character, the sensitivity of RIXS to both charge and magnetic excitations obscured a definitive assignment in previous experiments. We first identify the character of this excitation by determining the associated magnetic and charge contributions to the RIXS spectra. This can be uniquely achieved by resolving the polarization of both the incident and scattered photons . Namely, magnetic excitations flip spins and necessarily change the angular momentum of the photons in the scattering process, i.e. contribute to the crossed-polarization channel (σπ or πσ). Conversely, charge excitations preserve the angular momentum of the photon and contribute to the parallel polarization channel (σσ or ππ). Figs. 1(d) and (e) show polarization-resolved RIXS spectra at for two different in-plane momenta. At q// = (0.045, 0) the features of the zone center excitation are fully suppressed in the crossed polarization (σπ) channel and the spectrum solely contains the parallel polarization (σσ) contribution. For larger momentum transfer q//= (0.095, 0) the mode disperses toward higher energy (~ 0.8 eV) [Fig. 1(e)] and the well-known paramagnon excitation emerges on a lower energy scale (~ 0.3 eV). As expected, the paramagnon yields spectral weight in both channels due to the mixture of single spin flip excitation, and double spin-flip and incoherent particle-hole charge excitations, with the latter becoming significant with increasing doping concentration . Importantly, the zone center excitation, which is separated in energy from the paramagnon, still appears only in the parallel polarization channel. Thus, we conclude that the zone center excitation is a pure charge mode. A second key insight can be obtained from a comprehensive mapping of the energy- momentum dispersion in all three dimensions of reciprocal space, in contrast to prior RIXS experiments that explored the projected in-plane momentum without focusing on the qz dependence . Figs. 2(a) and (b) show the RIXS intensity maps as a function of momentum respectively) at l = 1 and l = 1.65. We denote h, k, l in reciprocal units (2p/a, 2p/b, 2p/c), where a, b = 4.01 Å and c = 12.4 Å are the lattice constants of LCCO with x = 0.175. For both l, the zone center excitation exhibits an almost linear dispersion emanating away from the zone center (0, 0, l) along both the hh- and h directions. Surprisingly, while the dispersion of the paramagnon remains unchanged for different l values (as expected for the quasi-2D magnetic structure of cuprates), the dispersion of the zone center excitation becomes steeper and increasingly separated from the paramagnon branch at larger l. This behavior is highlighted in Fig. 2(c). The raw data itself also clearly shows such an l-dependence: the spectral peak shifts to higher energy and becomes broader at the higher l-value for a given in-plane momentum [Figs. 2(d), (e)]. Evidently, such finding calls for a more detailed investigation along the out-of-plane direction. Fig. 3(a) displays the energy-momentum dispersion as a function of l at fixed in-plane momentum transfer (0.025, 0) near the in-plane zone center. As anticipated, the dispersion is symmetric around the out-of-plane zone center l = 1 since it is a high symmetry point in reciprocal space. Remarkably, with further increasing l, the zone center excitation continues dispersing toward high energy, insensitive to the next high symmetry point at l = 1.5. In fact, we also observe the same peculiar behavior in our new momentum-resolved RIXS measurements on NCCO (see Supplementary Fig. 7), suggesting a universal origin to the three dimensionality of the charge mode in an otherwise layered quasi-2D material. These results can be rationalized by doubling the out-of-plane Brillouin zone size, implying that the crystallographic unit cell with lattice constant c does not set the periodicity of the zone center excitation, but rather d = c/2: the nearest neighbor CuO2 plane spacing [Fig. 3(b)]. Hence, a new index l* in units of 2p/d appropriately describes the Brillouin zone “felt” by the zone center excitation and establishes the proper periodicity of the dispersion. An obvious candidate which can induce such a Brillouin zone "reconstruction" in a quasi-2D system is the interplanar Coulomb interaction. These striking features are reminiscent of acoustic plasmon bands theoretically proposed in the aforementioned layered electron gas model [Fig. 1(a)], which provides a qualitative fit to the observed zone center excitation (See Supplementary Information and Supplementary Fig. 8 for the fits). To demonstrate the behavior of collective charge dynamics beyond this weakly correlated layered electron gas model, we perform determinant quantum Monte Carlo (DQMC) calculations for a 2D three-band Hubbard model with an electron doping of x = 0.18, and incorporate three dimensionality through interplane Coulomb interactions using a random phase approximation (RPA)-like formalism (see Methods). Therewith, we obtain the collective charge response in form of the loss function (-Im 1/ε) vs. out-of-plane momentum transfer l*. As shown in Fig. 3(c), the calculated dispersions along the l*-direction at in-plane momenta accessible in our 16 x 4 cluster exhibit the same qualitative behaviors observed in both LCCO [Fig. 3(a)] and NCCO (Supplementary Fig. 7). We note that recent calculations using different methods and models have also demonstrated l*-dependent plasmon bands . While RIXS is not simply proportional to (-Im 1/ε) due to the resonant process , it nevertheless can contain critical information on the loss function, such as the dispersion of excitations. Thus, the agreement between our data and theory lends strong support to attributing the zone center mode to a plasmon excitation, with momentum resolved RIXS providing unique access to its acoustic bands. Interestingly, the data shown in Figs. 2 and 3(a) indicate that the plasmon peak broadens when approaching the equivalent zone center along the l*-direction (see also Supplementary Figs. the plasmon linewidth of approximately 0.5 eV [Fig. 3(a)] is similar to previous transmission EELS reports and optical conductivity measurements at (0, 0, 0) . The increasing incoherence of the mode near the zone-center is consistent with incoherent charge dynamics inferred from c-axis optical conductivity . However, such linewidth evolution appears to be different from the Landau quasi-particle picture in which the plasmon peak should be sharpest at the zone center where the continuum is minimal and well separated from the plasmon. Other mechanisms, such as the presence of non-Fermi liquid behavior, polar interlayer electron-phonon coupling , and/or Umklapp scattering , may reconcile these observations. We now turn to the investigation of the acoustic plasmon bands in LCCO as function of the Ce doping concentration, or carrier density x. As shown in Figs. 4(a) and (b) the plasmon bands exhibit detectable doping dependence. In a naive picture, the plasmon energy is expected to be zero in the absence of carriers and increases proportionally to !"/$∗, where m* is the effective electron mass. Consistent with such expectation the mode energies of x = 0.11 to ~ 0.15 increases linearly with √' [Fig. 4(c)], further substantiating the attribution of the zone center excitation to a plasmon. For higher dopings, the rate of increase slows down and appears to hit a plateau for x = 0.17 and 0.18. This observation suggests a possible variation in the band dispersion or Fermi-surface approximately at x ~ 0.15. Recent Hall-effect and magnetoresistivity measurements on LCCO have indicated Fermi surface reconstruction due to antiferromagnetic correlations ending at around x ~ 0.14 , corroborating our observation. Our results reveal comprehensive information about the charge dynamics of electron- doped cuprates. The collective charge modes propagate in all three dimensions of reciprocal space with different in- and out-of-plane dynamics. They are not quasi-2D, as one may have anticipated from the single-particle spectrum, and the out-of-plane momentum dependence highlights the importance of interplane Coulomb interaction. Significant structural and electronic analogies between electron- and hole-doped materials imply a similar three dimensionality would be expected in the latter's charge dynamics. While previous RIXS studies on hole-doped compounds primarily focused on magnetic, orbital, and other high energy excitations , few investigated the region of energy-momentum space necessary to identify and characterize the acoustic plasmon . More detailed RIXS measurements on hole-doped compounds, both single and multi-layer systems with higher Tc, can provide clarity on the role of interplane Coulomb interaction and acoustic plasmons in achieving high temperature superconductivity . Moreover, our demonstration of using RIXS to gain insights into plasmonics of layered systems in three dimensional reciprocal space, can open new routes for studying heterostructures of 2D layered materials and stacked graphene multilayers. Methods The c-axis oriented LCCO thin films with Ce concentrations of x = 0.11, 0.13, 0.15, 0.17, 0.175, and 0.18 were fabricated on (100) SrTiO3 substrates by pulsed laser deposition utilizing a KrF excimer laser. The annealing process was optimized for each x. The superconducting Tc of the x = 0.11 and 0.13 films is ~ 30 K and ~ 22 K, respectively. The x = 0.175 and 0.18 films did not show a superconducting transition. The NCCO single crystal with Ce concentration x = 0.15 was grown by traveling-solvent floating-zone method in O2 and annealed in Ar at 900 °C for 10 hours. The Tc is ~ 26 K. The RIXS measurements were performed at beamline ID32 of the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF, Grenoble, France) using the high-resolution ERIXS spectrometer. The scattering angle 2Θ can be changed in a continuous way from 50° to 150°. The samples were mounted on the 6-axis in-vacuum Huber diffractometer/manipulator and cooled to ~ 20 K. The RIXS data were obtained with incident σ polarization (perpendicular to the scattering plane, high through-put configuration). The incident photon energy was tuned to the maximum of the Cu L3 absorption peak at ~ 931 eV. The energy resolution was approximately ΔE ~ 60 meV for the x = 0.11, 0.15, 0.17 and 0.18 LCCO sample and ΔE ~ 68 meV for the x = 0.13 and 0.175 LCCO and the x = 0.15 NCCO sample. The RIXS polarization resolved measurements were conducted with a wider monochromator exit slit at a resolution of ΔE ~ 85 meV in order to partly compensate the reduced efficiency of the polarimeter with respect to the normal configuration. For each transferred momentum a non-resonant silver paint or carbon tape spectrum provided the exact position of the elastic (zero energy loss) line. For the polarimetric RIXS measurements of Figs. 1 (d) and (e), σ- polarization incident on the sample was used and the graded multilayer served as analyzer of the scattered photons as explained in details in . In the theory calculations we consider the three-band Hubbard model with the following standard Determinant quantum Monte Carlo (DQMC) is used to solve the model on a fully periodic 16 x 4 cluster at a temperature of T = 0.125 eV. For each doping, 512 independently seeded Markov chains with 50000 measurements each are run. The charge susceptibilities obtained by DQMC are analytically continued to real frequency using the Maximum Entropy method (MEM) with model functions determined by the first moments of the data . The inverse dielectric function plotted in Fig. 3(c) is obtained via - .(0,2) = - - 6 789(0,2), where :(;, <) is the real frequency charge susceptibility from DQMC and MEM. The long-range and three dimensional Coulomb interactions neglected in the three-band Hubbard model are captured by =0. We use the layered electron gas form : =0 = ) > .?0 0 @ABC(0 )) DE@C(0 ))F DE@(0G)), where d is the interplane spacing and q and qz are the in-plane and out-of-plane components of the momentum transfer, respectively. HI, the sole free parameter of our calculation, is adjusted to give a roughly 1eV mode for qz = 0 and the smallest nonzero q = (0.0625, 0); its value is not varied with doping. Data availability The data that support the plots within this paper and other findings of this study are available from the corresponding authors upon reasonable request.