1 Evidence of long-range ferromagnetic order and spin frustration effects in the double perovskite La2CoMnO6 R. P. Madhogaria, R. Das, E. M. Clements, V. Kalappattil, M. H. Phan*, H. Srikanth* Department of Physics, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida 33620, USA N. T. Dang Institute of Research and Development, Duy Tan University, Da Nang 550000, Viet Nam D. P. Kozlenko Frank Laboratory of Neutron Physics, Joint Institute for Nuclear Research, Dubna 141980, Russia N. S. Bingham Department of Applied Physics, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06511, USA ABSTRACT We present a comprehensive study on the magnetic structure, dynamics, and phase evolution in the single-phase double perovskite La2CoMnO6. The mixed valence state due to oxygen deficiency is verified by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, and confirms a double ferromagnetic transition observed in DC magnetization. Neutron diffraction reveals that the magnetic structure is dominated by long-range ferromagnetic ordering, which is further corroborated by a critical exponents analysis of the paramagnetic to ferromagnetic phase transition. An analysis of the magnetization dynamics by means of linear and nonlinear ac magnetic susceptibilities marks the presence of two distinct cluster glass-like states that emerge at low temperatures. The isothermal entropy change as a function of temperature and magnetic field (H) is exploited to investigate the mechanism of stabilization of the magnetic phases across the H-T phase diagram. In the regime of the phase diagram where thermal energy is sufficiently low, regions of competing interactions due to local disorder become stabilized and display glass- like dynamics. The freezing mechanism of clusters is illustrated using a unique probe of transverse susceptibility that isolates the effects of the local anisotropy of the spin clusters. The 2 results are summarized in a new H-T phase diagram of La2CoMnO6 revealed for the first time from these data. KEYWORDS: Double perovskites; Collective magnetism; Magnetic glassy; Magnetic anisotropy *Corresponding authors: phanm@usf.edu (MHP) and sharihar@usf.edu (HS) I. INTRODUCTION Double perovskite oxides with a general formula A2BB╩╣O6 (where A is a rare earth or alkaline earth metal, and B and B╩╣ are d-block transition metals) display a wide range of interesting physical properties with composition variations, as two B-site cations allow for novel combinations of different elements . The properties of these oxides are governed by B-site cations, which provide a platform to explore new double perovskite materials and study their electrical and magnetic properties . The electrical properties of these systems vary from insulator-metal to semiconductor-half metal, and their magnetic properties range from ferromagnetic to spin glass . Extensive research has been done to improve magnetodielectric, magnetoresistance, and magnetocapacitance properties, and to adapt the materials chemistry for large scale production for technological applications . As double perovskite oxides are promising candidates for novel applications, such as high density recording media, spintronics, magnetic field sensors and infrared detectors , it is essential to advance the synthesis and characterization techniques of complex compositions and structures. One member of the double perovskite oxides, La2CoMnO6 (LCMO), has gained particular attention because of the presence of the magnetodielectric effect and multiferroic 3 properties . LCMO crystallizes in several phases, namely monoclinic (P21/n or pseudotetragonal), orthorhombic (Pbnm) and rhombohedral (R3c) , depending on the synthesis route. A paramagnetic (PM) to ferromagnetic (FM) phase transition close to room temperature with insulating behavior is seen in the monoclinic P21/n (or pseudotetragonal) phase of this material . The FM insulating properties are governed by the Goodenough-Kanamori rules, with FM coupling arising from a 180o superexchange interaction between two transition metal cations . The magnetic properties of the LCMO system are governed by cation ordering, cation valences and defects, all of which, along with the structural phase composition, depend sensitively on their synthesis conditions . In a study by Dass and Goodenough on the solid state synthesis of LCMO, it was reported that the monoclinic P21/n phase was obtained with a saturation magnetization (MS) value of 4.85 ╬╝B/f.u. when the sample was annealed at 1350 oC (12 h) in the presence of O2 and cooled at 20 oC/h. In that same study, the sample annealed at 600 oC (12 h) in air and cooled at 180 oC/h alternatively yielded a monoclinic pseudotetragonal with MS = 3.62 ╬╝B/f.u. The authors concluded that the high MS corresponded to a highly atomically ordered sample in which the atomic disorder was attributed to oxygen vacancies rather than antiphase boundaries. Villar et. al. synthesized LCMO using a nitrate decomposition method and obtained a mixed phase of 97% orthorhombic and 3% rhombohedral. They found that the cooling rate had a direct effect on the magnitude of the MS. The sample annealed at 1325 oC (20 h) and cooled at 20 oC/h in oxygen had 22.5 % higher MS than the sample annealed at 1300 oC (40 h) and cooled at 45 oC/h in air. In the former sample, the high magnetization (MS = 5.54 ╬╝B/f.u.) was related to long-range cationic and valence ordered Mn4+/Co2+ ions and strong ferromagnetic interactions. In the latter, the decreased value of MS (4.42 ╬╝B/f.u.) was attributed to the presence of Mn3+/Co3+ ions. 4 The presence of multiple and complicated crystal structures, together with alternating cation valencies and defects, leads to inconsistencies in the magnetic transition temperatures . The reported PM-FM phase transition temperatures (TC) vary across a broad range from 170 ÔëĄ T ÔëĄ 235 K . These discrepancies are likely due to the presence of oxygen vacancies and formation of antiphase boundaries between specimens. The ordering of Co2+ and Mn4+ cations, which leads to 180o superexchange interactions, supports a ferromagnetic exchange at higher temperatures, while the oxygen vacancies introduce Co3+ and Mn3+ ions resulting in atomic disorder and a lowering of TC . Multiple magnetic transitions have been reported in LCMO due to coexisting cationic orders. Guo et al. found that materials synthesized at relatively high and intermediate oxygen pressure had two values of TC at 230 K and 80 K associated with Mn4+-O2--Co2+ ferromagnetic superexchange and Mn3+-Co3+ ferromagnetic vibronic superexchange interactions, respectively. They have also reported the existence of spin glass-like behavior below both TC values due to the competing character between FM Mn4+-O-Co2+ and antiferromagnetic (AFM) Mn4+-O-Mn4+ or Co2+-O-Co2+ interactions. The spin glass state at zero applied magnetic field (H) has also been reported by Wang et al. on the basis of frequency dependent peaks at TC (220 K) in the real part of the AC susceptibility and slow spin relaxation for T < TC . Murthy et al. showed that for a monoclinic (pseudotetragonal) phase with two FM transitions at 218 K and 135 K, a frequency dependent peak at 33 K is also present due to the reentry of a frozen state of non-interacting clusters from a state of long-range FM order. However, a direct relationship between oxidation state and cation order/disorder and the definitive answer to the magnetic ground state of LCMO is still a matter of debate. As the exact nature of the magnetic phases, magnetic transitions and phase evolution with respect to field and temperature remain unknown, 5 a thorough understanding may provide a route for designing new materials for novel applications. In this study, the magnetic properties of a single phase polycrystalline sample of LCMO are characterized by means of DC magnetization, AC susceptibility, magnetic entropy change (╬öSM), neutron diffraction (ND), and X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS). Our study sheds light on the nature of the magnetic transitions governed by different magnetic interactions and how each phase evolves in this system. Neutron diffraction indicates the existence of long-range FM order for T < TC down to T = 20 K. A systematic analysis of the critical exponents using magnetization data supports the presence of a PM-FM phase transition, in agreement with ND results. AC susceptibility reveals the presence of cluster glass dynamics at low temperature that is further supported by the ╬öSM measurements, which displays signatures of a magnetic state that competes with the dominant FM phase. The magnetic anisotropy is probed by transverse susceptibility as a function of temperature to investigate the effects of coexisting magnetic states and associated freezing phenomena. The article is organized as follows. Experimental methods are described in Sec. II. Section III. presents results and discussion. In Sec. III A, the structural and cationic ordering of the synthesized sample are confirmed. In Sec. III B, features of the DC magnetization are reviewed. In Sec. III C, the magnetic structure is examined via neutron diffraction, and a critical exponents analysis is performed on the magnetization data. In Sec. III D, short-range ordering due to disorder/defects and its influence on the time dependence and anisotropy is investigated as a major competition to the predominant long-range ordering. Sec. III E presents further analysis and discussion of the phase evolution via the magnetocaloric effect, and the results of the static and dynamic studies are summarized in an H-T phase diagram. The conclusion is given in Sec. IV. 6 II. EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS Polycrystalline LCMO was prepared using a conventional sol-gel method. Reagent chemicals lanthanum nitrate hexahydrate (LaN3O96H2O), cobalt sulphate heptahydrate (CoSO47H2O) and manganese nitrate tetrahydrate (MnN2O64H2O) were taken as the precursor materials according to their stoichiometric ratios. Citric acid was added as the chelating agent to the stoichiometric mixture of precursors. The entire reaction was carried out in basic medium. The resulting mixture was continuously stirred and heated from 100 Ôłĺ 400 oC until a viscous gel was formed and decomposed. Final calcination was done at 950 oC for 8 h. The structural phase analysis was carried out using Bruker AXS powder x-ray diffractometer (XRD) with Cu-K╬▒ radiation. X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) was performed with a PHI VersaProbe II, in ultra-high vacuum (~10-8 torr). Magnetic measurements were performed using a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS) with the Vibrating Sample Magnetometer (VSM) and AC Measurement System (ACMS) options. Magnetization versus applied magnetic field (M vs. H) was measured from H = 0 Ôłĺ 50 kOe for temperatures ranging from T = 10 ÔÇô 250 K, and magnetization versus temperature was measured from T = 10 ÔÇô 260 K for H = 100 Oe. The first (¤ç1), second (¤ç2) and third (¤ç3) harmonics of AC susceptibility were measured simultaneously for T = 10 ÔÇô 250 K for frequencies f = 500 Ôłĺ 10000 Hz with an AC driving field amplitude h = 5 Oe. Magnetic entropy change was calculated from magnetization versus field data which was measured up to H = 30 kOe and with temperature steps of 5 K from T = 20 ÔÇô 200 K, 1 K from T = 200 ÔÇô 232 K and 2 K from T = 232 Ôłĺ 244 K. Transverse susceptibility measurements were performed using a tunnel diode oscillator (TDO) with a resonant frequency of 12 MHz and sensitivity on the order of 10 Hz . This measurement was done for T = 20 ÔÇô 120 K with the applied field from H = 0 ÔÇô 50 kOe. The 7 neutron powder diffraction measurements in the temperature range T = 20 ÔÇô 290 K were performed with the DN-12 diffractometer , (IBR-2 pulsed reactor, JINR, Russia). The experimental data were analysed by the Rietveld method using the Fullprof program . III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION A. Structural and cationic ordering The XRD pattern of LCMO is shown in Fig. 1(a). A single monoclinic (P21/n) phase with no impurities was obtained with crystallite size of 32.5 nm estimated using the Debye Scherrer formula. The inset of Fig. 1(b) shows the SEM image of LCMO particles that are homogenously distributed with an average particle size of 200 nm. The chemical characterization of the sample was done by Energy-Dispersive-X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS) using a JEOL JSM-6390LV SEM. The EDS spectra show 22.94 wt% of La (SD = 0.66), 10.61 wt% of The XPS was recorded at the Mn and Co L2,3 edges [Figs. 1(c) and (d), respectively] to confirm the mixed valence states in the transition metal ions. The fit was performed using the CTM4XAS program , in which a mixed state of 25% Mn3+/Co3+ and 75% Mn4+/Co2+ was calculated. The Mn and Co L2,3 spectra [Figs. 1(c) and (d)] were fitted by weighting contributions from Mn4+ and Mn3+, and Co3+ and Co2+. The following parameters were used for UddÔłĺUpd = 1 eV; (2) for Mn4+, 10Dq = 2.4 eV, ´üä = -3 eV, UddÔłĺUpd = 2 eV. Likewise, the following parameters were used at the Co edge: (1) for Co2+, 10Dq = 1eV, ´üä = 1 eV, UddÔłĺUpd = 1eV; (2) for Co3+, 10Dq = 1.2 eV, ´üä = 3 eV, UddÔłĺUpd = 1 eV. For all of the fits, the Slater 8 integrals were reduced to around 80%. In Fig. 1(d), a small peak appears at 804 eV in the experimental data as well as the fit, which is attributed to Co 3d ÔÇô O 2p charge transfer . B. Static magnetization The temperature dependence of the zero field cooled (ZFC) and field cooled (FC) magnetization was measured for T = 10 Ôłĺ 270 K at H = 100 Oe, as shown in Fig. 2(a). Divergence is clearly seen between FC and ZFC magnetization curves below 226 K. Apart from the peak at 226 K, a peak at 218 K is also clearly visible in the ZFC magnetization curve. Fig. 2(b), shows dM/dT vs. T for both ZFC and FC magnetization, which further reveals the presence of two anomalies in close proximity to each other. The minimum at 228 K (TF1) and the minimum at 220 K (TF2) correspond to two different FM interactions. The large deviation between FC and ZFC below 226 K suggests the presence of magnetic frustrations in the system . Fig. 2(c), shows M vs. T measurements at H = 60 kOe. Despite the large applied magnetic field, the separation between the FC and ZFC magnetization is clear below 80 K, which further supports the appearance of magnetic frustrations at low temperatures. The paramagnetic susceptibility in the range T = 250 Ôłĺ 270 K has been fitted to the Curie-Weiss law, ( ) 1/ / T C ´üú ´ü▒ = Ôłĺ , [Fig. 2(d)] which gives ╬Ş = 231.42 ┬▒ 2.66 K, C = 7.00 ┬▒ 0.05 emu K/mol Oe and ╬╝eff = 7.52 ╬╝B, which is somewhat higher than the theoretically expected value calculated by ╬╝eff = 2 2 2 [ ( 1) ( 1) ] B Co Mn g s s g s s ´üş + + + ~ 7.00 ╬╝B, where s = 3/2 for both Mn4+ and Co2+ ions, g = 2 for Mn4+ and g = 3 for Co2+ due to its orbital contribution . The higher value of ╬╝eff can imply the presence of FM correlations in the paramagnetic regime, which is consistent with the presence of a FM peak at T > TC present in the neutron diffraction data, as will be shown in a later section (Fig. 4). The magnetic field dependence of magnetization at selected temperatures 9 [Fig. 3(a)] shows a hysteresis loop signifying ferromagnetism at each temperature except 300 K, at which the material is in the PM state. Magnetization at H = 50 kOe and T = 5 K is calculated to be M5T = 5.68 ╬╝B/f.u. The structural ordering of B/B╩╣ can be defined as the ratio of experimental to theoretical magnetic moments (╬┤), which should be 1 for perfect cationic order . In the present case, where theoretical magnetic moment is 6.00 ╬╝B/f.u., ╬┤ = 0.95, which indicates a possible presence of small cationic disorder at B/B╩╣ sites. The coercive field (HC) at T = 5 K is HC ~ 5.4 kOe. The remanent magnetization (Mr) is 3.10 ╬╝B/f.u., which indicates a relatively low population of antiphase boundaries, as at H = 0 it is expected that any antiphase region would return to its antiparallel orientation, decreasing the value of Mr . Enhanced values of HC and Mr can also be related to a frozen cluster glass state . Saturation is not achieved even at 50 kOe, which could be due to either large crystalline anisotropy of the octahedral site Co2+ ions or canting of antisite spins . The decrease of M5T and HC with increasing temperature, which is a feature for a typical FM system, is demonstrated in Fig. 3 (b). Based on HC ~ 5.4 kOe at 5 K and the nature of M vs. H curve, it can be concluded that the system is highly anisotropic. Although the high values of ╬╝eff and M5T at 5 K relative to previous studies indicate that the sample is highly cationically ordered, the value of ╬┤ < 1 still suggests the possibility of a mixed valence state of B/B╩╣ site ions, which is mainly due to some concentration of oxygen vacancies as well as possible cation vacancies. The high degree of order of B site cations in the sample implies the presence of predominantly Mn4+ and Co2+ ions, giving rise to a FM 180o superexchange interaction, e2-O-e0. However, the presence of oxygen vacancies can induce electron transfer from Co2+ to Mn4+ resulting in intermediate spin Mn3+ and Co3+ ions leading to vibronic superexchange interactions, e1-O-e1 . Based on the XPS data, which indicates the 10 presence of mixed valence state of Co and Mn ions, and the above discussion, the first FM transition at TF1 = 228 K can be attributed to the Co2+-O- Mn4+ interactions while the second FM transition at TF2 = 220 K to that of Co3+-O- Mn3+ interactions. C. Long-range ferromagnetic ordering The large separation in FC and ZFC curves and comparatively high values of HC and Mr seen in DC measurements are indicative of absence of purely FM state in LCMO. To gain insight into the magnetic structure and the order of FM interactions, neutron diffraction experiments were performed. Fig. 4 displays the neutron diffraction patterns of La2CoMnO6, measured at selected low temperatures. The structural model previously reported for the monoclinic P21/n phase provides a satisfactory fit to the room-temperature neutron diffraction data with the fitting reliability R-factors Rp = 6.58% and Rwp = 8.35%. Moreover, the large contrast in neutron scattering length of Co (2.49 fm) and Mn (Ôłĺ3.75 fm) allows a determination of their distribution over the crystallographic sites for transition metal ions and the degree of order between the two cations. The cation ordering degree of 0.91(6) was refined, which agrees well with ╬┤ obtained from DC magnetization in Sec. III B. The presence of anion vacancy indicates the existence of influence the magnetic properties (Sec. III D). At low temperature, a magnetic contribution to nuclear peaks located at dhkl positions of 2.73 and 3.86 ├ů is evidenced, which increases continuously as temperature is lowered further. The data analysis reveals that these behaviors correspond to the formation of long-range FM order. The average ordered magnetic moment of Co/Mn ions at 20 K is 2.8(5) ╬╝B, which is close to the value extracted from isothermal magnetization curves. Notably, the ordered magnetic moment value is lower compared to that 11 determined from spin-only values for Co/Mn ions, which further suggests that the magnetic ground state of La2CoMnO6 is not purely FM. As the neutron diffraction results indicate predominant long-range ferromagnetic ordering, the critical behavior across the PM-FM phase transition is investigated to further probe the nature of the magnetic ordering. The critical behavior of a second-order phase transition can be characterized by the set of critical exponents, which are defined by universal scaling laws. For a PM-FM transition, the magnetization (M) acts as the order parameter, and the universal scaling laws take the form : ( ) ( ) 0 , S C M T M T T ´üą ´üó = Ôłĺ ´Ç╝ (1) ( ) ( ) 1 , C T h M T T ´üž ´üú ´üą Ôłĺ = ´Çż (2) 1 , C M DH T T ´üĄ = = (3) where M0, h/M, and D are the critical amplitudes of the spontaneous magnetization, inverse susceptibility and the field dependence of the magnetization, respectively, and ╬Á = (T Ôłĺ TC)/TC is the reduced temperature. Alternatively, these exponents can be calculated using the Arrott- Noakes equation of state , ( ) 1 1 A B H M M ´üž ´üó ´üą = + , (4) where rescaling of magnetization data as a function of magnetic field and temperature into a series of parallel lines can only be achieved by the correct exponents, and the isotherm corresponding to TC passes through the origin. 12 Four different values of the exponents were used to construct the Arrott plot and modified-Arrott plot (MAP) to test the universality class into which this system belongs. For the mean-field model (MF), which is also simply known as the Arrott plot, ╬▓ = 0.5 and ╬│ =1.0; for 3D Ising, ╬▓ = 0.325 and ╬│ =1.24; for 3D Heisenberg, ╬▓ = 0.365 and ╬│ = 1.336; and for tricritical mean-field, ╬▓ = 0.25 and ╬│ = 1.0 . Fig. 5(a-d) shows all four plots at high magnetic fields (´üş0H = 2 ÔÇô 3 T) and with a step size ´üäT = 0.25 K from 220 K ÔÇô 235 K. The plots show series of to determine an appropriate model for the system by calculating the normalized slope (NS). Using a value of TC = TF1 determined from dM/dT vs. T, NS is defined as NS = S(T)/ S(TC). NS vs. T is plotted for all the above models and is compared to the ideal value of NS = 1. Fig. 6(a) clearly shows that the data rescaled with respect to the mean-field model is closest to 1 while other models deviate significantly. To obtain the most accurate values of the critical exponents and TC, a combined iterative procedure using the Kouvel-Fisher (KF) method and the Arrott-Noakes equation of state was implemented yielding ╬▓ = 0.59 , ╬│ = 1.12 and TC = 224 K. The modified-Arrott plot using the values obtained from the KF method is shown in Fig. 6(b). The ╬▓ and ╬│ values are closest to MF (╬▓ = 0.5, ╬│ = 1), in agreement with the normalized slope results, and deviate significantly from the other three models. The exponents indicate that the FM ordering is governed by long-range interactions in the synthesized LCMO. However, the calculated value of TC differs by 4 K from the value determined by DC magnetization, as well as AC susceptibility (Sec. III D), and has a large error. This discrepancy may be due to the proximity of the onset of the second type of FM correlations at TF2 to TC, and as a result, the magnetic system cannot be described as undergoing an exactly canonical PM-FM transition. 13 D. Emergent magnetic frustration with short-range order As shown in Fig. 2(c), the clear separation observed between FC and ZFC curves at fields as high as ´üş0H = 6 T signifies the presence of frustration in the system at lower temperatures. In previous studies, glass-like behavior has been reported at low temperatures and associated with possible magnetic frustration. AC magnetic susceptibility is a useful tool to detect the existence of magnetic frustration and characterize associated glassy behavior by an analysis of relaxation phenomena. Furthermore, higher-order susceptibilities can be used to unravel the systemÔÇÖs behavior, as they reflect symmetry breaking related to spin configuration . AC susceptibility is the differential dM/dH response of the magnetization of the sample to a time-dependent magnetic field, e.g. HAC = h sin (2´ü░ f t) . The magnetization (M) of a system can be expressed in terms of driving field (HAC) as: 2 3 0 1 2 3 ( ) ... M H M H H H ´üú ´üú ´üú = + + + + (5) where M0 is the spontaneous magnetization, ¤ç1 is the linear susceptibility and ¤çn (n > 1) are the higher harmonics representing the nonlinear response to HAC. Fig. 7 shows the AC susceptibility measurements at frequencies f = 500 ÔÇô 10,000 Hz. As expected, the real part of first harmonic (¤ç1╩╣) (Fig. 7(a)) shows anomalies at TF1 = 228 K and TF2 = 220 K, similar to that shown in the ZFC magnetization. For consistency with DC results above, TF1 and TF2 are considered as the inflection points of the curve. Though the magnitude of the peaks changes with frequency, no longitudinal shift is observed along the temperature axis. In general, for spin glass systems, the longitudinal peak position is dependent on the frequency, as the response of AC-¤ç is related to the broad distribution of relaxation times which tend to shift towards longer time scales as the temperature is reduced. The presence of these relaxation times 14 within the time of measurement results in peaks that shift to lower temperature as frequency is decreased . Since the anomalies located at TF1 and TF2 are frequency independent, they can be related to FM interactions of Co2+-O-Mn4+ and Co3+-O-Mn3+, respectively. On closer inspection of Fig. 7(a), two additional features appear as a spread in the curves from T = 110 Ôłĺ 140 K and an anomaly at low temperatures, shown in the inset of Fig. 7(a)). In Fig. 7(b), ¤ç1╩║ more clearly shows these dynamic features in addition to the peaks at TF1 and TF2. A broad frequency-dependent hump, denoted as TCG1, shifts from T = 110 Ôłĺ 140 K for frequencies from f = 500 ÔÇô 10000 Hz. The low temperature anomaly observed in ¤ç1╩╣ appears in the magnetic loss near T = 42 K. We denote this transition as TCG2. The presence of the frequency-dependent behavior suggests a freezing over a large range of temperatures indicating the existence of a glassy state , which is a different observation from the previously reported FM transition near T = 135 K . To confirm the glass-like behavior, the Vogel-Fulcher (VF) fit has been carried out for the transition at TCG1. According to VF model, the relaxation time of an ensemble is given by the following relation, VF 1 0 0 exp E ( ) a CG kB T T ´ü┤ ´ü┤ ´âę ´â╣ = ´â¬ ´â║ Ôłĺ ´âź ´â╗ , (6) where Ea is the activation energy expressed as the product of anisotropy constant (K) and volume (V), i.e. Ea = KV, T0CG1 is the characteristic temperature, also referred to as the interparticle/intercluster interaction strength, and ¤äoVF is the relaxation time of individual particles. The inset of Fig. 7(b) shows the successful fit to the data. The fitted parameters obtained have the following values: ¤äoVF = 10-7 s, Ea/kB = 400 K and T0CG1 = 77 K. The relaxation time, ¤äoVF, is several orders of magnitude larger than the spin flip time of an atomic magnetic moment (~10-13 s) indicating the freezing of spin clusters with a freezing temperature T0CG1 15 ~ 80 K. Since T0CG1 << Ea/kB, there is a weak coupling between the clusters . The Fulcher parameter, (Tf ÔÇô T0CG1 ) / T0CG1 , where Tf is the temperature taken as the peak in ¤ç╩║, is obtained to be 0.68, which is an order of magnitude higher than that of spin glasses, ruling out the possibility of cooperative freezing. Instead, the obtained value is comparable to the case of the progressive freezing of a cluster glass . The peak shift is also characterized by the phenomenological factor which helps to compare glass-like systems, K = ╬öTf / (Tf ╬ö log f). The calculated value of K for our system is 0.142. The K value has been categorized as 0.005 Ôłĺ 0.01 for spin glass, ~ 0.03 ÔÇô 0.06 for cluster glass and >0.1 for superparamagnetic compounds . The obtained K value in the superparamagnetic range implies that the intercluster interactions are very weak in the present system. The ordering of Mn4+ and Co2+ ions in La2Co2+Mn4+O6 can be described by FM e2-O-e0 interactions (TF1), but appearance of these ions at the antisite positions establishes weaker Mn4+- O-Mn4+ or Co2+-O-Co2+ AFM interactions. Dass et al. showed that the formation of antiphase boundaries in an ordered double perovskite leads to the presence of AFM interactions. Antiphase boundaries are formed if the positions of the Co2+ and Mn4+ ions are inverted in one atomically ordered region relative to that in a neighboring region. The resulting antiphase interface between the two regions would have short range AFM Co2+-O-Co2+ or Mn4+-O- Mn4+ interactions while the ordered regions would have FM Co2+-O-Mn4+ interactions. Thus, the observed spin clusters are likely to arise due to the local magnetic frustration caused by the competition between the FM and AFM interactions. With similar arguments as above, the low temperature kink at TCG2 = 42 K seen in Fig. 7(b), can be associated with oxygen deficiency. The oxygen-deficient regions consist of Co3+ and Mn3+ ions which interact via Co3+-O-Mn3+ FM vibronic superexchange interactions. The 16 presence of antisite disorder in these regions would lead to short-range AFM Co3+-O-Co3+ or Mn3+-O- Mn3+ interactions at the antiphase interface. Thus, the observed anomaly at TCG2 could be due to the local frustrations arising from the competitive Co3+-O-Mn3+ FM and Co3+-O-Co3+ or Mn3+-O- Mn3+ AFM interactions. The absence of a frequency-dependent feature at TCG2 could be due to the longer time scales required to observe the dynamics of these clusters at low temperature. To review, the presence of antisite defects in regions with and without oxygen vacancies lead to the formation of two types of clusters in the system, respectively. Type I: co-existence of expected that the volume fraction of the anion-deficient region is low, which would result in a smaller volume of type II clusters compared to type I. For a certain field and frequency, the dynamics of larger clusters freeze at a higher temperature. Hence, the freezing of type I clusters is observed before type II clusters. To further support the FM nature of the transition at TF1, the nonlinear components of the AC susceptibility were studied. The real part of second harmonic component (¤ç2╩╣) (Fig. 7(c)) is zero in the paramagnetic phase, has a positive peak at 228 K (TF1), a negative peak at 218 K (~TF2) and thereafter slowly decreases to a small yet finite value at the lowest temperatures measured. The strength of the positive peak at TF1 weakens with an increase in the frequency. According to Pramanik et. al. , ¤ç2 can be observed experimentally only if there is presence of a symmetry breaking internal field, or spontaneous magnetization, i.e. ╬öM = M(H) ÔÇô (ÔÇôM(ÔÇôH)) Ôëá 0. Sudden changes in the internal field result in sharp features in ¤ç2 . Hence the sharp peak in ¤ç2╩╣ [Fig. 7(c)] corresponds to FM Co2+-O-Mn4+ interactions, and the sharp change in peak 17 direction near TF2 indicates a sudden change in the internal field. This reinforces that a modification of the magnetic structure occurs at TF2, where the FM interactions of Co3+ and Mn3+ ions are stabilized. At low temperatures, a small yet finite value of ¤ç2╩╣ remains indicating the presence of spontaneous magnetization, which, however, lacks any indication of sudden variations in the magnetic ordering. The real part of third harmonic (¤ç3╩╣) is shown in Fig. 7(d). The anomaly in ¤ç3╩╣ is known to indicate the presence of a magnetic phase change, and reflects the nature of the transition at TC . The negative to positive crossover of ¤ç3╩╣ at T = 228 K indicates the paramagnetic to ferromagnetic nature of the phase transition, hence this temperature is defined as TC for this system. Furthermore, the inflection point of ¤ç1╩╣, as shown in the inset of Fig. 7(d), and the inflection points of the ZFC and FC curves [Fig. 2(b)] justifies the definition of TC = 228 K (TF1). To gain a better understanding of the effects of the coexisting cluster glass state and ferromagnetic phase on the magnetic properties, the magnetic anisotropy is investigated as a function of temperature. While the static magnetization curves can give a rough estimation of the total anisotropy, transverse susceptibility measurements provide a much more accurate determination . Transverse susceptibility (TS) measurements are performed using a custom built tunnel diode oscillator (TDO) probe, which provides basic information about how the magnetic anisotropy evolves with temperature. The change in resonant frequency (╬öf) of the TDO circuit is a consequence of the change in inductance as the sample inside the circuit is magnetized. ╬öf is directly proportional to the change in TS (╬ö¤çT) such that the quantity | ( ) | (%) 100 sat T T T sat T T H x ´üú ´üú ´üú ´üú ´üú ´üä Ôłĺ = (7) 18 can be measured as a function of HDC, where ¤çTsat is the TS at the saturating or maximum field, Hsat. Peaks are expected in the TS scan at the positive and negative anisotropy fields, ┬▒HK, and at the switching fields, ┬▒HS. As the TS measured via TDO is a dynamic response in nature, it provides an ideal route to probe the effects of the time-dependent properties of the coexisting cluster glass and FM phase on HK. Fig. 8(a) shows the TS measurement at 20 K. ┬▒HK are shown by arrows. The switching field is generally merged with one of these peaks . The broad nature of the peaks could be due to the distribution of the anisotropy axes in the polycrystalline sample . Fig. 8(b) shows the dependence of HK on temperature which displays a maximum at T ~ 80 K. Above 80 K, the reduction in HK with temperature behaves as expected in a FM system, where thermal fluctuations tend to lower the energy barrier that the external field must overcome to align spins against their anisotropy axis. However, below ~80 K, HK values drop continuously with decreasing temperature. This observation is in stark contrast to the behavior observed in the magnetic hysteresis loops; Since the coercivity increases as temperature is lowered [Fig. 3 (b)], it is expected that the total magnetic anisotropy of the system would show a similar trend. The difference in the temperature dependence of HK and HC suggests that the TS measurement does not reflect the total anisotropy of the magnetic system over the entire temperature range. Moreover, the maximum in HK at T = 80 K agrees well with the freezing temperature of T0CG1 = 77 K determined for the type I clusters in the AC-¤ç measurements. HK begins to decrease as temperature drops below T0CG1. This behavior may signify the pinning of clusters to the FM matrix, which effectively reduces the contribution of the random anisotropy of the clusters reflected in the dynamic response. The continuous decrease in HK as temperature is reduced further reflects the progressive freezing of spin clusters in the type II regime. It should be noted 19 that TDO measurements are performed at relatively high frequencies such that the behavior associated with the dynamics of the FM matrix + clusters can be markedly different from the behavior observed in the zero frequency M vs. H measurements. E. Magnetocaloric effect and magnetic phase diagram With the understanding gained about the mechanisms of the phase evolution using time- dependent measurements, a detailed investigation of the static magnetic behavior across the H-T phase diagram is performed by exploiting the magnetocaloric effect. On subjecting the magnetic sample to a change of external magnetic field at a constant temperature, the isothermal entropy change, or by convention, the magnetic entropy change (╬öSM), can be calculated with the help of the following Maxwell relation, 0 ( , ) ( , ) M H T S T H M T H H T ´üş ´éÂ ´éÂ ´âŽ ´âÂ ´âŽ ´âÂ = ´âž ´âĚ ´âž ´âĚ ´éÂ ´éÂ ´âĘ ´âŞ ´âĘ ´âŞ . (8) The magnetic entropy change may be calculated numerically via 0 ' f i H M H M S T dH ´üş ´âŽ ´éÂ ´âÂ ´üä = ´âž ´âĚ ´âĘ ´éÂ ´âŞ ´â▓ (9) Conventionally, in ferromagnetic materials, the magnetic entropy of the spin system decreases (╬öSM < 0) as the magnetic field tends to orient moments along the field direction, hence suppressing thermal fluctuations. On the other hand, the application of a magnetic field may increase the entropy causing ╬öSM > 0, for example in antiferromagnets, as the external field rotates the spins in antiparallel sublattices against their preferred direction . The magnetic entropy change has been demonstrated to be an effective tool to understand the features 20 of the coexisting magnetic phases . In the following discussion, the magnetic entropy change is analyzed as a function of temperature and magnetic field across the H-T phase diagram. Based on isothermal magnetization versus magnetic field curves, the calculated magnetic entropy change as a function of temperature and magnetic field change, ´üş0´üäH, is summarized in Fig. 9. The plot of ╬öSM (T) at low changes in field, ´üş0´üäH = 0.05 ÔÇô 0.45 T, is shown in Fig. 9(a). The dominant feature in ╬öSM (T) is the minimum near TF1 = TC that signifies the transition from the PM phase into the long-range-ordered FM state. Fig. 9(b) displays a zoomed view of ╬öSM (T) at high fields and high temperature in which, along with the negative peak at TF1, a dip in magnetic entropy occurs at TF2 (red dashed line). The observation of this dip in entropy at TF2 corroborates our earlier assignment of this peak to the onset of FM Co3+-O-Mn3+ interactions. At low temperatures, however, a field-dependent crossover from negative to positive ╬öSM (T) is observed in Fig. 9(a), which signifies a field-induced disordering of the magnetic state. Fig. 9(c) displays the magnetic field dependence of ╬öSM at low temperatures, which reaches a maximum positive value before decreasing at higher ´üş0´üäH. We first analyze the magnetic entropy change across the PM-FM phase transition. Based on power law dependence of change in magnetic entropy with field, i.e. ╬öSM Hn, it has been confirmed that ╬öSM (T) can be scaled close to the second-order phase transition . Hence if proper scaling is achieved, ╬öSM (T) curves close to the transition temperature and corresponding to different fields should collapse on to the same point of the universal curve. According to the procedure described in , the universal curve is constructed as follows: ╬öSM (T) is normalized by the maximum value of ╬öSM (Tpeak), where Tpeak is the transition temperature, 21 the temperature axis is rescaled such that ╬öSM (Tr)/ ╬öSM (Tpeak) Ôëą 0.5, where Tr is a reference temperature. The rescaled temperature axis is defined as 1 2 C C r C C C r C T T T T T T T T T T T T ´ü▒ Ôłĺ ´âČÔłĺ ´éú ´â» Ôłĺ ´â» = ´âş Ôłĺ ´â»Ôłĺ ´Çż ´â» Ôłĺ ´â« , (10) where Tr1 and Tr2 are the two reference temperatures, Tr1 > Tpeak and Tr2 < Tpeak and are chosen Fig. 9(d) shows the universal curve constructed for field range of 0.14 Ôłĺ 0.75 T, which provides evidence for the second-order PM-FM phase transition and corroborates the critical analysis performed in Sec. III B. However, below Tpeak a spread in the data starts from ~ 211 K with a dispersion of ~16%. Failure of collapse for ´ü▒ < -1 has been ascribed to improper scaling of magnetic entropy and may be attributed to the increasing fluctuations of an additional magnetic phase near the ordering temperature, Tpeak . This failure can be eliminated by the use of two reference temperatures, and collapse can be achieved for a second-order transition. An absence of universal behavior even with the use of two reference temperatures is typically associated with the presence of a first-order transition and typically exceeds 100% . In our results, however, a significant dispersion is observed above Tr2 (´ü▒ > -1). This region lies in the temperature range at which the Co3+-O-Mn3+ FM interactions enter the system just below TC. Thus, the occurrence of dispersion is likely due to the proximity of the critical temperature for the onset of second FM interactions to Tpeak. The inset of Fig. 9(d) shows the rescaling of field axis to produce a linear plot of ╬öSM (Tpeak) vs. Hn, where 1 (1 ) n ´üó ´üó ´üž = + Ôłĺ + = 2/3 for mean- 22 field . The linearity of graph further supports the observation of mean-field critical behavior at the phase transition, as concluded in Sec. III C. The H-T phase diagram in Fig. 10 is formulated based on the results from static and dynamics measurements. Namely, it displays a surface plot that illustrates the general behavior of ╬öSM due to the changes in field and temperature, where cool colors signify the region of decreasing ´üäSM and warm colors indicate the region of increasing ´üäSM. The minima [Fig. 9(b)] corresponding to TF1, where universal behavior is observed, and TF2 are marked by yellow and red dashed lines, respectively. Characteristic temperatures derived from AC measurements are displayed: The red star labels the freezing temperature, T0CG1, where the dynamics of type I clusters become frozen, and the blue star marks the type II cluster anomaly seen in ¤ç1. As temperature is lowered into the cluster glass regime, the region of positive ╬öSM broadens rapidly and begins to dominate the H-T phase diagram. The presence of non-negative ╬öSM (T, ´üş0´üäH) is likely due to the magnetic field orienting the spins within each cluster away from their preferred direction, i.e. lowest energy configuration, or against the local anisotropy within the clusters . Although ND results indicate predominantly long-range ferromagnetic order for temperatures as low as 20 K, the glassy states arising due to the competing short-range AFM interactions become stabilized at sufficiently low thermal energy and dominate the magnetic entropy change. As seen in Fig. 9(b), ╬öSM reaches a maximum after which it begins to decrease with magnetic field. This indicates a crossover at which the external field is sufficient to overcome the random local anisotropy of the individual clusters, as shown by the black line in Fig. 10. A jump in the critical magnetic field is observed at T0CG1, where HK begins to decrease. The glassy phases are separated by a dashed line, where the red star represents the freezing temperature of type I clusters. At temperatures below the dashed line, 23 type II clusters progressively freeze, as demonstrated in Sec. III D. A rapid increase in the critical field occurs as temperature is lowered, especially near TCG2 (blue star). In this regime, the progressive freezing phenomena of type II clusters shows up as a dramatic increase in magnetic entropy and the peak-like behavior of ╬öSM (´üş0´üäH) broadens significantly. At fields up to 2 T, the entropy change has not crossed to negative, as seen in Fig. 9(b). However, according to equation negative at adequately high magnetic field. IV. CONCLUSION A comprehensive study of the static and dynamic magnetic behavior of the double perovskite, La2CoMnO6 (LCMO), has been performed to clarify the complex phase evolution. A long range ferromagnetic order is established at TF1 = 228 K. Unlike previous studies, we found the high values of TF1 and ╬╝eff in the sample with a relatively large degree of cationic order and noticeable amount of oxygen deficiency, the latter leading to the second FM interaction established at 220 K. The presence of antisite disorder and oxygen deficiency in a long-range- ordered FM matrix serves as the origin of two different types of clusters. The dynamics of type I clusters are clearly seen in the AC-¤ç data, while type II clusters relax at longer time scales. Using transverse susceptibility to study the behavior of the magnetic anisotropy as a function of temperature, the freezing mechanism of the cluster glass-like states was investigated. The behavior of the magnetic entropy change supports the existence of a cluster-glass regime, as the increasing entropy indicates that the spin configuration is disordered when the external field is applied. Magnetic entropy change results clearly show the coexistence of two different FM phases and the spin cluster dominance at low temperatures. A comprehensive magnetic phase 24 diagram was constructed which summarizes the static and dynamic features of the magnetic phases. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Research at USF (synthesis and magnetic study) was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Materials Sciences and Engineering under Award No. DE-FG02-07ER46438. Work at DTU was supported by the Vietnam National Foundation for Science and Technology Development (NAFOSTED) under grant number 25