Deposition and Visualization of DNA Molecules on Graphene Thatis Obtained withtheAidof Mechanical Splitting on a Substrate with an Epoxy Sublayer A. V. Frolova, b, N. A. Barinovc, D. V. Klinovc, V. V. Koledova, P. V. Legaa, A. P. Orlova, d, and A. M. Smolovicha, * aKotel’nikov Institute of Radio Engineering and Electronics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, 125009 Russia bMoscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudnyi, Moscow oblast, 141700 Russia cFederal Scientific Clinical Center of Physicochemical Medicine, Moscow, 119435 Russia dInstitute of Nanotechnology of Microelectronics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, 115487 Russia *e-mail: asmolovich@petersmol.ru Abstract—Controlled deposition of DNA on graphene films obtained with the aid of mechanical splitting of graphiteonasubstratewithanepoxysublayerisdemonstrated.TheDNAmoleculesarevisualizedusingAFM. INTRODUCTION Considerable recent interest in the DNA– graphene hybrid structures [1–5] has been driven mainlybytheapplicationsofsuchstructuresinbio- sensors, in particular, medical diagnostics. Note also thatgraphenecanbeusedasacarrierforDNAstor- age, hybridization, targeted assembling, and interac- tion of complementary chains . It is of interest to studygraphenestructuringwiththeaidofdeposition of metallized DNA that can be considered as molecu- larwire.Thedeposition mayleadtovariations in the conductivity of graphene and DNA molecules. Complicate technology of the DNA deposition on graphene depends on the method for fabrication of graphene. A method for fabrication of graphene basedon mechanicalsplittingofgraphiteusingepoxyadhesive has recently been proposed in . On the one hand, the method is simple in comparison with the widely spread methods for growth of graphene films or methods based on plasmachemical etching .Ontheotherhand,themethodmakesitpos- sible to increase the film area in comparison with alternative methods for mechanical splitting, in par- ticular, the Geim–Novoselov method . However, the main advantage of the method lies in reliable fab- ricationofalmostperfectfreshlycleavedgraphenesur- face. The method has been used to obtainsingle-layer graphenefilmswith an areaofup to200×200m2 and atomic-thin graphite with an area of up to 1000 × 1000m2. Quantum effects revealed in the structures based on such films indicate relatively high quality of the films and original crystal [15–19]. We assume that 2D graphene crystals fabricated with the aid of mechanicalsplittingofgraphiteusingepoxyadhesive mayserveassensitiveelementsofbiosensors.Thepur- poseofthiswork isthedevelopment oftechnologyfor deposition of DNA molecules on graphene samples fabricated using the new method. 1. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE The method forfabrication ofgraphene of lies in thinning of bulk graphite crystals using adhesion tape and can be considered as a modification of the method of . Natural graphite serve as original crystals, since such a material contains relatively large single crystals, forms atomic-smooth sur- face upon exfoliation, and, in accordance with the results of , is superior (with respect to quality) tohighly orientedpyrolytic graphite(HOPG)that has been used in . Upper layers of the crystal are removed with the aid of adhesion tape to obtain mir- ror-smooth regions with an area of up to1 mm2. Then, the surface of the graphite crystal is attached to the substrate using epoxy adhesive and thinned using adhesion tape to nanometer-scale thicknesses. Thus, weobtainatomic-thinlayeredsinglecrystalsofgraph- ite including single-layer graphene attached to the substrate by the adhesive agent (Fig. 1). Twomethods are used to determine the quantity of the graphene layers. In the first method, we measure the optical transmittance of the sample in the visible spectral rangeand 1 2 performcalculationsusingthefactthateachgraphene layer provides absorbance of about 2.3% . For such measurements, the sample must be placed ona transparent (e.g., glass) substrate. In the second method,thenumber ofgraphenelayersisdetermined with the aid of Raman scattering . For the deposition of DNA molecules on graphene,weuseaprocedurethatissimilartothepro- cedure for deposition of DNA molecules on graphite [24–27]. Solution of graphite modifier (GM) ((CH2)n(NCH2CO)m–NH2 from Nanotyuning, Rus- sia) with a concentration of 0.1% and a volume of 100Lisdepositedonthegraphenesurface.After1- min-longexposure,theGMisremovedusingnitrogen jet and the substrate is dried. Molecules of duplex DNA from Escherichia virus Lambda with a concen- tration of 1 g/mL are deposited from the solution containing 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.6) and 1 mM EDTA on the surface of the modifier for 1 min, and, then, the drop with dissolved DNA is removed using the nitrogen jet.Themonolayer ofthemodifier rep- resents lamellar structuresthat are epitaxially crystal- lizedby intermolecular Hbonds onthegraphene sur- face. The deposition of the modifier is needed for attachment of unfolded DNA molecules tothe sur- face, since DNA molecules weakly interact with pure graphene and exhibit twisting, folding, and shifting uponpassageofthedropletmeniscus.Whenthedrop- let is driedrather than removedusing thenitrogen jet, the impurities contained in the solution at mass frac- tions ofgreater than 10–6 are precipitated as a rough layerwithathicknessofabout1nmthatiscomparable with the DNA thickness. This circumstanceimpedes the DNA identification using AFM. We employ AFM to monitor the DNA deposition. The landscapes of samples are measured in the semi- contact resonance regime on an NT-MDT Integra Prima setup using NOVA 1.1 software. High-resolu- tionsupersharpsiliconcantileversfromNanotyuning are used for the measurements. The resonance fre- quencies ofthe cantilevers range from 190 to325 kHz, the radius ofcurvature ofthe tip is lessthan 2 nm, and the apex angle is less than 22. The amplitude ofthe freeoscillationsofthecantilever inairrangesfrom1to 1onm. The automatically maintained amplitude of the cantilever oscillations in the vicinity of the surface (SetPoint parameter) is fixed at a level of 60–70% of theamplitudeofthecantileveroscillationsinair. TheNOVA1.1softwarefromNT-MDTisusedfor signalprocessing,digitization,andimaging.Theexper- imental results are represented as 2D images in which lightanddarksurfacefragmentscorrespondtohillsand wells, respectively (Figs. 2 and 3). The NOVA Image Analysis2.0softwareisusedfordataprocessing. Fig.1.Imagesofgrapheneflakesobtainedwiththeaidof optical microscopy in the reflection mode. 2. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION culesonthegraphenesurface.Itisseenthatthepro- posedmethodmakes itpossible toobtain relatively uniformdistribution ofDNAonthegraphenesurface. DNA molecules form relatively strong bondswith modified graphene, so that even small modifier-free fragments are covered with DNA molecules. The measurements of heights in such fragments (dark areas in Fig. 2a) are used to estimate the thickness of the modifier layer (about 0.7 nm). DNA molecules can alsobedepositedoninterfaceswithdifferentnumbers of the graphene layers (like the graphene- bigraphene composition) (Fig. 2b). DNA molecules are not detected on the surface of the epoxy adhesive that is not covered with graphite or graphene (upper right-hand region in Fig. 2b). Practical results show that the modifier must be deposited on graphene immediately after splitting, sincerelatively long exposureofthegraphenesurface to air leads to contamination, so that the modifier cannot be deposited after short exposures. The graphite sur- facewiththemodifierismorestablein air: DNA was successfully deposited on the graphene sample that was stored under forvacuum conditions over three monthsafterdepositionofthe modifier (Fig. 2c). For such a sample, the DNA molecules are stretched along the direction of the gas jet owing to relatively weak interaction with the modifier. For better adhesion of DNA to modifier, the droplet with dissolved DNA is kept on the sample over a longer time interval (2– 3min). However, in this case, the deposition of DNA is accompanied by precipitation of impurities: balls 100 m Graphene 3 Fig.2.AFMimagesofDNAmoleculeson(a)graphenesurfacewiththemodifierlayer,(b)graphene–bigraphene–substrate interface with themodifier layer,and (c) graphene samples storedunder forvacuuum conditions aftermodifier deposition. Fig. 3. AFM images of (a)graphene fragments formedonthe Si/SiO2 substrateusing the Geim–Novoselovmethodwiththe depositedmodifier(thepresenceofnoninterfaced lamellasofmodifierindicatessurfacecontaminationofgraphene)and(b)sin- gle DNA molecules (in theframe). (c) 100 nm (а) 100 nm (b) 100 nm (а) (b) 4 withadiameterofseveralnanometersareobservedon the graphene surface (Fig.2c). For comparison of the efficiencies of the proposed andconventionalmethods,wemakeattemptsatdepo- sition of the modifier and DNA molecules on graphenefabricated using theclassical method of onthesubstratemadeofheavilydopedsiliconwith 300-nm-thick layer of SiO2. Problems emerge at the stage of the modifier deposition: the modifier poorly covers the graphene surface being deposited as inter- facedlamellasorientedalongthecrystallinedirections of graphene (Fig. 3a). The presence of adhesive agent fromtheadhesivetapeonthesubstrateisapossible reasonforsuchproblems.Wehaverevealedthefol- lowingregularity:theprobabilitywithwhichthemod- ifier is well deposited and DNA molecules are found on the surface of the modifier increases with an increase in the distance from the flake to the area cov- ered with adhesive agent. At such fragments that are far from the regions covered with the adhesive agent, wefindsingleDNAmoleculesdepositedongraphene (Fig.3b).Dissolutionoftheadhesiveagentdoesnot lead to better results, since a thin layer of contami- nants that survives on the graphene surface prevents the modifier deposition. Wehavealsotriedtomeasurethetransportcharac- teristicsofgraphenepriortoandafterDNAdeposi- tion. In our opinion, the observed variations in the graphene conductivity after the deposition predomi- nantly result from variation in the position of the FermilevelrelativetotheDiracpoint.Theprob- lem lies in the fact that the graphene surface is extremely sensitive to the interaction with environ- ment,sothat theFermilevelcanbeshiftedduetoboth DNA deposition and interaction of the graphene sur- facewithairandprecipitatedimpurities(Fig.2c). CONCLUSIONS Wehaveproposedlaboratorytechnologyfordepo- sition of DNA molecules ongraphene that is obtained withtheaidofmechanicalsplittingofnaturalgraphite usingepoxyadhesive.Theprocedureinvolvesprelim- inarydepositionofthemodifierlayeronthefreshly preparedgraphene. DNAmolecules aredeposited on top of the modifier layer. The stages of the procedure are monitored using AFM. The comparison have shownthattheproposedprocedureforthedeposition of DNA molecules is superior (with respect to quality and technological simplicity) to alternative methods. The results ofthis work can be used in the develop- ment of nanoelectronic sensors for biomedical appli- cations. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by the Russian Science Foundation (project no. 17-19-01748).