Elastic higher-order topological insulator with topologically protected corner states Haiyan Fan, Baizhan Xia*, Liang Tong, Shengjie Zheng, Dejie Yu State Key Laboratory of Advanced Design and Manufacturing for Vehicle Body, Hunan University, Changsha, Hunan, People’s Republic of China, 410082 Topologically gapless edge states, characterized by topological invariants and Berry’s phases of bulk energy bands, provide amazing techniques to robustly control the reflectionless propagation of electrons, photons and phonons. Recently, a new family of topological phases, dictated by the bulk polarization, has been observed, leading to the discovery of the higher-order topological insulators (HOTIs). So far, the HOTIs are only demonstrated in discrete mechanical and electromagnetic systems and electrical circuits with the quantized quadrupole polarization. Here, we realize the higher-order topological states in a two-dimensional (2D) continuous elastic system whose energy bands can be well described. We experimentally observe the gapped one- dimensional (1D) edge states, the trivially gapped zero-dimensional (0D) corner states and the topologically protected 0D corner states. Compared with the trivial corner modes, the topological ones, immunizing against defects, are robustly localized at the obtuse-angled but not the acute- angled corners. The topological shape-dependent corner states open a new route for the design of the topologically-protected but reconfigurable 0D local eigenmodes and provide an excellent platform for the topological transformation of elastic energy among 2D bulk, 1D edge and 0D corner modes. Topological states, theoretically predicted in condensed matter physics1-3, have become the revolutionizing technologies for the robust control of the propagation of photons and phonons. The topological insulators (TIs) of photons and phonons were firstly realized in the broken time-reverse symmetry systems, in which the counterpropagating partners are perfectly prohibited4-12. Then, the quantum valley Hall effects13-21 and the quantum spin Hall effects22-28 were observed in time-reverse invariant photonic and phononic systems. These topological characteristics, dictated by integer topological invariants and Berry’s phases of bulk energy bands, obey the bulk-edge correspondence principle, exhibiting the topologically protected gapless 1D edge states which immunize against large confined imperfectness and even spontaneous emissions. More recently, by gapping edge states, the higher-order topological phases, characterized by the bulk polarization, have been theoretically predicted29-35. And then, the HOTIs were experimentally implemented in mechanical36, microwave37, and optical38 systems and electrical circuits39. The elastic wave propagation in well-structured phononic systems has exhibited exotic properties, from negative refraction40, super focusing41 to cloaking42. Inspired by the fascinating topological characteristics of acoustic and optical systems, the topologically protected edge states in elastic phononic plates43-49 have been receiving great attentions and show excellent prospects for energy storing, information carrying and nondestructive testing. However, the HOTIs, going beyond the classical bulk-edge correspondence principle, have not been realized in elastic wave systems. Compared with optical and acoustic waves, the elastic waves consisting of in-plane and out-of-plane waves are the vector waves whose bulk polarizations are much more difficult to be well-controlled. In this paper, we design an elastic HOTI. The gapped 1D edge states, the trivially gapped 0D corner states and the topologically protected 0D corner states, instead of the gapless 1D edge states, are experimentally observed in the topologically nontrivial bandgap. The corner states, robustly localized at the corners of the elastic HOTI, not only seriously decay into the bulk, but also rapidly attenuate along edges. Differing from the previous HOTIs in square and cube lattices29,35-37, the new developed topological corner states depend on both the bulk topology and the corner shapes. They can be pinned to the obtuse-angled corners valued by 2π/3, but vanish at the acute-angled corners valued by π/3. This topological property provides an unprecedented opportunity for the topological design of elastic devices with reconfigurable local eigenmodes at corners. A composite unit cell consisting of six nodes is presented in Fig. 1a. The continuous elastic honeycomb lattice formed by an array of composite unit cells (highlighted by a green hexagon) is depicted in Fig. 1b. This lattice is fabricated by cutting hexagonal blocks from an acrylic panel with the material properties of density ρ=1190kg/m3, Poisson’s ratio ν=0.35, and Young’s modulus E=3.2GPa. The thickness of the acrylic panel is d=1.98mm. The width and length of the acrylic beam are w=5.02mm and L=15mm, respectively. Two cylindrical nickel-plated neodymium magnets (ρ=7400kg/m3, ν=0.28, and E=41GPa), marked by light blue in Fig. 1a, are attached to the upper and lower sides of each node, working as additional masses. The height and radio of the magnet are h=2.0mm and r=2.51mm, respectively. The coupling within the composite unit cell is marked as the inter-cell coupling linter. The coupling among the neighboring unit cells is marked as the intra-cell coupling lintra. The inter- and intra-cell couplings can be modulated by the lengths of acrylic beams. Fig. 1 | a, A composite unit cell of the honeycomb lattice, with six pairs of magnetic cylinders clamped at the six nodes. b, Partial selection of the lattice. Green hexagon delimits the composite unit cell. Red (blue) beams represent the inter- cell (intra-cell) beams whose coupling strength are defined by their length linter (lintra). c, Band structures of the composite unit cell with a double Dirac cone at a frequency of 1517Hz. Here, linter equates to lintra. d, Band structure with a complete bandgap in a shrunken lattice (linter<lintra). Under a long wavelength limit, this lattice can be approximated as a thin plate. The out-of-plane mode described by the parabolic dispersion is loosely coupled with in-plane modes, leading to that the out-of-plane bands (red lines) are identifiably uncoupled from the in-plane bands (gray lines). In this paper, the in-plane polarization which goes beyond the scope of this work is neglected. When linter equates to lintra, this elastic honeycomb lattice is a perfect honeycomb phononic crystal. As shown in Fig. 1c, there is a double Dirac cone, linearly degenerated by four bands, emerging at the Γ point of the irreducible Brillouin zone. This double Dirac cone is protected by the C6v symmetry of the lattice. If the mirror-reflection symmetry is broken, the quantum valley Hall effects, accompanied with the topologically protected gapless 1D edge states, can yield in this elastic honeycomb lattice47. Here, we will explore the higher-order topological phases which exhibit the gapped 1D edge states and the in-gap 0D corner states, instead of the gapless 1D edge states. Aiming as this issue, a new mechanism based on the modulation of the inter- and intra-cell couplings will be developed. When linter increases to 1.2L, and at the same time, lintra reduces to 0.6L, the double Dirac cone is lifted, yielding a complete bandgap ranging from 1503Hz to 1715Hz. On the contrary, when linter reduces to 0.836L and lintra increase to 1.328L, the double Dirac cone is also lifted for a bandgap ranging from 1461Hz to 1650Hz, inspected in Fig. 1d. Thus, when linter<lintra (referred to a shrunken lattice) and linter>lintra (referred to an expanded lattice), the elastic phononic plates support two new band diagrams, respectively. Although they are similar and cannot be intuitively distinguished, these two band diagrams essentially describe two distinct topological phases. Their displacement fields are inversed when crossing the gapless double Dirac point at linter=lintra (Seeing Supplementary Fig. S1), giving rise to a band inversion and a topological transition between trivial and nontrivial phases which can be demonstrated by the bulk polarization29,30,35. The symmetry-protected edge state on the boundary of a configuration is the fascinating property of the TI. In this study, we construct two different elastic phononic configurations with periodic boundaries along x direction, but truncated along y. The first one is a ribbon configuration consisting of 9 expanded unit cells. Its band dispersion, presented in Fig. 2a, shows that there are only bulk bands which are separated by a complete bandgap, indicating that this expanded ribbon configuration is a trivial one without edge states. With the decrease of linter/lintra, the bandgap will gradually decrease, and finally degenerate to a gapless one at linter/lintra =1 (Seeing Supplementary Fig. S2). If linter/lintra is further reduced, the second ribbon configuration consisting of 9 shrunken unit cells is constructed. In this sample, the bandgap reopens, with two edges bands, denoted by the red lines in Fig. 2b. However, these 1D edge states are gapped, which is inherently different from the gapless 1D edge states protected by the time-reversal symmetry in the quantum Hall insulator. Fig. 2 | a, Band dispersion of a ribbon configuration consisting of an expanded phononic lattice with 9 cells along the y direction. b, Band dispersion of a ribbon configuration consisting of a shrunken phononic lattice with 9 cells along the y direction. Three large experimental hexagon-shaped samples with 37 unit cells are depicted in Fig. 3a, 3b and 3c. The hexagon-shaped sample with expanded unit cells (linter>lintra) distributing along the six boundaries is a trivial structure. Its numerically calculated eigenfrequencies presented in Fig. 3d show that there are only bulk modes, as expected. On the contrary, the second hexagon-shaped sample with shrunken unit cells (linter<lintra) is a topological nontrivial structure. As presented in Fig. 3e, the gapped edge modes and the in-gap corner modes are generated in the topologically nontrivial bandgap between the lower- and the higher-frequency bulk modes. The simulated field profile presented in Fig. 3g show that for the gapped edge modes, the elastic wave energy is well localized along the boundaries of the topological hexagon-shaped sample, expect for the six corners. Besides of gapped edge modes, two classes of in-gap corner modes are in the bandgap. One is the topologically protected corner mode (marked by red in Fig. 3e) and the other one is the trivial corner mode (marked by blue in Fig. 3e). Their simulated field profile depicted in Fig. 3h (for a topological corner mode) and 3i (for a trivial corner mode) show that the elastic wave energy is strongly concentrated in the corners of the topological hexagon-shaped sample, which is essentially different from the edge mode (Fig. 3g) and the bulk mode (Fig. 3j). The nontrivial bulk polarization of a HOTI suggests that the topologically protected corner states exhibit a good immunity against defects. To confirm this, we deliberately design an imperfect hexagon-shaped sample by attaching one more magnet with the height of 1mm at the upper side of each node of 12 unit cells (marked by red dotted lines in Fig. 3c). Numerically evaluated eigenfrequencies presented in Fig. 3f show that the topological corner states (defined by red nodes) are well confined at the frequency around 1555Hz, perfectly isolated from the bulk and edge states, favorably evidencing the strong robustness of the topological corner states against moderate defects and disorders. On the contrary, the frequencies of trivial corner states (marked by blue nodes in Fig. 3f) are shifted from 1528Hz to 1476Hz, which reveals that the trivial corner states are very sensitive to defects and disorders. Fig. 3 | a-c, Images of hexagon-shaped samples with expanded unit cells, shrunken unit cells and defects (framed by red dashed lines) respectively. d-f. Numerically evaluated eigenfrequencies of hexagon-shaped samples with expanded unit cells, shrunken unit cells and defects. Green, red, blue and black dots denote gapped edge, topological corner, trivial corner and bulk modes, respectively. g-j, The simulated displacement field profiles of gapped edge, topological corner, trivial corner and bulk states, respectively. The bulk, the edge and the corner transmission spectra of the trivial hexagon-shaped sample are presented in Fig. 4a. All measurements were performed by a scanning laser Doppler vibrometer (LV- S01), seeing Method for details. Within the complete bandgap, the bulk, the edge and the corner transmissions are very low, indicating that the propagation of elastic waves is efficiently blocked in this trivial sample. The bulk, the edge and the corner transmission spectra of the topological hexagon- shaped sample are presented in Fig. 4b. For the bulk transmission spectrum (the black curve), the peaks, separated by the complete bandgap, are observed in the lower- and the higher-frequency bulk regions. For the edge transmission spectrum (the green curve), a high peak, located in the bandgap, is observed around 1610Hz, being consistent with the edge mode presented in the simulations of Fig. 3e. The topological and the trivial corner states of this hexagon-shaped sample are very close to each other. As a result, the peaks, being consistent with both corner modes, are overlapped to be whole, expressing as a common peak around 1550Hz, as shown in the corner transmission spectrum (the red curve). Fig. 4 | a, Measured bulk (black), edge (green) and corner (red) transmission spectra for a trivial hexagon-shaped sample. b, Measured bulk (black), edge (green) and corner (red) transmission spectra for a topological hexagon- shaped sample. A large triangular-shaped sample with shrunken unit cells (linter>lintra) distributing along three boundaries is depicted in Fig. 5a. Its numerically evaluated eigenfrequencies presented in Fig. 5c shows that this triangular-shaped sample has bulk, gapped edge and gapped corner modes. The simulated field profiles presented in Fig. 5e-5g show that for the above eigenmodes, the elastic wave energy is localized along the boundaries (except for the three corners), at the corners and within the bulk of the triangular-shaped sample, respectively. When the perfection of the triangular-shaped sample is broken by attaching one more magnet with a height of 1mm on the upper side of each node of 6 unit cells (marked by red dotted line in Fig. 5b), the gapped corner modes will shift to the lower frequency region and even move out of the bandgap (Fig. 5d), indicating that these trivially gapped corner states are very sensitive to defects. The topologically protected corner mode immunizing against defects is not observed in this triangular-shaped sample, which is inherently distinct from the hexagon-shaped sample. The experimentally measured corner transmission spectra depicted in Fig. 5h show that the peak for the perfect triangular-shaped sample is around 1500Hz, being consistent with its trivially gapped corner modes. However, the peak for the imperfect sample is shifted to 1450Hz, due to the variation of the trivially gapped corner modes. Fig. 5 | a-b, Images of the triangular-shaped samples without and with defects, respectively. The defect nodes are framed by red dashed lines. c-d, Numerically evaluated eigenfrequencies for triangular-shaped samples without and with defects. Green, blue and black dots denote gapped edge, gapped corner and bulk modes, respectively. e- g, The simulated displacement field profiles of edge, corner and bulk states, respectively. h, Measured corner transmission spectra for the hexagon-shaped samples with defects (black curve) and without defects (red curve). According to the different corner states of the hexagon- and the triangular-shaped samples, a physical consequence of our elastic HOTI is that the topologically protected corner modes only emerge at the obtuse-angled corners valued by 2π/3, but not the acute-angled corners valued by π/3. To explain this phenomenon, a topological index N=|N+−N−|, capturing the interplay between the topology of the bulk Hamiltonian and the topological structure of the defect, is introduced. N=|N+−N−| is the number of stable modes bounded to corners50,51. N+ and N− are respectively the numbers of zero modes with topological charges +1 and −1. When the intra-cell coupling is larger than the inter-cell coupling which can be neglected in its limiting case, the topological index N can be determined by the number of zero modes at corners. At the acute-angled corner valued by π/3, there are four zero modes. Two of them have the topological charge +1 and the other two possess the topological charge −1. Thus, the topological index N is N=N+−N−=2−2=0. As a result, there are no stable modes localized at the acute-angled corners, as shown in Fig. 5c. At the obtuse-angled corner valued by 2π/3, there are three zero modes. Two of them have the same charge and the other one locating at the sharpest corner possesses the opposite charge. Thus, the topological index N is N=|N+−N−|=|2−1|=1, assuring that the stable modes will be localized at the obtuse-angled corners, as presented in Fig. 3e. The topological parallelogram-shaped sample simultaneously possessing the obtuse- and the acute-angled corners (seeing the Supplementary Figure S3) further verifies the topological shape-dependent corner states. In conclusion, this work develops an elastic HOTI by modulating the inter- and intra-cell couplings in a honeycomb lattice. The topologically protected 0D corner modes, lying in the nontrivial bandgap, can robustly concentrate the wave energy at the obtuse-angled corners valued by 2π/3, but not the acute-angled corners valued by π/3. Based on this shape-dependent characteristic, our elastic HOTI provides an additional degree-of-freedom, which is apart from the bulk polarization, to turn on/off the topologically protected local eigenmodes at corners. It is believed that our work exhibits a great ability to control the elastic wave propagation in an unprecedented way and provides an excellent platform to design the new type of elastic topological devices which can topologically transform the elastic wave energy among the bulk, the edge and the corner modes. Furthermore, our physical mechanism to realize the elastic higher-order topological phase is simple, so it can be directly extended to the three-dimensional (3D) HOTIs and even Weyl semimetals, exhibiting in-gap hinge states over a wide range of disciplines, including optics, acoustics and mechanical vibrations. Reference 1. Hsieh, D. et al. A topological Dirac insulator in a quantum spin Hall phase. Nature 452, 970–974 2. Bernevig, B. A., Hughes, T. L. & Zhang, S. C. Quantum spin Hall effect and topological phase transition in HgTe quantum wells. Science 314, 1757–1761 (2006). 3. Konig, M. et al. Quantum spin hall insulator state in HgTe quantum wells. Science 318, 766–770 4. Bahari, B. et al. Nonreciprocal lasing in topological cavities of arbitrary geometries. Science 358, 5. Wang, Z., Chong, Y., Joannopoulos, J. D. & Soljačić, M. Observation of unidirectional backscattering-immune topological electromagnetic states. Nature 461, 772–775 (2009). 6. Skirlo, S. A., Lu, L. & Soljačić, M. Multimode One-Way Waveguides of Large Chern Numbers. Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 113904 (2014). 7. Pan, D., Yu, R., Xu, H. & de Abajo, F. J. G. Topologically protected Dirac plasmons in a graphene superlattice. Nat. Commun. 8, 1243 (2017). 8. Fleury, R., Sounas, D. L., Sieck, C. F., Haberman, M. R. & Alù, A. Sound Isolation and Giant Linear Nonreciprocity in a Compact Acoustic Circulator. Science 343, 516–519 (2014). 9. Khanikaev, A. B., Fleury, R., Mousavi, S. H. & Alù, A. Topologically robust sound propagation in an angular-momentum-biased graphene-like resonator lattice. Nat. Commun. 6, 8260 (2015). 10. Yang, Z. et al. Topological Acoustics. Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 114301 (2015). 11. Souslov, A., van Zuiden, B. C., Bartolo, D. & Vitelli, V. Topological sound in active-liquid metamaterials. Nat. Phys. 13, 1091–1094 (2017). 12. Maayani, S. et al. Flying couplers above spinning resonators generate irreversible refraction. Nature 558, 569–572 (2018). 13. Lu, J., Qiu, C., Ke, M. & Liu, Z. Valley Vortex States in Sonic Crystals. Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 093901 14. Brendel, C., Peano, V., Painter, O. J. & Marquardt, F. Pseudomagnetic fields for sound at the nanoscale. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114, E3390–E3395 (2017). 15. Dong, J.-W., Chen, X.-D., Zhu, H., Wang, Y. & Zhang, X. Valley photonic crystals for control of spin and topology. Nat. Mater. 16, 298–302 (2017). 16. Lu, J. et al. Observation of topological valley transport of sound in sonic crystals. Nat. Phys. 13, 17. Gao, F. et al. Topologically protected refraction of robust kink states in valley photonic crystals. Nat. Phys. 14, 140–144 (2018). 18. Lu, J. et al. Valley Topological Phases in Bilayer Sonic Crystals. Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 116802 19. Noh, J., Huang, S., Chen, K. P. & Rechtsman, M. C. Observation of Photonic Topological Valley Hall Edge States. Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 063902 (2018). 20. Wang, M., Ye, L., Christensen, J. & Liu, Z. Valley Physics in Non-Hermitian Artificial Acoustic Boron Nitride. Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 246601 (2018). 21. Xia, B.-Z. et al. Observation of valleylike edge states of sound at a momentum away from the high- symmetry points. Phys. Rev. B 97, 155124 (2018). 22. Wu, L.-H. & Hu, X. Scheme for Achieving a Topological Photonic Crystal by Using Dielectric Material. Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 223901 (2015). 23. He, C. et al. Acoustic topological insulator and robust one-way sound transport. Nat. Phys. 12, 24. Deng, Y., Ge, H., Tian, Y., Lu, M. & Jing, Y. Observation of zone folding induced acoustic topological insulators and the role of spin-mixing defects. Phys. Rev. B 96, 184305 (2017). 25. Zhang, Z. et al. Topological Creation of Acoustic Pseudospin Multipoles in a Flow-Free Symmetry-Broken Metamaterial Lattice. Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 084303 (2017). 26. Barik, S. et al. A topological quantum optics interface. Science 359, 666–668 (2018). 27. Yang, Y. et al. Visualization of a Unidirectional Electromagnetic Waveguide Using Topological Photonic Crystals Made of Dielectric Materials. Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 217401 (2018). 28. Xia, B.-Z. et al. Topological phononic insulator with robust pseudospin-dependent transport. Phys. Rev. B 96, 094106 (2017). 29. Benalcazar, W. A., Bernevig, B. A. & Hughes, T. L. Electric multipole moments, topological multipole moment pumping, and chiral hinge states in crystalline insulators. Phys. Rev. B 96, 30. Ezawa, M. Minimal models for Wannier-type higher-order topological insulators and phosphorene. Phys. Rev. B 98, 045125 (2018). 31. Khalaf, E. Higher-order topological insulators and superconductors protected by inversion symmetry. Phys. Rev. B 97, 205136 (2018). 32. Ezawa, M. Higher-Order Topological Insulators and Semimetals on the Breathing Kagome and Pyrochlore Lattices. Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 026801 (2018). 33. Langbehn, J., Peng, Y., Trifunovic, L., von Oppen, F. & Brouwer, P. W. Reflection-Symmetric Second-Order Topological Insulators and Superconductors. Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 246401 (2017). 34. Song, Z. D., Fang, Z. & Fang, C. (d-2)-Dimensional Edge States of Rotation Symmetry Protected Topological States. Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 246402 (2017). 35. Benalcazar, W. A., Bernevig, B. A. & Hughes, T. L. Quantized electric multipole insulators. Science 36. Serra-Garcia, M. et al. Observation of a phononic quadrupole topological insulator. Nature 555, 37. Peterson, C. W., Benalcazar, W. A., Hughes, T. L. & Bahl, G. A quantized microwave quadrupole insulator with topologically protected corner states. Nature 555, 346–350 (2018). 38. Noh, J. et al. Topological protection of photonic mid-gap defect modes. Nat. Photon. 12, 408–415 39. Imhof, S. et al. Topolectrical-circuit realization of topological corner modes. Nat. Phys. 14, 925– 40. Zhu, R., Liu, X., Hu, G., Sun, C. & Huang, G. Negative refraction of elastic waves at the deep- subwavelength scale in a single-phase metamaterial. Nat. Commun. 5, 5510 (2014). 41. Veres, I. A., Grünsteidl, C., Stobbe, D. M. & Murray, T. W. Broad-angle negative reflection and focusing of elastic waves from a plate edge. Phys. Rev. B 93, 174304 (2016). 42. Stenger, N., Wilhelm, M. & Wegener, M. Experiments on elastic cloaking in thin plates. Phys. Rev. 43. Li, S., Zhao, D., Niu, H., Zhu, X. & Zang, J. Observation of elastic topological states in soft materials. Nat. Commun. 9, 1370 (2018). 44. Yu, S. Y. et al. Elastic pseudospin transport for integratable topological phononic circuits. Nat. Commun. 9, 1–8 (2018). 45. Liu, T.-W. & Semperlotti, F. Tunable Acoustic Valley–Hall Edge States in Reconfigurable Phononic Elastic Waveguides. Phys. Rev. Applied 9, 014001 (2018). 46. Chaunsali, R., Chen, C.-W. & Yang, J. Subwavelength and directional control of flexural waves in zone-folding induced topological plates. Phys. Rev. B 97, 054307 (2018). 47. Vila, J., Pal, R. K. & Ruzzene, M. Observation of topological valley modes in an elastic hexagonal lattice. Phys. Rev. B 96, 134307 (2017). 48. Wang, G., Xu, H. & Lai, Y.-C. Mechanical topological semimetals with massless quasiparticles and a finite Berry curvature. Phys. Rev. B 95, 235159 (2017). 49. Foehr, A., Bilal, O. R., Huber, S. D. & Daraio, C. Spiral-based phononic plates: From wave beaming to topological insulators. Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 205501 (2018). 50. Altland, A. & Martin, Z. R. Nonstandard symmetry classes in mesoscopic normal-superconducting hybrid structures. Phys. Rev. B 55, 1142 (1997). 51. Teo, J. C. & Kane, C. L. Topological defects and gapless modes in insulators and superconductors. Phys. Rev. B 82, 115120 (2010).