Prediction of MoO2 as high capacity electrode material for (Na, K, Ca)−ion batteries$ Yong-Chao Rao, Song Yu, Xiao Gu, Xiang-Mei Duan∗ Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, Ningbo University, Ningbo-315211, P.R. China Abstract Na, K and Ca−ion battery electrode materials with appropriate electrochemical properties are desirable candidates for replacing lithium−ion batteries (LIBs) because of their natural richness and low cost. Recently, MoO2 has been re- ported as the anode material in LIBs, but so far not received attention in Na and other ion batteries. In this paper, the behaviors of Na, K, and Ca on MoO2 are investigated by first−principles calculations. These metal atoms strongly absorb on the hexagonal center of MoO2 and the adsorption results in semiconducting−metallic transition. The low diffusion barrier, 0.13, 0.08, 0.22 eV for Na, K, Ca, respectively, leads to an ultrahigh diffusivity. Impor- tantly, the maximum metal−storage phases of MoO2 monolayer correspond to Na4MoO2, K2.5MoO2 and Ca3MoO2, with considerable theoretical specific ca- pacities of 837, 523 and 1256 mAh g−1. The electrode materials exhibit mod- erate average voltage of 0.30, 0.75, 0.35 V, respectively. Our findings suggest that MoO2 monolayer can be utilized as a promising anode material with high capacities and high rate performance for next generation ion batteries. Keywords: MoO2 monolayer; Ion−battery; First principles calculations ∗Corresponding author Email address: duanxiangmei@nbu.edu.cn ( Xiang-Mei Duan∗) Preprint submitted to Journal of LATEX Templates November 28, 2018 arXiv:1811.11029v1 [physics.comp-ph] 27 Nov 2018 1. Introduction With the tremendous and rapid development of portable electronic devices and electric vehicles, rechargeable batteries with large capacity, high rate ca- pability and good cycle performance have attracted great attention both in basic research and industry applications. As one of the most important en- ergy storage devices, lithium−ion batteries (LIBs) are widely used in the com- mercial society. However, issues such as cost, safety, energy storage density, charge/discharge rates, and lifetime will continue to spur the research for new batteries beyond LIBs. Room temperature sodium−ion batteries (SIBs) have gained increasing attention due to the cheaper cost and relative abun- dance of sodium. Calcium−ion batteries (CIBs) offer low price, chemical safety and lighter mass−to−charge ratio. Moreover, potassium is indeed a competitive metal with less complicated interfacial reaction and higher ionic conductivity in solution. The battery−performance characteristic strongly depends on the electro- chemical properties of electrode materials. Great challenge of advanced metal−ion batteries is to find better electrode substrates. Currently, a wide range of compounds have been proposed for SIB anodes, and much progress has been made . However, capacity for SIBs are still limited owing to the rel- atively large ionic radius of Na−ion (1.02 ̊A) compared to Li−ion (0.76 ̊A). The commercially used anode material in LIBs, graphite, is not suitable for Na−ion batteries for the low capacity and poor rate capability. With the high specific surface area, 2D materials provide variable choice in designing high energy and high motility devices. Much research efforts turn to the development of SIBs, KIBs (potassium ion−battery) and CIBs based on 2D materials, such as graphene and its dopant, transition metal oxides, TMDs, silicene and other van der Waals−bonded lay- ered materials. Recently, MoO2 sub−micro sheet was synthesized by using a novel chemical vapour deposition method. The dynamical and ther- mal stabilities MoO2 monolayer have been confirmed via ab initio molecular 2 dynamics simulation and phonon dispersion spectrum. Moreover, Li−binding on MoO2 sheet possesses superb conductivity, lower diffusion barrier (75 meV), and astonishing theoretical storage capacity (2513 mAh g−1). Due to the electrochemical similarity between LIBs and SIBs, KIBs and CIBs, an interesting question arises: Can the superior electrochemical property of the MoO2 sheet, demonstrated in LIBs, extend into Na, K, Ca−ion cells? In this work, DFT calculations are employed to systematically investigate the elec- tronic, metal adsorption and storage behaviors of MoO2 monolayer. Our results indicate that Na, K and Ca atoms can strongly absorb on the surface of MoO2, and the metallic characteristics they presented, are crucial for the anode mate- rials. The diffusion barrier for Na, K, Ca on MoO2 is only 0.13, 0.08, 0.23 eV, respectively, implying good diffusion mobility during the charging/discharging process. Furthermore, the theoretical specific capacities are as high as 837, 523, 1256 mAh g−1 for Na, K, Ca−ion batteries. Most especially, the capacity for Na is 4.5 times higher than that of the oxidized graphite electrode (184 mAh g−1). Therefore, as electrode materials for Na, K, Ca−ion batteries, the MoO2 sheet possesses great potential and outstanding performance. 2. Computational details DFT calculations were performed by using the Vienna ab initio Simulation Package (VASP). The exchange−correction interaction were treated within the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) in the form of the Perdew−Burke−Ernzerhof (PBE) functional. The electron wave functions were expanded using plane waves with a cutoff energy of 500 eV, and the convergence criteria for the residual force and energy on each atom during structure relaxation was set to 10−2 eV/ ̊A and 10−5 eV, respectively. 4 × 4 × 1 supercells were built and complemented by vacuum layers of 20 ̊A thickness in the out−of−plane direction to avoid in- teraction between periodic images. The k−point sampling of 3 × 3 × 1 and 7 × 7 × 1 were chosen for geometry optimization and electronic structure com- putation, respectively. For the adatom diffusion on MoO2 sheet, the climbing 3 image nudge elastic band method was used to perform minimum energy path profiling and figure out the diffusion barrier. The strength between the metal atoms and the substrate was described by the average adsorption energy, Eads, which is defined as Eads = (EAxMoO2 − EMoO2 − xμA)/x (1) where x is the total number of adsorbed metal atoms in the primitive cell and EAxMoO2, EMoO2, μA is total energies of the metal ion adsorbed on the sys- tem, pristine MoO2 monolayer, and the energy per atom in the bulk metal, respectively. The average voltage of AxMoO2 (A = Na, K, and Ca) in the range of x1 ≤ x ≤ x2 is given as Vave ≈ [EAx1MoO2 − EAx2MoO2 + (x2 − x1)μA]/(x2 − x1)e (2) According to the Faraday equation, the maximum specific capacity, CA, is obtained by CA = xmaxF/M (3) Where xmax represents maximum number of A in the primitive cell, F is the Faraday constant with the value of 26806 mAh mol−1, and M is the mass of MoO2 in g mol−1. 3. Results and discussion 3.1. Adsorption of Na, K, Ca on MoO2 surface As the common transition−metal dichalcohenides (TMDs), MoO2 monolayer is composed of a triple layer (sandwich structure), where atoms are stacked in a sequence of O−Mo−O with thickness of 2.47 ̊A, the optimized lattice parameter is found to be a = b = 2.83 ̊A, which are in good agreement with the previous calculation values of 2.82 ̊A. To systematically study metal atoms intercalation on MoO2 monolayer, we first examine four possible high−symmetric adsorption sites (H site: hexagonal 4 center site; B site: over the center of the Mo−O bond; T site: the top of a O atom; T′ site: the top of a Mo atom) for isolated Na, K, Ca atom, as plotted in Fig. 1 (a). The adsorption energies (Eads) of a single Na, K, and Ca atom adsorbed on MoO2 are illustrated in Fig. 1 (c). In general, the K−adsorbed configurations are the most stable, while the strength of adsorption of one Ca atom on MoO2 is the weakest with the smallest Eads. The negative adsorption energies for H, B and T′ configurations indicate the Na, K, and Ca storage is exothermic and spontaneous, which is foundational and favorable for the application. H site is the most stable configuration with the largest adsorption energy of −1.46, −2.01, −1.16 eV for Na, K and Ca, respectively. We note that a single Na atom adsorbed on the MoO2 monolayer is more stable, when compared with other 2D materials, such as boron−doped graphene (−0.79 eV) and single−layer MoS2 (−1.23 eV). High adsorption strength ensures that metal atoms do not form clusters, which is beneficial to keep good cycling during the charging/discharging process of batteries. More particularly, the adsorption energies on T′ site (−1.42, −1.99, −1.07 eV for Na, K and Ca, respectively) are slightly smaller that that of H site, which implies that the metal atoms may move from the H site to the T′ site with lower energy barrier. Conductivity is a key factor in determining the electrochemical performance of an electrode. Pristine MoO2 is an indirect semiconductor with a band gap of 0.92 eV, which is consistent with previous theoretical work of 0.91 eV, imply- ing poor electrical conductivity. The valence band maximum (VBM) of MoO2 is contributed by O−2p orbitals and its conduction band minimum (CBM) is dom- inated by Mo−4d orbitals. The total density of states (TDOS) and projected density of states (PDOS) for the adsorption of single Na, K, Ca, respectively, are shown in Fig. 2 (a), (b) and (c). It can be seen that three adsorbed systems exhibit metallic characteristic, the CBM of each system is still dominated by Mo 4d orbital, and the s orbital of metal atoms is empty. To obtain insights into the nature of metals−MoO2 binding, we refer to the charge density differences of (110) section defined as ∆ρ = ρmetal/MoO2 − ρmetal − ρMoO2, which are shown in Fig. 3. Clearly, electrons accumulate around oxygen atoms and their densities 5 surrounding metal atom decrease, suggesting ionic character of metals−MoO2 binding. By using Bader charge analysis, the absorbed Na, K and Ca atoms act as electron donor, and transfer 0.9, 0.93 and 1.61 e to the underlying MoO2, respectively. The spin−dependent GGA plus Hubbard U (GGA+U) method was em- ployed as a test. Comparing the Eads and DOS with the results obtained from the common GGA method, the difference is negligible, implying the weak on- site Coulomb repulsion between the 4d electrons of molybdenum. Moreover, the systems with/without metals absorption show non−magnetic behavior. 3.2. Diffusion of metal adatoms on MoO2 surface Another factor that plays a central role in the performance of electrode materials is the diffusion rate of ions, which contributes directly to the charg- ing/discharging loading rates accessible by a battery. We investigate the dif- fusion pathways and energy barriers of Na, K and Ca on MoO2 surface. Only the diffusion path between two neighboring, most preferred binding sites are taken into consideration. Due to the symmetry, there are three representative pathways for metal atom migration between two adjacent H sites: (a) through the T site (H−T−H), (b) across the Mo−O bond (H−B−H), and (c) through the T′ site. As we mentioned above, the almost equivalent adsorption energy at H and T′ sites motivates us to only consider the pathway (c). The optimized route is shown in Fig. 4(a). The corresponding energy profiles of Na, K and Ca along pathway on the MoO2 surface are depicted in Fig. 4(b). The barrier for Na is 0.13 eV, implying very fast Na diffusion kinetics, which would lead MoO2 to be an effective anode electrode for Na−ion batteries. The value of the barrier is comparable with other 2D materials such as MoS2 (0.11 eV), graphene (0.13 eV) and boron−doped graphene (0.16−0.22 eV). Particularly, the barrier in K−adsorbed system is as low as 0.08 eV, smaller than corresponding Na system, which can be ascribed to the larger vertical distance (2.16 ̊A) be- tween K and substrate, while Na−substrate distance is 1.68 ̊A. Similar trends have been observed in VS2 and MoN2. For the case of Ca, the relative 6 large mass results in a short cation−substrate distance of 1.50 ̊A, the diffusion barrier of Ca is 0.22 eV. Therefore, we conclude that MoO2 monolayer have the ability to rapidly charge/discharge Na and K ions. 3.3. Average open−circuit voltage and metals storage capacity of the MoO2 monolayer From the practical point of view, the average open−circuit voltage and metal storage capacity are significant features for the electrode materials. Due to the high symmetry of MoO2 structure, we consider all the adsorption with double sides to obtain the higher capacity. The typical NaxMoO2 configurations are illustrated in Fig. 5. To avoid the inherently strong coulomb repulsion as metals absorb on the top of the MoO2 surface, the adsorption structures appear to be mixed configurations. As shown in Fig. 5 (a), four Na atoms absorb on the H site due to its relatively larger Eads. The additional four Na atoms tend to adsorb on the next nearest neighbor T′ site, as shown in Fig. 5(b), to reduce the repulsion as possible. As the concentration increases, the physical attraction between the further far metal atoms and MoO2 becomes weaker, so the adsorption prefers to proceed layer by layer, with each layer containing eight metal atoms [see Na3MoO2 in Fig. 5 (c)]. In Fig. 6, we present the OCVs as function of the concentration by varying x in the AxMoO2 system. With the increase of x, the OCVs decrease gradually because the distances between adjacent metal atoms become shorter and their repulsive interaction is enhanced. Once the OCV is zero, no more atom can be adsorbed, and the maximum x in AxMoO2 is obtained. Encouragingly, the large initial OCVs of 1.27, 1.79, and 1.16 V for Na, K, and Ca systems, respectively, indicate the potential application of MoO2 in ion−batteries. For the NaxMoO2 system, the electrode potential varies in the range of 1.27−0.09 V. The Vave, 0.30 V, is in the desirable voltage range for a sodium anode of 0.0−1.0 V. At x = 4, the corresponding maximum specific capacity of MoO2 for SIBs is 837 mAh g−1, which is larger than that of existing SIB anode materials (including hard carbon, Na4Ti5O12, Na2Ti3O7) and is even larger than some 7 alloy−based materials. Compared with the capacities of 2D materials, such as MoS2/graphene of 338 mAh g−1, VS2 of 232.91 and 116.45 mAh g−1 for 1H and 1T phases, respectively and GeS nano−sheet of 512 mAh g−1, the capacity of Na4MoO2 is also competitive. Therefore MoO2 monolayer should be a promising candidate for an electrode material in SIBs. For the case of K and Ca adsorbed MoO2, electrode potentials are in the range of 0.02−1.79 V and 0.25−1.16 V, with the Vave of 0.75 and 0.35 V, respectively. Due to the large ionic radius of K and Ca, the maximum x is estimated to be 2.5 and 3, and the corresponding capacity of KIB and CIB is 523 and 1256 mAh g−1. When evaluating cycling stability, the degree of structural deformation would cause substantial loss of capacity in several cycles. After the absorption of max- imum Na, K, and Ca, the thickness of MoO2 is 2.50, 2.48, 2.52 ̊A respectively, slightly stretched from the original thickness of 2.47 ̊A. The bond length of Mo−O changes negligibly. During the process of ions intercalation/deintercalation, the structure remains intact to ensure good cycle performance and a smooth sur- face that will undoubtedly minimizes diffusion resistance during the metal ion transport. So far, the MoO2 anode for KIBs is predicted to be a perfect ma- terial, which simultaneously possesses a large specific capacity (523 mAh g−1), excellent stability and conductivity [see Fig. 2(b)], and a modest open circuit voltage (0.75 V). 4. Conclusion In summary, we investigate the properties of 2D MoO2 monolayer as po- tential anodes for batteries beyond LIBs. With large adsorption energies, Na, K or Ca atom is preferentially absorbed over the center of the honeycomb lat- tice, and the charge transfer from metal atoms to the substrate results in a transition of semicondutive MoO2 to metallic AxMoO2. The diffusion barriers of metal atoms on the surface of MoO2 are relatively low, especially for Na and K, which are only 0.13 and 0.08 eV. The theoretical specific capacity of Na4MoO2, K2.5MoO2 and Ca3MoO2 are as high as 837 mAh g−1, 523 mAh g−1 8 and 1256 mAh g−1, respectively. When the MoO2 anodes are used for SIBs, KIBs and CIBs, the open voltage is 0.30 V, 0.75 V and 0.35 V, respectively. Moreover, MoO2 exhibits high mechanical stability and integrity upon metal insertion. Our results give insights for further experimental work in exploring the possibility of MoO2 for Na, K and Ca−ion batteries. Acknowledgments This research is supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China (grant No. 11574167), the New Century 151 Talents Project of Zhejiang Province and the KC Wong Magna Foundation in Ningbo University. Conflict of interest The authors declare they have no conflict of interest