1 Pressure-induced electronic topological transition and superconductivity in topological insulator Bi2Te2.1Se0.9 Lei Kang,1 Zi-Yu. Cao2*, and Bo Wang3 1College of Medical Information Engineering, Guangdong Pharmaceutical University, Guangzhou, 510006, China 2 Center for Quantum Materials and Superconductivity (CQMS) and Department of Physics, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, Republic of Korea 3 School of Applied Physics and Materials, Wuyi University, Jiangmen 529020, China * Correspondence should be addressed to ZYC (zy.cao317@gmail.com) 2 One approach to discovering topological superconductor is establishing superconductivity based on well-identified topological insulators. However, the coexistence of superconductivity and topological state is always arcane. In this paper, we report how pressure tunes the crystal structure, electronic structure, and superconductivity in topological insulator Bi2Te2.1Se0.9. The first pressure-induced structure transition start from 8.4 GPa, followed by the structure sequence of R-3m - C2/m - C2/c - Im-3m up to 37 GPa. Superconductivity starts to present at 2.4 GPa with the Tc around 6.6 K. Moreover, at around 2.5 GPa, the abnormal changes of c/a and the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of mode indicate the occurrence of electronic topological transition (ETT). These results suggest that ETT highly promotes the superconductivity in topological insulator Bi2Te2.1Se0.9 in the low-pressure rhombohedral phase. Our work clarifies the complex electronic structure in Bi2Te2.1Se0.9 and sheds light on the new candidate for superconductivity in topological insulators. Topological insulators are new states of quantum matter that have time-reversal symmetry protected surface or edge states residing in the bulk insulating gap and are, therefore, robust with non- magnetic impurities and external environment.1-3 By chemical doping or applying pressure, the superconductivity can be accidentally produced in the topological insulators with primordial crystallographic structure. And it provides an alternative way to create a coexistence region of bulk superconductivity and topological state in a single crystal, which may offer a path to discovering the topological superconductor.4,5 Bi2Te3 and its isostructural compounds Bi2Se3 and Sb2Te3 are prototypical precursors.6-8 The superconductivity was successfully achieved in copper intercalated Bi2Se3 at ambient pressure, resulting in intense discussions in the community on the topological superconducting nature of CuxBi2Se3.4 From the point-contact spectra, a zero-bias conductance peak, which is deemed to be the attribution of Majorana fermions, was discovered in CuxBi2Se3.9 This observation is supported by theory, 10,11 but, argued by other point-contact spectra measurement, 3 suggesting the zero-bias conductance peak can be tuned by the contact barrier strength.12 ARPES measurements revealed the existence of nontrivial surface states.13 Meanwhile, in the dc magnetization measurements, their observation is consistent with the spin-triplet pairing superconductivity with odd parity.14 However, The STM and specific heat study suggest the electron pairing in CuxBi2Se3 possesses a fully gapped s-wave symmetry, departure with the odd-parity superconductor proposed by the theory.15-17 Applying external pressure without introducing impurities can also induce superconductivity into the phase protected by the topological surface state.18,19 The superconductivity can be reviled in topological insulators Bi2Te3 and Sb2Te3 without structural phase transition at the pressure of the topologically nontrivial band structure exist.18,20-22 However, performing further experiments to investigate the superconducting mechanism under pressure is quite difficult. The superconductivity nature of these compounds is still merging further study. Bi2Se3 and its isostructural compounds Bi2Te3 and Sb2Te3 are well-known thermoelectric materials.23 Meanwhile, they show rich physical properties under pressure, such as electronic topological transition (ETT). ETT or Lifshitz transition, proposed by Lifshitz, can be driven by an external parameter such as pressure, temperature, doping, or magnetic field, resulting in variations in the topology of the Fermi surface without symmetry breaking.24 It is characterized as a 2.5 order transition that the thermodynamic potential and its first derivatives are not affected by an ETT, but the second or third derivatives are expected to vary in the vicinity of the ETT. Recent high-pressure powder XRD measurements have proved a pressure-induced ETT in Bi2Te3 and Sb2Te3 at around 3.2 GPa and 3.5 GPa.25-27 It is worth noting that the pressure-induced superconductivity in Bi2Te3 and Sb2Te3 are present at the pressure of 3.2 (1.0) and 4.0 (1.2) GPa, respectively,18,20,28 which is comparable with the ETT pressure within the uncertainty of the pressure step and measurements. The answer to whether the ETT and superconductivity are coupled may shed light on some urgent questions related to superconductivity and topological superconductivity in these compounds. In this paper, we tune the superconductivity by selenium substitution for tellurium in Bi2Te3, then 4 track down how ETT varies with pressure. Bi2Te2.1Se0.9 is the solid solution of Bi2Te3 and Bi2Se3, and they share a similar structure and topological state.29 Combined with the X-ray measurement, the sharp drop of resistance to zero at 2.4 GPa indicates that the superconductivity of Bi2Te2.1Se0.9 is not caused by structure transition. We surprisingly found that the pressure-induced ETT is pinned with the superconductivity. Moreover, the structural evolution and vibrational modes properties of Bi2Te2.1Se0.9 under pressure are also investigated and discussed. about 34.5 GPa. The resistance taken at ambient pressure is shown in the inset. As a narrow-band-gap semiconductor, Bi2Te2.1Se0.9 exhibits metallic behaviors at ambient pressure, which is similar to its mother compound Bi2Te3.30 When pressure is increased to about 2.4 GPa, a clear drop of resistance to zero occurs with a narrow transition width of about 0.5 K, which indicates that a superconducting transition emerges in Bi2Te2.1Se0.9 with the onset of transition temperature Tc of 6.6 K. Here, the Tc is defined as the intersection of two extrapolated lines shown in the Figure. With further increasing pressure to 18.3 GPa, a high Tc phase gradually emerges with a Tc of 8.9 K. Under the pressure of 22.9 GPa, only a high Tc phase with sharp transition can be observed. The emergence of the high Tc phase is induced by structural transition, which will be discussed later. It seems that the two superconducting phases coexist in the pressure range of about 18.3-22.9 GPa. The coexistence of superconducting phases can also be found in other materials.18 With further compression, the Tc is insensitive to pressure up to 34.5 GPa, which is the highest pressure in our electrical transport measurement. It is worth noting that at 28.9 GPa, the normal state resistance curve in the low-temperature region shows an upturning behavior. A hump-like feature near Tc is often observed in disordered superconductors, which can be ascribed to the development of SC puddles surrounded by a normal state.31,32 In order to explore the structural behavior and the relationship between crystal structure and superconductivity of Bi2Te2.1Se0.9 at high pressures, we performed high-pressure Raman scattering and XRD studies on Bi2Te2.1Se0.9 up to 27.0 and 36.3 GPa, respectively. Raman spectroscopy is a powerful 5 tool to study the vibrational properties and electron-phonon coupling, which has been widely used in Bi2Se3 and Bi2Te3.33 For Bi2Se3, Bi2Te3, Sb2Te3, and their solid solutions, the space group at ambient pressure belongs tp R-3m. There are three quintuple layers, stacked by van der Waal's forces, in a unit and Te atoms exhibit two different chemical environment (Te(1), Te(2)). The chemical bonding between Bi and Te(2) is covalent, while it exhibits slightly ionic between Bi and Te(1).34,35 For the Bi2Te3-xSex compounds, Se atoms, showing more electronegative than Te atoms, will occupy the Te(2) sites and then display random replacements of atoms at Te(1) sites.34,35 For Bi2Te2.1Se0.9, the doping amount of Se is small so Se atoms will occupy Te(2) sites only. motif, 15 dynamical modes exist at the center of the Brillouin zone, among which 12 are the optical branch and the other 3 are the acoustic branch. However, due to Raman inactive or insignificant scattering cross section, only three Raman active modes can be observed, which are assigned as A 1 cm-1), E 2 g (104 cm-1), and A 2 1g (141 cm-1).36 The schematic diagram of these vibrational modes is shown in Figure 2(b). Eg modes correspond to atom vibrations in the plane of the layers, while the Ag modes correspond to vibrations perpendicular to the layers.37 When pressure is increased to 11.8 GPa, abrupt changes occur in the Raman pattern. For example, the A 1 1g and A 2 1g modes disappear, and the intensity of E 2 g shows significant reduction, which indicates a phase transition. Figure 2(b) shows the pressure dependence of vibrational frequencies of the three Raman modes. The Raman modes shift to high frequency with increasing pressure due to the decrease in bond distances and increase in effective force constants.38 With further compression to 20.7 GPa, no Raman modes can be observed, suggesting the occurrence of a high symmetrized structure. Interestingly, the FWHM of A 1 1g with pressure exhibits distinct features showing a maximum at around 3.0 GPa in the initial structure. It is easily reminiscent of the recent report in Bi2Te3 and Sb2Se3 that the local maximum of the FWHM in A 1 1g phonon is an indicator of ETT.39,40 6 The high-pressure XRD patterns of Bi2Te2.1Se0.9 up to 36.3 GPa are depicted in Figure S1. X-ray diffraction is believed as a direct and efficient tool to probe the changes in the long-range structure of the crystal. With increasing pressure, the diffraction peaks shift to higher two-theta angles. This can be explained by the reduced distances of crystal planes and the shrinkage of unit cell volume with applied pressure. The structure motif seems robust with pressure below 8.4 GPa. Once the pressure is above 8.4 GPa, there are several changes in the XRD patterns, including the number, intensity, and shape of the diffraction peaks, indicating a structural transition. Upon further compression to 13.3 GPa, the original strongest peak (marked by a down-facing arrow) of phase I disappears, and the new peak of phase II (marked by an up-facing arrow) becomes the strongest peak, indicating that the transformation is complete and the existence of pure phase of phase II. When pressure is increased up to 13.8 GPa, a peak marked by a solid circle emerges, which indicates another phase transition and the emergence of phase III. At 17.7 GPa, a new peak marked by a rhombus appears, indicating the emergence of phase IV. With pressure increased to 22.9 GPa, the diffraction peaks of phase II disappear completely. However, the coexistence of phases III and IV persists to the highest pressure, 36.3 GPa, in our experiment. Upon releasing pressure, the crystal structure returns to phase I, suggesting the reversibility of the phase transitions. The structural evolution of Bi2Te2.1Se0.9 is consistent with those of Bi2Te3 and Bi2Se3,20,30,41,42 with slightly different high-pressure mixed phases. Both Raman and XRD measurements provide consistent evidence for the pressure-induced phase transitions. We refined the XRD patterns to obtain the accurate crystal structures of various Bi2Te2.1Se0.9 phases. Figures 3(a)-(d) show the Rietveld refinements of XRD patterns at different pressures, and the crystal structures of the four phases are shown in the inset. Figure 3(a) shows the refinement at 0.6 GPa, and it can be indexed with the space group R-3m, which agrees well with the reported result.36 At 13.3 GPa, the crystal structure of phase I transforms into that of II completely. The refinement [Figure 3(b)] of the XRD pattern at 13.3 GPa resolves a pure phase with C2m symmetry. When pressure is increased to 21.2 GPa, according to the XRD pattern, we can see XRD peaks from phases 7 II, III, and IV, indicating that the material is a mixture of three phases (II+III+IV). The refinement [Figure. 3(c)] at 21.2 GPa shows the mix of the three high-pressure phases, which agrees with the observed XRD pattern, and phase III has a C2/c symmetry. With further compression to 36.3 GPa, a small peak at around 2θ=12.0°, which belongs to phase III, is observed. We refine the pattern at 36.3 GPa by excluding this peak and the refinement [Figure. 3(d)] shows that phase IV can be indexed to a bcc unit cell (occupancy: 0.4 for Bi and 0.6 for Te and Se) within this structure. Bi, Te, and Se atoms are disordered to randomly share the bcc lattice sites, forming a Bi-Te-Se substitutional alloy. A complete pressure-temperature phase diagram is well established, shown in Figure 5. pressure up to about 13.0 GPa. Figure 4(c) shows the pressure dependence of the unit cell per atom up to 36.3 GPa. We can observe obvious discontinuity at several pressure points where phase transitions occur. Recent high-pressure studies reveal the pressure-induced electronic topological transition in Bi2Te3, Bi2Se3, and Sb2Te3.25-27,39 ETT is characterized as a 2.5 order transition,24 which is driven by pressure, temperature, doping, etc., resulting in variations in the topology of the Fermi surface that changes the electronic density of the surface near the Fermi energy. No discontinuity of the volume(first derivative of the Gibbs free energy ) can be seen. Still, variations of the second derivative of the Gibbs free energy, such as compressibility, are expected. Moreover, phonon softening and transport properties anomalies may also be observed during ETT.43 It is shown that there is a clear change in the c/a ratio, but without volume discontinuity around the ETT in the Bi2Te3, Bi2Se3, and Sb2Te3 under pressure.25-27,39 We also observed similar changes in Bi2Te2.1Se0.9 at about 2.5 GPa [Figures 4(b) and 4(c)]. To confirm whether an ETT occurs in Bi2Te2.1Se0.9, we performed a linearization of the BM-EOS vs. the Eulerian strain: ' 0 0 0 3 ( 4) 2 E H B B B f    (1) Where B0 denotes the isothermal bulk modulus, B ' 0 is the first pressure derivative of the bulk modulus, 8 52 3 (1 2 ) E E P H f f   (2) is the reduced pressure, and 2 1 3 E X f   (3) is the Eulerian strain, with 1 0 3 ( V ) X  V (4) where V0 is the volume per atom at ambient pressure, and V is the volume per atom at pressure P given in GPa. Without the ETT, the reduced pressure H vs. the Eulerian strain ƒE should be linear. Figure 4(d) shows the reduced pressure H as a function of the Eulerian strain ƒE. We can see a clear change at about 2.5 GPa, indicating the presence of an ETT. Figures 4(e) and 4(f) show the H(ƒE) plot for the The kink present in the slop of Ha, however, is absent in the pressure dependence of Hc, providing an anisotropy nature in the ETT. It indicates that the compressibility perpendicular to the layers shows great change after ETT, while the compressibility parallel to the layers is not. The resulting is self- consistent with the abnormal changes of c/a shown in figure 4 (b). The changes in the slopes of H and Ha vs. pressure give solid evidence for the pressure-induced ETT at about 2.5 GPa in Bi2Te2.1Se0.9, which is consistent with the changes in the slope of FWHM of phonon as a function of pressure in Raman spectra. Slight selenium substitution for tellurium in Bi2Te3 shifts the appearance of ETT from 3.2 to 2.5 GPa. In the meantime, the superconductivity presents follow the shifts of ETT at 3.2 GPa in Bi2Te3 and 2.4 GPa in Bi2Te2.1Se0.9. Clearly, the superconductivity in this compound is pinned with the ETT, which indicates the ETT may play a crucial role in the appearance of superconductivity in Bi2Te3-xSex 9 at the initial phase of R-3m symmetry. These results underline that ETT highly promotes or even induces superconductivity in topological insulator Bi2Te2.1Se0.9 in the low-pressure rhombohedral phase. In summary, we have explored the high-pressure behaviors of Bi2Te2.1Se0.9 using X-ray diffraction, Raman scattering, and electrical resistance measurements. By electrical resistance measurement, electrical resistance measurement can observe superconductivity at 2.4 GPa with a Tc of about 6.6 K in Bi2Te2.1Se0.9. X-ray diffraction and Raman experiments indicate that the first crystal phase transition occurs at about 8.4 GPa, much larger than the pressure value where superconductivity arises. Moreover, at about 2.5 GPa, the abnormal changes in the c/a ratio and the FWHM of A 1 1g mode indicate the occurrence of electronic topological transition (ETT). Compared with the well-investaged sample Bi2Te3, Our results suggest that ETT and superconductivity are highly coupled in Bi2Te2.1Se0.9 at the low-pressure rhombohedral phase. Our results and finding clarifies the complex electronic structure and may shed light on the superconductivity mechanism in topological insulator Bi2Te2.1Se0.9. Experimental Methods The elements Bi, Te, and Se (99.5%, Alfa Aesar Co.) were weighted according to the molecular formula Bi2Te2.1Se0.9. After being thoroughly grounded and pressed into a pellet, the mixture was loaded into a quartz tube sealed under a vacuum degree of 10-4 Pa. Then, the quartz tube was put into a muffle heated at the rate of 5 K/min to 1073 K and kept at the temperature for 12 hours to get the pure phase of Bi2Te2.1Se0.9. The ingot was grounded to nanoscale powder and compacted by a vacuum hot-pressing furnace at a pressure of 55 MPa for 0.5 h. The sample was polycrystal with a relative density above 99.7% of the theoretical density. The crystal phase of the sample was confirmed by X- ray diffraction at room temperature using Cu Kalpha radiation. The high-pressure electrical transport properties were investigated using the standard four-probe 10 method in a diamond anvil cell (DAC) made of CuBe alloy. Slim Pt wires of 10 um in diameter were used as electrodes.44 A T301 stainless steel gasket covered with fine cubic BN powder was used to insulate the electrode from the gasket. The low-temperature measurements were performed in Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS). High-pressure XRD and Raman measurements were performed using diamond anvil cells with a diameter culet of 300 um, and T301 stainless steel plates were used as gaskets. We used the standard ruby fluorescence method to calculate pressures in the sample chamber.45 Renishaw inVia Raman microscope using standard backscattering geometry was used to carry out Raman measurements. A diode pumped solid state laser with the wavelength of 532 nm was applied to excite the sample, and the output power was 10 mW. The spectral resolution of the Raman system was around 1 cm-1. In situ high-pressure angle-dispersive X-ray diffraction (ADXRD) experiments were performed on the 4W2 beamline at the High-Pressure Station of the Beijing Synchrotron Radiation Facility (BSRF) with a wavelength of 0.6199 Å. The average acquisition time was 300 s. The sample to detector distance and geometric parameters were calibrated using a CeO2 standard. A MAR345 image plate detector was used to collect the diffraction patterns, and the two- dimensional XRD images were converted to one-dimensional intensity versus diffraction angle 2- theta patterns using FIT2D software.46 High-pressure structural information was obtained using the Rietveld refinement method combined in the GSAS package. Acknowledgments The authors want to show their great reverence and gratitude to Dr. Xiao-jia Chen (HPSTAR, Shanghai) and Dr. Viktor Struzhkin (Geophysical Laboratory, Carnegie Institution of Washington) for their helpful instructions and discussions. This work is supported by the financial supports from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (22074024), Key scientific research platforms and projects of Guangdong colleges and universities (2021ZDZX2043), and Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province (2214050009294). Medical Scientific Research Foundation of Guangdong 11 Province, China (No. A2021487), Science and Technology Program of Guangzhou, China (No. 202102020778). X-ray diffraction experiments were conducted at 4W2 beamline, Beijing Synchrotron Radiation Facility (BSRF) which is supported by Chinese Academy of Sciences. Portions of this work were performed at the 15U1 beamline at the Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility (SSRF). Data availability All data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. Conflict of interest The authors declare no conflict of interest.