1 An unusual continuous paramagnetic-limited superconducting phase transition in 2D NbSe2 Egon Sohn1,2, Xiaoxiang Xi1,3, Wen-Yu He4, Shengwei Jiang1,2, Zefang Wang1,2, Kaifei Kang1,2, Ju-Hyun Park5, Helmuth Berger6, László Forró6, Kam Tuen Law4, Jie Shan1,2,7*, Kin Fai Mak1,2,7* 1Department of Physics, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, USA 2Department of Physics and School of Applied and Engineering Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA 3National Laboratory of Solid State Microstructures, School of Physics, and Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Microstructures, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China 4Department of Physics, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong, China 5National High Magnetic Field Laboratory, Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida 32310, USA 6Institute of Condensed Matter Physics, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland 7Kavli Institute at Cornell for Nanoscale Science, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA *Correspondence to: jie.shan@cornell.edu, kinfai.mak@cornell.edu Time reversal and spatial inversion are two key symmetries for conventional Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) superconductivity 1. Breaking inversion symmetry can lead to mixed-parity Cooper pairing and unconventional superconducting properties 1-5. Two-dimensional (2D) NbSe2 has emerged as a new non-centrosymmetric superconductor with the unique out-of-plane or Ising spin- orbit coupling (SOC) 6-9. Here, we report the observation of an unusual continuous paramagnetic-limited superconductor-normal metal transition in 2D NbSe2. Using tunneling spectroscopy under high in-plane magnetic fields, we observe a continuous closing of the superconducting gap at the upper critical field at low temperatures, in stark contrast to the abrupt first-order transition observed in BCS thin film superconductors 10-12. The paramagnetic-limited continuous transition arises from a large spin susceptibility of the superconducting phase due to the Ising SOC. The result is further supported by self-consistent mean-field calculations based on the ab initio band structure of 2D NbSe2. Our findings establish 2D NbSe2 as a promising platform for exploring novel spin-dependent superconducting phenomena and device concepts 1, such as equal-spin Andreev reflection 13 and topological superconductivity 14-16. In conventional BCS superconductors, Cooper pairs are even-parity singlet 17, which yields nearly zero spin susceptibility at low temperatures. The paramagnetic- limited superconductor-normal metal transition is thus an abrupt first-order transition at 2 the upper critical field 10 (Fig. 1a). This has been experimentally verified, for instance, in very thin superconducting aluminum 10, 11 and beryllium 12 films under an in-plane magnetic field, for which orbital depairing is suppressed. In non-centrosymmetric superconductors, which lack a center of inversion in the crystal structure, the presence of antisymmetric spin-orbit coupling (SOC) can give rise to a wealth of novel properties, including the superconducting magneto-electric effect 1, spin Hall effect 1 and helical phases 1, 18. In particular, the spin susceptibility of the superconducting phase can become significant compared to the normal-state value 19-21 and lead to a continuous paramagnetic-limited transition in the zero-temperature limit 22 (Fig. 1a). Such a transition, however, has not yet been observed in any systems. The recently emerged non- centrosymmetric superconductors 2D NbSe2 6-9 and gated MoS2 23, 24 possess unique Ising SOC, which pins the electron spins to the out-of-plane direction. They also have sample thickness much smaller than the bulk penetration depth, and therefore, a significantly suppressed orbital response to an in-plane magnetic field 7, 9, 23, 25. In contrast to the well known non-centrosymmetric superconductors with Rashba SOC 1-5, in which orbital effect is often important, atomically thin superconductors with Ising SOC provide an ideal platform for the investigation of the paramagnetic-limited phase transition and other pure spin-dependent superconducting phenomena and device concepts. Single-layer NbSe2 consists of a layer of Nb atoms sandwiched between two layers of Se atoms in a trigonal prismatic structure 9, 26. It has out-of-plane mirror symmetry and broken inversion symmetry. Electrons are subject to strong out-of-plane SOC fields (opposite at opposing crystal momenta), and are effectively Ising spins 9, 13, 23, 24. The Ising spins are largely preserved in each monolayer of multilayer samples due to the weak interlayer interactions 9 (Fig. 1b). Recent experimental advances in high-quality atomically thin NbSe2 samples have unveiled the coexistence of charge-density-wave order and superconductivity down to the monolayer limit 6, 8, 9, 26, in-plane upper critical fields far exceeding the spin paramagnetic limit of the BCS theory 9, and a Bose metal phase 7. The earlier studies 9, 23, 24 based on resistance measurements, however, do not have direct access to the spectroscopic information and the superconducting order parameter 13, 15, 18. Here we report the first tunneling measurement of a non- centrosymmetric superconductor in the paramagnetic-limited regime, and the observation of an unusual continuous paramagnetic-limited phase transition in 2D NbSe2 under a high in-plane magnetic field. Our result provides strong evidence for a significant spin susceptibility of the superconducting phase in the zero temperature limit originated from the Ising SOC. insulator-superconductor (NIS) junction that has been employed in this experiment. It consists of a thin layer of platinum or gold electrode, a thin layer of tunnel barrier and a superconducting NbSe2 layer. Two different tunnel barrier materials, aluminum oxide (AlOx) and few-layer MoS2, have been tested. Both types yielded similar results. Bilayer and trilayer instead of monolayer NbSe2 have been studied because of their significantly higher chemical stabilities and sheet critical current densities. Because of the weak interlayer interactions, results for atomically thin samples are similar. Below we present the trilayer result and include the bilayer result in Supplementary Sect. 4 and 5. Both the 3 four-point resistance R and the differential tunneling conductance spectrum G(V) (= dI/dV, where I is the tunneling current and V is the bias voltage) have been measured on the same devices. These quantities normalized by the normal-state values (RN and GN) are shown in Fig. 1 and 2. Raw differential conductance spectra are included in Supplementary Sect. 4. Details on the device fabrication and electrical measurements are provided in Methods and Supplementary Sect. 1 - 3. The basic characterization of 2D NbSe2 superconductors by four-point resistance measurements is shown in Fig. 1e and 1f. The critical temperature determined from the onset of the transition (90% of the normal resistance) is T! ≈ 5.8 K (Fig. 1e, top panel). The in-plane critical field H!! ∥ determined from the onset of the transition increases with decreasing temperature and saturates at ~ 38 T (Fig. 1f). This value is about 3.5 times the Pauli paramagnetic limit H! (≈ 1.84 T!) of the BCS theory 17, which supports the preserved Ising spins in trilayer NbSe2 as a result of weak interlayer interactions 9. Meanwhile, the transition width (shaded region of the fields between 90% and 10% of the normal-state resistance) increases with temperature due to the enhanced thermal fluctuations 10, 17. It approaches about 2 T at low temperatures, likely limited by sample inhomogeneities. These results agree well with the reported studies 6, 7, 9, 26. We now investigate the superconducting gap as a function of temperature and in- plane field by tunneling spectroscopy. The differential tunneling conductance spectra under zero magnetic fields are shown in Fig. 1d (symbols) for several representative temperatures. At low temperatures, they consist of two symmetric peaks that are stemmed from tunneling of normal electrons into the electron and hole branches of the quasiparticles in the superconductor 17 (Fig. 1c). The separation between the peaks corresponds to the superconducting gap 2Δ ≈ 2 meV. Finite in-gap conductance is also observed and is caused by Andreev reflection at junctions with finite transparency 17, 27. As temperature increases, the quasiparticle peaks broaden and their separation decreases, indicating the closing of the superconducting gap. For a more quantitative analysis of the tunneling spectra, we compare them to the Blonder-Tinkham-Klapwijk (BTK) model that includes both the single quasiparticle tunneling and the Andreev process in an NIS junction of arbitrary barrier strength 17, 27 (solid lines, Fig. 1d). The dimensionless barrier strength, gap energy and quasiparticle lifetime have been used as free fitting parameters. (For details refer to Supplementary Sect. 5.1 and 5.2.) The agreement between experiment and theory is generally very good except the small dips observed outside the superconducting gap unaccounted. These features likely arise from heating of local constrictions in the junction 27. For typical junctions used in this experiment, the barrier strength (~ 0.5 – 1.5) is moderate. The temperature dependence of the gap is depicted in Fig. 1e (symbols) and can be described by the BCS theory 17 (solid line). The extracted T! (dashed vertical line) is consistent with the value from the resistance measurements. The extracted zero-temperature gap size 2∆!≈ 4.3k!T! (where k! is the Boltzmann constant) is higher than the usual 3.52k!T! for a BCS superconductor 17, likely due to strong-coupling corrections 28. The behavior of the superconducting gap in an in-plane magnetic field is illustrated in Fig. 2. The contour plot in Fig. 2a is the differential conductance as a 4 function of bias voltage V (bottom axis) and in-plane field H∥ up to about 40 T (left axis) at 0.3 K (≈ 0.05T!). Figure 2b shows the representative tunneling spectra (symbols) together with comparison to the BTK model (solid lines). The BTK analysis here has neglected both the orbital effect and the Zeeman effect (see Methods for justification based on the estimated orbital-limited upper critical field). The extracted gap as a function of H∥ is summarized in Fig. 2c and the other parameters, in Supplementary Sect. 5.3, respectively. The figure also includes results at several elevated temperatures. (See Supplementary Sect. 5.5 for raw spectra and analysis.) As a comparison, we have included the classic example of superconducting aluminum thin films under an in-plane field 10, 11 in Fig. 2d (tunneling spectra) and Fig. 2e (superconducting gap extracted from the data in ref. 11 by our BTK analysis). Our results differ drastically from the behaviors of BCS thin film superconductors: (1) The two quasiparticle peaks have survived up to H∥ > 30 T, which far exceeds the Pauli paramagnetic limit of the BCS superconductors 17. (2) The two quasiparticle peaks exhibit negligible Zeeman splitting even under very high fields unlike the significant Zeeman splitting observed in the BCS superconductors 10, 11. (3) As H∥ increases, the superconducting gap drops continuously to zero at the upper critical field in the zero-temperature limit, indicating a continuous phase transition, in stark contrast to the abrupt first-order phase transition observed in BCS superconductors 10-12. The observed continuous paramagnetic-limited superconductor-normal metal transition in 2D NbSe2 is rather unique. Table 1 summarizes all currently available experiments on the order of the paramagnetic-limited transition. They range from metal thin films 10-12 to quasi-2D heavy fermion 29, 30, organic 31 and iron pnictide 32 systems such that orbital depairing is strongly suppressed under a magnetic field in order to reach the paramagnetic-limited regime. In the low-temperature limit, they all exhibit a first- order transition in contrast to 2D NbSe2. We note that non-centrosymmetric superconductors with Rashba SOC in principle can also exhibit a continuous paramagnetic-limited transition, but under an out-of-plane field (Supplementary Sect. 6.3). The orbital depairing under this configuration, however, makes it almost impossible to reach the paramagnetic-limited regime. To understand our experimental observations, we consider the free energies of the normal and superconducting states in the zero-temperature limit when all real quasiparticle excitations are frozen. Including only the spin paramagnetic effect, the free energy can be expressed as F! = −χ∥!H∥ !/2 for the normal state, and F! = −N!∆! !/2 − χ∥!H∥ !/2 for the superconducting state (ref. 1, 17). Here χ∥! and χ∥! denote the field- dependent spin susceptibility of the normal and superconducting states, respectively; N! is the density of states at the Fermi surface. For a BCS superconductor, electron spins are Heisenberg-like, i.e. no preferential direction. Under H∥, the quasiparticle peaks are Zeeman split by gμ!H∥ (ref. 10, 11) (g and μ! are the electron g-factor and the Bohr magneton, respectively). The spin susceptibility of the superconducting state is zero (χ∥! = 0) since Cooper pairs are singlet 19, 20. The spin susceptibility of the normal state is the Pauli paramagnetic susceptibility χ∥! = N!(gμ!)!/2. The transition occurs when F! = F! at the familiar upper critical field H!! ∥ = H!. It is first order since the derivative of the two free energies is discontinuous at H! (Fig. 1a) 10, 12. 5 On the other hand, in 2D NbSe2 with Ising spins pinned by the strong intralayer SOC field 9, 13, 15, H!"(≫ H∥), the in-plane field induces an electron spin magnetic moment of ~gμ!( !∥ !!") and a Zeeman splitting of ~gμ!H∥ !∥ !!" ≪ gμ!H∥. This energy is ~ 0.1 meV even at H∥ = 30 T, which explains the negligible Zeeman splitting observed in the quasiparticle peaks. The Ising SOC also endows the in-plane spin susceptibility a van Vleck character. The van Vleck spin susceptibility is originated from virtual transitions involving states over an energy scale much larger than the superconducting gap ∆! 22 (the band width, the spin-orbit splitting and ∆! of NbSe2 are on the order of 1 eV, 100 meV and 1 meV, respectively). As a result, the opening of a small superconducting gap at the Fermi surface has little effect on the spin susceptibility, i.e. χ∥! ≈ χ∥! (, 21). The two free energies therefore touch smoothly to yield a continuous paramagnetic-limited transition at a much higher H!! ∥ (Fig. 1a), as observed in our experiment. Finally, we perform quantitative calculations of the superconducting gap as a function of in-plane magnetic field in trilayer NbSe2 to validate the above physical picture. The results have been obtained by solving the self-consistent mean-field equation based on the ab initio band structure of trilayer NbSe2 and on the assumption of an isotropic s-wave pairing potential 13, 15. The latter assumption is consistent with studies of the superconducting gap of bulk NbSe2 by the angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) 33. For comparison, we have also included results when the Ising SOC has been turned off numerically. Figure 3a shows the temperature dependence of the ratio of the susceptibilities χ∥!/χ∥! in the low-field limit. Whereas χ∥!/χ∥! goes to zero at low temperature in the absence of SOC, as expected for a BCS superconductor 19, χ∥!/χ∥! remains close to unity even at low temperatures when SOC is included. Figure 3b depicts the field dependence of the gap. In the presence of SOC (main panel), the gap decreases to zero continuously with field at all temperatures, in good agreement with our experiment (Fig. 2c). In contrast, the transition becomes first order at low temperatures in the absence of SOC (inset, Fig. 3b), in agreement with the behavior of a BCS superconductor (Fig. 2e) 10-12. In conclusion, we have observed an unusual continuous paramagnetic-limited superconductor-normal metal transition in 2D NbSe2 at low temperature by tunneling spectroscopy. Our results have provided strong evidence for significant spin susceptibility of 2D NbSe2 in the zero temperature limit, which is originated from the antisymmetric Ising SOC. The findings together with the developed junction devices have paved the path for probing exotic superconducting phenomena such as equal-spin Andreev reflection, proximity phenomena and topological superconductivity 13, 15, 16 in 2D NbSe2.