1 Complete steric exclusion of ions and proton transport in two‐dimensional water K. Gopinadhan,1,2,3 S. Hu,2,4 A. Esfandiar,5,1 M. Lozada‐Hidalgo,1 F. C. Wang,1,6 Q. Yang,2,7 A. V. Tyurnina,2,8 A. Keerthi,1,2 B. Radha,1,2 A. K. Geim1,2 1School of Physics & Astronomy, University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL, UK 2National Graphene Institute, University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL, UK 3Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar, Gujarat 382355, India 4College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemistry for Energy Materials, Xiamen University, Xiamen, 361005, China 5Department of Physics, Sharif University of Technology, P.O. Box 11155‐9161, Tehran, Iran 6Chinese Academy of Sciences Key Laboratory of Mechanical Behavior and Design of Materials, Department of Modern Mechanics, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230027, China 7Key Laboratory of Advanced Technologies of Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu, Sichuan 610031, China 8Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Nobel St. 3, 143026 Moscow, Russia Biological membranes allow permeation of water molecules but can reject even smallest ions. Behind these exquisite separation properties are protein channels with angstrom‐scale constrictions (e.g., aquaporins). Despite recent progress in creating nanoscale pores and capillaries, they still remain distinctly larger than protein channels. We report capillaries made by effectively extracting one atomic plane from bulk crystals, which leaves a two‐dimensional slit of a few Å in height. Water moves through these capillaries with little resistance whereas no permeation could be detected even for such small ions as Na+ and Cl‐. Only protons can diffuse through monolayer water inside the capillaries. The observations improve our understanding of molecular transport at the atomic scale and suggest further ways to replicate the impressive machinery of living cells. It has long been an aspirational goal to create artificial structures and devices with separation properties similar to those of biological membranes1‐5. The latter utilize a number of separation mechanisms but it is believed that angstrom‐scale constrictions within protein channels6,7 play a key role in steric (size) exclusion of ions with the smallest hydration diameters DH  7 Å, typically present in biofluids and seawater8,9. Such constrictions are particularly difficult to replicate artificially because of the lack of fabrication tools capable to operate with such precision and, also, because the surface roughness of materials is typically much larger than the required angstrom scale1. Nonetheless, several artificial systems with nanometer and sub‐nanometer dimensions were recently demonstrated, including narrow carbon and boron‐nitride nanotubes5,10,11, graphene oxide laminates12,13 and atomic‐scale pores in graphene and MoS2 monolayers3,4,14. The resulting devices exhibited high selectivity with respect to certain groups of ions (for example, they blocked large ions but allowed small ones12,13 or rejected anions but allowed cations and vice versa2,3,5). Most recently, van der Waals assembly of two‐dimensional (2D) crystals15 was used to make slit‐like channels of several Å in height16,17. They were atomically smooth and chemically inert and exhibited little ( 10‐4 C cm‐2) surface charge17. The channels allowed fast water permeation16 and blocked large ions with a complete cutoff for diameters larger than 10 Å (ref. 17). Small ions (for example, those in seawater with DH of 7 Å) still permeated through those channels with little hindrance, showing that an angstrom‐scale confinement comparable to that in aquaporins6,7 is essential for steric exclusion of small‐diameter ions. In this report, we describe 2D channels with the height h of about 3.4 Å (ref. 18), which are twice smaller than any hydrated ion (smallest ions are K+ and Cl‐ with DH  6.6 Å)8,19 but sufficiently large to allow water inside (effective size of water molecules is 2.8 Å). The achieved confinement matches the size of protein constrictions in biological channels, a critical factor to mimic their selectivity6,7. 2 Our devices were fabricated using the van der Waals assembly described previously16,17. In brief, two thin (100 nm) atomically flat monocrystals were obtained by cleaving bulk graphite or hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) and placed on top of each other, with stripes of graphene serving as spacers between the two crystals (Fig. 1A). The resulting trilayer assembly can be viewed as a pair of edge dislocations with a 2D empty space connecting them. This space can accommodate only one atomic layer of water (Fig. 1B). The 2D channels were designed16,17 to have the width w  130 nm and the length L of several m. We normally used many channels in parallel ( 100) to increase sensitivity of measurements. The resulting structures were assembled on top of a silicon nitride membrane that separated two isolated containers so that 2D channels provided the only molecular pathway between the containers (Fig. 1A). For further details, see Supplementary Information. The principal difference with the capillaries reported earlier16,17 is the use of monolayer graphene as spacers. Previously, water permeation could be discerned only for capillaries with thicker spacers (h  6.7 Å) and molecular dynamics simulations also suggested that smaller 2D cavities should collapse because of van der Waals attraction between the opposite walls16. This has turned out to be incorrect as revealed by our Raman measurements, which show that water can fill even monolayer capillaries (Supplementary Fig. 1). To detect minute molecular flows through them, we needed to introduce the following improvements: 1) tenfold increase in the number n of channels probed in parallel; 2) use thicker top crystals to avoid their sagging16; and 3) clip channels’ mouths by plasma etching to remove their blockage by thin edges of the top crystal18. Fig. 1. Transport of water through one‐atom‐high capillaries. (A) Schematic of our fluidic devices. Top and bottom layers are either graphite or hBN crystals. The spacers are monolayer graphene. The trilayer assembly is supported by a free standing membrane with a rectangular opening. (B) There is space only for a monolayer of water inside such 2D cavities as molecular dynamics simulations show20,21. (C) Weight loss due to water permeation through 1,500 channels and its subsequent evaporation; L = 2 m. Bottom inset: Gravimetry setup. Top inset: Evaporation rates for three graphite/graphene/graphite devices with n = 1500. The shown rates are per 1 μm channel length. The detection limit of our gravimetry (10‐13 g s‐1) is comparable to that of helium mass spectrometers and much better than that achieved by mass spectrometry for other gases and vapors using similar devices16. We first describe water permeation through our capillaries. The inset of Fig. 1C shows a schematic of the used gravimetry setup16. The device containing 2D channels sealed a miniature container filled with water, and the weight loss was recorded as a function of time. For reference, we studied devices made in exactly the same way but without etching stripes within the graphene layer used for spacers16. No evaporation could be detected for the reference devices, even after many days of measurements. In contrast, the monolayer devices exhibited a clear weight loss evolving linearly in time (Fig. 1C). This translates into a water permeation rate of 1.510‐12 gs‐1 per μm channel length per channel. Three such devices were studied, all showing similar rates (inset of Fig. 1C). This value is 10 times smaller than the rates reported previously for devices with bilayer spacers (h  6.7 Å) and is well below the detection limit achieved in ref. 16. The difference in water evaporation 3 rates through mono‐ and bi‐ layer capillaries is larger than 4 times, which is expected from the h2 dependence for the 2D channels16,18. The additional flow reduction (by a factor of 2) is not surprising because water becomes increasingly more viscous under strong confinement16,22,23. Having established that water can flow through our 2D channels, we investigated their permeability with respect to ions. In these experiments, the devices separated two reservoirs filled with chloride solutions (inset of Fig. 2A). The electrical conductance G between the reservoirs was measured using chlorinated Ag/AgCl electrodes or calibrated reference electrodes17 (Supplementary Fig. 2). First, we tested ion conductance using chloride solutions in 1 M concentrations. Within our detection limit of 50 pS given by parasitic leakage currents of 5 pA, no conductance could be detected for any salt (some of them are listed in Fig. 2A). This is in stark contrast to the behavior observed for capillaries with thicker spacers including bilayers17. The latter (h  6.7 Å) exhibited G of the order of 10‐8 S, that is, 3 orders of magnitude above our detection limit, in agreement with the conductance expected from the known conductivity  of the 1 M chloride solutions for the given length L and cross‐sectional area nhw of the bilayer devices. The latter measurements were reported previously17 but, for consistency, repeated in this work. Despite no discernable ion transport through capillaries with h  3.4 Å, they unexpectedly showed a substantial conductance if we used HCl rather than salt solutions (Fig. 2A, Supplementary Fig. 2). The measured  for the acid varied approximately linearly with its concentration C as expected (Fig. 2B) but the absolute values were 10‐30 times smaller than for bulk HCl (black curve in Fig. 2B). This is again in contrast to the behavior found for bilayer devices (h  6.7 Å), which exhibited the conductance that agreed well with that of bulk HCl in the given geometry (Fig. 2B). Fig. 2. Steric exclusion from one‐atom‐high capillaries. (A) Conductance observed for one of our monolayer devices (n = 100; L = 10 μm; hBN/graphene/hBN) using the specified 1M solutions (symbols). The values of G were extracted from the slopes of I‐V curves over a voltage interval of 30 mV. Error bars show standard deviations (SD) in determining G from the curves. The grey area indicates our typical detection limit given by leakage currents, as found using both reference devices and blank Si nitride membranes. Several other common salts17 were tested and exhibited no discernable conductance. In total, seven devices with monolayer spacers were studied showing the same behavior. For the case of HCl, G was well above our detection limit, although it varied between different devices from 0.1 nS to 0.64 nS (Supplementary fig. 2B) yielding on average G = 0.32  0.2 nS. Inset: Schematic of our setup. (B)  calculated from the measured G for different HCl concentrations for mono‐ and bi‐ layer capillaries (red and blue symbols, respectively; red is the same device as in A). Red curve is the linear fit; black the literature values for bulk HCl. The green symbol shows  for monolayer devices using Nafion (instead of HCl) as proton reservoirs (see below). The horizontal error bar indicates the uncertainty in determining the proton concentration in Nafion films24. 4 The fact that no ion currents could be detected for salt solutions indicates steric rejection of all hydrated ions from the one‐atom‐high channels. It was previously reported17 that ion permeation remained practically unaffected if DH  h but was sharply suppressed ( 15 times) if DH exceeded h by only 50%. In our case, h  3.4 Å is at least twice smaller than DH of the tested ions, and the extrapolation of the previously observed cutoff (quicker than exponential)17 suggests that the monolayer capillaries should completely prohibit transport of any ion. This conclusion does not contradict the finite G observed for HCl because of a high concentration of protons in the latter case. They diffuse in water not as ions dressed in large hydration shells but more like particles jumping between water molecules, according to the Grotthuss mechanism25,26. In short, protons do not have hydration shells with a finite DH and, therefore, are not excluded by the angstrom confinement. To corroborate the suggested proton transport scenario, we used the same ion measurement setup but different HCl concentrations in the two reservoirs. The concentration gradient drives both H+ and Cl‐ in the same direction, from the high concentration (Ch) reservoir to the low concentration (Cl) one, and the sign of the electric current I at zero applied voltage V indicates whether majority carriers are H+ or Cl‐ (refs. 8,17). Examples of I‐V characteristics observed for our monolayer devices are shown in Fig. 3A. One can see that the current at zero V was always positive, indicating the dominant proton transport. Moreover, for the chosen gradient  = Ch/Cl = 3, the I‐V curves intersect the current axis at the same V0 = 28  4 mV regardless of the used Cl and Ch. This voltage that compensates the currents caused by concentration gradients is described by27 V0 = (tH – tCl)(kT/e) ln() where tH,Cl  are the so‐called transport numbers for H+ and Cl‐, k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature (2953 K in our experiments), and e is the elementary charge. For  = 3 and V0  28 mV, the formula yields tH – tCl  1, which can only be satisfied if tH ≈ 1 and tCl ≈ 0. This means that only protons diffuse through our monolayer devices whereas Cl‐ ions are rejected, in agreement with the conclusions reached from the experiments of Fig. 2. Fig. 3. Proton transport through monolayer water inside 2D channels. (A) I‐V curves for different concentrations of HCl in the two reservoirs connected by monolayer capillaries. Same  for all the curves (color coded). The red symbol marks voltages at zero I. The vertical bar indicates our maximum leakage currents; horizontal bar is the statistical error in determining V0 using measurements for several monolayer devices. Inset: Square‐like ice is one of the possible ices expected inside the 2D channels at room temperature, as found from molecular dynamics analyses18,28,29. (B) Proton transport using Nafion as proton reservoirs. Top inset: Schematic of our devices. Blue symbols: Their resistance as a function of length (hBN/graphene/hBN; n = 100). Bottom inset: G(n) for several Nafion devices with L = 2 m. Red and blue lines: Best linear fits. Error bars are SD, as in Fig. 1. 5 Proton transport can be probed more directly using Nafion instead of HCl (ref. 24). Nafion is a polymer in which protons are the only charge carriers and the counterions (SO3 ‐) are fixed within the polymer matrix30. Using the approach described in ref. 24, we coated our devices with Nafion from both sides, and hydrogenated Pt films were used as proton‐injecting electrodes converting electric current into a proton flow (top inset of Fig. 3B). For electrical measurements, these devices were placed in a hydrogen atmosphere at 100% relative humidity to ensure high proton conductivity of Nafion24. In comparison with our ion transport measurements, the Nafion devices were much more robust, sustained higher I (ref. 18), exhibited smaller leakage currents ( 1 pA) and showed little variations between similar devices. Because polymer molecules are much larger than h, they cannot enter 2D channels and, therefore, Nafion served in our experiments only as a reservoir providing protons for monolayer water inside the channels. Fig. 3B shows examples of the electrical resistance R = 1/G exhibited by our devices. It varied linearly with L and 1/n, as expected. Reference devices with no spacers showed negligible conductance ( 10‐11 S; error bars in Fig. 3B). One can see that R accurately extrapolates to zero in the limit of zero L (blue curve in Fig. 3B), which yields that protons experience little barrier for entry into the capillaries. The experiments yield   2.1 0.2 mS cm‐1 whereas the proton concentration in Nafion and, hence, inside the 2D water can be estimated from conductivity of our Nafion coating. It was found to be 70 mM but with a relatively large uncertainty given by details of Nafion preparation24. These values (green symbol in Fig. 2B) agree well with  found from the HCl measurements, which further substantiates our conclusion of proton‐only transport through one‐atom‐high channels. It is instructive to estimate the diffusion constant dp of protons within monolayer water that fills the capillaries. It is given by dp = (kT/eFCp)  410‐6 cm2 s‐1 where Cp is the proton concentration in HCl or Nafion, and F is the Faraday constant18. This value is more than an order of magnitude smaller than dp  910‐5 cm2 s‐1 for bulk water9,26 which is also obvious from the difference between the red and black curves in Fig. 2B, if one recalls that the conductivity of bulk HCl is  80% dominated by protons8. On the other hand, proton transport in 3D water is several times slower than that in 1D water inside sub‐nm carbon nanotubes5,11, which exhibited dp  410‐4 cm2 s‐1. The anomalously slow proton diffusion in 2D and nonmonotonic dependence of dp on dimensionality seem puzzling (dp in 2D is much smaller than in both 1D and 3D) but are consistent with different hydrogen bonding for the three cases18. For example, water molecules under 2D confinement may form either hexagonal or square‐like ice at room temperature20 (the latter is illustrated in Fig. 3A). The highly‐ ordered hydrogen bonding in 2D water should suppress rotation of water molecules with respect to 3D water, which is an essential but slowest step for proton transport, according to the Grotthuss mechanism25,26. This is in contrast to 1D water that exhibits a string‐like hydrogen bonding, which was argued5,11 to enhance proton transport (Supplementary Fig. 3). To conclude, our one‐atom‐high voids allow one monolayer of water inside but exclude all ionic species. This is in contrast to the behavior of twice larger slits (h  6.7 Å) which showed little effect on such small ions as Na+ and Cl‐ (DH  7 Å). The extreme steric exclusion for h  3.4 Å is attributed to the fact that it is no longer possible for any ion to squeeze inside the slits by deforming their hydration shells. Protons are different in that they diffuse not as hydrated H+ ions but follow the Grotthuss mechanism. The slow diffusion observed for protons in 2D water suggests that it forms a proton ordered ice, in agreement with molecular dynamics simulations.