Enhanced correlations and superconductivity in weakly interacting partially flat band systems: a determinantal quantum Monte Carlo study Edwin W. Huang,1, 2 Mohammad-Sadegh Vaezi,3, 4 Zohar Nussinov,4 and Abolhassan VaeziвҲ—1, 5 1Department of Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 2Stanford Institute for Materials and Energy Sciences, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory and Stanford University, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA 3Pasargad Institute for Advanced Innovative Solutions (PIAIS) , Tehran 1991633361, Iran 4Department of Physics, Washington University, St. Louis, MO 63160, USA 5Stanford Center for Topological Quantum Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USAвҲ— (Dated: November 22, 2018) Motivated by recent experiments realizing correlated phenomena and superconductivity in 2D van der Waals devices, we consider the general problem of whether correlation effects may be enhanced by modifying band structure while keeping a fixed weak interaction strength. Using determinantal quantum Monte Carlo, we study the 2D Hubbard model for two different band structures: a regular nearest-neighbor tight-binding model, and a partially flat band structure containing a non-dispersing region, with identical total non-interacting bandwidth W. For both repulsive and attractive weak interactions (|U| вүӘ W), correlated phenomena are significantly stronger in the partially flat model. In the repulsive case, even with U an order of magnitude smaller than W, we find the presence of a Mott insulating state near half-filling of the flat region in momentum space. In the attractive case, where generically the ground state is superconducting, the partially flat model exhibits signif- icantly enhanced superconducting transition temperatures. These results suggest the possibility of engineering correlation effects in materials by tuning the non-interacting electronic dispersion. Introduction.вҖ“ The recent discovery of superconduc- tivity in the twisted bilayer graphene (TBG) has spurred increasing interest in 2D van der Waals materi- als with structural deformations [3вҖ“10] and has inspired new venues to search for high Tc superconductivity [11вҖ“ 18]. In TBG, the band structure hosts tiny regions near K and KвҖІ valleys with nearly flat energy dispersions [19вҖ“ 24]. When these regions are partially occupied, a phase diagram similar to that of high Tc cuprates has been reported . Alongside and possibly compounding other effects, e.g., , it is widely believed that due to the large density of states (DOS) at the two tiny (nearly) flat regions, the system exhibits strong correla- tion physics [2, 26вҖ“36]. Inspired by these experiments on TBG and the broader quest of understanding flat bands, we introduce вҖңPartially Flat BandвҖқ (PFB) models wherein the band structure is neither fully flat nor fully dispersive (see Fig. 1). In PFBs, the bare kinetic (i.e., not interaction induced ) dispersion Оөk is nearly flat over a finite fraction of the Brillouin zone (BZ) with a diverging DOS. There are no reliable theoretical tools to obtain the effective low energy action for the PFB. Perturbation theory fails due to the divergence of the DOS over a fi- nite portion of the BZ. Other conventional methods of strongly correlated systems such as the Wolff-Schrieffer transformation become inapplicable. These difficulties are tied to the existence of three significantly different energy scales: (i) the bandwidth associated with the flat region, (ii) the total bandwidth, and (iii) the interaction energy scale which is much greater than (i) yet far smaller than (ii). Interactions can mix the smoothly connected -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 0 1 2 3 4 Wtot |U| Wflat E k A schematic band structure of partially flat band systems. The band structure contains a (nearly) flat region with a high DOS and a narrow bandwidth Wflat. In the PFB system, the interaction energy scale may be much smaller (larger) than the total (flat region) bandwidth; thus: Wflat вүӘ |U| вүӘ Wtot. The blue region denotes occupied energy states when the interaction is switched off. However, using DQMC we find that all single particle states inside the flat region are (almost) equally occupied upon considering interaction effects (see the text). Due to the absence of any mass gap between the flat and dispersive areas, the two regions are strongly coupled through interactions. flat and dispersive regions. These two regions may ac- tively exchange particle and energy. Thus, if the nearly flat region is partially filled, the dispersive region cannot be disregarded. A projection of the interactions onto the flat region is unjustified. In order to better grasp the physics of PFB systems, we introduce a toy model allowing numerical studies on general lattices. Herein, a large fraction (of order one) of the band structure is (nearly) flat. We utilize the Deter- minental Quantum Monte Carlo (DQMC) approach to obtain the phase diagram for both repulsive and attrac- arXiv:1811.08848v1 [cond-mat.str-el] 21 Nov 2018 2 tive weak Hubbard interactions. Due to the existence of flat areas, correlation effects are pronounced and we ex- pect to encounter evidence of strong correlation physics despite only weak interactions. In particular, we observe an emergent Mott insulating state near half-filling of the flat region in momentum space. Our calculations show that the momentum space electron occupation number becomes nearly uniform and fractional all over the flat region. This is inconsistent with the Luttinger theorem and constitutes another indication that we either have a gapless non-Fermi liquid or a Mott insulating phase. Lastly, we find a considerable enhancement of the super- conducting transition temperature for attractive interac- tions which can be generated via, e.g., retarded phonon- mediated electron-electron coupling [31, 39вҖ“41]. Model.вҖ“ The Hubbard model Hamiltonian is given by H = пҝҪ kПғ ОөkcвҖ  kПғckПғ + U пҝҪ i niвҶ‘niвҶ“. (1) Here, cвҖ  kПғ creates an electron of momentum k and spin Пғ, the (non-interacting) band dispersion is Оөk, and niПғ = cвҖ  iПғciПғ is the number operator on site i. The local (on- site) interaction is parameterized by U. Thanks to its possible relevance to high-Tc cuprate superconductors, the repulsive (U > 0) Hubbard model on a square lat- tice has been the focus of many numerical studies. Due to the fermion sign problem in quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) simulations of the repulsive Hubbard model, un- biased numerical results are absent at temperatures rele- vant to the putative superconducting phase of the model (though a variety of techniques suggest the presence of d- wave superconductivity and various competing phases). By contrast, the attractive Hubbard model (U < 0) is amenable to sign-problem-free QMC simulations, al- lowing for detailed characterization of the s-wave super- conducting phase, including calculation of Tc. We will study both the repulsive and attractive realizations of this model. For simplicity and to ease comparison to existing stud- ies of Hubbard models, we performed the simulations on the commonly studied periodic L Г— L square lattice ge- ometries. Here, the band structure Оөk = (1 + f sign(Оө0 k))Оө0 k (2) Оө0 k = вҲ’2(cos kx + cos ky). (3) The parameter f controls the flatness of the band. For f = 0, Оөk = Оө0 k corresponding to nearest neighbor hop- ping dispersion. Here, both the nearest neighbor hopping amplitude t and the lattice constant are set to unity. (In this work, all energies will be given in units of t(= 1) and we will further set the Boltzmann constant kB to unity.) For f = 1, the dispersion Оөk = 0 when Оө0 k вүӨ 0 (half the BZ) and Оөk = 2Оө0 k otherwise. We refer to the f = 0 model as the вҖңregular bandвҖқ Hubbard model and to the f = 1 system as the вҖңPFB Hubbard modelвҖқ. 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 sign (a) U = 0.5 U = 1.0 U = 1.5 U = 2.0 0 1 2 3 (b) 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 n 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 n n / n n (c) 0 1 2 0.0 0.5 1.0 U = 6 U = 8 U = 12 Doping dependence of average fermion sign (a), charge compressibility ПҮ = вҲӮвҹЁnвҹ© вҲӮОј (b), and double occupancy ratio (c) in the partially flat band model with a repulsive interaction U > 0. In the inset of (c), we plot the double occupancy ratio for the regular band Hubbard model with strong interactions. All simulations here are for a 16Г— 8 peri- odic cluster at temperature T = U/15. All error bars are Вұ1 standard error of the mean, determined by jackknife resam- pling. Importantly, the total bandwidth is fixed to Wtot = 8 in either case. Hence, our data showcases the effects of introducing a flat region in the non-interacting disper- sion, while keeping the total bandwidth constant. In all cases, we will focus on the hole-doped model (i.e., an av- erage occupancy вҹЁnвҹ© = вҹЁnвҶ‘+nвҶ“вҹ© < 1), such that if f = 1, the non-interacting Fermi level lies inside the flat region. Repulsive interaction.вҖ“ We first consider the repulsive model with a partially flat band and weak interactions U вүӨ 2. The presence of the fermion sign problem re- stricts accessible temperatures to T >вҲј U/15 for moderate system sizes (вҲј 100 sites), with certain fillings amenable to somewhat lower temperatures. Interestingly, the av- erage sign in the DQMC simulation is enhanced near a density of вҹЁnвҹ© вҲј 0.6 per unit cell and decreases rapidly away from this value [Fig. 2(a)]. This behavior is rem- iniscent of that in the repulsive Hubbard model with a regular band, where the sign is protected by particle-hole 3 0 kx 0 ky (a) ( , ) (0, 0) ( , 0) ( , ) k 2 0 2 4 6 8 10 (b) 1.0 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 N( ) (c) = 1.5 = 3.0 = 4.5 = 6.0 = 7.5 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.5 T 0.30 0.35 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 kckвҹ© for the partially flat band model with repulsive interaction U = 2 at temperature T = 0.133 and average filling вҹЁnвҹ© = 0.62, on a periodic 16 Г— 16 cluster. (b) Single particle spec- tral function A(k, Пү) along high-symmetry cuts obtained for the same simulation using maximum entropy analytic con- tinuation. (c) Single particle density of states N(Пү) for the same parameters at inverse temperatures ОІ = 1/T as given in the legend. Inset: charge compressibility as a function of temperature. symmetry at exactly half-filling (вҹЁnвҹ© = 1); doping away from half-filling (such that вҹЁnвҹ© Мё= 1) leads to a severe sign problem. While no such symmetry is exactly manifest in the partially flat model, the similar behavior of the вҹЁnвҹ© вҲј 0.6 PFB system to the regular Hubbard model at half-filling hints at similar (Mott insulating) underlying physics. To confirm this, we examine the charge compressibil- ity ПҮ = вҲӮвҹЁnвҹ© вҲӮОј in Fig. 2(b). As a function of filling, ПҮ has a pronounced dip around вҹЁnвҹ© вҲј 0.6. The compressibil- ity at вҹЁnвҹ© = 0.62 decreases with lowering temperature [Fig. 3(c), inset], indicating insulating behavior and sug- gesting an incompressible gapped ground state. To relate this behavior to Mott physics and quantitatively assess correlation effects, we compare the number of doubly oc- cupied sites вҹЁnвҶ‘nвҶ“вҹ© to the uncorrelated case (in which вҹЁnвҶ‘nвҶ“вҹ© = вҹЁnвҶ‘вҹ©вҹЁnвҶ“вҹ© = вҹЁnвҹ©2/4). The ensuing ratio is plot- ted in Fig. 2(c). For a regular Hubbard model [inset of Fig. 2(c)], at half-filling, this ratio is suppressed when there are strong interactions. This ratio remains sup- pressed upon hole-doping but rises for electron-doping where double occupancy becomes unavoidable. In the PFB model, we observe the same behavior relative to a filling of вҹЁnвҹ© вҲј 0.6 at which a crossover occurs. The sup- pression, even for U вҲј 1, of double occupancy in the PFB system is comparable in magnitude to that of the regu- lar band Hubbard model with U вҲј 8. Taken together, the analogies between the weakly interacting PFM model and the regular band strongly interacting Hubbard model demonstrate that even weak interactions are sufficient to enable correlated phenomena given the correct band structure. Knowing that a Mott insulating state appears in the PFB model when вҹЁnвҹ© вҲј 0.6, we now explore in greater depth the momentum and energy dependence of the single-particle properties. In Fig. 3(a), we plot the elec- tron occupancy вҹЁnkвҹ© = вҹЁcвҖ  kckвҹ©. As is evident from Eq. 3, the non-dispersive flat region is delineated by |kx| + |ky| вүӨ ПҖ. In this region, the electron occupancy varies from 0.52 to 0.55 while the total filling (Fig. 3(a)) is вҹЁnвҹ© = 0.62. Thus, the crossover seen in Fig. 2 at вҹЁnвҹ© вҲј 0.6 corresponds to a half-filling of the flat portion of the PFB. Inconsistency with LuttingerвҖҷs theorem implies a non- Fermi liquid type behavior or a featureless gapped (Mott insulating) state. This special behavior of the occupancy suggests a modified mean-field approach to the PFB for the effective low energy action from which the emergence of the Mott insulator becomes obvious . To corroborate these statements, we computed the single-particle spectral function A(k, Пү) by an analytical continuation of the imaginary time GreenвҖҷs function us- ing the Maximum Entropy method . Fig. 3(b) shows A(k, Пү) along high-symmetry cuts of the BZ. The most pertinent feature is the presence of a Mott gap through- out the flat region. In Fig. 3(b), for U = 2 and a temper- ature T = 0.133, the gap is largest (вҲј 0.8) at k = (0, 0), and gradually drops near the boundaries of the flat re- gion. Fig. 3(c) provides the single-particle density of states N(Пү) = 1 L2 пҝҪ k A(k, Пү) for different temperatures; the gap opening temperature is estimated to be between T = 0.22 and 0.33 concomitant with the onset of insulat- ing behavior in the charge compressibility [inset]. Attractive interaction.вҖ“ While we have found strong indications of Mott insulating physics in the repulsive partially filled model with only weak interactions, the sign problem prevents a detailed study of phases that emerge by doping away from вҹЁnвҹ© вҲј 0.6. By contrast, 4 0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 s (a) 0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 L 7/4Ps (b) 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 (d) 0.0 0.1 0.2 T 0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 zz(q = 0, = 0) (c) 0.0 0.1 0.2 T 0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 (e) Estimates of the superconducting transition tem- perature Tc for the regular attractive (a,b,c) and PFB (d,e) Hubbard models. Here, U = вҲ’2 and вҹЁnвҹ© = 0.8. We plot the superfluid stiffness ПҒs (Eq. (4)) in (a), the s-wave pair-field susceptibility (Eq. (8)) multiplied by LвҲ’7/4 (b,d), and the static spin susceptibility (Eq. (9)) (c,e). The dashed line in (a) is 2T/ПҖ. The shaded regions indicate estimates of Tc. by studying the attractive Hubbard model via DQMC , we can establish concrete results on the effect of the modified band structure on superconductivity. In 2D simulations, accurate estimates of superconducting Tc may be obtained using the Nelson-Kosterlitz (NK) criterion for superfluid stiffness: ПҒs(Tc) = 2Tc/ПҖ. For finite cluster simulations, the temperature where ПҒs(T) intersects with 2T/ПҖ provides an estimate for Tc in the thermodynamic limit. In DQMC, ПҒs may be calculated as ПҒs = 1 4 пҝҪ ОӣL вҲ’ ОӣT пҝҪ (4) ОӣL = lim qxвҶ’0 Оӣxx(qx, qy = 0, Пүn = 0) (5) ОӣT = lim qyвҶ’0 Оӣxx(qx = 0, qy, Пүn = 0), (6) 0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 zz(q = 0, = 0) (a) 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 (c) U = 1 U = 2 U = 3 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 T 0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 zz(q = 0, = 0) (b) n = 0.8 n = 0.6 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 T 0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 (d) the regular attractive Hubbard model (a,b) and in the par- tially flat band model (c,d). The downturn in the static spin susceptibility signals formation of singlet pairs and provides a rough indication of Tc. where Оӣxx(q, Пүn) = пҝҪ i пҝҪ ОІ 0 dП„ eвҲ’i(qВ·riвҲ’ПүnП„)вҹЁjx(i, П„)jx(0, 0)вҹ©. (7) Here, jx(i) is the x component of the current density operator at lattice site i, j(i) = пҝҪ jПғ itij (ri вҲ’ rj) cвҖ  iПғcjПғ where tij is the hopping between sites i and j (related to the dispersion through tij = вҲ’ 1 L2 пҝҪ k eikВ·(riвҲ’rj)Оөk.) We show the results of this analysis in Fig. 4(a), for the attractive regular band Hubbard model for U = вҲ’2, and вҹЁnвҹ© = 0.8. Comparing simulations on different cluster sizes allows us to estimate Tc вүҲ 0.056(5) for these pa- rameters. Here, the minimal cluster size for a reasonable estimate of Tc is вҲј 20 Г— 20. (In a previous DQMC simu- lation of the attractive Hubbard model for U = вҲ’4, a lattice of size вҲј 10Г—10 was sufficient for estimating Tc. For low |U|, the longer superconducting coherence length requires larger clusters to mitigate finite-size effects.) A PFB requires many real-space hopping amplitudes to be non-zero. Consequently, the computation of the current correlator becomes expensive. As an alternative, we infer Tc from the behavior of the pair field susceptibil- ity and of the static spin susceptibility. The equal-time s-wave pair field susceptibility is given by Ps = вҹЁ{вҲҶ, вҲҶвҖ }вҹ©, (8) where вҲҶвҖ  = 1 L пҝҪ i cвҖ  iвҶ‘cвҖ  iвҶ“ = 1 L пҝҪ k cвҖ  kвҶ‘cвҖ  вҲ’kвҶ“ is the s-wave pair field creation operator at zero net momentum. The 5 spin susceptibility is given by ПҮzz(q, П„) = вҹЁTП„Sz(q, П„)SвҖ  z(q)вҹ©, (9) where Sz(q) = 1 L пҝҪ i eвҲ’iqВ·ri пҝҪ cвҖ  iвҶ‘ciвҶ‘ вҲ’ cвҖ  iвҶ“ciвҶ“ пҝҪ . We focus on the static spin susceptibility at q = 0: ПҮzz(q, Пү = 0) = пҝҪ ОІ 0 dП„ ПҮzz(q, П„). (We consider only the z component of spin; ПҮxx, ПҮyy, and ПҮzz are identical within statistical errors). Upon cooling below Tc, one expects that the formation of singlet pairs suppresses the static spin susceptibility. In the absence of a pseudogap, the onset temperature of this suppression provides an estimate of Tc. A corre- sponding rise of the pair field susceptibility would confirm that the suppression of spin susceptibility is due to the onset of superconductivity. Figs. 4(a-e) display the results of DQMC calculations for the temperature dependence of the pair field suscep- tibility and the static spin susceptibility. For the reg- ular band, we observe the expected downturn in spin susceptibility and rise in pair field susceptibility near Tc вүҲ 0.056(5). Similar behavior occurs in the PFB model at Tc вүҲ 0.11(1), indicating that the attractive Hubbard model with a PFB has doubled the superconducting tran- sition temperature of the model with a regular dispersion. This increase is partially anticipated by the larger den- sity of states in the PFB. We emphasize that this is while keeping the interaction strength and the total noninter- acting bandwidth fixed. An enhancement of superconductivity in the attractive PFB appears for different interaction strengths and dop- ings. In Figs. 5(a,b), we vary the interaction strength for both the regular band and the PFB models. As before, the downturn in the static spin susceptibility provides a rough indication of Tc. When |U| = 3, the Hubbard model Tc rises to 0.12(2) for the regular band model and 0.18(2) for the FBM. For a smaller interaction strength of |U| = 1, the PFB model has a Tc of 0.06(5) while the Tc of the regular band model was too low to be read- ily accessible. In Figs. 5(c,d), we contrast the effects of additional hole doping within the two models. As the number density varies from вҹЁnвҹ© = 0.8 to вҹЁnвҹ© = 0.6, the regular band Hubbard model Tc decreases from 0.056(5) to 0.035(5) while the PFB model shows little variation its Tc. Conclusions.вҖ“ We introduced and studied PFB sys- tems. PFBs may be realized in diverse experimental are- nas, e.g., TBG or heavy fermion systems. Our DQMC analysis illustrates that the existence of flat subregions enhances the correlation effects even for interactions sig- nificantly weaker than the total bandwidth. We found a Mott insulating state for weak local repulsion and an s-wave superconductor with a considerably enhanced Tc for weak local attraction. Our PFB model may aid the understanding of TBG whose band structure hosts ex- tremely tiny (nearly) flat areas due to the very large spa- tial extent of the Moir МҒe super-lattices. Studying systems with such super-cells is not computationally feasible. As we discussed earlier, the dispersive non-flat regions that are connected to small flat domains of the TBG may not be ignored. Thus, a projection of the Hamiltonian onto the flat region is not possible. One needs to keep sin- gle particle (hole) excitations with energies of order the interaction scale |U| above (below) the flat region. Our PFB model captures these essential features and provides a simple toy model to study TBG which is computation- ally feasible as well (albeit by imposing triangular lattice symmetry). The ideal PFB (i.e., the model exhibiting exactly flat subregions of the band) requires the existence of finite hopping amplitudes between distant sites. Nonetheless, we may truncate these amplitudes beyond a cutoff dis- tance without impacting the low energy physics. In doing so, we may still achieve nearly flat regions with enhanced correlation. Remarkably, augmenting a nearest neighbor hopping tight binding amplitude (t = 1) by an additional next nearest neighbor hopping amplitude t2 вүҲ вҲ’0.54 suf- fices to achieve a high DOS in the lower half of the band structure on the square lattice. Such a simple model might be realizable in 2D van der Waals devices with square lattice symmetry or in cold atoms systems via photo-induced coupling experiments or through applying pressure, and is expected to have an amplified supercon- ducting transition temperature.