Weyl-loop half metal in Li3(FeO3)2 Cong Chen,1, 2 Zhi-Ming Yu,2 Si Li,2 Ziyu Chen,1 Xian-Lei Sheng,1, 2, ∗ and Shengyuan A. Yang2, 3 1Department of Physics, Key Laboratory of Micro-nano Measurement-Manipulation and Physics (Ministry of Education), Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China 2Research Laboratory for Quantum Materials, Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore 487372, Singapore 3Center for Quantum Transport and Thermal Energy Science, School of Physics and Technology, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing 210023, China Nodal-line metals and semimetals, as interesting topological states of matter, have been mostly studied in nonmagnetic materials. Here, based on first-principles calculations and symmetry anal- ysis, we predict that fully spin-polarized Weyl loops can be realized in the half metal state for the three-dimensional material Li3(FeO3)2. We show that this material has a ferromagnetic ground state, and it is a half metal with only a single spin channel present near the Fermi level. The spin- up bands form two separate Weyl loops close to the Fermi level, which arise from band inversions and are protected by the glide mirror symmetry. One loop is of type-I, whereas the other loop is of hybrid type. Corresponding to these two loops in the bulk, on the (100) surface, there exist two fully spin-polarized drumheads of surface states within the surface projections of the loops. The effects of the electron correlation and the spin-orbit coupling, as well as the possible hourglass Weyl chains in the nonmagnetic state have been discussed. The realization of fully spin-polarized Weyl-loop fermions in the bulk and drumhead fermions on the surface for a half metal may generate promising applications in spintronics. I. INTRODUCTION Topological metals and semimetals have been attract- ing extensive attention in recent research [1–5]. In these materials, the electronic band structure exhibits pro- tected band crossings near the Fermi level. The low- energy electrons around these band crossings may ac- quire an emergent pseudospin degree of freedom and can have distinct types of dispersions. For example, in the Weyl/Dirac semimetals, the conduction and va- lence bands cross at isolated twofold/fourfold degenerate nodal points in the Brillouin zone (BZ), such that the low-energy electrons resemble the relativistic Weyl/Dirac fermions [6–20], and hence many fascinating phenomena in relativity and high-energy physics may be simulated in condensed matter experiments [21–23]. For a three-dimensional (3D) crystalline material, be- sides the 0D nodal points, the band crossing may also form 1D nodal lines or 2D nodal surfaces [25–27]. A variety of nodal lines have been discovered [28–40], and they may be classified according to different character- istics. For example, a single nodal loop can be classi- fied by its winding pattern around the BZ (which is a three-torus) , characterized by a Z3 index, so a loop circling around a high-symmetry point is distinct from a loop traversing the BZ. A nodal line can also be classi- fied according to the type of energy dispersion, leading to type-I, type-II , and hybrid nodal lines . The classification can also be based on the order of dis- persion: besides the conventional linear order disper- sion, Yu et al. have shown that quadratic and cu- bic nodal lines can also exist. In addition, when two or ∗Electronic address: xlsheng@buaa.edu.cn more lines are present, they may interconnect and form interesting patterns in the BZ, such as crossing nodal rings , nodal boxes , nodal chains [46–49], and Hopf links [50–54]. The previous study on nodal lines are mostly in non- magnetic materials, whereas the examples with magnetic nodal lines are rather limited, such as MnF3 , some cubic magnetic oxides , and magnetically ordered GdSbTe . Two classes of nodal lines in antiferromag- netic systems have been proposed by model analysis . Obviously, the nodal lines in magnetic materials repre- sent another distinct type. Particularly, it would be most interesting when the material is a half metal, i.e., when the bands around the Fermi level are all belong to a sin- gle spin channel, then the nodal line would be completely spin polarized. Consequently, all the interesting physical properties associated with the nodal-line fermions hap- pen only for a single spin, and the spin polarization can be switched by controlling the magnetization direction. Thus, such topological half metals have great potential for spintronics applications for information storage and processing, with the advantages of high speed and low power consumption. In this work, by first-principles calculations, we reveal the 3D material Li3(FeO3)2 as a Weyl-loop half metal with fully spin-polarized topological features. We show that the material has a ferromagnetic ground state, and it is a half metal: only spin-up bands are present around the Fermi level, whereas the spin-down bands have an energy gap ∼ 1.35 eV. Remarkably, the crossing between the spin-up bands form two separate doubly degenerate Weyl loops close to the Fermi level. One Weyl loop cen- tered around the R point in the kx = π plane is a type-I loop, while the other centered around the Γ point in the kx = 0 plane is a hybrid loop. Such pattern of magnetic Weyl loops has not been reported before. Corresponding arXiv:1811.05254v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 13 Nov 2018 2 to these two loops, there exist fully spin-polarized topo- logical drumhead surface states in two separate regions on the (100) surface. The robustness of the band fea- tures against spin-orbit coupling (SOC) and correlation effects are discussed. In addition, we show that by sub- stituting Fe with Te, the material can become a metal with Weyl chains dictated by nonsymmorphic symme- tries. Our work reveals a new magnetic topological state with fully spin-polarized Weyl loops and drumhead sur- face states, which may have promising applications in spintronics. II. COMPUTATIONAL METHOD The first-principles calculations are based on the density-functional theory (DFT) as implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) , us- ing the projector augmented wave method . The generalized gradient approximation (GGA) with Perdew- Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) realization was adopted for the exchange-correlation potential. The plane-wave cut- off energy was set to 500 eV. The Monkhorst-Pack k- point mesh of size 11 × 11 × 7 was used for the BZ sampling. To account for the correlation effects for tran- sition metal elements, the DFT+U method was used for calculating the band structures. U values be- tween 0 and 6 eV have been tested for the Fe-3d orbitals. The crystal structure was optimized until the forces on the ions were less than 0.01 eV/ ̊A. From the DFT results, the maximally localized Wannier functions (MLWF) for Fe-3d and O-2p orbitals were constructed, based on which the tight-binding models for bulk and semi-infinite sys- tems were developed to study the surface states [66–69]. III. CRYSTAL STRUCTURE The crystal lattice structure for Li3(FeO3)2 is shown in Fig. 1(a-b), which belongs to the orthorhombic crys- tal system, with space group No. 34 (Pnn2). The lat- tice consists of a framework of Fe atoms, with each Fe atom surrounded by six oxygen atoms, forming an oc- tahedral crystal field, and the Li atoms are intercalated Li3(FeO3)2. Atom Wyckoff letter x y z Li1 2a 0.5 0.5 Li2 2a 0.5 0.5 Li3 2b 0.5 0.0 Fe1 2a 0.5 0.5 Fe2 2b 0.5 0.0 O1 4c O2 4c O3 4c Li Fe/Te O a b Г X U Z T Y S R c b a (a) (b) (c) a b Fe Li O ture for Li3(FeO3)2. (c) The corresponding Brillouin zone. The red lines indicate the paths where the bands are twofold degenerate (see the discussion in Sec. V). into the framework to reach electronic neutrality. One unit cell here contains two formula units of Li3(FeO3)2. The Wyckoff coordinates are given in Table I. This struc- ture was proposed in Materials Project , which has been demonstrated to be energetically and dynamically stable. The optimized lattice constants are a0 = 4.7952 ̊A, b0 = 4.8122 ̊A, and c0 = 8.1250 ̊A. There are two glide mirror planes involving half lattice transla- tions ̃ Mx : (x, y, z) → (−x + 1 2, y + 1 2, z + 1 2) and ̃ My : (x, y, z) → (x + 1 2, −y + 1 2, z + 1 2). Combining these two operations leads to the twofold rotation C2z. These symmetries will be important for our discussion below. IV. MAGNETIC CONFIGURATION Before studying electronic structure, it is important to determine the magnetic ground state for the mate- rial. The 3d element Fe in Li3(FeO3)2 carries a nonzero magnetic moment. These moments spontaneously order in the ground state. To facilitate the study of magnetic configurations, here we focus on the framework consist- ing of only the Fe atoms. Figures 2(a-c) illustrate the framework of Fe atoms, which displays honeycomb-like structure when viewed from different directions. Here, we investigate four different kinds of possible magnetic configurations as shown in Figs. 2(d-g). These include the ferromagnetic (FM) state [Fig. 2(d)], the N ́eel-type antiferromagnetic (NAFM) state, the striped antiferro- magnetic (SAFM) state, and the zigzag-type antiferro- magnetic (ZAFM) state. For each of these states, we consider four possible orientations for the magnetic mo- ments, namely, the , the , the , and the directions. Our first-principles calculations show that the lowest energy occurs for the FM configuration, i.e., when the magnetic moments are aligned in the direc- 3 tion (pointing from one Fe atom to another equivalent Fe atom). The comparison of the total energies for these states are shown in Table II. In the table, the values shown for the AFM states are for the respective lowest energy spin orientations. The large energy difference be- tween the FM and the nonmagnetic states indicates the high stability of the magnetic ordering. In the following, we take FM as the ground state configuration for studying the electronic band structure for Li3(FeO3)2. V. SPIN-POLARIZED WEYL LOOPS After identifying the magnetic ground state, we then concentrate on the electronic band structure. Figure 3(a) shows its detailed band structure for Li3(FeO3)2 in the FM configuration. Here, the U value is taken to be 4 eV, which is typical for Fe. SOC is neglected for now, be- cause its strength is small for the light elements involved in this material. The effects of the U value and the SOC on the band features will be discussed later. One observes that the material is a half metal, with one channel (spin up) being metallic and another channel (spin down) being insulating. From the projected density of states (PDOS) as displayed in Fig. 3(b), one clearly sees that the states around the Fermi energy are fully polarized in the spin-up channel, while the spin-down channel has a large gap of about 1.35 eV. The low-energy states are dominated by the Fe-3d and the O-2p orbitals. In Fig. 4, we show an enlarged view of the low-energy bands around the Fermi level. Two kinds of features can be observed. First, the bands are doubly degenerate along the high-symmetry paths indicated by the red lines in Fig. 1(c) (some are not shown in Fig. 4). Second, linear band crossing points appear on the paths Γ-Y , Γ-Z, R-U, and R-S, as indicated in Fig. 4. b c c a a b c FM (a) (c) (b) (d) NAFM (e) SAFM (f) ZAFM (g) framework, from (a) , (b) , and (c) directions. The lower panels illustrate the possible magnetic configura- tions that we have considered: (d) ferromagnetism (FM), (e) N ́eel antiferromagnetism (NAFM), (f) striped AFM (SAFM), and (g) zigzag AFM (ZAFM). (a) Energy (eV) 0 -1.5 1.5 Y Γ Z U R S X U PDOS (b) 17 -17 0 Total O_p Fe_d -8 -4 0 4 Energy (eV) (a) Band structure of Li3(FeO3)2 with on-site Coulomb repulsion U = 4.0 eV (red and blue lines correspond to spin-up and spin-down channels, respectively). (b) Spin- polarized total and projected density of states of Li3(FeO3)2, with the spin-up taking positive values and the spin-down taking negative values. Let’s first investigate the double degeneracy appearing on the high-symmetry paths marked in Fig. 1(c). We shall show that such degeneracy is guaranteed by the symmetry of the system. Before proceeding, it is important to note that with- out SOC, the spin and the orbital degrees of freedom are independent and can be regarded as different subspaces. The spin orientation does not affect the orbital part of the wave function. With a chosen spin polarization axis, the two spin channels are decoupled, and hence in terms of symmetry properties, the bands for each spin species can be effectively regarded as for a spinless system. Thus, re- garding the states of one spin, such as the spin-up bands here, all the crystalline symmetries are preserved . For example, consider the degeneracy along the U-X that of the FM ground state), as well as magnetic moment M (in μB) per Fe atom, obtained for several magnetic con- figurations as illustrated in Fig. 2. The values are calculated by GGA+SOC method with U = 4.0 eV. Paramagnetic state has Etot = 6.660 eV and M = 0. FM FMx FMy FMz NAFM SAFM ZAFM Etot 0.0 M 4 Energy (eV) 0 -0.4 0.4 Y Γ Z U R S X U 1 2 3 4 near the Fermi level. The band-crossing points are labeled by the numbers. path. One notes that any k point on this path is invariant under both ̃ Mx and ̃ My. The commutation relationship between ̃ Mx and ̃ My is given by ̃ Mx ̃ My = T ̄110 ̃ My ̃ Mx, (1) where T ̄110 = eikx−iky represents the translation along the [ ̄110] direction by one unit cell. Along U-X, we have kx = π and ky = 0, hence T ̄110 = −1. Therefore, the two glide mirrors anti-commutate along this path. As a result, for any energy eigenstate |u⟩ with ̃ Mx eigenvalue gx, it must have a degenerate partner ̃ My|u⟩ with ̃ Mx eigenvalue −gx. This proves that the double degeneracy on U-X is guaranteed by symmetry. Next, we consider the path U-Z with ky = 0 and kz = π. It is an invariant subspace for the combined operation T ̃ Mx. We note that (T ̃ Mx)2 = T011 = e−iky−ikz, (2) where we have used T 2 = 1 for the spinless case. Con- sequently, (T ̃ Mx)2 = −1 for any k point on U-Z. This anti-unitary operator thus generates a Kramers-like dou- ble degeneracy on on U-Z. Similar analysis applies for the other four paths Z- T, T-Y , Y -S, and S-X, showing that all the bands are doubly degenerate along these paths. Now, let’s turn to investigate the band crossing points, as labeled by 1 to 4 in Fig. 4. A careful scan of the band structure near these crossing points shows that these points are in fact not isolated. Instead, they are located on two separate nodal loops, as illustrated in Fig. 5(a). One loop (denoted as L1) lies in the kx = 0 plane, cen- tered at the Γ point. The other loop (denoted as L2) lies in the kx = π plane, centered at the R point. Figure 5(b- c) shows the shape of the two nodal loops obtained from the first-principles calculations. In the following, we show that the two loops are pro- tected by the ̃ Mx symmetry and are caused by band in- version. Let’s consider L2 in the kx = π plane. Here, we take a path l which connects R to some arbitrary point P on U-X. According to the previous discussion, each ky (1/b) (b) -π 0 π π -π 0 kz (1/c) (c) Γ π -π 0 (eV) 0 0.6 R Γ X Y U R S T Z kx = 0 kx = π (a) 0 π 2π ky (1/b) R U X S (e) (d) Γ/ R P P kz (1/c) + - + - (a) Schematic figure showing the two fully spin- polarized Weyl loops: loop L1 in the kx = 0 plane centered at Γ and loop L2 in the kx = π plane centered at R. This figure shows a reduced BZ. (b-c) Shape of the two Weyl loops obtained from DFT calculations. The color map indicates the local gap between the two crossing bands. (d) Schematic fig- ure of the band ordering along a generic path connecting Γ (or R) to a point P on Z-T-Y (or U-X-S). The labels indicate the ̃ Mx eigenvalues. (e) The crossing point in (d) (denoted by the green dot) traces out the Weyl loop on the kx = π (or kx = 0) plane. state at P has a double degeneracy, and the degenerate partners have opposite ̃ Mx eigenvalues ±gx, which are labeled as (+, −) in Fig. 5(d). As schematically shown in Fig. 5(d), at P, there are two such degenerate pairs (four states) near the Fermi level. On the other hand, the corresponding four states are not required to be degener- ate at R, where the ̃ Mx eigenvalues are (−, −, +, +) for the states in ascending order. Along the path l, the four bands form a pattern shown in Fig. 5(d). Focusing on the middle two bands, they are of opposite ̃ Mx eigenvalues, and their ordering is inverted between P and R. As a result, they must cross along l and the crossing point is protected by ̃ Mx. The analysis applies for an arbitrary path connecting R to an arbitrary point on U-X and also X-S. Thus, the crossing point will trace out a nodal loop 5 on the kx = π point centered at R, protected by the ̃ Mx symmetry, as shown in Fig. 5(e). Since the crossing is doubly degenerate and is linear, the loop L2 is a Weyl loop. Similarly, another Weyl loop L1 appears in kx = 0 plane, and is also symmetry-protected. As we have mentioned, a nodal loop can be classified as type-I, type-II, or hybrid type , based on the type of dispersion for the points on the loop. After careful scan of the dispersion around each loop, we find that the loop L1 is a hybrid loop, composed of both type-I and type-II nodal points. On the other hand, the loop L2 is type-I. In addition, since each loop is locally located around a high-symmetry point, not traversing the BZ, the corresponding Z3 index characterizing its winding in BZ is trivial . The most important feature of the Weyl loops here is that they are fully spin polarized. The nodal loops oc- cur in the ferromagnetic state. More importantly, they belong to a single spin channel, due to the crossing be- tween spin-up bands. Therefore, the low-energy nodal- loop fermions are fully spin polarized, which will be useful for spintronics applications. VI. SPIN-POLARIZED DRUMHEAD SURFACE STATES It is known that nodal loops in the bulk typically gen- erates drumhead type surface states within the projected area of the loop in the surface BZ . For Li3(FeO3)2 studied here, since the bulk has fully spin polarized Weyl loops, one may expect that there would exist fully spin polarized drumhead surface states. Another interesting point is that there are two separate Weyl loops in the bulk. Then will they each produce a drumhead of sur- face states? To address these issues, we have calculated the sur- face spectrum for the (100) surface, on which the two Weyl loops can have finite projected areas. Figure 6(b) shows the surface spectrum along high-symmetry paths in the surface BZ. One observes the drumhead type sur- face states around Γ and T, as indicated by the arrows. These surface states indeed appear inside the projected loops. In Figure 6(a), we plot the projected loops in the surface BZ. The two loops do not overlap, and each has a finite projection. The surface states in Fig. 6(b) form two drumheads inside these two projected loops, marked by the shaded region in Fig. 6(a). the constant energy slice at E = −50.5 meV, which cuts through the two drumheads (because they are not com- pletely flat in energy), forming the two Fermi circles as indicated by the arrows. We have analyzed the spin po- larization of these surface states, and confirm that they are fully polarized in the spin-up state. VII. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION We have demonstrated that Li3(FeO3)2 is a half metal with two fully spin polarized Weyl loops near the Fermi level. In the calculation, we have set the Hubbard U = 4 eV, a typical value for Fe 3d orbitals. How robust is our result against the variation in U? To check this, we have tested U values up to 6 eV. We find that the key band features such as the half metal character and the Weyl loops are robust against the variation in U. For instance, eV. One observes that the system is still a half metal, and the low-energy bands are very similar to the result in Fig. 3(a). The main difference is that the gap for the spin-down channel is increased from 1.35 eV to 2.12 eV. We have mentioned that the SOC effect is negligible for Li3(FeO3)2, which consists of only the light elements. To verify this, we show the DFT band structure with SOC in Fig. 7(b). Compared to Fig. 3(a), one can see that the bands are almost unaffected by SOC. Only when we zoom in the small region at the band crossing points, a small SOC gap can be observed. Our calculation shows that the SOC gap is very small (< 4 meV) at the Weyl (b) 0.5 -0.5 0 Z Γ Y T Z Energy (eV) (c) ky (1/b) kz (1/c) 0 π 2π π 2π 0 (a) ky kz T Γ Γ Γ Γ T projections of the two bulk Weyl loops on the (100) surface. The red loop is from L1 and the blue one is from L2. The drumhead surface states are located inside these projected loops, indicated by the shaded regions. The dashed box here shows a unit surface BZ. (b) Projected spectrum on the (100) surface for Li3(FeO3)2. (c) shows a constant energy slice at −50.5 meV. The arrows in (c) and (d) indicate the drumhead surface states. These states are also fully spin polarized. 6 loops. Thus, the SOC effect is indeed negligible. It has been demonstrated that even for cases with strong SOC, certain nonsymmorphic space group sym- metries can protect interesting topological band features. For Li3(FeO3)2, we already have two glide mirror planes. The SOC can be enhanced by replacing Fe by some heav- ier element such as Te. We have studied the resulting ma- terial Li3(TeO3)2. This materials is non-magnetic and its band structure (with SOC) is shown in Fig. A1(a). From the zoom-in plot in Fig. A1(b-d), one can observe the hourglass type dispersions . The neck point in the hourglass dispersion traces out two Weyl chains in the BZ, as schematically shown in Fig. A1(e), dictated by the nonsymmorphic symmetries . However, the band splitting in Li3(TeO3)2 is not large enough, so the Weyl chain features may not be easily resolved in experiment. Other candidate materials with the similar structure may be explored in the future. In conclusion, we reveal that Li3(FeO3)2 is a Weyl-loop half metal. We show that the material has a ferromag- netic ground state. It is metallic in one spin channel, yet insulating in the other spin channel. The low-energy bands form doubly degenerate lines along several high symmetry paths, and form two separate Weyl loops close to the Fermi level. The Weyl loops are in a single spin channel, hence they are fully spin polarized. We show that they lead to two drumheads of surface states on the (100) surface, which are also fully spin polarized. Such ferromagnetic Weyl loops and drumhead surface states may have great potential in spintronics applications. (a) Energy (eV) 0 -1.5 1.5 Y Γ Z U R S X U Energy (eV) (b) -1.5 0 1.5 Y Γ Z U R S X U Band structure of Li3(FeO3)2, (a) with U = 6.0 eV (without SOC), and (b) with SOC and U = 4.0 eV. (a) 0 0.3 -0.3 (b) (c) Y Γ Z U X S Y T R U with SOC 0.6 Y T R 0 Energy (eV) 0.21 0.07 0.14 Γ X U R (d) Energy (eV) Energy (eV) Y Γ (e) Г X U Z T Y S R is included. (b)-(d) Enlarged views of the band structure around the hourglass crossing points. (e) Schematic figure showing the Weyl chains in the 3D BZ. The blue and yel- low lines show the Weyl loops located in mutually orthogonal planes. The high-symmetry lines supporting a twofold degen- eracy are highlighted in red.