Plasmonic Metamaterial Perovskite Solar Cells: Fundamental Tradeoffs, Limitations, and Opportunities Kwangjin Kim1,2 and Seungwoo Lee2* 1SKKU Advanced Institute of Nanotechnology, Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU), Suwon 16419, Republic of Korea 2KU-KIST Graduate School of Converging Science and Technology, Korea University, Seoul 02841, Republic of Korea *Email: seungwoo@korea.ac.kr Keywords: Perovskite solar cells, Light-trapping, Metamaterials, Refractive index, Photo-recycling Abstract: Whether dispersal of plasmonic nanoparticles (NPs) within a perovskite active layer can increase the efficiency of solar cells is a long-standing question. It is well known that inclusion of metallic NPs in an active layer can boost the surrounding near-field intensity around them owing to the dipolar localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR, also called antenna effect), which can increase light absorption by solar cells. However, the use of plasmonic NPs in perovskite solar cells has been barely reported, and it is not known whether inserting plasmonic NPs into a perovskite active layer produces any performance advantage compared with a pure perovskite counterpart. We explore the fundamental and practical limits of “plasmonic metamaterial” perovskite solar cells by applying effective medium theory and a detailed balance analysis. Our results indicate that an increase in effective refractive index of perovskite through dispersed plasmonic NPs can in principle enhance the performance of solar cells. TOC: Introduction: Increasing the refractive index (n) has long been a goal of photon management in solar cells. The Yablonovitch limit (4n2 limit) is an example of a target maximum for ray-optic light trapping; S. Fan and colleagues successfully probed that the 4n2 limit also applies to the nanophotonic regime. The recently raised claim regarding the importance of recycling radiative luminescence (also known as photon-recycling) in boosting open-circuit voltage (Voc) has further emphasized the significance of of n, because a higher n can confine more photon gas within a medium by a factor of n2. Even if an unnaturally low n (e.g., index-near-zero (INZ)) is found to afford another degree of freedom for light trapping in solar cells, increasing the value of n is considered key to efficient photon management in solar cells and thus enhancement of power conversion efficiency (PCE (%)). Meanwhile, lead halide perovskite has opened promising new opportunities for solar cell research. In particular, perovskite solar cell efficiency has experienced considerable progress over the past few years, from an initially demonstrated PCE of 12 % to the recently achieved value of 23.3 %. Much of this advancement can be traced to optimization of lead halide materials, interfacial property, and device architecture. However, the surging trend in PCE brought about by these engineering approaches has declined since reaching approximately 20 % (see TOC figure), which is still far below the fundamental PCE limit (also called Shockley-Queisser limit (S-Q limit)) of lead halide perovskite solar cells as defined by detailed balance analysis. New momentum in perovskite solar cell research is needed to approach the S-Q limit. At the same time, photon management in perovskite solar cells via enhanced light-matter interaction has attracted comparatively less interest, probably due to their already excellent light absorption and strong photon-recycling ability. However, efficient absorption of light beyond the perovskite bandgap has yet to be demonstrated. Also, a relatively low n for perovskite (~ 2.5, for example, for lead halide) compared with those of gallium arsenide and silicon (3.0 ~ 3.5) would be detrimental in terms of maximizing photon-recycling. These challenges raise the question of whether an increase in effective n (neff) of perovskite can indeed boost the PCE of solar cells. To address this question, we studied the effect of increasing neff on photon management in perovskite and the resulting solar cell performance. Deep-subwavelength-scale plasmonic nanoparticles (NPs) dispersed within perovskite can act as electrical meta-atoms, broadly enhancing neff while simultaneously maintaining high transparency at a quasi-static (off-resonance) regime. This optical effective media provides a good model system to increase the neff of perovskite at a broadband solar spectrum with minimal parasitic absorption. To this end, we designed perovskite-based optical effective media using the retrieval of effective parameter (i.e., the s-parameter extraction method). A detailed balance analysis was then carried out to systematically verify the influence of enhanced neff on solar cell performance. Our work provides insight into enhanced neff-enabled photon management of perovskite solar cells, including fundamental tradeoffs, limitations, and opportunities. Design of plasmonic metamaterial perovskite: Recently, a detailed balance analysis was successfully adapted to perovskite solar cells by explaining how efficiency is influenced by non-radiative recombination (Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH) non-radiative recombination rate; ASRH=1/t, where t is efficiency (ηext (%)) and parasitic absorption of luminescence (Ppar). For this detailed balance analysis on perovskite solar cells, we designed a plasmonic metamaterial perovskite effective medium (PMPEM) as follows. The thickness of a perovskite active layer in solar cells is typically comparable to the wavelength of the solar spectrum (< 1500 nm); consequently, a should be interpreted under the nanophotonic regime rather than its ray-optic counterpart. However, a previously reported detailed balance analysis on perovskite solar cells thinner than 1500 nm employed ray-optical light trapping for both flat and randomly textured solar cells. Along with these standards, we also used a ray-optic approximation for a. Because the main goal of our study is to elucidate the role of increasing neff in solar cell performance, we hereafter include the a only for a randomly textured perovskite solar cell with maximized light trapping (4n2 limit): (1) where d, qm, and α are thickness, maximum angle of emission, and absorption coefficient, respectively. As we focused on randomly textured perovskite solar cells, qm is assumed to be 90°. Generally, this approximation of a is effective when αd is much smaller than 1. The α of perovskite (i.e., lead halide) used in this study (see Figure 1a) was from previously reported experimental values; direct and indirect bandgaps of lead halide (i.e., lead iodide) resulting from the Rashba effect were reflected in α. At wavelengths below the bandgap (~ 760 nm wavelength (1.62 eV)), lead halide exhibits strong light absorption (i.e., αd ~ 1.0 for 1000 nm thickness at 450 nm wavelength), and the light trapping effect via increasing neff cannot be as effective in this regime. Enhancement of neff at wavelengths larger than the bandgap should therefore be a main goal in designing a PMPEM. As shown in Figures S1a, increasing the neff of active layers (assumed to have α of lead iodide with a constant n of 2.5) selectively at wavelengths larger than 760 nm (i.e., from 2.5 to 4) can considerably enhance a and result in an increased short circuit current (Jsc) as follows: (2) where q and FS(E) are the elementary charge and solar spectrum, respectively. By contrast, increasing neff selectively at wavelengths smaller than 760 nm (i.e., also from 2.5 to 4) slightly enhance a and Jsc, due to the already matured light absorption of perovskite (see Figures S1a-b). Note that the light trapping effect via increasing neff was not as well estimated in a sub-1500 nm-thick perovskite layer, because our approximation depended on ray-optics. The nanophotonic detailed balance analysis on perovskite solar cell will be reported separately, as it is beyond the scope of this study. Another key to success in the design of a PMPEM is minimizing Ppar of luminescence (at wavelengths of 680 nm ~ 880 nm), as follows. It is well known that ηext is a determinant for Voc according to the following equation derived by Ross in 1967: (3) where Voc,max is the maximum limit of Voc, defined by the quasi-Fermi level. Smaller ηext results in reduced Voc and thus lower cell efficiency. According to the following equation, ηext is reduced by Ppar: (4) 2 2 2 4 ( ) 4 sin m n d a E n d a a q = + 0 ( ) ( ) SC S J q a E E dE ¥ = F ò ,max ln oc oc ext qV qV kT h = - 2 int 2 3 int( ) esc ext SRH esc par Auger B P i A i B P P i C i h = + + + where Pesc, i, and Bint are escape probability, available carrier density, and internal radiative coefficient, respectively. Plasmonic NPs intrinsically suffer from significant optical loss. Even if plasmonic light trapping using gold (Au) and silver (Ag) NPs has attracted significant attentions regardless of solar cell type, ηext is likely compromised through optical loss of these noble NPs in luminescence spectra. As such, we used aluminum (Al) NPs as meta-atoms rather than conventional Au and Ag counterparts (see Figure 1b). This is because Al NPs exhibit significant optical loss mainly at ultraviolet (UV) wavelengths (less than 350 nm for 30 nm by 30 nm by 20 nm Al NPs) compared with the visible and near-infrared (IR) ranges. Also, the dipolar resonance of Al NPs at UV wavelengths can still increase neff in a quasi-static regime (including visible and near-IR) with negligible optical loss. For example, an effective optical medium in which 2D tetragonal arrays of 30 nm by 30 nm by 20 nm Al NPs with 10 nm gap are dispersed in 30 nm thick air shows an neff of 6.8 at a dipolar resonance wavelength (340 nm) and that of 4.5 at the quasi-static limit (wavelengths of 400 ~ 1000 nm), both of which are much higher than the n of the host medium (i.e., 1.0), as shown in Figure 1c. Details on numerical calculation of this effective parameter (i.e., the s-parameter retrieval method) are summarized in Methods part. In particular, the figure of merit (FOM) was larger than 10 at the quasi- static limit (the imaginary part of n was ranged from 0.15 to 0.21), as shown in Figure S2. As such, deep-subwavelength Al NPs can act as electric meta-atoms for enhancing the neff of an optical effective medium in conjunction with minimal loss in luminescence spectra. Further increase in size of Al NPs from 30 nm by 30 nm by 20 nm could lead to the optical loss at the visible-near infrared regime, overlapped with luminescence spectra. In contrast, Au and Ag counterparts exhibit significant optical loss at the wavelength of 500 ~ 800 nm (see Figure S3), which could result in a decrease in Pesc and the parasitic absorption of solar spectrum. assumed to be arrayed in a 2D tetragonal lattice with a different lateral gap spanning from 5 nm to 100 nm. Also, Al NPs are designed to be encapsulated in a 1 nm polymeric shell (an organic ligand with an n of 1.45). The effective thickness of the PMPEM is found to be 30 nm, satisfying no explicit physical boundaries for retrieval of neff. The n of the perovskite (i.e., lead halide) host medium used in this study is shown in Figure S4. The smaller gap between Al NPs (higher vol% of Al NPs) gives rise to higher neff at the wavelength of interest (beyond bandgap): at solar spectrum (particularly beyond bandgap), neff can be broadly tuned from ~ 2.75 to ~ 6.00 with respect to vol% of Al NPs. Effective absorption (keff) of PMPEM with respect to vol% of Al NPs is shown in Figure S5. Even if we use the regularly arrayed Al NPs for clarity, the random dispersion of Al NPs can be also used to increase neff (Figure S6). Fundamental efficiency limits and tradeoff problems: Using a detailed balance analysis, we systematically verified how a collective set of a, Jsc, ηext, Voc, fill factor (FF), and PCE is influenced by increasing the neff of the active layer (Figure 2). The neff of the active layer (i.e., PMPEM) used in this analysis, is summarized in Figure 1d. More information about the detailed balance analysis is included in Methods part. Thickness of the active layer varied from 30 nm to 1500 nm, as with previously reported detailed balance analysis on perovskite solar cells. Also, SRH non-radiative recombination should be absent, when calculating fundamental limit of efficiency (i.e., t is infinite). For the same reason, a perfect mirror with 100 % reflectivity (R) is used as a rear electrode. Other basic parameters of lead halide, including i, CAug, and Bint, are described in Methods part. Several features are noteworthy, as follows. First, a and Jsc increase with thickness of the PMPEM (Figures 2a-b). This is because the increased thickness allows the active layer to absorb more light, according to equation (1). More importantly, it is obvious that higher neff results in higher a and the resulting Jsc, due to enhanced light trapping (from bluish to reddish lines). As such, plasmonic metamaterials appear to be a valid option to improve light trapping in perovskite solar cells. Second, in contrast, Voc decreases for thicker solar cells (Figures 2c). Increasing a, particularly beyond the direct bandgap, by increasing the thickness of the active layer reduces the gap between n- and p-type quasi-Fermi levels (i.e., reducing the effective bandgap). Voc,max is tunable, because Voc,max relies on a quasi-Fermi level instead of an intrinsic bandgap. Also, ηext is reduced by increasing the thickness of the active layer (Figures 2d), because thicker active layers lead to a smaller Pesc: (5) where FBB indicates blackbody radiation spectral density. These two effects synergistically decrease Voc when the thickness of the active layer is increased. Furthermore, an increase in neff reduces ηext and thus Voc, because an enhanced neff narrows the escape cone and thereby further decreases Pesc (see equation 5). FBB is not influenced by neff, as follows: (6) where h, c, and nsub are Plank’s constant, the speed of light, and n of the substrate, respectively. Pesc herein is solely affected by neff. Note that the n2 term in the denominator of equation (5) accounts for photon-recycling; photon- recycling cannot affect Jsc. Thus, equation (5), recently derived by U. Rau et al., indicates that ηext is a gauge not only of loss mechanisms (i.e., ASRH, CAug, and Ppar), but also of the degree of photon- recycling. Given this claim, we conclude that greater photon-recycling results in poorer Pesc, which in turn decreases ηext and Voc. As recently described by Yablonovitch and his colleagues, a higher neff and the resulting more crowd photon gas can boost the luminescence emission rate rather than ηext. Also, because absorption should be balanced by emission, less-probable ηext resulting from higher neff restricts an accessible amount of both light absorption and photo-generated carriers. Overall, as the density of photo-generated carriers defines voltage, boosting photon-recycling by increasing neff results in a reduction in Voc. In addition, the rates of ηext and Voc decrease, caused by enhancing neff, are accelerated with increasing thickness of the active layer (see Figures 2d). This means that the effect of photon-recycling is also enhanced with increasing thickness of the active layer. In addition to photon-recycling, the effective bandgap of perovskite is narrowed by increasing the thickness-enabled enhancement of light trapping, as mentioned above. These two effects cooperatively reduce Voc. As a result, Voc and Jsc trade off with each other, once both light trapping and photon-recycling are simultaneously boosted by increasing neff. 0 2 0 4 BB esc BB a dE P n d dE p p a ¥ ¥ F = F ò ò 2 2 3 2 2 ( ) exp sub BB n E E E h c kT æ ö F = ç- ÷ è ø These results provide an important insight into potential new directions for plasmonic metamaterial solar cell design. Previous reports on embedding plasmonic NPs into active layers of solar cells focused mainly on near-field enhancement by localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) and its use in increasing overall a (i.e., antenna effect). This LSPR effect was also used for improvement of light absorption in perovskite solar cells. However, LSPR increases not only near-field absorption, but also neff. Therefore, thermodynamic change caused by an increasing neff needs to be fully reflected to accurately define the fundamental limit of efficiency, as detailed above. Meanwhile, Snaith et al. suggested that inclusion of plasmonic NPs (i.e., Ag NPs) in perovskite could result in enhanced radiative decay of excitons and therefore an increase in photocurrent. This effect could further improve luminescence emission rates and the amount of photo-generated carriers. We focus on the thermodynamic variations of solar cells caused by increasing the neff of the perovskite active layer, but the possibility that such electronic effects arise from plasmonic NPs should be studied further and included in future theoretical analyses on the fundamental limit of plasmonic perovskite solar cells. PCE is enhanced with increasing thickness of the PMPEM. More importantly, despite the Voc drop, PCE can still be enhanced by increasing neff (FF slightly decreases). This enhancement of PCE by increasing neff is visible regardless of PMPEM thickness. This result implies the resultant Jsc boost can compensate for the Voc decrease. Practical limitations caused by non-radiative recombination: Next, we explore how the material quality of lead halide affects the efficiency of plasmonic metamaterial perovskite solar cells. Defects in lead halide give rise to trap-assisted non-radiative recombination, significantly reducing the non- radiative lifetime (t) in a realistic condition. According to previous reports, the experimentally accessible maximum t of perovskite is approximately 1 μs. To define the practical limit of efficiency, we take a t of 1 μs in the detailed balance analyses, while the R of a rear mirror is still 100 % (perfect mirror). as functions of neff and perovskite thickness. The values of a and Jsc remain intact even with a distinct non-radiative recombination (see Figure S7). This is because a non-radiative recombination affects only ηext and thus Voc, while Jsc is a function of a (see equations of 1-4). The cases with and without Al NPs show the same variations of a and Jsc with respect to neff and PMPEM thickness (Figure S7). Critically, as shown in Figures 3a-b, the reduced t (from infinite to 1 μs) causes both ηext and Voc to decrease dramatically (e.g., from 1.27 V to 1.17 V for 1000 nm thick bare perovskite without plasmonic metamaterials). More importantly, the degrees of falls in ηext and Voc, driven by increasing the thickness of the active layer, becomes increased after reducing t from infinite to 1 μs (compare role in defining ηext and Voc with increasing the active layer thickness. Consequently, a significantly lower Voc, particularly for a relatively thicker active layer, cannot be overcome, even by enhanced light trapping; PCE of bare perovskite solar cells, handicapped with a non-radiative recombination, peaks at a relatively thin active layer (26.9 % for 200 nm thickness) and gradually decreases beyond that thickness (Figures 3c). Corresponding FF data are included in Figure S8. This PCE trend with respect to thickness of the active layer contrasts starkly with results achieved without a non-radiative penalty (compare Figure 3c with Figure 2f). As with an ideal perovskite, increasing the neff of realistic perovskite significantly reduces Voc due to the narrowed effective bandgap and a decrease in ηext. More critically, non-radiative recombination further facilitates the degree of Voc drop at each thickness (Figure 3b). In a realistic situation, an improved Jsc cannot compensate for the Voc drop via increasing neff, especially for a relatively thick perovskite (i.e., thicker than 600 nm). For the active layers thicker than 600 nm, the PCE of plasmonic metamaterial perovskite solar cells becomes smaller than that of a bare perovskite counterpart. However, it is clear that increasing neff can still improve the practical limit of PCE for relatively thin perovskite solar cells (< 600 nm); a PCE with a 5 nm gap-based PMPEM can peak (~ 27.8 %) at the thickness of 60 nm. This is because a Voc drop resulting from increasing neff is relatively mitigated as the active layer is thinned. Indeed, the enhancement factor of PCE via increasing neff (difference of PCE between metamaterial (PCEMM) and pure (PCEBare) perovskite solar cells) becomes more significant as the thickness of perovskite is reduced (Figures 3d). As a result, we can achieve an increase in maximum PCE (from 26.9 to 27.8) even with a thinner perovskite solar cell (from 200 nm to 60 nm) by using plasmonic metamaterials in realistic situations. Practical limitations due to use of a realistic mirror: In a realistic situation, the R of a rear mirror is less than 100 %. A flat Au back electrode is located at the bottom of perovskite solar cell, serving as a rear reflector. To optimize the carrier extraction, Au was chosen as a rear mirror element. However, parasitic absorption via surface plasmon resonance and interband transition inevitably arises from the use of flat Au, as shown in Figure 4a; the reflection spectra of a flat Au rear mirror used in this study is from experimental data. Beyond an interband transition regime (i.e., wavelengths > 550 nm), the R of a flat Au is approximately 97 ~ 99 %, which decreases significantly below 50 % at the interband transition regime (i.e., wavelengths < 500 nm). Thus, a approximated by the 4n2 limit should be modified to reflect the unperfected R of a mirror: (7) Furthermore, Pesc can be handicapped as follows: (8) Because both a and Pesc are damaged by a factor of n2 under realistic mirror conditions, an increase in neff dilutes the effect of light trapping, while simultaneously reducing ηext and Voc further. Figure 4b summarizes how an unperfected mirror affects a by comparing it with a perfected mirror. For both cases of real and ideal mirrors, t is set to 1 μs, while for clarity, PMPEM with a gap of 5 nm is only included as a representative example of plasmonic metamaterial solar cells along with bare perovskite solar cells. As expected, the unperfected R of a mirror leads to a reduction in a. Also, as shown in defined by aMM – aBare) is diluted by Ppar of a real mirror and increases with reducing active layer thickness. The corresponding Jsc is summarized in Figure S9. Additionally, an unperfected R of a mirror reduces ηext (see Figure 4d). More importantly, increasing the neff further decreases ηext due to enhanced light trapping and photon-recycling; the degree of such 2 2 2 4 ( ) 4 1 (1 ) n d a E n d n R a a = + + - 2(1 ) par esc P P n R = ́ - fall in ηext caused by an increasing neff becomes more significant for a thinner active layer; the corresponding Voc is summarized in Figure S10. This in turn further narrows the range of active layer thickness, in which an increase in neff can enhance PCE. As shown in Figure 5a, for an active layer thinner than 330 nm, plasmonic metamaterial perovskite solar cells can outperform bare perovskite counterparts; corresponding FF data are summarized in Figure S11. Also, the degree of PCE enhancement by increasing neff (PCEMM-PCEBare) increases as the active layer is thinned (Figure 5b). This suggests that plasmonic metamaterials would be effective only for ultrathin perovskite solar cells (thinner than 100 nm); this restriction originates with the tradeoff between Voc and Jsc, in which light trapping and photon-recycling are simultaneously boosted by increasing neff. The random dispersion of Al NPs in perovskite solar cells also resulted in a similar performance enhancement for ultrathin active layer, as summarized in Figure S12. Conclusions: We systematically verified how increasing the neff of the active layer affects the performances of perovskite solar cells. Using the concept of plasmonic metamaterials, a theoretical strategy for increasing the neff of perovskite is suggested. From a materialization perspective, our design could be readily accessible via random dispersing or entropic packing of Al NPs within perovskite media. A detailed balance analysis was then carried out to determine the effect of increased neff on solar cell efficiency. An off-resonant, broadband increase in neff of PMPEM was found to enhance photon management of perovskite solar cells with minimal parasitic absorption. In that context, both a and Jsc can benefit. However, the enhanced photon-recycling via increasing neff negatively affects ηext and the resulting Voc. Despite the penalty of a Voc drop, the fundamental limits of PCE in perovskite can in principle be enhanced by increasing neff regardless of the thickness of the active layer. In a realistic situation defined with a non-radiative recombination and an unperfected rear mirror, an increase in neff holds promise, particularly for an ultrathin perovskite solar cell. Methods Detailed balance analysis: In detailed balance analysis, the total current density (Jtotal) is calculated by generation and recombination rates expressed with current density. These current density components are combined as followings: (9) The three loss mechanisms of perovskite solar cell are considered: radiative recombination rate (J0,rad), auger recombination rate (JAuger), Shockley-Read-Hall recombination rate (JSRH). Each of these terms are defined by: (10) (11) (12) 0, ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) total sc rad Auger SRH J V J J V J V J V = - - - 0 ( ) ( ) sc S J q a E E dE ¥ = F ò 0, 0 ( ) ( ) ( ) qV kT rad BB J V q e a E E dE p ¥ = F ò 3 3 2 ( ) qV kT Auger Auger J V qe C i d = (13) where a(E), FS, FBB, CAuger, i, d, and ASRH are the absorptivity, solar spectrum, black body radiation of the solar cell, auger recombination coefficient, intrinsic carrier concentration, thickness of solar cell, and Shockley-Read-Hall recombination coefficient respectively. The value of Bint, CAuger are van Roosbroeck-Shockley Relationship: (14) Numerical calculations of effective parameters of a PMPEM: Scattering parameters including transmission, reflection, and relevant phase changes are numerically calculated by finite-difference, time-domain (FDTD), supported by a commercial package (CST Microwave Studio 2014). The dielectric constants of Al, Au, and Ag were derived from a Drude-critical model. A periodic boundary condition was used; perfect matched layers (PML) were placed at the top and bottom of the simulation model to avoid reflection from the boundaries. We then obtained all effective parameters using an s- parameter extraction method based on homogenization theory. Both the thickness of metamaterials (30 nm) and size of meta-atoms (plasmonic NPs) were deep-subwavelength scale (~ 0.37l/neff), so as to justify the use of homogenization theory. Acknowledgement This work was supported by Samsung Research Funding Center for Samsung Electronics under Project Number SRFC-MA1402-09. Supporting Information Details about (1) index-engineering for light trapping, (2) FOM of Al NPs-based optical effective medium (host medium of air), (3) optical effective medium consisting of gold (Au) and silver (Ag) NPs (host medium of air), (4) n of lead halide host medium used in this work, (5) keff of Al plasmonic metamaterial perovskite effective medium, (6) n and solar cell performance of the randomly dispersed Al NPs-perovskite solar cells, (7) a, Jsc, and FF of the Al plasmonic metamaterial perovskite solar cells, handicapped with a non-radiative recombination, and (8) Jsc, Voc, and FF of the Al plasmonic metamaterial perovskite solar cells, handicapped with a non-radiative recombination and a realistic rear mirror are available in Supporting Information. This material is available free of charge via the internet at http://pub.acs.org. ( ) 2 SRH SRH qV J V qe A id kT = 2 2 int 0 4 BB B i n dE p a =¥ F