1 A non-contact mutual inductance based measurement of an inhomogeneous topological insulating state in Bi2Se3 single crystals with defects Amit Jash1, Kamalika Nath1, T. R. Devidas2,3, A. Bharathi2, S. S. Banerjee1* 1Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur 208016, Uttar Pradesh, India; 2UGC- DAE Consortium for Scientific Research, Kalpakkam-603104, India; 3Present address; The Racah Institute of Physics, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Givat Ram, Jerusalem, 91904, Israel Keywords: Topological insulator, Bi2Se3, Bulk and surface states, Non-contact measurement, disorder effects, Band bending. Abstract: Pure Topological Insulating materials preserve a unique electronic state comprising of bulk insulating gap and conducting surface states. Here we use bulk Bi2Se3 single crystals possessing Se vacancy defects as a prototype topological insulator (TI) material for exploring the effect of non-magnetic disorder on the conducting properties of TI. We employ a sensitive, non- contact mutual inductance based technique for measuring the surface and bulk contribution to electrical conductivity in the TI. We discern the bulk and surface contributions by observing that predominant surface electrical conduction shows linear frequency dependence of the pickup signal while bulk conductivity gives rise to quadratic frequency dependence. We also observe an algebraic temperature dependent surface conductivity and an activated form of bulk electrical conductivity. Using the above we uncover an interplay between surface and bulk contribution to electrical conductivity in the TI as a function of temperature. In the Bi2Se3 crystals the transformation from surface to bulk dominated electrical transport is found to occur close to a temperature of 70 K. This temperature matches well with our results from activated bulk electrical transport results which shows an activation energy scale  which is in the meV range. The gap  is much less than the bulk band gap in Bi2Se3 which we argue is associated with defect states in the TI material. To understand our results, we propose a model of TI comprising of an inhomogeneous low electrically conducting medium (bulk) which is sandwiched between thin two high electrically conducting sheets (surface). The inhomogeneous TI state we argue is generated * Email: satyajit@iitk.ac.in. 2 by Selenium vacancies defects in Bi2Se3, which is responsible for producing an interplay between bulk and surface conductivity. I. Introduction: In recent times, new materials like three dimensional (3D) topological insulator, exhibit topologically protected bulk gapped state enclosed by conducting surface state . Herein no continuous variation of the lattice parameter can change the unique character of the electronic states in these materials. These gapless surface states in a topological insulator (TI) exhibit Dirac-like linear energy - momentum dispersion , chiral spin texture and Landau level quantization . Materials like Bi2Se3, Bi2Te3 and Bi1-xSbxare amongst the most well studied three dimensional TIs . The characteristic TI properties have been confirmed via different techniques like angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) , Shubnikov-de Haas (SdH) oscillations, scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and transport studies . Spin momentum locking in TI causes chiral currents to flow which are unaffected by scattering from disorder . Recent development of pump probe techniques to study spin momentum locking reveal that TI are important from the point of view of spintronics and quantum computation applications . While pristine TI are important, it is also important to explore how the TI state is affected in the presence of material defects. While presence of magnetic impurities will lead to breaking time reversal symmetry and hence destroy the TI state, the issue of how non-magnetic disorder affects the TI state is worth investigating. To study the effect of disorder on TI, the popular Bi2Se3 crystals are a suitable choice, as they intrinsically possess Se vacancies which are a nature source of disorder in this material. The TI nature of Bi2Se3 has been identified through magneto-transport studies which confirm the presence of conducting surface states through the observation of SdH oscillations and weak anti-localization effects . In Bi2Se3 the bulk insulating gap has been estimated to be ~ 300 meV . However the presence of Se vacancies electron dopes the material , thereby enhancing the bulk electrical conductivity. The resulting parallel conducting channels through the surface and bulk, make it difficult to explore the details of the individual bulk and surface state contributions to electrical conductivity in these TI materials . In such materials, the surface states have been identified either by suppressing defect induced bulk conductivity through 3 counter doping or by comparing changes in the conducting properties as a function of the thickness of TI thin films . Without counter doping, the issue of investigating how Se vacancies affects the TI state in Bi2Se3 single crystals is none the less important. Studies show that increasing Se vacancy concentration weakens the SdH oscillations, which is a fingerprint of the conducting surface states characterizing a TI . The SdH oscillations in magneto-transport are typically measurable at low temperature and high magnetic field regime. Hence, due to the limitations of the transport studies mentioned above, while the presence of disorder like Se vacancies seem to weaken the TI state, the details of how exactly the surface and bulk conductivities are affected by disorder and modified by Se vacancies, still remains unclear. Furthermore, studies have shown that due to degradation of surface of Bi2Se3, for example due to oxidation of the surfaces, causes band bending of the surface states extending upto 20 nm into the bulk . Hence, there is a need for a technique which distinguishes between bulk and surface contributions to electrical conductivity in a TI. We report here a non-contact measurement technique of shielding currents induced in a TI using a two coil mutual inductance setup. We study the frequency (f) and temperature (T) dependence of the pickup voltage, from five single crystals of different thickness of Bi2Se3 placed between the coils. The pickup voltage shows two distinct regimes of frequency dependence, viz., a quadratic and linear regime. We show that the quadratic frequency dependence is associated with bulk electrical conductivity in the TI while the linear frequency dependence regime is associated with surface conductivity in the TI. As a function of temperature, we show that below 70 K, the frequency dependence of the pickup voltage is predominantly linear while it turns quadratic at higher T. Analysis of the data also shows that below 70 K we identify an algebraic temperature dependent electrical conductivity regime which saturates at low temperatures, while above 70 K electrical conductivity is of thermally activated type with a thermal activation energy scale () of tens of meV. From our study we identify four distinct temperature regimes for the Bi2Se3 crystal, identifying the crossover between different surface and bulk dominated conductivity regimes. At high temperature above 180 K, we observe the unusual return of surface dominated conductivity (σs) coexisting with bulk conductivity (σb) in the material. To understand our results, we propose a simplified model of a TI, comprising of a low conducting bulk sandwiched between two high conducting surface sheets. Our simulations show surface and bulk conductivity values in the Bi2Se3 crystals to be of the order of 1011 S/m and 103 S/m, respectively. While this minimal model explains the overall features of the data and offers 4 a way to estimate the surface and bulk electrical conductivities of the TI from the measurements, it doesn’t match the data exactly. A better agreement with the data is obtained by considering an inhomogeneous TI state. Inhomogeneous TI is modelled by incorporating in the minimal model, conducting channels threading the low conducting bulk medium. The model fits our experimental data by introducing inhomogeneity 30 percent. The inhomogeneous TI state we argue is a result of disorder in the TI bulk, generated by Selenium vacancies. Excess charge carriers produced by Se vacancies produce the gap ~ , which results in an interplay between bulk and surface conductivity. II. Experimental details: Transport measurement of Bi2Se3 single crystals. For our study we use single crystals of Bi2Se3 prepared by slow cooling stoichiometric melts of high purity bismuth (Bi) and selenium (Se) powders [for details see refs.35,36]. In this work we have investigated the surface and bulk conductivities across five different single crystals belonging to the same batch of Bi2Se3 crystals grown (with similar electrical transport characteristics, for example see Fig.1). The thickness (surface area) of the crystals are, 20 m (2.4 mm × 1.9 mm) transport measurements shown in Fig.1 are on a Bi2Se3 single crystal with thickness of 70 m. Note that as transport measurements involves making of electrical contacts on the sample which introduce irreversible physical changes in the sample, hence for our non contact measurements (which is the main topic of our manuscript) and transport measurements (here and refs.), we are compelled to use different samples for the two measurements, albeit chosen from the same batch of single crystals grown with similar sample thickness. Figure 1(a) shows distinct SdH oscillation in longitudinal magneto-resistance (Rxx vs magnetic field (B)) measurements at different temperature using standard Van der Pauw geometry. The low temperature SdH oscillations which weaken with increasing T, indicates the topological character of conducting surface states in TI at low T (more detailed analysis of the transport data is shown elsewhere ). The figure shows that the topological character of transport progressively gets affected with increasing T. The Berry phase () is calculated from the LK fitting and the value being close to π at low T, suggests the SdH oscillation arises from surface Dirac electron (see inset of Fig. 1(b), and discussed in later section). The destruction of the SdH oscillations is identified with the onset 5 of bulk contribution to electrical conductivity. Figure. 1(b) shows the Hall resistance (Rxy) measurement as a function of magnetic field (B) at different temperatures. This measurement establishes electrons as the charge carriers in these Bi2Se3 samples. It may be recalled that electrical transport measurement studies have shown that Se vacancies lead to weakening the SdH oscillations . Recent studies show a correlation between Positron annihilation lifetime with Se vacancy concentration in Bi2Se3. These studies, performed on this batch of samples show Se vacancy concentration are in the range of 1017 cm-3 . From these SdH measurements at low T and high B it is however difficult to determine the extent of surface and bulk contributions to conductivity, and hence study how it is affected by either T or disorder variation present either in on the surface or bulk of the material (note, we shall return to this issue in the discussion section). As mentioned earlier the appearance of finite bulk conductivity in Bi2Se3 sample with Se vacancies mixes the surface and bulk contributions to electrical conductivity making it difficult to discern the individual contributions. In the next section, we discuss a non-contact measurement technique which allows us to distinguish between the two contributions to electrical conductivity. geometry at 3 K, 4.2 K, 7 K, 10 K and 25 K (see legends in the main panel). The main panel shows ΔRxx vs. 1/B plot showing SdH oscillations in Bi2Se3 (sample thickness 70 m) at different temperatures. ΔRxx is calculated by subtracting from the experiment Rxx(B) values a polynomial fit to the data (Rpoly (B)), where B is the magnetic field. The data is fitted to, 2 2 1 0 ( ) R B R B R Rpoly B    Lifshitz-Kosevich (LK) equation is used to fit the ΔRxx data at 4.2 K which is shown by black solid line. For fitting to the magneto-resistance data in Fig. 1(a), following ref. and the values therein, we use 0.08 0.12 0.16 0.20 -2 -1 0 1 LK fitting 3 K 10 K 4.2 K 25 K 7 K Rxx (m ) 1/B (T -1) 8 12 16 Rxx (m) B (T) -15 -10 -5 0 5 -0.2 -0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 3 K 4.2 K 7 K 10 K 25 K Rxy() B (T) Bi2Se3 Bi2Se3 (a) (b) 6 0.6 0.8 1.0  ( ) T (K) 6     0.95 cos 2 sinh B B xx B F R a B e B                           . In this equation a = 0.0135 Ω and F and β are the fitting parameters. A fit to the data (see black solid line in Fig. 1(a)), gives F= 46.95 ±0.25 T and β = 0.43. (b) Hall measurement of the transverse resistance, Rxy vs B at different temperatures. The sample used in the above measurements has thickness ~ 70 m. Inset shows the Berry phase as function of temperature which is measured from the phase of the LK equation, viz., φ = 2πβ. III. Two coil mutual inductance measurement setup: Non-contact measurement To characterize the surface and bulk states of TI we use a modified non-contact two coil mutual inductance measurement technique. The two coil mutual inductance technique is well-established experimentally and it is sensitive enough to experimentally study the shielding response of superconductors, especially in situations when it becomes weak like that near the critical temperature of a superconductor. The technique has been analyzed theoretically to determine the nature of the field and current distributions generated in the sample placed within the two coil configuration, by incorporating effects of skin depth or penetration depth and studying the behavior of the pickup signal generated. Note that, whereas in conventional electrical transport measurement the Joule heating at electrical contacts complicate temperature dependent conductivity measurements, here such issues are avoided through our non-contact two- coil mutual inductance measurement technique. Figure 2(a) shows the schematic of our setup where a crystal is placed between an excitation coil and a pickup coil. Both coils are designed with very closely matched coil parameters (for details on coil dimensions and other parameters see S1 of the supplementary information in Ref. ). The data for all our pickup measurements corresponds to AC current of amplitude 153 mA applied to the excitation coil (corresponding to 1Volt drop across the coil) at frequency f, and the real and imaginary components of the pickup voltage from the pickup coil is measured using a lock-in amplifier. Measurements at higher AC excitation current amplitude, yield similar results. In the supplementary section S1 (Ref. ) we show the linear relationship between the excitation current in the coil and the pickup voltage for an S20 sample at 65 kHz excitation frequency. The excitation current generates a time-varying magnetic field, which induces currents inside the conducting sample, that in-turn leads to a time- varying magnetic field associated with the sample. This local field induces a voltage in the pickup coil, which is being measured. Effectively one considers that the presence of a sample between the two coils modifies the mutual inductance. Variations in the sample properties change the signal 7 induced in the pickup coil. One may note that voltage is induced in the pickup coil not only from time-varying magnetic fields associated with the sample, but also the via the stray magnetic fields present outside the sample. These stray field induced pickup voltage signal can often lead to a large background signal which masks the signal from the sample if it is weak. In order to significantly reduce this stray field effect between the dipolar coil assembly, a 1.5 mm thick oxygen-free high thermal conductivity Cu (OFHC) sheet (resistivity ~ 1.7 × 10-8 .m) with a hole at its center (see Fig. 2(a)), is placed coaxially above the excitation coil. The hole diameter (2 mm) is chosen such that it doesn’t exceed the sample surface dimensions (the sample is placed above the Cu sheet covering the hole). Note that the OFHC Cu sheet thickness (1.5 mm) is larger than its skin depth, which at 60 kHz is 0.27 mm and at 5 kHz is 0.92 mm. The high conductivity thick OFHC Cu sheet shields the alternating magnetic field generated by the excitation coil, except over the hole. The electromagnetic shielding provided by the thick Cu sheet helps to reduce the stray flux linkage outside the sample, while the hole in the sheet concentrates the magnetic flux on the sample. Therefore, the Cu sheet with the hole effectively enhances the coupling of the two coils via the sample in between and the effects of the stray field is minimized. In Figs. 2(b) and 2(c), the colored regions represent the simulated vertical (z) component of the AC magnetic field distribution (Bz) around excitation coil (for simulation details, see S2 section in supplementary information of Ref. ). Figure 2(c) shows the concentration of magnetic flux above the hole in the Cu plate. In Fig. 2(d), the simulated Bz profile measured above the coil (black dashed line in Fig. 2(c)), shows the significant concentration of magnetic flux above the hole in the Cu sheet. The sample when placed above the Cu sheet experiences this concentrated oscillating magnetic field and the oscillating magnetic field induces a voltage in the pickup coil voltage. Figure 2(c) shows that due to the hole in Copper sheet, the central field (amplitude of the AC field) within the coil above the hole is increased by almost a factor of two compared to the field above the solid Cu sheet outside the hole. We thus achieved almost a two times increase in the signal induced within the pickup coil due to the use of the thick copper sheet with hole. When the sample which is slightly larger than the hole diameter is placed over the hole in the Cu sheet, then due to the enhancement in the field over the hole, a stronger signal emanates preferentially from the sample which induces a voltage in the pickup coil. Thus by using the hole in the Cu sheet we obtain a signal which is preferentially emanating from the sample. Without the use of a Cu sheet with hole, viz., without any Cu sheet the Fig. 2(d) (see green curve) shows the field is uniformly strong over 8 within the entire coil area. In this configuration if a sample is placed between the coil and the magnetic susceptibility of the sample isn’t high, then the signal induced in the coil would get buried in the background signal. Here the background signal emanates from the time varying magnetic flux in regions outside the sample area which induce voltage in the pickup coil apart from the signal induced by the sample. Hence the use of the Cu sheet with the hole, preferential by concentrates the magnetic flux over the sample area, which therefore helps to induce a stronger signal in the pickup coil emanating from the sample. The use of the Cu sheet also helps to significantly reduce the stray field coupling from outside the coil area as the thick Cu sheet electromagnetically shields the alternating AC magnetic field and thereby reduces the background signal outside the sample further. This modification enhances the sensitivity of the two coil configuration in measuring the magnetic response of the sample compared to the conventional configuration without the Copper sheet with hole. During the measurements with TI we balance out the imaginary part of the signal as it doesn’t change significantly during measurements. Furthermore, we would like to emphasize that for all our measurements we subtract the background voltage at all temperature and frequencies by measuring the pickup signal without a sample and with only the Cu sheet with a hole placed between the coils. -2 -1 0 1 2 1 2 3 4 Hole edge Without Cu sheet Cu sheet With hole Bz ( kOe) r (mm) Cu sheet Without hole Hole edge 15 20 25 30 -1.5 -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 0 10 20 T (K) V (V) Frequency 20 kHz Excitation current 150 mA V (nV) Tc Pick up coil Sample Cu sheet Excitation coil Lock-in amplifier AC current from Lock-in amplifier z BaFe1.85 Co0.15As2 Cu sheet + r r BZ(kOe) Cryostat Exchange gas cooling Excitation coil (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) 9 component of the AC magnetic field (BZ) distribution for the two cases. The outline of the solid excitation coil bobbin is shown in yellow. In Fig. (b) only a solid Cu sheet (orange) is placed above the excitation coil and in Fig. (c) a Cu Sheet with a hole at the center is placed over the coil. The sample is placed above the hole in the Cu sheet. These simulations are performed using COMSOL with 150 mA, AC current at 60 kHz sent through the excitation coil. (d) Shows the simulated Bz vs r profile as measured across the black dashed line shown in Fig. (c) (r = 0 is the central (z) axis of the excitation coil bobbin), for three different cases: (i) without any Cu sheet above the pickup coil, (ii) Cu sheet with a hole, (iii) Cu sheet with no hole. The inset of Fig. (d) shows the schematic of the circular Cu sheet with a hole placed over the top of the excitation coil. (e) The superconducting transition of Iron Pnictide single crystal, BaFe1.85Co0.15As2 is shown. The figure depicts the behavior of the real (left axis) and imaginary (right axis) component of the pickup voltage as a function of temperature. The BaFe1.85Co0.15As2 crystal dimension is 3.2 mm × 2.4 mm × 0.5 mm. The Tc is indicated as the green dashed line ~ 24.7± 0.2 K. A similar Tc value of this sample is observed through bulk magnetization measurement on a SQUID magnetometer. We test the performance of the setup using a superconducting sample as its shielding response is well known. Figure 2(e) illustrates the performance of our setup by measuring the AC susceptibility response of a superconducting single crystal, viz., an optimally doped Iron Pnictide crystal (BaFe1.85Co0.15As2) which is placed above the hole in the Cu sheet. Due to strong superconducting diamagnetic shielding of AC magnetic field, (Fig. 2(e)) we see the rapid drop in the in phase signal in the pickup coil (V′) at T < Tc. Near Tc , we also see the expected peak in the out of phase signal (V′′). To identify the negative signal below transition temperature, we have subtracted the data form the saturation value above Tc. The superconducting transition temperature Tc estimated from the peak position in V′′ is 24.7 K which compares well with Tc reported for this stoichiometry . The observation in Fig. 2(e) that at the characteristic temperature Tc, there is a sharp change in the background corrected, V′ signal (viz., the diamagnetic shielding response) and V′′signal (viz., the dissipation response), suggests that these feature cannot be related to features associated with the background signal (when no sample is present and only the Cu sheet with hole is present). The behavior of the background signal of the two coil setup (with only the Cu sheet placed between the hole) is simulated and pickup voltage signal due to solid Cu sheet is shown in the supplementary information (see S3 section in supplementary information of Ref. ). The close match between the experimentally measured background signal with the simulated data (S3 section in supplementary information of Ref. ) shows that the background signal can 10 be explained using standard Maxwell’s equations for a metallic conductor. There is nothing in the equations which can cause a non-monotonic change in the background signal. IV. Studying the shielding response of Bi2Se3 single crystal at different f and T:         2 2 V f V f V f V f       , as for these TI crystals,     V f V f    . In the figure One can identify two regimes of behavior in V(f), namely, one in the low frequency regime where V(f)  f 2 (see red dotted line through the data), and the other in the higher frequency regime where,   V f  f  shows that the pickup voltage saturates to constant value at low T upto 40 K. Above 40 K to 70 K the V(T) data fits (solid black line) with     1 s T C DT    where C is related to static disorder scattering and D to electron-phonon coupling strength. While above 70 K to 170 K the data fits (red dashed line) with   0 T exp b b K T b           , Δ ~ 25.2 ± 1.25 meV, where Δ is the activation energy scale and b0 is the high temperature conductance of the bulk state. Above the temperature 170 K, the data deviates from the thermally activated behavior which is present between 70 K to 170 K. Figure 3(c) shows that V(f) is linear over a wide frequency regime at T ≤ 40 K. Inset of Fig. 3(a) shows that at 40 K, V(f) increases linearly with f for the entire frequency range. At 220 K (see Fig. 3(a) inset) V(f) is not quadratic rather V   f  f  above 20 kHz, where α ~1, viz., almost linearly dependent. Between 70 K & 170 K   2 V f  f for f ≤ 20 kHz and   V f f   ,where α ~1 for higher frequency. Identical features at different f and T are shown in supplementary for other samples as well (see supplementary sections S4, S5, S6, S7 & S8 of Ref. ). 11 quadratic (   2 V f  f ) and nearly linear ( V   f  f  , where α = 0.9 ± 0.05) regions are shown by the dotted red line and solid black line respectively. Insets show pickup response at 40 K and 220 K (V is measured from V(T) scan at different frequencies). For both 40 K and 220 K above 20 kHz, V is increasing linearly with frequency. All data in the figures correspond to excitation current of 153 mA in the excitation coil. (b) Variation of pickup voltage (V) with temperature (T) for sample S69 at frequency 65 kHz. Red dotted line is the fitted line corresponding to bulk conductivity, viz., b0 b V V exp K T         and the black line is fitted with surface conductivity, i.e.,   1 V C' D'T   . The fitting parameters are C' = 0.0052 mV-1, D' = 1.86 mV-1K-1, Vb0 = 18.7 mV and Δ is (25.2  1.25) meV. (c) The behavior of pickup voltage with frequency is plotted at different low temperatures (15 K, 20 K, 25 K). We would like to mention that the pickup signal, at low f is lesser than that at 70 kHz in a frequency dependent measurement or it is lesser at low T compared to that above 300 K in a T dependent measurement. Therefore, while measuring the pickup signal as a function of f or T one can balance out the signal above, 70 kHz or 300 K, to note the negative sign of the pickup signal corresponding to the diamagnetic nature of Bi2Se3. V. Understanding the frequency dependence of the pickup signal: To understand the above frequency dependence of the pickup voltage, we recall that AC magnetic field produced from the excitation current in the primary induces screening currents extending upto different depths inside the conducting TI sample (skin depth). The magnetic field generated from the sample by these induced screening currents couple with the pickup coils to induce a pickup voltage. It is known that the depth upto which the currents are induced in the sample depends on the frequency of AC field. At low frequencies as the AC excitation penetrates deeper into the bulk of the sample (due to large skin depth), hence the bulk properties in the TI sample 0 20 40 60 0 20 40 60 0 3 6 9 f (kHz) S69 15 K 20 K 25 K V (mV) 60 120 180 240 0 4 8 S69 V (mV) T (K) 65 kHz (c) (b) 0 20 40 60 0 3 6 9 S69 90 K 80 K f (kHz) V (mV) 70 K 0 20 40 60 f (kHz) 0 20 40 60 0 4 8 f (kHz) V (mV) 40 K f 2  , f   ~1  (a) 12 are probed with low f. The schematic of the distribution of the magnitude of induced screening current (Iinduced) across the sample cross section is shown in Figs 4(a) and 4(b) for low frequency and high frequency respectively. The expression for skin depth () is 1  f  , where μ is permeability of Bi2Se3. At high frequency Fig. 4(b), screening currents circulate within the high conductivity surfaces. We show in S11 in supplementary section, Ref. a simulation showing the attenuation of an impinging EM signal is governed by the high conducting surface sheath in the TI material. Hence the properties of the surfaces state of the TI is probed at high f. At low frequency (Fig. 4(a)) the induced current circulates in the bulk of the sample. In Fig. 4(c) we plot the pickup voltage versus sample surface area for all our five samples having varied thickness. Note that above 120 K at 5 kHz as the current induces in the bulk of the sample, the pickup signal saturates to a value close to 1 mV for all samples, which shows no scaling with surface area. In fact, at high frequency and low T (65 kHz and 25 K) as the highly conducting surface states are effectively probed, the pickup voltage scales with the sample surface area. At low T, numerous studies show as well as SdH oscillation in Fig. 1(a) confirm the dominance of surface conductivity in the TI. In this regime the observation of V   f  f  ,where α ~1, suggests the linear frequency dependence of pickup voltage V(f), is related to contribution to electrical conduction from the surface state of the TI. The emergence of the   2 V f  f at low frequency and higher T is related to the bulk contribution to conductivity where V(T) shows thermally activated behavior. section at a lower frequency. The induced current is shown to flow across the entire volume of the sample. The AC excitation magnetic field in the primary is shown in blue while the field induced in the pickup coils through the currents induced in the sample is shown in red. A schematic plot of the induced current profile across the sample cross-section (a) t B t B IInduced d Bi2Se3 t B t B IInduced d (b) 4 6 8 10 4 6 8 10 0 3 6 9 65 kHz, 25 K 5 kHz, 160 K V (mV) Surface area (mm 2) (c) 13 at different f is shown. (b) Shows at a higher frequency, the nature of the induced current distribution which flows only in TI’s high conducting surface states. The nature of the excitation field in the excitation coil (blue) and the induced field in the pickup coil (red) are also shown. (c) Shows the pickup voltage response with sample surface area at 5 kHz, 160 K and 65 kHz, 25 K. At low T our transport measurements in Fig. 1 as well as past observations have confirmed the dominance of surface contribution to conductivity at low T in the TI. In this low T regime our pickup signal exhibits a linear frequency dependent regime. This suggests that the linear frequency dependence of the pickup signal is related to the surface conducting state in the TI. Similarly, at high T the observation from our transport measurements and those of other of the emergence of bulk conducting response, coincides with the observed quadratic dependence at low frequencies of the pickup signal. Therefore, this quadratic frequency dependence at low frequency of the pickup signifies the emergence of bulk contribution to electrical conductivity. Another possible explanation to the observed frequency dependence is given as follows: The pickup voltage develops due to the current induced in the sample. These induced currents depend on the electrical conductivity of the sample. Based on the above discussion the electrical conductivity of the TI has two contributions   0 T exp b b K T b           and     1 s T C DT    . The pickup voltage is given by (see S9 section in supplementary information of Ref. for detailed calculation)     2 1 1 i t os ob pickup KT V r,z e C DT i e                     , (1) where ξ(r, z) is a geometric factor which is a function of the pickup coil radius (r), the height between the two coils (z),  is the magnetic flux passing through the sample, τ is scattering time scale and 2 f    . Terahertz spectroscopy measurements show that bulk and surface have different value of scattering time scale τ. Hence, we assume two different limits in eqn. (1) (see S9 of Ref. for details). When bulk state dominates in conduction, we use a limit f << 1. Under this assumption Eq. (1) gives us     2 2 0 i ft pickup b V f r,z f e       . (2) 14 If the surface state start to dominate in conduction, using the limit fτ >> 1, Eq. (1) shows V   f  f  , viz.,     2 0 i ft pickup s V f r,z e f       . (3) the expression: where, Psurface and Pbulk are mean fractions of the surface and bulk contribution to the pickup voltage with Psurface + Pbulk = 1. Note the T dependence of s and b has already been shown by the black line and red dashed line in Fig. 3(b), respectively. The S69 data in Fig. 5(a) fits with Psurface = 35%, Pbulk = 65%. Note that at 65 kHz, the Psurface is sensitive to the thin conducting regions within the sample where shielding currents are induced by the AC field. The minima in V(T) at 70 K (Fig. 5(a)) suggests regions in the TI which exhibited predominantly surface conductivity response at low T (Fig. 3(c)), with increasing T begins to display bulk conductivity. The surface contribution is gradually degraded by transport channel being created in the bulk, as a result we see only an average 35% contribution to the total conductivity from the surface. 15 the fit to the data, done using Eq. 4. Four distinct regions (I-IV) are shown with four different colors (see text for details). (b) A schematic showing the bulk conduction and valence bands as well as the surface states. The schematic on the right is an expanded portion of the left schematic. The violet curve in the right schematic shows upward band bending of the conducting band towards the Fermi energy of the surface state due to Se vacancies. The forward channel (Forward Ch.) is associated with electrons migrating from the bulk to the surface, the reverse channel (Reverse Ch.) is associated with electrons being thermally activated from the surface into the bulk. Black lines show the Dirac cone associated with the surface states. The Fermi energy is shown by red dotted line. The green region represents the defect states produced by the Se vacancies. The activation energy gap (Δ) is between the defect state and minima of the conduction band (c) Activation energy gap (Δ) calculated from our model is plotted as a function of bulk carrier (nbulk). The nbulk is calculated using, ( ) b nbulk d e    , where 3000 ( ) 140 1 d d    is the thickness (d) dependent mobility and σb ~103 S/m (based on the value used in the simulations above). Bulk conduction Band Fermi energy of the surface state Bulk gap (0.3 eV) Bulk valance Band Δ Defect bands Bulk conduction Band Forward Ch. 8 16 24 32 meV) nbulk (10 17 cm -3) (c) (b) Interaction dominated I II III IV 60 120 180 240 4 8 12 T (K) V (mV) Competing surface + bulk state Surface dominated Interaction dominated (a) Bulk >Surface Bulk < Surface 16 The fitting in Fig. 5(a) shows that at high T above 170 K there is a deviation from the Eq. 4 fit and the V(T) becomes weakly temperature dependent. We have found in all the samples, the V(f) at high temperatures exhibits linear and quadratic frequency dependence at high and low frequencies respectively (for eg. see 150 K data in Fig .3(a)). This behavior suggests the presence of surface conductivity coexisting with a bulk conducting regime in the sample even at high temperature. The temperature dependence of V(T) below 70 K in Figs. 3(b) and 5(a) suggests that the electrical conductivity of the sample obeys     1 s T C DT    . This form of temperature dependence of the electrical conductivity has been reported for surface conducting state in TI . The T dependent part of the electrical conductivity,     1 T C DT    , sets in above 40 K (i.e., D >> C). Our, and other investigations shows the presence of a temperature independent conductivity regime below 40 K, which is a feature of metallic conductivity of the topologically protected surface states in TI materials. Earlier studies in Bi2Se3 studies show that the T dependent conductivity above 40 K is due to electron phonon interactions . With lowering of T (below 40 K) where the surface conductivity of the TI dominates, the electron – phonon coupling significantly weakens . From the above expression the T independent conductivity regime is obtained when D << C at T < 40. In this temperature regime where conductivity is via the topological surface states, magneto-transport studies show weak antilocalization due to the chiral nature of the currents . In this regime studies suggest electron interactions play a role in determining the behavior of conductivity of the TI materials. Hence below 40 K where there is a saturated behaviour of conductivity, the effect of electron – phonon interaction may be relatively diminished compared to that of electron interaction effects. In view of this we identify an electron interaction dominated regime at low T. Based on our above discussions, in Fig. 5(a) we identified four different regimes: (i) Region I (below ~ 40 K the strong interaction dominated surface regime): In this regime, surface conductivity dominates in the TI and conductivity is nearly temperature independent due to strong electron-electron interaction effects (ii) Region II (temperature dependent surface state): Here the surface state dominates the conductivity of the TI with a temperature dependence of the form     1 s T C DT    due to the onset of electron-phonon scattering. As the temperature increases, the surface conductivity falls until it reaches close to the bulk conductivity value, which is close 17 to the minima in V(T). (iii) Region III (bulk dominated state): In this region, which extends about 70 K to 170 K, Fig. 3(b) shows a good fit to bulk behavior (see dashed red curve in Fig. 3(b)). However, the fit doesn’t imply that in region III the surface contribution to conductivity is zero. much smaller than the bulk contribution, due to which the fit to bulk appears to be good and bulk dominated. Figure. 3(a) shows that for temperatures in regime III (like 90 K and 150 K) the V(f) has quadratic as well a nearly linear regime ( V   f  f  ,where α ~1), which shows the presence of both bulk and surface contributions to conductivity. Hence, region III is a regime with the bulk contribution to conductivity dominating over a weak surface contribution. Here the response from the bulk in the TI shows a thermally activated conductivity behavior. The typical thermal activation energy scale is estimated to be ~ 6 meV - 30 meV by studying five different samples. (iv) Region IV: This is an unusual regime found at high temperatures, where V(T) deviates from Eq. (4) fit. In this regime, we recall similar linear V(f) behavior (inset Fig. 3(a)). Just like the weakly T dependent surface conductivity regime is present at low T, we propose the weakly temperature independent regime at high T is where the effects of surface conductivity of a TI become important once again. We would like to reiterate here that surface and bulk, both conductivities contribute to the pickup voltage, as the induced currents are generated in both surface and bulk of the sample. The region III and region IV (Fig. 5(a)) are associated with a competition between bulk and surface state contributions to conductivity. The change in curvature of V(T) curve in Fig. 5(a) is going from region III to region IV which signifies a competition between surface and bulk contributions to conductivity. In (region III) the thermally activate nature of transport we have showed that bulk conductivity dominates. Recall inset of Fig. 3(a) at high T, showed a nearly linear frequency dependence, viz., V   f  f  , where α ~1 when T is in region IV. This suggest the re-emergence of significant surface contributions to conductivity along with bulk. Here within the temperature window III the bulk contribution to conductivity dominates over the surface contribution, while in region IV it is vice versa. VI. Simulations of the mutual inductance measurements: 18 We simulate the electromagnetic response of this topological insulator with defects using COMSOL multi-physics software. In Fig. 6(a) inset, we first model a defect free TI with high conducting thin metallic sheets (yellow) sandwiching a bulk low conducting slab (blue). We solve the Maxwell equation for the modelled TI subjected to a time varying magnetic field applied using coil parameters identical to our experiment (see S2 section in supplementary information of Ref. ). We use an AC excitation current of I = 150 mA (similar to our experiment). First, the rate of change of induced flux (   MI ) in the pickup coil is calculated from which the mutual inductance (real and imaginary components) M ′ and M ′′are calculated (analog to our experiments, M ′′<<M ′). The modelled TI has crystal thickness and surface area similar to S20 sample, with a thickness of 5 nm for the metallic high conducting sheets and 20 m for the bulk insulating layer. The above is based on estimates indicating the thickness of conducting surface in Bi2Se3 is between 5 to 10 nm . In Fig. 6(a) we see the data begins to look like the experimental V(f) data when the bulk conductivity σb~ 103 S/m and the conductivity of the metallic sheets σs ~ 1011 S/m (note OFHC triple nine purity copper has conductivity ~ 108 S/m). Earlier transport measurements have shown conductivity of surface states in Bi2Se3 ~ 104 S/m to 105 S/m . It may be mentioned here that in conventional transport measurements due to inability to distinguish between bulk and surface conducting channels, the measured surface conductivity via transport measurements could be much lower than the actual value. (Details on the behavior of the skin depth and its estimate is shown in the supplementary section S10 of Ref. ).Note that the relation between M′ and induced voltage in the pickup coil is V M    (as M′′ << M′or V′′<< V′, M′(f) = V′(f) ωI where I = 150 mA,  = 2f). Figure 6(a) shows simulated M ′ as a function of frequency for different conductivities of the TI surface while keeping the bulk conductivity constant at ~103 S/m. The value σb we use is based on estimates in literature . The general behavior of M ′(f) is that, it increases linearly with frequency and it saturates at higher frequency. At lower frequency regime where M ′(f)  f (see dotted line drawn in Fig. 6(a)) corresponds the pickup voltage, V(f)  f 2. At higher f where the M ′ is weakly dependent on f, corresponds to V(f)  f. Figure 6(a) shows that the M ′ begins to show saturating features as the surface state conductivity (σs) increases. This confirms that highly conducting surface states are responsible for the nearly linear frequency dependence of pickup voltage V(f) in the high frequency regime (see Fig. 3). Note that while the simulations in Fig. 6(a) shows the M ′(f) saturates above 40 kHz, however in our experiments 19 (Fig. 3) showed that V   f  f  (where α ~1) regime (i.e., M ′(f) ~ constant) sets in above 20 kHz and not from 40 kHz. conducting surface state. The thickness of the high conducting surface state is taken as 5 nm (thickness of the yellow region), the other relevant dimensions are height = 20 μm, width = 1.9 mm, and length= 2.4 mm. The main panel shows the behavior of the simulated M'(f) for different conductivity of surface state keeping bulk conductivity constant (~103 S/m). Red dash line shows the linear dependence of M'. It is clear that M' seems to saturate beyond 40 kHz whereas the experimentally measured data shows saturation from 20 kHz onwards. (b) Shows the M' is simulated as a function of f for different inhomogeneity levels (0%, 20% and 30%) by incorporating conducting channels inside the bulk (see text for details and section S2 of supplementary information, of Ref. ). Comparison of simulation and experimental result (scattered data) of M' is shown for S20 sample at room temperature. In order to match our simulations with the observed saturation of M ′(f) at relatively lower f (from 20 kHz), without significantly enhancing the surface conductivity σs (far beyond what have been reported in literature for these samples), we consider a situation where conducting channels exist in the bulk which connect to the high conducting surface states. We argue later these high conducting channels in the bulk are generated by Se vacancies. Such a state of the TI we refer to as an inhomogeneous topological insulator state. We incorporate inhomogeneity in our model for the TI by considering a distribution of solid high conductivity cylindrical regions threading through the bulk of the sample connecting the top and bottom high conducting surface sheets of the TI (see section S2 in the supplementary information of Ref. for a schematic of the modelled 15 30 45 60 0 20 40 M  (nH) f (kHz) 20% 0% Homogeneous Inhomogeneous fraction 30% b S/m S S/m S20 @ 300K (b) 0 20 40 0 10 20 30     f (kHz) M  (nH) b S/m S S/m   ( a ) (a) 20 μm 2.4 mm 20 inhomogeneous TI system). In our simulation the percentage inhomogeneity in the TI is varied by changing the density of cylinders and the conductivity of the cylinders is taken as σs. Figure 6(b) shows that the results of simulations match with our experimental results by, using σs~1011 S/m, σb~103 S/m and 30% inhomogeneity. The introduction of the 30% inhomogeneity in our TI model causes the M ′(f) to saturate from lower frequencies of 20 kHz. The presence of 30% inhomogeneity in the sample would affect the net bulk electrical conductivity. However, estimating the extent of change in the net bulk electrical conductivity isn’t clear as yet as this would statistically depend on the fraction of high conductivity and low channels contributing to the electrical conduction paths when electric current flows through the bulk. We find that our above simulation results are not sensitive to the details of the spatial distribution of inhomogeneity introduced in the TI, but rather the result are quite sensitive on the inhomogeneity fraction in the TI (see section S2 in the supplementary information of Ref. ). Figure 6(b) shows the close match between the simulated M'(f) (purple dashed line) and the measured voltage data (green scattered data) for S20 sample at 300 K using the inhomogeneous TI model. Since in this high frequency regime the skin depth in the TI is estimated to be ~100 nm (see the supplementary information, S10 of Ref. ), we suggest that the inhomogeneity discussed above are clustered over length scales which are  100 nm (in our model we take the spatial extend of inhomogeneity in the TI as the diameter of the cylinders). Due to the presence of parallel channels of electrical conduction between the surface and bulk of the TI material, it is difficult to identify the surface conductance and inhomogeneity through the bulk in a transport measurement, especially at intermediate temperature regimes where both contributions are admixed. However, the analysis of SdH oscillations at different T help to give a signature to the onset of the bulk contribution to electrical conductivity. Analysis of the SdH oscillations in our Bi2Se3 (see Fig.1 and its caption for details) using the Lifshitz-Kosevich (LK) equation gives a frequency of the SdH oscillations (F) = 46.95  0.25 T. As   2 4 sn F e   , where ns is the surface carrier density, we get ns = (2.268 ± 0.012) cm-2, which compares well with earlier estimates in this batch of samples . Using ns we estimate the Fermi wave vector for the 2D surface states in our sample is, 2 f s k n  ±0.0027) Å-1 . By comparing this kF value with the ARPES spectrum measured for Bi2Se3 samples 21 (see Fig.1 of Ref. ), we see that the Fermi energy (Ef) should be located approximately 30 meV above the Dirac point and about 100 meV below the bottom of the bulk conduction band (this comparison is illustrated in section S12 of supplementary information, Ref. ). If we assume the origin of the SdH oscillation in the transport measurements is due to the bulk electrons, then bulk carrier density should be 2 4 F k c    cm-3, where c=28.64 Å is the Bi2Se3 lattice spacing along c axis. However, the bulk carrier density (nbulk) in the TI material as estimated from the Hall coefficient (Fig. 1(b)), is  cm-3. This comparison shows that the features of our transport data at low T cannot be reconciled with bulk conduction electrons contributing to conductivity rather they are arising from 2D surface electrons. The SdH oscillations in the transport measurements (see Fig. 1) analyzed using the Lifshitz-Kosevich (LK) equation also reveal information on the Berry phase, φ = 2πβ (see Fig. 1(b) inset). For the two-dimensional Dirac fermion in TI φ = π suppresses the back scattering from disorder due to destructive interference. From the analysis of the SdH at different T, we obtain a value close to π at low T below 10 K (see Fig.1(b) inset). Thus at low T the observed value of  close to π suggests that the SdH oscillation arises from 2D surface Dirac electrons. As bulk contributions to conductivity increases with T, the SdH oscillations weaken and disappear (see Fig. 1(a)) and the  value significantly deviates from  above 10 K (see Fig.1(b) inset). Therefore, at low T the transport data shows conductivity of the TI is surface dominated which gets progressively affected as the bulk conductivity sets in at higher T. However the temperature range over which the above analysis can be done is very limited. While the above observations are consistent with our results based on pickup coil measurements, however our technique is applicable over a wider T range. VII. Discussion on the role of disorder in Bi2Se3: A bulk gap in Bi2Se3 of 0.3 eV suggests that thermally activated conductivity should be seen at significantly elevated temperatures, but we see activated conductivity from T ~ 70 K onwards (viz., the region III in Fig. 5(a)). In Bi2Se3 samples it is known Se vacancies add defect states in the bulk. These defects states add excess electrons in the bulk due to which the conductivity of the bulk increases. The measured Δ values are almost an order of magnitude smaller than the estimates of bulk band gap in Bi2Se3 of about 0.3 eV . One possible scenario could be, the gap Δ corresponds to a gap between the defect states generated by Se vacancies and bottom of conduction 22 band (see Fig. 5(b)). It is known that Se vacancy causes an upward band bending (Fig. 5(b)) of the states near the bottom of the conduction band towards the surface state . The band bending favors the migration of electrons generated in the bulk (due to Se vacancies) to the surface. We refer to this as the forward channel (see Fig. 5(b)). Above 70 K the thermal energy is sufficient for thermal activation of charges from defects states into the bulk. We refer to this as the reverse channel. This reverse channel for charge migration begins at T > Δ/kB (Fig. 5(b)). Recall, that in Bi2Se3 excess charge carriers are produced by Se vacancies. In Fig. 5(c) we estimated the behavior of carrier density in the bulk (nbulk) using a known form , ( ) b n d e bulk    , where 3000 ( ) 140 1 d d    is the thickness (d) dependent mobility and σb ~103 S/m. Thus the activation barrier Δ is larger for smaller bulk carrier density. Akin to a tight binding like picture, we propose the hopping back and forth of charges between the defect states in the bulk and surface states enhances the average kinetic energy of charges leading to the formation of a broad defect band and this also helps to open a gap Δ near the surface states. The Δ decreases with nbulk as seen in Fig. 5(c), could be a result of enhanced Coulombic interactions in these lower electron doped samples suppressing the kinetic energy and localizing the charges. Enhanced interaction effects lead to the weak T dependence of conductivity not only at low T below 40 K but also at high T above 180 K (Fig. 5(a)). Thus Selenium vacancy induced electron doping of the bulk leads to an interplay between bulk and surface conductivity, leading to an inhomogeneous TI state in Bi2Se3.Based on the above discussion, we propose that in region III of Fig. 5(a) the bulk contribution to the conductivity dominates over the surface, due to thermal excitation of charge carrier in the bulk state. However, at higher temperature (region IV), the excess charge migration to surface state due to Se vacancies results in the contribution of the surface conductivity to enhance once again. It is due to this effect, we see the experimental data deviating from the fitting line in high temperature regime (region IV in Fig. 5(a)). We believe more detailed work using techniques like STM and ARPES, is required to probe the effect of defect states lying within the bulk and the resulting gap emerging in the TI. VIII. Conclusions: 23 In conclusion, our non-contact two coil mutual inductance measurements in Bi2Se3 single crystals suggest that the surface states are coupled to bulk state with filamentary high conducting structures. The inhomogeneous state gets precipitated in the bulk of the TI only above the threshold temperature, which is associated with the activation of charge between the surface and bulk. This leads to an interplay between bulk and surface dominated transport regimes at different T, which is produced as a result of disorder introduced in the system. While material disorder leads to interplay between bulk and surface conductivity in a TI material, it is also responsible for resurfacing of the surface conductivity at high temperature which is a potentially feature useful for applications. Acknowledgements SSB acknowledges the funding support from DST (TSDP), IIT Kanpur for funding support.