1 Spin-orbit torques in heavy metal/ferromagnet bilayers with varying strength of interfacial spin-orbit coupling Lijun Zhu,1* D. C. Ralph,1,2 and R. A. Buhrman1 1. Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14850 2. Kavli Institute at Cornell, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA *e-mail: lz442@cornell.edu Despite intense efforts it has remained unresolved whether and how interfacial spin-orbit coupling (ISOC) affects spin transport across heavy metal (HM)/ferromagnet (FM) interfaces. Here we report conclusive experiment evidence that the ISOC at HM/FM interfaces is the dominant mechanism for “spin memory loss”. An increase in ISOC significantly reduces, in a linear manner, the dampinglike spin-orbit torque (SOT) exerted on the FM layer via degradation of the spin transparency of the interface for spin currents generated in the HM. In addition, the fieldlike SOT is also dominated by the spin Hall contribution of the HM and decreases with increasing ISOC. This work reveals that ISOC at HM/FM interfaces should be minimized to advance efficient SOT devices through atomic layer passivation of the HM/FM interface or other means. Key words: spin orbit torque, spin Hall effect, spin orbit coupling, spin transparency Current-induced spin-orbit torques (SOTs) in heavy metal/ferromagnet (HM/FM) systems have attracted remarkable attention due to their potential for the efficient manipulation of magnetization in metals and insulators at the nanoscale . When the spin Hall effect (SHE) of the HMs is the dominant source of the SOTs as is the case for many HM/FM systems , achieving high spin transparency (Tint) at the HM/FM interfaces is of the same importance as achieving a large spin Hall ratio (θSH) in the HMs for obtaining a large dampinglike SOT efficiency per unit bias current density ξDL j ≡ TintθSH, the quantity of primary importance for efficiently driving magnetization switching , magnetization dynamics, and chiral spin texture displacement . Recently, it has become recognized that so-called “spin memory loss” (SML) at many HM/FM interfaces can degrade Tint and therefore substantially reduce the spin current that is pumped into the HM by a resonantly excited FM, or alternatively reduce the ξDL j exerted on the FM layer by spin current arising from the SHE in the HM. While intermixing and atomic disorder were initially expected to be the dominant cause of SML, an extended first-principles analysis of spin pumping by Zwierzycki et al. indicates that the spin mixing conductance G⇅ of a HM/FM interface is insensitive to interfacial diffusion and atomic disorder. Thus a different explanation for SML is required. The initial spin-pumping theories and the supporting experiments omitted any effects of the interfacial spin-orbit coupling (ISOC) at the HM/FM interface and assumed the (pumped) spin current to be continuous across the HM/FM interface . More recently, a number of theoretical efforts have been made to assess the possible relevance of ISOC to Tint and the SOT efficiencies. Some calculations have suggested that ISOC at the HM/FM interface could contribute to SML , acting to enhance the spin scattering at the interface even in absence of inter-diffusion or atomic disorder . However, clear experimental evidence for whether and how ISOC is relevant in SOTs and Tint has been lacking, as it is a major challenge to engineer and quantify a changing strength of ISOC within one material system while keeping the SOT efficiencies high enough to measure accurately. In this letter, we demonstrate that ISOC at Pt/Co and Au0.25Pt0.75/Co interfaces can be tuned significantly via thermal engineering of the spin-orbit proximity effect. From this ability we show that ISOC is the dominant mechanism for SML and reduces the dampinglike SOT efficiency by degrading Tint in a linear manner. We also find that the fieldlike torque is dominated by the SHE of the HM and is affected by ISOC only via degradation of Tint. The ISOC- generated SOTs is found to be negligible in the studied HM/Co systems. We studied several magnetic bilayers (see Supplemental Material ), each of which underwent repeated cycles of measurements and annealing (see Table 1) to tune the strength of ISOC. These include sample series Pt 4/Co 0.85 (P1-P4) and Au0.25Pt0.75 4/Co 0.85 (P5-P8) with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA), and Pt 4/Co 3.2 (I1-I4) with in-plane magnetic anisotropy (IMA) (the numbers are layer thicknesses in nm). In addition, we measured two IMA reference samples Pt 4/Hf 0.67/Co 1.4 (R1) and Pt 4/Co 1.4 (R2). We used two quantities, the interfacial magnetic anisotropy energy density (Ks) and the anomalous Hall conductivity (σAH), as indicators of the strength of ISOC. It has been well established that Ks in HM/Co bilayers and superlattices originates from spin-orbit coupling (SOC)- enhanced orbital magnetic moments localized at the first layer adjacent to the interface . A HM with a strong SOC (e.g. 5d Pt) can modify the perpendicular orbital moments in an adjacent 3d Co layer via strong interfacial 3d-5d hybridization, which enhances the latter’s spin-orbit interaction and thereby Ks. σAH in thick Co films is determined by the intrinsic contribution from the internal spin-orbit interaction related to the integral of the Berry curvature over occupied states . However, in ultrathin ferromagnetic films where the electron mean-free-path is determined by interfacial scattering, this “bulk” contribution to σAH decreases linearly towards zero with decreasing FM thickness, which allows the contribution from a strong 2 ISOC to dominate . We find that σAH in ultrathin Co films in contact with Pt (or Au0.25Pt0.75) provides a separate and independent measure of the relative strength of ISOC. In Figs. 1(a) and 1(b) we plot Ks and σAH as measured in the different samples and for different annealing treatments. We note that the dominant contributions to the magnitudes of Ks (1-3.5 erg/cm2) and σAH and their variation with annealing come from the Pt/Co and Au0.25Pt0.75/Co interfaces and their ISOC variation, rather than the MgO interfaces or bulk contributions. The upper bound for the Ks contribution from the Co-MgO interface is only ~0.6 erg/cm2, i.e. Ks(MgO) as indicated by dotted line in Fig. 1(a). This bound was determined from a Pt/Hf/Co/MgO sample (R1) and assumes the Hf/Co interface has a negligible contribution to Ks. Upon 300 ̊C annealing, Ks(MgO) from R1 changed from 0.56±0.05 to 0.66±0.10 erg/cm2, which is a minimal variation compared to that of the Pt/Co/MgO samples (e.g. nearly doubling from I1 to I2 for a similar 300 C anneal; also see ). Similarly, an upper bound for the Co bulk contribution to σAH is estimated to be 0.30⨉104 Ω-1 m-1 and 1.12⨉104 Ω-1 m-1 for the 0.85 and 3.2 nm “bulk” Co layers respectively, as indicated by σAH(Co) in Fig. 1(b), by using the σAH(Co) = 0.49⨉104 Ω-1 m-1 as determined from R1 and the proportional dependence of the intrinsic σAH on FM thickness . There was also only a minimal effect of annealing on σAH of R1 (σAH = 0.46⨉104 Ω-1 m-1 after 300 ̊C annealing). As is clearly seen in Fig. 1, the changes in Ks and σAH, track each other fairly closely for each sample set, consistently indicating an evolution of ISOC with the annealing steps. Specifically, for the two PMA samples the ISOC first increases and then gradually drops back down, while for the IMA Pt/Co samples it goes up monotonically. We tentatively attribute the different behavior of the thicker IMA Co sample set to differences in strain relaxation that occur for different Co thicknesses, associated with the large lattice mismatch relative to Pt. We attribute the evolution of ISOC with the annealing steps to thermal tuning of the spin- orbit proximity effect . It has been shown that a HM with strong SOC can modify the SOC in the interfacial region of an adjacent layer due to the spin-orbit proximity effect . A particularly striking example is the enhanced SHE and quantum anomalous Hall effect in graphene . The annealing-induced changes of Ks and σAH that we observe are unrelated to atomic inter-mixing at the HM/Co interfaces. Chemical depth profiling indicates displacement of the Co is at most at the single-atomic-layer level, while x-ray reflectivity indicates that annealing sharpens the HM/Co interfaces rather than inducing intermixing . Detailed transport and magnetic characterization of the samples safely further exclude the occurrence of any substantial atomic inter-mixing in these samples. Ks and σAH are high in the as-grown state, and keep increasing with annealing for the IMA Pt/Co series (I1-I4), whereas an intermixed layer that is deliberately introduced (e.g. an alloy layer of Co50Pt50 or Pt3Co/Co50Pt50/Co3Pt) is found to substantially degrade Ks and σAH . We note that our results are also consistent with the earlier finding that high-temperature annealing can separate Co out from initially chemically disordered CoPt alloys and therefore enhance the PMA of Pt/Co (111) superlattices . In Figs. 1(c) and 1(d) we show the dampinglike and fieldlike SOT efficiencies for the samples before and after annealing as determined by harmonic response measurements . Since the resistivities of both Pt and Au0.25Pt0.75 can change during the annealing process and alter the SOT efficiencies per unit bias current density, ξDL(FL) j , we show first the SOT efficiencies per unit applied electric field, ξDL(FL) E = ξDL(FL) j /ρHM ( ρHM is the HM resistivity), in Fig. 1(c), and then for completeness ξDL(FL) j in Fig. 1(d). The dependence on annealing is similar for both quantities, but in the following we will focus on ξDL(FL) E as being more fundamental for considering changes in intrinsic SOTs. Focusing first on the technologically more important and stronger dampinglike component ξDL E for the PMA series Pt/Co (P1-P4) and Au0.25Pt0.75/Co (P5-P9), upon the first annealing step ξDL E drops by ~50% and then gradually recovers back to some extent as result of the two subsequent annealing steps. For the IMA Pt/Co series (I1-I4), ξDL E monotonically decreases with annealing. The key observation is that for all three cases the variations of ξDL E upon annealing are strikingly well (negatively) correlated with the variation of the ISOC strength as seen in both Figs. 1(a) and 1(b). The fact that ξDL E tracks the ISOC quantified by Ks and σAH in a markedly close manner strongly indicates that SML is mainly due to interfacial spin-orbit scattering. Our findings are consistent with the theoretical calculations that a strong ISOC at the HM/FM interface enhances interfacial spin scattering. As schematically shown in Fig. 2(a), ISOC leads to a sharp drop and discontinuity of the spin current density at HM/FM interfaces in a SOT experiment. In order to quantitatively determine the scaling of ξDL E with ISOC, in Figs. 2(b) and 2(c) we plot ξDL E as a function of the two more direct indicators of ISOC strength, Ks ISOC = Ks - Ks(MgO) and σAH ISOC = σAH - σAH(Co), for the three sample series. Strikingly, ξDL E scales roughly linearly with Ks ISOC and σAH ISOC for each sample series. We also note that the intercepts are apparently indicating the values of ξDL E in absence of the ISOC. It is rather remarkable that the best linear fits as a function of Ks ISOC (σAH ISOC) for both the PMA and IMA Pt/Co sample series indicate a giant ξDL E of ≈ 6 ⨉ 105 Ω-1 m-1 for an ideal Pt/Co interface with zero ISOC. We point out that this large value ξDL E ≈ 6 ⨉ 105 Ω-1 m-1 is still a lower bound for the internal spin Hall conductivity (σSH) of Pt, because the spin backflow (SBF) is not taken into account. If we assume the same SBF correction of Tint SBF ≈0.48 for the Pt/Co interface as determined by a recent Pt thickness dependent study , we obtain σSH ≈ 1.3 ⨉ 106 Ω-1 m-1 for Pt. For the Au0.25Pt0.75/Co interface, the best linear fits of ξDL E vs Ks ISOC (σAH ISOC) yield ξDL E ≈ 7.5 ⨉ 105 Ω- 1 m-1 in the zero-ISOC limit. Taking into account Tint SBF ≈ 0.63 for Au0.25Pt0.75/Co interface as reported recently , we then obtain an internal value of σSH ≈ 1.2 ⨉ 106 Ω-1 m-1 for Au0.25Pt0.75, comparable with that of Pt. Here we emphasize that the strong ξDL E variations are unlikely to be 3 attributed to any annealing-induced change of either G⇅ or the spin Hall conductivity of the HM layers. First, calculations have indicated that G⇅ is insensitive to interfacial disorder and ISOC , although recent work has suggested that SBF at HM/FM interface could be modified by the interfacial spin-orbit scattering. Second, σSH for Pt and Au1-xPtx is dominated by the intrinsic SHE determined by the topology of the band structure, which for simple fcc metals is only dependent on the long-range crystal structure and is hence robust against localized changes in structural disorder that might occur during annealing . We can also report that the strong variations in ξDL E are unrelated to atomic intermixing at the HM/Co interface. We found that inserting a 0.6 nm intermixed Co- Pt layer (i.e. Pt3Co 0.2/Co50Pt50 0.2/Co3Pt 0.2) between the Pt and Co had no significant effect on ξDL E . Our results indicate that the development of highly efficient HM/FM spin-torque devices, e.g. magnetic memories, will generally be advanced by minimizing ISOC at the HM/FM interfaces. As an example, we show in Figs. 3(a) and 3(b) that, through atomic Hf layer passivation of the HM/FM interface, the ISOC at a Pt/Co interface can be significantly reduced (samples R1 and R2), which beneficially results in an significant improvement of ξDL E (and hence Tint) and a considerable reduction (⨉4.6) in the ISOC enhancement of magnetic damping via SML or/and two-magnon scattering . Turning to the fieldlike torque, for all the samples ξFL E is negative (opposite to the Oersted field generated by the bias current) and small in magnitude compared to ξDL E (Fig. 1(c)). According to the SBF theory, the fieldlike torque generated by a SHE spin current impinging onto a HM/FM interface is expected to be quite weak in comparison to the dampinglike torque , scaling as ImG⇅ << ReG⇅. While the magnitude of |ξFL E | relative to ξDL E for the Pt/Co and Au.025Pt0.75/Co samples is somewhat higher than predicted by these model calculations it is still comparatively low, consistent with other Pt/Co systems . We find that |ξFL E | shows the same trend as that of ξDL E with annealing, which we take as strong evidence that the SHE is the dominant mechanism for both torque components in our PMA and IMA samples, with ISOC determining the SML at the HM/Co interface. Recent theoretical work has advanced the understanding that there are various mechanisms by which a strong ISOC might generate rather than degrade SOTs in HM/FM bilayers. However, we find no indication of any significant ISOC-induced SOTs that scale positively with ISOC strength. Therefore, we conclude that the SOTs in the HM/Co systems studied here are predominantly due to the SHE in the HMs while the ISOC-generated torques are negligible. In summary, we have demonstrated that thermal engineering of the spin-orbit proximity effect is a simple but effective approach to controllably vary the strength of ISOC at Pt/Co and Au25Pt75/Co interfaces. From this variation, we have obtained conclusive experimental evidence that ISOC at a HM/FM interface is the dominant mechanism for SML and increasing ISOC significantly reduces the dampinglike and fieldlike SOTs by enhancing interfacial spin scattering and degrading Tint in a linear manner. For both PMA and IMA HM/FM systems studied here, the ISOC-generated torques are negligible. This work also indicates that the development of highly efficient HM/FM spin-torque devices, e.g. magnetic memories, will generally be advanced by minimizing ISOC effects, through atomic layer passivation of the HM/FM interface or other means. The approach we utilized here to tune the ISOC strength should be also beneficial for research and applications of Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (skyrmion and chiral domain wall physics) and other ISOC effects. This work was supported in part by the Office of Naval Research and by the NSF MRSEC program (DMR-1719875) through the Cornell Center for Materials Research. Support was also provided by the Office of the Director of National Intelligence (ODNI), Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA), via contract W911NF-14-C0089. The views and conclusions contained herein are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies or endorsements, either expressed or implied, of the ODNI, IARPA, or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Governmental purposes notwithstanding any copyright annotation thereon. Additionally this work was supported by the NSF (ECCS- 1542081) through use of the Cornell Nanofabrication Facility/National Nanofabrication Infrastructure Network. I. M. Miron et al., Perpendicular switching of a single ferromagnetic layer induced by in-plane current injection, Nature 476, 189–193 (2011). C. O. Avci et al., Current-induced switching in a magnetic insulator, Nat. Mater. 16, 309–314 (2017). S. Emori, U. Bauer, S.-M. Ahn, E. Martinez, and G.S.D. Beach, Current-driven dynamics of chiral ferromagnetic domain walls, Nat. Mater. 12, 611–616 (2013). L. Liu et al., Spin-torque switching with the giant spin Hall effect of tantalum, Science, 336, 555 (2012). P. P. J. Haazen et al., Domain wall depinning governed by the spin Hall effect, Nat. Mater. 12, 299 (2013). S. Shi, Y. Ou, S.V. Aradhya, D. C. Ralph, and R. A. Buhrman, Fast, low-current spin-orbit torque switching of magnetic tunnel junctions through atomic modifications of the free layer interfaces, Phys. Rev. Applied 9, 011002 Y. Liu, Z. Yuan, R. J. H. Wesselink, A. A. Starikov, P. J. Kelly, Interface enhancement of Gilbert damping from first principles, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 207202 (2014). J.-C.N. Rojas-Sánchez et al. Spin pumping and inverse spin Hall effect in platinum: the essential role of spin- memory loss at metallic interfaces, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, C.-F. Pai, Y. Ou, L. H. Vilela-Leao, D. C. Ralph, and R. A. Buhrman, Dependence of the efficiency of spin Hall torque on the transparency of Pt/ferromagnetic layer interfaces, Phys. Rev. B 92, 064426 (2015). M. Zwierzycki, Y. Tserkovnyak, P. J. Kelly, A. Brataas, and G.E.W. Bauer, First-principles study of magnetization relaxation enhancement and spin transfer in thin magnetic films, Phys. Rev. B 71, 064420 (2005). 4 W. Zhang, W. Han, X. Jiang, S.-H. Yang, and S. S. P. Parkin, Role of transparency of platinum-ferromagnet interface in determining intrinsic magnitude of spin Hall effect, Nat. Phys. 11, 496–502 (2015). P. M. Haney, H.-W. Lee, K.-J. Lee, A. Manchon, and M. D. Stiles, Current induced torques and interfacial spin- orbit coupling: Semiclassical modeling, Phys. Rev. B 87, Y. Tserkovnyak, A. Brataas, and G. E. W. Bauer, Enhanced Gilbert damping in thin ferromagnetic films, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 117601 (2002). P. M. Haney, H. W. Lee, K. J. Lee, A. Manchon, and M. D. Stiles, Current-induced torques and interfacial spin- orbit coupling, Phys. Rev. B 88, 214417 (2013). K.-W. Kim, K.-J. Lee, J. Sinova, H.-W. Lee, and M. D. Stiles, Spin-orbit torques from interfacial spin-orbit coupling for various interfaces, Phys. Rev. B 96, 104438 K. Chen and S. Zhang, Spin pumping in the presence of spin-orbit coupling, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 126602 (2015). J. Borge and I. V. Tokatly, Ballistic spin transport in the presence of interfaces with strong spin-orbit coupling, Phys. Rev. B 96, 115445 (2017). K. Dolui and B. K. Nikolić, Spin-memory loss due to spin-orbit coupling at ferromagnet/heavy-metal interfaces: Ab initio spin-density matrix approach, Phys. Rev. B 96, see Supplemental Material for more details on sample fabrication and characterizations, interfacial magnetic anisotropy and anomalous Hall conductivity, annealing effects on Pt/Co and Pt/Hf/Co interfaces, spin-orbit torque efficiencies and resisitivities, absence of relation of ISOC variations and SOTs variations to intermixing at the HM/Co interfaces, direct structural characterizations of the HM/Co interfaces, and strain variation. N. Nakajima et al. Perpendicular magnetic anisotropy caused by interfacial hybridization via enhanced orbital moment in Co/Pt multilayers: magnetic circular x-ray dichroism study, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 5229-5232 (1998). M. Suzuki et al. Depth profile of spin and orbital magnetic moments in a subnanometer Pt film on Co, Phys. Rev. B 72, 054430 (2005). D. Hou, Y. Li, D. Wei, D. Tian, L. Wu, and X. Jin, The anomalous Hall effect in epitaxial face-centered-cubic cobalt films, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter. 24, 482001 (2012). L. Wu, K. Zhu, D. Yue, Y. Tian, and X. Jin, Anomalous Hall effect in localization regime, Phys. Rev. B A. Avsar et al. Spin–orbit proximity effect in graphene, Nat. Commun. 5, 4875 (2014). Z. Qiao et al. Quantum anomalous Hall Effect in graphene proximity coupled to an antiferromagnetic insulator, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 116404 (2014). L. J. Zhu, D. C. Ralph, R. A. Buhrman, Irrelevance of magnetic proximity effect to spin-orbit torques in heavy metal/ferromagnet bilayers, Phys. Rev. B 98,134406 (2018). P. Poulopoulos et al. Structural, magnetic, and spectroscopic magneto-optical properties aspects of Pt–Co multilayers with intentionally alloyed layers, J. Appl. Phys. W. Grange et al. Experimental and theoretical x-ray magnetic-circular-dichroism study of the magnetic properties of Co50Pt50 thin films, Phys. Rev. B 62, 1157 J. Kim, J. Sinha, M. Hayashi, M. Yamanouchi, S. Fukami, T. Suzuki, S. Mitani, and H. Ohno, Layer thickness dependence of the current-induced effective field vector in Ta|CoFeB|MgO, Nat. Mater. 12, 240–245 (2013). C. O. Avci, K. Garello, M. Gabureac, A. Ghosh, A. Fuhrer, S. F. Alvarado, and P. Gambardella, Interplay of spin-orbit torque and thermoelectric effects in ferromagnet/normal-metal bilayers. Phys. Rev. B 90, M.-H. Nguyen, D. C. Ralph, and R. A. Buhrman, Spin torque study of the spin Hall conductivity and spin diffusion length, Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 126601 (2016). L. Zhu, D. C. Ralph, and R. A. Buhrman, Efficient spin current generation by the spin Hall effect in Au1-xPtx, Phys. Rev. Applied 10, 031001 (2018). E. Vilanova Vidal, H. Schneider, and G. Jakob, Influence of disorder on anomalous Hall effect for Heusler compounds, Phys. Rev. B 83, 174410 (2011). R. Arias and D. L. Mills, Extrinsic contributions to the ferromagnetic resonance response of ultrathin films. Phys. Rev. B 60, 7395-7408 (1999). Bilayers P1-P8 have perpendicular magnetic anisotropy, while others have in-plane magnetic anisotropy. Layer thicknesses for Co, Pt, Au0.25Pt0.75 and Hf are in nm. # Bilayers Anneal condition P1 Pt 4/Co 0.85 As-grown P2 Pt 4/Co 0.85 350 oC,2 h P3 Pt 4/Co 0.85 350 oC,4 h P4 Pt 4/Co 0.85 350 oC,4 h +400 oC,1 h P5 Au0.25Pt0.75 4/Co 0.85 As-grown P6 Au0.25Pt0.75 4/Co 0.85 350 oC,2 h P7 Au0.25Pt0.75 4/Co 0.85 350 oC,4 h P8 Au0.25Pt0.75 4/Co 0.85 350 oC,4 h +400 oC,1 h I1 Pt 4/Co 3.2 As-grown I2 Pt 4/Co 3.2 300 oC, 0.5 h I3 Pt 4/Co 3.2 300 oC, 0.5 h +350 oC,4 h I4 Pt 4/Co 3.2 300 oC,0.5 h +350 oC,4 h+450 oC,1 h R1 Pt 4/ Hf 0.67/ Co 1.4 As-grown/ 300 oC, 0.5 h R2 Pt 4/ Co 1.4 As-grown 5 Fig. 1. (a) The interfacial magnetic anisotropy energy density (Ks), (b) The anomalous Hall conductivities (σAH), (c) The dampinglike and fieldlike SOT efficiencies per unit applied electric field, and (d) The dampinglike and fieldlike SOT efficiencies per unit bias current density for the sample series defined in Table 1. The blue dotted line in (a) represents an upper bound for Ks from the Co/MgO interface as determined from measurement of the R1 reference sample with Hf passivation of the interface; the blue dotted and grey dashed lines in (b) represent calculated values of σAH for a 0.85 nm Co layer and a 3.2 nm Co layer, respectively, in the absence of significant ISOC at the HM/Co interface. Fig. 2. (a) Schematic illustration of the z-profile of the spin current density (js) at a HM/FM interface in spin-orbit torque experiment, where the spin current arises from the SHE in the bulk of the HM. The blue and red curves represent js for non-zero and zero ISOC at the HM/FM interface, respectively. The red arrow points to the spin transport direction. In the case of non-zero ISOC, js drops when traveling across the interface. Scaling of dampinglike SOT efficiency per unit applied electric field with (b) the interfacial magnetic anisotropy energy density (Ks ISOC) at the HM/Co interface, and (c) the HM/Co interface contribution to the anomalous Hall conductivity (σAH ISOC), for the sample series defined in Table 1. The solid lines in (b) and (c) represent the best linear fits to the data. Fig. 3. (a) The interfacial magnetic anisotropy energy density (Ks), the anomalous Hall conductivities (σAH), and dampinglike SOT efficiency per unit applied electric field ( ξFL E ), and (b) Frequency dependence of ferromagnetic resonance linewidth broadening (ΔH) and magnetic damping constant (α) for Pt 4/Co 4 and Pt 4/Hf 1.4/Co 4 as- grown samples. 1 Supplemental Material for Spin-orbit torques in heavy metal/ferromagnet bilayers with varying strength of interfacial spin-orbit coupling L. J. Zhu, 1* D.C. Ralph,1,2 and R. A. Buhrman1 1. Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14850 2. Kavli Institute at Cornell, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA 1. Sample fabrication and characterizations. 2. Interfacial magnetic anisotropy and anomalous Hall conductivity. 3. Annealing effects on Pt/Co and Pt/Hf/Co interfaces 4. Spin-orbit torque efficiencies and resistivities 5. ISOC variations are unrelated to increased intermixing at the HM/Co interfaces 6 SOTs variations are unrelated to increased intermixing at the HM/Co interfaces 7. Direct structural characterizations of the HM/Co interfaces 8. Strain variation 2 1. Sample fabrication and characterization. The samples were deposited at room temperature by sputtering onto oxidized Si substrates with an argon pressure of 2 mTorr and a base pressure of ~10-8 Torr. A 1 nm Ta underlayer was utilized to improve the adhesion and smoothness of the HM layer, i.e. Pt or Au0.25Pt0.75, but is expected to contribute negligible spin current into the Co layer as a consequence of the small thickness and high resistivity of Ta, the short spin diffusion length (< 2 nm) of Pt and Au0.25Pt0.75. Each sample was capped with a 2 nm MgO layer and a 1.5 nm Ta layer that was fully oxidized upon exposure to atmosphere. To minimize interfacial intermixing, each layer was sputtered at a low rate (e.g. 0.007 nm/s for Co and 0.016 nm/s for Pt) by introducing an oblique orientation of the target to the substrate and by using low magnetron sputter power. Annealing was performed in a vacuum furnace with a background pressure of ~10-7 Torr. The samples were patterned into 5×60 μm2 Hall bars and 10×20 μm2 microstrips by ultraviolet photolithography and argon ion milling, followed by deposition of 5 nm Ti and 150 nm Pt as electrical contacts. A Quantum Design PPMS with a vibrating sample magnetometer (sensitivity~10-7 emu) was used to determine the sample magnetization (Ms). A Signal Recovery DSP Lock-in Amplifier (Model 7265) was used to source a 4 V sinusoidal voltage onto the Hall bars and to detect the first and second harmonic Hall voltage responses, V1ω and V2ω. All the measurements were performed at room temperature. The magnetic damping of the in-plane magnetized samples (10×20 μm2 microstrips) was measured by spin-torque ferromagnetic resonance as a function of frequency. 2. Interfacial magnetic anisotropy and anomalous Hall conductivity For a PMA HM/FM system, the effective PMA field (Hk) can be determined by fitting the in-plane bias field (H) dependence of the in-phase first harmonic Hall voltage response (V1ω) to the sinusoidal voltage (Vin = 4 V) applied to the Hall bar following V1ω = ± VAHcosθ = ± VAH (1-H2/2Hk2) where VAH is the anomalous Hall voltage determined by measuring V1ω as a function of Hz, θ ≈ H/Hk << 1 is the polar angle of the magnetic moment tilted away from the film normal direction, and the signs ± correspond to the initial magnetization states of ±Mz, respectively. Here the charge current flows in the x-direction, V1ω is measured along the transverse direction y, and z is the out-of-plane direction. We measured both Hx and Hy dependencies of V1ω for the ±Mz cases (see Fig. S1(a)) and averaged the four values of Hk for the bilayers P1-P8. For IMA Pt 4/Co 3.2 (I1-I4), dV1ω/dHz is first determined under different in-plane bias fields Hx. Hk and VAH were then determined by fitting the data to The values of Hk we determined for both the PMA (P1-P8) and the IMA (I1-I4) bilayers are plotted in Fig. S1(c). Ks was then determined following the relation Hk = -4πMs + 2Kv/Ms + 2Ks/Mst, where Ms ≈ 1330 emu/cm3 for each sample, and t and Kv are the Co thickness and volume (magneto-elastic and magneto-crystalline) anisotropy. We measured the anomalous Hall resistivity ρAH = VAHt/ICo, where ICo is the current in the Co layerThe anomalous Hall conductivity is determined as σAH = VAHL/VinWρCo, where L and W are the length and the width of the Hall bars, respectively. Fig. S1. (a) Hx dependence of V1ω of the Pt 4/Co 0.85 bilayer annealed at 400 oC for 1 hour (P4) for both ±Mz cases. The solid lines are best fits to V1ω= ±VAH (1-H2/2Hk2); (b) Hx dependence of dV1ω/dHz for the Pt 4/Co 3.2 bilayer annealed at 450 oC for 1 hour (I4). The solid line is a best fit to bilayers P1-P8, and I1-I4. 3 3. Annealing effects on Pt/Co and Pt/Hf/Co interfaces Fig. S2. Comparison of the annealing effects on the interfacial magnetic anisotropy energy density (Ks) and the anomalous Hall conductivity (σAH) for Pt 4/Co 3.2 and Pt 4/Hf 0.67/Co 1.4. The annealing-induced enhancement of Ks and σAH is significant for Pt/Co interface, while minimal for Pt/Hf/Co interfaces. This is consistent with the spin-orbit proximity effect being the mechanism of interfacial spin-orbit coupling at the HM/Co interfaces. 4. Spin-orbit torque efficiencies and resistivities We determined the SOT efficiencies for the HM/Co bilayers by harmonic response measurements. For the IMA Pt/Co samples, the in-plane angle (φ) dependence of the out-of-phase second harmonic voltage response V2ω is given by V2ω = Vacosφ + Vpcos2φcosφ, where Va = VANE, and Hin are the planar Hall voltage, the anomalous Nernst effect voltage, and the applied in-plane magnetic field, respectively, and φ is the angle between Hin and the bias current direction (Fig. S3(a)). The Va and Vp contributions to V2ω were separated out by fitting the φ dependence of V2ω as measured for different Hin (Fig. S3(b)). HDL and HFL were obtained from the slopes of the linear fits For both PMA and IMA samples, the dampinglike and fieldlike SOT efficiencies per unit bias current density are ξDL(FL) j = 2eμ0MstHDL(FL)/ħje, with HDL(FL), e, μ0, t, ħ, and je = Vin /LρHM being the damping-like (field-like) effective spin torque field, the elementary charge, the permeability of vacuum, the ferromagnetic layer thickness, the reduced Planck constant, and the charge current density, respectively. For the PMA HM/Co samples, HDL(FL) = -2 ∂V2ω ∂Hx(y) / ∂2V1ω ∂2Hx(y), where V2ω was measured as a function of in-plane bias fields Hx and Hy (see Figs. S3(d) and S3(e)). The damping-like and field-like SOT efficiencies per unit applied electric field are calculated as ξDL(FL) E =ξDL(FL) j /ρHM. We note that in analyzing our out-of-plane harmonic-response results we do not employ the so-called “planar Hall correction (PHC)” which was developed to account for magnetoresistance effects (e.g. anisotropic magnetoresistance in the FM and spin Hall magnetoresistance in the HM) in the determination of SOTs in PMA HM/FM bilayers . Although there are only limited discussions in the literature about the “PHC” problem, this is an issue that is rather well known in the spintronics research community . Experimentally, whether or not to use the “PHC” is not of any practical concern when the ratio  = VPH/VAH, is not larger than ~0.1 as this correction has negligible influence on the value of HDL or ξDL j for a PMA sample. However, when  is larger than typically > 0.2, we find that this “correction” can lead to unphysical magnitudes and even sign reversals for the extracted values of the SOT efficiencies, with large discrepancies compared to other measurement methods. To illustrate the invalidity of the “PHC”, we show a few examples in Table S1. For ξDL j , the application of the “PHC” leads to unreasonably large values of ξDL j for Pt/Co and Au0.25Pt0.75/Co and an unphysical sign change of ξDL j for Pd/Co. The “PHC” also leads to an exceptionally large value of ξFL j for Pd/Co and Pt/Co and a sign reversal for Pt/Co. Compared to the values of ξDL j obtained from harmonic response measurements on the IMA samples, applying the “PHC” to the PMA data produces large discrepancies. On the other hand, neglecting the PHC for the PMA samples gives ξDL j results that are in close accord with the results from the IMA samples with the same FM/HM components and the similar resistivities and thicknesses . (Table S1 shows that the field-like torques in the PMA HM/Co samples can differ from the corresponding IMA samples even without the PHC correction, but we take this as a real physical difference, because the Co layer in the PMA samples is thinner than the spin dephasing length, so that ξFL j is generated by spin scattering at both the HM/Co and the Co/MgO interfaces, while for the IMA samples the fieldlike term is only sensitive to spin scattering at the HM/Co interface.) While we conclude that applying the “PHC” to PMA samples gives erroneous results, if we do apply this to our data corresponding to different annealing protocols, the anti-correlation of the strength of the damping-like SOT efficiency with ISOC for the PMA samples is not affected, although the amplitude of the damping-like SOTs are unreasonably high in all cases. The HM resistivity of each sample with the HM thickness d of 4 nm was determined by measuring the conductance enhancement of the corresponding stacks (d =4 nm) with respect to a d = 0 stack. Figure S3(f) shows the evolution of the resistivity of the HM layers (ρHM) and Co layers (ρCo) with enhanced annealing, which we tentatively attribute to atomic structure changes, for instance, strain relaxation. Interestingly, ρHM is larger in the PMA Pt/Co than in the IMA Pt/Co bilayers, which is mostly likely due to enhanced interfacial scattering. Overall the increase in ρHM with annealing is relatively small and is unlikely to be indicative of any change of the internal intrinsic spin Hall conductivity of Pt or Au0.25Pt0.75 layers. The Fermi surface topology and Berry phase of fcc metals are well-known to be robust to structural impurity and defects. We also note that the change in ρHM is monotonic with the annealing steps 4 for all the three sample series. Therefore we conclude that the spin diffusion length of the HM layers, which is expected to be determined by the Elliott-Yafet spin-relaxation mechanism should also decrease monotonically with annealing. Thus a change in the spin diffusion length cannot readily explain the non-monotonic variation of the spin-orbit torques with annealing. Fig. S3. (a) Schematic showing the measurement coordinate system. (b) φ dependence of the second harmonic voltage V2ω for the Pt 4/Co 3.2 as-grown bilayer (I1) as measured under in-plane bias fields of 1000 and 3000 Oe. The solid lines represent the best fits of the data to relation V2ω=Vacosφ+Vpcos2φcosφ. (c) Va and Vp plotted as a function of –VAH/2(Hk+Hin) and –VPH/2Hin for the Pt 4/Co 3.2 as-grown bilayer (I1). The solid lines are linear fits. (c) The second harmonic voltages for The determined HDL and HFL. (f) Evolution of the resistivity of the HM layers (ρHM, black squares) and Co layers (ρCo, red circles) with enhanced annealing. 5 using the PMA harmonic response method. Here, we first compare the harmonic response results for the spin torque efficiency per current density ξDL(FL) for the PMA samples Pt 4/Co 0.75, Pd 4/Co 0.64, and Au0.25Pt0.75 4/0.8 without and with the “PHC”. Then we compare to measurements on the IMA samples (Pt 4/Co 1.4, Pd 4/Co 0.94, and Au0.25Pt0.75 4/1.4) with the similar HM resistivities. The PMA and IMA results for ξDL j are in good agreement if the planar Hall correction is not applied and they disagree if it is applied. The PHC for the PMA samples modifies the spin torque efficiency as ξDL(FL) j (With PHC) = (ξDL(FL) j +2ξDL(FL) j )/(1-4 2), where  = VPH/VAH. ζ= VPH/VAH PMA sample No “PHC” PMA sample With “PHC” IMA sample ξDL j ξFL j ξDL j ξFL j ξDL j ξFL j Pt/Co 0.31 0.21 0.29 0.13 0.19 Pd/Co 0.56 0.07 -0.1 0.06 Au0.25Pt0.75 /Co 0.33 0.30 0.39 0.32 5. ISOC variations are unrelated to increased interfacial intermixing Fig. S4. Comparison of the anomalous Hall voltage (VAH) hysteresis loops for (a) the as-grown and (b) the annealed (350 oC, 2h) Pt 4/Co 0.85 bilayer (black squares) and the alloy control sample Co50Pt50 1.9 (red circles). (c) Effective saturation magnetization (Mseff) determined by assuming the measured magnetic moments are solely from the Co atoms in the magnetic layer, (d) perpendicular anisotropy field (HPMA), and (e) VAH for the Pt 4/Co 0.85 and the Co50Pt50 1.9 samples plotted as a function of annealing conditions. For (a), (b), and (e), VAH was measured with a constant electrical field E ≈ 66.7 kV/m along the Hall bar. All the measurement were performed at 300 K. In this section, we show that the variations we measure in the perpendicular magnetic anisotropy energy density and the anomalous Hall conductivity cannot be explained by intermixing at the HM/Co interfaces. In Fig. S4, we compare the magnetic behaviors of the Pt 4/Co 0.85 bilayers (P1-P4) with a control sample Si/SiO2/Ta 1/Pt 3.6/Co50Pt50 1.9/MgO 2/Ta 1.5 that was sputter deposited with similar growth parameters as those used for other samples in the paper. Here we use the Co50Pt50 alloy layer as a representative for Co-Pt alloys that could potentially be induced by any intermixing. The thickness of 1.9 nm is to simulate the thickness for the 0.85 nm Co (111) layer being fully alloyed with Pt (lattice constants for L10-Co50Pt50 are a = 3.803 Å, c = 3.701 Å; for fcc Co, a = 3.545 Å). As indicated by the sweeps of anomalous Hall voltage (VAH) vs applied magnetic field in Fig. S4 (a) and (b), for both the as-grown and 300 oC-annealed cases, the alloy control sample Co50Pt50 1.9 shows a non-hysteretic gradual magnetization switching in the film normal direction, a signature for the film normal being the magnetically hard axis. This is in striking contrast to the case of the as-grown and annealed PMA Pt/Co and Au0.25Pt0.75/Co bilayers (sample sets P1-P8), where the magnetization switching is very sharp, the VAH hysteresis loops are square, and the coercivities are large (410 Oe and 570 Oe for P1 and P2, respectively). We emphasize that such degradation of PMA in real Co-Pt alloy samples compared to the Pt/Co bilayers or multilayers is widely observed and is consistent with previous experimental reports that interfacial intermixing, if substantial, degrades PMA at Pt/Co interface . The reason is that chemical disorder in alloys is very difficult to remove, even though the ideal L10-Co50Pt50, which is in fact a Pt/Co superlattice stacked along (001), is expected to have strong uniaxial perpendicular magneto-crystalline anisotropy. bilayer and the alloy control sample Co50Pt50 1.9 in terms of the magnitudes of the effective saturation magnetization (Mseff), the perpendicular anisotropy field (HPMA), and the anomalous Hall voltage (VAH) for different annealing conditions. Here Mseff is determined by assuming the measured magnetic moments are solely from the Co atoms in the magnetic layer; HPMA is the sum of the effective perpendicular anisotropy field (Hkeff) and demagnetization field (4πMseff); and VAH for each sample is measured with an alternating electric field with a magnitude E =Vin /L = 66.7 kV/m applied along the 5⨉60 um2 Hall bars. For each annealing condition we used for this work, the alloy sample has much smaller values of Mseff, HPMA and VAH than the Pt 6 4/Co 0.85 bilayer. The small magnitude and weak annealing dependence of Mseff for the alloy sample (i.e.1.72-1.8 μB/Co) obviously fail to explain the initially large and then quickly increasing Mseff we observed for all the bilayer samples in this work (i.e. 1.81-2.36 μB/Co). As discussed in detail in , at room temperature an occurrence of any other degree of Co-Pt intermixing should also lead to either a dead layer (paramagnetic A1, L12–CoPt3) or a reduction of effective magnetization of Co (L12–Co3Pt, ~1.72 μB/Co). We therefore conclude that any significant Pt-Co intermixing at the Pt/Co interface should degrade the effective magnetization and thus the magnetic proximity effect and can be excluded in our Pt/Co (111) or Au0.25Pt0.75/Co (111) bilayers. Similarly, HPMA for the alloy sample Co50Pt50 1.9 (Fig. S4(d)) is at least ~5 times smaller than that of the Pt 4/Co 0.85 bilayers (i.e. 2.76-5.6 T). The measured VAH for the alloy sample Co50Pt50 1.9 (Fig. S4(e)) is a factor of ~20 smaller than that of Pt/Co layers before annealing and about a factor of 2 smaller afterwards,, and is therefore too small to account for the large VAH values in Pt/Co (111) bilayers (VAH is 2.97, 5.27, 5.34, and 5.63 mV for P1-P4, respectively). Note that such a large VAH difference between the Co-Pt alloy and Pt/Co (111) bilayer cannot be attributed to the different ferromagnetic layer thickness. In this measurement geometry, the value of VAH is not influenced by the evaluation of the ferromagnetic layer thickness because it is given as VAH = EwρAH/ρxx with w=5 um, ρAH, ρxx, and ρAH/ρxx being the Hall bar width, the anomalous Hall resistivity, the longitudinal resistivity, and the anomalous Hall angle of the ferromagnetic layer. The results for Mseff, HPMA and VAH for the bilayers in the main text are therefore all consistent with the occurrence of a strong magnetic proximity effect, but are clearly contrary to the results for Co-Pt alloying . In particular, the PMA and VAH for all the samples, i.e. PMA Pt/Co and Au0.25Pt0.75/Co, and IMA Pt/Co, increase substantially right after the first annealing. This excludes the possibility of intermixing occurrence after the first annealing step because Pt-Co intermixing decreases PMA and VAH as we show in Fig. S4. Instead, the increase of PMA and VAH indicate that the interface is overall more ordered as the result, since chemical disorder is expected to degrade the PMA . The non-monotonic changes of the interfacial magnetic anisotropy energy density and VAH for the PMA bilayers of Pt/Co and Au0.25Pt0.75/Co strongly disagree with any mechanisms based on annealing-induced intermixing as the intermixing is unlikely to vary with annealing in a non-monotonic manner. 6. SOT variations are unrelated to increased interfacial intermixing The annealing-induced variations of the SOT efficiencies of our samples also cannot be explained by increased interfacial intermixing. To demonstrate this point directly we produced two additional Pt/Co samples, one with an insertion layer of Pt3Co 0.2 nm/Co50Pt50 0.2 nm/Co3Pt 0.2 nm at the Pt/Co interface as a simulation of a possible intermixing upon annealing and one without this insertion layer. As shown in Fig. S5, the insertion of the alloy layer at the interface has no discernable effect on HDL compared to the sample without the insertion. The almost identical HDL values for the Pt 4/Co 2.3 samples with and without the alloy insertion layer indicate that even if there were interfacial intermixing in our annealed samples this would not cause a large change in E DL . When the thin Pt-Co alloy insertion layer is present, the ISOC as indicated by HK is reduced, again indicating that a strongly intermixed Pt-Co interface does not, of itself, result in a stronger ISOC. VAH is also slightly reduced in the sample with the thin Pt-Co- insertion layer, consistent with a decrease of the ISOC and with the Pt-Co alloys having negligibly small VAH contribution. Fig. S5 (a) Dampinglike spin-torque fields (HDL), (b) anomalous Hall voltages (VAH), and (c) effective anisotropy fields for Pt 4/Co 2.3 samples without (red) and with (blue) alloy spacer Pt3Co 0.2/Co50Pt50 0.2/Co3Pt 0.2. In (a) and (b), the electric bias field ≈66.7 kV/m. With respect to the dampinglike SOT efficiency, even if annealing did generate interfacial intermixing we would expect this to enhance σSH and the dampinglike spin-torque efficiency per electric field ( E DL ) rather than to produce the decreases reported in the main text. Diffusion of Co into Pt should increase the electron scattering rate and the Pt resistivity ρxx (we determine the resistivity of the Co50Pt50 sample to be ~90 μΩ cm, higher than that for Pt in Fig. S3(f)) and thus reduce the spin diffusion length λs of the Pt layer due to the Elliot–Yafet spin relaxation mechanism (λs ∝ 1/ρxx). Thus a direct consequence of substantial intermixing would be an increase of E DL because )) ( )(1 sech( / ) ( E DL E DL s d d       with the Pt thickness d = 4 nm. Doping magnetic impurities into Pt has also been found 7 to introduce strong additive skew scattering, which can increase the total spin Hall conductivity and E DL . As shown in the main text, for the in-plane Pt/Co sample, E DL  decreases monotonically with annealing, which is sharply contrary to an occurrence of a significant intermixing at the HM/Co interface. 7. Direct structural characterization of the HM/Co interfaces Even though we have already shown that neither the ISOC variations nor the SOT variations are due to annealing-induced interfacial intermixing, it is still interesting to directly characterize whether or not there is intermixing at the HM/Co interfaces after annealing. We first performed x-ray reflectivity measurements. In the incident-angle-dependent x-ray reflectivity measurements, the oscillation strength and attenuation length reflect the interface sharpness. As can be seen from Figs. S6(a)-(c), the oscillation strength and attenuation length both indicate good interface sharpness in the as-grown state, and the quality of these signals is improved after the final-step annealing. This indicates that annealing-induced intermixing at the interfaces of the bilayer samples should be minimal. We also carried out chemical depth profile measurements with secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) to independently characterize the HM/Co interfaces. In order to minimize the etching-induced diffusion and to maximize the depth resolution, we used low-energy oblique argon-beam etching (accelerating voltage = 150 V, 20o degrees away from the sample surface). As shown in Fig. S7(a), if we compare the etching time when the Co and Pt signals reach their maximums, we find that the Co and Pt signals reach their maximums at the same time for the reference alloy sample Co50Pt50, whereas the peaks in the Co and Pt signals are well separated for all the Pt/Co bilayers (see Figs. S7(b)-(e)). In both the IMA and the PMA cases, the etching time for the maximization and disappearance of Pt signal for the as-grown Pt/Co bilayers are the same as for the annealed ones, indicating that there is at most minimal Pt diffusion into Co. For both IMA and PMA samples, the Co signal for the as-grown and annealed samples reaches the maximum after the same etching time, suggesting no annealing-enhanced intermixing between the MgO and the Co layers (see Fig. S8 (a)-(d)). However, we note that the Co tails of the two annealed samples (P4 and I4) decay slightly more slowly than those of the corresponding as-grown bilayers (P1 and I1) despite their same disappearance time (see Figs. S8(e) and (f)). This could indicate a small amount of Co diffusion into the top layer of Pt. As discussed above, any inter-diffusion of Co must be limited in amount and extent to be consistent with the experimental results for the interfacial spin-orbit coupling (ISOC) strength (PMA, VAH), Mseff, and the oscillation strength and decay length of x-ray reflectivity curves, because all will be substantially degraded if there was significant intermixing of the Co and Pt layers. Therefore we conclude that although there may be some diffusion of Co atoms into Pt layer, such diffusion has a negligible affect on the ISOC and spin-torque properties. Finally we note that in literature there is disagreement on the thermal stability of the Pt/Co interfaces. MeGee et al. find sputtered amorphous Pt/Co samples are more stable than those epitaxially grown on single-crystal substrate by molecular-beam epitaxy , which suggests that the thermal stability can be sensitive to interface details. K. Yakushiji et al. find Pt/Co superlattices are thermally stable to at least above 370oC. In contrast to the assumption that annealing can enhance intermixing at Pt/Co interfaces, some experiments reveal that high temperature annealing separates Co out from a disordered Co-Pt mixture and improve the magnetic anisotropy of Co/Pt superlattices . 8 solid lines refer to best two-peak fits of the measured curves. As indicated by the stars in (d), the shift of the HM (111) peak with enhanced annealing indicates the relaxation of the strains in the bilayers. 9 Fig. S7 SIMS measurements of the depth profile of Co, Pt, and Mg elements for (a) the alloy control sample Co50Pt50 1.9 annealed at 300 oC 0.5 h, 350 oC 4 h, and 400 oC 1 h (corresponding to I4). All the samples are seeded with a 1 nm Ta and protected with MgO 2/Ta 1.5. Here we use low-energy oblique argon-beam etching (accelerating voltage of 150 V, 20o degrees away from the sample surface) to minimize the etching-induced heating and diffusion and to maximize the depth resolution. If we compare the etching time when the Co and Pt signals reach their maximums, we find that the Co and Pt peaks overlaps very well for the alloy control sample Co50Pt50, whereas they are well separated for all the Pt/Co bilayers. As an example, we use the two dashed lines for (a)-(c) to indicate the etching time when the Co and Pt signals reach maximums. 10 Fig. S8 Comparison of the SIMS signals of Mg, Pt, and Co elements for as-grown (black) and annealed (red) Pt/Co bilayers and Pt don’t show evident diffusion; while the slower decays of the Co signals for the annealed samples are likely suggestive of a small amount of diffusion of Co into Pt. 8. Strain variation diffraction θ-2θ patterns for the Pt 4/Co 0.85 (P1-P4), the Au0.25Pt0.75 4/Co 0.85 (P5-P8), the Pt 4/Co 3.2 bilayer samples (I1-I4) as a function of annealing steps. The shift of the HM (111) peak with annealing indicates relaxation of the strains in the bilayers. For the PMA bilayers, the HM/FM peaks shifts to higher angle after the first annealing step, and then remains relatively constant with further annealing. For the IMA samples where the Co is 3.2 nm thick, the Pt peak shifts monotonically to higher angles, while the Co peak does the opposite. The different strain variation of the PMA and IMA bilayers is likely related to the different variations of interfacial ISOC strength that the two different types of bilayers exhibit (see Fig. 1 in the main text).