Ultrasonic Nanofabrication with an AFM Ultrasound Facilitates Nanolithography and Nanomanipulation Ultrasonic AFM may improve fabrication technologies on the nanometer scale. In the presence of ultrasonic vibration, hard surfaces can be indented and scratched with the tip of a soft cantilever, due to its inertia. Ul- trasound reduces or even eliminates friction, and hence modifies the tip-nanoparticle-surface interactions in AFM manipulation. The subsurface sensitivity of the technique makes feasible the purposed manipulation of subsurface nanoscale features by ultrasonic actuation. plitude is sufficiently high that the tip-sample distance varies over the non- linear tip-sample force interaction regime, the cantilever experiences a static force during the time that the ultrasonic excitation is acting. This force is the so-called “ultrasonic force”, and can be understood as the net force that acts upon the cantilever during a com- plete ultrasonic cycle, due to the nonlin- earity of the tip-sample interaction force. The cantilever behaves then as a mechanical diode and deflects when the tip-sample contact vibrates at ultrasonic frequencies of sufficiently high ampli- tude. The magnitude of the ultrasonic force or of the ultrasonic-force-induced additional cantilever deflection (UFM sig- nal) is dependent on the details of the tip-sample interaction force, and hence on material properties such as elasticity and adhesion. Therefore, UFM allow us to discern nanoscale topographic regions with distinct elastic contrast, as shown in figure 2, where images of Sb nanoparti- cles on Highly Oriented Pyrolitic Graph- ite (HOPG) are displayed. Remarkably, in this case, the UFM contrast reveals stiff- ness variations even within individual Sb particles . Recently, a novel ultrasonic AFM mode, namely Mechanical-Diode Ultrasonic Friction Force Microscopy (MD-UFFM) based on the lateral mechanical diode effect has additionally been proposed for the study of friction and lubrication on the nanoscale, in the presence of surface shear ultrasonic vibration . Ultrasonic Nanofabrication Ultrasonic AFM techniques provide a means to monitor ultrasonic vibration at the nanoscale, and open up novel oppor- tunities to improve nanofabrication tech- nologies . In the presence of ultrasonic vibration, the tip of a soft cantilever can dynamically indent hard samples due to its inertia. In addition, it has been demonstrated that ultrasound reduces or even eliminates nanoscale friction . Typical top-down approaches that rely in the AFM are based on the use of a cantilever tip that Ultrasonic Atomic Force Microscopies Information of ultrasonic vibration on the nanoscale has recently become accessible by a new family of Scanning Probe Microscopy techniques based on the use of Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) with ultrasound excitation . Among them, the techniques of Ultra- sonic Force Microscopy (UFM) and Heterodyne Force Microscopy (HFM) rely in the so-called „mechanical-diode“ effect , in which a cantilever tip is in contact with the sample surface and nor- mal ultrasonic vibration is excited at the tip-sample contact (see fig. 1). If the excitation frequency is high enough, or is not coincident with a high-order canti- lever contact resonance, the cantilever will not be able to linearly follow the sur- face vibration due to its inertia. Never- theless, if the ultrasonic excitation am- M. Teresa Cuberes Keywords: atomic force microscopy, ultrasonic force microscopy, nanomanipulation, nanolitho­ graphy, nanoscratching Scanning S e c t i o n 36 • G.I.T. Imaging & Microscopy 4/2007 acts as a plow or as an en- graving tool. The ability of the AFM tip to respond inertially to ultrasonic vibration excited perpendicular to the sample surface and dynamically in- dent hard samples may facili- tate the nanoscale machining of semiconductors or engi- neering ceramics in a reduced time. Figure 3 demonstrates the machining of nanotrenches and holes on a silicon sample in the presence of ultrasonic vibration. Interestingly, no de- bris is found in the proximity of lithographed areas. Figure 3 (a) refer to results performed using a cantilever with nomi- nal stiffness comprised be- tween 28–91 Nm–1 and a dia- mond-coated tip. Figure 4 (b) refer to results achieved using a cantilever with nominal stiffness 0.11 Nm–1 and a SiN tip; in the absence of ultra- sound, it was not possible to scratch the Si surface using such a soft cantilever. In the machining of soft materials, as for instance plastic coat- ings, the ultrasonic-induced reduction of nanoscale fric- tion may permit eventual finer features and improved sur- face quality in quasi-static ap- proaches. In , an in-plane acoustic wave coupled to the sample support was used to enhance the intermittent force exerted by the tip in dynamic AFM nanomachining of thin polymer resist films. In bottom-up approaches, ultrasound may assist in the self-assembly or AFM manip- ulation of nanostructures . Effects such as sonolubrica- tion and acoustic levitation have been studied at the mi- croscale. These phenomena may facilitate a tip-induced motion of nano-objects. In the manipulation of nanoparti- cles (NPs) on surfaces with the tip of an AFM cantilever, when ultrasound is excited at a sample surface both tip- particle and particle-surface frictional properties change . Moreover, the excitation of NP high-frequency internal vibration modes may also modify the NP dynamic re- sponse, and introduce novel mechanisms of particle mo- tion. Some of the opportuni- ties in ultrasonic-assisted AFM manipulation are illus- trated in figure 4, which show images of Au NPs on a silicon surface. The surface was cov- ered by poly-l-lysine to pre- vent that the Au NPs were swept away by the AFM tip. Nevertheless, when scanning in contact mode in the ab- sence of ultrasound, most NPs were inevitably swept away by the tip. Scanning in the same conditions that led to a NP displacement but in the presence of surface ultrasonic vibration, with an appropri- ate election of the ultrasonic amplitude, the NPs remained undisturbed. In figure 4, two NP were displaced while re- cording the images, which have been pointed out by blue arrows. A close inspection of the data in figure 4 reveals traces of the UFM and LFM responses from those moving particles while being in mo- tion (see areas enclosed by el- lipses and rectangles). The study of the UFM response of a moving NP may allow us to learn about the dynamic mechanisms of NP displace- ment across surfaces. Con- sistently with the fact that ul- trasound eliminates friction, no frictional contrast is dis- tinguished on the undisturbed Au NPs in the LFM images. However, from the compari- son of the traces of the two moving NPs in the forward and backward LFM scans, friction during the tip-induced NP motion is apparent. Con- trolled and accurate meas- urements of lateral and ultra- sonic forces exerted by individual NPs when in motion under tip ultrasonic actuation may bring about a wealth of information about the dissi- pated energy, ultrasonic lu- brication effects, NP dynam- ics, etc. Eventually, it should be pointed out that the sensitiv- ity of ultrasonic-AFM to sub- surface features makes feasi- ble to monitor subsurface The New BioMAT TM Workstation AFM. Perfect Imaging Results for Opaque Samples. The BioMAT TM Workstation combines upright optical microscopy with AFM and opens up a wide range of applications for the study of non-transparent specimens. Even in liquids. www.jpk.com S c a n n i n g S e c tion G.I.T. Imaging & Microscopy 4/2007 • 37 modifications . We have recently dem- onstrated that actuation with an AFM tip in the presence of ultrasonic vibration can produce stacking changes of ex- tended grapheme layers, and induce per- manent displacements of buried disloca- tions in Highly Oriented Pyrolytic Fig. 4: Displacement of Au NP induced by the tip of an AFM cantilever in the presence of normal surface ultrasonic vibration of ~ 2.6 MHz. (a­d) were simultaneously recorded. (a) Contact­mode AFM topography. (b) UFM; (c) LFM forward scan; (d) LFM backward scan Fig. 5: Lateral displacement of a subsurface dislocation in HOPG by ultrasonic tip actuation (a) Topography of the HOPG surface in AFM contact mode: (700 x 700) nm; Fo=105 nN. (b,c) Ultra­ sonic­AFM images recorded in sequence over nearly the same surface region: a=2.15 MHz (b) A=3.5 Vpp (c) A=2.4 Vpp. (d–f) LFM forward scan, simultane­ ously recorded with (a–b) respectively, with the same parameters. Graphite (HOPG). This effect is illustrated in figure 5. In the presence of normal surface ultrasonic vibration, both AFM and LFM images reveal subsurface fea- tures . Subsurface modification was brought about in this case by scanning in contact mode, with high set-point forces, and high surface ultrasonic excitation amplitudes . Summary Ultrasonic AFM techniques provide a means to monitor ultrasonic vibration at the nanoscale, and open up novel oppor- tunities in nanofabrication technologies. The use of ultrasound may improve both down-top and bottom-down approaches in nanofabrication, facilitating the pat- terning of nanoscale surface features, the manipulation or self-assembly of na- nostructures, and possibly the controlled subsurface manipulation of buried nano- objects. Acknowledgments The author thanks J. J. Martinez and A. Lusvardi for assistance in the UFM lab. The samples of Sb NPs were provided by C. Ritter and U. Schwarz. The Au NPs were provided by M. A. Gonzalez and M.P. Morales. Financial support from the JCCM (Junta de Comunidades de Cas- tilla-La Mancha) under project PBI-05- 018 is gratefully acknowledged.