Monolithic integration of single photon sources via evanescent coupling of tapered InP nanowires to SiN waveguides Khaled Mnaymneh,∗ Dan Dalacu, Joseph McKee, Jean Lapointe, Sofiane Haffouz, Philip J. Poole, Geof C. Aers, and Robin L. Williams National Research Council Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, K1A 0R6. We demonstrate a method to monolithically integrate nanowire-based quantum dot single photon sources on-chip using evanescent coupling. By deterministically placing an appropriately tapered III- V nanowire waveguide, containing a single quantum dot, on top of a silicon-based ridge waveguide, the quantum dot emission can be transferred to the ridge waveguide with calculated efficiencies close to 100%. As the evanescent coupling is bidirectional, the source can be optically pumped in both free-space and through the ridge waveguide. The latter configuration provides a self-contained, all-fiber, single photon source suitable as a plug-and-play solution for applications requiring bright, on-demand single photons. Using InAsP quantum dots embedded in InP nanowire waveguides, we demonstrate coupling efficiencies to a SiN ridge waveguide of 74% with a single photon purity of 97%. The integrated photonics platform has been identified1 as the most practical way to realize quantum technolo- gies in the near-term2. Critical to its widespread im- plementation is the design and integration of scalable quantum light sources3. Integrated sources are attrac- tive for experiments requiring complex photonic circuits such as linear optics quantum computing4 and quantum simulation5. Integration is also relevant in the develop- ment of ‘plug and play’ sources6 for secure quantum com- munication, where standard waveguide-fiber coupling techniques7 can be utilized to reduce the complexity in- herent to active alignment procedures required with free- space approaches. Efforts to develop monolithically integrated sources in- clude quantum dots coupled to ridge8–11, nanobeam12,13 and photonic crystal waveguides14–17 using the same ma- terial system as the quantum dot. Hybrid approaches where various two-level systems are coupled to silicon- based photonic circuits have also been investigated18–20, inspired by techniques developed for laser integration21. Zadeh et al, for example, have demonstrated a pick-and- place technique22 where individual InAsP/InP quantum dot nanowires are transferred from the growth substrate to a silicon substrate. Subsequent processing is used to define SiN waveguides with the single emitters embedded within. Hybird integration based on evanescent coupling has also been demonstrated; in this case, devices having appropriate geometries are either fabricated on the III- V growth substrate and transferred to a silicon chip23 or the entire epitaxial layer is transferred and processing is done on silicon24. Both of the latter approaches uti- lized randomly nucleated dot ensembles and hence lacked the deterministic incorporation of single emitters used in . In this work we propose a hybrid integration method based on the evanescent coupling of a nanowire waveg- uide mode excited by a single quantum dot to an under- lying ridge waveguide. Nanowire waveguides with well- controlled tapers25 provide an ideal geometry for evanes- cent mode transfer. In contrast to previous work on the emission from an InP nanowire to a SiN waveguide. (b) Electric field Ey of the fundamental waveguide mode in the coupled device. (c) Calculated coupling efficiency as a func- tion of the nanowire taper length, L, for a ridge waveguide with w = 400 nm and t = 500 nm. nanowire on-chip integration22,26, where the nanowire is embedded within the waveguide, the present approach can be used with pre-fabricated photonic integrated cir- cuits via the nanomanipulator transfer technique de- scribed in . In the work presented here however, single emitters are transferred deterministically. A schematic of the device is shown in Figure 1(a). It consists of a tapered InP nanowire placed on top of a SiN ridge waveguide. A single InAsP quantum dot is located in the untapered base of the nanowire which has a diameter Db chosen to confine the fundamental HE11 mode25. The upper section of the nanowire waveguide is tapered to evanescently transfer the HE11 mode to the SiN waveguide. We assume that the quantum dot is polarized to optimally couple to the TE mode of the arXiv:1901.00469v1 [physics.app-ph] 8 Dec 2018 2 nanowire-waveguide system. In Figures 1(b) and (c) we show the calculated cou- pling efficiency and its dependence on the taper length, L. The calculations were performed using eigenmode ex- pansion methods27 for a nanowire with base diameter Db = 250 nm tapered to a tip diameter Dt = 100 nm over a length L. The nanowire is located on a SiN waveguide with a width w and thickness t. The nanowire-waveguide device is encapsulated above and below with 5 μm of SiO2 for waveguiding in the SiN/SiO2 system. Devices with over 90% transfer of the HE11 from the InP nanowire to the SiN waveguide after 10 μm of taper, approaching 100% for longer tapers, are predicted. Calculations are shown for w = 400 nm and t = 500 nm although signifi- cant transfer efficiencies are predicted over a wide range of waveguide widths and thicknesses. We also note that this approach works equally well with the nanowires po- sitioned beside the ridge waveguide. length L = 8 μm on a SiN ridge waveguide. Scale bar is 1 μm. (b) PL spectrum for excitation normal to the nanowire and collection from the chip edge. (c) Pulsed excitation power de- pendence of the integrated PL for free space (black symbols) and waveguide (red symbols) pumping, see insets. Solid lines are fits to a saturation function of the form I ∝ 1 − e−P/Psat. To demonstrate the feasibility of an evanescently cou- pled on-chip nanowire source, we used the pick-and-place technique previously demonstrated in . We use InAsP/InP nanowire quantum dot sources grown using a combined selective-area and vapour-liquid-solid (VLS) epitaxy approach28 which have demonstrated single pho- ton purities greater than 99%29 and near-transform- limited linewidths of less than 4 μeV30. Pre-selected nanowires were transferred from the InP growth sub- strate to a silicon substrate pre-coated with a 5 μm layer of SiO2 and a 200 nm layer of SiN and patterned with gold alignment marks. The SiN waveguides were defined underneath the nanowire using electron-beam (e-beam) lithography and dry-etching. The device was then coated with a top 5 μm layer of SiO2. Details of the device fab- rication are given in Methods. A scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of a fab- ricated device prior to the top SiO2 coating is shown in The nanowire is well-aligned to the SiN waveguide and is tapered over 8 μm after an initial 1 μm untapered section which contains the quantum dot. To optically characterize the source, we excite above-band with either a continuous wave (cw) or a pulsed laser (see Methods) with the excitation oriented normal to the nanowire. The emission is collected off-chip using a cleaved fiber, butt-coupled to the SiN waveguide. Cou- pling losses are minimized by tapering the width of the SiN waveguide down to 200 nm over a distance of 300 μm near the chip edge, adiabatically expanding the mode for matching to the single-mode fiber core31. A photoluminescence (PL) spectrum from the source using cw excitation is shown in Figure 2(b) and consists of a single peak identified at the neutral exciton from the power dependence of the intensity. A lorentzian fit to the peak gives a resolution-limited linewidth of 60 μeV and higher resolutions are required to verify that the integra- tion method does not degrade the optical quality of the emitter. To estimate the evanescent coupling efficiency we use the integrated intensity, I, at a pulsed excita- tion power, Psat, that saturates the transition. From sured at Psat using a pulsed excitation rate of 80 MHz. Taking into account an experimental system through- put of 1.85% (see Table I), we estimate a count rate in the waveguide of 22.4 MHz, giving a source efficiency of 28%. Since the quantum dot emission is equally likely to emit in the forward and backward directions along the nanowire, one can estimate the evanescent coupling ef- ficiency from twice the source efficiency (i.e. 56%). If we account for 5% emission into leaky modes25 and 20% emission into phonon sidebands at 4 K32 (not included in the measured counts obtained using a lorentzian fit) the evanescent coupling efficiency is 74%. Throughput [%] Waveguide propagation 69.2 Waveguide-fiber coupling 45.7 Spectrometer 11.7 CCD detector efficiency 50 Total 1.86 The waveguide loss calculations are given in Supplementary Information. Spectrometer losses include fiber transmission and the monochromater (i.e. one grating, three mirrors). To measure the photon statistics, an all-fiber Hanbury- Brown Twiss (HBT) interferometer was used. The emis- sion from the source is directed to a pair of fiber-coupled 3 photon emission statistics. Second-order correlation function measured using (b) cw and (c) pulsed excitation. Red curve in (b) is a fit after deconvolving a detector response of 675 ps. Red curve in (c) is a fit using a re-excitation model. Si avalanche photodiodes (APDs) after filtering through a tunable fiber Bragg grating (FBG), see Figure 3(a) and Methods. The second-order correlation function, g2(τ), under cw excitation measured at Psat is shown delay is 1 − g2(0) = 89%. The solid red line is corrected for the timing response of the APDs by deconvolving a fit to the data using a two-level second-order correlation function g2(τ) = 1 − exp(−|t|/τ) and the detector time response of 675 ps, where τ = 1.3 ns is the radiative life- time of the transition. From the fit, a corrected single photon purity of 97% is obtained. We conclude that the non-resonant pumping scheme and propagation through the waveguide has no major effect on the photon statis- tics. citation at Psat = 800 nW. The measured single-photon purity in this case is also 89%, determined from the ratio of the τ = 0 peak to the adjacent peaks. In contrast to the cw measurement, where single photon purity is deter- mined from post-selected photons arriving at τ = 0, the pulsed measurement also provides information on photon coincidences at short delay times. The counts observed around zero delay suggests re-excitation of the nanowire quantum dot from carriers produced in the same excita- tion pulse, frequently observed using above-band excita- tion when pumping close to saturation33,34. We model the exciton re-excitation process from the band-edge as a competition between carrier recombination and dot cap- (a) HBT measurement with the optical excitation fiber-coupled into the 1% port of a 99:1 splitter where the splitter’s transmission port is facet-coupled to the SiN waveg- uide. (b) Measured g2(τ) using pulsed evanescent excitation. Red curve is a model fit to the data. ture after each exciton emission process. We find that a time of 100 ps for both processes, shorter than both the exciton radiative lifetime and the pulse period, is re- quired to reproduce the measured coincidences (solid red curve in Figure 3(c)). Since the evanescent coupling is bidirectional, the nanowire quantum dot can also be excited by pumping into the SiN waveguide. power dependence of the integrated PL from the quan- tum dot obtained using evanescent excitation (red sym- bols). In this case, optical excitation is provided by a fiber-coupled pulsed laser into the 1% port of a 99:1 fiber splitter that was facet-coupled to the SiN waveguide; the pump propagates within the SiN waveguide and evanes- cently excites the quantum dot. The reduced excitation power required to achieve saturation compared to free- space pumping is attributed to an increased absorption cross-section in the case of evanescent pumping. In Fig- ure 4 we show a second-order correlation measurement from the evanescently pumped source. The measured single photon purity is 1 − g2(0) = 76%, lower than that measured with free-spacing pumping. This decrease in purity is attributed to insufficient rejection of the back- reflected pump laser from the chip facet; a problem that can be remedied with an anti-reflection coating and/or a better FBG. In conclusion, we have demonstrated a hybrid integra- tion method where single InAsP quantum dots can be placed anywhere within a silicon-based integrated pho- 4 tonic circuit and employed as a scalable single photon source. The method allows for pre-selected single quan- tum dots, epitaxially grown within InP nanowire waveg- uides, to be transfered and placed, at will, on SiN ridge waveguides. The tapered index profile of the nanowire, defined during growth, is used to evanescently couple to the waveguide system. The quantum dot photolumines- cence can then be efficiently routed into the ridge waveg- uide and time-correlated measurements confirm the sin- gle photon nature of the coupled emission collected at the ridge waveguide facet. Measured coupling efficien- cies were 74%, whilst numerical studies predict values close to 100% for an optimized nanowire taper geome- try. Finally, we demonstrated that optical pumping and collection of the resulting quantum dot emission can be performed from the same ridge waveguide, allowing for attractive fiber-coupled solutions for plug-and-play appli- cations using fixed, V-groove-type waveguide-fiber align- ment techniques7. Fabrication: The dielectric films SiO2 and SiN were deposited using plasma-enhanced chemical vapor depo- sition (PECVD) using SiH4 chemistry. Gold alignment marks were defined on the first SiO2 layer using e-beam lithography and lift-off. The SiN waveguides were de- fined after nanowire transfer using e-beam lithography and dry etching and positioned under the nanowires us- ing the alignment marks. See Supplementary Informa- tion for additional details on device fabrication. Optical Measurements: Optical studies were per- formed in a fiber-coupled continuous flow helium cryostat at 4K. Free-space laser excitation was directed normal to the nanowire through a 50X microscope objective (N.A. = 0.42). Excitation through the SiN waveguide was per- formed through a cleaved 780-HP fiber aligned in an end- fire configuration to the waveguide facet at the sample edge. Excitation was above-band using both cw (λ = 632.8 nm from a HeNe laser) and pulsed (λ = 790 nm from a Ti-Sapphire laser, pulse width of 1.2 ps, repeti- tion rate of 80 MHz). Collection was through the same fiber and dispersed using a 0.5 m grating spectrometer and detected using a liquid-nitrogen cooled Si CCD for PL or filtered using a tunable FBG (100 μeV resolution) and detected using two Si APDs (675 ps timing jitter) for g2(τ) measurements. Modeling g2(τ): Our stochastic model of the exci- tonic emission process includes excitonic excitation due to a continuous chain of pump pulses with given period, followed by exciton emission with fitted lifetime and de- tection probability. Exciton re-excitation after a partic- ular pulse due to the decaying band-edge carrier popula- tion was also included via a competition between carrier recombination time and dot occupation time. A second- order correlation curve, g2(τ), was generated by binning the resulting exciton emission times until a desired num- ber of detection events was obtained. The calculated g2(τ) curves were convolved with the measured detector response time of 675 ps to compare with experiment. This work was supported by the Canadian Space Agency. ∗ khaled.mnaymneh@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca 1 T. Rudolph, APL Photonics 2, 030901 (2017). 2 A. N. Vamivakas, A. Sergienko, and A. Fiore, Journal of Optics 19, 080403 (2017). 3 P. Senellart, G. Solomon, and A. White, Nat. Nanotech. 4 M. G. Thompson, A. Politi, J. C. F. Matthews, and J. L. O’Brien, IET Circuits, Devices Systems 5, 94 (2011). 5 C. Sparrow, E. Martín-López, N. Maraviglia, A. Neville, C. Harrold, J. Carolan, Y. N. Joglekar, T. Hashimoto, N. Matsuda, J. L. O’Brien, D. P. Tew, and A. Laing, Nature 557, 660 (2018). 6 X. Xu, F. Brossard, K. Hammura, D. A. Williams, B. Al- loing, L. H. Li, and A. Fiore, Appl. Phys. Lett. 93, 021124 7 Y. Shi, L. Zhang, P. Chen, and S. He, IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 26, 1169 (2014). 8 M. Schwartz, U. Rengstl, T. Herzog, M. Paul, J. Kettler, S. L. Portalupi, M. Jetter, and P. Michler, Opt. Exp. 24, 9 K. D. Jöns, U. Rengstl, M. Oster, F. Hargart, M. Held- maier, S. Bounouar, S. M. Ulrich, M. Jetter, and P. Mich- ler, J. Phys. D 48, 085101 (2015). 10 G. Reithmaier, M. Kaniber, F. Flassig, S. Lichtmannecker, K. Müller, A. Andrejew, J. Vučković, R. Gross, and J. J. Finley, Nano Lett. 15, 5208 (2015). 11 P. Schnauber, J. Schall, S. Bounouar, T. Höhne, S.-I. Park, G.-H. Ryu, T. Heindel, S. Burger, J.-D. Song, S. Rodt, and S. Reitzenstein, Nano Lett. 18, 2336 (2018). 12 N. Prtljaga, R. J. Coles, J. O’Hara, B. Royall, E. Clarke, A. M. Fox, and M. S. Skolnick, Appl. Phys. Lett. 104, 13 G. Kiršansk ̇e, H. Thyrrestrup, R. S. Daveau, C. L. Dreeßen, T. Pregnolato, L. Midolo, P. Tighineanu, A. Javadi, S. Stobbe, R. Schott, A. Ludwig, A. D. Wieck, S. I. Park, J. D. Song, A. V. Kuhlmann, I. Söllner, M. C. Löbl, R. J. Warburton, and P. Lodahl, Phys. Rev. B 96, 14 A. Schwagmann, S. Kalliakos, I. Farrer, J. P. Griffiths, G. A. C. Jones, D. A. Ritchie, and A. J. Shields, Appl. Phys. Lett. 99, 261108 (2011). 15 A. Laucht, S. Pütz, T. Günthner, N. Hauke, R. Saive, S. Frédérick, M. Bichler, M.-C. Amann, A. W. Holleit- ner, M. Kaniber, and J. J. Finley, Phys. Rev. X 2, 011014 16 M. Arcari, I. Söllner, A. Javadi, S. Lindskov Hansen, S. Mahmoodian, J. Liu, H. Thyrrestrup, E. H. Lee, J. D. Song, S. Stobbe, and P. Lodahl, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 17 I. Söllner, S. Mahmoodian, S. L. Hansen, L. Midolo, A. Javadi, G. Kiršansk ̇e, T. Pregnolato, H. El-Ella, E. H. Lee, J. D. Song, S. Stobbe, and P. Lodahl, Nat. Nano. 10, 18 B. J. M. Hausmann, B. Shields, Q. Quan, P. Maletinsky, 5 M. McCutcheon, J. T. Choy, T. M. Babinec, A. Kubanek, A. Yacoby, M. D. Lukin, and M. Lončar, Nano Letters 12, 19 S. Khasminskaya, F. Pyatkov, K. SÅĆowik, S. Ferrari, O. Kahl, V. Kovalyuk, P. Rath, A. Vetter, F. Hennrich, M. M. Kappes, G. Gol’tsman, A, Korneev, C. Rockstuhl, R. Krupke, and W. H. P. Pernice, Nat. Photon. 10, 727 20 D. J. P. Ellis, A. J. Bennett, C. Dangel, J. P. Lee, J. P. Griffiths, T. A. Mitchell, T.-K. Paraiso, P. Spencer, D. A. Ritchie, and A. J. Shields, Appl. Phys. Lett. 112, 211104 21 G. Roelkens, L. Liu, D. Liang, R. Jones, A. Fang, B. Koch, and J. Bowers, Laser & Photon. Rev. 4, 751 (2010). 22 I. E. Zadeh, A. W. Elshaari, K. D. Jöns, A. Fognini, D. Dalacu, P. J. Poole, M. E. Reimer, and V. Zwiller, Nano Lett. , 2289 (2016). 23 J.-H. Kim, S. Aghaeimeibodi, C. J. K. Richardson, R. P. Leavitt, D. Englund, and E. Waks, Nano Lett. 17, 7394 24 M. Davanco, J. Liu, L. Sapienza, C.-Z. Zhang, J. V. D. M. Cardoso, V. Verma, R. Mirin, S. W. Nam, L. Liu, and K. Srinivasan, Nat. Commun. 8, 889 (2017). 25 D. Dalacu, P. J. Poole, and R. L. Williams, submitted. 26 A. W. Elshaari, I. E. Zadeh, A. Fognini, M. E. Reimer, D. Dalacu, P. J. Poole, V. Zwiller, and K. D. Jöns, Nat. Commun. 8, 379 (2017). 27 Lumerical Solutions, Inc., Vancouver, B.C. Canada (2004). 28 D. Dalacu, A. Kam, D. G. Austing, X. Wu, J. Lapointe, G. C. Aers, and P. J. Poole, Nanotech. 20, 395602 (2009). 29 D. Dalacu, K. Mnaymneh, J. Lapointe, X. Wu, P. J. Poole, G. Bulgarini, V. Zwiller, and M. E. Reimer, Nano Lett. 30 M. E. Reimer, G. Bulgarini, A. Fognini, R. W. Heeres, B. J. Witek, M. A. M. Versteegh, A. Rubino, T. Braun, M. Kamp, S. Höfling, D. Dalacu, J. Lapointe, P. J. Poole, and V. Zwiller, Phys. Rev. B 93, 195316 (2016). 31 V. R. Almeida, R. R. Panepucci, and M. Lipson, Opt. Lett. 28, 1302 (2003). 32 P. Lodahl, S. Mahmoodian, and S. Stobbe, Rev. Mod. Phys. 87, 347 (2015). 33 T. Aichele, V. Zwiller, and O. Benson, New J. Phys. 6, 90 34 C. Santori, D. Fattal, J. Vuckovic, G. S. Solomon, and Y. Yamamoto, New. J. Phys. 6, 89 (2004).