1 Quantum coherence across bosonic superconductor-anomalous metal-insulator transitions Chao Yang1,*, Yi Liu2,3,*, Yang Wang1, Liu Feng1, Qianmei He1, Jian Sun2,3, Yue Tang2,3, Chunchun Wu1, Jie Xiong1†, Wanli Zhang1, Xi lin2,3 , Hong Yao3,4,5, Haiwen Liu6, Gustavo Fernandes7, Jimmy Xu7,8, James M. Valles Jr.8†, Jian Wang2,3,5,9,10†, and Yanrong Li1 1State Key Laboratory of Electronic Thin Films and Integrated Devices, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, China. 2International Center for Quantum Materials, School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China. 3Collaborative Innovation Center of Quantum Matter, Beijing 100871, China. 4Institute for Advanced Study, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. 5State Key Laboratory of Low Dimensional Quantum Physics, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. 6Center for Advanced Quantum Studies, Department of Physics, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, China. 7School of Engineering, Brown University, 182 Hope Street, Providence, RI02912, USA. 8Department of Physics, Brown University, 182 Hope Street, Providence, RI 02912, USA. 9CAS Center for Excellence in Topological Quantum Computation, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China. 10 Beijing Academy of Quantum Information Sciences, West Bld. #3, No. 10 Xibeiwang East Rd., Haidian District, Beijing 100193, China *These authors contributed equally to this work. †Corresponding author. E-mail: jianwangphysics@pku.edu.cn (J.W.); james_valles_jr@brown.edu (J.M.V.J); jiexiong@uestc.edu.cn (J.X.) Abstract: After decades of explorations, suffering from low critical temperature and subtle nature, whether a metallic ground state exists in a two-dimensional system beyond Anderson localization is still a mystery. Supremely, phase coherence could be the key that unlocks its intriguing nature. This work reveals how quantum phase coherence 2 evolves across bosonic superconductor-metal-insulator transitions via magneto-conductance quantum oscillations in high-Tc superconducting films. A robust intervening anomalous metallic state characterized by both resistance and oscillation amplitude saturations in the low temperature regime is detected. By contrast, with decreasing temperature the oscillation amplitude monotonically grows on the superconducting side, but decreases at low temperatures on the insulating side. It suggests that the saturation of phase coherence plays a prominent role in the formation of this anomalous metallic state. Main Text: In 1979, the scaling theory of localization predicted that metallic states are absent at zero temperature in two-dimensional (2D) disordered systems due to quantum interference (1). The phase coherence length as a fundamental property will diverge as electron waves are exponentially localized (1-2). Consistently when electrons form Cooper pairs in 2D disordered system, the ground states should be superconductors or insulators. Nevertheless, approaching zero temperature, an anomalous metallic ground state has been experimentally observed (3-15), which shows a residual resistance far below the quantum resistance at low temperatures. The existence and origin of this unexpected metallic state gives rise to intense debates (16-24). The resistance saturation as the characteristic of anomalous metallic ground state in 2D superconductors (3-15) has been experimentally observed in ultralow temperature regime. However, extrinsic effects such as noise and carrier overheating may also disrupt the phase coherence, which raises the difficulty of clarifying the origin of 2D metal-like state at zero temperature (25). To date, the nature of the anomalous metallic state is still mysterious and the conclusive evidence is highly desired. The phase coherence could be a key to understand 2D metallic state. If the phase coherence length of electrons saturates at low temperatures, due to the weakening of constructive quantum interference, the diffusion should not be absolutely prohibited resulting in a possible metallic state in a low dimensional electron system (26-28). Thus, it is crucial to investigate the phase coherence of Cooper pairs in anomalous metallic state of 2D superconductors. Here, we present a systematic study of Cooper pair phase coherence through the superconductor-anomalous metal phase transition followed by the anomalous metal-insulator phase transition in high-Tc superconductor (HTS) films patterned with array of holes. The relatively high energy scale of HTS and low temperature measurements make the observations reliable. The wide resistance saturation over one decade of temperature variation, zero Hall resistance and the giant magneto-resistance are simultaneously detected as characteristics of an anomalous metallic state. Interestingly, magneto-conductance quantum oscillations with a period of h/2e are detected in superconducting, anomalous metal and insulating states, providing a direct observable of Cooper pair coherence through the phase transitions. By reactive ion etching (RIE), we etched a high quality 12 nm thick YBCO thin 3 film through a contact mask with a hexagonal array of holes (see Fig. S1). Each mask is an anodized aluminum oxide (AAO) membrane formed on and then separated from an aluminum base (see Fig. 1A). The approach offers the advantages of minimal molecular residuals and processing contamination (29-31). The RIE transfers the pattern, around 70 nm diameter holes with center-to-center hole spacing of ~103 nm, onto the HTS film (Fig. 1B). In the process, the ion bombardment impacts the sidewalls of the resultant pores to create a less crystalline and strained YBCO shell, which becomes thicker with increasing etching time (31, 32). This was confirmed in a detailed high-resolution transmission-electron microscopy (HRTEM) analysis, which shows high density of structural defects around the nanopatterned holes (33). We deduce from the transport data presented below that this process forms superconducting islands at the nodes of the hexagonal pore lattice connected to three links. The islands shrink and the links become more resistive with increasing etching time (Fig. 1C). The measured curves of the nanopatterned YBCO thin films exhibit quantum phase transition (QPT) behaviors, as shown in Fig. 1D. The YBCO thin film subjected to a minimal RIE time remains superconducting (see a representative film SC exhibited in Fig. 1D). The superconducting onset critical temperature is defined as the temperature at which the sheet resistance curve deviates from the linear extrapolation of the normal state (Fig. 1D & Fig. S2) and the normal state sheet resistance is defined as . With increasing etching time, the superconducting transition region becomes wider and the zero resistance state fades away. We define this state as anomalous metal (AM) state as there is a plateau of residual resistance at lower temperatures. A representative AM film is shown in Fig. 1D. For films with the normal resistance larger than the critical value ≈ 13 kΩ, presents a superconducting transition below followed by an insulating transition at lower temperatures. We define this as a transitional state (TS). A typical TS curve is marked in Fig. 1D. The samples with more etching exhibit a more pronounced insulating upturn emerging at higher temperatures. With further etching, increases monotonically to infinite at zero temperature indicating an insulating property over the whole temperature range. An example labeled as INS (insulating state) is shown in Fig. 1D. More details of electrical transport of all films can be found in Fig. S2. an array of nanopores. The Arrhenius plot of the anomalous metallic state films and superconducting films are presented in Fig. 2A. For superconducting films, the resistance below drops to zero within the measurement resolution. For metallic state films, in the low temperature regime, the resistance drops and saturates to a finite value which can be up to five orders of magnitude smaller than normal state resistance. In the smallest saturating resistance film, the saturation of resistance starts at around 5 K, which is much higher than that of conventional superconductors (4-8, 10-15). To exclude external noise effects, we measured metallic state films using 4 well-filtered electrical leads in a dilution refrigerator cryostat down to 50 mK as shown in Fig. 2B & Fig. S3. The I-V curves are linear below 100nA indicating the measurements are in the ohmic regime, as shown in inset of Fig. 2B. The resistance saturation remains almost the same with or without the resistor-capacitor (RC) filters, demonstrating that the metallic state is intrinsic. To further explore the nature of the anomalous metallic state, the Hall resistance ) and longitudinal resistance ( ) were measured simultaneously. Below , the slopes of curves are largely suppressed and drop to zero with decreasing temperature for a representative metallic state film (Fig. 2C inset). measurement resolution at a relatively high temperature ~50 K, while is still finite. The absence of Hall resistance at low temperatures reveals the particle–hole symmetry in the anomalous metal (also see Fig. S4). Furthermore, a giant positive longitudinal magneto-resistance is simultaneously observed as another important feature of this anomalous metallic state (13) (Fig. 2D). Below , the perpendicular magneto-conductance of all the YBCO nanopore thin films in Fig. 1D oscillates at low fields as shown in Fig. 3A-C for three representative films. We present the data as the negative change of magneto-conductance , where is the conductance at zero magnetic field. The magneto-conductance of all films is symmetric and the magneto-conductance oscillations appear on a monotonically rising background (full data shown in Fig. S5). Up to four magneto-conductance oscillations are detected with a constant period of ~2.25 kOe. This period is consistent with one superconducting flux quantum threading an area of one unit-cell of the hexagonal pattern (around 9200 nm2), where h is Planck’s constant and e is the electron charge. The appearance of the charge 2e quantum oscillations just below demonstrate that Cooper pairs participate in the transport in all the states through the superconductor-metal-insulator transitions. To highlight the temperature dependence of the oscillations, we define the magneto-conductance oscillation amplitude as after subtracting the rising background. Figure 3D shows the temperature dependence of on a logarithm scale for the films exhibiting superconducting, anomalous metallic and insulating states, respectively. For the films of superconducting state, the oscillation amplitude monotonically grows to a giant value beyond our measurement limit with decreasing temperature. In contrast, the oscillation amplitude saturates in the anomalous metallic region below 5 K (Fig. 3D), reminiscent of the residual resistance plateau of anomalous metallic state at low temperatures (Fig. 2A). For insulating films (i.e. INS films), with decreasing temperature peaks and then drops. Interestingly, with increasing disorder, varies by at least nine orders of magnitude from the superconducting films to most insulating films in the zero temperature limit, while the normal resistance only changes two orders of magnitude. It demonstrates that the Cooper pair coherence over a wide range can be controlled by 5 tuning the link resistance of nanopatterned YBCO films. The electrical transport and the magneto-conductance oscillations in YBCO nanopore thin films can be qualitatively understood by modeling them as resistively shunted Josephson junction arrays. With increasing etching time, the link resistances grow and the superconducting islands shrink (34), which drives the system through a superconductor-anomalous metal-insulator transition. For all films, varies by no more than 15% from the superconducting film to the insulating film, which indicates that the strength of local superconducting pairing remains stable through the QPT while Cooper pair phase coherence can be tuned by increasing link resistance. The magneto-conductance oscillations originate from Cooper pair quantum interference effects in the multiply connected geometry imposed by the array structure (35,36). These effects enter through the Josephson coupling energy between nodes of the array as given by , where is the gauge invariant phase difference of the order parameter between islands i and j, and is the line integral of the vector potential between neighboring nodes. is proportional to the order parameter amplitude on the islands. Josephson coupling energy oscillates with increasing magnetic field due to the requirement that the line integral of the phase around a closed loop is a multiple of 2 . The dimensions of the array unit dictate the period of the oscillations. The magneto-conductance oscillates on the superconducting side because is the barrier to thermally activated vortex motion (36). The magneto-conductance oscillates on the insulating and anomalous metal side because is proportional to the Cooper pair tunneling rate. We now discuss the evolution of the temperature dependence of the oscillations across the QPT within this array model. For all the YBCO films, the oscillations appear just below indicating that local phase coherence develops as soon as the amplitude of the order parameter forms on the islands. At lower temperatures, the oscillation amplitude is approximately proportional to the phase coherence as the growth of order parameter on the islands ceases. For superconducting films, the oscillation amplitude monotonically grows beyond our measurement range with decreasing temperature, indicating the phase coherence length diverges in the zero temperature limit. By contrast, the oscillation amplitude of anomalous metallic state films saturates below around 5 K after a severe growth. The saturating temperature dependence of the oscillation amplitude is consistent with that of the resistance, indicating that phase coherence saturation should be crucial to the formation of the anomalous metallic state. For the insulating films, as the link resistance rises beyond with decreasing temperature, the interisland capacitance and self-capacitances of the islands can produce a Coulomb blockade to Cooper pair transport (37). Thus and the phase coherence length decrease as the Cooper pairs become localized. In order to quantify phase coherence through the QPT, we estimate the phase coherence length by approximately using the formula 6 for quasi-particle quantum interference (28,38), where r is half of center-to-center hole spacing ~ 50 nm, h is Planck’s constant and e is the electron charge. It is noteworthy to mention that the above formula can only be applied to insulating or some metallic states films with relatively larger residual resistance when is smaller or comparable to quantum conductance. The temperature dependence of are presented in Fig. 3E, indicating the saturation of quantum coherence for anomalous metallic states in the low temperature regime. It is noted that the magneto-conductance oscillation amplitude observed in the anomalous metallic states with small residual resistance is giant and much larger than the quantum conductance, which is hard to be simply explained by quasi-particle quantum interference, leaving an open question for further investigations. The phase diagrams of resistance and differential resistance as a function of temperature and normal resistance in Fig. 4 provide a summary of the results. We use as the tuning parameter since it is directly related to the etching time (see Fig. S6) and increases with increasing disorder in the nanopatterned films (34). The normal state and other states are separated by . At the boundary from to , the array resistance drops below to zero (SC) or a plateau of residual resistance (AM) at the lowest temperatures as shown in the bottom-left part of the phase diagram (Fig. 4). The crossover between the AM and resistance drop region is separated by a short dash line (ill defined). Below the onset of insulating behavior is visible in the lower right region where is negative. We label this region as the Cooper pair insulator (CPI). Approaching zero temperature, with increasing , there is a regime where changes from zero to a negative value which can be interpreted as the critical regime of a quantum phase transition. The phase diagram shows the evolution of anomalous metal state to a Cooper pair insulator state separated by a QCP around ~13 kΩ. To date, the nature of the anomalous metallic state in 2D system is still mysterious. Candidate theory includes dissipating bath coupled to environment (16-18), Bose metal (19), order parameter fluctuation (20-23) and composite Fermi liquid phase (24). In our HTS system, this anomalous metallic state is clearly a bosonic state demonstrated by h/2e quantum oscillations. As for the fermionic system, the phase coherence saturation is argued to be the key to understand low-dimensional metal (26-28, 39), which might be universal for both fermionic and bosonic system. However, the very low phase coherence saturation temperature in fermionic system creates challenges to explore the underlying mechanism. An anomalous metal state appears in a d wave superconductor at higher temperatures with zero Hall resistance indicates that the low energy excitation spectrum plays a secondary role in its formation and the model on Cooper pair phase coherence may be the right direction to reveal the nature of this anomalous metallic state. Thus, our work paves the way for investigations on the anomalous state of matter by using finite frequency probes, like terahertz spectroscopy that are more difficult to apply at dilution refrigerator 7 temperatures. The ability to control and reveal the quantum coherence and relatively high critical temperature in our nanopatterned HTS system will shed light on the anomalous metallic state and quantum phase transitions in low-dimensional systems.