Vortex glass-liquid transition and activated flux motion in an epitaxial, super- conducting NdFeAs(O,F) thin film J. Hänisch1*, K. Iida2,3, T. Ohmura3, T. Matsumoto2, T. Hatano2,3, M. Langer1, S. Kauffmann- Weiss1, H. Ikuta2,3, B. Holzapfel1 1Institute for Technical Physics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 76344 Eggenstein- Leopoldshafen, Germany 2Department of Materials Physics, Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8603, Japan 3Department of Crystalline Materials Science, Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8603, Japan *email: jens.haenisch@kit.edu Abstract An epitaxial NdFeAs(O,F) thin film of 90 nm thickness grown by molecular beam epitaxy on MgO single crystal with Tc = 44.2 K has been investigated regarding a possible vortex glass-liquid tran- sition. The voltage-current characteristics show excellent scalability according to the vortex- glass model with a static critical exponent ν of around 1.35 and a temperature-dependent dy- namic exponent z increasing from 7.8 to 9.0 for the investigated temperature range. The large and non-constant z values are discussed in the frame of 3D vortex glass, thermally activated flux motion, and inhomogeneity broadening. Keywords Superconducting, film, electrical properties, molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) Introduction Since Koch et al. introduced the theory of a glassy vortex state in high-temperature super- conductors as early as 1989, the characteristic scaling of the resistivity  as well as the voltage- current, V(I), respectively electric field-current density, E(J), curves near its transition to the vor- tex liquid state have been found in numerous high-temperature cuprate superconductors. Even though the vortex liquid phase is expected primarily for superconductors with large Ginzburg numbers Gi, corresponding to the presence of strong thermal fluctuations, the glass-liquid tran- sition (GLT) has also been reported in superconductors with small Gi, e.g. in Nb and In films, al- loys, and MgB2. For the Fe-based superconductors(FBS), the GLT has also been investigated in all relevant mate- rial classes, such as 11 compounds (e.g. thin films of Fe(Se,Te) ), 111 compounds (e.g. LiFeAs ), 122 compounds (e.g. Co- doped BaFe2As2 (Ba122) ), and the Sm1111 compounds (SmFeAsO1-x single crystals and SmFeAs(O,F) polycrystalline bulk samples ). On the other hand, for most other Ln1111 compounds (Ln lanthanoid), e.g. La1111 and Gd1111 (as well as Sr- based 122 compounds), literature data on a possible GLT seem not available, and for Nd1111 compounds, the available data are rare and inconclusive. Liu et al. found a signature of a GLT for NdFeAsO1-x polycrystals but no sign for such a transition in NdFeAs(O,F). Xie et al. showed simple resistivity scaling for literature data on NdFeAsO0.7F0.3 polycrystals. So far, proper GLT scaling of V(I) curves in combination with resistivity data is missing for NdFeAs(O,F), especially for single crystals or epitaxial thin films. This study will present such data on a thin-film sample for the first time in order to gain deeper understanding of the vortex behavior near the irrevers- ibility line in NdFeAs(O,F) in particular and in Ln1111 materials and Fe-based superconductors in general. The class of Ln1111 compounds is not only interesting for basic investigations of FBS but poten- tially also for high-field and detector applications due to their relatively high Tc values of up to 56 K (highest among FBS), high upper critical and irreversibility fields as well as low electronic anisotropies at low temperatures, even though the preparation of films, tapes and wires of these materials is not as straightforward as for 11 and 122 compounds. In order to successfully increase the irreversibility fields and current carrying capabilities, it is helpful to know the be- havior of the vortices near the irreversibility line. Sample Preparation and electrical measurements Epitaxial NdFeAs(O,F) thin films of around 90 nm thickness were fabricated on MgO(001) single crystals by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). For fluorine doping, the NdOF over-layer technique has been employed in which the mother compound NdFeAsO is deposited, followed by a NdOF over-layer. Both NdFeAsO and NdOF were deposited at 800 °C. More details about sample preparation can be found in Ref. . For the electrical transport measurements, a microbridge of 30 μm width and 1 mm length was structured by laser cutting. The V(I) characteristics as well as the temperature dependence of the resistance, R(T), were measured in four-point geometry in a Quantum Design 14 T PPMS with Keithley current source 2460 and Nanovoltmeter 2482A. The current and voltage leads were attached at the contact pads via Pogo pins. The film investigated had an onset Tc on of 44.2 K, which is determined as the extrapolation of largest slope in R(T) towards the tempera- ture dependent normal state resistance Rn(T), corresponding to around 90% of Rn, Fig. 1(a). The upper critical field Bc2(T) was determined with the same 90% Rn criterion. The V(I) characteristics were measured up to a voltage level of 0.1 mV for constant magnetic fields (B||c) between 1 and 13 T (step size 2 T) at temperature steps of 0.4 K between 4 K and 35 K. The lnV(lnI) curves were fitted with first and second order polynomials with different fit procedures to extract glass- liquid temperature Tg (disappearance of quadratic term) and the n value (n=dlnV/dlnI) near the critical current density Jc, which itself was determined using an electric field criterion of 1 μV/cm. Results and Discussion The resistive transition to the superconducting state of the film, Fig. 1(a), shows the typical broadening with increasing magnetic fields (B||c) due to thermally activated flux motion. The activation energy U0 for flux motion is usually determined by linear fits to the relevant region in the respective Arrhenius plots, Fig. 1(b). This analysis is, however, only valid for activation ener- gies which are either constant or linearly dependent on temperature. In those cases, the deriva- tive U’ = - dlnR/dT-1 is temperature-independent. As shown in Fig. 2(a), this is not the case for the investigated sample. To evaluate this further, we follow here the analysis by Zhang et al. based on the early work of Palstra et al. : For activated flux motion, the resistance is approx- imated by (1) where the prefactor 2R0U(B,T)/kT (k...Boltzmann constant) is generally T-dependent, in contrast ent derivative U’ for each magnetic field reads as follows: (2) Whereas the exponent q is field-dependent as proposed by Zhang et al. , it is set constant here in order to reduce arbitrariness. The green line in Fig. 2(a) is a fit to the U’ data at 13 T with eq. 2, and the green lines in Figs. 1(a) and 1(b) show the corresponding fits with eq. 1 to all R(T) data. Best fits were achieved with a Tc value of 44.0 K (corresponding well to the onset Tc value) and q = 1.55. The zero-temperature activation energy U0 is shown in Fig. 2(c) in comparison to values from the usual linear fits to the Arrhenius plots. Both show B-1 dependence in magnetic fields above 4 T, indicative of collective pinning. For lower magnetic fields, the logarithmic slope of U0(B) is gradually decreasing, which is expected for the transition to the single vortex pinning regime. The Arrhenius plot values (corresponding to q = 1) are underestimations but may be re- garded as U0 values near the glass-liquid transition. U0 is very comparable to literature data (q=1) on a NdFeAs(O,F) single crystal , whereas the SmFeAsO0.85 single crystal and the SmFeAs(O,F) thin film show around 3 times higher values and the LaFeAs(O,F) thin film one order of magnitude lower values. This is closely correlated to Tc (being around 25 K (La), 45 K (Nd), and 55 K (Sm)) but individual differences in defect density and pinning strength (e.g. F-doped vs. O-deficient samples and F-content dependence ) certainly play a role. Poly- crystalline samples of Fig. 2(c)’s Ln1111 compounds usually exhibit slightly larger values of U0 in literature (due to the averaging effect between different crystallite orientations and increased density of strongly pinning defects). At medium fields, U0 is inversely proportional to B for all reasonable values for B0, which is close to the irreversibility field at 0 K. The theory of vortex glass-liquid transition predicts that resistance and current (or more generally resistivity ρ and current density J) can be scaled according to (3) I/T α (T-Tg)ν(1-d) (4) where ν and z are the static and the dynamic critical exponent respectively and d the dimen- sionality of the system. Eq. 4 was modified by the factor 1/T α with α = in order to check for these both scaling methods found in the literature. Yamasaki et al. pointed out that if the scaling parameter J0 (crossover current density) is proportional to kT as predicted by Koch et al., α should be 1, as is found for several compounds such as YBa2Cu3O7 , Co-doped Ba122 , SmFeAsO0.85 , and MgB2 . Many other studies (including on similar samples as listed above and also interestingly by Koch et al. themselves ) find good scaling instead for α = 0 (i.e. without the extra factor 1/T). This can be explained by J0 being proportional to a tempera- ture-independent thermal-fluctuation activation energy Utf instead of kT . For the sample in this study, scaling was also only possible for α = 0. The V(I) curve exactly at Tg is following a perfect power law with exponent (5). We determined this temperature by the disappearance of the quadratic term of second-order polynomial fits to the lnV(lnI) curves, adopted from Ref. . Fig. 3 shows the set of V(I) curves (a), their logarithmic derivatives near Tg (b), and the scaling according to eqs. 3 and 4 for d = 3 (3D case) for B = 13 T (c) exemplarily. The behavior of the other data sets is accordingly and of the same quality. The V(I) curve closest to Tg not only shows the smallest variance in n value for different fit procedures but also the largest range of constant logarithmic derivative, Fig. 3(b). From scaling behavior alone, it is not possible to discern between the different cases 3D vortex glass (VG), (quasi-)2D vortex glass and Bose glass (BG, for presence of strong columnar pinning centers), since their respective scaling parameters are related to each other via: BG-VG (d=3): νBG = 2/3 νVG, zBG = (3zVG+1)/2 (6) 2D-3D (VG): ν2D = 2ν3D, z2D = (z3D-1)/2 (7). Certain types of glass phases have to be ruled out instead by their parameters lying outside the expected range, i.e. νVG = 1...2 and zVG > 4 and usually < 6 for vortex glass, and νBG ~ 0.8...1.8 and zBG ~ 6...9 for Bose glass . For the NdFeAs(O,F) film of this study, a Bose glass could be ruled out in that way (z ≫ 9) and also because strong correlated c-axis-aligned defects are unlikely in such MBE-grown films. Typical defects are uncorrelated regions of differing stoichiometry in the range of 10...20 nm as measured via atom probe tomography (not shown here). Discerning be- tween 2D and 3D via the scaling parameters alone is not possible for the investigated sample (2D: ν>2 and z in the expected range, 3D: ν in the range but z≫6). On the other hand, the slope of Bc2||c near Tc, dBc2/dT|Tc = -2.1 T/K, and a Tc of 44.2 K result in an orbital upper critical field Bc2 orb(0 K) = 64 T and therefore in a coherence length ξab = 2.25 nm. With a typical anisotropy parameter γ for this type of NdFeAs(O,F) films with thickness > 50 nm of around 4.5 , the coherence length in c-direction can be estimated to ξc ~ 0.5 nm. The crossover temperature be- tween 2D and 3D behavior in layered superconductors, Tcr = (1-2(ξc/d)2)Tc, where d is here the inter layer distance, i.e. the sample’s c-axis parameter of 0.8543 nm, is therefore around 14 K. Even though close to the transition to 2D behavior, the measured glass-liquid temperatures of this study are within the 3D region above Tcr, which leaves 3D vortex glass scaling as best option, and the large (and T-dependent) z values have a different reason as discussed below. As visible in Fig. 3(b), Tg at 13 T is 15.2 ± 0.4 K (the maximum error in Tg was estimated by the step size in T), and nTg = 4.45. With eq. 5, z is 7.9 ± 0.1 at 13 T. The resistance will go to zero for T→ Tg as R ~ (T-Tg)s, with exponent s = ν(z+2-d), (8) within the critical region (Vogel-Fulcher relationship). That means, Tg and z being known, ν can be evaluated from the behavior of R near Tg. If eq. 8 holds, the derivative D = (dlnR/dT)-1 goes linearly to zero for T→Tg with slope 1/s. This is shown in Fig. 2(b) for 13 T. The value of s in that case is 8.8 ± 0.1, and the according value of ν = 1.27±0.05. The two derivatives U’ and D are re- lated as U’ = T2/D. That means they can easily be converted in the other form and cross-checked for consistency (dashed lines in Figs. 2(a) and 2(b)) to reduce the errors in U0 and s (and hence ν). The temperature T* (23.7 ± 0.2 K at 13 T) at which both derivatives start to fail to fit the data determines the upper bound of the critical region. It is worth mentioning that solely from R(T) curves Tg can only be estimated with relatively large error bars in many cases, and Tg and T* are usually overestimated as well as s and hence ν underestimated. As Liu et al. showed, an effective activation energy Ueff = kT (Tc-T)/(T-Tg) for thermal activation of flux motion in the critical region leads to the observed power law dependence of R near Tg and is consistent with the vortex-glass theory . That means, R can be scaled in the critical region ured fields between 1 and 13 T. Due to an increasing z value for increasing T (or decreasing B), s (expected values 2.7...8.5 for a 3D vortex glass) is not constant and perfect scaling is not ob- served. However, the critical region between Tg and T* can be identified clearly. A similar scaling to scaling for this sample and, furthermore, does not resolve the critical region correctly. The latter scaling approach has nonetheless been successfully applied to Ba122 single crystals with Ueff given above. The results of this study are summarized in Fig. 4: Three clearly distinct regions in the magnetic field-temperature phase diagram, Fig. 4(a), of this Nd1111 film are visible: The glass liquid tran- sition (Tg or Bg(T)) separates vortex glass and vortex liquid. The vortex liquid shows a critical re- gion near Tg as well as a thermal-activation region, which are separated by T* (i.e. B*(T)). None- theless, the resistance within the critical region can also be described by thermal activation with an effective pinning potential Ueff as described above. The dashed line separating thermal acti- vation and transition region (determined by inhomogeneity broadening and fluctuations) de- notes the temperatures at which eqs. 1 and 2 fail to fit R(T), Fig. 1(a). Whereas the static expo- nent ν, Fig. 4(b), is constant with temperature (or field) at around 1.35 within the error bars (re- garding scaling behavior), the dynamic critical exponent z, Fig. 4(c), is increasing with tempera- ture (or as often visualized in literature decreasing with increasing field) as mentioned above. Forcing z to be constant leads to non-scaling of V(I) and offsets in Tg. Similarly high values of z (while ν is more or less constant) have been observed for YBa2Cu3O7 films by Voss-de Haan et al. . The authors pointed out that reducing the range in electrical field of the V(I) curves would lead to lower z values. The dashed red line is a fit according to Bg ~ (1-T/Tg0)m with m = 1.5 ± 0.1, where Tg0 is the glass-liquid transition temperature in zero applied field. An exponent m around 1.5 is often found for sufficiently high magnetic fields. The theory of glass-liquid transition has not been unquestioned. Coppersmith et al. showed very early that the (scaling) V(I) curves could in principle be explained by pure thermal activation of flux line motion, where the counterargument, however, is the universality of the scaling pa- rameters . Similar results were achieved, e.g., by Hu et al. for theoretical V(I) curves on YBa2Cu3O7 films. Strachan et al. showed that often a unique glass-liquid temperature can- not be deduced from logarithmic derivatives of the V(I) curves nor from successful scaling, which might explain the large range of the critical parameters in literature. They found a peak in dlnV/dlnI instead of a constant value at Tg. Such an effect, however, was not seen for our sam- ple, Fig. 3(b). Sullivan et al. finally pointed out that the V(I) curves near the transition can be heavily altered by noise effects. We therefore ensured to measure R(T) as well as V(I) with min- imum noise and to avoid possible spurious effects as well as to disregard any data which may be affected by run-away temperature. All of the above critics come to the conclusion that scaling alone is not sufficient evidence for the presence of a vortex phase transition. Other authors on the contrary conclude that a glass-liquid transition and thermal activation of flux motion do simply not necessarily have to exclude each other , , see above. The group of Matsushi- ta, e.g. , developed a model, which describes the influence of disorder and Jc variance on the scaling behavior of the V(I) curves, relating the critical exponents ν and z with new parameters parameters ν and z. This model can explain the large and T-dependent z values for our sample. In the end, however, it is a matter of interpretation whether one regards the transport behavior as glass-liquid transition altered by thermal activation and disorder or as thermal activation mimicking a phase transition, since it is not decidable from the data alone according to litera- ture. Whether possibly cleaner Nd1111 (and other Ln1111) film samples with maximized Tc would show glass-liquid behavior with constant critical parameters in the expected range is an interesting task for future investigations. Conclusion In summary, the temperature dependence of the resistance, R(T), as well as the voltage-current characteristics, V(I), of the NdFeAs(O,F) film of this study (grown by MBE, 90 nm thickness) are well explained by the vortex glass theory with a transition to the vortex liquid at the glass-liquid transition temperature Tg. Whereas the static critical exponent ν of around 1.35 lies within the expected range (1...2) for a vortex glass, the dynamic exponent z is considerably larger than the expected upper bound of 6 and more importantly temperature-dependent, i.e. non-universal. This can be explained by thermally activated flux motion in the liquid region (also within the crit- ical region Tg...T*) in combination with Tc and hence Jc variation in the sample. Acknowledgment The authors thank Rainer Nast (KIT) for laser-structuring of the sample and A. Gruber (KIT) for technical support. This work was partially supported by the JSPS Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Re- search (B) Grant Number 16H04646.