1 Anomalous Hall Conductivity of a Non-Collinear Magnetic Antiperovskite Gautam Gurung, Ding-Fu Shao, Tula R. Paudel, and Evgeny Y. Tsymbal Department of Physics and Astronomy & Nebraska Center for Materials and Nanoscience, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Nebraska 68588-0299, USA The anomalous Hall effect (AHE) is a well-known fundamental property of ferromagnetic metals, commonly associated with the presence of a net magnetization. Recently, an AHE has been discovered in non-collinear antiferromagnetic (AFM) metals. Driven by non-vanishing Berry curvature of AFM materials with certain magnetic space group symmetry, anomalous Hall conductivity (AHC) is very sensitive to the specific type of magnetic ordering. Here, we investigate the appearance of AHC in antiperovskite GaNMn3 as a representative of broader materials family ANMn3 (A is a main group element), where different types of non-collinear magnetic ordering can emerge. Using symmetry analyses and first-principles density-functional theory calculations, we show that with almost identical band structure, the nearly degenerate non-collinear AFM Γ5g and Γ4g phases of GaNMn3 have zero and finite AHC, respectively. In a non-collinear ferrimagnetic M-1 phase, GaNMn3 exhibits a large AHC due to the presence of a sizable net magnetic moment. In the non-collinear antiperovskite magnets, transitions between different magnetic phases, exhibiting different AHC states, can be produced by doping, strain, or spin transfer torque, which makes these materials promising for novel spintronic applications. I. Introduction It is known that the anomalous Hall effect (AHE) emerges in metals with broken time-reversal symmetry (TRS) and strong spin-orbit coupling (SOC) . Usually, the AHE is found in ferromagnetic (FM) metals, where a transverse voltage generated by a longitudinal charge current is sensitive to the net magnetization. The intrinsic AHE is driven by a fictitious magnetic field in the momentum space associated with the Berry curvature, a quantity inherent in the electronic band structure . With the magnitude and direction determined by the magnetization and SOC, this fictitious magnetic field controls the charge current in a similar way as a real magnetic field in the ordinary Hall effect. The AHE vanishes in conventional collinear antiferromagnetic (AFM) metals due to the anomalous Hall conductivities being opposite in sign and hence cancelling each other for the two ferromagnetic sublattices with opposite magnetization. In other words, the existence of symmetry combining time reversal and lattice translation prohibits the AHE. This observation suggested that the presence of a non- vanishing net magnetic moment is the necessary condition to break the related symmetry and produce the AHE . It appeared, however, that the AHE can be observed in certain types of non-collinear antiferromagnets, such as Mn3X alloys (X = Ga, Ge, Ir, etc.) [4–8]. In these metals, the Mn moments are arranged in a Kagome-type lattice within the (111) plane. The magnetic space group symmetry operations in these compounds cannot eliminate the total Berry curvature, leading to a non-vanishing AHE . The presence of a sizable AHE in non- collinear AFM metals is interesting for AFM spintronics, where an AFM order parameter, as a state variable, can be controlled on a much shorter time scale compared to magnetization in ferromagnets [9–11]. Importantly, specifics of magnetic ordering in non-collinear AFM materials associated with different magnetic space group symmetries have a strong impact on the AHE . For example, it was found that the AHC tensors have a different form in Mn3X (X = Ga, Ge, and Sn) and Mn3Y (Y = Rh, Ir, and Pt) compounds, due to different magnetic moment configurations. One can expect therefore that a significant change in the anomalous Hall conductivity (AHC) can emerge at the magnetic phase transition associated with switching between different non-collinear magnetic orderings. Realizing such an effect in practice would be interesting for potential spintronic applications, and therefore exploring the AHE in possible material systems with competing and tunable non-collinear magnetic phases is valuable. Antiperovskite materials are potential candidates for the control of the AHE by tunable non-collinear magnetism. Antiperovskites have a perovskite structure, where cation and anion positions are interchanged (Fig. 1(a)). Abundant functional properties have been discovered in these materials, such as superconductivity , magnetoresistance , and magnetovolume [ 16 – 18 ], magnetocaloric , and barocaloric effects. Manganese nitride antiperovskites ANMn3 (A = Ga, Cu, Ni, etc.) are typically metallic and often reveal complex magnetic orderings . Various magnetic phases, such as non-collinear AFM Γ5g and Γ4g phases and a non-collinear ferrimagnetic M-1 phase have been found in these compounds (Fig. 1). Transformations between these magnetic phases can be induced by perturbations, such as doping, pressure, and temperature [23–25]. It has also been predicted that the transition between the Γ5g and Γ4g phases can be achieved using a spin transfer torque . These properties make ANMn3 compounds promising for a functional control of the non- 2 collinear magnetism and thus interesting for exploring the AHE in different magnetic phases. In this paper, we consider gallium manganese nitride GaNMn3 as a representative antiperovskite material to investigate the magnetic phase dependent AHC of the whole ANMn3 family. The high temperature paramagnetic phase of GaNMn3 has a cubic crystal structure with the space group Pm3̅m. The Γ5g phase emerges below room temperature (Fig. 1(a)) and represents the most common non-collinear AFM phase of the ANMn3 compounds. In this phase, to avoid the frustration from the triangular geometry of the Ga-Mn Kagome-type lattice in the (111) plane, the magnetic moments of the three Mn atoms form a chiral configuration with the 120° angle between each other. The Γ4g magnetic structure is another common non- collinear AFM phase in the ANMn3 family, which can be obtained from the Γ5g phase by rotating all magnetic moments around the axis by 90° (Fig. 1(b)). Both the Γ5g and Γ4g phases have zero net magnetization. GaNMn3 also exhibits a non-collinear ferrimagnetic M-1 phase (Fig. 1(c)), which can be stabilized by stoichiometric deficiency or high pressure . In this phase, the Mn magnetic moments are antiferromagnetically (ferromagnetically) coupled in (between) the Ga-Mn (001) planes, resulting in collinear AFM sublattices within these planes. On the other hand, the magnetic moments in the Mn-N (002) planes are arranged non-collinearly (Fig. 1(c)), leading to the net magnetic moment along the direction. Using symmetry analyses and first-principles density- functional theory (DFT) calculations, we explore the AHE of the three non-collinear magnetic phases of GaNMn3. We show that with nearly identical band structure, the nearly degenerate AFM Γ5g and Γ4g phases have zero and finite AHC, respectively. In a non-collinear ferrimagnetic M-1 phase, GaNMn3 exhibits a large AHC due to the presence of a sizeable net magnetization. With a possibility to control the appearance of these magnetic phases by external stimulus, the predicted variation of the AHC between different magnetic phases in the same material point to a new approach of designing the AHE-based functional devices for spintronic applications. II. Symmetry analysis Within the linear response theory, the intrinsic AHC is expressed as the integral of the total Berry curvature (Ωαβ) over the Brillouin zone of the crystal σαβ = − e2 ħ ∮ d3k⃗ (2π)3 Ωαβ(k⃗ ) BZ , (1) where the total Berry curvature Ωαβ ≡ Ωγ = ∑ fn(k⃗ )Ωn γ n (k⃗ ) is the sum of the Berry curvatures Ωn γ(k⃗ ) corresponding the individual bands n, fn(k⃗ ) is the Fermi distribution function, and indices (α, β, γ) denote Cartesian co-ordinates. The expression for the Berry curvature Ωn γ(k⃗ ) is given by Ωn γ(k⃗ ) = −2iħ2 ∑ ⟨ψn,k⃗⃗ |vα|ψm,k⃗ ⟩⟨ψm,k⃗ |vβ|ψn,k⃗ ⟩ (Em(k⃗ )−En(k⃗ ))2 m≠n , (2) where ψn,k⃗ is the Bloch function and v is the velocity operator. Space group symmetry of a material determines the presence or absence of a finite AHC. For example, since Ωn γ(k⃗ ) is odd with respect to time reversal symmetry, i.e. Ωn γ(−k⃗ ) = −Ωn γ(k⃗ ), the total Berry curvature Ωαβ and hence the AHC are zero for non- magnetic materials. Similarly, if there is symmetry operation Ô transforming k⃗ to k⃗ ′ (i.e., k⃗ ′ = Ôk⃗ ), such as two-fold rotation or mirror reflection, for which ÔΩn(k⃗ ′) = −Ωn(k⃗ ) , the AHC vanishes . In non-collinear AFM materials, such as GaNMn3, various magnetic phases are associated with different magnetic space group symmetries, resulting in different AHC. The Γ5g phase of GaNMn3 is characterized by a lattice of magnetic “whirls” composed of non-collinear Mn magnetic moments in the (111) plane (Fig. 2(a)). This arrangement forms the magnetic space group R3̅m, which has three mirrors planes perpendicular to the (111) plane. Application of the symmetry transformations M = M01̅1, M101̅ , or M1̅10 preserves the original configuration of magnetic moments. The invariance under the mirror symmetry transformations causes the AHE in the Γ5g phase to vanish. For example, under the M1̅10 symmetry operation, the Berry curvature is transformed as Ωxy(kx, ky, kz) = −Ωxy(ky, kx, kz) , which implies that the integral over the whole Brillouin zone in Eq. (1) is zero. This odd property of the Berry curvature in GaNMn3 under the mirror symmetry transformations is broken in the Γ4g phase. In this phase, the Mn magnetic moments form a lattice of “vertices” in the (111) plane (Fig. 2(b)). This configuration corresponds to the magnetic space group R3̅m′, in which the Different non-collinear magnetic phases in AFM antiperovskite GaNMn3: (a) Γ5g, (b) Γ4g, and (c) M-1. Red arrows denote magnetic moments. 3 mirror symmetries are broken. As seen from Fig. 2(b), mirror symmetry transformation M reverses all the magnetic moments. In contrast, the product of mirror symmetry M and time reversal symmetry T is preserved in the Γ4g phase. As shown in Fig. 2(b), when reversal of all moments by the mirror symmetry operation M is followed by the time reversal symmetry transformation T all the moments are reversed back to their initial configuration. The presence of the combined TM symmetry makes the Berry curvature an even function of wave vector k⃗ . For example, applying the TM1̅10 transformation we obtain Ωxy(kx, ky, kz) = Ωxy(−ky, −kx, −kz) . This even property of the Berry curvature makes the AHC non-zero in the Γ4g phase. Magnetic space group symmetry determines the shape of the AHC tensor. While in the Γ5g phase, all the nine components of the AHC tensor are zero, in the Γ4g phase, corresponding to the magnetic space group R3̅m′, the AHC tensor is non-zero. Table 1 shows that there are six non-vanishing matrix elements of the AHC tensor in the Γ4g phase with only one σxy being independent. In the non-collinear ferrimagnetic M-1 phase (Fig. 1 (c)), GaNMn3 has a net magnetization along the direction. Therefore, a non-zero AHC is expected in this case similar to that in ferromagnetic metals. Table 1 shows the AHC tensor for the magnetic space group symmetry P4 corresponding to the M-1 phase. Like in collinear ferromagnetic metals, the AHC tensor has two non-zero components with only one σxy being independent. III. Methods Next, we perform first-principles DFT calculations to obtain the AHC of the three non-collinear magnetic phases of GaNMn3. The DFT calculations are performed using a plane-wave pseudopotential method with the fully-relativistic ultrasoft pseudopotentials implemented in Quantum-ESPRESSO . The exchange and correlation effects are treated within the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) . We use the plane-wave cut-off energy of 52 Ry and the k-point mesh of 16 × 16 × 16 for the cubic Γ5g and Γ4g phases and 12 × 12 × 16 for the tetragonal M-1 phase in GaNMn3. Spin-orbit coupling is included in all the calculations. The AHC is calculated using the PAOFLOW code based on pseudo-atomic orbitals (PAO) . Tight-binding Hamiltonians are constructed from the non-self-consistent DFT calculations with a 16 × 16 × 16 k-point mesh for the Γ5g and Γ4g phases and a 12 × 12 × 16 k-point mesh for the M-1 phase. Then, the AHC are calculated with a 48 × 48 × 48 k-point mesh for the Γ5g and Γ4g phases and a 46 × 46 × 48 k-point mesh for the M-1 phase using the adaptive broadening method. The symmetry determined geometries of the AHC tensor are obtained using the FINDSYM code and the linear response symmetry code . The figures are created using VESTA and gnuplot . IV. Results Our DFT calculations show that the lattice constant of GaNMn3 is 3.869 Å, which is close to the experimental and previously calculated values . We find that the Γ5g phase is the ground state of GaNMn3, while the total energies of the Γ4g and M-1 phases are higher by 0.5 meV/f.u. and 193.5 meV/f.u., respectively. This result is consistent with the experimental observations showing the appearance of the Γ5g phase in GaNMn3 at low temperature . Recently, the M-1 phase was observed at high pressure in stoichiometrically deficient samples of GaNMn3 . phases in GaNMn3. Here, the ordinary Cartesian coordinates are used, i.e. x̂||, ŷ||, and ẑ||. Magnetic Phase Γ5g Γ4g M-1 Magnetic Space Group R3̅m R3̅m′ P4 AHC tensor [ 0 σxy −σxy −σxy 0 σxy σxy −σxy 0 ] [ 0 σxy 0 −σxy 0 0 0 0 0 ] and Γ4g (b) in the (111) Ga-Mn plane of GaNMn3. (a) The Γ5g phase preserves mirror planes (1̅10), (101̅) and (01̅1) (denoted by dashed lines) and is invariant under symmetry transformations M = M01̅1, M101̅ or M1̅10. (b) The Γ4g phase does not preserve the mirror planes, but is invariant under the product of mirror symmetry M and time reversal symmetry T. Red arrows denote the magnetic moments. Dotted lines denote the mirror planes. 4 The calculated local magnetic moment in the Γ5g and Γ4g phases is about 2.16 B/Mn atom, which is in a qualitative agreement with the experimental and previously calculated values . As expected, the non-collinear AFM configuration leads to a zero net magnetic moment. For the ferrimagnetic M-1 phase, we obtain 2.10 B per Mn atom in the (001) plane and 1.75 B per Mn atom in the (002) plane, resulting in the net magnetic moment of 2.52 B/f.u pointing along the z direction. These values are calculated using the lattice constant of the Γ5g phase and are slightly different from the experimental values, which is understandable due to the M-1 phase emerging only at high pressure . Since Γ5g and Γ4g have similar magnetic structures, we first investigate the AHE in these two phases of GaNMn3. Figure 3(a) shows the band structure of the Γ5g phase. Five bands cross the Fermi energy (EF). These dispersive bands are largely composed of the Mn-3d orbitals. It is seen that in some directions the bands are very close to each other. For example, along the -Z and R-  directions, there are nearly degenerate bands. seen that there are peaks along the R-Γ direction, which appear, according to Eq. (2), due to the small band separation between the three bands crossing EF along this direction close to the Γ point (see Fig. 3(a)). Along the Γ-Z direction, the Berry curvature Ωxy is zero within the computation accuracy. This is due to the mirror symmetry M1̅10 which holds along this high symmetry direction, resulting in Ωxy(0,0, kz) = −Ωxy(0,0, kz), and hence Ωxy(0,0, kz) = 0. In order to demonstrate the odd nature of the Berry curvature under the mirror symmetry M1̅10, we plot in Figure 3(c) the color map of Ωxy in the (110) plane, which is perpendicular to the (1̅10) plane. It is seen that hot spots (i.e. regions where the absolute values of the Berry curvature are large) appear around the k-points where the Fermi surfaces of different bands (indicated by solid lines in Fig. 3(c)) cross. As is evident from symmetry transformation M1̅10 (reflection with respect to the dashed line in Fig. 3(c)). Clearly, integration of the Ωxy over the whole Brillouin zone using Eq. (1) leads to zero AHC (within the computational accuracy) for the Γ5g phase. As seen from Figure 5(a), this property is independent of energy (Fermi energy). phase. Since the Γ4g phase can be obtained from the Γ5g phase by rotation of all magnetic moments around the axis by 90°, in the absence of SOC the band structure of the two phases should be identical. Thus, the subtle differences in the bands structures in Figures 3(a) and 3(d) are due to SOC. These differences are seen, particularly, along the Γ-Z and Γ-R along high symmetry path (b), and the color map of Ωxy in the (110) plane (c) for the Γ5g phase of GaNMn3. (d-f) The calculated band structure (d), Ωxy along high symmetry path (e), and the color map of Ωxy in the (110) plane (f) for the Γ4g phase of GaNMn3. The inset of (b) shows the Brillouin zone. The solid lines and the dashed line in (c) and (f) denotes the Fermi surfaces and the mirror plane M1̅10. GaNMn3 in the M-1 phase along high symmetry paths in the Brillouin zone. The inset of (b) shows the Brillouin zone. 5 directions, where there is a slight increase in the band splitting around the Fermi energy. GaNMn3 in the Γ4g phase and reveals pronounced peaks in Ωxy along the Γ-Z and Γ-R directions. According to the TM1̅10 symmetry, Ωxy is an even function of the wave vector k⃗ , i.e. Ωxy(kx, ky, kz) = Ωxy(−ky, −kx, −kz). This is reflected in the calculated color map of Ωxy in the (110) plane, which is shown in Figure 3(f). It is seen that the hot spots of Ωxy appear nearly at the same locations as for the Γ5g phase (Fig. 3 (c)). However, in the Γ4g phase, they are distributed symmetrically and have the same sign, proving that Ωxy is an even function with respect the TM1̅10 symmetry transformation. The AHC is calculated by integration of Ωxy according to Eq. (2). Figure 5(a) shows that σxy is finite as a function of energy and at the Fermi energy σxy = −40 Ω−1cm−1 . Clearly, the difference in the AHC between the Γ5g and Γ4g phases is due to the different magnetic space group symmetry of these phases. in the M-1 phase along high symmetry directions in the Brillouin zone. The band structure is more intricate compared to those for the Γ5g and Γ4g phases, because of a larger unit cell and more complex magnetic configuration. The presence on the net magnetic moment breaks time reversal symmetry, which makes the AHC non-zero. Figure 5(b) shows the calculated Berry curvature Ωxy along the high symmetry directions. It is seen that there are a number of pronounced broad peaks which are associated with the multiple low dispersive bands around the Fermi energy which are coupled by the spin-orbit interaction. the M-1 phase. At the Fermi energy, σxy = 454 Ω−1cm−1 which is much larger than the AHC in the Γ4g phase, due to the presence of the net magnetic moment in the M-1 phase. It is notable that σxy can be strongly enhanced in the M-1 phase by hole doping. For example, at E = EF – 0.04 eV, the calculated value of σxy is as large as 685 Ω−1cm−1 which is comparable to the AHC in Fe (σxy~700 Ω−1cm−1 ). V. Discussion Our results demonstrate that in the family of antiperovskite compounds, as represented by GaNMn3, the AHC is strongly dependent on the specific magnetic configuration. A significant change in the AHC can be produced by transitions between different magnetic phases. Such transitions can be driven by an external stimulus, provided that the energies of the different non- collinear magnetic phases are engineered to be nearly degenerate. In experiment, the Γ5g phase is found in the ANMn3 compounds with A = Zn, Ga, and the Γ4g phase is found for A = Ni, Ag, Sn . The M-1 phase can be produced by non- stoichiometry and pressure . These facts imply the sensitivity of the non-collinear magnetic phases to the chemical composition and lattice volume. Recently, monocrystalline ANMn3 films have been successfully grown on different substrates, such as SrTiO3, BaTiO3, and LSAT . This opens a possibility to engineer antiperovskite compounds with nearly degenerate energies of the different magnetic phases by proper doping and suitable epitaxial strain produced by the substrate. In particular, the dynamic strain generated by a piezoelectric substrate, such as PMN-PT, can be used to realize the reversible switching between different magnetic phases. Furthermore, the energy barrier between different magnetic phases, such as Γ5g and Γ4g, could be overcome by the spin transfer torque induced by a spin polarized current . This would lead to a magnetic phase transition between local energy minima without lattice distortion. These possibilities make the ANMn3 family of materials a promising platform for the AHE based applications of spintronic devices. VI. Summary In this work, we have studied the intrinsic AHC in different non- collinear magnetic phases of GaNMn3, as a representative of a broader materials family of antiperovskite compounds ANMn3 (A is a main group element). Based on the symmetry analysis and first-principles DFT calculations, we showed that the nearly degenerate non-collinear AFM Γ5g and Γ4g phases of GaNMn3 have zero and finite AHC, respectively. This difference was explained by the different magnetic space group symmetry of these phases. We also predicted that GaNMn3, in the non- collinear ferrimagnetic M-1 phase, exhibits large AHC which is comparable to the AHC in elemental ferromagnets, such as iron. and Γ4g (a) and M-1 (b) phases of GaNMn3. 6 We argued that by doping and strain it is possible to engineer the ANMn3 compounds where the energy difference between these magnetic phases could be small, so that an external stimulus, such as the dynamic strain or the spin transfer torque could produce switchable magnetic phase transitions. Our work demonstrates that the antiperovskite family of non-collinear magnetic materials is a good platform to realize the multiple AHE states in a single compound, which is promising for novel spintronic applications.