1 Structure and energetics of carbon-related defects in SiC (0001)/SiO2 systems revealed by first- principles calculations: Defects in SiC, SiO2, and just at their interface Takuma Kobayashi1 and Yu-ichiro Matsushita1 1Laboratory for Materials and Structures, Institute of Innovative Research, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Yokohama 226-8503, Japan We report first-principles calculations that reveal the atomic forms, stability, and energy levels of carbon-related defects in SiC (0001)/SiO2 systems. We clarify the stable position (SiC side, SiO2side, or just at the SiC/SiO2 interface) of defects depending on the oxidation environment. Under an O-rich condition, the di-carbon antisite ((C2)Si) in the SiC side is stable and critical for n-channel MOSFETs, whereas the di-carbon defect (Si-C-C-Si) at the interface becomes critical under an O-poor condition. Our results suggest that the oxidation of SiC under a high- temperature O-poor condition is favorable in reducing the defects, in consistent with recent experimental reports. 2 Silicon carbide (SiC) has attracted increasing attention as a suitable material for next-generation power devices, owing to its superior physical properties (e.g., wide bandgap, high critical electric field, and high thermal conductivity).1,2) One of the unique advantages of SiC is that it can be thermally- oxidized to form an insulator, silicon dioxide (SiO2), on its surface. Thus, metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistors (MOSFETs) have been recognized as a strong candidate for power switching devices.2) Despite their great potential, SiC MOSFETs have suffered from the low channel mobility, which is certainly due to the high interface state density (DIT) of SiC/SiO2 systems (~ 1013 eV-1cm-2) near the conduction band edge (EC) of SiC.2-7) Due to this high DIT, which is thousand-fold higher than that in limited by the carrier trapping effect by the interface states, even after proper interface nitridation.7) Although the physical origin of the interface states is not identified yet, carbon-related defects have widely been believed as the major origin of interface states. In fact, a study based on internal photoemission (IPE) suggested the existence of carbon clusters near the SiC/SiO2 interface.9) A recent report based on secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) also suggested the evidence of carbon- related defects and discussed the correlation between the interface quality and the excess carbon density.10) Theoretical calculations also focused on the carbon-related defects and suggested various forms Si16) structure just at the interface have been suggested. However, very few of the reports 3 systematically deal with the defects in the entire area around the interface (i.e., SiC side, SiO2 side, and just at the SiC/SiO2 interface). In this report, we provide systematic first-principles calculations that reveal the possible atomic forms of carbon-related defects in the SiC side, SiO2 side, and just at the SiC/SiO2 interface. We compare the formation energies of the defects under different chemical potential conditions to discuss the defect stability depending on the oxidation environment. We also calculate the localized levels induced by the defects for those which are stable. All of the calculations in this study were performed on the basis of density functional theory (DFT)21,22) by using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP).23,24) Both the structural optimization and one-electron energy level calculations were performed by using the Heyd-Scuseria- Ernzerhof (HSE06) hybrid functional25-27) to reproduce the experimental bandgap of SiC well. The projector augmented wave (PAW) method28) as implemented in the VASP code was applied in the calculations. The cutoff energy was 400 eV in the plane-wave-basis set, and the structural optimization was performed until the remaining forces of the structures became less than 40 meVÅ-1. A single k- point (the Γ point) was sampled during the calculations. We used a 128-atom 4H-SiC supercell (a 4×4×1 supercell), a 72-atom α-quartz-SiO2 supercell, and a 128-atom 4H-SiC surface slab as basic structures to investigate the carbon defects in SiC, SiO2, and just at their interface, respectively (see supplementary data in detail). We considered 114 patterns of initial structures (SiC-side: 23 patterns, SiO2-side: 12 patterns, SiC (0001)/SiO2 interface: 79 patterns) to investigate a variety of mono- and di-carbon defects, which is also explained in detail in the supplementary data. The formation energy, EF, of defects was calculated by EF = ED − E0 − ∑ Niμi i , (1) 4 where ED and E0 are the total energy of the simulation cell with and without the defect, respectively. Ni and μi are number of the removed (ni < 0) or added (ni > 0) i-type atom and its chemical potential, respectively. We supposed four extreme situations during the oxidation of SiC, where the chemical potentials of the atomic species were calculated as μSi = E(SiO2) − 2μO, μC = E(SiC) − μSi, μO = E(O2) 2 (C-rich, O-rich), (2) μSi = E(Si), μC = E(CO2) − 2μO, μO = E(SiO2)−μSi 2 (C-rich, O-poor), (3) μSi = E(SiO2) − 2μO, μC = E(CO2) − 2μO, μO = E(O2) 2 (C-poor, O-rich), (4) μSi = E(Si), μC = E(SiC) − μSi, μO = E(SiO2)−μSi 2 (C-poor, O-poor). (5) dioxide (CO2) molecule, α-quartz SiO2, an oxygen (O2) molecule, and 4H-SiC per formula unit, respectively. We determined the relationships between the chemical potentials (Eqs. (2)-(5)) as follows; First, we assumed chemical equilibrium among Si, O2, and SiO2 during the oxidation of SiC and considered the O-rich or O-poor condition, where μSi and μO are determined as μSi = E(SiO2) − either SiC or CO2, and μC was determined as μC = E(SiC) − μSi or μC = E(CO2) − 2μO, resulting in Eqs. in this study. As we approximated the SiC/SiO2 interface with an H-terminated SiC surface slab (see supplementary data), the chemical potential of an H atom is also needed to calculate the formation energy (Eq. (1)), which was calculated as μH = E(SiH4)−μSi 4 , (6) molecule per formula unit. Note that the H atoms were introduced in order to eliminate the fictitious 5 dangling bonds in the calculation model (see supplementary data). We adopted E(SiH4) in calculating μH, since most of the H atoms were used to terminate the fictitious Si-dangling bonds. We obtained the temperature dependence of enthalpy, H(T), and entropy, S(T), of gas molecules, O2, CO, CO2, and SiH4 at standard state pressure (p0 = 0.1 MPa) from thermochemical tables29) to correct their energies at finite temperature. Fig. 1. Temperature dependence of defect formation energies in comparison with the energies of gaseous CO and CO2 molecules at the (a) C-rich, O-rich and (b) C-rich, O-poor limits. The zeros of the formation energies are set at the energy of a CO molecule. The structure of the defects (#1 - #10) is depicted in Fig. 2. Lines in dark contrast (red, blue, and black) indicate the defects stable at 1600 K, which is about the typical experimental temperature of SiC oxidation. The red, blue, and black solid lines indicate the defects in SiC side, SiO2 side, and just at the SiC/SiO2 interface, respectively. Green lines indicate the gaseous CO and CO2 molecules. (b) (a) -4 -2 0 2 4 Formation Energy / eV Temperature / K C-rich, O-rich #2 SiC/SiO2 + CO SiC/SiO2 + CO2 #1 #4 #3 #5 -4 -2 0 2 4 Formation Energy / eV Temperature / K C-rich, O-poor SiC/SiO2 + CO SiC/SiO2 + CO2 #6 #7 #10 #8 #9 6 Fig. 2. Structure of the defects stable at 1600 K, which is about the typical experimental temperature of SiC oxidation. The structure is listed in order of stability, depending on the oxidation environment (the C-rich, O-rich and C-rich, O-poor limits). The blue, brown, red, and small white balls are the Si, C, O, and H atoms, respectively. Note that the H atoms are fictitious, and in the realistic situation, defects are supposed to be attached to either Si or O atoms of amorphous SiO2 instead of H atoms. in SiC (0001)/SiO2 systems. Here, the energies of gaseous CO and CO2 molecules are also shown for comparison. The structure of the carbon defects is depicted in Fig. 2. At the O-rich limit (Fig. 1 (a)), the formation energies of defects #1-#5 are quite low at 1600 K, which is about the typical experimental temperature of SiC oxidation, and even comparable with the energies of gaseous CO and CO2 molecules. Such a result indicates that, during the oxidation of SiC under a condition close to the O-rich limit, a significant portion of C atoms will favor staying around the interface to create defects than to be ejected as CO or CO2 molecules. At the O-poor limit (Fig. 1 (b)), in contrast, the formation energies of the defects are relatively high compared to the energies of CO and CO2 molecules. Therefore, in the viewpoint of static energetics, oxidation under the O-poor condition is more favorable than that under the O-rich condition in reducing the carbon defects at a SiC/SiO2 interface. 7 When looking at the temperature dependences, CO and CO2 molecules become more stable compared to the carbon defects at higher temperatures, suggesting that oxidation at higher temperatures is also favorable. In fact, a recent experimental study proved that high-temperature oxidation at 1450○C (~ 1720 K) combined with rapid cooling reduces the defects at a SiC (0001)/SiO2 interface.30) Also, post- oxidation annealing in very-low oxygen partial pressure argon (Ar) ambient at 1500○C (~ 1770 K), of which condition is considered to be close to the O-poor limit (Fig. 1 (b)), reduces defects at a SiC (0001)/SiO2 interface.31) Such results can be qualitatively explained by our calculation results. Fig. 3. Calculated electron energy levels for the defects depicted in Fig. 2. EC and EV are the conduction and valence band edges of 4H-SiC. Note that the energy levels for interface defects (#1, #3- #8, and #10) may contain an error of < 0.4 eV since the calculated bandgap (3.46 - 3.60 eV) is overestimated compared to the experiment one (3.26 eV2) at RT). The overestimation and variation of the calculated bandgap are attributable to the application of the slab model (see supplementary data) and to the hybridization of the defect states with the conduction and valence band states. The charge transition levels for SiC-side (#2) and SiO2-side (#9) defects are taken from Refs. 32 and 14, respectively. The results of both h- and k-site defects are shown for the SiC-side defect (#2). EC EV #1 Si-CO-CO2 #3 #4 Si-CO-CO-Si #5 Si-(CO)-CO2 EV+0.6 eV EC-0.02 eV EV+0.03 eV EV+0.7 eV EC-0.4 eV ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑ #6 Si-C-C-Si #7 Si-C-C-O-Si EC-0.1 eV #10 Si3-C #8 Si2-C-C-O EV-0.04 eV EC-0.9 eV ↑ EC EV #2 (C2)Si #9 Si2-C-C-Si2 EC-0.1 eV (h) EC-0.4 eV (k) EV+1.6 eV (h) EV+1.7 eV (k) EV+1.1 eV (k) EV+1.0 eV (h) EC EV-0.2 eV 8 condition at 1600 K. In Fig. 2, we see that the defects with O atoms tend to appear as stable forms in stable and especially critical for n-channel MOSFETs, since it creates a defect level very near EC (about EC − 0.1 eV for h-site and EC − 0.4 eV for k-site defect: Fig. 3).32) Under the O-rich condition the creation of (C2)Si by lowering the formation energies of silicon vacancy (VSi) and carbon clusters at the same time. The existence of (C2)Si near the SiC/SiO2 interface is also predicted in . Many CO2 (#5), are stable under the O-rich condition and create defect levels relatively close to the valence band edge (EV) of SiC (Fig. 3). Thus, they are critical for p-channel MOSFETs. For the O-poor condition, the interface carbon-dimer defect (Si-C-C-Si, #6) is most stable and critical for n-channel MOSFETs, since it creates a defect level very near EC (about EC − 0.1 eV: Fig. 3). For p-channel MOSFETs, the O-poor condition seems to be quite favorable and there are few stable defects which create defect levels near EV inside the bandgap (Fig. 3). As explained in the caption of Fig. 3, however, the calculated energy levels of interface defects (#1, #3- #8, and #10) may contain an error of < 0.4 eV. In such a case, the Si3-C (#10) defect may create a defect level inside the bandgap near EV and hinder electrical characteristics of p-channel MOSFETs. However, since the Si3-C (#10) defect owns a C-dangling bond, the defect level would be relatively easily passivated by hydrogen annealing. In summary, we investigated the possible atomic forms of carbon-related defects in SiC side, SiO2 side, and just at the SiC (0001)/SiO2 interface. Our results indicate that oxidation of SiC under an O- 9 rich condition, especially at low temperatures, results in the creation of critical defects both for n- and p-channel MOSFETs. For instance, the di-carbon antisite in the SiC side ((C2)Si (#2)) is stable under the O-rich condition and creates a defect level near EC, being crucial for n-channel MOSFETs. As critical defects for p-channel MOSFETs, many types of interface carbon-dimer defects, such as Si- they create defect levels relatively close to EV. Thus, in the viewpoint of static energetics, we suggest the oxidation of SiC at a high-temperature O-poor condition in order to reduce the carbon defects. Even at such a condition, however, a certain number of carbon-dimer defects (Si-C-C-Si, #6) may remain just at the interface and create defect levels very near EC. In realizing high-performance n- channel MOSFETs, this defect should be somehow further reduced. Acknowledgments Computations were performed mainly at the Center for Computational Science, University of Tsukuba, and the Supercomputer Center at the Institute for Solid State Physics, The University of Tokyo. The authors acknowledge the support from JSPS Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (A) (Grant Nos. 18H03770 and 18H03873). 10