1 Structural, magnetic, and electrical properties of collinear antiferromagnetic heteroepitaxy cubic Mn3Ga thin films Hyun-Woo Bang1, Woosuk Yoo1, Chungman Kim1, Sunghun Lee2, Jiyeong Gu3, Yunchang Park4, Kyujoon Lee5 and Myung-Hwa Jung1,* 1Department of Physics, Sogang University, Seoul 04107, Republic of Korea 2Department of Physics and Astronomy, Sejong University, Seoul 05006, Republic of Korea 3Department of Physics and Astronomy, California State University LongBeach, Long Beach, CA 90840, USA 4National nanofab center, Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea 5Institute of Physics, Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Mainz 55128, Germany Abstract Although a cubic phase of Mn3Ga with an antiferromagnetic order has been theoretically predicted, it has not been experimentally verified in a bulk or film form. Here, we report the structural, magnetic, and electrical properties of antiferromagnetic cubic Mn3Ga (C-Mn3Ga) thin films, in comparison with ferrimagnetic tetragonal Mn3Ga (T-Mn3Ga). The structural analyses reveal that C-Mn3Ga is hetero- epitaxially grown on MgO substrate with the Cu3Au-type cubic structure, which transforms to T- Mn3Ga as the RF sputtering power increases. The magnetic and magnetotransport data show the antiferromagnetic transition at TN = 400 K for C-Mn3Ga and the ferrimagnetic transition at TC = 820 K for T-Mn3Ga. Furthermore, we find that the antiferromagnetic C-Mn3Ga exhibits a higher electrical resistivity than the ferrimagnetic T-Mn3Ga, which can be understood by spin-dependent scattering mechanism. Keywords: Heusler compound, antiferromagnetic cubic material, magnetic transition, hetero-epitaxy * Corresponding author: Tel.: +82 2 705 8828, E-mail: mhjung@sogang.ac.kr 2 Introduction Most of Heusler compounds crystallize in the cubic L21 structure, where special attention has been focused on half-metallic ferromagnetism to exhibit a metallic behavior in one spin channel and an insulating behavior in the other spin channel, resulting in complete spin polarization of electrons at the Fermi level . Among them, Mn-based Heusler compounds have been received of great interest due to the tetragonally distorted structure showing half-metallic ferrimagnetism , which has an advantage of low saturation magnetization requisite for spin-transfer-torque based spin devices . The magnetization of tetragonal Mn3Ga vanishes over a wide range of temperature because the magnetic moments of two Mn sublattices are antiferromagnetically aligned with different magnitude . However, the tetragonal distortion tends to destroy the compensated ferrimagnetism as well as the half-metallic behavior . In theory, a cubic phase of Mn3Ga is predicted to display half-metallicity with collinear antiferromagnetic order, anticipating both complete spin polarization and zero net magnetic moment , which are meaningful to lower energy loss in spintronic device applications. However, the cubic phase of Mn3Ga has not been experimentally verified yet in a bulk or film form. There has been only one report on nanostructured ribbons of cubic Mn3Ga phase, built with nano-sized particles, which are made by quenching method of arc melting and melt spinning . Unfortunately, the cubic antiferromagnetic phase is not thermally stable and undergoes phase transitions to tetragonal ferrimagnetic phase at 600 K and to hexagonal antiferromagnetic phase at 800 K. In the present work, we have successfully fabricated hetero-epitaxial Mn3Ga films with stable cubic phase by using RF magnetron sputtering method. We report the structural, magnetic, and electrical properties of the cubic Mn3Ga (C-Mn3Ga), in comparison with the tetragonal phase (T- Mn3Ga). The structural analyses reveal that C-Mn3Ga deposited with low RF power crystallizes in the disordered Cu3Au-type structure, and it transforms to T-Mn3Ga as the power increases. We find the antiferromagnetic transition at TN = 400 K for C-Mn3Ga, while the ferrimagnetic transition at TC = 800 K for T-Mn3Ga. Furthermore, the electrical resistivity is higher in the antiferromagnetic phase of C-Mn3Ga than that in the ferrimagnetic phase of T-Mn3Ga. 3 Experimental Details The films of Mn3Ga were deposited on MgO(001) substrate using RF magnetron sputtering with a base pressure of 1.0 × 10-6 Torr. The RF power was varied from 10 W to 55 W with a constant substrate temperature of 400oC and Argon pressure of 2mTorr during the deposition. The crystal structure of the samples was determined by using X-ray diffraction (XRD Bruker AXS D8 Discover diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation). In addition, high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM FEI Tecnai G2 F30 S-TWIN) and transmission electron diffraction (TED) were used for detailed structural investigation of Mn3Ga with MgO substrate. The surface morphology and relative Mn composition were measured using the scanning electron microscope (SEM) and electron dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDX JEOL JSM-6700F). The magnetic properties and electron- transport properties were measured using a superconducting quantum interference device-vibrating sample magnetometer (SQUID-VSM Quantum Dsign MPMS) where the magnetic field was swept from -7 T to 7 T and temperature range 2 ~ 300 K. The temperature dependence of magnetization with high temperature was measured from 300 K to 800 K by using a physical property measurement system (VSM PPMS). Results and Discussion The structural evolution with varying the deposition conditions has been investigated by the X- ray diffraction (XRD) measurements. Figure 1(a) shows the XRD patterns of Mn3Ga films grown with various deposition powers of the RF magnetron sputtering system. As the RF power decreases from 50 to 25 W, the D022 tetragonal phase of Mn3Ga (T-Mn3Ga in Fig. 1(b)) is slowly transformed to the cubic Mn3Ga phase (C-Mn3Ga in Fig. 1(c)) with the disordered Cu3Au-type (L12) structure. Besides the peaks from MgO substrate, the XRD patterns mainly show three different peaks from the samples, which are two (002) and (004) tetragonal peaks and one (002) cubic peak. For the films deposited with high powers (P > 43 W), there are two dominant peaks at 24.99 and 51.28 which coincide with the (002) and (004) peaks of the D022 tetragonal structure, respectively. For the films 4 grown with low powers (P < 41 W), we observe a peak at 48.27 which is matched with the (002) peak of the disordered L12 cubic structure . In the intermediate RF powers (41 W ≤ P ≤ 43 W), a mixture of both tetragonal and cubic phases is found even though the diffraction peaks become broader than those of single phase of T-Mn3Ga or C-Mn3Ga. It is clear that the structural phase change from the tetragonal structure to the cubic structure occurs as the RF power decreases. The lattice parameters obtained from the XRD analyses for T-Mn3Ga are c = 7.11 Å and a = 3.89 Å by setting c/a = 1.83, which are the same values reported by other literatures . For C-Mn3Ga, we estimate the lattice parameter of a = c = 3.76 Å, which is consistent with that in the nanostructured ribbons of Mn3Ga proposed to have the Cu3Au-type cubic structure . Here, it should be pointed out that the lattice mismatch of C-Mn3Ga with the MgO substrate (a = c = 4.21 Å) is larger than that of T- Mn3Ga, and the C-Mn3Ga phase is not a stable phase in nature. Nevertheless, we obtain epitaxial films of both T-Mn3Ga and C-Mn3Ga, which are demonstrated by the in-plane phi scans. The representative plots are shown in Figs. 1(d) and (e), where the peaks are observed at 90 degree intervals indicating four-fold symmetry. The results suggest that both T- and C- Mn3Ga films on MgO substrate are epitaxially grown with high quality. To elucidate the epitaxy of C-Mn3Ga, we have performed the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and transmission electron diffraction (TED) measurements. Fig. 2(a) shows the TEM image of C-Mn3Ga deposited with the RF power of 25 W. The two different layers of MgO(100) substrate and C-Mn3Ga sample are clearly distinguished in the TEM image. The thickness of C-Mn3Ga is about 10 nm. In Fig. 2(b), we observe two distinct TED patterns corresponding to (200) orientation of C- Mn3Ga and MgO with four-fold symmetry, in consistent with the result of XRD pi scan experiments. The lattice parameters from the TED results are estimated to be a = c = 3.78 Å and 4.21 Å for C- Mn3Ga and MgO, respectively, which also agree well with the values from the XRD results. The lattice mismatch between C-Mn3Ga and MgO is about 10.2%, which is too large to consider the epitaxial growth of C-Mn3Ga phase. In order to investigate the microstructure at the interface between C-Mn3Ga and the MgO, we have taken a magnified image at the interface. Figure 2(c) shows the magnified TEM image of the area in the red box of Fig. 2(a). The atoms of C-Mn3Ga are marked with 5 red circles in the upper part and the atoms of MgO are marked with yellow circles in the lower part. It is clearly seen that there is an atomic stacking ratio of 10:9 between C-Mn3Ga and MgO at the interface with small dislocation of a few atomic layers. This kind of growth mechanism is well known in hetero-epitaxial thin films with a large lattice mismatch of more than 9% . In the hetero- epitaxial growth, the films are grown by domain-matching epitaxy. In the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the surface morphology shown in Figs. 2(d) and (e), the domain boundaries are observed in C-Mn3Ga, compared with the flat surface in T-Mn3Ga. This difference in domain structure would be a natural feature when considering the domain-matching epitaxial growth. The most prominent change in the crystal structure is clearly seen in the magnetism. We probe the magnetic transition temperatures of two T-Mn3Ga and C-Mn3Ga phases by measuring high- temperature magnetization up to 820 K. Figure 3(a) shows the temperature dependence of remanent magnetization for T-Mn3Ga, measured when the external magnetic field is removed after field cooling. The magnetization abruptly increases below TC = 800 K corresponding to the ferrimagnetic transition temperature of T-Mn3Ga. For C-Mn3Ga, on the other hand, we have measured the temperature dependent magnetization in an applied magnetic field of 1 kOe because of no remanence. In Figure 3(b), the magnetization exhibits a sharp peak at TN = 400 K, which is close to the temperature proposed as an antiferromagnetic transition temperature in the cubic phase of Mn3Ga . These magnetic data recorded in thin films are different from those taken with nano-ribbons , where the antiferromagnetic cubic Mn3Ga undergoes multiple magnetic and structural transitions to ferrimagnetic tetragonal phase at 600 K and to antiferromagnetical hexagonal phase at 800 K, and they are thermally irreversible. The irreversibility has been explained by the unstable cubic phase of Mn3Ga in nature because the cubic phase is obtained only by a nonequilibrium synthesis process such as rapid quenching from a very high temperature. However, in our case of a thin-film form, we obtain a quite stable cubic phase of Mn3Ga, which may be related to a strain effect of the MgO substrate. Notably, we obtain two different stable phases of ferrimagnetic T-Mn3Ga and antiferromagnetic C- Mn3Ga simply by changing the RF deposition power. As aforementioned, the lattice mismatch between Mn3Ga sample and MgO substrate is large (~ 10.2%). When such materials are deposited on 6 the substrate with a large lattice mismatch, higher kinetic energy is necessary to overcome the energy barrier of metastable state and achieve the stable state. In the present case, the metastable state is cubic phase of Mn3Ga and the stable state is the tetragonal phase of Mn3Ga, and the higher deposition power means higher kinetic energy giving rise to the deposition of stable T-Mn3Ga phase. On the other hand, the lower deposition power could result in the growth of metastable C-Mn3Ga phase . Figs. 3(c)-(e) show the magnetization M(H) curves at room temperature for the three typical phases of T-Mn3Ga, M-Mn3Ga, and C-Mn3Ga. The magnetic fields are applied perpendicular and parallel to the film plane, and the background signals from the diamagnetic substrate are subtracted. In Fig. 3(c), T-Mn3Ga exhibits clear hysteresis loop in the out-of-plane configuration, indicating the perpendicular magnetic anisotropy found in a tetragonal system . The saturation magnetization and anisotropy constant values are extracted to be MS = 220 emu/cc and Keff = 0.97×106 J/m3, which are consistent with previous results . In Fig. 3(d) for M-Mn3Ga deposited with an intermediate power of 43 W, which is a mixture of the cubic and tetragonal phases, the saturation magnetization is approximately three times lower than that of T-Mn3Ga. The low saturation magnetization is due to the appearance of the cubic phase of Mn3Ga. In other words, the total volume of ferromagnetic component decreases compared to the pure T-Mn3Ga phase. In Fig. 3(e), C-Mn3Ga shows no hysteresis behavior but only a linear field dependence, demonstrating the antiferromagnetic order. Note that all the samples show abrupt change at low magnetic fields, which may come from small misalignment from the c axis or small misorientation in lattice. Mn3Ga obtained at room temperature for the field along the c axis. The results are in good agreement with the M(H) curves. We observe clear hysteresis loops for T-Mn3Ga and M-Mn3Ga, whereas no hysteresis loop is found in C-Mn3Ga. Here it is noteworthy that there is a slight shift of the hysteresis loop in M-Mn3Ga, which is an indication of exchange bias effect. If the ferrimagnetic states of T- Mn3Ga coexist with the antiferromagnetic states of C-Mn3Ga, the exchange bias effect can be expected. The shift of hysteresis loop is quite small because the magnetic field and temperature 7 required for the conventional exchange bias effect are too low enough to affect the exchange bias. From the high-field data with linear dependence, we calculate the carrier density of n = 1.0  1020, 1.3  1020, and 1.9  1020 cm-3 for T-Mn3Ga, M-Mn3Ga, and C-Mn3Ga, respectively. These values lie in poor metallic regime, which is necessary for later discussion on the electrical transport. We investigate the temperature dependence of electrical resistivity (T) for C-, M-, and T-Mn3Ga. The results are displayed in Fig. 4(a). Since M-Mn3Ga can have dominant contributions from the different volume of mixed C- and T-Mn3Ga phases, we select two different M-Mn3Ga films deposited with the RF powers of 43 and 41 W, which correspond to tetragonal- and cubic-phase dominant samples, respectively. As shown in Fig. 4(a), the electrical resistivity of T-Mn3Ga is distinct from that of C-Mn3Ga, i.e., they display very different behavior not only in temperature dependence but also in magnitude. T-Mn3Ga displays metallic behavior, C-Mn3Ga exhibits semiconducting behavior, and M- Mn3Ga shows the intermediate behavior depending on the dominant phase; (T) of the tetragonal- phase dominant M-Mn3Ga (43 W) is close to that of T-Mn3Ga and (T) of the cubic-phase dominant M-Mn3Ga (41 W) is close to that of C-Mn3Ga. The resistivity values are also changed sequentially depending on the structural change. According to the carrier density estimated from the Hall measurements, C-Mn3Ga has more carriers than T-Mn3Ga, so that (T) of C-Mn3Ga must be lower than that of T-Mn3Ga. However, we observe the opposite behavior in experiment. The carrier mobility estimated from the carrier density and resistivity value is 1,400, 950, and 510 cm2/Vs for T-Mn3Ga, M-Mn3Ga, and C-Mn3Ga, respectively, suggesting that the electrical resistivity is governed mostly by the carrier mobility. One possible explanation for the difference between T-Mn3Ga and C-Mn3Ga is the effect of grain boundary scattering on the electron transport. As shown in the SEM images in Fig. 2(d) and (e), more grain boundaries exist in C-Mn3Ga, resulting in the reduced carrier mobility and the increased electrical resistivity. However, this grain boundary effect cannot explain the intermediate behavior of M-Mn3Ga. Another explanation can be the spin-dependent scattering mechanism, which is normally discussed in giant magnetoresistance effect . The electrical resistance is larger for the collinear antiferromagnetic spin configuration. 8 Since the electrical transport is strongly affected by the magnetic order in magnetic materials, it is useful to compare magnetoresistance with magnetization. As displayed in Fig. 4(b) and (c), clear two peaks in the magnetoresistance of T-Mn3Ga coincides with the sharp peaks of differential magnetization data at HC = 15 kOe. On the other hand, no anomaly is found in C-Mn3Ga, where the magnetoresistance changes by the order of 0.1% of the total resistance. Conclusions Our results show that the cubic phase of Mn3Ga can be stabilized and manipulated by reducing the deposition power in RF magnetron sputtering. Notably, depending on the crystal structure of Mn3Ga, two distinct magnetic phases have been observed experimentally; cubic Mn3Ga (C-Mn3Ga) and tetragonal Mn3Ga (T-Mn3Ga). The XRD and TEM analyses show that C-Mn3Ga is hetero- epitaxially grown on MgO substrate in spite of large lattice mismatch. From the magnetic field and temperature dependent magnetization measurements, we confirm C-Mn3Ga to be antiferromagnetic with TN = 400 K and T-Mn3Ga to be ferrimagnetic with TC = 800 K. The electrical transport data provide poor metallicity in C-Mn3Ga, which can be understood by spin-dependent scattering in collinear antiferromagnetic spin structure. These results enlarge the family of Heusler compounds and pave a new way to the engineering of new antiferromagnetic material for future spintronic device applications. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (No. 2016M3A7B4910400, 2017R1A2B3007918). 9