1 Enhanced flexoelectricity at reduced dimensions revealed by mechanically tunable quantum tunnelling Saikat Das1,2, Bo Wang3, Tula R. Paudel4, Sung Min Park1,2, Evgeny Y. Tsymbal4, Long- Qing Chen3, Daesu Lee5* and Tae Won Noh1,2* 1Center for Correlated Electron Systems, Institute for Basic Science (IBS), Seoul 08826, Korea. 2Department of Physics and Astronomy, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Korea. 3Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, USA. 4Department of Physics and Astronomy & Nebraska Center for Materials and Nanoscience, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Nebraska 68588, USA. 5Department of Physics, Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), Pohang 37673, Korea Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to D.L. (email: dlee1@postech.ac.kr) and T.W.N. (email: twnoh@snu.ac.kr). 2 Abstract Flexoelectricity is a universal electromechanical coupling effect whereby all dielectric materials polarize in response to strain gradients. In particular, nanoscale flexoelectricity promises exotic phenomena and functions, but reliable characterization methods are required to unlock its potential. Here, we report anomalous mechanical control of quantum tunnelling that allows for characterizing nanoscale flexoelectricity. By applying strain gradients with an atomic force microscope tip, we systematically polarize an ultrathin film of otherwise nonpolar SrTiO3, and simultaneously measure tunnel current across it. The measured tunnel current exhibits critical behaviour as a function of strain gradients, which manifests large modification of tunnel barrier profiles via flexoelectricity. Further analysis of this critical behaviour reveals significantly enhanced flexocoupling strength in ultrathin SrTiO3, compared to that in bulk, rendering flexoelectricity more potent at the nanoscale. Our study not only suggests possible applications exploiting dynamic mechanical control of quantum effect, but also paves the way to characterize nanoscale flexoelectricity. Introduction Polar materials form the basis of electromechanics, optoelectronics, and studies on emerging quantum states1. Such materials belong to only 10 of the 32 possible crystal point groups, and sometimes exhibit problematic size effects2. Under such circumstances, flexoelectricity3вҖ“5 offers unique advantages6вҖ“15. Strain gradients can intrinsically polarize all materials with arbitrary crystal symmetries3вҖ“5, ranging from dielectrics16 to semiconductors11 and from bio-materials17 to two-dimensional materials. Importantly, such ubiquitous flexoelectric effects potentially become even larger at the nanoscale, as strain gradients scale inversely with material size. Nanoscale strain-graded dielectrics (e.g., a strain variation вҲҶu = 3 1% within 1 nm) encompass enormous strain gradients (to вҲӮu/вҲӮx = 107 mвҲ’1) and may exhibit remarkable phenomena and flexoelectric functionality6вҖ’15. Furthermore, nanoscale flexoelectricity can fundamentally differ from the conventional bulk flexoelectricity, e.g., due to a nonlinear polarization response under large strain gradients9. Thus, characterizing nanoscale flexoelectricity, namely, the flexocoupling coefficient, is of great importance from both a fundamental and technological viewpoint. To characterize the flexocoupling coefficients at the nanoscale, it is necessary to identify a nanoscale phenomenon that can be actively controlled by the flexoelctric effect, which could allow quantifying the flexoelectric polarization as a function of strain-gradient. It is well established that the quantum tunnelling probability through a nanometer thick ferroelectric barrier layer sandwiched between two metallic electrodes sensitively depends on the polarization direction and its magnitude18вҖ’20. In this so-called ferroelectric tunnel device, the depolarization field, originating from the imperfect screening of ferroelectric polarization by the metallic electrodes, alters the intrinsic barrier height. For asymmetric electrodes, changing the polarization direction yields two different effective barrier heights, and subsequently leads to two discrete electroresistance states. Meanwhile, due to the converse piezoelectric effect, the barrier width can also modulate in response to the electric field applied during the tunnelling transport measurement21вҖ’25. This also leads to dissimilar electroresistance states. All these considerations, suggest a possibility of controlling quantum tunnelling by the flexoelectric effect, thereby quantifying the flexocoupling coefficient at the nanoscale. Here, we demonstrate that a systematic control of quantum tunnelling through a paraelectric ultrathin SrTiO3 (STO) film by strain-gradient induced flexoelectric polarization allows quantifying flexocoupling coefficient at the nanoscale. By applying the strain-gradients from a conductive scanning probe tip we simultaneously polarize and measure the tunnelling current across the film. With increasing strain-gradients, the tunnelling current exhibits an 4 asymmetric-symmetric crossover, which we attribute, based on the WentzelвҖ“KramersвҖ“Brillouin (WKB) modelling, to flexoelectric polarization-driven modification of the tunneling barrier profile. Furthermore, analyzing the modification of the barrier profile as a function of strain-gradients enables quantifying the flexocoupling coefficient, which we found to be significantly enhanced compared to the bulk. We discuss possible origins of this enhanced flexocoupling coefficient. Results Concept of flexoelectric control of quantum tunnelling atomic force microscope (AFM) tip (PtIr-coated) to apply strain gradients8 and simultaneously measure the tunnel current. We systematically generated giant strain gradients (up to > 107 mвҲ’1), as estimated by contact mechanics analysis (Fig. 1b and Methods). These strain gradients are much larger than those achievable using a conventional beam-bending approach, which generates gradients in the range of 10вҲ’1 mвҲ’1 (using micrometre-thick beams)16 to 102 mвҲ’1 (employing nanometre-thick beams)10. When an ultrathin dielectric layer becomes flexoelectrically polarized by a giant strain gradient, the resulting depolarization field and electrostatic contribution18вҖ’20 significantly modify the tunnel barrier profile (Figs. 2aвҖ’c). Therefore, we can utilize pure mechanical force by an AFM tip as a dynamic tool not only for systematically controlling quantum tunnelling, but also for characterizing nanoscale flexoelectricity. As a model system, we chose the archetypal dielectric material SrTiO3 (STO), which remains paraelectric down to a temperature of 0 K in bulk. We prepared homoepitaxial ultrathin STO films on (001)-oriented STO substrates with a conductive SrRuO3 (SRO) buffer layer. To avoid the off-stoichiometry-driven ferroelectric phase of STO 26 , we used an ultra-slow growth scheme27, combined with in situ post-annealing in oxygen to minimize oxygen vacancies. 5 Piezoresponse force microscopy confirmed that the STO films are indeed paraelectric (Supplementary Fig. 1). Notably, our geometry induced compressive strains in both the transverse x1 and longitudinal x3 directions (Fig. 1b and Supplementary Fig. 4), attributable to AFM tip-induced downward bending and pressing. Such three-dimensional compression of STO does not favour either ferroelectricity or piezoelectricity. This makes it possible to explore pure flexoelectric polarization, the electrostatic effect of which modifies the STO tunnel barrier18,19. Strain-gradient dependent tunnelling transport We measured the tunnel current across a nine unit cell-thick (i.e., ~3.5 nm-thick) STO as a function of the applied strain gradients. Our theoretical analysis reveals that the transverse strain gradients defined as, are an order of magnitude larger than the longitudinal strain gradients вҲӮu33/вҲӮx3 (Supplementary Note 2 and Supplementary Fig. 4); we thus considered only the вҲӮut/вҲӮx3 values. Figures 2dвҖ“f show the measured currentвҖ“voltage (IвҖ“V) curves for three representative вҲӮut/вҲӮx3 values (see Supplementary Fig. 2 for the entire set). For вҲӮut/вҲӮx3 < 1.56 Г— 107 mвҲ’1 (Fig. 2d), the IвҖ’V curves exhibit typical tunnelling characteristics (red solid line) and are highly asymmetric, manifesting rectifying behaviour. The forward current systematically increases with increasing вҲӮut/вҲӮx3, whereas the reverse current remains comparable to the noise level (~1 pA). When вҲӮut/вҲӮx3 attains a critical value, 1.56 Г— 107 mвҲ’1, the IвҖ’V curve became maximally asymmetric (Fig. 2e). Beyond a вҲӮut/вҲӮx3 of 1.56 Г— 107 mвҲ’1, however, the reverse current begins to increase, whereas the forward current increased only marginally, rendering the IвҖ’V curve more symmetric (Fig. 2f). Figure 2g emphasizes this critical behaviour by plotting rectification ratios (RR вүЎ |I+V/IвҖ’V|) as a function of вҲӮut/вҲӮx3. We 6 also observed a similar critical behaviour in the eleven unit-cell thick STO film (Supplementary Fig. 3). Before addressing how flexoelectricity could explain these results, we rule out other possible origins of the phenomena. First, the AFM tip-induced pressure did not cause any permanent surface damage to the STO film (Supplementary Fig. 5). Additionally, the mechanical control of electron tunnelling is reversible (Supplementary Fig. 6), excluding any involvement of an electrochemical process. We also considered the effect of strain on the STO tunnel barrier profiles. AFM tip-induced compressive strain per se would not only decrease the barrier width (вҲҶd вүӨ 0.2 nm) but also slightly increase the STO band gap28 and hence the barrier height. However, our detailed analysis show that the strain effect is too small to explain our observations (Supplementary Note 3). Furthermore, we confirmed that the strain-induced changes in electronic properties of SRO are too small to be responsible for the anomalous behaviour of tunnelling transport (Supplementary Note 6). Thus, the asymmetric-symmetric crossover is an intrinsic effect possibly attributable to flexoelectric polarization-induced modification of the tunnel barrier. Understanding and modelling the tunnelling transport To understand how the barrier profile affects tunnel current, we perform a one- dimensional WentzelвҖ“KramersвҖ“Brillouin (WKB) simulation of a metal-insulator-metal (M1- I-M2) heterostructure (Supplementary Note 4). In the experiment, вҖҳM1вҖҷ, вҖҳM2вҖҷ, and вҖҳIвҖҷ correspond to SRO, PtIr, and STO, respectively. Our calculations suggest that the observed rectifying tunnelling behaviour should originate from an asymmetric, trapezoidal barrier profile, with the barrier height ПҶ1 at the M1-I interface being smaller than the barrier height ПҶ2 at the I- M2 interface (as in Fig. 2a). Such an asymmetric tunnel barrier implies downward flexoelectric polarization (pointing towards the M1/I interface), and a higher probability of transmission to 7 the M1 electrode than in the reverse direction (to the M2 electrode). When flexoelectric polarization attains a critical value, the tunnel barrier becomes triangular, such that ПҶ1 = 0 (as in Fig. 2b), yielding the maximum rectifying behaviour. This explains the anomalous increase in RR in regime (A) (yellow) of Fig. 2h. When the flexoelectric polarization increases further, the conduction band minimum of STO could cross the Fermi level (as in Fig. 2c). This crossing metallizes the interfacial barrier layer and concomitantly decreases the effective barrier width d, as supported by first-principles calculations (Fig. 3, Supplementary Note 5, and Methods). For convenience, we describe this case using a negative ПҶ1 (Supplementary Fig. 10). As the RR of a triangular tunnel barrier is exponentially proportional to the barrier width d, the decrease in d would lower the RR, as shown in regime (B) (blue) of Fig. 2h. Notably, the barrier-asymmetry dependence of RR (Fig. 2h) strikingly resembles the experimentally observed strain-gradient dependence of RR (Fig. 2g); both exhibit the asymmetric-symmetric crossover. Therefore, we conclude that flexoelectric polarization-induced metallization near the SRO/STO interface manifests itself as an asymmetric-symmetric crossover in tunnelling transport. Next, to understand how the barrier profile varies with increasing вҲӮut/вҲӮx3, we fit the tunnel spectra of regime (A) to an analytical equation20 that describes tunnelling through a trapezoidal barrier (red solid line in Fig. 2d; see Methods and Supplementary Note 1). Taking into account the work functions of SRO (5.2 eV)29 and PtIr (5.6 eV)30, and the electron affinity of STO (3.9 eV)29, we set the intrinsic barrier heights ПҶ0,1 and ПҶ0,2 to 1.3 and 1.7 eV, respectively (black line in Fig. 2a). Furthermore, following simple electrostatics argument18,19, we constrain ОҙSRO and ОҙPtIt are the effective screening lengths of SRO and PtIr, respectively. Given that ОҙSRO вүҲ 0.5вҖ“0.6 nm 2 and ОҙPtIr < 0.1 nm, we set вҲҶПҶ1/вҲҶПҶ2 (= ОҙSRO/ОҙPtIr) to be 8. Figure 4a plots the fitted ПҶ1 and ПҶ2 values as a function of вҲӮut/вҲӮx3. Consistent with the WKB simulations, our 8 fitting yields highly asymmetric trapezoidal barrier profiles, where with increasing вҲӮut/вҲӮx3, ПҶ1 decreases from 0.57 to 0.34 eV, and ПҶ2 increases from 1.79 to 1.82 eV. Quantifying flexocoupling coefficient at the nanoscale Based on this вҲӮut/вҲӮx3 dependence of ПҶ1 and ПҶ2, we estimate the strength of effective flexoelectric coupling. The transverse strain gradient polarizes the STO layer through the flexoelectric effect, and the induced polarization can be expressed as P = Оө кһҸ feff кһҸ (вҲӮut/вҲӮx3), where Оө and feff are the dielectric permittivity and the effective flexocoupling coefficient of STO, respectively. In ultrathin STO, this flexoelectric polarization results in depolarization field ( / пӮө пҖӯP пҒҘ ) and modifies the tunnel barrier profile according to the following electrostatic equation (Supplementary Note 7)18,19 : (2) where e is the electronic charge and Ebi is the additional built-in field contribution that could arise from the work function difference between SRO and PtIr, surface dipoles31, and/or an offset between the calculated and actual strain gradients. As shown in Fig. 4b, the calculated (ПҶ2 вҖ“ ПҶ1)/ed varies almost linearly with вҲӮut/вҲӮx3 (grey solid line), giving a slope feff of 23 Вұ 1 V. In addition, fitting also yielded a nonzero contribution at вҲӮut/вҲӮx3 = 0 (i.e., 8вҖ“10Г—107 V mвҲ’1), corresponding to the built-in field Ebi. We now focus on the onset of asymmetric-symmetric crossover of tunnel current at (вҲӮut/вҲӮx3)c = 1.56 Г— 107 mвҖ’1, which also allows us to estimate feff. According to our simulation, this crossover is attributable to the polarization-induced trapezoidal-to-triangular transition of the tunnel barrier. At the critical вҲӮut/вҲӮx3 (or equivalently, at the critical P), we therefore expect 9 = 28 V. This value compares reasonably well to that (23 Вұ 1 V) obtained from fitting, demonstrating that our approach is innately consistent. Furthermore, using this feff, we simulated a three-dimensional profile of local P (Fig. 1c and Methods), and found that the average out-of-plane P was around 0.17 C mвҖ“2 for вҲӮut/вҲӮx3 = 1.6 Г— 107 mвҲ’1 (i.e., just above the critical вҲӮut/вҲӮx3). This value compares well to the predicted critical polarization (i.e., Pc = 0.16 C mвҲ’2; Supplementary Note 8), which again emphasizes the self-consistency of our approach. Discussion Interestingly, the estimated flexocoupling coefficient (23вҖ’28 V) is larger than KoganвҖҷs phenomenological estimate (1вҖ’10 V)3,5, and indeed an order of magnitude greater than the experimental value (~2.6 V) for bulk STO16 . To understand this enhancement, we first note that a nonlinear flexoelectric response could arise under large strain gradients, as demonstrated in several material systems9,32. By considering the nonlinear flexoelectricity, e.g., third-order response (Supplementary Note 9), we might explain the enhancement of feff under a huge вҲӮut/вҲӮx3. Additionally, a surface contribution fsurf can be involved33,34, which, combined with the bulk contribution fbulk, determines the overall coupling coefficient feff (= fsurf + fbulk) of a material. When considered separately, both fsurf and fbulk could be >10 V in magnitude but opposite in sign35. Our results may thus imply that only either the surface or bulk contribution becomes dominant in the ultrathin limit. To obtain a complete understanding of enhanced flexoelectricity in ultrathin STO, further systematic experimental and theoretical investigations will be required. In summary, we show that quantum tunnelling is mechanically tunable. Such mechanical tunability allows determining the flexocoupling strength at the nanoscale, which we found to be much enhanced compared to that in bulk. This finding emphasizes that flexoelectricity could become much more powerful at reduced dimensions due to not only a 10 large strain gradient, but also an enhanced coupling strength. We hope that this study would encourage the construction of flexocoupling coefficient databases at the nanoscale, and the design of high-performance flexoelectric devices. From a broader perspective, this study highlights several favourable aspects of nanoscale flexoelectricity. First, nanoscale flexoelectricity allows for the generation of large polarization in a continuous manner. We started from a nonpolar STO, and continuously polarized it with P up to 0.4 C mвҲ’2. Second, such a continuously tunable, large polarization can also generate a large electrostatic potential, which corresponds to a stationary effective electric field, as high as 109 V mвҲ’1. This can be useful for a large electric-field control of dielectrics, which has been challenging due to dielectric breakdown. 11 Methods Sample fabrication. SRO and STO thin films were sequentially grown on TiO2-terminated and (100)-oriented STO substrates. The growth dynamics and thicknesses were monitored by in situ reflection high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED). Film deposition was performed at 700В°C under oxygen partial pressures of 100 and 7 mTorr for SRO and STO, respectively. After deposition, films were annealed at 475В°C for 1 h in oxygen at ambient pressure and subsequently cooled to room temperature at 50В°C minвҖ’1. Structural characterization, namely, the reciprocal space mapping was performed to ensure that the STO film is strain-free (Supplementary Fig. 14). Tunnelling measurements. Current-voltage curves were obtained using an Asylum Research Cypher AFM at room temperature under ambient conditions. Conducting PtIr-coated metallic tips (NANOSENSORSTM PPP-EFM) with nominal spring constants 50вҖ“60 N mвҖ’1, and a dual- gain ORCA module, were used to measure currents. An electrical bias was applied through the conducting SRO electrode; this was swiped from вҖ’1 V to +1 V at a ramping rate of about 4 V sвҖ’1. The noise floor of the AFM system was about ~1 pA. To extract barrier heights from the tunnelling IвҖ’V curves, we used an analytical equation describing direct tunnelling through trapezoidal tunnel barriers20,36: 3 3 2 2 2 1 1 1 2 2 2 1 2 1 1 2 2 2 2 1 exp ) ( ) 2 2 3 ( ) sinh ) ( ) 2 2 2 2 ) ( ) 2 2 eV eV V eV eV eV I V b c V eV eV V пҒЎ пҒӘ пҒӘ пҒЎ пҒӘ пҒӘ пҒЎ пҒӘ пҒӘ пғ¬ пғј пғ© пғ№ пғҜ пғҜ пҖӯ пҖӯ пҖ« пғӯ пғҪ пғӘ пғә пғ¬ пғј пғ© пғ№ пғҜ пғҜ пғҜ пғҜ пғ« пғ» пғ® пғҫ пҒҖ пҖ« пҖӯ пҖӯ пҖ« пғӯ пғҪ пғӘ пғә пғҜ пғҜ пғ© пғ№ пғ« пғ» пғ® пғҫ пҖӯ пҖӯ пҖ« пғӘ пғә пғ« пғ» . (3) baseline, free electron mass, barrier width, and barrier height, respectively. As explained in the main text, our fittings imposed the constraints ПҶ2 = 1.7 + вҲҶПҶ and ПҶ1 = 1.3 вҖ“ 8вҲҶПҶ. In addition, we used a scaling factor to account for the increase in contact area with increasing contact 12 force, but this did not affect our principal results (i.e., the RRs, |I+V/IвҖ“V|). For smaller вҲҶПҶ values, we used the entire tunnelling spectra for fitting (Supplementary Figs. 2aвҖ“c). However, when larger distortions of the barrier profiles were apparent (i.e., at larger вҲҶПҶ values), we fitted the tunnelling spectra using smaller bias windows. Simulation of strain profile. The strain distribution in a 3.5 nm-thick STO thin film pressed with an AFM tip is obtained by solving the elastic equilibrium equation by using Khachaturyan microelasticity theory37 and the Stroh formalism of anisotropic elasticity38. The detailed procedure has been elaborated in previous works39. Here, we discretized three-dimensional space into 64 Г— 64 Г— 700 grid points and applied periodic boundary conditions along the x1 and x2 axes. The grid spacing was вҲҶx1 = вҲҶx2 = 1 nm and вҲҶx3 = 0.1 nm. Along the x3 direction, 35 layers were used to mimic the film; the relaxation depth of the substrate featured 640 layers to ensure that the displacement at the bottom of substrate was negligibly small. To estimate surface stress distribution that developed on AFM-tip pressing, we adopted the Hertz contact mechanics of the spherical indenter40 with a tip radius of 30 nm and a mechanical force of 1вҖ“7 ОјN. The YoungвҖҷs moduli and Poisson ratios of the Pt tip and the STO film were Etip = 168 GPa and П…tip = 0.38, and Efilm = 264 GPa and П…film = 0.24, adapted from reference 41. The electrostrictive and rotostrictive coupling coefficients of STO were adapted from reference 42. See Supplementary Note 2 for more details. Simulation of polarization profile. The polarization distribution under the mechanical load by an AFM tip can be calculated by self-consistent phase-field modeling43. The temporal evolution of polarization field P(x,t) is governed by the time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau equation, i.e., вҲӮP/вҲӮt = вҖ“L(ОҙF(P)/ОҙP), where L is the kinetic coefficient. The total free energy F can be expressed as43 13 0 0 1 2 1 1 1 1 ( )( ) ( 2 2 2 ( ) [ 2 i k ij i j ijkl i j k l ij i j ijkl i j k l ijkl i bulk elastic electri j k l ijkl j l i k k ijkl ijkl ij c grad ij kl kl ient fl i i ijkl i exo j l l P P PP PP P P t PP g x x P k c F f f f E P f x x f dV x f пҒЎ пҒЎ пҒў пҒұпҒұ пҒў пҒұпҒұ пҒұ пҒұ пҒұ пҒұ пҒұ пҒұ пҒҘ пҒҘ пҒҘ пҒҘ пҒҘ пҖҪ пҖ« пҖ« пҖ« пҖ« пӮ¶ пӮ¶ пҖ« пҖ« пҖ« пҖ« пҖ« пӮ¶ пӮ¶ пӮ¶ пӮ¶ пӮ¶ пҖ« пҖ« пҖӯ пҖӯ пҖӯ пҖ« пӮ¶ пӮ¶ пӮ¶ пҖҪ пғІ пғІ )] ij j k l x P dV пӮ¶пҒҘ пҖӯ пӮ¶ . (4) The bulk Landau free energy fbulk consists of two sets of order parameters, i.e., the spontaneous polarization P and the antiferrodistortive order parameter Оё, which represents the oxygen octahedral rotation angle of STO42. The flexoelectric contribution is considered as a Liftshitz invariant term as 1 ( ) 2 ij k flex ijkl ij k l l o f P f P x x пҒҘ пҒҘ пӮ¶ пҖӯ пӮ¶ пҖҪ пӮ¶ пӮ¶ . (5) The eigenstrain tensor Оө0 in the elastic energy density is given by 0 , ij ijkl k l ijkl k l ijkl k l Q P P F P пҒҘ пҒұ пҒұ пҖҪ пҖ« пҒҢ пҖӯ , (6) where the electrostrictive, rotostrictive, and converse flexoelectric couplings are considered via tensor Q, Оӣ and F. The coefficients used in constructing the total free energy F of STO single crystal were given in our previous works42,44. The transverse flexoelectric constant of STO estimated from experiments in present work were used (f12 = 25 V) while the other two flexoelectric component are assumed to be zero (i.e., f11 = f44 = 0) for simplicity. First-principles calculations. The atomic and electronic structure of the system was obtained using the density functional theory (DFT) implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP)45,46. The projected augmented plane wave (PAW) method was used to approximate the electron-ion potential47. The exchange and correlation potentials were calculated using the local spin density approximation (LSDA). In calculation, we employed a kinetic energy cutoff of 340 eV for PAW expansion, and a 6 Г— 6 Г— 1 grid of k points48 for Brillouin zone integration. The in-plane lattice constant was that of relaxed bulk STO (a = 3.86 Г…); the c/a ratio and the internal atomic coordinates were relaxed until the HellmanвҖ“Feynman 14 force on each atom fell below |0.01| eV Г…вҖ“1. The dielectric constant were calculated using density functional perturbation theory49вҖ“51. See Supplementary Note 5 for more details. Data availability All relevant data presented in this manuscript are available from the authors upon reasonable request.