1 Data-driven Exploration of Pressure-Induced Superconductivity in AgIn5Se8 Ryo Matsumotoa,d, Hiroshi Haraa,d, Zhufeng Houb, Shintaro Adachia, Hiromi Tanakae, Sayaka Yamamotoa,d,e, Yoshito Saitoa,d, Hiroyuki Takeyaa, Tetsuo Irifunef, Kiyoyuki Terakurac and Yoshihiko Takanoa,d aInternational Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (MANA), National Institute for Materials Science, 1-2-1 Sengen, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0047, Japan bResearch and Services Division of Materials Data and Integrated System (MaDIS), National Institute for Materials Science, 1-2-1 Sengen, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0047, Japan cCenter for Materials research by Information Integration (CMI2), National Institute for Materials Science, 1-2-1 Sengen, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0047, Japan dUniversity of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennodai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8577, Japan eNational Institute of Technology, Yonago College, 4448 Hikona, Yonago, Tottori 683-8502, Japan fGeodynamics Research Center, Ehime University, Matsuyama, Ehime 790-8577, Japan Abstract Candidates compounds for new thermoelectric and superconducting materials, which have narrow band gap and flat bands near band edges, were exhaustively searched by a high-throughput first-principles calculation from an inorganic materials database named AtomWork. We focused on AgIn5Se8 which has high density of state near the Fermi level. AgIn5Se8 was successfully synthesized as single crystals using a melt and slow cooling method. The single-crystal X-ray diffraction analysis revealed the obtained crystal is high quality without deficiencies. The valence states in AgIn5Se8 were determined to be Ag1+, In3+ and Se2- in accordance with a formal charge by the core level X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy analysis. The electrical resistance was evaluated under high pressure using a diamond anvil cell with boron-doped diamond electrodes. Although the sample was insulator with a resistance of above 40 MΩ at ambient pressure, the resistance markedly decreased with increase of the pressure, and a pressure-induced superconducting transition was discovered at 3.4 K under 52.5 GPa. The transition temperature increased up to 3.7 K under further pressure of 74.0 GPa. 2 1. Introduction The idea of using informatics techniques in conjunction with the data-driven approach based on high-throughput computation for functional materials design, namely materials informatics, recently has been carried out in practice and also has produced remarkable outcomes . For example, a combination of deep learning-assisted artificial intelligence (AI) and density functional theory (DFT) calculations enabled researchers within 10 days to find five synthesizable and stable organic molecules with desired properties of absorption wavelength . On the other hand, almost all superconducting materials have been discovered via the traditional carpet-bombing type experiments which were based on the experiences and inspirations of researchers. We have performed the data-driven approach to explore new pressure-induced superconductors using a database and the DFT calculation . In this particular screening, candidate compounds were selected by a specific band structure of “flat band” near a Fermi level . If the flat band crosses the Fermi level, superconductivity would be realized due to high a density of state (DOS) . For example, an existence of singularity of DOS, known as a van Hove singularity (vHs) is predicted near the Fermi level in compressed H3S with highest superconducting transition temperature (Tc) and high-Tc cuprates . Indeed, new pressure-induced superconductivity was discovered in real compounds of SnBi2Se4 and PbBi2Te4 through the high-throughput screening. One of the most interesting material is AgIn5Se8 in the screened-out candidates. There is no research considering this compound as a candidate of superconductor because of a relatively wide band gap . AgIn5Se8 is In2Se3-based pseudo-binary alloy, belongs to the AIBIII5CVI8-type semiconductor family which is focused on a candidate of solar cell materials . Carrier-tuned AgIn5Se8 is also expected as a candidate for a superior thermoelectric material . Moreover, since AgIn5Se8 equips high DOS near valence band edges, it could be expected the appearance of superconductivity by band-structure engineering using high pressure technique. To examine the appearance of superconductivity under high pressure, we have synthesized the sample of AgIn5Se8 in single crystals. The crystal structure, compositional ratio, and valence state of AgIn5Se8 single crystals were analyzed by the X-ray diffraction (XRD), energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry (EDX), and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), respectively. The electrical resistance of the obtained sample was evaluated under high pressure using a diamond anvil cell (DAC) with boron-doped diamond electrodes . 2. Electronic band structure under high pressures Electronic band structures of the selected material AgIn5Se8 were calculated under various pressures up to 70 GPa. The details of our screening scheme in the high-throughput first-principles calculations were given in our previous paper . Figure 1 shows the band structures and the total DOSs of AgIn5Se8 up to 70 GPa, obtained by the generalized gradient approximation. The valence band edges of AgIn5Se8 show a flat feature near the Fermi level. The band gap under ambient pressure is 0.24 eV which is wider than that of previous compounds of SnBi2Se4 and PbBi2Te4. Although the DOS at valence band edge increases with quite sharp peak like the van Hove singularity under 10 GPa, the band gap dose not decrease. The band gap gradually decreases with the 3 increase of the pressure from 20 GPa, and completely closes at 50 GPa, indicating an insulator-to-metal transition. According to the insensitive response for the applied pressure, critical pressure for superconductivity in AgIn5Se8 would be higher than 10-20 GPa of SnBi2Se4 and PbBi2Te4. The Tc would be enhanced under further pressure because the DOS near the Fermi level increases from 50 GPa to 70 GPa. by the generalized gradient approximation. 3. Experimental procedures 3.1 Sample synthesis Single crystals of AgIn5Se8 were grown by a melt and slow-cooling method. Starting materials of Ag powders (99.99%), In grains (99.98%) and Se chips (99.999%) were weighed in the stoichiometric composition of AgIn5Se8. The starting materials were loaded into an evacuated quartz tube and pre-reacted at 500oC for 10 hours. The resultant tube was heated at 1000oC for 20 hours and then slowly cooled to 600oC in 20 hours, followed by the homogenizing anneal at 500oC for 20 hours. 3.2 Characterization The single crystal XRD measurement was carried out by use of the XtaLAB mini (Rigaku) with Mo-K radiation ( = 0.71072 Å). The crystal structure was solved by the program SHELXT on the WinGX software and refined using the program ShelXle . The crystal structure was depicted by the software VESTA . The chemical composition was determined by the EDX, using the JSM-6010LA (JEOL). The valence state was estimated by the core level XPS analysis using the AXIS-ULTRA DLD (Shimadzu/Kratos) with monochromatic Al Kα X-ray radiation (hν = 1486.6 eV), operating under a 4 pressure of the order of 10-9 Torr. The samples were cleaved using scotch tape in a highly vacuumed pre-chamber of the order of 10-7 Torr. A binding energy scale was established by referencing the C 1s value of an adventitious carbon. A background signal was subtracted by using the active Shirley method implemented in COMPRO software . The photoelectron peaks were analyzed by a pseudo-Voigt functions peak fitting. 3.3 Transport property measurement Electrical resistance measurements of AgIn5Se8 single crystal under high pressure were performed using an originally designed DAC with boron-doped diamond electrodes . Figure 2 shows an optical image of the sample space of our DAC. The sample was placed at the center of a bottom nano-polycrystalline diamond anvil where the boron-doped diamond electrodes were fabricated. The undoped diamond insulating layer separates the electrodes and a metal gasket. The details of the cell configuration were described in a literature . Cubic boron nitride powders with a ruby manometer were used as a pressure-transmitting medium. The applied pressure values were estimated by a fluorescence from ruby powders and a Raman spectrum from the culet of top diamond anvil using the inVia Raman Microscope (RENISHAW). diamond electrodes. 4. Results and discussion 4.1 Structural analysis and composition The single crystal structural analysis of AgIn5Se8 was successfully performed. The crystallographic data are given in supplemental tables SI-SIV. The final refinement with 22 variables using 1 restraint converged on the R1 value of 6.77% and the wR2 value of 15.14% for I > 2(I) with the goodness of fit of 1.297. The refinement well converged when all the site occupancies were unity. There was no significant difference in R1 values as the occupancy of a specific site was varied, indicating that the obtained AgIn5Se8 does not have any deficiencies at each site. The chemical 5 composition of the obtained single crystal is normalized by the Ag element and then is estimated to be Ag:In:Se = 1:4.9(1):8.0(1) from the EDX analysis, which is consistent with the nominal composition of AgIn5Se8. This fact is different from the case of SnBi2Se4 which exhibits the deficiencies at Bi and Se sites . The crystal structure was assigned as a tetragonal lattice (space model for the crystal structure of AgIn5Se8 is shown in Fig. 3. The In and Se atoms form two kinds of InSe4 tetrahedrons: one is composed of In1, Se1 and Se2 atoms (Tet. A), and the other consists of In2 and Se2 atoms (Tet. B). The Tet. A and the Tet. B form each InSe4 tetrahedron layer, and the crystal structure of AgIn5Se8 is upper and lower symmetric around the central Ag atom. The sum of the central angles in the Tet. A of 432.3o is near to that in regular tetrahedron (423.16o) using the bond angles in Table SIV, where a central angle is defined as an angle between a central atom and apical atoms of tetrahedron. While, the sum of the central angles in the Tet. B of 447o is far from the value of 423.16o, indicating that the Tet. B is more distorted than the Tet. A. 4.2 Valence state The valence states of Ag, In and Se in AgIn5Se8 were investigated by the XPS measurement. 373.7 eV corresponding to Ag 3d5/2 and 3d3/2 with the valence state of Ag1+ . Figure 4(b) displays In 3d core-level spectrum. A perfect fit to two peaks located at 444.7 and 452.3 eV are clearly observed, which can be attributed to the characteristic spin-orbit split 3d5/2 and 3d3/2, respectively . This result indicates that the indium valency is mainly 3+ in the crystal . The peak of Se is more complex, as seen in fig. 4(c), because the spin-orbit-splitting of 0.86 eV in the Se 3d core levels is narrower . The Se 3d5/2 and 3d3/2 peaks are located at 54.0 eV and 54.8 eV, respectively. From this fitting, it can be concluded that the valence state of Se is mainly 2-. These Ag1+, In3+ and Se2- are consistent with a formal charge valence of AgIn5Se8. 6 AgIn5Se8 single crystal. 4.3 Electrical resistance measurement under high pressure The electrical resistance of AgIn5Se8 was measured under high pressure to investigate the pressure-induced superconductivity. The sample at ambient pressure behaved as insulator with quite high resistance above 40 MΩ. The resistance was decreased less than 100 Ω at 7.0 GPa, and then we evaluated the temperature dependence of resistance under various pressures up to 24.8 GPa, as shown in Fig. 5(a) with log scale. The resistance decreased more than two orders of magnitude with increase of applied pressures, and the slope dR/dT became almost flat from 24.8 GPa indicating a metallization. This feature of band gap closing is good agreement with the theoretical estimation of band gap closing as shown in Fig.1. Figure 5(b) shows the temperature dependence of resistance from 38.9 GPa to the highest pressure of 85.2 GPa. The sample under 52.5 GPa exhibited a sudden drop of resistance from 3.4 K corresponding to superconductivity. The pressure-induced insulator to metal transition and the superconductivity in AgIn5Se8 were successfully discovered based on our data-driven strategy. The superconductivity remained up to 85.2 GPa, and the diamond anvil was broken above further pressure, unfortunately. – 24.8 GPa in log scale, (b) 38.9 - 85.2 GPa in linear scale. 7 superconducting transitions. The Tc of AgIn5Se8 was almost constant around 3.4 K from 52.5 GPa to 65.4 GPa. The behavior was drastically changed above 74.0 GPa with a multi-step superconducting transition and an increase of Tc, and the Tc slightly decreased at 85.2 GPa. To clear the change of behavior between 65.4 GPa and 74.0 GPa, we picked up the data from each pressure region as shown in Fig. 6 (b). The resistance under 65.4 GPa was increased around 3.5 K just before the onset of superconducting transition, which feature is known for the inhomogeneity of superconducting region . To confirm that the hump is originated from the superconductivity, we measured the temperature dependence of resistance under magnetic field as shown in Fig. 7. The hump at just before the drop of resistance under 65.4 GPa was suppressed by applying magnetic field, therefore, this would be sign for appearance of higher Tc phase. Instead of the suppression of the hump, the three steps of superconducting transition appeared at 74 GPa, which labeled by lower Tc, middle Tc, and higher Tc of 2.3 K, 2.9 K, and 3.8 K, respectively. There is a possibility of crystal structural phase transition of this compound above 50 GPa by our calculations for structural stability under various pressures. Our DFT calculations showed that the lattice constant of c axis was shrunk and a(b) axis was expanded when the applied pressure was around 50 GPa. The suddenly appeared three steps superconducting transition would be originated from the intrinsically distorted crystal structure and structural phase transition of AgIn5Se8. The theoretical exploration of possible structural phase transition of AgIn5Se8 is undertaken and we will discuss the results in a future work. All Tc values under 74.0 GPa were gradually suppressed by an increase of magnetic field, and completely disappeared above 2 K under 4 T. Although the lower and middle Tc was decreased under the highest pressure of 85.4 GPa, the higher Tc stayed around 3.8 K. AgIn5Se8 from 52.5 GPa to 85.2 GPa. (b) Picked up data under 65.4 GPa and 74.0 GPa. 8 GPa, (b) 74.0 GPa and (c) 85.2 GPa. ambient pressure was insulator with quite high resistance above 40 MΩ. The resistance markedly decreased under 10-20 GPa, caused by the band gap closing. The temperature dependence of resistance became metallic tendency from around 30 GPa, and the pressure-induced superconductivity appeared above 50.2 GPa. The Tc of AgIn5Se8 increased from 74.0 GPa in accordance with the enhancement of DOS near the Fermi level. The maximum Tc of 3.8 K was observed under 74.0 and 85.2 GPa. When the applied pressure increased further, the diamond anvil was broken. 5. Conclusion We focused on AgIn5Se8 from the viewpoint of the pressure-induced high DOS near the 9 Fermi level, compared with the other candidates of SnBi2Se4 and PbBi2Te4 which was also chosen by the data-driven approach. The single crystal growth of AgIn5Se8 was confirmed by single crystal XRD and EDX analysis. The XPS analysis revealed that the valence state of all elements was consistent with the nominal value. The synthesized AgIn5Se8 showed insulator to metal transition at 24.8 GPa and superconducting transition at 52.5 GPa by the high pressure resistance measurement using DAC with boron-doped diamond electrodes in accordance with our scenario. The highest Tc was observed at 3.8 K under 74.0 and 85.2 GPa. The pressure-induced metallization and superconductivity were successfully observed in AgIn5Se8. According to the multi-steps of Tc above 74 GPa, it is necessary to perform the further studies for the crystal structural analysis under higher pressure. Acknowledgment This work was partly supported by JST CREST Grant No. JPMJCR16Q6, JST-Mirai Program Grant Number JPMJMI17A2, JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number JP17J05926, and the "Materials research by Information Integration" Initiative (MI2I) project of the Support Program for Starting Up Innovation Hub from JST. A part of the fabrication process of diamond electrodes was supported by NIMS Nanofabrication Platform in Nanotechnology Platform Project sponsored by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT), Japan. The part of the high pressure experiments was supported by the Visiting Researcher’s Program of Geodynamics Research Center, Ehime University. The computation in this study was performed on Numerical Materials Simulator at NIMS.