Fabrication and structural characterization of diamond-coated tungsten tips Alexander Tafela,∗, Mingjian Wub, Erdmann Spieckerb, Peter Hommelhoffa, J ̈urgen Risteina aDepartment of Physics, Friedrich-Alexander-Universit ̈at Erlangen-N ̈urnberg, Staudtstrasse 1, D-91058 Erlangen, Germany bInstitute of Micro- and Nanostructure Research & Center for Nanoanalysis and Electron Microscopy (CENEM), Department of Materials Science, Friedrich-Alexander-Universit ̈at Erlangen-N ̈urnberg, Cauerstrasse 6, D-91058 Erlangen, Germany Abstract Coating metal nanotips with a negative electron affinity material like hydrogen-terminated diamond bears promise for a high brightness photocathode. We report a recipe on the fabrication of diamond coated tungsten tips. A tungsten wire is etched electrochemically to a nanometer sharp tip, dip-seeded in diamond suspension and subsequently overgrown with a diamond film by plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition. With dip-seeding only, the seeding density declines towards the tip apex due to seed migration during solvent evaporation. The migration of seeds can be counteracted by nitrogen gas flow towards the apex, which makes coating of the apex with nanometer-thin diamond possible. At moderate gas flow, diamond grows homogeneously at shaft and apex whereas at high flow diamond grows in the apex region only. With this technique, we achieve a thickness of a few tens of nanometers of diamond coating within less than 1 μm away from the apex. Conventional transmission electron microscopy (TEM), electron diffraction and electron energy loss spectroscopy confirm that the coating is composed of dense nanocrystalline diamond with a typical grain size of 20 nm. High resolution TEM reveals graphitic paths between the diamond grains. Keywords: conformal coating, nanocrystalline diamond, EELS, HRTEM, nanoemitter 1. Introduction Negative electron affinity (NEA) materials are of great interest for photocathodes due to their high photoelectron yield and low thermal emittance . The electron affinity of diamond depends on the exact surface, i.e. chemical species, orienta- tion and reconstruction, and is readily adjustable between +1.7 eV and -1.3 eV with only oxygen and hydrogen as chemisorbed atoms . If the surfaces are terminated by hydrogen, they reveal a compar- atively low work function and true NEA, i.e. a con- duction band minimum (CBM) above the vacuum level at the solid-vacuum interface. This boosts the photoelectron yield by orders of magnitude, paving the way for a highly efficient photocathode. Photo- excitation happens in the bulk and electrons are emitted into vacuum when they reach the surface, even if they have thermalized to the CBM. This ∗Corresponding author Email address: alexander.tafel@fau.de (Alexander Tafel) is in contrast to metals, where only photoelectrons excited within the thermalization length below the surface can escape into vacuum. The combination of NEA, high thermal conductivity and mechanical robustness under imperfect vacuum condition make diamond a desirable material for photocathodes. As the electron emittance - a measure of beam qual- ity - is directly connected to the electron source size, nanosized emitters are favoured. Sharp tungsten tips are known as the brightest electron sources in scanning and transmission electron microscopes be- cause of their extremely small virtual source size, which can be even smaller than the nanometer- sized geometrical source size . Coating such a sharp tungsten tip with a NEA material like hydrogen-terminated diamond holds promise for an ever brighter photocathode. Since a small source size is important to be maintained, the diamond layer should be thin. The thickness also defines the mean migration time of the excited carriers to the surface. This migration influences the electron pulse duration after pulsed photo-excitation. Preprint submitted to Diamond and Related Materials February 5, 2019 arXiv:1902.01369v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 4 Feb 2019 All these arguments favour a thin and dense di- amond coating on a sharp tungsten tip. For the deposition of such thin layers, a high nu- cleation/seeding density is crucial. The shorter the mean distance between neighbouring nucleation sites, the thinner the resulting dense film can be. Sufficiently high seed densities require appropriate adhesion of the seeds to the substrate, e.g. via electrostatic forces . Rheological forces occur- ring during the drying process of dispersed parti- cle suspensions influence the local seeding density and can lead to phenomena like ring stains, also known as ”coffee ring effect” . Therefore, zeta potential adjustment and counteracting of rheolog- ical forces is essential for the control of the seeding densities. Moreover, the morphology of the nan- odiamond films will play a crucial role for the elec- tron emission properties as well. sp2-bonded car- bon specifically located at the grain boundaries of the film is beneficial in terms of providing sufficient conductivity through the film to prevent charging during operation. Previous work reported the coating of tips based on electrophoresis , with bias-enhanced nu- cleation during chemical vapour deposition (CVD) , parafin wax and CVD and ultrasonic seeding in nanodiamond slurry with and without a carburization step . In this work, we report a new recipe on the fabrication of diamond-coated tungsten tips via dip-seeding, nitrogen gas flow and CVD. Furthermore, we characterize the structure of the resulting diamond coating. The results are promising for a high brightness diamond-based elec- tron source. This approach is also valuable for the fabrication of samples for local electrode atom probe tomography to investigate the spatial distri- bution of dopants in ultrathin nanocrystalline dia- mond films. 2. Experimental 2.1. Tip fabrication Tungsten wire is etched electrochemically with 3 mol/L aqueous NaOH via the lamellae drop-off technique : A thin film of the electrolyte is trapped in a ring-shaped gold electrode. A bias voltage of 6 V is applied between this gold cathode and tungsten wire -which acts as the anode- until the wire is etched through. A second gold electrode with trapped electrolyte underneath the cathode detects the drop-off and shuts off the etching po- tential within less than 1 μs to prevent post-etching and blunting of the tip. Freshly etched tips are rinsed with deionised water to remove electrolyte residue. Resulting radii of tungsten tips with this method are typically 5-20 nm. 2.2. Diamond seeding Sharp tungsten tips are dip-seeded for a few sec- onds in monodisperse nanodiamond suspensions of crystal diameter of 4-6 nm. Both 0.025 wt.% aque- ous suspension from Carbodeon and 0.025 wt.% in dimethyl sulfoxide:methanol 1:3 from Adamas Nan- otechnologies were used in this work with compara- ble results. Due to the oxidized tungsten surface af- ter etching, the zeta potential of the freshly etched tungsten surface is presumably negative at the pH of the seeding suspensions. To ensure good adhe- sion of the diamond seeds, highly zeta-positive hy- drogenated seeds are therefore used. Even though the exact zeta potential of the tungsten surface and of the seeds is not known, this qualitative approach has worked reliably on flat samples and nanotips. Experiments with zeta-negative seeds on flat tung- sten samples showed more than one order of magni- tude lower seeding densities. Directly after seeding of a nanotip by dip-coating, it is blown dry with pressurized nitrogen gas directed from the shaft to- wards the tip apex with adjustable flow rates be- tween 0.5 − 2.5 L sec through a nozzle with 3.5 mm diameter. 2.3. Diamond deposition Diamond deposition is performed in a home-built microwave plasma-enhanced chemical vapor depo- sition (MPECVD) chamber at 2.5 GHz frequency and 512 W microwave power, at a pressure of 49 mbar using 50 sccm hydrogen and 2 sccm methane flow. The sample holder is heated to 600 °C and then lifted into the plasma. The plasma addition- ally heats the sample so that the local temperature of the tip apex region is expected to be higher than 600 °C. Deposition times range between 2 and 20 min with a growth rate of approximately 10 nm min. After terminating the diamond growth by switch- ing off the microwave power and sample heater, the sample cools down in a hydrogen atmosphere at 45 mbar. This recipe reliably results in a hydrogen- terminated diamond surface with negative electron affinity . 2 seeding density clearly decreases along the tip shank and only few grains are found close to the apex. Homogeneous coating of the apex could not be achieved. d)-f) Moderate flow: The entire tip including the apex is densely covered with nanodiamond. g)-i) Strong flow: Here, the apex region is selectively coated with 20 nm thin diamond. Only the first 400 nm are coated with a dense layer of diamond. From ∼ 800 nm behind the apex, the coating is almost absent. The inset in i) is the same tip prior to deposition. 2.4. Characterisation Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) is used for routine imaging of the tip geometry and the mor- phology of the diamond films. In addition, a coated tungsten tip is characterized by imaging, electron diffraction and electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) in a Titan Themis transmission electron microscope (TEM) operating at 200 kV. The mi- croscope is equipped with Cs-correctors both at the illumination and imaging side and a Gatan GIF Quantum ER spectrometer. The sample wire was inserted in a Nanofactory STM-TEM holder. The image corrector was tuned to negative Cs imaging condition where the first pass band corresponds to a resolution of 1 ̊A. We noticed that upon illumination of the tip area, the effective lens aberration can suf- fer from strong drift at high dose rate. Therefore, a moderate to low dose rate and careful grounding of the STM-TEM holder is necessary to obtain high- resolution TEM (HRTEM) images with good qual- ity. The single electron energy loss (EEL) spectra were acquired directly in TEM diffraction-coupled mode with the largest collection angle - i.e. with- out objective aperture - to suppress the anisotropic effect in the study of graphite . The EEL spectrum image was acquired in scanning TEM (STEM) mode with an effective collection an- gle of 30 mrad, a pixel size of 1.1 nm and a short dwell time to balance the sample drift. The low- loss and high-loss (i.e. zero-loss and Carbon 1s re- gion in this study) are acquired with a dispersion of 0.25eV/channel. The standard Fourier-Log decon- volution method using the recorded zero-loss and plasmon peaks is applied to account for multiple scattering . We use an approximate quantifica- tion scheme to extract the sp2/sp3 ratio neglecting the anisotropy of the scattering cross section of the graphitic components. 3. Results and discussion 3.1. Diamond seeding and coating Diamond films deposited ater dip-seeding on tungsten foils show clear signs of evaporation dy- namics and their influence on local seeding den- sity (see Appendix A). A related effect can be observed when tungsten tips are dip-seeded with nanodiamond suspensions. Without dry-blowing of the dip-seeded tips, continuous and homogeneous coating with diamond was achieved at the shank 3 of the tip, as can be seen in fig. 1a)-c). The high nucleation density at the shank is presumably a re- sult of the high positive zeta potential of seeds and the negative zeta potential of the tungsten surface. However, the density of diamond crystallites indi- cating the seeding density clearly decreases towards the tip. Solvent evaporation and the accompany- ing forces seem to redistribute the seeds, which are pushed away from the tip. To counteract this effect, we adopt a controlled flow of nitrogen gas towards the apex during the drying process. Without the nitrogen gas flow not a single sample out of ten samples was covered with diamond at the apex. Using pressurized nitrogen gas for dry-blowing im- mediately after the dip-seeding and consecutive MPECVD, diamond was successfully grown on the tip apex with a 82% success rate (14 out of 17 sam- ples). At moderate flows rates (0.5 - 1.0 L/sec), homogeneous coating both at the shank and at the apex is achieved as can be seen in fig. 1d)-f). Even the sharpest tips with approximately 5 nm radius were succesfully coated with this technique (fig. 2). At high flow rates (up to 2.5 L/sec), the tung- sten tips can even be coated selectively at the apex within less than 1 μm with 20 nm thin diamond (fig. 1g)-i)). From these observations we deduce that the nitrogen flow successfully counteracts the migration of the seeds away from the apex. If the flow is high enough, the seeds start migrating to- wards the apex and remain there only. 3.2. Structural and chemical characterization Carbon deposited by MPECVD results in var- ious phases as graphite, diamond and amorphous carbon depending on the exact parameters. The nanocrystalline diamond (NCD) films are expected to be composites of graphitic and diamond phases. Their morphology and composition will have deci- sive influence on the electron emission properties from coated tips. In order to elucidate the struc- tural details we performed an extensive TEM study on an ultrasharp tungsten tip (apex radius approx- imately 5 nm) covered by a 100 nm thin NCD film. The tungsten is seen dark in the center and is cov- ered by a gray layer of NCD. The selected area elec- tron diffraction (SAED) pattern shown in fig. 2b) was acquired using an aperture covering an area with about 200 nm radius over the tip region show- ing diffraction rings perfectly matching the pow- der pattern of diamond (red circles in fig. 2b)). This confirms that the coated layer is dominated by polycrystalline tungsten tip becomes visible under TEM in- spection. (a) bright-field TEM image of the diamond coated tungsten tip. The radius of curvature of the coated tip is 100 nm, while the initial W tip radius is ∼ 5nm. (b) selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern of the sample. The calculated diamond powder ring pattern (using kinematical diffraction theory, red circles) is superimposed on the ac- quired pattern, indicating that the coating is dominated by crystalline diamond. Some weak spots can be assigned to tungsten and graphite as is exemplarily illustrated by the black arrows. (c-e) dark-field images of the sample with the objective aperture placed at different positions of the {111} diffraction ring as indicated in (b) by the colored circles. Single grains oriented such that the {111} Bragg condition is satisfied are revealed this way and the columnar shape as well as the characteristic grain size of 20 nm is revealed. The high resolution image in fig. 5 is obtained at the dashed black box in (a) and the EEL spectrum shown in fig. 3 is acquired in the blue dashed circle region in (a). diamond crystallites. Some additional weak spots that do not belong to diamond can be attributed to tungsten and graphite. Although the experimental diffraction ring pattern fills each circle completely, some sparse segments and strong spots can be seen especially on the {220} diffraction ring. This is due to the textured structure of the dia- mond grains. However, the texture can hardly be retrieved from this diffraction pattern alone and will be subject of future research. In order to reveal the shape of the diamond grains more clearly, a series of dark-field images was recorded with the objec- tive aperture placed at different azimuth location of the diamond {111} diffraction ring as indicated by the coloured circles in fig. 2b). The corresponding images are displayed in fig. 2(c-e). The columnar shape of the diamond grains with a width of about 20 nm is clearly evidenced by these dark-field im- ages. The grain columns seem to align themselves at a small angle to the surface normal. On closer 4 cle region in fig. 2(a) with characteristic peaks of nanocrys- talline diamond, in-situ graphite reference (black) and bulk diamond (blue) . inspection, the columnar grains are also faintly vis- ible in the bright-field image in fig. 2a). Fig. 3 presents the background substracted EEL spectrum recorded from the tip region marked by the dashed circle in fig. 2(a), as well as graphitic and diamond reference spectra. The fine structure of the carbon K-edge in the EEL spectrum reflects the orbital character of the conduction band states. Transitions into sp2 − σ∗ antibonding states, which form the upper part of the graphite conduction band, create a broad and featureless band in the EEL spectrum with a maximum at 292 eV. The di- amond conduction band with sp3 − σ∗ character is also reflected as a broad band in the K-edge EEL sprectrum with a threshold at about 290 eV and peaks at 292, 297 and 305 eV. These peaks are well resolved in the spectrum of the coated tip (fig. 3) and their presence is a clear proof that the coating is diamond . Both the tip and the graphitic ref- erence spectrum show a well resolved peak at 285 eV loss energy that is assigned to electron tran- sitions into sp2 − π∗ antibonding states. As the sp2 − π∗ signal is absent for monocrystalline dia- mond, the integral of appropriate energy windows holds quantitative information on the ratio of sp2- to sp3-bonded carbon . Fig. 4 shows the pixel-wise evaluated sp2 to sp3 ratio from the spatially-resolved STEM-EELS spectra (for details of the evalution, see Appendix B). The map re- veals that the average sp2 content is larger at the apex and that paths of high sp2 content are present which align with the axes of the single grains (fig. 2 & 4). The large sp2 content at the apex is at- tributed to a larger seeding density at the apex as fig. 1 shows that the seeds adhere well to the apex carbon. (a) Evaluated map after the simple formula and processing method in Appendix B. More sp2-bonded car- bon is found in the axial region of the apex. The high ratio at the surface is due to carbon deposition (contamination) during the STEM-EELS measurement. The (deconvoluted and background subtracted) spectra denoted at positions b, c and d are shown in (b)-(d), respectively. (e) Intensity of extracted Gaussion peak 1 (G1) at 285 eV and (f) sum of Gaussian peak 2 and 3 (G2+G3) at 289 and 292 eV, respec- tively. after dry-blowing with nitrogen. Further insight into the morphology of the film, specifically the location of the sp2-bonded tissue, is given by the HRTEM image in fig. 5. Wavy lattice fringes with a characteristic distance of 354 pm corresponding to the interlayer spacing of graphite can be seen. Some fringes are marked in white in fig. 5 for eas- ier identification. Apparently, the graphitic compo- nents form contiguous paths between the diamond crystallites, which promises sufficient conductivity of the composite film to prevent charging of the tip during electron emission in future applications. At the tip, one can see a few grains showing 2D lat- tice fringes. From the lattice fringe distances, one can attribute the lattice plane indices and plane normal directions. A small region as marked by the dotted box in fig. 5 is magnified in the inset with its Fourier transform on the upper right side. The {111} and {220} lattice planes can be easily recognized. However, drawing general conclusions about texture requires a thinner coating and will be subject of future studies. 4. Conclusion Tungsten tips with apex radii down to 5 nm have been successfully coated with dense nanocrystalline 5 HRTEM image of the diamond coating at the apex of the tungsten tip. Graphitic paths between the grains with interplane distance of 0.354 nm are visible. The dashed boxed region is magnified as inset with its Fourier transform shown on the right side. diamond films with a thickness as small as 20 nm. Solvent evaporation after seeding has a large effect on the local seeding density, especially at strongly curved surfaces, and must be engineered appropri- ately. To counteract evaporation forces, we adopt a nitrogen gas flow towards the tip apex. Diamond deposition on shaft only, apex only as well as ho- mogeneous coating of shaft and apex is achieved by variation of the nitrogen flow. We achieved the growth of 20 nm thin diamond limited to less than 1 μm away from the tip apex by this technique. EELS and electron diffraction of a coated tungsten tip confirm the presence of diamond with a fraction of sp2-bonded carbon, identified as graphitic paths inbetween grains via HRTEM images. A spatially resolved STEM-EELS measurement shows an ele- vated fraction of the relative sp2-content at the tip apex. Furthermore, a columnar radial growth of di- amond crystallites with a typical grain size of 20 nm is revealed. We expect that these diamond-coated tungsten tips with negative electron affinity offer a great potential for the use as high brightness pho- tocathodes both in dc and ultrafast laser-triggered operation. 5. Acknowledgements We thank J. Litzel for setting up and modernizing the MPECVD reactor. This work was supported by the ERC grant ”Near Field Atto”, DFG research training group ”In-situ Microscopy with Electrons, X-rays and Scanning Probes”(GRK 1896) and DFG collaborative research center ”Synthetic carbon al- lotropes” (CRC 953). 6. Literature