Kinetic Analysis of Illite Dehydroxylation Based on Differential Scanning Calorimetry Tomáš Ondro1, a), Anton Trník1, 2, b) and Omar Al-Shantir1, c) 1Department of Physics, Constantine the Philosopher University in Nitra, A. Hlinku 1, 949 74 Nitra, Slovakia 2Department of Materials Engineering and Chemistry, Czech Technical University in Prague, Thákurova 7, 166 29 Prague, Czech Republic a) Corresponding author: tomas.ondro@ukf.sk b) atrnik@ukf.sk c) omar.alshantir@ukf.sk Abstract. The two-step dehydroxylation of illite is studied using the differential scanning calorimetry on powder samples with heating rates from 1 to 10 °C min–1 in a dynamic argon atmosphere. The values of apparent activation energy and pre-exponential factor are calculated using the Kissinger method. The determined values of apparent activation energy and pre-exponential factor of trans-vacant layer dehydroxylation are (227 ± 6) kJ mol–1 and (2.87 ± 0.09) ×1013 min–1, respectively. The results also show that this process can be characterized by 1D diffusion controlled reaction with instantaneous nucleation rate. For the cis-vacant layer dehydroxylation, the values of apparent activation energy and pre- exponential factor are (242 ± 10) kJ mol–1 and (5.37 ± 0.23) ×1012 min–1, respectively. The value of Avrami peak factor for this step indicates diffusion controlled growth of the new phase with zero or decreasing nucleation rate. INTRODUCTION Illite is a significant rock-forming mineral that is the main component of illitic clay . Its structure consists of repeating tetrahedron-octahedron-tetrahedron (T-O-T) layers and the interlayer space is occupied mainly by potassium cations and a variable amount of water molecules . During heating, in the temperature range of (450 – 800) °C, the dehydroxylation of illite occurs according to the reaction: 2(OH)→H2O(↑)+Or (Or is residual oxygen) . Then, the formed water molecules migrate throughout the thermally expanded tetrahedral rings into the interlayer region and finally out of the illite structure . Thermogravimetric experiments show that this process proceeds in two overlapping steps. The most probable explanation seems to be that the individual steps correspond to dehydroxylation of trans-vacant (tv) and cis-vacant (cv) illite layers . The values of apparent activation energy for tv- and cv-layer dehydroxylation show considerable variations. An overview of determined values of activation energy is shown in Tab. 1. For this reason, the further systematic study of these processes is required. Analysis tv-layer cv-layer