arXiv:1902.06727v2 [physics.app-ph] 29 Aug 2019 Single-step fabrication of surface waveguides in fused silica with few-cycle laser pulses Federico J. Furch1, W. Dieter Engel1, Tobias Witting1, Armando Perez-Leija1, Marc J. J. Vrakking1, and Alexandre Mermillod-Blondin1* 1Max-Born-Institut f ╠łur Nichtlineare Optik und Kurzzeitspektroskopie, Max-Born-Stra├¤e, D-12489 Berlin, Germany *Corresponding author: mermillod@mbi-berlin.de August 30, 2019 Abstract Direct laser writing of surface waveguides with ultrashort pulses is a crucial achievement towards all-laser manufacturing of photonic inte- grated circuits sensitive to their environment. In this Letter, few-cycle laser pulses (with a sub-10 fs duration) are used to produce subsurface waveguides in a non-doped, non-coated fused silica substrate. The fab- rication technique relies on laser-induced microdensification below the threshold for nanopore formation. The optical losses of the fabricated waveguides are governed by the optical properties of the superstrate. We have measured losses ranging from less than 0.1 dB/mm (air superstrate) up to 2.8 dB/mm when immersion oil is applied on top of the waveguide. Among the several fabrication techniques that may be used to produce waveguides in glass substrates , fs-laser direct writing is especially at- tractive because it does not require a cleanroom environment, is cost-effective, and offers a high throughput . Fs-laser writing enables full 3d waveguide fabrication in crystals , polymers as well as glasses . Although re- search efforts have been mostly concentrated on volume microprocessing, the direct fabrication of surface waveguides would greatly extend the domain of applications of laser-written photonic integrated chips. The propagation of an optical field in a surface waveguide implies the presence of an evanescent wave which can be exploited for refractive index sensing , plasmonic excitation sensing or Fourier-transform spectrometry . However, using fs-laser di- rect writing on or near the surface of the host material is challenging. Attempts in non-optimized glasses have resulted in surface swelling , cracking and 1 ablation . In pure fused silica, the direct fabrication of near-surface waveg- uides with a good refractive index contrast has even been considered impossible . The main reason is that fs-laser direct writing relies on pulse-to-pulse heat accumulation to induce controlled, localized heating of the substrate. After cool- ing, high-refractive index regions with light-guiding capabilities appear. In this scheme, the magnitude of the stress load produced upon thermal relaxation is a major limitation. Recently, several routes have been explored to enable surface waveguide photoinscription. One strategy consists in using toughened glasses as a host substrate . Another approach is to enhance the photosensitivity of the glass by doping with silver ions . A third method relies on suppressing the air/dielectric interface by bonding a thin glass on top of the sample . Because the bond is ensured by weak van der Waals attractive forces (only manifesting when the sample and the cover glass are in close contact), such a method might only be applicable to planar substrates. In this Letter, we describe the direct fabrication of surface waveguides in fused silica with the help of few-cycle laser pulses. Our method does not rely on pulse-to-pulse heat accumulation, but in- stead is based on the type 1 laser-matter interaction regime triggered in a grazing incidence irradiation scheme. Modifications induced in the type 1 regime exhibit a smooth, uniform and positive refractive index change Ōłån, in contrast to type 2 modifications which are characterized by an important bire- fringence due to the presence of periodic nanogratings in the irradiated region. Furthermore, we demonstrate the possibility to control the propagation losses by playing on the refractive index of the superstrate which opens a route for the laser-assisted fabrication of non-hermitian microoptical systems . The experimental setup is depicted in Fig. 1. Few-cycle pulses (sub-10 fs duration, central wavelength at 800 nm) from a high repetition rate (400 kHz), non-collinear optical parametric amplifier are focused on the surface of a fused silica sample with a grazing incidence. The samples are parallelepipedic and polished to optical quality on all sides. In order to preserve the temporal structure of the laser pulse in the focal plane, we use a gold-coated reflective objective (numerical aperture 0.5) . Such an irradiation scheme provides two focii F1 and F2 formed by the upper and lower halves of the laser beam, respectively. The presence of a planar air/glass interface induces wavefront distortions and leads to the formation of an aberrated focus F2 which is shifted and spread along the propagation axis. The corresponding laser-induced modifications are shown in Fig. 1(b). An analogous distortion happens in the time domain with consequences on the temporal profile of the irradiation . Because the spatio-temporal distortions imparted on the lower half of the beam increase with the amount of propagation in the sample, the irradiation char- acteristics vary when translating the sample along the propagation axis. In order to limit the irradiation to the part of the beam traveling through air only, the lower half of the laser beam was blocked. Furthermore, the entrance of the beam diameter was slightly reduced with the help of an iris, providing an overall transmission of 0.17 for the focusing unit. The fabrication of a single line-shaped microstructure is then straightforward. It suffices to irradiate the surface of the substrate continuously from edge to edge by translating the sample with the 2 microprocessing at grazing incidence. The part of the laser beam represented in bright red propagates through air only and forms the focus F1. The beam blocker can be put in the beam path to prevent the formation of the aberrated focus F2. (b): Phase-contrast microscopy (PCM) picture of the sampleŌĆÖs top surface showing the refractive index distribution resulting from F1 and F2. help of a stepper motor. In what follows, the laser pulse energy was constant with a value of E = 530 nJ after the microscope objective and the speed of the stepper motor was 60 ╬╝m sŌłÆ1. The laser-induced microstructures had a length of 10 mm (i.e. the width of the sample). For higher pulse energies, intense laser light scattering occurred and the irradiated region exhibited a mix of negative and positive refractive index changes (not shown). These features are indicative of the type 2 interaction regime characterized by the formation of nanopores . In Fig. 2(a) we show the laser footprint on the exit facet after sample pol- ishing, using optical transmission microscopy (numerical aperture 0.9). The laser-induced microstructure has a width w Ōēł 2 ╬╝m and a height h Ōēł 6 ╬╝m. Diagnostics of the top surface with an atomic force microscope (AFM) are pre- sented in Fig. 2(b), and reveal the presence of a shallow surface topography variation (< ŌłÆ10 nm, about 430 nm FWHM) on top of the laser-induced mi- crostructure. The negative sign of the topology variation is indicative of a volume reduction (and hence a density increase) in the irradiated area, and is the opposite to what happens when microprocessing is performed in the type 2 regime, with longer (35 fs) and more energetic (about 2 ╬╝J) laser pulses where surface swelling as high as 250 nm was measured . An inversion in the sign of the surface topography is consistent with recent observations reporting a volume reduction of glass cantilevers irradiated in the type 1 regime and a net volume increase of cantilevers irradiated in the type 2 regime . We emphasize that the absence of material re-deposition in the AFM pictures hints towards a purely non-ablative process. The phase shift distribution ŌłåŽå across the laser-induced microstructure presented in Fig. 2(c) was measured by spatial light interference microscopy . As expected from a local density increase, ŌłåŽå is positive in the irradiated volume . The corresponding spatial average of the laser-induced 3 refractive index change Ōłån = ╬╗cŌłåŽå 2ŽĆh Ōēł 0.006, where ╬╗c =550nm is the cen- tral wavelength of the illumination source (an halogen light bulb in our case), h = 6 ╬╝m is defined in Fig. 2(a) and ŌłåŽå = 0.43 rad is the phase shift measured at the center of the microstructure. We emphasize that the magnitude of Ōłån obtained exceeds the value of 10ŌłÆ4 ŌłÆ10ŌłÆ3 usually measured in the bulk for type 1 modifications . D2 ’┐Į3 D1 Main Band Wavenumber [cm-1] Intensity [arb. units] Substrate (fused silica) Laser-induced microstructure (end facet) Air 10 ’┐Įm (a) AFM 2 ’┐Įm Height [nm] 430 nm (b) Phase shift [rad.] QPCM 2 ’┐Įm (c) (d) h ~ 6 ’┐Įm w ~ 2 ’┐Įm view of the sample acquired with an optical transmission microscope. The sample is illuminated with an halogen lamp. (b): Surface topography (top view) measured with an atomic force microscope (AFM).(c): Phase shift across the microstructure, measured with a spatial light interference microscope (SLIM). (d): Micro-Raman investigations of the irradiated zone (purple line) and of the pristine sample (grey line). The spectra were normalized with respect to the Žē3 band. To further confirm our conclusion on the laser-induced compaction and re- fractive index increase, we have examined the signature of the fs laser-induced structural modifications in micro-Raman spectra measured in the pris- 4 tine and irradiated material, as shown in Fig. 2(d). The excitation wavelength was 442 nm and the microscope objective used for excitation and collection of the Raman signal has a numerical aperture of 0.8 which provides a depth resolution of 0.85 ╬╝m. The spectra were normalized with respect to the amplitude of the Žē3 band . They reveal an increase of the D2 peak (centered at 600 cmŌłÆ1) in the irradiated volume, confirming a local laser-induced compaction . These micro-Raman measurements were carried out on the top surface of the sample and might not necessarily correspond to the maximum of compaction, presum- ably located in the center of the laser-induced microstructure (i.e. Ōēł 3 ╬╝m away from the surface). In order to examine the ability of the microstructures to guide light at op- tical frequencies, the fundamental mode of a CW He-Ne beam (╬╗ = 633 nm) was focused onto the entrance facet of the laser-induced microstructures with a microscope objective (numerical aperture 0.42). A second microscope objective (Olympus MPlan, 100x, numerical aperture 0.9) used in combination with a tube lens (focal length of 200 mm) formed a 111-fold magnified image of the end facet on a camera sensor. Figure 3(a) shows the obtained output intensity distribution. It demonstrates that these laser-induced microstructures support optical waveguiding at 633 nm. A modal analysis in the directions parallel (pŌłÆ) and perpendicular (sŌłÆ) to the surface of the sample (see Fig. 3(b)) provides a mode field diameter (MFD, defined as the 1/e2 decay of the maximum mode intensity), of 4.3 and 6.0 ╬╝m in the pŌłÆ and sŌłÆ directions, respectively. Out of the center region, the guided mode intensity decays exponentially with decay constants of Ōēł 1.1 ╬╝m and 0.4 ╬╝m in glass and in air, respectively. We checked that the optical transfer function of the microscope objective did not significantly influence these values by applying a deconvolution algorithm to the curves shown in Fig. 3(b). The point spread function used for the deconvolution was estimated numerically based on the model of Gibson and Lanni . The influence of the input polarization was examined by placing the waveg- uide between a polarizer and an analyzer. The transmission of the waveguide was measured as a function of the relative angle between the polarizer and the analyzer [see Fig. 3(b)]. The polarization is maintained for input fields with a linear polarization in the s- and p- directions (see thick transparent lines in Fig. 3(b) left). However, an input field with a linear input polarization in another direction becomes elliptically polarized upon propagation in the waveg- uide, which indicates that s- and p- polarized fields have different propagation constants. Having confirmed the waveguiding capabilities of the laser-induced microstruc- tures and their polarization-maintaining properties, we now examine the pos- sibility to control the propagation losses by varying the refractive index of the superstrate ns. By applying the optimum end-fire coupling method , losses < 0.1 dB mmŌłÆ1 were measured for ns = 1.00 (in air). The losses obtained when applying a drop of immersion oil on top of the waveguide are shown in Fig. 4. The diameter of the oil droplet was controlled by using a graduated microsy- ringe. A first order exponential fit of the experimental data indicates that the 5 crostructure at a wavelength of 633 nm. (b): Mode-field analysis. The regions in gray correspond to the size of the waveguide core deduced from Fig. 2(a). The dotted lines are first-order exponential fits of the experimental data. MFD: mode field diameter defined as the 1/e2 decay of the maximum intensity. (c): Transmitted intensity as a function of the analyzer angle for linear input po- larizations in the p- and s- directions (left) and for an arbitrary linear input polarization (right). The dark thin lines represent the polarization of the beam after propagation in the waveguide and the thick, semi transparent lines repre- sent the polarization of the input beam. 6 Oil droplet diameter [mm] Transmitted intensity [arb. units] ii iii iv v Waveguide Oil droplet mersion oil (noil = 1.516) with a variable diameter is placed on top of the laser-induced surface waveguide. The dotted line represents a fit of the exper- imental data using a single exponential decay. The presence of oil induces an attenuation of 2.83+0.48 ŌłÆ0.66 dB mmŌłÆ1. superstrate-induced leakage is as strong as 2.83+0.48 ŌłÆ0.66 dB mmŌłÆ1. The uncertain- ties were obtained from fits of the lower and upper bounds of the experimental values. In the so-called ray-optic approach of guided mode theory , the light propagating through a waveguide is described as a sum of oblique rays experi- encing total internal reflection at the boundary of the waveguide. Changing ns changes the conditions for total internal reflection. When ns increases, the min- imum angle for total internal reflection decreases and the steepest rays escape the waveguide . The large attenuation coefficient deduced from the numerical fit indicates that the optical structures are sensitive to the refractive index of their envi- ronment and can thus be employed as refractive index sensors, with significant potential for lab-on-chip applications. These waveguides may for instance con- stitute the sensitive part of optical biosensors microsystems that are used for label-free bio-sensing . The optical structures presented in this Letter may also be used as efficient photon/plasmon couplers to interface photonic and plasmonic architectures , or as the backbone for the fabrication of compact stationary-wave integrated Fourier-transform spectrometers . Furthermore, the ability to control the losses in integrated waveguide configurations opens the door to new perspectives to manufacture non-Hermitian non-resonant photonic systems in connection with exceptional points singularities . In this Letter we have presented a method to inscribe waveguides directly on the surface of a pure fused silica substrate. For the results presented here, few-cycle pulses from a high repetition rate non-collinear optical parametric amplifier have been utilized. The extent to which longer pulses can be utilized will be the subject of future investigations. We note that stretching the pulse by linear dispersion is not a viable option. The highly structured ultra broadband spectrum quickly leads to a multi-pulse structure in the time domain, which 7 could potentially change the dynamics of the ionization process. We also note that new trends in non-linear pulse compression have the potential to bring few-cycle pulse capabilities to lasers typically used in laser material processing . The results presented in this Letter represent the first demonstration of waveguides that are directly photoinduced on the surface of fused silica without the need for pre- (e.g. deposition of a photosentive material or applicaton of a cover slip) or post-processing of the target substrate. The optical structures produced correspond to type 1 modifications, support waveguiding at optical frequencies, possesses polarization-maintaining properties and exhibit a core re- fractive index change of Ōłån Ōēł +0.006 on average. AFM measurements and Micro-Raman investigations indicate that laser-induced microcompaction is at the origin of the observed refractive index change. The waveguides are sensitive to their environment, extending the capability of the direct laser write method to the rapid prototyping of compact optical non-Hermitian microsystems tak- ing advantage of all the well-known benefits (small size and weight, low power consumption, improved reliability and vibration sensitivity ) of integrated optical devices. Funding Information Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, Grants ME4427/1-1 and ME4427/1-2. Acknowledgments The authors thank J. Tomm and S. Schwirzke-Schaaf for their assistance with the micro-Raman measurements. Supplemental Documents