1 High-speed domain wall racetracks in a magnetic insulator Saül Vélez1,§,*, Jakob Schaab1,§, Martin S. Wörnle1,2, Marvin Müller1, Elzbieta Gradauskaite1, Pol Welter2, Cameron Gutgsell1, Corneliu Nistor1, Christian L. Degen2,*, Morgan Trassin1,*, Manfred Fiebig1 and Pietro Gambardella1,* 1Department of Materials, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland 2Department of Physics, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland § These authors contributed equally *e-mail: saul.velez@mat.ethz.ch (S.V.); degenc@ethz.ch (C.L.D.); morgan.trassin@mat.ethz.ch (M.T.); pietro.gambardella@mat.ethz.ch (P.G.) Recent reports of current-induced switching of ferrimagnetic oxides coupled to a heavy metal layer have opened realistic prospects for implementing magnetic insulators into electrically addressable spintronic devices. However, key aspects such as the configuration and dynamics of magnetic domain walls driven by electrical currents in insulating oxides remain unexplored. Here, we investigate the internal structure of the domain walls in Tm3Fe5O12 (TmIG) and TmIG/Pt bilayers and demonstrate their efficient manipulation by spin-orbit torques with velocities of up to 400 m s-1 and minimal current threshold for domain wall flow of 5 x 106 A cm-2. Domain wall racetracks embedded in TmIG are defined by the deposition of Pt current lines, which allow us to control the domain propagation and magnetization switching in selected regions of an extended magnetic layer. Scanning nitrogen-vacancy magnetometry reveals that the domain walls of thin TmIG films are Néel walls with left-handed chirality, with the domain wall magnetization rotating towards an intermediate Néel-Bloch configuration upon deposition of Pt. These results indicate the presence of a sizable interfacial Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya interaction in TmIG, which leads to novel possibilities to control the formation of chiral spin textures in magnetic insulators. Ultimately, domain wall racetracks provide an efficient scheme to pattern the magnetic landscape of TmIG in a fast and reversible way. 2 Spintronics relies on the use of current-induced torques for manipulating the magnetization of thin films and nanodevices (1). Owing to spin-orbit coupling, charge currents flowing in heavy metals, such as Pt, Ta or W, generate spin currents that exert a torque onto an adjacent ferromagnetic layer (2, 3). These so-called spin-orbit torques (SOTs) are capable of reversing the magnetization of ferromagnets in a highly efficient and ultra-fast manner (4–8) as well as driving domain walls at very high velocities (9–11). Most studies in this area, however, have been performed on ultrathin metallic ferromagnets, for which extensive characterizations of the domain wall (DW) structure and velocity have been reported (12–20). Magnetic insulators offer exciting perspectives for spintronic and magnonic applications beyond conventional metallic systems (21). In particular, ferrimagnetic rare-earth garnets coupled to heavy metal layers have attracted attention due to the possibility of electrically exciting and detecting propagating magnons (22–25) as well as for their low power and high frequency magnetization dynamics (26). Despite increasing interest in such systems, however, the electrical manipulation of the equilibrium magnetization has not been investigated in detail. Current-induced switching of magnetic insulators has been only recently demonstrated in Tm3Fe5O12 (TmIG) and BaFe12O19 in combination with either Pt or W layers (27–30). These studies relied on magnetoresistance measurements in order to detect the orientation of the magnetization, from which the dynamics of the switching process cannot be inferred. In this work, we present a combined scanning nitrogen-vacancy (NV) magnetometry and spatially-resolved magneto-optic Kerr effect (MOKE) study of the DW structure and dynamics driven by SOTs in racetrack structures embedded in a TmIG layer. We demonstrate highly efficient current-induced DW motion in TmIG/Pt, with mobility comparable or larger than metallic ferromagnets, an extraordinarily low threshold for DW flow, and very small depinning fields. We further provide the first direct characterization of the DW width and internal structure in thin-film TmIG as well as TmIG/Pt bilayers. Previous studies in garnets were only able to provide estimates of the DW width based on indirect or diffraction-limited optical measurements, with reported values ranging from tens of nanometers to micrometers (31–34). Scanning NV magnetometry reveals that the DWs in TmIG films are only ~20 nm wide and have a well-defined chiral structure, which changes from left Néel in TmIG to intermediate left Néel-Bloch in TmIG/Pt. These findings evidence the presence of strong interfacial Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya interaction (DMI) in TmIG grown on substituted gadolinium gallium garnet Gd3Sc2Ga3O12 (SGGG), which is attenuated by the deposition of Pt. The DMI is the key ingredient required to stabilize chiral Néel DWs in ferromagnets and ferrimagnets with perpendicular magnetization, which can then be driven by SOTs at very high velocities (10–15). In contrast with metallic ferromagnets, TmIG thin films support the formation of Néel DWs without introducing heavy metal layers. Our results show that ferrimagnetic garnets are ideal materials for fabricating efficient and high-speed DW racetracks. 3 TmIG(8 nm)/Pt(5 nm) bilayers were grown on SGGG (111)-oriented substrates by a combination of pulsed laser deposition for epitaxial growth of the garnet and in-situ dc sputtering for Pt. The numbers between parentheses indicate the thickness of each layer. Pt current lines were patterned in the shape of Hall bars by optical lithography and selective etching of the metal, leaving the TmIG film un-etched (see Methods). Figure 1A shows an optical image of a TmIG/Pt device. The structural, electric, and magnetic characterization of the TmIG film and the TmIG/Pt bilayer are reported in the Supplementary Materials (Section S1 and Figs. S1 and S2). The magnetic state of the TmIG film underneath the Pt current line, +m (up) or -m (down), can be read electrically by measuring the transverse Hall resistance Rxy, as shown in Fig. 1B during a sweep of the out-of-plane magnetic field Hz. The measurement confirms that the films exhibit robust perpendicular magnetic anisotropy with a coercive field of about 40 Oe. In agreement with a previous report (27), the magnetization of TmIG can be deterministically switched upon the application of a current pulse of sufficient current density Jx in the presence of a constant in-plane field Hx (Fig. 1C). The switching polarity is determined by the damping-like component of the SOT (2–4), which stabilizes +m for Jx parallel to Hx and –m for Jx antiparallel to Hx in TmIG/Pt. Notably, we found that full switching can be achieved with pulses of 1 ms at current densities below 107 A cm-2 for an in-plane field as small as |Hx|=20 Oe, which confirms the high quality of our devices (see also Supplementary Materials Section S1). A distinctive feature of our experiments is that TmIG covers the entire substrate, but switching occurs only in the region defined by the Pt current line. This is clearly seen in Fig. 1D, which shows a differential MOKE image of a TmIG/Pt device after the application of a current pulse. The bright contrast coinciding with the Pt current line shows the region where the magnetization has switched from -m to +m, demonstrating that it is possible to control the magnetization of a continuous TmIG film in a local way without altering the magnetic moments of the surroundings. Only in the presence of an out-of-plane field, or in the case of significant Joule heating, the switched magnetic domain may extend beyond the Pt line (see the Supplementary Materials Section S2). Such local control of the magnetization is unique to magnetic insulators due to the confinement of the current in the metal overlayer. As discussed further below, we also find that the surrounding magnetic medium influences the switching dynamics underneath the Pt current line. This is seen by the fact that a larger current is required for inducing down-to-up switching relative to up-to-down switching when starting from a homogenously magnetized TmIG film pointing down (Fig. 1C), and vice versa starting from a homogenously magnetized layer pointing up (not shown). As SOT-induced switching is strongly dependent on the DW structure (12–15), we use scanning NV magnetometry to reveal the DW magnetization profile in both TmIG and TmIG/Pt layers. The 4 technique is based on a single NV defect located at the apex of a diamond tip, which senses the magnetic stray field BNV(X,Y) emanating from a magnetic surface with high spatial resolution (Fig. 2A) (17, 35, 36). Figure 2B shows BNV(X,Y) of the TmIG film measured in a region where a DW intersects an area partially covered by Pt. From this measurement, we reconstruct the out-of-plane component of the magnetization Mz(X,Y) (see Methods), as shown in Fig. 2C. Although the DW runs continuously across the Pt edge, the linescans of BNV(X,Y) shown in Figs. 2D and 2E reveal that the DW structure changes going from TmIG/Pt to TmIG. In order to extract the magnetization profile of the DW from these measurements, we fit BNV(X,Y) by assuming that the magnetization components in the rotated coordinate system XYZ (Fig. 2A) vary as (17, 33) MX(X) = MS cos ψ cosh( X ∆DW), MY(X) = 0, MZ(X) = −MS tanh ( X ∆DW), (1) where ψ defines the angle of the in-plane magnetization direction with respect to the X-axis, ∆DW is the DW width, and MS the saturation magnetization. Figures 2D and 2E compare representative BNV(X,Y) line profiles for TmIG/Pt and TmIG together with fits performed assuming a pure Bloch wall Fig. 2B according to Eq. 1 gives ∆DW= (17 ± 17) nm and ∆DW= (27 ± 6) nm for TmIG/Pt and TmIG, respectively (see Methods). Despite the large uncertainty in ∆DW, which is due to the weak dependence of BNV on ∆DW, the fits show that the DWs in 8-nm-thick TmIG are extremely narrow. Moreover, we find that the DW have a Néel chiral structure in both TmIG/Pt and TmIG, which is characterized by the angles ψ = (116 ± 33)° and ψ = (173 ± 17)°, respectively. Thus, the DW changes from left-handed Néel to an intermediate left-handed Néel-Bloch configuration in going from TmIG to TmIG/Pt, which is a compelling indication of the presence of negative DMI in the bare TmIG layer, most likely due to symmetry breaking at the SGGG/TmIG interface. The deposition of Pt reduces the DMI, which we ascribe to the presence of positive DMI at the TmIG/Pt interface, consistently with the sign of the DMI found in metallic ferromagnetic/Pt bilayers (14, 15, 17). These findings have important consequences for the operation of DW racetracks in magnetic insulators, because the reduced ∆DW favors the localization of DWs, whereas the finite DMI allows for their efficient manipulation by SOTs. In order to prove this last point, we investigate the switching dynamics and current-induced DW motion below the Pt line. We refer to the switching of the magnetization starting from a homogeneously magnetized TmIG layer as forward switching (domain expansion), and to the return to 5 a homogenous magnetic state starting from a reversed domain as backward switching (domain contraction). Figure 3A shows the relative change in the magnetization induced by a single forward switching current pulse as a function of Hx and Jx. Within the experimental error, we find that the switching diagram is symmetric upon inversion of Hx or Jx, indicating that the SOT efficiency is the same for up-to-down and down-to-up switching and independent on the current direction. Distinct to electrical reading (27–29), which is only sensitive to the magnetic moments in the vicinity of the Hall cross (Fig. 1, B and C, and Fig. S5), MOKE measurements reveal that for a wide range of Hx and Jx only partial switching is achieved. We thus study the distribution and evolution of reversed magnetic domains induced by a sequence of current pulses. Since we expect an influence of the surrounding TmIG on the magnetization dynamics underneath the Pt current line (Fig. 1C), and because the switching process is symmetric upon inverting both m and H (4, 8), we investigate the forward and backward switching processes for one fixed initial state of the film (-m). during forward switching and backward switching, respectively. For each case, we compare the combinations of field and current that allow for domain nucleation and expansion (±Hx, ±Jx) and domain contraction (±Hx, ∓Jx). These images reveal that forward switching occurs via nucleation of a reversed domain at a defect site (as confirmed by a series of repetitions) and subsequent domain expansion along the Pt current line, with comparable speeds for both DWs on the left- and right-hand sides of the domain. Backward switching takes place by pushing the outer DWs towards the center of the domain. Similar dynamics –for either expansion or contraction– is observed upon inverting Hx and Jx. The different timescales of the switching processes (see Figs. 3B and 3C) indicate that domain contraction is significantly faster than domain expansion. The most likely cause for this behavior is the tendency of the reversed domain to shrink in order to reduce the DW energy (37). Accordingly, we find that the minimum pulse length required to induce DW motion upon contraction is much smaller than for expansion (Fig. 3D). Measurements of the DW velocity vDW are reported in Fig. 4 for an up-down DW as a function of Jx and Hx during both domain expansion and domain contraction. vDW is evaluated by considering the total DW displacement after a sequence of current pulses of length tp as the DW moves along the Pt current line. Since the same tp does not allow for sampling a large Hx, Jx parameter space, we used longer (shorter) pulses for smaller (larger) Hx, Jx values. Note that the DW velocity remains almost constant when changing tp, indicating that it is not influenced by inertia (see Methods and Fig. S6). Our measurements reveal robust DW velocities of up to ~200 m s-1 for domain expansion (Fig. 4A) and ~400 m s-1 for domain contraction (Fig. 4B), which are comparable to the ones found in all-metallic structures under similar conditions (9, 14, 15). Most remarkably, however, the DW mobility μDW = 6 vDW Jx reaches values in excess of 3 × 10−10 m3 A-1 s-1 for Jx = 5 × 107 A cm-2, which is comparable to that observed in compensated metallic ferrimagnets (11, 38). In contrast, most metallic ferromagnets feature μDW = 0 in this current range (9, 10, 14, 15). The linear increase of vDW with Jx for expanding and contracting walls (Fig. 4, A and B) further reveals a very low onset of the DW flow regime (≲ 5 × 106 A cm-2) compared to conventional ferromagnetic layers (9, 10, 14, 15). This behavior is attributed to the reduced depinning field of TmIG, ~1-2 Oe (see Fig. S7), which is one to two orders of magnitude smaller than in metallic and semiconducting ferromagnets with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (39). Upon increasing the current, vDW reaches a plateau between ~0.5 x 108 A cm-2 and ~1.0 x 108 A cm-2, followed by a further upturn. The plateau indicates the saturation of the DW velocity at vDW sat ≈ γ∆DW π 2(Hx + HDMI), which occurs at a current density Jx ≫ 2eαμ0Mst ħθSH (Hx + HDMI), where  is the gyromagnetic ratio, ħ the reduced Planck constant, μ0 the vacuum permeability, θSH the effective spin Hall angle of Pt, and HDMI the effective DMI field (12, 16). Taking γ ~ 1.43 × 107 Oe-1 s-1 (40) and ∆DW ~ 20 nm (Fig. 2), and by approximating Hx + HDMI ≈ Hx = 300 Oe, we find that vDW sat ~ 135 m s-1, which agrees well with the experimental data (Fig. 4, A and B). The further increase of vDW beyond saturation, which is typical also of metallic ferromagnets (10, 15), is attributed to the influence of Joule heating and the Oersted field (see the Supplementary Materials Section S2 and Figs. S4 and S8). In agreement with the presence of DMI inferred from the DW magnetization profile, we observe a slightly larger vDW when the DW moves against the direction of the current (red symbols in Fig. 4). The same behavior is also confirmed for down-up DWs (Fig. S9). This asymmetry, which is characteristic of chiral Néel DWs (14, 15), is consistent with the left-handed Néel chirality derived from scanning NV magnetometry and the sign of the torques in TmIG/Pt (see Fig. S10 for more details). By fitting the vDW(Hx) data to a linear function and extrapolating it to vDW = 0 (15), we estimate |HDMI|~12 ± 3 Oe (Fig. 4, C and D). The DMI constant can then be calculated as D = μ0HDMIMS∆DW (9, 14), where MS ~ (6.0 ± 1.5) x 104 A m-1 and ∆DW ~ 20 nm, yielding D ~ − 2 ± 2 J m-2. This value is two to three orders of magnitude smaller than the DMI reported for ultrathin metallic ferromagnets/Pt (14, 15, 18) and one to two orders of magnitude smaller than that of ferrimagnetic metal/Pt bilayers (11). As the DW mobility in the flow regime is proportional to ΔDW/αMs, the large mobility and high DW velocities in TmIG/Pt appear as the direct consequence of the small Ms and low- damping  typical of garnet layers (31, 41). By tuning the interfacial DMI, we anticipate that even larger vDW may be reached at a relatively low current density. Our results demonstrate fast current-driven DW motion in a magnetic insulator and provide first insight into the internal DW structure of thin garnet layers. The chiral Néel structure of the DWs 7 in TmIG reveals that oxide interfaces support a finite DMI even in the absence of heavy metal layers, which makes it possible, in principle, to stabilize nontrivial topological configurations in insulating magnetic thin films, such as spin spirals and skyrmions. The low current threshold for DW flow and the large DW mobility, combined with the possibility of defining DW racetracks embedded in a continuous magnetic medium, make TmIG extremely attractive for spintronic applications. Local control of the magnetization is unique to magnetic insulators, which opens the possibility of printing arbitrary circuit paths enabling, for instance, the implementation and in situ reconfiguration of synthetic magnetic structures with tailored magnonic bands (21, 42) and nanomagnonic waveguides (43, 44). 8 Methods: Films growth and devices fabrication. The TmIG thin films were grown by pulsed laser deposition on (111)-oriented Gd3Sc2Ga3O12 substrates (lattice constant a = 12.56 Å) to achieve high tensile strain (~2%), which promotes perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (45). The substrate temperature was 650 °C, the oxygen pressure was 0.2 mbar, while the laser fluence and repetition rate were set to 1.35 J cm-2 and 8 Hz, respectively. After deposition, the samples were cooled in 200 mbar oxygen at a rate of -10 K/min. The bare TmIG films showed a root-mean-square roughness of about 0.15 nm over a ~5 x 5 μm2 area. After growth, the samples were directly transferred to the sputter chamber without breaking vacuum, where the Pt layer was deposited at room temperature for three minutes at a power of 10 W in 0.05 mbar Ar. The thickness of the layers were calibrated by x-ray reflectometry. For the sample presented in the main text, the thicknesses of TmIG and Pt where 8.3 and 5.0 nm, respectively. The Pt layer was patterned into Hall bars (consisting of three Hall crosses separated by L = 50 μm with a total channel length of 140 μm and width W = 10 μm) by photolithography and subsequent Argon plasma etching. Electric transport measurements. The longitudinal and transverse Hall resistances Rxx = Vx/Ix and Rxy = Vy/Ix, respectively, were measured by applying an alternating current (AC) of amplitude Ix = 0.3 mA and frequency f = 11 Hz and by recording the first harmonic longitudinal (Vx) and transverse (Vy)voltages, as shown schematically in Fig. 1a. MOKE measurements. We used a home-built wide-field polar MOKE microscope with Koehler illumination to measure the out-of-plane component of TmIG. Magnetic contrast was enhanced by taking differential MOKE images, i.e., each image was subtracted by a reference image captured in a fully magnetized state. The setup was equipped with two sets of orthogonal coils for the generation of out-of-plane and in-plane magnetic fields. For the switching and DW velocity studies, current pulses were injected using an AGILENT 8114A (100V/2A) pulse generator with a 50  output impedance. The impedance matching with the Pt current line was achieved by connecting a 50  resistance in parallel to the current line. The relative change in the magnetization shown in Fig. 3A was evaluated by integrating the differential MOKE signal along the Pt current line (corresponding to the bright area in Fig. 1D) after the application of a single current pulse starting from a fully magnetized state. For the domain expansion measurements (Fig. 4, A and C), an initial domain was nucleated by a single current pulse at a defect site near the center of the Hall bar. For the domain contraction experiments (Fig. 4, B and D), the initial domain was generated by switching the area underneath the Pt current line 9 with a single current pulse of tp = 150 ns, |Jx| = 0.94 x 108 A cm-2 and |Hx| = 125 Oe, leading to a domain as the one shown in Fig. 1D. In order to compare the DW velocities obtained for domain expansion and domain contraction, we studied the same DW moving back and forth over the same area. The case presented in Fig. 4 corresponds to an up-down DW moving between the center and the right end of the Hall bar. The DW velocity vDW was evaluated by measuring the total DW displacement ∆x (as identified by direct MOKE imaging) obtained after the application of a series of Np current pulses of width tp, yielding vDW = ∆x / (Np tp). The pulses were applied at a frequency of 1 Hz in order to minimize the heat load during the experiment. vDW was found to be nearly independent of tp –only showing a slight increase of 10% or less when doubling the pulse length, which we attribute to Joule heating– indicating that the DW motion coincides with the pulse duration (see Fig. S6 for more details). Scanning NV magnetometry. Spatially resolved scans of the magnetic stray field produced by a DW in TmIG (see Fig. 2A) were acquired on a home-built nanoscale scanning diamond magnetometer (NSDM) microscope. Experiments were carried out in ambient environment and at zero magnetic bias field. The NSDM employed a monolithic diamond probe tip with a single NV center implanted at the apex (QZabre LLC, www.qzabre.com). The NV center spin resonance was monitored by optically-detected magnetic resonance (ODMR) spectroscopy (36)(46) using a nearby microwave antenna (~2.9 GHz) for spin excitation and fluorescence microscopy (532 nm excitation, 630-800 nm detection) for spin state readout. To convert the spin resonance frequencies to units of magnetic field, we fitted the ODMR spectrum to a double Lorentzian and extracted the frequency difference Δf between the resonance peaks. The detected field BNV is then given by |BNV| = π Δf γ , where γ = 2π ⋅ 28.0 GHz/T is the electron gyromagnetic ratio. To re-establish the relative sign of BNV, we inverted (BNV → −BNV) the image on one side of the DW (Fig. 2B). Note that scanning NV magnetometry provides a vector projection of the magnetic field, BNV = B → ∙ e → NV = sinθNV cos φNV Bx + sinθNVsinφNVBy + cos θNVBz, (2) because the NV center is sensitive only to fields that are parallel to its symmetry axis e → NV. Here, B → is the vector field at the position of the NV center, and θNV and φNV are the polar and azimuth angles of e → NV in the laboratory frame (see Fig. S11). The direction e → NV is determined by the crystallographic orientation of the diamond tip and the probe arrangement in the setup (see Fig. 2A). θNV and φNV were calibrated by a series of ODMR measurements and confirmed by line scans. For the experiments presented in Fig. 2, θNV = (55 ± 2)° and φNV = (83 ± 3)°. 10 We investigated the magnetization, spin structure and width of the DW by analyzing the local field image BNV(X, Y) shown in Fig. 2B. In a first step, we fitted line cuts across the TmIG to TmIG/Pt step edge to extract the NV center stand-off distance, d = (104 ± 5) nm (see the Supplementary Materials Section S3). To characterize the chirality and width of the DW, we took line cuts of BNV perpendicular to the DW as shown in Fig. 2B, and compared them to the analytical model given through Eq. (1). The associated magnetic stray field was obtained by forward propagation of Eq. (1) in k-space according to (47)(48), B̂X = ĝ(−kM̂X + ikXM̂Z) , B̂Y = ĝ(−kM̂Y + ikyM̂Z) , B̂Z = ĝ(ikXM̂X + ikYM̂Y + kM̂Z) , (3) where hat symbols indicate Fourier transforms, kX, kY, and k = (kX 2 + kY 2)1/2 are the in-plane k-space vectors, ĝ = μ0t 2 ( 1−e−kt kt ) e−kd is the Fourier transform of the Green’s function (48), and t = 8.3 nm is the film thickness. When taking line cuts along X across a domain wall extending along Y, the Y and M̂Y terms become zero and Eq. (3) simplifies to B̂X = ĝ(−kM̂X + ikXM̂Z), B̂Y = 0 and B̂Z = ĝ(ikXM̂X + kM̂Z). To extract values for Ms, ψ and ∆DW we fitted the experimentally measured BNV to the analytical prediction by Eqs. (1-3), with the domain wall position x = x0 as an additional fit parameter. By repeating the fitting procedure for a series of line scans, we obtained distributions for all parameters together with their means and standard deviations. A detailed description of the fitting procedure and error analysis is given in the Supplementary Materials Section S3. By assuming that the magnetization is predominantly out-of-plane, we further reconstructed a magnetization map Mz from the magnetic field map BNV by using M̂Z = −B̂NV W g(ikXeX+ikYeY−keZ), (4) where W is a low-pass filter (cutoff λ = d) that suppressed high spatial frequencies in the image (48). The resultant magnetization map is plotted in Fig. 2C. Note that while the magnetic domains of TmIG and TmIG/Pt are well reproduced, the reconstruction slightly overestimates Mz near the DW due to the left Néel character of the DW. 11 Supplementary Materials Supplementary material for this article is available at .........  Section S1. Electrical characterization of TmIG/Pt by spin Hall magnetoresistance: determination of the interface quality and the magnetic anisotropy  Section S2. Influence of the presence of an applied out-of-plane field, current-induced Oersted fields and Joule heating on the magnetization switching process  Section S3. Scanning NV magnetometry  Fig. S1. Structural and magnetic characterization of the thulium iron garnet thin films  Fig. S2. Electrical characterization of the spin Hall magnetoresistance and magnetic anisotropy of TmIG/Pt  Fig. S3. Forward switching in the presence of an out-of-plane field Hz  Fig. S4. Switching dynamics at large current densities: influence of the Oersted fields  Fig. S5. Simultaneous Hall and MOKE measurements of TmIG/Pt devices  Fig. S6. Dependence of vDW on the pulse length  Fig. S7. Evaluation of the domain wall depinning field  Fig. S8. Multiple domain nucleation at large current densities  Fig. S9. Comparison of vDW between an up-down and a down-up domain wall  Fig. S10. Schematics of the domain wall structure and current-induced domain wall motion in the presence of Hx and DMI  Fig. S11. Definition of the polar angles NV and NV  Fig. S12. In situ calibration of the NV stand-off distance on TmIG/Pt 