Atomistic structure learning Mathias S. Jørgensen, Henrik L. Mortensen, Søren A. Meldgaard, Esben L. Kolsbjerg, Thomas L. Jacobsen, Knud H. Sørensen, and Bjørk Hammer∗ Department of Physics and Astronomy, and Interdisciplinary Nanoscience Center (iNANO), Aarhus University, DK-8000 Aarhus C, Denmark. (Dated: February 28, 2019) One endeavour of modern physical chemistry is to use bottom-up approaches to design materials and drugs with desired properties. Here we introduce an atomistic struc- ture learning algorithm (ASLA) that utilizes a convolutional neural network to build 2D compounds and layered structures atom by atom. The algorithm takes no prior data or knowledge on atomic interactions but inquires a first-principles quantum me- chanical program for physical properties. Using reinforcement learning, the algorithm accumulates knowledge of chemical compound space for a given number and type of atoms and stores this in the neural network, ultimately learning the blueprint for the optimal structural arrangement of the atoms for a given target property. ASLA is demonstrated to work on diverse problems, including grain boundaries in graphene sheets, organic compound formation and a surface oxide structure. This approach to structure prediction is a first step toward direct manipulation of atoms with artificially intelligent first principles computer codes. The discovery of new materials for energy capture and energy storage and the design of new drugs with tar- geted pharmacological properties stand out as the ulti- mate goals of contemporary chemistry research and ma- terials science . The design spaces for these problems are immense and do not lend themselves to brute force or random sampling . This has led to the introduction of screening strategies in which computational chemistry is utilized to identify the more promising candidates be- fore experimental synthesis and characterization is car- ried out . Machine learning techniques have further been introduced to speed up such screening approaches . Unsupervised machine learning may serve to cate- gorize substances whereby further search efforts can be focused on representative members of different categories . Supervised machine learning may direct the searches even further as properties of unknown materials are pre- dicted based on the properties of known materials . In recent years, there has been a move toward even more powerful use of machine learning, namely the employ- ment of active learning schemes such as reinforcement learning . In active learning, the computational search is self- directed. It thereby becomes independent on both the availability of large datasets as in big data approaches and on the formulation by the research team of a valid guiding hypothesis. In the chemistry domain, the power of active learning has been demonstrated in drug design. Schemes in which molecules may be built from encoding strings, e.g. the simplified molecular-input line- entry system (SMILES) strings, have led to artificial in- telligence driven protocols, where a neural network based on experience spells the string for the most promising next drug to be tested . For instance, generative ∗ hammer@phys.au.dk adversarial networks (GANs) have been utilized for this . The strength of reinforcement learning was recently demonstrated by Google DeepMind in a domain accessi- ble to the general public [14–16]. Here Atari 2600 com- puter games and classical board games such as Chess and Go were tackled with techniques from computer vision and image recognition and performances were achieved that surpassed those of all previous algorithms and hu- man champions. I. ATOMISTIC REINFORCEMENT LEARNING In the present work, we aim at bringing the image recognition approach into the domain of quantum chem- ical guided materials search. I.e. we formulate a protocol for deep reinforcement learning in which a convolutional neural network (CNN) starts with zero knowledge and builds up its knowledge of optimal organisation of mat- ter via self-guided recurring inquiries for its produced candidate structures. By optimal organisation of mat- ter, we consider in this first application primarily the thermodynamical stability of a configuration as revealed by a quantum mechanical simulation. The network is fed a real-space image-like representation of the chemi- cal structures and is trained by ”playing” against itself, striving to beat the properties of its ever best candidate. As a result, the blueprint for favourable atomic arrange- ments is directly searched for and learned by the network. This deviates from existing approaches that based on in- tricate descriptors of the atomic environments attempt to facilitate the calculation of quantum mechan- ical energy landscapes at a low cost [19–24] and use them in traditional global structure optimisation methods [25– 27]. Technical details on our CNN architecture and train- ing procedure are described in Methods. arXiv:1902.10501v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 27 Feb 2019 2 Training Phase Neural network weight update Training data example Calculating training batch rewards s(i) t s(i) t+1 , , , r1 , , , r2 rNbatch a(i) t Q Qtarget(s(i) t , a(i) Spillover Input Convolution layers DFT calculation Evaluation Phase Replay buffer P(i) P(i) P(i) P(i) P(i) Building Phase Neural network Action (ɛ-greedy) Neural network Action (ɛ-greedy) Action (ɛ-greedy) Action (ɛ-greedy) s(i) 2 s(i) 1 s(i) 3 s(i) 10 s(i) final structure s(i) t is input to the CNN that outputs Q-values (blue raster plot) estimating the expected reward for the final structure, s(i) final. N consecutive actions, a(i) t , are taken according to an ε-greedy policy thereby building the final structure. In the evaluation phase, a structure property, P(i), is calculated. All episode steps are stored in the replay buffer from which a training batch is extracted. Properties contained in the batch are then converted to rewards which represent Qtarget-values that the CNN is trained toward predicting. The goal of an ASLA structure search is to generate structures of a given stoichiometry which optimise a tar- get structural property, P. This is done by repeatedly generating candidate structures, evaluating a reward ac- cording to P, and learning from these experiences, or episodes, how to generate the globally optimal structure. The three phases of an ASLA structure search, building, evaluation and training, are depicted in Fig. 1. In the building phase, atoms are placed one at a time on a real space grid to form a structure candi- date. N atoms are placed in a sequence of actions at ∈ {a1, a2, ..., aN}. At each step of the candidate gen- eration ASLA attempts to predict the expected reward of the final structure given the incomplete current structure. This information is stored in a CNN, which takes as in- put the incomplete, current configuration st, encoded in a simple one-hot tensor, and outputs the expected reward (Q-value) for each available action (see Extended Data Fig. 1). The action is chosen either as the one with the highest Q-value (greedy), or in ε-fraction of the time at random to encourage exploration. After the completion of a structure (episode i), the property P(i) of that final structure s(i) final is calculated in the evaluation phase, e.g. as the potential energy according to density functional theory (DFT), P(i) = EDFT(s(i) final), in which case ASLA will eventually identify the thermodynamically most sta- ble structure at T = 0 K. In the training phase, the CNN parameters are up- dated via backpropagation, which lowers the root mean square error between predicted Q-values and Qtarget- values calculated according to: Qtarget(s(i) t , a(i) t ) = r(P(i)), (1) where r ∈ [−1, 1] is the reward of completing episode i with property P(i), where 1 is considered the better re- ward (reflecting e.g. the lowest potential energy). Thus, the Q-value of action a(i) t of step t is converged toward the reward following the properties of the final configu- ration s(i) final, an approach also taken in Monte Carlo rein- forcement learning . Equation 1 ensures that actions leading to desired structures will be chosen more often. A training batch of Nbatch state-action-property tuples, t , a(i) t , P(i)), is selected from the most recent episode, the best episode, and via experience replay of older episode steps. The batch is augmented by rotation of structures on the grid. Rotational equivariance is thus learned by the CNN instead of encoded in a molecular descriptor as is done traditionally . This allows the CNN to learn and operate directly on real space coordinates. We furthermore take advantage of the smoothness of the potential energy surface by smear- 3 a b No training i = 200 i = 1000 i = 2000 i = 2000 t = 1 t = 10 t = 20 t = 1 t = 10 t = 20 One example of predicted Q-values for t = 1, 10 and 20 after 0, 200, 1000 and 2000 episodes respectively. b, An example of an agent which builds the globally optimal structure in a different sequence. ing out the learning of Q-values to nearby grid points (spillover). See Methods for details. II. BUILDING GRAPHENE As a first demonstration, an instance of ASLA (an agent) learns how to build a sheet of pristine graphene. One carbon atom is present in an initial template struc- ture, s1, and N = 23 carbon atoms are placed by the agent on a grid with periodic boundary conditions. Fig- ure 2a presents one example of predicted Q-values for t = 1, 10, 20 during the building phase of one agent (for statistics involving 50 independent agents, see Extended Data Fig. 2a+b). Values are shown for the tabula rasa agent (the untrained agent) and for the agent trained for 200, 1000 and 2000 episodes. At first, the untrained CNN outputs random Q-values stemming from the random ini- tialization, and consequently a rather messy structure is built. After 200 episodes, the agent has found the sub- optimal strategy of placing all the carbon atoms with reasonable interatomic distances, but more or less on a straight line. The angular preference at this point is thus to align all bonds. After 1000 episodes, the agent has realized that bond directions must alternate and now ar- rives at building the honeycomb pattern of graphene. Af- ter 2000 episodes, the agent still builds graphene, now in a slightly different sequence. The evolution over the episodes of the overall ring- shaped patterns in the Q-values for t = 1 show how the agent becomes aware of the correct interatomic dis- tances. The barely discernible six-fold rotational sym- metric modulation of the Q-values that develop within the rings ends up being responsible for the agent choosing bond directions that are compatible with accommodating graphene within the given periodic boundary conditions. Interestingly, the agent may discover the optimal struc- ture through different paths due to the random initializa- tion and the stochastic elements of the search. In Fig. 2b, another agent has evolved into building the graphene structure in a different sequence. This time the agent has learned to first place all next-nearest atoms (half of the structure) in a simple, regular pattern. The remain- ing atoms can then be placed in the same pattern but shifted. One can imagine how this pattern is easily en- coded in the CNN. III. TRANSFER LEARNING Moving on to a more complex problem, we consider a graphene grain boundary which has been studied by Zhang et al. . Here, an ASLA agent must place 20 atoms in between two graphene sheets that are mis- aligned by 13.17◦, which induces a pentagon-heptagon (5-7) defect in the grain boundary. The complete struc- ture under consideration is comprised of 80 atoms per cell. We first run an ensemble of 50 tabula rasa agents. Within ∼2500 episodes, half of the agents have found the 5-7 defect structure as the optimal structure (Fig. 3 and Extended Data Fig. 2d). The number of required episodes can be lowered signif- icantly with the use of transfer learning. Transfer learn- ing is a widely used approach in many domains where knowledge is acquired for one problem and applied to an- other . Our CNN architecture allows us to utilize transfer learning, since each Q-value is evaluated based on the atomic-centered environment, which is indepen- dent of the cell size. The CNN may learn elements of how to discriminate favourable and unfavourable atomic arrangements in simple systems, and retain this knowl- edge when used in larger, more computationally expen- sive systems. To demonstrate this, we choose a simpler problem, namely that of placing two atoms at the edge of a graphene nanoribbon (see upper right corner of Fig. 3). Using our DFT setup this simple problem is cheaper to compute by a factor of ∼5 due to the smaller num- 4 2500 episodes 1000 episodes Transfer 1000 episodes CPU hours 0 9.9 67.1 ... ... required to solve the graphene grain boundary problem with- out and with transfer learning (left and right part, respec- tively). The transferred agents pay a small amount of com- putational resources on the cheap graphene edge problem to get a head start on the grain boundary problem, where they solve it 50% of the time using 57.2 CPU hours or less. How- ever, the tabula rasa agents need 143.0 CPU hours to achieve the same. ber of atoms. The agents trained on this problem are transferred to build the grain boundary. Although the graphene edge problem is too simple to immediately in- fer the full solution to the grain boundary problem (Ex- tended Data Figs. 3+4), the pretrained agents hold a clear advantage over the tabula rasa agents. The aver- age energies during the search reveal that the transferred agents produce structures close in energy to the globally optimal structure even before further training (Extended Data Fig. 2f), and now only about 1000 episodes are re- quired for half of the agents to find the 5-7 defect. a b c d e f <0.4 Q-values >0.9 <-0.5 Relevance values >0.5 Q-values (left) and relevance values (right) given by an agent trained on the graphene edge. a, The agent has learned that closing a six-membered carbon ring results in low potential energy and assigns high Q-values for these positions. b, Relevance values for the action (×) re- veal that nearby atoms are responsible for the high Q-values. c, If an atom is too close to an action (×), this atom is re- sponsible for low Q-values. d, The agent recognizes similar arrangements of atoms in the grain boundary (after 3 atoms have been added) and assigns high Q-values for correspond- ing actions. e and f, Although the agent has never seen this configuration, it applies the local knowledge learned in the graphene edge problem. To inspect the agents’ motivation for predicting given Q-values, we employ a variant of the layer-wise relevance propagation method (see Methods). The relevance value of an atom indicates how influential that atom was in the prediction of the Q-value, where 1 is positive influence, −1 is negative influence and 0 is no influence. We show the Q- and relevance values for the graphene edge and grain boundary problems in Fig. 4, as given by one of the agents that has only been trained on the graphene edge problem. In addition to solving the graphene edge problem by closing a six-membered ring, the agent rec- ognizes similar local motifs (unclosed rings) in the grain boundary problem which lead to favourable actions even 5 without further training (Fig. 4b+e). The relevance val- ues in Fig. 4c+f also reveal that the agent has learned not to place atoms too close no matter the local environment. IV. MOLECULAR DESIGN The ability of ASLA to build multicomponent struc- tures is easily accommodated by adding to the CNN in- put a dimension representing the atomic type. The CNN will then correspondingly output a map of Q-values for each atomic type. When building a structure, a greedy action now becomes that of choosing the next atom place- ment according to the highest Q-value across all atomic types. trained ASLA agent assembling three carbon, four hydro- gen and two oxygen atoms into one or more molecules. The agent identifies the combination of a carbon diox- ide and an ethylene molecule as its preferred build- ing motif. The reason for this build is the thermody- namic preference for these molecules with the chosen computational approach. Depending on the initial condi- tions and the stochastic elements of ASLA, we find that other agents may train themselves into transiently build- ing a plethora of other chemically meaningful molecules given the present 2D constraint. The list of molecules built includes acrylic acid, vinyl formate, vinyl alcohol, formaldehyde, formic acid and many other well known chemicals (see Extended Data Figs. 5+6). when 25 independent agents are run for 10000 episodes, and shows that ASLAs prolific production of different molecules has a strong preference for the thermodynam- ically most stable compounds (blue bars). This is in ac- cordance with the reward function depending solely on the stability of the molecules. We find, however, that the building preference of ASLA may easily be nudged in particular directions exploiting the bottom-up approach taken by the method. To do this we modify the prop- erty function slightly (see Methods) rewarding structures that contain some atomic motif. The histogram in Fig. 5c shows the frequencies with which molecules are built once the reward is increased for structures that have an oxy- gen atom binding to two carbon atoms. No constraints on the precise bond lengths and angles are imposed, and ASLA consequently produces both ethers (structures 6, 18, 22 and 24) and an epoxy molecule (structure 19) at high abundance, while the building of other molecules is suppressed. The production of the epoxy species intensifies as evi- denced by Fig. 5d once the rewarding motif becomes that of a carbon atom bound to one carbon and two oxygen atoms. This motif further codes very strongly for acidic molecules (structures 2, 14 and 23). In fact, now every agent started eventually ends up building acrylic acid (structure 2) within the allowed number of episodes. values in the process of building ethylene + carbon diox- ide. b, Distribution of molecular compounds of stoichiometry C3H4O2, sorted by formation energy, as found by 25 agents during 10000 episodes. For all structures see Extended Data Fig. 6. The sum exceeds 100% as a punishing term is em- ployed once a build has been found repeatedly (see Methods). c, Search results when rewarding O binding to 2×C, coding for ether and epoxy groups. d, Search results when rewarding C binding to C and 2×O, coding for epoxy and acidic groups. e, Search results when rewarding C binding to O and 2×C, coding mainly for cyclic C3 groups. 6 4)-O phase (adapted from ). b, Experimental information on super cell, absence of atoms in corner regions and stoichiometry is used as input to ASLA. c, Transfer of ASLAs 2D structure to become a surface layer in a DFT slab calculation. d, Predicted Q-values for an episode where the agent has self-learned to build the globally optimal overlayer structure. Switching to a rewarding motif consisting of a carbon atom binding to one oxygen and two carbon atoms we find the results of Fig. 5e. Now, the search builds almost twice as many 2-hydroxyacrylaldehyde molecules (struc- ture 4) and adopts a clear preference for molecules with three carbon atoms in a ring, such as the aromatic cyclo- propenone and related molecules (structures 16, 20 and 26). The ability of ASLA to direct its search in response to variations in the reward function represents a sim- ple illustration of how automated structure search may lead to design of molecules with certain properties. The present approach may be used in search for larger organic compounds with some given backbone building blocks or some assemblies of functional groups. It might also be directly applicable when searching for organo-metalic compounds where the malleable bonds mean that the desired motif may only be specified loosely as done here. However, for searches that target e.g. ionization poten- tials, HOMO-LUMO gaps, deprotonation energies, and other global properties of molecules, we envisage that more elaborate strategies for directing the searches must be implemented in order to truly conduct molecular de- sign. V. SURFACE OXIDE ON AG(111) As a final, non-trivial example, the structure of ox- idized silver, known to be an efficient catalyst for e.g. epoxidation reactions , is considered. For this system, one particular surface oxide phase, Ag(111)-p(4 × 4)-O, has been subject to many studies since the 1970s resulting in several proposed structures [33–37]. Key experimental observations include STM images (Fig. 6a) of a regular rhombic surface unit cell containing 12 Ag atoms and 6 O atoms per unit cell with void regions amounting to approximately 25% of the cell . Using this information, we prepare a grid (Fig. 6b) on which an agent can build a Ag12O6 overlayer structure. The prop- erty of a specific build is the DFT potential energy of the overlayer structure once placed on a single, fixed Ag(111) layer representing the silver crystal (Fig. 6c). Employ- ing transfer learning, starting from an agent trained in 7 forming Ag4O2 clusters (Extended Data Fig. 7) ASLA proves capable of learning by itself to build the intricate structure shown in Fig. 6d. In hindsight, this structure might appear highly intuitive to a trained inorganic sur- face chemist, yet despite many efforts this correct structure remained elusive for more than half a decade after the first characterization by STM imaging in 2000 until it was finally identified in 2006 . It is intrigu- ing how such a puzzling structure may now emerge from a fully autonomous reinforcement learning setup and a CNN of a relatively modest size. VI. OUTLOOK In the present work, we have demonstrated how deep reinforcement learning can be used in conjunction with first principles computational methods to automate the prediction of 2D molecular and inorganic compounds of optimal stability. The work is readily generalized into handling 3D atomistic structures by turning to 3D con- volution kernels and adding one more spatial dimension to the input grid and to the output Q-value tensor. This will increase the computation load of each Q-value pre- diction linearly in the number of grid points added in the 3rd dimension, which is manageable. It will, however, also open for more complex problems to be addressed which will require more episodes to converge. As more complex 2D or even 3D problems are tackled with the method, we foresee the need for introducing fur- ther means of directing the global optimisation. The re- inforcement protocol will be slow in detecting structures that require several favourable ε-moves to form and will suffer from conservatism, exploring mainly close to pre- viously built structures. Here, adding e.g. a beam search strategy, Monte Carlo tree search and possibly combining the method with a property predictor network allowing for the screening of several orders of magnitude more structures than those handled with the first principles method may be viable strategies. Finally, we note that agents trained to act on a vari- able number of atoms are desirable as they will be more versatile and capable of solving more diverse problems. Such agents may be obtained by introducing chemical potentials of atomic species. Notwithstanding such pos- sible extensions, we consider the present work to repre- sent a first peek into a rich research direction that will eventually bring about first principles computer codes for intelligent, bottom-up design and direct manipulation of atoms in chemical physics and materials science. Gisbert Schneider and Uli Fechner, “Computer-based de novo design of drug-like molecules,” Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 4, 649–663 (2005). Daniel P. Tabor, Lo ̈ıc M. Roch, Semion K. Saikin, Christoph Kreisbeck, Dennis Sheberla, Joseph H. Mon- toya, Shyam Dwaraknath, Muratahan Aykol, Car- los Ortiz, Hermann Tribukait, Carlos Amador-Bedolla, Christoph J. Brabec, Benji Maruyama, Kristin A. Pers- son, and Al ́an Aspuru-Guzik, “Accelerating the discov- ery of materials for clean energy in the era of smart au- tomation,” Nature Reviews Materials 3, 5–20 (2018). Peter Kirkpatrick and Clare Ellis, “Chemical space,” Na- ture 432, 823 (2004). Andrew McNally, Christopher K. Prier, and David W. C. MacMillan, “Discovery of an -amino c–h arylation reac- tion using the strategy of accelerated serendipity,” Sci- Jeff Greeley, Thomas F. Jaramillo, Jacob Bonde, Ib Chorkendorff, and Jens K. Nørskov, “Computational high-throughput screening of electrocatalytic materials for hydrogen evolution,” Nature Materials 5, 909–913 Rafael G ́omez-Bombarelli, Jorge Aguilera-Iparraguirre, Timothy D. Hirzel, David Duvenaud, Dougal Maclau- rin, Martin A. Blood-Forsythe, Hyun Sik Chae, Markus Einzinger, Dong-Gwang Ha, Tony Wu, Geor- gios Markopoulos, Soonok Jeon, Hosuk Kang, Hiroshi Miyazaki, Masaki Numata, Sunghan Kim, Wenliang Huang, Seong Ik Hong, Marc Baldo, Ryan P. Adams, and Al ́an Aspuru-Guzik, “Design of efficient molecular organic light-emitting diodes by a high-throughput vir- tual screening and experimental approach,” Nature Ma- terials 15, 1120–1127 (2016). L. L. Duan, Y. Mei, D. Zhang, Q. G. Zhang, and G. Z. H. Zhang, “Folding of a helix at room temperature is crit- ically aided by electrostatic polarization of intraprotein hydrogen bonds,” J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132, 11159–11164 G. Pilania, C. Wang, X. Jiang, S. Rajasekaran, and R. Ramprasad, “Accelerating materials property predic- tions using machine learning,” Sci. Rep. 3, 2810 (2013). Marcus Olivecrona, Thomas Blaschke, Ola Engkvist, and Hongming Chen, “Molecular de-novo design through deep reinforcement learning,” J. Cheminformatics 9, 48 Mariya Popova, Olexandr Isayev, and Alexander Trop- sha, “Deep reinforcement learning for de novo drug de- sign,” Science Advances 4, eaap7885 (2018). James E. Saal, Scott Kirklin, Muratahan Aykol, Bryce Meredig, and C. Wolverton, “Materials design and dis- covery with high-throughput density functional theory: The open quantum materials database (oqmd),” JOM Rafael G ́omez-Bombarelli, Jennifer N. Wei, David Duvenaud, Jos ́e Miguel Hern ́andez-Lobato, Benjam ́ın S ́anchez-Lengeling, Dennis Sheberla, Jorge Aguilera- Iparraguirre, Timothy D. Hirzel, Ryan P. Adams, and Al ́an Aspuru-Guzik, “Automatic chemical design using a data-driven continuous representation of molecules,” ACS Central Science 4, 268–276 (2018). Evgeny Putin, Arip Asadulaev, Yan Ivanenkov, Vladimir Aladinskiy, Benjamin Sanchez-Lengeling, Al ́an Aspuru- Guzik, and Alex Zhavoronkov, “Reinforced adversarial neural computer for de novo molecular design,” J. Chem. 8 Inf. Model 58, 1194 (2018). Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, An- drei A. Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G. Bellemare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K. Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, Stig Petersen, Charles Beattie, Amir Sadik, Ioannis Antonoglou, Helen King, Dharshan Kumaran, Daan Wierstra, Shane Legg, and Demis Hassabis, “Human-level control through deep reinforcement learn- ing,” Nature 518, 529 (2015). David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J. Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George van den Driessche, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershel- vam, Marc Lanctot, Sander Dieleman, Dominik Grewe, John Nham, Nal Kalchbrenner, Ilya Sutskever, Timothy Lillicrap, Madeleine Leach, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis, “Mastering the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search,” Nature David Silver, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja Huang, Arthur Guez, Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, Matthew Lai, Adrian Bolton, Yu- tian Chen, Timothy Lillicrap, Fan Hui, Laurent Sifre, George van den Driessche, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis, “Mastering the game of go without human knowledge,” Nature 550, 354 (2017). B. Huang and O. A. von Lilienfeld, “Communication: Understanding molecular representations in machine learning: The role of uniqueness and target similarity,” J. Chem. Phys. 145, 161102 (2016). F. A. Faber, L. Hutchison, B. Huang, J. Gilmer, S. S. Schoenholz, G. E. Dahl, O. Vinyals, S. Kearnes, P. F. Riley, and O. A. von Lilienfeld, “Prediction errors of molecular machine learning models lower than hybrid dft error,” J. Chem. Theory Comput. 13, 5255–5264 (2017). A. O. Bart ́ok, M. C. Payne, R. Kondor, and G. Cs ́anyi, “Gaussian approximation potentials: The accuracy of quantum mechanics, without the electrons,” Phys. Rev. Jrg Behler and Michele Parrinello, “Generalized neural- network representation of high-dimensional potential- energy surfaces,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 146401 (2007). Matthias Rupp, Alexandre Tkatchenko, Klaus-Robert M ̈uller, and O. Anatole von Lilienfeld, “Fast and ac- curate modeling of molecular atomization energies with machine learning,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 058301 (2012). Z. Li, J. R. Kermode, and A. De Vita, “Molecular dynamics with on-the-fly machine learning of quantum- mechanical forces,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 096405 (2015). J. S. Smith, O. Isayev, and A. E. Roitberg, “Ani-1: an extensible neural network potential with dft accuracy at force field computational cost,” Chem. Sci. 8, 3192 S. Chmiela, A. Tkatchenko, H. E. Sauceda, I. Poltavsky, K. T. Sch ̈utt, and K.-R. M ̈uller, “Machine learning of accurate energy-conserving molecular force fields,” Sci. Adv. 3, e1603015 (2017). R. Ouyang, Y. Xie, and D. Jiang, “Global optimiza- tion of gold clusters by combining neural network po- tentials and the basin-hopping method,” Nanoscale 7, S.-D. Huang, C. Shang, P.-L. Kang, and Z.-P. Liu, “Atomic structure of boron resolved using machine learn- ing and global sampling,” Chem. Sci. 9, 8644 (2018). E. L. Kolsbjerg, A. A. Peterson, and B. Hammer, “Neural-network-enhanced evolutionary algorithm ap- plied to supported meral nanoparticles,” Phys. Rev. B. Richard Sutton and A Barto, Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction (MIT Press, 2018). Kristof T. Sch ̈utt, Farhad Arbabzadah, Stefan Chmiela, Klaus R. M ̈uller, and Alexandre Tkatchenko, “Quantum- chemical insights from deep tensor neural networks,” Na- ture Communications 8, 13890 (2017). Xiuyun Zhang, Ziwei Xu, Qinghong Yuan, John Xin, and Feng Ding, “The favourable large misorientation angle grain boundaries in graphene,” Nanoscale 7, 20082–20088 Sinno Jialin Pan and Qiang Yang, “A survey on transfer learning,” IEEE Trans. on Knowl. and Data Eng. 22, Matthew E. Taylor and Peter Stone, “Transfer learning for reinforcement learning domains: A survey,” J. Mach. Learn. Res. 10, 1633–1685 (2009). J. Schnadt, A. Michaelides, K. Knudsen, R. T. Vang, K. Reuter, E. Lægsgaard, M. Scheffler, and F. Besen- bacher, “Revisiting the structure of the p(4 × 4) surface oxide on ag(111),” Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 146101 (2006). Angelos Michaelides, Karsten Reuter, and Matthias Scheffler, “When seeing is not believing: Oxygen on ag(111), a simple adsorption system?” J. Vac. Sci. Tech- nol. A 23, 1487 (2005). G. Rovida, F. Pratesi, M. Maglietta, and E. Ferroni, “Chemisorption of oxygen on the silver (111) surface,” Surf. Sci. 43, 230–256 (1974). C. I. Carlisle, D. A. King, M.-L. Bocquet, J. Cerd ́a, and P. Sautet, “Imaging the surface and the interface atoms of an oxide film on ag{111} by scaning tunneling mi- croscopy: Experiment and theory,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, M. Schmid, A. Reicho, A. Stierle, I. Costina, J. Klikovits, P. Kostelnik, O. Dubay, G. Kresse, J. Gustafson, E. Lundgren, J. N. Andersen, H. Dosch, and P. Varga, “Structure of ag(111)-p(4 × 4)-o: No silver oide,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 146102 (2006). Mart ́ın Abadi, Ashish Agarwal, Paul Barham, Eugene Brevdo, Zhifeng Chen, Craig Citro, Greg S. Corrado, Andy Davis, Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu Devin, Sanjay Ghe- mawat, Ian Goodfellow, Andrew Harp, Geoffrey Irving, Michael Isard, Yangqing Jia, Rafal Jozefowicz, Lukasz Kaiser, Manjunath Kudlur, Josh Levenberg, Dande- lion Man ́e, Rajat Monga, Sherry Moore, Derek Mur- ray, Chris Olah, Mike Schuster, Jonathon Shlens, Benoit Steiner, Ilya Sutskever, Kunal Talwar, Paul Tucker, Vincent Vanhoucke, Vijay Vasudevan, Fernanda Vi ́egas, Oriol Vinyals, Pete Warden, Martin Wattenberg, Martin Wicke, Yuan Yu, and Xiaoqiang Zheng, “TensorFlow: Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous systems,” (2015), software available from tensorflow.org. Z.-X. Xu, X.-L. Chen, L. Cao, and C.-X. Li, “A study of count-based exploration and bonus for reinforcement learning,” in 2017 IEEE 2nd International Conference on Cloud Computing and Big Data Analysis (ICCCBDA) K. Hansen, F. Biegler, R. Ramakrishnan, W. Pronobis, O. A. von Lilienfeld, K.-R. M ̈uller, and A. Tkatchenko, “Machine learning predictions of molecular properties: Accurate many-body potentials and nonlocality in chem- ical space,” J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 6, 2326–2331 (2015). 9 J. J. Mortensen, L. B. Hansen, and K. W. Jacobsen, “Real-space grid implementation of the projector aug- mented wave method,” Phys. Rev. B 71, 035109 (2005). Ask Hjorth Larsen, Jens Jrgen Mortensen, Jakob Blomqvist, Ivano E Castelli, Rune Christensen, Marcin Duak, Jesper Friis, Michael N Groves, Bjrk Hammer, Cory Hargus, Eric D Hermes, Paul C Jennings, Pe- ter Bjerre Jensen, James Kermode, John R Kitchin, Es- ben Leonhard Kolsbjerg, Joseph Kubal, Kristen Kaas- bjerg, Steen Lysgaard, Jn Bergmann Maronsson, Tris- tan Maxson, Thomas Olsen, Lars Pastewka, Andrew Pe- terson, Carsten Rostgaard, Jakob Schiøtz, Ole Sch ̈utt, Mikkel Strange, Kristian S Thygesen, Tejs Vegge, Lasse Vilhelmsen, Michael Walter, Zhenhua Zeng, and Karsten W Jacobsen, “The atomic simulation environ- menta python library for working with atoms,” J. Phys. Condens. Matter 29, 273002 (2017). John P. Perdew, Kieron Burke, and Matthias Ernzer- hof, “Generalized gradient approximation made simple,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3865–3868 (1996).