1 Stacking order-dependent sign-change of microwave phase due to eddy currents in nanometer-scale NiFe/Cu heterostructures O. Gladii,* R. L. Seeger,* L. Frangou,* G. Forestier, U. Ebels, S. Auffret, and V. Baltz** SPINTEC, Univ. Grenoble Alpes / CNRS / INAC-CEA / GINP, F-38000 Grenoble, France * equal contribution ** vincent.baltz@cea.fr Abstract In the field of spintronics, ferromagnetic/non-magnetic metallic multilayers are core building blocks for emerging technologies. Resonance experiments using stripline transducers are commonly used to characterize and engineer these stacks for applications. Up to now in these experiments, the influence of eddy currents on the excitation of the dynamics of ferromagnetic magnetization below the skin-depth limit was most often neglected. Here, using a coplanar stripline transducer, we experimentally investigated the broadband ferromagnetic resonance response of NiFe/Cu bilayers a few nanometers thick in the sub-skin-depth regime. Asymmetry in the absorption spectrum gradually built up as the excitation frequency and Cu-layer thickness increased. Most significantly, the sign of the asymmetry depended on the stacking order. Experimental data were consistent with a quantitative analysis considering eddy currents generated in the Cu layers and the subsequent phaseshift of the feedback magnetic field generated by the eddy currents. These results extend our understanding of the impact of eddy currents below the microwave magnetic skin-depth and explain the lineshape asymmetry and phase lags reported in stripline experiments. Keywords: ferromagnetic resonance, eddy currents, sub-skin-depth, lineshape, phaseshift 2 Resonance experiments are a powerful means to study physical systems and facilitate advances in material characterization and engineering. In the field of spintronics, ferromagnetic/non-magnetic (F/NM) metallic multilayers are core building blocks for emerging technologies.1 In these multilayers, the physical properties of the F (effective magnetization, anisotropy, damping), the NM metal (spin penetration length, relaxation mechanisms, eddy currents) and the interface (spin filtering, roughness) can all be recorded by measuring ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) spectra and determining their position (resonance field), linewidth, and lineshape.2 Lineshape asymmetries are relatively common in FMR experiments performed with stripline setups (coplanar and microstrip).3вҖ“7 The part of the stripline inductively coupled to the sample is equivalent to a device circuit defining a complex microwave impedance.3,8,9 The resulting phase of the microwave excitation leads to an absorption-dispersion admixture and produces asymmetric lineshapes. Although a phenomenological parameter accounting for such asymmetry is considered to extract the resonance field and linewidth from data fitting, it is usually not commented on. The reason for this is because in most cases, asymmetry, linewidth and resonance field are not related, and because for most geometries, the absorption component prevails3 and this type of experiment-related asymmetry is therefore small. Other effects such as eddy currents may produce unusual lineshapes. This type of effect has been thoroughly studied for film thicknesses above the skin-depth limit.10 In contrast, below this limit, the effects of eddy currents were most often neglected, except for a study on ac charge currents, including currents produced by spin pumping and spin-charge conversion11 and for series of comprehensive studies focused on microwave screening/shielding,3,9,12,13 e.g. leading to layer-transducer ordering-dependent standing spin wave modes in sufficiently thick layers3,12 and to depth-dependent dephasing.13 As we will further discuss below, eddy currents need to be carefully considered to accurately determine damping14,15 and other related spintronic 3 properties,16 especially when characterizing low-damping materials. Some recent experimental studies on F-NiFe(10nm)/NM-(Au,Cu) bilayers17,18 revealed how the Oersted field - due to eddy currents in the NM layer - affects the dynamics of F magnetization, and more specifically, how it distorts the resonance lineshape. The experiments were performed in a cavity setup and corroborated the results of analytical calculations. The scenario considered in Refs. 17,18 involved eddy currents in the NM conductor, generated by homogeneous excitation radiofrequency magnetic field (hrf) applied out-of-plane. The phaseshift (пҒӘ ) between hrf and the eddy current-induced field out-of-plane ( пҖҪ h h i ind Ој rf e пҒӘ ) resulted in an absorption(A)- dispersion(D) admixture of the signal. It produced an asymmetric resonance line, related to the absorbed power, пӮө пҖ« P A пҒўD with: 0 sin( ) 1 cos( ) пҖҪ пҖ« пҖ« Ој Ој пҒӘ пҒў пҒў пҒӘ (1), where ОІ0 is the empirical residual experiment-related phaseshift. P can be calculated from: * Re ( ) пғ© пғ№ пӮө пғ« пғ» rf rf P i h h пҒ· пҒЈ , where the magnetic susceptibility пҒЈ is deduced from the Landau- Lifshitz-Gilbert equation. In this scenario relying on the use of homogeneous hrf out-of-plane, experiments conducted with stripline setups, with hrf in the sample plane, should not generate eddy currents in the conductive layers. However, it has been suggested that sample tilting would lead to an out-of-plane component,17 thus creating the conditions for eddy current-related asymmetry. According to this hypothesis, the sign of the asymmetry should be independent of the stacking order for the layers, because the homogeneous hrf generates eddy currents with hind pointing in the same direction above and below the NM conductor. The data show that this assumption fails to completely describe experimental results. In this article, the incompletely understood impact of eddy currents is investigated and we unravel the contributions to lineshape asymmetry in stripline experiments. The full stacks 4 between 1 and 14 nm; tNiFe is the thickness of the NiFe layer: tNiFe = 4, 8, or 12 nm. Stacks were deposited at room temperature by dc-magnetron sputtering on Si/SiO2(500) substrates at a pressure of argon of 2.3 x 10-3 mbar. The NiFe layer was deposited from a Ni81Fe19 (at. %) permalloy target. A 2-nm-thick Al cap was deposited to form a protective Al(2)Ox film after oxidation in air. This insulating film also prevented electrical contact between the samples and the waveguide (Fig. 1(a,b)). Unless specified otherwise, the sample dimensions were: l = 4 mm, w = 3 mm. The microwave transducer consisted of a double-ground plane broadband coplanar waveguide. The width of the central conductor strip was 375 Ојm and the gap between the lines was: g = 140 Ојm. A Schottky diode was used for detection. Modulation coils and lock- in detection were used to enhance the signal-to-noise ratio. FMR experiments and the corresponding differential absorption spectra, " / / пӮө d dH dP dH пҒЈ vs. H (Fig. 1(c-h)), were recorded at room temperature at frequencies ranging between 4 and 20 GHz. First, we discuss the spectrum asymmetry which gradually built up as the tCu increased (Fig. 1(c-h)). This behavior revealed a non-negligible impact of eddy currents circulating in the Cu layers. Most importantly, the sign of the asymmetry depended on the ordering of the Cu and NiFe layers, i.e., whether the Cu layer was the buffer or capping layer. Figure 2(a) illustrates a mechanism where the inhomogeneous field of the coplanar waveguide, with out-of-plane components, generates eddy currents with oppositely directed induced in-plane fields (hind) above and below a Cu layer. Further considering a phaseshift between hrf and hind, one can write: пӮұ hпӮұ пҖҪ h i ind Ој rf e пҒӘ . The superscripts вҖҳ+вҖҷ and вҖҳ-вҖҷ relate to the вҖҳcappingвҖҷ and вҖҳbufferвҖҷ cases respectively. We get a situation similar to , described by Eq. (1), but considering that the dominant coupling occurs between the FMR mode and the in-plane fields. To extract the asymmetry and quantify the findings, the differential resonance spectra were fitted using the 5 following equation:17 " 2 2 1 ( ) / ( 3 ) ( ) ( 3 / 2) пғ© пғ№ пҖ« пҖӯ пҒ„ пӮө пғӘ пғә пҖӯ пҖ« пҒ„ пғӘ пғә пғ« пғ» res pp res pp H H H d d dH dH H H H пҒў пҒЈ , where Hres is the resonance field, пҒ„ Hpp is the peak-to-peak linewidth. 2(b) shows пҒў plotted as a function of tCu for series of (вҖҳcappingвҖҷ) multilayers. The gradual increase in пҒў with tCu agrees with the fact that eddy currents relate to the conductance of the Cu layers, which increases with tCu. The above deductions can be correlated by using Eq. (1). The field hind relates to the rate of change of magnetic flux through the area, S, delimited by the eddy current loop. It can be expressed as 02 , пҖҪ Cu ind rf t h f a(l,w g)h пҒӯ пҒ° пҒІ . We considered that the eddy current was given by 2 / пҖҪ rf I S fh R пҒ° , where the numerator corresponds to the electromotive force due to variations of hrf over time. The resistance of the loop of length P, is given by / ( ) пҖҪ Cu R P t пҒІ пҒә , where пҒә is the width of the loop, the spatial profile of which depends on the sampleвҖҷs geometry in a non- trivial manner.19 The averaged magnetic field acting on the NiFe layer is expressed as 0 / hind пҖҪ пҒӯ I b , where b is a function of the geometry of the sample. The geometry-dependence of the parameters, including / ( , пӮә S bP) a(l,w g) пҒә (dimension of length) will be discussed further below. Over the thickness range investigated (1-14 nm), the Cu layerвҖҷs resistivity is given by 0 / пӮұ пӮұ пӮұ пҖҪ пҖ« Cu tCu пҒІ пҒІ пҒЁ , where 3 / 8 пӮұ пӮұ пҖҪ mfp пҒЁ пҒ¬ according to the Fuchs-Sondheimer model.20,21 From separate 4-point electrical measurements, we obtained [ . ] 7 53/ пҖ« пҒ— пҖҪ пҖ« Cu Cu Ој cm t nm пҒІ for the capping layers and [ . ] 5 35/ пҖӯ пҒ— пҖҪ пҖ« Cu Cu Ој cm t nm пҒІ for the buffer layers (Fig. 2(c)), which produce reasonable values for the electron mean free path: пҖ« пҖҪ 14 mfp nm пҒ¬ and пҖӯ пҖҪ 9 mfp nm пҒ¬ . With regard to the phaseshift (пҒӘ ) in Eq. (1), we neglected the contribution of the skin effect, which is proportional to tCu/пҒӨCu,22 because tCu=1-14 nm, and the 6 skin-depth пҒӨCu~1000-500 nm for f=4-20 GHz. In the ideal situation of a negligible inductive contribution to the complex impedance, / 2 пҒӘпҖ« пҖҪ пҒ° for the вҖҳcappingвҖҷ layer case (quadrature phaseshift because hind is related to the time derivative of hrf), and / 2 пҒӘпҖӯ пҖҪ пҖӯ пҒ° for the вҖҳbufferвҖҷ layer case (in antiphase to the вҖҳcappingвҖҷ layer case). Developing the different terms in Eq. (1) produced a predictable non-linear dependence of пҒў on tCu, and a linear dependence on f: 0 0 0 2 , / пӮұ пӮұ пӮұ пҖҪ пӮұ пҖ« пҖ« Cu Cu t f a(l,w g) t пҒў пҒӯ пҒ° пҒў пҒІ пҒЁ (2). The two solid lines in Fig. 2(b) were fitted with Eq. (2); , a(l,w g) and ОІ0 were the only free parameters. It can be seen that the simplified model captures the physics of the phenomenon observed experimentally. Data fitting returned ОІ0=-0.3 and , a(l,w g)=185Вұ3 Ојm in both cases, in agreement with the constant sample dimensions in these sets of experiments. Remarkably, the model can account for the difference in the thickness-dependence of Cu-resistivity due to the inversion of the growth order. To emphasize this, the dashed line in Fig. 2(b) corresponds to a simulation using Eq. (2), considering the fictitious case of пҖ« пҖӯ Cu пҖҪ Cu пҒІ пҒІ . From Fig. 2(b), we note that slight deviations between predictions and experimental data can still be observed for the вҖҳbufferвҖҷ layer case. Most importantly for thick Cu layers - as for example experimentally shown in in the 10-50 nm range - and high frequencies, inductive contributions to the complex impedance are very likely to affect the ideal thickness-dependence of пҒў in a non- trivial manner. Considering such a term, the phase shift becomes: / 2 ( , , , , ) пҖҪ пӮұ пҖ« f tCu l w g пҒӘ пҒ° пҒұ , where пҒұ shows a non-linear dependence on several parameters, thus producing non-linear dependences of пҒў (from Eq. (1)). The non-trivial influence of the inductive contributions to the complex impedance can clearly be seen for f-dependent measurements. Figure 2(d) shows пҒў vs. f, for series of 7 multilayers. Data for tCu=1 nm, in the absence of eddy current, correspond to пҒў0 and superimpose for the вҖҳbufferвҖҷ and вҖҳcappingвҖҷ cases. The f-dependence of пҒў0 is weak, ruling out any f-dependent impedance contribution of the NiFe layer to the phaseshift. The solid lines in Fig. 2(d) were produced by calculations using Eq. (2). The same set of parameters as that returned from Fig. 2(b) was used. It concurrently described the thickness- and f-dependences of пҒў for the вҖҳcappingвҖҷ case (Fig. 2(d)), confirming that the simplified model reflects the physics behind the phenomenon observed. The overall linear increase of пҒў with f, driven by the fact that eddy currents increase when the rate of change of flux rises, may be altered by complex inductive contributions, which are known to increase for higher frequencies and thicker films. In agreement with this information, we observe in Fig. 2(d) that data depart from a linear dependence above 10 GHz for the 14-nm-thick layers, a result that contrasts with those obtained for the 8-nm-thick ones, which follow a linear dependence throughout. The 14-nm-thick buffer layer case typically illustrates how non-trivial contributions can drastically distort and bend the initially linear f-dependence. To rule out any contribution of the Si/SiO2(500) substrate on the stack deposited on glass substrates (not shown). The same trend of a positive vs. negative value of пҒў for the вҖҳcappingвҖҷ vs. вҖҳbufferвҖҷ case was obtained. We will now consider finite-size effects. Once again using Fig. 2(b), we will briefly comment on the square crossed symbol corresponding to data recorded after patterning only the 2(a)). A 4x3 mm2 array of square dots with lateral size of 100 Ојm was fabricated. Following patterning, two effects compete with one another. First, the number of eddy current loops increases, and simultaneously, the path of each loop is constrained. The fact that patterning reduced пҒў to a value close to пҒў0 (Fig. 2(b)) shows that eddy currents cannot develop in the 8 dots. This result indicates that the dot size was smaller than the width of the eddy current loop. We further assessed the dependence of пҒў on the sampleвҖҷs geometry in Fig. 3(a). We considered geometry-dependent parameters, / ( , пӮә S bP) a(l,w g) пҒә to account for the fact that the spatial profile of the eddy currents depends on the sampleвҖҷs geometry in a non-trivial manner. In particular, the width (пҒә ) and the circulation (determining S and P ) are unknown. In addition, the amplitude of I is likely inhomogeneous along the width пҒә , making it difficult to obtain an analytical expression for the parameter b relating to the magnetic field created by I. Considering the limit case when eddy currents extend over the full sample (inset in Fig. 3(a)), we obtained a linear dependence on / S P (Fig. 3(a)), meaning that пҒә / b seems to be almost independent of the geometry. The discrepancy for the пҒў0 intercept is probably related to a geometry-dependence close to the smallest dimensions, that is likely to result in curve-binding. The results also show that rotating the sample in the plane of the stripline had no impact on the data (Fig. 3(a)), demonstrating that both the length and the width of the current path contribute to hind. The most relevant insight is that stacking order-, thickness-, and f-dependent measurements (Fig. 2) returned the same value of , a(l,w g), in agreement with the constant sample dimensions in these sets of experiments. The value of a~185 Ојm is also in agreement with the order of magnitude that can be estimated from . Figures 3(b,c) present control data showing that the sample vs. stripline dimensions remained within a range where the linewidth (пҒ„Hpp) and resonance field (Hres) were unaffected by geometrical effects. Before concluding the paper, we will briefly comment on Hres and пҒ„Hpp. The total Gilbert damping, пҒЎ пҖ¬ was calculated from the slope of f-dependent measurements ( пҒ„Hpp vs. f ), from 0 4 / ( 3 ) pp pp H H пҒ°пҒЎ f пҒ§ пҒ„ пҖҪ пҒ„ пҖ« ,23 where пҒ„Hpp0 is the inhomogeneous broadening24 due to spatial variations in the magnetic properties (values of a few Oe were measured in our experiments) and пҒ§ is the gyromagnetic ratio (derived from the fit of the curve representing 9 Hres vs. f ). Plots representing Hres vs. tCu and пҒЎ vs. tCu are shown in Figs. 4(a,b) and Figs. 4(c,d), respectively. The data showed no obvious link between eddy currents in the Cu layers (spectrum asymmetry in Fig. 2), and the spectrum position, Hres. Regarding пҒЎ, eddy currents in conductors adjacent to a resonator, including the waveguide, were shown to contribute to a damping process due to losses via inductive coupling.14,15,25 This phenomenon is referred to as radiation damping and can be expressed as пҒЎrad=Ој02пҒ«пҒ§MStFw/(2Z0l),14 where MS is the saturation magnetization, tF is the ferromagnetвҖҷs thickness, Z0 is the impedance of the NM conductor, and 121 emu.cm-3 and dimensions of 2x5 mm2, in-plane stripline FMR measurements showed that пҒЎrad due to eddy currents in the Pt capping layer can be up to 3Г—10-4 - for the 20 nm thick 35- пҒ— Pt layerпҖ®пҖұпҖө From this value, considering the dependence of пҒЎrad on MS, tF, Z0 and the sample dimensions, and extrapolating to our case, we estimate a maximum value of пҒЎrad of 1Г—10-4 for the NiFe(12)/Cu(14) (nm) with MS ~ 700 emu.cm-3, dimensions of 3x4 mm2 and a resistance of the Cu layer of 10 пҒ—. This value of пҒЎrad is too small to influence the damping of our NiFe layers (пҒЎ~6-8Г—10-3). In fact, no obvious contribution of eddy currents to пҒЎ can be inferred from our data. However, given the orders of magnitude indicated above, radiation contribution due to eddy currents in NM layers will need to be carefully considered when extracting пҒЎ in several other cases. For example, with a 5-fold increase of the NiFe layer thickness, пҒЎrad will become sizeable. In addition, an пҒЎrad of the order of few 10-4 is already significant for materials exhibiting low intrinsic damping, such as the YIG insulator (пҒЎ~6Г—10-5), пҖұпҖө the Co1.9Mn1.1Si half metal Heusler alloy (7Г—10-4),26 and the Co25Fe75 bcc alloy (5Г—10-4).27 We finally note from Fig. 4 that, for tNiFe = 4 nm, a non-monotonous dependence of Hres was observed. This behavior supports non-monotonous dependence of the effective NiFe magnetization, Meff, (Figs. 4(e,f)) which can be extracted from Hres vs. f using the Kittel formula:28 10 2 (2 ) ( 4 ) res res eff f H H M пҒ° пҒ§ пҒ° пҖҪ пҖ« . We recall that 2 / (4 ) eff S S S NiFe M M K пҒ°M t пҖҪ пҖӯ . The values of MS (Fig. 4(g,h)), measured independently by magnetometry, were monotonous and thus confirmed that the non-monotonous behavior of Meff seems to primarily relate to the properties of the Cu/NiFe interface. A similar non-monotonous dependence of пҒЎ was observed. Cu wets poorly on SiO2 compared to NiFe on SiO2 and Cu, and as a result may create rougher thin Cu films. Consequently, spatially inhomogeneous stray fields may lead to incoherent dephasing of the spin current29,30 injected from the NiFe to the buffer Cu layer, and thus to enhanced damping. In conclusion, the main contribution of this paper is that it represents systematic experimental evidence of a stacking-order-dependent sign-change of the microwave phase in nanometer-scale NiFe/Cu bilayers. The effect could be ascribed to eddy currents generated in the Cu layer in the sub-skin-depth regime by the time varying magnetic fields in the experiment. Distinct sets of experimental data were consistent with a simple quantitative analysis encompassing the main features of the phenomenon. These results contribute to our understanding of the impact of eddy currents below the microwave magnetic skin-depth and explain the contributions to lineshape asymmetry and phase lags reported in stripline experiments commonly used to characterize and engineer materials for spintronic applications. They support a rational explanation to the use of the вҖҳphenomenologicalвҖҷ parameter accounting for lineshape asymmetry when extracting the spectral resonance field and linewidth from FMR data-fitting. The results also provide a straightforward way to detect the contributions of eddy currents from NM-adjacent conductors, as a caveat for the need in some cases to take these contributions into account when attempting to accurately determine damping14,15 and other related spintronic properties such as spin-mixing conductance and the spin-Hall angle in spin- pumping experiments.16 11 Acknowledgments We acknowledge financial support from the French national research agency (ANR) 2626]. We also thank M. Gallagher-Gambarelli for critical reading of the manuscript. 12