4EPo1D Template version 8.0d, 22 August 2017. IEEE will put copyright information in this area See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information. 1 Very Large Scale Integration of Josephson-Junction- Based Superconductor Random Access Memories Vasili K. Semenov, Yuri A. Polyakov, and Sergey K. Tolpygo, Senior Member, IEEE Abstract—Arrays of Vortex Transitional (VT) memory cells with functional density up to 1 Mbit/cm2 have been designed, fab- ricated, and successfully demonstrated. This progress is due to re- cent advances in design optimization and in superconductor elec- tronics fabrication achieved at MIT Lincoln Laboratory. As a starting point, we developed a demo array of VT cells for the 100-μA/μm2 MIT LL fabrication process SFQ5ee with 8 nio- bium layers. The studied two-junction memory cell with a two- junction nondestructive readout occupied 168 μm2, resulting in an over 0.5 Mbit/cm2 functional density. Then, we reduced the cell area down to 99 μm2 (corresponding to over 0.9 Mbit/cm2 func- tional density) by utilizing self-shunted Josephson Junctions (JJs) with critical current density, Jc of 600 μA/μm2 and eliminating shunt resistors. The fabricated high-Jc memory cells were fully op- erational and possessed wide Read/Write current margins, quite close to the theoretically predicted values. We discuss approaches to further increasing the integration scale of superconductor memory and logic circuits: a) miniaturization of superconducting transformers by using soft magnetic materials; b) reduction of JJ area by using planar high-Jc junctions similar to variable thickness bridges. Index Terms—Josephson junctions, RAM, SFQ digital circuits, SFQ electronics, superconducting electronics, superconductor electronics fabrication, superconducting memory, SFQ VLSI. I. INTRODUCTION ECADES ago, development of superconducting latching logic circuits was considered as a more challenging task than development of Josephson junction memories utilizing the natural ability of superconductors to store data as persistent cur- rents . Since then, there has been a spectacular advance of superconductor digital electronics based on novel logic families , , . Unfortunately, it has not been complemented by a similar revolution in JJ-based random access memories (RAM). The development of superconductor RAMs slowed down after the demonstration of a Vortex Transitional (VT) memory cell , and VT-based RAM circuits in 1990s , . The 4- Kbit level of RAM integration achieved at that time was in line with available fabrication technologies. The reported performance of superconductor RAM also matched the expectations set by the speed of light. For instance, This research is based upon work supported by the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity, via Air Force Contract FA872105C0002. (Corresponding author: Vasili Semenov.) V. K. Semenov and Yu. A. Polyakov are with the Department of Physics and Astronomy, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794-3800, USA (e- mail: Vasili.Semenov@StonyBrook.edu). a 380-ps RAM access time reported in matched the propa- gation delay in the superconducting transmission lines used for the cell selection and indicated negligible contributions of JJ switching time to the memory operation. Indeed, the speed of light in superconducting passive transmission lines (PTLs) is about c/3 ~ 100 μm/ps. Therefore, the minimum time required to address a memory cell in the middle of a 1-cm chip from a control circuitry at the chip edge and fetch the data is ~ 0.3 ns. This is equivalent to about 3 GHz effective clock rate of RAM. The latter figure appears to be in a shocking mismatch with extremely high clock frequencies, tens of GHz, reported for complex RSFQ digital circuits, and reaching up to 750 GHz for the simplest ones . Deep pipelining and other memory archi- tectural solutions have been suggested to mitigate the propaga- tion delays between logic and memory circuits . In addition to the VT-based RAMs, it is appropriate to men- tion some other, less successful, solutions , , , re- view , and declared “intentions” to develop a superconduc- tor RAM . We will not discuss here many existing original proposals of single memory cells, which are either not ready yet for integration into RAM, e.g., , or such an integration ap- pears to be very complicated to the authors, e.g., , , etc. The first and the last of the demonstrated VT cells occupied areas of 49 μm x 49 μm and 25 μm x 25 μm, respec- tively. The smallest VT cell was fabricated using e-beam lithog- raphy and had area of 9.5 μm x 12 μm . However, this was only a standalone cell and no further development was reported. In order to develop large-scale integration of superconduc- tive RAMs, we started with the original VT memory cell and performed its miniaturization and optimization using the mod- ern design tools for the now-available advanced fabrication technologies. These results are presented in Sec. II. In the fol- lowing sections III and IV, we discuss approaches to further miniaturization of superconductor memory cells in order to achieve very large scale integration (VLSI) of superconductor memory required, e.g., for applications of superconducting pro- cessors in high performance computing. We mainly address S. K. Tolpygo is with the Lincoln Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Tech- nology, Lexington, MA 02421, USA (e-mail: Sergey.Tolpygo@ll.mit.edu). Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier will be inserted here upon acceptance. D 2 reduction of the area occupied by superconducting flux trans- formers and potential use of the planar junction technology for VLSI. II. CIRCUIT DESIGN AND TEST RESULTS The circuit diagram of a generic VT memory cell is shown in Fig. 1. To better understand superconductor RAM scaling, we implemented VT cells in two fabrication technologies devel- oped recently at MIT Lincoln Laboratory. The first, a more con- ventional, implementation VT1 was done in the SFQ5ee fabri- cation process , and based on externally shunted Jo- sephson junctions with Jc = 100 μA/μm2. The microphotograph of the fabricated VT1 memory cell is shown in Fig. 2a. We reduced the cell dimensions by a factor of two in comparison to the earlier implementations -, , down to 12 μm x 14 μm, despite the evident similarity of the cell topology. This four-fold reduction in the cell area was achieved due to three factors: a) reduction of dimensional re- strictions in our fabrication technology; b) reduction of shunt resistors; c) improvement of design optimization procedure. Specifically, we intentionally reduced the characteristic volt- ages, IcRsh products, of the shunted junctions in order to reduce the area of the shunt resistors; here Ic is the critical current and Rsh is the shunt resistance. We used InductEx package - to accurately extract all mutual inductances, including parasitic, between submicron wires. Also, the recently developed PSCAN2 package allowed us to conveniently include the mutual inductances into the numerical optimization of the cell parameters. Design parameters of the VT1 memory cell are given in Ta- ble I. In order to reduce the size of two transformers used in the VT cells, we implemented them as coupled (overlapping) mi- crostrips on two adjacent wiring layers. The mutual coupling between the microstrip lines was increased by making perfora- tions (openings) in the ground plane under a large part of their length; see Sec. III. The resultant values of the most important mutual inductances, Mij between pairs of inductors Li and Lj, Fig. 1. Generic equivalent circuit of a VT cell. Three open squares shown in the equivalent circuit mark vias between superconductor lay- ers. Mutual inductances between pairs of inductors (L1, L7), (L2, L7), (L3, L6), (L3, L5), and (L5, L8) were taken into account in numerical simulations. Design parameters of VT cells demonstrated in this work are given in Table I. IY IX IS DESIGN PARAMETERS OF FABRICATED MEMORY CELLS Design parameter / Implementation VT1 VT2 Jc (μA/μm2) 100 600 Memory cell size (μm) 9 x 11 Memory array pitch (μm) 9 x 12 Minimum linewidth used (μm) 0.7 0.4 Minimum via size / surround (μm) 0.7 / 0.35 0.35 / 0.1 J1 (μA) / Shunt resistor (Ω) 213 / none J2 (μA) /Shunt resistor (Ω) 94 / 2.6 125 / none J3 and J4 (μA) 60 80 AXf (μA) 820 672 AYf(μA) 225 300 ASf (μA) 100 119 DC (μA) 462 525 L1 (pH) 7.42 6.10 L2 (pH) 3.17 1.80 L3 (pH) 7.92 4.33 L4 (pH) 4.75 2.48 L5 (pH) 3.17 2.77 L6 (pH) 4.75 2.59 L8 (pH) 1.32 0.98 M17 (L1, L7) (pH) 0.95 1.29 M27 (L2, L7 (pH)) 0.95 0.58 M53 (L5, L3) (pH) 1.32 0.53 M63 (L6, L3) (pH) 1.32 0.90 M85 (L8, L5) (pH) none 0.42 Write/Read transformer area (μm2)a 6.7 5.4 Area of ground plane perforation un- der Write/Read transformer (μm2)b 18.7 12.4 NDRO transformer wire area (μm2) 7 7.2 Area of ground plane perforation un- der NDRO transformer (μm2) 24 10.5 Area of ground plane moat between cells in the memory array (μm2)d 5.6 4 Memory density (Mbit/cm2) 0.53 0.88 Circuit density (106 JJ/cm2) 2.2 3.7 aOverlap area of two wires forming the transformer for Write/Read current IX. bArea of an opening (moat) in the ground plane under the cell Write/Read trans- former formed between inductors L1+L2 and L7. cArea of a perforation in the ground plane under the nondestructive readout (NDRO) coupling transformer formed between inductors L3+L5 and L6+L8. dMoat area per memory cell. These moats are used to mitigate flux trapping. fAX, AY and AS are amplitudes of IX, IY and IS currents. (a) (b) Fig. 2. Microphotographs of the fabricated memory cells. (a) Fabrication process using shunted JJs with Jc = 100 μA/μm2; the cell dimensions are 12 μm x 14 μm. R1 and R2 are resistor shunting junctions J1 and J2 re- spectively. (b) Fabrication process using self-shunted JJ with Jc = 600 μA/μm2; the cell dimensions are 9 μm x 12 μm. The cell layout topology in (b) corresponds to the equivalent circuit in Fig. 1. J1 J2 R1 R2 J3 IS IX IY 3 (Li, Lj) are given in Table I; they were taken into account in numerical optimization of the VT cells. The designed VT1 cells were arranged into 12 x 6 arrays with 12-μm pitch in the x-direction (along the rows) and 15-μm pitch in the y-direction. A larger pitch in the y-direction was used to place a 1-μm wide and 45-μm long moats in the ground plane between the adjacent rows of memory cells to mitigate mag- netic flux trapping. The resultant functional density of the RAM is about 0.56 Mbit/cm2. The cells in each column of the array are connected galvani- cally by a bit selection line marked IY in Fig. 1. The cells in each row are coupled inductively to a common word selection line marked IX in Fig. 1. Memory Readout SQUIDs J3-J4 of all cells in each row are biased in series using a common bias line marked IS in Fig. 1. The resultant 24 independent leads are con- nected to contact pads. All currents are returned to the common ground plane. The IX and IY current patterns required to perform Write and Read operations on a selected VT cell were generated and meas- ured by an automated, multichannel data acquisition setup, Oc- topus that also measured readout voltage on the IS leads. The test patterns used are functionally similar to the patterns discussed in ; they are shown in Fig. 3. These 72-bit memory arrays were fabricated and tested to de- termine the operating margins of the individual cells. All meas- ured cells were fully operational but demonstrated relatively narrow margins of operation shown in Fig. 4 for a few randomly selected cells. We omit further details on VT1-based memory arrays in favor of the second, more advanced implementation, VT2. VT2 implementation is based on self-shunted JJs with 600 μA/μm2 critical current density , . Due to elimina- tion of external shunt resistors (see, right photo in Fig. 2) and better design optimization, the cell dimensions have been re- duced to 9 μm x 11 μm, giving about 41% reduction in the cell area. The cells were organized into 12 x 6 array using x and y pitches of, respectively, 9 μm and 12 μm, as shown in Fig. 5. Fig. 6 shows test results for three randomly selected memory cells. Black circles in the Fig. 6 mark amplitudes of the IX and IY currents at successful operation cycles of the tested cells, while green crosses mark incorrect operation. The measured margins are similar to the ones projected in , demonstrating that performance of the fabricated circuits is in a good agree- ment with the theoretical model. We attribute wider margins of the VT2 cells in comparison to the ones observed on VT1 cells to a better layout optimization and parameter extraction, mainly to a better account for the mutual inductances between all the cell inductors, including parasitics – the experience gained as a result of our work on the VT1 cells. Fig. 3. Numerically simulated operation of a VT cell in Fig. 1. Three external currents shown in the upper plot initiate cell operations. Write “0” and Write “1” operations are activated by applying, respectively, positive IX (black trace) and IY (green trace) currents and negative currents IX and IY. Read operations are activated by negative IY and positive IS (red trace) currents. Superconduct- ing currents flowing through the Josephson junctions J1 and J2 are shown in the middle panel, and voltage drops on the junctions are shown in the lower panel. The output voltage across the readout SQUID junction J3 shows Joseph- son oscillations in the Read “1” state. All the traces are shown in normalized units. In order to present the test pat- terns in the same plot, currents IX and IS are individually rescaled, and a con- stant DC offset of the IX current is not shown. A substantial fraction of cell testing time is devoted to half selections when we check that applying only one and anyone current does not activate any operation. The amplitudes of IX and IY currents were varied to determine boundaries (margins) of the region of cor- rect operation of each memory cell as shown in Fig. 4. Fig. 4. Operating margins of two randomly selected VT1 cells fabricated us- ing the 100-μA/μm2 fabrication process SFQ5ee . The cells are identified by their column (x) and row (y) positions in the 6x12 array. Each point in the 2D margin plots corresponds to a pair of current amplitudes |IX| and |IY| used to perform Write “0”, both currents are positive, and Write “1”, both currents are negative, operations. Successful operations are shown by black dots and failed operations are shown by green crosses. 4 We also performed a random pattern test on the whole array. In this test a random pattern of the size 6 x 12 was written into the array and then was read out and compared. The test was run for 100 times and showed zero errors. To demonstrate low interference between the cells, we ran a more comprehensive, although time consuming, checkerboard test, which is used in semiconductor memory testing to detect bridging faults. The test consists of: a) writing a checkerboard pattern of “1”s and “0”s in the whole array; b) reading the con- tent of all cells; c) writing a complementary checkerboard pat- tern consisting of “0”s and “1”s; d) reading the content of all cells. This test failed when applied to the whole array. However, it passed through when two particular cells were excluded from the test. The extracted cumulative margins for the checkerboard test are shown in Fig. 7. As expected, they are significantly nar- rower than the discussed earlier margins of individual cells. The achieved functional density of our JJ RAM is about one million cells per cm2, and the circuit density is about 4 million JJs per cm2. We believe that this functional density exceeds the density of any state-of-the-art superconducting circuits reported up to date. However, the achieved density is still a few orders of magnitude below the density of SRAM and DRAM in CMOS. In the following sections, we discuss our proposals for a) doubling the functional density by incremental improve- ments of the existing fabrication technology; and b) more radi- cal but still feasible technology developments required for dra- matic improvements in functional density of superconductor electronics. Fig. 5. A ten by four fragment of the 12 x 6 memory cell array fabricated using 600 μA/μm2 technology. The word selection and bit selection lines IX and IY are marked in the picture along with the readout line IS. The chip was rotated about 90o for electrical testing, giving a difference in cell labeling in Fig. 6. Fig. 6. Operating margins of three randomly selected VT2 cells fabricated us- ing the 600-μA/μm2 fabrication process with self-shunted junctions , . The cells are identified by their row (y) and column (x) positions in the array consisting of 6 columns and 12 rows. Each point in the 2D margin plots corre- sponds to a pair of current amplitudes |IX| and |IY| used to perform Write “0”, both currents are positive, and Write “1”, both currents are negative, operations. Regions occupied by blue dots correspond to correct Write/Read operations. IX IY IS→ 5 III. MINIATURIZATION OF TRANSFORMERS A. Superconducting Flux Transformers About 25% of the Josephson junction-based memory cell area is occupied by two flux transformers; see Table I. The sim- plest superconducting transformers usually utilize a mutual in- ductance, M = k(L1L2)1/2 between two parallel stripline or mi- crostrip inductors with self-inductances L1 and L2 located either in the same plane or stacked vertically. Spacing between the inductors and vertical separation determine the coupling coef- ficient, k. Self-inductance, L and mutual inductance, M of vari- ous combinations of microstrip (over one ground plane) and stripline (sandwiched between two ground planes) inductors on various layers of the MIT LL fabrication process was measured in and modeled using 3D inductance extractors . Since two inductors in the same plane occupy at least twice as much area as vertically stacked inductors, we used vertically stacked microstrip inductors formed by layers M5 and M6 above M4 ground plane in our memory design. For the layer stack description, Nb and interlayer dielectric thicknesses, and other parameters, see . The mutual inductance between the stacked M5 and M6 mi- crostrip inductors is shown in Fig. 8. The mutual inductance per unit length increases with the inductors linewidth w decreasing, but saturates and becomes practically independent of w below about 0.7 μm. At the same time, the self-inductance per unit length steadily increases with w decreasing due to increasing of both the magnetic (geometrical) inductance and especially ki- netic inductance of the film. However, the coupling coefficient k strongly decreases with decreasing w because more and more energy is stored as a kinetic energy of the supercurrent while magnetic flux coupling diminishes with diminishing geomet- rical size of the inductors. If we want to keep IX and IY currents below 1 mA, the mu- tual inductance of the transformers should be about 2 pH. Ac- cording to Fig. 8, this requires transformer length to be about 10 μm, independently of the width of inductors if w < 0.5 μm. This scale sets the dimensions of the memory cell. It may appear that some reduction in the area of the trans- formers could be achieved by meandering the inductors. How- ever, this is not possible because meander’s turns need to be spaced by some nonzero amount, s. Therefore, the area occu- ways larger than the area lw of a straight-line inductor with the same inductance, where l is the straight-line inductor length and n is the number of turns in the meander. In order to increase the mutual coupling, both flux transform- ers in the VT cells were implemented as stacked superconductor strips crossing ground plane perforations (holes), as shown schematically in Fig. 9(a). These perforations could be seen as dark rectangles in the upper and left parts in Fig. 2 and as dark rectangles under lines IX and IS in Fig. 5. 0.01 0.1 1 10 0.01 0.1 1 0.01 0.1 1 M6 M5 Coupling coefficient, k Mutual inductance, M (pH/μm) Width of microstrips, w (μm) stacked microstrips M5 and M6 above M4 ground plane k M M4 w Fig. 8. Mutual inductance, M per unit length (left axis) and the coupling coefficient k = M/(L1L2)1/2 (right axis) between the vertically stacked M5 and M6 inductors with the common ground plane M4. The thickness of Nb layers M4 and M6 is 200 nm and of M5 is 135 nm. The interlayer die- lectric thickness between M4 and M5 is 200 nm and between M5 and M6 is 280 nm. Fig. 9. (a) Cross sections of a conventional flux transformer used in our design of VT memory cells; local increase of self- and mutual inductance is achieved due to a ground plane hole. (b) A proposed transformers utilizing soft magnetic non-conducting films to increase coupling between the superconductor films. Adding vertical magnetic vias, shown in light green color, magnetically con- necting the films and forming a closed magnetic core, would dramatically in- crease the overall transformer performance. Ground plane Ground plane hole Nonconducting soft magnetic films Superconductor films Superconductor films (a) (b) Fig. 7. Results of the checkerboard test algorithm. Cumulative margins of 70 cells in the 12 x 6 array are shown. Cells (5,2) and (5,6) failed and were excluded from the test. 6 A ground plane perforation under a strip increases its induct- ance because it lengthens the ground current path and also in- duces a circulating superconducting current around the perfora- tion. The self-inductance in this case can be estimated as a sum of the strip inductance and the inductance of the ground plane perforation. The latter is very well known from the design of washer-type SQUIDs and, for a sufficiently large ground plane, can be estimated as γμ0a, where a is the size of the per- foration and γ is the perforation shape-dependent factor, e.g., γ = 1.25 for a square washer; see for detailed numerical sim- ulations for a variety of shapes. For strips with w > (2λ + d)/γ, where λ is the magnetic field penetration depth and d is the dis- tance to the ground plane, the strip magnetic inductance is mainly determined by the size of the perforation. Similarly, the mutual inductance between two microstrip in- ductors over the perforation is defined mostly by dimensions of the perforation rather than by the shapes of the inductors, while the coupling coefficient k remains relatively low. Hence, the available design techniques do not allow for a significant downscaling of transformer dimensions. B. Transformers with Thin Magnetic Films The use of soft magnetic materials is a well-known remedy for a drastic reduction of transformer dimensions in electronics. However, it is also known that magnetic impurities can spoil or even destroy superconductivity. This is why magnetic materials have been avoided in superconductor electronics. Fortunately the prejudice against magnetic materials has been reduced due to very promising investigations of Josephson junctions with barriers made of magnetic metals; see , for a review. We suggest to use thin-film soft magnetic materials to reduce transformer dimensions, as illustrated in Fig. 9b. Magnetic films are located below the lower and above the upper trans- former strips. Numerical simulations of the transformer using the latest InductEx package showed that a relative permeability, μ of magnetic strips of 10, or even 5, is sufficient to signifi- cantly enhance mutual inductance of the transformer in Fig. 8b. In simulations, the widths of magnetic films in Fig. 9b were taken to be equal to width of the perforation in Fig. 9a. With optional magnetic vias connecting magnetic films to form a continuous magnetic path, the size of the transformer decreases proportionally to roughly 1/μ. Optimization of the suggested magnetic-core transformer is still in progress and requires more details on magnetic properties of the films; the results will be reported later. To operate at very high frequencies expected from supercon- ductor electronics, magnetic films in the suggested transformers need to be nonconductive and possess a low imaginary part μ” of complex magnetic permeability μ = μ’+iμ” in order to have low RF losses in the transformer. At the same time, the real part μ’ should be sufficiently high at the frequencies of operation in order to provide for a desired reduction in the transformer size. Preferably, it should also weekly depend on frequency. There are many advanced materials, e.g., conventional fer- rites, spinels, hexaferrites, etc., capable of working at up to ~ 100 GHz; see for a review. Development of thin-film mag- netic materials for RF applications in microelectronic integrated circuits is a very active area of industrial and academic research and subject of numerous publications, which simply could not be listed here; see , and references therein as an exam- ple. Despite the wide use of various magnetic materials in con- ventional electronics, the authors have no doubts that integra- tion of magnetic dielectrics into superconductor electronics fab- rication processes is a very challenging undertaking. We should note that other areas of superconductor electron- ics, namely various ac-biased logic circuits, would significantly benefit from the development of compact transformers. For in- stance, all Reciprocal Quantum Logic (RQL) , Quantum Flux Parametron (QFP) , and Adiabatic QFP (AQFP) digital circuits use multiphase ac biasing schemes and flux transformers which significantly limit the achievable scale of integration. IV. MINIATURIZATION OF JOSEPHSON JUNCTIONS The smallest Josephson junctions used in our VT2 cell are about 400 nm in diameter, and all four JJs occupy less than 4% of the memory cell area. Therefore, further miniaturization of the JJs does not seem to provide significant benefits to the memory density. However, the presently utilized Josephson tunnel junctions have two significant drawbacks which may complicate miniaturization of other components and integration with magnetic dielectrics. First of all, AlOx tunnel barriers used degrade above ~ 200 oC. This makes it difficult to apply modern miniaturization technologies to superconductor electronics. For instance, the widely used in CMOS industry damascene pro- cessing requires filling of high aspect ratio vias and narrow trenches by chemical vapor deposition of superconducting ma- terials, which usually requires processing temperatures above Fig. 10. A sketches of sandwich-type tunnel JJs (a), a constant-thickness (b) and variable-thickness (c) bridges consisting of a conductive material connect- ing two superconducting banks. For the required geometrical dimensions of Jo- sephson bridges, see text and , . Superconductor (Nb) banks Superconductor electrodes Conductive bridge d d w w Substrate (b) (c) D Tunnel barrier (a) 7 300 oC. Secondly, miniaturization of sandwich-type JJs shown in Fig. 10a below ~ 300 nm is difficult because it requires bar- riers with very high critical current density and also because JJs need a top via. Therefore, it is possible that, with progress in fabrication technology, planar bridge-type Josephson devices reviewed in [34, will become competitive with sandwich- type JJs. Among the bridge-type Josephson devices, a Variable Thick- ness Bridge (VTB) schematically shown in Fig. 10c looks more attractive for applications and from theoretical perspectives , than a constant-thickness bridge (CTB) shown in Fig. 10b. Nevertheless, in some rare cases, CTBs were the only available type of devices, despite their impractical appearance; see, e.g., . Basically, all theories tell that the bridge length, d should be smaller than the coherence length in the bridge material, ξ in order to minimize the dependence of the bridge critical current Ic on d, which in this regime changes as 1/d; and the shorter the bridge the better. The material-depend coherent length in thin films is typically ~ 50 nm. This sets the scale of the required bridge length. Patterning at these dimensions is quite comfortable for the modern tools used in CMOS industry. However, if the required spread (one standard deviation, σ) of Ic is, say, 2%, the 1σ spread in d should be less than 1 nm, which is beyond the cur- rent capabilities even of the most expensive CMOS technolo- gies. The other unpleasant limitation is related to the required range of bridge resistances, Rn which should be from ~ 2 Ω to ~ 8 Ω. It comes from the desired IcRn product of ~ 0.8 mV and the typical range of Ic used in digital circuits, from ~ 0.1 mA to ~ 0.4 mA. This range of Ic could only be covered by changing the bridge width, w since the bridge length d is fixed. For the bridge material with sheet resistance, Rs of 10 Ω per square, the re- quired width is from ~ 40 nm to ~ 250 nm. If the width is de- fined with the same 1σ spread as the one required for d, the re- sultant spread in Ic would be √2σ ~ 2.8%. These well-known estimates were given again to emphasize that implementation of the bridge-type planar technologies for superconducting VLSI circuits would require fabrication tech- nologies as sophisticated and expensive as used in the very ad- vanced CMOS nodes. About 35 years ago bridges and other weak links lost their competition with sandwich-like tunnel structures mainly because of the above requirements. It would be interesting to see if advantages of the planar devices for VLSI could be realized when a 50-nm patterning scale becomes standard in superconductor electronics. We note, however, that such dimensions are quite usual at a low scale of integration where such techniques as e-beam lithography and focused ion beam etching are practical, and junction parameter spreads are not important. For instance, very small Josephson junctions are mandatory components of nano-SQUIDs; see, for example, . V. DISCUSSION One of the goals of this presentation was to demonstrate ad- vantages of the recently developed fabrication technologies , , , for increasing the integration scale of su- perconductive circuits. The circuit selection was driven by the lack of JJ memories and RAMs in particular, as mentioned in Sec. I. We thought that by designing a memory circuit we could find reasons for a misfortune of conventional JJ-based memo- ries in superconductor electronics and justify current efforts in developing various magnetic junction based cryogenic memo- ries; see, e.g., , , and references therein. No reasons have been found. All miniaturized memory cells were fully op- erational and set new records for the functional density and for Josephson junction density, respectively of about 1 Mbit/cm2 and 4×106 JJ/cm2. The other goal was to assess if superconductor electronics can reach integration scales and functionalities comparable to the modern CMOS circuits, a question posed in . One of us (SKT) provided a negative answer in , based on a very gen- eral argument that superconductor electronics manipulating with circulating currents, i.e., encoding information by fluxons, cannot be miniaturized to the scale of CMOS electronics encod- ing information by static charge, because a localized charge would always need less space than a moving charge, especially charge moving in a loop, i.e., the circulating current. However, how far the scaling of superconductor electronics could go and at what integration scale superconducting circuits would out- perform CMOS circuits remain to be answered. By investigating the compact memory cells, we confirmed that miniaturization by linewidth reduction is the best natural remedy against parasitic flux trapping. Not only because Abrikosov vortices cannot be trapped in narrow superconduct- ing traces, but also because effects of a magnetic flux trapped in any of the flux-trapping moats (seen as long dark horizontal rectangles in Fig. 5) become distributed between multiple cells (between eight cells in our RAM array), minimizing impact on any particular cell. It was commonly accepted that the spacing between super- conductor wires should be kept sufficiently wide to avoid their parasitic coupling. Indeed, two stripline or microstrip inductors located in the same plane couple mainly through fringing fields between them, and the k nearly exponentially decreases with increasing the spacing between the inductor edges, a so-called edge coupling; see Fig. 3 in . The maximum coupling k ~ 0.3 is reached at zero spacing between the inductors; and k weakly depends on the width of signal strips. We found that the coupling factors between wires of miniature cells remain quite low even if the wires are placed above a perforated ground plane and the wires are vertically stacked. This means that the minimum spacing is really set by the fabrication process rather than by the design. Of course, numerous, but relatively low, parasitic couplings should be taken into account. The used tandem of InductEx and PSCAN2 perfectly executed this task. The miniaturization pro- cedure was quite labor intensive in comparison with the past practice. This is because the stretching or narrowing of one wire affects values of all other self- and mutual inductances, i.e., the 8 effective inductances are mutually dependent. Therefore, a known recommendation, e.g., in PSCAN2, to adjust just one in- ductance during circuit optimization cannot be implemented. Instead, it was necessary to run numerous optimization cycles and make a tradeoff between PSCAN2 recommendations and the real set of inductive parameters extracted by InductEx after each optimization cycle. We hope that the proposed transformer miniaturization could be realized if technology integrating soft magnetic dielectrics with high permeability and superconductor electronics will be developed. Miniaturization of Josephson junctions is a chal- lenging task and without the guaranteed success. Many bridge techniques have been tested with disappointing results for large-scale applications. However, bridge junctions firmly keep niche positions due to a set of unique advantages. First of all, the discussed earlier small dimensions. Secondly, being planar devices, they are better suited for vertical integrations with sev- eral stacked Josephson junction layers. Bridges could be useful even if they are formed as a narrowing in a superconductor film. For example, superconductive constrictions are used as heaters locally destroying superconductivity of thin films . Our interest in Josephson junction memories was inspired in part by a recent burst of interest to programmable magnetic π- junctions and their use in “magnetic” junction memories; see, for example, MJRAM and references therein. It could be noted that the equivalent circuit of a MJRAM cell in is somehow similar to the schematics of a VT cell shown in Fig. 1a. In particular, the MJRAM cell explicitly contains two transformers (see Fig. 1b in that shows one extra trans- former hidden in Fig. 1a in ) and two conventional JJs. It is easy to conclude then that the area occupied by these conven- tional components of the MJRAM cell should be about 2/3 of the area occupied by the VT cell, if both cells are fabricated using similar technologies. Hence, even if the magnetic JJ and its wiring does not occupy any space, the maximum expected reduction in area of the MJRAM cell with respect to the VT cell is only 30%. We be- lieve that this would not be sufficient to justify implementation of MJRAMs, given all the technological complexities with fab- rication of highly uniform programmable MJJs and high mag- netic fields required for their initialization and control. Note also that these fields could be incompatible with superconduc- tor logic circuits because of high sensitivity of the latter to mag- netic field capable to induce undesirable Abrikosov or Joseph- son vortices. Nevertheless, we recognize that initial demonstra- tions may not necessarily illustrate all advantages of a new tech- nology. We did not attempt to implement existing or develop new drivers and decoders for JJ RAM because of a small scale of our effort. We are counting on the known solutions such as pre- sented in and potentially on a larger effort in the future. Finally, let us note that memory cells could be also made of logic cells and, whereas transformers are highly desirable, they are not mandatory components of JJ-based memory. The key function of the transformers is to “calculate” AND functions of half-selection input data. For instance, in the VT cell, the input data are presented by DC currents IX and IY. In general, these data could arrive within a large, say, 200 ps time interval, which is too long for the RSFQ-like logic circuitry. However, S. Rylov in presented an SFQ AND gate with a predefined range of time delays between input SFQ pulses, which could be utilized in a logic-cell-based JJ memories. VI. CONCLUSION We have demonstrated JJ-based memory cells and RAM ar- rays with record functional density of about 1 Mbit/cm2 and rec- ord density of Josephson junctions of 4×106 JJ/cm2. We searched for new solutions to end the existing skepticism about very large scale integration of superconductor RAMs and other digital circuits. We illustrated that advancing patterning tech- nique to 50 nm along with thin-film transformers using soft magnetic dielectrics would be sufficient to increase the func- tional density of RAM to 10 Mbit or even to 20 Mbit per square centimeter. Compact transformers with soft magnetic materials operating up to tens of GHz would also be highly beneficial to superconductor logic circuits such, e.g., QFP, AQFP, RQL, and others, which need transformers in their multi-phase ac-biasing networks, in signal invertors, and in logic gates. ACKNOWLEDGMENT We thank Coenrad Fourie and Kyle Jackman for suggesting examples for numerical simulation of circuits with soft mag- netic materials using InductEx software. We thank Pavel Shevchenko and Alex Kirichenko for the assistance with PSCAN2 software. We thank Anatoly Borodin for his assis- tance in measurements. We are grateful to Vladimir Bolkhov- sky and Scott Zarr for their part in high-Jc process development and running the process used in this work. Finally, we are thankful to Leonard Johnson, Eric Dauler, Gerald Gibson, Scott Holmes, and Marc Manheimer for their interest in and support of this work. This work was supported in part by the IARPA C3 Program. The views and conclusions contained herein are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily rep- resenting the official policies or endorsements of the U.S. Gov- ernment.