First-principles prediction of potentials and space-charge layers in all-solid-state batteries Michael W. Swift∗ and Yue Qi† Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824-1226, USA As all-solid-state batteries (SSBs) develop as an alternative to traditional cells, a thorough theoretical understanding of driving forces behind battery operation is needed. We present a fully first-principles-informed model of potential profiles in SSBs and apply the model to the Li/LiPON/LixCoO2 system. The model predicts interfacial potential drops driven by both elec- tron transfer and Li+ space-charge layers that vary with the SSB’s state of charge. The results suggest lower electronic ionization potential in the solid electrolyte favors Li+ transport, leading to higher discharge power. All-solid-state batteries (SSBs) have recently attracted widespread attention due to increased safety and energy density [1–4]. Additionally, the functionality of SSBs can serve as the basis for artificial synapses in redox memory devices [5–8]. Solid-state electronic heterojunctions at solid-electrolyte/electrode interfaces play a critical role in determining ionic transport, and therefore performance, in these devices. Among various interfacial phenomena such as phase change , ionic distribution , and electrostatic potential drop [11–13], the formation of a “space-charge layer” at the electrode/solid-electrolyte in- terface is often cited as a barrier for lithium ion trans- port . The driving force behind space-charge- layer formation is the chemical potential difference be- tween contacting materials, which can result in depletion or enrichment of charged defects near the interface . However, even such basic questions as the direction of lithium transfer remain controversial in experiments. For example, for the commonly studied LiCoO2/LiPON in- terface, Refs. reported Li depletion from LiCoO2 to LiPON, while Ref. reported Li transfer from LiPON to LixCoO2. Explicit first-principles calculations of electrode-electrolyte interface structures shed some light on Li transfer and diffusion , but it is difficult to draw general conclusions based on a small number of in- terface structures. A comprehensive first-principles model is noticeably absent. Prediction of space-charge layers in solid elec- trolytes with heterogeneous interfaces has been at- tempted by lattice models , atomistic models , thermodynamic models , and DFT-informed ther- modynamic models . However, predicting space- charge-layer formation at the solid-electrolyte/electrode interface is even more challenging, as ion insertion and/or reaction with the electrode alters the material and thus band alignments at the interfaces . In this Letter, we establish an ab initio framework to calculate the ther- modynamic driving forces and the resulting net interfa- cial potential drops in a model SSB at equilibrium open- circuit conditions. Space-charge layers in the model arise from Li+ transfer (predicted by defect formation ener- gies) and electron transfer (due to interfacial band bend- ing). Together, potential drops and space-charge layers govern the interfacial lithium transport barriers, which are known to be bottlenecks for both performance and lifetime . Therefore this model represents a fun- damental step forward in the theoretical description of SSB interfaces. The application of this model to the Li/LiPON/LixCoO2 system leads to the important discovery that the polarity of the space-charge layer and the sign of the potential drops vary with the state of charge (i.e. Li concentration in LixCoO2). This new physics insight unifies the seemingly contradictory experimental observations [2–4]. Improved theoretical understanding also provides valuable design rules for the next generation of devices. The interfacial electric fields predicted by our model can be engineered to reduce interfacial barriers and cathode overpotential, leading to higher power output. For the discharge process, favorable interfacial fields may be achieved by restricting operation to lower levels of cathode lithiation or by using solid-electrolyte materials with a high valence band. The model starts from the assumption of equilibrium open-circuit conditions. In an SSB, the insulating solid electrolyte blocks the flow of electrons between elec- trodes, but lithium ions (Li+) are free to move. As a result, the lithium ion electrochemical potential (the lithium atomic chemical potential minus the electron electrochemical potential) reaches a constant, which is referenced to zero. ̃μLi+ = μLi − ̃μe− = 0 . (1) The difference in μLi between anode and cathode is the driving force behind battery operation. This chemical potential difference is the open-circuit voltage (OCV) of the battery, given by the Nernst equation: V = (μa Li − μc Li)/e , (2) where superscript a indicates the anode and c the cath- ode. The OCV can be calculated as an average for a arXiv:1902.11158v2 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 2 Apr 2019 2 redox reaction, such as CoO2 + x Li → LixCoO2, using the equation (3) where E is the total energy calculated with density func- tional theory (DFT) and e is the electron charge. When electrodes are brought into contact through a solid electrolyte, Li+ will flow until the buildup of pos- itive charges in the cathode increases the electrostatic (Galvani) potential φ, blocking further ionic transfer and establishing the open-circuit equilibrium. This may be seen mathematically by noting that μLi = ̃μe− (Eq. 1) and substituting the definition of electrochemical poten- tial ( ̃μe− = μe− − eφ) into Eq. 2: V = (μa e− − μc e−)/e + (φc − φa) . (4) The second term arises from ionic charge accumulation, and is thus called the “ionic part” of the OCV: VI = φc−φa . The first term is the “electronic part”: Ve− = (μa e− − μc e−)/e, where μe− is the chemical potential of electrons in the bulk material in absence of any external potential . The μe− in the SSB may be approximated through the work function ψ with respect to the anode (see [S.III] in the Supplemental Material for details on this approximation), as μe− = −ψ + ψa. The ionization po- tential IP is the position of the valence-band maximum (VBM) below the vacuum level, ψ is the position of the Fermi level below the vacuum, and EF is the Fermi level defined relative to the VBM. These quantities are related through ψ = IP − EF . Therefore Eq. 1 can be rewritten: ̃μLi+ = μLi − (EF − IP + ψa − eφ) = 0 . (5) This key equation forms the basis of the potential pro- file model, which is constructed through the following procedure: First, a μLi profile is built. We choose zero as the μLi reference in the anode, so by Eq. 2, μLi = −eV in the cathode. V is calculated using DFT from Eq. 3. In the solid electrolyte, μLi is constrained by thermodynamic stability conditions [S.I]. The model accepts various as- sumptions for the μLi profile in the solid electrolyte [S.II]. A sensible one (which is used in this work) is that μLi is at its upper limit in the electrolyte near the anode and at its lower limit near the cathode. The μLi profile is completed by interface regions which interpolate μLi in the electrolyte and electrodes. For the purposes of this model, the interface is reduced to the net changes that occur in potentials; predictions of the spatial width and microscopic structure of the interface will be left to future work. Second, the bulk properties of the battery materials are calculated via DFT. To facilitate vacuum alignment, IP in lithium metal, LiPON, LiCoO2, and Li0.5CoO2 before con- tact. Occupied bands (VBM) are blue and unoccupied bands (CBM) are orange. Vacuum (dashed line) alignments and band gaps are indicated. is calculated. For metals, IP = ψ [S.III]. For insulators (e.g. solid electrolytes) and semiconductors (e.g. lithium transition metal oxides), point defect calculations that give EF as a function of μLi are performed [S.IV]. Finally, the results of the previous steps are used with Eq. 5 to calculate the φ profile. Interfacial band bending is caused by bending of the local vacuum level Evac = −eφ + ψa (referenced to the anode Fermi level), so a band profile may also be derived from φ. This completes the potential profile model. We now apply this general model to the Li/LiPON/LixCoO2 SSB system. Our DFT calcu- lations use vasp with the projector-augmented wave (PAW) method , employing a 520 eV cutoff and the PBE functional. In order to correctly describe layered LixCoO2, the van der Waals interaction must be taken into account . The optPBE approach [34–37] is used as recommended in Ref. ; tests using other “opt” functionals produce similar results. Correlations on the cobalt d states are taken into account through DFT+U with U = 3.32 eV . The calculated OCV is V = 4.02 V for LiCoO2 and V = 4.15 V for Li0.5CoO2, consistent with both DFT-predicted and experimental values . LiPON electrolytes are typically amorphous and have widely varying stoichiometry, but are generally char- acterized by oxygen-decorated P-N-P chains ionically bonded to lithium. In order to facilitate first- principles calculations, a crystalline structure contain- ing these structural motifs, SD-Li2PO2N, is used. It has been shown experimentally to have similar lithium transport properties to glassy LiPON . The band structure is shown in Fig. S.4. Vacuum alignments are calculated using standard pro- cedures [S.III]. Calculated band gaps and ionization po- tential for SSB materials before contact are shown in Fig. 1, and IP and μLi = ̃μe− are tabulated in Table I. In order to determine the direction of ion transfer at interfaces and the Fermi level inside LiPON, the forma- 3 EF IP ̃μe− Ve− VI Li metal 0 3.14 0 LiPON (Li-rich) 2.02 5.56 LiPON (Li-poor) 1.02 5.56 LiCoO2 0 5.33 2.19 1.82 Li0.5CoO2 0 6.38 3.24 0.91 ∆EB ∆EI ∆φ Li/LiPON LiPON/LiCoO2 LiPON/Li0.5CoO2 materials, calculated using DFT. Electronic and ionic parts of OCV (Eq. 4) with respect to Li metal are shown for LixCoO2. Bottom: band offsets and electrostatic potential drops for SSB interfaces (Eq. 8). tion energies of point defects must be calculated and compared for both LiPON and LixCoO2. The forma- tion energy of point defect X in charge state q is given by [S.IV] Ef[Xq] = Etot[Xq] − Etot[bulk] − � i niμi + qEF . (6) The μLi has already been discussed in detail. Other atomic chemical potentials are set by thermodynamic stability [S.I]. Supercell artifacts from charged defect cal- culations are corrected using the Freysoldt method . Defect formation energy calculations are partially automated using pymatgen and PyCDT . A thorough inventory of point defects in LiCoO2 [S.IV, Fig. S.2] shows that, at the cathode chemical potential μLi = −4.02 eV, the dominant defect is the shallow ac- ceptor V − Li . As a result, the material is heavily p-type, in agreement with experiments , so EF = 0. The Fermi level in Li0.5CoO2 is similarly at the top of the valence band. Since the LiPON electrolyte exists in between the Li- rich and Li-poor extremes of the electrodes, the defect formation energies are considered as a function of μLi. This allows calculation of the EF as a function of μLi through the requirement of charge neutrality. The results are shown in Fig. 2, with details in [S.IV, Fig. S.3]. In the dilute limit, the concentration of a defect is given by c = Ne−Ef /kBT where N is the concentration of defect sites and kBT is the temperature in energy units. This allows for the concentration of Li+ carriers to be calculated as a function of μLi (Fig. 2). Note that the dominant lithium carrier in LiPON changes from interstitials in anode-like conditions to vacancies in cathode-like conditions. Defect formation energies also determine the direction of Li+ transfer at interfaces. At the Li/LiPON interface, Li+ is the dominant carrier in LiPON. The energy change of the reaction Li+ i [Li] → Li+ i [LiPON] determines the direction of Li transfer: Ef[Li+ i ; LiPON] − Ef[Li+ i ; Li] = −0.17 eV. (7) EF C (cm-3) 10-6 106 1010 1014 1018 102 10-2 Lii VLi axis) and Li+ carrier defect concentrations (Li+ i , orange and V − Li , blue; right axis) as a function of μLi. Li metal and LiCoO2 values for μLi are solid vertical lines, and the bound- aries for thermodynamic stability of LiPON are dashed lines. This means that Li+ i will tend to move from lithium metal into LiPON. At the LiPON/LiCoO2 interface, the dominant lithium carrier is V − Li , so the relevant reaction is V − Li [LiPON] → V − Li [LiCoO2]. The reaction energy is −0.28 eV, so V − Li moves from LiPON into LiCoO2. For x = 0.5, the re- action energy is 8.52 eV. This represents a very strong tendency for V − Li to migrate from Li0.5CoO2 into LiPON. These results indicate the direction of Li flow at the in- terface depends on the Li concentration in LixCoO2, i.e. the battery’s state of charge (SOC). In addition to Li+, transfer of electrons or holes may contribute to interface dipoles. The net charge trans- fer is caputred by the electrostatic potential drop ∆φ at each interface, which causes electronic band bending. ∆φ may be extracted from the full potential profile that will be calculated using Eq. 5, but it is worthwhile to examine ∆φ directly in the context of an interface. Eq. 5 shows that the electrostatic potential drop is given by the changes in bulk quantities across the interface: ∆φ = 1 e (∆EF − ∆IP − ∆ ̃μe−) . (8) This equation may be recast in terms analogous to traditional band-bending theory at semiconductor het- erojunctions , with the key difference that it is not EF , but rather ̃μLi+, that attains a constant value in equilibrium. The intrinsic valence band offset at the in- terface is ∆EI = −∆IP (a positive value indicates a higher valence band in the second material). The differ- ence in bulk VBM positions is ∆EB = ∆ ̃μe− − ∆EF . The difference between ∆EI and ∆EB is caused by band bending, driven by the interfacial potential drop ∆φ = (∆EI − ∆EB)/e. Based on EF , IP, and μLi on either side of inter- faces, the ∆EI, ∆EB, and ∆φ at three interfaces are calculated, as shown in Table I. At the Li/LiPON inter- 4 eφ VBM e− h+ Li+ eφ h+ e− ΔEI=−0.82 eV eΔφ=−0.33 eV ΔEB=−0.49 eV eΔφ=+0.59 eV VBM ΔEB=−0.49 eV ΔEI=+0.23 eV Li+ (a) LiPON/LiCoO2 (b) LiPON/Li0.5CoO2 bands at the interfaces between LiPON and LixCoO2 for (a) x = 1 and (b) x = 0.5. Electron transfer based on the band structure and Li+ transfer based on defect formation energies are illustrated schematically. The shapes of the curves are for illustrative purposes only. Computed bulk offsets ∆EB, intrinsic offsets ∆EI, and resulting potential shift e∆φ are indicated. face, the increase in ∆φ is mainly caused by Li+ trans- ferred to LiPON, since no electron transfer into LiPON is possible because the Fermi level is deep in the for- bidden gap. For the cathode interfaces, schematics of band-bending and charge transfer are shown in Fig. 3. At the LiPON/LiCoO2 interface, a positive ∆φ predicts net transfer of positive charge into LiCoO2: electrons are transferred into LiPON, outnumbering the Li+ that move into LiPON. Fingerle et al. have measured the work function of LiCoO2 and found it bent 0.3 eV up toward LiPON at this interface , consistent with our predic- tion. At the LiPON/Li0.5CoO2 interface, ∆φ is nega- tive, so net positive charge is transferred into LiPON. Electrons are transferred out of LiPON, again outnum- bering the Li+ that move into the cathode. This shows that the potential drop at the cathode interface is driven primarily by electron transfer. The full Li/LiPON/LixCoO2 profiles calculated from Eq. 5 and synthesizing all this information are shown in Fig. 4. The interface regions on both anode and cathode side are indicated in gray, and the calculated quantities on either side of a given interface are connected by dotted lines, showing the net change across the interface. While the details of the potential profile across the interfaces are unknown (and may depend on complex kinetics), the net change is enough to draw useful conclusions about the effects of the interfaces on battery operation. In the fu- ture, this framework can easily be extended to explicitly include SEI phases or interlayers, providing more detail in the interfacial region. Our results explain the different directions of Li+ transfer observed at the LiPON/LixCoO2 interface. Ex- periments showing Li+ transfer into LixCoO2 may have had lower lithiation than experiments which observe Li+ transfer into LiPON . The direction of Li+ transfer and the interface dipole (b) (a) VBM VBM CBM CBM VBM CBM CBM VBM Vacuum Vacuum μ = μ Li ~ e- μ = μ Li ~ e- eφ eφ 1D Li/LiPON/LixCoO2 battery in open circuit conditions. in SSBs have important implications for device perfor- mance . An electric field at the interface which at- tracts Li+ into the cathode is desirable since it reduces the energy barrier for discharge. When electrons are al- lowed to flow through an external circuit, a lower in- terfacial barrier will lead to a reduced overpotential and higher discharge power output. Our results show that the Li/LiPON interface always adds a barrier for discharge and the LiPON/cathode interface potential drop will re- duce the discharge barrier at high SOC and increase it at low SOC. Linear interpolation predicts the unfa- vorable dipole develops for lithiation greater than x = 0.68. This effect is compounded by changes in lithium carrier concentration within the electrolyte. Since the lithium carrier in LiPON near the cathode is V − Li , lithium transfer into the LiPON at full cathode lithiation re- duces the carrier concentration, further hindering the dis- charge process. By contrast, Li+ transfer into Li0.5CoO2 increases the concentration of vacancies, assisting dis- charge. This prediction agrees with measured impedance changes upon Li+ transfer . Our results suggest that the changes they discuss in Li+ concentration profiles are only part of the story: the interfacial potential drop also plays a crucial role. In the opposite direction, the poten- tial drop at the LiPON/cathode interface at high SOC 5 will resist Li+ transport for fast charging. Based on this model, several methods can be sug- gested to reduce the interface resistance of SSBs dur- ing discharging. One approach is raising the electrolyte valence band. This tends to lower ∆φ, maintaining a favorable interface dipole for discharge across a wider range of lithiation and thus increasing power output without sacrificing capacity. This could be done by tun- ing LiPON growth methods or by using alternative electrolyte materials that maintain a negative band offset with LixCoO2 across a wider range of lithiation. Alterna- tively, higher ∆φ is desired for fast charging, suggesting the opposite approach depending upon the desired out- come. Another approach would be to apply an interlayer between the solid electrolyte and the electrode to miti- gate the interfacial barrier. This may occur in the gray areas in Fig. 4, where LiPON is not thermodynamically stable and may form an SEI layer. Our model can be extended to explicitly model the role of such interlayers in modifying the potentials and carrier concentration at electrolyte/interlayer/electrode interfaces . In conclusion, we have presented a new technique for building a potential profile in a model SSBs based on inputs from first-principles calculations. This model pre- dicts various key properties of the interfaces between electrodes and electrolyte. At the LixCoO2 interface, our results suggest that the interfacial potential drop is driven by electron transfer, and the direction of e− and Li+ transfer depends on the degree of lithiation of the cathode (equivalently the SOC of the battery). These results unify the conflicting Li-transfer trends observed in experiments, and suggest design rules for improving power output by minimizing discharge barriers at the electrode/electrolyte interfaces. The methodology devel- oped in this work is broadly applicable to modeling other all-solid-state battery systems. Thanks to K. Leung at Sandia and A. Van der Ven at UCSB for helpful suggestions. This work was sup- ported by the Nanostructures for Electrical Energy Stor- age (NEES) center, an Energy Frontier Research Cen- ter funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences under Award num- ber DESC0001160. This work was supported in part by Michigan State University through computational re- sources provided by the Institute for Cyber-Enabled Re- search. ∗ swiftmi2@egr.msu.edu † yueqi@egr.msu.edu F. Zheng, M. Kotobuki, S. Song, M. O. Lai, and L. Lu, J. Power Sources 389, 198 (2018). M. Fingerle, R. Buchheit, S. Sicolo, K. Albe, and R. Hausbrand, Chem. Mater 29, 7675 (2017). F. S. Gittleson and F. El Gabaly, Nano Lett. 17, 6974 K. Leung, A. J. Pearse, A. A. Talin, E. J. Fuller, G. W. Rubloff, and N. A. Modine, ChemSusChem 11, 1956 E. J. Fuller, F. E. Gabaly, F. Lonard, S. Agarwal, S. J. Plimpton, R. B. Jacobs-Gedrim, C. D. James, M. J. Marinella, and A. A. Talin, Adv. Mater. 29, 1604310 Z. Wang, S. Joshi, S. E. Savel’ev, H. Jiang, R. Midya, P. Lin, M. Hu, N. Ge, J. P. Strachan, Z. Li, Q. Wu, M. Barnell, G.-L. Li, H. L. Xin, R. S. Williams, Q. Xia, and J. J. Yang, Nat. Mater 16, 101 (2016). J. J. Yang and Q. Xia, Nat. Mater 16, 396 (2017). C.-S. Yang, D.-S. Shang, N. Liu, E. J. Fuller, S. Agrawal, A. A. Talin, Y.-Q. Li, B.-G. Shen, and Y. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater. 28, 1804170 (2018). Y. Zhu, X. He, and Y. Mo, J. Mater. Chem. A 4, 3253 D. Santhanagopalan, D. Qian, T. McGilvray, Z. Wang, F. Wang, F. Camino, J. Graetz, N. Dudney, and Y. S. Meng, J. Phys. Chem. Lett 5, 298 (2014). S. Braun, C. Yada, and A. Latz, J. Phys. Chem. C 119, A. C. Luntz, J. Voss, and K. Reuter, J. Phys. Chem. Lett 6, 4599 (2015). A. Schw ̈obel, W. Jaegermann, and R. Hausbrand, Solid State Ion. 288, 224 (2016). K. Yamamoto, Y. Iriyama, T. Asaka, T. Hirayama, H. Fujita, C. Fisher, K. Nonaka, Y. Sugita, and Z. Ogumi, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 49, 4414 (2010). J. Haruyama, K. Sodeyama, L. Han, K. Takada, and Y. Tateyama, Chem. Mater 26, 4248 (2014). J. Maier, Prog. Solid State Chem 23, 171 (1995). S. Sicolo, M. Fingerle, R. Hausbrand, and K. Albe, J. Power Sources 354, 124 (2017). A. Bunde, W. Dieterich, and E. Roman, Phys. Rev. Lett. B. J. Morgan and P. A. Madden, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, S. Stegmaier, J. Voss, K. Reuter, and A. C. Luntz, Chem. Mater 29, 4330 (2017). L. Fu, C.-C. Chen, D. Samuelis, and J. Maier, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 208301 (2014). N. J. J. de Klerk and M. Wagemaker, ACS Appl. Energy Mater. 1, 5609 (2018). Q. Zhang, J. Pan, P. Lu, Z. Liu, M. W. Verbrugge, B. W. Sheldon, Y.-T. Cheng, Y. Qi, and X. Xiao, Nano Lett. S. Kasamatsu, T. Tada, and S. Watanabe, Solid State Ion. 226, 62 (2012). Y.-X. Lin, Z. Liu, K. Leung, L.-Q. Chen, P. Lu, and Y. Qi, J. Power Sources 309, 221 (2016). R. Huggins, Advanced Batteries: Materials Science As- pects (Springer, New York, 2008). M. Aykol, S. Kim, and C. Wolverton, J. Phys. Chem. C I. A. Courtney, J. S. Tse, O. Mao, J. Hafner, and J. R. Dahn, Phys. Rev. B 58, 15583 (1998). H. Gerischer, F. Decker, and B. Scrosati, J. Electrochem. See Supplemental Material for details of the compu- tational methodologies used in this work, including Refs. [27, 38, 39, 44, 47, 48, 53–57]. G. Kresse and J. Furthm ̈uller, Phys. Rev. B 54, 11169 6 P. E. Bl ̈ochl, Phys. Rev. B 50, 17953 (1994). J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3865 (1996). M. Dion, H. Rydberg, E. Schr ̈oder, D. C. Langreth, and B. I. Lundqvist, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 246401 (2004). G. Rom ́an-P ́erez and J. M. Soler, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, J. Klimeˇs, D. R. Bowler, and A. Michaelides, J. Phys. Condens. Matter 22, 022201 (2010). J. c. v. Klimeˇs, D. R. Bowler, and A. Michaelides, Phys. Rev. B 83, 195131 (2011). S. L. Dudarev, G. A. Botton, S. Y. Savrasov, C. J. Humphreys, and A. P. Sutton, Phys. Rev. B 57, 1505 L. Wang, T. Maxisch, and G. Ceder, Phys. Rev. B 73, G. G. Amatucci, J. M. Tarascon, and L. C. Klein, J. Electrochem. Soc 143, 1114 (1996). S. Sicolo and K. Albe, J. Power Sources 331, 382 (2016). K. Senevirathne, C. S. Day, M. D. Gross, A. Lachgar, and N. Holzwarth, Solid State Ion. 233, 95 (2013). N. Holzwarth, Phys. Procedia 57, 29 (2014). C. Freysoldt, B. Grabowski, T. Hickel, J. Neugebauer, G. Kresse, A. Janotti, and C. G. Van de Walle, Rev. Mod. Phys. 86, 253 (2014). C. Freysoldt, J. Neugebauer, and C. G. Van de Walle, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 016402 (2009). C. Freysoldt, J. Neugebauer, and C. G. Van de Walle, Phys. Status Solidi (b) 248, 1067 (2011). S. P. Ong, W. D. Richards, A. Jain, G. Hautier, M. Kocher, S. Cholia, D. Gunter, V. L. Chevrier, K. A. Persson, and G. Ceder, Comput. Mater. Sci 68, 314 D. Broberg, B. Medasani, N. E. Zimmermann, G. Yu, A. Canning, M. Haranczyk, M. Asta, and G. Hautier, Comput. Phys. Commun 226, 165 (2018). H. Tukamoto and A. R. West, J. Electrochem. Soc 144, S. Sze, Semiconductor Devices: Physics and Technology (John Wiley & Sons Singapore Pte. Limited, 2012). K. Leung and A. Leenheer, J. Phys. Chem. C 119, 10234 R. Hausbrand, G. Cherkashinin, H. Ehrenberg, M. Gr ̈oting, K. Albe, C. Hess, and W. Jaegermann, Mater. Sci. Eng. B 192, 3 (2015). A. Jain, S. P. Ong, G. Hautier, W. Chen, W. D. Richards, S. Dacek, S. Cholia, D. Gunter, D. Skinner, G. Ceder, and K. A. Persson, APL Mater. 1, 011002 (2013). S. P. Ong, S. Cholia, A. Jain, M. Brafman, D. Gunter, G. Ceder, and K. A. Persson, Comput. Mater. Sci 97, P. G. Moses, M. Miao, Q. Yan, and C. G. Van de Walle, J. Chem. Phys. 134, 084703 (2011). C. G. Van de Walle and R. M. Martin, Phys. Rev. B 35, B. Meredig, A. Thompson, H. A. Hansen, C. Wolverton, and A. van de Walle, Phys. Rev. B 82, 195128 (2010).