Activity-Enhanced Self-Assembly of a Colloidal Kagome Lattice Stewart A. Mallory‚àó,‚ÄÝ and Angelo Cacciuto‚àó,‚Ä° ‚ÄÝDivision of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125, United States ‚Ä°Department of Chemistry, Columbia University, New York, New York 10027, United States E-mail: smallory@caltech.edu; ac2822@columbia.edu Abstract Here, we describe a method for the enhanced self-assembly of triblock Janus colloids tar- geted to form a kagome lattice. Using com- puter simulations, we demonstrate that the for- mation of this elusive structure can be sig- nificantly improved by self-propelling or acti- vating the colloids along the axis connecting their hydrophobic hemispheres. The process by which metastable aggregates are destabilized and transformed into the favored kagome lat- tice is quite general, and we argue this active approach provides a systematic pathway to im- proving the self-assembly of a large number of colloidal structures. Introduction The current rise in popularity of colloidal active matter is due in large part to the recent ad- vances in colloidal synthesis. Through the pio- neering work of synthetic chemists and material scientists, there now exists a large number of ex- perimental realizations of synthetic microswim- mers and active colloids.1‚Äì8 These active parti- cles can be thought of as the synthetic ana- logues of swimming bacteria. However, a ma- jor benefit of these synthetic variants over their biological counterpart is the ability to system- atically tailor interparticle interactions and dy- namically modulate swim speed.9‚Äì21 The func- tionality of synthetic active particles potentially makes them the ideal tool to manipulate and self-assemble matter at the microscale.22‚Äì34 In a recent theoretical study,35 it was sug- gested that active forces can dramatically im- prove the self-assembly of colloidal building blocks designed to form capsid-like structures. The key design principle for these small com- pact structures, which has been experimentally demonstrated in systems of gliding microfila- ments,36,37 was to have the self-propelling forces of the colloids sum close to zero within the tar- get structure. This generates a unique envi- ronment where the target structure is further stabilized by active forces, and any compet- ing metastable structures are quickly destroyed. This approach is successful in leveraging activ- ity to improve the self-assembly of small com- pact colloidal structures; however, the problem becomes less obvious when considering the self- assembly of macroscopically large crystals or periodic structures. In this work, we explore to what extent activity can be used as an extra handle to promote the self-assembly of colloidal building blocks designed to form stable periodic structures and under what conditions the com- plex self-assembly landscape can be simplified and biased toward a particular target structure. As our model system, we consider the heavily studied experimental system of triblock Janus colloids.38‚Äì43 As shown in Figure 1, the tri- block system is designed to self-assemble into 1 arXiv:1902.05583v1 [cond-mat.soft] 14 Feb 2019 self-assembly into a kagome lattice. There ex- ist a short-ranged attraction between hydropho- bic patches (black), while the equatorial regions (red) contribute only volume exclusion interac- tions. The white arrows indicate the direction of self-propulsion, which is fixed and colinear with the line connecting the center of the hy- drophobic patches. a kagome lattice. We have selected this par- ticular colloidal system for two important rea- sons. The first being that the kagome lattice, and more generally open-cell colloidal crystals, are of particular interest because of their novel optical and mechanical properties.44‚Äì48 The second is that open-cell lattices are no- toriously difficult to self-assemble and present a unique challenge within the materials com- munity.49‚Äì55 For most patchy colloidal systems, including the triblock system, there exist an ensemble of extended structures that directly compete with the formation of the target struc- ture. And if the self-assembly pathway is not fully understood and system conditions are not highly optimized, the time required to form the target structure can become prohibitively long.56‚Äì60For the triblock system, the forma- tion of the kagome lattice is observed to be a two-step process. A fast first step that in- volves the formation of a metastable web-like network or gel followed by a second significantly slower step. The slow second step involves lo- cal structural rearrangements that morph the kinetically favored gel state into the thermo- dynamically favored kagome lattice. This mul- tistep mechanism is common in complex self- assembly processes that rely on patchy particles interacting through short-range interactions as their colloidal building blocks. Thus, the via- bility of a large class of self-assembled materials hinges on the kinetics of the second step, which in turn is determined by the robustness of ther- mal fluctuations and their ability to rearrange colloids from the disordered metastable state to the thermodynamically preferred target struc- ture. The premise of our approach is built around finding alternative and more efficient self- assembly pathways by leveraging the unique driven nature of active colloids. By introducing activity as a new dimension in the self-assembly parameter space, we demonstrate how this new control variable makes it possible to bias the se- lection of a particular crystal structure against the formation of unwanted metastable states and greatly improves the overall yield and rate of self-assembly in the triblock system. Model and Analysis Each triblock Janus colloid is modeled as a sphere of diameter œÉ and undergoes Brownian dynamics at a constant temperature T accord- ing to the coupled overdamped equations: Ãárrr(t) = U nnn(t) + ‚àö 2DŒæŒæŒæ(t) + Œ≥‚àí1FFF{rij} (1) Ãánnn(t) = ÔøΩ 2DR ŒæŒæŒæR(t) √ó nnn(t) + Œ≥‚àí1 R TTT{rij} (2) where the translational diffusion of the colloid is given by the Stokes‚ÄìEinstein relation D = kBTŒ≥‚àí1, with Œ≥ being the translational friction due to the fluid. For spherical colloids in a low Reynolds number environment, it is reasonable to assume rotational diffusion is thermal in ori- gin and given by DR = kBTŒ≥‚àí1 R = 3DœÉ‚àí2, where the rotational friction is given by Œ≥R. In this study, we prefer not to specify a par- ticular propulsion mechanism and instead gen- erally assume that each triblock Janus colloid swims at a fixed speed U along a predefined orientation unit vector nnn(t). In this work, we also neglect all hydrodynamic interactions be- tween colloids. Given the relatively small swim 2 speeds involved in this study, it is reasonable to assume that long-range hydrodynamics in- teractions will be relatively weak and will only quantitatively change the self-assembly behav- ior of the triblock Janus system. The two hydrophobic patches that give the colloids their triblock nature are located at op- posite poles of the colloid, with each hydropho- bic patch accounting for ‚âà 28% of the parti- cle surface area. The polar equatorial region accounts for the remaining 44% of the surface area. A key requisite of this approach is that the swimming axis of the colloid is aligned with the center-line of the two hydrophobic hemi- spheres as shown in Figure 1. By choosing a propelling axis for the colloids that is colin- ear with the center-line of the two hydropho- bic hemispheres, we minimize internal stresses and shearing forces within the kagome struc- ture. The random Brownian forces and torques acting on each colloid are modeled as Gaussian white-noise and are characterized by ‚ü®ŒæŒæŒæ(t)‚ü© = 0 and ‚ü®ŒæRŒ±(t)ŒæRŒ≤(t‚Ä≤)‚ü© = Œ¥Œ±Œ≤Œ¥(t ‚àí t‚Ä≤), respectively. The interparticle forces and torques that arise from the chemical patterning of the colloid‚Äôs surface are given by FFF{rij} and TTT{rij}, respec- tively, with Œ±, Œ≤ ‚àà {x, y}. The interparticle pair potential for the triblock Janus colloids was im- plemented such that the phenomenology agrees with the experimental work of Chen et al. 39 and the extensive numerical simulations of Janus colloids in the literature.24,59,61,62 Additionally, our model exhibits qualitatively similar phase behavior to previous thermodynamic studies on equilibrium triblock Janus colloids.42,43,55,63 A more complete discussion of this patchy poten- tial and its functional form can be found in the Supporting Information. Below we list the key features of the anisotropic interaction potential, which drives the formation of the kagome lat- tice: ‚Ä¢ Experimentally, self-assembly is induced by the addition of salt, which screens long-ranged electrostatics and allows hy- drophobic attractions to dominate. In simulations, this is manifested by a short- range attraction between the hydropho- bic patches, which we often refer to as a ‚Äúbond‚Äù, and is characterized by a binding energy Œµ, which is cutoff at a separation distance of 1.5œÉ. ‚Ä¢ Due to the electrostatic screening, we as- sume that the equatorial polar regions can effectively be described by a short-ranged volume excluding potential, which is cut- off at 21/6œÉ. ‚Ä¢ The angular potential between the col- loids is rather flat for a range of angu- lar displacements. The only nonthermal torques are those induced at the bound- ary between the polar and hydrophobic region of the colloids. This is consistent with experimental observations that show a large degree of rotational freedom when two particles are in contact with each other with their hydrophobic patches fac- ing each other. In this work, all simulations contain N = 10, 000 triblock Janus colloid, which are strictly confined to self-propel in two dimensions. Both the motion and the orientation vectors of the colloids are confined to evolve in the xy-plane. This mimics the reference experimental system where self-assembly is templated to occur on a surface after sedimentation. The length and energy scales were chosen to be œÉ and kBT, re- spectively, while œÑ = œÉ2D‚àí1 is the unit of time. All simulations were run for 104œÑ with a time step of ‚àÜt = 10‚àí5œÑ. All results are reported in reduced Lennard-Jones units. As a useful reference, an active colloid in our simulations with swim speed U = 1 in reduced Lennard- Jones units corresponds to a swim speed of ‚âà 1 Œºm/sec for an active colloid with a diame- ter of ‚âà 1 Œºm. Three different volume fractions were consid- ered: œÜ = 0.2, œÜ = 0.4, and œÜ = 0.6. For each volume fraction, a range of temperatures T and self-propelling speeds U were consid- ered such that this study spans the parame- ter space where formation of the kagome lattice is possible. Both the size of the hydrophobic patches and the magnitude of the binding en- ergy (Œµ = 15kBT) were tuned to maximize the 3 self-assembly of the kagome lattice in the equi- librium system U = 0 at a temperature of T = 1 and volume fraction œÜ = 0.6. All simulations were carried out using a modified version of the HOOMD-Blue simulation package,64,65 and a majority of the analysis was done within the OVITO visualization and analysis package.66 Using a shape-matching approach described by Keys et al.,67 the success or yield of self- assembly is quantified in terms of local struc- tural features. In general, a colloid is identified as part of a given structural phase by analyzing the nearest neighbors within a cutoff of 1.25œÉ and the relative orientation of those neighbors around the particle. Our approach is equiva- lent to the method employed by Chen et al. 39 to identify kagome order in their experimental work. The percent yield of a phase is simply defined as the percentage of colloids of a given structural type, and we delineate between three structural phases: kagome, hexagonal, and a disordered fluid phase. A more thorough dis- cussion on phase identification for patchy col- loidal systems is provided in the Supporting In- formation. Results and Discussion a control variable can improve the self-assembly of patchy colloidal systems. Here, we present the percent yield of the kagome lattice as a func- tion of time for the three different volume frac- tions considered in this study. In Figure 2, the temperature is fixed at T = 1 while a range of self-propelling speeds were explored. Both the active (U > 0) and equilibrium (U = 0) triblock systems exhibit the characteristic two- step self-assembly growth dynamics. There is an initial burst of kagome order followed by a regime of slow but constant growth. At equi- librium, the overall yield is heavily influenced by the bulk volume fraction. For dilute sys- tems (e.g., œÜ = 0.2), the initial jump in kagome order is small (< 10%) and the rate of self- assembly is nearly zero (Movie S1). The slow rate of self-assembly is due predominately to the dilute nature of the system. For the triblock as a function of time for three different volume fractions œÜ = 0.2, œÜ = 0.4, and œÜ = 0.6. The system temperature was fixed at T = 1 for all volume fractions and propelling speeds reported in the figure. system at equilibrium, random thermal fluctu- ations are solely responsible for breaking apart malformed aggregates and regulating diffusion across the system. So as the system becomes increasing dilute, it inherently takes more time for a colloid to detach, reorient, and diffuse to a region where it can be properly integrated into the kagome lattice. At the opposite end of the spectrum, if the 4 bulk volume fraction is too high (œÜ ‚â´ 0.6), the self-assembly dynamics becomes sluggish, and the system is prone to become trapped in a metastable disordered state (data not shown). There exists a window in volume fraction where self-assembly of the kagome lattice is favored, and we empirically find that œÜ = 0.6 is an op- timal volume fraction to maximize the rate of self-assembly for the equilibrium system. At this particular volume fraction, the colloids al- most immediately find the proper coordination and orientation to form the kagome lattice. Self-assembly at this volume fraction also leads to highly polycrystalline structures, as forma- tion of the kagome lattice occurs nearly simulta- neously throughout the sample (see Figure 4a). The simulations at volume fraction œÜ = 0.6 pre- dominately serve as a reference and provide in- sight into the effects of activity for an optimized equilibrium self-assembly process. Interestingly, the percent yield of the kagome lattice increases significantly once a small amount of activity is introduced. The self- propulsion of the triblock colloids generates a unique nonequilibrium environment that con- stantly allows for rearrangements of any me- chanically unstable structure and guides the formation of the thermodynamically and me- chanically stable kagome lattice (see Movie S2). For the two smaller volume fractions œÜ = 0.2 and œÜ = 0.4, the rate of self-assembly is dra- matically faster than the equilibrium system. As expected, the improvement in self-assembly is less dramatic for the highly optimized equi- librium system at œÜ = 0.6. It is also important to note from Figure 2 that the percent yield has a nonmonotonic dependence on the self- propelling speed. This suggests that a balance must be struck between active and adhesive forces to maximize the yield, or more generally that activity cannot be implemented blindly, but rather has to be done in a manner that is commensurate with the target structure and the other system parameters (density, temper- ature, binding energy, etc.). function of temperature T and self-propelling speed U after allowing the system to evolve for 104œÑ. For volume fractions œÜ = 0.2 and nal dense (green), or disorder phase fluid (blue) for the three volume fractions (from top to bot- tom) œÜ = 0.2, œÜ = 0.4, and œÜ = 0.6. The numerical value of the corresponding yield is in- dicated at the center of each slice (yields below 20% are unlabeled). œÜ = 0.4 the equilibrium system does not ex- hibit a significant degree of crystalline order for any of the temperatures considered in this study. The one exception is for the intermedi- ate volume fraction œÜ = 0.4, where there is a 5 single temperature T = 1.0 where the forma- tion of the kagome lattice is appreciable (40%), albeit the rate of self-assembly is rather slow (see Figure 2). For œÜ = 0.6, the equilibrium system exhibits a significant degree of kagome order for T = 1.0 (> 70% yield) and T = 1.2 (> 80% yield). A snapshot of the final config- uration of the best performing equilibrium sys- tem T = 1.2 is given in Figure 4a. For œÜ = 0.2, the equilibrium triblock system assembles into a porous percolating networks (gel) at low tem- peratures (see Figure 4(c)). For œÜ = 0.6 at T ‚â§ 0.8, the system also forms a gel network; however, due to the increase in volume fraction, there are a few small regions having hexagonal and kagome compatible crystalline order. The branching factor of these networks is inversely proportional to temperature. As temperature is increased, we observe the formation of linear chains with minimal branching and predomi- nately a single bond per patch. For volume fraction œÜ = 0.2 at T = 1.2 the system forms a disordered dynamic fluid of polydisperse flex- ible rods. At larger volume fractions œÜ = 0.4 and œÜ = 0.6 at T = 1.2 these flexible rods stack and wind around one another (see Figure 4b) forming patterns similar to fingerprint textures observed in liquid crystals.68 Once activity is introduced in the system it is always possible to find a range of temperatures and activities for which a high yield of kagome assembly can be obtained. Remarkably, this is true across all three volume fractions consid- ered in this study. A snapshot of the final con- figuration of the active system at state point (œÜ = 0.4, U = 4, T = 1.2) is given in Figure 4d. The physical mechanism that leads to this level of control over local structure can be at- tributed to two unique features of active sys- tems. The first is giant long-lived density fluc- tuations. These fluctuations are closely related to the heavily studied phenomenon of motility induced phase separation and are generally be- lieved to be a generic feature of active systems that are driven out of equilibrium by a persis- tent local energy input that breaks detailed bal- ance. For the best performing region of the active triblock system, we observe the kagome lattice block Janus system for different state points (œÜ, U, T). (a) The best performing equilibrium system at state point (œÜ = 0.6, U = 0, T = 1.2). (b) Disordered fluid phase at high temperature (T = 1.2) for equilibrium system at volume fraction œÜ = 0.6. (c) Representative snap- shot of metastable web-like network at state point (œÜ = 0.2, U = 0, T = 0.2). (d) The best performing active system at state point (œÜ = 0.2, U = 4, T = 1.2). form out of local high density fluctuations that develop from frequent collisions among the self- propelled linear precursors. These large fluctu- ations in density are especially important early on in the self-assembly process. For many self- assembly processes, the growth of a particular target structure requires the formation of a crit- ical nucleus of a characteristic size. By con- trolling the level of activity in the system, it is possible to modulate the magnitude and life- time of density fluctuations. The fact that ac- tivity alone can generate giant fluctuations in density has important implications for colloidal self-assembly and is a key ingredient in devel- oping our approach to active self-assembly. In addition, self-propulsion will in general improve the kinetics of self-assembly, as the dynamics becomes inherently faster. The rate at which an unbounded colloid can explore the system is now set by the swim speed U, and is no longer 6 solely regulated by the temperature T. The en- hanced diffusivity scales as D ‚àº U 2/Dr in the dilute limit.69 The second contribution specifically targets those colloids bound in the percolating net- work, it is more important later on in the self- assembly process, and is central to healing de- fects and grain boundaries. A unique aspect of patchy colloids including the triblock system is that they typically do not form plastic crys- tals. The rotation of each colloid is severely hindered when bonded to its neighbors. When the system is active, the colloids in the crys- tal are orientationally locked and exert a force F ‚àº Œ≥‚àí1U along the direction of their pro- pelling axis. Any extended structure developing in the system that competes with the formation of the kagome lattice, such as the metastable gel state pictured in Figure 4c, become mechani- cally unstable upon the introduction of active forces. This structural imbalance gives rises to internal stresses and shearing forces which drive the compaction of the low density net- work into the more stable kagome lattice. This compaction and reorganization process will con- tinue until all colloids have found a compatible orientation within the kagome lattice. However, if the self-propelling speed becomes too large this effect can contribute to the partial collapse of the kagome lattice into one with hexagonal symmetry. Interestingly, we observe extended regions of coexistence between kagome and hexagonal crystals with the latter crystal structure be- coming more stable at large activities. This is consistent with the notion that an increase in activity corresponds to an increase in swim pressure,70,71 which for sufficiently large activi- ties drives the collapse of the kagome lattice. However, it should be appreciated that the nature of pressure in active systems is much richer than its equilibrium counterpart. A re- cently published study provides a more rigorous framework for contextualizing how pressure can be manipulated in active system to drive col- loidal self-assembly.72 Lastly, it should be noted that in the equilibrium system the hexagonal phase is expected only for very low temper- atures where attractive interactions dominate function of temperature T for various propelling speeds U at volume fraction œÜ = 0.4. Active systems at high temperatures exhibit a signif- icant degree of orientational alignment, while at low temperature colloids are predominately randomly oriented. over thermal forces and at larger volume frac- tions where hexagonal order is entropically fa- vored.38 Thus, the formation and coexistence of a hexagonal phase under these conditions is an inherent non-equilibrium property of the active triblock system. Unexpectedly, there are two different regimes where hexagonal order naturally develops in the active system, and although the corresponding structures both exhibit translational hexagonal symmetry, they differ significantly in the ori- entation of the triblock colloids within the lat- tice. The two different flavors of hexagonal or- der in the active system are shown in Movies S3 and S4. We should stress that the forma- tion of a stable hexagonal lattice in both the active and equilibrium system requires a global realignment of the orientations of the colloids within the lattice. As shown in Figure 6c and are oriented such that their orientation axes are parallel to their neighbors. This configuration maximizes the interaction between hydropho- bic patches at large densities and is different than that associated with the kagome lattice (see Figure 1) where the overlap between hy- drophobic patches is maximized when the angle 7 between orientation vectors is 60o. This align- ment of the orientation vectors gives rise to a high level of nematic order within the hexag- onal lattice. If we now take into account the direction of the propelling forces of the triblock colloids (i.e. polar order) we find a substan- tial difference in the orientational distribution for self-assembled structures at low and high temperature. For this purpose, we introduce a global polar order parameter Œ© defined as Œ© = 1 N N ÔøΩ i=1 œâi = 1 NMi N ÔøΩ i=1 Mi ÔøΩ j=1 nnni ¬∑ nnnj (3) where nnni is the orientation of the propelling vec- tor of the ith colloid and Mi is its corresponding number of neighbors within a cutoff distance rc = 3œÉ. Figure 5 shows Œ© as a function of T for different values of U measured from the fi- nal configurations at volume fraction œÜ = 0.4. If each colloid has its axis of propulsion ori- ented in the same direction as its neighbors, then Œ© = 1 and if the colloidal propelling axes are randomly oriented Œ© = 0. At a volume fraction œÜ = 0.4, the equilibrium triblock system does not exhibit hexagonal or- der for any temperature T and there is no global alignment as shown in Figure 5. This is con- trasted with the active system where at high temperatures and sufficiently large propelling speeds (e.g., U = 6 or U = 8) a significant de- gree of orientational order develops as signified by the large values of Œ© in Figure 5. It is partic- ularly revealing to look at the data for U = 8, as at these activities a large degree of hexagonal order is observed across the different tempera- tures (> 70%), but the local alignment of the propelling axes only occurs for large values of T. Strikingly, the orientational order tends to develop mostly in the outer shells of the crystal, where large ordered domains having an average orientation pointing toward the center of the hexagonal crystal are clearly visible (See Fig- ure 6b), while its core remains disordered. An equally important observation is that no net ori- entational order is observed for triblock colloids within a kagome crystals. This observation ap- pears to be true for both the active and equilib- tive self-assembly at low (a) and high temper- ature (b). The self-propelling speed is fixed at U = 8 and œÜ = 0.4. The coloring of each colloid is given by the local alignment œâi as defined in Eq. 3. (a) At low temperature (T = 0.2), we observe coexistence between kagome and hexag- onal structures. Within both crystal structures, the colloids exhibit low to no alignment. (b) At high temperatures (T = 1.2), colloids within the center of the cluster exhibit very little polar alignment (green), while colloids on the perime- ter exhibit a high degree of alignment (red). There is a small fraction of colloids within these order domains that are antialigned with their neighbors (blue). Panels (c) and (d) present magnified views of (a) and (b), respectively. rium triblock system, and indicates that there is no mechanism at play that drives orienta- tional alignment of colloids within the kagome lattice and that colloids are incorporated into the structure at random. These results related to the orientational alignment provide insight into the mechanisms behind the active destabilization of the kagome lattice in favor of the hexagonal lattice. At low temperatures, unbalanced shear forces can easily develop within the orientationally dis- ordered kagome lattice for large values of U. When the active forces dominate over the ad- hesive forces between the particles the kagome 8 lattice is destabilized in favor of the hexagonal crystal. This is consistent with the observation that when a hexagonal crystal develops from a kagome lattice or coexists with it, no significant degree of orientational order is observed (See U or T, the disordered hexagonal structure is it- self unstable against the action of the propelling forces. The only mechanism that allows for the formation of a stable structure under these con- ditions is to generate configurations with a net radial pressure compressing the crystal from the boundary. As illustrated in Figure 6b this re- quires highly aligned hexagonal domains with their net orientation directed inward toward the center of the crystal. Lastly, we should note that in this high tem- perature and highly active regime, orientational alignment does not develop from within the core of an already assembled crystal structure, but rather develops early on in the assembly process as the crystal nucleates from the fluid. An ini- tially disordered small crystallite templates its own growth fueled by the addition of colloids or short chains from the bulk. Given the active nature of the colloids, free-swimming colloids joining the crystallite will be more likely to have their propelling axis directed inward and to- ward the center of the cluster they join. As the crystallite grows it preferentially forms layers of colloids oriented predominately in the same di- rection. Since the sum of all active forces acting on these crystals is typically not equal to zero, the developing crystals are typically quite ac- tive in their own right, and they tend to rotate and move across the system with a speed that is proportional to the imbalance of active forces and torques within the crystal. It is the merg- ing of these highly oriented crystalline domains that gives rise to the stable hexagonal crystals that result in the final configurations (See Fig- ure 6b). Conclusion In this paper, we have shown how even a small amount of activity can have a profound im- pact on the self-assembly pathway of triblock Janus colloids intended to spontaneously orga- nize into a macroscopic kagome lattice. We find significant yields of kagome assembly can be obtained under system conditions where no assembly is possible in the corresponding equi- librium system. Activity is able to sufficiently smooth the underlying energy landscape such that the kinetically favored intermediates can quickly transform into the thermodynamically favored product. The ability of active particles to efficiently break apart branching and com- peting metastable structures, while generating high density fluctuations favoring the growth of isotropic structures such as the kagome and the hexagonal crystals, is the key element responsi- ble for the enhanced self-assembly observed in this system. Although we study this problem through the lens of a single model system, we believe that the general approach and methodology dis- cussed here can be successfully applied to other patchy colloidal systems. For instance, we have performed several simulations with colloids car- rying four orthogonal attractive patches tai- lored to form a colloidal square lattice,73 and find an analogous trend where by modulating the activity of the colloids it is possible to greatly improve the self-assembly of the square lattice. It is also important to emphasize that the structural changes introduce by activity are completely reversible. Once activity is turned off, the system will relax toward its stable equi- librium configuration. In systems where activ- ity can be dynamically modulated, this suggests a number of protocols that can be implemented to maximize self-assembly. One can think of self-propulsion in these systems as a very selec- tive filter that only allows for the stabilization of certain structures. Supporting Information The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/jacs.8b12165. Additional simulation details, and movie cap- tions of representative state points (PDF) 9 Movies S1‚ÄìS4 (ZIP) Acknowledgement A.C. acknowledges fi- nancial supported from the National Science Foundation under Grant No. S.A.M. acknowledges financial support from the NSF Alliance for Graduate Education and the Professoriate under Award No. We gratefully acknowledge the support of the NVIDIA Corporation for the donation of the Titan V GPU used to carry out this work. We thank Austin Dulaney and Ahmad Omar for in- sightful discussions and helpful comments. The authors declare no competing financial interest