1 Extraordinary efficient spin-orbit torque switching in (W, Ta)/epitaxial-Co60Fe40/TiN heterostructures Nilamani Behera,1 Rahul Gupta,1 Sajid Husain1, Vineet Barwal,2 Dinesh K. Pandya,2 Sujeet Chaudhary,2 Rimantas Brucas,1 Peter Svedlindh,1 and Ankit Kumar1,* 1Department of Engineering Sciences, Uppsala University, Box 534, SE-751 21 Uppsala, Sweden 2Thin Film Laboratory, Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 110016, India The giant spin Hall effect in magnetic heterostructures along with low spin memory loss and high interfacial spin mixing conductance are prerequisites to realize energy efficient spin torque based logic devices. We report giant spin Hall angle These structures also exhibit very low spin memory loss and high spin mixing conductance. These extraordinary values of SHA and therefore ultra-low JCrit in semiconducting industry compatible epitaxial materials combinations open up a new direction for the realization of energy efficient spin logic devices by utilizing epitaxial interfaces. 2 Pure spin current based spintronic devices have advantages over conventional microelectronic devices owing to low energy dissipation, fast switching, and high-speed data processing etc., and can be integrated with microelectronic semiconductor devices for better functionality1-4. These new spintronic devices mainly work on the principle of spin manipulation employing the spin Hall effect (SHE) and the Rashba Edelstein effect (REE). The basic building block of the spin devices is comprised of ferromagnetic (FM)/ non-magnetic (NM) bilayers; and the NM layers and their interfaces should possess strong relativistic spin-orbit interaction (SOI). The SOI can be of bulk as well as of interfacial origin, and it generates spin- orbit torques (SOTs), i.e. damping-like (DL) and field-like (FL) SOTs4-8. A charge current applied to SHE and REE based devices generates a transverse spin current and therefore a spin orbit torque at the FM/NM interface, which can be used to manipulate the FM state4-7. In contrast, devices based on the inverse effects, the inverse SHE (ISHE) and inverse REE (IREE) convert a spin current generated by spin pumping into a charge current in the NM layer by the ISHE and at the FM/NM interface by the IREE6-12. Bulk SOI of the NM layer is responsible for the SHE and ISHE mechanisms2, 4, 5, 8, while interfacial SOI is responsible for the REE and IREE mechanisms6, 7, 9, 10. Recently, a strong DL SOT in ferromagnetic semiconductor (Ga,Mn)As thin films7 and Py/CuOx heterostructures10 has been reported, the origin of which lies in crystal inversion asymmetry and interfacial SOI induced Berry curvature7, 10, respectively. High values of the spin Hall angle, which is a measure of the SHE, have been reported, of the order of 100% in Ni0.6Cu0.4 13, 1880 % in topological insulator BixSe1–x 14, and 5200% in conducting topological insulator Bi0.9Sb0.1 15 thin films. The topological insulators exhibit the highest value of spin Hall angle, however their thin film fabrication is challenging. Therefore, present technological focus is to find CMOS (complementary metal- oxide semiconductor) technology compatible material combinations with even larger SOTs, or more specifically larger spin angular momentum transfer across the interfaces in magnetic heterostructures. Spin manipulation in the bulk or at the interface plays a decisive role in building the next generation of spintronics devices, viz. spin torque magnetic random access memories (ST-MRAMs), spin logic devices, ST-transistors and ST nano-oscillators 4-10. To optimize the bilayer stacks for devices, there is a need to control interfacial properties like spin backflow, spin memory loss and magnetic proximity effects that may arise at/near the interface in FM/NM bilayer structures, properties that demean the overall spin transport in the structures3, 16-22. It is known that the spin current at the interface also exhibits spin memory loss in the presence of interfacial SOI, by creating a parallel relaxation path for the spin current3, 19-22. The spin memory loss can be quantified as the relative amount of spin current which is dissipated while passing through the FM/NM interface. Since the heterostructures interfaces play a decisive role in controlling the spin angular momentum transfer, it would be intriguing to investigate in detail how interfacial parameters affect the spin Hall angle and therefore the spin orbit torque switching efficiency when NM layers are interfaced with epitaxial FM heterostructures. In this work, spin pumping measurements were performed on β-W/epi-Co60Fe40/TiN and β-Ta/epi-Co60Fe40/TiN heterostructures to estimate precisely the interfacial parameters; spin mixing conductance (gNM/CoFe ↑↓ ), spin memory loss (SML) and spin diffusion length (λSD). The interfacial parameters corrected spin Hall angle values of W and Ta interfaced epitaxial heterostructures have been determined by performing line-shape analysis and dc current induced modulation of the effective damping using data obtained from spin torque ferromagnetic resonance (STFMR) measurements. The dc bias dependent changes of the effective damping confirm the presence of significantly large interfacial DL torques in these heterostructures whose origin lie both at the W and Ta interfaces as well as at the TiN interface with epitaxial Co60Fe40. The critical switching current density of the W (Ta) interface at which the effective damping reverses sign is 1.82 (8.21) MA/cm2, which is comparable to the values reported for conductive topological insulators15. 3 The RHEED patterns along of (a) TiN 10nm, and (b) Co60Fe40 10nm thin films. (c) and (d) show the pole figure XRD patterns of Co60Fe40(022) for W/ epi- Co60Fe40/TiN/Si and Ta/epi-Co60Fe40/TiN/Si thin films, respectively, confirming the epitaxial quality of the Co60Fe40 thin films grown on TiN buffered Si (100) substrates. Structural Characterization the direction for the TiN(200) film grown on a 2 × 1 reconstructed Si(100) substrate and for the Co60Fe40 film grown on TiN buffered Si(100), respectively. The evolution of elongated and sharp streaks confirms the 2D-epitaxial quality of the CoFe layers, giving evidence of a CoFe(200)/TiN(200)/Si(400) orientation relationship of these samples. To further confirm the epitaxial growth of CoFe on the TiN buffered Si substrate, texture analyses were performed by measuring XRD pole figures. CoFe(022) plane at 2=45.2o for the W/epi-CoFe/TiN/Si and Ta/epi-CoFe/TiN/Si thin films confirming the epitaxial quality of the CoFe thin films. The X-ray reflectivity (XRR) determined thickness of each individual layer is in close agreement with the nominal values predicted from the growth rates; the XRR results are presented in supplementary information (SI). The interface roughness of each individual layer is in the range of  1 nm, and these values are also closely matching with previously reported values 23-25. Spin Hall angle measurement In-plane angle dependent FMR measurements reveal that the epitaxially grown CoFe thin films exhibit cubic anisotropy, as shown in SI. In the in-plane FMR configuration, the resonance field Hr and full-width at half-maximum linewidth ∆H of the spectra were determined by using a lock-in-amplifier based FMR technique; in-plane FMR spectra are presented in SI and the estimated parameters are shown in Table 1. The out-of- plane FMR measurements were performed using vector network analyzer to determine two magnon scattering free Hr, and ∆H; see SI. The out-of-plane FMR estimated values of the spin mixing conductance, intrinsic Gilbert damping (0), spin pumping (S), spin memory loss and spin diffusion length in the W and Ta interfaced FM heterostructures are also shown in To determine the spin Hall angle and the spin-orbit torque switching efficiency, STFMR measurements were performed and Ta(6nm)/epi-CoFe(10nm)/TiN/Si thin films. Schematic figures of the STFMR setup and the torques acting on the magnetization are shown in Figs. 2 (a) and (b) (see for measurement details). In the STFMR measurements, the microwave current Irf generates an Oersted field and a transverse spin current in the NM layer due to the SHE. The torques due to the Oersted field (τOe) and the transverse spin current (τAD) contribute with anti-symmetric and symmetric profiles, respectively, to the FMR line-shape. The anti-damping τAD torque acts against the intrinsic damping torque τD in the FM layer. In case of interfacial SOI, the Rashba Edelstein effect contributes with a field-like torque (τFL) with direction opposite to that of τOe. At resonance, the temporal variation of the magnetization vector with respect to the direction of Irf produces due to the anisotropic magnetoresistance of the FM layer a time varying resistance that mixes with Irf yielding a dc voltage output. In our case, using a low-frequency (1 kHz) modulation of Irf the STFMR signal is detected using a lock-in amplifier. The observed STFMR spectra exhibit a combination of symmetric and anti-symmetric Lorentzian weight factors27- 33. The STFMR spectrum can be expressed as Vmix = V0 [SFS(H) + AFA(H)], (1) 4 where V0 is the amplitude of the mixing voltage. S = ħJS 2eμ0MStCoFe ⁄ and A = (Hrf + HFL)√(1 + Meff Hr ) are symmetric and anti-symmetric Lorentzian weight factors, accounting for anti-damping and field-like torques, respectively. ħJS 2e ⁄ is the spin current density generated in the NM layer in units of J/m2, HFL represents the field-like torque, and μ0Meff is the effective magnetization. FS(H) = ( ∆H 2 ) 2 [( ∆H 2 ) 2 + (H − Hr)2] ⁄ is the symmetric and FA(H) = FS(H) × (H−Hr) (∆H 2 ) is the anti-symmetric Lorentzian function (for details see ). The Oersted field generated by Irf can be expressed as Hrf = tNM 2 JC,rf, where JC,rf is the microwave current density in the NM layer. The linear change of S with increasing microwave power for ≤ 13 dBm power shows that the experimental results are not influenced by heating at the power used in the measurements (13 dBm); see SI for details. The spin Hall angle (SH LS ) can be calculated from the expression27-33 SH LS = JS JC,rf = S A 2eμ0MStCoFe ħ ( tNM 2 + HFL JC,rf) √(1 + Meff Hr ), (2) The line-shape parameters S, A, Hr and H were obtained by fitting the STFMR spectra using Eq. (1); results of the fitting are shown in Fig. 2 (c-d). The results of f vs. Hr and H vs. f are shown in Fig. 2 (e) and (f), respectively, together with fits employing the in-plane Kittel equation, f = μ0γ 2π [(Hr + HK)(Hr + HK + Meff)] 1 2 34 and μ0∆H = μ0∆H0 + (4παefff γ ⁄ ) 35, where γ=180 GHz/T is the gyromagnetic ratio, and eff is the effective Gilbert damping of the heterostructure. The fitted values of μ0Meff are 2.08±0.01T and 2.14±0.01T for W(6nm)/epi-Co60Fe40(10nm)/TiN/Si and Ta(6nm)/epi-Co60Fe40(10nm)/TiN/Si, respectively, which closely match with the FMR determined values. The determined values of eff are found to be 0.0073±0.0002 and for W(6nm)/epi-CoFe(10nm)/TiN/Si and Ta(6nm)/epi-CoFe(10nm)/TiN/Si, respectively. Since the intrinsic damping 0 values of CoFe in both samples are nearly equal (cf. Fig. S6(c) of SI), the higher value of eff in W(6nm)/epi-CoFe(10nm)/TiN/Si is due to a larger spin pumping contribution. The inhomogeneity contribution to damping H0 is found to be 5mT and 1mT for W(6nm)/epi- CoFe(10nm)/TiN/Si and Ta(6nm)/epi-CoFe(10nm)/TiN/Si, respectively. To estimate the true SH LS values of the W and Ta interfaced heterostructures, Eq. (2) must be corrected for the spin pumping contribution in the symmetric line-shape, and the TiN layer Oersted and interface field-like contributions in the anti-symmetric line-shape. During spin transfer torque or spin pumping measurements, the precessing magnetization in the FM layer transfers a pure spin current to the NM layer in the FM/NM system. Using Eq. (2) to determine SH LS , only accounts for the spin-orbit torque, Oersted and interface field-like contributions from the W/Ta layer in the line-shape. The SOT contribution weight factor in the STFMR spectrum can be expressed as ηSOT = 1 (1 + VISHE VSTFMR sym ) ⁄ , where VISHE and VSTFMR sym are the spin- pumping and SOT contributions, respectively, to the total μ0Ms(T) α0(10-3) αs(10-2) (nm) gNM/CoFe ↑↓ (1019) m-2 SD(nm) W/epi-Co60Fe40/TiN/Si in-plane FMR out-of-plane FMR Ta/epi-Co60Fe40/TiN/Si in-plane FMR out-of-plane FMR μ0Meff(T) |SH LS | |SH MOD| W(6nm)/epi-Co60Fe40(10nm)/TiN/Si STFMR Ta(6nm)/epi-Co60Fe40(10nm)/TiN/Si STFMR 4.57 5.09 Parameters determined from in-plane, out-of-plane FMR and STFMR measurements on W/epi-Co60Fe40/TiN/Si and Ta/epi-Co60Fe40/TiN/Si thin films. The observed difference in the intrinsic damping α0 values measured by in-plane and out-of-plane FMR is due to the presence of two-magnon scattering contribution in the in-plane FMR determined values. 5 symmetric part of the resonance line-shape (VTotal sym = VISHE + VSTFMR sym ). The frequency dependent ηSOT values are calculated by using the method presented in and out-of-plane FMR determined parameters values (See SI for details), and subsequently the interfacial parameters corrected spin pumping (a) Schematic of the patterned structure and the STFMR setup. (b) Schematic of torque induced precession of the magnetization M around its equilibrium direction, where θ is the angle of M with respect to the XY plane. τD, τAD, τOe and τFL are intrinsic damping torque, spin current anti-damping-like torque, Oersted field-like torque, and Rashba Edelstein field-like torque, respectively. (c) and (d) STFMR spectra in the frequency range Ta(6nm)/epi-Co60Fe40(10nm)/TiN/Si thin films, respectively. The red solid lines are the respective fits to the experimental data. (e) f vs. μ0Hr and (f) μ0∆H vs. f obtained from STFMR measurements for W(6nm)/epi-Co60Fe40(10nm)/TiN/Si and The red solid lines are fits to the experimental data (see main text for explanations). contributions (VISHE) are subtracted from the STFMR spectra. The W and Ta layer Oersted field contribution weight factor in the STFMR spectrum can be expressed as ΛNM = 1 (1 + ATiN ANM) ⁄ , where ATiN and ANM are the TiN and W or Ta layers antisymmetric contributions, respectively, to the total anti-symmetric part of the resonance line-shape (ATotal Asym = ATiN + ANM); details are presented in SI. The spin-pumping and TiN Oersted and interface field-like corrected average values (using Eq. (S11) in SI) of |SH LS | are 33.68 and 4.57 for heterostructures, respectively, which clearly reflects the impact of accounting for the TiN layer when estimating the spin Hall angle. STFMR measurements have also been performed on a epi-CoFe(10nm)/TiN/Si heterostructure to estimate the CoFe(10nm)/TiN interface spin Hall angle. However, the TiN STFMR spectrum peak-to-peak amplitude is small compared to the amplitude of the Ta and W based heterostructure recorded spectra; see SI for details. We have estimated the spin Hall angle by correcting the line-shape of the STFMR spectrum for extrinsic contributions. However, we emphasize that these corrected values of the spin Hall angle only provide approximate information relating to the spin Hall effect and spin-orbit torque switching efficiency of the W and Ta interfaced epi-CoFe(10nm)/TiN/Si structures; hence, need to confirm using a method which is free from extrinsic contributions. In order to make a more reliable determination of the spin Hall angle and spin-orbit torque switching efficiency, one can use the dc induced change of the damping, often referred to as the modulation of damping (MOD) method, for which the spin pumping (ISHE) and field-like contributions are absent. In the MOD method, one measures the change of the STFMR linewidth and the effective damping parameter as a charge current Idc is applied to the patterned structure27-29. The Idc induced change of the effective Gilbert damping αeff(Idc) is given by28,29 αeff(Idc) − αeff(Idc = 0) = ( sin φ (Hr + 0.5Meff)μ0MStCoFe ħ 2e) JS, (3) where the spin current density JS = SH MODJC,dc(NM); JC,dc((W, Ta) + TiN) = Idc [( 1 AW,Ta RCoFe × RTiN + ( 1 ATiN RCoFe × RW,Ta 6 Here JC,dc is the charge current density in the NM layers. ANM is the cross sectional area of the NM layer and RNM is the resistance of the NM layer. The measured resistivity values of W, Ta, TiN and CoFe are 283 -cm, 183-cm, 98 -cm, and 72-cm, respectively. The charge current in the W (Ta) layer is about 7% (10%) of Idc. These values are close to the value reported by Huang et al. for the charge current in Ta (6.8% of Idc) in Ta(5nm)/CoFeB(1.5-4 nm)/Pt(5nm) heterostructures36. However, Nan et al. 37 reported a charge current corresponding to 34.5% of Idc in the Ta layer in Ta(6nm)/Py(4nm) structures. Since our structures include a TiN seed layer with resistivity 98-cm, a significant part of Idc is expected to go through the TiN layer. The spin Hall angle SH MOD can be estimated by measuring the Idc dependent rate of change of the effective damping, ∂αeff(Idc) ∂Idc ⁄ . Hence SH MOD can be expressed as29 SH MOD = [ ∂αeff ∂JC,dc(NM) ⁄ ( sin φ (Hr+Meff)μ0MStCoFe ħ 2e) ] , (4) STFMR spectra were recorded for different Idc in the range +5 mA to ‒5mA on W(6nm)/epi-CoFe(10nm)/TiN/Si and Ta(6nm)/epi-CoFe(6nm)/TiN/Si patterned structures. The recorded spectra were fitted using Eq. (1) to determine the line- shape parameters, and subsequently αeff(Idc) was extracted for both the structures; the results are shown in Fig. 3(a). αeff(Idc) increases from 0.00250.0006 to 0.01170.0004 for ‒5mA, and from 0.00470.0025 to 0.00670.0019 for to 5mA. To make this data more understandable, the change in H and αeff with Idc, i.e. H(Idc) − H(Idc = 0) and αeff(Idc) − αeff(Idc = 0) vs. Idc, are plotted in Fig. 3(b) and (c). A linear decrease in H(Idc) − H(Idc = 0) with increasing Idc for both samples clearly depicts the absence of heating in our measurements. The observed variation in is due to the larger spin Hall angle and therefore higher SOT in the W based heterostructure. The percentage current-induced change of αeff(Idc), defined as αeff(Idc=0)−αeff(Idc) αeff(Idc=0) × 100%, at Idc = ±5mA is 65% and 22% for the W and Ta based heterostructures, respectively. Here, Idc = 5mA corresponds to a dc current density of Jdc = 2.91 × 109 A m2 and 4.35 × 109 A m2 in the W and Ta layer, respectively. The observed current-induced change of αeff(Idc) in W/epi-CoFe/TiN/Si is significantly higher than that reported by Pai et al.31, where a current-induced change of 0.17% of the effective damping constant at Jdc = ±1.0 × 109 A m2 was reported for the W(6nm)/Co40Fe40B20(5nm)/SiOx/Si system. Our current- induced change of αeff(Idc) is significantly higher than that reported by Liu et al.27; they achieved a current-induced change of αeff(Idc) of 0.003% at Jdc = ±8.95 × 109 A m2 in Py(4nm)/Pt(6nm) structures. The calculated value of |SH MOD| averaged over all measured frequencies for the W(Ta)/epi- CoFe/TiN heterostructure using Eq. (4) is 28.67 (5.09). Here we notice that the role of the TiN interface cannot be ignored. These values are analogous to the values determined by line- shape analysis. However, ignoring the part of the current density passing through the TiN layer in the spin Hall angle (c) αeff(Idc) − αeff(Idc = 0) vs. Idc for positive applied fields. The solid lines are linear fits to the experimental data. 7 determination, the values for W and Ta are 110.84 and 14.61, respectively. The observed large Idc induced change of the effective damping parameter in W/epi-CoFe/TiN/Si is due to the SOI splitting of doubly degenerated tungsten bands near the Fermi level, resulting in a large spin Berry curvature and hence a large intrinsic SHE in the W based heterostructure38. In principle, the calculation of the spin Hall angle either by line- shape analysis, using Eq. (2), or the Idc dependent change of the effective damping parameter using Eq. (3), should give the same result. If no extra interfacial torques are acting on the CoFe layer, then SH LS = SH MOD. The observed small inconsistency in the experimentally determined spin Hall angle values of respective structure either by line-shape or by current induced change of the effective damping clearly indicates the presence of additional interfacial torques in the W(Ta)/CoFe(10nm)/TiN/Si structure. The critical switching current density of the W(Ta)/epi-CoFe/TiN heterostructure at which effective damping reverses sign is 1.82 (8.21) MA/cm2, while it is 0.47 (2.87) MA/cm2 for the W(Ta) interface alone. The determined ultra-low value of the critical current density is comparable to the value reported in conducting topological structures; Bi0.9Sb0.1/MnGa bilayers15. Recently, Gao et al.10 have reported an intrinsic Berry curvature anti- damping-like torque in Py/CuOx heterostructures arising solely from interfacial SOI in the structure. Moreover, external field free switching was demonstrated in employing interfacial torques39. In these structures, the presence of non-negligible interface-generated spin currents stem from the FM(CoFeB,NiFe)/Ti and Ti/CoFeB interfaces39. Since TiN generates a non-negligible spin current at the CoFe/TiN interface, we find that the FM/TiN interface plays a significant role in the Idc dependent change of the effective damping, originating from anti-damping-like torques due to interfacial symmetry breaking and SOI. The interfacial spin torques are very sensitive to the crystallographic structure and therefore the orbital ordering at the interface, hence the epitaxial nature of the heterostructures appears to be responsible for the large switching efficiency. The observed extraordinary switching efficiency in the studied epitaxial heterostructures leaves an open question about the physics at epitaxial interfaces. Therefore, to conclude with certainty on the origin of the enhanced damping change with Idc will require detailed theoretical analysis; however, further experimental interfacial spin band structure investigations are key to unveil the potential of the studied structures for ultralow powered spin-logic circuits. Conclusions In summary, spin pumping and spin transfer torque studies have been performed on β-W/epi-CoFe(10nm)/TiN/Si and β- Ta/epi-CoFe(10nm)/TiN/Si heterostructures. This study clearly indicates the importance of correcting for extrinsic parameters to accurately determine interfacial parameters as well as the parameters describing the NM layer. The giant spin Hall angle and therefore the extraordinary spin-orbit torque switching efficiency in the studied semiconducting technology compatible W(Ta) and TiN interfaced FM heterostructures open up a new avenue for the realization of ultralow powered spintronic devices by utilizing epitaxial magnetic heterostructures. Materials and Methods Four sets of W and Ta interfaced epitaxial Co60Fe40 films were deposited on TiN(200)(10nm)/Si substrates by pulsed dc magnetron sputtering technique. In the first two sets of films, layers of W(tW) and Ta(tTa) with different thickness in the range of 1-15 nm were deposited on epi- CoFe(10nm)/TiN/Si. In last two sets of films, two series of W(4nm)/epi-Co60Fe40 (tCoFe)/TiN/Si, and Ta(5nm)/epi- Co60Fe40 (tCoFe)/TiN/Si structures were grown; here tCoFe was varied in the range 3-17nm. It was also noted that the grown W and Ta layers mostly exhibit the desired -phase (i.e. A-15 cubic for W and tetragonal for Ta) as reported in our previous work40-41. The details of the experimental methods are presented in SI file.