Full proximity treatment of topological superconductors in Josephson-junction architectures F. Setiawan,1, вҲ— Chien-Te Wu,2, 3, 1 and K. Levin1 1James Franck Institute, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA 2Department of Electrophysics, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu 30010, Taiwan, Republic of China 3Physics Division, National Center for Theoretical Sciences, Hsinchu 30010, Taiwan, Republic of China Experiments on planar Josephson-junction architectures have recently been shown to provide an alternative way of creating topological superconductors hosting accessible Majorana modes. These zero-energy modes can be found at the ends of a one-dimensional channel in the junction of a two- dimensional electron gas (2DEG) proximitized by two spatially separated superconductors. The channel, which is below the break between the superconductors, is not in direct contact with the superconducting leads, so that proximity coupling is expected to be weaker and less well controlled than in the simple nanowire configuration widely discussed in the literature. This provides a strong incentive for this paper which investigates the nature of proximitization in these Josephson junc- tion architectures. At a microscopic level we demonstrate how and when it can lead to topological phases. We do so by going beyond simple tunneling models through solving self-consistently the Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations of a heterostructure multicomponent system involving two spa- tially separated s-wave superconductors in contact with a normal Rashba spin-orbit-coupled 2DEG. Importantly, within our self-consistent theory we present ways of maximizing the proximity-induced superconducting gap by studying the effect of the Rashba spin-orbit coupling, chemical potential mismatch between the superconductor and 2DEG, and sample geometry on the gap. Finally, we note (as in experiment) a Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov phase is also found to appear in the 2DEG channel, albeit under circumstances which are not ideal for the topological superconducting phase. I. INTRODUCTION There has been much excitement in the literature over the possibility of observing one-dimensional (1D) topological superconductivity which involves a single 1D wire leading to accessible Majorana zero modes. Be- cause of fluctuation effects in low dimensions, there can be no intrinsic superconductivity so that the focus is on proximitized superconductors. Studies of these wires and their applications towards quantum computation have led to a very extensive literature [3вҖ“10]. In a broad sense, there are two general configurations for proximitized 1D topological superconductors. These are associated with вҖңnanowiresвҖқ in direct contact with superconducting hosts as well as the recently proposed planar Josephson junc- tion . The latter contains a proximitized 1D chan- nel in the two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) just be- low the break between the two superconductors. This configuration is less widely studied, but there is evidence based on zero-bias conductance peaks [13вҖ“16], as in the simple nanowires [17вҖ“37], that topological superconduc- tivity has been experimentally observed . Indeed, the planar junctions have a notable strength relative to the nanowires. The phase difference between the two superconductors provides an alternative knob (beyond the Zeeman field) to tune the system into the topological phase . In ideal (i.e., transparent) systems, when the superconducting phase difference is вҲ— setiawan@uchicago.edu ПҶ = ПҖ, the topological phase can be achieved for rather small Zeeman fields. However, compared to the prox- imitized nanowire, the planar Josephson junction archi- tecture is associated with weaker and less well-controlled proximitization, as the 1D channel in the junction is not in direct contact with the host superconductors. This leads to the central goal of this paper which is to quantify this somewhat indirect form of proximiti- zation and to optimize its effectiveness. We focus on a well-studied substrate: the 2DEG which has moder- ately strong Rashba spin-orbit coupling (SOC). Our cal- culations go beyond the simple tunneling models [40вҖ“44] of the proximity effect by solving the full Bogoliubov- de Gennes (BdG) equations of a multicomponent system with self consistency . In our full proximity model, the host superconductors are treated as a participating component rather than as a passive source of Cooper pairing. The effectiveness of proximitization is quanti- fied via the strength of the induced pairing amplitude, вҲҶprox. Maximizing this pairing amplitude is the goal as it is associated with a large gap in the dispersion. This, in turn, leads to more localized and thus more sta- ble Majorana modes. In this paper we characterize the deleterious effects on вҲҶprox which can come from any of the following: SOC, enhanced substrate thickness, en- hanced channel width, and chemical potential differences (between the host superconductors and the 2DEG). Im- portantly, our findings which are obtained using a fully self-consistent theory, can provide guidance in determin- ing the optimal range of experimental parameters for the topological protection of Majorana modes. While not essential to the topological superconductiv- arXiv:1903.00844v2 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 21 May 2019 2 x y B Lx Ly Оі Оі Оі 2DEG SC SC WSC W WSC вҲҶeiПҶ 2 вҲҶeвҲ’iПҶ 2 z (a) (b) Оі Lx D2DEG DSC B Lz Lz two spatially separated superconducting leads which form a Josephson junction. By tuning the strength of either the ap- plied in-plane magnetic field B or the phase difference ПҶ be- tween the two superconductors, the system can be tuned into the topological superconducting phase which hosts Majorana zero modes (Оі) at the end of the junction. (b) Schematic di- agram of a nanowire proximitized by a superconductor. The system becomes a topological superconductor, which hosts Majorana zero modes (Оі) at the end of the nanowire, when the strength of the magnetic field B is above a certain critical value. ity, a relevant complement to these studies relates to a very elusive state of matter, the Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin- Ovchinnikov (FFLO) phase which we also observe in these planar junctions. This appears to be consistent with recent experiments which have reported that this otherwise rare phase of superconductivity is realized in proximitized superconductors . For the situation here, it can be viewed as arising from a вҖңsecond-order proximitizationвҖқ process. We trace its origin to the fact that the channel makes little direct contact with the su- perconductors, unlike the rest of the proximitized 2DEG. Thus, in this region of the junction, the pairing ampli- tude is reduced and the effective small pairing gap is freer to oscillate in response to an applied Zeeman field. We finally note that this FFLO phase is most apparent in relatively wide junctions where the gap is smaller and it is thus unfavorable for stabilizing a topological phase. The two generic types of proximitized 1D topological superconductors are illustrated in Fig. 1. The Majorana zero-modes (indicated by Оі) appear at the ends of the junction where they are most easily manipulated. In structures as shown in Fig. 1(a), the substrate is a Rashba spin-orbit-coupled 2DEG. Figure 1(b) shows a more suc- cessful variant of these hybrid structures which involve semiconducting nanowires (although chains of magnetic atoms [50вҖ“56] and topological insulators [57вҖ“59] have also been considered). One should appreciate that to design topological su- perconductors without proximitization, say by doping a topological insulator , there is less control in en- gineering the appropriate combination of SOC, Zeeman field, and band structure in the presence of sufficiently strong pairing attraction. The existence of these intrin- sic topological superconductors is still controversial so that, currently, proximity-induced superconductivity appears to be an essential tool. Because it is so essential it is imperative to understand it better, not just in the immediate interface, which has been studied [42вҖ“44], but well into the depth of a hypothesized topological super- conductor . A. Overview and Outline It is useful to quantitatively characterize the Josephson-junction-based topological superconductors we consider here in terms of the size of the energy gap, Egap, associated with the proximitized 2DEG. The quan- tity Egap depends on the junction geometry and ma- terials parameters. It varies with the junction thick- ness, the strip width, the SOC and chemical poten- tial difference between the host superconductors and the 2DEG. Equally important is its dependence on the ex- ternal parameters which control topological phases: the Josephson-junction phase difference ПҶ and the Zeeman field EZ. This field enters in two different ways; it affects the gap opening and closing processes associated with topological phase transitions in a Josephson junction. It also affects the coupling at each separate interface be- tween the host superconductor and the 2DEG substrate. Increasing EZ in the 2DEG inhibits proximitization. It is convenient, then, to isolate these processes by writing Egap вүЎ вҲҶprox|(EZ=ПҶ=0) f(EZ, ПҶ). (1) This states that the energy gap in the presence of Zeeman and superconducting phase difference, Egap, depends di- rectly on a proximity-induced gap вҲҶprox, (which is de- duced in the absence of any Zeeman field, EZ or phase bias ПҶ), times a multiplicative function, f(EZ, ПҶ), which represents (dominantly) the topological characteristics of the junction. In the topological region, the parameter Egap is, thus, a crucial parameter, as its inverse characterizes the Ma- jorana localization length. The smaller this length, the more localized are the Majorana modes. The localization of the Majoranas is, then, optimized when the proximity gap вҲҶprox is maximal. Understanding this is one of the central contributions of our paper. We now present a brief outline. Section II of the paper discusses the theoretical model, i.e., the Hamiltonian of the planar Josephson junction. In Sec. III, we give a dis- cussion of the self-consistent BdG approach used to solve for the energy dispersion and proximity-induced gap. In Sec. IV we study a simple tunneling model of the su- perconducting proximity effect in which the junction is converted to a lower dimension by integrating out the host superconductors. Section V focuses on numerical results from our full-proximity model for the proximity 3 gap вҲҶprox where вҲҶprox is the spectral gap calculated for junctions in the absence of Zeeman field and supercon- ducting phase difference. Here we separately discuss the role of SOC, chemical potential mismatch, and 2DEG thickness on вҲҶprox. The symmetry class of the planar Josephson junction is addressed in Sec. VI. In Sec. VII we present the topological phase diagram as a function of in-plane Zeeman field and superconducting phase bias for different chemical potential mismatch. We further show the evolution of the energy spectrum across the topo- logical phase transition. Section VIII presents a brief discussion of how FFLO superconducting phase is estab- lished, in the presence of an in-plane Zeeman field along the junction. More details of this elusive FFLO phase are presented in Appendix A. Finally, we summarize our conclusions in Sec. IX. II. THEORETICAL MODEL We consider a Josephson junction made from a Rashba spin-orbit-coupled 2DEG in contact with two spatially separated superconductors and subjected to an in-plane magnetic field along the junction as shown in Fig. 1(a). This system was proposed recently as a new platform to realize topological superconductors. In this setup, the transition between the trivial and topological phases can be tuned by varying either the applied in- plane magnetic field B along the junction or the phase difference ПҶ between the two superconductors. In an ideal situation, the interplay between these two indepen- dent knobs enables a lower critical field for the topolog- ical transition to be achieved when the superconducting phase difference is tuned near ПҶ = ПҖ. This Zeeman- and phase-tunable topological transition was demonstrated in recent experiments carried out by two independent groups . A. Hamiltonian We begin by writing down the вҖңnormalвҖқ component (in the absence of superconducting pairing) of the Hamilto- nian as H = пҝҪ d3r пҝҪ ПғПғвҖІ ПҲвҖ  Пғ(r) пҝҪпҝҪ P 2 2mвҲ— вҲ’ Ој(r) пҝҪ Пғ0 + EZ(r)Пғx + Оұ (r) (PxПғy вҲ’ PyПғx)] ПҲПғвҖІ (r) , (2) where ПҲПғ (ПҲвҖ  Пғ) is the annihilation (creation) operator of an electron with spin Пғ =вҶ‘, вҶ“. In Eq. (2), Пғ0 is the iden- tity matrix and Пғ вүЎ (Пғx, Пғy, Пғz) are the Pauli matrices acting on the spin degree of freedom. Here, P repre- sents the real space momentum operator, mвҲ— is the effec- tive electron mass, and Ој is the chemical potential. The chemical potentials are taken to be пЈұ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈІ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈі ОјS for W/2 < |y| < WSC + W/2 and D2DEG < z < D2DEG + DSC, Ој2DEG for |y| < WSC + W/2 and 0 < z < D2DEG, (3) where ОјS and Ој2DEG are the chemical potentials of the su- perconductor and 2DEG, respectively. Throughout this paper, we work in units where Д§ = 1, Ој2DEG = 1, and 2mвҲ— = 1 which gives the Fermi momentum of the 2DEG, kF = 1. The widths of the superconductors and the junction (along the y direction) are denoted by WSC and W, respectively [see Fig. 1(a)]. In this paper we con- sider the width of the superconducting leads WSC > Оҫ, where Оҫ is the superconducting coherence length. We fur- ther denote the thicknesses of the superconductors and the 2DEG by DSC and D2DEG, respectively. Note that for numerical simplicity, we introduce an insulator in be- tween the superconductors with the same thickness as the superconductor above the 2DEG. Its chemical potential is taken to be very negative (ОјI = вҲ’5), so that it behaves essentially as a vacuum. The Zeeman energy EZ(r) = пҝҪg(r)ОјBB/2 is due to the applied in-plane magnetic field B along the junction (x direction) with пҝҪg being the Lande g factor and ОјB being the Bohr magneton. Except when indicated otherwise, the Zeeman energy EZ(r) is assumed to be zero in the host superconductor and insulator but taken to be con- stant throughout the 2DEG (EZ,L = EZ,J = EZ, where EZ,L is the Zeeman energy of the 2DEG directly below the superconducting leads and EZ,J is the Zeeman energy of the 2DEG in the junction). We justify this assumption by noting that the Lande g factor for the superconductor (пҝҪg вҲј 2 for Al) is much smaller than the Lande g factor for the semiconductor (пҝҪg вҲј 15 for InAs) [65вҖ“67]. An important parameter which appears throughout this paper is Оұ which characterizes the strength of the SOC in the 2DEG. The SOC strength is zero in the su- perconductors and insulator but finite in the 2DEG, i.e., пҝҪ 0 for D2DEG < z < D2DEG + DSC, Оұ for 0 < z < D2DEG. (4) This is a realistic representation of the well- studied situation of a spin-orbit-coupled semiconductor proximitized by an s-wave superconductor. So far we have described a noninteracting system. Now, let us include the superconducting pairing term in the Hamiltonian, which is given by пҝҪ ПғПғвҖІ (iПғy)ПғПғвҖІвҲҶ(r)ПҲвҖ  Пғ(r)ПҲвҖ  ПғвҖІ(r) + H.c. (5) We assume that the system is translationally invari- ant along the x direction and finite in both y and z directions. Because the system is translation- ally invariant along the x direction, we can write 4 the Hamiltonian in the Nambu basis ОЁkx(y, z) = пҝҪ ПҲkxвҶ‘(y, z), ПҲkxвҶ“(y, z), ПҲвҖ  kxвҶ“(y, z), вҲ’ПҲвҖ  kxвҶ‘(y, z) пҝҪT as H = 1 2 пҝҪ dkx пҝҪ dz пҝҪ dyОЁвҖ  kx(y, z)Hkx(y, z)ОЁkx(y, z), (6) where the BdG Hamiltonian is given by Hkx(y, z) = пҝҪ k2 x вҲ’ вҲӮ2 y вҲ’ вҲӮ2 z вҲ’ Ој(y, z) пҝҪ П„z + вҲҶ(y, z)П„+ + вҲҶвҲ—(y, z)П„вҲ’, (7) Here the Pauli matrices Пғ and П„ act in the spin and particle-hole subspace, respectively, with П„Вұ = (П„x Вұ iП„y)/2. The superconducting pairing potential, вҲҶ(y, z), arises microscopically from the attractive interactions which are only present in the host superconductors: вҲҶ(y, z) вүЎ g(y, z)F(y, z), (8) where g(y, z) is the coupling function within the parent superconductors: g(y, z) = пЈұ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈІ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈі g0eвҲ’iПҶ/2 for вҲ’(WSC + W/2) < y < вҲ’W/2 and D2DEG < z < D2DEG + DSC, g0eiПҶ/2 for W/2 < y < WSC + W/2 and D2DEG < z < D2DEG + DSC, 0 otherwise. (9) Here, g0 is the attractive coupling constant, and ПҶ is the phase difference between the two superconduc- tors. Applying a Bogoliubov transformation, ПҲkxПғ = пҝҪ n пҝҪ unkxПғОіnkx + vвҲ— nkxПғОівҖ  nkx пҝҪ , where Оіnkx(ОівҖ  nkx) is the Bogoliubov quasiparticle annihilation (creation) operator at an energy En, we then obtain the pair am- plitude F(y, z) = вҹЁПҲвҶ‘(y, z)ПҲвҶ“(y, z)вҹ© = пҝҪ dkx пҝҪ Enkx<ПүD пҝҪ unkxвҶ‘vвҲ— nkxвҶ“ вҲ’ unkxвҶ“vвҲ— nkxвҶ‘ пҝҪ Г— tanh пҝҪEnkx 2T пҝҪ , (10) with T being the temperature. The Debye frequency ПүD provides an energy cutoff in Eq. (10). Note that, through the proximity effect, the pair amplitude F(y, z) in the 2DEG is nonzero even though there is a vanish- ing order parameter, вҲҶ = 0, reflecting the fact that g(y, z) = 0 there. The superconducting pairing poten- tial вҲҶ(y, z) is obtained by solving the BdG Hamiltonian self-consistently as explained in the next subsection. III. SELF-CONSISTENT BdG EQUATION We obtain the pair amplitude F(y, z) [Eq. (10)] by nu- merically solving the BdG eigenvalue problem following the scheme developed in Refs. [70вҖ“73]. The scheme is based on the idea of diagonalizing the BdG Hamiltonian [Eq. (7)]. The resulting BdG equation reads Hkx(y, z)ОҰnkx(y, z) = EnkxОҰnkx(y, z), (11) where the wave function is given by ОҰnkx(y, z) = пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈӯ unkxвҶ‘(y, z) unkxвҶ“(y, z) vnkxвҶ“(y, z) вҲ’vnkxвҶ‘(y, z) пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈё , (12) with the boundary condition ОҰnkx(y, z) = 0 at |y| > WSC + W/2, z < 0 and z > D2DEG + DSC and subject to the self-consistency equation [Eqs. (8)- (10)]. To this end, we expand both the matrix elements and the eigenfunc- tions in terms of a Fourier basis. Specifically, the quasi- particle (unkxПғ) and quasihole (vnkxПғ) wavefunctions are given by unkxПғ(y, z) = 2 пҝҪ LyLz пҝҪ pq upq nkxПғ sin пҝҪpПҖy Ly пҝҪ sin пҝҪqПҖz Lz пҝҪ , (13a) vnkxПғ(y, z) = 2 пҝҪ LyLz пҝҪ pq vpq nkxПғ sin пҝҪpПҖy Ly пҝҪ sin пҝҪqПҖz Lz пҝҪ . (13b) For definiteness, we set the smallest length scale to be of the order of 1/kF where kF = вҲҡОј2DEG is the Fermi momentum of the 2DEG. General matrix elements are similarly expanded in terms of the same Fourier series. For example, we de- fine the matrix elements of an operator O to be OpqpвҖІqвҖІ вүЎ вҹЁpq|O|pвҖІqвҖІвҹ© = 4 LyLz пҝҪ Ly 0 пҝҪ Lz 0 dydz sin пҝҪpПҖy Ly пҝҪ sin пҝҪqПҖz Lz пҝҪ Г—O sin пҝҪpвҖІПҖy Ly пҝҪ sin пҝҪqвҖІПҖz Lz пҝҪ . (14) In this way all terms in the BdG Hamiltonian can be expanded in this basis set. What we have accomplished in this procedure is to successfully transform a set of differential equations into an algebraic matrix eigenvalue problem. Having recast the Hamiltonian in the basis given in Eq. (13), we then solve for the pair amplitude using by diagonalizing the Hamiltonian [Eq. (11)]. The cal- culated pair amplitude is then used to get a new wave- function . This self-consistent procedure is carried out repeatedly until convergence is reached. The first iter- ation generally contains the central physics. Because of 5 the numerical complexity of the full-proximity model and the many parameter sets we address, in many plots we restrict ourselves to the first iteration; in test cases we have confirmed that higher iterations introduce changes in the solution of only a few percent. Throughout this paper, the pair amplitude F(y, z) is calculated by set- ting the parent superconductor pair potential, вҲҶ0 = 0.3, Debye frequency ПүD = 0.5, and temperature T = 0 in Eq. (10). IV. TUNNELING APPROXIMATION TO PROXIMITIZATION The above more powerful procedure has not been widely applied; rather the literature focus has been on an approximate treatment of proximitization. The ap- proximate approach builds on earlier work by McMil- lan , who introduced a perturbative treatment of a tunneling Hamiltonian for a single NS junction which consists of a normal metal in proximity to a superconduc- tor. This treatment was later extended by Refs. [42вҖ“44] to deal with a spin-orbit-coupled electron gas or a topo- logical insulator in proximity with a superconductor. In this section we use N and S to represent the 2DEG and superconductor, respectively; both are considered to be sufficiently thin so that any spatial variations within each can be ignored. The Hamiltonian for the SC/2DEG het- erostructure can be written as H = HS + HN + HT . (15) Here, HS,N is the Hamiltonian of the superconductor (S) and 2DEG (N), respectively, and the tunneling Hamilto- nian is given by HT = пҝҪ kвҲҘ,kвҠҘ,Пғ t(cвҖ  S,(kвҲҘ,kвҠҘ),ПғcN,kвҲҘ,Пғ) + h.c., (16) where cS/N,k,Пғ is the annihilation operator in the S or N side of the interface for an electron with momentum k and spin Пғ = вҶ‘ / вҶ“. This tunnel Hamiltonian HT con- serves momentum kвҲҘ parallel to the NS interface but changes the transverse momentum kвҠҘ perpendicular to the interface. In this approach one derives the proximity-induced su- perconductivity by integrating out the superconducting term in Eq. (15) and calculating the surface self-energy due to the electron tunneling between the 2DEG and su- perconductor. Assuming the density of states to be weakly dependent on energy, the surface self-energy can be calculated to be ОЈN(Пү) = |t|2ОҪ(ОөFN ) пҝҪ dОөGS(Оө, Пү) = вҲ’|t|2ОҪ(ОөFN ) пҝҪ ПүП„0 + вҲҶ0П„x пҝҪ вҲҶ2 S вҲ’ Пү2 + О¶NП„z пҝҪ , (17) where the density of states ОҪ(ОөFN ) is evaluated at the Fermi energy of the 2DEG and О¶N is the proximity- induced shift in the chemical potential of the 2DEG. We can now incorporate this self-energy into the strong- coupling form [75вҖ“77] of the 2DEG GreenвҖҷs function, where we have GN(k, Пү) = ZО“N Пү вҲ’ ZО“N HN вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ ZО“N )вҲҶSП„x . (18) Here, ZО“N (Пү) = пҝҪ 1 + О“N пҝҪ вҲҶ2 S вҲ’ Пү2 пҝҪвҲ’1 (19) is the reduced quasiparticle weight due to the virtual propagation of electrons in the superconductor with О“N = |t|2ОҪ(ОөF,N) being the effective coupling between the 2DEG and superconductor. This quasiparticle weight can be viewed as the fraction of time that a propagating electron spends on the superconducting side of the NS interface. The proximity-induced superconducting pair- ing potential in the 2DEG is then given by вҲҶN = (1 вҲ’ ZО“N )вҲҶS. (20) Having solved for вҲҶN, we now solve for the renormalized superconducting pairing potential in the superconductor. Similar to Eq. (17), the self-energy of the superconductor due to electron tunneling from the 2DEG is given by ОЈS(Пү) = вҲ’|t|2ОҪ(ОөFS) пҝҪ ПүП„0 + вҲҶNП„x пҝҪ вҲҶ2 N вҲ’ Пү2 + О¶SП„z пҝҪ . (21) Substituting this into the strong-coupling form of GreenвҖҷs function of the superconductor, we have GS(k, Пү) = ZО“S Пү вҲ’ ZО“SHN вҲ’ [ZО“SвҲҶ0 + (1 вҲ’ ZО“S)вҲҶN]П„x , (22) where ZО“S(Пү) = пҝҪ 1 + О“S пҝҪ вҲҶ2 N вҲ’ Пү2 пҝҪвҲ’1 . (23) Thus, the renormalized superconducting pairing poten- tial in the superconductor is given by вҲҶS = ZО“SвҲҶ0 + (1 вҲ’ ZО“S)вҲҶN, (24) where вҲҶ0 is the gap of an isolated superconductor. Note that the subscripts N, S in the above equations refer to the quantities in the 2DEG (N) and superconductor (S), respectively. The coupled gap equations [Eqs. (20) and (24)] reflect the fact that proximitization is a two- way process. This leads to a pairing gap in a normal material and at the same time it renormalizes the exci- tation gap in the host superconductor. 6 A. Relation to the standard effective model In the literature, it is rather common to ignore the corrections in the host superconductor and assume вҲҶS = вҲҶ0 but we will see in the full proximitization theory that this is not generally a good assumption. Also important is that in the more general situation, all pair amplitude parameters vary continuously across the system. With this simplification, the above analysis is the basis for the so-called вҖңeffective modelвҖқ which is described as having integrated out the host superconductor. In the effective model, the Hamiltonian of the 2DEG is given by Hkx = пҝҪ k2 x вҲ’ вҲӮ2 y вҲ’ вҲӮ2 z вҲ’ Ој пҝҪ П„z + Оұ(kxПғy + iвҲӮyПғx)П„z (25) where вҲҶ is the proximity-induced pairing potential in the 2DEG which is obtained after integrating out the superconductors. This is given by пЈұ пЈҙ пЈІ пЈҙ пЈі вҲҶproxeвҲ’iПҶ/2 for вҲ’(WSC + W/2) < y < вҲ’W/2, 0 for вҲ’W/2 < y < W/2, вҲҶproxeiПҶ/2 for W/2 < y < WSC + W/2, (26) where вҲҶprox is chosen phenomenologically. V. UNDERSTANDING THE PROXIMITY-INDUCED GAP вҲҶprox We turn now to numerical results for вҲҶprox obtained from our full proximitization studies. Although we be- gin with the limit of zero magnetic field, it is useful to understand how the magnetic field affects the separate proximitization processes at each of the two interfaces be- tween the 2DEG and the host superconductor. To do this we compare two kinds of Josephson-junction configura- tion: The first junction has the Zeeman field confined to the channel in the 2DEG between the two superconduc- tors [Figs. 2(a) and 2(c)] and the second junction has the field applied uniformly in the 2DEG substrate [Figs. 2(b) and 2(d)], as in experiments. The upper panels in Fig. 2 present contour plots of the pair amplitudes and the lower plots show the energy dispersions. One can see that a magnetic field below the superconductors has very little effect on the parent superconductors but, as expected, it inhibits proximiti- zation and does decrease the pair amplitude and energy gap in the 2DEG. Fortunately with the planar Josephson- junction design, we can tune the phase difference towards ПҖ where the critical field for the transition into the topo- logical phase is smaller such that there is still a substan- tial gap present when the system is in the topological phase. In the remainder of this section, we will address how to optimize the proximity gap вҲҶprox at EZ = ПҶ = 0. -23 0 23 kFy 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 kFz (a) EZ,J = 0.17, EZ,L = 0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 -23 0 23 kFy 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 kFz (b) EZ,J = EZ,L = 0.17 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 вҲ’1 0 1 kx/kF -вҲҶ0 0 вҲҶ0 E (c) EZ,J = 0.16, EZ,L = 0 вҲ’1 0 1 kx/kF -вҲҶ0 0 вҲҶ0 E (d) EZ,J = EZ,L = 0.17 Profile of pair amplitudes (top panel) and energy spectra (bottom panel) of the planar Josephson junction for the case: (Left panel) Zeeman is only in the junction (EZ,J = 0.17 and EZ,L = 0) and (right panel) Zeeman is uniform across the 2DEG (EZ,J = EZ,L = 0.17). Note that the presence of the Zeeman field in the 2DEG below the superconductor (EZ,L) reduces the induced pair ampli- tude and proximity gap in the 2DEG [panels (b) and (d)]. The black dashed lines in the top panel denote the bound- aries between the superconductors and the 2DEG. The pa- rameters used are ОјS = 1, Ој2DEG = 1, Оұ = 0.05, вҲҶ0 = 0.3 DSC = 10/kF , and D2DEG = 4/kF . By dropping the Zeeman field and junction phase bias, we are establishing how to select materials as well as geometric parameters. A. Effects of variable spin-orbit coupling and chemical potential mismatch Since SOC plays an important role, it should be noted that there is no consensus in the literature about how SOC interacts with proximitization. It has been argued that larger SOC is beneficial . We find here, that in the absence of a magnetic field, the effects of SOC on the proximity-induced gap are strongly tied to the size of the chemical potential difference between the super- conductors and the 2DEG. This can be understood in large part because of a mismatch in the Fermi momenta of the bands in the superconductors with those of the spin-orbit-coupled 2DEG. This mismatch is illustrated in Fig. 3. Here the left panel (a) shows the superposed normal-state dispersions for the case where the superconductor and spin-orbit- 7 kx E kx (b) ОјS вү« Ој2DEG + Оұ2 (a) ОјS = Ој2DEG E SC 2DEG SC 2DEG on proximitization. Energy spectra of the normal part of the Hamiltonian of the superconductor (SC) and 2DEG for the case where (a) ОјS = Ој2DEG and (b) ОјS вү« Ој2DEG+Оұ2. For the case where (a) ОјS = Ој2DEG, the mismatch between the Fermi momenta of the SC and 2DEG gets larger for increasing SOC strength Оұ while for the case where (b) ОјS вү« Ој2DEG +Оұ2, the mismatch between the Fermi momenta of the SC and 2DEG is weakly dependent on the SOC strength Оұ. In summary, the dependence of the proximity gap вҲҶprox on Оұ is weaker for the case where the SC chemical potential is much larger than the 2DEG chemical potential. coupled 2DEG have the same chemical potential and the right panel (b) is for the case where the chemical poten- tial in the superconductor is much larger than that in the 2DEG, as is more often the case. The principal conclu- sion from panel (a) is that there are many bands in 2DEG which have little Fermi momentum overlap (because of the shift due to SOC in the 2DEG) with bands in the su- perconductors; one can anticipate that this mismatch in- creases as the SOC becomes larger. This is in contrast to panel (b) where all bands in the 2DEG have their Fermi momenta close to those in the superconductor. Here the deleterious effects of SOC on the proximity-induced gap will be less apparent. We summarize this by noting that the dependence of the proximitized gap on the SOC strength is weaker for the case where the superconductor chemical potential is larger than the 2DEG chemical potential. This is be- cause a superconductor with a larger chemical potential has more occupied subbands. As a result, for an incident electron coming from the 2DEG with transverse momen- tum normal to the NS interface, there is an electron from one of the subbands in the superconductor with momen- tum which is close to matching the incident momentum of the electron from the 2DEG. Note that a mismatch in the Fermi velocity of the elec- tron in the superconductor and 2DEG increases the am- plitude of the normal reflections while decreasing that of Andreev reflections. Since the superconductivity in the 2DEG is proximity induced via Andreev reflection processes at the interface , the mismatch in turn reduces the strength of the proximity-induced gap. These physical effects are illustrated more directly in Fig. 4. As shown in the top panel for the case where ОјS = Ој2DEG, the Fermi momentum mismatch between the su- perconductors and 2DEG increases as the SOC strength increases in the 2DEG which in turns reduces the prox- imity gap. The effect of the SOC on the proximity gap -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 kx/kF -вҲҶ0 0 вҲҶ0 E (a) Оұ = 0.0, ОҙОј = 0 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 kx/kF (b) Оұ = 0.2, ОҙОј = 0 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 kx/kF (c) Оұ = 0.5, ОҙОј = 0 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 kx/kF -вҲҶ0 0 вҲҶ0 E (d) Оұ = 0.0, ОҙОј = 9 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 kx/kF (e) Оұ = 0.2, ОҙОј = 9 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 kx/kF (f) Оұ = 0.5, ОҙОј = 9 there is no magnetic field. Top panel: For small chemical po- tential mismatch, e.g., ОҙОј = ОјS вҲ’Ој2DEG = 0, the gap depends strongly on the 2DEG SOC. The gap decreases with increas- ing SOC strength as shown in panels (a)-(c) because there is a larger mismatch between the Fermi momentum of the super- conductor and Rashba spin-orbit-coupled 2DEG as the SOC strength increases. Bottom panel: For large chemical poten- tial mismatch, e.g., ОҙОј = ОјS вҲ’ Ој2DEG = 9, the gap depends weakly on the 2DEG SOC [see panels (d)-(f)] as there are more occupied subbands in superconductors with large ОјS. This implies that for an incident electron coming from one of the bands of the 2DEG, there is a band in the superconduc- tor with a momentum close to the incident momentum. The parameters used are Ој2DEG = 1, EZ,J = EZ,L = 0, вҲҶ0 = 0.3, ПҶ = 0, WSC = 20/kF , W = 6/kF , DSC = 10/kF , and D2DEG = 4/kF . is less pronounced for the case where ОјS вү« Ој2DEG. This is shown in the lower panel of Fig. 4. In summary, for a weaker dependence of the proximity-induced gap on the SOC, the chemical potential of the superconductor has to be much larger than that of the 2DEG. But this raises another important issue. While a sub- stantial mismatch in chemical potentials helps to negate the SOC effects on the proximitization, there is a neg- ative side to making the chemical potential mismatch (ОҙОј = ОјS вҲ’ Ој2DEG) too large. To make this clear, we can compare Figs. 4(a) and 4(d) which represent an extreme example of zero SOC in the 2DEG. Here one can see that the larger the chemical potential difference, the smaller the effective pairing gap. This is because the chemical po- tential mismatch increases the Fermi velocity mismatch between the 2DEG and the superconductors resulting in a decrease in the NS interface transparency. We will refer back to these competing effects involving ОҙОј and the SOC strength, Оұ, in a summary figure (Fig. 7) be- low, but we here emphasize the subtle tradeoffs which must be considered to optimize the outcome. 8 вҲ’1 0 1 kx/kF 0.00 0.05 0.10 E (a) W = 6/kF вҲ’1 0 1 kx/kF (b) W = 30/kF вҲ’1 0 1 kx/kF (c) W = 80/kF Energy spectra of planar Josephson junctions for different junction widths: (a) W = 6/kF , (b) W = 30/kF , and (c) W = 80/kF . The spectral gap decreases with increasing junction width W. The parameters used are: Ој2DEG = 1, 2.12/kF ], ПҶ = 0, WSC = 20/kF , DSC = 10/kF , and D2DEG = 4/kF . B. Effects of variable channel width and variable junction thickness width of the quasi-1D channel of the junction in the 2DEG. The pairing gap is greatly suppressed as the chan- nel becomes wider. This is relatively easy to understand, as proximitization strength (arising from the leaking of Cooper pairs from the superconductors to 2DEG) decays with increasing distance from the superconductors which results in a smaller superconducting gap for a wider junc- tion between the two superconductors. We illustrate this case in part because this wide channel situation is more favorable for observing the FFLO phase discussed in Sec. VIII. of the 2DEG on the proximity gap, illustrating another effect associated with geometry. Shown here are plots of the pair amplitude (upper panel) and energy spectra (lower panel) of the Josephson junction. It can be seen from the plots that the pair amplitude and spectral gap decrease with increasing thickness of the 2DEG. There are contrary suggestions in the literature that these thicker substrates could be favorable as they allow вҖңmultichannel participationвҖқ. As shown here, though, thicker junctions lead to smaller proximity gaps since they require that the superconducting correlations ex- tend over a greater distance deeper into the 2DEG. We, thus, conclude that as Majorana zero modes are pro- tected by large proximity-induced gaps, thinner 2DEGs are more favorable to be used as platforms for topological quantum computation. by geometry and materials parameters. This figure shows how increasing (a) the thickness, (b) the chemical poten- tial difference and (c) the SOC strength affect the prox- imity gap (at zero Zeeman field and zero phase differ- ence). Clearly making both the thickness and the channel width larger has deleterious effects. However, as shown in Figs. 7(b) and 7(c), the effects of SOC are strongly -23 0 23 kFy 0 4 14 kFz (a) D2DEG = 4/kF -23 0 23 kFy 0 8 18 (b) D2DEG = 8/kF -23 0 23 kFy 0 11 21 (c) D2DEG = 11/kF 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 вҲ’1 0 1 kx/kF -вҲҶ0 0 вҲҶ0 E (d) D2DEG = 4/kF вҲ’1 0 1 kx/kF -вҲҶ0 0 вҲҶ0 (e) D2DEG = 8/kF вҲ’1 0 1 kx/kF -вҲҶ0 0 вҲҶ0 (f) D2DEG = 11/kF Thickness effects. Profile of pair amplitude (top panel) and energy spectra (bottom panel) of planar Joseph- son junctions for zero Zeeman field and different thickness of 2DEG: D2DEG = 4/kF (left panel), D2DEG = 8/kF (mid- dle panel) and D2DEG = 11/kF (right panel). Note that the thicker the 2DEG is, the smaller is the induced superconduct- ing gap in the 2DEG. The black dashed lines in the top panel denote the boundaries between the superconductors and the 2DEG. The parameters used are ОјS = 1, Ој2DEG = 1, Оұ = ПҶ = 0, WSC = 20/kF , W = 6/kF , and DSC = 10/kF . connected to the magnitude of the chemical potential dif- ference (ОҙОј = ОјS вҲ’ Ој2DEG) . As shown in Fig. 7(b), when there is any finite SOC, there is a notable nonmono- tonicity in plots of вҲҶprox versus ОҙОј. The initial rise in вҲҶprox with ОҙОј for a fixed Оұ is due to the matching of the band structure of the superconductor with the Rashba- derived band structure in the 2DEG. However, once the chemical potential difference is sufficiently large, as might be expected, increasing it further has a negative effect on the proximity gap due to the mismatch in the Fermi momenta between the superconductors and 2DEG, as il- lustrated in Fig. 3. There seems to be a вҖңsweet spotвҖқ around ОҙОј вүҲ 10 which is substantially below the more realistic physical regime (where ОҙОј might approach 100 or larger). Figure 7(c) shows that the effects of SOC on the proximity gap вҲҶprox becomes weaker as ОҙОј increases, as discussed in Sec. V A. Overall this figure should help guide materials parameters and geometries . VI. SYMMETRY CLASS It is useful to look at the underlying symmetries which dictate the nature of the topological phases. The above BdG Hamiltonian [Eq. (7)] for the planar Josephson junc- tion commutes with the particle-hole symmetry operator 9 4 8 12 16 20 kFD2DEG 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 вҲҶprox/вҲҶ0 (a) 0 10 20 30 40 50 ОҙОј 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 вҲҶprox/вҲҶ0 (b) Оұ = 0 Оұ = 0.2 Оұ = 0.5 Оұ = 1 0.0 0.5 1.0 ОұkF 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 вҲҶprox/вҲҶ0 (c) ОҙОј = 0 ОҙОј = 4 ОҙОј = 9 ОҙОј = 19 ОҙОј = 49 of the 2DEG thickness D2DEG for SOC strength Оұ = 0.05 and ОјS = Ој2DEG = 1. The induced gap decreases with increasing 2DEG thickness. (b) Induced gap вҲҶprox/вҲҶ0 as a function of chemical potential difference (ОҙОј = ОјS вҲ’ Ој2DEG) calculated for Ој2DEG = 1, D2DEG = 4/kF and several values of SOC strength Оұ. For small Оұ, the induced gap decreases with increasing ОҙОј. For large Оұ, the induced gap has nonmonotonic dependences on ОҙОј where it first increases with increasing ОҙОј, rises to a maximum, and after reaching the maximum it decreases with increasing ОҙОј. (c) Induced gap вҲҶprox/вҲҶ0 as a function of SOC strength Оұ for D2DEG = 4/kF and different values of ОҙОј. For small ОҙОј, the induced gap depends strongly on Оұ where it decreases with increasing Оұ. For the case where ОјS is much bigger than Ој2DEG, the induced gap depends weakly on Оұ. The P = ПғyП„yK where K is the complex conjugation. For zero Zeeman field EZ = 0 and a superconducting phase bias ПҶ = 0 or ПҶ = ПҖ, the Hamiltonian belongs to the sym- metry class DIII in the tenfold classification [84вҖ“86] as it also commutes with the time-reversal symmetry opera- tor T = вҲ’iПғyK (where T 2 = вҲ’1). Moreover, the system also has a mirror symmetry along the x-z plane with the mirror operator given by My = вҲ’Пғy Г— (y вҶ’ вҲ’y). The T and My symmetries are broken when an in- plane Zeeman field is applied along the junction (x di- rection) or for a phase bias other than ПҶ = 0 or ПҶ = ПҖ. The Hamiltonian, however, remains invariant under an antiunitary вҖңeffectiveвҖқ time-reversal operator пҝҪT which is the product of the T and My operators, i.e., пҝҪT = MyT = iK Г— (y вҶ’ вҲ’y) where T 2 = 1. Thus the sys- tem has the BDI symmetry . Moreover, since the Hamiltonian possesses пҝҪT and P symmetries, it also has a chiral symmetry, where the Hamiltonian anticommutes with the chirality operator C = вҲ’iP пҝҪT = MyП„y. When the пҝҪT symmetry is broken, the symmetry class is reduced from class BDI to class D. In this case, an even number of Majorana zero modes at the same end of the junc- tion couples to each other and splits into finite-energy mode leaving either zero or one Majorana mode at each end of the junction. This BDI symmetry can be bro- ken by disorder , applying a transverse Zeeman field perpendicular to the junction (along the y direction) or having left and right superconductors with different widths or pairing potentials . The symmetry class BDI is characterized by a Z topo- logical invariant QZ where |QZ| denotes the number of Majorana zero modes at each end of the junctions. On the other hand, the symmetry class D is characterized by a Z2 topological invariant QZ2 which denotes the parity of the QZ invariant. VII. TOPOLOGICAL PHASE DIAGRAM AND TRANSITION We obtain the phase diagram of the system by calcu- lating the topological invariant following Ref. . The numerical computation is considerably more complicated in the presence of our full treatment of proximitization. To do so, we first diagonalize the chiral operator C with 1 and вҲ’1 in the upper-left and lower-right block, respec- tively. Since {C, H} = 0, in this basis where the C is block diagonal, the BdG Hamiltonian Hkx is off diagonal, i.e., UCU вҖ  = пҝҪ 1 0 0 вҲ’1 пҝҪ , (27a) UHkxU вҖ  = пҝҪ 0 A(kx) AT (вҲ’kx) 0 пҝҪ . (27b) We can calculate the Z topological invariant (QZ) from the winding of the phase Оё(kx) of the determi- nant of the off-diagonal part A(kx) where eiОё(kx) = detA(kx)/|detA(kx)|. The Z topological invariant is given by QZ = пҝҪ вҲһ 0 dkx ПҖ dОё(kx) dkx , (28) and the Z2 topological invariant (the parity of QZ) is given by QZ2 = (вҲ’1)QZ. (29) It is shown in Ref. that Eq. (29) is simply the Z2 Pfaffian invariant of 1D systems , i.e., QZ2 = sgnPf[(HkxвҶ’вҲһ)ПғyП„y] Pf[(Hkx=0)ПғyП„y] . (30) 10 0.00 0.06 0.12 0.18 EZ 0 ПҖ 2ПҖ ПҶ (a) Class BDI -2 -1 0 1 2 3 Z topological invariant 0.00 0.06 0.12 0.18 EZ 0 ПҖ 2ПҖ ПҶ (b) Class D 1 -1 Z2 topological invariant Topological phase diagrams for a proximitized Josephson junction with vanishing chemical potential mis- match ОҙОј = 0. (a) Class BDI and (b) Class D phase dia- gram as functions of EZ and ПҶ. Each region is labeled by different Z topological invariants in the BDI phase diagram. The Z2 invariant gives the parity of the Z index. The topo- logical invariant QZ2 = вҲ’1 and QZ2 = 1 corresponds to the odd and even Z indices which in turn indicates the topolog- ical and trivial phases of class D. The parameters used are ОјS = Ој2DEG = 1, Оұ = 0.05, вҲҶ0 = 0.3, WSC = 20/kF , W = 6/kF , DSC = 10/kF , and D2DEG = 4/kF . 0.00 0.06 0.12 0.18 EZ 0 ПҖ 2ПҖ ПҶ (a) ОјS = 1, Ој2DEG = 1 1 -1 Z2 topological invariant EZ 0 ПҖ 2ПҖ ПҶ (b) ОјS = 20, Ој2DEG = 1 1 -1 Z2 topological invariant out (ОјS = 1, Ој2DEG = 1) and (b) with chemical potential mismatch (ОјS = 20, Ој2DEG = 1). Class D phase diagrams for two different values of chemical potential differences be- tween the superconductors and the 2DEG: (a) ОјS = 1 and Ој2DEG = 1 and (b) ОјS = 20 and Ој2DEG = 1. The Z2 in- variant QZ2 = -1 and QZ2 = 1 indicate the topological and trivial phases of class D. The chemical potential of the 2DEG is renormalized by the chemical potential of the superconduc- tors resulting in a difference between the effective chemical potential of the 2DEG below the superconductor and that of the 2DEG in the junction. This difference increases as the mismatch between the superconductor and 2DEG chemical potential becomes larger which in turn increases the ampli- tude of normal reflections in the 2DEG. As a result, for a larger chemical potential mismatch, the phase diagram be- comes more stripe like (less dependent on ПҶ) and the critical Zeeman field for ПҶ = ПҖ shifts to a larger value. The parame- ters used are Ој2DEG = 1, Оұ = 0.05, вҲҶ0 = 0.3, WSC = 20/kF , W = 6/kF , DSC = 10/kF , and D2DEG = 4/kF . nar Josephson junction obtained from the full proximity calculations. These phase diagrams emphasize the novel feature of the Josephson-junction architecture which en- ables the topological phase to be tuned either by changing the phase bias or the Zeeman field. agrams for the same junction. Each phase in the BDI phase diagram [Fig. 8(a)] is labeled by a different Z topo- logical invariant (QZ) where |QZ| denotes the number of Majorana zero modes located at each end of the junction. As can be seen from Fig. 8(a), the Z = 1 topological re- gion occupies most of the phase diagram as it occurs in a wide range of parameters. The topological transition between each of the BDI phases is indicated by a gap clos- ing at kx = kF . The class D phase diagram [Fig. 8(b)], on the other hand, shows the parity of the Z topologi- cal invariant [Eq. (29)] where QZ2 = 1 and QZ2 = вҲ’1 correspond to the trivial and topological phases of class D, respectively. The topological transition between the QZ2 = 1 and QZ2 = вҲ’1 regions is reflected in a gap closing at kx = 0 (see Sec. VII A). The bulk-boundary correspondence implies that the change in the topological index from QZ2 = 1 to QZ2 = вҲ’1 which is accompanied by a bulk gap closing at kx = 0 corresponds to the appearance of a Majorana zero mode at the end of a finite-length junction. Importantly, the edge states that appear in a finite-length junction of our model are Majorana zero modes and not Andreev bound states. Clearly, Andreev bound states do not involve a change of topological index (from trivial to topological) and are also not accompanied by bulk gap closings. match (ОҙОј = ОјSC вҲ’ Ој2DEG) on the phase dependence of the class D phase diagram. For an ideal or вҖңtransparentвҖқ Josephson junction, the phase diagram has a diamond shape where the critical Zeeman field at which the topo- logical phase transition happens is considerably smaller for ПҶ = ПҖ than for ПҶ = 0 [see Fig. 9(a)]. We observe that, with a larger value for ОҙОј, the phase diagram appears to be more stripelike as in Fig. 9(b). Here, the dependence of the phase diagram on the superconducting phase dif- ference ПҶ becomes weaker and the critical Zeeman field for ПҶ = ПҖ shifts to a larger value. We understand this stripelike phase diagram as deriv- ing from an increasing mismatch between the chemical potential of the superconductor and the 2DEG. This, in turn, should be viewed as leading to an increase in the strength of the normal reflections in the 2DEG. Due to the proximity to the superconductor, the chemical po- tential of the 2DEG directly in contact with the super- conductor will be renormalized by that of the supercon- ductor. As a result, there is a difference between the effective chemical potential of the 2DEG directly below the superconductor with the effective chemical potential of the 2DEG in the junction. This effectively creates a potential barrier for the electrons which in turn increases the strength of normal reflections. We conclude this section by noting that under ideal circumstances (i.e., for transparent junctions with small ОҙОј), the critical Zeeman field needed to tune the system to topological phases can be greatly reduced for a phase bias ПҶ = ПҖ. One can infer from Fig. 9(b), that when ОҙОј 11 assumes a substantial (and physically reasonable) value, this gain in reduction of the critical Zeeman field (by tun- ing the phase ПҶ to be near ПҖ) is mostly lost . We note that similar to the effect of ОҙОј, decreasing the width of the superconducting leads also makes the phase diagram becomes less dependent on the phase bias due to the en- hancement of multiple normal reflections at the interface between the superconductors and the vacuum . A. Energy dispersion across the topological phase transition The topological phase transition of class D is associ- ated with a gap closing at kx = 0 . As can be seen from the phase diagram [Fig. 9(a)], for a transparent junction the critical Zeeman field at which the transi- tion happens is much smaller when the superconducting phase difference ПҶ is near ПҖ. As a complement to this phase diagram, we address the energy spectrum of the system as a function of kx across the phase transition. of a planar Josephson junction as the Zeeman field is tuned across the topological phase transition for two dif- ferent values of superconducting phase differences: ПҶ = 0 (upper panel) and ПҶ = ПҖ (lower panel). At a particular value of critical field EZ, the gap at kx = 0 closes [panels (b) and (e)] which reflects the transition between triv- ial and topological phases. The critical Zeeman field is reduced as ПҶ вҶ’ ПҖ. We summarize this section by noting that despite the more indirect form of proximitization associated with this Josephson-junction architecture, as compared with the nanowires of Fig. 1(b), we have presented strong evidence that proximitized topological phases exist. This topo- logical superconductivity occurs even when there are no direct attractive interactions in the 2DEG channel. Nev- ertheless, in this Josephson-junction configuration the proximity coupling guarantees that there is a finite pair amplitude within the channel. VIII. PROXIMITY-INDUCED FFLO PHASE An exotic superconducting state, characterized by nonzero center-of-mass momentum of Cooper pairs and spatially varying order parameter, may occur for certain materials in the presence of both in-plane magnetic field and superconductivity. Interestingly, the planar junc- tions discussed here are associated with this exotic form of superconductivity, referred to as the Fulde-Ferrell- Larkin-Ovchinikov (FFLO) phase . Indeed, it is hard to find examples where this elusive phase, deriving from magnetic field effects, has been observed which do not originate from proximity coupling. Experiments based on this Josephson-junction architecture report that the FFLO phase appears to be confined within the 1D channel of the junction. One might have expected it вҲ’1 0 1 kx/kF 0.00 0.02 0.04 E (a) EZ = 0.1, ПҶ = 0 вҲ’1 0 1 kx/kF (b) EZ = 0.11, ПҶ = 0 вҲ’1 0 1 kx/kF (c) EZ = 0.12, ПҶ = 0 вҲ’1 0 1 kx/kF 0.00 0.02 0.04 E (d) EZ = 0.0, ПҶ = ПҖ вҲ’1 0 1 kx/kF (e) EZ = 0.0053, ПҶ = ПҖ вҲ’1 0 1 kx/kF (f) EZ = 0.02, ПҶ = ПҖ son junction across the topological phase transition for ПҶ = 0 (upper panel) and ПҶ = ПҖ (lower panel). The topological tran- sition is characterized by a gap closing at kx = 0 where the critical field at which the topological transition occurs is the smallest at ПҶ = ПҖ. The critical fields for ПҶ = 0 and ПҶ = ПҖ spectively. Energy spectra shown correspond to the phase diagram of Fig. 8. The gap closes and reopens at kx = 0 as the Zeeman field EZ is respectively tuned towards and away from the critical field. (a),(d) The system is in the trivial phase; (b),(e) the system undergoes a topological phase tran- sition with a gap closing at kx = 0; (c),(f) the system is in the topological phase. Shown here are only a few low-energy states close to zero energy where the energy levels closest to zero energy are shown by red lines. Here, we take the Zeeman field to be uniform (EZ,J = EZ,L = EZ) in the 2DEG. The parameters used are ОјS = 1, Ој2DEG = 1, вҲҶ0 = 0.3, Оұ = 0.05, WSC = 20/kF , W = 6/kF , DSC = 10/kF , and D2DEG = 4/kF . to be present in some form throughout the 2DEG since magnetic fields and proximity coupling are present out- side the channel as well. Due to the close proximity to the parent superconductor the induced gap there, however, is stronger and is not energetically favorable to oscillate in response to an applied in-plane Zeeman field. The chan- nel in the junction, on the other hand, is well away from the host superconductors and thus has greatly weakened pair amplitude with superconducting phases which are freer to oscillate. The upper panel of Fig. 11 presents a contour plot of the pair amplitude F(r) throughout the junction. We point out that the junctions considered here are very wide. They correspond to the widest case shown in Fig. 5(c) where the proximity gap is extremely small. This weak proximity gap is not favorable to topologi- cal superconductivity. This figure should make it clear, however, that even though the channel is wide, the ex- istence of a FFLO phase demonstrates that the chan- nel should be viewed as a proximitized superconductor, 12 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 kFz (a) Оұ = 0.0 (b) Оұ = 0.3 (c) Оұ = 0.5 вҲ’0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 Re[F/вҲҶ0] kFy 0.00 0.02 Re[F/вҲҶ0] (d) Оұ = 0.0 kFy (e) Оұ = 0.3 kFy (f) Оұ = 0.5 of the pair amplitude of planar Josephson junctions with 2D Rashba SOC of different strength: Оұ = 0 (left panel), Оұ = 0.3 (middle panel), and Оұ = 0.5 (right panel). Upper panel shows the color plots of the real part of the pair amplitude Re[F/вҲҶ0], and the lower panel is the linecuts of the pair amplitude along the y direction at different values of z. As shown in the bot- tom panel, the pair amplitude oscillates along the y direction with a characteristic oscillation length О» = EZ/(2vF ) that decreases with increasing Оұ (as vF increases with increasing Оұ). The black dashed lines in the upper panel denote the boundary between the superconductors and the 2DEG. The parameters used are ОјS = 1, Ој2DEG = 1, EZ,J = EZ,L = 0.3, вҲҶ0 = 0.3, ПҶ = 0, WSC = 20/kF , W = 80/kF , DSC = 10/kF , and D2DEG = 4/kF . rather than as a strictly вҖңnormalвҖқ region. Shown in the upper panel of Fig. 11 are the pair amplitudes for three different values of SOC strength. The lower panel of Fig. 11 presents linecuts of this pair amplitude along the y direction at different values of z. As can be seen from the figure, the oscillations of the pair amplitude are con- fined to the 2DEG channel; this oscillation can manifest as the oscillation in the critical current as a function of an in-plane Zeeman field as observed in recent experi- ments . The frequency of these oscillations scales ap- propriately with both the applied in-plane Zeeman field and the SOC strength. In Appendix A we show that the FFLO state is also present for the case of 1D Rashba SOC. There we also illustrate how the same behavior can be found in the effective models where the superconducting hosts have been вҖңintegrated outвҖқ. In general, the amplitude of the FFLO oscillation de- creases with increasing temperature as temperature weakens FFLO pairing. Since the typical experimental temperature (from 0.5 K down to 31 mK ) is well be- low the superconducting critical temperature (Tc of an Al film is 1.2-1.6 K ), the FFLO order should be ex- perimentally observable, as reported in recent work on Al-proximitized HgTe quantum wells . We note that since the proximitization strength decreases with increas- ing junction width, the FFLO oscillation amplitude de- cays towards the middle of the junction (away from the superconductor). This implies that the FFLO phase of a narrower junction is associated with a larger proximitized gap in the middle of the junction. The presence of nonmagnetic disorder will decrease the amplitude and period of the FFLO oscillations. This is because the associated scattering involves an averaging of the effective magnitude of the magnetic field over all directions (from a minimum value of 0 to a maximum value of EZ), yielding a shorter oscillation period . Magnetic disorder, on the other hand, leads to a decrease in the characteristic decay length and an increase in the period of oscillations . IX. CONCLUSIONS While heterostructures that involve proximitization appear to be important for achieving topological super- conductivity, the major components required to achieve this phase are in many ways inimical to the proxim- itization process. These involve Zeeman fields, spin- orbit coupling which can lead to band-structure mis- matches and substantial chemical potential discontinu- ities between the parent superconductors and the prox- imitized (often semiconducting) medium. Nevertheless, experiments seem to be demonstrating success. Although theoretically we might expect this proximitiza- tion to be a rather delicate and fragile process, neverthe- less, we are able to show that there are clear indications of well-established topological superconductivity. The fig- ures throughout this paper illustrate this situation. We stress that in our Josephson-junction configuration the proximity is more remote compared to that in the con- ventional nanowire configuration of Fig. 1(b). Because we have focused on the proximitization pro- cess itself, in this paper we were able to consider how to maximize the proximity gap вҲҶprox both by varying ge- ometry as well as materials parameters. This particular parameter вҲҶprox is understood to be computed in the absence of Zeeman field or phase difference. It neverthe- less sets the scale for the energy gap in the topological phase, Egap, and thereby for the stability of Majorana zero modes. One should aim for junctions with very thin 2DEG re- gions and narrow channels between the host supercon- ductors. Additionally, there is a delicate competition be- tween the chemical potential differences of the 2DEG and the superconductors (ОҙОј), and the Rashba SOC strength. While a larger ОҙОј serves to compensate for deleterious effects of SOC, it cannot be too big. Indeed, Fig. 9(b) shows that one major knob of the Josephson junction architecture (which is the ability to tune the phase dif- ference to ПҖ and thereby require very small Zeeman fields to access topological phases) is undermined if ОҙОј is too large. 13 Finally, by plotting the pair amplitude itself, we have provided in this paper very direct evidence for the elusive FFLO phase. It is not necessarily to be associated with topological physics, but it has some of the same require- ments. We show how the presence of Zeeman fields to- gether with SOC and (remote) proximity effect stabilize this state which exists entirely inside the 2DEG channel, much as in recent experiments . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Erez Berg for helpful conversations. This work was supported by NSF-DMR-MRSEC 1420709. C.-T.W. is supported by the MOST Grant No. 106- We acknowledge the University of Chicago Research Computing Center for support of this work. Roman M. Lutchyn, Jay D. Sau, and S. Das Sarma, вҖңMajorana fermions and a topological phase transition in semiconductor-superconductor heterostructures,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 077001 (2010). Yuval Oreg, Gil Refael, and Felix von Oppen, вҖңHelical liquids and majorana bound states in quantum wires,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 177002 (2010). Jason Alicea, вҖңNew directions in the pursuit of majorana fermions in solid state systems,вҖқ Reports on progress in physics 75, 076501 (2012). Martin Leijnse and Karsten Flensberg, вҖңIntroduction to topological superconductivity and majorana fermions,вҖқ Semiconductor Science and Technology 27, Tudor D Stanescu and Sumanta Tewari, вҖңMajorana fermions in semiconductor nanowires: fundamentals, modeling, and experiment,вҖқ Journal of Physics: Con- densed Matter 25, 233201 (2013). C W J Beenakker, вҖңSearch for majorana fermions in su- perconductors,вҖқ Annu. Rev. Con. Mat. Phys. 4, 113вҖ“136 Steven R. Elliott and Marcel Franz, вҖңColloquium: Ma- jorana fermions in nuclear, particle, and solid-state physics,вҖқ Rev. Mod. Phys. 87, 137вҖ“163 (2015). Sankar Das Sarma, Michael Freedman, and Chetan Nayak, вҖңMajorana zero modes and topological quan- tum computation,вҖқ npj Quantum Information 1, 15001 Ram МҒon Aguado, вҖңMajorana quasiparticles in condensed matter,вҖқ Riv. Nuovo Cimento 40, 523вҖ“593 (2018). RM Lutchyn, EPAM Bakkers, LP Kouwenhoven, P Krogstrup, CM Marcus, and Y Oreg, вҖңMajo- rana zero modes in superconductorвҖ“semiconductor het- erostructures,вҖқ Nature Reviews Materials 3, 52 (2018). Falko Pientka, Anna Keselman, Erez Berg, Amir Yacoby, Ady Stern, and Bertrand I. Halperin, вҖңTopological su- perconductivity in a planar josephson junction,вҖқ Phys. Rev. X 7, 021032 (2017). Michael Hell, Martin Leijnse, and Karsten Flensberg, вҖңTwo-dimensional platform for networks of majorana bound states,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 107701 (2017). K. Sengupta, Igor ЛҮZuti МҒc, Hyok-Jon Kwon, Victor M. Yakovenko, and S. Das Sarma, вҖңMidgap edge states and pairing symmetry of quasi-one-dimensional organic su- perconductors,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 63, 144531 (2001). K. T. Law, Patrick A. Lee, and T. K. Ng, вҖңMajorana fermion induced resonant andreev reflection,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Karsten Flensberg, вҖңTunneling characteristics of a chain of majorana bound states,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 82, 180516 Elsa Prada, Pablo San-Jose, and Ram МҒon Aguado, вҖңTransport spectroscopy of ns nanowire junctions with majorana fermions,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 86, 180503 (2012). V. Mourik, K. Zuo, S. M. Frolov, S. R. Plissard, E. P. A. M. Bakkers, and L. P. Kouwenhoven, вҖңSig- natures of majorana fermions in hybrid superconductor- semiconductor nanowire devices,вҖқ Science 336, 1003вҖ“ Leonid P Rokhinson, Xinyu Liu, and Jacek K Furdyna, вҖңThe fractional ac josephson effect in a semiconductor- superconductor nanowire as a signature of majorana par- ticles,вҖқ Nat. Phys. 8, 795вҖ“799 (2012). M. T. Deng, C. L. Yu, G. Y. Huang, M. Larsson, P. Caroff, and H. Q. Xu, вҖңAnomalous zero-bias con- ductance peak in a nbinsb nanowirenb hybrid device,вҖқ Nano Lett. 12, 6414вҖ“6419 (2012). Anindya Das, Yuval Ronen, Yonatan Most, Yuval Oreg, Moty Heiblum, and Hadas Shtrikman, вҖңZero-bias peaks and splitting in an al-inas nanowire topological supercon- ductor as a signature of majorana fermions,вҖқ Nat. Phys. H. O. H. Churchill, V. Fatemi, K. Grove-Rasmussen, M. T. Deng, P. Caroff, H. Q. Xu, and C. M. Marcus, вҖңSuperconductor-nanowire devices from tunneling to the multichannel regime: Zero-bias oscillations and magneto- conductance crossover,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 87, 241401 (2013). A. D. K. Finck, D. J. Van Harlingen, P. K. Mohseni, K. Jung, and X. Li, вҖңAnomalous modulation of a zero- bias peak in a hybrid nanowire-superconductor device,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 126406 (2013). Sven Marian Albrecht, AP Higginbotham, Morten Mad- sen, Ferdinand Kuemmeth, Thomas Sand Jespersen, Jes- per Nyg МҠard, Peter Krogstrup, and CM Marcus, вҖңExpo- nential protection of zero modes in majorana islands,вҖқ Nature 531, 206 (2016). МҲOnder G МҲul, Hao Zhang, Jouri DS Bommer, Michiel WA de Moor, Diana Car, S МҒebastien R Plissard, Erik PAM 14 Bakkers, Attila Geresdi, Kenji Watanabe, Takashi Taniguchi, et al., вҖңBallistic majorana nanowire devices,вҖқ Nature nanotechnology 13, 192 (2018). Jun Chen, Peng Yu, John Stenger, Mo МҲДұra Hocevar, Diana Car, S МҒebastien R Plissard, Erik PAM Bakkers, Tudor D Stanescu, and Sergey M Frolov, вҖңExperimental phase diagram of zero-bias conductance peaks in superconduc- tor/semiconductor nanowire devices,вҖқ Science advances MT Deng, S Vaitiek МҮenas, Esben Bork Hansen, Jeroen Danon, M Leijnse, Karsten Flensberg, Jesper Nyg МҠard, P Krogstrup, and Charles M Marcus, вҖңMajorana bound state in a coupled quantum-dot hybrid-nanowire sys- tem,вҖқ Science 354, 1557вҖ“1562 (2016). H. J. Suominen, M. Kjaergaard, A. R. Hamilton, J. Sha- bani, C. J. PalmstrГёm, C. M. Marcus, and F. Nichele, вҖңZero-energy modes from coalescing andreev states in a two-dimensional semiconductor-superconductor hybrid platform,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 176805 (2017). Fabrizio Nichele, AsbjГёrn C. C. Drachmann, Alexan- der M. Whiticar, Eoin C. T. OвҖҷFarrell, Henri J. Suomi- nen, Antonio Fornieri, Tian Wang, Geoffrey C. Gardner, Candice Thomas, Anthony T. Hatke, Peter Krogstrup, Michael J. Manfra, Karsten Flensberg, and Charles M. Marcus, вҖңScaling of majorana zero-bias conductance peaks,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 136803 (2017). Hao Zhang, Chun-Xiao Liu, Sasa Gazibegovic, Di Xu, John A Logan, Guanzhong Wang, Nick Van Loo, Jouri DS Bommer, Michiel WA De Moor, Diana Car, et al., вҖңQuantized majorana conductance,вҖқ Nature 556, Hao Zhang, МҲOnder G МҲul, Sonia Conesa-Boj, MichaпҝҪl P Nowak, Michael Wimmer, Kun Zuo, Vincent Mourik, Folkert K De Vries, Jasper Van Veen, Michiel WA De Moor, et al., вҖңBallistic superconductivity in semi- conductor nanowires,вҖқ Nature communications 8, 16025 Joachim E. Sestoft, Thomas Kanne, Aske NГёrskov Gejl, Merlin von Soosten, Jeremy S. Yodh, Daniel Sherman, Brian Tarasinski, Michael Wimmer, Erik Johnson, Ming- tang Deng, Jesper Nyg МҠard, Thomas Sand Jespersen, Charles M. Marcus, and Peter Krogstrup, вҖңEngineering hybrid epitaxial inassb/al nanowires for stronger topolog- ical protection,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Materials 2, 044202 (2018). M.-T. Deng, S. Vaitiek МҮenas, E. Prada, P. San-Jose, J. Nyg МҠard, P. Krogstrup, R. Aguado, and C. M. Marcus, вҖңNonlocality of majorana modes in hybrid nanowires,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 98, 085125 (2018). Dominique Laroche, Dani МҲel Bouman, David J van Wo- erkom, Alex Proutski, Chaitanya Murthy, Dmitry I Pikulin, Chetan Nayak, Ruben JJ van Gulik, Jesper Nyg МҠard, Peter Krogstrup, et al., вҖңObservation of the 4ПҖ- periodic josephson effect in indium arsenide nanowires,вҖқ Nature Communications 10, 245 (2019). Jasper van Veen, Alex Proutski, Torsten Karzig, Dmitry I. Pikulin, Roman M. Lutchyn, Jesper Nyg МҠard, Peter Krogstrup, Attila Geresdi, Leo P. Kouwenhoven, and John D. Watson, вҖңMagnetic-field-dependent quasi- particle dynamics of nanowire single-cooper-pair transis- tors,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 98, 174502 (2018). Michiel WA de Moor, Jouri DS Bommer, Di Xu, Georg W Winkler, Andrey E Antipov, Arno Barg- erbos, Guanzhong Wang, Nick van Loo, Roy LM Veld, Sasa Gazibegovic, et al., вҖңElectric field tun- able superconductor-semiconductor coupling in majo- rana nanowires,вҖқ New Journal of Physics 20, 103049 Anna Grivnin, Ella Bor, Moty Heiblum, Yuval Oreg, and Hadas Shtrikman, вҖңConcomitant opening of a topolog- ical bulk-gap with an emerging majorana edge-state,вҖқ S Vaitiek МҮenas, M-T Deng, P Krogstrup, and CM Marcus, вҖңFlux-induced majorana modes in full-shell nanowires,вҖқ Hechen Ren, Falko Pientka, Sean Hart, Andrew Pierce, Michael Kosowsky, Lukas Lunczer, Raimund Schlereth, Benedikt Scharf, Ewelina M. Hankiewicz, Laurens W. Molenkamp, Bertrand I. Halperin, and Amir Yacoby, вҖңTopological superconductivity in a phase-controlled josephson junction,вҖқ Nature 569, 93 (2019). Antonio Fornieri, Alexander M. Whiticar, F. Seti- awan, El МҒДұas Portol МҒes Mar МҒДұn, Asbjorn C. C. Drachmann, Anna Keselman, Sergei Gronin, Candice Thomas, Tian Wang, Ray Kallaher, Geoffrey C. Gardner, Erez Berg, Michael J. Manfra, Ady Stern, Charles M. Marcus, and Fabrizio Nichele, вҖңEvidence of topological superconduc- tivity in planar josephson junctions,вҖқ Nature 569, 89 W. L. McMillan, вҖңTunneling model of the superconduct- ing proximity effect,вҖқ Phys. Rev. 175, 537вҖ“542 (1968). W. L. McMillan, вҖңTheory of superconductorвҖ”normal- metal interfaces,вҖқ Phys. Rev. 175, 559вҖ“568 (1968). Jay D. Sau, Roman M. Lutchyn, Sumanta Tewari, and S. Das Sarma, вҖңRobustness of majorana fermions in proximity-induced superconductors,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 82, Tudor D. Stanescu, Jay D. Sau, Roman M. Lutchyn, and S. Das Sarma, вҖңProximity effect at the superconductorвҖ“ topological insulator interface,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 81, 241310 Andrew C. Potter and Patrick A. Lee, вҖңEngineering a p+ ip superconductor: Comparison of topological insulator and rashba spin-orbit-coupled materials,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B Although not all of the results presented in this paper are fully self-consistent, we have checked in a few cases that increasing the number of iterations only very slightly modifies our results. Peter Fulde and Richard A. Ferrell, вҖңSuperconductivity in a strong spin-exchange field,вҖқ Phys. Rev. 135, A550 AI Larkin and Yu N Ovchinnikov, вҖңNonuniform state of superconductors,вҖқ Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 47, 1136 (1964). Sean Hart, Hechen Ren, Michael Kosowsky, Gilad Ben- Shach, Philipp Leubner, Christoph Br МҲune, Hartmut Buh- mann, Laurens W Molenkamp, Bertrand I Halperin, and Amir Yacoby, вҖңControlled finite momentum pairing and spatially varying order parameter in proximitized hgte quantum wells,вҖқ Nature Physics 13, 87 (2017). Angela Q Chen, Moon Jip Park, Stephen T Gill, Yi- ran Xiao, Dalmau Reig-i Plessis, Gregory J MacDougall, Matthew J Gilbert, and Nadya Mason, вҖңFinite momen- tum cooper pairing in three-dimensional topological in- sulator josephson junctions,вҖқ Nature communications 9, Stevan Nadj-Perge, Ilya K Drozdov, Jian Li, Hua Chen, Sangjun Jeon, Jungpil Seo, Allan H MacDonald, B An- 15 drei Bernevig, and Ali Yazdani, вҖңObservation of majo- rana fermions in ferromagnetic atomic chains on a super- conductor,вҖқ Science 346, 602 (2014). Jelena Klinovaja, Peter Stano, Ali Yazdani, and Daniel Loss, вҖңTopological superconductivity and majo- rana fermions in rkky systems,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, S. Nadj-Perge, I. K. Drozdov, B. A. Bernevig, and Ali Yazdani, вҖңProposal for realizing majorana fermions in chains of magnetic atoms on a superconductor,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 88, 020407 (2013). Jian Li, Hua Chen, Ilya K. Drozdov, A. Yazdani, B. An- drei Bernevig, and A. H. MacDonald, вҖңTopological su- perconductivity induced by ferromagnetic metal chains,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 90, 235433 (2014). J Li, T Neupert, Z Wang, A H MacDonald, Y Yazdani, and A Bernevig, вҖңTwo-dimensional chiral topological su- perconductivity in shiba lattices,вҖқ Nature Communica- tions 7, 12297 (2016). P. M. R. Brydon, S. Das Sarma, Hoi-Yin Hui, and Jay D. Sau, вҖңTopological yu-shiba-rusinov chain from spin-orbit coupling,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 91, 064505 (2015). Hoi-Yin Hui, PMR Brydon, Jay D Sau, S Tewari, and S Das Sarma, вҖңMajorana fermions in ferromagnetic chains on the surface of bulk spin-orbit coupled s-wave superconductors,вҖқ Scientific reports 5, 8880 (2015). Liang Fu and C. L. Kane, вҖңSuperconducting proximity effect and majorana fermions at the surface of a topolog- ical insulator,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 096407 (2008). Jin-Peng Xu, Mei-Xiao Wang, Zhi Long Liu, Jian-Feng Ge, Xiaojun Yang, Canhua Liu, Zhu An Xu, Dandan Guan, Chun Lei Gao, Dong Qian, Ying Liu, Qiang- Hua Wang, Fu-Chun Zhang, Qi-Kun Xue, and Jin- Feng Jia, вҖңExperimental detection of a majorana mode in the core of a magnetic vortex inside a topological insulator-superconductor bi2te3/nbse2 heterostructure,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 017001 (2015). Hao-Hua Sun, Kai-Wen Zhang, Lun-Hui Hu, Chuang Li, Guan-Yong Wang, Hai-Yang Ma, Zhu-An Xu, Chun-Lei Gao, Dan-Dan Guan, Yao-Yi Li, Canhua Liu, Dong Qian, Yi Zhou, Liang Fu, Shao-Chun Li, Fu-Chun Zhang, and Jin-Feng Jia, вҖңMajorana zero mode detected with spin selective andreev reflection in the vortex of a topological superconductor,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 257003 (2016). Liang Fu and Erez Berg, вҖңOdd-parity topological super- conductors: Theory and application to cuxbi2se3,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 097001 (2010). Satoshi Sasaki, M. Kriener, Kouji Segawa, Keiji Yada, Yukio Tanaka, Masatoshi Sato, and Yoichi Ando, вҖңTopo- logical superconductivity in cuxbi2se3,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. Haibing Peng, Debtanu De, Bing Lv, Fengyan Wei, and Ching-Wu Chu, вҖңAbsence of zero-energy surface bound states in cuxbi2se3 studied via andreev reflection spec- troscopy,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 88, 024515 (2013). Ching-Kai Chiu, William S. Cole, and S. Das Sarma, вҖңInduced spectral gap and pairing correlations from su- perconducting proximity effect,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 94, 125304 Tudor D. Stanescu and S. Das Sarma, вҖңSuperconducting proximity effect in semiconductor nanowires,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Roland Winkler, вҖңSpin-orbit coupling effects in two- dimensional electron and hole systems,вҖқ Springer Tracts in Modern Physics 191, 1вҖ“8 (2003). August E. G. Mikkelsen, Panagiotis Kotetes, Peter Krogstrup, and Karsten Flensberg, вҖңHybridization at superconductor-semiconductor interfaces,вҖқ Phys. Rev. X Andrey E. Antipov, Arno Bargerbos, Georg W. Winkler, Bela Bauer, Enrico Rossi, and Roman M. Lutchyn, вҖңEf- fects of gate-induced electric fields on semiconductor ma- jorana nanowires,вҖқ Phys. Rev. X 8, 031041 (2018). Doru Sticlet, Bas Nijholt, and Anton Akhmerov, вҖңRo- bustness of majorana bound states in the short-junction limit,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 95, 115421 (2017). Tudor D. Stanescu and Sankar Das Sarma, вҖңProximity- induced low-energy renormalization in hybrid semiconductor-superconductor majorana structures,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 96, 014510 (2017). Klaus Halterman and Oriol T. Valls, вҖңProximity effects at ferromagnet-superconductor interfaces,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B Chien-Te Wu, Oriol T. Valls, and Klaus Halterman, вҖңProximity effects in conical- ferromagnet/superconductor bilayers,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Chien-Te Wu, Brandon M. Anderson, Wei-Han Hsiao, and K. Levin, вҖңMajorana zero modes in spintronics de- vices,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 95, 014519 (2017). Chien-Te Wu, F. Setiawan, Brandon M. Anderson, Wei- Han Hsiao, and K. Levin, вҖңQuantum phase transitions in proximitized josephson junctions,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 98, Tudor D. Stanescu, Roman M. Lutchyn, and S. Das Sarma, вҖңMajorana fermions in semiconductor nanowires,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 84, 144522 (2011). Yoichiro Nambu, вҖңQuasi-particles and gauge invariance in the theory of superconductivity,вҖқ Phys. Rev. 117, 648вҖ“ GM Eliashberg, вҖңInteractions between electrons and lat- tice vibrations in a superconductor,вҖқ Sov. Phys. JETP J Robert Schrieffer, Theory of superconductivity (W. A. Benjamin, New York, 1964). B Pannetier and H Courtois, вҖңAndreev reflection and proximity effect,вҖқ Journal of low temperature physics TM Klapwijk, вҖңProximity effect from an andreev per- spective,вҖқ Journal of superconductivity 17, 593вҖ“611 The transparency of the interface between the supercon- ductor and 2DEG is determined by the matching of the Fermi velocity between the two materials. While the dif- ference between the Fermi energy of the superconductor and semiconductor can be of several orders of magni- tude, the Fermi velocity between the two has a smaller mismatch in magnitude because of a smaller electron ef- fective mass of the semiconductor, which is not accom- modated here. We note that the transparency is also af- fected by microscopic parameters such as the tunnel cou- pling strength and charge accumulation at the 2DEG-SC interface which are not accounted for in our model. Roman M. Lutchyn, Tudor D. Stanescu, and S. Das Sarma, вҖңSearch for majorana fermions in multi- band semiconducting nanowires,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 16 Note that the realistic picture of chemical potential mis- match can be quite complicated as it involves band bend- ing and charge screening at the NS interface (which are not taken into account in our model). Taking the band bending into account implies that the larger the chem- ical potential mismatch between the 2DEG and the su- perconductor, the larger Rashba SOC field (due to larger electrical field at the interface). We note that our results are obtained using parabolic dispersions for the semiconductor and superconductor. In general, the semiconductor band structure is well approx- imated by a parabolic band dispersion since the chemical potential of a semiconductor is close to the band bottom. Our choice of the band structure for superconductor will not affect our results as the effect of the band structure of the superconductor is independent of the effect of the above three parameters (thickness, spin-orbit coupling, and chemical potential mismatch) on the proximity gap. Alexei Kitaev, вҖңPeriodic table for topological insulators and superconductors,вҖқ in AIP Conference Proceedings, Vol. 1134 (AIP, 2009) pp. 22вҖ“30. Shinsei Ryu, Andreas P Schnyder, Akira Furusaki, and Andreas WW Ludwig, вҖңTopological insulators and su- perconductors: tenfold way and dimensional hierarchy,вҖқ New Journal of Physics 12, 065010 (2010). Alexander Altland and Martin R. Zirnbauer, вҖңNon- standard symmetry classes in mesoscopic normal- superconducting hybrid structures,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 55, Arbel Haim and Ady Stern, вҖңBenefits of weak disorder in one-dimensional topological superconductors,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 126801 (2019). F. Setiawan, Ady Stern, and Erez Berg, вҖңTopological superconductivity in planar josephson junctions вҖ“ nar- rowing down to the nanowire limit,вҖқ arXiv:1902.11300 Sumanta Tewari and Jay D. Sau, вҖңTopological invariants for spin-orbit coupled superconductor nanowires,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 150408 (2012). A Yu Kitaev, вҖңUnpaired majorana fermions in quantum wires,вҖқ Physics-Uspekhi 44, 131 (2001). It can be noted that we use the same effective electron mass in the superconductor and 2DEG in addressing proximitization within this paper, and, thus, we may be overestimating the reduction in the phase dependence of the class D phase diagram and the proximity-induced gap due to the chemical potential mismatch ОҙОј. Miikka O. J. Heikkinen, Dong-Hee Kim, and P МҲaivi T МҲorm МҲa, вҖңFinite-temperature stability and dimensional crossover of exotic superfluidity in lattices,вҖқ Phys. Rev. E. A. Demler, G. B. Arnold, and M. R. Beasley, вҖңSuper- conducting proximity effects in magnetic metals,вҖқ Phys. A. I. Buzdin, вҖңProximity effects in superconductor- ferromagnet heterostructures,вҖқ Rev. Mod. Phys. 77, 935вҖ“ A. I. Buzdin, вҖңSurface superconductivity in ferromag- nets,вҖқ PisвҖҷma Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 42, 283 (1985). Zhen Zheng, Ming Gong, Xubo Zou, Chuanwei Zhang, and Guangcan Guo, вҖңRoute to observable fulde-ferrell- larkin-ovchinnikov phases in three-dimensional spin- orbit-coupled degenerate fermi gases,вҖқ Phys. Rev. A 87, Zhen Zheng, Ming Gong, Yichao Zhang, Xubo Zou, Chuanwei Zhang, and Guangcan Guo, вҖңFflo superfluids in 2d spin-orbit coupled fermi gases,вҖқ Scientific reports Da Wang, Zhoushen Huang, and Congjun Wu, вҖңFate and remnants of majorana zero modes in a quantum wire array,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 89, 174510 (2014). Appendix A: FFLO phases We begin by studying the mechanism for the formation of the FFLO phases. In the absence of SOC, the Fermi surfaces of up and down spins always form concentric circles as shown in Fig. A.1(a). For zero Zeeman fields, the superconducting pairing occurs between electrons carrying opposite spin with opposite momentum (k вҶ‘ and вҲ’k вҶ“) on the Fermi surface where the Cooper pair has a zero center of mass momentum. If an in-plane magnetic field is applied to a system with no SOC, the Zeeman field enlarges and shrinks the Fermi surfaces radially in momentum by EZ/vF for the up and down spins, respectively, while keeping the two Fermi surfaces concentric. The pairing now occurs between the up- and down-spin electrons with different Fermi momenta, i.e., k + q/2 and вҲ’k + q/2 where q = 2EZ/vF , so that the Cooper pairs have a net center of mass momentum of q. When the applied in-plane Zeeman field is sufficiently strong, spatial symmetry needs to be broken in order to lower the ground state energy which results in the FFLO state. However, because of the Pauli depairing, this FFLO state only survives in a narrow parameter regime. This depairing effect in strong Zeeman fields can be mitigated by using the SOC, which allows both singlet and triplet pairings, since the triplet pairing is not sensitive to the depairing effect. In the presence of Rashba SOC, the Hamiltonian of a 2DEG without a Zeeman field [Eq. (7)] is invariant when the spin and momentum are rotated simultaneously in the x-y plane, i.e., пҝҪвҲ’kвҖІ y kвҖІ x пҝҪ = R пҝҪ вҲ’ky kx пҝҪ , пҝҪПғвҖІ x ПғвҖІ y пҝҪ = R пҝҪ Пғx Пғy пҝҪ , (A.1) where R = пҝҪ cos Оё sin Оё вҲ’ sin Оё cos Оё пҝҪ (A.2) 17 ОӨ EZ vF B ky kx ОӨ EZ vF B вҲҶ вҲҶ вҲҶ вҲҶ (a) (b) the case of (a) zero SOC and (b) finite SOC strength. The Fermi surfaces in the absence and presence of B are represented by light and dark colors, respectively. (a) In the absence of a Zeeman field, the Fermi surfaces of a 2DEG without SOC are doubly degenerate. When an in-plane Zeeman field is applied, the Fermi surfaces of the up and down spins enlarge and shrink radially in momentum by EZ/vF while keeping the two Fermi surfaces concentric. The superconducting term вҲҶ pairs up electrons with opposite spin from different Fermi surfaces. (b) The 2D Rashba SOC causes a clockwise and anticlockwise spin orientation (represented by red and blue arrows, respectively). The applied in-plane Zeeman field along the x direction shifts the inner and outer Fermi surfaces in the opposite direction along ky by EZ/vF . The superconductivity term вҲҶ pairs up electrons with opposite spin from the same Fermi surface. is the rotation operator in the x-y plane. Note that the Hamiltonian still respects this rotational symmetry even in the presence of an out-of-plane Zeeman field (along the z direction). However, the application of an in-plane Zeeman field EZ along the junction, i.e., along the x direction, breaks this rotational symmetry. The energy spectrum of the electron in the presence of the in-plane Zeeman field EZ is given by E = k2 x + k2 y вҲ’ Ој + Оұ2 4 Вұ пҝҪ Оұ2k2x + (EZ вҲ’ Оұky)2. (A.3) which breaks the rotational symmetry. In the limit where EZ вүӘ ОұkF вүӘ Ој, the two Fermi surfaces are shifted in the direction perpendicular to the Zeeman field direction (along ky) by q = 2EZ/vF as shown in Fig. A.1(b). The pairing in this case occurs between up and down spins belonging to the same Fermi surface resulting also in Cooper pairs having a net momentum of q. Thus the wave are the singlet and triplet pairing wave functions, respectively. So, the presence of SOC stabilizes the FFLO phase as the SOC lifts the spin degeneracy and shifts the Fermi surface in such a way that the resulting Cooper pair has a finite center of momentum . In the main text we have shown how the FFLO phase appears in a proximitized junction in the presence of an in-plane Zeeman field and a conventional (2D) Rashba SOC. In this appendix we show that our findings are quite robust, appearing also for a 1D Rashba SOC as well as in the effective model. We self-consistently solve the BdG equations to obtain the pair amplitude [as given by Eq. (10) of the main text]: F(y, z) = пҝҪ dkx пҝҪ Enkx<ПүD пҝҪ unkxвҶ‘vвҲ— nkxвҶ“ вҲ’ unkxвҶ“vвҲ— nkxвҶ‘ пҝҪ tanh пҝҪEnkx 2T пҝҪ . (A.4) amplitudes are calculated for different SOC strengths. As for the case of 2D Rashba spin-orbit-coupled electron gas, here we also find an oscillation of the pair amplitude within the junction channel and with the oscillation length scale given by О» = EZ/(2vF ) which increases with increasing Zeeman field EZ and decreases with increasing Оұ (as vF increases with increasing Оұ). This is indicative of the FFLO phases formed in the presence of an applied in-plane magnetic field along the junction. We note that the Hamiltonian of a 2DEG with a 1D Rashba SOC can be mapped by a gauge transformation into the Hamiltonian of a conical Holmium magnet (Ref. ) or coupled nanowires (Ref. ) which are also platforms for topological superconductors. Finally, Fig. A.3 shows the pair amplitude F(y, z) for the effective model [Eq. (25)] of a planar Josephson junction with a 2D Rashba SOC. As shown in the figure, in the presence of an in-plane magnetic field, the pair amplitude F(r) oscillates inside the junction channel with an oscillation length which decreases with increasing SOC strength. Again, the oscillation is consistent with the formation of an FFLO phase in the presence of an in-plane magnetic field. 18 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 kFz (a) Оұ = 0.0 (b) Оұ = 0.3 (c) Оұ = 0.5 вҲ’0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 Re[F/вҲҶ0] kFy 0.00 0.02 Re[F/вҲҶ0] (d) Оұ = 0.0 kFy (e) Оұ = 0.3 kFy (f) Оұ = 0.5 the color plots of the real part of the pair amplitude Re[F0/вҲҶ0], and lower panel shows the linecuts of the pair amplitude along the y direction at different values of z. As shown in the lower panel, the pair amplitude oscillates along the y direction with a characteristic oscillation length О» = EZ/(2vF ) that decreases with increasing Оұ (as vF increases with increasing Оұ). The black dashed lines in the upper panel denote the boundaries between the superconductors and the 2DEG. The parameters used are 19 0 2 4 kFz (a) Оұ = 0.0 (b) Оұ = 0.5 (c) Оұ = 0.8 вҲ’0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 Re[F/вҲҶ0] kFy 0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 Re[F/вҲҶ0] (d) Оұ = 0.0 kFy (e) Оұ = 0.5 kFy (f) Оұ = 0.8 junction [Eq. (25) of the main text]. The pair amplitudes are calculated for a 2D Rashba SOC of different strengths: Оұ = 0 (left panel), Оұ = 0.5 (middle panel), and Оұ = 0.8 (right panel). Upper panel shows the color plots of the real part of the pair amplitude Re[F0/вҲҶ0], and lower panel shows the linecuts of the pair amplitude along the y direction at different values of z. As shown in the lower panel, the pair amplitude oscillates along the y direction with a characteristic oscillation length О» = EZ/(2vF ) that decreases with increasing Оұ (as vF increases with increasing Оұ). The parameters used are ОјS = 1, Ој2DEG = 1,