Coercivity enhancement of selective laser sintered NdFeB magnets by grain boundary infiltration Christian Huber,1, 2, ∗ Hossein Sepehri-Amin,3 Michael Goertler,4 Martin Groenefeld,5 Iulian Teliban,5 Kazuhiro Hono,3 and Dieter Suess1, 2 1Physics of Functional Materials, University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria 2Christian Doppler Laboratory for Advanced Magnetic Sensing and Materials, 1090 Vienna, Austria 3National Institute for Materials Science, Tsukuba 305-0047, Japan 4Institute for Surface Technologies and Photonics, Joanneum Research Forschungsgesellschaft GmbH, 8712 Niklasdorf, Austria 5Magnetfabrik Bonn GmbH, 53119 Bonn, Germany (Dated: 07. 03. 2019) Laser powder bed fusion is a well-established additive manufacturing method that can be used for the production of net-shaped Nd-Fe-B sintered magnets. However, low coercivity has been one of the drawbacks in the laser powder bed fusion processed Nd-Fe-B magnets. In this work, we have demonstrated that the grain boundary diffusion process using low-melting Nd-Cu, Nd- Al-Ni-Cu, and Nd-Tb-Cu alloys to the selective laser sintered NdFeB magnets can results in a substantial enhancement of coercivity from 0.65 T to 1.5 T. Detailed microstructure investigations clarified formation of Nd-rich grain boundary phase, introducing Tb-rich shell at the surface of Nd2Fe14B grains, and maintaining the grain size in nano-scale are responsible for the large coercivity enhancement. INTRODUCTION Additive manufacturing (AM) or colloquially called 3D printing of permanent magnetic materials offer new possi- bilities in advanced applications through the design free- dom of the magnetic parts. The object is fabricated in a layer-by-layer manner of formless of form-neutral con- struction material by means of thermal or chemical pro- cesses. Magnets manufactured by AM methods have sev- eral advantages compared to traditional manufacturing methods like sintering or injection-molding of polymer- bonded magnets. Advantages include net shape capabil- ity, reduced waste, and mechanical flexibility, etc. Fused Deposition Modelling (FDM) is a reasonable and rapid AM method to process polymer-bonded NdFeB magnetic material [1–6]. Disadvantages of FDM hard magnets are the limited operational temperature of the polymer- matrix material and the reduced (BH)max compared to sintered magnets due to the isotropic nature of FDM hard magnets. Binder jetting of NdFeB powder was success- fully shown in . Disadvantage of this method is the low density of only 50 % compared to the full-dense object. Nevertheless, this porous 3D printed structures are well suited for an alloy infiltration process to increase the den- sity and coercivity of the printed magnets. Low-melting point eutectic alloys (i.e. NdCuCo, PrCuCo) can be used to infiltrate a structure and double the coercivity . Laser powder bed fusion (LPBF) is well established method to produce sintered and fully dense metallic ob- jects . It completely melts the metal powder by the aid of a high-power laser source. To increase the qual- ity of the printed structures and its mechanical proper- ∗ Correspondence to: huber-c@univie.ac.at ties, powders with a spherical morphology are required . Soft magnetic materials can be in-situ synthesized with this method [11–13]. LPBF of hard magnetic Al- NiCo powder with a spherical morphology is presented in . Most recent publications in the field of LPBF of hard magnets use a commercial NdFeB powder (MQP- S-11-9 supplied by Magnequench Corporation) . This grade has a spherical morphology and its main field of application is the manufacturing of bonded magnets, particularly by injection molding, extrusion and calen- dering. It is based on a patented NdPrFeCoTiZrB al- loy . The nano-sized NdFeB grains have an uniaxial magnetocrystalline anisotropy, and the orientation of the grains is random leading to isotropic magnetic properties of the bulk magnet. It is produced by employing an at- omization process followed by heat treatment As mentioned before, the process parameters of the LPBF process are usually set to completely melt the pow- der material locally by means of a laser source, forming a solid material layer after solidification. This rapid liq- uefaction and the subsequent cooling down of the melt, influences the size of the grains and the composition of the grain boundaries [18–20]. This modification of the microstructure affect the coercivity of the additive man- ufactured magnets. High performance motors and gen- erators have an operating temperature of around 200 ◦C, and due to the thermal coercivity degeneration of NdFeB, the coercivity at room temperature should be maximized . Therefore, we refrain from completely melting each powder layer but sinter the particles, to retain their orig- inal microstructure. First, doping with Dy increase the coercivity of NdFeB up to 3 T, but the magnetization decrease substantially . Alternatively, the coer- civity of NdFeB magnets can be substantially enhanced by diffusion of Nd-Tb-Cu and Nd-Al-Ni-Cu eutectic alloy through grain boundaries (GB) arXiv:1903.02233v1 [physics.app-ph] 6 Mar 2019 2 In this publication, we present a grain boundary (GB) infiltration method to increase the coercivity of LPBF manufactured samples. Several infiltration alloys are in- vestigated, and detailed microstructural analyses inves- tigate the GB diffusion processes. EXPERIMENTS For sample fabrication a commercial Farsoon FS121M LPBF-machine was used. It is equipped with a contin- uous wave 200 W Yb-fibre laser with a wavelength of 1.07 μm and a spot size of 0.1 mm. The spherical MQP-S- 11-9-20001 powder produced by Magnequench Corporpa- tion was used in this study . In , the characteris- tics of the powder were investigated: the chemical compo- sition states Nd7.5Pr0.7Fe75.4Co2.5B8.8Zr2.6Ti2.5 (at.%), the powder size distribution shows a d50 of 38 μm and the tap density exhibits 61.4 % of the materials full density. Since the MQP-S powder exhibits a lower Nd-content than the Nd2Fe14B hard magnetic phase, its magnetic properties are not superior. Considering its powder size distribution and morphol- ogy, the MQP-S powder meets the requirements of the recoating process during LPBF processing . The morphology of the MQP-S powder can be seen in the scanning electron microscopy with backscattered electron contrast (BSE-SEM) image shown in Fig. 1(a). The vast majority of particles is spherical with no or few small satellites and a minor fraction of particles is rod-like. Some powder particles are broken indicating brittle ma- terial behavior. Studies of Ja ́cimovi ́c et al. and Kolb et al. document the production of magnetic samples by fully melting the MQP-S powder to cubic specimens in an LPBF machine . In this study, we plan to additively manufacture spec- imens from the MQP-S powder and infiltrate them with low-melting point eutectic alloys in order to investigate the effect of the infiltration process on the magnet’s co- ercivity. Since a high surface to volume ratio enables an efficient diffusion of the alloys through the grain bound- aries, we produced specimens with a micro-porous inner structure. This is achieved by only sintering and not fully melting the MQP-S powder during the LPBF process. Therefore, the process parameters of the LPBF machine were adjusted accordingly. The printing was performed under argon atmosphere with oxygen content below 0.1 %, a layer thickness of 20 μm and the powder recoating was done with a carbon fiber brush. All specimens were printed without support structured directly onto a steel substrate plate to ensure proper heat dissipation. To find a proper parameter regime, melt track studies were performed. For the production of single melt lines the parameters laser power P and scan speed v were var- ied according to a matrix: P was varied between 20 W and 100 W and v between 50 mm/s and 2000 mm/s. To minimize the effect of chemical mixing between the MQP- S powder and the steel substrate during laser exposure, five lines were printed stacked upon each other with a layer thickness of 20 μm. For interpretation purposes, we introduce the artificial magnitude line energy Eline, which reads as P over v. As a result, completely molten tracks were produced for P ≥ 40 W and Eline ≥ 0.1 J/mm. Since full melting of the powder is improper for sinter- ing, we focused on line energies between 0.03 J/mm and 0.07 J/mm at 40 W for the production of volumetric specimens. For the production of volumetric specimens, parallel melt tracks are produced next to each other with a de- fined offset, called hatch spacing h. Together with the above mentioned parameter combinations of Eline and P, h was varied between 0.1 mm and 0.14 mm to find proper parameter sets for the production of intactly sin- tered cubes with dimensions of 5 × 5 × 5 mm3. The produced specimens were inspected optically concerning their structural integrity. Intact cubes could be pro- duced for volume energy inputs Evol between 0.14 and 0.21 J/mm3. The volume energy input reads as Eline over the layer thickness and hatch distance. The average density of the cubes was determined to 65±2 % by dry weighing each cube, which is in good ac- cordance with the MPQ-S powder’s tap density of 61.4 % as measured by . This shows that the MPQ-S powder was sintered without complete melting of the material. Low melting point melt-spun ribbons with composi- tions of Nd70Cu30, Nd80Cu20, Nd60Al10Ni10Cu20, and Nd50Tb20Cu20 were prepared by single role melt-spinner. The ribbons were crashed into the flake and the surface of LPBF processed Nd-Fe-B magnets were covered by the flakes with the mass ratio of 10 to 1 followed by an- nealing at a temperature of 650 ◦C for 3 h under vac- uum. The magnetic properties of the LPBF processed Nd-Fe-B magnets and diffusion processed magnets were measured using a superconducting quantum interface de- vice vibrating sample magnetometer (SQUID-VSM). Mi- crostructure of the samples were studied using Carl Zeiss CrossBeam 1540EsB. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was performed using a Titan G2 80-200 TEM with a probe aberration corrector. Energy dispersive X- ray spectroscopy (EDS) was collected using a Super-X EDX detector. RESULTS Fig. 1(a) shows secondary electron (SE) SEM image of the gas atomized powders used for LPBF process. The spherical shaped powder particles have a size of smaller than 100 μm. Fig. 1(b) shows high angle annular dark field (HAADF)-STEM image and STEM-EDS maps of Fe, Nd, Ti, and Zr showing microstructure of the gas at- omized powders. The powders contain Nd2Fe14B grains with a size of smaller than 100 nm along with Ti and Zr- rich phases. No distinct segregation of Nd can be seen at the grain boundaries of the powders and nano-sized 3 α-Fe can be seen in the microstructure of the starting powders. This is due to the composition of the pow- ders that contains total RE of 8.2 at.%, smaller than the stoichiometric composition of Nd2Fe14B phase. SEM-SE image obtained from surface of LPBF sample is shown in Fig. 1(c) indicating densified sample while several cracks can still be seen in the microstructure. (b) (a) (c) (a) SE-SEM image of the initial MQP-S powder. The major fraction of particles exhibits spherical morphology with no or small satellites and a minor fraction exhibits rod like mor- phology. (b) STEM-EDS maps of Fe, Nd, Ti, and Zr showing the microstructure of the gas atomized powders. (c) SEM image of the surface. Spherical particles with a diameter of 10 − 80 μm are visible. Some regions are porous and several cracks are observed. Fig. 2 shows the magnetization curves of the initial LPBF processed magnet and diffusion processed sam- ples using Nd70Cu30, Nd80Cu20, Nd60Al10Ni10Cu20, and Nd50Tb20Cu20 diffusion sources. The coercivity of the initial LPBF processed sample is only 0.65 T. This low coercivity is due to the absence of the Nd-rich grain boundary phase separating nano-sized Nd2Fe14B grains as well as the existence of soft α-Fe phase in the mi- crostructure as shown in Fig. 1(b). Diffusion of Nd-Cu alloys and Nd-Al-Ni-Cu alloys increases the coercivity from 0.65 T to 1.0 T. However, use of Nd-Tb-Cu as the diffusion source results in achieving a larger coercivity of 1.5 T in the samples. The samples after diffusion process showed a full density of above 7.5 g/cm3. Tab. I shows the magnetic properties of all investigated samples. processed MQP-S-11-9 from Magnequench Corporation. sample Br (mT) μ0Hcj (T) powder (data sheet) 746 initial 436 Nd70Cu30 464 Nd80Cu20 475 Nd60Al10Ni10Cu20 466 Nd50Tb20Cu30 390 Fig. 3 shows backscattered electron (BSE) SEM images obtained from the Nd80Cu20 diffusion processed sample. −4 −2 0 2 4 magnetic field strength μ0H (T) −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 polarization J (T) initial sample Nd70Cu30 Nd80Cu20 Nd60Al10Ni10Cu20 Nd50Tb20Cu30 the diffusion-processed samples. In this image, the brightly imaged contrast corresponds to the Nd-rich phase and the grayly imaged phase cor- responds to the Nd2Fe14B matrix. Fig. 3(a) indicates the Nd-Cu flakes melt and infiltrate into the LPBF pro- cessed sample during the heat treatment at 650 ◦C fill- ing the voids between the powder particles as well as diffusing inside the particles through the grain bound- aries. SEM BSE image with a higher magnification is shown in Fig. 3(b) indicating formation of Nd-rich in- tergranular phases isolating nano-sized Nd2Fe14B grains. However, the interface of the powders shows a different microstructure, in particular different grain size, that is shown more clearly in Fig. 3(c) and (d). Although the size of Nd2Fe14B grains at the interface of the initial pow- ders in LPBF processed magnet is as large as 2 − 5 μm, Nd-rich phase infiltrates through the grain boundaries forming Nd-rich grain boundary phases. Observed inho- mogeneity in the Nd-Cu diffusion processed LPBF pro- cessed magnet is due to the effect of laser during the process. Laser heats and melts the surface of the gas atomized powders resulting in sintering of the surface of the powders. Hence, during slow solidification of the interface area, large sized Nd2Fe14B grains form at the interface of initial powders explaining observed heteroge- neous grain size from the interface toward the center of the original powders in the LPBF processed magnet. Fig. 4(a) and (b) show low and high magnification SEM BSE images of Nd-Tb-Cu diffusion processed samples. Microstructure of this sample also shows a heterogeneous Nd2Fe14B grain size distribution, a large sized grains at the interface of initial powder particles and nano-sized grains inside of the particles that are isolated with Nd- rich intergranular phase, similar to that of observed in the Nd-Cu diffusion processed sample. High magnifi- cation HAADF-STEM image and STEM-EDS maps of Nd, Tb, Fe, Cu, Ti, and Zr are shown in Fig. 4. Note that the Nd-rich phase is formed at the grain bound- aries of Nd-Tb-Cu diffused sample, covering nano-sized Nd2Fe14B grains. A Tb-rich shell can be seen covering the surface of Nd2Fe14B grains. No α-Fe is observed in 4 (a) (b) Nd-rich phases GB phase (c) (d) diffusion-processed sample. (a) Different grain size inside the particles and at the interfaces. (b) Magnetic isolation of nano- sized Nd2Fe14B grains inside of the initial particles. (c) Dark gray regions correspond to grains of the NdFeB phase. Bright regions are so-called “Nd-rich” phases. (d) Grain boundaries are observed with inhomogeneous contrast. the microstructure that should be due to the reaction of Nd-Tb-Cu liquid phase with Fe phase during the diffu- sion process. (a) (b) (c) (Nd, Tb)2Fe14B Nd2Fe14B diffusion-processed sample. (a) BSE-SEM image of the mi- crostructure inside the grains and the interfaces. (b) BSE- SEM image indicates a diffusion of Nd-rich phase into the GB boundaries. (c) TEM-EDS elemental mapping images of Nd,Tb,Fe; Cu; Ti,Zr. A formation of a Nd-rich GB phase and a Tb-rich shell are visible. The initial particle grains are nano-sized and maintaining the 2:14:1 ratio. Remaining questions are what is the chemical com- position of the Nd-rich intergranular phase and what is the Tb content at the surface of Nd2Fe14B grains? Fig. 5(a) shows high magnification HAADF-STEM im- age obtained from the interface of a grain boundary phase with Nd2Fe14B grain. STEM-EDS maps of Nd, Tb, Fe, Cu, Zr, and Ti is shown in this figure, obtained from marked box in HAADF-STEM image. Composition line profile obtained from red arrow is shown in Fig. 5(b) indicating the grain boundary phase does not contain any ferromagnetic elements and is enriched with Nd and Cu. In order to clarify the Tb content at the surface of Nd2Fe14B grains, composition line profile of Nd and Tb obtained from blue arrow, marked in (a), is shown in Fig. 5(c) showing the surface 2:14:1 grains contain 2 at.% of Tb. Enrichment of Tb at the surface of 2:14:1 grains increases magnetocrystalline anisotropy field at the in- terfaces hindering nucleation of reversed domains at the interfaces resulting an increase in the coercivity. Unlike conventional Dy or Tb vapor diffusion process in Nd- Fe-B sintered magnets that require elevated temperature diffusion process of above 850 ◦C, Nd-Tb-Cu diffusion process was carried out at low temperature of 650 ◦C resulting formation of Tb-rich shell without substantial grain growth of Nd2Fe14B phase. This was also reported previously in the hot-deformed Nd-Fe-B magnet (a) (b) (c) RE2Fe14B GB phase Composition of the GB phase of the LPBF and with Nd50Tb20Cu30 diffusion-processed sample. (a) STEM- HAADF image and STEM-EDS elemental mapping images of Nd,Tb; Fe,Cu; Zr,Ti. (b) Line scan of the composition along the red doted line. (c) Line scan of the composition along the blue dotdashed line. CONCLUSION Laser powder bed fusion (LPBF) is a well established additive manufacturing (AM) method for the production of metal high performance metallic parts. Recently, sev- eral research groups work on AM methods for hard or soft magnetic objects. However, low coercivity of Nd- Fe-B magnets processed with LPBF has been one of the draw backs of these magnets. The commercial isotropic NdFeB powder MQP-S from Magnetquench meets the powder requirements for the LPBF process. For an efficient diffusion of the low melt- 5 ing point alloy, the powder is only sintered and not fully melted during the LPBF process. The printing param- eters are optimized in order to produce mecchanically stable parts with a similar volumetric mass density as the powder tab density. The coercivity of the sintered parts is with 0.65 T slightly lower than the coercivity of the powder (0.88 T). This low coercivity is a result of the absence of the Nd-rich grain boundary phase which separates nano-sized Nd2Fe14B grains as well as of the existence of soft α-Fe phase in the microstructure. For the coercivity enhancement of the printed parts, low melting point melt-spun ribbons with composi- tions of Nd70Cu30, Nd80Cu20, Nd60Al10Ni10Cu20, and Nd50Tb20Cu20 are investigated. Diffusion of Nd-Cu al- loys and Nd-Al-Ni-Cu alloys increases the coercivity from 0.65 T to 1.0 T. However, use of Nd-Tb-Cu as the dif- fusion source results in achieving a larger coercivity of 1.5 T in the samples. After diffusion process, the samples showed a full density of above 7.5 g/cm3. Enrichment of Tb at the surface of Nd2Fe14B grains increases magne- tocrystalline anisotropy field at the interfaces hindering nucleation of reversed domains at the interfaces resulting an increase in the coercivity. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The support from CD-Laboratory AMSEN (financed by the Austrian Federal Ministry of Economy, Family and Youth, the National Foundation for Research, Tech- nology and Development) is acknowledged. C. Huber, C. Abert, F. Bruckner, M. Groenefeld, O. Muthsam, S. Schuschnigg, K. Sirak, R. Thanhoffer, I. Teliban, C. Vogler, R. Windl, and D. Suess, Applied Physics Letters 109, 162401 (2016). C. Huber, C. Abert, F. Bruckner, C. Pfaff, J. Kriwet, M. Groenefeld, I. Teliban, C. Vogler, and D. Suess, Jour- nal of Applied Physics 122, 053904 (2017). C. Huber, C. Abert, F. Bruckner, M. Groenefeld, S. Schuschnigg, I. Teliban, C. Vogler, G. Wautischer, R. Windl, and D. Suess, Scientific Reports 7, 9419 M. Ortner, C. Huber, N. Vollert, J. Pilz, and D. S ̈uss, in SENSORS, 2017 IEEE (IEEE, 2017) pp. 1–3. L. Li, A. Tirado, I. C. Nlebedim, O. Rios, B. Post, V. Kunc, R. R. Lowden, E. Lara-Curzio, R. Fredette, J. Ormerod, T. A. Lograsso, and M. P. Paranthaman, Scientific Reports 6, 36212 (2016). K. von Petersdorff-Campen, Y. Hauswirth, J. Carpenter, A. Hagmann, S. Bo ̈es, M. Schmid Daners, D. Penner, and M. Meboldt, Applied Sciences 8, 1275 (2018). M. P. Paranthaman, C. S. Shafer, A. M. Elliott, D. H. Siddel, M. A. McGuire, R. M. Springfield, J. Martin, R. Fredette, and J. Ormerod, JOM 68, 1978 (2016). L. Li, A. Tirado, B. S. Conner, M. Chi, A. M. Elliott, O. Rios, H. Zhou, and M. P. Paranthaman, Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials 438, 163 (2017). J. Kruth, L. Froyen, J. V. Vaerenbergh, P. Mercelis, M. Rombouts, and B. Lauwers, Journal of Materials Pro- cessing Technology 149, 616 (2004), 14th Interntaional Symposium on Electromachining (ISEM XIV). H. Attar, K. G. Prashanth, L.-C. Zhang, M. Calin, I. V. Okulov, S. Scudino, C. Yang, and J. Eckert, Journal of Materials Science & Technology 31, 1001 (2015). C. Huber, M. Goertler, C. Abert, F. Bruckner, M. Groenefeld, I. Teliban, and D. Suess, Scientific re- ports 8, 14651 (2018). C. Mikler, V. Chaudhary, T. Borkar, V. Soni, D. Jaeger, X. Chen, R. Contieri, R. Ramanujan, and R. Banerjee, JOM 69, 532 (2017). B. Zhang, N.-E. Fenineche, H. Liao, and C. Coddet, Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials 336, 49 E. M. H. White, A. G. Kassen, E. Simsek, W. Tang, R. T. Ott, and I. E. Anderson, IEEE Transactions on Magnetics 53, 1 (2017). J. Ja ́cimovi ́c, F. Binda, L. G. Herrmann, F. Greuter, J. Genta, M. Calvo, T. Tomˇse, and R. A. Simon, Ad- vanced Engineering Materials (2017). N. Urban, F. Huber, and J. Franke, in Electric Drives Production Conference (EDPC), 2017 7th International (IEEE, 2017) pp. 1–5. H. Kanekiyo, T. Miyoshi, and S. Hirosawa, “Nanocom- posite magnet and method for producing same,” (2004), uS Patent 6,790,296. R. Fischer, T. Schrefl, H. Kronm ̈uller, and J. Fidler, Journal of magnetism and magnetic materials 153, 35 H. Engelmann, A. Kim, and G. Thomas, Scripta mate- rialia 36, 55 (1997). H. Kronm ̈uller, K.-D. Durst, and M. Sagawa, Journal of magnetism and magnetic materials 74, 291 (1988). K. Hono and H. Sepehri-Amin, Scripta Materialia 67, E. Boltich, E. Oswald, M. Huang, S. Hirosawa, W. Wal- lace, and E. Burzo, Journal of applied physics 57, 4106 S. Hirosawa, Y. Matsuura, H. Yamamoto, S. Fujimura, M. Sagawa, and H. Yamauchi, Journal of applied physics L. Liu, T. Akiya, H. Sepehri-Amin, T. Ohkubo, N. Sakuma, M. Yano, A. Kato, and K. Hono, Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials 412, 234 (2016). J. Li, L. Liu, H. Sepehri-Amin, X. Tang, T. Ohkubo, N. Sakuma, T. Shoji, A. Kato, T. Schrefl, and K. Hono, Acta Materialia 161, 171 (2018). https://mqitechnology.com/,. T. DebRoy, H. Wei, J. Zuback, T. Mukherjee, J. Elmer, J. Milewski, A. Beese, A. Wilson-Heid, A. De, and W. Zhang, Progress in Materials Science 92, 112 (2018). T. Kolb, F. Huber, B. Akbulut, C. Donocik, N. Urban, D. Maurer, and J. Franke, in Electric Drives Produc- tion Conference (EDPC), 2016 6th International (IEEE, 2016) pp. 34–40.