A new metal transfer process for van der Waals contacts to vertical Schottky-junction transition metal dichalcogenide photovoltaics Cora M. Went1,2, Joeson Wong3, Phillip R. Jahelka3, Michael Kelzenberg3, Souvik Biswas3, Harry A. Atwater2,3,4* 1. Department of Physics, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA 2. Resnick Sustainability Institute, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA 3. Thomas J. Watson Laboratory of Applied Physics, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA 4. Joint Center for Artificial Photosynthesis, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA *Corresponding author: Harry A. Atwater (haa@caltech.edu) Abstract Two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides are promising candidates for ultrathin optoelectronic devices due to their high absorption coefficients and intrinsically passivated surfaces. To maintain these near-perfect surfaces, recent research has focused on fabricating contacts that limit Fermi-level pinning at the metal-semiconductor interface. Here, we develop a new, simple procedure for transferring metal contacts that does not require aligned lithography. Using this technique, we fabricate vertical Schottky-junction WS2 solar cells with Ag and Au as asymmetric work function contacts. Under laser illumination, we observe rectifying behavior and open-circuit voltage above 500 mV in devices with transferred contacts, in contrast to resistive behavior and open-circuit voltage below 15 mV in devices with evaporated contacts. One-sun measurements and device simulation results indicate that this metal transfer process could enable high-specific-power vertical Schottky-junction transition metal dichalcogenide photovoltaics, and we anticipate that this technique will lead to advances for two-dimensional devices more broadly. Two-dimensional (2D) semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), including MoS2, WS2, MoSe2, and WSe2, are promising for many optoelectronic applications, including high-specific-power photovoltaics1–4. With absorption coefficients 1–2 orders of magnitude higher than conventional semiconductors, monolayer (<1 nm thick) TMDs can absorb as much visible light as about 15 nm of GaAs or 50 nm of Si5. Both multilayer and monolayer TMDs can achieve near-unity broadband absorption in the visible range6,7. Due to their layered structure and out-of-plane van der Waals bonding, TMDs have intrinsically passivated surfaces with no dangling bonds and can form heterostructures without the constraint of lattice matching. To take advantage of the intrinsically passivated surfaces of TMDs, gentle fabrication techniques are needed to form metal contacts without damaging the underlying semiconductor. A number of new contact techniques have been presented recently, including one-dimensional edge contacts8, via contacts embedded in hBN9, slowly-deposited In/Au contacts10, and 2D metals11. Recently, Liu et al have shown that transferring rather than evaporating metal contacts onto TMDs can yield interfaces with no Fermi-level pinning, where the Schottky barrier height can be predicted by the ideal Schottky-Mott rule12. Their work demonstrates the utility of transferring an arbitrary three-dimensional metal onto a 2D material, forming a nondamaging van der Waals contact. However, this technique requires a final aligned lithography step to expose the contact under the polymer used for transfer, which limits its scalability12. To date, the above techniques for gentle contact fabrication have been applied to device geometries where carriers are collected laterally rather than vertically. Though laterally-contacted devices are important for electronic applications, such as field-effect transistors, vertically- contacted devices are necessary for optoelectronic applications that require scalable photoactive areas, such as solar cells. Van der Waals contacts could have an even greater advantage for these vertical device geometries, where the ratio of contact area to device area is often higher than in lateral device geometries. Schottky-junction solar cells represent one specific device geometry where van der Waals metal contacts could enable high performance in vertical devices. Although vertical-junction solar cells are more aligned with conventional photovoltaics13, most Schottky-junction TMD solar cells studied have been lateral-junction devices12,14,15. Vertical Schottky-junction TMD solar cells have been limited by ohmic I-V behavior, low external quantum efficiencies, and low open-circuit voltages, likely due to Fermi-level pinning induced by contact evaporation6,16. New gentle contact fabrication techniques have the potential to eliminate this Fermi-level pinning, enabling high- efficiency vertical TMD solar cells in the Schottky-junction geometry. Here, we develop a simple technique for transferring metal contacts, where all lithographic patterning is done on a donor substrate rather than on the active device. We apply this technique to vertical Schottky-junction solar cells with multilayer TMD absorber layers. Due to the tradeoff between bandgap energy and photoluminescence quantum yield, the theoretical maximum power conversion efficiency achievable for multilayer and monolayer single-junction solar cells is similar4,17, and further, tunneling limits transport in monolayer vertical devices18, so we focus on multilayer devices in this work. Ultrathin (10–20 nm) WS2 forms the absorber layer, while Ag and Au form the asymmetric-work-function contacts. Devices made with transferred metal contacts show diode-like I-V behavior with a near-unity ideality factor and high VOC, while similar devices made with evaporated metal contacts show ohmic I-V behavior and near-zero VOC. We demonstrate peak external quantum efficiency (EQE) of >40% and peak active-layer internal quantum efficiency (IQEactive) of >90% in transferred-contact devices. Using a solar simulator, we measure a photovoltaic power conversion efficiency of 0.46%, comparable to what has been seen in other ultrathin vertical TMD photovoltaics19. Device simulations of further-optimized geometries suggest that this new metal transfer process has the potential to enable Schottky- junction TMD solar cells with power conversion efficiencies greater than 8% and specific powers greater than 50 kW/kg. Results & Discussion Fabrication of vertical WS2 Schottky-junction solar cells. We prepare vertical WS2 Schottky- junction solar cells made from 16-nm-thick WS2 absorber layers, with Ag (fAg » 4.3 eV) and Au (fAu » 5.1 eV) as asymmetric work function contacts (Fig. 1a)12. Template-stripped Ag, which exhibits an RMS roughness <0.5 nm, forms both the electron-collecting bottom contact and back reflector for all devices20. We mechanically exfoliate WS2 directly onto the Ag substrate. The subwavelength-thick WS2 achieves broadband, angle-insensitive absorption on top of the highly reflective Ag, giving the WS2 a deep purple color as illustrated in Fig. 1b6,21. For transferred- contact devices, we transfer thin Au disks from a thermally-oxidized Si donor substrate to form the semi-transparent hole-collecting top contact, using the process described in the following section. Both the top surface of the template-stripped Ag and the bottom surface of the transferred Au inherit the smoothness of the SiO2/Si donor substrate, leading to near atomically-sharp metal- WS2 interfaces12,20. For comparison, we also fabricate devices by direct evaporation of thin Au disks onto the WS2 using standard photolithography techniques. The ideal band diagram of this Schottky-junction solar cell is shown in Fig. 1c. We assume a doping concentration of 1014 cm-3 for WS2, as provided by the bulk crystal vendor. Since the length of the depletion region at a Schottky junction between bulk WS2 and either Au or Ag is on the order of 1 μm, the device is fully depleted. We measure the final thicknesses of the WS2 and the Au to be 16 nm and 19 nm, respectively, using atomic force microscopy (Fig. 1d). Metal transfer process. We develop a new, simple process for transferring metal contacts onto TMDs (Fig. 2). This process relies on a self-assembled monolayer (SAM) to reduce the adhesion between the Au and the SiO2/Si donor substrate22, a thermoplastic polymer to preferentially pick up or drop down the metal23, and a variable peeling rate to tune the velocity-dependent adhesion between a metal and a viscoelastic stamp22. Briefly, we create a SAM on clean thermally-oxidized Si chips in a vacuum desiccator22. We then deposit 20 nm of Au via electron beam evaporation. Using photolithography, we define the contact areas with positive photoresist and a positive photomask. We etch the Au outside the masked contact areas, then dissolve the remaining photoresist in acetone, leaving Au disks on the SAM-coated SiO2/Si substrates. We prepare a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamp coated with the thermoplastic polymer polypropylene carbonate (PPC) on a glass slide23. In a 2D transfer setup, we align and slowly lower the stamp onto a contact at 60oC. We set the temperature to 40oC, and once the stage reaches that temperature, we raise the transfer arm rapidly to peel the stamp and pick up the contact. We align the contact with the target TMD and slowly lower the stamp down at 60oC, and then slowly peel it away immediately after contact at the same temperature. The contact delaminates from the PDMS/PPC stamp and sticks to the TMD. Further details of the procedure are provided in Supplementary Note 1. This metal transfer technique has worked in 15 out of 16 devices fabricated thus far (94% yield). It works for both 20-nm-thick and 100-nm-thick Au, and can likely be extended to other metals and to larger-scale contacts (i.e. for contacts to CVD-grown TMDs). A substantial advantage of this technique is that, whereas prior metal transfer techniques require a final aligned electron-beam lithography step to expose the contact area12, this technique only utilizes unaligned photolithography to define the initial contacts on the SiO2/Si donor substrate. This allows for batch-fabrication of an array of contacts that can then be picked up, aligned, and printed to form multiple devices. Further, this metal transfer process could enable van der Waals contacts to air- and moisture-sensitive nanomaterials, such as lead halide perovskites or black phosphorus, to be formed without removing the sample from an inert environment. Comparison of transferred and evaporated metal contacts. We measure I-V curves under illumination with a 633 nm laser focused to a ~1 μm2 spot in a confocal microscope at room temperature. In devices with transferred metal contacts, we observe rectifying I-V curves and a pronounced photovoltaic effect (Fig. 3a). We measure a VOC of 510 mV under the maximum laser excitation. Short-circuit current follows a power law as a function of incident power, ISC = Pinca, with a close to 1 (Fig. 3c). According to the diode equation, VOC scales linearly with ln(ISC) and can be fit with an ideality factor n = 1.2 (Fig. 3d). This near-unity ideality factor confirms the high interface and material quality in these devices. The ideality factor, diode-like behavior and high open-circuit voltage suggest that a Schottky junction is successfully formed in devices with transferred contacts. In contrast, we observe resistive behavior and a small photovoltaic effect in devices with evaporated top metal contacts (Fig. 3b). ISC vs. Pinc follows a power law with a less than 1 (Fig. 3e). As shown in Fig. 3f, this device behaves as a resistor with R = 3.1 kW. At comparable laser powers, VOC is around 4 mV in evaporated contact devices and 400 mV in transferred contact devices, and JSC is three to four times higher for transferred contacts than for evaporated contacts. Previous work demonstrates that due to Fermi-level pinning, evaporated Au and transferred Ag have effectively the same barrier height for electrons and holes12. Assuming an effective work function difference between Au and Ag of 50 meV, device simulations can predict the purely resistive behavior in an evaporated-contact Schottky-junction device (Supplementary Fig. 1). This evidence points to strong Fermi-level pinning in devices with evaporated contacts due to interface states induced by the Au evaporation. In devices with transferred contacts, the slope of the I-V curve at short-circuit increases linearly with increasing laser power, corresponding to a decreasing shunt resistance (Supplementary Fig. 2a). This photoshunting effect occurs in solar cells without perfectly selective contacts due to increased minority carrier conductivity across the device under illumination24,25. Device simulations can replicate this photoshunt pathway without the addition of any external shunt resistance (Supplementary Fig. 2b). In future devices, the introduction of contacts with greater carrier selectivity could reduce or eliminate the photoshunting observed here. Quantum efficiency and photocurrent generation. Light-beam induced current (LBIC, or photocurrent) maps, acquired with a 633 nm laser in a confocal microscope, show uniform current generation under the entire Au disk contact, except where shaded by the contact probe (Fig. 4a). The uniformity of the photocurrent demonstrates that the Au is homogeneously semitransparent and in good contact with the TMD. Importantly, this indicates that the area of the Au disk can be used to accurately define the device active area (Supplementary Fig. 3) and suggests that one- dimensional device simulations are sufficient to describe the behavior in these vertical devices26. Further, it demonstrates that there are no visible bubbles created during the metal transfer process. The measured total absorption (Fig. 4c) matches well with the absorption calculated using the transfer matrix method (Fig. 4b), as has been previously demonstrated in TMD solar cells6,16. To calculate the active-layer absorption in the experimental WS2 devices, we subtract the simulated parasitic absorption (the sum of the Au and Ag curves in Fig. 4b) from the experimentally measured total absorption in Fig. 4c. The mean active-layer absorption from 450 nm to 650 nm is 39%. The reduced absorption in our devices relative to what has been previously demonstrated in WS2 on a metal back-reflector (~80% over this wavelength range)6 is due to parasitic absorption and reflection losses from the 19-nm-thick Au top contact. Using a more transparent top contact could double our photogenerated current, assuming identical work function and conductivity. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the device follows the spectral shape of absorption well, averaging 28% from 450 nm to 650 nm and reaching a peak of above 40% around 550 nm (Fig. 4d). To accurately determine EQE, we multiply by a shading factor of 1.39 to correct for shading from the probes (see Methods). Internal quantum efficiency (IQE) remains relatively flat across all wavelengths above the bandgap, averaging 49% from 450 nm to 650 nm (Fig. 4e). IQEactive, calculated by dividing EQE by the active-layer absorption rather than the total absorption, is greater than 90% at its peak, and averages 74% between 450 nm and 650 nm (Fig. 4f). This high IQEactive suggests efficient collection of photogenerated carriers in transferred-contact devices. Performance under one-sun illumination. Vertical Schottky-junction WS2 solar cells with transferred top contacts achieve reasonable photovoltaic performance when measured under simulated AM1.5G illumination. Fig. 5 shows the AM1.5G I-V behavior of a representative device. We divide the measured current by the device active area to yield current density, then then further divide by a factor of 0.67 to account for spectral mismatch between our solar simulator calibration point and the true AM1.5G spectrum (see Methods; Supplementary Fig. 4)27. The spectral mismatch correction leads to a 50% increase in short-circuit current, so the VOC and power conversion efficiency of the device are likely underestimated here. We measure a VOC of 256 mV, a corrected JSC of 4.10 mA/cm2, a fill factor (FF) of 0.44, and a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 0.46%. This efficiency is in the range of what others have reported for ultrathin TMD photovoltaics15,16,19. Using the densities of Au, WS2, and Ag, we estimate a specific power of 3 kW/kg for this device. By fitting the one-sun I-V curve using the diode equation with series and shunt resistances, we estimate a shunt resistance (RSH) of 231 W cm2 and a negligible series resistance (RS), as shown in Supplementary Fig. 5. The shunt resistance is likely due to the photoshunting behavior discussed above, and could be reduced by design and realization of contacts that are more carrier-selective. This photovoltaic performance is consistent among multiple measurements and devices. The JSC of 4.10 mA/cm2 that we measure with the solar simulator is within 10% of the JSC that we calculate by integrating the EQE over the solar spectrum (4.55 mA/cm2). We believe that probe shading, which we correct for in EQE measurements but not in solar simulator measurements, accounts for the 10% discrepancy. Though the JSC varies due to differences in thickness and therefore absorption in exfoliated flakes, the VOC is replicable across all devices fabricated for this work. As shown in Supplementary Figs. 6 and 7, VOC is between 220 mV and 260 mV in all four devices measured under one-sun illumination, and VOC is greater than 220 mV in six different devices measured under illumination with a halogen lamp (~20 suns power density). The I-V curves show no hysteresis when swept in the forwards and backwards directions (Supplementary Fig. 8). Simulated performance of optimized devices. To examine and further optimize the performance of these devices, we simulate a variety of device geometries. The assumed material parameters of the WS2 are detailed in Supplementary Table 1. Simulating the same device geometry as our experimental device yields the I-V curve in Fig. 6a. The simulated JSC of 5.7 mA/cm2 is consistent with our measured active-layer IQE of 74% and the JSC of 4.55 mA/cm2 estimated from the EQE. The simulated VOC of 646 mV and RSH of 2240 W cm2 are considerably higher than the VOC of 256 mV and RSH of 231 W cm2 observed in our one-sun measurements. This demonstrates that with further optimization, our device geometry could achieve higher voltages and less shunting than we currently see (Supplementary Fig. 9). As a first improvement, we suggest replacing Au with a different high-work-function metal, as Au is known to form thiol bonds with sulfides that could affect the quality of the van der Waals contact12,28. To identify a potential path towards high-efficiency vertical Schottky-junction WS2 solar cells, we simulate a series of optimized devices (Fig. 6b). Using an optimized thickness of WS2 (26 nm) for maximum absorption under 20 nm of Au increases the JSC to 7.1 mA/cm2. The JSC can be further increased to 12.5 mA/cm2 by replacing Au with a transparent top contact, assuming an identical work function to Au and no parasitic absorption or reflection. By selecting metal work functions that are optimally aligned to the conduction and valence bands of WS2, we predict a VOC increase of 230 mV. Combining transparent top contacts and optimized metal work functions yields the device shown in Fig. 6c, with a VOC of 898 mV, a JSC of 12.7 mA/cm2, a fill factor of 0.78, and a power conversion efficiency of 8.9%. This simulated power conversion efficiency in a device with a thickness <150 nm represents a specific power of 58 kW/kg, demonstrating that this metal transfer process has the potential to enable devices with an unprecedented power-per-unit- weight ratio for transportation and aerospace applications. Conclusion We develop here a process for transferring metal contacts with near-atomically smooth interfaces that has high-yield, allows for batch fabrication, and eliminates aligned lithography. We expect that this procedure will be highly relevant and useful to the 2D community, as well as to researchers working on air-sensitive nanomaterials, as it allows all processing to be done on the contacts rather than the device. By applying this new technique to vertical Schottky-junction TMD solar cells, we demonstrate that transferred contacts are particularly advantageous for vertical device geometries, which are important for photovoltaic and other optoelectronic applications due to their scalable active areas. The rectifying I-V curves shown in transferred-contact devices and resistive I-V curves shown in evaporated-contact devices support the hypothesis that transferring contacts can reduce Fermi-level pinning and allow the work function asymmetry between the contacts to define the maximum achievable VOC. We observe active-layer absorption >55%, EQE >40%, and active- layer IQE >90% in these devices, demonstrating efficient collection of photogenerated carriers. Under one-sun illumination, we measure a VOC of 256 mV, a JSC of 4.10 mA/cm2, a fill factor of 0.44, and a power conversion efficiency of 0.46%. We highlight areas for improvement by simulating the behavior of optimized devices based on this architecture and show 8.9% simulated efficiency and 58 kW/kg simulated specific power in a device with transparent top contacts, optimized thickness, and ideal metal work functions for carrier extraction. Given the proof-of-concept performance and the clear pathways for improvement presented here for devices less than 150 nm thick, ultrathin vertical Schottky-junction TMD solar cells with transferred contacts are promising candidates for high-specific-power photovoltaic applications. We anticipate that this new metal transfer process will enable similar advances for 2D TMD devices beyond Schottky-junction solar cells, as well as for nanomaterial-based devices more broadly. Methods Device fabrication. Template-stripped silver substrates are prepared as described previously16,20. WS2 is mechanically exfoliated directly onto template-stripped silver from the bulk crystal (HQ Graphene) using Scotch tape. For transferred contact devices, Au top contacts are prepared and transferred using the metal transfer technique summarized in the main text, and described in detail in Supplementary Note 1. The SAM used is trichloro(1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorooctyl)silane (PFOTS, Sigma Aldrich), the photoresist used is S1813, and the Au etchant used is Transene Gold Etchant TFA. For evaporated contact devices, Au top contacts are patterned using standard photolithography techniques as described previously16. Contacts are fabricated on WS2 within 12 hours of exfoliation. Final WS2 and Au thicknesses are confirmed using atomic force microscopy (Asylum Research). Photocurrent and power-dependent I-V. Photocurrent and power-dependent IV are measured on a scanning confocal microscope (Zeiss Axio Imager 2) using a long working distance objective (50x, NA = 0.55). Devices are contacted using piezoelectrically controlled micromanipulators (MiBots, Imina Technologies). I-V curves are measured with a Keithley 236 Source-Measure Unit using custom LabView programs. Laser powers are measured using a USB power meter (ThorLabs). All measurements are performed under ambient temperature and pressure. Absorption and EQE. Absorption and EQE are measured using a home-built optical setup with a long working distance objective (50x, NA = 0.55). A supercontinuum laser (Fianium) is coupled to a monochromator to produce a tunable, monochromatic light source. A chopper and lock-in detection are used for all measurements. For absorption, the sample reflectance is measured using a NIST-calibrated photodetector (Newport 818-ST2-UV/DB) with a beamsplitter. A protected silver mirror (Thorlabs) is used to calibrate the reflectance based on its reported reflectance curve, and a dark background is subtracted from both measurements. For EQE, the current generated by the sample is probed using MiBots and compared to the current collected by the NIST calibrated photodetector when placed at the sample position, corrected by the photodetector’s responsivity. Absorption and EQE measurements are both corrected by a shading factor of 1.39 that corrects for the shading of the MiBot tips, which is calculated by comparing absorption with and without the tips in place and averaging over the spectral range 450 nm–650 nm. Solar simulator. One-sun I-V curves are measured using a 1 kW Xenon arc lamp (Newport Oriel) with an AM1.5G filter (ABET Technologies). To ensure 100 mW/cm2 incident power, the lamp power is adjusted to generate the correct current on a Si reference cell placed at the same location as the sample. MiBots are used to contact the device, and I-V curves are measured with a Keithley 2425 SourceMeter using custom LabView programs. The current density is divided by a spectral mismatch factor to account for the difference in bandgap between our WS2 sample and our Si reference cell and the difference in spectrum between our solar simulator and AM1.5G27. As no EQE data was available for our device below 400 nm, linear extrapolation was used, leading to about a 5% error in the spectral mismatch factor and the reported JSC values. The device area was assumed to be that of the Au disk, which has a diameter of 28 μm. Device simulations. Absorption and generation are calculated using the transfer matrix method, with optical constants for WS2 taken from literature29. All other device simulations are performed using Lumerical Device. The WS2 doping was specified by the bulk crystal vendor (HQ Graphene). Other WS2 parameters, including bandgap30, work function31, DC permittivity32, effective mass33, out-of-plane mobility34–36, and photoluminescence quantum yield37–39 are taken from literature and listed in Supplementary Table 1. The radiative recombination coefficient is calculated using the Roosbroeck-Shockley relation40, and the Shockley-Read-Hall lifetime for minority carriers is then estimated using the photoluminescence quantum yield. Data availability All data supporting the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon request.