Landau Level Degeneracy in Twisted Bilayer Graphene: Role of Symmetry Breaking Ya-Hui Zhang, Hoi Chun Po, T. Senthil Department of Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA (Dated: April 24, 2019) The degeneracy of Landau levels flanking charge neutrality in twisted bilayer graphene is known to change from eight-fold to four-fold when the twist angle is reduced to values near the magic angle of Ōēł 1.05ŌŚ”. This degeneracy lifting has been reproduced in experiments by multiple groups, and is known to occur even in devices which do not harbor the correlated insulators and superconductors. We propose C3 symmetry breaking as an explanation of such robust degeneracy lifting, and support our proposal by numerical results on the Landau level spectrum in near-magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene. Motivated by recent experiments, we further consider the effect of C2 symmetry breaking on the Landau levels. I. INTRODUCTION The discovery1,2 of correlated insulators and supercon- ductivity in magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene (TBG) has sparked tremendous experimental and theoretical ac- tivity. The original results of Refs. 1 and 2 have been confirmed and extended in Refs. 3 and 4. Ferromag- netism, accompanied by an anomalous (possibly quan- tized) Hall effect, has also been observed at 3/4 filling of the conduction band for some devices4,5. In addition, gate tunable correlated insulators6 as well as signs of superconductivity7 have been demonstrated in the moire bands of ABC trilayer graphene aligned with a hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) substrate. Very recently, twisted double bilayers of graphene have also been studied and are shown to host spin-polarized correlated insulators8ŌĆō10 and superconductivity8,9. In spite of the experimental progress, theoretically there is very little understanding of the many-body physics of these systems. In this paper, we address one aspect of the phenomenology of the normal metallic state of near-magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene that has re- sisted explanation so far. Specifically, we will focus on understanding the Landau level degeneracy near charge neutrality. As we discuss below, the same pattern of Landau fan is consistently observed across samples with varying twist angles and in a reasonably wide range of densities and temperatures. This robust experimental observation, however, has resisted a clear theoretical ex- planation so far. More specifically, it is well known that the band struc- ture of twisted bilayer graphene features two Dirac points at charge neutrality within each microscopic valley. This band touching is protected by a C2T symmetry11. We will refer to these as mini-Dirac points. With two mini- Dirac points per valley and per spin, we have a total of eight Dirac points, which is double of that in monolayer graphene. Upon doping away from neutrality, Landau levels will form out of the mini-Dirac cones. The cor- responding Landau fan sequence will then be expected to be double of that of monolayer graphene, namely, ┬▒4, ┬▒12, ┬▒20, . . . . Indeed, precisely this degeneracy pat- tern is seen in experiments on devices with relatively large twist angle of 1.8ŌŚ”12, which is far away from the magic angle Ōēł 1.1ŌŚ”. In the vicinity of the magic angle, however, there is a surprise. The Landau fan emerging from neutrality has the Hall conductance sequence ┬▒4, ┬▒8, ┬▒12, . . . . In other words, the eight-fold Landau-level degeneracy is re- duced to four-fold. Experimentally, this degeneracy lift- ing is always seen in samples showcasing the correlated insulators and superconductivity. However, the converse is not true, i.e., the same sequence is observed even in some devices which do not show the other correlated phenomena13. Furthermore, the Landau fans are found to terminate once the half-filling correlated insulators set in, and the degeneracy is further reduced to two-fold on the other side of the insulator. As superconductivity is seen on both sides of the insulators, understanding the Landau fan, which conveys information on the nature of the charge carriers and the possible patterns of symmetry breaking, may shed light on the nature of the correlated phenomena closer to the magic angle. Here, we show that the experimentally observed Lan- dau fan can be reproduced within a free-fermion model of twisted bilayer graphene, for various angles close to the magic angle. Our main result is that the sequence is stabilized by a weak breaking of C3 symmetry. As is well-known, C3 symmetry breaking splits the Van Hove singularity (VHs) in the density of states14,15. For con- creteness, let us focus on the conduction band. In the energy range between the two split Van Hove singulari- ties, the equal-energy contours in the momentum space (within each valley) take a qualitatively different shape compared to those allowed in the symmetric case: there is a single electron-like orbit which encloses both of the Dirac points. In contrast, without C3 symmetry break- ing, the equal energy contours either consist of two dis- joint pockets each enclosing a Dirac point, or a single hole-like pocket enclosing the band maximum at ╬ō. In the presence of a magnetic field, these new equal-energy contours give rise to four-fold degenerate Landau levels stemming out from charge neutrality. We find that even for a relatively small degree of the C3 breaking, the de- generacy in the vicinity of the magic angle is four-fold at the magnetic field strengths at which the experiments arXiv:1904.10452v1 [cond-mat.str-el] 23 Apr 2019 2 are done (Ō¬å 1 T) . We trace the origin of this effect to the large suscep- tibility of near-magic-angle TBG to such a C3 breaking perturbation, which leads to a significant modification to the electronic spectrum even when the ŌĆ£bareŌĆØ C3 break- ing is weak. Such symmetry breaking may arise due to strain effects (known to be generally present in TBG), or due to spontaneous symmetry breaking driven by inter- actions. While we leave open the physical origin of the C3 breaking, we remark that the smallness of symmetry breaking required suggests that the presence of strain in the sample is a plausible explanation. In some devices of twisted bilayer graphene, for exam- ple in , it is known that there is very likely also a breaking of C2 symmetry. For the device in , this is due to the near alignment with a h-BN substrate. Such C2 breaking gaps out the Dirac points and results in an insulator at charge neutrality. In the device studied in , it is observed that the system is insulating at neutrality. A possible explanation is that C2 is broken in this system as well, although it is unclear if the symmetry breaking is again due to alignment with h-BN, or is in- teraction driven In light of these experimental results, we also study the expected Landau levle degeneracy in de- vices with C2 symmetry breaking, both with and without an additional C3 breaking. We remark that multiple theoretical attempts have al- ready been made to address the neutrality Landau fan in small-angle TBG16ŌĆō20. While all of the emergent symme- tries of TBG are preserved in these earlier works, some of them did identify specific choice of parameters for which the experimental sequence of ┬▒4, ┬▒8, ┬▒12, . . . can be ob- served. For instance, found numerically that the experimental sequence can be reproduced in a narrow range of parameters near the magic angle. However, the sequence is also found to depend very sensitively on the choice of model parameters20, and might not explain the experimental robustness (across groups and samples) of the Landau level sequence. Alternatively, proposed a VHs-induced Landau level splitting mechanism that is essentially the same as the one we discuss below. As emphasized above, we find that this picture is valid only if C3 symmetry breaking is invoked. This is consistent with the more microscopic calculation presented in , which did not observe the experimental sequence for the parameter range sug- gested in when all the emergent symmetries are kept. Finally, we also note that suggested that layer-dependent strain could lead to the observed Lan- dau level sequence near neutrality, although they did not perform an explicit calculation on this point. The mech- anism they considered, however, is different from the one discussed in the present work. In particular, in our model the C3 symmetry does not differentiate the two layers. Very recently studied the effects of such strain on the pairing structure of the superconductor in TBG but that work did not address the Landau fans which are our interest here. II. HOFSTADTER BUTTERFLY CALCULATIONS Our starting point is the single-valley continuum model for twisted bilayer graphene22,23. Let q ŌēĪ 4ŽĆ 3a╬Ė with a = 2.46 ├ģ being the lattice constant of monolayer graphene, and define the wave vectors q1 = ŌłÆq╦åy, q2 = q(sin 2ŽĆ 3 ╦åx ŌłÆ cos 2ŽĆ 3 ╦åy), and q3 = q(ŌłÆ sin 2ŽĆ 3 ╦åx ŌłÆ cos 2ŽĆ 3 ╦åy). The Hamiltonian is given by H = ’┐Į ─¦v(ŌłÆiŌłć + q3) ┬Ę ŽāŌłÆ╬Ė/2 T(r) T ŌĆĀ(r) ─¦v(ŌłÆiŌłć ŌłÆ q2) ┬Ę Žā╬Ė/2 ’┐Į (1) where ŽāŽå ŌēĪ eiŽåŽā3/2ŽāeŌłÆiŽåŽā3/2, T(r) = ’┐Į3 j=1 T jeŌłÆibj┬Ęr with T j = tM ’┐Į ╬▒ eŌłÆi 2ŽĆ 3 (jŌłÆ1) ei 2ŽĆ 3 (jŌłÆ1) ╬▒ ’┐Į , (2) and bj = qj ŌłÆ q1 are reciprocal lattice vectors for the moir├® potential. We use v = 106 m/s, tM meV23, and ╬▒ = 0.8 to incorporate the effect of lattice relaxation24. A perpendicular magnetic field can be incorporated by substituting ŌłÆiŌłć ’┐ĮŌåÆ ŌłÆiŌłć ŌłÆ eA/─¦, with the vector po- tential A = ŌłÆBy ╦åx in the Landau gauge. As in , the spectrum for non-zero B can be solved by first go- ing into a Landau level basis for two decoupled layers, and then re-expressing the inter-layer potential T(r) in this basis (more details can be found in Appendix A). In practice, in the numerical calculations we keep only finite Landau levels (typically several hundreds) close to the charge neutrality. Note that in the limit B ŌåÆ 0 an infinite number of Landau levels should to be kept, and so we only consider fields B > 1.2 T. Eq. (1) has all the effective symmetries of twisted bi- layer graphene. In the following, we will also consider the effect of symmetry breaking (at the single-particle level). In particular, we will set (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)T 1 = T 2 = T 3, such that ╬▓ ╠Ė= 0 controls the degree of C3 symmetry breaking. We will also introduce C2 symmetry breaking through HM = MtŽā3 ŌŖĢ MbŽā3, which corresponds to a staggered chemical potential that would be present if the coupling to the hBN substrate is significant. We focus on small twist angles ╬Ė > 1.1ŌŚ”, slightly away from the true magic angle of ╬Ė Ōēł 1.05ŌŚ”25, for the following reasons: (1) In the experiment, the four-fold degeneracy is observed in a large range of angles, including in devices where the correlated insulators and superconductors are not observed. For instance, the sequence ┬▒4, ┬▒8, ┬▒12, . . . has been seen in the device at 1.27ŌŚ” in under ambi- ent pressure. This suggests that the key physics leading to the four-fold degeneracy should be in effect over a rel- ative broad range of angles. (2) Due to the very small bandwidth exactly at the magic angle, the Landau level is not well-formed within our free-electron treatment, which complicates the analysis. 3 III. LANDAU FAN FOR THE SYMMETRIC CASE First, we show the results for the fully symmetric model, which retains the C3 and C2 symmetries. We will show that the Landau fan close to charge neutrality should have eight-fold degeneracy, in agreement with the experiments at twist angle ╬Ė = 1.8ŌŚ” but in disagreement with the results near the magic angle1,3. The spectrum is shown in Fig. 1. From neutrality, only Landau levels n = 0, ┬▒1, ┬▒2 are well-developed, and the higher levels are superseded by the Landau levels coming from the top and bottom of the active bands. In a semi-classical pic- ture, such blending of Landau levels occurs near the zero- field Van Hove singularity separating the equal-energy contours enclosing the two mini Dirac points from those enclosing the band extrema located at ╬ō. Importantly, each Landau level emanating from charge neutrality is eight-fold degenerate. This degeneracy can be explained by noting the doubling due to spin, valley and layer degrees of freedom. We remark that the layer index is not generally a good quantum number; however, as these low-lying Landau levels can be understood as coming from the mini Dirac points, there is still a two- fold degeneracy arising from the mini-valley degeneracy. In contrast, in the experiments the Landau fan is only four-fold degenerate at such small twist angles. and C3 symmetry. From neutrality, only n = 0, ┬▒1, ┬▒2 Landau levels can be resolved. Each of them is eight fold degenerate and the Landau fan sequence is ┬▒4, ┬▒12, ┬▒20. IV. LANDAU FAN WITH C3 BREAKING In this section, we consider the effect of C3 symmetry breaking by introducing an anisotropy ╬▓ such that (1 ŌłÆ ╬▓)T 1 = T 2 = T 3. We will not specify the physical origin of this anisotropy in this work. Our main purpose is to demonstrate that C3 breaking can qualitatively change the Landau fan sequence, and so long as a mean-field description remains valid, we expect our conclusions to hold even if the C3 breaking is interaction-driven. breaking parameter ╬▓ = 0.07. Compared to the C3 symmetric case, more Landau levels emerging from neutrality can be clearly resolved. Meanwhile, in the magnetic field B > 1.2 T, each Landau level is split into, each being four-fold degenerate. This leads to the Landan fan sequence ┬▒4, ┬▒8, ┬▒12, .... Ec is the energy of the first van-Hove singularity point discussed in Section IV. The Landau fan spectrum at ╬▓ = 0.07 is shown in Fig. 2. Compared to the C3 invariant case, there are several clear differences. First, more Landau levels from neutrality can be seen, suggesting that the Van-Hove sin- gularity is pushed further away from charge neutrality. Such shift of Van-Hove singularity has also been observed in STM experiment at neutrality14. Second, the previ- ously eight-fold degenerate Landau level is split into two groups when magnetic field is larger than a critical field Bc(n) for each Landau level n. Bc(n = 0) = 6 T and Bc(n = ┬▒1) = 1.2 T. For |n| Ōēź 2, Bc is smaller than the lowest field we can reach in the calculation. Later we will argue that Bc(n) Ōł╝ 1 |n|, which is confirmed for a smaller C3 breaking parameter ╬▓ = 0.01 in the Appendix. From the splitting of the Landau levels, one expects the Landau fan sequence ┬▒4, ┬▒8, ┬▒12, ... as observed in the experiments. This is confirmed in the Wannier plot in Fig. 3. Here we try to give a simple, qualitative explanation of the splitting of the eight-fold degenerate Landau level based on a semi-classical picture derived from the band structure at zero magnetic field. With C2 symmetry pre- served, the four-fold degeneracy from spin and valley is robust. In our numerics, we have explicitly checked that 4 (a) C3 Symmetric. (b) C3 breaking parameter ╬▓ = 0.07 ┬▒4, ┬▒8, ┬▒12, ..., is reproduced. (a) (c) (b) 0 0.07 -10 10 0 E (meV) 0 10 30 20 E (meV) ╬▓=0.07 ╬▓=0 ╬▓ Representative equal energy contours (not equally spaced) of the conduction band for ╬▓ = 0. The critical contour corresponding to the van Hove singularity is colored in red. The K and KŌĆ▓ points are indicated by white asterisks. (b) Same as (a) but with ╬▓ = 0.07. Note there are two critical contours. (c) Density of states in arbitrary units. The bright yellow regions indicate the Van Hove singularities flanking charge neutrality, which splits as ╬▓ is tuned away from 0. the splitting happens within each fixed spin-valley sector, and so for the discussion here we can focus on a fixed sec- tor. In the fully symmetric case (i.e., for ╬▓ = 0), there are two Dirac cones at the K and KŌĆ▓ points of the mini Brillouin zone (MBZ). At doping slightly above charge neutrality, the Fermi surface consists of independent elec- tron pockets, each enclosing one of the Dirac points (Fig. 4a). As discussed in the previous section, the Landau lev- els arising from such orbits exhibit a two-fold mini-valley degeneracy, which, when combined with valley and spin degeneracy, leads to eight-fold degenerate Landau levels. When the doping is increased beyond the Van Hove sin- gularity, the Fermi surface becomes a single hole pocket enclosing the ╬ō point, which leads to four-fold degener- ate Landau levels coming from the superlattice gap at the top of the active bands. Importantly, the breaking of the C3 symmetry unpins the Dirac cones from the K and KŌĆ▓ points and distorts the dispersion. Similar to before, at doping slightly above charge neutrality, the Fermi surface consists of two inde- pendent electron pockets, and one expects mini-valley degeneracy in the corresponding Landau levels. How- ever, at higher doping the mentioned distortion opens up the possibility of a new form of Fermi surface, which is electron-like and encloses both of the Dirac points (Fig. 4b). The corresponding Landau level would appear to emerge from charge neutrality, but would no longer show- case mini-valley degeneracy. In other words, the eight- fold degenerate Landau levels split. Equivalently, the emergence of such new form of Fermi surfaces can be seen from the splitting of the Van Hove singularity as ╬▓ increases (Fig. 4c). Such splitting from C3 symmetry breaking is also discussed in . Note that the pre- ceding discussion assumes ╬▓ Ōēź 0; while the Van Hove singularity still splits for negative values of ╬▓, the new equal energy contours are open orbits and do not lead to four-fold degenerate Landau levels in the semi-classical picture. Consistently, we find that the Landau levels do not split for ╬▓ < 0 (Appendix.B). As a complementary point of view, one can consider the Landau levels associated with the mini Dirac cones, 5 which have energies En = veff ŌłÜ 2e─¦nB for n Ōēź 0. In this picture, the lifting of the mini-valley degeneracy origi- nates from the hybridization between the two set of mini- Dirac Landau levels. Qualitatively, such hybridization is expected to become significant when En Ō¬å Ec17, where Ec denotes the energy of the first split Van Hove singu- larity arising from C3 breaking. As such, we expect the Landau level splitting to be observable for B Ōēź Bc(n) where Bc(n) ŌłØ 1/n. This trend is in qualitative agree- ment with the numerics shown in Fig. 2 and Appendix C. However, we caution that such a simple picture does not explain, for instance, the splitting of the zeroth Landau level shown in Fig. 2. V. LANDAU FAN WITH C2 BREAKING Recent experiments have seen signatures of C2 breaking4,5. A typical C2 breaking term is the staggered potential: HM = MtŽłŌĆĀ t ŽāzŽłt + MbŽłŌĆĀ bŽāzŽłb (3) where Mt, Mb is the staggered potential strength for top and bottom layer. Žā denotes Pauli matrices in the A, B sublattice subspace. If the sample is well-aligned with only the top h-BN substrate, one expects Mt ╠Ė= 0, Mb Ōēł 026,27. In this case, the zeroth Landau level is always split into four groups, each of which has only two-fold spin degeneracy (see Ap- pend. D). Therefore the first two Landau fan sequences are always ┬▒2, ┬▒4, which has indeed been observed in both Refs. 5 and 4. In this case, the activation gap for the ╬Į = 2 quantum Hall sequence is proportional to the magnitude of |Mt| ŌłÆ |Mb| and therefore is almost a con- stant when changing magnetic field. This feature may be a useful test for this scenario in the experiment. Note that the valley splitting for zeroth Landau level is from the valley-sublattice locking and should not be thought as a simple valley Zeeman coupling in the semi-classical pic- ture. To get a strong ╬Į = 2 sequence in the single particle level, we find it necessary to invoke a strong mirror reflec- tion breaking through a finite |Mt|ŌłÆ|Mb|. Therefore the sample in should also have a strong mirror reflec- tion symmetry breaking to explain the observed ╬Į = ┬▒2 sequence. The origin of the mirror reflection symmetry breaking is not clear because no obvious signature of hBN alignment is reported in . Next, we turn to the higher Landau levels. For |n| Ōēź 1 the valley splitting is quite small, as shown in Fig. 5. Without C3 breaking, the |n| Ōēź 1 Landau levels from mini K and KŌĆ▓ overlap with each other and therefore we still expect eight-fold degeneracy if C3 is a good symme- try. C3 breaking is necessary to get the observed four fold degeneracy in higher Landau levels. One example is illustrated in Fig. 5. In the above, we just assume the order parameters without asking about their origins. The simplest source to get Mt = M and Mb = 0 is just alignment with the top h-BN substrate. For spontaneous symmetry breaking, the most natural ansatz of spontaneous symmetry break- ing in Hartree Fock calculation is actually Mt = Mb28 and cannot reproduce the ╬Į = ┬▒2 sequence. It remains a question whether the C2, mirror reflection and C3 break- ings needed to match the Landau fan in are from external sources or from correlation effects. VI. DISCUSSION Since the first experiment on near magic angle twisted bilayer graphene, the Landau fan near neutrality have been a mystery. The observed 4-fold Landau fan is in striking contrast with the naive theoretical expectation of an 8-fold degeneracy which is also what is seen at larger twist angles. The 4-fold degeneracy is seen in devices that approach but need not be too close to magic angle. In this paper we have shown how to understand these obser- vations through explicit calculations of the Landau fan within the continuum model of the band structure. While there exist previous such calculations with mixed success in explaining the experiments, we find that a key ingre- dient is to include C3 symmetry breaking into the con- tinuum Hamiltonian. Upon approaching the magic angle the decreasing bandwidth (and the concomitant increase in density of states) leads to an amplified response of the electronic structure to a weak C3 breaking anisotropy. This makes it easier for the equal energy contours near the mini-Dirac points to touch and reconstruct. Beyond a low energy scale the equal energy contours then enclose both mini-Dirac points thereby reducing the Landau fan degeneracy from 8 to 4. We also consider the effect of C2 breaking. With this understanding let us now revisit the ex- perimental results on various devices. The samples in ŌĆō3 behave as a semimetal at neutrality, suggest- ing a good C2T symmetry. To explain the four fold de- generacy of Landau fan, we require the existence of C3 breaking, either from strain or from interaction driven symmetry breaking. Such C3 breaking has been seen in STM experiments14,29 on other near magic angle twisted bilayer graphene samples. The sample in is aligned with the h-BN substrate on one side. This leads to an explicit breaking of both C2 and the effective mirror (a 1800 rotation in 3d about an axis that is parallel to and bisects the 2 layers) sym- metries. The C2 breaking leads to to a gap at neutrality, consistent with the high resistivity observed at neutrality compared to the devices in ŌĆō3. Extensive Landau fan data is not available in though the reported Landau levels ┬▒2, ┬▒4 are reproduced by our analysis that takes into account both C2 and mirror breaking. In the recent study of , a number of additional features are reported. In contrast to ŌĆō3 but some- what similar to charge neutrality is insulating with a sizeable gap Ōēł 0.8 meV. Further, a Landau fan sequence ┬▒2, ┬▒4, ┬▒8, ...... is reported near neutrality. The insulat- 6 indicate states in the two microscopic valleys. With C3 breaking, the experimentally observed sequence4 ┬▒2, ┬▒4, ┬▒8, ┬▒12, ..., is reproduced. ing behavior at neutrality could be due to C2T breaking either from explicit alignment with at least one of the h- BN substrates, or spontaneously due to interactions30. In the observed Landau fan sequence near neutral- ity is ┬▒2, ┬▒4, ┬▒8, . . . . In our calculations if we further retain the effective mirror symmetry, then we are un- able to reproduce the observation of the ┬▒2 level. Thus we conclude that the mirror symmetry must be strongly broken. An additional C3 breaking is needed to further reduce the degeneracy of higher Landau levels to be four fold. Thus we think it likely that C2, C3 and effective mirror are broken in the device in . The C3 and C2 breaking that we have crucially invoked in understanding the Landau fan clearly sets the stage on which the other correlated phenomena happen. An immediate open question is whether it is an explicit or spontaneous symmetry breaking driven by interactions. We hope to study this in the future. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Z. Bi, Y. Cao, P. Jarillo-Herrero, D. Mao, M. Yankowitz, and M. P. Zaletel for helpful discussions. TS is supported by a US Department of Energy grant DE- SC0008739, and in part by a Simons Investigator award from the Simons Foundation. HCP is supported by a Pappalardo Fellowship at MIT and a Croucher Founda- tion Fellowship. 1 Y. Cao, V. Fatemi, A. Demir, S. Fang, S. L. Tomarken, J. Y. Luo, J. D. Sanchez-Yamagishi, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, E. Kaxiras, et al., Nature 556, 80 (2018). 2 Y. Cao, V. Fatemi, S. Fang, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, E. Kaxiras, and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Nature 556, 43 (2018). 3 M. Yankowitz, S. Chen, H. Polshyn, Y. Zhang, K. Watan- abe, T. Taniguchi, D. Graf, A. F. Young, and C. R. Dean, Science 363, 1059 (2019). 4 X. Lu, P. Stepanov, W. Yang, M. Xie, M. A. Aamir, I. Das, C. Urgell, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, G. Zhang, et al., arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.06513 (2019). 5 A. L. Sharpe, E. J. Fox, A. W. Barnard, J. Finney, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, M. A. Kastner, and D. Goldhaber-Gordon, arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.03520 6 G. Chen, L. Jiang, S. Wu, B. Lyu, H. Li, B. L. Chittari, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, Z. Shi, J. Jung, Y. Zhang, and F. Wang, Nature Physics 15, 237 (2019). 7 G. Chen, A. L. Sharpe, P. Gallagher, I. T. Rosen, E. Fox, L. Jiang, B. Lyu, H. Li, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, J. Jung, Z. Shi, D. Goldhaber-Gordon, Y. Zhang, and F. Wang, arXiv:1901.04621. 8 C. Shen, N. Li, S. Wang, Y. Zhao, J. Tang, J. Liu, J. Tian, Y. Chu, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, R. Yang, Z. Y. Meng, D. Shi, and G. Zhang, arXiv e-prints , arXiv:1903.06952 9 X. Liu, Z. Hao, E. Khalaf, J. Y. Lee, K. Watan- abe, T. Taniguchi, A. Vishwanath, and P. Kim, 10 Y. Cao, D. Rodan-Legrain, O. Rubies-Bigord├Ā, J. M. Park, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, and P. Jarillo-Herrero, 11 C2 refers to 180 degree spatial rotation and T to time reversal. 12 Y. Cao, J. Y. Luo, V. Fatemi, S. Fang, J. D. Sanchez- Yamagishi, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, E. Kaxiras, and 7 P. Jarillo-Herrero, Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 116804 (2016). 13 For instance, see supplementary data in on the 1.27ŌŚ” device (D2) at the ambient pressure of 0 GPa. 14 Y. Choi, J. Kemmer, Y. Peng, A. Thomson, H. Arora, R. Polski, Y. Zhang, H. Ren, J. Alicea, G. Refael, et al., arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.02997 (2019). 15 Z. Bi, N. F. Q. Yuan, and L. Fu, arXiv:1902.10146. 16 R. Bistritzer and A. H. MacDonald, Phys. Rev. B 84, 17 R. de Gail, M. O. Goerbig, F. Guinea, G. Montambaux, and A. H. Castro Neto, Phys. Rev. B 84, 045436 (2011). 18 P. Moon and M. Koshino, Phys. Rev. B 85, 195458 (2012). 19 B. Lian, F. Xie, and B. A. Bernevig, arXiv preprint 20 K. Hejazi, C. Liu, and L. Balents, arXiv:1903.11563. 21 F. Wu and S. Das Sarma, arXiv:1904.07875. 22 J. M. B. Lopes dos Santos, N. M. R. Peres, and A. H. Castro Neto, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 256802 (2007). 23 R. Bistritzer and A. H. MacDonald, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108, 12233 (2011). 24 M. Koshino, N. F. Yuan, T. Koretsune, M. Ochi, K. Kuroki, and L. Fu, Physical Review X 8, 031087 (2018). 25 Defined here as the angle at which the active band has a minimum band width, for the parameters we used. 26 Y.-H. Zhang, D. Mao, and T. Senthil, arXiv preprint 27 N. Bultinck, S. Chatterjee, and M. P. Zaletel, arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.08110 (2019). 28 M. Xie and A. H. MacDonald, arXiv preprint 29 A. Kerelsky, L. McGilly, D. M. Kennes, L. Xian, M. Yankowitz, S. Chen, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, J. Hone, C. Dean, et al., arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.08776 30 Alternately, it could be due to an interaction-driven inter- valley coherence order31. 31 H. C. Po, L. Zou, A. Vishwanath, and T. Senthil, Phys. Rev. X 8, 031089 (2018). Appendix A: Calculation of Hofstadter butterfly In this section we describe the procedure of our calculation of Hofstadter butterfly spectrum. The method we used is essentially the same as in . We first describe a general scheme for any graphene moir├® superlattice systems. Then calculation for the twisted bilayer graphene is straightforward. For moir├® system with large lattice constant, the two valleys always form separated spectrum and here we only treat valley + as an example. At zero magnetic field, a moir├® system is described by a continuum model: H = H0 + HM (A1) H0 is just the effective model for the valley: H0 = ’┐Į k h╬▒╬▓(k)f ŌĆĀ ╬▒(k)f╬▓(k) (A2) where ╬▒, ╬▓ is the combination of layer and sublattice index. The HM is the moir├® hopping or superlattice potential term. It involves the scattering of momentum from k to k + GM, where GM is the reciprocal vector of the small mini Brillouin zon (MBZ) folded by HM. A general HM term looks like HM = ’┐Į k ’┐Į Qj T╬▒╬▓(Qj)f ŌĆĀ ╬▒(k)f╬▓(k + Qj) (A3) When the moire├® superlattice is formed by twisting two layers, the momenta of the Dirac cones (or more general band crossing points) from the two layers are different. Here we follow the notation of and define the momentum k in Žł╬▒(k) as the momentum relative to the Dirac point in the corresponding layer fixed by ╬▒. In this convention Qj does not belong to the reciprocal vector of the MBZ. The key idea to calculate the spectrum under magnetic field is the following. We first ignore HM and add magnetic field to H0. We can easily get the new eigenstate in the Landau level basis. Then we express HM in the Landau level basis, which generically mix different Landau levels. Numerically we can still solve the resulting Hamiltonian and get the spectrum. First let us solve H0 plus magnetic field. The Hamiltonian is labeled by dynamical momenta ŽĆx = px ŌłÆ eAx and ŽĆy = py ŌłÆ eAy with the commutation relation: [ŽĆx, ŽĆy] = i 1 l2 B (A4) where l2 B = ─¦ eB . 8 We can define guiding center coordinates Rx = x + l2 BŽĆy and Ry = y ŌłÆ l2 BŽĆx with commutation relation: [Rx, Ry] = ŌłÆil2 B (A5) We also have [ŽĆa, Rb] = 0. ŽĆa generates the Landau level index n and Ra generates the orbital within each Landau level. Define the ladder operator: a = lB ŌłÜ 2(ŽĆx + iŽĆy) aŌĆĀ = lB ŌłÜ 2(ŽĆx ŌłÆ iŽĆy) (A6) One can easily check that [a, aŌĆĀ] = 1. Therefore a can be viewed as an annihilation operator. Landau level n eigenstate satisfy: a |nŌ¤® = ŌłÜn |nŌ¤® (A7) We use the Landau gauge: A = (ŌłÆBy, 0), then Rx = x + pyl2 B and Ry = ŌłÆpxl2 B. We can use Ry = ŌłÆpxl2 B to label the basis of each Landau level. Each basis is then labeled by Landau level index n and kx. We label the funciton Žån,kx(y) as the wavefunction in the real space for the basis |n, kxŌ¤®. The corresponding annihilation operator is labeled as Žł╬▒;n,kx, where ╬▒ = A1, B1, A2, B2 is the sublattice index. The continuum model can be written in terms of the operator f╬▒;kx,ky, which is related to Žł through f╬▒;kx,ky = ’┐Į n ╠āŽån,kx(ky)Žł╬▒;n,kx (A8) where ╠āŽån,kx(ky) is the Fourier transformation of Žån,kx(y) with respect to y. We have the following translation property: Žån,kx(y) = Žån,0(y + kxl2 B) ╠āŽån,kx(ky) = ╠āŽån,0(ky)eikxkyl2 B (A9) H0 can be expressed in the following form H0 = ’┐Į kx ’┐Į nm;╬▒╬▓ ŽłŌĆĀ ╬▒;n,kxh╬▒╬▓;nmŽł╬▓;m,kx (A10) Here kx is defined in the whole range of R = [ŌłÆŌł×, Ōł×]. In the graphene problem, hnm is usually very simple. For example, in monolayer graphene, it is just an off diagonal term from B, n to A, n + 1. HM generically scatters momentum. In terms of Žł╬▒;n,kx, HM in Eq. A3 can be rewritten as HM = ’┐Į kx ’┐Į Q ’┐Į nm T╬▒╬▓(Q)Fnm;kx(Q)ŽłŌĆĀ ╬▒;n;kxŽł╬▓;m;kx+Qx (A11) where Fnm;kx(Q) = ’┐Į ky ╠āŽåŌłŚ n,kx(ky) ╠āŽåm,kx+Qx(ky + Qy) = F 0 nm(Q)ei(kxQy+ 1 2 QxQy)l2 B (A12) where we have used Eq. A9. We have F 0 nm(Q) = ’┐Į ky ╠āŽåŌłŚ n,0(ky) ╠āŽåm,0(ky + Qy)eikyQxl2 Be i 2 QxQyl2 B = ’┐Į m! n! (zx + izy)nŌłÆmeŌłÆ |z|2 2 LnŌłÆm m (A13) 9 where (zx, zy) = 1 ŌłÜ 2(Qx, Qy). Ln m(z) is the associated laguerre polynomials. If we view kx = k0 x + xŌłå with x Ōłł Z as site in a 1D chain, Eq. A11 is basically a hopping term in this 1D chain. The lattice constant is Ōłå = Qx for the smallest non-zero Qx. Here ╬▒, n is just the orbital label of each site labeled by kx. At each site kx, the hopping term t(kx) = Fnm;kx(Qx) is a function of the site kx. Generically we have a quasi-periodic 1D model because t(x) Ōł╝ eikxQyl2 B Ōł╝ eiQxQyl2 Bx is oscillating according to Eq. A12. With the commensurate condition ŌłåQyl2 B = 2ŽĆ q p, we have a unit cell with p sites. Then we can solve the model with good quantum number k1 = k0 x Ōłł [0, Ōłå] and k2 Ōłł [ŌłÆ ŽĆ p , ŽĆ p ] as the crystal momentum of this 1D chain. For TBG, the corresponding flux per moir├® unit cell is ╬” = 2ŽĆ 6 p q h e2 . Now we apply the above general scheme to the TBG. We keep M Landau levels. Typical M is several hundreds. For the flux corresponding to ╬” = 2ŽĆ 6 p q h e2 , we can construct a 4pM matrix for H0 + HM corresponding to each fixed (k1, k2). We use f╬▒,n,j(k1, k2) to label the state with momentum k2 in the 1D chain fixed by k1. j = 1, 2, ..., p is the sublattice index for each unit cell. The Hamiltonian corresponding to H0 is: H0 = ŌłÆ ŌłÜ 2Žģ lB ’┐Į k ’┐Į n=0,1,...M ’┐Į ei ╬Ė 2 ŌłÜ n + 1f ŌĆĀ A1;n+1;j(k)fB1;n;j(k) + h.c. + eŌłÆi ╬Ė 2 ŌłÜ n + 1f ŌĆĀ A2;n+1;j(k)fB2;n;j(k) + h.c. ’┐Į + ’┐Į k ’┐Į n Mt(f ŌĆĀ A1;n,j(k)fA1;n,j(k) ŌłÆ f ŌĆĀ B1;n,j(k)fB1;n,j(k)) + ’┐Į k ’┐Į n Mb(f ŌĆĀ A2;n,j(k)fA2;n,j(k) ŌłÆ f ŌĆĀ B2;n,j(k)fB2;n,j(k)) (A14) Note that here k = (k1, k2) is just a label of the eigenstate of the 1D chain. It is not the true 2D momentum. For TBG, HM is HM = ’┐Į k ’┐Į nm ’┐Į F 0 nm(Q0)eik0 xQj yl2 BeiŌłåQj yl2 Bj + ’┐Į j=1,2 eik2F 0 nm(Qj)ei(k0 xQj y+ 1 2 Qj xQj y)l2 BeiŌłåQj yl2 Bj’┐Į f ŌĆĀ ╬▒;n;j(k)T j ╬▒╬▓f╬▓;m;j(k) (A15) where T j ╬▒╬▓ is the inter-layer moir├® hopping matrix. We have T j tb = T jŌĆĀ bt = T j. Here t, b means top and bottom layer. The momentum transfer is Q1 = (0, 4ŽĆ 3aM ), Q2 = (ŌłÆ 2ŽĆ ŌłÜ 3aM , ŌłÆ 2ŽĆ 3aM ) and Q3 = ( 2ŽĆ ŌłÜ 3aM , ŌłÆ 2ŽĆ 3aM ). T j = tM ’┐Į ╬▒ eŌłÆiŽå(jŌłÆ1) eiŽå(jŌłÆ1) ╬▒ ’┐Į (A16) where Žå = 2ŽĆ 3 . ╬▒ Ōēż 1 is a parameter to incorporate lattice relaxation. We use ╬▒ = 0.8 in our calculation. Appendix B: Landau levels when ╬▓ < 0 In the main text we show that a C3 breaking with ╬▓ > 0 can reduce the degeneracy to four fold. Here we discuss the case with ╬▓ < 0. As is shown in Fig. 6, each Landau level from the charge neutrality is still eight fold degenerate for ╬▓ < 0. This implies that very specific form of C3 is required to explain the experimental result of four fold degenerate Landau fan. Appendix C: Landau fan at larger twist angle For ╬Ė = 1.24ŌŚ”, the spectrum and the Wannier plots are shown in Fig. 7 and Fig. 8. Clearly even at this larger angle C3 breaking can lead to four fold degenerate Landau fan at finite magnetic field, even though the band width is as large as 40 meV here. 10 In contrast to positive ╬▓, there is no splitting of the Landau levels and the Landau fan is eight fold degenerate. (a) C3 symmetric (b) C3 breaking parameter ╬▓ = 0.03 (c) C3 breaking parameter ╬▓ = 0.07 For ╬▓ = 0.07, one can see obvious splitting of |n| Ōēź 1 Landau levels when energy is larger than 8 meV. Correspondingly, the splitting happens above a critical magnetic field Bc(n = 1) Ōēł 1.2 T and Bc(n = 2) Ōēł 2.4 T. They satisfy the scaling Bc(n) Ōł╝ 1 |n| derived from semiclassical picture in the main text. Appendix D: Landau Fan with C2 Breaking Recent experiments have seen signatures of C2 breaking4,5. A typical C2 breaking term is just the staggered potential: HC2 = MtŽłŌĆĀ t ŽāzŽłt + MbŽłŌĆĀ bŽāzŽłb (D1) where Mt, Mb is the staggered potential strength for top and bottom layer. Žā is a Pauli matrix in the A, B sublattice subspace. For C2 breaking coming from alignment with the top (bottom) h-BN layer, we have Mt = M, Mb = 0 (Mt = 0, Mb = M). For C2 breaking from spontaneous symmetry breaking, a natural choice is Mt = Mb = M 28. Alignment with both top and bottom h-BN layers also gives this term. In the following we discuss the Landau fan close to neutrality from the above two different C2 breaking ansatz. 1. Zeroth Landau levels We start from the n = 0 Landau level with an emphasis on the observed ╬Į = ┬▒2 sequence4,5. When C2 is preserved, there are two Dirac cones at K and KŌĆ▓ of the MBZ for each spin-valley sector. 11 (a) C3 symmetric (b) C3 breaking parameter ╬▓ = 0.03 (c) C3 breaking parameter ╬▓ = 0.07 can still see the sequence n = ┬▒8╬” at magnetic field B > 2.5 T. Let us suppress the spin index. For the Dirac cone at K (or KŌĆ▓) of valley a = ┬▒, we can write a 2 ├Ś 2 effective model: Heff = ’┐Į k ŽłŌĆĀ(k) ’┐Į MK,KŌĆ▓ Žģeff(kx Ōłō iky) Žģeff(kx ┬▒ iky) ŌłÆMK,KŌĆ▓ ’┐Į Žł(k) (D2) where Žł(k) is a two component spinor. Note that the pseudospin basis of Žł(k) is a mixture of the sublattice and layer. Let us make Mt = Mb = 0 first. Now we add magnetic field and get four zeroth Landau levels formed by (┬▒, K/KŌĆ▓) for each spin sector. In total the zeroth Landau level has eight fold degeneracy. Next we treat Mt and Mb as small perturbation and add them on this eight fold degenerate n = 0 Landau level subspace. For the zeroth Landau level, it is well known that the pseudospin is polarized and locked to the valley. The +, K and +, KŌĆ▓ eighenstate only contains Žł1 component while the ŌłÆK and ŌłÆKŌĆ▓ eigenstate only contains the component Žł2. Because of this special property, MK and MKŌĆ▓ (resulting from Mt and Mb) just shift the energy of the zeroth Landau level from (┬▒, K) ((┬▒, KŌĆ▓)) by a constant energy ┬▒MK (┬▒MKŌĆ▓). The final result is that we have four groups of n = 0 Landau levels: two groups from valley ŌłÆ at energy ŌłÆMK and ŌłÆMKŌĆ▓, two groups from valley + at energy MKŌĆ▓ and MK. This is clearly shown in Fig. 9. For Mt = 5 meV, Mb = 0, each of the four groups only has two fold spin degeneracy. There should be a ╬Į = ┬▒2 Quantum Hall sequence with the activation gap almost constant with the magnetic field. For |Mt| Ōēł |Mb|, we have |MK| Ōēł |MKŌĆ▓|. Therefore there are only two groups of n = 0 Landau levels. In this case the ╬Į = ┬▒2 quantum Hall sequence should be quite weak or even absent without invoking interaction effects. 12 (a) Mt = 5 meV, Mb = 0 (b) Mt = 5 meV, Mb = 4 meV indicate states in the two microscopic valleys. The zeroth Landau levels are split to four or two groups and do not disperse with magnetic field up to 8 Tesla. For the second plot with a small |Mt| ŌłÆ |Mb|, the splitting between K and KŌĆ▓ state within each valley is very small. In this case, the ╬Į = ┬▒2 quantum Hall sequence should be absent without invoking interaction effects. 2. Higher Landau Levels For higher Landau levels, observe four fold degeneracy. Here we try to give an explanation with C2 breaking ansatz. With C2 breaking, the only exact degeneracy at finite magnetic field is the two fold spin degeneracy (we ignore the small spin Zeeman coupling). However, for n Ōēź 1, the valley splitting is quite weak, as shown in Fig. 9. For Mt = 5 meV and Mb = 0, the mirror reflection is strongly broken. However, the n Ōēź 1 Landau levels from K and KŌĆ▓ for each valley still overlap with each other. Therefore the n Ōēź 1 Landau levels have eight fold degeneracy as long as C3 is not broken. With C3 breaking, the Landau levels from K and KŌĆ▓ will couple with each other and reduce the degeneracy to four fold, as discussed for C2 symmetric case. We show the Wannier plots for several cases in Fig. 10. One can see that the ansatz with Mt = Mb can not give the ╬Į = ┬▒2 quantum Hall sequence regardless of whether C3 is broken. The only ansatz which can reproduce the sequence ┬▒2, ┬▒4, ┬▒8, ┬▒12, ... in is the one shown in Fig. 5 in the main text. (a) Mt = 5 meV, Mb = 0; C3 symmetric (b) Mt = Mb = 5 meV; C3 symmetric (c) Mt = Mb = 5 meV; C3 breaking pa- rameter ╬▓ = 0.03. the Landau fan sequence ┬▒2, ┬▒4, ┬▒8, ┬▒12, ... in .