1 Designable spectrometer-free index sensing using plasmonic Dop- pler gratings Fan-Cheng Lin,†,# Kel-Meng See,†,# Lei Ouyang,‡,§ You-Xin Huang,† Yi-Ju Chen,‡ Jürgen Popp‡,§ and Jer-Shing Huang*,†,‡,⊥,∥ †Department of Chemistry, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan ‡Leibniz Institute of Photonic Technology, Albert-Einstein Straße 9, D-07745 Jena, Germany §Institute of Physical Chemistry and Abbe Center of Photonics, Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena, Helmholtzweg 4, D-07743 Jena, Germany ⊥Research Center for Applied Sciences, Academia Sinica, 128 Sec. 2, Academia Road, Nankang District, Taipei 11529, Taiwan ∥Department of Electrophysics, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu 30010, Taiwan ABSTRACT: Typical nanoparticle-based plasmonic index sensors detect the spectral shift of localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) upon the change of environmental index. Therefore, they require broadband illumination and spec- trometers. The sensitivity and flexibility of nanoparticle-based index sensors are usually limited because LSPR peaks are usually broad and the spectral position cannot be freely designed. Here, we present a fully designable index sensing plat- form using plasmonic Doppler gratings (PDGs), which provide broadband and azimuthal angle dependent grating perio- dicity. Different from LSPR sensors, PDG index sensors are based on the momentum matching between photons and sur- face plasmons via the lattice momentum of the grating. Therefore, index change is translated into the variation of in- plane azimuthal angle for photon-to-plasmon coupling, which manifests as directly observable dark bands in the reflec- tion image. The PDG can be freely designed to optimally match the range of index variation for specific applications. In this work, we demonstrate PDG index sensors for large (n = 1.00~1.52) and small index variation (n = 1.3330~1.3650). The tiny and nonlinear index change of water-ethanol mixture has been clearly observed and accurately quantified. Since the PDG is a dispersive device, it enables on-site and single-color index sensing without a spectrometer and provides a prom- ising spectroscopic platform for on-chip analytical applications. Introduction Plasmonic nanoparticle-based sensors have attracted tremendous attention.1-4 The working principle is based on detecting the spectral shift of the localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR). Since LSPR is determined by the particle shape, materials and the surrounding medium5, 6, the change in the environmen- tal index can be quantified by measuring the spectral shift of LSPR. This kind of nanoparticle-based plasmonic sensors has found many applications, including heavy metal pollutant detection7, 8 , hydrogen sensing9, 10, dise- ase diagnosis11, 12, chemical reaction monitoring13, 14 and index sensing15, 16. However, the sensitivity of nanoparti- cle index sensors based on LSPR is typically limited by the broad bandwidth of the LSPR peaks, which is mainly due to the intrinsically low quality factor of plasmonic resonator.17 To have reasonable sensitivity, LSPR based index sensors either require very large spectral shift upon particle aggregation7, 18, 19 or rely on sharp spectral fea- tures, e.g. the steep edge of Fano-like resonance of spe- cially engineered nanostructures.20-22 Moreover, the LSPR of single nanoparticles cannot be freely designed because LSPR is an intrinsic property of the nanoparticle. There- fore, the sensitivity, i.e. the spectral shift per refractive index unit (RIU), can hardly be optimally tuned for dif- ferent applications. From experimental point of view, the major drawback of LSPR based index sensors is that they require broadband illumination and a spectrometer to perform spectroscopic analysis. Although there are col- orimetric sensors developed for bare-eye detection, they are more suitable for qualitative analysis 23-25 rather than quantitative one, for which high-performance spectrom- eters are still necessary to detect the small shift of the broad LSPR peaks. To address these issues, we propose using a plasmonic Doppler grating (PDG) as a designable index sensor, which is capable of on-site, single-color and spectrome- ter-free sensing. The working principle of PDGs is based on the coupling between free-space photon and surface plasmons (SPs) via the azimuthal angle dependent grat- ings, instead of LSPR. Typically, direct excitation of SPs by free space photons is not possible because SPs possess larger in-plane momentum than the corresponding pho- 2 tons. Several schemes have been developed to excite SPs at metal/dielectric boundaries, including Kretschmann- and Otto-configurations26,27, nonlinear wave-mixing28, 29 and metallic gratings30-32. Among these strategies, metal- lic gratings have been extensively used and investigated because of their simplicity and well understood coupling mechanism.32-37 A grating can effectively excite SPs be- cause it provides lattice momentum to fulfill the mo- mentum conservation condition (Fig. 1a)30 2π λ0 nd sin α + 2mπ P = ± 2π λ0 √ εm∙nd 2 εm+nd 2 . (1) Here, α is the incident angle, 0 is the vacuum wave- length of the incident light, ɛm is the permittivity of ma- terial, P is the periodicity of the grating, nd is the refrac- tive index of the surrounding dielectric medium and m is the resonant order. Eq. (1) is the base of index sensing using plasmonic gratings as it links the refractive index of the surrounding medium (nd) to the grating periodici- ty (P). Metallic gratings have been used for index sens- ing.38-40 Recently, chirped gratings have been demon- strated to offer continuously varying periods in one di- rection.41-43 As described in our previous work,30 our Doppler grating design also provides continuously vary- ing periodicity depending on the azimuthal angle. The azimuthal angle dependent grating periodicity can be calculated by Eq. (2) Here, φ is the in-plane azimuthal angle, at which free space photons effectively excite SPs. ∆r is the radius in- crement and d is the displacement of the ring center. They are the two most important design parameters for a PDG because they determine the span and the central wavelength of the spectral window. By choosing these two design parameters, a PDG can be easily designed for optimal sensing performance for large index change or small index change. Inserting Eq. (2) into (1), the cou- pling wavelength can be expressed as λ0 = ±dcos φ+√(d2 cos 2φ+2∆r2−d2)/2 m (√ εm∙nd 2 εm+nd 2 − nd sin α). (3) Equation (3) links the refractive index of the surrounding medium (nd) to the in-plane azimuthal angle (φ) for PDG index sensing. For a well-designed PDG structure (fixed ∆r, d and εm) illuminated by single-color light source impinging at a specific incident angle (fixed λ0 and α), photon-to-plasmon coupling only happens effec- tively along specific azimuthal angles determined by the refractive index of surrounding medium. One unique feature of PDGs is that they offer varying periodicity chirped in the tangential direction perpendicular to the grating’s wave vector, whereas linear chirped gratings provide varying periodicity chirped in the direction par- allel to the grating’s wave vector. Therefore, spectral dis- persion due to conventional grating effect and the perio- dicity chirp can be unambiguously separated by PDGs but not by linear chirped gratings. Also, PDGs provide larger number of grooves for each periodicity than linear chirped gratings and thus better grating efficiency. In an experiment, the change of the in-coupling azimuthal angle can be easily observed because photon-to-plasmon coupling would manifest as dark bands in the reflection images. In the following, we demonstrate index sensing with reflection type PDGs (Fig. 1b) optimally designed for large range (nd = 1.00 to 1.52) and small range (nd = 1.3330 to 1.3650) index sensing. Experimental results are verified with the analytical model described by Eq. (3) . coupling via plasmonic grating. The momentum matching condition described in Eq. (1) governs the excitation of SPs, which can propagate into opposite directions depending on the resonance order m. (b) A schematic showing the struc- ture of reflection type PDG index sensor and the configura- tion of optical characterization. (c) SEM image of a PDG fabricated on the surface of a single-crystalline gold flake (∆r = 500 nm, d = 140 nm) for large range index sensing. The scale bar is 2.5 m. (d) Optical setup for near-normal inci- dent reflection imaging. Method and materials Nanofabrication PDGs were fabricated by applying gal- lium focused-ion beam (FIB) milling (Helios Nanolab 600i System, FEI Company) to create grooves on the sur- face of chemically grown ultrasmooth single-crystalline gold flakes30, 44 on a cover glass coated with an indium- tin oxide (ITO) transparent conductive layer (Fig. 1b). The ITO layer (thickness = 40 nm) helps avoid charging effect during FIB milling and scanning electron micro- scope (SEM) imaging. The beam current and the acceler- ation voltage of the FIB are 2.1 pA and 30 kV, respectively. The flakes are chemically stable and grain boundary free, making them an ideal substrate for the fabrication of high-definition plasmonic nanostructures.30, 44, 45 The ultrasmooth surface of the flakes is important because it greatly suppresses the background noise from the scat- tering of SPs by surface roughness. This enhances the signal-to-noise ratio of the reflection images and facili- tates the quantitative analysis of intensity angle distribu- tion. Since the targeted media only approach the PDG from one side, only shallow PDG grooves (depth < 100 nm) were fabricated by FIB on the surface of thick gold flakes (thickness > 5 μm). Figure 1c shows the SEM image of the PDG for wide refractive index sensing (nd = 1.00 to 1.52). If thin gold flakes were used (thickness< 200 nm), FIB could mill through the flakes and create PDGs on both metal/dielectric interfaces, i.e. medium/gold and gold/substrate. This would allow photon-to-plasmon coupling on both interfaces and enable more functionali- 3 ties, with the cost of more difficulty in quantitative anal- ysis.30, 34 Optical measurement The reflection images of the fab- ricated PDGs were recorded by a home-made optical microscope. Figure 1b illustrates the optical characteriza- tion in reflection mode. The incident illumination is a near-normally incident white light. Since plasmonic grat- ings best respond to incident light with polarization per- pendicular to the grating grooves, radially polarized light would be ideal for illumination. This requires, however, the center of the radially polarized illumination to be well aligned to the center of the zeroth ring of the PDG. Misalignment can lead to distortion of the scattering intensity distribution and lead to systematic bias. In this work, we have used unpolarized plane-wave illumination to reduce the complexity of optics and alignment. This is advantageous to practical applications of PDGs. The price to pay is the increase of background noise due to the reflection of light with unwanted polarization. Nev- ertheless, the intensity contrast due to photon-to- plasmon coupling is large enough to clearly reveal the position of dark bands for further quantitative analysis on the intensity angle profiles (Fig. 2a). Possible elliptici- ty of the unpolarized illumination introduced by optics in the illumination beam path has been taken into con- sideration by the polarization parameter η in the fitting formula (Supporting Information). The reflection image is collected by an air objective with low magnification (20) and small numerical aperture (NA = 0.4), as shown in Figure 1d. Various transparent immersion media with different refractive indexes were introduced onto the surface of PDG and covered by a second cover glass. The used media include air (nd = 1.00), water (nd = 1.33), etha- nol (nd = 1.36), tert-butanol (nd = 1.39), ethylene glycol (nd = 1.43) and microscope index matching oil (nd = 1.52). For large range index sensing (nd = 1.00 ~ 1.52), bandpass filters with 40 nm bandwidth (FKB-VIS-40, Thorlabs) were used to obtain narrow-band illumination centered at 550 nm and 650 nm. For small range index sensing on water-ethanol mixtures (nd = 1.3330~1.3650), a 632.8 nm laser line filter was used (bandwidth = 3 nm, FL632.8-3, Thorlabs). To avoid contamination from residual immer- sion media, after each immersion and sensing process, the PDGs were rinsed with ethanol and deionized water and blown dry with clean pressurized nitrogen. Results and discussions The angle distribution of grating periodicity and thus the sensitivity can be freely designed by choosing suitable ∆r and d. From azimuthal angle 0 to 180, the periodicity changes continuously from the maximum ∆r + d to the minimum ∆r − d. For example, for large index change (nd = 1.00 to 1.52), the PDG has been designed to possess grating periodicity from 360 nm to 640 nm by choosing ∆r = 500 nm and d = 140 nm. For sensing the small index variation of the water-ethanol mixture (nd = 1.3330 to 1.3650), the PDG has been designed to “zoom-in” to this range by choosing ∆r = 390 nm and d = 40 nm. The pos- sibility to freely design and optimize the sensitivity for specific applications makes PDG a convenient and unique index sensing platform. sensor optimized for large index change. Under the cov- erage of six different dielectric media, the surrounding refractive index changes from 1.00 to 1.52. As can be seen in the full-color images (left column in Fig. 2a), the color distribution changes with the index. The colors seen in the reflection images are indeed complementary to those coupled into surface plasmons.30 Therefore, with a band- pass color filter, the SP resonances would manifest themselves as dark bands in the reflection images. For example, in the color images taken with the red filter at 650 nm (middle column in Fig. 2a), dark bands due to SP resonances with m= -1 are clearly observed for refractive index up to 1.43. For index matching oil (nd = 1.52), the SP mode with m= -1 is no longer observable and the dark bands from the SP modes with m= +1 and m= -2 emerge. If a green filter centered at 550 nm is used, the m = -1 mode observed for the case of air (nd = 1.00) rapidly moves out of the range of PDG as the index increases and the dark band due to m = -2 resonance emerges and changes its in-coupling azimuthal angle with increasing refractive index (right column in Fig. 2a). The averaged intensities at each azimuthal angle (angle resolution: 0.2°) were plotted in Fig. 2b. Using our previously developed algorithm30, the intensity angle distribution can be fitted and the azimuthal angle of the SP resonances for differ- ent environmental refractive indexes can be quantita- tively determined. Details of the reflection image analy- sis, fitting procedure and fitting parameters can be found in the Supporting Information. Figure 2b shows the ex- perimentally observed (dots) and fitted (lines) angle dis- tributions at 650 nm and 550 nm. With the fitting, the azimuthal angles of the dark bands (m = -1 resonance at 650 nm) can be quantitatively determined. Since PDG is symmetric about the horizontal line (φ = 0), each mode results in two dark bands, one in the upper and the other in the lower half of the PDG. This allows us to define our analytical signal as the “open angle” between the two dark bands of the same mode. The open angles obtained from the fitted azimuthal angles of the two peaks are 346.0±0.38 for surrounding index of 1.00, 1.33, 1.36, 1.39 and 1.43, respectively. Complete data of the evaluated open angles and the corresponding uncertainties can be found in the Supporting Information. It is important to note that the open angle is not a linear function of the index. Therefore, typically used figure of merit, angle changed per RIU, is not suitable for PDG index sensors. In fact, the sensitivity of PDG index sensors is fully de- sign dependent. This makes PDG index sensors unique and advantageous compared to common plasmonic in- dex sensors, such as films or plasmonic nanoparticles. In addition, the spread of the in-coupling angle is also de- termined by the intrinsic bandwidth of photon-to- plasmon coupling via gratings, which is mainly due to the polarization of the illumination relative to the grat- ing direction, the loss of surface plasmon, and the band- 4 width of illumination and the finite illumination and collection angle.30 These factors have been included in the analytical model to fit the intensity profiles in Fig. 2b. By plotting the open angle (2φ) between the two sym- metric SP resonance bands (upper panel of Fig. 3a) as a function of the refractive index, calibration curves for quantitative analysis were established. Figure 3b shows the experimental data together with the calibration curves obtained from analytical model for three different grating orders (-2, -1 and +1) at two wavelengths (550 nm and 650 nm). With the wavelengths and grating orders fixed, Eq. (3) describes the relationship between the in- coupling azimuthal angle and the surrounding refractive index. This provides the basis for the analytical predic- tion of the open angle as a function of the surrounding index. The shaded areas in Fig. 3b mark the ranges of the in-coupling azimuthal angles due to the 40 nm band- width of the illumination determined by the bandpass filters. Detailed information about the analytical model can be found in the Supporting Information. The exper- imental results are in good agreement with the theoreti- cal prediction. Reflection images of the PDG index sensor illuminated by a nearly normal incident white light without any filter (left column) and with bandpass filters centered at 650 nm (middle column) and 550 nm (right column). Shown from the top to the bottom rows are the reflection images of a PDG covered with air (nd = 1.00), water (nd = 1.33), ethanol 1.43) and microscope index matching oil (nd = 1.52). The dashed lines mark the positions of the SP resonance dark bands and the position of the 0° reference. (b) Reflection intensity profiles obtained with the 650 nm (left) and 550 nm (right) bandpass filters. Solid lines are obtained from fitting the experimental data with the analytical model based on Fano resonance model. Similar to other grating-based sensing platforms, PDGs offer different SP resonances at different colors with dif- ferent slopes for index sensing. This grants additional flexibility for applications. Since the slope of a calibra- tion curve means sensitivity, one single PDG simultane- ously provides various sensitivities for the user to choose. For example, SP modes with small slopes are suitable for applications involving large index change or broad spec- tral range. SP modes with large slopes are sensitive to small range index sensing. The users can easily choose the SP modes by changing the color of the illumination using bandpass filters. Overall, the PDG reports the vari- ation of the surrounding refractive index as the change in azimuthal angle of the dark bands due to photon-to- plasmon coupling, similar to the pointer in a speedome- ter and enabling easy and direct evaluation of the sur- rounding index without spectrometer. nance with m = -1 at 650 nm (top panel) and m = -2 at 550 nm (bottom panel) at various environmental indexes. The blue dashed double arrows marks the open angle defined for analytical calibration curves. (b) Calibration curves showing the dependence of the open angle on the surround- ing refractive index. Red open dots, red solid dots and green open dots are experimental data of the in-coupling angle of the SP resonance with m = -1 at 650 nm, m = +1 at 650 nm and m = -2 at 550 nm, respectively. Red solid, red dashed and green solid curves are the corresponding results pre- dicted by the analytical model based on Eq. (3). Shaded are- as along the curves are the analytically predicted deviation due to the 40 nm bandwidth of the bandpass filter. Finally, we show that a PDG can be easily designed and optimized for quantitative analysis of a tiny index change. Here, the tiny and nonlinear index change due to the formation of hydrogen bonds in water-ethanol mixture was used as the model system. When water (nd = 1.3330) and ethanol (nd = 1.3615) are mixed, the refractive index of the mixture solution can go up to nd = 1.3650, exceed- ing that of pure ethanol. This is due to the intermolecu- lar interaction between water and ethanol molecules. The nonlinear refractive index change has been broadly used to evaluate the density of the water-ethanol mix- ture and to indicate their mixing ratio.46 The peculiar enhancement of the refractive index is very small and is difficult to be directly observed by standard plasmonic 5 index sensing platforms. By using specially designed PDG with high sensitivity for tiny index change, it is pos- sible to resolve and follow the index change of the mix- ture of ethanol and water between 1.3330 and 1.3650 and clearly observe the peculiar index enhancement. To resolve the small index change as a function of molar ratio of ethanol (χEtOH), the PDG index sensor has been designed to have a radius increment ∆r = 390 nm and a displacement of center d = 40 nm. The choice of these parameters allows the PDG index sensor to have best sensitivity within the range of index variation between 1.3330 and 1.3650. The analytical performance of a PDG with a slightly different design (∆r = 390 nm, d = 20 nm) is also provided in the Supporting Information for refer- ence. To enhance the sensitivity, a laser line filter cen- tered at 632.8 nm with a bandwidth of 3 nm is used to produce narrow band illumination. Figure 4a shows the raw reflection images of the same PDG in contact with a series of water-ethanol mixture. Dark bands are clearly observed at different azimuthal angles depending on the molar ratio of ethanol (χEtOH). By fitting the intensity angle distribution profiles (Fig. 4b), the azimuthal angle of SP resonances and the index of each mixture solution can be precisely quantified. The indexes obtained from PDG are plotted in Fig. 4c together with experimental data from previous works using refractometer-based methods. The agreement is very good and the peculiar index enhancement due to hydrogen bonds around χEtOH=0.5, i.e. the index of the mixture exceeds that of pure ethanol, is also clearly observed. 46-48 Table 1 sum- marizes the obtained indexes with errors obtained in this work and compares it with the data from . This example demonstrates PDG’s ability to “zoom in” to a small index window to achieve ultimate resolution in small refractive index window. luminated by a near-normally incident white light filtered by a narrow band filter centered at 632.8 nm. Shown from the top to the bottom rows are the reflection images of the PDG index sensor covered with water-ethanol mixture with molar ratio of ethanol χEtOH = 0, 0.05, 0.10, 0.20, 0.50 and 1.00. The dashed lines mark the azimuthal angles of the SP resonant bands with m = -1 and the position of the 0° refer- ence. (b) Intensity angle distribution extracted from the reflection images in (a) at corresponding molar ratio of eth- anol. Solid traces are obtained from fitting the experimental data with an analytical model based on Fano resonance model.30 (c) The index of the water-ethanol mixture as a function of the molar ratio of ethanol χEtOH. Red open stars mark the data points obtained with the PDG index sensor in this work. Green crosses, grey open triangles and the violet open squares mark the data from Refs. 46, 47 and 48, re- spectively. The SEM image of the PDG used here is shown in the insert of (c). The scale bar is 2.5 m. sponding refractive indexes (nd) of the water-ethanol mixture solutions. Data from are also listed for comparison. EtOH 2φ nd 0 0.05 - 0.10 0.20 0.50 1.00 Conclusion We have demonstrated the design and ap- plications of PDG index sensors for large range and small range of index change. Since the working principle of PDG index sensor is based on photon-to-plasmon cou- pling via azimuthal angle dependent plasmonic gratings, the sensitivity of a PDG index sensor can be easily opti- mized for specific applications by choosing suitable de- sign parameters. With an optimal design, we have demonstrated the ability of PDG to quantitatively meas- ure very small index change of water-ethanol mixture. The peculiar index enhancement in water-ethanol solu- tion has been clearly observed and precisely quantified. Since PDG is a planar and dispersive microstructure, it can be easily integrated into microfluidic channels for on-site spectrometer-free index sensing. With surface functionalization, PDGs can also perform spectrometer- free biochemical analysis. By incorporating active con- trollable materials, it is also possible to actively control the optical response of a PDG. We anticipate various sensing applications using PDGs. Supporting Information Supporting Information Available: Reflection image analy- sis, reflection intensity profile fitting, uncertainty of peak position, analytical model for calibration curves, Small- range index sensing data from a PDG with d= 20 nm and Δr = 390 nm Corresponding Author * jer-shing.huang@leibniz-ipht.de Author Contributions F.-C.L., K.-M.S. and J.-S.H. conceived the idea. F.-C.L., K.- M.S. and Y.-X.H. fabricated the structures. F.-C.L. and K.- M.S. performed the optical measurement and numerical simulations. All coauthors contributed to the data analysis, interpretation and manuscript preparation. J.P. and J.-S.H. supervised the research. # These authors contributed equal- ly. 6 ACKNOWLEDGMENT Financial support by the Thuringian State Government within its ProExcellence initiative (APC2020), the DFG (HU2626/3-1 and CRC 1375 NOA) and the Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan under contract no. MOST-103-2113-M-007-004-MY3 are acknowledged