Non-universal Transverse Electron Mean Free Path through Few-layer Graphene D. Geelen,1 J. Jobst,1 E.E. Krasovskii,2, 3, 4 S.J. van der Molen,1 and R.M. Tromp5, 1, ∗ 1Huygens-Kamerlingh Onnes Laboratorium, Leiden Institute of Physics, Leiden University, Niels Bohrweg 2, P.O. Box 9504, NL-2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands 2Departamento de F ́ısica de Materiales, Universidad del Pais Vasco UPV/EHU, 20080 San Sebasti ́an/Donostia, Spain 3IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science, E-48013 Bilbao, Spain 4Donostia International Physics Center (DIPC), E-20018 San Sebasti ́an, Spain 5IBM T.J.Watson Research Center, 1101 Kitchawan Road, P.O. Box 218, Yorktown Heights, New York, New York 10598, USA (Dated: August 22, 2019) In contrast to the in-plane transport electron mean-free path in graphene, the transverse mean- free path has received little attention and is often assumed to follow the ‘universal’ mean-free path (MFP) curve broadly adopted in surface and interface science. Here we directly measure transverse electron scattering through graphene from 0 to 25 eV above the vacuum level both in reflection using Low Energy Electron Microscopy and in transmission using electron-Volt Transmission Electron Microscopy. From this data, we obtain quantitative MFPs for both elastic and inelastic scattering. Even at the lowest energies, the total MFP is just a few graphene layers and the elastic MFP oscillates with graphene layer number, both refuting the ‘universal’ curve. A full theoretical calculation taking the graphene band structure into consideration agrees well with experiment, while the key experimental results are reproduced even by a simple optical toy model. INTRODUCTION The mean free path (MFP) of electrons, i.e., the aver- age distance between scattering events, plays a key role in numerous areas of science and technology. As an elec- tron moves through a medium (gaseous, liquid, solid, or plasma) it will undergo scattering which may be ei- ther elastic, or inelastic due to interaction with phonons, plasmons, nuclei or other electrons. The MFP of elec- trons determines many physical phenomena on all energy scales. At or near the Fermi level in a solid, the MFP is a key ingredient to the transport properties. For exam- ple, ballistic transport is only possible when the MFP is larger than the critical device dimension. At somewhat higher energies (several eV), where electrons can over- come the workfunction of a material and escape into the vacuum, the MFP determines from which depth below the surface an electron can escape. Thus, the probing depth of electrons in a Low Energy Electron Diffraction (or Microscopy) experiment, the electron escape depth in photoemission experiments, the efficacy of electron emis- sion in electron sources and electron multipliers, and the spatial extent and resolution of electron interactions in Scanning Electron Microscopy, all depend on the electron MFP. At higher energies yet (1 keV to 500 keV), the MFP is of key concern in Transmission Electron Microscopy, and in plasmas for the interaction of energetic electrons with other plasma constituents and the solid surfaces in contact with the plasma. Finally, in the few MeV en- ergy range, the relatively short MFP is useful in electron beam treatment of superficial cancers. For electrons with vacuum energies from just a few eV to tens of keV, the MFP in solids is often assumed to be described by a ‘universal’ curve, which implies the MFP to depend strongly on energy, but only weakly on material . This ‘universal’ curve shows a minimum in MFP at energies of a few 10’s of eV, increasing at both lower and higher energies. At the lowest energies not many excitation mechanisms other than phonons and in- traband transitions are available for scattering, so the MFP is long, presumably up to a 100 nm at 1 eV accord- ing to Ref. . At somewhat higher energies (several eV to 10’s of eV) surface and bulk plasmon excitations kick in, and the MFP drops to just ∼1 nm. With fur- ther increasing energy, the cross-section for plasmon ex- citations decreases, while other excitations such as ion- ization have relatively small cross-sections, and the MFP again increases. Surface scientists use the MFP minimum to maximize surface sensitivity in electron probe and/or electron emission experiments . This ‘universal curve’ is widely accepted despite a dearth of experimental data below 30 eV. However, there is a more fundamental prob- lem with the notion of a ‘universal’ MFP curve [3–6]: In a semi-infinite solid, an electron can only exist in a state with given energy and momentum if that state is allowed in the solid’s electronic band structure. Consequently, electrons cannot propagate through a solid with an en- ergy at which the bands are gapped. Here we explicitly measure electron propagation through few layer graphene by recording the energy- dependent reflectivity and transmissivity in this low en- ergy range directly. We demonstrate that the electron MFP strongly depends on electronic material properties in contrast to the ‘universal’ curve. In particular, it changes greatly with the number of graphene layers and thus electronic interlayer resonances. This shows that, the motion of electrons through solids is intricately linked to band structure – which is materials specific – and thus, arXiv:1904.13152v2 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 21 Aug 2019 2 (a) (b) E0 (eV) 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 M K Г 1.0 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 -1) 0.01 0.5 R 0.1 LEEM gun eV-TEM gun imaging system detector prism sample objective lens (c) (d) eV-TEM 500 nm 1L 3L 2L 10.9 eV 5.1 eV 500 nm 1L 3L 2L LEEM (a) Sketch of the ESCHER setup combining two electron guns for reflection (LEEM, red) and transmission (eV-TEM, blue) experiments. (b) Angle-resolved reflected- electron spectroscopy of exfoliated bulk graphite showing elec- tronic bands as minima and band gaps as maxima in elec- tron reflection in agreement with band structure calculations (black lines). Reproduced from Ref. . (c) LEEM image of a free-standing membrane of 1, 2 and 3 layer graphene. (d) The same area imaged in eV-TEM. Electron energy (indicated in to top right) in both images is chosen for optimal contrast. that electron mean free paths cannot be universal. We describe a set of experiments on thin graphene lay- ers illuminated with electrons with kinetic energies E0 in the range from 0 to 25 eV where only the specularly re- flected and the directly transmitted beams are present (first order Low Energy Electron Diffraction can only be excited above ∼28 eV, which thus sets an upper limit to a straight-forward, quantitative interpretation). In addition to these energy-loss-free coherent beams, elec- trons scatter ‘thermally’ (Debye-Waller scattering) and inelastically. Here, we quantitatively determine the elas- tic scattering fractions in both the specularly reflected and the transmitted electron beams as a function of en- ergy, using the ESCHER aberration-corrected Low En- ergy Electron Microscope (LEEM) [8–10] equipped with two distinct electron sources (see sketch in Fig. 1a). In a standard LEEM experiment, the sample is illuminated with an electron source from the front side of the sam- ple (red in Fig. 1a), and an image is formed from re- flected electrons. However, if the sample is sufficiently thin, one may also use an electron source located behind the sample (blue in Fig. 1a), and utilize electrons trans- mitted through the sample to form an image. Over the last few years we have developed such a capability en- abling Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) exper- iments at electron energies of just a few eV , rather than 10’s or 100’s of keV as in conventional TEM. Us- ing this ‘electron-Volt Transmission Electron Microscopy’ (eV-TEM), we can thus study energy-dependent elastic transmission, in addition to energy-dependent elastic re- flection using standard LEEM, on the same (thin) sample within the same instrument. To understand this energy dependence in an idealized system, let us assume that at a particular electron en- ergy, at normal incidence (k∥ = 0), our sample has a bandgap. In the absence of incoherent and inelastic chan- nels, we would then expect a reflectivity of 1 and a trans- missivity of 0 for electrons of that energy . I.e., all electrons are elastically back-reflected as the sample elec- tronic band structure has no states that would allow the electrons to propagate within the solid. One can ‘probe’ the band structure of the solid above the vacuum level by measuring electron reflectivity as a function of energy and momentum [13–15]. Figure 1(b) shows the results of such an Angle-Resolved Reflected Electron Spectroscopy (ARRES) experiment on bulk graphite reproduced from Ref. . Reflectivity is plotted as function of energy and in-plane momentum k∥. The solid lines show theoretical band structure results from Ref. , in good agreement with the data. Specifically, the high reflectivity (red) re- gion across the Brillouin zone between ∼7 and 15 eV cor- responds with a large bandgap above the vacuum level. Conversely, regions of minimum reflectivity correspond to allowed states in the band structure that yield high transmission, and thus, can only be probed indirectly in these reflection experiments. Using eV-TEM, we can now investigate these high-transmission states directly, i.e. in transmission. In the following, we will focus on trans- mission and reflection data for perpendicular incidence (i.e. at the Γ point the center of the Brillouin zone) as a function of energy. eV-TEM (E0 = 10.9 eV) images, respectively. They are obtained on thin free-standing graphene of varying thick- ness of 1, 2 and 3 layers (in the following nLG will stand for n-layer graphene, with n = 1–4). In LEEM, only the specularly reflected (0,0) LEED beam was used, and in eV-TEM only the directly transmitted beam. Inelastic electrons were removed from the signal by energy filter- ing, using the magnetic prism array as an efficient in-line energy filter . Thus, the image intensities in Fig. 1(c) and (d), normalized to the intensities of the incident elec- tron beams, directly yield the elastic reflectivity R and transmissivity T. Recording LEEM and eV-TEM im- ages as a function of energy E0 yields a laterally-resolved, spectroscopic data cube where reflectivity and transmis- sivity spectra can be extracted from every area. Figure 3 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 reflectivity R experiment 1 layers 2 layers 3 layers 4 layers full theory 0 5 10 15 20 25 E0 (eV) 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 transmissivity T experiment 0 5 10 15 20 25 E0 (eV) full theory (a) (c) (d) (b) (a) Electron reflectivity R(E0) as a function of land- ing energy E0 on 1–4 layer graphene. A general decreasing trend with strongly layer-dependent oscillations is observed. (b) The electron transmissivity T(E0) from the same areas also decreases with energy, but exhibits maxima where R(E0) has minima. (c,d) Theoretical predictions of R(E0) and T(E0) obtained by ab initio methods reproduce the experi- mental data in all key features. spectra for electrons with energies E0 from 0–25 eV, ob- tained on sample areas with 1–4 layers of graphene. In addition to a decrease with energy, strong mod- ulations that depend not only on energy, but also on the number of graphene layers are visible for R(E0) and T(E0). For 2LG and thicker we find a broad maximum in reflectivity and minimum in transmission between 5 and 15 eV, corresponding to the graphite bandgap seen in Fig. 1(b). For 1LG this feature is absent, indicating that this gap is a result of interlayer interactions. In fact, between 0 and 5 eV we find n − 1 reflection minima where n is the number of graphene layers that are gen- erally assumed to be caused by inter-layer transmission resonances that, eventually, merge into the broad mini- mum for many layers [see data on graphite in Fig. 1(b)] . Measuring corresponding maxima in transmis- sivity directly [Fig. 2(b)], we here confirm that reflection minima correlate with transmission maxima. Of course, for 1LG there is no interlayer scattering and thus no min- imum/maximum. The energy dependence of reflectivity and transmissivity for all layer numbers is well repro- duced by ab initio theory in Fig. 2(c) and (d), respec- tively. To obtain these, we calculate the ground-state potential of the n-layer graphene from first principles in the local density approximation and use it to obtain the scattering wave functions as described in Refs. . To account for inelastic effects, an energy-dependent op- tical potential is used in the scattering calculations. In addition, the theoretical reflectivity (obtained for a static lattice) is scaled down by a factor of 8 to fit the exper- imental reflectivity spectra which accounts for the en- hanced Debye-Waller scattering in free-standing mem- branes. Generally, both reflectivity and transmissivity (elastic signals) shown in Fig. 2(a, b) decrease with in- creasing energy, indicating increasing inelastic scattering. Using the quantitative R(E0) and T(E0) data, we can de- rive the inelastic MFP λinel and elastic MFP λel, which combine to the total MFP λtot. The total electron MFP λtot can be obtained from the transmission data alone since both elastic and inelastic scattering give rise to a reduction of the elastically transmitted electron signal Iet. The elastic transmissivity T, shown in Fig. 2a, is thus given by T = Iet I0 = e−λtot/d (1) where I0 the incident intensity and d the sample thick- ness. Similarly, the inelastic MFP λinel can be obtained from the sum of reflected and transmitted intensities Ier and Iet, as the total elastic signal is depleted by inelastic scattering only. T + R = Iet I0 + Ier I0 = e−λinel/d (2) where R is the elastic reflectivity shown in Fig. 2(a). Fi- nally, the elastic MFP λel is given by 1 λtot = 1 λel + 1 λinel . (3) The experimentally measured λtot, λinel and λel are plot- ted in units of graphene layers as a function of electron energy in Fig. 3(a), (b) and (c), respectively. Strikingly, the total MFP [Fig. 3(a)] is very short for all layer num- bers, even at energies very close to 0 eV. These values fall far short of the large numbers (∼300 layers) sug- gested by the ‘universal’ curve , even at energies below the graphene π-plasmon energy of ∼6 eV . Indeed, if we separate out the inelastic MFP [Fig. 3(b)] we find a monotonic decrease from λinel ≈ 3 layers near 0 eV to λinel ≈ 1 layer at 25 eV. While one may tentatively dis- cern a somewhat steeper decrease in λinel at about 6 eV, this is by no means a drastic effect, indicating the strong contribution of phonon and intra-band excitation losses at lower energies. The elastic MFP shown in Fig. 3(c) exhibits possibly the most interesting effects. Between 0 and 5 eV, where the interlayer resonances occur, λel is strongly modulated with the graphene layer number: one maximum for one interlayer resonance (2LG), two (three) maxima for 3LG (4LG). The coherent nature of this process calls into question the very name ‘mean free path’ for λel, but we keep using it for consistency with literature. Compared to the total and inelastic MFPs, λel is quite large in this energy range with up to λel ≈ 80 layers for 2LG, and λel ≈ 20–30 layers for 3LG and 4LG while it is smallest for 1LG. Conversely, between 6 and 4 0 1 2 3 λtot (layers) 1L 2L 3L 4L 0 20 40 60 80 λel (layers) toy model 0 2 4 λinel (layers) 0 20 40 60 80 λel (layers) energy-dependent toy model 0 5 10 15 20 25 E0 (eV) 0 20 40 60 80 λel (layers) experiment 0 5 10 15 20 25 E0 (eV) 0 20 40 60 80 λel (layers) full theory (a) (b) (c) (e) (f) (d) (a) Energy-dependent total MFP λtot for electrons impinging on 1–4 layer graphene obtained from the spectra in Fig. 2 using Eq. (1). It decreases with energy, but is gener- ally much lower than the ‘universal’ curve predicts. (b) The inelastic MFP λinel [Eq. (2)] shows a similar trend but the layer-dependent maxima are absent. (c) The elastic MFP λel [Eq. (3)] exhibits strong, layer-dependent peaks at the ener- gies of high-transmission states where λel is very long. The zoomed-in inset shows that the λel is largest for monolayer graphene in the energy range from 6 eV to 12 eV. (d) An op- tical toy-model based on transfer matrices describes position and shape of the layer dependent oscillations in λel well. (e) When an energy-dependent absorption is taken into account, the experimental data in (c) is well described by this sim- ple model over the full energy range. (f) The λel calculated from the ab initio spectra in Fig. 2(c,d) also reproduces the experiment well over the full energy range. 15 eV, λel is largest for 1LG [see inset in Fig. 3(c)] as the bandgap seen in thicker layers is not present for single layer, and electron tunneling may play a significant role. In the next band (15–22 eV), an increased λel is clearly visible while layer-number-dependent maxima are broad- ened due to inelastic effects, and no longer resolved. This second high transmission band was predicted by Feenstra et al. , but never before observed experimentally. To arrive at a qualitative and intuitive understanding of these results, we turn to a simple toy model. In anal- ogy with an optical multilayer, every graphene layer is modeled as a semitransparent boundary with reflectiv- ity R1 = |r|2 and transmissivity T1 = |t|2 where r and t are the reflection and transmission amplitudes, respec- tively. The total reflectivity R and transmissivity T of a multilayer are then determined by the interference of all possible wave reflections and transmissions within the multilayer, while gaining a phase φ when propagating from layer to layer. Losses due to absorption, incoher- ent scattering, etc. are taken into account for every layer by setting R1 + T1 < 1. The energy-dependent R(E0) and T(E0) can be calculated using the transfer matrix approach (see Supplemental Materials for details ) frequently used in thin film optics e.g., to describe anti- reflective coatings . Figures 3(d) shows λel as a function of electron energy extracted from those R(E0) and T(El) using Eqs. (1–3) for the case with moderate absorption (R1 = 0.1, T1 = 0.6). The peaks correspond- ing to high-transmission states are clearly visible between 0 and 5 eV and 15 and 20 eV. Their position and de- pendence on layer number are in remarkable agreement with the experiment [Fig. 3(c)] given that other than the choice of R1 and T1, this is a parameter-free toy model (we use literature values of graphite for layer separation and work function, see Supplemental Material ). We obtain better agreement with the experiment at the sec- ond resonance between 15 and 20 eV by taking losses in- creasing with energy into account [Fig. 3(e)]. We opti- mize R1(E0) and T1(E0) by comparing to LEEM specu- lar reflectivity data of 1–8 graphene layers by Hibino et al. (see Supplemental Material for details). We find that constant R1 = 0.1, T1 = 0.6 below the plasmon energy of 6 eV where losses (phonons, intraband scatter- ing, etc.) are not strongly energy-dependent, and then a smooth decrease to R1 = 0.033, T1 = 0.2 at 25 eV to take account of π- and (σ+π)-plasmon losses above 6 eV leads to excellent agreement with the data over the full energy range. This indicates that even this very simple opti- cal toy-model captures the essential physics of electron scattering in multilayer graphene. The full quantum mechanical approach [Fig. 3(f)], cal- culating the elastic MFP from the theoretical R(E0) and T(E0) shown in Fig. 2(c,d) again yields good agreement with the experimental data in Fig. 3(c). In this quantum mechanical picture, the maxima in λel correspond to the transmission resonances. Comparison with the optical toy-model gives us the intuitive understanding that the enhanced transmission is the result of interlayer multi- reflection resonances of the electron waves. The energy range and scattering-induced broadening of the second high transmission band [15–20 eV in Fig. 3(c)] is well de- scribed by both the toy model [Fig. 3(e)] and the full theory [Fig. 3(f)]. We have presented the first direct measurements of elastic electron reflection and transmission data in the energy range between 0 and 25 eV. While the ‘univer- sal’ MFP curve for electrons in this energy range would suggest very large mean free paths, up to 100 nm at the lowest energies , we find that this prediction is far from true. Inelastic MFPs in single and multilayer graphene are just a few layers, even below the graphene π-plasmon energy of ∼6 eV indicating that inelastic scattering due to phonon and intraband excitations plays an important 5 role, on a par with plasmon excitation. Both λel and λinel depend not only on electron energy, and on mate- rial (all carbon here), but also significantly on the de- tails of the electronic structure above the vacuum level. The presence of interlayer resonances gives rise to high transmission, and very long λel due to multilayer electron interference. This can explain the surprising fact that 1LG has the shortest total MFP over most of the energy range. These basic features are reproduced qualitatively by a simple toy model, and in detailed electronic struc- ture + electron scattering theory. The high transmis- sion/low reflection nLG graphene resonances correspond to electron anti-reflection coatings in our toy-model ana- logue. For other, more complex materials this simple toy model does not yield valid predictions. Already for other layered crystals such as hexagonal boron nitride or transition metal dichalcogenides only the full ab initio theory can describe the reflectivity spectra correctly. This indicates that the MFPs in these ma- terials are also strongly affected by the band structure effects discussed here. Further measurements on those materials will, thus, elucidate our understanding of scat- tering of low-energy electrons with matter more broadly. Moreover, the observed transmission resonances strongly modify the so-called final state in Angle-Resolved Photo- Emission Spectroscopy (ARPES) for low photon energies . Together with the considerably shorter MFPs found here compared to the universal curve, this has broad implication on the interpretation of ARPES data at photon energies below 30 eV. The advent of eV-TEM in conjunction with LEEM, in a single instrument, has made it possible to study elastic reflection and transmission of low energy electrons from the same sample for the first time. This allows us to de- velop a more complete and detailed understanding of the interaction of low energy electrons with solids. These results challenge the perceived universality of electron MFP, and demonstrate that such universality cannot ex- ist. The electronic structure of a material depends on its elemental composition, crystal structure, crystal ori- entation, and sample thickness and dominates scattering at low electron energies. The imaging and spectroscopic capabilities close to E0 = 0 demonstrated here enables other eV-TEM experiments. For instance, using eV- TEM, we have succeeded in imaging single DNA origami molecules with electron energies below 5 eV, where radia- tion damage appears to be negligible , with strong contrast. Together with the projected spatial resolution below 2 nm in an aberration-corrected instrument, eV- TEM promises new avenues for imaging and spectroscopy in physics, materials science, and life science. We thank Marcel Hesselberth and Douwe Scholma for their indispensable technical support, Ruud van Egmond, Arthur Ellis, Raymond K ̈ohler and Bert Crama for build- ing the eV-TEM gun assembly and electronics, Aniket Thete for help with the transfer of graphene membranes and Martin van Exter for discussions on the transfer ma- trix approach. This work was supported by the Nether- lands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO/OCW) via the VENI grant (680-47-447, J.J.) and the STW- HTSM grant (nr. 12789). It was supported by the Span- ish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness MINECO, Grant No. FIS2016-76617-P. ∗ rtromp@us.ibm.com M. P. Seah and W. A. Dench, Surface and Interface Anal- ysis 1, 2 (1979). R. M. Marsolais, E. A. Cartier, and P. Pfluger, Excess Electrons in Dielectric Media, edited by J.-P. Jay-Gerin and C. Ferradini (CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1991) p. 43. N. Barrett, E. E. Krasovskii, J.-M. Themlin, and V. N. Strocov, Physical Review B 71, 035427 (2005). R. Naaman and L. Sanche, Chemical Reviews 107, 1553 I. M ̈ullerov ́a, M. Hovorka, and L. Frank, Ultrami- croscopy 119, 78 (2012). J. Cazaux, Journal of Applied Physics 111, 064903 J. Jobst, A. J. H. van der Torren, E. E. Krasovskii, J. Bal- gley, C. R. Dean, R. M. Tromp, and S. J. van der Molen, Nature Communications 7, 13621 (2016). R. Tromp, J. Hannon, A. Ellis, W. Wan, A. Berghaus, and O. Schaff, Ultramicroscopy 110, 852 (2010). R. Tromp, J. Hannon, W. Wan, A. Berghaus, and O. Schaff, Ultramicroscopy 127, 25 (2013). S. M. Schramm, J. Kautz, A. Berghaus, O. Schaff, R. M. Tromp, and S. J. van der Molen, IBM Journal of Re- search and Development 55, 1:1 (2011). D. Geelen, A. Thete, O. Schaff, A. Kaiser, S. J. van der Molen, and R. Tromp, Ultramicroscopy 159, 482 (2015). J. C. Slater, Physical Review 51, 846 (1937). V. N. Strocov, H. I. Starnberg, P. O. Nilsson, H. E. Brauer, and L. J. Holleboom, Physical Review Letters J. Jobst, J. Kautz, D. Geelen, R. M. Tromp, and S. J. van der Molen, Nature Communications 6, 8926 (2015). F. Wicki, J.-N. Longchamp, T. Latychevskaia, C. Escher, and H.-W. Fink, Physical Review B 94, 075424 (2016). H. Hibino, H. Kageshima, F. Maeda, M. Nagase, Y. Kobayashi, and H. Yamaguchi, Physical Review B E. E. Krasovskii, Physical Review B 70, 245322 (2004). V. U. Nazarov, E. E. Krasovskii, and V. M. Silkin, Phys- ical Review B 87, 041405(R) (2013). R. M. Tromp, Y. Fujikawa, J. B. Hannon, a. W. Ellis, A. Berghaus, and O. Schaff, Journal of Physics: Con- densed Matter 21, 314007 (2009). R. M. Feenstra, N. Srivastava, Q. Gao, M. Widom, B. Di- aconescu, T. Ohta, G. L. Kellogg, J. T. Robinson, and I. V. Vlassiouk, Physical Review B 87, 041406(R) (2013). A. Politano and G. Chiarello, Nanoscale 6, 10927 (2014). R. Feenstra and M. Widom, Ultramicroscopy 130, 101 “See Supplemental Material [url] for a description of the 6 transfer-matrix calculations used as toy model, which in- cludes Ref. [25–29],”. L. Rayleigh, Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Math- ematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 93, 565 A. Gr ̈uneis, C. Attaccalite, T. Pichler, V. Zabolotnyy, H. Shiozawa, S. L. Molodtsov, D. Inosov, A. Koitzsch, M. Knupfer, J. Schiessling, R. Follath, R. Weber, P. Rudolf, L. Wirtz, and A. Rubio, Physical Review Letters 100, 037601 (2008). S. Zhou, G.-H. Gweon, and A. Lanzara, Annals of Physics 321, 1730 (2006). F. Matsui, H. Nishikawa, H. Daimon, M. Muntwiler, M. Takizawa, H. Namba, and T. Greber, Physical Re- view B 97, 045430 (2018). H. Anders, Thin films in optics (The Focal Press, London and New York, 1967). T. Zhan, X. Shi, Y. Dai, X. Liu, and J. Zi, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 25, 215301 (2013). H. Hibino, H. Kageshima, F. Maeda, M. Nagase, Y. Kobayashi, Y. Kobayashi, and H. Yamaguchi, e- Journal of Surface Science and Nanotechnology 6, 107 E. E. Krasovskii, V. N. Strocov, N. Barrett, H. Berger, W. Schattke, and R. Claessen, Physical Review B 75, T. A. de Jong, J. Jobst, H. Yoo, E. E. Krasovskii, P. Kim, and S. J. van der Molen, physica status solidi (b) , V. Strocov, P. Blaha, H. Starnberg, R. Claessen, J.-M. Debever, and J.-M. Themlin, Applied Surface Science V. N. Strocov, A. Charrier, J.-M. Themlin, M. Rohlfing, R. Claessen, N. Barrett, J. Avila, J. Sanchez, and M.-C. Asensio, Physical Review B 64, 075105 (2001). M. Germann, T. Latychevskaia, C. Escher, and H.-W. Fink, Physical Review Letters 104, 095501 (2010). J.-N. Longchamp, S. Rauschenbach, S. Abb, C. Escher, T. Latychevskaia, K. Kern, and H.-W. Fink, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114, 1474 (2017).