Electronic Structure and Phase Stability of Yb-filled CoSb3 Skutterudite Thermoelectrics from First Principles Eric B. Isaacs and Chris Wolverton∗ Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois 60208, USA E-mail: c-wolverton@northwestern.edu Abstract Filling the large voids in the crystal structure of the skutterudite CoSb3 with rattler atoms R provides an avenue for both increasing car- rier concentration and disrupting lattice heat transport, leading to impressive thermoelectric performance. While the influence of R on the lattice dynamics of skutterudite materials has been well studied, the phase stability of R- filled skutterudite materials and the influence of the presence and ordering of R on the elec- tronic structure remain unclear. Here, focusing on the Yb-filled skutterudite YbxCo4Sb12, we employ first-principles methods to compute the phase stability and electronic structure. Yb- filled CoSb3 exhibits (1) a mild tendency for phase separation into Yb-rich and Yb-poor re- gions and (2) a strong tendency for chemical decomposition into Co–Sb and Yb–Sb binaries (i.e., CoSb3, CoSb2, and YbSb2). We find that, at reasonable synthesis temperatures, configu- rational entropy stabilizes single-phase solid so- lutions with limited Yb solubility, in agreement with experiments. Filling CoSb3 with Yb in- creases the band gap, enhances the carrier ef- fective masses, and generates new low-energy “emergent” conduction band minima, which is distinct from the traditional band convergence picture of aligning the energies of existing band extrema. The explicit presence of R is neces- sary to achieve the emergent conduction band minima, though the rattler ordering does not strongly influence the electronic structure. The emergent conduction bands are spatially local- ized in the Yb-rich regions, unlike the delo- calized electronic states at the Brillouin zone center that form the unfilled skutterudite band edges. Introduction In thermoelectric heat-to-electricity conversion, the figure of merit is ZT = σS2T/κ, where σ is the electrical conductivity, S is the ther- mopower, κ is the thermal conductivity, and T is the temperature. Therefore, efficient thermo- electric materials must exhibit a rare combina- tion of electronic and thermal transport prop- erties: large σ, large S, and small κ. In order to (1) understand the ability of existing ther- moelectric materials, typically heavily doped semiconductors, to satisfy this set of rare physi- cal properties and (2) design improved thermo- electric materials, a detailed understanding of the electronic structure, lattice dynamics, and phase stability is critically important. One famous class of thermoelectric materials is the skutterudite CoSb3, a covalent semicon- ductor satisfying the 18-electron rule.3 CoSb3, whose skutterudite crystal structure is shown in Fig. 1, can be considered a perovskite (ABX3, with an empty A-site) with substantial distor- tions of the CoSb6 octahedra that create large voids.1 CoSb3 has a body-centered-cubic (bcc) 1 arXiv:1904.07983v2 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 29 Jul 2019 conventional unit cell is shown with the black dashed lines and cyan, blue, and brown cir- cles indicate Yb/vacancy, Co, and Sb, respec- tively. We note that there is an alternative crys- tal structure description in terms of Sb4 rings (sometimes called squares or rectangles);1,2 one such ring is shown. lattice with 16 atoms in the primitive unit cell and a space group of Im ̄3. CoSb3-based thermoelectric materials exhibit favorable elec- tronic transport properties, as the highly cova- lent bonding leads to large electronic mobility μ and σ (but also increasing κe, the electronic contribution to κ).4 In addition, the presence of a high-degeneracy conduction band minimum close in energy to the conduction band minima at the Brillouin zone center has been invoked to rationalize the large S, via the concept of band convergence.5,6 Perhaps the most distinguishing feature of skutterudite materials is their ability to host “rattler” atoms R (such as alkali, alkaline earth, actinide, rare earth, and halogen elements) in the large crystallographic voids,7 which serves a dual purpose with respect to thermoelectricity. First, it enhances the power factor (σS2) via electronic doping.8 Secondly, it drastically re- duces κL, the lattice component of κ.9 Loosely bonded to the rest of the solid, the rattler atoms are believed to disrupt phonon transport via “rattling” in the voids (hence the name).10–13 While the influence of rattlers on the lattice dynamical properties of skutterudite materials has been much studied,14–38 the phase stability and electronic properties have received far less attention. In particular, the thermodynamic stability of filled skutterudite materials, the or- dering tendencies of the rattlers, and the pre- cise influence of the rattlers on the electronic states are all unclear. Therefore, in this work, we present a detailed study of the phase stabil- ity and electronic structure of filled skutterudite CoSb3 using first-principles calculations. We focus on Yb rattlers since Yb-filled skutteru- dite CoSb3 exhibits some of the most promising thermoelectric properties, e.g., ZT approaching 1.5, and has been subject to considerable exper- imental investigation.7,39 We find that the Yb-filled skutterudite ex- hibits a tendency to phase separate into Yb-rich and Yb-poor regions, though the energetic low- ering (compared to the completely empty and filled endmembers) is only on the order of 10 meV per Yb/void site. Due to the small mag- nitude of the formation energy, configurational entropy will likely win this energetic battle, 2 consistent with the single-phase solid solutions typically found in experiment. The Yb-filled skutterudite is in a three-phase region of the thermodynamic convex hull, with a substantial thermodynamic driving force for chemical de- composition into binaries. We find that this chemical decomposition tendency limits the Yb solubility, in agreement with experiments. Fill- ing the CoSb3 skutterudite with Yb opens the electronic band gap, increases the carrier effec- tive masses, and leads to the emergence of sev- eral new conduction band minima. The explicit presence, though not the ordering, of the rat- tlers is responsible for the new conduction band minima, which are not present in the unfilled skutterudite, as would be the case for the tra- ditional band convergence picture. The emer- gent conduction bands exhibit distinct charac- ter with spatial localization in the Yb-rich re- gions, as compared to the delocalized electronic states at the Brillouin zone center. Computational Methodology As can be observed in Fig. 1, CoSb3 exhibits a significant octahedral distortion (a+a+a+ in Glazer notation40) with respect to the ideal per- ovskite structure. While ∠Co–Sb–Co is 180◦ for perovskite, it is 127◦ in CoSb3. Similarly, ∠Sb– Co–Sb is 85–95◦ instead of the ideal 90◦. The octahedral distortion in the skutterudite crystal structure yields 1 void per 4 Co atoms. There- fore, the general stoichiometry for a filled CoSb3 skutterudite is RxCo4Sb12 with 0 < x < 1. Using □ to explicitly indicate an empty void, the formula becomes □1−xRxCo4Sb12. We note that the upper limit of x, i.e., the filling frac- tion limit (FFL), is lower than 1 in practice,41–44 but we consider the full crystallographic range of 0 ≤ x ≤ 1. Plane-wave density functional theory (DFT)45,46 calculations are performed using vasp47 w/ the generalized gradient approxima- tion of Perdew, Burke, and Ernzerhof48 using Co, Sb, and Yb_2 (5p66s2 valence) projec- tor augmented wave (PAW) potentials.49,50 We use a 500 eV kinetic energy cutoff, Γ-centered k-point grids of density ≥ 500 k-points/Å−3, 0.1 eV 1st-order Methfessel-Paxton smearing51 for structural relaxations, and the tetrahedron method with Blöchl corrections52 for static runs. The energy and ionic forces are converged to 10−6 eV energy and 10−2 eV/Å, respectively. Given the reaction energy for Yb + 2CoSb3 → YbSb2 + 2CoSb2 changes by only 20 meV/Yb (1.3%) via the inclusion of the 4f states in the Yb PAW potential, we expect the absence of such states will not significantly affect our results. The convex hull is constructed from the Open Quantum Materials Database (OQMD),53,54 a database of electronic structure calculations based on DFT, which contains 49 binary and 5 ternary phases in the Yb–Co–Sb space (as of June 2018). A cluster expansion (CE)55,56 is employed to describe the energetics of dif- ferent configurations of Yb and □ on the bcc sublattice of voids in the skutterudite structure. The optimal CE in atat57 contains null, point, and pair (out to 6th nearest neighbor) clusters. Disordered structures are modeled with special quasirandom structures (SQS)58 with 8 Yb/□ sites for x of 1/4, 1/2, and 3/4.59 To generate an analytical representation of the x-dependent energetics of SQS, we fit the formation ener- gies of the SQS to a Redlich-Kister polynomi- als of order 1 (subregular solution model), as discussed in Refs. 60 and 61. Band structure unfolding based on the CoSb3 lattice parameter is performed using bandup.62,63 Results and Discussion Phase stability ternary convex hull based on the OQMD, shows that YbxCo4Sb12 is in a 3-phase region of the convex hull bounded by CoSb3, CoSb, and Yb11Sb10. In other words, YbxCo4Sb12 → (4 − is the lowest-energy decomposition reaction ac- cording to the OQMD. Experiments instead suggest the competing phases CoSb3, CoSb2, and YbSb2,42,64 so we focus on the correspond- ing decomposition reaction. Although CoSb2 3 (a) (b) Competing phases in experiment Yb Co YbSb2 Sb Yb5Sb3 Yb4Sb3 YbCo2 Yb2Co17 CoSb2 YbCo3 CoSb CoSb3 Yb11Sb10 YbCo4Sb12 Stable Phase Metastable Phase x=1 Composition Competing phases in the OQMD −40 −30 −20 −10 0 10 20 0 ❒Co4Sb12 1/4 1/2 3/4 1 YbCo4Sb12 superlattice superlattice CoSb3 + CoSb2 + YbSb2 Formation Energy (meV/❒1−xYbxCo4Sb12) x in ❒1−xYbxCo4Sb12 SQS polynomial fit SQS DFT Structures CE Structures CoSb3 + CoSb + Yb11Sb10 (black filled circles connected by grey tie lines), we indicate two metastable phases (above the hull by 7 meV/atom for YbCo3, 4 meV/atom for CoSb2) with open blue squares. YbxCo4Sb12 corresponds to the line (not drawn) between the YbCo4Sb12 composition (filled green triangle) and CoSb3. The vertices of the red dashed triangle indicates the decomposition products for the lowest-energy decomposition reaction for YbxCo4Sb12; those of the smaller purple dotted triangle correspond to an alternate decomposition reaction discussed in the text. (b) Cluster expansion formation energy as a function of Yb concentration for structures used to fit the cluster expansion (open blue circles) and those predicted by the cluster expansion (solid orange squares). The DFT- computed formation energy for SQS (large open cyan circles) and a polynomial fit (cyan line) are also shown. In panel (b), the thick lines in the region of negative formation energy correspond to the formation energy of the two decomposition reactions indicated in panel (a). 4 is metastable, it is above the convex hull by only 4 meV/atom. Given this small energy, it is conceivable that vibrational entropy (not com- puted in this work) might stabilize this phase. Artificially lowering the energy of CoSb2 alone is not sufficient to make YbxCo4Sb12 → (4−2x) CoSb3 +2x CoSb2 +x YbSb2 the lowest-energy decomposition reaction. However, as discussed in the Supporting Information, its combina- tion with stabilizing YbSb2 and/or destabiliz- ing Yb11Sb10 can achieve this effect. For ex- ample, the three-phase equilibrium of CoSb3, CoSb2, and YbSb2 is achieved by the simulta- neous artificial energy lowering of CoSb2 and YbSb2 by 20 and 23 meV/atom, respectively. Validation of the convex hull from the OQMD is discussed in the Supporting Information. The formation energies of YbxCo4Sb12, with respect to the x = 0 and x = 1 endmembers, computed via cluster expansion, are shown in Fig. 2(b). The cluster expansion, which is fit to 40 structures, achieves a leave-one-out cross-validation score of 1.6 meV per lattice site. Additional details on the cluster expan- sion are contained in the Supporting Informa- tion. A mild phase separating tendency is ob- served, with positive formation energies on the order of tens of meV per lattice site. Phase sep- aration has also been predicted in LaxFe4Sb12 via coherent potential approximation calcula- tions (in this case with appreciable energy of mixing ∼ 0.6 eV),37 whereas a previous cluster expansion for BaxCo4Sb12 found several stable ordered phases (formation energy no lower than ∼ −90 meV).65 Among the ordered phases, we find (110) and (100) superlattices are the lowest-energy structures (still higher in energy than phase separation). The SQS exhibit DFT-computed formation energies (6–15 meV) similar to the formation energies of the ordered structures, which is re- flective of the relatively weak interaction be- tween the rattlers. Therefore, given the small magnitude of the formation energy, we ex- pect configurational entropy to easily overcome the phase separation tendency at reasonable synthesis temperatures and enable single-phase solid solutions of YbxCo4Sb12. For example, the ideal configurational entropy contribution to the mixing free energy, −kBT[(1 − x) ln(1 − x) + x ln(x)], where kB is the Boltzmann con- stant, is ≈ −44 meV for x = 1/4 at 900 K, which is significantly larger in magnitude than the mixing energy (≈ 10 meV). The thermodynamic driving force for chem- ical decomposition into binaries, on the other hand, is much stronger than the phase sepa- ration tendency. As shown by the steep nega- tively sloped lines in Fig. 2(b), the formation energies for chemical decomposition are signifi- cantly larger in magnitude than the mixing en- ergy. For example, the formation energy for the appropriate linear combination of CoSb3, CoSb2, and YbSb2 [dotted purple line in Fig. 2(b)] for x = 1/4 is ≈ −44 meV. Therefore, the chemical decomposition tendency serves to limit the solubility of Yb in CoSb3, as has been suggested by previous theoretical works.66–69 In experiments, a phase of YbxCo4Sb12 with a maximum in Yb content is typically achieved without evidence of Yb ordering or separation into Yb-rich and Yb-poor phases; this phase of- ten coexists with the binary impurity phases CoSb2 and YbSb2.42,44,70–73 This behavior is qualitatively consistent with our computational findings. We note that samples whose prepara- tion involves ball milling may exhibit a inhomo- geneous Yb distribution due to non-equilibrium effects, however.74 Although it has received considerable atten- tion in the literature, the solubility (FFL) of Yb in CoSb3 remains controversial, with values re- ported ranging from 0.2 to 0.7.41–43,66,73,75 Here, we address this important issue by computing the solubility from our first-principles calcula- tions and comparing directly to past theoret- ical calculations and recent experiments. In our work, we take a subregular solid solution model (corresponding to the polynomial fit to SQS energetics discussed above) and quantita- tively incorporate ideal configurational entropy; vibrational entropy is discussed below. To com- pute the solubility, we employ the common tan- gent construction with respect to the binary de- composition products observed in experiment (CoSb2 and YbSb2). Further details on the evaluation of the solubility from our calcula- tions, as well as details on the comparison data 5 600 700 800 900 1000 1100 1200 1300 Theory: This work Theory: This work ∆S=1.9kB scaling with Theory: Shi 2005 Theory: Shi 2008 Experiment: Co−rich data Experiment: Sb−rich data 0 100 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 x in YbxCo4Sb12 T (K) Temperature-dependent solubility (filling fraction limit) of YbxCo4Sb12. The com- puted solvus from this work is shown without (thick solid black line) and with (dashed grey line) the scaling factor e∆S/kB for a vibrational entropy change ∆S = 1.9 kB, as discussed in the main text. Past theoretical solubility pre- dictions from Refs. 66 (thin solid orange line, labeled Shi 2005) and 69 (thin dashed purple line, labeled Shi 2008) are included for compar- ison. Experimental data for the Co-rich (red open triangles) and Sb-rich (blue open squares) region of the experimental phase diagram are taken from Fig. 4 of . from past theoretical studies, are included in the Supporting Information. black line) temperature-dependent solubility curve (solvus) for Yb in CoSb3 in comparison with past theory and experiments. The pre- vious theoretical calculations of Refs. 66 (thin solid orange line) and 69 (thin dashed purple line) found relatively small temperature depen- dence. In addition, the similar previous the- oretical work of Mei et al. reported a sin- gle FFL value (0.30) rather than temperature- dependent results.67 The lack of strong temper- ature dependence in the past theoretical works is in disagreement with the experimental results of Tang et al., who observed the measured solu- bility can vary by as much as a factor of five as a function of annealing temperature.42 Impor- tantly, the past theory works also found finite solubility for T → 0. Since entropy must van- ish for T → 0 (third law of thermodynamics), such a solid solution cannot exist on the T = 0 phase diagram.76 In this sense, the past theoret- ical predictions violate the third law. They also are inconsistent with experiments, which sug- gest FFL approaching 0 for T → 0.42 We note that it may be possible to maintain a finite rat- tler concentration at low T in experiment, but only as a result of kinetic effects. In contrast to the past theoretical works, we correctly find a vanishing solubility at low tem- perature, which is consistent with the third law and agrees with experiment.42 Figure 3 shows a quantitative comparison of our com- puted solvus with experimental data from for the solubility in the Co-rich (red open triangles) and Sb-rich (blue open squares) re- gions of the experimental phase diagram. We focus on the Co-rich data since it corresponds to equilibrium of YbxCo4Sb12 with CoSb2 and YbSb2.42 Our computed values appreciably un- derestimate the experimental solubility. As a result, although we find a larger temperature dependence compared to past theoretical works (and the correct exponential dependence in the dilute limit), our computed temperature de- pendence is still significantly smaller than ex- periment.42 This solubility underestimation has been commonly observed in first-principles pre- 6 dictions due to the neglect of vibrational en- tropy.77–80 Given Yb is a rattler, corresponding to low-frequency vibrational modes, one can ex- pect the inclusion of vibrational entropy to sig- nificantly stabilize the YbxCo4Sb12 solid solu- tion, enhancing the solubility. Via fitting, we find that a vibrational formation entropy ∆S (of the solid solution with respect to the linear combination of binary decomposition products) of 1.9 kB, taken to modify the solubility via a e∆S/kB multiplicative factor (dilute limit ap- proximation), is sufficient to reconcile the the- oretical prediction with experiment, as shown in Fig. 3. Experimental measurements and/or calculations of the phonon entropy will be im- portant future work towards achieving quanti- tative solubility prediction for skutterudite ma- terials. We note that, beyond vibrational en- tropy, non-ideal configurational entropy may also help reconcile the computational results with experiment. Endmember electronic band struc- ture −1 −0.5 0 0.5 1 Γ H N Γ P H Energy (eV) CoSb3 Yb1/4CoSb3 4: Electronic band structure of YbxCo4Sb12 for the fully-relaxed endmembers (x = 0 and x = 1). Energies are plotted with respect to the gap midpoint at Γ, and the Fermi energy for x = 1 is indicated by the horizontal arrow. Emergent conduction band minima in x = 1 are noted by the vertical arrows. The electronic band structure of the endmem- bers (x = 0 and x = 1) is shown in Fig. 4. Filling the voids with Yb (x > 0) leads to a metallic state with carriers in the conduction band. For comparison, the zero of energy set to gap midpoint at Γ. Here, both the x = 0 and x = 1 structures are fully relaxed, so x = 1 has a smaller Brillouin zone volume than that of x = 1 due to a larger lattice parameter. We note that we find the same trends discussed be- low if we fix to the relaxed x = 0 lattice param- eter. With Co contributing 9 e− and Sb3 contribut- ing 9 e−, CoSb3 satisfies the 18 e− rule3 and forms a semiconductor with a small experimen- tal band gap on the order of 35–50 meV.81,82 We find CoSb3 is a direct-gap semiconductor, with the singly-degenerate valence band and triply-degenerate conduction bands located at Γ, consistent with previous calculations.5,83,84 The valence bands are primarily a mix of Co p/d and Sb p character, whereas the conduc- tion bands are primarily Co d character. As shown in early electronic structure calculations on CoSb3,83,84 the valence band and one of the conduction bands exhibit linear dispersion (as opposed to the usual parabolic behavior) near the band extrema. Filling the voids of CoSb3 with Yb leads to two major effects. First of all, it can be seen that adding Yb increases the magnitude of the band gap. Secondly, the Yb rattlers lead to the emergence of additional conduction band minima close in energy to the band edge at Γ. We observe such bands, which we refer to as “emergent bands” for reasons discussed in the next section, at four locations along the high- symmetry k-path shown in Fig. 4: (1) between Γ and H, (2) at N, (3) between P and Γ, and (4) between P and H. We note that another emergent band minima exists between N and H, not shown in Fig. 4. For sufficiently large x, the conduction band minimum no longer cor- responds to the band at Γ, i.e., the direct gap at Γ is no longer the smallest gap. The same trends of band gap opening and new, emergent conduction band minima are also present for intermediate x values, as discussed below. Here, we discuss the band gap trends in more 7 detail. Although semilocal DFT is well known to exhibit errors in band gaps,85 quasiparticle and spin-orbit coupling corrections have been shown to yield only small changes to the gap (∼ 0.1 eV) in this system,86,87 and we expect the computed trends to be valid even if there are small errors in the absolute values. The com- puted band gap of CoSb3, 0.155 eV, is larger but still comparable to the small experimental band gap on the order of 35–50 meV.81,82 Fully filling the voids with Yb (corresponding to the x = 1 structure) increases the gap to 0.210 eV. The band gap increases further to 0.239 eV if we fix to CoSb3 structural parameters; this in- dicates the gap opening is a chemical, not struc- tural, effect. In order to understand the role of the Yb atoms, we also artificially dope CoSb3 by increasing the electron chemical potential of CoSb3 and adding compensating homogeneous background charge to retain charge neutrality, rather than including Yb atoms. In such artifi- cially doped CoSb3, we find a substantial band gap of 0.315 eV, which indicates that gap open- ing upon doping is not specifically tied to the presence of Yb as the rattler. Similar behavior was found in a previous study of Ba-filled skut- terudite CoSb3,88 which suggests the effect is largely invariant to the nature of the rattler. In contrast to the band gap opening behavior, the emergence of new, low-energy conduction band minima is not found for the artificially-doped x = 1 case, whose band structure is shown in the Supporting Information. This indicates that the presence of the rattler atoms is respon- sible for the emergent conduction band minima. Filling the voids with Yb also impacts the carrier effective masses m∗ determined via a quadratic fit of the band structure near the band extrema. The effective masses become larger (corresponding to less dispersive bands) for x = 1 as compared to x = 0. For example, for the valence band at Γ along the P direc- tion, the effective mass is 0.06 me for x = 0 as compared to 0.09 me for x = 1. Along this di- rection, there are two heavy and one light con- duction band. For x = 0, the corresponding effective masses are 0.19 me and 0.07 me, appre- ciably smaller than the 0.21 me and 0.11 me for x = 1, respectively. The same qualitative trend is found for the Γ valence and conduction bands along each of the k-space directions along the computed high-symmetry path in the Brillouin zone, as is discussed in the Supporting Informa- tion. The decrease in carrier mobility (∼ 1/m∗) for larger x is consistent with experiments.74 Electronic structure of partially- filled skutterudite CoSb3 In order to probe the electronic properties of YbxCo4Sb12 with intermediate x (0 < x < 1), we compute the effective band structures for structures with partial Yb filling, as shown in Fig. 5. For ordered structures, we choose the low-energy structures corresponding to (110) superlattices since such structures have a rela- tively small primitive unit cell. In addition, we note that previous DFT calculations found that (110) is the lowest-energy surface.89 We com- pare to disordered structures in order to assess the effect of Yb ordering on the electronic struc- ture. Both the ordered and disordered struc- tures show similar effects as the fully-filled skut- terudite material: band gap opening and emer- gent conduction band minima. This suggests rattler ordering does not have a dramatic effect on the band structure, though the presence of the rattler atoms is necessary to achieve the new conduction band minima (as discussed above). We note that there are differences between the ordered and disordered structures in the finer details of the emergent bands. In order to investigate the nature of the elec- tronic states in the partially-filled skutteru- dite material, we compute for the superlat- tice structures the projections of the wavefunc- tions (1) on all atoms corresponding to the Yb- rich region (which we call pYb−rich) and (2) on all atoms corresponding to the Yb-poor region (which we call pYb−poor). The layers of atoms at the interfaces between these regions are not included in either of these projections. For ex- ample, for x = 1/2, these interface atoms in- clude those lying in the purple planes drawn in Fig. 5(d) as well as the corresponding atoms between layers 2 and 3. We define the spatial polarization, with respect to the Yb-rich and 8 −0.2 0 0.2 0.4 Disordered Superlattice −0.2 0 0.2 0.4 Energy (eV) x=0 x=1 −0.2 0 0.2 0.4 Γ H N Γ P H (a) x=1/4 (b) x=1/2 (c) x=3/4 (d) Superlattice structures layer 1 layer 2 layer 3 layer 4 dered (110) superlattice and disordered struc- ture of YbxCo4Sb12 for (a) x = 1/4, (b) x = 1/2, and (c) x = 3/4. Size of the points is proportional to the weight in the effective band structure as determined by band unfolding. For visual clarity, we only plot points with weight greater than 0.02. Fermi energies are indicated by horizontal arrows. The endmember band structures are shown as solid lines. All struc- tures are fixed to the relaxed x = 0 lattice parameter. The superlattice structures corre- spond to retaining Yb in layer 1 for x = 1/4, layers 1 and 2 for x = 1/2, and layers 1, 2, and 3 for x = 3/4 as shown in panel (d). −0.2 0 0.2 0.4 (a) x=1/4 x=0 x=1 Superlattice −0.2 0 0.2 0.4 (b) x=1/2 Energy (eV) Yb−poor Yb−rich Spatial Polarization −0.2 0 0.2 0.4 Γ H N Γ P H (c) x=3/4 dered (110) superlattice of YbxCo4Sb12 for (a) of the points is proportional to the weight in the effective band structure as determined by band unfolding, and the color indicates the spa- tial polarization ξ of the wavefunctions (as de- fined in the main text). We only plot points with weight greater than 0.02 (for visual clarity) whose pYb−rich and pYb−poor are both greater than 0.025 (to avoid numerical errors in com- puting ξ). Fermi energies are indicated by hori- zontal arrows. The endmember band structures are shown as solid lines. All structures are fixed to the relaxed x = 0 lattice parameter. 9 Yb-poor regions, of the electronic states as ξ = pYb−rich/x pYb−rich/x + pYb−poor/(1 − x). The factors of 1/x and 1/(1 − x) are included to normalize for the differing sizes of the Yb- rich and Yb-poor regions when x ̸= 1/2. A spatial polarization value of 1/2 indicates the wavefunction exhibits an equal preference for localization on an atom in the Yb-rich region as that in the Yb-poor region, whereas a ξ value of 1 (0) indicates a 100% preference for local- ization on an atom in the Yb-rich (Yb-poor) region. The spatial polarization of the superlattice electronic states is shown via the color of the points in Fig. 6, which shows the superlat- tice band structure. The emergent conduction bands exhibit values of ξ significantly larger than 1/2, which indicates such states tend to be localized in the Yb-rich region. Although these states have a strong preference to localize in the Yb-rich region, we note that the states are not localized on the Yb atoms, which act as cations and donate their charge. In contrast to the emergent bands, the electronic states at Γ show values of ξ much closer to 1/2. This indicates that the highly-dispersive bands at Γ are much more spatially delocalized. Therefore, one can think of YbxCo4Sb12 as containing two distinct types of carriers: delocalized electrons at Γ and electrons more localized in the Yb-rich regions from the emergent bands. Finally, we discuss our use of the term “emergent bands” and put our results in the context of the concept of band conver- gence. The behavior we find is quite distinct from typical band convergence (such as in PbTe1−xSex,90 Mg2Si1−xSnx,91 Pb1−xMgxTe,92 and Pb1−xSrxSe93) in which the energies of multiple existing band minima converge as a function of some tuning parameter, such as temperature or doping. In our case, several of the low-energy minima away from Γ are not in general even present (in any recognizable form) in the unfilled material. For example, as can be seen in Fig. 4 between Γ and P, the lowest-energy conduction band minimum for x = 1 (∼ 2/3 of the way from Γ to P), which is associated with the lowest- energy minima along this high-symmetry line in k-space for fractional x in Figs. 5(a-c), es- sentially does not exist for x = 0. In other words, this band minima does not appear at all similar to the band from which it appears to originate, which is the very flat (away from Γ) x = 0 band at energy of ∼ 0.5 eV in Fig. 4. In this sense, such bands “emerge” rather than “converge” with Yb filling and we describe the new band minima as “emergent bands” rather than “convergent bands.” The band convergence previously discussed in the literature for skutterudites5,6,94 takes a dif- ferent form than that identified in our work. Since in these previous works the term was ap- plied to the convergence of the energy of an existing conduction band minimum between Γ and N for x = 0 (i.e., the lowest-energy mini- mum roughly halfway from Γ to N in Fig. 4) to that of the conduction band minima at Γ, this corresponds to the typical use of the band con- vergence term, as discussed above. Our results strongly suggest that several other band min- ima, including those emergent bands absent in the unfilled material, should also substantially contribute to the electronic transport. Indeed, as shown in Fig. 5(a), even for the lowest fill- ing value considered of x = 1/4, these other band minima are significantly lower in energy than the band minimum previously considered in the literature. Conclusions Using first-principles calculations, we provide a detailed understanding of the phase stability and electronic properties of filled skutterudite CoSb3. The Yb-filled skutterudite YbxCo4Sb12 exhibits a mild tendency to phase separate into the Yb-rich and Yb-poor endmembers, as well as a strong tendency for chemical decomposi- tion into Co–Sb and Yb–Sb binaries. Single- phase solid solutions with a limited Yb solubil- ity, observed in experiment, are stabilized by configurational entropy. In addition to enhanc- ing the band gap and effective masses, the pres- 10 ence of Yb leads to two distinct types of elec- tronic carriers: (1) new emergent conduction band minima whose electronic states are local- ized near the rattler atoms and (2) the delo- calized electronic states at the Brillouin zone center. Acknowledgement We thank Jeff Snyder (Northwestern) and Wenjie Li (Penn State) for useful discussions. We acknowledge sup- port from the U.S. Department of Energy un- der Contract de-sc0014520. Computational re- sources were provided by the National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center (U.S. Department of Energy Contract DE-AC02- 05CH11231), the Extreme Science and Engi- neering Discovery Environment (National Sci- ence Foundation Contract ACI-1548562), and the Quest high performance computing facility at Northwestern University. Supporting Information Avail- able The following files are available free of charge. Additional details on the Yb–Co–Sb convex hull, YbxCo4Sb12 cluster expansion, polynomial fit to formation energies of SQS, computation of solvus and comparison to past solubility pre- dictions, the electronic band structure of arti- ficially doped CoSb3, and the carrier effective masses for CoSb3 and YbCo4Sb12.