Empirical case for two pseudogaps in cuprate superconductors J. M. Tranquada∗ Condensed Matter Physics and Materials Science Division, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York 11973, USA (Dated: April 25, 2019) Superconductivity in cuprates is achieved by doping holes into a correlated charge-transfer insu- lator. While the correlated character of the parent insulator is now understood, there is no accepted theory for the “normal” state of the doped insulator. I present a mostly empirical analysis of a large range of experimental characterizations, making the case for two pseudogaps: (1) a large pseudogap resulting from the competition between the energy of superexchange-coupled local Cu moments and the kinetic energy of doped holes; (2) a small pseudogap that results from dopant disorder and consequent variations in local charge density, leading to a distribution of local super- conducting onset temperatures. The large pseudogap closes as hole kinetic energy dominates at higher doping and the dynamic antiferromagnetic correlations become overdamped. Establishing spatially-homogeneous d-wave superconductivity is limited by those regions with the weakest su- perconducting phase coherence, which tends to be limited by low-energy spin fluctuations. The magnitude of the small pseudogap is correlated with the doping-dependent energy Ecross associated with the neck of the hour-glass dispersion of spin excitations. The consequences of this picture are discussed. I. INTRODUCTION It is now well established that the parent compounds of cuprate superconductors are charge-transfer Mott- Hubbard insulators [1–3], where a consequence of the strong Coulomb repulsion in the half-filled Cu 3dx2−y2 or- bital is antiferromagnetism driven by the superexchange mechanism . Superconductivity with a high transition temperature, Tc, can be achieved by doping a sufficient density of holes into such a system. We know that the resulting superconducting state involves pairing of holes with a d-wave symmetry . At the same time, there is no accepted understanding of the “normal” state from which the superconductivity develops, and finding an ef- fective description remains a major challenge in the field . Analysis often begins at finite doping. Starting from a weak-coupling perspective, the depression of the measured density of charge carriers compared to the expectation for a model with no Coulomb repulsion has been characterized in terms of a pseudogap . As the carrier density appears to decrease with cool- ing, the temperature-doping phase diagram is typically drawn with an effective phase boundary between high- temperature and pseudogap phases. Despite the fact that the high-temperature phase is incoherent , it has been popular to propose mean-field pictures in which the onset of an order parameter that competes with superconduc- tivity causes a reduction of the density of states at the Fermi energy . Based on a weak-coupling interpre- tation of magnetic susceptibility, heat capacity, and re- sistivity measurements as a function of dopant-induced hole density p, Tallon and Loram proposed that the pseudogap closes at pc ∼ 0.2. A number of theorists ∗ jtran@bnl.gov have proposed that pc corresponds to a putative quantum critical point (QCP) associated with various possible or- der parameters [12–17]. Recent experimental studies of quantities probing the electronic density of states have been interpreted as providing evidence for such a QCP . From an alternative perspective, the pseudogap phe- nomena are a consequence of competing energies, rather than orders. Following Anderson’s lead , one can start with the big energies in the problem and consider their impact. There is now a great library of experimental re- sults on hole-doped cuprates [21–24]. A recent review has made clear some of the apparent conflicts in inter- preting the results from different experimental techniques . Here, I attempt to combine the results and insights of many researchers to form an interpretation based on ex- perimental results, with minimal reliance on theory, that overcomes many of the conflicts. Rather than a review, this will be something of a meta-analysis. My motivation has come from facing down inconsistencies of interpreta- tion based on my own experiments . I will present the case that we need two pseudo- gaps in order to reconcile a variety of observations. The large pseudogap results from a competition between superexchange-coupled Cu moments and the doped holes that would like to lower their kinetic energy by delocal- izing. Here the instantaneous correlations of neighboring spins are the key factor; these cannot be described by a static mean field theory. With doping, one observes a gradual reduction in the characteristic spin-excitation energy together with an evolution of the energy width as- sociated with charge excitations. This pseudogap tends to zero when the holes reach sufficient density to over- damp the remaining clusters of antiferromagnetic (AF) spins. The small pseudogap involves spatial variation in the local hole density, local development of superconducting arXiv:1904.10473v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 23 Apr 2019 2 coherence, and inhibition of long-range phase order due to regions with low-energy AF fluctuations. The spatial disorder has long been clear from local probes such as scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) [27–29] and nu- clear magnetic resonance (NMR) studies , and an appreciation for its impact has been growing . The maximal energy and temperature scales for local coherence and superconductivity fluctuations occur at p ∼ 0.12. They are correlated with the doping depen- dence of the spin-excitation spectrum, which develops an “hourglass” form with a characteristic energy Ecross that appears to act as an upper limit for the pairing scale. I begin by considering the measured excitations of the lightly-doped Mott insulator, followed by a simple- minded theoretical analysis in Sec. III. The large pseudo- gap and its doping dependence are described in Sec. IV. The analysis of the small pseudogap is presented in Sec. V. Finally, the implications of this analysis are dis- cussed in Sec. V, with a brief summary in Sec. VI. II. DOPING A MOTT INSULATOR Three decades of experiments have taught us quite a bit about cuprates. The undoped parent compounds, such as La2CuO4, are antiferromagnetic (AF) insulators with a superexchange coupling in the range of 120 to 140 meV [34–36]. The optical excitation gap of 1.5–2 eV is of the charge-transfer type and does not depend on the presence of AF order . The hole on each Cu is in the 3dx2−y2 orbital [38–40] with some hybridization to the neighboring O 2pσ orbitals , where the degree of hy- bridization can vary among cuprate families . Other 3d levels are separated by at least 1.5 eV . When a modest density of holes is doped into the planes, the op- tical gap does not collapse; instead, weight is gradually transferred into the gap . The dopant-induced holes have a dominant O 2pσ character . Recent STM measurements on lightly doped Bi2Sr2−xLaxCuO6+δ (Bi2201) confirm some of the earlier results and provide important new clues . made at several different points within 200 ̊A of one another on the same atomically-flat sample surface. The hole concentration is estimated to be p = 0.07, but the sample is not superconducting. A crucial feature of these spectra is that the range of bias voltage spans the charge-transfer gap. Looking at curve 1, we see that there are essentially no states within the gap at that point and the charge transfer gap is about 2 eV. For the other curves, we see that, locally, weight from both the lower and upper edges of the gap has moved into the gap, and the chemical potential is pinned within the gap, not at the top of the valence band. Furthermore, the transferred weight is spread over a large energy scale (∼ 0.5 eV), and there is a gap centered at the chemical potential that is relatively particle-hole symmetric. The variation in the local weight of the mid-gap states Tunneling curves at various points on the surface of Bi2Sr2−xLaxCuO6+δ with p = 0.07 (charge-ordered insula- tor) measured by STM. Reprinted with permission from , Springer Nature c⃝2016. suggests a significant role for the long-range Coulomb in- teraction. In the present case, a hole is introduced by replacing a La3+ ion with a Sr2+. The hole goes into a neighboring CuO2 plane, but it is not free to move away. It feels a substantial Coulomb attraction to the dopant site, and in the limit of very small doping, the screening comes mainly from phonons . As reviewed in , a single hole may be localized on a scale of a few lattice spacings. In La2−xSrxCuO4 with a hole concentration p ≲ 0.05, the low-temperature in-plane resistivity shows a resistive upturn at low temperature with a form consis- tent with variable-range hopping in a Coulomb potential . Coulomb effects are not the only impediment to charge motion; there is also the important role of AF corre- 0 0.5 1 Q = (H,0.5,0) 0 100 200 300 400 500 Energy (meV) (a) spin waves La2CuO4 2J 0 1 2 dI/dV (pS) (b) point tunneling p = 0.03 0 0.5 1 |cos(kxa)-cos(kya)|/2 (c) electronic dispersion Ca2CuO2Cl2 0 0 kx ky (a) Spin-wave dispersion in La2CuO4 measured by neutron scattering . (b) Schematic version of typical conductance curves measured by STM at typical locations in Bi2Sr2−xLaxCuO6+δ with p = 0.03 , plotted as binding energy vs. conductance; black: region with no in-gap states; magenta: region with significant in-gap states. (c) Effective gap or dispersion along the nominal weak-coupling Fermi sur- face measured by ARPES in Ca2CuO2Cl2 . 3 0 /2 k x 0 /2 k y -0.5 0 0.5 Energy (eV) kx ky Energy (eV) k = (π/2,π/2) k = (π,0) (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (a) Dispersion of the antibonding band for a non-interacting 3-band model with only nearest-neighbor hopping, projected onto a quadrant of the first Brillouin zone with energy referenced to the chemical potential at half-filling. Circles Antiferromagnetic spin structure with spin size proportional to the dx2−y2 weights in the (π/2, π/2) wave function. (d) Schematic wave function at k = (π, 0) , and (e) the corresponding weighted spin components. lations. Here the relevant energy scale is the nearest- neighbor superexchange interaction J. It can be de- termined from measurements of the antiferromagnetic spin waves in parent compounds such as La2CuO4 by inelastic neutron scattering, as illustrated in Fig. 2(a) . While longer-range interactions can have small impacts, one can see that the spin-wave bandwidth is ∼ 2J ∼ 300 meV. This is also the energy scale for locally flipping a single spin. It is interesting to compare the magnetic energies with the electronic dispersion measured by angle-resolved pho- toemission spectroscopy (ARPES) in another insulator, Ca2CuO2Cl2, as shown in Fig. 2(c) . By knocking out an electron, a hole is created, whose energy varies with wave vector. The measurements shown are roughly along the direction of the anticipated Fermi surface for noninteracting electrons (see Sec. III), in which case, the sample would be a metal and we would expect to see no dispersion. Instead, the measured dispersion has a form quite similar to that of a d-wave superconducting gap, which is linear in | cos(kxa) − cos(kya)| . The magnitude of the effective gap here is very similar to 2J, suggesting a connection to spin correlations. To make a connection with the STM measure- ments, representative tunneling conductance curves for Bi2Sr2−xLaxCuO6+δ with p ∼ 0.03 are shown in Fig. 2(b) . Where in-gap states appear, their relative weight (on the positive binding-energy side) has a maximum that is comparable to 2J. III. ROUGH INTERPRETATION To appreciate how the different results in Fig. 2 may be connected, it is helpful to use simple ideas about the pos- sible electronic structure. We consider the tight-binding calculation involving the Cu 3dx2−y2 and O 2pσ orbitals [where σ = x(y) for O sites along the a(b) axis] with only nearest-neighbor hopping. (This is essentially the Emery model , but with the onsite Coulomb repulsion U set to zero.) The relevant formulas have been given in detail by Andersen et al. . Using common parameter values (3 eV for the separation between the Cu and O levels and hopping tpd = 1.6 eV ), the antibonding band, which should be half-filled for an undoped CuO2 layer, is easily calculated. The dispersion, projected onto a quadrant of the first Brillouin zone, is shown in Fig. 3(a). In this sim- ple model, the Fermi surface runs diagonally from (π, 0) to (0, π) through (π/2, π/2), the position of the node in the case of the d-wave superconducting gap (the nodal point). Note that for this section the lattice parameter a is set equal to 1. The schematic wave functions at two of these points [indicated by circles in Fig. 3(a)] are also given in , and we reproduce them in Fig. 3(b) and (d). The an- tibonding band involves arrangements of the O 2pσ or- bitals that are in-phase with the Cu 3dx2−y2. At each wave vector, the variation of the wave function in real space follows cos(k·rn), where rn is the center of the nth unit cell. For k = (π/2, π/2), we see that the phase of the d orbitals is identical for all sites along the diagonal, but is staggered for second neighbors along the Cu-O bond directions; for nearest neighbors, the amplitude is zero. For k = (π, 0), the d orbitals are in-phase along and antiphase along . Again, these states have identical energies in this noninteracting model. Now consider the impact of antiferromagnetism. At the nodal point, the Cu sites that contribute to the wave function all have the same spin direction, as shown in Fig. 3(c), so that the electronic state is not impacted by 4 the spin correlations. On the other hand, at the antinodal wave vector (π, 0), neighboring Cu sites have antiparallel spins. An extended state must have a single spin state, so the wave function at (π, 0) is incompatible with AF spin correlations. Note that the incompatibility does not depend on static order; if the instantaneous spins are antiparallel on neighboring sites, then they cannot be part of the same extended state. (For a proper analysis of the problem of one hole in a two-dimensional (2D) antiferromagnet, see .) In order to realize the state shown in Fig. 3(d), it is necessary to flip half of the Cu spins. The energy to flip a spin corresponds to the maximum spin-wave en- ergy, ∼ 2J ∼ 300 meV. Hence, it is plausible that, for a hole moving in an AF, the energy difference between the antinodal (AN) and nodal points is ∼ 2J. Furthermore, we can use the factor cos(k · rn) to estimate the energy gap along the noninteracting Fermi surface in terms of the relative amplitude on neighboring Cu sites. It has the same form as the absolute magnitude of the d-wave superconducting gap, consistent with the dispersion ob- served by ARPES in Fig. 2(c). We can also use this picture to interpret the STM con- ductance curves. In terms of density of states, the non- interacting band dispersion in Fig. 3(a) results in a van Hove singularity at the antinodal points. AF correla- tions will smear out this distribution, but more impor- tantly, they will put a gap in the middle of it. Note that there are similar densities of states above and below the Fermi level, and the AF correlations will gap states on both sides of the chemical potential. This is qualita- tively compatible with the experimental observations, as in Fig. 1. Another factor for the STM concerns the nature of the tunneling process from the probe tip to the sample surface and along the c axis, typically through an api- cal O site, to a Cu site in the CuO2 plane nearest the surface. The 2p orbital on the apical site has s symme- try relative to the Cu, so that it cannot couple to the 3dx2−y2 but may couple to the in-plane O 2pσ states. From Fig. 3(b) and (d), one can see that no coupling is possible at k = (π/2, π/2) because the O orbitals are all in phase with the nearest Cu 3dx2−y2 orbital, but there is a finite coupling at (π, 0) as the phasing is different. Such effects were originally noted in analyses of c-axis conduc- tion and planar tunneling , and are discussed for STM in . It is important to note that the competition between AF correlations and kinetic energy at the AN point does not depend on static order of the spins. What matters is the strength of local, instantaneous correlations, and these can survive to very high temperatures , far beyond any ordering temperature. IV. LARGE PSEUDOGAP Based on the comparison of magnetic and electronic spectra in undoped to very lightly hole-doped cuprates, it seems reasonable to associate the large pseudogap in the AN region with AF correlations. In this section, we will follow how these energies change with doping and see how they are correlated. Hole doping as low as p = 0.02 is enough to destroy long-range AF order in cuprates . At low excitation energies, the long-wavelength spin correlations are signif- icantly reorganized ; however, the high-energy excita- tions evolve more gradually . A useful measure of the high-energy evolution is given by Raman scattering measurements of two-magnon excitations . The ex- citation mechanism for a quasi-2D AF involves flipping the orientation of a nearest-neighbor pair of spins with respect to all others. This disrupts 6 magnetic bonds and costs an energy of ∼ 3J . evolves with doping in YBa2Cu3O6+x . As one can see, the well-defined peak in the lightly-doped sys- tem softens in energy as holes are added. Sugai et al. have similar results for La2−xSrxCuO4 (LSCO), Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ (Bi2212), and Bi2201, extending to higher doping, and in all cases the 2-magnon peak ap- pears to become overdamped in the vicinity of p ∼ 0.2. p 0 100 200 300 400 500 Energy (meV) YBa2Cu3O6+x (a) 2-magnon Raman 0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 p 0 100 200 300 400 500 Energy (meV) (b) mid IR (a) Two-magnon response measured by Raman scattering in YBa2Cu3O6+x as a function of estimated hole concentration p . (b) Mid-infrared optical conductivity in YBa2Cu3O6+x , with the energy scale divided by 2. In both (a) and (b), the data have been interpolated, and circles denote measured peak positions. Dashed lines are quadratic extrapolations of the peak positions. 5 If we assume that the excitation mechanism remains the same in the doped systems, then the energy will depend both on the strength of J and the degree to which a finite patch of Cu sites retains AF correlations. While the AF correlations restrict the hole motion and spatial distribu- tion, the increasing density of holes must reduce the spa- tial areas in which AF correlations among Cu spins can survive. Neutron scattering measurements have shown that the instantaneous spin correlation length is reduced to approximately one lattice spacing near optimal dop- ing , so a decrease in correlation length can describe much of the decay in the peak energy with p. Never- theless, it can also be convenient to think of an average reduction in J. For example, Johnston pointed out that the temperature dependence of the bulk magnetic susceptibility in La2−xSrxCuO4 can be scaled by doping- dependent values of J and average moment per Cu, with both trending toward zero at p = x ∼ 0.2, as confirmed by others . I argued in the last section that the energy scale of the distribution of mid-gap states detected by STM in lightly doped cuprates is associated with AF correlations. Another measure of these states is given by optical con- ductivity, σ1(ω). At energies below that of the charge- transfer gap, optical measurements largely probe transi- tions from filled to empty mid-gap states. For moderately underdoped cuprates, it is possible at low temperature to distinguish the broad “mid-IR” conductivity from the more coherent Drude peak, centered at zero energy . observed in YBCO at temperatures close to but above the superconducting Tc . Here the energy scale has been divided by two to make it comparable to electron binding energies. The energy scale decreases in a fashion similar to the two-magnon energies, while the spectral weight grows with doping. The variation of the effective carrier concentration is considered more quantitatively in Fig. 5. Integrating the optical conductivity from zero to a finite frequency gives a result proportional to the effective hole density peff divided by an effective mass m∗. Padilla et al. compared optical data with measures of p from the Hall coefficient to obtain m∗/me ≈ 4 for LSCO and 3 for YBCO, where me is the electron mass. (A later study has suggested that m∗ decreases by ∼ 50% with doping in the range 0.1 < p < 0.22 .) To estimate the carrier density associated with the Drude peak, they integrated σ1(ω) data for LSCO and YBCO to 80 meV, which yields the peff values indicated by filled squares in Fig. 5, plot- ted against the estimated dopant-induced carrier density p . At small p, the effective Drude carrier density is close to p, while it begins to rise above p for p ≳ 0.1; such behavior in LSCO was originally noted based on measurements of the Hall coefficient , and similar be- havior is seen in the nodal weight detected by ARPES . Integrating up to 1.5 eV, one captures the peff asso- ciated with both the Drude peak and the mid-IR signal, indicated by the filled circles. This value is several times 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 p 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1 ps, peff LSCO YBCO peff = p ps Drude Drude + mid-IR Comparison of various estimates of carrier density in La2−xSrxCuO4 (violet) and YBa2Cu3O6+x(green). Triangles: superfluid density, ps, from measurements of the magnetic penetration depth on Y0.8Ca0.2Ba2Cu3O6+x by muon spin rotation and on LSCO films by mutual inductance ; squares: effective carrier density, peff, from integrating in- plane optical conductivity to 80 meV ; circles: peff from integrating to 1.5 eV . In evaluating peff, the effective masses of 4me and 3me for LSCO and YBCO, respectively, determined in were used. larger than the Drude weight alone, and approaches 1 for LSCO at p ≈ 0.18; however, it never seems to reach the level of 1 + p that one would expect in the absence of correlations. In a complementary fashion, one can obtain the su- perfluid density ps from measurements of the magnetic penetration depth λ at T ≪ Tc, using 1 λ2 = 4πpse2 mec2 . (1) Two ways to measure λ are by muon spin relaxation (μSR) in an applied magnetic field and by mutual inductance . The open triangles in Fig. 5 indicate ps values for Y0.8Ca0.2Ba2Cu3O6+x (determined by μSR ) and for LSCO thin films (from mutual inductance ). (A related figure of ps in LSCO, including detailed data from , is presented in .) Much of the Drude weight from T > Tc goes into the superfluid, while ps in these materials reaches a maximum near p ∼ 0.2. 6 0 1 2 3 4 pH / x La2-xSrxCuO4 x = 0.17 0.14 0.11 0.08 (a) 0 100 200 300 400 500 Temperature (K) 0 1 2 3 (10-7 emu/g) (b) (a) Ratio of the hole concentration pH determined from the Hall effect to the Sr fraction x in La2−xSrxCuO4; data from have been interpolated. (b) Bulk magnetic susceptibility in La2−xSrxCuO4; data from have been in- terpolated. The hole concentration pH measured by the Hall effect shows temperature dependence. Figure 6(a) shows the the ratio pH/x for La2−xSrxCuO4 from measurements reported in . The ratio grows both with temperature and doping. This behavior is correlated with changes in the magnetic susceptibility, shown in Fig. 6(b) . The magnetic susceptibility for a purely magnetic system is inversely proportional to J; it is small when AF correla- tions are strong, and it rises with temperature to a maxi- mum as nearest-neighbor correlations become weak. The maximum in χ has been used as one measure of the pseu- dogap, and the correlation with the temperature depen- dence of pH has been analyzed previously . Opti- cal studies of underdoped cuprates have shown that the electronic excitations are completely incoherent at high temperature, where the AF correlations are also weak; a Drude peak only develops on cooling, which oc- curs together with the enhancement of the spin correla- tions (also seen by inelastic neutron scattering ). The large pseudogap effectively closes near pc ∼ 0.2 as the fraction of correlated Cu spins is reduced suf- ficiently that they can be overdamped by quasiparticle scattering in the normal state. With the loss of domi- nant magnetic correlations, the antinodal states can be- come more conventional. It is in the vicinity of pc that quasiparticle interference analysis of STM spectroscopic images observes a transition of the locus of Bogoliubov states from finite arcs to a full Fermi surface . In LSCO, it is close to pc that the change in Fermi-surface topology from hole-like to electron-like is observed . V. SMALL PSEUDOGAP From the earliest spectroscopic imaging with STM on Bi2212 at T ≪ Tc, a common point of emphasis has been the spatial variation and disorder in apparent supercon- ducting coherence peaks with energies in the range of 20–50 meV [27–29]; such behavior is also seen in Bi2201 . When measurements were eventually done across Tc, it was found that there is also a correlation between the size of the local gap and the temperature at which it closes, with larger gaps closing at higher temperatures that extend well above the bulk Tc . Experiments also established correlations between dopant defects and local gap size . The scale of the disorder in the coherence peaks of Bi2212 is tens of ̊A , but this is also the scale of the superconducting coherence length . This has led to proposals that the inhomogeneity is associated with variations in the local hole concentration and the local pairing scale . There is also evidence of a spatial variation of hole concentration in La2−xSrxCuO4 based on the analysis of 63Cu nuclear quadrupole resonance and 17O nuclear magnetic resonance measurements. For x ∼ 0.15, the width of the distribution is ∆x ∼ 0.05 at low temperature, with a characteristic length scale of ∼ 30 ̊A. The lack of effective charge screening is also indicated by a study of the dynamic charge susceptibil- ity with momentum-resolved electron-energy-loss spec- troscopy in Bi2212, where the expected plasmon features are missing . 0 0.5 1 Q = (H,0.5,0) 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 Energy (meV) YBCO UD61K c Ecross (a) 0 5 10 dI/dV (pS) Bi2212 UD75K c (b) 0 0.5 1 |cos(kxa)-cos(kya)|/2 Bi2212 UD75K c (c) (a) Magnetic spectral weight measured by neutron scattering in YBa2Cu3O6.6 with Tc = 61 K and p ≈ 0.12 . (b) Bias voltage (binding energy) vs. conductance measured by STM for typical regions in Bi2212 with Tc = 75 K and p = 0.13(1) ; shading reflects the relative fre- quency with which these spectra occur. (c) Superconducting gap dispersion measured by ARPES at 10 K in a similar un- derdoped Bi2212 sample with Tc = 75 K ; dashed line indicates the simple d-wave gap form. In each panel, the gray line indicates ∆c = 3kTc based on Raman results . 7 tance curves (for positive binding energy) from STM measurements at various locations on the surface of un- derdoped Bi2212 . For a sample with Tc = 75 K, the most frequently observed gap energy is 45 meV, with a broad spread of gaps observed around that value. (Note that for more underdoped samples, the energy scale of the coherence peaks decreases and is clearly distinguished from the large pseudogap .) Another measure of the superconducting gap is given by ARPES, which provided some of the original evidence that the gap has a d-wave form . Deviations from the d-wave gap dispersion are observed in underdoped cuprates , as illustrated in Fig. 7(c) for Bi2212 with Tc = 75 K . The variation from the d-wave- like dispersion indicated by the dashed line occurs in the antinodal region and at energies that are similar to the coherence-peak energies detected by STM. As ARPES averages over a large area, it is reasonable to expect that it averages over the distribution of local gaps detected by STM. This averaging effect was recently taken into ac- count to explain the anomalous temperature dependence near Tc of the antinodal spectral function in slightly- overdoped Bi2212 crystals . It should also explain the appearance of sharp antinodal peaks at T ≳ Tc in optimally to underdoped Bi2212 . On warming to T ∼ Tc, ARPES measurements on un- derdoped Bi2212 and Bi2201 find that the gap closes only along a finite arc, centered on the nodal point, with a gap remaining in the AN region [96, 102, 107– 109]. The magnitude of the low-temperature gap that develops at the ends of the arcs has been labelled ∆c, the coherent superconducting gap, which is detected by Andreev reflection in tunneling spectroscopy and by Raman scattering . For the families YBCO, Bi2212, Tl2Ba2CuO6+δ, and HgBa2CuO4+δ, it has been observed that 2∆c ≈ 6kTc . For energies below ∆c, STM studies observe spatially homogeneous behav- ior [112–114]. The magnitude of ∆c is plotted as a gray horizontal line in Fig. 7. As one can see, the variations among the tunneling curves tend to disappear below ∆c and the ARPES gap follows the d-wave slope below that energy. The energy scale associated with the antinodal coher- ence peaks is smaller than that of the big pseudogap, and hence it seems reasonable to label it the small pseu- dogap. As with the big pseudogap, it is appropriate to consider the connection with antiferromagnetic cor- relations. Figure 7(a) shows a schematic version of the imaginary part of the dynamic susceptibility, χ′′(q, ω), in YBa2Cu3O6.6 as determined by inelastic neutron scat- tering . (No neutron scattering studies of under- doped Bi2212 crystals have been reported yet.) One sees an “hourglass” spectrum similar to that of other under- doped cuprates , with the neck of the hourglass at Ecross = 38 meV. The excitations dispersing above Ecross are similar to spin waves with a substantial gap. Such a singlet-triplet gap is generally considered by theorists to be good for inducing pairing among the doped holes At the same time, downwardly-dispersing excitations are also present, and these are predicted to be bad for pairing . The magnitude of ∆c corresponds to the scale where the low-energy excitations are getting very weak. A recent study has found that this is a general feature: the spin gap ∆spin, defined by the energy be- low which magnetic spectral weight decreases below Tc, acts as an upper limit to ∆c . When combined with the evidence for charge inhomogeneity, I believe that this provides an important clue to the physics behind ∆c. The AF excitations extend to lower energies for smaller hole concentrations. Defects, such as Zn impu- rities, can also locally-induce low-energy AF excitations [119–122]. From the STM imaging results, we have have a picture of patches with local superconducting coherence that can develop at temperatures above the bulk Tc. One can think of an analogy with granular superconductors, where individual grains develop strong pairing but bulk superconductivity is limited by the lack of phase coher- ence across the interfaces between grains . In fact, this analogy has been invoked previously to explain the correlation between superfluid density and the product of Tc with normal-state conductivity, known as Homes’ law and which subsumes the Uemura relation between Tc and superfluid density in the un- derdoped regime . Furthermore, the temperature- dependent development of a coherent superconducting gap ∆c smaller than the superconducting pseudogap in a granular superconductor has been demonstrated re- cently by Andreev spectroscopy on indium oxide samples . For cuprates, the barrier to phase coherence would be regions with low-energy AF correlations. Developing superconducting phase order across the sample requires a proximity-effect-like establishment of a minimum spin gap in all spatial regions. Several analyses of ARPES data on Bi2212 conclude that the closing of the superconducting gap along a fi- nite arc is associated with the electronic scattering rate exceeding the gap size in the near nodal region [128–130]. A study of c-axis optical conductivity found evidence for superconducting phase fluctuations in the vicinity of Tc , and further support was provided by an STM study of quasiparticle interference as a function of temperature in a fairly underdoped Bi2212 sample . Recent ob- servations of nonlinear conductivity extending well above Tc in various cuprates have been interpreted as evidence of charge inhomogeneity . Together, these results seem compatible with and supportive of the proposed scenario. To test the correlation between Ecross and the AN SC gap energies, it is useful to look at the doping dependence of these quantities. Figure 8(a) shows the doping depen- dence of Ecross determined by neutron scattering in four families of cuprates. The trends are remarkably similar in all of these compounds. The general doping trend is approximated by the gray bars in the background. In Fig. 8(b), the gray bars are repeated to allow a com- 8 0 20 40 60 E cross (a) LSCO YBCO 0 20 40 60 Energy (meV) c AN (b) 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 p 0 50 100 Temperature (K) SC (c) LSCO 8. (a) Ecross from neutron scattering studies of La2−xSrxCuO4 , YBa2Cu3O6+x[134–137], Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ[138–142], and HgCa2CuO6+δ . Gray line indicates the common trend among these fami- lies. (b) Antinodal gap (red filled circles) and coherent gap (dark red open circles) energies from Raman scattering on Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ . The shading of the ∆AN sym- bols reflects the change in peak area with doping. (c) Vi- olet contours indicate relative strength (logarithmic scale) of superconducting fluctuations above the superconducting phase (blue) obtained from Nernst effect measurements on La2−xSrxCuO4 . parison with measurements of ∆c and the small AN pseu- dogap ∆AN determined by Raman scattering in Bi2212 . (Comparisons of 2∆AN from a broad range of techniques have been presented elsewhere ; the other measures are consistent with the Raman results. For Raman results on a broader range of families, see .) Besides indicating the energies by symbol position, the shading of the symbols is indicative of the integrated in- tensity of the spectral feature, which extrapolates to zero at p = 0.10 . Note that the absence of the ∆AN sig- nal for p ≲ 0.12 is found for other cuprate families, as well . Also, ARPES measurements on Bi2212 with p ≲ 0.1 (Tc < 70 K) generally show an absence of legit- imate quasiparticle peaks in the AN region, where the large pseudogap tends to dominate [147–150]. Hence, it appears that ∆AN ≲ Ecross (with the exception of LSCO, where ∆AN ≪ Ecross ). This result is consistent with the idea that the singlet-triplet excitation gap for local Cu moments sets the scale for pairing. perconducting fluctuations as a function of doping in LSCO, where the measure is the Nernst coefficient, plot- ted with roughly logarithmic intensity contours . (The Nernst effect is the transverse voltage measured in response to a longitudinal temperature gradient in the presence of a magnetic field; it is sensitive to vortex fluc- tuations for temperatures near Tc .) The maximum onset temperature occurs for p ∼ 0.1, with the response falling rapidly at lower p. This behavior is consistent with the result in Fig. 8(b) that the maximum local pairing gap is optimized near p ∼ 0.12. In contrast, phase coher- ence and superfluid density are optimized at p ∼ pc, as indicated by the plot of the superfluid density in Fig. 5. VI. DISCUSSION The interpretations presented above have implications for various other features observed in cuprates, as dis- cussed below. A. Case of ∆spin = 0 If the energies associated with superexchange among Cu spins and the delocalization of doped holes are com- peting, then one must eventually confront the issue of how correlated local moments and mobile holes are in- stantaneously distributed in real space. This topic is the subject of intertwined orders, which has been reviewed elsewhere . The evolution of the low-energy spin excitations, as a modest density of holes is introduced, shows a common shift from commensurate to incommen- surate, with the incommensurability growing in propor- tion to p, for several cuprate families . This behavior is simply connected to the rise of Ecross with doping . Recent numerical calculations support the idea that hole- doping an antiferromagnet leads to segregation of charge and spins into stripe-like structures . In the extreme experimental case, one observes static charge and spin stripe order, as in La2−xBaxCuO4 . In the presence of maximum spin order at x = 1/8, we have ∆spin = 0 and a strong suppression of spatially- uniform d-wave superconductivity, as indicated by the severely depressed onset temperature for 3D supercon- ductivity. Nevertheless, the occurrence of 2D supercon- ductivity can be rationalized in terms of a putative pair-density-wave superconductor . This can be viewed as the limiting case of low-energy spin fluctu- ations inhibiting uniform phase coherence between hole- 9 rich regions with a large pairing scale. Once spin order develops, the neighboring stripes of pair correlations can establish a relative π phase shift to minimize the overlap with the spin stripes. These are variations on a common theme. B. Charge order Charge-density-wave order has now been observed in most cuprate families, where, in contrast to La2−xBaxCuO4, it develops only in the absence of spin order . In particular, a significant range of doping has been tested in YBCO . In zero-field, the onset temperature (which is not sharply defined) has a maximum of ∼ 150 K at p ∼ 0.12, with finite order ob- served for 0.08 ≲ p ≲ 0.18; the short-range and static characters are confirmed by NMR . This ordering correlates with the onset of the spin gap as determined by the temperature dependence of the spin-lattice relax- ation rate measured by Cu NMR . Enhanced ∆AN peaks were found in this regime by Raman scatter- ing and ARPES ; in both cases, the amplitudes decay towards zero as p decreases to 0.1. Further evidence of superconducting correlations above Tc is provided by studies of c-axis optical conduc- tivity. A transverse bilayer plasmon associated with in- terlayer Josephson coupling has been identified in YBCO . In underdoped samples, it starts to develop well above Tc [167–170]. At low temperature, the con- nection with superconductivity is indicated by a partial suppression in a c-axis magnetic field . There is also evidence for a small amount of superfluid density that survives above Tc in the same regime as the CDW order . There is disorder in this system associated with im- perfect Cu-O chain ordering. X-ray scattering studies of chain order in high-purity, underdoped samples find finite correlation lengths along all directions . Even the best case of a carefully annealed and detwinned crystal had a correlation length ξc of just 5 unit cells along the c axis, while in-plane, ξb ∼ 400 ̊A parallel to the chains and ξa ∼ 150 ̊A in the perpendicular direc- tion . More typical values are ξb < 200 ̊A parallel to the chains . The finite correlation lengths have been confirmed by measurements in which a small x-ray beam is scanned across a sample . NMR on chain-site Cu confirms the disorder through the presence of inequivalent sites . The disorder appears to be reflected in the CDW measurements, where the typical in-plane correlation length is ∼ 60 ̊A . It seems likely that all of these phenomena are con- nected. The evidence for local pairing correlations in a landscape of finite disorder could lead to a spatial mod- ulation of the pair density. Indeed, it has been proposed that local PDW order underlies the CDW correlations , in which case the small pseudogap might be asso- ciated with PDW order. C. Quantum oscillations Detailed studies of quantum oscillations (QO) have been performed on YBCO at high magnetic fields . It is clear that the magnitude of the QO will be limited by impurities and disorder . Is the obser- vation of QO consistent with the disorder that has been observed in x-ray scattering studies? To answer this, we must consider the length scales involved. Finite QO gradually appear at fields greater than 20 T. The most relevant quantity to consider would be the cy- clotron radius, but this requires quantitative knowledge of the relevant Fermi velocity. As an alternative, one can evaluate the vortex lattice spacing at the onset of QO. Assuming a square vortex lattice , the vor- tex spacing at 20 T is 144 ̊A. This is comparable to the in-plane correlation length along the chain direc- tion . With increasing field, the magnetic length decreases while the disorder remains fixed, so that the relative volume compatible with coherent cyclotron or- bits will increase with field. D. Tri-layer cuprates Within a given family, Tc varies with the number of consecutive CuO2 layers, showing a maximum for three layers . Analysis of NMR Knight shift data on 3- and 4-layer cuprates indicates that the hole concentra- tions are different on the inner and outer layers, with p being larger on the outer planes by ∼ 0.04 . The results shown in Figs. 5 and 8 suggest why the distinct values of p could be beneficial for Tc. The superfluid density reaches a maximum for p ∼ 0.2, whereas pairing strength appears to be optimized for p ∼ 0.12. The tri- layer cuprates can simultaneously benefit from both of these features, consistent with a proposed mechanism for enhancing Tc . E. Other measures of disorder and SC fluctuations One must acknowledge that not all researchers are in agreement on the magnitude and relevance of disorder. For example, there has been an analysis of charge dis- order in LSCO, based on an analysis of x-ray diffrac- tion peak widths and superconducting transition widths, which concludes that the range of superconducting fluc- tuations above Tc is no more than 10% of Tc for a signif- icant range of doping . There have also been studies of magnetoresistance in YBCO and in-plane optical conductivity on LSCO from which it was concluded that superconducting fluctuations are restricted to a lim- ited temperature range above Tc. These studies demonstrate that, to the extent that su- perconducting correlations survive well above Tc, they do not occur uniformly across a sample. That observa- tion can still be consistent with local patches that have a 10 high transition temperature, provided that these patches do not percolate until the temperature gets close to Tc. Regarding disorder, one must give significant weight to local probe studies. For example, a scanning probe study of an LSCO film (x ≈ 0.1, Tc ≈ 18 K) found a disor- dered distribution of diamagnetism that was detectable to T ∼ 3Tc . F. Evidence for QCP There are certainly interesting behaviors such as nematic order [191–193] that evolve with doping in cuprates, and evidence for a possible nematic QCP has recently been presented . I view such order as more of a consequence than a driver of the electronic correla- tions and thus compatible with the perspective presented in this paper. An analysis of specific heat measurements on Y0.8Ca0.2Ba2Cu3O6+x found that the superconducting condensation energy gained below Tc shows a sharp peak at p = pc . Of course, this analysis ignores pair condensation energy that may develop above Tc, which one expects to be more significant for p < pc. It is also relevant to note that the superfluid density for the same system varies much more gradually with p, as shown in Fig. 5. A recent study of the low-temperature electronic heat capacity in Nd- and Eu-doped LSCO, with superconduc- tivity suppressed by a magnetic field of up to 18 T, finds a sharp peak at pc = 0.23 , which is interpreted as evidence of a QCP. Given that there are a structural tran- sition in that vicinity and large rare-earth moments that can amplify the correlations of Cu moments, there are reasons to wonder whether the spike in specific heat divided by T (C/T) is purely electronic. Perhaps a more interesting question is related to the large dip in C/T found at p ∼ 0.12 . The assumption has been made that the applied magnetic field is sufficient to destroy all electronic pairing; however, a recent high-field transport study on LBCO with x = 1/8 finds 2D superconductivity at T = 0.35 K and a field of 20 T, while there is evidence that pairing correlations may continue to survive at 35 T . Another way to destroy pairing is to substitute Zn for Cu. A study of the electronic C/T in LSCO, with normal-state behavior determined by Zn doping, found that the dip largely filled in and the maximum at p ∼ 0.2 was fairly rounded . VII. SUMMARY A broad range of experimental characterizations of cuprates can be reconciled with a few simple concepts. There is a large pseudogap that results from the competi- tion between local antiferromagnetic correlations, involv- ing superexchange-coupled Cu moments, and the doped holes that would like to lower their kinetic energy by de- localizing. The relative strength of the AF correlations decreases with doping, and the AF correlations become overdamped for p > pc. There is also a small pseudogap that results from the dependence of the pairing scale on p and the local vari- ation in p due to disorder and the long-range-Coulomb interaction. This energy scale appears to be limited by the doping-dependent spin fluctuation spectrum, and in particular the energy Ecross, corresponding to the neck of the hourglass dispersion. The onset of bulk super- conductivity is limited by regions with low-energy AF fluctuations; the magnitude of the spin gap established in the superconducting state corresponds to the energy scale for spatially-uniform superconductivity. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS I have benefited from discussions with and comments by K. Fujita, C. C. Homes, M. H ̈ucker, P. D. Johnson, S. A. Kivelson, P. A. Lee, Y. Li, H. Miao, N. J. Robinson, Senthil, and many others. This work was supported at Brookhaven by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences, U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) under Contract No. de- N. F. Mott, The Basis of the Electron Theory of Metals, with Special Reference to the Transition Metals, Proc. Phys. Soc. London A 62, 416 (1949). J. Hubbard, Electron correlations in narrow energy bands. II. The degenerate band case, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) A 277, 237 (1964). J. Zaanen, G. A. Sawatzky, and J. W. Allen, Band gaps and electronic structure of transition-metal compounds, Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 418 (1985). P. W. Anderson, New Approach to the Theory of Su- perexchange Interactions, Phys. Rev. 115, 2 (1959). C. E. Gough, M. S. Colclough, E. M. Forgan, R. G. Jordan, M. Keene, C. M. Muirhead, A. I. M. Rae, N. Thomas, J. S. Abell, and S. Sutton, Flux quanti- zation in a high-Tc superconductor, Nature 326, 855 C. C. Tsuei and J. R. Kirtley, Pairing symmetry in cuprate superconductors, Rev. Mod. Phys. 72, 969 B. Keimer, S. A. Kivelson, M. R. Norman, S. Uchida, and J. Zaanen, From quantum matter to high- temperature superconductivity in copper oxides, Nature J. Friedel, The high-Tc superconductors: a conservative view, J. Phys. Condens. Matter 1, 7757 (1989). 11 Y. S. Lee, K. Segawa, Z. Q. Li, W. J. Padilla, M. Dumm, S. V. Dordevic, C. C. Homes, Y. Ando, and D. N. Basov, Electrodynamics of the nodal metal state in weakly doped high-Tc cuprates, Phys. Rev. B 72, 054529 J. C. Slater, Magnetic Effects and the Hartree-Fock Equation, Phys. Rev. 82, 538 (1951). J. Tallon and J. Loram, The doping dependence of T ∗— what is the real high-Tc phase diagram?, Physica C 349, C. M. Varma, Non-Fermi-liquid states and pairing insta- bility of a general model of copper oxide metals, Phys. Rev. B 55, 14554 (1997). C. Castellani, C. Di Castro, and M. Grilli, Non-Fermi- liquid behavior and d-wave superconductivity near the charge-density-wave quantum critical point, Z. Phys. B: Condens. Matter 103, 137 (1996). S. Sachdev, Quantum phase transitions, Physics World S. Chakravarty, R. B. Laughlin, D. K. Morr, and C. Nayak, Hidden order in the cuprates, Phys. Rev. B S. Sachdev, Colloquium: Order and quantum phase transitions in the cuprate superconductors, Rev. Mod. Phys. 75, 913 (2003). A. Abanov, A. V. Chubukov, and J. Schmalian, Quantum-critical theory of the spin-fermion model and its application to cuprates: Normal state analysis, Adv. Phys. 52, 119 (2003). S. Badoux, W. Tabis, F. Lalibert ́e, G. Grissonnanche, B. Vignolle, D. Vignolles, J. B ́eard, D. A. Bonn, W. N. Hardy, R. Liang, N. Doiron-Leyraud, L. Taillefer, and C. Proust, Change of carrier density at the pseudogap critical point of a cuprate superconductor, Nature 531, B. Michon, C. Girod, S. Badoux, J. Kaˇcmarˇc ́ık, Q. Ma, M. Dragomir, H. A. Dabkowska, B. D. Gaulin, J.- S. Zhou, S. Pyon, T. Takayama, H. Takagi, S. Ver- ret, N. Doiron-Leyraud, C. Marcenat, L. Taillefer, and T. Klein, Thermodynamic signatures of quantum crit- icality in cuprate superconductors, Nature 567, 218 P. W. Anderson, Is There Glue in Cuprate Supercon- ductors?, Science 316, 1705 (2007). T. Timusk and B. Statt, The pseudogap in high- temperature superconductors: an experimental survey, Rep. Prog. Phys. 62, 61 (1999). M. R. Norman, D. Pines, and C. Kallin, The pseudogap: friend or foe of high Tc?, Adv. Phys, 54, 715 (2005). S. H ̈ufner, M. A. Hossain, A. Damascelli, and G. A. Sawatzky, Two gaps make a high-temperature super- conductor?, Reports on Progress in Physics 71, 062501 P. A. Lee, N. Nagaosa, and X.-G. Wen, Doping a Mott insulator: Physics of high-temperature superconductiv- ity, Rev. Mod. Phys. 78, 17 (2006). Y. Li, R. Zhong, M. B. Stone, A. I. Kolesnikov, G. D. Gu, I. A. Zaliznyak, and J. M. Tranquada, Low-energy antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations limit the coherent superconducting gap in cuprates, Phys. Rev. B 98, T. Takahashi, T. Sato, T. Yokoya, T. Kamiyama, Y. Naitoh, T. Mochiku, K. Yamada, Y. Endoh, and K. Kadowaki, Two different types of pseudogaps in high-Tc superconductors, J. Phys. Chem. Solids 62, 41 T. Cren, D. Roditchev, W. Sacks, J. Klein, J.-B. Moussy, C. Deville-Cavellin, and M. Lagu ̈es, Influence of Disorder on the Local Density of States in High- Tc Superconducting Thin Films, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 147 C. Howald, P. Fournier, and A. Kapitulnik, In- herent inhomogeneities in tunneling spectra of Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8−x crystals in the superconducting state, Phys. Rev. B 64, 100504(R) (2001). S. H. Pan, J. P. O’Neal, R. L. Badzey, C. Cha- mon, H. Ding, J. R. Engelbrecht, Z. Wang, H. Eisaki, S. Uchida, A. K. Gupta, K. W. Ng, E. W. Hud- son, K. M. Lang, and J. C. Davis, Microscopic elec- tronic inhomogeneity in the high-Tc superconductor Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+x, Nature 413, 282 (2001). P. M. Singer, A. W. Hunt, and T. Imai, 63Cu NQR Mea- surement of Stripe Order Parameter in La2−xSrxCuO4, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 047602 (2002). P. M. Singer, T. Imai, F. C. Chou, K. Hirota, M. Tak- aba, T. Kakeshita, H. Eisaki, and S. Uchida, 17O NMR study of the inhomogeneous electronic state in La2−xSrxCuO4 crystals, Phys. Rev. B 72, 014537 D. Pelc, P. Popˇcevi ́c, M. Poˇzek, M. Greven, and N. Bariˇsi ́c, Unusual behavior of cuprates explained by heterogeneous charge localization, Sci. Adv. 5, 10.1126/sciadv.aau4538 (2019). M. A. Kastner, R. J. Birgeneau, G. Shirane, and Y. En- doh, Magnetic, transport, and optical properties of monolayer copper oxides, Rev. Mod. Phys. 70, 897 S. A. Kivelson, I. P. Bindloss, E. Fradkin, V. Oganesyan, J. M. Tranquada, A. Kapitulnik, and C. Howald, How to detect fluctuating stripes in the high-temperature su- perconductors, Rev. Mod. Phys. 75, 1201 (2003). R. J. Birgeneau, C. Stock, J. M. Tranquada, and K. Ya- mada, Magnetic Neutron Scattering in Hole-Doped Cuprate Superconductors, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 75, 111003 N. S. Headings, S. M. Hayden, R. Coldea, and T. G. Perring, Anomalous High-Energy Spin Excitations in the High-Tc Superconductor-Parent Antiferromagnet La2CuO4, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 247001 (2010). Y. Tokura, S. Koshihara, T. Arima, H. Takagi, S. Ishibashi, T. Ido, and S. Uchida, Cu-O network de- pendence of optical charge-transfer gaps and spin-pair excitations in single-CuO2-layer compounds, Phys. Rev. J. M. Tranquada, S. M. Heald, and A. R. Mooden- baugh, X-ray-absorption near-edge-structure study of La2−xSrxCuO4−y superconductors, Phys. Rev. B 36, S. M. Heald, J. M. Tranquada, A. R. Moodenbaugh, and Y. Xu, Orientation-dependent x-ray-absorption near- edge studies of high-Tc superconductors, Phys. Rev. B M. Moretti Sala, V. Bisogni, C. Aruta, G. Balestrino, H. Berger, N. B. Brookes, G. M. de Luca, D. D. Cas- tro, M. Grioni, M. Guarise, P. G. Medaglia, F. M. Gra- nozio, M. Minola, P. Perna, M. Radovic, M. Salluzzo, T. Schmitt, K. J. Zhou, L. Braicovich, and G. Ghir- inghelli, Energy and symmetry of dd excitations in un- 12 doped layered cuprates measured by Cu L3 resonant in- elastic x-ray scattering, New J. Phys. 13, 043026 (2011). A. C. Walters, T. G. Perring, J.-S. Caux, A. T. Savici, G. D. Gu, C.-C. Lee, W. Ku, and I. A. Zaliznyak, Effect of covalent bonding on magnetism and the missing neu- tron intensity in copper oxide compounds, Nat. Phys. D. Rybicki, M. Jurkutat, S. Reichardt, C. Kapusta, and J. Haase, Perspective on the phase diagram of cuprate high-temperature superconductors, Nat. Commun. 7, S. Uchida, T. Ido, H. Takagi, T. Arima, Y. Tokura, and S. Tajima, Optical spectra of La2−xSrxCuO4: Effect of carrier doping on the electronic structure of the CuO2 plane, Phys. Rev. B 43, 7942 (1991). C. T. Chen, F. Sette, Y. Ma, M. S. Hybertsen, E. B. Stechel, W. M. C. Foulkes, M. Schulter, S.-W. Cheong, A. S. Cooper, L. W. Rupp, B. Batlogg, Y. L. Soo, Z. H. Ming, A. Krol, and Y. H. Kao, Electronic states in La2−xSrxCuO4+δ probed by soft-x-ray absorption, Phys. Rev. Lett. 66, 104 (1991). A. Bianconi, J. Budnick, A. Flank, A. Fontaine, P. Lagarde, A. Marcelli, H. Tolentino, B. Chamber- land, C. Michel, B. Raveau, and G. Demazeau, Ev- idence of 3d9-ligand hole states in the superconduc- tor La1.85Sr0.15CuO4 from L3 X-ray absorption spec- troscopy, Phys. Lett. A 127, 285 (1988). P. Cai, W. Ruan, Y. Peng, C. Ye, X. Li, Z. Hao, X. Zhou, D.-H. Lee, and Y. Wang, Visualizing the evo- lution from the Mott insulator to a charge-ordered in- sulator in lightly doped cuprates, Nat. Phys. 12, 1047 B. I. Shklovskii and A. L. Efros, Electronic Properties of Doped Semiconductors (Springer, Berlin, 1984). R. Coldea, S. M. Hayden, G. Aeppli, T. G. Perring, C. D. Frost, T. E. Mason, S.-W. Cheong, and Z. Fisk, Spin Waves and Electronic Interactions in La2CuO4, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 5377 (2001). F. Ronning, C. Kim, D. L. Feng, D. S. Marshall, A. G. Loeser, L. L. Miller, J. N. Eckstein, I. Bozovic, and Z.-X. Shen, Photoemission Evidence for a Remnant Fermi Surface and a d-Wave-Like Dispersion in Insu- lating Ca2CuO2Cl2, Science 282, 2067 (1998). O. Andersen, A. Liechtenstein, O. Jepsen, and F. Paulsen, LDA energy bands, low-energy hamiltoni- ans, t′, t′′, t⊥(k), and J⊥, J. Phys. Chem. Solids 56, V. J. Emery, Theory of high-Tc superconductivity in oxides, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 2794 (1987). B. Lau, M. Berciu, and G. A. Sawatzky, High-Spin Po- laron in Lightly Doped CuO2 Planes, Phys. Rev. Lett. H. Ebrahimnejad, G. A. Sawatzky, and M. Berciu, The dynamics of a doped hole in a cuprate is not controlled by spin fluctuations, Nat. Phys. 10, 951 (2014). S. Chakravarty, A. Sudbø, P. W. Anderson, and S. Strong, Interlayer Tunneling and Gap Anisotropy in High-Temperature Superconductors, Science 261, 337 T. Xiang and J. M. Wheatley, c Axis Superfluid Re- sponse of Copper Oxide Superconductors, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 4632 (1996). A. V. Balatsky, I. Vekhter, and J.-X. Zhu, Impurity- induced states in conventional and unconventional su- perconductors, Rev. Mod. Phys. 78, 373 (2006). T. Imai, C. P. Slichter, K. Yoshimura, and K. Kosuge, Low frequency spin dynamics in undoped and Sr-doped La2CuO4, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 1002 (1993). R. J. Birgeneau, M. Greven, M. A. Kastner, Y. S. Lee, B. O. Wells, Y. Endoh, K. Yamada, and G. Shirane, Instantaneous spin correlations in La2CuO4, Phys. Rev. M. Enoki, M. Fujita, T. Nishizaki, S. Iikubo, D. K. Singh, S. Chang, J. M. Tranquada, and K. Yamada, Spin-Stripe Density Varies Linearly With the Hole Con- tent in Single-Layer Bi2+xSr2−xCuO6+y Cuprate Super- conductors, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 017004 (2013). C. Stock, R. A. Cowley, W. J. L. Buyers, C. D. Frost, J. W. Taylor, D. Peets, R. Liang, D. Bonn, and W. N. Hardy, Effect of the pseudogap on suppressing high energy inelastic neutron scattering in superconducting YBa2Cu3O6.5, Phys. Rev. B 82, 174505 (2010). M. Fujita, H. Hiraka, M. Matsuda, M. Matsuura, J. M. Tranquada, S. Wakimoto, G. Xu, and K. Yamada, Progress in Neutron Scattering Studies of Spin Excita- tions in High-Tc Cuprates, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 81, 011007 S. Sugai, H. Suzuki, Y. Takayanagi, T. Hosokawa, and N. Hayamizu, Carrier-density-dependent momen- tum shift of the coherent peak and the LO phonon mode in p-type high-Tc superconductors, Phys. Rev. B 68, N. Chelwani, A. Baum, T. B ̈ohm, M. Opel, F. Venturini, L. Tassini, A. Erb, H. Berger, L. Forr ́o, and R. Hackl, Magnetic excitations and amplitude fluctuations in in- sulating cuprates, Phys. Rev. B 97, 024407 (2018). G. Xu, J. M. Tranquada, T. G. Perring, G. D. Gu, M. Fujita, and K. Yamada, High-energy magnetic ex- citations from dynamic stripes in La1.875Ba0.125CuO4, Phys. Rev. B 76, 014508 (2007). D. C. Johnston, Magnetic Susceptibility Scaling in La2−xSrxCuO4−y, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 957 (1989). T. Nakano, M. Oda, C. Manabe, N. Momono, Y. Miura, and M. Ido, Magnetic properties and electronic conduc- tion of superconducting La2−xSrxCuO4, Phys. Rev. B C. Bernhard, J. L. Tallon, T. Blasius, A. Golnik, and C. Niedermayer, Anomalous Peak in the Superconduct- ing Condensate Density of Cuprate High- Tc Supercon- ductors at a Unique Doping State, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, T. R. Lemberger, I. Hetel, A. Tsukada, M. Naito, and M. Randeria, Superconductor-to-metal quantum phase transition in overdoped La2−xSrxCuO4, Phys. Rev. B W. J. Padilla, Y. S. Lee, M. Dumm, G. Blumberg, S. Ono, K. Segawa, S. Komiya, Y. Ando, and D. N. Basov, Constant effective mass across the phase dia- gram of high-Tc cuprates, Phys. Rev. B 72, 060511(R) E. van Heumen, W. Meevasana, A. B. Kuzmenko, H. Eisaki, and D. van der Marel, Doping-dependent optical properties of Bi2201, New J. Phys. 11, 055067 H. Takagi, T. Ido, S. Ishibashi, M. Uota, S. Uchida, and Y. Tokura, Superconductor-to-nonsuperconductor tran- sition in (La1−xSrx)2CuO4 as investigated by transport and magnetic measurements, Phys. Rev. B 40, 2254 13 T. Yoshida, X. J. Zhou, T. Sasagawa, W. L. Yang, P. V. Bogdanov, A. Lanzara, Z. Hussain, T. Mizokawa, A. Fujimori, H. Eisaki, Z.-X. Shen, T. Kakeshita, and S. Uchida, Metallic Behavior of Lightly Doped La2−xSrxCuO4 with a Fermi Surface Forming an Arc, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 027001 (2003). M. Tinkham, Introduction to Superconductivity (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1975). Y. J. Uemura, G. M. Luke, B. J. Sternlieb, J. H. Brewer, J. F. Carolan, W. N. Hardy, R. Kadono, J. R. Kempton, R. F. Kiefl, S. R. Kreitzman, P. Mulhern, T. M. Rise- man, D. L. Williams, B. X. Yang, S. Uchida, H. Takagi, J. Gopalakrishnan, A. W. Sleight, M. A. Subramanian, C. L. Chien, M. Z. Cieplak, G. Xiao, V. Y. Lee, B. W. Statt, C. E. Stronach, W. J. Kossler, and X. H. Yu, Uni- versal Correlations between Tc and ns m∗ (Carrier Density over Effective Mass) in High-Tc Cuprate Superconduc- tors, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 2317 (1989). I. Boˇzovi ́c, X. He, J. Wu, and A. T. Bollinger, Depen- dence of the critical temperature in overdoped copper oxides on superfluid density, Nature 536, 309 (2016). Y. Ando, Y. Kurita, S. Komiya, S. Ono, and K. Segawa, Evolution of the Hall Coefficient and the Peculiar Elec- tronic Structure of the Cuprate Superconductors, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 197001 (2004). H. Y. Hwang, B. Batlogg, H. Takagi, H. L. Kao, J. Kwo, R. J. Cava, J. J. Krajewski, and W. F. Peck, Scaling of the temperature dependent Hall effect in La2−xSrxCuO4, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 2636 (1994). L. P. Gor’kov and G. B. Teitel’baum, Interplay of Externally Doped and Thermally Activated Holes in La2−xSrxCuO4 and Their Impact on the Pseudogap Crossover, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 247003 (2006). K. Takenaka, R. Shiozaki, S. Okuyama, J. Nohara, A. Osuka, Y. Takayanagi, and S. Sugai, Coherent- to-incoherent crossover in the optical conductivity of La2−xSrxCuO4 : Charge dynamics of a bad metal, Phys. Rev. B 65, 092405 (2002). K. Takenaka, J. Nohara, R. Shiozaki, and S. Sugai, Inco- herent charge dynamics of La2−xSrxCuO4 : Dynamical localization and resistivity saturation, Phys. Rev. B 68, G. Aeppli, T. E. Mason, S. M. Hayden, H. A. Mook, and J. Kulda, Nearly Singular Magnetic Fluctuations in the Normal State of a High-Tc Cuprate Superconductor, Science 278, 1432 (1997). K. Fujita, C. K. Kim, I. Lee, J. Lee, M. H. Hamidian, I. A. Firmo, S. Mukhopadhyay, H. Eisaki, S. Uchida, M. J. Lawler, E.-A. Kim, and J. C. Davis, Simultane- ous Transitions in Cuprate Momentum-Space Topology and Electronic Symmetry Breaking, Science 344, 612 T. Yoshida, X. J. Zhou, D. H. Lu, S. Komiya, Y. Ando, H. Eisaki, T. Kakeshita, S. Uchida, Z. Hussain, Z.-X. Shen, and A. Fujimori, Low-energy electronic structure of the high-Tc cuprates La2−xSrxCuO4 studied by angle- resolved photoemission spectroscopy, J. Phys: Condens. Matter 19, 125209 (2007). M. C. Boyer, W. D. Wise, K. Chatterjee, M. Yi, T. Kondo, T. Takeuchi, H. Ikuta, and E. W. Hudson, Imaging the two gaps of the high-temperature super- conductor Bi2Sr2CuO6+x, Nat. Phys. 3, 802 (2007). K. K. Gomes, A. N. Pasupathy, A. Pushp, S. Ono, Y. Ando, and A. Yazdani, Visualizing pair formation on the atomic scale in the high-Tc superconductor Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ, Nature 447, 569 (2007). A. N. Pasupathy, A. Pushp, K. K. Gomes, C. V. Parker, J. Wen, Z. Xu, G. Gu, S. Ono, Y. Ando, and A. Yazdani, Electronic Origin of the Inhomogeneous Pairing Interac- tion in the High-Tc Superconductor Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ, Science 320, 196 (2008). K. McElroy, J. Lee, J. A. Slezak, D.-H. Lee, H. Eisaki, S. Uchida, and J. C. Davis, Atomic-Scale Sources and Mechanism of Nanoscale Electronic Disorder in Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ, Science 309, 1048 (2005). I. Zeljkovic, Z. Xu, J. Wen, G. Gu, R. S. Markiewicz, and J. E. Hoffman, Imaging the Impact of Single Oxy- gen Atoms on Superconducting Bi2+ySr2−yCaCu2O8+x, Science 337, 320 (2012). A. C. Fang, L. Capriotti, D. J. Scalapino, S. A. Kivel- son, N. Kaneko, M. Greven, and A. Kapitulnik, Gap- Inhomogeneity-Induced Electronic States in Supercon- ducting Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 017007 Y. Wang, S. Ono, Y. Onose, G. Gu, Y. Ando, Y. Tokura, S. Uchida, and N. P. Ong, Dependence of Upper Criti- cal Field and Pairing Strength on Doping in Cuprates, Science 299, 86 (2003). Y. Wang, Z. A. Xu, T. Kakeshita, S. Uchida, S. Ono, Y. Ando, and N. P. Ong, Onset of the vortex- like Nernst signal above Tc in La2−xSrxCuO4 and Bi2Sr2−yLayCuO6, Phys. Rev. B 64, 224519 (2001). M. Mitrano, A. A. Husain, S. Vig, A. Kogar, M. S. Rak, S. I. Rubeck, J. Schmalian, B. Uchoa, J. Schnee- loch, R. Zhong, G. D. Gu, and P. Abbamonte, Anoma- lous density fluctuations in a strange metal, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 115, 5392 (2018). V. Hinkov, S. Pailh`es, P. Bourges, Y. Sidis, A. Ivanov, A. Kulakov, C. T. Lin, D. P. Chen, C. Bernhard, and B. Keimer, Two-dimensional geometry of spin excita- tions in the high-transition-temperature superconductor YBa2Cu3O6+x, Nature 430, 650 (2004). V. Hinkov, P. Bourges, S. Pailhes, Y. Sidis, A. Ivanov, C. D. Frost, T. G. Perring, C. T. Lin, D. P. Chen, and B. Keimer, Spin dynamics in the pseudogap state of a high-temperature superconductor, Nat. Phys. 3, 780 K. McElroy, D.-H. Lee, J. E. Hoffman, K. M. Lang, J. Lee, E. W. Hudson, H. Eisaki, S. Uchida, and J. C. Davis, Coincidence of Checkerboard Charge Order and Antinodal State Decoherence in Strongly Underdoped Superconducting Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ, Phys. Rev. Lett. W. S. Lee, I. M. Vishik, K. Tanaka, D. H. Lu, T. Sasagawa, N. Nagaosa, T. P. Devereaux, Z. Hussain, and Z. X. Shen, Abrupt onset of a second energy gap at the superconducting transition of underdoped Bi2212, Nature 450, 81 (2007). A. Sacuto, Y. Gallais, M. Cazayous, M.-A. M ́easson, G. D. Gu, and D. Colson, New insights into the phase diagram of the copper oxide superconductors from elec- tronic Raman scattering, Rep. Prog. Phys. 76, 022502 N. Munnikes, B. Muschler, F. Venturini, L. Tassini, W. Prestel, S. Ono, Y. Ando, D. C. Peets, W. N. Hardy, R. Liang, D. A. Bonn, A. Damascelli, H. Eisaki, 14 M. Greven, A. Erb, and R. Hackl, Pair breaking ver- sus symmetry breaking: Origin of the Raman modes in superconducting cuprates, Phys. Rev. B 84, 144523 Y. Kohsaka, C. Taylor, K. Fujita, A. Schmidt, C. Lupien, T. Hanaguri, M. Azuma, M. Takano, H. Eisaki, H. Takagi, S. Uchida, and J. C. Davis, An Intrinsic Bond-Centered Electronic Glass with Unidirec- tional Domains in Underdoped Cuprates, Science 315, W. Ruan, X. Li, C. Hu, Z. Hao, H. Li, P. Cai, X. Zhou, D.-H. Lee, and Y. Wang, Visualization of the periodic modulation of Cooper pairing in a cuprate superconduc- tor, Nat. Phys. 14, 1178 (2018). A. Damascelli, Z. Hussain, and Z.-X. Shen, Angle- resolved photoemission studies of the cuprate supercon- ductors, Rev. Mod. Phys. 75, 473 (2003). T. Kondo, R. Khasanov, T. Takeuchi, J. Schmalian, and A. Kaminski, Competition between the pseudogap and superconductivity in the high-Tc copper oxides, Nature I. M. Vishik, M. Hashimoto, R.-H. He, W.-S. Lee, F. Schmitt, D. Lu, R. G. Moore, C. Zhang, W. Meevasana, T. Sasagawa, S. Uchida, K. Fujita, S. Ishida, M. Ishikado, Y. Yoshida, H. Eisaki, Z. Hus- sain, T. P. Devereaux, and Z.-X. Shen, Phase compe- tition in trisected superconducting dome, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 109, 18332 (2012). N. Zaki, H.-B. Yang, J. D. Rameau, P. D. Johnson, H. Claus, and D. G. Hinks, Cuprate phase diagram and the influence of nanoscale inhomogeneities, Phys. Rev. A. V. Fedorov, T. Valla, P. D. Johnson, Q. Li, G. D. Gu, and N. Koshizuka, Temperature Dependent Photoemis- sion Studies of Optimally Doped Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 2179 (1999). H. Ding, J. R. Engelbrecht, Z. Wang, J. C. Cam- puzano, S.-C. Wang, H.-B. Yang, R. Rogan, T. Taka- hashi, K. Kadowaki, and D. G. Hinks, Coherent Quasi- particle Weight and Its Connection to High-Tc Super- conductivity from Angle-Resolved Photoemission, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 227001 (2001). M. R. Norman, H. Ding, M. Randeria, J. C. Cam- puzano, T. Yokoya, T. Takeuchi, T. Takahashi, T. Mochiku, K. Kadowaki, P. Guptasarma, and D. G. Hinks, Destruction of the Fermi surface in underdoped high-Tc superconductors, Nature 392, 157 (1998). T. Kondo, A. D. Palczewski, Y. Hamaya, T. Takeuchi, J. S. Wen, Z. J. Xu, G. Gu, and A. Kaminski, Forma- tion of Gapless Fermi Arcs and Fingerprints of Order in the Pseudogap State of Cuprate Superconductors, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 157003 (2013). T. Kondo, W. Malaeb, Y. Ishida, T. Sasagawa, H. Sakamoto, T. Takeuchi, T. Tohyama, and S. Shin, Point nodes persisting far beyond Tc in Bi2212, Nat. Commun. 6 (2015). G. Deutscher, Coherence and single-particle excitations in the high-temperature superconductors, Nature 397, T. P. Devereaux and R. Hackl, Inelastic light scatter- ing from correlated electrons, Rev. Mod. Phys. 79, 175 A. Pushp, C. V. Parker, A. N. Pasupathy, K. K. Gomes, S. Ono, J. Wen, Z. Xu, G. Gu, and A. Yazdani, Ex- tending Universal Nodal Excitations Optimizes Super- conductivity in Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ, Science 324, 1689 T. Kurosawa, T. Yoneyama, Y. Takano, M. Hagiwara, R. Inoue, N. Hagiwara, K. Kurusu, K. Takeyama, N. Momono, M. Oda, and M. Ido, Large pseudogap and nodal superconducting gap in Bi2Sr2−xLaxCuO6+δ and Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ: Scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy, Phys. Rev. B 81, 094519 (2010). A. Sugimoto, T. Ekino, A. M. Gabovich, R. Sekine, K. Tanabe, and K. Tokiwa, Multilayered cuprate su- perconductor Ba2Ca5Cu6O12(O1−x, Fx)2 studied by temperature-dependent scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy, Phys. Rev. B 95, 174508 (2017). V. Hinkov, C. Lin, M. Raichle, B. Keimer, Y. Sidis, P. Bourges, S. Pailh`es, and A. Ivanov, Supercon- ductivity and electronic liquid-crystal states in twin- free YBa2Cu3O6+x studied by neutron scattering, Eur. Phys. J. Special Topics 188, 113 (2010). T. Dahm and D. J. Scalapino, Dependence of Tc on the q − ω structure of the spin-fluctuation spectrum, Phys. Rev. B 97, 184504 (2018). E. Dagotto and T. M. Rice, Surprises on the Way from One- to Two-Dimensional Quantum Magnets: The Lad- der Materials, Science 271, 618 (1996). D. J. Scalapino, A common thread: The pairing inter- action for unconventional superconductors, Rev. Mod. Phys. 84, 1383 (2012). K. Kakurai, S. Shamoto, T. Kiyokura, M. Sato, J. M. Tranquada, and G. Shirane, Neutron-scattering study of magnetic fluctuations in Zn-substituted YBa2Cu3O6.6, Phys. Rev. B 48, 3485 (1993). A. Suchaneck, V. Hinkov, D. Haug, L. Schulz, C. Bern- hard, A. Ivanov, K. Hradil, C. T. Lin, P. Bourges, B. Keimer, and Y. Sidis, Incommensurate Magnetic Or- der and Dynamics Induced by Spinless Impurities in YBa2Cu3O6.6, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 037207 (2010). A. V. Mahajan, H. Alloul, G. Collin, and J. F. Marucco, 89Y NMR probe of Zn induced local moments in YBa2(Cu1−yZny)3O6+x, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 3100 M.-H. Julien, T. Feh ́er, M. Horvati ́c, C. Berthier, O. N. Bakharev, P. S ́egransan, G. Collin, and J.-F. Marucco, 63Cu NMR Evidence for Enhanced Antiferromagnetic Correlations around Zn Impurities in YBa2Cu3O6.7, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 3422 (2000). B. Sac ́ep ́e, T. Dubouchet, C. Chapelier, M. Sanquer, M. Ovadia, D. Shahar, M. Feigel’man, and L. Ioffe, Lo- calization of preformed Cooper pairs in disordered su- perconductors, Nat. Phys. 7, 239 (2011). U. S. Pracht, N. Bachar, L. Benfatto, G. Deutscher, E. Farber, M. Dressel, and M. Scheffler, Enhanced Cooper pairing versus suppressed phase coherence shap- ing the superconducting dome in coupled aluminum nanograins, Phys. Rev. B 93, 100503(R) (2016). Y. Imry, M. Strongin, and C. C. Homes, ns − Tc Corre- lations in Granular Superconductors, Phys. Rev. Lett. C. C. Homes, S. V. Dordevic, M. Strongin, D. A. Bonn, R. Liang, W. N. Hardy, S. Komiya, Y. Ando, G. Yu, N. Kaneko, X. Zhao, M. Greven, D. N. Basov, and T. Timusk, A universal scaling relation in high- temperature superconductors, Nature 430, 539 (2004). 15 T. Dubouchet, B. Sac ́ep ́e, J. Seidemann, D. Shahar, M. Sanquer, and C. Chapelier, Collective energy gap of preformed Cooper pairs in disordered superconductors, Nature Physics 15, 233 (2019). M. R. Norman, A. Kanigel, M. Randeria, U. Chatter- jee, and J. C. Campuzano, Modeling the Fermi arc in underdoped cuprates, Phys. Rev. B 76, 174501 (2007). J. D. Rameau, Z.-H. Pan, H.-B. Yang, G. D. Gu, and P. D. Johnson, Universal scaling of length, time, and en- ergy for cuprate superconductors based on photoemis- sion measurements of Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ, Phys. Rev. B T. J. Reber, N. C. Plumb, Z. Sun, Y. Cao, Q. Wang, K. McElroy, H. Iwasawa, M. Arita, J. S. Wen, Z. J. Xu, G. Gu, Y. Yoshida, H. Eisaki, Y. Aiura, and D. S. Dessau, The origin and non-quasiparticle nature of Fermi arcs in Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ, Nat. Phys. 8, 606 J. Corson, R. Mallozzi, J. Orenstein, J. N. Eckstein, and I. Bozovic, Vanishing of phase coherence in underdoped Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ, Nature 398, 221 (1999). J. Lee, K. Fujita, A. R. Schmidt, C. K. Kim, H. Eisaki, S. Uchida, and J. C. Davis, Spectroscopic Fingerprint of Phase-Incoherent Superconductivity in the Underdoped Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ, Science 325, 1099 (2009). D. Pelc, M. Vuˇckovi ́c, M. S. Grbi ́c, M. Poˇzek, G. Yu, T. Sasagawa, M. Greven, and N. Bariˇsi ́c, Emergence of superconductivity in the cuprates via a universal perco- lation process, Nat. Commun. 9, 4327 (2018). C. Stock, W. J. L. Buyers, R. A. Cowley, P. S. Clegg, R. Coldea, C. D. Frost, R. Liang, D. Peets, D. Bonn, W. N. Hardy, and R. J. Birgeneau, From incommen- surate to dispersive spin-fluctuations: The high-energy inelastic spectrum in superconducting YBa2Cu3O6.5, Phys. Rev. B 71, 024522 (2005). S. M. Hayden, H. A. Mook, P. Dai, T. G. Perring, and F. Do ̆gan, The structure of the high-energy spin excita- tions in a high-transition-temperature superconductor, Nature 429, 531 (2004). D. Reznik, J.-P. Ismer, I. Eremin, L. Pintschovius, T. Wolf, M. Arai, Y. Endoh, T. Masui, and S. Tajima, Local-moment fluctuations in the optimally doped high- Tc superconductor YBa2Cu3O6.95, Phys. Rev. B 78, H. Woo, P. Dai, S. M. Hayden, H. A. Mook, T. Dahm, D. J. Scalapino, T. G. Perring, and F. Do ̆gan, Magnetic energy change available to superconducting condensa- tion in optimally doped YBa2Cu3O6.95, Nature Physics H. F. Fong, P. Bourges, Y. Sidis, L. P. Reg- nault, A. Ivanov, G. D. Gu, N. Koshizuka, and B. Keimer, Neutron scattering from magnetic excita- tions in Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ, Nature 398, 588 (1999). G. Xu, G. D. Gu, M. Hucker, B. Fauque, T. G. Per- ring, L. P. Regnault, and J. M. Tranquada, Testing the itinerancy of spin dynamics in superconducting Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ, Nat. Phys. 5, 642 (2009). B. Fauqu ́e, Y. Sidis, L. Capogna, A. Ivanov, K. Hradil, C. Ulrich, A. I. Rykov, B. Keimer, and P. Bourges, Dis- persion of the odd magnetic resonant mode in near- optimally doped Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ, Phys. Rev. B 76, H. He, Y. Sidis, P. Bourges, G. D. Gu, A. Ivanov, N. Koshizuka, B. Liang, C. T. Lin, L. P. Regnault, E. Schoenherr, and B. Keimer, Resonant Spin Excita- tion in an Overdoped High Temperature Superconduc- tor, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 1610 (2001). L. Capogna, B. Fauque, Y. Sidis, C. Ulrich, P. Bourges, S. Pailhes, A. Ivanov, J. L. Tallon, B. Liang, C. T. Lin, A. I. Rykov, and B. Keimer, Odd and even magnetic resonant modes in highly overdoped Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ, Phys. Rev. B 75, 060502 (2007). M. K. Chan, C. J. Dorow, L. Mangin-Thro, Y. Tang, Y. Ge, M. J. Veit, G. Yu, X. Zhao, A. D. Christian- son, J. T. Park, Y. Sidis, P. Steffens, D. L. Abernathy, P. Bourges, and M. Greven, Commensurate antiferro- magnetic excitations as a signature of the pseudogap in the tetragonal high-Tc cuprate HgBa2CuO4+δ, Nat. Commun. 7, 10819 (2016). M. K. Chan, Y. Tang, C. J. Dorow, J. Jeong, L. Mangin-Thro, M. J. Veit, Y. Ge, D. L. Aber- nathy, Y. Sidis, P. Bourges, and M. Greven, Hourglass Dispersion and Resonance of Magnetic Excitations in the Superconducting State of the Single-Layer Cuprate HgBa2CuO4+δ Near Optimal Doping, Phys. Rev. Lett. S. Blanc, Y. Gallais, M. Cazayous, M. A. M ́easson, A. Sacuto, A. Georges, J. S. Wen, Z. J. Xu, G. D. Gu, and D. Colson, Loss of antinodal coherence with a single d-wave superconducting gap leads to two energy scales for underdoped cuprate superconductors, Phys. Rev. B Y. Wang, L. Li, and N. P. Ong, Nernst effect in high-Tc superconductors, Phys. Rev. B 73, 024510 (2006). K. Tanaka, W. S. Lee, D. H. Lu, A. Fujimori, T. Fujii, Risdiana, I. Terasaki, D. J. Scalapino, T. P. Devereaux, Z. Hussain, and Z.-X. Shen, Distinct Fermi-Momentum- Dependent Energy Gaps in Deeply Underdoped Bi2212, Science 314, 1910 (2006). M. Hashimoto, G. Ghiringhelli, W.-S. Lee, G. Del- lea, A. Amorese, C. Mazzoli, K. Kummer, N. B. Brookes, B. Moritz, Y. Yoshida, H. Eisaki, Z. Hus- sain, T. P. Devereaux, Z.-X. Shen, and L. Braicovich, Direct observation of bulk charge modulations in opti- mally doped Bi1.5Pb0.6Sr1.54CaCu2O8+δ, Phys. Rev. B I. K. Drozdov, I. Pletikosi ́c, C. K. Kim, K. Fujita, G. D. Gu, J. C. S. Davis, P. D. Johnson, I. Boˇzovi ́c, and T. Valla, Phase diagram of Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ revisited, Nat. Commun. 9, 5210 (2018). Y.-G. Zhong, J.-Y. Guan, X. Shi, J. Zhao, Z.-C. Rao, C.-Y. Tang, H.-J. Liu, Z. Y. Weng, Z. Q. Wang, G. D. Gu, T. Qian, Y.-J. Sun, and H. Ding, Continuous doping of a cuprate surface: Insights from in situ angle-resolved photoemission, Phys. Rev. B 98, 140507(R) (2018). E. Fradkin, S. A. Kivelson, and J. M. Tranquada, Collo- quium : Theory of intertwined orders in high tempera- ture superconductors, Rev. Mod. Phys. 87, 457 (2015). E. W. Huang, C. B. Mendl, S. Liu, S. Johnston, H.-C. Jiang, B. Moritz, and T. P. Devereaux, Numerical evi- dence of fluctuating stripes in the normal state of high- Tc cuprate superconductors, Science 358, 1161 (2017). B.-X. Zheng, C.-M. Chung, P. Corboz, G. Ehlers, M.-P. Qin, R. M. Noack, H. Shi, S. R. White, S. Zhang, and G. K.-L. Chan, Stripe order in the underdoped region of the two-dimensional Hubbard model, Science 358, 1155 16 M. H ̈ucker, M. v. Zimmermann, G. D. Gu, Z. J. Xu, J. S. Wen, G. Xu, H. J. Kang, A. Zheludev, and J. M. Tran- quada, Stripe order in superconducting La2−xBaxCuO4 (0.095 ≤ x ≤ 0.155), Phys. Rev. B 83, 104506 (2011). Q. Li, M. H ̈ucker, G. D. Gu, A. M. Tsvelik, and J. M. Tranquada, Two-Dimensional Superconducting Fluc- tuations in Stripe-Ordered La1.875Ba0.125CuO4, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 067001 (2007). E. Berg, E. Fradkin, S. A. Kivelson, and J. M. Tran- quada, Striped superconductors: how spin, charge and superconducting orders intertwine in the cuprates, New J. Phys. 11, 115004 (2009). D. F. Agterberg, J. C. S. Davis, S. D. Ed- kins, E. Fradkin, D. J. V. Harlingen, S. A. Kivelson, L. Radzihovsky, J. M. Tranquada, and Y. Wang, The Physics of Pair Density Waves (2019), https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.09687. R. Comin and A. Damascelli, Resonant X-Ray Scatter- ing Studies of Charge Order in Cuprates, Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys. 7, 369 (2016). M. H ̈ucker, N. B. Christensen, A. T. Holmes, E. Black- burn, E. M. Forgan, R. Liang, D. A. Bonn, W. N. Hardy, O. Gutowski, M. v. Zimmermann, S. M. Hayden, and J. Chang, Competing charge, spin, and superconduct- ing orders in underdoped YBa2Cu3Oy, Phys. Rev. B 90, S. Blanco-Canosa, A. Frano, E. Schierle, J. Por- ras, T. Loew, M. Minola, M. Bluschke, E. Weschke, B. Keimer, and M. Le Tacon, Resonant x-ray scat- tering study of charge-density wave correlations in YBa2Cu3O6+x, Phys. Rev. B 90, 054513 (2014). T. Wu, H. Mayaffre, S. Kr ̈amer, M. Horvati ́c, C. Berthier, W. N. Hardy, R. Liang, D. A. Bonn, and M.-H. Julien, Incipient charge order observed by NMR in the normal state of YBa2Cu3Oy, Nat. Commun. 6, M. Takigawa, A. P. Reyes, P. C. Hammel, J. D. Thompson, R. H. Heffner, Z. Fisk, and K. C. Ott, Cu and O NMR studies of the magnetic properties of YBa2Cu3O6.63 (Tc = 62 K), Phys. Rev. B 43, 247 S.-H. Baek, T. Loew, V. Hinkov, C. T. Lin, B. Keimer, B. B ̈uchner, and H.-J. Grafe, Evidence of a critical hole concentration in underdoped YBa2Cu3Oy single crys- tals revealed by 63Cu NMR, Phys. Rev. B 86, 220504(R) K. Nakayama, T. Sato, K. Terashima, T. Arakane, T. Takahashi, M. Kubota, K. Ono, T. Nishizaki, Y. Takahashi, and N. Kobayashi, Doping depen- dence of the gap anisotropy of the high-temperature YBa2Cu3O7−δ superconductor, Phys. Rev. B 79, D. van der Marel and A. Tsvetkov, Transverse optical plasmons in layered superconductors, Czech. J. Phys. M. Gr ̈uninger, D. van der Marel, A. A. Tsvetkov, and A. Erb, Observation of Out-of-Phase Bilayer Plasmons in YBa2Cu3O7−δ, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 1575 (2000). C. C. Homes, T. Timusk, D. A. Bonn, R. Liang, and W. N. Hardy, Optical phonons polarized along the c axis of YBa2Cu3O6+x, for x = 0.5 → 0.95, Can. J. Phys. 73, J. Sch ̈utzmann, S. Tajima, S. Miyamoto, Y. Sato, and R. Hauff, Doping and temperature dependence of c-axis optical phonons in YBa2Cu3Oy single crystals, Phys. Rev. B 52, 13665 (1995). A. D. LaForge, W. J. Padilla, K. S. Burch, Z. Q. Li, A. A. Schafgans, K. Segawa, Y. Ando, and D. N. Basov, Magnetic field induced modification of superfluid density and interplane spectral weight in YBa2Cu3Oy, Phys. Rev. B 79, 104516 (2009). A. Dubroka, M. R ̈ossle, K. W. Kim, V. K. Malik, D. Munzar, D. N. Basov, A. A. Schafgans, S. J. Moon, C. T. Lin, D. Haug, V. Hinkov, B. Keimer, T. Wolf, J. G. Storey, J. L. Tallon, and C. Bernhard, Evidence of a Precursor Superconducting Phase at Temperatures as High as 180 K in RBa2Cu3O7−δ (R =Y,Gd,Eu) Super- conducting Crystals from Infrared Spectroscopy, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 047006 (2011). E. Uykur, K. Tanaka, T. Masui, S. Miyasaka, and S. Tajima, Persistence of the Superconducting Condensate Far above the Critical Temperature of YBa2(Cu, Zn)3Oy Revealed by c-Axis Optical Conduc- tivity Measurements for Several Zn Concentrations and Carrier Doping Levels, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 127003 P. Schleger, R. A. Hadfield, H. Casalta, N. H. An- dersen, H. F. Poulsen, M. von Zimmermann, J. R. Schneider, R. Liang, P. Dosanjh, and W. N. Hardy, Random-Field Structural Transition in YBa2Cu3O6.5?, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 1446 (1995). M. v. Zimmermann, J. R. Schneider, T. Frello, N. H. Andersen, J. Madsen, M. K ̈all, H. F. Poulsen, R. Liang, P. Dosanjh, and W. N. Hardy, Oxygen-ordering su- perstructures in underdoped YBa2Cu3O6+x studied by hard x-ray diffraction, Phys. Rev. B 68, 104515 (2003). R. Liang, D. Bonn, and W. N. Hardy, Preparation and X-ray characterization of highly ordered ortho-II phase YBa2Cu3O6.50 single crystals, Physica C: Supercon- ductivity 336, 57 (2000). A. Ricci, N. Poccia, G. Campi, F. Coneri, A. S. Ca- porale, D. Innocenti, M. Burghammer, M. v. Zimmer- mann, and A. Bianconi, Multiscale distribution of oxy- gen puddles in 1/8 doped YBa2Cu3O6.67, Sci. Rep. 3, A. Ricci, N. Poccia, G. Campi, F. Coneri, L. Barba, G. Arrighetti, M. Polentarutti, M. Burghammer, M. Sprung, M. v Zimmermann, and A. Bianconi, Net- works of superconducting nano-puddles in 1/8 doped YBa2Cu3O6.5+y controlled by thermal manipulation, New J. Phys. 16, 053030 (2014). T. Wu, R. Zhou, M. Hirata, I. Vinograd, H. Mayaffre, R. Liang, W. N. Hardy, D. A. Bonn, T. Loew, J. Porras, D. Haug, C. T. Lin, V. Hinkov, B. Keimer, and M.-H. Julien, 63Cu-NMR study of oxygen disorder in ortho-II YBa2Cu3Oy, Phys. Rev. B 93, 134518 (2016). Z. Dai, Y.-H. Zhang, T. Senthil, and P. A. Lee, Pair- density waves, charge-density waves, and vortices in high-Tc cuprates, Phys. Rev. B 97, 174511 (2018). N. Doiron-Leyraud, C. Proust, D. LeBoeuf, J. Leval- lois, J.-B. Bonnemaison, R. Liang, D. A. Bonn, W. N. Hardy, and L. Taillefer, Quantum oscillations and the Fermi surface in an underdoped high-Tc superconduc- tor, Nature 447, 565 (2007). S. E. Sebastian and C. Proust, Quantum Oscillations in Hole-Doped Cuprates, Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys. 6, 411 (2015). 17 S. Chakravarty and H.-Y. Kee, Fermi pockets and quan- tum oscillations of the hall coefficient in high tempera- ture superconductors, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 105, A. Melikyan and O. Vafek, Quantum oscillations in the mixed state of d-wave superconductors, Phys. Rev. B N. G. Leos, J. S. White, J. A. Lim, J. L. Gavilano, B. Delley, L. Lemberger, A. T. Holmes, M. Medarde, T. Loew, V. Hinkov, C. Lin, M. Laver, C. D. Dewhurst, and E. M. Forgan, Influence of the Fermi Surface Mor- phology on the Magnetic Field-Driven Vortex Lattice Structure Transitions in YBa2Cu3O7−δ: δ = 0, 0.15, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 84, 044709 (2015). S. Chakravarty, H.-Y. Kee, and K. V ̈olker, An expla- nation for a universality of transition temperatures in families of copper oxide superconductors, Nature 428, S. Shimizu, S. Iwai, S.-i. Tabata, H. Mukuda, Y. Kitaoka, P. M. Shirage, H. Kito, and A. Iyo, Planar CuO2 hole density in high-Tc cuprates de- termined by NMR Knight shift: 63Cu NMR on bilayered Ba2CaCu2O4(F,O)2 and three-layered Ba2Ca2Cu3O6(F,O)2, Phys. Rev. B 83, 144523 (2011). S. Kivelson, Making high Tc higher: a theoretical pro- posal, Physica B 318, 61 (2002). J. Mosqueira, L. Cabo, and F. Vidal, Structural and Tc inhomogeneities inherent to doping in La2−xSrxCuO4 superconductors and their effects on the precursor dia- magnetism, Phys. Rev. B 80, 214527 (2009). F. Rullier-Albenque, H. Alloul, and G. Rikken, High- field studies of superconducting fluctuations in high-Tc cuprates: Evidence for a small gap distinct from the large pseudogap, Phys. Rev. B 84, 014522 (2011). L. S. Bilbro, R. V. Aguilar, G. Logvenov, O. Pelleg, I. Bozovi ́c, and N. P. Armitage, Temporal correlations of superconductivity above the transition temperature in La2−xSrxCuO4 probed by terahertz spectroscopy, Nat. Phys. 7, 298 (2011). I. Iguchi, T. Yamaguchi, and A. Sugimoto, Diamagnetic activity above Tc as a precursor to superconductivity in La2−xSrxCuO4 thin films, Nature 412, 420 (2001). M. J. Lawler, K. Fujita, J. Lee, A. R. Schmidt, Y. Kohsaka, C. K. Kim, H. Eisaki, S. Uchida, J. C. Davis, J. P. Sethna, and E.-A. Kim, Intra-unit-cell elec- tronic nematicity of the high-Tc copper-oxide pseudogap states, Nature 466, 347 (2010). L. Nie, G. Tarjus, and S. A. Kivelson, Quenched disorder and vestigial nematicity in the pseudogap regime of the cuprates, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 111, 7980 (2014). S. Mukhopadhyay, R. Sharma, C. K. Kim, S. D. Ed- kins, M. H. Hamidian, H. Eisaki, S. ichi Uchida, E.- A. Kim, M. J. Lawler, A. P. Mackenzie, J. C. S. Davis, and K. Fujita, Evidence for a Vestigial Ne- matic State in the Cuprate Pseudogap Phase (2019), https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.00915. N. Auvray, S. Benhabib, M. Cazayous, R. D. Zhong, J. Schneeloch, G. D. Gu, A. Forget, D. Colson, I. Paul, A. Sacuto, and Y. Gallais, Critical nematic fluctuations at the onset of the pseudogap phase in the cuprate superconductor Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ (2019), https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.03508. J. Loram, K. Mirza, J. Cooper, and J. Tallon, Specific Heat Evidence on the Normal State Pseudogap, J. Phys. Chem. Solids 59, 2091 (1998). B. B ̈uchner, M. Breuer, A. Freimuth, and A. P. Kampf, Critical Buckling for the Disappearance of Superconduc- tivity in Rare-Earth-Doped La2−xSrxCuO4, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 1841 (1994). Y. Li, J. Terzic, P. G. Baity, D. Popovi ́c, G. D. Gu, Q. Li, A. M. Tsvelik, and J. M. Tranquada, Tuning from failed superconductor to failed insulator with magnetic field (2018), https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.10646. N. Momono, M. Ido, T. Nakano, M. Oda, Y. Oka- jima, and K. Yamaya, Low-temperature electronic spe- cific heat of La2−xSrxCuO4 and La2−xSrxCu1−yZnyO4. Evidence for a d wave superconductor, Physica C: Su- perconductivity 233, 395 (1994).