Blue-Light-Emitting Color Centers in High-Quality Hexagonal Boron Nitride Brian Shevitski,1, 2, 3, 4 S. Matt Gilbert,1, 2, 3 Christopher T. Chen,4 Christoph Kastl,4, 5 Edward S. Barnard,4 Ed Wong,4 D. Frank Ogletree,4 Kenji Watanabe,6 Takashi Taniguchi,6 Alex Zettl,1, 2, 3, ∗ and Shaul Aloni4, † 1Department of Physics, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, U.S.A. 2Materials Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, U.S.A. 3Kavli NanoEnergy Sciences Institute at the University of California at Berkeley and the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94729, U.S.A. 4The Molecular Foundry, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, U.S.A. 5Walter-Schottky-Institute and Physik Department, Technical University of Munich, Garching, 85748, Germany. 6Advanced Materials Laboratory, National Institute for Materials Science, 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba,305-0044, Japan (Dated: September 9, 2019) Light emitters in wide band gap semiconductors are of great fundamental interest and have po- tential as optically addressable qubits. Here we describe the discovery of a new color center in high-quality hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) with a sharp emission line at 435 nm. The emitters are activated and deactivated by electron beam irradiation and have spectral and temporal charac- teristics consistent with atomic color centers weakly coupled to lattice vibrations. The emitters are conspicuously absent from commercially available h-BN and are only present in ultra-high-quality h-BN grown using a high-pressure, high-temperature Ba-B-N flux/solvent, suggesting that these emitters originate from impurities or related defects specific to this unique synthetic route. Our results imply that the light emission is activated and deactivated by electron beam manipulation of the charge state of an impurity-defect complex. I. INTRODUCTION Luminescent defects in wide band gap semiconductors are of great importance for both fundamental physics and future technological applications. Many of these defects are single photon emitters (SPEs), a likely component of next-generation information technologies, especially quantum cryptography1,2 and information processing3–5. SPEs embedded in solid state systems are particularly significant for widespread adoption of these emerging technologies as they offer a promising route toward scal- able deployment of new integrated quantum circuits. The diamond nitrogen-vacancy (NV) center has been the leading candidate for solid-state SPE applications be- cause it can easily be manipulated and readout at room temperature using existing optical methods6,7. Due to the technical difficulty of synthesizing and fabricating diamond-based devices, greater attention has been placed on finding new solid-state SPE systems8,9 with particu- lar emphasis placed on 2D material systems, especially sp2-bonded hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) )10–14. h-BN or “white graphite” has been of great inter- est to the nanoscience community over the last several decades, in part because it is isostructural to graphite and forms many of the same types of nanostructures as sp2- bonded carbon, but with different electronic and ther- modynamic properties15–19. h-BN is especially impor- tant to the expanding study of 2D materials because it is atomically flat, inert, and electrically insulating, mak- ing it an ideal substrate for testing new physics in low- dimensional materials20. Recently it has been shown that the local structure of h-BN can be controlled via electron irradiation21,22 and synthetic methods23, allowing for ad- ditional material control. In this communication we report the discovery of a new color center in high- quality h-BN, activated and charac- terized by an electron beam. We show that these emit- ters are highly localized, are spectrally pure, and have an emission signature indicative of weak lattice coupling at room temperature. These properties make the new color center a promising candidate for future applications in quantum information science. II. EXPERIMENTAL Ultra-high-quality h-BN crystals used in this study (generally accepted as the best substrates available for sensitive device applications and scanning probe mea- surements) are synthesized using a Ba-B-N solvent pre- cursor at high temperature and high pressure at the Na- tional Institute for Materials Science (NIMS) by Watan- abe and Taniguchi24. We refer to this material through- out the text as NIMS-BN. Millimeter size crystallites are mechanically exfoliated using blue wafer dicing tape and transferred onto p++ silicon substrates (0.001-100 Ω-cm) with a few nm thick native oxide layer. Samples of com- mercially available h-BN (Alfa Aesar 040608) are sim- ilarly exfoliated and transferred, and then annealed at 850 ◦C in argon at one Torr for one hour before charac- terization. We use CL in a scanning electron microscope (SEM) to activate and characterize light emission from the h- BN. CL measurements are performed using a home-built SEM CL system shown in FIG. 1 The system is built around a Zeiss Gemini Supra 55 VP-SEM operated at accelerating voltages between 2-10 keV with beam cur- rents in the 100-1500 pA range. Light emission from the arXiv:1904.12107v6 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 6 Sep 2019 2 Long-Pass Dichroic 1 Long-Pass Dichroic 2 Long-Pass Dichroic 3 Electron Beam Band-Pass 1 Band-Pass 2 Band-Pass 3 Point Detector 1 Point Detector 2 Point Detector 3 CCD Camera Spectrometer Secondary Electron Detector Sample In-Lens Backscattered Electron Detector Parabolic Mirror Light Emission SEM Cathodoluminescence Experimental Setup Band-Pass 0 HBT Setup C Beam Splitter Experimental setup for measuring cathodoluminescence (CL) in the scanning electron microscope (SEM). The electron beam excites the sample and causes it to fluoresce. The resulting light is then used for hyperspectral imaging by a spectrometer (slow acquisition, low signal to noise, high spectral resolution) and point detectors (fast acquisition, high signal to noise, low spectral resolution). A Hanbury-Brown Twiss (HBT) apparatus is used to measure the second order coherence function (g2 (τ)) of the light emission. sample is collected by a parabolic mirror and directed down an optical path for characterization. Synchronous data from SEM (secondary electron and in-lens detec- tors) and optical (photon counting point detectors and spectrometer) channels are acquired using the Molecular Foundry ScopeFoundry software25. All experiments are conducted at room temperature. As the electron beam is rastered across the sample, the light emission from each point of the scan can be cou- pled into an optical fiber (Thorlabs FG200UEA) using a UV-enhanced parabolic aluminum reflector and recorded using a spectrometer (Princeton Instruments SP2300i) with CCD camera (Andor 970-UVB) to capture the spec- tral distribution of the light at each pixel, resulting in a three-dimensional data set we refer to as a spectral image (SI). The spectra are not intensity corrected for the wave- length dependent efficiency of the spectrometer grating and CCD camera. Alternatively, the light can be directed through a series of dichroic mirrors and bandpass filters to an array of photon counting photomultiplier tube point- detectors (Hamamatsu H7360-01, Hamamatsu H7421-40, and Hamamatsu H7421-50), resulting in intensity images of well-defined wavelength bands. We refer to such data throughout the text as bandpass (BP) images. Time-correlation of the emitted light can be measured by coupling to a Hanbury-Brown-Twiss (HBT) setup. The arrival times of photons at the detectors in both arms of the apparatus are recorded with 50 ps resolution and a coincidence histogram as a function of delay time between the two detectors is made. The raw coincidence histogram is then normalized by the number of coinci- dences at long delay times. A background correction is performed using the signal to background ratio esti- mated independently for each measurement26, resulting in a measurement of the second-order auto-correlation function (g2 (τ)) of the emitted light (See Supplemental for details). All data analysis is performed using common open- source packages in the Python programming language. Multivariate statistical analysis (MVA) of hyperspec- tral images is carried out using the HyperSpy Python package27. III. RESULTS We first describe results from NIMS-BN. In order to activate and characterize individual emitters, we initially identify large (lateral size of 10-100 μm) flakes of h-BN using the raster scan images from the SEM electron de- tectors, shown in FIG. 2(a). Optical and atomic force microscopy (AFM) observations of our samples indicate that the flakes generally have thicknesses of tens to hun- dreds of nanometers. Relevant spectral bands for BP imaging are determined by inspection of the average CL spectrum, shown in FIG. 2(b), obtained by integrating spectra while continuously scanning a single flake. We isolate the primary spectral regions of interest (indicated by the vertical lines and shaded regions in FIG. 2(b)): 280-409 nm (UV), 430-470 nm (Blue), and 485-735 nm (Vis) for BP imaging with appropriate dichroic and band- pass optics. There are several striking features in each channel of the BP images. tion of the previously reported UV emitters in the h-BN flake14. The emitters have a point-like character and are densely and uniformly distributed across the entire h- BN 3 (a) (c) (d) (e) (b) Intensity (arb.unit) UV Vis Blue Cathodoluminescence Spectrum UV CL (280-409 nm) Vis CL (482-735 nm) Blue CL (430-470 nm) Overview of light emission from h-BN. An SEM image of a flake of h-BN is shown in (a), scale bar is 1 μm. Panel (b) shows the mean Cathodoluminescence (CL) response from the sample, with the three main spectral bands of interest indicated by vertical lines and shaded regions. Panels (c-e) show the light emission from the flake in each of these 3 spectral bands (wavelength range listed above each image, intensity scale in counts/pixel). Panel (c) shows UV light emission from a high density of point-like emitters as well as bright emission from a large line-like feature. The intensity in the Blue band arises mostly from the new point-like emitters, shown in Panel (d). Panel (e) shows the spatial distribution of intensity from the green to red region of the spectrum (Vis). Emission in this band arises mostly from extended defects in the crystal. The images are generated by averaging 17 consecutive scans, each with a pixel dwell time of 28.6 μs/pixel. crystal, with enhanced emission along line-like features that are likely associated with extended line defects28 or strain caused by a wrinkle or fold in the crystallite29. band (485-735 nm) as previously reported28. These fea- tures are localized at grain-boundaries and dislocations within the h-BN crystal. No localized, point-like sources of light emission are observed within this band using CL BP imaging. The bright, point-like features in the Blue BP image between 430-470 nm in FIG. 2(d) show the new color centers in NIMS-BN, which are the focus of this study. They appear slightly larger and less dense compared to the UV emitters in the previous panel. Also present is the line-like feature from the UV band, as well as a very weak signal from extended features in the Vis band. The broad spectral character of these extended features results in residual intensity leaking into the Blue band. We further characterize electron-stimulated light emis- sion from NIMS-BN using hyperspectral CL imaging by collecting a CL spectrum from each pixel in a raster scan. To isolate the unique spectral signature of each type of emitter we perform a non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) decomposition30 of the spectra in the SI into four components that visualize the main features present in the dataset. FIG. 3(a-f) show the results of the decompo- sition. Each image (also called the decomposition loading or decomposition weight) shows the relative abundance of each associated spectral component (also called the decomposition factor) below. The vertical red lines in BP imaging in FIG. 2(c), 2(d), and 2(e), respectively. The first component (see Supplemental) is a spatially uniform background that reflects dark counts, noise, and non-localized light emission. The component shown in line defects, as well as a small number of highly local- ized features with appreciable intensity that are consis- tent with previous photoluminescence (PL) studies10,11 of SPE in h-BN. FIG. 3(a) shows a dense collection of point-like emitters, similar to the UV BP image in Fig. 2(b). The spectral features in the component in FIG. 4 Wavelength (nm) Intensity (a.u.) Delay time (ns) Corrected g(2) τ = 2.6 ± 1.1 ns g(2)(0) = 1.27 ± 0.08 (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h) Hyperspectral characterization of a dense array of emitters across three spectral regions in h-BN. Hyperspectral CL data are decomposed using Non-Negative Matrix Factor- ization (NMF) to display the main features of the data. Each image component (top row, scale bar 1 um) shows the spa- tial distribution of the associated spectral component below (middle row). The red lines on the spectral components in panels (b), (d), and (f) show the edges of the bandpass fil- ters used in bandpass imaging from FIG. 2. The spatial (a) and spectral (b) distributions of the first component show point-like UV emitters from 300-400 nm. The peaks between 600-700 nm are artefacts due to the second-order reflections of the UV light from the spectrometer grating. Panels (c) and (d) show the spectral signature of the newly discovered blue color centers between 400-500 nm. Panels (e) and (f) show extended emission features between 500-700 nm, likely caused by extended defects and/or strain. Panel (g) shows a rescaled view of the blue emission component as well as the results of multi-gaussian fitting of the peak. The fitted components show a Zero-Phonon Line (ZPL) followed by several phonon replicas with decreasing amplitude, an indicator of a single- photon emitter weakly coupled to the lattice. The photon- correlation curve in (h) shows a bunching peak, a signature of quantum emission in CL. Fitting to a single exponential decay model gives a lifetime of several nanoseconds, similar to lifetimes observed from SPE in other defects in h-BN. 3(b)) are a close match to UV SPEs in h-BN seen in previous CL studies14. The most striking feature, shown in FIG. 3(c) and 3(d), closely resembles the spectral and spatial sig- natures of a typical color center in a wide bandgap semiconductor10,12. Specifically, they are highly local- ized, spectrally sharp, and the first peak is followed by additional spectral features shifted by tens of meV that are interpreted as evidence of electron-phonon coupling. This component is investigated further in FIG. 3(g) using multi-Gaussian fitting of the spectral component. Fitting reveals a series of peaks, decreasing in intensity and in- creasing in width with increasing wavelength. The spec- trum is dominated by a sharp, well-defined zero phonon line (ZPL), centered at 436 nm (2.84 eV), with a FWHM of 10 nm (65 meV), contributing a spectral weight of ∼ 26%, followed by several phonon replicas at 443, 461, and 484 nm (2.80, 2.69, and 2.56 eV). There is also a small, broad, background component centered at 482 nm (2.57 eV). In contrast to the UV emission described above (where the phonon replicas have higher intensity than the ZPL), the relatively high intensity of the ZPL com- pared to the phonon replicas suggest that this emitters coupling to the lattice is significantly weaker, a desirable quality for possible applications in future quantum in- formation technologies. The density of emitters in FIG. 3(c) is higher than in the BP image in FIG. 2(d) and is related to the higher electron dose required for hyper- spectral imaging, which will be discussed later. Spectral information from the hyperspectral imaging can be used to perform time-correlation measurements of light from the blue emitters. A bandpass filter is selected that covers a large portion of the emission peak from FIG. 3(d) in order to measure the second-order autocorrelation function using HBT intensity interferometry. FIG. 3(h) shows the result of this measurement from an ensemble of emitters (See Supplemental for experimental details). The majority of previous studies of light emission in h- BN have measured g(2) P L (τ) using PL. In stark contrast, g(2) CL (τ), measured in this study, exhibits a bunching peak as opposed to an anti-bunching dip. This behavior, which has been explored previously31,32, is attributed to simul- taneous excitation of multiple color centers by the elec- tron beam. In PL studies of defects in wide band gap semiconductors, such as SPEs in h-BN and NV centers in diamond, the excitation energy is typically less than the band-gap of the material, resulting in the production of a single e-h pair per photon. In CL, the excitation energy is much higher than the band-gap of the material, resulting in the excitation of many e-h pairs. A semi-empirical re- lation predicts that approximately Ne−h = E0 3Eg e-h pairs are excited per incident electron33, where E0 is the beam energy and Eg is the band gap of h-BN. For Eg = 6 eV and E0 = 3 keV, Ne−h = 111. Previous work34 has shown that if the bunching peak of the g(2) CL (τ) function can be attributed to simultaneous excitation of an ensemble of emitters, that the lifetime of the defect state can be extracted similar to an analogous PL measurement of the lifetime from the anti-bunching dip. An exponential fit to the time correlation data using as free parameters, gives a lifetime of τlifetime = 2.6 ns and g(2) (0) = 1.27. This lifetime is close in value to previous measurements of SPEs in h-BN10–14,34. The g(2) (0) value is quite low, but it has been shown that at high current, the bunching effect becomes washed out, resulting in a decreased apparent value of g(2) (0). While 5 Elapsed time (seconds) (a) (c) (b) (d) (e) (f) (g) activation deactivation scan direction (j) (h) (i) 5 10 15 20 Overview of switching behavior in hBN emitters. A series of CL bandpass images (409- 482 nm) are taken over 1.5 hours at 4.5 minutes per image, with each time point corresponding to a single image scan with an electron beam dose of 2.3 × 107 e−/ ̊A2. The top row shows the first, middle, and final images in the series at full spatial resolution (scale bar is 500 nm, color scale in units of counts/pixel). The bottom row shows the dynamic behavior of 4 separate 300 nm regions (indicated by the colored boxes in the top panel) over the entire time series. The emitters exhibit clear switching behavior, turning on and off between frames of the time series. Examples of emitters that suddenly turn on or off as the beam is passing over are shown in panels (h) and (i), respectively. Panel (j) shows that the number of emitters in each frame grows roughly linearly with electron beam dose. the observed bunching peak and extracted fit parameters are not incontrovertible proof that the new color center is a quantum emitter, the presence of this peak is consistent with the newly discovered blue emitter being a potential single photon source. There are two striking differences between the Blue emitters shown in FIG. 2(d) and those shown in FIG. 3(c) that are associated with the higher electron dose re- quired to acquire an SI compared to a BP image. First, the number and density of features is higher in the SI, indicating that we are creating new emitters by electron irradiation. Second, a variation in the shape of individual emitters appears. The emitters are round and symmet- ric in the BP image in FIG. 2(d), while many emitters appear to have a truncated shape in the SI component in FIG. 3(c). This truncation, discussed below, is associ- ated with a sudden activation or deactivation event while the beam is over an emitter. To further investigate this, we acquire a 2.5-hour time series of long scan time (262 seconds per image) BP im- ages over a flake of h-BN. Each image corresponds to an exposed dose of 2.3 × 107 e−/ ̊A2 per image, with a to- tal exposed dose of 5.7 × 108 e−/ ̊A2. Time-series data are aligned and registered using template matching and cross-correlation to correct for sample drift during the ex- periment. Individual emitters were automatically identi- fied in each frame of the time series using the difference of Gaussian blob finding algorithm. 50x50 pixel regions around emitters were extracted and image feature vectors were calculated using the PCA weights of each image. Fi- nally, false positives were removed by inspection of the output of k-means clustering on the feature vectors. top row shows the first (FIG. 4(a)), middle (FIG. 4(b)), and last (FIG. 4(c)) images from the time series at full spatial resolution. The colored boxes in the full resolu- tion images indicate regions where we have cropped the data and displayed the entire time series in a 300 nm region around four emitters (FIG. 4(d-g)). shows an emitter that is suddenly activated by the elec- tron beam (indicated by the truncated disc shape of the emitter), remains in the emissive state for 5 frames, then suddenly switches off for the remainder of the time se- ries. FIG. 4(e-f) show emitters that switch on and off several times throughout the scan. Some of these ac- tivation/deactivation events appear as truncated discs (shown in detail in FIG. 4(h-i)), while some appear as the sudden appearance or disappearance of a bright spot from one frame to another. FIG. 4 illustrates that not only are the emitters activated and deactivated by the electron beam, but they also disappear and reappear in identical spatial locations (within the accuracy of our measurement) We note that we have also attempted characterization of these emitters using PL. NIMS-BN samples on indexed Si substrates are seeded with emitters using the SEM, characterized using CL, and then transferred to a CW PL setup using 1 mW 349 nm, 10 mW 405 nm, and 30 mW 532 nm excitation focused to a diffraction limited spot. No emission is observed in the Uv-Vis range using the 6 available excitation energies and intensities within rea- sonable integration times. This fact, in conjunction with the activation/deactivation behavior observed under the electron beam, hints that the origin of this emission is associated with the charge state of an electron irradi- ated point defect, similar to SPE in other semiconductor systems35–37. Furthermore, we note that the Blue 435 nm emission is not observed using PL or CL in any samples of commer- cial h-BN powder. This implies that the new emission may be closely related to the unique synthetic origin of NIMS-BN. IV. DISCUSSION We consider possible mechanisms for the new emission. We immediately rule out the direct creation of defects via knock-on damage and electron-beam-induced heat- ing. The electron energy threshold for knock-on damage in h-BN is in the range of 70-80 keV38,39, far greater than the 1-10 keV energy range of the SEM beam. Electron- beam-induced heating is unlikely due to the high thermal conductivity of h-BN along with the relatively low cur- rent of the electron beam. The change in temperature of the sample can be estimated40 assuming that energy from the electron beam is uniformly deposited in a sphere of radius R using ∆T = 3IVf/2πRκ, where I is the beam current, V is the beam accelerating voltage, f is the fraction of inci- dent energy that is absorbed, and κ is the thermal con- ductivity of h-BN (600 W/m K). Assuming that 100% of the incoming power is absorbed in a spherical inter- action volume of radius R = 30 nm, a 2 keV electron beam with 1 nA of current causes a temperature increase of ∆T = 0.05 K. This value would be even lower at increased accelerating voltage41 because the interaction size scales approximately as V1.75. Furthermore, due to the finite thickness of an h-BN flake, the fraction of en- ergy from the beam deposited into the sample decreases at higher beam energies. We propose that the origin of this new emitter is electron-beam-induced defect chemistry, outlined in FIG. 5. The as-synthesized NIMS-BN crystal has some initial concentration of vacancies and intercalated interstitials, illustrated in the cartoon in FIG. 5(a). Electron beam induced diffusion increases the mobility of the intersti- tials causing the impurities to diffuse towards the nat- urally occurring vacancies within the material, resulting in the interstitial and vacancy combining into a defect complex42,43 (FIG. 5(b)). We propose that the activa- tion/deactivation behavior results from electron beam in- duced charge state switching of the color centers, similar to previous observations of NV centers in diamond44. In our model, the electron beam modifies the charge state of the defect causing it to change from a non-emissive to an emissive state, resulting in the production of pho- tons (FIG. 5(c)). The charge state of the defect can also be modified in the opposite sense, resulting in emitters switching on and off during a measurement. We do not see any evidence of emitters switching or blinking to a different emission band in our experiments. This effect would be fairly obvious in the SIs and would appear as a distinct component, complementary to the one shown in FIG. 3(c) and 3(d). The spatial loading would appear as a collection of point-like emitters accompanied by a set of truncated disks (truncated in the opposite sense compared those in FIG. 3(c)). This change in charge state has two possible origins. One scenario is that incident beam and secondary elec- trons are captured by the defect complex, resulting in a negative charge state. Alternatively, the incident or sec- ondary electrons ionize the defect, resulting in a positive charge state. Currently, neither possibility can be ex- cluded suggesting future experiments and calculations. Previous studies have shown that a low energy elec- tron beam can cause diffusion of impurities or vacan- cies, vacancy-impurity defect reconstruction, and charge state switching in other wide band gap semiconductors. While speculative, our proposed model is consistent with previous findings of electron beam induced luminescent diamond NV centers45. We propose that this emission has not been previously observed in h-BN for several reasons. Past studies of color centers in h-BN have typically not used NIMS-BN which has a unique synthetic origin, but rather commer- cially obtained h-BN. We surmise that the Ba-B-N sol- vent precursor used in the NIMS-BN synthesis could pro- duce barium impurities in these samples, which would not be present in commercially obtained material syn- thesized using different growth precursors. Under the assumptions of our model, the new emission would not be observed in the absence of this unique impurity. PL studies of color centers in h-BN that do use NIMS-BN have used a 532 nm laser excitation to probe the sample and have focused on light emission in a high wavelength range. This excitation energy is too low to probe a state that emits at 435 nm. It is likely that the charge re- combination dynamics in this regime are dominated by non-radiative transitions. It is possible that the 435 nm emission is only present using CL because of the large number of electron-hole pairs created per incident elec- tron, as well as the high intensity of the electron probe. A final, more speculative reason that this emission has not been observed to date is the possibility that the par- ticular defect complex responsible for the emission needs the high energy density of the electron beam in order to drive interstitial-vacancy recombination. Our experimental results of the spectral and spatial character of this new emitter in h-BN show many fea- tures observed in quantum emitters, suggesting that this new color center is a potential source of single photons. The emission is highly localized, spectrally pure, exhibits a ZPL with phonon replicas, and can be modified with an electron beam, all features of SPEs in other solid state systems. The bunching behavior seen in the g(2) (τ) mea- 7 surement, while not proof of single photon emission, is not inconsistent with electron beam induced light emis- sion from an ensemble of quantum emitters. While all ob- servations are consistent with the behavior of a two-level- like system capable of single photon emission, further study is required to unambiguously confirm the quantum nature of this emitter. (a) (b) (c) h-BN interstitial vacancy ħω electron beam Proposed model for formation and activation of blue color centers in NIMS-BN. The as-synthesized material has some intrinsic density of interstitial impurities and lattice vacancies, as shown in (a). When stimulated by the electron beam, the impurity atoms are driven into the vacancies and due to the energy provided by the beam a substitutional de- fect complex is formed. The charge state of the new defect is changed by the beam causing it to emit photons. The charge state of the defect is sensitive to the intense stimulus from the electron probe and can jump between emissive and non- emissive states, resulting in a blinking effect. V. CONCLUSION We have identified a new color center unique to high- quality hexagonal boron nitride using cathodolumines- cence in the SEM. The emission is peaked at 435 nm and has spectral characteristics indicative of weak lattice coupling. The electron beam activates and deactivates emission from point defects in the crystal. We propose that this emission originates from a barium atom inter- stitial impurity forming a defect complex with a vacancy driven by the energy of the electron beam. The charge state of this defect is changed by the electron beam re- sulting in the emitters switching on and off. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This research was supported primarily by the Direc- tor, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences and Engineering Division, of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02- 05-CH11231 within the sp2-Bonded Materials Program (KC-2207) which provided for design of the experiment, and collection and analysis of the CL data. Additional support was provided by the Director, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences and Engineering Division, of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05-CH11231 within the van der Waals Heterostructures Program (KCWF16), which provided for BN sample preparation. This work was also supported by the National Science Founda- tion under Grant No. DMR-1807233 which provided for TEM structure and impurity characterization; and under Grant No. 1542741 which provided for development of optical instrumentation. Work at the Molecular Foundry was supported by the Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, of the US Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231. SMG acknowledges support from a Kavli Energy Nano Sciences Institute Fel- lowship and an NSF Graduate Fellowship. ∗ azettl@berkeley.edu † saloni@lbl.gov 1 H.-K. Lo, M. Curty, and K. Tamaki, Nature Photonics 8, 2 V. Scarani, H. Bechmann-Pasquinucci, N. J. Cerf, M. Duek, N. Ltkenhaus, and M. Peev, Reviews of Modern Physics 81, 1301 (2009). 3 P. Kok, W. J. Munro, K. Nemoto, T. C. Ralph, J. P. Dowl- ing, and G. J. Milburn, Reviews of Modern Physics 79, 4 J. L. O’Brien, A. Furusawa, and J. Vukovi, Nature Pho- tonics 3, 687 (2009). 5 T. E. Northup and R. Blatt, Nature Photonics 8, 356 6 C. Kurtsiefer, S. Mayer, P. Zarda, and H. Weinfurter, Physical Review Letters 85, 290 (2000). 7 P. Neumann, N. Mizuochi, F. Rempp, P. Hemmer, H. Watanabe, S. Yamasaki, V. Jacques, T. Gaebel, F. Jelezko, and J. Wrachtrup, Science 320, 1326 (2008). 8 S. Castelletto, B. C. Johnson, V. Ivdy, N. Stavrias, T. Umeda, A. Gali, and T. Ohshima, Nature Materials 9 A. J. Morfa, B. C. Gibson, M. Karg, T. J. Karle, A. D. Greentree, P. Mulvaney, and S. Tomljenovic-Hanic, Nano Letters 12, 949 (2012). 10 L. J. Martnez, T. Pelini, V. Waselowski, J. R. Maze, B. Gil, G. Cassabois, and V. Jacques, Physical Review B 94, 11 T. T. Tran, C. Zachreson, A. M. Berhane, K. Bray, R. G. Sandstrom, L. H. Li, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, I. Aharonovich, and M. Toth, Physical Review Applied 5, 12 T. T. Tran, C. Elbadawi, D. Totonjian, C. J. Lobo, G. Grosso, H. Moon, D. R. Englund, M. J. Ford, I. Aharonovich, and M. Toth, ACS Nano 10, 7331 (2016). 13 T. T. Tran, K. Bray, M. J. Ford, M. Toth, and I. Aharonovich, Nature Nanotechnology 11, 37 (2016). 14 R. Bourrellier, S. Meuret, A. Tararan, O. Stphan, M. Ko- ciak, L. H. G. Tizei, and A. Zobelli, Nano Letters 16, 4317 15 N. G. Chopra, R. J. Luyken, K. Cherrey, V. H. Crespi, M. L. Cohen, S. G. Louie, and A. Zettl, Science New 8 Series, 269, 966 (1995). 16 A. Rubio, J. L. Corkill, and M. L. Cohen, Physical Review 17 K. S. Novoselov, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, T. J. Booth, V. V. Khotkevich, S. V. Morozov, and A. K. Geim, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 102, 10451 (2005). 18 A. Nagashima, N. Tejima, Y. Gamou, T. Kawai, and C. Oshima, Physical Review B 51, 4606 (1995). 19 D. Golberg, Y. Bando, O. Stphan, and K. Kurashima, Applied Physics Letters 73, 2441 (1998). 20 C. R. Dean, A. F. Young, I. Meric, C. Lee, L. Wang, S. Sor- genfrei, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, P. Kim, K. L. Shep- ard, and J. Hone, Nature Nanotechnology 5, 722 (2010). 21 T. Pham, A. L. Gibb, Z. Li, S. M. Gilbert, C. Song, S. G. Louie, and A. Zettl, Nano Letters 16, 7142 (2016). 22 S. M. Gilbert, G. Dunn, A. Azizi, T. Pham, B. Shevit- ski, E. Dimitrov, S. Liu, S. Aloni, and A. Zettl, Scientific Reports 7, 15096 (2017). 23 S. M. Gilbert, T. Pham, M. Dogan, S. Oh, B. Shevitski, G. Schumm, S. Liu, P. Ercius, S. Aloni, M. L. Cohen, and A. Zettl, 2D Materials 6, 021006 (2019). 24 T. Taniguchi and K. Watanabe, Journal of Crystal Growth 25 D. B. Durham, D. F. Ogletree, and E. S. Barnard, Surface and Interface Analysis 50, 1174 (2018). 26 R. Brouri, A. Beveratos, J.-P. Poizat, and P. Grangier, Optics Letters 25, 1294 (2000). 27 Francisco de la Pea, Tomas Ostasevicius, Vidar Tonaas Fauske, Pierre Burdet, Eric Prestat, Petras Jokubauskas, Magnus Nord, Mike Sarahan, Katherine E. MacArthur, Duncan N. Johnstone, Joshua Taillon, Jan Caron, Vadim Migunov, Tom Furnival, Alberto Eljarrat, Stefano Maz- zucco, Thomas Aarholt, Michael Walls, Tom Slater, Florian Winkler, Ben Martineau, Gal Donval, Robert McLeod, Eric R. Hoglund, Ivo Alxneit, Ida Hjorth, Trond Henninen, Luiz Fernando Zagonel, Andreas Gar- mannslund, and 5ht2, “hyperspy/hyperspy: HyperSpy 1.3.1,” (2018). 28 P. Jaffrennou, J. Barjon, J.-S. Lauret, B. Attal-Trtout, F. Ducastelle, and A. Loiseau, Journal of Applied Physics 29 N. V. Proscia, Z. Shotan, H. Jayakumar, P. Reddy, C. Co- hen, M. Dollar, A. Alkauskas, M. Doherty, C. A. Meriles, and V. M. Menon, Optica 5, 1128 (2018). 30 M. Arngren, M. N. Schmidt, and J. Larsen, Journal of Signal Processing Systems 65, 479 (2011). 31 M. A. Feldman, E. F. Dumitrescu, D. Bridges, M. F. Chisholm, R. B. Davidson, P. G. Evans, J. A. Hachtel, A. Hu, R. C. Pooser, R. F. Haglund, and B. J. Lawrie, Physical Review B 97, 081404 (2018). 32 S. Meuret, T. Coenen, H. Zeijlemaker, M. Latzel, S. Chris- tiansen, S. Conesa-Boj, and A. Polman, Physical Review 33 C. A. Klein, Journal of Applied Physics 39, 2029 (1968). 34 S. Meuret, L. Tizei, T. Cazimajou, R. Bourrellier, H. Chang, F. Treussart, and M. Kociak, Physical Review Letters 114, 197401 (2015). 35 M. V. Hauf, B. Grotz, B. Naydenov, M. Dankerl, S. Pez- zagna, J. Meijer, F. Jelezko, J. Wrachtrup, M. Stutzmann, F. Reinhard, and J. A. Garrido, Physical Review B 83, 36 P. Siyushev, H. Pinto, M. Vrs, A. Gali, F. Jelezko, and J. Wrachtrup, Physical Review Letters 110, 167402 (2013). 37 B. Grotz, M. V. Hauf, M. Dankerl, B. Naydenov, S. Pez- zagna, J. Meijer, F. Jelezko, J. Wrachtrup, M. Stutzmann, F. Reinhard, and J. A. Garrido, Nature Communications 38 J. Kotakoski, C. H. Jin, O. Lehtinen, K. Suenaga, and A. V. Krasheninnikov, Physical Review B 82, 113404 39 A. Zobelli, A. Gloter, C. P. Ewels, G. Seifert, and C. Col- liex, Physical Review B 75, 245402 (2007). 40 L. Reimer, Scanning Electron Microscopy: Physics of Image Formation and Microanalysis, 2nd ed., Vol. 45 (Springer, 2013). 41 C. Donolato, physica status solidi (a) 66, 445 (1981). 42 O. Dyck, S. Kim, S. V. Kalinin, and S. Jesse, Applied Physics Letters 111, 113104 (2017). 43 B. M. Hudak, J. Song, H. Sims, M. C. Troparevsky, T. S. Humble, S. T. Pantelides, P. C. Snijders, and A. R. Lupini, ACS Nano 12, 5873 (2018). 44 T. Gaebel, M. Domhan, C. Wittmann, I. Popa, F. Jelezko, J. Rabeau, A. Greentree, S. Prawer, E. Trajkov, P. Hem- mer, and J. Wrachtrup, Applied Physics B 82, 243 (2006). 45 J. Schwartz, S. Aloni, D. F. Ogletree, and T. Schenkel, New Journal of Physics 14, 043024 (2012).