1 Selective excitation of multipolar spoof plasmons using orbital angular momentum of light Takashi Arikawa1†, Tomoki Hiraoka1†, Shohei Morimoto1†, François Blanchard2, Shuntaro Tani3, Tomoko Tanaka3, Kyosuke Sakai4, Hiroki Kitajima4, Keiji Sasaki4 and Koichiro Tanaka1,3 * 1 Kyoto University, Department of Physics, Kyoto, 606-8502, Japan 2 École de technologie supérieure (ÉTS), Department of Electrical Engineering, Montréal, Québec, H3C 1K3, Canada 3 Kyoto University, Institute for Integrated Cell-Material Sciences (iCeMS), Kyoto, 606- 8501, Japan 4 Research Institute for Electronic Science, Hokkaido University, Hokkaido, 001-0020, Japan † These authors contributed equally to this work * email: kochan@scphys.kyoto-u.ac.jp 2 The nature of light-matter interaction is governed by the spatial-temporal structures of a light field and material wavefunctions. The emergence of the light beam with transverse phase vortex, or equivalently orbital angular momentum (OAM) has been providing intriguing possibilities to induce unconventional optical transitions beyond the framework of the electric dipole interaction. The uniqueness stems from the OAM transfer from light to material, as demonstrated using the bound electron of a single trapped ion. However, many aspects of the vortex light-matter interaction are still unexplored especially in solids with extended electronic states. Here, we unambiguously visualized dipole-forbidden multipolar excitations in a solid-state electron system; spoof localized surface plasmon, selectively induced by the terahertz vortex beam. The results obey the selection rules governed by the conservation of the total angular momentum, which is numerically confirmed by the electromagnetic field analysis. Our results show light’s OAM can be efficiently transferred to an elementary excitation in solids. The Fermi’s golden rule defines whether an optical transition between quantum mechanical states is allowed or not. In the common case of the plane wave with no transverse phase structure in the long-wavelength regime (field gradient along the propagation direction is ignored), one obtains dipole selection rules, which has been successful in describing a variety of linear optical phenomena1. Several efforts have been made to break the selection rules and access dark electronic states by violating the uniform phase condition using oblique irradiation or steep field gradient in a metallic nanogap2,3. These methods simultaneously excite many modes due to the low symmetry, which is preferred for light energy harvesting. To selectively excite one particular dark mode, nonlinear optical techniques such as two-photon absorption and stimulated Raman scattering have been employed provided that strong light sources are available4. The vortex beam with the orbital angular momentum (OAM)5 is a new and ideal tool for selectively exciting dipole-forbidden states by linear optical absorption at normal 3 incidence. Its transverse phase is structured so that different selection rules from dipole ones are derived6,7. The selectivity can also be understood in terms of the OAM transfer from light to material. This is clearly demonstrated by the observation of the dipole-forbidden S to D state transition in the bound electron of a trapped ion, where the electron absorbs both spin angular momentum (SAM) and OAM from the vortex beam8. However, the transition probability of such a transition is very small due to the significant size mismatch between the diffraction-limited spot size of the vortex beam (~ 1000 nm) and the spatial extent of the electronic wavefunction (< tens of nm)7,9. In this context, electrons in solids with extended wavefunctions are expected to provide a promising platform for studying vortex light-matter interaction10. In fact, electromagnetic field analyses predict efficient OAM transfer from vortex beams to localized surface plasmons (LSPs) in a metallic disk of similar size to the diffraction-limited excitation beam11. In the simulations, multipolar modes with larger angular momentums (quadrupole, hexapole, ...) are selectively excited as a result of the OAM transfer, while Gaussian beam (plane wave) only splits positive and negative charges in an opposite direction, resulting in the dipole mode. In this study, we experimentally demonstrated this selective excitation using the spoof LSP; a low-frequency analogue of LSP, that exists around the surface of a periodically textured metallic disk12-14. It mimics LSP with tailor-made resonance frequencies depending on the geometric parameters of the corrugation. By properly designing the structures, we brought the resonance frequencies down to the terahertz (THz) frequency region, where nondestructive imaging of the near field distribution is possible in a time-resolved manner15-17. This allows us to unambiguously visualize characteristic near-field patterns around the corrugated disk and identify spoof LSP modes excited in the sample. 4 Generation and detection of THz vortex beam Let us first characterize the THz excitation beam, which is measured without metallic structures. Linearly polarized coherent THz pulses are focused to the electro-optic (EO) crystal (LiNbO3) by two lenses (Fig. 1a,b). When performing vortex beam experiments, we put a spiral phase plate (SPP) in the collimated part of the THz beam propagating in the z-direction18-21. We made two SPPs to generate vortex beams with the z-component of the OAM of ±ħ or ±2ħ centered at around 0.5 THz (SPP-1 and -2. See Methods and Supplementary information 2). Two-dimensional EO imaging was performed using a probe beam with a large spot size and a CMOS camera with a polarization analyzer unit (see Supplementary information 1). Figure 1d shows the snapshots of the THz pulse passing through the EO crystal taken without a SPP. A uniform phase (colour) of the electric field in the center suggests the original THz pulse is very close to the ideal Gaussian beam. Figures 1e and 1f show frequency-domain intensity and phase images at 0.5 THz, which also exhibit Gaussian beam nature; single intensity peak and flat phase distribution around the center. The snapshots shown in Fig. 1g was measured with the SPP-1. A vortex phase structure making a clockwise turn is clearly seen. The frequency-domain intensity (Fig. 1h) and phase (Fig. 1i) images at 0.5 THz show the characteristic features of the vortex beam with the OAM of +ħ, i.e., donut-shape intensity profile and the 2π phase rotation with a center singular point (white cross). Similar experiments and analysis were done with the SPP-2 to generate the vortex beam with the z-component of the OAM of -2ħ at 0.5 THz. We can see a vortex rotating counter-clockwise (Fig. 1j) in the time-domain, and 4p phase rotation (Fig. 1l) with a center intensity null (Fig. 1k) in the frequency-domain. The non-ideal intensity profile suggests low OAM purity as characterized in the Supplementary information 2. 5 converts Gaussian beam into vortex beam. Two lenses (Lens1: Tsurupica lens, f = 50 mm. Lens2: 3-mm-thick, 2-mm-radius silicon bullet lens) were used to match the spot size of the excitation beam to the size of the metallic structure for efficient excitation. For details, see Supplementary information 1. b. Electric field waveform of the incident Gaussian THz pulse. The inset shows its frequency spectrum. c. Magnified view around the EO crystal (side view). 1-μm-thick, x-cut LiNbO3 is mounted on a glass substrate. To perform EO sampling in the reflection geometry, the top and bottom surfaces of this substrate are coated with high-reflection (HR) and anti-reflection (AR) films (3 μm thick) for the probe pulse at 780 nm, respectively. The top view of the corrugated disk is schematically shown with the following structural parameters; inner radius (r), outer radius (R), periodicity (d), groove width (a), number of grooves (N). The refractive indices inside the groove and outside the disk are given by ng and nout, respectively. d,g,j. Time-domain EO images of the Gaussian and vortex beams. e,h,k. Frequency-domain intensity images of the Gaussian and vortex beams at 0.5 THz. The intensity images are normalized by the maximum values. f,i,l. Phase images of the Gaussian and vortex beams at 0.5 THz. 6 Direct observation of multipole spoof LSPs To visualize the near-field pattern due to spoof LSPs, we fabricated corrugated gold disks directly on the top surface of the EO substrate (Fig. 1c) using photolithographic and vacuum deposition technique. This allows us to sample electric field only a few μm (<< wavelength of a few hundred μm) away from the metallic structure15-17. Figure 2a shows five snapshots of the THz electric field around the sample excited by a linearly polarized Gaussian beam. Even after the incident THz pulse has passed through the sample, an electric field oscillation localized around the outer circle of the sample is observed (3rd to 5th frame), which indicates a resonant excitation of a spoof LSP. It has four nodes at fixed points along the outer circle. This is shown by the red curve in Fig. 2b, where we plot the electric field taken along the outer circle of the sample at 5.67 ps (4th frame) as a function of the azimuthal angle j. Notice that the selected snapshots (3rd to 5th frame) display almost one oscillation period. These results show that a standing wave mode with a period of 4.2 ps (0.24 THz) is excited. The red curve in Fig. 2b nicely follows cos(2j) drawn by the dashed black curve. This represents the expected electric field pattern when the dipole mode is excited in the sample, which is obtained by projecting the quasi-static electric field around the dipole onto the detection polarization axis (e⃗#) in the experiment (see Methods for details). This confirms that the dipole mode is excited by the Gaussian beam. polarized vortex beam with the OAM +ħ. A localized electric field with six zero-crossing points along the outer circle is seen after the excitation. An azimuthal plot along the outer circle at 5.47 ps (3rd frame) agrees excellently with cos(3j) curve, which is the expected functional form when the quadrupole mode exists (Fig. 2d). In contrast to the Gaussian beam excitation, we can see this electric field pattern travels along the outer circle in a clockwise direction. A similar experiment and analysis were carried out for the vortex beam excitation with the OAM -2ħ (Fig. 2e,f). Although not clear as above, multipolar field pattern with eight zero-crossing points can be recognized (Fig. 2e), which partly follows cos(4j) curve suggesting the excitation of the hexapole mode (Fig. 2f). 7 evolution around the sample excited by a. Gaussian beam, c. vortex beam (OAM +ħ), and e. vortex beam (OAM -2ħ). The Double circle represents the position of the sample (inner radius r, outer radius R). The sample dimensions are r = 70 μm, R = 100 μm, N = 30, a/d = 0.4. The time origin (0 ps) is the time when the first positive peak of the incident pulse comes. The colour scales are optimized at each frame for the sake of clarity. b,d,f. The electric field taken along the outer circle of the sample as a function of the azimuthal angle j (red curves). The dashed cosine curves are expected electric field patterns when the modes depicted on the right are excited. The solid arrows schematically represent the quasi-static electric field around each mode. The cosine functions are obtained by projecting the quasi-static field onto the polarization axis (e⃗#, dashed up arrow) detected in the experiment. e⃗$ and e⃗% are cylindrical unit vectors. 8 Field pattern analysis These observations indicate that multipole spoof LSPs are excited by using vortex beams. To clearly illustrate this point, we performed the following analysis. The orthogonal functional forms of the electric field [cos(mj), m: integer] for different LSP modes allow us to decompose the complicated field pattern into the superposition of each mode. See Methods for the proof of the one-to-one correspondence between the LSP modes and cosine functions for their electric field distributions. For this purpose, we focused on the electric field along the outer circle of the sample as we have done in Fig. 2b,d,f, but this time including the time dependence [E(j, t)]. We expanded E(j, t) along both axes by two-dimensional Fourier transform to obtain E(m, f) = ∫ dφ ∫ dtE(φ, t)cos (mφ − 67 68 9: # 2πft). E(m, f) then represents the frequency (f) spectrum of each LSP mode (m = ±2; dipole, m = ±3; quadrupole, and so on) excited in the sample. The positive (negative) sign of m corresponds to the traveling wave mode in the clockwise (counter-clockwise) direction. To exclusively analyze the electric field generated by spoof LSPs, we only used data after the incident THz pulses have passed through the sample (t1 to t2 in Fig. 2). This enables us to minimize spurious signals due to the electric field pattern of the excitation pulse (see Supplementary information 2). f)], and hexapole mode [E(±4, f)] in the case of the Gaussian beam excitation. We can see only the dipole modes are excited at 0.24 THz. Note that both traveling modes with clockwise and counter-clockwise directions are equally excited, which is consistent with the standing wave observed in Fig. 2a. In contrast, the frequency spectra in the case of the vortex beam (+ħ) excitation clearly show a peak in the quadrupole mode (Fig. 3b, middle). Furthermore, the positive index mode (red) is selectively excited as inferred from the clockwise traveling wave observed in Fig. 2c. The same analysis for the case of the vortex beam (-2ħ) excitation clearly demonstrates the selective excitation of the negative hexapole mode (Fig. 3c, top). The selection of the inverse rotation modes is also confirmed by inverting the sign of the z-component of the OAM (See Supplementary Fig. S3). These results clearly demonstrate the selective and efficient excitation of the multipolar modes 9 using the OAM of light. The excitation of the dipole mode in Fig. 3b,c and the negative quadrupole mode in Fig. 3c are explained by the residual Gaussian and vortex (-ħ) beam components in the excitation pulse, respectively (see Supplementary Fig. S2). Although the simultaneous excitation of those modes complicates the electric field pattern in the time-domain (Fig. 2c,e), this analysis allows us to identify all spoof LSP modes excited in the sample. This analysis also reveals the resonance frequencies of each spoof LSP mode and allows us to draw its dispersion relation (solid circles in Fig. 3d). As the number of poles increases, the resonance frequency becomes higher and shows a signature of saturation. This is well reproduced by the theoretical curve22,23, which supports that multipole spoof LSPs are excited (see Methods for the detailed procedure of the fitting). The control of the resonance frequency of the spoof LSP by changing the dimensions of the corrugation is demonstrated in Supplementary Information 3. 10 traces show the traveling wave modes in the clockwise and counter-clockwise direction, respectively. d. Dispersion relation of the spoof LSP. The red dots represent the resonance frequencies determined in a-c. The blue curve is a theoretical fitting. 11 Selection rules These results allow us to deduce the selection rules for the excitation of multipole spoof LSPs. Table 1 summarizes the z component of the angular momentum of the excitation beams (upper part) and the observed LSPs (lower part). Let us first revisit the excitation of the dipole mode by the uniform electric field of the Gaussian beam in terms of the angular momentum. The linearly polarized incident light is a superposition of two circularly polarized waves with the SAM of +ħ and -ħ. Due to the zero OAM, the total angular momentum (TAM) of the incident Gaussian beam is equal to the SAM. The excited dipole mode, which mimics the dipole LSP with a traveling surface charge distribution r(j,t) ∝ cos(±j - 2pft), also possesses the z-component of the angular momentum of ±ħ (see Methods for the relation between the charge and electric field distribution). This gives us an alternative way to interpret the selective excitation of the dipole mode by the Gaussian beam, i.e., transfer of the TAM (= SAM) of light to the electronic system. Similar arguments hold true for the vortex beam excitations. The TAM of the linearly polarized vortex beam (OAM +ħ) is +2ħ and 0. The clockwise quadrupole mode observed in the experiment also has the z-component of the angular momentum of +2ħ, which suggests the transfer of the TAM. Note that no LSP mode is excited by the vortex beam with the TAM of 0 (ref. 11). The TAM of the linearly polarized vortex beam (OAM -2ħ) is -3ħ and –ħ. The selective excitation of the counter-clockwise hexapole mode with the z-component of the angular momentum of -3ħ obeys the same rule. This rule also predicts that the field component with the TAM of –ħ at 0.5 THz should excite counter-clockwise dipole mode. This is also observed in Fig. 3c (bottom) where the higher frequency tail of the counter-clockwise dipole mode (blue) is stronger than the other (red). These experimental observations strongly support the selection rules governed by the conservation of the TAM. 12 and total angular momentums (3rd row) of the excitation beams are summarized in the upper part. The last row below the downward arrows shows the angular momentums of the spoof LSPs observed in the experiment. Spoof LSP modes having the same angular momentum with the total angular momentum of the excitation light are excited. 13 Numerical simulations The selection rules inferred by the experiments are exactly the same as the ones predicted for real LSPs by numerical simulations11. This tells us that the spoof LSP mimics not only the dispersion relation of the LSP, but also the selection rules for excitation. We numerically confirmed this point by performing similar electromagnetic field analyses as ref. 11 for spoof LSPs (see Methods). Fig. 4a shows an electric field distribution around the sample excited by a linearly polarized Gaussian beam at 0.24 THz. The dipolar standing wave (four nodes) is seen around the outer circle, which reproduces the experimental result (Fig. 4b) very well. Similar field patterns are obtained in simulations performed with different excitation frequencies and the integrated electric field intensities along the outer circle are collected to draw an intensity spectrum (Fig. 4c). This shows the dipolar spoof LSP is resonantly excited at 0.24 THz as observed in the experiment (Fig. 4d). Similar simulations for the vortex beam (OAM +ħ) excitation exhibit the characteristic field distribution (six zero-crossing points) unique to the clockwise quadrupole mode (Fig. 4e), which is very similar to the one in the experimental result (Fig. 4f). The intensity spectrum (Fig. 4g) reveals a very similar resonance frequency (0.39 THz) found from the experiment (Fig. 4h). Similarly, the selective excitation of the counter-clockwise hexapole mode (eight zero-crossing points) is clearly seen in the vortex beam (OAM -2ħ) excitation at 0.52 THz (Fig. 4i). Note the purer hexapolar field pattern than the experimental result (Fig. 4j). The intensity spectrum (Fig. 4k) shows the resonance frequency of the hexapole mode similar to the one revealed by the experimental data (Fig. 4l). At lower excitation frequencies, we start to see the dipolar mode around 0.21 THz, which supports the selection rules described in Table 1. These simulations clearly demonstrate that the same selection rules apply for exciting the spoof LSPs. 14 figure 4 | Numerical simulations showing the selective excitation of multipole spoof LSPs. a. Simulated electric field distribution around the sample excited by the linearly polarized Gaussian beam (0.24 THz). The figure shows the linear polarization component along the polarization of the excitation beam to simulate the experimental condition. b. One experimental snapshot from Fig. 2a is shown for comparison. c. Intensity spectrum showing the resonance frequency of the dipole mode at 0.24 THz. d. The spectrum of the dipole mode from Fig. 3a is shown for comparison. e-h. Similar set of data for the linearly polarized vortex beam (+ħ) excitation. The field pattern (e) rotates in the direction shown by the black arrow (clockwise). Note that due to the pure vortex beam excitation, the dipolar mode at 0.24 THz is not excited at all in the spectrum (g). i-l. Similar set of data for the linearly polarized vortex beam (-2ħ) excitation. The field pattern (i) rotates in the direction shown by the black arrow (counter-clockwise). 15 Conclusions We succeeded in selectively exciting dipole-forbidden eigen modes of spoof LSPs, multipolar modes with high OAM, using the phase vortex beam. The efficient TAM transfer from light to spoof LSPs are achieved. This is due to the negligible electron scattering in metals in the THz frequency region that assures the coherent collective motion of electrons over the entire sample with a similar size to the excitation beam. Theory predicts similar TAM transfer to a variety of elementary excitations in solids such as single electronic states24, phonons25, and skyrmions26. For the experimental realization of these excitations with subwavelength wavefunctions, focusing techniques beyond the diffraction limit should play a crucial role27,28.