An optical all-pass filter realized by using self- compensation of loss Lu Xu1,2, Yuan Yu1,2*, Xiaolong Liu1, Xuewen Shu1 & Xinliang Zhang1* Abstract: Filters are key devices in optical systems and are usually applied to signal suppression or selection based on their amplitude frequency responses. Different from amplitude filtering, an all-pass filter (APF) is a unique type of filter that exhibits a uniform amplitude and variable phase in the frequency response. Traditionally, an APF is designed to be ideal and lossless, which is impossible in practice. Here we demonstrate a method of realizing an APF even when transmission loss exists, and a possible structure for realizing the lossy APF is proposed. The method indicates that a lossy APF can be realized by introducing self-compensation of loss to the structure of an ideal single-stage APF, and an APF based on silicon-on-insulator (SOI) foundry is fabricated and demonstrated. The method of self-compensation of loss can also be used to realize APFs in the electrical domain. We anticipate that our work will inspire realizations of more APF-related devices that once seemed impossible in practice. Filters have been widely used in signal processing systems to select desired signals and suppress interferences and noise based on their amplitude frequency responses1-5. Instead of manipulating power, an all-pass filter (APF) aims to manipulate the signal phase and exhibits a constant amplitude response with respect to frequency. In an APF, the phase response can be designed for different applications by utilizing suitable structures. With this unique characteristic, APFs are highly desired for occasions where only a phase variation is needed, such as the phase shifters6,7, dispersion compensation8- 10, time delays11,12, ultrafast all-optical clock recovery13 and Hilbert transformers14,15. General optical APF structures have been achieved in ideal lossless circumstances16. The research shows that in a lossless 2пҝҪ 2 network structure that consists of two inputs and two outputs, by connecting one output to one input with a delay line, the resulting structure is a single-stage APF. However, lossless transmission is impossible in practical waveguides, and the implementations of an APF in this manner are actually approximations of ideal APFs and are not real APFs9-12. The same problem also exists in the theoretical models17-19 and fabricated devices20-23 of electrical APFs. Up to now, to the best of our knowledge, an APF has not yet been realized with lossy transmission. To realize an APF, precise compensation of the transmission loss in the waveguide is of fundamental importance. In active waveguides, the transmission loss can be compensated by controlling and tailoring the gain spectrum in theory. However, it is 1Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics (WNLO), Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST), Wuhan, China. 2These authors contributed equally: Lu Xu, Yuan Yu. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Y.Y. (email: yuan_yu@hust.edu.cn) or to X.Z. (email: xlzhang@mail.hust.edu.cn) rather difficult to precisely equalize the gain and loss, because the equalization is very sensitive to fluctuations in the input power and the injection current of the active waveguide. Therefore, to avoid lasing, the gain must be set to be lower than the loss, and consequently, the amplitude variations in the amplitude frequency response cannot be eliminated. To resolve the challenge of precise loss compensation, here we propose to compensate for transmission loss in passive waveguides by using a novel method called self-compensation of loss, in which the compensation is a power scaling copy of the input. A feasible source for this kind of compensation is to take a slice from the input. When the compensation precisely equals to the transmission loss, an APF can then be realized. Here, we consider an all-pass microring resonator (MRR), which exhibits all-pass transmission only for lossless transmission (see Methods), as an example to demonstrate the method. A detailed demonstration of the realization of a general single- stage lossy APF using self-compensation of loss is given in Methods. The transfer function of a lossy all-pass MRR (Fig. 1a) can be expressed as 1 1 1 i i r ae H rae пҒӘ пҒӘ пҖӯ пҖҪ пҖӯ (1) where r1 is the self-coupling coefficient,пҖ пҒӘ is the round-trip phase shift of the MRR and a is the round-trip amplitude transmission, including both the propagation loss in the MRR and the coupling loss in the coupler24 (the influence of the coupling loss on the transmission of the APF is discussed separately in Methods). Here, a=exp(вҲ’пҒЎL/2), where пҒЎ is the power attenuation coefficient and L is the perimeter of the MRR. We can conclude that a=1 for lossless transmission. Based on a lossy all-pass MRR, the structure of the APF with loss compensation (Fig. 1b) is the same as that of an add-drop MRR, and the compensation is injected into the MRR via the add port (port 3 in Fig. 1b). It should be stressed that the phase of the compensation is the same as that of the input. Fig. 1. The MRR-based APF. a, The structure of a lossy all-pass MRR. The diameter of the MRR is represented by D. b, The structure of the all-pass MRR with self- compensation of loss. The structure is the same as that of an add-drop MRR. Ports 1, 2, 3 and 4 represent the input, through, add and drop ports of the add-drop MRR, respectively. C1 and C2 represent the two directional couplers connecting ports 1and 2 and ports 3 and 4, respectively. c, An ideal lossless all-pass MRR. The diameter of the MRR is D/2. d, e, The transmission spectra (d) and the phase responses (e) of the add- drop MRR when only the input (T1-2 and пҒӘ1-2), only the compensation (T3-2 and пҒӘ3-2), and the combined input and compensation (T1-2+3-2 and пҒӘ1-2+3-2) are injected into the device, respectively. f, Simulated results of the MRR-based APF in b. To realize the APF, two conditions must be satisfied (see Methods). Here, in the case of an MRR-based APF, condition 1 is that the add-drop MRR is critically coupled24 for the input at port 1, indicating that r1=r2a, where r1 and r2 are the self-coupling coefficients of couplers C1 and C2 (Fig. 1b), respectively. Assume that the amplitudes of the input at port 1 and the compensation at port 3 are represented by Ei and Ec, respectively. Condition 2 is that the amplitude ratio between Ec and Ei, which is represented by x, satisfies x=k1/(k2вҲҡпҝҪ) (see Methods). Under the two conditions, when the input and the compensation are injected into the MRR alternatively, the corresponding transmission spectra from port 1 to port 2 and from port 3 to port 2 are shown by the green and purple curves in Fig. 1d, respectively. It can be observed that the two transmission spectra are complementary to each other. However, when the two conditions are satisfied and the input and compensation are injected into the MRR simultaneously, the transfer function of the add-drop MRR from port 1 to port 2 is calculated to be (see Methods) ( 2) 1 ( 2) 1 1 i o i i E r e H E re пҒӘ пҒӘ пҖӯ пҖҪ пҖҪ пҖӯ (2) where Eo represents the amplitude of the output at port 2 (Fig. 1b). By comparing equations (1) and (2), we can observe that the add-drop MRR is equivalent to a lossless all-pass MRR, which is an ideal APF. From equation (2), it can be calculated that the transfer function satisfies |H|2=1, shown as the blue curve in Fig. 1d. This is in accordance with the definition of an APF. The corresponding phase responses (Fig. 1e) show that, when both the input and the compensation are injected into the add-drop MRR simultaneously, the free spectral range (FSR) of the phase response (red curve in Fig. 1e) is twice the FSR of the phase response when only the input or the compensation is injected into the MRR, indicating that the round-trip phase shift of the equivalent lossless all-pass MRR is пҒӘ/2. Consequently, under the two conditions, the lossy add- drop MRR after loss compensation is equivalent to the ideal lossless APF shown in Fig. 1c. In the equivalent ideal lossless APF, the self-coupling and cross-coupling coefficients are r1 and k1, respectively, and the perimeter is one-half of that of the lossy add-drop MRR (Fig. 1b). Fig. 1f shows the simulated response of the lossy add-drop MRR when the optical signal is transmitted from port 1 to port 2 after self- compensation of loss, which is equivalent to that of the ideal lossless all-pass MRR (Fig. 1c). In Fig. 1f, we can observe that the amplitude response is constant with respect to wavelength while the phase varies periodically. Therefore, the combined result of conditions 1 and 2 is that the transmission of the input in the MRR is exactly compensated by the compensation, and a real APF can be achieved. To eliminate the influence of fabrication error on the deviations of the coupling coefficients, we propose a Mach-Zehnder interferometer (MZI)-assisted MRR structure (Fig. 2a) to realize the APF. In this structure, the MZIs are designed to achieve the desired coupling coefficients with controllable adjustments25. MZI1 and MZI2 each have two directional couplers and the self-coupling and cross-coupling coefficients of the couplers are both r1 and k1 in MZI1 and are both r2 and k2 in MZI2, respectively. In Figs 2a and b, the centres of the couplers are marked with orange dots and represented by capital letters. Then, the waveguides can be marked by capital letters at the terminals of the waveguides. The lengths of the waveguides AC, BD, EG and FH are all L1, and their amplitude transmission a1 satisfies a1=exp(вҲ’пҒЎL1/2). Similarly, the lengths of the delay lines DE and GB are both L0, and their amplitude transmission a0 satisfies a0=exp(вҲ’пҒЎL0/2). пҒӘ0 is the phase shift of the delay lines DE and GB, пҒӘ1пҖ is the phase shift of AC, BD and EG and пҒӘ2пҖ is the phase shift Fig. 2. Realization of an APF based on the MZI-assisted MRR. a, The structure of the MZI-assisted MRR. b, The structure of an ideal lossless APF based on an MZI. c, The structure of the designed APF. d, A micrograph of the fabricated APF based on silicon-on-insulator (SOI) foundry. Here, a spare micro-heater is added to the upper arm of MZI0. e, Measured optical transmission spectra of the fabricated device. The blue curve shows the measured optical spectrum of the fabricated APF, the red curve shows the measured optical spectrum of the device when no voltages are applied to the micro-heaters, and the black curve shows the transmission of the equivalent optical waveguide. f, Amplitude and phase frequency responses of the proposed APF measured by a vector network analyzer (VNA). of FH. According to conditions 1 and 2, it can be demonstrated that the structure in Fig. 2a is an APF when the parameters satisfy (see Methods) (3) where y=exp[i(пҒӘ2вҲ’пҒӘ1)] and x=Ec/Ei. Fig. 2b shows the structure of an ideal lossless APF based on an MZI (see Methods). The phase shifts of A'C' and B'D' are both пҒӘ1, which is the same as the phase shifts of AC and BD. The phase shift of D'I'B' is the same as that of DE or GB and equal to пҒӘ0. The waveguides in Fig. 2b are all lossless. It can be demonstrated that the MZI-assisted MRR in Fig. 2a is equivalent to the ideal lossless APF in Fig. 2b (see Methods). According to the theoretical analysis, the structure shown in Fig. 2c can be designed to realize an APF based on the MZI-assisted MRR by using self-compensation of loss. The optical signal is input into the photonic chip via a grating coupler (GC1 in Fig. 2c) and equally split into the two arms of MZI0 by a 1пҝҪ2 multimode interferometer (MMI)26. MZI0 is then connected with a 2пҝҪ 2 MMI, and the power splitting ratio between the two outputs can be adjusted by changing the phase difference between the two arms of MZI027 via a micro-heater deposited on the lower arms of MZI0. After MZI0, the optical signal at the lower port acts as the input Ei, and the optical signal at the upper port acts as the compensation Ec. Then, two waveguides of the same length (ensuring that no phase difference exists between the input and compensation) are used to deliver the input and compensation to the MRR, respectively. Based on the designed lossy APF shown in Fig. 2c, the fabricated APF based on silicon-on-insulator (SOI) foundry is shown in Fig. 2d. In the structure shown in Fig. 2c, conditions 1 and 2 can be satisfied by adjusting the voltages applied to the micro-heaters. When the two conditions are not satisfied simultaneously, the optical power transmission from GC1 to GC2 varies with respect to wavelength (red curve in Fig. 2e). By adjusting the voltages applied to the micro-heaters to satisfy conditions 1 and 2, the power transmission spectrum at the output of the APF is shown by the blue curve in Fig. 2e. Compared with the red curve, we can observe that the periodic power variations at the resonance wavelengths no longer exist. We also compare the measured transmission spectrum of the APF with that of an equivalent single-mode waveguide (see Methods) shown as the black curve in Fig. 2e. We can observe that the transmission spectrum of the APF is in good agreement with that of the equivalent optical waveguide except for an extra transmission loss of approximately 5 dB, which is caused by the compensation used for self-compensation of loss. In the 2 2 2 2 1 1 0 1 2 2 2 0 1 1 1 2 2 0 1 ( 1) 2 ( 1) r k ya a r y a a k r x y k r a a пҖӯ пҖ« пҖҪ пҖ« пҖҪ пҖ« APF operation, one part of the input optical signal is split into the upper waveguide by MZI0 and used as the compensation. Therefore, extra transmission loss is generated. Slight ripples with a maximal amplitude of approximately 0.3 dB and an FSR of approximately 0.3 nm are generated by the Fabry-PГ©rot cavities formed by GC1 and GC2 and by GC1 and GC3, simultaneously. These ripples can be reduced by further optimizing the grating couplers. To measure the amplitude and phase frequency responses precisely, the fabricated APF is also measured by a vector network analyzer (VNA) (see Methods), and the results are shown in Fig. 2f. We can observe that the amplitude remains constant while the phase has a variation of 1.8 пҒ°пҖ within 40 GHz. Therefore, we can conclude that the APF is successfully realized. It should be noted that all-pass transmission can alternatively be achieved via GC3 when the micro-heaters are adjusted correspondingly to satisfy the two conditions for the optical transmission from GC1 to GC3. Since only phase variations exist in the frequency response of the APF and the amplitude remains constant, some interesting applications can be explored based on the fabricated APF (the experimental details are shown in Methods). The APF is an ideal device for a microwave photonic phase shifter. By adjusting the voltage applied to the micro-heaters deposited on the MRR, the measured microwave phase shifts and the corresponding amplitudes with respect to frequency are shown in Figs 3a and b, respectively. In Fig. 3b, it can be observed that there is a power variation of approximately 0.4 dB in every amplitude frequency response curve, which is generated by the transmission ripples caused by the Fabry-PГ©rot effect (Fig. 2e). During the adjustment of the microwave phase shift, we can see that the output microwave power changes slightly and the power variation is less than 0.8 dB. This is caused by thermal crosstalk during the adjustment of the micro-heater on the MRR, which can be reduced by using thermal isolation trenches28. Fig. 3. Results of possible applications based on the fabricated APF. a, b, Phase (a) and amplitude (b) frequency responses with different phase shifts when the APF works as a microwave photonic phase shifter. c, The microwave photonic notch filter based on the APF with different central frequencies. d, e, Different measured time delays of the APF when the input is a sinusoidal signal with a frequency of 1 GHz (d) and a Gaussian pulse with a bandwidth of 500 ps and a repetition rate of 500 MHz (e). f, The normalized output optical power for different time delays. Based on the optical phase shifter, a single notch microwave photonic filter is also realized (Fig. 3c). The rejection ratio is over 50 dB, and the central frequency can be tuned from 0 to 40 GHz, which is limited by the bandwidth of the modulator. Based on the proposed APF, tunable time delays can also be achieved with almost invariant output power. A sinusoidal signal and a Gaussian pulse are used in the experiment to measure the time delay, respectively. The measured maximum time delays of both the sinusoidal signal and Gaussian pulse are approximately 200 ps (Figs 3d and e). When the time delay is changed by adjusting the voltage applied to the micro-heater on the MRR, the measured power variation of the optical signal is less than 0.4 dB (Fig. 3f). In summary, by using self-compensation of loss, we have demonstrated a real APF based on an add-drop MRR even when transmission loss exists, and an APF based on an MZI-assisted MRR has been demonstrated and fabricated using the SOI foundry. Applications of the proposed APF in a microwave phase shifter, a microwave photonic filter, and time delays have been explored. We believe that the method of self- compensation of loss employed for realizing the APF holds great potential in numerous fields of research. Our work opens up a possible path for realizing devices that seemed to be impossible in the past, such as amplitude distortion-free Hilbert transformers15,29,30 and microwave photonic phase shifters. With fabrication improvements in the future, the realization of an APF will be simplified, and more efforts should be devoted to exploring the potential of APFs. Methods Demonstration of the general single-stage APF. For a general 2пҝҪ2 network-based lossless structure (Fig. 4a), which is represented by Sa in the following text, the transmission matrix M0 of the inputs and outputs can be expressed as 2 1 11 12 21 22 a a oa ia E E m m E E m m пғҰ пғ¶ пғҰ пғ¶ пғҰ пғ¶ пҖҪ пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғЁ пғё пғЁ пғё пғЁ пғё (4) When the output E2a is connected to the input E1a with a lossless delay line, the relation between E1a and E2a can be expressed by E1a=E2ap0, where p0=exp(iпҒӘ0пҖ©пҖ and пҒӘ0 is the phase shift of the delay line. The transfer function of the lossless structure can be written as 2 22 0 0 11 0 1 oa a ia E m p d H E m p пҖӯ пҖҪ пҖҪ пҖӯ (5) where d 2 0 is the determinant of M0 and d 2 0=det(M0). Then, it can be derived that 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 0 22 0 0 22 0 0 22 22 0 0 22 0 0 2 11 0 11 0 11 0 11 0 11 ( ) 1 1 1 a d m p d m p d m m p d m p d H m p m p m p m p m пҖӘ пҖӘ пҖӘ пҖӘ пҖӘ пҖӘ пҖӯ пҖӯ пҖ« пғҰ пғ¶ пҖӯ пҖӯ пҖҪ пғ— пҖҪ пғ§ пғ· пҖӯ пҖӯ пҖӯ пҖӯ пҖ« пғЁ пғё (6) In a single-stage APF, |Ha|2=1 must be satisfied. For general 2пҝҪ 2 network-based structures, such as an all-pass MRR, the transmission matrices in the ideal lossless condition satisfy m11=m22 and d 2 0=1. Therefore, the transfer functions of these structures Fig. 4. General forms of the applicable structures for the proposed method. a, The ideal lossless structure of a general single-stage APF. The amplitudes of the two inputs and the two outputs of M0 are represented by Eia, E1a, Eoa and E2a, respectively. p0=exp(iпҒӘ0), and пҒӘ0 is the phase shift of the delay line connecting the input E1a and the output E2a. b, The lossy structure with self-compensation of loss. The loss in the propagation and in the transmission matrices (M1 and M2) are both considered in this structure. The amplitudes of the two inputs and the two outputs of M1 are represented by Eib, E1b, Eob and E2b, respectively, and the amplitudes of the two inputs and the two outputs of M2 are represented by E3, Ec, E4 and E5, respectively. The phase shift of the delay lines connecting M1 and M2 are both equal to пҒӘ0. The amplitude transmissions of the two delay lines are both a0. satisfy |Ha|2=1, and all-pass transmission can be realized. However, there is definitely transmission loss in practice, and a loss coefficient must be added into equation (5). Therefore, equation (5) cannot be satisfied, and consequently all-pass transmission cannot be achieved. Based on this kind of structure, the method of self-compensation of loss can be used to realize a lossy APF, which is an APF with transmission loss. The method is also applicable to other structures that satisfy |Ha|2=1 in lossless conditions (such as the proposed MZI-assisted MRR, in which d 2 0вү 1). The key to achieving the APF is to compensate for the transmission loss. Therefore, the lossy structure in Fig. 4b, which is represented by Sb in the following text, is proposed. The transmission loss in this structure can be compensated by using a compensation, which is a power scaling copy of the input and its phase is the same as that of the input. The compensation can be easily achieved by taking a slice from the input. The two delay lines used to connect M1 and M2 are of the same length as that of the delay line in Sa, and the phase shifts of the two delay lines in Sb are equal to пҒӘ0. The amplitude transmissions of the two delay lines in Sb are both a0. The relation between the inputs Eib and E1b and the outputs Eob and E2b of the matrix M1 and the relation between the inputs Ec and E3 and the outputs E4 and E5 of the matrix M2 can be expressed by 2 1 11 12 21 22 4 33 34 3 5 43 44 b b ob ib c E E M M E E M M E M M E E M M E пғҰ пғ¶ пғҰ пғ¶ пғҰ пғ¶ пҖҪ пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғЁ пғё пғЁ пғё пғЁ пғё пғҰ пғ¶ пғҰ пғ¶пғҰ пғ¶ пҖҪ пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ·пғ§ пғ· пғЁ пғё пғЁ пғёпғЁ пғё (7) The determinants of M1 and M2 are represented by det(M1) and det(M2), respectively. Considering the loss of the 2пҝҪ2 network structures, we denote that det(M1)=d 2 1 (0<d1<1) and det(M2)=d 2 2 (0<d2<1). Based on equation (7), E3=E2ba0p0 and E1b=E4a0p0, the relations among the input Eib, compensation Ec and output Eob can be calculated as 44 11 0 0 43 43 12 12 5 33 1 22 2 0 0 12 12 43 43 1 1 0 1 0 det( ) det( ) ib c ob M M a p M M M M E E E E M M M M a p M M M M пҖӯ пҖӯ пғҰ пғ¶ пғҰ пғ¶пғҰ пғ¶пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғҰ пғ¶ пғҰ пғ¶ пғ§ пғ·пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пҖҪ пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ·пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пҖӯ пҖӯ пғЁ пғё пғЁ пғё пғ§ пғ·пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ·пғЁ пғё пғЁ пғё пғЁ пғё (8) Combining equations (6) and (8), the amplitude of the transfer function |Hb| of Sb can be calculated, and the APF can be realized when |Hb|=1. To simplify the calculations, we can conclude two simplified conditions for realizing the APF. Considering the light recirculating in the loop of Sa and in the loop of Sb, we denote the amplitude of the optical field at a certain point, such as point A in Sa and point B in Sb, as E0. After recirculating two times in the loop of Sa and returning to point A, the amplitude of the optical field changes and can be expressed as E0m 2 11 p 2 0 . For a comparison, after recirculating one time in the loop of Sb and returning to point B, the amplitude of the optical field can be expressed as E0M11M33a 2 0 p 2 0 . Condition 1 is to ensure that the amplitude variation after two recirculations in the loop of Sa is equivalent to the amplitude variation after one recirculation in the loop of Sb, which indicates that 2 11 33 0 2 11 M M a пҖҪ m (9) To compensate for the transmission loss of the input exactly, condition 2, which requires the power ratio between the compensation and the input in Sb to be equal to a specific value, also needs to be satisfied. To satisfy condition 2, the ratio between Ec and Eib can be ascertained by a simplified method. If we assume that the number of times that the light recirculates in the loop of Sb is n (n=0, 1, 2...), then the amplitude of the final output Eob in Sb can be decomposed into a superposition of separate outputs after each denotes the amplitude of the output light in Fig. 4b after the n-th recirculation). For the light injected as the compensation, whose amplitude is Ec (Fig. 4b), the output amplitude after the n-th recirculation in the loop can be expressed as Eob(0.5+n) (point B is set as the ending point of the recirculation). Similarly, in Sa, the amplitude of the output after the n-th recirculation in the loop can be expressed as Eoa(n). Based on the relation that the loop in Sa is one-half the loop length in Sb, to satisfy condition 2, we must ensure that for any Eoa(n) in Sa, there is a corresponding Eob(n/2) in Sb to satisfy 22 22 ib ia E M пҖҪ E m (10) 12 34 0 0 12 21 0 c ia E M M a p E m m p пҖҪ (11) 2 2 2 12 21 33 0 0 11 12 21 0 ib ia E M M M a p пҖҪ E m m m p (12) Combining equations (9)-(12), we can deduce that M11M22=m11m22d 2 1 /d 2 0 , 2 1 /d 2 0 and Ec/Eib=m12m21M22/(m22M12M34a0). In the general transmission matrices in which m12=m21 and M12=M21, we can deduce that M12=m21d1/d0. If we assume that the ratio between Ec and Eib satisfies Ec/Eib=x, it can be derived that 12 22 0 22 34 1 0 m M d x пҖҪ m M d a (13) Therefore, an APF can be achieved based on the two conditions. Condition 1 ensures that the signal recirculations in the loops of the two structures are equivalent and can be expressed by equation (9). Condition 2 requires that the power ratio between the compensation and input must be equal to a specific value, which can be expressed by can calculate that 2 2 22 0 0 1 11 2 0 11 11 0 1 ob b ib E m p d d m H E d M m p пҖӯ пҖҪ пҖҪ пғ— пҖӯ (14) Comparing equation (14) with equation (5), we can conclude that the transfer functions of the two structures have the same forms except an additional attenuation of d 2 1m11/(d 2 0 2 1 m11|2/|d 2 0 M11|2. Obviously, |Hb|2 is a constant, so we have proven that, when the two conditions are satisfied, the lossy structure (Fig. 4b) is an APF. It should be noted that to simplify the demonstration, some restrictions (m12=m21 and M12=M21) are set here and will limit the application of the method. The core of the method is to make a lossy structure equivalent to a lossless structure, in which conditions 1 and 2 must be satisfied simultaneously. In particular cases, some restrictions can be changed accordingly while the core of the method remains the same. Demonstration of the APF based on the add-drop MRR. We can find some examples for a single-stage lossy APF. A possible structure is based on an add-drop MRR. Because the coupling loss also affects the transmission, here, the effect of the coupling loss on the transmission of the lossy APF will be discussed separately. In the add-drop MRR (Fig. 1b), we assume that the self-coupling and cross-coupling coefficients with coupling loss are R1 and K1, respectively. For the structures shown in Figs 1c and b, equations (4) and (7) can be rewritten as 2 1 1 1 1 1 a a oa ia E E r ik E E ik r пғҰ пғ¶ пғҰ пғ¶ пғҰ пғ¶ пҖҪ пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғЁ пғё пғЁ пғё пғЁ пғё (15) and 2 1 1 1 1 1 4 3 2 2 5 2 2 b b ob ib c E E R iK E E iK R E E R iK E E iK R пғҰ пғ¶ пғҰ пғ¶ пғҰ пғ¶ пҖҪ пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғЁ пғё пғЁ пғё пғЁ пғё пғҰ пғ¶ пғҰ пғ¶ пғҰ пғ¶ пҖҪ пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғЁ пғё пғЁ пғё пғЁ пғё (16) respectively. Here, det(M0)=r 2 1+k 2 1=d 2 0=1, det(M1)=R 2 1+K 2 1=d 2 1 and the coupling loss in coupler C1 is 1вҲ’d 2 1. From M11M22=m11m22d 2 1/d 2 0 and M12M21=m12m21d 2 1/d 2 0, we can obtain R 2 1=r 2 1d 2 1 and K 2 1=k 2 1d 2 1. Therefore, from equation (9), we can deduce that 2 2 2 1 2 2 0 1 1 1 / R R a r R d пҖҪ пҖҪ (17) From equation (17), we can obtain R1=R2d 2 1a 2 0. Based on equation (13), R 2 1=r 2 1d 2 1 and K 2 1 =k 2 1d 2 1, x can be derived as 1 1 1 1 2 1 0 2 1 0 k R K x r K d a K d a пҖҪ пҖҪ (18) Compared with the occasion when the coupling loss in coupler C1 is not separated from the round-trip amplitude transmission a, where a=d 2 1a 2 0, the outcomes of x in the two cases are equivalent. When the coupling loss is separated from the round-trip amplitude transmission, the only alteration of the transfer function is that a modification should be added to equation (2). Based on equation (14) and R 2 1=r 2 1d 2 1, the transfer function of the add-drop MRR can be derived as ( 2) 1 0 1 1 1 ( 2) 1 0 1 1 1 i i r p r e H d d r p re пҒӘ пҒӘ пҖӯ пҖӯ пҖҪ пҖҪ пҖӯ пҖӯ (19) where пҒӘ0пҖҪпҒӘ/2пҖ®пҖ From equations (6) and (19), we can calculate that |H|2=d 2 1 , which indicates that the lossy structure based on the add-drop MRR is an APF after self- compensation of loss. Therefore, the general method can be applied to the demonstration of an APF based on the add-drop MRR. We also demonstrated that the coupling loss does not influence the feasibility of the APF. Therefore, the coupling loss can be included in the amplitude transmission of the structure to simplify the demonstration. Demonstration of the APF based on an MZI-assisted MRR. To simplify the demonstration of the MZI-based APF, here the coupling loss will not be discussed separately. For the structures shown in Figs 2a and b, equations (4) and (7) can be rewritten as 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 ( ) 2 2 ( ) a a oa ia E E p r k irk p E E irk p p r k пғҰ пғ¶ пҖӯ пҖӯ пғҰ пғ¶ пғҰ пғ¶ пҖҪ пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пҖӯ пҖӯ пғЁ пғё пғЁ пғё пғЁ пғё (20) and 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 4 3 1 1 2 2 2 1 2 2 1 2 2 2 5 1 2 2 1 2 1 2 2 1 2 ( ) 2 2 ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) b b ob ib c E E a p r k ia rk p E E ia r k p a p r k E E a p r p k ia r k p p E E ia r k p p a p r p k пғҰ пғ¶ пҖӯ пҖӯ пғҰ пғ¶ пғҰ пғ¶ пҖҪ пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пҖӯ пҖӯ пғЁ пғё пғЁ пғё пғЁ пғё пғҰ пғ¶ пҖӯ пҖӯ пҖ« пғҰ пғ¶ пғҰ пғ¶ пҖҪ пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пҖӯ пҖ« пҖӯ пғЁ пғё пғЁ пғё пғЁ пғё (21) where p1=exp(iпҒӘ1) and p2=exp(iпҒӘ2). From equation (20), we can deduce that the determinant det(M0)=d 2 0=p 2 1. Based on equation (20) and E1a=E2ap0, the transfer function of the ideal lossless structure shown in Fig. 2b can be calculated as 2 2 2 1 1 1 0 1 2 2 0 1 1 1 ( ) 1 ( ) a p r k p p H p p r k пҖӯ пҖӯ пҖҪ пҖӯ пҖӯ (22) Combining equations (6) and (22), we can derive that |Ha|2=1, which indicates that the ideal lossless structure (Fig. 2b) is an APF. It can also be calculated that det(M1)=d 2 1=a 2 1 p 2 1. From equations (9), (20) and (21), we can derive that 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 2 2 2 1 1 1 2 0 ( ) ( ) a p r p k p r a k пҖӯ пҖҪ пҖӯ (23) Combining equations (13), (20) and (21), we can derive that 1 1 1 2 2 1 2 0 1 2 = ( ) rk p x r k p пҖ« p a a (24) 2 2+k 2 2=1 into equations and E1b=E4a0p0, we can also derive the transfer function of the MZI-assisted MRR 2 2 2 1 1 1 0 1 1 2 2 0 1 1 1 ( ) 1 ( ) b p r k p p H a p p r k пҖӯ пҖӯ пҖҪ пҖӯ пҖӯ (25) From equations (6) and (25), we can deduce that |Hb|2=a 2 1 , which proves that the proposed MZI-assisted MRR is an APF. Comparing equations (22) and (25), we can observe that the transfer function of the APF based on the MZI-assisted MRR (Fig. 2a) is equal to that of the ideal lossless APF (Fig. 2b), except for the additional attenuation a1 in equation (25). The additional loss is generated by the lossy waveguides of MZI1 and MZI2 (Fig. 2a), and the waveguides are lossless in the structure in Fig. 2b. Neglecting the additional attenuation a1, here we have demonstrated that the two APFs in Figs 2a and b are equivalent to each other. Adjusting the fabricated device to function as an equivalent optical waveguide. In Fig. 2c, by adjusting the voltage applied to the micro-heater deposited on the lower arm of MZI0 to change the phase difference between the two arms of MZI0, the power splitting ratio of MZI0 can be adjusted as well. At first, we adjust the power splitting ratio of MZI0 to maximize the power of the optical signal output from GC2, which indicates that no optical power splits into the upper arm of the output waveguides of MZI0. Then, we adjust the voltage applied to the micro-heater on the lower arm of MZI1 to eliminate the notches at the resonance wavelengths of the ring, which indicates that the optical signal in the lower arm of the output waveguides of MZI0 is directly coupled to GC2 and no optical power is coupled into the ring. Consequently, the device works as a single-mode waveguide. Device fabrication and experimental details. The device is fabricated on a standard SOI wafer with a 220-nm-thick silicon layer on a 2-пҒӯm-thick buried oxide layer. All the silicon waveguides are strip waveguides, and the width and depth of the waveguide are 500 nm and 220 nm, respectively. After the 220-nm silicon etch process, the silicon waveguides are then covered by SiO2 deposition with a thickness of 1.2 пҒӯm. The related metal layer is deposited upon the SiO2 layer to form the micro-heater. Fig. 5. Experimental setups. a, b, c, Setups for measuring the amplitude and phase responses of the fabricated APF (a), implementing a microwave photonic notch filter (b) and measuring the time delay of the APF (c). PC, polarization controller; PM, phase modulator; OBF, optical bandpass filter; EDFA, erbium-doped fibre amplifier; PD, photodetector; VNA, vector network analyzer; MZM, Mach-Zehnder modulator; AWG, arbitrary waveform generator; OSC, oscilloscope. It should be noted that the light is coupled into and out of the photonic chip by using a tapered and lensed fibre and the grating couplers in the fabricated device. The experimental setup for measuring the amplitude and phase responses of the fabricated APF is shown in Fig. 5a. The continuous-wave light emitted from a laser source (Koheras BASIK) is injected into a phase modulator (PM, Covega LN66S-FC). The optical carrier is then modulated by microwave signals emitted by the VNA (Anritsu MS4647B). An optical bandpass filter (OBF) is used to realize single-sideband modulation after PM, and the response of the APF will be mapped from the optical domain to the electrical domain after the photodetector (PD, SHF AG Berlin). The frequency responses from 0 to 40 GHz are measured by VNA, and the range of the measurement is limited by the bandwidth of the PM. The demonstration of the microwave photonic phase shifter6,31-33 is also based on this experimental setup. By setting the optical carrier wavelength within the phase shift region of the APF, a microwave phase shift can be achieved by beating the sideband and the optical carrier in the PD. By adjusting the micro-heater deposited on the MRR (Fig. 2c), the phase offset between the optical carrier and the sideband is consequently changed. Therefore, the phase shift of the microwave is changed and measured by the VNA. Based on the APF, a microwave photonic notch filter can be implemented34,35, and the experimental setup is shown in Fig. 5b. A Mach-Zehnder modulator (MZM, Fujitsu FTM7938EZ) is used to implement the amplitude modulation. The APF works as an optical phase shifter to change the phase of one sideband, and the phase difference between the two beat frequencies, which are generated by beating the optical carrier and the Вұ1st order sidebands, is also changed consequently. When the phase difference between the two beat frequencies is пҒ°, a notch band with a high rejection ratio is generated because the two beat frequencies with the same amplitude and counter phases cancel each other out. Tuning the phase shift region of the APF by the micro-heater deposited on the MRR, the central frequency of the notch response can be tuned from 0 to 40 GHz with a rejection ratio of more than 50 dB. The experimental setup for measuring the time delay based on the APF36,37 is shown in Fig. 5c. The microwave signals applied to the MZM are generated from an arbitrary waveform generator (AWG, Keysight M8195A). The modulated signals are injected into the APF. By setting the optical spectrum of the modulated optical signal within the phase shift region of the APF, a time delay can be achieved. Here, the OBF is used to suppress the noise and improve the signal-to-noise ratio of the signal. Another low-frequency sinusoidal signal generated by the AWG is used as the frequency clock to trigger the oscilloscope. By adjusting the phase shift region of the APF, different time delays can be obtained, and the measured maximum delay time is approximately 200 ps. Data availability. The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding authors upon request.