1 1 | Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland 2 | University POLITEHNICA of Bucharest, 060042 Bucharest, Romania 3 | Universitat Politècnica de València, 46022 Valencia, Spain * | Author to whom correspondence should be addressed: andrei.muller@epfl.ch Reconfigurable radiofrequency electronic functions designed with 3D Smith Charts in Metal-Insulator-Transition Materials Andrei A. Muller1*, Alin Moldoveanu2, Victor Asavei2, Riyaz A. Khadar1, Esther Sanabria- Codesal3, Anna Krammer1, Montserrat Fernandez-Bolaños1, Matteo Cavalleri1, Junrui Zhang1, Emanuele Casu1, Andreas Schuler1, Adrian M. Ionescu1 Recently, the field of Metal-Insulator-Transition (MIT) materials has emerged as an unconventional solution for novel energy efficient electronic functions, such as steep slope subthermionic switches, neuromorphic hardware, reconfigurable radiofrequency functions, new types of sensors, teraherz and optoelectronic devices. Designing radiofrequency (RF) electronic circuits with a MIT material like vanadium dioxide, VO2, requires the understanding of its physics and appropriate models and tools, with predictive capability over large range of frequency (1-100GHz). In this work, we develop 3D Smith charts for devices and circuits having complex frequency dependences, like the ones resulting by the use of MIT materials. The novel foundation of a 3D Smith chart involves here the geometrical fundamental notions of oriented curvature and variable homothety in order to clarify first theoretical inconsistencies in Foster and Non Foster circuits, where the driving point impedances exhibit mixed clockwise and counter-clockwise frequency dependent paths on the Smith chart as frequency increases. We show here the unique visualization capability of a 3D Smith chart, which allows to quantify orientation over variable frequency. The new 3D Smith chart is applied as a 3D multi-parameter modelling and design environment for the complex case of Metal-Insulator-Transition (MIT) materials where their permittivity is dependent on the frequency. In this work, we apply 3D Smith charts to on Vanadium Dioxide (VO2) reconfigurable Peano inductors. We report fabricated inductors with record quality factors using VO2 phase transition to program multiple tuning states, operating in the range 4 GHz to 10 GHz. Finally, the 3D Smith chart enables the design and fabrication of a new variety of Peano curves filters that are also used to experimentally extract the frequency-dependent dielectric constant of VO2 within 1 GHz- 50 GHz, a quasi-unexplored field of major importance for the accurate predictive design of radio frequency electronic applications with phase change materials. The Smith chart, invented in 19391, is a graphical tool widely used in various fields of electrical engineering and applied physics when dealing with frequency dependent reflection coefficients or impedances. The Smith chart is widely employed in the design/measurement stage of a large variety of circuits, from metasurfaces2 to coils3 (Supplementary Fig. 3 in3) or scanning microwave microscopy4, while being mostly present in microwave- terahertz frequency region in the design and characterization of antennas5, transmission lines6-7, power amplifiers8, filters9 or acoustic resonators10. The 3D Smith chart proposed in11 generalizes the Smith chart (which is limited within the unit circle to circuits with reflection coefficients (Γ = Γr + jΓi) magnitudes smaller than unity Fig. 1a) onto the Riemann sphere in order to make it usable for all circuits (Fig. 1b and Fig. 1c). An essential drawback of the Smith chart and previous 3D Smith chart representations1-13 is the lack of visualization of the variable parameter (frequency), thus the orientation changes and dynamics of the scattering parameters frequency dependency being impossible to be pictured. Although many circuits exhibit a clockwise orientation of their driving point impedances and reflection parameters curves as frequency increases2-5,9,(6,10 – unspecified), the absence of a clockwise motion (i.e. discontinuity points or counter-clockwise motion) was often reported leading to diverse interpretations. In active devices (transistors), as for example in14,15 it is referred as “kink-phenomenon”, in lossless (purely reactive) non-Foster circuits (such as negative capacitors and inductors)16- 19, as an intrinsic phenomenon. Unfortunately, this counter-clockwise dynamics phenomenon recurrent existence in lossy circuits with non-Foster elements18,20-23, led to some misleading conclusions: in20-23 the authors assume 2 that the existence of this phenomenon proves the presence of a non-Foster element, while in24 it is stated that passive linear devices cannot exhibit driving point immittances with counter-clockwise frequency dependency on the Smith chart. 2D Smith chart representations lacking in zooming may oversee the changes of orientation occurring in passive networks (for input impedances and reflection coefficients) with Foster elements (observed too in25-26). This orientation reversal phenomenon in lossy networks with Foster elements is often overlooked or seen an interpolation error and its presence is often ignored. Since the paths of the reflection coefficients of these circuits (excepting orientation) may be identical the Smith chart on a specific frequency range (as for negative inductors and positive capacitors and viceversa16,18,19,25) a frequency dependency visualization is missing in order to get an insight to the intrinsic phenomenon. For this purpose, we first introduce the notion of oriented curvature27, prove the mixed clockwise-counter- clockwise orientation phenomenon in lossy circuits with Foster elements and propose a frequency orientation quantification (while increasing the sweeping range) with a new implementation within the 3D Smith chart tool by using the topology of the Riemann sphere28-29. Thus, a new vision to detect this orientation reversal for both Foster and Non-Foster16-23,30-32 elements based networks is first presented (while increasing the frequency of analysis), impossible to quantify for 2D parametrical plot such as the Smith chart or basic 3D Smith chart (where only the Riemann sphere surface is used). Further the 3D Smith chart is additionally exploited and further developed in order to display simultaneously parameters needed in reconfigurable frequency designs while dealing with inductors. Frequency dependent inductances based on the Y1133-35 admittance parameter (shunt models), series models of inductances based on the Y2136-37 parameter, quality factors33-38 , self-resonant frequencies, Smith chart information38 need all to be simultaneously optimized and analyzed over a wide frequency range during the designs and characterizing stages of inductors. This leads33-38 to a larger number of graphics or to different scaling in order to grasp all parameters of interest. Here all these factors are implemented and analyzed on a display using the 3D Smith chart topology and different perspectives. The newly developed capabilities are particularly suited to explore and design reconfigurable CMOS-compatible inductors design for microwaves frequencies using a phase change material like Vanadium Dioxide (VO2)36-37, 39- 46 for tuning the values of inductance. Indeed, it is known that VO2 behaves like an insulator under its phase transition temperature Tc = 68 °C (or higher when dopped41) with monoclinic crystal structure39 while deposited on SiO2/Si substrates. Because of its ease of integration, reversible insulator to metal transition (IMT), low transition temperature and fast switching time, the employment of Vanadium Dioxide (VO2) as a reconfigurable radio frequency (RF) material has been just recently investigated for a variety of RF-reconfigurable devices36- 37,39,43,44. Still, much of existing studies are carried out in the frequency range of terahertz or far-infrared40,42-43, leaving (RF) VO2 a largely uncharted area for exploration in development. The conductivity levels of VO2 in its off (isolating state) and on state (conductive state) vary over a wide range depending on the substrate36-37,39-46 causing limitations in the RF devices performances (being below 50,000S/m for SiO2/Si depositions in the on state). The on state limited conductivity levels restricted the quality factors of the reconfigurable inductors fabricated with VO2 in its conductive state37 to sub-unitary values, while to less than three in36 for CMOS compatible Si VO2 reconfigurable inductors. Here we further introduce a new type of reconfigurable inductors based on the Peano curves47 with VO2 switches and using the freshly implemented multi parameter displays we manage to increase with a factor of 2.33 the quality factors previously reported in36 at reconfigurable inductors with VO2 in on state (and with orders of magnitude in respect to37) while increasing too the number of tuning states. Further due to its original geometry the inductor exhibits a tuning range of 77% (better than 55% in36 or 32% in37) and a ratio of Qmax_on/ Qmax_off of 0.87 unlike 0.27 in our previous work36 on SiO2/Si substrates. It is worth pointing out that the inductor while facing the limited conductivity levels of VO2 on SiO2/Si substrates exhibits a 2.33 better quality factor in the on state also in respect to other VO2 based reconfigurable inductors such as the SiO2/Sapphire inductor reported in48 where the conductivity levels exceed 300.000S/m. Motivated by the large variety of the values reported at room temperatures for the dielectric constant40 (the real part of the relative effective permittivity) of the VO2 in its semiconductor state (30 in36,44(stated) or 90-700 in the 0.1 GHz-30 GHz range (frequency dependent43), 3-10 at infrared frequencies40,45) we elaborate and validate a new 3 model of the effective permittivity of VO2. The model in43 is facing the limitations of the conformal mapping extraction techniques46 while dealing with finite ground planes (assumed infinitely in43), skin effect losses49 while neglecting damping losses50 in the final extraction model of the relative effective permittivity. By producing a series of Peano inspired filters (using the space filling property of the curves to shift resonance frequencies down while using limited areas) with a series of different resonance frequencies with or without a thin VO2 layer below them we propose based on a mixed frequency shift model and avoiding the limitations of conformal mapping43 a more complete model of the effective permittivity including both intrinsic dielectric losses (damping) and conductive losses50 and we extract the frequency dependency of the dielectric constant. The extraction is performed within the commercial, satellites communications frequency bands, from 1 GHz-50 GHz and thus provide a more complete model for this emerging material whose applications in reconfigurable wireless communications are in its birth moments. Oriented curvature of input impedances, reflection coefficients, slope of reactance and 3D Smith chart implementation of frequency dependency orientation Based on the notion of oriented curvature introduced and explained in the Supplementary Material, we show that the changes in sign of the reactance frequency derivative do not imply changes in orientation neither for the input impedance nor for the reflection coefficient of 1- port networks (when losses occur). We provide the conditions and equations under which one may have the same orientation (more details in Supplementary Section 1) for both reflection coefficient and input impedances. The lossless (reactive) cases (purely Foster16-17,26 and non-Foster16-19) become particular cases where the reflection coefficients are direct inversive (Mobius) and indirect inversive transformations of the oriented imaginary axes of the impedance plane and the clockwise and counter-clockwise motion on circles is a consequence of the reactance slope and sign. By introducing the geometrical notion of oriented curvature in this field27 we prove that the assumptions made by other authors20-24 may not apply (see Supplementary Section 1). Further, as seen also for the input impedance of an antenna in26, the negative frequency derivative of the reactance of a lossy 1-port network does not imply counter-clockwise motions in the case of lossy 1-port networks. Consider first a 1-port network terminated on a resistive load r. The input impedance is given by (1), where rm(ω) denotes its resistive part and xm(ω) its reactive part, while its reflection coefficient is given by (2). Computing the oriented curvature values for both of them (Supplementary Section 1) we get kzm(ω) (the oriented curvature of zm(jω) = rm(ω) + jxm(ω) (1) Γ1zm(jω) = zm(jω)/r−1 zm(jω)/r+1 (2) kzm(ω) = rm′(ω)2(xm′(ω) rm′(ω)) ′ (rm′(ω)2+xm′(ω)2)3 2 ⁄ (3) kΓ1zm(ω) = rm′(ω)) ′ xm(ω) ) ′ 2 r (rm′(ω)2+xm′(ω)2)3 2 ⁄ (4) complex link between the change of sign of (3) and (4) is described in Supplementary Section 1. Denoting with xmF(ω) and BmF(ω) the reactance and susceptance of purely Foster elements and with xmNF(ω) and BmNF(ω) the ones for Non Foster elements we obtain: for Foster networks rm(ω) =0 while dxmF(ω) dω > 0 and dBmF(ω) dω > 0 and using (3)-(4) we get the input impedance and 1 –port reflection coefficient curvatures for them dxmNF(ω) dω < 0 and dBmNF(ω) dω < 0 hold thus via (3) and (4) we get the input impedance and 1 –port reflection coefficient curvatures for them as kNFzm(ω)= 0 and kΓ1zmNF(ω) = 1. In the case of two port networks with equal port impedances similar computations can be done for purely Foster and non-Foster elements resulting in the corresponding reflection coefficients Γ2zmF and Γ2zmNF with their corresponding oriented curvatures kΓ2zmF(ω)= -2 and kΓ2zmNF(ω)= 2. Their oriented curvature magnitudes explain their paths on 0.5 radius circles in Fig. 1d and Fig. 1e on the Smith chart and 3D Smith chart) (see Supplementary 4 Section 1). The reflection coefficients on the other hand of purely reactive 1-port elements are given in Fig. 2a- Fig. 2d (purely reactive Foster and non-Foster circuits in Fig. 2a, lossy circuits with non-Foster elements in c and lossy circuits with Foster elements in Fig. 2d. The results in Fig. 2d show that clockwise and counter clockwise reflection coefficients rotations (and the same for input impedance) can occur at lossy 1-port networks containing only Foster elements too. The results plotted in Fig. 1d and Fig. 1e, Fig. 2b - Fig. 2c show the new 3D Smith chart implementations capable of detecting orientation changes and intrinsic behavior where the Smith chart shows a limited insight capability to the phenomenon. Supplementary Section 2 describes fully the employment details. Fig. 1| Smith chart limitations and clockwise and counter-clockwise frequency dependency of Foster and non-Foster elements on a newly introduced frequency dependent 3D Smith chart. a, Smith chart. b, Extended Smith chart c, 3D Smith chart as in 2018 (without frequency dependency). d, 3D Smith chart representation of the two port reflection coefficient and newly implemented frequency dependent 3D Smith chart representation for it. For a capacitor with purely negative capacitance and an inductor with positive inductance their reflection coefficient frequency representation overlaps on the Smith chart for a wide frequency range, their orientation changes cannot be distinguished. On the newly implemented frequency dependent 3D Smith chart one can clearly see their clockwise motion with increasing frequency for the inductor while the counter-clockwise motion for the capacitor with negative capacitance. e, 3D Smith chart representation of the reflection coefficient and newly implemented frequency dependent 3D Smith chart for a negative valued inductor and capacitor with positive capacitance. Again, their trace is identical on a Smith chart, their intrinsic opposed frequency dependency cannot be seen. On the 3D Smith chart one can directly see the clockwise motion of the reflection coefficient of the capacitor and the counter-clockwise motion of the reflection coefficient of the negative valued inductor. The main new insight is given by the representation of the frequency parameter over the 3D Smith chart representation of the reflection coefficient S113d(jω) via a variable homothety with its center in the center of the 3D Smith chart: Each frequency that corresponds to a point of the 3D Smith chart reflection point of the S113d(jω) curve will be displayed as a segment on the line that passes from the center of the 3D sphere and the point of the 3D Smith chart surface curve of S113d(jω) . The length of the segment will be given by the normalized frequency and the direction will be outwards of the surface of the 3D sphere. Fig 1d displays in the 3D Smith chart surrounding space the counter-clockwise dynamics of the two port negative capacitor reflection coefficient while the clockwise dynamics of the two port reflection coefficient of the positive inductor. In Fig. 1e one may see the 5 clockwise frequency increasing orientation of the reflection coefficient of the positive capacitor and the counter- clockwise orientation of the negative inductor. The Smith chart plot can detect the magnitude of the curvature |kΓ2F(ω)| (which gives the path of the reflection coefficient) but cannot see its sign which determines its direction, the new 3D Smith chart orientation quantification implementation (the frequency sweeping is always increasing in our modelling) detects its sign (see additional video) and thus its orientation. In the cases presented in Fig. 1d and Fig. 1e |kΓ2F(ω)| is constant and not zero thus a circle. The same happens in Fig. 2a and Fig. 2b. However in more complex circuits one does not deal with constant curvatures, these can alternate in sign and frequency dependency exhibiting orientation changes for both Foster and Non Foster circuits as seen in Fig. 2c and Fig. 2d. In Fig. 2d it can be seen that even a network characterized by a positive real function can generate mixed curvature in its input impedance and reflection coefficient. These reversals of orientation may be easy overlooked on the Smith chart if the zooming scales are not properly chosen but using (3) and (4) this is clearly discovered in Fig. 2d. Fig. 2| Reflection coefficient orientation changes and the sign of the oriented curvature for different circuits. a, Smith chart representation of the reflection coefficient for a 1-port negative capacitance (purely non-Foster circuit) and a positive inductance (purely Foster). For a capacitor with purely negative capacitance and an inductor with positive inductance their reflection coefficients Γ1zm(jω) overlap on the Smith chart on a wide frequency range. Their opposite orientation is given by the different sign of their oriented curvature kΓ1zm(ω). Their same path is given by the same absolute value of their oriented curvature. b, On the newly implemented frequency dependent 3D Smith chart one can see the clockwise motion with increasing frequency for the inductor with positive inductance and the counter-clockwise motion for the negative valued capacitor, the motion is on the contour of the equatorial plane (lossless circuits). c, Mixed motion for a fabricated circuit containing non-Foster (lossy elements). d, Mixed clockwise and counter-clockwise motion of the reflection coefficient of a passive lossy network described by the positive real function zm(s) with the 1 port reflection coefficient (for s=jω) Γ1zm(jω). The reflection coefficient has a clockwise orientation reflection coefficient curvature kΓ1zm(ω)(4) generates the changes of orientation of its path on the Smith chart. It is interesting to notice that mixed motion can exist on limited bandwidth also for lossy circuits with only Foster elements and thus that the counter- clockwise motion is by no means a prove of an existence of a non-Foster element in the network. A more detailed description on oriented curvature and 1-port and two port networks is given in Supplementary Section 1. 3D visualization insights of frequency dependent series and shunt inductances and quality factors The S parameters of the inductors are directly converted by the new implementations in the software tool into the series inductance model LSeries(ω)36-37 and shunt inductance model LShunt(ω)33-35 using classical conversion techniques of two port parameters (see Supplementary Section 2). The series and shunt inductances values are then normalized to their maximum value over the frequency range of interest and we get the corresponding normalized values LSeriesN(ω) and LShuntN(ω). The reflection parameter S11(jω) of the inductor is then plotted first on the surface of the 3D Smith chart as S113d(jω) using the previously implemented features11-12. Then the 3D space surrounding the 3D Smith chart is used by means of a variable homothethy with the homothetic center in the center 6 of the sphere through the S113d(jω) parameter of the inductors. The S113d(jω) parameter is sent to another point in 3D at a distance corresponding to LSeriesN or LshuntN: (5) The quality factor Q(ω) of the inductors is also computed by the new 3D Smith chart tool implementation using classical conversion formulas (from the S parameters) (see Supplementary Section 2) and normalized to its maximum over the frequency range of interest obtaining QN(ω). Using the 3D representation of the LSeries, shunt3d(ω) curves we then use the normal plane of the curves to associate to each (frequency) point of them the quality factor as a cylinder of variable radius associated to its normalized value Q3D(ω). In Fig. 3 one may see the implementations done for the newly fabricated Peano inductor compared whose performances are compared with the spiral inductor in36. Fig. 3| Series, shunt and quality factor frequency variations representations on a 2D plot and simultaneous 3D Smith chart visualization for the new fabricated Peano (pink) inductor in the conductive state of VO2 versus previously reported best performing inductor (red) using VO2 in same technology36 a, 2D series inductance representation versus frequency: both Peano inductor and previously reported inductor36 show stable series inductance in within the 4GHz-10GHz frequency range. b, 2D frequency dependency of quality factors in the 4 GHz-10 GHz frequency range. c, Shunt inductance frequency dependency shows linearity on a sharper frequency range (see Supplementary Section 3) for both inductors. d, 3D Smith chart representation of series inductance over the S11 parameters in the 4 GHz-10 GHz frequency range. e, 3D Smith chart representation of series inductance and quality factors 4GHz-10GHz over the series inductances 3D curves. f, 3D Smith chart representation of series inductance and quality factors 4GHz-15GHz. The Qs start descending to 0 close to 15 GHz (the cylinders radius becomes 0 when Q becomes negative) for both models while the S11 parameters crossed into the West hemisphere of the Smith chart (capacitive region). g, 3D Smith chart representation of shunt inductance 4GHz-15GHz. One may see that the shunt inductance becomes negative below 15GHz (entering the 3D Smith chart) .h, 3D Smith chart representation of shunt inductance and quality factors 4GHz-15GHz.i, Simultaneously 3D Smith chart representation of series, shunt inductance and quality factors (along both series and shunt inductance)in the 4GHz-15GHz range. The new implementation allows the concurrent view of five different parameters: S113d(jω), LSeries3d(ω), LShunt3d(ω), Q3D(ω) and frequency (not plotted in Fig. 3 since the dynamics of S11(jω) is clockwise anyway in this case, unlike the cases presented in Fig. 2). The use of different perspectives and the topology of the 3D Smith chart permits one thus to simultaneously analyze matching problems (Smith chart) and visualize series and shunt inductances and quality factors all on a same interactive display. This plays an important role in investigation for directly understanding multiple phenomenon on a single display. The information contained in Fig. 3a-Fig.3c can be visualized together using three scaling on a common 2D plot, however still without having any information on the complex reflection coefficient S11(jω) of the inductor. In Fig. 3d we may see just S113d(jω) and LSeries3d(ω), the display contains already more information than in the 2D Fig. 3a, allowing us to understand that the series inductance model is linear for both analyzed inductors and that S113d(jω) is still in the East hemisphere (in the 4GHz-10 GHz frequency range) (inductive). Additionally, the zeros of the S11(jω) are strongly related to the zeros of the Y11(jω) of an inductor and under certain circumstances (in some) identical (no resistive losses in their 7 equivalent Pi model), thus a change of hemisphere of the S11(jω) is strongly related to the self-resonances of the inductors model implying in most cases that the quality factor fails to be positive anymore (see Supplementary Section 3). In Fig. 3e we can see S113d(jω), LSeries3d(ω) and Q3D(ω) for the 4 GHz-10 GHz frequency range, again the information contained offers an insight on three parameters impossible to visualize together in 2D. In Fig. 3f we may see how by increasing the analysis range up to 15 GHz the quality factors for both inductors become zero, while the S113d(jω) enters the capacitive hemisphere too. It is interesting to notice that the series inductance model stays linear. Using the 3D Smith chart tool (see supplementary video) one may see the exact frequencies at which S113d(jω) changes hemisphere and the frequency for which Q becomes zero (the 3D generalized cylinders become curves-their radius becomes zero (at 14.44 GHz for both inductors). In Fig. 3g S113d(jω), LShunt3d(ω) models become negative starting 14.44 GHz for both inductors and thus they enter the interior of the 3D Smith chart from that frequency point. In Fig. 3h we may see S113d(jω), LShunt3d(ω) and Q3D(ω), clearly Q3D(ω) becomes zero once LShunt3d(ω) enters the 3D Smith chart. In Fig. 3i all these parameters are shown together. The new implementation helps one to visualize key parameters of interest in the same time and thus supports and gives new insights, unreachable by any other means to our best knowledge, in the design stages of an inductor where one needs Q↑, stable series and shunt inductance (or both) over a large frequency range while maintaining the matching information S113d(jω). Peano reconfigurable inductors using VO2 switches As a case study of the 3D Smith chart and its predictive capabilities for radiofrequency design with VO2, we have designed and fabricated a reconfigurable inductor based on the Peano curve of order 2 by means of VO2 switches. Its geometry is presented in Fig. 4. In Fig. 4a one may see the cross sectional view of the technology used. The inductors were fabricated using standard microelectronic processes starting with a high-resistivity (10000 Ω·cm) 525 μm thick silicon substrate. A 300 nm thick amorphous silicon layer was first deposited to improve radiofrequency performances. The substrate was then passivated with 500 nm SiO2 deposited by sputtering. 140 nm-thick VO2 and films a Pulsed Laser Deposition (PLD). The film was then patterned using photolithography followed by dry etching and Cr (20 nm)/Al (400 nm) bi-layer was deposited to contact the patterned VO2 film. This thin contact layer allowed for the realization of smaller than 0.6 μm gaps between the contact pads (unlike 2μm in our previous work36). Additionally, a 2.4μm-thick Al layer was deposited on top of these contact pads by conventional lift-off methods to provide low RF losses (to create the final CPW elements), the photo of the fabricated inductor being shown in Fig. 4b. The small width of the VO2 switches (0.6 μm at the limit of photolithography) minimizes the losses while in the on state, while their increased length (120 μm) contributes too to this effort (a tilted photo of the switch in Fig. 4b, is in detail in (Supplementary Section 3). Switch photos and current distributions are further shown in Fig. 4c- Fig. 4f. The inductor has been designed and simulated in the Ansys HFSS commercial software tool with the aim: to obtain a higher Q than in36 while facing the limited VO2 conductivity in the on state, measured as 40,000S/m), Qmax_on/ Qmax_off ↑ and more tuning range than 55%. The position of the VO2 switches was optimized in order to maximize these values: the final current distribution at 5 GHz being shown as simulated in Fig. 4c (when both switches are off), Fig. 4e when one switch is off and one on and Fig. 4f with both switches on. The measured inductances and quality factors plotted in Fig. 3a- Fig. 3b are compared to our previous work36 for the on state of the inductor with two switches show (“on” when measured at 100°C): Peano inductors more than double the quality factor while also dealing with a smaller inductance (0.9 nH unlike 1.35 nH in36, while usually the Qmax decrease a lot while using lower inductances34) for the 5GHz-10 GHz frequency range. Further the series inductance is stable with an average value of 0.95 nH within the 4GHz-10 GHz frequency range and thus over- performing our previous reported results36. In terms of shunt inductance (untreated in36,37) the inductor is stable within the 3 GHz-6 GHz frequency range with an average of 1nH as seen in Fig. 3c. The overall performances of the inductor with two switches on, two switches off and of a fabricated inductor with one switch on are all plotted together in Fig. 4g (series inductances), Fig. 4h quality factors and Fig. 4i both quality factors and normalized 3D series inductances and quality factors. The results show 77% tuning range and Qmax_on/ Qmax_off 0.88 and thus 3.26 times higher than Qmax_on/ Qmax_off reported in36. The maximum quality factor in the on 8 state exceeds 7 being comparable with the off state Qmax even though the inductance is tuned with 77% down to 0.95 nH. This result in the on state is particularly interesting since it overcomes the limited performances of the previously reported inductor on VO236 while using a smaller inductance (0.95nH vs 1.35nH). On the other hand, the limited off state (at room temperature) quality factor (Q) is comparable with the one reported in36 (although dealing with a smaller inductance than in36). While exhibiting a better performance in the low GHz frequency range and a more stable frequency dependency linearity the values are facing the same trend as in36. The maximum value is limited as in36 by the CMOS compatible CPW SiO2/Si technology used, (Supplementary Section 3). Additionally, the VO2 lossy dielectric behavior in the off state, DC conductivity (20S/m) and intrinsic losses contribute to this. It is worth mentioning that comparable values of the Q were obtained here for smaller inductances The design of radiofrequency functions in wideband applications, with accurate predictive capability, pointed out the need of an accurate modeling and extraction of main parameters of VO2 such as the relative effective dielectric permittivity as a function of frequency, for which the reports in the literature are limited or inconsistent. A new extraction approach and new data are presented in the following section. Fig. 4| Fabricated VO2 reconfigurable Peano inductor geometry and performances a, Cross sectional view b, SEM photo of the inductors. c, Current distribution ( 5GHz) in the off state for an inductor with 2 switches. The current ignores the VO2 switches and goes through all the windings in its path from port 1 (input) to port 2 (output). d, VO2 switch fabricated photo: a gap in the contact metal of 0.6μm is left in order to contact the VO2 layer. In the insulating phase of VO2 the switch is in off state (acting like a lossy dielectric), in the conductive state of the VO2 the 600nm gap plays an important role to minimize the conductive losses since the VO2 has a limited 40,000S/m conductivity on the SiO2/Si substrate. e, Current distribution (5GHz) in the hypothetical on state of one switch while the other is in the off state. The current ignores the off state VO2 switch and follows a shorter path from input to output. f, Current distribution (5 GHz) in the on state for an inductor with 2 switches. All current distributions are within a range from 0.5 A/m (dark blue) to 5.2 A/m (intense red) using the same scale. g, Series inductance of the fabricated inductors with 2 switches, in on state and off state, series inductance of an inductor with one switch in on state. h, Quality factor of the inductor with 2 switches in off state and on state, and of an inductor with one switch (on state) i, Simultaneous 3D Smith chart representation for the 2 GHz-10 GHz frequency of the series inductance and quality factors for all 3 situations. 9 Dielectric constant of VO2 in the microwave frequency range Space filling curves can be also used to generate resonating structures with a variety of central frequencies using very limited space. To generate resonating frequencies within the 1 GHz- 50 GHz microwave spectrum we use tenths of Peano inspired defected ground plane structures (DGS) in the coplanar waveguides (CPW). Peano curves of order 3 kind of DGS (which have 9 times the complexity of the Peano curve of order 2) are used to generate resonance frequencies below 10 GHz (Fig. 5a), while modified repetitions of DGS Peano curves inspired shapes of order 2 are used to generate structures resonating within the 10 GHz-50 GHz frequency range (Fig. 5a). The structures have different widths of the tubes along the generating Peano types of curves and different aspect ratios. The structures are fabricated on bilayer SiO2/Si (Fig. 5b) substrates and on multilayer VO2/ SiO2/Si substrates (Fig. 5c). Each of the filters performances is measured in both cases and a frequency shift and losses difference is noticed. The exact same DGS structure on the triple-layer substrate in Fig. 5c would always resonate at a lower frequency than on the bi-layer structure if the dielectric constant εreff ′ (f) of VO2 is higher. (εreff(f) is the relative effective dielectric permittivity, εreff ′ (f) its real part and εreff ′′ (f)its imaginary part while ε0 the permittivity of the free space)-(6).However for each DGS type of structure this relative down shift level is lower or higher for a fixed dielectric constant of the VO2, the relative shift itself being dependent also on each DGS type. The bandstop performances in terms of Q and maximum attenuation are on the other hand very sensitive to the losses of the VO2 thin film. (see Supplementary Section 4) To overcome limitations of previously reported models of the VO2 of the εreff(f) for the 1 GHz-50 GHz frequency ranges43 we include the damping losses (within the first imaginary term in (6) using the more general model50) - the intrinsic tangent loss tanδ and separate this term from the losses given by the conductivity σ′(f). The presence of this term enables us to perform the de-embedding with HFSS simulator50 which allows the user to make a distinction between conductive losses determined by the non-zero conductivity σ′(f) of the VO2 and other intrinsic damping losses of the dielectric included in δ. εeff(f) = ε0 ∗ εreff ′ (f) ∗ (1 − jtanδ − jσ′(f) /(ωε0εreff ′ (6) a 10 b c Fig. 5| Dielectric constant extraction through frequency shift of Peano inspired defected ground plane structures at room temperature a, Frequency dependency of the dielectric constant extracted with a variety of structures resonating at different frequencies. The same structure fabricated without and with the VO2 layer below the metallization resonates at a different frequency. The frequency shift is given by the different relative effective dielectric permittivity. b, Substrate configuration for the measurement without the 170 nm VO2 layer. c, Substrate configuration for the measurement with the 170 nm VO2 layer just below the metallization (above the 500nm of SiO2). Conclusions We have first reported new theoretical foundations for a frequency-dependent 3D Smith with 3D visualization methods for the orientation of parametric curves and used them to quantify and understand curvature reversal, while sweeping the frequency, of driving point impedances and reflection coefficients of circuits in the RF frequency bands. Further we have additionally extended the capabilities of the tool to simultaneously envision a variety of frequency dependent parameters required in the inductor design and thus proposed a unique multi- parameter display. We demonstrated by design, fabrication and measurements, original Peano reconfigurable inductors by employing the phase change VO2 materials in CPW/ CMOS compatible technology on SiO2. The reported inductors improve the previously reported state of art in the incipient field of VO2 reconfigurable inductors design for the S, C and X band of the radio frequency spectrum. Last, a variety of first-time DGS Peano structures resonating within the mobile, satellite communications and military bands were fabricated in CPW CMOS compatible technology in order to extract based on a frequency shift, for the first time, the VO2 dielectric constant within the 1 GHz-50 GHz frequency range and to propose and validate a more general and accurate model for it. Methods Fabrication The devices were fabricated using a high resistivity (10000 Ω∙cm) Si wafer (525 μm) as the starting substrate. A 300 nm-thick amorphous Si was deposited by low pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD), to reduce the losses during measurement. A surface passivation using 500 nm sputtered SiO2 was then carried out, followed by deposition of 140 nm (and 170nm)-thick VO2 using a Pulsed Laser Deposition (PLD) system The film was deposited by pulsed lased deposition (PLD) using a Solmates SMP 800 system. The deposition was performed at 400 C 11 in oxygen ambient, with a chamber pressure of 0.01 mbar. The ablated V2O5 target was placed at 60 mm distance from the wafer. Further the deposition, an annealing of 10 min at 475 C was performed without breaking the vacuum in the chamber. The fabrication process for the Peano filters on the above substrate then commenced with a photolithography step to pattern the VO2 followed dry etching to remove the VO2 from the unwanted areas. A Cr-20 nm/ Al-400 nm bi-layer metal stack was then deposited by evaporation after a subsequent photolithography step on the patterned VO2. This thin metallization made it possible to realize sub-micron gaps (600 nm) which is critical for extracting a good Q in the conductive state of VO2 for the inductors. This was followed by deposition of a 2.4 μm-thick Al layer on these contact pads by conventional lithography followed by metal lift-off procedure to form the CPW elements with low RF losses. Devices simulation and characterization The numerical simulations of the inductor and filters were done in HFSS ANSYS commercial software relying on the finite element method (FEM) to solve Maxwell equations. Considering the full wave electromagnetic simulation technique, we used the modal solution type for the inductors and the terminal solution type for the filter simulations. The conductivity of the Al was decreased to 3.1*10^7S/m and the VO2 switches were modeled for the inductors as simple dielectrics with 20S/m losses and a loss tangent of 0 in the off state. In the on state, the VO2 switches were simulated as lossy metals of a conductivity of 40,000S/m. Subsequently full inductors and filters models were built in the software according to the actual physical structure fabricated. The Peano shapes were implemented using the Equation Curve facility of the tool, their equations being written parametrically and where needed rotations and reflections were used for the very final shapes. In the case of the filters an extensive de-embedding was used in order to extract the frequency dependent model of VO2 using variable dielectric constant, tan of losses and conductivity by fitting the results obtained. In the frequency model of the relative effective dielectric permittivity all parameters available in the HFSS model were used (frequency dependency of the dielectric constant, loss tangent, conductivity losses) The devices were measured with the Anrtisu Vector Star VNA in a Cascade Summit prober with controllable chuck temperature who was set to 20°C in the “off state” and 100°C in the on state. For the 2D graphical interpretation the measured S parameters were converted using the Anritsu Star VNA installed Microwave Office too into the desired parameters analyzed. 3D Smith Chart implementation The 3D Smith Chart application is developed using the Java programming language and the following libraries and development environment are used: - 3D rendering: OpenGL through the Java Binding for the Open GL API (JOGL2) library; - Mathematical operations and complex data representation: the Apache Commons Mathematics Library; - Development environment: The NetBeans IDE with Beans Binding Library for the implementation of the application GUI and JOGL2 usage. Further implementation details about the new mode of visualization, new simulation parameters used in the paper and their 3D representation on the Riemann sphere can be found in Supplementary Section 2. Mathematical modelling of curvature The calculations for the oriented curvature was performed using Mathematica software tool by writing the frequency parametric equations of the curves analyzed.