Mn2C monolayer: hydrogenation/oxygenation induced strong room-temperature ferromagnetism and potential applications Xiaoming Zhang,a,b Tingli He,a,b Weizhen Meng, a,b Lei Jin,a,b Ying Li, b Xuefang Dai, b and Guodong Liua,b,* aState Key Laboratory of Reliability and Intelligence of Electrical Equipment, Hebei University of Technology, Tianjin 300130, China. bSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Hebei University of Technology, Tianjin 300130, China. E-mail: gdliu1978@126.com Abstract: Two-dimensional ferromagnetic materials with strong ferromagnetism and high Curie temperature are significantly desired for the applications of nanoscale devices. Here, based on first-principles computations, we report hydrogenated/oxygenated Mn2C monolayer is a such material with strong room-temperature ferromagnetism. The bare Mn2C monolayer is an antiferromagnetic metal with the local magnetic moment of Mn ~ 3μB. However, the antiferromagnetic coupling of Mn atoms can transform into the ferromagnetic order under hydrogenation/oxygenation. Especially, the magnetic moments in hydrogenated/oxygenated Mn2C monolayer can be as large as 6 μB per unit cell, and the Curie temperatures are above 290K. Beside the potential applications in spintronic devices, our work suggests that Mn2C monolayer is also promising to be used in hydrogen/oxygen detection and removal devices. Keywords: 2D materials, Mn-based MXene, Strong Ferromagnetism, Hydrogenation andoxygenation 1 Introduction Since the discovery of graphene, a large number of two dimensional (2D) materials including transition-metal dichalcogenides, silicene, transition metal carbide, nitride, and carboniborides (known as MXenes), and borophene have been synthesized.1-11 They exhibit many exotic properties and have a wide range of practical applications such as electronic and spintronic devices.12-18 However, their applications in spintronics are greatly limited currently, because most known 2D materials are intrinsically nonmagnetic (NM). Therefore, developing 2D materials with room-temperature ferromagnetism is highly desired. Recently, the experimental realization of ferromagnetism in 2D Cr2Ge2Te6, CrI3 and Fe3GeTe2 has generated intensive interests.19-21 Beside exploring 2D materials with intrinsic ferromagnetism, several approaches such as strain engineering, doping, defect generation, and surface passivation have been developed to introduce magnetism in 2D materials. For example, spin polarization will be established in layered NbS2 and NbSe2 by applying biaxial tensile strain;22 graphene and phosphorene can exhibit weak magnetism under elemental doping; 23,24 MoS2 monolayer can also become ferromagnetic (FM) under the combined effects of strain and hydrogenation.25 However, the magnetism in these systems is usually quite weak, which still limits their practical applications in spintronic devices. Fortunately, it has been demonstrated recently that MXenes can provide an excellent platform to realize strong ferromagnetism. For example, Cr2C monolayer intrinsically shows ferromagnetism with the magnetic moment as high as 8 μB per unit cell;26 Cr2N monolayer can transform from antiferromagnetic (AFM) to FM state under oxygenation, and the magnetic moment can reach 9 μB per unit cell; 27 some other MXenes including Ti2C, Mn2N, and Mn2N can also exhibit strong ferromagnetism with magnetic moment of 6 - 9μB per unit cell when their surfaces are terminated by F, OH, Cl, or other atoms.28-30 Quite recently, a new Mn-based MXene, namely Mn2C, is identified.31 In Mn2C monolayer, it has seen a local magnetic moment of ~3μB on Mn atom. However, the spin polarization among neighboring Mn atoms naturally takes AFM ordering rather than FM ordering.31 It is well known that, hydrogenation/oxygenation, which usually happens during the synthesis of MXene, can be an effective approach on turning the magnetic ordering in MXene.27-30 Therefore, in this work we theoretically investigate the feasibility of inducing ferromagnetism in Mn2C monolayer by hydrogenation/oxygenation. The hydrogenation/oxygenation process on Mn2C monolayer is systematically studied, and it is shown that the fully hydrogenated/oxygenated Mn2C monolayer (Mn2CH2/Mn2CO2) exhibits a stable ferromagnetic ground state, with the total magnetic moment as large as 6 μB per unit cell and the Curie temperature higher than 290K. The room temperature ferromagnetism in hydrogenated/oxygenated Mn2C monolayer makes it promising for a wide range of applications such as spintronic devices, and hydrogen/oxygen (H/O) detection and removal devices. 2 Computational methods In this work, the computations are performed based on density functional theory (DFT), realized by the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP).32 The generalized gradient approximation (GGA) with Perdew−Burke−Ernzerhof (PBE) functional is used for exchange and correlation contributions.33,34 During the computations, the DFT-D2 method is adopted to describe the long-range van der Waals interactions.35 The cutoff energy is selected as 450 eV. For the structure of bare Mn2C monolayer, a vacuum spacing of more than 20 Å is built to eliminate possible interactions between neighboring layers. Considering the strong correlation effects in the Mn element, the GGA+U method is used in the calculations. 36,37 Herein, the effective Coulomb energy Ueff of Mn atom is set as 4.0 eV. To sample the Brillouin zone, the Γ-centered k-mesh of 7×7×1 and 15 × 15 × 1 are adopt for structure optimization and total energy calculation. The convergence criteria for energy and force are set as 10−7 eV and 0.01 eV Å-1, respectively. 3 Results and discussions 3.1 The ground state of Mn2C monolayer MXenes can crystallize in different structure configurations such as 2H, 1T, and 1T'. We first investigate the most energetically stable structure for Mn2C monolayer. Our calculations find the 2H structure has the lowest energy among these structures, which is consistent with former computations.31 As shown in Fig. 1(a), the 2H-type Mn2C monolayer manifests a honeycomb lattice with the D3h symmetry, In the side view, it exhibits a triple-layer configuration with atomic layers stacked in the sequence of Mn−C− Mn, as shown in Fig. 1(b). The optimized lattice constants of Mn2C monolayer are a = b=2.565 Å, with the Mn–C interatomic distance of 2.098 Å. Then we construct a 2 × 2 supercell of Mn2C monolayer to investigate its ground magnetic state. Herein, different magnetic states including NM, FM, and AFM are considered. According to the crystal symmetry, there exist three possible AFM coupling configurations (AFM1, AFM2, and AFM3, see Fig. 1c) in Mn2C monolayer. The total energies for different magnetic states are shown in Fig. 1(d). We can observe that the AFM2 state possesses the lowest energy, indicating the intrinsic AFM ordering in Mn2C monolayer. Our results are consistent with previous computations.31 Under the ground state, the total and projected density of states (DOS) for Mn2C monolayer is shown in Fig. 2 (e). It obviously manifests a metallic electronic structure with sizable DOS at the Fermi level. Given by the projected DOS, the states near the Fermi level are mostly contributed by the 3d orbitals of Mn atoms. 3.2 Hydrogenation/oxygenation induced AFM-FM transition To investigate the hydrogenation/oxygenation process on Mn2C, we need first determine the most favorable adsorption site for H/O atom. We use a 4 × 4 supercell of Mn2C monolayer as the substrate and first assign an isolate H/O atom on its surface. Considering the crystal symmetry, there exist four typical H/O adsorption sites on Mn2C monolayer. These adsorption sites are shown in Fig. 1(a), where site-A, site-B, site-C and site-D are on the top of Mn atoms, C atoms, the bridge site of Mn-C atoms and the center of the hexagonal lattice, respectively. The adsorption energy (EAd) for different sites are calculated, where the EAd is defined as: 2 2 / / Ad H O Mn C Mn C H O E E E E + = − − (1) In equation (1), 2 / EH O Mn C + and 2 EMn C represent the total energies of Mn2C supercell after and before H/O adsorptions, and EH/O is the energy for per H/O atom. Our calculations show site-D possesses the lowest energy among the four adsorption sites, indicating both H and O atoms tend to be adsorbed above the center of the Mn2C honeycomb lattice. Then we assign one more H/O atom on Mn2C monolayer. Here two possibilities need to be considered: (1) two H/O atoms situate on the same side and (2) opposite sides of Mn2C surfaces. We find the latter case is lower in energy by 65 meV for per H atom and 39 meV for per O atom. Therefore, H/O atom prefers to be adsorbed on different sides of Mn2C surfaces when more atoms are included. We continue to increase the numbers of H/O atoms on both sides of Mn2C monolayer. This process well describes the increase of the hydrogenation/oxygenation degree. During this process, we compare the energy for all the possible magnetic states (NM, FM, AFM1, AFM2, and AFM3) of Mn2C monolayer. In Figs. 2(a) and (b), we show the energy difference among these magnetic states under different hydrogenation and oxygenation degree, respectively. Here, a 0% hydrogenation/oxygenation degree is for the bare Mn2C monolayer without H/O adsorption, and a 100% degree means fully hydrogenation/oxygenation with all the sites-D of Mn2C supercell occupied by H/O atoms. In Figs. 2(a) and (b), the energy for the AFM2 state has been set as the reference energy, and the energy for the NM state is not shown in the figures because it possesses far higher energy than other magnetic states. For the hydrogenation case, as shown in Fig. 2 (a), we can observe that the energy difference between AFM2 and other magnetic states become smaller with increasing the hydrogenation degree. Especially, the energy of FM state becomes the lowest under the 100% hydrogenation degree, indicating the occurrence of AFM-to-FM transition during the period. Similar AFM-to-FM transition also happens under 75% and 100% oxygenation degree, as shown in Fig. 2 (b). Just as our expected, Mn2C monolayer can show strong ferromagnetism under proper hydrogenation/oxygenation, where the magnetic moment is 6.44 μB per unit cell under 100% hydrogenation degree, and 6.20 μB and 6.12 μB under 75% and 100% oxygenation degree. These values are significantly higher than previous induced ferromagnetism in graphene, phosphorene, NbS2 and MoS2.22-25, 38-40 In the following, we use the cases of 100% hydrogenation and oxygenation degree for more detailed discussions. Figure 3(a) shows the structural geometry for these states, where H/O atoms are chemically bonding to Mn atoms. Under hydrogenation and oxygenation, as shown in Fig. 3(b) and (c), we can find that FM Mn2C monolayer exhibits metallic electronic structures, where exist sizable DOS at the Fermi level in both spins. This ensures good conductivity for the applications in electronic devices. Then we investigate the stability of FM state in hydrogenated/oxygenated Mn2C monolayer by evaluating the Stoner criterion: 41 I *D(EF) > 1 (2) where I is the effective Stoner exchange parameter, and D(EF) is the total DOS at the Fermi level for the NM state. If the value of I *D(EF) is larger than 1, FM state is more likely to form to lower the total energy. The exchange parameter I can be calculated by using the following equation: I =ΔE/μ (3) whereΔE is the exchange splitting between the bands in spin-up and spin-down, and μ is the local magnetic moment on the atom. Our calculations show the value of I is similar for Mn2C monolayer before and after hydrogenation/oxygenation, which is calculated to be in the range of 0.72-0.76. Therefore, the D(EF) plays the decisive role in the stability of FM state. Figure 3(d) compare the total DOS of Mn2C monolayer under the NM state before and after hydrogenation/oxygenation. One can find that the D(EF) in hydrogenated/oxygenated Mn2C is more than two times of that in pristine Mn2C monolayer. Especially, both cases of hydrogenated and oxygenated Mn2C satisfy I *D(EF) > 1, indicating the FM state is more stable in these systems. The Curie temperature (TC) is an crucial parameter for FM materials. Here, by using the Monte Carlo (MC) simulation based on Ising model, we evaluate the TC of hydrogenated/oxygenated Mn2C monolayer. The Hamiltonian for Ising model can be described as: H = −ΣijJijMiMj (4) where Jij represents the nearest-neighboring exchange parameter, and M is the spin magnetic moment on Mn atom. Based on the energy difference between AFM and FM states, the exchange parameter J is estimated to be 6.8 meV and 7.6 meV for hydrogenated and oxygenated Mn2C monolayer, respectively. In our MC simulation, a 100 × 100 size of supercell is used, which is large enough to ensure credible results. As shown in Figs. 4(a) and (b), the estimated Curie temperature is 293K for hydrogenated Mn2C and 323K for oxygenated Mn2C. This indicates hydrogenated/oxygenated Mn2C monolayer is promising to be used in spintronic and electronic devices working in room temperature. 3.3 Possible applications Beside potential applications in spintronic devices, the novel magnetic properties make Mn2C monolayer also promising to be used in H/O detection and removal devices. based on Mn2C monolayer. Under none or a low H/O atmosphere, Mn2C monolayer is in the AFM state. The power indictor does not work because the circuit is open [see Fig. 5(a)]. However, when exposed in a high H/O atmosphere, Mn2C monolayer will transfer into the FM state after hydrogenation/oxygenation. As a result, the magnet and Mn2C monolayer are connected and lights the power indicator [see Fig. 5(b)]. Mn2C monolayer is also promising be applied to H/O removal devices. Especially, comparing with traditional H/O removal devices, the removal devices based on Mn2C monolayer possess a major advantage. Figure 6(a) shows the mechanism for traditional H/O removal, where the adsorbent is displayed for H/O adsorption. For this case, it is difficult to monitor the H/O adsorption process on the adsorbent. However, this problem can be simply solved in the Mn2C-based H/O removal devices. As shown in Fig. 6(b), we display a magnet in the cavity containing H/O atmosphere. When Mn2C monolayer reaches the maximum H/O adsorption capacity, it becomes ferromagnetic and will be caught by the magnet. Then an automatic H/O removal process can be realized by inputting the bare Mn2C monolayer and outputting the hydrogenated/oxygenated Mn2C monolayer from the cavity. 4 Summary In summary, based on first-principles calculations, we investigate the feasibility of inducing ferromagnetism in Mn2C monolayer by hydrogenation/oxygenation. Our calculations show both H and O can be stably bonded to the Mn atom in Mn2C, and the hydrogenation/oxygenation is systematically studied. We find the antiferromagnetic Mn2C monolayer becomes ferromagnetic under fully hydrogenation/oxygenation, which can be well described by the Stoner criterion. The hydrogenated/oxygenated Mn2C monolayer shows strong ferromagnetism with magnetic moments higher than 6 μB per unit cell. By using Monte Carlo simulations, the Curie temperature is calculated to be 293K and for 323K for hydrogenated and oxygenated Mn2C monolayer, respectively. The novel magnetic properties in Mn2C monolayer make it promising for variable applications ranging from spintronic devices, to hydrogen/oxygen detection and removal devices. Acknowledgments This work is supported by the 333 Talent Project of Hebei Province (No. A2017002020), the Special Foundation for Theoretical Physics Research Program of China (Grant No. 11747152). One of the authors (X.M. Zhang) acknowledges the financial support from Young Elite Scientists Sponsorship Program by Tianjin. One of the authors (G.D. Liu) acknowledges the financial support from Hebei Province Program for Top Young Talents.