Independent control of nucleation and layer growth in nanowires Carina B. Maliakkal*1,2,3, Erik K. Mårtensson2,3, Marcus Tornberg2,3, Daniel Jacobsson1,3,4, Axel R. Persson1,3,4, Jonas Johansson2,3, Reine Wallenberg1,3,4 and Kimberly A. Dick*1,2,3 1Centre for Analysis and Synthesis, Lund University, Box 124, 22100, Lund, Sweden. 2Solid State Physics, Lund University, Box 118, 22100, Lund, Sweden. 3NanoLund, Lund University, 22100, Lund, Sweden. 4National Center for High Resolution Electron Microscopy, Lund University, Box 124, 22100, Lund, Sweden. *E-mail: carina_babu.maliakkal@chem.lu.se, kimberly.dick@ftf.lth.se Abstract: Control of the crystallization process is central to developing novel materials with atomic precision to meet the demands of electronic and quantum technology applications. Semiconductor nanowires grown by the vapor-liquid-solid process are a promising material system in which the ability to form components with structure and composition not achievable in bulk is well-established. Here we use in situ TEM imaging of GaAs nanowire growth to understand the processes by which the growth dynamics are connected to the experimental parameters. We find that two sequential steps in the crystallization process – nucleation and layer growth – can occur on similar time scales and can be controlled independently using different growth parameters. Importantly, the layer growth process contributes significantly to the growth time for all conditions, and will play a major role in determining material properties. The results are understood through theoretical simulations correlating the growth dynamics, liquid droplet and experimental parameters. A central challenge in crystal growth is to understand the dynamic and transient processes underlying the nucleation and growth steps. The ability to independently control these two steps would greatly expand the potential to design the structure, morphology and properties of the resulting material. Understanding the steps in crystallization is particularly important in the emerging fields of nanoscale and confined crystal growth, where a large interface-to- volume ratio enables new degrees of freedom in designing crystal properties1,2. Vapor-liquid- solid (VLS) growth of nanowires, which uses a nanoscale liquid melt to control nucleation and crystal growth, offers a platform to investigate heterogeneous nucleation and growth separately. For semiconductor materials, the VLS growth process enables synthesis of metastable crystal phases3–5, metastable semiconductor alloys6,7, extremely high dopant and impurity incorporation8,9, and atomically-precise lattice-mismatched10–12 and crystal-phase heterostructures13. Understanding the nucleation and crystallization processes at the interface in VLS-growth, and how these are influenced by the finite size of the liquid droplet, is centrally important for controlled design of these novel nanomaterials. In particular, it is critical to understand on an atomic scale the mechanisms by which the growth process is correlated to accessible experimental parameters. The VLS process is understood to occur by dissolution of semiconductor precursor species (or their derivatives) in a liquid metal (often Au-based), followed by precipitation of the solid semiconductor after the liquid becomes supersaturated14,15. This process occurs in two steps: formation of a critical nucleus at the liquid-solid interface followed by layer growth across this interface16,17. Since the metal droplet is relatively small, the number of atoms causing supersaturation of the liquid is finite and could be consumed during the formation of a layer18. After the growth of a complete layer following the nucleation, there typically is an ‘incubation’ (waiting) period before the nucleation of the next layer19–21. The serial nature of the steps suggests the potential to separately access the parameters controlling them and to use this as a means to design material properties. In this work we demonstrate using in situ transmission electron microscopy (TEM) imaging of GaAs nanowire growth that nucleation and layer growth can be controlled independently. By correlating the incubation time and layer growth time to the partial pressures of Ga and As precursors, we observe that the time scales for the two steps are of similar magnitude but follow entirely different trends. For most of the studied parameter space, incubation can be tuned by varying the Ga precursor partial pressure, while the layer growth can be independently controlled using the flow of the As precursor. Towards the edges of the parameter space, interactions between these species lead to more complicated trends. Simulations of the growth show that the observed effects can be understood by considering the very different steady-state compositions of the two species in the catalyst droplet during growth. Since this effect is fundamental in nature, it can be directly extrapolated to other growth conditions, growth methods and other binary semiconductor materials. Nanowire growth GaAs nanowires were grown in a Hitachi HF-3300S environmental TEM, on SiNx-coated heating chips on which Au aerosol nanoparticles (~30 nm diameter) had been deposited. Trimethylgallium (TMGa) and arsine (AsH3) were used as the precursors as in a typical ex situ metal-organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) system. These precursors were supplied via capillary tubes fed through the sample holder such that the gases entered the microscope within 4 mm of the sample area. Gas flows were controlled by mass flow controllers and pressure valves, and monitored during growth with a residual gas analyzer in the exhaust gas which had been calibrated to give partial pressures at the sample. Gas flows were chosen to give AsH3 partial pressure in the same range as typical ex situ MOCVD nanowire growth, with slightly lower TMGa flows giving average nanowire growth rates in the range of 0.1 – 1 nm/s (comparable to typical ex situ GaAs nanowire growth rates of about 0.5 – 5 nm/s)22,23. Details of the experimental setup are found in the Methods section. TMGa and AsH3 were supplied simultaneously to initiate nanowire growth, after which a suitable nanowire was selected based on its orientation relative to a hole in the supporting SiNx film and to other nanowires, in order to follow the growth as parameters were varied. Nanowire growth was imaged continuously with 50 ms exposure time per image using conventional parallel beam TEM. Fig. 1. Layer growth in GaAs nanowires: (a) TEM image of a growing GaAs nanowire NW along with the catalyst. A partially grown layer can be observed in this image (indicated by the arrow). (b)-(f) Sequence of frames (cropped) showing layer growth from a recorded video of another nanowire. The frame number (fr.) and time elapsed from the image in (b) is denoted on the top right of each section. The layer completion time, i.e. the time between the starting and ending of this layer corresponds to 4 frames (i.e. 0.22 s). After the ending of a layer in frame 5 (e) a new layer starts only in frame 11 (f). So the ‘incubation time’ or the waiting time in this example is 6 frames (i.e. 0.33 s). Scale bars indicate 5 nm. (See also Supplementary Video 1.) (g)-(h) Histograms of layer completion time and incubation time, respectively, of some layers grown at the same growth condition. (The frame rate for the video is 18.3 fps on an average.) We observe that growth occurs layer-by-layer across the nanowire interface (Fig. 1 a-f), consistent with previous reports20,21,24. There is also a measurable ‘incubation time’ between successive layer growths, which we interpret as a waiting period where the droplet accumulates enough material to overcome the nucleation barrier for a new layer. This interpretation implies that there is a ‘nucleation step’ during which the critical nucleus (and potentially a small part of the layer) forms. This step is extremely fast and not visible in such experiments, and so will not be considered in this analysis. In the following we use the terms ‘layer completion time’ for the time observed for completion of each GaAs layer, and ‘incubation time’ as the time between completion of one layer and the starting of the next layer. Interestingly, we observe that the order of magnitude of the incubation and layer completion times is similar, with layer completion times ranging from 0.1 - 0.5 s, and incubation times ranging from about 0.2 to 5 s; an example is shown in Fig. 1 (g), (h). This is surprising, since most models on nanowire growth have assumed the layer completion time to be negligible compared to incubation time19,25–27. In situ investigations have in some cases demonstrated slow layer growth (and relatively insignificant incubation time)20,21,28; however, these experiments were conducted under conditions yielding very low growth rates, and hence are generally not considered to be representative of typical ex situ growths. Our observations suggest that, for conditions comparable to typical ex situ nanowire growth, both steps – incubation and layer completion – contribute in a significant way to the overall growth process. Kinetics as a function of As-precursor supply In order to understand the mechanisms controlling the incubation and layer growth, we first discuss the dependence of growth kinetics on the AsH3 flow at 420 oC and TMGa pressure of 13x10-5 Pa (Fig. 2). AsH3 partial pressure was initially set to 1 Pa (see also Supplementary Video 2) and subsequently increased monotonically. After conducting growth at the highest AsH3 pressure (5.6 Pa), the AsH3 flow was reduced again to 1 Pa to verify reproducibility of the observations. The time for completing each layer (purple squares) decreases with increasing AsH3 supply, indicating that layer completion is restricted by the amount of arsenic present in the catalyst. This suggests that there are not sufficient (excess) As atoms present in the droplet at any instant to form a complete layer. This is not surprising since the solubility of As in the Au-Ga alloy is very low, and experimental reports29,30 and theoretical predictions31 show very low concentration of As species in the catalyst. Incubation time is plotted as a function of the AsH3 partial pressure as cyan circles in Fig. 2; we see that incubation, unlike layer completion, increases slightly as we increase the As precursor pressure . Kinetics as a function of Ga-precursor supply Next we discuss the effect of TMGa pressure while keeping the AsH3 constant (1 Pa) at the same temperature of 420 oC (Fig. 3). We observe that incubation time decreases with increasing TMGa flow (i.e. nucleation occurs after a shorter average waiting time). This trend is strongest at low TMGa flow, while for high TMGa flow, the incubation time is very brief, and there is very little change with increasing flow. There is a large variability in incubation times measured for different layers growing at low TMGa flow, resulting in large error bars; for higher flows however, the spread is very small (not visible on the scale of the figure). On the other hand, the layer completion time does not depend in an obvious way on TMGa flow for most of the studied TMGa flows (9 - 60 x10-5 Pa). For the very lowest TMGa flow investigated (9x10-5 Pa), there is a slight increase in layer completion time, suggesting that for this extremely low Ga-supply, there might not be sufficient excess Ga atoms to form one complete layer. Finally, we observe that for a significant part of the parameter space covered Fig. 2. Incubation and layer completion as a function of AsH3: The average layer completion time (purple squares, axis on left side) and incubation time (cyan circles) for growing a layer is plotted as a function of the As-precursor pressure. The layer growth of each individual layer is faster at higher AsH3 flow. Error bars denote standard deviation across the measured 10 or more events. in the measurement (TMGa > 25x10-5 Pa), the layer completion time is actually longer than the incubation time. We note that this experiment was conducted on a different nanowire and day, and so the absolute values of the incubation time and layer completion time for the same ‘set’ experimental parameters differ slightly between experiments. This may be related to differences in local environment at the nanowire or the pumping efficiency of the instrument on different days; however, the observed qualitative trends are reproducible. Simulation of the growth of layers in GaAs nanowires The observations show that under typical growth conditions nucleation of a new layer is controlled by the Ga species, while the arrival of As species controls the layer formation. To understand this better, we conducted Monte Carlo simulations of the nanowire growth based on mass transport and nucleation theory (details are found in Methods and Supplementary Fig. 3. Incubation and layer completion as a function of TMGa: Layer completion time (purple squares) and incubation time (cyan circles) are plotted as a function of the Ga-precursor flow at fixed AsH3 partial pressure of 1 Pa. With increasing Ga-precursor flux, the incubation time decreases, indicating that the nucleation of each new layer is controlled by the Ga supply to the catalyst particle. For TMGa pressure above 10 x 10-5 Pa, the layer completion time stabilizes at a non-zero value indicating that layer growth is limited by the As availability. Error bars denote standard deviation across the measured 10 or more events. Information section 1). An illustrative example of the simulated growth is shown in Fig. 4. The Ga and As concentrations in the catalyst droplet (and several other related parameters) change in a cyclic way: increase until a critical supersaturation is reached, then decrease when nucleation occurs (i) and a layer forms (ii). Following completion of a layer (iii), the concentrations again increase. Arsenic has a high vapor pressure and very low equilibrium solubility in Au31; droplet supersaturation is thus very sensitive to the addition of As atoms, and As concentration rapidly equilibrates with the ambient AsH3 pressure. Gallium on the other hand easily forms metallic liquid alloys with Au32, and the Ga concentration in the droplet is high during nanowire growth (measured experimentally to be on the order of 25-55 atomic %)29, with additional Ga atoms having a relatively much smaller effect on the droplet supersaturation. In order for nucleation to occur, the species in the droplet must exceed the Fig. 4. Simulation of the layer growth process in GaAs nanowires: (a) Simulation of the Ga and As concentration in the Au-Ga-As catalyst droplet as a function of time. The collection and depletion of (excess) Ga is relatively slower than As. The As concentration is several orders of magnitude lower than Ga concentration. Different stages of layer growth (nucleation, progression of a layer and completion of a layer) are denoted in the figure as i, ii and iii respectively. (b) A schematic progression (not simulated) of these steps is shown for illustrative purposes; this schematic is not intended to display the real geometry of the growing layer, which evolves in a complex way as in Ref. . nucleation barrier as determined by the supersaturation of Ga and As in the droplet relative to the GaAs crystal. When the As concentration has equilibrated with the vapor, the probability of overcoming this barrier is typically low enough to prevent nucleation. While the As concentration remains flat, the Ga concentration continues to increase (Fig.4 (a)) resulting in a higher nucleation probability. Thus, the nucleation of a new layer is controlled by Ga for most of the parameter space (further details on the parameters controlling the different steps for different regimes are found in Supplementary Information section 2). When a nucleation event occurs the number of available As atoms drops rapidly and is insufficient to form a complete monolayer, and so layer growth will primarily be controlled by the rate at which As atoms arrive. Monte Carlo simulations were performed for about 35 cycles of growth for each precursor flow to find the average layer completion and incubation times (Fig. 5). The error bars represent the standard deviation among ‘grown’ layers in the simulation. We can see that the simulation reproduces the trends observed experimentally (Fig. 2, 3): Layer completion time decreases strongly with increasing As partial pressure while showing a very weak, almost flat, dependence on Ga partial pressure. Incubation on the other hand decreases strongly with increasing Ga partial pressure, while increasing slightly with increasing As partial pressure. The observation of a small increase in incubation with As pressure in the simulation allows us to understand its origin: some of the arriving Ga species accumulate in the catalyst during the layer completion, so the corresponding incubation time (after the layer growth is completed) is slightly longer when the layer completion time is shorter. Finally, the simulation also shows that the spread in incubation times between individual layers is much larger for low Ga partial pressure, and that layer-to-layer variability in completion time is very small for all conditions. Discussion The results here show that the time scales for incubation and layer completion are comparable, and hence nanowire growth cannot be completely understood by considering only one species or only one process. Overall growth rate depends more strongly on the Ga species than As species for most of the accessible parameter space (in our experiments and in comparable ex situ growths). However, the observation that incubation/nucleation and layer growth are primarily controlled by different experimental parameters (Ga and As Fig. 5. Simulation of incubation and layer growth as a function of precursor pressures: Layer completion time and incubation time obtained from Monte Carlo simulations for (a) the AsH3 series and (b) TMGa series. The error bars represent the standard deviation among ‘grown’ layers. precursor partial pressures, respectively) means that under appropriate conditions it is possible to independently control the two steps. The evolution of the droplet composition during the two steps will control such properties as composition, uniformity and crystal structure; clearly understanding the time scales for the two events thus provides a greater freedom to design the material properties. Crystal structure for instance is generally controlled by nucleation, assuming the absence of structural defects during layer growth or post-growth structural transformations. On the other hand, compositional uniformity and impurity/dopant incorporation can also strongly depend on the layer growth step. For example, incorporation of impurities by step trapping, which can result in very high concentrations of dopants or other trace elements, is directly proportional to the layer- propagation rate rather than overall growth rate6,33. Similarly, the performance of heterostructure devices such as tunnel field-effect transistors depends critically on the composition of the heterojunction34, which will be sensitive to the relative rates of both the incubation and layer growth processes. As noted earlier, parameters in this study were chosen to give nanowire growth rates comparable to the lower end of typical growth rates observed for ex situ MOCVD, achieved by using similar AsH3 pressures and lower TMGa pressures. This indicates that ex situ incubation times will tend to be slightly shorter than observed here, while layer completion times will be similar – together suggesting that the similar time scales and distinct trends observed for these events will also be applicable for most ex situ MOCVD nanowire growth. Since the effects are not related to the types of precursors used, they should apply equally well to other growth techniques (such as molecular beam epitaxy). Moreover, although this study focuses on gold-seeded GaAs nanowire growth, the key insights are not restricted to this system. The fact that Ga readily alloys with the metallic catalyst while As incorporation into the catalyst is minimal is the underlying reason why Ga and As control growth in very distinct ways. Most other III-V and II-VI binary semiconductors are also composed of one metallic (group II or III) element and one nonmetallic (group V or VI) element, which in most cases exhibit similar alloying trends with gold or other typical transition metal catalyst32,35. It is thus reasonable to hypothesize that it will be possible to independently control layer nucleation (typically with the group II/III precursor) and layer growth (typically with the group V/VI precursor) for many of these material combinations. Summary and Conclusions Understanding the mechanistic processes controlling nucleation and crystal growth is key to designing materials with desired properties. In particular, interface-dominated, nanoscale systems offer new opportunities to control the crystallization process and resulting properties. In this study we have investigated in situ the nucleation and layer growth processes in VLS growth of GaAs nanowires. We observe that the nucleation (controlled by an incubation process) and layer growth processes can be independent, occur on similar time scales and are controlled by different parameters for most of the growth parameter space. This is a consequence of the confined multi-phase nature of the VLS process: Although material is supplied via the gas phase, the kinetics of the process are controlled by the catalyst droplet, which is very small. This means that the nucleation and initial layer growth can significantly change the composition of the droplet, depleting it of supersaturating atoms. For binary materials composed of two species that interact very differently with the catalyst droplet material, this opens up a broad parameter space in which nucleation and layer growth are independently controlled. Specifically, nucleation can be controlled by the species that easily alloys with the catalyst (such that each atom changes the chemical potential very little) while layer growth is controlled by the other species, for which very few atoms are required to supersaturate the droplet. The similar time scales of these two steps indicate that both must be considered in order to understand the nanowire growth process and to control the material properties. Controlling the parameters dominating the independent steps offers an opportunity to engineer devices with controlled properties, such as crystal structure, composition and impurity incorporation. Methods Data acquisition and presentation: Videos of atomic resolved images were recorded with an AMT XR401 sCMOS camera with an exposure time of 50 ms per image. Continuously recording results in videos with about 18.3 frames per second (fps) on average. The TEM images shown here were extracted from these videos and processed. The incubation time and layer completion time are measured from the videos. The error bars in the plots of incubation time and layer completion time represent the standard deviation among multiple layer growth events. In situ growth: GaAs nanowires were grown in a Hitachi HF-3300S environmental transmission electron microscope (ETEM) with a cold field emission gun and a CEOS B- COR-aberration-corrector. The wires grew along the <111> direction (cubic notation, or equivalent <0001> direction in hexagonal notation). Blaze software supplied by Hitachi was used to control the local sample temperature using Joule heating in a constant resistance mode. The heating chips used had thin SiNx windows on which nanowire growth could be followed; some contained holes so that growth could be viewed without SiNx in the background. The ETEM was connected to a gas handling system with the MOCVD gases. Further details of the experimental setup can be found in . Precursor supply: AsH3 and TMGa were used as the precursors. The AsH3 flow was controlled exclusively by the mass flow controller. The TMGa was supplied via a bubbler maintained at -10 oC with H2 bubbled through it. A portion of the TMGa/H2 flow passing the mass flow controller was bypassed to the vent line to restrict the TMGa pressure reaching the microscope. The precursor fluxes sent to the ETEM were monitored with a residual gas analyzer (SRS RGA 300) using mass spectrometry. The precursor flows were calibrated to find the partial pressure at the sample. More details on the calibration methodology is given in . AsH3 series experiments: The AsH3 flow was varied at constant TMGa pressure (13.1x10-5 Pa) and temperature (420 oC). The AsH3 supply partial pressure was initially set to 1 Pa, then increased in steps to 5.6 Pa and finally decreased back to 1 Pa. Ga series experiments: The TMGa partial pressure was varied at a fixed AsH3 supply (~1 Pa) and temperature (420 oC). This experiment was started at a TMGa pressure of 11x10-5 Pa, and successively set to 9, 13, 27 and finally 55 x 10-5 Pa. Specifications about the model: The Monte Carlo simulation model is based on the work in , which uses the effective impingement rates of As and Ga as the main input parameters. A complete description of the model is found in Supplementary Information section 1; here we summarize the simulation process and how it was used in this study. Time steps of 1 ms are taken and in each step, the composition of the seed particle is updated based on the effective impingements, the evaporation of As and Ga and potentially on Ga-As pairs incorporated in the layer growth. The nucleation rates, which depend on the properties of the seed (such as supersaturation), are calculated using classical nucleation theory, modified to take droplet depletion18 into consideration. Whether or not a nucleation event occurred in the time step is decided by random numbers and the nucleation rates. Once a nucleation event has occurred (and layer growth is not yet completed), Ga-As pairs are moved from the liquid seed to the solid layer in each time step, as long as the supersaturation is high enough for it to be energetically favorable to grow the nucleus further. The layer completion time and incubation time are thus obtained for each cycle. The values shown in Fig. 5 are obtained by averaging over multiple such simulation cycles (about 35 cycles for each set of growth conditions). The error bars in the modelled value denote the standard deviation among the multiple ‘layer growth’ events in the simulation. In this model we assume that the Ga (or As) flux into the catalyst is directly proportional to the TMGa (or AsH3) partial pressure. Due to the slight difference between the absolute values measured for the two different experiments, the proportionality constant between AsH3 partial pressure and the As flux into the particle was adjusted. (As a consequence, the 1 Pa AsH3 pressure used for the Ga series experiment was set in the simulation to be equivalent to 1.5 Pa AsH3 of the AsH3 series.) The proportionality constants will be affected by for instance V/III or pressure dependent precursor decomposition, TMGa-dependent Ga surface diffusion, effect of local environment near the nanowire, and the spatial variation of the gas flow (in terms of fluid dynamics); therefore, these effects are not explicitly accounted for.