Analog and digital phase modulation of spin torque nano- oscillators A. Litvinenko1, P. Sethi1, C. Murapaka1, A. Jenkins2, V. Cros3, P. Bortolotti4, R. Ferreira2, B. Dieny1 & U. Ebels1 1Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CEA, CNRS, IRIG-SPINTEC, F-38000 Grenoble, France 2International Iberian Nanotechnology Laboratory (INL), Braga, Portugal 3Unit Mixte de Physique CNRS, Thales, Univ. Paris-Sud, Universit Paris-Saclay, Palaiseau, France 4THALES TRT, Palaiseau, France Spin torque nano-oscillators (STNO) are nanoscale and multifunctional devices with wide band frequency tunability. Their RF properties are well suited to define novel schemes for wireless communication used within wireless sensor networks (WSN). To meet constraints of low power consumption and autonomy, WSNs use basic protocols for data transmission which are amplitude, frequency and phase shift keying (ASK, FSK, PSK). ASK and FSK have been demonstrated for STNOs but implementation of PSK has been left open so far. Phase shift keying requires a stable phase and a well-defined reference phase, while in free running STNOs the phase is free and characterized by large fluctuations. Here we introduce a special PSK technique for STNOs by combining their modulation and injection locking functionality. Injection locking provides a stable reference phase and reduces the STNO phase noise making the system compatible with IEEE standards. We used injection locking at 2f and f/2. The STNO intrinsic frequency is detuned via injecting additional modulation 1 arXiv:1905.02443v1 [physics.app-ph] 7 May 2019 signal resulting in a well-defined phase shift in the injection locked state at the constant fre- quency multiple to the external source frequency. The concept is validated using magnetic tunnel junction based vortex STNOs. For injection locking at 2f and f/2 we demonstrate PSK data transmission rates up to 4Mbit/s as well as the possibility of quadrature phase shift key- ing (QPSK). Finally we have built a bench-top transmitter-receiver system to demonstrate data transmission over a 10 meter distance using analog phase modulation of STNOs and a conventional software defined radio receiver. We discuss the steps to be taken for integra- tion of this scheme. This demonstrates that performances of the STNO-based PSK modula- tor (e.g. phase noise and output power) are compatible with existing technologies and that STNO multifunctional properties can be exploited to define compact approaches for wireless communication in sensor networks. 1 Introduction Wireless sensor networks (WSN) 1 are amongst the key enabling technologies of the Internet of Things (IoT)2. In a WSN, a large number of nodes are interconnected and are communicating with each other. Such applications require solutions which are wideband, compact, low cost and autonomous. Recent advances in the field of spintronics3,4 led to active developments of commu- nication systems5–7 based on spin-torque nano-oscillators (STNO) using basic modulation tech- niques 5,8. Spin-torque nano-oscillators (STNOs) are potential candidates to be used as rf sources within transmitter-receiver blocks due to their large frequency tunability, nanoscale size and and multifunctionality. In an STNO, a spin-polarized DC current injected through the magnetic stack 2 induces steady-state oscillations of the free layer magnetization by compensating damping torque 9. STNOs are non-isochronous, i.e. their frequency depends on the amplitude of oscillation. This dependence provides tuning of the oscillation frequency via changing the input DC current. Ap- plying an additional RF signal (current or field) at the STNO input makes it possible to either injection lock the STNO to an external signal source 10 (fsource = NfSTNO) or to modulate the amplitude and frequency of the signal (fsource < fSTNO). So far only frequency 8,11–16 and am- plitude modulation 5,7,12,16 have been demonstrated while for data transmission there is a third basic concept which is phase modulation (PM)17,18, including analog PM and digital phase shift keying (PSK). PSK modulation is more bandwidth efficient than FSK modulation and has a lower bit error rate (BER) than ASK modulation19. However, neither analog PM nor digital PSK has been demonstrated for STNOs. The nanoscale dimension of STNOs comes at an expense of larger phase noise which leads to large phase drifts on longer timescales. The phase of the STNO is free and, therefore, fluctuations of the phase can accumulate over time. For instance, even for vortex nano-oscillators of very low linewidth, the phase drift on a μs time scale is of the order of tens of radians 10,15. According to the IEEE standard for the binary PSK (BPSK) 20, maximal efficiency and noise resistance are achieved when the difference of two phase states is π. Therefore, the phase noise should be significantly reduced from tens of radians to at least π in order to distinguish between data phase states and implement the PSK technique with STNOs. One way around this would be to use the STNO within a phase-locked loop (PLL). Such PLL operation has recently been demonstrated for STNOs of vortex or uniform magnetized states 21,22. However, the problem with PLL is that the bandwidth of modulation and with this the maximum achievable data rate is 3 limited by the settling time and the loop filter of the PLL. Another possibility to reduce phase noise and through this to stabilize the phase dynamics on short and longer timescales, is to injection lock the STNO to an external RF current or field source 15,23–28. The aim of this work is to introduce and validate the principle of analog PM and digital PSK for STNOs by combining injection lock- ing and modulation. Within applications the external RF signal source can then be replaced by a PLL-stabilized STNO. 2 Principle of PM and PSK for STNOs The idea of the PSK technique for STNOs is the following: Injection locking reduces the phase noise and provides a stable reference phase for the STNO. This is necessary to well distinguish different phase levels at reasonable modulation indices. Perfect locking has been demonstrated for MTJ based vortex STNOs when the locking ratio N = fsource/fSTNO is 0.5, 1, 2 10. When injection locked, the oscillator phase φSTNO has a finite and constant phase difference with respect to the phase of the source φsource 29–34 given by Ψ = φsource − NφSTNO, with dΨ/dt = 0. This phase difference has two contributions. A constant one Ψ0 that is determined by the coupling mechanism between the oscillator and the source (i.e. dissipative or conservative coupling as well as non- linear frequency amplitude coupling)35. The second contribution is determined by the detuning δ, which is the difference in the free-running frequency of the oscillator and the signal source, δ = fsource−NfSTNO0. It is generally accepted to consider only positive values of the detuning and define the locking range as the maximum positive detuning of the oscillator’s intrinsic frequency: ∆Ω = δmax/N. Note that the value of ∆Ω varies with the order N of synchronization. In order to 4 use the full potential of synchronization phenomena we employ both positive and negative values of the frequency detuning δ and therefore we define the full locking range as 2∆Ω. With this the phase difference as seen from the external source is given by 33,34,36 Ψ|source =          Ψ0 + arcsin( δ ∆ΩN ), at harmonics Ψ0 + Narcsin( δ ∆ΩN ), at sub-harmonics (1) Here, we have taken into account the possibility of injection locking at harmonics with N = 1, 2, 3, ... and fractional injection locking at sub-harmonics37 with N = 1/2, 1/4, .... Different mechanisms33 are responsible for harmonic and sub-harmonic synchronization which leads to the additional pre-factor N for the phase difference for synchronization at sub-harmonics. For data transmission using PSK we are interested in the phase difference that can be in- duced in the STNO signal since it will serve as the carrier to be phase-modulated. Moreover, for PSK we need to have a constant carrier frequency. Therefore, we keep the frequency of the ex- ternal source fsource unchanged and shift the STNO phase by detuning its intrinsic free running frequency fSTNO0 via a modulation signal. Taking into account the ratio between the external and forced frequency of the STNO fsource = NfSTNO the equation (1) can be rewritten for the phase difference of the detuned and synchronized STNO: Ψ|STNO = 1 N Ψ|source, (2) From Eq. 1 and 2 and for the maximum locking range with δ = ∆Ω, the corresponding 5 N = 1, 1/2, 1/4, ... and (ii) ∆Ψmax = π/N for N = 2, 3, 4, .... Based on this possibility to control the STNO phase via the detuning, phase modulation of STNOs can be achieved by combining injection locking and modulation (see Fig. 1): (i) first a DC current source IDC excites the auto-oscillation at the carrier frequency fSTNO0; (ii) an RF signal Vsource at frequency fsource = NfSTNO is used to injection lock the STNO, whereby the STNO will oscillate at the frequency fSTNO, which is multiple to external source frequency fsource at a phase difference Ψ|STNO = Ψ0/N; (iii) an RF modulation signal Vmod detunes the STNO free running frequency and hence the frequency detuning δ(Vmod). This results in a phase modulation principle of phase detuning, we demonstrate here analog phase modulation PM as well as digital binary phase shift keying BPSK, up to modulation frequencies of fmod = 2MHz for MTJ based vortex STNOs. We also demonstrate the possibility of quadrature phase shift keying QPSK and voice transmission. 6 Fig. 1 Schematic of the electrical setup for PSK with STNOs. 3 Experiments and Results For the experiments MTJ based vortex nano-oscillators were chosen, since they have demonstrated the capability of perfect locking to an external source 10. The same principle should apply for any STNO configuration, given that perfect synchronization can be achieved. The MTJ vortex STNOs used here, were realized at INL (more details see Methods). For these devices best signal generation and injection locking were obtained for nanopillar diameters of 300 − 400nm with corresponding frequencies of [290 − 310]MHz. A DC source (Keithley 2401) was used for signal generation, a signal generator (Agilent E8257D) for injection locking and a waveform generator (Tektronix AWG4162) for modulation. RF signals were injected via couplers to separate the STNO input and output signal. The output signal is passed through a filter (275-325MHz) and amplified by 20dB using a commercial ampli- fier. The STNO output voltage signal is measured by a spectrum analyzer to deduce the carrier frequency fSTNO, linewidth ∆f and the power of the free running and injection-locked states as well as by a real-time oscilloscope with a single-shot mode to register time traces. From the Hilbert 7 transform of the time traces the phase fluctuations and the phase noise properties are deduced in the free running, injection locked and phase modulated state similar to previous studies 8,10,15,38,39. For the injection locking as well as PM and PSK, the operating point has been chosen such that the free running oscillator frequency is fSTNO0 = 300MHz, which requires a DC current of I ≈ 9.5mA and an out-of-plane field of H ≈ 2.5kOe produced by a permanent magnet. At this operating point the free running linewidth and the power are 250kHz and 0.25μW, correspond- ingly.The dependence of the free running oscillator frequency on the DC current can be found in the supplementary material. Then an RF sinusoidal signal at a frequency of fsource = 2fSTNO = 600MHz is injected at a power level of -3dBm. The frequency fsource was kept constant and the DC current was varied. Fig. 2 (a) shows an example of the injection locking of the STNO upon varying the intrinsic frequency of the STNO via the DC current. The STNO remains locked over a locking range of DC input current 2∆I ≈ 0.5mA which corresponds to the locking range of intrinsic frequency 2∆Ω(I). The corresponding linewidth 40, which is limited by the resolution bandwidth ∆fsa of the spectrum analyzer used, drops to below 50 kHz in the locking range, as shown in the inset in Fig. 2 (a). The resolution of 50kHz was chosen for faster data processing and analysis. However, the real linewidth inside the locking range decreases down to the linewidth of the external source ≈ 1Hz. In Fig. 2 (b) we show the corresponding Arnold tongue Psource vs IDC. The locking range expands with increasing RF power Psource. The corresponding instanta- neous phase dynamics is shown in Fig. 2 (c) and the phase noise is shown in Fig. 2 (d) for an RF power of −3dBm and three different values of detuning. (1) For large detuning beyond the locking range, the oscillator is unlocked and the phase is free, leading to a random walk of the 8 instantaneous phase, which is reflected in large phase fluctuations in the time domain and a 1/f 2 dependence in the phase noise (red curves, Figs. 2 (c,d)). (2) At detuning values close to the locking range (red area in the Arnold tongue), the phase noise starts to flatten off below a roll-off frequency froll−off (see Fig. 2 (d)). The instantaneous phase is partially locked but suffers from phase slips which is reflected in the increasing phase noise with at a slope of 1/f 2 at offset fre- quencies below fcorner (blue curves). (3) For zero detuning and detuning within approximately 60% of the full locking range, there are no phase slips visible within the time window of basic characterization measurements (1ms). The phase noise becomes flat in the range of offset frequen- cies below froll−off (black curves). It is in this area of the Arnold tongue with zero phase slips, for which phase modulation has to be carried out. To demonstrate binary phase shift keying (BPSK) we inject a time-varying modulation signal Vmod in the form of a square wave pattern to the STNO for a given power Psource = −3dBm of the injection locking external source and a given DC cur- rent. The amplitude of the modulation signal was chosen such that the detuning remains within the range free of phase slips. 9 Fig. 2 STNO’s signal characteristics at Psource = −3dB and fsource = 600MHz for different values of current: 1 - unlocked free-running STNO (ISTNO = 11mA); 2 - partially locked STNO (ISTNO = 10mA) with phase slips; 3 - injection locked STNO (ISTNO = 9.75mA). (a) State diagram. Corresponding linewidth (blue curve in inset). Red dashed line limits the resolution of spectrum analyzer. (b) Arnold’s tongue demonstrating locking area in parameters of Psource(peak power) and ISTNO. The injection locking range at Psource = −3dB highlighted by dashed blue line and delimited by vertical dashed green lines. (c) Instantaneous phase time traces. (d) Phase noise plot Similar to the phase noise analysis of the free running and injection-locked STNO (Fig. 2) we extract the instantaneous phase of the modulated STNO signal using a Hilbert transform technique. The data was obtained for 2f(N = 2) and f/2(N = 1/2) locking regimes. The locking regime at 1f frequency has not been used since the STNO is a resistive one-port device and, consequently, 10 it is impossible to separate the signal coming from the STNO and the external source. The time traces of the instantaneous phase are shown in Fig. 3 for different amplitudes Vmod and for different modulation frequencies fmod. Light blue lines represent the modulation signal Vmod for 2f locking and red lines correspond to Vmod for f/2 locking. Instantaneous phases are shown in dark blue (2f synchronization) and pink (f/2 synchronization). In Fig. 3(a) for 2f synchronization at fmod = 500kHz, when the peak-to-peak amplitude of the square modulation signal Vmod is 6mV , the shift of the instantaneous STNO phase ∆Ψ|STNO is around ≈ 0.5rad. For f/2 synchronization at Vmod = 4mV , the phase shift is ∆Ψ|STNO ≈ 1.1rad. Fig. 3 Time traces of the instantaneous phase and modulation signal in BPSK regime for 2f and f/2 locking frequencies. Vmod modulation amplitude: (a) - 4mV @f/2 and 6mV @2f, fmod = 500kHz, (b) - 8mV @f/2 and 12mV @2f, fmod = 500kHz; 6mV @f/2 and 10mV @2f 11 The shift ∆Ψ|STNO reaches ≈ 0.9rad which is ≈ 60% of ∆Ψmax for 2f locking and ≈ 2.1rad which is ≈ 70% of ∆Ψmax|STNO for f/2 locking on increasing the modulation signal to Vmod = 12mV and 8mV respectively (see Fig. 3 (b)). This corresponds to a total change of current flowing through the STNO 2δI = Vmod/RSTNO ≈ 0.3mA for 2f locking and 2δI = Vmod/RSTNO ≈ 0.2mA for f/2 locking which corresponds to 60% of the locking ranges 2δΩ(I) at 2f and f/2. The signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) improves with increasing Vmod, Fig. 3 (b). However when increasing the amplitude of the square wave pattern above ≈ 60 − 70% of the locking range 2δI the BPSK between well-defined levels is no more possible. Random fluctuations cause the instantaneous frequency to go beyond 60% of the locking range 2∆Ω(I), which leads to slips of the instantaneous phase within the measurement time window. Since phase slips are stochastic it will lead to the rise of bit error rate (BER). Thus, the maximal effective range of phase shifts is limited to ≈ 60% of the theoretical ∆Ψmax|STNO. Another limitation appears at high frequency of modulation: when at constant amplitude of the modulation signal Vmod the modulation frequency is increased to fmod = 2000kHz the amplitude of the instantaneous phase shift drops to ∆Ψ ≈ it is close to ≈ 60% of the theoretical limits. This is caused by the inertia-like behavior in the STNO in response to an external source and is reflected in the amplitude-relaxation frequency Γp above which the influence of the external signal on the STNO becomes weaker and the STNO does not respond to external signals. Γp is usually different for each synchronization regime 10. In our experiment Γp is lower for f/2 locking than for 2f locking. It leads to a higher reduction of ∆Ψ|STNO for f/2 than at 2f locking at the modulation frequency fmod = 2MHz. 12 Fig. 4 (a) - PSDs of a free-running STNO (green curve), FSK signal (blue curve), BPSK signal in injection locking regime at Psource = −3dB. Both modulated signals are obtained at the amplitude of modulation signal Vmod = 6mV . Signal peak amplitude to noise floor ratio improves by a factor of 30dB. (b) - Spectrogram of voice transmission. A voice message transcription: ”Demonstration of voice transmission using phase modulation of spin torque nano-oscillators” A complementary technique to characterize modulation properties of the STNO signal is spectrum analysis. The modulation rate, modulation index and the carrier linewidth can be easily deduced from the spectrum. In Fig. 4 (a) we compare the spectra for BPSK (black line), FSK (brown line, only Vmod used, and zero Psource) and the free running oscillations (orange line, zero Vmod and zero Psource). The FSK and BPSK signals are characterized by multiple sidebands. In the 13 FSK regime the instability of the carrier frequency translates to the modulation sidebands causing their broadening and, therefore, will degrade the quality of the demodulated signal. In the PSK regime the linewidth of modulation sidebands is defined by the stability of the external source and the modulation signal itself. With this it is possible to use modulation indices β ⩽ 1, while for the FSK scheme using STNOs 13 it was necessary to use large modulation indices β >> 1 to be able to distinguish after demodulation between the actual signal and the fluctuations translated from the carrier. The disadvantage of large modulation indices β >> 1 is that the FSK occu- pied bandwidth Foccup equals twice the peak frequency deviation ∆f of the frequency excursions Foccup = 2(β+1)fmod ≈ 2βfmod = 2∆f and is independent of the modulation frequency. It signif- icantly reduces the number of frequency separated channels and hence the performance. The pro- posed PSK technique provides the carrier with narrow linewidth which allows to use narrow-band modulation protocols with modulation indices starting from ≈ 0.1. The spectrum for the BPSK signal under Vmod = 4mV for 2f locking is shown in Fig. 4. The amplitude of the first modula- tion harmonic is 16dB lower than the carrier. There are theoretical calculations of the dependence between the modulation index and relative sideband amplitudes for square wave modulation 41. For the first relative sideband amplitude of −16dB the modulation index equals to β = 0.24rad which corresponds to one half of the full amplitude of phase shifts ∆Ψ|STNO/2 = 0.22rad. The good agreement between results from two different techniques confirms the correctness and the precision of the measurements. 14 Fig. 5 Time traces of the instantaneous phase and modulation signal in QPSK (a) and analog PM (b) regime. 2f locking regime. fmod = 10kHz. The results of Figs. 3 and 4 clearly demonstrate the BPSK scheme using STNOs where the phase follows the input signal, in the limits discussed above. Since the dependence of the phase detuning is a continuous function of frequency detuning (eq. 1), more phase states can be used to decode data, thus increasing the data transmission capacity and channel efficiency. Here we demonstrate 4-level QPSK and continuous analog PM. While for demonstration of BPSK the SNR can be low to distinguish between two phase states, for demonstration of QPSK and analog PM the SNR has to be increased. Therefore, a low modulation rate of 10kHz was chosen and a low pass numerical filter with cut-off frequency of 300kHz was applied to the instantaneous phase signal to filter out phase noise above 30th harmonic. The high number of harmonics allows phase modulation with a complex shape signal. The amplitude of the modulation signal Vmod was chosen to be 8mV to avoid phase slips on a millisecond timescale. It limits the maximum amplitude of the STNO phase shifts to ∆Ψ ≈ 0.7rad. In Fig. 5 (a) and (b) the QPSK modulation with four distinguishable levels and analog PM are shown correspondingly. The phase change in analog PM is continuous and close to linear. The technique, therefore, allows to transmit analog information 15 such as voice, analog sensors readings and etc. The frequency stability and the power of the PSK and PM signals generated by an injection-locked STNO are high enough to use conventional receivers such as FM- and TV-tuners. To demonstrate this, we have setup a benchtop transmitter - receiver system, where the transmitter uses the setup of Fig.1 and where the amplifier output is connected to an antenna and the modulation source is replaced by a microphone with an audio amplifier. At the receiver side the signal is captured by an antenna connected to a conventional software defined radio (SDR) receiver. The distance between the two antennae is 10m. More details can be found in the Supplementary. The SDR receiver is controlled by a PC program that displays the received signal as a frequency-time spectrogram to visualize the transmitted signals and produces an audible decoded signal. An example is shown in Fig. 4b. A real-time video can be found online42 with the voice transmission in the form of frequency-time spectrogram with an audible soundtrack. When there is no input to the microphone, only the carrier is seen. After 1s the microphone is switched on and the voice transmission starts, generating sidebands on the carrier that are clearly seen. In summary we have demonstrated the concept of digital phase shift keying and analog phase modulation in MTJ based STNO with vortex configuration. The maximum data rate of 4 Mbit/s was achieved for both 2f and f/2 synchronization regimes and found to be limited by the am- plitude relaxation rate. The phase shift is directly proportional to the modulation signal Vmod. The concept was extended to demonstrate voice transmission using analog modulation as well as quadrature phase shift keying (QPSK) by injecting a modulation signal with four distinct levels. The demonstration of PSK presented here has been done for injection locking at 2f and f/2 since 16 for injection locking at f the signal of the STNO and the external source cannot be distinguished. While injection locking at 2f limits the theoretical phase shift ∆Ψmax to π/2, the advantage of sub-harmonic locking is that theoretically the full range of phase shift ∆Ψmax = π can be used. Here we used the injection of current generated by an arbitrary waveform voltage generator as the modulating signal. As shown previously 8, this limits the maximum possible modulation rate to the amplitude relaxation frequency - Γp. For vortex devices Γp lies on the order of several MHz. Using a microstrip line to generate a modulation RF magnetic field one can improve the maximum possible modulation rate above 2MHz for vortex devices. However, vortex devices have been selected here merely for the demonstration, since they show perfect locking. For uniform in-plane devices, which have Γp in the range of 100-200MHz 8, FSK was demonstrated using current modulation with data transmission rates up to 400Mbit/s 15. Hence, in principle much higher modulation rates can be achieved with the proposed PSK technique for STNOs operating at higher frequencies. The proposed technique presented in this paper can be applied and is best suited for any type of nano-scale auto-oscillators where the phase noise is high due to nanoscale dimension and where it can be sufficiently improved with an external synchronization signal. As an outlook, we note that the use of many, either external or internal, RF sources for every channel in communication systems leads to consumption of area and complicates the transmitter design. As a development of the technique, we are going to exclude the external RF sources and use separately controlled PLL-stabilized STNOs 21 working at different frequency channels. Such STNO-PLLs can thus 17 be considered as a stable RF reference source with a stable reference phase. Injection locking of a second STNO to such a phase stabilized STNO-PLL will provide a route to implement phase modulation as a compact and effective communication scheme for integrated circuits(ICs). Methods Sample fabrication. The composition of the vortex MTJs used in our experiments is the follow- MgO/ 2.0 CoFe40B20/ 0.2 Ta/ 7 NiFe/ 10 Ta/ 30 CuN/ 7 Ru [thicknesses in nm]. The materials were sputter deposited and nanofabricated at INL using a Singulus Rotaris machine and ion beam and optical etching techniques. Electrical measurements were performed using a 50-Ohm matched nano-probe station. The sample was placed on top of a permanent magnet using a positioning stage to provide a field of 1 − 3kOe at a small out-of-plane angle of 1 − 5 degrees. While dif- ferent devices have been measured, with similar performances, results for two devices of 370 nm diameter with similar dynamical and static characteristics (RSTNO ≈ 40Ohm, TMR ≈ 150% and RA ≈ 4.5Ωμm2) are presented in the paper. Data post-processing. To better asses the dynamics of the instantaneous phase φ(t), we registered the time traces x(t) of the voltage output signal from which the phase fluctuations are extracted using the Hilbert transform 8,10,15,38,39: φ(t) = arctan(HT[x(t)] x(t) ) (3) 18 where HT is the Hilbert transform. The data shown in Fig. 2 (c,d) corresponds to the instantaneous phase in relation to the locking frequency for injection locked and partially locked states: δφ(t) = φ(t) − 2πfsourcet/N (4) and to the phase in relation to the average STNO frequency for unlocked free-running state: δφ(t) = φ(t) − 2πfSTNOt (5) The analysis of the phase noise figure was done by taking the power spectral density of the instan- taneous phase fluctuations δφ(t) (1,1): PSDδφ = FFT 2(δφ(t)) (6) The Arnold tongue was assembled from data of state diagrams at different Psource. From each state diagram a line at fsource was taken to assemble the Arnold tongue contour plot, where the y-axis is Psource, color-axis is PSTNO. The accuracy of this method is limited by the free run- ning linewidth. It also doesn’t distinguish between general and complete synchronization regimes. However, it is accurate enough to determine the center of the locking range and the approximate maximum amplitude of the modulation signal Vmod = ImodR which has to be applied to achieve the maximum phase detuning ∆Ψmax. For experiments with PM and PSK the value of Psource was chosen in the linear part of the Arnold tongue to avoid nonlinear effects in frequency and phase detuning. 1. Yang, S.-H. Wireless Sensor Networks: Principles, Design and Applications (Springer Pub- lishing Company, Incorporated, 2013). 19 2. Uckelmann, D., Harrison, M. & Michahelles, F. Architecting the internet of things (Springer Science & Business Media, 2011). 3. Dumas, R. K. et al. Recent advances in nanocontact spin-torque oscillators. IEEE transactions on magnetics 50, 1–7 (2014). 4. Chen, T. et al. Spin-torque and spin-hall nano-oscillators. Proceedings of the IEEE 104, 5. H. S. Choi, S. Y. Kang, S. J. Cho, I.-Y. Oh, M. Shin, H. Park, C. Jang, B.-C. Min, S.-I. Kim, S.-Y. Park et al. Sci. Rep. 4, 5486 (2014). 6. Oh, I., Park, S., Kang, D. & Park, C. S. Wireless spintronics modulation with a spin torque nano-oscillator (stno) array. IEEE Microwave and Wireless Components Letters 24, 502–504 7. Sharma, R. et al. Modulation rate study in a spin-torque oscillator-based wireless communi- cation system. IEEE Transactions on Magnetics 51, 1–4 (2015). 8. Purbawati, A., Garcia-Sanchez, F., Buda-Prejbeanu, L. & Ebels, U. Enhanced modulation rates via field modulation in spin torque nano-oscillators. Applied Physics Letters 108, 122402 9. J. C. Slonczewski. Magn. Magn. Mater. 159, L1L7 (1996). 10. R. Lebrun et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 017201 (2015). 20 11. Pufall, M. R., Rippard, W. H., Kaka, S., Silva, T. J. & Russek, S. E. Frequency modulation of spin-transfer oscillators. Applied Physics Letters 86, 082506 (2005). URL https://doi. org/10.1063/1.1875762. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1875762. 12. Muduli, P. K. et al. Nonlinear frequency and amplitude modulation of a nanocontact-based spin-torque oscillator. Phys. Rev. B 81, 140408 (2010). URL https://link.aps.org/ doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.81.140408. 13. Manfrini, M. et al. Frequency shift keying in vortex-based spin torque oscillators. Journal of Applied Physics 109, 083940 (2011). 14. Sharma, R. et al. A high-speed single sideband generator using a magnetic tunnel junction spin torque nano-oscillator. Scientific reports 7, 13422 (2017). 15. A. Ruiz-Calaforra, et al. Applied Physics Letters 111, 082401 (2017). 16. Zahedinejad, M. et al. Current modulation of nanoconstriction spin-hall nano-oscillators. IEEE Magnetics Letters 8, 1–4 (2017). 17. Haykin, S. Digital Communications (John Wiley & Sons, Toronto, Canada, 1988). 18. Anderson, J. B., Aulin, T. & Sundberg, C.-E. Digital phase modulation (Springer Science & Business Media, 2013). 19. J. Tewari, H. M. Singh. J. Inn. Res. in Comp. and Comm. Eng. 4, 13425–13431 (2016). 20. Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) specifications. IEEE Std. 802.11g-2003 (2003). 21 21. M. Kreiig et al. IEEE 60th International Midwest Symposium on Circuits and Systems (MWS- CAS) 0, 910–913 (2009). 22. S. Tamaru, et al. Applied Physics Express 5, 053005 (2016). 23. Adler, R. A study of locking phenomena in oscillators. Proceedings of the IRE 34, 351–357 24. S. I. Kiselev, J. C. Sankey, I. N. Krivorotov, N. C. Emley, R. J. Schoelkopf, R. A. Buhrman, and D. C. Ralph. Nature 425, 380 (2003). 25. J. Grollier, V. Cros, and A. Fert. Phys. Rev. B 73, 060409 (2006). 26. V. Tiberkevich, A. Slavin, E. Bankowski, and G. Gerhart. Appl. Phys. Lett. 95, 262505 (2009). 27. Demidov, V. et al. Synchronization of spin hall nano-oscillators to external microwave signals. Nature communications 5, 3179 (2014). 28. M. Tortarolo et al. Scientific Reports 8, 1728 (2018). 29. Y. Zhou, et al. Journal of Applied Physics. 101, 09A510 (2007). 30. W. Rippard, et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 067203 (2005). 31. M. Rosenblum, J. K. C. S., A. Pikovsky & Tass, P. A. Phase synchronization: From theory to data analysis. 279–321 (Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2001). 32. A. N. Slavin and V. Tiberkevich. Trans. Magn. 45, 1875 (2009). 22 33. Balanov, A., Janson, N., Postnov, D. & Sosnovtseva, O. Synchronization: From Simple to Complex (Springer, 2009). 34. Pikovsky, A., Rosenblum, M. & Kurths, J. Synchronization : a universal concept in nonlinear sciences (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2001). 35. Osipov, G. V., Kurths, J. & Zhou, C. Synchronization in oscillatory networks (Springer Science & Business Media, 2007). 36. Razavi, B. A study of injection locking and pulling in oscillators. IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits 39, 1415–1424 (2004). 37. S. Urazhdin, P. Tabor, V. Tiberkevich and A. Slavin. Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 104101 (2010). 38. M. Quinsat, F. Garcia-Sanchez, A. S. Jenkins, A. Zeltser, J. A. Katine, A. N. Slavin, L. D. Buda-Prejbeanu, B. Dieny, M.-C. Cyrille, and U. Ebels. Applied Physics Letters 105, 152401 39. Grimaldi, E. et al. Response to noise of a vortex based spin transfer nano-oscillator. Phys. Rev. URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB. 40. J.-V. Kim, V. Tiberkevich, et A. N. Slavin. Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 017207 (2016). 41. Stocklin, F. Relative sideband amplitudes versus modulation index for common functions using frequency and phase modulation. Tech. Rep., Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, USA (1973). An optional note. 23 42. Video Demonstration of Voice Transmission using PM. http://www.spintec.fr/.