1 Reinforced room temperature spin filtering in chiral paramagnetic metallopeptides Ramón Torres-Cavanillas1, Garin Escorcia-Ariza1, Isaac Brotons-Alcázar1, Roger Sanchís-Gual1, Prakash Chandra Mondal1, Lorena E. Rosaleny1, Silvia Giménez-Santamarina1, Michele Sessolo1, Marta Galbiati1, Sergio Tatay1, Alejandro Gaita-Ariño1*, Alicia Forment-Aliaga1*, Salvador Cardona-Serra1* 1ICMol. Universitat de València. C/ Catedrático José Beltrán no 2, 46980 Paterna, Valencia, España. ABSTRACT: Chiral-induced spin selectivity (CISS), whereby helical molecules polarize the spin of electrical current, is an intriguing effect with potential applications in nanospintronics. In this nascent field, the study of paramagnetic chiral molecules, which could introduce another degree of freedom in the control of the spin transport, remains so far unexplored. To address this challenge, herein, we propose the use of self-assembled monolayers of helical lanthanide-binding peptides. In order to elucidate the effect of the paramagnetic nuclei, monolayers of the peptide coordinating paramagnetic or diamagnetic ions are prepared. By means of spin- dependent electrochemistry, CISS effect is demonstrated by cyclic voltammetry and impedance measurements for both samples. Additionally, an implementation of the standard liquid-metal drop electron transport setup has been carried out, demonstrating their suitability for solid-state devices. Remarkably, the inclusion of a paramagnetic center in the peptide increases the spin polarization as independently proved by different techniques. These findings permit the inclusion of magnetic biomolecules in the CISS field, paving the way to their implementation in a new generation of spintronic nanodevices. The discovery of the giant and tunnel magnetoresistance gave rise to the field of spintronics:1,2 the use of the electronic spin in addition to the electronic charge to transport and process information. Typically, inorganic materials had been used as active elements of such devices. However, the study of spin-related phenomena in molecular systems have garnered considerable attention in the last years, allowing the extension from inorganic into molecular spintronics. Since then, researchers have started to profit from the rich diversity of molecules that chemistry and nature can provide, to combine and improve the functional components of a spintronic device. Molecular Spintronics is young but prolific, and recent experimental advances 3 - 5 have been supported by the theoretical evaluation of various molecular families 6, 7, and DNA strands8. In this scenario, chiral molecules are playing a singular role in the field since Naaman and others showed that the electronic transport along chiral diamagnetic molecules produces a net spin polarization of the current, the so-called Chiral Induced Spin Selectivity (CISS)9, and thus can behave as a molecular-based spin filter. The origin of this phenomenon has been deeply studied by theoretical calculations, occasionally combined with experiments 10 - 16 and it has been recently proposed to be of relevance in different issues like the role of spin in electron transfer through bio-systems17, the building of spintronic logic devices based on organic ferromagnets at room temperature18 or the fabrication of a spintronic magnetic memory which, including a ferromagnetic platelet, presents memristor-like behavior19. Since its discovery, the CISS effect has been studied, both in single molecules20 and in thin layers of a broad spectrum of chiral molecular systems, ranging from Langmuir-Blodgett films of L- or D- stearoyl lysine21 to self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) of polyalanine 22 , double-strand DNA 23 , bacteriorhodopsin24,25 and helicene molecules26. On the other hand, the possibility to induce room temperature spin-dependent transport has also been probed through molecules with a single paramagnetic ion27, and the specific electronic configuration of the metal centers has turned out to be decisive for the spin-polarized current 28 . However, so far, the combination of chirality and paramagnetism in molecular spin filters has remained elusive. In this context, we identified the family of helical metallopeptides known as Lanthanide Binding Tags (LBTs) as a promising system for CISS-based biospintronics. LBTs were originally designed by Imperiali et al. to achieve high affinity for lanthanoid ions,29-32 and have been known to autonomously and robustly fold into a partially helical structure (310 helix), where one of the atoms in the coordination sphere directly coordinates the lanthanoid ion (Ln3+) through a carbonyl group belonging to a peptide bond 33. Since the current in peptides has been known to flow through the backbone chain34, some reciprocal influence between the spin polarization of the current along the helical backbone and the spin orientation of the lanthanoid ion could be expected. 2 Fig. 1 LBTC metallopeptide and spin filtering. a Side view of MLBTC in ribbon representation (based on a structure with PDB ID:1TJB); arrows show the right-handed helicity. The aminoacids coordinating the metal ion are tagged (Asp1, Asn3, Asp5, Trp7, Glu12, Glu14), including those coordinating through different lateral residues and the Trp containing the coordinating carbonyl oxygen. b and c Schemes of spin-dependent transport setups used in this work emphasizing the magnetization of the Ni layer under an external magnetic field (350 mT) and its influence on the empty and occupied density of states, as well as the expected CISS effect of the right- handed helical MLBTC SAM. b Three-electrode electrochemical cell: MLBTC SAM on (Ni/Au) as working electrode (WE), Ag/AgCl redox probe. c Home-made liquid-metal EGaIn transport system. Recently, our group has shown that they can be used as spin tags to open a fruitful playground in the field of molecular spin qubits 35 , thanks to the ease of preparing new structures with optimized properties by means of standard techniques of molecular biology. Furthermore, LBTs have also been used to obtain insight into the real-time interaction between the dynamics of spin energy levels and internal molecular motions 36. Here, we prove the spin polarization effect in LBT SAMs and demonstrate a non-innocent role of the paramagnetic center. By means of spin dependent electrochemistry37, spin dependent local transport in solid state devices using liquid-metal drop contacts, and DFT transport calculations we show the potential of LBT SAMs for spin filtering beyond the CISS effect. Results and discussion Surface assembling of metalloLBTC units For our experiments, we selected a LBT sequence 33 modified with an additional cysteine (LBTC, see Fig. 1a) as the C-terminal position to ensure a strong Metal-S interaction between the biomolecule and a metallic surface like Au or Ni which is an essential requirement for the performance of spin-dependent transport measurements. We prepared the peptide and metallopeptide-based SAMs by overnight immersion in aqueous buffered LBTC or LBTC with Tb3+ (TbLBTC) solutions and a reducing agent (tris(2- carboxyethyl)phosphine) to avoid thiol oxidation during the grafting process (see SI section S1). Anchoring of the molecules on the surface was confirmed by the identification of the LBTC molecular weight in the fragments extracted in time- of-flight mass spectrometry (see SI section S3), and by the chemical composition of the functionalized surfaces with X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy which shows the presence of terbium (see SI section S4). Moreover, quartz crystal microbalance measurements suggested near complete molecular coverage (see SI section S6) and atomic force microscopy (see SI section S2) gave us insight into their homogeneous topography. The persistence of the lanthanide ion bound to the LBTC peptide on the surface was experimentally supported by its luminescence emission (see SI section S1, Fig. S1.2). The stability of the three-dimensional folding is consistent with our estimation of the SAM thickness (see SI section S7). More importanly, previous works have demonstrated by using the SHAPE program35 and Q values38 the high similarity between different reported crystal structures as well as solution structures of several LnLBT metallopeptides.38 It is well established now that the folding of LBT peptides is very robust and essentially indistinguishable in solution or in solid state. This means no relevant change in helicity or metal coordination is expected in our SAMs regardless of the coordination atom. Instead, a narrow distribution of shapes is expected for the peptides at room temperature due to thermal effects.36 3 Fig. 2 Magnetic field-dependent electrochemistry. a-c Spin-dependent cyclic voltammograms on a SAM of TbLBTC on Ni/Au (a) and YLBTC on Ni/Au (b), and on the bare Ni/Au working electrode (c). Voltammograms were recorded at 20 mV/s under an external magnetic field pointing “up” (solid red line) or “down” (solid blue line); 4 cycles were averaged. d-f Electrochemical impedance external magnetic field pointing “up” (red circles) or “down” (blue squares). e The equivalent circuit employed for the EIS fit . Spin-dependent electrochemistry Once the possibility of assembling metalloLBTC (MLBTC) complexes onto metallic surfaces was demonstrated, their spin filtering properties were investigated by spin-dependent electrochemical measurements. For these experiments, K4Fe(CN)6/K3Fe(CN)6 was used as a redox active external probe due to the non-electroactive nature of the SAM. As expected, scan rate dependence measurements confirmed that this redox reaction is limited by a diffusion process 39 (see SI section S8). Next, the integration of a permanent magnet in the electrochemical setup permitted to perform spin- dependent cyclic voltammetry, which is a well- established technique that is useful to measure the spin-selective electron conduction (as shown in Fig. 1b) 37 between the measured K4Fe(CN)6/K3Fe(CN)6 voltammograms when MLBTC-modified (Fig. 2a-b) or a bare ferromagnetic Ni/Au electrodes (200 nm Ni protected with 5 nm Au) were used (Fig. 2c). The results showed that the current in the case of the bare Ni/Au working electrode (WE) was quasi- independent of the orientation of the magnet placed underneath, with the differences for each magnetic field direction being comparable with those observed for two consecutive voltammetry scans (Fig. 2c). However, when the MLBTC-modified WE was used, the current density was appreciably higher with the external magnet pointing “down” compared to when it was pointing “up”. Furthermore, a decrease in the current and an anodic and catodic shift in the oxidation and reduction potential of the Ni/Au/MLBTC system were observed (Fig. 2a-b). This kind of changes in the voltammetric cycles are expected due to the presence of a less conductive layer between the electrochemical probe and the metal in the WE. We define the spin polarization (SP) as: !" = !!""!#$%& !!"#!#$%& % 100 4 , where Jup, and Jdown stand for current density (Ji = Ii/Area) at specific potential when the Ni layer is magnetized “up”, and “down”, respectively. For the Ni/ Au/ TbLBTC, SP = -3.3 (± 0.2)% measured at +460 mV, and -1.9 (± 0.2)% at -70 mV (vs. Ag/AgCl) with scan rate of 20 mV·s-1 were obtained. Moreover, the anodic and catodic peak shifts -28 mV and -20 mV, respectively. The negative sign means that electrons are preferentially transported with their spin orientation antiparallel to the direction of their movement40. These results are consistent with the expected effect of the right-handed helicity of the molecule in our experimental setup (Fig 1b) 40 . The external Nd magnet below the TbLBTC modified substrate governs the orientation of the magnetization of the Ni layer, which in turn determines the energy of the spin- up vs. the spin-down bands in the Au layer near the Fermi level. When the external magnet is pointing up, the Ni valence band will be polarized spin up, and the Ni conduction band will be polarized spin down, and vice-versa. Independently of the magnet direction, right-handed helices always tend to spin-polarize moving electrons (current) in the direction antiparallel to the direction of their movement. For current flowing upwards through our right-handed SAM, this means the majority current will be spin down; here we represent this as a larger spin-down density of states at the Au-SAM interface. For our experiments, this implies that, with the magnet pointing down, the system is expected to conduct better, whether this means spin down electrons flowing upwards (extracted from the Ni valence band) or spin up electrons flowing downwards (injected into the Ni conduction band). Interestingly, when the diamagnetic Y3+ center replaces the paramagnetic Tb3+, SP effect was slightly decreased, displaying SP of -0.6 (± 0.2)% measured at Epc = +515 mV, and -1.9 (± 0.2)% at Epa = -140 mV (vs. Ag/AgCl). Additionally, the anodic and catodic shift of the oxidation and reduction potential also decreases respect its paramagnetic counterpart, -21 and -11 mV respectively (Fig 2a-b). This experimental observation suggested an increase in the filtering of the SAM, product of the magnetic behaviour of the metallic center. Nevertheless, due to the high voltages applied to the sample during the measurements, modification in the SAM packing can occur, complicating the quantitative comparation of the SP between samples. Therefore, to confirm the reliability of this experimental observation, Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were carried out. EIS is a powerful technique to further investigate and characterize electrochemical processes. While typical direct current voltammetry requires the application of high voltage, up to 0.5 V, potentially affecting the packing of the SAM, lower voltages are applied in EIS (voltage amplitude of 0.01V). Therefore, the structural rearrangements produced by the flow of current are minimized. For the evaluation of electron-transfer properties under the influence of an external magnetic field pointing either “up” or “down”, an AC potential of 10 mV going from 105 to 100 Hz was applied at the Open Circuit Potential. Fig. 2d and e displays the Nyquist plot of the response of the corresponding electrochemical systems. The equivalent circuit used to fit the data is shown in Fig. 2g. Constant phase element (CPE), which is a non-ideal capacitance, is introduced to provide a good match with the experimental data because of the possible surface roughness, physical non-uniformity and/or the non- uniform distribution of the electroactive sites. The equivalent circuit is composed by a resistance coming from the ionic transport through the solution (Rs) connected in series with a first parallel branch (Rint and Cint) corresponding to the electron that has to move through the current collectors and the different layers of the WE. These three elements appear in the high-frequency region. On the other hand, the low- frequency region is associated with a second parallel branch corresponding to the charge transfer and its interface capacitance (RCT and CPEdl) taking place between the SAM and the electrolyte. As it can be noticed, at high frequencies, the first semicircles remain unaltered after modifying the magnetic field sense. Contrary to that, the second semicircles, that involve the redox process of K4Fe(CN)6/K3Fe(CN)6, are clearly affected. With the external magnet pointing “down”, these semicircles are reduced. In this direction, the more depressed the semicircle in the Nyquist plot, the lower the charge transfer resistance. Thus, a reduction of the resistance is observed by changing an external magnet from “up” to “down”. A similar trend was observed starting in “down” position and changing to “up” (see Fig. S8.3). Remarkably, it was found a SP of -3.6 (± 0.2) % for the TbLBTC and -2.4 (± 0.2) % for the YLBTC. This strongly points out to an active role of the metallic center in the spin selectivity. A blank measurement (i.e. without peptide and metal) was also carried out to ascertain the spin polarization effect. In Fig. 2f it can be seen that the peptide absence facilitates the charge transfer leading to an important decrease of RCT (around 4 orders of magnitude). Importantly, both semicircles exhibit almost no variation after altering the magnetic field position. Indeed, these small differences are reliably related to experimental error. 5 Fig. 3 Magnetic field-dependent liquid-metal transport experiments measured for a C18S b Ala8 c YLBTC d TbLBTC. Current density histograms measured at ±0.15V (top) and averaged current density vs. voltage curves (middle) measured under an external magnetic field pointing “up” (red) or “down” (blue). SP polarization as a function of the bias voltage calculated from the measured averaged current density (bottom). In all cases, the sign criterion is such that negative SP means the device is more conductive with the magnetic field pointing down Liquid metal EGaIn transport measurements Once the spin selectivity was demonstrated, to advance towards a setup that is closer to a practical solid-state device permitting direct local spin- transport measurements, we investigated magnetic field dependent charge-transport through MLBTC with liquid-metal contacts using the Gallium Indium Eutectic alloy (EGaIn) as liquid-metal contacts (Fig. 1c). Liquid-metal drop local transport in solid state devices has been widely used in electronic current transport measurements through organic layers41 , and here we have extended it to CISS measurements by including an additional local magnetic field. Before performing any spin-dependent measurement, to gain local information on the electron transport through MLBTC SAMs, we performed charge- transport studies using Au/TbBTC/Ga2O3/EGaIn liquid contact junctions. For statistics, a total of 30 different junctions with areas ranging from ∼3200 to ∼12000 μm2 were measured with about 16 I-V scans (between −0.5 and 0.5 V) collected on each one. Compared to the pristine samples (without SAM), in the case of the TbBTC SAM the vast majority of the junctions (>90%) showed lower current densities with log (|J/A·cm-2|) = ~ -1, roughly three orders of magnitude lower than the pristine sample that displayed log (|J/A·cm-2 |) = ~ 2, both measured at 0.15V (Fig. S9.1a). To estimate the energy offset (eo) between EF (Fermi energy) and the energy of the nearest conduction orbital, eo = |E -EF|, we used a single-level model with Lorentzian transmission (Newns–Anderson model)42. Fitting of the I–V curves up to ±500 mV yielded eo = 0.68 ± 0.18 eV on average (a representative I–V curve and its fit is shown in Fig. S9.1b). This value is close to that measured using transition voltage spectroscopy (TVS). In order to measure the transition voltage (Vt), we collected additional I-V scans up to ±1 V. A Fowler-Nordheim plot reveals an average value Vt = 0.82 ± 0.10 V and eo = 0.71 eV (SI Fig. S9.1c). This information combined with the change in the absolute value of the electrode work function (Φ) due to the adsorbed TbLBTC SAM, ΦSAM = 4.62 eV (measured through a combination of Kelvin probe and ambient pressure photoemission spectroscopy, see SI section S10), led to the energy level alignment scheme of Au/TbLBTC//Ga2O3/EGaIn junction proposed in Fig. S9.2. In order to exploit the spin filtering effect in a solid state device, we extended the experimental setup with the addition of a permanent magnet (350 mT) in close proximity to the sample (with an additional ferromagnetic Ni layer). To validate our experimental setup, we prepared and measured two analogous devices based on SAMs of different molecules, including chiral and non-chiral SAMs. The non-chiral molecule was octadecanethiol (C18S) and the chiral reference was the right-handed HS−CH2−CH2−NHCO(Ala-AiB) 8−NH2 (Ala8) 43 , where Ala = Alanine and AiB = 2- aminoisobutyric acid. We measured from 6 to 22 consecutive I-V curves for a given drop size. From these data, we calculated the current density J vs. applied voltage V. Once up to 6 non short-circuited I-V curves were collected, the sample was displaced laterally with an XYZ-stage, where a new EGaIn drop was produced, and the characterization was repeated all over again. To improve the significance level, we repeated this process at least 10 times on randomly selected different parts of the film surface and collected at least 60 I-V curves for each sample. From these data, we calculated the current density J vs. applied voltage V for magnet “up” and “down” orientations. Fig. 3 shows current density histograms measured at ±0.2 V for opposing directions of the external magnet. 6 In the case of the non-chiral C18S SAM, no difference in the current density histograms for opposing directions of the external magnet were observed (Fig. 3a), in contrast to Ala8 case (Fig. 3b). Therefore, negative SP was only observed for helical molecules (SP » 2 ± 2% for C18S, SP » -40 ± 15 % for Ala8). Once the feasibility of the set up was proved, solid state measurements of the TbLBTC and YLBTC were carried out. It must be noticed that, similarly to Ala8 SAMs, MLBTC SAMs chirality is expected to be right-handed, and thus to provide a negative SP.40 As was already anticipated by the electrochemistry measurements, the SP differs according the metallic center present in the SAM. In both cases negative SP are recorded, however the filtering effect on the spin selectivity displayed by the paramagnetic SAM is considerably larger than the one displayed by its diamagnetic analogue (SP » -50 ± 20 % for YLBTC and SP » -70 ± 10 % for TbLBTC, Fig. 3). Noticeably, SP measured liquid metal contacts are of the same sign but one order of magnitude larger compared with those obtained by electrochemistry methods. We attribute this fact to the more local nature of this technique. The unavoidable presence of pin-holes in the SAM should result in a supply of unpolarized electrons that will contribute to the total measured current, and in turn this will account for a reduction of the measured SP. In electrochemical measurements, due to the larger contact surface, which is about 1500 times the contact area generated with EGaIn drops, this effect is maximized 44 . While, in the case of electrochemical measurements the presence of TbLBTC SAMs results in a moderate decrease of J compared to the pristine substrate, a three order of magnitude decrease is measured in the case of liquid metals. Influence of the paramagnetic Ln3+ on transport properties. We now aim at estimating the upper limit of the spin filtering effect created by a lanthanide ion (which is here assumed to be fully polarized) on the current, initially neglecting the effect of the CISS. As a first step, we carried out structural relaxation calculations using the software SIESTA 45. After this step, we employed a non-equilibrium Green function approach, using the code SMEAGOL46 to obtain the transport properties of the junction (see SI section S11 for details). We used the calculated Density of States (DOS) to obtain the final spin-dependent transmission spectra normalized to the Fermi energy (EF), as shown in Fig. 4b. We found a small transmission peak at E- EF = -0.3 eV, which, when integrating between -0.5 eV and +0.5 eV, results in a spin filtering of about SP = - 70% assuming a complete polarization of the lanthanide ion, i.e. at very high magnetic fields or very low temperatures. The position of the peak is at a smaller voltage compared with the experimentally estimated |E-EF| = 0.7 eV but still comparable with the experimentally proposed energy level alignment scheme (Fig. S9.2). We then studied the Local Density of States at E-EF = -0.3 eV, and confirmed that the nearest transmission orbital is indeed extended all over the peptide backbone (see Fig. S11.2). It means that this path strongly overlaps with the f magnetic orbitals of the lanthanide ion. In other words, the magnetic orbitals of the lanthanoid participate in the singly occupied molecular orbital (SOMO) transmission peak that appears at moderate voltages. Due to this uncommon feature, the effective exchange coupling is expected to be anomalously large. In fact, it is deemed to be within the typical range for lanthanide ions directly coordinated to organic radicals, that corresponds to a magnetic exchange coupling Jex = 1–25cm−1 47-50. In this particular case, we estimated this level splitting with additional DFT calculations, (see SI section S12) obtaining differences between the ferro- and antiferromagnetic states of the order of ~5 cm −1. This calculated upper limit of SP = 70% to the effect of the Tb is an obvious overestimation in this case, considering it would require the Tb3+ ion to be fully polarized. In the opposite extreme, the effect derived from a magnetic polarization in thermal equilibrium is estimated to have a negligible effect (SP = 51%, see details in SI section S12). However, this is expected to be an underestimation. We need to recall that, as long as current is circulating, the system is out of equilibrium. In particular, since this current is spin polarized by the CISS effect, the magnetization of the Tb3+ ion will also be out of equilibrium. The actual result will thus lie between the two extreme scenarios, coinciding with the experimental observation of a modest, but evident, effect of the lanthanoid ion reinforcing the spin polarization, which matches our experimental observation. Conclusions Spin filtering enhancement induced by the encapsulated paramagnetic ion has been demonstrated in lanthanide binding peptides. The active role of the paramagnetic ion has been unambiguously confirmed by three independent experimental approaches: cyclic voltammetry, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and local transport in solid state devices using liquid-metal drop contacts. In the best conditions, a spin polarization SP = -70 ± 10 % was achieved with the contribution of complexed Tb3+ ions. The interaction between paramagnetism and chirality in the same molecule is intriguing, since they are two fundamentally different mechanisms for spin filtering. Spin-dependent transport calculations have been performed to shed some light into the experimentally observed behavior, and confirmed an interaction between the magnetic polarizations of the current and the lanthanide ion. 7 Fig. 4 Calculated spin filtering effect due to the paramagnetic lanthanide a Structure of the total region (including the electrodes) that has been used as model for the calculation. Note that the system has periodic boundary conditions in x-y metal plane while no boundary is considered in the transport z direction where the bulk Au electronic structure is simulated by the non equilibrium Green’s function method (depicted as transparent gold layers in the scheme). b Calculated Density of States (light colors) and normalized transmission down reference is the polarization direction of the f electrons in the lanthanide. A sharp spin-down conduction peak near the Fermi level is marked with a dashed line as the main conducting peak at low gate voltages. Methods SAM preparation. The metallopeptide-based SAMs are prepared following a similar strategy from the typical growth in solution method used for alkanethiol on gold. Substrates made of thermally evaporated metal on a Si/SiO2 wafer are immersed during 24 h in a 0.1 mM buffered solution of LBTC in the presence of an excess of Tb3+. This procedure ensures formation of a monolayer with high surface coverage as observed experimentally (Supplementary Information sections S1-S5 including luminescence studies, AFM, MALDI-TOF, XPS, and QCM). Spin-dependent cyclic voltammograms and Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. LBTC grafted on 5 nm Au overlayered onto a 200 nm Ni (Ni/Au) is used as working electrode, Pt, and Ag/AgCl are used as counter and reference electrodes, respectively. Freshly prepared and deoxygenated 5 mM Fe2+/Fe3+ solution in HEPES buffer are used as the redox mediator, and oxidation, reduction currents were monitored under an external magnetic field of 0.35 T applied underneath the TbLBTC modified ferromagnetic Ni. The same set up was used for EIS, but using Gamry 1000E and Gamry 5000E potentiostat/galvanostat controlled by Gamry software. An AC voltage of 10 mV in the frequency range of 100–105 Hz at the OCP was applied. EIS data were analyzed and fitted by means of Gamry Echem Analyst v. 7.07 software. EGaIn measurements. Spin-dependence by EGaIn method. LBTC grafted on 5 nm Au overlayered onto a 200 nm Ni (Ni/Au) is used as the bottom electrode and EGaIn drop as the top contact. 6 junctions were measured with 16 I-V curves between −0.2 and 0.2 V for a magnetic field applied of 0.35 T and -0.35 T by a permanent magnet placed under the metallic surface (see details in S6). Electron transport calculations. First-principles calculations are performed using the SMEAGOL code that interfaces the non-equilibrium Green’s function approach (NEGF) to electron transport with density functional theory (DFT). In our simulations, the transport junction is constructed by placing the polypeptide between two Au (111)-oriented surfaces. The exchange-correlation potential is described by the GGA (PBE) functional. The Au-valence electrons are represented over a numerical s-only single-ζ basis set that has been previously demonstrated to offer a good description of the energy region around the Fermi level. In contrast, for the other atoms we use a full-valence double-ζ basis set. Finally, the spin-dependent current flowing through the junction is calculated from Landauer-Büttiker formula. Data availability. The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author on request. Author Contributions. R.T.-C., A.F.-A. and L.R. prepared and characterized the SAMs. M.S. and M. G. did the spectroscopic characterization of the SAMs. S.G.-S. and S. C.-S. performed the theoretical calculations. S.T. and G. E.-A. performed the EGaIn experiments, P.C.M., I.B.- A. and R.S.-G. performed the electrochemical studies. S.C.-S., A.G.-A. and A.F.-A. conceived the work and coordinated the writing of the paper. Acknowledgements The research reported here was supported by the Spanish MINECO (Grants MAT2017-89528 and CTQ2017-89993, and Excellence Unit María de Maeztu MDM-2015-0538), the European Union (ERC-CoG DECRESIM 647301, FATMOLS and COST-MOLSPIN-CA15128 Molecular Spintronics Project), the Generalitat Valenciana (Prometeo Program of Excellence) and the Universitat de València (PRECOMP14-202646). A.G.-A. and M. S. thank the Spanish MINECO for the Ramón y Cajal Fellowship. S. T. thanks the Spanish MINECO for the Ramón y Cajal Fellowship (RYC- 2016-19817). S.C.-S. and M. G. thank the Spanish MINECO for a ‘Juan de la Cierva-Incorporación’ grant. P.C.M. thanks European Union for Marie-Curie Post-doctoral Fellowship (H2020-MSCA-2015-706238). We thank Fernando Coloma (SSTTI Universidad de Alicante) for the XPS measurements and Angel López for the ellipsometry measurements (ICMol – UVEG). The MALDI-TOF analysis was carried out in the SCSIE Universitat de València Proteomics Unit, a member of ISCIII Proteo-RedProteomics Platform by O. Antúnez and L. Valero. 8