Submitted to [Journal of Applied Physics] (final update: 15-May-2019) Page 1 / 23 Hybrid-functional and quasi-particle calculations of band structures of Mg2Si, Mg2Ge, and Mg2Sn Byungki Ryu,1,a) Sungjin Park,1 Eun-Ae Choi,2 Johannes de Boor,3 Pawel Ziolkowski,3 Jaywan Chung,1 and SuDong Park1 1Energy Conversion Research Center, Electrical Materials Research Division, Korea Electrotechnology Research Institute (KERI), Changwon 51543, Republic of Korea 2Computational Materials Department, Materials Processing Innovation Research Division, Korea Institute of Materials Science (KIMS), Changwon 51508, Republic of Korea 3 German Aerospace Center (DLR) - Institute of Materials Research, Cologne 51147, Germany We perform hybrid functional and quasi-particle band structure calculations with spin–orbit interaction to investigate the band structures of Mg2Si, Mg2Ge, and Mg2Sn. For all Mg2X materials, where X = Si, Ge, and Sn, the characteristics of band edge states, i.e., band and valley degeneracies, and orbital characters, are found to be conserved, independent of the computational schemes such as density functional generalized gradient approximation, hybrid functionals, or quasi-particle calculations. However, the magnitude of the calculated band gap varies significantly with the computational schemes. Within density-functional calculations, the one-particle band gaps of Mg2Si, Mg2Ge, and Mg2Sn are 0.191, 0.090, and -0.346 eV, respectively, and thus severely underestimated compared to the experimental gaps, due to the band gap error in the density functional theory and the significant relativistic effect on the low-energy band structures. By employing hybrid-functional calculations with a 35% fraction of the exact Hartree–Fock exchange energy (HSE-35%), we overcame the negative band gap issue in Mg2Sn. Finally, in quasi-particle calculations on top of the HSE-35% Hamiltonians, we obtained band gaps of 0.835, 0.759, and 0.244 eV for Mg2Si, Mg2Ge, and Mg2Sn, respectively, consistent with the experimental band gaps of 0.77, 0.74, and 0.36 eV, respectively. a) Corresponding author: byungkiryu@keri.re.kr. Submitted to [Journal of Applied Physics] (final update: 15-May-2019) Page 2 / 23 I. INTRODUCTION Thermoelectric technology enables eco-friendly energy harvesting by converting unused or waste heat into electricity . For the fast industrialization of thermoelectric technology, highly efficient materials and modules are demanded strongly. As thermoelectric efficiency can be approximately determined by the dimensionless thermoelectric figures of merit ZT , high ZT materials have been explored in which ZT is expressed as ZT = (α2σ/κ)T, where α, σ, κ, and T are the Seebeck coefficient, electrical conductivity, thermal conductivity, and absolute temperature, respectively. From the relation between electrical and thermal transport and ZT, a large power factor (PF) α2σ and a low thermal conductivity κ are important to obtain a high performance thermoelectric system . Several material strategies have been developed to increase the PF: Fermi-level tuning , band convergence for charge transport , formation of resonant states , and energy filtering of charge carriers . To decrease the thermal conductivity by phonon–alloy scattering in solid solutions , intrinsic and extrinsic nanosized inclusions or precipitations , nanostructuring due to smaller grain sizes , and intrinsically strong anharmonic phonon scattering have been introduced. Mg-based binary silicides, i.e., Mg2X (X = Si, Ge, Sn) compounds and their alloys are eco-friendly thermoelectric materials, as they consist of nontoxic and earth- abundant materials, unlike tellurides or other heavy-element-based compounds. Mg- based silicides crystallize in the antifluorite structure with a chemical formula of Mg2Si . The Si atoms form an fcc sublattice with lattice parameter a, while the Mg atoms form a simple cubic sublattice with lattice parameter a/2. By mixing Mg2Si with Mg2Ge or Mg2Sn, Mg2Si-based alloys can exhibit a relatively high n-type ZT exceeding 1 at a temperature from Submitted to [Journal of Applied Physics] (final update: 15-May-2019) Page 3 / 23 600 to 800 K , with a high power factor and low thermal conductivity, compared to the binary Mg2Si . Mg2X-based alloys exhibit low thermal conductivity, owing to their complex microstructures. In these materials, thermal energy is primarily transferred by phonons that are bosons. Thus, all phonon modes contribute to thermal conduction . Furthermore, Mg2(Si,Sn) alloys exhibit complex microstructures owing to the miscibility gap, thus resulting in the phase separation to Si- and Sn-rich Mg2(Si,Sn) . In this alloy, each phase can serve as a point-disorder region because it is a disordered solid solution, while the interface between Si- and Sn-rich regions can block the phonon transport. Thus, in Mg2Si- related silicide alloys, the naturally formed superlattice-like structure is reported to be responsible for its low thermal conductivity of approximately 1–3 W/m/K . Similarly, our recent work revealed Sb-induced microstructure inhomogeneities in Mg2(Si,Sn) alloys . Mg2X compounds exhibit a high thermoelectric PF , owing to a unique n- type electronic structure . The experimental band gaps of Mg2Si, Mg2Ge, and Mg2Sn are known to be 0.77, 0.74, and 0.36 eV, respectively . The valence and conduction band edge states are located at Γ and X points, respectively . For Mg2Si and Mg2Ge, the conduction band minimum (CBM) state (X1) does not belong to Mg or Si atoms, while the valence band maximum states are localized near atomic sites. Instead, the X1 state is localized near the interstitial site . Under the tensile strain on Mg2Si and Mg2Ge, this CBM state ascends, while the next CBM state (X3), composed of Mg s states, descends, resulting in the band convergence between X1 and X3 . Note that the lattice parameter varies when Mg2Si is alloyed with Mg2Sn. Thus, as discussed in , in the Submitted to [Journal of Applied Physics] (final update: 15-May-2019) Page 4 / 23 Mg2(Si,Sn) solid solution, the lattice parameter variation and the conduction band convergence are responsible for the high n-type PF in Mg2(Si,Sn) solid solutions. Furthermore, Mg2X compounds exhibit a large density-of-states effective mass with a small transport effective mass because of their anisotropic band structures . Meanwhile, creating p-type Mg2X-based compounds and alloys by impurity doping such as Ag- and Li doping has been challenging . However, the p-type PFs for Mg2X and their alloys are found to be smaller than those of n-types , owing to the lower p-doping efficiency and a smaller band degeneracy for VBM, compared to the n-type. The recent theoretical and computational investigations on quantum transport have revealed the importance of nanostructuring on charge and heat transport. Nanostructuring can be effective in increasing electrical conductivity and PF, in addition to suppressing bipolar thermal conductivity, especially for bipolar or narrow gap materials with interface-rich structures, and this results in enhanced thermoelectric performance . However, to optimize thermoelectric materials for better thermoelectric performance, it is essential to correlate experimental results with theoretical studies. Thus, it is important to understand the atomic and electronic structures of Mg2X compounds and their alloys thoroughly. The electronic structure of Mg2X compounds has been investigated for the further understanding of Mg2Si-related alloy systems using first-principles density-functional theory (DFT) pseudopotential calculations . However, because of the band gap error in DFT , the computed band gaps for Mg2X were still highly underestimated compared to the experimental findings. To overcome the DFT band gap error, hybrid-functional calculations were adopted for Mg2Si and Mg2Sn . However, the band gap is still small in Submitted to [Journal of Applied Physics] (final update: 15-May-2019) Page 5 / 23 hybrid-functional calculations. Quasi-particle GW calculations were conducted for Mg2Si and Mg2Ge , without the relativistic effect that is crucial for heavy elements such as Ge and Sn . However, in 2018, Shi and Kioupakis reported relativistic quasi-particle GW band gaps with high accuracy for Mg2Si, Mg2Ge, and Mg2Sn . Furthermore, in GW calculations, the proper description of initial wavefunctions and eigenvalues are important. In this context, Shi and Kioupakis corrected the wrong band occupation number. Additionally, the correction owing to spin–orbit interactions (SOIs) were included on top of the GW band structures in a non-self-consistent manner . The band gap is critical for thermoelectric transport, especially at higher temperatures where the thermal energy can overcome the band gap energy or the band offset potentials between materials. For example, a small gap results in a smaller Seebeck coefficient and a larger value of thermal conductivity owing to enhanced bipolar conduction . Moreover, the band gap size and position of band edges are crucial because they are correlated to various transport properties such as dopant ionization energy and dopability , band offset potential for carriers , and work function differences between materials responsible for carrier filtering . However, the Mg2Sn band gap is still 0.142 eV in state-of-art relativistic GW calculations, i.e., smaller by approximately 0.1 to 0.2 eV than the experimentally reported values. Although Shi and Kioupakis corrected the band occupation, an error may exist in the starting wavefunction owing to the overlap between the valence and conduction bands. Meanwhile, it was found that, in small-gap materials, one-shot GW calculations can be erroneous if the starting wavefunctions are wrong . In this study, to overcome the band gap underestimation owing to erroneous wavefunctions and wrong band occupations, we perform hybrid functional and quasi- Submitted to [Journal of Applied Physics] (final update: 15-May-2019) Page 6 / 23 particle calculations of the band structures of Mg2X, where X = Si, Ge, and Sn. Using hybrid-functional calculations, we overcome the negative band gap problem in Mg2Sn and correct the incorrect band occupation near the negative band gap. Using the one-shot GW calculations on top of the hybrid-functionals, we finally obtain reliable band gap values for Mg2X, which are consistent to the measured values. II. CALCULATION METHOD We performed the DFT , hybrid-functional , and quasi-particle GW calculations to calculate the atomic and electronic structures of Mg2X, where X = Si, Ge, and Sn. For DFT calculations, we used the projector-augmented-wave (PAW) pseudopotential , generalized-gradient-approximation parameterized by Perdew–Burke– Ernzerhof (PBE) , which were implemented in the VASP planewave code : for the atomic potentials, we used the Mg potential of ‘PAW Mg_pv_GW 20Apr2010’, Si potential of ‘PAW Si_GW 19Mar2012’, Ge potential of ‘PAW Ge_d_GW 17Dec2007’, and Sn potential of ‘PAW_PBE Sn_d_GW 20Mar2012’, which are implemented in VASP code. The lattice parameters were optimized within DFT-PBE, without SOIs. The optimal lattice parameters from DFT-PBE calculations were 6.348, 6.410, and 6.801 Å for Mg2Si, Mg2Ge, and Mg2Sn, respectively. Note that the calculated lattice parameters are very close to the experimental lattice parameters, 6.338, 6.384, and 6.750 Å for Mg2Si, Mg2Ge, and Mg2Sn, respectively . For the band structure calculations of the primitive cell of Mg2X containing two Mg and one X atoms, we used the 6 × 6 × 6 MP k-point mesh . For hybrid-functional DFT Submitted to [Journal of Applied Physics] (final update: 15-May-2019) Page 7 / 23 calculations, we used the Heyd–Scuseria–Ernzerhof functionals (HSE06) with mixing parameter of 25, 30, and 35% for the Hartree–Fock exact exchange with a screening parameter of 0.2 Å-1 . For the GW calculations, we used DFT-PBE or hybrid-DFT Hamiltonians for starting electronic wavefunctions and the Kohn–Sham eigenvalues. Subsequently, the self-energy was computed from G and W, and the quasi-particle band structure was calculated. In GW calculations, the number unoccupied bands are important to obtain the reliable converged band gap. Here, in total, we used the 240, 360, and 360 bands while there are 10, 10, and 15 occupied bands for Mg2Si, Mg2Ge, and Mg2Sn, respectively. For GW with SOI calculations, the numbers of bands are doubled. For the GW on top of the PBE Hamiltonian, we used four different schemes for the GW calculations: one-shot G0W0 approximation with one-shot G and W; GW0 approximation with updated G with fixed W; self-consistent GW0 (scGW0) including an off-diagonal component with updated G and fixed W; fully self-consistent GW (scGW), where G and W are updated. For the GW on top of the HSE Hamiltonian, we only considered the G0W0 calculations with HSE-25, HSE-30, and HSE-35. To observe the effect of SOI on the band structure, we performed the GW calculations with and without SOI. III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION (X = Si, Ge, Sn), without and with SOI. Mg2X binary compounds exhibit highly similar band dispersions especially for the valence bands. For all Mg2X, the p-orbital bands of the X atoms are located near the energy range from –5 to 0 eV, with respect to the VBM energy. Submitted to [Journal of Applied Physics] (final update: 15-May-2019) Page 8 / 23 Three VBM band states are degenerated at the Γ point if SOI effects are not taken into account. The CBM states of Mg2X are found at point X with a valley degeneracy of three, thus exhibiting an indirect band gap nature. With SOI, the three VBM bands the Γ point are split into 4 and 2 bands at, while the CBM bands at the L point are not. Note that, as going from X = Si to Sn, the spin-orbit splitting becomes larger. Table 1 shows the characteristics of the band edge states for Mg2X. The Mg2X compounds exhibit different CBM states: for Mg2Si and Mg2Ge, the CBM is the X1 state localized at the interstitial site, and the next CBM state (C+1) is the X3 state localized at the Mg s orbitals (see Figure 2). However, for Mg2Sn, the ordering between X1 and X3 is inverted: X3 is the CBM, while X1 is the C+1 state. It was reported that the band inversion of Mg2X was related to the lattice strain . Similarly, in Table 1, we summarize the effect of volume expansion on the band ordering of CBM and C+1. In DFT-PBE calculations, the band gaps are severely underestimated, i.e., 0.202, 0.151, and -0.190 eV, for Mg2Si, Mg2Ge, and Mg2Sn, respectively. With SOI effect, the band gaps are reduced to 0.191, 0.090, and –0.346 eV, respectively (see Figure 1). It is noteworthy that the SOI affects the band gap significantly, consistent to a previous report . Furthermore, Mg2Sn has a negative band gap energy. To overcome the band gap underestimation of Mg2X, we employed hybrid-functional and quasi-particle GW calculations. Mg2Si using DFT-PBE, hybrid-functional, and quasi-particle GW calculations. The band edges are computed with respect to the average of the electrostatic local potential over the unit cell, which can be used for band alignment using the reference potential method [66-68, Submitted to [Journal of Applied Physics] (final update: 15-May-2019) Page 9 / 23 83]. It is clearly observed that the hybrid-functional calculations exhibit larger band gaps than DFT-PBE; however, the results from HSE-25, HSE-30, and HSE-35 are still smaller than the experimental values. To overcome the band gap underestimation of DFT-PBE and HSEs, we performed quasi-particle GW calculations to obtain a quasi-particle band gap. We found that the one-shot approximation still underestimated the band gap, even though SOI was not included. However, by iterating G or W, we finally increased the band gap to a level comparable to the experimental value (~0.80 eV). This implies that the initial wavefunctions might be inexact. However, the scGW computations are extremely time consuming. To minimize the computation time and use the corrected starting wavefunctions and Kohn–Sham eigenvalues, we calculated the quasi-particle band gap using the one-shot G0W0 calculations G0W0 (HSE-35), respectively. Finally, we obtained a band gap of 0.835 eV using G0W0 (HSE-35), which was slightly larger than the experimental gap of 0.77 eV. Mg2Ge using various computational schemes. We observed that the band gaps were underestimated even for the HSE-35 and one-shot GW calculations. By iterating G and W, the self-consistent quasi-particle band gap (0.768 eV) becomes comparable to the experimental gap of 0.74 eV. It is noteworthy that the inclusion of SOI is important for the band gap prediction of Mg2Ge. In DFT-PBE, the SOI reduce the Mg2Ge band gap by 0.06 eV. If we consider the SOI correction on the band gap, the self-consistent quasi-particle band gap might be smaller than 0.7 eV. This implies that the self-consistent band gap will be smaller than the experimental gap, owing to poor starting wavefunctions for Mg2Ge. Therefore, by conducting quasi-particle GW calculations on top of the HSE-35, we corrected the initial Submitted to [Journal of Applied Physics] (final update: 15-May-2019) Page 10 / 23 wavefunctoins compared to density-functoinal calculations, and finally obtained the band gap of 0.759 eV with relativistic effects. methods, and quasi-particle GW calculations. In contrast to Mg2Si and Mg2Ge, Mg2Sn exhibits a negative band gap in DFT-PBE. It is noteworthy that the band gap is still negative for HSE-25 with SOI. When we increased the fraction of the exact Hartree–Fock exchange to 30–35%, we finally obtained positive band gaps for Mg2Sn. The band gaps of DFT-PBE, HSE-25, HSE-30, and HSE-35 were computed to be -0.346, -0.030, 0.052, and 0.134 eV. It is well known that wrong starting wavefunctions or wrong band occupations result in the wrong quasi-particle band gaps . Thus, we must correct the electronic wavefunction by iterating G or W when we perform the GW calculations. We found that scGW0 and scGW can increase the band gap of Mg2Sn. However, the self-consistent GW methods are time consuming. Therefore, we conducted the GW calculations on top of the hybrid-functional results. By employing the HSE-35 electronic wavefunction with a positive band gap, we obtained a plausible band gap of 0.244 eV, consistent with the experimental gap of 0.36 eV. It is noteworthy that our computed gaps for Mg2Sn are larger than Shi and Kioupakis’s band gap of 0.142 eV. calculations, the SOI effect reduces the band gaps of Mg2Si, Mg2Ge, and Mg2Sn by 0.011, 0.062, and 0.156 eV, respectively. Also SOI affects VBM splittings as the mass of the involved X atoms become heavier . For Mg2Si, a negligible SOI splitting exists for the VBM and a negligible band gap narrowing. However, for Mg2Sn, the spin splitting of VBM is enlarged to 0.485 eV for DFT-PBE, consistent to the semi-relativitistic Korringa-Kohn- Submitted to [Journal of Applied Physics] (final update: 15-May-2019) Page 11 / 23 Rostoker calculations . It is noteworthy that the spin splitting is nearly unchanged with different computational schemes. This implies that the inclusion of SOI on top of GW calculations is valid , compared to our GW calculations on top of SOI calculations. We estimated the band edge positions of VBM, X1, and X3 for a ternary solid solution Mg2(Si(1-x)Snx) and subsequently computed its band gap (see Figure 3(a) and (b)). The band edge positions of binary Mg2X with respect to the average local potential in the bulk are calculated using the GW calculations on top of the HSE-35 Hamiltonian. By linearly interpolating the values for the end point binary compounds, i.e., Mg2Si and Mg2Sn, we estimated the band edge positions of the ternary solid solution Mg2(Si,Sn). Note that our supercell approach on the band edge calculations also confirm the nearly linear relation between band edge energies and composition. As shown in Figure 3(a), the VBM and X1 states of Mg2Si ascends when alloying with Mg2Sn, while the X3 state descends. Consequently, the X1 and X3 states are converged and the band gap becomes smaller. In DFT-PBE with SOI calculations, the X1 and X3 states converged at approximately x = 0.357, which is inconsistent with the experimental reports. In the quasi-particle GW calculations, the X1 and X3 conduction bands converged at x = 0.525. Similarly, as shown in Figure 3(c) and (d), the conduction band convergence of Mg2(Ge1-ySny) is occurred at y = 0.60. It is noteworthy that the conduction band convergence between X1 and X3 is observed experimentally at approximately x = 0.6 for Mg2(Si1-xSnx) and y=0.75 for Mg2(Ge1-ySny) . The remaining differences can be due to the temperature dependency band structures of Mg2X: we computed the band structures at 0 K, while the experimental observation is at 600 to 800 K. Submitted to [Journal of Applied Physics] (final update: 15-May-2019) Page 12 / 23 IV. CONCLUSIONS In conclusion, the band structures of Mg2X (X = Si, Ge, and Sn) were investigated using DFT-PBE, hybrid-functionals, and quasi-particle GW calculations. Severe band gap underestimations occurred owing to DFT band gap errors and strong spin–orbit interactions. By correcting the initial wavefunctions and Kohn–Sham eigenvalues from the hybrid-functional calculations, we obtained a reliable quasi-particle band gap for Mg2X that was consistent to the experimental ones. Finally, the quasi-particle band structures of Mg2X well predict the compositions of the conduction band convergences in Mg2(Si,Sn) and Mg2(Ge,Sn) solid solutions. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by the Energy Efficiency & Resource Core Technology Program of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) granted from the Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy (MOTIE), Republic of Korea (no. 20188550000290, no. 20172010000830, no. 20162000000910). It was also supported by the Korea Electrotechnology Research Institute (KERI) Primary Research Program through the National Research Council of Science and Technology (NST) funded by the Ministry of Science and ICT (MSIT) of the Republic of Korea (No. 19-12-N0101-22). EAC is supported by the Fundamental Research Program (POC3360) of the Korea Institute of Materials Science (KIMS). Also, one of the authors (JdB) is partially funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation)-project number 396709363. Submitted to [Journal of Applied Physics] (final update: 15-May-2019) Page 13 / 23