Pressure induced Superconductivity and location of Fermi energy at Dirac point in BiSbTe3 Vinod K. Gangwara, #, Shiv Kumarb, #, Mahima Singha, Labanya Ghosha, Zhang Yufengc,d, Prashant Shahie, Swapnil Patila, Eike F. Schwierb, Kenya Shimadab, Yoshiya Uwatokoc, Sandip Chatterjeea,* aDepartment of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology (BHU) Varanasi 221005 bHiroshima Synchrotron Radiation Center, Hiroshima University, Higashi-Hiroshima City, 739-0046 Japan cInstitute for Solid State Physics, University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, Chiba 277-8581, Japan dSchool of Physics and Key Laboratory of MEMS of the Ministry of Education, Southeast University, Nanjing 211189, China eDepartment of Physics, D.D.U. Gorakhpur University, Gorakhpur 273009 Abstract We have grown single-crystal BiSbTe3 3D TI sample and studied structural, TE as well as pressure dependent magneto-transport properties. Large positive Seebeck coefficient confirmed the p-type nature of BiSbTe3, which is consistent with Hall measurement. We have also studied the electronic band structure using Laser-based ARPES, which revealed the existence of a Dirac-cone like metallic surface state in BiSbTe3 with a Dirac Point situated exactly at the Fermi level. Additionally, superconductivity emerges under pressure of 8 GPa with a critical temperature of ~2.5 K. With further increase of pressure, the superconducting transition temperature (Tc) increases and at 14 GPa it shows the maximum Tc (~3.3 K). Topological insulator (TI) is a new quantum state of matter in condensed matter physics which has attracted a huge attention because of their unique properties and potential technological applications such as quantum computation, spintronics and low power-dissipation electronic devices . Bi2Se3, Bi2Te3 and Sb2Te3 are most studied 3D TIs, but so far very few reports are available on BiSbTe3TI compounds . Usually, the conductivity of Bi2Te3 and Sb2Te3 shows n-type behavior and p-type behavior respectively due to the formation of Te- vacancies and antisite defects . The Fermi level (EF) in n-type Bi2Te3 lies in the bulk conduction band (BCB) and the Dirac point (DP) is hidden in the bulk valence band (BVB). On the other hand, pure Sb2Te3 has different band structure, in which DP remains within the bulk gap and EF lies in the BVB (p-type). Tuning of the position of DP and EF can be achieved simultaneously by mixing of these two compounds. This may guide to an ideal TI in which EF and the DP coincides in insulating bulk, which may lead TIs to the technological applications in a controlled manner. The theoretical and experimental studies on (Bi1−xSbx)2Te3 alloy have shown that the topological properties preserved for the entire range of composition, and with the help of ARPES as well as electrical measurements it was found that a transition from n-type to p- type was occurred in a composition of 50% (Bi/Sb) . The transition from n-type to p-type in (Bi1−xSbx)2Te3 films which were grown on sapphire by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), was about 94% of Sb content . In the other studies, the films of (Bi1−xSbx)2Te3 grown on SrTiO3 substrate show that transition occurs in the range of 35–45% Sb . As a matter of fact, the stoichiometric of Bi/Sb has not yet been reported where EF is located exactly at the DP. In the present investigation we have shown that in BiSbTe3 3D TI EF is located exactly at the DP. Moreover, BiSbTe3 performs as a good thermoelectric material at room-temperature which attracts a great attention for the application as thermoelectric (TE) devices. Furthermore, usage of external pressure can be a very useful method to tune the materials properties and design new materials. Because, inter atomic distance inside the material can be reduced by imposing external pressure, which affects the material properties. Recently, pressure- induced superconductivity has been observed in Bi2Te3, Bi2Se3 and Sb2Te3 3D topological insulators . Majorana fermions, potentially fruitful in quantum computing can be expected at the edge states in these 3D topological superconductors . Superconductivity in Bi2Te3 was observed with the ambient-pressure crystal structure. However, superconductivity in Sb2Te3 was reported with different crystal structure . The structural transition in BiSbTe3 compound was reported by Jacobsen et al. around 8 GPa, which was assigned to the orthorhombic I222 structure . In their other report, they found a slight increase in Seebeck coefficient and a similar decrease in thermal conductivity at 8 GPa pressure . In this report, we have characterized single crystal of BiSbTe3 sample by ARPES technique to examine the surface states thoroughly and also measured transport properties with the variation of magnetic field and pressure. The single crystal BiSbTe3 3D TI sample was grown by a modified Bridgman method as has been reported elsewhere . The cleaved shiny silver colored single crystal was characterized by X-Ray diffraction, which indicates that the crystal growth direction is along the c-axis as shown in Fig.1 (a). Weyrichet et al. estimated Sb content by the intensity ratio of XRD peaks corresponding to (009) and (0015) planes. The Peaks corresponding to (009) and (0012) are absent in Bi2Te3 but present in Sb2Te3. Hence, intensity ratio of (009) to (0015) is feasible to determine Sb content. In present sample, intensity ratio is I(009)/I(0015) ~ 0.075, suggested almost 50% of Sb content . We have also performed the powder XRD of BiSbTe3 sample after grinding the single crystal sample. To determine lattice parameters, we have analyzed powder XRD data by Le Bail refinement using the FullProf volume is 493.54(4) Å3 with rhombohedral crystal structure belonging to the space group D3d 5 (R-3m), whereas the calculated α, β and γ values are 90 ̊, 90 ̊ and 120 ̊. All of the extracted values from Le Bail refinement of XRD spectra are well matched with the reported values . The magneto-transport properties were measured by using physical property measurement system (PPMS) with varying magnetic field up to 7 T. The Seebeck coefficient (S) was measured by homemade setup. To probe the Dirac point and the surface states of BiSbTe3, the ARPES experiment was performed by Laser-ARPES at the Hiroshima Synchrotron Radiation Center (HiSOR) using s- polarized light of 6.45 eV and measured with a hemispherical analyzer (VG Scienta SES R4000) at 20 K and 60 K. The sample was cleaved in-situ at ~22 K in an ultra high vacuum below 8×10−9 Pa. The cleaved BiSbTe3 single crystal along (00l) direction was used for transport properties measurement. The resistivity (ρxx) with respect to temperature (2 K ≤ T ≤ 300 K) is shown in Fig.2(a). From resistivity graph, one can see that the nature of the sample is metallic, as resistivity is decreased with decreasing temperature and become constant at very low temperature. The residual resistivity ratio (RRR) is calculated as ρxx(300 K)/ρxx(2 K) ~9 supporting the good quality of sample. Moreover, we have performed pressure-dependent measurement on BiSbTe3 single crystal sample and measured electrical resistance (R) as a function of temperature at different pressures. The variation of the resistance (R) at various pressures is shown in Fig. 2(b). From the graph, it can be seen that the value of R decreased when applied pressure changed from 2 GPa to 6 GPa. However, no sharp transition in the resistance was observed up to the lowest measured temperature (~2 K) (inset: Fig. 2 (b)). When pressure was further increased to 8 GPa, a sharp decrease in resistance value is observed around 2.5 K with Tonset = 2.47 K. After increasing pressure to 8.25 GPa, a similar transition occurred at a little higher onset temperature (Tonset = 2.51 K). This sharp decrease in the resistance at a particular temperature above 8 GPa can be assigned for the superconducting transition. The superconducting transition is getting more pronounced with increasing pressure and Tonset is also shifting toward higher value with applied pressure, as shown in the Fig.2 (c). The highest Tonset (3.36 K) was observed at 14 GPa, after which it becomes almost constant up to 15 GPa. Fig.2 (c) displayed that above 11 GPa pressure, resistance value dropped to zero before reaching 2 K and simultaneously transition becomes sharper. This superconducting phase of BiSbTe3 can be correlated to the phase transition in BiSbTe3 around 8 GPa as has been reported by Jacobsen et al. . Hence, observed superconductivity in BiSbTe3 might be due to the structural phase transition from rhombohedral R-3m to orthorhombic I222. To confirm the structural transition we measured the resistance as a function of pressure at 300 K as shown in Fig.2 (d, e). The value of resistance decreased with increasing pressure up to 8 GPa. An increase in resistance has been observed above 8 GPa pressure, which decreases slightly in pressure range 8 GPa to 15 GPa. Hence, the increase in resistance is clearly indicating that the structural phase transition occurred around 8 GPa pressure. This is reconfirming that the observed superconductivity phase is due to the structural phase transition in BiSbTe3. Such types of structural and superconducting transitions have also been reported for Bi2Te3 and Sb2Te3 around 8 GPa . The variation of temperature at which resistance dropped to zero (TC zero ) and Tonset with respect to pressure is shown in Fig.2 (d, e). function of applied magnetic field at different temperatures is shown in Fig.2 (f). The magnetic field was applied in the perpendicular direction to the applied electric current. A non-saturated positive linear MR has been observed at all the temperatures up to 7 T magnetic field; the MR value is ranging nearly from 49% (2 K) to 4% (300 K). Non-saturated MR with high mobility is reported for many topological materials where MR is linearly varied with the carrier mobility . The variation of MR with respect to mobility is shown in Fig.3 (c). From Fig.3 (c) we can see that MR is directly proportional to the mobility in the present case, which is consistent with some other reports . However, the obtained value of mobility and MR from magneto-transport data of present sample is less than those reported by Huang et al. but consistent with those reported by other groups . The variation of Hall resistivity (ρxy) with the magnetic field (B) at different temperatures is shown in Fig.3 (a). It can be seen from Fig.3 (a) that Hall resistivity is linear with positive slope in full range of magnetic field and temperature that indicates the transport is p-type. The slope of Hall data increases above 100 K; hence the corresponding decrease in the carrier concentration (n) is also observed. The carrier concentration obtained from hall data is ranging from 3.63x1019cm-3(2 K) to 2.64x1019 cm-3 (300 K) and the obtained mobility from Hall data is ranging from 993 cm2/V.s (2 K) to 164 cm2/V.s (300 K) . It can be observed from the carrier concentration graph that there is a little decrease in carrier concentration below 100 K. The decrease in carrier concentration might be due to the decrease of bulk contribution below 100 K. However, the mobility is decreasing with an increase in temperature; the decrease in mobility with an increase in temperature is mainly because of enhancement of thermal vibration. The p-type nature of BiSbTe3 TI is also confirmed by thermoelectric measurement with positive seebeck coefficient (S), as shown in Fig.3 (d), which is the consequence of contribution of bulk valance band (BVB). The value of ‘S’ is increased with temperature and slope is changed above 100 K, which can be correlated with carrier concentration. We obtained the maximum value of ‘S’ at room temperature with minimum carrier concentration. The maximum obtained value of Seebeck coefficient is ~240 μV/K at 300 K, which is consistent with other reports with the same carrier density . We have calculated the power factor (PF), using the formula PF =σS2, Where σ is the electrical conductivity and S is the Seebeck coefficient. The Variation of PF with temperature for BiSbTe3 is shown in inset of Fig.3 (d). It is observed that PF is linearly increased up to 100 K, then saturated at a value ~ 3x10-3W/m.K2 . In order to investigate the electronic structure of this compound we have carried out the ARPES measurements as shown in Figs. 4 and 5. These measurements were carried out at 20 K and 60 K respectively. Figs. 4(a) and 4(b) represent the ARPES spectra as a colored and grayscale image respectively. The same holds, respectively, for Figs. 5(a) and 5(b). These images show the BVB of the compound forming a V-shaped valley like bulk band gap region around the -point in the Brilliouin zone and the topological surface state (TSS) residing inside it as observed earlier . The sharpness of the linear dispersion of the TSS reveals good quality of the sample as well as the high energy and momentum resolution of the laser ARPES spectra. Quite interestingly we are able to discern the unoccupied part of the Dirac cone (DC) related to the TSS above EF at 60 K due to the thermal broadening of the Fermi distribution function. The DP is seen to lie near EF in this compound which happens to be an ideal condition for the technological exploitation of the topological properties of the TSS. This is important because the parent compounds Bi2Te3 and Sb2Te3 are mainly of n-type and p-type . Doping Sb for Bi is expected to tune the DP at EF for some of the intermediate composition. Accordingly, when we doped Sb in place of Bi halfway, we could realize a rare and important feat of tuning the DP to EF. Thus the surface of this particular compound could potentially prove to be useful in realizing the promises of the TSS for practical applications. Surprisingly, the transport properties for this compound show a p- type behavior which is difficult to be understood entirely from the states near DP. From our ARPES spectra we observe a finite contribution from the BVB towards EF which is due to its specific band dispersion enclosing a valley type of bulk band gap containing the DP. Thus when EF is at the DP the surrounding peaks from the BVB simultaneously also cross EF giving rise to a net p-type electrical transport in this compound since the states of the BVB have a p-type dispersion. Nevertheless it is important to investigate further, the methods of tapping the DP towards technological applications. Figs. 4(c) and 4(d) as well as Figs. 5(c) and 5(d) depict the isoenergy contours and stacked plot of the momentum distribution curves (MDC’s) of the ARPES spectra respectively. The stacked plot of MDC’s offers clarity in visualizing the DC. Here we are able to see the sharpness of DP at 20 K and the emergence of the unoccupied part of the DC at 60 K clearly. The vertically stacked isoenergy contours taken at different binding energies (BE’s) clearly reveal the 3-D view of the DC around the -point. The bright circular central contour surrounding the -point arises from the TSS while the BVB reveals a six-fold petal like structure around the central contour. At higher BE’s the central contour touches the petal structure. Upon approaching EF it shrinks while the petal structure expands which is consistent with the band dispersion of the respective states. Here again we observe a point like Fermi surface (FS) arising due to the DP in concurrence with the occurrence of the DP at EF. At higher BE’s the DC is seen to develop slight warping. Such a warping in the FS is known to originate from the effect of spin orbit coupling in the electronic structure of topological insulators . In conclusion, we have investigated the external pressure effect on the resistance and the ARPES on BiSbTe3. It is observed that with increase of pressure resistance decreases and at a value of 8 GPa a sharp drop in resistivity is observed which indicates the occurrence of superconductivity. With further increase of pressure the superconducting transition temperature (Tc) increases and at 14 GPa it shows the maximum Tc (~3.3 K). Measured resistivity at 300 K as function of pressure shows an anomaly at 8 GPa indicating the structural phase transition. This may indicate that the superconducting transition might be due to the structural phase transition in BiSbTe3. Furthermore, the ARPES study clearly indicates the location of Fermi energy exactly at Dirac point. This is an ideal condition for the technological exploitation of the topological properties of the TSS. In addition, the large Seebeck coefficient and good TE performance at room-temperature attract great attention for the application in TE devices. #Both the authors have equal contribution. *Corresponding author: schatterji.app@itbhu.ac.in