Signatures of Helical Edge Transport in Millimetre-Scale Thin Films of Na3Bi Chang Liu1,2,3, Dimitrie Culcer3,4, Mark T. Edmonds1,2,3*, Michael S. Fuhrer1,2,3* 1School of Physics and Astronomy, Monash University, Victoria 3800 Australia 2Monash Centre for Atomically Thin Materials, Monash University, Victoria 3800 Australia 3ARC Centre of Excellence in Future Low-Energy Electronics Technologies, Monash University, Victoria 3800 Australia 4School of Physics, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales 2052 Australia * mark.edmonds@monash.edu and michael.fuhrer@monash.edu Abstract A two-dimensional topological insulator (2DTI) has an insulating bulk and helical spin-polarised edge modes robust to backscattering by non-magnetic disorder. While ballistic transport has been demonstrated in 2DTIs over short distances, larger samples show significant backscattering and a nearly temperature-independent resistance whose origin is unclear. 2DTI edges have shown a spin polarisation, however the degree of helicity is difficult to quantify from spin measurements. Here, we study 2DTI few-layer Na3Bi on insulating Al2O3. A non-local conductance measurement geometry enables sensitive detection of the edge conductance in the topological regime, with an edge mean free path ~100 nm. Magnetic field suppresses spin-flip scattering in the helical edges, resulting in a giant negative magnetoresistance (GNMR), up to 80% at 0.9 T. Comparison to theory indicates >98% of scattering is helical spin scattering significantly exceeding the maximum (67%) expected for a non- helical metal. GNMR, coupled with non-local measurements demonstrating edge conduction, thus provides an unambiguous experimental signature of helical edges that we expect to be generically useful in understanding 2DTIs. When time-reversal symmetry is preserved, the edges of a 2DTI are expected to be perfect ballistic conductors at zero temperature . Indeed, 2DTIs were first identified experimentally through ballistic edge-state transport over few-micron distances. However, in larger samples a finite, nearly temperature-independent resistance is observed . The prevailing theoretical picture is that this edge resistance results from spin-flip scattering via exchange coupling to local moments, either impurity species or metallic “puddles” of conduction electrons with odd electron number , however no experiments have probed this magnetic scattering directly. Recent efforts have focused on identifying larger bandgap 2DTIs with the hope of demonstrating topological electronic devices at room temperature. WTe2 , bismuthene and Na3Bi are thought to be large-bandgap 2DTIs, edge-state transport has been shown up to 100 K in WTe2 . However, HgTe quantum wells have shown the persistence of edge state conduction into the conventional insulator regime, calling into question whether edge conduction alone is decisive evidence of topological transport. As the study of 2DTIs expands to new materials and new regimes, an unambiguous signature of helical edge state transport is necessary. Here we demonstrate such a signature, using a combination of non-local transport measurements to demonstrate edge conduction, and magnetoresistance to confirm unambiguously helical transport. We study ultra-thin Na3Bi, especially promising for topological devices due to its very large topological bandgap (>300 meV) and electric-field induced topological phase transition . Unlike monolayer WTe2 and bismuthene, Na3Bi is expected to be a 2DTI over at least 1-3 layer thicknesses. Na3Bi can be grown on a variety of substrates at relatively low substrate temperature (≤ 330 °C). These qualities are promising for large area epitaxial ultra-thin 2DTIs, robust to temperature and layer- number fluctuations . We grow large area epitaxial ultra-thin (~2nm) film Na3Bi on an atomically flat insulator (α- Al2O3). We use local and non-local conductivity measurements to probe the bulk and edge conductivity as a function of doping and magnetic field. As-grown bulk-conducting films possess carrier mobility as high as 34,000 cm2/Vs and electron doping as low as 2.8×1010 cm-2, and show a carrier density-dependent transition between weak localization (WL) near the band edge to weak anti- localization (WAL) at high doping, characteristic of a gapped Dirac system. When the Fermi level is tuned into the bulk gap the non-local resistance becomes comparable to the local resistance, indicating edge-dominated transport even in our millimetre-sized devices. An exceptional giant negative magnetoresistance (GNMR), up to 80% at 0.9 T, develops as a direct consequence of the spin-flip nature of scattering in a topological edge mode. Comparison with theory indicates that >98% of backscattering is spin-flip scattering, as expected for the helical edges of a 2DTI, and inconsistent with a non-helical metal. The Na3Bi films were grown via molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) in a Createc Low-Temperature-MBE- STM system on atomically flat α-Al2O3 substrates (Shinkosha Japan) that were prepatterned with Ti/Au electrodes (5/50 nm) in either a van der Pauw geometry or in a Hall bar geometry by growing through a stencil mask affixed on the substrate. The growth was achieved by co-depositing Bi (99.999%) and Na (99.95%) in an over Na flux with a Na:Bi flux ratio above 10:1. Deposition rates were calibrated using a quartz crystal microbalance. A two-step growth method was employed with the first 1 nm grown at 200 °C and the remaining 1 nm grown at final temperature around 270 °C. After growth, annealing at 300-330 °C for 10 min in a Na flux was carried out to improve film quality. The as-grown film was then transferred in UHV to the low-temperature STM with 1 T perpendicular magnetic field and in-situ electrical contacts. The tetrafluorotetracyanoquinodimethane (F4-TCNQ) deposition was carried out in the MBE chamber at room temperature using an effusion cell and the rate calibrated by quartz crystal microbalance to p-type dope thin-film Na3Bi without degrading the electronic properties . The thickness of a monolayer F4-TCNQ is expected to be ca. 3.6 Å . Fig. 1 shows growth and transport properties of as-grown ultra-thin Na3Bi. Fig. 1(a) and 1(b) show the reflection high energy electron diffraction (RHEED) pattern of the α-Al2O3 substrate and ~2 nm Na3Bi film respectively. The clearly defined streaks in Fig. 1(b) are consistent with RHEED taken on ultra-thin Na3Bi and 15 nm Na3Bi grown on Si(111) indicating high-quality epitaxial growth. STM topography in Fig. 1(c) shows ~10 nm terraces with an average thickness of 2 nm (see Supplementary Materials for details). The carrier density and mobility for the nine different as-grown 2 nm Na3Bi samples are shown in Fig. 1(d). In this regime non-local measurements confirm that conduction is dominated by the doped bulk (see below). All as-grown films are n-type with carrier density 2.81010-3.8×1011 cm-2, and mobility 1000-34000 cm2/Vs. Variations in density and mobility are most likely due to subtle variations in substrate quality and growth conditions, whilst, the n-type doping is due to interfacial doping, consistent with 20 nm Na3Bi thin films . We now turn to the bulk magneto-transport properties of as-grown ultra-thin Na3Bi. Fig. 2(a) shows the change in conductivity, xx, as a function of perpendicular magnetic field for four as-grown samples with different carrier densities. At higher density there is only negative magneto-conductance and as the density decreases there is crossover from negative to positive magneto-conductance at around 0.25 T, consistent with a crossover from WAL to WL. We fit the data to the full Hikami-Larkin-Nagaoka (HLN) formula (solid lines in Fig. 2(a); see Supplementary Materials for formula and details) to obtain the phase (lφ) and spin (lSO) coherence lengths, and plot the mean free path (le) (calculated in Supplementary Materials), lφ, and lso as a function of carrier density in Fig. 2(b). For all films, lφ >> le consistent with the quantum diffusive regime. The phase coherence length, lφ increases monotonically with doping similar to WSe2 . On the other hand, lso increases as the density decreases, reflecting the decrease in spin-momentum locking (perfect spin-momentum locking corresponds to lso = 0). At low density when lφ ~ lso, the crossover of WAL to WL is expected. Additional experiments probing a p-type to n-type transition using in-situ K-dosing showed a similar transition from WL to WAL (see Supplementary Materials for data). The coherence length in a conductor is ultimately limited by electron-electron scattering though may be smaller due to other dephasing processes such as electron-phonon scattering or spin-flip scattering from local moments. For electron-electron scattering we expect that the ratio lφ le = ( τφ τe) 1/2 = ( 4EF kBT) 1/2 ( 1 1/2 ≈ ( 4EF kBT) 1/2 . The electron band of few-layer Na3Bi is well approximated by a massive Dirac system with Fermi velocity vF = 1 x 106 m/s, gap parameter Δ = 92 meV, and effective mass m* = Δ /vF2 = 0.016 me, where me is the electron mass . Then for our typical carrier densities n = 1-4 x 1011 cm-2 and T = 5 K we find lφ le ≈ 12-24. This is in good agreement with the ratio lφ le ≈ 8- 14 observed in Fig. 2(b) (and Fig. S2(b)), implying that the small effective mass and large Fermi energy in Na3Bi enables long coherence times and phase-coherent transport at relatively high temperature. Further studies of the temperature dependence of the magnetoresistance could confirm whether electron-electron interactions limit the phase coherence. Bulk Na3Bi exhibits near perfect WAL due to the perfect spin-momentum coupling expected for a topological Dirac semimetal . The appearance of WL at low carrier density indicates that this topological protection is lost in ultrathin Na3Bi, due to opening of bulk gap, while near perfect WAL is retained at high density far from the gapped region where spin-momentum locking is approximately preserved. The opening of bulk gap is a necessary but not sufficient condition for a 2DTI; it does not indicate whether the resulting insulator is topological or conventional. We now investigate the transport properties when the Fermi level is within the bulk bandgap. We deplete the as-grown n-type doping by depositing high electron affinity (5.24 eV) F4-TCNQ to p-type dope thin-film Na3Bi. their ratio RNL/RL as a function of F4-TCNQ coverage at temperatures of 5.3-20 K. For a uniform conductor we expect RL = ρxxL/w and RNL = ρxxe−πL/w. For our geometry, L/w ratio is 2 and hence RNL/RL ~ 10-3. This agrees well with our measurements on the as-grown film where RL ~10 k and RNL is only few ohms. Upon initial deposition of F4-TCNQ, the local resistance increases by two orders of magnitude consistent with the Fermi level moving into the bulk gap. RNL is no longer suppressed and becomes comparable with RL and RNL/RL is close to 1 at an F4-TCNQ coverage of 0.020 monolayer (ML). This non-local resistance in the absence of magnetic field has been previously taken as evidence of a 2DTI edge state . We have eliminated the possibility of edge conduction by metallic Bi or Na (see Supplementary Materials) and conclude that conduction occurs through Na3Bi edge modes. For the highest coverages and lowest temperatures, RNL saturates at ~100 M, and RNL/RL saturates ~ 1, suggesting that when the Fermi level is deep in the bulk gap, the edge current is less affected by bulk leakage, and RNL reflects the edge resistance. The edge resistivity is ρedge = R/L = h/e2le,edge where R is the resistance of an edge section of length L, h is Planck’s constant, and e the elementary charge. Accounting for the two current paths, RNL ~ 100 M corresponds to ρedge ~ 300 kΩ/μm and le,edge ~ 100 nm. Fig. 3(b) shows that RNL is temperature-dependent, becoming larger at lower temperature. However, the temperature dependence appears to mirror the temperature dependence of the ratio RNL/RL; the largest RNL is measured at 5.3 K when RNL/RL saturates near unity, and lower RNL values coincide with deviation from RNL/RL ~1 and likely reflects bulk leakage rather than temperature dependence of ρedge. More work is needed to clarify the detailed temperature dependence of ρedge. The temperature dependence of RNL/RL also prevents us from probing edge transport to temperatures above 20 K, apparently limited by bulk leakage. This temperature is much smaller than the bandgap in ultrathin Na3Bi, suggesting that bulk leakage could be significantly reduced in cleaner samples, realizing higher temperature edge transport. Fig. 3(d) shows a non-local I(V) curve with around 0.036 ML F4-TCNQ coverage at 10 K when RNL/RL ~ 1. The I(V) shows two different non-local resistance regimes: at low current, the slope is large (RNL/RL ~ 1) as electron transport occurs through the edge states. However, at higher current the slope becomes much smaller, corresponding to a decrease in RNL/RL, consistent with some current being shunted through the bulk. The abrupt change in slope indicates that the bulk conduction turns on at a critical edge current/voltage; the critical voltage ~ 75 mV is of similar order as the bulk bandgap energy hence it is reasonable to expect significant bulk conduction at this bias. We now demonstrate that the observed edge transport is helical. Fig. 4 shows the longitudinal magnetoresistance (MR) of 2 nm Na3Bi as a function of F4-TCNQ doping. In contrast to the positive MR due to WAL observed for bulk transport (Fig. 2(a) and black line in Fig. 4), in the edge conduction regime a giant negative MR (GNMR) develops, as large as -80% at 0.9 T and nearly independent of the doping (F4-TCNQ coverage). Negative MR in metals is unusual. GNMR has been observed previously in bulk Dirac and Weyl semimetals, but only in parallel electric and magnetic fields due to the chiral anomaly , however the GNMR observed here in ultra-thin Na3Bi is observed in a perpendicular magnetic field. The finite edge resistance in 2DTIs with weak temperature dependence has been explained as due to exchange-mediated scattering from local moments, either atomic-scale defects or electrons localised in puddles due to spatial fluctuations of the Fermi energy, at temperature T > TK, the Kondo temperature. Exchange-mediated scattering from magnetic impurities is a known source of negative MR in metals: Magnetic fields polarize local moments, making spin-flip scattering inelastic and unfavourable once the Zeeman energy exceeds the thermal energy. We model the edge state magnetoresistance as follows. The edge states of Na3Bi in the presence of a perpendicular magnetic field // z are described by the Hamiltonian H = (ħvFkx + geμBB) σz, where x is the transport direction parallel to the edge, ge is the edge spin g-factor and the Pauli matrix σz represents the edge spin operator. The spins are polarised out of the plane and the magnetic field shifts the origin of kx without opening a gap. We consider scattering off magnetic impurities with spin coupled to the edge spins via a local exchange interactions Jδ(r⃗) σ⃗ ∙ S⃗, whose matrix elements between momentum states are independent of wave vector. The magneto-resistance is calculated using Boltzmann theory in the spirit of Refs. but adapted to spin-polarised edge states. Scalar and spin-conserving transitions ∝ σz Sz drop out when the scattering-out and scattering-in terms are both included, eliminating the effect of forward scattering. Single-particle spin-flip terms are determined in the Born approximation ∝ J2, keeping terms linear in the impurity density. This yields the following formula for the magneto-resistance: R(B) − R(0) R(0) = 〈Sz〉 S [coth x 2 − x 2 (sinh x 2) 2] (1) where x = gμBB kBT , g is the impurity gyromagnetic ratio, g-factor, and 〈Sz〉 S is given by the Brillouin function, which reflects the polarisation of the impurity spins by the Zeeman interaction. Spin-flip becomes inelastic and the energy cost associated with flipping the impurity spins leads to a negative magnetoresistance. We note that Kondo scattering terms logarithmic in T show up at orders J3 and higher. The Kondo temperature TK is expected to be vary small for known TI parameters , and the good fit to Eq. (1) suggests T >> TK here. Fig. 4 shows a fit of the experimental MR to Eq. (1); the only free parameter is g = 32.3. This is in reasonable agreement with g ~ 20 inferred from transport measurements on bulk Na3Bi , suggesting the impurities are quantum dot-like "puddles". In Fig.4, we also show the expected MR for a hypothetical non-helical metal, where the only scattering is via exchange interaction, but spin- preserving scattering is allowed; Eq. (1) is modified by an additional prefactor 2/3, i.e. the maximum MR is 2/3 (67%). Generic metals with other scattering processes would show even lower MR. Our best estimate for the fraction of spin-flip scattering in Fig. 4 is 98.1% (see Supplementary Materials). We have observed at higher F4-TCNQ doping that the fraction of spin-flip scattering is reduced (see Supplementary Materials). This is possibly due to the formation of larger puddles with increasing disorder, which scatter via non-spin-flip inelastic processes, or the F4-TCNQ ions themselves acting as a local moments with small g ~ 2. Our results demonstrate how electronic transport experiments can be used to observe the opening of a bandgap due to confinement in a topological Dirac semimetal, and to determine unambiguously whether the resulting insulator is topological or trivial. Our as-grown ultrathin Na3Bi films are lightly n-doped, and the conducting bulk shows a transition from weak anti-localisation to weak localization as the doping is decreased, as expected for a gapped Dirac system. The weak localization behavior contrasts with gapless bulk Na3Bi, which shows only perfect weak anti-localisation, strongly indicating a mixing of the Dirac cones and opening of a gap in ultrathin Na3Bi. When the sample is doped to bring the Fermi level into the bulk bandgap, the non-local resistance signal becomes comparable to the local signal, indicative of edge transport. A giant negative magnetoresistance arises in the edge transport regime due to the suppression of spin-flip scattering by a magnetic field. The field dependence of the resistance shows excellent agreement with theory for a helical edge mode, conclusively demonstrating the topological nature of the edge conductance. We expect that the observed GNMR should be generic to helical edge transport in any 2DTI. Furthermore the GNMR follows a simple universal form with only one materials parameter, g. While the GNMR is particularly large in Na3Bi due to the large g, even for g = 2 we expect that the GNMR should reach 90% at B = 3.1 T and T = 1 K. Therefore we expect the combination of non-local transport measurements and magnetoresistance to provide a simple method for unambiguous identification of future 2DTI materials which is not limited to samples exhibiting ballistic transport over long distances. J. Maciejko, C. Liu, Y. Oreg, X.-L. Qi, C. Wu, and S.-C. Zhang, Physical review letters 102, 256803 M. König, S. Wiedmann, C. Brüne, A. Roth, H. Buhmann, L. W. Molenkamp, X.-L. Qi, and S.-C. Zhang, Science 318, 766 (2007). A. Roth, C. Brüne, H. Buhmann, L. W. Molenkamp, J. Maciejko, X.-L. Qi, and S.-C. Zhang, Science 325, G. Gusev, E. Olshanetsky, Z. Kvon, A. Levin, N. Mikhailov, and S. Dvoretsky, Physical review letters K. C. Nowack et al., Nature materials 12, 787 (2013). G. Gusev, Z. Kvon, E. Olshanetsky, A. Levin, Y. Krupko, J. Portal, N. Mikhailov, and S. Dvoretsky, Physical Review B 89, 125305 (2014). E. M. Spanton, K. C. Nowack, L. Du, G. Sullivan, R.-R. Du, and K. A. Moler, Physical review letters 113, J. I. Väyrynen, M. Goldstein, Y. Gefen, and L. I. Glazman, Physical Review B 90, 115309 (2014). L. Du, I. Knez, G. Sullivan, and R.-R. Du, Physical review letters 114, 096802 (2015). E. Olshanetsky, Z. Kvon, G. Gusev, A. Levin, O. Raichev, N. Mikhailov, and S. Dvoretsky, Physical review letters 114, 126802 (2015). Z. Fei et al., Nature Physics 13, 677 (2017). S. Tang et al., Nature Physics 13, 683 (2017). S. Wu, V. Fatemi, Q. D. Gibson, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, R. J. Cava, and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Science F. Reis, G. Li, L. Dudy, M. Bauernfeind, S. Glass, W. Hanke, R. Thomale, J. Schäfer, and R. Claessen, Science 357, 287 (2017). J. L. Collins et al., Nature 564, 390 (2018). J. Hellerstedt, I. Yudhistira, M. T. Edmonds, C. Liu, J. Collins, S. Adam, and M. S. Fuhrer, Physical Review Materials 1, 054203 (2017). J. Hellerstedt, M. T. Edmonds, N. Ramakrishnan, C. Liu, B. Weber, A. Tadich, K. M. O’Donnell, S. Adam, and M. S. Fuhrer, Nano letters 16, 3210 (2016). M. T. Edmonds, J. Hellerstedt, K. M. O’Donnell, A. Tadich, and M. S. Fuhrer, ACS applied materials & interfaces 8, 16412 (2016). J. Song, F.-Y. Kam, R.-Q. Png, W.-L. Seah, J.-M. Zhuo, G.-K. Lim, P. K. Ho, and L.-L. Chua, Nature nanotechnology 8, 356 (2013). Y. Zhang, Z. Liu, B. Zhou, Y. Kim, Z. Hussain, Z.-X. Shen, Y. Chen, and S.-K. Mo, Applied Physics Letters H. Yuan et al., Nature Physics 9, 563 (2013). B. L. Altshuler, A. Aronov, and D. Khmelnitsky, Journal of Physics C: Solid State Physics 15, 7367 Y. Wang, X. Cai, J. Reutt-Robey, and M. S. Fuhrer, Physical Review B 92, 161411(R) (2015). C.-Z. Li, L.-X. Wang, H. Liu, J. Wang, Z.-M. Liao, and D.-P. Yu, Nature communications 6, 10137 (2015). J. Xiong, S. K. Kushwaha, T. Liang, J. W. Krizan, M. Hirschberger, W. Wang, R. Cava, and N. Ong, Science 350, 413 (2015). Y. Wang et al., Nature communications 7, 13142 (2016). C. Zhang et al., Nature communications 8, 13741 (2017). T. Van Peski-Tinbergen and A. Dekker, Physica 29, 917 (1963). M.-T. Béal-Monod and R. Weiner, Physical Review 170, 552 (1968). J. Wang and D. Culcer, Physical Review B 88, 125140 (2013).