Magnetic resonance imaging with optical preamplification and detection A. Simonsen1, J. D. Sanchez2, S. A. Saarinen1,3, J. H. Ardenkjær-Larsen2, A. Schliesser1,3, and E. S. Polzik1 1Niels Bohr Institute, University of Copenhagen 2Center for Hyperpolarization In Magnetic Resonance (HYPERMAG), Technical University of Denmark 3Center for Hybrid Quantum Networks (Hy-Q), University of Copenhagen Abstract Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging relies on conventional electronics that is increasingly challenged by the push for stronger magnetic fields and higher channel count. These problems can be avoided by utilizing optical technologies. As a replacement for the standard low-noise preamplifier, we have implemented a new transduction principle that upconverts an MR signal to the optical domain and im- aged a phantom in a clinical 3 T scanner with signal-to- noise comparable to classical induction detection. 1 Main Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging is a well-established and non-invasive tool for routine clinical diagnostics and basic research. Its utility would benefit from enhanced signal-to-noise and acquisition speed—the key perfor- mance parameters for MR imaging—and is the focus of considerable research efforts. Two trending developments are higher magnetic fields and more detection coils in ar- rays. Yet most technical innovation relies on the same principle of matching a detection coil to a low-noise pream- plifier in the receiver chain of the scanner similar to the diagram in Fig. 1 (lower right), a common practice that testifies to the extraordinary performance of con- ventional electronics obtained through decades of opti- mization. However, the electronics is increasingly chal- lenged by the ever-increasing magnetic field strengths in MR imaging . And with the push for more coils, the standard approach adds problems like cross-talk and elec- trical interference associated with the individual pream- plifiers and cables that each coil needs, not to mention that dense arrays demands a miniaturization of the cor- responding circuits . These issues may be alleviated by leveraging optical communication and sensing. In partic- ular, optical fibers are insensitive to high magnetic fields, immune to electrical interference, and considered MR safe . Converting the MR signal into an optical modula- tion has been done , and is even commercially available (Phillips dStream), but those approaches still use the stan- dard electrical preamplifier first and then convert the am- plified signal. In contrast, this work replaces the conven- tional electrical preamplifier with a transducer [6–8] that up-converts the MR signal onto an optical carrier. The signal can then be analyzed at the other end of a long and 1.3 cm 2 cm MR scanner Laser RF bias Optical fiber Analysis + - Coil Preamplifier Capacitors DC source Standard detection circuit Analysis Transducer transduction. The main photograph shows the MR scan- ner with the vacuum chamber inside. In the sketch of the scheme, an external frequency bias powers the detection scheme to light and optical fibers routes light from laser to transducer (inset lower left), and from transducer to anal- ysis. The coil can be any standard RF coil used for MR detection. In the standard MR detection scheme (lower right), the RF coil is matched to a low-noise preamplifier. A DC voltage source powers the amplifier and electrical cables carry the amplified signal out of the scanner for further processing. low-loss optical fiber which moves the receiver electronics out and away from the coils and high magnetic field in the scanner. The idea is sketched in Fig. 1 where a signal induced in an MR coil is combined with a radio-frequency (RF) bias, and together they vibrate a micro-mechanical element which, in turn, modulates the amplitude of re- flected laser light. The transduction scheme can have a low noise-temperature , can target any signal frequency, is compatible with telecom optical wavelengths, and has been successfully used to detect a nuclear magnetic res- onance signal . And with proper circuit design and protective steps, we here show for the first time that it can be integrated into a commercial, clinical MR scanner to acquire and reconstruct a complete MR image. Fig. 1 shows a simplified version of our detection setup. A detailed diagram is in the supplementary information. Inside an MR imaging scanner (3 T GE MR750), a typ- ical MR RF coil formed a resonant circuit together with a mechanically compliant capacitor—the transducer. The 1 arXiv:1906.12260v1 [physics.med-ph] 19 Jun 2019 circuit was tuned to resonate at the Larmor precession frequency of the nuclear spins aligned along a strong mag- netic field. In our case, the setup specifically involved 13C nuclear spins and a 3 T magnetic field, i.e. a preces- sion of 32 MHz. The scanner applied an RF pulse to ex- cite the nuclear precession—the transmit pulse. Further- more, it applied gradient magnetic fields that enable selec- tive excitation of atoms and encodes their phase through spatially-dependent time evolution. As the spins precess, they create an oscillating magnetic flux through the coil thus inducing a voltage in the RF coil. That voltage is usually electronically amplified and processed to gener- ate the MR image. Our new development consists of re- placing the standard preamplifier with an optomechanical transducer that converts the MR signal to an amplitude modulation of laser light. The transducer was connected directly in parallel to the coil and consisted of a freely sus- pended membrane—equivalent to a tiny drum-skin—that simultaneously constitutes one side of a capacitor and one mirror in an optical cavity. Charges on the capacitor exert a force on the membrane and cause it to move, and this motion then changes the capacitance and thus also the charges that affects the motion. Hence, the mechanical and electrical resonance are parametrically coupled . As the MR signal induces charges on the capacitor, the resulting motion proportionally changes the reflection of light from the optical cavity. This transduction is most sensitive when the membrane is driven near resonance, which a signal at any frequency can do in unison with an RF bias if the beatnote between the signal and the bias is at the membrane’s resonance—see for the detailed theory. In our case, that meant the bias frequency had to be the difference between the Larmor precession and the membrane resonance, 32 MHz and 1.4 MHz respectively. Note that because the bias and signal are non-degenerate, interference and cross-talk between them can be removed through filtering and the mechanical response helps with that. After the transduction, we downconverted the de- tected signal from optical modulation to the RF domain simply by measuring the reflected optical power with a detector. Although this output was frequency-shifted to the mechanical frequency, it corresponded to the voltage induced in the coil by the MR sequence and was conse- quently sufficient to reconstruct the MR image through post-processing. However, we chose, out of convenience, to leverage the scanner’s dedicated imaging software and fed the transduced signal back to the scanner’s receiver chan- nel. That required the signal to be frequency-shifted back to the signal frequency expected by the scanner, which we did by mixing the transducer signal with the RF bias (see the methods section and figure in supplementary informa- tion). The transducer’s membrane was circular and made out of alumina and aluminum under tensile stress attached on top of a partially reflective mirror. See the methods section and for details. Because aluminum reflects, the membrane and mirror formed an optical cavity with a length determined by the cleanroom fabrication proce- dure. We designed the stack such that the fixed wave- length of our laser was about one cavity linewidth (half width at half max) away from the resonance of the op- tical cavity. Laser light was routed to the sample by an optical network and coupled directly from fiber into the cavity through focusing optics. The same fiber also col- lected the reflection, and the optical network then routed the signal to a detector. To electrically connect the trans- ducer and the circuit, we mounted and wirebonded the membrane chips to an 8-pin integrated circuit socket. Be- cause the transducer needs vacuum to operate, we placed the assembly inside a vacuum chamber made of glass-fiber that could hold a pressure below 1 × 10−3 mbar through- out the measurement series—see the method section. The chip and the circuit were then connected with a short RF cable via a vacuum feedthrough. We protected the trans- ducer from electro-static discharges with a switch (see Fig. 1, lower left) that could short-circuit the capacitor pins. This was particularly important whenever we connected the transducer to circuitry or transported it. In addi- tion, we took several protective steps beyond [6–9, 12] to prevent the membrane from collapsing during the trans- mit pulse: first, two crossed diodes were added in parallel to the transducer to short it if the induced voltage ex- ceed their threshold. Such protection is a common way to protect standard preamplifiers, but did not sufficiently protect the transducer on its own. In addition, it unfor- tunately limits the RF bias that can be applied, but we could anyway get satisfactory transduction performance. Second, the detection resonance was detuned to minimize the voltage and current induced in the coil by the transmit pulse. This is another standard technique in MR imaging and the scanner supplied the trigger signal that con- trolled the detuning. For this purpose, the coil loop had a segmenting capacitor and additional components that together created a tank circuit when the trigger activated a PIN diode’s forward-voltage threshold. The full circuit diagram is described in the methods section and shown in supplementary information. Third, the RF bias was switched off by pulse-modulating the bias amplitude with the same trigger that detuned the circuit. See the full setup diagram in supplementary information. Note that the RF bias and spin-flip pulse overlap a little because the long (8 m) RF cables to and from the scanner add a time delay (∼100 ns), but this was not a problem with every- thing else in place. In its first implementation, the transduction scheme had problems with excess noise which we addressed in the fol- lowing ways: first, the RF bias was filtered twice to re- duce its sideband noise at the detection frequency. Once through an external filter and then through a filter built into the detection circuit. Such sideband noise can limit sensitivity . Second, there was considerable added noise when flexible cables connected the setup inside the scanner room with the setup outside. We believe the poor shielding of the cables allowed ambient noise to leak into the setup. Using instead semi-rigid cables with better shielding reduced the noise significantly. Third, electrical noise at the membrane-frequency could drive the mechan- ical motion because our sample had trapped charges . We cancelled these out with a DC bias on the transducer which gave significant reduction in the overall transducer 2 noise. With those noise-eliminating steps in place, we ob- tained the data shown in Fig. 2 with the optomechanical transduction. We imaged a phantom (Fig. 2a) consisting of a bottle filled with ethylene glycol (purity 99.8 %; natural abun- dance, 1.1 %, 13C; triplet with JCH of 142 Hz). The recorded image (Fig. 2c) shows the spatial density of 13C atoms in a cross-section through the bottle. As we expected, the image does not have a uniform signal-to- noise throughout the volume because we used a surface coil where the detected signal decays with the increased dis- tance to the coil (Fig. 2b). This effect is not corrected in the image processing. To each image voxel corresponds a spectrum obtained from the spin-precession (Fig. 2d). For ethylene glycol, that spectrum has a characteristic triplet as shown in the reference measurement (Fig. 2d), obtained with a commercial coil but still using the same phantom and scanner. And the spectrum obtained with the trans- ducer (Fig. 2e) also shows the same triplet. Additionally, the two detection schemes have different background noise; for the standard electronic amplifier the noise is flat in a broad window, but for the transducer it has a distinctive narrow Lorentzian lineshape plus an offset (Fig. 2e). We believe the Lorentzian feature comes from the membrane’s spectral response because the Lorentzian peak frequency and linewidth changed with the bias power as we expect from the electromechanical interaction . Addition- ally, moving the bias frequency also shifted the detected signal with respect to the noise peak and scaled its am- plitude following the peak shape. This is an expected be- haviour if the MR signal drives the membrane’s motion and therefore further corroborates that the spectral shape of the noise is related to the mechanical motion. Further- more, the transducer’s flat noise background scales with optical power which suggests that it originates from am- plitude noise of the laser, most likely due to shot-noise of light. Finally, we have not found any other spectral feature in the circuit response, nor any spurious noise in the setup, that is consistent with the observed Lorentzian peak. In summary, we have implemented MR imaging with di- rect optical detection and amplification of the MR induc- tion signal thus bringing the technical benefits of optical signal processing to the receiver chain of an MR scanner. To the best of our knowledge, this work represents the first successful implementation of direct electro-mechano- optical transduction in an MR system. We clearly see the expected image and spectrum for our phantom and coil, and a noise-background compatible with the mechanical motion’s Lorentzian linewidth plus an offset from optical noise. The transducer’s spectrum shows a signal-to-noise comparable with a commercial system, although still not as high, and a transduction bandwidth that is narrow com- pared to standard preamplifiers. However, both features can be improved greatly with straightforward improve- ments such as increasing the RF bias amplitude, reducing the capacitance in parallel with the transducer, and espe- cially by decreasing the membrane-capacitor gap . The noise can be reduced by cooling the system, increasing the mechanical quality factor, and using a lighter mem- brane . Bandwidth can be increased by using multiple mechanical modes . Improvements of the optical cav- ity will also benefit performance. Incidentally, our sample had a suboptimal cavity length for the specific bias volt- age, so we can expect to reach better sensitivity using the present platform but with some fabrication optimiza- tion. Note that we deliberately reduced signal-to-noise slightly by upconverting the detected signal in order to send it back to the scanner. This step was not necessary, but convenient. Our future work will aim to address the trapped charges in transducer fabrication in order to elim- inate the DC bias, and to address the transducer’s need for vacuum with cleanroom packaging. The required vac- uum should be achievable with available techniques . Furthermore, while the RF bias is necessary to power the transduction scheme, supplying it with cables is not a ne- cessity. The bias could instead be delivered wirelessly , potentially delivered by the same coil that generates the transmit pulses, and collected by the RF coil. Such a scheme would eliminate all electrical connections to the RF coil, leaving the optical fiber as the only physical con- nection to the circuitry. This would enable a great increase in the density of elements in MR array coils, avoiding all- together the performance and safety issues that stems from the large number of electrical connections present in MR arrays based on current technology.