POLED displays: Robust printing of pixels Pallav Kant,1 Andrew Hazel,1 Mark Dowling,2 Alice Thompson,1 and Anne Juel3, a) 1)School of Mathematics and MCND, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PL, United Kingdom 2)Cambridge Display Technology, Technology Development Centre, Unit 12, Cardinal Business Park, Godmanchester, Cambridgeshire PE29 2XG, United Kingdom 3)MCND and School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PL, United Kingdom (Dated: 6 September 2021) The fabrication of a high-quality POLED (Polymeric Organic Light Emitting Diode) display requires the deposition of identical, uniform fluid films into a large number of shallow recessed regions that form a regular array of pixels on a display backplane. We determine the protocols required to achieve continuous liquid coverage of the entire pixel area for the case where equally-spaced fluid droplets are sequentially printed along a straight line within a stadium-shaped pixel, and explore how these protocols depend on the wetting properties of the pixel surface. Our investigation uses a combination of experiments and numerical modelling, based on the assumption of fluid redistribution via capillary spreading according to a Cox-Voinov law. We show that the model is able to predict quantitatively the evolution of the liquid deposited in a pixel and provides a computationally inexpensive design tool to determine efficient printing strategies that account for uncertainties arising from imperfect substrate preparation or printhead dysfunction. In recent years, inkjet printing-based manufacturing1,2 has established itself as a simpler and more econom- ical approach than conventional lithography processes for the production of a variety of microelectronics,3–5 displays,6–8 sensors,9–11 photovoltaic cells12,13, etc. How- ever, limitations pertaining to the stability of function- alized inks and the need for robust printing strategies that will yield controlled thin-film deposits of non-trivial shapes14–16, mean that the technology has had limited uptake on an industrial scale17,18. In this letter, we ex- plore printing strategies that can be used to form an elongated thin-film (L ≃ 200 μm) of specified shape by sequential deposition of partially overlapping droplets; a process which arises in the context of POLED (Polymeric Organic Light Emitting Diode) display fabrication7,8. The manufacture of high-resolution POLED displays via inkjet printing requires the controlled deposition of a dense pattern of identical liquid films of a functional ma- terial in solution. Solid deposits are formed upon evapo- ration of the solvent to yield the bottom-gated transistors that emit light, commonly referred to as pixels8. The for- mation of continuous solid deposits, which is essential to achieve high-performance displays, requires the coverage of the entire pixel area by the deposited liquid film. In ad- dition, an accurately defined pixel edge is required in or- der to deter unwanted leakage currents and crosstalk be- tween the pixels2. This is a considerable challenge for the inkjet-printing of thin-films which tends to suffer from low spatial resolution14,15,19,20. Hence, chemical21–23 or geometrical24–26 substrate patterns are commonly intro- duced to manipulate the spreading of the deposited liq- uid. Kant et al.27 recently identified the distinct roles of topography and wettability patterning in the sequen- tial deposition of partially overlapping droplets within a a)Electronic mail: anne.juel@manchester.ac.uk shallow recessed substrate region (pixel) that was highly wetting compared to the elevated banks surrounding it. They found that the presence of bounding side walls en- hances local spreading thus facilitating fluid coverage of the entire recessed region, whereas wettability patterning ensures containment of the fluid within the pixel. Hence, robust filling of pixels requires both forms of patterning in combination. In this letter, we focus on determining the conditions required to fill such pixels as a function of the wetting properties of the substrate and the printing parameters, i.e. the total number of droplets deposited in a pixel (N) and the inter-drop distance between them (∆x). We demonstrate that a simple model26,27 based on capillary spreading of the deposited liquid provides a computa- tionally inexpensive design-tool to determine safe print- ing strategies that account for experimental limitations pertaining to the patterning accuracy and printhead op- eration. Experimental methods: A schematic diagram of the ex- perimental setup is shown in Fig. 1a. The details of the experimental setup have been described elsewhere26,27 and thus we will only give a brief description of the points most pertinent to the present study. In a typical exper- iment equidistant partially overlapping droplets (each of volume V = 7.6 ± 0.4 pL) were deposited onto a sub- strate using a horizontally translating drop-on-demand inkjet printhead (SX3, Fujifilm Dimatix) at a constant frequency of f = 80 Hz. Drops produced from the print- head had an in-flight radius Rf = 3� V/(4/3π) = 12.2 μm and coalesced with the pre-existing fluid layer upon impact. The printhead was moved horizontally at dif- ferent speeds v using a linear motion stage (ANT95L, Aerotech) to vary the inter-drop distance (∆x = v/f) be- tween neighbouring droplets. The fluid was a Cambridge Display Technology (CDT) proprietary solution used in POLED printing with dynamic viscosity η = 6.25 × 10−3 arXiv:1906.07824v1 [physics.app-ph] 18 Jun 2019 ii (a) Schematic diagram of the experimental setup. (b,c,d) Influence of the inner advancing contact angle θAi and inter-drop distance ∆x on the spreading of a liquid line deposited inside a pixel. Three sequences of bottom- view snapshots track the deposition of seven droplets for (b) θAi = 20◦, ∆x = 35 μm, (c) θAi = 20◦, ∆x = 25 μm and (d) θAi = 38◦, ∆x = 35 μm. In each sequence, the last image shows the final equilibrium configuration, taken 120.0 s after the deposition of the last droplet. The red outlines overlaid on the experimental images indicate the evolution of the liquid footprint computed numerically for the same parameters. Pa s, density ρ = 1.066 × 103 kg m−3 and surface ten- sion σ = 44 × 10−3 N m−1. The Weber number of the droplet impact was low, We = 2ρV 2 i Rf/σ = 2.4, where Vi = 2.2 m s−1 is the vertical velocity of the droplet20, and accordingly no splashing was observed at the time of impact28. We report observations based on the bottom views recorded at 500 frames per second. Experiments were performed on sample display back- planes manufactured in the clean room facility of CDT, each having a pixel density of 200 pixels per inch – see Kant et al.27 for details of the fabrication process and techniques used for the characterisation of the topograph- ical and wettability patterns. Each pixel on the display consisted of a recessed stadium-shaped well bound by 1.2 μm high sloping side walls (i.e. 10% of the in-flight droplet radius), with different wetting properties inside (4◦ ≤ θAi ≤ 40◦, θRi = 0◦), on the narrow sloping walls (θAw = 47◦, θRw = 0◦) and outside (θAo = 65 ± 2◦, θRo = 40 ± 2◦) the pixel boundary; here θAx and θRx re- fer to the advancing and receding contact angles, respec- tively; see ESI. We varied the inner advancing contact angle by letting the substrate age in the laboratory; this aging did not affect the contact angles on the walls and outer surfaces which remained approximately constant. The high values of the advancing and receding contact angles on the banks surrounding the pixels ensured that any droplet deposited partially outside the boundary re- treated into the pixel so that the deposited volume was contained inside the pixel27. Numerical model: The details of the model develop- ment have also been presented previously20,26,27. Briefly, we model the deposited liquid mass as a thin film of fixed volume that evolves through (quasi-static) capillary ef- fects. A kinematic boundary condition advances the con- tact line according to a Cox-Voinov spreading law29,30, which we parameterise using the experimental contact- angle measurements to give a wetting profile for the pixel, see Fig. 2. The only initial conditions required for the model are the total volume and the footprint shape of the wetted region. Upon deposition of a new droplet, the liquid footprint is taken as the union of the regions wet- ted by the existing liquid morphology and by the newly deposited droplet, and the total volume is incremented accordingly. The fluid pressure and height profile con- sistent with the updated footprint and fluid volume are then adjusted to ensure that the fluid is in static equi- librium. This model was implemented numerically using the finite element library oomph-lib31; see source code32 and ESI for model details. The three sequences of images in Fig. 1 illustrate the evolution of a liquid line formed from the deposition in- side a pixel of seven equidistant droplets, thus a fixed vol- ume of fluid, for different values of pixel wettability (θAi) and inter-drop spacing (∆x). The centre of the initial droplet was always located at a distance of δx = 14±3μm from the edge of the pixel. In all three cases, the droplet deposition leads to the formation of a rivulet that fills the pixel at the upstream end and narrows as further droplets are deposited downstream. The three liquid lines evolve towards distinct equilibrium configurations (last image in each sequence), with only Fig. 1b resulting in a filled pixel. In Fig. 1d the pixel does not fill because of the in- creased advancing contact angle on the inner pixel surface (θAi = 38◦). In Fig. 1b,d, the value of ∆x has been cho- sen so that the liquid line extends over the whole length iii of the pixel (∆x =35 μm) in contrast with Fig. 1c where ∆x =25 μm. Although in Fig. 1c the contact angle is low (θAi = 20◦), the pixel does not fill because the line of de- posited fluid does not extend to the end of the pixel (and the wetting front propagating along the pixel boundary comes to rest when it reaches the end of the liquid line). The red contours overlaid on the experimental snap- shots in Fig. 1 represent the footprints of the deposited liquid computed numerically for the same parameter val- ues as in the experimental sequences. The model cap- tures the main features of the evolution of the liquid lines for different values of θAi and ∆x. At early times (t ≤ 0.0875 s), the model predictions are almost indistin- guishable from the experiment. Small discrepancies in the position of the wetting fronts along the side-walls oc- cur only in Fig. 1b, which we attribute to experimental variability in the wetting properties of the side-walls (see Fig. 2 for further discussion). At later times, the liquid spreads faster in the computations because the model does not include any viscous effects which begin to re- strict the flow in the experiments. Despite the difference in the spreading time scales, the model correctly predicts the evolution and the equilibrium states of the three liq- uid lines in Fig. 1. (a) (b) footprint obtained following the deposition of five droplets (∆x = 35 μm) with their centroids displaced from the hor- izontal centreline of the pixel by 5% of the pixel width (θAi = 30◦). The contact line does not extend to the side walls of the pixel, suggesting that the inner-surface of the pixel is bound by a non-wetting region. This experimental footprint is compared with numerical simulations performed for (a) the wetting profile used throughout this paper (yel- low contour); (b) a profile where the region with θAw = 47◦ has been extended into the flat recessed portion of the pixel (red contour). In the wettability profiles, B denotes the local height of the pixel, with B = 0 inside the pixel, and θA is the advancing contact angle. The examples shown in Fig. 1 demonstrate that the filling of pixels does not occur for all values of θAi and ∆x. A large number of experiments (∼ 100) were con- ducted to construct a phase diagram of ‘filled’ or ‘par- tially filled’ equilibrium states in terms of the operating conditions (N, ∆x) for pixels of three different wettabil- ities θAi = 4.5◦, 20◦ and 38◦. The resulting phase dia- gram is shown in Fig. 3. The shaded region indicates con- ditions for which at least one droplet is deposited entirely outside the pixel, while the filled circles interpolated by solid lines represent the minimum number of droplets re- quired to fill a pixel as a function of inter-drop distance, for different values of θAi. Thus, the areas above each threshold boundary that are bordered by the red-shaded region on the right hand-side correspond to the ‘safe’ op- erating conditions that systematically lead to filled pix- els. Note that the boundaries between different regions in the phase diagram were determined experimentally. For wetting pixels (θAi = 4.5◦), ‘safe’ operating condi- tions are for N ≥ 4 (green line) because the low contact angle enables the line to spread to the end of the pixel regardless of droplet positioning. This means that the filling of a wetting pixel only depends on the total vol- ume deposited; see Figs. S4 and S5. The number of droplets required to fill the pixel decreases with decreas- ing contact angle until for strongly wetting substrates (θA < 1◦) a single droplet can fill the pixel provided that the volumetric evaporation rate is not too high. For partially wetting substrates (20◦ ≤ θ ≤ 38◦), the filling of a pixel for small values of ∆x also requires the volume deposited to exceed a threshold value. However, the number of droplets required to fill the pixel decreases as the inter-drop distance increases (blue line: θAi = 20◦; black line: θAi = 38◦) because the filling of the pixel re- lies on the liquid line reaching the downstream end of the pixel and this can be achieved for a reduced total deposited volume by increasing ∆x. This result is con- sistent with Fig. 1b, where at ∆x = 35 μm, the liquid line extends over the length of the pixel and the side walls enhance spreading sufficiently to fill the pixel. Overall, the area of the parameter plane that leads to filled equi- librium states shrinks with increasing θAi. However, the minimum number of droplets required to fill the pixel can be reduced by using droplets of higher volume, thus ex- panding the safe range of operating conditions; see Fig. S6. Using the numerical model, we were able to reproduce the threshold operating conditions that separate filled and partially filled pixel states; see Fig. 3. The numerical model systematically reproduces the details of the equi- librium configurations observed in the experiments, and hence predicts the boundary between filled and under- filled pixels. This agreement demonstrates the utility of our computationally inexpensive model, promoting it as a feasible design tool for inkjet-printing-based manufac- turing. In a small subset of experimental pixels, anoma- lous equilibrium configurations were obtained, which the model used in Figs. 1 and 3 failed to capture. An exam- ple is shown in Fig. 2, where the off-centred deposition of five droplets yields an equilibrium liquid line that does not extend to the side walls. The footprint calculated numerically with the wetting profile used so far, differs from the experiment in that one side of the footprint has spread along the bounding wall, as indicated by the pres- ence of a wetting front (Fig. 2a). We find that a change in the imposed wetting profile can reproduce the exper- iv on the filling of a stadium-shaped pixel. The boundary of the red-shaded region represents the maximum number of droplets which can be deposited at least partially inside the pixel for a chosen value of ∆x. The filled circles, linearly interpolated by solid lines, correspond to the threshold operating conditions that separate filled and partially filled pixels with θAi = 4.5◦ (green), 20◦ (blue) and 38◦ (black), respectively. Each data point indicates three concurrent experiments, and the accuracy of each data point was confirmed by performing repeated experiments for one and two fewer droplets as well as for one more droplet, which consistently led to partially filled and filled pixels, respectively. Hence, safe operating conditions that result in a filled pixel are in the regions above the threshold conditions and left of the red-shaded region. The stars correspond to the operating conditions of the snapshots on the right side of the graph for θAi = 20◦; 38◦, and in the ESI for θAi = 4.5◦. The red contours are the numerically computed equilibrium footprints for the same parameter values. imental equilibrium state numerically (Fig. 2b): the re- gion where θAw(θRw) = 47◦(0◦) is extended by 0.5 μm (1.5% of the pixel width) into the inner pixel region. This result suggests that the numerical model can be used to diagnose small variations in the wetting properties of the side-walls across pixels, which result from the fabrication process. This known variability in the wetting profile can in turn be accounted for when numerically predicting safe operating conditions that lead to filled pixels. Finally, we used the numerical model to capture the effect of a printhead dysfunction commonly encountered during operations on an industrial scale, namely the mis- firing of a droplet. As printing defects can lead to par- tially filled pixels8 which reduce the overall resolution and performance of a display device, it is necessary to account for such dysfunctions at the design stage. In Fig. 4, a numerical scheme is depicted which misses out the printing of the penultimate droplet, in order to ac- count for the misfiring of a droplet during the deposi- tion sequence. Experimental and numerical equilibrium configurations obtained following this protocol are in ex- cellent agreement. This test suggests that the numerical model may be used to identify a subset of the safe operat- ing conditions reported in Fig. 3 where filling is ensured despite the occasional misfiring of the printhead. To summarize, we have discussed various aspects per- taining to the printing of short liquid lines to robustly fill pixels in the context of POLED display fabrica- tion. We have shown that in order for sequentially de- posited droplets that coalesce upon impact to form a thin (a) (b) (a) Schematic diagram illustrating the numerical scheme used to simulate a common printhead dysfunction (missed droplet). (b) Comparison between experimental and numerical footprints of an equilibrium configuration following a deposition sequence where the 13th droplet out of 14 was missed out: θAi = 38◦, ∆x = 15 μm. film that covers the entire pixel surface, the wettability of the pixel surface must be considered in conjunction with the deposition parameters. Furthermore, we have demonstrated that a simple model that relies on capil- lary spreading according to a Cox-Voinov spreading law can be used as a computationally inexpensive design tool to determine efficient printing strategies in the fabrica- tion of high performance POLED and also LCD (Liquid Crystal Display)33 devices. 1P. Calvert, Chem. Mater. 13, 3299 (2001). 2M. Singh, H. M. Haverinen, P. Dhagat, and G. E. Jabbour, Adv. Maters. 22, 673 (2010). 3H. Sirringhaus, T. Kawase, R. Friend, T. Shimoda, M. In- basekaran, W. Wu, and E. Woo, Science 290, 2123 (2000). v 4H. Minemawari, T. Yamada, H. Matsui, J. Tsutsumi, S. Haas, R. Chiba, R. Kumai, and T. Hasegawa, Nature 475, 364 (2011). 5S. H. Ko, H. Pan, C. P. Grigoropoulos, C. K. Luscombe, J. M. Fr ́echet, and D. Poulikakos, Nanotechnology 18, 345202 (2007). 6P. Andersson, R. Forchheimer, P. Tehrani, and M. Berggren, Adv. Funct. Mater. 17, 3074 (2007). 7T. Shimoda, K. Morii, S. Seki, and H. Kiguchi, MRS Bull. 28, 8J. Halls, in Inf. Disp, Vol. 2 (2005). 9V. Dua, S. P. Surwade, S. Ammu, S. R. Agnihotra, S. Jain, K. E. Roberts, S. Park, R. S. Ruoff, and S. K. Manohar, Angew. Chem. 10P. Lorwongtragool, E. Sowade, N. Watthanawisuth, R. R. Bau- mann, and T. Kerdcharoen, Sensors 14, 19700 (2014). 11K. Abe, K. Suzuki, and D. Citterio, Anal. Chem. 80, 6928 12C. N. Hoth, P. Schilinsky, S. A. Choulis, and C. J. Brabec, Nano Lett. 8, 2806 (2008). 13S. Jung, A. Sou, K. Banger, D.-H. Ko, P. C. Chow, C. R. McNeill, and H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Energy Mater. 4, 1400432 (2014). 14J. Stringer and B. Derby, Langmuir 26, 10365 (2010). 15P. C. Duineveld, J. Fluid Mech. 477, 175 (2003). 16A. Dalili, S. Chandra, J. Mostaghimi, H. C. Fan, and J. C. Simmer, J. Colloid Interf. Sci. 418, 292 (2014). 17E. Sowade, K. Y. Mitra, E. Ramon, C. Martinez-Domingo, F. Vil- lani, F. Loffredo, H. L. Gomes, and R. R. Baumann, Org. Elec- tron. 30, 237 (2016). 18J. Noh, M. Jung, Y. Jung, C. Yeom, M. Pyo, and G. Cho, Proc. IEEE 103, 554 (2015). 19D. Soltman and V. Subramanian, Langmuir 24, 2224 (2008). 20A. B. Thompson, C. R. Tipton, A. Juel, A. L. Hazel, and M. Dowling, J. Fluid Mech. 761, 261 (2014). 21J. Wang, Z. Zheng, H. Li, W. Huck, and H. Sirringhaus, Nat. Mater. 3, 171 (2004). 22H. Gau, S. Herminghaus, P. Lenz, and R. Lipowsky, Science 23M. Kuang, L. Wang, and Y. Song, Adv. Mater. 26, 6950 (2014). 24C. E. Hendriks, P. J. Smith, J. Perelaer, A. M. Van den Berg, and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Funct. Mater. 18, 1031 (2008). 25R. Seemann, M. Brinkmann, E. J. Kramer, F. F. Lange, and R. Lipowsky, Proc. Natl. Acad.Sci. 102, 1848 (2005). 26P. Kant, A. L. Hazel, M. Dowling, A. B. Thompson, and A. Juel, Phys. Rev. Fluids 2, 094002 (2017). 27P. Kant, A. L. Hazel, M. Dowling, A. B. Thompson, and A. Juel, Soft matter 14, 8709 (2018). 28C. W. Visser, P. E. Frommhold, S. Wildeman, R. Mettin, D. Lohse, and C. Sun, Soft Matter 11, 1708 (2015). 29R. Cox, J. Fluid Mech. 168, 169 (1986). 30O. Voinov, Fluid Dyn. 11, 714 (1976). 31M. Heil and A. L. Hazel, in Fluid-structure interaction (Springer, 2006) pp. 19–49. 32https://figshare.com/s/9e95e92400ee8e74e6ac. 33C.-T. Chen, K.-H. Wu, C.-F. Lu, and F. Shieh, J. Micromech. Microeng. 20, 055004 (2010).