1 Few-Layer MoS2/a-Si:H Heterojunction pin-Photodiodes for extended Infrared Detection Andreas Bablich 1, Daniel S. Schneider 2, Paul Kienitz 1, Satender Kataria 3, Stefan Wagner 2, Chanyoung Yim 1,4, Niall McEvoy 5, Olof Engstrom 2, Julian Müller 1, Yilmaz Sakalli 1, Benjamin Butz 1, Georg S. Duesberg 4, 5, Peter Haring Bolívar 1 and Max C. Lemme 2, 3 1 University of Siegen, School of Science and Technology, Hölderlinstr. 3, Siegen, 57076, Germany 2 Advanced Microelectronic Center Aachen (AMICA), AMO GmbH, Otto-Blumenthal-Str. 25, 52074 Aachen, Germany 3 Chair for Electronic Devices, Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Information Technology, RWTH Aachen University, Otto-Blumenthal-Str. 25, 52074 Aachen, Germany 4 Institute of Physics, EIT 2, Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Information Technology, Universität der Bundeswehr München, Werner-Heisenberg-Weg 39, 85577 Neubiberg, Germany 5 School of Chemistry and AMBER, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland E-Mail: andreas.bablich@uni-siegen.de Phone: +49 (0) 271 – 740 4748 Fax: +49 (0) 271 – 740 2410 Keywords: 2D semiconductor, infrared photodetector, molybdenum disulfide MoS2, amorphous silicon a-Si:H, transition metal dichalcogenide TMD, semiconductor device fabrication 2 Abstract Few-layer molybdenum disulfide (FL-MoS2) films have been integrated into amorphous silicon (a-Si:H) pin-photodetectors. To achieve this, vertical a-Si:H photodiodes were grown by plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PE-CVD) on top of large-scale synthesized and transferred homogeneous FL-MoS2. This novel detector array exhibits long-term stability (more than six month) and outperforms conventional silicon-based pin-photodetectors in the infrared range (IR, l = 2120 nm) in terms of sensitivities by up to ~50 mAW-1. Photodetectivities of up to ~2·1010 Jones and external quantum efficiencies of ~3 % are achieved. The detectors further feature the additional functionality of bias-dependent responsivity switching between the different spectral ranges. The realization of such scalable detector arrays is an essential step towards pixelated and wavelength-selective sensors operating in the IR spectral range. Photodetectors play significant roles in fields of optical communication 1, imaging 2, night vision 3, safety and security 4, environmental-/agricultural sensing 5, industrial process monitoring 6, in the food industry 7 and, exceptionally, in fields of research 8. Established photodetectors for the visible (VIS) regime predominantly consist of crystalline or amorphous silicon (c-Si, a-Si:H) as the absorber due to the maturity and availability of group IV (Ge) or III-IV semiconductors (e.g., InGaAs, InAsSb, etc.) 9, which necessitate demanding and thus more cost-/energy intensive thin-film fabrication techniques, typically Metal-Organic Chemical Vapor Deposition. Mercury cadmium telluride (HgCdTe) is photosensitive at wavelengths above 2 μm when operated at cryogenic temperatures 10. Disadvantageous, the noise level of narrow bandgap detectors, like HgCdTe (< 0.1 eV 11), increases drastically with temperature due to the thermal excitation of charge carriers. Aside from the novel photodetector architecture presented in this work, quantum dot (e.g. colloidal 12 or type-II superlattices) or transition metal oxide based photodetectors, (e.g. VO2/V2O5 heterostructures 13) might allow reasonable (N)IR detection at higher operating temperatures in the future due to 3D quantum confinement effects. As applications advance, photoresponse in a combined optical range, here shown from VIS to mid-IR wavelengths, with the capabilities for panchromatic or selective detection (voltage-dependent sensitivity) are desired 14. In this work, we demonstrate significantly extended photoresponse in well-established a-Si:H photodetectors towards the infrared by the integration of a large-scale 2D semiconductor, the transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) molybdenum disulfide (MoS2). Even though the bandgap (Eg) of bulk MoS2 is only slightly smaller than that of the a-Si:H, a distinct responsivity in the NIR range is observed. Such considerable absorption up to 5 μm has been reported for isolated large-scale MoS2 and depends on its thickness and crystallinity 15. Although optoelectronic devices based on exfoliated mono- or multilayer MoS2 flakes have been demonstrated to show good photodetection capabilities 16,17, they lack scalability due to the small flake size in the μm range and tedious manual handling. Following the efforts of process integration of scalable chemical vapor deposited (CVD) graphene films 18–20, the large-area growth of MoS2 and other TMDs has also been demonstrated using CVD and related techniques 21–24 such as thermally assisted conversion (TAC) of molybdenum (Mo) thin films 25. The transfer of such grown films is also challenging, but recent progress is quite promising 26. Beyond material growth and transfer, the large-scale integration of TMDs into semiconductor process technology faces another challenge: the controlled and homogeneous nucleation and growth of functional layers on top of the TMD. Here, few-layer molybdenum disulfide (FL-MoS2) was successfully and reproducibly integrated on a centimeter-scale on two different chips with a conventional thin-film deposition process of a-Si:H pin-photodiodes. The resulting detector arrays can be tuned in their photoresponse from the VIS to the IR range depending on the applied bias 3 voltage. The a-Si:H effectively passivates the 2D MoS2 and provides long-term device stability of at least six month (cf. Figure S5-S7). The device technology and fabrication described in this work is generally scalable and suitable for standardized deposition techniques, provided that the transfer of 2D materials becomes an automated process technology. circular 200 μm MoS2/a-Si:H detectors, b) fabrication scheme including MoS2 integration, c) cross-sectional STEM micrograph with corresponding EDS element maps, d) HRTEM detail of embedded MoS2 thin film with corresponding fast Fourier transform. Methods The MoS2 was grown on an oxidized silicon wafer (300 nm SiO2 on Si) by TAC of pre-deposited Mo. The resulting MoS2 had a thickness of approximately 4 nm, which should theoretically result in an electronic band gap of Eg = 1.45 eV 27. Details about the process tool and synthesis parameters are given in the Supporting Information. The layers were subsequently transferred by a conventional wet method using spin-coated polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) as a support for the MoS2. The 2D film was separated from the growth substrate by etching the Si/SiO2 in potassium hydroxide. The supported MoS2 was transferred onto deionized water for plasma-enhanced CVD (PE-CVD) process in a multi-chamber vacuum system. The Supporting Information and provide detailed process parameters. The MoS2 films intentionally did not cover the entire sample area, so that MoS2-free regular photodiodes were fabricated next to the IR-sensitive MoS2/a-Si:H detectors. Aluminum-doped zinc-oxide (AZO) was deposited in-situ to avoid unwanted contamination at the semiconductor-/contact interface. The single devices were finally separated by selective ion etching of the front contact and the a-Si:H pin-diode, including the embedded FL-MoS2. After the MoS2 transfer onto the substrate and prior to further PE-CVD deposition of a-Si:H, Raman analyses were conducted to examine the MoS2 quality and to confirm its thickness. The spectra were recorded using a confocal WITec Alpha 300R Raman microscope equipped with a 532 nm laser. The signal was collected through a 100× objective and dispersed using an 1800 g/mm grating. A Peltier cooled charge-coupled device (Andor DU401 BV) was used for the spectrum detection. During the Raman measurements, the laser power was kept constant at 0.5 mW. The process integration, i.e. the quality and homogeneity of the thin film stacks, the roughness of the embedded MoS2 and the wetting and growth of the a-Si:H on the FL-MoS2, was investigated by scanning and transmission electron microscopy (SEM, TEM) in conjunction with focused ion-beam (FIB) cross-sectioning. An FEI Strata dual- beam FIB/SEM was utilized for SEM and site-specific TEM sample preparation by regular FIB lift-out. High- resolution TEM (HRTEM), scanning TEM (STEM) and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) at 200 kV were carried out using a FEI Talos F200A with a large-area ChemiSTEMTM EDS detector. Electrical characterization comprised current-voltage measurements (I-V) with and without standardized AM1.5 illumination and was performed using a Suss microprobe station connected to a Keithley 4200-SCS parameter analyzer. For spectrally resolved photoresponse measurements, a monochromator (Acton Research, tungsten- halogen lamp) was utilized to sample narrow wavelength bands of 10 nm in the range of 400 nm to 2120 nm. 4 The photocurrent signals were converted using a FEMTO DLCPA-200 I-V converter and amplifier and acquired via lock-in technique (Princeton 5210). The optical setup was calibrated using a reference c-Si photodetector (S1337-33BQ, Hamamatsu) for wavelengths below 1100 nm and an InGaAs photodetector (12182-030k, Hamamatsu) for wavelengths up to 2120 nm (cutoff wavelength) to extract absolute spectral responsivity values. All electrical and optical measurements were performed under ambient conditions. Results and discussion diode photodetectors. The targeted MoS2 thickness of ~4 nm as well as the interlayer spacing were verified by HR(S)TEM (cf. Figure1d) and coincide with the expected thickness increase of the initial metallic Mo by a factor of three 29. After the repeated fabrication of entire MoS2/a-Si:H photodiodes (cf. Supporting Information, Methods), the intended layer sequence of the devices was verified by site-specific cross-sectional S/TEM analyses (cf. Figure1c, d). The S/TEM images confirm excellent homogeneity of the FL-MoS2 (cf. Figure1c, d) and exceptional wetting of the i-a-Si:H on the MoS2, a prerequisite for the successful integration. The devices show minimal interface roughness, in particular in close vicinity to the embedded FL-MoS2. Consequently, the stacks exhibit minimal thickness variations (detailed information is provided in the Supporting Information). For vertical devices, significant PMMA contamination after the transfer of the thin-film semiconductor is expected to negatively affect the i-a-Si:H nucleation and growth. More importantly, it would govern the charge transfer to, as well as the transport through, the pin-junction. However, nanoscopic TEM characterization did not reveal such residuals indicating the thorough removal of the PMMA. This demonstrates that routine integration of a 2D layered semiconductor like FL-MoS2 in regular semiconductor-processing schemes is feasible and can considerably extend the functionality and performance of current devices. In this case, functional arrays of FL- MoS2 based devices up to 0.25 mm2 on a total area of 4 cm2 were realized. J-V curves of an MoS2-based photodiode and a reference a-Si:H pin-diode are presented in Figure 2a. For both detector types, we extracted ideality factors of n ≈ 3 from the dark-current density (jdark) measurements. An ideality factor of n = 2 for the a-Si:H pin-diode was extracted under AM1.5 illumination, which compares well to the predicted values in the range of 1.4-2 30. Under illumination, the shape of the J-V characteristic of the MoS2/a-Si:H heterostructure changes substantially at low bias voltages so that a substantiated extraction of the ideality factor is almost impossible. The photocurrent decrease might be due to oxide formation at the MoS2 interfaces most likely originating from the wet transfer. The presence of oxygen has been confirmed by EDX line- scan measurements (cf. Figure 1c and S3). Local oxidation of the a-Si:H presumably reduces the vertical charge transfer along the heterojunction and leads to an additional, parasitic series resistance. However, a decade change in current by increasing the external bias from 0.6 V to 1.5 V would result in n ≈ 15.. The bare a-Si:H detector exhibits an exceptional high dynamic range DR = 20 ∙ log - .3456 7 of ≥100 dB at low bias voltages. In the low reverse bias regime, the dynamic of the MoS2/a-Si:H diodes likewise reach ≥ 80 dB which is comparable to the performance of common a-Si:H based mono- or multicolor photodetectors 31,32. The slight reduction in dynamic and drop in the ideality factor may be explained by additional series resistances due to charge transfer perpendicular to the MoS2 layers and/or by charge recombination at additional defects and interfaces. Under larger reverse bias conditions of Vbias < -2 V, both detectors perform nearly identical and exhibit good dynamic ranges of around 60 dB at -6 V. Even after several months, the DR remains almost constant (cf. Figure S3, S4) demonstrating that capping the MoS2 by a-Si:H conserves its properties. 5 detector types under reverse bias (-6 V, measured up to 2120 nm ≡ 0.58 eV), left inset: transition region at 800 nm, right inset: responsivity maxima in the visible range for both detector types, c) bias-dependent Rl of a representative MoS2/a-Si:H photodetector under reverse bias of -4 V and -5 V, d) demonstration of clear bias- dependent responsivity switching above 800 nm. The absolute photoresponsivities Rλ of a MoS2/a-Si:H heterostructure and a typical a-Si:H reference pin- photodiode are shown in Figure 2b for an applied bias of -6 V. Although absolute photoresponsivities of the reference devices slightly vary due to slight inhomogeneities of the AZO contact deposition, the Rλ of all a-Si:H pin-detectors is qualitatively identical (cf. Figure 2b,c), confirming reproducible a-Si:H fabrication conditions. They reach an almost bias-independent global maximum of around 320 mAW-1 at 520 nm (Vbias = -6 V) (cf. Figure 2b) corresponding to an external quantum efficiency (EQE) of about 75 %. This performance compares well to other a-Si:H pin-detectors 33,34. Being insensitive for infrared light due to the a-Si:H bandgap of 1.65 eV (cf. Figure S8b), Rλ of these reference detectors vanishes above 800 nm. By optical simulations it has been verified that the local maxima at 600 and 650 nm result from interference effects between the different layers (cf. Figure S9). These maxima shift in the MoS2/a-Si:H detectors (Figure 2b, right inset) as the interference conditions change due to increased device thickness (cf. Figure S9b,c). Despite the very small mass fraction compared to the i-a- Si:H absorber, the embedded MoS2 effectively extends the spectral detection bandwidth of our MoS2/a-Si:H pin- diodes in a broad range far into the mid-IR (cf. Figure 2b). Although the band gap of the grown MoS2 has been determined by spectroscopic ellipsometry to be Eg = 1.45 eV (cf. Figure S8a), systematic absorption far below that inherent optical bandgap occurs. The presence of the MoS2 is thus not sufficient to explain this repeatable observation. Instead, the absorption may be due to a high density of defect states in the sulfurized material and/or at the interfaces to the a-Si:H. This hypothesis is in line with experiments on pure MoS2, where it was concluded that sulfur vacancies in the MoS2 lattice reduce the bandgap and lead to a metallic behavior of MoS2 above a certain level of disorder 15. The IR photoresponsivities of different MoS2/a-Si:H photodetectors above 750 nm were found to follow a general trend (cf. Figure S7), although the detailed wavelength dependencies vary. This may be attributed to local variability of the MoS2 (and thus the local interface to the a-Si:H), similar to the shifts in interference maxima in the visible range. A key parameter to evaluate the photon-to-charge conversion for specific wavelengths is the detectivity D∗ = :; <=∙>∙.3456 35. Here, Vbias allows a facile tuning of the dark-current density j@ABC, Rl and therefore D*. The MoS2/a-Si:H heterojunction diodes with FL-MoS2 reach a mean Rl of around 50 mAW-1, a respective D* of 2·1010 Jones, and an EQE of nearly 3 % in the IR at 2120 nm ≡ 0.58 eV. The mean EQE in the IR is larger than 1 % above 1100 nm at -6 V bias voltage (cf. Figure 2b). An interesting feature of our MoS2/a-Si:H detectors is their capability to be easily switched between a limited optical response in the visible regime and an extended response comprising the visible and IR (cf. Figure 2c, d). By applying a specific external voltage to the MoS2/a-Si:H heterojunction (cf. Figure 2d), charge from the MoS2 contributes to the total spectral responsivity. We assume, that - as a result of the MoS2 integration - defect states within the MoS2 itself or interface states might cause defect-to-band transitions at wavelength below the initial MoS2 bandgap. It is already known that sulfur vacancies introduce additional defect levels within the MoS2 bandgap 36,37. It is possible, mobile OH- ions in MoS2 interact with interface states 38 causing charge screening effects above a certain external bias. We believe that other TMDs, e.g. PtSe2 39, synthesized by the TAC approach might have similarly high defect densities and might also produce similar but not identical effects to those presented in our work. Due to the local variation of the MoS2, the bias voltage required to activate IR sensitivity 6 varies between samples. However, our detectors facilitate different operation modes. They can be used for panchromatic measurements at higher reverse bias to detect the sum of incoming visible plus IR contributions. At low reverse bias, the clear bias dependency facilitates the distinction between visible and IR components (e.g., IIR = I -5V - I -4 V, cf. Figure 2c) using just a single pixel detector. responsivity in the VIS and the IR range. The listed devices were realized in more simple lateral geometric configurations and are based on exfoliated flakes, i.e. limited in size and scalability. In addition, the IR response in most of these studies was achieved through specific band gap engineering in 2D heterostructures, plasmonics or nanoparticles. Esmaeili-Rad et al. 40 deposited a-Si:H on a mechanically exfoliated FL-MoS2 flake, but no IR photoresponse was measured for the lateral MoS2/a-Si:H heterojunction photodetector. A scalable IR sensitive lateral quasi-bulk MoS2 photoconductor has been demonstrated by Xie et al. 15 with slightly lower Rl and D* under high power illumination. However, these devices were not tunable (cf. Table 1). Our approach is therefore unique that it utilizes standard semiconductor processes and a scalable MoS2 synthesis process and results in tunable IR sensitive photodetectors. The vertical detector arrays are based on the mature a-Si:H platform and show long-term functionality (cf. , Figures S5-7). Ref. Detector type Assembly Operation conditions Device dimensions Active area Radiant power# / W λreference / nm Rλ / AW-1 D* / Jones Spectral range / nm Thickness of 2D-material This work Vertical photodiode MoS2/a-Si:H pin-junction Vbias = -6 V Any shape 2 x 2 cm2 0.7 x 10-6 2120 50 x 10-3 2 (minimum) 5–6 layers (~4 nm) Deng et al. 2018 41 Lateral phototransistor MoS2/graphene (Gr)/MoS2 VG = 0 V, VDS = 0.5 V ~ 100 μm2 3 x 10-7 1400 ~6 x 10-6 ~2 1 layer Gr MoS2 (N.A.) Xie et al. 2017 15 Lateral photoconductor MoS2 V = 10 V 60 μm x 2 mm Ø = 25 mm 8 x 10-3 2111 32 x 10-3 <109 73 layers Huo et al. 2017 42 Lateral photoconductor MoS2 + HgTe quantum dots VG = 15V, VDS = 1V N.A. (< 10 μm2) 0.7 2000 105 1012 few layers Ye et al. 2016 43 Lateral photodetector BP/MoS2 pn-junction VG = 60 V, VDS = 3 V N.A. (~30 μm2) 1.5 x 10-6 1550 30 x 10-3 2 1550 22 nm BP 12 nm MoS2 Zhang et al. 2016 44 Lateral photoconductor MoTe2/MoS2 pn-junction (VDS ~ 0.8 V) N.A. (~50 μm2) 0.5 x 10-3 1550 17 x 10-6 --- 1550 1 layer MoTe2 1 layer MoS2 Kufer et al. 2015 12 Lateral photoconductor MoS2 + PbS quantum dots VG = 100 V, VDS = 1 V 2 1000 2.2 7 >2 layers Wang et al. 2015 45 Lateral photoconductor MoS2 + plasmonic antenna Vbias = 0.8 V N.A. 1.5 x 10-7 1070 5.2 --- 2 layers Yu et al. 2014 46 Lateral photoconductor Dye-sensitized MoS2 VG = 0 V, VDS 5 = V ~80 μm2 1 x 10-3 1000 <1 x 10-6 102 1 layer #All former studies utilized laser illumination; here standardized/natural illumination is applied; BP: black phosphorous 7 Conclusion This work demonstrates the systematic, reproducible, and scalable integration of large-area TAC MoS2 as a 2D layered semiconductor into the mature a-Si:H thin-film technology for vertical photodiodes. We show the large- scale synthesis and transfer of homogeneous MoS2 as well as the subsequent growth of a-Si:H photodiodes by PE-CVD. The MoS2 extends the detector bandwidth from the optical range far into the mid-IR (minimum up to 2120 nm) with an almost constant responsivity above 800 nm. The new MoS2/a-Si:H photodiodes exhibit good performance (DR = ~60 dB at -6 V, Rl ~50 mAW-1/ D* = ~2·1010 Jones / EQE ~3 % at 2120 nm under ambient conditions) in conjunction with an excellent long-term stability. The detectors realized in this work combine several advantages: I) they are suited for various applications where a tunable photodetection in the visible regime and beyond is needed, II) they are easily operated under ambient conditions at room temperature combined with long-term stability, and, most importantly, III) they are based on a scalable, mature optoelectronic thin-film platform allowing for large-scale integration in detector arrays and making the integration of additional fabrication steps reliable, easy and economic. Prospectively, such detector arrays in combination with state-of-the-art read-out electronics, pave the way for the realization of pixelated, wavelength-selective sensors with a photoresponse in a wide spectral range. Further responsivity enhancement by bandgap engineering like the defined introduction of defects, the additional implementation of other 2D materials and/or the facile tuning of the a-Si:H composition and thickness might even enable novel a-Si:H multi-spectral photodetectors or high-efficient solar cells covering an even broader spectrum from the ultraviolet (UV)/VIS to the IR. Acknowledgement The authors gratefully acknowledge the preparation of the FIB-lamellae by Dr. Erich Müller from the Laboratory for Electron Microscopy (Prof. Dr. Dagmar Gerthsen)/Karlsruhe Institute of Technology KIT. Dr. Matthias Adlung from the Institute for Inorganic Chemistry (Prof. Dr. Claudia Wickleder)/University of Siegen is given credit for absorption spectra measurements. Part of this work was performed at the Micro- and Nanoanalytics Facility (MNaF) of the University of Siegen. G. S. D. acknowledges the support of SFI under Contract No. 12/RC/2278 and PI_15/IA/3131 as well as Graphene Flagship under Contract 785219. N. M. acknowledges support from SFI through 15/SIRG/3329. Supporting Information Proposed band structure, fabrication parameters, EDX line-scan, ideality factor extraction, MoS2 Raman spectra, long-term J-V and Rl stability, a-Si:H and MoS2 absorption coefficients, optical simulation 8