M. M. Moussilli, A. R. El Falou, R. M. Shubair Page 1 of 12 Exploring Graphene Effect on Fiber Optic Surface Plasmon Resonance Biosensors Mariam M. Moussilli1, Abdul Rahman El Falou1, Raed M. Shubair2 1 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Beirut Arab University (BAU), Lebanon 2 Research Laboratory Of Electronics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), USA Abstract—This report investigates design enhancements of Fiber Optic Surface Plasmon Resonance (FO-SPR) biosensors with Gold and Silver metallic films. The effect of adding a Graphene coating on the sensitivity and detection accuracy of FO-SPR biosensors is studied. We also compare the results for the addition of five layers of Graphene on both Gold-based and Silver-based FO-SPR biosensors in order to determine the optimum sensor design. Our results indicate that the sensitivity of the biosensor increases when a Graphene coating is added, while the detection accuracy decreases. Results also demonstrate that the sensitivity due to adding Graphene sheets increases more for Silver-based biosensor when compared to Gold-based biosensors. M. M. Moussilli, A. R. El Falou, R. M. Shubair Page 2 of 12 INTRODUCTION This report is concerned with Fiber Optic Surface Plasmon Resonance (FO-SPR) biosensors which are label-free optical biosensors used to measure the concentration of a desired analyte in a sample. These biosensors have surged in popularity in recent years due to their high sensitivity, nano-size, light weight, simplistic design, adaptation to harsh environments, possibility of remote sensing, impossibility of electrocution, immunity to electromagnetic interference, resistance to corrosion, and need for minute sample quantities and conservation of the sample integrity and minimal invasiveness which are essential requirements in medical applications . The work in this project is a continuation of the several previous contributions which have been reported in the literature in various relevant technologies, systems, and their associated applications and . The report is organized as follows: Section II explains the operating principle of FO-SPR sensors and highlights the sensitivity and and detection accuracy as the key performance parameters of FO-SPR sensors. Section III includes the simulation results, which demonstrate the effect of adding Graphene coating on a Gold-based and a Silver-based FO-SPR sensors. Finally, conclusions are outlined in Section IV. M. M. Moussilli, A. R. El Falou, R. M. Shubair Page 3 of 12 FO-SPR OPERATION AND PERFORMANCE PARAMETERS In FO-SPR sensors, Surface Plasmon Waves (SPWs) are excited by absorbed evanescent waves. SPWs transduce the change in the Surrounding Refractive Index (SRI) of the sample into a change in the optical signal received at the Optical Spectrum Analyzer (OSA). Upon SRI variation, the change in the signal received at the OSA is represented as a shift in the wavelength where maximum power is absorbed known as the resonance wavelength (λres) . In Graphene enhanced FO-SPR biosensors, a Graphene coating is added to the metallic layer of the sensor probe in order to improve the performance of the sensor . The Sn is the measure of the ability of the sensor to translate the variation in the SRI of the sample into a shift in the λres at the OSA . The DA is the measure of the ability of the sensor to pinpoint the exact λres by calculating the depth of the dip in the power at the λres with respect to the width of the dip . The work in this project is a continuation of the several previous contributions, which have been reported in the literature in various relevant technologies, systems, and their associated applications . M. M. Moussilli, A. R. El Falou, R. M. Shubair Page 4 of 12 ADDITION OF GRAPHENE TO THE GOLD AND SILVER SENSORS We follow the 4-layer model presented in in order to simulate the response curves of the FO-SPR sensor for varying SRI= [1.33,1.35,1.37]. The values used are as follows: the core diameter is 100μm, the core refractive index is 1.451, the cladding refractive index is 1.450, the sensing region length is 10mm, the metal thickness is 40nm and with 5 Graphene sheets. M. M. Moussilli, A. R. El Falou, R. M. Shubair Page 5 of 12 When comparing fig.1 and fig.2 for increasing SRI, the red shift in the λres becomes greater and the response curves become shallower and broader when Graphene is added to the Gold sensor. So we can conclude that the sensitivity increases and the detection accuracy decreases upon the addition of Graphene which is also assured by the calculations in table 1. From table 1 and at SRI=1.35, the addition of Graphene increases the Sn by 8.98% and decreases the DA by 36.82%. M. M. Moussilli, A. R. El Falou, R. M. Shubair Page 6 of 12 SRI 1.33 1.35 1.37 Before the Addition of Graphene Sn (Nm/RIU) Calibration Curve DA (TU%/nm) After Addition of 5 Graphene Layers Sn (Nm/RIU) Calibration Curve 1895 DA (TU%/nm) M. M. Moussilli, A. R. El Falou, R. M. Shubair Page 7 of 12 ct SRI 1.33 1.35 1.37 Before the Addition of Graphene Sn (nm/RIU) Calibration Curve DA (TU%/nm) After Addition of 5 Graphene Layers Sn (nm/RIU) Calibration Curve 2130 2535 DA (TU%/nm) M. M. Moussilli, A. R. El Falou, R. M. Shubair Page 8 of 12 Based on fig.3 and fig.4, the same observations for the Gold sensor stand for the Silver sensor and these observations are assured by the calculations presented in table 2. From table 2 and at SRI=1.35, the addition of Graphene increases the Sn by 9.37% and decreases the DA by 53.54%. Regarding sensors without a Graphene layer, we deduce that a Silver sensor exhibits higher Sn and higher DA compared to a Gold sensor of same parameters. For sensors with a Graphene layer, we deduce that the Sn increase of the Silver sensor is greater than the Sn increase of the Gold sensor and that the DA decrease of the Silver sensor is greater than the DA decrease of the Gold sensor noting that despite this, the DA of the Graphene enhanced silver sensor remains higher than the DA of the Graphene enhanced Gold sensor. M. M. Moussilli, A. R. El Falou, R. M. Shubair Page 9 of 12 CONCLUSION Our investigations have shown that adding Graphene coating to a FO-SPR biosensor increases sensor sensitivity significantly but with the trade-off of decreasing the sensor's detection accuracy. These parameters predominantly improve for FO-SPR sensors based on Silver when compared to Gold. The work in this project is a continuation of the several previous contributions, which have been reported in the literature in various relevant technologies, systems, and their associated applications -. M. M. Moussilli, A. R. El Falou, R. M. Shubair Page 10 of 12