Noname manuscript No. (will be inserted by the editor) Effect of the additional Se layer on the electronic structure of iron-based superconductor FeSe/SrTiO3 L.V. Tikhonova · M.M. Korshunov Received: date / Accepted: date Abstract We use density functional theory to study the structure and the band structure of the monolayer FeSe deposited on the SrTiO3 substrate with the addi- tional layer of Se between them. Top of the SrTiO3 is formed by the double TiO layer with and without oxy- gen vacancies. Several structures with different arrange- ments of the additional Se atoms above the double TiO layer is considered. Equilibrium structures were found and the band structures for them were obtained. Near the Γ = (0, 0, 0) point of the Brillouin zone, the hole Fermi surface pockets persist and, additionally, an elec- tron pocket appears. Thus neither the presence of the additional Se layer nor the oxygen vacancies in the dou- ble TiO layer leads to the sinking of hole bands below the Fermi level near the Γ point. Necessity to include the strong electronic correlations into account is dis- cussed. Keywords Fe-based superconductors · Monolayer FeSe · SrTiO3 · density functional theory 1 Introduction Iron-based materials represents a class of high-Tc su- perconductors that is based on the conducting layer This work was supported in part by “BASIS” Foundation for Development of Theoretical Physics and Mathematics. L.V. Tikhonova and M.M. Korshunov Siberian Federal University, Svobodny Prospect 79, 660041 Krasnoyarsk, Russia M.M. Korshunov Kirensky Institute of Physics, Federal Research Center KSC SB RAS, Akademgorodok, 660036, Krasnoyarsk, Russia E-mail: mkor@iph.krasn.ru of Fe surrounded by As or Se in pnictides and chalco- genides, respectively . Each of the constituents can be replaced by some other element thus providing a doping and/or crystal lattice distor- tion. This results in the rich phase diagram that in- cludes, among others, antiferromagnetic and supercon- ducting phases. Proximity of the magnetic phase im- plies the role of spin fluctuations in the formation of Cooper pairs . Stemming from the ideas of Berk and Schrieffer , the theory of spin fluctuation-mediated pairing provides consistent explanation of several im- portant features of superconductivity in Fe-based mate- rials . Observation of the spin resonance peak in inelastic neutron scattering and the quasiparticle interference pattern in scan- ning tunneling spectroscopy confirms sign-changing s± gap predicted by the spin fluctuation theory of super- conductivity . Other approaches to the theory includes pairing due to the orbital fluc- tuations supported by phonons or the Aslamasov- Larkin vertex corrections . Discovery of superconductivity in FeSe monolayers with Tc as high as 100 K presents another mystery in the physics of iron-based materials . Different mechanisms of superconductive pairing in mono- layer FeSe were suggested including specific realization of the electron-phonon interaction , ne- matic fluctuations , orbital fluctuations , spin fluctuations , and spin fluctuations involving incipient bands . Recent advances in scanning tun- neling spectroscopy of iron chalcogenides support sign- changing gap . Any pairing theory is tightly connected to the un- derlaying band structure and the Fermi surface. Thus, knowledge of the band structure details becomes ex- tremely important. Angle-resolved photoemission spec- arXiv:1907.10643v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 24 Jul 2019 2 L.V. Tikhonova, M.M. Korshunov troscopy (ARPES) shows that there is only one kind of Fermi surface sheets – electron pockets around the corners of the Brillouin zone (M points), while there is no hole pockets around the center (Γ point) . More- over, with increasing number of FeSe layers hole pockets around the Γ point become visible in ARPES and at the same time the superconductivity disappears . Sur- prisingly, despite a successful qualitative and even semi- quantitative description of the bulk Fe-pnctides and Fe-chalcogenides electronic structure within the mod- ern band structure calculation schemes, they fail to reproduce such a topology of the Fermi surface. For example, existing density functional studies do not re- veal significant differences between the monolayer and double unit cell layer of FeSe . There are at least two reasons why this may happen. First one is related to the global problem of the density functional theory (DFT) in describing the systems with strong electronic correlations (SEC). If this is the case, i.e. the mono- layer FeSe represents a class of systems with SEC, then some specific approach is required to describe its elec- tronic structure and, moreover, theory of superconduc- tivity should be formulated taking SEC into account. There is, however, another possibility of why there is a disagreement between the results of DFT and the experimentally observed Fermi surface. It is related to the atomic structure of the FeSe/SrTiO3 interface. The interface seems to be more complicated then can be naively expected because the preparation of the mono- layer FeSe is quite cumbersome. If FeSe deposited on graphene or SrTiO3 it doesn’t become neither metal nor superconductor. However, if it is deposited on Se- enriched SrTiO3 and then annealed, the superconduc- tivity with high Tc appears . The process of an- nealing and Se bombardment naturally modifies the surface layer of SrTiO3 . There are few experimental studies of the interface , which revealed the pres- ence of the TiO2 double layers on top of SrTiO3 . Both this and the possible oxygen vacancies due to the an- nealing were incorporated in the first principles calcula- tions . They had some success in explaining the disappearance of the hole pocket around the Γ point. Recent experimental study utilized the high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron mi- croscopy (HAADF-STEM) images and revealed an ad- ditional Se layer located between FeSe monolayer and TiOx-terminated SrTiO3 . This new fact may be impor- tant for the FeSe band structure and have to be taken into account. Here we use DFT calculations to study the influence of the additional Se layer on FeSe/(2TiO)SrTiO3 elec- tronic structure. Several possible positions of additional Se atoms and of FeSe monolayer in the unit cell of Fig. 1 Band structure of the FeSe/SrTiO3 with the double TiO layer without vacancies. Fermi level is set to zero. FeSe/Se/(2TiOx)SrTiO3 heterostructure were modeled to search for favorable configurations and the electronic structure of these configurations were investigated. The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents details of the computational procedure, Section 3 con- tains results and their discussion, and Section 4 is the conclusion. 2 Computational details DFT calculations were carried out using Open source package for Material eXplorer software package (OpenMX, http://www.openmx-square.org) based on a linear combination of pseudoatomic orbital (PAO) method and norm-conserving pseudopotentials . The cutoff energy value was equal to 150 Ry. The PAO basis set with s2p2d2f1 for Fe and Ti, s2p2d2 for Se and O, and s2p1 for Sr were found to be sufficient to describe the structures. Cutoff radii of 10.0 a.u. for Sr, 7.0 a.u. for Ti and Se, 6.0 a.u. for Fe, and 5.0 a.u. for O were used. Exchange-correlation effects were taken into account in the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) by the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) func- tional . The structures were relaxed until the forces acting on atoms and the translation vectors became less then 1 · 10−4 Hartree/Borh. The convergence con- dition for the energy was 1 · 10−6 Hartree. To simu- late the two-dimensional (2D) structures using Periodic Boundary Conditions (PBC), the periodic replicas were separated by a vacuum spacing of at least 20 ̊Aalong the c axis. The first Brillouin zone (BZ) was sampled with 12 × 12 × 1 k-grid. Band structure calculations were performed along the high symmetry directions in To avoid the edge effects on the atomic and electronic structures, the SrTiO3 supercell 1 × 1 × 4 was used in calculations. The Visualization for Electronic and Effect of the additional Se layer on the electronic structure of iron-based superconductor FeSe/SrTiO3 3 Structural Analysis (VESTA) software was used to visualize the atomic structures. 3 Results and discussion In Fig. 1, we show the band structure of the refer- ence system, i.e. the FeSe/(2TiO)SrTiO3 heterostruc- ture without vacancies and without the additional Se layer. Notice the bands slightly above the Fermi level (EF ) at the Γ point, which have downward dispersion thus forming the hole Fermi surface pockets in the cen- ter of the BZ. Oxygen vacancies play an important role, so we study the band structure of the FeSe/SrTiO3 system with and without O vacancies in the double TiO layer. To show the general effect of vacancies and to make the calcula- tions manageable, we consider the case of one vacancy per two unit cells. This corresponds to 50% of vacan- cies and represents a limiting case, i.e. the result for the fractional number of vacancies x would lie somewhere between the results for x = 0 and x = 0.5. Thus, for- mally, we are dealing with the FeSe/Se/(2TiOx)SrTiO3 heterostructure. Since from the experimental study the exact positions of Se atoms are not known, we considered several cases shown in Fig. 2. That is, Se is located above Ti atoms [Fig. 2(a),(b)], above lower the double TiOx layer, and above the oxygen vacancy [Fig. 2(h)]. In the case of Se location below the low- est Se of FeSe monolayer, additional configurations was considered with shifted FeSe monolayer in the xy plane so that the additional Se atoms appears right below Fe atoms. During the structure optimization, the additional Se atom moved to the position above the upper oxy- gen atoms of the double TiO layer, Fig. 2(g), or above the oxygen vacancies, Fig. 2(h). In both cases, location of the additional Se atom under the Fe atoms is ener- getically favorable. The resulting equilibrium configura- tions of FeSe/Se/(2TiOx)SrTiO3 heterostructure with- out and with oxygen vacancies are shown in Fig. 3(a) and (c), respectively. Corresponding band structures are shown in Fig. 3(b) and (d). In the structure with- out vacancies, the additional Se is above the surface of (2TiOx)SrTiO3 by 1.70 ̊A and below the FeSe mono- layer by 2.35 ̊A. The charge transfer to the FeSe mono- layer is −0.032 electrons per FeSe formula unit ( ̄e/FeSe). The resulting charge at the additional Se is positive (+0.058 ̄e/Se). As seen from the band structure in Fig. 3(b), the additional band crosses the Fermi level around the Γ point. It results in the additional Fermi surface elec- tron pocket in the center of the BZ. On the other hand, bands forming the hole pockets are still present and at (a) (c) (e) (g) (b) (d) (f) (h) Fig. 2 The positions of Se atoms on top of the 2TiOx surface cies. Yellow, blue, and violet colors indicate Ti, O, and Se atoms, respectively. the Γ point they are at 0.23 eV above the EF . It is higher by 0.03 eV than in the reference system without additional Se layer, compare to Fig. 1. Presence of the oxygen vacancies [50% in the calcu- lation, see Fig. 2(h)] in the upper layer of TiOx results in the shift of the additional Se towards the substrate layer by 0.22 ̊A. Distance between the FeSe monolayer and the additional layer of Se becomes 3.15 ̊A. Charge transfer to the FeSe monolayer is −0.045 ̄e/FeSe. It is only by 0.013 ̄e more than in the system without va- cancies. The charge at the additional Se is −0.265 ̄e/Se. Therefore, the most part of the charge is localized in the additional Se layer. The band structure, shown in Fig. 3(d), displays the presence of both hole and elec- tron Fermi surface pockets around the Γ point similar to the case without vacancies shown in panel (b). From the study of the two energetically favorable cases, we see that the small increase of the electron 4 L.V. Tikhonova, M.M. Korshunov Fig. 3 Atomic structures (a),(c) and the corresponding band structures (b),(d) of the energetically favorable configurations of the FeSe/Se/(2TiOx)SrTiO3 heterostructure. Fermi level is set to zero. In (a) and (c), yellow, blue, orange, green, and violet colors indicate Ti, O, Sr, Fe, and Se atoms, respectively. For clarity, the substrate along the z axis is only partially shown and along the x and y axes only two unit cells are shown. charge in the FeSe monolayer due to the additional Se layer does not lead to the sinking of the hole bands be- low the Fermi level at the Γ point. On the contrary, new electron pockets formed by the bands with upward dispersion below the Fermi level appear. In general, this is in a disagreement with the ARPES data . We see that including more details of the FeSe/SrTiO3 in- terface haven’t solved the mystery of the hole pocket absence in photoemission. In particular, both oxygen vacancies and additional Se layer certainly affect the band structure near the Γ point, but this effect has nothing to do with the simple sinking of hole bands be- low the Fermi level. Therefore, we have to assume that some other mechanism affects the electronic structure. Natural choice is the effect of strong electronic correla- tions mentioned in the Introduction. Proper treatment of them requires a separate study. Some success in this direction was achieved within the LDA+DMFT (local density approximation+dynamical mean field theory) studies 4 Conclusions We have studied the effect of the additional Se layer on the band structure of the FeSe/SrTiO3 heterostructure. The additional layer is situated between the FeSe mono- layer and the double TiOx layer on top of SrTiO3 . For x = 0 and x = 0.5, the band structure near the Γ point results in the hole Fermi surface pockets and, addition- ally, a new electron pocket. Therefore, the presence of the additional Se layer does not leads to the sinking of hole bands below the Fermi level. In the presence of the oxygen vacancies in the double TiO layer, Se atoms plays a role of the missing oxygen, i.e. it localizes the charge and prevents its transfer to the FeSe monolayer. We conclude that the strong electronic correlations have to be taken into account to peoperly describe the low energy physics of FeSe monolayers. Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank In- formation Technology Center, Novosibirsk State University, Institute of Computational Modelling of SB RAS, Krasno- yarsk for providing the access to supercomputer facilities, and Irkutsk Supercomputer Center of SB RAS for providing the access to HPC-cluster “Akademik V.M. Matrosov” (Irkutsk Supercomputer Center of SB RAS, Irkutsk: ISDCT SB RAS; http://hpc.icc.ru, accessed 13.05.2019).