1 of 28 MoS2 pixel arrays for real-time photoluminescence imaging of redox molecules M. F. Reynolds1†, M. H. D. Guimarães1,2†, H. Gao3,4, K. Kang3,4, A. J. Cortese1, D. C. Ralph1,2, J. Park2,3,4, and P. L. McEuen1,2* 1 Laboratory of Atomic and Solid State Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca – NY, USA 2 Kavli Institute at Cornell for Nanoscale Science, Cornell University, Ithaca – NY, USA 3 Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca – NY, USA 4 Department of Chemistry, Institute for Molecular Engineering, and James Franck Institute, University of Chicago, Chicago – IL, USA *Corresponding author: plm23@cornell.edu † These authors contributed equally to this work Abstract Measuring the behavior of redox-active molecules in space and time is crucial for better understanding of chemical and biological systems and for the development of new technologies. Optical schemes are non-invasive, scalable and can be applied to many different systems, but usually have a slow response compared to electrical detection methods. Furthermore, many fluorescent molecules for redox detection degrade in brightness over long exposure times. Here we show that the photoluminescence of “pixel” arrays of an atomically thin two-dimensional (2D) material, a monolayer of MoS2, can image spatial and temporal changes in redox molecule concentration in real time. Because of the strong dependence of MoS2 photoluminescence on doping and sensitivity to surface changes characteristic of 2D materials, changes in the local chemical potential significantly modulate the photoluminescence of MoS2, with a sensitivity of 0.9 mV / Hz on a 5 μm by 5 μm pixel, corresponding to better than parts-per-hundred changes in redox molecule concentration down to nanomolar concentrations at 100 ms frame rates. The real-time imaging of electrochemical potentials with a fast response time provides a new strategy for visualizing chemical reactions and biomolecules with a 2D material screen. 2 of 28 MAIN TEXT Introduction Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) such as MoS2 are 2D semiconductors with a bandgap in the visible portion of the electromagnetic spectrum. They have received great interest since the discovery that a monolayer of MoS2 is a direct bandgap semiconductor with a reasonable photoluminescence (PL) efficiency (1, 2). Since then, the PL of transition metal dichalcogenides has been studied extensively and shown to respond to electrostatic gating (3, 4), chemical doping (5, 6), changes in pH (7), and defects (8, 9). However, only a few studies have exploited this sensitivity to use MoS2 PL as a chemical or biological sensor. Early work on biological sensors used ion intercalation schemes to optically measure cell viability (10, 11). Researchers have also studied charge transfer processes between MoS2 and a variety of electrolytes, observing charge transfer rates dependent on illumination intensity (12) and back-gate voltage (13). One attractive application for TMDs which has not been previously demonstrated is the spatially resolved optical detection of redox molecules at the micron scale. Current approaches for spatially resolved redox molecule sensing include arrays of microelectrodes (14, 15), altered CMOS camera detectors (16), ISFET arrays (17), and scanning electrochemical microscopy (18). These techniques demonstrate high-speed detection and resolution at the few micrometer level, but also require wires for read-out. Optical detection methods such as scanned photocurrent (19), porous silicon (20), surface plasmon (21, 22) techniques and functionalized carbon nanotubes (23, 24) provide many advantages, but none of the techniques above combine fast response, good spatial resolution, no wires, and a simple experimental setup. In this work, we show that MoS2 pixel arrays are a powerful new class of sensors for detecting redox-active molecules. Patterned arrays of MoS2 squares are used to measure changes in redox concentrations with micron-scale spatial resolution and at 10 millisecond temporal resolution. We can detect concentration changes on the order of few nM, on par with the best electrical microelectrode detectors. These MoS2 pixels can be deployed in a wide variety of environments, from optical fibers to microfluidic systems, making them an attractive redox sensing platform for numerous applications. Results The samples consist of photolithographically patterned MoS2 directly grown on fused silica substrates using metal-organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) (25). We examine two different geometries: MoS2 “pixel arrays” (Fig 1A, left) consisting of small (2x2 or 5x5 m2) electrically floating squares, or MoS2 ionic-liquid gate transistors (Fig 1A, right) with Ti/Au contacts. For most of the measurements reported here, the samples were placed in a standard supporting electrolyte solution consisting of tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate (Bu4NPF6) in acetonitrile. The redox couple ferrocene/ferrocenium was added as indicated. Similar results were obtained with other redox couples in aqueous environments. Details regarding the sample preparation process can be found in the Methods and Supplementary Information. pixels and the devices show bright photoluminescence. The observed internal quantum efficiency (IQE) of ~ 10-4 is comparable to other reports in the literature (1, 26). Fig 1D 3 of 28 shows the effect of the ferrocenium/ferrocene (Fc+/Fc) redox couple on the PL intensity for different Fc+/Fc ratios at a fixed 1 mM total concentration. The PL increases dramatically with increasing concentration of ferrocenium. The Fc+ ions serve to extract electrons from the MoS2, as shown in Fig. 1C. This is consistent with the quenching of the PL in doped MoS2 observed previously as a function of a solid-state back gate voltage (3, 4) when electrons are added to the conduction band. The devices thus operate as redox sensors, with orders of magnitude changes in PL seen when changing the Ox/Red ratio. The mechanism can be understood by considering the chemical potential of the solution s set by the ferrocene/ferrocenium ratio. This chemical potential is given by the Nernst equation: 0 ln s B Fc eE k T Fc  +   = +     , where kB is Boltzmann’s constant, T is the temperature, and E0 is the standard reduction potential. As described in the equation above, an increase in the ferrocenium/ferrocene ratio results on an increase in the liquid potential. This change in chemical potential is followed by the MoS2 Fermi level due to charge transfer between the MoS2 and the ferrocene/ferrocenium. Thus, the shift in the chemical potential acts as an effective gate voltage on the MoS2 that changes the electron density, and therefore the PL. To demonstrate this quantitatively, we compare the response of the pixels to measurements of the gated devices, shown schematically in Fig. 2A. Figure 2B shows both the PL and the two-probe in-plane conductance of the MoS2 transistors as a function of the ionic liquid voltage (VLG). As seen in the figure, the PL of the device decreases with the addition of electrons (VLG > 0), and simultaneously, the device begins to conduct. For VLG < 0 V the electrons are depleted, the PL increases and then saturates when the Fermi level of the MoS2 is in the bandgap of the semiconductor. The equivalence of these different ways of shifting the charge density is demonstrated in Fig 2C, where the PL of the pixels as a function of the chemical potential is plotted on the same graph as the dependence of the PL of the transistor devices on gate voltage. We observe a one-to-one correspondence between the change in liquid potential determined according to Eq. (1) and the directly-applied ionic liquid gate voltage, with no rescaling. The two curves overlay accurately, indicating that the PL of the MoS2 pixels is set by the shift in the chemical potential of the solution with changing redox molecule concentration. production of oxidized molecules at a working electrode. A microelectrode (position indicated in the first frame of Fig. 3A) is positioned 5 m or less above the MoS2 pixel- array in a ferrocene solution with an initial ferrocene concentration [Fc]0 = 1 mM. A voltage pulse is applied to the microelectrode going from a voltage below to above the oxidation voltage for ferrocene, Vw = 0 V to 0.8 V. This fast voltage step results in the rapid oxidation of ferrocene to ferrocenium. A few milliseconds after the voltage pulse we observe a large increase in the PL of the MoS2 pixels around our electrode (Fig. 3A and Movie S1, with a three-dimensional plot showing the distribution of bright pixels shown in Fig. 3B). The cloud of Fc+ diffuses outward from the microelectrode, lighting up the rest of the MoS2 pixel array. 4 of 28 By following the size of the ferrocenium cloud as a function of time we can directly measure its diffusion constant in the solution. For a localized source such as a microelectrode, the concentration of ferrocenium as a function of time (t) is expected to follow the form (27): 4 x Fc A erfc Dt +     =        , where erfc is the complementary error function, x is the distance from the microelectrode, and D is the diffusion constant of ferrocenium. By plotting pixel brightness as a function of x for each frame and fitting every plot with the above equation (Fig. 3C), we obtain the radius R of the ferrocenium cloud as a function of time. Fig. 3D plots the square of this radius, which is predicted to grow linearly with time, 2 4 R = Dt for simple diffusion. Linear fitting yields D = (1.76 ± 0.02) × 10-9 m2/s. This agrees with the values for the diffusion constant of ferrocenium in acetonitrile found in the literature, 1.6 – 2.2 × 10-9 m2/s (28). The ionic current can also be mapped by following the PL gradient as a function of time, showing a high ionic current near the microelectrode that decays rapidly as a function of the distance from the electrode (see Supplementary Information, Fig. S4). To determine the ultimate resolution of the pixel array to changes in redox concentrations, we examine noise properties of individual pixels. By recording the PL intensity of MoS2 pixels as a function of time with 10 ms exposure times, shown in the insets of Fig. 4, we observe that the PL intensity fluctuates around a constant value at a constant concentration of ferrocene and ferrocenium. We study the noise in our devices for different MoS2 areas: a 2×2 m2 pixel (Fig. 4A), a 5×5 m2 pixel (Fig. 4B), and a 15×15 m2 region of a MoS2 sheet (Fig. 4C). As expected, we observe that the signal to noise ratio increases with increasing area. The noise power spectra for all three regions is nearly frequency independent and lies close to the estimated shot noise from our experimental setup (shown by the dashed gray lines), which sets our ultimate noise floor. The shot noise in our setup arises from the finite number of photons reaching the camera and can be estimated by 2 N N  = , where the factor of 2 accounts for added noise from the EMCCD gain of the camera. Using a gate curve taken for a nearby transistor device on the same chip, this noise can be converted to a voltage noise. The right axis in Figure 4 shows the corresponding voltage noise density for the three regions with the panels plotted in the same scale for better comparison. We obtain a voltage noise density of 2 mV / Hz for the 2×2 m2 MoS2 pixel, 0.9 mV / Hz for the 5×5 m2 MoS2 pixel and 0.5 mV / Hz for the 15×15 m2 MoS2 region. The voltage noise can be translated to an [Ox]/[Red] detection resolution through the Nernst equation. For a concentration ratio of ferrocenium to ferrocene (   r Fc Fc +   =   ), the resolution is given by / / B r r d k T   = . This gives a redox detection resolution of r r  = 0.03 Hz-1/2 or 10% at a 25 Hz bandwidth on a 5×5 m2 pixel. This detection limit, which is independent of the initial concentration, is advantageous for measuring changes in redox molecule concentration in dilute solutions, as we demonstrate below. We now compare MoS2 pixel redox sensors to the standard electrochemical method for measuring redox molecules, cyclic voltammetry (CV). We performed cyclic voltage sweeps at an ultramicroelectrode while monitoring the photoluminescence of nearby MoS2, shown schematically in Fig. 5A. These measurements were done at ferrocene 5 of 28 concentrations ranging from 50 μM to 1 mM, as seen in Fig. 5B. IW abruptly increases when the working electrode voltage overcomes the oxidation voltage for ferrocene at roughly the same values for each concentration of ferrocene. Similarly, we observe a sharp increase in PL intensity above the ferrocene oxidation potential, coinciding with the turn on in current for the CV measurements. However, these two measurements have a crucial difference: while the current at the microelectrode scales linearly with the initial concentration, the PL produces roughly the same response to sweeps in voltage down to the M-range of initial concentrations of ferrocene (Fig. 5B), limited only by the background concentration of any other redox molecules in the solution. The CV measurements and MoS2 PL measurements are related by the Nernst equation (Eq. 1). Assuming that the large initial ferrocene concentrations [Fc]0 remains constant and the concentration of ferrocenium is proportional to the current to the working electrode (a valid assumption provided the electrochemical system is in steady state as defined in the Supplementary Information), we can rewrite Eq. 1 as   ( 0 ) ln B W k T I Fc   . Therefore, for the region of MoS2 doping where the PL intensity is linear with the electrochemical potential, we expect that  0 ln W B I PL k T Fc          .By plotting this change in potential versus  0 ln IW Fc         , the data should collapse onto the same curve independent of ferrocene concentration. This is indeed what we observe (Fig. 5C). Our data is well fit by Eq. 1 with kBT/e = (21 ± 5) meV (with uncertainty in the conversion between PL and voltage constituting the largest source of error), indicating a simple relationship between standard current-based detection methods for calculating concentration and our method using MoS2 PL. Since the signal for MoS2 PL detection of molecules is independent of absolute concentration and depends instead on the ratio of oxidized-to-reduced species, it provides a method for detecting redox molecules that scales favorably down to low concentrations. In order to test the detection limits of our system we performed simultaneous CV sweeps and PL measurements of MoS2 pixels at lower concentrations of ferrocene, shown in Fig. 5D. Although the current at our microelectrode falls below the detection limit of our setup for concentrations under 10 μM, the PL of the MoS2 attains the same value as a function of voltage for 10 and 1 μM concentrations. The response begins to shift at 100 and 10 nM concentrations, perhaps due to comparable concentrations of contaminant redox molecules, but still reaches the same peak PL intensity. The low detection limit of sub-10 nM concentrations using MoS2 PL improves upon ultramicroelectrode detection limits for concentration detection, which are reported to be at best around 50 nM (29, 30). The linear scaling of current at a microelectrode with concentration sets the detection limit for amperometric techniques. Assuming a microelectrode of the same area as our MoS2 pixels (~100 m2) and linear scaling of the current with concentration, the current would be approximately 100 fA for a concentration of 10 nM. Having explored the operation of the pixel arrays for redox sensing, we illustrate their use in a variety of situations. Fig. 6A and B shows a MoS2 pixel array deployed in a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) microfluidic channel to measure the spatial distribution of the oxidation state of redox active molecules. A syringe pump connected to the channel supplies pressure-driven (laminar) flow, while a platinum surface electrode on chip can be 6 of 28 used to perform redox chemistry in the channel. A short pulse applied to the surface electrode oxidizes ferrocene in the channel to ferrocenium, which is carried to the right by the flow. The resultant PL response of the MoS2 pixel array is shown in Fig. 6B and Movie S2, allowing the direct tracking of the oxidized molecules in real time with micron and millisecond space and time resolution. Similar results for electroosmotic flow are shown in the Supplementary Materials. These pixel arrays can be transferred to almost any substrate. Figure 6C shows a MoS2 pixel array on an optical fiber where the light through the fiber is used to excite the pixels. ferrocenium. Discussion This work demonstrates a new class of 2D fluorescence sensors for the detection of redox- active species. The sensor is shot noise limited, with a sensitivity of 10% in a 30 Hz bandwidth at a 5 x 5 μm2 pixel and detection limits down to nM concentrations. Improvements to the PL efficiency could increase this sensitivity by another 1-2 orders of magnitude. The fast, all-optical detection of chemical potentials, ionic densities, and charge transfer rates using the PL of a 2D material has great potential for monitoring various chemical and biological systems, such as hydrogen evolution reactions and neurological activity. (The supplementary materials present initial measurements of dopamine). Being flexible, chemical inert, and easily transferrable, MoS2 provides a local redox sensing method that can be easily incorporated into a broad range of environments and systems. Materials and Methods MoS2 Growth and Device Fabrication The MoS2 sheets were grown by Metal-Organic Chemical Vapor Deposition on 1” fused silica wafers as described in reference (25). After initial PL and Atomic Force Microscopy characterizations (Fig. S1), we defined Ti/Au (5/50 nm) electrodes and alignment markers using conventional optical lithography and metal evaporation methods. The MoS2 structures (pixels and device channels) were defined by a final optical lithography step followed by Reactive Ion Etching (SF6:O2 5:1 ratio at 20 W). In order to increase the PL quantum efficiency in our films we treated our final structures with bis(trifluoromethane)- sulfonimide (TFSI) following the procedures detailed in reference (26). Experimental Setup The devices were measured using a probe-station with automated micromanipulators (Sensapex). The samples were mounted with the MoS2 side pointing up on an inverted microscope and imaged with a water immersion 60x objective with numerical aperture 1.25 and an Andor electron-multiplier CCD. The PL measurements were made using a mercury arc lamp combined with a 550 nm bandpass filter (40 nm FWHM, ThorLabs) and a dichroic mirror (552 nm long pass, Semrock) as our incident light beam. The reflected light is partially filtered by the dichroic beamsplitter and further selected using a 650 nm bandpass filter (40 nm FWHM, ThorLabs) which includes the A-exciton peak at room temperature (~ 660 nm). 7 of 28 For the electrochemical measurements we used a Pt wire as our reference electrode and Pt/Ir microelectrode probes (Microprobes for Life Sciences) with ~1 M impedance at 1 kHz to the liquid as our working electrode. Electrolyte and Ferrocene Solution Preparation The electrolyte solution for all the measurements presented consists of 100 mM of tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate (Bu4NPF6, Sigma Aldrich) in acetonitrile. After the electrolyte preparation, the desired amount of ferrocene (Sigma Aldrich) is mixed to obtain the concentrations ranging from 1 nM to 100 mM used in our work. The desired solution is then pipetted onto the fused silica chips containing the MoS2 structures which sits on the inverted microscope. The liquid is contained by a PDMS ring (~ 2 mm thick) which seals onto the wafer. For the measurements with increasing ferrocene concentration we start with the lowest concentration and increase it by pipetting away the lower concentration and flushing the liquid with the higher concentration solution. If a series of measurements were required, the samples were flushed in acetonitrile several times in order to remove any adsorbed ferrocene molecules. H2: Supplementary Materials Materials and Methods Fig. S1. Characterization of MoS2 samples. Fig. S2. Diagram of the experimental setup. Fig. S3. Detection of ions in solutions containing ruthenocene and ruthenocene/ferrocene mixtures. Fig. S4. Diffusion current mapping of ferrocene ions. Fig. S5. Photoluminescence decay time for varied Fc concentrations. Fig. S6. PL imaging of electroosmotic flow. Fig. S7. Photoluminescence versus dopamine concentration. Movie S1. Visualizing ferrocenium diffusion using a MoS2 pixels array. Movie S2. Visualizing laminar flow of ions in a microfluidic channel. Movie S3. Visualizing electro-osmotic flow of ions in a microfluidic channel.