1 Factors limiting ferroelectric field-effect doping in complex-oxide heterostructures L. Bégon-Lours1,♦, V. Rouco1, Qiao Qiao2, A. Sander1, M. A. Roldán3, R. Bernard1,, J. Trastoy1, A. Crassous1, E. Jacquet1, K. Bouzehouane1, M. Bibes1, J. Santamaría1,3, A. Barthélémy1, M. Varela3 and Javier E. Villegas1,* 1Unité Mixte de Physique, CNRS, Thales, Univ. Paris-Sud, Université Paris Saclay, 91767 Palaiseau, France 2Oak Ridge National Laboratories, Oak Ridge TN 37840, USA 3GFMC, Dpto. Física de Materiales, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, 28040, Spain * corresponding author: javier.villegas@cnrs-thales.fr ♦ present address: MESA+ Institute, Inorganic Materials Science, Enschede, The Netherlands  present address: Fonctions Optiques pour les Technologies de l’Information, UMR 6082, CNRS, INSA de Rennes, Rennes, France Ferroelectric field-effect doping has emerged as a powerful approach to manipulate the ground state of correlated oxides, opening the door to a new class of field-effect devices. However, this potential is not fully exploited so far, since the size of the field-effect doping is generally much smaller than expected. Here we study the limiting factors through magneto-transport, scanning transmission electron and piezo-response force microscopy in ferroelectric/superconductor (YBa2Cu3O7-δ /BiFeO3) heterostructures, a model system showing very strong field-effects. Still, we find that they are limited in the first place by an incomplete ferroelectric switching. This can be explained by the existence of a preferential polarization direction set by the atomic terminations at the interface. More importantly, we also find that the field-effect carrier doping is accompanied by a strong modulation of the carrier mobility. Besides making quantification of field-effects via Hall measurements not straightforward, this finding suggests that ferroelectric poling produces structural changes (e.g. charged defects or structural distortions) in the correlated oxide channel. Those findings have important consequences for the understanding of ferroelectric field-effects and for the strategies to further enhance them. 2 I. INTRODUCTION Ferroelectric field effects [1–4] can be achieved in heterostructures in which a ferroelectric gate and a strongly correlated oxide channel are combined (e.g. a superconducting cuprate , a half-metallic manganite or a Mott insulator ), following the scheme of a transistor. As the bound charges in the ferroelectric are screened by free-charges in the channel, carriers are either accumulated or depleted depending on the direction of the ferroelectric polarization. Owing to the extreme sensitivity of correlated oxides to carrier density variations , they can be driven across boundaries in their phase diagram upon ferroelectric switching by a gate voltage . This effect ultimately enables electrical control of functionalities [5,10–12]. In this context, the advantages of ferroelectric versus dielectric or liquid-electrolyte gating [13– 16] include the nonvolatile character of the doping , the possibility to produce it selectively over nanometric lateral scales , and the short switching times involved (below ~ns). These characteristics make ferroelectric gates the most promising for new application concepts . However, ferroelectric field effects are generally weaker than those found in liquid- electrolyte gating [13–15]. In principle, the field-effect doping size should correlate with the magnitude of the bulk ferroelectric polarization P, which amounts nearly a hundred C·cm-2 in oxide ferroelectrics, for example in BiFeO3 (BFO). In particular, a sheet carrier density modulation Δn2D up to 2P/e ~ 1014 -1015 cm-2 is expected upon full ferroelectric switching , allowing for significant modulation of parameters such as the critical temperature TC in superconductors or the saturation magnetization in ferromagnets . However, quantitative measurements show that the induced Δn2D is only a small percentage of 2P/e . This fact suggests that a number of complex factors and mechanisms are simultaneously at play, and that the potential of ferroelectric field-effects is far from being fully exploited. 3 Here we study a model system: superconducting (YBa2Cu3O7-δ)/ferroelectric (BiFeO3) heterostructures in which we observe a large ferroelectric modulation of the superconducting critical temperature accompanied by a consistently large modulation of the carrier density. The doping efficiency eΔn2D/2P reaches up to ~20% which, despite being among the highest reported in the literature, is far from full efficiency. Furthermore, we find that eΔn2D/2P unexpectedly decays with increasing YBa2Cu3O7-δ thickness. Using ferroelectric characterization at the nanoscale, we rule out that poor ferroelectric properties near the interface may account for any strong reduction of the doping efficiency. However, we find that that full ferroelectric switching is not achieved upon ferroelectric poling. This can be explained by the observation of a preferential polarization direction, which originates at pinned dipoles set by the atomic terminations at the interface. In addition, and very importantly, the analysis of the transport experiments shows that the carrier density modulation is accompanied by a substantial modulation of the carrier mobility − an effect generally overlooked, but whose relevance has been brought to light by recent studies on ferroelectric/rare-earth nickelate heterostructures . We show here that if the carrier mobility variations are neglected in the Hall measurements analysis, the ferroelectric doping efficiency can be severely misestimated, particularly when the channel is thicker than the Thomas-Fermi screening length. This is indeed at the origin of the unexpected doping efficiency decay inferred from a plain analysis of the Hall coefficients. Chiefly, the strong mobility modulation suggests that the carrier modulation is accompanied by structural changes in the oxide channel, which could be for example structural distortions or likely disorder in the form of charged point defects (such as oxygen vacancies) that would contribute to the screening of the electric field. The ingredients invoked above (ferroelectric asymmetry controlled by the terminations at polar interfaces , screening by oxygen vacancies ), as well as the experimental conditions (correlated oxide channel thicker than the Thomas Fermi screening length) are ubiquitous in ferroelectric/correlated oxide interfaces and their studies, and thus the impact of 4 the discussed factors on ferroelectric field-effects doping and their quantification should be quite general. II. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS. A. Sample growth Epitaxial heterostructures with a fixed Mn-doped BiFeO3 (BFO) thickness (30 nm) and varying YBa2Cu3O7-δ (YBCO) one (2 to 6 unit cells) with a few (typically 4) unit-cells buffer layer of PrBa2Cu3O7 (PBCO) were grown on (100) SrTiO3 (STO) substrates by pulsed laser deposition, using a KrF 248 nm excimer laser with an energy density of ~3.7 J/cm2, and a repetition rate of 1 Hz. PBCO is a large-gap semiconductor isostructural to YBCO. The presence of this buffer layer enhances the superconducting properties of the heterostructures . The in situ growth of the different materials was done at 700 oC for PBCO and YBCO, and subsequently at 560 oC for BFO, in a 0.36 mbar pure oxygen atmosphere. After BFO growth, the samples were cooled-down to room temperature in 800 mbar of pure oxygen. Under the used conditions, the epitaxial YBCO and PBCO layers are c-axis (001) oriented. BFO grows under compressive strain on the YBCO/PBCO//STO stack, which as we showed earlier induces in BFO a monoclinic structure with c-axis lattice parameter c = 4.07 Å instead of a = b = c = 3.96 Å observed for bulk BFO. Further details on the growth conditions and structural characterization can be found elsewhere . B. Electrical transport Multi-probe transport bridges were defined using a combination of standard optical lithography and Ar+ ion etching. The bridges width is 15 or 20 m, depending on the sample, and the distance (longitudinal) between voltage probes is 40 m. Samples were wedge-bonded using Al wire. A four-probe configuration was used to obtain the longitudinal RX and transverse RY (Hall) resistances from the voltage (respectively VX or VY) measured under an injected current IX. Measurements were carried out either in a close-cycle refrigerator equipped with a 5 ~1 T electromagnet or in a liquid He cryostat equipped with a ~0.6 T electromagnet, the magnetic field being perpendicular to the films plane. C. Electron Microscopy Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) combined with electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS) studies were carried out in a Nion UntraSTEM200 operated at 200 kV and equipped with a fifth order aberration corrector and a Gatan Enfinium EEL spectrometer, at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. Atomic resolution EELS maps were produced by performing multiple linear least square (MLLS) fits on unfiltered, raw EEL spectrum images. Specimens were prepared by conventional methods, including mechanical polishing and Ar ion milling. D. Piezo-response microscopy Ferroelectric domains were “written” by applying VDC between the scanning tip of a conductive-tip atomic force microscope (CT-AFM) and the YBCO layer, as discussed elsewhere . The tip was electrically grounded. The remnant polarization state was “read” by measuring the piezo-response under an AC voltage excitation of amplitude 1 VPP at a frequency of 35 kHz. Subsequent DC poling and AC reading can be achieved with the tip fixed a particular spot, to obtain cycles as those shown in Fig. 4 (c). For these, VDC is set to the target value and then to 0V at a rate ~1 V s-1. The piezo-response is measured in the remnant state with an AC voltage excitation of amplitude 1 VPP. III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS A. Transport experiments A multi-probe bridge was lithographed on the samples [see sketch, inset of Fig. 1 (a)] to study the ferroelectric field-effect doping through resistance and Hall effect measurements in the virgin state and at remanence after poling the BFO via CT-AFM. Because YBCO is a hole-doped superconductor, carrier depletion or accumulation is expected depending on whether the net polarization points towards (P↓) or away (P↑) from the interface, respectively. 6 The main panel of Fig. 1 (a) shows resistance vs. temperature for different states of the same sample. In the depleted state (P↓, blue curve), TC is only slightly lower than in the virgin state (green curve). This suggests that in the virgin state the ferroelectric polarization is similar to that set after poling the BFO towards the interface (P↓, hole depleted state). In contrast, TC dramatically increases in the hole accumulated state (P↑ , red curve), as expected . R(T) and Hall coefficient RH measurements at T>TC (either at 80 K or 100 K for different sample series) were carried in the virgin/doped/depleted states for series of samples with varying YBCO thickness, to obtain TC vs. 1/eRH (e is the electron charge) shown in Fig. 1 (b). In YBCO, the superconducting critical temperature TC depends on the carrier concentration n [22– 25]. The expected TC(n) for bulk YBCO is plotted in Fig. 1 (b) (dashed line). The experimental TC vs. 1/eRH roughly follows TC(n). The most important observation is that, for every sample (that is, for each symbol shape), the critical temperature variation ΔTC between different states (symbol colors) correlates with the Hall coefficient variation (1/eRH) following the TC(n) trend. This shows that, as discussed earlier , TC variations are associated with carrier density variations Δn produced upon ferroelectric switching. Fig. 1 (c) displays the product of the YBCO thickness (tYBCO ) with the variation |Δ(1 RH ⁄ )| produced upon switching from the depleted to the doped state (blue-red symbols), as a function of tYBCO. If we assume − following the observations on Fig. 1(b) − that 1/eRH equals the average carrier density in the YBCO layer, then tYBCO ∙ |Δ(1 RH ⁄ )| = n2De , with n2D the YCBO sheet carrier density variation. In principle, n2De must equal the polarization variation produced by ferroelectric switching, that is, n2De = ΔP = P↑ − P↓. While the maximum n2De ~30 C cm-2 we observe is large as compared to most data in the literature , it is only ~20% of 2Pz BFO~ 120 C cm-2 expected for a full switching of the bulk BFO polarization along the direction. Furthermore, and strikingly, tYBCO ∙ |Δ(1 RH ⁄ )| steadily decreases with increasing tYBCO. This is completely unexpected. The reason 7 is that ΔP = P↑ − P↓ must not depend on the YBCO thickness since, as discussed below, the structural and ferroelectric properties of BFO are similar for 3 u.c.<tYBCO< 6 u.c. Therefore, tYBCO ∙ |Δ(1 RH ⁄ )| should be constant. As we explain below, the unexpected thickness dependence observed in Fig. 1 (c) indicates that the measured tYBCO ∙ |Δ(1 RH ⁄ )| does not exactly reflect the sheet charge carrier density variation. B. Electron Microscopy We conducted electron microscopy experiments in the virgin (as-grown) samples to investigate the link between doping efficiency, structural and ferroelectric properties at the nanoscale. Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 show a summary of electron microscopy results representative of a series of BFO/YBCO/PBCO/STO heterostructures with YBCO thicknesses varying between 3 and 6 unit cells. Atomic resolution STEM-EELS confirm the high quality local crystalline structure of the samples. Lower magnification images (not shown) demonstrate flat and continuous layers over micrometric lateral distances. Fig. 2(a) displays a cross section high angle annular dark field (HAADF) image across the BFO/YBCO/PBCO/STO stacking from a major defects such as interface dislocations or secondary phases are observed. EELS imaging was used to ascertain the chemical integrity of the layers. Fig. 2(b) shows a series of atomic resolution chemical maps obtained from EEL spectrum images including the Ti L2,3, Fe L2,3, Ba M4,5 and Pr M4,5 absorption edges. All signals drop from 75% to 25% within distances below 0.5 nm. Having in mind that some beam broadening effects are present due to dechanneling , this finding points to the presence of atomically sharp interfaces. Finally, we could not detect a clear c-axis lattice expansion (beyond the noise level, i.e. in the few per cent units) across the YBCO-BFO interface, which is consistent with the absence of any appreciable interfacial concentration of oxygen vacancies in the virgin state. This is confirmed by estimates of the Fe 8 oxidation state from EELS data, in particular from the Fe L2,3 intensity ratio, which is constant (within the technique sensitivity) across the entire BFO layer. u.c.)/STO heterostructure. Given the Z-contrast nature of the image, the brightness of each atomic column is roughly proportional the square of its atomic number. The image shows the whole stacking with the BFO film on the top, deposited on a bilayer composed of five unit cells of YBCO and four unit cells of PBCO, grown on the STO substrate. We have carried out a quantitative analysis of such HAADF images, in order to directly measure the displacements of Fe columns relative to the center of the Bi sublattice in the as-grown (virgin) state . Such displacements measured along the and directions, namely dz and dx, are plotted in Fig. 3(b) and (c) respectively. In the color maps, each unit cell is represented by a pixel. The color maps are accompanied by a graph in which we plot the Fe off-center displacement averaged over each pixel line, < dz > and < dx >. The sign of dx shows a small variability, particularly close the interface, which indicates the presence of nano-domains with different projection of the polarization vector along the direction. However, as displayed in Fig. 3 (b), dz is homegeneous and positive, that is, the Fe columns exhibit a net displacement that points away from the interface. This finding means that the polarization vector along points from the ferrite into the cuprate , which is the most common finding in all the studied in this series. As shown earlier for ferroelectric/oxide interfaces , the origin of this preferential polarization direction can be explained by the presence of rigid interface dipoles which result from the highly polar structure of both ferrite and cuprate , and from their different polarity stacking along the growth direction . In particular, see Fig. 2, in the studied heterostructures a nominally polar FeO2- plane faces a nonpolar BaO0 plane at the interface. The basal planes of the (incomplete) interfacial ferrite/cuprate unit cells are respectively BiO+ and CuO- (as recently shown , the Cu valence in the CuO chains is close to +1). Thus, considering that the formal nominal charge of each basal plane is shared with a 9 neighboring unit cell, the polar stacking can be described by the sequence BiO+0.5/FeO2- nominal excess charge of +0.5/cell for the cuprate (due to the missing CuO- chains plane) and of -0.5/cell for the ferrite (due to the missing BiO+ plane) incomplete interface cells. Thus, a pinned interfacial (non-switchable) dipole builds up, which points from the ferrite into the cuprate. From this finding, we expect a preferred polarization direction within the bulk of the BFO layer pointing towards the YBCO layer as indeed observed in Fig. 3 (b). This preferred polarization direction is consistent with the observation of similar transport properties in the virgin state and after the BFO has been poled towards the YBCO layer [Fig. 1 (a)]. Fig. 3(d) displays the Fe off-center displacement within the (010) plane D = √dx 2 + dz 2 (color map) and the laterally averaged < D > profile (adjacent panel). The mean value of the displacement is D = 36 ± 7 pm. From this, the projection of the polarization vector on the image plane can be readily estimated as Pxz = 2.5 ∙ D C cm-2 = 90 18 C cm-2, with the projections along the axes being Pz =70 12 C cm-2 and Px =50 18 C cm- 2 . Assuming that Px=Py we estimate the spontaneous polarization P =100 18 C.cm-2 , which is in good agreement with the value for bulk BFO . Note however that Pz > Px, in contrast to as in bulk BFO for which Pz = Px = Py~ 60 C.cm-2 . That is, in the studied sample the polarization vector is slightly rotated from the towards the direction. This is as expected (both qualitatively and quantitatively) from the existence of compressive epitaxial strain on the BFO, which amounts ~1.5% given the lattice parameters of ST0 (3.90 Å) and bulk BFO (3.96 Å) and considering that the few layers of YBCO/PBCO grow fully strained. Fig. 3 (b) shows that the magnitude of dz (and hence Pz, which yields the field effects on YBCO) is homogeneous within the noise level. Particularly, < dz > at the interface is not much lower than far from it. Overall, < dz > variations are at most 30%. Altogether, the facts 10 that the native P estimated from STEM is as expected for bulk BFO and dz (and thus Pz) is not substantially depressed near the interface rule out poor native ferroelectric properties, which consequently cannot account for any major reduction of the field-effect doping efficiency. C. Piezo-response microscopy A study of the ferroelectric properties at the microscale was carried out by piezo-response microscopy (PFM). The piezo-response phase (either 0o or 180o) indicates the polarity of the net polarization under the CT-AFM tip: towards the YBCO (180o) or outwards from it (0o). Fig. 4(a) shows a piezo-response phase image of a BFO/YBCO/PBCO//STO heterostructure in which a pattern – two concentric squares with homogeneous, opposite piezo-response phase – has been “written” . The writing is done by first applying a dc voltage VDC = +5V between the YBCO layer and the CT-AFM tip (grounded) while this is scanned over the large square (dark contrast). Subsequently, VDC = -5 V is applied while scanning over the small square (bright contrast). Then, the PFM image is taken at remanence. One can see in Fig. 4 (a) a multidomain structure in the virgin area (around the largest square). Note however that bright- contrast domains (180o phase) are predominant. This finding suggests a preferred ferroelectric polarization polarity in the virgin state. Fig. 4 (c) shows piezo-response phase vs. VDC loops measured with the tip positioned at a fixed spot. One can see that |VDC| < 2V is sufficient to switch the phase to 180o (corresponding to a net polarization pointing towards the YBCO) while |VDC| ~ 3V is required to switch the phase to 0o. This asymmetry also suggests a preferential polarity, namely with the polarization vector along the direction pointing from the BFO into the YBCO. This is fully consistent with the STEM observations discussed above Furthermore, an unusual, strong asymmetry is observed also in the piezo-response amplitude. Fig. 4 (b) exhibits the piezo-response amplitude image counterpart of Fig. 4 (a). The amplitude is significantly lower in the area where the phase is 0o (dark contrast, net polarization pointing away from away from the YBCO) than in the area where the phase is 180o (bright contrast). The same asymmetry is observed in the PFM amplitude vs. VDC cycle, see Fig. 4 (d). This 11 behavior is consistently observed in a series of samples with varying BFO and YBCO thickness. Since the piezo-response amplitude scales with the modulus of the ferroelectric polarization P (averaged under the CT-AFM tip), the stark contrast observed in Figs. 3 (b) and (d) implies that the effective P is much smaller when the BFO is poled outwards from the YBCO layer (|P↑|) than when it is poled towards the YBCO (|P↓|). In other words, the amplitude contrast suggests that full ferroelectric switching is not achieved upon poling, and consequently that the polarization variation ΔP = P↑ − P↓ must be significantly smaller than twice the virgin BFO polarization projected along the direction, 2Pz~140 C cm-2. This fact must largely contribute to the reduced field-effect doping efficiency discussed in section A, which is the main conclusion of the PFM study. With the evidence at hand, the low piezo-response amplitude (= small effective |P↑|) when the ferroelectric is poled outwards from the YBCO can be understood if we consider the existence of pinned ferroelectric domains in which the polarization has the preferred polarity as suggested earlier . In particular, we can propose the scenario sketched in Fig. 4 (e), in which the ferroelectric polarization under the AFM tip is homogenous after being poled towards the YBCO layer, but shows residual domains with the preferred polarity after being poled in the opposite direction. There may be alternative scenarios to explain the small effective |P↑|. For example, a depression of the spontaneous polarization due to charge transfer effects or to the migration of oxygen vacancies into BFO upon ferroelectric poling. To discriminate between the possible explanations, further experiments would be required, for instance STEM studies (as those discussed above) as a function of the ferroelectric poling history. IV. THEORETICAL MODEL AND COMPARISON TO EXPERIMENT Fig. 5 (a) displays a toy model that allows for a quantitative understanding of the transport experiments, and includes the learnings from the STEM and PFM studies discussed above. 12 The YBCO layer is divided in two layers of thickness t1 and t2, with the total thickness tYBCO = t1 + t2 . The critical temperature TC2, the carrier density n2 and mobility 2 are uniform and independent of the ferroelectric polarization far enough from the interface (layer “2”). Contrarily, close to the interface (layer “1”) n1, TC1 and 1 depend on the ferroelectric polarization direction. Note that, although we expect an exponential decay of the accumulation of screening charges and consequently a gradient of the electronic properties across layer “1”, for simplicity we consider uniform n1, TC1 and 1 for each polarization state (P↑ and P↓). This approximation does not impact the conclusions drawn below. Note finally that, in this model, t1 is virtually equivalent to the Thomas Fermi screening length TF . Based on that model, and using a standard approach for multilayer systems , the conductivity σ′ and mobility μ′ expected in a measurement of the YBCO film are given by σ′tYBCO = σ1t1+σ2t2 (Eq. 1) μ′σ′tYBCO = μ1σ1t1 + μ2σ2t2 (Eq. 2) Using the relationships for the conductivities σ′ = μ′n′e, σi = μinie and the sheet carrier density n2Di = tini (with i = 1,2 ), the Hall coefficient RH = 1/en′ expected in an measurement obeys the relationship: tYBCO/eRH = (μ1 μ2n2D1+n2D2) 2 (μ1 μ2) 2 n2D1+n2D2 (Eq. 3) From this equation, one readily realizes the measured tYBCO/eRH equals the sheet carrier density in the YBCO layer n2D = n2D1 + n2D2 only if μ1 = μ2. Otherwise, tYBCO/eRH ≠ n2D and, consequently, the Hall coefficient variation observed upon ferroelectric switching is not a direct measurement of the sheet carrier density variation, that is, tYBCO ∙ |Δ(1 RH ⁄ )| ≠ eΔn2D = ΔP. Considering this and the fact that ΔP must be very similar for all the samples in the series, the steady decrease of tYBCO ∙ |Δ(1 RH ⁄ )| with increasing tYBCO [Fig. 1 (c)] indicates that the carrier mobility varies across the YBCO layer (μ1 ≠ μ2 ) at least for one of the states 13 (accumulated/depleted). This scenario is further confirmed by numerical simulations based on Eq. 3, which allow us to quantitatively reproduce the experimental results. In order to simulate the experimental behavior via model calculations, we proceeded as follows. Since the native carrier concentration n2 is not the same in all the samples (see in Fig. 1 (b) that 1/eRH is modulated around ~1021 cm-3 for some samples and around ~21021 cm-3 for others) we made calculations in the range 1021 cm-3<n2<2·1021 cm-3. We accordingly adjusted the thickness of region “1” between 3 u. c.> t1 >2 u. c. Note that t1 is not a fitting parameter. We fixed t1 for each n2 by considering that the screening length is TF ~ 1 nm (~1 u.c.) for optimally doped YBCO (n~ 6·1021 cm-3) and that this length is inversely proportional to the square-root of the carrier density . Then we searched n1 and μ1/μ2 (in the accumulated and depleted states) that allowed to mimic the decay of tYBCO ∙ |Δ(1 RH ⁄ )| seen in Fig. 1 (c), by imposing two consistency conditions. First, the same eΔn2D1 = eΔn2D = ΔP is used for all n2, which means that the ferroelectric properties do not change from sample to sample, as indicated by their similar PFM and STEM properties. Second, we impose |n1 − n2|accumulated < |n1 − n2|depleted, which accounts for the assymmetric behavior |P↑| < |P↓| evidenced by PFM. The simulation results are represented by lines in Fig. 1 (c). The continous horizontal line corresponds to the case in which μ1/μ2 = 1 both in the depleted and accumulated states. Here tYBCO ∙ |Δ(1 RH ⁄ )| is constant, independent of n2, and equals the chosen eΔn2D = 32 C.cm-2. The dashed and dash-dotted lines that envelope the experimental data respectively correspond to calculations for n2 = 1.1021 cm-2 and n2 = 1.9 1021 cm-2 with the fitting parameters eΔn2D = 32 C.cm-2, μ1/μ2(accumulated) = 0.36 and μ1/ μ2(depleted) = 1, which yield the best match between model calculations and experimental data. There is some degree of uncertainty in those parameters. For example, similar results are obtained with 0.7 < μ1/μ2(depleted) ≤1, or with up to 20% higher eΔn2D at the expense of using lower μ1/μ2(accumulated). However, a good matching can be obtained only if i) 14 in the Supplemental Material by a series of simulations with varying fitting parameters). In other words, the modelling i) confirms that n2De << 2Pz ~ 140 C cm-2 and ii) shows that the YBCO carrier mobility close to the interface (layer “1”) is significantly reduced and varies upon poling the ferroelectric. Further comparison between model calculations and experiments is done in Figs. 5 (b)- (c). The data points come from a series of samples grown in a single run and having a comparable native carrier density n2 ~1021 cm-3. Fig. 5 (b) shows 1 eRH ⁄ vs. tYBCO measurements in the depleted/accumulated states (respectively circles/squares). One can see that in the accumulated state (squares) 1 eRH ⁄ drops rapidly with increasing tYBCO and tends to merge 1 eRH ⁄ in the depleted state (circles). Calculations (dashed and continuous lines) are made with the same parameters as in Fig. 1 (c) (n1 in the depleted/accumulated states and n2 are respectively indicated by blue, red and black horizontal dotted lines). The continuous curves correspond to calculations with uniform mobility across the YBCO layer (1/2 = 1). The dashed curves correspond to the case in which 1 is reduced upon carrier accumulation (1/ 2= 0.36). This simulation case closely reproduces the experimental trend, particularly the marked decay of 1 eRH ⁄ in the accumulated state (squares) which is not accounted for by the simulation case 1 = 2 (continuous lines). The stark contrast between the behavior of the dashed and continuous curves illustrates once again the sensitivity of the Hall coefficient to carrier mobility variations across the YBCO layer. That sensitivity is an effect of the electrical current redistribution between layers “1” and “2” . Note finally that the scattering of the experimental data (squares/circles) around the theoretical curves (dashed) reflects the variability of n2 from sample to sample, which seemingly amounts 10% - 15%. Consistently, that scattering disappears in the representation of in Fig. 5 (c), which shows the variation between the accumulated and doped state for the same data and calculations displayed in (a). 15 Within the model in Fig. 5(a), the critical temperature in layer “1” TC1 will depend on in YBCO the critical temperature depends on the carrier concentration [22–25]. In layer “2” the carrier density (and thus TC2) does not change upon ferroelectric poling. Note that the expected TC (as measured with the electrical current injected parallel to the interface) equals the maximum between TC1 and TC2. Thus, in the doped state, the measured TC equals TC1. Contrarily, in the depleted state TC1 is depressed, and thus the measured TC equals TC2. This allows for a qualitative explanation of the experimental results in Fig. 5 (d). One can see that TC in the accumulated state does not depend on tYBCO. This is because t1, n1 and thus TC1 are independent on tYBCO. In the depleted state TC = TC2 strongly decreases with decreasing tYBCO. This is understood if one considers that t2 = tYBCO − t1 decreases with decreasing tYBCO. Thus one expects that TC2 decreases with decreasing tYBCO , as observed, because the critical temperature of ultrathin YBCO films decreases with decreasing thickness (one can think of t2 as an “isolated” ultrathin film since the critical temperature in t1 is strongly depressed/suppressed in the depleted state). V. CONCLUSIONS We have unveiled and characterized various factors that limit the ferroelectric field- effect doping efficiency in the BiFeO3/YBa2Cu3O7- heterostructures. First, we have shown that full ferroelectric switching is not achieved after electrical poling, which clearly contributes to the carrier density modulation being below the maximum expected value 2P (with P the bulk ferroelectric polarization normal to the interface). The incomplete ferroelectric switching is likely connected with the existence of a preferential polarization direction, as denoted by both PFM and STEM experiments. The preferred direction is set by the atomic terminations at the interface, which result in a fixed interface dipole pointing from the ferrite into the cuprate. In this scenario, the weaker polarization measured when the ferroelectric is poled opposite to the 16 preferential direction could be explained by the presence of residual domains in which the polarization remains pinned. These observations point to interface engineering as a key route to enhance ferroelectric field effects. Second, and more importantly, our experiments show that the field-effect induced carrier accumulation is accompanied by a substantial change of the carrier mobility in the oxide channel. This finding is relevant in two ways: i) On the one hand, it shows that quantitative studies of field-effect doping through Hall experiments are not straightforward, since changes in the Hall coefficient upon ferroelectric switching do not only reflect the carrier density modulation, but also the changes in the carrier mobility. Especially when the channel is thicker than the Thomas-Fermi screening length, neglecting changes of the mobility leads to misestimating the carrier density modulation. In the present experiments, if the mobility decrease is neglected the carrier density modulation is underestimated, to an extent that is greater the thicker the YBCO. ii) On the other hand, the mobility variations produced by ferroelectric poling suggest that the doping effects are accompanied by structural changes in the YBCO channel. A consistent scenario would be that, upon ferroelectric poling, charged defects such as oxygen vacancies are induced . Structural distortions controlled by the polarization state could also contribute to the mobility variations, as recently shown . Further experiments, for example STEM studies as a function of the polarization state, would be required to ascertain the physical origin of the mobility variations. Finally, we stress that the factors discussed above may play a relevant role in other ferroelectric/complex-oxide interfaces, because the key ingredients (such as the presence of polar interfaces, oxygen vacancies, or the oxide channel being thicker that the Thomas-Fermi screening length) are ubiquitous in these systems and their studies. 17 18 Acknowledgements Work supported by the ERC grant No 64710, French ANR grant ANR-15-CE24-0008-01 and European COST action 16218 “nanocohybri”. Work at UCM supported by Spanish MINECO- FEDER MAT2015-66888-C3-3-R and ERC PoC2016 POLAR-EM. Electron microscopy observations at ORNL were supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Basic Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences and Engineering Division. J. S. thanks INP-CNRS and "Scholarship program Alembert" funded by the IDEX Paris-Saclay ANR-11-IDEX-0003-02 for support during his stay at the Unité Mixte de Physique CNRS/Thales. J.E.V. thanks S. Fusil and V. Garcia for discussions and suggestions. 19