arXiv:1908.09802v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 26 Aug 2019 Why band theorists have been so successful in explaining and predicting novel superconductors? I. I. Mazin Code 6393, Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C. 20375, USA (Dated: August 27, 2019) In this contribution to the J. Phys. memorial issue in honor of Sandro Massidda I reflect on a phenomenon Sandro had been a part of. While theoretical condensed matter physicists have made, over the years, exciting and most elegant contributions to the theory of superconductivity (which, in and by itself, is one of the most beautiful constructs in theoretical physics), some of them of utmost importance, they have had less success in predicting and explaining superconducting states and mechanisms in specific materials. More down-to-earth computational materials scientists, who often go by the moniker “band theorists”, have been much more successful in applying (usually other people’s) ideas in such circumstances. In this essay I give some examples, largely drawn from my own experience, and speculate on their meaning. The last several decades have witnessed impressive contributions of band theorists, now more often referred to as computational materials scentists, in the fields of conventional and unconventional superconductivity. While the former is amazing in terms of the accuracy and predictive power of such first principles calculations, it is less surprising than the latter, which is justly perceived to be a domain of “high-brow science”, well beyond direct capability of first principles calculations. In my opinion, these two successes have quite different reasons, and I will dicuss them both in the following text. The first principles theory of (at that time conven- tional) superconductivity goes back to George Gas- pari and Balazs Gyorrfy, who suggested the first, al- beit rather approximate, technique for computing the electron-phonon coupling constant, λ, from ab initio band structure calculations, and fundamental theoreti- cal works by Phil Allen, Dierk Rainer, Eugene Maksimov and many others, well summarized in Rainer’s review. As a result, a foundation of first principles calculations of the anisotropic Eliashberg functions was established (a special mention goes to collaborations between Phil Allen, mostly an analytical theorist, and band theorists, such as Bill Butler, Warren Pickett, and others). Af- ter establishing the technique of applying Sternheimer’s perturbation theory to the linear response in periodic solids by Baroni and his collaborators, the commu- nity witnessed rapid progress in calculating the Eliash- berg function and solving the Eliashberg equation, first isotropic, and then anisotropic, from first principles. A parallel, very successful development, also based on these linear response techniques, was superconducting density functional theory. As these two directions matured (Sandro was taking an active part in both developments), accurate calculations of the critical temperatures of sim- ple classical superconductors, such as Nb or Mo, had become possible. The very fact that a quantity expo- nentially dependent on parameters (at least, in the weak coupling regime) was coming out basically right was per- ceived as curious, but not necessarily very enlightening. The fact that superconductivity of the doped fullerenes was clarified in 1991 on the very basic level, as being related to intramolecular bond-length-changing phonon modes by three independent groups[6–8], two of which entirely composed of band theorists, was left unappreci- ated, partially because it was later recognized that the full physical picture was more complicated than that. This perception would change definitively in 2001 af- ter the discovery of a 40 K superconductivity in MgB2. Recognized gurus of strongly correlated matter, who had gained fame through high-Tc cuprates (we will get to this family later) proffered all sorts of theories to this ef- fect, all of them, it turned out, spectacularly off mark. At the same time band theorists were able to identify both the essential physcs, aptly dubbed by Warren Pick- ett “doping of covalent bonds” (we will get back to this concept later), and the correct structure of the order parameter (two distinctly different gaps). In both cases the insight was based, in a profound and intimate level, on the very material-specific aspects of the elec- tronic bands, Fermi surfaces, and the calculated Eliash- berg function. Lack of this detailed understanding of materials-specific electronic properties is what prevented bright minds fed on model Hamiltonians from uncover- ing the right physics. Their modus operandi was “what exciting physics is possible?” rather than “what is pos- sible in this specific material?” (I will come back to this important difference later again) It is instructive at this point to go back twelve years and look at the paper by Len Mattheiss et al. This was, arguably, the first paper where a new superconduct- ing compound was suggested theoretically and verified experimentally. Noteworthy, this prediction was made years before the computational soft- and hardware had developed to a level permitting full electron-phonon cou- pling calculations for complex solids. Rather, the predic- tion was based entirely on Len’s band theorist’s intuition. A few years earlier he had calculated the electronic struc- ture of the so-called Sleight oxide, BaBiO3, which had been known to superconduct at a few Kelvin upon dop- 2 ing Pb for Bi, despite having a very low density of states. Mattheiss found that the conducting electrons are pri- marily derived from the Bi orbitals, and correctly con- jectured that doping the “active” bands does not allow for full benefits for superconductivity. Thus, he proposed to substitute the fully ionized Ba for K, and, indeed, the critical temperature for the optimal doping was dramat- ically increased compared to that of Ba(Bi,Pb)O3, even- tually surpassing 30 K. This example shows that the main advantage of com- putational material scientists over the model theories adepts is not, or, at least, mostly not, the access to ac- curate numbers cranked by a computer, but material- sensitive, chemistry-driven intuition developed through performing calculation and analyzing their results for many classes of materials. With time, more and more accurate calculations for more and more complex systems have become possi- ble, together with considerable progress in computing crystallographic stability, eventually leading to excellent “brute force” predictions of entirely new superconduc- tors. This development has recently culminated in two record-breaking discoveries, superconductivity in H3S at 200 and in LaH10 at 250 K, both predicted theoreti- cally as materials stable at high pressure and as high- temperature superconductors, and, in fact, both utilizing Pickett’s concept of “doped covalent bonds”. This is probably less surprising given that the the- ory of phonon-driven superconductivity is well estab- lished (as long as the key conditions are satisfied, namely, kTc ∼ ∆ ≲ ωph ≪ EF ), and materials in question are satisfactorily described by the density dunctional theory, DFT, (which is, by nature, a static mean field theory). What is astonishing is that band theorists (if not the band theory directly) have provided over the years a lot of insight into the physics of unconventional supercon- ductivity in unconventional materials. Historically, when it was first realized that the in- sulating state of the parent compounds of the high-Tc cuprates cannot be reproduced by DFT calculations, the first reaction was to deny the latter any relevance and utility. To lesser extent, similar fate was suffered by Eliashberg equations. This author was a part of a paper submitted originally to Phys. Rev. Lett., which was rejected on the ground of its using the Zeyher-Zwicknagl theory, dismissed by the referee as “uncritical utiliza- tion of the Eliashberg equations beyond their range of applicability”, and calculating the electron-phonon cou- pling parameters from DFT, “application of DFT to materials to which it has no relevance”. The excellent agreement with the experiment did not seem to waver the referee’s conviction. Needless to say, DFT calcula- tions of the electron-phonon coupling in optimally doped cuprates were later recognized as quite reasonable, and regardless of the nature of the superconducting gap, its effect on the phonon energy was correctly described by the Zeyher-Zwicknagl formalism. It is instructive to recall the state of experimental af- fairs in the field of superconducting cuprates at that time. Both the ARPES techique and the sample quality would undergo dramatic progress in the coming decade, but at that time it was not even able to detect the Fermi sur- face in the optimally doped cuprates. Superconductiv- ity in alleged absence of a regular Fermi surface in the normal state led to a plethora of highly exotic theories, including such notions as, for instance, “pseudo Fermi surface” or anyon superconductivity. An idea that, at least in the optimally- and overdoped high-Tc super- conductors, the concept of (renormalized) Fermi liquid may not be so out-of-touch with reality and the DFT Fermi surface may actually be meaninful was, at that time, advocated only by band theorists. As we now know very well, this concept was correct, and improved experiments have confirmed it. For a while, it seemed impossible to distinguish spectroscopically the bonding- antibonding splitting in bilayer cuprates, which led to a new generations of intriguing physical theories, such as “interlayer pair tunneling”. Again, with time the experiment has converged to the DFT results, not the other way around, as it often happens with theories. Moreover, while there is still no consensus on the theory of superconductivity in cuprates, arguably the most pop- ular direction takes the most intuitive, from the point of view of DFT, approach, wherein the pairing interaction has magnetic origin and the Fermi surface geometry and the character of spin fluctuations (both easily obtainable from DFT calculations) lead to a d-wave pairing. This point of view was advocated by Doug Scalapino, David Pines and others. Of course, they were basing their intu- ition on the experimental findings, but could have used DFT calculations as well. This said, it is quite clear that the essential physics of the high-Tc superconductivity is beyond the scope of DFT, which brings us to another important aspect of the latter. DFT is a quantitative theory, based on a well- defined set of approximations. It is in a unique posi- tion where both successes and failures of a theory add equally to our understanding of real physics in a par- ticular system. Model calculations more often than not can be tuned (to avoid the word “massaged”) to agree with essentially any experiment. DFT has relatively few knobs (although its extentions such as DFT+U or DFT+DMFT have more), and therefore its failure clearly outlines the applicability of its fundamental assumptions to a given material. Moreover, depending on the manner in which it fails one can extract invaluable information about the system. For instance, the fact that DFT under- estimates the tendency to magnetism in cuprates tells us about the importance of local physicis and local correla- tions there. Conversely, the fact that DFT overestimates the tendency to magnetism in Fe-based superconductors suggests that magnetism there is largely itinerant and 3 suppressed by long-range spin fluctuations. Let us continue our historical excursion. For decades, Cu-based superconductors occupied most of researchers’ attention, however, there were interesting splashes time and again in the sea of superconducting materials. The first that comes to mind is A3C60 (A =K,Rb,Cs). Super- conductivity at a record at that time (not counting the cuprates) temperatures up to 40 K was mentioned above. It is worth noting that it was not a brute force calculation that provided insight; in fact, full electron- phonon calculations as we know them now were not possi- ble at that time, and when they became possible it turned out that they underestimate the calculated coupling con- stant by 40% (band calculations beyond DFT, such as hybrid or GW functional correct for this error). Rather, it was qualitative (and correct) understanding of the ba- sic physics, which had emerged from relatively inaccurate DFT calculations. Fast forward ten years, and we have a bunch of dis- coveries that would have been sensational before the cuprates, but only attracted moderate attention in 2001. I am speaking of several new superconductors discovered, or declared in that year: MgCNi3, ZrZn2, ε-Fe, and, of course, MgB2. Among them we find, in this order, (i) a material with a very strong electron-phonon cou- pling, but with a rather modest critical temperature of 8 K, (ii) an experimental artifact, a several years later retracted claim of coexistence of superconductivity and ferromagnetism, (iii) a ferromagnet turned into a su- perconductor by pressure, and (iv) the record normal- pressure-Tc conventional superconductor. In all these cases the original assessement of the community was to a larger or smaller extent off the mark. In the first case, the original paper was pointing out an analogy with the LnNi2B2C family, which are 2D superconductors, and ex- pressed a justified surprise that in a 3D analogue Tc is much lower. This paper advocated for an unconventional superconductivity, having no gauge for the strength of the electron-phonon coupling. Early DFT calculations, however, have identified a very strong coupling with ro- tational phonon modes (with, it was later found, a strong anharmonic component), with a strong pair- breaking due to proximity to magnetism. In the second case, the original paper was aiming at triplet pairing, postulating a microscopic coexistance with ferromagnetism; DFT calculations, again, showed strong coupling with particular phonons, and the cal- culated electronic and magnetic properties did not look encouraging for triplet pairing — nothing explicit, just a general impression. Correspondingly, Ref. offered three possible scenarios, ordered by their likelihood: sam- ple inhomogenuity, a Fulde-Ferrel state, or, least likely, triplet pairing. Indeed, a few years later it was found that Ref. had observed surface superconductivity. Finally, in the third case it was found that when Fe loses its ferromagnetism at pressures above 15 GPa it transforms into a hexagonal structure know as ε-Fe and becomes superconducting. The original paper was call- ing ε-Fe “non-magnetic” and referred to decades-old pre- dictions (including one involving Sandro Massidda) that the electron-phonon coupling in Fe, if the mag- netism could be entirely suppressed, would be strong enough to provide for measureable superconductivity. When band theorists took a closer look at this experi- ment, they found that (1) ε-Fe at this pressures is not non-magnetic, but paramagnetic, sporting large, but dis- ordered and strongly fluctuating magnetic moments and (2) electron-phonon coupling depends on the pres- sure very weakly, while superconductivity exists only in a very narrow pressure range. These two finding were in contradiction with the original proposal of the phonon- driven superconductivity, but rather pointing toward a spin-fluctuations-induced, uncoventional pairing. Subse- quent experiments found unusual sensitivity to disorder, indicating such an unconventional pairing. Let us once again return to the fourth case, MgB2, which was, arguably, the most important discovery in su- perconductivity since the cuprates. The computational part, even while challenging at that time, was rather trivial, as was the much touted prediction of a two- gap superconductivity (curiously, the “model Hamil- tonian” theorists were quite at loss with this compound, apparently still under the spell of the incorrect claim of a 30 K Tc limit for conventional superconductors, see Ref.; they were proposing such exotic mechanisms as acoustic phonons, resonant valence bond, etc., overlook- ing the simple solution). What was not trivial was a new concept in phonon-driven superconductivity, introduced by Warren Pickett, which has proven instrumental for recently dicovered record-Tc hydorgen based supercon- ductors: doped covalent bonds. An opposite idea, of the utility of soft modes, had been circulated in the community for decades, even though many theorists were warning that the classical soft modes are only soft at particular points in the Brillouin zone and thus do not have enough phase space to boost supercon- ductivity. The soft mode concent was based on the math- ematically correct statement that phonons with frequen- cies close to 2πTc are the most efficient in increasing the critical temperature, and that the classical expression for the electron-phonon coupling includes inverse force constants, which can written as λν,q ∝ 1/Φ = 1/Mω2 ν,q, where M is some effective ionic mass. Obviously, low- ering ω will increase λ in the exponent, with should be more important than the prefactor ω. Or is it? Pickett’s observation related to the dual character of the electron-phonon coupling: while indeed λ ≈ η/Φ, where η is an electronic factor characterizing the sensitiv- ity of the electronic structure to ionic displacements, and Φ is some measure of the force constants, the force con- stants themselves depend on η, roughly as Φ ≈ Φ0 − 2η, where Φ0 is the unscreened force constants parameter. 4 Thus, η cannot be too large, because of the danger of the lattice becoming unstable. Doping covalent bonds is difficult to effect, but, if it can be done, it achieves two goals. First, the electronic structure strongly de- pends on ionic displacements modulating the covalent bond lengths (such are modes responsible for high Tc in both A3C60 and in MgB2), providing for large η, and the unscreen force constants are hard for covalent bonds, that providing for a large Φ0. Taken together, one can have a large λ and a large ω. This is exactly what hap- pens in MgB2. The Eg modes, mainly responsible for superconductivity, have large Φ0, of the order of 107 a.m.u×cm−2, which is reduced by a factor of three by the electron-phonon coupling — and still the phonon fre- quencies remain high, on the order of 500 cm−1. The same physics appears to be crucial for the recently dis- covered record-temperature superconductors H3S and LaH10 (which, incidentally, were both predicted com- putationally). A novel element there is that ultra-high pressures were instrumental in doping the H-involving covalent bonds, simply because compression severly lim- its possibilities of a system (which is obviously unhappy to have metallic covalent bonds) to assume a different crystal structure and get read of this undesired property. Between 2001 and 2018 a number of interesting novel superconductors were discovered, and in explaining most, if not all of them, band theorists played an important and often a leading part. I will not dwell on those, hav- ing shown enough very diversified examples already. One milestone is however hard to pass over: Fe-based super- conductors. These are the only truly high-Tc unconven- tional superconductors besides cuprates. The history of MgB2 had repeated itself again, in the sense that out- standing theorists were suggesting all sort of highly ex- citing scenarios, but it was band theorists who came up with the basic idea (now understood to be a big over- simplification, but still covering the basic physics) of a novel pairing state dubbed s± since then. There was a simple reason for that. This novel superconducting state basically results from a fortuitous combination of a particular Fermi surface geometry and a particular type of magnetic ordering these systems are close to. Both things are something band theorists calculate routinely and have a good intuition about. Which brings to the crucial question: what is the ad- vantage that band therists, a.k.a. computational mate- rials scientist, have? The author of this essay is of firm opinion that theorists doing model calculations are gen- erally smarter than us, and have deeper knowledge of the theory of superconductivity. Despite that, their intu- ition as regards specific superconducting materials seems to work less well. A seemingly unrelated, but in reality quite similar question is, why solid state chemists, and not physicists, are responsible for a lion share of novel superconductors discovered in the last several decades? Materials-dependent intuition may be the key. Arguably, the most interesting question a theoretical physicst can ask is, what can happen, in principle? Answers to this question often lead to most interesting toeretical models, exciting possibilities, new concepts. An alternative ques- tion to ask is, what can happen in this specific material? Generically, this question is more boring, but also more productive as regards understanding a concrete supercon- ductor. A correct answer to this question requires both a profound understanding of the microscopic physics, spe- cific features of electronic bands, phonon spectra, mag- netic orders, and an intuitive feeling based on dozen, if not handreds previous calculations indicating what is possible in which material. Last but not least, in order to predict something one need not necessarily invent some- thing new, but rather be aware of all hypotetical idea that had been floated around, sometimes decades ago, by smarter-than-us theorists. It is worth noting that the two gap superconductivity had been studied, as a purely theoretical concept, as early as the late 50s; the s± superconductivity in the early 70s. Without knowing this general (and, until some time, purely ab- stract) frameworks it would be hard to associate actual superconductivity in MgB2 and in LaFeAsO with these phenomena. In conclusion, I would like to express my gratitude to my many brothers-in-arms, who over the years worked in the same field, applying band structure calculations to supercondutivity, as Sandro, for instance, did. I am also thankful to my senior colleagues, my teachers and role models: Ole Andersen, Warren Pickett, Phil Allen, as well as to those who initiated me into the theory of superconductivity: Eugene Maksimov, David Kirzhnits, Vitaly Ginzburg. G.D. Gaspari and B.L. Gyorffy, Phys. Rev. Lett., 28, 801 D. Rainer, Physica B&C, 109, 1671 (1982) R.M. Sternheimer, Phys. Rev. 96, 951 (1954) S. Baroni, P. Giannozzi, and A. Testa, Phys. Rev. Lett. L. N. Oliveira, E. K. U. Gross, and W. Kohn, Phys. Rev. Lett. 60, 2430 (1988). C. M. Varma, J. Zaanen, and K. Raghavachari, Science M. Schl ̈uter, M. Lannoo, M. Needels, G. A. Baraff, and D. Tom ́anek, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 526 (1992) I. I. Mazin, S. N. Rashkeev, V. P. Antropov, O. Jepsen, A. I. Liechtenstein, and O. K. Andersen, Phys. Rev. B J. M. An and W. E. Pickett, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 4366 A.Y. Liu, I. I. Mazin, and J. Kortus, Phys. Rev. Lett. I cannot resist but mentioning that Sandro Massidda has made an invaluable contribution into study of MgB2, hav- ing published 30 papers on this subject, with more than 5 1000 cummulative citation count. L. F. Mattheiss, E. M. Gyorgy, and D. W. Johnson, Jr., Phys. Rev. B 37, 3745(R) (1988) C.Thomsen, M.Cardona, B.Friedl, C.O.Rodriguez, I.I.Mazin, and O.K.Andersen: Solid State Comm. 75, R. Zeyher and G. Zwicknagl, Z. Phys. B - Condensed Matter 78, 175 (1990) I.I. Mazin, Sov. Phys. Usp. 32, 489 (1989) W. E. Pickett, D. J. Singh, H. Krakauer, and R. E. Co- hen, Science 255, 46 (1992) J. M. Wheatley, T. C. Hsu, and P. W. Anderson, Phys. Rev. B 37, 5897(R) (1988) M. J. Rosseinsky, A. P. Ramirez, S. H. Glarum, D. W. Murphy, R. C. Haddon, A. F. Hebard, T. T. M. Palstra, A. R. Kortan, S. M. Zahurak, and A. V. Makhija, Phys. Rev. Lett. 66, 2830 (1991) T. He, Q. Huang, A. P. Ramirez, Y. Wang, K. A. Regan, N. Rogado, M. A. Hayward, M. K. Haas, J. S. Slusky, K. Inumara, H. W. Zandbergen, N. P. Ong and R. J. Cava, Nature 411, 54 (2001) C. Pfleiderer, M. Uhlarz, S. M. Hayden, R. Vollmer, H. v. L ̈ohneysen, N. R. Bernhoeft and G. G. Lonzarich, Nature K. Shimizu, T. Kimura, S. Furomoto, K. Takeda, K. Kon- tani, Y. Onuki, and K. Amaya, Nature, 412, 316 (2001) J. Nagamatsu, N. Nakagawa, T. Muranaka, Y. Zenitani, J. Akimitsu, Nature. 410, 63 (2001) D. J. Singh and I. I. Mazin, Phys. Rev. B 64, 140507 A. Yu. Ignatov, S. Y. Savrasov, and T. A. Tyson, Phys. Rev. B 68, 220504(R) (2003) D. J. Singh and I. I. Mazin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 187004 E. A. Yelland, S. M. Hayden, S. J. C. Yates, C. Pfleiderer, M. Uhlarz, R. Vollmer, H. v. L ̈ohneysen, N. R. Bernhoeft, R. P. Smith, S. S. Saxena, and N. Kimura,Phys. Rev. B 72, 214523 (2005); I cannot but note that this paper has 34 citations, while the original, disproved paper has 364. E.P. Wohlfarth, Phys. Lett. A 75, 141 (1979); A. J. Free- man, A. Continenza, S., Massidda, and J.C. Grossman, Physica C 166, 317 (1990). G. Steinle-Neumann, L. Stixrude, and R.E. Cohen, PNAS 101, 33 (2004) I. I. Mazin, D. A. Papaconstantopoulos, and M. J. Mehl, Phys. Rev. B 65, 100511(R) (2002) D. Jaccard, A.T. Holmes, G.Behr, Y.Inada and Y. Onuki, Physics Letters A 299, 282 (2002) G. Bergmann and D. Rainer, Z. Physik 263, 59 (1973) I.I. Mazin, Physica C 468, 105 (2008)G. Bergmann and D. Rainer, Z. Phys. 263, 59 (1973) A. P. Drozdov, M. I. Eremets, I. A. Troyan, V. Kseno- fontov and S. I. Shylin, Nature 525, 73 (2015) A. P. Drozdov, V. S. Minkov, S. P. Besedin, P. P. Kong, M. A. Kuzovnikov, D. A. Knyazev, M. I. Eremets, arXiv:1808.07039; M. Somayazulu, M. Ahart, A. K. Mishra, Z. M. Geballe, M. Baldini, Y. Meng, V.V. Struzhkin, and R. J. Hemley, arXiv:1808.07695; A. P. Drozdov, P. P. Kong, V. S. Minkov, S. P. Besedin, M. A. Kuzovnikov, S. Mozaffari, L. Balicas, F. Balakirev, D. Graf, V. B. Prakapenka, E. Greenberg, D. A. Knyazev, M. Tkacz, M. I. Eremets, arXiv:1812.01561 I. I. Mazin, D. J. Singh, M. D. Johannes, and M. H. Du, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 057003 (2008) H. Suhl, B.T. Matthias, and L.R. Walker, Phys. Rev. Lett. 3,552 (1959); V.A. Moskalenko, Fiz. Met. Met. 4, A.G. Aronov and E.B. Sonin, Sov. Phys.-JETP 36, 556