Ion exchange gels enhance organic electrochemical transistor performance in aqueous solution Connor G. Bischak,1 Lucas Q. Flagg,1 and David S. Ginger1, a) Department of Chemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195-1700, United States Conjugated polymer-based organic electrochemical transistors (OECTs) are being studied for applications ranging from biochemical sensing to neural interfaces. While new conjugated polymers are being developed that can interface digital electronics with the aqueous chemistry of life, the vast majority of high-performance, high-mobility organic transistor materials developed over the past decades are extremely poor at taking up biologically-relevant ions. Here we incorporate an ion exchange gel into an OECT demonstrating that this structure is capable of taking up biologically-relevant ions from solution and injecting larger, more hydrophobic ions into the underlying polymer semiconductor active layer in multiple hydrophobic conjugated polymers. active layer and a blend of the ionic liquid 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide we demonstrate more than a four order of magnitude improvement in OECT device transconductance and a one hundred-fold increase in ion injection kinetics. We demonstrate the ability of the ion exchange gel OECT to record biological signals by measuring the action potentials of a Venus flytrap plant. These results show the possibility of using interface engineering to open up a wider palette of organic semiconductor materials as OECTs that can be gated by aqueous solutions. Because of their ability to conduct both electronic and ionic charge carriers, conjugated polymers have emerged as promising materials for use in a wide array of appli- cations, such as energy storage devices,1–3 neuromorphic computing,4,5 and bioelectronics.6–9 One technology that exploits the dual electronic/ionic conductivity of conju- gated polymers for bioelectronics is the organic electro- chemical transistor (OECT),10 which has been used for many applications,11 including recording electrical im- pulses in humans and cell populations,12–14 in vivo elec- trophysiological recordings,15 in vitro biosensing,16–19 and neuronal stimulation.20 A distinguishing feature of OECTs compared to conventional organic field-effect transistors (OFETs), is that upon application of an elec- trochemical gate bias, ions from the electrolyte directly enter the polymer to charge compensate the electronic carriers injected into the organic semiconductors, thus permitting injection of much higher volumetric carrier densities than would be possible with only dielectric sur- face gating. To achieve OECTs with high transconductance, the conjugated polymer active layer should have both a high electron or hole mobility (μ) and a high volumet- ric capacitance (C*).21 A high μ is achieved through a tightly-packed, often crystalline, polymer morphology, whereas a high C* relies on facile ion migration within the polymer.22,23 These parameters depend on a num- ber of properties of the conjugated polymer active layer and electrolyte, including polymer chemistry,23–25 poly- mer microstructure,22,26 choice of electrolyte anion and cation,27,28 and electrolyte concentration.29 For OECT a)Corresponding Author (dginger@uw.edu) applications, ion injection kinetics are also an impor- tant figure-of-merit: sub-second device switching speeds are desirable for capturing transient biological signals, while even faster kinetics might be beneficial for electro- physiology. OECT kinetics can depend on the degree of conformational changes of the polymer upon electro- chemical doping, as well as the chemistry of the poly- mer sidechains.23,25 Unfortunately, most p-type semicon- ducting polymers traditionally used for OFETs and non- aqueous OECTs are hydrophobic and unable to take up and transport biologically-relevant ions, functioning poorly as OECT active layers in aqueous electrolytes.23,25 A number of promising strategies have been pursued to improve the performance of conjugated polymers for OECT active layers. OECTs with non-aqueous gate di- electrics, such as ionic liquid-based ion gels30–32 and poly- meric ionic liquids,33,34 operate using hydrophobic conju- gated polymer active layers, yet these polymers are gen- erally incompatible with aqueous gate dielectrics, pre- cluding their use in bioelectronics or biosensing appli- cations. To enhance ion transport in conjugated poly- mers, many strategies, including developing new device designs35 and new conjugated polymers, have been pur- sued. Recently, conjugated polymers and small molecules with ethylene glycol-based or charged side chains have been used for OECTs, including both p-type23,25,36–39 and n-type organic semiconductors.40–43 Unlike polymers with alkyl side chains, these more hydrophilic polymers are better at transporting biologically-relevant ions, such as Cl-, K+, and Na+. On the other hand, hydropho- bic polymers are capable of transporting larger, more hydrophobic ions, such as hexafluorophosphate (PF6-) or bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (TFSI-),27,28 prob- ably because these larger ions are more polarizable, and bind weakly to surrounding water molecules, lowering the arXiv:1909.13397v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 29 Sep 2019 2 device schematic with the ion exchange gel positioned on top of the active layer. Upon application of a gate bias, ions from solution (Cl-) enter the ion exchange gel and ions from the ion exchange gel (TFSI-) enter and dope the semiconductor polymer active layer. (B) Schematic of OECT operation with the ion exchange gel and p-type active layer. (C) Chemical structures of the polymer semiconductor active layer, PBTTT, and the ion exchange gel, comprising PVDF-HFP and BMIM TFSI ionic liquid. (D) Transfer curve of a PBTTT OECT with and without the ion exchange gel (VDS = -0.6 V, d = 55 nm, L = 20 μm, W = 100 μm). The inset shows the transfer curve of a PBTTT OECT without the ion exchange gel, which has five orders of magnitude lower operating current, and significantly more hysteresis. The μC* of PBTTT with the ion gel is 179 ± 40 F cm-1 V-1 s-1 as determined by a series of transistor measurements with different L and d. (E) Output curves (VG = 0.3-0.7 V) for the PBTTT OECT with the ion exchange gel. threshold voltage for ion injection and enabling transport within the hydrophobic polymer matrix. These larger, hydrophobic ions, however, are not commonly found in nature, so it has been difficult to exploit their favorable properties for bioelectronics. Herein, we demonstrate a platform that uses an interfacial ionic liquid-based ion exchange gel to en- hance the transconductance and ion injection kinet- ics of OECTs gated with aqueous solutions. We show that the ion exchange gel can significantly im- prove both the OECT transconductance and kinet- ics of ion injection for OECTs with active layers composed of a variety of different hydrophobic poly- mers, including poly[2,5-bis(3-tetradecylthiophen-2-yl) thieno[3,2-b]thiophene] (PBTTT), a common polymer previously used in OFETs44 and non-aqueous electrolyte- gated OECTs.45 We evaluate the stability of this device architecture, and show that only polymer regions in con- tact with the ion exchange gel exhibit enhanced electro- chemical doping. Finally, we demonstrate the viability of this OECT device geometry by recording the action po- tential of a live Venus flytrap plant. Our results demon- strate a promising new architecture for OECTs that ex- changes biologically-relevant ions for large, hydropho- bic ions, resulting in vastly enhanced steady-state dop- ing levels and faster ion injection kinetics in commonly- available, hydrophobic conjugated polymers. 1A shows the device architecture of an OECT incorporating an ion exchange gel between the conjugated polymer active layer and the aqueous electrolyte. Upon application of a gate bias (VG), Cl- ions from the aqueous electrolyte enter the ion exchange gel and TFSI- ions enter the underlying semiconductor polymer active layer, compensating for holes on the polymer backbone (Figure 1B). The ion exchange gel is composed of a blend of poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene) (PVDF-HFP) as the gel matrix and 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (BMIM TFSI) as the ionic liquid (Figure 1C). We choose BMIM TFSI as the ionic liquid component because it is immiscible with water and contains TFSI-, an anion that has been previously shown to efficiently dope and diffuse within hydrophobic conjugated polymers.25,46 We found that other ionic liquids with smaller, more hydrophilic anions worked, but require a higher bias to dope the underlying hydrophobic polymer (Figure S1). We focus on characterizing this device geometry using PBTTT as the semiconductor polymer active layer (Figure 1C). PBTTT has been used widely as the active layer 3 The ion exchange gel improves ion injection kinetics. Spectroelectrochemistry of PBTTT (A) without and (B) with the ion exchange gel, and P3HT (C) without and (D) with the ion exchange gel recorded in 100 mM KCl. Each spectrum is acquired with a 100 ms integration time with 300 ms between spectra (E) Kinetics traces of the decrease in the absorption peaks as a function of time with biexponential fits (black solid and dotted lines). When applying the ion exchange gel, the change in absorption upon doping increases and the time constant for ion injection decreases. For PBTTT, the predominant decay constant decreases from 68.8 ± 1.1 s to 1.53 ± 0.02 s when the ion gel is applied. in OFETs47 and has a relatively high charge carrier mobility of ∼1.0 cm2 V-1 s-1,44 yet this polymer has hydrophobic alkyl side chains and appears unable to uptake biologically-relevant anions in the absence of the ion exchange gel (Figure 1D). We compare the performance of OECTs with and with- out the ion gel present using PBTTT as the conjugated polymer active layer. Figure 1D shows transfer curves of an OECT with a PBTTT active layer with and without the ion gel. Figure 1E shows the corresponding output curves with the ion exchange gel applied. The trans- fer curve shows an increase in the operating current at VG = -0.7 V of more than four orders of magnitude upon adding the ion exchange gel. The transconduc- tance increases from 1.0 x 10-4 ± 9.0 x 10-5 mS to 9.0 ± 1.8 mS upon applying the ion exchange gel on de- vices with the same polymer film thickness (d = 55 nm) and device dimensions (L = 20 μm, W = 100 μm). We find that this improvement in OECT performance when gated with aqueous electrolytes is a general phenomenon for hydrophobic conjugated polymers when using the ion exchange gel: OECTs with a poly-3-hexylthiophene (P3HT) active layer exhibit a ∼24,000-fold improvement in the transconductance from 1.2 x 10-4 1.1 x 10-4 mS to 2.9 ± 0.6 mS on the same device with and without the ion exchange gel (d = 80 nm, L = 20 μm, W = 100 μm) (Figure S2). To compare the ion-exchange OECT to other state- of-the-art OECTs, we measure the μC* product, an in- trinsic property of the polymer active layer that is in- dependent of transistor dimensions and film thickness.21 By characterizing many transistors with different dimen- sions and active layer thicknesses, we calculate a μC* of 179 ± 40 F cm-1 V-1 s-1 for PBTTT and 63 ± 18 F cm-1 V-1 s-1 for P3HT with the ion exchange gel applied (Figure S3). Notably, the μC* for PBTTT with the ion exchange gel approaches that of the best-performing ac- cumulation mode OECT materials (μC* = ∼250 F cm-1 V-1) reported to date.21 When used with P3HT, the μC* of the ion exchange gel OECT is on the same order as that of typical PEDOT:PSS-based OECTs (μC* = ∼60 F cm-1 V-1).21 In addition to improving the steady-state OECT de- vice performance, we show that the ion injection rate increases by up to two orders of magnitude when the ion gel is applied. Figure 2A shows a schematic of the spec- troelectrochemistry setup used to measure ion injection kinetics. We submerge a PBTTT-coated FTO/glass slide in an electrochemical cell containing 100 mM KCl with a Pt mesh counter electrode (CE) and an Ag/AgCl refer- ence electrode (RE). The FTO-coated glass slide serves as the working electrode (WE). Figure 2B shows images of the ion gel on the polymer thin film before and after application of a bias, demonstrating that enhanced elec- trochemical doping occurs underneath the ion exchange gel upon applying a bias and minimal doping occurs in 4 Ag/AgCl electrode and PBTTT-based OECT attached to a Venus flytrap. The gate electrode is placed in the plant’s soil. (B) Image of an OECT and Ag/AgCl electrode on the surface on a Venus flytrap trap. (C) Schematic showing the device geometry on the Venus flytrap surface with guar gum/KCl as a biocompatible adhesive gel. (D) Current as a function of time from an OECT and voltage as a function of time from a Ag/AgCl electrode upon triggering the hair inside the flytrap four times. (E) Simultaneous measurement of an OECT and Ag/AgCl electrode with no ion exchange gel. The inset shows change in current versus time with a current scale that captures the signal recorded. areas of the film directly exposed to the KCl electrolyte. Movie S1 and Movie S2 also show reversible enhanced doping under the ion exchange gel in PBTTT and P3HT, respectively, upon performing multiple cyclic voltammo- grams. To show that this selective doping is a general phenomenon for hydrophobic conjugated polymers, we also demonstrate enhanced doping with the ion exchange gel applied in both PTB7 and PCPDTBT, which can be oxidized in the electrochemical window of water (Figure S4). In the same configuration, we assessed the stabil- ity of the ion exchange gel by performing 100 successive cyclic voltammograms. The reversibly injected charge level decreases by only ∼10% after 100 cyclic voltammo- grams performed on PBTTT film covered with the ion exchange gel, and does not appear to degrade on P3HT films over 100 cycles (Figure S5). By using spectroelectrochemistry to measure changes in absorption upon applying a bias, we determine the ki- netics of electrochemically-driven ion injection and dop- ing. Figure 2C shows a series of absorption spectra taken following application of a 0.7 V bias (vs. Ag/AgCl) to PBTTT. These spectra show a small decrease in the main absorption peak and an increase of the near-IR polaron absorption peak. Figure 2D shows the results of the same experiment with the ion exchange gel modified PBTTT film, which results in faster doping and a more substan- tial decrease in the main absorption peak and increase in the polaron absorption. We fit the decrease of the ab- sorption spectrum maximum of PBTTT to a biexponen- tial decay and find that the main component decreases from 68.8 ± 1.1 s to 1.53 ± 0.02 s upon adding the ion gel, a ∼50x increase in ion injection rate. For P3HT, we find a similar decrease of 152 ± 12 s to 1.64 ± 0.02 s, a ∼100x increase the ion injection rate when the ion gel is applied (Figure S6). We additionally measured transistor switching speeds by modulating VG between 0 and -0.7 V and find a similar time constant for tran- sistor turn on (3.1 ± 0.1 s) and much faster time con- stant for transistor turn off (0.14 ± 0.01 s) (Figure S7). We also evaluated the frequency response of OECTs with and without the ion exchange gel (Figure S8) and, consis- tent with the device measurements, found that the device does not turn on without the ion exchange gel. We note that while the ion-gel-modified OECTs operate with im- proved kinetics relative to unmodified OECTs based on hydrophobic polymers, their kinetics are still ∼10-100x slower than OECTs containing conjugated polymers with glycol sidechains and PEDOT:PSS-based OECTs.23,25,48 While second-scale switching speeds may already be suffi- cient for some biosensing applications, we speculate that it should be possible to improve kinetics and switching speeds further by modifying the ion gel/polymer inter- face, and optimizing the device geometry and/or polymer morphology. Finally, as a practical demonstration, we explore the viability of the ion-exchange gel-modified OECTs for measuring extracellular action potentials by using them to record the action potential of a Venus flytrap (Dion- 5 aea muscipula) upon mechanical stimulation. The Venus flytrap serves as a model system for recording extra- cellular signals with an action potential that consists of a sharp depolarization peak followed by a longer hyperpolarization.49–52 The upper leaf of the Venus fly- trap typically contains six trigger hairs, which generate an action potential when stimulated. The trap closes when two mechanical stimuli occur within 0.75-20 s, plac- ing constraints on the time resolution of the system. We placed both a commercial Ag/AgCl wire electrode and an OECT on the surface of the Venus flytrap leaf and recorded signals from both the OECT and Ag/AgCl elec- trodes simultaneously while stimulating the trigger hairs to trigger the action potential. We show the positions of the electrodes and circuit diagram in Figure 3A and an image of the electrodes on a Venus flytrap leaf in Figure 3B. Figure 3C shows the device geometry of the OECT with a PBTTT active layer, PVDF-HFP/BMIM TFSI ion exchange gel, and a biocompatible gel composed of a mixture of guar gum and an aqueous 100 mM KCl solu- tion used to interface with the plant and prevent direct contact between the ion exchange gel and the plant. We simultaneously record a series of action poten- tials with the OECT and standard Ag/AgCl electrode by stimulating the trigger hairs on the Venus flytrap repeat- edly. Movie S3 and Movie S4 show OECT action poten- tials recorded upon flytrap stimulation. Traces of voltage versus time show the simultaneous recording of the ac- tion potential with both the ion exchange gel PBTTT OECT (L = 20 μm, W = 400 μm, d = 55 nm) and a standard commercial Ag/AgCl wire electrode (Figure 3D). The Ag/AgCl electrode serves as a control and mea- sures changes in potential between the Venus flytrap leaf and ground. We calculate the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) by dividing the amplitude of the depolarization peak (IA or VA) by the standard deviation (σ) of the noise with- out flytrap stimulation, as has been used previously to calculate the SNRs of OECTs.19 In comparing the SNR without, and with, the ion gel applied (Figure 4D and 2 (IA = 0.27 ± 0.06 μA, σ = 28 nA) to 1250 ± 20 (IA = 35 ± 1 μA, σ = 28 nA) when the ion exchange gel is applied. Without the ion gel, the SNR is similar to that measured with the Ag/AgCl electrode (SNR = 11 ± 1, VA = 14 ± 1 mV, σ = 1.3 mV). Although the SNR improves significantly with the ion gel, the OECT oper- ation could still benefit from an increase in the response speed, as evidenced by the broadening of the depolar- ization peak in the OECT channel. Potential strategies to increase the transistor kinetics include optimizing the polymer thickness, increasing the surface area of polymer / ion gel interface through nano- and micro-structuring, or developing new gel materials that exhibit higher ion mobilities. Nevertheless, the ion-exchange gels already allow conversion of existing OFET platforms into aque- ous OECTs capable of recording signals in aqueous and biological environments. We have used an ion exchange gel to enhance the prop- erties of hydrophobic polymers when incorporated into OECTs in contact with aqueous electrolytes. By ex- changing Cl- in the aqueous electrolyte with TFSI- in the ion exchange gel, we show enhanced device perfor- mance with transconductance values improving by up to four orders of magnitude and a μC* approaching the highest performing accumulation mode OECT materials. We additionally show an improvement in the ion injec- tion kinetics by as much as 100x and stability of the ion gel under repeated cycling. To show the utility of the ion exchange gel, we measure the action potential of a Venus flytrap with and without the ion exchange gel and show over two orders of magnitude improvement in the SNR upon incorporating the ion exchange gel. Overall, using an ion exchange gel for enhanced OECT perfor- mance is a promising, straight-forward means to turn an otherwise poorly-performing hydrophobic polymer into a high-performing, sensitive OECT active layer material. This technology allows for the fine-tuning of polymer-ion interactions independent of the aqueous electrolyte and provides a promising route for OECT device optimization through interfacial layers. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS C. G. B. is a Washington Research Foundation Post- doctoral Fellow. L. Q. F.’s contribution was based in part on work supported by the expired National Science Foundation award, NSF DMR-1607242, and subsequent support from NWIMPACT SEED award funding. AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS C. G. B., L. Q. F. and D. S. G. conceived of the experi- ments and wrote the manuscript. C. G. B. fabricated ion exchange gel and OECTs and performed all transistor measurements and spectroelectrochemistry. C.G.B and L.Q.F. measured action potentials from the Venus flytrap with the OECTs.