arXiv:1909.07688v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 17 Sep 2019 A "road-map" of Nickelate superconductivity Navinder Singh∗ Physical Research Laboratory, Ahmedabad, India. navinder.phy@gmail.com September 18, 2019 Abstract We comment on the electronic structure of Nickelate system NdNiO2 which shows superconductivity on doping. The doped system Nd0.8Sr0.2NiO2 shows (most probably unconventional) superconductivity with transition temperatures ranging from 9 K to 15 K. The resistivity of the parent compound NdNiO2 shows a minimum at around 60K, and an up-turn at lower temperatures. In the current understanding it is thought to be originating from a Kondo like coupling between mobile d-states of the Nd 5d bands and un- paired electrons in Ni3dx2−y2 − O2p hybrid orbitals of Ni1+ and O2−ions. In this note we offer alternative possibilities of the observed resistance minimum in LaNiO2. We attempt to construct a "road-map" of various possibilities to comprehend the observed behaviour and suggest further experiments to prove or disprove a given explanation. We also compare and contrast Nickelates with Cuprates. Comparison points towards unconventional superconductivity in Nickelates. I. Introduction Recent discovery of 9 K to 15 K superconduc- tivity in the compound Nd1−xSrxNiO2 has created much excitement and electronic struc- ture calculations has been reported. The parent compound NdNiO2 is a conduc- tor which shows peculiar resistivity (In con- trast, parent compounds of Cuprates are mag- netic insulators). Formal valence counting in NdNiO2 will suggest Ni to be in d9 statei sim- ∗Cell Phone: +919662680605 iNi : [Ar]3d84s2 and Nd : [Xe]4f 45d06s2, in the compound we will have ilar to d9 configuration of Cu in Cuprates. This similarity was recognized roughly two decades ago where authors investigated possible nickelate analogs to the Cuprates. They recognized that Ni1+ is a difficult va- lence and suggested (based on LDA+U cal- culations) that LaNiO2 will be a magnetic in- sulator (with Ni having rare d9 states and un-paired electrons in Ni3dx2−y2 state having dominating weight at the Fermi level). On doping it should lead to (S=0) Ni2+ states imbedded in the matrix of (S=1/2) Ni1+ states. Similarity with cuprates was clear, however, authors recongnized the very different local 1 environment. They also studied other valence states of Ni (Ni2+ and Ni3+). In NiO and in La2NiO4, Ni is in the usual valence state of 2+ that is d8 con- figuration. These compounds form insu- lators. Ni can be in the valence state Ni3+ as in LaNiO3 (La3+Ni3+[O2−]3). For- mally, Ni should have d7 configuration (Ni : [Ar]3d84s2 and Ni3+[Ar]3d7), however, it turns out that due to "self-doping" holes are created in oxygen p orbitals (Ni3+O2− → Ni2+O1−) which constitute mobile states and localized (S=1) states are formed on Ni2+ (one un- paired electron in Ni3dx2−y2 orbital and an- other unpaired electron in Ni3d3z2−r2 orbital). It was pointed out that there exists strong cou- pling between mobile p holes with localized Ni spins via 2p − 3d hybridization and the sys- tem (LaNiO3) should lead to heavy fermion Kondo type behaviour which was later found to be so. Authors in the recent discovery re- duce LaNiO3 to LaNiO2 via difficult low temperature topochemical reaction ("Jenga chemistry"). However, it turns out that resistivity of LaNiO2 shows insulating be- haviour below 150 K. Then, the authors explored La1−xSrxNiO2 (x ≃ 0.2) which too showed insulating behaviour below 150 K. In an attempt to increase electronic band- width authors replaced bigger ion La with a smaller ion Nd. This lead to smaller cell volume and more electronic bandwidth. The system NdNiO2 becomes the parent com- pound of Nd0.8Sr0.2NiO2 which showed su- perconductivity from 9 K to 15 K. How- ever, more deeper understanding is required why Nd0.8Sr0.2NiO2 is superconducting while La0.8Sr0.2NiO2 is not (both thought to have Ni d9 configurations). II. A list of plausible explanations In the present note we would like to comment about the behaviour of resistivity of the par- ent compound and on the mechanism of su- perconductivity in the doped system. Resistiv- ity of the parent compound NdLiO2 is repro- duced in figure (1). It decreases with decreas- ing temperature upto 60 K, and then shows upturn at lower temperatures. There are sev- eral possibilities for the observed resistivity minimum (figure 1) at around 60 K and up- turn at lower temperatures in NdNiO2: per red curve is for NdNiO2. From Ref. • Weak localization effects: This is unlikely, 2 as the system (NdNiO2) prepared is rea- sonably good crystalline material (figure 1 and 2 in ref). • As suggested in, 5d states of Neodymium atoms could be involved in electrical transport and there could be a coupling of these degrees of freedom with un-paired electrons in Ni1+ leading to Kondo system like behaviour and resistivity minimum. This is quite plausible. Exper- iments to prove or disprove this explana- tion are proposed at the end of this sec- tion. • The third possibility is temperature driven intra-band transitions. The resis- tivity upturn starts at around 60 K and at roughly the same temperature Hall coeffi- cient turns large negative in the undoped system NdNiO2, and changes sign from being negative to positive in the doped system. The underlying cause could be analyzed in the following way: At zero doping and zero tempera- ture, Nd 5dxy bands form mobile states. There is direct Nd 5dxy − Nd 5dxy overlaps and mobile bands are formedii, whereas Nd5d3z2−r2 − Ni3d3z2−r2 hybridization form localized states for the ab-plane electrical conduc- tion (i.e., transverse direction to this hy- bridization state). There exists finite crystal field splitting between the mobile iiLDA calculations show that Nd 5d bands are quite broad (from -0.2 eV to 8 eV) states and localized states. There are another important degrees of freedom central to superconductivity. It is the hybrid band Ni3dx2−y2 − O2p which exists in the ab-plane and does not sup- port any mobile state. The reason is the standard one: double occupancy at Ni3dx2−y2 site leads to large Hubbard U.iii At finite temperatures the mobile Nd 5d states are more populated and provide the dominant contribution to conduction in the ab-plane. As the temperature is reduced below 60 K, the electronic pop- ulation of the conducting Nd 5d band reduces and that of the hybrid states Nd5d3z2−r2 − Ni3d3z2−r2 improves (we dis- cuss other possible experiments to de- tect a signature of this splitting (60 K ≃ 5 meV)). Thus, the resistivity up-trun in the undoped compound below 60 K points towards the loss of carriers in the con- ducting band. This loss of carriers is also vis- ible in the Hall coefficient data which drops towards large negative values as shown in fig- ure (2) [red curve]. As the Hall coefficient is given by: RH(T) = − 1 n(T)ec, (1) the decrease in n(T) with lowering tem- perature in mobile band Nd 5d leads to larger negative Hall coefficient( figure (2) lower curve). iiiIt has been pointed out that Nickelates are Mott insu- lators while Cuprates are charge transfer insulators 3 Lower red curve is for NdNiO2. From Ref[] . Thus in the undoped system NdNiO2 con- ductivity is through Nd 5d bands, and contribution to conductivity of the hybrid band Ni3dx2−y2 − O2p (which is the base of superconductivity) is zero due to Mott physics. Next question is what happens on dop- ing. When the system NdNiO2 is doped with Strontium (Nd0.8Sr0.2NiO2) holes are created in Ni3dx2−y2 states (a small hole pocket is opened up). The hole doping leads to the removal of the un-paried electron from Ni3dx2−y2 states, leaving Ni2+. Thus a typical charge con- figuration on Ni will be a mixture of d9 and d8 states. With Sr concentration 0.2 in the above system, 20 percent Ni atoms in a given sample will be in d8 configu- ration and 80 percent will be having d9 configurations. But the situation is not static. Even at zero temperature, configu- ration at a given Ni atom will fluctuate be- tween d8 and d9 as electrons flit from one Ni atom to another. This is due to quan- tum fluctuations. And the hybrid band Ni3dx2−y2 − O2p opens out another con- ducting channel (hole pocket) along with the existing Nd 5d one (electron pocket). This is like two resistances working in par- allel (figure 3), and leads to even lesser re- sistivity. Reduced resistivity can be seen R R2 1 resistances constituted by mo- bile Nd5d states (R1) and hole doped Ni3dx2−y2 − O2p hybrid states (R2), leading to net lower resistivity of the doped compound Nd0.8Sr0.2NiO2. in figure (1) for the doped system case. Conduction is electron like in the band Nd5d whereas the conduction is hole like in the band Ni3dx2−y2 − O2p . Thus at around 60 K the conduction happens via the doped holes in Ni3dx−y2 − O2p band where it is hole-like and leads to sign change of the Hall coefficient from nega- 4 tive to position at that temperature (figure 2). This is one possible explanation of the observed behaviour. We return back to the "Kondo system like behaviour" possibility. If 5d states of Neodymium atoms are involved in elec- trical transport and there is a coupling of these degrees of freedom with un-paired electrons in Ni1+, then it can lead to Kondo system like behaviour and resistivity minimum can be understood in the un- doped system. Now, when the system is doped, the doped holes goes to Ni3dx2−y2 − O2p strongly correlated band. It could have two consequences: (1) It weakens the Kondo Coupling, and (2) another conducting channel is opened up (our parallel resistance idea (figure 3)). The result is the reduced resistivity of the doped system Nd0.8Sr0.2NiO2 (fig- ure 1) which on further lowering the tem- perature "skips" the Kondo up-turn and the system goes into the superconduct- ing state. But how to reconcile the be- haviour of the Hall coefficient is a chal- lenging open issue in this scenario. • There is yet another possibility. It is known that Nickelates support various charge density wave orders (NdNiO3 shows long range charge order be- low the metal-insulator transition at TMI=205 K). Thus there is a plausibility that NdNiO2 also supports some form of charge order. There are two further possi- bilities: Possibility No. 1: In the undoped sys- tem (NdNiO2), if charge order happens in the Nd 5d channel at around 60 K, then due to the build up of the charge order, resistivity starts to increase as the tem- perature is reduced below 60 K (figure 1, upper curve). And when the system is doped, second conducting channel is opened up in Ni3dx2−y2 − O2p strongly correlated band (as holes reside on Ni in Nd0.8Sr0.2NiO2). This "by-pass" or "shunt" the higher resistive channel (fig- ure 3) of CDW order and net resistivity is less for the doped system (figure 1, lower curve). The behaviour of the Hall coeffi- cient can also be reconciled in the follow- ing way. Louis Taillefer and collaborators has done extensive amount of experimen- tal investigations in the case of charge or- der in under-doped Cuprates. Along with other probes they observe simultaneous rise in resistivity and fall in the Hall co- efficient when temperature is lowered be- low TCharge Order. These connections are quite intriguing! And much work is needed in this direction. However, it is difficult to reconcile the change in the Hall coefficient from negative to positive at 60 K (figure (2) upper curve) in this "pic- ture". Possibility No. 2: There is a possibility of self doping even in the case of NdNiO2. Then along with configurations of the 5 type Nd3+ − Ni1+, there will also be con- figurations of the form Nd2+ − Ni2+. This implies that even in the undoped system NdNiO2, in the strongly correlated band Ni3dx2−y2 − O2p, there are holes on Ni ions. These holes destroy Mott insula- tion, and the system is conducting via two channels: Nd − Nd direct channel and Ni3dx2−y2 − O2p. Now, holes in the un- doped system in the Ni3dx2−y2 − O2p hy- brid states are not randomly distributed, but they organize in the form of stripes, at and below the temperature TStripes = 60 K. This can lead to resistivity up-turn of the undoped system below 60 K! And when the system is further hole doped with Sr, charge order temperature is shifted to even lower temperatures. But before that stipulated temperature the doped system undergoes superconducting transition. These are some of the possibilities to com- prehend the observed behaviour. The field of Nickelate superconductivity is at a very early stage of development. With more experiments in future the "ac- tual picture" will emerge. Actually, all the experimental arsenal used to analyze Cuprates can be used in the case of Nick- elates. Below we suggest some of the ex- periments that will be useful to resolve the cases: 1. To analyze CDW order, for example, Seebeck coefficient and Nernst coef- ficient can be measured across the 60 K mark. 2. Heat capacity measurements and quantum oscillations measurements can tell about the presence or ab- sence of heavy fermions and Kondo physics in Nickelates. 3. Heat capacity measurements can de- tect the 5 meV gap (as the itinerant degrees of freedom start to freeze be- low 60 K, and γ T term in the heat capacity will reduce). III. Unconventional superconductivity The conducting hole doped band (Ni3d −O2p) in Nd0.8Sr0.2NiO2 could be responsible for su- perconductivity. There are three possibilities to rationalize superconductivity in these sys- tems: 1. Unconventional superconductivity from repulsion: This is the most favorable case. A sign changing gap like d-wave is expected. 2. Superconductivity from magnetic spin fluctuations as glue. Magnetic spin fluctu- ation glue is unlikely way to understand Nickelate superconductivity. There are at least two reasons: (1) these do not show- ing any magnetic instability and (2) it is difficult to imagine same electrons provid- ing glue and the same electrons participat- ing in pairing as argued in ref (as in 6 the case of Cuprates). One possible rea- son why NdNiO2 does not show AFM or- der could be that it has much weaker su- perexchange interaction J. 3. Plain vanilla RVB approach: This is an alternative possibility. Nickelates can be thought of as Cuprates but with re- duced correlation effects. Mott physics is not observed in the case of Nickelates. The reason is due to the possibility of "by- passing" or "short circuiting" the quan- tum jam in Ni3dx2−y2 − O2p states via Nd conducting channel. But this does not stop one to use t − J model for Nicke- lates also (Ni3dx2−y2 − O2p states). Ba- sically, at zero doping and zero temper- ature one has un-paired localized elec- trons in the Ni3dx2−y2 − O2p hybrid band. Thus Hubbard model based approaches become applicable to this case also. There- fore, Mott physics based approaches may be applicable to Nickelates. But, there are problems with the Plain vanilla RVB ap- proach even in the case of Cuprates: (1) Pairing is assumed a-priori through su- perexchange interaction J and (2) RVB ap- proach gives continuous behaviour across the quantum critical point p∗ where pseu- dogap boundary ends. Experimen- tally, it found that at p∗ several observ- ables show anomalous behaviour (like heat capacity ∝ −lnT, Hall coefficient etc.). If it turn out that Nickelates do not show quantum criticality then RVB- based approach is even more appropriate. On the other hand if quantum criticality is found in Nickelates, then the mainstream approach "superconductivity from repul- sion" will be more appropriate. Thus, superconductivity in Nickelates can be rationalized through point (1). In this case also (repulsive mechanism for unconventional superconductivity) we do not have a predictive theory as is well known in the case of Cuprates. We end this note with some more com- ments: • More experimental work related to study of superconductivity at various doping levels is much needed (which is ex- tremely difficult in Nickelates). Question is whether there is a dome type structure? • Whether there is a quantum critical point at a special doping level of Sr? Measure- ment of heat capacity and hall coefficient at that point can establish more connec- tions with cuprates (or can rule out). • Heat capacity/Quantum oscillation mea- surements to rule out (or in) the heavy fermion behaviour (as suggested in ref). Actually, all the questions which were asked in Cuprate superconductivity can be asked in the case of Nickelates. Clear differences are (1) the lack of magnetism, and (2) the role of spacer layer (Nd layer) in electrical conduction, in the case of prepared Nickelate compounds. 7