arXiv:1909.01686v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 4 Sep 2019 Observation and characterization of the zero energy conductance peak in the vortex core state of FeTe0.55Se0.45 Xiaoyu Chen, Mingyang Chen, Wen Duan, Xiyu Zhu, Huan Yang∗ and Hai-Hu Wen† National Laboratory of Solid State Microstructures and Department of Physics, Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Microstructures, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China The search for the Majorana fermions in condensed matter physics has attracted much attention, partially because they may be used for the fault-tolerant quantum computation. It has been pre- dicted that the Majorana zero mode may exist in the vortex core of topological superconductors. Recently, many iron-based superconductors are claimed to exhibit a topologically nontrivial sur- face state, including Fe(Te,Se). Some previous experiments through scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) have found zero-bias conductance peaks (ZBCP) within the vortex cores of Fe(Te,Se). How- ever, our early experimental results have revealed the Caroli-de Gennes-Matricon (CdGM) discrete quantum levels in about 20% vortices. In many other vortices, we observed a dominant peak lo- cating near zero bias. Here we show further study on the vortex core state of many more vortices in FeTe0.55Se0.45. In some vortices, if we take a certain criterion of bias voltage window near zero energy, we indeed see a zero energy mode. Some vortices exhibit zero energy bound state peaks with relatively symmetric background, which cannot be interpreted as the CdGM discrete states. The probability for vortices showing the ZBCP lowers down with the increase of magnetic field. Meanwhile it seems that the presence and absence of the ZBCP has no clear relationship with the Te/Se ratio on the surface. Temperature dependence of the spectra reveals that the ZBCP becomes weakened with increasing temperature and disappears at about 4 K. Our results provide a con- firmed supplementary to the early claimed zero energy modes within the vortex cores of Fe(Te,Se). Detailed characterization of these zero energy modes versus magnetic field, temperature and spatial distribution of Te/Se will help to clarify its origin. I. INTRODUCTION In a type-II superconductor at an external magnetic field stronger than the lower critical field, the quantized vortices will appear with the supercurrent circling around the vortex core. The vortex core region shows a sup- pression of superconducting order parameter and can be described as a normal-state cylinder with the radius com- parable to the coherence length ξ. The quasiparticle ex- citations then take place in the vortex core and form the vortex bound states. The electronic properties of vor- tex core state were first studied by Caroli, de Gennes and Matricon (CdGM) in 1964, and their calculation shows that the quasiparticles in the vortex core region will form discrete bound states (CdGM states) in quan- tum limit with the energy level Eμ = ±μ∆2/EF with ∆ the superconducting gap and EF the Fermi energy. Further theoretical studies by solving the Bogoliubov- de Gennes equations reached the conclusion that μ = 1/2, 3/2, 5/2 · · · . In many conventional supercon- ductors, the Fermi energy is usually quite large (about several hundred meV to several eV) compared with the superconducting energy gap. Therefore the energy level spacing of the CdGM state is relatively small. In this case, one can see a dominant peak at zero bias in the tunneling spectrum measured at the vortex core center, and the central peak consists of accumulated states near zero energy with low angular momenta μ. When moving away from the vortex core center, the peak splits into two because the bound state peaks at higher eigenstate energies with larger μ will dominate the contribution to the density of states [2–5]. FeTe1−xSex is one of the typical iron-based super- conductors with maximum critical temperature Tc of about 14.6 K . The angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) measurements show that the compound has very small Fermi energy (several meV) . In our previous study in the vortex cores in FeTe0.55Se0.45, we can observe clear CdGM states with discrete quantum levels in about 20% of measured vor- tices . This is due to very small EF in the material, and the quantum limit condition can be easily satisfied. In some other vortices, we observe a dominant in-gap peak near zero bias on the tunneling spectra. Recent studies show that FeTe1−xSex may have a topo- logical surface state. Theoretically it was proposed that the downward shifted pz band due to the Te substitution will cross the dxz band near Fermi energy [10–12]. Be- cause of the strong spin-orbital coupling effect and the parity feature of these bands, a topological surface state exists with a spin-helical texture. This spin-helical fea- ture has been seen by the ARPES measurements which show a Dirac cone like dispersion in the surface band structure . In addition, a robust zero-bias differential conductance peak is observed at the interstitial excess iron atom on the cleaved surface, and the peak does not split under magnetic fields . Theoretical explanation about this feature is a Majorana zero mode existing in a quantum anomalous vortex induced by a magnetic impu- rity when the topological surface state exists in this ma- terial . Therefore, FeTe1−xSex may host a topological nontrivial surface state and the surface layer behaves as a topological superconductor due to the intrinsic proximity effect. 2 The vortex core state of topological superconductors shows different behaviors comparing with the CdGM states in a conventional superconductor. It is predicted that one can find Majorana zero modes in the vortices of two dimensional p+ip superconductors . By using the proximity effect between an s-wave superconductor and a topological insulator, a 2D topological superconduct- ing state which resembles a p + ip superconductor can be achieved. In this case Majorana zero modes can also exist in the vortex cores . Through scanning tunnel- ing microscopy/spectroscopy (STM/STS) measurement, a zero-bias conductance peak (ZBCP) can be found in the tunneling spectra taken at the vortex cores of topo- logical superconductors. The zero energy mode in the vortex core states of topological superconductors shows different behavior comparing with the CdGM states. In recent STM measurement of vortices on FeTe0.55Se0.45, the ZBCPs were observed and these ZBCPs show a non-splitting behavior in space . It was also suggested that the CdGM state and the Majorana bound state may differ by a half integer energy level shift in the spectra of the vortex bound states . Later on, a quantized conductance plateau at 2e2/h was also observed . Theoretically it is predicted that the tunneling into an isolated Majorana mode will give rise to a zero-bias conductance peak with the upper limit height of 2e2/h [21–23]. The result suggests the possible existence of the Majorana zero modes in the vortex cores of FeTe0.55Se0.45. In some other iron-based superconductors, the coexistence of superconductivity and nontrivial topological states were also suggested . Furthermore, the Majorana zero mode and the quantized conductance plateau were also detected in (Li1−xFex)OHFeSe . In this paper, we report our further study on the vor- tex core states in FeTe0.55Se0.45. By measuring hundreds of vortices in the FeTe0.55Se0.45 single crystals, we also find zero-bias differential conductance peaks on the tun- neling spectra measured on some vortices. Furthermore, the influences of the magnetic field, temperature, and the Te concentration on the ZBCPs have also been studied. Our results give useful information for the understand- ing of the ZBCPs (perhaps due to the Majorana modes) appearing on some of the vortices in FeTe0.55Se0.45. II. METHODS The single crystals used in this work were grown with the nominal composition of FeTe0.55Se0.45. Fe (99.9%), Te (99.999%) and Se (99.999%) powders were mixed with the ratio of 1.04:0.55:0.45 and then sealed in an evacuated quartz ampoule. The mixture was heated to 1080 ◦C and stayed for 15 hours, then it was slowly cooled down to 400 ◦C at a cooling rate of 3 ◦C/h to obtain single crystals. After that, we annealed the sam- ple at 400 ◦C for 20 h in appropriate O2 atmosphere to remove the excess Fe atoms. Then it is quenched in liq- uid nitrogen. The STM/STS measurements were carried out in the STM (USM-1300, Unisoku Co., Ltd.) system. The FeTe0.55Se0.45 samples were cleaved in an ultrahigh vacuum with the base pressure of about 1 × 10−10 Torr. Electrochemical etched tungsten tips were used for the STM measurements after electron-beam heating in the ultrahigh vacuum chamber. A typical lock-in technique was used for the STS measurements with an ac modu- lation of 0.3 mV and the frequency of 831.773 Hz. The voltage offsets of the tunneling spectra were carefully cal- ibrated . All data were measured at the temperature about 400 mK except for some cases with temperatures specially stated. III. RESULTS Topographic image of the sample surface and dif- ferential conductance mappings of vortices under magnetic fields. (a) Topographic image measured on the cleaved sur- face of FeTe0.55Se0.45. The setpoint conditions are bias volt- age Vbias = 1 V and tunneling current Iset = 10 pA. (b) Atomically resolved topography re-measured in the marked square area in (a) with Vbias = 10 mV and Iset = 100 pA. (c,d) Zero-bias differential conductance mapping measured in the same area of (a) and at 0 and 0.5 T, respectively. (e-i) Images of the vortices by subtracting the zero-bias differen- tial conductance mapping measured at 0 T [g0(r, 0 T)] from the ones measured at different magnetic fields [g0(r, B)] in the same area of (a) and with B = 0.5, 1, 2, 4, and 6 T, respectively (see text). The red circles mark the same posi- tion that has pinned a vortex under different magnetic fields. All the differential conductance mappings were recorded with Vbias = 10 mV, Iset = 100 pA. All the data were recorded at the temperature about 400 mK. Fig. 1(a) shows topographic image of the cleaved sur- face of FeTe0.55Se0.45, and Fig. 1(b) shows an enlarged 3 view of the marked square area in Fig. 1(a) with atomic resolution. One can see that atoms on the surface form a well organized square lattice. The Se atoms have lower height and the Te ones have higher height. No inter- stitial irons can be observed on the surface, and they would behave as very bright spots locating within the plaques of four neighboring Te/Se atoms if they existed . In type-II superconductors, quantized vortices will be formed with applying of magnetic field stronger than the lower critical field. Due to the formation of the vor- tex bound states and the depairing of the Cooper pairs in the normal-state vortex core area, the density of states (DOSs) at zero energy within vortex cores should be higher than other superconducting areas without vortices where DOSs of normal electrons are gapped or partially gapped. Therefore, the vortices can be imaged by STM by zero-bias differential conductance mapping [g0(r, B)] with r the location vector and B the applied magnetic field. Here the measured differential conductance is pro- portional to the local DOSs approximately. Fig. 1(d) shows the measured zero-bias differential conductance mapping g0(r, 0.5 T). Compared with g0(r, 0 T) shown in Fig. 1(c), one can see that some spots are induced by the impurity bound states at zero-bias instead of the vortices, and this has also been seen in previous stud- ies in FeTe1−xSex . In order to get a clear view of the vortices, we subtract g0(r, 0 T) from g0(r, B) to re- move some impurity induced states near zero bias. The obtained difference mappings of g0(r, B) − g0(r, 0 T) are shown in Fig. 1(e-i) at different magnetic fields. Zero-bias conductance peaks observed in different vortices at about 400 mK. (a-d) Tunneling spectra measured in the center of the related vortex whose zero-bias differential conductance image is shown in the inset. The imaging area for each vortex has the dimensions of 20 nm × 20 nm and is recorded with Vbias = 10 mV and Iset = 100 pA. The magnetic fields for different measurements are (a) 0.5 T, (b) 1.0 T, (c,d) 2.0 T. (e-h) Tunneling spectra measured along the white dashed arrows in the insets of (a-d), respectively. By measuring hundreds of vortices in many different areas on different samples at different magnetic fields, we can observe ZBCPs at the centers of some vortex cores. Some typical spectra as the examples are shown in Fig. 2(a-d), and they are measured at the centers of the vortices whose images are shown in the insets. Fig. 2(e- h) show four sets of tunnel spectra measured across the selected vortices along the white dashed arrows in the insets of Fig. 2(a-d), respectively. We can see that these ZBCPs actually do not split but the intensities of these peaks shrink when the STM tip moves away from the vor- tex core center. The ZBCPs present in the range with a radius of about 4-5 nm around the vortex center from our experiments. The results are consistent with previ- ous observations of ZBCPs in FeTe1−xSex . When the spectra are measured far away from the vortex core center, they behave as a fully gapped feature with one or two pairs of coherence peaks at about 2 meV. The presence of the non-split differential conductance peaks locating exactly at zero bias can not be interpreted as the CdGM states which were observed in our previous work . These CdGM state peaks generally exhibit half integer energy values with the first energy level locating at around 0.3 to 0.5 meV. over all the measured vortices under different magnetic fields. The total vortex numbers for statics are 15, 33, 25, 160 and 240 for the magnetic fields of 0.5, 1, 2, 4 and 6 T, respectively. In order to investigate the influence of the magnetic field, we measured a large number of vortices under dif- ferent magnetic fields in the same area shown in Fig. 1(a). We do the statistic analysis on the probability of vortex cores with ZBCPs, and the result is shown in Fig. 3. At the magnetic fields below 4 T, we have carefully mea- sured the tunneling spectrum at each vortex core center. Here we have to mention that since there are many vor- tices that have single peaks close to zero energy, in this case, we take a criterion of the bias voltage window from −0.1 to +0.1 mV, to determine whether the vortex has a ZBCP. In other words, if the spectrum at the vortex center shows a single dominant peak close to zero bias 4 and within this bias voltage window, we regard them all as the vortices with ZBCPs. For the situation at 0.5 and 1 T, the vortices are diluted in the field of view. We do the measurements for several times through re-adding the magnetic field in the same area in order to increase the sampling number. The vortices change their positions when we reapply the magnetic field. While at the mag- netic fields of 4 and 6 T, we did not measure the spatial dependent spectra crossing each vortex core because the number of the vortices in the area becomes quite large. What we measured are the differential conductance map- pings at bias voltage between −1.0 and +1.0 mV with in- crement of 0.2 mV. Then we convert the differential con- ductance mappings at different energies to the tunneling spectra and judge whether the vortex has a ZBCP. From the statistic result in Fig. 3, one can see that the probabil- ity of vortices with ZBCPs decrease quickly with increase of magnetic field, which means that magnetic field may be an important factor to affect the emergence of ZBCP within the vortex core center. -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 0 2 4 6 8 B=0 T B=2.0 T B=0.5 T B=4.0 T B=1.0 T B=6.0 T dI/dV (a.u.) Bias (mV) B=0 T B=1.0 T B=0.5 T B=2.0 T dI/dV (a.u.) Bias (mV) tunneling spectra taken at vortex cores. For each panel, the tunneling spectra were measured in the center of the vortices staying in the same area under different magnetic fields. When the magnetic field varies, we can see from the vortex images in Fig. 1(e-i) that some vortices could re- main at the same positions by some weak pinning cen- ters, e.g. the red circles show the same position that has pinned a vortex under different magnetic fields. These pinned vortices thus give us opportunities to study the influence of the magnetic field to the ZBCPs in the vortex cores of FeTe0.55Se0.45 and exclude other local effects. We find that there are some vortices that exhibit ZBCPs at low magnetic field. And by further increasing the mag- netic field, although these vortices remain at the same positions, the general shape of spectrum changes with magnetic field. Figure 4 shows the results measured at the centers of two such vortices appearing at different locations. In Fig. 4(a), the tunneling spectrum at the vortex core center shows a dominant peak at −0.1 meV (close to zero) at 0.5 T. At the magnetic field of 1 T, the central peak remains but moves a little to a positive en- ergy. When the magnetic field increases to 2 T, one can see that the central peak disappears and two tiny peaks show up at around ±0.35 meV, which seems to suggest the conductance peak near zero bias splits upon using a higher magnetic field. However, in another vortex [see Fig. 4(b)], the zero-bias peak remains as a single one even when the magnetic field reaches 6 T. While the weight of the zero-bias peak decreases with increase of field. The evolution of the tunneling spectra at the vortex core cen- ter with the change of the magnetic field could possibly explain why the fraction of the vortices with ZBCPs be- comes smaller when the magnetic field is increased. Our results show that when the magmatic field goes higher, the zero energy mode in some vortices could be destroyed and the CdGM states appear, while in some other vor- tices the ZBCPs still remain up to 6 T. age measured in an area of 70 nm × 70 nm. Vbias = 1 V, Iset = 10 pA. (b) Differential conductance mapping at zero bias measured in the same area of (a) at B = 6 T and tem- perature around 400 mK. Vbias = 10 mV, Iset = 100 pA. (c,d) Tunneling spectra measured along the marked line 1 and 2 in (b). When the magnetic field is increased, the average distance between the vortices becomes smaller. Mean- while the repulsive interaction between vortices becomes 5 stronger. To further evaluate the influence of magnetic field to the ZBCP, we specially take a careful look to the vortices at 6 T at which field the vortices should have stronger interactions. The fraction for observing the vortices with ZBCPs is only about 10% at 6 T, so these vortices are randomly distributed and do not usu- ally stay close to each other. However, we do find in one case that there are three neighboring vortices which all exhibit ZBCPs. Here we show the topographic image of the measured area in Fig. 5(a), and Fig. 5(b) shows the dI/dV mapping of vortices at 6 T measured in this area. The average distance is about 20 nm between the nearest neighboring vortices. We measured spatially dependent spectra by following the two arrowed lines in Fig. 5(b), and the results are shown in Fig. 5(c,d). One can see that these three neighbored vortices host the ZBCPs, and these peaks almost do not shift when the tip moves away from the vortex core center. The results indicate that even though the nearest neighboring vortices have strong interactions, the ZBCPs can still exist in these vortex centers. at low temperature. (a-c) dI/dV mappings measured in the same area (14 nm × 14 nm) at different temperatures under a magnetic field of 2 T. A single vortex locates almost at the same positions in (a-c). (d) Tunneling spectra measured at the vortex core centers at different temperatures. (e) Tunnel- ing spectrum measured at another vortex core center at T = 4.0 K. The insert shows the dI/dV mapping of the measured area (50 nm × 50 nm). The black dashed square frame repre- sents the same area in (a-c), while the tiny blue circle marks the position where the tunneling spectrum is taken at T = 4.0 K. One can see that the location of the vortex changes a little from the initial positions at 0.43, 1.74, 2.50 K (a-c) from that at 4.0 K. To further investigate the characteristics of the ZBCPs, we measured the temperature dependence of the tunnel- ing spectra at the center of a vortex core, and the results are shown in Fig. 6. In Fig. 6(d), one can see the dif- ferential conductance peak locating almost at zero bias on the spectrum taken in the center of a vortex shown in Fig. 6(a) at 0.43 K and 2 T. With increase of temperature to 2.5 K, we try to measure the tunneling spectrum in the center of the vortex which stays at almost the same position as that of the vortex at 0.43 K. The intensity of the ZBCP is lowered down obviously from that shown in Fig. 6(d), and the side peak at negative bias energy is also weakened simultaneously. The ZBCP is very weak on the tunneling spectra taken at 2.5 K. When the tem- perature increases to 4.0 K, the vortex shifts a little bit. However fortunately from the initial place, we can ob- serve a vortex nearby as shown in the inset of Fig. 6(e), and the tunneling spectrum measured in the center of this vortex is shown in Fig. 6(e). One can see that the feature of the ZBCP and the side peak are absent on the spectrum measured in the center of the vortex at 4.0 K. Considering the strong suppression of ZBCP at 2.5 K, we argue that the ZBCP may be completely suppressed at about 4.0 K as evidenced by the spectrum measured in another vortex nearby, as shown in Fig. 6(e). without ZBCPs. The dark blue color covers the area of Se atoms on the surface, while the bright yellow color covers the area of Te atoms. The red ellipses show roughly the major areas of the observed vortex cores whose images are shown in the insets by differential conductance mapping at zero bias. (a-c) The Te/Se distributions near vortices with ZBCPs. (d-f) The Te/Se distributions near vortices without ZBCPs. 6 In order to investigate the influence of the local chem- ical potential to the presence of the ZBCP at vortex cen- ter, we measured the atomical-resolved topography in the region near the vortex core. The Te or Se atoms can be distinguished by the height of the atoms. The propor- tion of Te:Se in a large area is close to the nominal com- position 0.55:0.45, but such proportion changes slightly in different local areas. In the main panels of Fig. 7, we show the topography measured near the vortices by binary color images, i.e., the bright yellow (dark blue) color to fill the area of Te (Se) atoms on the surface with higher (lower) heights. graphic images measured near the vortices with ZBCPs, while Fig. 7(d-f) show the ones measured near the vor- tices without ZBCPs but with CdGM states. One can see that the result doesn’t show any direct relationship of Te/Se concentrations to the emergence of ZBCPs in the vortex cores. IV. DISCUSSIONS As presented above, we have measured the tunneling spectra in a large number of vortices in FeTe0.55Se0.45, the ZBCPs are only observed in some vortices. The fea- ture of these ZBCPs is different from that of the CdGM states observed in the vortex cores in superconductors with a large value of EF , which is consistent with previous reports . In our previous work , we ob- served the discrete CdGM states due to very small EF in some vortices. These CdGM states can also be observed in the vortex cores with or without ZBCPs. Besides, the detailed structures and backgrounds of the spectrum in the center of vortex are very complex at energies near the Fermi energy. In another set of measurements in some vortices on the same material taken at a lower effec- tive temperature of about 85 mK, the authors find very sharp ZBCPs accompanied by some satellite peaks which can not be explained by a straightforward picture. In our measurements, the temperature is about 0.4 K, the ther- mal broadening effect on these peaks may mix the ZBCP with satellite peaks and may slightly change the exact maxima energy of the ZBCP. In this case, it maybe rea- sonable for us to regard the in-gap bound state peaks at energies within the window ±0.1 meV as the ZBCPs. With this point of view, the single peak observed in some vortex cores near zero energy in our previous work may also be the ZBCP mixed with other bound-state peaks. In addition, the previous measurements were car- ried out at the magnetic field of 4 T , and the frac- tion for observing the vortices with ZBCPs is only about 10% according to the statistic result in Fig. 3. Hence, it is understandable that none of the measured vortices presented in our previous work exhibit the differential conductance peaks exactly at zero bias. For all the results measured on the vortices of FeTe0.55Se0.45, we found that only a fraction of them ex- hibit ZBCPs. Since the topological surface states have been predicted and proved in some way in this material , it is really strange why the ZBCPs can only be ob- served in some of the vortices if they are regarded as the Majorana bound state at zero energy . The ZBCPs can be observed in the vortex center at the magnetic field up to 6 T, however, the ratio of the vortices with ZBCPs decrease rapidly with increase of magnetic field, which is consistent with a previous work . Our present ex- periments reveal that the single ZBCP is strongly sup- pressed or even splits into two peaks at high magnetic field. This may explain why the fraction for observing the vortices with ZBCPs at a high magnetic field is low. And in this point of view, some of the ZBCPs, which split at high magnetic field, may not be the Majorana zero-energy modes. Even for the Majorana zero-energy modes, a theoretical proposal is that the strong inter- action between the vortices at high magnetic field could lead to the suppression to these fragile modes . Interestingly, we found three neighboring vortices that all exhibit ZBCPs even at a magnetic field of 6 T. This may suggest that the disordered arrangement of the Ma- jorana distribution and the Majorana hybridization lead to the decreasing fraction of ZBCPs. For the tem- perature evolution, the ZBCP becomes very weak at 2.5 K, and may disappear completely at about 4 K. There- fore these ZBCPs are very fragile to the thermal effect. Moreover, we did not find the direct relationship between the local Te/Se concentration on the top surface and the occurrence of the ZBCP within the vortex cores. V. CONCLUSION In conclusion, through measuring the scanning tun- neling spectra within the vortex cores in FeTe0.55Se0.45, we have confirmed the discovery of ZBCPs in some vor- tices. The ZBCP does not split when moving away from the vortex core center, which is different from that ex- pected by the CdGM states in the vortex cores in most superconductors with large EF , thus it is most likely the Majorana mode. The temperature dependence of the spectra measured in the vortex core center shows that the ZBCP may be suppressed completely at about 4 K, indicating a thermal-fragile feature of the ZBCP. Fur- thermore, we find that a large magnetic field can sup- press the fraction of the vortices with ZBCPs, but the ZBCP can sometime exist at a magnetic field as high as 6.0 T. We did not find any close relationship between the local Te/Se concentration and the presence of the ZBCP within vortex cores. Our results will help to elaborate the origin of these ZBCPs found in the vortex core states in FeTe0.55Se0.45. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We acknowledge useful discussions with Tetsuo Hanaguri, Ching-Kai Chiu, Tadashi Machida, and Hong 7 Ding. This work was supported by National Key R&D Program of China (grant number: National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant number: 11534005), and the Strategic Priority Research Program of Chinese Academy of Sciences (grant number: ∗ huanyang@nju.edu.cn † hhwen@nju.edu.cn C. Caroli, P. G. De Gennes, and J. Matricon, Bound Fermion states on a vortex line in a type II superconduc- tor, Phys. Lett. 9, 307 (1964). N. Hayashi, T. Isoshima, M. Ichioka, and K. Machida, Low-lying quasiparticle excitations around a vortex core in quantum limit, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 2921 (1998). H. F. Hess, R. B. Robinson, R. C. Dynes, J. M. Valles, and J. V. Waszczak, Scanning-Tunneling-Microscope ob- servation of the Abrikosov flux lattice and the density of states near and inside a fluxoid, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 214 H. F. Hess, R. B. Robinson, and J. V. Waszczak, Vortex- core structure observed with a scanning tunneling micro- scope, Phys. Rev. Lett. 64, 2711 (1990). F. Gygi and M. Schl ̈uter, Self-consistent electronic struc- ture of a vortex line in a type-II superconductor, Phys. Rev. B 43, 7609 (1991). R. Khasanov, M. Bendele, A. Amato, P. Babkevich, A. T. Boothroyd, A. Cervellino, K. Conder, S. N. Gvasaliya, H. Keller, H. H. Klauss, H. Luetkens, V. Pom- jakushin, E. Pomjakushina, and B. Roessli, Coexistence of incommensurate magnetism and superconductivity in Fe1+ySexTe1−x, Phys. Rev. B 80, 140511 (2009). Y. Lubashevsky, E. Lahoud, K. Chashka, D. Podolsky, and A. Kanigel, Shallow pockets and very strong cou- pling superconductivity in FeSexTe1−x, Nat. Phys. 8, 309 S. Rinott, K. B. Chashka, A. Ribak, E. D. L. Rienks, A. Taleb-Ibrahimi, P. Le Fevre, F. Bertran, M. Randeria, and A. Kanigel, Tuning across the BCS-BEC crossover in the multiband superconductor Fe1+ySexTe1−x: An angle-resolved photoemission study, Sci. Adv. 3, e1602372 M. Chen, X. Chen, H. Yang, Z. Du, X. Zhu, E. Wang, and H.-H. Wen, Discrete energy levels of Caroli-de Gennes- Matricon states in quantum limit in FeTe0.55Se0.45, Nat. Commun. 9, 970 (2018). Z. Wang, P. Zhang, G. Xu, L. K. Zeng, H. Miao, X. Xu, T. Qian, H. Weng, P. Richard, A. V. Fedorov, H. Ding, X. Dai, and Z. Fang, Topological nature of the FeSe0.5Te0.5 superconductor, Phys. Rev. B 92, 115119 (2015). G. Xu, B. Lian, P. Tang, X.-L. Qi, and S.-C. Zhang, Topological superconductivity on the surface of Fe-based superconductors, Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 047001 (2016). X. Wu, S. Qin, Y. Liang, H. Fan, and J. Hu, Topological characters in Fe(Te1−xSex) thin films, Phys. Rev. B 93, P. Zhang, K. Yaji, T. Hashimoto, Y. Ota, T. Kondo, K. Okazaki, Z. Wang, J. Wen, G. D. Gu, H. Ding, and S. Shin, Observation of topological superconductivity on the surface of an iron-based superconductor, Science 360, 182 J. X. Yin, Z. Wu, J. H. Wang, Z. Y. Ye, J. Gong, X. Y. Hou, L. Shan, A. Li, X. J. Liang, X. X. Wu, J. Li, C. S. Ting, Z. Q. Wang, J. P. Hu, P. H. Hor, H. Ding, and S. H. Pan, Observation of a robust zero-energy bound state in iron-based superconductor Fe(Te,Se), Nat. Phys. 11, K. Jiang, X. Dai, and Z. Wang, Quantum anomalous vor- tex and Majorana zero mode in iron-based superconductor Fe(Te,Se), Phys. Rev. X 9, 011033 (2019). N. Read and D. Green, Paired states of fermions in two dimensions with breaking of parity and time-reversal sym- metries and the fractional quantum Hall effect, Phys. Rev. B 61, 10267 (2000). L. Fu and C. L. Kane, Superconducting proximity effect and Majorana fermions at the surface of a topological insulator, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 096407 (2008). D. Wang, L. Kong, P. Fan, H. Chen, S. Zhu, W. Liu, L. Cao, Y. Sun, S. Du, J. Schneeloch, R. Zhong, G. Gu, L. Fu, H. Ding, and H.-J. Gao, Evidence for Majorana bound states in an iron-based superconductor, Science 362, 333 L. Kong, S. Zhu, M. Papaj, L. Cao, H. Isobe, W. Liu, D.Wang, P. Fan, H. Chen, Y. Sun, S. Du, J. Schneeloch, R. Zhong, G. Gu, L. Fu, H.-J. Gao, and H. Ding, Obser- vation of half-integer level shift of vortex bound states in an iron-based superconductor, arXiv:1901.02293. S. Zhu, L. Kong, L. Cao, H. Chen, S. Du, Y. Xing, W. Liu, D. Wang, C. Shen, F. Yang, J. Schneeloch, R. Zhong, G. Gu, L. Fu, Y.-Y. Zhang, H. Ding, H.-J. Gao, Ob- servation of Majorana conductance plateau by scanning tunneling spectroscopy, arXiv:1904.06124. K. T. Law, P. A. Lee, and T. K. Ng, Majorana Fermion Induced Resonant Andreev Reflection, Phys. Rev. Lett. K. Flensberg, Tunneling characteristics of a chain of Ma- jorana bound states, Phys. Rev. B 82, 180516 (2010). M. Wimmer, A. R. Akhmerov, J. P. Dahlhaus, and C. W. J. Beenakker, Quantum point contact as a probe of a topological superconductor, New J. Phys. 13, 053016 P. Zhang, Z. Wang, X. Wu, K. Yaji, Y. Ishida, Y. Ko- hama, G. Dai, Y. Sun, C. Bareille, K. Kuroda, T. Kondo, K. Okazaki, K. Kindo, X. Wang, C. Jin, J. Hu, R. Thomale, K. Sumida, S. Wu, K. Miyamoto, T. Okuda, H. Ding, G. D. Gu, T. Tamegai, T. Kawakami, M. Sato, and S. Shin, Multiple topological states in iron-based su- perconductors, Nat. Phys. 15, 41 (2019). Q. Liu, C. Chen, T. Zhang, R. Peng, Y.-J. Yan, C.-H.- P. Wen, X. Lou, Y.-L. Huang, J.-P. Tian, X.-L. Dong, G.-W. Wang, W.-C. Bao, Q.-H. Wang, Z.-P. Yin, Z.-X. Zhao, and D.-L. Feng, Robust and clean Majorana zero mode in the vortex core of high-temperature superconduc- tor (Li0.84Fe0.16)OHFeSe, Phys. Rev. X 8, 041056 (2018). C. Chen, Q. Liu, T. Z. Zhang, D. Li, P. P. Shen, X. L. Dong, Z.-X. Zhao, T. Zhang, D. L. Feng, Quan- tized conductance of Majorana zero mode in the vortex of the topological superconductor (Li0.84Fe0.16)OHFeSe, 8 Y. Liu, and C. T. Lin, A Comparative study of Fe1+δTe1−xSex single crystals grown by Bridgman and self-flux techniques, J. Supercond. Nov. Magn. 24, 183 T. Machida, Y. Sun, S. Pyon, S. Takeda, Y. Kohsaka, T. Hanaguri, T. Sasagawa, and T. Tamegai, Zero-energy vortex bound state in the superconducting topological sur- face state of Fe(Se,Te), Nat. Mater. 18, 811 (2019). C.-K. Chiu, D. I. Pikulin, and M. Franz, Strongly in- teracting Majorana fermions, Phys. Rev. B 91, 165402 T. Liu and M. Franz, Electronic structure of topological superconductors in the presence of a vortex lattice, Phys. Rev. B 92, 134519 (2015). C.-K. Chiu, T. Machida, Y. Huang, T. Hanaguri, and F.- C. Zhang, Scalable Majorana vortex modes in iron-based superconductors, arXiv:1904.13374.