Quantum optics with single molecules in a three-dimensional polymeric platform Maja Colautti1,2, Pietro Lombardi3, Marco Trapuzzano2, Francesco S. Piccioli3, Sofia Pazzagli2,3, Bruno Tiribilli5, Sara Nocentini1,3, Francesco S. Cataliotti1,2,3, Diederik Wiersma1,2,6 Costanza Toninelli1,3* 1European Laboratory for Non-Linear Spectroscopy (LENS), Via Nello Carrara 1, Sesto F.no 50019, Italy 2 Dipartimento di Fisica e Astronomia, Università degli Studi di Firenze, Via G. Sansone 1, Sesto Fiorentino 50019, Italy 3 National Institute of Optics (CNR-INO), Largo Enrico Fermi 6, Firenze 50125, Italy 5 Institute for Complex Systems (CNR-ISC), Via Madonna del Piano 10, Sesto F.no 50019, Firenze, Italy 6 Istituto Nazionale di Ricerca Metrologica (INRiM), IT-10135 Torino, Italy ∗toninelli@lens.unifi.it September 17, 2019 Abstract The successful development of future photonic quantum technologies heavily depends on the possibility of realizing robust, reliable and, crucially, scalable nanophotonic devices. In integrated networks, quantum emitters can be deployed as single-photon sources or non-linear optical elements, provided their transition linewidth is broadened only by spontaneous emission. However, conventional fabrication approaches are hardly scalable, typically detrimental for the emitter coherence properties and bear limitations in terms of geometries and materials. Here we introduce an alternative platform, based on molecules embedded in polymeric photonic structures. Three-dimensional patterns are achieved via direct laser writing around selected molecular emitters, which preserve near-Fourier-limited fluorescence. By using an integrated polymeric design, record-high photon fluxes from a single cold molecule are reported. The proposed technology allows to conceive a novel class of quantum devices, including integrated multi-photon interferometers, arrays of indistinguishable single photon sources and hybrid electro-optical nanophotonic devices. Polymers are used in a wide application range, from nan- otechnology and biomedicine, to clothing and food pack- aging , being low-cost mass-produced materials with tailored physical, electronic and optical properties. They provide expanded functionalities to optoelectronic and pho- tonic devices . In optical integrated circuits e.g., polymer photonics extends the design options to three- dimensions (3D) and free-standing structures, supporting hybrid integration and interchip connection . On the other hand, future technologies rely on light manipulation at the single photon level, targeting unmatched function- alities based on quantum effects. This sets new require- ments to traditional photonic platforms, such as the integra- tion of quantum emitters, which hold promise as on-demand sources of non-classical light and for measurements be- yond the classical limit . An effective coupling to quan- tum emitters is indeed mandatory to guarantee efficient col- lection and processing of the quantum states . How- ever, structuring the environment around quantum emit- ters in the wavelength scale affects the emission properties, typically degrading its quantum coherence and photostabil- ity , thus limiting on-chip operation. Furthermore the nanofabrication of such semiconductor hybrid devices is demanding and hardly scalable, while the perfor- mances result very sensitive to imperfections. Seminal re- sults reported in Refs. [14–16] point at the key advantages of single-emitter integration in polymeric microstructures, such as one-step 3D patterning and a-priori positioning of the emitter in high-intensity regions of the electro-magnetic field. Nevertheless, the colloidal systems employed in Refs. are not suitable for most quantum applications due to decoherence and spectral diffusion , whereas the epitaxially grown quantum dots in are not favourable for a full 3D integration. Single organic molecules of polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) have shown remarkable quantum optical proper- ties within numerous combinations of guest chromophores and host matrices, and are potentially compatible with 1 arXiv:1909.07334v1 [physics.app-ph] 16 Sep 2019 polymer chemistry. In particular, the realization of Anthracene nanocrystals doped with Dibenzoterrylene molecules (DBT:Ac NCXs) exhibiting photostable single- photon emission and Fourier-limited line-widths at 3K , has opened the pathway to their full embedding in poly- meric devices . In this work we introduce a hybrid polymeric photonic plat- form, that shows emission close to the life-time limit from single molecules coupled to 3D integrated optical elements. The nanophotonic chips are obtained by direct laser writ- ing (DLW) of polymers , with unique advantages in terms of versatility, large offer of multi-purpose photore- sists, sub-micron resolution and computer-aided man- ufacturing. The compatibility with molecules and broad flexibility in the design is demonstrated here by embed- ding Anthracene nanocrystals doped with Dibenzoterry- lene molecules at variable heights and well-defined loca- tions in different architectures, fabricated either on silica or on gold substrates. Critical aspects like the perfor- mances of the hybrid photonic device under cryogenic cool- ing and the effect of the whole fabrication process on the emitter quantum coherence are investigated. In particular, close-to Fourier limited emission is observed from on-chip molecules at cryogenic temperatures and enhanced light ex- traction is achieved in a micro-dome solid immersion lens design. These results show how an all-organic platform can be realised, that offers unique solutions for photonic quantum technologies, combining on a chip the freedom of three-dimensional polymeric architectures with the op- timal properties of single photon emission from fluorescent molecules. Organic quantum emitters in 3D polymeric structures Single PAHs are excellent candidates as non-classical light sources [23–26], non-linear elements at the few photon level [27–29] and nano-scale sensors for electric fields, pressure and strain [19, 30–32]. Recently they have been successfully integrated in open optical cavities and antennas and evanescently coupled to nanogu- ides and waveguides [37–39]. Here, in Fig. 1 we present three different light collecting devices 3D-carved in polymers, each fully embedding a nanocrystal with fluores- cent molecules. In the respective artistic views (top panels 1a, 1b, 1c) the integrated emitter is represented by a dipole (black arrow) and red arrows highlight the promoted direc- tion for the emitted fluorescence. Fig. 1a shows a micro- dome on a transparent dielectric substrate (silica, refractive index n = 1.45). This is a modified Weierstrass solid im- mersion lens (SIL) , consisting of a hemisphere and a cylindrical base built on top of one DBT:Ac NCX. NCXs are previously deposited on the substrate (grey in the Figure and with a zoom on the DBT chemical structure) and selec- tively addressed upon preliminary characterization of the fluorescence intensity at room temperature. The structure is therefore centered on the emitter, so as to maximize up- wards redirection and collection efficiency at narrow angles. In Fig. 1b a similar design is sketched, this time realized on a gold-coated layer (∼ 200-nm thick) to avoid radiation in the lower hemisphere. With DLW, suspended architectures can also be fabricated, such as the arch waveguide outlined in Fig. 1c. In this case the nanocrystal is completely en- veloped at the middlepoint of the structure, which is con- ceived to efficiently route fluorescence throughout the silica substrate. Besides the improvement in terms of integrated coupling efficiency , the possibility of suspended inte- gration is crucial to avoid losses through the substrate due to the usually low refractive index of polymer materials. The correct emitter position in the vertical dimension is ensured by the use of two photoresist layers with different viscosity but equal refractive indices. The accurate reproduction of the three designs can be appreciated in the scanning elec- tron microscope images reported in Figs. 1d, 1e, 1f. For each structure, fluorescence imaging has been acquired to evaluate the persistence of molecular emission. Figures 1g, 1h and 1i represent the fluorescence maps obtained at room temperature, and collected from the top in the first two cases and through the substrate in the waveguide geometry (see Methods). The presence of fluorescence in all the de- vices in Fig. 1 is striking evidence for the compatibility of the organic molecular emitters with the whole fabrication process, both on dielectric and metallic surfaces and even in the suspended architecture. Notably, upon optimization of the writing parameters, all the investigated micro-domes showed molecule emission. The integration success rate is also enhanced by defining and anchoring the coordinate sys- tem of the writing laser beam to the location of selected nanocrystals within the optical microscope image. Deter- ministic positioning with such a simple and cost-effective fabrication method is key for scaling up the process to more complex chips, involving e.g. multiple emitters. We remark that the overall process of reprecipitation of the nanocrystals, deposition and selection of single photon sources, requires the experimenter less than one hour and can be readily automated. The bright spots in Fig.1g and Fig.1h correspond to emis- sion from the nanocrystals at the bases of the micro-domes. Comparing the two, a first indication is obtained of the higher directivity achievable in the presence of a reflective substrate underneath the SIL-like structure. In Fig.1i in- stead, fluorescence is observed both in correspondence with the nanocrystal position at the centre of the waveguide, and at the lateral output ports, where the guided emission is outcoupled. From the relative intensities, a lower bound for the molecule-to-waveguide coupling efficiency can be hence estimated, yielding a value of about 10%. We remark that this measurement is the result of the integrated signal from all the emitters in the NCX, each with different orien- tation and position with respect to the guided mode, hence with varying coupling efficiency. Furthermore, the addi- tional propagation losses due to the emitter inclusion can be evaluated by comparing the normalized laser throughput (ηWG+NCX = 36±1%) with the case of empty waveguides (ηWG = 40 ± 2%). The measured value for the additional 2 5 μm 5 μm 1 1 0 Norm. intensity 1 0 Norm. intensity 0 Norm. intensity 1 DBT:Ac NCX c d e g h i a b f 785$nm$ V0 V0 devices realized with Direct Laser Writing and fully embedding an Anthracene nanocrystal with fluorescent molecules of Dibenzoter- rylene (DBT:Ac NCX). The black double arrow represents the integrated emitter dipole and red arrows highlight the promoted direction for the emitted fluorescencce. a,b Micro-dome lens design for upwards redirection, respectively realized on a silica substrate, and on a gold-coated layer to avoid bottom radiation and maximize collection efficiency. c, Suspended arch waveguide, fully enveloping the nanocrystal at its middlepoint, for efficient routing of fluorescence throughout the silica substrate. Middle panel (d,e,f), Scanning Elec- tron Microscope images of the respective structures. Bottom panel (g,h,i), Fluorescence maps attesting the persistence of molecular emission after fabrication, acquired at room temperature and collected from the top in the micro-dome designs (d,e) and through the substrate in the waveguide geometry (f). The dashed line in the maps denotes the contour of the respective structure. scattering losses of 10% can be further minimized upon se- lection of smaller nanocrystals, e.g. by integrating fluores- cence imaging capability in the DLW workstation, as done e.g. in Ref. . In the following more accurate experiments are discussed, which characterize the emission at the single molecule level and in a cryogenic environment, using as test bed the geometry depicted in Fig. 1b. Indeed, in the context of quantum technologies, coherence in the emission of single photons is required for basic quantum optics operations, whereas narrow lines enable sensing applications and efficient interfacing with atomic memories . Such properties can be observed with a standard epifluorescence microscope, upon cooling the sample down to 3K (see Methods). The employed pumping scheme is shown in the simplified Jablonski diagram in the inset of Fig. 2a. By scanning the frequency of a tunable continuous-wave diode laser around a wavelength of ≈ 785nm, the zero-phonon line of a single DBT molecule within a highly doped nanocrystal can be readily selected. The Stoke-shifted fluorescence is collected through a longpass filter and analyzed in different aspects. The emitted photon statistics is measured with two avalanche photodiodes (SPADs) arranged in a Hanbury Brown and Twiss (HBT) configuration. The second order autocorrelation function g(2)(τ) is inferred from the histogram for short delay times of the photon coincidences on the two SPADs. A typical result from the micro-dome on gold structure is displayed in Fig. 2a, obtained at saturation. The best fit to the experimental data with the is the time delay and Γ accounts for the excitation and spontaneous emission rates, yields g(2)(0) = 0.00 + 0.03. Such value clearly verifies single molecule emission and proves the high purity of the single photon stream emitted in the integrated-molecule geometry. By recording the Stoke-shifted fluorescence as a function of the laser frequency, operating well below saturation, the 3 0 1 2 3 4 0.0 0.5 1.0 Norm. Counts Laser Detuning (GHz) 0 25 50 75 0.0 0.5 1.0 Norm. Coincidences Time (ns) 5 10 15 20 25 30 15 30 45 60 75 Laser Detuning (GHz) Time (min) Norm. Counts 0.0 30 70±1 MH g(2)(0)=0.00±0.03 a b c 1.0! 0.5! 0.0! 1.0! 0.5! 0.0! Time (min) 70±1 MH g(2)(0)=0.00±0.03 a b c 15! 0! 30! 45! 60! 75! 90! 70±1 MH g(2)(0)=0.00±0.03 a b c 0! 0! 1! 0! 10! 20! 30! 0! 1! 2! 3! 4! 0! 25! 50! 75! DBT:Ac NCX c d e g h i b f 785$nm$ V0 V0 z dome on gold structure. Inset, Simplified Jablonski diagram of the pumping scheme. The zero-phonon line of a single DBT molecule is selected in frequency with a tunable continuous-wave laser (≈ 785nm) and the Stoke-shifted fluorescence is collected through a longpass filter. a, Histogram of photon coincidences on two avalanche photodiodes in a Hanbury Brown and Twiss configuration. 0.00+0.03. b, Excitation spectrum recording the Stoke-shifted fluorescence as a function of the laser frequency. The Lorentian fit (red line) to the experimental data (black dots) accounts for a near to the life-time limited line-width γexp = 70±1 MHz. c, Photostability of the integrated molecule emission shown by repeated line-width measurements (b) over time for 1.5h, with fluctuations of the excitation central frequency within the range of few line-widths. excited state population is probed and the zero-phonon line- width can be directly retrieved. A characteristic excitation spectrum is shown in Fig. 2b with a near to the life-time limited line-width γexp = 70 ± 1MHz. Considering that γexp is within the experimental statistics collected for the non integrated DBT:Ac NCX , and that it is close to the theoretical Fourier-limited value of 40MHz for DBT molecules, we can deduce that this fabrication process does not alter significantly the NCX properties and that quantum coherence is not compromised. Finally, spectral diffusion is investigated by repeating the line-width measurement previously described over time, for 1.5h. Fig. 2c shows a good photostability of the integrated molecule emission, whose excitation central frequency fluctuates within the range of few line-widths. Being spectral diffusion a sensitive tool to appreciate the environmental disturbance on quantum emitters, these results are a relevant indication that the proposed polymeric platform is a reliable technique to embed single molecules in a photonic circuit. Record-high photon flux from a single molecule at low temperatures We choose the micro-dome design as a case study to in- vestigate its performances in terms of light extraction from single molecules. The total height of the structure is given by h = (1 + 1/n)r, where n is the polymer refractive index and r the radius of curvature. This design provides redi- rection via refraction at all upwards angles and efficiently compresses emission into a small numerical aperture. It also offers advantages in terms of simplicity of fabrication and robustness against imperfections. In Fig. 3, the results of 2D numerical simulations for the collection efficiency and the collected photon flux (for the experimental numerical aperture NA ∼ 0.62) for the micro- dome geometry on gold are summarized (see Methods). The structure dimensions are optimized assuming a dipole- to-gold distance dipoleh = 100nm, which promotes emis- sion in the upper hemisphere following Ref. , yield- ing hth = 8.7μm and rth = 5.3,μm. Since experimentally though there is no control over the fluorophore position within the nanocrystal volume, calculations are performed varying its value within the largest possible NCX thickness of 400nm. The DBT alignment within Ac crystal is instead well known and lies horizontally on the plane of the sub- strate . As a result, for dipoleh ≈ 100nm, a remarkable collection efficiency above 85% is obtained, together with a small enhancement of the total emission rate. In the corre- sponding polar plot, the emission pattern appears highly di- rectional, resulting in ∼ 80% of the total emission funneled within a polar angle of about 30◦. The oscillatory behavior in the detected photon flux is due to the interference nature of the photonic redirection effect, as already discussed for a similar case e.g. in Ref. . Close to the metal layer, the dipolar emission is obviously quenched. As the dipole position is further displaced away from the gold surface, the onset of emission lobes beyond the critical angles is clearly visible in the second polar plot, reducing the overall collec- tion efficiency, even when constructive interference in the forward direction is recovered for dipoleh ≃ 350nm. Based on such theoretical results, the fabrication of the micro-dome on gold embedding a single DBT:Ac NCX was optimized and characterized by means of atomic force microscopy (AFM). A typical AFM image is displayed in Fig. 4a. In particular, a strip-scan of the structure passing through the dome pole is shown together with a high re- 4 Coll. Eff. dipoleh [μm] 0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 Coll. Photon Flux 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 0.51 0.9 function of the fluorophore vertical position within the nanocrystal volume (dipoleh), for the the micro-dome on gold. The collected photon flux is calculated as the radiated power within the numerical aperture acceptance NA ∼ 0.62 (Phom) and the total power emitted in a homogeneous medium (Phom). For dipoleh = 110nm the collection efficiency is maximum, above 85%, and the corresponding polar plot shows a highly directional pattern with ∼ 80% of the total emission within a polar angle of ∼ 30◦. While the emission is quenched close to the metal layer, at bigger distances the overall collection efficiency is reduced due to emission lobes beyond the collection limits (grey dashed lines in the polar plots), as displayed in the corresponding emission patterns. solved AFM map of the top 4x4μm2 surface area. From the dome profile we estimate the experimental dimensions of the structure, with a total height h = 9.1 ± 0.1μm and a radius r = 5.0 ± 0.1μm, in good agreement with the nom- inal values set by the numerical optimization. From the AFM map, the average surface roughness is estimated to be ∆r = 41±4nm. Finally, Fig. 4b shows one of the main results of the pa- per, that is the collected photon flux as a function of pump power at low temperatures, emitted from a single molecule embedded in the polymeric micro-dome device, whose de- sign has just been commented. The measurements are com- pared to the case of a nude nanocrystal and of a molecule in the micro-dome device on silica. The photon flux is ob- tained, for a given excitation power, by measuring the exci- tation spectrum and recording the detected count rates in the Stokes-shifted band at resonance, without correcting for the detector internal efficiency, (ηdet ≃ 65%). In case indistin- guishable photons from the ZPL are required, non-resonant excitation on low-density NCXs can be employed and a similar count rate can be estimated, based on the typical expected branching ratio for DBT:Ac (30% ÷ 50% ). For each configuration, the variability in the emitter posi- tion within the crystal results in some statistical fluctuations in the measured count rate within nominally identical struc- tures. The stronger effect is to be found for the dome-on- gold, as follows from the previous discussion on Fig. 3. The direct comparison reported in Fig. 4 is however representa- tive of the typical observed trend. As expected, a saturation curve is observed in all three cases as a function of the pump power, expressed in logarith- mic scale. The detected counts are fitted according to the the maximum detected count rate, P the laser power, Ps the saturation power and (a+bP) accounting for the resid- ual laser scattering as a linear contribution. We obtain a maximum measured photon flux at the detector equal to R∞NC = (0.18 ± 0.01)Mcps, R∞dome = (0.66 ± 0.02)Mcps and R∞Au−dome = (2.38 ± 0.11)Mcps, respectively. The de- tected count rate from a single cold molecule in the opti- mized micro-dome design is to our knowledge the high- est reported to date and appears particularly significant when associated with the long excited state lifetime of DBT molecules (≃ 4.5 ns). Furthermore, taking into account the efficiency of the detector (ηdet), of the optical path (55%) and the objective transmission (70%), the real photon flux at the detector is ∼ 10Mcps. In particular, with respect to the nude nanocrystal, we measure a factor 3.7 ± 0.2 improve- ment in the collected photon flux for the micro-dome on silica, and a factor 13±1 in the case of the optimal config- uration for the micro-dome on gold. Moreover a reduction in the saturation power by about two orders of magnitude is observed, passing from a value of (56 ± 10)W/cm2 to (0.10±0.02)W/cm2. Indeed, the presence of the modified SIL has the primary effect of increasing the effective nu- merical aperture of the optical system, hence improving its focusing efficiency. The reflective layer underneath further increases the intensity at the emitter position for a given in- put power. In order to probe the emission pattern of the devices, we perform back focal plane (BFP) measurements of the emit- ted fluorescence, providing the power distribution in mo- 5 0 z (μm) 9 a 0,01 0,1 1 10 100 0,0 0,5 1,0 1,5 2,0 2,5 dome Au dome silica NC silica Fluorescence (Mcps) uW Laser Power (μW) Fluorescence (Mcps) dome Au dome silica NC silica μ-dome on Au μ-dome on silica NC on silica Norm. intensity 1 0 NC on silica c d e Norm. intensity 1 0 μ-dome on silica Norm. intensity 1 0 μ-dome on Au b strip-scan (20x1μm2) of the structure passing through the dome pole gives an estimation of the experimental dimensions, with a total height h = 9.1±0.1μm and a radius r = 5.0±0.1μm, in good agreement with the optimal values based on simulations, hth = 8.7μm and rth = 5.3μm, and displayed in the grey silhouette. From the AFM map of the top 4x4μm2 surface area, the surface roughness is estimated to be ∆r = 200 ± 150nm. b, Experimental collected photon flux at low temperature from a single molecule embedded in the fabricated micro-dome structure on gold (yellow stars), compared to the case of the micro-dome on silica (red dots) and of the nude nanocrystal (blue triangles). Saturation curves are obtained by plotting the maximum counts of the measured excitation spectrum corresponding maximum detected photon flux at the detector are R∞Au−dome = (2.38 ± 0.11)Mcps, R∞dome = (0.66 ± 0.02)Mcps and R∞NC = (0.18 ± 0.01), respectively. c,d,e, Back focal plane (BFP) measurements of the emitted fluorescence showing the emission pattern for the micro-dome on gold, the micro-dome on silica and the nude nanocrystal, respectively. Detected counts are plotted in momentum space and normalized to the maximum for all plots, whereas the white dashed circumferences identify the experimental maximum collection angle of ∼ 42◦ . mentum space. In Figures 4c, 4d, 4e we compare the nor- malized BFP maps for the nude nanocrystal on silica, the micro-dome device on silica, and the micro-dome on gold. The white dashed circumferences in the plots identify the experimental maximum collection angle of ∼ 42◦, whereas the centre of the circumference corresponds to the objec- tive optical axis. Fig. 4c shows a homogeneously bright map, as expected from a dipole emission and consistently with the typical on-plane orientation of the DBT:Ac sys- tem . Conversely, Fig. 4d and 4e confirm an ef- fective redirection into small angles achieved in the micro- devices, competitive with what shown in much more com- plex structures . In the last cases, the slight misalign- ment of the bright spots is evidence of the not perfectly cen- tred emitter, which owes both to the 3DLW process and to the uncertainty in the fluorophore position within the Ac nanocrystal. Consistent with the results of the numerical simulations presented in Fig.3, the pattern of a micro-dome on gold hosting a horizontally oriented molecule at an ap- propriate distance from the gold surface (≃ 100nm) features most of its emission within the first 30◦ (see also Supple- mentary Information (S.I.) Fig.1). It is worth noticing that this configuration is not the one exhibiting the highest di- rectivity. Narrower emission lobes can indeed be observed (see Fig.2 in the S.I.), corresponding though to a lower col- lection efficiency, as clearly evident from the central polar plot of Fig.3. The effective redirection at narrow angles combined with 6 Fiber-coupled Fluorescence 51% Collection optics Gaussian mode Fluorescence Overlap integral 76% a b Cryogenic station Normalized field intensity x (μm) Fiber-collimator dome on gold. The target value is evaluated in terms of mode matching by comparison of the measured fluorescence spatial distribution of the integrated structure with a Gaussian mode, typical of a single mode optical fiber. The estimation gives the best overlap integral of ≈ 80%. b, Schematic of the experimental setup and measured performance of up to 51% coupling efficiency, which is normalized to the detected counts on a SPAD. In particular, the setup consists in the objective, a telescope and a tunable-distance fiber-collimator. the high detected count rate achieved with the micro-dome device are particularly suitable for the efficient coupling into a fiber, within the perspective of a compact fiber- coupled single photon source. With the experimental setup schematically shown in Fig. 5b, a coupling efficiency up to 51% into a single mode fiber is achieved. The target value can be estimated in terms of mode matching by com- paring the measured fluorescence spatial distribution in the micro-dome on gold with a Gaussian mode, typical of a sin- gle mode optical fiber (see Fig. 5a). In particular, we esti- mate the best overlap integral to be of the order of ≃ 80%. Considering the flexibility offered by a polymeric photonic platform , a monolitic fiber coupler can be integrated onto the metal-coated micro-dome in order to realize an alignment-free and ultra compact fiber-coupled SPS. Conclusions We have demonstrated the fast, efficient integration of sin- gle molecule quantum emitters in 3D polymeric structures, thus realizing a novel flexible photonic platform, leverag- ing the versatility of polymeric materials. The experimental results entail deterministic positioning of the source, fabri- cation on different substrates (dielectric, metallic) as well as integration in suspended designs. Furthermore, the com- patibility of direct laser writing with organic nanocrystals is demonstrated by showing close-to Fourier-limited emis- sion from a single embedded dibenzoterrylene molecule at 3K. As a first example of the performances attainable by our platform, we show unequalled collection efficiency for single organic emitters at low temperatures, reaching pho- ton fluxes above 2.3 Mcps. This value approximately dou- bles the state of the art for the detected count rate from a single molecule, with the improvement rising to a factor 5 considering the specific case of DBT . The effec- tive fluorescence redirection displayed in back-focal-plane measurements makes this device suitable for fiber-coupling, with an expected efficiency of ≃ 80% and a measured value up to 50%. The use of single-molecule emitters, intrinsically identi- cal, offers the appealing possibility of conveying indistin- guishable photons from different remote sources . Few- photon non-linearities can be also envisaged, based on such quantum emitters interacting with confined optical modes . Owing to the great flexibility of the direct laser writing technique and to the versatility of polymeric ma- terials, the proposed approach can be potentially extended to operational chips integrating monolithic cavities, waveg- uides and directional couplers . For example, a complex quantum effect such as the interference among more than two particles can be observed, using on-demand single pho- tons generated by individual molecules embedded in 3DL- written polymeric tritters . Otherwise, the proposed technology can be adapted for scalable and efficient cou- pling of multiple emitters, even in hybrid polymer-silicon nitride circuits . Furthermore, the possibility to engi- neer photo-functional materials as photoresists en- ables full customization, from the optimization of spatial resolution and mechanical stability, to the employment of photo-reactive or electro-optical features for tunable resonances. Thanks to its advantages, we expect that our platform will lead to a plethora of novel scalable micro- photonic devices with tailored functionalities, at the single emitter level. Our achievements anticipate the impact or- ganic materials can have also in quantum technologies. 7 Acknowledgements The authors acknowledge and thank Hengsbach Stefan and Bade Klaus from the Institute of Microstructure Technology (MIT) in Karlsruhe, for the useful discussions and insights on the fabrication process. Funding This project has received funding from the EraNET Cofund Initiatives QuantERA within the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program grant agreement No. 731473 (project ORQUID). M.C. acknowledges the Karl- sruhe Nano Micro Facility (KNMF) for the access to fabri- cation and characterization technologies within the KNMF Author contributions M.C., P.L. and C. T. conceived the research and designed the experiments. M.C. fabricated the devices with help from S.N.. M.C, P.L. and M. T. carried out the experimental characterization. F.P., P.L., M.C. carried out the theoreti- cal analysis. B.T. and M.C. performed the morphological characterization. C.T. supervised the project. All authors discussed the results. M.C. and C.T. wrote the manuscript with critical feedback from all authors. Competing financial interests The authors declare no competing financial interests.