SOTFET: Proposal for a New Magnetoelectric Memory Spin-Orbit Torque Field-Effect Transistor (SOTFET): Proposal for a New Magnetoelectric Memory Xiang Li,1, a) Joseph Casamento,2 Phillip Dang,3 Zexuan Zhang,1 Olalekan Afuye,1 Antonio B. Mei,2 Alyssa B. Apsel,1 Darrell G. Schlom,2 Debdeep Jena,1, 2, 4 Daniel C. Ralph,4, 5 and Huili Grace Xing1, 2, 4 1)School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA. 2)Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA. 3)School of Applied and Engineering Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA. 4)Kavli Institute at Cornell for Nanoscale Science, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA. 5)Department of Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA. (Dated: 1 April 2020) Spin-based memories are attractive for their non-volatility and high durability but provide modest resistance changes, whereas semiconductor logic transistors are capable of large resistance changes, but lack memory function with high durability. The recent availability of multiferroic materials provides an opportunity to directly couple the change in spin states of a magnetic memory to a charge change in a semiconductor transistor. In this work, we propose and analyze the spin-orbit torque field-effect transistor (SOTFET), a device with the potential to significantly boost the energy efficiency of spin-based memories, and to simultaneously offer a palette of new functionalities. The understanding of spin transport in heterostructures1 led to the realization of magnetic memories based on gi- ant magnetoresistance (GMR)2–4 and spin-transfer torque (STT)5–8. Current research aims to make the writing process for magnetic memories more efficient using spin-orbit torques (SOTs)9,10. STT and SOT magnetic random access memo- ries (MRAMs) offer the virtues of non-volatility, infinite en- durance, and good write speeds8. Nonetheless, the modest resistance change between the magnetic ‘0’ and ‘1’ states of STT- and SOT-MRAMs necessitates a substantial current to obtain acceptable readout voltages, impairing read energies and speeds. In contrast, non-magnetic semiconductor field-effect tran- sistors (FETs) achieve orders of magnitude resistance change in each switching event. The field effect converts a linear change in the gate voltage into an exponential change in the mobile carrier density in the semiconductor, and consequently modulates its resistance. Thus, a material that can trans- duce the change of the spin/magnetic state in a SOT structure into the charge of a semiconductor channel could significantly boost the resistance change of a magnetic memory. This requirement would be met by recently developed mag- netoelectric multiferroic materials, which simultaneously pos- sess magnetic order and ferroelectricity in a manner that these order parameters are coupled due to the magnetoelectric effect11–13. Moreover, exchange coupling of spins in a ferro- magnetic layer to the magnetic order of a multiferroic layer across ferromagnet/multiferroic heterointerfaces has been ex- perimentally demonstrated14,15. Inspired by these recent advances in SOT and multiferroic materials, we propose a new magnetoelectric memory device, the spin-orbit-torque field-effect transistor (SOTFET). This device aims to combine the virtues of magnetic memories with the large resistance change of FETs, providing both memory a)Electronic mail: xl633@cornell.edu and logic functionalities. Analysis of the memory aspect in- dicates that the SOTFET can offer orders of magnitude in- crease in the on-off resistance ratio compared to existing mag- netic memories, which can potentially lower the operation en- ergy significantly. The potential logic aspect of the SOTFET would also enable new circuit architectures for efficient logic or search functions16. In this paper, we present the physical operation of the SOTFET along with a device model, and will mainly focus on the memory aspect. (a) Device structure and working principle of a SOTFET. A CoFe/BiFeO3 bilayer is employed in this study as the example FM/MF bilayer. The P, MC, and N in BiFeO3 are indicated in its perovskite unit cell. In equilibrium, P points to one of the ⟨111⟩ directions. (b) A charge current JSO through the spin-orbit (SO) layer switches the magnetization M in the FM layer, (c) which in turn switches the polarization P in the MF layer. As a result, (d) the semiconductor channel resistance is modulated and the drain current ID is used as the read-out component. an ordinary metal-oxide-semiconductor FET (MOSFET), but with a unique gate stack. The SOTFET gate stack comprises three layers (from top to bottom): a spin-orbit (SO) layer, a ferromagnetic (FM) layer, and a multiferroic (MF) layer, ad- arXiv:1909.08133v3 [physics.app-ph] 31 Mar 2020 SOTFET: Proposal for a New Magnetoelectric Memory 2 jacent to a semiconductor channel to which source and drain contacts are made. The working principle of the SOTFET is illustrated in Fig. 1. The state of magnetization M of the FM layer is the memory component. When a charge current JSO flows in the SO layer, transverse spin-polarized currents are gener- ated due to spin-momentum locking17–22. Spin absorption at the SO/FM interface exerts a spin-orbit torque that switches the M of the FM8,23,24, as illustrated in Fig. 1(a) and qualita- tively plotted in Fig. 1(b). Flowing JSO in the opposite direc- tion switches the magnetization between ‘1’ ↔ ‘0’, identical to the conventional writing mechanism in SOT-MRAMs. The SOTFET differs from the conventional SOT-MRAMs in the read mechanism. Coupling the M of the FM with the semiconductor channel would be achieved by the magneto- electric multiferroic layer. Due to the exchange coupling be- tween the FM and the MF14,15, the magnetic dipole of the MF is also switched with the M in the FM. Within the MF mate- rial, the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI)25,26 effec- tively couples electric and magnetic dipoles, since the weak canted magnetic moment MC originates from the DMI14,27,28. When the MC switches polarity, the electric polarization P in the MF deterministically switches in tandem, all in response to JSO, as indicated in Fig. 1(c). The resulting switching of P gates the semiconductor chan- nel by shifting the surface potential, similar to the effect in ferroelectric-gate FETs29–32. The current ID flowing in the semiconductor channel is the read-out signal, which changes by several orders of magnitude due to the resistance change. Consider the direction of JSO in the SO layer in Fig. 1(a) as writing a ‘1’ in the FM, leading to a high conductivity ON state of the semiconductor. When the current JSO flows in the opposite direction, all the dipoles in the gate stack are flipped. The flipping of P then depletes the semiconductor channel, putting it in the OFF state. The resulting transistor output current ID in response to JSO is shown in Fig. 1(d): it is bi-stable, and provides the desired large resistance ratio for efficient readout. To prove the feasibility of the SOTFET, we quantitatively analyze the dynamical coupling across each interface, and the entire device. The analysis to follow shows that the SOTFET behavior is achievable, but requires magnetoelectric multifer- roics of specific magnetism and polarization, along with an appropriate hierarchy of strengths for the exchange coupling, DMI, and anisotropy energies within the gate stack. Because the FM/MF heterointerface is the least explored, instead of a generic case, we use experimental results of the CoFe/BiFeO3 heterostructure14,27 in this initial exploration. Bi2Se3 is se- lected as the example SO layer. Other materials candidates are discussed in33. The aim of the model is to guide experi- ments by pointing towards desired heterointerface choices. The magnetization M of the FM layer is switched by spin- orbit torque (SOT). For simplicity we assume single-domain macrospin behavior. The switching dynamics of this pro- cess are captured by the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert-Slonczewski (LLGS) equation6,8,34,35: d ˆm dt = −γμ0 ˆm×He f f +α ˆm× d ˆm dt +( γ MS )⃗τSOT, (1) where ˆm is the normalized magnetization of the FM, Hef f is the effective magnetic field acting on ˆm, γ is the electron gyromagnetic ratio, μ0 is the vacuum permeability, α is the Gilbert damping factor, MS is the saturation magnetization and ⃗τSOT =⃗τAD +⃗τFL is the spin-orbit torque, the sum of the anti- damping torque⃗τAD and field-like torque⃗τFL, which are given by8,34: ⃗τAD = ( ̄h 2e)( 1 t ) jθAD ˆm×( ˆm× ˆmp), and (2) ⃗τFL = ( ̄h 2e)( 1 t ) jθFL ˆm× ˆmp. (3) Here ̄h is the reduced Planck constant, e is electron charge, t is the thickness of ferromagnetic (FM) material, j = JSO is the charge current density in the SO layer, θAD(FL) is the spin Hall angle of the anti-damping (AD) or field-like (FL) torque from the SO layer, and ˆmp is the normalized spin polarization. The effective field Hef f = Hext + Ha + Hdemag + HDMI, where Hext is any external magnetic field and Ha is the anisotropy field with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA) calculated by Ha = 2K μ0MS mzˆz ≡ Hkmzˆz35, where K is the anisotropy constant. Hdemag is the demagnetization field as calculated in Beleggia et al.36. The last term HDMI is the effective magnetic field arising from the effective DMI, which is discussed further below. Switching of M in the FM switches the electric polariza- tion P of the MF due to the exchange coupling and DMI. The dynamics of P are captured by the Landau-Khalatnikov (LK) equation32,37,38: γFE ∂Pi ∂t = −∂F ∂Pi , (4) where γFE is the viscosity coefficient, Pi(i = x,y,z) is the x/y/z component of P. F is the total ferroelectric free energy38,39: F(P,u) = α1(P2 x +P2 y +P2 z )+α11(P4 x +P4 y +P4 z ) +α12(P2 x P2 y +P2 x P2 z +P2 y P2 z )+Kstrain(ˆP·u)2 −P·(Fext +FDMI), (5) where α1, α11, α12 are the phenomenological Landau ex- pansion coefficients, Kstrain is the strain energy, u is the axis of substrate strain, Fext is the external electric field and FDMI is the effective electric field from DMI. The strain term, Kstrain(P·u)2, in Eq. 5 arises from the substrate-induced strain38,39, which dictates the energy-favorable planes for the equilibrium states of P, thereby reducing the degeneracy of P orientations in the specific case of the MF BiFeO3, which is shown in previous studies14,40,41. In our model, the exchange coupling, which couples MC in BiFeO3 and M in CoFe, and the DMI, which couples P and MC in BiFeO3, are merged into one effective DMI term that directly captures the interaction between the M in CoFe and P in BiFeO3, with an effective Hamiltonian14,28: EDMI = −EDMI,0 ˆP·( ˆN× ˆM), (6) where EDMI,0 is the energy coefficient of DMI, ˆP is the polar- ization of BiFeO3, ˆN is the Neel vector, and ˆM is the magnetic SOTFET: Proposal for a New Magnetoelectric Memory 3 moment in CoFe. All vectors in the equation are normalized vectors. The effective magnetic and electric fields that enter the equations of motions are then: HDMI = − 1 μ0MS ∂EDMI ∂ ˆM ≡ HDMI,0(ˆP× ˆN) (7) and FDMI = − 1 PS ∂EDMI ∂ ˆP ≡ FDMI,0( ˆN× ˆM), (8) where HDMI,0 is the effective DMI magnetic field magnitude and FDMI,0 is the effective DMI electric field magnitude. Both fields have constant magnitudes for specific material combi- nations, because they originate from the energy and material parameters: EDMI,0 = μ0MS·HDMI,0 = PS·FDMI,0. (9) With the direction of N defined as ˆN = −ˆP× ˆM, all vectors in the CoFe/BiFeO3 FM/MF system (P, N and M) are con- nected by the DMI. The method of implementing the dynamic evolution of the M and P described above is shown schemati- cally in Fig. 2. The initial state of the SOTFET is defined by a set of vectors: M in the FM, and MC, P, and N in the MF. When a current JSO flows in the SO layer, all 4 vectors (M, MC, P, and N) can switch to new states, with dynamics dic- tated by the LLGS and the LK equations in each loop. Finally, a new set of the 4 vectors in a new equilibrium state will be reached by iteration. The switching behavior of P and M is assumed to be purely rotational, consistent with experimental studies of BiFeO314. Key parameters used in the numerical evaluation of the SOTFET are provided in Supplement S1. The model is val- idated by comparing to the micromagnetic simulation tools OOMMF42 and MuMax343, and other theoretical calculations and experimental results, shown in Supplement S2. For the SOTFET gate stack to controllably gate the semiconductor channel, a deterministic switching of the polarization P in z- direction in the MF is desired. For the CoFe/BiFeO3 FM/MF heterostructure and tak- ing PS=100 μC/cm2 of BiFeO344 and MS=1.6×106 A/m of CoFe15, switching behavior for a range of DMI energies is shown in Fig. 3(a). Upon applying a current JSO = −30 MA/cm2, different switching behavior of the x−component of the magnetization (Mx) is observed for different DMI en- ergies. For these values, however, the z−component of the polarization Pz in the MF layer does not follow the motions of M. This is because, given the large PS, a moderate DMI energy is not sufficient to overcome the anisotropy energy in P to switch it. For a high DMI energy, with P held in place, M also does not switch because the HDMI then functions as an effective unidirectional anisotropy acting back on M. This is therefore a situation when the SOTFET does not achieve the desired functionality. The natural next step is to explore reduced PS in the MF layer. Reducing PS in BiFeO3 is experimentally feasible, for example, by La-substitution of Bi in BiFeO345,46. Recent ex- periments by Lin et al47 also shows that the exchange interac- tion between CoFe and La-substituted BiFeO3 remains strong even with reduced PS. Qualitatively, this implies that the multiferroic layer should have a relatively weak ferroelectric- ity, a strong magnetization, and strong coupling between the two order parameters. The calculated results with a reduced PS=10 μC/cm2 and other parameters unchanged are shown in Fig. 3(b) for a range of EDMI,0. For the same current JSO, a critical EDMI,0 is observed. Above the critical EDMI,0, Mx and Pz concomitantly switch, signalling the required materials pa- rameters for successful SOTFET operation. Reducing PS of the BiFeO3 could help the switching of P successfully for two reasons. First, as shown in Eq. 9, for a fixed HDMI,0 and MS, lowering PS for the same EDMI,0 im- plies an enhanced FDMI,0 to switch the polarization. Second, a reduced PS leads to a weaker polarization anisotropy as de- scribed in the free energy equation Eq. 5. This lowers the en- ergy barrier between polarization equilibrium states, making the switching easier. ing behavior of the SOTFET is achieved by choosing the CoFe/BiFeO3 heterostructure with a reduced PS=10 μC/cm2 of the MF (BiFeO3) and an above-critical EDMI,0=0.8 pJ/μm3, which corresponds to DMI fields of HDMI,0=5 kOe and FDMI,0=80 kV/cm. It is seen that switching the current di- rection in the SO layer successfully switches Pz. The current density used, 30 MA/cm2, is about 1 order of magnitude lower than heavy-metal based SOT-MRAMs48,49 due to the assumed large spin Hall angle of Bi2Se3 (θAD = θFL = 3.523), and can be further reduced by using larger spin Hall angle materials such as BiSb50. M is observed to switch within the x−y plane and P is switched out-of-plane. The switching trajectories of M and P are shown in the spherical plot in Fig. 3(d). Clear set and reset processes between State 0 and 1 are observed, proving feasibility of the SOTFET operation for the chosen material parameters. The switching of P with a reduced PS=10 μC/cm2 shown in Figs. 3(c) and 3(d) results in a charge difference ∆Q = 2Pz ≈12 μC/cm2 in the semiconductor channel, assuming the absence of traps at the interface between the MF and the semi- conductor channel. For example, for the choice of a silicon channel, this will lead to a surface potential change approx- imately at ∆ψ ≈1.3 V by a simple calculation51, accessing the entire operating regime of a MOSFET from strong in- SOTFET: Proposal for a New Magnetoelectric Memory 4 high PS in (a), it is observed that upon applying a current JSO (lower panel), Mx responds to the spin-orbit torque (upper panel); Pz, however, does not switch (mid panel). For a lower PS in (b), it is observed that above a critical DMI energy, both Mx and Pz switch deterministically. to “0” (P=) by purple. version to accumulation. Thus, by estimation, at least an on/off ratio of 108 in ID can be achieved due to the resistance change of the channel, which in practice will be limited by gate leakage and interfacial trap states rather than the intrinsic capability of a SOTFET. The simulation integrated with a Si- MOSFET model in SPICE verifies that an on/off ratio > 107 can be achieved16, which indicates that a PS ≈ 0.1μC/cm2 is sufficient to fully control the semiconductor channel for the high on/off ratio when assuming no defect presents. The high on/off ratio in ID as the read-out component brings the read energy of a SOTFET down to the same level as a conventional semiconductor transistor. An electrically insulating magnetic (FM) layer is more desirable for SOTFET application in order to reduce the shunting current from SO layer, and boost the spin torque efficiency52. Besides, the insulating FM layer should poten- tially reduce the charge injection in the MF layer, thus allevi- ating the fatigue that is often confronted by ferroelectric ma- terials. The fatigue issue is also addressed by the fact that the polarization switching is driven by coupling to the mag- netic layer rather than an external electric field, which should reduce the tendency for long-distance atom motion. Another challenge in the development of ferroelectric memory devices has been the presence of the depolariza- tion field that can destabilize the ferroelectric polarization over time53. If the hierarchy of coupling energies within the SOTFET is designed correctly, P cannot switch unless M is switched by JSO. Therefore, the exchange coupling of the multiferroic to the magnetic layer can help to improve the fer- roelectric retention. In addition, by the virtue of simultaneously being a FET, the SOTFET can also provide logic functionality by a gate voltage controlling the channel. As a merger of memory and logic, the SOTFET is capable of process-in-memory (PiM) functionali- ties that significantly lower the energy consumption and phys- ical size of computation, comparing to a von Neumann archi- tecture where logic and memory are separated. Some exam- ples are explored in16. The experimental realization, and var- ious modes of operation of the SOTFET are currently being investigated. In summary, the SOTFET, a new magnetoelectric memory device is proposed, in which a change in magnetization of a SO/FM layer is transduced to control the semiconductor chan- nel by using a magnetoelectric multiferroic layer, so that a readout with several orders of magnitude change in resistance can be achieved. We establish a quantitative model of the dy- namics of the magnetization and polarization of the layers of the SOTFET. From the model, the materials needs for the suc- cessful operation are identified and the feasibility of the SOT- FET is proved in a properly designed CoFe/BiFeO3 gate stack. Supplementary Material - Key parameters for numerical simulations and the validation of the model are provided in supplementary material.