1 Fragility of surface states in topological superfluid 3He P. J. Heikkinen1, A. Casey1, L. V. Levitin1, X. Rojas1, A. Vorontsov2, P. Sharma3, N. Zhelev4, J. M. Parpia4 and J. Saunders1 1Department of Physics, Royal Holloway University of London, Egham, Surrey, TW20 0EX, U.K. 2Department of Physics, Montana State University, Bozeman, Montana 59717, USA 3Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, India 4Department of Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA Topological superfluid 3He, with unconventional spin-triplet p-wave pairing1-3, provides a model system for topological superconductors4, which have attracted significant interest through potential applications in topologically protected quantum computing5-7. In topological insulators and quantum Hall systems, the surface/edge states, arising from bulk-surface correspondence and the momentum space topology of the band structure, are robust8. Here we demonstrate that in topological superconductors the surface Andreev bound states, which depend on the momentum space topology of the emergent order parameter, are fragile with respect to the details of surface scattering. We confine superfluid 3He within a cavity of height D comparable to the Cooper pair diameter 0  . We precisely determine the superfluid transition temperature cT and the suppression of the superfluid energy gap, for different scattering conditions tuned in situ, and compare to the predictions of quasi-classical theory9. We discover that surface magnetic scattering leads to unexpectedly large suppression of Tc, corresponding to an increased density of low energy bound states. The spin-triplet superfluid phases of liquid 3He provide a benchmark for topological superconductivity. So far topological superconductors are the missing “elements” in the periodic table of quantum matter10; while candidates exist, such as Sr2RuO411, UPt312, doped Bi2Se313, UTe214, no bulk material has yet been unambiguously identified as a topological arXiv:1909.04210v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 4 May 2020 2 crystalline superconductor15. Nevertheless devices fabricated from spin-triplet crystalline topological superconductors should eventually contribute to potential applications in topological quantum computation. Current strategies rely on the manipulation of Majorana zero modes (MZMs) in devices which rely on 1-D topological superconductivity16-19 induced by the proximity effect in topological insulators or semiconductors with strong spin-orbit coupling, or via planar Josephson Junctions20,21. However MZMs may be corrupted by non-topological low energy Andreev bound states (ABS)22, which can be present as a result of details of interfaces and materials properties in such systems23. Here we report the fragility of surface ABS in superfluid 3He at an ideal non-transparent interface, exploiting the ability to tune in situ the scattering of quasiparticles by the surface through adjustment of the isotopic composition of the helium surface boundary layer. Recently we have shown that it is possible to cool 3He confined within precisely engineered nanoscale cavities into the superfluid phases24, and detect the nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) response of the small 3He sample using an ultra-sensitive spectrometer25. Surface scattering dominates the properties under strong confinement. NMR determines the superfluid transition temperature, the pairing state, and the superfluid energy gap24,26,27, the suppression of which under confinement self-consistently determines, through quasiclassical theory28, the density of states of the mid-gap surface excitations (ABS). Superfluid 3He consists of spin-triplet Cooper pairs, with one unit ( 1 l  ) of orbital angular momentum1. The order parameter is a complex 3x3 matrix, encoding the spin state over the spherical Fermi surface. In bulk liquid two phases are found with distinct symmetries1,2 and momentum-space topologies3. The A phase is chiral, breaking time reversal symmetry. Over the Fermi surface pairs form with the same direction of their orbital angular momentum, and in an equal-spin state comprising just  and  pairs. The B-phase is time-reversal invariant, comprising all three components of the spin triplet, with broken spin-orbit relative 3 symmetry. The relative stability of these phases is profoundly altered by confinement.24 Superfluid 3He is an intrinsically impurity-free system, although impurities can be artificially introduced using silica aerogels of different porosities and structure factor29. In the work reported here we determine the influence of surface scattering alone on gap suppression, in the absence of impurity scattering. In our experiment, superfluid 3He was confined within a 192 nm high cavity defined in a silicon wafer, Fig. 1a. The effective confinement can be varied at fixed cavity height D by changing the sample pressure and hence the superfluid coherence length 0 0 F / 2 B c v k T    , where F v is the Fermi velocity and 0 cT the bulk superfluid transition temperature. Measurements were made at a series of pressures from 0 to 5.5 bar, over which 0  decreases from 77 to 40 nm. We determine the shift in the NMR resonance frequency f relative to the Larmor frequency Lf , L f f f    , which occurs in the superfluid state. The onset of this shift identifies Tc in the cavity. This is determined precisely relative to 0 cT by also observing frequency shifts in small volumes of bulk liquid incorporated in the cell design, Fig 1a and Supplementary Figure 1. The frequency shifts from the cavity and the bulk markers are of opposite sign, Fig 1b. The superfluid transition within the cavity is sharp, due to the uniformity of cavity height, relative to that achieved in stacked multiple films with a broad distribution of thickness30. Suppression of the gap by confinement is inferred from the magnitude of the cavity signal frequency shift. The relatively strong confinement in the 192 nm cavity stabilizes the A phase at all temperatures and pressures, consistent with the phase diagram determined in previous work24,30,31. The orbital angular momentum of the pairs, which defines the orientation of point nodes of the gap in momentum space, lies normal to the cavity surface ˆ l  ˆ z . The order parameter A   ˆ ˆ ( ) ( ) x y z p ip           Δ p 31, where A  is the A-phase gap maximum, 4 which in general has a spatial dependence across the cavity. The static magnetic field 0 H  H0ˆ z orients the spins along zˆ, via the anisotropic magnetic susceptibility. With this relative orientation of spin and orbital angular momentum, the dipolar energy is maximized, accounting for the negative frequency shift observed from the cavity, Fig. 1 (and Supplementary Note 1). In quasiclassical theory the surface scattering can be characterized in terms of a single parameter: specularity S, Fig. 1d. There is prior compelling evidence that the surface scattering may be tuned in situ from diffuse to specular30,32-35 by coating surfaces with 4He, both from hydrodynamic studies of surface slip32 in normal state 3He and from transverse acoustic impedance studies34,35 of surface excitations in 3He-B. These studies suggest close to specular scattering in the presence of a superfluid 4He surface film. Quasiclassical theory predicts for the A-phase that Tc and gap suppression, and surface bound states are all eliminated for specular scattering. For diffuse scattering the suppression of Tc scales as 2 0 0 / ( / ) c c T T D    to leading order. Details of the treatment of surface scattering used in our quasiclassical computations are given in Supplementary Note 3. We first discuss measurements in which the sample walls and heat exchanger surfaces were plated with sufficient 4He to displace the magnetic solid 3He surface boundary layer, which arises naturally in pure 3He samples36. The plating procedure results in a non-magnetic localized solid 4He surface boundary layer. In this case the observed Tc suppression is close to that predicted for purely diffuse scattering. The results are best fit with specularity S  0.1 , referred to here as “diffuse”, Fig. 2a. The increase in Tc suppression with decreasing pressure arises naturally from stronger effective confinement 31, Fig. 2b. Subsequently a thicker 4He film was formed on the cavity walls to create a surface superfluid film of 4He. In this case we observe an almost complete elimination of Tc suppression, demonstrating close to fully specular scattering, referred to here as “specular”, Fig 2a,b. 5 In general, the measured frequency shift is related to the spatial average of the suppressed gap within the cavity via 2 2 2 ( ) L A f f z     , where  is an intrinsic material parameter which is pressure dependent but temperature independent (Supplementary Note 1). In the Ginzburg-Landau regime, sufficiently close to Tc0, the A-phase bulk gap maximum A  is given by   2 2 A 0 0 (1 / ) A B c c n C k T T T C      , where A / n C C  is set to the measured heat capacity jump at Tc0. This expression thus incorporates strong-coupling corrections to the gap near Tc0 (Supplementary Note 4). For “specular” boundaries, the measured cavity frequency shift corresponds to the unsuppressed, bulk gap, Fig 2c, and allows determination of the constant  at each pressure. For the “diffuse” boundary, using the determined value of , we can precisely infer the gap-suppression from the measured frequency shift, independent of uncertainties in material parameters and temperature scale, Supplementary Note 1. We find that the observed gap suppression is also best described by S  0.1 , establishing the consistency of the experimentally determined gap suppression and Tc suppression within the framework of quasi-classical theory. We now turn to the results where no 4He preplating was deployed, leaving a magnetic surface boundary layer of localized 3He. Rapid exchange with the liquid results in a single hybridized NMR line30. The superfluid transition temperature is inferred from analysis of the frequency shift of the hybridized line, which is a weighted average of the internal dipolar frequency shift in the solid 3He surface boundary layer and that due to superfluidity30 (Supplementary note 5). It shows an unexpectedly large Tc suppression, Fig. 3a, significantly exceeding that observed with a solid 4He boundary layer, and inconsistent with diffuse scattering S  0 . This result can be phenomenologically described in terms of an effective specularity eff 0.4 S   . This approaches the condition for maximal pair-breaking 1 S   , corresponding to full retro-reflection, in which case the phase shift φ experienced by the retro- 6 reflected quasiparticle is    for all incoming/outgoing trajectories and surface bound states accumulate at zero energy, since / cos( / 2) E     28 (see density of states calculation as a function of specularity in Supplementary Fig. 8). However momentum scattering with a preponderance of retroreflection is inconsistent with measurements of boundary slip in viscous transport in the normal state, which find equivalent specularity (0 1  S  ) for both solid 3He and solid 4He surface boundary layers32. We invoke magnetic surface scattering to explain this stronger Tc suppression in the presence of a magnetic solid 3He surface boundary layer. Exchange interaction between quasiparticles and isolated magnetic impurities has been theoretically established to induce additional bound states in superconductors through the Yu-Shiba-Rusinov mechanism37. Magnetic scattering by localized 3He38 strongly influences the observed superfluid phase diagram of 3He in different aerogels39,40. Here we extend these ideas to consider exchange scattering by the uniform 2D surface layer. We seek processes which generate an excess of zero-energy states over that found for diffuse momentum scattering (Fig. 3b and Supplementary Note 6). The structure of the order parameter is such that the phase shift φ experienced by the scattered quasiparticle, and hence the energy of the surface bound states, will be influenced by spin-dependent scattering processes. To account for extra pair breaking we need to include quantum spin dynamics of randomly oriented localized quantum spins, allowing for their spin flips. Exchange coupling between such spins and incident quasiparticles gives rise to interference between the singlet and triplet scattering channels. In our experimental configuration we find this to be the only viable mechanism resulting in enhanced Tc suppression. We find that for a surface with momentum scattering specularity S , the suppression of Tc corresponds to an effective specularity between bounds eff S S S    , 7 depending on strength of exchange coupling. Thus this process is only detectable for non- diffuse surfaces, but can give rise to Tc suppression exceeding that for a diffuse surface, as observed. In order to reach the detected eff 0.4 S   , the required underlying specularity for momentum scattering from the atomically smooth silicon surface with solid 3He surface boundary layer should be S  0.4 , which is a plausible scenario (Methods). The specular surfaces we have demonstrated open the investigation of cavities of arbitrarily small height towards 0 D  entering the quasi-2D limit, in which thermal and spin analogues of the Quantum Hall effect are predicted41,42. Magnetic 3He boundaries may stabilize new order parameters under confinement, and influence surface spin currents. Future topological superfluid 3He mesoscopic devices should provide a new platform for the study of MZMs at well-defined interfaces. The sculpture of the superfluid by confinement will allow the fabrication of hybrid devices based on different 3He “materials”, with clean transparent interfaces, Fig. 4. Design of these platforms is supported by quasi-classical theory, which self- consistently describes the spectrum of surface states, gap suppression and Tc suppression. In conclusion, our results show experimentally the sensitivity of ABS to the details of quasiparticle scattering from the surface. A superfluid 4He surface boundary layer results in specular scattering, which eliminates surface ABS in chiral superfluid 3He-A. A surface boundary layer of solid 4He leads to diffuse scattering, with a finite density of low energy ABS, and superfluidity will be completely suppressed in cavities thinner than 100 nm at zero pressure. We discover that surface magnetic exchange scattering from a solid 3He surface boundary layer must further increase the density of low energy ABS, and thus gives rise to a greater suppression of Tc than for diffuse scattering. We predict that this effect is strongest when the momentum scattering is specular. The surface states of 3He-A are not topologically protected, unlike its edge states43 or the Majorana surface states of 3He-B44. The calculation of 8 the influence of spin-flip magnetic boundary scattering on the density of states of surface excitations in these two topological superfluids remains an open problem. In more complex topological superconductor architectures designed to realize, detect and manipulate MZMs for topological quantum computation, it is necessary to eliminate the excess low energy ABS arising from the interface scattering processes such as we have identified here. Meanwhile our result is a crucial step in the quest to produce and identify Majoranas in liquid 3He, the as yet only firmly established topological superconductor/superfluid. More generally, the influence of magnetic degrees of freedom in topological materials45 and spin-active interfaces in hybrid superconducting-ferromagnetic spintronics46 are both areas of current interest to which the understanding of spin-dependent surface scattering in a spin-triplet superfluid will contribute. Methods Silicon nanofluidic cavity fabrication. The experimental cell was fabricated by direct wafer bonding of two silicon wafers. The confinement region and supporting pillars are defined lithographically on one of the wafers using a process similar to that used in a previous generation of cells47. The typical surface roughness of the silicon surface is 0.1 nm48. This is significantly smoother than the mechanically polished silicon surfaces for which surface specularity has been characterized by normal state studies of slip in viscous transport32, potentially promoting specularity of surface scattering even in the absence of a superfluid 4He film. Deep Reactive Ion Etch (DRIE) is used to create two 300 micron diameter holes either side of the confinement region. One acts as a fill line and the other provides a region of bulk helium on the far side of the slab shaped cavity, Fig. 1a. DRIE is also used to pattern the backside of the wafer to improve the joint between the cell and an external fill line48. After all the features are patterned onto the wafers they are cleaned using a combination of a two-step RCA clean at 75 °C followed by immersion in concentrated (49%) HF to remove any oxide or contaminants. The clean patterned wafer is brought into contact with a blank silicon wafer within a wafer aligner, forming a bond between the cavity wafer and the lid. The bond strength is increased and made permanent by an annealing step at 1000 °C for 2 hours. Successful bonding is confirmed using infra-red imaging and scanning acoustic microscopy. The bonded wafer is diced into individual cells using a diamond saw. A 500 nm thick silver film is evaporated onto the outside of the bonded wafers to thermalize the cell to the nuclear stage. In order to minimise the effects of differential thermal contraction between the metallic fill line/ far-end bulk marker plug and the silicon cell, laser-machined silicon washers are attached around both of the DRIE holes with epoxy (Stycast 1266 mixed with silicon powder), Supplementary Fig. 1. The height of the cavity used in this work was determined to be 192 nm by a profilometer scan on the unbonded wafer. The error in the cavity thickness ±2nm was estimated from 9 the distribution in height measured in this way across all the cavities on the unbonded wafer. The dependence of cavity height on pressure is determined by finite element method simulations to be 2.6 nm/bar, Supplementary Fig. 2. NMR measurements. The cooling of the 3He within the cell, the thermometry and the SQUID NMR spectrometer were as used in previous work24,25, Supplementary Fig. 1. The helium is cooled via the column of 3He in the fill line which connects the cell to a sintered silver heat exchanger mounted on a silver plate, connected via a silver rod to the copper nuclear demagnetization stage. A platinum NMR thermometer is mounted on the silver plate. Measurements were made at a 3He Larmor frequency of 967 kHz, with the static field of around 30 mT applied along the cavity surface normal ( ˆz ). Field gradients were applied to both separate the bulk marker signals from the cavity signal (along ˆz ), and to resolve the signals from the two bulk markers (along ˆ ˆ,x y ). The free induction decay following small angle tipping pulses, applied at 10s intervals, was averaged typically 30 times, and Fourier transformed. Measurements with tipping pulses of different amplitude enabled a correction to be made for temperature gradients between the 3He in the cell and the platinum thermometer (Supplementary Note 7). This correction depended on the surface boundary condition, which influenced the boundary resistance of the silver heat exchanger. The temperature gradient across the cavity is small, and dependent on surface boundary condition; it is determined from the difference between the measured superfluid transition temperature in the two bulk marker volumes. For solid 4He and 3He surface boundary layer the difference is around 20μK, while for the superfluid 4He surface boundary layer it is at most 2μK, Supplementary Fig. 6. This gradient is taken into account in determining the error in superfluid transition temperature. In situ tuning of surface scattering. Magnetic scattering. Pure 3He, with 4He impurity concentration less than 100 ppm, is used to fill the empty cell and silver heat exchanger (surface area 8 m2). This results in a magnetic surface boundary layer of solid 3He36. The results suggest that this self-assembled solid 3He layer on the extremely smooth silicon surface gives rise to partially specular momentum scattering which combines with spin-flip magnetic scattering. Diffuse non-magnetic scattering. In order to displace the naturally occurring magnetic surface boundary layer of 3He36, 32 mol/m2  of 4He was added to the empty cell and silver heat exchanger at 30K, followed by cooling to below 1K over 30 hours, and a subsequent anneal at 2K for several hours. This coverage is below that necessary to see a superfluid transition in the surface 4He layer, in the presence of an overburden of 3He at saturated vapour pressure49. The sample is cooled to 100 mK before adding 3He. Under these conditions the 3He surface magnetism seen in pure 3He samples is eliminated. The results find that the remaining momentum scattering is close to diffuse, suggesting that the 4He pre-plating surface layer has a greater roughness than the self-assembled solid 3He boundary layer occurring in pure 3He sample. Specular scattering. To create specular scattering conditions from the previous 4He surface plating conditions, the cell is pumped at 1.5K, leaving a residual solid 4He “layer” on the surfaces. Then more 4He is added into the cell/heat exchanger. Subsequently the helium pumped out in the previous step is restored. The sample is slowly cooled into the mK range, during which all the 4He forms a surface film of solid 4He with a superfluid 4He overlayer. With nominal surface 4He coverage in the range 68 to 139 mol/m2  , we always detect the same specularity, consistent with previous work32, which found evidence for surface scattering close to specular for surface film coverages in excess of 60 mol/m2  . 10 Theoretical calculation of gap suppression is made using quasiclassical theory with the random S- matrix scattering model (Supplementary Note 3). Author contributions: Experimental work was carried out by P.J.H and L.V.L with contributions from A.C. The nanofabricated cells were prepared and assembled by N.Z, X.R and A.C. X.R carried out the FEM simulations of the cell. The analysis and presentation was carried out by P.J.H, L.V.L and A.V with contributions from J.S. A.V performed calculations of gap profile and superfluid transition temperature. A.V developed the theory of magnetic scattering with contributions from P.S. The work at Cornell was supervised by J.M.P, and the work in London was supervised by J.S, A.C and L.V.L, who had the leading roles in formulating the research. P.J.H, J.S and A.V had leading roles in writing the paper, with contributions from all authors. Acknowledgements: We thank M. Eschrig, J. A. Sauls, S. Simon, V. V. Dmitriev and A. M. Zimmerman for helpful discussions. This work was supported by EPSRC grants EP/J0220004/1 and EP/R04533X/1, NSF grant DMR-17808341, and the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme, under Grant Agreement no. 824109 (European Microkelvin Platform). Fabrication was carried out at the Cornell Nanofabrication Facility (CNF) with assistance and advice from technical staff. CNF is supported in part by the NSF through ECCS-1542081. Measurements we made at the London Low Temperature Laboratory, supported by technical staff, in particular Richard Elsom, Ian Higgs and Paul Bamford and Harpal Sandhu. Competing financial interests: The authors declare no competing financial interests. Materials & Correspondence: Requests should be addressed to petri.heikkinen@rhul.ac.uk and j.saunders@rhul.ac.uk. 11 wafer, bonded to upper wafer. The support posts shown maintain cavity height D under different liquid pressures. The cavity is filled through a fill line via a sintered heat exchanger and cooled through the column of 3He within it. Small volumes of bulk liquid at each end of the cavity provide markers for the bulk superfluid transition 0 cT , and eliminate errors due to temperature gradients. The NMR coil set around the sample is shown in Supplementary Fig. 1. Suitable small magnetic field gradients are used to resolve the NMR response of different regions of the cell, see Methods. b, c. NMR signatures of superfluid transition in cavity and bulk markers, for two different surface boundary conditions, at 3He pressure of 2.46 bar. 3He-A in the cavity shows a negative frequency shift whereas the bulk markers show positive frequency shift (Supplementary Note 2). The cT suppression observed with a surface boundary layer of solid 4He is eliminated by the addition of 4He to create a superfluid 4He film at the surface. d. Schematic illustration of the tuning of surface scattering conditions, parameterised by specularity coefficient S. 12 conditions. a. Measured pressure dependence of Tc for close to diffuse and close to specular boundary conditions. Full lines show predicted Tc for diffuse and fully specular boundaries, dashed lines are best fits yielding S  0.1 and S  0.98 . b. Suppression of Tc for diffuse boundary steeply increases with confinement. Suppression of Tc for specular boundary is essentially eliminated. c. Spatial average of energy gap in cavity at two pressures (0.0, 5.5 bar), inferred from measured frequency shift (Supplementary Note 1), for these two surface scattering conditions. At zero bar the “diffuse” experiment agrees best with theory for S  0.1 . All theoretical curves include strong coupling corrections valid near Tc. The emergent discrepancy between theory and experiment at lower temperatures at 5.5 bar, for both scattering conditions, is in agreement with the expected temperature dependence of strong coupling corrections to the gap (Supplementary Note 4). The width of the theoretical curves for S  0.1 accounts for errors associated with the weak pressure dependence of cavity height (Methods). d. The calculated gap profile at zero pressure for specularities between 0 and 1 in intervals of 0.1. 13 boundary layer. Plot compares suppression of cT in cavity relative to that of bulk liquid as a function of square of the inverse effective confinement, for solid 3He boundary (diamond), solid 4He boundary (square) and superfluid specular (S = 1). Dashed lines show best fits to the data: S  0.4,0.1,0.98 . For the solid 3He boundary, cT is identified from onset of superfluid frequency shift after correcting for background frequency shift arising from magnetic solid layer (Supplementary note 5). b. Three candidate scattering mechanisms for negative effective specularity (see also Supplementary Note 6): retroreflection (ruled out by normal state measurements); spin- dependent pair breaking on scattering from a magnetically polarized layer (absent for the relative orientation of surface layer spin polarization m, surface normal and spin orientation of A-phase pairs in our set-up); spin-flip exchange scattering (spin-polarization of surface layer can be zero) Here the effective specularity Seff is a parameter characterising combined magnetic and momentum scattering, bounded by the specularity S that would arise from momentum scattering alone. 14 hybrid structures. a. An SNS junction, where spatial modulation of cavity height defines SN interfaces. b. Circular region of higher cavity height defines an isolated mesa of superfluid, cooled through normal liquid in a more confined region.