1 Electronic structure of rare-earth infinite-layer ReNiO2 (Re=La, Nd) Peiheng Jiang1,†, Liang Si1,2†, Zhaoliang Liao3, Zhicheng Zhong1,4* 1 Key Laboratory of Magnetic Materials and Devices & Zhejiang Province Key Laboratory of Magnetic Materials and Application Technology, Ningbo Institute of Materials Technology and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Ningbo 315201, P. R. China 2 Institut für Festkörperphysik, TU Wien, Wiedner Hauptstraße 8-10, 1040 Vienna, Austria 3 National Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, P. R. China 4 China Center of Materials Science and Optoelectronics Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, P. R. China *Corresponding authors: Z.Z. (email: zhong@nimte.ac.cn) † These authors contributed equally to this work. Abstract: The discovery of infinite layer nickelate superconductor marks the new era in the field of superconductivity. In the rare-earth (Re) nickelates ReNiO2, although the Ni is also of d9 electronic configuration, analogous to Cu d9 in cuprates, whether electronic structures in infinite-layer nickelate are the same as cuprate and possess the single band feature as well are still open questions. To illustrate the electronic structure of rare-earth infinite-layer nickelate, we perform first principle calculations of LaNiO2 and NdNiO2 compounds and compare them with that of CaCuO2 using hybrid functional method together with Wannier projection and group symmetry analysis. Our results indicate that the Ni-dx2-y2 in the LaNiO2 has weak hybridization with other orbitals and exhibits characteristic single band feature, whereas in NdNiO2, the Nd-f orbital hybridizes with Ni-dx2-y2 and is a non-negligible ingredient for transport and even high-temperature superconductivity. Given that the Cu-dx2-y2 in cuprate strongly hybridizes with O-2p, the calculated band structures of nickelate imply some new band characters which is worth to gain more attentions. 2 Main text: Since the discovery of high-TC cuprate superconductor in 1986 , searching for new high-TC superconductor and revealing the mechanism of high-TC superconductivity (HTSC) are invariably at the forefront of research of condensed matter physics. Although the mechanism of HTSC in the cuprates remains a puzzle, there is a general consensus that the key structural unit CuO2 plane, which exhibits characteristic quasi- two-dimensional (2D) physics of the dx2-y2 orbital, plays a central role in HSTC. The Cu in cuprate has d9 electron configuration and the crystal field of CuO2 plane strongly lifts the degeneracy of the eg orbital with dx2-y2 located above dz2. The dx2-y2 hybridizes with oxygen 2p bands, forming an effective singlet band with zero spin moment known as the Zhang-Rice singlet (ZRS) . The hole in oxygen site couples antiferromagnetically with hole on the copper site. The hole doping can suppress the antiferromagnetic ordering and drive the cuprate into superconductive phase wherein the Cooper pairs are proposed to be mediated by antiferromagnetic spin fluctuation . Designing and fabricating an analogue of cuprate superconductor is one of the key steps towards identifying the key ingredients and unraveling the mechanism of HSTC. Nickelates are one of the ideal systems to mimic cuprates. In bulk perovskite ReNiO3 system, the Ni is of d7 configuration with one electron in the doubly degenerate eg orbitals. One idea to generate cuprate-like electronic structure is to remove the degeneracy of eg orbitals and deplete the dz2 orbital, which leads to a half-filled dx2-y2 band similar to the parent compound of cuprates. This is the idea behind the theoretical proposal of LaAlO3/LaNiO3 hetero-structures by Chaloupka et al. in 2008 . The actual orbital polarization obtained by experimental efforts, however, is too small to produce characteristic dx2-y2 single-band electronic structure . To remove the apical oxygen in nickelates and then flip the orbital configuration to lift up the dx2-y2 against the dz2 is another path to mimic orbital configuration in cuprates . In this case, to hall-fill the highest-energy dx2-y2 orbital, Ni needs to be d9. One promising candidate is the infinite layer ReNiO2, which can be obtained by reducing 3 the ReNiO3. In infinite layer ReNiO2, the Ni1+ possesses d9 configuration with half- filled dx2-y2. Exploring the superconductivity in ReNiO2 starts earlier from 2009 in (La,Sr)NiO2 , but no evidence of superconductivity in (La,Sr)NiO2 is found experimentally. A breakthrough is made by Li et al. who discovered the superconductivity in Nd0.8Sr0.2NiO2 with TC ranging from 9-15 K depending on the samples . The discovery of superconducting Nd0.8Sr0.2NiO2 sheds the light on the era of nickelate superconductivity, and is now motivating worldwide efforts to explore this new system . A systematic comparison between infinite layer nickelate with cuprate can pave the way to identify essential features for superconductivity and to narrow down the range of possible theory of HSTC. The first glance of the nickelate in comparison with the cuprate is what the difference of their electronic structures is. Whether the Zhang-Rice singlet band model is still valid for nickelate? Additionally, to what extend do the d and f orbital of the rare earth—which are close to the Fermi level—affect the electronic structure and participate in the superconductivity? With these questions in mind, we perform first principle density functional theory (DFT) calculations using hybrid functionals which incorporate 25% short range Hatree-Fock exchange, 75% full-range Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange, and 100% PBE correlation . The hybrid functional performs exceptionally well in predicting band-gap of semiconductors such as Si and SrTiO3, and describing systems with a mixture of itinerant and localized electrons from different orbitals, where the delicate balance between itinerancy and localization can produce multiple competing ground states and phases . For the rare-earth oxides of LaNiO2 and NdNiO2, both the transition metal d electrons and lanthanide f electrons participate in electronic band structure near Fermi level . The hybrid functional which can deal with both itinerant and localized electrons without any adjustable parameters is a very effective method to describe the electron behavior of such materials. By performing the first principle DFT calculation and group symmetry analysis, we show that the Ni- dx2-y2 in the LaNiO2 has very weak hybridization with other orbitals and exhibits 4 characteristic single band feature, whereas in NdNiO2 the Nd-f orbital hybridizes with Ni-dx2-y2 and makes the NdNiO2 different from both LaNiO2 and cuprates. These facts imply that a single-band model may not capture all the key ingredients of NdNiO2. We performed the DFT calculations within the generalized gradient approximation and the projector augmented wave method as implemented in the Vienna ab- initio simulation package (VASP) . To confirm the reliability of our results, the main calculations have been checked by Wien2K code with plane wave method and full potential. For La and Nd, 10 and 14 valence electrons of 5s26p65d6s2 and 5s26p64f45d6s2 were considered in calculations, respectively. We performed spin- polarized calculations for NdNiO2, while complex spin order is not considered for simplicity. The PBEsol functional was adopted for structure relaxation. The relaxed lattice constants are a = b = 3.88 Å and c = 3.35 Å for LaNiO2, a = b = 3.86 Å and c = 3.24 Å for NdNiO2. A hybrid density functional of Heyd–Scuseria–Ernzerhof (HSE06) , which includes the short range exact exchange function and thus can deal with both itinerant and localized electrons, was used for an accurate prediction of electronic band structure. The Brillouin zone was sampled with 12×12×12 and 8×8×8 k-mesh for DFT and HSE calculations, respectively. The kinetic energy cutoff was set to 500 eV. To obtain the tight-binding model Hamiltonian, the La-5d and Ni-3d DFT bands are projected onto maximally localized Wannier functions using WIEN2WANNIER and VASP2WANNIER interfaces. The infinite layer ReNiO2 is isostructural to CaCuO2, which can be derived from removing the apical oxygen of the octahedra in ReNiO3. In detail, it is stacked by Re layers and NiO2 planes alternately in a tetragonal lattice. The Re atom is surrounded by an oxygen tetragon, and the Ni atom is surrounded by a Re tetragon and also by oxygen square in the NiO2 plane. The local point group is D4h, D4h and D2h for La (Nd), Ni and O, respectively. With this lattice structure, we first investigate the orbital projected electronic band structure of LaNiO2 where the La-f orbital can be neglected and only La-d orbital has to be considered. As shown in Fig. 1(a), six bands within the energy range of −10 ~ −5 eV are contributed by O-p orbitals, and four bands of 5 Ni-t2g and dz2 orbitals are located at a higher range of −5 ~ −2 eV. Near the Fermi level between −2 ~ 3 eV, the bands are mainly contributed by Ni-dx2-y2, La-dxy and La- dz2 orbitals. Other La-d orbitals and all La-f orbitals form the upper bands. The prominent band and orbital characters of LaNiO2 can be further characterized by the Fermi surface and partial charge density. As shown in Fig. 2(a), there are two Fermi spheres around Γ and A points with 0.10 and 0.19 electrons included, respectively, and one large electron pocket around Γ-Z direction, which are contributed by La-dz2, La-dxy, and Ni-dx2-y2 orbitals, respectively. In particular, the cylindrical distribution of Fermi surface and energy dispersion of Ni-dx2-y2 orbital indicate a quasi-2D character along Γ-Z direction. Figures 2(b)-(d) display the charge density of the pockets around Γ, Z and A points, respectively. These localized charge distribution around Z point and large orbital-weight of the Ni-dx2-y2 band together indicate the localization of this orbital. For the other pocket around A point, the charge disperses to almost the whole space of the La atomic plane, which results from the itinerant La-dxy orbital. Such a non-localized character is consistent with the smaller orbital-weight as shown in Fig. 1(a). The orbital hybridizations are essential properties to estimate electronic structures and to investigate the single-band picture. Although the Ni-dx2-y2, La-dxy and La-dz2 orbitals are all located near the Fermi level, the weak hybridization between Ni-dx2-y2 and other orbital as revealed by our Wannier projection tight binding calculation and group symmetry analysis demonstrate that the LaNiO2 can be well described by single band picture as we discussed in the following. The hybridization between two orbitals is mainly determined by two parameters. One is the energy splitting of two orbitals Δ. The other parameter is the hopping term t, which is related to orbital shape and lattice symmetry. The strength of hybridization is expressed by the formula√1 + ( 2t ∆ )2 − 1. A small Δ and a large t will lead to strong hybridization. In the case of weak hybridization, the system can be simplified as a single band. When the hybridization becomes strong, extra treatment of the band and theoretic model should be considered. A typical example is the modified effective single band model, such as 6 Zhang-Rice singlet which mixes the effective information of p orbital into d orbital. Another example is Emery model , which is a three-band Hubbard model with one Cu-dx2-y2 and two O-p orbitals. With respect to LaNiO2, our calculations show that the Ni-dx2-y2 has negligible hybridization with O-p orbitals, which is in strong contrast to the case in cuprate. Using the CaCuO2 as an example, the Cu-dx2-y2 orbital has strong hybridization with O-p orbital owing to small Δ and a large hopping term t. In this situation, the system is generally described by an effective d-p hybrid single band model. While in LaNiO2, the energy splitting Δ between Ni-dx2-y2 and O-p orbitals is as big as 6 eV. Meanwhile, the orbital weight of dx2-y2 in LaNiO2 is much larger than CaCuO2, e.g. 36% larger at A point. Both of these two facts reveal a much weaker orbital hybridization in LaNiO2 than that in CaCuO2. As a consequence, the d-p singlet model is not necessary for LaNiO2. What is more, the Ni-dx2-y2 orbital is also found to not hybrid with other Ni-d orbitals. First, the Ni-dx2-y2 and Ni-t2g hybridization is prohibited by orbital orthogonality as revealed by the zero hopping term between Ni-dx2-y2 and Ni-t2g (see Supplemental Material, SM ). Secondly, the inter-orbital hybridization between Ni-dx2-y2 and the Ni-dz2 is energetically unfavorable due to large energy splitting Δ in spite of nonzero hopping term t of 0.035 eV between Ni-dx2-y2 and Ni-dz2. Our results also indicate weak hybridization between Ni-dx2-y2 and La-d orbital. The hopping terms from Ni-dx2-y2 to La-dxy/z2 orbitals are zero due to the orbital orthogonality . Moreover, when wave vector approaches kx = 0.5 (Γ-X path), the wave vector group is reduced from D4h (Γ) to C2v (Γ-X) and the Ni-dx2-y2 band is described by A1, which is the same with La-dz2 band. The hybridization between Ni- dx2-y2 and La-dz2 is allowed in terms of their same symmetry. Yet, a large Δ between Ni- dx2-y2 and La-dz2 severely reduces hybridization. Along X-M-Γ path, the Ni-dx2-y2 band is described by B1 (C2v) while the La-dz2 band is described by A1 (C2v), the hybridization is prohibited by the difference in symmetry. When these two orbitals approach A point (kx = ky = kz = 0.5), the characters and symmetric properties of the bands do not change: the Ni-dx2-y2 band hosts representation of A2 (C2v) and the La-dxy 7 band is described by B1 (C2v). The most striking consequence of the weak/no hybridization of Ni-dx2-y2 with other orbitals is that no hybridization gap (band anti- crossing) is formed in the whole Brillouin zone near Fermi level. Further analysis indicates that at kz = 0.5 plane a nodal line is formed and protected by crystal symmetry. The corresponding symmetry analysis can be found in SM . With quasi-single-band behavior of Ni-dx2-y2, tight binding Hamiltonian is constructed through Wannier projection . By replacing La with Nd, the partially filled f electrons are introduced into the system. Fig. 3 shows the orbital projected electronic band structure of NdNiO2. Here the spin polarization is considered because of the large local magnetic moment of Nd-f electrons. The total magnetic moment is 3.91 μB per unit cell, and the local moments of Nd-f and Ni-d are 3.03 μB and 0.89 μB, respectively. As shown in Fig. 3, there is a large splitting between spin majority and minority channels of Ni-dx2-y2 orbital. The Nd-d orbitals still cross Fermi level and self-dope the system like La-d orbitals in LaNiO2. We now focus on the spin majority channel and find that the Nd-f orbitals are much more localized and almost do not disperse. Three f bands below Fermi level and one f band cross Fermi level contribute a local moment of 3.03 μB. Since f electrons are located near Fermi level, a d-f hybridization occurs at M point. This hybridization is so strong that the d-orbital is split and a gap is opened. In contrast, such hybridization does not occur at A point. Unlike the quasi-single-band behavior in LaNiO2 and CaCuO2, the band dispersion of NdNiO2 near Fermi energy exhibits an unusual behavior: the dominating Ni-dx2-y2 band shows strong hybridization with f orbitals around M point, whereas it exhibits quasi-single-band behavior around A point. These characters make the electronic structures of NdNiO2 differ strongly from LaNiO2. The physical origin of this unusual phenomenon is explained by our symmetry analysis, for details please see Fig. S6 . We can draw a conclusion that there is strong hybridization between f and d electrons in NdNiO2. In summary, we have performed the DFT calculations of infinite layer ReNiO2 (Re=La, Nd) with hybrid functional method and group symmetry analysis. Our results 8 suggest that the Ni-dx2-y2 sub-band in LaNiO2 can be treated as an isolated single band due to its weak/no hybridization with other orbitals. As a consequence, the 2D single band character in LaNiO2 becomes even stronger than that of CaCuO2. Meanwhile, the La-d electrons have two non-negligible impacts. One is the self-doping effect, which might lead to the redistribution of charge and alter the magnetic properties of the system. The second effect is that the interaction between La-d electrons and Ni-d electrons might be substantial. The itinerant La-d orbitals provide an electron background in LaNiO2, while the 2D single band of Ni-dx2-y2 orbital is localized with the energy near Fermi level, and only weak hybridization exists between them. For NdNiO2, the Nd-d orbital behaves similarly with La-d orbital in LaNiO2. Nd-d orbital also crosses Fermi level and has self-doping effect. The hybridization between Nd-d orbital and Ni-dx2-y2 is also very weak. The big difference between NdNiO2 and LaNiO2 arises from their f-orbital. Different from the LaNiO2 wherein the f orbitals are far from Fermi level and Ni-d orbitals, the Nd-f orbitals are located near Fermi level and strongly hybridize with Ni-dx2-y2 in NdNiO2. Additionally, the large magnetic moment of Nd-f orbitals can lead to spin polarization of Ni orbital and would affect the magnetic ordering of NdNiO2. The magnetization of f electrons would also make the single Ni-dx2-y2 model not as effective as that in LaNiO2. The role of rear-earth f orbital in affecting the electronic structure then suggests a new twist of freedom to engineer superconductive and magnetic behavior in infinite layer nickelates by engineering the f-d orbital hybridization, which is usually not feasible in cuprate.