Nanoscale High Transition Temperature Superconducting Quantum Interference Device Transimpedance Amplifier Hao Li1, Ethan Y. Cho1, Han Cai1, Shane A. Cybart1 1Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Riverside As the quantum generation of electronics takes the stage, a cast of important support elec- tronics is needed to connect these novel devices to our classical worlds. In the case of super- conducting electronics, this is a challenge because the Josephson junction devices they are based upon require tiny current pulses to create and manipulate the single flux quanta which guide their operation. Difficulty arises in transitioning these signals through large tempera- ture gradients for connection to semiconductor components. In this work, we present nano superconducting quantum interference devices (SQUID) with critical dimensions as small as 10 nm from the high-transition-temperature superconductor YBa2Cu3O7−δ (YBCO). We in- tegrate these nano-SQUIDs with nano-isolated inductively coupled control lines to create a low power superconducting output driver capable of transimpedance conversion over a very wide temperature range. Superconductive electronics (SCE) based on Josephson junctions could play a key role in delivering high-speed, low-power, high-performance, centralized and specialized computing. With demonstrated switching speeds of several hundred GHz1 and energy dissipation on the order of 10−19 Joules per transition2, single flux quantum (SFQ) logic3 is one of the most mature and viable post-CMOS technologies. Unlike CMOS, which is based on electric charge, Josephson 1 arXiv:1910.10757v1 [physics.app-ph] 23 Oct 2019 junctions are quantum devices with operation based on the quantum mechanical wave functions of the superconducting electrons4. As a result, SCE can also offer new functionalities beyond conventional computing. For example, quantum computing with superconductors has flourished over the past two decades and could provide big breakthroughs in the factoring of large numbers5. Quantum annealing processors based on SCE can efficiently solve certain optimization problems6. Neuromorphic computing7 and ultra-low power adiabatic reversible computing8,9 are other newly emerging computational technologies based on SCE. In all of these SCE technologies, CMOS plays a key role in connecting the inputs and outputs of these cryogenic technologies to our lives at room temperature. SCE and Josephson junctions are low impedance (1-2 Ω) flux-based devices that rely on mA level current pulses for operation. Where CMOS, on the other hand, are voltage devices requiring higher impedance millivolt level signals. Therefore there is a critical need for low power transimpedance amplifiers for matching SCE to room temperature electronics. Furthermore, it is also highly desirable to operate over a wide cryogenic temperature range to move the power dissipation from 4 K or 10 mK (in the case of quantum computing) to higher temperature such as the upper 40 K cooling stage in typical refrigeration systems to lower the cooling power required for the system. SCE from ceramic high transition temperature (high-TC) superconductors could fill this role, however these materials are notoriously difficult to process and breakthroughs are needed in device fabrication. The most commonly studied high-TC superconductor (HTS) is YBa2Cu33O7−δ(YBCO). It 2 crystallizes in a distorted perovskite orthorhombic structure. As a result the electrical transport is highly anisotropic and varies in every direction. The resistivty along the b direction is the lowest (∼ 100 μΩ·cm) and is 3 and 10 times higher along the a and c directions respectively10. Similarly the superconducting coherence length, ξ, is very short and anisotropic. Along the a crystalline direction ξa is only 2 nm but even shorter along the b and c directions11. The poor transport prop- erties along the c direction coupled with the fact that the highest-quality films have their c-axes’ orientated perpendicular to the substrate motivates Josephson junctions with geometries where cur- rent flows in the a-b plane. Furthermore, the fabrication of vias and crossovers for the creation of multi-layer input coils and complex layouts are also very challenging and typically involve pat- terning and overlapping films etched at angles to make connections in the a-b plane12,13. YBCO is very sensitive to heat and process damage which makes physical etching of feature sizes less than a few micrometers very challenging14. The recent development of focused helium ion beam (FHIB) direct-write nano-lithography of HTS materials opens up the door to novel devices with nanoscale geometries15 because it does not involve removal or etching of material. In this work, we overcome many of the fabrication challenges associated with HTS to develop a high-transition temperature nano superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) flux-to-voltage transimpedance am- plifier that can operate over a broad range of parameters and temperatures. Our device lies entirely within the a-b plane of a single YBCO film, and occupies an area less than 1 μm2. The heart of our device is a high impedance (30 Ω) nano-SQUID. Nano-SQUIDs are robust to stray magnetic fields due to their very small areas, however this property also makes the coupling of flux into the SQUID from on-chip lines very difficult. In practice, it is hard to inductively couple magnetic flux into a 3 nano-SQUID because the area is so small, a global large external magnetic field hundreds of times stronger than Earth’s field is usually needed. In our design, we use FHIB direct-write lithography to place a control line just a few nanometers away from the SQUID. This close proximity allows for strong coupling because the field strength B is inversely proportional to the distance r from the current carrying wire, B ∼ 1/r. Nano-patterning of YBCO is accomplished using FHIB direct-write lithography. This tech- nology utilizes a finely focused 0.5 nm diameter helium ion beam from a gas field ion source16. The irradiation causes disorder in the YBCO lattice that at moderate doses (1015 ions/cm2) con- verts the material from superconductor to insulator17,18. With this method, very fine sub-10 nm insulating lines can be written directly into the plane of a YBCO thin film to create Josephson junctions15,19–21. To fabricate nano-SQUID transimpedance amplifiers, we began with 5 mm × 5 mm sapphire substrates commercially coated with a 35-nm-thick YBCO thin-film grown by re- active coevaporation22. The film was capped in-situ with a thermally evaporated 200-nm-thick Au layer for electrical contacts. Laser photolithography and Ar ion milling were used to pattern large circuit features into both the Au and YBCO layers. A second photolithography and Au chemical etch were performed to uncover the YBCO film in the centre of the substrate for FHIB direct- writing as shown in Fig. 1a. The centre region was designed to contain four test structures, each containing a nano-SQUID integrated with a strongly coupled on-chip magnetic flux control line. Fig. 1b is a photograph of a representative device which shows a zoomed in view of the YBCO electrodes for a nano-SQUID, an on-chip control current path and illustrations where direct-write patterning was performed. Irradiation with a dose of ∼8×1017 He+/cm2 was used to modify the 4 film to form the SQUID loop (white square) and the insulating lines (white lines) which define the on-chip control line. Using a smaller ion dose of 6∼8 ×1016 He+/cm2, a very narrow insulating barrier (of the order of ξ) for YBCO Josephson junctions (red lines) was also created. The FHIB nano-SQUIDs are not visible using optical microscopy because of their small size and the fact that no materials have been removed in the direct writing process. However, excellent contrast between insulating and conducting regions can be observed with helium ion microscopy. Fig. 1c shows a scanning helium ion image of a nano-SQUID device after implantation. The altered electrical properties provide sufficient contrast to discern the nano-SQUIDs fabricated by FHIB. We also remark that regions where high dosages of helium have been delivered, can also be observed by atomic force microscopy (AFM), as shown in Fig. 1d. This is consistent with the findings of previous work involving helium irradiated silicon23. The high energy helium ions (or helium atoms after recombining with electrons and becoming neutral) become trapped in the substrate. When exceeding a dose threshold the helium coalesces and causes a local expansion or bubble that raises the exposed area. In the case of Fig. 1d, application of a helium irradiation dose of ∼8 ×1017 He+/cm2 to a YBCO on sapphire substrate changes the average height by ∼12 nm, or ∼30% of the thickness of the 35 nm thick YBCO film. The mechanical distortion together with the structural defects such as oxygen displacement and amorphization of the crystal likely contribute to the insulating properties of the film after high dose irradiation. Several FHIB nano-SQUIDs with integrated control lines were written with square SQUID loops with side ranging from 900 nm to 10 nm with (300 × 2 nm) Josephson junctions to determine 5 the optimum size for our transimpedance amplifier. After fabrication, I-V characteristics were measured in a liquid helium, dip probe with a three-layer magnetic shield. Subsequently, devices were DC biased slightly over critical current IC(∼1.2IC), and a current IM was swept through the on-chip control line, which generated a relative strong magnetic field, and the voltage across the device was measured to examine V -IM. The process was found to be reliable and reproducible. The data recorded for all of these devices is included in supplemental Fig. S1. Helium ion images of the two smallest nano-SQUIDs with 10 nm and 50 nm square loops are shown in Fig. 2. These SQUIDs have the smallest loops demonstrated to date in any super- conducting material. The I-V curves for these smallest nano-SQUIDs are shown in Fig. 3a. They exhibit relatively high resistance of 25 Ω and 32 Ω for the 50 nm and 10 nm nano-SQUIDs re- spectively. Because the ICRN product for a material is approximately constant, higher resistance implies lower IC. Smaller IC is desirable for a given geometry because it leads to smaller values of the inductance parameter βL = ICL/Φ0, where L is the inductance of nano-SQUID loop. This in-turn results in larger amplitude of the SQUIDs voltage modulation as shown in Fig. 3b. The am- plitude of the voltage for these nano-SQUIDs reached maximums of 0.8 and 0.5 mV for the 50 and 10 nm nano-SQUIDs respectively. This is many times larger than typical values of nano-SQUID devices found in the literature. While these smallest devices are an advance in scaling down the size of nano-SQUIDs, unfor- tunately, the inductive coupling strength of our integrated control line was too weak for operation of the nano-SQUID as a transimpedance amplifier. Our further studies in this effort focused on 6 devices with 400-nm square SQUID loops because they exhibited the best combination of output voltage and inductive coupling between the control line. Current-voltage (I-V) characteristics for a 400-nm square loop device are shown in Fig. 4a from 4.2 K up to 52 K. The critical current IC ranged from 50 μA to 5 μA, while a nearly temperature independent voltage-state resistance RN was observed to be 30 Ω. This desirable feature allows us to operate the SQUID over a wide tem- perature range with a stable output impedance. The voltage magnetic field characteristics (Fig. 4b) for this SQUID are nearly ideal with excellent uniformity, and symmetry. They exhibit a periodic- ity in external magnetic field with a period ∆B ∼ 3.6 mT. The amplitude of the voltage modulation ranges from 0.5 mV to 0.03 mV with temperature from 4.2 K up to 52 K. The large amplitude and wide operating temperature range show the capability of these devices to output large voltages at high and low temperatures. The local minimal points in the voltage-magnetic field (V-B) curves in Fig. 3b represent integer numbers of the single flux quantum, Φ0, contained within the SQUID. An area can be defined as Aeff ≡ Φ0/∆B. In practice this typically doesn’t match the geometric area for a SQUID due to the focusing of flux into the SQUID from nearby electrodes. With the inspiration from the previous work about planar junctions?, we estimated the effective area to include the points whose nearest non-superconducting edges are the four sides of the insulating white square, as shown in Fig. 1a. This estimate provides an area of 0.56 μm2 that is in good agreement with Aeff. We measured the noise properties of the nano-SQUID by using a open loop method. The voltage noise was recorded by spectrum analyzer, when a bias current ∼60 μA and flux bias -0.13 7 Φ0 were used to achieve the steepest slope in the V-B curve. Dividing the voltage noise by the corresponding transfer function yielded a flux noise of ∼ 300 nΦ0/Hz1/2 at 100 kHz at 4.2 K, as shown in supplemental Fig. S2. This value is typical of nano-SQUIDs?,? measured by this method, but larger than that of the state of art high-Tc and low-Tc nano-SQUIDs?,? measured with the help of low-temperature amplifiers and or flux-locked loops employing bias reversal for elimination of critical current noise. To characterize the coupling of the nano-isolated control line to the 400-nm square loop SQUID a current was swept through the control line and the voltage response of the SQUID was measured (Fig. 5a), for several different values of SQUID DC bias currents (∼8 μA to ∼17.5 μA). The shape of the characteristics and maximum amplitude of the modulation voltage Vmax were found to be in good agreement with that measured using externally applied magnetic field (Fig. 4b). The mutual inductance M, between the on-chip control line and the main body of the nano- SQUID was calculated to be 0.067 pH by the relation M = Φ0/∆I, where ∆I is the amount of current needed to couple a single flux quantum into the nano-SQUID. The period of the control current, ∼31 mA (Fig. 5a) corresponds to approximately a field strength of 3.6 mT (Fig. 4b) or a transfer factor of 8.6 mA/mT. For operation as a transimpedance output driver the SQUID was DC biased at ∼13μA and a flux of 0.1Φ0 was applied to field bias the SQUID to the maximum transfer factor. A 3 mA input current was then pulsed through the on-chip control line generating an output voltage pulse of ∼ 0.35 mV, resulting in a transimpedance ∼0.1 Ω as shown in Fig. 5b. Because the control line is completely superconducting no power is dissipated in its operation. Power is dissipated in the junctions of the SQUID when they are in the voltage state but it is estimated to be 8 only 9 nW due to the small bias current of the SQUID ∼13μA, compared to the power dissipation 3.1 mW of the recent developed cryogenic semiconductor trans-impedance amplifier?. Our findings demonstrate the nano-SQUID as a promising low power trans-impedance am- plifier for connection of superconducting circuits to room temperature silicon electronics. Gas field ion source direct-write patterning of HTS has given us the ability to aggressively scale and integrate device features in superconducting electronics. The integration of nano-scale Josephson junctions, SQUID loops and in-plane insulators for control lines to build and test a trans-impedance amplifier is an example of the power of this technique. The possibilities for other SCE circuit im- plementations are countless as we move into a new era in HTS electronics. Methods Sample fabrication A 35-nm-thick YBCO thin-film was grown on CeO2 buffered r-plane sap- phire by reactive coevaporation by Ceraco GmbH. After deposition a 200 nm thick gold film is thermally evaporated in-situ. The wafers were coated with a thick layer of photo resist and diced into 5 mm × 5 mm chips along the YBCO a-b axis with a Disco DAD321 automatic dicing saw. The substrates were spin coated with Fuji film OCG 825 resist at 5000 rpm, and baked for 60 s on a 90◦C hotplate. A Microtech LW405 maskless laser direct-write photolithography system was used to expose the resist with a 405 nm wavelength laser in raster scanning mode. After exposure, devel- opment was performed using Fuji film OCG 934 for 90 s. Subsequently, the pattern was etched into both the Au and YBCO layers in a 21 cm Ion Tech argon ion mill with power 150 W, Ar pressure 1.7E-4 torr and energy 500 eV. A second photolithography step was performed to mask the electri- 9 cal contacts and Transene gold etchant was used to expose the YBCO film for FHIB direct writing. The sample was loaded into a Carl Zeiss Orion Plus Helium Ion Microscope. A 0.5-nm-diameter, 32-keV focused helium ion beam was formed by aligning the atomically sharp tungsten tip with the help of the electrical extracting, accelerating, and focusing system. The custom-defined vector pattern (direct-writing) was generated by NanoPatterning and Visualization Engine (NPVE). For Josephson junctions the single line irradiation dose 600 ions/nm was used with a dwell time of 1 μs, a point spacing of 0.25 nm. For the SQUID loop, and other insulators an area irradiation dose was used 3200 ions/nm2 with spacing 0.25 nm in both x-axis and y-axis. Electrical transport measurement The chip was mounted with Devcon epoxy 14270 and wedge wire bonded to a 44-pin copper plate chip carrier with a Lake Shore silicon diode DT-670 to en- sure the accurate monitoring of the local temperature of the chip. The whole chip carrier was mounted on a vacuum tight dip probe with twisted pair wires and pin-type low pass EMI filter with bandwidth 1 MHz. The test signal was generated by an Agilent arbitrary waveform generator A33522, which was conditioned through a custom made iso-amplifier. The output voltage of the nano-SQUID was amplified by a Stanford Research preamplifier SR560. The data was recorded by a National Instruments analog ot digital converter NI9215 connected to a PC. For noise mea- surements the chip was mounted on a G10 fiberglass dip probe to avoid any noise from normal metals. A niobium can and cryoperm shield was used to reduce the background magnetic noise. Lead acid batteries were used for the bias current and control current for the on-chip coils. The bias current was also filtered by a second order low pass RC filter working at low temperature. The output voltage was amplified by a SR560 with a white noise 4 nV/Hz-1/2, then recorded by a 10 Hewlett Packard spectrum analyzer 3562A. 1. Chen, W., Rylyakov, A., Patel, V., Lukens, J. & Likharev, K. Rapid single flux quantum t-flip flop operating up to 770 ghz. IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity 9, 3212–3215 2. Mukhanov, O. A. Energy-efficient single flux quantum technology. IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity 21, 760–769 (2011). 3. Likharev, K. K. & Semenov, V. K. Rsfq logic/memory family: A new josephson-junction technology for sub-terahertz-clock-frequency digital systems. IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity 1, 3–28 (1991). 4. Josephson, B. D. Possible new effects in superconductive tunnelling. Physics letters 1, 251– 5. Devoret, M. H. & Schoelkopf, R. J. Superconducting circuits for quantum information: an outlook. Science 339, 1169–1174 (2013). 6. King, A. D. et al. Observation of topological phenomena in a programmable lattice of 1,800 qubits. Nature 560, 456 (2018). 7. Shainline, J. M., Buckley, S. M., Mirin, R. P. & Nam, S. W. Superconducting optoelectronic circuits for neuromorphic computing. Physical Review Applied 7, 034013 (2017). 11 8. Takeuchi, N., Ozawa, D., Yamanashi, Y. & Yoshikawa, N. An adiabatic quantum flux parametron as an ultra-low-power logic device. Superconductor Science and Technology 26, 9. Takeuchi, N., Yamanashi, Y. & Yoshikawa, N. Thermodynamic study of energy dissipation in adiabatic superconductor logic. Physical Review Applied 4, 034007 (2015). 10. Friedmann, T., Rabin, M., Giapintzakis, J., Rice, J. & Ginsberg, D. Direct measurement of the anisotropy of the resistivity in the a-b plane of twin-free, single-crystal, superconducting yba 2 cu 3 o 7- δ. Physical Review B 42, 6217 (1990). 11. Worthington, T. K., Gallagher, W. & Dinger, T. Anisotropic nature of high-temperature super- conductivity in single-crystal y 1 ba 2 cu 3 o 7- x. Physical review letters 59, 1160 (1987). 12. Kingston, J. J., Wellstood, F. C., Lerch, P., Miklich, A. H. & Clarke, J. Multilayer yba2cu3o x-srtio3-yba2cu3o x films for insulating crossovers. Applied Physics Letters 56, 189–191 13. Van Wijck, M. et al. Ceo2 as insulation layer in high t c superconducting multilayer and crossover structures. Applied physics letters 68, 553–555 (1996). 14. Kimura, T. et al. Operation of toggle flip-flop circuits up to 500 ghz based on vertically- stacked high-temperature superconductor josephson junctions. IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity 19, 127–130 (2009). 15. Cybart, S. A. et al. Nano josephson superconducting tunnel junctions in YBa2Cu3O7−δ directly patterned with a focused helium ion beam. Nat. Nanotechnol. 10, 598 (2015). 12 16. Ward, B., Notte, J. A. & Economou, N. Helium ion microscope: A new tool for nanoscale microscopy and metrology. Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B: Microelectronics and Nanometer Structures Processing, Measurement, and Phenomena 24, 2871–2874 (2006). 17. White, A. E. et al. Controllable reduction of critical currents in yba2cu3o7- δ films. Applied physics letters 53, 1010–1012 (1988). 18. Lang, W. et al. Ion-beam direct-structuring of high-temperature superconductors. Microelec- tron. Eng. 83, 1495–1498 (2006). 19. M ̈uller, B. et al. Josephson junctions and SQUIDs created by focused helium-ion-beam irra- diation of YBa2Cu3O7. Phys. Rev. Appl. 11, 044082 (2019). URL https://link.aps. org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevApplied.11.044082. 20. Cho, E. Y. et al. Direct-coupled micro-magnetometer with Y-Ba-Cu-O nano-slit squid fab- ricated with a focused helium ion beam. Appl. Phys. Lett. 113 (2018). URL http: //par.nsf.gov/biblio/10076662. 21. Cho, E. Y., Zhou, Y. W., Cho, J. Y. & Cybart, S. A. Superconducting nano josephson junctions patterned with a focused helium ion beam. Appl. Phys. Lett. 113, 022604 (2018). 22. Kinder, H. et al. YBCO film deposition on very large areas up to 20× 20 cm2. Physica C 282, 23. Livengood, R., Tan, S., Greenzweig, Y., Notte, J. & McVey, S. Subsurface damage from helium ions as a function of dose, beam energy, and dose rate. Journal of Vacuum Science 13 & Technology B: Microelectronics and Nanometer Structures Processing, Measurement, and Phenomena 27, 3244–3249 (2009). Authors contribution H.L. and S.C. conceived and planned the experiments. H.C designed and prepared the chips by using laser photolithography, argon ion milling and gold etching. H.L, and E.Y.C. made the chips by using helium ion microscope. H.L., H.C., and E.Y.C carried out the measurement and character- ization at low temperature. H.L, E.Y.C. and S.C. contributed to the interpretation of the results. S.C. took the lead in writing the manuscript.