1 Near-direct bandgap WSe2/ReS2 type-II pn heterojunction for enhanced ultrafast photodetection and high-performance photovoltaics Abin Varghese, †, ‡, ¶Dipankar Saha, †Kartikey Thakar, †Vishwas Jindal, § Sayantan Ghosh, †Nikhil V Medhekar, ‡Sandip Ghosh, §and Saurabh Lodha∗, † †Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai 400076, India ‡Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia ¶IITB-Monash Research Academy, IIT Bombay, Mumbai 400076, India §Department of Condensed Matter Physics and Materials Science, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai 400005, India E-mail: slodha@ee.iitb.ac.in Abstract PN heterojunctions comprising layered van der Waals (vdW) semiconductors have been used to demonstrate current rectifiers, photodetectors, and photovoltaic devices. However, a direct or near- direct bandgap at the heterointerface that can significantly enhance optical generation, for high light absorbing few/multi-layer vdW materials, has not yet been shown. In this work, for the first time, few-layer group-6 transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) WSe2 is shown to form a sizeable (0.7 eV) near-direct bandgap with type-II band alignment at its interface with the group-7 TMD ReS2 through density functional theory calculations. Further, the type-II alignment and photogeneration across the interlayer bandgap have been experimentally confirmed through micro-photoluminescence and IR 2 photodetection measurements, respectively. High optical absorption in few-layer flakes, large conduction and valence band offsets for efficient electron-hole separation and stacking of light facing, direct bandgap ReS2 on top of gate tunable WSe2 are shown to result in excellent and tunable photodetection as well as photovoltaic performance through flake thickness dependent optoelectronic measurements. Few-layer flakes demonstrate ultrafast response time (5 μs) at high responsivity (3 A/W) and large photocurrent generation and responsivity enhancement at the heterostructure overlap region (10-100×) for 532 nm laser illumination. Large open circuit voltage of 0.64 V and short circuit current of 2.6 μA enables high output electrical power. Finally, long term air-stability and a facile single contact metal fabrication process makes the multi-functional few-layer WSe2/ReS2 heterostructure diode technologically promising for next-generation optoelectronic applications. Introduction Layered van der Waals (vdW) materials such as graphene, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), and hBN are being studied for applications in photodetection,1 terahertz spectroscopy,2 photovoltaics,3 as well as flexible electronics.4 The ability to form epitaxy-free heterostructures by vertical stacking of these layered materials has enabled diverse material combinations and device applications.5–8 Specifically, heterostructures employing vdW semiconductors, with bandgaps in the visible and near-infrared wavelength range, have been used to demonstrate atomically thin pn junctions,1,6,9–14 light emitting diodes,9 photovoltaic cells,6,8,11,13 and memory devices.15 Although pn junctions using layered semiconductors have also been realized using electrostatic or chemical p and n doping in a single material (homojunctions),3,16 the approach of conjugating separate p- and n-type materials (heterojunctions) yields atomically abrupt junctions and exhibits efficient electron-hole separation owing to type-II band alignment as seen in WSe2/MoS2,6,9 BP/MoS2,1 MoTe2/MoS2,10,11 ReSe2/ReS2,12,13 GaTe/MoS214 heterostructures. However, a rational selection of the constituent p- and n-type semiconductors should be based on their intrinsic thickness dependent heterointerface electronic bandstructure, band alignment and optical properties, as well as extrinsic stability in the ambient and ability to form low resistance metal contacts. This can lead to the realization of technologically relevant pn junctions with excellent multi-functional (opto)electronic performance as demonstrated through WSe2/ReS2 gated pn heterostructures in this work. 3 Selection criteria for p and n materials The semiconducting group-6 TMD WSe2, generally found in trigonal prismatic phase,17 is an indirect bandgap material in its bulk form.18,19 However, group-7 TMD e.g. 1T phase of ReS2 is distorted octahedral in structure17,20 and exhibits direct (or, near-direct) bandgap at (or, close to) the Γ point of the Brillouin zone (BZ). Interestingly, unlike the group-6 TMDs, ReS2 exhibits a unique property owing to its distorted structure and weak interlayer coupling- the direct or near-direct nature of its bandgap remains unchanged from monolayer to bulk.20–22 Closer examination of the bandstructure of group-7 TMDs reveals that the conduction band minimum of ReS2 remains at the Γ point, irrespective of the number of layers.20,23 But for group-6 TMDs (such as WSe2) the valence band maximum relocates from K to Γ point of the BZ with increasing number of layers.18,24 It is important to note that the valence band maximum at the Γ point differs in energy only slightly from that at the K point.18 This gives rise to an increased probability of direct as well as indirect transitions from the Γ and the K valence maxima of WSe2 to the Γ conduction minimum of ReS2 respectively, for a predicted type-II band alignment. The possibility of a direct bandgap transition is not observed in a heterostructure of monolayer WSe2 and monolayer/few-layer ReS2. Hence, interfacing few-layer (FL) flakes of group-6 WSe2 and group-7 ReS2 can significantly enhance internal quantum efficiency through increased heterointerface optical generation, a critical requirement for optoelectronic applications. Higher photon absorption at the interfacial region of the heterostructure (overlap region) increases photogenerated carrier concentration leading to a larger external quantum efficiency that is essential for photovoltaic applications. Layered vdW materials have large absorption coefficients in the visible range for mono and few layers (nearly 105 cm−1 for 600 nm wavelength).25 While the absorption is ∼ 10% for monolayers,26 it is significantly higher at ∼ 40% for thicker flakes (∼ 25 nm).25 This makes FL ReS2 a more appropriate choice for the top, light facing material in the WSe2/ReS2 pn heterostructure stack. Further, ultrathin FL TMDs of group-6 (here, WSe2) show excellent modulation of the Fermi level with applied gate voltage,27 in contrast to FL ReS2.28 Controlled variation in the quasi-Fermi level difference between the p and n materials with gate bias can yield tunable open circuit voltages (VOC).29 Hence, FL WSe2 is a more appropriate choice for the bottom, gate facing material in the WSe2/ReS2 pn heterostructure stack. Besides gate-tunable VOC, in line with organic solar cells and also shown through atomistic simulations in this work, the large difference between the conduction band minimum of ReS2 and the valence band maximum of WSe2 is expected to result in a large VOC value.10,30 4 Previous studies have shown that Pt contacts on ReS231 and WSe227 demonstrate n- an p-type transport, respectively. A single metal (Pt) for contacting both WSe2 and ReS2 requires a single lithography-metal deposition-liftoff process sequence. Several reports of pn heterojunctions with dissimilar metal electrodes for the p- and n-type layers (cf. Table 1) require additional fabrication steps. Further, WSe2 and ReS2 are both known to show long term stability in air without any capping layer.12,27 It is important to note that capping layers have been shown to enhance ambient stability in highly unstable materials such as black phosphorus. However, unlike electronic transport, capping layers can limit optoelectronic performance due to optical absorption losses. In summary, a combination of (i) high optical generation due to the near-direct bandgap at FL group-6/group-7 TMD interface, (ii) high optical absorption in thick TMD layers, (iii) direct bandgap of FL ReS2 and high gate tunability of FL WSe2, (iv) single metal for p and n contacts, and, (v) air stability of uncapped WSe2 and ReS2, can enable excellent optoelectronic performance and ease of fabrication in the type- II pn heterostructure, of a FL flake of ReS2 (group-7) stacked on top of a gated FL flake of WSe2 (group- 6), as reported in this work. heterostructures with the FL/FL WSe2/ReS2 heterostructure diode reported in this work, highlighting its versatile and superior optoelectronic performance. It demonstrates excellent pn diode action with a gate tunable current rectification ratio (RR) reaching 105. High responsivity (R = 3 A/W), large photo-amplification (106), a 10-to-100 times enhancement of photocurrent, and hence responsivity, at the heterostructure overlap region are consistent with the near-direct type-II band alignment at the heterointerface, calculated using density functional theory and confirmed through temperature and flake thickness dependent micro-photoluminescence (PL) measurements. Moreover, the interlayer bandgap allows infrared (IR) photodetection in energy range much lower than the bandgaps of the constituent WSe2 and ReS2. The ultrafast photoswitching (rise (τr) and fall (τf) times of ∼5 μs) shows efficient charge separation across the heterojunction and reinforces the predicted large type-II band offsets. Further, the large VOC of 0.64 V is in close agreement with the calculated interlayer bandgap value of 0.7 V. Flake thickness dependent optoelectronic measurements justify the choice of FL flakes to achieve improved photodetection and photovoltaic metrics. Finally, long term photoswitching stability over months in ambient storage conditions, and a single contact metal process highlight the technological relevance of this work. 5 heterojunctions and the FL/FL WSe2/ReS2 heterostructure diode reported in this work . Ref. p/n M(n) G(n) Stable Thickness Electrical Photodetection Photovoltaic (nm) RR η R τr (ms) VOC (V) ISC (nA) 6 WSe2/MoS2* Al-Pd 6-6 Yes - - 0.01 - 0.5 70 9 WSe2/MoS2* Au 6-6 Yes - - - < 0.1 0.27 220 1 BP*/MoS2 Au -6 No 105 2.7 0.4 - ∼ 0.3 ∼ 15 12 ReSe2/ReS2* Pd 7-7 Yes - - 105 4 - - 10 MoTe2*/MoS2 Pt-Au 6-6 Yes 3/3 103 1.3 0.3 25 0.3 200 29 GeSe/WSe2* Au -6 Yes 104 1.7 103 - 0.7 3 32 GaSe*/InSe Gr - No 105 - 350 2 × 10−3 - - 11 MoTe2*/MoS2 Pd-Au 6-6 Yes 80 - 0.3 0.06 0.51 13 ReSe2/ReS2* Pt-Ti 7-7 Yes 364 - 0.02 400 0.17 0.05 This work WSe2/ReS2* Pt 6-7 Yes 2 3 5 × 10−3 0.64 G ∼ TMD group, M ∼ Metal, Gr ∼ Graphene, η ∼ ideality factor, * denotes the material on top Atomistic Model An atomistic study employing first-principles based density functional theory (DFT) calculations was carried out to gain insights into fundamental electronic properties of the WSe2/ReS2 vdW heterostructures. The DFT calculations were performed using the software package ‘QuantumATK’.33,34 To capture bulk intrinsic properties of the WSe2/ReS2 heterostructure, 4 layers (4L) of WSe235 and 2 layers (2L) of distorted 1T-ReS236 were considered (as illustrated in Figure 1a). The indirect bandgap of 4L WSe2 was found to be 1.24 eV, whereas the direct bandgap of 2L ReS2 was 1.40 eV (Figure 1b). Details of the calculations can be found in the ‘Methods’ section as well as in Supporting Information, S1. It should be noted that the bandgaps calculated for 4L WSe2 and 2L ReS2 are consistent with those of bulk WSe2 and ReS2.18,37,38 To further compare the calculated layer- dependent bandgap values of WSe2 and ReS2 with previously reported theoretical and experimental results, tables T1, T2 and figures S1.2, S1.3 have been included in the Supporting Information. Calculated bandstructure in Figure 1b (i) depicts the conduction band minimum for 2L ReS2 (CBmin_R) at the Γ point. Comparing this with monolayer DFT results (Supporting Information, Figure S1.1), it can be noticed that the CBmin_R is near the Γ point irrespective of the number of layers.23,39 However, for WSe2 the valence band maximum (VBmax_W ) relocates from the K point to the Γ point of the BZ (Figure 1b (ii)), as the number of layers is increased from a monolayer to four layers. The VBmax_W calculated at the Γ point is only 0.08 eV above than that at the K point. Such a trend in valence band dispersion has already been shown in previous studies.18,24 Figure 1c shows the computed 6 dint_W (∼3.3 Å), and dint_WR (∼3.4 Å) are the optimized equilibrium distances. (b) Bandstructure of 2L ReS2 and 4L WSe2. (c) Projected bandstructure of 4L/2L WSe2/ReS2 vdW heterostructure showing element-wise contributions. EF_R, EF_W, and EF_WR denote the Fermi level positions of 2L ReS2, 4L WSe2, and WSe2/ReS2 vdW heterostructure, respectively. The direct and indirect bandgap values are only 0.02 eV apart. (d) Schematic illustrating the near-direct type-II band alignment of the WSe2/ReS2 heterostructure. Here, the ∆EC and ∆EV values for the 4L/2L structure are 0.61 eV and 0.58 eV, respectively. The direct and indirect transition probabilities across the heterojunction are marked as TWR_D and TWR_I, respectively. TW is the transition probability in WSe2 and TR in ReS2. (e) Calculated direct and indirect bandgaps as well as the corresponding energy difference (∆E) values of the various WSe2/ReS2 heterostructures. 7 bandstructure of the composite 4L/2L WSe2/ReS2 vdW heterostructure, along with the projections of element-wise contribution. Structural transformation of constituent materials into an optimized composite supercell gives rise to type-II band alignment with conduction band minimum at the ΓS point and valence band maximum at the KS point of the BZ. Moreover, the composite bandstructure is not just a superposition40 of the bands originating from 2L ReS2 (Figure 1b (i)) and 4L WSe2 (Figure 1b (ii)), since it incorporates several quantum mechanical and structural effects like charge redistribution and percentage of strain on each material. The conduction band minimum due to ReS2 forms a 0.68 eV indirect bandgap (ΓS to KS) with the valence band maximum contributed by WSe2. However, the indirect bandgap is very close to the direct bandgap value (0.7 eV, at ΓS). The possible optical transitions in the heterojunction are illustrated by double-headed arrows in Figure 1d, where the direct and indirect transition probabilities are represented by TWR _D (ΓS to ΓS) and TWR_I (KS to ΓS), respectively. It should be noted that for optical generation across the heterointerface, the direct bandgap transition TWR_D will not require phonon assisted momentum conservation, unlike TWR_I. Hence, this near-direct41 electronic structure can lead to significantly large optical transitions at ΓS which may contribute to enhanced photogeneration. This strongly correlates to the high responsivity obtained from the heterojunction in our focused laser measurements. Furthermore, a closer look at Figure 1c shows a type-II bandstructure necessary for efficient separation of the photogenerated electrons and holes42,43 and can offer strong interlayer coupling via tunnelling of the majority carriers.6,42 This is further reinforced by strong photoluminescence quenching (Figure 3) and the region-wise photoresponse (Figure 5d) indicates maximum photoresponse at the WSe2/ReS2 interface region. Figure 1d also which illustrates a schematic representation of the projected bandstructure shown in Figure 1c, where the conduction and valence band offsets (∆EC and ∆EV ) are 0.61 eV and 0.58 eV, respectively. The near-direct interface bandgap (0.7 eV) enhances photogeneration and the large values of ∆EC and ∆EV favour easy and fast dissociation of the photogenerated electrons and holes thereby improving the photoresponsivity.6,42,43 The calculated sizeable bandgap value of 0.7 eV can also result in a relatively large VOC.30 To further investigate the band alignment in thicker WSe2/ReS2 heterostructures, atomistic models were designed using 5 layers of WSe2 and 3 layers of ReS2 (5L/3L WSe2/ReS2) and 6 layers of WSe2 and 4 layers of ReS2 (6L/4L WSe2/ReS2). Apart from that, a thinner 3L/2L WSe2/ReS2 heterostructure has also been considered for comparison. The electronic bandstructures for 3L/2L WSe2/ReS2, 5L/3L 8 WSe2/ReS2, and 6L/4L WSe2/ReS2 heterointerfaces are shown in Figure S1.3 of Supporting Information. The direct and indirect bandgaps as well as their energy difference (∆E) for the thicker and thinner heterostructures are compared with the aforementioned 4L/2L case in Figure 1e. Although the thick (4L/2L and above) structures exhibit indirect bandgaps around 0.7 eV, their ∆E values always remain close to or less than 0.02 eV, rendering a near-direct nature41 to the bandstructure. Figure 1e justifies that the 4L/2L case can be used to represent the bandstructure of the thicker FL/FL WSe2/ReS2 heterostructure used for the optoelectronic measurements (described in the next section). Results and Discussion Device fabrication and physical characterization FL WSe2 and ReS2 flakes were exfoliated from bulk crystals onto polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) films. The WSe2 flake was transferred first onto a 280 nm SiO2/Si substrate. Next, the FL ReS2 flake was aligned and transferred over WSe2 ensuring a good overlap for the heterojunction. A schematic of the heterostructure showing the ReS2 flake on top of WSe2 is shown in Figure 2a. False colored scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the heterojunction is shown in Figure 2b and the contacts are labelled in the inset. An optical microscope image is available in Figure S2 of Supporting Information. Raman spectra from the individual materials as well as the overlap region are shown in Figure 2c. For FL ReS2, Raman peaks at 161 and 212 cm−1 are identified as the E2g (in-plane) and A1g (out-of- plane) vibration modes, respectively.28 FL WSe2 exhibits A1g and 2LA(M) (second order Raman mode) peaks at 249 and 257 cm−1 respectively.44 Characteristic peaks corresponding to both materials are distinctly seen in the overlap region indicating good interface quality. Further, the thickness of each individual flake obtained by atomic force microscopy (AFM) is marked in the AFM image in Figure 2d. This device will be referred to as FL/FL WSe2/ReS2heterostructure. To examine the optical properties of the WSe2/ReS2 heterostructure, micro-PL studies were carried out using 532 nm laser with a spot diameter of ∼4 μm. In addition to the aforementioned FL/FL structure, two samples with thinner constituents: (1) FL/8L WSe2/ReS2 (65 layers of WSe2 and 8 layers of ReS2) and (2) 2L/2L WSe2/ReS2 (Figure 3a) were studied (AFM data available in Supporting 9 Information, S3). The laser was selectively focused on the individual WSe2 and ReS2 regions as well as the WSe2/ReS2 overlap region. At 300 K, for the relatively thicker FL WSe2, in Figure 3b, the A and I peaks corresponding to the direct (K in conduction band to K in valence band) and indirect (between Γ and K in conduction band to Γ in valence band) transitions, respectively, and the direct bandgap peak (D) for 8L ReS2 at Γ are prominent.18,20 The characteristic peaks from both materials are significantly quenched in the PL signal from the overlap region. For the thicker FL WSe2, the signal from the indirect bandgap is pronounced, hinting towards the increased possibility of transitions to the Γ of the BZ and in turn accumulation of photogenerated holes at Γ. The direct transitions in ReS2 also occur at Γ. For the thinner 2L/2L WSe2/ReS2 heterostructure, at 300 K, the A and I peaks are merged, whereas at 25 K, the A peak shows a blueshift18 owing to the typical increase in the direct bandgap of a semiconductor with decrease in temperature. The PL from 2L layer ReS2 was very weak the fabricated FL/FL heterostructure device. The bottom flake shown in blue is WSe2 and ReS2, in red, is placed on top. The inset shows the contact labels. (c) Raman spectra acquired from individual WSe2 and ReS2 regions as well as from the overlap region showing characteristic peaks corresponding to both materials. (d) Atomic force microscope image of the FL/FL heterojunction area showing flake thicknesses. 10 at room temperature and hence the measurement at 25 K was performed. In the 2L/2L heterostructure also, it was observed that the PL intensity was significantly reduced at the overlap region owing to efficient transfer of the laser induced photogenerated carriers across the heterojunction6,45 (electrons to ReS2 and holes to WSe2) indicating a type-II band alignment, in good agreement with the DFT predictions and consistent with many previous reports.6,45,46 The PL quenching data from a FL/FL heterostructure is available in S4 of Supporting Information. The absence of a PL signal due to recombination of interlayer excitons, if any, in the PL spectra captured flakes are marked in red and ReS2 in blue. (b) Room temperature PL signal from individual WSe2 and ReS2 regions as well as the WSe2/ReS2 overlap region of the FL/8L heterostructure showing considerable quenching of PL in the overlap region (multiplied by 5 for clarity). (c) Room temperature and (d) low temperature (25 K) PL data for 2L/2L heterostructure which also show PL quenching in the overlap region. 11 by the Si-based detector (detection range upto 1.1 eV) employed in this study reinforces the possibility of a lower energy (sub-1.1 eV) type-II interlayer bandgap. Electrical characterization without illumination For electrical characterization, multiple electrodes were fabricated on the heterostructures using stack. Pt has been reported to form ohmic contacts to ReS231 as well as WSe2.27 Individual field effect transistor (FET) performance was first analyzed using contacts only on WSe2 (W2-W3) and only on ReS2 (R1-R2). Transfer (ID − VG) and output (ID − VD) characteristics of these individual FETs are shown in Figure S5 of Supporting Information. For both FETs, the threshold voltage (VTh) was obtained at the maximum transconductance (gm) point in the transfer characteristics and the carrier mobility (μ) was calculated at VTh using the equation: μ = L/W CGVD dID dVG. Here, L and W are the length and width of the channel, VG and VD are the gate and drain voltages, ID is the drain current, and the oxide capacitance CG = 1.23× 10-8 Fcm−2. The WSe2 FET shows excellent modulation of ID with VG, demonstrating an on/off current ratio of 105, with VTh = −28 V and μ = 32 cm2 V−1 s−1. On the other hand, the ReS2 FET shows a poor gate tunability of ID and a lower μ = 3 cm2 V−1 s−1. FL ReS2 flakes have been shown to exhibit very weak interlayer coupling20 which could lead to reduced gate dependent charge carrier modulation in thicker flakes. Nevertheless, on/off current ratio of 108 is shown for a thinner (trilayer) ReS2 FET in Figure S6 of Supporting Information. From the transfer characteristics of the individual FETs, n- and p-type characteristics are clearly observed for ReS2 and WSe2, respectively. Similar transport characteristics were observed for heterostructure devices without the Cr adhesion layer (S7 of Supporting Information). Further, the choice of WSe2 as the bottom, gate facing, electrically tunable layer and FL direct bandgap ReS2 as the top, light-facing, high optical absorption layer is justified. The diode characteristics were measured across the contacts W1 on WSe2 and R1 on ReS2. VG dependent output characteristics are shown in Figure 3a. WSe2 was connected to the drain and ReS2 to the source terminal. A maximum RR, defined as the ratio of the forward current (IF ) to the reverse current (IR) at VD = ±1 V, of 6×103 was obtained at VG = −20 V. On comparing with the Shockley diode equation, ID = I0 (exp ( qVD ηkBT) − 1), where I0 is the reverse leakage current, q is electronic charge, kB is Boltzmann’s constant, T is temperature, and η is ideality factor, the η is approximately 2 for various 12 VG, indicating recombination limited transport across the heterojunction. Figure S8 in the Supporting Information describes a similar device with RR reaching 105. A significantly large series resistance (Rs) of the order of MΩ is extracted from the output characteristics at high VD, which further increases at positive VG due to reduced hole density in WSe2. The output characteristics of the diode at positive VG are shown in Figure S9 of Supporting Information. contacts W1 and R1. Inset shows the extracted values of rectification ratio and diode ideality factor as a function of applied back gate voltage. (b) Plot of ln(ID VD ⁄ 2) vs 1/VD showing a linear region with a negative slope (inset) indicating Fowler-Nordheim tunneling transport through the heterostructure. (c) Transfer characteristics of the pn heterojunction for forward and reverse bias conditions with the various regions marked. Inset shows gate voltage dependent extracted hole sheet density in WSe2 (pW) and electron sheet density in ReS2 (nR) along with the product nRpW that determines the interlayer recombination current. (d) Energy band diagrams for VG = −40 V: (i) band alignment in WSe2 and ReS2 with their respective Fermi levels defined by the gate voltage, (ii) under forward bias, the dominant charge transport is governed by interlayer recombination of the majority carriers giving rise to Irec, and (iii) for reverse bias the reduced current is due to intralayer and interlayer generation denoted by Igen. EG ⃗⃗⃗⃗ and ED ⃗⃗⃗⃗ are the electric fields due to back gate and source-drain bias, respectively. The relative thickness of the arrows indicates the magnitude of the currents. 13 In contrast to pn junctions fabricated using inorganic doped semiconductors like Si, the forward bias current transport in vdW pn heterojunctions is dominated by tunnelling-based trap assisted (Shockley-Read-Hall, SRH) or direct (Langevin) recombination of majority carriers across the heterointerface.6,47 The current transport due to Fowler-Nordheim tunnelling (FNT) through a triangular potential barrier is modelled by the equation:48,49 I ∝ V2 exp ( −4d√2m∗φ3 3ħqV ), where d is the thickness of the barrier, m∗ is the effective mass of the charge carriers, ħ is the reduced Planck’s constant, and φis the height of the tunnel barrier. Hence, the presence of tunnelling mediated transport can be confirmed by a straight line with negative slope in the ln (ID VD ⁄ 2 ) against 1/VD plot. triangular barrier required for FNT could be at the heterointerface or at the contacts. For VG < −20 V, near the VTh of WSe2, IF is high, implying WSe2 dominated forward bias transport. Transfer characteristics across the heterostructure are shown in Figure 4c for VD = 1 V and VD = −1 V. The forward bias transfer curve exhibits prominent n and p branches owing to contributions from both materials. The VG dependent sheet carrier density of majority holes in WSe2 is represented by pW and majority electrons in ReS2 by nR. For VG near the VTh in WSe2 and ReS2 FETs, the ID is approximated by the respective carrier concentrations (n) using the contact resistance (RC) corrected drift current relation:50,51 ID = qnμ(VD − IDRC)(W/L). The pW peaks at large negative VG (∼ 5.3 × 1012 cm−2) and drops to its intrinsic value6,52 (pW0 ∼ 3×109 cm−2) below VTh. On the other hand, nR is extracted to be ∼ 1.8 × 1013cm−2at high positive VGbut it does not display considerable variation with VG. Further, VG dependent trends in the calculated values of nRand pWare shown in the inset of Figure 4c. Being in close proximity to SiO2, the Fermi level in thin WSe2 can be effectively modulated by the gate bias. The electron affinities (χ) of WSe2 and ReS2 are considered to be 4 eV48 and 4.5 eV,12 respectively. (EF_W ) and ReS2 (EF_R) for VG = −40 V. Based on the transfer characteristics of the individual FETs, EF_W is assumed to be near the valence band and EF_Rto be near the conduction band. When forward biased, a positive voltage is applied to WSe2 and ReS2 is kept grounded. Now, as described in Figure 4d (ii), for VG = −40 V, there is an accumulation of majority charge carriers- electrons from ReS2 and holes from WSe2at the heterointerface which can undergo interlayer recombination to yield a large current component, Irec ∝ nRpW , marked as region (1) in Figure 4c (nR and pW both being large). For the reverse bias case in Figure 4d (iii), since the direction of the source-drain electric field (ED ⃗⃗⃗⃗ ) is now reversed, the current (marked as region (5) in Figure 4c) is due to generation of charge carriers in 14 WSe2 (intralayer) or across the heterojunction (interlayer) and much smaller than the forward bias case. Further insights on the charge transport across the heterostructure for the various regions marked in Figure 4c and also at VG = 40 V are provided in S10 of Supporting Information. Photodetection Optoelectronic characteristics of the three WSe2/ReS2 diode configurations (FL/FL, FL/8L, and 2L/2L) were studied using a 532 nm laser focused through a 50× objective yielding a spot of diameter ∼ 4 μm. The laser power (Plaser) was varied from 1 nW to 0.5 mW. Unless otherwise stated, all ID −VD characteristics were recorded with an applied back gate voltage of −20 V for the FL/FL WSe2/ReS2 structure and −10 V for the two thinner configurations. For the FL/FL WSe2/ReS2 heterostructure, ID− VDcharacteristics with increasing Plaserare shown in Figure 5a. The current under illumination is denoted by Ilight, from which the photocurrent (Iph) is calculated as Iph = Ilight − Idark. Iph depends on (i) generation of photoexcited electron-hole pairs (EHP) in the heterojunction region, (ii) efficient separation of the EHPs, and (iii) extraction of the carriers into the external circuit to contribute to the total current. Similar plots for the thinner heterostructures demonstrating lower photocurrents than the FL/FL diode for matched laser powers are shown in Figure S11 of Supporting Information. The high Iph obtained in the FL/FL WSe2/ReS2 device can be attributed to (i) FL flakes for higher optical absorption, (ii) near-direct bandgap of the WSe2/ReS2 heterojunction for enhanced optical generation, and (iii) high values of ∆ECand ∆EVwhich lead to efficient charge separation across the heterointerface. Photo-amplification is the ratio of Ilight to Idark at different Plaser for a particular drain voltage. An enhanced photo-amplification exceeding 2×106 in the FL/FL WSe2/ReS2 heterostructure (Figure 5b) can enable excellent photodetection applications. Responsivity (R = Iph/Plaser ) is a key figure of merit for photodetectors. A high R of 3 A/W at 1 nW of laser power, better than commercial Si photodetectors (for 532 nm)10 can be attributed to the large Iph generated in the overlap region owing to the high absorption coefficients of the thick WSe2 and ReS2 flakes.53 Consequently, the FL/8L and 2L/2L WSe2/ReS2 heterostructures demonstrate lower R that decreases with decreasing flake thicknesses. Absorption spectrum of a thick ReS2 flake on sapphire substrate for small angle of incidence is shown in the Supporting Information, Figure S12. The variation of R with Plaser for the different heterostructures is shown in Figure 5c. A power 15 dependence of R ∝ Plaser−0.42 for VD = 0 V is obtained by fitting the data. Detectivity (D∗) quantifies the photodetector’s ability to measure very weak signals and can be calculated from the R and Idark at a particular VD and Plaser by the relation D∗ = R√A √2qIdark . Here, A is the area of the device. A D∗ value of 3×1012 Jones at VD = 0 V and 1 nW illumination results in a noise equivalent power (NEP = √A D∗) of 2×10-16 WHz−1/2. The variation of Iph with VG under reverse bias (VD = −1 V) for the FL/FL heterostructure at 100 nW and 1 μW incident illumination is discussed in S13 of Supporting Information. As expected, the photocurrent increases with increasing illumination intensity and is significantly larger than the dark nm laser illumination at various incident powers for FL/FL heterostructure. (b) Photo-amplification with laser power for WSe2/ReS2 heterojunctions having different thicknesses of constituent flakes at a low VD of −0.1 V. (c) Responsivity for the different heterostructures, power law fit at VD = 0 V, and detectivity (of FL/FL structure) at various laser powers. (d) Linescan showing region-dependent normalized photocurrent at VD = 0 V, VG = −20 V. The laser beam was converged to a spot size of 1 μm diameter and focused on the points marked in red in (i). The photoresponse from the different regions: only FL WSe2, FL/FL WSe2/ReS2 heterojunction, and only FL ReS2, is shown in (ii). 16 transfer characteristics. Iph vs VG for the forward biased diode and the transport mechanisms are included in Figure S14 of Supporting Information. To map the origin of the photoresponse, the laser was selectively incident on multiple points (1 to 12) in three distinct regions of the FL/FL Normalized Iph for VD = 0 V, VG = −20 V is plotted in (ii) showing that the maximum current due to photogeneration is from the overlap region. In comparison to the individual WSe2 and ReS2 regions, the photocurrent shows 10-to-100 times increase in the overlap region, markedly higher than in BP/MoS2,1 WSe2/SnS2,54 WSe2/MoSe2,55 and MoS2/GaSe53 heterojunctions. This leads to a similar enhancement in R at the heterointerface in comparison to regions 1 and 3. Photovoltaic effect and IR Photoresponse A distinct photovoltaic effect is seen in the I−V characteristics in Figure 5a. Figure 6a shows the fourth quadrant (photovoltaic operating region) plot for increasing Plaser indicating the VOC and ISC. In organic solar cells the difference between the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the donor and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the acceptor limits the maximum VOC.30 Here, the difference between the conduction band minimum of FL ReS2 and the valence band maximum of FL WSe2 at the heterointerface (0.7 eV) being larger than several other reported vdW heterostructures, a relatively higher VOC is predicted.10,30 As expected, for the FL/FL heterostructure, a high VOC value of 0.64 V was obtained for Plaser = 0.5 mW. The corresponding ISC was 2.6 μA. Slope of the VOC vs Plaser plot (described in Figure S15 of Supporting Information) gives an ideality factor of ∼1.5 implying that both SRH and Langevin recombination processes influence the performance. A modified Shockley diode equation56: I(V) = Iph {exp [ q(V−VOC) kBT(1+α)] − 1} , is used to fit the I−V characteristics in the photovoltaic operation region. Here, α is a dimensionless quantity which depends on charge recombination and extraction.56,57 An α value of ∼ 2, for 10 nW and 100 nW laser illumination indicates good carrier extraction at the contacts. Fits to the ID−VD data for low illumination powers using the modified equation are shown in Figure 5b. Power generated (Pelec) by the FL/FL photovoltaic device as a function of VDfor various illumination powers is shown in Figure 6c. The output power reaches 350 nW for Plaser = 0.5 mW, making it one of the highest values reported among vdW heterojunctions. The maximum electric power generated by the FL/8L and 2L/2L WSe2/ReS2 heterostructures, significantly (5× and 80×, respectively) lower 17 Fourth quadrant plot showing ISC and VOC for varying laser power, and (b) fitting of photovoltaic data using the modified Shockley diode equation56 for the FL/FL heterostructure. (c) Electrical power generated by the FL/FL device as a function of incident laser power. The maximum output electric power obtained for the FL/8L and 2L/2L heterostructures are also marked. (d) Fill factor and PCE at various laser powers for the FL/FL and 2L/2L heterostructures. (e) Output characteristics across the WSe2/ReS2 heterojunction under dark and upon IR illumination tuned using long pass filters. Photovoltaic effect and interlayer IR photoresponse are seen in the I-V characteristics. Inset shows that a WSe2 FET does not have any response to the IR radiation above 1250 nm. (f) Plot depicting the energy range involved in the measurements. 18 than the FL/FL structure, is also shown in Figure 6c. Figure S16 of Supporting Information shows the variation in ISC and VOC with varying gate voltage and laser power. Similar to the transfer characteristics under illumination (S13 in Supporting Information), ISC increases with laser power and is higher for negative gate voltages. VOC is determined by the electron (ReS2) and hole (WSe2) quasi Fermi level difference upon illumination. In the FL/FL device, the Fermi level of ReS2 stays near the conduction band and that of WSe2 varies from the valence band edge upto midgap with back gate voltage. VOC shows good tunability with VG, with the maximum for VG ≤ −30 V when the Fermi levels of WSe2 and ReS2 are near their respective valence and conduction band edges, thereby maximizing EFn - EFp. Similarly, the minimum value for each incident power occurs for VG below (more positive) VTh of WSe2. Further, the VOC depends on the dark current as well as the light induced photocurrent in the pn junction. Owing to the reduced thickness and lower absorption coefficients of the constituent flakes in the thinner heterostructures, the VOC is lower than the FL/FL structure as shown in Figure S17 of Supporting Information. As seen from Figure 6d, a maximum fill factor (FF = Pelec, max/(VOCISC)) of 0.4 and a maximum power conversion efficiency (PCE = VOCISCFF/Pin) of 0.2 % are obtained. The FF and PCE of the thinner (2L/2L) heterostructure are compared to the thicker (FL/FL) device in Figure 6d. External quantum efficiency (EQE = Iph/q Plaser/hν × 100%) is ~600 % at 1 nW laser power. It should be noted that these values of EQE have been calculated from corresponding values of R; the experimental values are typically found to be lower.25 The strong PL quenching and enhanced photocurrent generation from the heterojunction overlap region are in good agreement with DFT calculations that predict a type-II band alignment at the heterointerface. The bandgaps of FL WSe2 and ReS2 are 1.35 eV and 1.50 eV as per our PL measurements (S4 of Supporting Information). The 532 nm (2.330 eV) laser excitation can lead to intralayer as well as interlayer generation of EHPs in the individual WSe2 and ReS2 layers and across the heterointerface, respectively. Therefore, to demonstrate photogeneration exclusively across the interlayer bandgap, the FL/8L heterostructure was irradiated using an IR source and various long pass filters (LPF) were used to selectively block wavelengths below the cut-on wavelength of the LPF. For instance, a 1250 LPF would only allow wavelengths beyond 1250 nm to pass through it. Figure 6e shows output characteristics of the diode under dark and on exposure to IR radiation tuned using three LPFs: 950 nm (1.305 eV), 1250nm (0.992 eV), and 2400 nm (0.516 eV). Photocurrent is obtained when 950 nm and 1250 nm LPFs are used, which correspond to energies significantly lower than the bandgaps of the individual materials and higher than the DFT predicted value for the interlayer bandgap. A clear photovoltaic effect is also seen in the I − V characteristics. Furthermore, 19 the use of 2400 nm LPF yields negligible change from the dark characteristics. This observation rules out the contribution of sub-bandgap traps (if any) in the photocurrent generation across the interlayer bandgap.58,59 Absence of photoresponse in an individual WSe2 FET (inset in Figure 6e) when subjected to IR radiation under the same set-up reinforces the sub-bandgap (type-II) interlayer photogeneration across the heterointerface. A schematic depicting the energy range involved in the optical measurements in comparison to the DFT interlayer bandgap values and the bandgaps of individual WSe2 and ReS2 layers is shown in Figure 6f for better visualization. Photoswitching and Benchmarking Transient photoresponse of the photodetector is a crucial measure for its use in high-speed applications. The three WSe2/ReS2 heterojunctions were exposed to laser illumination which was powered operation for the FL/FL WSe2/ReS2 heterostructure. The rise and fall times are ∼ 5 μs. (b) Normalized photocurrent demonstrating fast switching response at 10 kHz for heterostructures of different thicknesses. (c) Variation of rise time and responsivity of the FL/FL device with switching frequency of the laser at 10 μW power. (d) Photoswitching at 10 kHz and 10 μW laser power before and after three months of ambient exposure demonstrating air stability of the FL/FL heterostructure. 20 pulsed at frequencies ranging from 100 Hz to 50 kHz. The modulation of the photocurrent was recorded using a digital oscilloscope coupled to a low-noise amplifier. The rise time, τr (fall time, τf) is calculated between 10% (90%) to 90% (10%) of the photocurrent. Figure 7a shows the photocurrent for the FL/FL heterodiode under 100 μW power switched at 10 kHz frequency, with both VD and VG kept at 0 V. This demonstrates the self-driven nature of the photodetection, owing to the photovoltaic effect, indicating good potential for ultra low-power applications. The τr and τf of ∼ 5 μs make the FL/FL structure one of the fastest reported vdW heterojunctions. Figure 7b compares the photoswitching response of all three heterostructures at 10 kHz. The thinner heterostructures also exhibit fast switching, but slower than the FL/FL structure. The ultrafast response time can be partly attributed to the large band offsets (∆EC, ∆EV) which enable prompt separation of the photogenerated charge carriers towards the contacts.6 Variation of τr and R with the switching frequency is shown in Figure 7c; indicating a possible trade-off between the two quantities as shown in other reports.28 It may be noted that 5 μs is the limit of the measurement setup used in this work. For the FL/8L and 2L/2L heterostructures, the response times are ∼ 24 μs and 28 μs, respectively. Stability is an essential parameter in the design space of vdW photodetectors since materials like BP, InSe are unstable60 and can lead to degradation of device performance with time. Although capping layers can improve stability,61 they can also lead to optical absorption loss and a lower external quantum efficiency. The choice of individual p and n materials in this work was also based on their air-stability without the need of a capping layer. As expected, the heterostructure shows good work demonstrates one of the fastest response times along with high responsivity. (b) Benchmarking of ISC and VOC of vdW pn heterojunctions with the current work showing excellent values of both parameters. R, τr, ISC, and VOC values for heterostructures of different thicknesses reported in this work are marked. 21 stability and a comparison of photoswitching response over a span of three months is shown in In order to benchmark the performance of our devices with published literature, a comparison of critical reported photodetector parameters, R and τr, are plotted in Figure 8a. Ideally, fast response time and high R are desirable for photodetection applications (top-left corner of the plot). The high value of R (3 A/W) and the ultrafast response time (5 μs) of the FL/FL WSe2/ReS2 heterostructure indicate significantly better performance than previously reported vdW heterostructure photodetectors.10–12,29,32,42,54,62–67 To compare the photovoltaic performance, ISC is plotted against VOC for reported vdW heterostructures in Figure 8b. Excellent values of both, VOC (0.64 V) and ISC (2.6 μA), are obtained for the current work in comparison to other reports.1,6,8,10,11,13,14,49,55,63,68–71 Conclusions This work demonstrates that an appropriate choice of n- and p-type materials from the group-6 and -7 TMDs can lead to excellent photodetection and photovoltaic performance. DFT calculations for the heterojunction composed of few-layer flakes of ReS2 stacked onto WSe2 predict type-II band alignment with a near-direct interlayer bandgap at the heterointerface which is experimentally supported by PL and IR photocurrent measurements. Excellent electrical characteristics are demonstrated with gate voltage tunable current rectification reaching 105. Dark and illuminated diode transfer characteristics have been explained based on interlayer recombination and generation processes. In terms of photodetection, one of the fastest (5 μs) high responsivity (3 A/W) transient photoswitching and the largest enhancement (10-100 × ) in photocurrent generation and responsivity at the overlap region are reported for the WSe2/ReS2 pn heterostructure owing to the type-II near-direct bandgap, high optical absorption, and efficient charge carrier separation due to large heterointerface band offsets. High VOC (0.64 V) resulting from gate tunability of WSe2 and the 0.7 eV interlayer bandgap, large ISC (2.6 μA) and peak output power of 0.35 μW make this one of the best reported heterostructure photovoltaic devices. Further, flake thickness dependent optoelectronic performance justifies the choice of FL flakes with high absorption coefficients. Finally, long term ambient stability and ease of fabrication due to a single contact metal process without capping layers, coupled with the multi-functional and excellent optoelectronic performance, makes the FL WSe2/ReS2 pn heterostructure significantly advance the prospects of 2D layered semiconductors enabling next-generation optoelectronic applications. 22 Methods Computational Methodology In order to carry out electronic structure calculations and geometry optimizations, density functional theory was employed using the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) exchange correlation in conjunction with the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) functional.72 Moreover, as the norm-conserving pseudopotentials, the OPENMX (Open source package for Material eXplorer) code was used.73,74 For FL structures, 9×9×3 k-points (in X, Y, and Z directions) along with the large density mesh cut off value of 200 Hartree were adopted. To account for the vdW interaction at different interfaces, the Grimme’s dispersion correction (DFTD2) was utilized.75 Device Fabrication and Characterization The heterostructures were fabricated on an SiO2 (285 nm)/ p+ global back gate substrate. ReS2 (HQ Graphene) and WSe2 (SPI Supplies) were exfoliated onto PDMS stamps and selected flakes were transferred onto the substrate using a micromanipulator set-up. The heterostructure was cleaned in acetone to remove organic residues. The samples were spin coated with EL9/PMMA-A4 bilayer resist and electron beam lithography (Raith 150-Two) was followed by deposition of Cr (< 5 nm)/Pt (50 nm)/ Au (50 nm) stack (7-target sputtering system from AJA International) to define the contacts. Following metal lift-off in acetone, the heterostructure was annealed at 200 OC to remove resist residues. Raman measurements were carried out on LabRAM HR800 (HORIBA Scientific) with a 1 μm spot diameter using a 532 nm laser. AFM measurements were performed using MFP-3D (Asylum Research Inc.). For PL measurements, the samples were irradiated with a 532 nm frequency doubled Nd-YAG laser via a 50× objective. The emitted luminescence was collected using a 0.5 m focal length Triax550 monochromator and detected using a Si-charge coupled device detector. For low temperature measurements, the samples were cooled in a liquid He flow cryostat with optical access. Electrical measurements were carried out using a probe station connected to a Keysight B1500A parameter analyzer. For the photocurrent study, the metal contact pads on the substrate were wire- bonded onto a custom-made PCB and mounted on a home-built measurement box fixed on the stage of an Olympus BX63 microscope. The radiation from a 532 nm diode laser was incident on the heterostructure through a 50× objective (spot diameter of ∼ 4 μm). Keysight B1500A was used for electrical measurements under illumination. For the photoswitching measurements, the laser beam was directly modulated by applying pulses from 100 Hz to 50 kHz using a function generator (Agilent 23 33220A). The current from the device was fed to an SR570 low noise current pre-amplifier and its output was recorded on an Agilent DSO6012A digital storage oscilloscope. Acknowledgement A.V. thanks IITB-Monash Research Academy for the fellowship. D.S. acknowledges Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay (IITB) for the Institute Post-Doctoral Fellowship. K.T. acknowledges Visvesvaraya PhD Scheme from the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY), Govt. of India. Authors acknowledge IITB Nanofabrication Facility (IITBNF) for usage of its facilities for device fabrication and characterization. N.V.M. acknowledges support from the Australian Research Council (CE170100039). This work was funded by the Department of Science and Technology, Govt. of India through the grant DST/SJF/ETA-01/2016-17. D.S. and K.T. contributed equally to the work. Supporting Information Available SI is included.