The following article has been accepted to the Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B. After it is published, it will be found at https://avs.scitation.org/journal/jvb. Direct Laser Writing of Birefringent Photonic Crystals Direct Laser Writing of Birefringent Photonic Crystals for the Infrared Spectral Range M. Lata,1, a) Y. Li,1 S. Park,1 M. J. McLamb,1 and T. Hofmann1 Department of Physics and Optical Science, University of North Carolina at Charlotte, 9201 University City Blvd, Charlotte, NC, Infrared optical photonic crystals fabricated using direct laser writing, which is based on the two-photon polymer- ization of suitable monomers, have received substantial interest since the emergence of this process. Two-photon polymerization could be a disruptive technology for the fabrication of all-dielectric photonic crystals in the infrared spectral range, as it allows the synthesis of large scale arrays of uniform structures with arbitrary geometries and arrangements. However, all-dielectric photonic crystals that provide birefringent optical responses in the infrared spectral range have not yet been demonstrated using direct laser writing techniques. Here we explore the form bire- fringence observed in photonic crystals composed of arrays of subwavelength-sized slanted polymer microwires. The photonic crystals investigated here were fabricated in a single fabrication step using direct laser writing of an infrared transparent photoresist (IP-Dip). A strong contrast of the cross-polarized reflectance of photonic crystals as a function of the in-plane orientation is observed in the mid-infrared spectral range at λ ≈ 6.5 μm. This observation is indicative of an anisotropic optical behavior. Finite element based techniques corroborate the experimentally observed responses qualitatively. I. INTRODUCTION Photonic crystals have received increased attention in re- cent years for optical applications ranging from chiral op- tical filters to super resolution.1 Many photonic crystals are fabricated from metals to take advantage of plasmonic resonances.1 However, these photonic crystals tend to suf- fer from Ohmic losses.2 All-dielectric photonic crystals have therefore been considered in order to eliminate the inherent Ohmic losses observed in their metal-based counterparts.3 Recently, all-dielectric photonic crystals have been demon- strated to display a range of interesting optical properties such as perfect reflectance and strong, lossless resonant re- sponses through trapped magnetic modes, for instance.4,5 Photonic crystals derive their unique optical proper- ties largely from the geometry of their subwavelength- sized building blocks. Therefore, sophisticated fabrication techniques are required to synthesize the subwavelength- sized elements with desired geometries and arrangements.1 Among applicable fabrication techniques, direct laser writ- ing by two-photon polymerization of suitable monomers enables the fabrication of arbitrary geometries with critical features on the micro- and even nanometer-scale.6,7 Thus, direct laser writing by two-photon polymerization has re- ceived substantial interest as an efficient avenue to fabri- cate all-dielectric photonic crystals for the infrared spectral range. We have demonstrated that direct laser writing allows the fabrication of structured surfaces to reduce Fresnel reflection loss at infrared wavelengths.8 Furthermore, all- dielectric, two-dimensional photonic crystals for optical fil- ters with high spectral contrast in the infrared spectral range have been successfully fabricated using this process.9 Despite these advances in the fabrication and charac- terization of all-dielectric photonic crystals, information a)Electronic mail: mlata@uncc.edu on the anisotropic optical responses of this material class is still lacking. In particular, geometries of all-dielectric photonic crystals composed of regular arrangements of subwavelength-sized slanted wires have not been explored in the infrared spectral range yet. This is in contrast to the visible and near-infrared spectral range, where such geome- tries, fabricated using UHV deposition techniques, have been demonstrated to exhibit strong form-induced birefrin- gence and dichroism.10–12 Here, we report on the fabrication of all-dielectric birefringent photonic crystals composed of slanted mi- crowire arrays using direct laser writing of a photoresist. The fabricated photonic crystals were investigated using polarization-sensitive infrared microscopy. A distinct con- trast was observed between photonic crystals with different azimuthal orientations. In addition, complementary finite element based calculations were performed that corrobo- rate these experimental findings qualitatively. II. DESIGN & FABRICATION The all-dielectric birefringent photonic crystals investi- gated here are composed of slanted microwires as shown in Fig. 1. Side view of the birefringent photonic crystal design. The slanted microwires have a square cross-section and are arranged in a square array of approximately 50 μm × 50 μm. arXiv:1910.04826v1 [physics.app-ph] 28 Sep 2019 The following article has been accepted to the Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B. After it is published, it will be found at https://avs.scitation.org/journal/jvb. Direct Laser Writing of Birefringent Photonic Crystals 2 Fig. 2. Top-view optical micrograph of the fabricated birefringent photonic crystals. The individual photonic crystals with azimuthal orientations ranging from 0◦ to 135◦ are clearly distinguishable. The scale bar indicates 20 μm. Fig. 1. The slanted microwires have a square base with nom- inal dimensions of 3×3 μm. The slanting angle of the mi- crowires is 45◦ with respect to the plane of the substrate and the microwires extend 10 μm vertically from the substrate. The microwires are arranged periodically over a square of approximately 50 μm × 50 μm with a center distance of 6 μm. The photonic crystals are designed to operate in the in- frared spectral range. Therefore, the dimensions of the slanted wires were chosen to maintain a subwavelength regime for infrared wavelengths, while being sufficiently large to allow accurate fabrication using the direct laser writing process. In order to conveniently test the polarization response of the photonic crystals in the infrared spectral range, four photonic crystals with different azimuthal orientations of the microwire slanting plane ranging from φ = 0◦ to 135◦ in steps of 45◦ were arranged in a pixel-like pattern. The photonic crystals shown in Fig. 1 were fabricated using a commercially available 3D direct laser writing sys- tem (Photonic Professional GT, Nanoscribe, GmbH). IP-Dip was selected as a suitable photoresist, as it allows the fab- rication of photonic crystals with μm- to nm-scale criti- cal dimensions.8 ITO-coated fused silica was selected as a substrate material. The all-dielectric photonic crystals were fabricated in a single 3D direct laser writing step us- ing a 25× objective. This approach allows the fabrication of the photonic crystals by steering the laser beam with the galvanometer scanner of the 3D direct laser writing sys- tem. By using only the galvanometer scanner, the need for any mechanical translation of the sample stage is omitted. This eliminates possible stitching and over-exposure errors that may be induced by the mechanical translation of the sample.14 After the fabrication, any unpolymerized monomer was removed by immersing the samples in propylene glycol monomethyl ether acetate (PGMEA, Baker 220) for 20 min. Subsequently, the samples were immersed in 99.99% iso- Fig. 3. Tilted (approx. 50◦) top-view SEM micrograph of fabricated birefringent photonic crystals. As in Fig. 2, the individual photonic crystals with azimuthal orientations ranging from 0◦ to 135◦ are clearly distinguishable. The geometry of the fabricated wires are in very good agreement with the nominal design. The scale bars indicate 20 μm and 5 μm, for the top panel and the insets, respec- tively. propyl alcohol for 2 min. Finally, the remaining isopropyl alcohol was evaporated at room temperature. An optical micrograph of the fabricated photonic crystals is shown in Fig. 2. The four photonic crystals with azimuthal orientations ranging from φ = 0◦ to 135◦ are clearly distin- guishable and the fabricated wires appear to be true to the designed form. In addition, a SEM micrograph is depicted in Fig. 3, clearly showing an excellent agreement between the fabricated structure geometries and the nominal design shown in Fig. 1. III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS & FINITE ELEMENT MODELING The cross-polarized reflectance of these photonic crys- tals was simulated using a commercial finite element mod- eling software package (COMSOL Multiphysics) in order to determine their expected infrared optical responses. The dielectric function of IP-Dip, which was previously deter- mined in the infrared spectral range by spectroscopic ellip- sometry, was used for these model calculations.13 The struc- tures were imported into the finite element software and ar- ranged onto a perfectly reflecting substrate, and a frequency domain plane-wave reflection simulation was performed. Fig. 5 shows the model calculated relative intensity im- age under cross-polarized illumination obtained for an ar- ray of four photonic crystals at normal incidence and λ ≈ 6.5 μm. The cross polarized response was found by us- ing a linearly polarized incident plane wave and then mea- suring the reflected intensity of the light polarized orthog- onally to the input wave. A strong contrast between the crystals with azimuthal orientations of φ = 0◦ and 90◦, and φ = 45◦ and 135◦, respectively, can be observed. For the photonic crystals for which the optical axis, which is parallel to the slanted wire elements, is oriented obliquely with re- spect to the input polarization (φ = 45◦ and 135◦), the cross- polarized reflectance is the largest. For the photonic crystals The following article has been accepted to the Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B. After it is published, it will be found at https://avs.scitation.org/journal/jvb. Direct Laser Writing of Birefringent Photonic Crystals 3 Fig. 4. Simplified optical beam path for the Bruker Hyperion 3000 microscope utilized for the reflectance measurements shown in Fig. 6. The collimated illumination from the globar source is polarized before being focused by a Cassegrain objective onto the sample. The reflected light is then collected and re-collimated by the same objective and sent through an analyzer oriented orthog- onally to the input polarizer before being sent to the detector. for which the optical axis is oriented parallel or perpendic- ular to the input polarization (φ = 0◦ and 90◦), the cross- polarized reflectance is vanishing. This optical response is indicative of a significant polarization mode conversion due to the form-induced birefringence of the investigated photonic crystals in the infrared spectral range. The cross- polarized reflectance of the photonic crystals was measured at λ ≈ 6.5 μm using a Bruker Hyperion 3000 infrared micro- scope in combination with a Bruker Vertex 70 FTIR spec- trometer. The beam path for this microscope when mea- suring in reflectance is outlined in Fig. 4. The microscope Fig. 5. Finite element model-calculated reflectance image under cross-polarized illumination obtained for an array of all-dielectric photonic crystals at normal incidence and λ ≈ 6.5 μm. Four pho- tonic crystals with azimuthal orientations ranging from φ = 0◦ to 135◦ are shown here. An infinite plane wave was assumed for the model calculation. The scale bar indicates 20 μm. is equipped with KRS-5 wire grid polarizers in the input and output beam path in order to allow polarization sen- sitive measurements. A liquid nitrogen cooled Mercury- Cadmium-Telluride focal plane array with 64 × 64 pixels was used as a detector and a SiC globar was used as a source. In combination with a 15× Cassegrain objective, the instru- ment allows the acquisition of hyperspectral infrared im- ages with a lateral resolution of 2.7 μm. Fig. 6 shows a cross-polarized reflectance image of the photonic crystal array obtained at λ ≈ 6.5 μm and normal incidence. The measured cross-polarized reflectance shows a similar contrast as observed in the finite element model- calculated reflectance shown in Fig. 5. The cross-polarized reflectance is maximal for the photonic crystals with az- imuthal orientations of φ = 45◦ and φ = 135◦ for which the optical axis of the photonic crystals is obliquely oriented with respect to the input polarization. For the photonic crystals with azimuthal orientations of φ = 0◦ and φ = 90◦, the reflectance is vanishing. This behavior is in good qual- itative agreement with the observations from the finite el- ement based model calculations and confirms experimen- tally the birefringence of the investigated all-dielectric pho- tonic crystals. The calculated near field response depicted in Fig. 5 shows distinct intensity fluctuations under cross- polarized illumination. The experimentally obtained re- sponse (Fig. 6) does not exhibit these fluctuations across the surface of the individual crystals, as the far field is be- ing recorded. Careful inspection of Fig. 6 shows that there is a considerable difference between the reflectance obtained for the photonic crystals with φ = 45◦ and φ = 135◦. We ten- tatively attribute this intensity difference to a biaxial opti- cal response which would be consistent with observations for slanted columnar thin films reported in the visible spec- tral range.12,15 In addition, it can be noticed that the inten- sity distribution across the surface of the photonic crystals is nonuniform. These apparent boundary effects are cur- rently under investigation and isotropic support structures Fig. 6. Cross-polarized reflectance image of the fabricated bire- fringent photonic crystals obtained at normal incidence and λ ≈ 6.5 μm. The dotted boxes illustrate the surface area of the individ- ual photonic crystals with an azimuthal orientation from φ = 0◦ to φ = 135◦ with respect to the incident polarization direction. The scale bar indicates 20 μm. The following article has been accepted to the Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B. After it is published, it will be found at https://avs.scitation.org/journal/jvb. Direct Laser Writing of Birefringent Photonic Crystals 4 designed to mitigate their impact are being explored. IV. CONCLUSIONS All-dielectric photonic crystals comprised of slanted mi- crowires were successfully fabricated using direct laser writ- ing from an infrared transparent photoresist. Experimen- tally obtained cross-polarized reflectance images exhibit a strong contrast between photonic crystals as a function of the azimuthal orientation. Photonic crystals obliquely ori- ented with respect to the direction of the input polarization show a strong reflectance. The cross-polarized reflectance of the crystals oriented perpendicular or parallel to the in- put polarization is vanishing. The experimental observa- tions are found to be in qualitative agreement with finite el- ement based model calculations of the cross-polarized nor- mal incidence reflectance. The optical response is indica- tive of a birefringent behavior which is expected for the pho- tonic crystals composed of slanted microwires. The differ- ence between the cross-polarized reflectance of photonic crystals with oblique azimuthal orientation is tentatively in- terpreted as an indication of a biaxial response. This would be consistent with experimental findings reported in the lit- erature for slanted columnar thin films investigated in the visible spectral range. We have also noticed boundary ef- fects, which could hinder the application of these materials for pixel-based polarization filters for wavefront-splitting infrared polarimeters, for instance. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The authors are grateful for support from the National Science Foundation (1624572) within the I/UCRC Center for Metamaterials, the Swedish Agency for Innovation Systems (2014-04712), and Department of Physics and Optical Sci- ence of the University of North Carolina at Charlotte. 1W. Cai and V. M. Shalaev, Optical Metamaterials, vol. 10, (Springer, New York, 2010) 2A. Krasnok, S. Makarov, M. Petrov, R. Savelev, P. Belov, and Y. Kivshar, To- wards all-dielectric metamaterials and nanophotonics, vol. 9502 of SPIE Optics + Optoelectronics, (SPIE, 2015) 3J. Wang, Z. Xu, Z. Yu, X. Wei, Y. Yang, J. Wang, and S. Qu, J. Appl. Phys. 4P. Moitra, B. A. Slovick, W. Li, I. I. Kravchencko, D. P. Briggs, S. Krishna- murthy, and J. Valentine, ACS Photonics 2, 692 (2015). 5J. Zhang, K. F. MacDonald, and N. I. Zheludev, Opt. Express 21, 26721 6B. H. Cumpston, S. P. Ananthavel, S. Barlow, D. L. Dyer, J. E. Ehrlich, L. L. Erskine, A. A. Heikal, S. M. Kuebler, I.-Y. S. Lee, D. McCord-Maughon, J. Qin, H. Röckel, M. Rumi, X.-L. Wu, S. R. Marder, and J. W. Perry, Nature 7J. K. Gansel, M. Latzel, A. Frölich, J. Kaschke, M. Thiel, and M. Wegener, Appl. Phys. Lett. 100, 101109 (2012). 8Y. Li, D. B. Fullager, E. Angelbello, D. Childers, G. Boreman, and T. Hof- mann, Opt. Lett. 43, 239 (2018). 9Y. Li, D. B. Fullager, S. Park, D. Childers, R. Fesperman, G. Boreman, and T. Hofmann, Opt. Lett. 43, 4711 (2018). 10D. Schmidt and M. Schubert, J. Appl. Phys. 114, 083510 (2013). 11D. Schmidt, B. Booso, T. Hofmann, E. Schubert, A. Sarangan, and M. Schubert, Appl. Phys. Lett. 94, 011914 (2009). 12D. Schmidt, B. Booso, T. Hofmann, E. Schubert, A. Sarangan, and M. Schubert, Opt. Lett. 34, 992 (2009). 13D. B. Fullager, G. D. Boreman, and T. Hofmann, Opt. Mater. Express 7, 888 14J. S. Oakdale, R. F. Smith, J.-B. Forien, W. L. Smith, S. J. Ali, L. B. Bayu Aji, T. M. Willey, J. Ye, A. W. van Buuren, M. A. Worthington, et al., Adv. Funct. Mater. 27, 1702425 (2017). 15M. W. McCall, I. J. Hodgkinson, and Q. Wu, Birefringent Thin Films and Polarizing Elements, (Imperial College Press, London, 2015), 2nd edn.