Intrinsic 1T ′ phase induced in atomically thin 2H -MoTe2 by a single terahertz pulse Jiaojian Shi,1, ∗ Ya-Qing Bie,2, 3, † Alfred Zong,4, 2, ∗ Shiang Fang,5, 6 Wei Chen,5 Jinchi Han,7 Zhaolong Cao,3 Yong Zhang,8 Takashi Taniguchi,9 Kenji Watanabe,10 Vladimir Bulovi ́c,7 Efthimios Kaxiras,5 Edoardo Baldini,2, 11 Pablo Jarillo-Herrero,2, ‡ and Keith A. Nelson1, § 1Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA 2Department of Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA 3State Key Lab of Optoelectronic Materials and Technologies, Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Display Material and Technology, School of Electronics and Information Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, 510275, People’s Republic of China 4Department of Chemistry, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA 5Department of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA 6Department of Physics and Astronomy, Center for Materials Theory, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA 7Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA 8Center for Materials Science & Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA 9International Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics, National Institute for Materials Science, 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba 305-0044, Japan 10Research Center for Functional Materials, National Institute for Materials Science, 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba 305-0044, Japan 11Department of Physics, Center for Complex Quantum System, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA (Dated: October 19, 2022) Polymorphic transitions in layered transition metal dichalcogenides provide an excellent platform for discovering exotic phenomena associated with metastable states, ranging from topological phase transitions1 to enhanced superconductivity2. In particular, the transition from 2H to 1T ′-MoTe2, which was thought to be induced by high-energy photon irradiation3–5 among many other means6–9, has been intensely studied for its technological relevance in nanoscale transistors3. Despite the remarkable electrical performance arising from this 2H-to-1T ′ transition, it remains controversial whether a crystalline 1T ′ phase is produced because optical signatures of this putative transition are found to be associated with the formation of elemental Te clusters instead10,11. Here, we demonstrate the creation of an intrinsic 1T ′ lattice after irradiating a mono- or few-layer 2H-MoTe2 with a single field-enhanced terahertz pulse, whose low photon energy limits possible structural damage by optical pulses. To visualize the temporal evolution of this irreversible transition, we further develop a single-shot terahertz pump-second harmonic probe technique, and we find that the transition out of the 2H phase occurs within 10 ns after photoexcitation. Our results not only resolve the long-standing debate over the light-induced polymorphic transition in MoTe2, they also highlight the unique capability of strong-field terahertz pulses in manipulating the structure of quantum materials. Tailored, ultrashort pulses of light can be used to manipulate metastable states in functional materials, such as triggering insulator-to-metal transitions12, un- veiling hidden states13, or even inducing long-lasting superconductivity way above the equilibrium critical temperature14. These photoinduced states have been in- tensely studied not only because they yield profound in- sights into fundamental light-matter interactions in cor- related systems but also because they bring new op- portunities to the field of laser fabrication and micro- machining, going beyond traditional laser cutting15, burning16, or stereolithography technologies17. From this application perspective, the metastable 1T ′ phase of MoTe2 induced in a semiconducting 2H polymorph is considered an outstanding candidate for tackling the issue of high contact resistance for two-dimensional elec- trical device18. In this polymorphic transition, the hexagonal unit cell of 2H-MoTe2 in its ground state is transformed into the metastable 1T ′ phase after go- ing through an intermediate structure (Fig. 1a), a pro- cess that was believed to be readily instigated by opti- cal irradiation19,20. Compared to other methods such as ionic gating6,21 and strain application9, the focused laser spot down to the sub-micrometer regime makes an opti- cally driven transition especially appealing for precision fabrication of small devices. Despite the high technological impact of this poly- morphic transition in MoTe2, recent studies have cast doubt on the existence of the purported 1T ′ struc- ture upon optical photon illumination. In particular, the main evidence for the 1T ′ polymorph was the Ag phonon peaks around 120 cm−1 and 140 cm−1 in Ra- man spectroscopy10,11 (Figs. S1 and S2), which have been shown to originate from nano- or micro-sized Te clus- ters. Given the high energy barrier Ebarrier of 0.88 eV per MoTe2 formula unit22 as well as the extremely large Te displacement of more than 1 ̊A required for the transition23 (Fig. 1a), it remains unclear whether light can initiate the polymorphic change after all. In this work, instead of using visible light, we report arXiv:1910.13609v3 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 18 Oct 2022 2 schematic illustration of a 2H-MoTe2 crystal spanning an insulating gap between deposited gold strips, which serve as a THz field enhancement structure. The monolayer 2H-MoTe2 crystal is encapsulated between top and bottom h-BN. THz pulses are incident from the side of the fused silica substrate. c, Field strength calculation of the THz enhancement structure. Numerical simulation results showing THz field enhancement by a factor of 20–50 in significant regions in and near the gap between the gold strips. The enhancement factor is defined as the ratio between the actual and incident electric field. d, Optical micrograph of a monolayer sample, including a 15-nm-thick top h-BN (white dashed line), a monolayer 2H-MoTe2 (green dashed line), and a 5-nm-thick bottom h-BN (blue dashed line), all spanning a 1.8-μm insulating gap (dark horizontal line) between the top and bottom gold strips. e, Raman spectra of monolayer MoTe2 after successive THz pulse irradiation with free-space field amplitudes of 270 kV/cm. The Ag mode of the 1T ′ phase sets in after 5 THz pulses and dominates upon further irradiation. By contrast, the A1g and E2g modes of the 2H phase are strongly reduced. The Raman measurements were conducted with a 1-μm-diameter laser spot and were therefore averaged over regions that had been subjected to differently enhanced THz field strengths. the successful transition from 2H to 1T ′-MoTe2 using single-cycle, field-enhanced terahertz (THz) pulses. The transition can be induced with as few as a single THz pulse on atomically thin crystals of 2H-MoTe2. Using Raman spectroscopy, we show that the induced phase reflects an intrinsic 1T ′ structure6,21, which is free from any spurious features associated with Te clusters. The validity of the metastable 1T ′ phase is further confirmed by selected area electron diffraction, which demonstrates a macroscopic structural transition. Using single-shot, time-resolved nonlinear optical spectroscopy, we also un- veil the different stages of this irreversible phase tran- sition. These findings provide a new route of structural manipulation using high-field THz pulses, which crucially avoids large-scale defect generation that often accompa- nies intense optical excitation3. 3 In our experiments, we positioned a flake of 2H-MoTe2 encapsulated by hexagonal-boron nitride (h-BN) on top of two parallel gold strips separated by a gap (Fig. 1b). The h-BN layers were used to isolate monolayers and bi- layer MoTe2 samples from field-induced emission in the gold layers24 and to prevent their direct exposure to air. prepared using a dry transfer method25. Upon illumi- nation of this structure with a free-space THz pulse, the field strength can be enhanced by more than 100 times at certain hot spots and about 20 times at the gap center, as shown in Fig. 1c. Since the peak electric field of the THz pulse in free space reached ∼ 300 kV/cm at the focus, the electrical field amplitude can be more than 10 MV/cm in significant regions of the sample26 (see Methods, Supple- mentary Note 1, and Fig. 1c for detailed information on THz generation). After irradiating this structure with a free-space THz field of 270 kV/cm, we probed lattice changes via spontaneous Raman scattering. shows the Raman spectrum before the THz illumina- tion. It consists of the A1g phonon at 171.5 cm−1 and the E2g phonon at 236 cm−1, in agreement with pre- vious studies of the 2H phase23. After excitation with five THz pulses, both modes of the 2H phase disappear and a peak at 163.3 cm−1 emerges (see Fig. S3 for ad- ditional peak width analysis). This feature signifies a change of the crystalline symmetry, and it is considered a specific fingerprint of the 1T ′ phase of MoTe26,23. The new phonon peak becomes more prominent after further exposure to THz pulses (Fig. 1e), indicating the growth of a larger 1T ′ sample area. Importantly, the spectrum does not show any localized modes due to damage-related Te clusters10 even though the resultant 1T ′ phase is not homogeneously produced in the flake suspended between the gap of the gold strips (Figs. S4 and S5). These obser- vations were reproduced in multiple samples, suggesting that the action of a strong THz field on our monolayer MoTe2 is to induce a phase transition from the 2H to the 1T ′ polymorph. To further investigate this structural transformation, we conducted experiments on a series of monolayer 2H- MoTe2 samples. Since the induced 1T ′ phase is long- lived, each measurement required a fresh specimen that was carefully positioned over the gap between the gold strips, as indicated in Fig. 1b. First, we studied how the 2H phase responded to a sequence of THz pulses with a gradually increasing field strength. To probe the phase transition, we tracked the changes in crystalline symme- try via optical second harmonic generation (SHG), a sen- sitive probe of inversion symmetry breaking that can dis- tinguish between the non-centrosymmetric 2H phase and the centrosymmetric 1T ′ phase in samples with an odd number of layers27,28 (see Methods). three representative real-space images of the SHG inten- sity before and after THz-field exposures with free-space amplitudes of 183 kV/cm and 240 kV/cm; additional SHG intensity images are shown in Fig. S6. A plot of the SHG intensities from three sample locations within the field-enhancement gap (labeled I, II, III in Fig. 2a) is pre- sented in Fig. 2b. We observe that the SHG signal drops when the field strength exceeds 183 kV/cm, disappearing completely above 270 kV/cm. As the field enhancement factor generated by the gold strips is approximately 20, the threshold needed to quench the SHG intensity is esti- mated to be around 4.0 MV/cm. We complemented these measurements by recording Raman spectra as a function of the THz field strength. Figure 2c shows the spectra acquired after irradiation at 200 kV/cm and 270 kV/cm. Consistent with the picture supported by the SHG re- sults in Fig. 2b, a single-pulse irradiation first leads to a drop in the intensity of the 2H phonons with a free-space field strength of 200 kV/cm, and stronger THz pulses at 270 kV/cm subsequently cause a further suppression, leading to a nearly complete extinction of the peak after 1000 pulses. Simultaneously, the Raman mode of the 1T ′ phase grows, eventually dominating the spectrum. The THz-induced transition is not restricted to mono- layer samples, and we observed similar phenomenology in bilayer and multilayer (∼ 10 layers) 2H-MoTe2 (see Figs. S5c,d and S7c,d). Figures 2d and 2e show the re- sults obtained on a multi-layer 2H-MoTe2, presenting the zone-axis electron diffraction pattern and Raman spectrum before and after irradiation with a single THz pulse at 300 kV/cm. We find that the diffraction pat- tern of the unexcited crystal exhibits the six-fold sym- metry expected for the 2H phase. Consistent with this observation, the Raman spectrum displays only an E2g phonon mode of bulk 2H-MoTe229. After THz irradia- tion, new peaks emerge in the diffraction pattern taken along the zone axis of the new unit cell, reveal- ing a cell-doubling superstructure30–33. This diffraction change is accompanied by the appearance of Bg and Ag phonons in Raman spectroscopy6,23. Both observables are characteristic signatures of the 1T ′ lattice, offering additional validation for the creation of an intrinsic 1T ′ phase (see Supplementary Notes 2–3 and Fig. S8). To gain microscopic insights into the THz-driven tran- sition, we next examine the photo-induced dynamics to trace out the temporal evolution of the crystalline lattice. This investigation cannot be accomplished by conven- tional time-resolved spectroscopy methods because their stroboscopic approach precludes the study of irreversible processes. We therefore developed a specialized appara- tus for THz pump-SHG probe single-shot spectroscopy, which is well suited for probing the formation dynamics of the long-lived metastable 1T ′ state. A schematic illus- tration of our experiment is presented in Fig. 3a; details of the setup are described in Methods. In our measure- ments, we irradiated trilayer samples with a single THz pulse, whose field strength was adjusted to exceed the phase transition threshold. We subsequently recorded the SHG signal at different pump-probe delays. Since 4 THz field dependence of the phase transition in monolayer and multilayer MoTe2. a, SHG images of monolayer MoTe2 before THz irradiation (0 kV/cm), after irradiation with one THz pulse at 183 kV/cm free-space field amplitude, and after irradiation with a second THz pulse at 240 kV/cm. The dashed lines indicate the edges of gold strips in the field enhancement structure. Different areas of monolayer MoTe2 in the gap are labeled by I, II and III. The primes in x′ and y′ of the axes are added to differentiate the x-y coordinates in Fig. 1 due to the rotated field of view in SHG microscopy. b, SHG from different spots (I–III) in a measured after irradiation of the sample by single THz pulses with successively increasing field strength. The SHG signal starts to decrease at a free-space field strength of 200 kV/cm and disappears above 240 kV/cm. c, Raman spectra of monolayer MoTe2 samples prior to THz irradiation (blue curve), after THz irradiation with a single pulse Raman modes of the 2H phase start to decrease after a single THz pulse above 200 kV/cm. The monolayer MoTe2 sample shows the Ag mode at 163.5 cm−1 after irradiation with 1000 pulses at 270 kV/cm. d, Electron diffraction pattern of a multilayer (∼ 10 layers) MoTe2 before and after a single THz pulse irradiation at 300 kV/cm, showing the emergence of superstructure peaks (yellow circle) that are characteristic of the 1T ′ phase. e, Raman spectrum of the multilayer MoTe2 before and after a single THz pulse irradiation at 300 kV/cm, showing the emergence of new Raman peaks that are characteristic of the induced 1T ′ phase. the THz field was above the threshold for generating the 1T ′ phase, the experiment was challenging because each THz shot with its predetermined delay time needed to be conducted on a fresh piece of sample. An added diffi- culty is the extremely weak single-shot SHG signal from a few-layer sample; using a photomultiplier tube, we ob- tained measurable second harmonic intensity under an incident 800-nm pulse fluence of ∼ 20 mJ/cm2, which is beyond the optical damage threshold. Here, the col- lection of single-shot SHG signals relies on the concept of “probe before destruction”34,35, which is well appli- cable to MoTe2 (see Supplementary Note 8). The small beam spot for SHG (1 μm) relative to the sample size (≥ 10 μm) and good spatial uniformity of the trilayer crystals (Fig. S12) allow a comparison among three lo- cally destructive single-shot SHG measurements at dif- ferent sample locations: one prior to THz excitation (Ii), the second at the selected delay time following THz exci- tation (It), and the third at a long delay time at approx- imately 1 min (If). nal relative to the initial signal following THz excitation (It/Ii, blue dots). The response first increases, reaching about twice the initial value at 20 ps. It then remains higher than Ii for several hundred picoseconds, before dropping to ∼ 0.2Ii at 12.5 ns. Finally, at long pump- probe delays, the SHG signal disappears completely, in- dicating the stabilization of a metastable phase. The 5 of the setup for single-shot SHG probe with a THz excitation pulse. Single-shot measurements were conducted by using a fresh sample in each shot. b, SHG intensities measured from trilayer MoTe2 samples at different delay times t from several picoseconds to hundreds of nanoseconds (blue dots) as well as around 1 minute (red dots). The data points on the same dashed line show the SHG intensity measured from the same flake shortly after (It) and 1 min after the THz excitation pulse (If), normalized by the SHG signal intensity prior to THz excitation (Ii). Due to the destructive nature of single-shot SHG, Ii, It, and If were measured at three different spots on the same sample. For this reason, we use #1a, #1b, etc. to emphasize that these data points were taken at different spots (a, b) of the same flake (#1). The error analysis is provided in Supplementary Note 8. c, The energy potential as a function of transition coordinate with nonequilibrium carrier distribution (charge neutral). Nonequilibrium distribution of carriers is qualitatively described by the Fermi-smearing method. The free-energy barrier decreases from 1.66 eV to 0.91 eV as the Fermi-smearing width increases from 0 to 0.5 eV. The figure legend has a unit of eV. d, The energy potential as a function of transition coordinate upon charge dopings. As the added charge density increases to 1.0 e/MoTe2, which corresponds to 9 × 1014 cm−2, the activation energy decreases from 1.66 eV to 1.19 eV. The figure legend has a unit of e/MoTe2. The atomic structures of transition states are shown in Figs. S16 and S17. metastability is further confirmed by the value of the fi- nal signals after 1 min of photoexcitation, If/Ii, shown as the red dots in Fig. 3b. We were able to reproduce these complex dynamics on different samples, with the initial enhancement of the SHG occurring even below the phase transition threshold (Fig. S9). From our single-shot spec- troscopy data, we identify a characteristic timescale on the order of 10 ns that is needed to completely switch MoTe2 out of the 2H polymorph. This timescale is com- parable to the reported carrier recombination lifetimes in few-layer MoTe236 (see Supplementary Note 4). We attribute the increase in SHG observed at shorter times to a possible nucleation of a transient structure with a lower crystalline symmetry than 2H, for example, the distorted trigonal prismatic 2H∗ phase7,19; this scenario at short delay times requires additional characterization by single-shot diffraction experiments, which are beyond the scope of our present study. To rationalize our findings, we theoretically explored different effects that can account for the 2H-to-1T ′ transition. Based on the nanosecond phase transition timescale, a natural hypothesis involves a THz field- driven carrier excitation mechanism. Microscopically, an intense electric field at THz frequency can gener- 6 ate high carrier densities through mechanisms such as Poole-Frenkel ionization, which liberate carriers and ac- celerate them to multi-eV energies (see Supplementary Note 5). These processes lead to impact ionization, liber- ating more carriers and evolving as a cascade event37. In our experiments, carriers can either remain as quasi-free in the bands or localize at the substrate/h-BN interfacial states. In the latter case, they lead to a local charging of the MoTe2 layers38. To account for both scenarios, we investigated the effects of a nonequilibrium neutral carrier redistribution and those of charge doping on the energy landscape of MoTe2. The results of our calculations are shown in Fig. 3c,d (see Methods and Supplementary Note 6 for details of the first-principles calculations). In equilibrium, the metastable 1T ′ phase lies about 0.1 eV higher in energy than the 2H phase (blue horizontal lines); here, energy values are quoted per two formula units of MoTe2 due to unit cell doubling in this transition. The 2H-to-1T ′ activation barrier and the reverse activation barrier are 1.66 eV and 1.56 eV, respectively, thus protecting the 2H and 1T ′ phases against thermal fluctuations. Upon exci- tation of a neutral electron-hole redistribution (Fig. 3c) or charge doping (Fig. 3d), two effects occur. First, the activation barrier lowers substantially (violet-to-red hor- izontal lines) and second, the 1T ′ energy decreases, both effects favoring the occurrence of the 2H-to-1T ′ transi- tion. Further analysis shows that the neutral carrier re- distribution takes the leading role in this process com- pared to the charge doping scenario. This is because the density of interfacial traps needed for charge dop- ing is three orders of magnitude smaller than the ef- fective charge densities required to stimulate the phase transition, as explained in more detail in Supplementary Note 5. Our joint experimental and theoretical studies estab- lish intense THz fields as a viable route to steer the poly- morphic transition in atomically thin MoTe2. Crucially, this transition cannot be induced by photons at higher energies3–5,39, as evidenced by our experiments per- formed with mid-infrared and near-infrared pulses cen- tered around 225 meV and 1.55 eV, respectively (Figs. S1 and S2). This large structural distortion leads to a signif- icant electronic structure reconstruction involving band inversion around the Γ point, driving a topologically triv- ial 2H phase of few-layer MoTe2 into a quantum spin Hall insulator state in the 1T ′ phase40 (see Supplemen- tary Note 7). The capability demonstrated in this work hence opens the tantalizing prospect in the search for novel phases of matter with non-trivial band topology. Our findings further highlight the unique capability of high-field THz pulses in shaping material properties in a complex, multi-phase energy landscape. ∗ These authors contributed equally to this work: J. Shi, Y.-Q. Bie, and A. Zong. † These authors contributed equally to this work: J. Shi, Y.-Q. Bie, and A. Zong.; bieyq@mail.sysu.edu.cn ‡ pjarillo@mit.edu § kanelson@mit.edu E. J. Sie, C. M. Nyby, C. D. Pemmaraju, S. J. Park, X. Shen, J. Yang, M. C. Hoffmann, B. K. Ofori-Okai, R. Li, A. H. Reid, S. Weathersby, E. Mannebach, N. Finney, D. Rhodes, D. Chenet, A. Antony, L. Bali- cas, J. Hone, T. P. Devereaux, T. F. Heinz, X. Wang, and A. M. Lindenberg, An ultrafast symmetry switch in a Weyl semimetal, Nature 565, 61 (2019). Q. Dong, Q. Li, S. Li, X. Shi, S. Niu, S. Liu, R. Liu, B. Liu, X. Luo, J. Si, W. Lu, N. Hao, Y. Sun, and B. Liu, Structural phase transition and superconductivity hier- archy in 1T-TaS2 under pressure up to 100 GPa, npj Quantum Mater. 6, 20 (2021). S. Cho, S. Kim, J. H. Kim, J. Zhao, J. Seok, D. H. Keum, J. Baik, D.-H. Choe, K. J. Chang, K. Suenaga, S. W. Kim, Y. H. Lee, and H. Yang, Phase patterning for ohmic homojunction contact in MoTe2, Science 349, 625 (2015). Y. Song, R. Tian, J. Yang, R. Yin, J. Zhao, and X. Gan, Second harmonic generation in atomically thin MoTe2, Adv. Opt. Mater. 6, 1701334 (2018). Y. Tan, F. Luo, M. Zhu, X. Xu, Y. Ye, B. Li, G. Wang, W. Luo, X. Zheng, N. Wu, Y. Yu, S. Qin, and X.-A. Zhang, Controllable 2H-to-1T′ phase transition in few- layer MoTe2, Nanoscale 10, 19964 (2018). Y. Wang, J. Xiao, H. Zhu, Y. Li, Y. Alsaid, K. Y. Fong, Y. Zhou, S. Wang, W. Shi, Y. Wang, A. Zettl, E. J. Reed, and X. Zhang, Structural phase transition in monolayer MoTe2 driven by electrostatic doping, Nature 550, 487 F. Zhang, H. Zhang, S. Krylyuk, C. A. Milligan, Y. Zhu, D. Y. Zemlyanov, L. A. Bendersky, B. P. Bur- ton, A. V. Davydov, and J. Appenzeller, Electric-field induced structural transition in vertical MoTe2- and Mo1−xWxTe2-based resistive memories, Nat. Mater. 18, Y. Qi, P. G. Naumov, M. N. Ali, C. R. Rajamathi, W. Schnelle, O. Barkalov, M. Hanfland, S.-C. Wu, C. Shekhar, Y. Sun, et al., Superconductivity in Weyl semimetal candidate MoTe2, Nat. Commun. 7, 11038 W. Hou, A. Azizimanesh, A. Sewaket, T. Pe ̃na, C. Wat- son, M. Liu, H. Askari, and S. M. Wu, Strain-based room-temperature non-volatile MoTe2 ferroelectric phase change transistor, Nat. Nanotechnol. 14, 668 (2019). S.-Y. Chen, C. H. Naylor, T. Goldstein, A. T. C. John- son, and J. Yan, Intrinsic phonon bands in high-quality monolayer T′ molybdenum ditelluride, ACS Nano 11, F. J. Manj ́on, S. Gallego-Parra, P. Rodriguez-Hernandez, A. Munoz, C. Drasar, V. Munoz-Sanjose, and O. Oeckler, Anomalous Raman modes in tellurides, J. Mater. Chem. M. Liu, H. Y. Hwang, H. Tao, A. C. Strikwerda, K. Fan, G. R. Keiser, A. J. Sternbach, K. G. West, S. Kitti- watanakul, J. Lu, S. A. Wolf, F. G. Omenetto, X. Zhang, K. A. Nelson, and R. D. Averitt, Terahertz-field-induced 7 insulator-to-metal transition in vanadium dioxide meta- material, Nature 487, 345 (2012). L. Stojchevska, I. Vaskivskyi, T. Mertelj, P. Kusar, D. Svetin, S. Brazovskii, and D. Mihailovic, Ultrafast switching to a stable hidden quantum state in an elec- tronic crystal, Science 344, 177 (2014). M. Budden, T. Gebert, M. Buzzi, G. Jotzu, E. Wang, T. Matsuyama, G. Meier, Y. Laplace, D. Pontiroli, M. Ricc`o, F. Schlawin, D. Jaksch, and A. Cavalleri, Evi- dence for metastable photo-induced superconductivity in K3C60, Nat. Phys. 17, 611 (2021). V. G. Niziev and A. V. Nesterov, Influence of beam po- larization on laser cutting efficiency, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 32, 1455 (1999). W. Buchalla and T. Attin, External bleaching therapy with activation by heat, light or laser—A systematic re- view, Dent. Mater. 23, 586 (2007). V. K. Popov, A. V. Evseev, A. L. Ivanov, V. V. Roginski, A. I. Volozhin, and S. M. Howdle, Laser stereolithography and supercritical fluid processing for custom-designed im- plant fabrication, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med. 15, 123 X. Zhang, Z. Jin, L. Wang, J. A. Hachtel, E. Villarreal, Z. Wang, T. Ha, Y. Nakanishi, C. S. Tiwary, J. Lai, et al., Low contact barrier in 2H/1T ′ MoTe2 in-plane het- erostructure synthesized by chemical vapor deposition, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 11, 12777 (2019). A. V. Kolobov, P. Fons, and J. Tominaga, Electronic excitation-induced semiconductor-to-metal transition in monolayer MoTe2, Phys. Rev. B 94, 094114 (2016). B. Peng, H. Zhang, W. Chen, B. Hou, Z.-J. Qiu, H. Shao, H. Zhu, B. Monserrat, D. Fu, H. Weng, and et al., Sub-picosecond photo-induced displacive phase transi- tion in two-dimensional MoTe2, npj 2D Mater. Appl. 4, Y. Wang, J. Xiao, T.-F. Chung, Z. Nie, S. Yang, and X. Zhang, Direct electrical modulation of second-order optical susceptibility via phase transitions, Nat. Electron. K.-A. N. Duerloo, Y. Li, and E. J. Reed, Structural phase transitions in two-dimensional Mo-and W-dichalcogenide monolayers, Nat. Commun. 5, 1 (2014). D. H. Keum, S. Cho, J. H. Kim, D.-H. Choe, H.-J. Sung, M. Kan, H. Kang, J.-Y. Hwang, S. W. Kim, H. Yang, K. J. Chang, and Y. H. Lee, Bandgap opening in few- layered monoclinic MoTe2, Nat. Phys. 11, 482 (2015). C. R. Dean, A. F. Young, I. Meric, C. Lee, L. Wang, S. Sorgenfrei, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, P. Kim, K. L. Shepard, and J. Hone, Boron nitride substrates for high- quality graphene electronics, Nat. Nanotechnol. 5, 722 L. Wang, I. Meric, P. Y. Huang, Q. Gao, Y. Gao, H. Tran, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, L. M. Campos, D. A. Muller, J. Guo, P. Kim, J. Hone, K. L. Shepard, and C. R. Dean, One-dimensional electrical contact to a two-dimensional material, Science 342, 614 (2013). B. C. Pein, W. Chang, H. Y. Hwang, J. Scherer, I. Coropceanu, X. Zhao, X. Zhang, V. Bulovi ́c, M. Bawendi, and K. A. Nelson, Terahertz-driven lumi- nescence and colossal Stark effect in CdSe–CdS colloidal quantum dots, Nano Lett. 17, 5375 (2017). M. Yamamoto, S. T. Wang, M. Ni, Y.-F. Lin, S.-L. Li, S. Aikawa, W.-B. Jian, K. Ueno, K. Wakabayashi, and K. Tsukagoshi, Strong enhancement of Raman scatter- ing from a bulk-inactive vibrational mode in few-layer MoTe2, ACS Nano 8, 3895 (2014). R. Beams, L. G. Can ̧cado, S. Krylyuk, I. Kalish, B. Kalanyan, A. K. Singh, K. Choudhary, A. Bruma, P. M. Vora, F. Tavazza, A. V. Davydov, and S. J. Stranick, Characterization of few-layer 1T ′ MoTe2 by polarization-resolved second harmonic generation and Raman scattering, ACS Nano 10, 9626 (2016). C. Ruppert, O. B. Aslan, and T. F. Heinz, Optical prop- erties and band gap of single- and few-layer MoTe2 crys- tals, Nano Lett. 14, 6231 (2014). L. Wang, Z. Xu, W. Wang, and X. Bai, Atomic mech- anism of dynamic electrochemical lithiation processes of MoS2 nanosheets, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 136, 6693 (2014). P. Gao, L. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Huang, and K. Liu, Atomic-scale probing of the dynamics of sodium trans- port and intercalation-induced phase transformations in MoS2, ACS Nano 9, 11296 (2015). J. Heising and M. G. Kanatzidis, Exfoliated and restacked MoS2 and WS2: Ionic or neutral species? En- capsulation and ordering of hard electropositive cations, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 121, 11720 (1999). L. Meng, Y. Ma, K. Si, S. Xu, J. Wang, and Y. Gong, Re- cent advances of phase engineering in group VI transition metal dichalcogenides, Tungsten 1, 46 (2019). H. N. Chapman, P. Fromme, A. Barty, T. A. White, R. A. Kirian, A. Aquila, M. S. Hunter, J. Schulz, D. P. De- Ponte, U. Weierstall, R. B. Doak, F. R. N. C. Maia, A. V. Martin, I. Schlichting, L. Lomb, N. Coppola, R. L. Shoe- man, S. W. Epp, R. Hartmann, D. Rolles, A. Rudenko, L. Foucar, N. Kimmel, G. Weidenspointner, P. Holl, M. Liang, M. Barthelmess, C. Caleman, S. Boutet, M. J. Bogan, J. Krzywinski, C. Bostedt, S. Bajt, L. Gumprecht, B. Rudek, B. Erk, C. Schmidt, A. H ̈omke, C. Reich, D. Pietschner, L. Str ̈uder, G. Hauser, H. Gorke, J. Ullrich, S. Herrmann, G. Schaller, F. Schopper, H. Soltau, K.-U. K ̈uhnel, M. Messerschmidt, J. D. Bozek, S. P. Hau-Riege, M. Frank, C. Y. Hampton, R. G. Sierra, D. Starodub, G. J. Williams, J. Ha- jdu, N. Timneanu, M. M. Seibert, J. Andreasson, A. Rocker, O. J ̈onsson, M. Svenda, S. Stern, K. Nass, R. Andritschke, C.-D. Schr ̈oter, F. Krasniqi, M. Bott, K. E. Schmidt, X. Wang, I. Grotjohann, J. M. Holton, T. R. M. Barends, R. Neutze, S. Marchesini, R. Fromme, S. Schorb, D. Rupp, M. Adolph, T. Gorkhover, I. Ander- sson, H. Hirsemann, G. Potdevin, H. Graafsma, B. Nils- son, and J. C. H. Spence, Femtosecond X-ray protein nanocrystallography, Nature 470, 73 (2011). J. Tenboer, S. Basu, N. Zatsepin, K. Pande, D. Milathi- anaki, M. Frank, M. Hunter, S. Boutet, G. J. Williams, J. E. Koglin, D. Oberthuer, M. Heymann, C. Kupitz, C. Conrad, J. Coe, S. Roy-Chowdhury, U. Weierstall, D. James, D. Wang, T. Grant, A. Barty, O. Yefanov, J. Scales, C. Gati, C. Seuring, V. Srajer, R. Henning, P. Schwander, R. Fromme, A. Ourmazd, K. Moffat, J. J. Van Thor, J. C. H. Spence, P. Fromme, H. N. Chap- man, and M. Schmidt, Time-resolved serial crystallogra- phy captures high-resolution intermediates of photoac- tive yellow protein, Science 346, 1242 (2014). K. Chen, A. Roy, A. Rai, H. C. P. Movva, X. Meng, F. He, S. K. Banerjee, and Y. Wang, Accelerated carrier recombination by grain boundary/edge defects in MBE grown transition metal dichalcogenides, APL Mater. 6, 8 K. Fan, H. Y. Hwang, M. Liu, A. C. Strikwerda, A. Stern- bach, J. Zhang, X. Zhao, X. Zhang, K. A. Nelson, and R. D. Averitt, Nonlinear terahertz metamaterials via field-enhanced carrier dynamics in GaAs, Phys. Rev. L. Ju, J. Velasco, E. Huang, S. Kahn, C. Nosiglia, H.-Z. Tsai, W. Yang, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, Y. Zhang, G. Zhang, M. Crommie, A. Zettl, and F. Wang, Photoin- duced doping in heterostructures of graphene and boron nitride, Nat. Nanotechnol. 9, 348 (2014). A. Krishnamoorthy, M.-F. Lin, X. Zhang, C. Weninger, R. Ma, A. Britz, C. S. Tiwary, V. Kochat, A. Apte, J. Yang, S. Park, R. Li, X. Shen, X. Wang, R. Kalia, A. Nakano, F. Shimojo, D. Fritz, U. Bergmann, P. Ajayan, and P. Vashishta, Optical control of non- equilibrium phonon dynamics, Nano Lett. 19, 4981 X. Qian, J. Liu, L. Fu, and J. Li, Quantum spin Hall ef- fect in two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides, Science 346, 1344 (2014). P. J. Zomer, M. H. D. Guimar ̃aes, J. C. Brant, N. Tombros, and B. J. van Wees, Fast pick up technique for high quality heterostructures of bilayer graphene and hexagonal boron nitride, Appl. Phys. Lett. 105, 013101 J. Hebling, K.-L. Yeh, M. C. Hoffmann, B. Bartal, and K. A. Nelson, Generation of high-power terahertz pulses by tilted-pulse-front excitation and their application pos- sibilities, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 25, B6 (2008). Y.-Q. Bie, A. Zong, X. Wang, P. Jarillo-Herrero, and N. Gedik, A versatile sample fabrication method for ul- trafast electron diffraction, Ultramicroscopy 230, 113389 G. Kresse and J. Furthm ̈uller, Efficient iterative schemes for ab initio total-energy calculations using a plane-wave basis set, Phys. Rev. B 54, 11169 (1996). G. Kresse and J. Furthm ̈uller, Efficiency of ab-initio total energy calculations for metals and semiconductors using a plane-wave basis set, Comput. Mater. Sci. 6, 15 (1996). J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Generalized gradient approximation made simple, Phys. Rev. Lett. G. Henkelman, B. P. Uberuaga, and H. J ́onsson, A climb- ing image nudged elastic band method for finding saddle points and minimum energy paths, J. Chem. Phys. 113, A. A. Mostofi, J. R. Yates, Y.-S. Lee, I. Souza, D. Van- derbilt, and N. Marzari, wannier90: A tool for obtaining maximally-localised Wannier functions, Comput. Phys. Commun. 178, 685 (2008). A. A. Mostofi, J. R. Yates, G. Pizzi, Y.-S. Lee, I. Souza, D. Vanderbilt, and N. Marzari, An updated version of wannier90: A tool for obtaining maximally-localised Wannier functions, Comput. Phys. Commun. 185, 2309 R. Yu, X. L. Qi, A. Bernevig, Z. Fang, and X. Dai, Equiv- alent expression of Z2 topological invariant for band in- sulators using the non-Abelian Berry connection, Phys. Rev. B 84, 075119 (2011). L. Fu and C. L. Kane, Topological insulators with inver- sion symmetry, Phys. Rev. B 76, 045302 (2007). METHODS Fabrication of THz field-enhancement structure on fused silica substrate The fabrication of the metal microslit array was based on a standard photolithography and lift-off process. Image reversal photoresist AZ5214 was spin-coated on a fused silica substrate at 3000 rpm for 30 s, soft baked at 110◦C for 50 s on a hotplate, UV exposed by a maskless aligner MLA 150 with a dose of 24 mJ/cm2, and post-exposure baked at 120◦C for 2 min followed by flood exposure and development in AZ422. A thin film of 2-nm Cr was deposited onto the substrate as an adhesion layer by thermal evaporation followed by a 98-nm-thick Au thin film. The sample was soaked in acetone and PG remover for lift-off to complete fabrication of the field enhancement structure. Layered MoTe2 integration with the field en- hancement structure The monolayer, few-layer MoTe2, and layered h-BN were exfoliated on SiO2/Si substrate from bulk MoTe2 (HQ graphene) or h-BN crystals. Monolayer and bilayer MoTe2 were identified by optical contrast and Raman spectroscopy. The layered materials were picked up by a transfer slide composed of a stack of glass, a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) film and a polycarbonate (PC) film, as described in ref.41. The resulting stacks of top h-BN layer, MoTe2 monolayer or bilayer, and bottom h-BN layer were then placed on top of the Au gap with the help of a transfer setup under an optical microscope24. h-BN layers were not used for MoTe2 trilayer and multi-layer samples because they will be totally damaged by the optical pulse for SHG if it is encapsulated by h-BN. High-field THz pulse generation High-field THz pulses were generated in a Mg:LiNbO3 crystal by tilting the optical pulse front of an 800-nm pump pulse to achieve phase matching42. By using a three-parabolic-mirror THz imaging system, the image of the THz beam spot on the sample was focused to its diffraction limit of around 500 μm in diameter. The incident THz pulse temporal profile was measured in the time domain using electro-optic sampling with a 100-μm-thick 110-oriented GaP crystal. When pumping with the 4 W output from an amplified Ti:sapphire laser system (repetition rate 1 kHz, central wavelength 800 nm, pulse duration 100 fs), the peak electric field of the THz pulses reached ∼ 300 kV/cm at the focus, with a spectrum centered at around 0.5 THz (see Figs. S10 and S11). The repetition rate of the laser output was down-counted from 1 kHz to 125 Hz by three successive phase-locked choppers, providing sufficient temporal separation between pulses for a mechanical shutter to 9 isolate single THz pulses. Spontaneous Raman scattering measurements Spontaneous Raman scattering was performed on sam- ples before and after THz irradiation using a commercial Raman spectrometer (Horiba LabRAM) with a HeNe laser (λ = 632.8 nm). The laser beam was focused on the samples by a 100× objective into a spot with a diameter of approximately 1 μm. Transmission electron diffraction microscopy To prepare the samples for transmission electron mi- croscopy (TEM) characterization before and after THz excitation, we designed a special TEM grid with a THz field enhancement structure. The enhancement pattern made of a 50-nm-thick gold film is deposited on a silicon nitride TEM window. The enhancement structure is a 300-μm-long, 2-μm-wide air gap within the gold film, as shown in Fig. S8. We transferred a multilayer MoTe2 flake on top of the gap using a PDMS dry-transfer method43 and measured the diffraction pattern before and after the single THz pulse excitation. The transmission electron diffraction measurement was performed using a transmission electron microscope (FEI Tecnai Multipurpose Digital TEM) operated at 60 keV at room temperature. SHG mapping As shown in Fig. S11, the SHG fundamental pulses were provided by a mode-locked Ti:sapphire oscillator centered at 800 nm. The laser pulse duration was around 35 fs at an 80 MHz repetition rate. The pulse was lin- early polarized by an achromatic polarizer (400–800 nm) and the polarization at the sample was controlled by an achromatic half-wave plate in a motorized rotational stage. SHG signals from the sample were collected by the same objective for focusing the fundamental light, and they transmitted through the same half-wave plate and polarizer, which ensured that the SHG components detected were parallel to the polarization of the funda- mental field. A photomultiplier tube (PMT, Hamamatsu Photonics H10721) was used to analyze the SHG signal. In the fast mapping mode, the laser beam on the sample was scanned using two-axis Galvo mirrors (Thorlabs, GVS412) to acquire in situ SHG images. We also use the SHG mapping method to look for trilayer sam- ples which have uniform response as shown in Fig. S12 for the single-shot THz pump-SHG probe measurements. Single-shot THz pump-SHG probe microscopy The THz pump arm was combined with SHG pulses from a second, temporally synchronized 12 W ampli- fied Ti:sapphire laser (repetition rate 1 kHz, central wavelength 800 nm, pulse duration 35 fs). SHG light was focused to a near-diffraction-limited size (1 μm) at the sample with a 50× objective. The SHG light was collected by the same objective and detected by a PMT with a confocal microscope to selectively probe the area at the focus with single-optical-pulse irradiation. The power level of the SHG excitation pulse was well above the damage threshold of MoTe2, but the ultrafast nature of the pulse enabled us to obtain a reliable SHG signal before the sample was damaged. The temporal overlap of the counter-propagating THz field and SHG optical pulse was determined by THz field-induced second har- monic signal from a 30-μm-thick LiNbO3 slab. All of the optical measurements were conducted on a single-shot basis under ambient conditions. More details are given in Supplementary Note 8 and Figs. S12d, S13, and S14. First-principles calculations We performed density functional theory (DFT) calcula- tions using the VASP code44,45 within the general gra- dient approximation (GGA) - Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange-correlation functional46. The kinetic en- ergy cutoff was 350 eV for the plane-wave basis sets. The lattice constants of 2H and 1T ′ phases in the neutral state were obtained via structural optimization with a convergence threshold of force on each atom of 0.01 eV/ ̊A, with a vacuum region more than 36- ̊A- thick to decouple the neighboring slabs. A Γ-centered 11×17×1 k-point mesh was used to sample the Brillouin zone. The climbing image nudged elastic band (CI-NEB) method47 with 5 to 7 intermediate images was used to de- termine the activation barrier of the phase transition. Be- sides converging the electronic ground states with charge neutrality, we also considered higher temperature smear- ing effects and charge doping. More information can be found in Supplementary Note 6 and Figs. S15–S18. In these barrier calculations, the in-plane lattice con- stants were all constrained to the value of the neutral state 2H phase, even for the charged state conditions in which the lattice tends to expand. We note that the treatment of constant area was mainly due to the diffi- culty of convergence when the lattice vectors were allowed to relax during CI-NEB calculations of charged slabs. It simulates the situation where the lattice of monolayer MoTe2 is strongly constrained by its interaction with sub- strates. Based on the converged electronic ground state with spin-orbit coupling in a given crystal structure, we fur- ther constructed the Wannier electronic model using the Wannier90 code48,49 by projecting the Mo d orbitals and Te p orbitals near the Fermi level. Besides capturing the electronic band structure, the Wannier models also allowed us to investigate the topological properties by evaluating the Z2 topological index from the non-Abelian Berry connections along the Wilson loop50 and the Fu- Kane parity formulation51 (when inversion symmetry is present). More information can be found in Figs. S19– S21. 10 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors acknowledge discussions and technical supports from Z.F. Ren, X. Wang, Y. Yoon, B. Pein, P.-C. Shen, A. Maznev, T. Mahony, F. Gao and Y. Chen. J.S. and K.A.N. acknowledge support from the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sci- ences, under Award No. DE-SC0019126. P.J.-H. ac- knowledges support from Gordon and Betty Moore Foun- dation’s EPiQS Initiative through grant GBMF4693. A.Z. acknowledges support from the Miller Institute for Basic Research in Science. W.C., S.F., and E.K. acknowledge support by ARO MURI award W911NF- S.F. is also supported by a Rutgers Center for Material Theory Distinguished Postdoctoral Fellow- ship. J.-C.H. and V.B. acknowledge support from the Center for Energy Efficient Electronics Science (NSF Award 0939514). Y.-Q.B. and Z.C.L. acknowledges support from National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.’s 61974167 and 91963205), the National Key R&D Program of China (No. No. 2019QN01X113. Y.-Q.B. further acknowledges the Open Project of Guangdong Province Key Lab of Dis- play Material and Technology (No. 2020B1212060030). K.W. and T.T. acknowledge support from the Elemen- tal Strategy Initiative conducted by the MEXT, Japan (Grant No. JPMXP0112101001) and JSPS KAKENHI (Grant No.’s 19H05790 and JP20H00354). AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS Y.-Q.B. and J.S. conceived the idea, conducted the experiments, and analyzed the data under the guidance from P.J.-H. and K.A.N. W.C., S.F., and E.K. provided theoretical calculations. Y.-Q.B., J.H., and V.B. synthe- sized field enhancement structures. A.Z. and Y.Z. con- tributed to sample preparations and electron diffraction measurements. Z.C. performed the field enhancement calculations. T.T. and K.W. grew the crystals of hexag- onal boron nitride. A.Z., Y.-Q.B., J.S., and E.B. led the manuscript preparation with input from all authors. ADDITIONAL INFORMATION Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to K.A.N., P.J.-H., and Y.-Q.B. The authors declare no competing financial interests.