1 A comparison study between the properties of BHBT2:PC71BM composite nanotubes and its bulk-heterojunction Muhamad Doris1,2*, Azzuliani Supangat2, Teh Chin Hoong2, Khaulah Sulaiman2 and Rusli Daik3 1 Department of Electrical Engineering, Universitas Trisakti, Indonesia 2 Low Dimensional Materials Research Centre, Department of Physics, University of Malaya, Malaysia 3 School of Chemical Sciences and Food Technology, Faculty of Science and Technology, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Malaysia Abstract In this study, we investigate the morphological, structural, and optical properties of both bulk-heterojunction and composite nanotubes that are composed of thiophene-based small phenyl C71 butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM). Mix-blended and template-assisted methods were used to fabricate the bulk-heterojunction and the composite nanotubes, respectively. A single material of BHBT2 thin films and nanotubes fabricated via spin-coating and template- assisted methods, respectively, were also studied. Two different formations between the bulk- heterojunction and the composite nanotubes were compared to elaborate on their advancement in properties. The absorption spectra of the BHBT2:PC71BM bulk- heterojunction and the composite nanotubes were found to have fallen within the ultraviolet- visible (UV-vis) range. Field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) and high- resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM) images showed that the carbon-rich of PC71BM, had successfully infiltrated into the BHBT2 nanotube to form the BHBT2:PC71BM * Corresponding author: m.doris@trisakti.ac.id 1 Department of Electrical Engineering Universitas Trisakti, Jakarta, 11440, Indonesia 2 Low Dimensional Materials Research Centre, Department of Physics University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, 50603, Malaysia 2 School of Chemical Sciences and Food Technology, Faculty of Science and Technology, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, 43600 UKM Bangi, Selangor, Malaysia 2 composite nanotubes. However, due to the inconsistent uniformed informal distribution of the infiltration, the charge carrier transfer is seen to be better in the bulk-heterojunction rather than in the composite nanotubes. Keywords: Thiophene, small molecules, alumina template, bulk-heterojunction, composite nanotube Background Organic materials have been of interest to many researchers due to their extraordinary properties such as flexibility, abundancy of resources, and low production cost. Initially, the organic materials are only used as electric insulator of electronic devices. However, this has changed after the discovery of the metallic behavior of polyacetylene (PA) by Shirakawa et.al . This discovery has lead to the emergence of other conducting organic materials such as polythiophene (Pth), polypyrrole (PPY), polyaniline (PANI), polycarbazole (PCz), polyparaphenylene vinylene (PPV), poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene) (PEDOT), and polyfuran (PF) that to date have been used in numerous electronic devices applications. In addition, many other new organic materials have recently been discovered and used in applications involving electronic nanodevices (field effect transistor, light emitting diode) , sensors (chemical, gas, optical, biosensor) , energy storage systems (solar cells, fuel cells, supercapacitors) , microwave absorption and electromagnetic shielding , and biomedical procedures (drug delivery, protein purification, tissue engineering, neural interfaces, actuators) . These materials and applications are fabricated based on polymer which have different properties over its small molecules. The small molecules based materials are promising as they have the properties of viscoelasticity, toughness, crystallinity, and optical when compared to polymer based materials . In this study, we examine a novel Thiophene-based small molecules in which the Thiophene is a heterocyclic compound that consists of a five-membered ring that 3 has properties still seen as reliable and remarkable to date. Furthermore, Thiophene-based small molecules have extraordinary properties that may compete with its polymer in terms of enhancing the efficiency of perovskite-based solar cells and small molecules organic solar cells . Some applications on small molecules organic solar cells , inorganic-organic hybrid solar cells , and field effect transistor have been realized from the thiophene-based small molecules. Therefore, intensive studies of thiophene- based small molecules are as crucial as studies of its thiophene-conjugated polymer. Thiophene-based small molecules, namely 1,4-bis (2,2’-bithiopen-5-yl)2,5- dihexyloxybenzene (BHBT2) is a pentamer that consists of four thiophene rings and one benzene ring that binds the two hexyl molecules and thiophene. BHBT2 has a profound solubility particularly in organic solvents such as chloroform, dichloromethane, and tetrahydrofuran. In addition, it is easily purified through column chromatography and recrystallization techniques. The terminal bithiophene groups in a BHBT2 pentamer are expected to provide good stability and excellent charge transport properties in the pentamer backbone. Therefore, the coupling of dihexyloxy-p-phenylene moiety with terminal bithiophene groups could improve the pi-electron conjugation path in the pentamer backbone without affecting their optical and electrochemical properties . In this work, one of the key explorations of BHBT2 properties is on its nanostructures. Nanostructures of small molecules such as nanotubes, nanorods, nanowires, and nanoflowers have been commonly fabricated using the template assisted-method . However, study of BHBT2 small molecules nanostructures upon the template assisted-method have never been examined to date. The template used is based on alumina oxide material that consists of orderly nanopores to infiltrate a solution, which in turn molds the nanostructured materials into shape. Formation of nanostructures is important to be studied due to its exceptional 4 properties over the planar structures. For instance, an active material in organic solar cells that is fabricated into nanostructures with the size that corresponds to visible wavelength can enhance the optical performance of the material . In addition, nanostructuring an active material of solar cells into nanorods, nanotubes, and nanowires increases the surface area of the active layer allowing it to absorb more photons that results in higher efficiency . The template assisted-method is a low cost technique to produce nanostructured materials where the properties of the materials can easily be controlled . The types of nanostructures are affected by the parameters of solution that infiltrate into the template’s pores. Molecular weight, solution viscosity, solution concentration, infiltration mechanism, and drying process are some of the parameters that influence the formation of nanostructures . Template-assisted method also can be used to fabricate the donor-acceptor system of p-n junction composite nanotubes . Unlike the well-known donor-acceptor system of bulk-heterojunction, the composite nanotubes that are composed of an ordered array of p-n core-shell junctions could accommodate well to the higher carriers mobility. The p-n core- shell junction is widely used in applications such as drug delivery and optoelectronic . As reported previously, a p-n core-shell junction nanowire that was applied to inorganic solar cells have been seen to have improved the efficiency performance of the device . On top of that, the p-n core-shell junction of composite nanotubes could also enhance the charge carrier transfer when compared with its bulk-heterojunction . In this study, the p-n core-shell junction of composite nanotubes has been successfully produced via the template assisted-method. Composite nanotubes of BHBT2 and fullerene -phenyl C71 butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) have also been fabricated and characterized. The characterizations are particularly emphasized on the optical, morphological, and structural properties of BHBT2:PC71BM. The two different formations of bulk-heterojunction and composite nanotubes of BHBT2:PC71BM are then studied. To the 5 best of our knowledge, there have been no studies that have investigated the properties of thiophene-based small molecules BHBT2. Therefore, studies on the p-n BHBT2:PC71BM properties may provide informative and useful knowledge. 6 Methods Thiophene-based small molecules, 1,4-bis (2,2’-bithiophene-5-yl)2,5-dihexyloxybenzene (BHBT2) were synthesized and used directly as needed. As shown in Figure 1a, BHBT2 contains a single benzene with four thiophene rings flank the benzene ring on each side. 5 mg of BHBT2 was dissolved into the 1 ml of chloroform where the solubility limit of BHBT2 within chloroform is 59 mg ml-1 . A similar concentration of 5 mg/ml was applied to -phenyl C71 butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM), by dissolving it in chloroform. The volume ratio of 1:1 was used to produce the BHBT2:PC71BM bulk-heterojunction and composite nanotubes. A porous alumina template with 20 nm and 60 μm of pores in diameter and thickness, respectively, was purchased from Whatman Anodisc and was utilized to fabricate the nanostructures. Prior to the infiltration, the templates were cleaned by immersing them in acetone under sonication for 15 min, and then rinsed using deionized water. Three different spin coating rates of 1000, 2000, and 3000 rpm were used in 30 s. Prior to the spin coating process, the templates were first attached onto a glass slide using scotch tape on its right and left sides (Figure 1b). The scotch tape was used to ensure that the template would remain stuck on the glass slide during the spin coating process. Figure 1c shows the infiltrated BHBT2 after and before the spin coating and dissolution process, respectively. nanotubes and the BHBT2:PC71BM composite nanotubes. The porous alumina template was first cleaned under sonication of acetone (i). Prior to the spin coating process, 50 μL of BHBT2 solution was dropped onto the cleaned template, which allowed the solution to infiltrate into the template (ii). To fabricate the BHBT2:PC71BM composite nanotubes, 50 μL of PC71BM were dropped on top of the infiltrated BHBT2 followed by the spin coating process (iii). Templates with infiltrated materials were then dried under room temperature. 7 These templates were stuck upside down on a copper tape (iv) before the dissolution of 6 h in 5 M of sodium hydroxide (NaOH) took place (v). In order to wash the remaining template thoroughly, it was rinsed several times using deionized water. Finally, the obtained nanotubes that remain stuck on the copper tape were ready to be characterized (vi). Schematic illustrations shown in Figure 2 were adapted from the sample preparation set up shown in (Figure 3a). The BHBT2 nanotubes were able to retain their adhesion on the copper tape although the sample was washed for several times (Figure 3b). The BHBT2:PC71BM composite nanotubes turned brownish due to the infiltration of the PC71BM (Figure 3c). As with the BHBT2 nanotubes, the BHBT2:PC71BM composite nanotubes were also be able to remain stuck upside down on the copper tape after several washing (Figure 3d). Several equipment such as the spin coater model WS-650MZ-23NPP (Laurell Technologies Corp., North Wales, PA, USA), Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (FESEM) (Quanta FEG 450), High Resolution Transmission Electron Microscope (HRTEM) (Tecnai G2 FEI), Raman and photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy (RENISHAW), UV-vis spectroscopy (Shimadzu UV-3101PC) and X-ray Diffraction Spectroscopy (XRD) were used in this study. 8 Results and discussion In this study, the properties of single material and composite materials comprised of BHBT2 dihexyloxybenzene) is a novel small molecule with pentamer and the advantage of high solubility with most solvents. By investigating its optical, morphological and structural properties, new applications on organic electronics devices can be realized to improve the device performance. Based on the X-ray Diffraction (XRD) measurement of BHBT2 shown in Figure 4a, multiple peaks that represent the BHBT2 pristine indicate that the BHBT2 small molecule is a crystalline material . Crystalline materials with periodic structure may provide a light management ability that can outperform the devices, for instance, the enhancement of photon absorption . To elaborate on the properties of BHBT2 small molecules further, incorporation of BHBT2 and a p-type material of PC71BM is applied. Nanostructuring these materials into p-n composite may enrich knowledge in nano- morphology studies. In addition, the charge transfer between donor and acceptor materials can be better understood and digested when there is more information on the carrier’s behaviors. Figure 4b shows the energy diagram of BHBT2 and PC71BM with HOMO-LUMO of 1.96-4.65 eV and 3.94-5.93 eV, respectively. The HOMO-LUMO of donor-acceptor will enable the exciton (electron-hole) to dissociate at the interface . Optical properties studies spin-coated at the different rates of 1000, 2000, and 3000 rpm, respectively. Increasing the spin coating rate was applied to produce thinner films of the BHBT2. A similar pattern of wavelength absorption is shown with the dissimilarity in absorption intensity where hypochromic effect have occurred in which decreasing the intensity of absorbance as effect 9 of less materials that absorb photon. This can be understood that the differences in the thickness of material depends on the spin coating rate in which the thicker layer will absorb more photon. From the UV-vis absorption spectra, BHBT2 thin films and nanotubes portrayed five significant absorption peaks. No single peak shifting either to left or right side was observed to have taken place, due to the different spin coating rates, apart from the changes in the absorption intensity of BHBT2 nanotubes, which get higher at 350 nm when compared to its thin films. It was noticed that BHBT2 favorably absorb photon only in the range of UV and visible light region. Due to its light absorption properties, BHBT2 may potentially be applied as UV-vis photodetector or as a booster material of active layer in organic photovoltaic applications. Fabricating this material into highly ordered nanostructures may enhance its performance since the charge carrier’s transfer mobility can be improved via the highly ordered structures . As shown in Figure 6a, BHBT2 nanotubes reveal significantly higher absorption intensity in comparison to their thin films . BHBT2 nanotubes and thin films exhibit four shoulders with their significant peaks occuring at 335, 350, 414, 429, and 461 nm. The longer absorption wavelength of both BHBT2 nanotubes and thin films are observed at 461 nm of Soret peak (B-band). This condition occurs due to movement of an electron dipole that corresponds to nonbonding-antibonding (n-π*) excitation among BHBT2 molecules. A small part of UV light disclosed at around 320 - 350 nm is attributed to the bonding-antibonding (π -π*) excitation. Generally, nanostructuring the BHBT2 either in single material or composite has increased its absorption performance. Incorporating BHBT2 with PC71BM slightly shifted the intense absorption and rendered the absorption range broader at 320-350 nm and 400-460 nm. As shown in Figure 6b, although the presence of π -π* transition was observed in the BHBT2 bulk-heterojunction, the better absorption was exhibited in the BHBT2 composite nanotubes. 10 In an organic material, once a photon bombards onto a donor material, exciton, which is a pair of electron-hole that binds with each other, will be generated. In order to generate a current, this exciton will need to be dissociated by dislodging the electron from its binding energy. One condition that has to be fulfilled is the affinity electron requirement of each donor and acceptor materials. In our study, to investigate the potential application of BHBT2 into a device, BHBT2 and electron acceptor of PC71BM were mixed. It should be possible to create a charge transfer phenomena via the HOMO-LUMO configuration of both materials since the electron affinity of the acceptor material is bigger than that of the donor. Charge carriers transfer will only occur when the binding energy of exciton is lower than the electron affinity energy difference between the donor and acceptor materials . The photoluminescence (PL) measurement was carried out to investigate the effectiveness of charge transfer between the donor and acceptor for both the bulk heterojunction and the composite nanotubes. The PL provides information on how well the exciton can reach the donor-acceptor interfaces . Exciton (a pair of electron-hole) that has been generated by the donor material needs to be separated for the current extraction. Recombination of exciton will lead to the emission of radiative photon (radiative recombination) which is shown as intensity in the PL spectra . Excitons that have successfully reached the donor-acceptor interfaces will be dissociated into hole and electron. This phenomenon is indicated by the lower intensity exhibited by the PL peak (quenching) compared to the curve of the radiative recombination which always exhibit the higher intensity. Quenching is attributed to the charge carriers transfer that had occurred between the donor and acceptor, which are carriers produced from the dissociated excitons at the donor- acceptor interfaces . As shown in Figure 7a, the quench phenomenon occurred due to the incorporation of BHBT2 with PC71BM, which allowed electrons from BHBT2 to jump to the acceptor material. It is hardly to obtain the photoluminescence results for thin films that 11 were spin-coated at 1000, 2000, and 3000 rpm at a concentration of 5 mg/ml based on the thickness matter. To solve this hindrance, drop-casting of the solution onto a glass substrate is applied in order to get the feasible films thickness. It is noticed that BHBT2 thin films has a higher photoluminescence intensity compared to the BHBT2 bulk-heterojunction and composite nanotubes. Mixing of two materials in the formation of bulk-heterojunction and composite nanotubes has gained almost totally quenching. Figure 7b shows the photoluminescence spectra of BHBT2 bulk-heterojunction and composite nanotubes. BHBT2 bulk-heterojunction got slightly quenched compared to its composite nanotubes. Charge transfer between BHBT2 and PC71BM in the formation of bulk-heterojunction was more effective than the composite nanotubes. Based on the morphology view of bulk- heterojunction, the donor and acceptor will easily agglomerate and mix together in order to allow the electron to reach the donor-acceptor interface. Better quenching of BHBT2:PC71BM bulk-heterojunction produced results which a contradict the results found by other studies where nanostructuring a material gets better quenching than bulk-heterojunctioning. The morphology of BHBT2:PC71BM composite nanotubes could be responsible for the better quenching of bulk-heterojunction where it could be predicted that most of the BHBT2:PC71BM composite nanotube interfaces were unevenly constructed. Structural properties studies Raman spectroscopy was applied to study the chemical and structural composition of materials. In its application, incident photons that interact with materials may lose or gain energy. The energy difference between the scattered photon and the incident photon is exactly similar to the energy difference in molecular vibration. Therefore, patterns of Raman spectra are generated from the molecular or lattice vibrations within the materials. A low frequency in the Raman shift corresponds to a low energy vibration of atoms which means that heavy atoms are held together with the weak bonds. On the other hand, a high frequency 12 corresponded to light atoms which were held together with a strong bound . Figure 8a and 8b show the Raman spectra of BHBT2 thin films versus nanotubes and the Raman spectra of BHBT2:PC71BM bulk-heterojunction versus composite nanotubes, respectively, with their Raman peaks tabulated in Table 1. Raman peak at 1445 cm-1 shows a slightly different in intensity between BHBT2 thin films and nanotubes indicating that the thiophenes ring was dominantly stretching in thin film compared to its nanotubes. The occurrence of thiophenes ring stretching supports the existence of BHBT2molecular structure with four thiophene rings attached to one benzene ring. However, the incorporation of two materials resulted in shifting around 3 cm-1 to the lower frequency. This shifting could be due to the effect of incidence energy that was divided and served to the two different molecules, which in turn resulted in a decrease in scattered energy . Most of the Raman peaks of BHBT2 nanotubes shifted to higher frequencies except for the peak at 1564 cm-1 that shifted to lower a frequency for 2 cm-1. However, no CH deformation occurred in BHBT2 nanotubes. Ring breathing and ring vibration para-substituted benzene were formed from the incorporation of BHBT2 and PC71BM. These rings were found at 1188 cm-1 and 1227 cm-1, respectively. BHBT2 composite nanotubes showed shifting to the higher frequencies of 1189 cm-1, and 1231 cm-1. Among the four Raman spectra (BHBT2 thin films, BHBT2 nanotubes, BHBT2:PC71BM bulk heterojunction, and BHBT2:PC71BM composite nanotubes), BHBT2 nanotubes and BHBT2:PC71BM composite nanotubes had somewhat a similar intensity although the highest peak intensity was dominated by BHBT2 thin films. Formation of nanostructured composite BHBT2 nanotubes were synthesized via the template-assisted method. Figure 9a-c show the FESEM images of BHBT2 nanotubes obtained from the three different spin coating rates of 1000, 2000, and 3000 rpm. Generally, the nanostructures created bundles of nanotubes by 13 collapsing their tips with each other instead of growing aligned as a single nanotube. Formation of nanotubes bundles could be due to the presence of attractive forces (van der Waals interactions) between the nanotubes . At spin coating rate of 1000 rpm, the morphology of BHBT2 nanotubes were produced inconsistently with some of the tubes longer than others. However, with the increase of the spin coating rate to 2000 rpm, the homogeneous growth of BHBT2 nanotubes was attained. A further increase to 3000 rpm, resulted in a thicker base layer and denser nanotubes. Due to the thicker base layer, the nanotubes bundles become more intricate as the base layer almost covered the nanotubes’ structure. Through further investigation, a spin coating rate at 2000 rpm was considered as an optimum parameter for the fabrication of BHBT2:PC71BM composites. During the infiltration, the solution that passes through the template nanochannels may experience two possible conditions along the process. The first possible condition is that the solution will spread and wet the nanochannels’ wall, which will in turn produce the hollow nanotubes after the template dissolution. The other possible condition is the formation of nanorods, due to the existence of force interactions between the molecules (solution) during infiltration that are stronger than the adhesive force (wall). In this study, the growth mechanism of BHBT2 nanostructures was rendered by the first possible condition (Figure 10 a-d). Since the optimum spin coating rate is 2000 rpm (BHBT2 nanotubes), BHBT2:PC71BM composite nanotubes were then produced at this optimum rate. Observation of hollow structure supported the prediction of wall wetting and force interaction between the wall and the solution. The wall of BHBT2:PC71BM composite nanotubes were found to be thicker than that of the BHBT2 nanotubes due to the infiltration of two different materials (BHBT2 and PC71BM). 14 BHBT2:PC71BM composite nanotubes, respectively. BHBT2 nanotubes contain only a single wall of tube whereas BHBT2:PC71BM composite nanotubes exhibit two different regions. These two different regions corresponded to the PC71BM (inner) and BHBT2 (outer), respectively. PC71BM was infiltrated into the center of the hollow BHBT2, which is shown as a darker region. PC71BM of carbon rich materials was successfully infiltrated into the BHBT2 nanotubes and wetted the inner wall of nanotubes, which led to the formation of p-n junction. If the assumption is that all of the PC71BM had totally infiltrated into the BHBT2 nanotubes, a more effective charge transfer will take place in composite nanotubes rather than in the bulk- heterojunction. However, based on the morphological images, it was notice that not many PC71BM had been infiltrated into the BHBT2 nanotubes. In addition to that, the nanotubes were not homogeneously constructed in terms of size. The occurrence of this phenomenon may have been due to the spin coating rate. In the spin coating process, some of the substances may have been swept away, out of the alumina template surface. Ideally, PC71BM substances would have to fully infiltrate the BHBT2 nanotubes and to have a well-mixed of donor-acceptor interfaces in order to form the homogeneous composite nanotubes. Therefore, the composite nanotubes would provide the more effective way for the charges to be transferred into the acceptor material. Conclusions We have successfully synthesized and characterized the properties of 1,4-bis (2,2’-bithiopen- 5-yl)2,5-dihexyloxybenzene (BHBT2) as single material and composites. The comparison study between BHBT2 thin films, BHBT2 nanotubes, BHBT2:PC71BM bulk-heterojunction and BHBT2:PC71BM composite nanotubes emphasized on their optical, structural and morphological properties. Nanostructuring the BHBT2 via template-assisted method had been successfully applied to produce nanotubes and composite nanotubes. Better quenching and 15 improvement of charge carriers’ transport was observed in BHBT2:PC71BM bulk- heterojunction due to the poor interfaces morphology of unevenly constructed BHBT2:PC71BM composite nanotubes. However, the enhancement of light absorption was observed in BHBT2 nanotubes and BHBT2:PC71BM composite nanotubes. PC71BM had been successfully infiltrated into the BHBT2 nanotubes due to the wetting properties possessed by both materials, although the uniformity of infiltration is poor. Abbreviations BHBT2, 1,4-bis (2,2’-bithiopen-5-yl)2,5-dihexyloxybenzene; FESEM, field emission scanning electron microscopy; HOMO, highest occupied molecular orbital; HRTEM, high resolution transmission electron microscopy; LUMO, lowest unoccupied molecular orbital; NaOH, sodium hydroxide; PA, polyacetylene; PANI, polyaniline; PC71BM, -phenyl C71- butyric acid methyl ester; PCz, polycarbazole; PEDOT, poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene); PF, polyfuran; PL, photoluminescence: Pth, polythiophene; PPV, polyparaphenylene vinylene; PPY, polypyrrole; XRD, X-ray Diffraction Spectroscopy Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors' contributions MD carried out the experiments, performed the analysis, and drafted the manuscript. AS participated in the design of the study, performed the analysis, and helped draft the manuscript. TCH carried out the experiments, and performed the analysis. KS and RD participated in the design of the study and in the sequence alignment. Authors' information 16 MD is a senior lecturer at the Universitas Trisakti. TCH is currently on postdoctoral fellowship at the University of Malaya. AS is the senior lecturer and KS is an associate professor at the Department of Physics, University of Malaya, while RD is a professor at the National University of Malaysia. 17 Acknowledgements The authors would like to acknowledge the University of Malaya for the project funding under the University of Malaya High Impact Research Grant UM-MoE Malaysian Ministry of Education for the project funding under the Fundamental Research Grant Scheme (FP002-2013A).