Vorticity of viscous electronic flow in graphene Sven Danz1 and Boris N. Narozhny1, 2 1Institut f ̈ur Theorie der kondensierten Materie, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 76128 Karlsruhe, Germany 2National Research Nuclear University MEPhI (Moscow Engineering Physics Institute), 115409 Moscow, Russia (Dated: June 1, 2020) In ultra-pure materials electrons may exhibit a collective motion similar to the hydrodynamic flow of a viscous fluid, the phenomenon with far reaching consequences in a wide range of many body systems from black holes to high-temperature superconductivity. Yet the definitive detection of this intriguing behavior remains elusive. Until recently, experimental techniques for observing hydrodynamic behavior in solids were based on measuring macroscopic transport properties, such as the “nonlocal” (or “vicinity”) resistance, which may allow alternative interpretation. Earlier this year two breakthrough experiments demonstrated two distinct imaging techniques making it possible to “observe” the electronic flow directly. We demonstrate that a hydrodynamic flow in a long Hall bar (in the absence of magnetic field) exhibits a nontrivial vortex structure accompanied by a sign-alternating nonlocal resistance. An experimental observation of such unique flow pattern could serve a definitive proof of electronic hydrodynamics. Traditional fluid mechanics1 describes long-distance properties of conventional (e.g., water, oil, etc.) and quantum (e.g., 3He) fluids equally well2,3. The key fea- ture uniting these diverse many body systems is the short-ranged or collision-like nature of interactions be- tween the constituent particles that conserve momentum. In the simplest case of a dilute gas (e.g., air) the hydrody- namic equations can be derived from the kinetic theory4. The resulting theory is however more general than the derivation: the hydrodynamic equations provide a uni- versal description applicable to any system within the same symmetry class. The usual theory of the electron transport in solids also relies on the kinetic theory5, but with momentum- relaxing scattering processes typically dominating over the momentum-conserving electron-electron interaction. Unlike the conventional fluids, electrons in solids exist in the environment created by a crystal lattice where scat- tering off either lattice imperfections (or “disorder”) or lattice vibrations (“phonons”) does not conserve momen- tum. At length scales exceeding the mean free path ldis (or le−ph) the electrons exhibit diffusive motion2,5. In rel- atively small, mesoscopic samples of the size smaller than (or comparable to) the mean free path, L ≲ ldis, le−ph, the electrons can cross the sample ballistically6,7. In contrast, should one manage to fabricate a sample, where the momentum-conserving electron-electron inter- action were the dominant scattering process, the macro- scopic flow of electrons would be hydrodynamic8–10. En- visioned by Gurzhi10 long time ago, this idea got trac- tion only with the emergence of ultra-pure materials11–20. Yet, while it has been established that transport proper- ties of such systems deviate significantly from the tradi- tional expectation5, the “hydrodynamic” interpretation of the observed results may still be considered as contro- versial. In particular, the nonlocal resistance (a tool of- ten used to uncover hydrodynamic transport14,15,20) has been extensively studied in the context of ballistic trans- port in multiterminal measurements in the presence21–23 or absence24–27 of an external magnetic field. Thus the hydrodynamic flow can be distinguished from a ballistic one28 by employing additional measurements: the nonlo- cal resistance should be supplemented by measurements of its temperature dependence15 and even imaging of the Poiseuille velocity profile has to be supplemented by mea- surements of additional quantities11. Recently two breakthrough experiments demonstrated two distinct imaging techniques allowing to “observe” the electronic flow directly7,11,12. This makes it possible to study a distinct feature of the hydrodynamic flow – vor- ticity – in laboratory experiments. The hydrodynamic vortices (otherwise known as eddies or whirlpools) were previously invoked to explain the observed negative non- local resistance in graphene20,29,30, but so far have not been directly imaged. In this paper, we solve the uncon- ventional hydrodynamic equations in graphene31,32 in a realistic Hall bar geometry (away from neutrality) and demonstrate that the electronic flow forms a unique pat- tern exhibiting multiple vortices. Alternation in spinning direction of these vortices results in a sign-alternating nonlocal resistance33. These features could be used to distinguish the hydrodynamic flow (to which they are unique) from ballistic propagation. Within linear response and in the case of stationary flow, the Navier-Stokes equation (A1) in graphene away from charge neutrality (i.e., the system considered in the imaging experiments of Refs. 7,11) takes the form9,29,32 v2 g∇P = v2 g [η∆u + enE] − μnu τdis , (1) where η is the shear viscosity14,20,34, n is the carrier den- sity, E is the electric field, vg is the Fermi velocity, P is the thermodynamic pressure, μ is the chemical potential, and τdis is the disorder mean free time, see Appendix A for details. At high enough densities, the electric current is proportional to the hydrodynamic velocity, J = enu. In the rest of the paper we analyze this equation numer- ically and establish the local flow patterns in experimen- tally relevant geometries. To verify our numerical methods (see Appendix B), we arXiv:1910.14473v2 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 29 May 2020 2 flow in doped graphene (cf. Fig. 2 of ). The two plots show the electrochemical potential Φ normalized by the driv- ing current I for ldis = 26 μm (ballistic propagation; left) and ldis = 0.15 μm (diffusive flow; right). The calculations were performed at T = 4 K, n = 1012 cm−2, and L = 25 μm. The left plot does not show the step-like contact voltage drops7,35 since the contact resistance36 was not included in the calcu- lation. first consider the hydrodynamic equation (1) in the ab- sence of viscosity, η = 0. In this case, Eq. (1) describes the usual Ohmic flow of electrons. By varying the ratio of the mean free path, ldis = vgτdis, to the sample length L within the two-terminal measurement scheme we observe the ballistic-to-diffusive crossover7, see Fig. 1. Combin- ing the pressure gradient and the electric field into the gradient of the electrochemical potential29,37, we follow the change of the latter along the rectangular sample placed between the two contacts. Choosing the mean free path to exceed the sample length (ldis = 26 μm, see ) we observe the almost flat profile of the electrochemical potential across the sample indicative of ballistic propagation (cf. the effect of electric field expulsion35), see the left panel in Fig. 1. In contrast, a system with a smaller mean free path (ldis = 0.15 μm) exhibits a linear variation of the electrochemical poten- tial typical of the diffusive transport, see the left panel in Fig. 1. Not surprisingly, this behavior fully agrees with experimental observations (see Fig. 2 of ). Viscous flow in the same two-terminal geometry is ex- pected to exhibit a Poiseuille-like velocity profile9,11,38,39. The precise form of the profile is determined by the inter- play of the viscosity, disorder mean free time, and bound- ary conditions. The parabolic profile1 corresponds to a pure liquid (τdis → ∞) with the “no-slip” boundary con- ditions (u = 0 at the sample edges). The latter were recently shown to be inapplicable in graphene40; instead, one should apply a more general boundary condition, Eq. (B1), characterized by the temperature-dependent “slip length”. This quantity was recently measured in −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.5 x in μm 10.5 11.0 11.5 12.0 12.5 13.0 u in m/s slip length slip length Gu = 10−3 Gu = 10−2 Gu = 10−1 Gu = 100 Gu = 101 strip geometry (W = 5 μm, L = 10 μm). The profiles were calculated with the “slip boundary condition” with the slip length11 ζ = 0.5 μm. The color-coded datasets correspond to different values of the Gurzhi number (2). graphene11 to be ζ ≈ 500 nm at T = 75 K. To describe the mutual effect of disorder and viscosity on the electronic flow we introduce a “Gurzhi number” Gu = ντdis l2 , ν = v2 gη W , (2) where ν is the kinematic viscosity1,14,20,34, W is the en- thalpy [see Eq. (A2)] and l is a typical length scale in the problem (e.g., the width of the graphene strip) in analogy to the standard composition of the Reynolds number1. For small values of the Gurzhi number the electrons prop- agate ballistically with a flat velocity profile across the bulk of the sample, while large values of Gu correspond to a Poiseuille-like flow with a nonuniform velocity dis- tribution. This behavior is illustrated in Fig. 2, where we show velocity profiles for various values of Gu measured in a strip of width W = 5 μm. The nonlocal effects in the electronic flow in graphene are typically studied in a Hall bar geometry11,15,20. The inviscid, Ohmic current is expected to flow directly from the source to drain contacts38,41, while exponentially de- caying into the bulk of the Hall bar. In long mesoscopic systems (i.e. with L > W) such decay is governed by the sample geometry rather than momentum relaxation as follows from the van der Pauw theorem24,42,43. Our numerical solution to Eq. (1) demonstrates exactly this behavior, see Figs. 3 and 4. The top panel in Fig. 3 shows the flow pattern of the Ohmic flow across a Hall bar. Measuring the voltage drop (i.e., calculating the chemical potential difference) at a distance x away from the source and drain contacts yields an exponentially de- caying signal as illustrated in Fig. 4. We have verified that the decay length ξ (defined in the figure caption) is mostly determined by the width of the Hall bar in agree- ment with the standard expectation based on the van der Pauw method24,43 and remains largely insensitive to 3 multiple vortices and sign-alternating nonlocal resistance. White rectangles indicate the source and drain contacts. The data were calculated with the “slip boundary condition” Eq. (B1) with the slip length11 ζ = 0.1 μm and for W = 2 μm, L = 16 μm, T = 200 K, n = 1012 cm−2, and Gu = 0.175 (increasing Gu or decreasing ζ reduces the vortex size increasing the number of vortices in the sample). The color map in the top panel shows the deviation of the electrochemical potential from its median value, while the red and blue colors in all other panels indicate the sign of this quantitiy (the broken white line separating the red and blue regions indicates the median value of the electrochemical potential; its patchiness reflects the finite precision of the simulation). The equidistant streamlines mask the exponential decay of the flow velocity, see Fig. 4. a variation of either L or ldis. The color map in the top panel in Fig. 3 shows the elec- trochemical potential distribution in the Hall bar. Away from the source and drain contacts, the electrochemical potential decays exponentially maintaining its sign along the Hall bar. To illustrate this point, the second panel in Fig. 3 shows the sign of the deviation of the electro- chemical potential from its median value. The nonlocal resistance (at a distance x away from the source and drain contacts) is exponentially small, see Fig. 4, and positive. Viscous flow in the Hall bar geometry is accompanied by formation of vortices20,29,30,41 (also referred to as ed- dies or whirlpools). In traditional hydrodynamics1, vor- ticity appears already at the level of the Euler equation (describing ideal, inviscid flows), while viscosity tends to suppress it. Laminar flows (with small Reynolds number) tend to be vortex-free far away from flow boundaries or obstacles with the latter being “responsible” for nontriv- ial flow patterns (e.g., in the laminar wake1). Now, electron motion in mesoscopic samples almost al- ways takes place in proximity of the sample boundaries and hence the appearance of nontrivial vortex structure 4 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 x in μm 0 10 20 30 RNL in Ω W = 2μm, ξ = 0.63μm W = 3μm, ξ = 0.93μm W = 4μm, ξ = 1.21μm W = 5μm, ξ = 1.47μm 0 1 2 3 Φel−ch in μeV panel in Fig. 3). The nonlocal resistance measured at a dis- tance x away from the source and drain contacts decays expo- nentially, RNL ∝ exp(−x/ξ). The obtained values of ξ for dif- ferent widths W (shown in the legend) roughly agree with the estimate ξ = W/π based on the van der Pauw method24,43. is to be expected. Earlier measurements aiming at de- tection hydrodynamic flows of electrons in graphene20 used the nonlocal resistance RNL as the tool to uncover nontrivial flow patterns: a change of direction of the elec- tronic flow may lead to a sign change in RNL. The neg- ative nonlocal resistance observed in these experiments was then interpreted29,30,41 as a sign of vortex formation indicating a viscous flow. Later on it became clear that negative nonlocal resistance may appear in multiterminal measurements on ballistic (and perhaps even diffusive24) electronic systems11,15,28 such that additional measure- ments were necessary to ensure that one observes indeed the hydrodynamic behavior. We have solved the hydrodynamic equation (1) with the slip boundary conditions11,40 in a somewhat longer (in comparison to the experimental samples of Refs. 14, 15,20), gated15,20,44,45 Hall bar. The results of our calcu- lations are shown in the two bottom panels in Fig. 3 and in Fig. 5. The third panel in Fig. 3 shows the flow pattern in the “theoretical” geometry considered in Refs. 29,41 with the source and drain contacts located on the oppo- site sides of the Hall bar. The bottom panel in Fig. 3 shows the current distribution in the “experimental” ge- ometry of (see also ). In both cases, the flow pattern on the right of the source contact (where we calculate the nonlocal resistance) is rather similar. The first vortex appearing to the right of the source con- tact is located at a distance roughly equal to the width of the Hall bar29 and is somewhat asymmetric stretch- ing more in the direction away from the contact. In a shorter Hall bar (as in the left side of the third panel in Fig. 3) there would be space for only one vortex, but in a longer system the second vortex appears. The size of the vortices and the exact location of the second vor- tex is determined by the interplay of the sample geom- 0.5 1.0 1.5 x in μm 0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 RNL in kΩ 5.0 5.5 6.0 x in μm −0.2 −0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 RNL in mΩ tronic flow (see the two bottom panels in Fig. 3). While still decaying exponentially, the nonlocal resistance measured in a viscous flow exhibiting multiple vortices changes sign as a function of the distance x away from the source and drain con- tacts. Left panel: the first sign change in RNL due to the first vortex observed in and calculated in . Right panel: the second sign change in RNL due to the second vor- tex with vorticity opposite to that of the first vortex. While the values of RNL are exponentially smaller, they remain in the measurable mΩ range. etry, slip length (see Appendix B), and disorder mean free path (we chose Gu = 0.175 on the basis of experi- mental data11,13,20; increasing the value of Gu or reduc- ing the slip length reduces the vortex size; this way we may observe more vortices in the sample). As the sec- ond vortex “spins” in the opposite direction to the first one, the resulting nonlocal resistance exhibit another sign change, see Fig. 5. Since the relation between the flow ve- locity and electrochemical potential involves derivatives, the sign change is not aligned with the vortex boundaries (such that the correspondence between the flow direction and the sign of RNL is not direct). Given that the decay of the electronic flow (see Fig. 4) has mostly geometric origin24,42,43, it is not surprising that the hydrodynamic flow decays in a similar fashion. As a result, the nonlocal resistance after the second sign change (see the right panel in Fig. 5) is several orders of magnitude smaller than the absolute value of the nega- tive RNL after the first sign change. Nevertheless, using realistic parameters (with the values borrowed from the experiments of Refs. 11,13,15,20) we obtain values of or- der mΩ (measurable in a modern laboratory). To conclude, we have solved the hydrodynamic equa- tions in doped graphene in experimentally relevant Hall bar geometry. We have mapped the nontrivial vortex pattern of the viscous electronic flow and calculated the corresponding sign-alternating nonlocal resistance. In contrast to , this behavior is not related to quasi- particle recombination (which is only important in close proximity to the Dirac point) and magnetic field (see also Ref 46). At charge neutrality, the electric current 5 density in the absence of magnetic field is decoupled from the hydrodynamic velocity, see Eq. (A3). As a re- sult, transport properties of neutral graphene are more complicated12,45–48 and require further investigation. We believe that the obtained flow patterns are unlikely to occur in ballistic electronic systems. We expect that an experimental observation of multiple vortices with the help of modern imaging techniques of Refs. 7,11,12 com- bined with the measurement of the sign-alternating non- local resistance will uniquely identify the hydrodynamic behavior of charge carriers in graphene, as well as any other electronic system that is pure enough to support the “hydrodynamic temperature window” [based on the universality of the hydrodynamic equation (1) which – unlike Eq. (A1) – is no longer specific to Dirac fermions in graphene].