High frequency guided mode resonances in mass-loaded, thin film gallium nitride surface acoustic wave devices Stefano Valle,1 Manikant Singh,2 Martin Cryan,1 Martin Kuball,2 and Krishna C. Balram1, a) 1)Quantum Engineering Technology Labs and Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University of Bristol, Woodland Road, Bristol BS8 1UB, UK 2)Center for Device Thermography and Reliability, H.H. Wills Physics Laboratory, University of Bristol, Woodland Road, Bristol BS8 1UB, UK (Dated: 21 October 2019) We demonstrate high-frequency (> 3 GHz), high quality factor radio frequency (RF) resonators in unreleased thin film gallium nitride (GaN) on sapphire and silicon carbide substrates by exploiting acoustic guided mode (Lamb wave) resonances. The associated energy trapping, due to mass loading from the gold electrodes, allows us to efficiently excite these resonances from a 50 Ω input. The higher phase velocity, combined with lower electrode damping, enables high quality factors with moderate electrode pitch, and provides a viable route towards high-frequency piezoelectric devices. The GaN platform, with its ability to guide and localize high-frequency sound on the surface of a chip with access to high-performance active devices, will serve as a key building block for monolithically integrated RF front-ends. A modern smartphone has ∼50 RF filters to enable seam- less communication across a wide variety of frequency bands1. As we move towards widespread adoption of 5G standards, and expect ever-greater functionality from our phones, the number of RF filters is expected to significantly increase and the filter packaging problem becomes increas- ingly acute2. Monolithic integration of piezoelectric acous- tic wave filters with amplifiers is the only scalable long-term solution. While integration of aluminum nitride (AlN) film bulk acoustic wave resonator (FBAR) filters with complemen- tary metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS) electronics is being actively pursued, the process incompatibility between micro- electro-mechanical systems (MEMS) and CMOS foundries, mainly substrate release, makes monolithic integration chal- lenging. In the past decade, three trends have converged to make GaN an interesting alternative3,4: improvements in ma- terial growth, especially interface quality for thin films, steady displacement of GaAs based power-amplifiers (PA) with GaN PAs and finally, the availability of GaN foundry services pro- viding ready-access to high performance amplifiers. Working with GaN allows us to trade-off a lower piezoelectric device performance (cf. AlN, lithium tantalate) for the benefits of monolithic integration with active devices. The prospect of building piezoelectric, primarily surface acoustic wave (SAW), resonators and filters in GaN was rec- ognized from the beginning of GaN device research5 and there has been a lot of exciting recent progress6. On the other hand, relatively little work has been done on exploiting the main ad- vantage that GaN provides over traditional SAW substrates like lithium tantalate7. In particular, GaN supports guided acoustic waves whose dispersion can be engineered, on ac- count of its lower acoustic velocity, compared to the growth substrate (mainly silicon, silicon carbide and sapphire) and buffer layers8. Guiding sound on the surface of the chip al- lows us to confine acoustic energy and increase the effective electromechanical coupling coefficient9. In addition, by trap- ping these sound waves using guided mode resonances10, one a)Electronic mail: krishna.coimbatorebalram@bristol.ac.uk can engineer high quality factor (Qmech) resonators without re- quiring substrate release. Such unreleased resonator platforms are also being explored for monolithic integration in non- piezoelectric CMOS-MEMS platforms11–14. In this work, we demonstrate high Qmech GaN resonators on unreleased sub- strates (sapphire and silicon carbide) by utilizing the metal- lic interdigitated transducer (IDT) electrodes for mass loading and energy trapping15. By avoiding patterning of the GaN device layer, our approach is compatible with current GaN HEMT foundry process flows and is attractive for the near- term monolithic integration of piezoelectric acoustic wave de- vices with GaN HEMT amplifiers. A representative device, shown in Fig.1 (a), consists of the standard IDT geometry, with the IDT period (ΛIDT) chosen to match the SAW frequency. The devices were fabricated either on SiC or sapphire substrates with the GaN thickness (tGaN ≈ 1-1.5 μm) and electrode thickness (tAu ≈ 75 nm). In addi- tion to exciting the Rayleigh SAW waves (shown in Fig.1 (b, left)), the transducer with the same period (ΛIDT), also excites a higher-frequency guided Lamb wave mode (also referred to as a Sezawa mode), shown in Fig.1 (b, right)7,16,17. In con- trast to the Rayleigh SAW mode, the Lamb wave mode has a higher phase velocity (∼1.5x) allowing higher frequency op- eration for the same ΛIDT. In addition, a significant fraction of the acoustic energy resides within the GaN layer, away from the GaN-electrode interface, leading to lower acoustic dissi- pation and higher Qmech at high-frequencies (2-6 GHz). To convert the IDT from a SAW transducer to a SAW res- onator, one needs to confine the acoustic energy, which can be achieved by employing acoustic reflectors on either side of the IDT. Traditionally, SAW resonators have relied on the weak finger reflectivity provided by shorted metallic gratings. But the weak reflectivity increases the number of finger pairs needed to achieve unity reflection, resulting in large device sizes (∼ mm). In contrast, we work in the regime of strong finger reflection (rf ≈ 0.06−0.1)18 and excitation of trapped acoustic modes to achieve compact high-Qmech resonators. While higher finger reflectivity is generally associated with higher out-of-plane scattering, the scattered waves phased ap- propriately can destructively interfere in the far-field (sub- arXiv:1910.08169v1 [physics.app-ph] 17 Oct 2019 2 (a) 1.75 μm Sapphire Sapphire AlN GaN AlN GaN Au Au 1.6 μm 0.35 μm (b) Sapphire AlN Au GaN (c) AlN Sapphire GaN (d) = 1.75 μm, tAu = 75 nm) (b) Finite element method (FEM) simula- tion performed using linear elastic piezoelectric theory in COMSOL Multiphysics v5.3 of the mode displacement of a 1.6 μm GaN on sapphire device with 350 nm AlN buffer layer (ΛIDT = 1.75 μm, tAu = 75 nm) for the SAW ( fSAW ≈ 2.06 GHz) and Lamb wave (fLamb ≈ 3.02 GHz) modes (c) FEM simulation of the mode displacement for the fundamental ( f ≈ 3.056 GHz) and higher-order ( f ≈ 3.049 GHz) trapped Lamb wave resonances (Npairs = 40). strate leakage), leading to high quality factors and tight mode confinement. Photonic and phononic crystal structures, simi- larly rely on strong index contrast19 to simultaneously achieve high Q and low mode volumes. In addition, the increased ra- diation conductance associated with energy trapping allows us to match the device impedance to 50 Ω and avoid the need for on-chip impedance matching networks20,21. Effec- tively, the increased radiation conductance (GIDT) dominates the IDT static capacitance (C0,IDT) and thus resistive matching is sufficient20. The higher rf is achieved by using gold (Au) electrodes for the IDT. For the same thickness, a Au electrode was mea- sured to have a higher (≈ 50x) rf for SAW waves compared to aluminum (Al) electrodes22. In a guided wave geometry, the r f is higher on account of the higher spatial mode overlap of the acoustic field with the metal electrode. Traditionally, Au electrodes have not been used with SAW devices, espe- cially at high-frequencies (> 1 GHz), due to the high acoustic wave damping. Compared with traditional Rayleigh wave- based SAW devices that have acoustic energy confined to the electrode-GaN interface and thus suffer from high damping, the Lamb wave has a significant fraction of the acoustic en- ergy below the interface (Fig.1(b)) and thus reduced spatial mode overlap with the electrode. Coupled with the higher phase velocity, which increases the IDT period and reduces the transducer series resistance, Lamb waves provide a viable alternative to traditional SAW and FBAR devices for building high-frequency, high-Qmech piezoelectric devices. If the rf exceeds a threshold value determined by the total number of fingers in the structure, the structure resembles a 1D acoustic Bragg stack with the IDT electrodes (GaN+Au) and the inter-electrode gaps (GaN) serving as the two effective acoustic materials comprising the stack. The strong finger re- flection couples the forward and backward propagating Lamb waves, leading to a 1D phononic bandgap. Since the guided modes in the IDT region have a lower frequency (due to mass loading) compared to the bare GaN regions, the overall struc- ture can be visualized as a 1D Bragg stack surrounded by two semi-infinite bare GaN regions that do not support propagat- ing modes at the same frequency. Provided the frequency dif- ference (∆ω) for the guided mode in the IDT and non-IDT regions exceeds the modal decay rate (κ), the mode is trapped in the IDT, and a guided mode resonance can be observed in an RF reflection (|S11|) measurement. We would like to note here that the trapped acoustic modes are analogous to the bound states observed in GaAs/AlGaAs superlattice struc- tures and a similar transfer-matrix based tunneling resonance approach can be used to calculate them23. Using an FEM simulation, the trapped Lamb wave resonances’ displacement profiles can be calculated and two of these are shown in Fig.1 (c,d). The fundamental mode has the highest quality factor and electromechanical coupling coefficient, with the higher- order modes being more weakly confined. While we have performed experiments on both GaN-on-SiC and GaN-on- sapphire devices, we restrict our FEM simulations to GaN- on-sapphire. (a) (b) (b) phase response for a GaN on SiC device with 125 finger pairs and IDT period 1.5 μm. The red dashed curve in (a) shows a Lorentzian fit to the fundamental mode response. These guided mode resonances can be observed in the RF reflection (|S11|) spectrum of the IDT. A representative spec- trum, for a 1.5 μm IDT period device fabricated on a GaN on SiC sample, is shown in Fig.2. In contrast to the expected 3 sinc2( f) response for the S11 magnitude as in a traditional IDT, we instead observe a series of sharp Lorentzian reso- nances, corresponding to the different trapped modes. The effect can also be observed in the phase response, where a series of phase inflections can be clearly seen in Fig.2(b), corresponding to the dips in Fig.2(a). The fundamental res- onance, fit with a Lorentzian lineshape (red curve in Fig.2(a)) has a quality factor , Qmech ≈ 2000, which corresponds to an f.Q∼7∗1012. Since acoustic waves at such high frequencies are expected to be strongly scattered by GaN growth defects, such as threading dislocations, such high Qmech point to the high-material quality in a GaN-SiC platform, especially at the GaN-buffer interface. AlN GaN Au Sapphire Sapphire AlN GaN Au Au Sapphire AlN GaN der Lamb wave modes (blue, inset right and red, inset left) as a func- tion of inverse electrode period 1/ΛIDT . The respective mode dis- placement profiles for the two modes are shown in the inset. The Lamb wave resonance (inset, bottom) frequency (Npairs = 40) is also shown (magenta). A zoomed-in section (shown by the dashed box) of the plot is shown in the inset for visualization. Simulation param- eters: tGaN = 1.5 μm, tAlN = 0.35 μm and tAu = 75 nm To quantify the effects of rf , we can use the idea of de- generate mode-splitting. A bare GaN on sapphire substrate unit cell supports two degenerate Lamb wave modes (forward and backward propagating). Adding a gold electrode (as part of the IDT) couples the forward and backward modes, lifting the frequency degeneracy and forming two modes (shown as a function of IDT period, by the red and blue curves in Fig.3). The frequency splitting between the two modes is governed by the coupling between the original forward and backward propagating modes, and thus is a measure of rf . For the IDT unit-cell, Fig.3 is plotting the 1D phononic bandgap at the Γ point as a function of ΛIDT. It is important to keep in mind that only the lower mode is excited by the IDT due to RF ex- citation symmetry. Also shown in Fig.3 is the trapped funda- mental mode frequency (Npairs = 40) and we can see that the trapped modes lie within the 1D phononic bandgap (zoomed inset in Fig.3). As long as the frequency separation (∆ω ≈ 30 MHz) of the bound mode (magenta) from the guided band (blue) is greater than the mode decay rate (κ ≈ 3-5 MHz in our devices), a sharp Lorentzian response, corresponding to the guided mode resonance, will be observed in the RF reflec- tion spectrum and the IDT acts as a resonator. On the other hand, if ∆ω ∼ κ, then bound mode spectrum overlaps with the guided mode band and the IDT acts as a transducer. IDT period (μm) quency (blue) and quality factor (brown) for GaN-on-sapphire de- vices with varying IDT periods (Npairs = 40). Simulation parame- ters: tGaN = 1.5 μm, tAlN = 0.35 μm and tAu = 75 nm. From a resonator design perspective, it is critical to under- stand the dependence of center frequency ( fc) of the resonator on the GaN device layer thickness (tGaN), as that becomes the key fabrication parameter to control. While the IDT-based design does ensure that the fc changes with IDT period, the quality factor (Qmech) of the guided mode resonance is not constant as a function of frequency. Given a GaN layer thick- ness, there is an optimal frequency range (fopt) for achiev- ing high Qmech. At f≪ fopt, the finger reflection drops due to reduced tAu/λacoustic. At the other extreme f≫fopt, the out-of-plane scattering and metal damping increases due to increased finger reflection and greater spatial mode overlap with the metal, on top of the standard f 2 acoustic wave at- tenuation dependence24. We can visualize the confinement dependence on IDT period by plotting the simulated quality factor (Qsim) for the fundamental Lamb wave resonance, for devices with N = 40 finger pairs (tGaN = 1.5μm, tAlN = 0.35μm and tAu = 75 nm). The results are shown in Fig.4. The quality factor (Qsim) is calculated from an eigenfrequency calculation by Qsim = freal/2fimag,25 where freal and fimag correspond to the real and imaginary components of the complex eigenfre- quency. It is important to note that the FEM calculation does not properly account for high-frequency metal damping and the Qsim is primarily an estimate of out-of-plane (substrate) scattering losses. As the plot shows, there is an optimal pe- riod for a given combination of tGaN and tAu to achieve the highest Lamb wave Qmech. From the plots, we can construct a rule-of-thumb of ≈ 500 MHz of fc tuning using the IDT period, while maintaining a high Qsim > 2000. While the Qmech achieved by the device in Fig.2 is high, the presence of multiple closely spaced resonances distorts both the amplitude and phase response, making it challeng- ing to use in practical applications. Ideally, one would like to work with a single isolated resonance with high Qmech so that more complex elements, like coupled resonator filters, can be synthesized. The IDT device in Fig.2 had 125 finger pairs and as shown in Fig.1 (c,d), in a uniform period (duty- cycle) IDT, adjacent sections of the transducer can support resonant modes, as shown in Fig.1(d), leading to an inher- 4 Frequency (GHz) (a) (b) phase ∠S11 response for a GaN on SiC device with 50 finger pairs and IDT period 1.75 μm. (b) Comparison of the measured RF |S11| response for the 50 (ΛIDT = 1.75 μm) and 125 (ΛIDT = 1.5μm) finger pairs devices. The response of the N=50 device has been shifted in frequency for easier comparison. ent multi-moded response. By reducing the number of fin- ger pairs, we can effectively achieve single-mode operation in the device, shown in Fig.5. As both the amplitude (|S11|) and phase (∠S11) response show in Fig.5(a), the response is primarily dominated by the fundamental mode. On the other hand, reducing the cavity size leads to lower mode confine- ment and reduced mode quality factors (Qmech). This can be clearly seen in Fig.5(b) where the multi-mode and single mode (frequency-shifted) responses are plotted on the same scale. The single-mode device has a Qmech ≈ 500, compared to the Qmech ≈ 2000 for the multi-mode device. Ideally, one would like to combine the high Qmech achievable with large N, with a single-mode response to enable design of more compli- cated circuit elements like coupled resonator filters. To implement a high-Qmech single-mode response, we can borrow ideas from the photonic crystal community on Gaus- sian 1D confinement26,27 of electromagnetic fields to achieve extremely high quality factors. In contrast to the optical do- main where the refractive index is shaped in response to plane wave excitation, in the acoustic case, the metal electrodes pro- vide both the excitation field and the confinement potential (due to the mass loading) and thus the mode shape and excita- tion efficiency are intimately linked, constraining the designs. Fig.6 (a) shows the mode shape for a uniform period IDT and Fig.6 (b) plots the mode displacement as a function of posi- tion. As the red Gaussian curve fit shows, the fundamental cavity mode shape can be well-approximated by a Gaussian with a peak displacement in the cavity centre. By apodising the duty cycle of the IDT to match the Gaus- sian mode-shape, we can both improve the Qmech and achieve single-mode operation. The improvement in Qmech occurs due (b) (c) (a) Sapphire AlN (0.575 μm) GaN (1.15 μm) in a GaN-on-sapphire device (b) Line-cut of the mode displacement (magenta) alongwith a Gaussian fit (black) (c) Measured RF reflec- tion (|S11|) response of apodized IDTs fabricated on a GaN-sapphire platform (tGaN = 1.15μm, tAlN = 0.575 μm, tAu = 75nm) with dif- ferent duty cycle chirps. The Qmech of the Lamb wave resonance of each device, calculated from a Lorentzian function fit to the S11 power spectrum, are ∼ 322, 386 and 478 respectively to two effects: since the peak of the modal displacement oc- curs in the cavity centre, by reducing the duty cycle of the IDT, we are effectively reducing the overlap of the acoustic field with the metal, which is the major source of damping and scattering. By apodizing the grating, we also reduce the ⃗k-space overlap between the Lamb wave resonance and the substrate modes, reducing the overall out-of-plane leakage28. Apodising the IDT-period also ensures single mode operation as the local duty cycle chirp ensures that higher order modes (such as those shown in Fig.1(d)) are not trapped. Fig.6(c) shows the measured RF |S11| spectrum of three devices with identical period and number of finger-pairs (Npairs = 100), but varying duty-cycle Gaussian chirp fabricated on a 1.15 μm GaN on Sapphire platform. The measurement results indicate that as we increase the duty-cycle chirp, we observe increased mode separation, a key step towards single-mode operation. We also see that the excitation efficiency (peak |S11| dip) is not uniform and attribute this to the mode excitation and confine- ment being provided by the same electrodes. We are currently working on achieving independent control of the excitation and confinement by patterning the GaN layer29. Although the phononic crystal designs do show an improvement in Qmech, the GaN-on-sapphire devices do not achieve the performance of the uniform ΛIDT GaN-on-SiC devices, primarily due to the 5 inferior quality of the GaN-substrate interface, which leads to excess acoustic scattering and dissipation. Finally, as a first step towards integrated resonant Lamb wave filters in GaN, Fig.7 shows the RF transmission spec- trum for a coupled resonator device with ΛIDT = 2 μm and res- onator spacing 10 μm. The transmission spectrum is peaked around the Lamb wave resonances, which can be seen in the overlaid S11 spectra. We would like to note that while the in- sertion loss is high (∼ 18 dB), there is tremendous scope for performance improvement by optimising the device geometry (ensuring high-Qmech single mode operation) and filter design (controlling the coupling rate between the two resonators). Frequency (GHz) fabricated on a GaN on SiC platform (ΛIDT = 2 μm and resonator gap = 10 μm) . The resonator response (S11) is overlaid for reference.