1 Large anomalous Nernst effect in a van der Waals ferromagnet Fe3GeTe2 Jinsong Xu1*, W. Adam Phelan2, C.L. Chien1 1 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21218, USA 2 Department of Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21218, USA Abstract Anomalous Nernst effect, a result of charge current driven by temperature gradient, provides a probe of the topological nature of materials due to its sensitivity to the Berry curvature near the Fermi level. Fe3GeTe2, one important member of the recently discovered two-dimensional van der Waals magnetic materials, offers a unique platform for anomalous Nernst effect because of its metallic and topological nature. Here, we report the observation of large anomalous Nernst effect in Fe3GeTe2. The anomalous Hall angle and anomalous Nernst angle are about 0.07 and 0.09 respectively, far larger than those in common ferromagnets. By utilizing the Mott relation, these large angles indicate a large Berry curvature near the Fermi level, consistent with the recent proposal for Fe3GeTe2 as a topological nodal line semimetal candidate. Our work provides evidence of Fe3GeTe2 as a topological ferromagnet, and demonstrates the feasibility of using two- dimensional magnetic materials and their band topology for spin caloritronics applications. Key words: Anomalous Nernst effect, Fe3GeTe2, spin caloritronics, topological ferromagnet *email: jxu94@jhu.edu 2 The recently discovered two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals (vdW) magnets , providing new constituent materials for spintronics and caloritronics, have attracted much attention. To date, most 2D vdW ferromagnets are semiconductors (e.g., Cr2Ge2Te6) and insulators (e.g., CrI3), with Fe3GeTe2 (FGT) being the only ferromagnetic (FM) metal. Electrical switching of FGT by spin orbit torque and tunneling magnetoresistance in FGT/h-BN/FGT heterostruture have recently been demonstrated. FGT also has the highest Curie temperature (TC) among the 2D vdW ferromagnets, and the value of TC in thin FGT films can be tuned by ionic gating up to about room temperature . Furthermore, the topological nature of FGT gives rise to some intriguing phenomena, for example, the observation of large anomalous Hall effect (AHE) and magnetic skyrmions . Of particular interest is the anomalous Nernst effect (ANE) in topological materials because the special band topology in these materials could introduce a very large ANE , which shares some similarities with, but also differences from, the better known AHE. In AHE and ANE, the current is driven by an electric field and temperature gradient ∇T respectively, while a voltage is measured perpendicular to both the current and the magnetization M of the material. While the AHE is dominated by the sum of the Berry curvatures for all the occupied states, ANE is determined by the Berry curvature at the Fermi level εF, thus providing a different probe of the Berry curvature near εF and the topological nature of materials . Therefore, FGT provides a unique platform for studying the ANE in 2D vdW ferromagnets and their topological properties. 3 In this work, we report the observation of AHE and ANE in exfoliated FGT thin film devices. We have determined σxx (defined as ρxx ρxx 2 +ρxy 2 ), and σxy (- ρxy ρxx 2 +ρxy 2 ), the longitudinal and the transverse (or Hall) conductivities respectively, as well as Sxx (−∇Vx/∇Tx) and Syx (−∇Vy/∇Tx), the longitudinal and the transverse Seebeck coefficients respectively. We have found very large AHE angle (θH = σxy/σxx) and very large ANE angle (θN = Syx/Sxx), about 0.07 and 0.09 at low temperatures respectively, much larger than those found in common FM metals of 0.02 or less . This places FGT outside the realm of common FM materials. We further found that the temperature dependence of the transverse thermoelectric conductivity αxy follows the Mott relation αxy = −( π2kB 2 3e )T( ∂σxy ∂ε )εF, and the Hall resistivity follows the scaling relation of ρxy = λMρxx n with n ≈ 2, where λ represents the strength of the spin-orbit coupling, M the magnetization, and ρxx ( ρxy ) the longitudinal (transverse) resistivity. This scaling relationship together with the observed large anomalous Hall conductivity (360~400 Ω-1 cm-1) indicates the origin of the observed large AHE and ANE in FGT is primarily the intrinsic mechanism from the large Berry curvature, and not scattering, such as skew scattering and side-jump , consistent with the topological nature of FGT . Our work provides evidence for FGT as a topological ferromagnetic metal, and demonstrates the feasibility of using 2D vdW magnetic materials and their band topology for spin caloritronic applications. The vdW material of Fe3GeTe2 consists of Fe3Ge slabs sandwiched by two layers of Te atoms and a van der Waals gap between the adjacent Te layers as shown in Fig. 1a. Single crystals of bulk FGT, grown by chemical vapor transport method, exhibit a lattice 4 constant of c = 16.36 Å, measured by X-ray diffraction (for details, see Supporting Information). The magnetic properties of bulk FGT, characterized by a superconducting quantum interference device, show a saturation magnetization of about 310 emu cm-3 with a magnetic moment of 1.25 μB per Fe atom, and Curie temperature of about 200 K (see Supporting Information Fig. S3). Thin FGT flake is mechanically exfoliated onto heavily n-doped Si wafer with a 300 nm SiO2 layer, then transferred onto pre-patterned Au contacts using dry transferred method (see Supporting Information for details). The thickness of our FGT samples are about 20~40 nm. Fig. 1b shows the schematic of a finished FGT device. There are two Au electrodes on the Si/SiO2 substrate used as heaters to generate a lateral temperature gradient ∇Tx and also as a thermometer to measure the local temperature (see Supporting Information). There is a ~20 nm h-BN insulating layer to electrically isolate the Au heaters and the FGT layer. On top of h-BN, there are Au electrodes to make electrical contact to the FGT layer to measure the longitudinal voltage Vx and transverse voltage Vy. For the measurements of both AHE and ANE, the magnetic field is applied out-of-plane, along the z-axis, unless otherwise noted. We first examine the magnetic properties of FGT through the anomalous Hall effect with magnetometry results in the Supporting Information. For AHE, a small DC current (1 μA) is applied along the x-axis in FGT while both longitudinal voltage Vx and transverse voltage Vy are measured. We experimentally measured the longitudinal (xx) and the transverse (xy) resistivities, which convert to σxx = ρxx ρxx 2 +ρxy 2 and σxy = - ρxy ρxx 2 +ρxy 2 , the longitudinal and the transverse (or Hall) conductivities respectively for quasi 2D materials. As shown in Fig. 2a, at low temperatures (50 K), the Hall conductivity σxy 5 shows a rectangular hysteresis loop with sharp switching under an external magnetic field Hz, suggesting a single magnetic domain over the entire device. Together with the near 100% remnant σxy at zero field, these ferromagnetic hallmarks indicate thin FGT device exhibits strong perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA) with the magnetic moments pointing in the out-of-plane direction. Thin films of common ferromagnets, hampered by the large shape anisotropy of 4πM, rarely achieve PMA without very strong crystalline anisotropy or broken inversion symmetry and interface charge transfer. As the temperature increases (e.g., 140 K in Fig. 2a), the rectangular hysteresis loop gradually evolves into narrow-waist shape due to the weakened PMA and the formation of labyrinthine domain structure . The temperature dependence of the Hall conductivity σxy extrapolated to 0 Oe and the longitudinal conductivity σxx is shown in Fig. 2b. For increasing temperature, the value of σxy decreases, and vanishes around 200 K, similar to bulk single crystals of FGT. The longitudinal conductivity σxx varies about 10% within the measured temperature range. Very significantly, the Hall angle θH = σxy/σxx reaches about 0.07 at low temperatures, similar to previous reports , much higher than those of common ferromagnets (≤0.02) . We next describe the anomalous Nernst effect results in thin FGT devices. As depicted in Fig. 1b, by applying a DC current 14 mA to the right side heater, we generate an in-plane temperature gradient ∇Tx of about 1.3 K μm-1. The transverse voltage Vy is measured as a function of external perpendicular magnetic field Hz as shown in Fig. 3a. Similar to that of AHE, we observe a rectangular hysteretic ANE loop. When we apply 12 mA current to the left side heater to generate an opposite temperature gradient ∇Tx of about -1.1 K μm-1, we observe a similar but reversed rectangular hysteresis loop as shown 6 in Fig. 3b. These results conclusively demonstrate ANE in the FGT device, after we address one experimental issue. It is well known that for thin films on thick substrates, the intended in-plane temperature gradient (∇Tx) is often accompanied inadvertently by an out-of-plane temperature gradient (∇Tz) due to the thermal conduction through the much thicker substrate. The latter may contribute an ANE voltage via ∇Tz  Mx, e.g., in permalloy thin films on Si substrate, where permalloy has in-plane magnetization Mx . To assess and eliminate this possible contribution, we apply a large magnetic field Hx up to 6 kOe along the x direction and observed no appreciable signal (see Supporting Information Fig. S5). This is because of the PMA of FGT is so strong that there is no measurable Mx even with the presence of a large in-plane magnetic field. Thus all the measured thermal voltage is due to the anomalous Nernst signal of ∇Tx  Mz in FGT. To gain further insight and extract the Seebeck coefficients at zero field, provided by the robust PMA, we measure the ANE in the FGT devices at different temperatures T*, and also with different temperature gradients ∇Tx, as summarized in Fig. 3c and 3d. The longitudinal voltage Vx and the transverse voltage Vy are displayed in colors as a function of T* and ∇Tx. Using the definitions of Sxx = - ∇Vx/∇Tx and Syx = - ∇Vy/∇Tx, we obtain the ANE angle θN = Syx/Sxx via LVy/WVx, where L = 10 μm and W = 5 μm are the length and width of the sample respectively. We obtained very large ANE angle θN of as much as 0.09 at low temperature, a value much higher than those of common ferromagnets (<0.02) . These large ANE angle θN of 0.09 corroborates with the similarly large AHE angle θH of 0.07, both are much larger than those in common FM metals of ≤ 0.02. 7 With the measured longitudinal (Sxx) and transverse (Syx) Seebeck coefficients, we can obtain the transverse thermoelectric conductivity -αxy. The temperature dependence of the transverse and longitudinal Seebeck coefficient Syx and Sxx is shown in Fig. 4a. The laws of thermodynamics and FM ordering dictate the temperature dependence of Syx, which must vanish at T = 0 K, remains finite below TC and becomes negligible above TC. With the aid of the Mott relation , quantitative analysis can be performed. The transverse thermoelectric conductivity -αxy and Seebeck coefficients are related through αxy = σxxSxy + σxySxx = −σxxSyx + σxySxx, (1) Therefore, αxy can be determined from the measured σxx, σxy, Sxx and Syx. On the other hand, if the Mott relation holds, αxy can be obtained from via αxy = −( π2kB 2 3e )T( ∂σxy ∂ε )εF, and Sxx from Sxx = −( π2kB 2 3e )T( ∂lnσxx ∂ε )εF, where kB is the Boltzmann constant, ε is the energy, and εF is the Fermi energy. By substituting the scaling relationship for the Hall resistivity ρxy = λMρxx n into the Mott relation and Eq. (1), we have Syx = σxy/σxx (( π2kB 2 3e ) (∂λ ∂ε)εF λ T + (n − 1)Sxx), (2) αxy = −σxy (( π2kB 2 3e ) (∂λ ∂ε)εF λ T + (n − 2)Sxx). (3) To examine the Mott relation and determine the exponent n, we use Eq. (2) and Eq. (3) to fit Syx and αxy to search for the best-fit values of ( ∂λ ∂ε)εF/λ and n, as shown in Fig. 4. The best-fit exponent is n = 2.3 ± 0.1 (blue solid curves). The exponent is clearly close to n = 2, and not n = 1, as shown in Fig. 4. The scaling relationship with n = 2 indicates that 8 the intrinsic mechanism or side-jump, instead of skew scattering, dominates AHE and ANE in FGT. Previous reports have shown the intrinsic mechanism dominates AHE in FGT , therefore n close to 2 favors intrinsic mechanism in FGT. At the same time, the anomalous Hall conductivity is σxy ≈ 360~400 Ω-1 cm-1 at low temperature, which is close to the intrinsic contribution σxy,in ≈ e2/haz ≈ 470 Ω-1 cm-1, where h is Planck constant and az is the interlayer distance (az = c/2 = 8.18 Å). This further corroborates the intrinsic Berry curvature as the primary source of the observed large AHE angle and ANE angle. This is consistent with the recent proposal of FGT as a topological nodal line semimetal with a large Berry curvature from the nodal line . This may be the reasons for the exceptionally large AHE angle θH and ANE angle θN of 0.07 and 0.09, far larger than those in common ferromagnets. In summary, we have observed ANE in exfoliated 2D van der Waals ferromagnetic metallic Fe3GeTe2 thin film devices. We have observed exceptionally large anomalous Nernst effect angle θN of 0.09, corroborated by the similarly large anomalous Hall effect angle θH of 0.07, much larger than the values of ≤ 0.02 for common ferromagnetic metals. From the measured transport coefficients and the Mott relation, we find the large Berry curvature is responsible for the observed large AHE angle and ANE angle, which provides evidence for FGT as a topological ferromagnet. Our results demonstrate the feasibility of using 2D vdW magnetic materials and their band topology for spin caloritronics applications. 9 ASSOCIATED CONTENT Supporting Information A description of device fabrication, Fe3GeTe2 bulk crystal growth and characterization, temperature calibration, and anomalous Nernst contribution from vertical temperature gradient. AUTHOR INFORMATION Corresponding Author *E-mail: jxu94@jhu.edu Authors contributions J.X. and C.L.C. conceived the experiment. W.A.P. synthesized the bulk crystals. J.X. performed the experiment. J.X. and C.L.C. wrote the manuscript with the input from all authors. All the authors discussed the results. Notes The authors declare no competing interests. ACKNOWLEGDEMENTS This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under grant DMREF- 1729555. The bulk crystals were grown in the Platform for the Accelerated Realization, Analysis, and Discovery of Interface Materials (PARADIM) facilities supported by the National Science Foundation under Cooperative Agreement No. DMR-1539918. 10