Progressive-Growing of Generative Adversarial Networks for Metasurface Optimization Fufang Wen,1, a) Jiaqi Jiang,2, a) and Jonathan A. Fan2, b) 1)Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University, NY, 10027, USA 2)Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, CA, 94305, USA (Dated: 3 December 2019) Generative adversarial networks, which can generate metasurfaces based on a training set of high performance device layouts, have the potential to significantly reduce the computational cost of the metasurface design process. However, basic GAN architectures are unable to fully capture the detailed features of topologically complex metasurfaces, and generated devices therefore require additional computationally-expensive design refinement. In this Letter, we show that GANs can better learn spatially fine features from high-resolution training data by progressively growing its net- work architecture and training set. Our results indicate that with this training methodology, the best generated devices have performances that compare well with the best devices produced by gradient-based topology optimization, thereby eliminating the need for additional design refinement. We envision that this network training method can generalize to other physical systems where device performance is strongly correlated with fine geometric structuring. I. INTRODUCTION Metasurfaces are nanostructured electromagnetic media with responses tailored by structure geometry1–3. They are an emergent technology and are relevant to a wide scope of applications, including those in imaging4, sensing5, polarization control6, and holography7. The identifica- tion of an effective and computationally efficient design method for high performance metasurfaces remains an open-ended problem8. Optimization-based methods, rang- ing from gradient-based topology optimization9,10 to ge- netic algorithms11, have become promising approaches to designing high-performance nanophotonic devices such as metagratings12–15, metasurfaces16,17, and in-plane nanopho- tonic devices18–21. However, these methods are computation- ally expensive, making their scaling to large ensembles of topologically-complex devices very costly and in some lim- its intractable. Various concepts based on machine learning have been proposed to mitigate the computational bottleneck of con- ventional optimization approaches22,23. One promising con- cept is the generative adversarial network (GAN)24–27, which learns from images of high-performance metasurfaces and can generate high resolution device layouts with topologically- complex features. While this approach requires the creation of a computationally expensive training set, this expense is a one time cost, and a trained GAN can generate a diver- sity of device layouts within seconds. In a recent study25, we trained a GAN from images of gradient-based topology optimized metagratings, which are periodic metasurfaces that selectively diffract incident light to a desired diffraction or- der. Our GAN possessed a conventional deep network ar- chitecture, and it was successful in generating ensembles of topologically-complex metagratings operating across a range of wavelengths and deflection angles. However, the perfor- mances of the best GAN-generated devices were consistently a)These two authors contribute equally to this work. b)Electronic mail: jonfan@stanford.edu lower than that those in the training set, and additional iter- ations of computationally costly gradient-based optimization were required to improve these devices. There are at least two reasons why conventional GAN gen- erators are not able to learn the detailed spatial features of the training set. One is because the design space of the train- ing set is vast and the GAN generator is unable to learn de- tailed features during training28. Another is that the use of a small training set makes it easy for the discriminator to over- fit. To address these problems, researchers in the computer vision community have proposed the progressive growth of GANs (PGGANs), which is a new GAN training scheme that supports improved training stability and the ability to capture spatially fine features from a high-resolution training set29. In this scheme, the PGGAN architecture operates with low spa- tial resolution during initial training iterations and focuses on learning spatially coarse features from the training set. Ad- ditional neural layers are then progressively added, at which point the PGGAN focuses on learning finer-scale details from the training set. Given the success of these techniques to im- prove the generation of high-resolution images, such as the faces of people, these networks serve as plausible candidate solutions to improving the generation of physical devices such as metasurfaces. In this Letter, we show that the performance of the GAN generator for metasurfaces can be dramatically enhanced through the progressive growth of the GAN architecture and training set during training. In addition to increasing the res- olution of the GAN throughout the network training process, we progressively augment the training set by identifying high- performance GAN-generated metasurfaces using an electro- magnetic simulator and adding them to the training set, while removing relatively lower performance devices. As a model system, we apply our progressive growth scheme to train a conditional metagrating PGGAN that can produce ensembles of devices operating across a range of wavelengths and deflec- tion angles. While our network training scheme incurs a large one-time computational cost, the final PGGAN is capable of generating devices with efficiencies comparable to and some- times better than the best devices in the training set, which arXiv:1911.13029v2 [physics.comp-ph] 2 Dec 2019 2 period, the metagrating is described by an Nx by Ny matrix, and each pixel possesses a refractive index value of either silicon or air. The width of the period along the x direction is λ/sin(θ) and the width of the period along the y direction is set to be λ/2. Reflection symmetry is enforced in the y direction. eliminates the need for additional computationally-expensive device refinement. II. PROBLEM SETUP AND OVERVIEW OF NETWORK TRAINING We focus on designing topologically complex metagratings that deflect normally incident TE-polarized light to the +1 diffraction order for a range of outgoing angles (35 degrees to 85 degrees) and operating wavelengths (500 nm to 1100 nm). A schematic of the device is summarized in Fig. 1. The meta- gratings comprise 325 nm-thick polycrystalline silicon on an SiO2 substrate, and devices are represented as images of sin- gle grating periods with dimensions of 64×128 pixels. Each pixel in the image has a value of either 0 or 1, which repre- sents the refractive index of air or polycrystalline silicon, re- spectively. Mirror symmetry along the y direction is enforced to simplify the design space. The deflection efficiency is de- fined as the intensity of light deflected to the desired angle θ, normalized to the incident light intensity in glass. Prior to PGGAN training, we create a training set containing 400 high- efficiency metasurfaces, each produced by performing 350 it- erations of gradient-based topology optimization on an ini- tially random dielectric distribution. These devices sparsely sample the design parameter space: the training set devices sample the wavelength space in increments of 200 nm and the deflection angle space in increments of 10 degrees. To evalu- ate the performance of the training set devices and those gen- erated by the PGGAN, we use the Rigorous Coupled-Wave Analysis (RCWA) electromagnetic simulator30. Our PGGAN comprises two neural networks, a genera- tor and discriminator. The inputs to the generator include the operating wavelength λ, deflection angle θ, and an 8- dimensional uniformly distributed random noise vector z, and its output is an image of the device. Given a distribution of noise values as inputs, the outputs are a diverse distribution of devices. The discriminator is a classifier that attempts to distinguish whether a presented input image is from the gen- erator or the training set. Architecturally, the generator con- tains fully connected layers followed by deconvolution layers, while the discriminator contains convolution layers followed by fully connected layers. The training process can be described as a competition be- tween the generator and discriminator. The discriminator aims to successfully distinguish between generated and training set devices, while the generator aims to fool the discriminator by generating devices mimicking the training set. The generator and discriminator train through an iterative process in alter- nating steps, and upon training completion, the final genera- tor will have learned the underlying topological features from high-efficiency devices in the training set and be able to gen- erate layouts with high-efficiency features. During training, both the generator and discriminator employ the Adam opti- mizer with a batch size of 256, learning rate of 0.001, β1 of 0, and β2 of 0.9. We employ Wasserstein loss with a gradient penalty with lambda of 10 for the discriminator loss31. A. Progressive growing of the network architecture To improve the stability of the training process and en- hance the capabilities of both the generator and discrimina- tor, we progressively grow the resolution of the PGGAN over the course of training29. Schematics of the PGGAN architec- ture at different stages of network training are presented in Fig. 2(a). The initial network architecture processes devices with a resolution of only 8×16 pixels and trains from down- sampled images of the training set. Our use of low-resolution devices and networks has three main implications. First, it allows the network to focus on learning the large-scale topo- logical features from the training set. Second, it restricts the design space to a much lower dimension, which improves the overall accuracy of the network training process itself. Third, training at lower spatial resolutions leads to dramatic reduc- tions in computational cost. Once the network has undergone sufficient training with these low-resolution devices, the network and device resolu- 3 sively grow over the course of training. The training starts by processing training set devices with a resolution of 8×16 pixels, downsampled from full resolution devices of 64×128 pixels, and the device and network resolution gradually increase to the full resolution of the original training set resolution. (b) Generator network transitioning from a lower to higher spatial resolution. (c) Discriminator network transitioning from a lower to higher spatial resolution. During the resolution transition, the impact of new layers is progressively increased in the network architecture by linearly tuning the weight α from 0 to 1. tion increase to 16×32 pixels, and then later to 32×64 pixels and finally to 64 × 128 pixels. During each increase in res- olution, an additional convolution and deconvolution layer is added to the generator and discriminator, respectively, each with dimensions matching the new device resolution. With these added layers, the PGGAN accurately learns and captures higher spatial resolution features in the training set. During the transition moments in the training process when the spatial resolution of the network increases, care must be taken to ensure that this increase in spatial resolution does not 4 EM solver Training progresses High-eff devices ... Training set Generator Added ... Generated devices (a) (b) ... ... ... ... ... Training progresses generator are identified and added to the training set throughout the training process. (b) The evolution of efficiency distributions from the training set over the course of network training for two representative wavelength-deflection angle pairs: (600 nm, 40◦) and (1000 nm, 70◦). These efficiency distributions are sampled from three network training moments: the first training set update, the sixth training set update, and the final training set update. The average efficiency of the training set for each wavelength-deflection angle pair is denoted in each plot. destabilize the network. These instabilities can arise because the convolution and deconvolution layers that are added to the PGGAN during these moments are untrained and possess ran- dom weights. To address this issue, the impact of the added convolution and deconvolution layers are gradually incorpo- rated into the PGGAN in a manner illustrated in Fig. 2b. Con- sider the PGGAN generator. When a new deconvolution layer is added to the network, the device at the output of this layer Xnew is the weighed superposition of two images. The first is Xdeconv, which is the device outputted from the prior deconvo- lution layer, upsampled to match the spatial resolution of the new deconvolution layer, and then processed by the deconvo- lution layer. The second is the device Xupsampled, which is the upsampled device. Xnew relates to Xupsampled and Xdeconv with the following expression: Xnew = α ∗Xdeconv +(1−α)∗Xupsampled (1) Over the course of 5000 iterations of network training, α lin- early increases from zero to one. Initially, α is zero and the untrained deconvolution layer does not contribute to the gen- erated device pattern. As training progresses and α increases, this layer begins to properly learn and capture spatially fine device features and contributes more to Xnew. After 5000 iter- ations, the generated device patterns are exclusively generated from the new deconvolution layer. 5000 additional training it- erations are performed after α is set to one to further stabilize the network, after which the network resolution is increased again and the process is repeated. The PGGAN discriminator evolves in a similar way, except that convolutional layers are progressively added to the network instead of deconvolutional layers. The downsampling operation in the discriminator is performed using average pooling. B. Progressive growing of the training set In addition to progressively growing the network architec- ture, we progressively grow the training set by adding rela- tively high-performance PGGAN-generated data to the train- ing set while removing relatively low-performance training data throughout the training process. The training set growth process is illustrated in Fig. 3a. Methods to improve the train- ing set are essential to train the best generator possible, as a properly trained generator produces devices with topological features mimicking the training set. As such, the only way for the generator to consistently generate devices with greater ge- ometric diversity and enhanced performance compared to the initial training set is to evolve and augment the training set. The generation of high-performance GAN-based devices is stochastic and due to the use of random noise as an input to the generator, which enables a diverse distribution of designs in the high-dimensional design space to be produced. To identify high-performance devices suitable for training set augmenta- tion, we simulate ensembles of generated devices using the RCWA EM solver and filter out the high-efficiency devices. For each training set growth step, we add high-efficiency de- vices to the training set while deleting the low-efficiency one (see Appendix A). Histograms of training set device efficiencies for 2 repre- sentative wavelength-deflection angle pairs, over the course of network training, are summarized in Fig. 3b. As training progresses, more high performance devices are added to the training set and both the quantity and average efficiency of the devices in the training set increases. The average efficiency of the training set converges to an asymptotic value after fifteen training set updates, or 160,000 training iterations, which sets the total number of PGGAN training iterations. 5 designed using (a) gradient-based topology optimization, (b) GAN, and (c) PGGAN. The initial training set used for the GAN and PGGAN have parameters denoted by the solid black boxes in (a). (d) Average generated device efficiency as a function of training iteration for GAN 500 devices are generated from the GAN and PGGAN for each wavelength-deflection angle pair. The highest efficiencies in each histogram are denoted. Our ability to improve the PGGAN using PGGAN- generated devices leads to a positive feedback loop between network and training set augmentation: improvements to the training set leads to enhanced discriminator and generator per- formance, while improvements to the generator lead to en- hanced generation of high efficiency metasurfaces that are added to the training set. By alternating these two processes, the network not only learns the desired features from the train- ing set, it also explores and interpolates better topological fea- tures in the design space. III. RESULTS & DISCUSSION We produce final device designs from our PGGAN by gen- erating 2000 devices for a given wavelength-deflection an- gle pair, evaluating the efficiencies of these devices using the RCWA EM solver, and taking the highest efficiency device. The operating device parameter space includes wavelengths ranging from 500 nm to 1100 nm, in increments of 50 nm, and deflection angles ranging from 35 degrees to 85 degrees, in increments of 5 degrees. As benchmarks, we also design devices in the following two ways: we design a total of 8000 devices using gradient-based topology optimization32 and se- lect the best device for a given wavelength-deflection angle pair, and we train a basic GAN without progressive growth and filter for high-performance generated devices in the same manner above. Plots that summarize the efficiencies of de- vices designed using these three methods are shown in Figs. A comparison between Figs. 4(a) and 4(c) shows that the best devices generated by the PGGAN have efficien- cies similar to or even better than those produced from gradient-based topology optimization. Statistically, for 50% of the wavelength-deflection angle pairs, the best PGGAN- generated devices outperform those from gradient-based topology optimization. Furthermore, when averaging all of the efficiency values from the plots in Fig. 4(a) and 4(c), the average efficiency value from the PGGAN is 1.4% higher than that from gradient-based topology optimization. The high ef- ficiencies for devices generated at all wavelength-deflection angle pairs, including those not covered in the original train- ing set, indicates that our PGGAN strategy can properly gen- eralize device design across the full wavelength and deflection angle parameter space without significant overfitting. A comparison between Figs. 4(b) and 4(c) shows that the PGGAN outperforms the basic GAN by a wide margin, fur- ther demonstrating the effectiveness of the progressive growth strategy. For 89% of the wavelength-deflection angle pairs, the best PGGAN-generated devices outperform those gener- ated from the basic GAN. This performance disparity can be further visualized by tracking device efficiencies over the course of network training for the PGGAN and basic GAN, which is summarized in Fig. 4(d). For the basic GAN, the average efficiency of the generated devices initially in- creases but plateaus after approximately 20,000 iterations. For the PGGAN, the average efficiency of the generated devices increases over the course of the full network training pro- cess, and upon training completion, PGGAN-generated de- vices have an average efficiency that is 30% higher than that 6 generated form the basic GAN. The superior performance of the PGGAN compared to the basic GAN is further enforced in Fig. 4(e), which shows efficiency histograms generated from the two methods. We find that the PGGAN consistently gen- erates devices with efficiency distributions that have peak and average values that are higher than those from the basic GAN. The ability for the PGGAN to generalize and accurately capture high resolution features from training data is due to the combination of progressive growth in both the training set and network architecture. As a means of comparison, we have trained two alternative GANs, one with only progressive net- work architecture growth and the other with only progressive training set growth. The results are summarized in Appendix B and indicate that progressive growth of either the network architecture or training set boosts the GAN performance be- yond the basic GAN concept. However, the performance from both of these GAN variants is still definitively worse than that of the full PGGAN. An estimation of the computational cost for the differing optimization methods featured in Figs. 4(a)-4(c) indicates that of the three options, the PGGAN concept requires the least computational overhead. For the gradient-based topology- optimized devices in Fig. 4(a), 16.8M RCWA EM simula- tions are required. For the basic GAN devices in Fig. 4(b), EM simulations are required to produce the training set, eval- uate the GAN-generated devices, and additionally refine the best GAN-generated devices25. In total, 4.5M RCWA EM simulations are required (see Appendix C). The PGGAN fea- tured in Fig. 4(c) requires the production of the initial training set, evaluation of generated devices during network training to grow the training set, and the evaluation of final PGGAN- generated devices. In total, 3.0M RCWA EM simulations are required. It is clear that PGGAN requires the fewest EM sim- ulations, which is the primary factor determining computa- tional cost, compared to the basic GAN and gradient-based topology optimization. Furthermore, most of the computa- tional cost with the PGGAN is a one-time cost incurred dur- ing network training, such that a fully trained network only requires the evaluation of generated devices to produce high performance structures. IV. CONCLUSION In summary, we present PGGAN as an effective and com- putationally efficient metasurface design methodology. Com- pared to the basic GAN, PGGAN benefits from the progres- sive growth of its network architecture, which enables more robust learning of topological features from the training set, and from the progressive growth of the training set, which enables further exploration of high-efficiency topological fea- tures in the design space. Our training results indicate that PG- GAN can generate devices that outperform the original GAN by a wide margin and that compare well with those gener- ated from gradient-based topology optimization, all while in- curring less computational cost. Directions for future work include identifying methods to reduce the computational cost of the training set and further optimizing the PGGAN archi- tecture and a resolution transition scheme. We envision that PGGAN can be widely utilized in other fields that require the design of high-resolution, high-dimensional layouts with in- put parameters. We also anticipate that our training set update strategy can be applied to other domains if a simulator exists that can evaluate the performance of generated layouts. Appendix A: Protocol of PGGAN training set growth Every 10,000 training iterations, we consider wavelengths ranging from 500 nm to 1100 nm, in increments of 50 nm, and a deflection angle ranging from 35 degrees to 85 de- grees, in increments of 5 degrees, and we generate 500 de- vices operating at each of these wavelength-deflection angle pairs. We then calculate the efficiencies of these devices using the RCWA EM solver. Devices that have efficiencies higher than the average efficiency of the training set, for a given wavelength-deflection angle pair, are added to the training set. We note that this sampling of deflection angles and wave- lengths is relatively dense and that many of these wavelength- deflection angle pairs are not covered in the initial training set. We add the five best PGGAN-generated devices for each of these wavelength-deflection angle pairs (not covered by the initial training set) to the training set during the first training set growth step. Over the course of training, we also remove devices that have relatively low overall performance, which can impede the ability of the PGGAN to optimally train. During each training set growth step, we identify the highest efficiency de- vice in the training set for a given wavelength-deflection angle pair and we remove devices that have efficiencies lower than 85% of this highest efficiency value. This method of train- ing set refinement ensures that the performance of the training set, as quantified by the average device efficiency and size, improves over the course of network training. Appendix B: Individual training results of network growth and training set growth The training results for the basic GAN, PGGAN, GAN with only training set growth, and GAN with only network growth are shown in Fig. 5. GAN performance benefits from net- work growth and training set growth, with training set growth contributing more than network growth. However, only the combination of both growth types can boost the performance of the GAN to levels comparable with gradient-base topology optimization. Appendix C: Computational cost calculation In this section, we further breakdown the computation cost of the optimization methods featured in Figure 5. For steps re- quiring gradient-based topology optimization, six individual device simulations per iteration are used. These include for- ward simulations of dilated, intermediate, and eroded patterns 7 Average efficiencies of generated devices as a function of training iteration for teh basic GAN (red), PGGAN (blue), GAN with only network growth (green), and GAN with only training set growth (cyan). The addition of network growth boosts the average GAN-produce device efficiency by about 10%, while the training set growth boosts the average GAN-produced device efficiency by about 20%. and their corresponding adjoint simulations. To create the ini- tial training set for the basic GAN and PGGAN, we perform 350 iterations of adjoint-based topology optimization for 800 randomly generated devices and add the top 50% devices (in terms of efficiency) to the training set. In total, the preparation of the sparse training set requires 800×350×6 = 1,680,000 simulations. 1. For gradient-based topology optimization, 8000 devices are produced. Each device needs 350 iterations of adjoint- based topology optimization, and it therefore takes 8,000 × 350×6 = 16,800,000 simulations. 2. For the basic GAN, we generate 5000 devices for each wavelength and angle combination (13 wavelengths and 11 deflection angles), from which 50 best devices are chosen for 50 iteration of topology refinement. The computational cost for the basic GAN includes the preparation of the ini- tial training set, the evaluation of the generated devices, and further generated device refinement. In total, the number of required EM simulations is 1,680,000 + 13 × 11 × 5,000 + 13 × 11 × 50 × 6 × 50 = 4,540,000 simulations. Of these 4,540,000 simulations, 13×11×5,000+13×11×50×6× 50 = 2,860,000 simulations are performed after the GAN model is trained. 3. For PGGAN, we perform 15 training set updates dur- ing network training. For each training set update, we simu- late the efficiencies of 500 devices at 13×11 combinations of wavelength and deflection angle. After training the PGGAN, we generate and evaluate 2000 devices for each wavelength and angle combination. The total computational cost includes the preparation of the initial training set, the training set up- dates, and the evaluation of the PGGAN-generated devices from a fully trained network. The total number of simula- 3,038,500 simulations. Given a fully trained PGGAN, the number of simulations required to evaluate generated devices is 13×11×2000 = 286,000 simulations. 1N. Yu and F. Capasso, “Flat optics with designer metasurfaces,” Nat. Mater. 2A. V. Kildishev, A. Boltasseva, and V. M. Shalaev, “Planar photonics with metasurfaces,” Science 339, 1232009 (2013). 3A. I. Kuznetsov, A. E. Miroshnichenko, M. L. Brongersma, Y. S. Kivshar, and B. Luk’yanchuk, “Optically resonant dielectric nanostructures,” Sci- ence 354, aag2472 (2016). 4S. Colburn, A. Zhan, and A. Majumdar, “Metasurface optics for full-color computational imaging,” Sci. Adv. 4, eaar2114 (2018). 5A. Tittl, A. Leitis, M. Liu, F. Yesilkoy, D.-Y. Choi, D. N. Neshev, Y. S. Kivshar, and H. Altug, “Imaging-based molecular barcoding with pixelated dielectric metasurfaces,” Science 360, 1105–1109 (2018). 6A. Arbabi, Y. Horie, M. Bagheri, and A. Faraon, “Dielectric metasurfaces for complete control of phase and polarization with subwavelength spatial resolution and high transmission,” Nat. Nanotechnol. 10, 937–943 (2015). 7G. Zheng, H. Mühlenbernd, M. Kenney, G. Li, T. Zentgraf, and S. Zhang, “Metasurface holograms reaching 80% efficiency,” Nat. Nanotechnol. 10, 8S. D. Campbell, D. Sell, R. P. Jenkins, E. B. Whiting, J. A. Fan, and D. H. Werner, “Review of numerical optimization techniques for meta-device de- sign,” Opt. Mater. Express 9, 1842–1863 (2019). 9S. Molesky, Z. Lin, A. Y. Piggott, W. Jin, J. Vuckovi ́c, and A. W. Rodriguez, “Inverse design in nanophotonics,” Nat. Photon. 12, 659–670 10J. S. Jensen and O. Sigmund, “Topology optimization for nano-photonics,” Laser Photonics Rev. 5, 308–321 (2011). 11S. Jafar-Zanjani, S. Inampudi, and H. Mosallaei, “Adaptive genetic algo- rithm for optical metasurfaces design,” Sci. Rep. 8, 11040 (2018). 12D. Sell, J. Yang, E. W. Wang, T. Phan, S. Doshay, and J. A. Fan, “Ultra- high-efficiency anomalous refraction with dielectric metasurfaces,” ACS Photonics 5, 2402–2407 (2018). 13J. Yang, D. Sell, and J. A. Fan, “Freeform metagratings based on complex light scattering dynamics for extreme, high efficiency beam steering,” Ann. 14J. Jiang and J. Fan, “Global optimization of dielectric metasurfaces using a physics-driven neural network,” Nano Lett. 19, 5366–5372 (2019). 15J. Jiang and J. Fan, “Simulator-based training of generative models for the inverse design of metasurfaces,” Nanophotonics (2019). 16D. Sell, J. Yang, S. Doshay, and J. A. Fan, “Periodic dielectric metasurfaces with high-efficiency, multiwavelength functionalities,” Adv. Opt. Mater. 5, 17Z. Lin, B. Groever, F. Capasso, A. W. Rodriguez, and M. Lonˇcar, “Topology-optimized multilayered metaoptics,” Phys. Rev. Appl. 9, 044030 18T. P. Xiao, O. S. Cifci, S. Bhargava, H. Chen, T. Gissibl, W. Zhou, H. Giessen, K. C. T. Jr, E. Yablonovitch, and P. V. Braun, “Diffractive spectral-splitting optical element designed by adjoint-based electromag- netic optimization and fabricated by femtosecond 3d direct laser writing,” ACS Photonics 3, 886–894 (2016). 19T. W. Hughes, M. Minkov, I. A. Williamson, and S. Fan, “Adjoint method and inverse design for nonlinear nanophotonic devices,” ACS Photonics 5, 20A. Y. Piggott, J. Lu, K. G. Lagoudakis, J. Petykiewicz, T. M. Babinec, and J. Vuˇckovi ́c, “Inverse design and demonstration of a compact and broad- band on-chip wavelength demultiplexer,” Nat. Photonics 9, 374 (2015). 21C. M. Lalau-Keraly, S. Bhargava, O. D. Miller, and E. Yablonovitch, “Ad- joint shape optimization applied to electromagnetic design,” Opt. Express 22D. Liu, Y. Tan, E. Khoram, and Z. Yu, “Training deep neural net- works for the inverse design of nanophotonic structures,” ACS Photonics 23S. Inampudi and H. Mosallaei, “Neural network based design of metagrat- ings,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 112, 241102 (2018). 24I. J. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-Farley, S. Ozair, A. Courville, and Y. Bengio, “Generative adversarial nets,” Ad- vances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2014) , 2672–2680 25J. Jiang, D. Sell, S. Hoyer, J. Hickey, J. Yang, and J. Fan, “Free-form 8 diffractive metagrating design based on generative adversarial networks,” ACS Nano 13, 8872–8878 (2019). 26Z. Liu, D. Zhu, S. P. Rodrigues, K.-T. Lee, and W. Cai, “Generative model for the inverse design of metasurfaces,” Nano Lett. 18, 6570–6576 (2018), 27S. So and J. Rho, “Designing nanophotonic structures using conditional deep convolutional generative adversarial networks,” Nanophotonics 8, 28A. Odena, C. Olah, and J. Shlens, “Conditional image synthesis with auxil- iary classifier gans,” International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML 29T. Karras, T. Aila, S. Laine, and J. Lehtinen, “Progressive growing of gans for improved quality, stability, and variation,” International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR 2017). 30J. Hugonin and P. Lalanne, Reticolo Software for Grating Analysis, Institut d’Optique, Palaiseau, France (2005). 31M. Arjovsky, S. Chintala, and L. Bottou, “Generative adversarial net- works,” International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML 2017) , 32D. Sell, J. Yang, S. Doshay, R. Yang, and J. A. Fan, “Large-angle, mul- tifunctional metagratings based on freeform multimode geometries,” Nano