arXiv:1911.01736v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 5 Nov 2019 BKT transition observed in magnetic and electric properties of YBa2Cu3O7−δ single crystals V.I. Nizhankovskiy and K. Rogacki∗ Institute of Low Temperature and Structure Research, Polish Academy of Sciences, ul. Okolna 2, 50-422, Wroclaw, Poland (Dated: November 6, 2019) Superconductivity of YBa2Cu3O7−δ single crystals was investigated in small magnetic fields. In magnetic measurements the superconducting transition for H∥c appears 0.4 K higher than for H⊥c. In this temperature range superconductivity is two-dimensional and the total thickness of supercon- ducting layers is about 0.83 of the sample thickness, which is a consequence of the occurrence of the quasi-insulating plane in the unit cell of the crystal structure. Resistivity in the ab-plane and along the c-axis was measured simultaneously. In these measurements two-dimensional superconductivity was observed in a temperature range of 0.6-0.8 K with the clear signs of the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz- Touless (BKT) transition which occurs approximately 0.15 K below Tc, the mean-field transition temperature. I. INTRODUCTION The BKT transition (Nobel Prize in 2016) was pre- dicted by Berezinskii , Kosterlitz and Touless for two-dimensional (2D) systems (films). If a film be- cames superfluid at a temperature Tc then the superfluid density, ns, appears at Tc and increases with decreasing temperature if no BKT transition occurs. But if BKT transition takes place at TBKT , then at temperatures TBKT < T < Tc, the superfluid density remains close to zero due to the creation of pairs of vortices with op- posite vorticity. This is possible if the vortex attraction force varies as 1/r, just as for superfluid He films . For superconducting films, such behaviour is possible at a distance smaller than the magnetic screening length Ls = 2λ2/d, (1) where λ is the London penetration depth of bulk material and d is the film thickness . At T < TBKT the vortices are bonded. One of the most important signatures of BKT tran- sition in superconducting films could be a jump of the exponent α of the I-V characteristics, V ∝ Iα, from α(TBKT ) = 3 to α(T > TBKT ) = 1 resulting from a jump of ns . However, numerous experimental results performed for thin superconducting films of usual and high-temperature (HTSC) superconductors are not con- vincing because, due to sample inhomogeneity, the BKT transition is blurred or not observed at all . Fur- ther theoretical analysis has shown that Eq.(1) which re- stricts sample dimensions is not sufficient because, due to the boundary conditions at the film edges, the interac- tion between vorticies turns into a short-range type with near exponential decay . Thus BKT transition will most likely not appear in thin superconducting films of usual superconductor deposited on insulating substrate. ∗ k.rogacki@intibs.pl Negative edge effects should be suppressed if a film is deposited on a superconducting substrate covered by a thin insulating layer . The ability to eliminate these edge effects in HTSC consisting of a stack of separated superconducting CuO2 planes was not yet examined. Besides BKT transition that influences the magnetism and electrical conductivity of superconducting films be- low the mean-field critical Ginzburg-Landau (GL) tem- perature, Tc, fluctuating conductivity of the Aslamazov- Larkin (AL) type exists at T > Tc . The interpola- tion formula for conductivity, that combines BKT and AL regimes and describes conductivity in a wide temper- ature range from T = TBKT to T >∼ Tc, was proposed in . This formula fits well with our experimental results pointing to the nature of superconductivity near Tc. After the discovery of high-temperature superconduc- tivity, the theory was expanded to explain numerous un- usual properties of HTSC in normal and superconduct- ing states. For example, diamagnetism above the critical temperature Tc and in high magnetic fields was observed and explained in [11–13]. Later the measurements were extended to a wide family of HTSC and high magnetic fields up to 45 T . Until now no studies in small magnetic fields (below 1 Oe) have been reported. In the present work we have investigated the magnetic and resis- tive properties of YBa2Cu3O7−δ single crystals in small magnetic fields near Tc. Evidence for the BKT transition has been shown in the temperature dependencies of both the critical field and resistivity. II. EXPERIMENT Single crystals of YBa2Cu3O7−δ (YBCO) were grown in a gold crucible by a conventional self-flux growth method. Then they were annealed in flowing oxygen for 80 hours whilst cooling from 470 ◦C to 420 ◦C. The sin- gle crystals have the shape of a thin plate with the main surface perpendicular to the crystallographic c-axis. One large single crystal with a thickness of 21 μm and a sharp transition to the superconducting state was broken into 2 3 pieces: two of them (with a surface S = 3.2 · 10−3 cm2) were used for magnetic measurements, one of them (S = 8.8·10−3 cm2) was used for studying the resistivity. A. Magnetic measurements Most measurements were done with a home-made SQUID magnetometer. This device was constructed for investigation of the quadrupolar magnetic field created by antiferromagnetic Cr2O3 and was also used in the measurement of small magnetic moments of antifer- romagnetic MnF2 . We avoided the use of super- conductors anywhere except for in the pick-up coil and thin-film SQUID sensor. The pick-up coil was placed out- side a dewar-insert made from glass. The main cryostat was made from fibreglass and shielded with four thin- wall permalloy tubes. The inner tube had longitudinal and toroidal demagnetizing coils, the next tube had a longitudinal demagnetizing coil. To eliminate trapped flux effects, no superconducting shield was used, even for the SQUID sensor. A residual magnetic field at the sample position, measured with a superconducting lead sphere, did not exceed 1 mOe. The magnetic field was produced by a copper coil. The sample holder was made from five quartz fibres, each 1 mm in diameter. At the end of the holder, aluminium foil and a Cernox-1050 bare chip thermometer were glued. The sample was attached to the foil with Apiezon grease. Good thermal contact between the sample and the thermometer was ensured and thoroughly tested. Once we noticed a parasitic shift in Hc(T ) dependence by 0.06 K. Examinations revealed a gap of about 0.3 mm between the thermometer and the aluminium foil. After the thermometer was glued again, the parasitic shift in temperature disappeared. A zero-field cooling procedure was used, i.e., the sam- ple was cooled down from 95 K to 85 K in zero mag- netic field, then the magnetic field was applied and the magnetic moment was measured during slow heating (dT/dt ≃ 0.12 K/min) in the fixed field. The magne- tization measurements in fields higher than 2 Oe were also performed in a Quantum Design Magnetic Property Measurement System with a Magnet Reset option which allowed us to reduce the trapped field below 0.3 Oe. B. Resistivity measurements A schematic diagram of resistivity measurements is shown in Fig.1(a). Six electrodes were connected to the single crystal for measurements performed in the ab- plane and along the c-axis. The measurements were done simultaneously with two lock-in amplifiers (Signal Re- covery 7225 and 7265) working at different frequencies (83 Hz and 137 Hz). In order to avoid parasitic phase shift, 10 kΩ resistors (smd type) determining measur- ing currents were mounted near the sample. The tem- perature was measured with a Cernox 1050 thermome- resistivity measurements and (b) a photo of the single crystal of YBa2Cu3O7−δ prepared for investigations. ter. The photo of the YBCO single crystal mounted for the resistivity measurements is shown in Fig.1(b). The crystal was glued to a sapphire plate with GE varnish, and then four contacts (gold wires, 12.7 μm in diame- ter) were made on one side of the crystal using a two- component Ag-epoxy (Epoxy Technology, H20E), which was annealed in air at 90 ◦C for 80 minutes. Then an- other two contacts on the other side of the crystal were made in a similar way. In order to obtain low-resistance contacts, the entire assembly was annealed in flowing oxygen at 410 ◦C for 12 hours. The contacts made in this way had a resistance of about 1.5 Ω and were stable over time. For resistivity measurements, the real temperature of the sample is usually difficult to measure with a high degree of precision. This is especially important for the investigations of I-V characteristics when a large current may overheat the sample. Simultaneous measurements of both Vab and Vc signals allowed us to overcome this difficulty (see below) and removed doubts in the inter- pretation of the experimental results. III. RESULTS A. Magnetic moment Examples of M(T ) records for the YBCO single crystal are shown in Fig.2. A significant shift of the supercon- ducting transition to higher temperatures and an increase of its slope was observed for H∥c with decreasing mag- netic field from 2 Oe to 0.1 Oe. For H∥ab and in a simi- lar field range, the transition (its temperature, width and slope) remains unchanged. The magnetic moment in the superconducting state (Fig.3) measured for H∥ab was as expected for the single crystal with a volume v ≃ 7·10−6 cm3 estimated from its dimensions. The magnetic mo- ment for H∥c was 11.8 times larger than that, which corresponds to the demagnetization factor n = 0.915. The superconducting transition temperature, T0, of the single crystal was determined at intersection of the tangent to the M(T ) curve with the M(T ) = 0 line (Fig.2 3 YBa2Cu3O7−δ. Arrows indicate a corresponding transition temperature, T0. and Fig.4 insert). This definition eliminates the influence of the demagnetization factor of the sample. The width of transition, ∆T , was determined from intersections of the tangent with lines M(T ) = M(85K) and M(T ) = 0 (Fig.5 insert). Fig.4 summarizes the M(T ) results ob- tained in fields up to 8 Oe. It is clearly shown that for fields equal to 1.5 Oe and higher, the temperature dependencies of the critical magnetic field of the single crystal for both orientations H∥c and H∥ab converge, but at lower fields they diverge and for H → 0, T0 for H∥c is 0.4 K higher than for H∥ab. Different behaviour of M(T ) at the transition, observed for different field ori- entation, can also be noticed for the field dependence of ∆T (Fig.5). For H∥c, ∆T increases linearly with a mag- netic field below 0.8 Oe, then remains roughly constant, and above 2 Oe increases again with a different slope. For H∥ab, the dependence ∆T (H) is linear for the whole range of magnetic fields. The two transitions, one for H∥c and the other for H∥ab, observed in fields lower than 1.5 Oe at different temperatures, manifest in the shape of the M(T ) depen- dence obtained for H∥c, as shown in Fig.6. For clar- ity, the magnetic moment is normalized to its value at T = 90 K. It was observed that in fields below 0.8 Oe the transition became two-stage. With increasing tem- perature, the transition started with a decreasing of the magnetic moment to about 0.83 of its value at T = 90 K (dashed line in Fig.6), remained at the ”0.83 plateau” and then went to zero. B. Resistivity Resistivity in the ab-plane (Fig.1) was measured in the Van der Pauw configuration with contacts placed near to, but not at the sample’s edges. A correction coefficient of 1.08 for the non-standard geometry of the 3. Magnetic moment of the single crystal of YBa2Cu3O7−δ measured at T = 85 K for H∥c (open circles) and H∥ab (filled circles). Critical magnetic field of the single crystal of YBa2Cu3O7−δ. Insert shows the definition of the transition temperature T0. sample was obtained experimentally using a model sam- ple cut from brass foil. Resistivity along the c-axis was measured using the Schnabel configuration . For the ideal case of an infinite plate with point contacts, the resistance is: Rc = Uc/Ic = ρab πd G(α) (2) were α = (ρc/ρab)0.5 · α0, α0 = d/s, d is the plate thick- ness and s is the distance between current and potential contacts. Function G(α) is tabulated in . The deriva- tive dG/dα → 0 for α → 0 and dG/dα → 1 for α → ∞. Thus for ρc = const, Rc should diminish with dimin- ishing ρab and Rc(ρab = 0) = 0. From measurements performed at room temperature, ρab = 0.37 mΩcm and Rc = 1.35 mΩ, and taking d = 21 μm and s = 0.37 mm, 4 crystal of YBa2Cu3O7−δ as a function of the applied magnetic field H∥c (open circles) and H∥ab (filled circles). The insert shows the definition of ∆T . of the magnetic moment at the superconducting transition of the single crystal of YBa2Cu3O7−δ for H∥c. The magnetic moment is normalized to its value at T = 90 K. we got G = 0.024, α = 0.689 and ρc/ρab ≃ 150. Taking into account that the contacts were placed near one side of the sample whose maximum size is only three times larger than the distance s between the contacts, the real value of an anisotropy is several times smaller. If the plate is a rectangle, then the function G(α) may be calculated by the method proposed in . Nu- merical estimation was done for a rectangle 0.8 mm x 1.2 mm and for contacts placed at its edge. Results for s = 0.37 mm were α = 0.605 and ρc/ρab ≃ 113. If s is made equal to the minimal distance between con- tact spots, s = 0.25 mm, then α = 0.619 and ρc/ρab ≃ 54. This anisotropy is higher than the maximum value ρc/ρab = 35 reported for optimally doped YBCO . Larger anisotropy is expected for single crystals of higher quality. Resistivity in the ab-plane and along the c-axis of the YBCO single crystal was measured on cooling from room temperature to below Tc and is shown in Fig.7(a). For temperatures above 93 K, Rc is proportional to ρab, so the anisotropy is constant. A detailed picture of the superconducting transition is shown in Fig.7(b). The data was obtained with slow heating of 0.2 K/min. Analysing the results when going from the normal to the superconducting state, it is seen that resistivity in the ab-plane monotonically diminishes (the width of transi- tion is about 0.30 K), whereas resistance along the c- axis starts to increase at the beginning of the transition in the ab-plane, goes through a deep minimum when ρab(T ) ≃ 0.1ρn and becomes zero below T = T2D−3D, where the transition along the c-axis is completed. The results are qualitatively the same for the two configu- rations of current and potential leads (for details see Fig.7(b)), and only the depth of the minimum differs. This means that the minimum in Rc(T ) curves cannot be ascribed to a non-alignment of contacts or inhomoge- neous distribution of current and has a deeper physical meaning, as we will discuss in section IV. Increasing the measuring current from 50 to 400 μA had no influence on Rc(T ) dependence. Results shown in Fig.7 were obtained during the first week after the sample’s contacts were prepared. Mea- surements performed six weeks later, which allowed the sample to relax and return to a state with homoge- neous oxygen distribution, yielded the results presented in Fig.8. The temperature dependence of the resistance along the c-axis changed, however some characteristic features remain. As before, Rc(T ) begins to grow when ρab(T ) begins to diminish, shows two maxima and goes to zero at T = 91.9 K (Fig.8(a)) instead of T = 92.2 K (Fig.7(b)). For Rc(T ), the more pronounced maximum is observed at T = 92.74 K where ρab(T ) reaches zero. When superconductivity in the ab-plane is suppressed by a larger measuring current, the increase of Rc shifts to lower temperatures and the more pronounced maxi- mum vanishes (Fig.8(b)). The temperature dependence of the resistivity in the ab-plane was measured at several currents from 20 μA to 5 mA, which allowed us to de- termine the exponent α of I-V characteristics, V ∝ Iα(T ) (Fig.9(a)), and the critical current at a level Vab = 10 nV (Fig.9(b)). For these measurements, a current limiting resistor was reduced from 10 kΩ to 1 kΩ to allow the use of a sufficiently high current. IV. DISCUSSION Experimental data for magnetization of the YBCO sin- gle crystal (Fig.4) clearly show that it has two differ- ent superconducting states. Below T2D−3D = 91.76 K, YBCO behaves as a usual three-dimensional (3D) super- 5 single crystal of YBa2Cu3O7−δ: grey line shows the resistiv- ity in the ab-plane, ρab, at Iab = 50 μA; black line shows the resistance along the c-axis, Rc, at Ic = 200 μA. (b) Detailed picture of ρab(T ) and Rc(T ) at the superconducting transi- tion, for Iab = 20 μA and Ic = 100 μA. Black lines show Rc(T ) measured for interchanged current and potential leads. Dashed line in (b) shows fitting of ρab(T ) to Eq.(4). conductor. Above this threshold temperature, its be- haviour is different - large diamagnetism remains for H∥c, however, it disappears for H∥ab. If we identify T2D−3D with the critical temperature Tc, then the diamagnetic response above Tc may result from the Gaussian ther- mal fluctuations of the order parameter ψ . How- ever, in that case the theory does not predict any criti- cal magnetic field above which this diamagnetism should disappear, which is contradictory to our observations, as shown in Fig.4. Another explanation could be proposed if one takes into account the crystalline structure of YBCO, which is a layered compound with conducting (metallic) lay- ers (blocks of double CuO2 planes with one yttrium layer) separated by buffer layers (blocks of CuO chain with two barium layers) serving as a charge reservoir. Thus, this compound is considered as a quasi 2D sys- tem due to the smallness of the coherence length along the c-axis, ξc, with respect to the thickness of the buffer layer. In this case, with temperature decreasing from T = 92.18 K, the superconductivity appears in CuO2 planes forming a stack of weakly coupled quasi 2D super- single crystal of YBa2Cu3O7−δ measured in the ab-plane (grey line) and along the c-axis (black line) at: (a) Ic = 200 μA, Iab = 50 μA and (b) Ic = 200 μA, Iab = 5 mA. Dashed line in (a) shows fitting of ρab(T ) to Eq.(5). These results were obtained 6 weeks later than the results presented in Fig.7. conducting plates. Further lowering of the temperature will result in the transition to bulk superconductivity at T2D−3D. When a magnetic field smaller than the lower critical field, Hc1, is applied along the c-axis at T = 85 K, the sample acquires a negative magnetic moment due to the surface screening current. For T < T2D−3D, this current fills the entire side surface of the sample, as shown schematically in Fig.10(a). When temperature rises above T2D−3D, the screening current should split up into many streams along the sides of the 2D supercon- ducting plates (Fig.10(b)). Consequently, if the applied magnetic field is small enough that the screening cur- rent does not exceed the critical value, then the M(T ) dependence will reveal a double-stage transition to the normal state, as shown in Fig.6. For H ∥ c < 1 Oe, a small plateau is observed at M(T )/M(90K)=0.83, which corresponds to the magnetic moment of the separated quasi 2D superconducting plates. The results presented in Fig.6 allowed us to estimate the thickness of the su- perconducting plates in one unit cell to be equal to ds = 0.83·c = 0.97 nm (c = 1.17 nm is the lattice dimen- sion along the c-axis) and, consequently, the thickness of non superconducting layers to be equal to 0.20 nm. 6 (a) Temperature dependence of the exponent α in I-V characteristics, Vab ∝ Iα(T ), of the single crystal of YBa2Cu3O7−δ. (b) Temperature dependence of the critical current determined at a level Vab = 10 nV. Solid line means Tc = 92.74 K (see Fig.8(a)). M T2D-3D< T < TBKT (b) M T < T2D-3D (a) Illustration of the screening current flow in the Meissner state at temperatures from two ranges: (a) T < T2D−3D and (b) T2D−3D < T < TBKT . The c-axis of the sin- gle crystal of YBa2Cu3O7−δ is oriented parallel to the mag- netic field and thus to the magnetic moment, M. In the Meissner state the screening current flows in a sheet with a thickness of about the penetration depth, λ. For H∥c (Fig.10), an increase of temperature above T2D−3D does not change the screening current trajec- tory; it continues to flow along the perimeter surface of the sample, except of the non superconducting buffer layers, as shown in Fig.10(b). For H∥ab, the situation is different; instead of flowing along the perimeter sur- face of the sample (as for T < T2D−3D), the screening current will flow along the perimeter surface of each su- perconducting plate, that is the block of double CuO2 planes with an yttrium layer. For this orientation of the magnetic field (H∥ab), the current trajectory will run along the ab-plane and in the direction of the c-axis. At T < T2D−3D the thickness of the current sheet is about and Tc = 92.18 K we get λc(T2D−3D) ≈ 3.9·10−4 cm, for T2D−3D = 91.76 K, as derived from Fig.4. This value is more than 5 times smaller than the thickness of the sample, that explains the full Meissner state re- vealed at temperatures just below T2D−3D, but is much larger than the thickness of a single superconducting plate (ds ≃ 1 nm), which explains the abrupt suppression of the Meissner state at T2D−3D for H∥ab (Fig.4). Earlier, the thickness of the superconducting plates in several high-temperature superconductors was estimated from the crossing-point phenomenon in magnetization measurements . In numerous experiments it has been observed that the magnetization curves M(H, T ) of most HTSC cross at a single point M ∗(T ∗), which is indepen- dent of the magnetic field applied perpendicularly to the superconducting planes. According to the theory , T ∗ = TBKT and −M ∗ = 0.52kBTBKT 2dsΦ0 , (3) where kB is the Boltzmann constant and Φ0 is the mag- netic flux quantum. It should be noted that in other theoretical works, ds was assigned to the interlayer dis- tance and the numerical coefficient in Eq.(3) was different [31–33]. In Ref. , the values of ds were from 0.76 nm for La1.92Sr0.08CuO4 to 4.4 nm for TlBa2Ca2Cu3O9+δ. The last value is almost 3 times larger than the lattice constant along the c-axis which seems to be impossible. The crossing point was not observed for YBCO due to its relatively low anisotropy. Behaviour of the resistivity of our sample in the nor- mal state (Fig.7 (a)) is typical for optimally doped YBCO [22–24]. For T > 93 K, Rc(T ) changes in the same way as ρab(T ). However, the behaviour of Rc(T ) alters at lower temperatures with the beginning of the supercon- ducting transition in the ab-plane, and this points to the emergence of different mechanism of conductivity along the c-axis. Like in our work, in it was observed that the superconducting transition in the ab-plane occurs at higher temperatures than that along the c-axis. For our sample, T ab c − T c c = 0.74 K, in it is equal to 0.35 K. Electrical properties of YBCO may be modelled by a stack of conducting plates separated by thin buffer lay- ers. At high temperatures the conductivity along the c- axis is provided by single electron transport through the buffer layers between conducting plates. In this case, the behaviour of resistance along the c-axis (Fig.7(b)) may be explained in the following way; as the temperature de- creases and fluctuating superconductivity in the conduct- ing blocks of double CuO2 planes appears (ρab decreases), the number of non-paired electrons in these planes, nn, diminishes which results in an increase of resistance along the c-axis. If BKT transition occurs at TBKT < Tc, then for temperatures in the range TBKT < T < Tc, the superfluid density ns remains zero or close to zero, nn 7 stays roughly constant and Rc(T ) does not change or de- creases due to more uniform current distribution. Thus a maximum in the Rc(T ) dependence appears just above TBKT . Below this temperature, ns rapidly increases, nn decreases and Rc raises again. At lower tempera- tures Rc begins to diminish due to Josephson coupling (Cooper pairs tunnelling) between the blocks of double CuO2 planes down to Rc = 0, which corresponds to the 2D-3D transition. This qualitatively explains the results presented in Fig.7(b). In this figure, arrows correspond to TBKT = 92.72 K and Tc = 92.81 K, so the tempera- ture interval in which the BKT vortex state exists is very narrow (0.09 K). Resistivity measurements were repeated after six weeks and the results shown in Fig.8 confirmed the observed increase of Rc, which occurred simultaneously with the decrease of ρab when the temperature was lowered. In Fig.8(a), the resistance along the c-axis reaches a maxi- mum at Tc = 92.74 K when ρab = 0. The BKT transition may be assigned to the temperature TBKT = 92.60 K, where Rc stops decreasing, so for these results, the tem- perature interval where the BKT vortex state exists is 0.14 K. Fig.8(b) shows that the superconducting transi- tion in the ab-plane is suppressed by a large measuring current and the maximum in Rc(T ) is smeared off, as expected. Exponent α of the I-V characteristics, Vab ∝ Iα(T ), gradually increases from α = 1 to α = 4 when the tem- perature decreases from 92.95 K to 92.55 K (Fig.9(a)). From condition α(TBKT ) = 3 it follows that TBKT = 92.60 K, which corresponds perfectly with the resistivity results (Fig.8(a)). In the temperature range T2D−3D < T < TBKT, Rc is determined by the competition between single-electron transport, which diminishes with lowering temperature, and Cooper pairs tunnelling, which rises . Thus, different behaviour of the resistivity can be observed and a quantitative model is necessary to de- scribe the specific Rc(T ) dependence. To our knowledge, such a quantitative model has not been presented to date in literature. An attempt to describe the resistive transition in the ab-plane was performed by using the Aslamazov-Larkin (AL) paraconductivity model with the resulting formula 1/ρ = 1/ρn + σ � T/Tc − 1, (4) where σ is a constant. This attempt was not successful, as shown in Fig.7(b). Similarly unsuccessful was an at- tempt to describe the results presented in Fig.8. Thus, the nature of the state above the transition to the super- conducting state seems to be different to the fluctuating superconductivity of the AL type, which is based on the appearance of the Cooper pairs above Tc along with lo- cal condensation. On the other hand, the temperature dependence of the resistivity in the ab-plane, measured at small current (grey line in Fig.8(a)), was well mapped by the formula obtained in the frame of the model which interpolates the BKT behaviour with the GL-type fluc- tuations : ρ ρn = 1 1 + (ξ/ξ0)2 , T ≥ TBKT , (5) ξ ξ0 = 2 Asinh b √ t, t = T − TBKT TBKT , where ξ0 is the zero-temperature coherence length and A and b are fitting parameters, which we will discuss below. As shown in Fig. 8(a) (dashed line), Eq.(5) describes the experimental ρab(T ) very well in the whole region of the transition to the superconducting state. The fitting parameter b is: b = 2α√tc, tc = Tc − TBKT TBKT , (6) where α determines the increase of the vortex-core en- ergy, μ, compared to the XY-model valid for a single- layer superconductor: μ = αμXY . The fitting pa- rameter A was taken to be equal to 284. The fit- ting coefficient b = 0.274, with ρn = 0.0698 mΩcm, TBKT = 92.60 K and Tc = 92.74 K (as taken from Fig.8(a)), gives α ≃ 3.5. This value of α is similar to that derived in . Summarizing the experimental results we can state that both magnetization and resistivity measurements showed the 2D behavior of our YBCO single crystals close to Tc and revealed a transition to the 3D state at lower temperatures. A characteristic non-monotonic tempera- ture dependence of Rc has been observed and interpreted as a result of the BKT transition. For one set of measure- ments, the BKT transition temperature TBKT = 92.60 K was found from the Rc(T ) dependence (Fig. 8(a)) and the α(T ) relation (Fig. 9(a)), and also derived from the BKT-AL interpolated formula which described correctly the ρab(T ) behaviour at the superconducting transition (Fig. 8(a)). Thus, we believe that the existence of the BKT transition in our single crystals has been sufficiently well proved. Experimental results on critical currents (Fig.9(b)) may be used for estimation of the possible error δT in the determination of Tc from the magnetic moment measurements in small magnetic fields. In the Meiss- ner state, the screening current flows in a thin surface layer (Fig.10) with a thickness of about the penetration depth, which depends on the temperature as λab(T ) = has been taken from Ref. . Thus, the solid line in Fig.9(b) corresponds to the linear critical current density 0.094 cm is an average dimension of the single crystal along the main surface (see Fig.1(b)), and Tc = 92.74 K. The 0.5L instead of L was used assuming an approximate distribution of current in the single crystal. The mag- netic moment of the sample with the main surface S = 3.2 · 10−3 cm2 is equal to M(T ) = 0.1Sj(T )λab(T ) emu ≃ 1.6 · 10−4(1 − T/Tc)2 emu. For this estimation, 8 the SQUID noise MS ≃ 3 · 10−8 emu corresponds to (1 − T/Tc) ≃ 1.4 · 10−2 or δT ≃ 1.3 K for Tc = 92 K. This estimation naturally explains the difference in the characteristic temperatures (Tc, TBKT and T2D−3D) ob- tained from magnetic (Fig.4) and resistivity (Fig.7 and Fig.8) measurements. Our results for the BKT transition have been obtained in conditions different from those reported earlier for YBCO single crystals [36–38]. A single crystal investi- gated in showed a wide resistive transition in the ab-plane, 81.6 − 83.3 K, and superconductivity along the c-axis which appeared at around 76 K. TBKT = 80 K was obtained by fitting the BKT scaling to the temper- ature dependencies Rab(T ) and α(T ), where α is the ex- ponent from the I-V characteristics. However, instead of Rc(T ) decreasing around TBKT , its rise followed by a steep fall at lower temperatures was observed. This be- haviour of the resistance along the c-axis does not agree with the expected diminishing of ns (increasing of nn) at T >∼ TBKT . A single crystal investigated in had a high critical temperature of about 93 K, but zero re- sistance in the ab-plane and along the c-axis occurred at the same temperature, i.e. superconductivity had a 3D character. For studies reported in , the resistance of a single crystal along the c-axis was not measured, so the 2D character of the superconductivity was not proved. On the other hand, the BKT type transition has been confirmed in another cuprate, the stripe superconductor La2−xBaxCuO4 . The main problem that arises in measurements of I-V characteristics is the precise control of the sample tem- perature. Usually it is difficult to ensure very good ther- mal contact of a sample and a thermometer even when they are stuck together. Strongly non-linear current and the temperature dependence of the resistivity result in uncontrollable heating of the sample and the I-V characteristics may acquire even an S-shape form . Therefore, we believe that for unambiguous identification of the BKT transition in HTSC, simultaneous measure- ments of the resistivity both in the ab-plane and along the c-axis are necessary. V. CONCLUSIONS Magnetic measurements of YBCO single crystals re- vealed the 2D-3D transition in the superconducting state, in fields lower than 1.5 Oe. Magnetization curves ob- tained at temperatures above T2D−3D showed a two- stage transition to the normal state which allowed us to estimate the effective thickness ds ≃ 1 nm of a sin- gle quasi two-dimensional superconducting plate. The value of ds, which is important for the calculation of the helicity modulus (phase stiffness) of the superfluid phase , is consistent with the crystal structure of YBCO containing the superconducting blocks of double CuO2 planes with an yttrium layer. Electric properties of YBCO single crystals were studied by simultaneous mea- surements of ρab and Rc confirming the 2D-3D transition revealed by the magnetization results. Whereas the tem- perature dependence of ρab was typical in nature, Rc(T ) showed more complicated behavior, which was explained by the competition between a single-electron transport and Josephson tunneling. Our experiment showed that peculiarities of the Rc(T ) dependence might be used as a probe of characteristic changes in the superfluid density below the superconducting transition, where ρab = 0 is not informative. The Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Touless state was observed in a narrow temperature range below the 2D mean-field superconducting transition. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We are grateful to James Owen for important sugges- tions and critical comments regarding the final form of this article. V. L. Berezinskii, Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 59, 907 (1970) [Sov. Phys. JETP 32, 493 (1971)]. V. L. Berezinskii, Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 61, 1144 (1971) [Sov. Phys. JETP 34, 610616 (1972)]. J. M. Kosterlitz and D. J. Thouless, Journal of Physics C: Solid State Physics 6, 11811203 (1973). P. Minnhagen, Rev. Mod. Phys. 59, 1001 (1987). B. I. Halperin and D. R. Nelson, Journal of Low Tem- perature Physics 36, 599 (1979). L. Benfatto, C. Castellani, and T. Giamarchim, Phys. Rev. B 80, 214506 (2009). C. Xu, L. Wang, Z. Liu, L. Chen, J. Guo, N. Kang, X.-L. Ma, H.-M. Cheng, and W. Ren, Nature Mat. 14, 1135 J. M. Repaci, C. Kwon, Qi Li, Xiuguang Jiang, T. Venkatessan, R. E. Glover III, C. J. Lobb, and R. S. Newrock, Phys. Rev. B 54, R9674 (1996). V. G. Kogan, Phys. Rev. B 75, 064514 (2007). L. G. Aslamasov and A. I. Larkin, Phys. Lett. A 26, 238 L. Li, Y. Wang, M.J. Naughton, S. Ono, Y. Ando, and N. P. Ong, Europhys. Lett., 72, 451457 (2005). Y. Wang, L. Li, M. J. Naughton, G. Gu, and N. P. Ong, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 247002 (2005). V. Oganesyan, D. A. Huse, and S. L. Sondhi, Phys. Rev. L. Li, Y. Wang, S. Komiya, S. Ono, Y. Ando, G. D. Gu, and N. P. Ong, Phys. Rev. B 81, 054510 (2010). D. N. Astrov, N. B. Ermakov, A. S. Borovik-Romanov, E. G. Kolevatov, and V. I. Nizhankovskii, Pisma Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 63, 713 (1996) [JETP Letters 63, 745 (1996)]. 9 V. I. Nizhankovskii, A. I. Khar’kovskii, and A. J. Zaleski, Eur. Phys. J. B 10, 761 (1999). V. I. Nizhankovskii, JMMM 242-245, 928 (2002). Van der Pauw, Philips Res. Repts 13, 1 (1958). P. Schnabel, Philips Res. Repts 19, 43 (1964). P. Schnabel, Z. angew. Phys. 22, 136 (1967). L. B. Luganskii and V. I. Tsebro, Instrum. Exp. Tech. 58, 118 (2015); in Eq.(16) the number π has been omitted (see: arXiv:1502.02600 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]). K. Nagasao, T. Masui and S. Tajima, Physica C 468, G. A. Shams, J. W. Cochrane, and G. J. Russell, Physica H. Uchiyama, N. Matsukura, and N. Chikumoto, Phys. Rev. B 81, 060511(R) (2010). R. V. Vovk, N. R. Vovk, O. V. Shekhovtsov, I. L. Gou- latis, and A. Chroneos, Supercond. Sci. Technol. 26, K. E. Gray and D. H. Kim, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 1693 M. Tinkham, Introduction to Superconductivity (Dover, New York, 2004). J. Kurkij ̈arvi and V. Ambegaokar, Phys. Rev. B 5, 868 T. Schneider, J. Hofer, M. Willemin, J.M. Singer, and H. Keller, Eur. Phys. J. B 3, 413 (1998). T. Schneider and J. M. Singer, Phase Transition Ap- proach to High Temperature Superconductivity (Imperial College Press, London, 2000), Chap. 6. L. N. Bulaevskii, M. Ledvij, and V. G. Kogan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 3773 (1992). A. E. Koshelev, Phys. Rev. B 50, 506 (1994). A. Junod, J.-Y. Genoud, G. Triscone, and T. Schneider, Physica C 294, 115 (1998). L. Benfatto, C. Castellani, and T. Giamarchi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 117008 (2007). S. Kamal, Ruixing Liang, A. Hosseini, D. A. Bonn, and W. N. Hardy, Phys. Rev. B 58, R8933 (1998). P. C. E. Stamp, L. Forro, and C. Ayache, Phys. Rev. 38, N.-C. Yeh and C. C. Tsuei, Phys. Rev. B 39, 9708 (1989). M. A. Vasyutin, A. I. Golovashkin, and N. D. Kuzmichev, Physics of Solid State 48, 2260 (2006). Q. Li, M. H ̈ucker, G. D. Gu, A. M. Tsvelik, and J. M. Tranquada, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 067001 (2007). J.M. Tranquada, G. D. Gu, M. H ̈ucker, Q. Jie, H.-J. Kang, R. Klingeler, Q. Li, N. Tristan, J. S. Wen, G. Y. Xu, Z. J. Xu, J. Zhou, and M. v. Zimmermann, Phys. Rev. B 78, 174529 (2008). A. Vl. Gurevich and R. G. Mints, Rev. Mod. Phys. 59, L. Qiao, D. Li, S. V. Postolova, A. Yu. Mironov, V. Vi- nokur, and B. Rosenstein, Scientific Reports 8, 14104 I. F. Herbut and M. J. Case, Phys. Rev. B 70, 094516 I. Boˇzovi ́c, X. He1, J. Wu1, and A. T. Bollinger, Nature