Integrated turnkey soliton microcombs operated at CMOS frequencies Boqiang Shen1,∗, Lin Chang2,∗,†, Junqiu Liu3,∗, Heming Wang1,∗, Qi-Fan Yang1,∗, Chao Xiang2, Rui Ning Wang3, Jijun He3, Tianyi Liu3, Weiqiang Xie2, Joel Guo2, Dave Kinghorn2, Lue Wu1, Qing-Xin Ji1,4, Tobias J. Kippenberg3,†, Kerry Vahala1,† and John E. Bowers2 1T. J. Watson Laboratory of Applied Physics, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA 2ECE Department, University of California Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA 3Institute of Physics, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Lausanne (EPFL), CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland 4School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China ∗These authors contributed equally to this work. †Corresponding authors: linchang@ucsb.edu, tobias.kippenberg@epfl.ch, vahala@caltech.edu While soliton microcombs offer the potential for integration of powerful frequency metrology and precision spectroscopy systems, their operation requires complex startup and feedback proto- cols that necessitate difficult-to-integrate optical and electrical components. Moreover, CMOS-rate microcombs, required in nearly all comb systems, have resisted integration because of their power requirements. Here, a regime for turnkey operation of soliton microcombs co-integrated with a pump laser is demonstrated and theoretically explained. Significantly, a new operating point is shown to appear from which solitons are generated through binary turn-on and turn-off of the pump laser, thereby eliminating all photonic/electronic control circuitry. These features are combined with high- Q Si3N4 resonators to fully integrate into a butterfly package microcombs with CMOS frequencies as low as 15 GHz, offering compelling advantages for high-volume production. Optical frequency combs have found a remarkably wide range of applications in science and technology . And a recent development that portends a revolution in minia- ture and integrated comb systems is dissipative Kerr soli- ton formation in coherently pumped high-quality-factor (high-Q) optical microresonators [2–8]. To date, these soliton microcombs have been applied to spectroscopy [10–12], the search for exoplanets , optical fre- quency synthesis , time keeping and other ar- eas. Also, the recent integration of microresonators with lasers has revealed the viability of fully chip-based soliton microcombs . However, despite their enormous promise, microcomb integration has faced two consider- able obstacles. First, complex tuning schemes and feedback loops are required for generation and stabilization of solitons . These not only introduce redundant power- hungry electronic components , but also require optical isolation, a function that has so far been challeng- ing to integrate at acceptable performance levels. Indeed, the omission of optical isolation between a high-Q res- onator and a laser has been a subject of study for some time. And semiconductor laser locking to the resonator as well as line narrowing have been shown to result from backscattering of the intracavity optical field. These attributes as well as mode selection when using a broad- band pump have also been profitably applied to oper- ate microcomb systems without isolation . However, prior studies of feedback effects have considered the resonator to be linear. Here, we show that the non- linear dynamic of the unisolated laser-microcomb system creates a new operating point from which the pump laser is simply turned-on to initiate the soliton mode locking process. A theory and experimental demonstration of the existence and substantial benefits of this new operating point are presented. A second issue impacting microcomb integration is the realization of repetition frequencies that are both de- tectable and that can be readily processed by CMOS circuits. These features are essential to realize the pro- cess of comb self-referencing that underlies many comb applications. While detectable repetition rates are readily available in larger table top and fiber-based combs, these rates have been much more challenging to achieve in soliton microcombs owing to excessive power consumption caused by the resulting enlarged optical mode volume. To overcome this problem, ultra-high-Q silica resonators and Damascene Si3N4 resonators provide effective pathways to reduce power consump- tion. Even there, however, it has not been possible until the present work to generate CMOS-rate solitons using integrated pumps. In the experiment, integrated soliton microcombs whose fabrication and repetition rate (40 GHz down to 15 GHz) are compatible with CMOS circuits are butt-coupled to a commercial distributed-feedback (DFB) laser via inverse tapers (Fig. 1A). The microres- onators are fabricated using the photonic Damascence reflow process [25–27] and feature Q factors exceeding 16 million (Fig.1B), resulting in low milliwatt-level para- metric oscillation threshold, despite the larger required mode volumes of the GHz-rate microcombs. This enables chip-to-chip pumping of microcombs for the first time at these challenging repetition rates. Up to 30 mW of opti- cal power is launched into the microresonator. Feedback from the resonator suppresses frequency noise by around 30 dB compared with that of a free-running DFB laser (Fig. 1C) so that the laser noise performance surpasses state-of-the-art monolithically integrated lasers and table-top external-cavity-diode-lasers (ECDL). Given its arXiv:1911.02636v1 [physics.optics] 6 Nov 2019 2 A D Laser Microresonator CMOS 20 GHz DC power supply Transmission (a.u.) 0 1 Frequency (MHz) Qo=16 M B -250 0 250 Measurement Lorentzian fitting C Frequency offset (Hz) 105 1010 Frequency noise (Hz2/Hz) 100 103 104 105 106 107 DFB, free running DFB, injection locked ULN integrated laser External cavity laser source and produces soliton pulse signals that are detectable with CMOS circuits. Four microcombs are integrated on one chip, but only one is used in these measurements. (B) Transmission signal when scanning the laser across a cavity resonance (blue). Lorentzian fitting (red) reveals 16 million intrinsic Q factor. (C) Frequency noise spectral densities (SDs) of the DFB laser when it is free running (blue) and feedback-locked to a high-Q Si3N4 microresonator (red). For comparison, the frequency noise Images of a pump/microcomb in a compact butterfly package. compact footprint and the absence of control electronics, the pump-laser/microcomb chip set was mounted into a butterfly package (Fig. 1D) to facilitate measurements and also enable portability. In conventional pumping of microcombs, the laser is optically-isolated from the downstream optical path so as to prevent feedback-induced interference (Fig. 2A). And on account of strong high-Q-induced resonant build- up and the Kerr nonlinearity, the intracavity power as a function of pump-cavity detuning features a bistability. The resulting dynamics can be described using a phase diagram comprising continuous-wave (c.w.), modulation instability (MI) combs and soliton regimes that are ac- cessed as the pump frequency is tuned across a cavity res- onance (Fig. 2B). This tuning through the MI regime functions to seed the formation of soliton pulses. On ac- count of the thermal hysteresis and the abrupt intra- cavity power discontinuity upon transition to the soliton regime (Fig. 2C), delicate tuning waveforms or ac- tive capturing techniques are essential to compensate thermal transients, except in cases of materials featuring effectively negative thermo-optic response . Now consider removing the optical isolation as shown in Fig. 2D so that backscatter feedback occurs. In prior feedback locking studies the resonator has been con- sidered to be linear so that the detuning between the feedback-locked laser and the cavity resonance is deter- mined by the phase φ accumulated in the feedback path . However, here the nonlinear behavior of the mi- croresonator is included resulting in a dramatic effect on the operating point. Including the nonlinear behav- ior causes the resonances to be red-shifted by intensity- dependent self- and cross-phase modulation. The rela- tionship between detuning δω (i.e. the difference of cav- ity resonance and laser frequency) and intracavity power of the pump mode P0 can then be shown to be ap- proximately given by, δω κ/2 = tan φ 2 + 3 2 P0 Pth (1) where κ is the power decay rate of the resonance and Pth is the parametric oscillation threshold for intracavity power. This dependence of detuning on intracavity power gives rise to a single operating point at the intersection of Eq. (1) and the soliton hysteresis as shown in Fig. 2E. Control of the feedback phase shifts the x-intercept of Eq. (1) and thereby adjusts the operating point. Cu- riously, this equilibrium is stable but can lie on the middle branch of the multi-stability curve, which is un- stable under conditions of conventional soliton pumping 3 Detuning Isolator Laser cavity Conventional pumping A B E D Direct pumping Injection Soliton Backscattered light Pump laser Laser cavity Nonlinear microresonator F 0 1 Comb power (arb.unit) Time (20 ms/div) 0 2 Frequency (MHz) Laser on fr = 19.787 GHz Time (200 μs/div) 0 1 Comb power (arb.unit) C Detuning Intracavity power 1 0 Power (a.u.) XPM Frequency decreasing Detuning Backward Nonlinear microresonator Intracavity power SPM Forward MI comb Soliton MI comb Soliton c.w. state Cold resonance +φ 0 0 optical isolator blocks the back-scattered light from the microresonator. (B) Phase diagram, hysteresis curve and dynamics of the microresonator pumped as shown in panel A. The blue curve is the intracavity power as a function of cavity-pump frequency detuning. Laser tuning (dashed red line) accesses multiple equilibria (middle point is unstable as indicated by blue arrows). (C) Measured evolution of comb power pumped by an isolated, frequency-scanned ECDL. The step in the trace is a characteristic feature of soliton formation. (D) Turnkey soliton microcomb generation. Non-isolated operation allows back-scattered light to be injected into the pump laser cavity . Resonances are red-shifted due to self-phase modulation (SPM) and cross-phase modulation (XPM). (E) Phase diagram, hysteresis curve and dynamics of pump/microresonator system. A modified laser tuning curve (dashed red line) intersects the intracavity power curve (blue) to establish a new operating point from which solitons form. The feedback phase φ is set to 0 in the plot. Simulated evolution upon turning-on of the laser at a red detuning outside the soliton regime but within the locking bandwidth is plotted (solid black curve). (F) Measured comb power (upper panel) and detected soliton repetition rate signal (lower panel) with laser turn-on indicated at 10 ms. (Fig. 2B). In the Supplement it is shown that the system converges to this equilibrium once the laser frequency is within a locking bandwidth (estimated to be 5 GHz in the present case). As verified both numerically (Fig. 2E) and experimentally (Fig. 2F), this behavior enables soli- ton mode locking by simple power-on of the pump laser (i.e., no triggering or complex tuning schemes). Indeed, an experimental trace of the comb power shows that a steady soliton power plateau is reached immediately af- ter turn-on of the laser. And the stable soliton emission is further confirmed by monitoring the real-time evolution of the soliton repetition rate signal (Fig. 2F). Numeri- cal simulation of this startup process is provided in the Supplement . Finally, using this form of soliton turn- on, the thermal nonlinearity does not frustrate soliton generation and the system is highly robust with respect to temperature and environmental disturbances. Indeed, soliton generation without any external feedback control was possible for several hours in the laboratory. state with 40 GHz repetition rate and multi-soliton states with 20 GHz and 15 GHz repetition rates. The pump laser at 1556 nm is attenuated at the output by a fiber- Bragg-grating notch filter in these spectra. The coher- ent nature of these soliton microcombs is confirmed by photodetection of the soliton pulse streams, and reveals high-contrast, single-tone electrical signals at the indi- cated repetition rates. Numerical simulations have con- firmed the tendency of turnkey soliton states consisting of multiple solitons, which is a direct consequence of the high intracavity power and its associated MI gain dynam- ics . However, single-soliton operation is accessible for a certain combination of pump power and feedback phase. To demonstrate repeatable turnkey operation, the laser current is modulated to a preset current by a square wave to simulate the turn-on process. Soliton microcomb operation is reliably achieved as confirmed by monitor- ing soliton power and the single-tone beating signal (Fig. 4A). More insight into the nature of the turnkey opera- tion is provided by the phase diagram near the equilib- rium point for different feedback phase and pump power (Fig. 4B). The turnkey regime occurs above a thresh- old power within a specific range of feedback phases. Moreover, the regime recurs at 2π increments of feed- back phase, which is verified experimentally (Fig. 4C). Consistent with the phase diagram, a binary-like behav- ior of turn-on success is observed as the feedback phase is varied. In the measurement the feedback phase was adjusted by control of the gap between the facets of the laser and the microcomb bus waveguide. A narrowing of 4 1520 1540 1560 1580 1600 Wavelength (nm) Power (10 dB/div) -0.5 0 0.5 1530 1540 1550 1560 1570 1580 Wavelength (nm) Power (10 dB/div) A B C 40 dB RF power Frequency (MHz +19.787 GHz) 1520 1540 1560 1580 1600 Wavelength (nm) Power (10 dB/div) RF power 40 dB -0.5 0 0.5 Frequency (MHz +15.056 GHz) fr=40 GHz fr=20 GHz fr=15 GHz RBW 100 Hz RBW 100 Hz rate fr = 40 GHz. (B)-(C) Optical spectra of multi-soliton states at 20 GHz and 15 GHz repetition rates. Insets: Electrical beatnotes showing the repetition rates. C 0 π 2π 3π 0 1 Derived phase 0 1 Comb power (arb. unit) A 0 5 Beatnote frequency (MHz + 19.785 GHz) Time (100 ms/div) 0 1 Power (arb. unit) 0 1 Turnkey success probability 0 π 2π 3π 4π 5π MI comb Soliton Feedback phase Normalized pump power 0 0 2 4 6 8 Parametric oscillation threshold −π π B gives the measured comb power versus time. The laser is switched on periodically as indicated by the shaded regions. The lower panel is a spectrogram of the soliton repetition rate signal measured during the switching process. (B) Phase diagram of the integrated soliton system with respect to feedback phase and pump power. The pump power is normalized to the parametric oscillation threshold. (C) Turnkey success probability versus relative feedback phase of 20 GHz (upper panel) and 15 GHz (lower panel) devices. Each data point is acquired from 100 switch-on attempts. the turn-on success window with an increased feedback phase is believed to result from the reduction of the pump power in the bus waveguide with increasing tuning gap (consistent with Fig.4B). Besides the physical significance and practical impact of the new operating point, our demonstration of a turnkey operating regime is an important simplification of soliton microcomb systems. Moreover, the application of this method in an integrated CMOS-compatible sys- tem represents a milestone towards mass production of optical frequency combs. The microwave-rate soliton mi- crocombs generated in these butterfly packaged devices will benefit several comb applications including minia- turized frequency synthesizers and optical clocks 5 . Moreover, the recent demonstration of low power comb formation in III-V microresonators suggests that monolithic integration of pumps and soliton micro- combs is feasible using the methods developed here. A phase section could be included therein or in advanced versions of the current approach to electronically con- trol the feedback phase. Finally, due to its simplicity, this approach could be applied in other integrated high- Q microresonator platforms to attain soliton microcombs across a wide range of wavelengths. S. A. Diddams, The evolving optical frequency comb, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 27, B51 (2010). T. Herr, et al., Temporal solitons in optical microres- onators, Nat. Photonics 8, 145 (2014). X. Xue, et al., Mode-locked dark pulse Kerr combs in normal-dispersion microresonators, Nat. Photonics 9, V. Brasch, et al., Photonic chip-based optical frequency comb using soliton Cherenkov radiation, Science 351, X. Yi, Q.-F. Yang, K. Y. Yang, M.-G. Suh, K. Vahala, Soliton frequency comb at microwave rates in a high-Q silica microresonator, Optica 2, 1078 (2015). E. Obrzud, S. Lecomte, T. Herr, Temporal solitons in microresonators driven by optical pulses, Nat. Photonics Z. Gong, et al., High-fidelity cavity soliton generation in crystalline AlN micro-ring resonators, Opt. Lett. 43, 4366 Y. He, et al., Self-starting bi-chromatic LiNbO3 soliton microcomb, Optica 6, 1138 (2019). T. J. Kippenberg, A. L. Gaeta, M. Lipson, M. L. Gorodetsky, Dissipative Kerr solitons in optical microres- onators, Science 361 (2018). M.-G. Suh, Q.-F. Yang, K. Y. Yang, X. Yi, K. J. Vahala, Microresonator soliton dual-comb spectroscopy, Science A. Dutt, et al., On-chip dual-comb source for spec- troscopy, Sci. Adv. 4, e1701858 (2018). Q.-F. Yang, et al., Vernier spectrometer using coun- terpropagating soliton microcombs, Science 363, 965 M.-G. Suh, et al., Searching for exoplanets using a mi- croresonator astrocomb, Nat. Photonics 13, 25 (2019). E. Obrzud, et al., A microphotonic astrocomb, Nat. Pho- tonics 13, 31 (2019). D. T. Spencer, et al., An optical-frequency synthesizer using integrated photonics, Nature 557, 81 (2018). Z. L. Newman, et al., Architecture for the photonic inte- gration of an optical atomic clock, Optica 6, 680 (2019). B. Stern, X. Ji, Y. Okawachi, A. L. Gaeta, M. Lipson, Battery-operated integrated frequency comb generator, Nature 562, 401 (2018). A. S. Raja, et al., Electrically pumped photonic inte- grated soliton microcomb, Nat. Commun. 10, 680 (2019). X. Yi, Q.-F. Yang, K. Youl, K. Vahala, Active capture and stabilization of temporal solitons in microresonators, Opt. Lett. 41, 2037 (2016). C. Joshi, et al., Thermally controlled comb generation and soliton modelocking in microresonators, Opt. Lett. W. Liang, et al., Whispering-gallery-mode-resonator- based ultranarrow linewidth external-cavity semiconduc- tor laser, Opt. Lett. 35, 2822 (2010). W. Liang, et al., High spectral purity Kerr frequency comb radio frequency photonic oscillator, Nat. Commun. N. Pavlov, et al., Narrow-linewidth lasing and soliton Kerr microcombs with ordinary laser diodes, Nat. Pho- tonics 12, 694 (2018). A. A. Abidi, CMOS microwave and millimeter-wave ICs: The historical background, in Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE International Symposium on Radio-Frequency In- tegration Technology (2014), pp. 1–5. J. Liu, et al., Ultralow-power chip-based soliton micro- combs for photonic integration, Optica 5, 1347 (2018). J. Liu, et al., Photonic microwave oscillators based on integrated soliton microcombs, arXiv:1901.10372 (2019). See supplementary materials. D. Huang, et al., High-power sub-kHz linewidth lasers fully integrated on silicon, Optica 6, 745 (2019). T. Carmon, L. Yang, K. Vahala, Dynamical thermal be- havior and thermal self-stability of microcavities, Opt. Express 12, 4742 (2004). N. Kondratiev, et al., Self-injection locking of a laser diode to a high-Q WGM microresonator, Opt. Express K. Y. Yang, et al., Bridging ultrahigh-Q devices and pho- tonic circuits, Nat. Photonics 12, 297 (2018). D. J. Moss, R. Morandotti, A. L. Gaeta, M. Lipson, New CMOS-compatible platforms based on silicon nitride and Hydex for nonlinear optics, Nat. Photonics 7, 597 (2013). M. H. P. Pfeiffer, et al., Photonic Damascene process for low-loss, high-confinement silicon nitride waveguides, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 24, 1 (2018). M. H. P. Pfeiffer, et al., Ultra-smooth silicon nitride waveguides based on the Damascene reflow process: fab- rication and loss origins, Optica 5, 884 (2018). M. Mashanovitch, et al., High-power, efficient DFB laser technology for RF photonics links, in Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE Avionics and Vehicle Fiber-Optics and Pho- tonics Conference (2018), pp. 1–2. C. Godey, I. V. Balakireva, A. Coillet, Y. K. Chembo, Stability analysis of the spatiotemporal Lugiato-Lefever model for Kerr optical frequency combs in the anomalous and normal dispersion regimes, Phys. Rev. A 89, 063814 L. Chang, et al., Ultra-efficient frequency comb generation in AlGaAs-on-insulator microresonators,