arXiv:1911.02207v3 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 3 Jul 2020 Enhancement of domain-wall mobility detected by NMR at the angular momentum compensation temperature Masaki Imai,1 Hiroyuki Chudo,1 Mamoru Matsuo,1, 2, 3 Sadamichi Maekawa,1, 2, 3 and Eiji Saitoh1, 4, 5, 6 1Advanced Science Research Center, Japan Atomic Energy Agency, Tokai 319-1195, Japan 2Riken Center for Emergent Matter Science (CEMS), Wako 351-0198, Japan 3Kavli Institute for Theoretical Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,19 Yuquan Road, Beijing 100049, P.R.China 4Advanced Institute for Materials Research, Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8577, Japan 5Institute for Materials Research, Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8577, Japan 6Department of Applied Physics, The University of Tokyo, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8656, Japan (Dated: July 6, 2020) The angular momentum compensation temperature TA of ferrimagnets has attracted much at- tention because of high-speed magnetic dynamics near TA. We show that NMR can be used to investigate domain wall dynamics near TA in ferrimagnets. We performed 57Fe-NMR measurements on the ferrimagnet Ho3Fe5O12 with TA = 245 K. In a multi-domain state, the NMR signal is en- hanced by domain wall motion. We found that the NMR signal enhancement shows a maximum at TA in the multi-domain state. The NMR signal enhancement occurs due to increasing domain-wall mobility toward TA. We develop the NMR signal enhancement model involves domain-wall mobility. Our study shows that NMR in multi-domain state is a powerful tool to determine TA, even from a powder sample and it expands the possibility of searching for angular momentum-compensated materials. I. INTRODUCTION The angular momentum compensation in ferrimagnets, where angular momenta on different sublattices cancel each other out, has attracted much attention because of its unique character[1–6]. In terms of an angular momen- tum, ferrimagnets at an angular momentum compensa- tion temperature, TA, can be regarded as antiferromag- nets, even though they have spontaneous magnetization. Magnetic dynamics in ferrimagnets at TA is also anti- ferromagnetic and much faster than in ferromagnets. In ferrimagnetic resonance (FMR), for example, the Gilbert damping constant was predicted to be divergent at TA . The resonance frequency of the uniform mode aris- ing from a ferromagnetic character increases and merges with that of an exchange mode arising from an antiferro- magnetic character at TA , and the Gilbert damping parameter estimated from the linewidth of the uniform mode shows an anomaly near TA . Due to this fast magnetic dynamics, the high-speed magnetization rever- sal was realized in the amorphous ferrimagnet of GdFeCo alloy at TA . Moreover, in GdFeCo alloy, the domain wall mobility is enhanced at TA . Domain wall motion occurs due to the reorientation of magnetic moments. Angular mo- mentum accompanied by a magnetic moment prevents the magnetic moment from changing its direction due to the inertia of the angular momentum, and the domain- wall mobility is suppressed. At TA, however, magnetic moments can easily change their direction because of the lack of inertia. As a result, the domain-wall mobility is enhanced. Thus, the angular momentum compensation of ferrimagnets may be useful for next-generation high- speed magnetic memories, such as racetrack memories. The rare-earth iron garnet R3Fe5O12 (RIG, where R is a rare-earth element) is a ferrimagnet accompanied by TA . However, RIG does not show any anomaly in FMR at TA because the angular momentum of R3+ ions weakly couples with that of Fe3+ ions and behaves almost as a free magnetic moment. As a result, the magnetic re- laxation frequency of the magnetic moment of R3+ ions is much higher than that of the magnetic moment of Fe3+ ions or the exchange frequency between R3+ and Fe3+ ions [12–15]. In this case, the magnetic moment of R3+ ions adiabatically follows the motion of the magnetic mo- ment of Fe3+ ions. Hence, R3+ ions contribute to the magnetization but not to the angular momentum due to heavy damping of the R3+ site . Although TA in RIG cannot be determined using FMR, the mobility of the bubble domains formed in the epitax- ial thin film of the substituted RIG increases at a certain temperature, which is regarded as TA . Furthermore, recently, it has become possible to directly and exactly measure the net angular momentum regardless of the ma- terial and its shape by using the Barnett effect, in which magnetization is induced by mechanical rotation due to spin–rotation coupling, HSR = −J · Ω, where J and Ω are the angular momentum of an electron and the an- gular velocity of the rotation . When a sample is rotated, angular momenta of electrons in a magnetic ma- terial align along with the rotational axis, and, then, the material is magnetized without any external magnetic fields. In this method, TA is determined as the tem- perature where magnetization induced by the mechani- cal rotation vanishes because of the disappearance of the net angular momentum. Consequently, TA of Ho3Fe5O12 (HoIG) was determined to be 245 K . With the focus on magnetic dynamics at TA, a microscopic method was required to investigate the spin dynamics at TA regard- less of materials and their shape. 2 signal in a domain wall. (a) An input RF magnetic field H1 causes the domain wall to move. The electron spins in the domain wall rotate, exciting the nuclear resonance through the hyperfine coupling. As a result, H1 appears to be ηin times for the nuclear spins. (b) The domain wall moves in accordance with the precession of nuclear spins, and the bulk magnetization oscillates with NMR frequency. The NMR sig- nal becomes ηout times. Here, we propose an NMR method to explore the spin dynamics at TA. In a magnetic ordered state such as in ferromagnets and ferrimagnets, an NMR signal can be observed without any external magnetic field due to an internal field, which enables us to observe domain walls at zero or low magnetic fields. Furthermore, the macro- scopic magnetization of electrons enhances the NMR sig- nal via hyperfine interactions. Particularly, the NMR signal from nuclei in domain walls is strongly enhanced due to the magnetic domain wall motion, as shown in Fig. 1. An input radio frequency (RF) magnetic field H1 used for NMR can move domain walls, thereby rotat- ing magnetic moments in the walls and generating the transverse component of a hyperfine field in synchroniza- tion with the RF field. As a result, H1 is enhanced to become ηinH1, where ηin is the enhancement factor for the input process. In the reverse process, the Larmor precession of nuclear spins causes domain wall motion, because the electronic system feels an effective magnetic field Heff from the nuclear magnetization through the hy- perfine interaction, which leads to the oscillation of the bulk magnetization; thus, a much stronger voltage is in- duced in the NMR pickup coil than the precession of nu- clear magnetic moment mn, and the output NMR signal is enhanced to be ηoutmn, where ηout is the enhancement factor for the output process. This enhancement effect enables us to selectively observe the NMR signal from nuclei in domain walls, even though the volume fraction of domain walls is much smaller than that of domains. In this paper, we report results of an NMR study of HoIG under magnetic fields of up to 1.0 T. For a multi- domain state below 0.3 T, the temperature dependence of the NMR intensity shows a maximum at TA. On the other hand, for a single-domain state above 0.5 T, the temperature dependence of the NMR intensity does not show any anomalies at TA. These results indicate the en- hancement of the domain wall mobility at TA. Extend- ing a simple conventional model for describing ηout, we formulated the modified enhancement factor η′ out by taking the domain wall mobility into account. This en- hancement of the NMR intensity at TA enables us to estimate the domain wall mobility to determine TA, even in a powder sample. II. EXPERIMENTAL METHOD We synthesized HoIG by solid-state reaction for this study. We ground the sample in a mortar to cre- ate a fine powder with a typical particle diameter of 5 μm. The sample was packed in the NMR coil, which was perpendicular to the external magnetic field. The NMR measurements of 57Fe nuclei at the d site in Ho3Fe5O12 were carried out using a standard phase-coherent pulsed spectrometer. The NMR signals were obtained using the spin-echo method, with the first and second pulse du- rations of 1.0 and 2.0 μs, respectively. During the mea- surements, the pulse width was kept constant and the RF power was varied to maximize the NMR signal. The spin- echo decay time T2 was measured by varying the interval time τ between the first and second pulses. The value of T2 is defined such that I(2τ) = I(0) exp(−2τ/T2), where I(2τ) and I(0) are the NMR intensity at 2τ and τ = 0, respectively. The nuclear spin-lattice relaxation time T1 was measured using the inversion recovery method. III. RESULTS NMR spectra of 57Fe at the d site without external fields. Each NMR spectrum shows a single peak, and the peak shifts to higher frequencies with decreasing temperature. The NMR intensity shows the maximum at 245 K. The top panel of Fig. 2(b) shows integrated NMR intensi- ties. Generally, the NMR intensities need to be cali- brated when comparing them under different conditions. The NMR intensity I is proportional to the voltage in- duced in a pickup NMR coil by the precession of the nuclear magnetization mn. Thus, I is proportional to dmn(t)/dt. Because mn(t) rotates at the Larmor fre- quency ν, I is proportional to νmn. The size of mn depends on the polarization of the nuclear spin derived from the Boltzmann distribution function. Thus mn is proportional to ν/T , where T is the temperature. As a result, I is proportional to ν2/T . Moreover, the NMR intensity measured by the spin echo method depends on T2. Therefore, we calibrated the NMR intensity by mul- tiplying T ν−2 exp(2τ/T2). The calibrated NMR intensity is retained to show a 3 NMR spectra. (b) In the upper panel, the red open and filled circles show the bare integrated signal intensity and calibrated intensity by multiplying by T ν−2 exp(2τ/T2), respectively. In the bottom panel, the blue cross shows MΩ obtained by the Barnett effect. The blue curve is a guide to the eye. The orange curve shows the magnetization obtained under the magnetic field of 1000 [Oe]. In both panels, the black solid and dashed lines show the magnetization and angular momentum compensation temperatures of Ho3Fe5O12, respectively. (c) Temperature dependence of resonance frequency (top), 1/T1, and 1/T2 (bottom). maximum at 245 K, which coincides with TA determined by the Barnett effect in which mechanical rotation in- duces magnetization MΩ due to spin–rotation coupling . The blue cross in the bottom panel of Fig. 2(b) shows the temperature dependence of MΩ under a rotation of 1500 Hz without any external magnetic field. MΩ be- comes zero at two temperatures: The lower temperature coincides with the magnetization compensation temper- ature TM determined by a conventional magnetization measurement as shown by the orange curve in the bottom panel of Fig. 2(b). At TM, spin–rotation coupling is effec- tive, but MΩ becomes zero due to the disappearance of bulk magnetization. In contrast, the higher temperature can be assigned to TA, where the bulk magnetization re- mains but the spin–rotation coupling is not effective due to the disappearance of the net angular momentum . Unlike the temperature dependence of the NMR inten- sity, there are no anomalies in the temperature depen- dence of ν, 1/T1, and 1/T2 as shown in Fig. 2(c). These results indicate that the maximum NMR intensity can be attributed to an anomaly in the enhancement factor. To perform NMR experiments for the single-domain state, we characterized the magnetic field dependence of HoIG as shown in Fig. 3. The top panel of Fig. 3 shows the NMR frequency in magnetic fields ranging from 0 to 1 T at 300 K. With the increase in the magnetic field the resonance frequency decreases because the mag- netic moment at the d site aligns with the magnetic field above TM, and the hyperfine coupling constant is nega- tive. The line in the top panel of Fig. 3 shows a slope of −57γ = −1.3757 MHz/T. In the multi-domain state at 0 to 1 T at 300 K. The top panel shows the field dependence of the resonance frequency. The solid line shows the slope of the gyromagnetic ratio of a 57Fe nucleus. The bottom panel shows the field dependence of optimized RF power. 4 (a) The temperature dependence of the NMR in- tensity in the magnetic fields ranging from 0 to 1 T. The NMR intensity of 0 and 0.3 T is calibrated by multiplying by T ν−2 exp(2τ/T2). The NMR intensity of 0.5 and 1 T is calibrated by multiplying by T ν−3 exp(2τ/T2). The solid and dashed lines show the magnetization and angular momentum compensation temperatures, respectively. (b) Schematic illus- tration of the domain wall motion induced by an effective RF magnetic field Heff through the hyperfine coupling. Here, R, d and x are a particle radius, a domain wall thickness, and do- main wall displacement, respectively. The domain wall moves l = 4x in one cycle of t = 1/ν. low fields, the rate of decrease in the NMR frequency by applying external field is smaller than −57γ until all the domain walls disappear because the external field at nu- clear positions is canceled out by the demagnetizing field caused by domain wall displacement due to the external magnetic field. In the single-domain state above 0.6 T, the NMR frequency decreases with the ratio of 57γ by the magnetic field. The optimized RF input power is shown in the bottom panel of Fig. 3. At low magnetic fields, the RF input power is small due to the large ηin, suggesting that the NMR signal from the domain walls, which is more en- hanced than that from domains, dominates the NMR in- tensity. The input power sharply increases in the region between 0.4 and 0.5 T and saturates above 0.6 T. This result indicates that the domain structure changes from multi-domain to single domain between 0.4 and 0.5 T. This is consistent with the result of the field dependence of the NMR frequency. At high magnetic fields, the NMR signal from the domain dominates the NMR intensity. calibrated NMR intensity in various magnetic fields. In the multi-domain state at 0 and 0.3 T, the NMR in- tensity shows a maximum at 245 K and then decreases toward TM. On the other hand, the calibrated values of the NMR intensity at 0.5 and 1.0 T do not show any anomalies around TA. These results indicate that the maximum NMR intensity is attributed to the domain walls. The drop in the NMR intensity at various mag- netic fields around TM results from the decrease in sig- nal enhancement, which is proportional to the magneti- zation. Notably, in the ferromagnetic or ferrimagnetic state, the enhancement factor ηout is proportional to the hyperfine field Hn, which is also proportional to the NMR frequency ν . Therefore, the NMR intensity in the single-domain state above 0.5 T is calibrated by multi- plying by T ν−3 exp(2τ/T2). In the multi-domain state of this sample below 0.3 T, however, the enhancement factor does not depend on ν so that the NMR intensity below 0.3 T is calibrated by multiplying by T ν−2 exp(2τ/T2). The temperature at which the NMR intensity shows a maximum at 0.3 T decrease slightly. It is speculated that TA decreases under magnetic fields in RIG, because the expectation value of the angular momentum of R3+ de- creases above TM in a magnetic field due to the decrease in molecular field at the R site . IV. DISCUSSION First, we introduce the conventional model describ- ing NMR enhancement due to domain-wall motion . In this model, the domain wall displacement x is lim- ited by a demagnetizing field Hd(x). The maximum dis- placement xmax is determined from a position in which Hd(xmax) is balanced with an oscillating effective field Heff, which is created by the precession of the nu- clear magnetic moment through the hyperfine interac- tion, Hd(xmax) = Heff. Because the sample used for the NMR measurement in the present study is a pow- der, each particle in it is assumed to be spherical with radius R, as shown in Fig. 4(b). Hd is expressed as Hd(xmax) = 2π xmax R m. The net electron magnetic mo- ment m is tilted by the effective field of Heff = mn m Hn, where Hn is the hyperfine field, and the tilt angle θ of m can be described by θ = πx/d, where d is the domain- wall thickness. Then, the bulk magnetization induced by nuclear magnetization is expressed as RHnmn 2dm = ηoutmn, (1) where ηout is the enhancement factor of the NMR signal for the output process and is defined as ηout = RHn 2dm . This model assumes that the velocity of the domain-wall motion v is fast enough to move 4xmax during one cycle of oscillating effective field, i.e. v = μHeff > 4xmaxν, where μ is the domain wall mobility. The conventional derivation of NMR enhancement in- duced by domain wall motion does not include the mobil- ity of the domain-wall. Herein, we consider that v is not fast enough to follow the oscillating effective field, i.e., v < 4xmaxν. In this case, the displacement x is limited by μ. Then, x is expressed to be v/4ν. The enhancement 5 factor ηout is modified such that η′ out = v 4xmaxν ηout = π 4dγ μ. (2) This formula indicates that η′ out in the slow limit of do- main wall motion is proportional to μ, and η′ out in the fast limit of domain-wall motion is continually connected to the conventional ηout. It is noted that η′ out does not depend on the NMR frequency ν. The domain-wall mobility of HoIG has not been re- ported, but it can be estimated from the reported damp- ing parameters . The domain wall mobility of Gd3Fe5O12 (GdIG) is 225 m · sec−1Oe−1 at 298 K . The magnitude of the damping is inversely proportional to the domain wall mobility because the damping pa- rameter of HoIG is 80 times as great as that of GdIG , the domain wall mobility of HoIG at room tempera- ture is estimated to be 2.8 m · sec−1Oe−1. However, the domain-wall mobility required for motion xmax is defined such that 4xmaxν/Heff = 2Rν/πM, which is estimated to be 4 m · sec−1Oe−1 for 4πM ∼ 500 G, R ∼ 5 μm, and ν ∼ 50 MHz. Thus, this evaluation indicates that, in HoIG, the displacement of domain walls induced by nu- clear precession is limited by μ. Therefore, in the multi- domain state in HoIG, we used the modified enhancement factor η′ out in Eq. (2). We estimate the value of μ at TA to be 3.5 m · sec−1Oe−1 using μ = 2.8 m · sec−1Oe−1 at 300 K. When we assume d to be 0.1–1.0 μm, ηout is es- timated to be 102–103, which is comparable to typical enhancement factors . Thus, the NMR method is very sensitive to detect such a small enhancements at TA. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank H. Yasuoka for fruitful discussion. This work was supported by JST ERATO Grant Number JPM- JER1402, JSPS Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research on Innovative Areas Grant Number JP26103005, and JSPS KAKENHI Grant Numbers JP16H04023, JP17H02927. M. I and H. C contributed equally to this work. C. D. Stanciu, A. V. Kimel, F. Hansteen, A. Tsukamoto, A. Itoh, A. Kirilyuk, and T. Ras- ing, Phys. Rev. B 73, 220402 (2006). C. D. Stanciu, A. Tsukamoto, A. V. Kimel, F. Hansteen, A. Kirilyuk, A. Itoh, and T. Rasing, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 217204 (2007). M. Binder, A. Weber, O. Mosendz, G. Woltersdorf, M. Izquierdo, I. Neudecker, J. R. Dahn, T. D. Hatchard, J.-U. Thiele, C. H. Back, and M. R. Scheinfein, Phys. Rev. B 74, 134404 (2006). K.-J. Kim, S. K. Kim, Y. Hirata, S.-H. Oh, T. Tono, D.- H. Kim, T. Okuno, W. S. Ham, S. Kim, G. Go, et al., Nature materials 16, 1187 (2017). M. Imai, Y. Ogata, H. Chudo, M. Ono, K. Harii, M. Matsuo, Y. Ohnuma, S. Maekawa, and E. Saitoh, Appl. Phys. Lett. 113, 052402 (2018), https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5041464. Z. Zhu, X. Fong, and G. Liang, Phys. Rev. B 97, 184410 (2018). R. K. Wangsness, Phys. Rev. 91, 1085 (1953). T. R. McGuire, Phys. Rev. 97, 831 (1955). S. S. Parkin, M. Hayashi, and L. Thomas, Science 320, R. C. LeCraw, J. P. Remeika, and H. Matthews, J. Appl. Phys. 36, 901 (1965), https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1714259. C. Borghese, R. Cosmi, P. De Gasperis, and R. Tappa, Phys. Rev. B 21, 183 (1980). G. P. Rodrigue, H. Meyer, and R. V. Jones, J. Appl. Phys. 31, S376 (1960), https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1984756. N. Ohta, T. Ikeda, F. Ishida, and Y. Sugita, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 43, 705 (1977), https://doi.org/10.1143/JPSJ.43.705. C. M. Srivastava, B. Uma Mahesh- war Rao, and N. S. Hanumantha Rao, Bulletin of Materials Science 7, 237 (1985). C. Kittel, Phys. Rev. 115, 1587 (1959). V. V. Randoshkin, V. A. Polezhaev, N. N. Sysoev, and Y. N. Sazhin, Physics of the Solid State 45, 513 (2003). M. Imai, H. Chudo, M. Ono, K. Harii, M. Matsuo, Y. Ohnuma, S. Maekawa, and E. Saitoh, Appl. Phys. Lett. 114, 162402 (2019), https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5095166. A. M. Portis and A. C. Gos- sard, J. Appl. Phys. 31, S205 (1960), https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1984666. H. Yasuoka, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 19, 1182 (1964), https://doi.org/10.1143/JPSJ.19.1182. G. Vella-Coleiro, D. Smith, and L. Van Uitert, IEEE Transactions on Magnetics 7, 745 (1971). G. VellaColeiro, D. Smith, and L. Van Uitert, Appl. Phys. Lett. 21, 36 (1972), https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1654209. J. Dho, M. Kim, S. Lee, and W.- J. Lee, J. Appl. Phys. 81, 1362 (1997), https://doi.org/10.1063/1.363872.