arXiv:1911.02999v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 13 Jan 2020 Role of 4f states in infinite-layer NdNiO2 Mi-Young Choi1 and Kwan-Woo Lee1,2∗ 1Department of Applied Physics, Graduate School, Korea University, Sejong 30019, Korea 2Division of Display and Semiconductor Physics, Korea University, Sejong 30019, Korea Warren E. Pickett† Department of Physics, University of California, Davis, California 95616, USA (Dated: January 14, 2020) Atomic 4f states have been found to be essential players in the physical behavior of lanthanide compounds, at the Fermi level EF as in the proposed topological Kondo insulator SmB6, or further away as in the magnetic superconductor system RNi2B2C (R=rare earth ion) and in Y1−xPrxBa2Cu3O7, where the 4f shell of Pr has a devastating effect on superconductivity. In hole-doped RNiO2, the R=Nd member is found to be superconducting while R=La is not, in spite of the calculated electronic structures being nearly identical. We report first principles results that indicate that the Nd 4f moment affects states at EF in infinite-layer NdNiO2, an effect that will not occur for LaNiO2. Treating 20% hole-doping in the virtual crystal approach indicates that 0.15 holes empty the Γ-centered Nd-derived electron pocket while leaving the other electron pocket unchanged; hence Ni only absorbs 0.05 holes; the La counterpart would behave similarly. However, coupling of 4f states to the electron pockets at EF arises through the Nd intra-atomic 4f − 5d exchange coupling K ≈ 0.5 eV and is ferromagnetic (FM), i.e. anti-Kondo, in sign. This interaction causes spin-disorder broadening of the electron pockets and should be included in models of the normal and superconducting states of Nd0.8Sr0.2NiO2. The Ni moments differ by 0.2μB for FM and antiferromagnetic alignment (the latter are larger), reflecting some itineracy and indicating that Heisenberg coupling of the moments may not provide a quantitative modeling of Ni-Ni exchange coupling. I. BACKGROUND AND MAJOR ISSUES The discovery of superconductivity up to Tc=15 K in Sr-doped NdNiO2 (Nd0.8Sr0.2NiO2) has re-invigorated the three decade long issue of whether there may be nickelates that can host cuprate-type superconduc- tivity. LaNiO2, which is isostructural with “infinite layer” CaCuO2 that superconducts up to 110 K when doped, has been one of the prime candidates, but what doping is possible has never resulted in superconductiv- ity. NdNiO2 is also isovalent with CaCuO2, providing a nominal d9 configuration on the open shell transition metal ion. Early comparison of the electronic structures of CaCuO2 and NdNiO2 identified similarities but sub- stantial differences, with questions about whether concepts such as strong superexchange coupling of the transition metal moments, or of Zhang-Rice singlets upon doping, are relevant to this nickelate. A number of groups recently have revisited this question, with the objective of few-band model-building to quantify differ- ences related to superconductivity.[6–19] The popular ap- proach has been to obtain the non-magnetic local density approximation (LDA) band structure of NdNiO2 with the 4f 3 electrons assigned to a non-magnetic core, then approximate the low energy bands with a minimal lo- cal orbital model, add a repulsive local interaction, and ∗Electronic address: mckwan@korea.ac.kr †Electronic address: wepickett@ucdavis.edu evaluate the consequences, viz. the pairing susceptibil- ity. Close attention is given to the geometry of the Fermi surface (FS), which strongly impacts the pairing suscep- tibility. Detailed analyses of the LDA electronic structure have been provided by Botana and Norman for LaNiO2 and by Nomura et al. for NdNiO2, in which three non- magnetic 4f electrons are included in the Nd core. In addition to the roughly half-filled Ni 3dx2−y2 band, sev- eral groups find and quantify Nd 5d derived bands ob- tained earlier. A Nd 5dz2 band drops below the Fermi level EF at Γ, and in addition a band usually identified as Nd 5dxy-derived drops below EF at the zone corner A=(π, π, π) point [in units of ( 1 a, 1 a, 1 c)]. This un- doped NdNiO2 FS differs in significant ways from that of nonmagnetic CaCuO2 but is similar to LaNiO2. X- ray absorption spectra of the O K and Ni L3 edges do not reveal significant differences between LaNiO2 and NdNiO2. There are other fundamental questions to be consid- ered. Experimentally, undoped CaCuO2 orders antiferro- magnetically with a high Neel temperature of 442 K, while undoped NdNiO2 and LaNiO2 do not order. The underlying differences with cuprates are several. The mean Ni 3d level ǫd is separated from the O 2p level ǫp by 4 eV in the nickelates versus only 2 eV in the cuprate. Ni therefore has less hybridization with oxygen 2p or- bitals than does Cu, thus should have a stronger ten- dency toward local moment magnetism than does Cu, and indeed it does so in LDA calculations. The superex- change coupling J is much smaller for the nickelate, thus one expects a lower but nonzero Neel temperature. Finally, LaNiO2 and NdNiO2 are reported as conduct- ing (albeit poorly), whereas CaCuO2 is insulating. Lack of Ni ordering is a central question to address; however, both in calculations and experimentally the nickelates are conducting. We note that magnetic order disappears in cuprates when they are doped to become conducting. The model treatments mentioned above would sug- gest that doped LaNiO2 should be superconducting as is doped NdNiO2. Since this is not the case, we pur- sue the viewpoint that a more fundamental question is what features may account for this difference between two highly similar nickelates. La and Nd are very sim- ilar chemically, with tri-positive ionic radii only slightly larger for La than for Nd. Although small size differ- ences in lattice constants or strains can influence states in correlated insulators, itineracy and screening by carri- ers strongly reduce such effects. An obvious difference between these nickelates is that La3+ is closed shell and nonmagnetic, whereas Nd3+, with Hund’s rule ground state S = 3 2, L = 6, J = 9 2, has a (free ion) Curie-Weiss moment of nearly 4 μB. Su- perconductivity appears in Nd0.8Sr0.2NiO2 in the midst of these large disordered local moments, which should compete with superconducting phases, directly or by in- troducing disorder into the electronic structure. In sev- eral YBCO-type cuprates, however, replacing a nonmag- netic rare earth ion (La or Y) by a magnetic lanthanide from Dy to Tb does not affect the superconductivity, be- cause the small 4f orbital is not involved in the electronic structure. Surprisingly, PrBa2Cu3O7 was found to be non-superconducting, due to antibonding coupling of the Pr 4fz(x2−y2) orbital to the O 2p orbitals. No- tably, the local environment of the 4f ion is the same as in NdNiO2. Another related system is the rare earth nickel boro- carbides RNi2B2C where R can be one of many of the rare earth atoms. This system displays strong interplay and competition between the R 4f magnetic moment and the conduction states with heavy Ni character, with the R 5d playing an important role in coupling the lo- cal moments to the itinerant states. Elemental europium at high pressure but retaining a f 7 local mo- ment, switches from metallic and magnetically ordered to superconducting and magnetically disordered around 80 GPa, providing its own questions about the effect of 4f moments on pairing, a coupling that must proceed through the Eu 5d states. The question of possible impact of the 4f shell has not been addressed in NdNiO2. While direct 4f-nickelate hybridization may be small, there is an intra-atomic ex- change coupling between the 4f spin and the 5d states around EF that, as mentioned, does not occur in LaNiO2. Since the 5d bands cross EF , carriers will be affected. Specifically, with disordered Nd moments, the 5d on-site energies will be spin-split, with a projection along any given direction that is distributed randomly. A carrier in a 5d band will be subjected to a random potential, re- sulting in band broadening and magnetic scattering that is absent in LaNiO2. The presentation is organized as follows. The com- putational methods and material configurations are de- scribed in Sec. II. In Sec. III results are presented for four assumed types of magnetic order in NdNiO2. The electronic bands and Fermi surfaces for non-magnetic Ni are discussed in Sec. IV. A few results relating to the oc- cupied Nd 4f orbitals are presented in Sec. V, followed by a discussion of hole doping in Sec. VI. Some obser- vations about the effects of magnetic order and relation to other 4f-containing superconductors are made in Sec. VII, which is followed by a brief summary in Sec. VIII. II. COMPUTATIONAL METHODS We have studied the electronic and magnetic properties of NdNiO2 using the precise, all-electron, full potential linearized augmented planewave method as implemented in wien2k. The lattice constants a = 3.92 ̊A, c = 3.37 ̊A observed for superconducting Nd0.8Sr0.2NiO2 have been used, all atoms lie at P4/mmm symmetry de- termined positions. Strong intra-atomic interactions on Nd, and usually on Ni in nickelates, are modeled with the DFT+U method (density functional theory plus Hub- bard U), which is essential to preserve the 4f local mo- ment and place the corresponding bands away from EF . The fully anisotropic, rotationally invariant DFT+U cor- relation correction functional in the fully localized limit form implemented in wien2k, was used. Results are presented for U Nd f =8.0 eV, JNd f =1.0 eV, U Ni d =5.0 eV, and JNi d =0.7 eV (and occasionally for U Ni d =0). Other input parameters and a survey of results beyond those presented here are provided in the Supplemental Mate- rial (SM). Section VI was carried out by reducing the nuclear charge on Nd by 0.20, and removing the same amount of electrons. The strong local 4f moment requires magnetically or- dered calculations. We find that Ni prefers a moment of the order of 0.5 μB without any U Ni, which increases to ∼1 μB for the values we have used. The Nd moment always assumes the spin value of 3 μB characteristic of an f 3 Hund’s rule ion, plus minor exchange polarization of the 5d orbitals. We have studied four magnetic con- figurations: AFM0: antiferromagnetic (AFM) Nd layers with non- magnetic Ni layers; AFM1: both Ni and Nd layers have antialigned moments; AFM2: ferromagnetic (FM) Nd layers and AFM Ni lay- ers; and FM: all Nd and Ni moments aligned. Note that it is the AFM1 and AFM2 cases in which Ni is antiferromagnetically ordered. Note also that AFM0 is done with U Ni d =0, so its energy cannot be compared with the other cases. The SM provides additional information about the electronic structures. An insulating band structure is never obtained, which is a great difference compared with 2 denote majority, dashed lines indicate minority, and EF is the zero of energy. Bottom: Color fatband plot of FM NdNiO2 near EF , with the legend describing the color choice. Note the Nd-derived electron pockets at Γ and A, and the Ni majority dx2−y2 hole pockets at M and A. cuprates. It was shown earlier that increasing U on Ni in NdNiO2 never leads to a Mott insulator, instead a 3dz2 orbital becomes unoccupied and forms a peculiar intra- atomic singlet with the dx2−y2 orbital. III. MAGNETIC ORDER Although it is expected that Ni1+ d9 ions will tend to order in antiferromagnetic (AFM1 or AFM2) fash- ion through superexchange as does CaCuO2 and several other d9 cuprates, we begin with FM alignment within both Ni and Nd layers, as it enables identification of the intra-atomic exchange splitting between the occupied Nd 4f and conduction 5dz2 orbitals. A magnetic Ni ion leads to a 120 meV energy gain compared to non-magnetic. This exaggerated tendency toward magnetic ordering and the magnitude of the mag- netic moment are a known deficiency of (semi)local den- sity functional methods, with much of the problem at- tributed to the lack of effects of spin fluctuations in the functional. The energies can be compared for those cases with magnetic Ni (AFM1, AFM2, FM) for which the same functional is used. The energy of AFM2 (FM Nd) is slightly lower than that of AFM1 (AFM Nd), by 7 meV for U Ni=0 and by only 1 meV (at the edge of compu- tational precision) with U Ni=5 eV, reflecting a slight tendency toward FM ordering of the 4f moments. The energy difference between FM and AFM2 provides the difference between AFM and FM Ni moment alignment; AFM is favored by 116 (25) meV/Ni in GGA(+U). This energy difference contains information about Ni-Ni in- plane exchange coupling, and would give a value of the nearest neighbor coupling if more distant exchange cou- plings were negligible. Liu et al. have derived values of coupling for a few neighbors, concluding that the values depend strongly on the value of U Ni that is assumed. For the FM bands shown in Fig. 1 the Ni and Nd mo- ments are aligned into an overall FM structure. The Ni dx2−y2 bands that give rise to the large FS are spin-split by 2 eV, reflecting the Ni spin moment of order 1μB. As noted earlier and recently by several others, Nd 5d- derived bands dip below EF at the zone center Γ and at the zone corner A, with bonding 5dz2 and antibonding 5dxy character respectively. There is mixing with Ni dz2 in both of these electron pockets, especially the lat- ter. This mixing is due to the surprise that the minority (but occupied) Ni dz2 antibonding band at kz = π (see the Z − R − A − Z lines) lies within 0.2–0.4 eV of EF . As shown in Fig. 1, the 5dz2 band energies relative to EF of up (down) bands are –0.7 (+0.3) eV at Γ, giving an intra-atomic coupling HNd = Kˆe4f · ˆe5d with K=0.5 eV, in terms of the orientations of the 4f and 5d spins. For the antibonding 5dxy orbital the eigenvalues at A lie at –1.2 eV with a splitting of less than 0.1 eV, reflecting the participation of Ni 3d orbitals and the out-of-phase char- acter of states at the A point. Note that this coupling is Hund’s rule alignment of 4f and 5d states and therefore anti-Kondo coupling of the local moment to the conduc- tion band, as opposed to some suggested Kondo model- ing of Nd0.8Sr0.2NiO2. Such anti-Kondo coupling has been studied in other lanthanide compounds. We return below to the K ≈ 0.5 eV intra-atomic exchange coupling of Nd 5d states. IV. NONMAGNETIC Ni AND FERMI SURFACES Low energy models of oxides including superconduct- ing possibilities are based on non-magnetic Ni, with an on-site repulsion added to provide correlated electron be- havior and a potential pairing mechanism. We have ob- tained a DFT+U solution with non-magnetic Ni (U Ni d =0, U Nd f =8 eV), our case AFM0. The Nd 4f moment that must remain fully spin-polarized has AFM alignment, so the Brillouin zone is correspondingly folded back. The Ni moment for AFM alignment is 1.2μB, compared to 1.0μB 3 non-magnetic Ni layer, plotted along lines in the AFM zone. Bottom: Fatbands indicating Nd 5d character (above) and Ni 3d weight (below), with orbital character as noted. In terms of the usual NiO2 sublattice, the M(A) point is folded back to Γ′(Z′). The other symmetry points are X′ = (π/2, π/2, 0) and M ′ = (π, 0, 0), while R′ and A′ lie above these points by (0, 0, π) respectively. for FM alignment. For U=0 (just GGA) the calculated moments are 0.52μB (AFM) and 0.35μB (FM); i.e. there is about 0.2μB difference in the moments, and the associ- ated Hund’s energy would be an important contribution to the lower energies for AFM alignment. The bands, density of states (DOS), and fatbands near EF for AFM0 alignment are shown in Fig. 2, with sym- metry points in that folded tetragonal zone now desig- nated with primes. Gaps at the zone boundaries indicate effects of the Nd AFM order, e.g. a gap of 0.3 eV can be seen in the Nd 5d band around 0.8 eV at X′. As for the FM order above, this splitting vanishes for the cor- responding antibonding band at R′. The nearby folded Ni 3d band displays no gap, reflecting canceling mixing with the eight neighboring Nd sites. The bands crossing EF giving the FSs are those that are fit to few band models. The corresponding FSs are shown in Fig. 3. The Nd 5dz2 related electron pocket Pk1 at Γ has attracted attention, with the electron pocket Pk2 at A=(π, π, π) [Z′ in Fig. 2] also receiving notice. the full zone corresponding to AFM 4f alignment. Surfaces have been separated into left and right sub-panels for clarity. (a),(b) Undoped NdNiO2. The spheres are (i) the Nd 5d electron pocket at Γ′ = Γ, at the center of the figure, and (ii) the other electron pocket at A folded back to Z′ (see text). (c),(d): Surfaces for VCA Nd0.8Sr0.2NiO2, x=0.20 hole doping. The Γ-centered electron pocket is essentially emptied, while the Z′-centered pocket is almost unchanged. (e) Top view of the Nd0.8Sr0.2NiO2 surfaces, showing the amount of kz dispersion. Pk2 has strong Ni 3dz2 character as well as some 3dxz,yz influence, considerably stronger than the Nd 5dxy com- ponent that has been discussed by several groups.[5–10] Due to kz dispersion, the large Ni dx2−y2 FS appears in this folded zone as a large banana centered at M ′, and strongly fluted cylinders also centered at M ′ and con- nected by tiny necks at the corner R′ points. These two surfaces are degenerate along the zone faces reflecting simple folding back into the AFM zone, and correspond to M-centered hole barrels in the primitive zone that are familiar from cuprate physics. These barrels have sur- prisingly large kz dispersion, lessening the relevance of two dimensional physics. V. OCCUPIED 4f ORBITALS We now consider briefly the Nd 4f contributions to the electronic and magnetic structure. The S = 3 2 spin configuration is strongly enforced by Hund’s first rule, and the energy difference between FM and AFM order of the Nd moments is very small; ∼ 7 meV/Nd ion for Ni treated in GGA, and only 1 meV/Nd ion for Ni treated in GGA+U. The three occupied bands lie at –7 eV with some small dispersion due to the direct overlap of 4f and O 2p orbitals, which is small but provides crystal field splitting of the 4f orbitals. The occupied states that we obtained are combinations of ml = −3, −2, +1, 4 each with lesser admixtures of +1, +2, −3 states, respec- tively, with total orbital moment morb=4.47 μB. When spin-orbit coupling is included, the occupied orbitals are those with j = 5 2, mj = − 5 2, − 3 2, + 1 2. (See SM for further information on these occupations.) The four unoccupied 4f bands are centered 3.5 eV above EF but are spread by the anisotropy of the orbitals and mixing with Nd 5d states over a range of 3 eV. VI. HOLE DOPING NdNiO2 becomes superconducting upon hole doping by 0.2 hole/f.u. With the Fermi level density of states N(0)=0.70/(eV cell), the drop in EF (in rigid band) is 0.29 eV, which is enough to empty the Pk1 pocket at Γ to 0.4 eV, and to reduce the carrier density of Pk2 but leaving substantial Ni carriers. Rigid band treatment may be deceptive, however, due to Fermi level charge on both Ni and Nd atoms. We applied the virtual crystal approximation (VCA) to obtain a more realistic effect of doping. Fermi surfaces Pk1 and Pk2 of undoped [Figs. 3(a) and 3b)] and x=0.20 doped NdNiO2 [Figs. 3(c)-3(e)] reveal important non-rigid band behavior, and the cor- responding bands provided in Fig. 4 indicate the reason. The Ni d bands are shifted only slightly (∼ 0.1 eV) with respect to EF by doping, as is the band giving the A- centered pocket (at Z′ in this figure). The Nd 5d band at Γ is, however, shifted by 0.3 eV and effectively emp- tied of its (undoped) 0.15 electrons. These VCA bands are similar to the VCA bands of Sakakibara et al. for La0.8Ba0.2NiO2, a difference being that their La 5d band is 0.2 eV higher than our Nd 5d band. The band giving rise to Pk2, often referred to as Nd 5dxy, is also heavily Ni in character (shown above, and in the SM), hence little affected as are the other Ni 3d bands. The result is that x = 0.20 doping changes the Ni 3d charge by only 0.05 holes. The disappearance of pocket Pk1 and its associated disorder scattering may contribute to the drop in resistivity by a factor of 2–3 upon doping. VII. IMPLICATION OF SPIN DISORDER The exchange splitting of the Nd 5d band at Γ (near EF ) reflects the intra-atomic 4f − 5d exchange on Nd of K ≈ 0.5 eV. The S = 3 2 spin moment on Nd drives this exchange splitting, which will follow the orientation of the 4f moment, which is disordered. With the very weak 4f − 4f exchange coupling noted in Sec. III, the Nd moments will be randomly oriented and quasi-static on an electronic time scale. In spite of the disorder broadening on the electron Fermi pockets and resulting strong spin scattering driven by stable, essentially classical but disordered 4f mo- ments, superconductivity survives in Nd0.8Sr0.2NiO2. Band structures of Nd0.8Sr0.2NiO2 (dashed lines) compared to those of NdNiO2 (solid lines), near EF . Here U Ni d = 0; Ni is non-magnetic. The bands are plotted in the Nd AFM zone. Note that hole doping removes electrons pri- marily from the Γ-centered Nd 5f electron pocket; the Z′ (A in primitive zone) pocket is nearly unchanged. This situation bears some similarity to that of elemental Eu with its 4f 7 moment: pressure kills magnetic order around 82 GPa but not the local moment, and there is a first order electronic but isostructural transformation to a superconducting phase at 1.7 K. The exchange cou- pling from the classical local moment that should be dis- ruptive to Cooper pairing in a specific spin configuration (singlet or triplet) may actually be contributing to the pairing in Eu. The exchange coupling in NdNiO2 is not as pervasive – every site in Eu has a 4f moment and the partially occupied conduction band is entirely 5d – but some of the physics may be related. A related, and commonly modeled, spin-scattering pro- cess will occur on the (locally) magnetic Ni ion (as treated for the Cu ion in cuprates), an effect that can be modeled by any of a variety of spin fluctuation formalisms appli- cable to transition metal oxides. The resulting strong scattering in the electron pockets is a potential contribu- tor to the resistivity of “conducting” NdNiO2, where the resistivity ρ ∼ 1mΩcm varies little between 300 K and the lowest temperature measured. The inferred mean free path in a Fermi liquid inspired Bloch-Boltzmann treat- ment would be atomic size, meaning incoherent transport and a washed out FS. A dynamical mean field approxima- tion treatment of Ni 3d fluctuations in LaNiO2 found little shifting and broadening of bands around EF , and no mechanism for the high resistivity. The large residual resistivity may be the result of the topotactic synthe- sis technique, with indications to be learned between the similarities and the distinctions between the doped thin films and doped bulk materials, which also have sim- ilarly high residual resistivity. 5 VIII. SUMMARY In this work we have focused on a primary distinction between NdNiO2 and LaNiO2. When the 4f moment on Nd is relegated to the core in nonmagnetic fashion, the electronic structures are nearly identical. Yet the Nd compound becomes superconducting while the sister La compound remains non-superconducting, when 20% hole-doped. We find that the strong Nd 4f moment is intra-atomic exchange-coupled to the Nd 5d orbitals by a coupling of roughly K=0.5 eV, giving anti-Kondo cou- pling between the Nd local moments and the lower con- duction band. The disordered 4f moments will give rise to a broadening of 5d bands of the order of K, affecting transport and perhaps becoming implicated in pairing, either as a participant or a disruptive agent. The calculated Ni moments are larger by 0.2μB for an- tiferromagnetic alignment than for ferromagnetic align- ment. The associated Hund’s rule energy provides a ten- dency toward AFM alignment that lies beyond the usual Heisenberg exchange coupling picture. An important fea- ture of this system is that the Γ-centered Nd 5d Fermi surface pocket accepts most of the doped holes, leaving Ni 3d charge changed only by 0.05 holes for 20% doping. The Pk2 spherical Fermi surface pocket that remains in- tact after doping, and rather strong kz fluting of the Ni Fermi surfaces, suggests the importance of kz dispersion (three dimensionality). Our results indicate that several aspects of the Nd ion arising from the open 4f shell re- quire attention for understanding both normal and su- perconducting state properties. Note Added: A useful reference has just appeared on the APS Condensed Matter Physics Journal Club post- ings. . IX. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We acknowledge informative discussions with A. S. Botana, J. Sun, M. J. Han, E.-G. Moon, D. Lee, and J. Son, and communication with S. Raghu. M.Y.C. and K.W.L were supported by National Research Foundation of Korea Grants No. NRF-2019R1A2C1009588. W.E.P. was supported by NSF Grant No. DMR 1607139. D. Li, K. Lee, B. Y. Wang, M. Osada, S. Crossley, H. R. Lee, Y. Cui, Y. Hikita, and H. Y. Hwang, Supercon- ductivity in an infinite-layer nickelate, Nature 572, 624 T. Siegrist, S. M. Zahurak, D. W. Murphy, and R. S Roth, The parent structure of the layered high-temperature su- perconductors, Nature 334, 231 (1988). M. Azuma, Z. Hiroi, M. Takano, Y. Bando, and Y. Tekeda, Superconductivity at 110 K in the infinite-layer compound (Sr1−xCax)1−yCuO2, Nature 356, 775 (1992). V. I. Anisimov, D. Bukhvalov, and T. M. Rice, Electronic structure of possible nickelate analogs to the cuprates, Phys. Rev. B 59, 7901 (1999). K.-W. Lee and W. E. Pickett, Infinite Layer LaNiO2: Ni1+ is not Cu2+, Phys. Rev. B 70, 165109 (2004). A. S. Botana and M. R. Norman, Similarities and differ- ences between infinite-layer nickelates and cuprates and implications for superconductivity, arXiv:1908:10946. H. Sakakibara, H. Usui, K. Suzuki, T. Kotani, H. Aoki, and K. Kuroki, Model construction and a possibility of cuprate-like pairing in a new d9 nickelate superconductor (Nd,Sr)NiO2, arXiv:1909.00060. X. Wu, D. D. Sante, T. Schwemmer, W. Hanke, H. Y. Hwang, S. Raghu, and R. Thomale, Robust dx2y2-wave superconductivity of infinite-layer nickelates, Y. Nomura, M. Hirayama, T. Tadano, Y. Yoshimoto, K. Nakamura, and R. Arita, Formation of 2D single- component correlated electron system and band engineer- ing in the nickelate superconductor NdNiO2, Phys. Rev. J. Gao, Z. Wang, C. Fang, and H. Weng, Elec- tronic Structures and Topological Properties in Nickelates Lnn+1NinO2n+2, arXiv:1909:04657. S. Ryee, H. Yoon, T. J. Kim, M. Y. Jeong, and M. J. Han, Induced Magnetic Two-dimensionality by Hole Doping in Superconducting Nd1xSrxNiO2, arXiv:1909.05824. G.-M. Zhang, Y.-F. Yang, and F.-C. Zhang, Self-doped Mott insulator for parent compounds of nickelate super- conductors, arXiv:1909.11845 H. Zhang, L. Jin, S. Wang, B. Xi, X. Shi, F. Ye, and J.-W. Mei, Effective Hamiltonian for superconducting Ni oxides Nd1−xSrxNiO2, arXiv:1909.07427. Y.-H. Zhang and A. Vishwanath, Kondo resonance and d-wave superconductivity in the t–J model with spin one holes: possible applications to the nickelate superconduc- tor Nd1−xSrxNiO2, arXiv:1909.12865. P. Jiang, L. Si, Z. Liao, and Z. Zhong, Electronic struc- ture of rare-earth infinite-layer ReNiO2 (Re=La, Nd), Phys. Rev. B 100, 201106(R) (2019). L.-H. Hu and C. Wu, Two-band model for magnetism and superconductivity in nickelates, Phys. Rev. Research P. Werner and S. Hoshino, Nickelate superconductors: multiorbital nature and spin freezing, arXiv:1910.00473. Z. Liu, Z. Ren, W. Zhu, Z. F. Wang, and J. Yang, Elec- tronic and magnetic structure of infinite-layer NdNiO2: trace of antiferromagnetic metal, arXiv:1912.01332. M. Jiang, M. Berciu, and G. A. Sawatzky, Doped holes in NdNiO2 and high-Tc cuprates show little similarity, M. Hepting, D. Li, C. J. Jia, H. Lu, E. Paris, Y. Tseng, X. Feng, M. Osada, E. Been, Y. Hikita, Y.-D. Chuang, Z. Hussain, K. J. Zhou, A. Nag, M. Garcia-Fernandez, M. Rossi, H. Y. Huang, D. J. Huang, Z. X. Shen, T. Schmitt, H. Y. Hwang, B. Moritz, J. Zaanen, T. P. De- vereaux, and W. S. Lee, Electronic structure of the par- ent compound of superconducting infinite-layer nickelates, 6 K. Mikhalev, S. Verkhovskii, A. Gerashenko, A. Mirmel- stein, V. Bobrovskii, K. Kumagai, Y. Furukawa, T. D’yachkova, and Yu. Zainulin, Temperature dependence of the sublattice magnetization of the infinite-layer anti- ferromagnet SrCuO2, Phys. Rev. B 69, 132415 (2004). H. B. Radousky, A review of the superconducting and normal state properties of Y1−xPrxBa2Cu3O7, J. Mater. Res. 7, 1917 (1992). A. I. Liechtenstein and I. I. Mazin, Quantita- tive Model for the Superconducting Suppression in R1−xPrxBa2Cu3O7 with Different Rare earths, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 1000 (1995). W. E. Pickett and I. I. Mazin, RBa2Cu3O7 Compounds: Electronic Theory and Physical Properties, Handbook on the Physics and Chemistry of Rare Earths, edited by K. A. Gschneidner, Jr., L. Eyring, and M. B. Maple (Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2000), pp. 453-489. L. C. Gupta, Superconductivity and magnetism and their interplay in quaternary borocarbides RNi2B2C, Adv. in Phys. 55, 691 (2006). W. E. Pickett and D. J. Singh, New Class of Intermetal- lic Borocarbides: Electron-Phonon Coupling and Physical Parameters, J. Supercond. 8, 425 (1995). M. Debessai, T. Matsuoka, J. J. Hamlin, J. S. Schilling, and K. Shimizu, Pressure-induced superconducting state of europium metal at low temperatures, Phys. Rev. Lett. S.-T. Pi, S. Y. Savrasov, and W. E. Pickett, Pressure- tuned Frustration of Magnetic Coupling in Elemental Eu- ropium, Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 057201 (2019). K. Schwarz and P. Blaha, Solid state calculations using WIEN2k, Comput. Mater. Sci. 28, 259 (2003). E. R. Ylvisaker, K. Koepernik, and W. E. Pickett, Anisotropy and magnetism in the LSDA+U method, Phys. Rev. B 79, 035103 (2009). A. B. Shick, A. I. Liechtenstein, and W. E. Pickett, Im- plementation of the LDA+U Method Using the Full Po- tential Linearized Augmented Plane Wave Basis, Phys. Rev. B 60, 10763 (1999). See Supplemental Material at [URL provided by the pub- lisher] where information is provided on the DFT method and several results beyond those in the manuscript.. J. Kuneˇs and W. E. Pickett, Kondo and anti-Kondo cou- pling to local moments in EuB6, Phys. Rev. B 69, 165111 The VCA was accomplished by replacing Z=60 of Nd by Z=59.8. The small shift in 4f levels is unimportant. Q. Li, C. He, J. Si, X. Zhu, Y. Zhang, and H.-H. Wen, Absence of superconductivity in bulk Nd1−xSrxNiO2, A. Fujimori, Electronic structure, magnetism, and super- conductivity in infinite-layer nickelates, Journal Club for Condensed Matter Physics, December (2019). X. SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL Calculation Methods Our calculations with wien2k were based on the gen- eralized gradient approximation (GGA). The effects of correlation were treated with the GGA+U approach in the fully localized limit. In the GGA+U calculations presented here, we focused on the results of the Hubbard U = 8(5) eV and Hund’s coupling J = 1(0.7) eV for the Nd 4f (Ni 3d), except where noted. Our conclusions weren’t affected by varying the value of U by 1–2 eV. In wien2k, the basis size was determined by RmtKmax = 8; checking RmtKmax=9 gave no noticeable difference. The APW radii were chosen as Nd 2.50, Ni 1.98, and O 1.70, in atomic units. Convergence was checked with dense k−meshes up to 29 × 29 × 34 to treat the highly localized 4f orbitals carefully. Fermi surface of Nd0.8Sr0.2NiO2 in rigid band approximation the rigid band approximation, for case AFM0 (non-magnetic Ni) as defined in the main text. The region shown is the folded zone corresponding to AFM 4f alignment. Surfaces have been separated into left and right sub-panels for clarity. These surfaces can be compared with the bottom panel of Fig. 3 in the main text, which provides the surfaces in the virtual crystal approximation. The Γ-centered electron pocket has been emptied, while the kz dispersion is increased substan- tially. (The undoped case is also given in the top panel of Fig. 3 in the main text.) GGA+U electronic structure of ferromagnetic state We provide here and below fatband plots indicating band character for all Ni 3d and Nd 5d orbitals, for both FM and AFM1 magnetic alignments (fully aligned moments; both Ni and Nd moments antialigned). The differences, also compared to the information in the main text for non-magnetic Ni, indicate how the various characters are shifted by relative magnetic alignment. Although order- ing does not occur down to the lowest temperature mea- sured, the differences give an indication of the effects of spin fluctuations. Some of the points to notice are in- cluded in the captions. The spin-resolved fatband plots of separate Ni 3d and 7 above for methods and values of interactions). Majority (up) bands are given in the upper panels, minority (down) in the lower panels. Note that there is some Ni dz2 character for both spin directions in the Γ centered electron pocket. There is very strong Ni dz2 character almost at EF in the minority bands along the zone edge Z − R − A − Z. Bottom: Fatband plots for all Nd 5d orbitals corresponding to those of Ni 3d, above. Majority (up) bands are in the upper panels, minority (down) bands are in the lower panels. Strong Nd 5d character (dz2) is confined to the electron pockets Pk1 at Γ. There is lesser Nd contribution (dxy) to the electron pocket Pk2 at A. Nd 5d orbitals in the range of –4 eV to 4 eV for FM alignment of all moments are displayed in Fig. 6. Some aspects to note follow. The electron pocket band at the Γ point (fully spin polarized for this FM alignment) has strong Nd 5dz2 character as noted by others, but it is mixed with significant Ni 3dz2 character near the Γ point. For the electron pocket at A = (π, π, π) there is admix- ture of Ni 3dxz/3dyz character with the Nd 5dxy orbitals. The hole bands at the M and A points have the primary dx2−y2 character as occurs in cuprates. projected densities of states (PDOSs) for FM alignment. 8 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 E - EF (eV) -2 0 2 DOS(staes/eV-f.u.) O Nd Ni -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 E - EF (eV) -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 DOS(staes/eV-f.u.) dxy dx2-y2 dxz / dyz dz 2 -2 0 2 4 E - EF (eV) -0.5 0 0.5 DOS(staes/eV-f.u.) dxy dx2-y2 dxz / dyz dz 2 0 1 2 1/2 3/2 5/2 0 1 -7/2 -5/2 -3/2 -1/2 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 0 1 1/2 3/2 5/2 7/2 E - EF (eV) DOS(states/eV-f.u.) -5/2 -3/2 -1/2 left: Nd 5d orbital PDOS. Bottom right: FM orbital-resolved DOSs of Nd 4f orbitals in the |j, mj > basis, using GGA+U+SOC. |5/2, 3/2 > orbitals lead to an orbital moment of –2.6 μB. The Nd 4f-orbital resolved DOSs obtained from GGA+U+SOC are given in the bottom right panel of Fig. 7. The main effect of SOC is to produce, via introduced anticrossings, individual flat bands giving rise to separated DOS peaks for each orbital |j.mj >. GGA+U electronic structures of antiferromag- netic states To consider antiferromagnetic (AFM) states, a √ 2× √ 2 supercell is necessary. As mentioned in the main text, we considered three AFM states and a fully aligned config- uration: * AFM0: nonmagnetic Ni and AFM ordered Nd * AFM1: both AFM ordered Ni and Nd ions * AFM2: AFM ordered Ni and FM ordered Nd * FM: both sublattices completely aligned. Here we provide additional information of AFM1 and AFM2, both of which have AFM Ni layers. For the AFM0 state, see the main text. In GGA+U, similar to the FM cases, the magnitude of the local spin moments are 3 μB for Nd and around 1.2 μB for Ni. In AFM2, the FM ordered Nd moment induces a very small difference between up and down Ni moments of 0.03 μB, indicating the weakness but non- vanishing of the magnetic Nd-Ni coupling as noted by others. AFM zone and atom-PDOSs of AFM1 and AFM2. (In the band structure plots, the prime symbol is omitted for simplicity.) Both band structures are characterized by a near gap as a cuprate would display, except for a band dispersing upward from Z′ − R′ and downward from a′ − Z′ along the kz = π plane. No such dispersion is observed on the kz = 0 plane Γ − X′ − M ′ − Γ. The Fermi level is fixed not by half-filling of this band but by the lower conduction band, which is flat along Z′−R′−A′−Z′. The dispersion band is of ambiguous mixed character while the flat band has very strong Ni dz2 character. In GGA, a magnetic Ni ion leads to a 120 meV energy gain compared to non-magnetic Ni. This exaggerated tendency toward magnetic ordering and the magnitude of the magnetic moment is a known deficiency of (semi)local density functional methods, with much of the problem attributed to the lack of effects of spin fluctuations in the functional. The energies of AFM1, AFM2, and FM, obtained with the same functional, can be compared. The energy of AFM2 (FM Nd) is slightly lower than that of AFM1 (AFM Nd), by 7 meV for U=0 and by only 1 meV (at 9 the edge of computational precision) with U=5 eV on Ni, reflecting a slight tendency toward FM ordering of the 4f moments. The energy difference between FM and AFM2 provides the difference between AFM and FM Ni mo- ments; AFM alignment is favored by 116 (25) meV/Ni in GGA(+U). This energy difference contains informa- tion about Ni-Ni in-plane exchange coupling, and would give a value of the nearest neighbor coupling if all others were negligible. Liu et al. have derived values of coupling for a few neighbors, concluding that the values depend strongly on the value of U Ni that are used. Results of AFM1 and AFM2 show similarity as ex- pected, with differences in the band structures appear- ing as small spin-splitting of bands, most evident in the Nd 5d electron-pocket band at Γ. Curiously, this band becomes incredibly flat along the zone-top lines Z − R − A − Z, pinning the Fermi level. The flatness leads to a sharp peak at the Fermi level with the associ- ated tendency toward instabilities of various kinds, and might contribute to the lack of such ordering. We display the simpler band structure of AFM1, with the fatband plots of Ni 3d and Nd 5d presented separately in Figs. 9 and 10, respectively. The flat band at the Fermi level is seen to be very strongly Ni dz2 in character. The corresponding orbital-projected DOSs are given in Fig. 11, where the Ni dz2 peak is very prominent at the Fermi level – purely of a single character. We also considered the effects of SOC in the GGA+U+SOC to analyze the Nd 4f configuration, lead- ing to the Nd orbital moment of –4.45 μB. Figure 12 shows the PDOS of Nd 4f orbitals in the |j, mj⟩ basis. DOS, when applying U and J only to the Nd 4f orbitals in the AFM1 alignment. J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3865 (1996). 10 spin-imbalance in the antiferromagnetic ordered Ni ions is induced by the FM ordered Nd ions (see the region near EF ). Note that in both cases a flat band along Z − R − A − Z pins the Fermi level. 11 -4 -2 0 2 4 E - EF (eV) -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 DOS(staes/eV-f.u.) dz 2 dxy dx2-y2 dxz dyz -4 -2 0 2 4 E - EF (eV) -0.5 0 0.5 DOS(staes/eV-f.u.) dz 2 dxy dx2-y2 dxz dyz 12 0 1 2 3 -5/2 -3/2 -1/2 1/2 3/2 5/2 0 1 2 -7/2 -5/2 -3/2 -1/2 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 0 1 2 1/2 3/2 5/2 7/2 E - EF (eV) DOS(states/eV-f.u.) configurations of similar energy might be obtained as self-consistent solutions, in which case the orbital moment would differ. orbital. The magnitudes of the local spin moments are Nd 3 μB and Ni 0.65 μB. Compared with that of applying U to both Ni and Nd orbitals (see Fig. 8), a clear distinction appears on the kz = π plane (along the Z − R − A − Z line), in addition to a few hole Fermi surface. In this case, the Ni 3dz2 orbital, which is dispersionless in this plane, is fully occupied, and an electron band appears at the Z-point. 13