Parity-preserving and magnetic field resilient superconductivity in indium antimonide nanowires with tin shells M. Pendharkar,1 B. Zhang,2 H. Wu,2 A. Zarassi,2 P. Zhang,2 C.P. Dempsey,1 J.S. Lee,3 S.D. Harrington,4 G. Badawy,5 S. Gazibegovic,5 J. Jung,5 A.-H. Chen,6 M.A. Verheijen,5 M. Hocevar,6 E.P.A.M. Bakkers,5 C.J. Palmstrøm,1, 3, 4 and S.M. Frolov2, ∗ 1Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA 2Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA 3California NanoSystems Institute, University of California Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA 4Materials Department, University of California Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA 5Eindhoven University of Technology, 5600 MB, Eindhoven, The Netherlands 6Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, Institut N ́eel, 38000 Grenoble, France (Dated: December 13, 2019) We study bottom-up grown semiconductor indium antimonide nanowires that are coated with shells of tin. The shells are uniform in thickness. The interface between Sn and InSb is abrupt and without interdiffusion. Devices for transport are prepared by in-situ shadowing of nanowires using nearby nanowires as well as flakes, resulting in etch-free junctions. Tin is found to induce a hard superconducting gap in the range 600 − 700 μeV. Superconductivity persists up to 4 T in magnetic field. A small island of InSb/Sn exhibits the coveted two-electron charging effect, a hallmark of charge parity stability. The findings open avenues for superconducting and topological quantum circuits based on new superconductor-semiconductor combinations. As we enter the era of intermediate-scale quantum cir- cuits , materials considerations come into renewed focus through their impact on quantum gate fidelity. The most successful solid state approaches rely either on su- perconductors , or on semiconductors , with the fu- ture topological platform to require a hybrid of both . The search continues for the ultimate material capable of rendering moot the issue of intrinsic decoherence. In this context, the push for qubits based on Majorana zero modes that are expected to be topologically immune to decoherence [6–9] has facilitated the introduction of high quality interfaces between superconducting metals and low-dimensional semiconductors [10–13]. Only a few superconductors were explored for Majo- rana qubits, most notably aluminum which is also the material of choice for transmon quantum processors . Among advantages of aluminum are self-limiting native oxide and hard induced gap in proximate semiconduc- tors . Due to this, aluminum is widely known to exhibit 2e charging in small islands, a crucial basic property that makes it a low-decoherence supercon- ductor [16–22]. Among disadvantages of aluminum are a relatively small superconducting gap equivalent to 1 K, and a low critical magnetic field. This confines quantum computing to ultra-low temperatures and even further constrains how we design future topological qubits which will require a precise balance of several energy scales . Here we present induced superconductivity in InSb nanowires with Sn shells. InSb is the highest electron mobility group III-V semiconductor with strong spin-orbit coupling and large Land ́e g-factors in the conduction band . These are the primary ingredients of the Majorana recipe , making InSb an opti- mal material for the investigation of induced topological superconductivity [30–34]. We find that when InSb nanowires are coupled to tin they exhibit hard induced superconducting gap up to 700 μeV. Superconductivity persists to a significant mag- netic field, up to 4 Tesla for 15 nm thick Sn shells. Most importantly, islands of tin do exhibit 2e-periodic charg- ing patterns. This effect is a landmark requirement for topological quantum computing as well as for transmon qubits, as it is a pre-requisite for long quasiparticle stabil- ity times. Our results indicate that there are more super- conductors compatible with quantum computing, open- ing future directions for heterostructure tailoring and ul- timately for high fidelity quantum circuits. Our first goal is to investigate electron tunneling into Sn through InSb in the normal metal-superconductor (N- S) configuration. For this we need a nanowire with only one end covered by tin. We use the uncovered end to define a tunneling barrier and an N-contact. In order to avoid damage to InSb that results from etching away part of the Sn shell, we employ in-situ nanoscale shad- owing . In this case it is an InSb flake, standing in front of the nanowire, that shadows the bottom of the wire during deposition of Sn in ultra-high vacuum (Fig. 1A). To prepare an N-S device the tin-coated nanowire is positioned onto a doped Si/SiOx substrate which is used as a back gate (BG) (Fig. 1B). A side gate (SG) is used to define and tune the tunneling barrier near the edge of the tin-free segment. The tunneling spectrum reveals a two- orders-of-magnitude suppression in conductance around zero bias (Fig. 1C). This so-called hard gap indicates the elimination of decoherence pathways due to disorder and spurious subgap states. A superconducting tunnel- ing peak is at ±680 μeV which is comparable to the gap arXiv:1912.06071v1 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 11 Dec 2019 2 atoms, shadowing the InSb nanowire standing behind. Dark streaks on the InSb substrate are also due to shadowing of the Sn beam by nanowires and flakes. The inset shows the direction of Sn beam and indicates the shadowed and exposed segments of the nanowire. (B) SEM of an N-S device (device A) with a flake-shadowed InSb/Sn nanowire and Ti/Au contacts and a side gate. Magnetic field is applied vertically. (C) Zero magnetic field tunneling conductance spectrum of device A in linear scale Bottom part contain linecuts along dashed lines in the top part. Line traces are at low and high V . of tin. In magnetic field, the hard gap is found to persist beyond 2 Tesla, with the gap “softening” at higher fields and fully closing around 4 Tesla (Fig. 1D). Magnetic field resilience is an indicator of a thin uniform shell. It is an- other advantage of Sn since topological, spin and some superconducting qubits operate at high magnetic fields. Supporting Materials contain extended data images and source files for this device, for all devices presented in the main text and from additional devices. Next, we study superconductor-superconductor (S-S) devices with both ends of the nanowire covered by tin, and only a narrow break in the shell to define an InSb weak link (Fig. 2A). For this we use a previously devel- oped method of shadowing the Sn flux by criss-crossing nanowires . We first study tunneling between two tin islands (Fig. 2B). We observe a smooth nanowire pinch off void of accidental quantum dot states. Three finite-bias resonances are observed, marked 4∆, 4∆/2 and 4∆/3 in Fig. 2B. This sequence is a manifestation of Multiple Andreev Reflection processes, which are charac- teristic of transparent S-S junctions. They correspond to 615 μeV ± 10 μeV which is somewhat smaller than the gap observed in the N-S device (Fig. 1C). At VBG < −1 V only the 4∆ resonance is observed. We interpret this as the superconducting tunneling regime. Because the S-S tunneling resonance is a peak in current, it appears as a peak-dip structure in conductance. The resonance at zero bias in Fig. 2B is the Josephson supercurrent. This effect is best studied in the current- bias configuration (Fig. 2C). The switching current (Isw) from superconducting to normal state is a peak in differ- ential resistance. Isw decays smoothly with more nega- tive VBG. The current-voltage characteristics are weakly hysteretic which is reflected in the asymmetry of Isw in positive and negative current bias. In magnetic field, the Josephson effect is observed up to 1.5 T and re- mains significant with sharp switching up to 0.5 T (see Supporting Materials). This significant field range is a positive development for schemes that require coupling and decoupling of topologically superconducting islands at finite magnetic field for Majorana fusion or braid- ing . Measurements on continuous-shell nanowires without shadow junctions yielded supercurrents in the range 20 − 30 μA corresponding to the critical current density of 2 × 106 A/cm2 (data in Supporting Materi- als). The extracted products IswRN (RN is the normal state resistance) are in the range 125 − 225 μeV, which is significant, and of the same order of magnitude as the gap. In Fig. 3 we present key findings on 2e charging of a tin island. The island is defined between two nanowire- shadow junctions in the N-S-N geometry (Fig. 3A). At zero magnetic field, we observe a single family of Coulomb peak resonances consistent with charging the entire island (Fig. 3B). At a finite magnetic field of 1 T, the frequency of Coulomb resonances doubles (Fig. 3C, 3D). We attribute data at zero field to 2e charging, and data at finite field to 1e charging. The transition from 2e to 1e is due to the superconducting gap or the lowest subgap state dropping in energy below the charging energy, which we estimate to be 0.3 meV (Figs. 3E, 3F). At finite magnetic field, it costs less en- ergy to add electrons to the island one-by-one, while near zero field, due to hard gap superconductivity, it is advan- 3 the shadow junction where Sn shell is visible. (B) Differential conductance as a function of source-drain voltage bias V and back gate voltage, VBG. The double arrows mark resonances 4∆, 4∆/2 and 4∆/3. (C) Differential resistance as a func- tion of current bias I and VBG (bottom). Top panel shows extracted switching current Isw (black) and IswRN (red) as a function of back gate voltage. tageous to add electrons in pairs. The two-electron charging effect is central for topolog- ical quantum computing because the states of a topolog- ical qubit are distinguished by even/odd island charge parity. If only 1e charging periodicity were observed, it would mean that despite a well-defined superconducting gap, electrons can be added to an island one at a time and the ability to distinguish the states of a topologi- cal qubit is scrambled. 1e periodicity is also detrimental for transmon qubits where single electron tunneling is a decoherence mechanism . Tin is an unusual material which has two different crys- tal phases with a phase transition at 13◦C. The low- temperature α-Sn has a diamond cubic lattice, while the high temperature β-Sn is tetragonal. The electronic properties of both phases are very different. α-Sn is a semimetal which can also be a topological insulator in monolayer form [39–41], whereas β-Sn is a metal with a superconducting transition temperature of 3.7 K. For tin on InSb nanowires we assess the structural properties and elemental distribution using transmission electron microscopy (TEM). TEM images reveal a poly- crystalline Sn shell of uniform thickness around the InSb nanowire (Fig. 4A): the shell features grains of sizes 25 × 25 nm to 50 × 60 nm (see Supporting Materials). The Sn-InSb interface is abrupt and some Sn grains show epitaxial relationship with InSb. The high-resolution an- nular bright field-scanning TEM image (Fig. 4C) shows a section of the interface where the {111} planes of zincblende InSb are aligned with lattice planes of a Sn grain with a lattice distance of 2.04 ̊A. This matches the {220} interplanar distance of β-Sn. This grain is one of (A) SEM of device C showing the Sn island, two shadow junctions with bare InSb, side gates SG1 and SG2 and Ti/Au source-drain contacts which cover the outside Sn segments and suppress superconductivity there. (B) and (C): 2e and 1e tunneling conductance resonances measured at V = 0 at B = 0 T and B = 1 T, respectively. (D) Magnetic field evolution of conductance along the dashed cut in panel (B). (E) and (F): V vs gate spectroscopy at B = 0 T and B = 1 T, respectively. 13 analyzed along the same nanowire. 11 of the grains are identified as β-Sn from the fast Fourier transform analysis of the interplanar distances (Fig. 4C, inset). Only two of those β-Sn grains show a preferential epitaxial relation- ship with InSb. In contrast, α-Sn is lattice matched to InSb and can grow epitaxially . The predominantly β-Sn shell observed at room temperature by TEM is in agreement with superconductivity observed at low tem- peratures, suggesting that no phase transformation of Sn occurred upon device cooldown. In addition to the uniform shell thickness, the nanowire shadow junctions used in S-S and N-S-N devices are sharp with Sn islands defined abruptly on each side of the junction (Fig. 4C). Energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDX) confirms that the Sn islands are isolated from each other and no interdiffusion between Sn and In is detected (Fig. 4D). A uniform 3-nm-thick AlOx passivation layer covers the entire nanowire. Oxidation at the Sn-InSb in- terfaces is not detected but cannot be fully excluded (see Methods). Our results illustrate that neither defect-free epitax- ial wire-shell interfaces nor single vacuum cycle growth of nanowire and shell are crucial requirements for the demonstration of hard gap, field-resilient superconduc- tivity and 2e charging. We conclude and discuss in the Methods section that the key components in attaining ro- 4 showing a homogeneously thin shell. (B) Higher magnifi- cation TEM of the AlOx (red) - Sn (green) - InSb (blue) stack. The Sn grain boundaries are highlighted by arrows. (C) HR-STEM image of the Sn-InSb interface. The insets show Fourier transforms to the left and to the right of the in- terface. (D) High-angle annular dark-field STEM image of a shadow junction. (E) EDX elemental mapping of the shadow junction in (D). The Al-rich layer (red) corresponds to AlOx, oxygen not shown for clarity. bust induced superconductivity are (1) removal of InSb native oxide using atomic hydrogen prior to Sn growth, followed by (2) liquid nitrogen cooling of the nanowires during metal evaporation to produce a homogeneous ul- trathin shell and (3) immediate passivation of the wire- shell hybrid with a stable dielectric. We anticipate follow-ups of this work to be further re- search into the formation of Sn and InSb interfaces, and experiments in the Majorana geometry in search for ro- bust signatures of topological superconductivity. Going forward, Sn/InSb nanowire system can be studied for ap- plications in transmon and topological qubits. Beyond Sn, other metals can be tried as replacements of Al in search for decoherence free qubit materials . Interface requirements may increase for full topological qubit devices for which the dominant decoherence mech- anisms are yet to be established experimentally. Methods Nanowire growth. InSb nanowires are grown using the vapor-liquid-solid technique in a horizontal metal- organic vapor phase epitaxy reactor. The first nanowires used in this work are stemless InSb nanowires with flakes as shadow objects (Fig. 1A) . Both InSb nanowires and flakes are grown on an InSb (111)B sub- strate with a selective-area mask and gold as catalyst. The second type of nanowires, shown in Figs. 2A and 3B are shadowed by other nanowires . The InP (100) substrates are etched to expose the two {111}B facets, on which gold particles are deposited with an offset on the two opposing facets of a trench. Nanowires grow to- wards each other, such that the front wire shadows the back wire. InSb wires are grown on InP stems. Sn shell growth. After transit in air, nanowire chips as grown are loaded into vacuum for subsequent growth of Sn shells. The chips are gallium bonded to molyb- denum blocks. Atomic hydrogen cleaning is performed at 380◦C (thermocouple temperature) for 30 minutes, at an operating pressure of 5 × 10−6 Torr consisting pri- marily of hydrogen ambient. Once cleaned, the sam- ples are transferred in-vacuo to an ultra-high vacuum chamber dedicated for metal evaporation (base pressure < 5×10−11 Torr). Here, the nanowire samples are cooled to 85 K (-188◦C) for 2 hours, prior to tin evaporation. 15- nm-thick tin is then evaporated from an effusion cell at a growth rate of 7.5 nm/hr and an evaporation angle close to 60◦ from sample normal. This shallow evaporation angle aids in-situ formation of Sn islands with nanowire or flake shadows. After Sn evaporation, while the sam- ple is still expected to be at cryogenic temperatures (due to the thermal mass of the molybdenum block), a 3-nm- thick shell of AlOx is electron-beam evaporated onto the nanowire sample, at normal incidence. The samples are then allowed to warm up to room temperature in vac- uum. Device fabrication and measurements. Device fabrication is similar to previous work on wires with epi- taxial Al film . Wires are transferred onto doped and thermally oxidized Si substrates using a micromanipula- tor under an optical microscope. Contacts and gates are patterned by electron-beam lithography by curing the re- sist at room temperature in vacuum to avoid nanowire heating and potential interdiffusion of Sn and In. Ar ion milling is performed to remove the AlOx layer be- fore evaporating 10/150 nm of Ti/Au. Measurements are performed in a dilution refrigerator with a 30 mK base temperature using a combination of direct current 5 and lock-in techniques. All voltage bias data are two- terminal measurements. A series resistance of ≈ 5kΩ due to measurement setup was taken into account in calcu- lating conductance in all figures as well as renormalizing V axis in Figs 2B, S1, S2A. TEM studies were performed using a probe corrected microscope operated at 200 kV, equipped with a 100 mm2 EDS detector.