1 Multi-Domain Negative Capacitance Effects in Metal-Ferroelectric-Insulator- Semiconductor (Metal) Stacks: A Phase-field Simulation Based Study Atanu K Saha, and Sumeet K Gupta School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, 47906, USA Insulator-Metal (MFIM) and Metal-FE-Insulator-Semiconductor (MFIS) stacks. Our analysis is based on 2D phase field simulations, in which we self-consistently solve time-dependent Ginzburg Landau (TDGL) equation, Poisson’s equation and semiconductor charge equations. Considering Hf0.5Zr0.5O2 (HZO) as the FE material, we study 180o FE domain formation in MFIM and MFIS stacks and their voltage-dependent DW motion. Our analysis signifies that, when FE is in multi-domain (MD) state with soft-DW, the stored energy in the DW leads to non-hysteretic NC effect in FE, which provides an enhanced charge response in the MFIM stack, compared to Metal-Insulator-Metal. According to our analysis, the DW-induced NC effect yields local negative permittivity in FE in the domain and DW regions, which leads to an average negative effective permittivity in FE. Furthermore, we show that the NC trajectory of FE is dependent on its thickness, the gradient energy coefficient and the in-plane permittivity of the underline DE material but not on the DE thickness. Similar to MFIM, MFIS also exhibits an enhancement in the overall charge response and the capacitance compared to MOS capacitor. At the same time, the MD state of FE induces non-homogenous potential profile across the underlying DE and semiconductor layer. In the low voltage regime, such non-homogenous surface potential leads to the co-existence of electron and hole in an undoped semiconductor, while at higher voltages, the carrier concentration in the semiconductor becomes electron dominated. In addition, we show that with FE being in the 180o MD state, the minimum potential at FE-DE interface and hence, the minimum surface potential in the semiconductor, does not exceed the applied voltage (in-spite of the local differential amplification and charge enhancement). The negative capacitance (NC) effect in ferroelectric (FE) materials has attracted an immense attention because of its potential to overcome the fundamental limits in field-effect transistor (FET) operation1. In conventional Metal-Oxide- Semiconductor (MOS)-FET, only a fraction of the applied gate voltage (VAPP) appears as semiconductor surface potential (Ψ) due to a voltage drop across the positive gate dielectric capacitance (dΨ/dVAPP<1). Therefore, the attainable subthreshold swing (SS) in MOSFET is always higher than the 60 mV/decade at room temperature (T=300K)1. However, it has been proposed that an FE layer at the gate stack of FE-FET (or NC-FET) can act as a negative capacitor and thus, can amplify the internal potential so that dΨ/dVAPP>1 and SS < 60 mV/decade at room temperature1. According to Landau’s free energy equation1, FE polarization (P) vs electric-field (E) characteristics exhibit an unstable negative slope. According to ref. 1, such an unstable (negative dP/dE) region in FE can be stabilized in a heterogeneous system (i.e. FE-DE stack) so that a homogeneously suppressed polarization (P=0) can be obtained by suppressing the depolarization energy. However, under certain conditions it may be more natural to form multiple domains with positive and negative P 2 separated by domain-walls (DWs) to suppress the depolarization energy of the system2. Recently, DW motion-based P- switching in multi-domain (MD) FE has been identified as a possible mechanism for obtaining static NC in FE3-5. Such DW- induced NC effect has been theoretically predicted in ref. 6-7 showing that the soft-DW displacement can lead to an effective negative permittivity of FE in presence of the interfacial dead layer. Further, a similar effect has been analyzed through phase- field simulations predicting a hysteresis-free NC path in FE by considering a moving DW in a FE capacitor8 and DE-FE-DE superlattice9. Additionally, an analytical model for DW-induced NC has been proposed for DE-FE-DE superlattice in ref. 9 suggesting that the NC path is dependent on the DE thickness (TDE), which contrasts with the analysis presented in ref.10. However, our phase field simulations show that the DW motion-based NC path in FE is independent of TDE, but depends on the in-plane permittivity of the DE layer, which is in agreement with ref. 10. To identify such interdependency of FE NC behavior on the properties of the constituent FE and DE layers in such heterostructures, we extensively analyze DW-induced NC effect in MFIM based on phase field simulations (beyond what has been explored so far) and establish its dependence on FE thickness, gradient energy coefficient, and DE permittivity and thickness. Furthermore, we, for the first time, develop a self-consistent 2D phase-field simulation framework for Metal-Ferroelectric-Insulator-Semiconductor (MFIS) stack. Utilizing our framework, we investigate DW induced NC effect in the MFIS stack, its effect on the semiconductor potential and its dependency on key material/device parameters. equation9, Poisson’s equation and semiconductor charge equations, yielding self-consistent solutions for polarization (P(x, z, the FE material, we consider Hf0.5Zr0.5O2 (HZO) and the corresponding Landau’s free energy coefficients (α, β and γ) are extracted from measured P-V characteristics11. For the gradient coefficient (g) of HZO, a range of values are considered as the actual value is still unknown. We assume the spontaneous P direction in FE is along the thickness of the film (z-axis), which is parallel to the c-axis of the orthorhombic crystal phase12-13. For DE, we consider SiO2, Al2O3 and HfO2, and for the semiconductor, we consider silicon (Si). The simulation parameters are listed in Fig. 1(b) and this framework is utilized for subsequent analysis of MFIM and MFIS stack (Fig. 1(c)). Let us start by considering an MFIM stack with an applied voltage (VAPP=0). It is well known that in MFIM stack, spontaneous polarization (P) appears at the FE-DE interface, which leads to a voltage drop across the DE. As a result, an E- field appears in FE opposite to the P direction (called depolarization field, EFE,Z), which leads to an increase in the depolarization energy density, fDEP (= ‒EFE,Z×P). However, fDEP can be suppressed with the formation of periodic 180o domains of alternating 3 state, the magnitude of the local EFE,Z (at a particular point in the FE) is greatly reduced due to stray fields (in-plane E-field, EFE,X) between P↑ and P↓ domains, as shown in Fig. 2(b). While this decrease in local EFE,Z is larger near the domain walls (DWs) compared to inside of the domains, the suppression of average EFE,Z is significant across the entire length of the stack (along the x-direction). The resultant decrease in fDEP, however, comes at the cost of DW energy density (fDW), which is comprised of (a) the electrostatic energy density (fELEC,X=εFE,XEFE,X 2 ) due to stray fields, where εFE,X is the in-plane background Subsequently, we will refer to the sum of fGRAD,X and fELEC,X over the FE region as the DW energy (FDW=∫∫ fDW dxdz, where, fDW = fGRAD,X + fELEC,X). Note that the magnitude of P inside of a domain also varies along the z-axis exhibiting a minima at the DE interface and gradually increasing in the bulk FE (away from the DE interface). This induces a bound charge density ρb=–dP(z)/dz and further suppresses the EFE,Z (and hence, fDEP) inside of the domain. However, this additional suppression of EFE,X occurs at the cost of an increase in fGRAD,Z (=g×(dP/dz)2). Our simulations show that fGRAD,Z occurs in FE both in the MD (co-existing P↑ and P↓) and poled (either P↑ or P↓) states. In the MD state (achieved by suppressing fDEP at the cost of fDW and fGRAD,Z while minimizing the overall system energy), the intricate interactions of these energy components with each other (and the free energy, fFREE) play a key role in determining the NC response of FE and its dependence on the device/material parameters, as discussed subsequently. Let us first describe the implication of FE thickness (TFE) on the formation of MD state. The P configuration of FE in MFIM stack for different TFE, shown in Fig. 2(c), suggests that the number of domains (and DWs) increases (within a certain length) with the decrease in TFE. As TFE decreases, fGRAD,Z increases as a similar P variation along z-axis (i.e. similar P maxima in the bulk and minima in the interface) occurs within a lower TFE. One of the possible ways to reduce fGRAD,Z could be decreasing P variation by increasing P magnitude in the interface, but this would increase fDEP. On the other hand, when the number of DW increases in FE, the domain width is reduced, which leads to higher penetration of domain wall into the domains. This reduces the P magnitude in the bulk FE and hence, an increase in fGRAD,Z due to lower TFE can be mitigated. In this case, suppression of fDEP becomes more significant inside of a domain (as P decreases in magnitude) and also on an average (as the number of DWs increases). At the same time, with decreasing TFE, as the number of DWs increases, the nature of DW changes from hard to soft type (Fig. 2(c)). The term hard-DW implies that the spatial variation in P within the DW is abrupt (dP/dx is high). Thus, the DWs and domains are physically separable entities. In contrast, in a soft-DW, the P distribution is more gradual (dP/dx is low) and the effects of DW (fGRAD,X) diffuses along the length-scale of a domain. However, if TFE is scaled below a critical value, a single domain (SD) state with homogenous P=0 stabilizes (Fig. 2(c): TFE=2nm), where the suppression of fDEP occurs at the cost of fFREE rather than fDW. For suppressing fDEP, if fDW is higher than fFREE then the SD state is preferred over the MD 4 state. Similar to the effect of TFE, the gradient coefficient (g) also determines the number of domains and transition from MD to SD states. As fGRAD,X is one of the components of fDW, a decrease in g leads to lower DW energy cost and, thus, the formation of larger number of domains (Fig. 3(d)). Also, the critical TFE (for MD→SD transition) decreases with a decrease in g (Fig. 2(e)) as fDW decreases and therefore, needs a lower TFE to go beyond fFREE. Note that if g is very small (~0.1x10-9 m3V/C), the critical TFE can potentially become so small (~0.25nm) that the SD state may not be physically realizable (see Fig. 2(e)). Similar to TFE, the nature of DW changes from hard to soft type as g increases. This is because, for higher g, dP/dx decreases (to compensate for the fGRAD,X =g×(dP/dx)2) and thus the P-distribution becomes more gradual and diffuses within the domain. The nature of DW plays an important role in E-field driven DW motion. To displace the hard-DW, the applied E-field needs to be higher than a critical value (coercive field of DW motion, |EC,DW|>0) and therefore, DW motion is hysteretic (due to positive non-hysteretic DW motion is possible. As in this work, our focus is on analyzing the non-hysteretic NC effect, therefore, we restrict our discussion only for soft-DW motion based P-switching. l 0 ] /l (average charge density), EDE,Z is the z-component of E-field at Metal-DE interface and l is the length of the stack. For |VAPP|<2V, a continuous Q-VAPP path exists when the FE is in MD state and the P-switching takes place through DW motion decreasing |VAPP|, MD state forms from the poled state at a lower |VAPP| (~0.9V) and that induces a hysteresis in the Q-VAPP characteristics. Therefore, for non-hysteretic operation, the MD state needs to be retained by limiting the VAPP. Interestingly, in the MD state, Q is higher in MFIM stack compared to the MIM (Metal-Insulator-Metal) at the same VAPP (Fig. 3(a)). That implies, the effective capacitance of the MFIM stack is higher than MIM. In a static scenario, such a phenomena is only possible if the FE layer acts as an effective negative capacitor (CFE<0). The extracted Q-VFE,EFF (VFE,EFF=VAPP–QTDE/εDE) characteristics (in Fig. 3(a)) shows that the CFE=dQ/dVFE,EFF is indeed negative while FE is in MD state and that implies the effective permittivity of the FE layer, εFE,EFF (=TFE×CFE) is negative. The DW-motion induced negative effective permittivity can be described as follows. When VAPP=0V, the P↓ and P↑ domains in FE are equal in size and the local EFE,Z (depolarizing field) is directed opposite to the local P (i.e. P↓ domains exhibit E↑ and P↑ domains exhibit E↓). Note that fGRAD,X is non-zero inside of the domain (due to DW diffusion in soft-DW) and that causes the P to decrease in magnitude (discussed earlier). Now, with the increase in VAPP, P↓ domains grow and P↑ domains shrink in 5 size, due to positive stiffness of DW motion7. As the DW moves away from P↓ domain and towards the P↑ domain, fGRAD,X in P↓ domain decreases and in P↑ domain increases. Due to this as well as because of positive VAPP, the magnitude of local P in P↓ domain increases and in P↑ domain decreases. Consequently, our simulation shows that the depolarizing field (EFE,Z) in P↓ domain increases and in P↑ domain decreases in magnitude. This implies fDEP increases (decreases) in P↓ (P↑) domain. The increase in fDEP in P↓ domains is possible as it is accompanied by a decrease in fGRAD,X. Note that, such VAPP-induced increase/decrease in P, is not directly driven by E-field in the FE; rather, the depolarizing E-field appears depending on the change in P induced by DW motion. As the oppositely directed local E-field in FE increases (decreases) with the increase (decrease) in local P in both P↓ and P↑ domains, the local permittivity of the domains (εFE,LOCAL(x)) become negative. At the same time, in the DW, the asymmetry in P distribution (due to unequal P↑ and P↓ domain sizes and P magnitudes) causes FDW (comprised of fGRAD,X and fELEC,X) to decrease compared to the symmetric P distribution (at VAPP=0)2. Such decrease in FDW allows a further increase in average-EFE,Z (an increase in depolarization energy) in the DW, while the average-P (directed opposite to EFE,Z) in the DW increases (due to unequal P magnitudes in P↑ and P↓ domain). As a consequence, the permittivity of the DW region also becomes negative. These local negative permittivity of the domain and DW regions give rise to a negative average permittivity in the FE layer (which was earlier referred to as effective permittivity of FE) i.e. εFE,EFF<0 . As we have identified that the FDW plays a crucial role in providing εFE,EFF<0, therefore, it is easy to understand how the NC behavior is dependent on the fGRAD,X (=g×(dP/dx)2) and fELEC,X (=εFE,XEFE,X 2 ) in the FE. To investigate such dependency, the NC path in the Q-EFE,EFF (where, EFE,EFF=VFE,EFF/TFE) responses of MFIM stack for different g are shown in Fig. 3(c), which with the increase in g, a higher energy reduction (or gain) can be achieved by displacing the DW, which further provides a higher increase (decrease) in fDEP in P↓ (P↑) domains, leading larger NC effect. Similarly, dP/dx increases as the number of domains and the DWs increase with the decrease in TFE (discussed before). Therefore, fGRAD,X increases and provides an This because, in the MD state, the average depolarization field (which is zero at VAPP =0) as well as fGRAD,X and fELEC,X is independent of TDE. Interestingly, the MD-NC path does depend on the DE permittivity (εDE) as shown in Fig. 3(f). This is because the in-plane E-field, EFE,X in the DW needs to satisfy the in-plane boundary condition at the FE-DE interface, which is EFE,X=EDE,X where EDE,X and EFE,X are the in-plane E-field in DE and FE, respectively. As the EDE,X increases with the decrease in εDE (considering similar P difference between two consecutive domains), therefore, EFE,X also increases in FE, which further increases the fELEC,X (=εFE,XEFE,X 2 ) stored in the DW. Therefore, the FDW increases and hence, NC effect increases with the decrease in εDE as shown in Fig. 3(f). From this analysis, we can summarize that, (i) an FE material with higher g, (ii) TFE 6 scaling and/or (iii) using low εDE DE materials are key device design knobs to enhance DW-induced NC effect (to increase and the MD NC effect is less compared to the NC effect that corresponds to Landau path. Now, as the MD NC path is dependent on TFE, g and εDE, therefore, the charge enhancement characteristics also depend on them. The charge response in MFIM increases with the increase in g (as 1/|εFE,EFF| increases), decreases with the increase in TDE and shows mild dependency with the increase in TFE (as an increase TFE leads to decrease in 1/|εFE,EFF|) and εDE (as an increase εDE leads to decrease in 1/|εFE,EFF|) due to counteracting factors. So far, we discussed how the DW-induced NC effect in FE can enhance the overall charge response of MFIM. Next, we turn our attention to the MFIS stack and to compare the results with conventional MOS capacitor, we also simulate MIIS in Fig. 4(a-b), which illustrate an enhanced charge and capacitance response of MFIS compared to the MIIS and MIS stack. We attribute this to the effective negative εFE,EFF of FE that we discussed earlier. Now, to analyze the effects of TFE, Q-VAPP characteristics for different TFE is shown in Fig. 4(c) showing minor enhancement in charge response with the increase in TFE. To understand this, a relation can be derived between charge response in MFIS (QMFIS) and in MIS (QMIS) when εFE,EFF is negative as follows: QMFIS = QMIS×(1-CMISTFE/|εFE,EFF|)-1. Here, CMIS is the capacitance per unit area of MIS stack. Recall that the NC effect decreases (1/|εFE,EFF| decreases) with the increase in TFE (discussed for MFIM). However, the increase in TFE dominates over decrease in 1/|εFE,EFF| in the expression of QMFIS above. Consequently, the charge responses show a mild boost (1.01x) with the increase in TFE (due to two counteracting factors). Similarly, to analyze the effect of fGRAD,X, we simulate MFIS stack for different values of g. The Q-VAPP characteristics (Fig. 4(d)) show that the MFIS charge response enhances with the increase in g and are higher than the corresponding MIIS and MIS stack. This is because the NC effect enhances (1/|εFE,EFF| increases) with the increase in g, as we discussed earlier in the context of MFIM. The overall enhancement in charge/capacitance response of MFIS stack (compared to MIS and MIIS) can be easily understood from the effective negative εFE,EFF of FE. However, for FEFET operation, it is also important to analyze the semiconductor surface potential (Ψ) in MFIS, especially, when FE is in MD state (Fig. 5(a)). In fact, Ψ in MFIS is non- homogeneous as shown in Fig. 5(b) at VAPP=0V. To understand this, let us consider the potential at the FE-DE interface, VINT. Note that in the MD state, E-field in FE, EFE,Z (≈(VAPP-VINT)/TFE) is directed opposite to the local P and exhibits a non- homogeneous profile along the x-direction due to periodic P↑ and P↓ domains. Therefore, VINT becomes non-homogenous and 7 exhibits a maxima (max-VINT) and minima (min-VINT) corresponding to the center of P↓ and P↑ domains, respectively. This Ψ). This further leads to local accumulation and co-existence of electrons or holes in the undoped Si layer (Fig. 5(c)). Note, such a spatially varying charge profile has been experimentally shown in ref. 15 for FE-semiconductor interface, when FE is in MD state. Now, with the increase in VAPP (~1.2V), P↓ domains grow and P↑ domains shrink in size leading to an overall amplification (dVINT/dVAPP>1) as shown in Fig. 5(h). Here the local differential amplification in min/max-VINT can be attributed to the local negative permittivity of FE in the P↓ and P↑ domains (discussed for MFIM). Now, as VINT increases, Ψ everywhere at the Si interface increases and becomes positive (but still remains non-homogeneous, see Fig. 5(e)). Therefore, electron At VAPP=1.2V, the max-Ψ in the MFIS is higher than the MIIS and MIS and the min-Ψ in MFIS is higher than MIIS but lower than the MIS. This can be understood from the following discussion. As in the MD state, EFE,Z (≈(VAPP-VINT)/TFE) is directed opposite to the local P, therefore, the max-VINT is larger than VAPP (for P↓ domains with E↑ i.e. EFE,Z < 0) and the min-VINT remains less than VAPP (for P↑ with E↓ i.e. EFE,Z > 0). This holds true when the FE is in 180o MD state and an only exception to this (where min-VINT>VAPP can occur) is for a very small voltage window just before the MD state switches to poled state. Hence, as long as FE remains in the 180o MD state (i.e. does not switch to the poled state), the min(max)-VINT is always lower(higher) than VAPP in MFIS (see Fig. 5(g)). Note that, this statement is also true for MFIM. Now, in the MIS stack, DE layer potential is directly driven by VAPP and hence VINT=VAPP. Therefore, min-VINT of MFIS is always less than VINT (=VAPP) of MIS. In addition, dΨ/dVINT is <1 and equal for both MFIS and MIS due to the same positive capacitance of the DE layer. As a consequence, the min-Ψ of MFIS is inevitably lower than the Ψ of MIS, when the FE is in 180o MD state. However, in MIIS, the VINT (HfO2-SiO2 interface potential) is not directly driven by VAPP and due to the positive capacitance of the HfO2 layer, VINT)/dVAPP>1) as shown in Fig. 5(h), the min-VINT of MFIS becomes higher than the VINT of MIIS beyond a certain VAPP (Fig. 5(h)). As a result, min-Ψ of MFIS becomes higher than the Ψ of MIIS at VAPP>1V) as shown in Fig. 5(h). Briefly, in MFIS, the min-Ψ can exceed the Ψ in MIIS but remains lower than the MIS, while the max-Ψ is always higher than the Ψ in MIIS and MIS. 8 Now, let us make a rough assumption that the channel current in FEFET will be mostly dependent on the min-Ψ as that is the highest potential barrier seen by the source electrons. Then, based on the above discussion, we can expect that the OFF current (at VAPP=0V) of FEFET will be significantly less compared to the MIS/MIIS-FET, and the ON current (VAPP~1.2V) will be higher than the MIIS-FET but comparable to MIS-FET. As the Ψ is highly non-homogeneous in MFIS stack in the low voltage regime, calculation of SS of FEFETs needs further exploration by considering source/drain regions along with the DW- induced non-homogenous semiconductor potential and solving the transport equations to obtain the impact of MD FE on the FEFET characteristics. In summary, by performing phase field simulation, we show that the energy stored in FE DW can be harnessed to enhance the capacitance of the MFIM and MFIS stack, where the soft-DW displacement leads to a static and hysteresis-free negative capacitance in MD FE. Our analysis indicate that the effective negative permittivity of the FE layer is dependent on the FE thickness, gradient energy coefficient, in-plane permittivity of the DE and is independent of DE thickness. Further, the DW- induced NC can lead to an enhanced charge/capacitance response in MFIS stack compared to MIS/MIIS stack. However, such a charge/capacitance enhancement in MFIS does not guarantee an enhanced local Ψ in Si compared to MIS. In fact, Ψ becomes spatially varying due to the MD nature of FE and the variation is higher at low applied voltages. In addition, we discuss that the minimum Ψ in MFIS can exceed the Ψ in MIIS but remains smaller than the MIS. Nevertheless, considering the local differential amplification of VINT (i.e. d(min-VINT)/dVAPP>1), the on/off current ratio of FEFET can potentially exceed the MIS/MIIS-FET. Since the non-homogeneity in Ψ is absent in conventional MOS capacitor (and MOSFET), therefore, as future work, it will be important to investigate the impact of such potential profile on the low voltage conduction of FEFETs. 9