1 Bioinspired Materials with Self-Adaptable Mechanical Properties Santiago Orrego1,2,3, Zhezhi Chen,1,2, Urszula Krekora4, Decheng Hou1,2, Seung-Yeol Jeon1,2, Matthew Pittman1, Carolina Montoya3, Yun Chen1, Sung Hoon Kang1,2,5* 1Department of Mechanical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, 21218, USA. 2Hopkins Extreme Materials Institute, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, 21218, USA. 3Department of Oral Health Sciences and Bioengineering Department, Temple University, Philadelphia, 19140, USA. 4Deparment of Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, 21218, USA. 5Institute for NanoBioTechnology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, 21218, USA. E-mail: shkang@jhu.edu (S. H. Kang) Keywords: bioinspired materials, self-adaptive, mineralization, piezoelectric, graded materials Natural structural materials, such as bone and wood, can autonomously adapt their mechanical properties in response to loading to prevent failure. They smartly control the addition of material in locations of high stress by utilizing locally available resources guided by biological signals. On the contrary, synthetic structural materials have unchanging mechanical properties limiting their mechanical performance and service life. Here, a material system that autonomously adapts its mechanical properties in response to mechanical loading is reported inspired by the mineralization process of bone. It is observed that charges from piezoelectric scaffolds can induce mineralization from media with mineral ions. The material system adapts to mechanical loading by inducing mineral deposition in proportion to the magnitude of the loading and the resulting piezoelectric charges. Moreover, the mechanism allows a simple one-step route for making graded materials by controlling stress distribution along the scaffold. The findings can pave the way for a new class of self-adaptive materials that reinforce the region of high stress or induce deposition of minerals on the damaged areas from the increase in stress to prevent/mitigate failure. They can also contribute to addressing the current challenges of synthetic materials for load-bearing applications from self- adaptive capabilities. 2 The mechanical efficiency of natural (or biological) structural materials is remarkable. Self-optimized architectures, outstanding mechanical properties with weak constituents, hierarchical structuring, and self-adaptability of stiffness in response to external stimuli are just a few examples of inspiring features that should be included within synthetic structural materials. They provide inspiration for potential solutions to address challenges associated with traditional approaches of material selection. In the classical approach, a material is selected for a specific application based on the expected loading conditions, design objective and constraints, and databases of material properties with fixed values (e.g., Ashby method). This methodology does not account for unpredictable loading conditions. To address this issue, safety factors are added, which increases the associated costs and weight of the structure; thus, reduces its mechanical efficiency. A potential solution for this dichotomy is to have materials with self-adaptable properties responding to loading conditions. This feature can result in materials with improved mechanical efficiency and reduction in costs, resources and environmental impact. So far, there are few synthetic materials capable of increasing stiffness in response to external stimuli. For example, Capadona et al. and Ramirez et al. reported polymers that changed elastic moduli by changing the degree of crosslinking upon chemical, thermal or mechanical stimuli. Agrawal et al. reported an increase of the elastic modulus of liquid crystal elastomers during cyclic mechanical stress due to the alignment of nematic directors. Recently, a “self-growing” hydrogel responding to repetitive mechanical stress was reported through mechanochemical transduction. Despite progress there are limited synthetic material systems adapting mechanical properties to external mechanical stimuli. Challenges of current self-stiffening materials include limited load-bearing capability, difficulty of material synthesis, high cost, lack of or limited biocompatibility, and need of additional energy for material property changes. 3 Natural structural materials have resolved these challenges by taking different strategies. Bone, wood, fish scales, and coral reefs are dynamic structural materials capable of self-adapting their mechanical properties in response to external loading to improve their mechanical efficiency and prevent failure. Introducing these features to synthetic material systems has been challenging since it requires active maintenance of living organisms. These natural materials utilize resources available in the environment to regulate their properties through mechanobiological mechanisms. For example, bone and coral reefs utilize cellular signals to control the addition and removal of minerals harvested from surrounding media (e.g. blood or seawater) at specific locations. During the process, organic matrices serve as templates for mineral growth. Specifically, it is reported that negatively charged carboxyl groups can bind calcium ions and induce nucleation of biominerals. Inspired by these findings, there have been numerous reports on mineral growth using negatively charged surfaces obtained by using electric field or self-assembled monolayers. However, previously synthesized minerals cannot change their mechanical properties upon external loading. Here we report a synthetic material system that can change its mechanical behaviors in response to external loading conditions inspired by natural mineralization processes in bone and coral reefs. We hypothesized that if we have a scaffold that can generate charges proportional to an external mechanical stimulus, the charges can work as signals to induce mineralization from resources (e.g. mineral ions) available in surrounding media. As a result, the material system can exhibit self-adapting mechanical behaviors. Our material system uses a new mechanism to realize self-stiffening materials and overcomes limitations of current synthetic materials with changing mechanical properties from its enhanced load-bearing capability, low cost, simple synthesis, no need of extra energy, and biocompatibility. To test our hypothesis, we utilized piezoelectric materials as scaffolds because they convert mechanical forces into electrical charges while other materials (e.g. triboelectric, 4 flexoelectric materials) could be utilized. We immersed piezoelectric polymer films (PVDF, (CH2CF2)n), d33~30 pC/N) with oppositely charged surfaces in a simulated body fluid (SBF) mimicking the ionic concentrations of human blood plasma (Figure 1a). After one week of SBF incubation, we observed the minerals formed on the surfaces of the films using a scanning electron microscope (SEM). Minerals were preferentially deposited onto the negatively charged surfaces (Figure 1b). This was consistent with previous study. To characterize chemical compositions of the formed minerals, we conducted energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements. EDX results showed peaks of Ca, P, and O, which are elements consisting of hydroxyapatite (HAp) (Figure S2). XRD analysis showed the characteristic diffraction peaks of HAp (Figure 1d). We also observed similar mineral deposition behavior on different substrates including piezoelectric composites (See Supporting Information S3 for details). Moreover, we found that we can control the type of formed minerals by controlling the ion composition of the media (See Supporting Information S4). Refreshing the SBF solution everyday led to the formation of HAp minerals (Figure 1d), whereas using non-refreshed SBF led to a combination of Calcite and HAp (Figure 1c). The minerals found in bone (HAp) and coral reefs (Calcite) originate from blood and seawater, respectively. Metallic medical devices are typically coated with these type of minerals to enable biocompatibility. Usually these coatings wear out and do not regenerate. To understand the dynamics of mineralization, we conducted quantitative studies by comparing the mineral thickness at different conditions (Figure 2). First, we studied the effect of the polarity of the charged surface on the mineral formation rate (see Supporting Information S5). We found that the negatively charged surface showed about an order of magnitude faster mineral formation rate than the positively charged surface (Figure 2b). The mineral growth rate (~6.4 μm/day) was comparable to that reported by Yamashita et al., which was obtained in polarized negative surfaces. We also studied the effect of the concentration of the SBF on mineral formation rate. We found higher concentrations of calcium in SBF resulted in faster 5 rates (Figure 2c), which is consistent with previous study that utilized other negatively functionalized surfaces. In our study, we mainly utilized 10× calcium concentration in SBF as it provides faster mineral formation. We also found that we could modulate the mineral growth rate by controlling the external mechanical loading. Higher electrical charges generated by cyclic mechanical loads led to higher quantities of minerals compared to static or no mechanical loads (Figure 2d). Different from previous studies that utilized permanent chemical functionalization, one can utilize “mechanical functionalization” using piezoelectric scaffolds to dynamically control the formation of minerals by modulating the loading condition. As an application of the mineralization mechanism controlled by mechanical stress, we made a graded material by using a simple one-step process. A piezoelectric PVDF film was subjected to a cantilever loading since it offers a gradual increase of stress (σ) from the free end to the fixation point (see Figure 2e, Supporting Information S13). In this beam configuration, the electrical charge changes proportionally to the beam length. We experimentally confirmed higher electrical charges at regions of high stress and vice versa at regions of low stress (Figure 2e) as a piezoelectric charge (Q) is proportional to the applied stress (Q = dσA, d: piezoelectric coefficient, A: area). Then, we submerged a PVDF specimen in SBF under repetitive loading (Supporting Information S7) and measured the amount of mineral along the beam (Supporting Information S8). Our results showed a gradual formation of minerals with higher amounts at regions of high stress (high charge) and vice versa at low stress regions (Figure 2f). This result indicates that our material system could autonomously reinforce regions that experience higher stress with more minerals. The mechanism allows materials or structures to self-adapt to the external loading conditions to minimize failure. We further investigated the correlation between the mechanical stress and the mineral distribution. We used a numerical model to calculate the stresses distribution along the beam and compared with the mineral thickness distribution. Interestingly, the stress distributions at different positions of the specimen showed similar trends as the mineral thickness (Figure 2f and Supporting Information S9). We also obtained 6 the quantitative relation between the mineral height and the charge along the beam as Equation (1) (Supporting Information S13) and found that the mineral height (MH) is approximately proportional to the square root of the charge (Q) or stress (σ). ! ≅ #$$%(4.33 × 10-./0) (1) (Q: charge in C, MH: mineral height in mm, d: piezoelectric coefficient in pC/N, A: area in mm2). Furthermore, we investigated whether our material system can change its mechanical behavior by inducing mineral formation in response to the external loading akin to bone (Figure 3a). We prepared porous piezoelectric scaffolds (d33~2 pC/N) using electrospinning (Supporting Information S10) inspired by bone’s porous architecture. The scaffolds were subjected to cyclic mechanical loading while submerged in SBF solution at room temperature (Supporting Information S11). The applied load and actuator displacement were measured to calculate changes in material property such as Young’s modulus. From the measurements, our material system showed self-stiffening behaviors by changing its mechanical properties in response to periodic loadings (Figure 3b). The modulus increased ~20% after 3 days of immersion in SBF. A control sample submerged in deionized water (no mineral ions available in the solution) did not show a significant increase in the mechanical properties over time (Figure 3c). Also, comparison of the stress-strain behaviors of the scaffolds before and after the external stimulation in SBF showed that the mechanical property increased ~30% in modulus and ~100% in toughness (Figure 3c). SEM images confirmed the mineralization of the scaffold that enabled the increase in mechanical property (Figure 3d-e). EDX results confirmed the presence of minerals with traces of calcium, phosphorous, and oxygen (Figure 3f). Fluorescent microscopy images showed the formation of minerals around the fibers (Figure 3i and Supporting Information S12). Moreover, to further test the self-adaptive behavior of the material system, we subjected scaffolds to cyclic mechanical loading with different load magnitudes while submerged in SBF. 7 Before cyclic loading, we verified the different piezoelectric charges under different load magnitudes. We measured the stress-strain responses after samples were submerged in SBF. As expected, the modulus of the material system increased proportional to the magnitude of the load and the resulting piezoelectric charge (Figure 3g-h). Specifically, the modulus increased by ~180% after three days for the maximum 5N cyclic load, further demonstrating the self- adaptive capability of the material system. In summary, we report a synthetic material system capable of changing its mechanical properties depending on external loading conditions by utilizing scaffolds that generate “signals” to induce mineralization from media with mineral ions. The material system allows control of the location and the rate of mineral formation by modulating the loading conditions. Our findings can contribute to addressing current challenges of synthetic materials used for load- bearing applications from self-adaptive capabilities. To make the material system portable, one can utilize porous scaffolds with suitable surface properties for making liquid-infused porous piezoelectric scaffolds inspired by bone, which holds blood within porous matrices. Beyond biominerals used as a model system in this study, we can further expand the material system based on the reported mechanism for broader applications. We envision that the strategy and the mechanism that we report will open new opportunities for technological advancement including smart coatings for bone implants to mitigate mismatch of mechanical properties, scaffolds for accelerating treatment of bone-related disease or fracture, smart resins for dental treatments requiring tissue regeneration, and 4D materials and structures reconfiguring to adapt to loading conditions. They will also contribute to fundamental advances in understanding dynamic behaviors of adaptive materials and structures and dynamics of mineralization induced by mechano-electric coupling. Moreover, built upon recent studies that reported piezoelectric charges could stimulate cell differentiation in various cell types and improve cell adhesion, bone growth and function in endothelial, nerve, and bone cells, the material system can serve 8 as a model system for quantitative understanding of the process with adequate choice of medium and provide guides for facilitating the regeneration. Experimental Section SBF Incubation: Piezoelectric PVDF films (TE Connectivity, PN: 3-1003352-0) were submerged in a sealed polypropylene bottle (Dyn-A-Med, 80094) containing ~200 mL of SBF solution kept at 37 °C for the duration of the experiment (see Figure 1a). Every 24 hours, the sample was taken out of the beaker, gently rinsed with de-ionized water (Milli pore, Milli-D) and put back into a refreshed solution. After the incubation, the sample was repeatedly rinsed gently in a de-ionized water solution to remove salts of NaCl. The sample was taken out and dried at room temperature in air for further analysis including SEM, EDS, XRD, profilometer. Self-Stiffening Experiments: To test the self-stiffening capability of our material system, electrospun PVDF samples were submerged in SBF solutions and were subjected to cyclic mechanical loadings to activate the piezoelectric charge generation. We prepared electrospun PVDF samples of 30×15 mm2. Simulated body fluids (10×SBF) were prepared by following protocols described in Supporting Information S1. While submerged in the solution at room temperature, samples were subjected to cyclic compression loading using an electromechanical universal testing machine (TA Instruments Electroforce 5500 with a 10 N capacity load cell). The stiffness (S) was calculated from the load (P) and displacement (∆δ) amplitudes measured with the actuator using the follow relation: S=∆P/∆δ. The force and displacement signals were monitored and recorded during experiments. To prevent any change of mechanical properties of electrospun films due to viscoelastic and time-dependent behavior during experiments in SBF, we initially subjected samples to cyclic compression loading while submerged in DI water for 3 days. The modulus (E) was calculated by multiplying by the cross section area and the deflection E=S*∆δ / A. 9 Acknowledgements We would like to thank Mr. Eugene Kang for the help fabricating the electrospinning apparatus, Mr. Ian McLane for the help and guidance during contact profilometer measurements, and Mr. Prashant Ray for his help during the concentration measurements. This work is supported by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research Young Investigator Program Award (Award number: FA9550-18-1-0073, Program manager: Dr. Byung-Lip (Les) Lee), Johns Hopkins University Whiting School of Engineering start-up fund, and Temple University Maurice Kornberg School of Dentistry start-up fund (PI: Orrego). Any opinions, finding, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the United States Air Force. Conflict of interest: A patent application has been filed on aspects of the described work.