Memristive Neuromorphic Systems A recipe for creating ideal hybrid memristive-CMOS neuromorphic computing systems E. Chicca1, a) and G. Indiveri2, b) 1)Faculty of Technology and Cognitive Interaction Technology - Center of Excellence (CITEC), Bielefeld University, Bielefeld, Germany 2)Institute of Neuroinformatics, University of Zurich and ETH Zurich, Switzerland (Dated: 13 December 2019) The development of memristive device technologies has reached a level of maturity to enable the design of complex and large-scale hybrid memristive-CMOS neural processing systems. These systems offer promising solutions for im- plementing novel in-memory computing architectures for machine learning and data analysis problems. We argue that they are also ideal building blocks for the integration in neuromorphic electronic circuits suitable for ultra-low power brain-inspired sensory processing systems, therefore leading to the innovative solutions for always-on edge-computing and Internet-of-Things (IoT) applications. Here we present a recipe for creating such systems based on design strategies and computing principles inspired by those used in mammalian brains. We enumerate the specifications and properties of memristive devices required to support always-on learning in neuromorphic computing system and to minimize their power consumption. Finally, we discuss in what cases such neuromorphic systems can complement conventional pro- cessing ones and highlight the importance of exploiting the physics of both the memristive devices and of the CMOS circuits interfaced to them. Neuromorphic computing has recently received consider- able attention as a discipline that can offer promising techno- logical solutions for implementing power- and size-efficient sensory-processing, learning, and Artificial Intelligence (AI) applications1–5, especially in cases in which the computing system has to operate autonomously “at the edge”, i.e., with- out having to connect to powerful (but power hungry) server farms in the “cloud”. The term “neuromorphic” was originally coined in the early 90’s by Carver Mead to refer to mixed sig- nal analog/digital Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) com- puting systems based on the organizing principles used by the biological nervous systems6. In that context, “neuromorphic engineering” emerged as an interdisciplinary research field deeply rooted in biology that focused on building electronic neural processing systems by exploiting the physics of sili- con to directly “emulate” the bio-physics of real neurons and synapses. More recently the definition of the term “neuromor- phic” has been extended in two additional directions: on one hand to describe more generic spike-based processing sys- tems engineered to “simulate” spiking neural networks for the exploration of large-scale computational neuroscience mod- els7–9; and on the other hand to describe dedicated electronic neural architectures that make use of both electronic Com- plementary Metal-Oxide Semiconductor (CMOS) circuits and memristive devices to implement neuron and synapse cir- cuits10,11. Another recent and very promising trend in developing ded- icated hardware architectures for building accelerated simula- tors of artificial neural networks is related to the field of ma- chine learning and AI12,13. The types of neural networks be- ing proposed within this context are only loosely inspired by biology, are aimed at high accuracy pattern recognition based on large data-sets, and require large amounts of memory for a)Electronic mail: chicca@cit-ec.uni-bielefeld.de b)Electronic mail: giacomo@ini.uzh.ch 1 2 3 quires the right mix of CMOS circuits and memristive devices, as well as the proper use of spatial resources and temporal dynamics, that need to be well matched to the system’s signal-processing appli- cations and use-cases. storing network states and parameters. While this approach is producing amazing results in a wide range of application ar- eas, the computing systems used to simulate these networks use significant amount of compute resources and power, espe- cially for the training phase: the learning algorithms rely on high precision digital representations for calculating high ac- curacy gradients, and they typically require the storage (and transfer from peripheral memory to central processing areas) of very large data-sets. Furthermore, they often separate the training from the inference phase, dismissing the ability to adapt to novel stimuli and changing environmental conditions, typical of biological systems. While there are examples of hybrid memristive-CMOS hardware architectures being developed to provide support for AI deep network accelerators5,11,14,15, it is important to clar- ify that many of the hybrid memristive-CMOS neuromorphic arXiv:1912.05637v1 [cs.ET] 11 Dec 2019 Memristive Neuromorphic Systems 2 circuits proposed in the literature16–20 as well as the original neuromorphic approach of emulating biological neural sys- tems proposed by Mead, are distinct and complementary to the machine learning one. While the machine learning ap- proach is based on software algorithms developed to minimize the recognition error in very specific pattern recognition tasks, the original neuromorphic approach is based on brain-inspired electronic circuits and hardware architectures designed for re- producing the function of cortical and biological neural cir- cuits21. As a consequence, this approach aims at understand- ing how to build robust and low-power neural processing sys- tems using inhomogeneous and highly variable components, fault-tolerant massively parallel arrays of computational ele- ments, and in-memory computing (non von Neumann) infor- mation processing architectures22. In the following, when dis- cussing about “hybrid CMOS-memristive neuromorphic com- puting systems”, we will refer to this specific approach. Our recipe (Fig. 1) for optimally building neuromorphic systems by co-integrating memristive devices with CMOS cir- cuits is based on the following considerations. a. Lay out the ingredients in parallel on the worktop. To minimize power consumption and maximize robustness to variability, it is important to use physically distinct instanti- ations of neuron and synapse circuits, distributed across the silicon substrate23. This strategy is very different from the one used to build classical computing systems based on the von Neumann architecture. In classical processors there is a single or a small number of computing blocks that are time- multiplexed at very high clock rates to execute calculations, or to simulate many “parallel” neural processes7,9,24. The continuous transfer of data between memory and the time- multiplexed processing unit(s) required to carry out compu- tation is limited by the infamous von Neumann bottleneck25, and is the major cause of high energy consumption. In con- trast, the amazing energy efficiency of biological systems, and of the neuromorphic ones that emulate them, arises from the in-memory computing nature of their architectures: there are multiple instances of neuron and synapse elements that carry out computation and at the same time store the network state. The disadvantage of having distributed state-full neuron and synapse circuits is that it can require significant amount of silicon real-estate for integrating all their memory structures (e.g., see the 4.3cm2 IBM TrueNorth chip24). However, the progress in CMOS fabrication technologies, the emergence of monolithic 3D integration technologies, and the possibility to co-integrate nano-scale memristive devices with mixed-signal analog/digital CMOS circuits in advanced node processes can substantially mitigate this problem26. b. Take your time. By eliminating the need to use time- multiplexed processing elements, these neuromorphic pro- cessing architectures can be designed to run in real physical time (time represents itself) as it happens in real biological neural networks. This is a radical departure from the classical way of implementing computation, that has decoupled com- puter simulation time from physical time since the very early designs of both computing systems and artificial neural net- works27,28. For sensory-motor processing systems and edge- computing applications that need to measure and process nat- ural signals, this is a tremendous advantage. Allowing time to represent itself removes the need of complicated clock or synchronizing structures that would otherwise be required to track the passage of simulated time. All computing elements in such neuromorphic systems are then coupled through the common variable of real-time (e.g., for implementing bind- ing by synchronization29). To build sensory-processing sys- tems that are best tuned to the signals they are required to process (or that can learn to extract information from them), it is necessary to use neural processing and learning circuits that have the same time-constants and dynamics of their in- put signals (e.g., to create “matched-filter” that can naturally resonate with their inputs). In the case of natural signals typ- ically processed by humans, such as voice or gestures, these time constants should range from milliseconds to minutes or longer. These time constants are extremely long, compared to the typical processing rates of digital circuits. This allows neuromorphic systems to reduce power consumption even more and to have very large bandwidths for seamlessly trans- mitting signals across the network and via I/O pathways in shared buses30,31. However, such long time constants can be very difficult to achieve using pure CMOS circuits32. Mem- ristive devices offer an ideal solution to this limitation. Al- though such devices are usually treated as non-volatile mem- ories, certain material systems exhibit a rather volatile resis- tance change after electrical biasing, with temporal scales that can be tuned and matched to biological neural and synaptic dynamics33–35. Recent demonstrations of volatile memristive devices used to model neural dynamics include the emulation of nociceptors (i.e., sensory neuron receptors able to detect noxious stimuli)36 and the implementation of spike-timing de- pendent learning rules with tunable forgetting rates37,38. In addition to exploiting the physics of the memristive devices to tune their volatility properties, it is possible to co-design more complex hybrid memristive-CMOS neuromorphic cir- cuits to implement the wide range of time constants needed to model the multiple plasticity phenomena observed in biology (ranging from milliseconds in synaptic short term depression to hours and more in structural plasticity) and crucial for arti- ficial neural processing systems32,39. c. Don’t worry about density. Memristive devices are often praised for the small (nano-scale) size, which can be exploited to develop very high density cross-bars40 in which the memristive devices are used as a learning synapses41. Nevertheless, current high-density approaches are not able to produce learning dynamics sufficiently complex for solving real-world tasks (e.g., with matched temporal scales, or suit- able for life-long learning requirements). The achievement of such dynamics in a single device requires sophisticated material engineering efforts which are still beyond the cur- rent state-of-the-art. Conversely, by dismissing the chimera of high density synaptic arrays and co-integrating nano-scale memory elements with mixed signal analog/digital neuromor- phic circuits, it is possible to implement sophisticated learning mechanisms that can exploit many features of memristive de- vices, besides their compact footprint, such as non-volatility, stochasticity, or state-dependent conductance changes. Fur- thermore, combining multiple transistors with one or more Memristive Neuromorphic Systems 3 memristive devices enables the design of complex synapse circuits that can reduce the effect of variability42, enable the control of stochastic switching behaviors11,43,44, and produce linear or non-linear state-dependent weight-updates45,46. d. Play it by ear: variability and randomness. Memris- tive devices are affected by both device-to-device and cycle- to-cycle variability47,48. Significant material science and de- vice technology research efforts are being made to minimize such variability41,47,49–52. However, rather than fighting these variability effects with different materials or device technolo- gies, neuromorphic systems can be designed to embrace and exploit them39. Examples of theoretical neural processing frameworks that require variability can be found in the domain of ensemble learning53, reservoir computing54 and liquid state machines55. Current efforts in neuromorphic engineering for implementing such frameworks to solve spatio-temporal pat- tern recognition problems rely on the variability provided by transistor device-mismatch effects56–60. Integration of mem- ristive devices with inhomogeneous properties in such archi- tectures can provide a richer set of distributions useful for en- hancing the computational abilities of these networks. Indeed, multiple circuit solutions have already been proposed to better control the shape and parameters of such distributions11,42. One important source of variability in the operational pa- rameters of memristive devices is in their switching mech- anism. In filamentary memristive devices, this mechanism exhibits stochastic behavior which stem from the underly- ing filament formation process18,61–63. This intrinsic proba- bilistic property of memristive devices can be exploited for implementing stochastic learning in neuromorphic architec- tures43,44,48,64–66, which in turn can be used to implement faithful models of biological cortical microcircuits67,68, solve memory capacity and classification problems in artificial neu- ral network applications69,70, and reduce the network sensitiv- ity to their variability43. Recent results on stochastic learning modulated by regularization mechanisms, such as homeosta- sis or intrinsic plasticity44,71–73, present an excellent potential for exploiting the features memristive devices, even when re- stricted to binary values. e. Don’t (hard) limit your devices. In the context of de- ploying always-on learning systems (both artificial and bio- logical) in real-world applications, a critical feature is their memory storage capacity74,75. When designing hardware neu- romorphic learning system that have practical physical restric- tions or limitations on the available resources (such as the number of memory devices integrated in the system, their resolution, precision, or dynamic range) it is important to be aware of the theoretical limits that set the bounds of achiev- able memory capacity and learning performance, independent of the device properties. The thorough theoretical analysis on the limits of memory capacity in neural processing systems presented by Fusi and Abbott in 200774 provides essential guiding principles for the construction of artificial learning memristive systems. In this analysis, learning models are subdivided into four main cat- egories, according to two key features: the synaptic weight bounds (hard or soft) and the (im)balance of potentiation and depression. Hard bounds are limits on the synaptic weight values that cannot be exceeded. Soft bounds are limits that can only be reached in the asymptotic limit. Typically, in neural network models with hard bounds, the weight update step size is constant and therefore independent of the weight value itself. Conversely soft bounds are introduced by allow- ing weight updates to depend on synaptic strength and to de- crease as they approach the bound itself. Even though it is clear that in real physical systems hard bounds are unavoidable (e.g., the supply rails in an electronic system), there is evidence that memristive devices exhibit soft bounds76. Therefore, by combining CMOS circuits with memristive devices, it is possible to design hybrid circuits that can implement and control the devices soft bounds for im- proving learning at the network level and for improving the overall system performance, e.g., in terms of reduced power consumption and increased memory capacity45. In contrast, it is impossible to precisely balance positive changes of synap- tic weights with negative ones in hybrid memristive-CMOS neuromorphic computing systems. Given this unbalanced po- tentiation and depression property, the longest memory life- time is achieved thanks to soft bounds, independently of the specific model chosen among those investigated by Fusi and Abbott74. To best implement the recipe we proposed it is necessary to use the right list of ingredients: a combination of mem- ristive devices with multiple complementary features. The recipe shopping-list should comprise devices with different properties on retention, endurance, variability, switching cur- rents, on-off ratios, that can be interfaced to analog and digital electronic CMOS circuits. However, even before attempting to bake the final hardware neural processing system, it is im- portant to have access to realistic and faithful device models, so that during the design phase it will be possible to specify the characteristics of both the CMOS and memristive compo- nents and understand how to best exploit their processing fea- tures for properly modeling the different aspects of plasticity and neural information processing systems. Once fabricated, these neuromorphic processing systems should implement always-on life-long learning features so that they can adapt to changes in their input signals and keep a proper operating regime. This implies that the hybrid CMOS-memristive neuromorphic system would be updating its synaptic weights continuously, with every learning event. This requires the use of memristive devices that support small gradual conductance changes, and very small currents (e.g., < 1μA), to minimize power consumption. In this case, the retention rate of such devices does not need to be extremely long, but should be compatible with the rate of weight up- date (which can be seen as a “refresh” operation) in the sys- tem. For example, in typical “edge” sensory-processing ap- plications (wearable devices, home automation, surveillance, environmental monitoring, etc.) this could range from mil- liseconds to seconds or minutes. On the other hand, once the learning process has terminated or if there is a long pause in the rate of input signals (e.g., during the night in ambient monitoring tasks), then it will be useful to be able to consolidate the memories formed in non- volatile memristive devices with high on-off ratio and long- Memristive Neuromorphic Systems 4 retention rates. In this case, since this operation would not be as frequent as the weight-update one for the on-line learning case, it would be acceptable to use devices that require larger switching currents, and that have a small number (even two) stable states77. To match the time constants of the neural processing system to the dynamics of its input signals, to maintain a stable oper- ating region over long time scales, and to optimize the learn- ing of complex spatio-temporal patterns, it is necessary to im- plement both fast (short term depression, long term potentia- tion, long term depression, etc.) and slow (intrinsic, homeo- static, structural) plasticity mechanisms, “orchestrating” mul- tiple time-scales in the learning circuits78. For this it is crucial to be able to use volatile memristive devices that span a wide range of retention rates (e.g., from milliseconds to hours). In addition, to increase the memory-capacity of such a sys- tem by introducing soft bounds for the synaptic weights, it is necessary to provide a mechanism that can realize the desired state dependence in the synaptic weight-update transfer func- tion45. This can be achieved by engineering the conductance change properties of the single memristive device, or by de- signing hybrid memristive-CMOS neuromorphic circuits in- terfaced with one or more memristive devices11,79. Alterna- tively, one can use multiple binary memristive devices with probabilistic switching in combination with an analog circuit designed to properly control their switching probability. As evident from the list of ingredients and recipe provided, it is now possible to build ultra low power massively par- allel arrays of processing elements that implement “beyond- von Neumann”, “in-memory computing” mixed signal hybrid memristive-CMOS neural processing systems. It is important to realize that for data-intense processing applications these neuromorphic systems should be used to complement, rather than replace, traditional von Neumann ar- chitectures. They could be considered as the cherry on the cake of a complex AI inference engine, that enables always- on neural processing, with life-long learning abilities. In this scenario, the hybrid memristive-CMOS neuromorphic com- puting system would carry out low-power computation acting as alow accuracy predictive “watch-dog” to quickly activate more powerful von Neumann architectures for high accuracy recognition, as soon as events of interest are detected. On the other hand, there are many applications where these hybrid neuromorphic systems would represent both the cherry and the cake together: these are IoT, edge-computing, and perception-action tasks that are solved efficiently by biologi- cal systems but have been proven to be “difficult” for artificial intelligence algorithms80. This difficulty could be measured with different performance metrics that could range from the physical size and energy consumption requirements to latency, adaptation, and ability to learn in continuous time closed-loop setups. By appropriately mixing all the ingredients and inte- grating them with mixed-signal analog/digital neuromorphic systems, it will be possible to produce computing systems that can directly emulate their biological counterparts. This emulation feature, which derives from the exploitation of the physics of the new materials and memory technologies being developed, is the key element for building efficient computing devices that can interact with the environment to solve arti- ficial intelligence tasks in the real physical world, rather than simulating these solutions with general purpose computers. In other words, it is not very useful to simulate the bee brain on a supercomputer because it will never fly. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We wish to acknowledge Melika Payvand and Regina Dittmann for the constructive comments on the manuscript. The illustration of Fig. 1 was kindly provided by Univer- sity of Zurich, Information Technology, MELS/SIVIC, Sarah Steinbacher. This work is supported by the European Re- search Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme grant agreement No 724295 (NeuroAgents). 1E. O. Neftci, “Data and power efficient intelligence with neuromorphic learning machines,” iScience 5, 52 – 68 (2018). 2C. S. Thakur, J. L. Molin, G. Cauwenberghs, G. Indiveri, K. Kumar, N. Qiao, J. Schemmel, R. Wang, E. Chicca, J. Olson Hasler, J.-s. Seo, S. Yu, Y. Cao, A. van Schaik, and R. Etienne-Cummings, “Large-scale neuromorphic spiking array processors: A quest to mimic the brain,” Fron- tiers in Neuroscience 12, 891 (2018). 3Y. Li, Z. Wang, R. Midya, Q. Xia, and J. J. Yang, “Review of memristor devices in neuromorphic computing: materials sciences and device chal- lenges,” Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 51, 503002 (2018). 4Y. van De Burgt, A. Melianas, S. T. Keene, G. Malliaras, and A. Salleo, “Organic electronics for neuromorphic computing,” Nature Electronics 1, 5G. W. Burr, R. M. Shelby, A. Sebastian, S. Kim, S. Kim, S. Sidler, K. Vir- wani, M. Ishii, P. Narayanan, A. Fumarola, et al., “Neuromorphic comput- ing using non-volatile memory,” Advances in Physics: X 2, 89–124 (2017). 6C. Mead, “Neuromorphic electronic systems,” Proceedings of the IEEE 78, 7S. Furber, F. Galluppi, S. Temple, and L. Plana, “The SpiNNaker project,” Proceedings of the IEEE 102, 652–665 (2014). 8F. Akopyan, J. Sawada, A. Cassidy, R. Alvarez-Icaza, J. Arthur, P. Merolla, N. Imam, Y. Nakamura, P. Datta, G.-J. Nam, et al., “Truenorth: Design and tool flow of a 65 mw 1 million neuron programmable neurosynaptic chip,” IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems 34, 1537–1557 (2015). 9M. Davies, N. Srinivasa, T.-H. Lin, G. Chinya, Y. Cao, S. H. Choday, G. Di- mou, P. Joshi, N. Imam, S. Jain, et al., “Loihi: A neuromorphic manycore processor with on-chip learning,” IEEE Micro 38, 82–99 (2018). 10D. Ielmini and R. Waser, Resistive Switching: From Fundamentals of Nanoionic Redox Processes to Memristive Device Applications (John Wiley & Sons, 2015). 11I. Boybat, M. L. Gallo, T. Moraitis, T. Parnell, T. Tuma, B. Rajendran, Y. Leblebici, A. Sebastian, E. Eleftheriou, et al., “Neuromorphic computing with multi-memristive synapses,” Nature communications 9, 2514 (2018). 12Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” Nature 521, 436– 13J. Schmidhuber, “Deep learning in neural networks: An overview,” Neural Networks 61, 85–117 (2015). 14A. Sebastian, M. L. Gallo, and E. Eleftheriou, “Computational phase- change memory: beyond von neumann computing,” Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 52, 443002 (2019). 15S. Ambrogio, P. Narayanan, H. Tsai, R. M. Shelby, I. Boybat, C. di Nolfo, S. Sidler, M. Giordano, M. Bodini, N. C. P. Farinha, B. Killeen, C. Cheng, Y. Jaoudi, and G. W. Burr, “Equivalent-accuracy accelerated neural- network training using analogue memory,” Nature 558, 60–67 (2018). 16S. Dai, Y. Zhao, Y. Wang, J. Zhang, L. Fang, S. Jin, Y. Shao, and J. Huang, “Recent advances in transistor-based artificial synapses,” Advanced Functional Materials 0, https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/adfm.201903700. Memristive Neuromorphic Systems 5 17E. Covi, S. Brivio, A. Serb, T. Prodromakis, M. Fanciulli, and S. Spiga, “Analog memristive synapse in spiking networks implementing unsuper- vised learning,” Frontiers in neuroscience 10, 1–13 (2016). 18S. H. Jo, T. Chang, I. Ebong, B. B. Bhadviya, P. Mazumder, and W. Lu, “Nanoscale memristor device as synapse in neuromorphic systems,” Nano letters 10, 1297–1301 (2010). 19J. J. Yang and Q. Xia, “Organic electronics: Battery-like artificial synapses,” Nature materials 16, 396 (2017). 20R. Berdan, E. Vasilaki, A. Khiat, G. Indiveri, A. Serb, and T. Prodromakis, “Emulating short-term synaptic dynamics with memristive devices,” Scien- tific Reports 6, 1–9 (2016). 21E. Chicca, F. Stefanini, C. Bartolozzi, and G. Indiveri, “Neuromorphic elec- tronic circuits for building autonomous cognitive systems,” Proceedings of the IEEE 102, 1367–1388 (2014). 22G. Indiveri and S.-C. Liu, “Memory and information processing in neuro- morphic systems,” Proceedings of the IEEE 103, 1379–1397 (2015). 23G. Indiveri and Y. Sandamirskaya, “The importance of space and time for signal processing in neuromorphic agents,” IEEE Signal Processing Maga- zine 36, 16–28 (2019). 24P. A. Merolla, J. V. Arthur, R. Alvarez-Icaza, A. S. Cassidy, J. Sawada, F. Akopyan, B. L. Jackson, N. Imam, C. Guo, Y. Nakamura, B. Brezzo, I. Vo, S. K. Esser, R. Appuswamy, B. Taba, A. Amir, M. D. Flickner, W. P. Risk, R. Manohar, and D. S. Modha, “A million spiking-neuron integrated circuit with a scalable communication network and interface,” Science 345, 25J. Backus, “Can programming be liberated from the von neumann style?: a functional style and its algebra of programs,” Communications of the ACM 26G. Indiveri, B. Linares-Barranco, R. Legenstein, G. Deligeorgis, and T. Prodromakis, “Integration of nanoscale memristor synapses in neuro- morphic computing architectures,” Nanotechnology 24, 384010 (2013). 27J. Von Neumann, “First draft of a report on the edvac,” IEEE Annals of the History of Computing 15, 27–75 (1993). 28W. McCulloch and W. Pitts, “A logical calculus of the ideas immanent in nervous activity,” Bull. Math. Biophys. 5, 115–133 (1943). 29M. Shadlen and J. Movshon, “Synchrony unbound: a critical evaluation of the temporal binding hypothesis,” Neuron 24, 67–77 (1999). 30K. Boahen, “Communicating neuronal ensembles between neuromorphic chips,” in Neuromorphic Systems Engineering, edited by T. Lande (Kluwer Academic, Norwell, MA, 1998) pp. 229–259. 31S. Moradi, N. Qiao, F. Stefanini, and G. Indiveri, “A scalable multicore architecture with heterogeneous memory structures for dynamic neuromor- phic asynchronous processors (DYNAPs),” Biomedical Circuits and Sys- tems, IEEE Transactions on 12, 106–122 (2018). 32N. Qiao, C. Bartolozzi, and G. Indiveri, “An ultralow leakage synaptic scaling homeostatic plasticity circuit with configurable time scales up to 100 ks,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Circuits and Systems (2017), 33X. Zhang, S. Liu, X. Zhao, F. Wu, Q. Wu, W. Wang, R. Cao, Y. Fang, H. Lv, S. Long, Q. Liu, and M. Liu, “Emulating short-term and long-term plas- ticity of bio-synapse based on cu/a-si/pt memristor,” IEEE Electron Device Letters 38, 1208–1211 (2017). 34T. Ohno, T. Hasegawa, T. Tsuruoka, K. Terabe, J. Gimzewski, and M. Aono, “Short-term plasticity and long-term potentiation mimicked in single inorganic synapses,” Nature Materials 10, 591–595 (2011). 35T. Werner, E. Vianello, O. Bichler, A. Grossi, E. Nowak, J.-F. Nodin, B. Yvert, B. D. Salvo, and L. Perniola, “Experimental demonstration of short and long term synaptic plasticity using oxRAM multi k-bit arrays for reliable detection in highly noisy input data,” in 2016 IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM) (IEEE, 2016) pp. 16–6. 36J. Yoon, H. Jung, Z. Wang, K. M. Kim, H. Wu, V. Ravichandran, Q. Xia, C. S. Hwang, and J. J. Yang, “An artificial nociceptor based on a diffusive memristor,” Nature communications 9, 417 (2018). 37Z. Wang, S. Joshi, S. E. Savel’ev, H. Jiang, R. Midya, P. Lin, M. Hu, N. Ge, J. P. Strachan, Z. Li, Q. Wu, M. Barnell, G.-L. Li, H. L. Xin, R. S. Williams, Q. Xia, and J. J. Yang, “Memristors with diffusive dynamics as synaptic emulators for neuromorphic computing,” Nature materials 16, 101 (2017). 38J. Xiong, R. Yang, J. Shaibo, H. M. Huang, H. K. He, W. Zhou, and X. Guo, “Bienenstock, cooper, and munro learning rules realized in second-order memristors with tunable forgetting rate,” Advanced Functional Materials 39M. Payvand, M. V. Nair, L. K. Müller, and G. Indiveri, “A neuromorphic systems approach to in-memory computing with non-ideal memristive de- vices: From mitigation to exploitation,” Faraday Discussions 213, 487–510 40S. Pi, C. Li, H. Jiang, W. Xia, H. Xin, J. J. Yang, and Q. Xia, “Memristor crossbar arrays with 6-nm half-pitch and 2-nm critical dimension,” Nature nanotechnology 14, 35 (2019). 41Q. Xia and J. J. Yang, “Memristive crossbar arrays for brain-inspired com- puting,” Nature materials 18, 309 (2019). 42M. V. Nair and G. Indiveri, “A differential memristive current-mode cir- cuit,” European patent application EP 17183461.7 (2017), filed 27.07.2017. 43M. Payvand, L. K. Muller, and G. Indiveri, “Event-based circuits for con- trolling stochastic learning with memristive devices in neuromorphic archi- tectures,” in Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), 2018 IEEE International Sym- posium on (IEEE, 2018) pp. 1–5. 44E. O. Neftci, B. U. Pedroni, S. Joshi, M. Al-Shedivat, and G. Cauwen- berghs, “Stochastic synapses enable efficient brain-inspired learning ma- chines,” Frontiers in Neuroscience 10, 241 (2016). 45S. Brivio, D. Conti, M. V. Nair, J. Frascaroli, E. Covi, C. Ricciardi, G. In- diveri, and S. Spiga, “Extended memory lifetime in spiking neural net- works employing memristive synapses with nonlinear conductance dynam- ics,” Nanotechnology 30, 015102 (2019). 46N. Diederich, T. Bartsch, H. Kohlstedt, and M. Ziegler, “A memristive plasticity model of voltage-based stdp suitable for recurrent bidirectional neural networks in the hippocampus,” Scientific Reports (Nature Publisher Group) 8, 1–12 (2018). 47A. Fantini, L. Goux, R. Degraeve, D. J. Wouters, N. Raghavan, G. Kar, A. Belmonte, Y. Chen, B. Govoreanu, and M. Jurczak, “Intrinsic switch- ing variability in hfo 2 RRAM,” in 2013 5th IEEE International Memory Workshop (IEEE, 2013) pp. 30–33. 48M. Suri and V. Parmar, “Exploiting intrinsic variability of filamentary re- sistive memory for extreme learning machine architectures,” IEEE transac- tions on nanotechnology 14, 963–968 (2015). 49A. Schönhals, R. Waser, and D. J. Wouters, “Improvement of SET vari- ability in TaOxbased resistive RAM devices,” Nanotechnology 28, 465203 50A. Prakash, D. Deleruyelle, J. Song, M. Bocquet, and H. Hwang, “Resis- tance controllability and variability improvement in a taox-based resistive memory for multilevel storage application,” Applied Physics Letters 106, 51B. Govoreanu, D. Crotti, S. Subhechha, L. Zhang, Y. Y. Chen, S. Clima, V. Paraschiv, H. Hody, C. Adelmann, M. Popovici, O. Richard, and M. Ju- rczak, “A-VMCO: A novel forming-free, self-rectifying, analog memory cell with low-current operation, nonfilamentary switching and excellent variability,” in 2015 Symposium on VLSI Technology (VLSI Technology) (IEEE, 2015) pp. T132–T133. 52X. Sheng, C. E. Graves, S. Kumar, X. Li, B. Buchanan, L. Zheng, S. Lam, C. Li, and J. P. Strachan, “Low-conductance and multilevel CMOS- integrated nanoscale oxide memristors,” Advanced Electronic Materials , 53Y. Freund and R. E. Schapire, “A decision-theoretic generalization of on- line learning and an application to boosting,” Journal of computer and sys- tem sciences 55, 119–139 (1997). 54H. Jaeger and H. Haas, “Harnessing nonlinearity: Predicting chaotic sys- tems and saving energy in wireless communication,” Science 304, 78–80 55W. Maass, T. Natschläger, and H. Markram, “Real-time computing without stable states: A new framework for neural computation based on perturba- tions,” Neural Computation 14, 2531–2560 (2002). 56S. Sheik, M. Coath, G. Indiveri, S. Denham, T. Wennekers, and E. Chicca, “Emergent auditory feature tuning in a real-time neuromorphic VLSI sys- tem,” Frontiers in Neuroscience 6 (2012), 10.3389/fnins.2012.00017. 57O. Richter, R. F. Reinhard, S. Nease, J. Steil, and E. Chicca, “Device mis- match in a neuromorphic system implements random features for regres- sion,” in 2015 IEEE Biomedical Circuits and Systems Conference (BioCAS) (IEEE, 2015) pp. 1–4. 58A. Das, P. Pradhapan, W. Groenendaal, P. Adiraju, R. T. Rajan, F. Catthoor, S. Schaafsma, J. L. Krichmar, N. D. Dutt, and C. V. Hoof, “Unsuper- vised heart-rate estimation in wearables with liquid states and a probabilis- Memristive Neuromorphic Systems 6 tic readout,” Neural networks 99, 134–147 (2018). 59E. Donati, M. Payvand, N. Risi, R. Krause, K. Burelo, T. Dalgaty, E. Vianello, and G. Indiveri, “Processing EMG signals using reservoir computing on an event-based neuromorphic system,” in Biomedical Cir- cuits and Systems Conference, (BioCAS), 2018 (IEEE, 2018) pp. 1–4. 60F. Bauer, D. Muir, and G. Indiveri, “Real-time ultra-low power ecg anomaly detection using an event-driven neuromorphic processor,” Biomedical Cir- cuits and Systems, IEEE Transactions on (2019), (in press). 61S. Gaba, P. Sheridan, J. Zhou, S. Choi, and W. Lu, “Stochastic memristive devices for computing and neuromorphic applications,” Nanoscale 5, 5872– 62S. Ambrogio, S. Balatti, V. Milo, R. Carboni, Z.-Q. Wang, A. Calderoni, N. Ramaswamy, and D. Ielmini, “Neuromorphic learning and recognition with one-transistor-one-resistor synapses and bistable metal oxide RRAM,” IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices 63, 1508–1515 (2016). 63J. J. Yang, D. B. Strukov, and D. R. Stewart, “Memristive devices for com- puting,” Nature nanotechnology 8, 13–24 (2013). 64M. Al-Shedivat, R. Naous, G. Cauwenberghs, and K. N. Salama, “Memris- tors empower spiking neurons with stochasticity,” IEEE Journal on Emerg- ing and Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems 5, 242–253 (2015). 65M. Suri, D. Querlioz, O. Bichler, G. Palma, E. Vianello, D. Vuillaume, C. Gamrat, and B. DeSalvo, “Bio-inspired stochastic computing using binary CBRAM synapses,” Electron Devices, IEEE Transactions on 60, 66S. Balatti, S. Ambrogio, R. Carboni, V. Milo, Z. Wang, A. Calderoni, N. Ra- maswamy, and D. Ielmini, “Physical unbiased generation of random num- bers with coupled resistive switching devices,” IEEE Transactions on Elec- tron Devices 63, 2029–2035 (2016). 67S. Habenschuss, Z. Jonke, and W. Maass, “Stochastic computations in cortical microcircuit models,” PLoS computational biology 9, e1003311 68A. Destexhe and D. Contreras, “Neuronal computations with stochastic net- work states,” Science 314, 85–90 (2006). 69S. Fusi and W. Senn, “Eluding oblivion with smart stochastic selection of synaptic updates,” Chaos, An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Sci- ence 16, 1–11 (2006). 70I. Ginzburg and H. Sompolinsky, “Theory of correlations in stochastic neu- ral networks,” Physical Review E 50, 3171–91 (1994). 71T. Dalgaty, M. Payvand, B. De Salvo, J. Casaz, G. Lama, E. Nowak, G. Indi- veri, and E. Vianello, “Hybrid cmos-rram neurons with intrinsic plasticit,” in International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), 2019 (IEEE, 72A. Yousefzadeh, E. Stromatias, M. Soto, T. Serrano-Gotarredona, and B. Linares-Barranco, “On practical issues for stochastic stdp hardware with 1-bit synaptic weights,” Frontiers in neuroscience 12 (2018). 73J. Leugering and G. Pipa, “A unifying framework of synaptic and intrinsic plasticity in neural populations,” Neural computation 30, 945–986 (2018). 74S. Fusi and L. Abbott, “Limits on the memory storage capacity of bounded synapses,” Nature Neuroscience 10, 485–493 (2007). 75S. Ganguli, D. Huh, and H. Sompolinsky, “Memory traces in dynamical systems,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105, 18970– 76J. Frascaroli, S. Brivio, E. Covi, and S. Spiga, “Evidence of soft bound behaviour in analogue memristive devices for neuromorphic computing,” Scientific reports 8, 71–78 (2018). 77P. Del Giudice, S. Fusi, and M. Mattia, “Modeling the formation of working memory with networks of integrate-and-fire neurons connected by plastic synapses,” Journal of Physiology Paris 97 , 659–681 (2003). 78F. Zenke, E. J. Agnes, and W. Gerstner, “Diverse synaptic plasticity mech- anisms orchestrated to form and retrieve memories in spiking neural net- works,” Nature Communications 6, 1–13 (2015). 79J. Bill and R. Legenstein, “A compound memristive synapse model for sta- tistical learning through stdp in spiking neural networks,” Frontiers in neu- roscience 8, 1–18 (2014). 80G. Plastiras, M. Terzi, C. Kyrkou, and T. Theocharidcs, “Edge intelli- gence: Challenges and opportunities of near-sensor machine learning ap- plications,” in 2018 IEEE 29th International Conference on Application- specific Systems, Architectures and Processors (ASAP) (IEEE, 2018) pp. 1–7.