SciPost Physics Submission Hall anomaly and moving vortex charge in layered superconductors Assa Auerbach1, Daniel P. Arovas2, 1 Physics Department, Technion, Haifa, Israel 2 Department of Physics, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093, USA *Corresponding: assa@physics.technion.ac.il April 2, 2020 Abstract Magnetotransport theory of layered superconductors in the flux flow steady state is revisited. Longstanding controversies concerning observed Hall sign reversals are resolved. The conductivity separates into a Bardeen-Stephen vortex core contribution, and a Hall conductivity due to moving vortex charge. This charge, which is responsible for Hall anomaly, diverges logarithmically at weak magnetic field. Its values can be extracted from magetoresistivity data by extrapolation of vortex core Hall angle from the normal phase. Hall anomalies in YBa2Cu3O7, Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8вҲ’x, and Nd1.85Ce0.15CuO4вҲ’y data are consistent with theoretical estimates based on doping dependence of London penetration depths. In the ap- pendices, we derive the Streda formula for the hydrodynamical Hall conductivity, and refute previously assumed relevance of Galilean symmetry to Hall anomalies. 1 Introduction The Hall effect in the flux flow (FF) regime of superconducting films has long been an in- triguing and controversial subject. The pioneering theory of Bardeen and Stephen (BS) predicted that the Hall sign is inherited from the normal phase which persists inside the vortex cores. Soon thereafter, in a challenge to BS theory, Hall sign reversals have been measured in diverse superconductors [2вҖ“6]. This effect, named вҖңHall anomalyвҖқ, is illustrated in Fig. 1. Proposed explanations included the effects of disorder , thermal excitations , interlayer vorticity , and vortex charge . These effects were incorporated into the FF trans- port theory by vortex dynamics equations , and time dependent Ginzburg-Landau theory [13вҖ“15]. However, the microscopic origin of non-dissipative vortex forces and imaginary relaxation rates, as well as the definition of the relevant vortex charge in a screened environment, have been subjects of ongoing debates, lasting for more than 50 years. In this paper, we take on the Hall anomaly problem with a new approach to flux flow transport theory. This approach allows us to show that an additional Hall current is carried by moving vortex charge (MVC), which does not vanish in a layered superconductor geometry. The MVC can be estimated from independently measured thermodynamic coefficients, and compared to the value extracted from magnetoresistivities data. The strategy of this paper is as follows. 1 arXiv:1912.10062v4 [cond-mat.supr-con] 31 Mar 2020 SciPost Physics Submission (i) We first revisit FF transport theory. While a vortex dynamical equation was used to explain dissipative FF transport , its form and some of its coefficients have not been microscopically derived. The source of the difficulty might be in computing the resistivity by imposing a bias current on superconductors without Galilean symmetry (see expanded discussion in Section 9). Here, in contrast, we completely avoid bias currents, vortex forces and their phenomeno- logical equations of motion. The mean vortex velocity in the steady state is constrained by the external electric field. The current is calculated as a linear response to the applied electric field, and Galilean symmetry is not assumed. (ii) We show that the conductivity (per layer) separates into two additive terms, ПғОұОІ = пҝҪBc2(T) B пҝҪ Пғcore ОұОІ + ОөОұОІ 2|e|Qv h . (1) e < 0 is the electron charge, and ОөОұОІ with Оұ, ОІ вҲҲ {x, y} is the antisymmetric tensor. The first term recovers BS formula which describes the transport currents generated lustration, vortex cores are assumed to obey Drude theory of metals. The deviation of Hall resistivity from Bardeen Stephen theory, and its sign reversal, are ascribed to moving vortex charge. 2 SciPost Physics Submission inside the moving vortex cores. B and Bc2 are the magnetic field and upper critical field respectively. The second term is due to the MVC, whose value is Qv. (iii) We use the Streda formula to relate Qv to the extra charge induced into the superconducting layer by the addition of one vortex. In isotropic superconductors, Qv = 0 due to in-plane screening by co-moving charges. In layered superconductors, screening in dopant (weakly superconducting) layers results in, Qv = Q0 log(ОұBc2/B) . (2) Q0 is proportional to the derivative of superfluid stiffness with respect to electron den- sity, and to the interlayer dielectric constant, which can be experimentally determined without microscopic knowledge of the normal state correlations. Оұ represents vortex core properties and is of order unity. Generically, Q0 has opposite sign to first term in Eq. (1), which can produce the Hall sign reversal depicted in Fig. 1. (iv) Qv can be extracted from experimental magnetresistivity data, and compared to Eq. (2), using a Hall angle extrapolation for estimating the BS term. Values extracted for hole doped , and electron doped cuprates are consistent Eq. (2), where Q0 can be fit to independent estimates of the doping derivative of London penetration depth and interlayer dielectric constant. We briefly discuss effects of inhomogeneous pinning at low magnetic field, and superconducting fluctuations. The paper ends with a summary of our results and their comparison to previous theories. 2 Flux Flow Steady State We consider a homogeneous thin film of a type-II superconductor, below the zero field tran- sition temperature T <T (0) c , A magnetic field B = BЛҶz induces a two dimensional (2D) vortex density nv = B/ОҰ0 = (2ПҖl2 B)вҲ’1, where ОҰ0 = hc/(2|e|) is the Josephson flux quantum. The FF regime is defined by (see Fig. 1), max пҝҪ Bmelt(T) , ОҰ0 2ПҖО»2(T) пҝҪ < B(T) < Bc2(T), (3) where Bc2 вүЎ ОҰ0/2ПҖОҫ2, Оҫ is the vortex core radius, and Bmelt is the vortex lattice melting field . For thin enough films, LondonвҖҷs penetration depth can be easily exceed the inter-vortex separation О» вү« lB. Hence, the magnetic field is approximately uniform and a more appropriate term for вҖңflux flowвҖқ would be вҖңvorticity flowвҖқ. In cuprates, and other highly anisotropic layered superconductors, Bmelt(T) вүӘ Bc2(T) at low temperatures . In the FF regime defined in Eq. (3), the critical current is zero, or immeasurably small, such that we will later be able to apply linear response theory to compute the longitudinal and transverse conductivities. The global phase field of the superconductor, outside the vortex cores, can be separated into the vorticity phase and transport phase: ПҶ(x) = ПҶv(x) + ПҶtr(x) ПҶv = sgn(e) Nv пҝҪ i=1 arg(x вҲ’ Xi) (4) 3 SciPost Physics Submission BЛҶz вҮ  moving vortex of velocity V . The circulating supercurrent is depicted by a wide blue arrow. A core EMF, Ecore, is imposed by the voltage drop (V1вҲ’V2) across the metallic region (yellow disk) of radius Оҫ. where Xi are the vorticesвҖҷ positions, and пҝҪ dl В· вҲҮПҶtr = 0 on any orbit. Henceforth we fix the gauge choice to be A0(x, t) = 0 throughout the paper. For a configuration of static vortices МҮПҶ(x) = 0. We introduce an external DC electric field into the vector potential as A = AB вҲ’ cEt, where вҲҮ Г— AB = BЛҶz. If ПҶ(x) remains time-independent, the 2D current density will increase linearly in time, viz. j(t) = 2e Д§ ПҒs пҝҪ вҲҮПҶ вҲ’ 2e Д§cA(t) пҝҪ вҲқ E t , (5) where ПҒs is the 2D superfluid stiffness, and the mean free energy density will increase as f(t) вҲј ПҒst2. The runaway energy will be cut off by destruction of the superfluid stiffness, or by mobilization of the vortices, which will result in вҲҮ МҮПҶ Мё= 0. Let us first consider a single moving vortex with velocity V as depicted in Fig. 2. Outside the vortex core of radius Оҫ, a dipolar electromotive force field (EMF) E = вҲ’ Д§ 2eвҲҮ МҮПҶv, is asso- ciated with the vortex motion. The EMF inside the metallic vortex core Ecore is determined 4 SciPost Physics Submission by the voltage drop between the core boundary points at вҲӮОҫ = пҝҪ x | |x вҲ’ X|2 = Оҫ2пҝҪ , x2 пҝҪ x1 dl В· Ecore = Д§ 2e МҮПҶv пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ x2 вҲ’ Д§ 2e МҮПҶv пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ x1. (6) where xi вҲҲ вҲӮОҫ. From the definition of ПҶv(x вҲ’ V t), the core EMF is linearly related to the vortex velocity by, Ecore = Д§ 2|e|Оҫ2 ЛҶz Г— V . (7) Since вҲҮ2ПҶv = 0 everywhere, E is divergence free, in analogy to an in-plane 2D вҖңmagnetic fieldвҖқ. The EMF produced by each moving vortex can be parameterized by a 2D вҖңmagnetic momentвҖқ, Ојi = Оҫ2 2 Ecore i . (8) In analogy with magnetostatics , a finite density of 2D вҖңmomentsвҖқ produces a 2D вҖңmag- netization fieldвҖқ m = nv М„Ој. Henceforth М„o вүЎ 1 вҲҶA пҝҪ вҲҶA d2x o, denotes coarse graining of o over an area вҲҶA which includes many vortices. The relation between the EMF and these вҖңmagnetic momentsвҖқ is given by the вҖңmagnetic fieldвҖқ to вҖңmagnetizationвҖқ ratio, М„E = 4ПҖm. By Eqs. (7-8) this relation implies, М„E = hnv 2|e| ЛҶz Г— V вүЎ h 2|e|ЛҶz Г— J v = вҲ’V Г— B/c . (9) V denotes the average vortex velocity, and J v is the vorticity current. The last equality in Eq. (9) uses nv = B/ОҰ0, and is known as JosephsonвҖҷs relation . In vortex dynamics approaches , JosephsonвҖҷs relation is used to express the EMF as a function of the computed vortex velocity. Here we turn this relation on its head. By demanding a steady state d dtвҹЁjвҹ© = 0, the externally imposed electric field must be cancelled, on average, by вҲ’ Д§ 2e вҹЁвҲҮ МҮПҶвҹ©, and hence E = М„E. This constrains the average vortex velocity to be, V (E) = c B2 E Г— B. (10) It should be emphasized that in our approach, the vortex velocity is independent of any Hamiltonian parameters. The transport problem is formulated in terms of a linear response of the transport current to the externally applied electric field E. The current has two separate components: the metallic vortex cores which serve as ideal current pumps, and the MVC transported by the moving vortices (see Fig. 3). 3 Core and transport currents Within the BS model, the vortex cores are metallic disks of radius Оҫ, with ПҒs = 0 inside the core and constant outside. The electrons in the disk are subjected to a core EMF which interpolates between its boundaries which move at velocity V of Eq. (10), as depicted in Fig. 2. The scattering impurities are, naturally, at rest in the lab frame. Lorentz transformation of 5 SciPost Physics Submission + - BЛҶz V IHall ЛҶx ЛҶy E Flux flow steady state transport. The electric field dictates the mean vortex velocity according to Josephson relation V = c B2 E Г— B. Each moving vortex core is an ideal current pump of both longitudinal and Hall components jcore. The core currents combine to a transport current density jtr = jcore marked by long blue arrows. Moving vortex charges of average magnitude Qv produce an additional Hall current, which is responsible for the Hall anomaly. the EMF from the moving frame to the lab frame (to linear order in V /c) combined with the external field E, yields Ecore + E + V Г— B/c = Ecore, where we have used Eq. (10). The core current in the lab frame is determined by the core conductivity tensor, jcore Оұ = пҝҪ ОІ Пғcore ОұОІ Ecore ОІ (11) For a homogeneous superconducting film, we assume that all vortices move at the same average speed and produce the same core current density. The moving vortex cores act as ideal current pumps of the DC transport current. Due to the finite viscosity of the core electrons, the current density is continuous at the core boundaries, jcore = jtr(x) вүЎ 2e Д§ ПҒsвҲҮПҶtr(x) (x вҲҲ вҲӮОҫ) , (12) 6 SciPost Physics Submission where ПҶtr was defined in Eq. (4). For weak enough electric field, additional vortex-antivortex pairs in the superconducting medium are not produced by the vortex motion and the transport current remains laminar, i.e. вҲҮ Г— вҲҮПҶtr = 0. By charge conservation, вҲҮ2ПҶtr = 0 everywhere outside the vortex cores. Thus, as a harmonic function, ПҶtr is determined (up to a constant) by its gradients on the vortex core boundaries. The unique solution for the transport current, is a globally uniform current density jtr = jcore, as depicted in Fig. 3. Local fluctuations in core currents and charge density are eliminated in the coarse grained DC current density М„jtr. Substituting Eq. (7) in Eq. (11), the BS conductivity is obtained: ПғBS ОұОІ = пҝҪBc2(T) B пҝҪ Пғcore ОұОІ , (13) which constitutes the first term in Eq. (1). Note that the BS Hall angle tan(ОёBS H ) = ПғBS xy /ПғBS xx , equals to the Hall angle of the metallic core. In Drude metals, tan(ОёH) = ПүcП„tr, where Пүc is the cyclotron frequency and П„tr(T) is the transport relaxation time which varies on the temperature scales of the normal phase. The alternative Hall angle result of Nozieres and Vinen is not validated by the derivation above. In the вҖңdirty limitвҖқ Оҫ вү« ltr , where ltr is the core mean free path, Пғcore(T, B) can be approximated by extrapolating the normal phase conductivity Пғnormal(T, B) from T > Tc(B) to T < Tc(B). For cuprate superconductors and other cases of relatively short Оҫ, an extrapolation procedure which exploits the continuity of the BS Hall angle will be proposed in Section 7. Fig. 1 illustrates the expected BS resistivities for Drude-theory core conductivity. The additional effect of MVC is discussed in the following sections. 4 Hall conductivity of charged vortices In this section we discuss the contribution of MVC to the Hall conductivity. In the static E = 0 case, in the absence of micrscopic particle-hole symmetry, one expects local vorticity currents to induce charge density modulations ОҙПҒvc(x вҲ’ Xi), which would be centred around the vortex positions {Xi}. Vortex charge has been previously proposed in the context of Hall anomalies , see discussion in Section 9. Vortex induced charge density modulations have also been observed experimentally . If indeed each vortex drags (on average) an MVC of value Qv, there will be an additional Hall current given by, jmvc = QvJ v = 2|e|Qv h E Г— ЛҶz, (14) which will produce the second term of Eq. (1). (See Fig. 3). The sign and magnitude of Qv are a-priori open to many options: The total conduction electron density per vortex or some fraction of it ? The superconducting condensate density per vortex? Coulomb screening could neutralize the total vortex charge, and must be carefully considered . These dilemmas have long been debated. Here, MVC is well defined using Kubo linear response theory. In the case of О» вү« lB, the vortex system behaves as an incompressible fluid due to the long range logarithmic interactions between vortices. The coarse-grained charge density response to any local variation of the 7 SciPost Physics Submission magnetic field ОҙBv is given by Оҙ М„ПҒvc(x, t) = пҝҪ d2xвҖІ dtвҖІ R(x вҲ’ xвҖІ, t вҲ’ tвҖІ) ОҙBv(xвҖІ, tвҖІ) . (15) where, by the aforementioned incompressibility, R is a local function of space and time. The dynamical Hall conductivity of the charged vortex fluid is proportional to the Fourier transform of R , Пғmvc xy (q, Пү) = c МғR(q, Пү), (16) which is shown in Appendix A. The second term in Eq. (1) is the DC limit Пғmvc xy = limПүвҶ’0 Пғmvc xy (0, Пү). Since R is a local function in space and time, МғR(q, Пү) is a smooth function of q, Пү, whose order of limits (q, Пү) вҶ’ 0 commute. Therefore, we can reverse the order of limits, and obtain the thermodynamic relation, Пғmvc xy = c lim qвҶ’0 МғR(q, 0) = c пҝҪвҲӮ М„ПҒvc вҲӮB пҝҪ Ој вүЎ 2|e| h Qv, (17) where the first equality is known as the Streda formula . Eq. (17) defines Qv as Qv вүЎ d dNv пҝҪ d2x М„ПҒvc(x), (18) that is to say, Qv is the change in total charge after inserting one additional flux quantum into the system. For the calculation in the following section, we note that the background charge density which is not created by the vorticity, does not contribute to the MVC Hall current. Streda formula is known for its application to gapped quantum Hall (QH) phases. There, the order of limits (q, Пү) вҶ’ 0 also commute due to the locking of local charge and magnetic flux variations. Intriguingly, the local flux-charge attachment property is shared between the QH and the vortex liquid phases . The difference between the vortex fluid and the QH liquid is that Qv in the QH phases is quantized at particular rational multiples of e. 5 Screened Ginzburg-Landau theory of the MVC Three dimensional screening ensures that the total charge accumulated around a static vortex vanishes, except near the surface . Here we need to know whether for a moving vortex, the screening charges move with the vortex and cancel any contribution of ОҙПҒvc to the Hall current. This question is answered by applying the theory of vortex charge screening of Khomskii and Freimuth to the layered superconductor. Since Thomas-Fermi screening length is much shorter than Оҫ and lB, the local electrochemical equilibrium equation, e ОҙПҶ(r) + ОҙОј(r) = 0, (19) relates between between the screening electrostatic potential ПҶ, and the local chemical po- tential deviation ОҙОј induced by the vorticity. Here, r = (x, z) is a three dimensional (3D) coordinate. The 3D charge density deviation is determined by PoissonвҖҷs equation, вҲҮ2ПҶ(r) = вҲ’4ПҖ Оө0 ОҙПҒ3D(r) (20) 8 SciPost Physics Submission arbitrary units. Оҫ is the vortex core radius, and blue arrows represent a circulating current. The local chemical potential deviation ОҙОј(x) = dfvl/dne, is approximately proportional to fvl(x, y). By symmetry, the normal gradient вҲҮвҠҘОҙОј vanishes on the unit cell boundaries. If the total charge per unit cell is non zero, it must be screened in the third dimension, as depicted in Fig. 5 where Оө0 is the local dielectric constant. Our goal is now to determine the profile of ОҙОј(r). In the absence of pinning, our vortex fluid is described as a slowly flowing hexagonal vortex lattice (VL). The quantities calculated will be accurate to leading order in the vortex velocity. We begin with the 2D Ginzburg-Landau (GL) free energy density of the superconducting condensate, f = a |ОЁ|2 + 1 2b |ОЁ|4 + K пҝҪпҝҪ(вҲҮ вҲ’ 2ie Д§c A)ОЁ пҝҪпҝҪ2 (21) with A = 1 2B ЛҶz Г— x. In the superconducting phase, a < 0 and the coherence length is Оҫ = (вҲ’K/a)1/2. Throughout we assume B вүӘ Bc2, in which case we may write ОЁ(x) вүҲ presumes that the vortex core size is zero, which we shall correct below. The GL free energy 9 SciPost Physics Submission superconducting planes with in-plane screening. (b) Staggered dopant layers and supercon- ducting planes with unscreened moving vortex charges, which contribute to the Hall current. density is thus written as fvl(x) = ПҒs 2 пҝҪ вҲ’ 1 2Оҫ2 + (вҲҮОҰ)2пҝҪ + ПҒs Оөcore Оҫ2 пҝҪ i Оҳ(Оҫ вҲ’ |x вҲ’ Xi|) (22) where ПҒs = вҲ’2Ka/b is the superfluid stiffness, Оөcore is the dimensionless vortex core energy, and ОҰ(x) = ПҖ 2 B ОҰ0 |x|2 вҲ’ пҝҪ i ln |x вҲ’ Xi| . (23) Setting вҹЁвҲҮ2ОҰвҹ© = 0 (charge neutrality of a 2D Coulomb gas) forces the vortex density to be rigidly determined by nv = B/ОҰ0. The profile of f(x), outside the vortex cores, is depicted in Fig. 4. The local chemical potential deviation in Eq. (19) can be derived from Eq. (22), ОҙОј(x, 0) = dfvl dne (x) (24) In isotropic three dimensional superconductors, вҲӮz ОҙОј(x, z) = 0. The in-plane screening case 10 SciPost Physics Submission is depicted in Fig. 5(a). The total 2D charge deviation in the unit cell area, пҝҪ uc d2x вҲҮ2 вҠҘОҙОј(x, z) = 0, (25) which is the consequence of вғ—вҲҮвҠҘОҙОјvl(r) vanishing by symmetry on the 2D unit cell boundaries, see Fig. 4. In layered superconductors, neighboring dopant layers are positioned at z = Вұac/2, with ОҙОј(x, Вұac/2) вҲқ ПҒdop s вүӘ ПҒs. The interlayer modulation can be approximately modelled by, ОҙОјvl(x, z) = 1 2 dfvl dne (x) пҝҪ 1 + cos(2ПҖz/ac) пҝҪ + O(ПҒdop s /ПҒs) . (26) This modulation results in interlayer screening. The charge deviation given by Eq. (20) is ОҙПҒ3D(x, z) = Оө0 4ПҖe пҝҪ вҲҮ2 вҠҘ вҲ’ пҝҪ2ПҖ ac пҝҪ2 пҝҪ ОҙОјvl(x, z) . (27) The MVC, by (17), is given by the differentiating the total areal charge of a supercon- ducting plane, with respect to vortex number: Qv = d dNv пҝҪ d2x ac/4 пҝҪ вҲ’ac/4 dz ПҒ3D(x, z) = вҲ’ Оө0 2eac d dNv d dne пҝҪ d2xfvl(x) . (28) We can discard the uniform condensation energy вҲ’ПҒs/4Оҫ2 in Eq. (22) which does not depend on Nv. As shown in Eq. (25), the integral over the in-plane Laplacian вҲҮ2 вҠҘ vanishes over each unit cell. The relevant vortex charge density is obtained by the second contribution of Eq. (27). This charge density is screened on the neigboring dopant layers, see Fig. 5(b). Averaging Eq. (22) over a unit cell (UC) of the vortex lattice can be performed analytically , Qv = вҲ’ Оө0ПҖ 2eac d dne пҝҪ ПҒs (ОөM + Оөcore) пҝҪ , (29) where ОөM is the dimensionless Madelung energy, ОөM = 1 2 ln пҝҪ Bc2 вҲҡ 3ПҖB пҝҪ вҲ’ ln |О·(П„)|2 , (30) О·(П„) = |q|1/24 вҲһ пҝҪ n=1 (1 вҲ’ qn) , (31) is the Dedekind eta function. The dimensionless vortex core energy Оөcore is of order unity in BCS theory . The log(1/B) dependence in Eq. (30) results from integration of the vorticity current squared, |x вҲ’ Xi|вҲ’2, over a unit cell area 2ПҖl2 B. 11 SciPost Physics Submission Extrapolation (dashed lines) of the Hall angle from the normal state of Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8вҲ’xinto the FF regime using the ratio of linearly extrapolated resistivities (In- set) of the normal phase data of Ref. . Combining Eqs. (29-31), we arrive at a compact formula for the MVC in terms of the GL parameters, Qv(T, B) = Q0 log(ОұBc2/B) , (32) where the temperature dependent parameters are, Q0(T)/e = вҲ’ ПҖОө0 4e2ac В· dПҒs dne log Оұ(T) = вҲ’1.47 + 2 ПҖОөcore (33) вҲ’ ПҒs пҝҪ dПҒs dne пҝҪвҲ’1пҝҪвҲӮBc2 вҲӮne BвҲ’1 c2 вҲ’ 2 ПҖ вҲӮОөcore вҲӮne пҝҪ . Оұ(T) is of order unity, and depends on Оҫ, and Оөcore(ne). These quantities require a mi- croscopic theory of the core properties, but do not effect the value of Q0 and the logarithmic dependence of Qv on magnetic field. 6 Extraction of Qv from experiment One would like to extract MVC values from experimental Hall and longitudinal magnetore- sistivities. The problem is that in unconventional superconductors, we often do not fully 12 SciPost Physics Submission understand the behavior of the metallic core conductivities, which are required for the sub- traction. Fortunately, the Hall conductivity in Eq. (1) exhibits a separation between the core and the MVC contributions which can be exploited. We can use the result that the BS Hall angle inside the metallic cores reflects the extrap- olated behavior of the normal phase. For temperatures not too far from Tc, it is reasonable to linearly extrapolate of the normal state temperature dependences of ПҒxx, ПҒyx to below Tc, as depicted in Fig. 6. This yields an extrapolated values of tan ОёH вҶ’ tan М„ОёH . Thus, the BS Hall conductivity can be deduced by multiplying the measured Пғexp xx (which is not affected by the MVC), by the extrapolated Hall angle, ПғBS xy = Пғexp xx (B, T) tan М„ОёH(B, T) , (34) Using Eq. 1, we can extract the experimental values of the MVC by subtracting ПғBS xy from the experimental Hall conductivity Пғexp xy , Qexp v (B, T) вүЎ h 2|e| пҝҪ Пғexp xy вҲ’ ПғBS xy пҝҪ . (35) 7 MVC of cuprate superconductors A crude theoretical estimation of Q0 of Eq. (33), based on observed doping and temperature dependent London penetration depth О», in bulk three dimensional cuprate superconductors. The two dimensional (per layer) superfluid stiffness ПҒs, is related to О» by ПҒs = ОҰ2 0 4ПҖ3 ac О»2 = 6.3 Г— 10вҲ’4 О»вҲ’2 [eV/cm] . (36) ac is the c-axis layer separation, which will later drop out of Q0. In the underdoped regime x вүӨ 0.15, the doping and temperature dependent ПҒs of cuprates [34вҖ“36] is roughly captured by an empirical formula ПҒs(x, T) = ПҒs(xopt, 0) пҝҪ |x| xopt пҝҪ вҲ’ ОіkBT , (37) for |x| < xopt, where x = 1вҲ’nea2 is the doping concentration per copper, xopt вүҲ 0.16 is optimal doping, and a вүғ 3.8 МҠA. is the copper-copper distance in the superconducting planes. Note that x is positive (negative) for hole (electron) doped materials, and that Оі is weakly doping and temperature dependent, which is consistent with the empirical Uemura scaling , given by ПҒ(0) s вүҲ ОіTc. Thus, dПҒs(T) dne вүғ вҲ’sgn(x) a2 ПҒs(xopt, 0) |xopt| . (38) which by Eq. (36), using the copper-copper distance of these materials yields, Qth 0 = вҲ’3650 e sgn(x) пҝҪ Оө0 xopt пҝҪпҝҪa О» пҝҪ2 , (39) whose values for hole-doped Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8вҲ’x and YBa2Cu3O7, and electron-doped Nd1.85Ce0.15CuO4вҲ’y, are listed in Table 1. 13 SciPost Physics Submission вҲ’1 вҮҘ 10вҲ’4 0 85 K T [K] 50 80 36 0 - |Qexp 0 | пЈҝ h 2eвҢҰвҲ’1 пҝҪ 0 15 Qv вҶөBc2 Qexp 0 log вң“вҶөBc2 B в—Ҷ two unit cell thickness film of Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8вҲ’xare inputs into the procedure described in Section 7. Dashed lines are fits to theory, Eq. 32. Inset: Fitted parameters ОұBc2 and Qexp 0 (T), (which is negative). The weak temperature dependence of Qexp 0 is consistent with a constant parameter Оі which is roughy consistent with phenomenological UemuraвҖҷs relations of Eq. (37). Compounds T[K] Qexp 0 /e О»/a Qth 0 /e Оө0 Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8вҲ’x 75 684 9 YBa2Cu3O7 91 410 12.4 Nd1.85Ce0.15CuO4вҲ’y 11 533 11.3 0 is extracted from Hall and magnetoresistivity data at fixed temperature T[K]. Qth 0 , of Eq. 39, is fit to Qexp 0 using the listed values of Оөfit 0 . Data from refs. . See text for details. The experimental values of Qexp 0 in Table 1, are extracted from the data of Refs. . The agreement is quite reassuring: we can fit Qexp 0 = Qth using Оө0 = 9 вҲ’ 11.3. These short wavelength parameters are difficult to obtain experimentally. The fact the dielectric constants are similar in the different cuprates, reflects similar local environments, and an insensitivity to ПҒs and T. These values are not extremely different from Оө0 = 4.5 which was used to fit ellipsometry data of Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8вҲ’x in Ref. . 14 SciPost Physics Submission jtr pinned vortices IHall LвҶө and the transport currents avoid their metallic cores. The external voltage V extdrops only on the flux flow strip of width Lff, which effectively enhances the Bardeen Stephen conductivity by a factor of L/Lff, but not the moving vortex charge contribution, see Eq. (40). 8 Inhomogeneous flow and fluctuations This paper has implicitly assumed weak effects of disorder and pinning in the FF regime. Eq. (1) applies to homegenous vortex motion, вҖҳdeepвҖҷ in the FF regime as defined by Eq. (3). Short range (relative to Оҫ) disorder determines the normal state conductivities of Пғcore. Long range disorder may broaden the melting transition at weak fields, due to formation of вҖқvorticity riversвҖқ of total cross section Lff, between pinned regions of cross section L вҲ’ Lff. In Fig. 8 we depict two domains, which can be generalized to describe realistic systems with multiple rivers and pinned domains. The FF conductivity, Eq. (1) is readily modified to take into account such inhomogeneous flow. The mean vortex velocity in the rivers, is enhanced by a geometric factor V вҶ’ V L Lff . Thus, the core currents of the moving vortices are also enhanced by that factor. Due to the laminar inter-vortex current flow, the identity jtr = jcore for the average current density still holds. The transport current through the superconductor bypasses the resistive cores of the 15 SciPost Physics Submission pinned vortices, see Fig. 8. The BS conductivity is therefore multiplied by a factor of L/Lff. The MVC Hall current, however, remains unchanged, because it is proportional to the total vorticity current, and the effective conductivity due to partial pinning is ПғFFвҲ’partial ОұОІ = пҝҪBc2 B пҝҪ пҝҪ L Lff пҝҪ Пғcore ОұОІ + ОөОұОІ 2|e|Qv h (40) The partial pinning parameter Lff/L < 1 depends on the sample inhomogeneities, and is an increasing function of field, temperature, and current. A signature of the partial pinning regime, would be a non linear current-voltage relation. We note partial pinning enhances both the BS Hall and longitudinal conductivities. There- fore, we can still extract Qexp v from Пғexp xx , Пғexp xy , and the extrapolated Hall angle, using Eq. (35). The primary difficulty at low fields is to measure the extremely low values of ПҒxx and ПҒxy in the linear response regime. Fig. 1 depicts the resistivities of Bardeen-Stephen mean field theory, in which Bc2 is a sharp phase transition. In reality, for quasi-2D films and especially for few monolayers as in Ref. , Tc(B) (or Bc2(T)) denote a broad crossover between the flux flow and normal metal regimes. Evidently, short range phase correlations which are required to define vortices, persist in a limited range of T > Tc, and B > Bc2(T). In the thin Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8вҲ’x films, Tc = TKT is of Kosterlitz-Thouless type, where, as Halperin and Nelson have shown, mobile vortices exist in some range above TKT . Consequently, if these vortices are charged by Qv Мё= 0, they can produce a Hall sign reversal even slightly above TKT. In thicker films, superconducting order pairing fluctuations play an important role above Tc. We note that for cuprates, the normal state (a.k.a. the вҖңbad metalвҖқ) longitudinal and Hall conductivities are poorly understood. 9 Discussion Hall anomalies in superconductors have been an open theoretical problem for more than four decades. Some of the confusion in the field originates in the formulation of vortex forces and viscosities. Vortex dynamics approaches calculate the vortex velocity (and the associated EMF it generates) as a response to the force exerted by a bias current, in addition to other forces. The conductivity tensor depends on the coefficients of these forces. However, conductivities can only be methodically computed by Kubo formulas, where the current is derived as a response to an applied electric field (as in our approach), and not vice versa. The vortex dynamical equation has seen endless debates since first introduced by BS and Nozieres and Vinen to describe flux flow. Missing in this equation are effects of realistic band structure, impurities, time-retardation and the multi-vortex interactions. While the friction term can be derived from the longitudinal core conductivity by equating the Joule power dissipation , non-dissipative forces have been difficult to justify microscopically . Hall voltage producing forces were related to imaginary relaxation time of the time dependent Ginzburg Landau equation , and to the topological phase-density action . The sign and magnitude of such a terms were determined by Ref. by appealing to Galilean invariance. However, this argument is not valid to flux flow in superconductors for two fundamental reasons: 1. Superconductors in a periodic potential with impurities are not Galilean invariant. 16 SciPost Physics Submission KelvinвҖҷs circulation theorem is valid for a perfectly Galilean liquid, where vortices must move at the velocity of the background current, i.e. вҖңgo with the flowвҖқ. This rule would indeed produce the Galilean Hall conductivity of Пғxy = cПҒ/B. However, de Gennes and Nozieres pointed out that superconducting vortices may only exhibit вҖңgo with the flowвҖқ effects for ПүcП„ = tan(ОёH) вү« 1. As seen in Fig. 6, the experimental values of tan(ОёH) вҲј 10вҲ’3 are well outside this regime. A counterexample is provided around half filling ПҒa2 вүғ 1 (a is a lattice constant), where the Пғxy vanishes and changes sign due to particle hole symmetry of the bandstructure. 2. As shown by several arguments in Appendix B, the onset of short range superconducting stiffness prevents the vortices from вҖңgoing with the flowвҖқ. The vortex liquid is incom- pressible due to its long range interactions. As a consequence, the Hall conductivity is given by the non Galilean invariant Streda formula, Eq. (46): Пғxy = c (вҲӮПҒ/вҲӮB) Мё= cПҒ/B. In this paper the vortex velocity is not driven by various forces, but dictated by the electric field via Josephson relation (10). The moving vorticesвҖҷ cores act as ideal transport current pumps. The derivation of Eq. (1) vindicates BS result for the magnetic field dependent Hall conductivity (in the absence of MVC), vis-a-vis Nozieres and VinenвҖҷs Galilean symmetry motivated prediction. An important feature of the present approach is the separability of the conductivity ten- sor in Eq. (1). This feature allows us to subtract the core conductivity term, which is poorly understood in many systems. The normal state conductivities are highly sensitive to material specific disorder, superconducting fluctuations (discussed in Section 8) , and inelastic scat- tering. In cuprates, it is fair to say, little is yet understood about its normal state transport coefficients. Hall sign reversals are a result of Qv Пғcore xy < 0. Whether there are one or two sign reversals, depends on the individual temperature dependence of each of the two terms in Eq. (1). Пғcore ОұОІ depends on quasiparticle scattering time, while the MVC is determined by the superfluid stiffness which saturates at low temperatures. A second (lower temperature) sign reversal, such as observed in Ref. , indicates that quasiparticle scattering is dominated by inelastic (electron-electron and electron phonon) processes. Previous authors have discussed the role of vortex charge in Hall anomalies, with emphasis on the vortex core charge density. Coulomb screening however can completely neutralize the total vortex charge in an isotropic superconductor, as depicted in Fig. 5(a). Here we have considered the geometry of dopant layers with interlayer screening. This allows the vortices to drag the MVC within the superconducting layers, while the vertically displaced screening charges reside in neighboring low mobility dopant layers. The major contribution for the MVC arises from vorticity kinetic energy density far outside the cores. Integration of this contribution over inter-vortex separation yields the log(Bc2/B) dependence of |Qv| at low fields, which is consistent with the experimental data in Fig. 7. Eq. (1) has been applied to analyse cuprate flux flow transport data in Section 7. We find reassuring agreement between estimates of the doping-dependent London penetration depth, interlayer dielectric constant, and the values of Q0 extracted from experiments, as given in Table 1. Independent measurements of vortex charging in these systems by resonance, capacitance and force microscopy, would be very informative. At very strong magnetic fields, Hall sign reversals in cuprates have been attributed to Fermi surface reconstructions in the normal metallic phase , which exhibits quantum 17 SciPost Physics Submission oscillations. It would be interesting to investigate the crossover between Hall anomalies at relatively weak field magnetic fields, and Fermi-liquid regimes at much higher fields. Acknowledgements We thank Amit Kanigel, Bert Halperin, Michael Reznikov, and Ari Turner, for useful input and discussions. We also thank Referees 1 and 2 for urging us to clarify our stand on aspects of previous theoretical work. We acknowledge support from US-Israel Binational Science Foundation grant 2016168, Israel Science Foundation grant 2021367, and Aspen Center for Physics, Grant NSF-PHY-1066293, where parts of this work were done. A Dynamical Hall conductivity and Streda formula We restrict ourselves to 2D system with area A. The dynamical Hall conductivity is defined as Пғxy(Пү) = Д§ AZ пҝҪ n,m пҝҪ eвҲ’ОІEn вҲ’ eвҲ’ОІEm (Em вҲ’ En)(Em вҲ’ En вҲ’ Д§Пү) пҝҪ (41) Г— Im пҝҪ вҹЁn|jx q|mвҹ©вҹЁm|jy вҲ’q|nвҹ© пҝҪ , where Z = Tr eвҲ’ОІH, and {En, |nвҹ©} is the spectrum of H. Charge conservation yields, МҮПҒq = i Д§[H, ПҒq] = вҲ’iq В· jq (42) MaxwellвҖҷs equation j = c вҲҮ Г— M, relates the magnetization to the current density, and in Fourier representation, jq = ic qГ—Mq . Without loss of generality, we can choose q = (qx, 0, 0) and M = Mz ЛҶz, and relate the matrix elements, вҹЁn|jx q|mвҹ© = вҲ’ 1 Д§qx (En вҲ’ Em)вҹЁn|ПҒq|mвҹ© вҹЁm|jy вҲ’q|nвҹ© = icqxвҹЁm|Mz вҲ’q|nвҹ©. (43) Inserting the current matrix elements (43) in (41) yields Пғxy(q, Пү) = c AZ пҝҪ n,m пҝҪ eвҲ’ОІEn вҲ’ eвҲ’ОІEm (Em вҲ’ En вҲ’ Д§Пү) пҝҪ Г— Re пҝҪ вҹЁn|ПҒq|mвҹ©вҹЁm|Mz вҲ’q|nвҹ© пҝҪ вүЎ c ОҙПҒ ОҙB (q, Пү) (44) The DC Hall conductivity is given by the DC transport limit, Пғxy = lim ПүвҶ’0 lim qвҶ’0 Пғxy(q, Пү) (45) 18 SciPost Physics Submission The Streda formula is the static thermodynamic susceptibility, ПғStreda xy = lim qвҶ’0 lim ПүвҶ’0 Пғxy(q, Пү) = c пҝҪ вҲӮПҒ вҲӮB пҝҪ Ој,T (46) When the limits (q, Пү) вҶ’ (0, 0) of Eq. (44) commute, Пғxy = ПғStreda xy . This condition is satisfied in gapped quantum Hall phases, and for the vortex liquid discussed in Section 4. In both of these systems the response of ОҙПҒ(x, t) to ОҙB(xвҖІ, tвҖІ) defined by R(x вҲ’ xвҖІ, t вҲ’ tвҖІ) in Eq. (15) is local. For resistive gapless metals, the two limits are different, and StredaвҖҷs formula does not describe the Hall conductivity. B Invalidity of Galilean Hall conductivity in flux flow regime To discuss the hydrodynamic contribution to the Hall current we consider вҖңcorelessвҖқ vortices by setting Пғcore xy вҶ’ 0 in Eq. (1). Here we do not assume underlying particle hole symmetry, since we wish to discuss the approximately Galilean invariant superconductor. In a perfect Galilean invariant liquid with total charge density ПҒ, vortices вҖңgo with flowвҖқ as dictated by KelvinвҖҷs circulation theorem. That is to say the averaged particlesвҖҷ velocity should be equal to that of the vortices, i.e. jHall = ПҒV . In the presence of an electric field, JosephsonвҖҷs mean vortex velocity is V = cEГ— ЛҶz/B вҖ“ see Eq. (10) вҖ“ and the Galilean invariant (GI) Hall conductivity is ПғGI xy = cПҒ B . (47) In this Appendix, we show that Eq. (47) is not valid in the flux flow regime of superconductors even in an approximate Galilean Hamiltonian. The conceptual point is that Eq. (47) does not capture the effects of short range superconducting stiffness ПҒs Мё= 0, which differentiates between the flux flow and the normal metal regimes. 1. The current induced by a moving vortex in the (Galilean invariant) dynamical Gross- Pitaevskii theory was calculated in the superfluid phase by Arovas and Freire using the mapping to dual (2+1)D electrodynamics: jv вҲқ ЛҶz Г— (r вҲ’ V t) |r вҲ’ V t|2 + O(V 2) (48) This current integrates to zero, and does not produce a global Hall current jHall = ПҒV , which is required for Eq. (47). 2. Consider a charged two dimensional bosonic superfluid of density n and charge q, and Hamiltonian H = пҝҪ i (pi вҲ’ q cA)2 2mвҲ— (49) on a narrow ring, subjected to a perpendicular magnetic field A = вҲ’ B 2 r Г— ЛҶz. A vortex lattice of density nv = B/ОҰ0 is produced in the bulk of the ring. Now a radial electric field E вҲҘ ЛҶr is adiabatically turned on. The vortex lattice will start moving around the annulus at JosephsonвҖҷs velocity V = cE Г— ЛҶz/B. We can understand the null drag effect 19 SciPost Physics Submission of the moving vortex lattice by analogy to that of moving potential term пҝҪ d2x ПҶ(x вҲ’ V t) ПҒ(x). At low velocities, the rigid condensate вҖңsticksвҖқ to the lab frame in which it was prepared, and is not dragged by the moving potential (in other words: it is hard to pump a superfluid). This statement can be verified by the following Gedankenexperiment: we boost the Hamiltonian to the rotating frame of velocity V , which is implemented by inserting an effective Aharonov-Bohm (AB) flux ОҰAB = (mвҲ—c/q)V L. Superconducting stiffness ensures that the circulating persistent current in the moving frame would be j = вҲ’nqV at a finite flux. The persistent current does not decay even in the presence of the (now) static potential ПҶ(x). (This is to be contrasted with the metallic phase, the current decays to zero by scattering at all fluxes ОҰAB = integer Г— ОҰ0.) Boosting back to the non-rotating lab frame, by setting ОҰAB вҶ’ 0, restores the motion of the potential, and rewinds the current back to zero. Thus the moving potential does not drag the condensate. 3. Due to the local stiffness (rigidity) of the superconductor, the vortex liquid is incompress- ible due to the logarithmic interactions between vortices. This justifies the interchange of q, Пү order of limits of the hydrodynamical Hall conductivity, resulting in the applica- bility of the Streda formula Пғxy = c (вҲӮПҒ/вҲӮB). The Streda formula for the vortex liquid is proven in Appendix A. Thus, the distinction between a Galilean metal and its lower temperature flux flow regime can be captured by the inequality of ПҒ/B Мё= (вҲӮПҒ/вҲӮB). .