Effects of Mid-infrared Graphene Plasmons on Photothermal Heating Anh D. Phan,1, 2, вҲ— Do T. Nga,3 Do C. Nghia,4 Vu D. Lam,5 and Katsunori Wakabayashi2 1Phenikaa Institute for Advanced Study, Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Faculty of Information Technology, Materials Science and Engineering, Phenikaa University, Hanoi 12116, Vietnam 2Department of Nanotechnology for Sustainable Energy, School of Science and Technology, Kwansei Gakuin University, Sanda, Hyogo 669-1337, Japan 3Institute of Physics Vietnam Academy of Science and Technology, 10 Dao Tan, Ba Dinh, Hanoi 12116, Vietnam 4Hanoi Pedagogical University 2, Nguyen Van Linh Street, Vinh Phuc, Vietnam 5Graduate University of Science and Technology, Vietnam Academy of Science and Technology, 18 Hoang Quoc Viet, Hanoi, Vietnam (Dated: December 18, 2019) We theoretically investigate the plasmonic heating of graphene-based systems under the mid- infrared laser irradiation, where periodic arrays of graphene plasmonic resonators are placed on dielectric thin films. Optical resonances are sensitive to structural parameters and the number of graphene layers. Under mid-infrared laser irradiation, the steady-state temperature gradients are calculated. We find that graphene plasmons significantly enhance the confinement of electromagnetic fields in the system and lead to a large temperature rise compared to the case without graphene. The correlations between temperature change and the optical power, laser spot, and thermal conductivity of dielectric layer in these systems are discussed. Our numerical results are in accordance with experiments. Photothermal effects have been of interest in efficient solar vapor generation , optical data storage , al- ternative cancer therapy , antibacterial activities , and radiative cooling . The incident light excites surface plasmons of metal-like materials in photothermal agents and thus is effectively confined in the nanostruc- tures. The confinement of electromagnetic waves causes strong light-absorbance. The absorbed energy converts efficiently into heat. Manipulating the electron density or plasmonic structures in systems leads to an inhomo- geneity of electric fields and generates local heat to match with desired purposes. Typically, photothermal applica- tions have employed noble metals because of their large concentration of free electrons and high efficiency of light- to-heat conversion . However, large inelastic losses of noble metals limit plasmon lifetimes in metal nanos- tructures and reduce service life of optical confinement. Graphene has been recently considered as a novel plas- monic material [9вҖ“11], which strongly confines electro- magnetic fields but provides relatively low loss . The optical and electrical properties of graphene can be easily tuned by doping, applying external fields, and injecting charge carriers . The small number of free electrons in graphene leads to occurance of plasmon resonance at the infrared regime and significantly reduces the heat dissipa- tion compared to metals. Consequently, graphene-based metamaterials are of interest and potentially display var- ious intriguing behaviors. There are several methods to investigate the perfor- mance of graphene-based devices. While experimental implementation is very expensive and simulation is time- consuming, theoretical approaches are scalable and pro- вҲ—Electronic address: anh.phanduc@phenikaa-uni.edu.vn vide good insights into the physics underlying design of metamaterials. Furthermore, the scalability is important in generating huge amount of data for machine learning and deep learning analyses. Thus, reliable theoretical models are useful for enhancing the highly accurate fab- rications in both size and morphologies. In this letters, we present a theoretical approach to calculate plasmonic properties of graphene-based nanos- tructures and temperature distribution in the systems when irradiated by a mid-infrared laser light. The sys- tems are modeled to be similar to mid-infrared graphene detectors fabricated in Ref. . These calculations al- low us to determine roles of graphene plasmons on the light confinement and heat generation. In addition, ef- fects of dielectric layers on the temperature gradient are also discussed. Our graphene-based systems as depicted in Figure 1 composed of a square lattice of graphene nanodisks on a diamond-like carbon thin film grown on a silicon sub- strate. The square lattice is characterized by a lattice period, a = 270 nm, a resonator size, D = 210 nm, and a number of graphene resonator layers, N. A thickness of the diamond-like carbon layer is h = 60 nm. Since the energy of optical phonon of the diamond is about 165 meV , one can expect that this energy of diamond- like carbon thin film has the same order. The value is higher than the phonon energy of SiO2 (55 meV) and other conventional substrates. Consequently, the surface of diamond-like carbon films has a lower trap density which leads to be non-polar and chemically inert surface. When the size is much smaller than the wavelength of incident light, we can apply quasi-static approxima- tion to analytically determine the polarizability of a sin- gle graphene resonator [11, 15вҖ“17]. To capture effects of interactions between graphene resonators on the polar- izability, the dipole approximation is employed for sim- arXiv:1912.07763v1 [physics.app-ph] 17 Dec 2019 2 (a) Top-down view a D width Side view N layers (b) Diamond-like carbon Silicon h Оө1 Оө2 Оө3 Graphene nanodisk ПҒ z Оә1 Оә2 ОҪ1 ОҪ2 L side view of graphene based system including structural pa- rameters. plicity. This approximation works well as a/D вүҘ 1.5 . We suppose that the accuracy is still accept- able for a/D вүҲ 1.29 in our system, which describes the practical graphene detector in Ref. . Оұ(Пү) = Оө1 + Оө2 2 D3 О¶2 вҲ’iПүDОө1 + Оө2 2Пғ(Пү) вҲ’ 1 О· , (1) where Оө1 = 1, Оө2 = 6.25, Оө3 = 11.56, Пү is frequency, and О¶ and О· are geometric parameters calculated using the lowest-order dipole plasmon model. The analytical dependence of О¶ and О· on the morphology and thickness can be found in Ref. . According to the random-phase approximation with zero-parallel wave vector, the N-layers graphene conduc- tivity in mid-infrared regime is Ne2i|EF | ПҖД§2 (Пү + iП„ вҲ’1), (2) where e is the electron charge, Д§ is the reduced Planck constant, П„ is the carrier relaxation time, and EF is a chemical potential. Typically, Пғ(Пү) contains both inter- band and intraband transitions. However, in the mid- infrared regime, the intraband conductivity is completely dominant. The in-plane optical conductivity of graphene in Eq. (2) ignores contributions of interband transitions. The approximation is only valid in the low frequency regime . To effectively combine Eq. (1) and (2), it is necessary to require the strong coupling condition , where the spacing distance between graphene disks is much smaller than the diameter D. In addition, since graphene disk layers are separated by a dielectric layer , the vertical optical conductivity is ignored and the horizontal optical conductivity is simply additive. The reflection and transmission coefficient of the graphene-based nanostructure are t13 = t12t23ei( Пү c вҲҡОө2h) 1 + r12r23e2i( Пү c вҲҡОө2h) , r13 = r12 + r23e2i( Пү c вҲҡОө2h) 1 + r12r23e2i( Пү c вҲҡОө2h) (3) where r0 = вҲҡОө2 вҲ’ вҲҡОө1 вҲҡОө2 + вҲҡОө1 , t0 = 2вҲҡОө1 вҲҡОө2 + вҲҡОө1 , r12 = r0 вҲ’ is(1 вҲ’ r0) ОұвҲ’1 вҲ’ Оі , t12 = t0 + ist0 ОұвҲ’1 вҲ’ Оі , r23 = вҲҡОө3 вҲ’ вҲҡОө22 вҲҡОө3 + вҲҡОө2 , t23 = 2вҲҡОө2 вҲҡОө3 + вҲҡОө2 , s = 4ПҖ a2 Пү/c вҲҡОө2 + вҲҡОө1 , Оі вүҲ g a3 2 Оө1 + Оө2 + is, (4) where c is the speed of light, g вүҲ 4.52 is the net dipolar interaction over the whole square lattice, rpq and tpq are the bulk reflection and transmission coef- ficients, respectively, when electromagnetic fields strike from medium p to q. From these, we compute the trans- responding to systems with and without graphene plas- monic resonators. The extinction spectra measured in the experiments is the relative difference in these trans- The calculations clearly determine confinement effects of electromagnetic fields due to graphene plasmons. Under infrared laser irradiation, the diamon-like car- bon layers and graphene-disk resonators absorb electro- magnetic energy and are heated up. The temperature rise in cylinderical coordinate, вҲҶT вүЎ вҲҶT(ПҒ, z), obeys the heat diffusion equation. Since the graphene resonator is a two-dimensional material, the thermal conductivity is anisotropic. This diffusion equation in the layer including all stacked plasmonic disks is Оә1вҲҘ 1 ПҒ d dПҒ пҝҪ ПҒdвҲҶT dПҒ пҝҪ + Оә1вҠҘ d2вҲҶT dz2 = p0eвҲ’ 2ПҒ2 w2 eвҲ’ОҪ1z, (5) where p0 is the laser power per unit volume, w is the laser spot, ОҪ1 is the absorption coefficient, Оә1вҲҘ and Оә1вҠҘ are the effective in-plane and out-of-plane thermal con- ductivity, respectively. To consider a uniform illumina- tion condition, one simply takes w = вҲһ and follows the same analysis as in Ref. . These conductivities are strongly dependent on the fraction of graphene plasmons in the plasmonic layer, which is fp = ПҖD2/4a2. By adopting Maxwell-Garnett (MG) theory for an effective medium approximation, Оә1вҲҘ and Оә1вҠҘ are Оә1вҲҘ,вҠҘ = Оәm (1 вҲ’ fp)(Оәbulk вҲҘ,вҠҘ + 2Оәm) + 3fpОәbulk вҲҘ,вҠҘ (1 вҲ’ fp)(Оәbulk вҲҘ,вҠҘ + 2Оәm) + 3fpОәm , (6) 3 where Оәbulk вҲҘ вүҲ 630 W/m/K and Оәbulk вҠҘ вүҲ 6 W/m/K are the corresponding conductivity of bulk graphene, and Оәm вүҲ 0.6 W/m/K is the thermal conduc- tivity of medium (air). Here, we ignore effects of plasmon and phonon coupling between graphene layers. A prior work indicated that the vertical coupling of graphene nanodisks is relatively strong and plays an important role in the frequency range from 140 cmвҲ’1 to 350 cmвҲ’1. How- ever, resonant frequencies in our optical spectra in Fig. 2 are greater than 0.57 eV (вҲј 460 cmвҲ’1). Thus, this strong coupling between vertically stacked graphene nanodisks may not (or may) happen in this work. According to Beer-LambertвҖҷs law, one can estimate ОҪ1 вүҲ Qabs/a2L, in which Qabs = 4 вҲҡ 2ПҖПүIm(Оұ(Пү))/cвҲҡОө1 + Оө2 is the absorption cross section, L = NОҙ is the thickness of graphene nanostruc- tures with Оҙ = 0.335 nm, and 1/(a2L) is the density of graphene resonators on the surface of the dielectric film. In the diamond-like layer, the diffusion equation is Оә2 пҝҪ1 ПҒ d dПҒ пҝҪ ПҒdвҲҶT dПҒ пҝҪ + d2вҲҶT dz2 пҝҪ = p0eвҲ’ 2ПҒ2 w2 eвҲ’ОҪ1LвҲ’ОҪ2(zвҲ’L),(7) where Оә2 вүҲ 0.6 W/K/m is the thermal conductiv- ity of the diamond-like layer and ОҪ2 вүҲ 1.5 ОјmвҲ’1 is the absorption coefficient. For simplification purpose, we as- sume that the silicon substrate is kept at ambient temper- ature by contacting with a thermostat. This boundary condition was used to successfully analyze experiments in Ref. . To solve these differential equations, we take the Han- kel transform of the above equations in ПҒ and it gives вҲ’Оә1вҲҘu2Оҳ(u, z) + Оә1вҠҘ d2Оҳ(u, z) dz2 = ОҪ1P0(1 вҲ’ R) 2ПҖ eвҲ’ u2w2 8 eвҲ’ОҪ1z, 0 вүӨ z вүӨ L (8) Оә2 пҝҪ вҲ’u2Оҳ(u, z) + d2Оҳ(u, z) dz2 пҝҪ = ОҪ2P0(1 вҲ’ R) 2ПҖ eвҲ’ u2w2 8 eвҲ’ОҪ1LeвҲ’ОҪ2(zвҲ’L), L вүӨ z вүӨ L + h (9) where вҲҶT(ПҒ, z) = пҝҪ вҲһ 0 Оҳ(u, z)J0(ПҒu)udu with J0 being the Bessel function of the first kind. P0 is the power of the incident flux. A correction factor (1 вҲ’ R) implies that only the absorption and transmission component of light play a role in the heating process. The analysis is consistent with a recent work . The reflection is calculated by R = |r13|2. At Пү вүҲ 0.1 eV, except for R вүҲ 0.376 as N = 3, R вүҲ 0.3 when N changes from 0 to 10. By solving Eqs. (8) and (9), one obtains the solutions Оҳ(u, z) = A1(u)e вҲ’ пҝҪ Оә1вҲҘ Оә1вҠҘ uz + B1(u)e пҝҪ Оә1вҲҘ Оә1вҠҘ uz + ОҪ1P0(1 вҲ’ R) 2ПҖ(k1вҲҘu2 вҲ’ Оә1вҠҘОҪ2 1)eвҲ’ u2w2 8 eвҲ’ОҪ1z, 0 вүӨ z вүӨ L (10) 2ПҖОә2(u2 вҲ’ ОҪ2 2)eвҲ’ u2w2 8 eвҲ’ОҪ1LeвҲ’ОҪ2(zвҲ’L), L вүӨ z вүӨ L + h (11) where A1(u), B1(u), A2(u), and B2(u) are parameters determined by boundary conditions вҲ’Оә1вҠҘ вҲӮОҳ(u, z) вҲӮz пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ z=0 = 0, Оҳ(u, LвҲ’) = Оҳ(u, L+), вҲ’Оә1вҠҘ вҲӮОҳ(u, z) вҲӮz пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ z=LвҲ’ = вҲ’Оә2 вҲӮОҳ(u, z) вҲӮz пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ z=L+ , Оҳ(u, z = L + h) = 0. (12) tra of graphene-based systems with several values of graphene plasmon layers calculated using Eqs. (3) and (4). The numerical results indicate the plasmonic peak for a square lattice of three-layers-graphene disks is roughly located at 0.1 eV (вҲј 806 cmвҲ’1), which quantita- tively agrees with experiment in Ref. . The presence of graphene plasmons reduces the transmission of electro- magnetic fields through these systems. An inrease of N blue-shifts the plasmonic resonance and enhances the am- plitude signal in the optical spectra. More mid-infrared optical energy is confined in the system as increasing the layer number of graphene plasmons. The amount of the trapped energy can be indirectly measured via tempera- ture caused by the light-to-heat conversion process. Other parameters can tuned to modify the extinction 4 0.00 0.08 0.16 0.24 0.32 0 20 40 60 80 N = 20 N = 15 N = 10 N = 5 N = 3 2 (%) пҒ·пҖ (eV) N = 1 tems having a graphene-disk array with EF = 0.45 eV and Д§П„ вҲ’1 = 0.03 eV at several numbers of graphene layers. spectrum. Since Оұ(Пү) вҲј D3, a reduction of the diame- ter weakens the in-plane plasmonic coupling among res- onators and lowers the optical peak when fixing a. Sim- ilar behaviors can be observed if the diameter remains unchanged and we increase the lattice period a. Mean- while due to Пғ(Пү) вҲј EF , effects of graphene plasmons on the optical spectrum becomes less important when decreasing EF . To investigate effects of the graphene plasmon layers on the heating of graphene-disk systems, we use Eq. (10), (11) and (12) to calculate the spatial distributions of steady-state temperature when exposed by an infrared laser beam. This laser operates at вҲј 0.1 eV with the in- coming power P0 = 630 ОјW and w = 2.3 Ојm. Numerical results are shown in Fig. 3 for different N. The incident photons are highly localized at the surface and spatially decay towards the bottom of the diamond-like carbon layer. The temperature increase at the hottest spot area (z = 0 and ПҒ = 0) in the case of N = 10 is 45 K, while that of systems having N = 3 and N = 1 are approxi- mately 33 K and 34.5 K, respectively. These tempera- ture rises are much higher than вҲҶT(ПҒ = 0, z = 0) вүҲ 1.67 K for the system without graphene plasmons. This re- sult clearly indicates that the dielectric loss is dominated by the ohmic loss (Joule heating) on graphene resonators under the mid-infrared irradiation. The temperature rise strongly depends on the inci- dent power P0 and the laser spot w. On the basis of Eqs. (10), (11) and (12), one analytically finds that вҲҶT(ПҒ, z) is proportional to P0. This finding is consis- tent with many prior works . For N = 3, our numerical results give вҲҶT(0, 0) = 0.0521P0 and pre- dicts вҲҶT(0, 0) вүҲ 330 K as P0 = 6.3 mW, which is close to вҲҶT вүҲ 365 K . Meanwhile, at fixed in- coming power, an increase of w leads to a decrease of the laser intensity (2P0/ПҖw2). It is well-known that the absorbed optical energy of a plasmonic resonator is ap- -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 z (nm) пҒІ (пҒӯm) N = 1 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 пҒІ (пҒӯm) N = 3 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 (c) (b) пҒІ (пҒӯm) 0.0 9.0 18 27 36 45 N = 10 пҒ„T (K) (a) state temperature rise in Kelvin units in graphene-based sys- illumination of a quantum cascade laser light. proximately 2QabsP0/ПҖw2. This analysis suggests that вҲҶTmax вҲј 1/w2 and/or log10(вҲҶT(0, 0)) is inversely linear to log10(w). This correlation is in a good agreement with numerical calculations. -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 (c) пҒ«2 = 0.6 W/m/K z (nm) пҒІ (пҒӯm) (a) (b) -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 пҒІ (пҒӯm) пҒ«2 = 1.2 W/m/K -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 пҒ«2 = 2 W/m/K пҒІ (пҒӯm) 0.0 11 22 33 пҒ„T (K) state temperature rise in Kelvin units in graphene-based sys- W/m/K, and (c) Оә2 = 2.0 W/m/K under illumination of a quantum cascade laser light. The thermal conductivity of the thin film (Оә2) be- low graphene plasmons has a significant influence on the temperature rise of graphene-based systems. To zeroth- order approximation, we assume a decoupling between Оә2 and Оө2. This assumption may be reasonable since the phonon scattering, which is very important in the lattice thermal conductivity, strongly depends on the interfacial roughness . Effects of the grain boundary on the thermal conductivity is frequency independent . 5 While a prior work indicated that the grain bound- ary does not alter the dielectric and infrared response of a ceramic material at room temperature. Thus, one can modify the grain boundary scattering without changing the dielectric constant of the host material. the system for different values of Оә2 illuminated by the mid-infrared laser light. We use the same laser as the calculations in Figure 3. The object having a larger Оә2 requires more thermal energy to be heated. Thus, the temperature rise is depressed. We have proposed to investigate the plasmonic heating of graphene-based systems under irradiation of a mid- infrared laser. The nanostructures comprise a square ar- ray of multilayer graphene nanodisks deposited on the diamond-like carbon thin film, which is supported by a silicon substrate. We employ the dipole model associ- ated with the random-phase approximation to calculate the polarizability of graphene on the substance and its absorption cross section. From these, the reflection and transmission coefficients are theoretically computed to estimate the confined power of the incident light. Our numerical results are in accordance with experiments . When illuminating the systems by the laser light, plasmonic nanodisks absorb more optical energy than the counterparts without graphene and convert to ther- mal dissipation. This finding indicates that the Ohmic loss is much larger than the dielectric loss in the mid- infrared regime. An increase of graphene plasmonic lay- ers enhances the thermal gradients. At fixed number of graphene layers, the temperature rise is linearly pro- portional to the optical power and decays as the inverse square of the laser spot. Furthermore, a decrease of the heated temperature as increasing the thermal conductiv- ity of the thin film layer is also calcualted and discussed.