Pore Network and Medial Axis Simultaneous Extraction through Maximal Ball Algorithm Mariane Barsi-Andreeta*a,Everton Lucas-Oliveiraa,Arthur Gustavo de Araujo-Ferreiraa,Willian Andrighetto Trevizanb,Tito Jos ́e Bonagambaa aS ̃ao Carlos Institute of Physics,University of S ̃ao Paulo, PO Box 369, 13560-970 , S ̃ao Carlos, SP, Brazil, bCENPES, Petrobras, Rio de Janeiro,RJ, Brazil, *mariane.andreeta@usp.br (Dated: December 11, 2019) Network Extraction algorithms from X-ray microcomputed tomography have become a routine method to obtain pore connectivity and pore morphology information from porous media. The main approaches for this extraction are either based on Max Ball Algorithm or Centerline/Medial Axis Extraction. The first is a robust method to separate the pore space into pore and throats, which provides the pore and throat sizes distributions directly. The second simplifies the medium by thinning the volume into a one voxel wide centerline that preserves the volume’s topological information. Since each method has drastically different implementations, it is not usual to use both to characterize the porous structure. This work presents a method to extract a simplified centerline of porous materials by adding few more steps to the well-established Max Ball algorithm. Results for sandstones and carbonate rock samples show that this Medial-Axis network can be used for single phase flow simulations, as well as preserves the mediums morphology. I. INTRODUCTION Porous space modelling began with the analogy be- tween flow in porous media and a random resistor net- work, idealized by Fatt in 1956, on the endeavor to under- stand the transport properties of porous materials. Since then, this area of research has greatly advanced with the improvement of imaging techniques, which made it possible to recover the morphology of porous media on Benchtop X-ray tomography scanners with resolution higher than 1 μm . The higher resolutions also brought a need for methods to extract information from the huge amount of data. This lead to the development and application of Pore Networks Extraction algorithms not only in the modelling of the pore space of rock and sand, with applications on aquifer management and oil recovery, but also to other applications that emerged, such as the evaluation of cellular materials , trabec- ular bone structure investigation ,the assessment of pore connectivity on lithium battery components and in tortuosity characterization of cement hydrates in high performance concrete . These applications use Pore Network modelling not only to recover macroscopic pa- rameters of transport simulations, but to do morpholog- ical analysis of the media. An intuitive method to quantify the morphology of in- terconnecting channels is the simplification of the volu- metric data through Medial Axis Extraction Algorithms (MA). These algorithms, based on thinning procedures, transforms the volumetric data into a one voxel wide skeleton that allows the quantification of the morpholog- ical parameters as channel tortuosity or diameter vari- ation, preserving the medium’s original topology. The quantification of these features have been used in vari- ous fields, but most commonly in medical applications, for example in the investigation of vascular disease . The main issue with current thinning algorithms is their sensitivity to the surface roughness on the boundary of the void space, therefore making them not well suited for more complex porous materials as rock cores. Even though new methods have been developed with alterna- tives to avoid this issue and preserve the topology of frac- tures [10–12], the algorithms are usually not simple to implement and are still not very wide spread. An alternative to the MA method is the Pore Network Extraction based on the separation of the pore space into two entities: pore bodies (nodes) and the connect- ing throats (edges). Since its development and further improvements, the Maximal-Ball Algorithm (MBA) has become a preferred method of this model of Pore Net- work extraction [13–17]. It is very robust, able to retain the topology and morphology of different mediums, and the concepts behind the algorithm are easy to understand and implement. Examples include applications in shale , gas bubble migration in sediment porous media , and transport properties in sea shallow sediments . The purpose of this work is to describe a method to simultaneously extract the medial axis from the volume as well as the pore-throat network just by adding a few strategic steps to the original MBA extraction. This providential modification in the algorithm provides an alternative to the approach of the medial axis, which, al- though having fewer nodes, can also capture the lengths and curvatures of the paths. The idea is based on the pore-throat chains described on the original MBA algorithm . After the Maximal Balls are found and the Balls representing the pore cen- ters and throat are defined, a pore-throat chain of spheres is built based on the algorithm process of hierarchy. The pore-throat chains are composed by the largest spheres that connect the pore spheres to the throat spheres. By connecting the chains, the final paths will compose a net- arXiv:1912.04759v1 [physics.data-an] 10 Dec 2019 2 network of inscribed spheres is created. Then, the local maxima spheres are identified as pores and through Djikstra’s algorithm, two outputs are generated: medial axis and pore-throat network. work that is a close approximation to the Medial-Axis network of MA algorithms. The network will preserve the medium’s topology, by maintaining the original con- nections and represent the center of the local pore space preserving the medium’s morphology. The main issue with the construction of the pore- throat chains in the MBA is dealing with groups Maximal Balls of same or very similar radii. On the original MBA, this is overcome by a clustering process. Here a new method is proposed solely based on Djikstras’ algorithm for finding shortest paths in weighted graphs [21–23]. The process is based on finding optimum paths between pores by modelling the Maximal Balls as a large weighted network. Djikstras’ algorithm is a well-established algo- rithm with implementation available in most graph pro- cessing packages, being a simple and robust solution for the medial network extraction. The algorithm was tested for different weighting approaches for samples of carbon- ate and sandstones. The Medial-Axis networks were ver- ified for the ability to predict the samples absolute per- meability and the preservation of its morphology. After the Medial-Axis networks were extracted, the networks were further processed to acquire the Pore-Throat Net- works. Since the method is an extension of the MBA, a quick review of the basis of the original algorithm is pre- sented followed by the proposed alterations. For further reading of the original method, the reader should refer to the cited previous works [13–16, 24]. II. ALGORITHM DESCRIPTION The set of voxels in the 3D matrix representation of the porous medium can be divided into two subsets:Vvoid and Vmaterial. The first represents the entire pore space and the second the solid space of the material. The original MBA performs a search on each of the vvoidi ∈ Vvoid voxels and calculates the maximum inscribed sphere Si centered at vvoidi(x,y,z). A sphere is maximum if it is wholly contained in the void space, touches the material surface at least at one point and it is not included in other larger spheres. Next, the spheres are sorted according to their radius, from largest to smallest. Each sphere’s radius is checked and compared to that of its neighbors. If it is the largest of the region it defines a Pore Center. Other spheres that have a connection to the Pore Center Sphere become part of the pore’s body. The spheres that are assigned to two or more pores in this process are defined as throats. This definition is achieved through the algorithm’s hierarchy process. A summary of the basic steps is as follows: 1. Pore space binarization and definition; 2. The pore space is subdivided into maximal in- scribed spheres. A sphere is said to be maximum if it is not contained by any other sphere and touches the volume surface at least at one point; 3. The spheres’ centers with the largest radius in each region is the center of a pore, and a tag is assigned to it; 4. Other spheres that touch a pore sphere, are as- signed the same tag and are said to belong to the pore’s body. This tag is passed through to neigh- boring spheres interactively. This is similar to a breadth-first search on a graph. Each sphere with smaller radius that is connected (overlaps another at some degree) to another with larger radius is given the same tag. This procedure is often com- pared to the pore’s “family name” being passed 3 through to the smaller spheres that compose its volume. 5. If an already tagged sphere is found by one with a different ‘family name’, it is tagged as a throat, or connection between pores. A. Medial-Axis Network Extraction The mapping procedure makes use of the maximal spheres acquired through the MBA algorithm to build a large weighted network, in which the spheres’ centers are the nodes’ positions. In the developed method, the maxi- mum spheres are found by first calculating the Euclidean Distance Transform (EDT) on the volumetric data. The EDT attributes to each voxel vvoidi the minimum dis- tance between vvoidi and all vmaterialk ∈ Vmaterial: EDT(vi void) = min0<k<Nmaterial(∥vi void − vk material∥).(1) The value attributed to each voxel by the EDT is the radius of the maximum inscribed sphere Si at voxel vvoidi (x,y,z). Therefore, at this point, all possible inscribed spheres are “stored” in the volumetric data. The next step is to exclude spheres that are included in larger ones. A sphere Sa is included in a Sb with larger radius Rb, if ∥vi a − vk b ∥ < Rb. (2) A simple approach to directly avoid inclusions is to au- tomatically exclude all voxels that belong to the current sphere’s volume. A voxel vvoidj (x,y,z) belongs to the sphere Si with center coordinates cvoidi (x,y,z) if: ∥v(x, y, z)j − c(x, y, z)i∥ < Ri. (3) The exclusion step tags with the Si’s id all voxels vvoidj that follow the rule of 3, if no tag were previously as- signed to it. This step removes redundant information from the data set, and stores only the maximal spheres’ information. It is important to note that equation 2 al- lows for spheres to overlap to some degree. This fact is used to find the connections between spheres and build the network(Fig. 2). Each node stores its id; position; the sphere’s radius; effective volume; and effective contact area. The effective volume is the number of voxels tagged with the sphere’s id in the exclusion step. The effective contact area is the number of voxels that belong to the effective volume set, but that have at least one neighboring material voxel vmaterial. After the sphere connections network is constructed, the pore nodes are defined by selecting the local max- ima of the network defined by the spheres’ radius, as described before on the original MBA. Then, the Medial Axis network is found by searching for the shortest path between the pore nodes in the complete network. The number of pore nodes used as seeds to find the optimum paths was left as a free parameter on the algo- rithm. The pore nodes are sorted from largest to smallest The construction of the network of regions. Two separate networks are constructed: a network composed of the complete set of spheres (middle image) and a second one composed only of the medial axis spheres (right image). Each node represents a sphere, stores its position,radius,effective volume and effective surface. Each sphere connection to its neighbor is weighted according to the proposed models. by their radii. Then a subset is selected to act as seeds from which the paths to all other pore nodes will be cal- culated. This improves the performance of the method and an evaluation of the impact of the selection of the pore nodes done in the previous step on the Medial-Axis extraction can be made. An additional parameter of the searching process is the cost set on each edge of the final network. The re- sult of the search should be a single path between two pore nodes composed by largest possible spheres, with the least resistance for fluid flow. Therefore, an assump- tion is made that the Medial-Axis network will be well defined by using the spheres’ radius as weighting strategy in the searching process. Three models were tested: Model1 : w(e(i,i+1)) = 1. (4) Model2 : w(e(i,i+1)) = 1/R2 i . (5) Model3 : w(e(i,i+1)) = Li,i+1/R4 i . (6) The first model is to verify this assumption by defining the shortest path as the one with the least number of edges, with no weights applied. The second is based on the cross section area of the inscribed Maximal Ball, and the third is set based on Hagen-Pouseille law, in which Li,i+1 is the distance between two spheres’ centers and Ri is set by selecting one of the spheres of the pair (Fig. 2). The extraction of the Pore-Networks followed the basic steps of the original hierarchy: 1. The spheres are sorted according to their radius (largest to smallest) and given infinite rank; 2. The spheres are divided according to size. Each group contains spheres of the same size; 3. The groups are processed from the largest size to smallest. Starting with the first sphere of the largest group, it passes its name to its smaller neighbors and ranks them one generation younger. 4 4. The spheres left in the group are sorted according to their rank. If the next sphere’s rank is infinite, it is given the tag of pore center, and sets its id as a family name. if not, it transfers the current family name to its smaller neighbors. 5. The same sorting and clustering processes apply for all the groups 6. If a sphere already belonging to a family is given a different family name, it is set as throat, and defines the connection between pores. 7. The process ends after processing all spheres. The diameter and length of the connection is set as twice the throat node’s radius and as the Euclidean dis- tance between the connecting pore centers respectively. This process is similar to the original MBA, but with some point differences. The original algorithm uses a pore merging method not applied here. Although the MBA algorithm is a robust approach to separate the pore space, the roughness of the pore walls may lead to an over estimation of pore nodes. Small variations in diameter due to the surface roughness can lead to a region be- ing separated into many pores. To avoid this issue, a post-processing procedure is applied to merge neighbor- ing pores that have radius similar to the previously found throat node, such as: (ri throat/ri pore) < λforλ, 0 < λ < 1. (7) The throats lengths are also defined differently, by a max- imum pore length. The MBA defines the border between the end of a pore and the start of a throat as the dis- tance between the pore center and the sphere on the pore- throat chain having a radius of 0.7 times its pore’s radius . The throat length lt is defined by subtracting the two pore lengths (li and lj) from the total throat length li,j (the distance from pore i center to pore j center). It was chosen not to do the pore merging process since the Pore-Networks were extracted to be compared to the Medial-Axis Networks of the previous step. In addition the behavior of the model for single phase simulations could be verified with less interference of free parameters, which could lead to implementation errors. Moreover, different choices of λ between implementations of the al- gorithm can provide different results on the pore-throat separation for the same sample, which in turn, could lead to different interpretations of the porous structure. III. VALIDATION AND DISCUSSIONS The method was validated by applying both network extractions to sandstone and carbonate samples presently available on the Imperial College Rock repository [25– 27]. The reason for this choice was so the method could be tested by the community on the same set of sam- ples. Another advantage is they are available already in Name Dimensions Resolution (μm) Porosity Bentheimer 3.0 21.6 Berea 2.25 18.9 C1 2.85 23.3 Estaillades 3.3 12.2 binary form, so possible noise removal steps that could add uncertainty to the results were avoided. And most importantly, the Imperial college repository also provides their extracted networks and simulation results for users to compare. The algorithm was tested on a Estaillades carbonate sample, a carbonate sample named C1 , a Ben- theimer sandstone sample, and finally a Berea sand- stone sample. The Berea sample is the only exception for which the tomography images were acquired by our group on a BrukerTM CT Scanner model SkyScan 1272, with 2.25μm voxel resolution. This sample’s absolute perme- ability was obtained experimentally, and it was added to this work so the network’s results could be compared di- rectly to experimental data. The characteristics of the samples are summarized on table I. The single-phase simulations were performed using OpenPNM and the morphology evaluation using Porespy , both open-source pore network modeling and pore-network extraction tools developed in Python. Wonderful projects that provide well-documented, simple to use and precise tools for pore space network modelling. The proposed model’s algorithm was developed in Python, then transferred to C++ code for better per- formance, as the search for the Maximal Balls and short- est paths through Djikstra Algorithm are run in parallel using Threads. The C++ code makes use of the ITK imaging processing package for reading and saving the data and for the distance transform calculations. The graph modeling was performed using the BoostGraph package.The developed algorithm was run on a Dell pre- cision Tower T7910. A. Medial-Axis Network evaluation The networks were first tested for single-phase flow simulations and the estimation of the absolute perme- ability for the three weighting models. After the connec- tivity of the pore space is recovered through each model, the hydraulic conductivity for each edge is set as: gi,i+1 = (πR4 i )/8μLi,i+1. (8) Li,i+1 is the distance between nodes and Ri is the radius associated to the edge on the complete network construc- tion step. The permeability kd was calculated through Darcy’s law, eq. 9. The subscript d refers to the or- thogonal directions x,y,z of the applied pressure gradient, △Pd = 1Pa. The dynamic viscosity μ was set to 1,0 10-3 5 The Medial-Axis Networks and Pore Networks obtained by the developed extraction methods Pa.s, the dynamic viscosity of water. Dd is the length of the sample on the direction d and Ad was set as the effective area of the cross section of the sample (the area of the outlet pores). kd = (μDd/Ad)Qd/△Pd. (9) The permeability calculated for each model for the four samples is presented on table II. The reported permeabil- ities are either the absolute experimental permeability, or the reported permeabilities presented on the before men- tioned references. Although the permeability are usually presented as one absolute value (the experimental value for the Berea and the reported absolute permeability for Bentheimer and Estallaides samples) , it was chosen to show the calculated permeability for the three directions so a further inspection of the method could be made. The exception is the carbonate sample C1, for which the permeability for the three directions is reported: kx = 785,ky = 1469, kz = 1053. The reported value presented for this sample is the average of the results for the three directions. Model 1, in which no weighting strategy was used, lead to an overestimation of the samples’ permeability for all cases. The ratio of the average measured permeability to the reported varied from 7.8 for the Estaillades to 2.65 for C1. It could be argued that the average of the measured permeabilities is not as representative for the Estaillades sample as it is for the others, since there is large variation between the values observed. Nonetheless, the increase of permeability of model 1 for this sample is evident for all directions of measurement. Sample Model kx ky kz Avg Reported Bentheimer 1 6749 7192 7134 7025 3547 2 3689 3872 3891 3817 3 2604 2805 2775 2728 Berea 1 1878 1830 2370 2026 623 2 944 907 1187 1012 3 674 881 623 726 C1 1 1970 4178 2617 2921 1102 2 1140 2208 1515 1621 3 868 1508 1075 1150 Estaillades 1 3197 395 441 1344 172 2 441 171 210 274 3 616 49 153 272 The change to Model 2, in which the weights of the edges are set as the cross section area, resulted in average permeabilities that are a close approximation to the re- ported ones. The overestimation decreased considerably for the Estaillades sample, resulting in 1.6. However, the variations for Berea and C1 were still relevant. Model 3 seemed to correct even further the overesti- mation of the other models. The ratio of the average to the reported values for C1 and Berea were 1.1 and 1.2 respectively. Comparing to the reported values for each direction of C1, kx = 785,ky = 1469, kz = 1053, the values obtained with model 3 were clearly a better approxima- tion, kx = 868,ky = 1508 and kz = 1075.It is interesting to note that for the Bentheimer sample, model 2 had a 6 Morphology Evaluation of the Medial Networks. better approximation to the reported permeability than model 3. This might be due to the characteristic larger pores of the sample ( Fig. 3). These results imply that defining the shortest path as the path of least fluid flow resistance (Model 3), ensures that it will follow the medial axis of the object, avoiding redundant information that would lead to a representa- tion of the pore space that is not topological equivalent to the true topology. The morphology preservation of the networks of model 3 can be further evaluated by comparing the results from porespy’s local thickness algorithm to the volume weighted radius distribution of the nodes preserved on the Medial-Axis extraction. It is possible to see from the results of Fig. 4 that the networks are representative of the pore space. The deviations for small radii were ex- pected since corners and fractures are not captured in the medial axis method. Another question was the influence of the number of pores used as seeds to find the Medial Axis networks. This influence was tested by sorting the Max Balls identi- fied as pore centers by their radius from largest to small- est. Then the networks were generated using model 3, searching for the smallest paths for an increasing number of pore seeds. The results were that eventually the aver- age permeability value converges for all samples (Fig. 5). This also implies that for a large enough number of pore nodes used as seeds, all the medial axis paths are re- covered, and further searching is not required. Other iterations only recover the same paths again. B. Pore Network evaluation Finally, the Medial Axis networks were further pro- cessed in order to model the Pore-Throat Networks. Both the Medial-Axis approach as well as the Pore Networks Ratio of the average calculated permeability to the expected (reported or measured) permeability of the samples versus the number of pore spheres used as seeds. The pore spheres are the local maxima sorted from the largest to the smallest sphere. dination numbers between pore networks models. PN refers to the proposed model and MB is the classic Maximal Ball model. Sample Network N Pores Mean Coord. Number Bentheimer MB 4.6 PN 2.6 Berea MB 3.9 PN 2.6 C1 MB 2612 3.9 PN 3315 2.9 Estaillades MB 2500 3.6 PN 2612 2.9 are presented on Fig. 3. The pore and throat size’s acquired by the developed method were compared to the pore and throat size’s from the networks extracted by the original Maximal Ball al- gorithm. The results are presented on Fig. 6(a), MB is the original Maximal Ball Network, PN is the version extracted using the Medial Axis. We had good agree- ment in both pore sizes and throat sizes distributions for most samples, even though the proposed method did not apply any restrains on minimum pore size/throat. The exception being the carbonate sample C1, for which the proposed method had the tendency of identifying larger pores and throats. The major differences between the PN and MB net- works were observed on the throat length distributions, Fig. 6(a). The short throat lengths present on the pro- posed model is an effect of choosing not to clear the net- work of small sized pores and not applying the merging technique. This is more evident when we compare the number of pores identified on the PN and MB methods , table III. The pore space is subdivided into more nodes in the 7 Maximal Ball model (MB). 8 out the throat length correction (PN) and corrected version (PNC) in contrast with the calculated permeability of the Medial-Axis Networks. Sample Network kx ky kz Bentheimer Medial 2916 2604 2805 PN 1144 1027 1061 PNC 2595 2284 2392 Berea Medial 722 674 881 PN 301 283 376 PNC 505 468 623 C1 Medial 868 1508 1075 PN 385 668 473 PNC 802 1164 994 Estaillades Medial 616 49 153 PN 258 12 61 PNC 426 24 133 proposed method, leading to more sparse networks, with smaller mean coordination numbers. When MBA merges regions, more distant pores are directly connected, result- ing in higher coordination numbers and longer throats. However, even though the throats length are short in the proposed approach, the modelling of the total length as the distance between pore centers have had a great impact on the permeability estimations, as it is shown on table IV. The result gets far more precise with the correction done in the original MBA, represented by PNC (Pore Network Corrected) in Fig. 6 (b) and on table IV. This effect was surprising, since the distances between pores were already small. The few longer throats lead to an underestimation of the permeability by a factor of almost 2 in most cases. Although only a subtle change can be seen on 6 (b), it had a major impact on the final results. Finally, in terms of performance, the current imple- mentation performed well in comparison to the MBA. The fastest case was for sample C1, in which the distance transform, Maximal Balls and Medial Axis network is found after a few minutes. The processing for the Estail- lades and Bentheimer samples was complete in 4 minutes for 20 seeds and 20 minutes for 1000 seeds. The slowest case was for the Berea sample, which the total processing time took a little more than 60 minutes using 1000 pores nodes as pore seeds. The reason for the slower performance for the Berea sample could be due to the high porosity, sample size and pore sizes. Even though the total porosity is similar, the larger pore sizes found in the Bentheimer sample lead to the complete Maximal Balls network with fewer nodes, the reason why the algorithm performance for this sample was better than for the Berea sample. The memory usage has reached as far 50GB for the Berea sample. However, the algorithm is not completely optimized memory wise. The process uses copies of the complete matrix representing the total volume on the graph modelling step, which could be avoided in the fu- ture. The processing to acquire the Pore-throat Net- works and single phase simulations were done in a Python script, with good performance for all samples. IV. CONCLUSIONS In this work, a new method for the extraction of a Medial Axis Network from the basis of the Maximal Ball Algorithm was presented. The model, which transforms the Maximal Balls into a large network and then searches for the optimum paths, was tested for three different weighting strategies. It was shown that the network with no weights assigned lead to Medial-Axis Networks that overestimate the samples’ absolute permeabilities. The networks found by both weighting strategies of inscribed sphere area and Hagen- Pouseille models gave better results for single phase flow simulations. The comparison to the reported permeabil- ities showed that the Hagen-Pouseille based method was the best suited model for these samples. The morphology of the Medial-Axis networks were further investigated by comparing the diameter variation of the spheres to a lo- cal thickness measurement tool, with good agreement for all cases. Afterwards, the Pore Networks extracted using the re- sults of the Medial-Axis method were compared to the networks acquired through the original Maximal Ball Al- gorithm. The pore size and throat size distributions are very similar between the methods, however the throat lengths are much smaller in the Pore Networks extracted in comparison to the original Max Ball Algorithm. After applying the correction proposed originally in the MBA, the absolute permeability estimation were a fair approx- imation to the expected results. This evaluation of the method is an important insight of the impact of the cho- sen parameters for the network extraction, which should be further investigated in future works. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The group would like to thank Imperial College for making available the samples for testing new methods for porous media analysis. We also would like to thank Dr. Rodrigo Neumann and Professor Dr. Francisco Apare- cido Rodrigues for the insights and all the help. This study was financed in part by the following Brazilian institutions: Coordena ̧c ̃ao de Aperfei ̧coamento de Pes- soal de N ́ıvel Superior - Brasil (CAPES) - Finance Code 001, National Council for Scientific and Technological De- versity of S ̃ao Paulo (USP), and Centro de Pesquisa e De- senvolvimento Leopoldo Am ́erico Miguez de Mello (Cen- pes/Petrobras) (ANP 2014/00389-8,2015/00416-8). 9 I. Fatt, The network model of porous media, 207, 144 Q. Xiong, T. G. Baychev, and A. P. Jivkov, Review of pore network modelling of porous media: Experimen- tal characterisations, network constructions and applica- tions to reactive transport, Journal of Contaminant Hy- drology 192, 101 (2016). C. M. P. Vaz, M. Tuller, P. R. O. Lasso, and S. Crestana, New perspectives for the application of high-resolution benchtop x-ray microct for quantifying void, solid and liquid phases in soils, in Application of Soil Physics in Environmental Analyses: Measuring, Modelling and Data Integration, edited by W. G. Teixeira, M. B. Ced- dia, M. V. Ottoni, and G. K. Donnagema (Springer In- ternational Publishing, Cham, 2014) pp. 261–281. V. Cnudde and M. Boone, High-resolution x-ray com- puted tomography in geosciences: A review of the cur- rent technology and applications, Earth-Science Reviews A.-H. Benouali, L. Froyen, T. Dillard, S. Forest, and F. N’guyen, Investigation on the influence of cell shape anisotropy on the mechanical performance of closed cell aluminium foams using micro-computed tomography, Journal of Materials Science 40, 5801 (2005). A. Mondal, C. Nguyen, X. Ma, A. E. Elbanna, and J. M. Carlson, Network models for characterization of trabec- ular bone, Physical Review E 99, 1 (2019). M. F. Lagadec, R. Zahn, S. M ̈uller, and V. Wood, Topo- logical and network analysis of lithium ion battery com- ponents: The importance of pore space connectivity for cell operation, Energy & Environmental Science 11 Y. Song, C. A. Davy, D. Troadec, and X. Bourbon, Pore network of cement hydrates in a High Performance Con- crete by 3D FIB/SEM — Implications for macroscopic fluid transport, Cement and Concrete Research 115, 308 G. Dougherty and J. Varro, A quantitative index for the measurement of the tortuosity of blood vessels, Medical Engineering and Physics 22, 567 (2000). Z. Jiang, K. Wu, G. Couples, M. I. Van Dijke, K. S. Sorbie, and J. Ma, Efficient extraction of networks from three-dimensional porous media, Water Resources Re- search 43, 1 (2007). Z. Jiang, M. van Dijke, S. Geiger, J. Ma, G. Couples, and X. Li, Pore network extraction for fractured porous media, Advances in Water Resources 371, 280 (2006). X. Li, Z. Jiang, J. Ma, and X. Wang, A pore-skeleton- based method for calculating permeability and capillary pressure, Transport in Porous Media 124, 767 (2018). D. Silin and T. Patzek, Pore space morphology analysis using maximal inscribed spheres, Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 371, 336 (2006). M. J. Blunt, Multiphase Flow in Permeable Media: A Pore-Scale Perspective (Cambridge University Press, H. Dong and M. J. Blunt, Pore-network extraction from micro-computerized-tomography images, Phys. Rev. E F. Arand and J. Hesser (EPR), Accurate and efficient maximal ball algorithm for pore network extraction, Phys. Rev. 47, 777 (1935). A. Q. Raeini, B. Bijeljic, and M. J. Blunt, Generalized network modeling: Network extraction as a coarse-scale discretization of the void space of porous media, Physical Review E 43, 1 (2017). D. Zheng and Z. Reza, Pore-network extraction algo- rithm for shale accounting for geometry-effect, Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering 176, 74 (2019). N. Mahabadi, X. Zheng, T. S. Yun, L. van Paassen, and J. Jang, Gas Bubble Migration and Trapping in Porous Media: Pore-Scale Simulation, Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth 123, 1060 (2018). S ̧ ̈ukr ̈u Merey, Prediction of transport properties for the eastern mediterranean sea shallow sediments by pore net- work modelling, Journal of Petroleum Science and Engi- neering 176, 403 (2019). E. W. Dijkstra, A note on two problems in connexion with graphs, Numerische Mathematik 1, 269 (1959). D. E. Knuth, A generalization of dijkstra’s algorithm, Information Processing Letters 6, 1 (1977). B. Veasey, S. G. M.D., and A. A. Amini, A comparative study of graph search algorithms for segmenting coro- nary arteries from cine angiography, in Medical Imaging 2019: Biomedical Applications in Molecular, Structural, and Functional Imaging, Vol. 10953, edited by B. Gimi and A. Krol, International Society for Optics and Pho- tonics (SPIE, 2019) pp. 418 – 425. A. S. Al-Kharusi and M. J. Blunt, Network extraction from sandstone and carbonate pore space images, Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering 56, 219 (2007). I. C. C. on Pore-scale Modelling, C1 Carbonate 10.6084/m9.figshare.1189257.v1 (2014). B. P. Muljadi, Estaillades carbonate, http://www. digitalrocksportal.org/projects/10 (2015). B. P. Muljadi, Bentheimer sandstone, http://www. digitalrocksportal.org/projects/11 (2015). http://openpnm.org/. http://porespy.org/.