1 Transient and Steady-State Temperature Rise in Three-Dimensional Anisotropic Layered Structures in Pump-Probe Thermoreflectance Experiments Puqing Jiang,1,2,a) and Heng Ban1,2,b) 1Department of Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15261, USA 2Pittsburgh Quantum Institute, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15260, USA ABSTRACT Recent developments of the pump-probe thermoreflectance methods (such as the beam-offset and elliptical-beam approaches of the time-domain and frequency-domain thermoreflectance techniques) enabled measurements of the thermal conductivities of in-plane anisotropic materials. Estimating the temperature rise of anisotropic layered structures under surface heating is critically important to make sure that the temperature rise is not too high to alias the signals in these experiments. However, a simple formula to estimate the temperature rise in three-dimensional (3D) anisotropic layered systems heated by a non-circular laser beam is not available yet, which is the main problem we aim to solve in this work. We first re-derived general formalisms of the temperature rise of a multilayered structure based on the previous literature work by solving the 3D anisotropic heat diffusion equation in the frequency domain. These general formalisms normally require laborious numerical evaluation; however, they could be reduced to explicit analytical expressions for the case of semi-infinite solids. We then extend the analytical expressions to multilayered systems, taking into account the effect of the top layers. This work not only enhances our understanding of the physics of temperature rise due to surface laser heating but also enables quick estimation of the peak temperature rise of 3D anisotropic layered systems in pump-probe thermoreflectance experiments and thus greatly benefits the thermoreflectance experiments in choosing the appropriate heating power intensity for the experiments. a puqing.jiang@pitt.edu b heng.ban@pitt.edu 2 I. INTRODUCTION Thermal conductivity of anisotropic materials is a critical property that impacts their wide applications in modern devices such as microelectronics,1 photonics,2 solar cells,3 thermal barrier coatings4, and thermoelectric modules.5 Accurate measurements of the three- dimensional (3D) thermal conductivity of thin films and small-scale samples were made possible with the recent development of transient techniques including the thermoreflectance methods (time-domain/frequency-domain thermoreflectance, TDTR/FDTR) and the 3Пү method. These techniques have been extensively used to measure the 3D thermal conductivity tensor of both thin films and bulk materials over a wide range of thermal conductivity.6, 7 8-21 The thermoreflectance methods, including both TDTR and FDTR, use a modulated pump laser beam to heat the sample and a second probe beam to detect the surface temperature change via the linear change of the surface reflectance RпҝҪ with temperature, О”RпҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪ О”T. TDTR typically uses ultrafast pulsed lasers (with pulse widths <0.5 ps) and FDTR typically uses continuous-wave (cw) lasers for the measurements. In both cases, the surface temperature rise О”T should not be too high to invalidate the assumption of the linear temperature dependence of RпҝҪ. Besides, since both methods measure the thermal properties of the sample at the base temperature TпҝҪ, the surface temperature rise О”T should not be too high to invalidate the assumption of constant thermal properties in the temperature range of TпҝҪ to TпҝҪ пҝҪ О”T. This is particularly important at low temperatures where the heat capacities have the TпҝҪ temperature dependence. A general guideline is that the steady-state surface temperature rise О”T should not exceed 10 K or 10% of the absolute temperature, whichever is smaller.6, 22 A quick and accurate estimation of the temperature rise in both TDTR and FDTR is thus critically important in choosing an appropriate heating power intensity for the experiments. 3 For the steady-state temperature rise in thermoreflectance experiments, Cahill23 was the first to derive an analytical expression for an isotropic semi-infinite solid, which was later extended to a more general form by Braun et al.24 as 0 2 2 0 1 2 ( ) z r P T k k w w пҒ° пҒ„ пҖҪ пҖ« . (1) Here, PпҝҪ is the averaged laser power absorbed by the sample, kпҝҪ and kпҝҪ are the in-plane and through-plane thermal conductivities of the material, wпҝҪ and wпҝҪ are the 1/e2 radii of the pump and probe laser spots, and О”T is the temperature rise as averaged by the probe beam. While Eq. (1) has been commonly used in both TDTR and FDTR experiments to estimate the steady-state temperature rise, it is limited to axially symmetric cases. Besides, the case of pulsed laser heating in TDTR should be more complicated than Eq. (1), and the peak transient temperature rise in TDTR due to the pulsed laser heating could be much higher than the steady-state temperature rise estimated by Eq. (1), especially at low temperatures where the sample could have a very high in-plane thermal diffusivity kпҝҪ/C. Also, as pointed out by Braun et al.24, the layers and interfaces in multilayered systems could redistribute the heat flux and result in a temperature rise that is different from the one predicted using Eq. (1). A more general formula of the temperature rise for both cw and pulsed laser heating that can apply to multilayered systems with 3D anisotropy is urgently needed. In this work, general formalisms of the peak temperature rise were first re-derived based on the previous literature work for both cw and pulsed laser heating of 3D anisotropic multilayered systems. These general formalisms were then reduced to simple semi-empirical correlations to enable fast and accurate estimation of the peak temperature rise in both FDTR and TDTR experiments. These simple analytical expressions were tested against the general formalisms for several different representative cases and the effect of thin-film layers on the peak temperature rise was discussed. 4 II. GENERAL FORMALISM The heat diffusion process in anisotropic media is governed by the following equation: 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 x y z xy xz yz T T T T T T T C k k k k k k t x y z x y x z y z пӮ¶ пӮ¶ пӮ¶ пӮ¶ пӮ¶ пӮ¶ пӮ¶ пҖҪ пҖ« пҖ« пҖ« пҖ« пҖ« пӮ¶ пӮ¶ пӮ¶ пӮ¶ пӮ¶ пӮ¶ пӮ¶ пӮ¶ пӮ¶ пӮ¶ . (2) Here C is the volumetric heat capacity, and kпҝҪ, kпҝҪ, kпҝҪ, kпҝҪпҝҪ, kпҝҪпҝҪ, kпҝҪпҝҪ are the 6 independent components of the 2nd rank thermal conductivity tensor, which must be symmetric by the reciprocity relation.25, 26 The temperature dependence of the thermophysical properties is ignored for the sake of simplicity. This parabolic partial differential equation could be simplified to a one-dimensional (1D) heat conduction problem in the frequency domain by doing Fourier transforms to the in-plane coordinates and time, ( , , , ) ( , , , ) T x y z t пӮ« пҒ‘ u v z пҒ· . Assuming a surface heat source boundary condition, the surface temperature rise ОҳпҝҪ of a multilayered system could be solved in the frequency domain as ЛҶ ( , , ) ( , , ) ( , , ) s s u v G u v Q u v пҒ· пҒ· пҒ· пҒ‘ пҖҪ , (3) where GпҝҪпҝҪu, v, ПүпҝҪ is the GreenвҖҷs function and QпҝҪпҝҪu, v, ПүпҝҪ is the surface heat flux in the frequency domain. Details on the derivation of the GreenвҖҷs function can be found in Refs. and also Supplementary Information Section S1 for the sake of completeness. We note that the assumption of a surface heat source boundary condition is not always valid due to the optical penetration of the laser beam into the sample. However, for most standard TDTR and FDTR experiments where the samples are coated with a metal transducer layer, most of the heat is absorbed by the thin transducer layer. Assuming the surface heat source boundary condition would only result in slightly higher temperature rise at short delay times (<10 ps) in TDTR but have no effect for the longer delay time range (>10 ps) in TDTR or FDTR. More detailed discussions can be found in Supplementary Information S2. In what 5 follows, we continue to derive the temperature rise expressions under the assumption of a surface heat source boundary condition. For the case of cw laser heating in FDTR, the surface heat flux is пҖЁ пҖ© 2 2 0 1 0 0 2 2 2 ( , , ) exp 2 cos cw x y x y x y q x y t P P t w w w w пҒ· пҒӘ пҒ° пғ© пғ№ пғҰ пғ¶ пҖҪ пҖӯ пҖ« пҖ« пҖ« пғ© пғ№ пғӘ пғә пғ§ пғ· пғ« пғ» пғ§ пғ· пғӘ пғә пғЁ пғё пғ« пғ» . (4) Here x w and y w are the 2 1 e radii of the pump laser spot in the x and y directions, respectively; PпҝҪ and PпҝҪ are the amplitudes of the offset component and the periodic heating power [in Watts] absorbed by the sample, with PпҝҪ пҝҪ PпҝҪ; ПүпҝҪ is the modulation frequency, and ПҶпҝҪ is an arbitrary phase shift. Fourier transform of Eq. (4) gives its frequency-domain expression as пҖЁ пҖ© пҖЁ пҖ© пҖЁ пҖ© 0 0 2 2 2 2 2 2 0 0 0 1 ( , , ) 2 exp exp 2 2 2 y cw x s i i v w u w Q u v e e P P пҒӘ пҒӘ пҒ° пҒ° пҒ· пҒ° пҒӨ пҒ· пҒ· пҒӨ пҒ· пҒ· пҒӨ пҒ· пҖӯ пғҰ пғ¶ пғҰ пғ¶ пҖҪ пҖӯ пҖӯ пӮҙ пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғЁ пғё пғЁ пғё пғ© пғ№ пҖӯ пҖ« пҖ« пҖ« пғӘ пғә пғ« пғ» . (5) The case of pulsed laser heating in TDTR would be a little more complicated, with the surface heat flux expressed as пҖЁ пҖ© 2 2 0 1 0 0 2 2 2 0 2 rep 2 ( , , ) exp 2 cos ( ) 0.94 exp 2.77 pulsed x y x y s p n p x y q x y t P P t w w w w t nT t f пҒ· пҒӘ пҒ° пҒҙ пҒҙ пӮҘ пҖҪпҖӯпӮҘ пғ© пғ№ пғҰ пғ¶ пҖҪ пҖӯ пҖ« пҖ« пҖ« пӮҙ пғ© пғ№ пғӘ пғә пғ§ пғ· пғ« пғ» пғ§ пғ· пғӘ пғә пғЁ пғё пғ« пғ» пғ© пғ№ пғҰ пғ¶ пҖӯ пҖӯ пҖӯ пғӘ пғә пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғӘ пғә пғЁ пғё пғ« пғ» пғҘ . (6) This is a train of pulses with Gaussian distribution in time and space, modulated by a sinusoidal function at frequency пҒ· 0. The laser pulses have a full duration at half maximum (FDHM) of p пҒҙ . The laser repetition rate is frep with a period of Ts=1/frep, and tпҝҪ is an arbitrary time shift of laser pulses. Similarly, the frequency-domain surface heat flux for the case of pulse laser heating could be obtained from the Fourier transform of Eq. (6) as: 6 пҖЁ пҖ© пҖЁ пҖ© пҖЁ пҖ© 2 2 2 0 0 0 2 2 2 2 2 2 0 0 0 1 ( , , ) 2 exp exp 2 2 2 s p s y pulsed x s n i i in t s s s n v w u w Q u v n e n e P n P e e пҒ· пҒҙ пҒӘ пҒӘ пҒ· пҒ° пҒ° пҒ· пҒ° пҒӨ пҒ· пҒ· пҒ· пҒӨ пҒ· пҒ· пҒ· пҒӨ пҒ· пҒ· пҖӯ пӮҘ пҖӯ пҖӯ пҖҪпҖӯпӮҘ пғҰ пғ¶ пғҰ пғ¶ пҖҪ пҖӯ пҖӯ пӮҙ пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғЁ пғё пғЁ пғё пғ¬ пғј пғ© пғ№ пҖӯ пҖӯ пҖ« пҖӯ пҖ« пғҜ пғҜ пҖӯ пҖ« пғӯ пғҪ пғӘ пғә пғ« пғ» пғҜ пғҜ пғ® пғҫ пғҘ . (7) The surface temperature rise of the layered structure can thus be obtained by doing an inverse 2D Fourier transform of Eq. (3) as пҖЁ пҖ© 1 ЛҶ ( , , ) ( , , ) ( , , )exp 2 ( ) 2 s x y t Q u v G u v i ux vy i t dudvd пҒұ пҒ· пҒ· пҒ° пҒ· пҒ· пҒ° пӮҘ пӮҘ пӮҘ пҖӯпӮҘ пҖӯпӮҘ пҖӯпӮҘ пҖҪ пҖ« пҖ« пғІ пғІ пғІ . (8) For the case of cw laser heating, the time-varying surface temperature rise is пҖЁ пҖ© пҒ» пҒҪ пҖЁ пҖ© 0 0 2 2 2 2 2 2 0 2 2 2 2 2 2 ( ) 1 0 ЛҶ ( , , ) ( , ,0)exp exp exp 2 ( ) 2 2 ЛҶ Re ( , , ) exp exp exp 2 ( ) 2 2 y x y i t x v w u w x y t P G u v i ux vy dudv v w u w P G u v e i ux vy dudv пҒ· пҒӘ пҒ° пҒ° пҒұ пҒ° пҒ° пҒ° пҒ· пҒ° пӮҘ пӮҘ пҖӯпӮҘ пҖӯпӮҘ пӮҘ пӮҘ пҖ« пҖӯпӮҘ пҖӯпӮҘ пғҰ пғ¶ пғҰ пғ¶ пҖҪ пҖӯ пҖӯ пҖ« пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғЁ пғё пғЁ пғё пғҰ пғ¶ пғҰ пғ¶ пҖ« пҖӯ пҖӯ пҖ« пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғЁ пғё пғЁ пғё пғІ пғІ пғІ пғІ . (9) Here the symbol ReпҝҪ пҝҪ represents the real part of a complex number. For the case of pulsed laser heating, it would be пҖЁ пҖ© пҒ» пҒҪ 2 2 2 0 2 2 2 0 0 2 2 2 2 2 2 ( ) 0 2 2 2 ( ) 1 0 ЛҶ ( , , ) ( , , )exp exp exp 2 ( ) 2 2 ЛҶ Re ( , , ) exp exp 2 s p s s p s n y in t t x s n n in t t i t x s v w u w x y t P e e G u v n i ux vy dudv u w P e e G u v n e пҒ· пҒҙ пҒ· пҒ· пҒҙ пҒ· пҒ· пҒ° пҒ° пҒұ пҒ· пҒ° пҒ° пҒ° пҒ· пҒ· пӮҘ пҖӯ пӮҘ пӮҘ пҖӯ пҖӯпӮҘ пҖӯпӮҘ пҖҪпҖӯпӮҘ пҖӯ пҖӯ пғ¬ пғј пғҰ пғ¶ пғҰ пғ¶ пғҜ пғҜ пҖҪ пҖӯ пҖӯ пҖ« пғ§ пғ· пғӯ пғҪ пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғЁ пғё пғҜ пғҜ пғЁ пғё пғ® пғҫ пғҰ пғ¶ пҖ« пҖ« пҖӯ пҖӯ пғ§ пғ· пғЁ пғё пғҘ пғІ пғІ пҖЁ пҖ© 2 2 2 exp 2 ( ) 2 y n v w i ux vy dudv пҒ° пӮҘ пӮҘ пӮҘ пҖӯпӮҘ пҖӯпӮҘ пҖҪпҖӯпӮҘ пғ¬ пғј пғҰ пғ¶ пғҜ пғҜ пҖ« пғ§ пғ· пғӯ пғҪ пғ§ пғ· пғҜ пғҜ пғЁ пғё пғ® пғҫ пғҘ пғІ пғІ (10) The first terms of Eqs. (9) and (10) are the steady-state temperature rise induced by the constant offset component of the heat flux, and the second terms of Eqs. (9) and (10) are the steady periodic temperature oscillation induced by the modulated component of the surface heat flux. laser heating with the same averaged heating power of PпҝҪ пҝҪ 10 mW and the same amplitude of the periodic heating power as PпҝҪ пҝҪ 10 mW. Here the pulsed laser has a repetition rate of 7 fпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ 80 MHz and a pulse width of П„пҝҪ пҝҪ 0.5 ps. Figure 1(b) shows that although the averaged power of the pulsed laser is only 10 mW, the instant laser power could be as high as 300 W due to the ultrashort widths of the laser pulses. of a 100 nm Al/Si two-layered system as a function of time under both cw and pulsed laser heating, whose power profiles are shown in Fig. 1 (a, b). The subplots (1c-1e) are for the system at 300 K (with kпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ 200 W/mK, CпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ 2.34 MJ/mпҝҪK, kпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ 140 W/mK, CпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ 1.6 MJ/mпҝҪK) and the subplots (2c-2e) are for the system at 70 K (with kпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ 80 W/mK, CпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ 0.77 MJ/mпҝҪK, kпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ 1680 W/mK, CпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ 0.35 MJ/mпҝҪK). The laser spot size was fixed as wпҝҪ пҝҪ wпҝҪ пҝҪ 5 Ојm and the modulation frequency was chosen as 5 MHz for both cases. The blue curves in Fig. 1 are for the pulsed laser heating and the red shadowed regions represent the cw laser heating. We note that in TDTR experiments the signals in the short delay time range 0-80 ps are usually excluded from being fitted by the thermal model prediction because data in this delay time range are complicated by heat transport processes in the transducer layer and are not important for extracting thermal properties of the substrate. Therefore, for the time-varying temperature rise of pulsed laser heating, the data in the delay time range 0- 80 ps after each pulse were omitted for the sake of clarity. 8 the same averaged heating power of PпҝҪ пҝҪ 10 mW and the same amplitude of oscillating heating power of PпҝҪ пҝҪ 10 mW. (c-e) The peak temperature rise (located at x пҝҪ y пҝҪ z пҝҪ 0) ОёпҝҪпҝҪ, ОёпҝҪпҝҪ, and Оё пҝҪ ОёпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ ОёпҝҪпҝҪ of a 100 nm Al/Si system as a function of time at different temperatures of 300 K (subplots 1c вҖ“ 1e) and 70 K (subplots 2c вҖ“ 2e) heated by both a pulsed laser (the blue curves) and a cw laser (the red shadowed region). The heating power, laser spot size, and modulation frequency are all kept the same for both cases. For the case of pulsed laser heating, the data in the delay time range 0-80 ps after each pulse were omitted for the sake of clarity. As shown in Fig. 1 (c-e), the temperature rise of the sample consists of a steady-state component ОёпҝҪпҝҪ induced by the constant offset component of the surface heat flux and a periodic oscillating component ОёпҝҪпҝҪ induced by the modulated component of the surface heat flux. The amplitude of ОёпҝҪпҝҪ is always smaller than or equal to that of ОёпҝҪпҝҪ. For the pulsed laser 9 heating, the temperature rise consists of a pulse accumulation component, which has an amplitude similar to that of the cw laser heating, and a transient component induced by each pulse heating event, whose amplitude decreases approximately exponentially with the delay time after the pulse heating event. The transient component of the temperature rise at a short delay time could be much higher than that of the cw laser heating, especially at low temperatures where the sample has a high in-plane thermal diffusivity kпҝҪ/C. For example, for the case shown in Fig. 1 (2e), Eq. (1) estimates a steady-state temperature rise of ~0.47 K for the Si substrate. However, the transient temperature rise in TDTR at a delay time of 80 ps would vary in the range 0-80 K, as shown in Fig. 1 (2e). The commonly used rule of thumb that вҖңthe steady-state temperature rise should not exceed 10 K or 10% of the absolute temperatureвҖқ 6, 22 is thus not valid here. Therefore, it would be insufficient to only estimate the steady-state temperature rise based on Eq. (1) in TDTR experiments. In what follows, we will develop simple analytical expressions for quick estimation of the full temperature rise for both cw and pulsed laser heating. These analytical expressions also help us identify the key parameters affecting the temperature rise and better understand the correlations among them. III. ANALYTICAL EXPRESSIONS FOR THE PEAK TEMPERATURE RISE OF SEMI-INFINITE SOLIDS The general formalisms derived above (Eqs. (9) and (10)) could be reduced to explicit analytical expressions for the simple case of a semi-infinite solid with an orthogonal thermal conductivity tensor (kпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ kпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ kпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ 0), for which the GreenвҖҷs function is пҖЁ пҖ© 2 2 2 1 ЛҶ( , , ) 4 z z x y G u v iC k k k u k v пҒ· пҒ· пҒ° пҖҪ пҖ« пҖ« . (11) 3.1 Peak temperature rise of a semi-infinite solid induced by cw laser heating Plugging Eq. (11) into Eq. (9) and setting x пҝҪ y пҝҪ 0, the spatially peak temperature rise of a semi-infinite solid under cw laser heating is expressed as: 10 пҖЁ пҖ© пҖЁ пҖ© пҖЁ пҖ© пҖЁ пҖ© пҖЁ пҖ© пҖЁ пҖ© 0 2 2 2 2 2 2 cw 0 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 2 2 2 0 exp 2 exp 2 2 exp 2 exp 2 + Re 4 x y z x y x y i t z z x y u w v w P dudv k k u k v u w v w P e dudv iC k k k u k v пҒ· пҒ° пҒ° пҒұ пҒ° пҒ° пҒ° пҒ· пҒ° пӮҘ пӮҘ пҖӯпӮҘ пҖӯпӮҘ пӮҘ пӮҘ пҖӯпӮҘ пҖӯпӮҘ пҖӯ пҖӯ пҖҪ пҖ« пғ¬ пғј пҖӯ пҖӯ пғҜ пғҜ пғӯ пғҪ пҖ« пҖ« пғҜ пғҜ пғ® пғҫ пғІ пғІ пғІ пғІ . (12) The first term of Eq. (12), which is due to the constant offset component of the cw laser heating, can be expressed as cw 0 dc 2 0 , 2 z r P w k k пҒұ пҒё пҒ° пҖҪ (13) with the anisotropy correction factor ОҫпҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪ expressed as пҖЁ пҖ© 2 2 2 2 0 0 2 2 exp ( ) 2 2 w u v w dudv u v пҒ° пҒў пҒў пҒё пҒЎ пҒў пҒ° пҒЎ пҒЎ пӮҘ пӮҘ пҖӯпӮҘ пҖӯпӮҘ пғ© пғ№ пҖӯ пҖ« пғҰ пғ¶ пғ« пғ» пҖҪ пғ§ пғ· пғЁ пғё пҖ« пғІ пғІ . (14) Here the anisotropy parameters are defined as Оұ пҝҪ пҝҪkпҝҪ/kпҝҪ, ОІ пҝҪ wпҝҪ/wпҝҪ, and the averaged in-plane thermal conductivity and laser spot size are defined as kпҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪkпҝҪkпҝҪ and wпҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪwпҝҪwпҝҪ, respectively. The anisotropy correction factor ОҫпҝҪОұ/ОІпҝҪ is a function of solely Оұ/ОІ and is plotted out as the solid curve in Fig. 2. It could also be approximated as ОҫпҝҪОұ/ОІпҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪвҲҡпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ, which has an error of <2% if Оұ/ОІ is in the range 0.1 пҝҪ Оұ/ОІ пҝҪ 10 and an error of ~10% if 0.01 пҝҪ Оұ/ОІ пҝҪ 100, as shown by the dashed curve in Fig. 2. If the anisotropy is too large with Оұ/ОІ пҝҪ 100 or Оұ/ОІ пҝҪ 0.01, a slightly different correlation ОҫпҝҪОұ/ОІпҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ.пҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ.пҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪ could be used instead to approximate Оҫ with an error <5%, as shown by the dash-dotted curve in Fig. 2. 11 and ОІ пҝҪ wпҝҪ/wпҝҪ. The solid curve is the accurate numerical result of Eq. (14). The dashed and dash-dotted curves are the approximations. When Оұ пҝҪ ОІ which gives Оҫ пҝҪ 1, Eq. (13) becomes identical to Eq. (1) if the probe laser spot size wпҝҪ in Eq. (1) is set to be 0. Note that the temperature rise derived here is the peak value induced by the pump heating and is independent of the probe spot size, whereas the temperature rise derived by Cahill23 and Braun et al.24 was the value averaged by the Gaussian profile of the probe beam. In the limit wпҝҪ вҶ’ 0, the probe beam detects only the peak temperature induced by the pump heating. In what follows, we focus only on the peak temperature rise induced by the pump beam; therefore, the laser spot sizes wпҝҪ and wпҝҪ in the correlations represent the 1/eпҝҪ radii of only the pump laser spot in the x and y directions, respectively. If the probe-averaged temperature rise is desired instead, simply set wпҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪwпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪ wпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ and wпҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪwпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪ wпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ in the correlations, where wпҝҪпҝҪ and wпҝҪпҝҪ are for the pump laser spot and wпҝҪпҝҪ and wпҝҪпҝҪ are for the probe laser spot. Equation (13) suggests that the steady-state temperature rise of the semi-infinite solid is proportional to both the heat flux and the square-root of the heated area, Оё вҲқ пҝҪ" пҝҪ вҲҡA, where A is the heated area and k пҝҪ пҝҪkпҝҪkпҝҪ is the averaged thermal conductivity. Therefore, even 12 under the continuous heating of a constant heat flux without any heat loss, a steady-state temperature rise could still be established in the semi-infinite solid if the heated area is finite. On the other hand, for the case of 1D uniform heating with an infinitely large heated area, the surface temperature rise would be Оё пҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪ" пҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪ вҲқ вҲҡt, where t is the heating time,27 in which case a steady state could never be established. The second term of Eq. (12), which is due to the heating by the modulated component of the cw laser heat flux, is oscillating with time with a constant amplitude in the fully established state. To understand how the heating frequency affects the amplitude of the steady periodic temperature oscillation, we plot in Fig. 3 the ratios between the amplitudes of the periodic temperature oscillation at different heating frequencies and the steady-state temperature rise as solid curves, assuming PпҝҪ пҝҪ PпҝҪ. We find that the temperature rise ratios mainly depend on the normalized laser spot size wпҝҪ пҝҪ wпҝҪ/пҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ , where wпҝҪ and kпҝҪ are the averaged laser spot size and in-plane thermal conductivity defined as wпҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪwпҝҪwпҝҪ and kпҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪkпҝҪkпҝҪ, respectively. The amplitude of the steady periodic temperature oscillation of the semi-infinite solid is always less than or equal to its steady-state temperature rise under the same amplitude of heating power. When wпҝҪ вүӘ пҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ where the heat flow is highly three- dimensional, the amplitude of the periodic temperature oscillation approaches the steady-state temperature rise. On the other hand, with wпҝҪ вү« пҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ the heat flow would be one- dimensional in the z-direction; in this case, the amplitude of the periodic temperature oscillation approaches zero. 13 temperature rise of a semi-infinite solid plotted as a function of normalized laser spot size for different anisotropy ratios Оұ/ОІ. The solid curves are the accurate numerical results and the dashed curves are the empirical correlation predictions (Eq. (15)). The in-plane anisotropy in both the thermal conductivity Оұ пҝҪ пҝҪkпҝҪ/kпҝҪ and laser spot size ОІ пҝҪ wпҝҪ/wпҝҪ also affect the amplitude of periodic temperature oscillation, as shown in Fig. 3. We come up with an empirical correlation for the ratio between the amplitude of the periodic temperature oscillation at the frequency ПүпҝҪ and the steady-state temperature rise of a semi- infinite solid under cw laser heating as cw cw ac dc 0 0 1 1 2 r C w k пҒё пҒұ пҒұ пҒ· пҒ° пҖ« пҖҪ пғҰ пғ¶ пҖ«пғ§ пғ· пғЁ пғё . (15) Predictions by the correlation Eq. (15) are plotted as the dashed curves in Fig. 3 and they compare quite well with the accurate numerical results if 0.01 пҝҪ Оұ/ОІ пҝҪ 100. In sum, the peak temperature rise of a semi-infinite solid under modulated cw laser heating could be estimated as 14 1 cw 0 0 1 0 2 0 1 1 2 2 r z r C P P w k w k k пҒё пҒ· пҒұ пҒё пҒ° пҒ° пҖӯ пҖ« пғ¬ пғј пғ© пғ№ пғҰ пғ¶ пғҜ пғҜ пғӘ пғә пҖҪ пӮұ пҖ« пғ§ пғ· пғӯ пғҪ пғ§ пғ· пғӘ пғә пғЁ пғё пғҜ пғҜ пғ« пғ» пғ® пғҫ . (16) The пҝҪ sign represents the range of the temperature oscillation due to the modulated heating. Note that the steady-state temperature rise due to cw laser heating depends only on the averaged thermal conductivity k пҝҪ пҝҪkпҝҪkпҝҪ but not the heat capacity of the material. Although the oscillating part of the temperature rise depends on the heat capacity, the amplitude of the oscillating part of the temperature rise is always less than or equal to the steady-state temperature rise. Therefore, the heat capacity of the material does not place a constraint on the temperature rise in FDTR experiments. The situation, however, is different in TDTR experiments, where a pulsed laser is used for the heating and the heat capacity could play a significant role in the transient temperature rise, see details below. 3.2 Peak temperature rise of a semi-infinite solid induced by pulsed laser heating Plugging Eq. (11) into Eq. (10) and setting x пҝҪ y пҝҪ 0, the spatially peak temperature rise of a semi-infinite solid under the heating of a train of modulated laser pulses is expressed as: пҖЁ пҖ© пҖЁ пҖ© пҖЁ пҖ© пҖЁ пҖ© пҖЁ пҖ© пҖЁ пҖ© 2 2 2 0 2 2 2 0 0 2 2 2 2 2 2 ( ) pulsed 0 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 ( ) 1 2 2 2 0 exp 2 exp 2 ( ) 4 exp 2 exp 2 + Re ( ) 4 s p s s p s n x y in t t n s z z x y n x y in t t i t s z z x y u w v w P e e dudv iC n k k k u k v u w v w P e e e du iC n k k k u k v пҒ· пҒҙ пҒ· пҒ· пҒҙ пҒ· пҒ· пҒ° пҒ° пҒұ пҒ· пҒ° пҒ° пҒ° пҒ· пҒ· пҒ° пӮҘ пҖӯ пӮҘ пӮҘ пҖӯ пҖӯпӮҘ пҖӯпӮҘ пҖҪпҖӯпӮҘ пҖӯ пҖӯ пғ© пғ№ пҖӯ пҖӯ пғӘ пғә пҖҪ пғӘ пғә пҖ« пҖ« пғ« пғ» пҖӯ пҖӯ пҖ« пҖ« пҖ« пғҘ пғІ пғІ n dv пӮҘ пӮҘ пӮҘ пҖӯпӮҘ пҖӯпӮҘ пҖҪпҖӯпӮҘ пғ¬ пғј пғ© пғ№ пғҜ пғҜ пғӘ пғә пғӯ пғҪ пғӘ пғә пғҜ пғҜ пғ« пғ» пғ® пғҫ пғҘ пғІ пғІ . (17) The first term of Eq. (17) is due to the offset component of the pulsed laser heating, an example of which is shown as the blue curves in Fig. 1 (1d, 2d). This temperature rise comprises a constant component due to the pulse accumulation and a transient component due to the heating by each pulse. If the pulse repetition rate fпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ вҶ’ вҲһ, the pulse accumulation would approach the cw laser heating and the transient temperature rise due to each pulse would approach zero. Although Eq. (17) is hard to be reduced further but requires numerical 15 evaluation, after analyzing the numerical results of some representative cases, we come up with the following semi-empirical correlation for the first term of Eq. (17) as 1 1 pulsed 0 0 dc 2 2 2 2 2 0 0 0 0 1.1 1 25 1 16 1 2 r r d rep rep z d z r P P k k t w C f w C f w k Ct w k k пҒё пҒұ пҒё пҒ° пҒё пҒ° пҒ° пҒ° пҖӯ пҖ« пҖӯ пғ© пғ№ пғҰ пғ¶ пғҰ пғ¶ пғӘ пғә пҖҪ пҖ« пҖ« пҖ« пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғӘ пғә пғЁ пғё пғЁ пғё пғ« пғ» . (18) Here tпҝҪ is the time after each pulse heating event. More details on deriving this semi- empirical correlation can be found in Supplementary Information Section S3. The first term of Eq. (18) is the pulse accumulation ОёпҝҪпҝҪ,пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ and the second term is the transient component ОёпҝҪпҝҪ,пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ due to the individual pulse heating events. The empirical correlation Eq. (18) has been tested against 1000 randomly chosen cases, with kпҝҪ, kпҝҪ, kпҝҪ independently and randomly varying in the range of 0.5-5000 W/mK, C varying in the range of 0.001-10 MJ/m3K, and wпҝҪ, wпҝҪ independently and randomly varying in the range of 1-100 Ојm. The tested anisotropy kпҝҪ/kпҝҪ and Оұ/ОІ have covered a wide range from 10пҝҪпҝҪ to 10пҝҪ. This correlation was found to be accurate with an error of <3% for tпҝҪ пҝҪ 100 ps if the dimensionless factor ОҫwпҝҪпҝҪCfпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ/kпҝҪ пҝҪ 3, which could be met in most cases in TDTR experiments. If ОҫwпҝҪпҝҪCfпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ/kпҝҪ пҝҪ 3 or if tпҝҪ is too large (e.g., tпҝҪ пҝҪ 1 ns) so that the three- dimensional heat flow dominates, the simple expression of Eq. (18) would cause a larger error on some special occasions but is still generally within 50% of the target values in estimating the temperature rise due to the pulsed heating, see Supplementary Information Section S4 for more details on the validation of this correlation. From Eq. (18), we can see that the steady-state temperature rise due to pulse accumulation mainly depends on пҝҪ" пҝҪ вҲҡA, and the transient temperature rise mainly depends on пҝҪ" пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ in the short tпҝҪ range, where eпҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪkпҝҪC is the through-plane thermal effusivity. The ratio wпҝҪ/пҝҪkпҝҪ/fпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ tпҝҪC is the key factor that determines the relative magnitudes of the pulse- 16 accumulation temperature rise and the transient pulse temperature rise: with wпҝҪ вү« пҝҪkпҝҪ/fпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ tпҝҪC the pulse-accumulation temperature rise would dominate over the transient pulse temperature rise; on the other hand, if wпҝҪ вүӘ пҝҪkпҝҪ/fпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ tпҝҪC , the transient pulse temperature rise could be much higher than the pulse-accumulation temperature rise. A more detailed proof of this statement can be found in Supplementary Information Section S5. Therefore, only estimating the steady-state temperature rise would be insufficient in TDTR experiments especially when measuring materials with high in-plane thermal diffusivities kпҝҪ/C, an example of which is shown in Fig. 1 (2d). The second term of Eq. (17) is more complicated since the modulation frequency ПүпҝҪ is non-zero. For the modulated pulsed laser heating, the temperature rise ОёпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ also contains a pulse accumulation component ОёпҝҪпҝҪ,пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ and a transient component due to the pulse heating event ОёпҝҪпҝҪ,пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ , both periodically varying with time, an example of which is shown as the blue curves in Fig. 1 (1c, 2c). After analyzing the numerical results of 7000 randomly chosen cases with the modulation frequency varying in the range 10 Hz вҖ“ 10 MHz, we recommend the following empirical correlations to estimate the amplitudes of ОёпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ: пҖЁ пҖ© 10 1 1 pulsed pulsed 0 0 0 1 ac dc,accum 0 1 0.1log (4 ) 0 pulsed 0 1 dc,trans 0 0 10 1 4 1 5 2 2 2 1 1 log (4 ) 2 d rep r rep t f d rep r w C P P k f C P w P t f k пҒё пҒё пҒ· пҒ· пҒұ пҒұ пҒ° пҒ° пҒ° пҒ· пҒ° пҒ· пҒұ пҒ° пҖӯ пҖӯ пҖ« пҖӯ пҖӯ пҖӯ пҖӯ пғ© пғ№ пғ© пғ№ пғҰ пғ¶ пғӘ пғә пҖҪ пҖ« пғӘ пҖ« пғә пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғӘ пғә пғӘ пғә пғЁ пғё пғ« пғ» пғ« пғ» пғҰ пғ¶ пғҰ пғ¶ пғҰ пғ¶ пғ§ пҖ« пҖӯ пҖ« пҖ« пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пҖӯ пғЁ пғё пғЁ пғё пғЁ пҖӯ1 пғ© пғ№ пғӘ пғ· пғә пғӘ пғә пғ·пғё пғӘ пғә пғ« пғ» . (19) The temperature oscillating range by the pulsed heating could thus be estimated as ОёпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ ОёпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ ОёпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ. The validity of Eq. (19) has been tested against the 7000 random cases, see more details in Supplementary Information Section S6. As a demonstration, we used the analytical expressions Eqs. (16, 18, 19) to estimate the peak temperature rise of a Si semi-infinite substrate heated at 300 K and 70 K and compare 17 them in Fig. 4 with the accurate numerical evaluations. The laser power was assumed to be absorbed on the surface of the Si substrate. This assumption is necessary here only to evaluate the analytical expressions but is admittedly not physically sound for Si, considering the very small extinction coefficient of Si at most wavelengths. More related discussions can be found in Supplementary Information S2. For the pulsed heating, the temperature rise was evaluated at a delay time tпҝҪ of 80 ps. All the other conditions are the same as those for Fig. 1. The shadowed regions in Fig. 4 represent the estimations using the analytical expressions and the curves are the numerical evaluations. The excellent agreement between the analytical estimations and accurate numerical evaluations proves the validity of these analytical expressions. laser (a, c) and a modulated pulsed laser (b, d) on the surface at different temperatures of 300 K (a, b) and 70 K (c, d). The averaged heating power is 10 mW and the laser spot size is 5 Ојm for all the cases. The curves are the numerical results and the shadowed regions represent the estimations using the analytical expressions. The symbols in (b, d) represent the numerical values of the temperature rise evaluated at tпҝҪ пҝҪ 80 ps after each pulse. It would be interesting to compare the temperature rises in Fig. 4 to those in Fig. 1 (1e, 2e). Both temperature rises are evaluated under the same conditions, except that the system 18 for Fig. 1 is 100 nm Al/Si whereas the system for Fig. 4 is a bare Si substrate. Comparison between Fig. 4 and Fig. 1 (1e, 2e) shows that the 100 nm Al layer on top of the Si substrate has little effect on the peak temperature rise of the system at 300 K but would increase the peak temperature rise by ~5 times at 70 K. The top layers could thus have different effects on the peak temperature rise of multilayered systems in different situations and should be carefully evaluated to accurately estimate the peak temperature rise of multilayered systems. V. EFFECT OF TOP LAYERS ON THE PEAK TEMPERATURE RISE IN LAYERED STRUCTURES The case of multilayered systems is more complicated than the semi-infinite solid mainly because the thin films could act as in-plane heat spreaders, making the heat flux intensity on the surface of the underlying layers different from the one originally supplied on the surface of the first layer. The in-plane heat spreading effect would be larger if the films have a larger kпҝҪh, where h is the film thickness. Assuming a linear temperature gradient across the thin films (which could overestimate the temperature rise if the films are too thick to invalidate this assumption), the peak temperature rise of an n-layered system could be estimated as: 1 1 1 0 1 -layered sub,dc 1 1 1 1 1 1 sub,ac 1 2 1 1 2 1 1 i i n n i i n n n r i n i i n i x y z i r z x y n r i n i i i x y z i r z x y k h P h w w k G k k w w k h h P w w k G k k w w пҒұ пҒұ пҒ° пҒұ пҒ° пҖӯ пҖӯ пҖӯ пҖҪ пҖҪ пҖӯ пҖӯ пҖӯ пҖҪ пҖҪ пғ© пғ№ пғҰ пғ¶ пғӘ пғә пғ§ пғ· пғҰ пғ¶ пғӘ пғә пғ§ пғ· пҖҪ пҖ« пҖ« пҖ« пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғӘ пғә пғ§ пғ· пғЁ пғё пғӘ пғә пғ§ пғ· пғЁ пғё пғ« пғ» пғ© пғ№ пғҰ пғ¶ пғӘ пғә пғ§ пғ· пғҰ пғ¶ пғӘ пғә пғ§ пғ· пӮұ пҖ« пҖ« пҖ« пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғӘ пғә пғ§ пғ· пғЁ пғё пғӘ пғә пғ§ пғ· пғЁ пғё пғ« пғ» пғҘ пғҘ пғҘ пғҘ , (20) where hпҝҪ is the thickness of the i-th layer, GпҝҪ is the interface thermal conductance between the i-th and the next layers, ОёпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ,пҝҪпҝҪ and ОёпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ,пҝҪпҝҪ are the temperature rise of the semi-infinite substrate evaluated using Eqs. (16, 18, 19). 19 As a demonstration of Eq. (20), we use this equation to calculate the peak temperature rise of two representative three-layered systems: 1) 100 nm Al/50 nm SiO2/Si substrate, and 2) 100 nm Ti/200 nm Si/SiO2 substrate, for both modulated cw and pulsed laser heating. In the first system, the middle layer has a thermal conductivity much lower than the substrate and therefore could incur a significant amount of temperature drop across the film. In the second system, the middle layer has a thermal conductivity much higher than the substrate and therefore should act as an in-plane heat spreader, significantly reducing the heat flux intensity on the surface of the substrate. In the evaluation, the heating power was fixed as PпҝҪ пҝҪ PпҝҪ пҝҪ 10 mW and an elliptical laser spot with wпҝҪ пҝҪ 5 Ојm and wпҝҪ пҝҪ 10 Ојm was used for both cases. The interface thermal conductance was assumed as G пҝҪ 300 MW/mпҝҪK for all the interfaces. The thermal conductivities and heat capacities of all the layers used in the calculation are summarized in Supplementary Information Table S1 in Section S7. The estimated temperature rises are compared with the numerical solutions in Fig. 5, where the shadowed regions represent the estimations using the analytical expressions, and the curves are the accurate numerical evaluation of the time-varying peak temperature rises of the systems. The excellent agreement between our estimations and the accurate numerical results, as shown in Fig. 5, proves the validity of our semi-empirical correlation Eq. (20). This correlation generally works well but could overestimate the temperature rise when the films are too thick to invalidate the assumption of a linear temperature gradient across the films, for example, in the case of Fig. 5 (a, b). 20 and a 100 nm Ti/200 nm Si/SiO2 substrate (c, d) heated by a modulated cw laser (a, c) and a modulated pulsed laser (b, d). The averaged heating power is 10 mW and the laser spot size is wпҝҪ пҝҪ 5 Ојm and wпҝҪ пҝҪ 10 Ојm for all the cases. The curves are the accurate numerical results and the shadowed regions represent the estimations using the analytical expressions. The symbols in (b, d) represent the numerical values of the temperature rise evaluated at tпҝҪ пҝҪ 80 ps after each pulse. V. CONCLUSIONS In summary, we provide simple semi-empirical correlations for quick and accurate estimation of both the steady-state and transient temperature rise of 3D anisotropic multilayered systems heated by either a cw or a pulsed laser beam. General formalisms of the time-varying temperature rise of 3D anisotropic multilayered systems were first re-derived based on the previous literature work for both modulated cw and pulsed laser heating, the evaluation of which, however, requires laborious numerical calculations. We then extract simple semi-empirical correlations of the peak temperature rise of semi-infinite solids from the accurate numerical values of several thousand random cases. These correlations were further extended to multilayered systems, taking into account both the temperature drop across the thin films and their in-plane heat spreading effect. These semi-empirical 21 correlations have been found to work well within the assumption of a linear temperature gradient across the thin films; otherwise, the temperature rise could be overestimated. These simple semi-empirical expressions not only serve the purpose of estimating the maximum temperature rise of 3D anisotropic layered systems in pump-probe thermoreflectance experiments and thus greatly benefits these experiments in choosing the appropriate heating power intensity for the experiments but also enhances our understanding of the physics of temperature rise of multilayered systems under both cw and pulsed laser heating. SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL See supplementary material for the derivation of the GreenвҖҷs function, the discussion on the effect of optical penetration, the derivation of Eq. (18), the validation of correlations Eqs. (18, 19), and a table of properties for the cases in Fig. 5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS P.J. acknowledges the financial support by the R.K. Mellon Postdoctoral Fellowship. DATA AVAILABILITY The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.