Gate-Tunable Graphene Hall Sensors with High Magnetic Field Sensitivity Brian T. Schaefer1, Lei Wang2, Alexander Jarjour1, Kenji Watanabe3, Takashi Taniguchi3, Paul L. McEuen1,2, and Katja C. Nowack1,2* 1Laboratory of Atomic and Solid-State Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA 2Kavli Institute at Cornell for Nanoscale Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA 3National Institute for Materials Science, 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba 305-0044, Japan *To whom correspondence should be addressed: kcn34@cornell.edu Solid-state magnetic field sensors are important to both modern electronics and fundamental materials science. Many types of these sensors maintain high sensitivity only in a limited range of temperature and background magnetic field, but Hall-effect sensors are in principle able to operate over a broad range of these conditions. Here, we fabricate and characterize micrometer-scale graphene Hall sensors demonstrating high magnetic field sensitivity from liquid-helium to room temperature and in background magnetic field up to several Tesla. By tuning the charge carrier density with an electrostatic gate, we optimize the magnetic field sensitivity for different working conditions. From measurements of the Hall coefficient and the Hall voltage noise at 1 kHz, we estimate an optimum magnetic field sensitivity of 80 nT Hz-1/2 at 4.2 K, 700 nT Hz-1/2 at room temperature, and 3 μT Hz-1/2 in 3 T background magnetic field at 4.2 K. Our devices perform competitively with the best existing Hall sensor technologies at room temperature, outperform any Hall sensors reported in the literature at 4.2 K, and demonstrate high sensitivity for the first time in a few Tesla applied magnetic field. 1 arXiv:1912.12678v1 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 29 Dec 2019 Hall-effect sensors are attractive for a variety of applications ranging from position detection in robotics1 and tracking nanoparticles in biological systems2 to fundamental studies of magnetism3 and superconductivity4–6. Combining a versatile fabrication process and straightforward measurement scheme, Hall sensors provide an accessible means of performing non-invasive measurements of small magnetic fields. In an ideal Hall-effect sensor, the deflection of electric current in an out-of-plane magnetic field B produces a transverse (Hall) voltage response VH = BI/(ne), where I is the bias current, n is the two-dimensional charge carrier density, and e is the electron charge7,8. This voltage response and the Hall voltage noise SV1/2 determine the magnetic field sensitivity SB1/2 = SV1/2/(∂VH/∂B). The fundamental limit for the noise performance is thermal Johnson noise, which is proportional to the square root of the device resistance, and the total noise typically has contributions from instrumentation noise, flicker noise, and random telegraph noise8–11. The desired combination of a large voltage response and low Johnson noise suggest a material system with low carrier density and high carrier mobility. Whereas carrier mobility decreases at low carrier density in most semiconductor-based two-dimensional electron systems12, in graphene the mobility is enhanced at low carrier density in the absence of long-range impurity scattering13. Recently, encapsulation in hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) has enabled access of this low-density, high-mobility regime14. Here, we fabricate Hall sensors from encapsulated graphene and exploit tuning the carrier density via electrostatic gating to maintain high sensitivity under different operating conditions, including for the first time in a high background magnetic field. We demonstrate that these graphene devices are, depending on the operating regime, comparable to or better than the most sensitive Hall sensors reported in the literature. devices (black markers) with measurements for leading Hall sensors in the literature. We include work that both reports noise spectra and specifies micrometer-scale device dimensions2,8–10,15–20. The quantity SB1/2 multiplied by the square root of the measurement bandwidth is the smallest detectable change in magnetic field, typically reported at kHz frequencies. We choose a reference frequency of 1 kHz to avoid contributions from random telegraph noise dominant at lower frequency (see Figure 4 and accompanying discussion). The noise performance of Hall sensors depends strongly on the material and size of the device. Previous work shows that SB1/2 for a given material and fabrication procedure scales approximately as w-1 with the width w of the active Hall sensor area15,16. Devices with similar performance fall along the dashed diagonal lines of constant SB1/2w in Figure 1. The best-performing devices minimize SB1/2w, combining low noise and small size. We find that our devices fall into the bottom left corner, outperforming any other sensor reported in the literature at low temperature. They also perform competitively with the best sensors made from InSb18 and hBN-encapsulated graphene8 at room temperature. Furthermore, even the sensitivity in high applied magnetic field is still competitive with most leading sensors characterized at zero magnetic field. To our knowledge, no reports of operating a micrometer-scale Hall sensor with high sensitivity in large magnetic field has been reported in the literature so far. 2 Each of our devices (Figure 2a) is fabricated on a silicon substrate and consists of exfoliated monolayer graphene encapsulated with hBN gate dielectrics14 and few-layer graphite (FLG) gate electrodes21–23 assembled using a dry-transfer technique (see Supporting Information for fabrication details). The combination of low charged defect density in hBN and the ability of FLG to screen charged impurity disorder in the silicon substrate improves carrier mobility, reduces the charge inhomogeneity, and can reduce charge noise in graphene devices21–25. The top graphite gate tunes the carrier density in the active region of the device, while the silicon back gate dopes the contacts to high electron density, lowering the contact resistance and voltage noise (see Supporting Information, Figure S2). In principle only a top graphite gate is needed, but our best-performing device (D1 in Figure 1) includes a lower graphite gate as well (see Supporting Information, Figure S2 for details on additional devices). We first evaluate the electronic quality of our devices at low background magnetic field and low temperature in a liquid-helium cryostat. We bias the device with a small ac current I and measure the two-point (V2p) and Hall (VH) voltages using standard low-frequency lock-in techniques while applying top gate voltage Vg to tune the carrier density (Figure 2a,b). From a series of gate sweeps at fixed magnetic field B up to 100 mT (see Supporting Information, Figure S1), we determine the panel). At gate voltages near the charge neutrality point (CNP), the coexistence of electrons and holes makes the Hall voltage nonlinear in magnetic field26. Elsewhere, RH ~ n-1 ~ Vg-1 assuming a simple capacitive coupling of the gate to the mobile carrier density7,13. Extrapolating the electron and hole densities to zero reveals that electrons and holes appear to reach charge neutrality at different Vg. This is consistent with contributions to the charging behavior of the graphene sheet from the quantum capacitance13,27 and additional charge traps with non-constant capacitance7, which become significant because of the large gate capacitance and small charge inhomogeneity in our devices. The maximum (minimum) value of RH for electron (hole) doping 240 kΩ/T (−340 kΩ/T) implies a smallest mobile carrier density δn ~ 2.6 × 109 cm-2 (−1.8 × 109 cm-2) limited by intrinsic charge inhomogeneity. Moreover, the width of the peak in the two-point resistance R2p = V2p/I (Figure 2c, lower panel) implies a charge inhomogeneity ~ 4 × 109 cm-2. This low amount of charge inhomogeneity is consistent with the best reported devices using atomically smooth single-crystal graphite flakes as gate electrodes22,23. Next, we characterize the voltage response as a function of applied dc current bias up to 50 μA. The Hall voltage response to a small change in magnetic field δB is δVH = IRHδB, suggesting that applying a larger bias current in principle proportionally increases the voltage signal. In practice, a large dc bias causes two changes in the transport characteristics of the devices (Figure 3): the peak RH decreases and the CNP gate voltage Vg0 shifts. The direction of the shift depends on the polarity of the applied current. These changes are consistent with a potential gradient and resulting carrier density gradient across the device27,28 (see Supporting Information, Figure S3). This 3 modifies the average RH within the Hall cross and limits its peak value. Despite the reduction in peak RH, applying larger bias current still increases the absolute voltage sensitivity IRH = (∂VH/∂B)B=0 (Figure 3b), giving a larger change in Hall voltage per unit change in magnetic field. To determine the magnetic field sensitivity reported in Figure 1, we measure the noise performance of the devices alongside the voltage response. We measure fluctuations in the Hall voltage in real time (Figure 4a) and take the Fourier transform to arrive at the Hall voltage noise spectral density SV1/2 (Figure 4b) (see Supporting Information for details). At low bias, 60 Hz and preamplifier input noise dominate the SV1/2 spectrum (Figure 4c). The shape of the noise spectra at higher bias suggest the presence of both flicker noise11,29 (1/f noise; SV1/2 ~ f -1/2) and random telegraph noise30 (RTN; SV1/2 constant at low frequency, SV1/2 ~ f-1 at high frequency), as reported previously in micrometer-scale Hall sensors9,10 and graphene-based devices31. Flicker noise originates most likely from random charging and discharging events of an ensemble of charge traps, while RTN is characteristic of a single charge trap more strongly coupled to the device29. These charging events can induce fluctuations in both the carrier mobility and carrier density which are prominent in graphene-based devices at low carrier density9,11,29,32. Charge fluctuations that modulate the contact resistance and defect states in the substrate or etched edges of the device can couple strongly into the voltage noise, especially near charge neutrality where charge fluctuations are poorly screened11,32. We find that the behavior of the RTN changes between successive cooldowns and under different conditions of current bias and gate voltage, suggesting that it arises here from a single charged impurity strongly coupled to the device (see Supporting Information, Figure S4). this frequency, we avoid RTN dominant at lower frequencies; at higher frequencies, the noise is limited by the instrumentation noise floor, making the gate voltage dependence less apparent. bias current, the increase in the voltage signal above the instrumentation noise floor is favorable over the reduction of RH at large bias current. Notably, the minimum SB1/2 does not occur at the same value of Vg at which RH peaks. This indicates that the optimum working point of the Hall probe balances tuning away from the CNP to reduce SV1/2 and tuning close to the CNP to increase RH. The minimum value, SB1/2 ~ 80 nT Hz-1/2 at 1 kHz (lowermost point in Figure 1), is to our knowledge the smallest magnetic field noise ever reported in a micrometer-scale Hall sensor at 4.2 K. At room temperature, repeating the Hall coefficient and Hall voltage noise measurements (see larger, but still competitive with the best Hall sensors reported in the literature (see Figure 1). Finally, we characterize the magnetic field sensitivity in a large magnetic field. To our knowledge this has not been reported for any leading micrometer-scale Hall sensors. In a large applied 4 magnetic field, the Hall resistance develops plateaus (Figure 5a) spaced by Δ(VH/I)-1 = 4e2/h as expected for monolayer graphene in the quantum Hall regime13. At 5 μA dc current bias, these plateaus onset at ~500 mT. The deviation of the resistance plateaus from precise quantization is caused by the large bias current and the wide, extended Hall voltage contacts in our device (Figure 2a), which mix a significant fraction of the longitudinal resistance into the Hall resistance33. The corresponding to the resistance plateaus. At high magnetic field (Figure 5d), the resistance plateaus flatten, and RH drops completely to zero. Repeating measurements of the Hall voltage noise as described above, at 3 T we obtain SB1/2 ~ 3 μT Hz-1/2 at optimum carrier density tuning (Figure 5d, Vg ~ 0.8 V). The higher noise compared to measurements at zero field is a result of both the reduced RH and a general increase in voltage noise in large background magnetic field, which is correlated with large longitudinal magnetoresistance and may also be attributed to charge fluctuations between localized and extended quantum Hall states34,35. In summary, we show that hBN-encapsulated monolayer graphene combined with few-layer graphite gates is an excellent material system for micrometer-scale Hall sensors. Because our devices are gate-tunable, we can optimize the magnetic field sensitivity over a large range of both temperature and magnetic field. We anticipate that optimization of the measurement itself (e.g. through lower noise pre-amplification) will further improve the reported sensitivities in the future. In addition to enabling high sensitivity, the dry-transfer fabrication process offers the flexibility to fabricate Hall sensors directly on top of materials of interest2,3,6. In the future, incorporation of these devices in a scanning probe will enable the imaging of magnetic fields over a range of temperatures and magnetic fields not accessed with a single probe to date. This imaging technique will provide a new window into a range of condensed matter systems including unconventional superconductors across their magnetic field-temperature phase diagram, magnetic-field-tuned phases of matter, and electric currents in regimes of electronic transport that appear at high temperature and magnetic field. 5 Acknowledgements The authors thank Menyoung Lee for useful discussions and Jeevak Parpia for contributing equipment for the low-temperature measurements. The authors also acknowledge the technical support of Greg Stiehl, Ruofan Li, Boyan Penkov, Vincent Genova, Jeremy Clark, and Eric Smith. This work was primarily supported by the Cornell Center for Materials Research with funding from the NSF MRSEC program (DMR-1719875). This work was performed in part at the Cornell NanoScale Science & Technology Facility (CNF), a member of the National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure (NNCI), which is supported by the National Science Foundation (Grant NNCI-1542081). This work was also performed in part at the Columbia Nano Initiative Clean Room. Growth of hexagonal boron nitride crystals was supported by the Elemental Strategy Initiative conducted by the MEXT, Japan and the CREST (JPMJCR15F3), JST. B.T.S. acknowledges support from the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant No. DGE-1650441. Author contributions B.T.S. fabricated the devices and performed the measurements, with support from L.W. and A.J. K.W. and T.T. synthesized the hexagonal boron nitride crystals. P.L.M. and K.C.N. supervised the project. B.T.S. and K.C.N. wrote the manuscript, with input from L.W. and P.L.M. Competing interests The authors declare no competing financial interest.