Pressure-induced superconductivity and structural transition in ferromagnetic Cr2Si2Te6 Wanping Cai1, Hualei Sun1,*, Wei Xia2, Changwei Wu1, Ying Liu3, Jia Yu1, Junjie Yin1, Hui Liu1, Yu Gong4, Dao-Xin Yao1, Yanfeng Guo2, and Meng Wang1,# 1School of Physics, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510275, China 2School of Physical Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai 201210, China 3Xi’an Mordern Chemistry Research Institute, Xi’an, 710065, China 4Beijing Synchrotron Radiation Facility, Institute of High Energy Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China Abstract: The discovery of intrinsic magnetism in atomically thin two-dimensional transition-metal trichalcogenides has attracted intense research interest due to the exotic properties of magnetism and potential applications in devices. Pressure has proven to be an effective tool to manipulate the crystal and electronic structures of the materials. Here, we report investigations on ferromagnetic van der Waals Cr2Si2Te6 via high-pressure synchrotron x-ray diffraction, electrical resistance, Hall resistance, and magnetoresistance measurements. Under compression, Cr2Si2Te6 simultaneously undergoes a structural transition, emergence of superconductivity at 3 K, sign change of the magnetoresistance, and dramatic change of the Hall coefficient at ~8 GPa. The superconductivity persists up to the highest measured pressure of 47.1 GPa with a maximum Tc = 4.5 K at ~30 GPa. The discovery of superconductivity in the two-dimensional van der Waals ferromagnetic Cr-based Cr2Si2Te6 provides new perspectives to explore superconductivity and the interplay between superconductivity and magnetism. Main article: Layered structural materials have been a fertile playground to investigate mechanisms of fundamental physics and explore potential applications1–14. The copper oxide and iron based high temperature superconductors (HTcs) with strong electronic correlation and weak magnetic exchange interactions between layers attracted intensive research in the past decades because of the emergence of unconventional superconductivity (SC) and intimate interplay of magnetism and SC15,16. Another family of materials with two-dimensional (2D) layers linked by van der Waals (vdW) forces has received growing attention, owning to the diversity of the system, for example, nonmagnetic transition-metal dichalcogenides MX2 (M = Mo, W, and X = S17,18, Se19, and Te20,21), antiferromagnetic (AFM) FePY3 (Y = S22, Se23), ferromagnetic (FM) CrZTe3 (Z = Si9, Ge25) and CrI32,26. This family also has extraordinary properties including thermoelectricity28, large magnetoresistance (LMR)21, intrinsic magnetic order even down to monolayer2, etc. These exotic discoveries motivate further scientific and engineering explorations on the 2D vdW family. Pressure is an ideal tool to tune crystal and electronic structures as well as magnetism without simultaneously introducing any disorders29,30. Previous high-pressure studies have found insulating- metal transition (IMT), structural transition, and spin-crossover in AFM FePY3 (Y = S, Se), and emergence of SC in FePSe322,23. For nonmagnetic 2D vdW WTe2 with LMR, SC has also been observed above ~10 GPa without a structural transition20,21. Regarding the search for SC, it is of great interest for FM materials because the FM compounds may host spin-triplet SC as observed in Sr2RuO431 and UTe232– 35. In the pursuit of SC in FM materials, Cr2Si2Te6 is an ideal member of the 2D vdW FM insulators24. It exhibits a 2D Ising FM order with moments of 2.73 μ" per Cr3+ and TN = 32 K lying ferromagnetically along the c axis36,37. The Cr3+ ions have the electronic configuration of 4s03d3, and the octahedral environment splits the d levels in the t2g and eg manifolds. According to the Hund’s rule, the Cr3+ is in the S = 3/2 state with three polarized electrons in the 3 t2g orbitals38,39. We note that SC has been observed in CrAs under pressure40 and A2Cr3As3 (A = alkali metals) at ambient pressure41, where the Cr3+ ions exhibit similar spin configuration. In this work, Cr2Si2Te6 was investigated via in situ high-pressure synchrotron x-ray diffraction (XRD) and electrical resistance in diamond anvil cells (DAC) with pressure up to 47.1 GPa. We found that a pressure-induced structure transition occurs at ~7 GPa, and SC appears concomitantly. The superconducting transition temperature Tc expands from ~3 − 4.5 K in the pressure range from 8.0 to 47.1 GPa, where the highest pressure we achieved. At the pressure of the structural transition, there are a sign change from negative to positive of the magnetoresistance (MR) and an abrupt change of the Hall coefficient, indicating a reconstruction of the Fermi surfaces. A temperature-pressure (T-P) phase diagram is established. Results Pressure-induced structural transition. Cr2Si2Te6 has a 2D honeycomb layered structure, which is formed by edges sharing CrTe3 octahedra. Each Cr3+ ion is octahedrally coordinated by six nearest neighbor Te atoms, as shown in Fig. 1a. The Cr3+ ions are arranged in a nearly perfect honeycomb lattice staked along the c axis. Figures 1b and 1c display measurements of XRD and magnetic susceptibility on single crystals of Cr2Si2Te6. The results reveal high quality of our sample and a FM ordered temperature of TN = 32 K that is consistent with previous reports7,9. From the XRD patterns under pressure in Figs. 2a and 2b, it is obvious to see a phase transition from the discontinuous shifts of the diffraction peaks at Q = (0 0 6), (1 1 3), and (1 1 6). The structure transition occurs at approximately 7 GPa. The low-pressure (LP) phase retains the ambient pressure crystal structure of R-3 up to 8 GPa, then evolves into a high-pressure (HP) phase. The XRD patterns with limited peaks under high pressure prevent us to refine the corresponding structure precisely. We notice that Cr2Ge2Te6 undergoes a structural transition from R-3 to R3 under pressure42. The reflection pattern of Cr2Si2Te6 at high pressure could be fitted by the R3 structure with preferred orientation. We adopted the R3 structure to fit the HP phase of Cr2Si2Te6. The determined volume and lattice constants are plotted in Figs. 2c and 2d. Pressure-induced insulator-metal transition and superconductivity. Figures 3a-3d show the typical temperature dependence of electrical resistance for single crystals of Cr2Si2Te6 measured in a DAC in the pressure range of 1.0 − 47.1 GPa. At ambient pressure, Cr2Si2Te6 is suggested to be a Mott insulator with an indirect gap of 0.4 eV and a direct gap of 1.2 eV. Upon applying a pressure of 1.0 GPa, a hump in resistance appears, yielding an IMT at Thump = 69 K (Fig. 3b). The transition temperature Thump evolves to the higher temperature upon increasing pressure. At pressures above 5 GPa, Thump moves out of the measured temperature range, demonstrating that Cr2Si2Te6 becomes a metal. Interestingly, with further increasing pressure, an abrupt drop in resistance appears at ~8.0 GPa, demonstrating the emergence of SC. The data in Fig. 3c show clear pressure-induced SC with zero resistance starting from 9.1 GPa and persisting up to 47.1 GPa which is the highest pressure we achieved in our measurement. The SC transition temperature Tc is 3.3 K at 9.1 GPa, defined by the intersection of the tangent to the resistance curve during the transition process and the straight-line fit of the normal state above the transition. The Tc reaches 4.0 K at 19.5 GPa. For higher pressures above 26.0 GPa, the SC transitions are broadened, and the transitions with zero resistance have a clear trend moving to lower temperatures. At 43.8 GPa, the resistance does not reach zero at 2 K. However, the temperature of the drop in resistance is close to the maximum Tc. To determine the upper critical field Hc2, we present temperature dependence of the resistance at 19.5 GPa under different magnetic fields in Fig. 3d. The Tcs are clearly suppressed by magnetic field. Zero resistance could not be observed at 3 and 4 T because the lowest temperature we could reach in our experiment is 2 K. The Ginzburg-Landau formula is adopted to fit the experimental data, yielding Hc2 = 4.0 T (Fig. 3e). An elaborate temperature-pressure phase diagram. We summarize the data extracted from the pressure dependent XRD and resistance in a temperature-pressure (T-P) phase diagram as presented in Fig. 3f. Before the structural transition, the insulating FM ground state undergoes an IMT. Our detailed measurements suggest that the FM order and ordered temperature TN persist closely to the structural transition. The SC appears simultaneously as the structural transition, where the FM order may not survive (Supplementary figures). Pressure-induced sign change of magnetoresistance. Previous studies have reported that Cr2Si2Te6 exhibits a negative magnetoresistance (MR) at ambient pressure24. The MR is related to the topology of Fermi surfaces and would have connections to SC. To study the pressure dependence of the MR, we measured magnetic field dependence of the resistance under fixed pressures at 10 K, as shown in Fig. 4a. The results reveal a dramatic change of the MR below 9.1 GPa and a negative to positive sign change of the MR at the pressure where the structural transition happens. The MR in the high-pressure range is positive and stable (Fig. 4b). Pressure and field dependences of the Hall coefficient. Figure 4c shows magnetic field dependence of the Hall resistance in the pressure range of 6.1 − 30.0 GPa. At pressures below 10 GPa, clear kinks appear on the Hall resistance Rxy. The Hall coefficients RH are fitted in the low field (LF) range of 0 − 0.3 T and high field (HF) range of 0.5 − 1.0 T, respectively. The sign change of the RHs from positive in LF to negative in HF for the pressures at 6.1, 7.0, and 8.0 GPa demonstrates that the majority carriers change from holes to electrons as increasing magnetic field, indicating a Lifzshift of the Fermi surfaces induced by magnetic field. For high pressures (P > 10 GPa), the negative RHs for the LF and HF merge together gradually, revealing the majority carriers are electrons in the normal state of the SC phase. The densities of electrons estimated from the Hall coefficients change from ~1019 to 1022 cm-3 under pressure. Discussion Cr2Si2Te6 and FePSe3 have the same honeycomb lattice formed by the edge sharing octahedral centered by 3d metal ions Cr3+ or Fe2+, respectively. Cr2Si2Te6 is a FM insulator, where the electrical configuration of Cr3+ ions is governed by the Hund’s rule coupling11,38. The SC emerging coincides with the structural transition. Both the MR and Hall coefficient have clear changes as the phase transition. In contrast, FePSe3 is an AFM insulator. Under pressure, SC appears concomitantly with a spin-crossover. Although mechanisms of the SC in AFM FePSe3, FM Cr2Si2Te6, and nonmagnetic WTe2 are unclear, the superconducting state is in the vicinity of the ground states for the 2D vdW materials. Keeping the spin configuration S = 0 for the SC phase of FePSe3 in mind, the Fe2+ ions are nonmagnetic and differ from that of the iron-based superconductors. Although the spin configuration of Cr3+ in the SC state of Cr2Si2Te6 need to depict, the similarities of the SC in various in-plane honeycomb structures and vdW coupled lattices suggest a close relationship between the SC and structure. In addition, the discovery of SC in the Cr-based honeycomb lattice Cr2Si2Te6 under pressure, together with the SC in CrAs under pressure40 and one-dimensional K2Cr3As3 at ambient pressure41, establishes a broad of Cr-based superconductors that could be used to explore SC and exotic physics. Methods Material synthesis and characterization. Bulk single crystals were grown by the flux method. The samples have been characterized previously. The single crystal XRD data at ambient pressure were taken at a single crystal x-ray diffractometer with the Cu Kα (λ = 0.1542 nm) radiation. The magnetization was measured by a Quantum Design physical property measurement system (PPMS). High-pressure structural characterization. In situ high-pressure XRD patterns were collected at room temperature on the 4W2 beam line at Beijing Synchrotron Radiation Facility. The X-ray has the energy of 20 keV (λ=0.6199Å) and the diffraction patterns were recorded by using a PILATUS detector with exposure times of about 300 s. Powder samples were ground from single crystals at room temperature. A symmetric DAC with a pair of 400 μm diameter culet-sized diamond anvils was used for the in situ high pressure measurements. A steel gasket was pre-indented to 40 μm in thickness and the corresponding sample chamber with 150 μm in diameter was drilled by laser. A pre-compressed Cr2Si2Te6 pellet was loaded in the middle of the sample chamber. Silicone oil was used as the pressure transmitting medium and the pressure in the diamond anvil cell was determined by measuring the shift of the fluorescence wavelength of the ruby spheres that were placed inside the sample chamber. The data were initially processed by using the Fit2d software43 (with a CeO2 calibration) and the subsequent refinements were calculated with Le Bail method using GSAS software44,45. High-pressure transport measurements. In situ high-pressure electrical resistance measurements on Cr2Si2Te6 single crystals were carried out using a miniature DAC made from Be-Cu alloy and a PPMS. Diamond anvils with 400 μm culet were used, and the corresponding sample chamber with 150 μm in diameter were made in the insulating gasket. The gasket was achieved by a thin layered of cubic boron nitride and epoxy mixture. NaCl powders were employed as a pressure transmitting medium. Pressure was calibrated by using the ruby fluorescence shift at room temperature46. The standard four-probe technique was adopted in these measurements. The Cr2Si2Te6 single crystals were cleaved along the ab plane with a typical size of 100×100×20 μm3. viewed along (a) the a axis and (b) c axis, respectively. The dashed line in (a) indicates a unit cell. The view in (b) shows the honeycomb lattice. (c) Experimental and indexed XRD pattern measured on an exfoliated surface of a single crystal, as shown in the inset image. (d) Temperature dependence of the magnetization of Cr2Si2Te6 on a single crystal under field cooling (FC) and zero field cooling (ZFC) modes in a magnetic field of 2000 Oe applied along the c axis and ab plane, respectively. patterns under pressures from 1.1 GPa to 26.9 GPa. A clear structural transition takes place at ~7 GPa. As increasing pressure, the diffraction peaks become weaker and broadened. (b) Two- dimensional XRD data showing abrupt changes for the (006), (113), and (116) peaks of Cr2Si2Te6. The wavelength of the x rays is λ = 0.6199 Å. (c) The derived cell volume values as a function of applied pressure for the low pressure (LP) and high pressure (HP) phases of Cr2Si2Te6. Insets show schematic views of the crystal structures at the LP and HP with the red, blue, and yellow globes representing the Cr, Si, and Te atoms, respectively. (d) Cell parameters of the LP and HP phases as a function of pressure. Temperature dependence of the resistance at pressures from 1.0 to 13.1 GPa shown on a logarithm scale. The arrows mark the humps in resistance. The inset is a photo of the sample and electrodes in the DAC. (b) Selected resistances at 1.0, 2.0, 4.0, and 8.0 GPa on a linear scale, showing the evolution of the IMT as functions of pressure and temperature. Superconductivity emerges at 8.0 GPa. (c) A zoom of the temperature dependence of resistances at pressures from 9.1 to 47.1 GPa, demonstrating SC occurs at ~3 − 4 K. (d) Superconducting transitions at 19.5 GPa under various magnetic fields. (e) The upper critical field Hc2 as a function of temperature at 19.5 GPa. The solid line represents a Ginzburg-Landau (GL) fitting. (f) A temperature-pressure phase diagram. The IMT and superconducting transition temperatures were determined from the resistance measurements on two samples. The structural (str.) transition pressure was measured with XRD at room temperature. The FM area is plotted based on the magnetic susceptibility at ambient pressure together with an indication of the Hall resistance measurements (See Supplementary). The Tcs have been multiplied by a factor of five. The purple points in the SC area are the Tcs determined from the temperatures with zero resistance. the resistance changes (R − R/)/R/ measured at 10 K and different applied pressures, where R is resistance and R/ is the resistance at zero field. (b) Resistance changes (R − R/)/R/ as a function of pressure at 3.0, 4.0, and 5.0 T. The data were taken from (a) for two samples. The magnetoresistance changes sign at 10 GPa. The open points in (a) and (b) are from the first run and the solid points are from the third run. (c) Magnetic field dependence of the Hall resistance at different pressures and 10 K for the second run. (d) Hall coefficients as a function of pressure determined from the Hall resistance measured in (c). The low field data were fitted in the range of 0 < H ≤ 0.3 T, and the high field data were extracted from the range of 0.5 < H ≤ 1.0 T. The densities of electrons were obtained from the HF Hall coefficients.