1 Surface-passivated high-Q GaAs photonic crystal nanocavity with quantum dots Kazuhiro Kuruma1, a), Yasutomo Ota2, b), Masahiro Kakuda2, Satoshi Iwamoto1,2 and Yasuhiko Arakawa2 1Institute of Industrial Science, The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8505, Japan 2Institute of Nano Quantum Information Electronics, The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8505, Japan a) E-mail: kuruma@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp b) E-mail: ota@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp Abstract Photonic crystal (PhC) nanocavities with high quality (Q) factors have attracted much attention because of their strong spatial and temporal light confinement capability. The resulting enhanced light-matter interactions are beneficial for diverse photonic applications, ranging from on-chip optical communications to sensing. However, currently achievable Q factors for active PhC nanocavities, which embed active emitters inside, are much lower than those of the passive structures because of large optical loss, presumably originating from light scattering by structural imperfections and/or optical absorptions. Here, we demonstrate a significant improvement of Q factors up to ~160,000 in GaAs active PhC nanocavities using a sulfur-based surface passivation technique. This value is the highest ever reported for any active PhC nanocavities with semiconductor quantum dots. The surface-passivated cavities also exhibit reduced variation in both Q factors and cavity resonant wavelengths. We find that the improvement in the cavity performance presumably arises from suppressed light absorption at the surface of the PhC’s host material by performing a set of PL measurements in spectral and time domains. With the surface passivation technique, we also demonstrate a strongly-coupled single quantum dot-cavity system based on a PhC nanocavity with a high Q factor of ~100,000. These results will pave the way for advanced quantum dot-based cavity quantum electrodynamics and for GaAs micro/nanophotonic applications containing active emitters. 2 I. INTRODUCTION Semiconductor optical micro/nanocavities that can strongly confine photons in time and space are promising platforms for research on light-matter interactions and for developing various photonic devices, including lasers, quantum light sources, and sensors. Among reported optical cavities, photonic crystal (PhC) nanocavities have been intensively studied because of their high quality (Q) factors with small mode volumes (V) on the order of one cubic optical wavelength. These properties are advantageous for enhancing light-matter interactions in cavity quantum electrodynamics (CQED) systems. In particular, III-V semiconductor-based PhC nanocavities have been widely used for active nanophotonic devices and for coupling with solid-state quantum emitters, such as self-assembled quantum dots (QDs). Two dimensional GaAs-based PhCs are one of the leading platforms among them, and have realized high-Q PhC nanocavities coupled with single QDs in a strong coupling regime, together with a variety of fascinating CQED phenomena[8–12]. Pursuit of stronger coupling with high- Q cavities is important for improving diverse optical devices, including nanocavity lasers, ultrafast optical switches[15–17], non-classical light generators, and quantum logic gates. At this stage, a further increase in Q factor while maintaining high QD-cavity coupling strength is expected for further enabling advanced CQED devices that are inaccessible with current device performances. In general, an experimental Q factor (Qexp) is lower than the one in design because of structural imperfections and optical absorptions. It is known that design Q factors (Qdess) can be enormously large in several dedicated PhC structures, such as those with precise airhole shifts around cavity region, leading to Qdess of 105~109. Such high Q factors have been experimentally confirmed in passive PhC nanocavities fabricated in various dielectrics/semiconductors such as Si and GaAs. Recently, suppression of surface absorptions was found to play a key role in further improvement of Qexp by surface treatments. So far, surface passivation techniques for mitigating the surface absorption have been investigated for various semiconductor optical micro/nanocavities, including those using atomic layer deposition, chemical treatments, and gas adsorption. Meanwhile, reported Qexp values for active PhC nanocavities till date still exhibit larger discrepancies between Qdes and Qexp. The latter is often limited to the order of 104, even when the PhC structure is precisely patterned. This suggests significant influence of optical absorptions, such as those in active emitters and host materials, and at the surface of the cavities. However, the influence of such optical absorption on Qexp in active PhC nanocavities is still unclear. 3 Indeed, there is no report on experimental approach to significantly improve Qexp for active PhC nanocavities. In this study, we demonstrate a significant increase in Qexp of GaAs active PhC nanocavities using a surface passivation technique. We employed a sulfur-based solution to modify the surface of the PhCs, which strongly reduces surface absorption and improves average Qexp by three times than that in the case without passivation. The best Qexp reaches ~160,000, which is the highest value among any active PhC nanocavities with QDs ever reported. Importantly, we have achieved the high Q factors at around 900 nm, where the state-of-the-art In(Ga)As/GaAs QDs are available for coupling to the cavity mode. In addition, the surface passivation also enables large reduction of variations in Qexp and cavity resonance wavelength. We find that these improvements stem from the suppression of the surface nonradiative recombination process in GaAs after the treatment. We consistently observed enhanced PL emission and extended carrier lifetime of the GaAs bulk. The prolonged carrier lifetime was also confirmed as distinct behaviors in pump power dependences of Qexps and resonant wavelengths of cavities with and without passivation. We also demonstrate strong coupling with a single QD and passivated nanocavity with an exceedingly high Qexp of 100,000, paving the way for QD-based nanophotonic devices and PhC-based cavity QED systems operating with previously-inaccessible high Q factors. II. CAVITY STRUCTURE AND SAMPLE FABRICATION The nanocavity investigated in this work is formed in an airbridge PhC with a double- heterostructure, as shown schematically in Fig. 1(a). The PhC consists of a triangular lattice of airholes in the GaAs slab with a line-defect waveguide formed by a missing row of airholes along Γ–K direction. We choose the lattice constant, airhole radius, and slab thickness to be a1 = 252 nm, r = 61 nm, and d = 130 nm, respectively. The double-hetero region is defined by slightly enlarging the lattice constant (a2) to 259.6 nm in Γ-K direction, which forms an optical mode-gap and gently confines photons inside . This cavity structure is advantageous for achieving high experimental Q factors. Qdes for the cavity design is 1×107 for the fundamental cavity mode, calculated by using the 3D finite difference time domain (FDTD) method. We also introduced double-periodic modulation of airhole radii by ±1.2% around the cavity region for better extraction of cavity radiation at the expense of the reduction in Qdes. We finally obtained a Qdes of 5×105 and a mode volume of 1.5(λ/n)3, where λ (= 3.875a) is the cavity resonant wavelength and n (= 3.46) is the refractive index of GaAs. Figure 1(b) shows a calculated 4 electric field distribution of the investigated fundamental cavity mode. The designed PhC cavity was fabricated into a 130-nm-thick GaAs slab using electron beam (EB) lithography combined with both dry and wet etching. First, the PhC patterns were written into a resist layer by EB exposure and then transferred onto a GaAs slab using a dry etching process. The airbridge GaAs slab structure was finally formed by removing a 1-μm-thick Al0.7Ga0.3As sacrificial layer underneath the slab using hydrofluoric acid. The GaAs slab contains a single layer of InAs QDs at the middle. We chose a sufficiently low QD density (~108 cm−2) to prevent unnecessary optical absorption in the active layer. PL peaks of single QDs were mainly observed around 930 nm, which were used for strong coupling with a PhC cavity in later experiments. taken after the wet etching process. A cross sectional SEM picture of a similar PhC can be found in ref.. From the SEM images of the cavity, we evaluated variations in airhole radii and positions in the fabricated cavities to quantify the influence of the structural disorders on Qexp. We fitted the airhole edges in the images with circles using ProSEM software (GenISys Corp.). The inset of Fig. 1(d) shows a fitting result. Here, we used test PhC cavities without the ±1.2% radius modulations for simplifying the evaluation process. fitting with a Gaussian function, we deduced average radius and standard deviation to be Avg.(r) = 61.1 nm and S.D.(r) = 0.4 nm, respectively. The obtained Avg.(r) shows a good agreement with that designed of 61 nm. Imperfections of airhole positions were also evaluated using the same software; the standard deviations of the x and y positions are 0.69 and 0.64 nm, respectively. Next, we used these extracted values for estimating the impact of the structural disorders on Q factors (denoted as Qdiso) by FDTD simulations. In the estimation, we assumed that the influence of sidewall roughness of airholes on Q factors is much smaller than that of variations in airhole radii and positions. We evaluated 30 different patterns of cavities with the same radius and position fluctuations evaluated experimentally. The computed average and standard The corresponding Qdiso still maintains a high value of ~400,000, exhibiting a discrepancy with Qexps, as discussed later. This suggests the need to consider the influence of optical absorptions on Qexp. In order to reduce the surface absorptions of the fabricated nanocavities, we performed sulfur-based surface passivation using a Na2S solution. Optical absorption at the surface 5 of GaAs could be associated with surface defect states presumably induced by surface oxidation, which could form shallow light-absorption energy levels inside the GaAs bandgap. The sulfur-based surface passivation based on Na2S solution is known to eliminate the oxide layer on the GaAs surface. Simultaneously, sulfur atoms bond with surface-exposed GaAs atoms, which leads to the reduction of the surface states in the bandgap, resulting in suppressed light absorption. Figures 2 (a)–(e) outline the basic flow of the investigated passivation process. After removing the sacrificial layer by wet etching to form the PhC slab structure (Fig. 2(a)), we performed wet chemical digital etching for surface cleaning by the removal of native oxide. For this step, we first prepared a hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) solution (H2O2 : H2O = 1: 9) and dipped the samples for 30 seconds to oxidize them (Fig. 2(b)). Then, the samples were rinsed with pure water and subsequently etched by a 1 mol/L solution of citric acid (C6H8O7) for 1 min (Fig. 2(c)). After rinsing the samples, we kept them in pure water to prevent oxidation in air. Next, we dissolved Na2S·9H2O in isopropyl alcohol (IPA, 20 ml) at 170 °C and cooled it down to room temperature to make a supersaturated Na2S solution. For passivation, we immersed the samples into the Na2S solution for 10 minutes (Fig. 2(d)). We note that the use of IPA is beneficial for increasing the efficiency of passivation, since the low electric permittivity of IPA (~20 at 20 °C) leads to an increase in the electrostatic interaction of sulfide ions with surface atoms of GaAs. After the passivation, the samples were rinsed with deionized water and loaded into a helium-flow cryostat in a glove box under a N2 atmosphere to avoid sample oxidation (Fig. 2(d)). The sample loading process was conducted after the oxygen concentration inside the glove box becomes <1000 ppm. For a fair comparison with passivated sample, we prepared another sample without the Na2S treatment by dividing one sample chip into two pieces after the wet digital etching process. III. OPTICAL CHARACTERIZATION A. Statistical Evaluation of Qexp and λ In order to evaluate Qexps of the fabricated PhC cavities, we performed reflectance measurements using super luminescent diode (SLD) at 60 K (see supplementary material for details of the measurement setup). For extracting Qexp, the measured cavity spectra were fitted by a Voight function while fixing its Gaussian part to be our spectrometer response (the details of fitting procedure can be found in supplementary material). For the following analyses, we also employ the inverse of Q factor, 1/Q, which indicates optical loss. Figure 3 (a) shows histograms of measured 1/Qexp for 60 different samples 6 with (red) and without (light green) passivation, respectively. Obviously, overall 1/Qexp for the samples with passivation are smaller than those without passivation, demonstrating the improvement in Qexp. By fitting the histograms with a Gaussian function, the average 1/Q values (Avg.(1/Qexp)) for the samples with and without passivation were deduced to be 1.16×10-5 and 2.98×10-5, respectively. The corresponding Avg.(Qexp) for the passivated samples is 90,000, which is roughly three times higher than those without passivation—35,000. In order to quantify the reduction in optical absorption loss, we used the following equation: 1 Qexp = 1 Qdes + 1 Qstr + 1 Qabs , (1) where Qdes, Qstr, and Qabs are Q factors respectively associated with design, structural imperfections, and optical absorptions. Qdes (1/Qdes) is 5×105 (2×10-6) according to the FDTD simulations, while Qstr (1/Qstr) is deduced to be 1.71×106 (5.85×10-7) using simulation results for PhC cavities with measured structural fluctuations as stated above. We also assume that the values of Qdes and Qstr are common for the passivated and unpassivated samples. Under these assumptions, the measured three-fold increase in Qexp can be interpreted as a 67% reduction in the optical absorption loss: passivation reduced 1/Qabs from 2.73×10-5 to 9.03×10-6. These results highlight the impact of the passivation process on increasing Q factor. We also found that the statistical variations of 1/Qexp values for the passivated samples are smaller than that for samples without passivation, as seen in Fig. 3(a). The S.D. of 1/Qexp (S.D.(1/Qexp)) for the passivated and unpassivated samples are 2.36×10-6 and 6.81×10-6, respectively. This result suggests that the absorption loss before passivation is not uniform across the samples. For applications, lower variance is essential in, for example, increasing device fabrication success yield. The remaining variation in 1/Qexp after the passivation is considered as originating from the remaining absorption loss, because the absorption loss still dominates Qexp in our nanocavities. passivation. λs for passivated samples become shorter than those for the unpassivated samples. The average λ (Avg.(λ)) for the passivated and unpassivated samples are found to be 946.4 nm and 954.8 nm, respectively. The decrease in Avg.(λ) by 8.4 nm can be understood as a consequence of the homogeneous etching of the GaAs slab and airholes by Na2S solution. Corresponding etching depth was estimated to be 1.9 nm using FDTD simulations. We also found that the standard deviation of λ (S.D.(λ)) was reduced 7 from 1.34 nm to 0.83 nm by the passivation, suggesting the usefulness of sulfur-based surface passivation in reducing the λ variation. Compared to calculated variations, S.D.(λ) = 0.19 nm and S.D.(1/Qdiso) = 5.8×10-7 using simulations with the measured structural fluctuations; we concluded that these variations in λ and 1/Qexp after the passivation do not arise from structural disorders of airhole radii and positions, again indicating that the remaining variations predominantly originate from remaining optical absorptions. Qexps among the samples with and without passivation. While the extracted Qexp for the unpassivated sample was ~47,000, we obtained a 3-times higher Qexp of ~160,000 for the sample with passivation, which is, to the best of our knowledge, the highest value ever reported for any active PhC nanocavities embedding semiconductor QDs. We note that the sulfur-based surface passivation prevents GaAs surface from being oxidized by air. Indeed, we did not see significant degradation of Qexps for the passivated samples even after the cavities were exposed to air for two days in total. Moreover, we confirmed that our passivation technique can be used for largely improving Qexps of other nanocavity structures such as so-called L3 and H0 types. B. Evaluation of the GaAs Surface based on PL Measurements For investigating the cause of reduced absorption loss by the passivation, we performed photoluminescence (PL) measurements of the GaAs slab in the unpatterned region (details of the PL measurement can be found in supplementary material). Figure 4(a) shows the PL spectrum of GaAs band edge measured for samples with (red) and without (black) passivation at room temperature. The peak of spectrum around 870 nm originates from the GaAs band edge. We observed a 1.5-fold increase in PL intensity after the passivation. Figure 4 (b) exhibits time-resolved PL decay curves of the GaAs band edge measured for samples with (red curve) and without (black curve) passivation, plotted together with fitting curves with a double-exponential function. The observed non-single exponential decay is attributed to a result of high carrier injection and to a large contribution from nonlinear carrier recombination such as Auger processes. Of the deduced two decay time constants, the slower component was attributed as reflecting carrier lifetime. The carrier lifetime for the passivated sample was deduced to be 230 ps, which is 1.6 times longer than that for the unpassivated sample. From the measured lifetime of the passivated sample, we estimated the surface recombination velocity S of the GaAs surface to be 6×104 cm/s, which is comparable with the previously reported value for a passivated sample with Na2S. In the estimation of S, we assumed the S of 8 the interface between the GaAs slab and AlGaAs sacrificial layer to be negligible (~500 cm/s). The prolonged carrier lifetime is consistent with the increased PL intensity and suggests the reduction in nonradiative surface recombination centers by the passivation. Next, we examined the behavior of Qexps under the presence of free carriers to further verify the extended carrier lifetime in passivated PhC cavities. In this experiment, we injected free carriers into the GaAs barrier via above-band-gap excitation using an 808 nm continuous wave laser diode, and measured Qexp through cavity reflectance measurements with varying power of the carrier injection laser. Figure 4 (c) shows the dependence of the Qexp on excitation powers ranging from 10 nW to 4.5×107 nW. At low excitation powers, both samples exhibit constant Qexps (indicated as black and blue dashed lines) since only negligible amounts of carriers are injected into the GaAs slab. With further increasing excitation powers, both Qexps start degrading because of free carrier absorption but with different onset powers. The passivated sample degrades even from a weak excitation power of around 200 nW. In contrast, the unpassivated sample degrades from a much higher excitation power of around 105 nW. The onset of the degradation is determined by the balance between carrier injection and recombination. The passivated sample accumulates carriers more efficiently because of the enhanced carrier lifetime, and thus, degrades earlier than the unpassivated sample. Marked influences of prolonged carrier lifetime were also observed in cavity resonant wavelength (λ), as shown in Fig. 4(d). λs for the unpassivated sample does not exhibit any significant changes until a pump power of 107 nW. In contrast, λs for the passivated sample are gradually blueshifted with increasing pump power, suggesting larger carrier plasma effect induced by higher carrier density. At an excitation power of 107 nW, we observed the largest blueshift of -0.125 nm for the passivated sample, as indicated by the black arrow in Fig 4 (b). The measured blueshift can be explained by a simple model considering a typical expression of carrier plasma effect, including the measured S (see supplementary material). Again, the observed blueshift of λ is consistent with earlier onset of the strong degradation of Qexp, which can be explained by prolonged carrier lifetime. For higher excitation powers over 107 nW, we observed rapid redshifts for both samples because of heating. At the highest excitation power of 4.5×107 nW, the unpassivated cavity showed the largest redshift of 0.28 nm for the sample without passivation, which corresponds to temperature rise of the sample to ~7 K, estimated from the measured relationship between sample temperature and shift of the λ (see supplementary material). 9 IV. STRONG COUPLING BETWEEN A SURFACE-PASSIVATED CAVITY AND SINGLE QD Finally, we performed PL spectroscopy to demonstrate strong coupling between a single QD and a high-Q PhC nanocavity realized by the surface passivation. For this study, we used a slightly different PhC cavity design with lattice constants of a1 = 249 nm and a2 = 256.5 nm for coupling to QDs emitting around 930 nm. Figure 5 (a) shows a PL spectrum of a surface-passivated nanocavity taken under a far QD-cavity detuning condition at 9.6 K. By fitting the spectrum, we deduced a high cavity Q factor of ~100,000 (corresponding to a cavity decay rate κ of 13 μeV). This is the highest value among any PhC nanocavity ever used for QD-CQED study. For evaluating the intrinsic Q factor of the cavity, we used sufficiently low excitation power of 23 nW to avoid the carrier-induced degradation of cavity Q. We noticed that PL signals from most cavities we measured increase after the passivation, as expected from the prolonged carrier lifetime in the system. This property is highly beneficial for practical applications using active PhC devices driven by carrier injection. We then investigated the properties of optical coupling between the cavity mode and a QD exciton emission line at 934.01 nm. For control of the QD-cavity spectral detuning, we tuned the cavity wavelength using a Xe gas condensation technique, which did not deteriorate the Qexp even after repeating the tuning process several times. Figure 5 (b) shows the color map of the PL spectra when the cavity wavelength is tuned across the QD emission line by the gas deposition. We observed an anti-crossing between the QD and cavity mode around the QD-cavity resonance condition, indicating that the QD-cavity system is in a strong coupling regime. The inset in Fig. 5(b) shows a vacuum Rabi spectrum at QD-cavity resonance condition, overlaid with fitting curves (blue solid lines). The additional center peak between two polariton peaks originates from a bare cavity emission[8,52–54], which is turned on by blinking of the QD and is supplied by pumping from the QD in off-resonant states and/or background emission. Figure 5(c) shows a summary of extracted peak positions of polariton branches and the bare cavity mode by fitting with multi-Voigt functions, again exhibiting the anti-crossing of the system. From the separation between two polariton branches at QD-cavity resonance, we deduced a vacuum Rabi splitting of 40 μeV, which corresponds to a coupling strength g of 20 μeV. The measured peak positions can be well reproduced by using a standard CQED model, as plotted in Fig. 5(c) using black solid lines. Owing to the very small κ, the QD-cavity coupled system still fulfills the strong coupling condition (g > κ/4), despite the relatively 10 small g. Such a strongly-coupled QD-cavity system with small g and low κ is beneficial for observing clear vacuum Rabi oscillations under limited time resolutions of the time domain measurements. These results also demonstrate the strongly-coupled QD- CQED system using a surface-passivated PhC cavity with an exceedingly high Q factor to the order of 105. V. CONCLUSION In conclusion, we have demonstrated large improvements in Q factors of GaAs active PhC nanocavities using sulfur-based surface passivation. The passivation technique largely reduced optical absorption, leading to a three-fold improvement of average Q factor than that without passivation. For the best cavity, we realized a high Q factor of ~160,000, the highest value for any active PhC nanocavities embedding QDs. In addition, we observed reduced variations in Q factors and cavity wavelengths after the passivation. We conclude that these improvements in the passivated cavities mainly originate from the reduction in surface recombination centers of GaAs, which was supported by observing the increase in PL intensity and carrier lifetime. The enhanced carrier lifetime was also confirmed by measuring excitation power dependences of Q factors and cavity wavelengths. Finally, we demonstrated strong coupling between a single QD and a passivated PhC cavity with a high Q factor of ~100,000. Our results show the importance of suppressing surface absorptions for achieving high experimental Q factors as well as for reducing variations in Q factors and cavity wavelengths among different samples. Our study will be a great help not only for further exploring advanced CQED experiments that are inaccessible with the current QD-cavity coupled systems , but also for diverse GaAs micro/nanophotonic devices requiring high-Q active cavities. SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL See the supplementary material for the details regarding (a) the optical measurement setup, (b) fitting of the cavity spectra for evaluating Q factors, (c) estimation of cavity wavelength shifts due to carrier plasma effect, and (d) temperature dependence of cavity wavelengths for evaluating the rise of sample temperature caused by laser heating. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to thank M. Nishioka and S. Ishida for their technical support and A. Osada 11 for fruitful discussions. This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant-in-Aid for Specially Promoted Research (15H05700), KAKENHI (16K06294, 18J13565, 19K05300), JST PRESTO (JPMJPR1863), Inamori Foundation, Iketani Science and Technology Foundation, Murata Science Foundation and a project of the New Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization (NEDO). 12