Strain engineered domain structure and their relaxation in perpendicularly magnetized Co/Pt deposited on flexible polyimide Esita Pandey,1 Braj Bhusan Singh,1 Purbasha Sharangi,1 and Subhankar Bedanta1, a) Laboratory for Nanomagnetism and Magnetic Materials (LNMM), School of Physical Sciences, National Institute of Science Education and Research (NISER), HBNI, P.O.- Jatni, 752050, India (Dated: 24 January 2020) The demand of fast and power efficient spintronics devices with flexibility requires additional energy for magnetization manipulation. Stress/and strain have shown their potentials for tuning magnetic properties to the desired level. Here, we report a systematic study for the effect of both tensile and compressive stresses on the magnetic anisotropy (MA). Further the effect of stress on the domain structure and magnetization relaxation mechanism in a perpendicularly magnetized Co/Pt film has been studied. It is observed that a minimal in-plane tensile strain has increased the coercivity of the film by 38% of its initial value, while a very small change of coercivity has been found under compressive strain. The size of ferromagnetic domains decreases under tensile strain, while no change is observed under the compressive strain. Magnetization relxation measured at sub-coercive fields yields longer relaxation time in the strained state. Miniaturization and flexibility with high speed and low power consumption are the key aspects for develop- ing next generation spintronic devices1–3. Perpendicular magnetic anisotropic (PMA) systems such as Co/Pt bi- layes have shown their importance in increasing thermal stability and developing non-volatile magnetic random access memories (MRAM’s) with low current density re- quirement for magnetization switching at 20 nm bit size level1,4–9. The major challenge in further downscaling of devices is the higher power dissipation10. Various ap- proaches have been taken to reduce the power consump- tion during magnetization switching e.g. spin transfer torque (STT), current induced domain wall (DW) motion etc.11,12. However, involvement of charge current is still a major factor to further reduce the power consumption. In this context, stress controlled method has been proven to be a promising one13,14. Strain engineering became an appealing approach to meet the current device require- ment. There are various possible ways to generate strain on a thin film deposited on rigid substrate e.g. by lattice mismatch15,16, voltage application via transducers17 etc., whereas for a film deposited on flexible substrate bend- ing, stretching, peeling or twisting mechanism also can generate adequate stress18. Such mechanical methods transfer almost uniform stress from substrate to the film, which gives rise to device flexibility. In recent years the stress effect on magnetic anisotropy and domain struc- ture in various magnetic films with in-plane MA have been studied3,19. However, the stress effect in flexible magnetic films with PMA is very less explored. Theoret- ical studies predicted that magnteic anisotropy energy as well as the easy axis of Fe/Pt multilayers can be modi- fied by strain20. Shepley et al. showed that the MA of a Co/Pt film decreased with increasing compressive strain while the DW velocity was increased by 30 to 100%21. Later the stress tuned DW velocity of Co/Pt depends a)Electronic mail: sbedanta@niser.ac.in on DW formation energy (balance of anisotropy and ex- change energy) is also reported22. However, a systematic study on the effect of different types of strain e.g. ten- sion, compression, peeling etc. on the MA, domain nu- cleation, its structure along with relaxation mechanism is still lacking. Exploring the effect of such magneto- mechanical coupling on different magnetic properties will not only help to understand the basics but also holds im- portance from application viewpoint. Here, we report a comprehensive study of the effect of tensile and compres- sive strain on the MA, domain nucleation and relaxation mechanism in a perpendicularly magnetized Co/Pt film prepared on polyimide substrate. We have prepared Pt/Co thin film upon 25 μm thick polyimide (PI) substrate by dc magnetron sput- tering in a high vacuum chamber manufactured by Mantis Deposition Ltd, UK. Polyimide (PI) substrate was cleaned ultrasonically by isopropanol before de- position. The sample structure is the following: fig.1(a). The base pressure of the deposition system was better than 1×10−7 mbar. The rate of deposition for Co, Pt and Ta layers were 0.10 /s, 0.15 /s and 0.13 /s respec- tively. The thickness was measured by a quartz crystal monitor (QCM) mounted close to the substrate holder. Substrate was rotated at 10 rotation per minute (rpm) during deposition to get uniformity in the samples. A 7 nm thick Ta buffer layer was used for better adhesion and growth of Pt layer along (111) direction. A 3 nm thick Pt was used as a capping layer to prevent the oxidation of Co layer. Magnetic properties of the sample have been recorded at both the flat as well as bend state. Different tensile (compressive) strain has been generated on the film by sticking it on convex (concave) mold made of aluminium with different radius of curvature. Schematic of both mold is shown in fig.1(b) and the molds used in the mea- surement are shown in supplementary fig.S1. Domain nucleation and propagation at both states of the sam- 1 arXiv:2001.09290v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 25 Jan 2020 polyimide substrate, (b) Tensile and compressive strain gen- eration by bending of the film achieved by convex and concave shaped molds, respectively. ple have been recorded by polar magneto optic Kerr ef- fect (PMOKE) based microscope manufactured by Evico Magnetics, Germany. Further, relaxation measurements have been carried out in the flat as well as bend state of the film. We have measured magnetic hysteresis loops in the po- lar mode by bending the sample towards inward and out- ward direction. Such bending induced strain on the film can be determined as, ε = t 2r ± t (1) where ε is the applied strain, ‘+’ sign for the tensile strain, ‘-’ sign is for the compressive one, r is the ra- dius of the mold used and t is the total thickness of the film and substrate23–25.Using molds almost uniform strain is possible to transfer from the substrate to the thin film (as thickness of the film is very low in compar- ison to the substrate). Coercivity (HC) of the sample was found to be 26.9 mT in flat state which increases (decreases) to 34.4 (25.7) mT under 0.13 % tensile (com- pressive) strain (fig.2). Even a minimal in-plane tensile strain (< 0.1%) has increased the coercivity largely (∼ 10 mT) whereas the effect of compression is almost negli- gible. Such behaviour can be explained by comparing the strength of stress induced anisotropy over interfacial anisotropy. Magneto-elastic energy of a thin film can be expressed as: EME = 3 2λσ sin2 θ (2) where λ is co-efficient of magnetostriction, σ is the ap- plied stress, θ is the angle between the stress and mag- netization axis26. As reported earlier λ is negative for Co/Pt system along (111) direction21 while the applied stress σ is positive (negetive) for tensile (compressive) strain, hence the λσ product is negative (positive) which induces an easy axis along the perpendicular plane (in- plane) of the sample to minimize total energy of the sys- tem. As the interfacial and tensile (compressive) stress induced MA acted along the same (opposite) direction, hence it is easier (harder) for tension (compression) to increase (decrease) the overall MA. Hence the strength of magneto-mechanical coupling effect require to modify MA significantly is different, depending upon the type of strain. unstrained (circle) and strained (square) states of the sample. Inset: Zoom in view of the black marked regions (B-D) of hysteresis loops, at which domain images are shown in fig.4. The variation of coercivity with increasing ten- sile/compressive strain has been plotted in fig.3. Here the 1st cycle represents the values of HC obtained from the hysteresis when the sample is bent for the first time at different radii after deposition. After that we kept the sample under 0.5% tension for 15 days and re-measured HC at different strain values which is plotted as 2nd cy- cle. The nature of the two graphs indicates an excellent endurance of the film under long term stress application. However under compression the effect is almost negligi- ble and HC decrease by ∼1.0 mT when a large (∼0.5%) strain is applied. Origin of such different behaviour is already explained in the previous section. Bubble domain has been observed at the initial flat state of the sample, as the anisotropy ratio, Q = Ku/Kd ≫1, where Ku is the uniaxial anisotropy and Kd is the stray field energy density, respectively27. The do- main images are recorded at saturation, near nucleation and sub-coercive field values of each hysteresis loops as shown in fig.4. All the domain images are captured at the same place of the sample, to easily compare them under different strained conditions. Red marked circles in fig.4 (b1 and c1) are showing the domain size for better visual- ization in the flat state of the sample. Same size of circles are drawn on the domain images recorded under tensile (b2 and c2) and compressive (b3 and c3) strained states to quantify the contraction/elongation of the domains in comparison to the flat state. It is observed that applica- tion of an in-plane tensile strain reduces the size of bubble domains significantly. As HC of the sample has increased by 38% under tension, it hindered the DW propagation which reduces the domain size. Magnetization reversal alongwith domain nucleation also takes place at higher (lower) field values due to the increases (decreases) in overall energy barrier under tensile (compressive) strain. 2 The difference between nucleation field (HN) and HC was found to be 2.5 mT at the flat state whereas it increases (decreases) to 4 (∼1.2) mT under tension (compression). This can be a result of increase(decreases) in Bloch wall formation energy due to the appliaction of +0.13% (- 0.13%) strain. The effect of -0.13% strain is not much visible possibly due to its less effect on total anisotropy field. Under in-plane tensile strain the DW motion is ex- pected to be reduced due to increase in potential barrier for the magnetization reversal. Shepley et al. has already reported a faster DW motion of Pt/Co/Pt tri-layer sys- tem under out of plane tensile strain where the sample was prepared near to spin-reorientation transition (SRT) region. As our sample is far from SRT so the effect of compression is very less in our case. circle) bending cycles under tensile strain. 2nd bending cycle is measured after keeping the sample under ∼0.5% tensile strain for 15 days. The square symbols represents the chnage in coercivity by applying compressive strain. As the compressive strain does not have much effect in modifying magnetic properties of our film hence we per- formed the relaxation measurement under tensile stress only and compared with the flat one. Under the appli- cation of a constant Zeeman energy to the system, the magnetization relaxation can be recorded with respect to time. This measurement basically reveals the efficiency of thermal activation energy to complete magnetization reversal via domain nucleation and DW motion. We have performed similar measurement on our film by PMOKE based microscopy. The sample was first saturated at a negative saturation field, then the field was increased manually near to positive sub-coercive field values e.g. 0.95 HC, 0.97 HC and kept it constant there. In this scenario, further reversal takes place with the help of thermal energy. Domain images were captured during the whole thermal relaxation process. The amount of dark grey contrast represents a measure of the magneti- zation for the sample. The intensity of each image was extracted by ImageJ software and the average intensity of all images captured at each second were calculated. The normalized intensity is then plotted against the time near nucleation (B), at coercivity (C), near positive saturation (D) and at positive saturation (E) points of the hysteresis loops (fig.2) by MOKE microscope at flat and bend (± 0.13% strain) state of the sample. Scale bar is 500 μm for all the domain images. taken to complete the reversal. Here the normalized in- tensity as a function of time basically reflects the net magnetization relaxation of the sample. Amongst vari- ous proposed models to explain magnetization relaxation phenomena Fatuzzo-Labrune model is extensively used for FM thin films28–33. However, the approximation of single energy barrier made in this model does not holds for a real thin film which consists of a distribution of en- ergy barrier with defects and inhomogeneity throughout the surface. Hence to fit our experimental data we have used the compressed exponential function29,34, I(t) = I1 + I2(1 − exp(−( t (3) where I(t) is the Kerr intensity measured at time t, I1 +I2 is the normalized Kerr intensity, β is an exponent varying within 1 (nucleation dominated) to 3 (DW mo- tion dominated) and τ is the relaxation time constant. At the flat state the relaxation happens via both domain nucleation as well as DW motion (β = 1.46±0.01 and 1.19±0.01) and the relaxation time constant is found to be 10.90 ±0.04 and 6.86±0.07 s at 0.95 and 0.97 HC, re- spectively. However, a slower relaxation phenomenon oc- curs in presence of 0.13% tensile strain which started via domain nucleation and dominated further by DW motion (β= 2.23±0.04 and 1.95±0.04). Relaxation time con- stant at the bend state was 23.63±0.14 and 16.24±0.13 s at 0.95 and 0.97 HC, respectively. Nature of the relax- ation curve also reflects a slower relaxation phenomenon as shown in fig.5 (a-b). This is supported by a larger relaxation time constant (τ) extracted from the fitting. To explain the origin behind this slow relaxation we have analyzed the domain images correspond to 0.95 HC of both states at different time intervals viz. 0, 5, 10 and 20 s (fig.5.c). Here 0 s signifies the initial time when the first image was taken after giving a constant (0.95 HC) magnetic field. As 0.95 HC field is greater than the nu- cleation field for both the states, hence bubble domains 3 at 0.13% strained (blue curve) and unstrained (black curve) state. The measured data were well fitted by the compressed exponential function.(c) Domain expansion by thermal energy at constant (0.95 HC) magnetic field recorded by PMOKE microscope at both unstrained (upper panel) and +0.13% tensile strained state (lower panel), during different time interval (0, 5, 10 & 20 s) of the reversal process. Scale bar is 500 μm for all domain images. are visible at both the images of 0 s. Further all the im- ages were taken at the same place of the sample hence at 0 s the size of the domain in the bent state is smaller due to obvious reason. Further with increasing time (5, 10 and 20 s) it has been found that the domain propagates slower in the bend state in comparison to the flat one due to its reduced wall motion. This reduced wall mo- tion also reflects in the difference between HN and HC field values of both state, as discussed earlier. In about 20 s of the relaxation process, flat sample almost completes the reversal while for the bend one, it is still far away from saturation. From the above result we expect that a Co/Pt thin film prepared near to SRT will show a sig- nificant reduction of relaxation time under compressive strain, which holds its potential in switching application. We presented the effect of tensile/compressive strain on the magnetization reversal, magnetic domains and re- laxation mechanism of a Co/Pt flexible film. It is ob- served that tensile strain has largely modified the MA, domain nucleation and relaxation mechanism of our film, whereas the effect of compression is found to be less prominent. A substantial increase in MA, nucleation field and decrease in domain size attributed mainly to the magneto mechanical coupling effect. In spite of this high coupling effect, our flexible film exhibits excellent endurance for long term stress application. A longer field span required to complete the magnetization reversal at the strained state, reflects a increase in potential bar- rier for the DW movement which modifies the relaxation time of the film. Relaxation measurements indicates ∼13 sec of relaxation time difference between the unstrained and curved state which is further endorsed by comparing domain images taken at different interval of time. This study further demands to explore the effect of compres- sion on the relaxation time (switching time) of a Co/Pt film prepared near to SRT region. It is expected that in such scenario the relaxation will be faster which has significant potential for faster device application. Authors would like to thank Mr. Brindaban Ojha and Dr. Tanmoy Chabri for their help during the relaxation measurements. We also thank the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) of the Govt. of India for providing the funding to carry out the research. BBS acknowledges DST for INSPIRE faculty fellowship. SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL See supplementary material for Figure S1 which shows the image of the convex and concave shaped molds used in the measurement. 4