Superconductivity in Undoped BaFe2As2 by Tetrahedral Geometry Design J. H. Kang1, J.-W. Kim2, P. J. Ryan2, L. Xie3, L. Guo1, C. Sundahl1, J. Schad1, N. Campbell4, Y. G. Collantes5, E. E. Hellstrom5, M. S. Rzchowski4, and C. B. Eom1* 1Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA 2Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, IL, USA 3Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China 4Department of Physics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA 5Applied Superconductivity Center, National High Magnetic Field Laboratory, Florida State University, 2031 East Paul Dirac Drive, Tallahassee, FL 32310, USA School of Physical Sciences, Dublin City University, Dublin 9, Ireland *e-mail: eom@engr.wisc.edu Fe-based superconductors exhibit a diverse interplay between charge, orbital, and magnetic ordering1-4. Variations in atomic geometry affect electron hopping between Fe atoms5,6 and the Fermi surface topology, influencing magnetic frustration and the pairing mechanism through changes of orbital overlap and occupancies7-11. Here, we experimentally demonstrate a systematic approach to realize superconductivity without chemical doping in BaFe2As2, employing geometric design within an epitaxial heterostructure. We control both tetragonality and orthorhombicity in BaFe2As2 through superlattice engineering, which we experimentally find to induce superconductivity when the As-Fe-As bond angle approaches that in a regular tetrahedron. This approach of superlattice design could lead to insights into low dimensional superconductivity in Fe-based superconductors. 2 Epitaxial thin films and heterostructures can fine tune the atomic arrangement of complex materials and subsequently enhance the superconducting transition temperature(Tc), as recently demonstrated in single-layer FeSe12. More complex high-Tc superconductors such as Co-doped BaFe2As2 have technical challenges such as structural and chemical disorder at surfaces and interfaces, but also offer the promise of inducing and enhancing superconductivity with structural control. Highly ordered and controlled interfaces can host superconducting properties superior to that of bulk materials13-21. Here, we present the atomic engineering to control and measure interfacial driven superconductivity in Fe-based compounds. The atomically sharp interfaces in undoped BaFe2As2 (Ba-122)/SrTiO3 (STO) superlattice systems offer advancement in the precise control of atomic structures. The relation between atomic structure and electronic properties of superconducting Ba(Fe1- xCox)2As2 and the parent compound BaFe2As2 has emerged as the key to understanding the complex nature of these materials, including the low-temperature superconducting state. The nematic phase arising at the structural transition temperature (Ts) breaks the 90 ̊ rotation symmetry of the high-temperature phase, necessarily exhibiting structural, orbital, and spin-driven nematic order4,7, with antiferromagnetic order setting in at a temperature Tn < Ts. Increased Co doping pushes the magnetic transition further below the structural orthorhombic (nematic) transition, and suppresses both associated order parameters. This correlates with the emergence of the low- temperature superconducting phase, which competes with static magnetic order. The highest superconducting transition temperature Tc is obtained at the Co doping for which not only is the orthorhombicity smallest, but also where the Fe-As bonds form a symmetric tetrahedral arrangement. An important question is the driving force behind these effects, whether spin, charge or structural effects. Substitutional doping affects electronic interactions, which in turn influence other orders in the material. Here we demonstrate the separate importance of orthorhombicity and tetrahedral coordination by inducing superconductivity in the undoped parent compound BaFe2As2 by strain and symmetry control. We accomplish this by alternating ultrathin layers of BaFe2As2 with SrTiO3 in an epitaxial superlattice grown on a CaF2 substrate. The substrate provides initial biaxial strain, and the SrTiO3 layers maintain that strain throughout the superlattice. The square template of both of these layers suppresses the orthorhombicity of low-temperature BaFe2As2, with the thinnest BaFe2As2 layers remaining almost fully tetragonal to low temperature. The undoped superlattice becomes superconducting, and the transition temperature increases with decreasing BaFe2As2 orthorhombicity, and with decreasing differences between Fe-As bond angles. We argue that structural control is an important contributor to superconductivity in Fe based superconductors. In parent Ba-122 bulk single crystals (Fig. 1a), the Fe sublattice undergoes a symmetry- breaking magnetostructural phase transition at low temperature, distorting the FeAs4 tetrahedron and altering all bond angles α, β, and γ, and changing the overall symmetry from tetragonal to orthorhombic. The magnetic ordering in the quasi-2D plane of the distorted FeAs4 tetrahedra is 3 believed to suppress superconductivity in bulk Ba-12222,23. However, we demonstrate superconductivity by tuning the system towards a higher-symmetry structure, namely a regular tetrahedral arrangement24 in high-quality epitaxial Ba-122/STO superlattice films on (001) CaF2 substrates (see Methods and Supplementary Sections 1.1 and 1.2). This is achieved via the manipulation of in-plane symmetry (orthorhombicity at low temperature) and the ratio between out-of-plane and in-plane lattice parameter (tetragonality at high temperature) of the Fe sublattice structures (Figure 1b). The superlattice system provides a mechanism to control the FeAs4 tetrahedron of the Ba- 122 layers for emergent superconductivity. First, bulk Ba-122 has anisotropic in-plane lattice constants associated with the tetragonal-to-orthorhombic transition, causing the β and γ bond angles to differ. We found that the orthorhombic transition is suppressed by in-plane clamping arising from epitaxy with STO, leading to equal β and γ. Secondly, tetragonal Ba-122 without the orthorhombic distortion still has a bond angle difference between α and β, as they are set by the in-plane lattice and the anion (Arsenic) z height9,25 (see Methods and Supplementary Section 2). Since in bulk Ba-122 α is larger than β as shown in Figure 1a, reducing the in-plane lattice and expanding the anion z height drives the bond angle α towards β, through bi-axial compressive strain imposed by CaF2 substrates. The regular tetrahedron can be achieved by tetragonal elongation where all bond angles approach 109.5o (Figure 1b). The reduction of Ba-122 thickness (t) in the superlattice structure decreases orthorhombic distortion and increases c-elongated tetragonality because the rigidity from STO transmits the compressive strain and the square symmetry more effectively through throughout the Ba-122 film (Fig. 1c). However the clamping effect on both the top and bottom of the Ba-122 layer is insufficient to fully suppress the orthorhombic transition. The superlattice Ba-122 layers experience a strain gradient (showing a broad superconducting transition), but the average values of structural and electrical properties tuned by the Ba-122 dimensionality clearly demonstrate the influence of tetrahedral geometry on Tc. We performed atomic-resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) combined with energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) to investigate the microstructure, chemistry and interfacial structure of the superlattice system (Fig. 2). Figure 2a shows a cross- sectional high-angle annular dark field (HAADF) image of the 12-layer Ba-122/STO superlattice structure with a total thickness of 260 nm (See Methods). Bright and dark layers in the image correspond to 7 nm thick Ba-122 and 14 nm thick STO layers, respectively. The thickness of each layer and the modulation wavelength (Λ) are in accordance with the structural information determined by satellite peaks in synchrotron X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns (See supplementary Section 3). Figure 2b shows a high-resolution HAADF image of the interfacial region of the STO/Ba-122/STO structure (black dotted box in Fig. 2a). Individual atoms of the Ba-122, STO, and interfaces are distinguishable (inset of Fig. 2b). The Ba-122/STO heterostructure has atomically sharp interfaces at both the top and bottom regions. 4 Interfacial imperfections such as chemical intermixing between Ba-122 and STO are investigated with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX). The elemental mapping by EDX shows there is no severe chemical reaction, diffusion or intermixing between Ba-122 and STO layers, and we can clearly see the layered distribution of Sr and Fe/As atoms in STO and Ba-122, respectively (Fig. 2c). The EDX line scan indicates that the bottom interface of the Ba-122 layer has less interdiffusion/intermixing than the top (Fig. 2d). Previous theoretical calculations on the STO/Ba-122 interface support suppressed intermixing at the bottom interface, as the Ba layer is thermodynamically stable on TiO2-terminated STO with an atomically sharp interface26. In contrast, there is a small amount of As and Fe atoms missing in Ba-122 underneath the top interface (red and blue arrows) due to Ti diffusion (purple arrows). Ba diffusion into the STO is also found above the interface (black arrows). The EDX scan indicates that a Ba/Sr interfacial layer on the As layer27,28 is unstable during the STO growth, allowing a small degree of intermixing at the interface. Since the intensity of Ti in the Ba-122 layer is from Ba-Lα edges which overlap with Ti-Kα in EDX (indicated by an asterisk in Figure 2d), we confirm that there are no Ti and O atoms in the Ba-122 layer with electron energy loss spectroscopy (See Supplementary Section 4). The detailed structure of superlattice Ba-122 was investigated by synchrotron X-ray diffraction in Fig. 3 (See Methods and Supplementary Section 5.1, 5.2 and 5.3). We measured the Ba-122 (2 2 8) reflections to examine the tetragonal-to-orthorhombic transition29 as a function of temperature. As temperature decreases, the peak broadens due to the orthorhombic distortion below the phase transition temperature (See Supplementary Section 5.2 and 5.3). The reflection was fitted with two peaks using the full-width half maximum (FWHM) of the tetragonal phase taken at room temperature represented by the purple and dark blue curves in Fig. 3a. The orthorhombic distortion is clearly shown in the thicker Ba-122, whereas it is reduced in the 3.5 nm thick Ba-122 layers. From the fitted peak positions of (2 2 8) and (0 0 L) reflections, we calculate orthorhombic a, b and c lattice parameters. The temperature-dependent in-plane lattice parameters are shown for different Ba-122 thicknesses in Fig. 3b. The SrTiO3 layer thickness is kept constant at 14nm, and all superlattices consist of 12 bilayers. Higher compressive bi-axial strain and the larger c-axis elongation are observed in the thinner Ba-122. As the Ba-122 is grown thinner, the structural transition temperature (Ts) shifts lower (indicated by arrows), and the difference between in-plane lattice parameters becomes smaller. We performed anomalous X-ray scattering at the As-K edge to extract the precise local structure of the FeAs4 tetrahedron. The extent of intensity variation in energy scans of the (0 0 L) at the absorption edges reflects the amount of As scattering contribution to the diffraction intensity, which is directly coupled to the z position (See Methods and Supplementary Section 5.4). Combining the lattice parameters with the As relative z position, the complete FeAs4 configuration is obtained. Figure 3c demonstrates that the As-Fe-As bond angles are controlled by the Ba-122 thickness. The three bond angles α, β, and γ in the tetrahedron are all different in thicker Ba-122 due to the orthorhombic symmetry. As the Ba-122 thickness decreases, the difference between the bond angles reduces until finally there is a negligible difference at 3.5 nm showing an ideal tetrahedron bond angle10,24 of 109.5o. The most symmetric tetrahedron is obtained via both the 5 suppression of orthorhombicity by the clamping effect and the manipulation of the tetragonality by the compressive bi-axial strain. Therefore, the superlattice design with the Ba-122 thickness control provides an explicit variable to realize the regular tetrahedron in parent Ba-122 (See Supplementary Section 5.5). To investigate the influence of tetrahedral geometry on superconducting Tc, temperature- dependent resistivity (Fig 4a) was measured in a van der Pauw geometry. The data show resistive anomalies corresponding to the structural and magnetic transitions. We assigned the structural phase transition temperature (Ts) to the onset of the first derivative of the resistivity, and the magnetic phase transition temperature (Tn) to the maximum in the first derivative of the resistivity with respect to temperature23,29,30 (See Supplementary Section 6.1 and 6.2). Reduction of Ts with decreasing the Ba-122 thickness is consistent with the suppression of the orthorhombic distortion characterized by X-ray measurements as shown in Figure 3b. Interestingly, Tn also moves to lower temperatures as the structural distortion is suppressed, in agreement with previous reports of antiferromagnetic ordering suppression in parent By suppressing the antiferromagnetically ordered orthorhombic phase, we observed emergent superconductivity and increased Tc up to 9 K in the superlattice sample with thinner Ba-122 layers (inset of Figure 4a). It is clearly shown that the Tc increases from 0 K to 9 K as the Ba-122 thickness decreases from 20 nm to 7 nm. The 3.5 nm layer thickness superlattice did not reach zero resistance above 2K, likely due to localization of Cooper pairs by scaling dimensions or scattering from the interface33- 35 (See Supplementary Section 7.1). in various magnetic field strengths perpendicular to the film surface. It shows a resistive broadening and a lowering of the superconducting transition with increasing magnetic field. However, the current-voltage characteristics in all the superlattice samples were nonlinear, even under high magnetic fields (See Supplementary Section 7.2), indicating that vortices are strongly pinned in the Ba-122 layer (inset of Figure 4b), different from weak pinning in other low- dimensional superconductors36. A zero-field-cooled magnetization Tc was measured to show clear diamagnetic signal by superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) magnetometer measurements (See Supplementary Section 7.3). superlattice system obtained from our experimental data. Structural (Ts) and magnetic (Tn) phase transition temperatures and superconducting critical temperature (Tc) are shown. Note that Ts was extracted from the bifurcation point of the in-plane lattice constants measured by synchrotron XRD, and Tn was extracted from the maximum in the first derivative of the resistivity with respect to temperature (See Supplementary Section 6.1 and 6.2). The structural transition does not exhibit a 1st order phase transition that is found in Ba-122 single crystals23,29,30 and Tn deviates considerably from Ts, similar to the effects of electron doping. As the Ba-122 thickness decreases to lower dimensions, both Ts and Tn decrease, indicating a suppression of both nematic and magnetic ordering due to bi-axial strain. While Ts and Tn decrease, Tc increases because the broken- 6 symmetry phase, which maintains magnetic ordering and competes with superconductivity, diminishes. The atomic engineering demonstrated here enables precise control of the FeAs4 tetrahedral geometry, and provides a platform to understand the connection between local structure and superconductivity. Reduction of the Ba-122 layer thickness manipulates the tetrahedra via systematic control of tetragonal and orthorhombic structures, and results in an enhanced superconducting Tc. We believe that the superlattice approach provides a pathway to overcome the limited ability to Tc control in the ultrathin films of the Fe-based superconductors16,37. Furthermore, this study will open up new opportunities to study low-dimensional superconductivity and to explore novel phenomena in Fe-based superconductors. Methods Methods, including statements of data availability and any associated accession codes and references, are available. 7