Large-area microwire MoSi single-photon detectors at 1550 nm wavelength I. Charaev,1, a) Y. Morimoto,1, b) A. Dane,1 A. Agarwal,1 M. Colangelo,1 and K. K. Berggren1 Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 50 Vassar Street, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA (Dated: 11 June 2020) We demonstrate saturated internal detection efficiency at 1550 nm wavelengths for meander-shaped superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors made of 3 nm thick MoSi films with widths of 1 and 3 μm, and active areas up to 400 by 400 μm2. Despite hairpin turns and a large number of squares (up to 104) in the device, the dark count rate was measured to be ∼103 cps at 99% of the switching current. This value is about two orders of magnitude lower than results reported recently for short MoSi devices with shunt resistors. We also found that 5 nm thick MoSi detectors with the same geometry were insensitive to single near-infrared photons, which may be associated with different levels of suppression of the superconducting order parameter. However, our results obtained on 3 nm thick MoSi devices are in a good agreement with predictions in the frame of a kinetic-equation approach. The superconducting nanowire single-photon detector (SNSPD) is an ideal detector for a broad range of applica- tions such as space communication1, LIDAR2 and quantum key distribution3. Following the first experimental demon- stration of SNSPDs4, several models have been proposed to explain the detection mechanism in nanowires5. The deter- ministic hard-core and diffusive hot-spot models predict the threshold for single-photon detection for a given material and cross-section. It was also commonly accepted that the sen- sitivity is reduced with an increase in the dimensions of the nanowire (thickness, d and/or width, W); however, a recently proposed theoretical model and experimental result involving single-photon response in micro-scale wires are in contradic- tion with previous understanding6. According to the theory by D. Vodolazov7, the detection of infrared photons in the narrow superconducting wires (W ≪ Λ, where Λ is the Pearl length) occurs once the ratio of critical current density, jC to the depairing current density, jdep C exceeds 0.7 at an operating temperature T ≈ TC/2 (TC - the critical temperature) indepen- dent of the cross-section of the structure. Experimentally, the single-photon regime of detection has been demonstrated on NbN6 and MoSi8 with wires widths ranging from 0.5 up to 5 μm. Although the saturation of the internal detection efficiency for wide wires was not achieved at telecom wavelengths, which are of special interest, these results6,8 indicated sev- eral practical advantages. First, wider nanowires make optical coupling and biasing easier than in traditional nanowire-based detectors. Second, microstructures can be patterned by pho- tolithography which can be less expensive and less time con- suming than electron or ion beam techniques. Also, the fabri- cation of large-area detectors by electron beam is a challenge due to requirements for long-term stability of electron beam parameters and long-term suppression of external acoustic, mechanical, and electro-magnetic interference. These draw- backs could be overcome by using a photolithographic tech- nique. Once the photolithographic process is optimized in a)Electronic mail: charaev@mit.edu.; Both authors contributed equally to this work. b)Both authors contributed equally to this work. terms of the quality of the microstructure edges, the noise and electrical characteristics should be comparable with de- vices made by electron-beam lithography. This is a great help in scaling up the active area of detectors which is, for ex- ample, required for dark-matter detection by superconducting nanowires9,10. The film uniformity remains a decisive factor in scaling up the detectors. As noted by Gaudio and co-authors11, the ex- perimental switching current is observed to be continuously reduced with the increase of the length of the nanowire for NbN structures. Some of the possible reasons of such behav- ior are intrinsic constrictions due to polycrystalline films and variation of the superconducting gap across the film. As alternative materials for SNSPDs, amorphous WSi12 and MoSi13,14 films have been proposed and demonstrated in the last decade. Due to their amorphous microstructure, de- vices fabricated from these materials appear to suffer from fewer constrictions. SNSPDs made from either of these mate- rials have shown excellent detection performance in the near infrared15,16. In this work, we report on the fabrication and testing of large-area MoSi microwire single-photon detectors that ex- hibit saturation of the internal detection efficiency at 1550 nm wavelength. The morphological structure of thin MoSi films has been studied by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis. We compare our obtained experimental results with previous reports and theoretical predictions. The fabrication process begins with magnetron sputtering of MoSi films onto silicon substrates with a 300 nm ther- mally oxidized SiO2 layer. Films were co-sputtered from Mo (99.95% purity, supplier: Kurt J Lesker Company Ltd) and Si (99.999% purity, supplier: Kurt J Lesker Company Ltd) targets in an argon atmosphere. The molybdenum was sput- tered using a DC power supply in constant current mode and the silicon with an impedance matched radio frequency (RF) power supply. The depositions were carried out without in- tentional heating while rotating the substrate holder at a speed of 20 rotations per minute during deposition for better unifor- mity of the film growth. Prior to deposition, both targets were pre-sputtered at an argon pressure of P(Ar) = 2.5 mTorr for 5 minutes to stabilize the plasma and clean the surface. At first, the discharge current of the Mo target was fixed at 130 mA. arXiv:2002.09088v2 [physics.app-ph] 10 Jun 2020 2 the sheet resistance (Rsh) (blue dots) on silicon content in 20 nm thick MoSi films. Open red dots show the upper limit for TC (i.e. the lowest measured temperatures for samples where no superconduct- ing transition was observed). The discharge current of the Mo target was fixed at 130 mA. The RF power applied to the Si target was then varied keeping other conditions unchanged in order to tune the composition of the MoSi films. Fig. 1 shows the critical temperature TC and sheet resistance Rsh of ∼20 nm thick MoSi films as a function of power to the Si target. The critical temperature is defined as the middle of the transition at R(T) = R20 / 2, where R20 is a resistance at 20 K. The sheet resistance is measured by a four-probe measure- ment at room temperature. Above 70 W, the TC is weakly de- pendent (∼7 K) on silicon content in the film (shown by filled red dots). Once the power was reduced below 70 W, no su- perconducting transition was observed at temperatures ≤ 4 K (the limit of our testing apparatus for TC screening). Open red symbols indicate the lowest temperatures measured for which the films remained normal (non-superconducting). This sharp transition is associated with a Mo rich composition reported in previous publications on MoSi film deposition17; however, the transition to the lower TC (< 4 K) samples was found to be more gradual in their work than we observe here. The sheet resistance of films was found to be in the range 65-70 Ω/sq. (blue dots in Fig.1) except one sputtered at the lowest power in the experiment (50 W) which was < 60 Ω/sq. To study the morphological structure of sputtered films we performed transmission electron dark-field imaging and diffraction on 7 nm thick MoSi film sputtered at conditions corresponding to the highest measured TC (73 W) using a field emission TEM (JEOL 2010F) at 200 kV. Additionally, we im- aged Mo-rich film with the same thickness sputtered at 50 W of silicon-target power. Results of examination by TEM are presented in Fig. 2. Fig. 2(a) shows a dark-field image and diffraction pattern of the MoSi film sputtered at 73 W to the Si target. The pres- ence of a single diffuse ring in the diffraction pattern indicates TEM. The images have different characteristic length scales. The in- sets show diffraction patterns. Films were sputtered at the following conditions: (a) 130 mA of DC current to the Mo target and 73 W of the RF power to the Si target. (b) 130 mA of the DC current to the Mo target and 50 W of the RF power to the Si target. that the film had limited crystallinity, which was confirmed by the dark-field TEM image. This image indicates that there were no big crystalline domains (∼2 nm) in the film, in agree- ment with with x-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements imple- mented on 50-nm thick MoSi film. A detailed report of an investigation of the local structural ordering of amorphous su- perconducting MoSi films can be found in17. Fig. 2(b) shows a dark-field image and diffraction pattern of the MoSi film sput- tered with 50 W applied to the Si target. The presence of sharp rings with distinct spots in the diffraction pattern indicates a polycrystalline structure with large grains. The dark-field im- age shows grains of size ∼50-100 nm. Based on the results of the film characterization, we decided to fabricate devices from MoSi film sputtered at 73 W. Super- conducting MoSi films with thicknesses of 3 and 5 nm have been prepared for fabrication of single-photon detectors. Ad- ditionally, a 2 nm-thick Si layer was deposited in-situ on top of the MoSi films to prevent oxidation of the superconduc- tor. Fig. 3 shows the resistance as function of the temperature plotted for both films. The critical temperature of the 5 nm film was found to be 4.6 K while the TC of the thinner film was around 4.1 K. Table I summarizes the electrical and su- perconducting properties of studied films and results reported in literature on MoSi films for fabricated nanowires. While the critical temperature follows the trend of increase with an increase of the thickness, the width of transition was found to be the widest for our films. We used electron-beam lithography with high-resolution positive electron-beam resist (ZEP 520 A) to pattern mi- crowires. The resist was spin coated onto the chip at 5000 rpm which ensured a thickness of 335 nm. The resist was ex- posed to a 125 keV electron beam with an area dose density of 500 μC/cm2. After exposure, the resist was developed by submerging the chip in O-xylene at 0 ◦C for 90 s with subse- quent rinsing in 2-propanol. The ZEP 520 A pattern was then transferred to the MoSi by reactive ion etching in CF4 at 50 W for 6 minutes. 3 nesses of 3 and 5 nm. and 5 nm thick MoSi films and reported characteristics of MoSi films for SNSPDs: d - a thickness of a film; R300 - a sheet resistance at 300 K; RRR - a residual-resistance ratio; TC - a critical temperature; ∆ T - a width of transition. d, nm R300, Ω RRRa TC, K ∆ T, K 3 585 0.85 4.1 1.57 5 345 0.87 4.6 1.3 2.88 - - 3.1 - - - 3.85 - 421 ∼700 0.5 516 - 0.94 4.9 1.1 514 - - 5 - 1015 - - 6.5 0.4 a taken as ∆ T=T(0.9R20) - T(0.1R20) Fig. 4 shows an SEM image of 3 μm microwire single- photon detector with surface area 400 by 400 μm2. To min- imize the current crowding18, the fill factor was reduced to 23%. In order to prevent latching19, we designed microwires with a total number of squares 104 and 7·103 for width of 1 and 3 μm respectively. To electrically and optically characterize the fabricated de- vice, we used an experimental setup in a single shot type He-3 cryostat with base temperature of 300 mK. The device was mounted on the sample holder using a contact glue (GE Var- nish). The holder was screwed down to the cold stage. A low-temperature bias tee decoupled the high-frequency path from the DC bias path. The high-frequency signal was car- ried out of the cryostat by stainless-steel rigid coaxial cables, while DC bias was provided via a pair of twisted wires con- nected to a low-noise voltage source. The signal was ampli- fied at room temperature by a low-noise amplifier LNA-2500 and then sent to a pulse counter. A single mode optical fiber guided light from a 1550 nm CW laser into the cryogenic ap- paratus through a vacuum feedthrough and was mounted on a surface area 400 by 400 μm2 made of a 3 nm MoSi film. stage above the sample surface. The single-photon counting regime was confirmed by measuring the count rate from the detectors, which was linear as a function of the applied laser power. We first characterized our devices in terms of their super- conducting properties. Fig. 5 presents an example of an IV- curve measured in current-bias mode. For 3 nm thick devices, the switching current was found in the range of 8-10 μA and 27-30 μA for the 1 and 3 μm wide wires respectively. The measured switching current of 5 nm thick devices was 19- 24 μA for 1 μm wires and 46-52 μA for 3 μm wires. By extracting the switching current ISW from IV-curves, we es- timated the density of critical current in wires jC and then compared that with depairing critical current density jdep C 22. To calculate jdep C , we used a diffusion coefficient D = 0.47 cm2 s−1, experimentally obtained for MoSi film with similar thickness and critical temperature20. We found the ratio to be in the range 0.5-0.63 for both 3 and 5 nm thick devices. We then performed optical measurements on both 3 and 5 nm chips. Fig. 6 represents photon count rate (PCR) and dark 4 detectors with thickness of 3 nm. Notice that both devices exhibited saturated count rate at high bias currents. count rate (DCR) as a function of relative bias current for 3 nm thick MoSi detectors where Ib is bias current. Both 1 and 3 μm devices show a clear plateau in the internal detection ef- ficiency under 1550 nm illumination. The detection efficiency of the 3 nm thick devices with saturation is likely limited by the absorbance of the MoSi film. Using the optical properties of superconducting films23 we estimated the absorbance24 of the 3 nm MoSi film to be 5.8% at 1550 nm. The reset time of devices with lengths of 104 squares was determined to be 75 ns. From this value of the fall time and the geometry of the wide wires, we extracted a kinetic inductance of ∼375 pH/sq. for the 3 nm thick MoSi devices with width of 1 μm, corre- sponding to a penetration depth of λ ∼ 950nm. Despite jC/ jdep C ratio of devices is similar on both chips, we did not observe optical response in devices of same nominal geometry made of 5 nm MoSi film. The formation of a normal hot-spot with sufficient size after absorption of the photon is crucial for the emergence of a normal belt in wide wires. From a theoretical point of view7, the radius of the hot-spot (RNS) is proportional to � Eph/N(0)dT 2 C , where N(0) - the total density of electronic states at the Fermi level; Eph - the energy of the photon. As- suming that the specific resistivity and diffusivity are similar for 3 and 5 nm MoSi films, the hot-spot radius size is depends on the critical temperature and the thickness for the same pho- ton energy. The estimated RNS for 5 nm MoSi is ∼ 50% smaller than the hot-spot radius for thinner films. Taking into account the fact that the calculated depairing current is simi- lar for samples of both thicknesses, single-photon sensitivity is expected in 5 nm MoSi wide devices for higher photon en- ergies. The absence of a photoresponse in 5 nm MoSi wide de- vices indicates possible issues in the realization of large-area wide detectors made of high-TC superconductors at telecom wavelength. Candidate materials for SNSPDs summarized in a recent overview25 exhibited a broad range of critical tem- perature, resistivity, and optical properties. Obviously, low- TC materials are preferable due to the smaller superconducting energy gap. It also was shown that amorphous MoSi and sput- tered polycrystalline TiN films show favorable optical proper- ties at infrared wavelength23. However, the number of internal constrictions in superconducting films should be minimized to reach the highest ratio of jC/ jdep C . The dark-count rate was determined by blocking the optical path at the room-temperature end of fiber. All tested devices demonstrate DCR below 103 cps (examples are displayed on right axis in Fig. 6). In conclusion, we fabricated and characterized 3 and 5 nm MoSi single-photon detectors with wire widths of 1 and 3 μm and surface area up to 400 by 400 μm2 at 1550 nm wave- length. These detectors show saturated internal detection ef- ficiency at a measurement temperature of 300 mK. The dark count rate was found to be two orders of magnitude lower than was measured on short devices with a shunt. Obtained re- sults open new perspectives for scaling the detectors to masses large enough to probe new territory in the direct detection of sub-GeV dark matter by superconducting wires. Addition- ally, scaling the detector area up to the millimeter range al- lows collection of photons from resonant absorption targets10 with maximum efficiency and system-design flexibility. The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors would like to thank J. Daley and M. Mondol of the MIT Nanostructures lab for the technical support related to electron-beam fabrication, and would like to thank Sae-Woo Nam and Jeff Chiles at NIST for helpful discussion and shar- ing an early version of their manuscript with us, and also we would like to thank Dr. C. Settens from the Center for Materi- als Science and Engineering X-ray Facility for his assistance 5 and advice on all matters related to x-ray measurements, and Brenden Butters and Mina Bionta for assistance in editing the final manuscript. Research was sponsored by the U.S. Army Research Office (ARO) and was accomplished under the Co- operative Agreement Number W911NF-16-2-0192. 1B. E. Vyhnalek, S. Tedder, E. J. Katz, and J. M. Nappier, “Few-mode fiber coupled superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors for photon effi- cient optical communications,” Free-Space Laser Communications 10910, 2L. Chen, D. Schwarzer, V. B. Verma, M. J. Stevens, F. Marsili, R. P. Mirin, S.-W. Nam, and A. M. Wodtke, “Mid-infrared laser-induced fluorescence with nanosecond time resolution using a superconducting nanowire single- photon detector: New technology for molecular science,” Acc. Chem. Res. 3K. Wei, W. Zhang, Y.-L. Tang, L. You, and F. Xu, “Implementation se- curity of quantum key distribution due to polarization-dependent efficiency mismatch,” Phys. Rev. A 100, 0223256 (2019). 4G. N. Gol’tsman, O. Okunev, G. Chulkova, A. Lipatov, A. Semenov, K. Smirnov, B. Voronov, and A. Dzardanov, “Picosecond superconduct- ing single-photon optical detector,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 79, 705 (2001). 5A. Engel, J. J. Renema, K. Ilin, and A. Semenov, “Detection mechanism of superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors,” Supercond. Sci. Tech- 6Y. Korneeva, D. Vodolazov, A. Semenov, I. Florya, N. Simonov, E. Baeva, A. Korneev, G. Goltsman, and T. Klapwijk, “Optical single-photon de- tection in micrometer-scale NbN bridges,” Phys. Rev. Applied 9, 064037 7D. Y. Vodolazov, “Single-photon detection by a dirty current-carrying su- perconducting strip based on the kinetic-equation approach,” Phys. Rev. Applied 7, 034014 (2017). 8Y. Korneeva, D. Vodolazov, I. Florya, N. Manova, E. Smirnov, A. Korneev, M. Mikhailov, G. Goltsman, and T. M. Klapwijk, “Single photon detec- tion in micron scale NbN and α-MoSi superconducting strips,” EPJ Web of Conferences 190, 04010 (2018). 9Y. Hochberg, I. Charaev, S.-W. Nam, V. Verma, M. Colangelo, and K. K. Berggren, “Detecting sub-GeV dark matter with superconducting nanowires,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 151802 (2019). 10M. Baryakhtar, J. Huang, and R. Lasenby, “Axion and hidden photon dark matter detection with multilayer optical haloscopes,” Phys. Rev. D 98, 11R. Gaudio, K. P. M. op ’t Hoog, Z. Zhou, D. Sahin, and A. Fiore, “In- homogeneous critical current in nanowire superconducting single-photon detectors,” APL 105, 222602 (2014). 12F. Marsili, V. B. Verma, J. A. Stern, S. Harrington, A. E. Lita, T. Gerrits, I. Vayshenker, B. Baek, M. D. Shaw, R. P. Mirin, and S. W. Nam, “Detect- ing single infrared photons with 93% system efficiency,” Nature Photonics volume 7, 210–214 (2013). 13V. B. Verma, B. Korzh, F. Bussières, R. D. Horansky, S. D. Dyer, A. E. Lita, I. Vayshenker, F. Marsili, M. D. Shaw, H. Zbinden, R. P. Mirin, and S. W. Nam, “High-efficiency superconducting nanowire single-photon de- tectors fabricated from MoSi thin-films,” Optics Express 23, 26, 33792– 14M. Caloz, B. Korzh, N. Timoney, M. Weiss, S. Gariglio, R. J. Warbur- ton, C. Schönenberger, J. Renema, H. Zbinden, and F. Bussières, “Opti- cally probing the detection mechanism in a molybdenum silicide supercon- ducting nanowire single-photon detector,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 110, 083106 15J. Li, R. A. Kirkwood, L. J. Baker, D. Bosworth, K. Erotokritou, A. Baner- jee, R. M. Heath, C. M. Natarajan, Z. H. Barber, M. Sorel, and R. H. Hadfield, “Nano-optical single-photon response mapping of waveguide in- tegrated molybdenum silicide (MoSi) superconducting nanowires,” Opt. 16M. Caloz, M. Perrenoud, C. Autebert, B. Korzh, M. Weiss, C. Schönen- berger, R. J. Warburton, H. Zbinden, and F. Bussières, “High-detection efficiency and low-timing jitter with amorphous superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 112, 061103 (2018). 17A. Banerjee, L. J. Baker, A. Doye, M. Nord, R. M. Heath, K. Erotokritou, D. Bosworth, Z. H. Barber, I. MacLaren, and R. H. Hadfield, “Charac- terisation of amorphous molybdenum silicide (MoSi) superconducting thin films and nanowires,” Supercond. Sci. Technol. 30, 084010 (2017). 18J. R. Clem and K. K. Berggren, “Geometry-dependent critical currents in superconducting nanocircuits,” Phys. Rev. B 84, 174510 (2011). 19A. Annunziata, O. Quaranta, D. F. Santavicca, A. Casaburi, L. Frunzio, M. Ejrnaes, M. J. Rooks, R. Cristiano, S. Pagano, A. Frydman, and D. E. Prober, “Reset dynamics and latching in niobium superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors,” J. Appl. Phys. 108, 084507 (2010). 20Y. P. Korneeva, N. N. Manova, I. N. Florya, M. Y. Mikhailov, O. Dobro- volskiy, A. A. Korneev, and D. Y. Vodolazov, “Different single-photon response of wide and narrow superconducting MoSi strips,” Phys. Rev. Ap- plied 13, 024011 (2020). 21Y. P. Korneeva, M. Y. Mikhailov, Y. P. Pershin, N. N. Manova, A. V. Di- vochiy, Y. B. Vakhtomin, A. A. Korneev, K. V. Smirnov, A. G. Sivakov, A. Y. Devizenko, and G. N. Goltsman1, “Superconducting single-photon detector made of MoSi film,” Supercond. Sci. Technol. 27, 095012 (2014). 22I. Charaev, T. Silbernagel, B. Bachowsky, A. Kuzmin, S. Doerner, K. Ilin, M. Siegel, A. Semenov, D. Roditchev, and D. Y. Vodolazov, “Enhancement of superconductivity in NbN nanowires by negative electron-beam lithog- raphy with positive resist,” J. Appl. Phys. 122, 083901 (2017). 23A. Banerjee, R. M. Heath, D. Morozov, D. Hemakumara, U. Nasti, I.Thayne, and R. H. Hadfield, “Optical properties of refractory metal based thin films,” Opt. Mater. Express 8, 2072–2088 (2018). 24A. Semenov, B. Günther, U. Böttger, H.-W. Hübers, H. Bartolf, A. Engel, A. Schilling, K. Ilin, M. Siegel, R. Schneider, D. Gerthsen, and N. A. Gip- pius, “Optical and transport properties of ultrathin NbN films and nanos- tructures,” Phys. Rev. B 80, 054510 (2009). 25I. Holzman and Y. Ivry, “Superconducting nanowires for single-photon de- tection: Progress, challenges, and opportunities,” Adv. Quantum Technol.