Ultra-broadband and sensitive cavity optomechanical magnetometry Bei-Bei Li,1 George Brawley,2 Hamish Greenall,2 Stefan Forstner,2 Eoin Sheridan,2 Halina Rubinsztein-Dunlop,2 and Warwick P. Bowen2, ∗ 1Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, P. R. China. 2School of Mathematics and Physics, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, Queensland 4072, Australia. (Dated: February 4, 2020) Magnetostrictive optomechanical cavities provide a new optically-readout approach to room tem- perature magnetometry. Here we report ultrasensitive and ultrahigh bandwidth cavity optomechan- ical magnetometers constructed by embedding a grain of the magnetostrictive material Terfenol-D within a high quality (Q) optical microcavity on a silicon chip. By engineering their physical struc- ture, we achieve a peak sensitivity of 26 pT/ √ Hz comparable to the best cryogenic microscale magnetometers, along with a 3 dB bandwidth as high as 11.3 MHz. Two classes of magnetic re- sponse are observed, which we postulate arise from the crystallinity of the Terfenol-D. This allows single- and poly-crystalline grains to be distinguished at the level of a single particle. Our results may enable applications such as lab-on-chip nuclear magnetic spectroscopy and magnetic navigation. PACS numbers: INTRODUCTION The resonant enhancement of both optical and me- chanical response in a cavity optomechanical system has enabled precision sensors of displacement, force , mass , acceleration , ultrasound , and magnetic fields [11–16]. Cavity optomechanical mag- netometers are particulary attractive, promising state- of-the-art sensitivity without the need for cryogenics, with only microwatt power consumption [11–14, 16], and with silicon chip based fabrication offering scala- bility . For instance, cavity optomechanical mag- netometers working in the megahertz frequency range have been demonstrated by using a magnetostrictive ma- terial Terfenol-D, either manually deposited onto a mi- crocavity with a reported peak sensitivity of 200 pT/ √ Hz , or sputter coated onto the micro- cavity with a reported peak sensitivity of 585 pT/ √ Hz . Efforts have also been made to improve the sensi- tivity at the hertz-to-kilohertz frequency range, which is relevant to many applications. The nonlinearity inher- ent in magnetostrictive materials have been used to mix the low-frequency signals up to high-frequency ; a peak sensitivity of 131 pT/ √ Hz has been reported in the 100 kHz range using a centimeter-sized CaF2 cavity with a cylinder of Terfenol-D crystal embedded inside ; and polymer coated microcavities have been combined with millimeter-sized magnets to provide a sensitivity of 880 pT/ √ Hz at 200 Hz . Resonant magnon assisted optomechanical magnetometers have recently been real- ized, achieving a sensitivity of 103 pT/ √ Hz in the GHz frequency range , while torque magnetometers have also been demonstrated using nanomechanical systems for magnetization measurement . With all of this recent progress, however, the sensitivity of the best op- tomechanical magnetometers remains around an order- of-magnitude inferior to similarly-sized cryogenic mag- netometers [20–22]. This paper focuses on optimizing the sensitivity of magnetostrictive optomechanical magnetometers. We find that the sensitivity depends critically on the shape of the support that suspends the magnetometer above the silicon chip. This support both constrains the magnetostriction-induced mechanical motion and pro- vides an avenue for thermal fluctuations to enter the system. By engineering its structure to increase both its compliance and the mechanical quality factor of the device, we demonstrate around an order of magnitude improvement in sensitivity compared to previous works, to 26 pT/ √ Hz. This is comparable to the similarly-sized cryogenic magnetometers [20–22]. The magnetic response as a function of magnetic field frequency is found to show two significantly different be- haviors: a relatively smooth response modulated by the mechanical resonances of the structure; and a response that exhibits dramatic variations as a function of fre- quency, with these variations occurring under the enve- lope of the mechanical resonances. We refer to these two behaviors as Type I and Type II, respectively. The mag- netic response of the Type II devices is observed to be highly sensitive to direct current (DC) magnetic fields. We find this behavior is consistent with interference of acoustic waves produced at multiple grain boundaries in a polycrystalline Terfenol-D particle. We therefore infer that the Type I and II responses arise when the particle is mono- and poly-crystalline, respectively. Our devices, therefore, provide a method to characterize the Terfenol- D crystal structure, a measurement which is generally challenging at the level of a single grain. The magnetometers show an ultra-broadband re- sponse. The working frequency ranges for both Type I and Type II magnetometers are more than 130 MHz, limited by the bandwidth of the photoreceivers we use in our experiment. Accumulated 3 dB bandwidths of arXiv:2002.00728v1 [physics.app-ph] 22 Jan 2020 2 showing the Terfenol-D deposition process. (d)-(e), The SEM images of a microtoroid before and after the Terfenol-D de- position. (f), A schematic of the side-view of a magnetome- ter, with a principal radius of R, minor diameter of d, and a pedestal width of Wped. (g)-(i), Top-view optical micro- scope images of a fabricated magnetometer, with gradually decreased pedestal width, marked in the area between the two white dotted circles. 11.3 MHz and 120 kHz are measured for the Type I and Type II magnetometers, respectively. This compares fa- vorably to other sensitive optically-read-out magnetome- ters, which typically have bandwidths in the 1-10 kHz range [23–26]. EXPERIMENT AND RESULT Fabrication The magnetometers are fabricated by depositing Terfenol-D particles into holes etched into the center of silica microtoroids, following the approach in Ref. , as shown in Figs. 1(a)-1(c). The silica microtoriods with central holes are first fabricated through photolithogra- phy, hydrofluoric acid etching, xenon difluoride (XeF2) etching, and carbon dioxide (CO2) laser reflow process . We then use a fiber tip to deposit a droplet of epoxy into the hole (Fig. 1(a)), and use the same fiber tip to pick up a piece of Terfenol-D and place it into the epoxy inside the hole (Figs. 1(b)-(c)). The epoxy is then cured over a period of 8 hours, to provide the bonded magnetometer. Figures 1(d) and 1(e) are scanning elec- tron microscope (SEM) images of one silica microtoroid before and after the Terfenol-D deposition. Figure 1(f) shows a side-view schematic of the magnetometer, with a principal radius of R, minor diameter of d, and a pedestal width of Wped. Measurement of magnetic field sensitivity To measure the magnetic field sensitivity of the fab- ricated magentometers, we use a tapered fiber to couple light from a tunable laser in the 1550 nm wave- length band into one of their whispering gallery modes (WGMs). We then use a photoreceiver to detect the light transmitted from the microtoroids back into the ta- pered optical fiber. After we identify a high-Q WGM, we thermally lock the laser frequency on the blue-side of the mode . Mechanical motion due to the applied magnetic field modulates the perimeter of the device and therefore changes the optical resonance. This translates into a periodical modulation in the transmitted light in- tensity. We use a spectrum analyzer (SA) to measure the noise power spectrum. We then apply a magnetic field to the magnetometer using a coil driven by a net- work analyzer. This allows the frequency of the magnetic field applied to the magnetometer to be swept and the magnetic response at each frequency to be characterized. With the noise power spectra and system response, we derive the magnetic field sensitivity, following Ref. . Sensitivity improvement by silicon pedestal etching In our experiment, to achieve a uniform CO2 laser re- flow process, the silicon pedestal is left with a width of ∼5-10 μm after the XeF2 etching. Here, in order to im- prove the mechanical compliance and thus improve the magnetic field sensitivity, we then further etch down the silicon pedestal by performing several runs of XeF2 etch- ing after the Terfenol-D deposition process is complete. The width of the pedestal can be directly measured from an optical microscope image, and is marked in the area between the two white dashed circles in Fig. 1(g). Fig- ures 1(g)-(i) are optical microscope images of a magne- tometer with gradually decreased pedestal width. We etch down the silicon pedestal by a few μm in each run of XeF2 etching, and measure the sensitivity. In Figs. 2(a) and 2(b), we plot the noise power spectra and sensi- tivity of a magnetometer with Wped=4.5 μm (red curves), and Wped=0.5 μm (blue curves), respectively. We find that, as Wped decreases, the mechanical resonances move to lower frequency, due to the increased mechanical com- pliance and therefore decreased spring constant of the microtoroids. The sensitivity improves across almost the entire active frequency range. In Figs. 2(c) and 2(d), we plot respectively the frequency of the peak sensitivity and the peak sensitivity, as a function of the pedestal width. The inset of Fig. 2(d) shows optical microscope images of 3 -100 -90 -80 -70 -60 -50 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 0.1 1 10 44 46 48 6 4 2 0 200 300 400 500 (a) (d) (c) (b) Noise power (dBm) W ped =4.5 m W ped =0.5 m W ped =4.5 m W ped =0.5 m Sensitivity (nT/Hz 1/2 ) Frequency (MHz) f peak (MHz) B peak (pT/Hz 1/2 ) W ped ( m) noise power spectrum and sensitivity spectra for a magnetometer with pedestal width of 4.5 μm (red curve) and 0.5 μm (black width. 30 60 90 120 0.01 0.1 1 10 -100 -90 -80 -70 -100 -80 -60 -40 30 60 90 120 0.01 0.1 1 10 (f) (e) (d) (c) (b) Type II Noise power (dBm) Type I System response (dB) Sensitivity (nT/Hz 1/2 ) Frequency (MHz) B peak =44 pT/Hz 1/2 0.2 (a) 1 Frequency (MHz) B peak =26 pT/Hz 1/2 response, and the sensitivity spectrum for a Type I magnetometer. The inset of Fig. 3(c) shows the profile of the radial breathing mode (where the peak sensitivity occurs) of the magnetometer, obtained through finite element method simulation using COMSOL Multiphysics. (d)-(f), The corresponding results for a Type II magnetometer. The peak sensitivities are 44 pT/ √ Hz and 26 pT/ √ Hz for the Type I magnetometer and the Type II magnetometer, respectively. the magnetometers with pedestal widths of 4.5 μm (left) and 0.5 μm (right), respectively. It can be seen that, 4 when the pedestal width is decreased from 4.5 μm to 0.5 μm, the peak sensitivity of the magnetometer is im- proved from 450 pT/ √ Hz at 47.7 MHz to 200 pT/ √ Hz at 44.5 MHz. This sensitivity improvement from silicon pedestal etching is consistently observed in most magne- tometers. Peak sensitivity In Fig. 3 we plot the noise power spectra, system re- sponses, and sensitivity spectra of two magnetometers with pedestal widths less than 5 μm. Characterizing sev- eral magnetometers, we observed that they each exhibit one of the two distinct behaviors, as illustrated on the left and right columns of Fig. 3. We define magnetome- ters that fit into the two classes as Type I and Type II, respectively. For the Type I magnetometer, the mag- netic response is relatively smooth as a function of the frequency, with peaks corresponding to the mechanical resonances. Figs. 3(a) and 3(b) show the noise power spectrum and the system response of a Type I magne- tometer. For Type II magnetometers, in addition to the mechanical resonance peaks, there exists strong modula- tion of magnetic response as a function of the frequency, as shown in Fig. 3(d). This phenomenon will be further studied in the following section. The peak sensitivity found for Type I magnetometers is ∼44 pT/ √ Hz at about 30 MHz. This frequency cor- responds to the radial breathing mode of the magne- -70 -60 -50 -40 0.01 0.1 1 (a) System response (dB) (b) S peak =26 pT/Hz 1/2 Sensitivity (nT/Hz 1/2 ) Frequency (MHz) and the sensitivity spectrum (b) of the Type II magnetometer around its peak sensitivity frequency. The peak sensitivity is around 26 pT/ √ Hz. tometer, with its mode profile shown in the inset of Fig. 3(e)), obtained through finite element method simula- tion using COMSOL Multiphysics. Generally this mode has the largest spatial overlap with the magnetostric- tion of the Terfenol-D. For the Type II magnetometer, both the magnetic response and sensitivity vary signifi- cantly with small changes in the frequency of the mag- netic field, as shown in both Figs. 3(e) and 3(f) and in their zoom-ins shown in Figs. 4(a)-4(b). It can be seen that the magnetic response varies by more than 25 dB within a frequency range of 20 kHz. The peak sensitivity is ∼26 pT/ √ Hz, at ∼10.5 MHz, and is flat over a 74 kHz frequency band, which is comparable with other high precision magnetometers, such as atomic mag- netometers and nitrogen vacancy center magne- tometers . This sensitivity is state-of-the-art in micro-optomechanical systems, and is comparable to the sensitivity of micro-sized SQUIDs [20–22]. Magnetic response 0 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 0.01 0.1 1 10 Type I Type II Peak sensitivity (nT/Hz 1/2 ) Device Number netometers, in which 18 of them show Type I magnetic re- sponse (red squares) and 8 show Type II magnetic response (blue circles). In order to study the two types of magnetic response, we fabricated a total of 26 magnetometers. Of them we found that 18 exhibited Type I magnetic response, and 8 showed Type II magnetic response. In Fig. 4 we plot the peak sensitivities of the 26 magnetometers, with the red squares denoting the Type I magnetometers, and the blue circles the Type II magnetometers. The results in Fig. 2 correspond to device No. 25 (Type I) and No. 9 (Type II), respectively. We note, also, that the Type I magnetometers have a more reliable performance, with five of them having sensitivity better than 100 pT/ √ Hz. The average sensitivities of the Type I and Type II mag- netometers are 470 pT/ √ Hz and 1.1 nT/ √ Hz, respec- tively. All of the measured magnetometers were fabricated us- ing the same method. The fact that magnetic domains 5 -15 0 15 -1 0 1 Amp (dB) (a) (b) Frequency (MHz) Phase ( ) (c) Amp (dB) (d) Frequency (a.u.) Phase ( ) (a)-(b), Measured amplitude and phase of the magnetic response in the frequency range be- tween 32-37 MHz, for a Type II magnetometer (No. 26 in Fig. 4). (c) and (d), Theoretically generated amplitude and phase of the system response obtained from the interference of multiple waves from different sources with different ampli- tudes and phases. in Terfenol-D can have a size similar to size of the grains [30–32] used in our experiment suggests that the two different types of magnetic responses originate from the variations in the number and configurations of the crystal grains. In particular, we postulate that the Terfenol-D particles we used in the Type I and II magnetometers are single crystalline and poly-crystalline, respectively. Since the magnetostriction of Terfenol-D is caused by the do- main boundary movement in the presence of a DC mag- netic field, this would mean that the Type II response could be engineered by an external magnetic field. To confirm this, we then take one Type II magnetometer (de- vice No. 26 in Fig. 4) and measure its magnetic response under an external DC magnetic field. In Figs. 6(a) and 6(b) we plot the amplitude and phase of the magnetic response of the magnetometer, measured from the net- work analyzer, under an external DC magnetic field of ∼93 mT. The phase here measures the relative phase be- tween the magnetic response of the magnetometer and the driving field from the network analyzer. Generally, the relative phase changes linearly with frequency. How- ever, there exist abrupt phase changes at the frequencies where the magnetic response exhibits anti-resonance-like dips, as can be seen in the shaded area in Fig. 6(a) and 6(b). In order to study how the amplitude of the DC magnetic field affects the magnetic response of the mag- netometer, we gradually decrease the amplitude of the DC magnetic field from 93 mT to 6 mT, with the result shown in Fig. S1(a) in the Supplementary Information. We observe that the magnetic response changes signifi- cantly, especially at the frequencies of the dips. This strong dependence of the magnetic response on the applied DC field observed in Type II magnetome- ters can be explained by interference between the mag- netostrictive waves generated at each crystal grain, with destructive interference responsible for the observed anti- resonance-like dips in the response. To explore this in- terference effect, we use a simple multi-wave interference model to simulate the process. show the amplitude and phase of the total response from interference of multiple waves. Multiple dips arise natu- rally in the response spectrum and abrupt phase changes appear at the dip frequencies, due to the destructive in- terference of different waves. In order to simulate the effect of changing the amplitude of the applied DC mag- netic field, we gradually change the relative amplitude of each wave component (simulating modifications of the magnetostriction coefficient due to an external DC mag- netic field), with the result shown in Fig. S1(b) in the Supplementary Information. It can be seen that the depth of the dips in the response spectrum changes sig- nificantly, e.g. in the shaded area. For more detailed analysis on the study of Type II magnetic response, see Supplementary Information and Fig. S1. Bandwidth 0.01 0.1 1 10 0.01 0.1 1 10 100 0.1 1 BW 3dB = 120 kHz Accumulated bandwidth (MHz) Threshold sensitivity (nT/Hz 1/2 ) T ype I BW 3dB = 11.3 MHz 0.01 0.1 1 10 100 T ype II Sensitivity (nT/Hz 1/2 ) Frequency (MHz) of the threshold sensitivity for the Type I (black curve) and the Type II (red curve) magnetometers in Fig. 2. The 3 dB bandwidth for the Type I and Type II magnetometers are 11.3 MHz and 120 kHz, respectively. In the inset it shows the definition of the accumulated bandwidth, to be the total frequency range in the shaded area. We finally discuss the bandwidths of the magnetome- ters. Due to the fact that the microtoroids support var- ious mechanical modes in a large frequency range from hundreds of kHz to hundreds of MHz, the magnetome- ters can detect magnetic fields over a broad bandwidth. 6 As can be seen in Figs. 3(c) and 3(f), the working band- widths for both Type I and Type II magnetometers ex- ceed 130 MHz, limited by the bandwidth of the photore- ceivers we use in the experiment. As the sensitivity varies with frequency, in order to quantify the bandwidth, we use the accumulated bandwidth which quantifies the accumulated frequency range over which the sensitivity is better than a certain threshold value. This is illustrated in the inset of Fig. 7, where the accumulated bandwidth is the total frequency range of the shaded area. In Fig. 7, we plot the accumulated bandwidth for a Type I magne- tometer (black curve) and a Type II magnetometer (red curve), as a function of the threshold sensitivity. The 3 dB bandwidth, over which the sensitivity is within a factor of two of the peak sensitivity, is obtained to be ∼11.3 MHz for the Type I magnetometer, and ∼120 kHz for the Type II magnetometer. This bandwidth is con- siderably larger than other types of room-temperature magnetometers, such as atomic magnetometers and nitrogen vacancy center magnetometers . CONCLUSIONS In summary, we have achieved an on-chip, room- temperature magnetometer, with a peak sensitivity of 26 pT/ √ Hz. This is state-of-the-art for micro- optomechanical magnetometers and is comparable to mi- croscale SQUIDs. We have also found that our mag- netometers exhibit two qualitatively different classes of magnetic response. The Type I magnetometers show a relatively smooth magnetic response as a function of the frequency, following the mechanical resonances of the de- vice; while the magnetic response of the Type II mag- netometers varies significantly over frequency ranges of 10 kHz, within the envelope of the mechanical resonances. We postulate that magnetometers with single crystalline Terfenol-D particles show a Type I magnetic response, and those with polycrystalline Terfenol-D particles show a Type II magnetic response, and that the dips in the magnetic response spectra of the Type II magnetome- ters arise due to the destructive interference of the mag- netostrictive response from different crystal grains. Fi- nally we show that the optomechanical magnetometers can have an ultra-broad accumulated bandwidth. The working bandwidth exceeds 130 MHz for both the Type I and Type II magnetometers. The 3 dB bandwidth where the sensitivity is within a factor of two of the peak sen- sitivity is found to be ∼11.3 MHz for a Type I magne- tometer, and ∼120 kHz for a Type II magnetometer, re- spectively, considerably larger than other sensitive room temperature magnetometers. The high sensitivity and broad bandwidth open up new possibilities for applica- tions such as on-chip microfluidic MRI.