Page 1 of 19 Pulsed-laser epitaxy of metallic delafossite PdCrO2 films Jong Mok Ok1, Matthew Brahlek1, Woo Seok Choi2, Kevin M. Roccapriore3, Matthew F. Chisholm3, Soyeun Kim4, Changhee Sohn1,4, Elizabeth Skoropata1, Sangmoon Yoon1, Jun Sung Kim5,6, Ho Nyung Lee1* 1Materials Science and Technology Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN 37831, U.S.A. 2Department of Physics, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, Korea 3Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN 37831, U.S.A. 4Department of Physics, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology, Ulsan 44919, Republic of Korea 5Department of Physics, Pohang University of Science and Technology, Pohang, Republic of Korea 6Center for Artificial Low Dimensional Electronic Systems, Institute for Basic Science (IBS), Pohang, Republic of Korea. *Correspondence should be addressed to hnlee@ornl.gov Abstract: Alternate stacking of the highly conducting metallic layers with the magnetic triangular layers found in the delafossite PdCrO2 is an excellent platform for discovering intriguing correlated quantum phenomena. Thin film growth of this material may enable not only tuning the basic physical properties beyond what bulk materials can exhibit, but also developing novel hybrid materials by enabling interfacing dissimilar materials, yet this has proven to be extremely challenging. Here, we report the epitaxial growth of metallic delafossite PdCrO2 films by pulsed laser epitaxy (PLE). The fundamental role the growth conditions, epitaxial strain, and chemical and structural characteristics of the substrate are investigated by growing under various growth conditions and on various types of substrates. While strain plays a large role Page 2 of 19 in improving the crystallinity, the direct growth of epitaxial PdCrO2 films without impurity phases was not successful. We attribute this difficulty to both the chemical and structural dissimilarities between the substrates and volatile nature of PdO layer, which inhibit nucleation of the delafossite phase. This difficulty was overcome by growing CuCrO2 buffer layers before PdCrO2 were grown. Unlike PdCrO2, CuCrO2 films were grown across a wide range of conditions. It was found that a single monolayer of CuCrO2 was sufficient to grow the correct PdCrO2 phase. This result indicates that the epitaxy of Pd-based delafossites is extremely sensitive to the chemistry and structure of the interface, necessitating near perfect substrate materials. The resulting films are commensurately strained, highly metallic, and show antiferromagnetism that emerges at 37 K and persists down to as thin as 3.6 nm in thickness. This work provides key insights into advancing the epitaxial growth of the broader class of metallic delafossites for both studying the basic physical properties and new technologies. Key Words: Delafossite, PdCrO2, Transport, Magnetism, Thin film, Epitaxy This manuscript has been authored by UT-Battelle, LLC under Contract No. DE-AC05-00OR22725 with the U.S. Department of Energy. The United States Government retains and the publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the United States Government retains a non-exclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, world-wide license to publish or reproduce the published form of this manuscript, or allow others to do so, for United States Government purposes. The Department of Energy will provide public access to these results of federally sponsored research in Page 3 of 19 ABO2 delafossites are a class of materials offering a wide range of physical properties due to the combination of electronic conduction and magnetism . Unique to this class of materials is the layered structure consisting of alternating A and BO2 layers as shown in Fig. 1(a). The natural heterostructuring of the A and BO2 layers makes the delafossite a key material system to study the interplay among itinerate behaviors of electrons with localized non-collinear magnetism. Further, the intrinsically long mean free path, leading to an extremely high conductivity as well as the two-dimensional (2D) nature of the transport, make this material system for transformative applications . The A layer is composed of closed-packed cations with A= Cu, Pd, Ag, or Pt, whereas the BO2 layer is composed of slightly distorted edge-sharing BO6 octahedra with B = Al, Cr, Fe, Co, or Rh . The delafossites with A = Cu, Ag are semiconductors and have long been studied as p-type transparent conducting oxides . This characteristic is contrasted by delafossites with A = Pd or Pt, which are highly metallic and exhibit conductivities as high as copper . Further, the triangular in-plane connectivity gives rise to non-collinear antiferromagnetic states for materials, such as CuFeO2 , CuCrO2 , AgNiO2 , and PdCrO2 . While several studies were reported from bulk materials, including a large magnetoresistance , unconventional anomalous Hall effect , field-induced magnetic transition , and magnetoelectric effect , many interesting questions, including the strain tuning, proximity effect, and dimensional control of interlayer coupling, are yet to be understood as there have been only few attempts in epitaxial growth of metallic delafossites . Among the delafossites, PdCrO2 is highly attractive owing to strong coupling between highly conducting 2D Pd layers and non-collinear antiferromagnetic CrO2 layers, and, consequently, exhibits unusual transport properties . However, the growth of Pd-based delafossites thin films have been shown to be challenging due to the volatile nature of PdO as well as challenges controlling nucleation of with impurity phase associated with reduction of the Pd . Here, we have systematically studied the epitaxial synthesis of the delafossite PdCrO2 by pulsed laser epitaxy (PLE) on various substrates. By systematically tuning the growth conditions, growth temperature (T), oxygen partial pressure (PO2), and laser fluence (J), it was found that the formation of high- quality, phase-pure PdCrO2 epitaxial films requires a delicate balance of the growth conditions. Although Page 4 of 19 the conditions that favor the growth of PdCrO2 are nominally independent of the substrate, the highest quality PdCrO2 was found to grow on low-lattice-mismatched delafossite buffer layers, which significantly reduced the appearance of impurity phases. The quality of the buffer layer was found to be the limiting factor for the growth of PdCrO2. This indicates that a new generation of bulk crystals will ultimately enable synthesis of high quality PdCrO2 epitaxial thin films. The pulsed-laser epitaxy of PdCrO2 films used a sintered polycrystalline target. Based on previous reports on bulk synthesis , the polycrystalline PdCrO2 target was prepared using a combination of Pd, PdCl2 and LiCrO2. These powders were mixed in a stoichiometric ratio then sintered at 900 °C in a vacuum furnace, which resulted in PdCrO2 mixed with LiCl. The mixture was then ground and washed in distilled water for 30 minutes to remove the LiCl byproduct. Note that LiCl is highly soluble in water, unlike PdCrO2. The resulting PdCrO2 polycrystalline powder was then dried by heating to 120 ̊C in air for approximately 12 hours. This power was then pelletized and sintered at 800 ̊C in atmosphere to form the final target. The single crystal was used to compare the optical properties with the thin films. For the PdCrO2 single crystal, a mixture of the obtained polycrystalline PdCrO2 and NaCl flux were annealed at 900 ̊C for 24 hours and slowly cooled to 800 ̊C as described elsewhere . For the films, the growth conditions were varied (T = 500 – 800 ̊C, PO2 = 10 – 1000 mTorr, and J = 1 – 2 J/cm2), whereas the repetition rate of the KrF excimer laser (λ =248 nm) was fixed at 10 Hz. After the growth, the samples were cooled to room temperature in PO2 = 100 Torr. CuCrO2 thin films, which were used as a buffer layer, were grown directly on Al2O3 at T = 700 ̊C under an oxygen pressure of PO2 = 10 mTorr. It is noted that the growth of the CuCrO2 films was achieved over a wide growth window. The crystal structure was characterized by X- ray diffraction (XRD) using a four-circle high-resolution x-ray diffractometer (X’Pert Pro, PANalytical; Cu Kα1 radiation), and the thickness of the film (d) was calibrated using X-ray reflectivity (XRR). The surface morphology measurements were made with atomic force microscopy (Veeco Dimension 3100). High-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) images were collected with a 5th order aberration-corrected NION UltraSTEM 200 operated at 200kV using a 30 mrad convergence semi-angle. The transport properties were measured using the van der Pauw configuration Page 5 of 19 with a 14 T Quantum Design PPMS using aluminum wires directly wire-bonded to PdCrO2 films. Optical properties of PdCrO2 thin films, PdCrO2 single crystal, and SrTiO3 substrate were measured using spectroscopic ellipsometry for UV-visible range (M-2000, J. A. Woollam Co.) with photon energies between 0.74 and 5.86 eV at an incident angle of 65°. For both the films and the substrate infrared ellipsometry (IR-VASE, J.A. Woollam) was used for energy below 0.74 eV. The spectra were fitted using a two-layer model (film/substrate) to obtain physically reasonable dielectric functions. For single crystal, the complex optical conductivity was extracted using Kramers-Kronig analysis after measuring near- normal reflectance (Vertex 80v FT-IR spectrometer, Bruker). PdCrO2 has a rhombohedral structure (space group R-3m) with lattice parameters of a = b = 2.930 Å, and c = 18.087 Å (α = β = 90°, γ = 120°) . The triangular in-plane geometry requires the use of substrates with a triangular (hexagonal) symmetry. This surface symmetry can be obtained from a variety of triangular structures, for example, (111) oriented cubic perovskites that are available with a wide range were chosen. Figure 1(b) shows the lattice parameters of various delafossites and commercially available single crystals as potential buffer layers or substrates. It is noted that there have been reports on successful synthesis of bulk materials, including CuCrO2, CuAlO2, CuFeO2, CuGaO2, PdCoO2, PdRhO2 and PtCoO2 . Among them, a few Cu-based delafossites, including CuAlO2 and CuCrO2 , were successfully grown as thin films. The lattice mismatches (δ(%) = (as − af)/as × 100, where as is the lattice parameter of the substrate) of PdCrO2 (aPCO = 2.930 Å) with various substrates are indicted in parentheses. Note that the surface lattice size (aS) of (111)-oriented cubic substrates is taken as triangular unit to mate with the oxygen lattice of the delafossite, as illustrated in Fig. 1(b). Overall, this approach gives a wide range of lattice SiC (δ = 4.8%). The majority of previous studies of thin-film growth of delafossites have focused on Al2O3 (0001) as a substrate due to its close lattice match and the hexagonal symmetry as well as the chemical similarity of the oxygen terminated surface of Al2O3 to the BO2 terminating surface of the delafossites. Page 6 of 19 Thus, this selection of substrates allows the influence of strain in achieving high-quality delafossite films to be studied. To understand the role of the substrate in nucleation of both the delafossite and impurity phases, PdCrO2 films were grown on the substrates mentioned earlier, as well as on an additional buffer layer i.e., parameters were optimized for PdCrO2 films grown on Al2O3, i.e. PO2 = 100 mTorr, T = 700 °C, and J = 1.5 J/cm2. XRD 2– scans for ~30 nm thick PdCrO2 films grown under the same optimum condition on all of the substrates and buffer layers are shown in Fig. 2(a). As one can find, the appearance of the 0006 PdCrO2 peak indicates confirms the delafossite phase. The PdCrO2 peaks are the most intense for the substrates and buffer layers with the closest lattice match, Al2O3 and delafossite CuCrO2 buffer layer. The PdCrO2 peaks are suppressed in general, as the lattice mismatch increase. Despite a small mismatch, no sign of PdCrO2 film peaks was observed on MgO substrates. The full width at half maximum (FWHM) from XRD rocking curve -scans measured for the 0006 peak is plotted as a function of lattice mismatch in Fig. 2(b). This result shows similar dependence on the lattice mismatch. For films grown with a low mismatch, the rocking curve width is low, ~0.1° for Al2O3 and CuCrO2, whereas the FWHM of >1° are found for 4H-SiC and SrTiO3. It is also noted that, while the sign is opposite, PdCrO2/SiC (δ = 4.8 %) has a similar size of lattice mismatch with PdCrO2/Al2O3 (δ = –5.9%), but the FWHM of the PdCrO2 phases show a huge difference. This may be because the tensile strain increases oxygen deficiency due to the reduced formation energy or increased oxygen exchange kinetics . The role the substrate plays in nucleation can be additionally seen by comparing the relative intensity of secondary phases. Specifically, in Fig. 2(c) the intensity of the Cr2O3 peak at 39.7° is plotted as a function of the lattice mismatch. The films grown on a buffer layer of CuCrO2 and on 4H-SiC showed highly suppressed Cr2O3 impurity phases, whereas films grown on Al2O3, SrTiO3, and MgO showed Cr2O3 peaks with a much larger intensity. This result shows that the nucleation of Cr2O3 is does not solely depend on the lattice mismatch, but rather is highly dependent on the crystal structure of the substrate. Specifically, Page 7 of 19 Cr2O3 shares the same crystal structure as Al2O3 and thus seems very energetically favorable to form epitaxially on Al2O3, explaining the dominant formation of Cr2O3. This result further contrasts with films grown on both buffer layer and 4H-SiC, where there is only a very weak Cr2O3 peak, likely indicating that the formation of Cr2O3phase is unfavorable on these surfaces. In addition to the crystallographic symmetry, it is noted that the formation of Cr2O3 impurities might be suppressed by preventing the loss of volatile PdO by using, for instance, Pd-rich targets as demonstrated for PdCoO2 . In general, for heteroepitaxy, the closer the film and the substrate crystal structures to one another, the higher the film quality. For example, PdCoO2 films grown on Al2O3 have shown epitaxial twins due to equivalent ways to crystallographically connect the delafossite structure to the corundum structure . As the data in Fig. 2 show, the CuCrO2 delafossite buffer layer gives rise to the highest crystalline quality PdCrO2. In addition to the small lattice mismatch and identical crystal symmetry of R-3m, CuCrO2 is electrically insulating, which readily allows transport measurements of PdCrO2. Thin film of CuCrO2 was grown using PLE on Al2O3 at T = 700 ̊C, PO2 = 10 mTorr, and J = 1.5 J/cm2. An XRD scan is shown in Fig. 3(a) for CuCrO2 where the delafossite 0003n peaks are the only peaks resolved. Moreover, the rocking curve FWHM of the 0006 peak from a thick CuCrO2 film (10 nm) is ~0.1°, indicating a higher film quality than those in previous reports . Using a single monolayer CuCrO2 buffer layer, the growth conditions of PdCrO2 were further mapped systematically. Figure 3(b) shows a full XRD scan and an -rocking curve for a PdCrO2 film grown under optimum condition, which confirms a good epitaxy of PdCrO2. plot indicates rocking curve FWHM values of the 0006 PdCrO2 peak, and the symbols indicate whether the sample is metallic (solid green circles) or insulating (blue stars). The conditions, where there were no PdCrO2 peaks observed, are marked with red crossed circles. From these data, the optimum growth regime is found to be 600 ≤ T ≤ 700 °C and 200 ≤ PO2 ≤ 300 mTorr. Within this optimal growth window, the rocking curve width is minimal, and the films are metallic, whereas the films grown outside of the optimal window are found to be insulating (beyond the instrumental limit) even in case with a good crystallinity. Page 8 of 19 The insulating nature was found to be due to islands formation which were not fully connected. The rocking curve width ( = 0.1°) is nominally the same as the underlying CuCrO2, which indicates that the structural quality is largely limited by the underlying buffer layer. Finally, it is important to point out that these growth conditions are nominally identical to those found for PdCrO2 directly grown on Al2O3, which confirms that formation of the impurities is driven by the character of the surface. In addition, as shown in Fig. 3(d), XRD reciprocal space mapping confirmed that this film is fully strained. HAADF-STEM image shown in Fig. 3(e) for PdCrO2 grown on a single-unit-cell thick CuCrO2 buffered Al2O3 substrate further confirms the high crystallinity of the epitaxial thin film. From this image taken along the <−1100> direction, the layered delafossite crystalline structure with alternatively stacked Pd (bright) and Cr (darker) layers is clearly resolved on the Al2O3 substrate, which is the darker region on the bottom of the image. The atomic structure at the interface is resolvable, for which there are several interesting aspects: First, the interfacial layer that forms on the Al2O3 substrate is found to be the Cr-O layer, followed by the Pd layer, which likely highlights that the Cr-O shares a similar metal-oxygen bond network as Al2O3. Second, noting that the STEM brightness is proportional to the atomic number, ∝ Z2, the CuCrO2 buffer layer should be appear at the interfaces with Al2O3 as a dark layer since as Cu (atomic number Z = 29) is much lighter than Pd (Z = 46). However, there is no obvious sign of the Cu layer from our Z-contrast imaging. This result might be due to the fact that first top Cu layer was replaced or mixed with Pd instead of nucleation of a Cr-O layer on top of the Cu layer. Third, the interfacial layer of the substrate shows disorder that might originate from intermixing with the film with the delafossite epilayers. The interfacial structure and role of the nucleation layer can be better understood by more extensive studies utilizing element-specific atomic resolution electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS), which is left as a future study. Overall, STEM measurements show that the structure is free of impurity phases and of high crystalline quality. Al2O3. As shown in Fig. 4(a), our films (d = 3.6–33 nm in thickness) show clear metallic behavior where the resistivity decreases with decreasing temperature, except for the thinnest (d = 3.6 nm) film, of which ρ(T) shows a slight upturn at low temperature, consistent with the onset of a localization transition. Below Page 9 of 19 3.6 nm, PdCrO2 thin films were no longer conducting due to the finite thickness, typical for conducting oxides such as SrRuO3 . ρ(T) for PdCrO2 films was nearly independent of thickness above ~4 nm, but the value was about an order of magnitude higher (ρ = 100 μΩ·cm at 300 K) than that of a single crystal (ρsingle = 8.2 μΩ·cm). The overall quality of the films is captured by the residual resistivity ratio (RRR, the ratio of the room temperature ρ to the low temperature ρ). The maximum RRR value is 2.1 for the 33-nm- thick film. This value is comparable to other PdCoO2 thin films grown by pulsed laser deposition , but significantly smaller than that from bulk crystals (RRR ~ 200) . This comparison indicates that the film quality may have room for further improvement. ρ(T) also gives insight into the magnetic properties of PdCrO2 films. Bulk PdCrO2 exhibits non-collinear antiferromagnetism with a Neel temperature of TN = 37.5 K , which is reflected in transport measurements as a kink in ρ(T) . This feature is more clearly seen in dρ(T)/dT shown in Fig. 4(b). We assign the maximum value of dρ/dT to be TN and have plotted as a function of thickness as shown in Fig. 4(c). These values are nominally thickness- independent over 3.6–33 nm at TN ≈ 37 K within the estimated error of around ± 5 K, which agrees well with the bulk value. Finally, optical conductivity spectra (σ1(ω)) of PdCrO2 thin films and a single crystal at the room temperature are shown in Fig. 5(a) and (b), which were extracted from spectroscopic ellipsometry. Overall, σ1(ω) of the thin films show a consistent behavior with that of the single crystal. First, all films and single crystal exhibited a low-energy Drude peak below around 1 eV, which reflects the metallic nature. There is also several interband transitions observed at 1.3 eV (referred as E1), 2.3 eV (E2), 4.5 eV (E3), and above 6.0 eV (E4). From electronic structure calculations , a schematic density of states (DOS) is provided as shown in Fig. 5(c). From the schematic, the E1 peak at 1.3 eV can be attributed to the on-site d-d transition between the hybridized Cr orbital states, and the E2 peak at 2.3 eV to the d-d transition between the hybridized Cr or Pd orbital states. The E3 and E4 peaks at 4.5 eV and above 6 eV are attributed to the charge transfer transition from the O to the Cr or Pd states. By considering the Drude and Lorentz oscillators, σ1(ω) fit and the result are shown in Fig. 5(b). The Drude parameters obtained from the fit were plasma frequency, ωp  28000 cm-1 and scattering rate, γi  1450±50 cm-1 (wavenumber). It is noted that ωp of our thin film is Page 10 of 19 in good agreement with that of our PdCrO2 single crystal (ωp  35000 cm-1, γi  220 cm-1) and a sister compound PdCoO2 single crystal (ωp  33000 cm-1, γi 97 cm-1) , but the value of γi is 7-15 times larger than that from the single crystal. The Drude parameters obtained from the fit are summarized in Table 1. The difference observed in γi is consistent with the higher resistivity of thin films. The Drude parameters were converted into relaxation time of τ  3.65 × 10-15 s, carrier density of n3Dopt ≈ 1.3 × 1022 cm-3, mobility of μopt ≈ 5.27 ± 0.5 cm2/V·s, and DC conductivity of σopt ≈ 9000 Ω-1·cm-1, corresponding to ρopt ≈ 110 μΩ·cm. This was consistent with the values from transport measurements. The data were found to be nominally thickness independent, which indicates that the broad electronic properties are preserved down to the thinnest sample. The Drude parameters, however, show clear thickness dependence, as listed in Table 1. The scattering rate γi was larger for small film thickness. This finding implies that disorder may play a dominant role in the ultrathin limit. It is also noted that the optical conductivity, σ1(0), and DC conductivity, σDC, show significant difference for the 3.6 nm-thick sample. This difference is attributed to potential inhomogeneity, e.g., twin boundaries and Cr2O3 impurity phases in the vicinity of the interface. In summary, we have shown that, albeit on the border of instability, PdCrO2 can be grown epitaxially by pulsed laser epitaxy. Epitaxial strain and the chemical and structural characteristics of the substrate are of key importance to the phase purity of PdCrO2. However, substrates that are at low strain states yet closely match impurity phases strongly enhance formation of these secondary phases. As such, achieving epitaxial PdCrO2 films required a different approach. It is found that the use of a CuCrO2 buffer layer as thin as a single monolayer not only helped reduce the impurity phases, but also improved the crystalline quality of the films in comparison to films grown directly on Al2O3. PdCrO2 epitaxial thin films exhibited a clear magnetic transition down to a thickness of 3.6 nm. Overall, these results show that overcoming significant growth challenges for delafossite family is the first step toward a new generation of complex oxide thin films and creation of novel quantum heterostructures. Acknowledgements Page 11 of 19 This work was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences and Engineering Division. The transport measurement and analysis were supported by the Computational Materials Sciences Program, and the optical measurement and analysis by W.S.C. was supported by Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF- Additional information Supplementary information is available in the online version of the paper. Reprints and permissions information is available online at ***.