Optically Addressed Spatial Light Modulator based on Nonlinear Metasurface Shengchao Gong,1 Mengxin Ren,1, 2, 3, a) Wei Wu,1 Wei Cai,1 and Jingjun Xu1, b) 1)The Key Laboratory of Weak-Light Nonlinear Photonics, Ministry of Education, School of Physics and TEDA Applied Physics Institute, Nankai University, Tianjin, 300071, P.R. China 2)Collaborative Innovation Center of Extreme Optics, Shanxi University, Taiyuan, Shanxi 030006, P.R. China 3)Renewable Energy Conversion and Storage Center, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, P.R. China Spatial light modulators (SLMs) are devices for modulating amplitude, phase or polarization of a light beam on demand. Such devices have been playing an indispensable influence in many areas from our daily enter- tainments to scientific researches. In the past decades, the SLMs have been mainly operated in electrical addressing (EASLM) manner, wherein the writing images are created and loaded via conventional electronic interfaces. However, adoption of pixelated electrodes puts limits on both resolution and efficiency of the EASLMs. Here, we present an optically addressed SLM based on a nonlinear metasurface (MS-OASLM), by which signal light is directly modulated by another writing beam requiring no electrode. The MS-OASLM shows unprecedented compactness and is 400 nm in total thickness benefitting from the outstanding non- linearity of the metasurface. And their subwavelength feature size enables a high resolution up to 250 line pairs per millimeter, which is more than one order of magnitude better than any currently commercial SLMs. Such MS-OASLMs could provide opportunities to develop the next generation of high resolution displays and all-optical information processing technologies. More than forty years ago, enthusiasm for large-screen display and optical data processing in parallel archi- tectures promoted invention and development of spatial light modulators (SLMs).1–4 Such devices can manipu- late light by modulating its amplitude, phase or polar- ization in dimensions of space and time as demanded.5,6 Nowadays, the SLMs already make its quiet, yet steady entrance into our daily lives and cutting edge researches, ranging from portable displays, virtual reality, light de- tection and ranging, and adaptive optics, etc.7–14 De- pending on the way that information is written into the SLMs, the SLMs can be divided into electrically ad- dressed (EASLMs) and optically addressed (OASLMs).15 The EA is the most mature and widely used tech- nique in currently commercial SLMs. The EASLMs are commonly constructed by sandwiching a light modulat- ing material, typically liquid crystals (LCs, as shown in Fig. 1) between pixelated electrical addressing electrodes. A voltage is applied across to tilt the LC molecules, providing means for a dynamical control of light such as phase, polarization state, and intensity, as shown in Fig. 1.16 However, pitches of the electrode pixels are normally on micrometers level even fabricated by state- of-the-art CMOS foundry. Thus the electrode meshes act as two-dimensional gratings, and induce undesir- able diffraction and wavefront distortions to the readout beam, which not only suppress light utilization efficiency, but also introduce noise to the optical displaying and the data processing. Furthermore, dead spaces between the pixels significantly block the light and reduce brightness of the SLMs. a)Electronic mail: ren mengxin@nankai.edu.cn b)Electronic mail: jjxu@nankai.edu.cn In contrast, in the OASLMs, light modulation is ful- filled in an all-optical manner by irradiating a writing light beam rather than applying the electronic signal.17,18 Thus no physically discrete electrode pixel is required, which shows advantages of easy fabrication, no diffrac- tion, and a nearly 100% fill factor (fraction of an area that is optically usable).19,20 Such OASLMs are highly desir- able, because they enable light control directly by light without electronic-optical conversion as EASLMs do. Thus they allow unique all-optical applications that are impossible by EASLMs, including coherent to incoherent image conversion, wavelength conversion, real time opti- cal correlation, and parallel optical computation.21–25 In principle, the OASLMs can be made using a single nonlinear optical material. For example, single photore- fractive materials were used to realize updatable holo- graphic display, image amplifier, phase conjugator.26–31 But the devices were too bulky and inapplicable in the nano-era because of the too weak nonlinearity. During the past decades, researchers never gave up but never suc- ceeded in finding a proper material with giant nonlinear- ity, which supports efficient “light-control-by-light” op- eration within a small-volume. Thus an OASLM mono- lithically based on a nonlinear material still remains an illusion. As a compromised strategy, a hybrid OASLM configuration consisting of light modulating layer (again mostly LCs), photosensing layer (such as ZnO, CdS, a-Si, or AsS,18,20,32–34) and electrodes were proposed decades ago, as shown in Fig. 1.17–19,33,35 The photosensitive layer absorbs the incident light and locally discharges, leading to a reduced resistance. LCs tilt under the voltage be- tween the electrodes, and finally the signal light is mod- ulated. In order to weaken the writing light, a thicker photosensor is preferred, but it limits the resolution due to lateral charge diffusion in the photosensing layer, and arXiv:2003.05075v1 [physics.optics] 11 Mar 2020 2 Alignment layer Electrode Electrode Liquid crystal Alignment layer Photosensor ~1μm EASLM OASLM MS-OASLM Cis state Trans state Ethyl red Nanostructure Comparison between different SLMs. EASLM (left): pixels are addressed electrically. A voltage is applied across the LCs through pixelated electrodes, leading to a certain tilt of the LC molecules. Resulting from optical anisotropy in the LC molecules, this tilt would modify phase, polarization (in picture), or intensity (aided by extra polarizers) of light (red arrows). OASLM (middle): light properties are controlled directly by another write beam (usually using violet light, shown by blue arrows). The device consists of a photosensor followed by a LC layer, which are sandwiched between two uniform transparent electrodes. The photosensor is locally discharged by the incident light and its resistance reduces. Thereby the LCs rotate under an external voltage between the electrodes, leading to a modulation to the signal light. MS-OASLM (right): metasurface is a sole constructing component, in which both electrodes and photosensor are absent. The writing beam (green arrows) causes a spatially heterogeneous photoisomerization of ethyl red azo molecules and selectively tunes the plasmonic resonance of the metasurface. This in turn affects the readout light polarization in a nonlinear manner. Such MS-OASLM shows superiorities of ultracompactness and easy fabrication. Inset gives a SEM image of the metasurface unit cell. also compromises the device compactness.36 Moreover, the operations of such OASLMs critically rely on precise opto-electronic synchronism between the write/read op- tical pulses and the external voltage bursts, which require complicated clocking circuits.33 Recently, the emergence of metasurfaces provides new candidates for nonlinear modulating materials for OASLM. The metasurfaces could localize the light field within nanoscale dimensions, and significantly amplify optical energy density, thus boost the nonlinearity with orders of magnitude larger than natural materials.37–40 Based on such advantages, significant nonlinear mod- ulation over the light intensity, phase, and polariza- tion under weak pump light have been demonstrated at nanoscales.41–46 Furthermore, subwavelength sized build- ing blocks of the metasurfaces not only guarantee the light transmission (or reflection) without diffraction, but also act as the natural pixels promising ultrahigh resolu- tion inaccessible by the current SLM technologies. Here, we present a novel OASLM based on the meta- surface framework (MS-OASLM). The operation princi- ple of our device relies on giant nonlinear polarization control over the signal light by another pump light using the chiral metasurfaces. Both electrodes and photosens- ing layers are not needed at all, which provides the device with advantages of compact profile and easy fabrication. Our MS-OASLM works in an all-solid-state fashion by escaping from long lasting tradition of constructing the SLMs using the LCs.5,16 This not only avoids sophis- ticated rubbing and sealing for the LC assembly, but also makes the SLM applicable under rigid conditions, for example vacuum environment. Profiting from dis- tinct ability of the metasurfaces in manipulating light behaviors at nanoscales, the MS-OASLM shows an ad- vantage of ultra-thin thickness of only 400 nm, which is thinner than one-tenth of thickness of any conventional SLMs,5 and less than one-third of thickness of recently proposed LC based MS-EASLM.47 The subwavelength feature sizes in the metasurface render the MS-OASLM immune to the diffraction. Image projections by our MS- OASLM are demonstrated, which is fulfilled by trans- forming the polarization modulation into an intensity replica by polarizing elements. The resolution achieves about 250 lines per millimeter (lp/mm), which is more than one order of magnitude better than the commer- cial SLMs(Hamamatsu X10468-01, 25lp/mm). Such MS- OASLM would provide a flexible and compact platform for the next generation ultrahigh resolution optical dis- plays, and all-optical applications including the parallel image processing and computation. The structure of the metasurface is shown in Fig. 1. It consists of a metallic nanostructure layer, which is covered by a 300 nm photoactive ethyl red azo polymer as the nonlinear switching layer. The building blocks 3 0 4 (b) Reading Light Writing Light (a) (c) (d) λ=820nm 1⁄4plate Analyzer Mask Image Filter φ χ x y x-pol Pw(mW) λ=820nm 0.1 Operation principle of MS-OASLM. a, A schematic of the MS-OASLM imaging projection system. x-polarized reading light becomes elliptically polarized after passing through the metasurface, which are defined by azimuth rotation φ and ellipticity angle χ. Positive values of φ and χ correspond to clockwise rotation of polarization azimuth and right-handed ellipse, as observed against propagation direction. A input mask is imaged onto the metasurface plane using 532 nm green light, and it is duplicated in form of a spatially inhomogeneous polarization distribution in readout light. Such polarization replica is transformed into a intensity replica by filtering through polarization elements. b, Nonlinear tuning of the reading light polarization as functions of wavelength and green light power. Under green light irradiation, the φ-χ trajectory suffers obvious blue shift, i.e. the total curve shift to shorter wavelength end. The writing light power (Pw) is shown in the color bar. Right panel shows nonlinear change of polarization at 820 nm. c, Nonlinear intensity modulation transformed from polarization modulation using a combination of waveplate and polarizer, which is normalized to the input signal light power. θW and θA are azimuth angles of waveplate and analyzer, respectively. In the shown example, wavelength of the signal light is 820 nm. And the maximum modulation is indicated by a white cross. d, Maximum nonlinear intensity modulation for different reading light wavelengths, and 820 nm gives the strongest modulation magnitude. of the nanostructure are composed of “L”-shaped slits, each of which was fabricated via focused ion-beam (FIB) milling through a 100 nm thick gold film supported by a 500 μm thick fused quartz substrate. The nanostructure lattice constant is 300 nm, with an entire array footprint of 40×40μm2. Because the nanoblocks are chiral in ge- ometry, an initially linearly polarized wave would become elliptically polarized with its azimuth rotated after pass- ing through such medium. The polarization changes are characterized in terms of azimuth rotation φ and ellip- ticity angle χ (defined in Fig. 2(a)), and measured using a home-built polarimeter. Blue trajectory in Fig. 2(b) gives spectral dispersions of φ and χ in wavelength range of 700 to 900 nm. And as high as -37.43◦ in φ and 26.1◦ 4 in χ are achieved for x-polarized incident light at 820 nm. Under external green light irradiation (532 nm), the azo molecules initially in trans state convert to cis state (as shown in Fig. 1). Such structural isomerization alters refractive index of the polymer, consequently changes resonance conditions of nanostructures. Consequently, a blue-shift of φ-χ trajectory happens and the polariza- tion states of the transmitted light are be actively varied under just milliwatt green light power (Pw), as indicated by Fig. 2(b). And as large as 26.3◦ and 9.7◦ nonlinear changes in φ and χ are observed at 820 nm, respectively. The most widely application of SLM belongs to the image projections. To accomplish this goal, a MS- OASLM image projecting system was built, as illustrated in Fig. 2(a). A series of binary masks, which were made by milling transparent letters of “I ♥ N K U” through an opaque metal film, were put in the green writing beam and imaged onto the metasurface plane by a combina- tion of a lens (f=200 mm) and an objective (10×, NA 0.25). In this way, the mask images were duplicated into the polymer layer in form of the spatial heterogeneity of the azo molecular structures, which would further trans- ferred into the spatial polarization variance of the reading light. The output from a x-polarized tunable supercon- tinuum laser was used as the reading beam and impinged normally onto the metasurface. Another objective (10×, NA 0.1) was put on the transmission side to collect the transmitted light, and a long pass filter to isolate the green light. A combination of a quarter waveplate and a polarizer was used to thus translate the polarization pro- file modulations into intensity distributions according to the Malus’ law. For a given writing light power level, the nonlinear modulations of the intensity are dependent on the wavelength, azimuth angles of waveplate θW and analyzer θA. In our experiment, the reading light was selected as 820 nm, meanwhile waveplate azimuth ori- ented along 120◦ and analyzer axis directed along 14◦, which is the condition for the largest normalized inten- sity modulation depth, as shown in Fig. 2(c) and (d). The signal beam was finally photographed onto a CMOS camera (Nikon, DS-2MBWc). The final images are given in Fig. 3(a), which present reasonable reproduction of the writing images. Fur- thermore, our MS-OASLM also functions as a wave- length converter here, which manages to transfer two dimensional information in visible (532 nm) to infrared (820 nm) channels in a full parallel fashion. Such wave- length converter is important to relocate optical channels between two separate optical systems. The spatial res- olution is an important parameter of SLM. The higher resolution means the finer modulation over optical wave- front. The subwavelength feature sizes make the meta- surface behave as a homogeneous film without optical diffraction. And ideally each unit cell acts as one pixel suggesting a high SLM resolution. To assess the spatial resolution, we replace the letter masks using resolution test charts, which consist of 2 sets of elements. Each el- ement encloses three horizontal and three vertical lines. (b) (a) 20μm 10μm Mask Image 10μm Mask Image Projection images of binary masks and reso- lution test charts a, Binary masks include a series of trans- parent letters of “I ♥ N K U” milled through an opaque metal film. First row gives optical images of the masks captured di- rectly using the green light (532 nm). And images reproduced by infrared signal beam (820 nm) are shown in the second row. Scale bar is 10 μm. b, Images of different sized reso- lution test charts by green light and infrared beam are given in the first and second rows of each panel, respectively. The test charts include 2 sets of elements, each of which encloses three horizontal and three vertical lines. The sizes of chart images are labeled beside each patterns. The elements with sizes of 10 μm are well recognized as three distinct lines with- out any blurring into one another, corresponding to a spatial resolution of about 250 lp/mm. The charts are in photographic negative format fabri- cated by milling through an opaque metal film. The res- olution test charts are written onto the metasurface plane using green light and form writing images with sizes rang- ing from 10 to 20 μm considering the magnification ratio of the optical system, as shown in first row of Fig. 3(b). The readout images by the infrared light are given in sec- ond row. The elements with sizes of 10 μm are well rec- ognized as three distinct lines without any blurring into one another. This implies a spatial resolution of about 250 lp/mm for our OASLM, corresponding to about 2 μm for the single pixel size. Such resolution is much better than both previously reported LC based OASLMs18,20,48 and a typical commercial EASLM (Hamamatsu X10468, 25lp/mm). In conclusion, we demonstrate here a novel ultracom- pact OASLM based on the nonlinear metasurface. Ben- efiting from the outstanding light manipulation capacity at nanoscales of the metasurfaces, the MS-OASLM ac- quires a merit of unprecedented compactness with thick- ness of about 400 nm, which is less than one tenth of thickness of the traditional LC based EASLMs. And the 5 subwavelength sized features in the metasurface render the MS-OASLM diffraction free leading to improved light utilization efficiency and suppressed diffraction noise in the readout light. In addition, because no electrode and photosensing layer is needed, the structure of the MS- OASLM is much simpler than the traditional OASLMs, thus significantly simplify the manufacturing process. We escape from the long lasting reliance on the LCs in manufacturing SLMs. This not only avoid sophisticated rubbing and sealing processes, but also endows the all- solid-state feature to the MS-OASLMs. Thus they be- come applicable in rigid environments, for example vac- uum. And we demonstrate the application of image pro- jection by our MS-OASLMs, whose resolution is shown to be one order of magnitude higher than the traditional SLMs devices. Our results would provide a new con- figuration for constructing the OASLMs. And the MS- OASLM would provide a great opportunities for novel op- tical displays and all-optical data processing techniques. I. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This work was supported by National Key R&D Pro- gram of China (2017YFA0305100, 2017YFA0303800); National Natural Science Foundation of China the 111 Project PCSIRT (IRT0149); the Open Research Program of Key Laboratory of 3D Micro/Nano Fabrication and Char- acterization of Zhejiang Province; the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities; the Tianjin youth talent support program. We thank the Nanofab- rication Platform of Nankai University for fabricating samples. II.