py4DSTEM: a software package for multimodal analysis of four-dimensional scanning transmission electron microscopy datasets Benjamin H Savitzky,1, ∗ Lauren A Hughes,1 Steven E Zeltmann,1 Hamish G Brown,1 Shiteng Zhao,1 Philipp M Pelz,1, 2 Edward S Barnard,3 Jennifer Donohue,1 Luis Rangel DaCosta,4 Thomas C. Pekin,5 Ellis Kennedy,1 Matthew T Janish,6 Matthew M Schneider,6 Patrick Herring,7 Chirranjeevi Gopal,7 Abraham Anapolsky,7 Peter Ercius,1 Mary Scott,1, 2 Jim Ciston,1 Andrew M Minor,1, 2 and Colin Ophus1, † 1National Center for Electron Microscopy, Molecular Foundry, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 1 Cyclotron Road, Berkeley, CA, USA, 94720 2Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, USA, 94720 3Molecular Foundry, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 1 Cyclotron Road, Berkeley, CA, USA, 94720 4Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA, 48109 5Institut f ̈ur Physik, Humboldt-Universit ̈at zu Berlin, Newtonstraße 15, 12489 Berlin, Germany 6Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM, USA, 87545 7Toyota Research Institute, Los Altos, CA, USA, 94022 (Dated: March 24, 2020) Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) allows for imaging, diffraction, and spectroscopy of materials on length scales ranging from microns to atoms. By using a high- speed, direct electron detector, it is now possible to record a full 2D image of the diffracted electron beam at each probe position, typically a 2D grid of probe positions. These 4D-STEM datasets are rich in information, including signatures of the local structure, orientation, deformation, electromagnetic fields and other sample-dependent properties. However, extracting this information requires complex analysis pipelines, from data wrangling to calibration to analysis to visualization, all while maintaining robustness against imaging distortions and artifacts. In this paper, we present py4DSTEM, an analysis toolkit for measuring material properties from 4D-STEM datasets, written in the Python language and released with an open source license. We describe the algorithmic steps for dataset calibration and various 4D-STEM property measurements in detail, and present results from several experimental datasets. We have also implemented a simple and universal file format appropriate for electron microscopy data in py4DSTEM, which uses the open source HDF5 standard. We hope this tool will benefit the research community, helps to move the developing standards for data and computational methods in electron microscopy, and invite the community to contribute to this ongoing, fully open-source project. I. Introduction In a scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) experiment, a beam of high energy electrons is focused to a very fine probe – on the order of or, often, smaller than the atomic lattice spacing – and rastered across the surface of the sample . In traditional STEM, a (two-dimensional) image is formed by populating the value of each pixel with the number of electrons (times a scaling factor) scattered into a detector at each beam position. The geometry of the detector – its size, shape, and position in the microscope’s diffraction plane – determines which electrons are collected at each probe position. As a result, different detector geometries can give rise to rather different images, by varying which electron scattering processes dominate image contrast . A point detector placed on the optic axis yields a bright-field STEM image which is formally equivalent by reciprocity to a TEM image. In contrast, ∗ ben.savitzky@gmail.com † cophus@gmail.com annular detectors with large inner-radii are dominated by high momentum-transfer elastic scattering events, making high-angle annular dark-field STEM a popular geometry because image contrast then generally scales monotonically with the projected potential of the sample (“Z-contrast” imaging) . Low-angle annular detectors have greater sensitivity to lighter elements, but lose the advantage of simple Z-contrast interpretability due to the increased importance of phase contrast, i.e. self- interference of the electron beam wavefunction. Many more detector geometries are possible, each best suited to reveal different aspects of sample structure, each suffering from different limitations . In four dimensional STEM (4D-STEM), we replace the standard STEM detectors, which integrate all electrons scattered over a large region, with a pixelated detector that captures the electron flux scattered to each angle in the diffraction plane [5–10]. While a typical STEM image therefore produces a single number for each position of the electron beam, a 4D-STEM dataset produces a two dimensional image of diffraction space intensities for each real space beam position. The resulting four-dimensional data hypercube can be arXiv:2003.09523v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 20 Mar 2020 2 contains complex, nanoscale structure, apparent in the distinct electron diffraction patterns across the field-of-view. From a single 4D-STEM experiment, py4DSTEM enables a range of measurements to be performed in post-processing, including virtual imaging, differential phase contrast, structural classification, strain mapping, and much more. collapsed in real space to yield information comparable to more traditional electron diffraction experiments. Alternatively, it can be collapsed in diffraction space to yield a variety of “virtual images,” corresponding to both traditional STEM imaging modes as well as more exotic virtual imaging modalities [11–15]. More information still can be extracted by judicious combination of real and reciprocal space. The structure, symmetries, and spacings of Bragg disks can be used to extract spatially resolved maps of crystallinity, grain orientations, and lattice strain [16–23]. Redundant information in overlapping Bragg disks can be leveraged to deconvolve the electron beam shape from the sample structure, yielding the sample potential itself [24–26]. Rings of diffracted intensity characteristic of amorphous samples can be used to extract correlation functions describing the short and medium range order and disorder. Indeed, the space of possible quantities of physical interest which can be extracted from a single 4D-STEM experiment is formidable, leading others to use the term “universal detectors” for 4D-STEM capable pixelated cameras . Fig. 1 shows the experimental geometry of a 4D-STEM 3 experiment, and various measurements performed from the same experimental dataset. For a mathematical discussion of STEM and 4D-STEM image formation, see Appendix A. The price paid for the versatility of 4D-STEM is new complexity in both the raw experimental data and in the computational processing required to extract meaningful measurements. Maximizing the impact this new generation of STEM experiments will have on structural characterization research now requires that the computer processing methods which enable the various 4D-STEM characterization modalities are accessible to as broad and diverse a segment of the scientific community as possible. Fortunately, a new generation of open source tools for electron scattering experiments is presently on the rise, such as hyperspy, pyXem, liberTEM, ncempy, and others[27–30]. Here, we present free and open source software for analysis of 4D-STEM data. The aim of the Python-based project py4DSTEM is threefold: (1) to make 4D-STEM data analysis easy and accessible for everyone; (2) to facilitate reproducibility, even in cases of complicated or multi-step processing workflows; and (3) to provide a comprehensive, robust suite of 4D-STEM analysis tools, enabling high throughput, multimodal analysis in which a single dataset can simultaneously provide many distinct measurements of sample structure. For ease and accessibility, py4DSTEM includes a complete API with associated documentation pages, many fully worked examples in the form of fully commented and interactive Jupyter notebooks, and a graphical user interface for fast data visualization and interaction. For reproducibility, py4DSTEM defines a set of structured data object types for 4D-STEM data processing, establishes a set of HDF5-based file format conventions for 4D-STEM data, and makes it easy to release, with any publication, the complete and fully transparent code which generates results and figures from raw data. For multimodal, high-throughput analysis, py4DSTEM includes a comprehensive suite of tools for structural analysis in crystalline and amorphous materials, including virtual imaging, phase and orientation mapping, strain mapping, radial distribution analysis, phase contrast imaging, classification, and more. A self-consistent framework allows many or even all of these measurements to be readily performed on a single dataset. The API and sample code for various analysis pipelines are freely available from the py4DSTEM repository . The organization of this document is as follows: following this introduction, Sec. II discusses the nature of 4D-STEM data, and how data is structured in py4DSTEM. Section III discusses basic processing algorithms which will typically be performed as precursors to the final measurements of interest, including locating Bragg disks, calibration, polar transformations, and classification. Section IV covers various 4D-STEM measurements that can be performed in py4DSTEM, including virtual imaging, phase mapping, strain mapping in amorphous or crystalline materials, short and medium range order analysis in amorphous materials, and phase retrieval in very thin samples. Conclusions are in Sec. V. Throughout, we have aimed to keep discussion qualitative in the main text, and have also included mathematical details for the interested reader in a number of appendices, referenced in the relevant sections. II. 4D-STEM Data Fundamentally, most 4D-STEM is just many electron diffraction experiments being run sequentially. The nature of the diffraction pattern obtained at each scan position depends on the sample structure and the illumination conditions of the microscope, as illustrated schematically in Fig. 1. In crystalline materials and with small-angle illumination, the periodic structure of the sample gives rise to a periodic pattern of disks in the diffraction plane . A bright disk appears wherever the Bragg condition is met, with the disk positions reflecting a slice through the reciprocal lattice of the crystal. In amorphous materials, concentric rings of diffuse intensity appear centered about the optic axis . The radii of these rings reflect the characteristic spacings of the atoms in the sample, and can therefore be used to extract statistical measures of structure, such as the radial distribution function. In analyzing crystalline materials, the crux of the analysis will generally be measuring the Bragg angles in each diffraction pattern, by determining the positions of all the Bragg disks. In analyzing amorphous materials, analysis will generally revolve around radial integration of the diffraction patterns. In samples containing both crystalline and amorphous regions, both types of analysis can be performed in concert. A. Experimental Conditions A complete discussion of the many experimental conditions to attend to in devising a given 4D-STEM experiment is beyond our scope, however, there is one parameter which stands apart in its centrality to both acquiring and understanding 4D-STEM data: the convergence semiangle, α. When examining a diffraction pattern, α corresponds to the radius of the bright-field disk in the diffraction plane, and therefore also the radius of each refracted Bragg disk in a crystalline sample. In real space, the probe size is inversely related to α; larger convergence angles correspond to finer probes, and overlapping disks are required to generate sub-lattice sized probes and therefore allow atomic resolution imaging . In extracting a strain map, for example, non-overlapping disks are important, both to facilitate the detection 4 of the disk positions, and also because strain is a physical quantity only defined on length scales equal to or larger than single unit cells. For a ptychographic reconstruction of the atomic potentials of very thin materials, overlapped disks are essential, as they provide the redundant information required to extract the phase of the electron wavefunction and the sample electrostatic potential . For analysis of amorphous materials, measuring radial distribution functions requires nearly- parallel illumination (a small semiconvergence angle), while measurements of medium range order in fluctuation electron microscopy experiments will often vary the probe semiangle to probe different sizes of atomic clusters . In general, the convergence angle should be selected carefully in light of the particular requirements of the experiment. B. Multimodal analysis - one dataset, many measurements A major advantage of 4D-STEM is the ability to perform a single experiment from which many distinctly meaningful structural measurements can be made. We take as our guiding example the Gd2Ti2O7 (GTO) crystal shown in Fig. 1. A pyrochlore structured GTO single crystal was first bombarded with ions, creating an amorphized layer. Then the sample was annealed, creating both a layer of recrystallization on the parent lattice as well as a band of smaller crystallites embedded in an amorphous matrix. Each of these regions is clearly visible in the diffraction patterns associated with various beam positions of the 4D-STEM scan. A selection of the types of measurements that can be performed from this dataset are shown in the figure. These include: virtual imaging spanning bright field images, annular dark field images, and dark field images of individual or multiple Bragg reflections (see Sec. IV A); differential phase contrast imaging, whereby shifts in the center of mass of the beam are used to back out the sample structure1 (see Sec. IV G 1); strain mapping, showing the local deformations of the atomic lattice (see Sec. IV C); and structural classification, where regions 1 Note that while DPC provides useful image contrast in a fairly wide array of contexts, physical interpretation, and in particular interpretation in terms of the local sample potential, should be undertaken with care. In this dataset, for instance, the presence of non-overlapping Bragg disks indicates that there exists sample structure (the atomic lattice) which is too fine for our probe to resolve, and which will not be reflected in a DPC reconstruction. Moreover, the spatial sampling here is larger than probe width, so any variation in the potential between sampling points will be effaced in the reconstruction. Thus this DPC image, though still informative to a point, has no simple physical interpretation. Images in this category might be referred to as “pseudo-DPC”. For more discussion, and an example where the DPC image is well thought of as a reconstructed sample potential, see Sec. IV G 1 and Appendix I. of distinct structure are identified and segmented (see Secs. III E and IV B). With py4DSTEM, these analyses and more can all be applied to a dataset within a single, unified framework. C. Data Structures 4-D data DataCube 2-D slices DiffractionSlice RealSlice N-D points PointListArray PointList of 5 classes of dataobjects – DataCube, DiffractionSlice, RealSlice, PointList, and PointListArray objects. Data in py4DSTEM is structured in five different types, broadly distinguished by their dimensionality, shown in Fig. 2. In-program, these are implemented as the following Python classes: DataCube, DiffractionSlice, RealSlice, PointList, and PointListArray. DataCube instances contain a 4D data array corresponding to the complete 4D-STEM dataset. DiffractionSlice and RealSlice instances contain one or more 2D arrays with shapes corresponding to that of diffraction space (i.e. the detector shape) or of real space (i.e. the raster scan shape), respectively. A DiffractionSlice might contain a single diffraction pattern, an image of the probe over vacuum, or the average background noise on the detector. A RealSlice might contain a virtual image, a Boolean mask indicating scan positions to be included or excluded in an analysis routine, or the x and y components of a lattice vector calculated at each scan position. This last example describes a RealSlice of depth 2, i.e. the data contained in the RealSlice class instance is two distinct 2D arrays (x and y of the lattice vector); in general DiffractionSlice and RealSlice objects can have arbitrary depth. The PointList class is flexible, containing a set of points of arbitrary length in an arbitrary number of dimensions. On instantiation of a PointList, a set of coordinates must be specified – e.g. to specify the positions and intensities of the Bragg disk positions detected in a single diffraction pattern, (‘qx’, ‘qy’, ‘intensity’) might be used. Points may then be added or removed from the PointList, e.g. as 5 Bragg disks are detected and then thresholded. Data in PointLists can be easily extracted or sorted by chosen coordinates. PointListArray instances are 2D arrays of PointLists, organized in memory to facilitate quick access of the PointList corresponding to a single array element, and are useful when storing a PointList for each scan position. All these datastructure classes inherit from a parent class called DataObject which facilitates basic searching, storing, and saving functionality for all data generated by py4DSTEM, as well as linking to any relevant metadata. D. File Structure py4DSTEM saves data in the HDF5 format, described on the HDF5 website . A description of the flavor of HDF5 used in py4DSTEM, which we refer to as “electron microscopy datasets” or EMD files, is available on the EMD website. Each HDF5 / EMD file generated by py4DSTEM has a top level group containing all data, allowing for the possibility of nesting many py4DSTEM files in a single, larger file, and version tags to allow for backwards compatibility. Within the top level group a py4DSTEM file contains 3 high level groups: data, metadata, and log. The data group typically contains 5 subgroups corresponding to the 5 datastructures discussed in the previous section, and each of these contains any number of subgroups, each storing the contents of a single corresponding dataobject, including its raw data and any relevant metadata (e.g. the length of a PointList, the dimensions of a DiffractionSlice, etc). This structure makes it possible to bundle all elements of one or more data processing pipelines pertaining to a single raw dataset in a single location, and simplifies reuse between measurements of any shared datastructures. Loading data necessarily varies based on the input file type. For its native HDF5 files, py4DSTEM supports scanning the contents of a file before pulling anything into memory, so the entirety of large files need not be loaded if only some subset of smaller dataobjects are required. For very large datasets, memory mapping of datacubes is supported, whereby the contents of a loaded datacube object are left in non-volatile storage, and individual diffraction pattern are pulled into RAM only as they are accessed, enabling analysis of datasets that are larger than available system RAM. Binning during loading is also supported. For non-native files, many of the file types used in electron microscopy are proprietary and the contents are not publicly described, which hinders scientific progress within electron microscopy. py4DSTEM therefore relies on the i/o components of two other open source projects, hyperspy and openNCEM. Most electron microscopy file formats are currently supported, and to-date the py4DSTEM reader has been tested and works successfully for 4D-STEM data in .dm3, .dm4, etc., formats. The metadata group contains 5 subgroups: microscope, sample, user, calibration, comments, and original. The microscope group contains information related to the microscope setup and acquisition parameters, such as the accelerating voltage of the beam, the camera length, the convergence angle, and so forth. The sample group stores information such as the material imaged, synthesis information, and any sample preparation. The user group is for information related to the scientist or scientists who obtained the data, including names, institutions, and contact information. The calibration group contains the pixel sizes (in real and diffraction space), as well as any additional calibration information such as rotational offsets, diffraction shifts, and elliptical distortions, which will be discussed in more detail in Sec. III C The comments group is for any miscellaneous comments. The original group contains any raw metadata scraped from the original data file. More details about the program structure, interface, implementation, and usage, including its data handling, modules, the 4D-STEM HDF5 file structure, logging, and metadata handling is available in the py4DSTEM documentation, or in the py4DSTEM repository. III. Basic Processing In this section, we discuss the basic processing required for most datasets, namely: preprocessing in Sec. III A, Bragg disk detection (for crystalline samples) in Sec. III B, calibration in Sec. III C, polar transformations (for amorphous samples) in Sec. III D, and classification in Sec. III E. These processing steps are basic in the sense of underpinning all subsequent analyses, rather than in the sense of simplicity; these methods are not aimed at producing a final measurement or plot, but rather are the necessary preparatory work to ensure such ultimate measurements are possible, and are optimally accurate. Measurements and applications are addressed in Sec. IV. A. Preprocessing This section discusses several preprocessing steps that may be performed on a 4D-STEM dataset. None of these steps are universally required, however, care in preprocessing can significantly speed up subsequent processing, and lead to higher accuracy and precision in final analyses. patterns from the GTO dataset. Vertical streaks are apparent in the image, as well as a handful of individual, erroneously saturated pixels. Zeroing the hot pixels, calculating a background image and subtracting it from each diffraction pattern, and then calculating a new average diffraction image yields Fig. 3(b). Here, hot 6 0 100 200 counts x106 log(counts) 0 1 2 3 0 5 10 15 Pixel intensities (a) (b) Bkgrnd subtraction (e) (f) (c) (d) Electron counting Bin and crop 2 nm-1 pattern of raw 4D-STEM data. (b) The same position averaged diffraction pattern after subtracting a background determined from the yellow regions in (a). (c,d) The initial step of an electron counting procedure, in which minimum and maximum thresholds (black and red dashed lines, respectively) of the pixel intensities are used to rule out background pixels and x-ray strikes. (e,f) Binning and cropping. pixels were found by detecting outliers in the histogram of pixel intensities across the dataset. The background was determined by identifying edges of the detector which were beyond the HAADF detector and should ideally have no counts, then using this region (shown in yellow) over many diffraction patterns to calculate the average background streaking. Alternatively, one or many dark reference images can be recorded directly. While the nature of noise in a raw 4D-STEM dataset will vary from camera to camera and experiment to experiment, background subtraction is generally recommended. In 4D-STEM data with a sufficiently low electron dose, it is possible to detect individual electron strike events. Electron counting, i.e. determining and recording the diffraction space positions of each electron incident on the detector, is beneficial for both noise reduction and data compression. In py4DSTEM, this is implemented by first calculating a dark reference for the detector. A histogram of pixel intensity values is then generated from a random sampling of detector frames, and is used to calculate an upper intensity threshold (for excluding x- ray strikes) and a lower intensity threshold (for excluding the background). In Fig. 3, the histograms in panels (c,d) correspond to the low-dose dataset shown in (e,f). These diffraction patterns were recorded by placing an “amplitude plate” aperture in a condenser aperture, as described in . Looping through each scan position, the dark reference is subtracted and the thresholds are applied to each detector frame, and the local maxima of the resulting image are identified. These local maxima are considered electron strike events. Optionally, their positions can be refined to subpixel precision. The electron counting shown in the figure compresses this data by a factor of ∼6000. The most basic preprocessing functions include reshaping, binning, and cropping data. Binning and cropping can be performed in either real or diffraction space, and allow large datasets to be reduced to more manageable sizes. For selected file formats, py4DSTEM also supports data binning on import. shows an electron beam which has been shaped using a structured condenser aperture; from panel (e) to (f) this data has been cropped and binned by a factor of three. Reshaping the data may be necessary in some cases, for instance, some file formats do not contain complete information about the real space scan shape, and thus can be initially loaded as 3D arrays (with the two real space dimensions collapsed into one) before being correctly reshaped into 4D arrays. B. Bragg disk detection For crystalline or semi-crystalline data, analysis generally begins by identifying the locations of all the Bragg disk reflections in each diffraction pattern, which correspond to the reciprocal lattice points of the crystal. In py4DSTEM, we find the Bragg disk positions in two steps: first, we extract the structure of the probe over vacuum in diffraction space to use as a template. We then find the Bragg disks by determining all the positions in each diffraction pattern that match the structure of this template . py4DSTEM includes 3 methods for generating vacuum probes. Ideally, we use an image or averaged image stack of the probe over vacuum. Alternatively, if an experimental 4D-STEM scan contains a vacuum region, or a region with only very thin material (e.g. amorphous carbon support), this can be used to generate a vacuum probe. In this case, the probes from each vacuum scan position should be aligned, to correct the translation of the diffraction patterns as the beam is scanned, and then averaged. Finally, if neither of these options is possible, a synthetic probe can be generated. Once a vacuum probe has been obtained, two additional processing steps are applied, with the purpose of generating a kernel for cross correlative template matching with the individual diffraction patterns. First, the center of the unscattered electron probe is found and shifted to the origin. Without this step, all measurements will have an offset, leading to incorrect results. Second, a Gaussian wider than the probe is subtracted, leading to a region of negative intensity surrounding the probe itself, such that the total integrated intensity of the kernel is zero. This has two advantages: first, it ensures that the cross correlation of noisy data is, on average, zero where there are no Bragg disks. Second, the negative kernel intensity penalizes cross correlation values where a Bragg disk and a template are slightly misaligned, enhancing the detectability of correlation maxima where disk/template alignment is perfect. While subtraction of a Gaussian is a useful heuristic, other approaches are possible, for instance those described in [22, 40– 7 (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h) (i) (j) (k) Vacuum Probe Diffraction Data Bragg Disk Positions BF Image Template matching via cross correlation 0.2 nm-1 50 nm 2 nm-1 by cross correlation of the probe template with each diffraction pattern. (d-g) Diffraction patterns corresponding to the four scan positions indicated in (b). (h-k) The detected Bragg peaks for these four diffraction patterns. The size of each circle indicates the cross correlation intensity, a rough approximation for disk intensity. 44]. Adding structure to the electron probes using an amplitude mask in the objective aperture has also been shown to significantly enhance the precision of Bragg disk detection . The Bragg disks are located by calculating the cross correlation of the probe kernel with each diffraction pattern, and then locating the correlation maxima. The disk positions can be located with subpixel precision via local Fourier upsampling in the region about each maximum . py4DSTEM allows for standard cross correlations, as well as phase or hybrid correlations, to be performed at this stage; see Appendix B for detailed discussion. The detected Bragg disks in each diffraction pattern are a stored in a PointList instance with three coordinates specifying the disk position in the diffraction plane and its cross correlation intensity, (qx, qy, I). The Bragg disks from the complete datacube are stored in a PointListArray instance, with one such PointList for each scan position. For many analyses, such as strain or orientation mapping, all subsequent computation can be performed on this PointListArray alone, as it contains the most crucial scattering information. The data compression here is significant, as only 3 numbers are now required to store each Bragg disk. For a datacube consisting of 512×512 pixel diffraction patterns with a bit depth of 16, 20 detected disks in an average diffraction pattern, and using 64-bit floating point numbers for the disk coordinates, this scheme compresses the data by a factor of approximately 1000. Once the Bragg disks have been detected, all peaks from all scan positions may be collapsed into a single image in the shape of the diffraction plane. The resulting object is roughly interpretable as a position averaged probability distribution of reciprocal lattice points, and is defined carefully in Appendix C. Figure 5 shows an example using the GTO dataset. We refer to this object as a Bragg vector map (BVM). Figure 5a shows the BVM of the complete GTO 4D-STEM scan, while Figs. 5(c-f) show the BVMs generated from subsets of the scan region indicated in the virtual image shown in Fig. 5b. The BVM of the single crystal region, Fig. 5c, shows sharp reciprocal lattice peaks of the orthorhombic crystal in the ⟨01 ̄1⟩ projection. The BVM of Fig. 5d also contains sharp peaks, now oriented isotropically about the origin, indicating many small, randomly 8 (a) (c) (d) (e) (f) (b) 2 nm-1 2 nm-1 50 nm from the complete dataset. (b) Virtual bright-field image with boxes indicating four regions of interest. (d-f) Bragg vector maps generated from the four corresponding regions shown in (b). oriented crystal grains. ring resulting from amorphous scattering in this mixed cystalline/amorphous region. Note that ideally the BVM would be insensitive to amorphous scattering because it should only contain counts where Bragg scattering occurs, however, false-positive Bragg disk detection can occur in the amorphous halo, resulting the ring here as well as in Fig. 5f. Figure 5e shows little amorphous signal, sharp peaks indicating crystal scattering, and fewer peaks than in Fig. 5d, suggesting this layer of the sample may contain fewer, larger crystallites. Figure 5f shows little or no crystalline signal, suggesting a purely amorphous layer. Phase mapping, found in Sec. IV B, confirms these hypotheses about the sample structure. BVMs are a useful tool in 4D-STEM data processing. In py4DSTEM they are used in processing pipelines including calibration (see Fig. 6), classification (see Fig. 8), strain mapping (see Fig. 11), and others. C. Calibration Calibration is the single most important step of any quantitatively meaningful 4D-STEM data analysis, as all subsequent measurements hinge on the accuracy of the calibration. In 4D-STEM a number of calibrations are desirable. These include correcting shifts of the diffraction pattern from the raster of the beam, correcting elliptical distortions of the diffraction patterns, calibrating the rotational offset between real and diffraction space, and calibrating the pixel sizes. Which calibrations are required will generally depend on the sample being imaged, the measurements being made, and the required precision. The data required to perform calibrations is similarly contingent, and depends on the structure of the sample, and which calibrations need to be performed. An image or a stack of images of the STEM probe over vacuum should always be acquired, and is important for analyses including Bragg disk detection, calibration of the convergence semiangle, and deconvolution of the probe. Scanning a standard calibration sample of known structure at the beginning or end of a microscope session is highly recommended, and will typically ensure the most accurate calibration of pixel sizes. Using a standard calibration sample which is polycrystalline is also highly recommended, to facilitate calibration of inevitable elliptical stretching of the diffraction patterns due to imperfect optics and alignments . Obtaining an image of the probe, positioned over the sample and then highly defocused to create a shadow image in the diffraction plane, is the recommended data for calibrating the real/diffraction space rotational offset. In some cases it is possible to obtain the necessary calibrations directly from the experimental 4D-STEM scan, however, this is not guaranteed to be possible, and is especially dubious for samples of unknown structure. 9 dataset . The top row of subpanels shows the data: a 4D-STEM scan of the sample of interest, in this case a single-crystalline, strained gold nanoparticle (Fig. 6a); a 4D-STEM scan of a standard calibration sample, in this case polycrystalline gold (Fig. 6b); an image of the STEM probe in the diffraction plane (Fig. 6c); and an image of the STEM probe after defocusing to make a shadow image (Fig. 6d). Diffraction shifts – overall translation of the diffraction patterns resulting from the scanning of the electron beam – yield apparent shifts of the position optic axis from one diffraction pattern to the next . The size of the diffraction shifts depend on the real space field-of-view of the scan, on the camera length, and on the particular instrument used; generally speaking, we recommend measuring diffraction shifts in scans larger than a few tens of nanometers, and then applying corrections if deemed necessary. In py4DSTEM, this calibration is performed by identifying the unscattered beam at each scan position, and measuring the shifts in its position. These shifts are then fit to a plane or low order polynomial, which can be used to correct the diffraction shifts. For correcting the shifts, it is possible to shift each diffraction pattern by the measured amount to generate a new, corrected datacube, however, this is slow, resource intensive, and often unnecessary. Instead, it is often possible to simply use the measured shift values to set the origin of coordinates in any subsequent measurements made on individual diffraction patterns. diffraction shift corrections have been applied to the measured bragg peak positions. The zoomed in images centered on the central peak (f,l) illustrate that the blurred peak of (f) collapses to a sharp peak in (l) after shift correction. In (g-p) we show the initial measurement of shifts of the central disk, a masking step to ignore some subset of data points, a smooth fit to the data, and the residuals, which are all much less than a single pixel. Elliptical distortions, in which circular features about the optic axis are stretched into ellipses, are generally experimentally unavoidable . These result from imperfect alignments, including off-axis illumination on the probe-forming condenser aperture, stigmation in the post-specimen optics, and finite tilt of the detector plane relative to the plane normal to the optic axis. Even in a well aligned system these distortions may be significant, and are therefore important to correct in many quantitatively sensitive experiments. In py4DSTEM, elliptical distortions can be measured by fitting an elliptical function to data within some specified annular region, as shown in Fig. 6(q,r). The functional forms of the fits are discussed in more detail in Appendix D. With elliptical fits in hand, the elliptical distortions can be corrected. For crystalline data in which the Bragg peaks have been measured and subsequent analysis will be performed on the measured peak positions only, correction may be accomplished by shifting the peak positions while leaving the raw data untouched. correction has been performed. An alternate approach to elliptical correction is to take a polar-elliptical transform, effectively re-sampling the data into a coordinate system which shares the data’s ellipticity. This latter approach is frequently useful in analysis of amorphous datasets, and is discussed further in Sec. III D. There is in general some angle of rotation between the electron beam in the sample plane and in the detector plane. Thus in order to correctly map orientations measured in the diffraction plane into real space, it is necessary to measure and account for this rotational offset. The simplest and most robust way to measure the offset is to compare a STEM image to a defocused probe shadow image. Any STEM image will suffice, provided that the same features are visible in the STEM and shadow images, and in Fig. 6 the bright field virtual image is used. Two identical points in each of the two images are identified in Fig. 6s,t and are then used to calculate the rotational offset. If a shadow image has not been obtained, other methods to determine the rotational offset are possible, however, will necessarily be less robust. Two additional techniques for rotational calibration are provided in py4DSTEM, both based on the principles of differential phase contrast imaging. As a result, these methods tend to work well when the assumptions of differential phase contrast hold. They are discussed further, along with the relevant caveats, in Sec. IV G 1. Calibration of the diffraction space pixel size minimally requires measuring a single diffraction vector with a known spacing. More accurate measurement is possible by fitting to several known spacings. Figure 6u shows a radial integral (see Sec. III D) of the elliptically corrected Bragg vector map shown in Fig. 6r. By indexing the peaks observed and using the known lattice spacing of gold, we use the measured peak positions to calculate the detector pixels size. The horizontal axis of these plots can then be written in physical units of ̊A−1. Ideally, the real space pixel size is determined by the distance the electron probe is rastered by the scan coils between detector frames, and is therefore equivalent to the size calibration of the instrument’s STEM scan. For this reason, processing tools for re- calibration of the real space pixel size are not provided. However, should such calibration be desired, it is straightforward to edit the py4DSTEM metadata based on independent measurement of the real space pixel sizes. When specimen drift leads to large deviations of the pixel size and scan direction angles, further pixel size measurements and drift correction may be required [49– 52]. D. Polar Transformation Transformation from Cartesian to polar coordinates is an important operation in many 4D-STEM analyses, 10 R/Q rotation (a) (b) (c) (d) Calibration Data 4D-STEM, sample of interest 4D-STEM, calibration sample Defocused probe Vacuum probe Diffraction Shifts (e) (f) (k) (l) After shift correction Measurement Mask Fit Residuals (g) (h) (i) (j) (m) (n) (o) (p) x shifts y shifts Elliptical Distortions (s) (q) (r) After ellipse correction Before ellipse correction Shadow image STEM image Detector Pixel Size 1.0 0.6 0.8 1.2 0 0.2 0.4 (u) 111 200 220 311 111 200 220 311 (t) Intensity (A.U.) Before shift correction 20 nm 20 nm 3 nm-1 5 nm-1 0.5 nm-1 20 nm 5 nm-1 5 nm-1 20 nm 1 nm-1 +3 -3 (pix) has been simulated. (a) A 4D-STEM dataset of a sample of interest, here a strained, single-crystal gold nanoparticle. (b) A 4D-STEM dataset of a standard calibration sample, here a distribution of gold nanoparticles. In both (a) and (b), a virtual bright-field image and three selected diffraction patterns of the 4D-STEM datasets are shown. (c) An image or image stack of the probe over vacuum. (d) An image of the probe over the sample and defocused until a shadow image is visible. (e-u) A complete set of 4D-STEM calibrations. (e-p) Measurement and correction of translations of the diffraction patterns with the beam raster. (q-r) Measurement and correction of elliptical distortions. (s,t) Measurement of the rotational offset of the electron beam between the real and diffraction planes. (u) Measurement of the detector pixel size. especially of amorphous data. Sections IV E and IV F discuss two examples, fluctuation electron microscopy and radial distribution function analysis. Polar-elliptical transformations are useful for correcting elliptical distortions, as discussed in Sec. III C. This also enables calculation of elliptically corrected radial integrals. the simulated calibration sample of gold nanoparticles described in Sec. III C. Both a polar (a,c) and polar- elliptical (b,d) transformation have been performed, in the latter case using elliptical parameters fit from the image. In the polar case we see that, just as the circular coordinate axes poorly align with the data in (a), so too do the rings turn into vertical sinusoids in (c). In 11 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 k (Å 1) (a) polar coords polar elliptical coords polar transform polar elliptical transform radial integral (b) (c) (d) (e) ky kx ky kx θ k θ k polar-elliptical polar Polar and polar-elliptical transforms. (a) Bragg vector map of the simulated gold nanoparticle calibration dataset, overlaid with a polar coordinate grid. (b) Identical data to (a), but overlaid with a polar-elliptical grid calibrated to this data. (c) The polar transform corresponding to (a). Note that the rings have been mapped to sinusoids, due to elliptical distortions. (d) The polar-elliptical transform corresponding to (b). The rings now map to lines, indicating that the elliptical calibration is correct. (e) Radial integrals calculated from the polar (red) and polar-elliptical (black) transforms. contrast, in (b) the axes and data are well aligned, and in (d) the rings turn into vertical lines rather than sine curves. Radial integration of a single or averaged diffraction pattern is an important operation, providing higher SNR information about electron scattering at each spatial frequency, at the expense of losing any orientation information. The polar-elliptical transform makes elliptically corrected radial integration easy – just sum along the theta axis of the transformed data. Figure 7e shows an example, with the radial integral calculated from the calibrated polar-elliptical transform in black and the radial integral from the simple polar transform in red. Note that the simple radial integral broadens peaks and, in the case of the first peak, splits a single peak into two apparent, but spurious, peaks. E. Classification In the context of 4D-STEM, classification refers to assigning one or more integer values to each scan position, which identify this position with associated classes. Ideally, each class corresponds to a type of diffraction pattern, or to structurally meaningful features or motifs, such that a scan position will be included in a given class if and only if its diffraction pattern contains these features. Virtual imaging, and thoughtful combination of virtual images and colormaps, is often the easiest way to visually differentiate distinct structural regions, and can be a powerful tool for microanalysis [12– 14, 53]. By identifying each pixel with discrete class types classification goes a step further, facilitating subsequent analyses as well as enabling generation and identification of class diffraction patterns . A 4D-STEM scan was taken of a medium entropy alloy containing a twin boundary, which is about three quarters of the way up the virtual image in Fig. 8a. Diffraction patterns averaged from 100 scan positions each about the positions shown with red, green, and blue sqaures are shown in Fig. 8b-d. Inspection reveals that the reciprocal lattice in Fig. 8b is twinned with respect to that of Figs 8c,d. This dataset is therefore an excellent testbed for a classification algorithm because the correct answer is immediately apparent: each diffraction pattern in this dataset should be assigned to one of two classes, according to the side of the twin boundary where it falls. The algorithm proceeds as follows. First, all Bragg disks are located, as described in Sec. III B. Next, the BVM is calculated, after any relevant calibrations such as diffraction shift correction have been performed – see Fig. 8e. The N maxima of the BVM are then located. A Voronoi tesselation of the diffraction plane is constructed using these maxima as the initial points, which carves the diffraction plane into a set of N regions, each of which is defined as the set of all points closest to one BVM maximum - see Fig. 8f. Each of these N regions is assigned an integer value. Next, the set of Bragg peaks which has been detected at each scan position is retrieved, and each peak is assigned a label according to which Voronoi region it falls in - see Fig. 8g-i. At this stage the complexity of the data has been reduced significantly - for each scan position, we have a small 12 (a) Virtual image (b) (c) (d) Diffraction patterns 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 (e) (f) Bragg Vector Map Find maxima and assign labels (j) Classified data 0 1 3 9 10 11 14 16 17 19 21 23 24 26 27 28 29 32 33 35 40 42 45 46 47 49 50 51 54 57 59 63 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 13 15 17 18 20 25 26 36 37 39 41 45 48 49 50 56 59 61 62 63 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 12 13 15 17 18 20 37 39 41 43 48 49 50 61 62 (g) (h) (i) BP co-occurance 100 diffraction patterns each from the regions shown in (a). (e) The Bragg vector map. (f) BVM maxima have been located, labelled, and used to segment the diffraction plane. (g-h) The segmentation in (f) is used to label the Bragg peaks in each diffraction pattern. (j) Co-occurance of Bragg peaks is used as a criterion to assign scan positions to classes, resulting in a classification which clearly identifies the twin boundary. set of integers encoding where Bragg scattering occurred, rather than an entire 2D diffraction pattern. Initial classes are identified by determining which Bragg peaks co-occur with the highest frequency, and these classes may then be refined, for instance via non-negative matrix factorization. Here, the final result is shown in Fig. 8j, with the data cleanly separated along the twin boundary. More detailed discussion of the algorithm can be found in Appendix E, and more complex classification example can be found in Sec. IV B. IV. Measurements and applications In this section, we build on the techniques described in Sec. III to make various measurements of physical interest from 4D-STEM datasets. In Sec. IV A we generate virtual images. In Sec. IV B we apply the classification algorithm discussed in Sec. III E to the GTO dataset to retrieve maps of various crystalline and amorphous phases present in the complex, nanostructured sample. In Secs. IV C and IV D we calculate strain maps from crystalline data, and from amorphous data respectively. In Secs. IV E and IV F we further analyze amorphous samples, calculating radial distribution functions in the former section and performing fluctuation electron microscopy analysis in the latter section. We conclude with two phase retrieval methods for reconstructing the sample potential, demonstrating differential phase contrast imaging in Sec. IV G 1 and ptychography in Sec. IV G 2. A. Virtual Imaging In a traditional STEM experiment, many imaging modalities are possible, by placing detectors of different geometries in different positions in the diffraction plane . 4D-STEM enables virtual recreation of a wide swath of such imaging modalities in post processing . See Appendix A. from the single crystalline region of the GTO sample, overlaid with various virtual detectors which were used to generate the images in Fig. 9c-g. Figure 9a shows annular dark field detectors of various inner and outer collection angles, and their corresponding virtual images are shown in Fig. 9c. The Miller indices of each Bragg reflection in the ⟨110⟩ projection are shown in Figure 9b, and virtual images corresponding to a detector placed about each 13 detectors. (c) Virtual annular dark-field images. (d) Virtual dark-field images corresponding to circular detectors about each of the indexed Bragg peaks. (e) Virtual bright-field image. (f,g) Virtual images corresponding to the yellow and red detectors shown in (b), respectively. The inner, yellow peaks are only present in one of the two expected crystal structures in this system. of these peaks are shown in Fig. 9d. Here, a single 4D- STEM scan is used to virtually recreate images analogous to 45 distinct traditional dark-field TEM images, similar to . and red, corresponding to the three virtual images shown in Fig. 9e-g. The first is a virtual bright field image, while the latter two use virtual detectors which would be challenging to realize physically, but which are of particular interest because of the structural significance of the yellow and red peaks to two crystalline phases in this system: the red peaks are present in both of the two expected single crystal phases (pyrochlore and fluorite), while the yellow peaks vanish in the higher symmetry fluorite phase. Thus with 4D-STEM, it is possible to virtually recreate images corresponding to every possible integrating STEM detector geometry, and also to generate complex, bespoke detectors matched to the sample structure and properties of interest. B. Phase Mapping An important problem in many applications is mapping distinct structural phases, and potentially many phases, present within a single sample . In this section we demonstrate mapping regions of a 4D-STEM scan in which the diffraction patterns are sufficiently similar to be considered a single type, using the classification algorithm discussed in Sec. III E. This therefore constitutes ‘phase’ mapping in the sense of distinguishing regions of structural similarity, defined in terms of differences in the measured diffraction patterns. These differences may result from the presence of distinct crystal structures, crystal grains of various orientations, amorphous regions, and so on. The meaning of any one of these phases must be interpreted in the context of the particular sample, and the details of each phases’ average diffraction pattern . We return to the GTO dataset as an example. The results are shown in Fig. 10. The classification algorithm identifies 82 distinct crystalline phases, including 5 single crystal phases (Fig. 10b,e) and 77 smaller crystallites (Fig. 10d,g). We then additionally identified two amorphous phases (Fig. 10c,f). This was accomplished by masking away all detected Bragg peaks, calculating radial integrals of the masked diffraction patterns, then using these curves as inputs to a non-negative matrix factorization algorithm. Masking Bragg peaks is not required for purely amorphous data, but is essential for mixed amorphous/crystalline specimens, as Bragg scattering even from small crystallites in a primarily amorphous matrix would otherwise dominate the radially integrated signal. In this dataset, we find a single crystal region which appears to transition smoothly from a pyrochlore structure (Fig. IV Bb, dark purple, and Fig. 10e, upper left) to a flourite structure in which the superlattice reflections vanish (Fig. IV Bb, yellow, and Fig. 10e, lower right). Below the single crystal region is a mixed crystalline/amorphous region (Fig. IV Bc, lighter green, and Fig. 10f, right). Below this is a layer of larger crystallites (Fig. IV Bd,g), followed by a pure amorphous region (Fig. IV Bc, darker green, and Fig. 10f, left). With a phase map in hand, any number of additional analyses, such as the orientation or size distribution of the crystallites, or the strain in the single crystal (see Fig. 11), become readily calculable. 14 described in III E. (b,e) The single crystal phases and their class diffraction patterns. (c,f) The amorphous phases and their class diffraction patterns. (d,g) The polycrystalline phases and their class diffraction patterns. C. Crystalline Strain Mapping The diffraction pattern of a crystalline sample from a low index zone axis contains a grid of Bragg disks given by the reciprocal lattice of the sample. Therefore the spacing of the Bragg disks is inversely proportional to the real space atomic spacing. Precise measurements of the reciprocal lattice vectors can therefore be used to map the local strain present in a crystalline sample, given by the deviations of the lattice from the ideal spacing and angles [18, 60–64]. In Fig. 11 we map the strain of the single crystal regions of the GTO data. Obtaining a strain map begins with Bragg peak detection as discussed in Sec. III B and data calibration as discussed in Sec. III C. Beginning from the calibrated BVM of the region of interest (Fig. 11a), the average reciprocal lattice vectors are extracted by taking its Radon transform, and then finding the projection angles at which the peaks of the BVM align (Fig. 11b). With the lattice vectors in hand, the BVM peaks are indexed (Fig. 11c). We then refine the reciprocal lattice vectors for each diffraction pattern by performing a fit to its set of detected Bragg peaks, using the average lattice vectors as an initial guess and weighting the fit according to the cross correlation intensities of the detected peaks. A reference lattice is chosen, and the infinitesimal strain tensor is computed at each beam position by examining the deviation of its local lattice vectors from the reference lattice. For further discussion see Appendix F. The results of this analysis are shown in Fig. 11e- h. Here, the x- and y-directions are shown in both real and diffraction space with red and orange arrows, respectively. εxx and εyy refer to the compressive/tensile (negative/positive) strain of the lattice along the x and y directions shown, while εxy and θ are the shear strain and the rotation of the lattice, respectively. Among other revealing features, the εxx map in this data shows significant tensile strain along the interface of the parent and recrystallized single crystal, indicating stretching of the crystal perpendicular to the interface. The choice of reference lattice is crucial to obtaining meaningful strain maps. In the simplest case, the experimental 4D-STEM scan contains a region of known undeformed lattice, which can be used directly to define the reference lattice. Alternatively, it is possible to obtain a separate scan of unstrained material to use as reference, however in this case, good calibrations are essential – see Sec. III C. With good calibrations and a known crystal structure, it is also possible to define a reference lattice by hand. In the case of the GTO dataset, in which there is a parent crystal at the top of the image and a region of recrystallization below, the parent crystal can be used as reference. Strain tensor values depend, in general, on the choice of coordinate system. It is therefore necessary to specify coordinates; without this specification, e.g. by including the coordinate axes on the plots, strain maps are not physically interpretable. Because there is some arbitrary rotation between real and diffraction space in 4D-STEM data, it is also important to show the orientation of the 15 yy (f) 0.00 0.75 1.50 % 0.00 0.50 1.00 xx (e) xy (g) (h) Diffraction space Real space Initial Chosen Coordinates Coordinates 1. rotate 2. possible flip (i) x y kx ky 000 222 222 004 004 222 220 222 113 113 331 113 113 440 331 440 220 331 331 111 333 333 111 111 115 115 333 333 111 002 002 115 224 224 115 224 224 442 442 006 444 335 442 006 335 442 0 2 (a) (b) (c) 2 nm-1 100 nm of the crystalline region of the GTO sample. (b) Automated detection of the lattice vectors, using the Radon transform. (c) The indexed Bragg vector map. (e-h) Strain maps of the single crystal region. The upper color bar applies to (e-g), and the lower colorbar to (h). (i) The relevant coordinate systems in real and diffraction space. axes in both real and diffraction space. In Fig. 11h, two sets of yellow axes show the chosen coordinate with respect to which the strain maps are are measured, in real space and diffraction space respectively. In this data, the rotation between the two was small (∼ 2◦), however note that in general it need not be, and will vary between microscopes. The best coordinate system to use for a give strain map depends on the sample and the relevant material questions. Typically, orienting one of the principle axes along some important crystallographic direction is best, and in Fig. 11 the strain x-direction has been oriented along the ⟨1 ̄10⟩ direction, which is also direction of ion bombardment and of recrystallization. In a strain mapping workflow in py4DSTEM, calculating the strain from the reference lattice produces a strain map with respect to a coordinate system oriented along the detector frame (Fig. 11i, top row); typically, some coordinate orientation which is sensible for the system and questions under study should then be chosen, and the strain map rotated into this coordinate system (Fig. 11i, bottom row). D. Amorphous Strain Mapping Electron diffraction experiments of amorphous materials, or materials containing a substantial fraction of an amorphous phase, will typically include ring-like features with a radius given by a characteristic scattering length. Similarly to crystalline materials, a local increase or decrease in the average atomic spacing (i.e. strain) in amorphous materials will cause a decrease or increase respectively in the amorphous ring radius. By fitting an elliptical function to each diffraction image, we can directly measure these deviations due to local strain. This has been demonstrated both in individual TEM diffraction images and in in situ 4D-STEM experiments . In py4DSTEM, we have implemented strain measurements of amorphous materials using the same elliptic fitting routines described in Sec. III C and Appendix D. Figure 12a-c show the elliptical fits. In each of the three plots shown, the data being displayed alternates in a pinwheel pattern between the data and the fit, for easy visual assessment of the fit quality. In the average diffraction pattern of the pure amorphous region, Fig. 12a, the data (shaded blue) is in excellent agreement with the fit. Using this fit as an initial guess, noisier individual diffraction patterns like Fig. 12b,c can then be fit as well. In data containing mixed amorphous and crystalline material, to obtain good elliptical fits to the amorphous signal it is important to mask off any Bragg scattering. In Fig. 12b,c the smaller black circles represent such masked regions. from these fits, then finding the deviation of the elliptical distortions from a reference. Here the median of the fully amorphous region is used. As with crystalline strain mapping, the choice of reference is important, and should be selected carefully based on the individual experiment. along the shown x and y directions as well as the shear strain, are comparable to the crystalline εxx, εyy, and εxy plots from Fig. 11. shows 1 2(εxx + εyy), representing the local dilation of the structure. Across the four shown amorphous strain plots we observe local structural changes, especially at the crystalline-amorphous interfaces. E. Radial Distribution Functions The radial distribution function (RDF), or g(r), describes the relative density of atoms some distance r from a given atomic position. Thus the RDF characterizes the distribution of distances between atoms in a given material. It can serve as an important fingerprint for amorphous materials, as it gives information about the distance and density of neighboring shells of atoms, which depend on the material’s structure, chemistry and defect density . 16 Amorphous strain. (a-c) Elliptical fits to the average amorphous diffraction pattern, and two two selected diffraction patterns. In (a), blue wedges show the data, while clear wedges show the fit function. In (b) and (c), the data and the fit are similarly interleaved, and Bragg scattering has been masked away to ensure good fitting. (d-e) The compressive/tensile strains εxx and εyy, the shear strain εxy, and the dilation 1 2(εxx + εyy). In this section, we qualitatively discuss the calculation of the RDF, and the structure of the resulting plot. Formal discussion of our methods, which follow , are found in Appendix G. The RDF can be directly determined from the average diffraction pattern of an amorphous material, as long as enough counts / images are collected to average out any local density fluctuations, and the probe convergence semiangle is sufficiently small to not blur out the diffraction pattern . An example of the mean diffraction pattern from amorphous silicon is shown in Fig. 13a. A radial integral is then calculated, here using a polar-elliptical methods of Sec. III D, yielding the diffracted intensity as a function of distance from the optic axis. The resulting curve, I(k), is shown in Fig. 13c. The important elements of this signal are (1) thermal diffuse background, resulting from thermal motion of the atoms and which dominates the behavior shown here at low k values, (2) the single atom scattering factors, describing the scattered intensity profiles which result from individual atoms and which dominate the behavior at high k values, and (3) the structure factor Φ(k), which describes the arrangement of atoms relative to one another in the material. By fitting the thermal background and atomic scattering factors it is possible to calculate the structure factor, and from the structure factor it is possible to calculate the RDF. Figure 13d and 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 Å r ( ) 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 0 10 20 30 40 50 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 ( Å 1) I(k) (a) (c) (d) (e) (b) Median Intensity Structure Factor Φ(k) g(r) RDF θ k k ( Å 1) k 5 nm-1 I(k) single atom scattering factor (a) An average diffraction pattern. (b) The polar-elliptical transform of (a). (c) The radial intensity profile, calculated from (b). (d) The structure factor, calculated by determining and subtracting off the single atom scattering factor, and applying a bandpass mask to cut off high and low frequency noise. (e) The radial distribution function, calculated using the structure factor, showing the first few shells of Si atoms. e show the structure factor and RDF, respectively. We ultimately invert the structure factor, a diffraction space quantity, to retrieve the RDF, a real space quantity. The sampling of the RDF is thus determined by the maximum k values in the experimental data. In py4DSTEM we therefore upsample by padding the structure factor with zeros before inversion, which allows extraction of an RDF which is in principle arbitrarily smooth. However, that smoothness should not be over-interpreted: the highest frequencies at which true 17 median DP max DP median mean (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) q 111 = 0.32 Å-1 q 220 = 0.53 Å-1 q 311 = 0.62 Å-1 (A.U.) (A.U.) 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 Å-1 ( ) amorphous silicon. (a) An average diffraction pattern of the 4D-STEM scan, using median statistics. (b) A diffraction image generated by selecting the maximum value at each pixel across all scan positions, and revealing the presence of some amount of Bragg scattering, and therefore crystallinity, in this sample. (c) The radial intensity profiles of the dataset using median (red) and mean (blue) statistics respectively. (d) The variance over all angles versus radial position. (e) V (q) ⟨I(q)⟩2 , a measure of short and medium range order which becomes larger with increasing order. Note the two peaks in blue (mean statistics) which become a single broad peak in red (median statistics). These come from Bragg scattering, suggesting the median statistics are superior for evaluating the amorphous structure. information has been transferred is set by the maximum k from the experimental data. In gathering data for RDF analysis it is important to capture high scattering angles to use in fitting the atomic scattering factors, therefore fairly short camera lengths are recommended. F. Fluctuation Electron Microscopy Fluctuation electron microscopy (FEM) is a method which, like RDF analysis, is used to characterize the structure of amorphous materials. In RDF analysis structure is typically considered out to distances of perhaps the first few shells of neighboring atoms, considered the “short range order” regime. However, many amorphous materials have a substantial degree of structural ordering beyond the first few shells . This property is referred to as “medium range order” in materials science . When using 4D-STEM to study amorphous materials, the STEM probe size (set by the convergence semiangle and/or probe defocus) can be tuned to match the size of atomic clusters. When these clusters deviate from a fully random distribution, they lead to “speckles” in the amorphous halo. The technique of quantifying the degree of variability as a function of scattering angle and probe size is called fluctuation electron microscopy (FEM) . In this section we qualitatively discuss FEM, and a mathematical treatment is in Appendix H. Our approach follows the methods of . The idea is to calculate the variance V (k) of the diffraction patterns as a function of scattering angle. With an appropriate normalization (see the appendix), the variance can be thought of as a metric of order. Consider the limiting cases: in a minimally ordered sample the atomic distribution is completely homogeneous, leading to perfectly smooth diffracted rings and thus zero variance at a given scattering angle. In a maximally ordered sample, a perfect crystal, the rings resolve into Bragg disks, so that the variance at some fixed k containing peaks will be maximized. The RDF is primarily sensitive to the 2-body atomic pair correlations, whereas the FEM variance is more sensitive to 4-body pair-pair correlations , hence its utility in examining medium range order. 14 shows an FEM measurement of an amorphous silicon sample, performed in py4DSTEM. the dataset, with two strong amorphous rings visible. However, plotting the maximum intensity across all probe positions as in Fig. 14b shows some Bragg disk features, due to small regions of crystallinity in some probe positions. We could simply exclude these patterns from the FEM measurement, but there is a simpler way to suppress or eliminate unwanted contributions of crystalline regions to the variance V (q): replace the mean intensity as a function of orientation angle φ with the median intensity. Median statistics are much more robust against outliers, such as the high variance due to Bragg peaks. mean and median statistics. The presence of crystalline regions barely effects the mean intensity ⟨I(q)⟩φ,R, but strongly modulates the variance V (q). Figure 14e shows a strong signal at q = 0.318 ̊A−1 that corresponds to the distribution of nearest neighbor atoms in amorphous Si, with a mean scattering vector approximately equal to the crystalline Si lattice spacing. This signal is approximately the same using both mean and median statistics, unlike the second peak. When the normalized variance is calculated using mean statistics, two additional Bragg peak signals become visible on top of the second broad amorphous peak, corresponding to the and crystalline Si diffraction peaks. This example highlights the importance of either careful 18 inspection of the diffraction images or using robust statistical methods such as medians when performing FEM studies. G. Phase retrieval py4DSTEM includes two methods for reconstruction of the sample potential: differential phase contrast (DPC) and ptychography. Broadly, the idea in both methods is to extract the amount of extra phase that has been added to the electron beam at each scan position. That phase is then taken to be the total (i.e. projected) sample potential at this scan position times a constant which encodes electron-charge interaction strength. Figure 15 show the results of the py4DSTEM phase retrieval algorithms applied to a carbon nanotube . These methods make the transmission function approximation and the projection approximation, and thus can be expected to be most reliable for thin, low- Z samples. In cases where these conditions don’t hold, phase retrieval should be interpreted cautiously. 1. Differential phase contrast Differential phase contrast (DPC) uses the fact that, for a sufficiently thin object, the mean deflection of the electron probe at each scan position in the STEM raster is related to the specimen electric and magnetic field components transverse to the beam propagation direction. Examples of material science applications of this technique include the study of built-in electric fields in semiconductor devices , magnetic skyrmions and domain structures and as a technique for efficient visualisation of light atoms in materials . The technique was first suggested by Dekkers and De Lang , was extensively applied to the study of magnetic materials from the 1970s onward by Chapman and colleagues and has seen more ubiquitous use with increased uptake of more sophisticated segmented detectors and the advent of fast-readout electron cameras in STEM . reconstruction. The mean probe deflections are shown in Fig. 15c,d at each scan position in the x- and y-directions, respectively. Once these are calculated, optionally after defining some mask to cut off high angle scattering, DPC considers this vector field of deflections to be the gradient of some scalar function. The primary task of DPC is thus to reconstruct the scalar field (a.k.a. the DPC image) which has as its gradient the measured probe deflections. In py4DSTEM this inversion is accomplished by Fourier integration of the probe deflections . In the phase object regime (also known as the multiplicative approximation), the resulting scalar field is proportional to the sample potential. Appendix I derives the relation between the beam deflections and the sample potential, and discusses the Fourier integration approach used. A consequence of Fourier integration is that it implicitly assumes periodic boundary conditions, which can be problematic for non-periodic electron microscopy specimens. Boundary condition handling is important to a high quality DPC reconstruction, and in py4DSTEM we have used an iterative boundary condition correction algorithm which is discussed in detail in Appendix I. The rotational offset between real and diffraction space needs to be correctly calibrated to perform the Fourier integration step. One possibility is to use the method discussed in Sec. III C. In the context of DPC, alternative approaches to this calibration are also possible. In one, the beam deflections are assumed to be a conservative vector field, which must be true if they are the gradient of a scalar field. However, if the coordinate systems of real and reciprocal space contain a relative rotation, the measured beam deflections will all be similarly rotated, resulting in general in a non- conservative field. The correct rotational offset can thus be identified by finding the relative rotation which results in beam deflections which are conservative, which can be identified by minimizing the curl as a function of the rotation. In another approach, we note that the contrast of a DPC reconstruction, that is the contrast of the scalar field which results from Fourier integration of the beam deflections, is typically maximized when the rotational offset is correct. Thus the calibration may also be performed by maximizing the DPC contrast as a function of real/diffraction space rotation. Note that this method permits a 180 degree ambiguity in the rotational offset, corresponding to a contrast reversal in the DPC image. Finally, we note that Fourier integration effectively applies a low pass filter (see Appendix I). Some amount of low pass filtering is therefore inherent in DPC imaging as implemented in py4DSTEM. 2. Ptychography Phase retrieval is difficult because phase is never directly recorded; instead, the detector only captures the square modulus of the electron wavefunction. In electron ptychography of crystals, the idea is that with a large enough convergence angle, the central disk will begin to overlap with other Bragg disks. In the overlap regions the phases of the two beams add coherently, and consequently phase reconstruction is possible by analyzing these regions. The method is analogous to holography, which combines a scattered beam and a reference beam to create an interference pattern, except that the ‘scattered’ and ‘reference’ beams are now the central beam and the Bragg reflected beams. Variations in these regions of interference as the beam is scanned enable phase retrieval. Ptychography was first suggested as a method to solve the crystallographic phase problem by Hoppe [84–86], and later extended to solve the phase 19 -0.8 +0.8 (a) (b) (c) (d) Iterations 0 250 500 0.15 0.20 Error (e) Differential Phase Contrast Single Side Band Ptychography CoMx CoMy DPC Convergence pixels The centers of mass of the diffraction patterns, used in DPC. (e) Convergence of the boundary condition correction component of the DPC algorithm. problem for arbitrary specimens by Rodenburg . py4DSTEM includes a ptychographic reconstruction algorithm which calculates the phase in a single step, based on the single-side-band approach and discussed in detail in Appendix J. Figure 15b shows the results for the carbon nanotube discussed above, and clearly reveals both the walls of the tube as well as the tortuous structure of carbon inside the tube. In general, direct solvers tend to be fast, however, better reconstruction quality is usually achieved with iterative algorithms. Unfortunately, a patent on iteration creates substantial challenges to making iterative ptychography codes of any sort freely available to the scientific community. V. Conclusion In this paper, we have presented the py4DSTEM software package written in Python, for analysis of 4D- STEM experiments. We have described the program’s purpose and structure, including an HDF5 based file standardization for 4D-STEM. We’ve described how py4DSTEM can be used for preprocessing and calibrating data, finding Bragg disk positions, transformation into polar-elliptical coordinates, and for classifying diffraction patterns based on commonalities in their diffraction patterns. We demonstrated measurements including virtual imagining, phase mapping, mapping strain in crystalline and amorphous materials, RDF and FEM analyses, and phase reconstruction with DPC and with ptychography. The analysis here spans 8 datasets, including seven experimental and one synthetic dataset. The py4DSTEM codes and many examples are freely available in the py4DSTEM repository on Github. As an open source project, both new users and new contributors are enthusiastically encouraged to try the code, use it in your own work, or make a pull request.