Nanomechanical system meets ultra-small, robust, and ultra-low-powered digital communication receiver Keita Funayama1,2, Hiroya Tanaka1, Jun Hirotani2, Keiichi Shimaoka1, Yutaka Ohno2,3, & Yuki- hiro Tadokoro1 1TOYOTA Central R&D Labs., Inc., Nagakute, Aichi 480-1192, JAPAN. 2Department of Electronics, Nagoya University, Nagoya, Aichi 464-8601, JAPAN. 3Institute of Materials and Systems for Sustainability, Nagoya University, Nagoya, Aichi 464- 8601, JAPAN. Nanomechanical systems offer a versatile platform for both fundamental science and in- dustrial applications1–3. Resonating vibration has been demonstrated to enable an ultra- sensitive detection of various physical quantities4–8, with emerging applications including sig- nal processing9–12, biological detection13,14 and fundamental tests of quantum mechanics15–19. It has also been shown that the mechanical vibration of a nanoscale cantilever can be used to detect electromagnetic analogue-modulated waves9. This concept is quite exciting; it opens the door to the possibility of fabricating an ultra-small transceiver by realising extreme scale- down of receiving antenna20. Indeed, aiming for digital data transfer with such small wire- less terminals, some research groups have attempted to detect digitally modulated signals with nanomechanical systems21–23. However, signals obtained with nanoscale receivers are so weak that the data transfer often fails21; to the best of our knowledge, no successful practical demonstration has yet been reported. Here, we present the first experimental demonstration 1 arXiv:2003.14017v1 [physics.app-ph] 31 Mar 2020 of the use of nanomechanical systems for digital data transfer with a digital image. With the introduction of error-correcting code and a novel digital signal processing technique suitable for nanomechanical systems, a nanoscale digital receiver with a vibrational nano-antenna composed of a carbon nanotube cantilever was experimentally shown to be capable of digital transfer. In fact, the developed nanomechanical receiver successfully receive a digital image. Furthermore, our fabrication method achieved a tiny gap around field emitter of vibrational nano-antenna, which enables the receiver to work with quite a low power consumption, on the order of 10 nW. Such an ultra-small, robust, and ultra-low-powered nanomechanical dig- ital receiver opens up a new paradigm of digital data transfer at the nanoscale; collecting much more meaningful data via such device is expected to contribute to the forthcoming data-oriented age with IoT and AI-based systems. The wireless transfer of digital data, such as text messages, pictures, and movies, enriches our modern life. The collection and analysis of scientific data with machine intelligence techniques have become essential techniques in natural and social science fields. Wireless communication terminals that have been scaled down to the nanoscale are expected to offer a more flexible platform for data collection24,25. Such devices would enable promising future applications, including in the realm of healthcare with real-time in-body sensing, spatially distributed invisible camera, and surgery using nano-machines24,26–28. To develop such a nanoscale terminal, the front-end circuit of the terminal, including radio frequency (RF) antenna, should be downsized to the nanoscale20. Such components are often designed based on electromagnetic theory; the size of an RF antenna is designed on the order of the wavelength, which is the main issue during downsizing. 2 Nanomechanical systems offer a versatile platform for fundamental science and applications1–19. By exploiting the resonating vibration of a nanoscale cantilever, it has been reported that electro- magnetic waves with frequency modulation (FM) can be received in nanoscale9. The concept of receiving digitally modulated signals with nanomechanical systems has also been proposed21,22. However, previously proposed receivers cannot obtain the entire energy of the incoming wave, which often causes error in the data transfer21; to the best of our knowledge, no successful practi- cal demonstration has yet been reported. Here, we provide the first experimental demonstration of an ultra-small, robust, and ultra- low-powered digital receiver. We achieved it by introducing concepts from recently developed physics of nanomechanics and original digital signal processing method. Fortunately, sensed data is often expressed in a digital format, and thus, the use of error-correcting code should contribute to error reduction. Our original digital signal processing technique that is suitable for nanomechanical systems is developed, and it is shown to further enhance the error correction capability of the receiver. The developed nanomechanical digital receiver, which is presented in Fig. 1, was designed to be ultra-small, robust, and show ultra-low power consumption. This receiver detects high- frequency signals, which can be used as carriers of digital contents, including digital images and sensory data. In the developed receiver, the incoming electromagnetic (EM) signal excites vibra- tions in a nanomechanical system consisting of a carbon nanotube (CNT) cantilever9,20,21. Simply observing the vibrations gives information about the signal, including its amplitude and phase. 3 With the application of binary amplitude shift keying (BASK)29 as a digital modulation method, the amplitude level of the vibration itself can be used to represent binary digital information. A sinusoidal signal with a small amplitude A0 represents a binary value of 0 and induces a small vibration. A large vibration comes from a signal with a large amplitude of A0 + ∆A, which repre- sents a binary value of 1 (see Methods). The term ∆A is a crucial variable that contributes to the discrimination of the transmitted data on the receiver side and is hereafter referred to as the “signal gain”. This vibrational method can be used to realise ultra-small antennas with sizes as small as 1.0 μm. Note that according to electromagnetic theory, the size of a traditional antenna that can receive a signal with a frequency of fc = 50 kHz is on the order of centimetres. To reduce the detection error, a robust digital detection method was also introduced. Be- cause of the nanoscale reception of the signal, the vibration sometimes cannot follow the variation of the amplitude. One typical situation is shown in Fig. 1; despite the variation in the signal, the output current of the nano-antenna does not change, which makes it difficult to correctly estimate the transmitted data. Although the demodulation method, which includes bandpass filtering and masking of the output current, reduces the amount of erroneously estimated data (see Supporting Information), it is unable to eliminate all detection error. For more reliable detection, a robust encoding scheme of convolutional coding was applied with a coding rate of RC =1/2 and a con- straint length of seven bits. Even with the demodulation error, in a decoding process with Viterbi decoding29, the erroneously estimated bits are often corrected. The details of the encoding, mod- ulation, demodulation, and decoding are provided in the Methods section. Note that detection process including decoding is often implemented in digital circuits. Because such circuits are eas- 4 ily miniaturised with the current nanotechnology, employing our detection method does not affect the size of the receiver. A concrete observation method is necessary to measure the amplitude of the vibration. Sim- ilar to the frontier work by Jensen et al.9, the developed receiver uses electric current for the measurement. When a voltage is applied, field emission occurs, and current flows along the CNT. Unlike fabrication methods using chemical vapour deposition6,7,9, the present fabrication method based on semiconductor processes enables the inclusion of a tiny gap of 40 nm between an elec- trode and the tip of the CNT cantilever (field emitter). The Fowler–Nordheim theory30,31 states that this tiny gap strongly enhances the current, meaning it becomes measurable even with our simple measurement system (see Methods). In fact, in a vacuum of 8.0 × 10−6 Pa, applying a low voltage of VDC = 7.91 V allows the observation of a measurable current ≳ 1 nA (see Supporting Informa- tion). These characteristics mean that the developed nanoscale receiver achieves ultra-low power consumption, on the order of 10 nW for RF front-end. Furthermore, because the gap width varies according to the amplitude of the vibration, the vibration amplitude can be estimated by simply observing the current. This method can be easily implemented in electrical circuits even at the nanoscale, which improves the productivity of the developed nanomechanical digital receiver. It was experimentally demonstrated that the developed nanoscale receiver could successfully detect a transmitted digital image (Fig. 2). The original image is RGB full-colour, 128 × 128 pixels, and composed of Ne = 393,216 bits (Fig. 2a). The image data were encoded, and modulated to ob- tain the transmitted signal Vsig(t) (Fig. 2b, see Methods). In the experiment, the amplitude parame- 5 ters were set to A0 = 1.0 V, ∆A = 2.0 V. The digital image obtained by the nanomechanical digital receiver is shown in Fig. 2f. Although the output current of the vibrational nano-antenna cannot describe the amplitude level of the transmitted signal (Fig. 2c), the original image was successfully received (Fig. 2f). This robustness arises from the proposed digital detection method: bandpass filtering and masking, combined with error correction. In this detection, bandpass filtering with a passband centred on f = 2fc is first applied to the output current. The results reveal that, as shown in the inset of Fig. 2c, the current has two peaks in the power spectrum at f = fc and 2fc. The cur- rent resulting from the vibration has a frequency of f = 2fc, see Ref21. The other component is a capacitive current arising because of the close placement of the signal electrodes to the vibrational nano-antenna (Extended Data Fig. 1). A unique procedure in the proposed detection method is the masking of the output current. vation results indicate that nearly the first half of the signal (i.e., the first two periods) are affected by the previous data bit (see Supporting Information). This erroneous effect comes from a transient behaviour in response to the data stream switching from 0 to 1 or vice versa. In these cases, the amplitude of the signal is digitally changed; however, because of the inertial effects, the tip of the CNT cantilever cannot immediately respond to the switching. As a result, the estimation of the transmitted data is incorrect, i.e., de ̸= ˆde. To avoid the erroneous effects of this peculiar behaviour of the vibrational nano-antenna, only the last two periods were used in the detection. The details of the proposed digital detection method are provided in the Methods. 6 Even with this digital detection method, detection error still remains. The amplitude of the current after filtering and masking, ADC, is shown in Fig. 2d to depict the detection error before error correction. Here, a detection threshold was introduced to determine the binary value of the transmitted data; if the current is below the threshold, the transmitted bit is estimated to be 0. The plot shows two distinct clusters of the points, with one having a large amplitude corresponding to bits with de = 1 and the other corresponding to de = 0. Although most of the points correctly describe the amplitude of the transmitted signal (marked with black points), a few cases result in error (marked with coloured points). This observation is visually understandable from the proba- bility density for the currents shown on the right in Fig. 2d (see Methods). The green and yellow area represent the probability of detection being correct, i.e., the correct detection rate P[ ˆde = de]. These two areas comprise most of the probability density, which indicates that most of the trans- mitted data are correctly estimated in the developed nanomechanical digital receiver. This success arises from the setting of the threshold value. To minimise erroneous detection, the probabilities for these two regions are calculated, and the threshold is set to make these two probabilities equal (see Methods). Despite the use of this optimal threshold, some level of error is unavoidable, as shown in Fig. 2d. The estimated image before error correction (Fig. 2e) shows that some pixels in the re- ceived image collapsed. A comparison of the images before and after error correction (Fig. 2e and f, respectively) demonstrates that the error correction strongly contributes to correct data transfer. It was found that increasing the signal gain ∆A contributes to the reduction of erroneous detection. Figure 3a shows the dependence of the correct detection rate on the gain. To measure the performance of the receiver in this regard, the reception of the transmitted signal was observed for 7 randomly generated input digital data, ds∈{0, 1}. When the gain was sufficiently large (∆A ≳ 2.0), the receiver was able to correctly discriminate the transmitted data in the presence of noise. Such a gain realises a significant difference in the vibrational amplitudes corresponding to the two states, which contributes to accurate discrimination. In the case of a small gain, however, the receiver fails to recover many transmitted data, even with the error correction. The signal-to-noise power ratio (S/N), a key performance indicator in terms of signal pro- cessing or communication systems, was also evaluated in the nanoscale receiver. From the mea- surement results presented in Fig. 2d, the ratio per bit was calculated (see Methods). The two curves for the S/N in Fig. 3b correspond to the transmitted data with de=0 and de=1. It is well- known that for reliable communication, the error rate should be smaller than the order of 10−3. Our receiver achieves this condition when the S/N is larger than approximately 6 dB. Employing the error correction method enhances the ability of the receiver to secure a high S/N. Based on this performance, the theoretical value of the correct detection rate can be calculated (see Meth- ods). The blue circles in Fig. 3a show these results; the experimental performance of the developed receiver without the error correction agrees well with the theoretical one. The limit on wireless transfer of digital data with the receiver was also investigated. In the field of information theory, a performance measure called channel capacity, which characterises the rate at which digital information can be reliably transmitted over a wireless channel, has been introduced29. A large channel capacity indicates that the capability of high-speed transfer and that the use of the bandwidth is efficient. The channel capacity of the developed receiver was calcu- 8 lated from the measured probability density (see Methods). As shown in Fig. 3c, the developed nanoscale receiver achieves a capacity of 1.0 bit/Hz, which is the theoretical upper bound in BASK modulation29. This high-efficiency, reliable reception indicates that even a nanoscale receiver has the capability of high-speed transfer; for example, it could achieve a rate of 10 Mbps for a digitally modulated signal with a bandwidth, 10 MHz, which is a common situation in WiFi systems. The achievements in this work represent a major milestone in the development of nanoscale digital wireless terminals. This Letter reports the first practical demonstration that nanomechan- ical systems are capable of detecting digitally modulated signals. With the use of a vibrational nano-antenna, the proposed robust digital signal processing method enables reliable nanoscale data transfer. The developed fabrication method contributes to strongly reducing the power con- sumption. The present experiments demonstrate that a digital image carried by a modulated signal can be successfully detected with the developed nanomechanical system. Such an ultra-small, ro- bust, and ultra-low-powered nanomechanical digital receiver opens up a new paradigm of digital data transfer at the nanoscale, which will contribute to the forthcoming age of true IoT world: everything are connected. 9 Vibrational nano-antenna Decoding Original digital demodulation GND Successful nanoscale reception of the digital contents A Carbon nanotube cantilever 1 Demodulation error Error correction nano-gap ( 40nm) EM signal 200 nm 0 CNT 0 1 Time Transfered with digitally amplitude-modulated sinusoidal signal 0 1 Time SEM image Noisy antenna output Robust digital detection Developped nanoscale receiver Digital data Image Sensory data LIDAR ECG Digital contents Bandpass filtering and masking Schematic of the developed digital receiver. This ultra-small nanomechanical digital receiver enables the robust transfer of digital data with ultra-low power consump- tion. The vibrational nano-antenna, which is composed of a CNT cantilever (see a scan- ning electron microscopy (SEM) image), significantly contributes to the miniaturisation of the RF part of the receiver. The resulting antenna output, however, is very noisy because of the nanoscale reception of the transmitted signal. A robust detection method, which 10 involves original demodulation by bandpass filtering and masking, in addition to error cor- rection, is used for signal discrimination. The introduced fabrication method achieves a tiny gap between field emitter (the tip of the cantilever) and counter-electrode, which en- ables the receiver to work with quite a low power consumption, on the order of 10 nW. The first experimental demonstration of nanoscale digital transfer was successfully performed with the proposed system (Fig. 2). 11 Field emission current amplitude per bit (nA) Transmitted signal (V) Output current of the vibrational nano-antenna (nA) Digital bit number Error: 8303 bits Error: 7 bits 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0 a d b c e f Time (s) Transmitted data 0 0 1 1 0 1 Time (s) 0.0 -2.0 2.0 0.0 -3.0 3.0 detection threshold detected as = 1 detected as = 0 Probability density = 0.47 Frequency (kHz) 50.0 Power sperctum (dB) Experimental demonstration of the transfer of digital contents with a nanome- chanical digital receiver. a, Original digital image ds (full-color, 128 × 128 pixels). b, Part of the transmitted data de obtained after the encoding and digital modulation, and the cor- responding signal Vsig(t). c, Output current of the vibrational nano-antenna (field emission current). The inset shows the frequency characteristics; the desired component excited by the vibration is the frequency 2fc, not fc. d, Amplitude ADC of the current samples in a part of the transmitted data. These samples were obtained after our original digital detection, namely, bandpass filtering and masking. They contain erroneously estimated bits, which have estimated values that are not equal to the transmitted values (coloured points). The probabilities of the erroneous detection are the area with blue and magenta. e, Estimated digital image obtained by the receiver; in Ne = 393,216 transmitted bits, detection error occurred in 8,303 bits, yielding an imperfect image. f, Corrected image obtained after the 12 decoding process. Almost all of the errors were corrected; only 7 bits with the detection error remain in the corrected image. 13 Correct detection rate Variation of the signal amplitude (V) a c 1.0 2.0 2.5 1.5 1.00 8.0 0.80 0.90 w/o coding theory (BASK) w/ coding 1.0 2.0 3.0 0.0 CNT Small vibration Small vibration Non- discriminative 0 1 0.00 1.00 0.50 Channel capacity (Bit/Hz) (V) (V) 1.0 2.0 CNT 0 Small vibration Large vibration Realiable discrimination 1 0.0 b Signal-to-noise power ratio (dB) Communication performance of the developed nanomechanical digital re- ceiver: a, Correct detection rate. Decreasing ∆A results in a lower rate of the correct detection. Even with the demodulation error, the rate can be kept to be high in the region where ∆A ≳ 1.25 V, because of the error correction method. The theoretical value is also shown, as calculated from the S/N per bit, which is plotted in b (see Methods). The exper- imental results obtained without coding agree well with the theoretical results. b, S/N per bit, εb/N0. Because the variance of the probability density depends on the value of the transmitted data de (see Methods), the ratio for de = 0 and 1 are slightly different. c, Chan- nel capacity. With sufficiently large ∆A, the receiver achieved a capacity of 1.0 bit/Hz, which is the theoretical upper-bound in BASK modulation29. 1. Roukes, M. Nanoelectromechanical systems face the future. Phys. World 14, 25–31 (2001). 2. Bunch, J. S. et al. Electromechanical resonators from graphene sheets. Science 315, 490 14 3. Sazonova, V. et al. A tunable carbon nanotube electromechanical oscillator. Nature 431, 4. Jensen, K., Kim, K. & Zettl, A. An atomic-resolution nanomechanical mass sensor. Nat. Nanotechnol. 3, 533 (2008). 5. Lee, J., Shen, W., Payer, K., Burg, T. P. & Manalis, S. R. Toward attogram mass measurements in solution with suspended nanochannel resonators. Nano Lett. 10, 2537–2542 (2010). 6. Moser, J. et al. Ultrasensitive force detection with a nanotube mechanical resonator. Nat. Nanotechnol. 8, 493–496 (2013). 7. Moser, J., Eichler, A., G ̈uttinger, J., Dykman, M. I. & Bachtold, A. Nanotube mechanical resonators with quality factors of up to 5 million. Nat. Nanotechnol. 9, 1007–1011 (2014). 8. Puller, V., Lounis, B. & Pistolesi, F. Single molecule detection of nanomechanical motion. Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 125501 (2013). 9. Jensen, K., Weldon, J., Garcia, H. & Zettl, A. Nanotube radio. Nano Lett. 7, 3508–3511 10. Hatanaka, D., Darras, T., Mahboob, I., Onomitsu, K. & Yamaguchi, H. Broadband reconfig- urable logic gates in phonon waveguides. Sci. Rep. 7, 12745 (2017). 11. Mahboob, I. & Yamaguchi, H. Bit storage and bit flip operations in an electromechanical oscillator. Nat. Nanotechnol. 3, 275–279 (2008). 15 12. Torrejon, J. et al. Neuromorphic computing with nanoscale spintronic oscillators. Nature 547, 13. Eom, K., Park, H. S., Yoon, D. S. & Kwon, T. Nanomechanical resonators and their applica- tions in biological/chemical detection: Nanomechanics principles. Phys. Rep. 503, 115–163 14. Kosaka, P. M. et al. Detection of cancer biomarkers in serum using a hybrid mechanical and optoplasmonic nanosensor. Nat. Nanotechnol. 9, 1047–1053 (2014). 15. Chu, Y. et al. Quantum acoustics with superconducting qubits. Science (2017). 16. Hong, S. et al. Coherent, mechanical control of a single electronic spin. Nano Lett. 12, 3920– 17. OfConnell, A. D. et al. Quantum ground state and single-phonon control of a mechanical resonator. Nature 464, 697 (2010). 18. Singh, V. et al. Optomechanical coupling between a multilayer graphene mechanical resonator and a superconducting microwave cavity. Nat. Nanotechnol. 9, 820–824 (2014). 19. Tavernarakis, A. et al. Optomechanics with a hybrid carbon nanotube resonator. Nat. Commun. 20. Atakan, B. & Akan, O. Carbon nanotube-based nanoscale ad hoc networks. IEEE Commun. Mag. 48, 129–135 (2010). 16 21. Tadokoro, Y., Ohno, Y. & Tanaka, H. Detection of digitally phase-modulated signals utilizing mechanical vibration of cnt cantilever. IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol. 17, 84–92 (2018). 22. Tadokoro, Y., Tanaka, H. & Dykman, M. I. Driven nonlinear nanomechanical resonators as digital signal detectors. Sci. Rep. 8, 11284 (2018). 23. Gouttenoire, V. et al. Digital and fm demodulation of a doubly clamped single-walled carbon- nanotube oscillator: Towards a nanotube cell phone. Small 6, 1060–1065 (2010). 24. Rizwan, A. et al. A review on the role of nano-communication in future healthcare systems: A big data analytics perspective. IEEE Access 6, 41903–41920 (2018). 25. F. Akyildiz, I. & Miquel Jornet, J. Electromagnetic wireless nanosensor networks. Nano Commun. Networks 1, 3–19 (2010). 26. Nobunaga, T., Tanaka, H. & Tadokoro, Y. Reconstruction for spatially distributed single-pixel imaging based on pattern filtering. IEEE Signal Process Lett. 25, 705–709 (2018). 27. Niu, S. et al. A wireless body area sensor network based on stretchable passive tags. Nat. Electron. 2, 361–368 (2019). 28. Gardaˇsevi ́c, G. et al. The IoT architectural framework, design issues and application domains. Wireless Personal Communications 92, 127–148 (2017). 29. Proakis, J. G. Digital communications (McGraw-Hill, New York, 2001). 30. Fowler, R. H. & Nordheim, L. Electron emission in intense electric fields. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. 17 31. Funayama, K. et al. Noise modeling in field emission and evaluation of the nano-receiver in terms of temperature. IEEE Access 7, 57820–57828 (2019).