1 Gate-Tunable Semiconductor Heterojunctions from 2D/3D van der Waals Interfaces Jinshui Miao,1 Xiwen Liu,1 Kiyoung Jo1, Kang He1, Ravindra Saxena,1 Baokun Song,1 Huiqin Zhang,1 Jiale He,2 Myung-Geun Han,3 Weida Hu,2 Deep Jariwala1,* 1Electrical and Systems Engineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA 2Shanghai Institute of Technical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200083, China 3Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY, USA Corresponding author: dmj@seas.upenn.edu ABSTRACT: Van der Waals (vdW) semiconductors are attractive for highly scaled devices and heterogeneous integration since they can be isolated into self-passivated, two-dimensional (2D) layers that enable superior electrostatic control. These attributes have led to numerous demonstrations of field-effect devices ranging from transistors to triodes. By exploiting the controlled, substitutional doping schemes in covalently-bonded, three-dimensional (3D) semiconductors and the passivated surfaces of 2D semiconductors, one can construct devices that can exceed performance metrics of “all-2D” vdW heterojunctions. Here, we demonstrate, 2D/3D semiconductor heterojunctions using MoS2 as the prototypical 2D semiconductor laid upon Si and GaN as the 3D semiconductor layers. By tuning the Fermi levels in MoS2, we demonstrate devices that concurrently exhibit over seven orders of magnitude modulation in rectification ratios and conductance. Our results further suggest that the interface quality does not necessarily affect Fermi-level tuning at the junction opening up possibilities for novel 2D/3D heterojunction device architectures. KEYWORDS: van der Waals, transition metal dichalcogenides, gallium nitride, silicon, gate- tunable, heterostructure. 2 ToC Figure 3 INTRODUCTION The advent of van der Waals (vdW) materials has renewed enthusiasm in noveldevice designs for highly scaled field-effect devices.1-6 This is in part due to the atomically-thin two- dimensional (2D) bodies and self-passivated surfaces that allow superior electrostatic control over all known covalently bonded three dimensional (3D) semiconductors.7-8 This self passivation in vdW materials arises from the nature of their binding where the surface atoms in each layer have no unsaturated orbitals and hence show no tendency towards chemical bonding or reactions with the neighboring medium. As a consequence, it is significantly easy to embed a vdW 2D semiconductor between metal gates separated by thin dielectrics for strong electrostatic modulation. However, Si and III-V technology is very mature and therefore the introduction of new materials is a significant challenge. Further, vdW materials with band-gap values and material quality comparable to Si or III-V materials are not readily available.9 In addition, stable, complementary doping in vdW semiconductors remains a persistent challenge which prevents the realization of low-power circuits.10-15 Conversely, 3D semiconductors have well established and stable complementary doping schemes available. However, the lack of self-passivated interfaces and bulk structureprevents superior electrostatic modulation in a planar geometry.16- 17 Therefore, there exists an opportunity to combine 2D materials with 3D semiconductors to explore fundamental charge-transport phenomena at their interfaces and exploit them for devices.18 This approach is particularly appealing since it is easy to transfer 2D vdW layers on 3D surfaces which can in turn help passivate the 3D surface due to the inert chemical nature of the 2D layers, thereby forming an electronically active interface.7-8 Further, this also opens avenues to vertical integration of more devices on top of a fully fabricated 3D complementary metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS) platform.19-20 Along these lines, several approaches have been adopted for varying purposes ranging from low-power to high-current modulation switching.7-8, 21-22 However, few efforts exist in making high-performance switching devices from 2D/3D heterojunctions. Early attempts to interface graphene with 3D semiconductors while successful, have been limited in performance due to the limited barrier height between semi-metallic graphene and the 3D semiconductor.7, 23 Other approaches have been limited to exploiting low- power operation or tunneling phenomena and photoresponse in two-terminal devices.24-29 Overall, the advantage of using ultrathin 2D materials and exploiting their field tunability has not been systematically investigated and exploited. In this work, we address this challenge by fabricating three-terminal, gate-tunable diodes (triodes) comprising of mono to few layers of MoS2 as the 2D semiconductors and degenerately doped Si and GaN as the 3D semiconductors. At the interface of these junctions, we demonstrate that Fermi-level is tunable in the MoS2 to achieve highly tunable rectification ratios across seven orders of magnitude i.e from 0.1 to 106. Concurrently, we have also demonstrated that these triodes can effectively serve the purpose of a switching device with on/off ratios exceeding 107. 4 Our results suggest that the 2D/3D semiconductor heterojunction system is highly tunable, near- ideal and effective for electronic applications despite the lack of perfect passivation at the interface. Given the hybrid nature of the device, it can serve the function in both switching and rectifying applications. Therefore, this device opens new possibilities of using hybrid architectures such as diode transistor logic (DTL)30-31 and other hybrid-logic concepts32 all integrated on top of Si CMOS. With a wealth of 2D semiconductors now isolated, combined with the availability of controlled complementary doping in 3D semiconductors, in addition to epitaxial liftoff33-34 and remote-epitaxy enabled layer transfer35 techniques, our work opens up new opportunities in high-performance and multi-functional, heterostructure devices for vertical integration on conventional semiconductor architectures. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION We begin by fabricating devices on highly doped wafers of Silicon or Galium Nitride. Figure 1a shows the schematic of a p-n heterojunction consisting of a 2D/3D vdW heterostructure between a few-layer MoS2 (n-type) and degenerately p-doped Si covered with an alumina gate dielectric and metal electrodes. Details of microfabrication processes are provided in Materials and Methods and Supporting information (SI) Figure S1, S2. A finite element simulation of this heterojunction system shows that the band diagram of the p++Si-MoS2 (p++Si resistivity ≤ 0.005 ohm-cm) heterojunction p-n diode (Fig. 1b) is a type II junction under equilibrium. Based on known work-functions and electron-affinities,36-39 p++Si conduction band lies above the MoS2 conduction band. Further, owing to the degenerately doped nature of Si, the depletion width exclusively resides within the MoS2 part with the width equalling ~ 50 nm in our simulation. The alignment and widths agree well with previously reported values.22, 40 This observation also suggests that the MoS2 (~6 nm) used in our devices must be completely depleted in the entire overlapping junction region with p++Si. However, a small depletion region of ~ 50 nm may exist within the MoS2 flake at the boundary of the junction with Si. Other structural characterizations including optical and electron microscopy suggest the clear formation of heterojunction regions (Fig. 1c, d). Topography analysis by atomic force microscopy (AFM) reveals that the thickness of the MoS2 layer (~ 6 nm, Fig. 1e) while the spatial map of tip amplitude (Fig. 1 e, inset) clearly shows the square depression below the gate electrode where the 2D/3D heterojunction forms. Additional optical and electron microscopy characterizations including cross-sectional composition analysis are provided in the SI (Fig. S2 and S3). Upon structural characterization and evaluation of the electronic structure, direct current (DC) electrical transport measurements were performed under varying drain (VDS) and gate (VGS) biases. The IDS-VDS output characteristics of p++Si-MoS2 heterojunction diodes at different VGS show strong modulation of current as shown in Figure 2a,b. This strong modulation shows no dependence as a function of MoS2 thickness in the limit that we have investigated which is from 5 6-8 layers as seen in Figure 2 down to monolayers (see SI Fig. S4). In particular, the reverse saturation current (positive VDS) is observed to be modulated from pA range to above 10 μA. This results in the device transitioning from a highly rectifying state at VGS = -12V (black line) to an ohmic-like state at VGS = 12V (orange line) demonstrating the gate-tunability of current through the p++Si-MoS2 heterojunction. Since the reverse current can be strongly modulated, the device can be operated as a digital logic switch when biased in this voltage range. The IDS-VGS transfer characteristics (Fig. 2c) at different reverse drain biases show this on/off current modulation. It is also observed that gate-modulation characteristics of drain current in forward bias versus reverse bias are fundamentally different which is explained below with band diagrams. In contrast, the transfer and output characteristics of a control MoS2 FET (see SI Fig. S5) built from the same flake show ohmic-like I-V behaviors suggesting that the 2D/3D junction dominates current output. Metalcontacts to the p++Si substrate are alsoOhmic , as confirmed by the linear I-V relationship with small resistance (~44 Ω) (see SI Fig. S6). Our triode heterojunctions show on/off current ratios of 2×107 (@ VDS = 4V) and a rectification ratio of up to 3×106 (@ VGS = -12V). The comparison of on/off ratio versus VDS (blue) and rectification ratio versus VGS (red) can be seen in Figure 2d. The rectification ratio varies by six orders of magnitude with VGS while the on/off ratio varies by seven orders of magnitude with VDS. We further note that this superior performance arises from the highly asymmetric nature of the junction that is obtained by the use of p++ Si. This allows the depletion region to be completely concentrated in the MoS2 which is effectively modulated by the gate. In addition, the lack of Fermi-level pinning due to the passivated vdW nature of the MoS2 further contributes to effective gate-tunability. Our triode device can serve more functions than simply serving as a rectifying diode (for negative VGS values) or transistor (for reverse VDS values). In particular, under forward bias, there is minimal current modulation as a function of gate voltage (Figure 2c, VDS = -2 to -4V and Figure S7). This suggests that the triode can be used as a tunable current source whose magnitude is dictated purely on VDS value which is of particular importance in analog circuits and LED drivers for noise-induced fluctuations.41 To develop a mechanistic understanding of the device operation, we investigate the junction band-diagrams under various biasing conditions by finite-element simulations, as shown in Figure 2e, f. For VGS > 0V, the Fermi level in MoS2 is pulled up, while the Fermi level in p++Si is pinned below the valence band (Figure 1e (i)). As a result, a p-n junction is formed and the built-in potential barrier for electrons and holes is lowered with VDS < 0V, leading to a large current dominated by diffusion. For VDS > 0V, the conduction band of MoS2 is pushed further below the valence band of p++Si, narrowing the depletion region further to ~ 10 nm. In this state the electrons from the valence band of p++Si can directly tunnel into the conduction band of MoS2 due to the availability of density of states (DOS) in the MoS2 conduction band, resulting in high current flow (Fig. 2e (ii)). When the MoS2 is depleted to near intrinsic levels (VGS < 0V), the Fermi level moves to the middle of band-gap forming an i-p++ junction which when forward biased (VDS 6 < 0) narrows down the depletion region and produces a large diffusion dominated current (Figure 2f (i)). The converse is true under reverse bias (VDS > 0V) which produces a wide depletion region almost exclusively in the MoS2 which not only increases the width for direct tunneling but also reduces availability of electron states in MoS2 leading to a low off-state current (Fig. 2f (ii)). While the above results of I-V characteristics suggest superior rectification and modulation, the fundamental nature of charge injection at a 2D/3D interface remains to be determined. To ascertain the current flow in p++Si-MoS2 heterojunction diode, we first characterize the current as a function of the metal contact length and 2D/3D junction area. The fabrication process is detailed in SI; Figure S8 and S9. IDS-VDS output characteristics with varying contact lengths (Figure 3a) show that the current decreases by approximately ~ 700% as the contact length changes from 18 μm to 2 μm. On the other hand, the output characteristics versus 2D/3D junction area (Figure 3c) show that current decreases slowly by only ~ 200% as the junction area changes from 169 μm2 to 36 μm2. Device conductance versus contact length at VDS = -4V extracted from Figure 3a is shown in Figure 3b which further demonstrates that the conductance linearly depends on contact length with a slope of ~4μS/μm. However, the perimeter-normalized conductance is independent of the junction area (slope of ~0.1μS/μm2) and it shows no change for varying junction areas as shown in Figure 3d. Based on these electrical characteristics we conclude that although the 2D/3D interface is planar in nature, the current injection is primarily one dimensional (1D) because of lateral drain contact geometry. To confirm the 2D/3D nature of the vdW junction, we fabricated and measured two-terminal vertical transport devices with varying areas of top drain electrodes (Figure 3e (inset)). In these devices, the conductance changes by 184.4% as the drain electrode area changes by 178.6% suggesting that the device conductance linearly depends on vertical 2D/3D junction area as shown in Figure 3e and f. Further, the area- normalized conductance stays constant at ~10 μS/μm2 (Figure 3f) confirming the uniformity and electronic homogeneity of the 2D/3D contact. We have further verified our claims of electronic homogeneity and uniformity of the 2D MoS2 /3D p++ Si contact by measuring multiple vertical- junction devices of constant contact area (SI, Figure S10) and performing spatial mapping of conductance using conductive AFM measurements (SI, Figure S11) both of which agree with the above-discussed results and solidify our claim. To get more direct evidence and further reinforce our observations from electrical measurements, we perform photocurrent measurements to deduce the electronically active area of the junction. Photocurrent microscopy shows a large photocurrent near the edge of 2D/3D junction (Figure 3g (ii)) because MoS2 collects photo-generated electrons and Si collects photo- generated holes leading to the photocurrent (see SI Figure S12). . A photocurrent signal suggests that the illuminated junction spot is electronically active as excited electrons and holes can separate, drift out and get collected at the electrodes under zero bias. By reciprocity, the same regions would participate in diffusive current transport under forward and reverse bias 7 conditions in the absence of illumination. This observed photocurrent signal diminishes further away from the 1D edge created by the etched oxide at which the 2D/3D junction initiates. The photocurrent while measurable along the edges up until the points where the metal electrodes extend along the length of the square. The photocurrent is however, more than three times lower at the center of the square (Figure 3g(ii) and (iii)) suggesting negligible carrier separation and collection from the center. This observation provides a direct illustration that the carrier separation/collection and hence injection in a 2D/3D junction primarily occurs at a 1D interface as confirmed by 1D square shape in Figure 3g (ii). It is also worth noting that no measurable photocurrent is observed from the nonoverlapping region of MoS2 or the metal contact, suggesting that there is minimal contribution from drift or metal/MoS2 contact induced charge separation, further indicating that the current flow in the p++Si-MoS2 junction is dominated by the junction (Figure 3g (iii)). Therefore, we conclude that the device output current is not only dominated by the junction but more importantly the carrier injection occurs predominantly at the 1D edge of 2D/3D junction. This observation concurs related observations in the electronic transport studied of metal contacts to 2D materials. 3D metal contacts to 2D TMDCs and graphene are known to have a 1D edge length dependence.42 However, often in the case of 3D metal contacts, there is covalent bonding involved.43 In contrast, this is the first demonstration of this kind for a 2D/3D vdW semiconductor junction wherein we observe that even in a vdW 2D/3D contact, the carrier injection is mainly 1D. This observation also has further implications in terms of areal scaling of the device. As long the device geometry entails charge injection and collection via metal side contacts, the 2D/3D junction area shouldn’t matter and thus arbitrarily narrow 2D/3D junction devices can be packed in a given area to achieve large packing density or current density. Finally, to establish comparative performance in a 2D/3D interface, we also use 3D GaN to build gate-tunable 2D/3D heterojunction diodes (Figure 4a and Figure S13, S14 in SI). The heterojunctions have an impact on a 2D/3D junction performance? and b. does the interface atomic and electronic structure affect field modulation characteristics? Figure 4b shows the gate- dependent output current (IDS) as a function of applied drain bias (VDS) on MoS2 while the contact to GaN is grounded. Similar to the silicon case, the GaN-based device exhibits a high rectification ratio of up to ~ 6×105 at VGS = -12V and it varies by over six orders of magnitude as a function of gate voltage. Figure 4c shows the drain current (IDS) as a function of gate voltage (VGS) with drain bias changing from -4 to 4V. It is observed that the device on/off ratio is higher at positive drain biases (VDS = 1 to 4V) than that at negative drain biases (VDS = - 1to -4V). It is worth nothing that the switching mechanism is somewhat different for the GaN/MoS2 isotype (n++/n) junctions in comparison to Si/MoS2 anisotype (p++/n) junctions as detailed below with simulated band diagrams. Further, we observe the ideality factor of GaN-MoS2 diodes (1.5 < n < 2.0) is smaller than that of Si-MoS2 diodes (2.0 < n < 3.5) because, in contrast to GaN, Si surface has a thin native 8 oxide layer which degrades interface quality of 2D/3D junction (Figure 4d, Figure S3, Figure S15 in SI).26, 44-45 Despite the differences in quality of the interface, the gate-tunability of rectification ratio maintains the same trend (Figure 4e, red plot) and the rectification ratio reaches a maximum when the MoS2 is fully depleted suggesting a maximum in built-in potential and formation an n++/i junction. Likewise, a high asymmetry is observed in gate-dependent conductance (transfer characteristics) depending on whether the diode is forward biased (-VDS) versus reverse biased (+VDS). This is once again a distinguishing feature of this device that the drain current remains constant as a function of VGS under forward bias. Even under reverse bias, at high positive values of VGS, the drain current reaches saturation (Figure 4c). We believe this is the case since one side of the junction is fully depleted. In summary, a high-performance three-terminal device with a record-high on/off ratio and diode with a high rectification ratio is simultaneously achieved in a single GaN/MoS2 heterostructure, as summarized in Figure 4e. It is worth noting however that several attempts have been made at making gate-tunable vdW heterojunctions.7-8, 21-22, 37, 46-51 In most 2D/2D or 2D/3D cases, the doping levels in both semiconductors are simultaneously moving due to the semitransparency of 2D layer to electric fields. Therefore either these devices were limited by off-currents or on-currents (hence a trade-off in their ratio) or built-in potential (rectification ratio). If we fix the doping level in one semiconductor and make it 3D, a maximum in both can be concurrently achieved in the same device which is the case here. This is shown as a comparison of the rectification ratio and on/off ratio with values reported in the literature (Fig. 4f). Simulated band-diagrams under gate-induced accumulation (Figure 4g) and depletion (Figure 4h) of MoS2 further elucidate the operation of this triode device. Unlike the case of p++Si- MoS2, simulated band alignments of n++-GaN and n-MoS2 show their Fermi levels and built-in potential barriers inversely aligned due to the comparable electron affinities of MoS2 and GaN.45 This also suggests that n-doped MoS2 can serve as an efficient electron injection or collection contact for GaN devices. Under positive gate voltage (VGS > 0V), the MoS2 is under accumulation and the Fermi level is raised close to its conduction band and the Fermi level in n++-GaN is equal to or above its conduction band. There is no potential barrier for electrons in the MoS2 conduction band which can diffuse unhindered into the GaN conduction band at VDS < 0V, resulting in a high current (Fig. 4g (i)). Even for reverse bias (VDS > 0), there is no barrier for electrons in this junction which leads to a high drift current for electrons (Fig. 4g (ii)). In fact, for sufficiently high VDS (> 2V), the current in reverse bias (drift) exceeds the current in forward bias without causing a breakdown and conceptually inverting the diode rectification (Fig. 4b, c). Under depletion of MoS2 i.e. VGS < 0V, the Fermi level in MoS2 shifts to the middle of band-gap while the Fermi level in n++GaN is still pinned above the conduction band owing to the lack of electric field modulation in a heavily doped 3D semiconductor with a high DOS. For VDS < 0 (forward bias) once again there is a large diffusion current due to lowering of the junction barrier and there is a small reduction in magnitude due to depletion of the MoS2 (Figure 4b, black plot). However, this 9 diffusion current will have a greater contribution from holes in MoS2 since the Fermi level is in the center of the gap (Figure 4h (i)) as opposed to an electron dominated current in the previous case of MoS2 under accumulation (VGS > 0). Finally, the MoS2 part is fully depleted at VGS < 0V and VDS > 0V (reverse-biased diode), which results in a very small drift current (Figure 4h (ii)). CONCLUSIONS In conclusion, we have demonstrated gate-tunable heterojunction diodes through vdW integration of 2D and 3D semiconductors. Owing to the ultrathin nature of 2D semiconductors and fixed doping of the 3D part, charge-carriers across the 2D/3D junction can be effectively modulated by a capacitively coupled gate, enabling wide tunability of diode rectification ratio of up to 106 concurrently with an on/off current ratio > 107 enabling utility for tunable rectification as well as digital switch. Also, we find that charge injection at a 2D/3D junction occurs along with a 1D contact interface with implications on scalability. Finally, the wide tunability of the junction and small ideality factors (1.5<n<3.0), despite an unpassivated 3D semiconductor surface, suggests a path towards heterogeneous integration on top of Si CMOS at low temperatures. In particular, with the availability of remote epitaxy and epitaxial lift-off techniques to lift and peel Si and III-V 3D semiconductors, the possibilities for integrating 2D layers with Si or III-V on arbitrary substrates towards multifunctional sensors, memory or optoelectronic layers in conjunction with a high-performance computing part poses to be a promising direction for the field in years to come. Acknowledgments D.J. acknowledges primary support for this work by the Penn Engineering Start-up funds (J.M., X.L.) and U.S. Army Research Office under contract number W911NF-19-1-0109 (K.J. and H.Z.). D.J. also acknowledges support from the NSF supported University of Pennsylvania Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) (DMR-1720530) and National Science Foundation (DMR-1905853). K.H. acknowledges Masters Scholar Award from the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Penn. This work was carried out in part at the Singh Center for Nanotechnology at the University of Pennsylvania which is supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure Program grant NNCI- 1542153. The work at Brookhaven National Laboratory was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, and Office of Basic Energy Sciences, under Contract No. DE- SC0012704. FIB sample preparation was performed at the Center for Functional Nanomaterials, Brookhaven National Laboratory. Notes The authors declare no competing financial interests. Supporting Information 10 The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website which includes experimental methods, additional experimental data, calculations, and analysis.