arXiv:2003.04055v1 [cond-mat.str-el] 9 Mar 2020 Spin-Triplet Superconductivity in UTe2 and Ferromagnetic Superconductors Dai Aoki1,2 ∗, Ai Nakamura1, Fuminori Honda1, DeXin Li1, Yoshiya Homma1 Yusei Shimizu1, Yoshiki J. Sato1, Georg Knebel2, Jean-Pascal Brison2, Alexandre Pourret2, Daniel Braithwaite2, Gerard Lapertot2, Qun Niu2, Michal Valiˇska2, Hisatomo Harima3, and Jacques Flouquet2 1IMR, Tohoku University, Oarai, Ibaraki, 311-1313, Japan 2University Grenoble Alpes, CEA, IRIG-PHELIQS, F-38000 Grenoble, France 3Graduate School of Science, Kobe University, Kobe 657-8501, Japan E-mail: aoki@imr.tohoku.ac.jp (Received September 16, 2019) The spin-triplet state is most likely realized in uranium ferromagnetic superconductors, UGe2, URhGe, UCoGe. The microscopic coexistence of ferromagnetism and superconductivity means that the Cooper pair should be realized under the strong internal field due the ferromagnetism. leading to the spin-triplet state with equal spin pairing. The field-reinforced superconductivity, which is ob- served in all three materials when the ferromagnetic fluctuations are enhanced, is one of the strong evidences for the spin-triplet superconductivity. We present here the results of a newly discovered spin-triplet superconductor, UTe2, and compare those with the results of ferromagnetic supercon- ductors. Although no magnetic order is found in UTe2, there are similarities between UTe2 and ferromagnetic superconductors. For example, the huge upper critical field exceeding the Pauli limit and the field-reentrant superconductivity for H ∥ b-axis are observed in UTe2, URhGe and UCoGe. We also show the specific heat results on UTe2 in different quality samples, focusing on the residual density of states in the superconducting phase. KEYWORDS: ferromagnetism, superconductivity, metamagnetism, reentrant superconductivity, spin triplet, specific heat The coexistence of ferromagnetism and superconductivity attracts much attention because un- conventional superconductivity with spin-triplet state is realized. In general, ferromagnetism and superconductivity are antagonistic because the large internal field due to the ferromagnetism eas- ily destroys the superconducting Cooper pairs in conventional superconductors. Thus it is natural to consider that the spin-triplet superconductivity with equal spin-pairing is realized in ferromagnetic su- perconductors. The microscopic coexistence of ferromagnetism and superconductivity is established only in uranium compounds so far, namely UGe2 , URhGe and UCoGe . All of these mate- rials have fairly small ordered moments (1–0.05 μB/U) in the ferromagnetic phase compared to that for the U free ion (∼ 3 μB). Thus the 5f electrons for these compounds are believed to be itinerant in the first principle, although the magnetic anisotropy is rather strong, indicating the Ising properties. The superconductivity occurs well below the Curie temperature, TCurie, in the ferromagnetic state. One of the highlights in ferromagnetic superconductors is the field-reentrant or field-reinforced su- perconductivity. In URhGe, for example, the reentrant superconductivity appears when the field is applied along the hard-magnetization b-axis in the orthorhombic structure. While the transition temperature Tsc is 0.25 K at zero field, the reentrant superconducting phase has a maximum Tsc of 0.4 K at HR ∼ 12 T, indicating that the superconductivity is indeed reinforced under magnetic field. ∗E-mail: aoki@imr.tohoku.ac.jp 1 The similar field-reinforced superconductivity is also observed in UCoGe. Recently a new spin-triplet superconductor, namely UTe2 was discovered . UTe2 has the body-centered orthorhombic structure with the space group Immm (#71, D25 2h). The distance of the first nearest neighbor for U atom is 3.78 Å, which is larger than the so-called Hill limit (∼ 3.5 Å). Although no magnetic order was found down to 0.025 K, UTe2 is believed to be at the verge of ferromagnetic order. In fact, the ferromagnetic fluctuations were observed in μSR and NMR experiments . By substituting Te with Se, the ferromagnetic order appears at 69 and 33 K in UTe0.72Se1.28 and UTe0.24Se1.76, respectively, although the space group for these materials is Pnma, which is different from that in UTe2. The superconducting transition occurs at 1.6 K with the sharp and large specific heat jump. The large residual density of states nearly 50 % may suggest the possibility for the spontaneous spin-polarization and the “partially-gapped” superconductivity sim- ilar to the A1 state with non-unitary state. However, it should be stressed that the direct transition from the paramagnetic state to the non-unitary state at zero field is forbidden from the symmetry restriction in this orthorhombic system. Thus, the hidden feature in the superconducting state is expected. No other transition in the superconducting state is not observed yet at least at zero field. The pressure study is definitely important to solve this problem. One of the strongest support for the spin-triplet superconductivity in UTe2 is the huge upper critical field, Hc2. In all the field directions, Hc2 extremely exceeds the Pauli limit (∼ 3 T) expected for the weak-coupling BCS theory. The values of Hc2 at 0 K are 7 and 11 T for H ∥ a and c-axis, respectively. For H ∥ b-axis, the spectacular field- reentrant superconductivity is observed. The transition temperature monotonously decreases with field down to 0.4 K at 16 T, then increases with field up to 0.9 K at 35 T. The first order metam- agnetic transtion occurs at Hm = 35 T , and the superconductivity is abruptly collapsed above Hm. The metamagnetic transition at Hm is connected to the so-called Tχ,max at low fields, where the magnetic susceptibility shows a broad maximum for H ∥ b-axis. The magnetic susceptibility shows the Curie-Weiss behavior at high temperatures. At low temperatures, the anisotropic susceptibility is observed with the relation, χa > χc > χb, which is consistent with the anisotropy of Hc2. In order to study more details on superconducting properties in UTe2, we have grown single crys- tals of UTe2 with different quality, and measured the specific heat at low temperatures. We compare the (H, T) phase diagrams for H ∥ b-axis in UTe2, URhGe and UCoGe. Single crystals of UTe2 were grown using chemical vapor transport method. The starting mate- rials of U and Te were put into a quartz ampoule with the atomic ratio, U : Te = 2 : 3, together with iodine as the transport agent to be the density, 3 mg/cm3 in the inner volume of the quartz ampoule. The ampoule was slowly heated and was kept at the temperature gradient of 1060 ◦C/1000 ◦C for 10 days. Many single crystals were obtained at lower temperature side, as shown in Fig. 1(a). The obtained single crystals were checked by the single crystal X-ray analysis. The lattice parameters and the atomic coordinates are in good agreement with the values in the previous report. The single crystals were oriented using the Laue photograph, as shown in Fig. 1(c). The clear superconducting transition was observed in resistivity and specific heat. The highest residual resistivity ratio (RRR) is about 40. Note that the we also obtained single crystals from the previous recipe, that is, a sto- ichiometric amount of starting materials and lower temperature gradient 950 ◦C/850 ◦C. The single crystals were grown at high temperature side in this case. However, the quality of the single crystal is lower with the low RRR (∼ 2–3), and no superconductivity was observed down to 0.1 K. As shown in Fig. 1(d), UTe2 is an incongruent melting compound in the U-Te phase diagram, and single crystals of UTe2 can be grown using the Te-flux method as well. The off-stoichiometric amounts of U and Te (22 and 78 at%, respectively) were put into an alumina crucible, which was sealed in a Ta-tube under Ar atmosphere gas. The Ta-tube was then sealed again in a quartz ampoule. The quartz ampoule was slowly heated up to 1050 ◦C and was cooled down to 960 ◦C. The Te-flux was removed at 960 ◦C in a centrifuge. The obtained single crystals were large, as shown in Fig. 1(b). However the residual resistivity ratio is not very large (RRR ∼ 3). Although the superconductivity 2 Fig. 1. (Color online) Photographs of UTe2 single crystals grown by (a) chemical vapor transport method from was confirmed by the resistivity, it was not a bulk property as no anomaly was detected in the spe- cific heat. Hereafter, we show the results of single crystals obtained by the chemical vapor transport method with off-stoichiometric amounts of starting materials and the high temperature gradient. the data is replotted from ,20. The data of sample #1 show the highest Tsc with a sharp and large jump at Tsc, indicating the highest quality sample. The value of Tsc defined by the entropy balance in #1 is 1.65 K, and the residual γ-value, γ0, which is extrapolated from the fitting Ce/T = γ0 + αT 2 at low temperatures assuming a point node gap, is γ0 = 52 mJ K−2mol−1. The residual γ-value is equal to 44 % of the γ-value in the normal state. The lower quality samples show the lower Tsc and the higher residual γ-value. For example, Tsc and γ0 in sample #4 are 1.23 K and 89 mJ K−2mol−1, respectively. In sample #5, no superconductivity was observed down to 0.4 K in specific heat, and it is confirmed by the resistivity measurement down 0.1 K. state. It is clear that Tsc decreases with increasing the residual γ-value. It is known that the decrease of Tsc can be described by the Abrikosov-Gor’kov pair-breaking theory. On the basis of this model, the relation between Tsc and the residual density of states had been studied theoretically and experimentally in high Tc cuprates and heavy fermion systems, where the rapid increase of the residual density of states is reported, compared to the decrease of Tsc. This can be explained by the unitarity scattering in unconventional superconductivity. The present result in Fig. 2(b) supports the unconventional superconductivity in UTe2. An important question is whether the residual density of states exists in the ideal single crystal 3 without impurities. In that case, the partial density of states would be gapped, and the so-called A1 state should be realized, where the time reversal symmetry must be broken at zero field. There is, however, no experimental evidence for the breaking of time reversal symmetry in UTe2. 0.3 0.2 0.1 0 Ce/T (J K -2mol -1) 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0 T (K) UTe2 #1 #2 #3 #4 #5 Ran et al. Metz et al. (a) 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0 TSC (K) 1.0 0.5 0 γ0/γN (b) Fig. 2. (Color online) (a) Electronic specific heat in the form of Ce/T vs T of UTe2 in different samples. The phonon contribution is subtracted from the fitting at high temperature above Tsc. Part of the data is replotted from ,20. (b) Tsc as a function of the normalized residual γ-value for different quality samples. Next we show in Fig. 3 the (H, T) phase diagrams of UTe2 and two ferromagnetic supercon- ductors, URhGe and UCoGe for H ∥ b-axis, corresponding to the hard-magnetization axis. The field-reentrant or field-reinforced superconductivity is observed both in URhGe and in UCoGe. The enhancement of superconductivity is clearly related to the suppression of TCurie, where the ferromag- netic instabilities are realized. In URhGe, the suppression of TCurie leads to the spin-reorientation at HR in field sweep at low temperatures. The slope of magnetization curve for H ∥ b-axis is larger than that for c-axis. The moment gradually tilts from c to b-axis, and finally it re-orients to b-axis at HR ∼ 12 T. The γ-value is enhanced with increasing field, taking a maximum at HR. In NMR experiments, the spin-spin relaxation rate, 1/T2 shows the diverging behavior around HR, indicating the strong enhancement of the longitudinal ferromagnetic fluctuations . The 2nd order transition of TCurie at low fields changes into the weak 1st order transition at HR through the tricritical point (TCP). The reentrant superconductivity appears with the maximum Tsc = 0.4 K exactly at HR. In UCoGe, the suppression of TCurie with field is similar to the case for URhGe. However, the spin reorientation is not observed in magnetization curve, indicating the strong Ising property com- pared to URhGe. The superconductivity shows an “S”-shaped curve, which is also connected to the suppression of TCurie. The enhancement of γ-value and the development of longitudinal fluctuation are observed in the field scan for H ∥ b-axis. In UTe2, the field reentrant superconductivity is also observed, while the temperature range and field range are much wider, compared to those in ferromagnetic superconductors, URhGe and UCoGe. The reentrant superconductivity is again linked to the metamagnetic transition at Hm. The clear difference from ferromagnetic superconductors is that Hm at high fields originates from the broad maximum of magnetic susceptibility, Tχ,max, instead of TCurie. In the heavy fermion system, it is well known that Hm is scaled with Tχ,max . The value of Hm = 35 T in UTe2 is consistent with Tχ,max = 35 K. The mass enhancement around Hm is detected in the resistivity A coefficient and γ-value from the Maxwell relation in magnetization and the direct specific heat measure- 4 ments . The crossover at Tχ,max changes into the 1st order transition at Hm through the critical end point (CEP). It should be noted that the reentrant superconductivity is abruptly suppressed above Hm in UTe2. On the other hand, the reentrant superconductivity in URhGe still survives in the small field range above Hm. This is probably due to the abrupt change of Tsc as it is inferred from the sharp increase of magnetoresistance at Hm, implying the drastic change of the electronic state at Hm. 40 30 20 10 0 H (T) 0.1 1 10 T (K) URhGe H // b-axis RSC SC HR FM TCurie TCP 0.1 1 10 T (K) UCoGe H // b-axis TCurie SC FM 0.1 1 10 T (K) SC T! max Hm UTe2 H || b-axis CEP Fig. 3. (Color online) (H, T) phase diagrams for H ∥ b-axis in URhGe, UCoGe and UTe2. The data are taken from ,14,16,17 In summary, we presented the single crystal growth of the novel spin-triplet superconductor, UTe2, and the results of specific heat in different quality samples. The higher quality sample shows the higher Tsc and the lower residual density of states. The rapid increase of the residual density of states compared to the decrease of Tsc supports the unconventional superconductivity in UTe2. The unusual field-reentrant superconductivity is a common feature in ferromagnetic superconductors and UTe2. The precise high field experiments from the microscopic point of views and pressure experiments using a high quality single crystal are desired for the future studies. Acknowledgements We thank Y. Tokunaga, S. Ikeda, Y. ̄Onuki, K. Ishida, K. Izawa, K. Miyake, V. Mineev, S. Ran, J. Ishizuka, Y. Yanase, K. Machida, C. Paulsen and K. Miyake for fruitful discussion. This work was supported by ERC starting grant (NewHeavyFermion), KAKENHI (JP15H05884, JP15H05882, JP15K21732, JP16H04006, JP15H05745, JP19H00646), and ICC-IMR.