High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors Remi Geiger,1, a) Arnaud Landragin,1, b) S ́ebastien Merlet,1, c) and Franck Pereira Dos Santos1, d) LNE-SYRTE, Observatoire de Paris - Universit ́e PSL, CNRS, Sorbonne Universit ́e, 61, avenue de l’Observatoire, 75014 Paris, France (Dated: 30 March 2020) The research on cold-atom interferometers gathers a large community of about 50 groups worldwide both in the academic and now in the industrial sectors. The interest in this sub-field of quantum sensing and metrology lies in the large panel of possible applications of cold-atom sensors for measuring inertial and gravitational signals with a high level of stability and accuracy. This review presents the evolution of the field over the last 30 years and focuses on the acceleration of the research effort in the last 10 years. The article describes the physics principle of cold-atom gravito-inertial sensors as well as the main parts of hardware and the expertise required when starting the design of such sensors. It then reviews the progress in the development of instruments measuring gravitational and inertial signals, with a highlight on the limitations to the performances of the sensors, on their applications, and on the latest directions of research. Keywords: Atom interferometry, cold atoms, inertial sensors, quantum metrology and sens- ing. I. INTRODUCTION Interferometry with matter waves nearly dates back to the first ages of quantum mechanics as the concept of matter waves played a key role in the development of the quantum theory, following the theoretical work of de Broglie in 1924 and the ensuing experiments of Davis- son, Germer and Thomson with electron beams. Since then, performing interference experiments with various types of matter-waves has driven the efforts of several communities working with electrons, neutrons, atoms, molecules, or anti-matter. The field of atom interfer- ometry has developped rapidly with the advancement of atomic physics, which offers a high level of control and reliability to the experimental physicist. This degree of control has become even more impressive since the advent of laser cooling techniques in the 1980s, which enhance the wave nature of atoms by increasing their coherence length. Since pioneering experiments in 19911–5, the field of atom interferometry has constantly grown, with an accel- eration in the last 10 years. Cold-atom inertial sensors based on light-pulse atom interferometry have reached sensitivity and accuracy levels competing with or beating inertial sensors based on different technologies. Such sen- sors cover various applications ranging from geophysics and inertial sensing to metrology and tests of funda- mental physics. Addressing these applications requires to constantly push further the performances of quantum sensors. As of 2020, about 50 research groups worldwide are actively developing atom interferometers for different ap- plications, and investigating techniques to improve the performances of cold-atom inertial sensors. Currently, a)Electronic mail: remi.geiger@obspm.fr b)Electronic mail: arnaud.landragin@obspm.fr c)Electronic mail: sebastien.merlet@obspm.fr d)Electronic mail: franck.pereira@obspm.fr the research focuses on three mains aspects: 1. pushing the performances of current sensors; 2. identifying new sensor architectures or generic tech- niques that can bring performance improvement or simplified architectures; 3. using atom interferometers for various fundamental and/or field applications. Improving the performances of atom inertial sensors covers different aspects: their sensitivity, but also their stability, accuracy, dynamic range, compactness, trans- portability, ease-of-use and cost. While the first 20 years of research were essentially focused on sensitivity im- provements and tests of fundamental physics in labora- tory environments, more projects have started to address field applications. In particular, this is the case for iner- tial guidance, which requires at the same time high levels of stability, wide dynamic ranges and high sampling fre- quencies, compactness and robustness. For this field of application though, cold-atom sensors are not yet mature enough to compete with other technologies in all these as- pects (e.g. ring laser gyroscopes for navigation). In that sense, the course for greater performance is, for example, at the core of the Quantum Sensors and Metrology pil- lar of the several quantum technology programs over the world. Several reviews of the field have been published in the last 10 years: the review in 2009 presents the whole field of matter-wave interferometry and detailed some of the cold-atom inertial sensor developments; more re- cently, from 2014 presents the advancements re- lated to atomic gyroscopes, and from 2016 presents the principle of inertial quantum sensors using light and matter and shows some examples; a perspective published in 2019 presents the challenges required to bring atom interferometers out of the laboratory; the review in from 2018 presents in details the ap- plication of cold-atom sensors to tests of fundamental physics and search for new physics. At a more special- ized level, some review articles address specific problems arXiv:2003.12516v1 [physics.atom-ph] 27 Mar 2020 High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors 2 linked to cold-atom sensors (e.g. the prospect of using atom-lasers as a source for atom interferometers11), or specific applications (e.g. gravitational wave detection by atom interferometry12,13). Two books, published in 1997 and 2014 gathering specialized con- tributions from experts in the field allow to catch in more details the various techniques and applications. To avoid overlap with these contributions and address a general audience, we focus here on cold-atom sensors aiming at measuring inertial signals, with the aim to present an ex- haustive and up-to-date view of the field, including both physical and system engineering aspects. Trapped atom interferometers, which represent an interesting perspec- tive for both fundamental studies and miniaturized sen- sors (but yet not competitive in terms of sensitivity and accuracy) are also not described in details here (see for instance the recent review of ). This article is organized as follows. In section II, we present the principles of light-pulse atom interferometry which are generic to the different sensor architectures de- scribed in this review. We explain the main limitations to the sensitivity which drive the design of instruments. Section III presents the most important elements of hard- ware common to any cold-atom inertial sensor. Section IV shows the developments of cold-atom gravimetry and its applications. Section V focuses on the research on accelerometers and gyroscopes as the potential building blocks of future inertial navigation systems. Section VI briefly presents for completeness an overview of other in- ertial measurements performed with cold-atom sensors, such as measurement of recoil velocities, prospects for gravitational wave detection or tests of the weak equiv- alence principle. Section VII describes the latest atomic physics techniques under study in academic laboratories to improve the performances of cold-atom inertial sen- sors. After the conclusion of the review, a list of sum- mary points highlights the most important ideas of the article and appendix A presents an up-to-date list of the different research groups actively working in the field of cold-atom inertial sensors. II. PRINCIPLE In this section, we explain the basic principle of light pulse interferometry with cold atoms, from the descrip- tion of the light pulse beamsplitters to the creation of an atom interferometer. We consider here the case of beamsplitters based on two photon transitions, such as based on stimulated Ra- man transitions or Bragg diffraction ; the later being a degenerated case of the former. It represents the vast majority of atom interferometers, because it allows at the same time for very high sensitivities and accuracies, for a good compromise in terms of simplicity. Indeed, the use of optical transitions allows for both a large velocity transfer to the atom (of the order of the cm.s−1) needed for the sensitivity, and a very good control of the diffrac- tion process, required for the accuracy. Furthermore, the use of two-photon transitions releases the constraint on the control of the optical phase of the lasers used in the beamsplitters, as only the phase difference between the two laser beams need to be controlled at first sight. In the case of Raman transitions, the atoms interact with two counter-propagating lasers, of angular frequen- cies ω1 and ω2 and wavevectors k1 and k2. These two light fields are detuned from a strong electronic transi- tion (typically a few hundreds of MHz to a few GHz away from the D2 line of alkali atoms) but their frequency dif- ference matches the energy difference between two funda- mental atomic states |a⟩ and |b⟩, which are then coupled by the light fields in a so-called lambda scheme (Fig.1.a). Atoms initially in the state |a⟩ will absorb a photon in the laser 1 and de-excite by stimulated emission of a photon in the laser 2, ending up in the state |b⟩. Conservation of momentum implies that the two coupled states differ in momentum by the momentum transfer ħ( ⃗k1− ⃗k2) = ħ⃗keff. The process being coherent, the system undergoes Rabi oscillations, such that by adjusting the duration and Rabi frequency of the laser pulses, one can prepare the state of an atom in a superposition of the two couple states with controlled weights. In particular, a so-called π/2 pulse acts as a matter wave beamsplitter, placing an atom in a balanced 50/50 superposition of the two couple states. A twice longer pulse is a π pulse, which swaps the two states, acting as a mirror for the matter wave. In the most simple case, a sequence of three π/2 − π − π/2 pulses (of duration τ − 2τ − τ for a constant Rabi frequency), separated by free evolutions times T −T then realizes the atom interferometer displayed in figure 1.b. There, the three pulses act as beamsplitters and mirrors, separating, redirecting and recombining the two partial wavepackets. This interferometer geometry is most often referred to as a Mach Zehnder interferometer due to its analogy of the latter optical interferometer. The populations in the two output ports of the in- terferometer are measured using a state selective fluo- rescence detection17. One finally derives out of these two populations (N1, N2) the transition probability P = N1/(N1 + N2). As in any other two-wave interferom- eter, it is given by P = P0 + C/2 × cos(∆Φ), where C is the interferometer contrast and ∆Φ the interferometer phase. This phase is the difference between the phases accumulated by the atomic wavepackets along the two arms of the interferometer. At the laser pulses, the phase difference between the counter-propagating lasers φ gets imprinted onto the atomic wavefunctions, so that in the end, the interfer- ometer phase shift is given by a linear combination of the lasers phase difference φ at the three pulses18,19: ∆Φ = φ1 − 2φ2 + φ3. (1) For free falling atoms, this leads to ∆Φ = −⃗keff · ⃗aT 2 + ⃗keff · (2⃗Ω × ⃗v)T 2, (2) where ⃗a and ⃗Ω are respectively the acceleration and the rotation rate of the experiment with respect to a reference frame defined by the purely inertial motion of the atoms. This dependence to inertial forces allows one to actually realize sensitive and absolute atom interferometry based inertial sensors: accelerometers and gyroscopes. High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors 3 (a) (c) Laser 1 Laser 2 energy time position Laser 1 Laser 2 0 T 2T detection 0 1 2 3 phase ( radians) 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 probability gravity (b) laser beams. The atom is subject to a stimulated two-photon process by absorption of a photon from laser 1 and stimulated emission of a photon in the mode of laser 2. This level diagram is typical of alkali atoms with two hyperfine ground states and an excited state manifold from which the two lasers are detuned in frequency by ∆. The transition between internal states is accompanied by a change of momentum given by ħ(⃗k1 − ⃗k2) ≡ ħ⃗keff. (b) A sequence of three light pulses allows to split, deflect and recombine the atomic waves to form an atomic Mach-Zehnder interferometer. The detection of the atom state at the output yields the atomic interference which is modulated by the difference of phase along the two arms. (c) Example of arrangement of the laser beams in the vertical direction in which atoms are free falling. - Non magnetic materials - Pressure < 10−9 mBar - Magnetic shields Vacuum chamber Control system - CPU controlled - Digital & Analog outputs - μs accuracy - Frequency synthesisers Laser system - 5 frequencies lasers - Laser power ⇠ 1 W - Phase stability ( ⇠ − 100 dBc/Hz at 10 kHz) Optical subsystems - Polarization maintaining fibers - Anti-vibration system - Accelerometer/Seismometer - Tiltmeter - Barometer - CCD camera Supp. Instrum. - ... Vibration noise reduction - Acoustic isolation - Detection/imaging system - Collimators (waist ⇠ 1 cm) - Stable fiber distribution system - Frequency agility ⇠ 1 GHz atom inertial sensor. The intrinsic sensitivity of these sensors is limited by the noise on the measurement of the transition probabil- ity, and ultimately by the so-called quantum projection noise resulting from the projective measurements of the populations in the two ports of the interferometer20. III. SYSTEM ENGINEERING The hardware common to all cold-atom inertial sen- sors consists of a vacuum chamber where the atoms are interrogated, a laser system required for cooling, manip- ulating and detecting them, an automatized control sys- tem to operate and interface the instruments, and some auxiliary instrumentation to stabilize the experiment. A general view of the different sub-systems is presented in figure 2. A. Vacuum system and cold-atom source At first, a sample of cold atoms is prepared in an Ultra- High Vacuum (UHV) chamber surrounded by magnetic shields, using standard laser cooling methods. The level of vacuum in the chamber must be below 10−9 hPa in order to be non limiting for the coherence of the system with atoms evolving freely during hundreds of ms. Such UHV level is reached with combinations of pumping tech- nologies such as turbomolecular pumps during backing of the chamber, and getter and ion pumps after baking. Moreover, the vacuum chamber shall be made of non- magnetic materials (e.g. Titanium, aluminium, glass ...) in order to limit the magnetic field gradients which are a source of stray forces owing to the second order Zeeman effect (for atom interferometers operating on transitions insensitive to the first order Zeeman effect). When metal- lic, the chambers are machined to accommodate typically a dozen of optical windows. They are interfaced with coils that generate magnetic fields: a magnetic gradi- ent for the MOT phase and an homogeneous bias field for the interferometer itself. Most often alkali atoms are used, and a preferred choice is 87Rb (interrogation wave- length on the D2 line λ = 780 nm ). Loading of a 3 dimensional Magneto Optical Trap directly from a background vapor22 or the intense flux of a 2D MOT23 allows for gathering of order of 108 atoms in 100 ms. Deep molasses cooling allows reaching temperature close to the recoil limit of the order of 2 μK. Atoms are then launched upwards in a fountain geometry24, or simply released in free fall from the molasses25. A sequence of microwave, pusher, and eventually Raman, pulses is then used to prepare the atoms in a pure Zeeman insensitive mF = 0 state, eventually with a narrower velocity dis- tribution. This preparation phase reduces the sensitiv- ity of the source to stray magnetic field fluctuations and increases the contrast of the interferometer, which is in general limited by the finite velocity spread of the source. High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors 4 R1 R2 Raman Lasers F’= 3 F’= 2 F’= 1 F’= 0 F = 2 F = 1 -20Γ < δ < -2Γ Cooling Repumper Detection Pusher 72,218 MHz 72,911 3 MHz -2 < Δ < -0,5 GHz 87Rb The five laser frequencies required for cooling, detecting and manipulating the atoms with a stimulated two-photon Raman process are represented. B. Laser system Since cooling the atoms and manipulating their quan- tum state is performed with lasers, the optical system represents a key subsystem of a cold-atom inertial sen- sor. The choice of laser technology is intimately linked with the nature of the atom used. Since alkali atoms are widely used, in particular Rubidium and Cesium inter- rogated on their D2 lines (respectively at 780 nm and 852 nm), semiconductor diode laser technology has been historically vastly deployed26. But telecom based laser sources have also attracted a lot of attention owing to the presence of qualified components (e.g. for field or space applications). This technology leads to commer- cially available laser systems for cold-atom inertial sen- sor experiments. To get enough optical power, of order of hundreds of mW, fiber or semiconductor amplifiers are used. All lasers need to be precisely tuned onto specific frequencies. This is realized using a number of frequency locking techniques: saturation spectroscopy in vapour cells, offset locks based on beatnote and acousto-optic modulation. In addition, Raman lasers need to be phase locked together. The five optical frequencies needed to perform a cold- atom inertial sensor are represented in figure 3, for 87Rb interferometers based on Raman transitions. A variety of different laser systems have been developed and pub- lished, with different number of lasers, ranging from five to only one, with designs constrained by the size, the final application, the measurement environment condi- tions and the evolution of technologies27–40. Figure 4 dis- plays a compact free space optical system and a complete architecture of a fibered optical bench which reached a Technology Readiness Level (TRL) of 4. a) b) free space compact laser system. (Adapted with permission from X. Zhang et al. ”Compact portable laser system for mobile cold atom gravimeters”, Appl. Opt. 57, 6545-6551 (2018) c⃝The Optical Society ) . b) Example of opti- cal architecture for an industrial telecom-doubled based sys- tem; Iso/Tap: optical isolator with tap coupler, PPLN-WG: waveguide PPLN crystal, Rb: Rubidium cell, Ph-mod: phase modulator, EDFA: Erbium-Doped Fiber Amplifier, AOM: Acousto-Optic Modulator, PMUX: polarization multiplexer. The upper part shows the master laser, followed by the cool- ing/detection laser. The bottom part shows the Raman lasers. The middle panel presents an optional system which allows to realize a Bloch elevator to launch the atoms and a delta kick collimator. (Adapted by permission from Springer Na- ture Customer Service Centre GmbH : Springer Nature, Eur. Phys. J. D, ”A prototype industrial laser system for cold atom inertial sensing in space”, R. Caldani et al. c⃝(2020), ). C. Optical subsystems Optical collimators are needed to shape and route light beams from the laser system to the vacuum chamber. When only one collimator was used in to realize all the functions of a gravimeter (trapping, interferometer and detection), most of the sensors actually use a ten of collimators. When driving Raman transitions, the phase difference between the Raman lasers needs to be stable and well controlled, not only in time (which requires the High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors 5 two beams to be phase-locked), but also in space (same wavefront for both counterpropagating laser beams). It can be realized by shaping both beams together using a single common collimator and retroreflecting them on a common mirror). Special care has thus to be paid in the realization of this Raman collimator: most often fibered for better stability in direction and shape, with a large beam waist for flat wavefronts (see part.IV D), with a well defined polarisation to maximize the coupling to the atoms and an intensity profile as flat as possible in or- der to keep the coupling homogeneous all along the atom trajectory. The retroreflecting system, usually composed of a quarter-wave plate and a mirror, constitutes a key subsystem in order to achieve high accuracy, as it defines the lasers equiphase, which constitute the reference for the acceleration measurement. A very high level of opti- cal quality (in particular planeity) is thus required for this system (see part.IV D) in order to reduce the variation of phase difference between the two counterpropagating beams sampled at the three pulses. To keep any eventual residual bias due to such wavefront distortions stable, one needs stable atom trajectories. These are determined by the cloud temperature, its initial mean velocity and po- sition in the beams, which can be stabilized by locking the optical powers of the molasses beams42. Finally, the detection system which collects the fluorescence signals from the clouds needs to be homogeneous and symmetric in order to avoid asymmetry effects42,43. D. Control system The automatized control of the apparatus, in particu- lar of the laser system, shares the same constraints as typ- ical atomic physics experiments: it requires tens of ana- log and digital outputs with temporal resolution below the μs, agile frequency synthesizers (RF and microwaves) and analog-to-digital converters. An important litera- ture is available on the topic which is a key concern in experiments due to the rapid evolution of hardware con- trol standards as well as operating system versions. We therefore refer the reader to the references in the most recent publications or online materials on this subject, e.g. Refs. 44–46. E. Vibration noise reduction When increasing the interrogation time T, phase noise induced by parasitic vibrations (i.e. at frequencies higher that the sampling frequency) rapidly constitutes the dominant limit to the sensitivity. Already when 2T gets larger than a few ms, ground vibration noise will typically limit the sensitivity, to a level of ∼ 10−5 m.s−2.τ −1/2, so that the sensors need to be isolated and/or the vi- brations measured to reject them. Different methods have been developed in order to reduce this noise source, which have to be adapted to the environmental condi- tions, being thus different for static sensors in a labora- tory, transportable sensors in outdoor environment, and mobile sensors for onboard measurements. They rely on the use of isolation platforms, and auxiliary sensors like seismometers or accelerometers, eventually combined to- gether, or on the development of better immune interfer- ometer schemes47. IV. GRAVITY SENSORS Gravity sensors are without any doubt the most em- blematic inertial sensors based on atom interferometry. This stems from their relatively simple interferometer configuration, being a single axis vertical accelerometer, from their heritage, being one of very first demonstra- tion of inertial sensing based on atom interferometry, and from the concrete application fields they address, in par- ticular the field of geosciences. A. Historical context In their seminal paper1, Kasevich and Chu used cold sodium atoms in an atomic fountain to realize the first demonstration of the 3-pulses atom interferometer based on Raman transitions, such as described in II. In this early demonstration, the authors anticipated that such sensors could compete with state of the art classical gravimeters, such as based on the precise tracking of a free falling corner cube by optical interferometry. Remarkably, in the following years, the efforts of Chu ’s team made this claim become reality. A. Peters et al per- formed a very comprehensive metrological study of the performances, both in terms of stability and accuracy, of a second generation instrument based on Cs atoms48,49. The stability reached a level as low as 20 × 10−8 m.s−2 at 1.3 s measurement time, and a large number of sys- tematic effects were studied, and evaluated with a com- bined uncertainty of 3.2×10−8 m.s−2. A direct side by side comparison with a commercial corner cube gravime- ter, FG5 from the Microg solutions company50, showed a 4 times better stability for the atom gravimeter, and agreement between the two determinations of g, within the combined uncertainty of 7×10−8 m.s−2. At the same time, pioneering works on atomic gradiometers, which are differential accelerometers, have been conducted in Stanford51, and a few years later at LENS52. Early works on gravimeters have triggered a wealth of developments. Projects aiming at more compact and transportable cold atom gravimeters started in the begin- ning of the 2000s, in particular at SYRTE53 and HUB54, and later by the AOSense company in the USA. Since then, the technology of atomic gravity sensors has con- siderably grown in maturity, as assessed by some ma- jor achievements, such as i) the participation since 2009 to CIPM Key Comparisons (KC) and Euramet compar- isons of absolute gravimeters55–57, in 2017, even if not in- cluded in the 3rd KC58, four atom gravimeters developed in China38,59–61 have participated to the associated pilot study; ii) the demonstration of on board measurements, in a ship62 and a plane63 and iii) the industrial devel- opment and commercial product offer of atom gravime- ters at a competitive level of performance64. In total, High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors 6 (Reprinted from A. Peters et al., ”High-precision gravity measurement using atom interferometry”, Metrologia 38, 25-61 (2001) c⃝BIPM. Reproduced by permission of IOP Publishing. All rights reserved ); b) picture of the HUB gravimeter (Reprinted from Humboldt-Universit ̈at zur Berlin website (Ref. a)), using the same fountain configuration as in a) but with Rb atoms; c) picture of the SYRTE gravimeter, with its magnetic shields opened, which simply drops Rb atoms, (Adapted from A. Louchet-Chauvet et al., ”The influence of transverse motion within an atomic gravimeter”, New J. Phys. 13, 065025 (2011) ) d) scheme of a single beam gravimeter, (Adapted from Q. Bodart et al., ”A cold atom pyramidal gravimeter with a single laser beam”, Appl. Phys. Lett. 96, 134101 (2011), with the permission of AIP Publishing ). a HUB website: https://www.physics.hu-berlin.de/en/qom/research about 30 research groups and private companies are to- day working on the development of atomic gravity sen- sors. B. Principle of the gravity measurement In a gravimeter configuration (Fig.1.c), the sensitiv- ity to rotation, the second term of equation 2, is null as the two interferometer arms do not enclose any physi- cal area. Raman transitions being velocity selective, one needs to chirp the frequency difference between the Ra- man lasers in order to compensate for the linear increase of the Doppler shift with time, and keep the three pulses on resonance. A frequency chirp δω = at leads to an ad- ditional contribution in the interferometer phase given by aT 2, which allows for scanning the interferometer phase in a perfectly controlled way and record a fringe pat- tern. This chirp induced phase compensates the gravity phase shift when it perfectly matches the Doppler shift: a0 = keffg. This leads to a dark fringe in the interferome- ter pattern, whose position (as a function of the chirp rate a) does not depend on T. Indeed, in the reference frame of the free falling atoms, the phase difference between the Raman lasers is fixed, without any acceleration. Precisely locating, and tracking, this fringe allows for measuring g via the relation g = a0/keff, as well as its fluctuations, in terms of SI traceable frequency measurements. This gives to this kind of sensors their absolute character: they do not require calibration, but an accurate control and knowledge of the RF and laser frequencies involved in the measurement. Remarkably, the cold atoms themselves, being well shielded from environmental perturbations in the drop chamber, can be used to guarantee the control and knowledge of these frequencies60. C. Sensitivity limits Typical interrogation times are in the range 2T = 100 ms to 1 s, depending on the size of the drop chamber (from about 10 cm up to 10 m). As mentioned in part III E for increased T, parasitic vibra- tions limit the sensitivity. Different isolation methods have been used, based on superspring stabilization65, or the use of passive isolation platforms25, eventually combined with additional active stabilization feedback control66–69, or the correlation of the interferometer phase with the remaining vibration noise measured by a classical sensor, either a seismometer70, or an accelerometer71. The latter method allows for correcting the interferometer phase, either via postcorrection25, or feed forward compensation in real time on the Raman lasers phase difference71. The latter scheme allows for operation without isolation platform70, and for efficient hybridization of classical and atomic accelerometers71. vertical vibration noise measured on the ground and on such dedicated isolation platforms66. These methods enabled several teams to reach sensitivities below m.s−2.τ −1/2 (Refs.32,72–74), even without isolation platform in quiet environment75, the record being held by HUST32, with 4.2 × 10−8 m.s−2.τ −1/2. Many other sources of noise impact the gravity mea- surements, such as related to the phase noise of the RF reference frequency oscillators, frequency, phase and in- tensity noise of the Raman lasers, and detection noise. Detailed analysis of these noise sources have been car- ried out, especially in , and later in , where the exact transfer function of the interferometer to phase noise fluctuations, the so-called sensitivity function de- rived in , was extensively used (with an extension to arbitrary pulse shapes presented in ). These sources of noises can be reduced down to the mrad per High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors 7 sured on the ground and on isolation platforms. Active isola- tion, based on sensing and actuation, allows to reach a level of vibration noise as low as the intrinsic noise of the sensor used for sensing. (Reprinted figure with permission from M.- K. Zhou et al., Phys. Rev. A 86 043630 (2012). c⃝2020 by the American Physical Society ( )). shot level, well below the level of residual vibration noise, which still amounts to 10-100 mrad per shot, even with sophisticated vibration isolation schemes. The situation is different for gravity gradiometers, for which vibrations are a common source of noise, which is thus rejected in the differential measurement51. This al- lows in principle these sensors to approach their intrinsic limit which will be set by detection noise, and ultimately by quantum projection noise. Best differential acceleration sensitivities of 3 − 4 × 10−8 m.s−2.τ −1/2 have been demonstrated with standard Raman interferometers78,79. For baselines of 1.4 m along the vertical direction78 and of 0.72 m along the horizontal direction80, this corresponds to best demonstrated grav- ity gradient sensitivities of 28 and 59 × 10−9 s−2.τ −1/2. D. Accuracy limits High accuracy is another appealing feature of atomic gravity sensors. Their scale factor being tied to time and frequency is well defined, which brings intrinsic accuracy and long term stability to the sensors. Yet, a number of systematic effects do bias the measurement, which have to be well measured and/or modelled, in order to cor- rect the gravity measurements. A first detailed analysis, though not completely exhaustive, of systematic effects was carried out in . In principle, the interferometer is insensitive to frequency detunings of the Raman con- dition, but not to its gradients, leading to sensitivity to inhomogeneities of light shifts and magnetic field gradi- ents. Remarkably, these shifts, as well as others related to electronic phase delays, can be efficiently eliminated via the so called keff reversal technique81. Indeed, the inter- ferometer can be realized with two different orientations of the keff wavevector (which corresponds to diffracting the intial wave packet upward or downward at the first beamsplitting pulse). This reverses the sign of the grav- ity phase shift, but not of the above mentionned system- atic effects, so that averaging the g measurements over the two directions cancels them. Some other effect do remain, the most important being a second order light shift82, the Coriolis acceleration49 and the effect of laser wavefront aberrations53 represented in figure 7. The first effect is related to the presence of the sec- ond pair of Raman lasers, which is frequency detuned by twice the Doppler shift. This is a drawback associated to the use of retro-reflected Raman lasers, which allows on the other hand for reducing the impact of wavefront distortions, as detailed later. This results in a bias that is larger when dropping the atoms than when launching them upwards, and that scales with the Raman coupling. It can thus efficiently be corrected by performing g mea- surements at different Raman intensities82. The second is related to residual transverse veloci- ties, which lead to Coriolis accelerations. At μK tem- peratures, atoms have residual velocities of order of cm.s−1, which leads to Coriolis accelerations as large as 10−6 m.s−2. Hopefully, the net effect results from the av- erage over the transverse velocity distribution. This leads in principle to a cancellation of the effect, provided that this velocity distribution is symmetric and well centered around zero, and that atoms with different transverse ve- locities do perform the interferometer and are detected with the same efficiency, or at last symmetrically with respect to the center of the velocity distribution. In prac- tice, residual asymmetries and geometrical effects, such as due to laser beams inhomogeneities and finite size of the detection zone, can compromise this cancellation43. The effect can then be evaluated by performing gravity measurements with different orientations by rotating the experiment53, the average between two opposite orienta- tions allowing to cancel the effect. An efficient alterna- tive consists in counter rotating the experiment49 or more simply the retroreflecting Raman mirror83,84 in order to compensate for the Earth rotation and thus eliminate the phase shifts induced by Coriolis acceleration. The third effect arises from the deviation of the Ra- man lasers wavefronts with respect to the ideally flat equiphase surfaces that act as a reference ruler used to measure the position of the free falling atoms at each of the three laser pulses. The required level of flatness is extremely demanding as a distortion as small as 0.1 nm corresponds to a Raman phase difference of about 1 mrad. The net effect results from the averaging of all possible trajectories, which samples differently the phase defects at each pulse. One can calculate that for the sim- ple case of a curvature, and for an atomic temperature of 2 μK, a wavefront flatness of λ/300 PV over 1 cm is required to keep the error on the gravity measurement below 10−8 m.s−2 . This implies that already the Gaussian character of the Raman laser beams has an effect, so that large size beam of waists larger than 1 cm are required to reduce the effect of the residual curvature. Finally, this effect is the most important con- tribution in the accuracy budget of the most accurate gravimeters, with contributions, up to recently, of or- der of 3 − 4 × 10−8 m.s−2. To evaluate this effect, one can investigate its dependence when increasing the atom temperature53, or when selecting the trajectories, either by truncating the detection area86 or the size of the Ra- High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors 8 Karcher et al., ”Improving the accuracy of atom interferome- ters with ultracold sources”, New J. Phys. 20, 113041 (2018) ). Because of to their ballistic expansion across the Raman beam, the atoms sample at the three π/2 − π − π/2 Raman pulses different parasitic phase shifts related to wave- front distortions (displayed in blue as a distorted surface). This leads to a bias in the gravity measurement, resulting from the average of the effect over all atom trajectories, fil- tered by finite size effects, such as related to the waist and clear aperture of the Raman beam and to the finite field of view at the detection. man laser beam87. But, none of these methods allowed to evaluate the effect with a low enough uncertainty to make the accuracy of the atomic sensor better than the announced one of the best classical instrument, the FG5 or FG5-X corner cube gravimeters. A better method consists in extrapolating the bias to zero temperatures by performing g measurements as a func- tion of decreasing temperatures. Such measurements, us- ing ultracold atoms produced via evaporative cooling in a dipole trap, recently allowed for extracting a model of the wavefront and reducing the uncertainty of the wavefront aberration bias down to 1.3 × 10−8 m.s−2 . E. Commercial instruments Even though some of the best atomic instruments have demonstrated performances better than state of the art classical sensors, many of these devices are ”laboratory sensors” in the sense that they mostly operate in labora- tory conditions, with air conditioning system for exam- ple. This is enough for some applications, but not for on field measurements, for which instruments have to be robust, compact and easy to operate for non-physicist operators, and sustain large temperature and humidity changes. Some companies have embarked on this path. AOSense was formed in 2004 to spin-off innovative re- search developed at Stanford University and delivered its first commercial compact gravimeter to an aerospace customer in 2010 . Since then, other compa- nies, mainly in Europe have followed. They are listed in the tables presented in the section A. One of them is the Muquans90 company founded in 2011. Their prod- ucts are the result of a long-term research effort initiated by SYRTE and LP2N. They have been developing com- mercial gravity sensors based on the simple architecture demonstrated in and on the ease of use and robust- ness of fibered laser systems29. First gravimeters have already been delivered to customers from the geophysics community64. F. Applications Gravity sensors find applications in many fields, rang- ing from geophysics and geodesy, navigation, civil engi- neering and fundamental physics. So far, atom gravime- ters have been mainly developed in or for laboratory- type environments, where they can reach excellent short term and long term stability, better than classical corner cube gravimeters32,73,74. There, they allow for recording continuous series53,59,74, a mode of operation usually re- stricted to relative, spring or superconducting, gravime- ters. Figure 8 displays an example for such signal. Being accurate, they can be used as metrological standards in National Metrology Institutes, and thus participate to CIPM Key Comparisons55,57. Other applications in the field of metrology are i) the precise determination of g for Kibble balance experiments91,92, which are now pri- mary standards that realize the kilogram based on its new definition linked to the Planck constant93,94, and ii) the determination of the gravitational constant G at the 10−4 level with gravity gradiometers95,96. To address wider applications, engineering and simpli- fication efforts in the sensors or its key subsystems are made in order to allow performing measurements in more aggressive environments27,31,36,38,40,41,64,97–100. Opera- tion of gravity sensors on board a ship62, and more re- cently in an aircraft63, has been demonstrated, and grav- ity mapping have been performed in both cases, showing improved repeatability and lower uncertainties compared to classical marine gravimeters. Figure 9 displays such gravity mapping. Ongoing developments target the de- ployment of gravity sensors, such as gradiometers, for civil engineering applications101 or the installation of a commercial atom gravimeter for natural risk manage- ment, e.g. on the Etna volcano102. V. INERTIAL SENSORS A. Gyroscopes Sensing rotations with an atom interferometer belongs to one of the pioneering experiments from 1991 which triggered the field of atom interferometry2. In that study, a calcium atomic beam was excited in an optical Ram- High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors 9 Tide signals. Example of NIM-AGRb-1 continuous gravity measurement over 20 days expressed in μGal (1 μGal = 10−8 m.s−2). Each data point is a 3 min average. The quantum sensor sensitivity allows for measuring grav- ity changes due to tides, air pressure variations, polar motion, water table level fluctuations. (Adapted from S.-K. Wang et al., ”Shift evaluation of the atomic gravimeter NIM-AGRb-1 and its comparison with FG5X”, Metrologia 55, 360-365 (2001) c⃝BIPM. Reproduced by permission of IOP Publishing. All rights reserved ). Gravity anomaly model of Meriadzec ter- race. (Adapted from Y. Bidel et al., ”Absolute marine gravimetry with matter-wave interferometry”, Nat Commun 9, 627 (2018) ). Gravity is expressed in mGal (1 mGal = 10−5 m.s−2). The model was obtained from ON- ERA ship-borne atom gravimeter measurements. sey geometry17 on the intercombination line 1S0 →3 P1 (λ = 657.46 nm). The whole atomic-beam apparatus was mounted on a rotational stage and could be rotated around a vertical axis perpendicular to the plane defined by the laser beams and the atomic beam and the authors observed a phase shift proportional to the rotation fre- quency of the apparatus. Differences between rotation rates of the order of 0.1 rad.s−1could be resolved by the apparatus. Following this proof-of-principle experiment, few groups developed interferometers using atomic beams as rotation sensors. The most important achievements were from the Pritchard group at MIT in 1997103 us- ing nano-fabricated gratings to realize beam-splitters and mirrors, and from the Kasevich group at Stanford104,105 and Yale106 using stimulated two-photon Raman transi- tions as atom-optics. A review on the historical aspects of these developments is presented in , which compares the performances of atomic beam and cold-atom based gyroscopes. While the short-term sensitivity of atomic beam interferometers still holds the record for atomic gy- roscopes (6×10−10 rad.s−1at 1 s integration time) owing to the large atom flux106, achieving long-term stability levels competitive with those of other technologies (e.g. optical gyroscopes) was challenging. On the contrary, the use of cold-atoms leads to a reduced atom flux, which lim- its the short term sensitivity, but allows a better control of atomic trajectories which is advantageous to achieve better long term stability levels. We will therefore focus here on cold-atom based gyroscopes. 1. Rotation phase shift. As explained in section II, a phase shift will appear in an interferometer where the atomic wavepacket moves with a velocity ⃗v with respect to a frame rotating at an angular velocity ⃗Ω, given by Φrot = ⃗keff · (2⃗Ω × ⃗v)T 2, (3) where T is the time between the light pulses (Mach- Zehnder geometry assumed here). An argument which is often put forward to explain the potentially very large sensitivity of atomic gyroscopes compared to their opti- cal counterparts is based on the expression of the phase High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors 10 shift of the Sagnac effect107: Φrot = 4πE hc2 ⃗Ω · ⃗A. (4) In this expression, which ties to the (special) relativistic nature of the Sagnac effect (pointed out by von Laue108), E is the total energy of the particle associated with the interfering waves and ⃗A is the oriented area-vector of the interferometer (the prefactor is 8πE in the case of a full loop interferometer). In the case of non-relativistic atoms, E ≃ mc2 is about 11 orders of magnitude larger than the energy hν of a photon used in an optical gy- roscope, yielding a much larger scale factor for atomic gyroscopes. This increase in scale factor has nevertheless to be confronted to the much larger photon flux and the larger area (e.g. in a fiber optic gyroscope) in optical in- terferometers. While this formulation helps in assessing the potential of an atomic gyroscope over an optical gyro- scope, it can lead to controversies in interpretation on the actual origin of the phase shift (see, e.g. ), which, as shown in section II solely originates from the sam- pling of the laser wavefront by the motion of the atomic wavepacket in the laser frame. The link between Eq. (3) and Eq. (4) is obtained by calculating the area of the interferometer given by ⃗A = ħ⃗keff m T × ⃗vT. (5) The larger scale factor of the atomic gyroscope over the optical gyroscope at constant interferometer area can be understood from the fact that the atom travels (at veloc- ity v) slowlier than the photon (velocity c) in the interfer- ometer of fixed dimensions, thereby sensing the inertial effect for an increased duration. This consideration on the importance of the interro- gation time T drives the design of atomic gyroscopes. We will present below two complementary directions of research: on one side some experiments target large in- terrogation times in order to increase the physical area, which supposes a large interrogation region since the free fall distance of the atoms scales as T 2; on the other side some efforts are conducted to reduce the physical dimen- sions of the sensor at the cost of a reduced sensitivity. 2. Instruments targeting high stability levels with long interrogation times a. First generations of cold-atom gyroscopes. The first cold-atom gyroscope experiment was started at the SYRTE laboratory in 2000 and developed until 2008. It used two clouds of Cesium atoms launched along parabolic trajectories and traveling in opposite directions through a common interrogation region, where three pairs of retro-reflected Raman beams enable to realize a full inertial basis (the three components of rotation and the tree components of acceleration)110,111. In par- ticular, the use of two counter-propagating atom clouds enabled to separate the horizontal acceleration and ver- tical rotation components of the phase shift. Finally, the demonstration of principle of a four pulse interfer- ometer sequence allowing to perform the measurement of one component of rotation without DC acceleration sensitivity was demonstrated. presents the com- plete characterization of the instrument when measuring one horizontal rotation axis: with a total interrogation time 2T = 80 ms, the authors demonstrated a sensitivity of 2.4 × 10−7 rad.s−1.τ −1/2 limited by quantum projec- tion noise, a long term stability of 1 × 10−8 rad.s−1at 4000 s integration time and a test of the linearity of the scaling factor at one part per 105. The limitations to the stability were identified as coming from the fluctuations of atom trajectories coupled to the wave-front distortions of the Raman laser. About at the same time, a cold Cs-atom gyroscope was developed at Stanford University. The experiment volume was comparable to the SYRTE gyroscope but used an architecture dedicated to the four pulse sequence: two clouds of atoms were also prepared in two differ- ent regions but launched along a vertical trajectory as in an atomic fountain, and interrogated by four-light pulses (π/2 − π − π − π/2, total interrogation time of 206 ms). The details of the apparatus developed during the period from 2002 to 2010 are given in with the end re- sults published in 2011 in . In this experiment, the authors demonstrate how this four pulse configura- tion overcomes accuracy and dynamic range limitations of three pulse atom interferometer gyroscopes. Moreover, by introducing a time asymmetry in the sequence, they present a method to suppress spurious noise terms related to multiple-path interferences, thereby increasing the sig- nal to noise ratio of the interferometer. They show how the instrument can be used for precise determination of latitude, azimuth (true north), and Earths rotation rate, and highlight the large potential of the four pulse config- uration. Few other cold-atom gyroscope projects have been con- ducted. At the University of Hannover (Germany), a sen- sor of 13.7 cm length was developed, featuring a Sagnac area of 19 mm2 (Fig. 10 and ). This experiment used a three light pulse (π/2−π−π/2) configuration with two clouds of atoms launched horizontally in opposite di- rections from two sources, and crossing three physically separated interaction regions. In particular, a method to minimize the relative alignment of the three Raman beams was demonstrated in by maximizing the contrast of the interferometer. A short term sensitivity of 6.1×10−7 rad.s−1.τ −1/2 was achieved. A modified ver- sion of this setup to accommodate composite light pulses that mitigate some of the technical noise sources (e.g. light shifts) was reported in , where a sensitivity of 1.2 × 10−7 rad.s−1.τ −1/2 was achieved at short time- scales (below 10 s). Another experiment is currently be- ing developed in China119 on a similar basis, i.e. with separated atomic sources launched along parabolic tra- jectories and a total interrogation time of 104 ms. In that setup, the current long term stability level reaches 6.2 × 10−8 rad.s−1after 2000 s of integration time. b. Strategy for improved long-term stability. As identified in Refs.110,112, the main limitation to the long- term stability of a cold-atom gyroscope is linked with the fluctuation of the atom’ mean trajectory coupled to High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors 11 trajectories preparation detection atom source 1 (2D-MOT, 3D-MOT/molassis) atom source 2 adapted from ). the imperfect relative wavefront of the Raman beams. As discussed in section IV, the atoms probe a finite re- gion of the laser wavefront which originates in a bias on the inertial measurement if not perfectly flat. This effect is even more pronounced in gyroscopes based on physi- cally separated interrogation beams (in contrast to a sin- gle retro-reflecting mirror in the case of the gravimeter). Fluctuations of the atomic trajectory then result in a random sampling of the Raman beam relative wavefront, yielding an instability. In most experiments, the effect of initial velocity fluctuations δv0 dominates that of ini- tial position fluctuations. The source of fluctuations then scales as δφwf ≃ 4πδv0T δλ λ2 , where δλ is the deviation of the wavefront with respect to a plane wave (for which δλ = 0). Since the inertial signal scales at least with T 2 (see Eq. 3), it is interesting to increase the interroga- tion time to minimize the bias with respect to the sig- nal, at the cost of increasing the size of the instrument (which scales with v.T or T 2 as a function of the archi- tecture). As a numerical example, achieving long-term stability levels δv0 < 1 μm.s−1 is technically challenging, which results, for wavefront aberrations δλ = λ/50 over a typical pupil diameter of 1 cm, in an interferometer bias δφ ∼ 15 mrad (T = 50 ms). This bias has to be compared to a signal of about 16 rad for the Earth rotation rate (72 μrad.s−1) in an interferometer with T = 50 ms and v ≃ 3 m.s−1. The long term stability is thus constrained to a level of the order of 7×10−8 rad.s−1, consistent with the value reported in several articles112,118,119. c. Second generation of cold-atom gyroscopes. In that context, a new instrument was built at SYRTE to target better long term stability levels by increas- ing the interrogation time to 800 ms. In the experi- ment described in , a four-light pulse architecture with an atom cloud launched vertically in a fountain configuration as in115. In that setup, two beams sepa- rated by 58 cm perform the atom optics (Fig. 11). In such a folded geometry, the interferometer phase shift acquires a cubic dependence with T and is given by Φrot = 1 2⃗keff · (⃗g × ⃗Ω)T 3. The phase shift associated with Earth rotation rate (72 μrad.s−1) becomes 333 rad (the Sagnac area is 11 cm2). Moreover, due to the folding of the trajectory, some effects of wavefront aberrations are reduced. This setup therefore currently represents the state-of-the-art for atomic gyroscopes, with a long term stability of 3 × 10−10 rad.s−1after 10 000 s of inte- gration time (Fig. 11)120. Note that the instrument still operates well above the quantum projection noise limit, which equals 2 × 10−10 rad.s−1.τ −1/2 for 106 atoms par- ticipating to the interferometer and a contrast of 50% (assuming a cycle rate of 4 Hz as in ). If the bias associated with the imperfect atomic trajectories is con- trolled at a sufficient level , then stability levels in the range of 10−12 rad.s−1can be anticipated. 3. Example of gyroscope simplification effort In parallel to these developments aiming at achieving stability levels that could beat those from other naviga- tion technologies in the future (see section below), efforts are conducted to study simplified architectures of sensors with a smaller volume. As an example, a group at NIST has built an instrument with a glass vacuum chamber oc- cupying a surface of 1 cm2 (Fig.? ) in which the rotation (and acceleration) phase shift can be measured by ob- serving its dependence on the individual atom velocities according to Eq. (3). In this so-called point source in- terferometry (PSI) technique, originally demonstrated in a 10-meter long instrument123, the interferometer con- figuration uses the natural expansion of the cold atom sample due to it’s residual temperature. If the initial size of the atom cloud is negligible with respect to the size after expansion, a camera, which images the atom cloud, resolves in a position-dependent way the rotation phase shift (Fig. 12). The Sagnac area is given by the root-mean-square atomic velocities and equals 0.03 mm2 in this setup. The authors identify the limitations to the sensitivity from the short Raman interrogation time (T = 8 ms), the technical noise, the initial size of the cold-atom cloud, and the measurement dead time. More- over, they show how the instrument could be used for gyro-compassing. While the PSI technique provides experimental sim- High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors 12 100 101 102 103 104 10 10 10 9 10 8 10 7 llan deviation of rotation rate (rad.s 1) A 10 3 10 2 10 1 llan deviation of phase (rad) A integration time, (s) Seismometers Vibration isolation platform Mirrors L Collimators g Detection Preparation x y z cloud of Cesium atoms is launched in the vertical direction and interrogated by four light-pulses; the middle panel shows the two arms of the interferometer. Right panel: the points show the rotation rate stability (Allan deviation) which is limited by vibration noise; the dotted line shows the limit associated with detection noise. (Adapted with permission from D. Savoie et al, Science Advances, Vol. 4, no. 12, eaau7948 (2018) ). plicity, the scale factor of the sensor is dependent on the initial size of the atom cloud which is exaggerated in com- pact designs where the expansion ratio is small, which leads to instabilities. In , the authors show how using additional information on the contrast and cloud size from the PSI images allows to determine the scale factor correction in each image, thereby enabling to sup- press scale factor drifts by a factor 10 without degrading the short term sensitivity. Other efforts by several other teams are ongoing, in order to build complete inertial measurement units (i.e. 3 axes of acceleration and 3 axes of rotation) in a com- pact system. They will be presented in the section below discussing accelerometer developments V B. 4. Applications We discuss here some applications of gyroscopes and relate them to different technologies in order to appreci- ate the efforts that must be accomplished by the commu- nity to enlarge the potential of cold-atom sensors. The appealing feature of cold-atom gyroscopes relies in their inherent long-term stability associated with the stabil- ity of the quantities involved in the gyroscope scale fac- tor. This feature, associated with the complexity of in- struments, naturally points for high-performance appli- cations such as strategic inertial navigation, or scientific applications, e.g. in geosciences or tests of fundamental physics. a. High-performance inertial measurement unit. As discussed above, the limit to the stability of cold-atom gyroscopes currently lies between 10−9 and 10−10 rad.s−1 for the best instruments120. Several other gyroscope technologies address the application of navigation. Cur- rent developments of MEMS gyroscopes target instabil- ity levels below 0.05 ◦/h (2.5 × 10−7 rad.s−1) , which makes this technology very important for mili- tary applications given their level of integration127. This can be compared to the best strategic-grade fiber op- tics gyroscopes (FOG) which feature instability levels in the 10−10 rad.s−1 range (Refs.128–130), or to Hemi- spherical Resonator gyroscopes (HRG) with comparable performances131. To refine the comparison, it is worth mentioning the importance of additional properties of sensors such as dynamic range, number of measurement axes, robustness to the environment (vibrations, temper- ature fluctuations), level of integration and industrializa- tion possibilities. A large research effort in these direc- tion is required to enlarge the scope of applications of cold-atom gyroscopes. As a result, the cold-atom tech- nology will probably, in a first stage, address applications requiring high stability levels but operating in quiet en- vironments, for example in underwater navigation (e.g. in a submarine); b. Scientific applications. Large ring laser gyro- scopes (RLG, ) feature instability levels in the 10−14 rad.s−1 range, which offers possibilities to study the evolution of the Earth polar motion133. Their excel- lent short term sensitivity is also exploited for rotational seismology134: here, colocalized acceleration (with seis- mometers) and rotation (with the RLG) measurements can inform on the direction of propagation of seismic waves as well as on the phase velocity of the waves, which represent a key information for geophysics. Cold- atom sensors, which can measure in a single platform and at the same position several components of the lo- cal instantaneous rotation and acceleration vectors could have a large impact in this emerging field. While their rotation rate sensitivity still not competes with that of RLG, this technology is interesting as it is in principle transportable, while current RLG are rather infrastuc- tures than sensors. The accurate knowledge of the scale factor in combination with portability could allow to spa- tially distribute several sensors in order to perform correl- ative rotational seismology. Much progress is expected in High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors 13 scale chamber. 87Rb atoms are laser-cooled in a glass cell with 1 cm2 cross-section area. A manifold that includes an ion pump, a Rb dispenser, and a vacuum window is connected to the glass cell. In the glass cell, the laser beams for state preparation, Raman interrogation, and detection propagate vertically in a shared beam path with a 1/e2 beam diam- eter of 8 mm and are circularly polarized inside the glass cell. Three orthogonal and retroreflected beams (not shown in the figure) with 1/e2 diameters of 6 mm form the magneto- optical-trap. The achieved short term sensitivity is currently 5×10−4 rad.s−1.τ −1/2 and integrates to 5×10−5 rad.s−1after 800 s of integration time. An improved version of the sensor could achieve a sensitivity of 10−6 rad.s−1.τ −1/2. (Repro- duced with permission from Y.-J. Chen et al, Phys. Rev. Ap- plied 12, 014019 (2019). Copyright 2019, American Physical Society ). this direction together with the improvement of the short term sensitivity levels of cold-atom gyroscopes. Finally, cold-atom gyroscopes have been proposed for tests of fundamental physics. The most accomplished project has been a test of general relativity by measur- ing the Lense-Thirring effect in space135,136, where both the quiet environment and long interrogation times are suitable for the very high sensitivity required in such a test. B. Accelerometers and progress for a complete inertial measurement unit Accelerometers using atom-interferometry are mostly developed for applications to inertial navigation as a building block of a full inertial measurement unit (IMU)111,137. As a single-axis accelerometer only re- quires one laser beam interacting with atoms at one given position, their implementation is simpler than for gyro- scopes, which need to open a physical area to the inter- ferometer. However, the first demonstration in a mo- bile vehicle97 (a plane) has shown the difficulties due to high frequency accelerations (vibrations) of the car- rier and dead times between successive measurements, since the use of an isolation platform is not a solution for this type of operation. Different approaches have been demonstrated or proposed to overcome these difficulties and will be detailed in the following. 1. Increasing the repetition rate and bandwidth A first approach to increase the bandwidth of cold- atom sensor consists in reducing the interrogation time and operate with an efficient recapture of the atoms, as explored in several articles from the team at Sandia Na- tional Laboratories , following . In particular, a dual-axis high-data-rate atom interferometer via cold en- semble exchange was reported in139 (dual-axis accelerom- eter and gyroscope). By recapturing the atoms after the interferometer sequence, the authors maintained a large atom number at high data rates of 50 to 100 mea- surements per second. Two cold ensembles were formed in trap zones located a few centimeters apart and were launched toward one another (see see Fig. 13). During their ballistic trajectory, they were interrogated with a stimulated Raman sequence, detected, and recaptured in the opposing trap zone. The achieved sensitivities were at 10−5 m.s−2.τ −1/2 and μrad.s−1.τ −1/2 levels. Keeping the interest of accuracy, this approach combines both in- crease of bandwidth and reduction of size of the senors at the cost of sensitivity, leading to the possibility of a compromise depending of the application. A more drastic approach is to avoid the production of the cold-atom ensembles by realizing atom interferometry in a vapor cell as demonstrated in140. This experiment, realized in Sandia National Laboratories, showed that in- terference signals may be obtained without laser cooling, by benefiting from the Doppler selectivity of the atom in- terferometer resonance. With a data rate of 10 kHz and an interrogation time of 15 μs, an inertial sensitivity of 10−1m.s−2.τ −1/2 is demonstrated, with the prospect to improve the sensitivity by 2 orders of magnitude in the future. Although the proposed scheme is much simpler than a cold-atom sensor, the sensitivity is still far from being competitive with that of best MEMS accelerome- ters than can reach sensitivities in the 10−6 m.s−2.τ −1/2 range (see e.g. and references therein). 2. Hybridization with a classical accelerometer The heading of this subsection refers to the general motivation for a cold-atom based sensor: its inherent long-term stability. Nevertheless, the dead times in cold- atom sensors (associated with cold-atom preparation and detection) leads to a loss of inertial information and strongly mitigates the possibility to realize inertial mea- surement units (IMUs) based on atom interferometry, as pointed out in . Moreover, when keeping long in- High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors 14 implementing the cold ensemble exchange. (a) Front view: Two MOTs are loaded 36 mm apart. Cooling beams are shown in blue, probe beams in pink, and Raman beams in yellow. The trap is turned off, and the outer and inner cooling beams are blue and red detuned, respectively, which launches the ensembles towards each other. After the experi- ment, atoms are recaptured in the opposite trap to facilitate loading. (b) Side view: The design allows for four planes of optical access, enabling a compact apparatus. The vector ⃗g shows the direction of gravity, while ⃗a and ⃗Ω are the direc- tions of acceleration and rotation measurement, respectively. (Figure and caption reproduced with permission from A. V. Rakholia et al, Phys. Rev. Applied 2, 054012 (2014). Copy- right 2014, American Physical Society ). terrogation times for high sensitivity, the vibrations lead to shot to shot interferometer phase fluctuations much higher than 2π. The correlation with classical sensors during the interferometer measurement allows to lift the π ambiguity in the phase determination (the atomic sen- sor being the fine scale of the vernier) and to improve the signal to noise ratio. This idea was first demon- strated for a gravimeter70 and later for an accelerometer in a plane97. The hybridization technique develops the idea to measure the acceleration during the dead times of the atomic sensor. In a similar way as an atomic clock can steer a local oscillator (e.g. a quartz or a laser) to constrain its instability on several days, a cold-atom ac- celerometer can be used to servo the bias of a relative accelerometer featuring a larger bandwidth but a poorer bias stability71,143. demonstrated at SYRTE the concept of a hybrid accelerometer that benefits from the advantages of both conventional and atomic sensors in terms of bandwidth (DC to 430 Hz) and long term stability. The use of a real time correction of the atom interferometer phase by the signal from the classical accelerometer enabled to run it at best performance without any isolation platform, while a servo-lock of the DC component of the conven- tional sensor output signal by the atomic one realized the hybrid sensor. Following this work, a team at LP2N re- alized a navigation-compatible hybrid accelerometer us- ing a Kalman filter where an algorithm was hybridizing the stable cold-atom interferometer with a classical ac- celerometer143. In particular, the bias of the classical accelerometer was tracked by the cold-atom sensor in an experimentally simulated harsh environment representa- tive of that encountered in mobile sensing applications. The resulting sensor exhibited a 400 Hz bandwidth and reached a stability of 10−7m.s−2 after 11 h of integration. 3. Multi-signal atom interferometers In the context of onboard applications with high dy- namic range and high sensitivity, and in order to over- come the limit from the ambiguity in phase determina- tion and the limit to the sensitivity when the atomic phase shift is closed to a multiple of π rad, different propositions of multi-signal atom interferometer have been demonstrated. A first work analyzes configurations for improving the measurement range and sensitivity by relying on multi- species atom interferometry at ONERA, involving the simultaneous manipulation of different atomic species in a unique instrument to deduce inertial measurements144. Using a dual-species atom accelerometer manipulating simultaneously both isotopes of rubidium, the authors report a preliminary experimental realization of original concepts involving the implementation of two atom inter- ferometers, first, with different interrogation times and, second, in phase quadrature. Two other experiments at the Weizmann Institute of Science have been achieved in the same context of oper- ating cold-atom interferometers in mobile environments. First, a technique producing multiple phase measure- ments per experimental cycle was presented in , allowing to realize quadrature phase detection in the presence of large phase uncertainties, and real-time sys- tematic phase cancellation. Second, introduces a scheme that improves on the trade-off between high sensi- tivity and limited dynamic range by a factor of 50 using composite fringes, obtained from sets of measurements with slightly varying interrogation times. The authors analyze the performance gain in this approach and the trade-offs it entails between sensitivity, dynamic range, and temporal bandwidth. 4. Multi-axis measurements In order to realize an IMU, a 3-axis accelerometer and a 3-axis gyroscope is required. Even if multi-axis mea- surements have already been demonstrated, the possibil- ity of measuring all components of inertia or even the 3 components of acceleration relies on successive measure- ments over the three directions. A theoretical proposal to extract information along several axis in a single shot High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors 15 was put forward at LP2N, where the authors propose new multidimensional atom optics that can create coher- ent superpositions of atomic wave packets along three spatial directions147. They argue how these tools can be used to generate light-pulse atom interferometers that are simultaneously sensitive to the three components of ac- celeration and rotation, and how to isolate these inertial components in a single experimental shot. 5. Ways forward A large part of the works in developing atom ac- celerometers for mobile applications aimed at mitigating the problem of phase ambiguity and loss of information associated with dead times. The high data rate inter- ferometers using recapture methods partially reduce the problem of dead times but at the cost of strong reduc- tion of sensitivity. On the other hand, the inertial noise aliasing associated with dead times can be alleviated by the hybridization technique, but this method is limited by non linearity in the correlation between both sensors. To solve this problem, combining different approaches will probably be needed. As an example, combining hy- bridization with continuous operation (i.e. without dead times) and eventually interlevead measurements, already demonstrated for rotation measurements120,121, should enable to achieve the full potential (i.e. quantum limited sensitivity) of cold-atom accelerometers. VI. OTHER MEASUREMENTS OF INERTIAL EFFECTS The sensitivity of atom interferometers to inertial forces can also be exploited for precise measurements of fundamental constants and fundamental tests, for the search for new exotic forces, for dark matter detection, for gravitational wave detection. For completeness of this review, we will briefly mention in this section some of these applications, and refer to the review articles cited in the introduction for further details. Atom interferometry is for instance key to precisely measure the change of velocity undergone by an atom after the transfer of momenta of a large number of photons148. This is accomplished by using a Ramsey Bord ́e interferometer149, which acts as a sensor for the velocity change between the first and second part of the interferometer, both constituted of a pair of π/2 pulses. This change of velocity is realized by placing the atoms, in between the two pairs of pulses, in an accelerated lat- tice. There the atoms undergo a large number of Bloch oscillations (up to a thousand), which results in a mo- mentum transfer of Nħk. This allows for a precise deter- mination of the recoil velocity. Remarkably, and this is the main motivation for such an experiment, this allows for the determination of fine structure constant α, the dimensionless constant that characterizes the strength of electromagnetic interactions, with relative uncertainties below the 10−9 level150,151. This experimental determi- nation can finally be compared with the more indirect determination of α derived from the anomalous magnetic moment of the electron, which can be precisely calculated using quantum electrodynamics (QED) theory and out of which a value the fine structure constant can be deter- mined. The comparison between the two determinations is one the most stringent tests of QED today. Another prospected application of cold-atom inertial sensors is the detection of gravitational waves12,152. In the currently mostly considered schemes, a set of atom accelerometers placed along a very long baseline (of hundreds of meters, if not kilometers) are simultane- ously interrogated with common laser beamsplitters, in a gradiometer-like measurement configuration153,154. This will allow for the detection of gravitational waves, whose signature is actually identical to gravity gradients, in a so far unexplored frequency band for ground-based de- tectors (0.1-1 Hz). Several studies have also proposed space-based detectors to address the mHz frequency band (e.g.155,156). Finally, other tests of gravitational physics can be per- formed, such as tests of the Weak Equivalence Princi- ple, by comparing the acceleration felt by two different atomic species157–164. To push the relative accuracy of these atomic physics based tests below the current lim- its of experiments involving classical test masses (at the 10−14 level165), long interrogation times are required. On ground, dedicated facilities are being operated or cur- rently built, where atoms will be launched or dropped over a few seconds. This can be realized in very tall vac- uum chambers of typically 10 meters166, or even longer, as well as in zero-g simulators, such as drop towers167 or in zero-g planes162. This prepares the ground for fu- ture space missions, such as the STE-QUEST mission168, where interferometers would last tens of seconds, thus boosting the sensitivity by 3 to 4 orders of magnitude. VII. NEW TECHNIQUES FOR COLD-ATOM INTERFEROMETRY Though the domain of cold-atom interferometry has gained a considerable maturity, leading, for example, to the industrial transfer of the technology, the perfor- mances of these instruments can still be improved signif- icantly for various applications. In the recent years, new methods have been introduced and are still presently be- ing actively investigated. A. Large Momentum Transfer (LMT) atom optics A variety of advanced beamsplitting methods have been demontrated such as double Raman transitions169,170 and double Bragg diffraction171, high order Bragg diffraction172, sequences of Bragg pulses173, Bloch oscillations in accelerated optical lattices174, combination of Bloch oscillation and high or- der Bragg pulses175–177, frequency-swept rapid adiabatic passage178,179. All these methods allow for improving the scale factor of the sensors, through a drastic increase of the separation of the atomic wavepackets, which can High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors 16 reach about a hundred photon momentum173,180,181, or even more. Record separation and subsequent recombi- nation with up to 408 photon momentum separation has recently been demonstrated182. A drawback of these methods lie in the existence of diffraction phases, which are parasitic phase shifts due to the beamsplitting process that depend on the depth of the lattice potential183,184, and to the presence of para- sitic interferometers due to the multiport nature of Bragg diffraction185. This leads to systematics in the interfer- ometer phase, but also to phase noise due to intensity temporal fluctuations, and loss of contrast, induced by intensity inhomogeneities. Strategies are being developed to mitigate these side effects186,187. This explains why, although a number of proofs of principle have been made, only few instruments have demonstrated a clear gain on the measurement of an actual inertial quantity. In partic- ular, the team at Stanford University implemented these techniques in an atomic gradiometer188. With transi- tions of 20 ħk, they obtained a gradient sensitivity of 3 × 10−9s−2 per shot (but with a very long cycle time of 15 s). The differential phase noise was relatively large though, of about 130 mrad per shot for transitions of 30 ħk, which is well above the detection noise limit and leaves margin for significant improvement in the future. In the context of large-momentum transfer beam split- ters which require larger laser intensities, schemes to interface an atom interferometer with an optical cav- ity tuned at resonance have been explored189–192. Such schemes are appealing since an optical resonator can pro- vide an interferometric control of the mode and impor- tant laser power enhancement (≫ 100). Nevertheless, the beam size that must be reached in the resonator (several mm of waist) to keep an homogeneous intensity profile over the freely expanding atom cloud tends to push to- wards long (several meters) cavities191 or towards the degenerate regime190,192 where the control of the impact of optical aberrations becomes challenging. Reducing the impact of intensity inhomogeneities over the atomic cloud can also be achieved by increasing the size of gaussian beams (at the cost of optical power loss)188 or by us- ing such as so-called top-hat beams with a flat intensity profile193. B. Ultracold atom sources Another important axis of investigation is the im- proved control over the atomic source, offered by ultra- cold atoms. Their reduced ballistic expansion allowed for increasing the interrogation time180, and their narrow momentum distribution for improving the efficiency of LMT methods194. More, lower temperatures also reduce systematic effects, such as related to the exploration by the atoms of intensity inhomogeneities in the spatial pro- file of the beamsplitters, or to wavefront distortions and Coriolis accelerations. Lensing methods, such as Delta Kick collimation in atom chips195 and optical traps196, allowed for the production of well collimated source, with temperatures lower than 100 pK. New detection methods have been demonstrated which allow for spatially resolv- ing the variations of the interferometer phase across the atomic source, at the output of the interferometer123,166, increasing the fringe visibility and the dynamical range of the sensors. C. Alkaline-Earth atoms Finally, other atom sources are also being used, such as other alkali species (eg. Potassium for tests of the Weak Equivalence Principle), or alkaline-earth atoms, such as Yb197 or Sr198. The latter offer, for their bosonic isotopes having zero spin in the ground state, reduced sensitivity to stray magnetic fields, and a richer electronic struc- ture, with narrow lines that can be used to implement single photon beamsplitters199,200 or to implement quan- tum metrology measurement protocols, such as based on spin-squeezing201,202. VIII. CONCLUSION Cold-atom inertial sensors have been developed for nearly 30 years in several groups worldwide, with an acceleration of the research effort and of the industrial transfer in the last 10 years. These sensors are especially well suited for applications requiring high performance in terms of stability and accuracy, while they compara- tively currently feature a weak robustness, dynamic range and level of miniaturization. Therefore, they have found up to now natural applications in testing fundamental physics, in metrology and in geoscience. Nevertheless, there is a growing research effort on taking the technol- ogy out of the laboratory, in particular on realizing high accuracy inertial measurement units operating in mobile platforms. On the fundamental side, several experiments are being set up to look for new physics, and large-scale instruments for gravitational wave detection are under design and realization in 3 continents. Several atom interferometer architectures have been considered with different atom optics techniques and dif- ferent atomic species. So far, the best performances have been achieved by cold-atom sensors using alkali atom sources and two-photon stimulated Raman transitions. Several teams are working on techniques to enhance the sensitivity and accuracy, in particular on ways to increase the separation between the two arms of the interferome- ter, using colder atom samples or atomic species with a richer level structure. Therefore, much improvement in performance can still be expected from this technology. Many groups are also working on simplifying the sen- sor architecture and subsystems to broaden the scope of applications and making cold-atom sensors compati- ble with operation in the field. On the industrial side, several companies have started to tackle the challenge of integrating the subsystems and currently concentrate on developing gravimeters or accelerometers with cold Rb atom, for which efficient, robust, and qualified laser sources have been realized. These efforts will ease the de- ployment of atom interferometer sensors and allow them to address a wide range of new applications, from ground High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors 17 to space, beyond the reach of classical sensors. SUMMARY POINTS 1. Atom interferometers use quantum superpositions of different momentum states in atoms. 2. Realizing these superposition states is efficiently achieved by using the interaction of an atom with two counter-propagating laser beams, which realize the role of beam splitter and mirror for the atomic wave. 3. The scale factor of atom interferometers (link be- tween the inertial effect to be measured and the interferometer output phase) is given by the space- time area of the interferometer, which is propor- tional to the square of the time spent by the atoms in the interferometer and to the wave-vector of the interrogation lasers. 4. Using cold-atom sources for atom interferometry allows to reach larger scale factors and high levels of stabilitiy and accuracy. Such performance orig- inate from the good control of atomic trajectories associated with low temperatures. 5. The fundamental limit to the sensitivity in these sensors is the quantum projection noise associated with the projective measurement of the atomic state performed at the output of the interferom- eter for ensembles of typically 1 million of atoms. Nevertheless, this quantum noise limit is often not reached since the effect of vibration noise domi- nates. 6. The mostly employed atoms are Rubidium and Ce- sium (Potassium in few cases), cooled by lasers to a temperature of few micro-Kelvins. Interferometers with alkaline-Earth atoms (Strontium and Ytter- bium) attract more and more interest. 7. Cold-atom inertial sensors mainly consist of a vac- uum chamber hosting the atom source, optical sys- tems to realize the momentum state superpositions, light detectors, real-time control electronics and ex- ternal instruments such as mechanical accelerome- ters. Typical dimensions of instruments range from 10 cm (integrated versions for field applications) to 10 m (large-scale experiments for fundamental studies). 8. Gravimeters are the most studied atom interfer- ometers. Best instruments have inaccuracy bet- ter than 2×10−8 m.s−2 and reach stability of 5×10−10 m.s−2 in 105 s of measurement. These sensors were the first instruments to be commer- cially developed. 9. Other largely studied sensors are accelerometers, rate gyroscopes and gravity gradiometers. Few large scale infrastructures (over 100 m baselines) are developed as prototypes of gravitational-wave detectors in the deci-Hertz frequency band. 10. Owing to their stability and accuracy, cold-atom intertial sensors have natural applications in geo- sciences and tests of fundamental physics. Integra- tion and engineering efforts let anticipate impor- tant applications in strategic inertial navigation in a near future. 11. Several research group work on new techniques to improve the sensitivity, stability, accuracy or com- pactness of cold-atom inertial sensors. Particu- larly followed routes are implementations of large momentum transfer beam splitters, production of ultracold-atom sources within a short time or new optical systems for improved atom optics efficiency. 12. About 50 research groups (including around 7 pri- vate companies) are active in the field. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We acknowledge Quentin Beaufils for careful reading of the manuscript. DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. IX.