1 Prediction of intrinsic topological superconductivity in Mn-doped GeTe monolayer from first-principles Xiaoming Zhang,1,2,3 Kyung-Hwan Jin,4,3 Jiahao Mao,5 Mingwen Zhao,6 Zheng Liu,2* and Feng Liu3* 1 Department of Physics, College of Information Science and Engineering, Ocean University of China, Qingdao, Shandong 266100, China 2 Institute for Advanced Study, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China 3 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112, USA 4 Department of Physics, Pohang University of Science and Technology, Pohang 37673, Republic of Korea 5 State Key Laboratory of Low Dimensional Quantum Physics and Department of Physics, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China 6 School of Physics and State Key Laboratory of Crystal Materials, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong 250100, China *Correspondence to: fliu@eng.utah.edu, zheng-liu@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn Recent discovery of topological superconductors (TSCs) has sparked enormous interest. Realization of TSC requires a delicate tuning of multiple microscopic parameters, which remains a great challenge. Here, we develop a first-principles approach to quantify realistic conditions of TSC by solving self-consistently Bogoliubov-de Gennes equation based on Wannier function construction of band structure, in presence of Rashba spin-orbit coupling, Zeeman splitting and electron-phonon coupling. We further demonstrate the power of this new method by predicting the Mn-doped GeTe (Ge1-xMnxTe) monolayer – a well-known dilute magnetic semiconductor showing superconductivity under hole doping – to be a Class D TSC with Chern number of -1 and chiral Majorana edge modes. By constructing a first-principles phase diagram in the parameter space of temperature and Mn concentration, we propose the TSC phase can be induced at a lower-limit transition temperature of ~40 mK and the Mn concentration of x~0.015%. Our approach can be generally applied to TSCs with a phonon-mediated pairing, providing useful guidance for future experiments. 2 INTRODUCTION The topological phase of superconductors (SC) has recently received intense research interest as the superconducting quasi-particles residing in the non-trivial gapless/zero-energy boundary states are considered a form of Majorana fermions. Majorana fermions are their own anti-particles 1 and obey the non-Abelian exchange statistics 2, which can be utilized for topological quantum computation 3. Topological superconductors (TSC) exhibit various exotic phenomena, including zero modes on the magnetic vortex 4, “fractional” Josephson effect 5, non-local correlation 6, and thermal responses 7. By now, the theoretical aspects of TSCs are reasonably well understood, but the experimental confirmation remains a great challenge due to the requirement of tuning multiple microscopic parameters like the Fermi level, magnetic field, temperature, etc.. Hence, it is highly desirable to predict more TSCs and quantify experimental conditions to advance the field. Unlike the successful first-principles prediction of electronic and topological materials, theoretical predictions of TSCs are challenging because of the uncertainty in the parameters used to construct Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian. Usually, only the pre-conditions of TSC, e.g. Rashba splitting 8 or topological properties 9-12 in the normal state of known superconductors, were analyzed using first-principles method, but not the topology of superconducting quasi-particles. Instead, effective models of TSC states are constructed with empirical parameters, at the best partially fit to the first-principles results 13. Moreover, conventional first-principles approaches that estimate the superconducting transition temperature (Tc) by employing the empirically McMillan’s formula 14 or solving the Migdal-Eliashberg formula 15 cannot be applied to the cases involving spin-orbit coupling (SOC) and magnetism (internal or external). Therefore, more versatile and accurate methods to predict Tc for SC as well as TSC are highly desirable. In this article, we attempt to further extend first-principles calculations to the field of TSCs, by developing a verstile approach to quantify realistic conditions of TSC. We construct and solve self-consistently a material-specific first-principles BdG Hamiltonian, based on Wannier function construction of band structure, in presence of Rashba SOC, Zeeman splitting and electron-phonon coupling (EPC). Furthermore, we demonstrate the usefulness of this new method by predicting the Mn-doped GeTe (Ge1-xMnxTe) monolayer to be a TSC by constructing a first-principles phase diagram in the parameter space of temperature and Mn concentration. Generally, TSC materials can be classified as intrinsic or extrinsic, depending on the experimental conditions of realizing the non-trivial phase. Intrinsic TSCs exhibit inherently a non-trivial superconducting gap without the need of applying an external field or constructing a heterostructure. They may be p-wave SCs with natural spin-triplet pairing 16,17, such as Sr2RuO4 18, Cu/Sr/Nb-doped Bi2Se3 19 and non-centrosymmetric SCs 20, or s-wave SCs with an effective spin-triplet pairing resulting from helical spin-polarized states, such as the two-dimensional (2D) 3 topological electronic states 21,22, and 1D 23,24 and 2D Rashba electronic states 25-27 which belong to the so-called Class D TSC without time-reversal symmetry (TRS). Extrinsic TSCs employ the same physical mechanisms, but realization of their non-trivial properties requires applying external fields or constructing heterojunctions. To the best of our knowledge, all the known Class D TSCs formed by the s-wave superconductivity are extrinsic, such as the semiconductor nanowire with strong SOC 28, the ferromagnetic atomic chains 29, the nanoscale magnetic islands 30, the ferromagnet 31, and the topological surface 32 and edge states 33 proximitized with conventional SCs with/without applying external magnetic field. Notably, the signature of TSCs observed by applying an external magnetic field in a superconducting material, e.g., FeTe0.55Se0.45 34, epitaxial GeTe 35 and β-Bi2Pd thin film 36 indicates the possible existence of intrinsic Class D TSC without needing the external magnetic field, which will further enrich the physics of TSC, in the same perspective as from quantum Hall effect (with magnetic field) to anomalous quantum Hall effect (without). Given the necessary conditions for realizing Class D TSCs with 2D Rashba electrons 25-27, i.e. inversion symmetry breaking, Zeeman gap opening and superconductivity, the IV-VI compound GeTe with Mn doping, a dilute magnetic semiconductors (DMS) with a ferromagnetic Curie temperatures Tc FM up to ~200 K for epitaxial layers on BaF2 (111) substrate 37-42, caught our attention. The superconductivity of GeTe with p-type doping due to Ge vacancy was confirmed as early as the 1960s 43,44. It is also known as a ferroelectric material with rhombohedral layered, non-centrosymmetric structure below the ferroelectric Curie temperature of ~700 K 45. Recently, a gradual opening of Zeeman gap in the Rashba bands of GeTe with Mn doping was observed, attributed to the entanglement of ferromagnetic and ferroelectric order 46. Also, a recent experiment has reported possible signatures of extrinsic TSC in GeTe film under external magnetic field 35. Specifically, we focus on the recent experimentally exfoliated GeTe monolayer 47, which was predicted to be useful in optoelectronic devices and may be a type-II Ising superconductor upon slight hole doping 48,49. We first show that GeTe monolayer inherits all the key characteristics of its bulk phase by using conventional first-principles calculation. Then, the first-principles BdG Hamiltonian was constructed via a Wannier-function scheme, through which we found that the GeTe monolayer with the hole concentration of ~7.4×1013 cm-2 becomes superconducting below ~120 mK and the Ge1-xMnxTe monolayer is a Class D TSC with Tc~40 mK characterized by a non-zero Chern number and chiral Majorana edge modes. A phase diagram of Ge1-xMnxTe is constructed by employing the newly developed first-principles approach to guide experimental detection of the predicted SC and TSC phase. Since both the exfoliated GeTe monolayer 47 and epitaxial Ge1-xMnxTe thin film already exist 37-42, our prediction should be readily testable experimentally. Our approach provides a benchmark to make material-specific predictions of TSCs by using first-principles calculations. 4 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Crystal and electronic band structure (conventional first-principles calculation) The crystal structure of GeTe monolayer is shown in Fig. 1a, which is a (111) layer fragment of its bulk phase. Each Ge(Te) atom is bonded with three Te(Ge) atoms, forming a buckled honeycomb lattice. The in-plane lattice constant a and buckling height h was optimized to be ~3.955 Å and ~1.565 Å, respectively, in good agreement with previous report 48. Due to the absence of inversion symmetry, a large Rashba splitting arises in the electronic band structure (Fig. 1b). The electronic states are doubly degenerate at the Γ and M points, forming the so-called Kramers pairs, while the degeneracy was lifted away from these time-reversal invariant points. For the four valence bands near the Fermi level of our interest, hereafter we name the lower (upper) two bands as the Rashba (Ising) bands for clarity, referring to their respective electronic spin-texture near the Γ point (Supplementary Fig. 1). To predict the TSC formed by 2D Rashba electrons 25-27, we focus on the Rashba bands with a significant Rashba splitting coefficient αR = 0.66~0.76 eV Å. It is comparable with that of heavy metals Au(111) and Bi(111) surface 50,51, but slightly smaller than that of bulk GeTe 52. A strong Rashba effect is desirable for the electrons to overcome the suppressing effect of Zeeman field on superconductivity. Doping 0.1 holes per primitive cell, corresponding to a hole concentration of ~7.4×1013 cm-2, will move the Fermi level (EF) to the Dirac point formed by the Rashba splitting (Fig. 1b). The electronic density of states (DOS) at EF is thus increased from 0 to NF~1.4 states/eV/primitive-cell, which stems mainly from the p-orbitals of Te and Ge atoms (Supplementary Fig. 2). Figure 1c shows the spin-texture s(k) on the Fermi surfaces (FSs) of the 0.1-hole-doped GeTe monolayer. One can clearly see the in-plane components are helical-like, while the out-of-plane ones are small. The metallic nature and the anti-parallel spins at the k and -k points provide the prerequisite conditions for s-wave superconductivity. Having demonstrated the Rashba spin splitting in the GeTe monolayer, we now discuss the second ingredient, the Zeeman gap. It has been reported that a Zeeman gap can be opened in the bulk Ge1-xMnxTe with a ferromagnetic order parallel to the (111) direction 46, which is the easy magnetization direction for small x 53. By reproducing the experimental results of bulk Ge1-xMnxTe based on the virtual crystal approximation (VCA) 54, the spin state of Mn dopants was determined to be S=5/2 Mn dopants is adopted in Ge1-xMnxTe monolayer under VCA. As expected, the Zeeman gaps δz of Rashba and Ising bands opened at Γ increase monotonically with the increasing Mn concentration (Fig. 1d), and can be fit by the equation of δz = 250×x and δz = 1550×x meV, respectively. The different slopes are resulted from different out-of-plane spin component of the electronic states near the Dirac point versus near the valance band maximum (VBM) (Supplementary Fig. 1c). 5 Superconductivity (newly developped first-principles approach) We next discuss the phonon mediated superconductivity of the 0.1-hole-doped GeTe monolayer. From the calculated phonon spectra (Fig. 2a), we first confirm its dynamical stability by the absence of imaginary frequency. For the acoustic branch with the lowest vibration frequency, Kohn anomalies can be seen at certain q-points around Γ, which is favorable for enhancing EPC. The q- and v-resolved EPC λqv show two significant features (Fig. 2a). On one hand, all phonon modes can couple with electrons. This is further confirmed by the comparison between the phonon DOS F(ω) and the isotropic Eliashberg spectral function α2F(ω) (Fig. 2b). To estimate the relative contributions of acoustic and optical modes, we calculated the cumulative EPC 2 0 ( ) ( ) 2 F d ω α ω λ ω ω ω ′ ′ = ′ ∫ . The λ(ω) increases quickly to 1.13 at the frequency of ~10 meV, which is about 81% of the total EPC λ=1.39. This indicates that the EPC stems mainly from the acoustic modes. The convergence of EPC calculation has been carefully checked (Supplementary Note 2). On the other hand, only the vibration modes with a finite wave vector can couple with electrons. This is because for all the FS contours surrounding Γ (Fig. 1c), only a finite length of phonon wave vectors can connect the initial and final scattering states. Additionally, both α2F(ω) and λq illustrate that the soft modes associated with the Kohn anomalies help to enhance EPC 55. To estimate the superconducting transition temperature (Tc), we construct a material-specific BdG Hamiltonian HBdG ( ) k by employing the electronic Hamiltonian HMLWFs ( ) k : ( ) ( ) ( ) * MLWFs F BdG MLWFs F H E H H H E Δ − ⎞ = ⎛ ⎟ + ⎜ − − + ⎝ ⎠ k k k (1) † † † † ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 2 2 2 2 i i i i i i i i H φ φ φ φ φ φ φ φ Δ א א א א ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑ + ↓ + ↓ + ↓ + ↓ ⎞ ⎞ ⎛ ⎛ = Δ − + Δ − ⎟ ⎟ ⎜ ⎜ ⎝ ⎝ ⎠ ⎠ (2) Here the basis of HMLWFs ( ) k is the Maximally localized Wannier functions (MLWFs) and obtained by fitting the first-principles band structure. The chemical potential EF in HBdG ( ) k is the Fermi energy where the superconducting gap condenses. Then we formulate the gap equation into the following form: 6 , , , 0 1 2 1 l l mn mn l mn g V e βε ε > ∂ Δ = − ∂Δ + ∑ k k k (3) Here the intra-orbitals spin-singlet pairing HΔ ensures m=n. The absolute pairing strength gnn is assumed identical for each band 55 and calculated as gnn = (λ-μ*)/NF. The Coulomb repulsion μ* is described by the Morel-Anderson pseudopotential ( ) 1 ln / c c F D μ μ μ ε θ ∗ = + 56, where the εF can be regarded as the energy difference between the Fermi level and band maximum of the Ising bands. Only the electronic states within one Debye temperature θD around Fermi level are summed over. Formulating this gap equation enables us to solve the superconducting gap self-consistently at different temperature based on the eigenvalues ,lε k of the constructed HBdG ( ) k . We emphasize that this new method is not only different from the conventional method employing the McMillan’s formula 14 or solving the anisotropic Migdal-Eliashberg formula 15 in estimating Tc, but also extend the first-principles approach to calculate the topological invariant of superconducting gap and the critical magnetic field/doping-concentration of superconductivity (see below). We check the correctness of Eq. 3 by reducing it to the well-known gap equation of 2 2 2 2 0 1 1 tanh 2 g E V E β > ⎞ ⎛ = Δ + ⎜ ⎟ ⎝ ⎠ Δ + ∑ k k k for a single-band s-wave SC 57. Its reliability is further confirmed by reproducing superconductivity of three representative known SCs, i.e. bulk lead (Supplementary Fig. 4) 58, bulk GeTe (Supplementary Fig. 3d) 44, and MoS2 monolayer (Supplementary Fig. 5) 59,60. In the calcualtions, the Debye temperature of ~105, ~200, and ~300 K is employed for lead, GeTe, and MoS2 monolayer 61,62, respectively. The weak Coulomb screening effect was considered by using μ*=0.2 for hole-doped bulk GeTe with 2.1×1021 holes/cm3 44 and the electron-electron correlation was taken into account by reducing EPC by ~45.5% for electron-doped MoS2 monolayer with 1.2×1014 electrons/cm-2 63. Details can be seen form Supplementary Note 3.1. For the 0.1-hole-doped GeTe monolayer, we assume the Debye temperature (~200 K) and Coulomb repulsion μ* to be same as that of bulk GeTe and extract the MLWFs using the p orbitals of Ge and Te. Also, we heuristically reduce the calculated λ from 1.39 to ~0.76 by ~45.5%, based on the benchmark of correlation effect in MoS2 monolayer 63. This should set a lower limit on EPC since the correlation effect of θD 7 p-orbitals is usually weaker than that of d-orbitals. The resulting gnn (~0.4) is comparable to that of bulk GeTe (~0.49) 64, which enables us to predict the superconducting gap Δ of the 0.1-hole-doped GeTe monolayer at different temperatures. From Fig. 2c, one can see the calculated Δ ~18.6 μeV for both Rashba and Ising bands, which is gradually suppressed with the increasing temperature. The Tc is around ~120 mK, lower than that of GeTe film 44. We anticipate that the predicted 2D superconductivity may be confirmed by growing GeTe monolayer on Si(111) wafers, as the epitaxial GeTe thin film was observed to be superconducting on this substrate 35. Next we simulate the superconductivity of Mn-doped GeTe (Ge1-xMnxTe) monolayer by adding an out-of-plane Zeeman energy Bz in HMLWFs ( ) k first: ( ) ( ) 2 2 z MLWFs z z MLWFs H B I H σ א א × = ⊗ + k k (4) Here σz is the Pauli matrix in spin space and the 2 2 Iא א × is a 2 2 א א × identity matrix. Then the new BdG Hamiltonian ( ) z HBdG k can be constructed through the Eq. 1 and Eq. 2. The reliability of such treatment in simulating the SC without TRS is confirmed by reproducing the in-plane critical magnetic field of MoS2 monolayer (Supplementary Note 3.2) 65. By diagonalizing the ( ) z HMLWFs k with different Bz in momentum-space, we obtain the Zeeman gap zδ′ of Rashba and Ising bands opened at Γ point (Supplementary Fig. 6a), which can be fit as zδ′ =0.122×Bz and zδ′ =2.0×Bz meV, respectively. Combining with the δz fit to the first-principles results in Fig. 1d, one obtains the relationship between Bz and Mn concentration, as Bz=2049×x and Bz =775×x meV for the Rashba and Ising bands, respectively. The self-consistently calculated Tc (Supplementary Fig. 6b) and Δ (Supplementary Fig. 6c) domenstrate that they both decrease gradually with the increasing Bz due to the pairing breaking effect of magnetism. The superconductivity of Rashba (Ising) bands is fully superssed when Bz > 0.35 (0.23) meV, indicating a critical Mn doping concentration of xc~0.017% (0.03%) (Fig. 2d). This value of xc is two orders of magnitude smaller than that (2%) of Mn doped MgB2 66, which is reasonable since the Tc of GeTe monolayer is lower than MgB2 by similar magnitude. Topological superconductivity and phase diagram (newly developped first-principles approach) 8 To realize TSC formed by 2D Rashba electrons, model analysis proposes that the half of the Zeeman gap opened at the Dirac point of Rashba bands, i.e. δz/2, should be larger than the superconducting gap Δ 25-27. In the following, the first-principles approach has been extended to characterize the TSC phase based on a material-specific BdG Hamiltonian ( ) z HBdG k for the first time. Specifically, we take Δ=0.2 meV and Bz=7.5 meV with δz~0.9 meV to construct the ( ) z HBdG k of Ge1-xMnxTe monolayer via Eq. 1, Eq. 2 and Eq. 4. The relatively large Bz and Δ are used to show the topological non-triviality more clearly. The ( ) z HBdG k is analogous to the single-particle Hamiltonian of electrons with an energy gap mathematically. By diagonalizing ( ) z HBdG k in the momentum space, we obtain the dispersion relation of superconducting quasi-particles (Fig. 3a). One can clearly see that the superconducting gap is indeed opened, where the topological invariant, i.e. first Chern number (Nc), is well-defined. For 2D systems, the Chern number of l-th band is calculated by integrating the Berry curvature ( ) ( ) l lA Ω k = ∇× k over the first Brillouin zone (BZ): 2 1 ( ) 2 l l c BZ N d = π Ω ∫ k k , where ( ) ( ) ( ) l l l A i u u = ∂k k k k is Berry connection. The total Chern number Nc can be obtained by summing up the Chern numbers of all the states below the superconducting gap, which is quantized to -1. The Berry curvature resides mainly at the Γ point associated with the Zeeman gap opening (Fig. 3b), similar to the band inversion in the quantum anomalous Hall systems. Here we should emphasize that Nc does not physically correspond to a quantized Hall conductance because charge is not conserved in the BdG Hamiltonian 22. Two chiral Majorana edge modes localized at two different edges clearly exist in the continuous superconducting gap due to the bulk-boundary correspondence (Fig.3c and 3d). The propagation of chiral Majorana fermions could lead to same unitary transformation as that in braiding Majorana zero modes 67, and the deterministic creation and braiding of chiral edge vortices in hybrid structures were elaborated 68. We finally construct a phase diagram of the 0.1-hole-doped Ge1-xMnxTe monolayer in Fig. 4, to help guide future experimental detection of the predicted TSC phase formed by the superconducting Rashba bands. At the zero-temperature limit, the SC phase of the Rashba bands will be preserved for x < xc =0.017% and the TSC phase will arise when x > xmin=0.014%, where the pre-condition of δz/2>Δ can be met (Supplementary Fig. 6d). At finite temperature, both the ferromagnetic and SC order should exist simultaneously for the formation of TSC phase. Referring to the ferromagnetic Curie temperatures Tc FM of Ge1-xMnxTe that increases linearly with increasing Mn concentration up to x=0.2 and can be fit by Tc FM(x)=333×x K (Supplementary Fig. 7a) 37-42, we estimate Tc FM(x) and x-dependent Tc will cross over 9 at x’min=0.014%= xmin (Supplementary Fig. 7b), too. Consequently, the TSC phase can be formed for xmin < x < xc at the temperature where the SC order occurs. We suggest preparing the desired Ge1-xMnxTe monolayer on BaF2 (111) substrate 37-42 by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) since the growth is known to start in a 2D manner 39. We anticipate that the chiral Majorana edge modes of Ge1-xMnxTe monolayer can be detected using Josephson effect 5 or charge transport 69, and controlled by magnetic flux 70. The effects of magnetic anisotropy and GeTe film thickness on the TSC phase are discussed in Supplementary Note 4 and Note 5. Lastly, in addition to the monolayer Ge1-xMnxTe we demonstrated here, we suggest three more candidate materials for Class D TSC. First, it was theoretically reported a ferromagnetic order can be induced by hole doping in monolayer GaSe, attributed to the exchange splitting of electronic states that exhibit a sharp van Hove singularity below the Fermi level 71. Given the superconductivity of bulk GaSe under pressure and Ga/GaSe layers being made experimentally 72,73, the hole-doped monolayer GaSe is likely to be superconducting. Secondly, the magnetic order induced Rashba-Zeeman splitting in the Si-terminated surface of HoRh2Si2 has been observed experimentally 74. A spin-singlet Cooper pairing could be tunneled into this surface state by superconducting proximity effect. Thirdly, since the heterostructures of MnBi2Te4/Bi2Te3 75,76 and Bi2Te3/NbSe2 32,77 have already been fabricated, the MnBi2Te4/Bi2Te3/NbSe2 hold high possibility to be synthesized. We propose that this type of heterostructures are also a Class D TSC characterized with non-zero Chern number. By applying our newly developed first-principles BdG Hamiltonian approach, a complete phase diagram of these systems can be constructed in the near future. METHODS Details of the First-principles Calculations The Vienna ab initio simulation pack (VASP) 78,79 was utilized to calculate the electronic property of normal states based on the density functional theory (DFT). The exchange-correlation of electrons was treated within the generalized gradient approximation in the form of Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof 80. The atomic structures of GeTe monolayer and thin film was set up by introducing a vacuum region of more than 15 Å to avoid the interactions between neighboring images. Structural relaxations and self-consistent calculations as well as the Zeeman gap calculations were performed on a uniform 30×30×1 (18×18×18) k-point sampling of the first BZ for monolayer (bulk) GeTe. The energy cutoff was set to 400 eV for plane-wave basis. The dipole correction was used to cancel the artificial electric field imposed by the periodic boundary condition of GeTe thin film. The QUANTUM ESPRESSO (QE) package 81 was used to calculate the phonon spectra and EPC based on the density-functional perturbation theory (DFPT) 82 as well as fit the first-principles band structure by interfacing the WANNIER90-2.1 code 83. The Optimized Norm-Conserving Vanderbilt Pseudopotential 84 was employed and 10 the kinetic energy cutoff was set to 100 Ry for wave functions. The hole doping was simulated by removing electrons from intrinsic GeTe monolayer and introducing the compensating jellium background to avoid divergence. The dynamic matrix and phonon frequency are computed on a 18×18×1 q-point mesh with a 18×18×1 k-point sampling, and a finer 36×36×1 k-point grid is used in the EPC calculations, where the DOS is converged (Supplementary Fig. 2b). Other q/k-point samplings (Supplementary Table 1) are also employed to check the convergence of EPC calculations. The phonon DOS F(ω) and the isotropic Eliashberg spectral function α2F(ω) as well as the cumulative frequency-dependent EPC λ(ω) are calculated using a 60×60×1 q-point sampling by means of the Fourier interpolation. Constructing the BdG Hamiltonian To perform first-principles prediction of TSC, the main challenge is to construct a BdG Hamiltonian of superconducting quasi-particles from the electronic Hamiltonian of normal state. Here we propose a strategy to overcome this obstacle by employing the MLWFs ( ) 2 ( , )T MLWFs i i φ φ φ א ↑ + ↓ = of specific materials. Here א is the total number of MLWFs with the orbital index of i=1... 2 א and i+ 2 א = 1 2 א + ...א for up and down spin orbitals, respectively. The starting point is the real-space Hamiltonian ( ) MLWFs H R and the matrix element ( ) mn h R represents the hopping between the mth and the nth MLWF connected by a vector of R, which can be obtained by fitting the first-principles band structures of specific materials using WANNIER90-2.1 code 83. The matrix element hmn ( ) k of momentum-space Hamiltonian HMLWFs ( ) k of normal state is then obtained through ( ) ( ) i mn mn h h e ⋅ = × ∑ R k R R k . Within the mean-field approximation, we can write the material-specific BdG Hamiltonian HBdG ( ) k (see Eq. 1) under the basis vector of † † ( ) ( ) 2 2 ( , , , )T i i i i ψ φ φ φ φ א א ↑ ↑ + ↓ + ↓ = . The matrix element of * ( ) −HMLWFs −k in HBdG ( ) k has the form of *( ) ( ) ( ) i MN mn mn h h h e ∗ ⋅ = − − = − × ∑ R k R R k k with M = m +א and N = n +א . The constructed HBdG ( ) k is a 2 2 א× א matrix with the particle-hole symmetry 1 * ( ) ( ) BdG BdG PH P − = −H − k k , where x P I τ א×א = ⊗ . For the materials with external/internal magnetism, we first add a Zeeman term B in HMLWFs ( ) k using the vector of Pauli matrix σ : 11 ( ) ( ) 2 2 MLWFs MLWFs H I H א א × = ⊗ + B k Bσ k . Then the first-principles BdG Hamiltonian BdG ( ) H B k without TRS can be constructed for a specific material by using the above procedure. Formulating the gap equation Under the basis of ( ) † † † 1, 2, 1, 2, , ,..., , ,... c c c c − − Ψ = k k k k k , the multi-band Hamiltonian with s-wave pairing can be written as: † 0 BdG ( ) H H > = Ψ Ψ ∑ k k k k with * ( ) ( ) ( ) BdG h H h −Δ ⎞ = ⎛ ⎟ ⎜ Δ − − ⎝ ⎠ k k k With the relation of ( ) † † , , , , m n n m mn H c c c c − − − ∂ = − + ∂Δ ∑ k k k k k , we can derive the gap equation of Δmn as: , , 2 ln 2 H H mn mn mn n m mn H mn mn g g H c c Tr e Tr e V V g Tr e V β β β β − − − − ⎡ ⎤ ∂ ⎡ ⎤ Δ = = − ⎢ ⎥ ⎣ ⎦ ∂Δ ⎣ ⎦ ∂ ⎡ ⎤ = ⎣ ⎦ ∂Δ ∑ k k k Here m and n are the band index. Diagonalizing the Hamiltonian H into the form of † , , , 0, l l l l H d d ε > = ∑ k k k k , we have { } ( ) , , , 0 , , , , 0 0,1 , , 0 ln ln 1 2 2 1 2 1 l l l l l l n mn mn mn l n mn mn l mn l mn g g e e V V g V e β ε βε βε β β ε > − − > = > ∑ ⎡ ⎤ ∂ ∂ Δ = = + ⎢ ⎥ ∂Δ ∂Δ ⎣ ⎦ ∂ = − ∂Δ + ∑ ∑ ∑ k k k k k k k k k Solving this gap equation self-consistently enables us to extimates the superconducting transation temperature Tc and the critical magnetic field/doping-concentration of specific materils based on the material-specific BdG Hamiltonian HBdG ( ) k with/without TRS constructed from the state-of-art first-principles approach. 12