1 Solution-processed silver sulphide nanocrystal film for resistive switching memories1 Beatriz Martín-García,*† Davide Spirito,*† Roman Krahne and Iwan Moreels‡ Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Via Morego 30, 16163 Genova (Italy) † These authors contributed equally. ‡ Present address: Department of Chemistry, Ghent University. Krijgslaan 281-S3, 9000 Gent, Belgium Resistive switching memories allow electrical control of the conductivity of a material, by inducing a high resistance (OFF) or a low resistance (ON) state, using electrochemical and ion transport processes. As alternative to high temperature and vacuum-based physical sulphurization methods of silver (Ag), here we propose, as resistive switching medium, a layer built from colloidal Ag2-xS nanocrystals -compatible with solution-processed approaches. The effect of the electrode size (from macro- to micro-scale), composition (Ag, Ti and Pt) and geometry on the device performance together with the electrochemical mechanisms involved are evaluated. We achieved an optimized Ag/Ti bowtie proof-of-concept configuration by e-beam lithography, which fulfils the general requirements for ReRAM devices in terms of low power consumption and reliable ION/IOFF ratio. This configuration demonstrates reproducible switching between ON and OFF states with data endurance of at least 20 cycles; and an ION/IOFF ratio up to 103 at low power consumption (0.1V readout), which outperforms previous results in literature for devices with resistive layers fabricated from silver chalcogenide nanoparticles. Introduction Resistive switching random access memories (ReRAMs) are promising nonvolatile memory devices due to their scalability, fast operation response and low power consumption, with applications in information storage technology, or in the development of neuronal networks and logical devices.1–3 ReRAMs are based on the ability to reversibly switch the resistance of a material between a high resistance state (HRS) and a low resistance state (LRS). General figure of merits for the next generation of ReRAMs are a read voltage between 0.1 and 0.2V, a resistance ratio (RON/ROFF) from 1.2 to 10 for reliable read-out, long endurance (number of write cycles superior to 103, keeping reliable read-out), and data retention longer than 10 years.3–6 Usually a ReRAM device consists of a resistive material layer (10 nm – 1μm thickness) between two metal electrodes. A bias voltage above a certain threshold allows to change the resistance state of the material.1,3 In the particular case of electrochemical metallization (ECM) systems,1,3 composed by at least one electrochemically active metal, the resistance switching is promoted by redox processes and ion migration, in which the LRS and HRS are related to the formation/growth and dissolution of a conductive “filament” between the metal electrodes.3,5,7,8 Therefore, compounds with high ion mobility have been This document is the Accepted Manuscript of a Published Work that appeared in final form in Journal of Materials Chemistry C, 6, 13128-13135. To access the final edited and published work, accessible at https://doi.org/10.1039/C8TC04068K 2 proposed for the resistive layers,7,9 such as silver and copper chalcogenides (e.g. Ag2S, AgGeSe, Cu2S).4 Among them, Ag2S stands out as model system due to its low redox overpotential and high mobility at room temperature.1,3,10–12 The conventional techniques for Ag2S film fabrication for ReRAMs are physical methods based on Ag sulphurization12–17 such as chemical vapor deposition, chemical bath deposition and thermal evaporation. These fabrication methods require high vacuum, high temperatures and/or controlled atmosphere. Therefore, the development of more simple alternative methods can open new opportunities in this field, and enable low-cost and scalable device fabrication. Colloidal synthesis methods are a viable option in this respect, offering the possibility to tune and control the atomic composition of the nanocrystals by combining two or more metal precursors, applying partial cation or anion exchange reactions, or forming multishell or dot-in-rod heterostructures.18–20 Indeed, colloidal nanocrystals (NCs) can be potentially applied as building block for the fabrication of the solid conductive electrolyte, since naturally they present defects and grain boundaries that are known to increase ionic mobility, favoring the switching mechanism.1,3 Even more, the incorporation of nanoscale “metal inclusions” (ca. 5 nm) have been considered as a disruptive technology in memristive devices.8 Earlier demonstrations using nanoparticles have been reported in the literature, focused on valence-change memory (VCM) devices comprising metal oxides21–28 or nonvolatile charge-trap memory devices involving quantum dots,29–38 as composites with polymers or mixed with other molecules. However, less attention has been paid to ECM devices, and only scarce examples can be found, such as sintered Ag2Se nanocrystal films39 or Ag2Se-MnO nanoparticles composites40, despite the broad range of chemical routes that have been proposed for silver chalcogenide NC synthesis41–44. Among the Ag chalcogenides (S, Se and Te), Ag2S stands out due to its higher ion45 and electron46 conductivity. Therefore, by choosing colloidal Ag2S NCs as starting point, we demonstrate a new avenue for accessible resistive materials for ECM-ReRAMs. Synthesis at mild conditions, combined with spin- coating/solid ligand exchange approaches at room temperature, were used for the preparation of the resistive layer in the device consisting of a close-packed Ag2S NCs film, giving a methodology compatible with solution-processed approaches toward low-cost and large-scale fabrication of ReRAMs. By fabricating lateral, macro-scale systems consisting of two electrodes deposited on the Ag2S NC-based film, we demonstrate their feasibility and gain insight into the working electrochemical mechanisms involved, while by means of electron beam lithography (EBL) we explore pathways for miniaturization and optimization of electrode design towards proof-of-principle devices. Since for a memristive device an active electrode (e.g. Ag), working as metal ions reservoir, together with a second active, or even inert electrode (e.g. Pt) are required,1,3,7 we tested a symmetric configuration with active metal electrodes of Ag, and two asymmetric configurations with Ag as active, and Ti and Pt as inert electrodes. The obtained figures of merit show reproducible and reliable memory characteristics in terms of ION/IOFF ratio up to 103 at a 0.1V readout and a stable data endurance of at least 20 cycles. Results and discussion In this study, the ion-electron conducting layer is a compact Ag2-xS NCs film prepared by spin coating. The Ag2-xS NCs are prepared by colloidal synthesis from AgNO3 and sulfur powder at 115oC, which can be performed at lower temperature, and does not require high vacuum conditions, as is the case for the established Ag sulphurization physical methods12–15. As result, we obtained Ag2-xS NCs with 3 nm diameter and acanthite crystal structure probed by TEM and XRD measurements, with x=0.6 obtained by elemental analysis (see Electronic Supplementary Information (ESI) Figures S1-S2 for NC characterisation). Since the 3 colloidal synthesis yields Ag2-xS NCs that are surrounded by non-conductive organic ligands (oleylamine and oleic acid), an iodine solid ligand exchange is performed during the preparation of the film, leading to a 20 nm thick Ag2-xS NC conductive layer. Briefly, after spin coating the NC film on the substrate, few drops of an iodine salt solution in MeOH are deposited on top and left for 20 s to allow the ligand exchange, followed by a washing step with MeOH. Subsequently, the electrodes consisting of Ag, Ti, or Pt are deposited by e-beam metal evaporation on top of the Ag2-xS NC film. As starting point for the understanding of As starting point for the understanding of and display the working mechanism, we considered an Ag/Ag2-xS/Ag device in lateral configuration.15 We fabricated simple devices consisting of pairs of square Ag electrodes with size of 1x1 mm2, separated by a gap of about 100μm, by metal deposition via a shadow mask on top of the Ag2-xS NC film spin-coated on glass substrates (Fig. 1a, see also ESI Fig. S3a for an optical microscope image of the complete device). Hereafter, we refer to these devices as ‘macroscale systems’. By applying successive DC voltage ramps from 0 to ±2V with a ramp speed of 0.1 Vs-1, the formation of metallic Ag protrusions inside the Ag2-xS layer can be observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Fig. 1, see also ESI Fig. S3a,c for additional optical microscopy images). In the macroscale systems, the growth process of the metallic Ag protrusions can be followed in real time in situ by optical microscopy while performing the DC voltage sweeps, (see ESI for movies). We observed the formation of metallic Ag protrusions (Fig. 1b-e) that grow from the negatively biased electrode (commonly referred as cathode for ECM devices47), and which are partially dissolved when the voltage bias is reversed. At the same time, Ag depletion of the positively biased electrode (noted as anode) occurs (Fig. 1a,c and ESI Fig. S3b). The Ag protrusions grow preferentially in regions of high electric field, being clearer under prolonged electric field application, when we observed the formation of dendrites that are preferentially oriented along the field lines (see ESI, Fig. S3c). Elemental analysis by SEM/energy dispersive X-Ray spectroscopy (EDX) indicated that the protrusions and dendrites consist of metallic Ag (ESI Fig. S4). The sulphur signal48 was detected solely from the underlying Ag2-xS film. The formation of metallic Ag under exposure to an electric field can be Fig. 1. SEM images of representative Ag/Ag2-xS/Ag macroscale devices at different magnification that have been exposed for short time (a,b) and more extended time (c-e) to an electric field. Scale Red square in panel a (c, d) indicates the area shown in panel b (d, e). The depletion of Ag from the top electrode in (a) and formation of Ag protrusions at the bottom electrode (b) are observed, as well as the formation of dendrites along the electric field lines in (c). The SEM image in panel ‘e’ has been recorded under an angle of 40° with respect to the normal of the substrate surface. 4 in the Ag2-xS film towards the cathode, as expected for this system.3,7,15 This is in accordance with previous results in an Ag/Ag2S/W system on the nanoscale, which investigated such processes by atomic resolution techniques, such as HR-TEM, highlighting that this phenomenon is responsible for the resistive switching.14 Fig. 2a shows the current-voltage (I-V) characteristics from a representative Ag/Ag2- xS/Ag macroscale device in the range from -2 V to 2V. Distinct features at 1.1V in the forward sweep (-2V to 2V) and at -1.5 V in the backward sweep (2V to -2V) can be observed, corresponding to the Ag2S/Ag resistive switching established in previous studies, at a voltage around 1.5 V.49 Control experiments under vacuum do not show any additional features; similar Ag protrusions are observed (see ESI, Fig. S5a and c). Following the hysteresis curve along the directions indicated by arrows, we can distinguish two loops, one under positive, and one under negative bias. In the forward sweep under positive bias starting at 0V, the device goes into a low resistance state. The current first increases almost linearly and then the system enters a region of negative differential resistance when the bias exceeds 1.1 V, corresponding to the formation of Ag protrusions and their extension from the cathode to the anode, as result of the Ag+ ions transport and reduction (Ag+ + e- → Ag0). In the following backward sweep, the conductivity is markedly lower compared to the preceding forward sweep, except for a small region around 0V. When the bias polarity changes, the current again increases (in absolute value) almost linearly, and then passes through a region of negative differential resistance between -1.5 and -2 V, ascribed to the growth of silver protrusions, now from the opposite electrode, while inducing the dissolution/breaking of the protrusions previously formed on the other electrode. The negative resistance observed from -1.5 V is the result of this balance of formation/dissolution processes. In the forward sweep, the current is again smaller than in the backward sweep. This behaviour corresponds to the ‘complementary switching’ already reported in Ag2S/Ag devices17 and other ReRAMs50– 52, related to a limited reservoir of mobile ionic species. In our case, one of the factors that can limit the Ag+ ion availability is the limited supply of Ag metal from the electrode. Indeed, we observe a partial depletion at the interface between metal electrode and the channel (Fig. 1a,c), indicating that the Fig. 2 (a) I-V cycle for a representative Ag/Ag2-xS/Ag macroscale device, where the shaded area indicates the operational voltage range for the memristor read-out. Time trace of voltage (b) and current (c) during the set/read/reset/read procedure. The dots mark the current value of each read pulse used for calculating the ION/IOFF ratio. Set/reset voltage values are -2 V and +2 V, respectively, and read voltage is 0.2 V (read pulse 1s). The corresponding current values for ON (●) and OFF (○) states, acquired over 100 set/reset cycles (d) are shown together with the ION/IOFF ratio (e). 5 electrode does not participate in its entirety to the reservoir of moving species. The dynamics of this phenomenon can be also observed in the movies in the ESI. Moreover, we note that the complementary mechanism has a positive threshold voltage (Vt,p), and a negative threshold voltage (Vt,n), that determine the onset of the LRS (corresponding to the formation of the filament) for positive and negative bias, respectively. The hysteresis behaviour in electrical conductivity reported in Fig. 2a can be exploited for memristor functionality, allowing to select appropriate voltage values for the programmable memory. While the observed complementary switching can be useful in integrated memory applications,51,53 it generally lacks the possibility of read-out at small voltage. In our devices, we observe a hysteresis at low voltage that we exploit for readout at V<0.5V. Considering Ag2S/Ag resistive switching at 1.1 V and -1.5 V, we established voltage bias pulses of 1s at -2V and 2V for the set and reset operations, consisting of Ag protrusions formation (LRS) and their dissolution/break (HRS), respectively. Read-out voltage was chosen in the range from 0.1 V to 0.4 V (marked with a shaded area in Fig. 2a). For much higher set/reset voltages up to ± 10 V, as have been proposed to induce the growth of conductive filaments,16 we found an increased instability in the switching behaviour in our devices (see ESI, control experiments at ±5V, Fig. S6).54 Concerning read-out, the low voltages of 0.1V to 0.4V are already in a range of distinct conductivity switching (at 0.5 V the ratio between HRS and LRS is about 2) and assure compatibility with low-power consumption requirements. Fig. 2b shows a representative Ag/Ag2-xS/Ag memristor operation over time. Here one cycle consists of a read pulse of 0.2V, followed by a set pulse of -2V, another read pulse of 0.2V, and a reset pulse of 2V. Fig. 2c demonstrates that the current trace follows the applied voltage pattern well, and the red and green dots illustrate the read out of the HRS and LRS, respectively. Figures 2d-e show the read out current after set (green) and reset (red) pulses, and their ratio (Fig. 2e) for up to 100 cycles. In the initial cycles, the conductivity of the HRS increase (IOFF), while the LRS (ION) is constant. This leads to a decrease in the ION/IOFF ratio, from about 2 to a stable value of 1.6±0.1 after 8 cycles (a lower value of 1±0.1 was observed for Vread = 0.1 and 0.4V). To shorten the number of cycles to reach a stable performance, a pre-activation process of the device can be applied, usually called ‘initial forming operation’, which should promote an initialization of the Ag+ ion migration across the Ag2-xS film3,55. Therefore, we applied a linear voltage ramp from 0 to 2V with 0.1 V/s (ESI, protocol of pre-activation Fig. S7a). In this case, the stabilization occurs earlier (4th cycle) keeping the same ratio at a read-out of 0.2V (ESI, Fig. S7b). To improve the device performance, we explored asymmetric device configurations consisting of one Here the Ti electrode was coated with a thin Au layer (10nm) to prevent its oxidation. In this case, the metal deposition, via e-beam evaporation through a shadow mask, was carried out in two consecutive steps. While Pt is commonly used as inert electrode, Ti can be a much more cost efficient alternative material, if it does not take part in the switching mechanism and keeps the performance. When using one inert electrode, initially the formation of metallic Ag occurs at the anode. This is again reflected by the formation of the macroscopic dendrites growing from the Ti or Pt electrode as evidenced in Fig. 3a, and supported by elemental analysis (ESI, SEM/EDX results in Fig. S8) that reveals the formation of metallic Ag detectable dissolution or diffusion of Ti is observed, since the preferential redox involves Ag+/Ag0, and 6 therefore Ti acts as inert electrode in this Ag/Ag2-xS system. Fig. 3b shows the current-voltage measurements of Ti/Ag2- xS/Ag and Pt/Ag2-xS/Ag devices, where we observe a qualitatively similar behaviour as in Fig. 2a, which underlines that the same switching processes lie at the origin of the changes in conductivity (see ESI for control experiments under vacuum in Ti/Ag and Pt/Ag systems, Fig. S5b and d-e). As for the Ag/Ag2-xS/Ag case, we selected the set/reset and read-out voltages from the analysis of the I-V characteristics. In this case the corresponding I-V sweep cycles (Fig. 3b) shows a HRS/LRS ratio of ca. 4 for Ti and ca. 5 for Pt, respectively, at voltages lower than 0.5 V. Therefore, also in this case, a read voltage between 0V and 0.5V could give a reliable and low power consumption read-out. The inset of Fig. 3b shows the voltage trace during a set and reset cycle with three readout pulses at voltages of 0.1V, 0.2V and 0.4V, to which we refer hereafter as the ‘multi-read protocol’. Similarly as in the Ag/Ag2-xS/Ag case, for the Ti/Ag2-xS/Ag and Pt/Ag2-xS/Ag systems an initial forming operation by a linear ramp from 0 to 2V leads to an earlier stabilization of the ION/IOFF ratio (Fig. 3c-d and ESI for results without pre-activation (ION/IOFF ratio about 3), Fig. S7c). The initialized Ti/Ag2-xS/Ag and Pt/Ag2-xS/Ag configurations show a small IOFF at 0.1 V that leads to large ION/IOFF ratios of average values of 12±3 and 11±3, respectively, with a reproducible switching endurance of at least 20 cycles. Therefore, the initialization process not only reduces the number of cycles to stabilize the performance, but data suggests that it also can enhance the final ION/IOFF ratio. The data reported above demonstrate the feasibility of resistive switching in our system with a simple, macroscopic device. However, the figures of merit of the ECM devices can be further improved by optimizing the size and geometry of the device. To this aim, we fabricated micron-scale metal contacts (100x100 μm2, gap 20 μm) via e-beam lithography and lift-off techniques on the top of the Ag2-xS NC film that was deposited on silicon/SiO2 substrates. To study the effect of geometry, we designed two different electrode shapes, one with a flat front, and one with a triangular tip, and their combinations result in are depicted in Fig. 4a-c. These geometries were chosen based on reported field simulations3,15,56 and structural designs5,13,57, which aim to manipulate the electric field lines and create high field regions. In particular, the tip shape yields regions with high electric field, which drives the dynamics of the filament growth/dissolution, as SEM images demonstrate in Fig. 4b-c. The performance of these devices was evaluated with set/reset cycles using the ‘multi-read’ procedure, Fig. 4f-h, and as before, an initialization process with a linear voltage ramp enhanced the device Fig. 3 (a) Representative SEM image of a Ti/Ag2-xS/Ag macroscale device. The Ag depletion region is marked by an arrow. Scale bar is 100 μm. (b) I-V cycles for representative Pt/Ag2-xS/Ag (blue solid) and Ti/Ag2-xS/Ag (orange dashed) macroscale samples, using the Ag electrode as cathode. The inset shows the ‘multi-read’ set/reset cycle protocol: reset/set voltage are at +2 V and -2V, respectively, while read voltages are 0.1 V, 0.2 V and 0.4 V. (c, d) ION/IOFF ratio for Ti/Ag2-xS/Ag and Pt/Ag2-xS/Ag macroscale representative devices, respectively, obtained via the ‘multi-read protocol’: Vread= 0.1 V (●), 0.2 V (■) and 0.4 V (▲). 7 performance (see ESI, Fig. S7d, for measurements without initialization). The results obtained from the different geometries and electrode materials are summarised in Table 1. From the data, it is clear that the best results are achieved in devices with the tip-tip (bow-tie) design. We observed that even for the tip-tip geometry the Ag/Ag2-xS/Ag configuration does not yield an improved ION/IOFF ratio in the microscale device (ION/IOFF ratio of 2.2±0.1, Fig. 4f), compared to the macroscale device discussed earlier (ION/IOFF ratio of 1.6). In contrast, devices with Ti and Pt electrodes are significantly improved with an ION/IOFF ratio of 1011±175 for Ti and 736±82 for Pt, as can be seen in Fig. 4g-h (see ESI, Fig. S9a- b, for other geometries). In this way, comparing the results of ‘multi-read’ experiments for the different Ag/Ag2-xS/Ag, Ti/Ag2-xS/Ag and Pt/Ag2-xS/Ag microscale devices (Fig. 4f-h, see ESI for additional 100 cycles tests, Fig. S10), clearly the Ti/Ag tip- tip geometry stands out with an ION/IOFF ratio of about 103 that is achieved at the lowest readout voltage of 0.1V. These results demonstrate the feasibility of the straightforward NCs-based fabrication approach here proposed, the relevance of the device design and the potential of the less explored and much more cost efficient Ti material as inert electrode in memristors, that can reduce the material cost58 of a device by a factor of five with respect to Pt. devices fabricated by shadow mask and EBL techniques. The readout voltage is reported in parenthesis. Electrodes Geometry Macroscale EBL designs Material flat/flat flat/flat flat (Ag) /tip tip(Ag)/flat tip/tip Ag/Ag 1.6±0.1 (0.2 V) 1.7±0.1 (0.1 V) 1.9±0.1 (0.1 V) 2.2±0.1 (0.1 V) Ti/Ag 12±3 (0.1 V) 31±4 (0.1 V) 298±60 (0.1 V) Pt/Ag 11±3 (0.1 V) 115±28 (0.2-0.4 V) 89±19 (0.2-0.4 V) 46±4 (0.1 V) 736±82 (0.2-0.4 V) Conclusions In conclusion, we explored Ag2-xS colloidal NC films for resistive switching devices, studied the electric field induced transformations, and characterised their performance in different device configurations. At the macroscale, we demonstrated the functionality of resistive switching and highlighted the mechanisms involved. Therefore, in this way the best performance is an ION/IOFF ratio of 15 obtained with the Fig. 4 (a-e) Representative SEM images of the microscale device geometries fabricated by EBL for the following electrode (c), Ag/Ti (d) and Ag/Pt (e). The SEM images were acquired after electrical characterisation. The scale bars are 10μm. (f-h) The corresponding ION/IOFF ratio for tip-tip microscale representative devices using as electrodes Ag/Ag, Ag/Ti and Ag/Pt, shown on top, respectively, with Vread= 0.1 V (●), 0.2 V (■) and 0.4 V (▲). The Ag systems. 8 asymmetric Ti/Ag2-xS/Ag design, which was already one order of magnitude larger than that of the symmetric Ag/Ag2-xS/Ag device. The devices displayed reproducible resistive switching between the ON and OFF states and read-out for at least 100 cycles. This is improved in microscale devices with a gap of around 20 μm, keeping the Ti/Ag2-xS/Ag configuration, where the electrodes in a tip-tip (bowtie) geometry enabled an ION/IOFF ratio enhancement of up to 2 orders of magnitude, with an ION/IOFF ratio of about 103 during at least 20 cycles at 0.1V read voltage. These results satisfy the basic requirements for reliable devices and show improved performance in comparison with other Ag chalcogenide NC memristors39. Our results greatly enhance the HRS/LRS ratio by almost 2 orders of magnitude compared to Ag/Ag2Se/Au NC- based devices (with a ratio of about 30).39 Compared to Ag2S memristors prepared by physical methods and with an advanced design, our devices are still in an early stage concerning switching speed, but competitive in ON/OFF ratio, where, for example, values of 10 for Pt-Ir/Ag2S/Ag devices,5 and close to 100 for Pt/Ag2S/Ag devices12 have been reported. Our results thus highlight that colloidal NCs are a promising material for solution-based fabrication of resistive switching memory devices, keeping in mind that remains room for improvement in terms of device speed and endurance. Future possibilities can be envisioned from the EBL design of the electrodes as already pointed out in this work, such as alternative device architectures (triode switching48, gap-type ‘tug of war’ switch16, three-terminal device59), and/or from the colloidal synthesis advantages, concerning the control of material composition, doping or NC shape, which can be explored in future work. Experimental Materials. AgNO3 (99.8%), oleic acid (OA, 90%, degassed at 100 °C for 2h), 1-octadecene (ODE, 90%, degassed at 150 °C for 3h), sulfur powder (99.98%), toluene (anhydrous, ≥99.8%), tetrachloroethylene (TCE, anhydrous, ≥99%), acetone (≥99.5%), ethanol (99.8%), methanol (anhydrous, 99.8%), 2-propanol (≥99.8%), tetramethylammonium iodine (TMAI, 99%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and oleylamine (OlAm, C18-content 80-90%, degassed) from Acros Organics. The water used in the ICP-OES sample preparation was obtained from a MilliQ® system and the HCl (≥ 37%, TraceSELECT® Fluka) and HNO3 (≥69%, TraceSELECT® Fluka) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Glass slides and p-doped silicon wafers (boron doping, 90 nm thermal SiO2, 1- 10 Ωcm, University wafer®). Resist (2:1) polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA A4) and anisole (A (99.999%) pellets were purchased from Kurt J. Lesker®. Ag2-xS nanocrystal synthesis. The synthesis of colloidal Ag2-xS NCs with photoluminescence emission around 1200 nm (see ESI, Fig. S1) was performed based on established protocols, but without using dodecanethiol (DDT)60,61. This protocol promotes metallic Ag formation which may enhance electron mobility in the nanocrystal film.11 We mixed AgNO3 (68 mg), OlAm (1 mL), OA (5 mL) and ODE (10 mL), and heated and degassed under vacuum in a Schlenk line at 95oC for 2h, obtaining a clear yellowish solution. The flask was then heated to 115oC, and a solution of S-OlAm (1 mL, 0.3M) mixed with pure OlAm (3 mL) was rapidly injected. After growing the NCs for 1 min, the synthesis was quickly quenched by cooling the flask to room temperature. The S-OlAm stock solution was prepared dissolving 0.16 g of S in 15 mL of OlAm under vacuum for 30 min at 120oC,62 and stored in a glove box. The NC suspension, as obtained from synthesis, was purified (in air) by adding acetone, followed by centrifugation, followed by a second washing step with ethanol and drying with a N2 flow. The NC powder was finally dispersed in toluene and filtered with a 0.2 μm 9 PTFE filter membrane (Sartorius®) obtaining a concentration of 30 mg mL-1, which was used for the device fabrication. Device fabrication. The substrates (glass or Si/SiO2) were cleaned in an ultrasonic bath (8 min each step), first with acetone, then followed by isopropanol, and finally dried with a N2 flow. The Ag2-xS NC layer (ca. 20 nm, measured by a Veeko Dektak® profilometer) was prepared by spin coating and solid ligand exchange procedures in a glove box. To deposit this layer, the NC dispersion (30 mg mL-1, 5-15 μL to cover the substrate) was spin coated at 2500 rpm for 30 s. Then, the film was covered by a TMAI solution in MeOH (1 mg mL-1)63 for 20 s and then rinsed with several drops of MeOH before spin coating at 2500 rpm for 30 s. The substrate was rinsed two more times with MeOH, followed by spinning at 2500 rpm for 30 s to dry the film. The films were stored in a N2- filled box overnight before processing the final device, to ensuring complete solvent evaporation. For the macroscale devices, we used a shadow mask to deposit the metals on 1x1 mm2 areas, separated by gaps of ca. 100 μm. In the case of asymmetric electrodes, two consecutive evaporations were performed exposing half of the device each time. The metals were evaporated in a Kenosistec® e-beam evaporator (deposition rate of 0.3 Å.s-1 and base pressure of about 1.0 10- 6 mbar) with thickness of 50 nm (Ag, Ti and Pt); for Ag and Ti an additional layer of 10 nm Au was evaporated to prevent oxidation. Microscale devices were fabricated, on Si substrates with a 90 nm SiO2 top layer, by e-beam lithography (EBL), using spin-coated PMMA as resist (baked at 170oC on a hot plate). The metal deposition for the electrodes was performed as for the macroscale devices, followed by lift-off in acetone and rising in isopropanol. Reproducibility was tested by fabricating devices with 3 different Ag2-xS NC synthesis batches, used for both macro- and microscale devices. For macroscale devices, at least 5 devices were tested in every configuration. For microscale devices (EBL fabrication), chips with 20-30 devices of each kind were fabricated; at least 10 were tested. The results are comparable between the different sets. SEM/EDX characterisation. We performed SEM/EDX measurements on the devices using a Helios Nanolab 600 (FEI Company) combined with an X-Max detector and INCA® system (Oxford Instruments) for the EDX spectra acquisition and analysis. SEM measurements were performed at 10-20 kV and 0.2 nA, while EDX measurement conditions were set at 10kV and 0.8nA. The SEM measurements were carried out with voltage ≤20 kV and current ≤0.8nA, since in previous studies14,16 – confirmed by our own observation – Ag protrusions can be formed under high density e-beam exposure. Thus, the focus (brightness, contrast and stigmatism) and beam adjustments were done outside of the imaged area and the photo was collected with an exposure time less than 1μs per pixel. Electrical measurements. Electrical characterisation was performed in air, using a probe station equipped with a Keithley 2612 sourcemeter in two-probe configuration. The high and low terminals are connected to the device. In devices with asymmetric electrodes (e.g. Ag/Ti) the low terminal is connected to Ag. The measurement procedure was controlled by a PC using Python® functions (via the Pymeasure package64); the data were subsequently handled and analysed using the Python packages Numpy,65 Scipy,66 Pandas67 and Matplotlib68. In the set/read/reset measurements, for each cycle the ION (LRS) and IOFF (HRS) values are acquired by taking the average over the read pulse, avoiding possible spikes during the measurements. Conflicts of interest There are no conflicts to declare. 10