Discovery of two-dimensional anisotropic superconductivity at KTaO3 (111) interfaces Authors: Changjiang Liu1*†, Xi Yan1,2,5 †, Dafei Jin3, Yang Ma6, Haw-Wen Hsiao4, Yulin Lin3, Terence M. Bretz-Sullivan1, Xianjing Zhou3, John Pearson1, Brandon Fisher3, J. Samuel Jiang1, Wei Han6, Jian-Min Zuo4, Jianguo Wen3, Dillon D. Fong1, Jirong Sun5, Hua Zhou2, Anand Bhattacharya1* Affiliations: 1Materials Science Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, IL 60439, USA. 2Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, IL 60439, USA. 3Nanoscale Science and Technology Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, IL 60439, USA. 4Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA. 5Beijing National Laboratory for Condensed Matter & Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, People’s Republic of China. 6International Centre for Quantum Materials, School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, People’s Republic of China. *Correspondence to anand@anl.gov or changjiang.liu@anl.gov †These authors contributed equally. Abstract: The unique electronic structure found at interfaces between materials can allow unconventional quantum states to emerge. Here we observe superconductivity in electron gases formed at interfaces between (111) oriented KTaO3 and insulating overlayers of either EuO or LaAlO3. The superconducting transition temperature, approaching 2.2 K, is about one order of magnitude higher than that of the LaAlO3/SrTiO3 system. Strikingly, similar electron gases at (001) KTaO3 interfaces remain normal down to 25 mK. The critical field and current-voltage measurements indicate that the superconductivity is two dimensional. Higher mobility EuO/KTaO3 (111) samples show a large in-plane anisotropy in transport properties at low temperatures prior to onset of superconductivity, suggesting the emergence of a ‘stripe’ like phase where the superconductivity is nearly homogeneous in one direction, but strongly modulated in the other. One Sentence Summary: Electron gases formed at KTaO3 (111) interfaces show 2D anisotropic superconductivity with Tc much higher than that in LaAlO3/SrTiO3. Main Text: Introduction Superconductivity in two dimensions (2D) has been a central theme in condensed matter physics and material science (1). In 2D, the electron-electron and electron-lattice interactions that mediate pairing can also give rise to states that compete with superconductivity, and fluctuations can further suppress 2D superconductivity. Thus, while there are many examples of two- dimensional electron gases (2DEG) and ultrathin metallic films, only a small fraction of these are superconducting. Most of the foundational work in 2D superconductivity was carried out using amorphous thin films (2), and led to deep insights regarding the nature of classical and quantum phase transitions in the 2D limit. In more recent years, there have been striking developments in the realization of 2D superconductivity in crystalline materials (1), including layered transition metal chalcogenides (3, 4), bilayer (5) and trilayer (6) graphene, gated surfaces of single crystals (7, 8), atomically thin ordered metallic layers on semiconductor surfaces (9), and interfaces between crystalline materials (10-12). These crystalline 2D superconductors allow us to realize and break symmetries, and tailor electronic structure in ways that are not possible in amorphous and disordered thin films. For example, in a 2D superconductor with strong spin-orbit coupling and broken inversion symmetry, a Rashba interaction may lead to a superconducting order parameter with mixed s-wave and p-wave symmetry (13), a candidate platform for realizing Majorana modes (14). It is perhaps telling that three of the most prominent examples of 2D superconductivity at crystalline interfaces – LaAlO3/SrTiO3 (LAO/STO), FeSe/SrTiO3 and La2CuO4/LaSrCuO4 - involve transition metal oxides (10-12), where strong electron-electron and electron-lattice interactions likely play a role in mediating superconducting pairing. In some of these interfacial systems, the superconductivity is believed to be ‘unconventional’ – i.e. with a non s-wave order parameter, and a pairing mechanism that is not described by the Bardeen- Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory. KTaO3 (KTO) is an insulator with a cubic perovskite structure, a bandgap of 3.6 eV, and a dielectric constant that grows to values > 4500 upon cooling to low temperatures (15, 16). It is believed that KTO is on the verge of a ferroelectric transition, thwarted by quantum fluctuations at low temperatures. It is thus called a ‘quantum paraelectric’, much like SrTiO3 (STO). STO can be easily doped into a metallic state that becomes superconducting at T < 0.5 K (17). In contrast, few studies on doped KTO exist for bulk samples (18, 19), and none of them report any signatures of superconductivity. Nonetheless, it was reported that ionic liquid gating could be used to tune the KTO (001) surface into a weak superconducting state with Tc ~ 47 mK (8). The electronic states near the Fermi level in electron doped KTO are derived from Ta-5d states (20) – in particular dxy, dzx and dyz orbitals in the t2g manifold. The large spin-orbit coupling in these states lifts the degeneracy of the t2g manifold and splits the J = 1/2 states to an energy ~ 0.4 eV higher than the J = 3/2 states (compared to ~ 0.025 eV in STO). The two J = 3/2 states (mJ = ± 1/2 and mJ = ± 3/2) are degenerate near the Γ-point and disperse as ‘light’ and ‘heavy’ electron states at finite momenta. Unlike in STO, there are no symmetry lowering lattice distortions at low temperatures to lift this degeneracy at the Γ-point, though confinement can also lift degeneracies. 2DEGs can be realized at the KTO (001) and (111) interfaces via vacuum cleaving (21, 22) followed by exposure to UV or synchrotron radiation, and have been characterized using angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) (21). ARPES studies on KTO (111) surface found a distinct Fermi surface with the six-fold symmetry of the surface lattice (Fig. 1a,b), spin split-off bands, and evidence for band bending and confinement near the surface (21, 23). Owing to the large spin-orbit coupling, the interfacial electron gas at KTO (111) interfaces (24, 25) is also expected to host complex spin textures in momentum space. In the particular case of a bilayer of KTO along the direction, which forms a puckered honeycomb lattice (Fig. 1b), calculations suggest that this system may support topological states (26, 27). Fig. 1. Schematics of KTO (111) surface, XANES and STEM characterizations. (a) KTaO3 lattice structure. The relative sizes of the ions are chosen to emphasize the Ta atoms. The three adjacent (111) planes containing Ta5+ ions are colored in light purple, blue and green, respectively. (b) Distribution of Ta5+ ions on the KTO (111) surface viewed along the crystal axis. Ta5+ ions are shown with progressively smaller sizes in the three adjacent (111) planes, which are labeled as Ta – I, Ta – II and Ta – III, respectively. Solid lines between Ta5+ ions indicate the relative distance or coupling strength – with thicker lines representing stronger couplings, giving rise to a buckled honeycomb lattice for the first bilayer comprising Ta - I and Ta - II sites. (c) XANES data from sample EuO/KTO(111)_4 at the Ta L-edge. The KTO near the surface is only slightly reduced, with Ta valence in the surface region close to its bulk value (5+). XANES data for pure Ta is also shown for comparison. (d, e) STEM images of the Green box indicates the region near the interface. Here, we report upon the observation of two-dimensional superconductivity in electron gases formed at oxide-insulator/KTO (111) interfaces. We have measured Tc values as high as 2.2 K, and this value can be tuned by varying carrier density. The superconductivity is highly dependent on the crystallographic orientation of the surface on which the 2DEG is realized. That is, while the superconductivity found at the KTaO3 (111) interface is robust, no superconductivity is observed in 2DEGs with similar doping levels at the KTaO3 (001) interface. Recently, 2DEGs realized on the KTO (001) surface via deposition of an oxide capping layer were found to have relatively high mobilities (28) compared to LAO/STO, and subsequently Shubnikov de Haas oscillations were observed at low temperatures (29). However, no superconductivity has been reported in these or other (001) oriented samples, barring the initial discovery (8). Measurements of the upper critical field and current-voltage (I-V) characteristics confirm that the superconductivity at the oxide-insulator/KTO (111) interfaces is two- dimensional. Furthermore, a large in-plane resistive anisotropy emerges in the vicinity of the superconducting state in a series of samples with varying mobilities and carrier densities. The temperature and magnetic field dependences of this state suggest that the anisotropy is a result of the formation of a ‘stripe’ like phase of spatially modulated superconductivity. Characterization of EuO/KTO and LAO/KTO interfaces The 2DEGs on KTO studied in this work were prepared by growing an overlayer of EuO with molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), or LAO using pulsed laser deposition (PLD) (details in Supplementary Materials). We characterized the chemical oxidation state of the EuO/KTO (111) interface using X-ray absorption near-edge spectroscopy (XANES) at the Ta-L3 edge (9.88 keV). XANES measurements were carried out adopting two different angles of incidence, one close to grazing incidence (0.16°) that probed only the first few nanometers of the KTO near the EuO/KTO interface, and another at a higher angle (5.16°) that probed the bulk of the KTO. As shown in Fig. 1c, these measurements indicate that the Ta oxidation state near the surface is very close to that in the bulk (Ta5+), and subtle differences in the enhanced white-line feature and the absorption edge suggest that the interfacial Ta is only slightly reduced. In particular, none of our measurements show any evidence for metallic Ta, which is known to be superconducting in ultrathin films (30). Shown in Figs. 1d and e are scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) measurements of our samples, which indicate abrupt interfaces between an annealed KTO (111) surface and the polycrystalline EuO or amorphous LAO overlayer, as confirmed by X-ray diffraction measurements. Using aberration-corrected high-resolution TEM and scanning TEM, we find there are oxygen vacancies near the EuO/KTO (111) interface, and Eu substitution on the K sites within the first three unit-cells (Fig. S1), both of which can dope the interfacial KTO with electrons. Similar doping effects are also observed at the LAO/KTO (111), EuO/KTO (001) and LAO/KTO (001) interfaces (Figs. S2, S3). Superconductivity in 2DEG at the KTO (111) interfaces EuO/KTO (001) interfaces display metallic behavior from 300 K to 4 K. As the temperature is lowered further, the EuO/KTO (111) samples show superconductivity, which is presented in Fig. 2b for four samples. These samples were grown at different temperatures and oxygen pressures, which result in different carrier densities and mobilities. Further details of the sample growth and properties are presented in the Materials and Methods and Table S1 in the Supplementary Materials. The value of Tc, determined using half of the normal state resistance R", reaches as high as 2.2 K in sample EuO/KTO(111)_1. To investigate whether the EuO overlayer is necessary for superconductivity, we also prepared 2DEGs using LAO overlayers. As shown in Fig. 1c, superconductivity with Tc > 1.1 K is also observed in LAO/KTO (111) samples. This demonstrates that a specific overlayer of the 2DEG is not required for the emergence of superconductivity. We have also performed measurements on 2DEGs formed at (001) oriented KTO interfaces. Figure 2d shows the measurement results for a series of (001) samples including both EuO and LAO overlayers. The charge carrier densities of these samples range from 5.8 × 10#$ cm-2 to 1.1 × 10#% cm-2, covering the same range of densities as the (111) samples shown in Fig. 2b and c, though slightly lower than the n2D values in Ref. (8). Unlike the (111) samples, no superconductivity is observed in these (001) samples down to 25 mK. This crystallographic orientation dependent interfacial superconductivity is in sharp contrast with 2DEGs at STO interfaces, where the superconductivity occurs for all orientations (10, 22, 31), with a much lower Tc of around 200 mK. STEM characterization of the (001) interfaces shows similar interfacial chemical composition as the (111) samples, which suggests that the electronic structure in the KTO (111) surface may play a role in inducing strong Cooper pairing among the interfacial charge carriers, though this point needs further investigation. Fig. 2. Transport measurements of 2DEGs formed at different KTO interfaces. (a) Metallic temperature dependence of the sheet resistance of EuO/KTO (111) and (001) samples measured from 300 K to 4 K. (b) Measurement at lower temperatures shows superconducting transitions in EuO/KTO (111) samples (current along [112#]) with varying carrier densities, which are determined from Hall measurement at T = 10 K. The carrier density in EuO/KTO(111)_4 is estimated from growth temperature. (c) Similar measurements on LAO/KTO (111) samples also show superconductivity. (d) No superconductivity is observed in samples with (001) oriented KTO interfaces with overlayers of either EuO or LAO down to 25 mK. The range of the carrier density is similar to those of the (111) oriented samples shown in (b) and (c). 2D nature of the superconductivity The superconductivity at the KTO (111) interface is two-dimensional. This is borne out by upper critical fields B&' and B&∥ measured perpendicular and parallel to the KTO (111) interface, defined as the field at which the resistance rises to half of R". Figure 3a and b show the magnetic field dependence of the R! measured on sample EuO/KTO(111)_3. The temperature dependence of B&' is well described by the Ginzburg-Landau (G-L) theory which yields a linearized equation: B&' = )! *+,"# $ 01 − - -%2, where Φ. is the magnetic flux quantum and ξ/0 is the G-L coherence length. The linear fit to B&'(T) in Fig. 3c gives ξ/0 ≈ 13 nm at T = 0 K. The extrapolated value of B&'(0) ≈ 1.8 T is > 103 times higher than the critical field observed in ionic-liquid gated KTO (001) devices (8). Further, we find that the critical fields are highly anisotropic. For fields applied in the sample plane, B&∥ is much higher than B&' with 1%∥ 1%' > 10 at T = 0.6 K (Fig. 3c). The temperature dependence of B&∥ shows a characteristic square root dependence as expected from Tinkham’s model (32): B&∥(T) = *+3,"# ;1 − - -%, where d is the effective thickness of the superconducting state. From the fit to B&∥(T), we obtain d ≈ 5.1 nm, smaller than ξ/0, consistent with 2D superconductivity. Fig. 3. Critical field and current-voltage measurements on sample EuO/KTO(111)_3. (a, b) Sheet resistance measured at different temperatures as a function of the out-of-plane and in-plane magnetic fields, respectively. (c) Temperature dependence of critical fields, which are determined at the half height of the normal-state resistance (dotted horizontal line in (a) and (b)). (d) I-V curves measured at different temperatures. (e) I-V curves plotted on a logarithmic scale using same color codes as in (d). Black solid lines are linear fit to the data. Red dashed line is V μ I3, which is used to infer the BKT transition temperature. (f) Hysteresis of I-V curves near the critical current measured at temperatures below Tc0. We note that B&∥(0) ≈ 17.0 T extrapolated from the fit is substantially larger than the paramagnetic pair-breaking field B4 = ∆5/√2μ6 ≈ 3.2 T based on BCS theory in the weak- coupling limit (33, 34), where ∆5≈ 1.76k6T& is the zero-temperature superconducting gap. High values of B&∥ in excess of BP can be realized in the presence of spin-orbit coupling due to elastic scattering (34, 35) in the limit where the mean free path l 789 ≪ ξ/0, though other spin- relaxation mechanisms may apply even in the clean limit in the presence of broken inversion symmetry and high spin-orbit coupling (36). Using a single-band model, our estimates suggest l 789 ~ 0.4 to 0.7 times ξ/0, which is intermediate between the clean and dirty limits. Enhanced B&∥ values have also been reported in superconductors that are believed to have a spin-triplet p- wave order parameter, though these were thought to be unstable in the presence of disorder. However, recent theoretical developments indicate that in the presence of strong spin-orbit coupling, criteria that might apply to KTO (111) interfaces such as broken inversion symmetry (37), spin-momentum locking (38) or multi-orbital superconducting states (39) can stabilize unconventional superconductivity against disorder scattering. Thus, at this time, the mechanism for realizing B&∥ values in excess of BP at KTO (111) interfaces remains an open question. In Fig. 3a, we also observe an approximate crossing point near B' = 2.1 T, which implies the existence of a nearly temperature-independent separatrix in Rs vs. T traces that show either a positive or negative temperature coefficient of resistance upon cooling, depending on magnetic field (see also Fig. S4). Such data may be interpreted in terms of a quantum phase transition between a 2D superconductor and a correlated metal (40). The superconducting state in the EuO/KTO sample shows a robust critical current. The measured I-V characteristics at different temperatures are shown in Fig. 3d, where the critical current Ic approaches values close to 200 μA at T = 1 K. We estimate a lower bound for two- dimensional critical current density, Kc > 500 μA cm-1 at 1K, which is more than 700 times larger than the Kc = 0.7 μA cm-1 reported for devices on ionic-liquid gated KTO (001) surfaces (8). As the temperature is raised to values near Tc, we observe the gradual onset of a resistive state at low currents. In Fig. 3e we plot the I-V on a log-log scale, and observe that the slope of the I-V characteristics evolves smoothly from the normal Ohmic state V ∝ I towards a steeper power law V ∝ I: as superconductivity sets in at lower temperatures. This evolution may be interpreted in terms of a Berezinskii–Kosterlitz–Thouless (BKT) transition in a 2D superconductor (41), where the onset of a non-linear I-V characteristic in the superconducting state is due to the current driven unbinding of vortex anti-vortex pairs that are created by thermal fluctuations at finite temperatures. This causes the exponent a to smoothly evolve from a value of 1 above and near the onset of superconductivity to higher values as the temperature is lowered (42, 43), with the a = 3 at TBKT. Red dashed line in Fig. 3f corresponds to a I3 dependence, which indicates that the TBKT of this sample EuO/KTO(111)_3 is between 1.2 K and 1.3 K, which is slightly below the zero-resistance Tc0 of about 1.34 K. At temperature below Tc0, we observe hysteresis in the I-V curves near Ic (Fig. 3f), which suggests that the 2D superconductivity is inhomogeneous, with superconducting regions joined by weak links (44). Emergence of an anisotropic ‘stripe’ phase near the superconducting state In higher mobility EuO/KTO (111) samples, we observe the emergence of a new phase near the superconducting state, as revealed by a giant in-plane anisotropy in sheet resistance. Shown in Fig. 4a is the measurement in sample EuO/KTO(111)_5, which has a relatively high mobility of about 279 cm2 V;# s;# and a low charge carrier density of 3.5 × 10#$ cm;* at T = 10 K. The measurements are carried out in a van der Pauw geometry as shown in Fig. 4b. As temperature is lowered below about 2.2 K (Fig. 4a), the resistance increases by almost 50% for current along the [11#0] crystal axis, while it decreases by over 50% for current flowing in the [112#] direction. The in-plane anisotropy observed here is far stronger than that observed at LAO/STO (111) 2DEGs (45, 46). The formation of this anisotropy over the entire sample suggests the emergence of a new phase (47) which breaks rotational symmetry over macroscopic length scales (Fig. S5). The observed anisotropy persists over a broad temperature range from 2.2 K down to about 0.7 K, which is shown with a green background in Fig. 4a. At still lower temperatures, the resistance in both the [11#0] and [112#] current directions drop rapidly to zero, and the superconducting state is obtained (light blue region). Fig. 4. Stripe phase in samples with varying mobilities. (a) Sheet resistance of sample under zero field. The light blue and green region indicate superconducting (SC) and ‘stripe’ state, respectively. (b) Illustration of the measurement geometry for the case of current along [11#0] direction perpendicular to the stripes. These stripes may be composed of Cooper pairs, which are shown as light blue bubbles. (c)-(f) Magnetic field dependence of the sheet resistance measured along both current directions at T = 0.1 K in samples with decreasing mobilities. The stripe phase is revealed around the critical field (green region). Note that EuO/KTO(111)_2 has a higher Tc than EuO/KTO(111)_3, but also shows a more prominent stripe phase. The increase in resistance along the [11#0] direction upon lowering temperature from the normal state is similar to observations in 2D granular superconductors (48). This occurs due to the gapping out of quasiparticles by a superconducting gap (49), which inhibits transport between weakly coupled superconducting regions. Global superconductivity is restored at still lower temperatures presumably via Josephson coupling between these regions. The decrease in resistance along [112#] at the same temperature implies stronger coupling between the superconducting regions in that direction. Such an anisotropy would naturally occur if the superconducting regions organized themselves into ‘stripes’ as shown in Fig. 4b. Recently, pre- formed superconducting puddles have also been suggested in the LAO/STO system, where macroscopic 2D superconductivity is obtained when phase coherence develops between them (50). The magnetic field dependence of sheet resistance provides further evidence for an anisotropic ‘stripe’ like superconductivity. Figure 4c shows the resistance measured in the same EuO/KTO(111)_5 sample in an out-of-plane magnetic field at T = 0.1 K, which is well below Tc0. As the magnetic field is increased to the critical field, there is a sharp rise in the resistance along both directions of current. The initial high/low resistance values along [11#0]/[112#] in the resistive state are approximately equal to those in the ‘stripe’ phase shown in Fig. 4a, obtained by just raising the temperature to above Tc0. This suggests that the ‘stripe’ phase is obtained by a suppression of global superconductivity upon the application of a magnetic field. By increasing the magnetic field further, the resistance decreases along [11#0] and increases along [112#], as the ‘stripe’ phase is driven into the normal state at B' ≳ 0.8 T, where the resistance anisotropy also disappears, presumably due to a more complete suppression of the superconducting gap within the stripes. The decrease in resistance with magnetic field for transport along [11#0] due to the suppression of the superconducting gap is also a signature of ‘granular’ superconductivity in that direction. EuO/KTO (111) samples, which have lower mobilities than that of EuO/KTO(001)_5. The resistance anisotropy, with the same orientation relative to the crystal axes, is observed in all of these samples to varying degrees around the critical field. The magnitude of the transport anisotropy measured relative to the normal-state value becomes progressively smaller as the mobility of the sample decreases. In sample EuO/KTO(111)_3, which has the lowest mobility among these samples, the transport is nearly isotropic as shown in Fig. 4f. This observation suggest that the ‘stripe’ phase depends on the level of disorder in the sample. Furthermore, the ‘stripe’ phase seems to not compete with the superconductivity. For example, sample EuO/KTO(111)_2 clearly shows ‘stripe’ like anisotropy (Fig. 4e), but it also has higher Tc than that of EuO/KTO(111)_3 (see Fig. 2b), which does not show the anisotropy (Fig. 4f). We also note that the transport in LAO/KTO (111) is mostly isotropic when an out-of-plane field is applied (Fig. S6), however a large anisotropy is observed upon applying an in-plane magnetic field approaching B&∥. This suggests that the ‘stripe’ phase may be influenced by coupling between the magnetic EuO overlayer and the superconductivity in EuO/KTO (111) samples, or by an in-plane magnetic field as in LAO/KTO (111). Discussion The 2D superconductivity observed in the KTO (111) interfaces shows substantially higher Tc than that observed in the widely studied LAO/STO system, and increases monotonically with n2D. These higher Tc values making fundamental studies and device applications of superconducting 2DEGs using crystalline interfaces more readily accessible. The origin of the superconductivity is still an open question. Possible links between superconductivity and the large spin-orbit interaction in KTO (111) 2DEGs, as has been suggested in LAO/STO (111) (51, 52), could be explored in future work. When global superconductivity in the KTO (111) surface is suppressed by either temperature or a magnetic field, transport measurements reveal a ‘stripe’ phase which produces large anisotropic transport in the (111) plane. Notably, the directions for the high/low resistance states in the vicinity of superconductivity are oriented along the same crystal axes in the KTO and STO (111) interfaces (46).We observe no dependence on thermal cycling across the onset temperature of the ‘stripe’ phase (Fig. S7), as has been observed in LAO/STO (53), where these effects were due to the formation of structural domain walls. In addition, the ‘stripe’ phase shows strong dependences on magnetic field and scattering of charge carriers by disorder, which suggest an electronic origin. A possible explanation for the observed anisotropy may be a spatially modulated or inhomogeneous superconductivity. This can happen for example in a Fulde-Ferrel-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) state, where a spin-split Fermi surface due to a magnetic proximity effect or an external magnetic field results in Cooper pairs with non-zero total crystal momentum (37, 54) , whose density is then periodically modulated in real space. It is also possible that the superconductivity at KTO (111) interfaces is inherently composed of a spatially modulated density of Cooper pairs or a pair density-wave (PDW) (55). Further experiments, including probes of the spatial structure of superconductivity, will be helpful for elucidating the nature of superconductivity and resistance anisotropy that we observe.