Solution-processed GaSe nanoflake-based films for photoelectrochemical water splitting and photoelectrochemical-type photodetectors Marilena Isabella Zappia,† Gabriele Bianca,† Sebastiano Bellani,†* Michele Serri, Leyla Najafi, Reinier Oropesa-Nuñez, Beatriz Martín-García, Daniel Bouša, David Sedmidubský, Vittorio Pellegrini, Zdeněk Sofer, Anna Cupolillo and Francesco Bonaccorso* Marilena Isabella Zappia, Dr. Reinier Oropesa-Nuñez, Dr. Vittorio Pellegrini, Dr. Francesco Bonaccorso BeDimensional Spa., via Albisola 121, 16163 Genova, Italy Gabriele Bianca, Dr. Sebastiano Bellani, Dr. Michele Serri, Dr. Leyla Najafi, Dr. Beatriz Martín- García, Dr. Vittorio Pellegrini, Dr. Francesco Bonaccorso Graphene Labs, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, via Morego 30, 16163, Genova, Italy E-mail: sebastiano.bellani@iit.it; francesco.bonaccorso@iit.it Gabriele Bianca Dipartimento di Chimica e Chimica Industriale, Università degli Studi di Genova, via Dodecaneso 31, 16146 Genoa, Italy. Dr. Daniel Bouša, Prof. David Sedmidubský, Dr. Zdeněk Sofer Department of Inorganic Chemistry, University of Chemistry and Technology Prague, Technická 5, 166 28 Prague 6, Czech Republic Dr. Anna Cupolillo, Marilena Isabella Zappia Department of Physics, University of Calabria, Via P. Bucci cubo 31/C 87036, Rende (CS), Italy †These authors equally contributed Keywords: Gallium selenide, photoelectrochemistry, photoelectrocatalysts, water splitting, photodetectors. Abstract Gallium selenide (GaSe) is a layered compound, which has been exploited in nonlinear optical applications and photodetectors due to its anisotropic structure and pseudo-direct optical gap. Theoretical studies predicted that its two-dimensional (2D) form is a potential photocatalyst for water splitting reactions. Herein, we first report the photoelectrochemical (PEC) characterization of GaSe nanoflakes (single-/few-layer flakes), produced via liquid phase exfoliation, for hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) in both acidic and alkaline media. In 0.5 M H2SO4, the GaSe photoelectrodes display the best PEC performance, i.e. a ratiometric power-saved metric for HER (Φsaved,HER) of 0.09% and a ratiometric power-saved metric for OER (Φsaved,OER) of 0.25%. When used as PEC-type photodetectors, GaSe photoelectrodes show a responsivity of ~0.16 A W-1 upon 455 nm illumination at light intensity of 63.5 μW cm-2 and applied potential of –0.3 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE). The stability analysis of the GaSe photodetectors evidences a durable operation over tens of cathodic linear sweep voltammetry scans in 0.5 M H2SO4 for HER. Viceversa, degradation effects have been observed in both alkaline and anodic operation due to highly oxidizing environment and O2-induced (photo-)oxidation effects. Our results provide new insight into PEC properties of GaSe nanoflakes for their exploitation in photoelectrocatalysis, PEC-type photodetectors and (bio)sensors. 1. Introduction Gallium selenide (GaSe) is a layered pseudo-direct optical bandgap (direct transition positioned just above the indirect one) binary chalcogenide (namely, a group-III monochalcogenide), composed of vertically stacked Se–Ga–Ga–Se tetralayers held together by van der Waals forces. Several stacking of tetralayered blocks (i.e., GaSe monolayers) are possible and form various polytypes (β, γ, δ and ε) of the crystal. The most common one is the hexagonal ε-GaSe (space symmetry group: P6̅m-D3h ′ ),,, which is grown by Bridgman methods., Due to its structure, GaSe shows fascinating optoelectronic properties, including photoresponse in ultraviolet/visible (UV-vis) spectral range (from 1.8 to 5 eV),,, non-linear optical behavior,, and a distinctive spin physics (e.g., spin-orbit coupling effects and generation/retention of spin polarization under nonresonant optical pumping,). For the aforementioned properties, GaSe has been proposed for photodetectors with high responsivity,,,,,,,,, (e.g., up to values > 1000 A W– 1 at light intensity ≤ 0.1 mW cm–2, in heterojunction with graphene), non-linear frequency generation (e.g., second and third harmonic and ultra-broadband radiation generation),,,,,,, spin polarization control (e.g., spintronic logic devices), light- emitting devices,, optical microcavities and saturable absorbers.,Moreover, the number of layers and strain engineering strongly affect the GaSe optoelectronic properties,,,,which can be on-demand tailored to fulfil the requirements of the final applications., In particular, theoretical calculations demonstrated a c-axis confinement-induced bandgap (Eg) blue shift, which resemble the behavior of transition metal dichalcogenides.,,,, An indirect Eg superior to 3 eV has been theoretically predicted for GaSe monolayer,,,,, and confirmed by experimental measurements., Such values of Eg raise interest for application of two-dimensional GaSe, as well as other group-III monochalcogenides, such as InSe, GeS, GeSe, and GeTe, as photo(electro)catalysts for water splitting reactions., Actually, GaSe monolayer fulfils the fundamental requirements for a water splitting photo(electro)catalysts, i.e.: 1) conduction two-dimensional nature of GaSe flakes maximizes the surface area available for water splitting reactions.,, Meanwhile, the distance between the photogenerated charges and the surface area is virtually reduced to zero,,, suppressing electron-hole recombination losses. The validation of the GaSe nanoflakes for PEC reactions could pave the way towards the design of novel GaSe-based PEC-type photodetectors/PEC sensors that can operate with low voltage sources, or even without external energy supply systems,,,, as well as eliminate complex device manufacturing. Notably, by detecting an analyte via photo-induced electrochemical reactions, PEC sensors offer several advantages over electrochemical sensor, since they can operate in differential mode to reduce the background signal (down to the limit of lock-in detection noise), and avoid frequent recalibrations.,,, Therefore, the validation of GaSe and other group-III monochalcogenides as novel PEC-active two-dimensional materials represents a great potential for the design of efficient photocatalysts and innovative optoelectronic devices.,,,, Despite these encouraging driving factors, the PEC properties of GaSe are still experimentally uncharted. A certain reluctance to study the (photo)electrochemical properties of GaSe and other group-III monochalcogenides undoubtedly originated from their tendency to undergo surface oxidation.,,,,,, The latter can occur either in a two-step reaction: GaSe + 1/4O2 = 1/3Ga2Se3 + 1/6Ga2O3 followed by Ga2Se3 + 3/2O2 = Ga2O3 + 3Se; or in a single-step reaction: (2) GaSe + 3/4O2 = 1/2Ga2O3 + Se. The presence of humidity and light has been reported to accelerate further the surface oxidation of GaSe., However, it is worth noticing that the material oxidation process can be controlled by properly adjusting (photo)electrochemical conditions such as potential, pH and the dissolved O2 concentration. For example, electrochemical reduction has been exploited to decrease the surface oxidation of GaSe crystals. Moreover, Ga2O3 can dissolve to Ga3+ and GaO2– or GaO33– in acidic and alkaline media, respectively, restoring the chalcogenide phase at the surface. Noteworthy, theoretical simulations predicted that the water solubility of GaSe is below 10–18 mol mL–1, which implies that GaSe can be stable in water. Driven by the aforementioned considerations, we aimed to unveil the photoelectrochemical behaviour of GaSe nanoflakes. We theoretically investigated the electronic structure of GaSe nanoflakes by using density functional theory (DFT) calculations. The calculated Eg values indicate that GaSe nanoflakes can absorb a significant fraction of solar irradiation. By determining the ECBM and the EVBM of GaSe nanoflakes and their alignment with the redox potential of H+/H2 and O2/H2O, respectively, we predicted that GaSe nanoflakes should act as photocatalysts for water splitting reactions. To prove our theoretical predictions, GaSe nanoflakes were prepared in liquid dispersion by means of a viable and environmentally friendly liquid-phase exfoliation (LPE), of synthetized bulky crystals in anhydrous 2-Propanol (IPA). Due to its scalability, the LPE method is suitable for applications in which large amounts of material are needed, overcoming the low- throughput suffered by micromechanical cleavage-based exfoliation and bottom-up nanomaterial synthesis (e.g., CVD),,, which are typically exploited for fundamental studies, including those on photodetectors.,,,, The as-produced GaSe nanoflakes were exploited as solution- processable materials for PEC water splitting and PEC-type photodetectors in aqueous electrolytes. In particular, the photoelectrodes were fabricated by spray coating the GaSe nanoflakes dispersion onto graphite paper. Our device fabrication does not involve any nanofabrication step, as typically devised to design Ga-based thin-film transistor for optoelectronic applications.,,, The as- produced photoelectrodes were investigated for PEC HER and OER in 0.5 M H2SO4 (pH 1) and 1 M KOH (pH 14) under the simulated sunlight (i.e., AM 1.5G illumination). The PEC properties of the GaSe nanoflakes were exploited to conceive PEC-type photodetectors, investigating the response at fixed illumination wavelength (455, 505 and 625 nm) in both acidic and alkaline media. 2. Result and discussion 2.1. Understanding the PEC properties of GaSe nanoflakes for water splitting reactions The thermodynamic requirements for a water splitting photo(electro)catalyst are ECBM > E(H+/H2) and EVBM < E(O2/H2O) for HER and OER, respectively., In order to evaluate if GaSe crystals and nanoflakes fulfil these requirements, we performed electronic structure calculations using DFT with generalized gradient approximation (GGA-PBE96) and Heyd-Scuseria-Ernzerhof hybrid exchange-correlation functional (HSE06) for bulk and 1-, 2-, 4- and 6-layer (denoted as B and 1L, 2L,.., 6L)-GaSe (see details in Supporting Information, Experimental section). As we will show below, the electronic structure of 6L-GaSe is similar to the one of bulk GaSe (B-GaSe). Therefore, xL-GaSe with x>6 were not investigated by DFT calculation, since they display electronic properties resembling those of the B-GaSe. Our calculations show that B-GaSe is a direct bandgap semiconductor with VBM and CBM at the Γ-point of the first Brillouin zone. It is worth noticing that the sole use of GGA-PBE96 to describe exchange-correlation interaction between the electrons underestimates the material Eg (around ~1 eV), since it neglects the screened Coulomb potential for Hartree–Fock exchange., By contrast, the use of hybrid HSE06 functionals (Figure 1a) results in an Eg of 1.91 eV, which is similar to experimental values reported in literature (between 1.9 and 2.0 eV).,, By reducing the number of layers in the GaSe, the Eg progressively increases up to the highest value in 1L-GaSe (see Supporting Information, Figure S1), i.e., 2.19 eV with the GGA- PBE96 and 3.14 eV with HSE06 (Figure 1b). Notably, this trend is accompanied by a shift of the VBM outwards from the Γ-point, leading to a direct-to-indirect bandgap transition in single-/few- layer GaSe (generically denoted with xL-GaSe, in which 1 ≤ x ≤ 6). Both B-GaSe and xL-GaSe exhibit a broad VB (energy ranging from 0 to –6 eV) formed by Se-4p states, while their CB is given by both Ga-4p and 4s states. The valence band significantly contributes to the electron density localized around the lines connecting Ga and Se atoms (Figure 1c), a characteristic feature of covalent semiconductors. Due to the direct Ga-Ga bonding and the formal oxidation state of Ga (Ga(+II)), Ga- 4s states constitute a narrow band centred at –7.5 eV occupied by 2 electrons per unit cell comprising 2 Ga atoms. A 1.8 eV wide band of Se-4s character is located at ~12.5 eV below the Fermi level (EF) and slightly above the sharp band constituted by highly localized Ga-3d states. The Ga-3d semi-core states substantially increases the VB electron density on Ga atoms (see the red spots on 2D section of electron density map of Ga-layer in Figure 1d) compared to Se layer (Figure 1e). projected density of states (DOS) (green lunes) for B-GaSe 1L-GaSe, respectively, calculated by DFT using the HSE06 hybrid functionals. c) 3D iso-surface of the electron density = – 0.3 e Å-3. d,e) Electron density distributions in 2D cross section over Ga and Se layers, respectively. The electron energies resulting from the calculation can be referred to the vacuum energy level in order to evaluate the ECBM and the EVBM related to (001) surface of the B- and few-layer GaSe structures relatively to E(H+/H2) and E(O2/H2O), respectively. Figure 2 shows the ECBM and the EVBM as functions of the number of layers including the bulk limits. The E(H+/H2) and E(O2/H2O) as functions of the pH are also shown. Noteworthy, xL-GaSe with x ≤ 4 are predicted to be pH-universal photocatalysts for HER, since they fulfil the ECBM > E(H+/H2) requirement independently by the pH. Meanwhile, xL-GaSe with x ≥ 4 are predicted to be pH-universal photocatalysts for OER, since they fulfil the EVBM < E(O2/H2O) requirement independently by the pH. These results indicate that mixed nanoflakes with different number of layers should act as “local” tandem water splitting systems. As representative case, B-GaSe and 3L-GaSe can attain the overall water splitting (i.e., both HER and OER) at pH < 1.5 and pH > 7, respectively. Differently, overall water splitting is impossible for both 2L- and 1L-GaSe, since their EVBM is higher than E(O2/H2O) (i.e., they cannot carry out OER). However, they can effectively operate in tandem configurations with other xL-GaSe, i.e., they can collect electron from the CB of x-GaSe with ECBM > EVBM,meanwhile transferring their photoexcited electrons toward the electrolyte by performing HER. of its layer number (bulk limits is also denoted by dotted lines), compared with the potentials of water splitting The van der Waals interactions, though weaker than covalent bonding inside the layers by more than three order of magnitudes, represent an essential feature of the layer cohesion in GaSe. While our DFT calculations using the bare GGA-PBE96 indicate that xL-GaSe is more stable than B-GaSe, the DFT-3D method, including the van der Waals dispersion correction, estimates a surface energy of xL-GaSe more negative than the one of B-GaSe (by 10.5 kJ mol–1for 1L-GaSe), with positive surface energies of the single/few-layer slabs (e.g., 143 and 145 mJ m–2 for 1L-GaSe and 6L-GaSe, respectively). The slab is the model representing the flake in the calculations, see Methods for details. Being twice the surface energy of the slabs, their interlayer cleavage energy of few-layer slabs is ~0.29 J m–2, which is lower than the one measured for graphite (~0.37 J m-2). These data indicate that xL-GaSe should be produced by cleaving the 3D counterpart (B-GaSe), in agreement with pioneering experimental works, and similarly to graphite., 2.2. Synthesis and exfoliation of GaSe crystals The GaSe crystal was synthesized by direct reaction from Ga and Se elements., More in detail, granulated Ga and Se with an exact elemental stoichiometry of 1:1 were loaded in a quartz glass ampoule, subsequently evacuated, secured and heated at 970 °C (i.e., melting temperature of GaSe) for 1 h (heating rate = 5 °C min–1). The synthesis products were then cooled down to room temperature (cooling rate = 1 °C min–1), obtaining the GaSe crystal (Figure 3a). The as-produced GaSe crystal was pulverized to be characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) coupled with energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). The high-magnification SEM image of the GaSe edge (Figure 3b) shows the layered structure of the crystal. The SEM/EDS analysis (Figure 3c) reveals a slight Ga-enriched phases of the GaSe crystals (Ga-to-Se atomic ratio ~1.4, Table S1), which is in agreement with previous studies., The stoichiometric excess of Ga is attributed to the formation oxides (i.e., Ga2O3), which partially passivate the GaSe surface, preventing the underlying GaSe from further oxidation.,,, The crystal structure of the GaSe crystals was evaluated by X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements. The XRD pattern (Figure S2) agrees with the JCPDS 37-931 card, indicating that the as-synthetized GaSe crystals are in the form of the lowest energy polytype, i.e., the hexagonal ε-GaSe, (space symmetry group: P6̅m-D3h ′ ),,, in agreement with previous literature reporting similar GaSe crystal syntheses., The GaSe nanoflakes were produced by LPE, of the synthetized crystals in anhydrous IPA followed by sedimentation-based separation (SBS) to remove un-exfoliated crystals by ultracentrifugation (see Experimental section). Noteworthy, first principle calculations estimated a weak interlayer coupling in GaSe crystals (i.e., cleavage energy ~0.33 J m–2), in agreement with our DFT calculations (cleavage energy of ~0.29 J m–2 for xL-GaSe with x ≥2), indicating their feasible exfoliation similar to other layered materials, e.g., graphite (cleavage energies of ~0.37 J m–2, experimental value) and MoS2 (theoretical cleavage energy of 0.27 J m–2). The use of IPA as solvent has been reported to be effective for exfoliating another Ga-based group-III monochalcogenides (i.e., GaS), as well as other transition metal monochalcogenides (e.g., InSe) and dichalcogenides (e.g., MoS2,,, MoSe2,, NbS2)., Moreover, IPA is a low toxicity and low boiling point (82.5 °C) solvent, which allows the exfoliated material to be processed at low-temperature (< 100 °C) without special precautions (e.g., use of fume hood and/or controlled atmosphere). By starting from cost-effective artificial crystals, the LPE method does not recur to low-throughput micromechanical cleavage exfoliation or time-consuming and expensive bottom-up synthesis (e.g., CVD).,, The morphology of the as-produced GaSe flakes was characterized by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) in order to evaluate their lateral dimension and thickness, respectively. Figure 3d shows the TEM image of representative GaSe nanoflakes, displaying wrinkled surfaces with irregular shapes, but edges with sharp profiles. Figure 3e shows an AFM image of a representative GaSe nanoflake, together with its height profile showing a step of ~3 nm at the edge. This height is attributed to a GaSe flake with less than 4 layers. In fact, the AFM thickness of a GaSe monolayer generally lies between 0.8 nm and 1 nm, depending on the substrate/GaSe interaction and the AFM instrumentation),,,, and the GaSe interlayer distance is ~0.8 nm,,,). Statistical TEM analysis (Figure 3f) indicates that lateral size data of the flakes follows a log-normal distribution peaking at ~45 nm, with maximum measured values above 0.5 μm. The statistical AFM analysis (Figure 3g) shows that the sample is mainly composed of single/few-layer GaSe nanoflakes. The estimated thickness values of the flakes are mainly between 1 nm (monolayer GaSe) and 10 nm, and follow a lognormal distribution peaked at ~2.4 nm. The crystal structure of the GaSe crystals and the exfoliated flakes was analyzed by Raman spectroscopy. As shown in Figure 3h, the GaSe crystals exhibit the two out-of-plane vibration modes A1g 1 and A1g 2 at ~134 and 308 cm–1, respectively, and the two in-plane vibration mode E2g 1 and E1g 2 at ~212 and ~251 cm–1, respectively, similar to previous reports. ,, In the case of the exfoliated GaSe flakes, the weakest E1g 2 is not distinguishable from background signal, while A1g 1 and E2g 1 slightly shifts to lower and higher wavenumbers, respectively (see also statistical analysis in Figure S3). Theoretical studies show that the softening of the A1g 1 and the strengthening of the E2g 1 with the decrease of the thickness are related to the reduced inter-layer forces, similarly to other transition metal chalcogenides (e.g., MoS2). Moreover, our results agree with experimental works on the thickness dependence of the Raman spectrum of GaSe.,, Notably, the A1g 2 shows a red-shifts similarly to A1g 1 . However, it is difficult to fully understand the behavior of this mode due to the presence of the second order mode of Si (i.e., the substrate) at 302 cm–1, as discussed in ref. . Additionally, the Raman spectra of GaSe crystals and exfoliated flakes do not present signatures attributed to Ga2Se3, Ga2O3 and amorphous/crystalline Se (a-/c-Se) modes, which are observed at ~155, ~200 and between 135–160 cm–1,,, respectively. This indicates that the LPE of GaSe crystal in anhydrous IPA does not cause significant additional surface oxidation of the native material.,, This conclusion is further supported by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis (Figure S4,S5 and Table S2-S7). Since the Ga 2p photoelectrons have lower kinetic energy (K.E.) (~369 eV) and shorter inelastic mean free path (λ) (~1.1 nm) than the Ga 3d photoelectrons (K.E. ~1466 eV, λ ~3.0 nm), their different sampling depth allows to conclude that oxidation of GaSe is limited to outer layer of crystals/flakes. The capability to harvest solar light of the GaSe flakes was evaluated by performing diffusive reflectance spectroscopy (DRS) measurements. Figure 3i shows the diffusive reflectance (R) spectrum of the GaSe flakes film deposited on quartz substrate. The Eg of the GaSe nanoflakes was determined using Kubelka-Munk theory of R phenomenon,, i.e., analysing the (F(R)hν)n vs. hν (Tauc plot) (inset a proportionality constant. The value of the exponent denotes the nature of the electronic transition, discriminating between direct-allowed transition (n = 2) and indirect-allowed transition (n = 0.5)., Due to the pseudo-direct gap behavior of GaSe,, n was set equal to 2. The estimated Eg is 1.9 eV, as the one measured for GaSe crystal. ,, Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) measurements allowed to determine the Fermi level energy (EF), i.e., the WF, and the EVBM. is also shown. b) SEM image of the GaSe crystals, evidencing the layered structure of its edge. c) SEM image of GaSe crystals and the corresponding EDS maps for Ga (green) and Se (violet). d) TEM image of the LPE- produced GaSe flakes. e) AFM image of a representative LPE-produced GaSe flake. The height profile of the indicated section (dashed line) is also shown. f) TEM statistical analysis of the lateral dimension of the exfoliated GaSe flakes. g) AFM statistical analysis of the thickness of the exfoliated GaSe flakes. h) Raman spectra of the as-synthetized GaSe crystals and the LPE-produced GaSe flakes. The Raman modes assigned to ε-GaSe are also shown. i) Spectrum of the diffusive reflectance (R) of the LPE-produced GaSe flakes. The inset shows the Tauc plot of the as-produced GaSe flakes. k) Secondary electron threshold region of He-I UPS spectrum of the LPE-produced GaSe flakes. The inset shows the He-I UPS spectrum region near the EF of the GaSe flakes. j) Extinction spectrum (Ext(λ)) of the LPE-produced GaSe flakes dispersion. The top-right inset shows the Ext(λ) vs. c plot for λ = 455 nm of the GaSe flakes dispersions. The inset shows a photograph of the LPE-produced GaSe flakes dispersion. spectrum is ∼16.5 eV, corresponding to WFs of 4.7 eV. The shoulder observed in the UPS spectrum can be attributed to the presence of surface oxides, e.g., Ga2O3, which exhibits a n-type behaviour (corresponding to a WF < 4.5 eV) originated by oxygen vacancies.,, The inset to Figure 3k shows the UPS spectra region near the EF, which allows the EVBM to be estimated at ∼–5.6 eV. By considering the Eg values estimated by the Tauc analysis, the ECBM is estimated at ∼–3.7 eV. It is worth noticing that the as-produced GaSe flakes have polydisperse morphology characteristics (see TEM and AFM analysis, Figure 3d-e). This means that the electronic properties of the thinnest flakes, as deduced by in the previous theoretical section, could be experimentally concealed by the thickest flakes, which show the lowest Eg and the highest EVBM (directly estimated by the Tauc and UPS analysis, respectively). The concentration of the GaSe flakes dispersion was estimated by the coefficient, c is the material concentration and L is the optical path length. More in detail, optical extinction measurements of controlled dilutions/concentrations of the as-produced GaSe flakes dispersion allow the extinction coefficient (ε(λ)) to be estimated form the slope of Ext(λ) vs. c plot, being the slope = ε(λ)L., The concentration value of the as-produced dispersion (0.20 ± 0.02 g L–1) was measured by weighting the solid material content in a known volume of the dispersion. of the Ext(λ) vs. c plot (inset to Figure 3j) provides: ε(455 nm) = 113.0 L g–1 m–1. By using the experimentally derived ε(λ) values, the concentration of GaSe flakes was fixed at 0.13 g L–1 during the subsequent experiments. This value could underestimate the actual concentration of the solid material content (as measured by weight measurements), which also include by-products, e.g., Ga2Se3, Ga2O3 and amorphous/crystalline Se (see Supporting Information, Table S1 and Figure S4). 2.3. Photoelectrochemical water splitting of GaSe photoelectrodes Based on the theoretical and experimental characterizations of their optoelectronic properties, the GaSe flakes were tested as candidate photoelectrocalysts for PEC water splitting and PEC-type photodetectors (Figure 4a). By taking advantage of the production of GaSe flakes in form of liquid dispersion in IPA, the GaSe-based photoelectrodes were fabricated by spray coating the GaSe flakes dispersion onto graphite paper (GaSe flakes mass loading = 0.1 mg cm–2). Figure 4b shows a photograph of the as-produced GaSe photoelectrode, which was manually bent to show its flexibility. As shown by the SEM image (Figure 4c), the photoelectrode has a laminar structure, in which GaSe flakes preferentially orient horizontally to the terrace of the graphite paper. of the LPE-produced GaSe flakes dispersion onto graphite paper (current collector), used for PEC water splitting reaction and PEC-type photodetectors. b) Photograph of the GaSe photoelectrode and c) its corresponding SEM image. The PEC water splitting activity of the as-produced photoelectrodes was evaluated in both acidic (0.5 M H2SO4) and alkaline (1 M KOH) N2-purged solutions at room temperature. To the best of our knowledge, no previous study experimentally investigated the PEC properties of GaSe flakes in aqueous solutions, although they have been theoretically predicted by recent works., Figure 5a,b show the cathodic and anodic linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) scans for the as-produced GaSe photoelectrodes illuminated by chopped simulated sunlight (i.e., AM 1.5G illumination) in 0.5 M H2SO4 and 1 M KOH. The common Figures of Merit (FoM) used to compare the performance of photoelectrodes are: the positive onset potential (VOP), the cathodic photocurrent density at 0 V vs. RHE (J0V vs RHE), the anodic photocurrent density at +1.23 V vs. RHE (J0V vs RHE), the ratiometric power-saved metric for HER (Φsaved,HER)and the ratiometric power-saved metric for OER (Φsaved,OER). The definition of these FoM is reported in the Supporting Information, Experimental section. In 0.5 M H2SO4, the photoelectrodes show a VOP of +0.14 V vs. RHE. The other FoM of the photoelectrodes are: J0 V vs RHE = −9.3 μA cm–2 and Φsaved,HER = 0. 09% for HER; J1.23 V vs RHE = +83.4 μA cm–2 and Φsaved,OER = 0.25% for OER. In 1 M KOH, the photoelectrodes exhibit a clear photoanodic behavior, while the cathodic LSV scan shows a negligible photocurrent density and a significant negative dark current density (< –10 μA cm–2 for applied potential < +0.2 V vs. RHE). In our view, the alkaline media promote the formation of oxidized species, which can decompose in soluble products (e.g., GaO2–) during cathodic LSV scans., scan) under chopped simulated sunlight (i.e., AM 1.5G illumination) in 0.5 M H2SO4 and 1 M KOH. The redox density of the photoelectrodes as a function of the applied potential measured in 0.5 M H2SO4 and 1 M KOH. The maximum absolute photocurrent density values obtained for both cathodic and anodic scan are also shown. potential, showing maximum values in 0.5 M H2SO4, suggesting such medium for the subsequent development of PEC-type photodetectors. Although the above data indicate a convenient use of GaSe photoelectrodes for performing the PEC OER at potential significantly inferior to the redox potential of O2/H2O (i.e., 1.23 V vs. RHE), it is worth noticing that the evolved O2 could degrade the photoelectrode surface by forming oxides.,,,,,, Actually, it has been shown that the concomitant presence of O2, humidity and above-gap illumination further accelerates the oxidation of GaSe flakes into Ga2O3, SeO2 and a-Se via an intermediate stage of formation of gallium hydroxides (i.e., Ga(OH)3) and selenium oxide-water complexes and selenic acid. In ref. , the water-assisted photo-oxidation was attributed to the transfer of photo-generated charge carriers towards aqueous O2 (i.e., dissolved O2), generating highly reactive superoxide anions (•O2−) that rapidly degrade the optoelectronic properties of GaSe. However, by bubbling O2 into the electrolytic solution, no oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) peak was observed during the LSV scan, which excludes an ORR-induced oxidation of the GaSe flakes. This is in agreement with the degradation mechanism proposed in ref. (the PEC stability of our photoelectrodes will be further discussed here below for the case of PEC-type photodetectors). 2.4. Photoelectrochemical-type photodetectors based on GaSe flakes On the basis of the preliminary results achieved for PEC water splitting, the GaSe photoelectrodes were investigated as PEC-type photodetectors in 0.5 M H2SO4 upon three different illuminations with wavelengths in the visible spectral range, i.e., 455, 505 and 625 nm, whose energy is above the Eg of the GaSe flakes (~1.9 eV (~653 nm), see Tauc analysis, Figure 3i). This means that the potential absorption from GaSe flakes can be explained by their optical transitions from valence to conduction bands (although optical transitions starting from intergap states, which are expected from the intrinsic p-type nature of GaSe, cannot be excluded). Moreover, as a precaution, the applied potentials were limited between –0.3 V and +0.8 V vs. RHE to avoid highly reductive and oxidative condition possibly causing uncontrolled (photo)electrochemical degradation of the photoelectrodes. Figure 6a shows the responsivity of the GaSe photodetector as a function of the applied potential at each wavelength (light intensity = 63.5 μW cm–2). As expected from the OAS analysis (Figure 3i), the responsivity of the GaSe photodetectors shows the maximum values (157 mA W–1 at –0.3 V vs. RHE and 117 mA W–1 at +0.8 V vs. RHE) under illumination at 455 nm, in agreement with absorption spectrum of the GaSe flakes in IPA dispersion. These values approach those of self-powered commercial UV-Vis photodetectors (e.g., Si- or GaP-based photodiodes), and are superior to those of relevant self-powered or low-voltage operating solution-processed photodetectors (Table S2).,,,,,,,, The stability of the PEC response was evaluated by measuring the responsivity over repeated LSV scans. Figure 6b reports the responsivity retention measured at –0.3 V vs. RHE (cathodic regime) and +0.4 V vs. RHE (anodic regime). Clearly, the GaSe photodetector shows a durable responsivity (+35% after 20 LSV scans) under cathodic operation, while it progressively degrades during OER (–80% after 20 LSV scans). The photoelectrode degradation under anodic potentials is tentatively attributed to the progressive oxidation of the GaSe flakes caused by both anodic potential and evolved O2. Similar photodetector degradation under anodic potentials was observed in 1 M KOH (Figure S6), in which the devices have also shown inferior performance compared to the ones measured in 0.5 H2SO4. The Raman spectroscopy analysis of the electrodes before and after stability tests (Figure S7) further evidences that GaSe nanoflakes preserve their structural properties during cathodic operation in 0.5 M H2SO4. Viceversa, after anodic operation in acidic and alkaline media, the presence of peak attributed to Ga2O3 and the increase of intensity of the peak ascribed to elemental Se, respectively, support the degradation of GaSe nanoflakes, as indicated by the decrease of their OER-activity during successive LSV scans (see further details on Raman spectroscopy analysis in Supporting Information). Based on these results, the GaSe photodetectors were further characterized when working in cathodic regime and acidic media, in which they showed both optimal PEC-responses and electrochemical stability. The photocurrent density of the GaSe photodetectors at fixed potential of –0.3 V vs. RHE was evaluated as function of the light intensity (Figure 6c). The photocurrent density increases with the light intensity passing from 0.011 to 31.8 mW cm–2. The relationship between the photocurrent density and the light intensity is typically expressed by a power law, i.e., photocurrent density ∝ (light intensity)γ, in which γ is a factor determining the response of the photocurrent to light intensity. For light intensity ≤ 56.7 μW cm–2, the power equation fits to the experimental data with γ equal to 0.97, indicating an almost linear fit. Since a unity value for γ suggests negligible charge recombination and trapping processes, it can be deduced that the two-dimensional morphology of GaSe flakes maximizes the surface area available for PEC reactions.,, Meanwhile, the distance between the photogenerated charges and the material surface area, where electrochemical reaction occurs, is reduced close to zero (zero for the monolayer case),,, suppressing electron- hole recombination losses. Consequently, the responsivity (~0.16 A W–1) is retained with increasing the light intensity (up to the tested values of 56.7 μW cm–2). A representative condition of high light intensity (31.8 mW cm–2) was also investigated, showing a decrease of the photodetector responsivity down to 19.5 mA W–1. This effect could results from both trap-assisted and/or bimolecular charge recombination processes occurring at high light intensity regime, and charge recombination effects in presence of kinetically limited heterogeneous charge transfer at solid/liquid interfaces. The response time is another important FoM of photodetectors. The temporal response of our GaSe photoelectrodes was measured at–0.3 V vs. RHE (Figure 6d), showing rise time (τR) and fall time (τF) of 855 ms and 720 ms, respectively, which are between one and two order of magnitude larger than those of GaSe monolayer-based photodetectors (~20 ms), but significantly inferior to solution processed PEC-type photodetectors (typically in the order of ten seconds). Overall, our results suggest that GaSe flakes can be efficiently exploited for PEC applications, including water splitting and photodetectors, although stability issues have to be carefully taken into account to limit degradation effects in presence of O2, water and above-gap illumination. potential upon three different illumination wavelengths in the visible spectral range: 455, blue; 505, green; 625 nm, red. Light intensity: 63.5 μW cm–2. b) Responsivity retention of the GaSe photodetecotors in 0.5 M H2SO4 at cathodic and anodic operations, i.e., applied potential of –0.3 V vs. RHE and +0.4 V vs. RHE, respectively. c) Photocurrent density (left y-axis) and responsivity of the GaSe photodetectors at –0.3 V vs. RHE as a function of the light intensity. The curve fitting the data measured at low-light intensity is also shown (dashed black line). d) Normalized photocurrent of the GaSe photodetector at applied potential of –0.3 V vs. RHE measured over time after an illumination pulse of 30 s (wavelength = 405 nm, light intensity = 63.5 μW cm– 2). The rise and fall time of the photocurrent response are also indicated. 3. Conclusion In summary, the electronic structure of solution processed GaSe flakes was theoretically studied using density functional theory (DFT) calculations. The predicted bandgap (Eg) values (3.14 eV for single- layer flake, between 2.7 and 2.0 eV for few-layer flakes) indicate that GaSe flakes can absorb a significant fraction of solar irradiation. By referring the calculated conduction band minimum energy (ECBM) and the valence band maximum energy (EVBM) of GaSe flakes versus the redox potentials of H+/H2 and O2/H2O, respectively, GaSe flakes with less than 4 layers are predicted to be pH-universal photocatalysts for hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). Meanwhile, GaSe flakes with at least 4 layers are expected as pH-universal photocatalysts for oxygen evolution reaction (OER). These results indicate that mixed nanoflakes with different number of layers could operate as “local” tandem water splitting systems. Moreover, the representative cases of bulk GaSe and trilayer-GaSe should attain the overall water splitting at pH < 1.5 and pH > 7, respectively. Driven by these expectations, GaSe single-/few-layer flakes were produced by liquid phase exfoliation (LPE) in 2-Propanol (IPA) to be used as photoelectrocatalyst in aqueous media. The GaSe photoelectrodes were fabricated via spray coating of the as-produced GaSe flakes dispersion onto graphite paper current collectors. They exhibit catalytic activity toward water splitting reactions, i.e., HER and OER in both acidic (0.5 M H2SO4) and alkaline (1 M KOH) media. The GaSe photoelectrodes show the best photoelectrochemical performance in 0.5 M H2SO4, in which they reach a cathodic photocurrent density at 0 V vs. RHE (J0V vs RHE) of −9.3 μA cm–2, a ratiometric power-saved metric for HER (Φsaved,HER) of 0.09%, an anodic photocurrent density at +1.23 V vs. RHE (J1.23V vs RHE) of 83.4 μA cm–2 and a ratiometric power-saved metric for OER (Φsaved,OER) of 0.25%. When used as PEC-type photodetectors, GaSe photoelectrodes show a responsivity up to ~0.16 A W–1 upon 455 nm illumination at light intensity up to 63.5 μW cm–2 (at applied potential of –0.3 V vs. RHE). The stability analysis of the GaSe photodetectors evidences a durable operation in 0.5 M H2SO4 for PEC HER. Viceversa, degradation effects have been observed in both alkaline and anodic operation (i.e., during OER) due to highly oxidizing environment and O2 evolved-induced (photo-)oxidation effects. Our results represent the first PEC characterization of GaSe single-/few-layer flakes, and further optimization of the PEC performance can be achieved by engineering the photocathodes architecture and optimizing the electrolyte solution. Prospectively, advanced photoelectrodes could be achieved by optimizing the GaSe nanoflakes films in terms of thickness (and possible incorporation of conductive additives) and electrochemically accessible surface area/porosity, while other electrolyte solutions (both aqueous and inorganic media) could be used for carrying out other kind of PEC reactions. Overall, our research provides new insight into the exploitation of the PEC properties of GaSe nanoflakes, paving the way towards their use in photoelectrocatalysis, PEC-type photodetectors/(bio)sensors and other innovative optoelectronics devices. Acknowledgements This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under grant agreement No.785219-GrapheneCore2. We thank: Lea Pasquale (Materials Characterization Facility, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia) for their support in XRD data acquisition/analysis; the Electron Microscopy facility – Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia for support in TEM and SEM data acquisition; and IIT Clean Room facility – Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia for the access to carry out SEM/EDS characterization. This work was supported by the project Advanced Functional Nanorobots (reg. No. CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/15_003/0000444 financed by the EFRR). Z.S., D.S. and D.B. were supported by Czech Science Foundation (GACR No. 17-11456S) and by specific university research (MSMT No. 21-SVV/2019).