1 Deterministically fabricated quantum dot single-photon source emitting indistinguishable photons in the telecom O-band N. Srocka1, P. Mrowiński1,2, J. Große1, M. von Helversen1, T. Heindel1, S. Rodt1, S. Reitzenstein1 1Institut für Festkörperphysik, Technische Universität Berlin, Hardenbergstraße 36, 10623 Berlin, Germany 2Laboratory for Optical Spectroscopy of Nanostructures, Department of Experimental Physics, Wrocław University of Technology, Wybrzeże Wyspiańskiego 27, Wrocław, Poland Abstract In this work we develop and study single-photon sources based on InGaAs quantum dots (QDs) emitting in the telecom O-band. The quantum devices are fabricated using in-situ electron beam lithography in combination with the thermocompression bonding to realize a backside gold mirror. Our structures are based on InGaAs/GaAs heterostructures, where the QD emission is redshifted towards the telecom O-band at 1.3 μm via a strain reducing layer. QDs pre-selected by cathodoluminescence mapping are embedded into mesa structures with a back-side gold mirror for enhanced photon-extraction efficiency. Photon-autocorrelation measurements under pulsed non-resonant wetting-layer excitation are performed at temperatures up to 40 K showing pure single-photon emission which makes the devices compatible with stand-alone operation using Stirling cryocoolers. Using pulsed p-shell excitation we realize single-photon emission with high multi-photon suppression of g(2)(0) = 0.027 ± 0.005, post-selected two-photon interference of about (96 ± 10) % and an associated coherence time of (212 ± 25) ps. Moreover, the structures show an extraction efficiency of ~5 %, which compares well with values expected from numeric simulations of this photonic structure. Further improvements on our devices will enable implementations of quantum communication via optical fibers. 2 Single photons, often referred to as flying qubits, are key resource in the field of photonic quantum technology and enable for instance the distribution of quantum information over large distances.1,2 Moving beyond simple point-to-point quantum key distribution protocols, such as BB84,3 the quantum nature of single photons in terms of high photon indistinguishability becomes important. In fact, high photon indistinguishability is required in large-scale quantum networks based e.g. on entanglement distribution via Bell state measurements. Moreover, single photon emitters have to comply with existing optical fiber infrastructure for long-haul communication in the telecommunication O-band at 1.3 μm or in the C-band at 1.55 μm.4–14 Therefore, besides a robust device concept with excellent quantum properties, the spectral matching to one of the two telecom bands is needed to enable fiber-based quantum communication of large distances. Despite significant progress,6–9,13–20 it is still a great challenge to fulfill these stringent requirements with on-demand quantum dot (QD) based single-photon sources. In this work, we address the above-mentioned requirements within a deterministic device technology. We transfer and optimize technology concepts, which allowed for high- quality emission from semiconductor QDs in the spectral range below 1 μm, to deterministically realize bright QD single-photon sources (SPSs) emitting in the telecom O-band. The sources are based on self-assembled InGaAs/GaAs QDs grown by metal organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD), where a strain-reducing layer (SRL) is applied to shift the emission wavelength to the telecom O-band.10,21–23 Using in-situ electron beam lithography (EBL) such QDs are deterministically integrated into nanophotonic structures. Here, low-temperature cathodoluminescence (CL) spectroscopy is used to pre-select suitable QDs based on their emission wavelengths and brightness, before micromesas allowing for enhanced photon- extraction efficiency are patterned with 30-40 nm alignment accuracy24 by in-situ EBL in the same system. The realized QD-micromesas with a backside gold mirror are designed to enable broadband enhancement of photon-extraction efficiency. This way, we realize high-quality telecom O-band SPSs with strong suppression of multi-photon emission events to 40 K. Moreover, by means of Hong-Ou-Mandel experiments we determine a two-photon interference (TPI) visibility of 96% under temporal post selection and of 12% without post-selection. We developed an advanced flip-chip based processing concept for telecom SPSs in which the single-QD device is fabricated within three main processing steps. First, a GaAs semiconductor heterostructure is grown by MOCVD including a single layer of self-assembled 3 InGaAs QDs. Then, a thin membrane of this structure is transferred on a gold mirror by thermocompression bonding and wet-chemical etching, before single QDs inside this membrane are deterministically integrated into mesa structures by means of in-situ EBL. The epitaxial growth starts with a 200 nm thick GaAs buffer on top of an n-doped GaAs (100) substrate to enable a high-quality epitaxial surface. Then, two Al0.90Ga0.10As layers of 1 μm and 100 nm thickness are deposited. These two layers are separated by a 2 μm-thick GaAs spacer layer which allows for a well-controlled two-step wet-chemical etching procedure to remove the initial substrate. All of these layers act as etch-stop and sacrificial layers and will be removed during the flip-chip post-growth processing.25,26 The growth resumes with 637 nm GaAs, 1.5 monolayers of In0.7Ga0.3As followed by an 0.5 monolayer GaAs flush to realize the QD layer, 5.5 nm InGaAs, whereby the In-content is linearly decreased from 30 to 10 %, forming the SRL, and a final GaAs capping layer of 242 nm complete the layer structure. The described layer design is depicted in Fig. 1(a). To enable thermocompression gold bonding a 250 nm thick gold layer is deposited on the as-grown heterostructure sample as well as on a bare piece of GaAs (100) substrate acting as host substrate. The sample is bonded to the host substrate (gold facing gold) by applying a pressure of 6 MPa and a temperature of approximately 600 K for four hours. The subsequent wet-chemical etching is performed in two steps. First, the 300 μm thick GaAs substrate is lifted off with a fast etching solution (H2O2/NH3, 10:1), where the etching stops at the first Al0.97Ga0.03As layer. After an HCl dip removing this etch-stop layer, the following GaAs layer is removed by a different etchant (citric acid/H2O2, 4:1). Here, the less aggressive etchant was chosen in favor of an improved surface roughness over a high etch rate. A final HCL dip leaves only a thin GaAs membrane of 885 nm, including the active QD layer, being gold bonded to the host GaAs substrate. On the cleaned sample 250 nm of AR-P 6200 electron-beam resist are spin coated in preparation for the lithography step. In the subsequent main processing step, single pre-selected QDs are integrated deterministically into micromesas to enhance their photon extraction efficiency.17,27,28 QD pre- selection is performed by CL mapping over (20 × 20) μm2 sample areas at 10 K. Immediate after, mesa patterns are written into the resist at the chosen QD positions by EBL in the same system at 10 K. During the subsequent resist development, the mapping area is cleared and only EBL patterned areas remain, acting as masks in the subsequent inductively-coupled-plasma 4 reactive-ion etching of QD mesas. We refer to Refs.24,29 for further details of the in-situ EBL technique. Fig. 1(b) shows an optical microscopy image and panel (c) presents a CL map of deterministic QD mesa structures. The CL map in Fig. 1(c) was taken with the same settings as for the pre-selection step, clearly showing the fabrication of deterministic QD-micromesas. The optical and quantum optical characterization of the QD mesas is performed by means of micro-photoluminescence (μPL), μPL-excitation (μPLE) and photon-correlation spectroscopy, respectively. The sample is mounted in a He-flow cryostat with temperature control in the range of 10 K to 40 K. Excitation is provided by a CW laser and tunable pulsed lasers focused on the sample by a microscope objective (numerical aperture (NA) = 0.4): A continuous-wave diode laser (785 nm) and a tunable laser providing ps-pulses at a repetition rate of 80 MHz. The photoluminescence signal is collected with the same objective, spectrally resolved in a grating spectrometer (spectral resolution ~ 0.05 nm) and either detected with a liquid nitrogen cooled InGaAs-array detector or coupled into a fiber-based Hanbury-Brown and Twiss (HBT) or a Hong-Ou-Mandel (HOM) setup. For HBT and HOM measurements the photons are detected by two superconducting nanowire single photon detectors (SNSPDs), each with a temporal resolution of ~50 ps and a detection efficiency of about 80% at 1310 nm. First, temperature-dependent μPL spectra and photon autocorrelation histograms were recorded for the selected deterministic photonic microstructure marked in Fig. 1(c). Corresponding μPL spectra are presented in Fig. 2(a) and (b), respectively, for temperatures from 10 K to 40 K. Three excitonic states – exciton (X), biexciton (XX) and charged exciton (CX) – of the single-QD mesa are identified by excitation-power- and polarization-dependent μPL studies (see supplementary material – Fig. S1). A temperature-induced red-shift is observed together with a notably stable single-QD emission up to 40 K, reflecting a rather deep carrier confinement in this type of QDs. The temperature stability is an important aspect regarding the development of stand-alone SPS operated by Stirling cryocoolers with a base temperature between 30 K and 40 K (depending on the manufacturer).30–32 The brightest CX emission line is further examined in the HBT setup to investigate the quantum nature of emission. Here, we obtain high multi-photon suppression of g(2)(0)fit = 0.076 ± 0.015 at 10 K and g(2)(0)fit = 0.114 ± 0.022 at 40 K under pulsed non-resonant wetting-layer excitation (974 nm), as shown in Fig. 2(b). The fit presented in Fig. 2(b) is based on a mono-exponential decay convoluted with the instrument response function (IRF) of the detection system. The fit yields a background signal of about 0.05 in g(2)() due to uncorrelated background emission. 5 Noteworthy, the lifetime of the CX state varies in the investigated temperature range between ~1.6 ns and ~1.9 ns with no clear trend, although state refilling processes from higher levels29 influencing the occupation per excitation pulse of the CX state are seen for higher temperatures (see supplementary material – Fig. S2). Next, we examined the source brightness in terms of the photon-extraction efficiency ηext. The QD was excited by pulsed non-resonant (~860 nm) excitation at saturation of the CX intensity. Under those conditions, we estimate a lower bound of ηext assuming that the internal QD efficiency is close to one (i.e. non-radiative rate is negligible). The emitted photons were detected by SNSPDs with an overall setup efficiency of ηsetup ~ 5.4%. For the given laser pulse repetition rate of 80 MHz we obtained 172.000 counts per seconds (cps) for the sum of X and CX emission yielding an extraction efficiency of ηext = cps f ηsetup = 5.0%. This lower bound value compares well with the expected extraction efficiency of 9.3% deduced from finite- element method simulations for this particular mesa (see supplementary material). High photon indistinguishability is an important requirement for many applications of SPSs in quantum technology. The TPI effect is measured for photons emitted by the QD- micromesa under study using a fiber-based HOM setup consisting of an unbalanced Mach– Zehnder interferometer (MZI) on the detection side and a complementary MZI on the excitation side. Here, the 4 ns relative optical path delay of the MZI in the detection path is compensated by the temporal separation of excitation pulses induced by the MZI on the excitation path. Before performing HOM experiments we established pulsed quasi-resonant p-shell excitation for the QD-micromesa under study to reduce charge noise and detrimental dephasing processes related to carrier relaxation from higher levels, presumably taking place mainly in the SRL. The s-p energy splitting is determined via μPLE experiments. As observed in Fig. 3(a) the excitation laser is in resonance with the QD’s p-shell at 1.0225 eV. The corresponding s-p splitting amounts to ΔEs-p = 65.7 meV (see also supplementary material – Fig. S3) and is in good agreement with values reported in ,34 When exciting quasi-resonantly at an excitation power required to achieve ~70 % of the maximum CX intensity, we achieved a further improvement of the g(2)(0) value. In Fig. 3(b) we fit the correlation data using again a mono- exponential decay convoluted with the IRF of the setup and with an uncorrelation background of 0.023, which yields g(2)(0)fit = 0.027 ± 0.005 for the telecom O-band QD-micromesa. In 6 addition, we observe noticeable blinking in the side maxima up to time delays  of about 40 ns, which we attribute to the memory effect for the subsequent pulses due to local charge fluctuations.29 Within ±3 ns around zero delay a slight recapture process is also indicated by a minimum observed at τ = 0. Noteworthy, the achieved g(2)(0) value of 0.027 ± 0.005 is similar to the lowest value (g(2)(0) = 0.03) observed previously for InGaAs/GaAs QDs emitting in the telecom O-band4 and proofs that our advanced device, processed in multiple steps, maintains a single-photon emission with high suppression of multi-photon events. Further improvements are expected for two-photon resonant excitation schemes.30,31 In Fig. 3(c) and (d) we present TPI histograms obtained for the CX line under p-shell excitation. As we expect an overlap of the side peaks of subsequent laser pulses, it is convenient to measure both the interference histogram for co- and cross-polarized photons and then to quantify the central peak suppression by direct comparison.38 According to the fitting function based on a series of Lorentzian peak functions, the histogram in Fig. 3(d) shows a single peak centered at τ = 0 with 2.693 coincidences for cross-polarized photons. In case of co-polarized photons in Fig. 3(c), we observe a suppression of coincidences down to 0.114. These numbers ⁄ , of (96 ± 10)%. Taking into account the integrated peak areas we obtain a visibility of (12 ± 4)% without post-selection. Moreover, by using the post-selected V as an input parameter for a description based on mono- exponential decay functions8 convoluted with the IRF we obtain a coherence time τc = (212 ± 25) ps (see supplementary material for details). These results show that further optimization and research is required to improve the coherence time and the indistinguishability. Most probably, the experimental values achieved are limited by structural imperfections and charge noise introduced by the SRL and HOM studies can be used as sensitive tool in the technological optimization of QDs emitting at wavelengths around 1.3 μm. Noteworthy, our results for QD- micromesas feature significantly higher post-selected indistinguishability and coherence time than 67% and 150 ps reported previously for a non-resonantly driven 1.3 μm QD coupled to a PhC nanocavity.8 Moreover, our photonic structures support broadband enhancement of photon extraction and are very robust which makes them suitable for development of stand-alone SPSs. In summary, we have shown a deterministically fabricated single-photon device emitting in the telecom O-band. The single-QD micromesa with a backside gold-mirror features single-photon emission stable up to 40 K, which makes it compatible with Stirling cryocoolers for stand-alone operation. The device shows strong multi-photon suppression associated with 7 g(2)(0) as low as 0.027 under pulsed p-shell excitation. The generated photons show indistinguishability of 96% and 12% with and without post-selection, respectively. The broadband design of the microstructure facilitates a photon-extraction efficiency of ~5%. This value compares well with the simulated extraction efficiency of about 9%. The developed flip- chip based telecom-SPS device technology is compatible with spectral strain tuning when combined with a lower piezo-actuator39 and with circular Bragg resonator SPSs which promises significantly higher photon-extraction efficiency in the future.40 In summary, we developed and deterministically fabricated a SPS emitting in the telecom O-band, which meets important requirements for single-photon sources for application in fiber-based quantum communication. Combining these requirements, especially for the emission in the O-band, is a significant step towards versatile high-performance single-photon sources. Supplementary Material See the supplementary material for information on the identification of excitonic complexes in quantum dots, the mission dynamics and spontaneous emission lifetime of quantum dots, micro- photoluminescence excitation spectroscopy, and on optical studies under quasi-resonant p-shell excitation. Moreover, the supplementary material includes details on the numerical optimization of QD-micromesas and the evaluation of Hong-Ou-Mandel experiments. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The research leading to these results has received funding from the German Research Foundation through CRC 787 “Semiconductor Nanophotonics: Materials, Models, Devices”, the Volkswagen Foundation via the project NeuroQNet, and the FI-SEQUR project jointly financed by the European Regional Development Fund (EFRE) of the European Union in the framework of the programme to promote research, innovation and technologies (Pro FIT). T. H. gratefully acknowledges financial support of the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) via the project ‘QuSecure’ (Grant No. 13N14876) within the funding program Photonic Research Germany. P.M. gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Polish Ministry of Science and Higher Education within “Mobilność Plus – V edycja” program. DATA AVAILABILITY The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. 8