arXiv:2005.03234v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 21 Sep 2020 Fluctuation-frustrated flat band instabilities in NdNiO2 Mi-Young Choi1, Warren E. Pickett2,∗ and Kwan-Woo Lee1,3† 1Department of Applied Physics, Graduate School, Korea University, Sejong 30019, Korea 2Department of Physics, University of California Davis, Davis CA 95616, USA 3Division of Display and Semiconductor Physics, Korea University, Sejong 30019, Korea (Dated: September 22, 2020) The discovery that Nd1−xSrxNiO2, with the CaCuO2 infinite-layer structure, superconducts up to 15 K around the hole-doping level x=0.2 raises the crucial question of its fundamental electronic and magnetic processes. The unexplained basic feature that we address is that, for x=0 and as opposed to strongly antiferromagnetic (AFM) CaCuO2, NdNiO2 with the same structure and for- mal d9 configuration does not undergo AFM order. We study this issue not in the conventional manner, as energetically unfavored or as frustrated magnetic order, but as an instability of the AFM phase itself. We are able to obtain the static AFM ordered state, but find that a flat-band, one-dimensional-like van Hove singularity (vHs) is pinned to the Fermi level. This situation is un- usual in a non-half-filled, effectively two-band system. The vHs makes the AFM phase unstable to spin-density disproportionation, breathing and half-breathing lattice distortions, and (innate or parasitic) charge-density disproportionation. These flat-band instabilities, distant relatives of single band cuprate models, thereby inhibit but do not eliminate incipient AFM tendencies at low temper- ature. The primary feature is that a pair of active bands (dx2−y2, dz2) eliminate half-filled physics and, due to instabilities, preclude the AFM phase seen in CaCuO2. This strongly AFM correlated, conducting spin-liquid phase with strong participation of the Ni dz2 orbital, forms the platform for superconductivity in NdNiO2. I. INTRODUCTION A disparate variety of interacting models [1–14] based on density functional theory (DFT) studies [15–22] have been proposed to illuminate the electronic and mag- netic behavior underlying the discovery and ex- perimental study [24–26] of long-sought superconduc- tivity in a layered nickelate, specifically hole-doped NdNiO2 (NNO). With the same infinite-layer structure as CaCuO2 (CCO), which superconducts up to 110 K when doped , NNO displays several differences with CCO. Undoped NNO is conducting; CCO is insulating; CCO orders antiferromagnetically, whereas no signature of order is seen in NNO (and its iso-electronic but non- superconducting sister LaNiO2 (LNO) [28–31]) and there is no sign of heavy fermion screening of Ni moments. CCO and NNO have a common d9 (formal) configuration (one hole) on the transition metal ion, however NNO per- sists as (poorly) conducting to low temperature. Central differences include positioning of metal 3d levels relative to O 2p levels that are substantially different in the two compounds , the presence of Nd 5d character at the Fermi level , and the interesting effects of Nd 4f character in the magnetic system . The electronic structures of the d9 infinite layer cuprates and nickelates were compared some time ago, with some similarities but substantial differences being noted and quantified more recently by Wannier function analysis , and some impact of the Nd mo- ments has been noted . The similarities but substan- ∗Electronic address: wepickett@ucdavis.edu †Electronic address: mckwan@korea.ac.kr tial difference continue to dominate the discussion and inform the models cited above. No items however seem as fundamental as the difference in ground states of the undoped materials: antiferromagnetic (AFM) insulator for CCO, and disordered moment conductor for NNO, the latter being a conducting quantum paramagnetic (MQPM) phase in the Sachdev-Read classification . Based on an interacting two-band model, Werner and Hoshino discussed NNO in terms of the spin-freezing theory of unconventional superconductivity , and the potentially simpler case of superconductivity at high pressure in elemental Eu with disordered f 7 moments might share in this behavior. Here, we focus on this absence of (AFM) ordering of Ni moments in NNO, moments whose ordering has been the overriding hallmark of the undoped phase in cuprates. In closely related layered nickelates [36–40] (viz. La3Ni2O6, La4Ni3O8, La4Ni3O10) even with non-integral formal Ni valences magnetic ordering and sometimes charge order- ing occur; none has a ground state without symmetry breaking, unlike NNO. The conventional means of ad- dressing the appearance of magnetic order is as an in- stability of the nonmagnetic metallic state, either via Stoner or RKKY instabilities as indicated by the static susceptibility χ(⃗q) or as instability to insulating charac- ter with interatomic exchange constants. Leonov et al. provide an example of the conventional approach ap- plied to NNO (actually LaNiO2) and extended to the DFT+DMFT (dynamical mean field theory). In spite of being energetically favored in the absence of fluctuations (i.e. in DFT calculations [16–18]) and evaluations of near neighbor exchange coupling in the 10- 18 meV (120-200 K) range , the AFM ordered state is not observed, suggesting it is a metastable but physically inaccessible phase. The AFM state of NNO is however accessible computationally, allowing study of its electronic structure and microscopic processes that render AFM order unstable, thereby giving insight into the inaccessibility of the AFM phase. We should note that the questions we address lie ex- actly in the broad controversy in this field: Is this nick- elate basically similar to the infinite layer cuprates, or essentially different? The similarities have been empha- sized by, for example, Botana and Norman, who obtain significant but not defining differences in some of the electronic characteristics of LaNiO2 and CaCuO2, and also offer that doping tends to make them even more similar. Jiang and collaborators contend that the un- derlying Ni ion (and its environment) is essentially dif- ferent from the cuprates, being at its core nonmagnetic, and they offer therefore that the pairing mechanism must be basically different from the cuprates. Lechermann reaches related conclusions, but there are stimulating results on both sides of this question. Our work expands on our earlier study and tends to accentuate differ- ences from the cuprates, rather than similarities. Our methods are described in Sec. II, followed by a brief discussion of relative energies and magnetic mo- ments in Sec. III. Section IV provides a description of the (experimentally inaccessible) AFM ordered state, point- ing out the effects of electronic correlation due to the on-site repulsion U. The Fermi surfaces of this AFM state, and their change with low levels of doping, are de- scribed in Sec. V. Sections VI and VII give a description of the magnetic (and charge) and lattice instabilities, re- spectively, that arise. A short wrap-up of our work is presented in Sec. VIII. II. OVERVIEW OF METHODS To treat the strong intra-atomic Coulomb interactions on Nd and Ni ions, we adopt the generalized gradi- ent approximation plus fully anisotropic Coulomb U (GGA+U) method, as implemented in the accurate all-electron full-potential code wien2k . As described in our previous work, this approach retains the all- electron character of Nd which provides intra-atomic Nd d − f exchange coupling but is not the subject here. With the lattice parameters experimentally observed for the superconducting thin films of Nd0.8Sr0.2NiO2 , a √ 2 × √ 2 supercell is used to investigate the AFM state, where both Ni and Nd layers have antialigned moments. In the supercell the frozen O full-breathing motion is in- vestigated, whereas the half-breathing motion is calcu- lated in a 2×2 supercell (see below). In the infinite layer structure, the Nd ion lies above/below the NiO2 square by c/2=1.685 ̊A, the Ni-O distance is 1.96 ̊A. Descrip- tion of lattice displacements are described as they are encountered in the paper. For purposes of comparison, we provide comparisons of crystal structures and ionic sizes of NdNiO2 and CaCuO2. For NNO, a=3.92 ̊A, c=3.37 ̊A ; for CCO, a=3.86 ̊A, c=3.20 ̊A , with cell volumes 51.8 ̊A3 and 47.7 ̊A3, respectively, an 8% difference. The relevant Shannon-Prewitt ionic radii are Nd3+: 1.25 ̊A, Ca2+: 1.12 ̊A. Square planar Cu2+ is 0.55 ̊A; unfortunately Ni1+ is so rare that no value is agreed, but extrapolating from other formal valences a reasonable guess is 10-15% larger. These differences account for the smaller volume CCO. Of importance for NNO is kz dispersion of the dz2 bands, which is larger in NNO due to hopping through the Nd 5d orbitals in spite of the larger interlayer separation in NNO. The effects of the different Madelung potentials, lowering of the O 2p bands in NNO, have been discussed in several of the papers cited in Sec. I. In the GGA+U calculations, for the Nd ions, the Hub- bard U Nd f = 8.0 eV and the Hund’s exchange coupling JNd f = 1.0 eV are fixed in all calculations, which provide the S = 3 2 Nd3+ spin state . The total angular mo- mentum J = 9 2 gives a correspondingly large total mag- netic moment. We varied U Ni d in the range of 0–5 eV, to study correlation effects up to the value that is rea- sonable for Ni ions in a conducting oxide, and with fixed JNi d = 0.7 eV. We quote values of U Ni d (simply called U) that we explore. As discussed in following sections, including U on Ni is essential but the electronic struc- ture near the Fermi level is practically invariant to U in the 2–5 eV range. We have mostly focused on results for U = 4 eV. In wien2k, the basis size was determined by RmtKmax = 8 and the augmented-plane-wave radii Rmt of Nd 2.50, Ni 1.95, and O 1.65, in atomic units. The other input parameters of these calculations are the same as in our previous study of NdNiO2 . III. ENERGIES AND MOMENTS The (110) AFM state we study, within a √ 2 × √ 2 su- percell, has both antialigned Nd and Ni spin layers, with the structure giving no net near neighbor Nd-Ni coupling. This AFM ordering is energetically favored over aligned Ni spins by 95 (62) meV/f.u. at U = 0 (4) eV, both being strongly favored over nonmagnetic Ni . A theoretical value of the energy for local but disordered Ni moments requires separate calculations, but at maximum would be of the order of JNi d . Leonov et al., for exam- ple, obtain first and second neighbor exchange constants that put it in the regime of magnetic frustration within the J1-J2 spin model only upon electron doping . Al- though DFT often overestimates magnetic moments and thereby energies in weak magnets, it is commonly accu- rate for larger (ionic) moments. These Ni moments are of the order of 1μB. Adding the effect of U revises the energetics and increases the moments somewhat, but not the relative stabilities of AMF and FM order. The ob- served avoidance by NNO of a relatively large ordering energy is our focus. 2 GGA+U, U=0, 1, 2 eV: (Left) Ni majority; (right) Ni mi- nority; EF ≡ 0. Characters that are emphasized are Ni dz2 (orange), dx2−y2 (magenta), and dxy (blue), relative to the primitive cell. The dz2 band flattens along the Z − R− A − Z lines (kz = π/c zone face) already for U=1 eV. Relative to the primitive cell, symmetry points are rotated by 45◦ in the √ 2 × √ 2 AFM supercell, i.e., M(R) ↔ X(A). IV. CORRELATION EFFECTS AND THE FLAT BAND Correlation effects are immediate and unexpected. One thing that proceeds as expected is that the Ni dx2−y2 bands are split by the order of U; in cuprates this opens a gap. In the nearest neighbor tight binding picture these bands are perfectly nested in the diamond-shaped region that becomes the Brillouin zone (BZ) in the AFM zone. From either a perfect nesting perspective or a superex- change spin model, a gap is opened and AFM order is robust. However, including even a small value of U leads to a dramatic change in the Ni dz2-derived band initially below but very near the Fermi energy EF . This band shows kz dispersion assisted by the Nd d orbital, but negligible dispersion for kz = π/c (Z − R − A − Z lines), where the bands remain degenerate in spite of being half filled. dx2−y2 (magenta), and dxy (blue) band characters as U increases over the range 0–2 eV; dxz, dyz orbitals of both spin are occupied. At U=0, all three orbitals are active near EF . However, already with the modest value U=1 eV, an unanticipated flatness of the dz2 band emerges -0.4 0 0.4 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 0 0.08 px py pz 0 0.04 0.15 PDOS (states/eV-atom) O Nd Ni1 z 2 x 2- y 2 xy xz yz EF 2: AFM orbital-projected densities of states (PDOSs)/atom of Ni 3d, two Nd 5d dz2 and dxy orbitals, and O 2p orbitals, for the undistorted lattice at U = 4 eV, in the 3d band region (note the difference in scales). Majority (mi- nority) are plotted upward (downward). The oxygen PDOS lies below 3 eV. Having EF pinned precisely at the sharp, 1D- like vHs (upper panel, minority spin, shown enlarged in the Inset) produces the instabilities discussed in the text. precisely at EF along the entire top zone face kz = π/c while some (but small) dispersion remains in the kz=0 plane. This distinctive flat band remains in place as U increases to 5 eV, not shown in the figure. To emphasize: the flat band on the upper/lower zone face is a robust feature of AFM order and two band behavior, with im- plications discussed below. The relatively short Ni-Ni distance 1.685 ̊A along the c-axis induces a hopping (assisted by Nd dz2 and dxy) between the dz2 orbitals on nearby layers, leading to dis- persion of 2 eV along the Γ − Z line. For NNO, the related effective hopping parameter is tdz2 ≈ 1 eV, large for kz hopping across a 3.4 ̊A distance but aided by the Nd 5d orbital. For the minority (higher energy) states, the Ni dz2 orbital is mixed with Nd dxy and somewhat with Nd dx2−y2 on the kz = π/c plane, resulting in a hy- bridization gap of 0.4 eV at the Z-point. The mixtures elsewhere, viz. at Γ, are negligible. eV) Ni, Nd, and O orbital-projected densities of states (PDOSs) in the d band region surrounding EF. The un- filled minority Ni dx2−y2 orbital (the hole) lies at +3 eV. One remarkable feature is that the minority Ni dz2 band spans nearly 5 eV, crossing EF and ensuring a conducting state. All other Ni d orbitals of both spins are narrow. The other notable feature is that this same orbital gives rise to a flat band across the entire kz = π/c zone face that produces a 1D van Hove singularity (vHs) pinned at EF , with pure dz2 character; recall, these two exotic features are robust, that is, insensitive to U. The valence bands have nearly pure Ni dz2 character within 1 eV of EF . Nd 5d character extends down to and slightly below EF as noted several times previously, but does not par- 3 Variations of AFM Fermi surfaces by carrier dopings: (a) 0.025 hole-doping, (b) undoped, and (c) 0.025 electron- doping per f.u. at U = 4.0 eV. Small doping levels (virtual crystal) were chosen to probe the geometry of the (nearly) flat band. ticipate in the flat band. Around Z (see along the Z − R and Z − A lines in Fig. 1), the flat band crosses a disper- sive band with mixed Nd 5dz2, Ni 3dxz/yz character at EF . As a result of coupling through Nd states, the flat band acquires a small width ∼40 meV corresponding to an effective in-plane hopping teff z2 =20 meV for this plane. Based on charge decompositions and PDOSs, and the Ni dz2 character above EF, the evidence suggests a formal valence closer to Ni1.4+ rather than Ni1+ as would be appropriate for an insulator. (Since O is clearly 2−, we expect this is a breakdown of formal valence counting as often occurs in metals.) In contrast to cuprates where the central role implicates the Cu dx2−y2 orbital, our results support previous indications that the Ni dz2 orbital becomes a central player in NNO (and LNO), with the dx2−y2 hole being more of a given and less of a dynamical component. V. FERMI SURFACES VERSUS DOPING To probe the geometry of the (nearly) flat band, the AFM Fermi surfaces (FSs) for U = 4 eV versus small (virtual crystal) doping levels are shown in Fig. 3. A Γ-centered electron sphere, a mixture of Ni 3dz2 and Nd 5dz2 characters , arises from the high veloc- ity band and slowly changes volume upon doping. 2D wafers appear near the kz = ±π/c planes. At stoichiom- etry, a round hole wafer is centered at Z and a rounded- diamond electron wafer at the zone corner A. For hole- doping, the thin hole wafer is pinched off around the Z- point [Fig. 3(a)], and the electron wafers connect. Small electron doping, Fig. 3(c), only electron buttons appear around Z. The flat and thin wafer and button FSs at stoichiome- try have a characteristic thickness 2KF z ≤0.06 π c . In addi- tion to the flatness, the very small velocities will lead to strong nesting, at KF z and 2π c −2KF z . The related suscep- tibility will encourage spin density, charge density, and lattice fluctuations, and possibly instabilities at ∼ 32c and ∼ 2c respectively. The long wavelength instabil- breathing mode and (right) half-breathing mode along (100) direction, showing 2 × 2 primitive cells. The full- and half- breathing modes allow for checkerboard and stripe charge and spin orders, respectively. The arrows on the Ni ions indicate spins of Ni ions, whereas the blue (thick) arrows denote the displacement of oxygen ions. (b) Changes of the magnitude of Ni magnetic moments ∆M, versus changes in the Ni-O bond length ∆dNi−O for both the full- and half-breathing modes at U = 4 eV. This ‘spin disproportionation’ instability occurs for the undistorted lattice. There is an accompanying charge disproportionation (see text). ity would be challenging to study numerically, the short wavelength one corresponds to a dimerization of succes- sive NiO2 layers – a Peierls instability of the dz2 band and its associated vHs peak. VI. MAGNETIC INSTABILITY A flat band generated DOS peak at EF in an AFM metal causes a possible “meta-Stoner” instability of the AFM order (Stoner instability being with respect to the already spin-polarized state). To break the underlying spin symmetry in this already magnetically-ordered AFM state, the spin symmetry must be broken. We have stud- ied this magnetic instability together with lattice insta- bility by imposing breathing and half-breathing types of oxygen distortions, see Fig. 4(a), which destroy the equiv- alence of the Ni ions. For the former, the unit cell is not enlarged; for the latter, the cell is doubled, with Ni ions of each spin direction being squeezed, or not, by the half-breathing distortion. The range of displacements is shown in Fig. 4(b). For the full- and half-breathing modes, the changes in moments of the two Ni sites, Ni1 and Ni2, are displayed 4 Γ X M Γ Z R A Z -2 -1 0 1 2 E - EF (eV) undis Ni1 Ni2 0.2 0.4 0.6 PDOS(states/eV-f.u.) AFM band structures and Ni atom-PDOSs for U = 4 eV. The (red and green) dashed lines indicate the bands split by the full-breathing mode, with O displaced by 0.03 ̊A. The energy splitting of each band per unit displacement is 5 eV/ ̊A. The half-breathing mode (not shown) shows similar band splitting. The peak-splitting is the source of the Peierls (meta-Stoner) charge (spin) instability. in Fig. 4(b). These frozen oxygen phonon modes lead to an unexpected change in the Ni magnet moments even for a very small displacement, indicating the magnetic instability is there even for the symmetric lattice. Tiny mode amplitudes (displacements down to 0.001 ̊A extrap- olating to zero; allowing for symmetry breaking is what is important) produce a ‘spin disproportionation’ of the AFM ions of the order of ±0.05 μB. This behavior signals that the AFM state is unstable to a first order transition to a ferrimagnetic state, which reflects the partially itin- erant character of the Ni moments. The mechanism is the vHs generated meta-Stoner instability, with feedback within the self-consistency loop (necessitated by the vHs) providing the first order nature; actual lattice distortion is unnecessary. The magnetic symmetry breaking is ac- companied by a Ni1-to-Ni2 charge disproportionation up to ∼ ±0.05e (from atomic sphere charges). Being accom- panied by the charge disproportionation as well, these results suggest there would be substantial magnetic and charge fluctuations in the AFM state, contributing to its evident instability. VII. LATTICE INSTABILITY The effect of the breathing mode on the band structure is displayed in Fig. 5, quantifying the splitting of the vHs peak. The splitting of the peak at EF due to the frozen phonon modes leads to a characteristic deformation po- tential (splitting of each band per unit displacement) of D=150 meV/0.03 ̊A=5 eV/ ̊A on the kz = ±π/c planes . This value places AFM NNO in the strong electron- phonon coupling regime. Due to the vHs giving strong structure in the density of states N(E), this splitting of 0 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 u (Å) 0 10 20 30 40 50 (E-E0) / u 2 (eV/Å 2) full half 0 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 u (Å) 0 50 100 150 E - E0 (meV) half full 4eV 3eV 5eV Energy distortions for the frozen-in oxygen full- and half-breathing modes at U = 4 eV. As shown in the Inset, these follow a quadratic plus lowest-order anharmonic term, indicated by the green (blue) dashed lines, and are insensitive to strength of U in the range of 3–5 eV. the vHs peak varies in the range of 3.1 to 7.3 eV/ ̊A for displacements in the range 0.01 to 0.047 ̊A. This varia- tion leads to strong effects on the electronic and magnetic properties, as discussed below. To explore the Peierls lattice instability, we plot the energy difference divided by squared amplitude K(u)=∆E(u)/u2 in Fig. 6; this is the lattice stiffness (effective force constant) K. For a harmonic phonon K(u) would be a constant, with deviation indicating an- harmonicity. The energy change with oxygen displace- ment u, ∆E(u) = E(u) − E(0), can be fit very well by A2u2 + A3u3. The obtained coefficients are A2 = 47.5 eV/ ̊A2, A3 = 61.2 eV/ ̊A3 (breathing); A2 = 29.4 eV/ ̊A2, A3 = 136.7 eV/ ̊A3 (half-breathing). As shown in the inset of Fig. 6, these values are insen- sitive to the strength of U in the range of 3–5 eV. The harmonic terms provide the frequency of each breathing mode (see below), whereas the A3u3 terms quantify an- harmonicity. The calculated K(u) is anomalous in two ways. For typical oxygen vibrational amplitudes 0.05-0.10 ̊A, it would be practically constant; high frequency O modes typically do not show significant anharmonicity. Figure 6 however shows that for both breathing and half-breathing modes, K(u) is only beginning to approach a steady value somewhere above 0.05 ̊A. Secondly, K(u) drops precipi- tously below 0.02 ̊A and extrapolates to negative values below 0.005 ̊A, viz. giving the classic unstable Mexi- can hat potential surface. Modern linear response lat- tice dynamics codes that incorporate infinitesimal dis- tortions would calculate imaginary frequencies in both cases, the signature of lattice instabilities for both types of modes. This behavior is revealing the response of the electronic vHs to (infinitesimal) perturbation, analogous to the magnetic instability discussed above. If calculated as often done on a mesh of u such as 5 0.01, 0.02, 0.03 ̊A etc., the unstable region would not be sampled carefully, but anharmonicity [non-constancy of K(u)] would be evident; high energy modes around ω = 80 meV and 60 meV for the full- and half-breathing modes respectively would be obtained, similar to our values. Compared with the values for these modes in CaCuO2 and in La2CuO4 , these frequencies are smaller by 10%-25% respectively. Both of these com- pounds are insulators with no important anharmonicity being reported. The lattice and magnetic instabilities reflect the sharp and narrow vHs that negates normal charge response and provides a platform that is extremely sensitive to any symmetry breaking that splits the vHs peak. The most anomalous response is confined to small distortions and energies (and thus low temperature), as is clear from Fig. 6. For this Peierls instability, a fully quantum treat- ment would require self-consistent treatment of (1) an- harmonicity, (2) non-adiabatic electron-lattice coupling around the vHs point (where heavy charge carriers are coupled to phonons of similar, or even higher, energy), and (3) behavior of coupled quasiparticle self-energies, which is far beyond the scope of this paper. A fully quantum treatment would include also the ef- fects of oxygen zero point fluctuations (ZPFs) on the sys- tem and its response. For frequencies of 60-80 meV, the oxygen zero point amplitude ⟨u0⟩ ≈ 0.04-0.05 ̊A. Within this distance of the oxygen site, the potential becomes strongly anharmonic and finally negative. To what extent ZPFs could temper the static lattice, spin, and charge instabilities might be challenging to deter- mine, because ZPF effects are subtle: the fully quantum metal has zero resistivity at T=0, because ZPFs do not scatter carriers, whereas the simple picture of averaging over displaced atoms would (incorrectly) suggest other- wise. An important dynamical lattice consequence for this AFM system is that the vHs will be renormalized at low temperature – narrowed instead of the naive expectation of broadening by electron-phonon interaction – and the issue of the behavior of the non-adiabatic coupled electron-phonon excitations is not settled. Just how the massive flat band carriers would deal with all of these instabilities would be a challenging theoretical problem, but the experimental outcome is that the underlying AFM order we have modeled gives way to a disordered moment metal. VIII. DISCUSSION: AVOIDANCE OF THE AFM PHASE We have explored the experimentally inaccessible AFM ordered state of NdNiO2 with correlated DFT methods. This is the state whose calculated energy indicates it should be the ground state versus nonmagnetic and com- peting simple magnetic states, and presumably the disor- dered moment phase as well, seemingly a severe problem for theory. However, we find as well that this state is multiply unstable: lattice, spin, or charge fluctuations – neglected in this static lattice, fixed spin DFT modeling – so further studies would be necessary to progress to a determination and understanding of the ground state. Experiments indicate a conducting state without mag- netic order, but likely with fluctuating moments (Ni and Nd) that make it very challenging to model from a DFT viewpoint. Specifically, we have shown that in the (unphysical) AFM ordered phase a Ni dz2 flat band pinned at the Fermi level arises on the entire kz = ±π/c zone faces, giv- ing rise to a 1D-like van Hove singularity that supports spin, charge, and lattice (both full- and half-breathing mode) instabilities of the ideal infinite-layer lattice. Due to the narrowness of the vHs, these coupled order pa- rameters may be affected by quantum zero point oxygen motion and non-adiabatic electron-lattice coupling in the vHs peak, finally frustrating these types of symmetry breaking. These observations account qualitatively for the stabilization of the observed symmetric (conducting, no spin order) phase. Yet, the AFM ordered state, calculated to be most stable for the static lattice, remains inaccessible by ex- periment, hence evidently is higher in free energy than the conducting spin-disordered state. We propose that as temperature is lowered, NdNiO2 approaches the AFM ordered phase but encounters its incipient instabilities with strong spin, charge, and lattice fluctuations that inhibit spin order and lattice distortion, thereby stabi- lizing the symmetric lattice. The result is to remain spin-disordered but with AFM correlations, i.e., incipient AFM order, that will reduce the spin free energy. This correlated spin liquid phase, the Sachdev-Read MQPM phase that has been proposed in another disordered mo- ment superconductor, provides the platform for the superconductivity that appears upon hole doping. None of these complications occur in CaCuO2. IX. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We acknowledge Sooran Kim for a critical reading of the manuscript. M.Y.C. and K.W.L were supported by National Research Foundation of Korea Grant No. NRF- W.E.P. was supported by NSF Grant No. DMR 1607139. L.-H. Hu and C Wu, Two-band model for magnetism and superconductivity in nickelates, Phys. Rev. Research 1, 6 I. Leonov, S. L. Skornyakov, and S. Y. Savrasov, Lif- shitz transition and frustration of magnetic moments in infinite-layer NdNiO2 upon hole doping, Phys. Rev. B S. Ryee, H. Yoon, T. J. Kim, M. Y. Jeong, and M. J. Han, Induced magnetic two-dimensionality by hole doping in the superconducting infinite-layer nickelate Nd1−xSrxNiO2, Phys. Rev. B 101, 064513 (2020). X. Wu, D. D. Sante, T. Schwemmer, W. Hanke, H. Y. Hwang, S. Raghu, and R. Thomale, Robust dx2−y2-wave superconductivity of infinite-layer nickelates, Phys. Rev. P. Werner and S. Hoshino, Nickelate superconductors: Multiorbital nature and spin freezing, Phys. Rev. B 101, G.-M. Zhang, Y.-F. Yang, and F.-C. Zhang, Self-doped Mott insulator for parent compounds of nickelate super- conductors, Phys. Rev. B 101, 020501(R) (2020). F. Lechermann, Late transition metal oxides with infinite-layer structure: Nickelates versus cuprates, Phys. Rev. B 101, 081110(R) (2020). H. Zhang, L. Jin, S. Wang, B. Xi, X. Shi, F. Ye, and J.-W. Mei, Effective Hamiltonian for nickelate oxides Nd1−xSrxNiO2, Phys. Rev. Research 2, 013214 (2020). H. Sakakibara, H. Usui, K. Suzuki, T. Kotani, H. Aoki, and K. Kuroki, Model construction and a possibility of cuprate-like pairing in a new d9 nickelate superconductor (Nd,Sr)NiO2, Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, 077003 (2020). Y. Gu, S. Zhu, X. Wang, J. Hu, and H. Chen, A substan- tial hybridization between correlated Ni-d orbital and itinerant electrons in infinite-layer nickelates, Commun. Phys. 3, 84 (2020). J. Chang, J. Zhao, and Y. Ding, Hund-Heisenberg model in superconducting infinite-layer nickelates, M. Jiang, M. Berciu, and G. A. Sawatzky, Critical nature of the Ni spin state in doped NdNiO2, Phys. Rev. Lett. T. Zhou, Y. Gao, and Z. D. Wang, Spin excitations in nickelate superconductors, Sci. China-Phys. Mech. As- tron. 63, 287412 (2020). J. Karp, A. S. Botana, M. R. Norman, H. Park, M. Zingl, and A. Millis, Many-body Electronic Structure of NdNiO2 and CaCuO2, Phys. Rev. X 10, 021061 (2020). V. I. Anisimov, D. Bukhvalov, and T. M. Rice, Electronic structure of possible nickelate analogs to the cuprates, Phys. Rev. B 59, 7901 (1999). K.-W. Lee and W. E. Pickett, Infinite-layer nickelate LaNiO2: Ni1+ is not Cu2+, Phys. Rev. B 70, 165109 M.-Y. Choi, K.-W. Lee, and W. E. Pickett, Role of 4f states in infinite-layer NdNiO2, Phys. Rev. B 101, A.S. Botana and M.R. Norman, Similarities and Differ- ences between LaNiO2 and CaCuO2 and Implications for Superconductivity, Phy. Rev. X 10, 011024 (2020). Y. Nomura, M. Hirayama, T. Tadano, Y. Yoshimoto, K. Nakamura, and R. Arita, Formation of a two-dimensional single-component correlated electron system and band engineering in the nickelate superconductor NdNiO2, Phys. Rev. B 100, 205138 (2019). P. Jiang, L. Si, Z. Liao, and Z. Zhong, Electronic struc- ture of rare-earth infinite-layer RNiO2(R=La,Nd), Phys. Rev. B 100, 201106(R) (2019). Z. Liu, Z. Ren, W. Zhu, Z. F. Wang, and J. Yang, Elec- tronic and Magnetic Structure of Infinite-layer NdNiO2: trace of antiferromagnetic metal, npj Quantum Mater. 5, B. Geisler and R. Pentcheva, Fundamental difference in the electronic reconstruction of infinite-layer versus per- ovskite neodymium nickelate films on SrTiO3(001), Phys. Rev. B 102, 020502(R) (2020). D. Li, K. Lee, B. Y. Wang, M. Osada, S. Crossley, H. R. Lee, Y. Cui, Y. Hikita, and H. Y. Hwang, Supercon- ductivity in an infinite-layer nickelate, Nature (London) M. Hepting, D. Li, C. J. Jia, H. Lu, E. Paris, Y. Tseng, X. Feng, M. Osada, E. Been, Y. Hikita, Y.-D. Chuang, Z. Hussain, K. J. Zhou, A. Nag, M. Garcia-Fernandez, M. Rossi, H. Y. Huang, D. J. Huang, Z. X. Shen, T. Schmitt, H. Y. Hwang, B. Moritz, J. Zaanen, T. P. Devereaux and W. S. Lee, Electronic structure of the parent compound of superconducting infinite-layer nickelates, Nat. Mater. Q. Li, C. He, J. Si, X. Zhu, Y. Zhang, and H.-H. Wen, Ab- sence of superconductivity in bulk Nd1−xSrxNiO2, Com- mun. Mater. 1, 16 (2020). Y. Fu, Y. Fu, A. Wang, H. Cheng, S. Pei, X. Zhou, J. Chen, S. Wang, R. Zhao, W. Jiang, C. Liu, M. Huang, X. Wang, Y. Zhao, D. Yu, F. Ye, S. Wang, and J.-W. Mei, Core-level x-ray photoemission and Raman spectroscopy studies on electronic structures in Mott-Hubbard type nickelate oxide NdNiO2, arXiv:1911.03177. M. Azuma, Z. Hiroi, M. Takano, Y. Bando, and Y. Tekeda, Superconductivity at 110 K in the infinite-layer compound (Sr1−xCax)1−yCuO2, Nature (London) 356, M. Crespin, P. Levitz, and L. Gatineau, Reduced forms of LaNiO3 perovskite. Part 1. Evidence for new phases: La2Ni2O5 and LaNiO2, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 2 M. A. Hayward, M. A. Green, M. J. Rosseinsky, and J. Sloan, Sodium Hydride as a Powerful Reducing Agent for Topotactic Oxide De-intercalation: Synthesis and Characterization of the Nickel(I) Oxide LaNiO2, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 121, 8843 (1999). D. Kaneko, K. Yamagishi, A. Tsukada, T. Manabe, and M. Naito, Synthesis of infinite-layer LaNiO2 films by metal organic decomposition, Physica C: Superconduc- tivity 469, 936 (2009). A. Ikeda, T. Manabe, and M. Naito, Improved conductiv- ity of infinite-layer LaNiO2 thin films by metal organic decomposition, Physica C: Superconductivity 495, 134 S. Sachdev and N. Read, Metallic spin glasses, J. Phys.: Condens. Matt. 8, 9723 (1996). S. Hoshino and P. Werner, Superconductivity from Emerging Magnetic Moments, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, P. Werner, S. Hoshino, and H. Shinaoka, Spin-freezing perspective on cuprates, Phys. Rev. B 94, 245134 (2016). S.-T. Pi, S. Y. Savrasov, and W. E. Pickett, Pressure- tuned frustration of Magnetic Coupling in Elemental Eu- ropium, Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 057201 (2019). V. Pardo and W. E. Pickett, Metal-insulator transition in layered nickelates La3Ni2O8−δ (δ = 0.0, 0.5, 1), Phys. Rev. B 83, 245128 (2011). A. S. Botana, V. Pardo, W. E. Pickett, and M. 7 R. Norman, Charge ordering in Ni1+/Ni2+ nickelates: La4Ni3O8 and La3Ni2O6, Phys. Rev. B 94, 081105(R) J. Zhang, A. S. Botana, J. W. Freeland, D. Phelan, H. Zheng, V. Pardo, M. R. Norman, and J. F. Mitchell, Mimicking cuprates: large orbital polarization in a metal- lic square-planar nickelate, Nat. Phys. 13, 864 (2017). A. S. Botana, V. Pardo, and M. R. Norman, Electron doped layered nickelates: spanning the phase diagram of the cuprates, Phys. Rev. Materials 1, 021801 (2017). J. Zhang D. M. Pajerowski, A. S. Botana, Hong Zheng, L. Harriger, J. Rodriguez-Rivera, J. P. C. Ruff, N. J. Schreiber, B. Wang, Yu-Sheng Chen, W. C. Chen, M. R. Norman, S. Rosenkranz, J. F. Mitchell, D. Phelan Spin stripe order in a square planar trilayer nickelate, Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 247201 (2019). J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Generalized gradient approximation made simple, Phys. Rev. Lett. E. R. Ylvisaker, K. Koepernik, and W. E. Pickett, Anisotropy and magnetism in the LSDA+U method, Phys. Rev. B 79, 035103 (2009). K. Schwarz and P. Blaha, Solid state calculations using WIEN2k, Comput. Mater. Sci. 28, 259 (2003). T. Siegrist, S. M. Zahurak, D. W. Murphy, and R. S. Roth, The parent structure of the layered high-temperature superconductors, Nature 334, 231232 K.-W. Lee and W. E. Pickett, Superconductivity in Boron-Doped Diamond, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 237003 P. Zhang, S. G. Louie, and M. L. Cohen, Electron- Phonon Renormalization in Cuprate Superconductors, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 067005 (2007). T. Fukuda, J. Mizuki, K. Ikeuchi, K. Yamada, A. Q. R. Baron, and S. Tsutsui, Doping dependence of softening in the bond-stretching phonon mode of La2−xSrxCuO4 (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.29), Phys. Rev. B 71, 060501(R) (2005). Y. Quan, S. Ghosh, and W. E. Pickett, Compressed Hy- drides as Metallic Hydrogen Superconductors, Phys. Rev. 8