Journal of the Physical Society of Japan SHORT NOTES Revisiting the phase diagram of T*-type La1−x/2Eu1−x/2SrxCuO4 using Oxygen K-edge X-ray absorption spectroscopy Shun Asano1,2, Kenji Ishii3, Kohei Yamagami4, Jun Miyawaki4, Yoshihisa Harada4, and Masaki Fujita2 ∗ 1Department of Physics, Tohoku University, Aoba, Sendai 980-8578, Japan 2Institute for Materials Research, Tohoku University, Katahira, Sendai 980-8577, Japan 3Synchrotron Radiation Research Center, National Institutes for Quantum and Radiological Science and Technology, Hyogo 679-5148, Japan 4Institute for Solid State Physics, The University of Tokyo, Kashiwa 277-8581, Japan Oxygen K-edge X-ray absorption spectroscopy measurements were conducted on T*-type La1−x/2Eu1−x/2SrxCuO4 (LESCO) to es- timate the hole density (nh) and investigate the oxidation annealing effect on nh. A drastic increase in nh due to annealing was found. The increase in nh cannot be explained solely by the oxygen gain due to annealing, suggesting that delocalized holes are introduced into the CuO2 plane. A phase diagram of LESCO was redrawn against nh. In lamellar oxides, the oxygen content and site occupation are essential factors in the emergence of superconductivity. In T’-type RE2−xCexCuO4 (RE = rare earth), the oxygen reduc- tion due to annealing induces an electron-doping and causes a uniform electrostatic potential on the CuO2 plane by remov- ing chemical disorders such as partially existing apical oxy- gen (Oap) in the as-sintered (AS) sample.1) It was recently clarified that the number of electrons induced due to anneal- ing process can exceed the expected value from the reduced oxygen content under the assumption of electron-doping into the upper Hubbard band.2) This result suggests a variation in the band structure due to annealing and the non-unique effects of oxygen reduction on the electronic state. Hole-doped T*-type cuprates containing CuO5 pyramids in the unit cell are known to exhibit superconductivity ow- ing to high-pressure oxidation annealing (OA).3) T*-type AS La1−x/2Eu1−x/2SrxCuO4 (LESCO) undergoes a magnetic tran- sition within a wide x range of at least 0.14 - 0.28 and ex- hibits superconducting (SC) state due to annealing.4) The es- sential role of annealing in the emergence of superconduc- tivity is considered to be the repair of oxygen deficiency at the apical site.5) However, because the increased oxygen con- tent due to annealing (δ) is only 0.02, the hole-doping through the introduction of oxygen is likely not the main reason for the appearance of superconductivity within the entire range of 0.14 ≤ x ≤ 0.28 in LESCO.4) To understand the origin of the variation of the ground state due to annealing in the T*-type cuprate, the actual hole density (nh) should be deter- mined. We therefore conducted an O K-edge X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) measurement on T*-type LESCO. Polycrystalline samples of AS and OA LESCO are the same as those used for previous muon spin relaxation (μSR) experiments.2) We prepared the sintered prismatic samples with a size of 1 mm × 1 mm × 2 mm for AS x = 0.14 and 0.26, ∗fujita@imr.tohoku.ac.jp Intensity (arb. units) 535 530 525 Energy (eV) 532 530 528 526 Oxygen K-edge as-sintered annealed La1-x/2Eu1-x/2SrxCuO4 H U Fig. 1. (Color online) The absorption spectra of as-sintered and oxidation annealed LESCO with x = 0.14. The peaks labeled H and U correspond to a hole-induced state and a hybridized state of Cu UHB with the O 2p states, respectively. The inset shows the background-subtracted spectra. and OA x = 0.14, 0.16, and 0.26. The samples were folded just before being placed in a vacuum chamber to obtain a clean surface. The XAS experiments were conducted at BL07LSU in SPring-8, and the absorption spectra were measured using the total fluorescence yield method at room temperature. In Fig. 1, the absorption spectra for AS and OA LE- SCO with x = 0.14 are shown. The intensity was normal- ized such that the spectra at approximately 531 eV, where the slope of the absorption edge is the steepest, match well with each other. According to an O K-edge XAS study on La2−xSrxCuO4 (LSCO),6) the peaks labeled H and U corre- spond to a hole-induced state and Cu upper Hubbard band hy- bridized with the O 2p states, respectively. The background at below ∼ 531 eV, shown by the black line, was subtracted from the normalized spectra. The inset represents the subtracted spectra. As shown in the figure, the intensity of peak H, IH (U, IU), increases (decreases) from the annealing, showing an increase in nh.6) For LSCO, in which nh is almost equal to x, a linear in- crease (decrease) of IH (IU) against x was reported.6) There- fore, through a comparison with the results for LSCO, we can evaluate nh in LESCO from the intensity ratio between IH and IU. With this method, the intensity ratio is essential for an evaluation of nh. Therefore, the ambiguity in the normaliza- tion of the spectrum to determine nh is eliminated. The inte- grated intensity for two peaks was obtained from the results of the fitting by the two Gaussian functions to the subtracted data. Figure 2 (a) shows the x dependence of IH/IU for LE- SCO. For comparison, the intensity ratio for LSCO is also plotted. The value on the right axis of Fig. 2 (a) represents nh, which is converted from IH/IU with considering the results of LSCO. In the AS sample with x = 0.14 and 0.26, nh is ∼0.05 and ∼0.06 holes/Cu, respectively. These values are much smaller than x. There are two possible interpretations of the experi- mental results. First, holes are not sufficiently induced owing to the apical oxygen defects. Second, most of the holes in- troduced by Sr substitution do not enter the CuO2 plane, and holes are trapped outside the CuO2 plane in the AS sample. 1 arXiv:2005.11148v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 18 Aug 2020 J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. SHORT NOTES SC SG 3 2 1 0 IH / IU 0.3 0.2 0.1 0 Sr (x) 0.2 0.1 0 nH (per Cu) as-sintered annealed LSCO La1-x/2Eu1-x/2SrxCuO4 AF (a) (b) nh 40 30 20 10 0 Temperature (K) 0.3 0.2 0.1 0 nh as-sintered Tm annealed Tc Fig. 2. (Color online) (a) Sr concentration (x) dependence of the peak in- tensity shown in Fig. 1 (IH/IU) and the corresponding hole density (nh) for La1−x/2Eu1−x/2SrxCuO4. Here, IH/IU for La2−xSrxCuO4 is also plotted.6) (b) Magnetic and SC transition temperatures (Tm and Tc) in as-sintered and ox- idation annealed La1−x/2Eu1−x/2SrxCuO44) respectively as a function of the hole density evaluated from IH/IU (nh). The green, blue, and pink areas repre- sent the antiferromagnetic ordered (AF), spin-glass (SG), and superconduct- ing (SC) states, respectively. Importantly, nh for the OA samples is larger than that in the AS sample at each x, and the increase in nh due to annealing becomes greater at a larger x; nh for x = 0.14 and 0.26 be- comes ∼0.09 and ∼0.17 holes/Cu, which also occurs due to annealing. Thus, in contrast to the weak x-dependence of nh in the AS samples, nh in the OA samples increases upon the Sr substitution by ∼0.67 holes/Cu/x, although the absolute value is still smaller than x. Based on a naive image in which one introduced oxygen atom generates two holes in the system to maintain the charge neutrality, δ ∼0.02 for the present sam- ples gives the expected nh of 0.04 holes/Cu. However, nh in- creases by ∼0.11 holes/Cu in the x = 0.26 sample, indicating that the annealing effect in LESCO has an aspect other than hole-doping. LESCO in which the horizontal axis corresponds to nh. In ad- dition, nh for 0.14 < x < 0.26 was obtained from the interpo- lation of nh for 0.14 and 0.26. The SC transition temperature (Tc) in the OA samples and the magnetic ordering tempera- ture determined by μSR experiments (Tm) for the AS samples are taken from the previos study.2) In the figure, we took the appearance of long-range magnetic order of below ∼170 K in T*-type parent La1.2Tb0.8CuO4 into account.8) The spin-glass phase is located at nh ∼ 0.06, and the SC phase lies in the nh region from 0.10 to 0.20. Although the phase diagram for x < 0.14, that is, nh < 0.05 (0.09) for the AS (OA) samples, is missing owing to the difficulty in obtaining single-phase samples, a general feature of the phase diagram against nh is similar to that for LSCO.7) However, we note that the results of AS and OA cannot be simply compared in the same phase diagram, because the structural disorder owing to an oxygen deficiency will affect the physical properties in the AS sam- ples. We also note that Tc tends to increase with a decrease in nh. Thus, it would be interesting to investigate the SC prop- erty in the lightly doped region through an analogy with the superconductivity in Ce-free T’-type RE2CuO4.9) The increase in nh due to annealing is probably related to the Oap. It is known that Tc in T*-type copper oxide increases with the hydrostatic pressure.10) Because the distance between the CuO2 plane and the RE2O2 block layer is reduced under pressure, holes can effectively enter the CuO2 plane by an in- crease in the charge transfer through Oap.10) Such a pressure effect suggests that the holes introduced by a Sr substitution are not fully doped into the CuO2 even in the OA samples under ambient pressure, which is consistent with the present results. In the case of annealing, the lattice elongates along the c-axis, indicating an increase in the distance between the CuO2 plane and the RE2O2 layer. Thus, if the charge trans- fer increases due to annealing, it will be caused not by the change in the structural distance but by the repair of the de- fect of Oap. Because the increased amount of hole density on the CuO2 plane cannot be explained only by the change in oxygen gain, the holes are trapped outside the CuO2 plane in the AS sample and most of those holes are introduced into the CuO2 plane due to annealing. In summary, the increase in the hole density due to oxida- tion annealing in T*-type La1−x/2Eu1−x/2SrxCuO4 was clari- fied through O K-edge X-ray absorption spectroscopy mea- surements. Our results show the potential contribution of the hole-doping effect on the variation of the physical properties due to annealing. The holes trapped outside the CuO2 plane in the block layer and/or at the oxygen-deficient apical site in the AS sample are introduced into the CuO2 plane due to annealing.