Survival of the fractional Josephson effect in time-reversal-invariant topological superconductors Christina Knapp,1, 2, вҲ— Aaron Chew,1, вҲ— and Jason Alicea1, 2 1Department of Physics and Institute for Quantum Information and Matter, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125 USA 2Walter Burke Institute for Theoretical Physics, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125 USA (Dated: July 10, 2020) Time-reversal-invariant topological superconductor (TRITOPS) wires host Majorana Kramers pairs that have been predicted to mediate a fractional Josephson effect with 4ПҖ periodicity in the superconducting phase dif- ference. We explore the TRITOPS fractional Josephson effect in the presence of time-dependent вҖҳlocal mixingвҖҷ perturbations that instantaneously preserve time-reversal symmetry. Specifically, we show that just as such couplings render braiding of Majorana Kramers pairs non-universal, the Josephson current becomes either ape- riodic or 2ПҖ-periodic (depending on conditions that we quantify) unless the phase difference is swept sufficiently quickly. We further analyze topological superconductors with T 2 = +1 time-reversal symmetry and reveal a rich interplay between interactions and local mixing that can be experimentally probed in nanowire arrays. Introduction. Topological superconducting wires hosting unpaired end Majorana zero modes (MZMs) [1вҖ“10] display remarkably rich phenomenology with applications for topo- logical quantum computation [11вҖ“15]. Well-separated MZMs span a set of degenerate ground states that are locally indis- tinguishable and hence define a fault-tolerant qubit subspace. Braiding unpaired MZMs implements universal non-Abelian rotations within the ground state subspaceвҖ”thereby generat- ing fault-tolerant qubit gates. Under a вҖҳfusionвҖҷ process, a pair of MZMs brought together in space hybridizes and yields a finite-energy fermionic state that can be either empty (I fu- sion channel) or filled (ПҲ fusion channel). Detecting which fusion channel emerges provides a means of qubit readout. An elegant method of probing topological superconductiv- ity and performing readout utilizes the so-called fractional Josephson effect [1, 16вҖ“18]. In a conventional Josephson junction, Cooper-pair tunneling generates a current that is 2ПҖ periodic in the superconducting phase difference across the barrier. A pair of MZMs fused across a topological Joseph- son junction mediates single-electron tunneling, resulting in an anomalous 4ПҖ-periodic fractional Josephson current whose sign correlates with the associated fusion channel. This pe- riod doubling intimately relates to non-Abelian braiding: Ad- vancing the phase difference by 2ПҖ has the same effect as fully braiding the MZM pair on one side of the junction (in turn swapping the fusion channel I вҶ” ПҲ for the hybridized MZMs). Two such braids are necessary to return the system to its initial state, corresponding to 4ПҖ phase evolution. When some time-reversal symmetry T is present, topolog- ical superconducting wires can host multiple MZMs at each boundary. In particular, a time reversal invariant topologi- cal superconductor (TRITOPS) for which T 2 = вҲ’1 [19вҖ“46] hosts a Kramers pair of end MZMs that cannot hybridize pro- vided T is preserved. MZM Kramers pairs in a TRITOPS wire accordingly generate a symmetry-protected ground state degeneracy consisting of locally distinguishable statesвҖ”and thus furnish a qubit subspace with limited fault-tolerance. In- deed, even time-dependent local perturbations that instanta- neously preserve T can rotate the Majorana Kramers pair wavefunctions, generating a non-universal non-Abelian Berry phase . As a result of this вҖҳlocal mixing,вҖҷ braiding MZM Kramers pairs generically produces non-universal rotations in the ground-state subspace . Given these non-universalities, to what extent does a frac- tional Josephson effect survive in TRITOPS wires? This ques- tion turns out to be exceedingly subtle. On one hand, in a TRITOPS Josephson junction that preserves T at phase dif- ferences 0 and ПҖ, each subgap level is certainly 4ПҖ-periodic (Fig. 1), suggesting that a fractional Josephson effect ap- pears as predicted in numerous works [26, 29, 30, 43, 49вҖ“57]. But on the other, the braiding/fractional Josephson connec- tion noted earlier naively implies that non-universality of the former spells doom for the latter. There is, however, reason for optimism: The Josephson-junction energy levels become degenerate only at discrete phase differences, suggesting that time-dependent local perturbations may play a less dramatic role compared to the braiding problem (for which degeneracy persists throughout the evolution). Here we show that, when the superconducting phase winds adiabatically, local mixing indeed spoils the fractional Joseph- son effect and yields either an aperiodic or 2ПҖ-periodic current-phase relation depending on local-mixing time scales. This result holds even in an otherwise ideal situation for which effects known previously to destroy 4ПҖ-periodicity [17, 49, 51, 58вҖ“63]вҖ”e.g., explicit T breaking, overlap between dis- tant MZMs, energy relaxation, and quasiparticle poisoningвҖ” are absent. By mapping the problem onto an effective model that features avoided crossings in the energy spectrum, we fur- ther demonstrate that 4ПҖ periodicity is recovered when the phase difference evolves sufficiently quickly that local mix- ing remains benign. We extend our analysis to junctions of T 2 = +1 topological superconductors, which can be real- ized (approximately) with proximitized nanowire arrays . Without interactions, local mixing can similarly spoil the fractional Josephson effect in a junction of 2m wires when m > 1. Interestingly, however, we find that interactions stabi- lize 4ПҖ periodicity for any odd m and 2ПҖ periodicity when m mod 4 = 0. The nontrivial m dependence reflects an interplay between local mixing and the Z8 classification of one-dimensional fermionic topological phases , and thus arXiv:2006.10772v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 9 Jul 2020 2 E[ПҶ] ПҖ 2 ПҖ ПҶ Top panel: TRITOPS Josephson junction with each wire modeled by two time-reversed copies of a topological superconduc- tor. Dotted lines indicate hybridization of Majorana Kramers pairs (dark purple) leading to Eq. (2). Local mixing arises when Majorana Kramers pairs undergo time-dependent coupling to excited states. Bottom panel: Many-body energy spectrum for a TRITOPS Joseph- son junction. Solid and dashed curves respectively correspond to even and odd fermion-parity sectors. provides an experimental window into both phenomena. Local mixing. Let Оі1(2), МғОі1(2) denote the MZM Kramers pair at the left (right) end of a TRITOPS wire. Time reversal sends Оіj вҶ’ sj МғОіj, МғОіj вҶ’ вҲ’sjОіj (1) for convention-dependent signs sj = Вұ1; note consistency with T 2 = вҲ’1. Bilinears hybridizing a given MZM Kramers pair are odd under T and thus forbidden. Local, adiabatic time-dependent perturbations that instan- taneously preserve T endow the MZM operators at each end with nontrivial time dependence. Such perturbations can re- sult, e.g., from external manipulation or stochastic noise that couples the initial MZMs and bulk energy modes, as re- viewed in the Supplemental Material. Reference 47 showed that after the Hamiltonian completes a closed cycle in time T, the final state generically differs in a non-universal way from the initial state. The ground-state rotation resulting from this вҖңlocal mixingвҖқ is implemented by the unitary matrix U = exp пҝҪпҝҪ j=1,2 ОёjОіj(0) МғОіj(0)/2 пҝҪ , with Оёj a local-mixing angle determined by evolution details. Local mixing ac- cordingly spoils the topological protection of braiding MZM Kramers pairs . TRITOPS Josephson junction. Consider a TRITOPS Josephson junction (Fig. 1, top) with superconducting phase ПҶL = 0 on the left and ПҶR = ПҶ on the right. The Majorana Kramers pair ОіL, МғОіL at the left side of the junction hybridizes with the Majorana Kramers pair ОіR, МғОіR on the right side, me- diating a supercurrent contribution that we wish to explore in the presence of local mixing. When ПҶ = nПҖ for n вҲҲ Z the junction preserves T ; at these values we adopt a convention where ОіL, МғОіL transform under T according to Eq. (1) with sL = 1, while ОіR, МғОіR transforms with sR = вҲ’(вҲ’1)n. A min- imal time-independent junction Hamiltonian compatible with this symmetry reads HJJ = iО»e cos (ПҶ/2) (ОіLОіR + МғОіL МғОіR) + iО»o sin (ПҶ/2) (ОіLОіR вҲ’ МғОіL МғОіR) , (2) where О»e,o are real-valued tunneling amplitudes (see Supple- mental Material for a derivation). In the even-parity sector (iОіLОіR)(i МғОіL МғОіR) = +1 only the first line survives, whereas in the odd-parity sector (iОіLОіR)(i МғОіL МғОіR) = вҲ’1 only the sec- ond line survives . Figure 1, bottom panel, sketches the corresponding energy-phase relation E(ПҶ). Each subgap en- ergy is 4ПҖ-periodic in ПҶ, and hence at this level of analysis the Josephson current вҹЁI(ПҶ)вҹ© = 2e Д§ dE dПҶ is also 4ПҖ-periodic under adiabatic phase evolution. Crucially, however, the TRITOPS fractional Josephson ef- fect hinted at here does not constitute a robust adiabatic cycle. As proof of concept, suppose that we begin in the ground state of the even-parity sector (solid lines in Fig. 1, bottom), and then implement the following process: (i) adiabatically wind ПҶ from 0 to ПҖ, yielding two-fold Kramers degeneracy, (ii) turn on a local-mixing closed adiabatic subcycle, and (iii) adia- batically wind ПҶ from ПҖ to 2ПҖ. After stage (ii) local mixing rotates the system into a superposition of even-parity junc- tion eigenstates via UJJ = exp пҝҪпҝҪ J=L,R ОёJОіJ(0) МғОіJ(0)/2 пҝҪ for some non-universal ОёL,R mixing angles. Specifically, if |вҲ’вҹ© and |+вҹ© denote states that respectively evolve from the even-parity ground state and excited state at ПҶ = ПҖ, the sys- tem evolves to UJJ|вҲ’вҹ© = cos пҝҪОёR вҲ’ ОёL 2 пҝҪ |вҲ’вҹ© + i sin пҝҪОёR вҲ’ ОёL 2 пҝҪ |+вҹ©. (3) Repeated implementations of the closed adiabatic cycle above generically result in aperiodic unitary state evolution, signal- ing a breakdown of the TRITOPS fractional Josephson effect. A more physically relevant scenario arises when local mix- ing and phase winding occur simultaneously. For an illus- trative toy model, we incorporate a Kramers pair of Andreev bound states described by f = (ОівҖІ Оө+iОіОө)/2, Мғf = ( МғОівҖІ Оө+i МғОіОө)/2 and supplement Eq. (2) with ОҙH(t) = Оө 2 [вҲ’i (ОіОөОівҖІ Оө + МғОіОө МғОівҖІ Оө) + 2] (4) + iОІ The Andreev bound states exhibit an energy gap Оө encoded by the first line and couple to the Majorana Kramers pair on the left side of the junction via the second line; all terms instanta- neously preserve T . We take Оө to be the largest energy scale and, for simplicity, project onto the even-parity subspace ОіLОіR МғОіL МғОіRОіОөОіОөвҖІ МғОіОө МғОівҖІ Оө = +1. In this formulation, the Hamil- tonian H(t) = HJJ + ОҙH(t) supports two вҖҳlow-energyвҖҷ instantaneous eigenstatesвҖ”denoted |ПҲ1(t)вҹ© and |ПҲ2(t)вҹ©вҖ” separated from the next lowest instantaneous eigenstates 3 1 5 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 t/tf Transition Probability 0.04 МҮвң“/2О»0 e Вұ2 cos (ПҶ/2) 2вҮЎ periodic aperiodic 0.8 0.4 0.01 0.1 1 5 вҢ§вҢҰ(t1) Transition probability after evolution by Heff(t) from t = 0 to tf for Оұ(t) = with f(t) = log пҝҪпҝҪ 1 + e(tвҲ’t1)/П„пҝҪ / пҝҪ 1 + e(tвҲ’t2)/П„пҝҪпҝҪ and ПҶ(t) = 2ПҖt/tf. Parameters are О»e = Оө/80, ОІ = Оө/40, tf = 2 Г— 107ОөвҲ’1, t1/2 = tf/2 Вұ 0.0025tf, and n = 25 Г— 103. The choice of Оұ(t) yields step-like jumps in МҮОё(t) over a time scale П„, as shown in the inset. In the main plotвҖҷs horizontal axis, О©(t1) denotes the magnitude of the instantaneous energy at the time of the jumps. вҖҳSlowвҖҷ jumps [П„О©(t1) вүі 1] yield nearly zero transition probability, signifying a 2ПҖ-periodic Josephson effect. вҖҳFastвҖҷ jumps [П„О©(t1) вүІ 1], however, generate aperiodicityвҖ”even for arbitrarily slow ПҶ(t). Inset: Off-diagonal element of Heff(t)/О»вҖІ e near ПҶ = ПҖ for П„О©(t1) вүҲ 1.257 (red) and П„О©(t1) вүҲ 0.00629 (blue), along with diagonal elements (grey). by an excess energy вҲј Оө. We further assume that Оұ(t) varies slowly in time, i.e., ОІ МҮОұ(t) вүӘ Оө2, so that transitions between the low- and high-energy states are negligible. Solutions to Schr МҲodingerвҖҷs equation then approximately take the form |ОҰ(t)вҹ© = the coefficients satisfy the equation of motion with Hinst a diagonal matrix populated by the instantaneous energies taining terms up to O пҝҪ ОөвҲ’2пҝҪ (except an unimportant term proportional to identity), we explicitly find Heff(t) = 2О»вҖІ e cos[ПҶ(t)/2]Пғz вҲ’ 1 2 МҮОё(t)Пғy, (5) where О»вҖІ e = О»e пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ ОІ2/(2Оө2) пҝҪ is a renormalized tun- neling amplitude, МҮОё(t) = вҲ’ МҮОұ(t)ОІ2/Оө2, and the Pauli matrices now refer to the basis of instantaneous eigen- states |ПҲj(t)вҹ©. When О»вҖІ e = 0, the time-evolution op- erator U = eвҲ’i пҝҪ T 0 Heff(t) вүЎ ei Оё 2 Пғy implements local mixing among the degenerate junction states with mixing angle Оё = пҝҪ T 0 dt МҮОё(t), in agreement with at ОІ вүӘ Оө. More interestingly, with О»вҖІ e Мё= 0, the Пғy term responsible for local mixing effectively couples the bound states related by time-reversal symmetryвҖ”even though the crossings in Fig. 1 are protected. To analyze the Josephson effect described by Eq. (5), we first consider МҮПҶ and МҮОё approximately constant. Treating local mixing as a small perturbation away from the time-reversal- invariant point, we expand Heff(t) near ПҶ = ПҖ to obtain a ... ... ... m mod 4 non-interacting I(ПҶ) interacting I(ПҶ) 1 4ПҖ 4ПҖ 2 2ПҖ, 4ПҖ, or aperiodic 2ПҖ, 4ПҖ, or aperiodic 3 4ПҖ or aperiodic 4ПҖ 4 2ПҖ, 4ПҖ, or aperiodic 2ПҖ Josephson junction between two sets of m proximitized nanowires that each (approximately) obey T 2 = +1 time-reversal symmetry . Table: Summary of the periodicity for the current- phase relation in the presence of local mixing, both in the non- interacting limit and with interactions. Multiple values are given when the result depends on local-mixing details. standard Landau-Zener Hamiltonian. The transition probabil- ity between instantaneous Heff(t) eigenstates monotonically increases as x = МҮОё2/О»вҖІ e МҮПҶ decreases. At x вү« 1, the adiabatic criterion is satisfied; here a system initialized into the instan- taneous ground state at ПҶ = 0 evolves into the instantaneous ground state at ПҶ = 2ПҖ, yielding a 2ПҖ-periodic current-phase relation. For x вүӘ 1 вҖҳfastвҖҷ phase winding instead overwhelms local mixing, and a 4ПҖ-periodic fractional Josephson effect emerges. Next we examine a вҖҳquenchвҖҷ that more closely resembles the proof-of-concept picture considered earlier: As sketched in the inset of Fig. 2, during an interval at which ПҶ вүҲ ПҖ, МҮОё(t) jumps from zero to a finite value over a time scale П„ and then similarly decays back to zero. Figure 2, main panel, depicts the numerically obtained transition probability as a function of П„О©(t1), where 2О©(t1) is the instantaneous energy gap evaluated at the jump; see caption for parameters. For вҖҳlargeвҖҷ П„ a local-mixing-induced 2ПҖ-periodic Josephson ef- fect again arises (Supplemental Material derives a condition for adiabatic evolution in this case). As П„ decreases, however, the transition probability becomes appreciable and eventually plateausвҖ”indicating an aperiodic current-phase relation. Thus far we have focused on unitary time evolution. We now note that continuously measuring the current can sta- bilize 4ПҖ periodicity through the quantum Zeno effect. Al- though current eigenstates correspond to energy eigenstates, the current is most distinguishable when the energies are de- generate; hence measurement backaction competes against local mixing. If the measurement projects onto a current eigenstate faster than the time scale of local mixing, the frac- tional Josephson effect survives (up to processes not consid- ered here). T 2 = +1 Josephson junction. Topological superconduc- tors with T 2 = +1 time-reversal symmetry can support an ar- bitrary number m of MZMs at each end in the non-interacting limit, but only m mod 8 with interactions . As a physical realization, we envision an array of m proximitized semicon- ductor nanowires in a magnetic field [10, 68вҖ“70], for which the minimal low-energy Hamiltonian preserves T 2 = +1 4 symmetry . Figure 3, top, sketches a Josephson junction assembled from such arrays. Our goal is to explore the impact of local mixing and interactions on the Josephson effect. Consider first the non-interacting limit. The junction hosts MZMs ОіL1,...,m from the left end and ОіR1,...,m from the right, which hybridize via HT 2=+1 JJ = пҝҪ j,k iО»jk cos(ПҶ/2)ОіLjОіRk. (6) Time-reversal symmetry persists at ПҶ = nПҖ (n вҲҲ Z); more- over, at ПҶ = ПҖ the hybridization vanishes, yielding 2m MZMs at the junction. As for the T 2 = вҲ’1 case, each energy de- scribed by Eq. (6) is 4ПҖ periodic in ПҶ, and hence a fractional Josephson effect exists at this level of analysis. Figure 4(a) illustrates the energies versus ПҶ for m = 3, with solid and dashed lines respectively denoting even- and odd-parity states. To incorporate local mixing, observe that ОҙH(t) in Eq. (4) also preserves T 2 = +1 symmetry (with ОіL, МғОіL, ОівҖІ Оө, МғОівҖІ Оө вҶ’ ОіL, МғОіL, ОівҖІ Оө, МғОівҖІ Оө and ОіОө, МғОіОө вҶ’ вҲ’ОіОө, вҲ’ МғОіОө). Thus one can imme- diately construct a local-mixing Hamiltonian for the T 2 = +1 problem by replacing ОіL вҶ’ ОіLj, МғОіL вҶ’ ОіLk in ОҙH(t) and summing over j, k pairs. The net effect is that local mix- ing can once again nonuniversally rotate the system among same-parity Hamiltonian eigenstates that are degenerate at ПҶ = ПҖ. For any m > 1 this degeneracy is nontrivial, implying that local mixing spoils the fractional Josephson effect unless the phase is swept sufficiently rapidly. Interestingly, for odd m > 1 local mixing can never generate 2ПҖ periodicity since the junction parity switches upon sweeping ПҶ by 2ПҖ; see, e.g., Fig. 4(a). Symmetry-preserving interactions, which we now turn on, substantially enrich this story. First, one only needs to consider m mod 4. Indeed with m = 4 the junction at ПҶ = ПҖ hosts 8 MZMsвҖ”whose degeneracy interactions com- pletely obliterate , thus stabilizing 2ПҖ periodicity. For m mod 4 = 1 a given fermion-parity sector has a unique ground state at ПҶ = ПҖ, so the fractional Josephson effect is immune to local mixing. The case m mod 4 = 2 essentially reduces to the TRITOPS Josephson junction already examined in great detail; at ПҶ = ПҖ a two-fold degeneracy in a given parity sector persists even with interactions, and local mixing accordingly generates 2ПҖ-periodicity, 4ПҖ-periodicity, or aperiodicity de- pending on details. Finally, for m mod 4 = 3 interactions shift crossings between same-parity states [recall Fig. 4(a)] away from ПҶ = ПҖ, where they become avoided crossings due to the absence of T symmetry; see Fig. 4(b). Interactions con- sequently protect the fractional Josephson effect against local mixing. See the Table from Fig. 3 for a summary. Discussion. A very general implication of our study is that symmetry-protected degeneracies among locally distinguish- able states do not necessarily suffice for generating robust nontrivial adiabatic cycles; examination of dynamics under generic conditions is additionally required. We have seen that T -symmetric local mixing perturbations that render braid- ing non-universal in TRITOPS wires also preclude (a) (b) E ПҶ +Hint avoided crossing ПҶ E вҮЎ 0 2вҮЎ вҮЎ 0 2вҮЎ Josephson junction in Fig. 3 in the m = 3 case. Solid and dashed lines respectively denote even- and odd-fermion-parity states. Cross- ings necessarily occur at ПҶ = ПҖ due to T 2 = +1 symmetry, and lo- cal mixing generically rotates among equal-parity degenerate states. (b) Many-body spectrum with interactionsвҖ”which shift the locations of the crossings away from the time-reversal-invariant point, where they are no longer protected. Interaction-induced avoided crossings between same-parity states protect the fractional Josephson effect against local mixing. a well-defined adiabatic fractional Josephson effect. Simi- lar results hold in junctions of T 2 = +1 topological su- perconductors, with the interesting addition that interactions in some cases immunize against local mixing. Our analy- sis exemplifies a more general result in that time- reversal-symmetry-protected effects are fragile in an open sys- tem. Whether an analogous fate befalls cycles in systems with degeneracies protected by local unitary symmetries remains an interesting open question. Our findings are relevant for experiments on both TRITOPS and nanowire-based Josephson junctions. Recent experiments investigating the Josephson effect in proximitized quantum spin Hall edges [72вҖ“74] observed signatures of 4ПҖ- and 2ПҖ- periodicity, whereas theory predicts an 8ПҖ-periodic Josephson effect [62, 75вҖ“77]. Subgap energy levels corresponding to the same fermion parity are predicted to have a Kramers degen- eracy at integer multiples of ПҶ = ПҖ; thus, local mixing could induce transitions at these time-reversal-invariant points. Ad- ditionally, the degree of T 2 = +1 symmetry breaking in Ma- jorana nanowires has important implications for topological quantum computing with MZMs [13вҖ“15]. Projective MZM parity measurements proposed in rely on pairs of MZMs hybridizing through adjacent quantum dots. Estimat- ing the magnitude of symmetry breaking, e.g., by observing the time scale of МҮПҶ(t) for which the junction in Fig. 3 recov- ers a periodic Josephson effect, would bound the visibility of these measurements.