A liquid nitrogen cooled superconducting transition edge sensor with ultra-high responsivity and GHz operation speeds Paul Seifert1†, José Ramón Durán Retamal1†, Rafael Luque Merino1, Hanan Herzig Sheinfux1, John N. Moore1, Mohammed Ali Aamir1, Takashi Taniguchi2, Kenji Wantanabe3, Kazuo Kadowaki4, Massimo Artiglia5, Marco Romagnoli5 and Dmitri K. Efetov1* 1. ICFO - Institut de Ciencies Fotoniques, The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Castelldefels, Barcelona, 08860, Spain 2. International Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics, National Institute for Materials Science, 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba 305-0044, Japan 3. Research Center for Functional Materials, National Institute for Materials Science, 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba 305-0044, Japan 4. Algae Biomass and Energy System (ABES) Research & Development Center & Institute of Materials Science University of Tsukuba 1-1-1, Tennodai, Tsukuba-shi, 305-8572, Japan 5. CNIT - National Interuniversity Consortium for Telecommunications, TeCIP -Institute of Com- munication, Information and Perception Technologies - Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna via Mo- ruzzi, 1, 56124 Pisa, Italy * E-mail: dmitri.efetov@icfo.eu, † equal contribution Photodetectors based on nano-structured superconducting thin films are currently some of the most sensitive quantum sensors and are key enabling technologies in such broad areas as quantum information, quantum computation and radio-astronomy. However, their broader use is held back by the low operation temperatures which require expensive cryostats. Here, we demonstrate a nitrogen cooled superconducting transition edge sen- sor, which shows orders of magnitude improved performance characteristics of any su- perconducting detector operated above 77K, with a responsivity of 9.61∙104 V/W, noise equivalent power of 15.9 fW/Hz-1/2 and operation speeds up to GHz frequencies. It is based on van der Waals heterostructures of the high temperature superconductor Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ, which are shaped into nano-wires with ultra-small form factor. To highlight the versatility of the detector we demonstrate its fabrication and operation on a telecom grade SiN waveguide chip. Our detector significantly relaxes the demands of practical applications of superconducting detectors and displays its huge potential for photonics based quantum applications. Because of their high detection efficiencies, low dark count rates and small noise equiv- alent powers (NEP), photo-detectors based on thin film superconductors (SCs) are crucial com- ponents in the development of revolutionary quantum communication protocols, such as quan- tum key distribution and the Bell inequality test1–5. Such outstanding performance is made pos- sible by engineering superconducting nanostructures with ultra-low heat capacity, which use the steep SC transition edge to induce large resistance jumps by the heat generated from ab- sorbed photons1,2,6. However, a broader use of SC detectors is held back by the low operation temperatures, which require expensive cryostats, and the highly disordered growth methods, which set an upper limit to the SC film thickness and impose strict restrictions to the employed SC materials and substrates. A breakthrough in this field would lie in the creation of ever thin- ner materials with ever higher superconducting transition temperatures (Tc), which would ulti- mately reach values beyond the boiling point of liquid nitrogen T > 77K. On this path, cuprate high temperature superconductors (high-Tc), with their record- high Tc > 100K7–9, are extremely promising. While their chemical sensitivity10,11 and the diffi- culty in thin film preparation strongly limited the performance of previous cuprate based photo- detectors9,12–16, recent breakthroughs in fabrication protocols allowed the preparation of single crystals of the optimally doped cuprate compound Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ (BSCCO), down to half a unit cell thick layers with thickness of d ~ 1.5nm and a Tc ~ 91K17,18. Belonging to the class of layered two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals (vdW) materials in which SC is confined to 2D planes18, BSCCO can be mechanically exfoliated and non-invasively transferred onto any sub- strate. These entirely new capabilities also open previously unimaginable prospects for SC de- tectors, as BSCCO based detectors can be deterministically integrated into silicon photonics platforms. Here we demonstrate a telecom wavelength high-Tc superconducting transition edge sensor (TES) that can be operated above liquid nitrogen temperatures, with record responsivity and operation speeds, which are comparable to state-of-the-art commercial detectors, such as InGaAs photodiodes9,12–16,19. The detector is made from superconducting BSCCO and is ena- bled by a novel inert nanofabrication, which allows unprecedentedly small detector dimensions as compared to most previous high-Tc detectors, with thickness d ~ 15nm and width w ~ 100nm (Figs. 1a-c). To highlight the material's versatility and integrability, we demonstrate operation of the BSCCO TES on a telecom grade SiN waveguide chip, which is laser illuminated through a grating coupler (Fig.1e and f). The photodetection principle of the BSCCO nano-wire is based on the sharp temperature dependent resistance at the superconducting transition edge, and tem- perature increase upon absorption of radiation, as is illustrated in Fig. 1d. The temperature increase upon absorption of radiation, locally drives the BSCCO into a resistive state which is stabilized via Joule self-heating and leads to a voltage spike across the device. At the same time, the superconducting surrounding of the nano-wire suppresses an electronic out-diffusion of heat, which is trapped at the thinnest part of the nano-structure5. The devices are prepared in inert argon atmosphere to avoid instantaneous oxidation of the BSCCO surface in air (SI Fig. S1). Few layer BSCCO sheets with thicknesses between 5 and 9 unit cells are mechanically exfoliated from bulk single crystals. These are then transferred onto the target substrate and encapsulated with thin sheets of insulating hexagonal boron-ni- tride layers (hBN), which prohibits further environmental degradation of the BSCCO. Electri- cal contacts to the BSCCO layer with contact resistances in the order of Rc ~ 0.1-1k is estab- lished by overlapping BSCCO with pre-patterned gold electrodes on the target substrate (SI). Without destroying the hermetic seal of the hBN layer, the BSCCO crystals are then locally subjected to focused helium ion beam irradiation (He-FIB) (SI), which modifies metallic BSCCO regions into insulating ones, by means of defect formation and amorphization20. The scan ability of the He-FIB and the ultra-high definition of the so-created insulating BSCCO regions down to 10nm allow to create homogeneous superconducting BSCCO nano-wires and circuits with conducting channel widths of only w ~ 100nm (SI Fig. S3-S5). Fig. 2a shows the temperature dependent resistance measurements R of a 7 unit cell thin BSCCO crystal before (gray) and after (blue) nano-wire fabrication with w ~ 100nm. Strik- ingly, after FIB shaping the device shows a robust SC state, with an onset of superconductivity at T ~ 90K. However, the SC transition becomes broadened by inhomogeneities and doping induced by the FIB treatment, with the zero-resistance state setting in only at around T ~ 40K. Fig. 2b shows the two-terminal differential resistance dV/dI measurements as a function of bias current Ibias and temperature T. We find a sharp superconducting transition at the critical current Ic ~ 435μA at T = 15K, which is monotonically decreasing when T is increased. In the super- conducting state, contact resistance at the gold/BSCCO interface gives rise to a reproducible residual resistance with a peak around zero bias. Depending on the sweeping direction, Ic de- velops a strongly pronounced hysteresis below T ~ 30K which can be explained by Joule self- heating in the resistive state when the current is swept down (Fig. 2c and SI Fig. S9). Connect- ing the nano-wire in parallel to a 1kΩ resistor during photo-detection measurements (Fig. 1b), prohibits its latching into a self-heated resistive state after absorption of radiation. We probe the photo response of the Ibias ~ 0.1mA biased device with a telecom laser with wavelength λ = 1550nm. Fig. 3a displays photo response maps, obtained by scanning the normally incident laser spot across the device, as well as across the grating coupler of the SiN waveguide. The responsivity of the detector is defined as the measured photo-voltage divided by the incident laser power Vphoto/Plaser. It exhibits a pronounced maximum when the laser is focused directly onto the nano-wire itself. For Vphoto/Plaser under free space coupling we assume full absorption of the laser power Plaser, which is incident on the metallic BSCCO nano-wire. Alternatively, the laser light can be injected into the waveguide, which then couples to the device through its evanescent mode and gives a sizeable photo-voltage response. Non-opti- mized grating coupling and propagation losses, result in a reduced overall efficiency (SI Fig. S11). However, recent studies of 2D materials on optimized photonic structures like wave- guides21,22 photonic crystals23–25, ring resonators26 and Fabry-Pérot microcavities27, have demonstrated that light absorption can be enhanced to almost 100%. We highlight the strong dependence of Vphoto on the superconducting transition edge, which shows a pronounced maximum at Ic. Fig. 3b compares the temperature dependent I/V characteristics (bottom) with the normalized photo-response Vphoto/Vmax (top) under laser illu- mination with Plaser = 100pW (top), where Vmax is the maximal response at Ic. The SC transition edge is sharply defined at low temperatures and gives rise to a large and sharp Vphoto. As tem- perature is increased, both gradually broaden, but strikingly even above T = 77K, supercon- ductivity is well formed and Vphoto shows a pronounced maximum and remains high. Fig. 3c shows the extracted maximum responsivity Vphoto/Plaser (blue) and the corresponding NEP (pink) as a function of device temperature T, where the NEP is obtained from the ratio of the theoretical thermal noise dominated voltage noise spectral density and Vphoto28. At T =15K, the detector performance reaches an ultra-high responsivity of Vphoto/Plaser = 2.33∙107 V/W result- ing in an ultra-low NEP = 55.2 aW/Hz-1/2. Most strikingly however, at T = 77K, the detector shows record performance for any SC detector, with a responsivity of Vphoto/Plaser = 9.61∙104 V/W and a NEP = 15.9 fW/Hz-1/2. Finally, we investigate the intrinsic speed limits of the detector, by measuring its AC relaxation time τ. To this end we employ a continuous wave photo-mixing technique, which was previously used to investigate the thermal relaxation in graphene (compare supporting in- formation S12)29. The BSCCO nano-wire is irradiated with two interfering, frequency-detuned lasers, which form an optical beating pattern with oscillation frequency Δf - the frequency dif- ference of the two lasers29. Measurements of the AC photo-voltage Vmix as a function of Δf reveal a Lorentzian peak, which corresponds to an exponential decay in the time domain, and hence determines the detectors relaxation time τ (Fig. 4a). We extract two time scales, one ultra-fast component τ1 ~ 220ps and a slower component τ2 ~ 2ns, which show only slight dependence on the sample temperature (Fig. 4b). These are longer than the thermal relaxation times found in bulk BSCCO crystals30, and may correspond to suppressed heat diffusion mech- anisms in these thin and nano-patterned devices. We show that these time-scales set the speed limits of the detector. At T = 77K it can operate at frequencies up to f ~ 100MHz without any sacrifice in responsivity, and can be even read out at GHz frequencies with a slightly reduced responsivity (Fig. 4c). Such ultra-fast operation speeds are absolutely unprecedented for a su- perconducting transition edge sensor, being many orders of magnitude faster than any previ- ously reported TES31,32. Our study presents a breakthrough in the development of high-performance supercon- ducting detectors and paves the way towards cheap, liquid nitrogen cooled quantum sensors. The presented unoptimized detector concept already shows record high performance charac- teristics, but it is feasible to push it to the ultimate limit of half a unit cell thickness. Alongside with the creation of more homogeneous nano-wire edges, this advancement will allow ever sharper SC transitions, and lead to the creation of liquid nitrogen cooled superconducting nano- wire single photon detectors (SNSPD) - a long standing goal in the field. The ease of integration into photonic circuits, will make such detectors a promising building block for the development of photonic quantum circuits.