Calibration of the von Wolffersdorff model using Genetic Algorithms Francisco J. Mendez1, ̊, Antonio Pasculli1, Miguel A. Mendez2, Nicola Sciarra1 1University G. D’Annunzio, Dept. of Engineering Geology (INGEO), Chieti-Pescara, Italy; 2 von Karman Institute for Fluid Dynamics, EA Department, Sint-Genesius-Rode, Belgium ̊Corresponding to: francisco.mendez@unich.it Abstract This article proposes an optimization framework, based on Genetic Algorithms (GA), to calibrate the constitutive law of von Wolffersdorff. This constitutive law is known as Sand Hy- poplasticity (SH), and allows for robust and accurate mod- eling of the soil behavior but requires a complex calibration involving eight parameters. The proposed optimization can automatically fit these parameters from the results of an oe- dometric and a triaxial drained compression test, by combin- ing the GA with a numerical solver that integrates the SH in the test conditions. By repeating the same calibration several times, the stochastic nature of the optimizer enables the un- certainty quantification of the calibration parameters and al- lows studying their relative importance on the model predic- tion. After validating the numerical solver on the ExCaliber- Laboratory software from the SoilModels’ website, the GA calibration is tested on a synthetic dataset to analyze the convergence and the statistics of the results. In particular, a correlation analysis reveals that two couples of the eight model parameters are strongly correlated. Finally, the cali- bration procedure is tested on the results from von Wolffers- dorff, 1996, and Herle & Gudehus, 1999, on the Hochstet- ten sand. The model parameters identified by the Genetic Algorithm optimization improves the matching with the ex- perimental data and hence lead to a better calibration. Keywords Hypoplasticity Model Calibration, Genetic Al- gorithm Optimization, Nonlinear Regression 1. Introduction To model the mechanical behavior of the soil, a large va- riety of constitutive laws have been developed, among which the hypoplasticity .This term has been coined in the 1986 by Dafalias although the first constitutive law has been proposed in the 1977 by Kolymbas . The study of the hypoplastic equations has been pioneered in the Univer- sity of Karlsruhe and Grenoble, with the objective of devel- oping constitutive models for granular materials, such as sand and gravel . Even if its earliest formulation did not take into account the void ratio as a state variable, the hypoplastic equations proved to be a powerful tool to describe the me- chanical behavior of the soil . Later, combining the contributions of Gudehus and Bauer , von Wolffersdorff formulated the set of equations that summarized over 25 years of previous studies . In this latest version, often referred to as Sand Hypoplasticity (SH), the constitutive law was able to describe the soil dila- tancy, pyknotropy, barotropicity, and the critical state. This model, although not without issue , has stood the test of time and remains an important tool to describe soils com- posed of undeformable and cohesionless grains. For cohesive soils, on the other hand, different kinds of hypoplastic constitutive laws have been developed. Nemunis proposed a visco-hyploplastic approach , while Maˇs ́ın elaborated an hypoplastic version of the Cam Clay model . With the intergranular strain concept proposed by Niemunis & Herle , which allows for extending the SH model to small deformation and cyclic loads, the hypoplas- tic theory is today able to describe the behaviour of granu- lar soil in a wide range of geotecnical problems . The interest of the scientific and professionals community for this family of constitutive laws is proven by their large dif- fusion in commercial codes, among which ABACUS, DIANA and PLAXIS. This article focuses on one of the most delicate aspects in the use of the SH constitutive law: its calibration, which is the identification of the model parameter for a given soil. This model depends on eight interconnected parameters that gov- ern a strongly nonlinear dynamic system. One of the most important contributions to the calibration of the SH model was proposed in 1996 by Herle & Gudehus . These au- thors have derived the analytic equations for estimating the SH parameters, and defined the experimental procedures re- quired for their identification. However, some of these ana- lytical formulae are extremely sensitive to the input data and can lead to considerable uncertainties in the estimated param- eters. Moreover, the calibration procedure proposed by Herle & Gudehus requires laboratory analyses that are uncommon arXiv:2006.08433v1 [cs.CE] 10 Jun 2020 in practice, which is usually limited to the triaxial and eodo- metric compression tests. To calibrate the SH model relying only on the results of these two tests, an optimization procedure is required. A free tool that for such calibration has been developed by T. Kadl ́ıˇcek, T. Janda and M. ˇSejnoha and is available at soilmodels.com/excalibre/. However, this pro- cedure tends to suppress the dilatancy and requires manual adjustments of some of the parameters. The scope of this work is to present an approach that re- turns all the SH parameters with no need for manual adjust- ments. This approach is based on a Genetic Algorithm (GA) optimizer, which interacts with a fast solver for the SH model to reproduce the results of the eodomeric and triaxial com- pression tests. A fundamental tool on which GA is based is the gener- ation of pseudorandom numbers. This type of approach is commonly used by the Monte Carlo method which has been also usefully applied in different fields, for example: . The GA has been initially developed by Holland in 1975 and later popularized by the excellent book of Goldberg . This algorithm is a global minimum optimizer, inspired by the principles of genetics and natural selection. In the era of the big data revolution, the GA has become a fundamental tool in a wide range of applications, including operation man- agement , image reconstruction , data-driven control and Machine Learning . The significant advantage of GA is easy programming and parallelization. Moreover, the GA offers a good balance between fast convergence and exploratory search, allowing for escaping from local minima and aiming to the global one. An excellent introduction to the subject is the monographs from Haupt & Haupt and Michalewicz . In this work, the GA optimizer operates on the set of model parameters, comparing the corresponding numerical predic- tion of the SH model to the experimental results until the best set is identified. The model equations implemented in the SH solver are described in Section 2, including both the general formulation and the simplified forms involved in the specific tests considered in this work. Section 3 describes the cali- bration methodology, including the integration procedure, the treatment of the different tests, the formulation of the cost function to minimize, and the GA optimizer. The results are presented in Section 4, which is divided into three parts. Sec- tion 4.1 presents a validation of the integration procedure. Section 4.2 focuses on the problem of solution uniqueness and its link to the sensitivity of the model and the uncertainty of the identified coefficients. These points are addressed by using the numerical model to construct synthetic experimen- tal data and then testing the capabilities of the optimizer to retrieve the coefficients from which the data is generated. Fi- nally, in Section 4.3, the algorithm is tested on the experimen- tal dataset provided by von Wolffersdorff in . The calibra- tion from GA, von Wolffersdorff and Herle & Gudehus are compared. The conclusions are collected in Section 5. 2. The Sand Hypoplasticity (SH) Model The Sand Hypoplasticity (SH) theory considers the soil as a continuous porous media for which it is possible to define a constitutive law in terms of rate-equations . These rate- equations represent a nonlinear dynamical system describing the time evolution of the objective stress tensor ̋T P R3ˆ3 to the granulate stretching rate D “ p∇vs ` ∇vT s q{2 P R3ˆ3, where vs is the velocity of the grain skeleton, the Cauchy effective stress T, and the void ratio e: # ̋T “ F ` D, T, e, P ̆ 9e “ gpD, eq (1) The objective stress tensor, used to preserve the inde- pendence on the frame of reference, is defined following Zaremba-Jaumann as: ̋T “ 9T ́ W ̈ T ` T ̈ W , (2) where 9T is the time derivative of the Cauchy effective stress and W “ p∇vs ́ ∇vT s q{2 is the spin tensor. The nonlinear function F depends the set of eight param- eters P P R8ˆ1. The calibration procedure consists in iden- tifying these parameters so that the solution of the dynamical system in (1) recovers the experimental results from two clas- sical tests: the oedometer and the triaxial drained test. The function g express the mass conservation of the sample dur- ing the test. Neglecting the deformability of the grains, this function relates the time evolution of the void ratio to the vol- umetric deformation as follows 9e “ p1 ` eq Tr ́ D ̄ . (3) This section describes how to obtain the dynamical sys- tem in (1); section 3 describes the optimization procedure to identify the model parameters. 2.1. General Formulation Following the formulation from von Wolffersdorff , the nonlinear function F in (1) becomes: ̋T “ fe fb TrpˆT2q ́ F 2D`a2 TrpˆT ̈DqˆT`fd a F ` ˆT` ˆT ̊ ̆ }D} ̄ (4) where Tr denotes the trace of a tensor, } } is the tensor norm }A} “ a Tr pAAT q, ˆT ̊ “ ˆT ́ 1{3I, with I the identity tensor and ˆT “ T{TrpTq. The coefficients pfe, fb, F, a, fdq have a semi-empirical interpretation and depend on the parameters of the model 2 that needs to be tuned during the calibration. The coeffi- cients a and F are linked to the critical yielding surface from Matsuoka-Nakai and are computed as: a “ ? 3p3 ́ sin φcq 2 ? 2 sin φc (5) F “ d 1 8 tan2 ψ ` 2 ́ tan2 ψ 2 ` ? 2 tan ψ cos 3θ ́ tan ψ 2 ? 2 , (6) where: tan ψ “ ? 3}ˆT ̊} (7) cos 3θ “ ́ ? 6 “ trpˆT ̊3q TrpˆT ̊2qs3{2 . (8) In the hydrostatic conditions (i.e., tan ψ “ 0) and in axysiym- metric conditions (i.e., 0 ď tan ψ ď ? 2 and cos 3θ “ ́1), the equation (8) is an undetermined function tending to F “ 1 . The barotropy ad piknotropy coefficients fb and fe in (4) were originally formulated as: fb “ ̃ ei0 ec0 ̧β hs n 1`ei ei ́ ́ TrpTq hs ̄1 ́n 3 ` a2 ́ a ? 3 ̃ ei0 ́ ed0 ec0 ́ ed0 ̧α , (9) fe “ ̃ ec e ̧β . (10) However, fe and fb are usually replaced by their product fs: fs “ hs n 1 ` ei ei ̃ ei e ̧β ̃ ́ TrpTq hs ̧1 ́n 3 ` a2 ́ a ? 3 ̃ ei0 ́ ed0 ec0 ́ ed0 ̧α (11) The coefficient fd is the pyknotropy coefficient defined as fd “ ̃ e ́ ed ec ́ ed ̧α . (12) The previous equations depends on the maximum (ed), minimal (ei) and critical (ec) void fractions. These are linked, according to Bauer , by the the system: ei ei0 “ ed ed0 “ ec ec0 “ exp « ́ ̃ ́ TrpTq hs ̧nff . (13) For a given mean pressure p “ ́trpTq{3, among the pos- sible void ratio ed ă e ă ei, we can identify regions of dila- tive (for ed ă e ă ec) and contractive (for ec ă e ă ei) behavior. (p{hs , e). p{hs ́ e plane. The dashed area represents the region of dilative behaviour of the soil and the dotted area the contractive one. Re- adapted from . Finally, the set of equations (5)-(13) include eight un- known parameters P “ tec0, ed0, ei0, hs, φ, n, α, βu, which are herein described . • ec0, ed0 ei0. These are, respectively, the critical the minimal and the maximal void ratios, obtained when ps “ TrpTq “ 0 (13). The ratios λd “ ed0{ec0 and λi “ ei0{ec0 govern the amplitude of the domains of dilatant or contractive behaviour, while ec0 defines the critical state in terms of void ratio. • hs is called granular hardness. This has the dimensions of kPa but should not be confused with the grains rigid- ity which are considered undeformable. This parameter is linked to the barotropy of the solid skeleton and its increase of the slope of eodometric curve response. • φc is the well-known critical friction angle and is linked to the shear strength in critical conditions. • n is a parameter influencing the barotropy of the soil. Increasing n produces an increase of the curvature in the response curve in the eodometric tests. • α is the exponent in the calculation of the picnotropy co- efficient fd and controls the dependency of peak friction angle on relative density. • β is an coefficient influencing barotropy and pikno- tropy. Increasing β produce an increase of the stiffness of material and in particular the shear stiffness. 3 The range of these parameters for various granular soil, taken from , is collected in Table 1. Finally, it is worth recalling that the SH constitutive law is a classical state-dependent model with the time arbitrarily scaled using a reference deformation ratio D. The general constitutive law is in fact homogeneous and of first order with respect to D, hence: ̋TpT, λD, eq “ λ ̋TpT, D, eq for λ ą 0 (14) 2.2. Axisymmetric Conditions Following Herle & Gudehus , the assumption of ax- isymmetry of the tensor equation (4) simplifies both the prin- cipal (axial) stress T1 and the second (radial) stress T2. The stress and the rate of deformation tensors reduce to T “ » – T1 0 0 0 T2 0 0 0 T2 fi fl D “ » – D1 0 0 0 D2 0 0 0 D2 fi fl . (15) In the case of W “ 0, the objective stress tensor reduces to the Cauchy effective stress ̋T “ 9T (see eq. 2) while intro- ducing (15) in the nonlinear function F from (1) yields: 9T1 “ fs pT1 ` 2T2q2 T 2 1 ` 2T 2 2 ̈ « D1 ` a2 ˆT1D1 ` 2T2D2 pT1 ` 2T2q2 ̇ T1` ` fd a 3 ˆ5T1 ́ 2T2 Ts1 ` 2T2 ̇b D2 1 ` 2D2 2 ff , (16) 9T2 “ fs pT1 ` 2T2q2 T 2 1 ` 2T 2 2 « D2 ` a2 ˆT1D1 ` 2T2D2 pT1 ` 2T2q2 ̇ T2` ` fd a 3 ˆ4T2 ́ T1 T1 ` 2T2 ̇b D2 1 ` 2D2 2 ff . (17) The response of the soil to the eodometric and triaxial drained tests can obtained by integrating in time the dynam- ical system in eq.s (16)-(17), together with the continuity equation (3). 3. Calibration Methodology The proposed calibration procedures combines a stochas- tic optimizer with a numerical solver of Ordinary Differential Equations (ODE). For every set of parameters P, the ODE solver integrates the hypoplasticity model in (1) to compute the soil response to a set of tests; the optimizer compares the obtained curves with a set of experimental data points and updates the parameters P until a maximum number of iteration is reached. All the function used in the calibration algorithm are developed in Python, using the Numpy library https://numpy.org. Both for the matrix operations and the random number gen- eration . The procedure for integrating the hypoplasticity model is described in Section 3.1 while the stochastic optimization strategy is described in Section 3.2. Section 3.4 reports a note on the search space definition. 3.1. Integration Procedure Assuming that the eodometric and the triaxial drain test simulated in the calibration are in axisymmetric conditions, the hypoplasticity model simplifies to (16), (17) and (3). The integration of this dynamical system is carried out us- ing the simple explicit Euler scheme. This allows for keep- ing the computational cost of each integration to a minimum, minimizing the number of function evaluations. Moreover, this formulation allows for an easy check of the solution ad- missibility (TrpTq ă 0 and ed ď e ď ei) at every time step. Defining Xk “ rT k 1 , T k 2 , eksT the state vector of the ODE system, the time integration scheme reads Xk`1 “ FGpXk, Pq ∆t ` Xk , (18) where FG here includes both F and g in (1). Because of the linear and homogeneous relation in (14), it is possible to fix an arbitrary reference D1 “ ́1 and com- pute the integration time tf from the maximal deformation obtained at the end of each test. For the oedometric test, the integration time is tf “ ́ ln ˆ 1 ́ e0 ́ efin e0 ` 1 ̇ , (19) while for the triaxial compression test is tf “ εfin . (20) Two exemplary results from these two tests are shown in Fig- ures 2 and 3 in which the e0, efin, εfin are indicated. For the sake of completeness, the deformation along the first principal component remains indicated as D1, although all the calculations presented in this work implies D1 “ ́1. Once the integration time r0, tfs is defined, the time step is computed as ∆t “ tf{nStep, where the number of time steps is fixed to nStep “ 100. The function FpX, Pq in (18) differs in the two tests, as detailed in the following subsections. Oedometer Compressive test The oedometer test consists in measuring the vertical dis- placement of a sample subject to vertical compression and having lateral expansion prevented. The sample for this test must be as loose as possible. A compacted dense sample, 4 Soil Tipe φc p ̋q hs pMPaq n p ́q ed0 p ́q ec0 p ́q ei0 p ́q α p ́q β p ́q Hochstetten gravel 36 0.18 0.26 0.45 0.50 0.10 1.9 Hochstetten sand 33 1500 0.28 0.55 0.95 1.05 0.25 1.0 Hostun sand 31 1000 0.29 0.61 0.96 1.09 0.13 2.0 Karlsruhe sand 30 5800 0.28 0.53 0.84 1.00 0.13 1.0 Lausitz sand 33 1600 0.19 0.44 0.85 1.00 0.25 1.0 Toyoura sand 30 2600 0.27 0.61 0.98 1.10 0.18 1.1 Zbraslav sand 31 5700 0.25 0.52 0.82 0.95 0.13 1.0 which has undergone load cycles with more than one reversal point, would in fact be difficult to model with the SH . The procedure to correctly prepare the sample for calibrating the SH model is discussed in . A schematic of the test, recalling the main parameters in- volved is shown in Figure 2 together with a sample set of ex- perimental data. The results of this tests are usually collected in the plane (e, ́T1) for sand and (e, logp ́T1q) for clay. points obtained from a tests. The boundary condition for the eodometric test is D2 “ 0. Imposing this to the set of equations (16),(17) and (3), the system (1) in matrix form reduces to: » —– 9T1 9T2 9e fi ffifl “ fs » —– L11 L12 0 L21 L22 0 0 0 1 ` e fi ffifl » —– D1 0 D1 fi ffifl ` ` fs fd » —– N1 N2 0 fi ffifl b D2 1 , (21) where L11 “ TrpTq2{ TrpT2q ̈ p1 ` a2T 2 1 { TrpTq2q (22) L12 “ 2a2T1T2{ TrpT2q (23) L21 “ a2T1T2{ TrpT2q (24) L22 “ 2a2T1T2{ TrpT2q ̈ p1 ` a2T 2 2 {trpTq2q (25) N11 “ TrpTq{ TrpT2q ̈ a{3p5T1 ́ 2T2q (26) N22 “ TrpTq{ TrpT2q ̈ a{3p4T2 ́ T1q (27) Triaxial Compression Test The triaxial compression test is performed on a drained and saturated sample, consolidated at a prescribed pressure . During the axial compression, the radial pressure is kept con- stant. The tests are performed at a controlled deformation rate εa: εa “ ́ ż tf 0 D1 dt “ tf . (28) The test returns the volume change εv εv “ ́ ż tf 0 TrpDq dt “ e ́ e0 1 ` e0 , (29) and the deviatoric stress q “ T2 ́ T1 . (30) A sketch of the test, with the relevant parameters and an example set of results are shown in Figure 3. The results of this test are usually given in triaxial deviatoric plane (εa, q) and triaxial volumetric plane (εa, εv). The boundary condition for the triaxial drained test is 9T2 “ 0. Therefore, the set (16), (17) and (3) in matrix form becomes: 5 (a) Tiaxial deviatoric plane (b) Triaxial volumetric plane and example of resulting experimental points in the (q, εa, top) and the (εv, εa, bottom) planes. » —– 9T1 0 9e fi ffifl “ fs » —– L11 L12 0 L21 L22 0 0 0 1 ` e fi ffifl » —– D1 D2 D1 ` 2 D2 fi ffifl ` ` fs fd » —– N1 N2 0 fi ffifl b D2 1 ` 2 D2 2 . (31) This problem is mixed since unknowns are both on RHS ( 9T1 and e) and the LHS (D2) . Following Nemunis , the solution strategy consists in obtaining an expression for D2 from the second equation, solve the resulting quadratic in terms of the norm x “ a D2 1 ` 2D2 2, and finally consider only the solution with x ą 0. The second equation yields: D2 “ ́fd N2 x ` L21 D1 L22 (32) and the introduction of x gives: x2 ́ 2 p ́Ns fd x ́ L11 D1q2 L2 22 ́ D2 1 “ 0 . (33) The solution of the resulting quadratic are: xI “ ́L22 a ́2 f 2 d N2 D2 1 ` L2 1 ` 2 D2 1 L21` 2 fd 2N 2 2 ́ L22 ` ` 2 fd L21 N2 D1 2 fd 2N 2 2 ́ L22 , (34) xII “ L22 a ́2 f 2 d N2 D2 1 ` L2 1 ` 2 D2 2 fd 2N 2 2 ́ L22 ` ́ 2 fd L21 N2 D1 2 fd 2N 2 2 ́ L22 . (35) The positive solution among xI e xII is used to com- pute D2 from (32) and finally advance the system (31). The uniqueness of the solution of the hypoplasticity problem de- pends on the existence of a single positive solution of (33). Therefore, if multiple or no positive solutions exist, the pro- posed algorithm excludes the corresponding set of parame- ters. 3.2. Cost Function Definition The cost function driving the optimization of the parame- ters P is built by accounting for the discrepancy between the numerical predictions and the set of measurements (see also ). The formulation of the cost function must account for two important aspects. Firstly, the parameters are not entirely independent; secondly, the weight of the data in input should be unit-independent and have a comparable weight in the op- timization, despite their largely different span (for example e P r0, 4 ́ 1s while q P r0 ́ 1.6sMPa). Concerning the parameter independence, the optimal search must be constrained within the contractive/dilative do- mains of interest (cf. Figure 1). This reduces the set P from eight to six parameters: ed0 and ei0 are chosen to preserve the ratios λd and λi. Following Herle & Gudehus , these ratios are taken in the range λd “ 0.52 ̃ 0.65 and λi – 1, 2. Therefore, the optimizer acts only on P ̊. P ̊ “ tec0, hs, φ, n, α, βu . (36) Concerning the weight of the data in the optimization, the experimental points obtained in the oedometric and the tri- axial tests are scaled in the dimensionless planes (pεE, pT1), (pεa, pq) and (pεa, pεv). This new scaled set reads: 6 pεa “ εa{εfin (37) pεv “ εv{maxpεvq (38) pq “ q{maxpqq (39) pT1 “ ́T1{minp ́T1q (40) pεE “ ́ ln ́ 1 ́ e0 ́ e e0 ` 1 ̄ { ln ́ 1 ́ e0 ́ efin e0 ` 1 ̄ . (41) This scaling maps the experimental data onto curves that start from the origin (0, 0) and end at (1, 1). For a given set of parameters P, the result of the numeri- cal integration yields the time evolution of the solution vector Xk on a uniform temporal grid. The deviation between the set of experimental points and the model prediction is eval- uated in terms of root mean square of the Fr ́echet distance. This measurement of curve similarity has been already used in various applications and provides a measurement which is invariant to the axis orientation . For a generic plane px, yq, given a set of M experimental points pxk, ykq with k P r1, Ms and a set of N numerical predictions pxj, yjq with j P r1, Ns, the discrete Fr ́echet distance is a vector DF of size minpM, Nq “ M with entries DFpkq “ min @jďN ! dE ` k, rj,j`1 ̆) (42) where dEpk, rj,j`1q is the distance between the experimental point k and the segment line rj,j`1 connecting two consec- utive experimental points. These distances dE are shown in the pq ́ pεa plane in Figure 4. The Fr ́echet distance is indi- cated with black circles centered on each data point, in red. In the figure, a sub-panel further describes the distance cal- culation. The deviation between experimental points and nu- merical prediction is finally computed as δ “ ||DF||2. This calculation is performed for the all curves produced by the tests, each providing a measurements of discrepancy. The final cost function is then CpPq “ w1 δ1pPq ` w2 δ2pPq ` w3 δ3pPq (43) where w1,2,3 are the weights setting the relative importance of each plane. The cost function in (43) can be easily extended to include results from other tests, if these are available. More- over, while this work presents a single-objective optimiza- tion, multiple objectives can be implemented via multiple cost functions. For example, one could consider each of the con- tribution in (43) as a different cost function, and seek the best compromise (Pareto front) among the different objectives. 3.3. Genetic Algorithm Optimizer Like many other population-based stochastic optimizers, the Genetic Algorithm (GA) starts from an initial population of possible solutions –in this work the model parameters P ̊– points and the prediction of the numerical model. and generates new sets by applying statistical operators. In the GA, these operators are designed to mimic the Darwinian theory of survival of the fittest. Borrowing from Biology, the GA terminology refers to each of the possible solutions as individual and the statistical operations are referred to as elitism, mutation, selection and cross-over. As shown in the pseudo-code listed in the Algorithm 1, the genetic algorithm involves three procedures. The first one is INIT.POP, to initialize the population; the second is EVAL.POP, to evaluate the population; the third is UP- DATE.POP, to update the population. A more detailed listing of each of these procedures is provided in the algorithm 2, 3 and 4. Algorithm 1 Optimization Algorithm–main main(): INIT.POP(Ni,Pmin,Pmax)Ñ Pop for iteration in (1,NI) do EVAL.POP(Pop,λi,λd)Ñ ID UPDATE.POP(Pop,Ni,iteration,NI)Ñ Pop end for EVAL.POP(Pop,Edo,Txd,Edo0,Txd0) P ̊=PoprIDr1ss return: P ̊ end A population is a matrix collecting all the individuals, one for each row. This matrix is indicated as Pop. The size of Pop is (Ni,6), were Ni is the number of individuals, and 6 is the size of constrained parameters P ̊. The population is initialized randomly within the search space bounded by vectors containing the lowest and the largest possible values 7 of each parameter P ̊ min and P ̊ max. These are introduced as user inputs. As reported in the INIT.POP procedure, we initialize half of the population with a uniform distribution spanning the en- tire search space, the other half as a Gaussian distribution cen- tered in the search space with a standard deviation equal to one-sixth of the range. Algorithm 2 Initialization of population. The functions random.uniform and random.normal are the ones available in Numpy . procedure INIT.POP(Ni,P ̊ min,P ̊ max,λi,λd) NGau=0.5Ni NUni=Ni ́ NGau for i in (1,6) do μris =(P ̊ maxris-P ̊ minris)/2 σris=(P ̊ maxris-P ̊ minris)/6 end for PU=random.uniform (Pmin,Pmax,NUni) PG=random.normal (μ,σ,NGau) return: Pop = PU Y PG end procedure Starting from the initial population, the EVAL.POP and the UPDATE.POP are executed in a loop until the maximum num- ber of iterations NI is reached. The evaluation consists of computing the cost function of each set of parameters, i.e., of each individual. The cost associated with each individ- ual is used by UPDATE.POP as a measurement of fitness and the population is ranked from the best (low cost) to the worst (high cost) candidate solution. This evaluation procedure is performed by the function EVAL.POP, which returns the in- dex vector of the list of first placed individuals ID. Algorithm 3 Evaluate population procedure EVAL.POP(Pop,λi,λd) COST= C(Pop,λi,λd) ID=COST.argsort() return: ID end procedure The procedure UPDATE.POP update the population com- bining elitism, mutation, selection and cross-over. Elitism consists in advancing some the best individual to the next generation. The fraction of elite individuals is herein indi- cated with nE and the total number of elite individual passed to the next generation, NE “ nE ̈ Ni, is taken form the Pop using the pointer form the first NE element of ID vector. Mutation is the fundamental operation that lets the GA ex- plore the solution space: a percentage of the population at each iteration continues to be randomly chosen, in this work from a uniform random distribution in P ̊ min ˆ P ̊ max. The fraction of mutated individuals is indicated with nM, and is computed as an exponentially decaying function of the itera- tions. This allows for balancing exploration and exploitation as the population convergences to its final distribution. The remaining Nn “ Nip1 ́nE ́nMq elements are gen- erated from the best individual via selection and cross-over. Selection is the operation that defines which of the individ- ual is allowed to mate; cross-over is the operation that defines how the information in mating individuals is combined to pro- duce the new ones, referred to as the offspring. Following the rank weighting approach in , the selection of individu- als is performed using a set of random numbers. These are sampled from a triangular probability density function of the form: ppnq “ 2pNf ́ nq pNf ́ 1q2 , (44) rounded to the closest integer, where Nf “ nf Ni is the num- ber of individuals that is allowed to mate and n P r1, Nfs is the rank of the individual, namely the index in the sorted list ID. This distribution implies that the fittest individu- als (n “ 1) have a higher chance of mating while the last (n “ Nf) has zero chances. Once the best Nf individuals are identified, the cross-over is generated by blending the features in the two parents as Pnew “ θkPn1 ` p1 ́ θkqPn2 (45) where n1 and n2 are the indices of the two randomly chosen parents from the triangular distribution in (44) and the vector θk selects a random number in the range r0, 1s for each of the 6 entries in Pn1, Pn2. The procedure UPDATE.POP returns a new population of individuals, characterized by an improved average cost. 3.4. A note on the search space In the methodology proposed thus far, the model calibra- tion is entirely entrusted to the Genetic Algorithm (GA). In- deed, the optimization can identify the correct parameters only if these are within the algorithm’s search space. How- ever, the proper definition of such search space requires ex- perience and, in some cases, multiple trials. Increasing the search space increases the risks of encountering a local mini- mum and decreases the convergence performances of the op- timization; decreasing the search space decreases the prob- ability that the best set of parameters is included and hence reachable. While it is not trivial to correctly identify the search space, it is generally easy to see if the chosen one is inappropriate: when this is too narrow, the population tends to clusters on its boundaries; when this is too large, a substantial variance be- tween the solutions obtained in different trials is observed. It is thus essential to run the optimization several times and an- alyze the statistics of the identified parameters. This analysis is proposed in Section 4.2. 8 Algorithm 4 Update the population. The functions random.uniform and random.triangular are the ones available in Numpy . procedure UPDATE.POP(Pop,Ni,ID,IT,NI) nE=0.01, nf=0.50, μ0=0.5, μfin=0.1 NE=nE ̈ Ni Peli=PoprIDr0 : NEss nM=μ0 ̈ exprIT {NI logpμfin{μ0qs NM=nM ̈ Ni Pmut=random.uniform (Pmin,Pmax,NM) NN=Ni ̈ p1 ́ nE ́ nMq for i in (1,NN) do Sel=random.triangular(nf ̈ NN,2) θ=random.uniform (0,1,6) Pn1=Pop[ID[Sel] Pn2=Pop[ID[Sel] Pnew[i]=θ ̈ Pn1 ` pθ ́ 1q ̈ Pn2 end for return: Pop = Peli Y Pmut Y Pnew end procedure It is good practice to build the calibration by using as much as possible well-known results from previous authors. In par- ticular, some coefficients are more easily estimated than oth- ers. The coefficient φc, for example, can be obtained with usual procedures based on the Mohr plane with acceptable uncertainties, if the shear banding is prevented . The pa- rameters n e hs can be estimated from the methods proposed in . From the authors’ experience, these can lead to es- timations of n with uncertainties in the range 10-20%, while the uncertainty in the estimation of hs can reach up to 70%. The remaining parameter can be estimated from the relations proposed in . 4. Results This section is organized in three subsections. In 4.1, the numerical method to integrate presented in the section 3.1 is validated using a free tool. In 4.2, the repeatably and the un- certainty of the calibration parameter is analyzed, along with a correlation analysis of the calibration parameters. Finally, 4.2 compares the calibration results for the Hochstetten sand soil presented in and . 4.1. Validation of the response curve The validation of the numerical model described in 3.1.1 and 3.1.2 was carried out using ExCaliber-Laboratory Test Simulation1. This tool is developed by Prof. Maˇs ́ın and co- workers and is powered by GEO5 FEM, a software by Fine Civil Engineering Software. The hypoplastic parameters chosen for the validation are 1see https://soilmodels.com/excalibre-en/ those proposed by von Wolffersdorff for the Hochstetten sand in : φc “ 33 ̋, hs “ 106 kPa, n “ 0.25, ec0 “ 0.95, ed0 “ 0.55, ei0 “ 1.05, α “ 0.25 e β “ 1.5. The initial conditions are T1 “ ́300kPa, T2 “ ́300 kPa and e “ 0.660 for the triaxial test and T1 “ ́10kPa, T2 “ ́10 kPa and e “ 0.730 for the oedometric test. The triaxial test goes up to the maximum deformation εfin “ 0.11 while the eodomeric test proceeds until the void ratio efin “ 0.680 is reached. The results for the three tests are shown in Figure 5. The curves are practically indistinguishable, hence validat- ing the numerical procedure used by the proposed optimizer. 4.2. Calibration Repeatability and Uncertainty In order to validate the optimizer and analyze the uncer- tainty of the calibrated parameters, this section reports on the analysis of synthetic data. The scope of these synthetic labo- ratory experiments, for which the exact set of model parame- ters is known, is threefold. The first objective is to analyze how quickly and how well the optimizer converges to the final set of parameters. The second objective is to analyze the variance and hence the uncertainty of each parameter. It is worth highlighting that by uncertainty we here refer to a measure of the parameter uniqueness. In other words, given a large set of converged so- lutions, all equally valid according to the cost function in (43), we reveal how sensitive the model is with respect to a given parameter. The third objective is to analyze the correlation between all the parameters and hence open possible avenues for a data-driven reduction of the calibration problem. The parameter chosen for the simulations in this section are φc “ 34 ̋, hs “ 3.8 ̈ 106 kPa, n “ 0.30, ec0 “ 0.886, ed0 “ 0.531, ei0 “ 1.06, α “ 0.144 and β “ 1.5. These rep- resent the exact solution for the calibration procedure. A set of M “ 15 points is extracted from the numerical simulation of one eodometer test while M “ 30 points is extracted from three triaxial drained tests. These tests, one odometer test and three triaxial drained tests, provide the minimal requirement for the model calibration. The initial conditions for these synthetic tests are shown in the Table 2. The triaxial tests go on until the maximum deformation εfin “ 0.20 is reached, while the eodomeric tests continue until a void ratio efin “ 0.720. and the oedometer test (EDO1) for the synthetic test cases. Test T1 The soil T2 e (kPa) (kPa) ( ́) TxD1 - 50.0 - 50.0 TxD2 TxD3 EDO1 -8.0 -4.0 We consider ratios λd “ 0.60 and λi “ 1.20 and the 9 (a) Eodometric plane (b) Tiaxial deviatoric plane (c) Triaxial volumetric plane bration (blue continuous curve) with the ExCalibre-Laboratory Test software (red markers). The validation is performed on the Eodo- metric plane (a), the triaxial deviatoric plane (b) an the triaxial volu- metric plane (c). search interval indicated in table 3. The parameters of the GA are set to Ni “ 500 and maxand P ̊ min ID φ hs n ec0 α β ( ̋q (GPa) (-) (-) (-) (-) max 40 9.0 0.40 1.1 0.20 2.0 min 25 1.0 0.25 0.6 0.05 1.0 (a) (b) iterations, showing the convergence of the population. The dashed lines mark the interval μ ̆2σ at each iteration, where μ and σ are the mean and the standard deviation of the population allowed to mate. NI “ 20, while the remaining ones are taken as the default in Algorithm 2 and 4. The weights wi i “ 1, 2, 3 in the cost function (43) are equal to unity, hence giving equal impor- tance to the errors in each test. To qualitatively analyze the convergence of the GA, we first focus on the evolution of the distribution of parameters during the iterative search. For the sake of compactness, we here focus on the histograms of the parameters φc and hs, being the histograms of the others quite similar. The evolu- tion of the population of these two parameters are shown in togram, with a slightly larger concentration in the central area of the search space, as prescribed in the Algorithm 2. Iteration by iteration, the distribution focuses on the result that mini- mizes the cost function, and the peak in the histograms grows accordingly. The narrowing of the population distribution is further highlighted by the dashed lines in Figure 6; these lines mark the boundaries of the interval μ ̆ 2σ at each iteration, where μ and σ are the mean and the standard deviation of the 10 population allowed to mate. The rate of convergence largely depends on the sensitivity of the cost function to each parameter: in the figures shown, the parameter φc appears to have a more important impact, and hence its distribution converges faster than hs. The reader should notice that even if the convergence is reached in both cases after about 15 iterations, a small portion of the his- togram remains flat and outside the mean value. This is due to the small percentage of mutations that is maintained through the iterations to continue exploring the search space. circles indicate the max values, the blue squares indicate the mean values. For both quantities, the plot shows the best-case (denoted with filled markers) and the worst-case (denoted with empty mark- ers) over 1000 tests. To assess the convergence performance of the algorithm and the parameter uncertainties, the calibration is here re- peated 1000 times. Figure 7 collects the main results on the cost function evolution as a function of the iteration number. The plot shows the evolution of the mean error, indicated with blue square markers, and the minimal error, indicated with red circle markers. For each of these quantities, the upper curve refers to the worst possible result among the 1000 trials, while the lowest curve refers to the best result. As expected, the convergence is proven by a reduction of one to two orders of magnitudes in the cost function. To further highlight the op- timization convergence, Figure 8 compares the experimental results with the prediction of the numerical solver using the best and the worst set of parameters obtained from the last it- eration of all the trials. As the difference in the cost function varies from CpPq “ 3 ̈10 ́1 (worst case) to CpPq “ 4 ̈10 ́2 (best case), the difference in the prediction is unnoticeable. It thus safe to conclude that the algorithm has converged, and setting the maximum number of iterations to NI “ 20 ensures that both the best-case and the worst-case set lead to acceptable results. The Figure 7 also shows that satisfactory convergence is reached after about ten iterations. However, despite the satisfying convergence, it is essential to notice that the final cost function is still three orders of magnitude larger than the cost function associated with the exact (the introduced) solution, which leads to CpPq “ 2 ̈ 10 ́5. Because of this apparently irrelevant difference, the ob- tained set of parameters does not coincide with the exact one. Moreover, the statistics of the parameters obtained in all the trials lead to a non-negligible variance, which can be asso- ciated to the parameter uncertainty. The main statistical re- sults for each of the parameters, obtained over all the tests, are collected in Table 4. In particular, the table collects the mean result, the standard deviation normalized by the mean, the minimum and the maximum values. While for most pa- rameters the ratios σ{μ are below 3%, the normalized stan- dard deviation σ{μ for hs reaches up to 7%. This implies that this parameter is overall less important than the others and its precise estimation is of comparatively lower importance. (μ), standard deviation (σ) over mean, minimum and maximum. Par. μ σ{μ ̈ 102 min max φ ( ̋) hs (GPa) 4.03 3.15 5.11 n ( ́) 0.30 0.28 0.31 ec0 ( ́) 0.87 0.86 0.89 α ( ́) 0.15 0.14 0.16 β ( ́) 1.44 1.32 1.55 Finally, to conclude the statistical analysis of the obtained result, we now focus on the correlation between all the pa- rameters. The Pearson correlation coefficients between the full set of parameters is shown in Table 5, rounded to the the third digit. eters. φc hs n ec0 α β φc 1 hs 1 n 1 ec0 1 α 1 β 1 The correlation between the parameters phs, nq and pec0, αq is particularly evident. The full set of scatter plots describing the mutual distribution of parameters is shown in are distributed with a polar symmetry around the peak. In each plot, the square marker indicates the position of the ex- act solution. For the correlated quantities, the equation for the linear regression is indicated in the corresponding plot. While the generalization of such linear trend outside the range of in- vestigated properties requires additional investigations, it is important to observe that such a correlation reduces of the number of model parameters six to four. 11 (a) Eodometric plane (b) Tiaxial deviatoric plane (c) Triaxial volumetric plane (a), the triaxial pεa, qq plane (b) and pεa, εvq plane (c). The red cir- cles indicate the synthetic experimental data. The blue lines showthe numerical prediction using the best and the worst set of parameters from the full set: as these are practically overlapping, the compari- son appears as a thick line. 4.3. Hochstetten sand calibration In the last simulation, the SH model is calibrated for the Hochstetten sand. The experimental data were obtained from the two oedometric tests and the three triaxial drained tests reported by von Wolfferdorff . The initial conditions for this test are shown in the Table 6. and the oedometer test (EDO1, EDO2) - von Wolefferdorff data . Test T1 T2 e (kPa) (kPa) ( ́) TxD1 TxD2 TxD3 EDO1 EDO2 The triaxial tests go on until the maximum deformation εfin “ 0.20 is reached, while the eodomeric tests continue until a void ratio efin “ 0.672 fore the EDO1 and efin “ 0.643 for the EDO2. We consider ratios λd “ 0.60 and λi “ 1.20 and the search interval indicated in table 7. maxand P ̊ min ID φ hs n ec0 α β ( ̋q (GPa) (-) (-) (-) (-) max 40 9.0 0.40 1.1 0.20 2.0 min 25 1.0 0.25 0.6 0.05 0.9 The parameters of the GA are set to Ni “ 500, NI “ 10, while the remaining parameters are taken as the default ones in algorithm 2 and 4. The weights wi i “ 1, 2, 3 in the cost function (43) are equal to unity, hence giving equal importance to the errors in each test. The GA calibration provides the set of parameters shown third column (GA) of Table 8. This table also shows the val- ues proposed by von Wolfferdorff (W) and by Herel & Gudehus (H) . The response curves calculated with these parameters are compared with the experimental data in the figure 10. The results show that the parameters suggested by von Wolffer- dorff yields better description of the the oedometric response curves than what achievable using the parameters suggested by Herle & Gudehus. The opposite is true in the regression of the triaxial test, both in terms of volumetric deformations and deviatoric stresses. The parameters obtained by the GA optimizer do not differ significantly from those proposed by the two authors. How- ever, these yield better agreements in all the response curves, hence enabling better predictive capabilities of the SH model. 12 The red square in each plot indicates the exact solution. While most pairs are independent, the planes pec0, αq and planes phf ́ nq shows a linear trend. The equation from the linear regression is indicated in the corresponding plots. 5. Conclusion A novel procedure for the automatic calibration of the von Wolfferdorff’s Sand Hypoplasticity (SH) model has been pre- sented. The procedure is based on the solution of a regression problem in which the model parameters are adjusted so that a numerical model match experimental data. This data is pro- vided by triaxial and eodometric tests, and the discrepancy between model prediction and experimental data is measured in dimensionless planes. The cost function is computed from the root mean square of the Fr ́echet distances in these planes, and the regression is solved via Genetic Algorithms (GA). After briefly reviewing the fundamentals of the SH model and their simplified formulation for the considered tests, the 13 (a) Eodometric plane (b) Triaxial deviatoric plane (c) Triaxial volumetric plane and the experimental data (red point) on Hochstetten sand . The magenta dotted line are computed using the parameters by von Wolf- ferdorff (W) , the black hatched whit the parameters by Herel & Gudehus (H) and the blue solid whit the parameters obtained from the implemented procedure (GA). Wolfferdorff (W) , Herel & Gudehus (H) and the GA cali- bration (GA). Par. W H GA φ ( ̋) hs (GPa) 1.00 1.50 1.32 n ( ́) 0.25 0.28 0.23 ei0 ( ́) 0.55 0.55 0.60 ec0 ( ́) 0.95 0.95 1.04 ed0 ( ́) 1.05 1.05 1.14 α ( ́) 0.25 0.25 0.23 β ( ́) 1.50 1.00 1.26 GA optimization is presented in detail. The numerical imple- mentation of the SH model has been successfully validated using the popular ExCaliber-Laboratory Test Simulation. A synthetic set of experimental datasets has then been used to study the relative importance, the uniqueness and the un- certainty of the parameters obtained by the GA calibration, and to explore their mutual correlation. Taking as benchmark test case hypothetical sand, the calibration has been repeated 1000 times, obtaining a large population of valid sets of pa- rameters. A statistical analysis of this population revealed that while the standard deviation of most of these is in the range 2 %, the deviation in the granular hardness hs reaches up to 7% of the expected value. These results highlight a mi- nor impact of this parameter on the model. Furthermore, cor- relation analysis revealed that this parameter is linearly cor- related with the parameter n. A strong linear correlation is also found for the parameters ec0 ́ α. These results thus show that the set of parameters in the model can potentially be reduced. Finally, the GA calibration is compared to the classical re- sults from von Wolffersdorff, and Herle & Gudehus on the Hochstetten sand. Overall, the proposed calibration yields better accuracy in matching the experimental data, en- abling the automatic calibration within a few minutes of com- putation. To conclude, the Genetic Algorithm calibration proved ca- pable of correctly identifying the set of SH parameters from the experimental results of triaxial drained and eodometric compression tests. Moreover, the calibration allowed us to study the parameter uncertainty and their mutual correlation, paving the way towards data-driven reduction of the model parameters. Acknowledgements The authors gratefully acknowledge the support and the discussions with the engineer Pierantonio Cascioli, from GEINA srl, and Gabriele Sandro Toro, laboratory technician of the Department of Engineering and Geology of the Faculty Gabriele D’Annunzio of Chieti. 14