1 Charged particle guiding and beam splitting with auto-ponderomotive potentials on a chip Robert Zimmermann1, Michael Seidling1, Peter Hommelhoff1 1Department Physik, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Staudtstraße 1, 91058 Erlangen, Germany We report guiding and manipulation of charged particle beams by means of electrostatic optics based on a principle similar to the electrodynamic Paul trap. We use hundreds of electrodes fabricated on planar substrates and supplied with static voltages to create a ponderomotive potential for charged particles in motion. Shape and strength of the potential can be locally tailored by the electrodes’ layout and the applied voltages, enabling the control of charged particle beams within precisely engineered effective potentials. We demonstrate guiding of electrons and ions for a large range of energies (from 20 to 5000 eV) and masses (5 ⋅ 10−4 to 131 atomic mass units) as well as electron beam splitting as a proof-of- concept for more complex beam manipulation. Simultaneous confinement of charged particles with different masses is possible, as well as guiding of electrons with energies in the keV regime, and the creation of highly customizable potential landscapes, which is all hard to impossible with conventional electrodynamic Paul traps. beam of charged particles with velocity vz (green arrow) is injected into a structure consisting of electrostatic electrodes with spatially periodic voltages, the charged particle beam will be subjected to the equivalent transverse restoring force as charged particles in a linear electrodynamic trap with the same geometry but with unsegmented electrodes as shown in (b). This is because the spatially periodic electrostatic quadrupole field with period length LP leads to an alter- nating field with the periodicity TP = LP/vz in the rest frame of the moving particles (c). Like in a linear Paul trap, the charged particles experience a time-averaged harmonic pseudopotential, the pondero- motive potential, resulting in a restoring force towards the center- line. (d) The pseudopotential Ψ of both linear trap realizations shown in (a) and (b) can be made identical. R represents the elec- trodes’ minimal distance from the guide’s center. The invention of radio frequency ion traps – Paul traps – 70 years ago set the foundation for precision mass spectrometry, ion trapping and cooling, and ion-based quantum computing . These electrodynamic traps are based on the confining time-averaged forces exerted on charged particles by alternat- ing electric fields . In the following, we describe the elec- trostatic version of the electrodynamic Paul trap that dramat- ically expands the range of trapping parameters while main- taining the same operation principle. These devices can (un- like conventional electrodynamic Paul traps) simultaneously confine charged particles with vastly different masses in highly customizable potential landscapes. Importantly, the applicable electron energies for these new structures are high enough that they can be used in combination with a standard electron microscope as demonstrated in the electron beam splitting experiment below. charged particles with charge Q and velocity vz is injected into a guiding structure consisting of two planar chips facing each other with a separation of 1 mm. The chips hold electrodes to which elec- trostatic potentials +UDC (blue) and −UDC (red) are applied. Their polarity varies periodically along the structure with the period length LP leading to the creation of the guiding pseudopotential for propa- gating electrons. (b) Simulation of the ponderomotive potential in a cut-plane transverse to the beam for electrons with UDC = 100 V and UA = 1 kV. The small ellipticity is due to the broken circular symmetry of the planar chips. (c) The electrodes on the chips define an S-curve that guides the particles so that they are laterally dis- placed. The particles are detected by a microchannel plate (MCP) detector 1 cm behind the structure. For illustration, only the bottom chip 1 is shown in full detail. Chip 2 has the mirrored electrode lay- out but with inverted polarity as shown in (a). The detector signal of guided particles is highlighted by a dashed purple circle. A picture of the front and back of the upper chip is displayed in the Supple- mentary Material in Fig. S2 on page 5. In our experiment, a charged particle beam with well-defined forward velocity is created and injected into a structure con- sisting of segmented electrodes with spatially alternating DC (direct current) voltages, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Like for mag- netic undulators or strong focusing structures in particle ac- celerators , the electrostatic potential is transformed into an alternating potential in the rest frame of the moving parti- cles and, thus, the particles are subjected to the same restoring transverse force as they are in a conventional linear Paul trap with AC voltages on non-segmented electrodes. 2 5.9 mm (electrons) and x = 6.1 mm (He-ions), almost exactly at the expected position of x = 5.8 mm. The barely visible curl structure results from spiraling trajectories of off-centrally injected particles. The detector signal of helium ions is expected to be the vertically mirrored image of the electron signal, due to the opposite sign of their charge, which can just be discerned. (e), (g) Guiding stability: normalized intensity of guided electrons (e) and helium ions (g) on the MCP detector. For each acceleration voltage UA, the applied electrode voltage UDC was scanned from 0-1 kV and the guiding signal of each scan was normalized to its maximum value. For comparison with electrodynamic traps, the corresponding driving frequency and AC power (impedance of 50 Ω) are given on the secondary axes (blue). Black lines corresponding to operation at q = 0.4 and q = 0.9 are drawn in (e) and (g) as a guide to the eye. Even though their masses differ by more than five orders of magnitude, guiding starts for all particles at q = 0.4 and no guiding is observed for q-values above 0.9, perfectly matching our particle tracking results. Because not all kinetic energies were possible to realize due to the source, some regions are left white. (f) Magnified image of a part of (e) showing that electrons are guided for kinetic energies as low as 20 eV, which was the lowest energy we could achieve with our source. Since the driving frequency generating this ponderomotive force originates from the particles’ forward velocity, we call the resulting effective potential “auto-ponderomotive”. The resulting transverse forces are identical to those in a linear Paul trap. Hence, the stability of the trajectories of the charged particles is described by the two well-known dimen- sionless stability parameters a and q . For non-relativistic particles, these parameters depend only on the amplitude of the applied voltages, the particle acceleration voltage UA and the guide’s geometry. Yet, in stark contrast to electrodynamic traps, the stability parameters are independent of the charge- to-mass ratio here (the derivation is shown in the Supplemen- tary Material on page 5). As a proof of concept, we present two auto-ponderomotive structures: One to show auto-pon- deromotive guiding over a curved path and another one for auto-ponderomotive beam splitting. Fig. 2 shows the design of a guiding structure and the simu- lation of the auto-ponderomotive potential Ψ. 84 electrodes are printed on each of the two chips and define an S-curve with a radius of curvature of RK= 0.535 m, such that the out- put of the guide is laterally displaced by 5.8 mm with respect to its input. Static voltages +UDC (blue) and -UDC (red) are applied on the electrodes forming a system of quadrupole lenses with spatially periodic polarity (period length LP=5.6 mm). This guide represents the electrostatic equivalent to the curved version of a conventional linear Paul trap with just an alternating potential applied (a = 0) . The stability is there- fore only determined by the parameter q = η⋅LP 2 ⋅UDC 2π2⋅R2⋅|UA| (the derivation is shown in the Supplementary Material on page 5). The geometric factor η = 0.61 accounts for deviations from the ideal hyperbolic electrode geometry and from the perfectly sinusoidal form of the electric field . R = 0.5 mm is the distance from the ponderomotive potential minimum to the chip surface. The charged particle beams are unguided when the electrodes are grounded, as shown in the detector images for electrons in Fig. 3(a) and for helium ions in Fig. 3(b). When voltages are applied to the electrodes, guiding is observed for electrons [Fig. 3(c)], as well as helium ions [Fig. 3(d)], evidenced by a shifted detector signal at the expected guide exit position. In contrast to the unguided beams, the position of the guided beams on the detector remains unchanged even when magnets (~ 1 mT) are brought close to the vacuum chamber. 3 is continuously split into two minima separated by 2.3 mm at the chip end. To illustrate this splitting, we plot the isopotential surface of Ψ = 1 eV for an electron beam with UA = 800 V and UDC = 210 V (transparent blue region). Simulated ponderomotive potential at the splitter’s input (1), center (2) and output (3) are shown in the green dashed boxes. Clearly, the initially single central minimum splits continuously into two central minima as the particle propagates down the structure. The splitter consists of two chips facing each other with a separation of 1 mm. For illustration, only the lower chip is shown. The upper chip 2 has the same electrode layout but with inverted polarity. (b) Detector image of an unguided electron beam (UDC = 0V). (c) Detector image of a split electron beam. Two spots are visible with a faint signal of lost electrons in between. The spot distance of 4.2 mm is expected given the opening angle of the split isopotential channels and the detector distance of 2.4 cm. (d) Top view of the beam splitter chip. The layout consists of three rows of electrodes. The width of the central electrodes widens along the chip from 0.3 to 2.2 mm (not to scale for illustration, see Fig. S3 in the Supplementary Material for a picture of the chip). To characterize the guiding stability, we measure the guided number of particles for a range of particle beam energies and electrode voltages. For each UA, the applied UDC was scanned from 0-1 kV. We observe guiding for a large energy range from 20 eV to 4000 eV for electrons [Fig. 3(e) and 3(f)] and from 800 eV to 5000 eV for helium ions [Fig. 3(g)]. Even though there are five orders of magnitude difference in the masses, guiding is observed for the same ratios of the applied voltages UDC/|UA|, corresponding to q values between 0.4 and 0.9. The lower border in q is due to the curvature of the guide. Since the restoring force of this potential depends on q, a finite value of q ≥ 0.39 is needed to compensate the cen- trifugal force resulting from the curves (see the Supplemen- tary Material), matching perfectly the experimentally ob- served minimum q ≅ 0.4. The upper border corresponds sim- ilarly well to the maximum q value of 0.91 in the first stabil- ity region of linear Paul traps . The measurement was re- peated for other noble gas ions (neon, argon, krypton, xenon) yielding similar results (displayed in the Supplementary Ma- terial in Fig. S4 on page 6). For comparison with radio fre- quency Paul traps, the corresponding driving frequencies and AC powers are given on the secondary axes in Fig. 3(c) and 3(e). Using electrons, the auto-ponderomotive design easily generates an apparent alternating field with driving frequen- cies in the gigahertz range with tens of kilowatts of AC power, which is virtually impossible to feed or maintain on an electrodynamic chip for thermal load reasons . Next to this most versatile guiding demonstration, we now show that more complex potential landscapes can be realized based on the auto-ponderomotive principle. As an example, we show the design of an auto-ponderomotive beam splitter in Fig. 4. Here, the electrode layout of each chip consists of 270 electrodes forming three rows. Electrostatic voltages +UDC (blue) and -UDC (red) are applied, forming a system of multipolar lenses with spatially periodic polarity with a period length LP = 2.4 mm. Moving along z, the width of the central electrodes widens (top view of the electrode layout is shown in Fig. 4(d). This splits the initial central minimum of the ponderomotive potential into two minima, separated by 2.3 mm. A charged particle beam fed into the single central minimum at the structure input splits transversely into two beams following smoothly the auto-ponderomotive potential. This is shown in Fig. 4(c) for an electron beam (of a scanning electron microscope) as two distinct beam spots [unguided beam displayed in Fig. 4(b)]. A more detailed investigation of the beam splitter will be subject to forthcoming work. The S-curved guide and the beam splitter presented here rep- resent examples of what we call auto-ponderomotive engi- neering: A powerful method to create a custom-made pon- deromotive potential landscape controlled by the geometry and arrangement of lithographically produced electrodes on a chip. It is noteworthy that the measured energy range for guided electrons from 20 to 4000 eV was limited by magnetic stray fields in the source for small beam energies and by sparking between the electrodes for large energies; we expect to expand the range from ~1 to at least 10 000 eV by shielding environmental magnetic fields and by using an optimized electrode layout for higher breakdown voltage. Because these structures work independently of the specific charge and mass of ions, any ion may be guided, hence simultaneous transport and trapping of various species of charged particles at well- defined velocities is possible, which might open up new pos- sibilities to cold and collision chemistry . Since the sensitivity of the charge-to-mass ratio in their electrodynamic counterparts is exchanged by a sensitivity on acceleration voltage, these structures work as energy filters when operated in analogy to a mass spectrometer . Furthermore, we find from particle tracking simulations that the addition of (switchable) electron mirrors at both guide ends will allow the stable confinement of particles in three dimensions. 4 nents are attached to the electron-optical bench with titanium clamps. The last aperture before the chip with a diameter of 400 μm limits the size and the divergence of the beam. The ruby balls on the chip ensure proper alignment of the two chips. With the electrodes of the shown structures miniaturized to the micrometer scale, driving frequencies close to the te- rahertz (1012 Hz) range can be achieved for electrons (see the Supplementary Material on page 7). This not only enters a new frequency range bridging the gap between microwave and optical frequencies, for which ponderomotive forces have been utilized , but it also facilitates extremely large trapping frequencies that may herald a new arena for quan- tum optics experiments and state-selective applications with free electrons. Supplementary Material 1. Charged particle gun, electron-optical bench and de- tector A compact system consisting of a tungsten needle tip, ex- tractor, four deflectors and two grounded apertures serves as a source of charged particles. The final aperture with a di- ameter of 400 μm limits the size and the divergence of the beam. The strong fields between the tungsten needle tip and the extractor allow electron field emission as well as ionization of gas molecules , depending on the polarity of the applied acceleration voltage. Tips of varying sharp- ness and distance to extractor were used to realize particle beams of various energies. For the electron beam splitting experiment, a scanning electron microscope (Philips XL30 SEM), which illuminated a spot (<1 μm) at the input, is used as the electron source. All components are pre-aligned and fixed rigidly onto a 25 cm long electron-optical bench con- sisting of two straight ceramic rods. A picture of the setup is displayed in Fig. S1. The setup was placed into a vacuum chamber and the charged particles are detected with a micro- channel plate (MCP) detector, which is placed 1 cm behind the S-curved guide (2.4 cm after the beam splitter). For the auto-ponderomotive guiding experiment, the measured intensity within a 1 mm wide square at point x = 5.8 mm and y = 0 mm on the detector is taken as the signal of the guided charged particles. 2. Layout of the S-curved guide The S-curved guide consists of two planar chips facing each other with a separation of 1 mm. They are fabricated by a standard printed circuit board process on FR4 substrates with electrodes made from gold-plated copper. The chips have a total length of 11.3 cm and each chip consists of 84 electrodes. The electrodes define an S-curve with a radius of curvature of RK = 0.535 m, such that the output of the guide is laterally displaced by 5.8 mm with respect to its input. The electrodes have a length of 1.3 mm and are 1.4 mm wide. The gap between the electrodes is 100 μm wide. The electrode layout of one of the two chips is displayed in Fig. 2 in the main text. The other chip has the mirrored electrode layout but with opposite polarity. Both chips have counter- sinks for ruby balls which serve to align the chips. The depth of the countersinks and the diameter of the ruby balls are chosen such that the chips are separated by 1 mm. The S- curved guide can be fixed and aligned to the electron-optical bench with a holder. A picture of the upper chip’s front and back are shown in Fig. S2. 3. Layout of the beam splitter The beam splitter consists of two planar chips facing each other with a separation of 1 mm. They are fabricated by a standard printed circuit board process on FR4 substrates with electrodes made from gold-plated copper. The chips have a total length of 11.3 cm and each chip consists of 270 electrodes arranged in three rows. The electrodes have a length of 0.55 mm and the gap between the electrodes is 50 μm wide. 5 plated through-holes (vias) resulting in spatially periodic voltages. The upper chip is placed above the lower chip such that their front sides are facing each other. Countersinks for ruby balls and holes for screws are drilled for alignment and fixation. The outer electrodes have a width of 1.4 mm, while the width of the inner electrodes changes along the splitter from 0.3 mm to 2.2 mm. A picture of the electrode layout of one of the two chips is displayed in Fig. S3. The other chip has the mirrored electrode layout but with opposite polarity. Alignment and mounting of the chips are done as for the S- curved guides described above. 4. Derivation of the non-relativistic and auto-pondero- motive formula of the parameter q The stability parameter q for a linear Paul trap (with Φ1 = UAC cos Ωt and Φ2 = −Φ1 applied to adjacent rod elec- trodes) is given by q = 2Q⋅2⋅UAC M⋅R2Ω2 with Q M the charge-to-mass ratio of the charged particles, R the minimal electrodes’ dis- tance to the guide center, UAC the amplitude of the alternating potential and Ω the driving angular frequency . To derive the expression of q for auto-ponderomotive guides, one replaces the driving frequency Ω with 2π ⋅ vz Lp. Here, vz is the velocity of the charged particles in the beam and LP the period length of the auto-ponderomotive struc- ture. The velocity depends on the acceleration voltage UA as vz = √2 ⋅ QUA/M. In our case, UAC must be replaced by UDC. Hence, q = LP 2 ⋅UDC 2π2⋅R2⋅UA. Because we use planar elec- trodes, a geometric factor η needs to be included to describe the effective quadrupole strength of the used geometry . Thus, the stability parameter is corrected to q = η⋅ LP 2⋅UDC 2π2⋅R2⋅UA and is valid for non-relativistic particles (vz ≪ speed of light c). The sign of q has no effect on the stability, therefore we only calculate the absolute value. An extension for relativ- istic velocities can be derived by including length contrac- tion of LP and the Lorentz transformation of the electric field, but resulting expression is only independent of the particle’s charge Q and rest mass M0 in the limiting cases of relativistically slow and fast particles. 5. Calculating η and the harmonic region of the auto- ponderomotive potential The ponderomotive potential is calculated as Ψ = Q2〈E2〉 4 M Ω2 with 〈E2〉 the time-averaged squared electric field. For auto- ponderomotive structures, 〈E2〉 is calculated by the average of the electric field squared along the guide over the period length LP. Compared to the ideal case of hyperbolic elec- trodes, the field strength of the quadrupole component is re- duced by a geometric factor η and is attained by a best fit from simulation. We obtain η ≈ 0.61 for the guiding struc- ture presented in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 in the main text. Like in any harmonic approximation, the best fit is only valid close to the center. The discrepancy is less than 5% for displace- ments Δx ≤ 80 μm from the guiding center and increases strongly for larger Δx. 6. Derivation of the minimum value of q for the S-curved guiding structure The harmonic force of the ponderomotive potential FH must compensate the centrifugal force FZ to guide the particles in a curve with curvature RK. Stable trajectories are limited to the harmonic region of the guide, where the restoring force FH = −∇Ψ = −∇( 1 2 ω2MΔx2) reads FH = ω2M Δx with the trapping frequency ω = q √8 Ω. The centrifugal force is given by the curvature RK and the particle’s velocity vz. De- manding that FH ≥ FZ leads to the guiding condition q ≥ LP⋅√2 π⋅√RK⋅Δx resulting in a minimum value of q = 0.39 for a guiding structure with the geometry presented in this work, in excellent agreement with the experimentally observed qmin for all guided species (see Fig. 3 in the main text and Fig. S4). 6 from 0.3 mm to 2.2 mm, while the width of the outer electrodes is 1.4 mm. Countersinks for ruby balls and holes for screws are drilled for alignment and fixation. Additional smaller holes are used to ensure good vacuum. 1/e the maximum intensity) for electrons and all used noble gas ions calculated from the detector intensity of the guided charged particles obtained by voltage scans (as discussed in the main text around Figure 3). As the guiding signal, the intensity within a 1 mm wide square at point x = 5.8 mm and y = 0 mm on the detector is taken. Note that the mass and charge-to-mass ratio varies over more than a factor of 200 000, clearly demonstrating that auto-ponderomotive potential engineering works independently of them. The measured maximum values of q vary stronger than the minimum values because guiding becomes more sensitive to imperfect injection for high q as the acceptance phase-space for coupling the beam into the guide decreases. 7 7. Miniaturization leads to higher trapping frequency ω If the geometry of an auto-ponderomotive structure is scaled down by a factor of cg, the period length LP and electrode’s distance to the centerline R are reduced to LP ′ = LP cg and R′ = R cg. The driving frequency 2π ⋅ vz Lp increases accordingly to Ω′ = Ω ⋅ cg. Since the stability parameter q ∝ LP 2 /R2 is in- dependent of cg, guiding is attained for the same applied voltage ratios for all scaling factors cg and the trapping fre- quency ω = q √8 Ω increases to ω′ = ω ⋅ cg. Thus, an elec- trode layout on the micrometer scale leads to much higher trapping frequencies if operated at the same stability param- eter q. For example, using a guide with a period length LP of 56 μm (cg~100) (which is straightforward to manufacture) and an electron beam with a kinetic energy of 1 kV results in a driving frequency of Ω = 2π ⋅ 0.33 THz. Operating the guide at q = 0.3 (UDC = 77.4 V, well below the breakdown voltage of high vacuum) leads to a trapping frequency of ω = 2π ⋅ 36 GHz. 8. Extended Data: Auto-ponderomotive guiding for elec- trons and noble gas ions Fig. S4 displays the result for all used noble gas ions as dis- cussed around Fig. 3 in the main text.