1 Electrostatic Engineering using Extreme Permittivity Materials for Ultra-wide Bandgap Semiconductor Transistors Nidhin Kurian Kalarickal1*, Zixuan Feng1, A F M Anhar Uddin Bhuiyan1, Zhanbo Xia1, Joe F. McGlone1, Wyatt Moore1, Aaron R. Arehart1, Steven A. Ringel1, 2, Hongping Zhao1, 2, Siddharth Rajan1, 2* 1Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA 2 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA The performance of ultra-wide band gap materials like β-Ga2O3 is critically dependent on achieving high average electric fields within the active region of the device. In this report, we show that high-k gate dielectrics like BaTiO3 can provide an efficient field management strategy by improving the uniformity of electric field profile in the gate-drain region of lateral field effect transistors. Using this strategy, we were able to achieve high average breakdown fields of 1.5 MV/cm and 4 MV/cm at gate-drain spacing (Lgd) of 6 μm and 0.6 μm respectively in β-Ga2O3, at a high channel sheet charge density of 1.8 × 1013 cm-2. The high sheet charge density together with high breakdown field enabled a record power figure of merit (Vbr 2 /Ron) of 376 MW/cm2 at a gate-drain spacing of 3 μm. Low loss power switching devices were mostly based on Si until the introduction of wide band gap semiconductors like SiC (3.2 eV, Fbr=2.5 MV/cm) and GaN (3.4 eV, Fbr=3 MV/cm). The much larger breakdown field strength in these semiconductors offered the possibility of shrinking the active drift region thickness for the same breakdown voltage resulting in much lower on resistance (Ron). This improvement in the performance of power switching devices on breakdown field is well described by the power figure of merit1 (BFOM- εμFbr 3 ), where ε, μ and Fbr represent dielectric permittivity, carrier mobility and breakdown field strength respectively. With a theoretical breakdown field strength (8 MV/cm)2,3 much higher than GaN and SiC, β-Ga2O3 offers a new material platform for improving the performance metrics of such devices. In addition to the large breakdown field strength, the availability of bulk substrates grown from melt4–7 makes β-Ga2O3 highly attractive since this * Author to whom correspondence should be addressed. Electronic mail: kalarickal.1@osu.edu, rajan.21@osu.edu 2 allows high quality epitaxial growth with low defect density. High quality epilayers have already been demonstrated using a variety of growth techniques like molecular beam epitaxy (MBE)8–10, metal organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD)11–14, halide vapor phase epitaxy (HVPE)15,16 and low pressure vapor phase epitaxy (LPCVD)17,18. Background acceptor impurity concentrations as low as 9.4×1014 cm-3 have been reported showing the quality of β-Ga2O3 epilayers that can be achieved14. High voltage β-Ga2O3 devices with excellent performance have already been demonstrated both in the vertical and lateral geometry19–23 but for these devices to compete with the current state of the art, it is essential to achieve the full breakdown field strength of β-Ga2O3 (8 MV/cm). However, this is challenging due to the lack of a suitable dielectric that can sustain electric fields significantly higher than 8 MV/cm. This leads to catastrophic failure of devices at much lower voltages due to dielectric breakdown. Additionally, many of the traditional field termination structures which are used in Si and wide band gap semiconductors such as guard rings24 and junction termination extensions25 cannot be utilized in β-Ga2O3 because of the absence of p-type doping. Therefore, new field management strategies may be necessary to achieve theoretical performance in β-Ga2O3 based devices. The low room temperature mobility is another significant issue hampering the performance of β-Ga2O3 based devices 26. The low mobility leads to high channel resistance which in turn affects the Ron. Improving the channel mobility is one approach to solving this problem, but since the intrinsic mobility in β-Ga2O3 is limited by polar optical phonon scattering 27,28, increasing the mobility beyond the theoretical limit may be difficult. An easier approach is to increase the charge density in the channel, especially in lateral field effect transistors. Most of the high voltage lateral field effect transistors reported in β-Ga2O3 20,29,30 use low channel charge density (< 1013 cm- 2) leading to high Ron and low power figure of merit. To more carefully understand the need for higher channel charge density, consider the case of a lateral field effect transistor at the breakdown condition. The peak electric field in the lateral (x) and vertical direction (y) may be written as Ex = k1 Vbr Lgd Ey = k2 qns εch (1) (2) Where VBR is the breakdown voltage, Lgd is the gate-drain spacing, ns is the channel charge density and εch is the dielectric permittivity. The constants k1 and k2 represent the efficacy of field management in the device, where values greater than one indicate a device without perfect field management, and k1 = k2~1 is a device with 3 perfect field management. In general, k1 and k2 also depend on the charge density (ns). Based on (1) and (2) the breakdown condition can be written as Ebr = √(k1 Vbr Lgd ) 2 + (k2 qns εch ) 2 (3) Where Ebr is the breakdown field strength of β-Ga2O3. The power figure of merit discussed above (BFOM) is therefore given by BFOM(ns) = Vbr 2 Ron = Vbr 2 (ns) ( Lgd 2 qnsμ) (4) Where Vbr 2 (ns) represents the solution to (3) as a function of ns and μ is the channel mobility. In equation (4), the contribution to Ron from the gate region and the gate to source access region has been ignored. Equation (4) has been plotted as a function of ns in Figure 1 for different values of k1 = k2, varying between 1 to 2. As the field management in the device improves (k1 = k2 ~ 1), the peak in the power figure of merit pushes out to higher sheet charge density. Based on this simple analysis we see that it is imperative to improve the field management in these devices as well as move to higher ns to optimize the high voltage performance of β-Ga2O3 based devices. simplification). The arrow denotes the contour of maxima of BFOM. In this paper, the use of high-k gate dielectrics is shown to simultaneously achieve high sheet charge density in the channel and improve the average breakdown field, resulting in an improved power figure of merit. First a 4 detailed analysis is done on the electrostatics of a high-k/semiconductor heterojunction transistor using two- dimensional device simulations as well as analytical modelling. This is followed up with experimental demonstration of the said electric field management in BaTiO3/ β-Ga2O3 lateral field effect transistor. 2D device simulation and modelling This section covers the investigation of the off-state gate-drain electric field profiles in the presence of high-k dielectrics. The effect of using a high-k gate dielectric has previously been studied using 2D device simulations by Xia et al 31. Though the simulation was done for the specific case of BaTiO3 on BaSnO3, the electrostatics remain the same and therefore the simulations are valid in general. In the work, it was found that the slope of the electric field in the lateral x-direction (see Figure 2(a)) reduces when the high-k gate dielectric is introduced. The effects of additional device parameters, specifically the thickness of the high-k gate dielectric (tb) and the channel sheet charge density (ns) are discussed in this study. Consider the lateral transistor structure shown in Figure 2(a) consisting of a low-k channel material (εch) with a channel sheet charge density of ns (assumed to be a 2D electron gas) and a high-k gate dielectric material on top. 2D device simulation in Silvaco Atlas software was used to extract both the x and y components of electric field along a lateral cutline in the low-k semiconductor as shown in Figure 2 (a). Gate length (Lg) of 1 um, gate- drain spacing (Lgd) of 3 um, εch of 10 and εb of 300 is assume for the device structure. Figure 2 (c) shows the variation in the field profile (Ex, Ey) as a function of tb. As tb is increased from 20 nm to 140 nm, the slope in the x electric field decreases. This decrease in slope of Ex is accompanied by a decrease in the peak value of y electric field at the drain side edge of the gate. Figure 2 (d) also shows the effect of ns on the electric field profile (Ex, Ey) showing the reverse trend. As ns is increased in the channel, the slope in the x electric field increases, increasing the peak electric field. Additionally, the peak value of y electric field also increases with increasing ns. Therefore, in addition to the dielectric constant of the high-k material, its thickness and the channel sheet charge density also have an effect on the electric field profile. 5 constant of the low-k channel material, (b) Zoomed in image of the gate drain region of the transistor (marked by red dotted rectangle in (a)) after applying a reverse bias between the gate and drain, (c) Simulated field profile of high-k/low-k transistor as a function of high-k dielectric thickness at a reverse bias of 250 V (ns=1.5 ×1013 cm-2), (d) Simulated field profile of high-k/low-k transistor as a function of channel charge density at a reverse bias of 250 V (tb=60 nm), (e) Comparison between analytical model and simulation on x electric field, (f) Comparison between analytical model and simulation on gate-drain depletion length. While simulations provide an accurate picture of the impact of parameters like dielectric thickness, tb, and sheet charge, ns, it is desirable to have a theoretical model to develop an intuitive understanding of the effects. To fully analyze an interface with dielectric discontinuity it is essential to estimate the polarization charges formed at the dielectric interfaces. Considering the same transistor design shown in Figure 2 (a) and assuming that the gate-drain depletion region (Ldep) supports a reverse bias Vdg, the distribution of charges at this reverse bias is shown in Figure 2 (b), consisting of positive sheet charge of ns in the channel and the equal amount of negative charge imaged at the gate edge. The gate charge is approximated as a line of charge with charge density λ located at the corner of the gate as shown in figure 2 (b). Since the total charge is conserved, we can write 0 1 2 3 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 0 1 2 3 4 Ey Gate Electric field (MV/cm) Distance (m) Drain Ex ns=5x1012 cm-2 ns=1013 cm-2 ns=1.5x1013 cm-2 ns=2x1013 cm-2 Gate Drain tb=60 nm 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 tb=20 nm tb=60 nm simulation model Ldep (m) Vdg (V) Lgd tb=100 nm 0 1 2 3 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 Vdg=410 V Vdg=260 V Vdg=160 V Vdg=100 V Gate simulation model Ex (MV/cm) distance (m) tb=60 nm Drain 0 1 2 3 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 0 1 2 3 4 Gate tb=20 nm tb=60 nm tb=100 nm tb=140 nm Electric field (MV/cm) Distance (m) Drain Ex Ey Gate Drain ns=1.5x1013 cm-2 6 λ = qnsLdep (5) The presence of these charges leads to the formation of polarization charges on both interfaces of the high-k dielectric. The negative line of charge induces a positive sheet of polarization charge (σ1(x)) at the A’-B’ interface B interface as shown in Figure 2 (a). In this simple model we are neglecting the contribution of the y field along the A-B interface due to the negative line charge on the gate. This is a reasonable assumption to make especially far away from the gate (x ≫ tb) where the vertical field due to the negative line charge becomes small. The solution to σ1(x) and σ2(x) is provided in the supplementary section giving σ1(x) = qnsLdep (εb − 1 εb + 1) δ(x) (6) Where δ(x) is the Dirac delta function with peak at x = 0, and σ2(x) = qns (εb − 1 εb + 1) (7) Therefore, the polarization charge density at the A’-B’ interface is zero except at the gate corner. Now consider a vertical line C-D at any position x through the high-k dielectric as shown in figure 2 (b). Since there is absence of free charge density within the dielectric, the electric field at any point along C-D obeys the Laplace equation (∂Ey ∂y ) C−D + (∂Ex ∂x ) C−D = 0 (8) If the x component of electric field Ex, is assumed to be only a function of x, then along any vertical line C-D (x = xo= constant) (∂Ey ∂y ) C−D = − (∂Ex ∂x ) xo = constant (9) Therefore, the slope of the y electric field is a constant and can most generally be written as (∂Ey ∂y ) C = (Ey(C) − Ey(D) tb ) (10) Since the high-k dielectric is assumed to be a linear, Ey(C) and Ey(D) are proportional to the polarization charge density at C and D respectively. Ey(C) = σ2(C) εo(εb − 1) = qns εo(εb + 1) (11) and Ey(D) = λbδ(xo) εo(εb − 1) = qnsLdep εo(εb + 1) δ(xo) (12) 7 Therefore, the slope of y electric field in the high-k dielectric at any position x along the A-B interface is given by (∂Ey ∂y ) A−B qns (1 − Ldepδ(x)) tbεo(εb + 1) (13) Since the high-k dielectric contains zero free charge, we can apply Laplace equation (∂Ey ∂y ) A−B + (∂Ex ∂x ) A−B = 0 (14) giving (∂Ex ∂x ) A−B = − qns (1 − Ldepδ(x)) tbεo(εb + 1) (15) Since the tangential component of electric field stays the same across the dielectric interface (∂Ex ∂x ) A−B = (∂Ex ∂x ) = − qns (1 − Ldepδ(x)) tbεo(εb + 1) (16) where ∂Ex ∂x represents the slope of the x electric field in the low-k semiconductor below the dielectric A-B interface. Ex can now be solved as Ex(x) = ∫ − qns (1 − Ldepδ(u)) tbεo(εb + 1) du x Ldep = qns tbεo(εb + 1) (Ldep − x) − qnsLdep tbεo(εb + 1) δx=0 (17) where δx=0 is the Kronecker delta function given by δx=0 = {1, x = 0 0, x ≠ 0 The depletion length at any given reverse bias Vdg can be calculated by satisfying Vdg = ∫ Ex(x, Ldep) Ldep 0 dx (18) simulations showing reasonable agreement. This simple model is thus able to predict the electric field profile in a lateral field effect transistor with an extreme dielectric interface. As is clear from equation (17), the dielectric constant, its thickness, and the sheet charge density determine the electric field profile within the gate-drain depletion region of the transistor. The asymmetric distribution of free charges (charge in the depletion region and on the gate) leads to asymmetric distribution of polarization charges at the interface of the high-k dielectric. This leads to a reduction in the slope of the x electric field. 8 Epitaxial Growth and Device Fabrication To demonstrate the field management strategy using high-k dielectrics we fabricated lateral metal insulator field effect transistors (MISFETs) on β-Ga2O3 with BaTiO3 as the high-k gate dielectric. Metal organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) carried out in an Agnitron Agilis R&D Oxide Growth System was used to grow the epilayer as shown in Figure 3 (a). Detailed information regarding the MOCVD growth of the epilayer is provided in the methods section. Fe-doped semi insulating β-Ga2O3(010) substrates procured from Novel crystal technologies was used on which a 500 nm unintentionally doped (UID) β-Ga2O3 buffer layer was grown first. The buffer layer facilitates the spatial separation of the channel from the Fe (deep acceptor) doped substrate, reducing buffer related trapping issues 32,33. The active part of the device consists of 30 nm Si doped (5 ×1018 cm-3 - n type) β-Ga2O3 channel layer, a 5 nm Si doped (5 ×1018 cm-3 ) β-(Al0.27Ga0.73)2O3 layer and a 15 nm cap layer of UID β- (Al0.27Ga0.73)2O3 epitaxially grown on top of the buffer layer as shown in Figure 3 (a). Source and drain regions were defined using optical lithography followed by ion implantation of Si atoms the subsequent activation anneal was carried out, the β-(Al0.27Ga0.73)2O3 cap layer was etched away from the source and drain regions using BCl3/Ar based dry etching. The dry etching step was followed by ohmic contact metallization using Ti/Au/Ni (40/50/50 nm) metal stack annealed at 470 °C in N2 ambient. The high-k BaTiO3 gate dielectric was deposited post metallization of ohmic contacts, using radio frequency (RF) sputtering in AJA Orion RF/DC sputtering tool. The deposition of the high-k gate dielectric was followed by mesa isolation to separate individual devices after which source and drain bond pads were opened up and the gate metal stack (Ni/Au/Ni – 40/50/50 nm) was deposited to form the Schottky junction. Figure 3 (b) shows the expected band diagram of the device along a vertical cutline under the gate electrode using the band line up between BaTiO3 and β-Ga2O3 reported in 34. 9 along a vertical cutline under the gate. Schottky barrier of 1.5 eV is assumed for the gate, (c) Simulated Si ion implant profile for source and drain ohmic contacts showing the 100 nm box profile, (d) Capacitance-Voltage measurements (1 MHz) performed pre and post high-k dielectric deposition. The inset shows the extracted charge profile as a function of depth, (e) TLM measurements performed pre and post deposition of high-k dielectric showing the increase in sheet resistance and contact resistance. Device Characteristics Capacitance-voltage (C-V) and transfer length measurements (TLM) were performed to estimate the effect of sputtering the high-k gate dielectric at high temperature (670 °C) on the channel charge density, mobility and contact resistance by comparing these measurements pre and post deposition. Sputtering involves deposition using high energy atomic species and can cause significant damage to the semiconductor surface35,36. C-V measurements 10 performed pre dielectric deposition show a total charge density of 1.8 ×1013 cm-2 in the channel as shown in layer that remains un depleted even at a reverse bias of -20 V. The MOCVD grown buffer layer is expected to have an un-intentional doping density of ~ 1 ×1016 cm-3 14, which does not explain the high background charge density (> 5 ×1016 cm-3) estimated from the C-V measurements. Additionally, samples which were not subjected to Si ion implant and the activation anneal showed very low charge in the buffer layer (not shown) suggesting that the Si ion implantation step is responsible for the increased buffer charge density. Further studies are required to fully understand the mechanism of this process. After deposition of the high-k dielectric, the charge density in the channel is reduced to 1.6 ×1013 cm-2 suggesting that a small amount of charge is depleted from the channel due to the sputtering process. This may be due to the presence of fixed negative charge within (or at interface of) the dielectric or due to the formation of intrinsic acceptor type defects in β-Ga2O3 from the high energy sputter process. The dielectric constant of the sputtered BaTiO3 dielectric layer can be estimated by comparing the capacitance values at zero gate bias in Figure 3 (a), yielding a dielectric constant of 235. This is only a lower bound estimate on the dielectric constant since there is a small depletion of charge in the channel after the deposition of BaTiO3. Nevertheless, the lower bound estimate of 235 is high enough to ensure electric field management as discussed in the previous section. The TLM measurements performed pre deposition of the high-k dielectric showed a sheet resistance of 3.35 KΩ/sq and a contact resistance of 1.4 Ω.mm as shown in Figure 3 (d). Based on the charge density estimated from the C-V measurement, an effective drift mobility of 103 cm2/V-s can be calculated. The deposition of the high-k dielectric layer increases the sheet resistance and the contact resistance to 5.4 KΩ/sq and 4.1 Ω.mm respectively whereas the channel mobility (estimated as given above) is decreased to 72 cm2/V-s. The high temperature sputtering process therefore had a negative impact on both the channel sheet resistance and the ohmic contact resistance. 11 resistance as a function of source-drain spacing measured for transistors with Lg=0.7 um, (d) Measured breakdown voltage and average breakdown field as a function of Lgd, (e) Leakage current in the transistor as a function of drain bias. Inset shows the simulated electric field profile at the corner of the gate electrode along a cutline drawn through the high-k gate dielectric, (f) Benchmark plot comparing this result with previous β-Ga2O3 transistor reports 20,23,29,30,37–39. Transistor characteristics including three terminal breakdown performance was measured to study the effect of high-k gate dielectric. The measured devices span a gate drain spacing from 0.5 um to 6 um. Figure 4 (a) shows the output characteristics of the fabricated BaTiO3/β-Ga2O3 field effect transistor, with source-drain spacing, gate length, and gate-drain spacing of 4.2 um, 0.7 um, and 3 um, respectively showing an on-resistance of 25.6 Ω.mm and a max drain current of 230 mA/mm. Figure 4 (b) shows the corresponding output characteristics for the same device showing an on-off ratio of ~ 105. The on-off ratio of all the measured devices are in the range of 104-105, which is excellent considering the high charge density in the channel. Figure 4 (c) also shows the variation of -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 0 2 4 6 8 10 Etotal Ex Ey Electric Field (MV/cm) distance (m) Gate corner 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 0 200 400 600 800 1000 VBR FBR LGD (m) VBR (V) 0 1 2 3 4 FBR (MV/cm) 0 2 4 6 8 0 10 20 30 40 50 Ron (mm) LSD (m) Rsh= 5.5 K/sq Lg= 0.7 m 12 measured on resistance (Ron) as a function of the source drain spacing (Lsd) for transistors with gate length of 0.7 um. As Lsd is increased from 1.5 μm to 7.2 μm, the corresponding Ron increases from 13.6 Ω.mm to 45 Ω.mm. A sheet resistance of 5.5 KΩ/sq is also estimated from the slope of Figure 4 (c), which matches well with the TLM measurements performed after deposition of high-k dielectric (Figure 3 (d))). Figure 4 (d) shows the variation of measured breakdown voltage (Vdg) and the average breakdown field (Fav) as a function of gate-drain spacing (Lgd). The three terminal breakdown voltage increases from 201 V to 918 V as the Lgd (Lsd) is increased from 0.5 μm (1.5 μm) to 6 μm (7.5 μm) representing a change in Fav from 4 MV/cm to 1.5 MV/cm. Figure.4 (e) shows the leakage current as a function of drain bias for the device with Lgd = 6 um, indicating that the gate Schottky junction limits the breakdown performance. Inset in figure.4 (e) also shows the simulated electric field profile at the corner of the gate electrode at the breakdown voltage showing a peak value of 9.5×106 MV/cm. Most of this peak electric field is due to Ex rather than Ey since the latter is reduced due to the large dielectric constant. Further electrostatic engineering is thus required to reduce this peak field along the x direction. The control experiment for this study consisted of transistors fabricated by directly depositing schottky gate metal on the β- (Al0.27Ga0.73)2O3 cap layer. The channel in these devices could not be pinched off due to high gate leakage (data not shown here), and therefore the breakdown voltage can be estimated to be near zero. The high average breakdown fields obtained in these devices even at the high sheet charge density of 1.8 ×1013 cm-2 is due to the presence of the thick BaTiO3 gate dielectric thus proving the efficacy of the high-k field management strategy. Figure.4 (e) compares the performance of BaTiO3/β-Ga2O3 with previous reported values in β-Ga2O3 transistors in terms of the power figure of merit (Vbr 2 /Ron sp) where Ron sp is the on resistance normalized to the active area of the device (Lsd × w). As shown, there is small variation in the figure of merit performance of the measured devices but all of them lie above 147 MW/cm2, with the best performing device, Lsd = 4.2 μm, Lg = 0.7 μm and Lgd = 3 μm, showing a power figure of merit of 376 MW/cm2 which is the highest reported value for any β-Ga2O3 transistor to the best of our knowledge. The high-k field management strategy using BaTiO3 as the gate dielectric has thus resulted in superior performance even in the absence of additional field termination structures like field plates. Conclusions In conclusion, we have shown that high-k insulators like BaTiO3 can provide efficient field management in lateral field effect transistors when used as gate dielectrics. 2D device simulations and analytical modelling considering polarization charges formed at the dielectric interfaces were done to theoretically understand the effect of 13 introducing the high-k gate dielectric. The field management strategy was further experimentally investigated by fabricating BaTiO3/β-Ga2O3 MISFETs with high channel charge density of 1.8 × 1013 cm-2. The fabricated devices showed excellent breakdown performance without any additional field termination structures like field plates, giving an average breakdown field of 1.5 MV/cm at Lgd= 6 um and 4 MV/cm at Lgd= 6 um. The high average breakdown fields coupled with the high channel charge density enabled a record power figure of merit of 376 MW/cm2 at a gate-drain spacing of 3 um. The performance of these transistors in future may be further improved by integrating additional field termination structures like field plates along with high-k gate dielectrics. The ideas developed here are relevant not just for β-Ga2O3, but also provide a framework for designing the next generation of semiconductor devices in RF and power electronics where higher electric fields enable better efficiency, power density, and faster speed. The integration of high permittivity dielectrics based on perovskite oxides into conventional and wide bandgap semiconductors such as Si, GaAs, GaN and SiC could enable unprecedented performance improvements in RF and power electronics devices. This work was supported by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research under award number FA9550-18-1-0479 (Program Manager: Ali Sayir. Methods: MOCVD growth: Prior to the growth, the substrates were rinsed using acetone, IPA and DI water followed by 5 min dip in 10% HF solution to remove possible Si contamination from the substrate growth surface. The epitaxial growth using MOCVD was performed at a substrate temperature of 880 °C using the precursors, trimethyl gallium (TEGa), trimethyl aluminium (TMAl) and oxygen for supplying Ga, Al and O adatoms respectively. Ar was used as the carrier gas for supplying the precursors into the growth chamber. Si doping was carried out using silane (SiH4) as the gas source balanced with Ar to achieve the required doping level. Further information on MOCVD growth of β-Ga2O3 and β-(AlxGa1-x)2O3 can be found in 14,40,41. Si Ion implantation: The Si ion implantation was done at ion energies ranging from 10 KeV to 115 KeV, so as to obtain a 100 nm box profile with Si ion concentration of 5×1019 cm-3 as shown in Figure 3 (c). Soft mask using S1813 photoresist (1.6 μm thickness) was used as the mask layer for Si ion implantation, following which the resist was removed using hot NMP (15 min, 100 °C) and piranha solution (15 min). Implant activation was carried out in a tube furnace in N2 ambient at a temperature of 900 °C for 30 min, similar to what has been reported previously 42,43. 14 RF sputtering of BaTiO3: Sintered BaTiO3 (99.9 % purity) procured from Kurt J. Lesker was used as target for the deposition process with an applied RF power of 140 W. Ar and O2 were used to form the sputtering plasma with corresponding flow rates set to 20 sccm and 2 sccm respectively and the chamber pressure maintained at 10 mTorr resulting in a deposition rate of 0.5 nm/min. A substrate temperature of 670 °C was also used for the deposition. The thickness of the high-k dielectric layer was measured using ellipsometry (woolam alpha-SE spectroscopic ellipsometer) giving a thickness of 73 nm and a high frequency refractive index of 2.25. Dry etching: Dry etching for both the source-drain contacts and mesa isolation was carried out in a Plasma Therm SLR770 ICP-RIE dry etcher. The etching conditions for the source and drain contacts involved BCl3 based plasma with a flowrate of 20 sccm and chamber pressure of 15 mTorr. RIE power of 30 W and ICP power of 200 W was used resulting in a nominal etch rate of 4.5 nm/min. For the mesa isolation a faster etch condition using BCl3 and Ar gases were utilized. The corresponding flowrates for BCl3 and Ar were 20 sccm and 5 sccm respectively. Chamber of pressure of 5 mTorr and RIE and ICP powers of 30 W and 200 W respectively resulted in an etch rate of roughly 30 nm/min. A total depth of 323 nm (73 nm of BaTiO3 and 250 nm of epilayer) was etched away to complete the isolation. For the BaTiO3 dielectric layer, dry etching conditions as mentioned in ref 44 was utilized. Data Availability Statement The data that supports the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.