Anisotropic physical properties and large critical current density in KCa2Fe4As4F2 single crystal Sunseng Pyon1, Yuto Kobayashi1, Ayumu Takahashi1, Wenjie Li1, Teng Wang2, Gang Mu2, Ataru Ichinose3, Tadashi Kambara4, Atsushi Yoshida4, Tsuyoshi Tamegai1 1 Department of Applied Physics, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan 2 State Key Laboratory of Functional Materials for Informatics, Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200050, China 3 Central Research Institute of Electric Power Industry, Electric Power Engineering Research Laboratory, 2-6-1, Nagasaka, Yokosuka-shi, Kanagawa 240-0196, Japan 4 Nishina Center, RIKEN, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan Abstract We present a systematic study of electrical resistivity, Hall coefficient, magneto-optical imaging, magnetization, and STEM analyses of KCa2Fe4As4F2 single crystals. Sharp diamagnetic transition and magneto-optical imaging reveal homogeneity of single crystal and prominent Bean-like penetrations of vortices. Large anisotropy of electrical resistivity, with c/ab > 100, and semiconductor-like c suggest that the electronic state is quasi two-dimensional. Hall effect measurements indicate that KCa2Fe4As4F2 is a multiband system with holes as main carriers. Magnetization measurements reveal significantly larger Jc compared with that in other iron-based superconductors with different values of Jc depending on the direction of magnetic field. Origin of these Jc characteristics is discussed based on microstructural observations using STEM. In addition, further enhancement of Jc in KCa2Fe4As4F2 for future application is demonstrated in terms of heavy-ion irradiation. Introduction The discovery of iron-based superconductors (IBSs) in 2008 has prompted great interest in the field of condensed matter physics. Their multi-gap superconductivity due to their multiband electronic structures were studied. Not only their unconventional superconducting mechanism leading to high transition temperature, but also their potential for applications has been extensively studied and several types of IBSs are expected as candidates for future applications . In the case of widely-studied IBSs such as 122-type (Ba,K)Fe2As2 , their electronic states are three-dimensional with weak anisotropy. It makes good a contrast to two-dimensional electronic states in cuprate superconductors. Recently, however, it is suggested that quasi two-dimensional electronic states emerge in novel IBSs such as 12442-type compounds or some IBSs consisting of FeSe layers sandwiched by thick insulating layers . The 12442-type IBSs, a series of bi-layered compounds AB2Fe4As4C2 (A = K, Rb, and Cs; B = Ca, Nd, Sm, Gd, Tb, Dy, and Ho; and C = F and O) are recognized as the intergrowth of 1111- and 122-type IBSs, and reported to be superconductors with superconducting transition temperature Tc = 28−37 K . The 12442-type IBSs have double Fe2As2 conducting layers between two neighboring Ca2F2 insulating layers . Based on the first-principle calculation, 10 bands crossing the Fermi level are predicted, which are more complicated than other IBSs, showing multi-band character . Using polycrystalline samples of 12442-type IBSs, their electronic and magnetic structures have been investigated . Furthermore, very recently, the growth of millimeter-sized high-quality single crystals of 12442-type IBSs was reported . It is needless to say that studies on high-quality single crystals are essential to reveal intrinsic properties of these superconductors. Using these single crystals, electronic states with large anisotropy were revealed by the estimation of the upper critical field, Hc2 , and torque analyses . In addition, neutron spin resonance measurements revealed quasi two-dimensional electronic behavior of KCa2Fe4As4F2, which is similar to those of highly anisotropic cuprate superconductors . Not only elucidation of unconventional superconductivity but also the possibility of future application of this material is intriguing topics. Hc2 of KCa2Fe4As4F2 is much larger than that of other systems of IBSs, when the magnetic field is applied along the ab plane, and large anisotropy parameter  (= Hc2 ab/Hc2 c) ~8 was revealed near the superconducting transition . Large Hc2 is helpful for future high-field applications. Although critical current density, Jc, in KCa2Fe4As4F2 has not been reported yet, recent report on Jc in CsCa2Fe4As4F2 at 2 K under self-field is comparable to that in well-studied 122-type materials . Further studies on Jc in 12442-type IBSs are demanded. In this paper, we characterize the superconducting properties of KCa2Fe4As4F2 single crystals by measuring anisotropic electrical resistivity, in-plane Hall coefficient, and anisotropic irreversible magnetization. The quality and microstructure of single crystals were also characterized by magneto-optical imaging and scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM). The electronic structure of KCa2Fe4As4F2 is discussed by comparing it with that in other IBSs. In addition, we found significantly large in-plane Jc in KCa2Fe4As4F2 compared with that in other IBSs, and unique anisotropy of Jc depending on the direction of magnetic field. Further enhancement of Jc in KCa2Fe4As4F2 for future application in terms of heavy-ion irradiation is also demonstrated. Experimental methods Single crystals of KCa2Fe4As4F2 were grown using the self-flux method with KAs as flux. Details of sample growth and basic physical properties have been reported in ref. . The bulk magnetization for H // c-axis and ab-plane were measured to evaluate the Jc by using a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) magnetometer (MPMS-5XL, Quantum Design). Electrical resistivity along the ab-plane (ab) and along the c-axis (c) were measured by the four-probe method. Anticipating relatively large anisotropy of transport properties based on the previous measurements , care was taken to prepare electrical contacts so that the current flows uniformly. In the case of ab measurement, consistency of the values evaluated on the top and bottom surfaces was carefully examined. The Hall voltage was measured with a Quantum Design physical property measurement system (PPMS) with the AC transport option with current density of ~11 A/cm2. The Hall voltage was obtained from the antisymmetric part of transverse voltage by subtracting the positive and negative magnetic field data. Macroscopic homogeneity of superconductivity was examined by measuring the critical state field profile using magneto-optical (MO) imaging. For MO imaging, an iron-garnet indicator film was placed in direct contact with the sample surface, and the whole assembly was attached to the cold finger of a He-flow cryostat (Microstat-HR, Oxford Instruments). MO images were acquired by using a cooled-CCD camera with 12-bit resolution (ORCA-ER, Hamamatsu). Cross-sectional observations of the single crystals were performed with a high-resolution STEM (JEOL, JEM-2100F). Enhancement of Jc was attempted by irradiating 2.6 GeV U ion along the c-axis at RIKEN Ring Cyclotron in RI Beam Factory operated by RIKEN Nishina Center and CNS, The University of Tokyo. Columnar defects at a dose-equivalent matching fields of B= 40 kG were created. Results and discussions KCa2Fe4As4F2 (510 x 390 x 7.8 m3). Tc defined by the onset of diamagnetism is 33.0 K and Tc is less than 1 K. The quality of the sample is almost the same as that reported in the previous publication . MO imaging of KCa2Fe4As4F2 was performed to evaluate its homogeneity and quality. Figures 2(a) and 2(b) display MO images of KCa2Fe4As4F2 in the remanent state at (a) 5 K and (b) 20 K, respectively, after cycling the field up to 1.2 kOe for 0.2 s. The crystal for MO measurements are carefully cut into a parallelepiped with smooth surface and no visible cracks as shown in the optical micrograph of Fig. 2(c). At 5 K, the magnetic field is mostly shielded and only partially penetrates the sample due to large Jc and the limitation of the value of the applied field. A faint horizontal white line near the center of the crystal may indicate a small crack which is invisible from the surface. At 20 K, the magnetic field reaches the center of the sample and the MO image of the right part shows the critical state field profile expected for a uniform thin-plate superconductor with clear current-discontinuity lines (d lines), although the magnetic field in the left half of the sample is not fully penetrated. These results indicate that the sample is fairly homogeneous with a weak variation of Jc in the crystal. Local magnetic induction profiles at different temperatures taken along the broken line in Fig. 2(a) are shown in Fig. 2(d). Magnetic induction profiles at higher temperatures of 20~30 K show rooftop patterns, indicating that the large and homogeneous current flows throughout the sample. At lower temperatures, however, the magnetic induction at the center of the sample are almost zero, since Jc in the sample is so high that the applied field up to 1.2 kOe is shielded. From the value of the trapped field, Jc can be roughly evaluated . At 20 K, trapped magnetic induction B is 581 G. Using the approximate formula between B and Jc for a thin superconductor with a thickness t, Jc ∼ B /(t ∗), with t = 9 m (β is a parameter determined by the sample dimensions and he distance between the sample surface and the garnet film, and β ~ 3.3 in the present case) , Jc at 20 K under the self-field is evaluated as 0.19 MA/cm2. The superconducting transition and electrical characteristics are also evaluated by the temperature dependence of ab. Two kinds of samples, No. 1 (920 x 392 x 8 m3) and No. 2 (878 x 236 x 3 m3) with different contact configurations are measured. The contact configuration for the sample No. 1 and No. 2 are shown in Fig. 3(a). Temperature dependences of ab of the two samples are shown in Fig 3(b). The absolute value of ab ~ 300 Ωcm at room temperature and their temperature dependences are consistent with each other. Both sample show sharp superconducting transitions at ~34.0 K. When the electrical resistivity of anisotropic crystals is evaluated, it is possible that the resistivity is estimated incorrectly due to inhomogeneous current flow, in particular along the direction perpendicular to the surface. However, the fact that ab of sample No. 2, where voltage contacts are attached on the opposite surface to the current contacts agrees with that of sample No. 1 with all contacts on the same surface, suggest that we can ignore the possible error in the absolute value of ab due to sample inhomogeneity and anisotropy. As shown in Fig. 3(b), ab(T) shows a tendency of saturation with increasing temperature. Similar saturating behaviors are also observed such as in K-doped BaFe2As2 , or CaKFe4As4 , and values of ab at room temperature are very similar. In general, an electrical resistivity is inversely proportional to the mean free path of electrons l in metals. As Ioffe and Regel argued, metallic conduction occurs only when l is larger than the interatomic spacing a . So maximum resistivity is limited, and that is maximized when l is comparable to a. This limit known as Mott–Ioffe–Regel (MIR) limit in universally observed in several metals, and the values of saturated resistivity around 100-400 cm were reported . By considering similarity of ab(T) and lattice parameter between KCa2Fe4As4F2 and K-doped BaFe2As2 or CaKFe4As4, ab ~ 300 cm at room temperature is more plausible than that ~ 1.3 mcm in previous report . We tried to estimate the residual resistivity at 0 K, (0 K), by curve fitting to evaluate the sample quality. We observed negative (0 K) values obtained by these two fittings due to the relatively large T-linear contribution in this temperature range. Similar negative (0 K) was also observed in Ba1-xKxFe2As2 . The obtained exponent of n ~ 1.3 for KCa2Fe4AsF2 is a little bit smaller than that of n ~ 1.4-2.0 in Ba1-xKxFe2As2, which suggests larger T-linear contribution. Instead of the extrapolated (0 K), the sample quality was evaluated by the resistivity value just above Tc, (36 K), which is 28.2 and 23.1 cm for sample No. 1 and No.2, respectively. resulting to RRR ~ 11.4 or 12.3, respectively. In a similar compound of CaKFe4As4, RRR ((300 K)/(35 K)) of ~15 has been reported . Relatively large RRR, small residual resistivity, and sharp transition width indicate that our crystals are of high quality. and H//ab-plane measured at various magnetic fields up to 50 kOe. As the magnetic field is increased, the superconducting transition for H//c-axis broadens significantly compared with that for H//ab-plane. Two kinds of irreversibility fields, for fields along c-axis (Hirr c) or ab-plane (Hirr ab), were also estimated from ab data. They are defined by the criteria of ab ~ 0.5 cm. Obtained temperature dependences of Hirr c and Hirr ab are shown in Fig. 4(c). We also evaluate two kinds of Hc2, for fields along c-axis (Hc2 c) or ab-plane (Hc2 ab), by applying the Wethamer-Helfand-Hohenberg Hc2 is defined by the two different criteria of 0.9n and 0.5n. Here, n is the normal state resistivity estimated from the extrapolation of the resistivity using the power-law form with n = 1.3 as shown in the broken line in Fig. 4(a). Estimated Hc2 ab (0 K) is 10,820 and 3,012 kOe, and Hc2 c(0 K) is 1,326 and 407 kOe, for 0.9n and 0.5n, respectively. Using these data, the anisotropy parameter γ = Hc2 ab/Hc2 c is also evaluated as 8.2 and 7.4 for 0.9n and 0.5n, respectively. These estimated values of  and Hc2 ab(0 K) are similar to that in the previous report , and significantly larger than those of other IBSs . To discuss the anisotropy of KCa2Fe4As4F2, we measured c for sample No. 3 (520 x 326 x 13 m3). A schematic drawing of the electrical contacts attached to KCa2Fe4As4F2 for c measurements is shown in Fig. 5(a). Compared with ab, the magnitude and temperature dependence of c are very different. As shown in Fig. 5(b), the c at room temperature is 35 mcm, which is almost 100 times larger than the value of ab shown in Fig. 3(b). In the simplest scenario, the anisotropy of the resistivity should be equal to 2. c/ab using the ab of sample No.1 is shown in Fig. 5(c). c/ab at room temperature is ~100, which is close to 2 evaluated from the anisotropy of Hc2. c/ab increases with decreasing temperature, reaching a very large value of ~1,800 around Tc. These values are significantly larger than that in doped and non-doped BaFe2As2 (∼100 or ∼4 ). The value of c/ab larger than 100 with increasing trend with decreasing temperature are also observed in cuprate superconductors and some IBS compounds such as (Li0.84Fe0.16)OHFe0.98Se and Lix(NH3)yFe2Se2 , where highly two-dimensional electronic states are suggested. In La2-xSrxCuO4, c/ab for over-doped with x ~ 0.3, where Fermi-liquid like metallic resistivity ( ~ T,  > 1) is observed, is almost temperature independent. On the other hand, that for under-doped with x < 0.2 increases significantly with decreasing temperature , which is similar to that in KCa2Fe4As4F2. These results can be understood by the quasi two-dimensional Fermi-surface sheets revealed by the first-principles calculations . Furthermore, temperature dependence of c shows a broad maximum with its maximum at around 90 K, and a tiny kink just above Tc. Similar behavior is reported in CsCa2Fe4As4F2 single crystal . A broad maximum in ρc-T has also been observed in the same 12442-type of CsCa2Fe4As4F2 , or (Li0.84Fe0.16)OHFe0.98Se , and Lix(NH3)yFe2Se2 . This crossover of temperature dependence of ρc may suggest opening of pseudogap in KCa2Fe4As4F2 as suggested by ref. . The Hall resistivity yx as a function of magnetic field up to 50 kOe at several temperatures are shown in Fig. 6(a). Dimensions of the sample are 784×730×12 m3. In the whole range, yx is positive and shows linear field dependence up to 50 kOe. The Hall coefficient RH in KCa2Fe4As4F2 obtained from yx is plotted in Fig. 6(b). The sign of RH is positive in the whole temperature range, which is consistent with self hole-doping scenario based on the first-principle calculation . RH increases with decreasing temperature from 300 K to 80 K, and stays nearly constant below 80 K. The absolute value of RH around Tc is two times larger than that at 300 K. The absolute value of RH in our single crystal is smaller than that of RH in polycrystalline sample . Around 75 K where RH takes its maximum value, RH of single crystal and polycrystalline sample are ~1.5 and 2.0 x 10-3 cm3/C, respectively. Larger RH in polycrystalline sample could be originated from the increase of Hall resistivity caused by lower packing density and the anisotropy of the Hall coefficient. The absolute value of RH at 300 K, ~0.7 x 10-3 cm3/C, is similar to that of other IBSs such as or CaKFe4As4 (~0.4 x 10-3 cm3/C) . It is noteworthy that doped carriers to FeAs layer in KCa2Fe4As4F2 should be almost the same as those in Ba0.5K0.5Fe2As2 and CaKFe4As4, since the number of doped hole per Fe is the same in these three compounds. Similar values of RH in these compounds are consistent to the simple hole-doping scenario. The temperature dependence of RH shown in Fig. 6(b) is consistent with a multiband electronic structure of KCa2Fe4As4F2. In a simple single-band system, the Hall coefficient is given by RH = 1/nqc, where q is the charge of a carrier, n is the carrier density, and c is the speed of light, and RH is T-independent. By contrast, the Hall coefficient in a multiband system, for instance, consisting of electron and hole bands, is given by RH = (nhh 2 – nee the mobility of holes (electrons). The Hall coefficient in a multiband system can be temperature-dependent. The obtained results indicate that KCa2Fe4As4F2 is a multiband system, which is consistent with the band structure calculation . The Jc in KCa2Fe4As4F2 was evaluated by measuring the irreversible magnetization. First, in-plane Jc for H//c-axis, which we simply call Jc, was evaluated from magnetization measurements. In the conventional method, Jc can be evaluated using the extended Bean model Jc = 20/a/(1-a/3b), where M [emu/cm3] is Mdown - Mup. Mup and Mdown are the magnetization when sweeping the field up and down, respectively, and a [cm] and b [cm] are the sample width and length (a < b) . For some magnetization data, however, since the self-field is significant,  is reduced in the return branch and causes a non-negligible errors in the calculation of Jc. So Jc was calculated from the magnetization of the second quadrant of the magnetic hysteresis loop in Fig. 7(a) using the extended isotropic Bean model, Jc = 40down/a/(1-a/3b), after subtracting linear background, as described in ref. . Figure 7 (a) shows the magnetic field dependence of magnetization at various temperatures. Evaluated Jc as a function of temperature is summarized in Fig. 7(b). Jc at 2 K under the self-field is 8.2 MA/cm2. This value of Jc is significantly larger than those of other IBSs in the same condition, MA/cm2) , and CaKFe4As4 (1.6 MA/cm2) . The value of Jc at 20 K under the self-field is 0.38 MA/cm2. This value agrees reasonably well with that evaluated from the analysis of the MO image. A slight underestimation of Jc evaluated from MO image may be caused by the effect of observed defect or a slightly larger gap between the sample surface and the garnet film. Jc decreases monotonically with the magnetic field without showing the peak effect in the whole temperature range. At temperatures above 20 K, the magnetic field dependence of Jc becomes significant as shown in Fig. 7(b). This is consistent with the low irreversibility field near Tc as described in Fig. 4(c). Next, we demonstrate further enhancement of Jc by swift-particle irradiation. It is well known that point or columnar defects created by swift-particle irradiation work as pinning centers for vortices and increase Jc . We introduced columnar defects by using 2.6 GeV U-ion irradiation at a dose equivalent field of B= 40 kG. The Jc as a function of magnetic field of the KCa2Fe4As4F2 is summarized in Fig. 8. The Jc in 2.6 GeV U-ion irradiated sample was calculated by the same method for that in the pristine sample. After the irradiation, Jc at 2 K under the self-field is enhanced up to ~19 MA/cm2, which is more than twice the value of the pristine crystal. The largest value of Jc obtained at 2 K under self-field in 2.6 GeV U-irradiated KCa2Fe4As4F2 is slightly larger than those in heavy ion-irradiated (Ba,K)Fe2As2, ~15 MA/cm2 . Considering the fact that Jc can be enhanced with adding proper defects as pinning centers by changing conditions of irradiation, further increase of Jc can be expected in KCa2Fe4As4F2 with artificial defects. In the case of compounds with tetragonal symmetry, three kinds of Jc should be considered. One of them is in-plane Jc when the field is applied along the c-axis as discussed above. The others are two independent critical current densities for H//ab-plane, one flows in the ab-plane and another flows along the c-axis. We tentatively designate the former as Jc2 and the latter as Jc3 (following the definition in ref. ). However, it is difficult to evaluate Jc2 and Jc3 independently without large difference between Jc2 and Jc3 as in the case of CaKFe4As4 . Hence, we only evaluated average Jc for H//ab-plane, Jc H//ab, using the extended Bean model. Since the return branch cannot be estimated well due to the small magnetization compared with the background signal, Jc is calculated using the conventional extended Bean model Jc = 20/a(1-a/3b). Figure 9(b) shows temperature dependence of Jc H//ab under self-field together with the self-field Jc for H//c-axis. Compared with Jc for H//c-axis, the absolute value of Jc H//ab is smaller, especially below 10 K. The self-field Jc H//ab at 2 K is ~0.9 MA/cm2. Anisotropic Jc has not been studied properly in other iron-based and even cuprate superconductors. For instance, Ba(Fe,Co)2As2 and Fe(Te,Se) single crystals are reported to show isotropic Jc . On the other hand, Jc H//ab in CaKFe4As4 shows opposite trend (Jc H//ab > Jc for H//c-axis) , and that in the same 12442-tupe of CsCa2Fe4As4F2 at 1.8 K shows similar trend (Jc H//ab is shown in Fig. 9(b). Jc under the self-field for H//c-axis is ~9 and ~1.5 times larger than Jc H//ab at 2 K and above 15 K, respectively. While temperature dependence of Jc H//ab below 10 K is weaker than that of Jc for H//c-axis, values and temperature dependence of both components of Jc become similar above 15 K. One of the possible reasons for the significantly large and anisotropic Jc could be the presence of natural defects in the pristine KCa2Fe4As4F2. In the case of CaKFe4As4, where anisotropic Jc was also observed, novel planar defects nearly parallel to the ab-plane were detected by STEM observations . Planar defects can work as pinning centers for vortices, causing enhancement of Jc2, or block electrical current flowing along the c-axis leading to reduction of Jc3. The former effect may be more dominant in CaKFe4As4. To give a hint for the anisotropic Jc, we performed high-resolution STEM observations. Figures 10(a)-(d) show STEM images on the cross section parallel to the c-axis in the pristine and 2.6 GeV U-irradiated KCa2Fe4As4F2. Clear periodic structure along the c-axis in Fig. 10 (b) corresponds to half unit cell of KCa2Fe4As4F2. Horizontal black line-like defects are observed as shown in yellow broken squares in Figs. 10(a), 10(c), and 10(d), respectively. These planar defects extending more than 400 nm are randomly distributed, and the separation between defects is larger than 100 nm. The lower density of defects and longer defects along the ab-plane in KCa2Fe4As4F2 should reduce Jc3 effectively rather than increase Jc2 as opposed to CaKFe4As4, leading to the net reduction of Jc H//ab. So the observed defects are possible origin of anisotropic Jc, where Jc H//ab is lower than Jc for H//c-axis. On the other hand, no characteristic defect structure along the c-axis was observed in the pristine KCa2Fe4As4F2 which may contribute to increase Jc for H//c-axis. Instead, as shown in Fig. 10(b), regions with dark contrasts with 5-10 nm scale are distributed. They could be the origin of the large Jc H//ab in KCa2Fe4As4F2. Lattice strains or chemical inhomogeneities of some kind can be the cause of these regions with dark contrasts. On the other hand, in 2.6 GeV U-irradiated KCa2Fe4As4F2, clear columnar defects along the c-axis are observed as shown in Figs. 10(c) and 10 (d), although these defects look a little discontinuous compared with those in 2.6 GeV U-irradiated K-doped BaFe2As2 . Possible reason for this difference is that the threshold energies of the irradiated ions to create the continuous columnar defects are different for each material. Actually, it has been confirmed that the continuity and radius of columnar defects are quite different between Ba(Fe,Co)Fe2As2 and (Ba,K)Fe2As2 irradiated by the same 2.6 GeV U ions . Observed columnar defects should work as pinning center for vortices to increase in-plane Jc as shown in Fig. 8. It should be noted that Jc of the irradiated crystal in higher temperature and magnetic field range shown in Fig. 8 is significantly larger than that of the pristine crystal shown in Fig. 7(b). This indicates that irreversibility field above 20 K is enhanced by pinning of vortices introduced by columnar defect. Higher performance of Jc around 20 K by increasing pinning force is more advantageous for the operation of them using He-free refrigeration systems in future . Moreover, further enhancement of Jc of KCa2Fe4As4F2 in a wide temperature range is expected. In the case of Ba0.6K0.4Fe2As2, degree of enhancement of Jc by heavy-ion irradiation is controlled not only by the matching field, but also by the energy and species of ions . Further enhancement of Jc by controlling the irradiation conditions is demanded in future. Conclusion We have presented a systematic study of anisotropic physical properties and critical current density in KCa2Fe4As4F2. The sharp onset of diamagnetic shielding and the magneto-optical image reveal the homogeneity of single crystal and prominent Bean-like penetrations of vortices. Temperature dependence of ab shows a tendency of saturation at high temperatures with a value ~300 cm at room temperature. This is comparable to values of Ba0.5K0.5Fe2As2 and CaKFe4As4 with similar doping levels, and is consistent to the universality of MIR limit in metals. A large anisotropy of electrical resistivity with c/ab ~ 100 at room temperature and semiconductor-like c suggest quasi-two-dimensional electronic state. RH analysis indicates that KCa2Fe4As4F2 is a multiband system and holes are dominant carriers. The irreversible magnetization reveal significantly larger Jc compared with that in other iron-based superconductors, and large anisotropy of Jc depending on the direction of magnetic field. Origin of anisotropic Jc may be caused by randomly distributed planar defect and scattered dark contrasts as observed in STEM images. Further enhancement of Jc up to 19 MA/cm2 at 2 K under self-field is also demonstrated by irradiating 2.6 GeV U at B = 40 kG. Significantly large enhancement of Jc is sustained even at high temperatures and high fields. Acknowledgements This work was partially supported by a Grant in Aid for Scientific Research (A) (17H01141) from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS).