A Novel Magnetic Material by Design: Observation of Yb3+ with Spin-1/2 and Possible Superconducting Trace in YbxPt5P Xin Gui,1 Tay-Rong Chang2,3 Kaya Wei,4 Marcus J. Daum,5 David E. Graf,4 Ryan. E. Baumbach,4,6 Martin Mourigal,5* Weiwei Xie1* 1 Department of Chemistry, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA, USA 70803 2 Department of Physics, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan 70101 3 Center for Quantum Frontiers of Research & Technology (QFort), Tainan, Taiwan 70101 4 National High Magnetic Field Laboratory, Tallahassee, FL, USA 32306 5 School of Physics, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA 30322 6 Department of Physics, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL, USA 32306 Weiwei Xie (weiweix@lsu.edu; weiwei.xie@rutgers.edu); Martin Mourigal (mourigal@gatech.edu) Abstract The localized f-electrons enrich the magnetic properties in rare-earth-based intermetallics. Among those, compounds with heavier 4d and 5d transition metals are even more fascinating because anomalous electronic properties may be induced by the hybridization of 4f and itinerant conduction electrons primarily from the d orbitals. Here, we describe the observation of trivalent Yb3+ with S = 1⁄2 at low temperatures in YbxPt5P, the first of a new family of materials. YbxPt5P (0.20 ≤ x ≤ 1) phases were synthesized and structurally characterized. They exhibit a large homogeneity width with the Yb ratio exclusively occupying the 1a site in the anti-CeCoIn5 structure. Moreover, the resistivity measurement of a sample analyzed as Yb0.25Pt5P shows it to exist a complete zero- resistance transition with a critical transition temperature of 0.6 K, possible superconductivity. However, the zero-resistivity transition was not observed in YbPt5P with antiferromagnetic ordering existing solely. First-principles electronic structure calculations substantiate the antiferromagnetic ground state and indicate that 2D nesting around Fermi level may give rise to exotic physical properties, such as superconductivity. YbxPt5P appears to be a unique case among materials. Introduction Understanding the electronic interactions in intermetallic compounds and designing the functional materials with targeted physical properties accordingly have been long-standing challenges in the materials science. One side, the classical chemical concepts, such as charge balance arguments and electron-counting rules, do not work for the intermetallic compounds with strong electron correlation, partially the valence orbital manifold, and occasionally relativistic effects.1 On the other side, quantum-chemical techniques including machine-learning is hindered by the limited data of materials with specific properties, such as superconductivity.2-4 The interplay between superconductivity and magnetism, which can happen under very restricted conditions, has the potential to lead to exotic new condensed matter physics and quantum devices. The coexistence of superconductivity and magnetism in a single material system is very rare.5–10 Materials physicists have worked to realize this state by fabricating hybrid nanostructures that combine both superconducting and magnetic layers, and along similar lines chemists have used solvent methods to build up hybrid materials with superconducting and magnetic fragments, most of which are not fully ordered.11–15 It is highly demanding to design and synthesize a new bulk material that displays the coexistence of superconductivity and magnetism in a single substance. One chemical perspective for discovering new functional materials especially superconductors is to posit that similar physical properties can be observed in structural families. A well-known example is the HoCoGa5-type structure motif type becoming intriguing after the discovery of heavy fermion superconductivity in CeCoIn516. The indium analogs, CeTIn5 (T- Transition Metals) show an intricate interplay of superconductivity and magnetism, e.g. unconventional superconducting CeCoIn5 and antiferromagnetic CeRhIn517. Heavy fermion superconductors, most of which are 4f1 Ce-based, are one way that the two kinds of electronic systems can interact,16–19 and an alternative is for more weakly coupled rare earth-metal systems, such as is seen for rare earth Chevrel phases6,20–23 and the lanthanide borocarbides.24–28 Yb3+, with a 4f13 electronic configuration, is often considered as the hole analogue of Ce3+, however, only a single Yb-based heavy-fermion superconductor, YbAlB4 has been reported to date, with Tc = 0.08 K;29 the large discrepancy must be due to unfavorable Yb- metal hybridization energies in most cases. The ternary compound LaPt5As, synthesized in rhombohedral symmetry under high pressure, provides a new avenue for research because, although non-magnetic, it hosts superconductivity with Tc~2.6 K.30 Consisting of Pt-rich layered networks, superconducting LaPt5As inspired us to incorporate a magnetic rare earth element (Yb3+) into the platinum-pnictide system. The much smaller ionic radius of Yb compared to La led us to replace As3- with smaller P3- to stabilize a hypothetical YbPt5P at ambient pressure. This may yield both superconducting and magnetic properties in a single material. Thus, here we report a new material YbxPt5P with a thorough crystallographic and physical properties characterization. YbxPt5P crystallizes in tetragonal TlPt5As-type structure with the space group P4/mmm. The structure can be considered as the anti-format of CeCoIn5. According to single crystal X-ray diffraction, the Yb content (x) in YbxPt5P varies significantly from x= 0.20~1.0. We studied the magnetic and electronic properties on two samples with x = 0.23 (1) and 0.96 (1). In both samples, we observed antiferromagnetic transitions of Yb3+ around 0.3 K. Moreover, the zero- resistivity transition, highly possible a superconducting transition, was observed around ~0.6 K only in low ratio Yb sample, Yb0.20(1)Pt5P, but not in Yb0.96(1)Pt5P. Our new quantum material is a new ideal platform to study the interplay between superconductivity and magnetism. Our new quantum material appears to be a distinct platform for studying the interactions between superconductivity and magnetism, in a material where the strong spin-orbit coupling is present. Experimental Section Synthesis: YbxPt5P samples with several loading compositions (x= 0.4, 0.5, 0.8 and 1.1) were synthesized by a high-temperature solid-state method. Stoichiometric elemental Yb (<200 mesh, Alfa Aesar, ≥ 99.9%), Pt (~22 mesh, Beantown Chemical, ≥ 99.99%) and red P (~100 mesh, Beantown Chemical, ≥ 99%) were mixed well, and pressed into a pellet inside an argon-filled glovebox. The pellet was placed in an alumina crucible which was then sealed in an evacuated quartz tube. Heat treatment to 950 oC was carried out with a rate of 30 oC per hour in a Thermo Scientific furnace. After holding at 950 oC for two days, the tubes were slowly cooled to room temperature in five days. Based on our experiments, heating at 950 oC longer than 10 days would lead to the decomposition of YbxPt5P and a low ratio of Yb less than x = 0.5 will less possibly yield the appropriate phases. Small single crystals (~0.4×0.2×0.02 mm3) were attached to the bulk polycrystalline material, as shown in FIG. S1. In most of the cases, some impurities appeared as black powder, which can be removed by soaking in ethanol in an ultrasonic bath for 20 minutes. YbxPt5P is resistible to both air and moisture. Phase Identification: The phase purity was determined by using a Rigaku MiniFlex 600 powder X-ray diffractometer (XRD) with Cu K radiation (=1.5406 Å, Ge monochromator). A long scan with the Bragg angle ranged from 3° to 90° in a step of 0.005° at a rate of 0.35°/min was performed for each sample. Rietveld method was utilized to fit the powder XRD pattern in the Fullprof Suite according to the calculated pattern from single crystal data.31 Structure Determination: Multiple pieces of crystals (~20×40×40 m3) were measured to get precise structural information. A Bruker Apex II diffractometer equipped with Mo radiation (K= 0.71073 Å) was applied to explore the crystal structure at room temperature. The small crystals were stuck to a Kapton loop with glycerol. Four different positions were chosen to take the measurement with an exposure time of 10 seconds per frame and the scanning 2 width of 0.5. Direct methods and full-matrix least-squares on F2 models with SHELXTL package were applied to solve the structure.32 Data acquisition was obtained via Bruker SMART software with the corrections on Lorentz and polarization effect done by SAINT program. Numerical absorption corrections were accomplished with XPREP, which is based on the face-index modeling.33 Physical Property Measurements: All the physical property measurements were performed on pieces of as-grown samples extracted from the sample crucible. The measured pieces consisted of a mixture of polycrystalline matrix and single crystals which were semi-randomly oriented with respect to each other. Magnetization measurements were carried out for temperatures T = 1.8 – 300 K using a Vibrating Sample Magnetometer (VSM) in Quantum Design PPMS systems. The heat capacity was measured for T = 0.05 – 2 K using a Dilution Refrigerator (DR) and for T = 2 – 200 K using the Heat Capacity (HC) option of the same Quantum Design PPMS systems. Electrical resistivity measurements were performed in a four-wire configuration with platinum or gold wires and silver contacts for T = 0.1 – 300 K using the Adiabatic Demagnetization Refrigerator (ADR) option or using the combination of Dilution Refrigerator and Electrical Transport (ETO) options. Electronic Structure Calculation: The bulk electronic structures of YbPt5P were computed using the projector augmented wave method34,35 as implemented in the VASP package36 within the generalized gradient approximation (GGA)37 and GGA plus Hubbard U (GGA+U)38 scheme. On- site U = 7 eV and 4 eV were used for Yb f-orbitals and Pt d-orbitals, respectively. The spin−orbit coupling (SOC) was included self-consistently in the calculations of electronic structures with a Monkhorst–Pack k-point mesh 20 × 20 × 10. The experimental structural parameters were employed. X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS): The oxidation states of Yb, Pt and P atoms for Yb0.67Pt5P and YbPt5P are determined by a Kratos AXIS 165 XPS/AES equipped with standard Mg/Al and high-performance Al monochromatic source in an evacuated (10-9 torr) chamber at room temperature. Results and Discussion Phase Information, Crystal Structure and Chemical Composition Determination: Single Crystal X-ray Diffraction (SXRD) analysis shows that YbxPt5P adopts the tetragonal structure illustrated in FIG. 1a, with space group P4/mmm, which can be considered an anti-CeCoIn5-type12 while in YbxPt5P, Yb and Pt atoms are located on the 1a and 1c sites and in CeCoIn5, the Ce and Co atoms occupy the 1c and 1a sites. The structure of YbxPt5P is layered, with planes of phosphorous atoms separating square-lattice layers of truncated YbPt12 cuboids. These cuboids The refined crystallographic data including atomic positions, site occupancies, and isotropic thermal displacements for the different Yb concentrations studied in detail are summarized in various Yb ratios. By decreasing the occupancies of Yb on 1a site to ~23%, vacancies of P/Pt on 1b/4i sites appears. This aspect of the structural chemistry influences the bulk physical properties. crystal X-ray diffraction of selected samples. Of these, the low-Yb loadings yielded a mixture of 151-phase and unreacted Pt phase, which can be distinguished by the optical microscope. Attempts to stabilize the 151-phase with homogenous Yb occupancy by extending the annealing time results in the decomposition of 151-type phases. The powder X-ray diffraction patterns of YbxPt5P were shown in FIG.1b. It can be found that YbxPt5P phases were obtained with slight Pt or PtP2 impurity with different occupancy of Yb. The samples used to perform the physical properties measurements were taken from the same specimen. After measurements done, the samples were ground into powder and the powder X-ray diffraction measurement confirmed the chemical compositions again. PXRD = powder X-ray diffraction; SCXRD = single crystal X-ray diffraction. Atomic % Yb Loaded Impurities (Manual) Phase (PXRD) --- Composition --- (PXRD) (SCXRD)a 40 Unreacted P; Pt 151-type; Pt; P Yb0.23Pt5P0.90 Yb0.23(1)Pt4.87(4)P0.90(5) 80 Pt; PtP2 151-type; Pt; PtP2 Yb0.67Pt5P Yb0.660(4)Pt5P 110 Pt 151-type Yb0.96Pt5P Yb0.96(1)Pt5P a 296 K; Numbers in ( )’s are standard uncertainties. For the X-ray powder diffraction patterns, all scale factors and lattice parameters were refined, while the displacement parameters of all atoms were assumed to be anisotropic. The refined lattice parameters for YbxPt5P phases showed a 1.54% and 2.64% increase along a and c according to X- ray powder diffraction as the Yb ratio increased from 25 to 100 atomic percent. Single crystals showed a similar trend. Analysis of samples all fall within various ratios of Yb in the phase. Does Yb still show 3+ oxidation state in the intermetallic YbxPt5P? With the question in mind, X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) experiments were performed on Yb0.67Pt5P and YbPt5P, which confirms 3+ oxidation state of Yb in both samples, as shown in FIG. S2. structure of YbPt5P, where green, grey, and red spheres represent Yb, Pt and P atoms, respectively. b. The Rietveld refinements of powder X-ray diffraction patterns of YbxPt5P with x = 0.25, 0.67, and 1. The red line and dot indicate the observed reflection patterns and the black line represents the calculated pattern obtained from single crystal XRD. The calculated patterns and the peak positions of YbPt5P are indicated by green vertical ticks. Antiferromagnetic Ordering in YbxPt5P: The magnetic susceptibility is shown as the inset of confirmed by SEM-EDX. The data was fitted over the high-temperature region (HT from 225 to 300 K) and the low-temperature region (LT from 1.8 to 15 K) to the Curie-Weiss law without a diamagnetic correction. The effective moment of eff = 4.21(5) B/f.u. obtained for the HT range is reduced to eff = 1.82 (9) B/f.u. in the LT range, where it is associated with a negative Weiss temperature W = -1.97 K indicative of an antiferromagnetic tendency. The isothermal magnetization at 2K in FIG. 2a (Main Panel) shows a negligible hysteresis and a saturation field around ~25 kOe with a saturation magnetization around 0.3 B/Yb. The heat capacity measurement, shown in FIG. 2b, illustrates a clearly magnetic transition peak around 0.23 K and the large entropy change in Yb0.25Pt5P. at 2.0 K for Yb0.25Pt5P. (Inset) The temperature-dependence of the magnetic susceptibility for Yb0.25Pt5P from 1.8 to 300 K measured under an applied field of 1000 Oe, data as indicated by the blue line for magnetic susceptibility and orange line for the inverse magnetic susceptibility. Green lines show the Curie-Weiss fitting of the inverse  data at high temperature. b. (Main panel) Heat capacity measurements for Yb0.25Pt5P from 0.1 to 150 K. (Inset) Ctot/T vs T2 for Yb0.25Pt5P with magnetic transition occurring at 0.23 K. As increasing Yb ratio to YbPt5P, the magnetic characterization of YbPt5P is shown in FIG. 3a and b. The inverse susceptibility does not show any linear Curie-Weiss behavior until below 30 K, indicating low-lying crystal-electric-field (CEF) levels. These CEF levels is slightly lower than in other Yb3+ systems in octahedral O environments. The Weiss constant is of the order of -2.2 to - 2.7 K, which are strongly depending on the field directions and the fitting range. This indicates there is possibly never a real Curie-Weiss regime in this sample due to CEF levels (at high T range) and strong spin-orbit interactions between spins (at low T range). The field-dependent magnetization with different orientations in the magnetic field. Orientation "||" means the field along the long axis of the piece. Orientation "~" means the field perpendicular to the long axis of the piece. The results show only a weak orientation dependence with saturated magnetization 5.4 and 4 depending on the field direction. The degree of spin-space anisotropy is consistent with observation of other Yb3+ based insulating magnets. The normal heat capacity measurements up to 200 K in both 0 T and 10 T can be fitted using a double Debye model with an extraction of a “phonon background” for the extraction of entropy. The significant shift of the magnetic specific heat capacity between 0 T and 10 T is consistent with the large g-tensor. Without applied magnetic field, in addition to sharp peak at 0.28 K, there is a broad feature around 4 K that may be contributed from a low-lying CEF level. The magnetic entropy change (obtained after subtracting the “phonon background”) indicates that there is indeed one effective S= 1/2 degrees of freedom per formula unit at temperatures below 3 K. susceptibility for YbPt5P from 1.8 to 300 K measured under an applied field of 1000 Oe, data as indicated by the blue and light blue solid circles for the field along the long axis of the piece and the field perpendicular to the long axis of the piece, respectively. Orange and brown lines show the inverse temperature-dependence of the magnetic susceptibility. Green lines show the Curie- Weiss fitting of the inverse  data at high temperature and low temperature, respectively. b. The magnetic behavior for YbPt5P up to 14 T at 1.7 and 5 K. c. Heat capacity measurement with/without applied magnetic field with the emphasis on the magnetic ordering transition around 0.28 K. d. Entropy change related to the magnetic ordering of Yb3+ in YbPt5P without applied field. Zero-resistance Transition Observed in Yb0.25Pt5P but Suppressed in YbPt5P: FIG. 4a presents zero-resistance transitions of two samples with x = 0.25 and 0.29. The resistivity curve from 1.8 to 300 K is consistent with what is expected for a metal in Yb0.25Pt5P and Yb0.29Pt5P without a phase transition shown in FIG. S3. The relatively small RRR may originate from defects on the Yb site. A drop to zero resistance is clearly seen at low temperatures, indicating the presence of a zero-resistance transition, highly possible a superconducting transition. The midpoints of the resistive transition of Yb0.25Pt5P and Yb0.29Pt5P are ~0.6 K and 0.65 K, respectively. To further characterize the zero-resistance transition, the inset of FIG. 2a shows the field-dependent resistivity curve of Yb0.25Pt5P. As applying magnetic field at various temperatures, the superconducting transition was suppressed gradually, which indicates that the strong spin-orbit coupling effects on Yb and Pt have negligible impact on the upper critical field of superconductivity. Moreover, the isostructural Y0.34Pt5P/Y0.45Pt5P and Pt5P2 (PtP2 is a semiconductor without resistance signal detected below 10 K.) were synthesized and characterized with no superconductivity observed above 0.4 K, as shown in FIG. S4 & FIG. S5 which can basically exclude the possibility that accidental impurities in Yb-based samples can contribute to the zero-resistance transition in resistivity measurements since both compounds were synthesized with identical procedure. The heat capacity measurements for Yb0.29Pt5P in FIG. S6 shows a small kink around 0.6 K, which is consistent with the zero-resistance transition in resistivity. However, the large entropy changes from the magnetic transition of Yb3+ in FIG. 2b make the subtle superconducting transition less possible to be observed. The similar problem occurs in the magnetic susceptibility measurements. Further study is required to confirm the superconductivity in the low ratio Yb samples. On the other side, the electric transport measurement of YbPt5P shows a failed superconducting transition starting from 0.6 K illustrated in FIG. 4b. Yb0.25Pt5P and Yb0.29Pt5P. (Main panel) Electrical resistivity measurements for resistance transition observed in low-Yb concentration samples The temperature-dependent resistivity for YbPt5P from 0.05 to 4 K measured under various applied fields with ADR mode conducted with 100A at 128Hz. Electronic Structure and 2D Nesting in YbPt5P: In order to further understand the nature of the ground state properties of YbPt5P, we perform first-principles calculations on the bulk band structure based on generalized gradient approximation (GGA) and GGA with SOC (GGA+SOC) methods, as shown in FIG. 5. Our GGA and GGA+SOC calculations reveal a metallic ground state. From the orbital decomposition (FIG.5a), we find the flat and narrow Yb-4f bands are located around EF from -0.25 eV. Contrary to Yb-4f localized states, Pt-5d orbitals exhibit opposed behavior. The itinerant hole-like Pt-5d bands with a larger band dispersion span across EF and interact with the Yb-4f localized bands near EF, leading to a complex Fermi surface (FS). The P- 3p orbitals split into two components. Upper part displays electron-like band dispersion above EF and hybridizes strongly with Pt-5d bands, while lower part lies about −7 eV below EF. FIG. 5c shows the three-dimensional (3D) FS of YbPt5P, and the corresponding band numbers are labeled in FIG.5d. The FS of YbPt5P mainly contains four nearly 2D pockets (FIG.5c and d). Two tube- like and one bigger funnel-like hole-type pockets around Γ point (band-1, band-2, and band-3) and another one hole-type pocket around X point (band-3). These nearly 2D FS may induce a superconducting state or an antiferromagnetic magnetic (AFM) phase in YbPt5P, resulted from the FS nesting effect. It is also note that the FS of YbPt5P is much different from the LDA band structure of heavy fermion CeCoIn5 in which there are two Fermi sheets around M point and the FS display much stronger kz dispersion at Γ point. This difference implies the nature of ground state of YbPt5P may entirely distinct from the typical heavy fermion system. By projecting the band structure onto the cubic harmonics basis, we find the FS of the occupied bands around EF 3D real-space charge density distribution within the energy interval (EF ~ -10 meV) clearly shows this orbital anisotropy feature (FIG. S7). In this sense, the in-plane hopping strength is stronger than the out-of-plane one, consequently exhibition nearly 2D FS characteristic. When SOC is dominate EF while j=5/2 states are shifted to -1.5 eV below EF. In addition, strong SOC effect gap out the band crossing points between Pt-5d and P-3p orbitals around Γ point, and further enhance the band splitting of the Yb-4f and Pt-5d hybridized anti-crossing gap around EF. Since the FS pattern of YbPt5P is significantly distinct from the heavy fermion Ce-115 family, the detailed theoretical modeling and experimental tests of the effect of f-d interaction in this material are left as an open question for future studies. Finally, we consider the electronic interactions via GGA plus correlation parameter U (GGA+U) calculations. We see the Yb-4f bands drop below EF as increasing the value of U (FIG. S9). As Yb-4f bands move to higher binding energies, their hybridization with conduction bands becomes smaller. The Pt-5d orbitals, on the other hand, are more pushed toward EF with increasing U and interact with P-3p states. Moreover, SOC effect split the Yb-4f state and further enhance the band splitting of crossing states, resulting in a continuous energy gap through whole Brillouin zone. phase. a. The bulk band structure of YbPt5P based on GGA calculations without the inclusion of spin–orbit coupling. The Fermi energy is zero. The red, blue, and green dots indicate Yb-4f, Pt-5d, and P-3p orbitals, respectively. b. Same as a but with the inclusion of spin–orbit coupling (SOC). The bulk Fermi surface of non-magnetic YbPt5P based on GGA calculations. The corresponding band number are labeled in d. Zoom-in band structure. The bands that cross Fermi level are labeled by blue, red, and green lines, respectively. Conclusions YbxPt5P (0.23 ≤ x ≤ 1) phases exhibit superconducting trace and magnetism with low Yb-ratio and sole magnetism with high Yb-ratio. The isostructural material can be synthesized with other rare earths, with a variety of strange results expected. The coexistence of such strongly competing electronic states in a single substance itself makes this material remarkable. Moreover, the fact that the strong spin-orbit coupling of the Pt electrons must have an influence in determining the properties makes it truly novel. The complexity of the interactions between magnetism and superconductivity in this new materials family will push the frontiers of our knowledge of electronic and magnetic properties of materials into new areas and provide fertile ground for developing our still-emergent understanding of quantum materials. The material can be synthesized with other rare earths, with a variety of strange results expected. Supporting Information Supplementary information, details of author contributions and competing interests; and statements of data are available at https://doi.org/xxx including: Crystallographic data; Equivalent isotropic displacement parameters; Crystal picture; XPS data; Powder XRD pattern for Yb0.29(1)Pt5P; Resistivity measurement of Y0.34Pt5P, Y0.45Pt5P, and Pt5P2; GGA bulk band structures with projection of various orbitals onto the cubic harmonics basis; 3D real-space charge density distribution; bulk band structures of GGA+U and GGA+U+SOC.