1 Title: On-the-fly Closed-loop Autonomous Materials Discovery via Bayesian Active Learning Authors: A. Gilad Kusne‡,1,2,*, Heshan Yu‡,2, Changming Wu3, Huairuo Zhang4,5, Jason Hattrick-Simpers1, Brian DeCost1, Suchismita Sarker6, Corey Oses7, Cormac Toher7, Stefano Curtarolo7, Albert V. Davydov4, Ritesh Agarwal8, Leonid A. Bendersky4,5, Mo Li3, Apurva Mehta6, Ichiro Takeuchi2,9,* Affiliations: 1 Materials Measurement Science Division, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD 20899, US 2 Materials Science and Engineering Department, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 3 Electrical & Computer Engineering Department, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, US 4 Materials Science and Engineering Division, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD 20899, US 5 Theiss Research, Inc., La Jolla, CA 92037, US 6 Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA 94025, US 7 Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science Department and Center for Autonomous Materials Design, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, US 8 Materials Science and Engineering Department, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 9 Maryland Quantum Materials Center, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, US * Emails: aaron.kusne@nist.gov; takeuchi@umd.edu ‡ These authors contributed equally to this work. Abstract: Active learning – the field of machine learning (ML) dedicated to optimal experiment design, has played a part in science as far back as the 18th century when Laplace used it to guide his discovery of celestial mechanics1. In this work we focus a closed-loop, active learning-driven autonomous system on another major challenge, the discovery of advanced materials against the exceedingly complex synthesis-processes-structure-property landscape. We demonstrate autonomous research methodology (i.e. autonomous hypothesis definition and evaluation) that can place complex, advanced materials in reach, allowing scientists to fail smarter, learn faster, and spend less resources in their studies, while simultaneously improving trust in scientific results and machine learning tools. Additionally, this robot science enables science-over-the- network, reducing the economic impact of scientists being physically separated from their labs. We used the real-time closed-loop, autonomous system for materials exploration and optimization (CAMEO) at the synchrotron beamline to accelerate the fundamentally interconnected tasks of rapid phase mapping and property optimization, with each cycle taking seconds to minutes, resulting in the discovery of a novel epitaxial nanocomposite phase-change memory material. 2 Main Text: Technologies drive the perpetual search for novel and improved functional materials, necessitating the exploration of increasingly complex multi-component materials2. With each new component or materials parameter, the space of candidate experiments grows exponentially. For example, if investigating the impact of a new parameter (e.g. introducing doping) involves approximately ten experiments over the parameter range, N parameters will require on the order of 10N+ possible experiments. High-throughput synthesis and characterization techniques offer a partial solution: with each new parameter, the number of candidate experiments rapidly escapes the feasibility of exhaustive exploration. The search is further confounded by the diversity and complexity of materials composition-structure-property (CSP) relationships including materials- processing parameters and atomic disorder3. Coupled with the sparsity of optimal materials, these challenges threaten to impede innovation and industrial advancement. Structural phase maps, which describe the dependence of materials structure on composition, serve as blueprints in the design of functional and structural materials, as most materials properties are tied to crystal-structure prototypes. For example, property extrema tend to occur within specific phase regions (e.g. magnetism and superconductivity) or along phase boundaries (e.g. caloric-cooling materials and morphotropic phase-boundary piezoelectrics). Structural phase maps, and more specifically equilibrium phase diagrams, were traditionally generated over years with point-by-point Edisonian approaches involving iterative materials synthesis, diffraction-based structure characterization, and crystallographic refinement. Machine learning (ML) is transforming materials research before our eyes4, and yet direct coupling of ML with experiments remains a formidable challenge. Closed-loop Autonomous System for Materials Exploration and Optimization (CAMEO) offers a new materials research paradigm to truly harness the accelerating potential of ML, setting the stage for the 21st-century paradigm of materials research – the autonomous materials research lab run under the supervision of a robot scientist or artificial scientist5. Active learning6 – the ML field dedicated to optimal experiment design (i.e. adaptive design), is key to this new paradigm. Active learning provides a systematic approach to identify the best experiments to perform next to achieve user-defined objectives. Bayesian optimization (BO) active learning techniques have been used more recently to guide experimentalists in the lab to optimize unknown functions7–12. BO methods balance the use of experiments to explore the unknown function with experiments that exploit prior knowledge to identify extrema. However, these past studies only advised researchers on the next experiment to perform, leaving experiment planning, execution, and analysis to the researcher. More recently, autonomous systems have been demonstrated for process optimization13, 14 and sample characterization15. Taking another step and placing active learning in real-time control of solid-state materials exploration labs promises to accelerate materials discovery while also rapidly and efficiently illuminating complex materials-property relationships. 3 We demonstrate CAMEO in real-time control of X-ray diffraction measurement experiments over composition spreads at the synchrotron beamline and in the lab. The algorithm accelerates phase mapping and materials discovery of a novel solid-state material, with a 10-fold reduction in required experiments, each iteration taking tens of seconds to tens of minutes depending on the experimental task. It uses an active-learning campaign that exploits physics knowledge (e.g. Gibbs phase rule) and combines the joint objectives of maximizing knowledge of the phase map P(x) with hunting for materials x∗ that correspond to property F(x) extrema, while also exploiting the shared information across these tasks via function g (See Eq 1). Here x ∈ Rd is the set of d materials-composition parameters. This allows CAMEO to target its search in specific phase regions or to search near phase boundaries, thus exploiting the dependence of materials property on structure. We demonstrate that this physics-informed approach accelerates materials optimization compared to general optimization methodologies that focus on directly charting the high dimensional, complex property function. Eqn (1) Here, we explored the Ge-Sb-Te ternary system to identify an optimal phase-change memory (PCM) material for photonic switching devices16. PCM materials can be switched between the amorphous and crystalline states with an associated change in resistance and optical contrast which can be accessed on the nanosecond scale or shorter. Various Ge-Sb-Te based PCMs, especially Ge2Sb2Te5 (GST225), have been used in DVD-RAM and nonvolatile phase-change random-access memory. We have implemented our strategy for identifying the optimal composition within the ternary for high-performance photonic switching with an eye toward neuromorphic memory applications17. Our goal was to find a compound with the highest optical contrast between amorphous and crystalline states in order to realize multi-level optical switching with a high signal-to-noise ratio. The composition range mapped was selected based on the lack of detailed phase distribution and optical property information near known PCM phases. We tasked CAMEO to find the composition with the largest difference in the optical bandgap ΔEg and hence optical contrast between amorphous and crystalline states. We have discovered a naturally-forming stable epitaxial nanocomposite at a phase boundary between the distorted face-centered cubic Ge-Sb-Te structure (which we refer to as FCC-Ge-Sb-Te or simply GST) phase region and phase co-existing region of GST and Sb-Te whose optical contrast is superior to the well-known GST225 or other compounds within the Ge-Sb-Te ternary. CAMEO satisfies many attributes of a robot scientist, as diagrammed in Figure 1. The modular algorithm has ‘at its fingertips’ a collection of information - knowledge of past experiments both physical and computational, materials theory, and measurement-instrumentation science. The algorithm uses this knowledge to make informed decisions on the next experiment to perform in the pursuit of optimizing a materials property and/or maximizing knowledge of a materials system. For example, at each iteration the set of possible phase maps are identified and ranked by Bayesian likelihood, given analysis results of the measured materials. Phase map and functional 4 property likelihoods establish scientific hypotheses and drive further phase mapping and materials optimization and are also presented to the human-in-the-loop who can then (optionally) provide guidance. Specifics are presented in Methods. CAMEO controls lab-based characterization equipment in real-time to orchestrate its own experiments, update its knowledge, and continue its exploration. The more specific implementation of Eqn 1 is shown in Figure 2. loading data from databases including composition data for the materials on the composition spread and computed materials data from the AFLOW.org18 density functional theory database. The collected data is then used to begin analysis of the data using physics-informed Bayesian machine learning. This process extends knowledge of structure and functional property from materials with data to those without, predicting their estimated structure and functional property, along with prediction uncertainty. Physics-informed active learning is then used to identify the most informative next material to study to achieve user- defined objectives. For this work, active learning can select the next sample to characterize through autonomous control of the high-throughput X-ray diffraction system at a synchrotron beamline or it can (optionally) request specific input from the human- in-the-loop. Future implementations will include autonomous materials synthesis and simulation. The data collected from measurements and from human input are added to the database and used for the next autonomous loop. For more information, see Methods. Simulate / Download Bayesian Manifold Learning w/ Physics Analyze Decide Execute Active Learning w/Physics Make Measure Ask an Expert Database (Internal / External) 1 cycle in seconds to 10s of minutes 5 mixture of exploration and exploitation without knowledge of the composition-structure-property (CSP) relationship. These methods are more likely to get caught in local optima. b) The phase-map-informed optimization scheme exploits CSP relationship by recognizing that the property is dependent on phase, thus including phase mapping in the search for the optimum. i) Phase- mapping steps and ii) materials optimization step that exploits knowledge of the phase boundaries. This allows a search for phase region dependent optima. c) The Ge-Sb-Te CAMEO workflow began with incorporating raw ellipsometry data as a phase- mapping prior. On each iteration CAMEO selects a material to measure for X-ray diffraction and concurrently requests an expert to calculate ΔEg for that material. Each cycle takes 20-25 minutes. material with the largest ΔEg, bandgap difference between amorphous and crystalline states. Performance is shown for: the CAMEO live run (black) with GST467 discovered on iteration 19 (black star); for the mean and 95% confidence interval of 100 CAMEO runs computed post data collection (blue), 100 runs of Gaussian Process – Upper Confidence Bounds (GP-UBC, magenta), and random sampling (red). b) Left: Structural phase map for the crystalline Ge-Sb-Te composition spread. Complete phase map constructed after all the diffraction measurements (beyond the live CAMEO run described in a)) is shown. Structural Composition Local Optimum! Target Property Composition a Simple Optimization No phase boundary knowledge b CAMEO Phase Boundary First find phase map Then use phase map to find global optimum Region 1 Region 2 Composition Global Optimum! Local Optima CAMEO Synchrotron diffraction Calculation of Eg Raw ellipsometry data as prior 20-25 minutes per cycle Remote operated Human-in-the-loop c a Iteration Number Random Mean GP-UCB Mean Avg CAMEO Mean Maximizing ΔEg: Ge-Sb-Te Deviation from Optimal [%] 100 10 1 0 % b Phase Map and ΔEg for Ge-Sb-Te CAMEO Live Run 6 (blue), and region where GST and Sb-Te phases co-exist (orange). The materials measured during the live CAMEO run are indicated in black. Right: Complete mapping of ΔEg following analysis of entire ellipsometry data (beyond the live CAMEO run). The discovered GST467 and GST225 are indicated in both maps. CAMEO is based on the fundamental precept that in navigating compositional phase diagrams, enhancement in most functional properties is inherently tied to the presence of particular structural phases and/or phase boundaries. The strategy is therefore broadly applicable to a variety of topics with disparate physical properties. The method was first benchmarked and its hyperparameters tuned using a previously characterized composition spread where an entirely different physical property was optimized (See Methods). It was then successfully used to discover a new photonic PCM composition whose ΔEg (between crystalline and amorphous states) is up to 3 times larger than that of the well-known Ge2Sb2Te5. For this task, scanning ellipsometry measurements were performed on the spread wafer with films in amorphous (initial) and crystalline states ahead of the CAMEO run, and the raw ellipsometric spectra data were incorporated as a phase-mapping prior (See Methods). Thus, the algorithm makes use of information regarding phase distribution across the spread that is “hidden” in the unreduced complex spectroscopic data, which vary non-trivially across the spread. At each iteration, CAMEO identifies the next material to query, indicates the material to the experimentalist (human-in-the-loop) who performs the intensive task of processing the raw optical data to extract ΔEg. In parallel, CAMEO remotely controls scanning of the synchrotron beam to collect X-ray diffraction data from the spread wafer with films in the crystalline state. CAMEO first seeks knowledge of the phase map until 80% convergence, and then switches to material optimization (See Methods section M1). This procedure identified the material with the largest ΔEg over 19 iterations taking approximately 10 hours, compared to over 90 continuous hours for the full set of 177 composition spots. CAMEO provides an approximate maximum average 20-iteration lead over the best alternative Gaussian Process – Upper Confidence Bounds (GP-UCB) focusing on ΔEg optimization in the composition space, and random sampling, both common benchmarks in BO. As seen in Fig. 3(c), the optimal composition identified here lies at the boundary between the FCC-Ge-Sb-Te (GST) phase region and the region where there is co-existence of GST and Sb-Te phases. The average composition of the region is Ge4Sb6Te7, and henceforth we refer to the region as GST467. Its ΔEg is found to be 0.76 ± 0.03 eV, which is nearly 3 times that of GST225 (0.23 ± 0.03 eV). To investigate the origin of the enhanced ΔEg of GST467 at the phase boundary, we have performed high-resolution transmission microscopy of this composition (Fig. 4(a)) which revealed a complex nanocomposite structure consisting of GST and Sb-Te phases. As seen in the figure, the phases have grown coherently with the relationship GST Fm-3m (111)//SbTe (001). (See Methods for details.) 7 This boost in ΔEg indeed directly leads to large enhancement in optical contrast as captured in Δk = kc − ka, the difference in the extinction coefficient (between amorphous (ka) and crystalline states (kc)) extracted from the ellipsometry data at different wavelengths (Fig. 4(b)). Δk for GST467 is 60 to 125 % larger than that of GST225 in the 1000 – 1500 nm wavelength range. The superior physical properties of GST467 shown here were reproduced on multiple composition spread wafers. We have fabricated photonic switching PCM devices based on the discovered GST467 nanocomposite. With a sequence of laser pulses (energy and pulse width) with varying amplitude sent through the device, the material can be switched between the crystalline and amorphous phases (Fig. 4(b)). The device made of the nanocomposite GST467 thin film was found to be stable up to at least 30,000 cycles indicating the high reversibility of the crystallization and quenching processes of the coherent nanocomposite. The one-to-one comparison between the devices fabricated with our GST225 and GST467 films here (Fig. 4(d)) shows that GST467 device exhibits a much-enhanced switching contrast resulting in up to 50% more in the number of interval states, important for photonic memory and neuromorphic devices19, 20. Recent reports of nanostructured PCM materials including multilayer and superlattice thin films have highlighted the crucial roles interfaces and defects play in their switching mechanisms leading to faster switching speed and lower switching energies21, 22. Our finding of GST467 exhibiting significant boost in ΔEg, and consequently larger optical contrast, underscores the effectiveness of naturally-forming nanocomposites as another approach to enhancing performance of PCM materials, especially for optical switching devices. It is the presence of epitaxial nano-pockets of the SbTe phase in GST467 which is locally modifying the resonant bonding in the GST matrix resulting in the lowered optical bandgap in the crystalline state, which in turn leads to the larger ΔEg. The discovery of a novel PCM material demonstrate that systems similar to CAMEO will fulfill the primary goals of materials design by accelerating the discovery and collection of materials knowledge, streamlining the experiment cycle, improving control over experimental variability, and improving reproducibility, thus improving trust in scientific results. They will also generate reference and benchmark datasets – automatically processed, analyzed, and converted to actionable knowledge with all associated metadata, for developing and improving trust in machine learning tools. Further benefits include automatic knowledge capture to maintain institutional knowledge, maximizing information gain, and reducing use of consumable resources such as expert time, freeing up experts to work on higher level challenges. Research at the synchrotron exemplifies these resource demands and limitations, where obtaining scientist and equipment time is difficult or expensive. And potentially most impactful, placing labs under the control of AI may greatly reduce the technical expertise needed to perform experiments, 8 resulting in a greater ‘democratization’ of science23. In turn, this may facilitate a more distributed approach to science, as advocated by the materials collaboratory concept24. GST467 shows large optical contrast ideal for photonic-switching device applications such as neuromorphic computing. (a) High resolution transmission electron microscopy image reveals formation of coherent nanocomposite of GST structure matrix and SbTe. The dotted lines denote the atomically sharp interface. The FFT (inset) of this region indicates structural similarity of the adjacent phases; (b) endurance of the GST467: it is stable over 30,000 cycles indicating the robustness of the nanocomposite structure defined by local composition variation. The dotted lines indicate the range of each state in relative optical transmission ΔT/To at 1500 nm. Laser pulses were 50 ns with 183 pJ for quenching and 500 ns with 3.3 nJ for crystallization. The fluctuations in ΔT/To are due to thermal fluctuation of the device measurement set up; (c) comparison of the optical contrast here indicated by difference in the extinction coefficient k between crystalline and amorphous phases(kc-ka) for the wavelength range of 1000 to 1500 nm for various compositions within Ge-Sb-Te system. GST225 and GST467 data are from this work. The GeTe data are from . GST467 shows higher extinction difference over other known compositions; (d) one-to-one comparison of GST225 (left) and GST467 (right) for multi-level switching in optical transmission at 1500 nm (ΔT/To) using 500 ns, 6 pJ pulses : GST467 having larger optical contrast results in substantially more states than GST225. Device fabrication and characterization details are in Methods. a b c d 9