Secondary Electron Emission by Plasmon Induced Symmetry Breaking in Highly Oriented Pyrolitic Graphite (HOPG) Wolfgang S.M. Werner∗, Vytautas Astaˇsauskas, and Philipp Ziegler Institut f ̈ur Angewandte Physik, TU Vienna, Wiedner Hauptstraße 8-10/134, A-1040 Vienna, Austria Alessandra Bellissimo† and Giovanni Stefani‡ Dipartimento di Scienze, Universit`a degli Studi Roma Tre, Via della Vasca Navale 84, I-00146 Rome, Italy Lukas Linhart and Florian Libisch Institut f ̈ur Theoretische Physik, TU Vienna, Wiedner Hauptstraße 8-10/136, A-1040 Vienna, Austria (Dated: June 11, 2020) Two-particle spectroscopy with correlated electron pairs is used to establish the causal link be- tween the secondary electron spectrum, the (π + σ)−plasmon peak and the unoccupied band struc- ture of highly oriented pyrolitic graphite. The plasmon spectrum is resolved with respect to the involved interband transitions and clearly exhibits final state effects, in particular due to the energy gap between the interlayer resonances along the ΓA-direction. The corresponding final state effects can also be identified in the secondary electron spectrum. Interpretation of the results is performed on the basis of density functional theory and tight binding calculations. Excitation of the plasmon perturbs the symmetry of the system and leads to hybridisation of the interlayer resonances with atom-like σ∗ bands along the ΓA-direction. These hybrid states have a high density of states as well as sufficient mobility along the graphite c-axis leading to the sharp ∼3 eV resonance in the spectrum of emitted secondary electrons reported throughout the literature. PACS numbers: 68.49.Jk, 79.20.-m, 79.60.-i Van der Waals materials have recently been attracting in- terest in materials science since they exhibit outstanding fundamental and technological properties and are build- ing blocks for multilayered quasi 2D materials as well as 3D materials and heterostructures . Graphite, be- ing a model system for this class of materials has been most extensively studied with respect to its electronic structure, both experimentally [3–14] and theoretically [15–20]. When two or more graphene layers are put on top of each other, so-called interlayer resonances form in the electronic structure which are highly dispersive along the c-axis and reflect the three dimensional structure of the crystal . Distinct oscillations in the electron reflec- tivity are observed when measuring the reflected inten- sity as a function of the electron kinetic energy [22–24], their number being equal to the number of graphene lay- ers minus one. Interlayer states are highly transmissive for electrons coming from vacuum and have a large lo- cal density of states in between individual graphene lay- ers. For graphite they appear as a broad band of states which strongly couple to vacuum . The character of ∗werner@iap.tuwien.ac.at, fax:+43-1-58801-13499 †present address: Laboratorium f ̈ur Festk ̈orperphysik, ETH Z ̈urich, Auguste-Piccard-Hof 1, Z ̈urich, Switzerland ‡present address: ISM-CNR, Via Fosso del Cavaliere 100, 00133 Roma, Italy. such electronic multi-quantum well states can be quali- tatively understood using the analogy to a Fabry-P ́erot interferometer in light optics . The signal employed in the above techniques, such as elastic peak electron spectroscopy and total current spectroscopy ex- clusively stems from impinging electrons which are even- tually detected without having suffered any energy loss, or are absorbed in their entirety, such as in inverse pho- toemission spectroscopy (IPES) experiments . Compared to the works cited above, the present paper concerns the reverse process where electrons are leaving the surface after being liberated inside the solid. This phenomenon of secondary electron emission (SEE) is of great fundamental as well as technological importance . In the past, SEE has also extensively been employed to study the unoccupied electronic structure of graphite [4–7, 9, 10, 27]. Obviously, for secondary electron emis- sion, energy losses, in particular excitation and decay of plasmons [28–34] play an essential role. A striking differ- ence between electronic structure data from SEE and the elastic techniques mentioned in the previous paragraph is that the dispersion of the interlayer resonances is not at all observed in SEE data. Instead, a strong resonance is found in secondary electron spectra which always appears at an energy of about 3 eV above vacuum (i.e. within the energy range of the first interlayer state above vacuum). The position of this resonance shows no dispersion what- soever in SEE data and is found to be independent of the experimental kinematics in a substantial number of arXiv:2006.05413v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 9 Jun 2020 2 Mon May 18 15:01:10 2020 ∆E=φ E2=∆E-φ /Users/werner/gitrepos/hopgplasmon/texgnuplot e2dfinal.g 0 20 40 60 80 E1-Evac (eV) 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 E2-Evac (eV) 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 coincidences call l2dall.g x2 π π+σ incidences for HOPG for an incident energy of 173 eV above vacuum (energy resolution δE1 = 5 eV). The white curve is the singles loss- and secondary electron spectrum. Indices ”1” and ”2” are used to indicate respectively fast and slow elec- trons arriving at detector 1, the hemispherical mirror analyser (HMA), and 2, the time of flight analyser (TOF) . The green line labeled ”E2 = ∆E − φ” indicates the minimum en- ergy loss needed for the slow liberated electron (”2”) to reach the vacuum level from the Fermi-level for a given energy loss ∆E where φ = 4.6 eV is the work function of HOPG. Here and below the yellow arrows correspond to final state energies of Ef − Evac = 3.7 eV and 17 eV, respectively. works by different authors [3–7, 9–11]. We use time-correlated two-electron spectroscopy to establish a causal relationship between energy losses and secondary electron emission [35–39] on a sample of highly oriented pyrolitic graphite (HOPG). In particular, sec- ondary electron-electron energy loss coincidence spec- troscopy (SE2ELCS) is employed (see supplemental in- formation ) to investigate the relationship between energy losses suffered by exciting a plasmon and the con- comitant emission of a secondary electron. Note that for a given energy loss of the primary electron to be feasi- ble, corresponding initial and final states need to exist in order to satisfy energy conservation. The electronic transitions taking place in resonance with the plasmon are explicitly identified experimentally. The experimen- tal results highlight the influence of the complex band structure of HOPG on the plasmon spectrum and the ejection of a secondary electron in the course of the asso- ciated interband transition and are interpreted with the aid of density functional theory (DFT) and tight binding (TB) calculations . In particular, when the symmetry of the system is broken in our tight binding model, the resulting hybridisation of the interlayer states with the atom-like σ∗ 2-band leads to the ∼3 eV resonance in the SE spectrum. Our experimental results are summarized in Figs. 1– 3(a) showing different portions of the electron coinci- dence spectrum taken in specular reflection geometry at the Bragg maximum for a primary energy of E0 −Evac = 173 eV (see Ref for details). The white curve in Figs. 1 and 2(a) represents the singles electron spectrum, exhibiting the elastic peak, the π− and (π +σ)−plasmon losses corresponding to minima in the real part of the di- electric function at ħωπ ∼ 6 eV and ħωπ+σ ∼ 23 eV . For higher energy losses plural plasmon excitation sets in. The secondary electron spectrum is characterized by a very sharp peak at 3.7 eV, which has been reported earlier by many authors[4, 6, 7, 9–11, 25, 27, 41–43] and a broad shoulder at ∼17 eV. The coincidence spectrum shown in Fig. 1 represents the number of correlated electron pairs emitted for a given combination of energies (E1, E2). When record- ing the spectrum of correlated electrons in a Bragg max- imum, those processes dominate in which the primary electron is first deflected along the outgoing Bragg beam followed by the inelastic process. In the deflection-loss (DL) model, one thus assumes an initial momentum of the primary electron determined by the Bragg condition [8, 44–46]. As a consequence, all initial and final states of the inelastic process are fixed by momentum and energy conservation . In other words, the coincidence experiment makes it possible to pinpoint the electronic transition of the bound electron involved in the (e,2e)- process by measuring time correlated electron pair inten- sities. In the present case this mainly concerns emission of a secondary electron after excitation and decay of a plasmon by the primary electron. Three distinctly different parts can be identified in the coincidence spectrum: (1) a region of high intensity near the green line labeled E2 = ∆E−φ. Comparison with the singles spectrum allows one to conclude that this feature corresponds to the excitation of a single plasmon, which is shown separately in Fig. 2(a); (2) horizontal stripes along the E1-scale at energies E2 =3.7 and 17 eV, indi- cated by the yellow arrows, which seem to have a coun- terpart along the E2 scale (vertical dashed lines marked by yellow arrows). This energy region will be referred to as the plural scattering region in the following; and (3) a strong and structured peak for energies E1, E2 ≤ 20 eV, corresponding to the cascade of secondary electrons. A distinct peak of what appears to be correlated electron emission is seen around the point (E1, E2) = (17, 17) eV. Fig. 2(b) shows the region in phase-space correspond- ing to the plasmon loss in Fig. 2(a), obtained by apply- ing energy and momentum conservation (See Eqns. 1-3 of ) to the data within the red parallelogram in Fig. 2(a). The colored arrows in Fig. 2(b) indicate the interband transitions corresponding to the energies of the fast and slow electrons marked by colored dots in Fig. 2(a). Finally, in Fig. 3 the total electron yield (TEY) mea- sured in absolute units (green curve, ) is compared 3 Call ebq50.g and Xl2d_final.g!!!! (a) (b) 0 (color online) (a). Coincidence spectrum of the plasmon loss in HOPG (measured with an energy resolution δE1 = 1.25 eV.) The white curve is the singles loss spec- trum. (b) The data in the plasmon feature in (a) within the red parallelogram represented in k-space and projected on the pertinent band structure along the ΓA- and ΓK-direction (see supplemental material). The colored arrows in the pan- els labeled ΓA and ΓK are projections of the initial and final states on these crystallographic directions corresponding to the colored dots in (a). with the coincidence data in Fig. 1 summed over E1 (blue curve) and the singles SE spectrum (black curve). The lower panel compares the band structure along the ΓA- direction with the DFT-results for the symmetry con- served (purple) and symmetry broken (red) case. A striking feature of the single scattering plasmon fea- ture is the complete absence of the π-plasmon in the co- incidence data, in particular also at low energies: finite count rates appear only for ∆ >12 eV. This can be un- derstood on the basis of the k-space representation of the data in Fig. 2(b): for the characteristic energy loss of the π-plasmon and the kinematics of the experiment, no favorable combination of initial and final states above vacuum is available which would allow a transition to take place . Note that our experiment mainly samples around q∥ ∼ 0.5 ̊A −1, exhibiting an energy gap between valence and conduction band. The coincidence data also convey the fact that plu- ral inelastic scattering proceeds via a Markov-type pro- cess , i.e. no memory of the previous collision plays a role in subsequent processes. If this were not the case, i.e. if coherent plural plasmon creation took place in which the full energy loss is transferred to a single electron, intensity due to plasmon replicas should appear just below the green diagonal line at energies (E1, E2) = (E0 − n × ħωπ+σ, n × ħωπ+σ − φ + Eb). Here n is an integer and Eb is the (negative) binding en- ergy of the initial state. Likewise, no plasmon replicas are seen for ejected electron energies corresponding to a single plasmon loss, i.e. at energies near (E1, E2) = (E0 − n × ħωπ+σ, ħωπ+σ − φ + Eb). Instead, stripes of intensity at energies (marked by the yellow arrows) of 3.7 and 17 eV, respectively are observed. The fact that the ejected electron energy in the plural scattering region is completely independent of ∆E cannot be understood within the DL-model. The explanation is that when more than one inelastic process occurs, any combination of scattering angles and energy losses in individual scat- tering events can lead to the net energy and momentum transfer observed for the ejected electron. In other words, the initial state for the process leading to ejection of the second electron is no longer determined as in the single scattering feature (see Fig. 2(a)). This implies that the DL-model is only valid in the single scattering regime. The final state in the plural scattering regime, however, is determined by the detection geometry and energy of the slow electron. Indeed, the energies at which these stripes appear seem to correspond to the position of the atom-like σ∗ 2-bands, as well as the flat σ∗-bands 22 eV above Fermi, along the ΓA-direction (see Fig. 3). Note that the ΓA-direction coincides with the symmetry axis of the TOF analyser, which measures the final state of the slow electron. For any energy loss ∆E in the single scattering plas- mon feature the probability for generating a secondary electron has a strong peak at energies E2 within the plas- mon feature. This observation highlights the fact that the final state of the scattering process corresponds to the ejection of a single bound electron. Any conceivable process in which the energy is transferred to more than one electron in the final state would lead to intensity below the single scattering plasmon feature for any rea- sonable energy sharing model. Furthermore, the inten- sity in the single scattering feature is seen to occur for a range of slightly different binding energies (energetic distance from the green diagonal) when going from top to bottom, following the dispersion of the initial state. This is indeed confirmed by the representation of the single scattering data in k-space, Fig. 2(b). A faint min- imum is seen in the plasmon loss feature in Fig. (1) near (E1, E2) = (154, 10) eV, corresponding to the energy gap in between the strongly dispersing interlayer bands along ΓA indicated by the yellow arrows in Fig. 2(b). Indeed, 4 a minimum in the final state intensity is also observed in the plasmon spectrum in Fig. 2(b) at E − EF ∼15 eV. These findings show that for a material with a complex band structure, such as graphite, the excitation of a plas- mon and the associated interband transitions are both essential parts of the same coherent process, a plasmon- assisted interband transition leading to ejection of the bound electron into an excited state. This picture supports the momentum-exciton model for the plasmon as a coherent excitation of a (rather small) num- ber of electron hole pairs behaving as a quasi-particle with a well-defined energy and momentum. Note that the typical number of electrons participating in a plas- mon is about five and that the range of possible energies above vacuum occupied by the ejected electron is limited by the plasmon energy. This implies that the width of the secondary electron peak is essentially gov- erned by the density of the solid state electrons. Finally, the energies of the secondary electrons emitted along the graphite c-axis (stripes in the plural scattering region marked with yellow arrows) and the sharp peak in the SE spectrum at 3.7 eV exhibiting a surprising lack of dispersion [4, 6, 7, 9–11, 25, 27, 41–43] deserve to be dis- cussed. These features appear energetically very close to the flat σ∗ 2- bands within the interlayer resonances along ΓA (Fig.2(b)). To understand their origin we use DFT calculations for bulk graphite as well as a surface slab to parameterize a tight binding model . We can then simulate the transmission of the secondary electron from a Bloch state inside the solid, i.e. the final state of the inelastic scattering process with the incoming electron to a free vacuum state (as given by Eq. (6) in the supple- mental material). Given an unperturbed graphite slab, we find, as expected by the flat nature of the σ∗ 2 bands, a very sharp resonance (see blue triangle in upper panel of Fig. 3(b)) that does not contribute significantly to the overall signal, as its area is vanishingly small. We next aim to model the symmetry breaking induced by the inci- dence of the primary electron and the emerging plasmon in the simplest way possible: we induce a symmetry- breaking at the surface of the slab by a local potential Vδsp2 ≈ 0.3eV added to a single of the three equivalent sp2 orbitals of each carbon atom of the surface layer. Such a term breaks the D6h symmetry of graphite, essen- tially locally eliminating the three-fold symmetry. The induced hybridisation between the σ∗ 2 bands and σ∗ 1,3- interlayer bands substantially enhances and broadens the resonance. The resulting hybrid state exhibits the high density of states of the flat band, implying that it is a favorable state for an initially bound electron to reach a final state above the vacuum level. The hybrid state also has the high mobility of the interlayer state which efficiently couples to vacuum, allowing it to escape from the surface. We have verified numerically that a similar symmetry breaking in bulk HOPG leads to transmission from σ∗ 2 to σ∗ 1,3 modes (and vice versa) in bulk transport Call stripes.g and stripes2.g and color_stripes.g!!!! (b) (a) (TEY) measured in absolute units ; Blue curve: coinci- dence data in Fig. 1 summed over E1; black curve: singles SE spectrum (white curve in Fig. 1). The lower panel com- pares the band structure along ΓA with the DFT-results for the symmetry conserved (purple) and symmetry broken (red) case. (b) Theoretical total transmission of graphite surface as a function of initial energy for symmetry-conserved (upper panel) and symmetry-broken (lower panel) slab. Blue trian- gles mark the transmission peak caused by the σ∗ 2 band. In the symmetry-conserved slab, this resonance is very sharp, containing few electrons, while it becomes much more pro- nounced in the symmetry-broken slab due to hybridisation (see text). perpendicular to the layers. Since the parametrization of our tight-binding model only extends to about 18 eV, the origin of the second stripe in the coincidence data at E − EF ∼17 eV could not be verified. It is conjectured however, that a similar hybridisation mechanism plays a role in that case as for the lower lying interlayer band around 3.7 eV. The peak of apparent correlated emission at (E1, E2) = (17, 17) eV then is a direct consequence of the hybridisation in that also the unoccupied flat band at around 17 eV (above vac- uum) is a favorable final state and by virtue of the high mobility of the hybridized state also leads to a strong peak in the secondary electron cascade. For the pri- mary energy E0 =173 eV employed here, plural inelas- 5 tic processes can lead to (incoherent) creation of several secondary electrons. A part of these SEs may actually escape and give rise to multi-electron detection events with prefered energies of 17 eV. As discussed above, this proceeds via a Markov sequence of events leading to a strong preference of final states with these energies in the course of (incoherent) plural inelastic scattering and generation of secondary electrons. Therefore, while the peak at (E1, E2) = (17, 17) eV appears to be due to correlated electron emission, it rather is an incoherent increase in the electron pair intensity due to the afore- mentioned process. A similar peak is also expected at (E1, E2) = (3.7, 3.7) but could not be observed since the lowest energy along the E1-scale that can be reached in the coincidence experiment is ∼10 eV. In summary, the (π + σ)-plasmon in graphite has been resolved with respect to the involved electronic transi- tions. Formation of a hybrid state as a consequence of plasmon induced symmetry breaking provides an expla- nation for the strong resonance observed in SE-spectra in the literature (at 3.7 eV in the present work). Most importantly, it explains the difference in band struc- ture measurements using elastic processes and techniques which involve creation of plasmon. To fully appreciate this point the reader is referred to Fig. 4 in Ref. which shows a direct comparison of IPES and SEE data, the dispersion of the interlayer state completely lacking in the latter. The results therefore indicate that the inverse-LEED (Low Energy Electron Diffraction) formal- ism which is often employed to interpret secondary elec- tron spectra should be complemented to account for many body processes, since the phenomenon of secondary electron emission cannot be fully described on the basis of the one-electron band structure.