1 Single-source, solvent-free, room temperature deposition of black γ- CsSnI3 films Vivien M. Kiyek, Yorick A. Birkhölzer, Yury Smirnov, Martin Ledinsky, Zdenek Remes, Jamo Mo- mand, Bart J. Kooi, Gertjan Koster, Guus Rijnders, Monica Morales-Masis* V.M. Kiyek, Y.A. Birkhölzer, Y. Smirnov, Prof. G. Koster, Prof. G. Rijnders, Dr. M. Morales-Masis MESA+ Institute for Nanotechnology, University of Twente, P.O. Box 217, Enschede, 7500 AE, The Netherlands Email: m.moralesmasis@utwente.nl Dr. M. Ledinsky, Dr. Z. Remes Institute of Physics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Cukrovarnická 10, Prague, 162 00, Czech Republic Dr. J. Momand, Prof. B.J. Kooi Zernike Institute for Advanced Materials, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 4, Groningen, 9747 AG, The Netherlands Keywords: halide perovskites, single-source in vacuum deposition, solvent-free deposi- tion, laser ablation, lead-free perovskites ABSTRACT: The presence of a non-optically active polymorph (yellow-phase) competing with the optically active polymorph (black γ-phase) at room temperature in CsSnI3 and the susceptibility of Sn to oxidation, represent two of the biggest obstacles for the exploitation of CsSnI3 in optoelec- tronic devices. Here room-temperature single-source in vacuum deposition of smooth black γ−CsSnI3 thin films is reported. This has been done by fabricating a solid target by completely sol- vent-free mixing of CsI and SnI2 powders and isostatic pressing. By controlled laser ablation of the solid target on an arbitrary substrate at room temperature, the formation of CsSnI3 thin films with 2 optimal optical properties is demonstrated. The films present a band gap of 1.32 eV, a sharp ab- sorption edge and near-infrared photoluminescence emission. These properties and X-ray diffrac- tion of the thin films confirmed the formation of the orthorhombic (B-γ) perovskite phase. The thermal stability of the phase was ensured by applying in situ an Al2O3 capping layer. This work demonstrates the potential of pulsed laser deposition as a volatility-insensitive single-source growth technique of halide perovskites and represents a critical step forward in the development and future scalability of inorganic lead-free halide perovskites. 3 Pulsed Laser Deposition (PLD) has offered unique options for the development of complex materials thin film growth, allowing stoichiometric transfer and multi-compound deposition independent of the relative volatility of the elements and ultimate control of interfaces. In the field of complex oxides, PLD opened the way to high- Tc superconducting films requiring stoichiometric transfer of multiple (4-5) cations. Here we present the rather unexplored but enormous potential of PLD as a unique single-source in-vacuum deposition technique of all- inorganic halide perovskites, using CsSnI3 as case example. CsSnI3 has been widely proposed in literature as a Pb-free and all-inorganic alternative to the archetypical hybrid halide solar cell absorber, CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3). The replacement of toxic Pb with Sn is a natural choice due to their similar ionic radius and lower toxicity of Sn. The replacement of the organic cation (e.g. CH3NH3) with Cs has been proposed to enhance the thermal stability of the material. While the decomposition temperature of Cs-based halide perovskites is higher than the ones containing organic cations, the size of the Cs+ cation is at the limit for stability of the perovskite structure, and therefore causing phase instabilities between the optically active (black) perovskite phase and the non-optically active (yellow) non-perovskite phase. In CsSnI3 these phases can coexist at room temperature. Black phase stabilization in all-inorganic perovskites is therefore critical to ensure their application in optoelectronic devices, and has been the subject of very recent work, focused on CsPbI3 and CsSnI3 . In terms of synthesis, solution-based processes are the most widely used techniques to fabricate these materi- als.[10–14] Concerns about the use of highly toxic solvents and complex device integration have recently motivated the investigation of solvent-free and vacuum-based thin film deposition processes. Thermal co-evaporation has been the main in-vacuum technique that enabled high quality thin film formation of a family of halide per- ovskites and high-efficiency devices. However, the need for multiple sources due to the different volatility of the constituent elements poses a limitation for the synthesis of multication-multihalide materials and their further upscaling. Steps towards achieving a single-source deposition have sporadically been reported for laser- based techniques. This includes resonant infrared matrix assisted pulsed laser evaporation (RIR-MAPLE) and pulsed-laser deposition (PLD)[21–23] of MAPbI3 and CsPbBr3, but high material quality remains yet to be 4 demonstrated. An approach gaining popularity is the mechano-chemical synthesis of halide perovskite powders and subsequent thin film formation following single-source vapor deposition (SSVD) of those powders.[24–26] However, SSVD might present hurdles on the exploration of a plethora of multication-multihalides and double- perovskites due to differing volatilities, i.e. off-stoichiometric transfer and/or sticking. Here we present single-source room temperature PLD of CsSnI3 thin films with excellent optical properties achieved by the formation of the orthorhombic black (B-γ) perovskite phase. This work introduces PLD as an enabling technology to achieve near-stoichiometric transfer of all-inorganic halide perovskites in vacuum, open- ing the path for controlled and reproducible growth as well as ease of integration in devices from PV to more complex architectures such as integrated photonics. powders were mixed by ball-milling in an Ar-filled vessel. We note that the mixing is done only by rotation of the cylindrical vessel containing the powder and ZrO2 balls, and therefore is different from the known mechano- chemical synthesis. To ensure a uniform mixture of the powders, the mixing process was left running for three days. The enhanced uniformity of the Cs, Sn and I elemental distribution on the target with increasing mixing time was confirmed by Energy-Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (Figure S1 and Table S1). The mixed powders were then pressed into a 2 cm diameter disk-shaped pellet using an uniaxial press, and subsequently exposed to an isostatic pressure of 360 MPa using a hydraulic press. A similar procedure has been used for the fabrication of Cs2AgBiBr6 wafers. The isostatic pressing allows for the formation of a compact and dense target (> 85% cal- culated density) as required for PLD. Therefore, no further sintering with heating was required. It is important to note that the pressed solid target does not react into the CsSnI3 phase, as shown by the X-ray diffraction pattern in Figure 3a. 5 The target was loaded into the PLD chamber, which was then evacuated to a base pressure of ~1 × 10-7 mbar. CsSnI3 thin films were deposited onto Si (with native SiOx), fused silica and glass substrates at room temperature using a KrF (248 nm) laser and a fluence of 0.2 J cm-2. The growth rate was 0.05 nm/pulse such that for a laser repetition frequency of 5 Hz, the total duration to grow 100 (200) nm CsSnI3 was only 400 (800) seconds. An Ar working pressure of 1.3 × 10-3 mbar was kept constant during deposition and no additional reactive gasses were introduced. Following CsSnI3 deposition, an amorphous Al2O3 capping layer was applied in situ by PLD. Steady-state photoluminescense (PL) spectra and absorption coefficient measurements were performed on 100 nm thick PLD-grown CsSnI3 films on fused silica substrates (Figure 2). The PL emission is centered at 1.38 eV (900 nm). Consistently, the absorption coefficient determined by Photothermal Deflection Spectroscopy (PDS) shows a sharp absorption edge centered at 1.32 eV. The absorption coefficient is shown with a solid black line and for comparison, the absorption coefficient (also determined by PDS) of a reference methylammonium lead halide (MAPbI3) perovskite film is shown with a dashed black line. These results highlight the high absorption coef- ficient at the whole visible spectral range and sharp edge, indicating a high quality absorber material, comparable to MAPbI3. In order to extract the Urbach energy, the absorption spectrum was calculated from the PL spec- trum at the band edge area via the reciprocal relation 29. Individually, this recalculated absorption spectra and the absorption coefficient measured by PDS, both confirm an Urbach energy of 12.9 meV for the PLD grown uniaxial press applying 33 MPa and hydraulic press applying 360 MPa isostatically, and final PLD solid target. 6 CsSnI3 films. This is only 0.4 meV higher that of MAPbI3 (12.5 meV) determined by the same methods. Such a low Urbach energy indicates potential for low voltage losses in the optimized solar cell. absorption edge of the CsSnI3, the absorption coefficient of a reference MAPbI3 film is presented. A band gap of 1.32 eV extracted from the Tauc plot (Figure S3) and the aforementioned optical properties are characteristics of the black orthorhombic phase of CsSnI3 (B-γ−CsSnI3). The formation of polycrystalline B- γ−CsSnI3 thin films is confirmed by X-ray diffraction (XRD). Figure 3 displays the XRD patterns of the target and the thin films shown in this manuscript. Panel (a) indicates that the target is an unreacted mixture of CsI and SnI2 powders, whereas panel (b) demonstrates that thin films grown from this target by PLD at room temperature crystallize in the perovskite structure and very well match the reference pattern of B-γ−CsSnI3 following refer- ence. No difference between thin (100 nm) and thicker films (200 nm) was noticed, indicating that the B- γ−CsSnI3 phase remains stable with doubled thickness (solid lines in Figure 3b). The dashed lines in Figure 3b are measurements taken four months (~3000 h) after fabrication of the films, where the films were stored in a glove box filled with argon gas, demonstrating that the B-γ−CsSnI3 phase of both film thicknesses remains stable even months after thin film fabrication. After these XRD measurements the same films were kept in open air for 72 hours, measured again, and still showed no structural changes (dotted lines in Figure 3b). The Al2O3 capping layer with a thickness of 13 and 40 nm for the 100 and 200 nm thick CsSnI3 films, respectively, is amorphous and therefore not present in the XRD spectra. Information about thin films grown from targets with different mixing times is found in the supplementary information (Figure S2). 7 films deposited at room temperature by PLD. The solid lines are measurements directly after the deposition, the dashed lines after 3000 h in Ar atmosphere, and the dotted lines after additional 72 h in air. For comparison, the same B-γ-CsSnI3 reference spectrum is plotted below in both graphs. The plots indicate that while the source target doesn’t present the CsSnI3 phase but a mixture of the CsI and SnI2 powders, the resulting thin films present the single black orthorhombic phase of CsSnI3, which is stable over long time thanks to the Al2O3 capping layer. Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy (STEM) results (Figure 4) confirm uniform sticking of the ablated elements and the formation of a smooth and dense film with large elongated grains along the thickness of the film (Figure 4a). Zoomed-in area of Figure 4a with enhanced contrast is shown in Supporting Information, Figure S5. The distribution of cesium (Cs), tin (Sn) and iodide (I) in the films was evaluated by cross-section EDX map- ping (Figure 4b-d). The EDX maps show a uniform distribution of the three elements across the thickness of the film and quantitative analysis indicate an overall Cs/Sn ratio of 1. Combining Rutherford Back Scattering (RBS) and Particle Induced X-ray Emission (PIXE), we determined an iodide content in the films of ~ 65 at% (Figure S4). Figure 4f-g also shows conformal coating and uniformity of the amorphous Al2O3 protective layer. The low roughness of the CsSnI3 + capped Al2O3 films was furthermore confirmed by atomic force microscopy (support- ing information Figure S6). 8 with elongated crystalline grains. (b-g) High-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) image and EDS mapping of the constituent elements of CsSnI3 and the Al2O3 capping layer. EDS confirms uniform distribution of Cs,Sn and I along the thickness of the layer and conformal coat- ing of the Al2O3 capping layer. Concluding, we have demonstrated the feasibility of single-source in-vacuum deposition of B-γ−CsSnI3 films by PLD. The high optical quality of the films and black phase confirmation by optical and structural characteriza- tion shows the enormous potential of PLD for the single source growth of halide perovskites even at room tem- perature. In comparison with recently reported SSVD, PLD presents the advantage of non-equilibrium ablation of a solid target, therefore allowing near-stoichiometric transfer insensitive to the different volatilities of the elements. Another demonstrated advantage of PLD is the possibility of depositing multilayers without breaking vacuum, in this case the application of the Al2O3 layer allowing the stabilization of the black phase and protec- tion against oxidation. This work motivates further exploration of the electrical properties of the material as well as its integration in complex devices, such as absorbers in solar cell devices, monolithic tandem solar cells or efficient light emitters in integrated photonic circuits. 9 Experimental Details Methods and Materials Target source materials: CsI and SnI2 source powders were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (99.9% purity) and TCI (> 97.0% purity). For the Al2O3 deposition, an Al2O3 single crystal with rough surfaces to enhance laser absorption was used as source target. PLD: The vacuum chamber was evacuated to a base pressure of ~1 × 10-7 mbar. A KrF (248 nm) laser was used to ablate the fabricated CsSnI3 target. Thin films were deposited onto Si (with na- tive SiOx), fused silica and glass substrates at room temperature. An Ar working pressure of 1.3 × 10-3 mbar was kept constant during deposition and no additional reactive gasses were introduced. The laser frequency was kept at 5 Hz, target-to-substrate distance at 50 mm, and a fluence of 0.2 J cm-2 was used. The deposition of the Al2O3 capping layer was performed under Ar atmosphere and room temperature as the CsSnI3 film. Al2O3 is a large band gap material (~7 eV) with insignif- icant absorption in the measured spectral region, therefore, the measured optical properties are unaffected by the Al2O3 thin film. PDS: Photothermal deflection spectroscopy directly measures the optical absorption of thin films with sensitivity of up to four orders of magnitude. The light absorption is determined via a sample heating effect, by measuring the deflection of a probe laser beam with a position-sensitive detec- tor. The PDS spectrophotometer uses a 150 W Xe lamp as a light source and a monochromator equipped with grating blazed at 750 nm operating in a broad spectral range from ultraviolet to infrared region 400−1200 nm. PL: Photoluminescence spectra are measured using an excitation laser at 442 nm in a Renishaw in-Via REFLEX spectroscope. The intensity of the excitation light is reduced in order to prevent any structural degradation during measurements. 10 XRD: The films were analyzed by X-ray diffraction, using a Bruker D8 Discover diffractometer with a high brilliance microfocus Cu rotating anode generator, Montel optics, a 1 mm pinhole beam collimator and an EIGER2 R 500K area detector. TEM: Cross-sectional specimen were prepared with a FEI Helios G4 CX FIB, using gradually de- creasing acceleration voltages of 30 kV, 5 kV and 2 kV. TEM analyses were performed with a dou- ble aberration corrected FEI Themis Z, operated at 300 kV. HAADF-STEM images were recorded with a probe currents between 50 and 200 pA, convergence semi-angle 21 mrad and HAADF col- lection angles 61-200 mrad. EDX spectrum imaging was performed with a probe current of 1 nA, where the spectra were recorded with a Dual-X system, providing in total 1.76 sr EDX detectors. 11 Supporting Information Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from the author. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors acknowledge Frank Roesthuis for support with the PLD system, Mark Smithers for high resolution scanning electron microscopy, and Max Döbeli for RBS & PIXE measurements. M.M.M. acknowledges the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (CREATE, Grant Agreement Number 852722), and UTWIST program of the University of Twente. M.L. acknowledges the support of Czech Science Foundation Project No. 17-26041Y. Conflict The authors declare no conflict of interest. Author Contributions V.M. Kiyek and Y.A. Birkhölzer contributed equally to this work. ORCID Vivien M. Kiyek: 0000-0001-9360-9541 Yorick A. Birkhölzer: 0000-0003-3133-2481 Yury Smirnov: 0000-0003-0417-4270 Martin Ledinsky: 0000-0002-6586-5473 Zdenek Remes: 0000-0002-3512-9256 Jamo Momand: 0000-0001-5153-2427 Bart J. Kooi: 0000-0002-0311-4105 Gertjan Koster: 0000-0001-5478-7329 Guus Rijnders: 0000-0002-4638-0630 Monica Morales-Masis: 0000-0003-0390-6839 Received: Revised: Published online: