Electronic Origin for the Enhanced Thermoelectric Efficiency of Cu2Se Shucui Suna,1, Yiwei Lib,1, Yujie Chena, Xiang Xua, Lu Kanga, Jingsong Zhoua, Wei Xiac, Shuai Liuc, Meixiao Wangc,d, Juan Jiangc, Aiji Liangc, Ding Peib, Kunpeng Zhaod, Pengfei Qiud, Xun Shid, Lidong Chend, Yanfeng Guoc, Zhengguo Wange, Yan Zhange, Zhongkai Liuc,f, Lexian Yanga,g,*, Yulin Chena,b,c,f,* aState Key Laboratory of Low Dimensional Quantum Physics, Department of Physics, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China bDepartment of Physics, Clarendon Laboratory, University of Oxford, Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PU, UK cSchool of Physical Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai 201210, China dState Key Laboratory of High Performance Ceramics and Superfine Microstructure, Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200050, China eInternational Center for Quantum Materials, School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China fShanghaiTech Laboratory for Topological Physics, Shanghai 200031, China. gFrontier Science Center for Quantum Information, Beijing 100084, China 1These authors contributed equally to this work. Email:*lxyang@tsinghua.edu.cn,*yulunchen@tsinghua.edu.cn Thermoelectric materials (TMs) can uniquely convert waste heat into electricity, which provides a potential solution for the global energy crisis that is increasingly severe. Bulk Cu2Se, with ionic conductivity of Cu ions, exhibits a significant enhancement of its thermoelectric figure of merit zT by a factor of ~3 near its structural transition around 400 K. Here, we show a systematic study of the electronic structure of Cu2Se and its temperature evolution using high-resolution angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy. Upon heating across the structural transition, the electronic states near the corner of the Brillouin zone gradually disappear, while the bands near the centre of Brillouin zone shift abruptly towards high binding energies and develop an energy gap. Interestingly, the observed band reconstruction well reproduces the temperature evolution of the Seebeck coefficient of Cu2Se, providing an electronic origin for the drastic enhancement of the thermoelectric performance near 400 K. The current results not only bridge among structural phase transition, electronic structures and thermoelectric properties in a condensed matter system, but also provide valuable insights into the search and design of new generation of thermoelectric materials. Keywords: thermoelectric materials, Cu2Se, angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy, Seebeck coefficient, band reconstruction 1. Introduction Thermoelectric (TE) materials encapsulate unique capability to harvest waste heat and deliver electric energy, which provides broad and versatile application potential in energy, electronics and semiconductor industries . Searching for TE materials with high TE efficiency, valued by the dimensionless figure of merit (zT), has become the central issue for the development of TE technology. By definition, zT = σS2T κ , which favors high electric conductivity σ , high Seebeck coefficient S and low thermal conductivity κ . Following this strategy, different TE materials have been discovered or created in various forms, such as nanostructured alloys of chalcogenides, filled skutterudites and clathrates, half-Heusler compounds, oxides, organic materials and ionic conductive materials . Correspondingly, various mechanisms are proposed to explain the enhancement of the TE efficiency, including band convergence , Peierls distortion , impurity resonance , modulation doping, lattice anharmonicity , large electron effective mass, topological quantum effects and phonon-glass electron-crystal mechanism . Among various TE materials, superionic Cu2Se, has attracted considerable research attention due to its simple chemical compositions and high zT value (~ 1.5 at 1000 K, among the highest values in bulk materials) . It is widely believed that the superionic diffusion of Cu+ at high temperatures strongly suppresses the lattice thermal conductivity, while the Se sub-lattice remains ordered and maintains the electric transport, which guarantees the high zT value at high temperatures. Interestingly, a dramatic enhancement of zT value by a factor of ~3 is observed across the structural phase transition from low-temperature -phase to high-temperature -phase near 400K , which is still mysterious and unsolved. In order to fully understand and improve its TE performance of Cu2Se, it is essential to study both its electronic and structural properties. Nevertheless, previous experimental efforts mainly focus on the structural properties such as superionic behavior of Cu ions, while the other crucial ingredient in the system, the electrons, are largely ignored. Especially, the crucial electronic band structure is only investigated by theoretical calculations up to date . In this Letter, using high-resolution angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES), we systematically investigated the electronic structure of Cu2Se and its temperature evolution. Around the structural transition, we observed an abrupt formation of an energy gap at the Γ̅ point near 400 K, together with a sudden change of the X-ray diffraction (XRD) peak position, suggesting a first-order nature of the  structural transition, which may be associated with a sudden change of lattice constants and drastic collective migrations of atoms . On the other hand, the √3  √3 reconstructed bands near K̅ gradually disappear, which alludes a continuous order-disorder crossover of Cu ions and is consistent with the continuous change in the transport measurements . Prominently, the observed band reconstruction well reproduces the drastic temperature evolution of the Seebeck coefficient across the phase transition. We thus conclude that the elevation of the zT value in Cu2Se near 400 K is due to a synergetic effect of band-reconstruction enhanced Seebeck coefficient and the suppression of lattice thermal conductivity κ by Cu+ disordering. Our results present important insights into TE behaviour in Cu2Se by putting forward the electron degree of freedom, which will help search and design new generation of TE materials. 2. Materials and methods 2.1 Sample synthesis. Single crystals of Cu2Se were synthesized by a melting-annealing-sintering process.. High-purity raw materials of Cu (Sigma Aldrich, 99.999%) and Se (Sigma Aldrich, 99.999%) were weighed out and loaded into a pyrolytic boron nitride crucible. Then the crucible was sealed in evacuated quartz tubes, which was slowly heated to 1423 K in 12 h, dwelled at this temperature for 24 h, slowly cooled to 1073 K in 50 h, and annealed at this temperature for 8 days. The obtained ingots were crushed into powders and then sintered at 753 K under a pressure of 65 MPa using a spark plasma sintering (Sumitomo SPS-2040) apparatus. Boron nitride was sprayed on the inner surfaces of graphite die to prevent currents going through the samples. Highly dense pellet samples with 10 mm in diameter and ~5 mm in thickness were finally obtained, and single crystals of Cu2Se with typical size of 0.5~1 mm for ARPES measurements were separated from the pellet samples. 2.2 ARPES measurements. ARPES measurements were performed at beamline U09 of Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility (SSRF), China, beamline BL13U of National Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory (NSRL), China, Surface/Interface Spectroscopy (SIS, X09LA) beamline at the Swiss Light Source (SLS) – Paul Scherrer Institute, Swiss and He-lamp based system in Tsinghua University and Peking University, China. The samples were cleaved in-situ and measured under ultra-high vacuum below 6×10-11 mbar. Data were collected with Scienta R4000 electron analyser at SSRF and NSRL, R2000 at SLS and DA30 analyser at Tsinghua and Peking University. The overall energy and angle resolutions were better than 20 meV and 0.2°, respectively. 2.3 Scanning Tunneling Microscope (STM). STM measurements were performed at ShanghaiTech University, China. Cu2Se single crystals were cleaved in sample preparation chamber and transferred to STM chamber for measurement under ultra-high vacuum below 1.5×10-11 Torr. Data were collected at room temperature using PtIr tips that were calibrated by silver islands grown on Si (111)-7×7 surface. 2.4 Seebeck coefficient and electrical resistivity measurements. The Seebeck coefficient and electrical resistivity were measured using our newly developed system based on the thermal expansion equipment (Netzsch DIL 402C) . The electrical resistivity was measured by the standard four-probe method. The Seebeck coefficient was calculated from the slope of the ΔV vs ΔT curve with a heating rate of 0.02 K/min, where ΔV and ΔT are the Seebeck voltage and temperature gradient, respectively. The Seebeck voltage ΔV was measured with a Keithley nanovoltmeter and further corrected for the thermopower of Pt. The temperature dependence of Seebeck coefficient was measured under a very small temperature step (around 0.1 K) between 320 K and 450 K. 3. Results and discussion In the high temperature -phase, Cu2Se crystallizes in a face-centred cubic sublattice of Se atoms with superionic Cu ions diffusing inside , which is isostructural with the topological insulator Ag2Te . Fig. 1a shows the anti-fluorite structure of -Cu2Se, which can be viewed as a quasi-layered structure along direction (Fig. 1b). The Cu ions can randomly occupy different positions in the tetrahedron of Se atoms (Fig. 1a) . Below the transition temperature, Cu2Se transforms into the monoclinic -phase . Although the accurate crystal structure of -Cu2Se is still under debate, it is commonly accepted that there exist alternating Cu-deficient and Cu-rich Se-Cu-Se layers in the crystal , as schematically shown in Fig. 1c. Such a layered structure is evidenced by the height of the terrace measured by scanning tunnelling microscopy (Fig. 1d). The topography of the topmost atoms shows dumbbell-like dimerization (Fig. 1e), which is in excellent agreement with the surface Cu+ arrangement in Fig. 1c. This dimerization supports a √3  √3 reconstruction of Cu ions (Fig. S2), which is also suggested by previous XRD measurements . The Resistivity as a function of temperature shows a clear anomaly near 400 K, verifying the structural transition in our samples (Fig. 1f). Further sample characterization can be found in the Support Materials (Fig. S1). The electronic structure of -Cu2Se is investigated by ARPES at 15 K. Fig. 2a shows the three-dimensional BZ of -Cu2Se and (001) surface projection. Due to the rearrangement of Cu ions, the periodicity in the momentum space is reduced to half along kz and 1/3 in kx-ky plane compared to  phase, consistent with the structural change as shown in Fig. 1. The Fermi surface map in kx-ky plane in Fig. 2b shows a clear hexagonal structure near both the Γ̅ and K̅ points, which are contributed by the hole bands shown along K̅ − Γ̅ − K̅ (Fig. 2c). The bands near K̅ are back-folded from Γ̅ due to √3  √3 Cu+ ordering (Fig. 1e). Photon energy dependent measurement shows clear kz periodicity at EF (Fig. 2d) suggesting the bulk origin of the measured bands. The fine FS map near  shows a circular hole pocket and a warped hexagonal hole pocket that evolves to a hexagram at high binding energies. 5 bands are resolved in an energy range of about 1.2 eV below EF, as shown in Fig. 2f. The weak intensity near the top of the  band may be due to the kz contamination. Near the Z point, the FS is dominated by a triangular feature that evolves to a complex structure consisting of three overlaid ellipses (Fig. 2g). The  band is out of the detected energy range near Z due to its strong kz dispersion (Fig. S4). Our measurement shows qualitative agreement with previous theoretical calculation of the electronic structure of -Cu2Se with a similar crystal structure shown in Fig. 1c . The intriguing  transition of Cu2Se is investigated by the temperature evolution of both crystal and electronic structure. Our temperature dependent single crystal X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements along (or in -phase) show a clear shift of XRD scattering peak near 26.3 together with the disappearance of the scattering peaks near 12.9 and 39.7 above 400 K (Fig. 3a and Fig. S3), suggesting a sudden change of the crystal structure along the interlayer direction . Interestingly, we observe a strong negative thermal expansion along c prior to the structural transition already starts from 300 K, which is attributed to the gradual reordering of Cu ions with temperature . While the sudden change of the XRD pattern alludes a first-order character of the structural transition near 400 K, the band structure exhibits a more complex temperature evolution. Fig. 3b and Fig. 3c compare the FS measured over multiple BZs at 10 K and 396 K, respectively. The electronic states near K̅ disappear at 396 K, consistent with the calculated electronic structure of -Cu2Se . With increasing temperature, the reordering of Cu ions as indicated by the negative thermal expansion reduces the √3  √3 superstructure and suppresses the spectral intensity near K̅. Interestingly, the spectral intensity near K̅ shows a continuous reduction to zero starting from far below 400 K, as shown in Fig. 3d and Fig. S6, consistent with the ordering-disordering crossover of Cu ions . On the other hand, near the Γ̅ point, the hole bands shift towards high binding energies in a narrow temperature range from 390 K to 400 K, and finally develop a band gap of about 150 meV near Γ̅ (Fig. 3e-h), suggesting the p-type semiconducting nature of -Cu2Se. In contrast to the continuous decrease of the intensity near K̅ (Fig.3d), both the intensity drop and the band shift near Γ̅ become drastic from 390 K (Fig. 3g, h), which may be associated with a sudden acceleration of Cu+ hopping and the subsequent structural transition. Temperature dependent measurements on both band and crystal structures indicate that the  transition consists of a first-order structural transition and a much slower continuous process. Upon cooling below 400 K, the crystal undergoes a sudden expansion along c and the Cu ions are almost “frozen” with suppressed hopping rates through the first-order transition , leading to the band gap close at Γ̅ In a much larger temperature range, the Cu ions continuously migrate along c and order in ab plane , forming the back-folded bands near the K̅ point. The proposed scenario may provide a microscopic interpretation for the exotic temperature evolution of the thermal conductivity of Cu2Se , which exhibits a drastic and continuous response to temperature change in different temperature ranges. The observed band reconstruction indicates a change of the chemical potential in the system during the structural transition, which can play a crucial role in the TE properties of Cu2Se that are sensitive to the density of states near EF . Indeed, when the system is in the disordered regime (short carrier lifetime and mean-free-path), the Seebeck coefficient S of a p-type semiconductor can be evaluated experimentally as : S = 2π2kB 2T 3e d ln N(E) dE | E=EF (1) where kB, e and N(E) are Boltzmann constant, electron charge and carrier density of states, respectively. It is worth noting that a rough approximation σ ∝ {N(EF)}2 was adopted in equation 1, where σ denotes the electrical conductivity . In Fig. 4, we approximate the density of states near EF with ARPES intensity I(E) to simulate the Seebeck coefficient. Since S is determined mainly by the electronic properties in a narrow energy window (a few kBT) around EF, we average the value of 2π2kB 2T 3e dlnI(E) dE over an energy window of 120 meV (~4kBT) near EF and show the result as a function of temperature in Fig. 4 (the grey curve). The approximation based on ARPES data qualitatively reproduces the evolution of the Seebeck coefficient across the  transition independently measured by the transport experiment (the blue curve in Fig. 4), confirming the dominant role of the electronic structure in the Seebeck coefficient of Cu2Se. In order to further understand the influence of the electronic structure on the Seebeck coefficient, we simulate the temperature evolution the Seebeck coefficient according to equation (1) based on a simple band-shift model. In this model, the band structure is approximated by a parabolic dispersion with its valence top energy EF - EV extracted from our ARPES measurements (Fig. 3h and Fig. S7). A Lorentzian broadening of 200 meV (FWHM) is applied on the band structure to simulate the disordered effect of finite carrier lifetime and mean-free-path. Prominently, as shown by the orange curve in Fig. 4, our simulation based on equation (1) excellently reproduces the temperature evolution of the Seebeck coefficient near 400 K, indicating a dominant contribution of the band reconstruction in the enhanced Seebeck coefficient of Cu2Se. Our finding of band-reconstruction enhanced Seebeck coefficient is supported by the strong influence of the chemical potential on the Seebeck coefficient of Cu2Se calculated using the Boltzmann transport equation . However, as an oversimplified model, quantitative differences between the simulated and transport measured Seebeck coefficient are still observed in Fig. 4. On the one hand, equation (1) was based on a rough approximation . On the other hand, other effects in the band structure, such as the multi- band nature, the change of electron effective mass, temperature dependent scattering rate and the non-rigid band shift across the structural transition as revealed by the band structure calculations can likewise contribute to the Seebeck coefficient, which requires further experimental and theoretical investigation. 4. Conclusion We present a comprehensive investigation of Cu2Se using high-resolution ARPES and XRD. Our results reveal the disentangled structural evolution of Cu and Se sub-lattices during the structural transition. We conclude that the band reconstruction plays a dominant role in the enhancement of the Seebeck coefficient, which together with the suppression of the lattice thermal conductivity due to Cu+ disordering, significantly improve the TE performance of Cu2Se near the  structural transition. Our results provide important insights into not only the peculiar electronic and structural phase transitions in Cu2Se, but also the excellent TE efficiency of Cu2Se, which will further shed light on its application in the TE devices. Acknowledgments We thank Zhe Sun, Yuliang Li, Yaobo Huang, Hong Ding, Junzhang Ma, and Ming Shi for experimental support. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 11774190, No. 11674229, No. 11634009 and No. 11874264), the National Key R&D program of China (Grant No. 2017YFA0304600, 2017YFA0305400 and 2017YFA0402900), EPSRC Platform Grant (Grant No. EP/M020517/1). Yanfeng Guo acknowledges the support from the Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai (No. 17ZR1443300). Lexian Yang and Yulin Chen acknowledge the support from Tsinghua University Initiative Scientific Research Program. Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. Author contributions Shucui Sun and Yiwei Li contributed equally to this work. Yulin Chen and Lexian Yang conceived the experiments. Shucui Sun and Yiwei Li carried out ARPES experiments with the assistance of Yujie Chen, Xiang Xu, Lu Kang, Jingsong Zhou, Juan Jiang, Aiji Liang, Ding Pei, Zhengguo Wang, Yan Zhang, and Zhongkai Liu. Shuai Liu and Meixiao Wang performed STM measurements. Wei Xia, Kunpeng Zhao, Pengfei Qiu, Xun Shi, Lidong Chen and Yanfeng Guo synthesized Cu2Se single crystals and measured the Seebeck coefficient. All authors contributed to the scientific planning and discussions. Supplementary materials Supplementary materials to this article can be found online or from the authors.