Jordan Journal of Physics, in press, February 2020 1 Applying the Field Emission Orthodoxy Test to Murphy-Good Plots Mohammad M. Allaham1, Richard G. Forbes2 and Marwan S. Mousa1* 1: Surface Physics and Materials Technology lab., Department of Physics, Mutah University, Al-Karak 61710, Jordan. 2: Advanced Technology Institute & Department of Electrical and Electronic Eng., Faculty of Eng. & Physical Sciences, University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey GU2 7XH, UK. *mmousa@mutah.edu.jo Abstract. In field electron emission (FE) studies, it is important to check and analyse the quality and validity of results experimentally obtained from samples, using suitably plotted current-voltage [Im(Vm)] measurements. For the traditional plotting method, the Fowler-Nordheim (FN) plot, there exists a so-called "orthodoxy test" that can be applied to the FN plot, in order to check whether the FE device/system generating the results is "ideal". If it is not ideal, then emitter characterization parameters deduced from the FN plot are likely to be spurious. A new form of FE Im(Vm) data plot, the so-called "Murphy-Good (MG) plot" has recently been introduced (R.G. Forbes, Roy. Soc. open sci. 6 (2019) 190912. This aims to improve the precision with which characterization-parameter values (particularly values of formal emission area) can be extracted from FE Im(Vm) data. The present paper compares this new plotting form with the older FN and Millikan-Lauritsen (ML) forms, and makes an independent assessment of Jordan Journal of Physics, in press, February 2020 2 the consistency with which slope (and hence scaled-field) estimates can be extracted from a MG plot. It is shown that, by using a revised formula for the extraction of scaled-field values, the existing orthodoxy test can be applied to Murphy-Good plots. The development is reported of a prototype web tool that can apply the orthodoxy test to all three forms of FE data plot (ML, MG and FN). Keywords: Field emission, Field electron emission, Murphy-Good plot, Fowler-Nordheim plot, Millikan-Lauritsen plot, Orthodoxy test. 1. Introduction The process of field electron emission (FE) occurs in very many technological contexts. This paper is about the analysis of measured current-voltage [Im(Vm)] data that relate to FE processes, devices, and systems. The conventional methods of analysing this data are to make either a Fowler-Nordheim (FN) plot, i.e., a plot of the form log!,!" I! V!! vs 1 V!, or (in older work) a Millikan-Lauritsen plot, i.e., a plot of the form log!,!" I! vs 1 V!. Such plots are often approximately straight. Emitter characterization parameters are then extracted from the slope of the plot, and from the intercept that a fitted straight line makes with the 1 V! = 0 axis. With logarithmic expressions, such as log{x}or ln{x}, an international convention is used in this paper that the symbol {x} means "the numerical value of x, when is x is measured in the stated units". In this paper, in all equations, all figures and all tables, Jordan Journal of Physics, in press, February 2020 3 voltages are always measured in volts and currents are always measured in amperes. Brackets not part of logarithmic expressions are used normally. A so-called ideal FE device/system is one where the measured Im(Vm) characteristics are determined only by unchanging system geometry and surface properties, and by the electron emission process. An ideal system is termed orthodox if, in addition, it is an adequate approximation to assume that emission takes place through a Schottky-Nordeim (SN) ("planar image rounded") potential-energy barrier, and hence that Murphy-Good FE theory applies. For an orthodox device/system, FN plot (or ML plot) analysis leads to correct values for emitter characterization parameters. However, for a variety of reasons (for example, series resistance in the measurement circuit) many real FE devices/systems are not ideal (and hence cannot be orthodox). When conventional FN plot (or ML plot) analysis techniques are applied to Im(Vm) data taken from non-ideal devices/systems, then spurious values can be (and often are) derived for emitter characterization parameters. The so-called Orthodoxy Test is a test that can be applied to a FN plot (or to an ML plot), in order to establish whether or not the plotted data are derived from an orthodox FE device/system (and hence whether extracted characterization parameters are valid or spurious). For a field emitter with local work function φ, subject to a local electrostatic field of magnitude FL, a corresponding scaled field fL can be defined by fL ≡ cS 2φ –2FL ≡ (e3/4πε0)φ –2FL ≡ FL/FR . (1) Jordan Journal of Physics, in press, February 2020 4 where cS is the Schottky constant, e is the elementary positive charge, ε0 is the vacuum electric permittivity, and FR ≡ cS −2φ 2 is the reference field needed to pull the top of a SN barrier of zero-field height φ down to the Fermi level. Emitter behaviour can be described in terms of characteristic field (FC) and scaled-field (fC) values, usually taken as the values at the emitter apex (for a pointed emitter), or at the apex of a prominent individual emitter (for large-area field electron emitters). The range of fC-values in which emitters normally operate is well established (see spreadsheet associated with Ref. ). When Im(Vm) data are plotted in the form of a Fowler-Nordheim (FN) plot or a Millikan-Lauritsen (ML) plot, the plot can be used to extract values of fC that correspond to the range of electrostatic fields apparently used in the experiments. The Orthodoxy Test compares these apparent fC-values with the known fC-values at which emitters normally operate, and draws appropriate conclusions. For example, if an extracted fC-value is higher than the known fC-value at which an emitter melts or self-destructs, it is concluded that the FE device/system is not ideal and that any characterization results derived from the FN (or ML) plot are likely to be spurious. Fowler-Nordheim plots came into use because the FE equation derived by FN in 1928 predicted that a FN plot would be linear. But, in 1953, Burgess, Kroemer and Houston (BKH) found a physical mistake in FN's thinking, and also a mathematical mistake in a related paper by Nordheim . In 1956, Murphy and Good (MG) used the BKH results to develop a revised FE equation . (For a modern derivation, using the International System of Quantities (ISQ), see .) Murphy-Good plots are a new form of FE Im(Vm) data plot that has recently been developed . They are based on improved mathematical understanding of MG theory, Jordan Journal of Physics, in press, February 2020 5 developed from 2006 onwards, and have the form loge,10{Im /Vm κ} vs 1/Vm, where the voltage exponent κ for the SN barrier used in MG theory has the value κ = 2 – η/6 . (2) The parameter η depends only on the assumed work-function φ and is given by η ≅ 9.836239 (eV/φ)1/2 (3) More generally, in the expression ln{Im/Vm k}, the value to be allocated to the general voltage exponent k depends on the plot type, as shown in Table 1. discussion Plot type Voltage exponent (k ) Murphy-Good (MG) (2 – η/6) Fowler-Nordheim (FN) 2 Millikan-Lauritsen (ML) 0 In the work reported in this paper, we will confirm that using a MG plot is an improved method to analyse FE data. This is because modern Murphy-Good theory predicts that (unlike an ML plot or a FN plot) an MG plot will be "almost exactly" a straight line. This means that, for ideal measured current-voltage data, we can extract well-defined emitter characterisation parameters more precisely and more easily than with the older plot forms. Jordan Journal of Physics, in press, February 2020 6 We also develop a form of orthodoxy test that applies to Murphy-Good plots, and report on the development of a software tool that implements this test for any of the three plot forms shown in Table 1. 2. Theoretical Background The so-called Extended Murphy Good (EMG) equation for the local emission current density (LECD) J! !"# can be written in the linked form J L EMG = λJ kL SN (4) JkL SN ≡ aφ −1FL 2 exp[−vFbφ 3/2/FL] . (5) Here: λ is an “uncertainty factor", of unknown functional dependence or value, called the local pre-exponential correction factor; J kL SN is called the kernel LECD for the SN barrier; and a and b are the first and second FN constants as usually defined (, also see Table 2 here). The parameter vF, which acts as the barrier-form correction factor for the SN barrier defined by φ and FL, is a particular value of a special mathematical function v(x), where x is the Gauss variable (i.e., the independent variable in the Gauss Hypergeometric Differential Equation), and usually is adequately given by the simple good approximation vF = v(x = f ) ≈ 1− f +( f /6)ln f , (6) Jordan Journal of Physics, in press, February 2020 7 where f is to be interpreted as the local scaled field fL as defined above, or as its characteristic value fC. Integrating Eq. (4) over the emitter surface, we can find the total emission current Ie EMG as Ie EMG = An EMGλJ kL SN , (7) where An EMG is the related notional emission area. On defining the formal emission area (for the SN barrier) by Af SN by Af SN = λAn EMG , (8) and on assuming that the measured current Im is equal to Ie EMG , we obtain the Im(FC) form of the EMG equation, as Im(FC) = Af SNaφ −1FC 2 exp[−vFbφ 3/2/FC]. (9) The characteristic barrier field FC can be related to the measured voltage Vm by the formula FC = Vm / ζC , (10) where ζC is a system-geometry parameter called the characteristic voltage conversion length (VCL). This parameter ζC is constant for ideal FE devices and systems, because their Im(Vm) characteristics are determined only by the emission process and Jordan Journal of Physics, in press, February 2020 8 unchanging system geometry and surface properties. Additional background theory is given in . 3. The theory of Murphy-Good (MG) plots 3.1 Development of a Theoretical Equation for the MG Plot This Section reviews the theory of Murphy-Good plots. To develop the theory, it is necessary to put Eq. (11) into so-called scaled form. From Eq. (1), for characteristic values, we have FC ≡ cS −2φ 2 fC . We can define two scaling parameters η(φ) and θ(φ) by η(φ) = bcS 2φ −1/2 , (11) θ(φ) = acS −4φ 3. (12) Inserting these three relationships into Eq. (9) yields the scaled EMG equation Im( fC) = Af SNθ fC 2 exp[−vFη/fC] , (13) where, for simplicity, we do not explicitly show that η and θ depend on φ . Making use of approximation (6), with f=fC, yields (after some algebraic manipulation) Jordan Journal of Physics, in press, February 2020 9 Im(( fC) = Af SNθ fC (2−η/6) exp[η] exp[−η/fC]. (14) Equation (13) now needs to be converted into a form where the measured voltage Vm is the independent variable. For an ideal device/system, the reference measured voltage VmR is related to the reference field FR (that corresponds to fC=1) by VmR ≡ FR ζC . (15) Combining this with Eq. (10) and definition (1) for characteristic scaled field fC yields fC = FC/FR = Vm /VmR . (16) yielding Im(Vm) = {Af SNθ exp[η]VmR −κ} Vm κ exp[−ηVmR /Vm]. (17) Dividing both sides by Vm κ , and taking the natural logarithms of both sides, gives us the equation for the theoretical MG plot: ln{Im/Vm κ} = ln{Af SN θ exp[η] VmR −κ} − ηVmR /Vm . (18) Jordan Journal of Physics, in press, February 2020 10 3.2 Extracting parameters from a MG plot MG plots have the form loge,10{Im /Vm κ} vs 1/Vm, but we discuss only the natural logarithmic form here. We can define the following expressions: Z ≡1/Vm , (19) Y ≡ ln{Im/Vm κ} , (20) α ≡ Af SN θ exp[η] VmR −κ , (21) β ≡ −ηVmR . (22) For a given work-function value, β, α and ln{α} are constants. On substituting Eqs. (19) to (22) into Eq. (18), we obtain the linear equation Y(X) = ln{α} + βΖ . (23) Thus, ln{α} is the theoretical intercept of the MG plot and β is its theoretical slope. It can also be seen that α | β |κ ≡ Af SNθηκ exp[η] =Af SNθη2η−η/6 exp[η]. (24) Jordan Journal of Physics, in press, February 2020 11 From eqs (11) and (12), it follows that θη2 = ab2φ2, so we obtain α | β |κ = Af SNθηκ exp[η] =Af SN(ab2φ 2)(η−η/6 exp[η]). (25) Let SMG fit denote the slope of a straight line fitted to an experimental MG plot (made using natural logarithms), and let ln{RMG fit } denote the intercept that this line makes with the (1/Vm)=0 axis. It follows from the equations above that an extracted value of formal emission area A! !" can be obtained from the extraction formula {Af SN}extr = ΛMGRMG fit | SMG fit |κ , (26) where the extraction parameter for the MG plot, ΛMG(φ), is given by ⎡⎣ ⎤⎦ (27) Examples of the numerical dependence of ΛMG(φ) on φ are given in . It also follows that extracted values of VmR and ζC can be obtained from {VmR}extr = − SMG fit /η , (28) {ζC}extr = − SMG fit / bφ 3/2 . (29) Jordan Journal of Physics, in press, February 2020 12 For large area field electron emitters (LAFEs), an extracted value of a characteristic (dimensionless) field enhancement factor (FEF) γ!", can then be obtained from {γMC}extr = dM /{ζC}extr , (30) where dM is the macroscopic distance used to defined the FEF (often, but not necessarily, the separation between two parallel planar plates). Once a value has been extracted for VmR, Eq. (14) can be used to determine (for an ideal device/system) the characteristic scaled-field value fC that corresponds to any measured voltage. This is equivalent to using the extraction formula { fC}extr =Vm /VmR = −(η / SMG fit ) / (1/Vm) . (31) This can be contrasted with the formula for extracting fC-values from an FN plot made against 1/Vm, which is { fC}extr =Vm /VmR = −(stη / SMG fit ) / (1/Vm). (32) Clearly, the MG-plot formula does not contain the slope correction factor st. 4. Orthodoxy test for a Murphy-Good plot 4.1 Description of the Test Jordan Journal of Physics, in press, February 2020 13 Since the orthodoxy test is based on comparing extracted ranges of fC with acceptable and unacceptable ranges of fC, as defined in Ref. and shown in Tables 2 and 3 below, it is straightforward to apply an orthodoxy test to a Murphy-Good plot, by using Eq. (31) to extract apparent fC-values. showing the upper and lower data points that define the range of voltages used. This plot covers the range 1.2 to 2.8 kV (corresponding to the scaled- field range 0.15 to 0.35). For clarity, "computer notation" is used for the horizontal-axis numerical values. Voltages are measured in volts and currents in amperes. To describe the test procedure, we use the simulated ideal Im(Vm) MG plot shown in Fig. 1. The method of generating this plot is described in detail in Section 4.2. The test procedure is as follows. (1) Fit a straight line to the experimental (or simulated) plot. Regression techniques can be used, but usually defining a straight line with a ruler is good enough. Jordan Journal of Physics, in press, February 2020 14 (2) Identify the position on the line that has the same X-coordinate (Xup) as the lowest-X data-point you wish to use, and determine the Y-coordinate (Yup) of this position on the line. These coordinates (Xup, Yup) define the upper point shown in Fig. 1. (The apparently contradictory terminology arises because "up" refers to the related value of Vm, rather than of 1/Vm.) (3) Carry out a similar procedure for the lower point shown in Fig. 1. (4) Evaluate the (negative) slope SMG fit of the fitted line, using the formula SMG fit = (Yup −Ylow) / (Zup − Zlow) . (33) (5) Extract the range-defining scaled-field values, by applying Eq. (31) to the (1/Vm)-values that define the ends of the range, as follows: { fC}low extr = −(η / SMG fit ) / (1/Vm)low , (34) { fC}up extr = −(η / SMG fit ) / (1/Vm)up . (35) (6) Apply the test condition, as derived from Tables 2 and 3. In Table 2, { fC}low extr is the extracted fC-value for the lower point, { fC}up extr is the extracted fC-value for the upper point, and the superscripts (A/NA) indicate the allowed/ disallowed limits for the extracted fC-values. (For simplicity, the subscript "C" is omitted in the tables.) Table 3 shows the values of these limits for various work- function values . If necessary, linear interpolation between these limits can be used. Jordan Journal of Physics, in press, February 2020 15 Condition Result Explanation f!"# ! ≤ f!"# !"#$ AND f!" !"#$ ≤ f!" ! Pass Reasonable range f!"# !"#$ ≤ f!"# !" OR f!" !" ≤ f!" !"#$ Fail Clearly unreasonable range f!"# !" ≤ f!"# !"#$ ≤ f!"# ! Inconclusive More investigation is needed f!" ! ≤ f!" !"#$ ≤ f!" !" Inconclusive More investigation is needed φ (eV) flow NA flow A fup A fup NA 5.50 0.09 5.00 4.50 0.10 4.00 3.50 0.11 3.00 0.12 2.50 0.13 The physical meanings of the two "fail" ranges are easy to state. The "low-fC" one corresponds to the situation where the extracted fC-value is thought too low for a measurable current to be detected in normal experiments; the "upper-fC" one corresponds to the situation where the extracted fC-value is higher than fC-values at which the emitter is known to electroform (i.e., change shape due to atomic migration) or self-destruct. In both cases, it has to be concluded that the FE device/system is not ideal, and that any characterization parameters extracted from the plot are likely to be spurious. At a recent conference , we reported on the development of a prototype of a web tool that can apply an orthodoxy test to either an ML or an FN plot, and––if the Jordan Journal of Physics, in press, February 2020 16 test is passed––extract values of relevant emitter characterization parameters. The output of this prototype is shown in Fig. 2. During the work reported here we have extended this prototype to include MG plots. At the time of writing, this prototype can be found at link . The web tool is still under development, and the final version will be made openly available in due course. It is also planned to develop a downloadable spreadsheet version (a) (b) (c) Jordan Journal of Physics, in press, February 2020 17 FN plot; (c) ML plot. 4.2 Consistency of scaled-field extraction for MG plot For an MG plot, the physical consistency of the extraction process can be checked in the following simple way. Highly precise simulated ideal Im(Vm) data-sets can be generated by using: (a) Eqs (13) and 14); (b) chosen values for system input parameters φ, VmR and A! !"; (c) a high-precision (HP) formula for v(f), given in and also in the Appendix to (in the range 0 ≤ f ≤ 1, v(f) varies from 1 down to 0, and the HP formula yields v(f)values known to have error less than 8×10–10); and (d) a chosen set of values for fC. Values of parameters used in (or related to) this simulation are shown in Table 4. The chosen values of fC (as shown in Table 5) lie in the range 0.15 ≤ fC ≤ 0.35. This range is used because it is known that, for tungsten FE devices, experimental fC- values often lie within this range. Table 5 also shows resulting simulated values of quantities relevant to drawing the MG plot shown in Fig. 1. For simplicity, the "lower" and "upper" data points on the MG plot are assumed to have the horizontal ("Z") and vertical ("Y") coordinates given by the values in columns 4 and 5 of Table 5, for the fC-values 0.15 and 0.35. The resulting "fitted" slope, S!" !"# , derived using Eq. (33), is shown in Table 4. The corresponding extracted values {f!}!"#$ are shown as the last column in Table 5, and are consistent with the input values, apart from a small systematic error of 0.27%. The cause of this error is the small discrepancy between the highly precise numerical formula for v(f)used in Jordan Journal of Physics, in press, February 2020 18 the simulations and the "simple good approximation" (6) used to develop MG-plot theory, which is known to have an error of this order of magnitude. For practical purposes the error is negligible. conversion length. Again, these are very close to the input values. The various good agreements just discussed, between extracted values and input values, serve to demonstrate the physical self-consistency of the MG plot and related extraction formulae, when these are applied to an orthodox FE device/system. extracted outputs related to its slope. Universal constants are shown to seven significant figures. Other parameters are shown to four or five figure precision. Asterisks indicate the chosen input-parameter values. Parameter name Symbol Numerical value Units Input and related data First FN constant a 1.541 434 μA eV V–2 Second FN constant b 6.830 890 eV–3/2 (V/nm) Schottky constant cS 1.999 985 eV (V/nm)–1/2 Local work function* φ 4.500 eV Reference field FR 14.06 V/nm Exponent scaling factor η Pre-exponent scaling factor θ A m–2 Voltage exponent (SN barrier) κ Reference measured-voltage* VmR Voltage conversion length ζC 56.90 Nm Formal area (SN barrier)* A! !" 100.0 Nm Extracted data Fitted slope S!" !"# –3.6995×104 Np V Extracted value of VmR {VmR}extr Extracted value of ζC {ζC}extr 56.73 Nm Jordan Journal of Physics, in press, February 2020 19 MG Plot, and related extracted values of characteristic scaled field fC. fC Vm Im 1/Vm ln{Im /Vm κ} {fC}extr % error – (V) (A) (V–1) – – A more detailed investigation was also carried out, in order to confirm the high consistency level with which characterization parameters can be extracted from a MG plot for an orthodoxly behaving FE device/system (if likely statistical errors in measured data are disregarded). This investigation was similar to, but performed independently of, that described in . A data-set was created by using the same basic input data as above, but using fC- values at intervals of 0.01 in the range 0.15 ≤ fC ≤ 0.35. This fC-range was then divided into four different smaller ranges, in order to check how much the extracted slope S!" !"# varied, depending on the particular range chosen. As shown in the first five columns of slope does not depend on the range used. Jordan Journal of Physics, in press, February 2020 20 !"# , for a MG plot, and fitted slope S!" !"# for a FN plot, for various different ranges of characteristic scaled field fC (and hence of predicted measured voltage Vm). Input data as in Table 4. (fC)low (fC)up (Vm)low (Vm)up S!" !"# S!" !"# (V) (V) (Np V) (Np V) 0.16 0.20 1280 1600 0.21 0.25 1680 2000 0.26 0.30 2080 2400 0.31 0.35 2480 2800 |Total variation|: 32 964 For the MG plot, the residual variations shown in Table 6 presumably result, as before, because the simple good approximation (6), used to derive MG-plot theory, is not an exactly precise expression for v(f). 5. Comparisons between the plot types It is known that a Fowler-Nordheim plot is not expected to be an exactly straight line, and that this gives rise to difficulties when interpreting a straight line fitted to an experimental FN plot. Within the framework of the prevailing "smooth planar metal emitter (SPME)" methodology almost-universally used for interpreting FE current- voltage data (see Section 6), the Murphy-Good plot was designed to be "very nearly" a straight line, and to remove these interpretation difficulties. Jordan Journal of Physics, in press, February 2020 21 exponent k=0; MG plot (middle) has k=κ; FN plot (bottom) has k=2. Voltages are measured in volts and currents in amperes. The superior quality of the MG plot is illustrated in Fig. 3, which shows the same set of basic Im(Vm) data plotted in the three ways under discussion. These plots are each based on a large set of data points, distributed over a wider fC-value range than was used to produce Fig. 1. The MG plot is "very nearly" straight, as 1/Vm gets smaller, whereas the FN plot curves slightly downwards and the ML plot curves upwards. The differences are small and normally difficult to see. However,––because the "lever -70 -60 -50 -40 -30 -20 -10 0 1.00 3.00 5.00 7.00 9.00 ln{Im/Vm k } 10000/{Vm} -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10 -5 0 1.00 2.00 3.00 4.00 5.00 Jordan Journal of Physics, in press, February 2020 22 effect" operates when extracting, from experimental data points well away from the (1/Vm)=0 axis, a value for the intercept on the axis––these small differences significantly affect the accuracy with which the intercept value can be extracted. To illustrate this quantitatively, we carried out for a FN plot a simulation exercise analogous to that described in Section 4.2 for an MG plot, using the same set of values of fC, Vm and Im. The results for the FN-plot fitted slope S!" !"# are listed in the last column of Table 6: the variation in S!" !"# (around 3%) is around 30 times higher than the variation in the fitted slope S!" !"# for the MG plot. This again demonstrates the superiority of the MG plot as a tool for the precise analysis of Im(Vm) data (within the framework of SPME methodology). Obviously, this difference between MG plots and FN plots aligns with the fact that Eq. (30) contains the slope correction factor st but Eq. (29) does not. It is known (e.g. ) that the slope correction function s(f) is a function of f, albeit a weak one. Thus, the "fitting value" st [≡ s(ft)] will be a function of the fitting value ft (ft is the value of characteristic scaled-field at which the experimental plot and the tangent to the theoretical plot are assumed to be parallel.) However, normal practice is to take st as having the constant value 0.95; this is part of the cause of the observed discrepancy. (One of the problems with precise FN-plot analysis is determining the precise value of st). Note that the numerics presented here have been generated specifically for the purpose of confirming the theoretical performance of a MG plot, and comparing this with that of a FN plot. These numerics should not be interpreted as likely errors when MG plots are used to interpret real experimental data. In the application of FN plots and MG plots to real experimental data, other factors come into play, including noise in the data, non-ideality, and weaknesses in SPME methodology. Jordan Journal of Physics, in press, February 2020 23 6. Applicability to non-metals and non-planar emitters Obviously, the whole discussion here has been within the framework of the near- universal experimentalists' assumption (whatever the material they are working with) that, theoretically, emitters can be treated as if: (a) the existence of atomic structure can be disregarded; (b) emission is coming from a limited area of a smooth planar surface of very large extent; and (c) Sommerfeld free electron-metal theory applies. This has been called elsewhere the "smooth planar metal emitter" (SPME) methodology. The above set of assumptions is obviously wildly unrealistic for some modern field electron emitters (in particular, for low-apex-radius carbon nanotubes). Clearly, for such emitters important questions are: "how should FE Im(Vm) data-analysis techniques be modified?" and (in the context of the present paper) "do new test(s) of FE 'ideality' need to be developed to replace the orthodoxy test?" To a large extent, these questions are outside the scope of the present paper. The MG plot is a method for improving the precision of data analysis within the framework of SPME methodology, and the focus of this paper has been on developing and testing a form of orthodoxy test applicable to a MG plot. These things have merit in themselves. Nevertheless, the following points deserve making. In reality, the situation is more favourable than it might seem at first sight. (1) (Except perhaps for very sharp emitters) most of the causes of non-orthodoxy in FE devices/systems are associated with breakdown of the assumption that VmR is constant, rather than with breakdown of the assumption that the emission is adequately described by Murphy-Good theory. But the causes of breakdown in the constant-VmR Jordan Journal of Physics, in press, February 2020 24 assumption are much the same, whatever the emitter material. (2) In breakdown of the assumption that the EMG FE equation applies, the biggest factor will probably be that the true barrier is not a SN barrier. But, except possibly for very sharply curved emitters, the effect on FN-plot analysis is known to be a change in the value of st by a relatively small amount (typically of the order of a few percent); equivalently, one would expect (qualitatively) that the numerical validity of MG-plot analysis would be affected only in a small way. (3) Differences in the electron supply function would be expected to have only a very small effect on the FN plot or MG plot slope, since they primarily affect the plot intercept. (4) With very sharp emitters it is likely that both FN and MG plots would be noticeably curved, and thus obviously non-orthodox. (5) Lack of strict applicability of orthodoxy test theory is more likely to result in a false determination that the FE device-system is non-orthodox, than a false determination that the FE device/system is orthodox. In fact, for further development of FE theory, a false determination of the first kind is of limited importance, because only results that pass the orthodoxy test are of scientific use. (6) The orthodoxy test is an "engineering triage" test, with generous margins of uncertainty built in. Although more-exact tests for "ideality/non-ideality" may be developed in due course, this seems unlikely to happen soon. For the time being, we consider that the orthodoxy test, whether applied to FN or MG plots, is a technological test of "ideality or otherwise" that is sufficient for purpose. A final point is that development of data-analysis theory for non-metal emitters and for very sharp emitters is inhibited by lack of sufficiently good understanding of emission theory for such emitters. Probably a higher strategic priority is to first develop a form of data-analysis theory that deals with metal emitters that have the shape of pointed needles or of rounded posts, or are otherwise sharp (but not "very Jordan Journal of Physics, in press, February 2020 25 sharp"). This topic is beginning to be an active area of research, and some of the issues involved have recently been discussed (see doi:10.13140/RG.2.2.32112.81927 and 7. Summary This paper has reviewed the theory of Murphy-Good (MG) plots, and has made some comparisons with the theories of Fowler-Nordheim (FN) plots and Millikan- Lauritsen (ML) plots. If experimental current-voltage characteristics conform to the so- called "Extended MG equation", then an experimental MG plot is expected to be "very nearly" a straight line, and "much more nearly straight" than either an FN plot or a ML plot. We have confirmed this to be the case. Also, by extracting (from a simulated MG plot) slope values that correspond to different voltage ranges, we have shown that (for an MG plot taken from a orthodoxly behaving FE device/system) the process of slope extraction generates very consistent slope values, irrespective of voltage range Because values of characteristic scaled field fC can be extracted from a MG plot by using Eq. (31), an orthodoxy test can be applied to a MG plot by using the same rules about scaled-field ranges as apply in the case of the FN plot. A prototype web tool that can apply the orthodoxy test to any of the three types of FE data plot discussed (ML, MG or FN) is partially completed, though still under development. It is planned that there should eventually also be a downloadable spreadsheet version. A particular application that we have in mind is to use the new data-analysis techniques discussed here, namely Murphy-Good plots and the related orthodoxy test, Jordan Journal of Physics, in press, February 2020 26 to enhance the analysis of experimental results obtained in the field emission laboratory at Mu'tah University.