1 Photo-physics and electronic structure of lateral graphene/MoS2 and metal/MoS2 junctions Shruti Subramanian1,2, Quinn T. Campbell1,3, Simon Moser4,5, Jonas Kiemle6, Philipp Zimmermann6, Paul Seifert6,7, Florian Sigger6, Deeksha Sharma8, Hala Al-Sadeg1, Michael Labella III9, Dacen Waters10, Randall M. Feenstra10, Roland J. Koch4, Chris Jozwiak4, Aaron Bostwick4, Eli Rotenberg4, Ismaila Dabo1, Alexander Holleitner6, Thomas E. Beechem11, Ursula Wurstbauer6,12, Joshua A. Robinson1,2,13,14 1. Department of Materials Science and Engineering, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, United States of America 2. Center for 2-Dimensional and Layered Materials, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, United States of America 3. Center for Computing Research, Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87185, United States of America 4. Advanced Light Source, E. O. Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California 94720, United States of America 5. Physikalisches Institut and Würzburg-Dresden Cluster of Excellence ct.qmat, Universität Würzburg, 97074 Würzburg, Germany 6. Walter Schottky Institut and Physik Department, Technische Universität München, Am Coulombwall 4, 85748 Garching, Germany 7. ICFO - Institut de Ciencies Fotoniques, The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Castelldefels, Barcelona, 08860, Spain 8. Department of Mechanical Engineering, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, United States of America 9. Nanofabrication Facility, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, United States of America 10. Department of Physics, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, United States of America 11. Center for Integrated Nanotechnologies, Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87185, United States of America 12. Institute of Physics, University of Munster, 48149 Münster, Germany 13. 2-Dimensional Crystal Consortium, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, United States of America 14. Center for Atomically Thin Multifunctional Coatings, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, United States of America Abstract Integration of semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) into functional optoelectronic circuitries requires an understanding of the charge transfer across the interface between the TMD and the contacting material. Here, we use spatially resolved photocurrent microscopy to demonstrate electronic uniformity at the epitaxial graphene/molybdenum disulfide (EG/MoS2) interface. A 10 larger photocurrent is extracted at the EG/MoS2 interface when compared to metal (Ti/Au) /MoS2 interface. This is supported by semi-local density-functional theory (DFT), which predicts the Schottky barrier at the EG/MoS2 interface to be ~2 lower than Ti/MoS2. We provide a direct visualization of a 2D material Schottky barrier through combination of angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy with spatial resolution selected to be ~300 nm (nano-ARPES) 2 and DFT calculations. A bending of ~500 meV over a length scale of ~2-3 μm in the valence band maximum of MoS2 is observed via nano-ARPES. We explicate a correlation between experimental demonstration and theoretical predictions of barriers at graphene/TMD interfaces. Spatially resolved photocurrent mapping allows for directly visualizing the uniformity of built-in electric fields at heterostructure interfaces, providing a guide for microscopic engineering of charge transport across heterointerfaces. This simple probe-based technique also speaks directly to the 2D synthesis community to elucidate electronic uniformity at domain boundaries alongside morphological uniformity over large areas. Keywords Photocurrent, graphene contacts, heterostructure, ARPES, Schottky barrier, molybdenum disulfide, first-principle calculations Two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals semiconducting materials, such as transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) are of interest due to their strong light-matter interaction dominated by exciton phenomena.1,2 Furthermore, van der Waals crystals are a highly tunable and versatile material systems that are poised to impact flexible and transparent electronics,3–5 optoelectronics,6–9 spin-and valleytronics,10 catalysis,11–13 biomedical14–16 and sensor17,18 applications, and next-generation quantum materials.19–23 Additionally, semiconducting 2D crystals can be engineered by external stimuli such as doping,24,25 strain,26,27 defects,28 pressure,29 environment,30 by interaction with light31 or in moiré superlattice structures.32 Key to the integration of semiconducting TMDs into functional circuitries is understanding the charge transfer across a 2D semiconductor and metallic heterojunction allowing for them to be precisely engineered to the specific functionality. In this regard, lateral junctions between molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) and conventional metals, as well as MoS2 and graphene are utilized in electronic and optoelectronic device schemes with graphene, providing better contact behavior33,34 and tunability due to its semi-metallic behavior.35 Here, we investigate the local charge transfer characteristics and the lateral heterogeneity of metal/MoS2 and graphene/MoS2 junctions via scanning photocurrent microscopy, and elucidate the band bending of both structures by a combination of angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy with spatial resolution selected to be ~300 nm (nano-ARPES) and DFT calculations. Illustrating the close correlation between experimental demonstrations and theoretical predictions of barriers at graphene/TMD interfaces allows us to develop a comprehensive understanding of charge transfer, aiding the microscopic engineering of charge transport across heterointerfaces. Direct visualization of built-in fields over large areas at heterostructure interfaces via scanning photocurrent microscopy speaks directly to the 2D synthesis community to correlate and demonstrate electronic uniformity alongside morphological uniformity. Results/Discussion Efficient electron-hole pair (e--h+) generation in MoS2-based devices upon photoexcitation is responsible for a single-layer MoS2-based photodetector exhibiting a photoresponsivity reaching 880 A/W.36 Despite the rich photo-physics, performance of MoS2 devices that rely on efficient photocurrent generation are limited by large exciton binding energies and resulting excited state decay.37–40 Slow photoresponse dynamics observed in MoS2-based devices necessitates a comprehensive understanding of photocurrent 3 dynamics and charge carrier recombination in MoS2.36,41 High performance optoelectronic detectors require efficient separation of charge carriers following photogeneration to prevent them from recombination before being collected at the electrodes. This separation of e--h+ pairs is facilitated by the existence of a built-in electric field in the system, which leads to the idea of constructing an electronic barrier in the system, away from the metal contacts, to aid the separation of charge carriers. In this work, we examine an epitaxial graphene (EG)/MoS2 lateral heterostructure exhibiting a uniform built-in electric field at the interface while using 2-3 layer EG as the contact material and allowing for an efficient separation of photogenerated charge carriers. EG/MoS2 lateral heterostructures are synthesized in the same controllable manner as previously demonstrated by Subramanian et al. with the resulting structure having a ~50-200 nm overlap of the multi-layer MoS2 onto the edge of the patterned EG33 as shown in the schematic of Figure 1(a) and 1(b). Spatial photocurrent mapping reveals the intrinsic photoresponse at the EG/MoS2 and the metal/MoS2 interfaces. The built-in electric field and photogenerated carrier extraction are compared utilizing photocurrent mapping of two synthesized heterostructure systems (Figure 1): (i) A symmetric lateral heterostructure consisting of metal/EG/MoS2/EG/metal as shown in heterostructure consisting of metal/MoS2/EG/metal as shown in Figure 1(b,d). The spatial resolution of photocurrent in 2D heterostructures allows for discerning local variations in the electric field. An optical probe maps the reflection from the two heterostructure systems, as shown in and asymmetric heterostructure systems, respectively, and this is directly coupled with the photocurrent maps. The different components of the heterostructure devices EG/MoS2/EG device lateral heterostructure with the overlap of the MoS2 onto the edge of the patterned EG. (b) Schematic of the asymmetric heterostructure device with metal/MoS2/EG configuration. (c) False-colored scanning electron micrograph (SEM) of the symmetric heterostructure with EG on both sides of the MoS2. (d) SEM of the asymmetric heterostructure with EG on one side and Ti/Au metal on the other. (e) Reflectance map of the symmetric heterostructure zoomed in from (c). (f) Reflectance map of the asymmetric heterostructure zoomed in from (d). (g) Photocurrent map (at zero applied bias) of the EG/MoS2/EG heterostructure displaying photo-activity at the EG/MoS2 interface. No photoactivity is seen at the metal/EG interface. Dotted lines are drawn to guide the eye to the photoactive interface. (h) Photocurrent map (at zero applied bias) of the metal/MoS2/EG heterostructure displaying “patchy” photo- activity at the metal/MoS2 interface as compared to the EG/MoS2 interface. 10 reduction in overall photocurrent is observed when compared to (g). 4 have different optical contrasts as seen in the reflectance maps. Photocurrent is observed at the heterostructure interfaces as shown in Figure 1(g) and 1(h), and is attributed to two mechanisms contributing to the photocurrent as extensively studied by Parzinger et al. – the primary contributor being the photovoltaic effect, i.e., the generation of e--h+ pairs and their subsequent spatial dissociation due to an electric field, and the secondary contributor being the photo-thermoelectric effect that allows for electrons to have a flux in response to the established temperature gradient by laser irradiation.9 The presence of a depletion region at the heterostructure interface leads to a measurable photocurrent upon illumination. For MoS2 multilayers, if the excitation energy is less than the direct bandgap but more than the indirect bandgap, e--h+ pairs will still be generated, but with reduced probability because this transition requires a phonon to change momentum.42,43 The lateral heterostructures studied here are dominated by multilayer MoS2, especially at the EG/MoS2 heterostructure interface.33 We illuminate the heterostructures using the emission line of an Ar/Kr laser at 488 nm (2.54 eV), whose energy is always greater than the direct bandgap of MoS2. The time-integrated photocurrent at heterostructure interfaces is primarily attributed to photovoltaic effect.9 Apart from an observation of a measurable photocurrent at the heterostructure interfaces, there are further subtleties visible from the photocurrent maps in Figure 1. Based on Figure 1(g), the photo-active interface is the EG/MoS2 interface, indicating the presence of a Schottky barrier that separates photogenerated charge carriers.44 Additionally, the metal/EG interface in the heterostructure system is not photo-active. This is contrary to the observations of photocurrent in exfoliated and CVD graphene at metal contacts where the Schottky barrier is formed.45–48 Here, the intrinsic polarization of the silicon carbide (SiC) substrate electrostatically dopes EG n-type, reducing the Schottky barrier at the metal(Ti/Au)/EG interface. In contrast, both exfoliated and CVD graphene are typically p-type,49,50 forming a much larger Schottky barrier with the Ti/Au metal stack, thus enabling significant space-charge regions at the interface. Epitaxial graphene on SiC also exhibits less surface impurities compared to CVD and exfoliated graphene since it does not undergo polymeric transfer processes, which may be a contributing factor to the reduced Schottky barrier at the metal (Ti/Au)/EG interface. All measurements are performed in vacuum to avoid the environmental doping of the 2D materials leading to changes in their Schottky barriers. The photocurrent landscape in the symmetric heterostructure is uniform through the length of the device as compared to the asymmetric heterostructure (See supplementary section S.1). Importantly, a uniform photocurrent exists along the length of the EG/MoS2 interface regardless of device symmetry (Figure 1(g,h)), noting the existence of a uniform built-in electric field due to a pristine EG/MoS2 interface. In contrast, the metal/MoS2 interface exhibits a non-uniform photocurrent signal, (Figure 1(h)) (Photocurrent standard deviation (σ) for the metal/MoS2 > 1.5 EG/MoS2 - See supplementary section S.1), possibly resulting in current crowding and localized heating of the device. We note that the laser illumination occurs through the contact layer (EG or 20 nm of Ti/Au – 5 nm Ti + 15 nm Au). A non- negligible part of the light, ~ 25%, is absorbed by the Ti/Au metal contact stack (Calculations done on www.filmetrics.com/reflectance-calculator based on the complex-matrix form of the Fresnel equations).51–55 This can lead to heating of the metal contact and may provide additional contributions to the observed photocurrent via thermal effects that could have opposite sign and spatial extension across the junction.9 Together with the reduced dark current, these additional contributions may be responsible for the reduced photocurrent signal in the asymmetric heterostructure when compared to the symmetric heterostructure. The improved uniformity of the built-in field at the EG/MoS2 interface (Figure 1(d)) allows for efficient charge separation and an improved electronic conduction through the entire heterostructure system, as evidenced by >10× increase in the 5 measured photocurrent compared to the asymmetric device (See supplementary section S.1). This trend is observed in all tested devices, spanning different samples, and directly corroborates our previous work where EG has been shown to be a better contact to semiconducting MoS2 compared to conventional metals.33 Semi-local density-functional theory (DFT) predicts the Schottky barrier at the EG/MoS2 interface to be ~2 lower than Ti/MoS2. Prediction of the Schottky barrier from first-principles necessitates, initially, calculations of work functions (φ) of the individual components – pristine graphene (φgr), MoS2 (φMoS2), and Ti (φTi) – and the relaxed heterointerfaces (φEG/MoS2, φTi/MoS2), summarized in Table 1. In this case, however, the work function of epitaxial graphene on SiC substrate, referred to as EG (φEG) is dominated by the intrinsic polarization in the SiC substrate, necessitating consideration of the SiC work function (φSiC). Previous first-principles calculations suggest work functions of undoped graphene, MoS2, and Ti to be 4.23 eV, 4.05 eV, and 4.38 eV, respectively.56–58 Here the trend is similar, but the absolute value is consistently lower by ~0.3 eV due to different parameterizations of the exchange-correlation functionals and van der Waals corrections in other works. Since the choice of parameterizations affect the absolute values of the work function but not the relative differences between them, the barrier calculations are considered accurate. φgr and φSiC differ by ~0.15 eV, leading to an equilibrium φEG that is calculated from the SiC/EG interfacial dipole as 3.99 eV.59 alternate DFT functionals is included in Supplementary S.2. The total voltage drop Δφ across the junction is defined as Δφ = φEG − φEG/MoS2, leading to Δφ = 0.45 V and 0.81 V for EG/MoS2 and Ti/MoS2, respectively. To calculate the height of the Schottky barrier (φB), we apply a technique developed for semiconductor interfaces, known to take into account Fermi level pinning60,61 (See supplementary section S.2): φB = εε0 2e0Nd | dφ dz (zc)| 2 (Equation 1) where φ is the electric potential of the equilibrium interface along the z-axis perpendicular to the plane of the interface, e0 is the electron charge, Nd is the three-dimensional defect density in the semiconductor, ε Material Work function (eV) Pristine graphene (φgr) 3.92 MoS2 (φMoS2) 3.78 SiC (φSiC) 4.06 Ti (φTi) 4.02 EG on SiC (φEG) 3.99 EG/MoS2 interface (φEG/MoS2) 3.55 Ti/MoS2 interface (φTi/MoS2) 3.21 6 and ε0 are the dielectric constant of MoS2 (ε = 4.3)62 and the vacuum permittivity, respectively. zc is the location along the transverse axis marking the transition between the quantum mechanical region of the interface model and the one-dimensional continuum (Mott-Schottky) description of the bulk semiconductor; zc is located two layers within the semiconductor to fully capture the effects of the interface before transitioning to a bulk model. The only unknown in equation 1 is Nd. Following the method of Kim et al.,63 we use the density that produces the best fit with the experimental nano-ARPES shown later, Nd = 4 x 1012 cm-3. The Schottky barrier of the EG/MoS2 interface is predicted to be 0.44 eV. This compares favorably with the previous predictions (0.4 eV) for undoped graphene/MoS2 junction,64 and reasonably with the prediction of 0.6 eV by Jin et al., using many-body perturbation (G0W0) calculations and a single monolayer of both graphene and MoS2.65 A notable feature of the EG/MoS2 interface in this study is the high fraction of Δφ compensated by the Schottky barrier at the interface. One explanation is that atomically “clean” interfaces, such as the EG/MoS2, have less covalent and ionic bonds and thus lower surface states, causing a larger fraction of potential offset Δφ to be taken up by the Schottky barrier φB. In contrast, the Schottky barrier of the Ti/MoS2 interface is predicted to be 0.79 eV. The voltage drop due to surface states at the interface barrier is ~2 larger for Ti/MoS2 than for EG/MoS2, due to increased charge trapping at the interface, indicating a rougher interfacial contact with more ionic and covalent bonds. The ionic and covalent nature of the interfaces was confirmed with Bader analysis, see supplementary section S.2 for details. calculations. (c) Diagram of the potential across the EG/MoS2 heterointerface. The interfacial potential difference ∆φ is compensated by a potential drop at the interface (calculated from semi-local DFT) and by a Schottky barrier φB (calculated using DFT-continuum embedding techniques; see , 61). The equilibrium voltage distribution is determined by self-consistently matching the final work functions of the doped graphene and the interface. (d) The same diagram as in panel (c), showing a higher value of predicted Schottky barrier at the Ti/MoS2 interface. (e) 7 Experimental Schottky barriers extracted using Arrhenius plots from temperature-dependent gated current measurements (I-V-T) show a lower value of the Schottky barrier at the EG/MoS2 interface as compared to the Ti/MoS2 interface. Temperature dependent gated current (I-V-T) measurements validate Schottky barrier predictions for EG contacted MoS2 and Ti/Au metal contacted MoS2. Electrostatic double layer (EDL) gating is implemented in a helium-cooled cryostat and the temperature range used is 3-300K and the gate voltage (Vg) range used is -2.5V to +2.5V. The Arrhenius equation is used to extract the apparent Schottky barrier heights for the two structures (See supplementary section S.3 for further details). EG/MoS2 heterostructure interface is shown to have a reduced Schottky barrier as compared to Ti/Au contacted MoS2 in Figure 2(e) – this result corroborates the photocurrent measurements and the theory calculations of Schottky barrier heights. The difference in the experimental and predicted values is due to the complex interaction of the non-ideal materials with their substrates and dielectric environments. For instance, while we do see significant covalent bonding and intermixing at the Ti/MoS2 interface in our calculations, previous literature has found a large interlayer of Ti and MoS2 which is computationally prohibitive to predict.66 This may lead to an increase in the predicted Fermi level pinning at this interface and a decrease in the predicted Schottky barrier. Having established that the EG/MoS2 heterointerface is more efficient for charge separation via spatially resolved photocurrent measurements and Schottky barrier extraction, it is essential to understand the specific movement of charge carriers at the EG/MoS2 heterointerface. Angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy with selected spatial resolution of ~300 nm (nano-ARPES) visualizes spatial variation in electronic band structures at the EG/MoS2 heterostructure interface to understand the photo-generated charge transfer. A lower Schottky barrier at the photo-active EG/MoS2 interface is coupled with a uniform built-in electric field aiding efficient charge separation. The spatial variations in the electronic band structure across the lateral EG/MoS2/EG interface (as shown in Figure 3(a)) are investigated at steady state by means of synchrotron-based nano-ARPES. The lateral heterostructure in this experiment is intentionally not allowed to coalesce through the width of the channel between the EG, to enable the study of variations in the electronic structure with edges, where the X-ray probe is focused by a Fresnel zone plate and scanned across the sample. The ARPES band structure I(Ε, k) is measured at every spatial point coordinate (x,y) creating a 4-dimensional (4D) dataset; E is the binding energy referenced to the Fermi level and k is the in-plane momentum along the orientation of the analyzer entrance slit and I is the intensity of the obtained signal. See supplementary section S.4 for the schematic of the nano-ARPES setup. In this scanning mode, nano-ARPES is particularly suited for flat conductive samples, providing a well-defined surface normal, and thus a well-preserved momentum resolution. Room temperature nano-ARPES results obtained with 98 eV photons and an X-ray spot size of ~300 nm FWHM across the MoS2 channel are summarized in Figure 3. 8 heterostructure. The MoS2 nucleates from the edges of the EG and grows outwards. Hence, the darker triangular features are the MoS2 with the lighter region being the exposed SiC substrate. (b) and (c) show two E vs k ARPES band structure maps focusing specifically on EG and MoS2, respectively. (b1) and (c1) use the E vs k ARPES band structure maps shown in (b) and (c) to obtain the spatial distribution of EG and MoS2. Darker contrast corresponds to higher intensity. Upon overlaying (b1) and (c1), surface morphology similar to that in (a) is revealed. Since these measurements are made with separate instruments, we have found similar regions of the same sample but they are not specifically focuses on an uncoalesced region to see the spatial variation of the bands. (g) is a zoomed in version of (d) displaying an ~500 meV voltage drop from the EG/MoS2 interface to the center of the channel. (h) Band bending as predicted by first-principles calculations in white overlaid on the experimental nano ARPES results presented in states and a considerable Schottky barrier. The valence band maximum in MoS2 bends ~ 500 meV over a length scale of 2-3 μm from the edge of the EG/MoS2 junction to the center of the channel. Figure 3(b) and 3(c) show two ARPES measured E vs k band structure maps. A darker contrast indicates a higher intensity (scale bars for each panel is shown in supplementary section S.4). Figure 3(b) focuses on a sample region containing only graphene, showing the well characterized π-band that crosses the Fermi level at K. Using the 4D dataset to extract the total intensity from the (E,k) region that highlights this π-band (dark red dashed rectangle in Figure 3(b)), and plotting the result as a function of (x,y), the spatial distribution of graphene across the scanned sample area is obtained as shown in Figure 3(b1). Similarly, focusing on a region containing only MoS2 (Figure 3(c)), and integrating over (E,k) such as to only highlight MoS2 valence band states (blue rectangle in Figure 3(c)), we can reveal the distribution of MoS2 across the sample as shown in Figure 3(c1). Upon overlaying, on a similar channel in Figure 3(a). Since these measurements are made with separate instruments, we have found similar regions of the same sample but they are not exactly superimposable. The 5 μm channel etched in the EG is filled with triangles of MoS2. An EG/MoS2 heterostructure synthesized in this manner has an overlap of the MoS2 on the EG at the patterned edge for a length scale of ~200 nm, on the order of the nano- ARPES resolution, and consequently is thicker at the patterned edge.33 The intentionally non-coalesced lateral heterostructure system exhibits regions where the MoS2 bridges the channel, which serve to explore 9 band bending within the channel. Step edges on the SiC substrate are readily observed as lines with lighter contrast in Figure 3(b1). Corresponding dark lines in Figure 3(c1) shows the favorable nucleation of MoS2 at the step edges of EG, which are known to be thicker and more defective compared to the EG on the terraces.67 To understand how the electronic band structure changes at the EG/MoS2 heterostructure interface, we focus on the MoS2 valence band maximum (VBM) and observe how it bends upon moving away from the interface. Horizontal cuts at select y-values, with differing MoS2 coverage, are taken from and 3(f)) mapping the variation of the MoS2 VBM across the EG/MoS2/EG interface. Figure 3(g) is a close- up of Figure 3(d), where the variation of the VBM is seen along a cut (yellow line in Figure 3(c1)) where the channel is completely coalesced with MoS2. Here, it is observed that the VBM bends strongly downwards, from approximately -1.5 eV at the interface to -2 eV near the channel center. The screening at this position is isotropic (Figure 3(g)), leading to symmetric band bending with respect to the center of the channel. The band bending in Figure 3(e) is similar in magnitude but highly asymmetric, possibly as a result of anisotropic screening due to variation in domain sizes and growth modes in both directions. Figure 3(f) shows the cut along the green line in Figure 3(c1), where the MoS2 channel is not coalesced and the VBM is interrupted. The precise shape of the band bending is a function of the specific electrostatic environment, determined by coalescence in the channel as well as charge carrier screening from the EG and the SiC substrate. We assume a rigid band model and extrapolate the bending of the VBM observed via nano- ARPES to be the same as the bending of the conduction band minimum (CBM). The direction of band bending indicates that the electronic charges are transferred out from the MoS2 into the EG upon formation of the heterostructure, indicating the MoS2 donates electrons to the EG in order to attain equilibrium. This band bending is thus, a direct observation of the Schottky barrier at the EG/MoS2 lateral heterostructure interface. Density functional theory calculations can help interpret the spatial distribution of the potential at the EG/MoS2 heterostructure interface. Following the Schottky barrier calculations (Figure 2), the potential φ(x) within the semiconductor can be expressed as68: φ(x) = − e0Nd 2εε0 x2 − dφ dz (zc)x + φs + φ0 (Equation 2) where x is the distance from the EG/MoS2 interface, and φ0 is a constant to fulfill the boundary condition at the midpoint of the leftmost edge of the band region in Figure 3(g). The expected band bending is plotted over the experimental results in Figure 3(h). Since the MoS2 is symmetrically terminated on both sides with an EG junction, the band bending in Figure 3(h) is shown according to Equation 2 until the midpoint of the MoS2 region, and then the potential is symmetrically mirrored on the other side. In our calculations, with only ~2.5 μm of space on each side for the potential to decrease, the dopant density is not high enough to reach the theoretically predicted height of the Schottky barrier, instead only forming a barrier of 0.38 eV. This leads to some uncertainty in whether the overall potential should be shifted slightly down to match the Fermi level of the EG, but the range of uncertainty nevertheless is small compared to the extent of the observed band regions. The agreement of the theoretical potential with its nano-ARPES counterpart at the carrier concentration of 4 x 1012 cm-3 strongly indicates that the synthesized interface is atomically clean with a low density of defects. This work highlights the capabilities of first-principles methods to understand behaviors at semiconductor junctions and facilitate the interpretation of experiments, providing physical insights and predictive trends. 10 Conclusion EG/MoS2/EG symmetric heterostructure has >10× larger photocurrent at the EG/MoS2 interfaces, as compared to metal/MoS2/EG asymmetric heterostructure, with a uniform built-in field through the length of the symmetric heterostructure device. The electronic Schottky barrier at the EG/MoS2 interface is predicted to be ~2 lower than Ti/MoS2using DFT, corroborated by experimental I-V-T measurements. To further understand the transfer of photo-generated charge at the EG/MoS2 interface, spatial variations of electronic bands are investigated using nano-ARPES. The valence band maximum in MoS2 bends ~500 meV over a length scale of 2-3 μm, matching theoretical calculations. This comprehensive understanding of the photo-physics and optoelectronic properties of the EG/MoS2 lateral heterostructure system can be extrapolated to other systems in order to build a library of photo-active heterostructure interfaces with properties tailored for specific optoelectronic applications. We have highlighted the utility of first-principles calculations to interpret the electrical response at heterostructure interfaces. The photocurrent measurements presented here are demonstrated to be a simple probe to measure the electronic uniformity of the synthesized lateral heterostructure interfaces. This simple probe-based technique can be adopted easily by the 2D materials’ growth community in order to check for electronic uniformity at domain boundaries of synthesized 2D materials and heterostructures over large areas alongside morphological uniformity. Methods Sample preparation: The method of sample preparation is the same as in our previous publications.33,69 EG is grown at 1800 oC in a three-phase, hot-zone, graphite furnace via silicon sublimation from the 6H SiC(0001) face. It is then patterned using standard ultraviolet photolithography, and a mixture of oxygen and argon (O2/Ar) is used for a reactive ion etch to remove the EG outside of the patterns, leaving behind periodically spaced graphene rectangles of fixed length (5 μm), that ultimately constitute the contacts to the MoS2 channel. Powder vaporization in a horizontal quartz tube furnace is used to synthesize MoS2 at 800 oC just outside the graphene rectangles, using 2-3 mg of molybdenum trioxide (MoO3) powder and 200 mg sulfur (S) as the precursors. Following the synthesis of EG/MoS2 lateral heterostructure, an SF6/O2 reactive ion etch is used to isolate the MoS2 between the graphene electrodes. Contact regions are then lithographically patterned, briefly exposed to an O2 plasma, and Ti/Au (5/15 nm) metal is deposited via electron-beam evaporation, followed by lift off in PRS 3000 photoresist remover. Ti is evaporated onto the sample at a vaccum of ~ 10-9 Torr in an electron beam evaporation chamber at a rate of ~ 0.5 Ǻ/s upto a thickness of ~ 5 nm. Au is then evaporated at the rate of ~ 1 Ǻ/s upto a thickness of ~ 20 nm. The sample chuck is cooled to 0 oC during the entire deposition process. Photocurrent measurements: We measure the photocurrent by scanning a tunable Ar/Kr laser at 488 nm (2.54 eV) across the area of the investigated lateral heterojunctions with piezo stages. The laser is focused on the heterojunctions by a 100× Mitutoyo Plan Apo objective (f = 200 mm) to a diffraction limited spot size of ~ 0.8 μm (FWHM). The resulting photocurrent at each point is measured by a succession of a current preamplifier (Ithaco 1211) at a sensitivity of 10-7 A/V and a digital multimeter (Agilent 34401A). All measurements are performed in vacuum (10−6 mbar) at room temperature. The SiC substrate does not contribute to the photocurrent at the wavelength of the laser utilized. 11 Computational Details: We utilize the plane-wave Density Functional Theory code QUANTUM- ESPRESSO.70 We create 4 layer thick slabs of each material as shown in Fig. 2, which was determined to be sufficient to converge the Fermi energy to 50 meV. We utilize Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange-correlation functionals71 with norm conserving Vanderbilt pseudopotentials from the PseudoDojo library, for all the calculations in the main text.72 For comparison in Table S.2.1, we also use PBEsol,73 PZ,74 and PW9175 PAW pseudopotentials from the PSLibrary.76 We sample the Brillioun zone with a 4 x 4 x 1 Monkhorst-Pack grid and 0.0001 Ry of Marzari-Vanderbilt smearing.77 We select wavefunction and charge density kinetic energy cutoffs of 50 Ry and 200 Ry, respectively. By aligning the potential of the vacuum region to zero, we can obtain the wavefunction of different slabs as the negative of the Fermi level (i.e. φ = −εF). We follow the procedure outlined in the text to obtain the Schottky barrier of the material, see supplementary section S2 for a summarized procedure. The slabs and interface were generated using the pymatgen utility.78 I-V-T measurements: Electrostatic double layer (EDL) gating is implemented in an Oxford Optistat closed- cycle helium cooled pulse tube cryostat using (PEO)76:CsClO4 as the electrolyte with mobile ions, allowing the I-V-T measurements in the temperature range of 3-300K. Biasing the EG/MoS2/EG and metal/MoS2/EG channel (Vds) and biasing the gate (Vg) is both performed with a dual-channel Keysight B2912A Precision Source/Measure Unit. In order to arrest the mobile ions in the electrolyte dielectric at a certain gate voltage, the Vg is applied at room temperature and then the system was cooled down to 3K. The temperature is slowly raised in steps of 5K until 300K and source-drain current (Ids) was measured at each temperature at a fixed Vds of 100 mV. The Vg is then increased by 0.5V and the measurement cycle is repeated. A side gate geometry is implemented. Nano-ARPES: Angle-resolved photoemission intensity maps were recorded using a focused synchrotron beam and a Scienta R4000 analyzer at the MAESTRO beamline of the Advanced Light Source. A Fresnel zone plate was used to focus the beam. The zone plate used in the experiments allows a minimum spot size of 120 nm. For ARPES, the photon energy was set to Eph = 98 eV, the detector resolution was 125 meV, the entrance slit width and height were 50 μm and the sample was held at room temperature. From the nano- ARPES maps, we determined a spatial resolution of ~300 nm for the measurements presented. The base pressure during the measurements was below 10−11 mbar. ARPES was conducted on the same samples as discussed in Ref 69.69 The samples were synthesized ex situ (as detailed in Ref 33),33 exposed to ambient conditions, and then transferred into the nano-ARPES chamber. Prior to the X-ray measurements, the samples were annealed at 100 °C under vacuum for 30 min to remove surface adsorbates. Acknowledgments S.S. and J.A.R. acknowledge the funding from NSF CAREER (Award: 1453924). S.M. acknowledges support by the Swiss National Science Foundation (Grant No. P300P2-171221). This research used resources of the Advanced Light Source, which is a DOE Office of Science User Facility under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231. P.S. acknowledges financial support from the Alexander von Humboldt foundation and the German federal ministry of education and research within the Feodor Lynen program. D.S. acknowledges funding from the National Science Foundation via award number EFMA 1433378 and EFMA 1433307. H.A.S. was supported by the EXPEC Advanced Research Center, Petroleum Engineering and Development Department at Saudi Aramco. D.W. and R.M.F.’s contribution was supported in part by the Center for Low Energy Systems Technology (LEAST), one of six centers of STARnet, a Semiconductor Research Corporation program sponsored by MARCO and DARPA. I.D. acknowledges the financial 12 support from the National Science Foundation under Grant No. DMREF- 1729338. U.W. was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) under Germany’s Excellence Strategy – EXC 2089/1 – 390776260. This work was performed, in part, at the Center for Integrated Nanotechnologies, an Office of Science User Facility operated for the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Science. Sandia National Laboratories is a multimission laboratory managed and operated by National Technology & Engineering Solutions of Sandia, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of Honeywell International, Inc., for the U.S. DOE’s National Nuclear Security Administration under contract DE-NA- 0003525. The views expressed in the article do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. DOE or the United States Government.