Revealing Hidden Orbital Pseudospin Texture with Time-Reversal Dichroism in Photoelectron Angular Distributions S. Beaulieu1,∗ J. Schusser2,3, S. Dong1, M. Schüler4, T. Pincelli1, M. Dendzik1,5, J. Maklar1, A. Neef1, H. Ebert6, K. Hricovini2,7, M. Wolf1, J. Braun6, L. Rettig1, J. Minár3,† and R. Ernstorfer1‡ 1Fritz-Haber-Institut der Max-Planck-Gesellschaft, Faradayweg 4-6, 14195 Berlin, Germany 2Laboratoire de Physique des Matériaux et Surfaces, CY Cergy Paris Université, 95031 Cergy-Pontoise, France 3New Technologies-Research Center, University of West Bohemia, 30614 Pilsen, Czech Republic 4Stanford Institute for Materials and Energy Sciences (SIMES), SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA 5Department of Applied Physics, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Hannes Alfvéns väg 12, 114 19 Stockholm, Sweden 6Department Chemie, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Butenandtstrasse 11, 81377 München, Germany 7LIDYL, CEA, CNRS (UMR 9222), Université Paris-Saclay, CEA Saclay, F-91191, Gif-sur-Yvette Cedex, France (Dated: August 28, 2020) We performed angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) of bulk 2H-WSe2 for different crystal orientations linked to each other by time-reversal symmetry. We introduce a new observable called time-reversal dichroism in photoelectron angular distributions (TRDAD), which quantifies the modulation of the photoemission intensity upon effective time-reversal operation. We demonstrate that the hidden orbital pseudospin texture leaves its imprint onto TRDAD, due to multiple orbitals interference effects in photoemission. Our experimental results are in quantitative agreement with both tight-binding model and state-of-the-art fully relativistic calculations performed using the one- step model of photoemission. While spin-resolved ARPES probes the spin component of entangled spin-orbital texture in multiorbital systems, we unambiguously demonstrate that TRDAD reveals its orbital pseudospin texture counterpart. Locking between spin and valley degrees of freedom emerges in solids possessing a combined broken inversion symmetry and strong spin-orbit coupling, leading to pe- culiar valley dependent spin texture in momentum-space. This spin-valley locking leads to optical selection rules allowing for the generation of spin- and valley-polarized excited carriers [1–3], which can be used for all-optical selective spin injection . In multiorbital systems, additional locking between crystal momentum and or- bital degree of freedom emerges as a consequence of band hybridization, leading to complex entangled spin-orbital textures, as predicted in some topological insulators (TIs) , two-dimensional electron gases (2DEGs) and transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs). The result- ing momentum-space orbital texture can lead to orbital Hall effect (OHE) , orbital Rashba effect , and the emergence of orbital Hall insulating phases . Orbi- tronics , i.e. encoding (quantum) information in the orbital degree of freedom, can be seen as a newly emerg- ing field, in analogy to spin- and valleytronics . TMDC monolayers are emblematic materials with en- tangled spin, orbital and valley degrees of freedom. In a minimal electronic structure model of TMDC monolayers , the valence band at the Brillouin zone boundary (K/K’ points) can be described by ∗ beaulieu@fhi-berlin.mpg.de † jminar@ntc.zcu.cz ‡ ernstorfer@fhi-berlin.mpg.de |ψK/K′ k bel VB1 and VB2 represented the two first spin-orbit split valence bands and where |d±2⟩ = [|dx2−y2⟩ ± i|dxy⟩]/ √ 2. While the spin texture is determined by the momentum-dependent spin state, the orbital tex- ture is set by the momentum-dependent orbital pseu- dospin, defined as σK/K′ i (k) = ⟨ψK/K′ k |ˆσi|ψK/K′ k ⟩, where ˆσi (i = x, y, z) is the Pauli operator , and where x, y are in-plane and z out-of-plane coordinates (normal to the surface). K and K’ valleys are related to each other via the time- reversal operator, i.e ˆT|ψK k ⟩ = |ψK′ k ⟩. In TMDC mono- layers, swapping valley indexes (time-reversal) thus re- verses both the spin and orbital textures. In bulk-TMDC of 2H polytype, the adjacent layers are rotated by 180◦ with respect to each other, leading to opposite and al- ternating local spin polarization and orbital texture be- tween neighboring layers. This peculiar layered struc- ture naturally introduces the concept of "hidden" spin and orbital texture, which exists within each layer, but vanishes in the bulk, i.e. when the inversion-symmetry of the crystal is restored . Probing such "hidden" physi- cal properties is experimentally challenging. While spin- and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy is now a well established surface sensitive technique to investigate hidden spin texture [18–20], an experimental technique allowing to selectively and directly probe hidden orbital texture has not been established. In this Letter, we perform extreme ultraviolet (XUV) arXiv:2006.01657v2 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 27 Aug 2020 2 angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) of bulk 2H-WSe2 for crystal orientations rotated by α = 60◦ with respect to each others (R60◦) effectively acting as the time-reversal operator ( ˆT): R60◦|ψK k ⟩ ≡ ˆT|ψK k ⟩ = |ψK′ k ⟩. We introduce a novel observable, time-reversal dichroism in photoelectron angular distributions (TR- DAD), which probes the modulation of the photoemis- sion intensity upon time-reversal, and which is shown to be sensitive to the orbital pseudospin texture, due to multiple orbitals interference effects in photoemission. We show that TRDAD is free of any spurious contribu- tion from experimental geometry, which typically compli- cates the interpretation of the (linear or circular) dichro- ism in ARPES. Our experimental results are in quan- titative agreement with state-of-the-art fully relativis- tic Korringa-Kohn-Rostoker (KKR) ab initio calculations performed using the one-step model of photoemission and with a tight-binding model, which allows us to investigate the microscopic origins of TRDAD. While we introduce this novel observable using the emblematic bulk 2H-WSe2 crystal, our conclusions are fully general and TRDAD can be used to probe (hidden) orbital tex- ture in any multiorbital systems. The experimental apparatus features a table-top fem- tosecond (fs) XUV (21.7 eV, 110 meV FWHM band- width) beamline coupled to a time-of-flight mo- mentum microscope spectrometer (METIS 1000, SPECS GmbH), see Fig. 1(a). This detector allows for simul- taneous detection of the full first Brillouin zone, over an extended binding energy range, without the need to rear- range the sample geometry . More details about the experimental setup can be found elsewhere and in the SM. As shown in Fig. 1 (b)-(e), we recorded the 3D photoemission intensity for two different crys- tal orientations, rotated by 60◦ with respect to each other. Looking at the experimentally measured con- stant energy contours (CECs) for energy E − EVBM = -0.25 eV, one can see that the photoemission intensity is strongly anisotropic around each K/K’ valley, describ- ing "croissant"-shaped patterns. This has been recently explained as originating from interference between pho- toelectrons emitted from the transition metal d-type or- bitals . The azimuthal variation of the photoemission intensity around K/K’ points, i.e. the orientation of the "croissant", changes upon rotation of the crystal by 60◦. A modification of the momentum-resolved photoemission intensity upon time-reversal can also be seen for larger binding energies in Fig. 1 (d)-(e). Dichroism in the angular distribution (both linear, LDAD, and circular, CDAD) are powerful quantities re- lying on the modulation of the photoemission transition dipole matrix element upon the change of the ionizing radiation polarization state. CDAD has been used to probe electronic chirality in graphene , helical spin texture in topological insulator and Berry curvature in TMDCs , for example. LDAD is typically as- sumed to encode the non-relativistic symmetry of the ground state wavefunction [32–34], which can contain in- Modulation of the photoemission intensity upon time-reversal ( ˆT): (a) Scheme of the experimen- tal setup: a p-polarized fs-XUV (21.7 eV) pulse is focused onto a bulk 2H-WSe2 crystal at an angle of incidence of 65◦ with respect to the surface normal, ejecting photoelec- trons which are detected by a time-of-flight momentum mi- croscope. (b)-(c) Scheme of the experimental geometry and spin-orbital texture: the scattering plane (light purple plane) coincides with the crystal mirror plane (M, green dashed line), which is along the Γ-M high symmetry direc- tion. The spin-orbital texture is schematically represented by the orbitals and the up/down spin state at each K/K’ val- leys. A 60◦ azimuthal rotation of the crystal (R60◦) yields the transformation of K to K’ valley (and vice-versa), and is analogue to the action of the time-reversal operator; i.e. R60◦|ψK k ⟩ ≡ ˆT|ψK k ⟩ = |ψK′ k ⟩. (d)-(e) Constant energy con- tours for different energies, E − EVBM, measured for the two different crystal orientations described above (I0◦ and I60◦). The radius of each constant energy contour corresponds to 1.6 Å−1. formation about the orbital texture . However, dichroism can also have an extrinsic origin, i.e. it can also emerges from experimental geometry induced symmetry breaking. Disentangling the intrinsic and extrinsic con- tribution to the dichroic signal is very challenging, but of fundamental importance to extract meaningful physical insight from it. Using our multidimensional detection scheme with the p-polarized fs-XUV pulses incident in the kx-kz plane (and along Γ-M/M’), the normalized intensity differ- ences between the forward (Iα(kx, ky, EB)) and back- 3 photoelectron angular distributions (TRDAD): (a)- (b) I0◦ and I60◦, the constant energy concours (CECs) for E − EVBM = -1.60 eV, measured for two crystal orientations rotated by 60◦ with respect to each others. (c) ∆I/I, the raw normalized difference, i.e. (I0◦ - I60◦)/(I0◦ + I60◦) between LDAD and A60◦ LDAD, the “left-right asymmetries”, reflect the photoemission inten- sity asymmetry between the kx <0 and kx >0 hemispheres, for two crystal orientations, respectively, and are calculated using Eq. 1. (f) TRDAD (calculated using Eq. 2) represents the component of A0◦/60◦ LDAD which is antisymmetric upon time- reversal (i.e. upon 60◦ azimuthal rotation of the crystal). ward (Iα(−kx, ky, EB)) hemisphere, i.e. the linear dichro- ism asymmetry in the photoelectron angular distribution (Aα LDAD(kx, ky, EB)), can be extracted (see Eq. 1), with- out the need to rearrange the sample geometry or the light-polarization state . Aα LDAD = Iα(kx, ky, EB) − Iα(−kx, ky, EB) Iα(kx, ky, EB) + Iα(−kx, ky, EB) (1) Looking at A0◦ LDAD and A60◦ LDAD (Fig. 2(d)-(e)), one can notice that some features of the dichroism are in- variant upon time-reversal, while others show antisym- metric behavior (sign flip). This can be understood by the fact that the contribution to the dichroism origi- nating from experimental geometry remains unchanged upon 60◦ rotation of the crystal. Moreover, depending on the energy-momentum region of the electronic struc- ture sampled in each experimental data voxel, the associ- ated ground state wavefunction might be invariant upon time-reversal. For example, the dichroism emerging from the branches pointing along Γ-M/M’ high symmetry di- rection, which is of multiorbital character (|px⟩ ± i|py⟩), switch sign upon crystal rotation. On the other hand, the dichroism emerging from the hexagonal-shaped band surrounding the Γ-point, which is mostly of single orbital character (|pz⟩), does not. Comparison between experimentally mea- sured and theoretically (KKR) calculated TRDAD. In the upper hemisphere of each panel, the raw photoemission intensity, and in the lower hemisphere, TRDAD. (a)-(d) Ex- perimentally measured photoemission intensity and TRDAD. (e)-(i) Calculated photoemission intensity and TRDAD. (a) 0.75 eV, , (c) and (g) E − EVBM = -1.60 eV and (d) and (i) E − EVBM = -2.07 eV. The radius of each constant energy contour corresponds to 1.6 Å−1. The new observable that we introduce, called time- reversal dichroism in the photoelectron angular distribu- tions (TRDAD), allows to isolate the antisymmetric part of the ALDAD dichroism upon time-reversal, in order to remove any spurious contributions from experimental ge- ometry. TRDAD is defined as, TRDAD = Aα LDAD − Aα′ LDAD 2 (2) where crystal rotation by an angle α-α′ (Rα−α′) is equivalent to time-reversal, i.e. Rα−α′ ≡ ˆT. The result- ing TRDAD is shown in Fig. 2(f). The branches pointing along Γ-M have opposite ALDAD with respect to adjacent valleys and dominates the signal, while the signature of the hexagonal-shaped band surrounding the Γ-point has disappeared. Indeed, a non-vanishing TRDAD signal im- plies that the state-resolved dichroism changes sign upon time-reversal operation, which we interpret as a switch of the orbital texture. To investigate the microscopic origin of TRDAD, we perform state-of-the-art quantitative one-step photoe- mission calculations based on fully relativistic density functional theory (DFT). The one-step model of photoe- mission is implemented in the fully relativistic Korringa- Kohn-Rostoker (KKR) method. The calculated photoe- mission signal is layer-resolved and includes all matrix element effects such as experimental geometry, photon energy, polarization state, and final state effects (see SM and refs. ). The striking similarity between experimental and the- oretical results (Fig. 3) confirms that the KKR method accurately describes the ground state properties of bulk 2H-WSe2 in an extended binding energy range and cap- tures well subtleties of the photoemission process, in- cluding multiorbital interference effects. Now that the 4 ability of the KKR method to quantitatively reproduce the experimentally measured signals is established, we want to strengthen our assert that TRDAD in XUV pho- toemission probes hidden physical quantities, i.e. quan- tities that are non-vanishing in each constituent layers but that are vanishing in its inversion-symmetric coun- terpart (bulk). To do so, we investigated the atomic- layer-resolved photocurrent and associated TRDAD. In Fig. 4(a), the photoemission intensity and associated TR- DAD emerging from all layers (bulk) are presented. The outer (VB1) and inner (VB2) bands around each K/K’ valleys show very similar dichroism, i.e. the same pos- itive/negative (red/blue) TRDAD patterns. While the TRDAD signal coming from the topmost selenium (Se) atomic layer (Fig. 4(b)) is strongly different from the full calculation (Fig. 4(a)), including the photocurrent from the first tungsten (W) layer (Fig. 4(c)) is already enough to almost perfectly reproduce all features of the full calcu- lation, which is in good agreement with the predicted W d-type orbitals nature of the valence band at K/K’ points. These calculations unambiguously confirm that TRDAD probes hidden physical quantities, which are modulated upon time-reversal. Next, we want to fully disentangle the signatures of spin and orbital textures in TRDAD. To do so, we have investigated the photoemission intensity and associated TRDAD in both the fully relativistic and non-relativistic limit (vanishing spin-orbit coupling (SOC)). Indeed, SOC is at the origin of the hidden spin-polarization of the two topmost valence bands at K/K’, and thus of the emer- gence of the peculiar spin texture in 2H-TMDCs. In the limit where SOC vanishes (non-relativistic limit), the two oppositely spin-polarized topmost valence bands at K/K’ are merging together, leading to the annihilation of the spin-polarization, but to a conservation of the orbital tex- ture. Because the dominant relativistic corrections scale with 1/c2, where c is the speed of light, a straightforward theoretical approach to go from the fully relativistic to the non-relativistic limit, and thus to modify the strength of SOC, is to modulate the speed of light. In Fig. 4(e), one can see that in the fully relativistic case, the topmost valence band at K/K’ are spin-orbit-split, and have sim- ilar TRDAD patterns, already suggesting its sensitivity to orbital texture. Strikingly, the non-relativistic TR- DAD from the degenerate band at K/K’ is identical to the dichroism of the associated topmost valence band in the fully relativistic case. This observation is a smoking- gun evidence that TRDAD is a powerful probe of the hidden orbital texture, which exists even in the absence of spin-orbit coupling and thus of spin texture. Last, to get a more intuitive and comprehensive pic- ture of the origin of TRDAD, we employ a third-nearest neighbor tight-binding (TB) model , which provides an excellent description of the electronic structure of 2H- WSe2 close to the K/K’ points. As shown in Fig. 5(a), the TB model, for energies close to the valence band max- imum, qualitatively reproduces the measured TRDAD. Our TB analysis unambiguously confirms that TRDAD croscopic origin of the time-reversal dichroism . In the upper panels, we study the atomic-layer resolved pho- tocurrent and associated TRDAD. The signal is coming from Se and W atomic layers (Se-W), and (d) first Se and W, and second Se atomic layers (Se-W-Se). In the lower panels, we investigate the role of spin-orbit coupling on the photocurrent and associated TRDAD, by going from the fully relativistic to the non-relativistic limit, upon modulating the speed of light in the calculations. (e) For ’standard’ speed of light enhanced speed of light, 1/c2=0.5, 1/c2=0.25, and 1/c2=10−3 (non-relativistic limit), respectively. All the constant energy contours are taken at E − EVBM = -0.75 eV, and their radii correspond to 1.6 Å−1. originates from interference between |dz2⟩ and |d±2⟩ or- bitals, which is characterized by the orbital pseudospin texture (see SM). Moreover, as shown in Fig. 5(b)-(c), TRDAD is directly linked to the projection of the in- plane orbital pseudospin (black arrows) along the direc- tion of the orbital vector field, which can be derived from the photoemission matrix elements (magenta arrows, see SM for details). Indeed, when the orbital pseudospin and the magenta arrow are parallel (anti-parallel) TRDAD is positive (negative), while it vanishes when they are orthogonal. Our tight-binding analysis thus provides a direct relationship between the experimentally measured TRDAD and the orbital pseudospin texture, a quantity of paramount importance in the emergence of Berry cur- vature and topological properties of matter. In conclusion, we have introduced a novel and fully general robust observable in angle-resolved photoemis- sion spectroscopy called time-reversal dichroism in pho- toelectron angular distributions (TRDAD), which probes the modulation of the photoemission intensity upon crys- tal rotation mimicking time-reversal. We have demon- strated that the hidden orbital pseudospin texture of pro- 5 ture using a tight-binding framework. (a) TRDAD for an energy E − EVBM = −0.20 eV computed using the tight- binding formalism described in the SM. (b), (c) TRDAD and in-plane orbital pseudospin (black arrows) around the K and K’ valleys, respectively. The magenta dashed arrow repre- sents the orientation of the orbital vector field, which can be derived from the photoemission matrix elements (more details can be found in the SM). As shown in Eq. 7 of the SM, when the pseudospin texture is parallel/anti-parallel to the orbital vector field, we get a positive/negative signal, while TRDAD vanish if they are orthogonal. This relationship provides a di- rect link between the experimentally measured TRDAD and the in-plane orbital pseudospin. totypical bulk 2H-WSe2 leaves its imprint onto TRDAD through the multiorbital interference process in photoe- mission. This robust observable is free of contributions from experimental geometry, and is extremely stable against variation of the photon energy, on the contrary to most conventional dichroic ARPES signals, e.g. CDAD (see SM). Similar to the role of spin-resolved ARPES to experimentally elucidate complex momentum-space spin texture, we envision that TRDAD could emerge as the new standard observable to probe peculiar momentum- space orbital texture in complex multiorbital materials. Moreover, the extension of the approach to time-resolved TRDAD experiments is conceptually straightforward and will give access to the orbital texture of excited states and changes of topological properties of out-of-equilibrium states of matter, on ultrafast timescales [39–43]. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS