Workflows in AiiDA: Engineering a high-throughput, event-based engine for robust and modular computational workflows Martin Uhrin,1, 2 Sebastiaan P. Huber,1, ∗ Jusong Yu,3 Nicola Marzari,1 and Giovanni Pizzi1 1Theory and Simulation of Materials (THEOS), and National Centre for Computational Design and Discovery of Novel Materials (MARVEL), École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland 2Department of Energy Conversion and Storage, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby DK-2800, Denmark 3Department of Physics, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, China (Dated: 2020-07-22) Over the last two decades, the field of computational science has seen a dramatic shift towards incorporating high-throughput computation and big-data analysis as fundamental pillars of the scientific discovery process. This has necessitated the development of tools and techniques to deal with the generation, storage and processing of large amounts of data. In this work we present an in- depth look at the workflow engine powering AiiDA, a widely adopted, highly flexible and database- backed informatics infrastructure with an emphasis on data reproducibility. We detail many of the design choices that were made which were informed by several important goals: the ability to scale from running on individual laptops up to high-performance supercomputers, managing jobs with runtimes spanning from fractions of a second to weeks and scaling up to thousands of jobs concurrently, and all this while maximising robustness. In short, AiiDA aims to be a Swiss army knife for high-throughput computational science. As well as the architecture, we outline important API design choices made to give workflow writers a great deal of liberty whilst guiding them towards writing robust and modular workflows, ultimately enabling them to encode their scientific knowledge to the benefit of the wider scientific community. I. INTRODUCTION As developments in computational power have steadily and tremendously increased over the past few decades, so with them the field of computational science. Digital ap- plications have become increasingly complex and often comprise an intricate combination of scientific computa- tional methods and data analysis. The sequence of steps in these applications is often encoded in a workflow and the need to automate these processes has led to an in- crease in the number of workflow management systems (WMS’s). A WMS provides the necessary functionality to define and subsequently execute workflows that essen- tially encode a sequence of data transformations1. In re- cent years, many WMS’s have been developed which have greatly simplified and streamlined the creation and anal- ysis of data. However, with these improvements come new challenges in managing the massive amounts of data that are produced. The most apparent challenge is finding an efficient method of storing the data itself. Although simple stor- age approaches can solve the problem of data persistence, they fail to address the question of data reproducibil- ity, which carries particular importance in the scientific method and plays a direct role in making data reusable, according to the FAIR Data Principles2. Indeed, the re- producibility of data can only be guaranteed if the prove- nance of data is treated with the same importance as the data itself, as it is the data’s provenance that enables its validation and verification3–6. Here, it is critical to realise that not only the data themselves, but also the workflows that create them should be part of the tracked provenance. As a consequence of this observation, ef- forts are underway to extend the FAIR Data Principles to workflows as well7. With the rate of data production made possible by modern technologies, it has become un- tenable to reconstruct the provenance of data a posteri- ori, calling for tools that automatically record it as it is created. Some WMS’s have started addressing this challenge, however, their data and workflow provenance guarantees are often insufficient to be able to retrace the origins of a piece of data or to recreate it. In this paper, we describe in detail the workflow sys- tem of AiiDA8, an open-source, high-throughput, scal- able computational infrastructure for automated repro- ducible workflows and data provenance, implemented in Python. While the design of AiiDA and its workflow system is generic enough to be applicable to any compu- tational, and potentially experimental, scientific domain, its origin and strengths lie in applications that make use of high-performance computing (HPC) systems. Users of these environments are often used to scripting, which is why the workflow engine of AiiDA provides a rich appli- cation programming interface (API), unlike the majority of WMS that provide a graphical user interface (GUI), such as Kepler9, Taverna10 and Triana11. An API pro- vides a more direct and seamless integration of the work- flow system with the simulation codes and data analysis tools that it manages and that are typically used on HPC systems. An additional benefit of an API-based workflow lan- guage and engine is that it allows the definition of dy- namic workflows, whose exact path is not pre-determined at runtime but evolves during execution based on the re- sults of completed steps. In AiiDA, for example, the code that defines a workflow is directly executed by the engine arXiv:2007.10312v2 [cs.DC] 21 Jul 2020 2 and there is no intermediate translation layer. The ma- jority of WMSs, however, interpret workflows that are defined through a static markup language such as XML in the case of Karajan12, custom XML derivatives such as Askalon’s13 AGWL14 or workflow specific standards such as the Common Workflow Language (CWL)15. Some of them may provide bindings to programming languages in order to define workflows through an API, such as Pegasus16, however, this is a mere pre-processing step as the workflows are still converted into a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) representation in XML, before being ex- ecuted by the workflow runner when launched. The big disadvantage of these document based workflow def- initions is that they are static, in the sense that the exact flow of the workflow needs to be known before it is executed17. The mechanism also naturally limits the available programming structures to DAGs or di- rected cyclic graphs (DCG), if loops are supported by the markup language. The recent Python-based workflow managers Signac18 and Parsl19 have chosen a different approach and rely on implicit dataflow to define and control workflows. In this model, new data operations, bound by data de- pendencies, are executed as those dependencies are full- filled by other data becoming available in the workspace. The Fireworks system20, which supports the definition of workflows through documents in JavaScript Object Notation21, has made important steps toward support- ing dynamic workflows. A workflow can insert new steps or spawn additional logical branches while it is running, based on intermediate results produced by previously completed steps. However, while this enables runtime- mutable workflows, specific mutations are bound by the constraints of the custom static JSON markup language through which they are defined. In contrast, workflows in AiiDA are implemented directly in Python and as such have all the dynamic expressiveness of a programming language directly at their disposal, as well as full access to the entire provenance graph with the data that is already stored in the database. This proves to be a very powerful mechanism to deal with, for example, the problem of er- ror handling when running high-throughput simulations. In the field of materials science specifically, other libraries and frameworks exist that provide advanced workflows with automated handling and recovery of errors encountered in ab-initio calculations, such as Aflow22, Atomate23, MAST24 and OQMD25. However, all of these are typically only compatible with one spe- cific ab-initio code (with some expanding support to oth- ers), whereas the ecosystem of density functional theory (DFT) features a great variety of popular codes26. By tightly coupling the WMS and the workflow implemen- tations themselves to any single or a few codes, inter- operability is naturally hamstrung. In stark contrast, the workflow system of AiiDA is completely agnostic of the external software that performs the computation and provides an integrated abstract interface for any simu- lation code, with built-in support for all major resource managing systems, such as PBSPro27, SLURM28, SGE29 and Torque30. Through its flexible plugin system, Ai- iDA allows any code to be made compatible via plugins, which are registered on the AiiDA registry31 and can be installed with a single command through the Python package manager pip32. With these considerations, the workflow system of Ai- iDA has been designed to satisfy the following criteria. The workflow system should (i) facilitate the definition of fully dynamic workflows, (ii) with an interface generic enough to support running arbitrary external codes, (iii) automatically store the full provenance of executed work- flows (iv) in a way that makes the data easily queryable while scaling towards exascale applications (v) with an overhead of the provenance storage that does not out- weigh the cost of the computational workflows them- selves. AiiDA’s workflow system can be roughly split into two components: the user interface (or API) that allows the users to implement workflows and interact with the provenance graph, and the engine that is responsible for automatically executing those workflows and storing the results. In this paper, we first describe the user interface followed by a technical description of the architecture and implementation of the engine. II. USER INTERFACE One of the main design goals of AiiDA’s workflow en- gine interface is to minimize the restrictions imposed on the developer, while simultaneously providing the tools that enable and stimulate the development of maintain- able, self-documenting, robust and modular workflows. When forcing interaction with the process engine through a specific API, the amount of functionality disposable to the user is intrinsically limited. To limit these restric- tions to the bare minimum, workflows in AiiDA are writ- ten directly in Python and the written code is directly executed by the engine, without translational layer. In this way, the workflow developer has direct access to the entire AiiDA API and all Python libraries, and is not dependent on a particular feature being exposed through a workflow-specific API. Moreover, in the field of com- putational science, Python is an abundant, thriving and well-supported language, which means that a lot of exist- ing code will naturally interface with AiiDA’s workflow engine without any additional custom development re- quired. On the other hand, not restricting the methods of workflow implementation could lead to a wide variety of solutions, which almost inevitably render them incom- patible and non-modular. To counteract this undesired phenomenon while maintaining full access to the AiiDA API, the workflow engine exposes various tools and con- structs to simplify the development of workflows and au- tomatically improve robustness and interoperability. In this section, these constructs will be explained in detail, covering their implementation and interface. 3 A final crucial consideration relates to the extent to which the maintenance of full data provenance, being the core principle of AiiDA, can be guaranteed by its engine. In giving the user almost unrestricted freedom in designing and developing workflows, perfect provenance cannot be guaranteed. As a compromise, the conditions under which provenance will be guaranteed by AiiDA, and conversely, how it will definitely be broken, need to be as simple and clear as possible to the user. The design mantra here is once more to restrict the user as little as possible and allow the breaking of data provenance if the user deems it necessary or justified. A. Process specification Any entity that can be run by AiiDA’s engine is named a process and should be implemented through the class Process. A process is defined as a set of logical instruc- tions, implemented in code, that operates on a set of inputs in order to produce certain outputs, with the pos- sibility of premature termination through known failure modes. Each Process defines its inputs, outputs and known failure modes through its specification, which is facilitated by the ProcessSpec class. 1. Ports and port namespaces Before diving into the details of how inputs and outputs are specified for a process through its pro- cess specification, we clarify the concept of ports and port namespaces. The inputs and outputs of a pro- cess share the common feature of being the gateways, or ports, through which data is ported in and out of the black box of a process. These ports can be further grouped or nested in port namespaces. The concepts of a port and a port namespace in AiiDA are implemented by the Port and PortNamespace classes, respectively. The PortNamespace is simply a container of Port in- stances, and given that it is itself a subclass of Port, PortNamespace instances can be nested within one an- other. Since the PortNamespace is implemented as a mapping, inserting and addressing members of the con- tainer is achieved through key referencing as with any other mapping in Python. Each Port instance has the following attributes: • valid_type: a tuple of accepted port value types, • validator: a custom validator function to validate the value passed to the port, • default: an optional default port value, • required: a boolean to indicate whether a port value is required, and, • non_db: a boolean to indicate whether the port requires a database storable type. In addition to these attributes, the PortNamespace has the dynamic attribute, which is a boolean to indicate whether the namespace can accept any values for ports that are not explicitly defined. The use case for this con- cept will become clear in a later section on workchains (see Sec.II B 3). When a Port or PortNamespace is val- idated, the validation of each port is called recursively, which includes verifying the type of the values passed with respect to the valid_type attribute and calling the validator function, if defined. A PortNamespace is con- sidered valid if and only if all of the ports nested within it, as well as itself, pass validation. By default, any input to a process should be a database storable type, as otherwise the provenance of the outputs generated by that process would be lost, violating a core principle of AiiDA. However, there are use cases where this isolated loss of provenance is acceptable and putting an absolute requirement on the storability of all inputs might be too restrictive. For this reason, the non_db at- tribute can be used to mark a port as not storable in the database. That is to say, any input that is passed through a port with non_db set to True will not be stored and linked as an input to the process node that is auto- matically created in the provenance graph when AiiDA executes the process. AiiDA makes use of this feature to allow defining various process metadata, such as a label or description, which are then not stored as actual input nodes, but directly as attributes of the process node. A user may also decide to use this feature if they deem a particular input as irrelevant for the provenance. 2. Inputs and outputs The inputs and outputs of a process are de- fined through its specification, as implemented by the ProcessSpec class. The ProcessSpec class contains two PortNamespace instances, accessible through the inputs and outputs attributes, that contain the input and out- put ports of the process, respectively. To define a new input or output port for a process, the ProcessSpec ex- poses two convenience methods: 1 spec = ProcessSpec () 2 spec.input('a', valid_type =Int , default=Int (2) , validator=is_positive_integer , required=True) 3 spec.output('b', valid_type =Float , default=Float ( -2.0) , validator=is_negative_float , required=True) Listing 1. The definition of an input and output port through the process specification. These two method calls result in the creation of an InputPort, stored in the inputs namespace under the key a, and an OutputPort, stored in the outputs names- pace under the key b, respectively. New input and output namespaces can be created similarly with the input_namespace and output_namespace methods, re- spectively, e.g.: 1 spec = ProcessSpec () 2 spec. input_namespace ('nested.input.namespace ') 4 3 spec. output_namespace ('some.outputs ') Listing 2. The definition of an input and output port namespace through the process specification. The argument passed to the methods is used as the key under which the newly created namespaces is inserted into their respective parent namespace. The period is treated as a special character and is interpreted as a namespace separator. The key nested.input.namespace is therefore interpreted as a nested namespace of depth three and the port names- paces are recursively created by the input_namespace call. Note that all these ProcessSpec methods are declar- ative in nature and that they can overwrite the effects of previously executed methods. Consider the following example: 1 spec = ProcessSpec () 2 spec.input('a', valid_type=Int , default=Int (2) , validator=is_positive_integer , required=True) 3 spec.input('a', valid_type=Float , default=Float (3.0) , validator=is_positive_float , required=False) Listing 3. The declarative nature of the process specification allows later declarations to override earlier ones. The resulting process specification has a single input port a in its inputs namespace that accepts float types, as the preceding directive is overwritten. 3. Exit codes In addition to inputs and outputs, the process speci- fication is also used to declare the known failure modes of the process. A common method of communicating a particular failure from a process to its caller is through the use of an exit status. An exit status, modelled on a similar concept found in POSIX processes, is defined as an integer that is returned by all processes. If the integer is zero, it signifies that the process executed correctly; any non-zero value indicates an error that maps onto a known failure mode. This concept is implemented in Ai- iDA through ‘exit codes’. Specifically, the ProcessSpec class implements the exit_code method that allows one to define an exit code for the corresponding process: 1 spec = ProcessSpec () 2 spec.exit_code (418 , 'ERROR_I_AM_A_TEAPOT ', 'the process experienced an identity crisis ') Listing 4. The definition of an exit code, consisting of an integer exit status, a reference label and an exit message, through the process specification. This example defines an exit code for the process, with exit status 418 and exit message ‘the workchain experi- enced an identity crisis’. These two values are stored in the DB as attributes of the process. In addition, the string ERROR_I_AM_A_TEAPOT is a human-readable unique label that can be conveniently used to reference the exit code instead of using the integer status. A de- tailed explanation of how exit codes are referenced and used in practice is given in paragraph II B 3 f. B. Process implementations 1. Calculation functions To honor the design goal of restricting a workflow de- veloper as little as possible, a solution was sought to turn any regular Python function into a fully AiiDA compliant function. Employing the concept of Python’s function decorators, a wrapping function that alters or adds to the behavior of the function it is applied to, the calcfunction decorator was developed. To explain its functionality, consider the following Python functions that add and multiply two numbers, respectively: 1 def add(a, b): 2 return a + b 3 4 def multiply(a, b): 5 return a * b Listing 5. Two standard Python functions to add and multiply two numbers, respectively. By leveraging the calcfunction decorator, these plain Python functions are turned into AiiDA compliant func- tions with the addition of just a single line: 1 @calcfunction 2 def add(a, b): 3 return a + b 4 5 @calcfunction 6 def multiply(a, b): 7 return a * b Listing 6. By decorating the Python function with the calcfunction decorator, the plain function is automatically transformed by the engine into an AiiDA process when executed. When either function is called, the decorator instructs the engine to create a Process instance on the fly, represent- ing the function. Python’s standard inspect module is used to introspect the function’s signature, which is used to define the input ports for the process specification as explained in Sec.II A 2. Note that, since the process spec- ification is generated based on the function signature, not all the functionality of ports and port namespaces are ac- cessible. For example, due to Python’s dynamic typing, the expected type for function arguments is not always specified and therefore the valid_type attributes for the generated input ports can be undefined. We are currently working to introduce parsing of type annotations to fur- ther augment the specification of the generated Process to be able to type check the passed parameters. By simply calling the functions with database-storable types, the engine automatically takes care of creating the corresponding data provenance in the database. For ex- ample, the following execution: 1 Listing 7. Running a decorated function works just as running a normal Python function, with the only difference being that the input values should be database-storable types. returns the value 35 and creates a representation of the execution in the provenance graph, as represented in 5 CREATE D1 D2 D4 D5 SUM RESULT y x D3 z CREATE C1 ADD C2 MULTIPLY executing the two calculation functions. Fig.1. The execution of the two functions are each repre- sented by a CalcFunctionNode in the provenance graph, with the corresponding input and output nodes correctly linked to it. 2. Work functions Even though a workflow could be encoded by means of a concatenation and/or nesting of calcfunction calls, that approach does not really capture the logic of a work- flow. For instance, from the created provenance graph, it is impossible to ascertain whether the two consecutively called calculations were part of a single coordinated com- putation, or if the output of the first was simply used as an input to an otherwise unrelated calculation. To define a workflow that captures this logic, the engine provides the workfunction decorator, which is analogous to the calcfunction, except its purpose is not to create new data out of its inputs, but rather to orchestrate a com- position of operations. The example of calling two calcu- lation functions directly, as shown in listing 7, could be rewritten as follows: 1 2 @calcfunction 3 def add(a, b): 4 return a + b 5 6 @calcfunction 7 def multiply(a, b): 8 return a * b 9 10 @workfunction 11 def add_multiply (x, y, z): 12 sum = add(x, y) 13 product = multiply(sum , z) 14 return product 15 16 Listing 8. By decorating the Python function with the workfunction decorator, the plain function is automatically transformed by the engine into an AiiDA workflow when executed and ‘call’ links are added to the calculation functions it calls. Simply calling the decorated work function (line 16 of listing 8) will execute the dynamically generated pro- cess while storing a representation of it in the provenance graph as shown in Fig.2. RETURN CREATE CALL D1 D2 D4 D5 SUM RESULT y x D3 z CALL CREATE C1 ADD C2 MULTIPLY W1 ADD AND MULTIPLY ated by executing the a work function that calls two calcula- tion functions in succession. The work function is not limited to calling only calcu- lation functions, but can also call other work functions, and these are also linked by CALL links as shown in Fig. 2. Therefore, arbitrarily deeply nested workflows can be constructed with these two basic components. However, due to their intentional simplicity, the calcfunction and workfunction decorator solutions (collectively referred to as process functions) also have inherent shortcomings that render them the incorrect tool for certain situations. In the two examples provided earlier, the computa- tional work that had to be performed in the function body was trivial. However, more often than not, the op- posite is the case in computational science applications. A decorated function constitutes a contiguous block of code and will necessary block the interpreter for the du- ration of the function execution. This implies that for computationally expensive functions, the interpreter will be blocked from executing anything else for extended pe- riods of time. Additionally, intermediate progress cannot be saved in such a way to allow execution to be resumed later at the same point in the source code. This means that when a function is interrupted at any point, all the work it performed up to that point will be lost (note that while Python coroutines would allow the interpreter to switch to executing other code, it would still be nearly impossible to save and later reconstruct the entire state of the call stack). This scenario is particularly relevant considering that the simulations managed by AiiDA can last weeks, and the user might want to stop or restart the machine where AiiDA runs. Therefore, for all its simplicity of use, process functions should be used sparingly and conscientiously in the devel- opment of workflows. The construct implemented in Ai- iDA that solves all the weak points of the workfunction is the WorkChain. 3. Work chains The WorkChain class is a subclass of Process and is the core component of workflow development in AiiDA. It is used to encode the logic that is typically encom- passed by any scientific workflow. The ProcessSpec for the WorkChain class supports, in addition to the standard 6 properties of the ProcessSpec as detailed in section II A, the outline method. This method allows a user to de- fine a set of logical rules that, when evaluated, will yield a set of steps that are then executed by the engine. The big advantage of using this construct over a concatena- tion of work functions is that, in between each step of a work chain, the engine automatically saves the progress to allow a restart from the last checkpoint in the case of execution failure. Additionally, the transition between steps gives the engine the chance to yield the interpreter to other parts of the code, alleviating the blocking be- havior inherent in the synchronous execution of the work function construct. a. Outline The outline method of the work chain’s ProcessSpec is used to encode the desired logic of a cer- tain workflow. It supports typical logical flow constructs, such as while loops, conditional blocks and return state- ments. To keep the user interface as simple as possi- ble, the aim was to support a syntax that is as close to standard Python logical constructs as possible. For il- lustration purposes consider the following description of a trivial workflow. Print the numbers from 0 to 100, re- placing the printed number with ‘fizz’ if it is a multiple of three, with ‘buzz’ if the number is a multiple of five, and with ‘fizzbuzz’ if it is both a multiple of three and five. The following listing demonstrates how this logic could be encoded using the syntax of the work chain outline: 1 spec.outline( 2 cls.intialize_to_zero , 3 4 5 cls.report_fizz_buzz , 6 ).elif_(cls. is_multitple_of_three )( 7 cls.report_fizz , 8 ).elif_(cls. is_multiple_of_five )( 9 cls.report_buzz , 10 ).else_( 11 cls.report_n , 12 ), 13 cls.increment_by_one , 14 ) 15 ) Listing 9. An example of a work chain outline that contains logical constructs such as a while loop and conditional statements. Note that, since the logical constructs while, if, elif and else are protected Python keywords, the outline analogues are suffixed with an underscore in order to properly distinguish them from the Python builtins. The statements between or within the calls of the logical con- structs represent a step that is to be executed by the engine. Since workflow development in AiiDA happens entirely in Python, the implementation of these steps is achieved by simply implementing them as methods of the WorkChain class for which the outline is defined. An ex- ample implementation of a subset of these class methods would look something like the following: 1 def initialize_to_zero (self): 2 self.ctx.n = 0 3 4 def is_multiple_of_three (self): 5 return self.ctx.n % 3 == 0 6 7 ... 8 9 def report_fizz_buzz (self): 10 self.report('fizzbuzz ') 11 12 ... 13 14 def increment_by_one (self): 15 self.ctx.n += 1 Listing 10. Example implementation of some of the outline steps defined in listing 9 as methods of the work chain class. Each outline step is defined by a method that takes a single argument self, which is a reference to the class instance as is standard in Python. This particularly triv- ially example already sets up the questions of how log messages can be reported from within a work chain and how data can be passed between outline steps. The an- swers to these questions will be addressed in the following two sections. b. Reporting The WorkChain class exposes the report method, which takes a single string as an ar- gument, which can be used by the developer to log mes- sages during the execution of the work chain. The report method emits the passed log message through the stan- dard Python logging module with a custom log level REPORT, which is defined by AiiDA and lies between the INFO and WARNING log levels. Additionally, the logging configuration of AiiDA defines a database log handler that automatically attaches these logged messages to the node that represents the work chain from which they were emitted. The recorded log messages can then be retrieved through the AiiDA API or its command line interface by referencing the relevant work chain node. This report system is meant for communicating human readable log-like messages as a record of the events that occurred during its execution and should not be parsed to communicate programmatically between processes. For that use case, the concept of exit codes has been im- plemented, which will be described in greater detail in paragraph II B 3 f. c. Checkpoints and context As mentioned in the in- troduction of this section, the engine will evaluate the logic defined by the outline and execute the methods that correspond to those outline steps. These methods only take a single argument, self, so there is no way to pass data directly from one step to another. To allow data to be passed between the steps of a work chain, each WorkChain instance defines a context, which is a simple Python dictionary, accessible through the ctx attribute, that is persisted between step transitions. The context can therefore be used as any other Python dictionary to store data and the engine ensures that the state of the work chain instance, along with its context, is saved in a checkpoint in the database (see section III B 1). Through this container, data that was stored in one outline step can be accessed in another. d. Calling subprocesses Work chains can launch any other process as a child process. For example, one can launch a CalcJob (a calculation running on an external computer, described in Sec. II B 4) or another WorkChain 7 from within a WorkChain. The syntax for submitting a process from within a WorkChain is identical to submit- ting a process from a top level Python script, with the exception that one should not use the submit free func- tion, but the submit method of the WorkChain class. For example, to submit a ChildWorkChain with a certain set of inputs from within another work chain, one would call: 1 def submit_child_workchain (self): 2 child = self.submit(ChildWorkChain , ** inputs) 3 return ToContext(child=child) Listing 11. A subprocess can be submitted through the submit method of the WorkChain class and the ToContext container can be used to register the submitted child process as an awaitable. For the parent work chain to continue, it has to wait for the child process to finish and therefore it has to return control to the interpreter. To communicate to the engine that the work chain needs to wait for a subprocess (in this example the ChildWorkChain) to finish, the developer should return an instance of the ToContext class. This turns the submitted subprocesses into awaitables, which instructs the engine to halt execution of the work chain until all subprocesses are completed. The same result can be achieved through the to_context method of the work chain: 1 def submit_child_workchain (self): 2 child = self.submit(ChildWorkChain , ** inputs) 3 self.to_context(child=child) Listing 12. Similar to listing 11, a subprocess can be submitted through the submit method of the WorkChain class and the to_context method can be used to register the submitted process as an awaitable. The engine will proceed to execute the submitted subpro- cesses and when they are completed, will assign the cor- responding process node, used to represent the executed process in the database, to the specified key (child in this example) in the context of the parent work chain. In the next outline step of the parent work chain, the devel- oper will then be able to access the finished child work chain through the context member self.ctx.child. One might want to submit multiple subprocesses from within a single outline step, in the case where the sub- processes are independent from one another and can be executed in parallel. Both the ToContext container and the to_context method do not limit the number of sub- processes that can be assigned, as long as the keys to which they are assigned are unique. To prevent a de- veloper from having to generate keys dynamically when one prefers to deal with an ordered list of results, the ToContext class and to_context method both support the append_ free function. Consider the following exam- ple: 1 def submit_multiple child_workchains (self): 2 for i in range (10): 3 self. to_context(children=append_(self.submit( ChildWorkChain , ** inputs)) Listing 13. The append_ free function can be used to alter the behavior of the to_context and ToContext constructs to append the created awaitable to a list instead of assigning it to a specific key. The append_ function in the to_context call ensures that the subprocesses, when finished, will be appended to a list in the context under the children key. In the next outline step, the developer can then access the list of process nodes that represent the completed subprocesses and iterate over them as with any other Python list. e. Recording outputs To emit outputs from a work chain, the class implements the out method, which takes two arguments, a string (used as the outgoing link label) and a node instance. At the point of calling, the out method merely records the new output node in memory and only at the end of the outline step will the engine commit the change to the database. It is at that point that the emitted output value is validated with respect to the output port as defined in the process specification of the work chain. When the execution of the work chain terminates, the emitted outputs are validated once more against the specification and if, for example, any required outputs have not been emitted, the work chain is marked as failed. f. Aborting At any point during the execution of a work chain, a developer might want to exit from the out- line logic and terminate the execution prematurely. The engine can be instructed to terminate the execution of the work chain from within an outline step at any time, simply by returning a non-zero positive integer from the method, as shown in listing 14. The non-zero positive integer return value of the outline method is interpreted as an exit status, which is set to the node that represents the work chain in the provenance graph, and the process is terminated. 1 def abort_from_this_step (self): 2 self.report('work chain will be terminated ') 3 return 404 Listing 14. By returning a non-zero positive integer from any outline method, the engine is instructed to terminate the execution of the work chain and the return value is set as the exit_status attribute on the corresponding node. Alternatively, to provide an accompanying message for the reason of the exit, an instance of the ExitCode named tuple can be returned as well, which has the same effect as the integer exit status. The named tuple consists of an in- teger exit status and a string exit message. The tuple can be constructed manually, or it can be retrieved through the exit_codes attribute of the work chain, which is a container of the exit codes defined through the process specification of the work chain, as shown in listing 4. 1 class AbortingWorkChain (WorkChain): 2 3 @classmethod 4 def define(cls , spec): 5 super ().define(spec) 6 spec.exit_code (404 , INEVITABLE_ERROR , 'this was unavoidable ') 8 7 spec.outline(cls. abort_straightaway ) 8 9 def abort_straightaway (self): 10 self.report('work chain will be terminated ') 11 return self.exit_codes. INEVITABLE_ERROR Listing 15. By returning a ExitCode named tuple instance, the engine is instructed to terminate the execution of the work chain and the exit_status and exit_message of the return value is set on the corresponding node. The self.exit_codes.INEVITABLE_ERROR call retrieves the exit code instance that was defined in the process specification (line 6) and, when returned from the outline step, triggers the engine to terminate the work chain. The exit status and exit message of the exit code is set to the corresponding attributes of the work chain node. Any potential caller of the work chain can then inspect these attributes and, based on their value, decide how to proceed. g. Exposing of ports As mentioned in the introduc- tion, one of the major design goals of the workflow en- vironment in AiiDA is to limit developers as little as possible in their freedom to design solutions, while pro- viding them with the tools to write modular workflows. Modular workflows in this sense can be defined as work- flows that perform a single well-defined task. Higher level workflows can then easily be built by wrapping these lower-level blocks. When a work chain wraps another work chain, it needs to ‘expose’ its input (and poten- tially output) ports, such that the caller of the top level work chain can pass in the required inputs. To make the process of wrapping a work chain within another workchain as simple as possible, and to prevent a devel- oper from having to copy the port specification of the wrapped work chain manually, AiiDA implements the concept of automatic port exposing. To illustrate the concept of port exposing, consider the simple example of a ParentWorkChain wrapping a ChildWorkChain. 1 class ParentWorkChain (WorkChain): 2 3 @classmethod 4 def define(cls , spec): 5 super ().define(spec) 6 spec. expose_inputs ( ChildWorkChain ) 7 spec.outline(cls.run_child) 8 9 def run_child(self): 10 child_inputs = self. exposed_inputs ( ChildWorkChain ) 11 child = self.submit(ChildWorkChain , ** child_inputs ) 12 return ToContext(child=child) 13 14 class ChildWorkChain (WorkChain): 15 16 @classmethod 17 def define(cls , spec): 18 super ().define(spec) 19 spec.input('a', valid_type=Int) 20 spec.outline(cls.run_step) 21 22 def run_step(self): 23 self.report('running the ChildWorkChain ') Listing 16. The expose_inputs method of the ProcessSpec class allows a work chain to automatically copy the ports of the work chain it is wrapping. The expose_inputs method by default copies over all the ports of the child work chain. Optionally, ports can be omitted through the exclude keyword, or spe- cific ports can be selected with the include keyword. The work chain ports can also be exposed in a partic- ular namespace by using the namespace keyword. This is especially useful if the exposed ports would otherwise overlap with existing ports with the same name. 4. Calculation jobs High-performance computing resources rarely allow their users to directly run calculations on the system, but instead require resources to be requested from, or jobs to be submitted to, a scheduler, such as SLURM or PBS. Submitting calculations as jobs to these schedulers on remote computing resources is one of the most com- mon activities in the workflow of a computational scien- tist, but involves a substantial amount of repetitive work. The job script has to be prepared and uploaded to the remote machine, including any other required input files for the calculation that is to be run. Subsequently, the job has to be submitted to the scheduler which will put it in a queue. The user must then monitor the queue to determine when the job is completed and the output files can be retrieved from the remote computing resource, to be optionally parsed and passed through post-processing tools. This entire process is automated by AiiDA and imple- mented by the CalcJob class. A detailed description of how the CalcJob can be implemented for an arbitrary code that can be run on a remote cluster is beyond the scope of this paper and can be found in the extensive online documentation (aiida-core.readthedocs.io). Here, rather, we focus only on how the required steps of running a calculation job are realized automatically by AiiDA’s engine. In addition to having to run a calculation through a scheduler, another complexity of running calculations on high-performance computing resources is that these ma- chines have to be remotely accessed, typically over an SSH connection. Since AiiDA is not required to run on the computing resource itself, it needs the ability to open a connection to perform the various operations involved with running calculation jobs. Any operation that re- quires opening a connection to the remote computing re- source is referred to as a ‘transport task’, as it requires the SSH connection to “transport” the command from the local machine where AiiDA is running to the remote machine. The life cycle of each calculation job knows four trans- port tasks that are executed in succession as shown in fig. 3. For the first task, ‘upload’, the engine creates a new folder in the scratch space on the remote machine, into which the input files and job script are uploaded. Subsequently, the ‘submit’ task executes the command to submit the newly uploaded job script to the sched- 9 start Upload Submit Update Retrieve Parse Substates of the calculation job (see fig. 6 for the full process state machine). A remote job is executed by transitioning through these states with each dashed transition occurring only when an open transport is available (prior to which the process is in a waiting state which is not shown). uler. If the job is successfully submitted, the output of the command is parsed to retrieve the unique identifier that the scheduler assigned to the job. The engine then uses this identifier to query the status of the job calcu- lation in the ‘update’ task. Once the scheduler returns that the job has been completed, the engine invokes the ‘retrieve’ task, which retrieves all the files specified by the calculation plugin from the remote working directory to a local folder. This folder is attached as an output to the calculation node that represents the execution of the calculation job in the provenance graph. Finally, the engine parses the retrieved data and attaches the result- ing output nodes to the formerly mentioned calculation node. However, since the data is already retrieved to the local machine, this operation does not require an open SSH connection and is therefore not a transport task. a. Error handling and robustness As detailed in the previous section, the majority of operations required for running a calculation job to completion on a remote com- puting resource require the opening of an SSH connection and executing a command over that connection. A va- riety of problems may occur during these steps. For ex- ample, the remote machine may be unreachable because the client machine lost its network connection, or the re- mote machine itself has network issues. But even when a connection is successfully established, there are still a myriad of reasons why the remote operations may fail. The operation can be interrupted, timeout or simply fail on the remote machine. The latter can occur often for the transport tasks that interact with the scheduler, such as the ‘submit’ and ‘update’ tasks, when the scheduler is unreachable or overloaded. In any case, problems like these during the execution of transport tasks raise exceptions that, however, should not cause a failure of the running process but rather be dealt with elegantly. More importantly, the character of these problems are often temporary and often resolve themselves if not with a little intervention from the user. These transport tasks therefore benefit enormously from an automated retry mechanism that detects problems and automatically retries the operation at a later point in time. This concept has been implemented in AiiDA’s en- gine by an ‘exponential-back-off-retry’ mechanism, that works as follows. Each transport task is wrapped in an exponential-back-off-retry co-routine. This wrapper catches any exceptions that occur during the execution of the transport task, in which case it reschedules the same operation for execution at a later point in time. The wrapper reschedules failed tasks a maximum number of times, each time doubling the initial waiting interval, af- ter which the parent process to which the transport task belongs, is paused. The initial waiting interval and the maximum number of retries are configurable per type of transport task. In our experience, many problems are automatically re- solved by this exponential-back-off-retry mechanism, but if this is not the case, the engine pauses the process in- stead of letting it except, giving the user the opportunity to investigate the problem. If the cause for the excep- tion was external to the process itself and can be fixed, the paused process can be successfully resumed by the user. Alternatively, if the source of the exception was with the process itself (e.g., a coding error in a parser or in a workflow step), the user can manually kill it. This mechanism of making calculation job processes robust is indispensable in high-throughput workflows. Without it, if, for instance, the network connection is lost when running a large number of complex and nested workflows in parallel, then all of the calculation jobs would except and, in a big cascade, all their parent pro- cesses too, resulting in a substantial loss of work. The exponential-back-off-retry mechanism combines a high degree of automation, by autonomously retrying failed tasks, and ultimately pausing tasks with problems in- stead of letting them except. b. Transport queue With the engine being primar- ily designed to operate under high-throughput condi- tions, one often runs many calculation jobs on a given remote resource, which requires many connections to be opened to that machine. However, remote computing re- sources often limit the amount of connections that are allowed to be opened in a given time interval by a sin- gle client. Exceeding said limit can lead the client to be banned entirely from accessing the machine. To reduce the number of opened connections, while maintaining high-throughput capability, the engine bundles all con- nections through a ‘transport queue’. Each worker (an independent Python process executing workflows - see section III A 1 for details) maintains one transport queue and the calculation jobs that it manages make requests for an open transport, instead of opening one themselves whenever they need it. The worker collects these requests and, at given point in time, opens a single connection to the remote machine and distributes the transport to the processes that requested it. The transport queue guaran- tees that it opens a connection only once per safe-interval, a configurable minimum amount of time allowed between connections. This mechanism ensures that the maximum connection opening rate is never exceeded, even when 10 Client Client Client DB Worker Worker Worker = TCP/IP tain a connection via TCP/IP to the database and RabbitMQ service enabling a rich set of possible configurations and cor- responding usage scenarios. running many concurrent calculation jobs on the same machine. The only limitation of this mechanism is that each worker maintains its own transport queue and there is no communication between those queues. This means that the promise of the safe-interval is only guaranteed per worker. However, by knowing how many workers are active (a value that the user can decide) the interval can of course be configured such that, on average, the con- nection rate is respected across all active workers. c. Bundling scheduler update requests The bundling of connections required by calculation jobs through the transport queue, as described in the previous paragraph, already relieves most of the load on remote computing resources when running in high-throughput mode. How- ever, each active calculation job would still regularly per- form the required remote operations, such as querying the scheduler for the state of the job, separately. When running in high-throughput mode, this scheme can still put unacceptable loads on the scheduler, despite the con- nection being shared. This, in turn, can render the sched- uler unusable for all users of the computer cluster. There- fore, the AiiDA engine bundles all scheduler updates for calculation jobs (on each worker), very similarly to the transport queue for connections. When a calculation job needs to update its status, instead of polling the sched- uler directly, it schedules an update request with the job manager of the worker. The job manager records these requests and, once a remote connection becomes available from the transport queue, issues a single scheduler up- date for the job identifiers that have registered themselves with it. The response is then parsed and the new status of each registered job is communicated to the correspond- ing calculation job. The combination of the bundling of connections and scheduler update requests ensures that the engine can run concurrent calculations jobs without overloading the remote computing resource. III. ARCHITECTURE AiiDA’s software architecture reflects several design goals that are informed, principally, by the needs of the high-throughput materials science community. These in- clude the ability scale from running on laptops up to high- performance supercomputers, carrying out processes that range anywhere from fractions of a second to, potentially, weeks in execution time. Furthermore, it should be pos- sible to have up to thousands of processes simultaneously active in a single instance. In terms of deployment config- urations, AiiDA instances are typically installed on each user’s workstation. However, there is the possibility to have a group or organisation-wide deployment or even a public-serving instance, as employed by the Materials Cloud33. As shown in fig. 4, the workflow engine relies on two main external components for the execution of workflows: a) The database engine (PostgreSQL34), used to per- sist the state of currently running processes, which doubles as a proxy to reflect the state of processes to the user, and, b) the message broker (RabbitMQ35), which is respon- sible for delivering messages between the client(s) and the worker(s) (which may run in the same Python instance or even be on separate comput- ers). This decoupled approach has numerous advantages both in terms of flexibility of deployment configurations and for enabling a clear separation of concerns that makes it easier to write correct and robust code. A. The engine In order to meet a number of the design goals for the workflow system relating to responsiveness, scaling and high-throughput capability, we rely heavily on events to trigger actions such as progressing a workflow from a state where it was waiting on something to complete, or to initiate the orderly termination of a running work- flow. This is in stark contrast to polling based systems, where an entity that is waiting for a particular outcome has to periodically check if the event has occurred, often leading to unnecessary loads on the database and to poor responsiveness. As with many event-based systems (e.g. graphical user interfaces, computer games) AiiDA uses an event loop to achieve this, which in our case is provided by Python’s built-in asyncio. Furthermore, this enables multiple Ai- iDA processes to be managed by a single Python in- stance, despite the lack of multithreading support, as coroutines can be scheduled for execution and can yield to others when they are waiting for some action to com- plete. The use of coroutines mitigates another issue, which is that database servers typically have a low default connection limit (100 in the case of PostgreSQL) and in threaded environments it is not uncommon for each thread to have a separate connection. Lastly, writing cor- rect multithreaded code is extremely complex and would 11 be difficult, even for experienced programmers, particu- larly given that we place no restriction on the API calls that can be made. The entire stack of Python components needed to exe- cute workflows are brought together in the Runner class which provides the event loop, persistence, communica- tion, transport (e.g., SSH) and other functionality, some of which are described in greater detail below. Thanks to the event loop, each runner can run any number of workflow processes concurrently (within memory limits). We call the number processes that can run on a single runner the number of process slots. 1. The daemon The runner can be used in a local interpreter. How- ever, in most production environments the user wishes to launch a daemon that can manage one or more run- ners, automatically restarting them if they happen to crash. In AiiDA, we use the Circus36 library to achieve this. Circus provides the ability to start multiple oper- ating system processes, automatically restarting them if they crash. In addition, it can show information about their current resource usage and dynamically increase the number of runners in the pool. With the daemon one can scale both vertically (multi- ple slots per runner) and horizontally (multiple Python instances, each with one runner) as shown in fig. 5. For workloads that require significant in-Python processing it is preferable to scale the number of workers while work- loads involving many remote calculations can just as well scale the number of slots per worker, minimising the load on the computer running the daemon with little loss in throughput. The hard limit is reached when the number of workers equals the maximum number of database con- nections (however, this is user configurable if they have access to the database settings). B. The process The principal object of AiiDA’s workflow engine is the Process class. All specific classes (WorkChains, CalcJobs, etc.) derive from Process (or a subclass thereof) and in so doing inherit a large swathe of com- mon functionality and features. The Process class itself is modeled as an extended state machine, meaning that it is composed of a finite-state machine, shown in fig. 6, where each state can have internal data members as part of its extended state. This is a pattern common in event-driven systems as it provides a consistent way to model the current state, as well as event hooks that can be used as triggers to perform actions either internal or external to the pro- cess during state transitions. The event hooks themselves come in the form of process member functions, e.g.: # Entering a new state 0 1 2 3 4 0 1 2 3 4 . . . W0-S0 W0-S1 W1-S0 W1-S1 # workers # slots . . . Max. connections Vertical scaling Horizontal scaling Scaling of the number of workers and slots per worker. The total number of concurrent processes is the prod- uct of the values on the two axes. start Created Running Finished Excepted Killed Waiting The process state machine. Terminal states are represented with a double circle. def on_entering (self , state): ... # Just entered the new state from 'from_state ' def on_entered (self , from_state): ... # About to exit the current state def on_exiting (self): ... Listing 17. AiiDA’s Process state transition hooks. These are invaluable for being able to guarantee that certain actions are performed when a state transition occurs. By using these hooks it is possible to schedule actions that should always be executed at the various points of a state transition and therefore guarantee a consistent state once the on_entered hook has finished. One use of these hooks in AiiDA is to reflect the current state of the process back to the database including saving a checkpoint. The state transition hooks are also used to send broadcast messages that allow listeners (which can potentially be on remote machines) to be updated of state changes as they happen (see section III C). A typical process progresses through the various states, potentially running several member functions or waiting 12 on other processes to finish. However, if an exception is propagated up to the Process level, it will be caught and the Process transitions to the terminal EXCEPTED state, whereupon a log entry is created containing, amongst other things, the Python stack trace. The other way to terminate a Process prematurely is to call the kill method. 1. Persistence A key requirement for the engine is that the progress of processes is check-pointed and persisted such that, in the case of an orderly or disorderly shutdown, the AiiDA engine can continue from the last clean state upon being restarted. In order to achieve this we use checkpoints that are written to the database at process state transi- tions. Specifically, the context of the process, outputs, and some metadata are saved to a dictionary which is then serialized to the database by an AiiDA specific per- sister as shown in fig. 7. C. Communication The workflow engine relies heavily on messaging for the external control of processes and to maintain high- throughput whilst ensuring fault tolerance. This is achieved by using a “message broker”, in our case Rab- bitMQ. Message brokers typically take responsibility for guaranteeing the durability and atomicity of messages, allowing the application to focus on the business logic. In RabbitMQ’s case the user installs a service that client software interacts with via a TCP port. The routing and persistence of messages are handled internally by Rab- bitMQ. To facilitate AiiDA’s interaction with RabbitMQ, we developed a software library, kiwiPy37, which in turn re- lies on the aio_pika38 library. KiwiPy significantly sim- plifies the process of interacting with RabbitMQ and pro- vides the ability to offload communication to a separate thread. This is essential for AiiDA as described below in subsection ‘task queues’. In addition to task queues kiwiPy provides AiiDA the ability to send Remote Pro- cedure Call (RPC) and broadcast messages. a. Task queues These are used to schedule new pro- cesses to be run. There is a major advantage to using RabbitMQ in that it provides certain guarantees about messages, depending on the chosen settings. For our task queues AiiDA uses persistent messages, which are persisted to disk such that they survive intentional or unintentional restarts of the machine. As such, a job is guaranteed to never be lost once delivered from the client to the broker. Furthermore, RabbitMQ expects ac- knowledgements for tasks that have been completed. If it loses connection with the worker, it automatically re- queues the task again, until completion is acknowledged. This mechanism relies on the use of periodic messages, called heartbeats, to which the worker must respond in a timely manner, otherwise, upon missing two consecutive responses, RabbitMQ assumes the worker to be dead and triggers the rescheduling mechanism. It is for this reason that kiwiPy runs a separate thread so that, even when AiiDA processes are under a heavy and blocking work- load, it is able to respond to heartbeats. b. RPC As suggested by the name, these kinds of messages are used to invoke a procedure (in our case a function or method) on the receiving process and deliver the result of the process back to the caller. This is used primarily to pause, play and kill active processes. c. Broadcast This involves sending a single message to any registered listeners with no possibility for them to send a direct response. These are used for two pur- poses: to pause, play or kill groups of processes and to control the flow between them. Parent processes that have spawned children can choose to wait for a child to complete before continuing their execution. This is fa- cilitated by registering itself as a listener to broadcasts from the child and yielding until it receives the child “ter- minated” message. This mechanism is what enables the functionality of the to_context work chain construct, as described in paragraph II B 3 d, notifying the work chain that it can continue as the process it was waiting for has completed. IV. CONCLUSIONS In this article we have described the decisions that have guided the development and shaped the internals of AiiDA’s workflow engine, in the recognition that often the insights gained in the development process can be as valuable as the finished product itself. AiiDA has a fairly broad set of challenging goals and target use cases. To meet these, we have incorporated a number of ad- vanced programming techniques such as coroutines, ex- tended finite-state machines, event-driven programming, futures, and a number of technologies commonly em- ployed in industry, but less common in academia, such as RabbitMQ and PostgreSQL. Being mindful of the in- herent complexity of this system, and the tasks it aims to address, we have attempted to create a user-friendly API that allows non-experts to write powerful, modular, robust and auto-documenting workflows with full prove- nance automatically stored as they run. With the inte- gration of AiiDA’s plugin system, sharing these workflows with the public is made simple, enabling the wider com- munity to reuse the scientific knowledge encoded within. While the engine is particularly well suited to manage high-throughput workflows whose steps involve simula- tions running on high-performance computing infrastruc- tures, it is versatile enough to also effortlessly run code on smaller machines such as personal desktops. With the release of AiiDA 1.0, its extensible and modu- lar nature has gained adoption within the materials dis- covery community with over 100 supported simulation 13 save_instance_state(out_state) commit() save_checkpoint(process) on_entered() loop: process:Process persister:AiiDAPersister db: A UML activity diagram showing the persistence of the internal state of a process at a state transition. The vertical bars show the period during witch the entity (at the top) is active and therefore defines its scope. When the persister gets a request to save the checkpoint is calls the Process and requests that it populates a dictionary, out_state which is then serialized and committed to the database. code executables and many workflows39 available at the time of writing, many of which have contributed directly to published scientific works. These are all encouraging signs, as the ultimate goal of AiiDA is to provide the community with a useful tool that can be used as part of an interoperable, FAIR, computational infrastructure to accelerate scientific discovery. As the scientific commu- nity transitions to the exascale era, there is little doubt that such tools will have a greater and greater role to play in the daily activities of researchers. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors thank Dominik Gresch, Tiziano Müller and Jens Bröder for detailed technical discussions. We thank the whole AiiDA team for contributions through- out the development process. MU would like to thank Matthieu Mottet for valuable discussions regarding asyncio and coroutines in Python. We thanks the Swiss Data Science Center for a stimu- lating exchange regarding data provenance frameworks. This work is supported by the MARVEL National Cen- tre for Competency in Research funded by the Swiss Na- tional Science Foundation (grant agreement ID 51NF40- 182892), the European Centre of Excellence MaX “Ma- terials design at the Exascale” (grant number 824143), by the Swiss Platform for Advanced Scientific Comput- ing (PASC) and by the swissuniversities P-5 “Materials Cloud” project (grant agreement ID 182-008). This work was supported by grants from the Swiss National Super- computing Centre (CSCS) under project ID s836. We acknowledge PRACE for awarding us access to Piz Daint at CSCS, Switzerland under grant number 2016153543. ∗ mail@sphuber.net 1 D. Talia, ISRN Software Engineering 2013, 1 (2013). 2 M. D. Wilkinson, M. Dumontier, I. J. Aalbersberg, G. Ap- pleton, M. Axton, A. Baak, N. Blomberg, J.-W. Boiten, L. B. da Silva Santos, P. E. Bourne, J. Bouwman, A. J. Brookes, T. Clark, M. Crosas, I. Dillo, O. Dumon, S. Ed- munds, C. T. Evelo, R. Finkers, A. Gonzalez-Beltran, A. J. Gray, P. Groth, C. Goble, J. S. Grethe, J. Heringa, P. A. ’t Hoen, R. Hooft, T. Kuhn, R. Kok, J. Kok, S. J. Lusher, M. E. Martone, A. Mons, A. L. Packer, B. Pers- son, P. Rocca-Serra, M. Roos, R. van Schaik, S.-A. San- sone, E. Schultes, T. Sengstag, T. Slater, G. Strawn, M. A. Swertz, M. Thompson, J. van der Lei, E. van Mulligen, J. Velterop, A. Waagmeester, P. Wittenburg, K. Wolsten- croft, J. Zhao, and B. Mons, Scientific Data 3 (2016), 3 J. P. A. Ioannidis, D. B. Allison, C. A. Ball, I. Coulibaly, X. Cui, A. C. Culhane, M. Falchi, C. Furlanello, L. Game, G. Jurman, J. Mangion, T. Mehta, M. Nitzberg, G. P. Page, E. Petretto, and V. van Noort, Nature Genetics 41, 4 R. D. Peng, Science 334, 1226 (2011). 5 C. Stoddart, Nature (2016), 10.1038/d41586-019-00067-3. 6 D. B. Allison, A. W. Brown, B. J. George, and K. A. Kaiser, Nature 530, 27 (2016). 7 C. Goble, S. Cohen-Boulakia, S. Soiland-Reyes, D. Garijo, Y. Gil, M. R. Crusoe, K. Peters, and D. Schober, Data Intelligence 2, 108 (2020). 8 S. P. Huber, S. Zoupanos, M. Uhrin, L. Talirz, L. Kahle, R. Häuselmann, D. Gresch, T. Müller, A. V. Yakutovich, C. W. Andersen, F. F. Ramirez, C. S. Adorf, F. Gargiulo, S. Kumbhar, E. Passaro, C. Johnston, A. Merkys, A. Ce- pellotti, N. Mounet, N. Marzari, B. Kozinsky, and G. Pizzi, ArXiv e-prints (2020), arXiv:2003.12476 [cs.DC]. 9 I. Altintas, C. Berkley, E. Jaeger, M. Jones, B. Ludascher, and S. Mock, in Proceedings. 16th International Conference on Scientific and Statistical Database Management, 2004. (IEEE). 10 T. Oinn, M. Addis, J. Ferris, D. Marvin, M. Senger, M. Greenwood, T. Carver, K. Glover, M. R. Pocock, A. Wipat, and P. Li, Bioinformatics 20, 3045 (2004). 11 I. Taylor, M. Shields, I. Wang, and O. Rana, Journal of 14 Grid Computing 1, 199 (2003). 12 G. von Laszewski, M. Hategan, and D. Kodeboyina, in Workflows for e-Science (Springer London, 2007) pp. 340– 356. 13 T. Fahringer, R. Prodan, R. Duan, F. Nerieri, S. Podlip- nig, J. Qin, M. Siddiqui, H.-L. Truong, A. Villazon, and M. Wieczorek, in The 6th IEEE/ACM International Work- shop on Grid Computing, 2005. (IEEE, 2005). 14 T. Fahringer, J. Qin, and S. Hainzer, in CCGrid 2005. IEEE International Symposium on Cluster Computing and the Grid, 2005. (IEEE, 2005). 15 B. Chapman, J. Chilton, M. Heuer, A. Kartashov, D. Leehr, H. Ménager, M. Nedeljkovich, M. Scales, S. Soiland-Reyes, and L. Stojanovic, Common Workflow Language, v1.0 (figshare, 2016). 16 E. Deelman, G. Singh, M.-H. Su, J. Blythe, Y. Gil, C. Kesselman, G. Mehta, K. Vahi, G. B. Berriman, J. Good, A. Laity, J. C. Jacob, and D. S. Katz, Scien- tific Programming 13, 219 (2005). 17 Logic and loops can often be used but these need to be represented explicitly which quickly becomes cumbersome. 18 C. S. Adorf, P. M. Dodd, V. Ramasubramani, and S. C. Glotzer, Computational Materials Science 146, 220 (2018). 19 Y. Babuji, I. Foster, M. Wilde, K. Chard, A. Woodard, Z. Li, D. S. Katz, B. Clifford, R. Kumar, L. Lacinski, R. Chard, and J. M. Wozniak, in Proceedings of the 28th International Symposium on High-Performance Parallel and Distributed Computing - HPDC 2019 (ACM Press, 20 A. Jain, S. P. Ong, W. Chen, B. Medasani, X. Qu, M. Kocher, M. Brafman, G. Petretto, G.-M. Rignanese, G. Hautier, D. Gunter, and K. A. Persson, Concur- rency and Computation: Practice and Experience 27, 5037 21 The JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) Data Interchange Format, Tech. Rep. (2014). 22 S. Curtarolo, W. Setyawan, G. L. Hart, M. Jahnatek, R. V. Chepulskii, R. H. Taylor, S. Wang, J. Xue, K. Yang, O. Levy, M. J. Mehl, H. T. Stokes, D. O. Demchenko, and D. Morgan, Computational Materials Science 58, 218 23 K. Mathew, J. H. Montoya, A. Faghaninia, S. Dwarakanath, M. Aykol, H. Tang, I. heng Chu, T. Smidt, B. Bocklund, M. Horton, J. Dagdelen, B. Wood, Z.-K. Liu, J. Neaton, S. P. Ong, K. Persson, and A. Jain, Computational Materials Science 139, 140 (2017). 24 T. Mayeshiba, H. Wu, T. Angsten, A. Kaczmarowski, Z. Song, G. Jenness, W. Xie, and D. Morgan, Compu- tational Materials Science 126, 90 (2017). 25 J. E. Saal, S. Kirklin, M. Aykol, B. Meredig, and C. Wolverton, JOM 65, 1501 (2013). 26 K. Lejaeghere, G. Bihlmayer, T. Bjorkman, P. Blaha, S. Blugel, V. Blum, D. Caliste, I. E. Castelli, S. J. Clark, A. D. Corso, S. de Gironcoli, T. Deutsch, J. K. Dewhurst, I. D. Marco, C. Draxl, M. D. ak, O. Eriksson, J. A. Flores- Livas, K. F. Garrity, L. Genovese, P. Giannozzi, M. Gi- antomassi, S. Goedecker, X. Gonze, O. Granas, E. K. U. Gross, A. Gulans, F. Gygi, D. R. Hamann, P. J. Hasnip, N. A. W. Holzwarth, D. I. an, D. B. Jochym, F. Jol- let, D. Jones, G. Kresse, K. Koepernik, E. Kucukbenli, Y. O. Kvashnin, I. L. M. Locht, S. Lubeck, M. Mars- man, N. Marzari, U. Nitzsche, L. Nordstrom, T. Ozaki, L. Paulatto, C. J. Pickard, W. Poelmans, M. I. J. Probert, K. Refson, M. Richter, G.-M. Rignanese, S. Saha, M. Schef- fler, M. Schlipf, K. Schwarz, S. Sharma, F. Tavazza, P. Thunstrom, A. Tkatchenko, M. Torrent, D. Vander- bilt, M. J. van Setten, V. V. Speybroeck, J. M. Wills, J. R. Yates, G.-X. Zhang, and S. Cottenier, Science 351, 27 http://www.pbsworks.com/Product.aspx?id=1. 28 https://computing.llnl.gov/linux/slurm/. 29 https://www.oracle.com/technetwork/oem/grid-engine- 166852.html. 30 http://www.adaptivecomputing.com/products/open- source/torque/. 31 https://aiidateam.github.io/aiida-registry/. 32 https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/. 33 L. Talirz, S. Kumbhar, E. Passaro, A. V. Yakutovich, V. Granata, F. Gargiulo, M. Borelli, M. Uhrin, S. P. Hu- ber, S. Zoupanos, C. S. Adorf, C. W. Andersen, O. Schütt, C. A. Pignedoli, D. Passerone, J. VandeVondele, T. C. Schulthess, B. Smit, G. Pizzi, and N. Marzari, , 1 (2020), 34 https://www.postgresql.org/. 35 https://www.rabbitmq.com/. 36 https://circus.readthedocs.io/. 37 M. Uhrin and S. P. Huber, arXiv:2005.07475 [cs] (2020), arXiv: 2005.07475. 38 https://aio-pika.readthedocs.io/en/latest/. 39 https://aiidateam.github.io/aiida-registry/.