1 Sub-micron single-particle perovskite plasmonic nanolasers at room temperature Sangyeon Cho1,2, Yi Yang3, Marin Soljačić3, Seok Hyun Yun1,2 1Wellman Center for Photomedicine, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, 65 Landsdowne St., Cambridge, Massachusetts, 02139, USA 2Harvard-MIT Health Sciences and Technology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 02139, USA 3Research Laboratory of Electronics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 02139, USA Abstract Plasmonic nanolasers have received a substantial interest for their promising applications in integrated photonics, optical sensing, and biomedical imaging. To date, a room-temperature plasmonic nanolaser, sub- micron in all dimensions, remains elusive in the visible regime due to high metallic losses. Here, we demonstrate single-particle lasing around 2.3 eV with full-submicron, cesium lead bromide perovskite (CsPbBr3) crystals atop polymer-coated gold substrates at room temperature. With a large number (~100) of devices in total, we systematically study the lasing action of plasmonic test and photonic control groups. The achieved smallest plasmonic laser was 0.56 μm × 0.58 μm × 0.32 μm in size, ten-fold smaller than that of our smallest photonic laser. Key elements to efficient plasmonic lasing are identified as enhanced optical gain by the Purcell effect, long carrier diffusivity, a large spontaneous emission factor, and a high group index. Our results shed light on three-dimensional miniaturization of plasmonic lasers. Main Text Nanoscale lasers have received a growing interest for scientific and practical applications (1–3). Incorporating metals, which support highly-confined surface-plasmon polaritons (SPPs), has become a promising route to reduce device sizes beyond what is possible with only semiconductors and dielectrics. One class of metal-based lasers, known as spaser, relies on localized surface plasmon resonances. Since its inception (4), a limited number of demonstrations (5–8) have been reported, although the samples under 2 study are in the form of colloidal ensembles instead of single particles (9). Another class of metal-based lasers, known as plasmonic nanolasers, relies on propagating SPPs. These plasmonic nanolasers have been demonstrated using various gain materials and metals (10–13). In the near-infrared regime, full submicron nanolasers in all dimensions have been realized with metallic-coated disks (14). Nevertheless, this goal becomes more challenging in the visible regime because of the relatively low gain in semiconductors (15) and the more absorptive response of metals. Although ultra-thin geometries, such as nanowires and microplates, are possible, at least one dimension along the cavity oscillation direction has to be micron- sized to compensate for propagation losses (16, 17). To date, in the visible regime, a room-temperature plasmonic nanolaser with full-submicron sizes in all three dimensions has remained experimentally elusive (18). emerged as solution-processable semiconductor materials for high-performance optoelectronic applications (19–22). Among different LHPs, cesium lead bromide perovskites (CsPbBr3) is an excellent laser material owing to its long carrier diffusion length (~9 μm) (23) and high optical gain (24): e.g. 4000 cm-1 near 2.3 eV. Such extraordinary properties result from a combinatory effect of large active carriers by Coulomb correlated electron-hole plasma (EHP) (25, 26) and large polaron formation by deformation of PbBr3- sublattice (27). Recent studies suggest that CsPbBr3 lasing occurs in a state of quasi-three-level EHP above Mott density (ρmott= 1017-18 /cm3) (26, 28), which is beneficial to build up a large population inversion by band gap renormalization (BGR) (29). Here, we demonstrate full-submicron perovskite plasmonic nanolasers in the visible regime with nanosecond optical pumping at room temperature. Our laser devices, solely fabricated with solution-based chemistry, harness CsPbBr3 submicron nanocubes atop a polymer-coated gold substrate. We achieve stable single- and multi-mode lasing around 2.3 eV (=540 nm) with a narrow laser linewidth of 1 meV (=0.2 nm) under a threshold fluence around 0.3 mJ/cm2. By measuring a number of laser parameters, including the Purcell factor, the spontaneous emission factor (β), and the quantum yield (η), with spectroscopic tools, we systematically study the lasing action of both plasmonic lasers (test) and their photonic counterparts (control). Such a comparison enables us to identify and explain a condition where efficient plasmonic lasing becomes possible. We synthesized CsPbBr3 micron- and submicron-sized crystals using a sonochemistry method (30) (Fig. S1). Prepared CsPbBr3 crystals were subsequently transferred onto different substrates: gold (Au) crystals on the gold substrate form the plasmonic laser group (test), while those on dielectric SiO2 or Si substrates are the two photonic counterparts (control). The quantities of devices in the test and control 3 groups are 30 (Au), 25 (Si), and 45 (SiO2), respectively. In the plasmonic test group, the thickness of the pNE spacer is chosen as 5 nm, which enabled the smallest lasers in our experiment (see the comparison of laser performances at different spacer thicknesses 1 nm, 5 nm, and 10 nm in Fig. S2). We pumped every single device with nanosecond optical pulses at 480 nm (duration 4 ns, repetition rate 20 Hz). For each device, we recorded output emission spectra at various pump levels (Fig. S3) below and above the lasing threshold. Their locations on the substrate were subsequently marked (Fig. S4) by pump laser irradiation at high fluence for scanning electron microscopy (SEM) imaging to determine the device sizes. The pump fluences E$% at the lasing threshold of the three experimental groups are shown in Fig. 1B as a function of the effective device side length L = √S, where S is the device area in the x-y plane. A large number of plasmonic lasers achieved lasing with submicron sizes. Ten smallest plasmonic lasers are denoted by i to x in Fig. 1B. The smallest plasmonic laser (Fig. 2A, inset) has L=0.57 μm (i; 0.56 μm × 0.58 μm × 0.32 μm for x, y, and z directions), which is about 10-fold smaller in device volume V than that of the smallest photonic laser. Besides, the second smallest device (ii; 0.75 μm × 0.49 μm × 0.3 μm; L=0.61 μm) showed single-mode lasing (Fig. 2B, inset). The gold substrate facilitated substantial reduction of the device sizes as no crystals smaller than L ≈ 1.2 μm on the dielectric substrates showed lasing. Regardless of L, the lasing thresholds were similar across all the three groups (Fig. 1B). Below the lasing thresholds, the plasmonic devices, regardless of sizes, generally exhibited multiple peaks in their PL spectra, indicating increased density of states (Figs. 2A, 2B, and S5). Above the thresholds, narrow emission peaks appear with substantial increase of intensity. The device i exhibited two lasing modes, M1 and M2 (Fig. 2A). M1 reached lasing first, followed by M2. The device ii demonstrated a single lasing mode. (Fig. 2B). We observed an immediate reduction of the full-width-half-maximum (FWHM) of the PL emission peaks near the thresholds in both devices using the multi-peak Lorentzian fitting method (Figs. 2C, 2D, and S6). The narrowest FWHM of the lasing peaks near the threshold is about 2.4 meV (=0.7 nm) and 2.2 meV (=0.5 nm) for both M1 and M2 in device i, and 1 meV (=0.2 nm) in device ii. Both the linewidth narrowing and a polarization change (Fig. S6E) are clear indications of lasing. In contrast, all photonic lasers showed broad single-peak profiles in the PL spectra below the lasing threshold (Figs. 2E, S6G, and S7). From hyperspectral images (Fig. S8), we reconstructed the stimulated emission profiles of both M1 and M2, which were revealed to be Fabry-Perot and whispering-gallery modes (WGM), respectively (Fig. 2F). We numerically calculated these two eigenmodes (COMSOL Multiphysics). The simulated quality factors are 61 and 41 for M1 and M2, respectively. Both modes are hybrid resonances, because their electric fields are concentrated inside the gap region and also oscillate within the CsPbBr3 crystal (Fig. 2G). Conceptually, these resonances can be understood as the surface plasmons of a planar multilayer 4 metal−dielectric closed system restricted to specific quantized wavevectors determined by the device sizes (31). We calculate the plasmon dispersions of such closed systems where the CsPbBr3 layer is infinitely extended in the x and y directions (Fig. S9). From the dispersion, group indices n. of the two modes are photonic control group with silicon substrates, two photonic modes are identified with Q0 ≈ 90 and 38, respectively, and n. ≈ 2.5 (Fig. S9). Therefore, in our devices, the plasmonic system can achieve similar quality factors to those of the photonic system. This is because the higher n. of the plasmonic modes results in stronger SPP boundary reflections circumventing the CsPbBr3 crystal, which reduces the radiation losses, and compensates the increased absorption losses. We studied the laser dynamics with a three-level rate equation model (16). In this model, the threshold pump absorption rate P$% per volume V at frequency ω3, (Supplementary Note 1) is given by P$%V ≈ ω3/Q0β0η. Here, β0 is the spontaneous emission factor of the lasing mode m, and η is quantum yield of the gain medium. P$% was calculated from the experimentally measured threshold pump fluence E$%, ranges from 0.5 to 5 × 1018 cm-3ns-1 for all lasing devices (Fig. S10). To reduce the lasing threshold, three parameters in the denominator are important: quality factor Q0 of the lasing mode, spontaneous emission factor β0 of the lasing mode, and the quantum yield η of the gain medium. Our simulation results above have predicted similar quality factors in our plasmonic and photonic devices. Below, we show that plasmonic devices, compared to the photonic test groups, offer higher β0 and η for submicron V. We used both laser experiment data and transient spectroscopic tools to analyze a few important laser parameters of our devices, including β0, η, and Purcell factor. First, we extracted β0 of the lasing mode of the plasmonic devices at a fixed, low pump fluence at 0.2 mJ/cm2 (Fig. 3A). We employ an analytical ray tracing model (12, 32) to calculate the number of cavity modes (N) (Fig. S12), which varies between 3 and 6 within the gain bandwidth. For the plasmonic devices, we obtain β0 by decomposing the PL spectra, which contain multiple emission peaks, into N Lorentzians and background fluorescence for uncoupled emission (Fig. S6). We observe that the plasmonic β0 increases from ~0.05 to ~0.35 as the device size decreases from ~1.3 μm to ~0.6 μm. β0 in photonic devices cannot be inferred from their PL spectra because of the lack of multiple resonant peaks (Fig. S7). Next, we probed the spontaneous emission enhancement with two approaches, the laser experiments (Fig. 3B) and the time-resolved spectroscopy (Fig. 3C). In an integrating sphere measurement, we benchmarked the intrinsic quantum yield (η?@$) ≈ 1.5% for our synthesized CsPbBr3 microcrystals (> 5 μm), synthesized in a N,N-dimehtlformaldehyde (DMF) solution and transferred to Si substrates. Compared to this benchmark, spontaneous emission at the same effective pump fluence (~0.2 mJ/cm2) was substantially enhanced in the plasmonic devices compared to that in the photonic ones, as shown in our 5 laser experiments (Fig. 3B). In particular, the plasmonic devices, especially those submicron sized, were 10-40x brighter. Consequently, the η of the gain media in the plasmonic devices were increased to 0.15- 0.6, an order of magnitude higher than those in the photonic devices. Spontaneous emission enhancement (the Purcell effect) via SPPs in the vicinity of plasmonic cavities has been well studied (33, 34). For the measured β0 and η of various devices, we devised an analytical model to explain their general trends with a decent agreement achieved (Fig. S13). In our second approach, we verified such emission enhancement using time-resolved spectroscopy. We show representative fluorescence decays of CsPbBr3 crystals of three different sizes on pNE coated Au substrates (Fig. 3C). More comprehensive measurements on more samples on both Au and Si substrates are shown in Fig. S14 and Table S1. We observed that the peak intensities and the total number of emitted photons, proportional to the total spontaneous emission enhancement (Supplmentary Note 1D), are simultaneously increased for small devices. From these data, we extracted the associated total Purcell factor and η (Fig. S14 and Table S1), which are at least one order of magnitude higher than those in the photonic control group. These results are in agreement with those obtained from the previous alternative methods (Figs. 3A and 3B). The light-in-light-out (L-L) curve is another crucial indicator of laser performance. Specifically, the nonlinear kink in the L-L curves is determined by the parameter x ≡ β0η (35) (Fig. 3D and Supplementary Note 1B). Figure 3D shows the L-L curves along with the extracted x parameters of our three devices. The extracted x parameters agree reasonably well with the product of the spontaneous emission factor of the lasing mode β0 and quantum yields η that are obtained independently in Figs. 3A and 3B. Our systematic study of the lasing actions in plasmonic and photonic devices enables us to identify a regime where efficient plasmonic lasing becomes possible. As shown in Fig. 4, we plot the measured threshold carrier density ρ$%, inferred from P$% (Supplementary Note 1C), versus the device sizes in all the three experimental groups. We also plot the associated theoretical calculations (solid and dashed lines) via ρ$%V ≈ ω3τF/Q0β0F$H$ (Supplementary Note 2) for our lasing devices around 2.3 eV. The comparison between the theoretical curves shows that the plasmonic (photonic) devices exhibit lower lasing thresholds for small (large) devices. The crossover of the two curves is around 2 μm. These predictions agree well with our measurements (squares). The increased group indices and Purcell factors in the plasmonic devices compensate for the absorptive losses and thereby reduce the lasing thresholds (Supplementary Note 2). Therefore, more efficient plasmonic lasing becomes possible, as indicated by the shaded yellow region in Fig. 4. 6 To achieve efficient plasmonic lasing, CsPbBr3 has two unique advantages, high carrier density and long carrier diffusion length (> 9 μm). From a material perspective, the maximal attainable ρ (proportional to optical gain) is limited by various loss mechanisms, such as Auger recombination and heat- induced material damage, even under strong pumping. In CsPbBr3 near the lasing threshold, carrier density ρ exceeds the Mott transition density ρIH$$ (dashed green line in Fig. 4) and reaches 1018-1019 cm-3, CsPbBr3 is measured as about 4000 cm-1 (24). Such high gain around 2.3 eV (28) is unique compared with other gain materials, including organic materials (e.g. poly(phenylene vinylene) polymers, ~90 cm-1 (36)) or inorganic III/V semiconductor (e.g. InGaN quantum wells, 1500 cm-1 (37)). Another advantage is that the diffusion length of charge carriers in CsPbBr3 exceeds 9 μm (23, 38). The charge carriers created over the entire device volume can migrate and undergo Purcell-enhanced radiative recombination upon increased overlap with plasmonic lasing modes. In this sense, gain media with low carrier diffusivity would be far less desirable for efficient plasmonic lasing. We have demonstrated CsPbBr3-on-gold nanolasers operated in the efficient plasmonic lasing regime. Compared to previous works (Table S2) in the visible wavelengths, the realized devices further reduce the length scales of room-temperature plasmonic nanolasers to the full-submicron regime. Furthermore, our devices, including both the semiconductor gain material and the polymer coating, are fabricated with solution-based chemistry only. Therefore, our techniques hold unique promise for mass production of high-performance nanolasers at low cost. The intrinsic η of our fabricated devices could be improved by defect reduction, as near 100% η in CsPbBr3 quantum dots has been demonstrated (39). Besides, lasing thresholds could be further reduced with Fano resonances in optimized structures (40, 41). These combinatory efforts may further miniaturize plasmonic nanolasers towards the deep sub-diffraction limit. Acknowledgements The authors thank Kwon-Hyun Kim for spectroscopic ellipsometry measurement. This research was supported by National Institutes of Health (grant no. DP1EB024242) and the Massachusetts General Hospital Research Scholar Award. S.C. acknowledges the Samsung Scholarship. Part of this work used the facilities in the Center for Materials Science and Engineering at MIT and the Center for Nanoscale Systems, a part of Harvard University and a member of the National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure Network (NNCI), which is supported by the NSF (grant no. 1541959). This material is based upon work supported in part by the U.S. Army Research Office through the Institute for Soldier Nanotechnologies at MIT, under Collaborative Agreement Number W911NF-18-2-0048. 7 Author contributions S.H.Y. and S.C. conceived and designed the project. S.C. performed the experiments and analyzed the data. Y.Y. provided theoretical assiatance. All authors contributed to manuscript writing. M.S. and S.H.Y. supervised the project. Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Corresponding author Correspondence to S.H.Y (syun@hms.harvard.edu)