1 Zero-Dimensional Organic-Inorganic Hybrid Material with Ultra-Narrow-Red Emission at Room Temperature Peiqing Cai1*, Song Wang1, Tianmou Xu1, Ying Tang1,2, Xiaolin Yuan2, Mingjie Wan1, Qi Ai1, Junjie Si1, Xin Yao1, Yonggang Cao3, Maxim K. Rabchinskii4, Pavel N. Brunkov4 and Zugang Liu1* 1College of Optical and Electronic Technology, China Jiliang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310018, China. 2Ningbo Semiconductor International Corporation, Ningbo, Zhejiang, 315800, China. 3College of Metrology and Measurement Engineering, China Jiliang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310018, China. 4Ioffe Institute, 26 Politekhnicheskaya, St Petersburg, 194021, Russian Federation. *Author to whom correspondence should be addressed: Email: pqcai@cjlu.edu.cn and zgliu78@cjlu.edu.cn. 2 Abstract Recently, low-dimensional organic-inorganic hybrid halide compounds have aroused great attention in the optoelectronic field, due to the unique topology and optical properties. Herein, we report an Mn4+ doped [N(CH3)4]2TiF6 zero-dimensional organic-inorganic hybrid phosphor, which could not only exhibit very narrow and pure red emission, but also maintain efficient emission intensity at room temperature. The crystal structure, photoluminescence properties and temperature sensing application are discussed. The excellent temperature dependent luminescent properties are attributed to the rigid structure and isolated MnF6 2- octahedra in the total crystal framework. These results will help design suitable materials and devices in both warm white light emitting diodes and optical sensors. Keywords: Mn4+ doped phosphors; Organic-inorganic hybrid material; Narrow red emitting. 3 1. Introduction Solid-state white light-emitting diodes (w-LED) have a significant position in the lighting and display markets. Currently,the most popular strategy for the w-LED design is the combination of InGaN blue chips and yellow YAG: Ce3+ phosphors. However, duo to the intrinsic lack of the red emission, the method above-mentioned could not completely simulate the nature sunlight. Recently, Mn4+ doped fluoride phosphors have been proposed as one kind of cost-effective candidates to compensate the red region, which are sensitive to the human eyes. The optical absorption and emission properties of Mn4+ ions doped inorganic fluoride materials have been known for many years, but their wet synthesis method and potential application have not been raised enough attention. A milestone improvement on the application of Mn4+ doped fluoride phosphor in w-LED occurred in 2008 by S. Adachi ‘s group, when they accidentally rediscovered the Mn4+ doped K2SiF6 (KSF) phosphor during the erosion experiment of fluorescent porous silicon. Since then, a various of Mn4+ doped inorganic fluoride and oxyfluoride compounds were reported subsequently. Although the Mn4+ inorganic fluoride phosphors exhibit narrow pure red emission and broadband absorption in the blue range, the intrinsic hydroscopicity of the Mn4+ doped phosphors will trigger the hydrolysis reaction. The manganese fluoride component of the compounds will be hydrolyzed into manganese oxides and hydroxides, which may reduce the emitting intensity and restrict the actual application 4 of the phosphors. Basically, the intense narrow red emission of the Mn4+ doped fluoride phosphors is originated from the MnF6 2- octahedral luminescent centers in a specific crystal field environment. Thus, reducing the degradation of the optical active MnF6 2- is the key point to realize the durability in the ambient environment. Several researchers found that the external surface modification was the general method to improve the moisture resistance of the inner delicate MnF6 2- octahedra. For example, Zhou et al. develop a simple surface passivation strategy to treat KSF:Mn4+ samples, the surface Mn4+ cations are sacrificed by H2O2, in situ forming a Mn4+-rare surface protective layer with low solubility and the Mn4+ inside are protected indirectly. Nguyen et al. reported a facile approach for coating Mn4+ doped fluoride phosphors with a moisture-resistant alkyl phosphate layer. Huang and coworkers utilized a novel reductive DL-mandelic acid to block the hydrolysis reaction of MnF6 2- clusters. The zero-dimensional organic-inorganic halide compounds own unique spatial bound structure, in which the inorganic components are isolated by the organic ingredients, thus the luminescent active inorganic components are protected well by the organic ligands, forming a self-modified structure to resist the moisture. Recently, the broadband emissions in zero-dimensional organic-inorganic metal halide perovskites and perovskite-related materials with excellent color tunability and high PLQE have aroused great attention in the w-LED community. Although the tunable narrow band emission originated from the excitonic states already have been demonstrated in the 3D, 2D and quasi-2D perovskites, narrow band emission 5 in the 0D systems have rarely been reported in the literatures. Recently, T. Jüstel et al reported an organic-inorganic [C(NH2)3]2GeF6: Mn4+ phosphor with narrow red emission. However, this material exhibits acute luminescence quenching at room temperature, due to the multi-phonon relaxation induced by the strong phonon modes from the organic guanidinium cations. Therefore, the narrow red emission of the Mn4+ could only be observed at cryogenic temperature. In this work, we reported a Mn4+ doped zero-dimensional tetramethylammonium hexafluorotitanium phosphor: [N(CH3)4]2TiF6: Mn4+ by the combination of facile solvothermal method and low temperature solid-state method. The as-prepared material not only shows narrow red emission at room temperature, but also exhibits negative luminescent thermal quenching, indicating the practical application potentials in w-LEDs and flexible optoelectronic devices. 2. Experiment section 2.1 Preparations A facile wet chemical method was adopted to synthesize [N(CH3)4]2TiF6: Mn4+ [tetramethylammonium hexafluorotitanium, (TMA)2TiF6:Mn4+] red phosphor. K2MnF6 powders were selected as the Mn4+ source and synthesized according to the literatures published elsewhere. . Pure polycrystalline [N(CH3)4]2TiF6 powders were prepared by using a solvothermal method reported in ref . Typically, 0.638 g TiO2, 0.438 g [N(CH3)4]Cl, 20 mL DMF, and 2 mL HF were mixed and 6 stirred for 1 h in a Teflon beaker. The precursor solution was transferred to a hydrothermal reaction vessel and heated to 180 oC for 4 days. After cooling down to room temperature naturally, the crystalline sample was collected by filtration and washed with DMF for three times. The final white product was obtained by heating at a vacuum oven at 120 oC overnight. The Mn4+ doped (TMA)2TiF6 was prepared by a simple solid-state method subsequently. 0.621g (TMA)2TiF6 and 0.024g K2MnF6 were completely mixed by grinding in an agate mortar. The mixture was transferred to a home-made Teflon container and heated in the vacuum oven at 100 oC for 3 h. 2.2 Characterization The crystalline information of the powder samples was obtained by means of X-ray diffraction (XRD, D8 Advanced, Bruker Co, Germany) using Cu Kα-radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å), temperature dependent photoluminescence excitation, emission spectra (PLE/PL) and decay curves were measured by utilizing an Edinburgh Instruments FLS1000 spectrometer equipped with a 450W Xe discharge lamp, a 60W μs Xe flash lamp and a closed-cycle Helium cryostat. Fourier transformed infrared (FTIR) spectrum was recorded by a Nicolet 6700 spectrometer with the sample dispersed in a KBr pellet. The Raman spectrum of Mn4+ doped sample was measured by the Raman microscope system (Horiba, LabRAM HR). 7 3. Results and discussion 3.1 Crystallographic determination and structure analysis The structure information of Mn4+ doped (TMA)2TiF6 was collected by powder X-ray diffraction and corrected by using Rietveld refinement on the GSAS program. The crystallographic data of the pure (TMA)2TiF6 reported by Göbel et al was selected as the initial structure model during the structure refinement. Fig. 1(a) exhibits the refined XRD data of 2% Mn4+ doped (TMA)2TiF6 and the detail crystallographic information was listed in Table. 1. As shown in Fig. 1(b), the Mn4+ doped (TMA)2TiF6 is belong to a centrosymmetric trigonal R-3 space group with cell parameters a = b = 7.997 Å, c = 19.915 Å. Isolated TiF6 2- inorganic octahedra were separated by rigid N(CH3)4 + organic tetrahedral cations, forming a zero-dimensional molecular framework structure. Structural vibration spectra studies of the molecular groups in the (TMA)2TiF6 crystal were performed by FTIR and Raman spectra. The FTIR spectra in Fig. 2 depicted the Ti-F vibrations in the range of 550-620 cm-1 with low phonon frequency. Two peaks located at 946 and 1018 cm-1 were assigned as the C-N stretching vibrations. The C-H asymmetric vibrations in the CH3 group were observed in the region ca. 1452-1512 cm-1. In the Raman spectra, the vibration peak observed at 603 cm-1 has been assigned as the Ti-F vibration mode, which is in agreement with the result exhibited in the FTIR spectra. Two skeletal modes located at 760 and 958 cm-1 has been assigned to the v1 and v3 non-degenerate A2-type modes of the C4N skeleton, 8 respectively. The C-H v15 triply degenerate F2-type vibration was observed at 1486 cm-1, which is both infrared and Raman active. These assignments are in agreement with the results in previously reported literatures. 3.2 Photoluminescence studies Fig. 3(a) show the normalized PL and PLE spectra of (TMA)2TiF6:Mn4+ at room temperature. The PLE spectrum with 630 nm emission exhibits three dominant bands in the range of 200-500 nm. The broad bands peaking at 374 and 470 nm are due to the spin-allowed 4A24T1 and 4A24T2 transitions of Mn4+ in octahedral symmetry, while the higher-lying absorption band at 250 nm could be assigned as the charge transfer (CT) band. The room temperature PL in Fig. 3(a) shows typical red sharp lines of Mn4+ in a fluoride phosphor, originating from the spin- and parity-forbidden 2Eg  4A2g zero phonon line (ZPL) transition and the accompanying Stokes and anti-Stokes vibrational sidebands v6 (630nm, 613nm), v4 (634nm, 609nm) and v3 (6460nm, 598nm), respectively. It has been reported in literatures that there is strong correlation between the ZPL emission intensity and the crystal symmetry of the host materials. S. Adachi has summarized that negligibly small ZPL of Mn4+ could be found in the cubic, tetragonal and trigonal structure with high crystal symmetry. As analyzed by the refined structure information in Table 1, the Mn4+ ions were confirmed to substitute the TiF6 2- octahedral in a centrosymmetric lattice of trigonal (TMA)2TiF6 system, thus no obvious ZPL was observed at room temperature according to Adachi‘s experience summary and the practical PL spectra of 9 (TMA)2TiF6:Mn4+ as shown in Fig. 3(a). However, some vibrational modes from the inorganic octahedral with low energy frequency still could borrow the energy from the 2Eg  4A2g ZPL transition, the phonon activated sidebands is therefore located on either side of the ZPL. On the other hand, from the point of view of crystal structure, the luminescent center MnF6 in the zero dimensional (TMA)2TiF6 does not share any connection with surrounding N(CH3)4 + organic tetrahedral by faces, edges or corners, thus the electron-lattice coupling effect, which is usually taken account for the spectral broadening of the phosphors, is trivial in this system. Thus the anti-Stokes and Stokes phonon emission peaks are quite sharp. Fig. 2(b) and (c) exhibit the photograph images of pure and Mn4+ doped (TMA)2TiF6 under illumination of daylight and UV excitation. Efficient red luminescence from the Mn4+ doped phosphor could be observed by the UV light illumination. The brown body color of the Mn4+ doped phosphor under the daylight illumination also indicates the efficient absorption in the range of UV to blue, corresponding to results revealed in the PLE spectra as shown in Fig. 3(a). Thermal stability is an important property for phosphors in application. Therefore, the temperature dependent emission spectra and decay curves of the Mn4+ doped (TMA)2TiF6 were investigated. As is shown in Fig.4 (a), the ZPL and Stokes sidebands are dominant in the emission spectra of Mn4+ doped (TMA)2TiF6 at 50 K. When the temperature increases, electrons have more chances of thermal occupancy to populate at higher vibrational state. As a result, the anti-Stokes sidebands were gradually rising on the high energy side of the ZPL. On the contrary with the 10 temperature dependent PL behaviors of Mn4+ doped (TMA)2TiF6, the decay lifetimes of the Mn4+ doped phosphor shows significant luminescent quenching. As shown in Fig. 4(b), in the range of the measured temperature, the decay curves are always keep exponential and decay time becomes shorter with temperature increase, indicating the dominated non-radiative relaxation process during the temperature rising experiment. The total average decay time can be calculated as:      0 0 ) ( ) ( t dt I tI t dt  (1) where I is the intensity at time t, t is the time, and τ is the average decay time. The calculated values of the lifetimes at various temperatures have been labeled in Fig. 4(b). Because the temperature dependent kinetic processes of the Mn4+ 2Eg  4A2g emission are very complicated in the full temperature range from cryogenic temperature to room temperature, the excited dynamics in the Mn4+ doped fluoride phosphors should comprehensively consider several factors such as activation energy, spin-orbit interaction and vibration modes, etc. A valid and simple non-radiative transition theory model with a few fitting parameters is difficult to be built to describe the temperature dependent behaviors of the lifetimes of the Mn4+ doped phosphors. Fig. 4 (c) shows the integrated emission intensities of anti-Stokes sidebands, Stokes sidebands and total Mn4+ emission as functions of temperature in the temperature range of 50 to 300 K. The intensity of all the components of the emission increased with increasing temperature from 50 to 300 K. As ascribed above, the 11 anti-Stokes vibrational state and Stokes vibrational state could be simply regarded as two coupled vibronic levels, which can borrow the energy from ZPL. The temperature dependent fluorescence intensity ratio (FIR) from the thermal coupling levels (TCL) of active Mn4+ ions can be modified as: FIR = Aexp(−ΔE/kT) (2) where A is constant, E is the energy difference between two coupled levels, k is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the temperature. Fig. 4 (c) illustrates the intensity ratio Ianti-S / IS of Mn4+ emission as a function of temperature in the range of 50 to 300 K. The sharp increase in Ianti-S / IS with increasing temperature indicates that the Mn4+ doped organic-inorganic phosphor has a potential application in temperature sensors. We delete the baseless description here The temperature dependent PL spectroscopy data represented here is quite different with the that of Mn4+ doped [C(NH2)3]2GeF6 (CGF) phosphors reported by T. Jüstel et al. The Mn4+ red luminescence in CGF host is quenched at room temperature and they assumed that the low thermal quenching temperature is caused by the multi-phonon relaxation induced by the high phonon frequencies of the organic component in the lattice (3400 cm-1, N-H stretching vibration). According to ref , the energy of C-H stretching vibration in the [N(CH3)4]2TiF6 host is about 3000 cm-1, comparable with the energy of the N-H stretching vibration in CGF. If this assumption is correct, the Mn4+ doped [N(CH3)4]2TiF6 should exhibit similar luminescent properties as Mn4+ doped CGF phosphor. In this work, the Mn4+ doped [N(CH3)4]2TiF6 exhibits no luminescence quenching when it is heated from low 12 temperature to the room temperature as shown in Fig. 4(c). To investigate the reasons behind this difference, we synthesized the Mn4+ doped [C(NH2)3]2TiF6 phosphor for comparison, which has an isostructure with the CGF crystal. We found that, as same as Mn4+ doped CGF, the as-synthesized [C(NH2)3]2TiF6:Mn4+ powders also show no red emission at room temperature under UV excitation. Ok et al. investigated the structure differences between the centrosymmetric [N(CH3)4]2TiF6 and nocentrosymmetric [C(NH2)3]2TiF6, and they found that both materials have the zero-dimensional crystal structure consisting TiF6 that are separated by organic cations. However, the stereo N(CH3)4 + tetrahedra cations could help to build a rigid structure framework of the [N(CH3)4]2TiF6 matrix, whereas the nitrogen atoms in planar C(NH2)3 + have significant hydrogen bonding with the fluorine atoms in TiF6, giving [C(NH2)3]2TiF6 a ̳soft‘ pseudo two-dimensional topology. As is well known, the 3d3 Mn4+ ion is belong to high field ions in a particular electronic configuration and the PL properties of Mn4+ are strongly influenced by the crystal environment, covalency and electron cloud expansion (nephelauxetic effect), etc. Therefore, we suggest that the ordered rigid structure with strong ionicity in [N(CH3)4]2TiF6 could effectively maintain the transition metal coordination field and suppress phonon scattering, thereby promoting the radiative transition at elevated temperature. On the cannot effectively block the movement of high-energy phonons, and the strong hydrogen bond interaction may also influence the high-order perturbation terms and coupling representation, reducing the transition probability of the radiative matrix 13 element, thus the red emission of Mn4+ is fully quenched at room temperature. Furthermore, we also synthesized the Mn4+ doped (4,4‘-bpyH2)TiF6 powders, in which the isolated TiF6 octahedra are localized in the hydrogen bond framework created by the bipyridinium cations. No red emission was observed at room temperature in this material, which is in agreement with the hypothesis of hydrogen bond effect mentioned above. 4. Conclusions A new red Mn4+ doped [N(CH3)4]2TiF6 phosphor has successfully synthesized by a mild solvothermal method for the first time. The as-prepared Mn4+ doped phosphor presented sharp red line emission of Mn4+ at around 630 nm under excitation in the near UV to blue region at room temperature. The temperature dependent PL and decay of Mn4+ were performed to investigate the origin of the efficient red emission at room temperature. Spectroscopy analyses demonstrated that enhanced phonon-assistant emission and elevated non-radiative transition are two competitive processes during the temperature rising process, which are responsible for the higher PL intensity and shorter decay time at elevated temperature. Comparative study of structure and bonding interaction on [N(CH3)4]2TiF6 and [C(NH2)3]2TiF6 also indicated that the Mn4+ doped organic-inorganic hybrid materials with rigid structure and strong ionic bond were necessary for efficient red emission. Our findings highlight the importance of judiciously choosing organic cations in the Mn4+ doped materials for the emission at room temperature, which has guiding significance for the 14 design of narrow red organic-inorganic hybrid luminescent materials.. 15 CRediT author statement Peiqing Cai: Conceptualization, Writing-Original draft preparation. Supervison. Song Wang: Software, Resources. Tianmou Xu: Software, Resources. Ying Tang: Data Curation. Xiaolin Yuan: Data Curation. Mingjie Wan: Resources. Qi Ai: Visualization. Junjie Si: Investigation. Xin Yao: Investigation. Yonggang Cao: Investigation. Maxim K. Rabchinskii: Writing-Review & Editing. Pavel N. Brunkov: Writing-Review & Editing. Zugang Liu: Writing-Review & Editing. Supervison. Conflicts of interest There are no conflicts to declare.