Substrate screening approach for quasiparticle energies of two-dimensional interfaces with lattice mismatch Chunhao Guo,1 Junqing Xu,2 Dario Rocca,3 and Yuan Ping2, ∗ 1Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California, 95064, USA 2Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA, 95064, USA 3University of Lorraine, LPCT, UMR 7019, 54506 Vandœuvre-l`es-Nancy, France (Dated: November 13, 2020) Two-dimensional (2D) materials are outstanding platforms for exotic physics and emerging appli- cations by forming interfaces. In order to efficiently take into account the substrate screening in the quasiparticle energies of 2D materials, several theoretical methods have been proposed previously; but only applicable to interfaces of two systems’ lattice constants with certain integer proportion, which often requires a few percent of strain. In this work, we analytically showed the equivalence and distinction among different approximate methods for substrate dielectric matrices. We evaluated the accuracy of these methods, by applying them to calculate quasi-particle energies of hexagonal boron nitride interface systems (heterojunctions and bilayers), and compared with explicit interface calculations. Most importantly, we developed an efficient and accurate interpolation technique for dielectric matrices that made quasiparticle energy calculations possible for arbitrarily mismatched interfaces free of strain, which is extremely important for practical applications. I. INTRODUCTION Two-dimensional (2D) materials and their interfaces have shown unprecedented rich physics and promising applications in many areas, such as opto-spintronics1,2, quantum information3,4, and biomedical research5,6. New emerging phenomena such as non-conventional su- perconductivity7,8 or topologically protected states9–12 may be created by stacking 2D layers. Experimentally, growth of 2D materials, achieved through physical epi- taxy or chemical vapor deposition (CVD), is typically supported on a substrate13. In general, the electrical and optical properties of 2D materials could be strongly modified by substrate screening. For example, the 2D materials’ fundamental electronic gap can be significantly reduced due to the dielectric screening from surrounding layers (substrates) when forming heterointerfaces14,15. Reliable prediction of substrate screening effects from first-principles calculations is critical for accurate inter- pretation of experimental results and guidance of new materials’ design. Currently, widely-used electronic structure methods such as the HSE06 hybrid functional16 may accurately describe a large number of three-dimensional bulk sys- tems, but are inadequate for low dimensional systems such as ultrathin 2D materials because of their highly in- homogeneous dielectric screening. The Koopman’s com- pliant hybrid functional17–19 or dielectric dependent hy- brid functional20 are necessary for the electronic struc- ture of ultrathin 2D materials, where the fraction of Fock exchange α varies with the number of layers21 and needs to be determined for each individual material and thick- ness. On the other hand, many-body perturbation theory (MBPT)22–24 can successfully describe the quasiparticle properties of 2D materials such as fundamental electronic gaps, regardless of their thickness and dielectric proper- ties. Generally, one and two-particle excitations, experi- mentally corresponding to charged excitations (e.g. pho- toemission) and neutral excitation (e.g. optical absorp- tion), can be accurately obtained by the GW approxima- tion22,25–28 and the Bethe–Salpeter equation29–34 (BSE), respectively. However, explicit interface calculations at this level of theory are extremely computationally de- manding and not suitable for the rapid evaluation of the effect of different substrates. Therefore, several approximate methods have been proposed to compute the quasiparticle properties of in- terfaces at the cost of primitive cell calculations of the subsystems composing the interface15,35,36. Typically, for weakly-bonded Van de Waals (vdW) interfaces, the hybridization between layers is relatively weak and the dominant effect of the substrate consists in modifying the dielectric screening of the material of interest36. Within the GW approximation, this effect can be described by approximating the dielectric matrix of an interface in terms of contributions from individual subsystems (the material and the substrate), as proposed in several pre- vious studies15,35,36. Despite the reasonable level of ac- curacy achieved through these methods, the underlying approximations and connections between different meth- ods have not been carefully evaluated. For example, par- tially neglecting local-field effect of substrate dielectric screening (i.e. removing in-plane and/or out-of-plane off-diagonal elements of dielectric matrices15,37,38) has been a common approximation previously, which was not carefully examined before. We will test the applicability of such approximation in different systems, for both in- plane and out-of-plane components of dielectric matrices. Most importantly, previous methods can not be ap- plied to arbitrarily lattice-mismatched 2D interfaces, namely an integer relation between lattice constants is necessary (L · N = ̃L · ̃N, where L and ̃L are the primi- tive lattice constants of the two systems at interfaces, and N( ̃N) is an integer number). Forcing lattice-matching arXiv:2007.07982v2 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 11 Nov 2020 2 or the fulfillment of the above relation is typically re- quired for interface calculations. These constraints ei- ther limit the choice of interfaces that can be studied or require applying artificial strain that may strongly mod- ify the electronic structure. In this work, we develop a reciprocal-space linear-interpolation method in the entire q + G space to approximate interface dielectric matrices of arbitrarily mismatched systems. This approach makes MBPT calculations of general interfaces possible and free of strain. In order to demonstrate the accuracy and efficiency of this new methodology, we will consider applications to interfaces involving hexagonal boron nitride (hBN). This material has a wide band gap in ultraviolet region, with promising applications in deep ultraviolet light-emitting devices39 and as a host for spin qubits and single pho- ton emitters40 in quantum information technologies26,41. As ultrathin hBN is mostly supported on substrates in experimental measurements, it is critical to accurately predict the effect of substrates on electronic structure of hBN. This is also important for evaluations of defect properties in 2D materials supported by substrates42,43. We will use hBN with SnS2 substrates and bilayer hBN in two conformations as prototypical examples for our methodology validation in this study. For the rest of the paper, we first analytically derived the connection among different approximations of dielec- tric matrices with substrate screening15,36,38,44,45. We then performed the separate GW calculations for sub- systems from interfaces with several approximate ap- proaches to construct the interface polarizability, and compared results with explicit interfaces in order to eval- uate the accuracy of these methods. Next we examine the importance of off-diagonal elements of polarizabil- ity in substrate screenings in various 2D interface sys- tems. Finally, we introduced our linear-interpolation technique, benchmarked it and showed the quasiparticle energies obtained by this technique for arbitrarily lattice- mismatched 2D interfaces. II. METHODOLOGY In this section, we will discuss the different methods and concepts used in this paper, which are summarized in the Table I. A. Methods for interface polarizability The interactions among quasi-particles within the GW approximation is described by the screened Coulomb po- tential W = ε−1vC, where vC is the bare Coulomb in- teraction and ε is the dielectric matrix. The inverse di- electric matrix is defined by ε−1 = 1 + vCχ within the random phase approximation (RPA)23. The reducible polarizability χ can be obtained from the irreducible po- Methods Assumption χeff-sum (Eq. 3) Coulomb interaction between layers χGSC eff -sum Uses interface eigenvalue in χeff-sum χF W F eff -sum Uses interface eigenvalue and wavefunctions in GW with χeff-sum χ0-sum (Eq. 4) Coulomb interaction between layers, equiv. to χeff-sum at RPA χ-sum (Eq. 6) No interaction between layers Approximations Definition ε−1-diag Neglects χs off-diagonal elements ε-diag Neglects χs 0 off-diagonal elements Interface structure Solution Lattice match Direct summation Special match q + G mapping Arbitrary mismatch q + G bilinear interpolation larizability χ0 (also known as independent-particle polar- izability) through the equation χ = χ0 + χ0vCχ. For the purpose of our discussion we first partition the total (“tot”) vdW interface systems into material (“m”) and substrate (“s”) subsystems36. Considering density response of external field, we obtain: δnm =χm(δVext + vCδns), δns =χs(δVext + vCδnm), (1) where δn is the density response, and the reducible polar- izability χ is defined as the density-density response func- tion to an applied potential. If we consider the material subsystem (“m”) as the probe, the total external poten- tial includes the external applied potential (δVext) and the Coulomb potential from the charge response δns in the substrate (vCδns). (We assume the material and sub- strate are connected only through interlayer Coulomb in- teractions, with minimum wavefunction overlap between material and substrates, i.e. interlayer hybridization.) Then we define an effective polarizability χeff as a density response function of one subsystem to only the external applied potential (δVext), i.e. χm/s eff = δnm/s/δVext. More precisely, χm/s eff can be given in terms of χm/s through Eq. 1: χm/s eff = δnm/s δVext (2) When subsystems have negligible interlayer wavefunc- tion overlap (i.e. hybridization), the total density re- sponse (δntot) can be written as δntot = δnm + δns and then the total polarizability χtot of entire interface sys- tems is χtot =δntot δVext = δnm δVext + δns δVext = χm eff + χs eff. (3) 3 Atomic structure of 2D interfaces a) hBN/SnS2, b) bilayer hBN with AB stacking, c) bilayer hBN with AA′ stacking. The green balls denote boron atoms; the white balls denote N atoms; the yellow balls denote sulfur atoms; the silver balls denote Sn atoms. In summary, this approach uses the reducible polar- izabilty of each subsystem (χm/s) where the Coulomb potential from the other subsystem is considered part of external potential in Eq. 1, to construct the effective re- ducible polarizability χm/s eff of each subsystem where such potential is excluded from external potential in Eq. 2. Then we sum up χm eff and χs eff to obtain total reducible polarizability of interface systems χtot in Eq. 3, which will be denoted as “χeff-sum”. As we noted above, interlayer wavefunction overlap or hybridization effect is not taken into account in the method described above. The hybridization effect can change the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions at the DFT level which then change the Green’s function (G) and di- electric matrix (in W) in the GW calculations. Therefore, for systems with strong interlayer hybridization, we can add the hybridization effect step-by-step. We can add corrections from ground state eigenvalues of interfaces to the χeff-sum methods, namely “χGSC eff -sum” method, which partially take into account the effect of interlayer hybridization on eigenvalues at the DFT level. Further- more, we can also include interface ground state wave- function (“FWF”) and eigenvalues as inputs for Green’s function (G), denoted as “χF W F eff -sum” method. This method is close to GW calculations of an explicit inter- face except with approximate dielectric matrix by Eq. 3. From another perspective, if the interlayer hybridiza- tion or wavefunction overlap is negligible (similar to the condition required above for δntot)44,45, the total irre- ducible polarizability χtot 0 of the interfaces can be ex- pressed approximately as the sum of each subsystem con- tribution15,37,38,44–46 χtot 0 = χm 0 + χs 0, (4) which we denote as “χ0-sum” method. To further un- derstand the theoretical connection between different methods, we rewrite Eq. 1 with χ0 through relation χ = χ0 + χ0vCχ as: δnm =χm 0 (δVext + vCδns + vCδnm), δns =χs 0(δVext + vCδnm + vCδns). (5) Here χ0 as the irreducible polarizability is the density response function to total field δVtot, which includes the applied field and bare Coulomb potential of the total in- terface system, namely δVtot ≡ δVext + vCδntot. Using the above condition δntot = δnm + δns for the interface, summation of the two equations of subsystems in Eq. 5 results in δntot = χtot 0 δVtot = (χm 0 +χs 0)δVtot, which gives Eq. 4. This indicate that the χeff-sum method and χ0- sum method are equivalent under RPA. However, χeff- sum method and χ0-sum method are not equivalent when the diagonal approximation is applied, i.e. neglecting off- diagonal elements of χ in the former or χ0 in the latter, as we will discuss in the Sec. II.B. Therefore we primarily used χeff-sum method in this paper. If we further neglect the interlayer Coulomb interac- tion, this will set vCδnm/s to zero in Eq. 1 and lead χeff → χ. This is at the non-interacting limit between two layers, where χtot = χm + χs, (6) and we name it as “χ-sum” method. In Sec. IV A, we will compare the quasiparticle energies of interfaces with the above approximated dielectric matrices with explicit interface GW calculations. B. Diagonal approximation of dielectric screening For simple metals which may be treated as “jellium”, the nearly translational invariance justifies the dielec- tric matrix ε may be diagonal in reciprocal space23. However, semiconductors and insulators have strong in- homogeneity at interaction length scale requires non- zero off-diagonal elements of ε23,47. The effect from off- 4 diagonal elements of dielectric matrix ε is often referred to the “local field effect”23,47,48. While the effect of off-diagonal terms in intrinsic di- electric screening has been systematically studied 23,47,48, the off-diagonal terms’ effect from environmental dielec- tric screening has not been studied in detail. Here we will investigate the off-diagonal effect of environmental dielec- tric screening through two different approaches, i.e. by applying the diagonal approximation of dielectric matrix ε (“ε-diag”, which directly relates to diagonal approxima- tion of χ0) or inverse dielectric matrix ε−1 (“ε−1-diag”, which directly relates to diagonal approximation of χ and χeff). The ε-diag approximation has been used for substrate dielectric screening in the past work15,37,38,46 when ap- plying the χ0-sum method, specifically, by removing the in-plane off-diagonal components of substrate dielectric matrices. The ε−1-diag approximation has not been em- ployed before, but is more convenient in the χeff-sum approach. Since the off-diagonal elements of χ0 will con- tribute to the diagonal elements of χ and ε−1 through the matrix inverse operation, this is a weaker approaximation than ε-diag. We will compare these two approximations considering specific numerical examples in Sec. IV B. C. Reciprocal-space linear-interpolation approach The construction of interface structure models is often complicated by the problem of lattice matching between two subsystems. One of the main objectives of this work is to propose a general approach that can be applied to subsystems with rather different periodicity and crystal symmetry, and does not require the application of strain to force the lattice matching at the interface. In general, in order to directly sum the subsystem con- tributions to obtain the polarizability (and dielectric ma- trix) of the full interface, one needs an exact correspon- dence of the q + G vectors between the material and the substrate. This requires finding two integer numbers N and ̃N such that the lattice constants L (substrate) and ̃L (material) satisfy the relation L · N = ̃L · ̃N. If N and ̃N can be chosen to be reasonably small, calculations can be directly performed for supercells containing N and ̃N repetitions, although this approach often requires the application of a small percentage of strain. However, if the required N or ̃N are large, several methods have been proposed to make this type of calculations practi- cal15,37,38,44–46. The central idea is to consider unit cells only and to perform a one to one mapping between the reciprocal space q + G vectors of the material and sub- strate45 (see Figure 2(a)). This approach still requires the relation L · N = ̃L · ̃N to be satisfied (possibly by applying a small strain to modify L or ̃L) but avoids supercell calculations. We note that even if one applies the diagonal approximation for χ0 or χ, the diagonal ele- ments still contain both q and G vectors, which requires this relation to be satisfied. While this is a clear nu- merical improvement, a large number of q vectors in the first Brillouin zone might still be required. Indeed, one needs to sample q and/or ̃q point meshes fine enough to ensure that the number of q points (Nq) satisfy the relation L · Nq = ̃L · N ̃q or equivalently Nq/N ̃q = N/ ̃N. Accordingly, this approach becomes computationally de- manding for large N and/or ̃N. A more serious issue is that this mapping scheme is not possible for interfaces with two systems with very different crystal symmetry, e.g. a hexagonal and a lattice. In this work we propose a general method for arbi- trarily lattice-mismatched interfaces where it is not pos- sible to map the q + G vectors between the two sub- systems. This approach applies a linear interpolation of the matrix elements on the substrate grid (q + G, q′ + G′) to obtain their representation on the mate- rial grid ( ̃q + ̃G, ̃q′ + ̃G′), as shown in Figure 2(b) and (c). We note that we need to interpolate q + G together between materials and substrates, which can completely remove the symmetry constrain. Interpola- tion of q only as done in the past work49,50 will im- prove q-sampling convergence speed but does not solve the periodicity or symmetry mismatch problem at inter- faces. As this procedure requires a sampling of the q vectors over the full first Brillouin zone (FBZ), when- ever necessary, the symmetry operators are used to re- construct the grid in the FBZ from the grid in the irre- ducible Brillouin zone (IBZ). Without loss of generality we choose the same size for vacuum in the z-direction for both subsystems; in this way the same out-of-plane reciprocal lattice Gz components are obtained. In order to simplify the implementation, we neglect the in-plane off-diagonal elements of the substrate, i.e. we consider vCχs G,G′(q) ≈ vCχs GG′(q)δGx,G′xδGy,G′y. As shown later for specific numerical examples (see Sec. IV C), this ap- proximation works well in practice for mismatched 2D interfaces. For each set of matrix elements at fixed {Gz, G′ z}, the standard bilinear interpolation technique51 is used to obtain the corresponding in-plane matrix ele- ments vCχGz,G′z( ̃qx,y + ̃Gx,y) in the material subspace, interpolated from vCχGz,G′z(qx,y +Gx,y) in the substrate subspace. As shown in Figure 2(b), the value of the re- sponse function ε−1 − 1 = vCχ at each ̃q + ̃G point (denoted by the black cross overlaying the blue dots) is obtained by interpolating the values at the four near- est q + G points (denoted by the red cross overlaying the orange dots). We note that the bilinear interpolation method can be applied only if all four nearest neighbours exist within the boundaries of q + G space; otherwise the standard proximal interpolation method is applied, which considers only the nearest point on the grid (most likely at the boundary), as shown in Figure 2(c). How- ever, the values close to the boundary of q+G space are very close to zero as shown in Figure 3(a).The bilinear interpolation method is fully general regardless of crystal symmetry, which can be applied to arbitrary interfaces. By applying the interpolation method, we can obtain substrate vCχ matrix elements at the material’s ̃q + ̃G 5 Schematic diagram of a) mapping between computed data points of substrate (orange dots) and computed data points of material (blue dots), where the reciprocal space q + G grid from the substrate and ̃q+ ̃G grid from the material are overlapping; b) bilinear interpolation of the black cross point at P (from ̃q + ̃G grid) from the four nearest data points A, B, C, D (red cross) when P is inside the boundary of the q + G grid (orange dots); c) proximal interpolation with the only nearest one point A when the interpolation point is P at the boundary. grids, without any artificial strain15,44,45. As shown in Gx,y) values computed at the substrate momentum space with full BZ, then we interpolate them to the blue points on the grids of material momentum space vCχGz,G′z( ̃qx,y + ̃Gx,y) (only elements in IBZ are shown here). The blue points fall smoothly on the surface of orange points which show a good interpolation quality. A zoomed-in picture is also shown in Figure 3(b). To show the generality of our method, we applied this in- terpolation method for hBN/phosphorene(BP) interface, where BP has a rectangle lattice, sharply different from the hexgonal lattice hBN has (see SI Figure 1). We show again with our interpolation method, one can obtain the matrix elements of substrates at the material ̃q+ ̃G grids. Then we can compute the quasiparticle energies of this 3D plot of in-plane diagonal elements of function ε−1 − 1 of SnS2 substrate, with G vector subset (Gz, G′ z) = (0, 0) in a) full reciprocal space; b) a zoomed-in portion of a) that contains the irreducible Brillouin zone of the interpolated points (blue) in hBN ̃q + ̃G subspace. The qi + Gi, i = x, y are in-plane reciprocal space Cartesian coordinate in atomic unit (Bohr−1). The orange points are directly computed data points (“DIR CALC”) in SnS2 substrate q + G subspace, while the blue points are interpolated points (“INTERP”) to (hBN) material ̃q + ̃G subspace. Note that the orange points used for interpolating blue points in b) are beyond the first Brillouin zone of the substrate q + G subspace. The single point at zero is the head element of ε−1 − 1, which is exactly zero for both material and substrate. interface, at two systems’ natural lattice constants, with the χeff-sum method. III. COMPUTATIONAL DETAILS A. Computational workflow The workflow of GW calculations for the interface is structured as follows. We first compute the reducible po- larizabilities (χ) for each subsystem separately and then we use them to obtain the effective polarizabilities (χm/s eff ) 6 using Eq. 2. In case of lattice mismatch between the two subsystems, the matrix elements of the polarizability χ of the substrates are obtained on the same reciprocal space grid of the material (ML hBN in the practical ap- plications of this work) by using the linear interpolation method described above. Next we sum them to obtain χtot (i.e. the χeff-sum method). Finally, in order to include the screening effect of the substrate on the material, the GW calculations are performed for the standalone hBN ML with the χtot obtained in the previous step. As we will discuss later, one can achieve further improvement for interfaces with strong hybridization by including corrections from ground state eigenvalues and wavefunctions of explicit interfaces. B. Numerical parameters In this work, we mainly focus on the quasiparti- cle energies of monolayer hBN/substrate interfaces as prototypical systems (where as substrates we will con- sider monolayer hBN itself and monolayer SnS2). Den- sity functional theory (DFT) ground state calculations based on the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange- correlation functional52 have been performed using the open source plane-wave code Quantum ESPRESSO53 with Optimized Norm-Conserving Vanderbilt (ONCV) pseudopotentials54 and a 80 Ry wave function cutoff. From structural relaxation we obtained lattice constants of 2.51 ( ̊A) and 3.70 ( ̊A) for the free-standing monolayer (ML) hBN and SnS2, respectively. GW calculations with the Godby-Needs plasmon-pole approximation55,56 (PPA) were then performed using the Yambo57 code. We chose PPA as a showcase for lower computational cost, but we can apply the same χeff-sum and reciprocal-space interpolation method with full fre- quency integration as well without technical difficulty, with more computational cost. Importantly, to the best of our knowledge, only PPA models or static COHSEX approximation were used in past calculations for the di- electric screening of substrates 15,36–38,44–46 and the ob- tained results were reasonably accurate. We used the same plasmon frequency for all calculations ωp=27.2 eV and found little variation of the results (i.e. within 20 meV, with ωp from 24.5 to 30 eV). The distance between the nearest periodic repetitions along the vacuum direction was set to be 20 ̊A. In or- der to speed up convergence with respect to vacuum sizes, a 2D Coulomb truncation technique was applied to dielectric matrices and GW self-energies58. For bi- layer hBN systems, we set the interlayer distance to the bulk value of 3.33( ̊A) for both of the two different stacking configurations considered here (AA′ and AB). The hBN/SnS2 interlayer distance was set to 3.31 ( ̊A) as obtained from structural relaxation with vdW-corrected functionals59,60. For each free-standing monolayer (“ML”) unit cell, the GW self-energy cutoff is set to 15 Ry. The number of bands is set to 1000 (1500) for hBN (SnS2) unit cell cal- culations. The exchange self-energy cutoff is set to 40 Ry. We use a 30 × 30 × 1 (20 × 20 × 1) k-points sampling for ML-hBN (ML-SnS2) unit cell calculations, unless speci- fied. GW calculations for the full explicit heterointerfaces have also been performed to obtain “exact” reference re- sults to benchmark the different methods for the sub- strate screening effects (see Sec. IV A). The computa- tional parameters for the full interface are set to keep consistency between supercells and unit cell calculations. Additional computational details and convergence tests can be found in SI68. IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS A. Numerical comparison of different methods for substrate screening After presenting in Sec. II with different approaches to approximate the total dielectric screening of an inter- face between two weakly interacting subsystems, in this section we discuss their accuracy in practical GW cal- culations. Results for explicit interfaces will be used as a reference. Specifically, we computed the GW quasi- particle bandgaps of three interfaces: hBN/SnS2, 2L-AB stacking hBN with two layers’ atoms misaligned, and 2L-AA′ stacking hBN interface with two layers’ atoms aligned (the corresponding atomic structures are shown in Figure 1). In order to keep the comparison of differ- ent methodologies as simple as possible, the calculations in this section are performed with fully commensurate interfaces, for both explicit and approximate interface calculations, as the results shown in Figure 4. From the explicit interface results in Figure 4 we see that the direct band gap of hBN at the hBN/SnS2 inter- face (black cross in the third column) is reduced by 0.8 eV compared with the isolated ML hBN (dashed line). This value is about four times of the band gap reduction for the bilayer hBN with respect to the isolated ML hBN (black cross in the first and second columns). This is be- cause ML SnS2 has a much stronger dielectric screening ( ε∞ ≈ 17) and a smaller electronic band gap (≈ 2 eV) compared to ML hBN, which has ε∞ ≈ 5 and an elec- tronic band gap of ≈ 7 eV. This indicates the positive correlation between electronic band gap reduction and substrate dielectric screening, similar to previous discus- sions61–63. Secondly, we find that the effective polarizability ap- proach results (“χeff-sum” method, blue circle) are con- sistently in good agreement with the ones from explicit interface GW calculations (“Direct”, black cross), i.e. within 0.2 eV. We improve the agreement by 50 meV with additional corrections from ground state eigenvalues of interfaces (“χGSC eff -sum” method, red triangle), which partially take into account the effect of interlayer cou- 7 hBN direct band gap at K from several interfaces with different approximations of substrate screening, com- pared with explicit interface calculations. The black dashed line is the direct band gap at K of free-standing ML hBN. For each symbol in the figure, “DIR HS” with black cross de- notes direct GW calculation of explicit heterostructure; “χeff- sum” with blue circle denotes sum of effective polarizabil- ity approach by Eq. 3 with ground state inputs from free- standing ML hBN; “χGSC eff -sum” method with red down tri- angle denotes “χeff-sum” method with additional eigenvalue corrections from ground state interface eigenvalues (“GSC”); “χF W F eff -sum” with magenta up triangle denotes “χeff-sum” method with both ground state eigenvalues and wavefunc- tions from interfaces; “χ-sum” denotes non-interacting “χ- sum” method by Eq. 6. plings on eigenvalues at the DFT level. Moreover, by using interface ground state wavefunctions and eigen- values (“FWF”) as inputs for Green’s function calcula- tions, the results of the effective polarizability approx- imation (“χF W F eff -sum” method, green square) are fur- ther improved, i.e. with only 10 meV difference from the explicit interface GW calculations. While a similar approach was used in , the χF W F eff -sum method has a computational cost similar to that of the full in- terface GW calculation (although the evaluation of the dielectric matrix is more efficient) and is much more de- manding than the other methods in Figure 4 and Ta- ble I. Therefore χeff-sum and χGSC eff -sum provide the best compromise between accuracy and computational cost. We note that for explicit hBN/SnS2 interface, we had to apply 1.5% strain to obtain commensurate supercells which may explain why this interface has slightly larger difference between χeff-sum and explicit calculation than bilayer hBN. In sharp contrast to the methods discussed above, the non-interacting interlayer method based on Eq. 6 (“χ- sum” method, black diamond) gives results far from the explicit interface reference (e.g. with an error of about 0.6 eV). This indicates that the interlayer Coulomb in- teraction plays a dominant role in the electronic bandgap reduction by substrate screening. GW results for hBN direct band gap at K using “χeff-sum” or equivalently “χ0-sum” method to examine the effect of diagonal approximations.“Full matrix” in black cross denotes full dielectric matrices without any diagonal approxi- mation as reference; “in-plane ε−1-diag” in red down triangle denotes diagonal approximation to in-plane elements of ε−1; “out-of-plane ε−1-diag” in dark blue right triangle denotes diagonal approximation to out-of-plane elements for ε−1; “in- plane ε-diag” in magenta up triangle denotes diagonal ap- proximation to in-plane elements of ε; “out-of-plane ε-diag” in light blue left triangle denotes diagonal approximation to out-of-plane elements of ε. B. Diagonal approximation of substrate dielectric screening In this section we will compare different diagonal ap- proximations for the screening considering different nu- merical examples. With “in-plane ε−1-diag” we will de- note an approximation that discards the in-plane off- diagonal elements of reducible polarizability χ in recipro- cal space, i.e. χGG′(q, ω)δGx,G′xδGy,G′y. Similarly, “out- of-plane ε−1-diag” will denote an approach that does not include the out-of-plane off-diagonal elements of polariz- ability in reciprocal space, i.e. χGG′(q, ω)δGz,G′z. Anal- ogous definitions will be used for ε-diag. The GW quasiparticle gaps with different diagonal ap- proximations for the hBN bilayer in two different con- fomations (AA′/ AB) and the hBN/SnS2 interface are shown in Figure 5. We find that for both the ε−1 and ε diagonal approximations, neglecting out-of-plane off- diagonal elements of the substrate (“out-of-plane ε−1- diag” and “out-of-plane ε-diag”, dennoted by dark blue right triangle and light blue left triangle, respectively) causes a large discrepancy of the bandgaps (i.e. from 0.2 to 0.8 eV) with respect to the “exact” result ob- tained from the full screening matrix (“Full matrix”, black cross). In contrast, the results obtained by ne- glecting in-plane off diagonal elements (in-plane ε−1/ in- plane ε-diag, red down triangle/ magenta up triangle) are similar to those with the full screening matrix with de- viations within 50 meV. This means the inhomogeneity effect of out-of-plane substrate screening on quasiparti- cle energies is much stronger than the one of in-plane 8 substrate screening, because the out-of-plane direction is along the non-periodic (vacuum) direction with dramat- ically inhomogeneous charge distribution, compared to the in-plane periodic direction. Besides the overall difference of diagonal approxima- tion along different directions, we also distinguish the difference between ε−1-diag and ε-diag approach in each case. 1) Along the in-plane direction, the difference be- tween different approaches is negligible, i.e. less than 10 meV. 2) Along the out-of-plane direction, the out- of-plane ε−1-diag results (dark blue right triangle) are much closer to the full dielectric matrix results (black cross) than the out-of-plane ε-diag results (light blue left triangle) in Figure 5. This is consistent with our earlier speculation that the ε−1-diag may be a better (weaker) approximation, because the off-diagonal elements of ir- reducible polarizability χ0 contribute to χ or ε−1 during its matrix inversion, which is completely missing in the ε-diag approximation. Moreover, the in-plane inhomogeneity is relatively larger when there is stronger interlayer coupling with atoms aligned perfectly for chemical bonding. For ex- ample, the in-plane inhomogeneity of bilayer hBN with atoms aligned (e.g. 2L AA′ hBN in Figure 1 (b); both in-plane ε−1-diag (red down triangle) and in-plane ε-diag (magenta up triangle) results have 40 meV difference from the “Full matrix” results in the first column of Fig- ure 5), is larger than the interfaces with atoms misaligned (e.g. 2L AB hBN and hBN/SnS2 hectorstructure in Fig- ure 1 (a) and (c); both in-plane ε−1-diag and in-plane ε-diag results have no difference from “Full matrix” re- sults in the second and third columns of Figure 5). C. Lattice mismatched hBN/SnS2 interface In order to benchmark the reciprocal-space linear- interpolation method introduced in Sec. II C and Table I, we consider the hBN/SnS2 interface. A strain of 1.5% was applied to SnS2 to match the hBN lattice constant with a 2:3 ratio in each direction of the plane (namely 2LSnS2 = 3LhBN). By using a commensurate q-point sampling for the two subsystems with a 2:3 ratio, a map- ping of the q + G vectors is possible and traditional methods for the substrate effect can be applied to pro- duce a reference results for our new interpolation method (which, instead, will be used with an incommensurate q- point sampling). We computed the GW band edges near the high symmetry point K of hBN on the SnS2 substrate with the χeff-sum method at different k-point samplings, as shown in Figure 6. The mesh for q-point sampling was chosen to be identical to the k-point sampling. Specifi- cally, the reference calculations were performed with the hBN unit cell calculation with 20×20×1 and 30×30×1 k-point sampling for the units cells of SnS2 and hBN, respectively (this choice satisfies the 2:3 ratio for each inplane direction). The reference result obtained from the q + G mapping is shown in Figure 6 (blue curve GW band structure of hBN at hBN/ stretched SnS2 interface, referenced to valence band maximum (VBM) by us- ing “χeff-sum” method. The blue solid line is computed with commensurate q-point sampling with the reciprocal space mapping approach, while the red/black dash line results are computed with incommensurate q-point sampling with the reciprocal-space linear-interpolation approach. a) shows both valence and conduction band edges; b) shows only the con- duction band edge close to K. labelled by “Nk 20 mapping”). To apply our interpola- tion technique, it is not necessary to use commensurate grids and we compare instead the results for two different choices of the q-point sampling for SnS2. Specifically, in dashed line, “Nk 22 interp.”) and 24 × 24 × 1 (black dashed line, “Nk 24 interp.”) q-point grids, which do not allow for a mapping of the reciprocal space vectors and would be impossible to treat without our interpola- tion method. The results in Figure 6(a) show that the GW band structure with interpolation (red and black dashed lines) is nearly identical to the one based on the mapping (blue solid line), with differences smaller than 1 meV (as can be seen by zooming-in the conduction band edge in Figure 6(b)). This comparison demonstrates the excellent numerical accuracy of our linear interpolation method, which could have also been expected from the high quality of the interpolation in Figure 3. Finally, we use our new interpolation method to bet- ter understand the effect of the strain on quasiparticle energies. In Figure 7, the blue curve corresponds to the the hBN bandstructure on the SnS2 substrate without 9 GW band structures of hBN with stretched SnS2 substrate (“hBN/stretched SnS2”, red dash-dotted line), hBN with SnS2 substrate with no strain (“hBN/SnS2”, blue solid line), compressed hBN with SnS2 substrate (“compressed hBN/SnS2”, black dashed line), respectively. strain for either system as obtained from the interpo- lation scheme described above. These results are com- pared with those obtained for the interface by applying strain either to compress the hBN lattice parameter or to stretch SnS2. We found that even a 1.5% compres- sive strain for hBN (black dashed line), the conduction band edge changes by 0.2 eV. Since we are focusing on the band structure of hBN states, the application of the strain to the SnS2 substrate leads to negligible changes (red dash-dotted line). This result highlights the high sensitivity of quasiparticle band structures to strain. We note that for a proof of principle and benchmark purpose, we chose systems with similar crystal symme- try, i.e. hexagonal lattice, in this work. However, our interpolation method can be applied to general inter- faces with very different crystal symmetry, e.g. interface between hexagonal and rectangle lattices, as the exam- ple of hBN/phosphorene interface shown in SI Figure 1. This is not possible by using the previous q + G map- ping approach. Our reciprocal-space linear-interpolation method makes possible the GW calculations of interfaces composed by two materials with very different lattice pa- rameters and symmetry, at the cost of primitive cell cal- culations only. V. CONCLUSION In this work, we theoretically and numerically exam- ined the existing methods to approximate substrate di- electric screening effect on quasiparticle energies, through hBN heterostructures as prototypical examples. We clarified the theoretical equivalence between the sum of effective reducible polarizability approach (χeff-sum) and sum of irreducible polarizability of interface sys- tems (χ0-sum), at the RPA level. We numerically com- pared the GW calculations of 2D interfaces with sev- eral approximations, and found excellent agreements be- tween χeff-sum and the explicit interface calculations. Further improvement can be achieved by including the ground state corrections of eigenvalues (and wavefunc- tions) from explicit interfaces. We further evaluated the importance of non-diagonal elements of ε and ε−1 from substrates on quasiparticle energies of 2D inter- face. Most importantly, we developed an accurate reciprocal-space linear-interpolation technique for arbi- trarily lattice-mismatched interfaces, which can be used to compute the interface polarizability for GW quasipar- ticle energies without any artificial strain, at the cost of only primitive cell calculations. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Diana Qiu and Felipe H. da Jornada for help- ful discussions. This work is supported by the National Science Foundation under grant number DMR-1760260. This research used resources of the Scientific Data and Computing center, a component of the Computational Science Initiative, at Brookhaven National Laboratory under Contract No. DE-SC0012704, the lux supercom- puter at UC Santa Cruz, funded by NSF MRI grant AST 1828315, the National Energy Research Scientific Com- puting Center (NERSC) a U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science User Facility operated under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231, the Extreme Science and En- gineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE) which is sup- ported by National Science Foundation Grant No. ACI- ∗ Electronic address: yuanping@ucsc.edu 1 S. Wolf, D. Awschalom, R. Buhrman, J. Daughton, v. S. von Moln ́ar, M. Roukes, A. Y. Chtchelkanova, and D. Treger, Science 294, 1488 (2001). 2 I. ˇZuti ́c, J. Fabian, and S. D. Sarma, Reviews of Modern Physics 76, 323 (2004). 3 Y.-M. He, G. Clark, J. R. Schaibley, Y. He, M.-C. Chen, Y.-J. Wei, X. Ding, Q. Zhang, W. Yao, X. Xu, et al., Na- ture Nanotechnology 10, 497 (2015). 4 T. T. Tran, K. Bray, M. J. Ford, M. Toth, and I. Aharonovich, Nature Nanotechnology 11, 37 (2016). 5 H. Wang, X. Yang, W. Shao, S. Chen, J. Xie, X. Zhang, J. Wang, and Y. Xie, Journal of the American Chemical Society 137, 11376 (2015). 6 Z. Sun, H. Xie, S. Tang, X.-F. Yu, Z. Guo, J. Shao, H. Zhang, H. Huang, H. Wang, and P. K. Chu, Ange- wandte Chemie International Edition 54, 11526 (2015). 7 Y. Cao, V. Fatemi, S. Fang, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, E. Kaxiras, and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Nature 556, 43 (2018). 8 Y. Cao, V. Fatemi, A. Demir, S. Fang, S. L. Tomarken, J. Y. Luo, J. D. Sanchez-Yamagishi, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, E. Kaxiras, et al., Nature 556, 80 (2018). 10 9 Z. Song, Z. Wang, W. Shi, G. Li, C. Fang, and B. A. Bernevig, Physical Review Letters 123, 036401 (2019). 10 J. Ahn, S. Park, and B.-J. Yang, Physical Review X 9, 11 W. Qin and Z. Zhang, Physical Review Letters 113, 266806 12 W. Qin, L. Li, and Z. Zhang, Nature Physics 15, 796 13 K. Novoselov, A. Mishchenko, A. Carvalho, and A. C. Neto, Science 353, aac9439 (2016). 14 K. T. Winther and K. S. Thygesen, 2D Materials 4, 025059 15 M. M. Ugeda, A. J. Bradley, S.-F. Shi, H. Felipe, Y. Zhang, D. Y. Qiu, W. Ruan, S.-K. Mo, Z. Hussain, Z.-X. Shen, et al., Nature Materials 13, 1091 (2014). 16 A. V. Krukau, O. A. Vydrov, A. F. Izmaylov, and G. E. Scuseria, The Journal of Chemical Physics 125, 224106 17 T. Stein, H. Eisenberg, L. Kronik, and R. Baer, Physical Review Letters 105, 266802 (2010). 18 N. L. Nguyen, N. Colonna, A. Ferretti, and N. Marzari, Physical Review X 8, 021051 (2018). 19 M. Weng, S. Li, J. Zheng, F. Pan, and L.-W. Wang, The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 9, 281 (2018), 20 H. Zheng, M. Govoni, and G. Galli, Physical Review Ma- terials 3, 073803 (2019). 21 T. J. Smart, F. Wu, M. Govoni, and Y. Ping, Physical Review Materials 2, 124002 (2018). 22 Y. Ping, D. Rocca, and G. Galli, Chemical Society Re- views 42, 2437 (2013). 23 M. S. Hybertsen and S. G. Louie, Physical Review B 35, 24 D. Sangalli, A. Ferretti, H. Miranda, C. Attaccalite, I. Marri, E. Cannuccia, P. Melo, M. Marsili, F. Paleari, A. Marrazzo, et al., Journal of Physics: Condensed Mat- 25 L. Hedin, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 11, R489 26 F. Wu, A. Galatas, R. Sundararaman, D. Rocca, and Y. Ping, Physical Review Materials 1, 071001 (2017). 27 M. Govoni and G. Galli, Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 11, 2680 (2015). 28 T. A. Pham, H.-V. Nguyen, D. Rocca, and G. Galli, Phys- ical Review B 87, 155148 (2013). 29 M. Rohlfing and S. G. Louie, Physical Review B 62, 4927 30 F. Wu, D. Rocca, and Y. Ping, Journal of Materials Chem- istry C 7, 12891 (2019). 31 Y. Ping, D. Rocca, D. Lu, and G. Galli, Physical Review 32 Y. Ping, D. Rocca, and G. Galli, Physical Review B 87, 33 D. Rocca, Y. Ping, R. Gebauer, and G. Galli, Physical Review B 85, 045116 (2012). 34 D. Rocca, D. Lu, and G. Galli, The Journal of Chemical Physics 133, 164109 (2010). 35 M. L. Trolle, T. G. Pedersen, and V. V ́eniard, Scientific Reports 7, 39844 (2017). 36 J. Yan, K. S. Thygesen, and K. W. Jacobsen, Physical Review Letters 106, 146803 (2011). 37 A. J. Bradley, M. M. Ugeda, F. H. da Jornada, D. Y. Qiu, W. Ruan, Y. Zhang, S. Wickenburg, A. Riss, J. Lu, S.-K. Mo, et al., Nano Letters 15, 2594 (2015). 38 D. Y. Qiu, F. H. da Jornada, and S. G. Louie, Nano Letters 39 Y. Kubota, K. Watanabe, O. Tsuda, and T. Taniguchi, Science 317, 932 (2007). 40 F. Wu, T. J. Smart, J. Xu, and Y. Ping, Physical Review 41 D. D. Awschalom, L. C. Bassett, A. S. Dzurak, E. L. Hu, and J. R. Petta, Science 339, 1174 (2013). 42 I. H. Abidi, N. Mendelson, T. T. Tran, A. Tyagi, M. Zhuang, L.-T. Weng, B. ̈Ozyilmaz, I. Aharonovich, M. Toth, and Z. Luo, Advanced Optical Materials 7, 43 D. Wang and R. Sundararaman, Physical Review Materials 44 F. Xuan, Y. Chen, and S. Y. Quek, Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 15, 3824 (2019). 45 Z.-F. Liu, F. H. da Jornada, S. G. Louie, and J. B. Neaton, Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 15, 4218 46 M. H. Naik and M. Jain, Physical Review Materials 2, 47 R. Resta and A. Baldereschi, Physical Review B 23, 6615 48 D. M. Ceperley and B. J. Alder, Physical Review Letters 49 H. Felipe, D. Y. Qiu, and S. G. Louie, Physical Review B 50 D. Kammerlander, S. Botti, M. A. Marques, A. Marini, and C. Attaccalite, Physical Review B 86, 125203 (2012). 51 W. H. Press, S. A. Teukolsky, W. T. Vetterling, and B. P. Flannery, Numerical Recipes 3rd edition: The Art of Sci- entific Computing (Cambridge University Press, 2007). 52 J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Physical Re- view Letters 77, 3865 (1996). 53 P. Giannozzi, O. Andreussi, T. Brumme, O. Bunau, M. B. Nardelli, M. Calandra, R. Car, C. Cavazzoni, D. Ceresoli, M. Cococcioni, N. Colonna, I. Carnimeo, A. D. Corso, S. de Gironcoli, P. Delugas, R. A. DiStasio, A. Ferretti, A. Floris, G. Fratesi, G. Fugallo, R. Gebauer, U. Gerst- mann, F. Giustino, T. Gorni, J. Jia, M. Kawamura, H.- Y. Ko, A. Kokalj, E. K ̈u ̧c ̈ukbenli, M. Lazzeri, M. Marsili, N. Marzari, F. Mauri, N. L. Nguyen, H.-V. Nguyen, A. O. de-la Roza, L. Paulatto, S. Ponc ́e, D. Rocca, R. Saba- tini, B. Santra, M. Schlipf, A. P. Seitsonen, A. Smogunov, I. Timrov, T. Thonhauser, P. Umari, N. Vast, X. Wu, and S. Baroni, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 29, 54 D. Hamann, Physical Review B 88, 085117 (2013). 55 R. W. Godby and R. Needs, Physical Review Letters 62, 56 A. Oschlies, R. Godby, and R. Needs, Physical Review B 57 A. Marini, C. Hogan, M. Gr ̈uning, and D. Varsano, Com- puter Physics Communications 180, 1392 (2009). 58 C. A. Rozzi, D. Varsano, A. Marini, E. K. Gross, and A. Rubio, Physical Review B 73, 205119 (2006). 59 S. Grimme, Journal of Computational Chemistry 27, 1787 60 V. Barone, M. Casarin, D. Forrer, M. Pavone, M. Sambi, and A. Vittadini, Journal of Computational Chemistry 30, 61 Y. Cho and T. C. Berkelbach, Physical Review B 97, 62 T. Olsen, S. Latini, F. Rasmussen, and K. S. Thygesen, 11 Physical Review Letters 116, 056401 (2016). 63 Z. Jiang, Z. Liu, Y. Li, and W. Duan, Physical Review Letters 118, 266401 (2017). 64 J. Towns, T. Cockerill, M. Dahan, I. Foster, K. Gaither, A. Grimshaw, V. Hazlewood, S. Lathrop, D. Lifka, G. D. Peterson, R. Roskies, J. R. Scott, and N. Wilkins-Diehr, Comput. Sci. Eng. 16, 62 (2014). 65 M. Birowska, J. Urban, M. Baranowski, D. K. Maude, P. Plochocka, and N. G. Szwacki, Nanotechnology 30, 66 W. Gao, W. Xia, X. Gao, and P. Zhang, Scientific Reports 67 D. Y. Qiu, H. Felipe, and S. G. Louie, Physical Review B 68 See Supplemental Material at [URL will be inserted by publisher], for additional details on examples of in- terpolation method for arbitrarily mismatched interface, numerical parameters and convergence of GW calcula- tions26,58,65–67.