Binding and excitations in SixHy molecular systems using quantum Monte Carlo Guangming Wang1,∗ Abdulgani Annaberdiyev1, and Lubos Mitas1 1) Department of Physics, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27695-8202, USA We present high-accuracy correlated calculations of small SixHy molecular systems both in the ground and excited states. We employ quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) together with a variety of many-body wave function approaches based on basis set expansions. The calculations are carried out in a valence-only framework using recently derived correlation consistent effective core poten- tials. Our primary goal is to understand the fixed-node diffusion QMC errors in both the ground and excited states with single-reference trial wave functions. Using a combination of methods, we demonstrate the very high accuracy of the QMC atomization energies being within ≈ 0.07 eV or better when compared with essentially exact results. By employing proper choices for trial wave functions, we have found that the fixed-node QMC biases for total energies are remarkably uniform ranging between 1−3.5 % with absolute values at most ≈ 0.2 eV across the systems and several types of excitations such as singlets and triplets as well as low-lying and Rydberg-like states. Our results further corroborate that Si systems, and presumably also related main group IV and V elements of the periodic table (Ge, Sn, etc), exhibit some of the lowest fixed-node biases found in valence-only electronic structure QMC calculations. I. INTRODUCTION Quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) methods belong to a rapidly developing family of many-body approaches that address the central challenge of accurate electronic struc- ture calculations posed by electron-electron correlations. Several flavors of QMC with different sampling strategies are being developed to achieve a better accuracy and use in a wider variety of applications, including model Hamil- tonians as well as real molecules and solids. Beyond per- haps the most established QMC in real space of particle coordinates [1–3], there are several successful alternative approaches (for example, auxiliary-field QMC, full Con- figuration Interaction QMC, just to name a few ). In this work, we use the diffusion Monte Carlo (DMC) algo- rithm that relies on the fixed-node (FN) approximation to deal with the fermion sign inefficiencies . We sim- plify the problem by using a valence-only Hamiltonian based on recently derived correlation consistent effective core potentials (ccECPs). Our ccECPs provide a new level of accuracy and fidelity to the original all-electron Hamiltonian as demonstrated on both atomic and molec- ular systems [7–11]. One of our goals is to test and benchmark these re- cently established ccECPs [8–11] in realistic systems be- yond just the training problems. This part of work in- volves also cross-checks with existing all-electron calcula- tions that harness state-of-the-art alternative many-body wave function methods. The second focal point is to bet- ter understand the fixed-node errors in simple molecular systems where high accuracy can be verified by alterna- tive approaches and combined into reference quality data. The third goal is to understand the impact of fixed-node errors on excited states which is an area where much less is known overall. Indeed, more data on the applicabil- ity of QMC methods to excited states of various types ∗ Corresponding author email address: gwang18@ncsu.edu (different spin channels, adiabatic vs vertical, Rydberg- like, etc) would be fruitful so as to expand upon a few previous studies . Considering these aims, we have opted for a few molec- ular SixHy systems where extensive basis sets and al- ternative many-body wave function expansion methods can be used to the full extent. The reason for choos- ing the particular element of Si was motivated by the fact that its valence electronic structure exhibits some of the smallest fixed-node errors in QMC calculations of the atom, molecule, and also solid systems. Surpris- ingly, our previous results suggested that this is true even though only single-reference trial wave functions have been employed . Therefore, another interesting issue we wanted to elucidate was the degree of accuracy that can be achieved for excitations using the same single- reference trial function setting. We have included several types of excitations such as singlets vs triplets, as well as low-lying states in the range of an eV, and also very high excitations (≈ 10 eV) with Rydberg-like character. The idea behind studying excitations was motivated by an ef- fort to build a data set that can be used for assessment of fixed-node errors in larger systems where expansions in excited states within either Configuration Interaction (CI) or Coupled Cluster (CC) methods are very limited or not feasible. II. METHODS We employ our recently generated ccECPs for Si and H. Previously, extensive ccECP transferability tests on atomic spectra as well as on SiO, Si2, H2 molecular binding energies, equilibrium geometries, and vibrational frequencies have been verified to provide very high ac- curacy, in some cases significantly beyond widely used ECPs of previous generations . Our ccECPs and cor- responding basis sets are available in Ref. . Several quantum chemical methods such as Coupled arXiv:2007.11139v2 [physics.chem-ph] 20 Oct 2020 2 Cluster with double excitations and perturbative triples (CCSD(T)), as well as triples with perturbative quadru- ples (CCSDT(Q)), Configuration Interaction with double excitations (CISD), and also triple excitations (CISDT), and finally, Configuration Interaction using a perturba- tive selection made iteratively (CIPSI) have been used. We use aug-cc-pVnZ basis sets throughout the work since we observed that the augmentations have been impor- tant in the description of molecular bonds and some of the excitations. The basis sets are TZ − 6Z quality for CCSD(T) and DZ − 5Z quality for CI/CIPSI calcu- lations. Using these sets enabled us to recover the total energies and differences within about half of the chemical accuracy threshold (1 kcal/mol ≈ 0.0434 eV). Whenever possible, Hartree-Fock (HF) and correlation energies are extrapolated to complete basis set (CBS) limit as : EHF n = EHF CBS + a exp (−bn) (1) Ecorr n = Ecorr CBS + α (n + 3/8)3 + β (n + 3/8)5 (2) where n is the basis set cardinal number. CI/CIPSI en- ergies with multiple roots were also extrapolated with Eqn. 1. In some cases, CIPSI energies were extrapo- lated also in regards to PT2 corrections (using the last 2 data points), shown as exFCI. CCSDT(Q) calculations were only feasible for small basis sets such as DZ or TZ, therefore, we estimated the CCSDT(Q) CBS limit value by evaluating the energy decrease from CCSD(T) to CCSDT(Q) at a specific basis set and adding that to the CCSD(T) CBS value: ECCSDT(Q) CBS ≈ ECCSD(T) CBS +(ECCSDT(Q) n=D/T −ECCSD(T) This estimation was observed to be reasonable on Si pseudo-atom where CCSDT(Q) was carried out for DZ- 6Z basis sets. Additionally, Ref. demonstrates that CCSDT(Q) energies are very close to FCI values (CBS values are same within the fitting errors). On the QMC side, we have carried out FN-DMC cal- culations for each system using single-reference and in some cases CI wave functions with an increasing num- ber of determinants (Ndet). Unless otherwise specified, we used orbitals from density functional theory (DFT) that are obtained at augmented QZ basis set level. We have tested how the ground and excited states depend on the basis set for DZ-6Z levels and we have found that both states were essentially converged at the QZ basis set level. We have also tried a doubly-augmented basis set for SiH4 and we did not observe noticeable DMC energy gain for the ground state and for the Rydberg-like sin- glet excitation. In all DMC calculations, we use timestep τ = 0.001 Ha−1 with T-moves algorithm , which makes the DMC energies rigorously variational. For each system, we evaluated the ground state, and the first singlet and triplet excited state energies. Ground and triplet states can be expressed with a single deter- minant wavefunction making it suitable to calculate in CC, CI, and QMC methods. However, for singlet ex- cited states, the correct space-spin symmetry typically leads to a multi-determinant description that is gener- ally challenging for CC methods available in quantum chemistry packages. Therefore, for these cases, we have not attempted to calculate the single-reference CC data. In QMC, it is straightforward to build such wave func- tions, in the simplest cases as a linear combination of two spin-up×spin-down determinantal products with a single promoted orbital in one or the other spin channel. Clearly, it is also straightforward to employ CIS, CISD, or higher-order excitation wave functions in QMC. In all cases, we have probed for relaxation effects in excited state orbitals when constructing the men- tioned two-determinant wave functions. To do so, we employed PBE/PBE0 functionals in GS SCF calcula- tion or even used orbitals from different spin symme- try. The most optimal orbitals obtained are indicated where necessary and we also include corresponding HF reference DMC values for comparison. For the fixed- node DMC and other many-body calculations that use a given set of self-consistent orbitals, we employ notation ”Method/Orbitals” throughout the paper. Note that the DMC method can access the excited states of the given Hamiltonian because the constructed nodal surface constrains it to converge to the ground state of that symmetry. This setting corresponds to all the excitations considered here so that the DMC method provides variational results ). All molecular geometries in this work are obtained from experimental values [20–22]. these geometries. Software packages Molpro and Mrcc were used for CC calculations. PySCF, Gamess, and Quantum Package were em- ployed to generate DFT orbtials and CI expansions. Subsequent DMC calculations were performed using QWalk and Qmcpack packages. III. RESULTS AND DATA A. Total energies for ground states and excitations In this subsection, we provide the ground state (GS) and excited state (EX) total energies and excitation gaps using various methods as specified above. The results for the Si atom are taken from . Table II shows the total energies as well as the singlet and triplet gaps of SiH2 molecule where we opted to calculate both vertical and adiabatic excitations since there is a significant ge- ometry relaxation in the adiabatic case according to the experiments. The total energies and vertical gaps for SiH4 and Si2H6 are listed in Tables III and IV respec- tively. Our calculations show solid consistency throughout various methods. For each of the molecules, single- reference DMC calculations provide remarkably good ac- curacy for both the total energies and excitation gaps 3 work. Experimental values are used [20–22]. All values are in �A. System Atom x y z SiH2 Si (GS & vertical EX) H H SiH2 Si (Adiabatic EX 1B1) H H SiH2 Si (Adiabatic EX 3B1) H H SiH4 Si H H H H Si2H6 Si Si H H H H H H of singlet and triplet states. In SiH2 and Si2H6, single- reference DMC excitation gaps also agree very well with experimental values that are known reliably. We list CCSD(T) and CCSDT(Q) calculations to illustrate the exact or nearly exact energies obtained by the CBS ex- trapolations. The general agreement between the values from DMC/DFT and CC extrapolations is in the range of or less than ≈ 0.1 eV. For the singlet excitations, DM- C/DFT gaps are compared with the CI method with the caveat of less accurate total energies but reasonably good estimations of the gaps. In SiH2, we also provide CIPSI+PT2/NatOrb CBS energies with large number of determinants showing that single-reference DMC gaps are accurate to almost the chemical accuracy level. In SiH4, we observe higher DMC/PBE excitation gap dis- crepancies with some experiments for the vertical states. Inspection of the experiments shows that the sin- glet peak is very broad and considering the high exci- tation energies in optical absorption, we conjecture that the measured spectrum might have involved contribu- tions from the adiabatic singlet (which is roughly 0.5 eV lower). Here we believe that the genuine vertical excita- tion is close to 9.4 eV. Similar considerations apply to the disilane triplet exci- tation where we conjecture that the measured value prob- ably involves some degree of adiabacity. Hence, we be- lieve that our values for vertical triplet clustered around 6.7 eV represent a valid prediction for this state. This requires further study including cleaner and more spe- cific experiments. Considering the overall accuracy of our calculations and consistency of diversified methods, we assume our result is closer to the true vertical excita- tion energy. B. Binding energies imental atomization energies. Included are values from extensive CCSD(T) calculations with large basis sets up to 6Z and limited CCSDT(Q) calculations to probe for convergence due to higher-order excitations. This en- abled us to check the extrapolation results more carefully and provided what we believe are very accurate, nearly exact estimations of the corresponding energy differences. Included also are results from published high accuracy studies [42–44] that we use for comparison and also as a cross-check with all-electron results. We find very close agreements with the results of these independent sets of calculations. Indeed, the differences are at the level of about ≈ 0.07 eV or smaller showing thus a very clear consistency between different methods. In fact, the dif- ferences between these calculations appear to be overall smaller than are the differences with experiments, see Tab. V. Our high accuracy calculations together with results quoted from references, therefore, suggest that experiments mildly underestimate the atomization ener- gies. This appears to be true also after all the correc- tions for core-valence, zero-point motion, and relativity are taken into account as outlined in the references. We believe that our results provide a strong argument in favor of the accuracy of the employed ccECPs. Below we further analyze the excitations; however, we expect them to be less sensitive to ccECP’s quality due to their more delocalized nature and decreased electron density in the core regions. Therefore, the main source of errors in excitations is expected to be due to the fixed-node bias. C. Fixed-node errors. Fixed-node biases for single-reference trial wave functions. In order to simplify the analysis of nodal biases, we probed for the impact of basis set sizes us- ing silane as an example (Table VI). We found essen- tially monotonous improvements in total energy with ba- sis set size, although beyond the quadruple zeta basis the improvements have become marginal at 0.1 mHa level. Quite surprisingly, a better basis does not automatically imply better nodes (see counter-examples of Bressanini et al.). Note that the kinetic energies also follow a similar pattern with monotonous improvements but with slower convergence. Also, total energy variances decrease with increasing basis, signalling more accurate trial wave functions. Let us now analyze the obtained fixed-node errors in more detail (Table VII). In particular, we have identified the following: 4 from experiments . GS Vertical excitation Adiabatic excitation (1A1) (1B1) (3B1) (1B1) (3B1) Method total[Ha] total[Ha] gap[eV] total[Ha] gap[eV] total[Ha] gap[eV] total[Ha] gap[eV] CISD/RHFa CISDT/RHFb exFCI/NatOrbc RCCSD(T)/RHFd -5.00627(9) CCSDT(Q)/RHFe -5.00726(9) DMC/RHF DMC/PBEf Yao et al. g Experiment 0.91(4)j, a CBS values using TZ-5Z extrapolation. b CBS values using DZ-QZ extrapolation. c Ndet ≈ 200 K. Natural orbitals (NatOrb) are obtained from smaller runs with Ndet ≈ 10 K. CBS values using DZ-QZ extrapolation. d CBS values using TZ-6Z extrapolation. e Estimated from energy decrease compared to RCCSD(T) at TZ basis set level. f The lowest GS energy corresponds to DMC/PBE0. g CBS values using DZ-5Z extrapolation with SHCI method from Ref. . h Estimated from Fig. 9 in Ref. i Ref. j Ref. obtained from experimental values. Number of determinants are given in thousands (k). Note that, Ndet GS (1A1) EX (1T2) EX (3T2) Method total[Ha] total[Ha] gap[eV] total[Ha] gap[eV] CISD/RHFa CISD/CAS(8e−, 14o)b RCCSD(T)/RHFc CCSDT(Q)/RHFd DMC/RHF DMC/PBEe VMC/CIS/PBE(aQZ) DMC/CIS/PBE(aQZ) CIPSI+PT2/PBE(aQZ) VMC/CIPSI/PBE(aQZ) CIPSI+PT2/NatOrb(aQZ)f Lehtonen et al.g. 9.53 Porter et al.h Grossman et al.i 9.1(1) 8.7(1) Experiment 8.9, 9.7 8.7 Experiment Experiment a CBS values using DZ-QZ extrapolation. b CBS values using TZ-5Z extrapolation. c CBS values using TZ-6Z extrapolation. d Estimated from energy decrease compared to RCCSD(T) at DZ basis set level. e The EX(1T2) state uses EX(3T2) UKS/PBE orbitals which resulted in lower energy than using GS orbitals. Spin contamination in UKS was observed to be negligible (< 2S + 1 >= 3.0020831). f Natural orbitals (NatOrb) are obtained from a run with Ndet ≈ 350 K. g AE CC2 calculation from Ref. h DMC/CASSCF calculation from Ref. i DMC/CASSCF calculation from geometry was used for this molecule . GS (1A1g) EX (1E1u) EX (3A1g) Method total[Ha] total[Ha] gap[eV] total[Ha] gap[eV] CISD/RHFa CISD/CAS(14e−, 13o)b -11.3400 RCCSD(T)/RHFc CCSDT(Q)/RHFd DMC/RHF DMC/PBEe Lehtonen et al f 7.61 Experiment 7.6 ≈ 6.7 g Experiment 7.56 a CBS values using DZ-QZ extrapolation. b CBS values using DZ-QZ extrapolation. c CBS values using TZ-6Z extrapolation. d Estimated from energy decrease compared to RCCSD(T) at DZ basis set level. e The lowest EX(3A1g) energy corresponds to DMC/PBE0. f AE CC2 values from . g Experimental value in Ref. of 6.3 eV is probably a mix of vertical and adiabatic excitations. a) As suggested in our previous study, the lowest per- centage of fixed-node errors are observed for closed-shell states in systems with a tetrahedral arrangement of single bonds. This holds also in extended systems since almost the same error is observed in Si crystal (to be published elsewhere). b) Somewhat larger errors are observed in open-shell systems and in excitations (Table VII) where we see, for example, an increase in percentage by a factor of three between the silane ground and its lowest triplet excited states. c) The largest percentage of errors do vary across the systems. For example, the two largest errors are found in the vertical excited singlet state of SiH2 and the vertical excited triplet state of silane. Overall, however, it is quite remarkable that in all these systems and states the fixed-node errors are be- tween 1% and 3.6%, especially when we consider that single-reference wave functions have been used to approx- imate the nodal hypersurfaces. Impact of nodal domain topologies vs nodal shapes. It has been conjectured and can be proved in a few cases that the correct number of nodal domains for fermionic ground states is two [48–50]. This implies that all even permutations form a simply connected domain in the space of electron coordinates. In this domain the wave function sign is constant. Similarly, the odd per- mutations’ complementary spatial domain mirrors this with the opposite wave function sign. Consequently, in dimensions two and higher, the fermionic ground states generically exhibit a bisection of the particle configura- tion space with the boundary given by the node. (There are exceptions but a further elaboration on this is out of the scope of this work.) For excitations, the situa- tion is a bit more complicated; the nodal count can be two or higher depending on symmetries and other char- acteristics. It is therefore interesting to point out that although the obtained fixed-node biases are rather small, the nodes of most of our calculations with single-reference wave functions are topologically imperfect. In fact, for most of the states studied here, the count of nodal do- mains is four. This is due to the single-reference trial wave functions with their anti-symmetric parts given as a product of spin-up times spin-down determinants. Interestingly, the following few cases happen to have the correct nodal topologies: a) ground state of the Si atom, that has only two nodal domains since there is only one minority spin electron, i.e., the exchange in that channel is absent. b) SiH2 and SiH4 open-shell singlet excitations that are given as a linear combination of two determinantal products. This form breaks the spin-up and spin-down artificial separation of spatial variables and leads to the fusion of the nodal domains into the minimal two, as it is illustrated in Fig. 1 and can be checked numerically. It is rather unexpected that there is no obvious signif- icant difference between the fixed-node biases for correct (2 domains) vs. incorrect (4 domains) topologies. Based on these observations, we suppose that in our systems, the spin-up and -down coordinate subspaces are energet- ically marginal and the nodal shape in other locations is more important. Obviously, with enough variational freedom, the corresponding correct topologies will ulti- mately emerge as a result of appropriate optimizations. Unfortunately, our knowledge about the convergence of variational expansions in this respect is rather limited al- though some promising progress has been achieved very recently with CIPSI methods [51–54]. Therefore our re- sults can serve as a reference for future studies that would address this particular issue. Fixed-node biases in excitations. One of our goals was to shed light on how the fixed-node errors impact the 6 various methods calculated using RCCSD(T), CCSDT(Q), and DMC/DFT methods compared with previous correlated calculations ([35, 42–45]) and with experiments. The experimental values are corrected to correspond to the bottom of the well (static ions) atomization energies. Experimental values of zero-point energy have been used (SiH2: 0.3092 eV, SiH4: 0.8339 eV, Si2H6: 1.3042 eV) . System Method De [eV] SiH2 RCCSD(T) CCSDT(Q) DMC/PBE0 Feller et al.a Haunschild et al.b Greef et al.c Yao et al. d Experimentse 6.40(9), 6.7(1) SiH4 RCCSD(T) CCSDT(Q) DMC/PBE Feller et al.a Haunschild et al.b Greef et al.c Martin et al.f Porter et al.g Yao et al. d Experimentse Si2H6 RCCSD(T) CCSDT(Q) DMC/PBE Feller et al.a Haunschild et al.b Greef et al.c Yao et al. d Experimentse a AE UCCSD(T) calculations from Ref. b AE frozen core CCSD(T) method calculations from Ref. c DMC calculations from Ref. d CBS values using DZ-5Z extrapolation with SHCI method. e Experimental values summarized in Ref. f AE CCSD(T) calculation from Ref. g DMC/CASSCF calculation from Ref. excited states. Therefore, we have chosen several types of excitations: singlets vs triplets, low-lying states with excited energies on the order of 1 eV vs Rydberg-like states with excitations around 10 eV. Interestingly, we do not observe any clear, simple or regular patterns. For SiH2 which has a diradical ground state, we find mild de- creases in the fixed-node biases. Presumably, the radical character of the state is still present and therefore the corresponding error persists into excitations with a mi- nor decrease due to orbital restructuring. On the other hand, for strongly bonded systems with saturated single bonds, the increase is significant, between a factor of two (a) (b) electrons at the same point) scan for a) ground state (single-reference), b) excited state singlet (2-reference). Quadrisection of the configurations in case a) and bisection in case b) are clearly visible. and three. This is clearly seen in silane that exhibits both the lowest percentage bias (in the ground state) and the highest percentage bias in its excited state. On an ab- solute scale, the increases are not substantial, since they are of the order of 0.1 − 0.2 eV. This is quite important for a qualitative assessment of the fixed-node biases in cases where it is, at present, very difficult to estimate their actual values. In particular, this is of significant in- terest for excitations in periodic (crystal) systems where QMC calculations involve hundreds of valence electrons . Multi-reference trial wave functions. We em- phasize that it is straightforward to eliminate the fixed- node errors in the studied systems by employing multi- reference trial wave functions. With appropriate effort, significant decrease of the biases can be achieved us- ing CIPSI expansions further boosted through trial wave function re-optimizations. However, our primary goal was to understand the behavior of single-reference fixed- 7 in aug-cc-pVnZ basis set. Total energies, kinetic energies, and total energy variances are shown for the Slater-Jastrow wave function (single-reference for GS, 2-reference for EX). Basis GS EX nZ Total Kinetic Variance Total Kinetic Variance DZ TZ QZ 5Z 6Z included preliminary results also for Si crystal, to be published elsewhere. MAD denotes mean average deviation. DMC/DFTa SCF/RHF Estim. Exact FN err. FN err./Corr. FN err./Nelec System State [Ha] [Ha] Corr. [Ha] [eV] [%] [eV/electron] Si 3P 2.2(1) SiH2 1A1 SiH2 1B1(vert) -4.9136(1) SiH2 1B1(adia) -4.9317(1) SiH2 3B1(vert) -4.9579(1) 2.3(1) SiH2 3B1(adia) -4.9718(1) 2.2(1) SiH4 1A1 SiH4 3T2 Si2H6 1A1g 1.6(1) Si2H6 3B1g 2.5(2) Si cryst/atomc 1.3(3) MAD ground states MAD excited states a DMC/DFT corresponds to the lowest single-reference DMC energies obtained in this work (2-reference for EX singlet). b SiH2 vertical and adiabatic singlet SCF/RHF energies correspond to CASSCF(2e−, 2o) energy with TZ-6Z extrapolations. c Assumed experimental cohesion of 4.68(1) eV/at. and extrapolated DMC/PBE0 value for the Si crystal ground state. node errors due to our interest in large systems where conclusive, high-accuracy multi-reference study might not be feasible. IV. CONCLUSIONS We have presented high accuracy study of SixHy sys- tems using both QMC and many-body wave function methods based on expansions in basis sets. We have probed mainly for the level of fixed-node errors in ground states and especially in excited states. We have found that the single-reference trial wave functions in FN-DMC provide excellent descriptions of these systems with 1- 3.5% correlation variation in fixed-node biases. In gen- eral, for excitations these errors were on the larger side, but not always and variations in fixed-node biases within the mentioned small range did not show any clear regu- lar or discernible pattern. We have found excellent agree- ment with previous independent all-electron state-of-the- art studies thus providing a clear support for the accu- racy of ccECPs used in this study. In silane, the verti- cal singlet excitation appears to be larger in our calcula- tions than in some experiments; however, we believe that new experiments with a more clear distinction between vertical and adiabatic excitations would be very useful. Overall, we demonstrate remarkably small fixed-node bi- ases that further confirm our previous finding. The small fixed-node errors are related to particular properties of s and p states in the main group elements of the 2nd row. Similar results can be expected for the same group, such as Ge, Sn, Pb as well as P, As, Sb and Bi especially in molecules and solids with similar single-bond patterns and closed shell states. The obtained data will be useful also for estimations of systematic errors of QMC results in similar systems with comparable chemical bonding and electronic state calculations.