arXiv:2007.10435v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 20 Jul 2020 Simulation of XANES spectroscopy and the calculation of total energies for N-heterocyclic carbenes on Au(111) Felipe Crasto de Lima,∗,† Adalberto Fazzio,∗,† Alastair B. McLean,∗,‡ and Roberto H. Miwa∗,¶ †Brazilian Nanotechnology National Laboratory (LNNano), Brazilian Center for Research in Energy and Materials (CNPEM), 13083-970, Campinas, SÃčo Paulo, Brazil ‡Department of Physics, Engineering Physics and Astronomy, Queen’s University, Kingston, ON, K7L3N6, Canada. ¶Instituto de Física, Universidade Federal de Uberlândia, C.P. 593, 38400-902, Uberlândia, MG, Brazil E-mail: felipe.lima@lnnano.cnpem.br; adalberto.fazzio@lnnano.cnpem.br; mcleana@queensu.ca; hiroki@ufu.br Abstract It has recently been demonstrated that N-heterocyclic carbenes (NHCs) form self- assembled monolayers (SAMs) on metal sur- faces. Consequently, it is important to both characterize and understand their binding modes to fully exploit NHCs in functional sur- face systems. To assist with this effort, we have performed first-principles total energy calculations for NHCs on Au(111) and simu- lations of X-ray absorption near edge struc- ture (XANES). The NHCs we have consid- ered are N,N-dimethyl-, N,N-diethyl-, N,N- diisopropylbenzimidazolylidene (BNHCX, with X=Me, Et, and iPr, respectively) and the bis- BNHCX complexes with Au derived from these molecules. We present a comprehensive analy- sis of the energetic stability of both the BNHCX and the complexes on Au(111) and, for the for- mer, examine the role of the wing group in determining the attachment geometry. Further structural characterization is performed by cal- culating the nitrogen K-edge X-ray absorption spectra. Our simulated XANES results give insight into (i) the relationship between the BNHCX/Au geometry and the N(1s) → π∗/σ∗, pre-edge/near-edge, absorption intensities, and (ii) the contributions of the molecular deforma- tion and molecule-surface electronic interaction to the XANES spectrum. Our simulations are compared with recent experimental results. Introduction There is currently interest in using N- heterocyclic carbenes (NHCs) to create self- assembled monolayers (SAMs) on metal sur- faces1–11. NHC-SAMs have been shown to be more thermally and chemically stable than thi- ols3,5, the ligand class of choice for the creation of SAMs12. The utility of NHC-SAMs stems from the fact that NHCs have a divalent car- bon atom with a lone pair; they are σ-donor ligands that form strong bonds to transition metals2. Such stronger bond can lead to an increased thermal robustness of current SAMs application, for instance in organic electron- ics13 electrochemical sensing14, and catalysis15. Moreover, by changing the N,N-substituents, or wing groups, their properties can be readily tuned, allowing for the rational design of 2D 1 structures and properties16,17. A number of experimental studies have been performed with BNHCiPr. For instance, in the BNHCiPr/Au(111) system the BNHCiPr- Au bond strength was estimated, using ther- mal desorption spectroscopy (TDS), to be (158 ± 10) kJ mol−1 5. The first images of NHC self-assembly were obtained with BNHCiPr on Au(111)3 and high resolution electron en- ergy loss spectroscopy (HREELS) was used to demonstrate that the attachment geometry is upright5 when it is deposited on Au(111) at room temperature in ultra-high vacuum (UHV). Consequently, it is likely that BNHCiPr adopts an atop geometry, bonding to a sur- face Au atom, or a geometry where it bonds to an adatom on the Au(111) surface10,18. The latter geometry places the wing groups fur- ther from the surface and, therefore, reduces the steric interaction between the molecule and the surface. However, in a recent study, Lo- vat et al. also considered tilted and flat-lying BNHCiPrgeometries19. This approach finds sup- port from recent experimental studies that have accumulated evidences for different bind- ing modalities of NHC on metal surfaces16. Meanwhile, in a very recent study, that em- ployed NHCs with different combinations of side groups and a range of molecular deposi- tion/annealing protocols, Inayeh et al.20 found that only BNHCiPr presents structurally sta- ble dual conformation on the Au(111) surface; namely attached to the surface Au adatom, or lying flat on the Au(111) surface. Here, the atomic scale understanding of the binding modes in NHC/surface systems, in particular the role played by the side groups, will be help- ful not only to support the experimental find- ings, but also to provide insights that will facili- tate the design of new molecular self-assemblies on metal surfaces. Spectroscopy techniques have been used in or- der to examine the electronic interactions, and structural properties of molecules adsorbed on solid surfaces. For instance, (i) X-ray photo- electron spectroscopy experiments addressing the electronic charge transfers and the charac- terization of molecule-surface chemical bonds of NHCs on metal surfaces21,22; and (ii) near-edge X-ray adsorption fine-structure spectroscopy (NEXAFS), recently used to characterize the conformation of NHCs on Au(111)19. How- ever it is clear that having simulated XANES spectra for candidate binding geometries, com- bined with total energy calculations, would be particularly helpful as an aid to data interpre- tation. Consequently, in this paper we have performed ab-initio calculations based on Den- sity Functional Theory (DFT) in order to un- derstand the binding modes of different benz- imidazol based NHCs, namely BNHCX where X = {iPr, Et, Me}, and bis-NHC complexes BNHCX-Au-BNHCX (Fig. 1), on the Au(111) surface. We show a correlation of the NHC’s wing groups and its binding mode; in partic- ular for BNHCiPr we present a detailed total energy picture that supports the experimental finding of dual conformation on Au(111). Fur- ther structural characterization was performed through simulations of nitrogen K-edge X-ray near edge structure (XANES) spectra. The re- lationship between the molecular conformation and the pre-edge/near-edge absorption spectra were interpreted in terms of the projection of the density of states, while the role played by the molecule-surface electronic interactions was examined through XANES simulations of hy- pothetical molecular configurations. Methods The calculations of atomic geometry were per- formed based on the DFT approach, as imple- mented in the VASP code23. The exchange correlation term was described using the GGA functional proposed by Perdew, Burke, and Ernzerhof24. The Kohn-Sham orbitals are ex- panded in a plane wave basis set with an energy cutoff of 400 eV. The Brillouin zone is sampled according to the Monkhorst-Pack method25, us- ing a gamma-centered 3 × 3 × 1 mesh. The electron-ion interactions are taken into ac- count using the Projector Augmented Wave method26. We have considered an Au(111) slab of 4-layers in a 5 × 5 supercell with the two lower layers fixed in the bulk lattice parameter. All NHC/Au geometries have been relaxed until 2 (a1) (a2) (b1) (b2) (c1) (c2) (d1) (d2) The atomic structure of the NHCs investigated: (a) BNHCiPr, (b) BNHCEt, and perpendicular to the molecular plane. Panels (d1) and (d2) show the BNHCiPr-Au-BNHCiPr complex. atomic forces were lower than 0.02 eV/Å, with van der Waals interactions included within the vdW-DF approach27. Although the optB88- vdW functional28 is more suited to describe the benzene binding energy onto the Au surface29, we found that this functional together with vdW-DF230 overestimate the NHC/Au binding energy by ≈ 60%19, while the vdW-DF method is in excellent agreement with experimental re- sults5. The Nitrogen K-edge X-ray absorption spec- troscopy (XANES) was calculated using the XSPECTRA package31, within the Quan- tum ESPRESSO code32, by using the Gauge- Including Projector Augmented-Wave (GI- PAW) method33 to calculate the dipolar K- edge34, σ(ω) ∝ ω � n |⟨n|ˆe·r|1s⟩|2δ(εn −ε1s − ̄hω), (1) where |n⟩ and |1s⟩ are the final and 1s orbital wavefunction with energies εn and ε1s, respec- tively. Such approaches allow to take into ac- count the core-hole effect of the 1s orbital of the X-ray absorber atom, while to obtain the X-ray absorption spectroscopy intensities unaffected by the presence of the pseudopotential35,36 by reconstructing the all-electron wave function. In order to eliminate spurious interactions we have considered a distance of 14.7 Å between core-holes and its periodic images. Results Total Energy Calculations. We have con- sidered four different adsorption geometries of BNHCX on the Au(111) surface (BNHCX/Au, with X=iPr, Et, and Me), as shown in Figs. 2(a)-(d). In atop and adatom, the molecule is aligned with the surface normal, and bonded to a surface Au atom (atop) or to a surface adatom (adatom), Figs. 2(a) and (b) respectively. In tilted [Fig. 2(c)], the molecule is bonded to a surface adatom but rotated to- wards the surface and in complex two molecules form a bis-NHC complex BNHCX–Au–BNHCX [Figs. 1(d1)-(d2)] that lies flat or nearly flat on the Au(111) surface [Fig. 2(d)]. The binding energy (Eb) is a measure of the stability of the BNHCX/Au adsorption geome- try, where, as usual, Eb is defined to be the total energy difference between BNHCX/Au and the separated components, (2) Our calculations of the binding energy, sum- marized in Table 1, reveal that the least sta- ble geometry is atop for all three NHCs, where we found Eb between 1.3 and 1.7 eV, and the C–Au bond length (d) of ≈ 2.13 Å. These re- sults are in good agreement with ones presented in the current literature. For instance, the binding energy and the C–Au bond length of 1.30 eV and 2.12 Å for atop–BNHCiPr/Au pre- dicted by first-principles DFT calculations 3, and the subsequent experimental measurement of Eb = 1.64 eV 5. Moreover, recent theoreti- cal studies predicted Eb of 1.47 37/1.25 38 eV and d=2.10/2.11 Å by including the long- range molecule–surface dispersion interactions using the semi-empirical DFT-D2 and -D3 ap- proaches 39,40. The binding energy increases by about 0.9 eV in the adatom and tilted config- urations, which is in agreement with the more 3 (a) (d) (b) (c) atop adatom tilted complex Atomic geometries for BNHCiPron Au(111), namely (a) atop-BNHCiPr/Au, (b) adatom-BNHCiPr/Au, (c) tilted-BNHCiPr/Au and (d) complex-BNHCiPr/Au. Here the top panels shown the Au(111) surface while the bottom panels show the Au(100) direction. These same configurations was considered for the BNHCEt and BNHCMe cases. reactive character of the Au adatom sites. At the equilibrium geometry, the vertical position of the molecule increases by about 1.3 Å with respect to the surface, reducing the steric con- straints at the BNHCX/Au interface, and thus enabling the search for energetically more sta- ble configurations. The BNHCX molecule sits on the Au adatom, with a C–Au bond length of 2.06 Å, that in turn lies on the hollow-fcc site of Au(111), giving rise to the so called "ballbot-type" structure 18. Our total energy results show that the adatom and tilted config- urations present practically the same binding energies. Here, the search for the tilted geome- try was performed by considering an initial tilt angle (θ0) of 30◦, and then the molecule and surface atomic coordinates were fully relaxed as 1: BNHCX Binding energy Eb (eV/molecule) to Au(111) surface, molecule electron loss ∆q (e), defor- mation energy Edef (meV/molecule), carbon-gold distance d (Å). The molecule–surface vertical distance h (Å) for complex-BNHCX/Au is given in parenthesis. BNHCiPr/Au System Eb d ∆q atop adatom tilted complex (4.30 Å) BNHCEt/Au System Eb d ∆q atop adatom tilted complex (3.92 Å) BNHCMe/Au System Eb d ∆q atop adatom tilted complex (3.65 Å) described above (Methods). We found, for the three BNHCX/Au systems, lowest energy con- figurations for tilt-angles θ of about 27◦ with re- spect to the surface normal; whereas, by consid- ering larger values for the initial tilt angle, for instance θ0 = 50◦, we found a metastable con- figuration, by 0.226 eV for θ ≈ 54◦. It is worth noting that, in addition to the formation of C–Au chemical bonds, the long range vdW interaction between the surface Au atoms and the H atoms, of the CH3 side groups 38,41, also contributes to the energetic stability of the upstanding or nearly upstanding BNHCX/Au. As shown in Table 1, the binding energy increases proportionally with the size of the side wings, for example, we found Eb = 2.27, 2.50, and 2.60 eV for adatom–BNHCX/Au, with X=Me, Et, and iPr. The same occurs for the atop and tilted configurations. In Figs. 3(a)–(c) we present the total charge 4 atop-NHCiPr adatom-NHCiPr tilted-NHCiPr complex-NHCiPr complex-NHCEt complex-NHCMe (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (b) adatom– and (c) tilted–BNHCiPr/Au; and for complex–BNHCX/Au with X= (d) iPr, (e) Et and (f) Me. The isosurface scale is set to 0.01 e/Å3. density at the molecule-surface interface of the atop–, adatom–, and tilted–BNHCiPr/Au con- figurations. Similar electronic distributions have been observed for the other molecules, where we can identify the formation of C–Au chemical bonds, and the emergence of an or- bital overlap between the wing-groups and the Au surface atoms in atop–BNHCiPr [Fig. 3(a)]. Such an orbital overlap allow us to infer a strengthening of the molecule-surface repulsive interaction, reflecting in a larger C–Au equilib- rium bond length (2.13 Å) compared with those of adatom and tilted geometries (2.06 Å). As shown in Figs. 3(d)–(f), there are no charge density overlap at molecule-surface in- terface region of complex–BNHCX/Au. At the equilibrium geometry, we found that the hori- zontal buckling and molecule–surface distance (h) are proportional to the "size" of the wing groups, Table 1. The energetic stability is dic- tated by attractive long range vdW interactions between the BNHCX π orbitals and the H atoms of the CH3 side groups with the Au(111) sur- face. Our results of binding energy reveal that the wing groups rules the energetic preference for the complex–BNHCX geometry, namely Eb increases by 0.14 and 0.25 eV/BNHCX, for X = Et and Me, when compared with the one of the tilted geometry, whereas it reduces by 0.05 eV for BNHCiPr. Thus, we can infer that that the formation of complex is quite likely for BNHCEt/ and BNHCMe/Au whereas for BNHCiPr/Au there is an energetic preference (although relatively small) for the tilted con- figuration. These results support the recent ex- perimental work, performed by Larrea et al. 10, addressing the orientation and the self-assembly of those molecules on Au(111). Similar results on the role played by the "size" of the NHC wing groups, on the molecular conformation on Au(111), have been reported in a recent study by Lovat 19 et al.. In particular, they suggested a thermally activated process in order to form complex structures of BNHCiPr. Indeed, in a very recent study, Inayeh et al.20 have shown that, in addition to the molecular structure of the side groups, other physical factors such as the surface coverage, annealing protocol, and molecular mobility also influence the confor- mation of BNHCX molecules on Au(111). In particular, for X=iPr, they found both tilted and complex geometries, where the flat lying complex structure was found to have a higher surface mobility that the "ballbot" structure of adatom– and tilted–BNHCiPr. Such a dual behavior of BNHCiPr can be ex- amined by considering the schematic scenario presented in Fig. 4(a), combined with our bind- ing energy results presented in Table 1. That is, given an adatom structure and a neighboring additional molecule, we may have the following final BNHCiPr/Au structures, (i) the additional molecule attaches to the surface Au atom re- sulting in the atop configuration, (ii) the for- mation of a second adatom structure, if there were any source of additional Au adatoms, or (iii) results in a complex structure. Our cal- culated binding energies indicate that in (ii) we have the largest energy gain, however, in 5 0 100 200 300 Total Energy Diff. (meV) H-fccB H-hcp B H-fcc T H-fcc B H-hcp B H-fcc T H-fcc + adatom complex 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 0 3 6 9 12 15 Energy (meV) φ φ (b) (a) (c) complex upright complex upright φ energy barrier estimation for BNHCiPr in dif- ferent sites (b) and throughout an azimuthal rotation degree of freedom (c). the absence of additional (and accessible) Au adatoms we find that (iii) is more likely than (i) by 0.40 eV/BNHCiPr. Indeed, similar reac- tion pathway has been proposed by Bakker et al. 42 for complex–NHCIMe/Au. In Fig. 4(b) we present the total energy dif- ferences of BNHCiPr on hole-fcc (H-fcc), - hcp (H-hcp), bridge (B), and top (T) sites. Due to the symmetry of these surface sites, our total energy results (although based on static calculations) allow us to infer the acti- vation energy (AE) of upstanding BNHCiPr on Au(111) 18. Here, the molecular ballbot like dif- fusion of adatom–BNHCiPr will take place pass- ing through bridge sites facing AEs of 54 and 33 meV for the H-fcc → H-hcp and H-hcp → H- fcc diffusion paths; while the T site is quite un- likely for the adatom or tilted configurations. In contrast, complex–BNHCiPr will face nearly flat energy barriers, with AEs lower than 20 meV, which is comparable with the ones involved with its rotation normal to Au(111) surface, up to 14 meV as depicted in Fig. 4(c). Such lower energy barriers confirm the experimen- tally observed nearly free diffusion of complex– NHCIMe 18,21 and –BNHCiPr 20 on the Au(111) surface. In the same diagram [Fig. 4(c)], for sake of comparison, we present the rotation en- ergy barrier for the upstanding adatom config- uration, which is lower than 6 meV, indicating that the rotational degree of freedom plays a minor role on the calculated AEs. adatom-NHCiPr complex-NHCiPr (a) Map of the total charge transfers for (a) adatom–BNHCiPr/Au and (b) complex– BNHCiPr/Au. The isosurface scale is set to 0.001 e/Å3. Simulations of XANES. In Figs. 5(a) and (b) we present a map of the total charge trans- fers in the adatom– and complex–BNHCiPr/Au structures. By using the Bader charge den- sity analysis, we find a net charge transfer of 0.30 and 0.23 e (∆q in Table 1) from the BNHCiPr molecule to the Au(111) surface. For both configurations, the total charge displace- ments take place mostly at the BNHCiPr/Au interface region, spreading out not only along 6 the BNHCiPr backbone but also in the CH3 side groups. Similar results were obtained for the other BNHCX/Au systems. Such a molecule → surface charge donation is in agree- ment with the recent X-ray photo-electron spectroscopy (XPS) results, further supported by DFT calculations 21,22,43. Indeed, each BNHCX/Au system presents its own spectro- scopic fingerprint, characterizing the molecular conformation and molecule-surface electronic interaction. For instance, XANES measure- ments have been done addressing the molecular conformation of NHCX (X=dipp and Me) and BNHCiPr on Au(111) 19. Here, in order to pro- vide a more complete picture of the BNHCX/Au systems, based on first-principles DFT simula- tions, we performed a detailed study of the ni- trogen K-edge XANES spectra. 400 405 410 415 420 Energy (eV) Intensity (arb. units) 0 o 10 o 20 o 30 o 40 o 50 o 60 o 70 o 80 o 90 o 400 405 410 415 420 Energy (eV) Intensity (arb. units) 0 o 10 o 20 o 30 o 40 o 50 o 60 o 70 o 80 o 90 o 400 405 410 415 420 Energy (eV) Intensity (arb. units) 0 o 10 o 20 o 30 o 40 o 50 o 60 o 70 o 80 o 90 o NHCiPr NHCMe NHCEt (a) (c) (b) 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 θ 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 C/A intensity fraction NHC iPr NHC Et NHC Me A B C A B C A B C (d) Polarization angle dependence of XANES for freestanding (a) BNHCiPr, (b) BNHCEt and (c) BNHCMe molecules. (d) Frac- tion between C and A peaks as a function of the tilted angle. The angle is defined in rela- tion to the benzene ring plane as shown in (d) inset. The energy scale is set in relation to the core-level energy. First, we examine the absorption spectra of (isolated) free-standing molecules, focusing on the relationship between the absorption spectra and the orientation of the molecule with respect to the polarization of the radiation (ˆε⊥), indi- cated by θ [inset in Fig. 6(d)]. In Figs. 6(a)- (c) we present the XANES results for BNHCiPr, BNHCEt, and BNHCMe, respectively. The K- edge spectra of the nitrogen atoms exhibits two main features, one associated with the N(1s) → π∗ transition, absorption peak A, and another associated with the N(1s) → σ∗ transi- tion, giving rise to features B and C. The energy of feature A, which comprises a single peak be- tween 405 and 406 eV, weakly depends on the atomic structure of the wing groups, and its in- tensity reduces for lower values of θ. That is, for θ = 90◦ → 0 the N(1s) → σ∗ transitions start to dominate the XANES spectra. The intensi- ties of B and C (between 408 and 411 eV) in- crease, and we notice that these absorption fea- tures are sensitive to the atomic structure of the wing groups attached to the nitrogen atoms. In Fig. 6(d) we present the intensity ratio (η) be- tween the absorption peaks C (IC) and A (IA), η = IC/IA, as a function of the molecule orien- tation, θ. We found that for θ varying from 0◦ to 90◦, the IC/IA absorption ratio reduces from ∼12.5 to 0.2; we will show below that such a ratio η can be used to estimate the orientation of the molecule with respect to the radiation polarization axis, ˆε⊥. (d) 400 405 410 415 420 Energy (eV) Intensity (arb. units) adatom tilted complex atop (b) NHCEt A' B' C' 400 405 410 415 420 Energy (eV) Intensity (arb. units) adatom tilted complex atop (c) NHCMe A' B' C' Intensity (arb. units) adatom tilted complex atop (a) NHCiPr 400 405 410 415 420 Energy (eV) A' B' C' XANES spectra for the configu- rations atop-, adatom-, tilted- and complex- X=Me. (d) XANES polarization vector perpen- dicular to Au(111) surface. The energy scale is set in relation to the core-level energy. The features A, B and C of the free- standing molecules are in general preserved in BNHCX/Au. In Fig. 7 we can identify their counterparts A′, B′ and C′ for a polarization vector perpendicular to the surface plane [ˆε⊥ 7 in Fig. 7(d)]. The near-edge region of the ab- sorption spectra is dominated by the features B′ and C′, while A′ lies in the pre-edge region [Figs. 7(a)–(c)]. The interpretation of these XANES spectra can be done through the calcu- lation of the orbital projected density of states (PDOS) of the 2p orbitals of nitrogen, and its nearest neighbor carbon atoms. In Fig. 8 we present our PDOS results, where we have pro- jected the 2p orbitals in two components, one perpendicular (p⊥) and another parallel (p∥) to the Au(111) surface. 0 5 10 E - Ef (eV) 0 5 10 E - Ef (eV) 0 5 10 E - Ef (eV) 0 0.5 1 PDOS (states/eV) 0 0.5 1 PDOS (states/eV) 0 0.5 1 PDOS (states/eV) 0 0.5 1 PDOS (states/eV) iPr Et Me (a1) (a2) (a3) (a4) (b1) (b2) (b3) (b4) (c1) (c2) (c3) (c4) atop adatom tilted complex complex tilted adatom atop atop adatom tilted complex Projected density of states in the p orbitals of N and neighboring C atoms. The p⊥ (p∥) are the p orbitals perpendicular (par- els are the PDOS for BNHCX, and X=iPr, Et and Me, respectively. (a1)-(c1) Show the atop- and (a4)-(c4) the complex-BNHCX/Au configu- rations. For the upstanding configurations, atop– and adatom–BNHCX/Au, the σ∗ (π∗) orbitals are projected on the p⊥ (p∥) component, i.e. σ∗ → p⊥ (π∗ → p∥), thus for ˆε = ˆε⊥ the K-edge absorption spectra will probe the N(1s) → σ∗ transitions. As shown in Figs. 8(a1)-(c1) and 8(a2)-(c2), the electronic states near the Fermi level (EF) project on the N and C π∗ orbitals, thus consistent with the absence of the pre-edge feature A′, while the near-edge spectra B′ and C′ [Figs. 7(a)-(c)] characterize the σ∗ orbitals which start to rise at about (EF + 2.5) eV. Un- fortunately, the nitrogen K-edge spectra do not allow to distinguish the upstanding atop and adatom geometries, unless the energy difference of ∼1 eV within the near-edge region, which can attributed to the C–N bond (length/angle) distortions of the side wings. In contrast, the tilted configuration can be identified by the rise of the feature A′, concomitantly with the re- duction of the absorption intensities of B′ and C′ when compared with those of the upstand- ing, atom and adatom, structures. We find that A′ comes from the N(1s) → π∗ transition, since the PDOS of the tilted–BNHCX/Au sys- tem [Fig. 8(a3)-(c3)] show that both σ∗ and π∗ orbitals are projected on p⊥, σ∗ + π∗ → p⊥. In the same PDOS diagram, it is noticeable the re- duction of the p⊥ component above EF +2.5 eV, compared with the ones of the upstanding ge- We found that the increase (reduction) of the π∗ (σ∗) orbital projection on the p⊥ component becomes more evident in complex–BNHCX/Au [Figs. 8(a4)-(c4)]. Such PDOS features reflect on the XANES spectra [Fig. 7], here character- ized by an enhancement of the A′ absorption spectrum, which correspond to the N(1s) → π∗ transition to the 2pz orbitals, of the N and near- est neighbor C atoms, lying at the Fermi level, followed by a nearly suppression of the pre-edge absorption peaks, B′ and C′. As discussed above, the tilted-BNHCX/Au structures are energetically more stable for θ about 27◦ with respect to the surface normal direction. As we have done for the free standing molecules, here we evaluate the intensity ratio between the absorption peaks C′ and A′, η′ = IC′/IA′. We obtained η′ = 4.53, 4.50, and 4.11 for X=iPr, Et and Me. Interestingly, based on the η = IC/IA ratio for free-standing molecules, Fig. 6(d), those results of η′ correspond to tilt angles of about 30◦, 27◦, and 28◦, thus nicely consistent with the calculated equilibrium ge- ometries for the tilted-BNHCX/Au configura- tions. Thus, suggesting that this ratio can serve as a guide to probe the angle of the molecule relative to the Au(111) surface. We can improve the understanding of the ab- 8 405 410 405 410 405 410 (a2) (a3) adatom adatom adatom (a1) tilted (b2) (b3) tilted (b1) tilted (c2) (c3) complex complex complex (c1) 405 410 405 410 405 410 iPr Et Me (i) (ii) (ii) (ii) (ii) (ii) (ii) (i) (i) (i) (i) (i) C’ C’ C’ B’ C’ B’ C’ B’ B’ B’ B’ C’ A’ A’ A’ A’ A’ A’ (i) (ii) (ii) (ii) (i) (i) 1.0 0.0 1.0 0.0 0.5 0.0 Intensity (arb. units) Intensity (arb. units) Intens. (arb. units) Energy (eV) Energy (eV) Energy (eV) XANES spectra with (shaded curve) and without (continuous black lines) the Au substrate presence keeping the molecule/substrate atomic configuration and the isolated relaxed molecule (dashed lines). The iPr, Et and Me molecules are shown in while the adatom, tilted and complex config- respectively. Here for a better comparison of each feature the spectra have been shifted in order to the peak A’ coincide with the BNHCX/Au configuration. sorption spectra through XANES simulations of hypothetical molecular structures. Here, we have considered an isolated BNHCX molecule constrained to the geometry of the adsorbed system. It represents an imaginary configu- ration where the surface potential is "turned- off", but the molecule is not allowed to re- lax. The XANES spectra of this system is indicated as (i) in Fig. 9, and the shaded re- gion [(ii)] represents the absorption spectra of the final system, BNHCX/Au. Therefore, the comparison between (i) and (ii) reveals the role played by the molecule-surface electronic inter- action in the nitrogen K-edge XANES spec- tra, such as the formation of C–Au chemical bonds, and BNHCX → Au(111) charge trans- fers. These comparisons for the upstanding and nearly upstanding configurations are shown in Figs. 9(a) and (b). We find that the effect of the molecule-surface interactions on the XANES spectra is negligible in adatom–BNHCiPr/Au [Fig. 9(a1)], while there is a small reduction on the absorption spectrum A′ for the tilted struc- ture [Fig. 9(b1)]. Similar reduction on the pre- edge spectrum has been observed for the other molecules, Figs. 9(b2) and (b3). Meanwhile, the near edge spectra of adatom– and tilted– BNHCX/Au, with X=Et and Me, are character- ized by slight changes on the absorption peaks B′ and C′, the absorption intensity of the former (latter) reduces (increases). Further XANES simulations of the fully relaxed free-standing molecules, indicated by dashed lines in Fig. 9, show that the molecular relaxations are charac- terized by very small contributions to the final BNHCX/Au absorption spectra of the upstand- ing or nearly upstanding BNHCX/Au systems. In contrast, in complex–BNHCX/Au, where the molecule lies flat or nearly flat on the Au(111) surface, we find that the molecule-surface in- teractions [(i) → (ii)], and the change of the equilibrium geometry of the molecule [dashed- line → solid-line] play important roles on the fi- nal XANES spectra. As shown in Fig. 9(c1)- (c3), both processes reduce the intensity of the absorption feature A′. These greater (lower) sensibility of the pre-edge (near-edge) absorp- tion features A′ (B′ and C′) reflects the larger (smaller) molecule-surface interaction between the molecular π (σ) orbitals, of the nitrogen and the nearest neighbor carbon atoms, and the 6s orbitals of the Au surface atoms. These results indicate that the use of η′(= IC′/IA′) in order to infer the molecular orientation is a reason- able approach for small tilt angles, since the pre-edge and the near-edge spectra are affected differently by the molecule-surface electronic in- teractions. Our XANES results in general show good agreement the experimental findings of the ni- trogen K-edge spectra obtained by Lovat et al.19. For instance, (i) the absence (presence) of pre-edge absorption feature A′ in the upstand- ing (flat-lying) configurations of NHC/Au, and (ii) the raise of the N(1s) → σ∗ transition (B′ and C′) at about 3 eV above A′. These features are in good agreement with our XANES sim- 9 ulations, being consistent with the projected density of states (PDOS in Fig. 8). However, in (ii) they measured a tilt angle θ of ∼40◦, supported by DFT adsorption energy calcula- tions, while we found the ground state config- uration for θ = 27◦. Here, we can point out two aspects that may explain such a disagree- ment, one is a possible presence of a multi- phase system in BNHCiPr/Au, composed by tilted and complex configurations, which can be translated as larger tilt angles in XANES spectra. In fact, multi-phase systems, made by tilted and complex geometries of BNHCiPr on the Au(111) surface, have been observed by In- ayeh et al.20. With respect to the DFT results, it is reported that the adsorption energy weakly depends on the tilt angle 19, and thus, we may have some uncertainties on the ground states geometry as a function of θ, since it may de- pends on the adequacy of the formalism used to calculate the vdW contribution, and other calculation parameters like the size of the sur- face unit cell. In addition, as shown in Fig. 4(c), there is azimuthal dependence (φ) on the total energy which should be taken into account for a precise determination of ground state value of θ. Conclusions Based on ab initio DFT total energy calcu- lations, combined with simulation of X-ray absorption spectra, we performed a thorough study of the energetic stability and structural arrangement of N-heterocyclic carbenes derived from benzimidazole on the Au(111) surface, BNHCX/Au (with X=iPr, Et, and Me). We found that BNHCEt and BNHCMe molecules are more stable lying parallel to the surface plane, forming complex structures on the Au(111) sur- face. Whereas, for BNHCiPr/Au we found that the tilted and complex configurations are some- what close in energy, where the former con- figuration is more stable than the latter by about 50 meV/molecule. These results pro- vide a total energy support to the recent ex- perimental findings, (i) the observation of flat- lying BNHCEt/ and BNHCMe/Au and upstand- ing BNHCiPr/Au 10, while (ii) in Refs. 19,20 the authors identified a dual conformation, namely tilted and complex, for BNHCiPr molecules on Au(111). Further investigation, based on the nitrogen K-edge XANES simulations revealed that the molecular orientation on the Au(111) surface is characterized by distinct X-ray absorption fingerprints. For a polarization vector perpen- dicular to the Au(111) surface, we found that the near-edge spectra of adatom-BNHCX/Au, upstanding configuration, is given solely by the N(1s) → σ∗ transition, with no contribution from the π∗ orbitals. The absorption inten- sity of N(1s) → σ∗ transitions reduces upon the vertical tilt of the molecule, tilt-BNHCX/Au; followed by the emergence of an absorption peak at the pre-edge region attributed to the N(1s) → π∗ transition. Finally, we show that such an emergence and increase of the pre- edge absorption feature, concomitantly with the suppression of the N(1s) → σ∗ (near -edge) transitions indicates the formation of BNHCX molecules lying parallel to the Au(111) surface, complex-BNHCX/Au. In order to improve the understanding of X-ray absorption results, not only the ones presented in this work, but also those obtained experimentally for BNHCiPr and other NHC molecules on Au(111)19; the inter- pretation of the final spectra was performed in light of the (i) the projection of the electronic density of states, and (ii) a set of XANES simu- lations of hypothetical molecular BNHCX struc- tures. Acknowledgement The authors acknowl- edge many fruitful discussions with Cathleen M. Crudden, Ishwar Singh, Alex J. Veinot, Alex Inayeh and Ryan R. K. Groome. The authors also acknowledge financial support from the Brazilian agencies FAPESP (grant 2019/20857- 0), CNPq, and FAPEMIG, and the CENAPAD- SP and Laboratório Nacional de Computação Científica (LNCC-SCAFMat2) for computer time. ABM acknowledges financial support from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Re- search Council of Canada (NSERC) and the Canadian Foundation for Innovation (CFI). 10