On the Variability of Critical Size for Homogeneous Nucleation in a Solid-State Diffusional Transformation Pooja Rani†, R.M. Raghavendra† and Anandh Subramaniam* Materials Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur-208016, INDIA, Ph.: +91(512)259 7215 † Authors with equal contribution and affiliation reflects the place of origin of the work *Author for correspondence: anandh@iitk.ac.in In a solid-state diffusional phase transformation involving nucleation and growth, the size of the critical nucleus for a homogeneous process ( * * rhomo = r ) has been assumed to be a time invariant constant of the transformation. The strain associated with the process has a positive energy contribution and leads to an increase in the value of *r , with respect to that for nucleation from a liquid. With the progress of such a transformation, the strain energy stored in the matrix increases and nuclei forming at a later stage encounter a strained matrix. Using devitrification of a bulk metallic glass as a model system, we demonstrate that r* is not a cardinal time invariant constant for homogeneous nucleation and can increase or decrease depending on the strain energy penalty. We show that the assumption regarding the constancy of *r is true only in the early stages of the transformation and establish that the progress of the transformation leads to an altered magnitude of r*, which is a function of the microstructural details, geometrical variables and physical parameters. With the aid of high-resolution lattice fringe imaging and computations of *r , we further argue that, 'liquid-like' homogeneous nucleation can occur and that the conclusions are applicable to a broad set of solid-state diffusional transformations. The above effect 'opens up' a lower barrier transformation pathway arising purely from the internal variables of the system. Keywords: Size of critical nucleus, Transmission electron microscopy, Finite Element Method. A first order diffusional phase transformation proceeds by nucleation and growth. The control of nucleation and growth is of paramount importance in diverse scientific and engineering applications . In the ambit of the classical nucleation theory (CNT) , the nucleation step occurs 'uphill' in the Gibbs free energy (G) and embryos below a critical size (r*) tend to revert to the parent phase . In an undercooled system held at constant pressure and temperature, the nucleation step involves a 'random statistical fluctuation' in the metastable phase, which leads to the formation a product nucleus of size r* . The net Gibbs free energy change for the formation of a crystal from a solid ( ∆Ghomo ) via homogeneous nucleation is given by: 1 ( ) ( ) homo V S . G G V A V G γ ∆ = − ∆ ⋅ + ⋅ + ∆ (1) where, ∆GV is the Gibbs volume free energy difference between the parent and product phases, 'V' is the volume of the product phase, 'A' is the interfacial area, γ is the interfacial energy and ∆GS is the strain energy associated with the transformation. For a nucleus of spherical shape of radius 'r', equation (1) can be written as: ( ) ( ) 3 2 4 homo V S 3 4 G r G G r π π γ ∆ = − ∆ − ∆ + ⋅ (2) The critical size for homogeneous nucleation ( * * rhomo = r ) is determined by finding the extremum of the function Ghomo( ) r ∆ . Two special cases of the nucleation of a crystal are noteworthy: (i) that from a liquid and (ii) that from an amorphous matrix. In the former case the strain energy term is absent and the critical size of the nucleus is: * V 2 / rliquid G = γ ∆ . The later case forms a model system of a solid to solid transformation, especially from an experimental perspective, due to the following attributes. (i) The degree of transformation is amenable to good control (via time and temperature). (ii) In the absence of 'interference' of the lattice fringes from the matrix, the crystallite size can be measured with relative ease, using the high-resolution lattice fringe imaging (HRLFI) technique. (iii) The isotropic properties of the matrix enable the simplification of the analysis. (iv) Sites of heterogeneous nucleation (like grain boundaries, dislocations, etc.) are absent, which can dominate over the homogenous nucleation processes in a typical solid to solid diffusional phase transformation. For the specific case of the formation of a crystalline nucleus in an amorphous matrix, the strain energy associated with the transformation can be written as : ( ) ( ) 3 2 m Strain 1 8 3 1 r f G E ν π ν + = − (3) where, ‘fm’ is the linear mismatch between the nucleus and the glass matrix (the linear mismatch is one third of the volumetric mismatch), ‘G’ & ‘ν’ are shear modulus and Poisson’s ratio respectively of the product phase, which is assumed to be isotropic in this simplified formula. Equation (3) 2 contains only the elastic properties of the product phase, while in reality the strain energy is partitioned between the matrix and the product phases and hence should involve properties of both phases . The inclusion of the strain energy term leads to an increase in the magnitude of r*, which is given by: ( ) * * V S 2 rbulk r G G γ ∞ = = ∆ − ∆ (4) Where, Strain S E G V ∆ = is the misfit strain energy per unit volume. Here, the '∞' in the subscript represents to a single nucleus in an infinite matrix. Needless to point out, the shape of the nucleus will determine the magnitude of the energies involved in equation (4) and this variable has been investigated in literature . Lee et al. has highlighted the role of the strain energy in determining the shape of the critical nucleus. Zhang et al. have computed the morphology of the critical nucleus taking into account the elastic anisotropy and have further shown that the shape of nucleus can be plates, needles or cuboids. In a related context, the effect of shear strain on the shape of the nucleus has also been investigated . Experimentally, HRLFI has been the preferred technique for the study of nucleation; especially in the determination of the critical nucleus size . In a recent fascinating work, Zhou et al. have used atomic electron tomography to study nucleation in a model FePt system. Computational techniques like molecular dynamics and density functional theory have also been used to study the nucleation behaviour in solids . The critical size can be altered due to the presence of preferred sites of nucleation (heterogeneous nucleation) or in the presence of defects and their associated strain fields, which leads to a reduced strain energy penalty . In many circumstances, a combination of these effects may be superposed . The effect of an altered strain energy penalty on the magnitude of r*, has been investigated for the case of martensitic transformations ; wherein the parent matrix may develop considerable strain with the progress of the transformation. The scenario wherein r* is altered due to nucleation in nanoscale volumes has also been investigated . In this work, a good match was observed between the value of r* computed using a combination of CNT and finite element computations; with that experimentally measured using HRLFI. This work also served to validate the utility of CNT in the context of computation of r* for the devitrification of a bulk metallic glass (BMG). In an interesting study, Gómez et al showed the variability of r* due to the effect of curvature of the substrate on the nucleation of two-dimensional phases. Shen et al. have incorporated the effect 3 of the stress state of the matrix, arising from the pre-existing microstructure, on nucleation. They have further incorporated the same in a phase field model. The effect of atom trapping on the critical nucleus size has been investigated by Erdélyi et al. . In a related context, the effect of strain energy on the formation of an interfacial melt has also investigated . An important point which emerges from the survey of the literature is that, the critical radius for homogeneous nucleation (r*) has been considered as cardinal time invariant constant for a given diffusional transformation. In the context of nucleation in a solid-to-solid diffusional transformation, the standard analysis involves the formation of a single nucleus in an infinite matrix. With the progress of the transformation this picture is altered and nuclei forming at a later stage do so in the proximity of pre-existing grown crystallites. The strain field of these pre-existing crystallites not only interacts amongst themselves in a complex fashion; but also alters the 'energy accounting', which arises due to the altered strain energy penalty for nucleation at a specific coordinate. In the current work, we use high-resolution lattice fringe imaging (HRLFI) and finite element computations to achieve the following tasks. (1) Establish that r* is not a cardinal time invariant constant for a given solid to solid phase transformation. (2) Compute the value of r* for model scenarios arising during the progress of transformation. (3) Elucidate that r* is function of the microstructural details, geometrical variables and physical parameters like anisotropy. (4) Argue that 'liquid-like' nucleation can occur with the progress of the transformation. The formation of Cu10Zr7 crystal (Cmca, oC68, a = 12.68 Å, b = 9.31 Å, c = 9.35 Å ) from an amorphous matrix (composition of (Cu64Zr36)96Al4) is considered as a model system to achieve the abovementioned tasks. We use the CNT in our computations and aspects regarding its utility are discussed later in the script and in the supplementary information. The following parameters are required for the computation of the value of r* (using equation (4): (i) ∆GV , (ii) crystal-glass interfacial energy (γ), (ii) Estrain. Further, the elastic constants of the phases and the value of the misfit strain (fm) are required for the determination of Estrain. We consider here briefly the methodology for the calculation of these quantities and details can be found elsewhere (, supplementary information). For the glass to crystal transformation, the value of ∆GV , reported by Zhou and Napolitano , is used for the calculation. The value of γ is determined using a formula derived using the negentropic model ( γ = 0.03 J / m2 ). The strain energy is computed using a finite element model, based on the Eshelby formalism . 4 As alluded to before, with the progress of the transformation the stress state in the matrix becomes complex due to a overlap of the stress fields arising from individual crystallites. Model three-dimensional finite element simulations have been used for the computation of the strain energy of the system, to elucidate the effect of nucleation in the vicinity of single and multiple crystallites. Figure 1 shows a schematic of a finite element model used for the calculation of the strain energy of a nucleus in the proximity of a larger crystallite. Eigenstrains are imposed in selected regions (Regions-A) of the numerical model (Figure 1a), corresponding to the volume misfit between the crystal and the glass. Anisotropic elastic properties have been used for the crystal. The matrix being glass, has isotropic material properties. The interaction of the strain field depends on the relative crystallographic orientation between the crystal and the nucleus, which is varied in a discrete manner. To compute the strain energy of a single nucleus in an infinite matrix, eigenstrains are imposed in Region-A only. The corresponding value of r* is labeled as * rbulk . A 3D view of the system is shown in Figure 1b. In the model considered the strain energy penalty for nucleation is a function of the: (i) shape of the nuclei, (ii) relative crystallographic orientation between the large crystal and the nucleus, (iii) distance of the nucleus from the crystal and (iv) size of the large crystal. The effect of these variables has been studied for specific value of the parameters. The relative crystallographic orientation between the 'large crystal' (L) and the nucleus (N) is designated by specifying two parallel basis vectors of the orthogonal set ( 1 1 1 1 1 1 || L N U V W u v w & 2 2 2 2 2 2 || L N U V W u v w ). A plot of the hydrostatic stress contours ( σhyd ) in the presence of a spherical nucleus (r = 1.1 nm) at a distance of 2 nm (d) from the grown crystal (R = 5 nm) is shown in Figure 1c. The relative orientation of the crystallites is: || L N & || L N ( || L N ). From the stress plot it is seen that tensile and compressive regions exist in the matrix around the large/grown crystallite. In the figure the nucleus is positioned in a compressive region of the large crystal. If nucleation occurs in the tensile region of the large crystallite, this will lead to an increase in the magnitude of r*. The converse will be true for the nucleation in the compressive region of the large crystallite. The details regarding the finite element models and the importance of the role of hydrostatic stress and other variables in the process, is described in the supplementary material. (Insert Figure 1 about here) *r ) as a function of the distance (d) from the grown crystallite. The value of the strain energy, which is an input in the computation of r*, is computed using the model in Figure 1a. The plots correspond to two relative orientations of the crystallites: (O1) || L N and (O2) || L N . It is seen that r* can 5 increase or decrease depending on the tensile or compressive nature of the stress state in the matrix (schematically illustrated in Figure 1b). As expected, the magnitude of the influence of the large crystal increases with a decreasing magnitude of 'd'. The plots (Figure 2a) display an asymmetry between the two orientations, which arises due to the inherent elastic anisotropy of the crystal. The plot of ∆Ghomo versus 'r' is shown for following three cases are shown as insets to the figure. (i) Nucleation in the absence of a large crystal (Figure 2c). In this case * * bulk r = r . (ii) Nucleation in the compressive region corresponding to orientation O1 and d = 4 nm (Figure 2d). (iii) Nucleation in the tensile region corresponding to orientation O2 and d = 4 nm (Figure 2e). (Insert Figure 2 about here) A brief outline of the experimental details is considered here and further details can be found in the supplementary information. The (Cu64Zr36)96Al4 BMG is produced by arc melting followed by suction casting in a copper mold. The following heat treatments have been followed to obtain partially crystallized samples: (P1) 200°C for 120 min, (P2) 325°C for 30 min and (P3) 200°C for 120 min. The temperatures for the heat treatment are based on the nucleation and growth rate curves (supplementary material). In P1 the sample is annealed in the nucleation dominated regime to obtain a sparse dispersion of nuclei in an amorphous matrix. In P2 the nuclei are grown in the growth dominated regime to obtain crystallites in the size range of 5-15 nm. In P3, akin to P1, the treatment is carried out in the nucleation dominated regime to obtain nuclei between the larger crystallites. The above treatments are based on the following rationale: the nucleation is P1 is in a strain free matrix, with little interference between strain fields of the nuclei; while the nucleation in P3 is in the strain field of pre-existing crystallites. These crystallites have grown during the P2 treatment. A total of seven samples were investigated to obtain HRLFI from nuclei. A point to be noted here is that, BMGs in contrast to marginal glasses are produced by a slow cooling rate. values of *r are for diverse configurations, which are shown schematically as insets to the figure. The abscissa (∆E) is a measure of the strain energy cost difference between nucleation in a strain- free matrix, versus that in a strained matrix. The different configurations considered give rise to a range of ∆E values and a negative value of ∆E implies a reduced strain energy cost for nucleation. Additional insets to the figure show selected HRLFI from nuclei, which have a range of r* values. The limit of the LFI technique to measure crystallite sizes is about 0.55 nm, which corresponds to five bright fringes and is marked as a broad band in the figure. The details regarding this aspect and the computational models can be found in the supplemental material. The following salient observations can be made from a study of Figure 3. 6 (A-i) (a) The nuclei which formed after the treatment P1 (i.e., nucleation in an unstrained matrix) have r* values of 1.42±0.03. This value matches well with the computed value of * rbulk ( * ( ) 1.4 rbulk Computed nm = ). The small scatter in the experimentally measured nuclei sizes ( * ( ) rbulk Exp ) is to be noted. (b) The experimentally measured r* values for samples with P3 treatment span a range: from that exceeding * rbulk , to that close to the value of * rliquid . (c) The number of nuclei with * * bulk r > r is much less than for the number of nuclei with * * bulk r < r . (A-ii) Nucleation in the tensile region(s) of the large crystal(s) leads to an increase in value of r* and the reverse is true for nucleation in the compressive region(s). (A-iii) The presence of multiple 'favourably oriented' crystals accentuates the effect on *r . A-i (a) implies that r* has a constant value in the absence of stress in the matrix. In a transformation, this scenario occurs at the early stages; wherein the density of nuclei is sparse and no growth has taken place. This result, additionally serves to validate the computational methodology adopted to determine the value of r*. A-i (b) implies r* is not a cardinal constant for a solid to solid diffusional transformation and that liquid like nucleation can occur in a bulk specimen. This scenario of variable r* will prevail for most parts of the transformation. A-i (c) is a natural consequence of the fact that, presented with a choice between higher a lower barrier height, the system chooses the later. In other words, since crystalline order arises in an amorphous matrix via a 'statistical fluctuation', the probability of occurrence of smaller crystal exceeds that of a larger crystal. A-ii and A-iii highlight the fact that local microstructural details dictate the increase or decrease in the value of *r and that a significant decrease in the magnitude of *r can occur in a highly strained matrix. It is noteworthy that, the computational models with elastic anisotropy, are able to capture the essential aspects of the experimental results. (Insert Figure 3 about here) The results obtained in the current work are for a specific system (Cu-Zr-Al system); however, given that the material properties of this system are in the typical range, we expect a broader applicability of the conclusions (i.e., for solid to solid phase transformation, including that for the nucleation of a crystal from a crystalline matrix). A detailed discussion regarding this aspect can be found in the supplementary information and an explicit validation of the same forms scope for the future work. In the current work a reasonably good explanation of the experimental observations is made via a computational methodology involving various assumptions. An analysis regarding the same can be found in the supplemental material. This includes alternatives to the CNT and alternate computational methods. A definitive proof, establishing that the glass originally formed is 7 free of quenched-in nuclei (i.e. pre-existing crystallites), can be found in the supplementary information. The following conclusions can be drawn from the current work, with respect to nucleation in a solid to solid diffusional phase transformation. (1) With the progress of the transformation the strain energy penalty for the formation of a nucleus is altered, leading to a variability in the magnitude of the critical nucleus size (r*) (i.e. r* is not a cardinal invariant). (2) This 'time dependent' penalty is a function of the microstructural details, geometrical variables and physical parameters like anisotropy and crystallographic orientation. (3) The interaction of stress fields of the nucleus with a prior formed crystal can lead to a decrease or an increase in the value of r*. The magnitude of the depression can be significant, which can result in a 'liquid-like' nucleation in a solid state transformation. (4) The aforementioned effect 'opens up' a lower barrier transformation pathway arising purely from the internal variables of the system. Acknowledgments We thank Jai Singh Advanced Imaging Centre, I.I.T. Kanpur for providing the facility to do TEM. Dr. Raghavendra Tewari, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai and Prof. Madhav Ranganathan, I.I.T. Kanpur, are kindly acknowledged for the discussions. The financial assistance from Science and Engineering Research Board, Department of Science and Technology (SERB- DST), India under Grant No. EMR/2016/004987 is acknowledged. Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Author contributions Pooja Rani carried out the experiments. R.M. Raghavendra performed the computations. Anandh Subramaniam conceived the problem and worked out a solution strategy and further penned the manuscript. 8 (a) (b) (c) the stress state of an ellipsoidal nucleus (with radii r1 and r2) in the proximity of a pre-existing crystal (of radius R). Eigenstrains are imposed in the Regions-A, corresponding to the volume mismatch between the Cu10Zr7 crystal and the amorphous matrix. The crystallographic orientation of the large/grown crystal is varied in a discrete manner to obtain specific orientation relationships. To simulate the case of a single nucleus in an 'infinite' matrix, eigenstrains are imposed only in Region-A. (b) A 3D view of the system. (c) A plot of the hydrostatic stress contours for the specific case of a spherical nucleus (r = 1.1 nm) at a distance (d) of 2 nm from the grown crystal. The radius of the large crystal (R) is 5 nm. The relative orientation of the crystallites marked in the figure corresponds to this special case and a zoomed-in view is depicted in the figure. The set (x, y, z) form the global coordinate set. 9 1 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 r* (nm) → d (nm)→ d = 4 nm Nucleation in Tensile Stress Field (O2) Nucleation in Compressive Stress Field (O1) * Bulk r (a) (b) 0.3 0.6 0.9 1.2 1.5 ∆G (× 10−20) (J)→ r (nm)→ r* ∆G* (e) 0.3 0.9 1.5 2.1 ∆G (× 10−20) (J)→ r (nm)→ r* ∆G* (d) 0.2 0.8 1.4 2.0 ∆G (× 10−20) (J)→ r (nm)→ r* ∆G* (c) the grown crystallite, along two crystallographic orientations ((O1) || L N and (O2) || L N ). The horizontal dashed line corresponds to * rbulk (i.e. nucleation in the absence of the large crystal). (b) Schematic illustrating the effect of the tensile and compressive regions of the large crystal in the magnitude of r*. (c-e) Plot of the variation of ∆Ghomo (= G ∆ ) with 'r' for three cases. Nucleation in the absence of the large crystal (c). Nucleation in the compressive region (d) and nucleation in the tensile region (e). In (d) and (e), d = 4 nm. The critical values of ∆G ( ∆G* ) and 'r' (r*) are marked in the figures. 10 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 −10 −8 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 8 10 ∆Ε (×10−19) (J)→ r*(nm) → 0.6 r* (experimental) r* bulk (Computed) r* liquid Limit to HRLFI 3nm 2.9 nm 3nm Crystallite Nucleus Tensile stress field Compressive stress field Crystallite Crystallite Crystallite Nucleus Tensile stress field Compressive stress field Crystallite Crystallite Nucleus Tensile stress field Compressive stress field Nucleus Crystallite Tensile stress field Compressive stress field Nucleus Crystallite Tensile stress field Compressive stress field Crystallite Crystallite Crystallite Compressive stress field Tensile stress field Nucleus r* bulk (Exp) r* (nm) → 0.6 3nm 1.56 nm Nucleus Nucleus Grown crystal Nucleus P3 P1 ∆E (× 10−19) (J)→ the computational model (filled circles) and (ii) HRLFI (square or diamond legend in a shaded box). For the computational plot the ordinate is the strain energy difference between nucleation in a strained versus that in an unstrained matrix (∆E). The experimental samples are of two types: one after P1 treatment and one after P3 treatment. The horizontal dashed lines correspond to * rbulk (computed), * rbulk (experimental) and * rliquid . The limit of the HRLFI technique in the measurement of crystal sizes is marked as a broad band (note that this is not the limit of HRTEM, but a practical limit of LFI in the measurement of sizes of crystals). The insets include: schematics of the computational configurations and HRLFI from Cr10Zr7 crystallites. The radii for the experimental crystallite sizes are that of an equivalent circle. 11