1 Nanoscale axial position and orientation measurement of hexagonal boron nitride quantum emitters using a tunable nanophotonic environment Pankaj K. Jha1, †, Hamidreza Akbari1, †, Yonghwi Kim1, †, Souvik Biswas1, Harry A. Atwater1, * 1Thomas J. Watson Laboratory of Applied Physics and Materials Science, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA. 2Resnick Sustainability Institute, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA. 3Joint Center for Artificial Photosynthesis, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA. †These authors contributed equally to this work. *Corresponding author: Harry A. Atwater (haa@caltech.edu) (Dated: February 23, 2021) Color centers in hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) have emerged as promising candidates for single-photon emitters (SPEs) due to their bright emission characteristics at room temperature. In contrast to mono- and few-layered hBN, color centers in multi-layered flakes show superior emission characteristics such as higher saturation counts and spectral stability. Here, we report a method for determining both the axial position and three- dimensional dipole orientation of SPEs in thick hBN flakes by tuning the photonic local density of states using vanadium dioxide (VO2), a phase change material. Emitters under study exhibit a strong surface-normal dipole orientation, providing some insight on the atomic structure of hBN SPEs, deeply embedded in thick crystals. We have optimized a hot pickup technique to reproducibly transfer flakes of hBN from VO2 onto SiO2/Si substrate and relocated the same emitters. Our approach serves as a practical method to systematically characterize SPEs in hBN prior to integration in quantum photonics systems. 2 Introduction Over the past few decades, point defects (1) that introduce electronic states with optical transitions, also known as color centers, have garnered great interest for quantum photonics applications, such as quantum computation and quantum information (2,3), quantum cryptography (4), and quantum and zinc oxide (9) offer promising platforms for hosting quantum emitters with emission in the visible to near-infrared spectrum. However, these materials suffer from one or more intrinsic challenges such as a requirement for cryogenic temperatures, decoherence of emitted photons, optical coupling losses, and challenges associated with chip-based photonic integration. These problems have driven researchers to seek new candidate materials with fewer disadvantages (10,11). Recent discoveries of quantum light emission from two-dimensional van der Waals (vdW) layered materials (12-17) have introduced promising candidates for single photon emitters (SPEs). In contrast to bulk materials, vdW materials offer easier integration with photonic structures and minimal loss due to refractive index mismatch (18,19). Among several candidate vdW host materials, hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) has received particular attention due to its ability to offer a bright source of quantum light at room temperature. Remarkably, quantum emitters in hBN have shown high (> 80%) Debye-Waller factor (17), a brightness comparable to the brightest SPEs (10, 19), polarized emission (17, 20), giant stark shift (21-23), magnetic-field dependent quantum emission (24,25), correlated cathodoluminescence and photoluminescence emission (26), and near transform-limited optical linewidth (27), all reported at room temperature. To this date, the atomic structure of hBN quantum emitters is not clear; the most common approach to deduce the atomic structure of these emitters has been to compare the energy of the zero-phonon line (ZPL) and phonon-assisted emission to the first-principles calculations (28). However, this approach cannot narrow down the pool of possible candidates. Accurate information of 3D orientation of emitting dipole would provide invaluable insight into the underlying symmetry properties of the defect center, which can complement the aforementioned approach and help in identifying the atomic origin of emitters. Quantum emitters in multi-layered flakes, in contrast to mono- and few-layered flakes, show superior emission characteristics such as higher saturation counts and spectral stability due to reduced environmental screening effects (29). Efficient coupling of these quantum emitters with 3 nanophotonic structures would require precise information about their axial position and 3D dipole orientation. Determining, both, the 3D dipole orientation and axial position of a quantum emitter in any multi-layered hBN poses as a coupled problem because the polarization characteristics of detected photons is strongly influence by either dipole orientation or axial position. In this Letter, we demonstrate nanometer-scale axial location of hBN quantum emitters in a multi-layered flake by leveraging highly sensitive, distance-dependent modulation of the spontaneous emission lifetime of these quantum emitters when in close proximity to a tunable phase-change material, vanadium dioxide (VO2). Specifically, we modify the local density of optical states (LDOS) by inducing an insulator-to-metal transition in VO2 which in turn modulates the emission rate of quantum emitters near the hBN/VO2 interface. This method, taken together with emission polarimetry to determine the three-dimensional (3D) orientation of the quantum emitter, give comprehensive information about emitters axial position and orientation, which could be used to distinguish possible candidates based on atomic structure of the emitter. Furthermore, we have optimized a polymer-assisted hot pickup and transfer process to reliably transfer hBN flakes from VO2 substrate onto any arbitrary substrate (here, we use SiO2/Si substrate as target), following which, the emitters under investigation were relocated. Measurement of hBN emitter location and 3D orientation with nanometer-scale resolution in multi-layered flakes together with advances in precise transfer and stacking of 2D materials (30) and metal contacts (31) offer opportunities for both fundamental physics advances (32) and quantum photonic technologies (33,34). The experimental configuration is shown in Figure 1a. A quantum emitter is located at a distance d, within the thickness of an hBN flake, from the surface of a substrate that consists of a thin layer of VO2 on sapphire. Photoluminescence excitation and detection were performed with optical pumping of quantum emitters by laser excitation from the top. The excited quantum emitter emission decay rate depends on its interaction with the optical environment (35). By optical environment we mean the substrate beneath and the air above the hBN flake. We model this interaction by treating the quantum emitter as an oscillating point dipole source oriented along the direction (θ, φ). For an emitter in an unbounded, homogeneous, and lossless medium with a refractive index n, the spontaneous decay rate is enhanced by a factor n compared to the free space. This result also holds true for bounded geometry as long as the emitter is at a distance d ≫ λ from any interface. When d ≪ λ the decay rate strongly depends on d, the dipole orientation (θ, φ), and 4 the refractive index contrast across the interface (36-38). In this work, we manipulated the optical environment of a quantum emitter located in the vicinity of the hBN/VO2 interface using VO2 whose complex refractive index exhibits a sharp change when VO2 is thermally switched from the insulating to metallic state, which occurs at near room temperature Tc ~ 340 K (39). as a function of distance d when the emitter is oriented perpendicular (θ = 0°) and parallel (θ = 90°) to the hBN/VO2 interface. Here, γ,-./0123-4 and γ67210038 is the total (radiative and non- radiative) decay rate of the emitter when VO2 is in insulating (30 °C) and metallic (100 °C) state respectively. In these simulations, we considered a flake thickness of 310 nm and an emission wavelength of 600 nm, corresponding to one of the quantum emitters in our experiment, shown in Figs. 4a and 4b. The refractive indices of the upper medium, hBN, and that of sapphire were set to 1, 1.82 (40), and 1.77 respectively. The complex refractive index of VO2 at 600 nm was extracted from our ellipsometric data and was set to 3.05 + 0.42i and 2.57 + 0.64i for VO2 in insulating and metallic state respectively (Supplementary Section S1). The thickness of the VO2 layer was 40 nm. In general, the photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY) of hBN quantum emitters varies in the range 0.6-1.0 (10,19) and a recent experiment has shown average PLQY in the range 0.6-0.8 for quantum emitters with zero-phonon line (ZPL) around 600 nm (41). The shaded area in Figure 1b, corresponds to this PLQY range. The dashed line within the shaded regions corresponds to a PLQY = 0.79 estimated from our experimental data (Supplementary Section S4). As can be seen, the relative modulation of decay rates for both orientations is clearly evident within first ~50 nm that quickly fades away at distances ~100 nm and above. We use this highly sensitive, distance- dependent decay rate of quantum emitters in the vicinity of the hBN/VO2 interface to localize their position along the axial direction. substrate. This sample was prepared by mechanical exfoliation of high purity hBN single crystals and transferred onto a 40 nm thick VO2 film deposited on 500 μm thick sapphire by pulsed laser deposition. To determine the thickness of this flake at each position, we employed atomic force microscopy (AFM). Figure 2b shows an AFM image of the hBN flake shown in Figure 2a. The red dot in Figure 2a, 2b indicates the location of the quantum emitters ‘A’ and ‘B’ with emission wavelength of 600 nm and 620 nm, respectively. Figure 2c show AFM height profile across the 5 lines (S-E) indicated in Figure 2b where flake thickness varies in the range 230-420 nm. At the location of the emitter ‘A’ and ‘B’ height of the flake is 310 nm and 340 nm respectively. To locate the quantum emitters precisely, we performed confocal photoluminescence (PL) mapping in mode by which the sample was scanned point by point. Figure 2d shows a PL map over an area of 20 x 20 μm@ on the hBN flake. The location of the quantum emitters ‘A’ and ‘B’ are highlighted by dashed circles. The single photon emission nature of these quantum emitters is evident from their second-order autocorrelation measurements indicating g2(0) < 0.5 (see Figs. 3 a,b). Figures 2e, 2f show the PL spectra of these quantum emitters obtained for insulating and metallic VO2. The emission spectra of each quantum emitter consist of a pronounced ZPL accompanied by a weaker phonon assisted emission. An increase in PL intensity at obtained for metallic VO2 compared to insulating VO2 is noticeable for all quantum emitters, which is indicative of a higher photon emission rate i.e. decrease in emission lifetime. This enhancement of emission rate is due to modification in LDOS owing to change in complex refractive index of VO2 when switched from the insulating to metallic state. Recent experiment has reported that the decay rate of hBN quantum emitters remains constant even when heated up to 800 K (42) which further corroborates that the enhancement of decay rate is due to modification in LDOS rather than a thermal effect. The defect-based quantum emitter’s dimensions are atomic scale, and thus lateral emitter size and location measurement is constrained by the optical diffraction limit (Supplementary Fig. S3). To investigate the single-photon emission characteristics and decay lifetime of the quantum emitters, we measured their second-order intensity correlation functions g@(τ) in both insulating and metallic phases of VO2. In order to reduce the influence of background signal and noise, we corrected the raw gE1F @ (τ) using the function g@(τ) = [gE1F @ (τ) − (1 − ρ@)]/ρ@, where ρ = S/(S + B) where S and B refer to the signal and the background counts, respectively. This background corrected g@(τ) was fitted with double exponential of the form (20) (1) where, ζ, ρ, γY,@ are laser power-dependent parameters (20,48). Here, γY and γ@ are the faster and the slower decay time constants, respectively, for a three-level system. The second-order intensity correlation functions g@(τ) under continuous wave excitation pumping for the quantum emitters ‘A’ and ‘B’ is shown in Figures 3a and 3b respectively, when VO2 is insulating (blue dots) and 6 metallic phase (red dots). The data for the metallic phase VO2 configuration has been offset vertically for visual clarity. Equal-time coincidence counts g@(0) for each quantum emitter is less than 0.5, which indicates the presence of a single emitter. All measurements were performed at a constant 50 μW pump laser power which is orders of magnitude smaller compared to the saturation power of ~ mW for hBN quantum emitters (10,18,19). Given the Fresnel reflections from all interfaces, which were analyzed using full-wave simulations, the excitation power within the flake along the axial direction is position dependent. From fitting our experimental data of correlation functions g@(τ), we extracted the decay constants (γY,@) which has contributions from the spontaneous decay rates and the pump rate (43,44). The spontaneous decay rates (γ) of the emitters ‘A’ and ‘B’ are shown in the Table T1 (see supplementary information section S2 for details). The correlation functions over long-time scales are shown in Fig. S10. With an excitation power of 50 μW, the pump rates are ~ 25-fold and 73-fold slower than the spontaneous decay rates for emitters ‘A’ and ‘B’, respectively, and thus make negligible contributions to the decay constants. From metallic-VO2 when compared to an insulating-VO2 configuration. Thus, the emitters ‘A’ and ‘B’ are located at distances, from the surface of VO2, such that their optical environment is modified when VO2 undergoes an insulator-to-metal transition. To model the distance-dependence of the quantum emitter lifetime on VO2 phase, we define the ratio of their decay rates in the insulating and metallic phases as β. Figures 3c, 3d show the two-dimensional plot of relative decay rate β as a function of distance d from the hBN/VO2 interface and the polar orientation angle θ of the dipole for each quantum emitters ‘A’ and ‘B’ respectively. Each plot has three contour lines; a dashed line for the relative decay rates β while the upper and the lower solid contour lines corresponds to the error in decay rate ( ± Δβ ). Using the experimental values of γ from the Table T1, we obtained the relative decay rates β for the quantum emitters ‘A’ and ‘B’, as 0.818 ± 0.108 and 0.800± 0.124 respectively. From these simulations and the experimental values of β, it is evident that the quantum emitters are located within a narrow region at a distance d ~ 21 nm from the surface of hBN/VO2 interface. However, the uncertainty in the axial position depends on the emitters’ polar angle θ. For emitter ‘A’, uncertainty (full width) varies from ~ 13 nm at θ = 0c to ~ 22 nm at θ = 90c. Similarly, for quantum emitter ‘B’ uncertainty in their axial location varies from ~ 15 nm to ~ 23 nm at θ = 0c and θ = 90c respectively. 7 Next, we focus on emission polarimetry of the quantum emitters. Previous studies (45) have shown that the three-dimensional orientation (θ, φ) of a dipole can be directly extracted by analyzing polarization characteristics of its emitted light. Figures 4a, 4b is the emission polarization measurement from the quantum emitters ‘A’ and ‘B’ respectively. The data is fitted by the function (45) (2) where If3-, f1g and φ are the fitting parameters. From the fit, we obtained for emitter ‘A’: If3- = 0.356 ± 0.013, If1g = 0.966 ± 0.024 and φ = 175.7c ± 1.0c. Similarly, for emitter ‘B’: If3- = 0.318 ± 0.034, If1g = 0.888 ± 0.066 and φ = 109. 9c ± 2.9c. In emission polarimetry, the polar angle θ can be extracted from the degree of polarization of the emission defined as δ(θ) = If1g − If3- If1g + If3- (3) From the fitting parameters (If1g , If3-), we obtained δ = 0.461 ± 0.023 and δ = 0.473 ± 0.070 for emitter ‘A’ and ‘B’ respectively. Figures 4c, 4d shows the calculated degree of polarization δ as a function of the polar orientation angle θ using the experimental values of numerical aperture (0.9), the refractive indices of hBN, VO2 (insulating phase) and sapphire. The distance d of the quantum emitters ‘A’ and ‘B’ from VO2/sapphire substrate was set to d ~ 20 nm. From Figures 4(e,f) we clearly see that variation in the distance d is negligible (dashed line). The red dot in Figs. 4e, 4f represents the measured value of δ and we extract the polar orientation angle θ = 20.5c ± 3.6c and θ = 21.2c ± 4.5c for emitter ‘A’ and ‘B’ respectively. In estimating the value of error in θ we accounted for the error in location d, which is shown Figs. 4(e,f) by solid lines. Figure 4(e) represents nanometer-scale axial location of emitter A with an uncertainty (full- width) of ~ 15 nm, oriented along (θ, φ) = (20.5c ± 3.6c, 175. 7c ± 1.0c). Similarly, Figure 4(f) represents nanometer-scale axial location of emitter B with an uncertainty full-width of ~ 17 nm, oriented along (θ, φ) = (21.2c ± 4.5c, 109. 9c ± 2.9c). The strong vertical component of the dipole orientation for both emitters found in the vicinity of hBN/VO2 interface are in agreement with our simulations results shown in Figure S6. The predominant out of plane dipole orientation of these emitters can be a result of an out of plane atomic structure of the emitter as discussed in 8 the literature. We believe the information provided by these measurements are of fundamental value in determining the underlying atomic structure of emitters. Next, we investigated the feasibility of transferring the hBN flake from the VO2 measurement substrate to a device substrate, which is a necessary capability for integration of quantum emitters with chip-based photonic components and waveguide circuits. In contrast to wet chemical transfer method (46), we utilized a polymer-assisted hot pickup technique (30, 47,48) to transfer the emitter-host hBN flake from VO2 to a receiving SiO2/Si device substrate (Supplementary Figure S13). Figure 5a, 5b show the optical image of the flake before and after the transfer. We were able to relocate the emitters ‘A’ and ‘B’ on the device substrate by performing confocal PL mapping (Figure 5c) and matching the spectral (Figure 5d) and spatial signatures of both emitters before and after the transfer process. To summarize, we have demonstrated an experimental technique by which the axial position of quantum emitters in a multi-layered hBN flake can be extracted with nanometer-scale accuracy by exploiting the modification of photonic density of states using a phase change optical material, VO2. Here, we tailor the optical environment of an emitter in the vicinity of VO2/Sapphire substrate which generates a sharply distance-dependent PL response. By performing time-resolved fluorescence spectroscopy, supplemented with emission polarimetry, several specific quantum emitters were identified at an axial distance of ~ 21 nm from the hBN/VO2 interface while also determining their full dipolar orientation (θ, φ). Furthermore, we utilized a polymer-assisted hot pickup technique to transfer the identified hBN emitters from a VO2 measurement substrate to a SiO2/Si device substrate, which opens the door to coupling of fully characterized emitters, where each emitter has undergone precise measurement of axial position and orientation. It is worth noting that any phase-change material which experiences a sharp change in optical properties would be suitable for this purpose. However, VO2 is particularly interesting because its insulator- to-metal transition happens near room temperature and is thus well suited to dynamically control emission rates of quantum emitters (49,50) near room temperature. Owing to the broadband nature of change in the dielectric function of VO2 when switched from the insulating to metallic phase, our technique could also be extended to locating other visible or infrared quantum emitters (10). 9