Impact of Trap Filling on Carrier Diffusion in MAPbBr3 Single Crystals N. Ganesh1, Anaranya Ghorai1, Shrreya Krishnamurthy2, Suman Banerjee1, K.L.Narasimhan3, Satishchandra B. Ogale2, K.S.Narayan1* 1 Chemistry and Physics of Materials Unit (CPMU), Jawaharlal Nehru Center for Advanced Scientific Research, Jakkur, Bengaluru, India – 560064 2 Department of Physics and Center for Energy Sciences, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Pune – 411008 3Center for Nano Science and Engineering (CENSE), Indian Institute of Science Bengaluru, Abstract We present experimental evidence showing that the effective carrier diffusion length (Ld) and lifetime (τ) depend on the carrier density in MAPbBr3 single crystals. Independent measurements reveal that both Ld and τ decrease with an increase in photo-carrier density. Scanning photocurrent microscopy is used to extract the characteristic photocurrent Iph decay- length parameter, Ld, which is a measure of effective carrier diffusion. The Ld magnitudes for electrons and holes were determined to be ~13.3 μm and ~13.8 μm respectively. A marginal increase in uniform light bias (≤ 5 × 1015 photons/cm2) increases the modulated photocurrent magnitude and reduces the Ld parameter by a factor of two and three for electrons and holes respectively, indicating that the recombination is not monomolecular. The Ld variations were correlated to the features in photoluminescence lifetime studies. Analysis of lifetime variation shows intensity-dependent monomolecular and bimolecular recombination trends with recombination constants determined to be ~ 9.3 x 106 s-1 and ~ 1.4 x 10-9 cm3s-1 respectively. Based on the trends of Ld and lifetime, it is inferred that the sub-band-gap trap recombination influences carrier transport in the low-intensity excitation regime, while bimolecular recombination and transport dominate at high intensity. Hybrid organic-inorganic perovskites (HOIP) have demonstrated unprecedented potential for device applications such as solar cells, photodetectors, LEDs, and lasing. Record high efficiencies, reaching 25 % in HOIP single-junction solar cells can be explained due to properties such as high absorption coefficient, long diffusion lengths, decent mobility, and long-lived carrier lifetimes . Long diffusion length (Ldiff) in HOIP has been attributed to processes such as photon recycling, Rashba splitting, high bi-molecular recombination rates, and defect tolerance . Ldiff estimates in the range of 100 nm – 3 mm, spanning across four orders of magnitude have been reported . This difference is partly due to different techniques such as transient photoluminescence (TRPL), transient photo-voltage (TPV), transient absorption, impedance spectroscopy and transient microwave conductivity (TRMC) to determine  . Additionally, techniques such as space charge limited current, time of flight, Hall Effect, TRMC, and terahertz conductivity are employed to determine carrier mobility  . Determination of diffusion length (Ldiff), a parameter indicative of efficient carrier transport, relies on twin measurements of  and . Long Ldiff are characteristic of good quality films with large grain size. Recombination at the grain-boundaries limits the Ldiff to grain size length-scales . To overcome grain size effects on Ldiff studies, sizable (2- 3 mm), Methylammonium Lead Bromide (MAPbBr3) single crystals (MSC) were utilized. Hybrid perovskite single crystals are evolving as suitable solar cell candidates due to low trap density, high Ldiff, and high sub-bandgap absorption, reaching efficiencies of 21 % . Applications based on their emission and optoelectronic properties are also emerging . In the first part of the paper, we present the direct spatial estimation of effective diffusion length (Ld) measurements on single crystals as a function of light bias intensity using scanning photocurrent microscopy (SPCM). We then report and analyze the emission characteristics using TRPL recombination lifetime techniques. These emission studies enable understanding of the processes and the role of dc light bias on the measured Ld. Sample Details In this study, large MSCs (~ few mm) were prepared using the technique of inverse temperature crystallization (details in Supplemental Material) . The sharp XRD peaks in Fig. S1 is a measure of the crystal quality. SPCM studies were carried out on MSC devices. For efficient collection of photogenerated carriers, selective contact layers were deposited: poly(N,N'-bis- ester (PC71BM) with Au and Ag electrodes for hole and electron extraction respectively, schematically shown in the band diagram, Fig. 1(a). Results Scanning Photocurrent Microscopy (SPCM) Fig. 1(b) is a schematic of the set up used for SPCM (Experimental details in Supplemental Material). In this experiment, ~ 3 μm spot size, (Fig. S2) intensity-modulated 405 nm (~ 27 mW/cm2) laser beam which is incident normally on MSC, is translated laterally between the two contacts. The modulated short-circuit photocurrent Iph(x) shown in Fig. 1(c) is measured using a lock-in amplifier at different positions of the incident beam between the two electrodes. The maxima in Iph(x) corresponds to the electrode-positions at either end. The contact resistance at the electrodes is estimated and verified to be negligible due to charge-selective interfacial layers, with the built-in voltage (Vbi) falling entirely along the inter-electrode length. In the present case of undoped sizable MSC (d ~ 1-2 mm, inset Fig. 1(c)), the built-in electric- field, Ebi = Vbi/d is negligible (< 6 V/cm) resulting in a dominant diffusion contribution to the observed Iph. Fig. 1: (a) Band alignment diagram depicting MSC-device used in SPCM experiments. (b) Schematic of Scanning Photocurrent Microscopy (SPCM) used for effective diffusion length measurement. The incident chopped probe-beam position is varied by translating the sample. The lock-in profile Iph(x) is utilized to estimate Ld. (c) Iph(x) shows Iph-peak at the interface. Single exponential fit to the Iph decay profile corresponds to the Ld of the corresponding carrier. The inset shows the image of the bulk single crystal. The determination of effective diffusion length, Ld from the Iph(x) measurement can be arrived at by solving the drift-diffusion equation. In the simplified case of single-carrier 1-D transport, minority excess carrier, δn is given as : ∂δn ∂t = D ∂2δn ∂x2 + μE ∂δn ∂x + G − δn τ (1) The generation rate G is given by delta function, G = G0.(x-x0) where x = x0 is the position of illumination. Under conditions of steady-state illumination (dδn/dt = 0), negligible electric field and x  x0, the diffusion current can be expressed as (derivation in Section 11, Supplemental Material): Iph(x) = I0 exp (− x Ld ) (2) where the effective diffusion length, Ld corresponds to the Iph(x) decay. It must be noted that effective diffusion length, Ld is different from minority carrier diffusion length, Ldiff. Ldiff is the microscopic quantity related to the diffusion coefficient (D) and expressed as (Dτ)1/2, where τ is the carrier lifetime. In disordered or amorphous systems, owing to the dispersive nature of transport, Ld and Ldiff can differ appreciably . However, Ld has been shown to be a representative of the long-lived carriers corresponding to states in the tail distribution, in organic and polymeric semiconductors . The Ld parameter in the present case of HOIP single crystals, is expected to be a closer representation of Ldiff owing to dominant band transport . In the present case of SPCM on MSC devices, it has to be noted that the Ld parameter is obtained upon fitting over the entire decay range and accounts for additional factors such as finite beam spot, 3D carrier diffusion and ambipolar transport away from the electrodes. The Iph(x) response in Fig. 1(b) can be qualitatively described as follows: Photo-excitation results in a point spread of electrons and holes via 3D diffusion – a fraction of which diffuse towards the electrodes. When the excitation is at a distance equivalent to many diffusion- lengths from the contacts, the diffusing photo-carriers get (i) trapped in shallow states and also (ii) recombine, resulting in a low-current. When the excitation beam is within Ld from the electrode, the current increases exponentially with the probe distance (Eq. (2)) enabling one of the carriers to be extracted leaving the other carrier in the perovskite to transit to the other electrode. The extraction of one carrier and the long lifetime associated with the displacement of the counter carrier, renders the extracted carrier as minority, with excitation close (x ≤ Ld) to the extraction electrode. Transient Iph measurements (Fig. S3), indicating longer transit for excitation near the electrodes compared to a distant region, confirms this viewpoint. Previous reports of SPCM have determined the “minority carrier diffusion length” using doped crystals and charge selective Schottky barrier . In the present case of MSCs, Ld corresponds to the selectivity of the extraction layer in undoped single crystal devices. Using Eq. (2), Ld for electrons and holes was determined to be 13.3 ± 0.6 μm and 13.8 ± 0.5 μm respectively. Intensity dependent studies reveal that the carrier Ldiff varies with excitation density similar to TPV studies, where Ldiff ~ 3 mm, at low-intensity excitation . These studies of Ldiff determination relied on indirect estimation. To investigate the effect of intensity dependence on directly measured spatial Ld, intensity-dependent SPCM studies are carried out by (i) varying the intensity of the probe beam (ii) superposing a uniform background illumination or light-bias using a 390 nm LED with the probe beam. (The optical absorption depth (~ 125 nm) of the 390 nm light is similar to the 405 nm probe beam .) Fig. S4(a) shows Iph(x) upon probe-intensity variation in the SPCM measurement. The excess generated probe-photo carriers, δnprobe diffuse away from the point of generation and decays as δn (x) = δnprobe(0). exp ( −x Ldiff). The corresponding Ld values in Fig. S4(b) as a function of probe beam intensity shows that Ld is independent of probe beam intensity. The invariance of Ld can be understood since the photo-carriers decay to background carrier concentration within ~ 3Ldiff. The addition of light bias, on the other hand, maintains uniform charge generation across the transport length of the probe-carrier. It was ensured that the effects of light-induced halide redistribution and phase segregation are minimal by maintaining the MSC-device in dark under short-circuit conditions after each measurement, under a positive pressure of the inert atmosphere . Fig. S5 provides evidence of the sample “self-recovering” as the ions equilibrate, confirmed by the increase in the magnitude of Iph(x). It must be noted that we have not carried any measurements under applied bias, where one expects a sizeable ionic contribution. Fig. 2: (a) Iph(x) variation on both end of the MSC device with a 405 nm probe beam and 390 nm light bias. (b) Normalized Iph(x) profiles indicating sharp decay at higher light bias (c) Ld extracted with the exponential fitting of Iph(x)-decay as a function of light bias. Fig. 2(a) depicts the Iph(x) profile at different dc light bias (additional plots and details in Fig. S6). The Iph magnitude increases with the light bias as indicated in Iph(x) maxima at the electrodes. Fig. 2(b) shows the normalized Iph(x) decay at either end of the MSC-electrode interface. The steep decay of Iph away from the electrode is evident under high light bias conditions. The Ld parameter is extracted by fitting the decay profile to Eq. (2). The estimated Ld (values of Ld given in Table S1) as a function of light bias-photon flux, presented in Fig. 2(c) reveals the decrease of Ld with dc light-bias intensity. The extracted Ld parameter decreases by a factor of 3 for holes and a factor of ~ 2 for electrons upon increasing the light bias from zero to ~ 5×1015 photons/cm2. To investigate the effects of surface recombination, the probe λex was changed to 532 nm in the presence of 532 nm light bias (corresponding to absorption depth ~10 μm) as shown in Fig. S7. Qualitatively similar results were observed for λprobe ≈ 532 nm. For both the cases of 405 nm and 532 nm excitation, beyond a certain high-intensity light bias, the Iph magnitude reduces as shown in Fig. S6(c) and S7(d) respectively. This reduction is attributed to the effects of light-soaking . The decrease of the Ld at high dc-light bias suggests that the recombination kinetics of the excess carriers is not monomolecular . This was verified by photophysical studies using intensity and time-dependent Photoluminescence (PL) measurements. PL measurements MAPbBr3 is characterized by absorption, largely in the UV-Vis spectral range (Fig. S8). Photo- thermal deflection spectroscopy and light transmission experiments have shown the presence of sub-bandgap states extending to ~ 2.0 eV . Fig. 3(a) is the plot of PL spectra for 3 eV (405 nm) excitation in reflection and transmission geometry. In reflection mode, the PL spectra exhibit a peak at 2.27 eV (545 nm) with a shoulder at 2.15 eV (575 nm). In transmission mode, the 2.27 eV peak is masked due to self-absorption. The 2.27 eV peak is identified and attributed to the band-to-band transition (free carrier recombination). The 2.15 eV peak has been attributed to different mechanisms viz. radiative recombination from a defect level or to bound exciton recombination. The 2.15 eV is observed exclusively in crystals and not in MAPbBr3 thin films (Fig. S9). Photo-induced absorption studies at different T of samples with different degrees of crystallinity can be used to attribute the 2.15 eV feature, in the present case, to long-range dipole-dipole interactions of defects in the bulk of single crystals . Without loss of generality and for simplicity of modeling and analysis, we identify the 2.15 eV (575 nm) emission as trap mediated radiative emission in the bulk of MSC. This is shown schematically in Fig. 3(d). Fig. 3: (a) PL data depicts 545 nm and 575 nm peak corresponding to PL measured in the reflection and transmission geometry respectively. (b) Plot shows the increase in E-PLQE at higher excitation fluence. (c) Emission intensity exhibits linear and quadratic dependence on excitation for 545 nm and linear variation for the 575 nm emission. (d) Schematic showing an illustration of band-to-band recombination and trap emission. Fig. 3(b) shows the intensity dependence on External PL Quantum Efficiency (E-PLQE). E- PLQE increases with an increase in the excitation intensity. Fig. 3(c) (and also Fig. S10) shows that the intensity dependence of emission on the excitation density for the 545 nm and 575 nm emission follows a power law: <IPL> = <Iex>x and is in agreement with previous observations . For the 545 nm peak (2.27eV), x ≈ 1 at low intensity (blue shaded region) and ≈ 2 at high intensity. In contrast, the 575nm (2.15 eV) emission peak reveals a linear x ≈ 1 response throughout. These results can be understood from a simple physical model where the effective excess carrier lifetime (eff) is expressed as 1 τeff = 1 τSRH + 1 τR where, SRH is the trap mediated non-radiative recombination lifetime and R is the radiative recombination time. The auger recombination component which becomes prominent at high excitation fluence (> 1017 photons/cm2) is neglected. 1/R can then be expressed as 1 τR = B (NA + δn) and 1 τSRH = RSRH. NT (3) where, δn is the excess carrier density, B the radiative constant, and NA the background doping concentration, RSRH is the non-radiative constant, and NT is the trap density. The radiative recombination rate is given as: δn τR = ARδn + B (δn)2 (4) where, AR = B.NA. At low fluence, the radiative recombination rate increases linearly with the excitation and quadratically with fluence at a higher intensity. This explains the excitation dependence of the 545 nm peak. The 575 nm peak arises due to recombination from a shallow trap. If δn is smaller than the trap concentration, the emission rate is linearly dependent on the excitation intensity - in agreement with the observation in Fig. 3(b). This basic model satisfactorily accounts for the PL observations. Fig. 4(a) shows the time-resolved emission spectra upon pulsed 405 nm excitation (19 mW/cm2) on MSC. From the decay trends of the two peaks (Fig. 4(b)), it can be observed that 545 nm is characterized by a faster decay lifetime in comparison to the trap emission at 575 nm. Fig. 4: (a) Time-resolved emission spectra on MSC upon pulsed excitation with a 405 nm source. (b) TRPL at 545 nm and 575 nm shows a shorter band-recombination lifetime at 545 nm. The PL-lifetimes were studied by varying the excitation intensity. Fig. 5(a) and 5(b) show the luminescence decay for both the 545 nm and the 575 nm respectively as a function of excitation power. The lifetime of the 545 nm emission decreases with an increase in excitation power. The results are summarized in Fig. 5(c). The lifetime measured in the TRPL corresponds to τeff which is given as: δn τeff = Aδn + B (δn)2 (5) where, A = B.NA + RSRH. NT. Fig. 5: (a) TRPL depicting the decrease in the PL lifetime at high fluence illumination (545 nm) (b) TRPL for 575 nm depicts the constancy of lifetime for the range of excitation intensities. (c) Compilation of intensity-dependent lifetimes for 545 nm and 575 nm emission. For 545 nm emission, the lifetime is constant in the lower intensity (< 1015 photons/cm2) and reduces at a higher intensity (> 1015 photons/cm2). For the 575 nm emission, a uniform lifetime in the entire intensity regime. The effective PL lifetime corresponding to 545 nm emission, marginally varies up to a fluence of 1015 photons/cm2 and at higher fluence, decreases as τR ∝ 1/Bδn. In contrast, for trap- emission at 575 nm, observed eff is independent of excitation intensity, implying monomolecular emission. Using Eq. (5) and the trends observed in Fig. 5(c), the coefficients A and B for 545 nm emission were determined to be (9.3 ± 0.2) x106 s-1 and (1.4 ± 0.2) x10-9 cm3s-1 respectively (details in Section 12, Supplemental Material). These values are in good agreement with recombination rate constants for direct band-gap semiconductors . Since the E-PLQE  eff / R , for a fluence > 1015/cm2, R decreases with increasing fluence. The E-PLQE increases with increasing fluence as shown in Fig. 3(b). Discussion We now correlate Ld to the PL-lifetime. In the absence of light bias, the tightly-focused probe beam (405 nm, 5×1016 photons/cm2) in the SPCM studies generate a high concentration of electron-hole pairs and correspondingly the excess carrier lifetime observed from PL studies (Fig. 5(c)) is small (< 28 ns). The excess carriers diffuse outside the illuminated zone and recombine gradually and the corresponding carrier lifetimes at these levels of concentration increase as observed in PL lifetime studies (545 nm, Fig. 5(c)). As the modulated probe-carriers diffuse to the electrodes, they are also trapped in deep trapping states effectively reducing the photocurrent. When the probe beam is within a couple of diffusion lengths away from the electrode, an increasing number of carriers (for instance, electrons at the ETL contact) are collected and the holes diffuse to the HTL contact setting up a current in the external circuit. When the carrier concentration reduces sufficiently, the excess carrier lifetime converges to ~ 125 ns, and Ldiff assumes the low-intensity value. The addition of dc light bias in the SPCM studies results in two effects: 1) DC light bias establishes a new dc equilibrium by populating the deep trapping states. This results in suppression of trapping along the pathway for the carriers generated by the modulated probe beam. The reduced trapping accounts for Iph increase with light bias, explaining features in Fig. 2(a) and Fig. S6(c). 2) The magnitude of the dc light bias determines the lateral excess-carrier concentration. The excess carrier lifetime decreases to a limit which is set by the dc-light bias magnitude. This scenario explains the decrease of Ld with increasing light bias. The light-bias feature elicits the trap-assisted recombination processes. Monomolecular recombination lifetime depends on radiative rate, SRH recombination rate, and trap density as shown in Eq. (5). An estimated trap density of ~ 1015 traps/cm3 significantly influences band recombination and lifetimes. Loss of charge carriers to traps is reduced in the presence of bias light presumably since traps occupancy increases with bias light. Under light bias, a higher fraction of the probe carriers bi-molecularly recombine resulting in shorter τ and Ld. Fig. 6: (a) The schematic describes the simulation of the SPCM experiment using the finite element method. The probe excitation (at x=0) is assumed to be a point source in addition to uniform dc light bias on MSC sample. The blue line at x=0 in all the plots indicates probe excitation. (b) Plot of spatial carrier decay profile considering 1-D diffusion of probe-carriers. The decay profile changes with different intensities of light bias. (c) Shows the excess carrier lifetime at different dc light bias. The excess carrier lifetime depends on the background carrier density (shown in (b)). Dashed line indicates lifetime of light bias generated carriers. As excess probe-carriers diffuse in space and recombine, the excess carrier density decreases resulting in an increased excess-carrier lifetime. This results in a spatial dependence of the excess carrier lifetime. (d) Shows the effective diffusion length decreases with increasing light bias. Dashed line indicates Ldiff of light bias generated carriers. Since the lifetime increases as the excess carriers diffuse away from x = 0, the effective diffusion length also increases. To understand the microscopic carrier diffusion dynamics, simulation of SPCM using the finite element method, incorporating 1-D carrier diffusion was carried out, results of which are presented in Fig. 6 (simulation details in Section 13, Supplemental Material). A probe excitation is introduced at x = 0 in addition to uniform dc-light bias on the MSC sample, as shown in the schematic Fig. 6(a). The excess carrier concentration at x is given as: ntot (x) = δnprobe(0). exp ( −x Ldiff ) + nexc (L. B) (6) The first term on the right side of Eq. (6) represents the diffusion of probe carriers and the second term corresponds to excess carrier generation due to the light bias. The plot of ntot(x) for different light bias conditions is given in Fig. 6(b).The photogenerated carriers diffuse from x=0 and also simultaneously recombine with lifetime τ which depends on excess carrier concentration (Fig. 5(c) and Fig. S12(b)). As the excess probe-carriers diffuse away from x=0 the carrier density reduces, increasing . However, the effective  reduces with increasing light bias as shown in Fig. 6(c). A similar trend is observed for the Ldiff, as shown in Fig. 6(d). As the probe carriers diffuse from x=0, the increase in lifetime (Fig. 5(c)) results in an increased value of Ldiff. The effective Ldiff reduces with increased light bias. The simulation results capture the observed trend of decreasing Ld (Fig. 2(c)). The other parameter, apart from lifetime, that determines Ld is the diffusion coefficient. Ščajev et.al has shown that the balancing effects of phonon scattering at low intensity and carrier scattering at high intensity was observed to have marginal effect on D. Therefore, the intensity dependent factor that influences diffusion dynamics is determined largely by . Photon recycling in perovskites is an additional factor that contributes to the transport length in perovskite based systems and devices . In Section 14 of Supplemental Material, we have presented a discussion which shows the simulated excess-carrier density accounting for photon recycling. Considering sizable reabsorbed carriers (nα = 0.54, ) and an upper limit on the photon propagation length (Lα =1/α ~ 10 μm for 545 nm), Fig. S13 shows that the changes in ntot, τ and Ldiff is marginal upon inclusion of photon recycling. Conclusion An elegant consistency is observed from the measurements of Iph(x) and PL studies. Ld was observed to decrease as a function of light bias in HOIP single crystals. This observation was correlated with PL lifetime studies which revealed the contribution of trap recombination dynamics in addition to free carrier dynamics. These results provide an insight into the contribution of free carrier and trap emission dynamics to Ld. The sizable Ld in systems where carrier transport is trap mediated points to the defect-tolerant capability of HOIP based device structures. Acknowledgements The authors acknowledge Department of Science and Technology, Government of India, EPSRC-UKRI Global Challenge Research Fund project, SUNRISE (EP/P032591/1) for the financial assistance. Conflict of Interest The authors declare no conflict of interest.