1 High-Curie-temperature ferromagnetism in bilayer CrI3 on bulk semiconducting substrates Nanshu Liu, Si Zhou*, Jijun Zhao Key Laboratory of Materials Modification by Laser, Ion and Electron Beams (Dalian University of Technology), Ministry of Education, Dalian 116024, China Abstract Two-dimensional (2D) ferromagnetic (FM) semiconductors with high Curie temperature have long been pursued for electronic and spintronic applications. Here we provide a general strategy to achieve robust FM state in bilayer CrI3 of the monoclinic stacking, which intrinsically has interlayer antiferromagnetic (AFM) order and weak in-plane FM coupling. We showed that the proximity effect from bulk semiconducting substrates induces electronic doping and significantly increases the FM nearest- neighbor exchange for bilayer CrI3, leading to the AFM-to-FM transition for the interlayer spin configuration as well as enhanced intralayer FM coupling. By first- principles calculations and Monte Carlo simulations, bulk and 2D semiconductors providing different interaction strengths from strong covalent bonding to weak van der Waals (vdW) interaction with CrI3 are compared to thoroughly address the substrate effect on magnetic behavior and Curie temperature of bilayer CrI3. These theoretical results offer a facile route for direct synthesis of 2D ferromagnets on proper semiconducting substrates to achieve high Curie temperature for device implementation. Keywords: bilayer CrI3, proximity effect, ferromagnetic coupling, Curie temperature * Corresponding author. Email: sizhou@dlut.edu.cn (S. Zhou) 2 1. Introduction Two-dimensional (2D) magnetic materials have attached tremendous attentions owing to their peculiar spin-related phenomena and immense potentials for magneto- optics, magneto-electronics and spintronic devices [1−5]. As a rising star of 2D ferromagnets, monolayer CrI3 possesses many exciting features including perfect crystalline order, intrinsic Ising type ferromagnetism , strong magnetic anisotropy, and a sizable band gap of about 1.2 eV . Unfortunately, the ferromagnetic (FM) coupling is rather weak in monolayer CrI3 with a Curie temperature (Tc) of only 45 K, while bilayer CrI3 with monoclinic stacking even exhibits antiferromagnetic (AFM) behavior with opposite magnetic moments from the neighboring FM layers . Clearly, the fragile magnetic order of CrI3 susceptible to the variation of layer thickness and stacking order has greatly hindered the application of this novel 2D material. For practical interests, large-area CrI3 sheets on semiconducting substrates are highly desirable, and an ideal scenario for device implementation is to select proper substrates to achieve robust FM order in CrI3 ultrathin films. Currently, monolayer and multilayer CrI3 can be synthesized by the exfoliation method and then transferred to insulating substrates, as well as be epitaxially grown on metal and nonmetal substrates, such as gold , highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) and yttrium stabilized zirconia . Generally speaking, most 2D materials as substrates provide van der Waals (vdW) interaction with CrI3 and can either retain or slightly perturb its intrinsic electronic band structure. In contrast, bulk materials with polar surface and dangling bonds may covalently couple to CrI3, resulting in some exotic functionalities at the interfaces. Therefore, appropriate choice of substrates enables a large degree of freedom for band structure engineering of 2D CrI3 and may give rise to unprecedented device architectures. Previous studies have explored the proximity effect in several CrI3-based vdW heterostructures. In experiment, the heterostructure of monolayer WSe2 and few-layer CrI3 has been exploited for valley manipulation of WSe2 through control of the magnetization in CrI3 ; in turn, the spin-valley properties render WSe2 a magnetic sensor for mapping out the layered antiferromagnetic domain in the CrI3 sheet . 3 On the theoretical aspect, the mechanism for valley splitting in WSe2/CrI3 heterostructures has been elucidated by considering the effects of stacking geometry , electrical field , and intrinsic point defects in CrI3 . Quantum anomalous Hall effect was also proposed by coupling Bi2Se3 or MnBi2Te4 with CrI3 monolayer, which induces sizable spin splitting of the topological states . Moreover, it was predicted that the in-plane FM coupling of CrI3 monolayer can be enhanced with Tc up to 85 K when supported on MoTe2 , silicene and germanene monolayers , owing to spin-dependent charge transfer at the heterojunctions and introduction of extra spin superexchange path. Directly growing or relocating CrI3 sheet on proper substrates for magnetism engineering can overcome the limitations inherent to doping, functionalization, and applying external fields, which may result in unintended clustering, disorder, or phase transition. However, current understanding of the proximity effect in CrI3 is based only on the aforementioned vdW heterostructures. How does the interlayer exchange of CrI3 vary with the bonding nature and strength of substrate? Is it possible to retain the magnetic order and semiconducting character of CrI3 covalently bound on a bulk substrate? Is there an optimal CrI3-substrate interaction strength that leads to robust FM coupling between CrI3 layers and high Tc for practical uses? These intriguing questions are all awaited to be solved. In this work, we explored bilayer CrI3 on a variety of non-metal substrates with a wide range of interfacial coupling strength, including bulk semiconductors (II-VI compounds, silicon) as well as 2D monolayer materials (group III and group IV monochalcogenides, transition metal dichalcogenides, phosphorene, etc.). By first- principles calculations, the geometries, electronic band structures, and magnetic behavior of the supported CrI3 sheet were systematically investigated. Strong FM order of bilayer CrI3 with Tc above 130 K was realized on selected bulk substrates, and the underlying exchange mechanism was elucidated. We further determined the key parameters that govern the exchange energy of bilayer CrI3 on various substrates, paving a way for precisely modulating the magnetism of CrI3 ultrathin sheets. 4 2. Computational methods The structure, electronic and magnetic properties of bilayer CrI3 on various substrates were investigated by density functional theory (DFT) calculations implemented in the Vienna ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) . We adopted the planewave basis set with energy cutoff of 500 eV, projected augmented wave (PAW) potentials for electron-ion interaction , and generalized gradient approximation parameterized by Perdew, Burke and Ernzerhof (GGA-PBE) for the exchange and correlation functional . Grimme’s semiempirical DFT-D3 scheme for dispersion correction was employed to describe the van der Waals (vdW) interactions between CrI3 layers and substrate . Our test calculations show that the choice of vdW functionals may affect the absolute value of interlayer exchange energy (EM) defined by Eq. (2), but give the same trend of EM for different heterostructure systems (Table SI of Supplemental Material, SM). Moreover, the ground state of freestanding bilayer CrI3 of the high-temperature (HT) phase is correctly predicted to be antiferromagnetic by using PBE-D3, vdW-optB86b, and vdW-PBE functionals, all consistent with the previous theoretical results based on PBE-D3 . A Hubbard on-site Coulomb parameter U = 3.0 eV was chosen for Cr atoms to account for the strong correlation effect, which can correctly predict the antiferromagnetic state for freestanding bilayer CrI3 in the monoclinic stacking according to our calculations (see Fig. S1 of SM for details) as well as the previous theoretical study . The supercells for bilayer CrI3 on various substrates have lateral dimensions (L) of 6.76 ~ 21.20 Å and a vacuum space of 15 Å in the out-of-plane direction (Table SII). The details of how to construct the heterostructure models are described in Fig. S2 of Supplemental Material. Among the substrates, the II-VI semiconductors ZnO, ZnS and CdSe of wurtzite phase with the exposed (0001) surface were modeled by a four-layer slab, and the bottom-layer chalcogen atoms were terminated by H atoms. The in-plane lattice of CrI3 sheet was slightly stretched or compressed to fit that of the substrate (with lattice mismatch below 1.3%) to ensure that the strain effect on the magnetic properties of CrI3 sheet is negligible compared with the substrate effect. The Brillouin zones of the supercells were sampled by the Monkhorst-Pack k-point meshes with a separation 5 of 0.01 Å−1. With fixed supercells, all the model structures were fully relaxed for the ionic and electronic degrees of freedom with convergence criteria of 10−5 eV for energy and 0.02 eV/Å for force, respectively. The charge transfer between CrI3 sheet and substrate was evaluated by the Bader charge analysis . 3. Results and discussion We considered bilayer CrI3 with the monoclinic lattice and C2/m space group symmetry, which is the HT phase observed in experiment at 210–220 K. It is formed by two CrI3 layers in AA stacking with one layer sliding by a/3 along the in-plane lattice vector a with respect to the other (Fig. 1(a), (b)). Within CrI3 monolayer, each Cr atom is coordinated by six I atoms with the Cr−I−Cr bond angle close to 90°, resulting in the FM coupling according to the superexchange theorem [29−31]. The magnetic moment is 3 μB per Cr atom, and the band gap is 1.17 eV predicted by the PBE functional, as revealed by the electronic band structure and density of states (DOS) in Fig. 1(c). Under the octahedral crystal field, the d orbitals of Cr atoms split into threefold occupied t2g (dxy, dyz, and dxz) orbitals and twofold unoccupied eg (dz2 and dx2−y2) orbitals, corresponding to t2g (dxy, dx2−y2, and dz2) and eg (dyz and dxz) orbitals in the present coordination system. By stacking two CrI3 layers into the HT phase, eg or t2g states in one layer for a given spin channel is degenerate with the same band of opposite spin in the other layer , leading to antiferromagnetic order (Fig. 1(d)). Our calculations show that the AFM state of bilayer CrI3 is slightly lower in energy than the FM state by −0.24 meV per CrI3 formula unit (f.u.), consistent with the previous experimental observation and theoretical reports (−0.20 meV/f.u. [6,33−35]). As displayed by Fig. 5(c) (AFM1), the spin moments align ferromagnetically within each CrI3 layer but point to the opposite directions between the layers. This is because the interlayer FM coupling is dominated by the virtual excitation from t2g to eg orbital, which encounters a large energy separation of 1.33 eV and cannot compete with the AFM exchange governed by interlayer eg-eg and t2g-t2g hybridization . To enhance the eg-t2g interaction and achieve robust FM order in bilayer CrI3, we take advantage of the proximity effect by placing the CrI3 sheet on a suitable substrate. 6 To explore the specific influence of substrate interaction on the magnetic state of the supported CrI3 bilayer, we considered a variety of substrate materials, including (0001) surface of II-VI wurtzite compounds CdSe, ZnS and ZnO, bulk Si(111) surface, 2D group III monochalcogenide GaSe and InSe, 2D group IV monochalcogenide SnS, 2D transition metal dichalcogenide MoS2 and WSe2, phosphorene (Black P), and h-BN. The geometrical structures of these hybrid systems are displayed in Fig. S3. For clarity, we define the bottom CrI3 layer close to the substrate as the 1st layer, and the top one as the 2nd layer. The interaction between the CrI3 sheet and a substrate is characterized by the interfacial binding energy (Ebind) defined as: Ebind = (Etot − ECrI3 − Esub)/NCr (1) where ECrI3 and Etot are the energies of freestanding and supported bilayer CrI3, respectively; Esub is the energy of the standalone substrate; NCr is the number of CrI3 formula units (f.u.) in monolayer CrI3 within the supercell model (which equals to the number of Cr atoms at the interface with substrate). The interlayer distance d is defined as the average vertical distance between the bottom I layer of CrI3 and the substrate surface. As revealed by Table I, the CrI3 bilayer exhibits strong interaction with the II-VI semiconductor surfaces, having interlayer distances of 2.13 ~ 2.59 Å and Ebind ranging from −2.32 eV/f.u. to −4.48 eV/f.u., while the geometric structure of the supported CrI3 sheet remains almost the same as that of the freestanding bilayer (see the geometrical parameters in Table SII). At the interface, the I atoms of CrI3 form covalent bonds with the surface metal atoms of the substrate, accompanied by charge transfer (CT) of 0.24 ~ 0.41 e/f.u. from substrate to CrI3. Accordingly, differential charge density in Fig. 4(d) shows notable electron accumulation in the interfacial region. On the Si(111) surface, the substrate interaction is relatively weaker with Ebind = −1.76 eV/f.u. and CT = 0.19 e/f.u., while vdW interaction is found between CrI3 layer and all the considered 2D materials, manifested by their large interlayer distance (3.18 ~ 3.69 Å) as well as small Ebind (−0.28 ~ −0.41 eV/f.u.) and CT (≤ 0.06 e/f.u.). For all the systems, the monoclinic stacking of bilayer CrI3 is well retained, and the optimized structures of supported CrI3 sheets do not show any reconstruction owing to the small lattice mismatch with various 7 selected substrates. However, the exchange interaction between two CrI3 layers is effectively modulated by the substrate, and consequently the preferred magnetic order of bilayer CrI3 would be modified as will be discussed in the following. The band structures and DOS of bilayer CrI3 on various substrates are presented in Fig. 2 and Fig. S4, respectively. Significant changes to band structure have been induced by the four bulk semiconductor substrates, while the 2D materials with vdW interaction only shift the bands of CrI3 by some extent. Taking bilayer CrI3 on insulating. For the spin-up channel, the top CrI3 layer presents a band gap of 1.18 eV, while the bottom CrI3 layer strongly coupled to the substrate shows prominent impurity states near the Fermi level, resembling the band structure character of n-doped CrI3 . The substrate-induced doping introduces itinerant carriers, giving rise to a half-metallic state for the supported bilayer CrI3. The eg↑ orbital of the bottom CrI3 layer gets closer to the t2g↑ orbital of the top layer. Due to the enhanced FM eg-t2g hybridization, bilayer CrI3 on the bulk semiconductors favor a FM ground state. To characterize the magnetic coupling strength, we calculate the interlayer exchange energy as the energy difference between the interlayer AFM and FM spin configurations: EM = (EAFM − EFM)/NCr (2) where a negative value of EM indicates an AFM ground state. As given by Table I, the strongest FM order is obtained for the bilayer CrI3 sheet on CdSe(0001) with EM = 9.42 meV/f.u., almost 40 times of the magnitude of the AFM coupling for freestanding bilayer CrI3 (EM = −0.24 meV/f.u.), signifying much enhanced FM coupling due to substrate interaction. The other semiconductor surfaces like ZnS(0001), ZnO(0001) and Si(111) also endow FM spin configuration to bilayer CrI3 with EM = 3.26 ~ 5.59 meV/f.u. On some 2D materials including SnS, GaSe, MoS2 and WSe2, the vdW interaction causes remarkable shift of the bands of CrI3, i.e. the Fermi level approaching the bottom of conduction band, while the band gap is slightly reduced to 0.44 ~ 0.96 eV, leading to relatively weak FM order with EM = 0.06 ~ 2.00 meV/f.u.. On the rest 2D materials like InSe, Black P and h-BN, the band gap of the CrI3 sheet is almost intact, 8 and the interlayer AFM coupling is maintained with EM = −0.06 ~ −0.30 meV/f.u.. For the substrates providing vdW interaction, we further explored strategies to strengthen the interlayer ferromagnetic order of bilayer CrI3 on the vdW substrate. We considered bilayer CrI3 on graphene (lattice mismatch is 0.38%) as a representative system feasible in the experiment and obtained EM = 2.31 meV/f.u., compared with EM = −0.24 meV/f.u. for freestanding CrI3 bilayer with AFM order. This means that an AFM-to-FM transition can be realized by placing bilayer CrI3 on graphene as a vdW substrate. By applying an external electric field perpendicular to the CrI3 sheet, EM further increases to 2.93 meV/f.u. at F = 0.2 V/Å (see Fig. S5(a)). Moreover, considering the possible in-plane strain in CrI3 bilayer supported on certain substrate due to lattice mismatch, we examined the effect of biaxial strain on the magnetism of freestanding bilayer CrI3. As shown in Fig. S5(b), the freestanding system remains AFM under stretching strain, while it switches to the FM state under compressive strain larger than 4%. In particular, EM reaches 0.45 meV/f.u. under 5% compressive strain. Therefore, by depositing HT-phase CrI3 bilayer on a suitable vdW substrate to induce proper in-plane strain and meanwhile by applying a vertical electric field, it is possible to significantly enhance the interlayer FM order and raise the Curie temperature for device application. The AFM to FM transition in bilayer CrI3 is attributed to its electron transfer with the substrate, which alters not only the energy level but also the occupancy of eg orbital of the bottom CrI3 layer, as illustrated by Fig. 3. The eg-t2g interaction strength that dominates the FM coupling of CrI3 layers can be reflected by the virtual exchange gap (Gex) between the eg and t2g orbitals. Generally speaking, the stronger CrI3-substrate binding associated with the larger interfacial charge transfer results in the smaller Gex and thus larger EM as well as stronger FM order, as displayed in Fig. 4(a). In particular, bilayer CrI3 on II-VI semiconductors and Si(111) surface have Gex value reduced to 0.52 ~ 0.87 eV, which is a significant impact on the electronic band structures, while 2D vdW substrates only induce band shifting and perturbation to the eg-t2g interaction (Gex = 1.10 ~ 1.44 eV, compared with 1.33 eV for the freestanding system). Moreover, the electrons transferred from the substrate occupy the eg orbitals of the bottom CrI3 9 layer, and the corresponding occupancy can be calculated by: occ. ( )d ( )d F g g E e e D E E N D E E −∞ +∞ −∞ = ∫ ∫ (3) where Deg(E) is the density of states from the eg orbitals of the bottom CrI3 layer at a given energy E. Remarkably, for bilayer CrI3 sheets on the bulk semiconductors, the considerable charge transfer leads to the occupation of eg orbitals to be Nocc. = 6.03 ~ 12.60% (Table SII), while the freestanding bilayer and that on 2D vdW substrates have small CT < 0.06 e/f.u. and thus Nocc. = 0. As shown in Fig. 4(b), EM generally increases with Nocc., as larger occupation of the eg orbital of the bottom CrI3 layer corresponds to more substrate-induced itinerant electron carriers, and thus leads to enhanced stability of interlayer FM spin configuration against AFM one. The interfacial charge transfer between bilayer CrI3 and substrate can be correlated with the work function (Φ) of the substrate. As illustrated by Fig. 4(c) and (d), the substrates with lower Φ result in larger CT to the CrI3 sheet, accompanied by stronger interfacial binding and smaller interlayer distance (d < 2.60 Å), which in turn leads to the increase of EM for interlayer FM exchange. In particular, the (0001) polar surfaces of bulk II-VI semiconductors have a much smaller theoretical work function of 3.60 ~ 3.81 eV than that of 5.63 eV for freestanding bilayer CrI3, thereby inducing prominent charge transfer through formation of the interfacial covalent bonds. In contrast, 2D materials have relatively larger work function in the range of 4.33 to 5.75 eV, and they donate to or even gain a small amount of electrons from the CrI3 sheet. Therefore, they have less impact on the magnetic order in bilayer CrI3. In other words, by choosing proper substrates based on the work function, it is possible to control the amount of charge transfer to bilayer CrI3 and tune the eg-t2g hybridization, ultimately modulating the interlayer spin configuration and exchange energy of the bilayer CrI3 sheet. To gain deeper insights into the mechanism of enhanced interlayer ferromagnetism of CrI3, we considered a Heisenberg model with the following Hamiltonian ij i j ij H = −∑J M M (4) 10 where Mi and Mj represent the magnetic moments at sites i and j, respectively, and we used the computed magnetic moments for each CrI3/substrate model from DFT calculations (see Table SII in the SM for the values of M); Jij is the exchange parameter between sites i and j. Later, we will use the subscript ┴ and || to denote the interlayer and intralayer exchange parameters, respectively. As illustrated by Fig. 5(b), a total of five Cr−Cr neighbors in bilayer CrI3 are considered — three for in-plane direction and two for vertical direction (the latter includes four nearest neighbors and four second nearest neighbors). The five lowest-energy AFM spin configurations are determined for freestanding and supported bilayer CrI3, as displayed in Fig. 5(c) and Fig. S6. According to the exchange energies of these AFM states, Jij can be calculated by Eq. (4) (see Eq. (S1 ~ S12) in the SM for more details). For freestanding CrI3 bilayer, we obtained the interlayer nearest-neighbor J1┴ = 0.88 meV representing the FM coupling, while the second nearest-neighbor J2┴ = −2.03 meV is obtained for AFM coupling, consistent with the previous theoretical reports . Upon substrate interaction, J1┴ is generally increased and J2┴ usually becomes less negative for the considered substrates, that is, stronger FM interlayer nearest-neighbor exchange and weaker AFM second nearest-neighbor exchange, which explains the enhanced interlayer FM coupling for the supported CrI3 sheet. In particular, J1┴ is notably enlarged for bilayer CrI3 on II-VI semiconductors and Si(111) surface (6.32 ~ 9.19 meV), which is about 7 ~ 10 times larger than that of the freestanding form, while J2┴ is less affected (−1.17 ~ −4.00 meV). Fig. 5(a) reveals that the exchange energy EM for the interlayer FM spin configuration increases with J1┴ for various supported bilayer CrI3 systems. Therefore, the CrI3- substrate interaction mainly stabilizes the FM interlayer nearest-neighbor exchange term, endowing robust FM coupling between CrI3 layers. The substrates can not only trigger the interlayer AFM-to-FM transition in CrI3, but also enhance the stability of intralayer FM state. As listed in Table I, for all the supported bilayer CrI3 systems, the intralayer ground-state spin configuration is FM order. The bottom CrI3 layer adjacent to the substrate has the intralayer exchange energy EM|| = 17.14 ~ 43.31 meV/f.u., compared with 16.30 meV/f.u. for the upper layer and 15.56 meV/f.u. for freestanding CrI3 monolayer. Accordingly, the intralayer nearest- 11 neighbor exchange parameter J1|| notably increases to 2.74 ~ 6.42 meV for the bottom CrI3 layer on various substrates owing to the enhanced eg-t2g hybridization (J1|| = 1.72 meV for freestanding CrI3 monolayer). The second nearest-neighbor J2|| is also FM and overall has less change with respect to that of freestanding CrI3 monolayer (J2|| = 1.54 meV). Considering two in-plane Cr−Cr near neighbors in Eq. (4), the exchange energy EM|| of intralayer FM order follows a linear relation with J1|| for the bottom CrI3 layer on substrate, as revealed by Fig. 5(b). Since bilayer CrI3 involves two macroscopic spins , the energy required to flip a spin requires overcoming not only the interlayer exchange energy, but also the intralayer exchange energy. Therefore, the enhancement of both in-plane and vertical FM coupling for CrI3 bilayer on semiconducting substrates would effectively elevate the Curie temperature. Based on the calculated exchange parameters Jij for both interlayer and intralayer spin configurations, we performed Monte Carlo simulations to estimate the Curie temperature of two representative systems, i.e. bilayer CrI3 on CdSe(0001) and 2D InSe. The specific heat (C) was computed based on the Heisenberg model, and the peak on C(T) curve corresponds to the temperature (Tc) for second-order magnetic transition . An (30 × 30) supercell was used, and the simulation for each system lasted for 105 loops at each temperature. As shown in Fig. 5(d), Tc is determined to be 130 and 60 K for bilayer CrI3 on CdSe(0001) and 2D InSe, respectively, while Tc for freestanding CrI3 monolayer is 40 K from our calculation (45 K in experiment ). Encouragingly, the FM order is strengthened by depositing bilayer CrI3 on bulk semiconductor as Tc increases by up to 3 times. According to the above discussions, the proximity effect on 2D CrI3 sheet from the semiconducting substrates originates from the interfacial electronic coupling and charge transfer, which greatly reduces the virtual energy gap and modifies the occupancy of eg orbitals, leading to enhanced eg-t2g hybridization and strengthened interlayer ferromagnetic order in bilayer CrI3. The interfacial charge transfer is correlated to the work function of the substrate relative to that of CrI3. Compared to the widely adopted approaches like heteroatom doping and functionalization with inherent limitations, depositing 2D magnetic materials on proper semiconducting substrates is a 12 universe strategy to manipulate the spin configuration toward robust ferromagnetism with high Curie temperature for practical applications in spintronics. 4. Conclusion In summary, we exploited various types of semiconducting substrates to tailor the interlayer spin configuration of bilayer CrI3. According to our first-principles calculations and Monte Carlo simulations, the antiferromagnetic ground state of CrI3 bilayer in high-temperature phase can be transformed into ferromagnetic state when deposited on suitable bulk surfaces or 2D materials. In particular, the (0001) surface of II-VI semiconductors (CdSe, ZnS and ZnO) form covalent bonds with CrI3 bilayer and endow it robust intralayer and interlayer FM order with Curie temperature up to 130 K, much higher than that on 2D substrates with vdW interaction. Such strong proximity effect can be understood by the prominent charge transfer from II-VI semiconductors, leading to carrier doping to the band structure of CrI3, which significantly enhances the eg-t2g hybridization and strengthens the FM nearest-neighbor exchange. These theoretical results provide essential guidance for obtaining high Curie temperature 2D ferromagnets on semiconducting substrates for practical uses. Conflict of interest There are no conflicts to declare. Acknowledgement This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (11974068), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities of China (DUT20LAB110), and the Supercomputing Center of Dalian University of Technology. 13