Prepared for submission to JHEP Non-vanishing zero-temperature normal density in holographic superfluids Blaise Gout МҒeraux and Eric Mefford CPHT, CNRS, МҒEcole polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, Route de Saclay, 91128 PALAISEAU, France E-mail: blaise.gouteraux@polytechnique.edu, eric.mefford@polytechnique.edu Abstract: The low energy and finite temperature excitations of a d + 1-dimensional system exhibiting superfluidity are well described by a hydrodynamic model with two fluid flows: a normal flow and a superfluid flow. In the vicinity of a quantum critical point, thermodynamics and transport in the system are expected to be controlled by the critical exponents and by the spectrum of irrelevant deformations away from the quantum critical point. Here, using gauge-gravity duality, we present the low temperature dependence of thermodynamic and charge transport coefficients at first order in the hydrodynamic derivative expansion in terms of the critical exponents. Special attention will be paid to the behavior of the charge density of the normal flow in systems with emergent infrared conformal and Lifshitz symmetries, parameterized by a Lifshitz dynamical exponent z > 1. When 1 вүӨ z < d + 2, we recover (z = 1) and extend (z > 1) previous results obtained by relativistic effective field theory techniques. Instead, when z > d + 2, we show that the normal charge density becomes non- vanishing at zero temperature. An extended appendix generalizes these results to systems that violate hyperscaling as well as systems with generalized photon masses. Our results clarify previous work in the holographic literature and have relevance to recent experimental measurements of the superfluid density on cuprate superconductors. arXiv:2008.02289v3 [hep-th] 23 Nov 2020 Contents 1 Introduction and results 3 2 Holographic superfluid model, generalities 7 2.1 IR geometries with emergent conformal invariance 8 2.2 Lifshitz symmetric IR geometries 9 2.3 Nonzero temperature 11 2.4 Horizon fluxes 12 3 Transport 13 3.1 Incoherent conductivity 14 3.2 Normal and superfluid densities 15 Vanishing ПҒ(0) n 19 Non-vanishing ПҒ(0) n 20 Competing broken symmetries 21 4 Numerical examples 21 5 Connection to previous literature 23 6 Discussion 26 A Landau-Tisza hydrodynamics 29 A.1 Conservation equations and constitutive relations for small superfluid velocities 29 A.2 Linear response a la Kadanoff-Martin 30 B Proof of (3.34) 33 C Scale-covariant geometries 36 C.1 IR geometries 39 C.1.1 Marginal deformations, z Мё= 1 40 C.1.2 Irrelevant deformations, z = 1 41 C.2 Specific example 45 D Translation breaking 45 E Semi-local quantum critical geometries 46 E.1 Zero temperature solution 49 вҖ“ 1 вҖ“ F Vanishing ПҒ(0) n but finite ПҒ(0) in 51 вҖ“ 2 вҖ“ 1 Introduction and results The spontaneous breaking of a U(1) symmetry and the associated phenomenon of superfluid- ity is one of most studied subjects of contemporary Physics. Superfluidity characterizes the low temperature behavior of systems ranging from the two isotopes of Helium, cold atoms and conventional superconductors. For these systems, microscopic descriptions are available. More generally, their low energy dynamics are captured by a universal effective theory (EFT) originally due to Landau and Tisza based on an extension of hydrodynamics and soon after extended to relativistic superfluids [3вҖ“8] вҖ“ see also [9вҖ“12] for more recent treatments. Hydrodynamics posits that slow deviations about local thermodynamic equilibrium can be captured by a small set of conservation equations following from the symmetries of the system, together with constitutive relations for the spatial currents associated to the con- served densities. For a superfluid, these equations need to be supplemented by a вҖҳJosephsonвҖҷ relation, which follows from gauge invariance and relates the time derivative of the Gold- stone following from the spontaneously broken U(1) symmetry to the chemical potential of the system. This equation is derived from the realization that the Goldstone is canonically conjugate to the charge density of the system . In the hydrodynamic theory, the dynamics at finite temperature can be thought of as the superposition of two types of flows, a normal flow and a superfluid flow. The normal flow is dissipative and is carried by a fraction of the total charge density ПҒ, the normal density ПҒn. On the other hand, the superfluid flow is dissipationless and is responsible for the phenomenon of superfluidity. It is carried by the superfluid fraction ПҒs of the total density, such that the total density ПҒ = ПҒn + ПҒs. In all the systems mentioned above, the normal density vanishes at zero temperature ПҒ(0) n s . This is consistent both with microscopic calculations, and relativistic superfluid effective field theories (EFT) [15вҖ“17]. Thus the zero temperature EFT only needs to account for a single, linearly-dispersing degree of freedom, the Goldstone mode.1 Under these assumptions, the following expression has been derived for normal density at leading order in a small temperature expansion (see e.g. ) ПҒn вүғ sT Ојc2 ir + . . . (1.1) where s is the entropy density and c2 ir the effective lightcone velocity. The dots stand for sub- leading corrections in temperature and cir. In general, the superfluid EFT yields ПҒn вҲј T d+1, , in agreement with the result (1.1) for 4Helium, see e.g. . In this work, we will 1 The Goldstone is also referred to as вҖҳsuperfluid phononвҖҷ in the literature, in relation to the extra sound mode it sources compared to normal fluids. вҖ“ 3 вҖ“ derive an improved expression (1.1) for the low temperature behavior of the normal density in relativistic superfluid phases, which holds for finite cir. The result from the superfluid EFT (1.1) is in line with the general expectation that ПҒ(0) n = 0. One of the arguments in favor of ПҒ(0) n = 0 provided in is based on lin- earized hydrodynamics. In , we have shown that this argument does not correctly account for the source of superfluid velocity fluctuations, and that one cannot conclude that ПҒ(0) n = 0 from these equations. This is not entirely surprising, as the specific temperature dependence of various thermodynamic quantities is an input to the hydrodynamic equations, which only allow to obtain the general expression for the collective modes and retarded GreenвҖҷs func- tions at late times and long wavelengths. The temperature dependence of thermodynamic quantities and transport coefficients must instead be computed given a specific microscopic theory. Another argument was given in . However it assumes the existence of coherent (quasi-)particles, which need not be true in strongly-coupled systems. Indeed, the vanishing of the normal density at zero temperature has recently been ques- tioned by measurements of the superfluid density in overdoped high Tc superconductors . There, it was found that the superfluid density was anomalously low at low temperatures, and scaled linearly with temperature ПҒs вүғ ПҒ(0) s + #T. Later, measurements of the optical conduc- tivity in the superconducting phase at low temperature revealed a very modest depression of the spectral weight inside the low frequency Drude peak , in tension with the expectation that ПҒ(0) = ПҒ(0) s . In a BCS superconductor, the normal density vanishes towards zero tem- perature exponentially quickly, see e.g. . Thus, as T < Tc, the normal spectral weight in the Drude peak is strongly suppressed and is transferred to the superfluid delta function. A legitimate concern is whether these expectations can be spoiled by disorder effects. However, these systems are expected to be quite clean, as evidenced by their very low residual resis- tivities. Moreover, disorder should induce a crossover from a linear to quadratic temperature dependence of the superfluid density at the lowest temperatures, which is not observed in the data . This led to argue that the anomalously low superfluid density could not originate from pair breaking effects due to disorder, although counter-arguments have been presented in [22вҖ“24] in the context of the вҖҳdirty BCSвҖҷ theory. In the absence of a well-posed microscopic theory of strongly-coupled superfluids, gauge- gravity duality offers an attractive framework to investigate the low temperature behavior of the normal density in superfluids. A pioneering achievement was the construction of holo- graphic systems spontaneously breaking a U(1) symmetry, [25вҖ“27]. While the original con- structions were вҖҳbottom-upвҖҷ and relied on including a simple charged, complex scalar field in the bulk, holographic superfluids were subsequently studied in top-down string theory mod- els [28вҖ“36]. A number of studies also verified that the low energy dynamics of these systems matched various aspects of relativistic superfluid hydrodynamics, [10, 11, 37вҖ“40]. вҖ“ 4 вҖ“ In a recent paper, , we demonstrated that ПҒ(0) n need not vanish for certain holographic superfluids in the vicinity of a quantum critical phase. The main purpose of this work is to ex- tend the results of that paper to general critical phases using gauge-gravity duality methods, establish criteria for ПҒ(0) n Мё= 0 and work out the sub-leading low-temperature dependence on the critical exponents characterizing the phase. In particular, we find that the temperature dependence is not always given by (1.2). Hints that ПҒ(0) n Мё= 0 in holographic superfluids have previously been reported, see e.g. figure 7 of , though the reason for this was unclear at the time. Here, we explain and generalize those results. Whether or not ПҒ(0) n vanishes depends on the nature of the zero temperature superfluid groundstate and on the spectrum of irrelevant deformations in its vicinity. In the main text of this work, we derive the normal density for a general translation invariant superfluid. We then apply this to Lifshitz superfluid groundstates which have been constructed in previous literature . In Appendix C, we extend this analysis to include groundstates which feature hyperscaling violation as well as cases with novel su- perfluid actions.2 While the analysis involves a somewhat subtle competition between various deformations, we can illustrate the general idea in two particularly simple and representative examples. In , it was shown that for a quartic scalar potential, the IR groundstate has an emergent conformal symmetry and is just another copy of Anti de Sitter. The existence of this ground- state relies on a certain deformation sourced by the gauge field being irrelevant in the IR, which restores the isotropy between time and space. We find that in this case ПҒ(0) n vanishes as in (1.2): ПҒn вүғ sT Ојc2 ir пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ c2 ir пҝҪ + . . . (1.2) where the dots denote subleading temperature dependence. (1.2) reduces to (1.1) in the limit of small cir вүӘ 1, as expected. (1.2) can also be derived within the relativistic superfluid EFT, . On the other hand, for different choices of the parameters in the scalar potential, the deformation sourced by the gauge field becomes relevant and breaks the isotropy between time and space. This leads to a groundstate invariant under Lifshitz scale transformations with a non-trivial dynamical exponent z > 1. In this case, dimensional analysis tells us that, for a Lifshitz-invariant state, the entropy density s вҲј T d/z and the effective IR velocity cir вҲј T 1вҲ’1/z. Naively extrapolating (1.2) to the Lifshitz case implies that ПҒn вҲј T d+2вҲ’z z . For sufficiently low values of z < d + 2, ПҒn does vanish at zero temperature and a more detailed calculation (see main text) reveals that it is still given by (1.2) at low temperatures, with an 2An analytic top-down solution featuring hyperscaling violation in the normal state can be found in . вҖ“ 5 вҖ“ appropriate definition of cir. However, for z > d + 2, the same (1.2) naively predicts that ПҒ(0) n diverges. The actual calculation (see main text) shows that it tends instead to a nonzero, finite value. This feature explains in particular the results of . Our results shed new light on the relation between charge densities in the boundary theory and in the bulk, various aspects of which have been explored in previous literature [36, 43, 47вҖ“54]. In some of these works, semi-local geometries with z = +вҲһ were singled out as they allow for Fermi surface-like features in their spectral functions. In such cases, it would be natural to expect that these fermionic-like, uncondensed degrees of freedom lead to a non-vanishing normal density at zero temperature, as in superfluid systems where Bogoli- ubov Fermi surfaces are formed, see e.g. . In the case at hand, one might have expected a priori that the normal density should be controlled by the charge behind the horizon ПҒin, and the superfluid density by the charge carried by the condensate in the bulk (which can be thought as a proxy for the density of condensed electrons). We find no such relation, and also do not find that z = +вҲһ geometries play any special role. Instead, in conformal or Lifshitz IR phases with z < d + 2, while ПҒ(0) n and ПҒ(0) in both vanish, they do so with a different temperature dependence. In Lifshitz phases with z > d + 2, ПҒ(0) n is non-vanishing as we noted above, but we still find that ПҒ(0) in vanishes. We are also able to find (see appendix F) phases similar to 4He, where ПҒ(0) n vanishes but ПҒ(0) in does not, as well as phases where ПҒ(0) n and ПҒ(0) in (the zero temperature limit of the charge behind the horizon) are both non-vanishing, see appendix C. From these results, we conclude that strongly-coupled holographic superfluids do not necessitate any fermionic-like degrees of freedom to exhibit a non-vanishing normal density at zero temperature, and provide an alternative mechanism to Bogoliubov Fermi surfaces. In the remainder of this paper, we give the details of our holographic setup and of the quan- tum critical superfluid groundstates we are interested in section 2. Then we explain how we compute the normal density and give a general criterion for its vanishing at zero temperature in section 3. We illustrate our criterion on various numerical examples in section 4. We com- ment on the relevance of our results to previous literature in section 5. Finally, we present our conclusion and discuss our results in a broader context in section 6. An extended ap- pendix is devoted to deriving the hydrodynamic equations (appendix A) as well as details of a technical proof (appendix B), extending our results to theories with a hyperscaling violating exponent Оё (appendix C), the case of weakly broken translations (appendix D), semi-local quantum critical geometries with Lifshitz exponent z = +вҲһ (appendix E), and geometries with non-vanishing horizon charge density but vanishing normal density (appendix F). вҖ“ 6 вҖ“ An abridged version of our results can be found in . 2 Holographic superfluid model, generalities The class of holographic superfluids that interests us can be described by the following bulk action, [25вҖ“27, 41, 42], S = 1 16ПҖG пҝҪ dd+2xвҲҡвҲ’g пҝҪ R вҲ’ 1 4FMNF MN вҲ’ |DО·|2 вҲ’ V (|О·|) пҝҪ . (2.1) Here AM is a U(1) gauge field with field strength, FMN = вҲӮMAN вҲ’ вҲӮNAM. We choose to source only a time component of the gauge potential which breaks the charge-conjugation symmetry of the boundary fluid. The complex scalar field О· has charge q under the U(1) symmetry and covariant derivative DM вүЎ вҲӮM вҲ’ iqAM. For the rest of the paper, we work in units in where 16ПҖG = 1. A general ansatz for the metric and matter fields consistent with translation and rotation symmetry that only breaks the charge-conjugation symmetry is d, A = At(r)dt, О· = О·вҲ— = О·(r). (2.2) The equations of motion arising from this ansatz are given in Appendix C.3 Importantly, these equations can be combined into the conservation equation d dr пҝҪпҝҪ Cd BD пҝҪ C пҝҪD C пҝҪвҖІ вҲ’ AtAвҖІ t пҝҪпҝҪ = 0, (2.3) which follows from an invariance under certain rescalings in the bulk, , or more recently as the Noether charge following from one of the bulk Killing vectors, . In the UV, we are interested in solutions that have an asymptotic form (r вҶ’ 0+), ds2 вҶ’ dr2 вҲ’ dt2 + dвғ—x2 d r2 . (2.4) For simplicity, we will chose a potential that satisfies (2.5) This choice of potential enforces that the matter fields have an asymptotic fall-off О· вүғ О·(1)r + О·(2)rd + ..., At вүғ Ој вҲ’ ПҒ (d вҲ’ 1)rdвҲ’1 + ..., B вҲј rвҲ’2 + ... D вүғ rвҲ’2 вҲ’ пҝҪ О·(1)пҝҪ2 2d вҲ’ Оө d + 1 rdвҲ’1 + ..., C вүғ rвҲ’2 вҲ’ пҝҪ О·(1)пҝҪ2 2d + P d + 1 rdвҲ’1 + ... . (2.6) 3There, we include an extra neutral scalar ПҲ. For the main text, ПҲ = 0 and ZF = MF = 1. вҖ“ 7 вҖ“ Here the dots indicate terms subleading in the limit r вҶ’ 0+. Ој is the chemical potential of the system and ПҒ the total charge density. P is the pressure and Оө the energy density. As is well-known, in the conventional quantization scheme, О·(1) and Ој act as sources for the expectation values О·(2) and ПҒ. In particular, the choice Ој Мё= 0 gives rise to a finite charge density and breaks the background charge-conjugation symmetry. With the choice О·(1) = 0, a non-zero О·(2) indicates spontaneous breaking of the U(1) symmetry and characterizes a holographic superfluid. The bulk action (2.1) leads to an RG flow from a conformally invariant UV fixed point to a quantum critical phase in the IR, characterized by a Lifshitz dynamical exponent z вүҘ 1, . If z = 1, the RG flow connects two scale-invariant Anti de Sitter spacetimes, described in section 2.1, whereas if z > 1, the IR is described by a Lifshitz geometry, see section 2.2. 2.1 IR geometries with emergent conformal invariance The condensation of the a scalar condensate in the action (2.1) leads to an RG flow either to an emergent conformally invariant IR (z = 1) or to a Lifshitz symmetric IR (z > 1) depending on the IR behavior of the complex scalar and the relevance of the Maxwell field. Specifically, if the scalar field О· minimizes the scalar potential in the IR, вҲӮV (О·0,О·0) вҲӮО·вҲ— = вҲӮV (О·0,О·0) вҲӮО· = 0, the RG flow is a domain wall solution interpolating between two conformally invariant fixed points with z = 1 . We may write the metric in the IR as ds2 = вҲ’L2 ЛҶr2 L2 t dt2 + МғL2 dЛҶr2 ЛҶr2 + L2 ЛҶr2 L2 x dвғ—x2 d. (2.7) ЛҶr is an appropriately chosen IR coordinate that does not extend all the way to the UV region. Instead, ЛҶr вү« L, where L is a scale that defines the region of spacetime where the metric takes the form (2.7). МғL is the IR AdS radius, given by МғL2 V (О·0, О·0) = вҲ’d(d + 1) . (2.8) In this solution, the gauge field is irrelevant. In particular, it does not support the IR geometry and we need to work out its leading behavior by solving the Maxwell equation in the background (2.7). By backreacting the solution on the metric and iterating the procedure, we can develop a consistent perturbative series that approximates the IR solution. We find At вүғ LtcA пҝҪ ЛҶr L пҝҪ МғвҲҶA0вҲ’1 пҝҪ 1 + #c2 A пҝҪ ЛҶr L пҝҪ2 МғвҲҶA0 + ... пҝҪ , МғвҲҶA0 = d вҲ’ ОҪA, ОҪA = d вҲ’ 1 2 пҝҪ 1 + пҝҪ 1 + 8 (d вҲ’ 1)2 МғL2q2О·2 0 пҝҪ . (2.9) For the perturbation to be irrelevant, МғвҲҶA0 < 0. Clearly this requires a non-vanishing con- densate, О·0 Мё= 0, and so, in the context of the RG flow, both At and О· drive the system away вҖ“ 8 вҖ“ from the IR fixed point towards the UV. There is also a deformation associated with the charged scalar, О· вүғ О·0 + cО· пҝҪ ЛҶr L пҝҪ МғвҲҶО· пҝҪ 1 + #c2 О· пҝҪ ЛҶr L пҝҪ2 МғвҲҶО· + ... пҝҪ МғвҲҶО· = d + 1 2 пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ пҝҪ 1 + 4 (d + 1)2 МғL2M2 IR пҝҪ , M2 IR = вҲӮ2V вҲӮО·вҲӮО·вҲ— + вҲӮ2V вҲӮО·вҲ—2 пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ О·=О·вҲ—=О·0 (2.10) We note that, because О·0 minimizes the scalar potential, M2 IR is always positive and real, and hence МғвҲҶО· < 0 so that the perturbation is always irrelevant. Both of these perturbations contribute to the RG flow from the IR fixed point to the conformally invariant UV. We write this schematically as ds2 вүғ ds2 0 пҝҪ 1 + #c2 A пҝҪ ЛҶr L пҝҪ2 МғвҲҶA0 + #c2 О· пҝҪ ЛҶr L пҝҪ2 МғвҲҶО· + ... пҝҪ . (2.11) We also note that this agrees with for the case d = 2 when the scalar potential is quartic. 2.2 Lifshitz symmetric IR geometries While МғвҲҶО· < 0 always, the perturbation associated with At can become relevant when МғвҲҶA0 > 0 . When this occurs, the Maxwell field strongly backreacts on the IR geometry and forces the scalar field to minimize the effective potential, вҲӮVeff(О·0,О·0) вҲӮО·вҲ— = вҲӮV (О·0,О·0) вҲӮО·вҲ— + 2q2A2 t О·0 = 0. In this case, the RG flow is from a conformally invariant UV fixed point to a Lifshitz symmetric quantum critical phase in the IR with z > 1 that is determined in terms of q and parameters in V : ds2 = вҲ’L2z ЛҶr2z L2 t dt2 + МғL2 dЛҶr2 ЛҶr2 + L2 ЛҶr2 L2 xdвғ—x2 d . (2.12) We can rescale ЛҶr вҶ’ (L/ МғL)ЛҶr so that we see only the scale МғL appears in the IR metric. The dynamical critical exponent is z = 2 d q2 МғL2О·2 0. (2.13) A consistent solution also requires V (О·0, О·0) = вҲ’d2 + (d вҲ’ 1)z + z2 МғL2 , вҲӮV вҲӮО·вҲ— (О·0, О·0) = d (z вҲ’ 1) МғL2О·0 . (2.14) These criteria can be used to find q, О·0 and МғL for a given value of z. The gauge field now behaves as A = Lt пҝҪ 2 вҲ’ 2 z пҝҪ ЛҶr L пҝҪвҲ’z dt. (2.15) вҖ“ 9 вҖ“ A boundary case to the superfluid Lifshitz geometries is z вҶ’ вҲһ, leading to an AdS2Г—Rd su- perfluid geometry (also sometimes called a semi-local quantum critical geometry ). Under a rescaling, пҝҪ ЛҶr L пҝҪ вҶ’ пҝҪ Мғr L пҝҪвҲ’1/z (2.16) and taking the z вҶ’ вҲһ limit, the metric (2.12) becomes ds2 = пҝҪ Мғr L пҝҪвҲ’2 (вҲ’L2 t dt2 + d Мғr2) + L2 xdвғ—x2 d, At = вҲҡ 2Lt пҝҪ Мғr L пҝҪвҲ’1 (2.17) To find a consistent holographic RG flow to such a phase with a superfluid requires a modified action. We detail this in Appendix E. As before, we investigate the irrelevant deformations about the IR Lifshitz fixed point (we leave the z вҶ’ вҲһ details to Appendix E). For d = 2 and a quartic potential, this was done in . We are interested in a particular set of deformations which connect the IR fixed point to the UV. Writing вғ—X = {D, B, C, At}, О· = О·вҲ— вүғ О·0 + cО· пҝҪL ЛҶr пҝҪОҪО· + ... , вғ—X вүғ вғ—XcО·=0 пҝҪ 1 + c вғ—X пҝҪL ЛҶr пҝҪОҪО· + ... пҝҪ . (2.18) We omit writing the details of ci since they are not particularly enlightening. The exponent is ОҪО·(Пғ1, Пғ2) = вҲ’d + z 2 + Пғ1 2О·0 пҝҪ D1 + 2Пғ2 пҝҪ D2 (2.19) where D1 = 2d(1 вҲ’ z) + пҝҪ 5z2 + 2M2 IR МғL2 + d(4 + d) вҲ’ 2(2 + d)z пҝҪ О·2 0 D2 = пҝҪпҝҪ z2 вҲ’ (d + 1)z + d вҲ’ M2 IR МғL2 2 пҝҪ О·2 0 + d(z вҲ’ 1) 2 пҝҪ2 вҲ’ 4d пҝҪ z2 + (d вҲ’ 2)z вҲ’ (d вҲ’ 1) пҝҪ О·2 0 (2.20) and Пғi = Вұ1. MIR is defined as in (2.10). It is worth noting that these deformations depend on the form of the scalar potential and can be complex for certain choices of parameters. Nevertheless, there should always exist a parameter range with real deformations for any choice of z. In this paper, we will fix the form of the scalar potential and choose z such that the deformations are real. It is clear that ОҪО·(вҲ’1, Пғ2) will always be a relevant perturbation, so this deformation does not participate in the RG flow. The least irrelevant perturbation will have МғОҪО· вүЎ ОҪО·(+1, вҲ’1). For the semi-local phase, the irrelevant deformations will depend on our choice of action. This is detailed in Appendix E. вҖ“ 10 вҖ“ 2.3 Nonzero temperature The solutions just described always possess a relevant deformation of the IR critical phase that introduces a temperature. In the language of the previous section, the finite temperature deformation of the background fields has a radial dependence ОҪО· = d + z. Unfortunately, since О·0 Мё= 0, we cannot write the finite temperature in closed form. This is in contrast to the solutions we discuss in Appendix C whose finite temperature metric can be written in closed form for О· = 0. There, we see that when we set the hyperscaling violation parameter Оё = 0, the finite temperature deformation also carries the same radial dependence, captured by an emblackening factor in the metric: gtt = gtt,0[1 вҲ’ (ЛҶr/ЛҶrh)d+z]. Semi-classical gravity tells us to interpret the area of the black hole horizon as the entropy density of the boundary superfluid and regularity of the Euclidean solution at the horizon gives us the superfluid temperature. For solutions that we can write in closed form, we find T = cT пҝҪ ЛҶrh L пҝҪвҲ’z , s = 4ПҖLd x пҝҪ ЛҶr L пҝҪвҲ’d (2.21) where cT is some constant which can be found in terms of the parameters in the IR metric. In particular, we find that s вҲј T d/z which is the expected temperature dependence of the entropy following from dimensional analysis. For the Lifshitz solutions we describe in the main text, though we have no closed form expression for cT , to leading order, T carries the same dependence on ЛҶrh. Furthermore, the expression for s does not change. Despite the lack of a closed form expression for the finite temperature metric, sufficiently close to the horizon we may write the metric as ds2 вҶ’ вҲ’4ПҖT(rh вҲ’ r)dt2 + dr2 4ПҖT(rh вҲ’ r) + s 4ПҖdвғ—x2 d . (2.22) where rh вҲј ЛҶrвҲ’1/z h . Furthermore, At must vanish at the horizon, so in the near horizon region we may write At = Ah(rh вҲ’ r) + ... (2.23) From this expansion, it is clear that by integrating (2.3) we obtain the identity пҝҪ Cd BD пҝҪ C пҝҪD C пҝҪвҖІ вҲ’ AtAвҖІ t пҝҪ = вҲ’sT . (2.24) Moreover, by evaluating the left hand side at the UV boundary, we recover the Smarr relation Оө + P = sT + ОјПҒ . (2.25) It is important to note that the deformation that leads to a temperature also contributes to a variation in the charge density which likewise contributes universal deformations of the normal and superfluid densities. This deformation can be the leading deformation but for cer- tain critical phases we will see that the universal deformation is subleading to non-universal deformations that are sourced by the condensate. вҖ“ 11 вҖ“ 2.4 Horizon fluxes Next, because horizons have a finite, large N2 c entropy, they are naturally associated with de- confined degrees of freedom in the system, or in our hydrodynamic interpretation, degrees of freedom that have dissipated into the thermal bath, see . We interpret the low-temperature horizon flux as a measure of the charge of these degrees of freedom. Upon condensation, we will see that this charge may be less than the total charge of the system, indicating the pres- ence of charged degrees of freedom that are isolated from the thermal bath. These charged degrees of freedom sit instead in the condensate. They can be thought of as the analogue of the condensed degrees of freedom. When there is no horizon flux at T = 0, all the charge is in the condensed degrees of freedom. This phase has previously been referred to as вҖңcohesiveвҖқ following the condensed matter literature; however, we feel that fully condensed is a more faithful reflection of the holographic picture. Any residual horizon flux at T = 0 will indi- cate a phase that is not fully condensed. In the holographic literature, this has been called вҖңfractionalized.вҖқ Here, we will refer to this as partially condensed if there is a condensate or uncondensed if there is no condensate. As an example, an AdS Reissner-Nordstrom black hole is an uncondensed phase (our semi-local geometries share the same IR). In the main text, we only consider fully condensed phases, though in Appendix C we will also consider partially condensed phases (see also ). The horizon flux is defined as ПҒin(rh) вүЎ вҲ’ Cd/2 вҲҡ BD AвҖІ t пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ r=rh (2.26) While we do not have closed form expressions for the finite temperature fields, we can use the near horizon metric to find ПҒin(rh) = Cd/2 h Ah (2.27) where we have defined Ch = C(rh). Given that At = Ah(rh вҲ’ r) + ... near the horizon, and that limTвҶ’0 AвҖІ t(r) = AвҖІ t,0(r), we can approximate Ah by the zero temperature metric at the finite temperature horizon вҲ’AвҖІ t,0(rh). Then, for scale invariant geometries, we have ПҒin = cinT dвҲ’ МғвҲҶA0 + ... (2.28) while for the Lifshitz solutions, we have ПҒin = cinT вҲ’d/z + ... (2.29) In these expressions, cin is a temperature-independent prefactor which depends on the precise form of the finite temperature metric through the relation between the temperature and ЛҶrh, (2.21). In both the scale invariant and Lifshitz cases, limTвҶ’0 ПҒin = 0 and hence are both fully condensed. On the other hand, semi-local quantum critical phases have ПҒin = cinT 0 + ... (2.30) вҖ“ 12 вҖ“ and hence are partially condensed. The subleading temperature behavior depends on the precise form of the action. 3 Transport The long-wavelength, low frequency fluctuations of our holographic system are well-described by the two-fluid hydrodynamical model of Landau and Tisza . As we detail in Appendix A, for a slowly fluctuating electric field in the ЛҶx direction, the longitudinal conductivity4 can be written as Пғ(Пү) = i ПүGR JЛҶxJЛҶx(Пү, 0) = пҝҪ i Пү + Оҙ(Пү) пҝҪ пҝҪ ПҒ2 n ОјПҒn + sT + ПҒs Ој пҝҪ + Пғ0 (3.1) Here, Пғ0 is the incoherent conductivity which describes the dissipative part of transport, which we discuss in section 3.1. The other terms stem from translation invariance and sponta- neous breaking of the U(1) global symmetry in the boundary, and we discuss them in section 3.2. Before doing so, it is useful to review the general strategy to compute the longitudinal conductivity holographically. To do this, we solve for the linearized fluctuations sourced by ОҙAЛҶx = aЛҶx(r)eвҲ’iПүt. The only other field sourced by this fluctuation is ОҙgtЛҶx. The two equations of motion are f 1 Cd/2вҲ’1 d dr пҝҪ Cd/2вҲ’1 пҝҪ D B aвҖІ ЛҶx пҝҪ вҲ’ пҝҪ B D пҝҪ 2q2DО·2 + (AвҖІ t)2 B вҲ’ Пү2 пҝҪ aЛҶx = 0 d dr пҝҪgtЛҶx C пҝҪ + aЛҶxAвҖІ t C = 0 (3.2) The UV expansion of the fluctuations are (where as before r вҶ’ 0+ is the boundary) aЛҶx(r) = a(0) ЛҶx ЛҶx d вҲ’ 1rdвҲ’1 + ... gtЛҶx(r) = u2g(0) tЛҶx вҲ’ вҹЁTtЛҶxвҹ© (d + 1)rdвҲ’1 + ... (3.3) Following standard holographic renormalization, a(0) ЛҶx = EЛҶx/(iПү) and if there is no temperature gradient g(0) tЛҶx = 0. Then a(1) ЛҶx iПүa(0) ЛҶx . (3.4) 4In the absence of a background superfluid velocity, the transverse conductivity does not feel the effects of the superfluid and is written ПғвҠҘ(Пү) = i Пү пҝҪ GR JЛҶyJЛҶy(Пү, 0) вҲ’ GR JЛҶyJЛҶy(Пү = 0, k вҶ’ 0) пҝҪ = пҝҪ i Пү + Оҙ(Пү) пҝҪ ПҒ2 n ОјПҒn+sT + Пғ0, where the second term is a static susceptibility that needs to be subtracted out. In this term, the Пү = 0 limit is taken first, and the zero wavector limit second, where k is the component of the wavevector along the ЛҶx direction. вҖ“ 13 вҖ“ 3.1 Incoherent conductivity The incoherent conductivity measures the transport of charged operators that do not have overlap with the momentum [58вҖ“61]. As a consequence, it only carries diffusive excitations, hence the name вҖҳincoherentвҖҷ. In particular, even in translation invariant phases, like the ones we discuss here, its DC limit is non-divergent. It can be defined as: Пғ0 вүЎ lim ПүвҶ’0 Re[Пғ(Пү)] (3.5) and as we now review, can be obtained through a near-horizon analysis, . Since (3.2) is a second order ordinary differential equation, it admits two independent solutions. It is helpful to distinguish between the solution regular at the horizon and the singular solution. Given knowledge of the regular solution, areg ЛҶx (r), to the zero frequency limit of (3.2), the singular solution can be obtained using the Wronskian method, asing ЛҶx (r) = areg ЛҶx (r) пҝҪ r 0 пҝҪ Cd/2вҲ’1 пҝҪ B Dareg ЛҶx (rвҖІ)2 пҝҪвҲ’1 drвҖІ. (3.6) Near the horizon, we use the fact that at finite temperature areg ЛҶx (rh) Мё= 0 and we verify that asing ЛҶx (r) вҶ’ вҲ’ 1 4ПҖTareg ЛҶx (rh) ln(r вҲ’ rh) + finite (3.7) is indeed singular as r вҶ’ rh. Finally, we note that the general solution to (3.2) must satisfy ingoing boundary condi- tions in order to correspond to the calculation of retarded GreenвҖҷs functions , вҲӮraЛҶx(r) вҶ’ вҲ’ iПү 4ПҖ(r вҲ’ rh)aЛҶx(r). (3.8) Expanding aЛҶx(r) slightly away from the horizon, we find aЛҶx(r) вүҲ areg ЛҶx (rh) пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ iПү 4ПҖT ln(r вҲ’ rh) + ... пҝҪ , (3.9) and so must be a specific combination of the regular and singular solution. The subleading pieces in this expansion come from the smooth parts of aЛҶx(r) near the horizon and do not contribute to Пғ0. This reflects the fact that dissipation in the dual field theory is intimately connected with the presence of an event horizon in the bulk geometry. At small frequencies, one can expand the general solution ax(r) to (3.2) as aЛҶx(r) = areg ЛҶx (r) + iПү МғaЛҶx(r) + O(Пү2). (3.10) вҖ“ 14 вҖ“ The first term must be the regular solution areg ЛҶx (r) to (3.2) with Пү вҶ’ 0. The second term is identified by requiring that the frequency dependence of (3.10) and (3.9) match near the horizon МғaЛҶx(r) = (areg ЛҶx (rh))2asing ЛҶx (r). (3.11) Away from the horizon there may be extra terms, but these do not contribute to the leading low frequency behaviour of the conductivity. Hence the solution to (3.2) valid in the entire spacetime in the limit of low frequencies is aЛҶx(r) = areg ЛҶx (r) + iПү(areg ЛҶx (rh))2asing ЛҶx (r) + O(Пү2). (3.12) We can now expand this expression near the boundary aЛҶx(r вҶ’ 0+) вҶ’ areg,(0) ЛҶx + areg,(1) ЛҶx (d вҲ’ 1)rdвҲ’1 + iПүareg,(0) ЛҶx (areg ЛҶx (rh))2 (d вҲ’ 1) rdвҲ’1 + O(Пү2), (3.13) where we used that asing ЛҶx (r) vanishes at the boundary (3.6). Finally, we use that areg,(1) ЛҶx must be real together with the definitions (3.4), (3.5), to deduce that the incoherent conductivity is given by Пғ0 вүЎ lim ПүвҶ’0 Re[Пғ] = (areg ЛҶx (rh))2. (3.14) The incoherent conductivity is always given by this horizon quantity. However, as we have seen, we generally do not know areg ЛҶx (rh). For small temperatures, however, we show in section 3.2 that areg ЛҶx (r) вүҲ a(0) ЛҶx Ој At,0(r) plus terms which are subleading in the temperature. The zero temperature gauge field At,0 does not vanish on the (finite temperature) horizon, and we have Пғ0 = (a(0) ЛҶx )2 Ој2 At,0(rh)2 вҲј пЈұ пЈҙ пЈІ пЈҙ пЈі # пҝҪ T Ој пҝҪ2вҲ’2 МғвҲҶA0 z = 1 # пҝҪ T Ој пҝҪ2 z > 1 . (3.15) 3.2 Normal and superfluid densities The normal and superfluid densities can be found from looking at Z вүЎ lim ПүвҶ’0 ПүIm[Пғ(Пү)] = ПҒ2 n sT + ОјПҒn + ПҒs Ој вҮ’ ПҒn = sT(ПҒ вҲ’ ОјZ) sT вҲ’ Ој(ПҒ вҲ’ ОјZ) (3.16) where we used ПҒ = ПҒn + ПҒs. Importantly, limTвҶ’0 Z = ПҒ Ој. It is a separate question whether or not limTвҶ’0 ПҒn = 0. In a recent paper , we showed that there are no inconsistencies in the two-fluid hy- drodynamic model when ПҒ(0) n Мё= 0 and illustrated this behavior with a holographic example. вҖ“ 15 вҖ“ Here we establish the criteria for this behavior in quantum critical phases with scale-invariant (z = 1) or Lifshitz (z > 1) symmetries for the specific action (2.1). In Appendix C, we will generalize this result to more general quantum critical phases with nonzero hyperscaling vi- olation exponent Оё Мё= 0 as well as novel superfluid actions in Appendix F. For the purpose of the main text, we find that d + 2 вҲ’ z < 0 вҮ’ ПҒ(0) n Мё= 0. (3.17) As explained in the previous section 3.1, the equation for aЛҶx has two independent solutions, one of which is regular at the black hole horizon and another of which is singular. At low frequencies, it is easily seen that the singular part does not contribute to the imaginary conductivity, though it does contribute to the dissipative part, Пғ0. Thus, to find the pole in the imaginary conductivity (and from there the normal density through (3.16)), one needs only find the regular solution to (3.2) at Пү = 0, Z = вҲ’areg,(1) ЛҶx areg,(0) ЛҶx . (3.18) Since the normal density is a thermodynamic property of the system, it is not surprising that it is enough to work at Пү = 0 to determine it, as was done in e.g. [10, 11, 38вҖ“40]. We now explain in detail how we arrive at (3.15) and (3.17). Due to the presence of the condensate, (3.2) cannot be solved exactly. However, it does allow for a perturbative solution at small temperature. It will be useful throughout the deriva- tion to keep in mind a few approximations we will make. The first is that everywhere in the derivation, we will use the radial coordinate r that aligns with Appendix C. In particular, r вҶ’ 0 corresponds to u вҶ’ вҲһ for the UV coordinate defined in (2.4). In addition, r вҶ’ rh corresponds to ЛҶr вҶ’ ЛҶrh for the IR coordinate defined in (2.12). To begin, we note that we can use (2.3) to rewrite the Пү вҶ’ 0 limit of (3.2) in the simple form d dr пҝҪ Cd/2вҲ’1 пҝҪ D B A2 t пҝҪaЛҶx At пҝҪвҖІпҝҪ = вҲ’(sT)AвҖІ t C aЛҶx. (3.19) where primes denote derivatives with respect to the radial coordinate r. From here, it is clear that at T = 0, the regular solution is aЛҶx = a(0) ЛҶx Ој At,0 (3.20) вҖ“ 16 вҖ“ where At,0 is the zero temperature solution to (C.2). While this equation is very simple, it slightly obscures the role of the complex scalar О·. To restore this dependence, we introduce a function R = вҲ’Cd/2AвҖІ t вҲҡ BD , RвҖІ = вҲ’2q2 пҝҪ BCd D О·2At (3.21) which has the property that at the horizon R(rh) = ПҒin and at the UV boundary R(r = 0) = ПҒ. Using (2.3) and integrating by parts, we may write a slightly messier but more convenient equation пҝҪ Cd/2вҲ’1 пҝҪ D B A2 t пҝҪ 1 + sT AtR пҝҪ пҝҪaЛҶx At пҝҪвҖІ вҲ’ sT D C пҝҪaЛҶx At пҝҪпҝҪвҖІ = (sT)2q2О·2CdвҲ’1A2 t R2 пҝҪaЛҶx At пҝҪвҖІ (3.22) As an aside, setting the condensate to zero О· = 0, R = ПҒ and using the bulk identity (2.24), the regular solution for any T is areg ЛҶx = areg,(0) ЛҶx sT + ПҒAt(r) sT + ОјПҒ (3.23) from which we immediately get Z = ПҒ2 sT + ОјПҒ вҲј ПҒ Ој вҲ’ sT Ој2 + (sT)2 Ој3ПҒ + ... (3.24) as expected for a normal fluid. Returning to (3.22), we treat sT as an expansion parameter. To clean up our expressions, we define A = Ој a(0) ЛҶx aЛҶx At , and our expansion reads A = A0 + (sT)A1 + (sT)2A2 + ... (3.25) Notably, r2вҲ’d dA dr пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ rвҶ’0+ = ПҒ Ој вҲ’ Z. (3.26) We can then find ПҒn from (3.16). In this expansion, we must be careful to distinguish between explicit temperature depen- dence in sT and implicit dependence in the background metric and matter functions. We start by writing the expansion in terms of the finite temperature background metric and matter field. вҖ“ 17 вҖ“ The functions Ai can be found in terms of the lower order functions A(iвҲ’1), пҝҪ Cd/2вҲ’1 пҝҪ D B A2 t AвҖІ i пҝҪвҖІ = пҝҪпҝҪ D C AiвҲ’1 вҲ’ Cd/2вҲ’1 пҝҪ D B At R AвҖІ iвҲ’1 пҝҪвҖІ + 2q2О·2CdвҲ’1A2 t R2 AвҖІ iвҲ’1 пҝҪ . (3.27) The first few terms are A0 = 1 A1 = пҝҪ r 0 вҲҡ BD Cd/2A2 t drвҖІ A2 = пҝҪ r 0 вҲҡ BD Cd/2A2 t drвҖІ пҝҪ rвҖІ 0 вҲҡ BD Cd/2A2 t d Мғr вҲ’ пҝҪ r 0 вҲҡ BD Cd/2A3 t RdrвҖІ вҲ’ пҝҪ r 0 пҝҪ B D 1 Cd/2вҲ’1A2 t drвҖІ пҝҪ rh rвҖІ 2q2О·2вҲҡ BDCd/2вҲ’1 R2 d Мғr . (3.28) In writing this solution, we have fixed that aЛҶx = a(0) ЛҶx at the UV boundary always. Notably, because At вүғ Ah(rh вҲ’ r) + O пҝҪ (rh вҲ’ r)2пҝҪ , the integrals diverge as r вҶ’ rh. Nevertheless, because limrвҶ’rh aЛҶx is finite, limrвҶ’rh AtA cannot diverge. It is easily seen that lim rвҶ’rh AtA0 = 0, lim rвҶ’rh AtA1 = 1 ПҒin . (3.29) For A2, the first and second terms in (3.28) seem to diverge as AвҲ’2 t . However, the first term is lim rвҶ’rh пҝҪ r 0 вҲҡ BD Cd/2A2 t drвҖІ пҝҪ rвҖІ 0 вҲҡ BD Cd/2A2 t d Мғr вүҲ вҲ’ пҝҪ rh вҲҡ BD Cd/2A3 t ПҒin drвҖІ + ... (3.30) so that the potential divergences cancel against each other. The remaining terms diverge no faster than AвҲ’1 t so that limrвҶ’rh AtA2 is finite. As we stated earlier, our expansion contains explicit temperature dependence in the form of sT as well as implicit temperature dependence from the metric and matter fields. If our expansion is well-behaved, then the implicit temperature dependence should be subleading to the explicit dependence. In particular, to leading order in the temperature, the explicit dependence is dominant when the metric and matter fields appearing in Ai can be approx- imated by their zero temperature limit. Here we run into an issue. Noting that T вҶ’ 0 is rh вҶ’ вҲһ, we find that the term arising from the condensate behaves as lim rhвҶ’вҲһ пҝҪ rh 0 0 вҲҡB0D0Cd/2вҲ’1 0 R2 0 drвҖІ вҲј 2q2О·2 h ПҒ2 in(rh)rвҲ’zвҲ’d+2 h . (3.31) Recalling the behavior of ПҒin in (2.28) and (2.29), we find that for z < d + 2, the integral diverges as rh вҶ’ вҲһ. This indicates that our expansion breaks down as T вҶ’ 0. We thus need to distinguish between two cases, z < d + 2 and z > d + 2. вҖ“ 18 вҖ“ Vanishing ПҒ(0) n For z < d + 2, the integral (3.31) diverges and contributes to the low temperature expansion at subleading order to (sT)2. We now extract the precise temperature dependence and the associated prefactor. In the integral (3.31), we unfortunately cannot simply replace the metric and matter fields with their zero temperature limits. This is because the finite temperature versions of the zero temperature AdS (2.7) and Lifshitz (2.12) metrics cannot be found in closed form. While simply substituting the zero temperature forms of the background fields in the integrand and introducing temperature through the upper bound rh would get the correct scaling with T, the prefactor would not be reliable. Nevertheless, we can still evaluate the integral in the following way. Let us first note that пҝҪ rh 0 d Мғr2q2О·2вҲҡ BDCd/2вҲ’1 R2 = пҝҪ rh 0 d Мғr пҝҪ вҲ’ пҝҪ D CR пҝҪвҖІ 1 At + 1 RAt пҝҪD C пҝҪвҖІпҝҪ (3.32) The last term in the integral is пҝҪ rh 0 d Мғr 1 RAt пҝҪD C пҝҪвҖІ = пҝҪ rh 0 d Мғr вҲҡ BD Cd/2+1 + (sT) пҝҪ rh 0 d Мғr BD Cd+1AвҖІ tAt (3.33) In the limit rh вҶ’ вҲһ, we show in Appendix B that the first term gives пҝҪ rh 0 d Мғr вҲҡ BD Cd/2+1 = c2 ir sT + ... (3.34) where the ... indicate subleading terms and where we have defined c2 ir = L2 t L2x пҝҪrh L пҝҪ2вҲ’2z вҲј T 2вҲ’2/z. (3.35) To leading order, the second piece gives (sT) пҝҪ rh 0 d Мғr BD Cd+1AвҖІ tAt вҲј sT ChПҒ2 in + ... (3.36) Returning to the first term in (3.32), the leading order temperature dependence is пҝҪ rh 0 d Мғr пҝҪ D CR пҝҪвҖІ 1 At вҲј вҲ’ sT ChПҒ2 in + ... (3.37) which cancels (3.36). Thus, the temperature dependence left after this cancelation is sub- leading to (3.34) so that lim rhвү«L пҝҪ rh 0 d Мғr2q2О·2вҲҡ BDCd/2вҲ’1 R2 вүҲ c2 ir sT + ... (3.38) вҖ“ 19 вҖ“ for z < d + 2. From (3.35), c2 ir вҲј T 2вҲ’2/z. This is more relevant than sT вҲј T 1+ d z for this range of z and hence must be considered before subleading sT terms. Then, (3.26) leads to Z вҲ’ ПҒ Ој = вҲ’sT Ој2 (1 вҲ’ c2 ir) + ... (3.39) Using (3.16), we find that the leading temperature dependence is ПҒn = sT Ој 1 вҲ’ c2 ir c2 ir + ... (3.40) where cir can be temperature dependent as indicated in (3.35). This result is exactly the same as found using the EFT for relativistic superfluids at low temperatures . Here, we see that it also holds when 1 < z < d + 2, away from the relativistic limit z = 1. If we attempt to use this expression for z > d + 2, something bizarre seems to occur. Including the explicit temperature dependence of cir, ПҒn вҲј T d+2 z вҲ’1 naively diverges for z > d + 2. However, for this range of exponents c2 ir is now less relevant than sT. Instead of ПҒn vanishing as T вҶ’ 0, we find a finite limit, as we shall now explain. Non-vanishing ПҒ(0) n For z > d + 2, all the integrals in (3.28) converge so that the expansion (3.25) is well-defined. Then, combining with (3.26), we find Z вҲ’ ПҒ Ој = вҲ’sT Ој2 + (sT)2 Ој3ПҒ(0) n + ... (3.41) where ПҒ(0) n = ПҒ(0) Г— пҝҪ 1 + ОјПҒ(0) пҝҪ вҲһ 0 2q2О·2вҲҡB0D0Cd/2вҲ’1 0 R2 0 drвҖІ пҝҪвҲ’1 . (3.42) The functions appearing in the integral are the zero-temperature functions of (2.12). From (3.42), we conclude that for z > d + 2, ПҒn does not vanish at T = 0, in stark constrast to z < d + 2. The subleading temperature dependence to the leading non-vanishing constant arises from the same integral with a finite upper bound of rh or from explicit sT dependence. We write this schematically as ПҒn вҲј ПҒ(0) n + #T zвҲ’dвҲ’2 z + #T d+z z + ... (3.43) For the examples in the main text, the first subleading temperature is always dominant. On the other hand, in Appendix F we give an example where this integral has a temperature scaling subleading to the sT. вҖ“ 20 вҖ“ Competing broken symmetries The criteria z > d + 2 for ПҒ(0) n Мё= 0 can be considered to arise from a competition between sT and c2 ir. These quantities naturally arise in other transport observables, specifically the low- energy sound and diffusion modes, which we discuss in . We have seen that the convergence of limTвҶ’0 sT/c2 ir gives ПҒ(0) n = 0 and its divergence signals ПҒ(0) n Мё= 0. Unfortunately, this is not a sufficient condition. Instead, the necessary and sufficient condition for the existence of a non-zero ПҒ(0) n is the convergence of the integral lim rhвҶ’вҲһ пҝҪ rh 0 0 вҲҡB0D0Cd/2вҲ’1 0 R2 0 drвҖІ , (3.44) which appeared in our low temperature expansion, see (3.28) and (3.30). When this diverges, ПҒ(0) n = 0, and when it converges, ПҒ(0) n Мё= 0. We can unpack the integral a little by looking at the fluctuation equation 1 Cd/2вҲ’1 d dr пҝҪ Cd/2вҲ’1 пҝҪ D B aвҖІ ЛҶx пҝҪ вҲ’ пҝҪ B D пҝҪ 2q2DО·2 + (AвҖІ t)2 B пҝҪ aЛҶx = 0. (3.45) Here, we see that there are two mass-like terms. The first arises from the breaking of the U(1) symmetry and a non-trivial condensate О·. The second arises from the non-zero density ПҒ. The ratio of the two terms is 2q2BDО·2 (AвҖІ t)2 = C1+d/2 вҲҡ BD Г— пҝҪ 2q2О·2вҲҡ BDCd/2вҲ’1 R2 пҝҪ (3.46) In terms of the zero temperature fields, we write 0 (AвҖІ t,0)2 |r=rh вҲј пҝҪ ЛҶrh L пҝҪОұ (3.47) we must have Оұ вҲ’ z + d + 2 < 0 (3.48) for the integral to converge and ПҒ(0) n Мё= 0. If this criteria is not met, then ПҒ(0) n = 0. We note that Оұ = d + 1 вҲ’ 2 МғвҲҶA0 for conformal phases and Оұ = 0 for Lifshitz phases so that this reproduces our earlier results. In Appendix F, we will show that modified superfluid actions can give non-trivial Оұ which in turn give rise to ПҒ(0) n Мё= 0 for spacetimes with any z by guaranteeing the convergence of (3.44) and vice-versa. 4 Numerical examples To demonstrate our results, we choose a specific scalar potential following in d = 2 and set L = 1, V (|О·|) = вҲ’6 вҲ’ 2О·вҲ—О· + g2 О·(О·вҲ—О·)2 (4.1) вҖ“ 21 вҖ“ в—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ 0.01 0.05 0.5 10-9 10-7 10-5 T/Ој Пғ0 в—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ 0.01 0.05 0.5 10-7 10-5 T/Ој ПҒin Ој2 в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ 0.01 0.05 0.5 10-9 10-6 1 T/Ој ПҒn Ој2 where gО· = 3/2. We must solve for q, О·0, МғL for a given value of z. For z = 1, we chose q = 2. We show results for z = 1 in figure 1, z = 2 in figure 2, z = 12 in figure 3, and z вҶ’ вҲһ in figure 4. In these plots, numerical results are plotted in open circles wheras solid lines denote fits to the appropriate temperature scaling. в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ 10-7 10-5 10-8 10-5 0.01 10 T/Ој Пғ0 в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ 10-7 10-6 10-5 10-5 10-4 T/Ој ПҒin Ој2 в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ 10-6 10-5 10-4 T/Ој ПҒn Ој2 To accurately compute ПҒn for z > 1, we needed to use very high precision numerics. We used a Newton-Raphson method with double floating point precision and up to N = 1000 points. Even with this level of precision, it was difficult to observe strong ПҒn вҲј T behav- ior for z = 2 since the a large region of the IR is well-approximated by (2.12) only below (T/Ој) вҲј 10вҲ’6. In figure 2, we fit to ПҒn вҲј b1T пҝҪ 1 + b2T ОҪ+ О· /2 + b3T ОҪвҲ’ О· /2пҝҪ for constants b1, b2, b3 and ОҪВұ О· = ОҪО·(вҲ’1, Вұ1). In order to clearly observe a single temperature scaling, we can also break translation invariance by adding an extra term to the action as was done in . Then extracting ПҒn requires lower precision and we can reach lower temperatures, allowing us to further confirm that to leading order ПҒn вҲј #T. We discuss this in detail in Appendix D. вҖ“ 22 вҖ“ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ 10-5 10-4 10-8 10-6 10-4 T/Ој Пғ0 в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ T/Ој ПҒin Ој2 в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ 0.01 T/Ој (ПҒn-ПҒn (0)) / Ој2 ПҒin ПҒT ПҒn ПҒT 0. 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 T/Ој n + #T 2/3 As we mentioned earlier, the z вҶ’ вҲһ case requires a slightly modified action, the details of which we relegate to Appendix E. In the notation of this Appendix, we choose a = 2 for the plot in figure 4 that shows an example with z вҶ’ +вҲһ. For this choice of the parameter a, we find an irrelevant deformation with МғОҪО· = вҲ’1 and that other choices of a lead to МғОҪО· Мё= вҲ’1. Nevertheless, for any choice of a, we find that ПҒnвҲ’ПҒ(0) n is always linear for phases with z вҶ’ вҲһ. Other cases will be discussed further in Appendix E. 5 Connection to previous literature In this work, we discuss transport in clean, quantum critical, holographic superfluids. Our main object of interest is the normal charge density which controls dissipative transport. In these systems, we establish the criteria for limTвҶ’0 ПҒn Мё= 0. Our conclusion is that this is pos- sible for quantum critical systems described by Lifshitz symmetries with dynamical critical exponent z > d + 2. In Appendix C, we generalize this to systems that exhibit hyperscaling and find new criteria which depend on the spectrum of irrelevant deformations. With this result, we are able to explain some previously mysterious results in the holo- graphic literature. The first result is from who looked at various sound modes in a system вҖ“ 23 вҖ“ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ 10-5 10-4 10-8 10-5 0.01 T/Ој Пғ0 в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұ 10-5 10-4 T/Ој (ПҒin-ПҒin в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұ 0.01 0.05 T/Ој (ПҒn-ПҒn ПҒin ПҒT ПҒn ПҒT 0.22 0.24 0.26 0.28 0.30 0.32 0.34 T/Ој in + #T, ПҒn вҲј ПҒ(0) n + #T with action 2.1 in d = 3. The superfluid second sound is given by c2 2 = пҝҪs ПҒ пҝҪ2 ПҒs вүғ пЈұ пЈІ пЈі z 3c2 ir z < d + 2, z 3 ПҒ(0) s ПҒ(0) sT ОјПҒ(0) n z > d + 2. (5.1) while the fourth sound is given by c2 4 = ПҒs Ој пҝҪ вҲӮПҒ вҲӮОј пҝҪ s вүғ 1 3 пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ ПҒn ПҒ пҝҪ . (5.2) In both equations above, we obtain the last relation by substituting the scalings following from the critical scaling of the holographic groundstate, allowing for z вүҘ 1. In figure 2 of their paper, for large enough q, c2 2 вҶ’ 1 3. On the other hand, for sufficiently small q, c2 вҶ’ 0. As we have seen, for large q, МғвҲҶA0 is sufficiently negative to allow for an emergent z = 1 IR geometry. Hence, limTвҶ’0 cir is a constant in this limit. On the other hand, for small q, the system flows to a geometry with z > 1 which has limTвҶ’0 cir = 0. In figure 3, the behavior of c4 mirrors this analysis. For sufficiently small q, c2 4 Мё= 1 3 indicating ПҒ(0) n Мё= 0. It is interesting to look at the upper right panel of figure 2 and the right panel of figure 3 for q = 1 and q = 2. The first of these has z = 18.3 while the second has z = 1.22. Both are Lifshitz phases so that limTвҶ’0 c2 = 0. However, for q = 1, z > 5 so we expect ПҒ(0) n Мё= 0 and c2 4 Мё= 1 3. This is вҖ“ 24 вҖ“ exactly what we see. In , the authors considered the holographic superconductor of Hartnoll, Herzog, and Horowitz . Importantly, the IR of this system is not quantum critical. Nevertheless, our analysis can explain their results as well. For q2 > |m2|/6, the authors of found that in the IR, ds2 = вҲ’L2 t пҝҪL ЛҶr пҝҪ2 dt2 + МғL2 dЛҶr2 ЛҶr2(ln[ЛҶr/L]) + L2 x пҝҪL ЛҶr пҝҪ2 dвғ—x2 (5.3) and О· = О·0 пҝҪ ln пҝҪ ЛҶr L пҝҪпҝҪ1/2 , At = A(0) t пҝҪ ЛҶr L пҝҪвҲ’ОІ пҝҪ ln пҝҪ ЛҶr L пҝҪпҝҪ1/2 , ОІ = 1 2 + 1 2 пҝҪ 1 + 48q2 |m2|. (5.4) From this scaling, we find 2q2BDО·2 (AвҖІ t)2 вҲј # пҝҪ ЛҶr L пҝҪОұ Г— пҝҪ ln пҝҪ ЛҶr L пҝҪпҝҪвҲ’1 , Оұ = вҲ’3 + пҝҪ 1 + 48q2 |m2| > 0. (5.5) and lim rвҶ’вҲһ вҲҡ BD C2 вҲј # пҝҪ ЛҶr L пҝҪ2 Г— пҝҪ ln пҝҪ ЛҶr L пҝҪпҝҪвҲ’1/2 . (5.6) Hence, the integral (3.44) will diverge and ПҒ(0) n = 0. This solution has a finite cir and we expect ПҒn = 1вҲ’cir2 c2 ir sT. We checked numerically, using (3.16), that this is true for q = 1, extending the results of . On the other hand, also considered backgrounds with a finite superfluid current. They observed that ПҒ(0) n = 0 for any value of the superfluid current (below the Landau critical velocity at which superfluid disappears), and q > 1 in d = 2. However, for q = 1, the authors found that ПҒ(0) n does not vanish, at least for the superfluid velocities they considered. We have checked that in this case, the ground state is not well-described by (5.3), but we leave the full analysis for this case to later work. In , superfluid flows in a top-down Type IIb embedding were considered and similar results obtained: above a certain value of the superfluid velocity, the infrared geometry ceases to be another copy of Anti de Sitter spacetime. It would be interesting to further study these systems and determine the relation, if any, to the formation of Bogoliubov Fermi surfaces in weakly-coupled superfluids at large superfluid velocities, . вҖ“ 25 вҖ“ 6 Discussion From a physical perspective, our criteria points to an interesting competition between two competing phenomena at low energiesвҖ“the spontaneous breaking of the U(1) associated with superfluidity and the breaking of charge-conjugation symmetry that gives rise to a finite charge density. Both effects contribute to a zero frequency pole in the imaginary part of the optical conductivity. When the effects of spontaneous symmetry breaking are weaker than the charge-conjugation symmetry breaking, ПҒ(0) n Мё= 0. Otherwise, ПҒ(0) n vanishes. For holographic superfluids, the degree to which spontaneous symmetry breaking must be weaker is estab- lished by the convergence of an integral in the deep IR of the spacetime. Nevertheless, we can understand a strong charge-conjugation symmetry breaking as indicating strong charge renormalization effects. Our work suggest that it may not be suprising to see ПҒ(0) n = 0 in systems like 4He and in BCS superconductors which are considered weakly interacting. On the other hand, in systems which exhibit strong electron interactions, our work suggests that it is possible for ПҒ(0) n Мё= 0. The relevance of this property to recent experiments on cuprate high Tc superconductors was discussed in . The normal density is the relevant quantity to discuss dissipative effects at low energies and low temperatures. In this work, we demonstrate that in this limit, its behavior depends only on properties of the underlying quantum critical groundstate and the spectrum of irrele- vant deformations. Much of the literature to date has worked explicitly with z = 1 phases and assumed that the low temperature spectrum is dominated by linearly dispersing superfluid phonons . With this starting point, the result ПҒn вүғ sT/c2 ir is easily obtained. On the other hand, the results of this work suggest that, at least for Lifshitz theories with z > d + 2, we must include other low energy contributions. Fortunately, given the universal dependence on the underlying quantum critical phase, it seems possible that quantum critical superfluids are amenable to an effective field theory treatment in the vein of . In par- ticular, for Lifshitz phases, we expect at sufficiently low temperatures the linear dispersion is modified to Пү вҲј kz. Hence, higher order derivative contributions must be included in a quantum effective action treatment analogous to as well as a modified equation of state. We are currently at work on including these terms. An interesting question to ponder is whether our results could be an artifact of the large N limit which underlies the gauge/gravity duality, especially when taking the zero temper- ature limit. Unfortunately, a precise answer would require a detailed account of finite N corrections, which is difficult. However, it is straightforward to observe that the normal den- sity in (1.2), which we have shown holds also for Lifshitz-invariant fixed points, diverges when z > d + 2. Clearly, we expect that the assumptions underlying the superfluid EFT, i.e. that the zero temperature groundstate can be treated as a gas of superfluid phonons, must break down. A possible resolution, as we argue here, is that new degrees of freedom must be taken into account, leading to a non-vanishing normal density. вҖ“ 26 вҖ“ The careful reader might be concerned that, even in the strict large N limit, since we are extracting the normal and superfluid densities by taking a very low temperature limit instead of working at exactly T = 0, some dramatic drop of the normal density could occur such that ПҒ(0) n would be exactly zero at T = 0 for all cases. Investigating T = 0 geometries presents challenges, as it is in general difficult to numerically ascertain that the solution is at zero temperature, rather than simply being probed in the region of spacetime where temperature effects are negligible. Spacetimes where an AdS2Г—R2 factor arises in the IR behave more nicely, as the timelike Killing vector has double zero and the extremal horizon remains finite. This double zero can be analytically implemented using pseudospectral methods. We con- struct such flows in appendix E.1 and demonstrate that the zero temperature values for the normal and superfluid densities agree with the values inferred by taking the low temperature limit. Another interesting aspect of holographic superfluids is that, for Lifshitz-invariant fixed points, the superfluid phase itself is critical, while conventional condensed matter treatments usually find that quantum criticality is hidden by a non-critical superfluid phase. For the IR geometries with emergent conformal invariance, as well as the scale-covariant, hyperscaling- violating geometries studied in and in appendix C, the superfluid condensate acts instead as an irrelevant deformation of the underlying quantum critical, normal phase. Hence, as we have described in some detail, the scaling of a number of thermodynamic or transport observables remains controlled by the normal phase. On the other hand, there also exist crit- ical superfluid phases where the superfluid condensate strongly deforms the normal phase, examples of which can be found in . It is worth contrasting our results with those obtained in a qualitatively different large N limit, where the effects of a gapless boson (a proxy for critical order parameter fluctuations) on a Fermi surface are investigated, [65вҖ“68]. There, the fermions transform in the fundamen- tal representation of some internal flavor symmetry group SU(N) while the bosons transform in the adjoint. N is taken to be very large, together with Оө вүӘ 1 where Оө = 3 вҲ’ d. What these authors find is that for sufficiently large NОө, naked metallic quantum critical points with finite BCS couplings appear in the phase diagram, but Tc = 0 and there is no finite condensate. Instead, for smaller values of NОө, the BCS couplings diverge in the IR, triggering a BCS instability which hides the quantum critical point under a superconducting dome, as in more conventional scenarios. By contrast, in the scale-covariant geometries studied in and in appendix C, there is a nonzero Tc with a finite condensate. This condensate only sources an irrelevant deformation of the IR geometry, which retains the same scaling properties as the underlying normal phase вҖ“ and hence is not a naked metallic quantum critical point in the sense of [65вҖ“68]. As we have described in some detail, the scaling of a number of thermodynamic or transport observables вҖ“ 27 вҖ“ in the superfluid phase remain controlled by the normal phase. On the other hand, there also exist critical superfluid IR geometries where the superfluid condensate strongly deforms the normal phase, examples of which can be found in . These geometries all have in common that they are supported by a logarithmically running scalar in the IR. In the very deep IR, quantum or stringy corrections are expected to become important and can lead to a different fixed point, see eg . However, we should re-emphasize that our result on the non-vanishing of the normal density at zero temperature also applies to scale-invariant Lifshitz fixed points, which do not suffer from such instabilities.5 Acknowledgments We would like to thank Elias Kiritsis for helpful discussions. In addition, we would like to thank Tomas Andrade and Richard Davison for initial collaboration at an early stage of this project. This work was supported by the European Research Council (ERC) under the European UnionвҖҷs Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement 5The Lifshitz metric does sport a null singularity, which was argued in to lead to uncontrolled prolifer- ation of test strings. It was later shown in that scattering of these strings with the matter supporting the Lifshitz metric slows down their proliferation, this circumventing the divergent tidal forces in . вҖ“ 28 вҖ“ A Landau-Tisza hydrodynamics In , we cover relativistic two-fluid hydrodynamics in detail. To keep the discussion self- contained, we reproduce that discussion here. A.1 Conservation equations and constitutive relations for small superfluid ve- locities We follow to study linear response in conformal, relativistic superfluid hydrody- namics. Compared to the usual relativistic hydrodynamics, the U(1) symmetry is spon- taneously broken, which we model by explicitly introducing the resulting Goldstone boson ОҫОј вүЎ вҲӮОјПҶвҲ’AОј. This expression is gauge invariant, though for simplicity we will fix a gauge in which AОј = 0. In equilibrium, ОҫОј acquires a constant value, which can be large and is related to the superfluid velocity. It should be counted at zeroth order in the gradient expansion. The authors of work in the simplifying limit where the gradient of the Goldstone boson is small, which is justified by the presence of instabilities in superfluid flows with large velocities. To first order in the gradient expansion, the constitutive relations of the superfluid are ОјОҪ JОј = ПҒuОј + О¶ПҒsnОј вҲ’ Пғ0TP ОјОҪвҲӮОҪ пҝҪ Ој T пҝҪ uОјОҫОј = вҲ’Ој + О¶3вҲӮОҪ (ПҒsvОҪ) (A.1) Here О¶ = Ојs/Ој is the superfluid fraction. The last equation is the Josephson condition for the superfluid. uОј is the velocity of the normal fluid, while vОј is the superfluid velocity defined by ОјsnОј = P ОҪ ОјОҫОҪ , P ОјОҪ = О·ОјОҪ + uОјuОҪ (A.2) From this definition, О¶nОј = ОҫОј Ој вҲ’ uОј. Writing things in terms of ОҫОј and uОј, we find TОјОҪ = (Оө вҲ’ ОјПҒs + P) uОјuОҪ + PО·ОјОҪ + ПҒs Ој ОҫОјОҫОҪ вҲ’ О·ПғОјОҪ вҲ’ О·sПғs ОјОҪ (A.3) JОј = ПҒnuОј + ПҒs Ој ОҫОј вҲ’ Пғ0TP ОјОҪвҲӮОҪ пҝҪ Ој T пҝҪ (A.4) so that the superfluid fraction drops out of the equations. The thermodynamic quantities obey the Smarr relation Оө + P = sT + ОјПҒ , ПҒ = ПҒn + ПҒs , (A.5) where ПҒ is the total charge density, as well as the first law dP = sdT + ПҒdОј вҲ’ ПҒs 2Ојd пҝҪ ОҫОҪОҫОҪ + Ој2пҝҪ (A.6) вҖ“ 29 вҖ“ This means that contrarily to the usual hydrodynamics of normal fluids, the thermodynamic quantities like the pressure are functions of say Ој and T, but also of ОҫiОҫi, the spatial superfluid velocity squared. However, working in the limit of small superfluid velocities, we can rewrite dОј = вҲ’s ПҒdT + dP ПҒ вҲ’ ПҒs ОјПҒОҫidОҫi (A.7) which shows that Ој(P, T, |Оҫi|) = Ој(P, T) вҲ’ ПҒs 2ОјПҒОҫiОҫi + . . . (A.8) We see that in this limit Ој(P, T, |Оҫi|) is the usual chemical potential up to terms quadratic in the superfluid velocity. By differentiating with respect to temperature and pressure, the entropy and the density are obtained as: s(P, T, |Оҫi|) = s(P, T) + ПҒОҫiОҫiвҲӮT пҝҪ ПҒs 2ОјПҒ пҝҪ + . . . (A.9) ПҒ(P, T, |Оҫi|) = ПҒ(P, T) + ПҒ2ОҫiОҫiвҲӮP пҝҪ ПҒs 2ОјПҒ пҝҪ + . . . (A.10) When substituting in the constitutive relations, we neglect terms cubic in |Оҫi|. As we are ultimately interested in linear response, our task is even more simple: terms quadratic in |Оҫi| make no contributions to the linearized equations, so we can drop all the quadratic corrections to the thermodynamic quantities. There will be non-zero contributions to Ji and T 0i, though. Imposing positivity of the divergence of the entropy current JОј s = suОј + ОјПғ0вҲӮОј(Ој/T) together with conformal invariance implies О·s = 0. A.2 Linear response a la Kadanoff-Martin Starting in the rest frame of the fluid with no background superfluid velocity, we linearize around equilibrium T(t, xi) = T + ОҙT , Ој(t, xi) = Ој + ОҙОј , uОј = (1, Оҙui) , nОј = О¶вҲ’1(0, Оҫi/Ој вҲ’ Оҙui) (A.11) and write the corresponding linearized expressions for the stress-tensor and current ОҙT 00 = ОҙОө ОҙT 0i = (ОјПҒn + sT)Оҙui + ПҒsОҫi ОҙT ij = пҝҪ ОҙP + О·вҲӮkОҙukпҝҪ Оҙij вҲ’ 2О·вҲӮ(iОҙuj) ОҙJ0 = ОҙПҒ ОҙJi = ПҒnОҙui + ПҒs Ој Оҫi вҲ’ Пғ0 пҝҪ вҲӮiОј вҲ’ Ој T вҲӮiT пҝҪ Оҫ0 = вҲ’Ој + О¶3ПҒs пҝҪвҲӮiОҫi Ој вҲ’ вҲӮiui пҝҪ (A.12) вҖ“ 30 вҖ“ We can now write linearized equations for the longitudinal fluctuation of conserved charges (ОҙОө, ПҖx = ОҙT 0x, ОҙПҒ, Оҫx) choosing a wavector in the ЛҶx-direction k = (k, 0): вҲ’ iПүОҙОө + ikПҖx = 0 вҲ’ iПүПҖx + ik (ОІ1ОҙОө + ОІ2ОҙПҒ) + О· hk2ПҖx вҲ’ k2 ПҒs h О· Оҫx = 0 вҲ’ iПүОҙПҒ + ikПҒn h ПҖx + Пғ0k2 (Оұ1ОҙОө + Оұ2ОҙПҒ) + ikПҒssT Ојh Оҫx = 0 ОҙОҫ0 + вҲӮОј вҲӮОө пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ ПҒ ОҙОө + вҲӮОј вҲӮПҒ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ Оө ОҙПҒ вҲ’ ikПҒs h О¶3ОҙПҖx + ikh + ОјПҒs Ојh ПҒsО¶3Оҫx = 0 (A.13) where h = ОјПҒn + sT and Оұ1 = пҝҪвҲӮОј вҲӮОө пҝҪ ПҒ вҲ’ Ој T пҝҪвҲӮT вҲӮОө пҝҪ ПҒ , Оұ2 = пҝҪвҲӮОј вҲӮПҒ пҝҪ Оө вҲ’ Ој T пҝҪвҲӮT вҲӮПҒ пҝҪ Оө ОІ1 = пҝҪвҲӮp вҲӮОө пҝҪ ПҒ , ОІ2 = пҝҪвҲӮp вҲӮПҒ пҝҪ Оө (A.14) We note that with no background field strength, вҲӮОјОҫОҪ = вҲ’вҲӮОҪОҫОј using commutivity of the partial trace. Using Оҫx = Ој(nx + Оҙux) , ПҖx = (h + ОјПҒs)Оҙux + ОјПҒsnx (A.15) The matrix of static susceptibilities is is ПҮ = пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈӯ T пҝҪ вҲӮОө вҲӮT пҝҪ Ој/T 0 пҝҪ вҲӮОө вҲӮОј пҝҪ T 0 0 w 0 Ој T пҝҪ вҲӮПҒ вҲӮT пҝҪ Ој/T 0 пҝҪ вҲӮПҒ вҲӮОј пҝҪ T 0 0 Ој 0 Ој ПҒs пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈё (A.16) T ]) as per usual. The susceptibility matrix is consistent with the following source for the Goldstone: sОҫ = ПҒsn (A.17) and comes from the following Hamiltonian deformation ОҙHAt = вҲ’ пҝҪ d3x ПҒsn В· Оҫ(x, t) = вҲ’ пҝҪ d3x n В· ПҖОҫ(x, t) (A.18) вҖ“ 31 вҖ“ with ПҖ = МғПҖ + ПҖОҫ , ПҖОҫ = ПҒsОҫ (A.19) so that ПҖОҫ is the momentum along the superfluid. As expected, the susceptibility matrix is symmetric (Onsager relations). This can be shown using the first law of thermodynamics in the grand-canonical ensemble. We can also derive the following relations ОІ1ПҮ11 + ОІ2ПҮ31 = w , ОІ1ПҮ13 + ОІ2ПҮ33 = ПҒ Оұ1ПҮ11 + Оұ2ПҮ31 = 0 , Оұ1ПҮ13 + Оұ2ПҮ33 = 1 вҲӮОј вҲӮОө пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ ПҒ ПҮ13 + вҲӮОј вҲӮПҒ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ Оө ПҮ33 = 1 (A.20) If we make use of conformal symmetry (which means that for instance p = T 3f(Ој/T)), we can further obtain ПҮ11 = 2w , ПҮ31 = ПҮ13 = 2ПҒ , ОІ1 = 1 2 , ОІ2 = 0 Оұ1 = ПҒ 2ПҒ2 вҲ’ wПҮ33 , Оұ2 = вҲ’w 2ПҒ2 вҲ’ wПҮ33 вҲӮОј вҲӮОө пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ ПҒ = 1 2 2ПҒ вҲ’ ОјПҮ33 2ПҒ2 вҲ’ wПҮ33 , вҲӮОј вҲӮПҒ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ Оө = вҲ’sT 2ПҒ2 вҲ’ wПҮ33 (A.21) This can be obtained by manipulations involving the Jacobian. For instance, if we define вҲӮ(X, Y ) вҲӮ(U, V ) = пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ вҲӮX вҲӮU пҝҪ V пҝҪ вҲӮX вҲӮV пҝҪ U пҝҪ вҲӮY вҲӮU пҝҪ V пҝҪ вҲӮY вҲӮV пҝҪ U пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ (A.22) then we have вҲӮ(X, Y ) вҲӮ(S, T) = вҲӮ(X, Y ) вҲӮ(U, V ) вҲӮ(U, V ) вҲӮ(S, T) , вҲӮ(X, Y ) вҲӮ(S, T) = вҲ’вҲӮ(Y, X) вҲӮ(S, T) (A.23) and also пҝҪвҲӮ(X, Y ) вҲӮ(S, T) пҝҪвҲ’1 = вҲӮ(S, T) вҲӮ(X, Y ) , вҲӮ(X, Y ) вҲӮ(U, Y ) = вҲӮX вҲӮU пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ Y (A.24) We can now obtain the retarded GreenвҖҷs functions following the method of Kadanoff and Martin, . We will denote by вҹЁAB(Пү, k)вҹ© = GR AB(Пү, k) вҲ’ GR AB(Пү = 0, k) (A.25) вҖ“ 32 вҖ“ the correlator from which the static susceptibility has been subtracted (GR AB(Пү = 0, k) = вҲ’ПҮAB). Then, the thermoelectric conductivities read Пғ = i ПүвҹЁJxJx(Пү, 0)вҹ© = Пғ0 + iПҒ2 n hПү + iПҒs ОјПү (A.26) Оұ = i ПүT пҝҪ вҹЁJxT 0x(Пү, 0)вҹ© вҲ’ ОјвҹЁJxJx(Пү, 0)вҹ© пҝҪ = вҲ’ Ој T Пғ0 + iПҒns hПү (A.27) М„Оә = i ПүT пҝҪ пҝҪ = Ој2 T Пғ0 + is2T hПү (A.28) Note that the delta function due to the presence of a superfluid only appears in the electric conductivity Пғ. Moreover the following Ward identities are obeyed ОұT + ОјПғ вҲ’ iПҒ Пү = 0 , М„Оә + ОјОұ вҲ’ is Пү = 0 (A.29) which take the same form as without a superfluid. B Proof of (3.34) In this Appendix, we prove the equation (3.34), which we recall here for convenience пҝҪ rh 0 вҲҡ BD Cd/2+1 d Мғr вүҲ c2 ir sT + ... (B.1) First, we note that the behavior of (2.12) in the deep IR implies пҝҪ rh 0 вҲҡB0D0 Cd/2+1 0 d Мғr вҲј b пҝҪrh L пҝҪ2+dвҲ’z + ... (B.2) which diverges when z < d + 2 and converges otherwise. Thus, it is only when z < d + 2 that this integral can be reliably approximated using only the near-extremal part of the spacetime. To prove this equation, we must distinguish between when the IR metric is AdS (2.7) with z = 1 and when it is Lifshitz (2.12) with 1 < z < d + 2. This is because of the presence of the irrelevant deformation sourced by the gauge field in the IR AdS case. We first consider z = 1, and follow closely the logic in section III.B.1 of . We rewrite (B.1) using (2.24): пҝҪ rh 0 вҲҡ BD Cd/2+1 d Мғr = вҲ’ пҝҪ rh 0 пҝҪD C пҝҪвҖІ 1 sT + RA = вҲ’ пҝҪD C 1 sT + RA пҝҪrh 0 + пҝҪ rh 0 D C пҝҪ 1 sT + RA пҝҪвҖІ (B.3) вҖ“ 33 вҖ“ can be neglected at low T, as we will shortly see that the second term diverges as T вҶ’ 0. We now restrict the integration domain of the second term to L вүӘ ruv < r < rir вүӘ rh. We will soon fix rir and ruv such that the form of the metric (2.7) and gauge field (2.9) are valid in this region. In this region, we thus have D/C вүғ L2 t /L2 x вүЎ c2 ir and can pull this constant factor out of the integral: пҝҪ rh 0 вҲҡ BD Cd/2+1 d Мғr вүғ c2 ir пҝҪ rir ruv пҝҪ 1 sT + RA пҝҪвҖІ вүғ c2 ir пҝҪ R(ruv)A(ruv) вҲ’ R(rir)A(rir) пҝҪ (B.4) We now define rir = Оөirrh and ruv = L/ОөUV such that given our assumptions the UV and IR cutoffs are very small Оөir, Оөuv вүӘ 1. In the region of integration R(r)A(r) вҲј c2 A(r/L)2 МғвҲҶA0вҲ’dвҲ’1. This leads to RrirA(rir) вүӘ sT вүӘ R(ruv)A(ruv) (B.5) provided c2 AT вҲ’2 МғвҲҶA0 вүӘ Оө d+1вҲ’2 МғвҲҶA0 ir , cвҲ’2 A T d+1 вүӘ Оө d+1вҲ’2 МғвҲҶA0 uv (B.6) which can always be achieved for small enough T, recalling that МғвҲҶA0 < 0. Neglecting sub- leading terms, we then obtain пҝҪ rh 0 вҲҡ BD Cd/2+1 d Мғr вүғ c2 ir sT (B.7) as desired. Ultimately, this derivation is rooted in the fact that there is a non-trivial competition between corrections to the metric (2.7) due to the irrelevant deformation sourced by the gauge field and due to nonzero temperature through the factor sT + R(r)A(r). For Lifshitz solutions with 1 < z < d + 2, the derivation is different, as can be quickly seen by noticing that in this case МғвҲҶA0 = 0 so the condition (B.6) cannot consistently be imposed. On the other hand, contrarily to cases without a condensate, a non-perturbative finite temperature solution cannot be found analytically, so we may not simply evaluate (B.1) on the IR T = 0 metric (2.12), introducing the temperature through the upper bound. More precisely, as can be checked numerically, lim rhвү«L пҝҪ rh 0 вҲҡ BD Cd/2+1 d Мғr Мё= lim rhвү«L пҝҪ rh 0 вҲҡB0D0 Cd/2+1 0 d Мғr вүғ d + z d + 2 вҲ’ z c2 ir sT (B.8) where 0 subscripts indicate we are using the T = 0 IR metric (2.12). вҖ“ 34 вҖ“ Instead, consider integrating (2.24) between r = 0 and r = rh: пҝҪ r 0 AtAвҖІ t C d Мғr = D(r) C(r) вҲ’ 1 + (sT) пҝҪ r 0 вҲҡ BD Cd/2+1 d Мғr (B.9) Evaluating this at r = rh gives пҝҪ rh 0 AtAвҖІ t C d Мғr = вҲ’1 + (sT) пҝҪ rh 0 вҲҡ BD Cd/2+1 d Мғr. (B.10) Now, set T вүӘ 1 in (B.9). Since we want to compare to the zero temperature solutions, we choose a gauge in which r вҶ’ ЛҶr in the IR, so that the horizon is at r = ЛҶrh вү« L. In other words, we identify the zero temperature and finite temperature radial coordinates outside the black hole horizon. When О· Мё= 0 and T вүӘ 1, finite temperature effects are relevant only in a region L вүӘ ЛҶrir < ЛҶr < ЛҶrh where At,0 вҲ’ At вҲј At,0(ЛҶrh).6 We can then write пҝҪ ЛҶrh 0 AtAвҖІ t C d Мғr вҲ’ пҝҪ ЛҶrh 0 At,0AвҖІ t,0 C0 d Мғr = (sT) пҝҪ ЛҶrh 0 вҲҡ BD Cd/2+1 d Мғr вҲ’ c2 ir вүғ пҝҪ ЛҶrh ЛҶrir AtAвҖІ t C d Мғr вҲ’ пҝҪ ЛҶrh ЛҶrir At,0AвҖІ t,0 C0 d Мғr (B.11) which is regular in the limit ЛҶrir вҶ’ ЛҶrh (the integrands on the right are non-divergent as r вҶ’ ЛҶrh). To fully justify the approximation in (B.1), we must show that the right hand side of (B.11) vanishes as T вҶ’ 0 fast enough compared to T 2вҲ’ 2 z . In the region ЛҶrir < r < ЛҶrh, we can use the near-horizon expansion of the background fields (B.12) B(r) вүғ 1 4ПҖT(rh вҲ’ r) + B2 + O((rh вҲ’ r)1) (B.13) (B.14) (B.15) Notably, in this gauge, rh вҲј ЛҶrвҲ’z h вҲј T. To justify the use of this expansion in the region rir < r < rh, we must have rir = rh(1вҲ’Оө), 0 < Оө вүӘ 1 with Оө chosen such that we may neglect the subleading terms (A2, B2, C2, D2) in the expansion. In particular, this requires that the contributions from subleading terms must vanish at rir as T вҶ’ 0 parametrically faster than the leading terms. Importantly, plugging the near -horizon expansion (B.12) in the Maxwell equation tells us that F2|r=rir вҲј 2q2О·2 0 Ah 4ПҖT (B.16) 6This is as opposed to geometries with О· = 0 which have At = At,0 вҲ’ At,0(ЛҶrh). вҖ“ 35 вҖ“ where F2 is a linear combination of A2, B2, D2 and C2. In the near horizon gauge, Ah вҲј T 0. Hence, when О· Мё= 0, in order for the contribution from these terms to vanish parametrically quickly in (B.12), we must have Оө вҲј T Оұ for Оұ > 0. Next, in this near horizon region, we can write At,0(r) вүғ At,0(rh) вҲ’ AвҖІ (B.17) and we have AвҖІ t,0(rh) вүҲ вҲ’Ah. This approximation follows from the fact that, once we identify the zero temperature radial coordinate with the finite temperature radial coordinate, then at any radial position outside of the horizon limTвҶ’0 AвҖІ t(r) = AвҖІ t,0(r) since this limit is non- vanishing. Importantly, this is not the case for At, since we are required to have At(rh) = 0 Мё= At,0(rh).7 Hence, for T вүӘ 1, at leading order in the temperature Ah = вҲ’AвҖІ t,0(rh), which is the same approximation we used for ПҒin. Importantly, this tells us that At вүҲ At,0 вҲ’ At,0(rh) (B.18) in the regions rir < r < rh. This justifies our earlier statement that the near horion region can be defined as the location where the finite temperature solution differs from the zero temperature approximately by a constant. Finally, given this approximation, we can write пҝҪ rh rir AtAвҖІ t C d Мғr вҲ’ пҝҪ rh rir At,0AвҖІ t,0 C d Мғr вүҲ At,0(rh) пҝҪ rh rir AвҖІ t,0 Ch вҲј ОөT 2вҲ’2/z. (B.19) where we used Ch вҲј T 2/z and rh вҲј T. Because Оө вҲј T Оұ, the right hand side of (B.11) vanishes parametrically faster than c2 ir вҲј T 2вҲ’2/z as T вҶ’ 0 and we have (B.1).8 C Scale-covariant geometries A more general class of solutions can be described by the action S = пҝҪ dd+2xвҲҡвҲ’g пҝҪ R вҲ’ ZF (ПҲ) 4 FMNF MN вҲ’ MF (ПҲ)|DО·|2 вҲ’ 1 2(вҲҮПҲ)2 вҲ’ V (ПҲ, |О·|) пҝҪ . (C.1) As before, О· is a complex scalar charged under a U(1) gauge field AM. In addition, there is a neutral scalar, the dilaton ПҲ. The main text is a sub-class of this action where we set ПҲ = 0 7In fact, this approximation also implies AвҖІ t(rir) вүҲ AвҖІ t,0(rir) вүҲ AвҖІ t,0(rh). If the near horizon expansion is justifed, then At(rh) вүҲ At(rir) вҲ’ AвҖІ 8For z > d + 2, we know that the left hand side of (B.11) scales as sT. Then, using (B.19), we would find Оө вҲј T вҲ’1+(d+2)/z which diverges as T вҶ’ 0. This divergence indicates a breakdown in the use of the near horizon approximation to evaluate the integral. This is expected, since the integral on the right hand side of (B.10) is only dominated by the IR region for z < d + 2. вҖ“ 36 вҖ“ and ZF (ПҲ) = 1. The equations of motion are: пҝҪ MF пҝҪ DCd B О·вҖІ пҝҪвҖІ + q2MF пҝҪ BCd D A2 t О· вҲ’ вҲҡ BDCd вҲӮV вҲӮО·вҲ— = 0 пҝҪпҝҪ DCd B ПҲвҖІ пҝҪвҖІ + ZвҖІ F (ПҲ) 2 пҝҪ Cd BD(AвҖІ t)2 вҲ’ вҲҡ BDCd вҲӮV вҲӮПҲ + пҝҪ BCd D пҝҪ q2A2 t О·2 вҲ’ D B (О·вҖІ)2 пҝҪ MвҖІ F = 0 пҝҪпҝҪ Cd BDAвҖІ t пҝҪвҖІ вҲ’ 2q2MF пҝҪ BCd D О·2At = 0 d пҝҪпҝҪ Cd BDDвҖІ пҝҪвҖІ + 2 вҲҡ BDCdV вҲ’ (d вҲ’ 1)ZF пҝҪ Cd BD(AвҖІ t)2 вҲ’ 2dq2MF пҝҪ BCd D О·2A2 t = 0 d 2 пҝҪ CвҖІ вҲҡ BDC пҝҪвҖІ + MF пҝҪ C BD(О·вҖІ)2 + 1 2 пҝҪ C BD(ПҲвҖІ)2 + q2MF пҝҪ BC D3 О·2A2 t = 0 2MF (О·вҖІ)2 вҲ’ (ПҲвҖІ)2 вҲ’ d 2 CвҖІ C пҝҪ 2DвҖІ D + (d вҲ’ 1)CвҖІ C пҝҪ вҲ’ ZF D (AвҖІ t)2 вҲ’ 2BV + 2q2MF B DО·2A2 t = 0. (C.2) The conservation equation for the background geometry now reads d dr пҝҪпҝҪ Cd BD пҝҪ C пҝҪD C пҝҪвҖІ вҲ’ ZF (ПҲ)AtAвҖІ t пҝҪпҝҪ = 0 (C.3) In the UV, we are interested in solutions that have an asymptotic form (r вҶ’ 0+), ds2 вҶ’ dr2 вҲ’ dt2 + dвғ—x2 d r2 . (C.4) For simplicity, we will chose a potential that satisfies 2ПҲ2 + ..., ZF = 1 + O(ПҲ2), MF = 1 + O(ПҲ2). (C.5) This choice of potential enforces that the matter fields have an asymptotic fall-off О· вҲј О·(1)r + О·(2)rd + ... ПҲ вҲј ПҲ(1)r + ПҲ(2)rd + ... At вҲј Ој вҲ’ ПҒ (d вҲ’ 1)rdвҲ’1 + ... D вҲј rвҲ’2 вҲ’ пҝҪ О·(1)пҝҪ2 2d вҲ’ Оө d + 1 rdвҲ’1 + ... C вҲј rвҲ’2 вҲ’ пҝҪ О·(1)пҝҪ2 2d + P d + 1 rdвҲ’1 + ... B вҲј rвҲ’2 + ... (C.6) вҖ“ 37 вҖ“ As is well-known, in the conventional quantization scheme, О·(1) and Ој act as sources for the expectation values О·(2) and ПҒ. In particular, the choice Ој Мё= 0 gives rise to a finite charge density and breaks the background charge-conjugation symmetry. With the choice О·(1) = 0, a non-zero О·(2) indicates spontaneous breaking of the U(1) symmetry and characterizes a holographic superfluid. Following the holographic renormalization procedure, we define the counterterm action Sct = 2 пҝҪ вҲӮОЈ вҲҡвҲ’Оі пҝҪ K вҲ’ d вҲ’ 1 2|О·|2 вҲ’ ПҲ2 4 пҝҪ (C.7) so that the full renormalized action is Sren = S + Sct. Here Оіab is the boundary metric along a constant radial hypersurface with unit normal nr = BвҲ’1/2(r). This can be used to find the extrinsic curvature and its trace K = ОіabKab. The full renormalized action allows us to identify Оө and P as the thermodynamic pressure and energy density via the stress tensor Tab = 2 [Kab вҲ’ KОіab вҲ’ dОіab] вҲ’ пҝҪ |О·|2 + ПҲ2 2 пҝҪ Оіab (C.8) Furthermore, the use of the conservation equation (2.3) and the UV asymptotics of the metric and matter fields give the thermodynamic relations Оө + P = sT + ОјПҒ (C.9) where P is the Gibbs potential P = Оө d вҲ’ О·(1)О·(2) вҲ’ ПҲ(1)ПҲ(2) 2 . (C.10) When ПҲ(1) Мё= 0, boundary conformal invariance is broken. On the other hand, when ПҲ(1) = 0 and when the U(1) symmetry is spontaneously broken, as in the main text, the boundary fluid maintains conformal invariance. The derivation of transport coefficients follow the same logic as in the main text, subject to including the new impact of the dilaton. In particular, ПҒin = вҲ’ Cd/2 вҲҡ BD ZF (ПҲ)AвҖІ t пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ r=rh , Пғ0 = (a(0) ЛҶx )2 Ој2 ZhAt,0(rh)2 (C.11) where Zh = ZF [ПҲ(rh)]. The derivation of ПҒn is also similar. The relevant equation of motion is d dr пҝҪ Cd/2вҲ’1 пҝҪ D B ZF A2 t пҝҪ 1 + sT AtR пҝҪ пҝҪaЛҶx At пҝҪвҖІ вҲ’ sT D C пҝҪaЛҶx At пҝҪпҝҪ = (sT)2q2О·2CdвҲ’1MF ZF A2 t R2 пҝҪaЛҶx At пҝҪвҖІ (C.12) вҖ“ 38 вҖ“ where R = вҲ’ Cd/2 вҲҡ BD ZF AвҖІ t . (C.13) From this, we find Z вҲ’ ПҒ Ој = вҲ’sT Ој2 + (sT)2 Ој3ПҒ + (sT)2 Ој2 пҝҪ rh 0 2q2О·2вҲҡ BDMF Cd/2вҲ’1 R2 drвҖІ + ... (C.14) as before. C.1 IR geometries When the scalar ПҲ is non-zero, it will generically have runaway behavior towards the IR. In these cases, we choose the IR behavior of the functions to be V (ПҲ) вҲј V0eвҲ’ОҙПҲ, ZF (ПҲ) вҲј Z0eОіПҲ. (C.15) For now, we set MF = 1. The charged scalar field is chosen to obtain a finite value as the temperature vanishes, О·0. This can be generalized, as in , though for simplicity we will avoid these cases. This choice of potentials leads to an effective action in the IR, SIR = пҝҪ dd+2xвҲҡвҲ’g пҝҪ R вҲ’ 1 2(вҲӮПҲ)2 вҲ’ V0eвҲ’ОҙПҲ вҲ’ Z0 4 eОіПҲF 2 пҝҪ . (C.16) This RG flow will be between a conformally invariant UV and a quantum critical phase with scaling exponents z and Оё which are determined in terms of Оҙ, Оі and the behavior of ПҲ. The behavior of the IR critical phase can be captured by the gravitational metric ds2 = пҝҪ ЛҶr L пҝҪ 2Оё d пҝҪ вҲ’L2z ЛҶr2z fL2 t dt2 + МғL2 dЛҶr2 f ЛҶr2 + L2 ЛҶr2 L2 xdвғ—x2 d пҝҪ , f = 1 вҲ’ пҝҪ ЛҶr ЛҶrh пҝҪd+zвҲ’Оё (C.17) As before, the coordinate ЛҶr is in general distinct from the radial coordinate r which governs the UV. For Оё < d (Оё > d), this metric will accurately capture the IR geometry for ЛҶr вү« L (ЛҶr вүӘ L) and tell us that the UV is at ЛҶr вҶ’ 0 (ЛҶr вҶ’ вҲһ). The entropy and temperature are s = 4ПҖLd x пҝҪ ЛҶrh L пҝҪОёвҲ’d , T = d + z вҲ’ Оё 4ПҖ МғL Lt пҝҪ ЛҶrh L пҝҪвҲ’z (C.18) so that ЛҶrh L = пҝҪ T r0 пҝҪвҲ’ 1 z , s = 4ПҖLd x пҝҪ T r0 пҝҪ dвҲ’Оё z . (C.19) вҖ“ 39 вҖ“ When the scalar ПҲ runs in the IR, the IR exponents are determined as follows, ПҲ = Оә ln пҝҪ ЛҶr L пҝҪ , Оә2 = (d вҲ’ Оё)(2z вҲ’ 2 вҲ’ 2Оё/d), ОәОҙ = 2Оё/d. (C.20) Instead, when the scalar ПҲ vanishes, Оё = 0, as in the main text. Our holographic superfluids can only have z and Оё that satisfy the inequalities d вҲ’ Оё z вүҘ 0, (2 вҲ’ Оё)(2z вҲ’ 2 вҲ’ Оё) вүҘ 0, (z вҲ’ 1)(d + z вҲ’ Оё) вүҘ 0. (C.21) As we will see below, the first inequality is the requirement that the entropy density increase with temperature, i.e. that the system posesses a positive specific heat. The second two in- equalities are imposed by the null energy condition along the radial and transverse directions. C.1.1 Marginal deformations, z Мё= 1 In these solutions, the gauge field A can behave as a marginal or relevant deformation de- pending on the value of z and Оё. If z Мё= 1 and Оё Мё= 0, the gauge field is a marginal deformation that renormalizes parameters in the IR metric but does not change the overall scaling with ЛҶr/L, A = A0Lt пҝҪ ЛҶr L пҝҪОёвҲ’dвҲ’z dt, A2 0 = 2(z вҲ’ 1) Z0[d + z вҲ’ Оё], ОәОі = 2d вҲ’ 2d вҲ’ 1 d Оё, МғL2 = (d + z вҲ’ Оё)(d + z вҲ’ Оё вҲ’ 1) вҲ’V0 . (C.22) There are irrelevant deformations around these solutions , but they only source sub- leading temperature dependencies in the observables we are interested in. These solutions are partially condensed with lim TвҶ’0 ПҒin = (d + z вҲ’ Оё) Ld x L МғL A0 (C.23) The subleading temperature scaling arises from either the integral ПҒin вҲ’ ПҒ(0) in вҲј пҝҪ вҲһ rh dr пҝҪ B0 D0 2q2Cd/2 0 О·2 0At,0 вҲј #T 2 z (dвҲ’Оё) (C.24) or from sT, whichever is least irrelevant. Similarly, for these solutions, ПҒ(0) n Мё= 0. The subleading temperature dependence is from the integral ПҒn вҲ’ ПҒ(0) n вҲј пҝҪ вҲһ rh dr2q2О·2 0 вҲҡB0D0Cd/2вҲ’1 0 R2 0 вҲј #T 1+ dвҲ’ОёвҲ’2 z (C.25) вҖ“ 40 вҖ“ which is always less irrelevant than sT. Hence, the transport observables have temperature dependence ПҒin = ПҒ(0) in + пҝҪ #T 2 z (dвҲ’Оё) z > d вҲ’ Оё, #T 1+ dвҲ’Оё z z < d вҲ’ Оё. (C.26) ПҒn = ПҒ(0) n + #T 1+ dвҲ’ОёвҲ’2 z Пғ0 = #T 2вҲ’ 2Оё dz (C.27) в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ 10-5 10-4 10-9 10-5 0.1 T/Ој Пғ0 в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ 0.01 0.01 0.1 T/Ој (ПҒin-ПҒin 0) / Ој2 в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұ 0.01 0.01 0.1 1 T/Ој (ПҒn-ПҒn 0)/ Ој2 ПҒin ПҒT ПҒn ПҒT 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 T/Ој in + #T 2, ПҒn вҲј ПҒ(0) n + #T 2 C.1.2 Irrelevant deformations, z = 1 On the other hand, if z = 1, the gauge field is irrelevant. Here Оё = d2Оҙ2 dОҙ2 вҲ’ 2, МғL2 = 1 вҲ’V0 (d вҲ’ Оё) (1 + d вҲ’ Оё) (C.28) The IR phase can then be thought of as a вҖңCFTвҖқ in d вҲ’ Оё dimensions in the presence of an irrelevant deformation with coupling A0. This irrelevant deformation grows toward the IR drives the RG flow to the UV conformal fixed point. The behavior of A вүЎ A0ПҶ(ЛҶr)dt can be determined from solving the Maxwell equation on the background (2.12) in the presence вҖ“ 41 вҖ“ в—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ 0.03 10-9 10-6 1 T/Ој Пғ0 в—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ T/Ој (ПҒin-ПҒin 0)/ Ој2 в—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ T/Ој (ПҒn-ПҒn ПҒin ПҒT ПҒn ПҒT 0.75 0.80 0.85 0.90 0.95 1.00 T/Ој 10 3 , ПҒin вҲј ПҒ(0) in + #T 3, ПҒn вҲј ПҒ(0) n + #T 7 3 of a constant condensate О·0. This is then backreacted on the metric to give an IR solution which can be solved order-by-order in A0. For instance, as recently discussed in , for О· = 0, At(r) behaves as a power-law. For instance, At = LtA0 пҝҪ ЛҶr L пҝҪОёвҲ’dвҲ’1+2вҲҶA0 пҝҪ 1 + #A2 0 пҝҪ ЛҶr L пҝҪ2вҲҶA0 + O пҝҪ ЛҶr4вҲҶA0пҝҪ пҝҪ , 2вҲҶA0 = 2(d вҲ’ Оё) вҲ’ ОәОі + 2 dОё < 0. (C.29) This gives a metric deformation, ds2 = ds2 A0=0 пҝҪ 1 + #A2 0 пҝҪ ЛҶr L пҝҪ2вҲҶA0 + O пҝҪ ЛҶr4вҲҶA0пҝҪ пҝҪ , ПҲ(r) = ПҲA0=0 + #A2 0 пҝҪ ЛҶr L пҝҪ2вҲҶA0 + O пҝҪ ЛҶr4вҲҶA0пҝҪ . (C.30) When О· Мё= 0, the range of Оі is extended to a regime where вҲҶA0 would be positive and we must be more careful. When Оі = Оҙ, the deformation still behaves as a power law, though вҖ“ 42 вҖ“ the power is different, At = LtA0 пҝҪ ЛҶr L пҝҪ МғвҲҶA0вҲ’1 пҝҪ 1 + #A2 0 пҝҪ ЛҶr L пҝҪ2 МғвҲҶA0 + ... пҝҪ , 2 МғвҲҶA0 = d + 1 вҲ’ Оё + (d вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ Оё) пҝҪ 1 + 8 МғL2q2О·2 0 Z2 0(d вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ Оё)2 . (C.31) In order for this perturbation to be well-defined, we must have МғвҲҶA0 < 0 which constrains the value of the condensate, О·2 0 > Z2 0 8 МғL2q2 пҝҪ (d + 1 вҲ’ Оё)2 вҲ’ (d вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ Оё)2пҝҪ > 0 (C.32) and hence this does not smoothly connect to the О·0 вҶ’ 0 case. Interestingly, for Оі Мё= Оҙ, At(r) instead decays exponentially. Define Оҫ = Оі/Оҙ. For Оҫ > 1, there exists a normalizeable solution which to leading order in (ЛҶr/L) has the form At = LtA0 пҝҪ ЛҶr L пҝҪвҲҶ1 Г— exp пҝҪ вҲ’cОё пҝҪ ЛҶr L пҝҪвҲҶ2пҝҪ + ..., вҲҶ1 = (d вҲ’ 1)(d вҲ’ Оё) вҲ’ ОёОҫ 2d , вҲҶ2 = (1 вҲ’ Оҫ)Оё d , c2 Оё = 0 МғL2 Z0Оё2(Оҫ вҲ’ 1)2 . (C.33) There is no normalizeable solution for Оҫ < 1. Notably, вҲҶ1 > 0 and вҲҶ2 > 0 for Оё < 0. The exponential decay is indicative of a gapped system. In particular, the exponential decay in At leads to low frequency conductivities that decay exponentially with temperature, reminiscent of s-wave BCS superconductors. We now find the temperature dependence of the various transport coefficients of interest. We will not find the coefficient of the temperature scaling since this depends on the UV parameters through A0, rather we just look at the overall scaling. Recalling that Оҫ = Оі/Оҙ, ПҒin = пЈұ пЈІ пЈі #T dвҲ’ОёвҲ’ МғвҲҶA0 + ... Оҫ = 1 #T вҲҶ1 Г— exp пҝҪ вҲ’ МғcОё (T)вҲ’вҲҶ2пҝҪ + ... Оҫ > 1 (C.34) Here, we have rescaled МғcОё = cОёrвҲҶ2 0 . Despite the fact that вҲҶ1 > 0, we also have вҲҶ2 > 0 so ПҒ(0) in always vanishes. To derive this temperature scaling, we used the fact that for Оҫ > 1, вҲҶ1 + вҲҶ2 вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ d вҲ’ 2 d (d вҲ’ Оё) вҲ’ 2Оҫ d Оё = вҲ’вҲҶ1. (C.35) Next, the conductivities are Пғ0 = пҝҪ #T 2(1вҲ’ Оё d вҲ’ МғвҲҶA0) + ... Оҫ = 1, #T вҲҶ2вҲ’1 Г— exp пҝҪ вҲ’2 МғcОё T вҲ’вҲҶ2пҝҪ + ... Оҫ > 1. (C.36) вҖ“ 43 вҖ“ Finally, these solutions have z = 1 and have, for any Оҫ, ОјПҒn = 1 вҲ’ c2 ir c2 ir (sT) + ... (C.37) в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұ 10-6 10-5 10-4 10-7 1000 T/Ој Пғ0 в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұ 10-7 0.01 T/Ој ПҒin Ој2 в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ 10-5 10-4 10-7 10-3 T/Ој ПҒn Ој2 в—Ұ в—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ 0.03 10-6 T/Ој Пғ0 в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ 0.04 1 T/Ој ПҒin Ој2 в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ 0.04 10-8 10-5 10-2 T/Ој ПҒn Ој2 в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ 0.04 10-9 10-7 10-5 10-3 T/Ој ПҒin 2/ (Ој4ПғQ) 2 Г— exp пҝҪ вҲ’2 МғcОёT вҲ’ 1 2 пҝҪ , ПҒin вҲј #T 5 4 Г— exp пҝҪ вҲ’ МғcОёT вҲ’ 1 2 пҝҪ , ПҒn вҲј #T 4, ПҒ2 in/Пғ0 вҲј #T 3 вҖ“ 44 вҖ“ C.2 Specific example As a specific example, we will use the model of in d = 2, ZF (ПҲ) = Z0eaПҲ/ вҲҡ 3, V (ПҲ, |О·|) = вҲ’6 cosh(ПҲ/ вҲҡ 3) вҲ’ 2|О·|2 + |О·|4 (C.38) which gives z = 12 + (a вҲ’ 3)(a + 1) a2 вҲ’ 1 , Оё = 4 1 вҲ’ a (C.39) for partially condensed phases and z = 1, Оё = вҲ’1 (C.40) for fully condensed phases. By turning on a source for the dilaton, ПҲ(1) Мё= 0, one can flow to either the partially condensed or full condensed phases in the IR. A qualitative understanding of this behavior is that ZF (ПҲ) controls the effective U(1) charge of the complex scalar in the IR. If ZF вҶ’ 0, the charge diverges and it becomes easier for the scalar to condense. On the other hand, if ZF вҶ’ вҲһ, the charge vanishes and it is more difficult for the scalar to condense. In fact, there is a special value of ПҲ(1) above which it is not possible to condense the scalar at T = 0 and this model will flow to an uncondensed phase. Since О· is an irrelevant deformation of the IR, the uncondensed and partially condensed phases are characterized by the same z, Оё. We do not consider uncondensed phases in this work. In , we show how this source controls the magnitude of ПҒ(0) n for a = b = 1. Here, we care only about the temperature scaling, so we choose a value of ПҲ(1) that leads either to a partially condensed phase in figures 5 and 6 or to a fully condensed phase in figures 7 and 8. D Translation breaking While we will not go into detail, we note that we can extract the normal and superfluid scaling more straightforwardly by explicitly breaking translations. This is done by modifying the action C.1 SвҖІ = S + пҝҪ dd+2xвҲҡвҲ’gY (ПҲ) 2 d пҝҪ i=1 вҲӮОјПҮiвҲӮОјПҮi (D.1) with Y (ПҲ) = Y0 exp(О»ПҲ), ПҮi = mxi. (D.2) This deformation of the action breaks translations homogeneously and allows for the equations of motion to maintain dependence only on the bulk radial coordinate . We choose the parameter О» such that this is an irrelevant deformation of the IR critical phase. Hence, our earlier analysis of the IR geometries does not change. вҖ“ 45 вҖ“ в—Ӣ в—Ӣв—Ӣв—Ӣв—Ӣв—Ӣв—Ӣв—Ӣв—Ӣв—Ӣв—Ӣв—Ӣв—Ӣв—Ӣв—Ӣв—Ӣв—Ӣв—Ӣв—Ӣ в—Ӣ в—Ӣ в—Ӣ в—Ӣ в—Ӣ в—Ӣ в—Ӣ в—Ӣ в—Ӣ в—Ӣ в—Ӣв—Ӣ в—Ӣ в—Ӣв—Ӣв—Ӣв—Ӣв—Ӣв—Ӣв—Ӣв—Ӣв—Ӣв—Ӣв—Ӣв—Ӣв—Ӣв—Ӣв—Ӣв—Ӣв—Ӣ в—Ӣ в—Ӣ в—Ӣ в—Ӣ в—Ӣ в—Ӣ в—Ӣ в—Ӣ в—Ӣ + + + + + + + + + + ++ + m/Ој = 0 m/Ој = 10-3 + T/Ој ПҒn Ој2 temperature. Here, for z = 2, we plot our result with m/Ој = 0 in gray and for m/Ој = 10вҲ’3 in black. The points exactly overlap and we confirm ПҒn вҲј #T. In the hydrodynamic model, this choice of translation breaking is reflected in the intro- duction of a dissipation timescale, П„, that only couples to the momentum. The timescale will depend on the function Y (ПҲ) and the parameter m, but we will leave its derivation to later work. For our purposes, the effect of this dissipation is to broaden the normal contribution to the zero frequency pole in the imaginary conductivity, so that the remaining weight only depends on the superfluid. Пғ(Пү) = i Пү пҝҪПҒs Ој пҝҪ + Пғ0 1 вҲ’ iПү/П„ (D.3) When breaking translations, care must be taken to work in terms of gauge invariant contributions of the fluctuating fields. Some details are outlined in and in . After carefully accounting for these, we can holographically compute the optical conductivity and extract the superfluid density. We confirm that the hydrodynamic expression holds. Fur- thermore, we find that our earlier analysis of the normal and superfluid densities does not change; that is, the leading temperature dependence of these quantities is fully determined by the IR geometries. For clean holographic superfluids, numerically extracting the normal and superfluid densities requires high numerical precision and accuracy due to subtle cancellations in (3.16). Translation breaking allows for lower precision computing and nicely confirms our results in clean superfluids. E Semi-local quantum critical geometries In the main text, we stated that z вҶ’ вҲһ is a boundary case of the Lifshitz spacetimes. It is clear from our general results for z > 1 that the z вҶ’ вҲһ limit is well behaved for ПҒin and ПҒn. вҖ“ 46 вҖ“ However, if one looks closely at the conditions for existence of a Lifshitz IR, one finds that z вҶ’ вҲһ implies q = 0. Hence, no superfluid can exist for this case. Instead, start with a more general action that has a canonically normalized scalar kinetic term but a modified mass for the gauge field. S = 1 16ПҖG пҝҪ dd+2xвҲҡвҲ’g пҝҪ R вҲ’ 1 2(вҲӮО·)2 вҲ’ V (О·) вҲ’ W(О·) 2 A2 вҲ’ Z(О·) 4 F 2 пҝҪ . (E.1) Here О· is a real scalar field, analogous to the modulus we chose in the main text. For О· вҶ’ О·0 in the IR, if we have W(О·0) = W вҖІ(О·вҲ—) = 0, an AdS2 Г— Rd solution is possible. For simplicity, we will choose V вҖІ(О·0) = 0. A simple class of functions W(О·) that at lowest order in О· resembles a superfluid action is W(О·) = q2О·2(1 вҲ’ О·2 О·2 0 )a (E.2) with a > 1. It will turn out that perturbations are best behaved for a вүҘ 2. We would like this action to arise from a U(1) invariant effective holographic action for a complex scalar О¶ = ПҮeiОё, 2 |DО¶|2 = G(ПҮ) 2 пҝҪ (вҲӮПҮ)2 + ПҮ2(вҲӮОјОё + qAОј)2пҝҪ . (E.3) We want ПҮ and О· to be related, so G(ПҮ)(вҲӮПҮ)2 = (вҲӮО·)2 and q2G(ПҮ)ПҮ2 = W(О·) (E.4) For a = 2, which we use for figure 4, ПҮ = aО· О· пҝҪ О·2 0 вҲ’ О·2 , О· = О·0 ПҮ пҝҪ ПҮ2 + a2О· , G(ПҮ) = О·2 0 a4 О· (ПҮ2 + a2О·)3 . (E.5) If we want О· вүҲ ПҮ and G(ПҮ) вҶ’ 1 as ПҮ вҶ’ 0, then we can choose aО· = О·0. We now look at solutions to the Einstein equations with this action. We choose Z(О·) = 1 for simplicity. As we said before, there is a solution which is AdS2 Г— Rd, ds2 = L2 Мғr2 пҝҪ вҲ’L2 t dt2 + d Мғr2 V0 пҝҪ + L2 xdвғ—x2 d (E.6) where V0 = L2V (О·0) and V вҖІ(О·0) = 0. The gauge field is A = Lt вҲҡ 21 Мғrdt. (E.7) вҖ“ 47 вҖ“ Here, Мғr вҶ’ вҲһ is the IR boundary. Denoting вғ—X = {D, B, C, At}, the perturbations all have the form О· =вҲј О·0 + cО· пҝҪ Мғr L пҝҪ МғОҪО· + ..., вғ—X = вғ—XcО·=0 пҝҪ 1 + c вғ—X пҝҪ Мғr L пҝҪ МғОҪО· + ... пҝҪ (E.8) There exist four solutions to these equations with the following exponents МғОҪО·1 = 0 МғОҪО·2 = 2, МғОҪВұ О· = 1 2 пҝҪ 1 Вұ вҲҡ 1 вҲ’ 4О» пҝҪ (E.9) with О» = вҲ’V вҖІвҖІ(О·0) + W вҖІвҖІ(О·0) вҲ’V (О·0) (E.10) If О» > 0, there is only one real irrelevant perturbation, МғОҪО·1. If О» > 1 4 then there is a set of complex perturbations, indicating a potential instability. Finally, if О» < 0, then there are two irrelevant perturbations. The least irrelevant of these perturbations is always МғОҪО·1 though this will not introduce any new temperature dependence. The perturbation with МғОҪО·2 is associated with introducing a finite temperature horizon and requires cО· = 0. Following the main text, we can choose a potential in d = 2, V (О·) = вҲ’ 6 L2 вҲ’ О·2 + g2 О· 4 О·4, О·0 = Вұ вҲҡ 2 gО· . (E.11) Then, V (О·0) = вҲ’ 6 L2 вҲ’ 1 g2О· , V вҖІвҖІ(О·0) = 4. (E.12) For a = 2, W вҖІвҖІ вҲ— = 8q2. (E.13) Using L = 1 and gО· = пҝҪ 3 2 to align with the treatment of Lifshitz phases in the main text, О» = вҲ’3 5(1 вҲ’ 2q2) (E.14) and we have a complex perturbation for q > вҲҡ 3 2 . For smaller q, there is an extra irrelevant perturbation which is always less relevant than the universal irrelevant deformation, МғОҪО·1. For a > 2, W вҖІвҖІ(О·0) = 0 and О» < 0 so we have two irrelevant perturbations. Finally, for a < 2, W вҖІвҖІ(О·0) diverges. вҖ“ 48 вҖ“ The temperature dependence of the transport coefficients are then Пғ0 = #T 2 ПҒin = ПҒ(0) in + #T вҲ’ МғОҪвҲ’ О· + ... ПҒn = ПҒ(0) n + #T + ... (E.15) E.1 Zero temperature solution A nice feature of the semi-local quantum critical geometries is that they readily allow for constructing numerical solutions at exactly zero temperature since the zeroes of the metric are only second order. Using pseudospectral methods, this double zero can be analytically implemented. To motivate the necessity for developing a zero temperature effective field theory for Lifshitz superfluids, we would like to confirm that the zero temperature limit thermodynamic quantities derived in the main text, for instance ПҒ(0) n , agree with what we find at exactly zero temperature. But there is a subtlety. From the translation invariant hydrodynamics discussed in Appendix A, the weight of the pole in the imaginary conductivity is always ПҒ(0)/Ој independent of the critical exponents. A physical rationale for this is that, directly at zero temperature, the translation invariant system has no dissipation and no way to distinguish ПҒ(0) n from ПҒ(0) s . To distinguish the two, we can introduce a finite superfluid velocity as in or break translations as in . We choose that latter and introduce neutral translation breaking scalars as in Appendix D. Effectively, this changes the conductivity Пғ(Пү) = i Пү ПҒ(0) Ој вҶ’ i Пү ПҒ(0) s Ој + Пғ(0) DC 1 вҲ’ iПү/О“ (E.16) Furthermore, since Пғ0 вҲј T 2, the incoherent conductivity does not contribute. Notably, the normal density contributes only to the real part of the conductivity after translation breaking, though there may be extra contributions to the coherent sector . These will in general be subleading in the strength of translation breaking. In general, at finite temperatures О“ вҲқ (m2s)вҲ’1 for the translation breaking parameter m of Appendix D. For 1 вүӨ z < вҲһ, this diverges as T вҶ’ 0. For semi-local quantum critical states, s вҶ’ s(0) and О“(0) remains finite and nonzero, which lets us access a zero temperature regime where О“(0) вүӘ Ој provided m вүӘ Ој. In this regime, m-dependent corrections to the values of ПҒ(0) n,s should be negligible, and we expect to be able to confirm that their zero temperature values agree with their low temperature limit in the translation-invariant case. In addition, we should see a measurable transfer of spectral weight to the real part of the conductivity at T = 0 if ПҒ(0) n Мё= 0. This was used in z вҶ’ вҲһ, Оё вҶ’ вҲ’вҲһ geometries in . As a first step, we note that with no complex scalar, we may obtain a semi-local quantum critical geometry by investigating the zero temperature limit of an AdS-Reissner-Nordstrom black hole. If we break translations with neutral scalars, such a system was investigated in . Given the absence of a complex scalar, there is no spontaneous symmetry breaking and we вҖ“ 49 вҖ“ expect breaking translations will completely remove the pole in the imaginary conductivity. In figure 10, we confirm this result. This is in contrast to the semi-local geometries with a superfluid. In figure 11, we confirm that there is residual spectral weight in the imaginary pole, and hence ПҒ(0) n Мё= 0. In fact, we confirm that this ПҒ(0) n agrees with the result we obtained with our translation invariant finite temperature solutions. 0.1 1. Г— 10-4 1 Пү/Ој ОјПүIm[Пғ(Пү)]/ПҒ 0.1 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Пү/Ој ОјПүIm[Пғ(Пү)]/ПҒ Complete depletion of spectral weight in the T = 0 AdS-RN conductivity from translation breaking. (Left) Weight of the T = 0 imaginary pole with m/Ој = 1/ вҲҡ 10 showing complete depletion of spectral weight. (Right) Weight of the T = 0 imaginary pole with m = 0 showing no depletion of spectral weight. 0.00 0.02 0.05 0.10 T/Ој ПҒs ПҒ 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.5 Пү/Ој ОјПүIm[Пғ(Пү)]/ПҒ 0.1 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Пү/Ој ОјПүIm[Пғ(Пү)]/ПҒ The normal density for a = 4 semi-local quantum critical superfluids. (Left) Finite temperature ПҒn from equation (3.16). (Center) Weight of the T = 0 imaginary pole with m/Ој = .315 showing partial depletion of spectral weight and ПҒ(0) n = ПҒ(0) вҲ’ПҒ(0) s Мё= 0. The dashed line is the value we find as T вҶ’ 0 from equation (3.16). (Right) Weight of the T = 0 imaginary pole with m = 0 showing no depletion of spectral weight. вҖ“ 50 вҖ“ F Vanishing ПҒ(0) n but finite ПҒ(0) in Up to this point, the necessary conditions for a non-vanishing ПҒ(0) n are either a non-vanishing ПҒ(0) in and any values of z, Оё or a vanishing ПҒ(0) in with d + 2 вҲ’ z вҲ’ Оё > 0. Recalling that ПҒ(0) in captures, in some sense, the degree to which charged degrees of freedom are uncondensed at zero temperature, these criteria seem not to apply to systems like 4He, which have ПҒ(0) n vanishing but not all 4He atoms are in the superfluid state at zero temperature. We would like to have a holographic model that can describe such a state. In order to do so, letвҖҷs recall the basic criteria for the vanishing of ПҒ(0) n . We can expand aЛҶx(r) = aЛҶx Ој At(r) пҝҪ пҝҪ (F.1) so long as the functions Ai(r) are sufficiently well-behaved. The expansion is guaranteed to be well-behaved if lim rhвҶ’вҲһ пҝҪ rh 0 dr2q2MF вҲҡ BDCd/2вҲ’1О·2 R2 (F.2) converges, at least up to order (sT)2. This allows a non-vanishing ПҒ(0) n for certain Lifshitz phases. Now, letвҖҷs ask what happens if we naively impose z = 1 and ПҒ(0) in Мё= 0. Such a solu- tion requires Оё Мё= 0. Using our original action, we must conclude that since both criteria for convergence are met, ПҒ(0) n Мё= 0. Hence z = 1 does not imply ПҒ(0) n = 0. A slight technical point is that for z = 1 partially condensed phases, the gauge field completely decouples from the equations of motion at T = 0 as can be seen from equation (C.22). Nevertheless, one can solve the Maxwell equation in the IR background and find that At is still given by equation (C.22) except that A0 is not fixed by the IR parameters and its value must be determined by the full RG flow. Fortunately, this leads to ПҒ(0) in Мё= 0 as desired. To find a ПҒ(0) n = 0 we need the expansion for ax to break down. Unfortunately, there is not a nice way to affect A1. On the other hand, we can affect A2 by modifying the mass term for the U(1) gauge field. Taking MF (ПҲ) вҶ’ M0 exp(d 2О№ОҙПҲ) вҲј M0 пҝҪ ЛҶr L пҝҪО№Оё (F.3) in the IR, we find that пҝҪ rh dr2q2MF вҲҡ BDCd/2вҲ’1О·2 R2 вҲј #Lt МғL L2x sq2О·2 h 2ПҖПҒ2 in пҝҪrh L пҝҪ2вҲ’z+О№Оё вҲј #T 1вҲ’ 2вҲ’d+(1+О№)Оё z (F.4) In our earlier language of (3.47), this means that Оұ = 2z вҲ’ (1 + О№)Оё вҲ’ 4 (F.5) вҖ“ 51 вҖ“ Hence, if 2 вҲ’ z вҲ’ d + (1 + О№)Оё > 0, the integral diverges. If |О№| is too large, this can disrupt the IR. We will only present results where this does not happen. Following our earlier discussion of (3.47) ОјПҒn вҲј пЈұ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈІ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈі ОјПҒ(0) n + #(sT) 2 + О№Оё < 0 , ОјПҒ(0) n + #T zвҲ’2+dвҲ’(1+О№)Оё z 2 вҲ’ d вҲ’ z + (О№ + 1)Оё < 0 < 2 + О№Оё , #T 2вҲ’d+(1+О№)ОёвҲ’z z #(sT) 2(1 вҲ’ d вҲ’ z + Оё) + О№Оё = 0 . (F.6) We demonstrate this scaling in figure 12. In systems like 4He, ОјПҒn вҲј sT, and hence is satisfied by the last case. Of course, this analysis required an additional field, the dilaton, which is likely not present in systems like 4He. This simplified our analysis but is not necessary. We can modify the action in different ways, for instance by setting ПҲ = 0 but letting О· run in the IR. The analysis for these cases is nearly identical to that with the dilaton since О· is irrelevant when ПҲ Мё= 0, so we omit writing them here. In such a system, we also found solutions with ПҒ(0) in Мё= 0 and ОјПҒn вҲј sT. We note that this behavior only depends on the behavior of potentials in the IR. Hence, from an RG perspective, ПҒn can have an anomalous dimension from a non-trivial О№. Neverthe- less, since everything is determined from IR quantities, the analysis suggests that quantum critical superfluids with general critical exponents may be amenable to an effective field theory treatment. в—Ұ в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ в—Ұ + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + О№Оё = 0 О№Оё = 4 + 0.03 1 T/Ој ПҒin ПҒT в—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұв—Ұ + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + О№Оё = 0 О№Оё = 4 + 0.03 10-6 10-5 10-4 T/Ој ПҒn Ој2 + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + О№Оё = 0 + 0.03 10-7 10-4 T/Ој (ПҒn-ПҒn An example using the potential in C.38 with a = 5 so that z = 1, Оё = вҲ’1 but ПҒ(0) in Мё= 0 (left). For О№ = вҲ’4, we find that ПҒn вҲј #T 2 whereas for О№ = 0, we find ПҒn вҲј ПҒ(0) n + #T 2 (middle and right).