Anomalous Hall effect in half-metallic Heusler compound Co2TiX (X=Si, Ge) Shubhankar Roy,1, 2 Ratnadwip Singha,1 Arup Ghosh,1 Arnab Pariari,1 and Prabhat Mandal1 1Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics, HBNI, 1/AF Bidhannagar, Kolkata 700 064, India 2Vidyasagar Metropolitan College, 39, Sankar Ghosh Lane, Kolkata 700 006, India (Dated: August 12, 2020) Though Weyl fermions have recently been observed in several materials with broken inversion symmetry, there are very few examples of such systems with broken time reversal symmetry. Various Co2-based half-metallic ferromagnetic Heusler compounds are lately predicted to host Weyl type excitations in their band structure. These magnetic Heusler compounds with broken time reversal symmetry are expected to show a large momentum space Berry curvature, which introduces several exotic magneto-transport properties. In this report, we present systematic analysis of experimental results on anomalous Hall effect (AHE) in Co2TiX (X=Si and Ge). This study is an attempt to understand the role of Berry curvature on AHE in Co2TiX family of materials. The anomalous Hall resistivity is observed to scale quadratically with the longitudinal resistivity for both the compounds. The detailed analysis indicates that in anomalous Hall conductivity, the intrinsic Karplus-Luttinger Berry phase mechanism dominates over the extrinsic skew scattering and side-jump mechanism. I. INTRODUCTION Co2-based Heusler compounds have enticed an im- mense interest in condensed matter physics due to their high Curie temperature and tunability of electronic and magnetic properties . Especially, the fascinating half-metallic character , makes these materials very promising candidates for the spintronics applications . Recently, Co2-based Heusler compounds have also been predicted to host Weyl fermions . While there are several topological Weyl semimetals with broken inver- sion symmetry [8–10], presence of such semimetallic state in magnetic systems due to broken time reversal symme- try is extremely rare . The Berry curvature associ- ated with topologically non-trivial band structure, leads to novel magneto-transport properties and several exotic phenomena such as anomalous Hall effect (AHE), chiral anomaly, and anomalous Nernst effect, etc [12–15]. Usually, in a ferromagnetic system, the measured Hall resistivity has contributions from both ordinary Hall ef- fect and AHE. The anomalous Hall resistivity component is proportional to the spontaneous magnetization (M). Although the basic theory of AHE has already been re- viewed extensively , the renewed interest in this phenomenon has emerged due to its strong correlation with Berry phase. It is well established that three pos- sible mechanisms are responsible for AHE . In order to explain AHE, Karplus and Luttinger were first to pro- pose a model (intrinsic KL mechanism), which takes into account the role of spin-orbit interaction in band struc- ture calculation of ferromagnetic metals . According to KL mechanism, the anomalous Hall resistivity (ρA xy) is expected to show a quadratic dependence on longi- tudinal resistivity (ρxx). Extrinsic mechanisms such as skew-scattering and side-jump or asymmetric scattering of conduction electrons by the spin-orbit coupled impu- rities can also result in AHE [19–21]. While for skew- scattering, the ρA xy is linearly proportional to ρxx, side- jump scattering is proportional to ρxx2 as in the case intrinsic KL mechanism. The intrinsic KL mechanism has in fact a direct link to the Berry-phase effects on occupied electronic Bloch states . There are several theoretical and experimental reports on the structural, electronic, and magnetic properties of Co2-based Heusler compounds . The spin- resolved band structure calculations show that the ma- jority spin-band has a metallic character, whereas the mi- nority spin-band exhibits semiconducting behavior with a band gap of about 0.5 eV at the Fermi level . Recent band structure calculations for these compounds show that the inclusion of the spin-orbit coupling (SOC) leads to novel topological Weyl semimetal state with time reversal symmetry breaking . However, a system- atic study on this topologically non-trivial state through transport experiments is still lacking. In the present work, we report the AHE associated with Berry curva- ture in Heusler compounds Co2TiX (X=Si and Ge). II. EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS Co2TiX (X=Si and Ge) compounds were prepared by arc melting the stoichiometric amounts of high purity of its constituents in a highly purified argon (Ar) atmo- sphere. In order to avoid any contamination with oxy- gen, the sample chamber was purged with high purity Ar and evacuated. This procedure was repeated several times. Furthermore, we have heated Ti pieces close to its melting point inside the vacuum chamber before arc melting the compound. To achieve chemical homogene- ity, the ingot was remelted five to six times and flipped before each new melting step. The obtained ingot was then sealed in an evacuated quartz tube and annealed for 3 weeks at 950 ◦C. Phase purity and structural anal- ysis for both the samples were done using the powder x-ray diffraction (XRD) technique with Cu Kα radiation in a Rigaku x-ray diffractometer (TTRAX III). The mag- netization measurements were performed using a super- conducting quantum interference device-vibrating sam- arXiv:2008.04837v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 11 Aug 2020 pattern of powdered samples of (a) Co2TiSi and (b) Co2TiGe. Black circles(◦) are experimental data, red line(−) is the cal- culated pattern, blue line(−) is the difference between exper- imental and calculated intensities, and vertical lines(|) show the Bragg positions. ple magnetometer (SQUID-VSM) (MPMS 3, Quantum Design) in magnetic fields up to 7 T. The sample used for the magnetic measurements is of approximate dimen- sions 0.3×0.4×4 mm3. To minimize the demagnetiza- tion effect, the external magnetic field was applied along the longest sample direction. The magnetization data were recorded over the temperature range from 2 to 380 K. To achieve good thermal equilibrium, we have stabi- lized each temperature for 30 minutes. For each M(H) isotherm, the magnetic field was increased from 0 to 7 T and then reduced to zero. We didn’t observe any dif- ference in M(H) between the increasing and decreasing field. The transport measurements were performed in a 9 T physical property measurement system (Quantum Design) using the ac-transport option. For both the re- sistivity and Hall measurements, the electrical contacts netization at 2 K for (a) Co2TiSi and (b) Co2TiGe. Right insets: Temperature dependence of the magnetization mea- sured at 500 Oe. Left insets: dM/dT versus temperature. were made in the four-probe configuration using conduct- ing silver paste and gold wires. In order to eliminate any contribution due to the small misalignment of voltage probes, the final Hall resistivity was obtained from the difference between measured Hall resistivity for positive and negative magnetic field. III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS Co2TiX compounds crystallize in cubic L21 struc- ture (space group: Fm ̄3m), which consists of four inter- penetrating face-centered-cubic lattices along (111) di- rection. The crystallographic positions of Co atoms are (0, 0, 0) and (1/2, 1/2, 1/2) and those of the Ti and Ge tively. The Rietveld profile refinement of the XRD pat- terns (Fig. 1) confirms that the prepared materials are 2 tudinal resistivity (ρxx) for (a) Co2TiSi and (b) Co2TiGe. single phase in nature. The refined lattice parameters, and Co2TiGe, respectively, are in good agreement with the earlier reports . The magnetic field dependence of dc-magnetization at 2 K for Co2TiSi and Co2TiGe are shown in Figs. 2(a) and 2(b), respectively. The observed behavior is quite similar to the earlier reports . The Co2-based Heusler alloys, which are half-metallic ferromagnets, exhibit the Slater-Pauling-type behavior of the magneti- zation as given by Mp = (Zp - 24) μB/f.u. Here, Mp is the total magnetic moment and Zp is the total number of valence electrons in the unit cell of the compound. For Co2TiX, the value of Zp is 26. Therefore, according to the above relation, the total magnetic moment should be 2 μB/f.u. From Figs. 2(a) and 2(b), the value of saturation magnetization (MS) is estimated to be ∼ 1.89 μB/f.u. for Co2TiSi and ∼ 1.99 μB/f.u. for Co2TiGe, which are consistent with the Slater-Pauling rule. In both figures, we have plotted the temperature netization (M vs. H) for (a) Co2TiSi and (b) Co2TiGe. dependence of M in right inset, measured at 500 Oe and the corresponding temperature-derivative in the left inset. It is clear from the right insets of Figs. 2(a) and 2(b) that the magnetization curve exhibits a continuous or second order ferromagnetic to paramagnetic phase transition. From the left insets, the Curie temperature (TC), defined as the temperature where -dM/dT shows a peak, is estimated to be around 380 and 371 K for Co2TiSi and Co2TiGe, respectively. dependence of longitudinal resistivity for Co2TiSi and Co2TiGe, respectively. Though the magnetization curves [right insets of Figs. 2(a) and 2(b)] show a clear ferromagnetic to paramagnetic phase transition, we have not observed such behavior in ρxx. Instead, resistivity data for both the compounds exhibit a broad maximum due to the crossover from semiconducting-like to metallic state below the Curie temperature. At 2 K, the values of resistivity are ∼109 and ∼141 μΩ 3 (Color online) (a) and (b) Magnetic field dependence of the Hall resistivity (ρxy) for Co2TiSi. (c) Temperature dependence of normal Hall coefficient (R0). Inset shows the obtained carrier density. (d) Anomalous Hall resistivity (ρA xy) as a function of temperature. cm for Co2TiSi and Co2TiGe, respectively which yield residual resistivity ratio [ρxx(300 K)/ρxx(2 K)] ∼ 1.83 and ∼ 1.16, respectively. In Figs. 4(a) and 4(b), we have plotted the magnetic field dependence of magnetization at various temperatures for Co2TiSi and Co2TiGe, respectively. Isotherms, well below TC, show a sharp increase with increase in field in the low-field region and a saturation-like behavior starts to appear at high fields. The saturation magnetization for the both materials decreases monotonically with increasing temperature. As we approach towards the Curie temperature, the overall nature of the M(H) curves in the low-field as well as in the high-field regions changes significantly. The measured Hall resistivity (ρxy) as a function of magnetic field for different temperatures is shown in Figs. 5(a) and 5(b) for Co2TiSi and in Figs. 6(a) and 6(b) for Co2TiGe. Similar to M(H), the ρxy(H) curve has two distinct regions for T<TC. At low field below ∼0.4 T, the Hall resistivity for both the compounds first increases sharply with increase in field. In the high-field region above ∼1 T, ρxy shows a weak linear field dependence up to 9 T. The similarity in the nature of ρxy(H) and M(H) curves in the low-field region indicates the presence of AHE in these materials. Unlike magnetization, the value of ρxy increases with the increasing temperature up to ∼325 K for Co2TiSi and ∼250 K for Co2TiGe. These temperatures are slightly below the corresponding TCs obtained from the mag- netisation data. With further increase in temperature, ρxy decreases gradually. In addition to usual Hall effect, ρxy in a ferromagnetic material has a contribution from magnetization and is expressed as, ρxy = ρ0 xy + ρA xy = R0H + RSμ0M, (1) where ρ0 xy is the ordinary Hall resistivity and R0 and RS are the ordinary and anomalous Hall coefficients, respectively. Carrier concentration (n) can be calculated from R0 = 1 ne, whereas the sign of R0 determines the type of the charge carriers. If M saturates, the values 4 (Color online) (a) and (b) Magnetic field dependence of the Hall resistivity (ρxy) for Co2TiGe. (c) Temperature dependence of normal Hall coefficient (R0). Inset shows the obtained carrier density. (d) Anomalous Hall resistivity (ρA xy) as a function of temperature. of R0 and ρA xy can be derived from the linear fit to ρxy(H) in the high field region. The slope and y-axis intercept of the linear fit then determine the values of R0 and ρA xy, respectively. However, it is not possible to perform such analysis, when M does not saturate for magnetic fields below 7 T. So, we can not extract R0 and ρA xy near Tc. Well below TC, RS can be calculated from the relation, ρA xy = RSμ0MS. Similar to other ferromagnetic systems, we have extracted MS from the M(H) curves at H=5 T . show the temperature dependence of R0 for Co2TiSi and Co2TiGe, respectively. Positive values of R0 at various temperatures indicate that the transport properties are dominated by hole type charge carriers for both compounds. Using R0, we have estimated the carrier concentration [inset of Figs. 5(c) and 6(c) for Co2TiSi and Co2TiGe, respectively]. It is clear from Figs. 5(c) and 6(c) that the R0 values are slightly scattered for both compounds. When the normal Hall coefficient R0 is significantly smaller than the anomalous Hall coefficient RS, there may be large error in extracted R0 and hence in calculated carrier density . For the studied materials, R0 is few orders of magnitude smaller than RS. At low temperature, R0 for Co2TiSi is about two orders of magnitude smaller than RS. On the other hand, R0 for Co2TiGe itself is very small and about four orders of magnitude smaller than RS. Thus a small error in R0 for Co2TiGe may affect the calculated value of carrier density significantly. For this reason, we have performed Hall measurements at few more temperatures below 75 K for Co2TiGe as compared to the silicon counterpart. These additional data points are shown using green square-shaped symbol in Fig. 6(c). The estimated carrier density for Co2TiSi and Co2TiGe are ∼5×1020 and ∼6×1021 cm−3, respectively. Thus our Hall measurements confirm that Co2TiGe has higher carrier density. From the band structure calculations, Barth et al. have shown that the total 5 xy) vs log(ρxx). Solid line is the fitting using the relation, ρA xy ∝ ρα xx. (c) Anomalous Hall conductivity (σxy A) as a function of temperature. (d) Temperature dependence of SH. density of states near Fermi energy is almost identical for Co2TiSi, Co2TiGe, and Co2TiSn compounds. Hence, one should expect similar values for the charge carrier density in these materials. We note that the above calculation has been performed without incorporating the SOC. In contrast, recent works suggest that SOC is an essential ingredient for the precise band structure calculation in Co2TiX . The inclusion of SOC leads to Weyl nodes in the momentum space. In fact, other properties of these Weyl nodes are predicted to be tunable with magnetization direction. As the strength of SOC increases with increase in atomic number (Z) find differences in calculated density of states for these compounds, albeit small, when SOC is included. In this context, we would like to mention a recent work on Co2TiSn . The carrier concentration for Co2TiSn has been reported as ∼1.4×1022 cm−3, which is higher than that for Co2TiGe. Thus the carrier concentration increase sequentially with increase of Z from Si to Ge to Sn in this family of materials. From Figs. 5(d) and 6(d), it is evident that the anomalous component of the Hall resistivity increases monotonically with increase in temperature from 10 K up to ∼325 K for Co2TiSi and up to ∼250 K for Co2TiGe. In Co2TiGe, ρA xy decreases above 250 K. This is also reflected in the calculated anomalous Hall coefficient RS for both materials [Figs. 7(a) and 8(a)]. In Figs. 7(b) and 8(b), we have checked the scaling behavior of ρA xy using the relation, ρA xy = βρα xx, in the temperature range 10 to 325 K and 10 to 250 K for Co2TiSi and Co2TiGe, respectively. For both the systems, almost quadratic dependence of ρA xy on ρxx (α≈2) confirms that the AHE is originated from either intrinsic KL or extrinsic side jump mechanism. We have also calculated anomalous Hall conduc- 6 xy) vs log(ρxx). Solid line is the fitting using the relation, ρA xy ∝ ρα xx. (c) Anomalous Hall conductivity (σxy A) as a function of temperature. (d) Temperature dependence of SH. tivity for understanding its possible origin. 7(c) and 8(c) show the temperature dependence of corresponding anomalous Hall conductance (AHC) (σA xy ≈ − ρA xy ρ2 xx ≈ − RSμ0MS ρ2 xx ) for Co2TiSi and Co2TiGe, respectively. At 20 K, | σA xy | is about 55 Ω−1 cm−1 for Co2TiSi and ∼170 Ω−1 cm−1 for Co2TiGe. With increasing temperature, | σA xy | gradually decreases. Ideally, when a nodal-line in the electronic band struc- ture is almost dispersion-less and Fermi level resides in the band gap induced by SOC, i.e., in the resonance condition, the intrinsic contribution to σA xy resonantly enhances and approaches towards a value e2 ha [30–32], where e, h, and a are the electronic charge, Planck constant, and lattice constant, respectively. Using a=5.811 ̊A, we have estimated the intrinsic contribution to be | σA xy,in |=666 Ω−1 cm−1 for Co2TiGe, which is comparable to the experimentally obtained value of σA xy (∼170 Ω−1 cm−1). Whereas in the case of Co2TiSi, σA xy (∼ 55 Ω−1 cm−1) is one order of magnitude smaller than the calculated | σA xy,in |=670 Ω−1 cm−1. In this context, it may be mentioned that anomalous Hall effect has also been studied in Co2TiSn compound. For Co2TiSn, the deduced value of σA xy is 284 Ω−1 cm−1 at low temperature region . This value of σA xy is larger than that for Co2TiGe. Thus both carrier density and anomalous Hall conductivity in Co2TiX series increase systematically from Si to Sn. As one might anticipate, the nodal-lines are not always dispersive along the expected direction, and only the part of the nodal-line, which satisfies the resonance condition, contributes to the intrinsic anomalous Hall conductivity. As a result, the theoretically calculated | σA xy,in | generally deviates from the idealized value e2 ha. There are several examples [32–34], where the experimental values of | σA xy | show significant deviation from the theoretically calculated | σA xy,in |, in spite of being originated from intrinsic Berry phase. On the other hand, the extrinsic side 7 jump contribution to σA xy should be of the order of e2 ha( εSO EF ), where εSO and EF are SOC and Fermi energy, respectively. We note that εSO EF is usually less than 0.01 for ferromagnetic metals . Hence, the intrinsic Berry phase driven KL contribution should dominate the AHC in Co2TiX. Nonetheless, there can be an extrinsic side-jump contribution, albeit small. However, in practice, it is not possible to decouple these two components. As intrinsic AHC, | σA xy,in |, is approximately propor- tional to magnetization, the scaling coefficient, SH = RSμ0 ρ2xx = σA xy,in M should be constant and independent of tem- perature . Figures 7(d) and 8(d), for Co2TiSi and Co2TiGe, respectively, show that SH is almost constant with temperature, which also confirms the dominant in- trinsic Berry phase contribution to AHC. The obtained value of SH is comparable to that reported previously for several Heusler compounds and ferromagnetic materials . The half-metallic magnetic Heuslers Co2TiX are predicted to host Weyl fermions associated with the large Berry phase of their Fermi surfaces . The en- hanced Berry curvature near the band crossings at EF is expected to add a large contribution to the intrinsic AHE. Though several theoretical works have been performed in order to correlate AHC with the Berry phase curvature , very few experimental observations have been reported on the AHE of Heusler alloys to confirm the theoretical prediction . Recently, Berry curva- ture calculations have been performed for Co2TiSn near the Fermi energy and intrinsic anomalous Hall conduc- tivity of 100 Ω−1 cm−1 has been calculated . The anomalous Hall conductivity in Co2TiSn mainly comes from slightly gaped nodal lines by magnetization-induced symmetry reduction. However, the experimentally ob- tained AHC in Co2TiSn thin film was attributed to in- trinsic KL mechanism associated with the Berry phase as well as the extrinsic mechanisms. All the same, re- cently, some ferromagnetic and non-collinear antiferro- magnetic metals have been confirmed to show the in- trinsic Berry phase driven AHC [27, 40–42]. The detail analysis of AHE of the half-metallic full Heusler Co2TiX shows that ρA xy is primarily originated from the intrin- sic KL mechanism associated with the Berry phase. The experimentally obtained AHC is comparable to that re- ported for several ferromagnetic and non-collinear anti- ferromagnetic materials [40–42]. IV. CONCLUSION In summary, we have performed transport and mag- netic measurements on Co2TiX. These half-metallic Heusler compounds are predicted to host Weyl fermions with broken time reversal symmetry along with the large associated Berry phase of their Fermi surfaces. In Co2TiX, the enhanced Berry curvature near the EF is expected to add a large contribution to the intrinsic AHE. We have carried out a detailed analysis of AHE for Co2TiSi and Co2TiGe compounds in which a scaling rela- tion between ρA xy and ρxx has been obtained as ρA xy ∝ ρα xx, α ∼ 2. The almost quadratic dependence (α≈2) sug- gests that AHE is originated from either intrinsic KL or extrinsic side jump mechanism. The experimentally obtained AHC found to be comparable with the theo- retically calculated intrinsic AHC in Co2TiGe, whereas, it is one order smaller in Co2TiSi. However, SH is al- most temperature independent for both the materials, which supports intrinsic nature of AHC. The large AHC and AHE make Co2TiX promising candidates for future spintronics applications. They also provide a platform for further investigations of exotic properties in other Co2- based Heusler materials. V. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Mr. Arun Kumar Paul for his help during sample preparation and measurements. F. Heusler, Verh. Deutsch. Phys. Ges. 5, 219 (1903). S. Trudel, O. Gaier, J. Hamrle, and B. Hillebrands, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 43, 193001 (2010). R. A. de Groot, F. M. Mueller, P. G. van Engen, and K. H. J. Buschow, Phys. Rev. Lett. 50, 2024 (1983). I. Galanakis, P. H. Dederichs, and N. Papanikolaou, Phys. Rev. B 66, 174429 (2002). C. Chappert, A. Fert, and F. Nguyen Van Dau, Nature Mater. 6, 813 (2007). G. Chang, S. Xu, H. Zheng, B. Singh, C. Hsu, G. Bian, N. Alidoust, I. Belopolski, D. S. Sanchez, S. Zhang, H. Lin, and M. Z. Hasan, Sci. Rep. 6, 38839 (2016). Z. Wang, M. G. Vergniory, S. Kushwaha, M. Hirschberger, E. V. Chulkov, A. Ernst, N. P. Ong, R. J. Cava, and B. A. Bernevig, Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 236401 B. Q. Lv, H. M. Weng, B. B. Fu, X. P. Wang, H.Miao, J. Ma, P. Richard, X. C. Huang, L. X. Zhao, G. F. Chen, Z. Fang, X. Dai, T. Qian, and H. Ding, Phys. Rev. X 5, S.-Y. Xu, I. Belopolski, D. S. Sanchez, C. Zhang, G. Chang, C. Guo, G. Bian, Z. Yuan, H. Lu, T.-R. Chang, P. P. Shibayev, M. L. Prokopovych, N. Alidoust, H. Zheng, C.-C. Lee, S.-M. Huang, R. Sankar, F. Chou, C.-H. Hsu, H.-T. Jeng, A. Bansil, T. Neupert, V. N. Strocov, H. Lin, S. Jia, and M. Z. Hasan, Sci. Adv. 1, e1501092 (2015). S.-Y. Xu, N. Alidoust, I. Belopolski, Z. Yuan, G. Bian, T.-R. Chang, H. Zheng, V. N. Strocov, D. S. Sanchez, G. Chang, C. Zhang, D. Mou, Y. Wu, L. Huang, C.-C. Lee, S.-M. Huang, B. Wang, A. Bansil, H.-T. Jeng, T. 8 Neupert, A. Kaminski, H. Lin, S. Jia, and M. Z. Hasan, Nat. Phys. 11, 748 (2015). S. Borisenko, D. Evtushinsky, Q. Gibson, A. Yaresko, K. Koepernik, T. Kim, M. Ali, J. van den Brink, M. Hoesch, A. Fedorov, E. Haubold, Y. Kushnirenko, I. Soldatov, R. Schfer, and R. J. Cava, Nat. Commun. 10, 3424 (2019). T. Suzuki, R. Chisnell, A. Devarakonda, Y.-T. Liu, W. Feng, D. Xiao, J. W. Lynn, and J. G. Checkelsky, Nat. Phys. 12, 1119 (2016). R. Singha, S. Roy, A. Pariari, B. Satpati, and P. Mandal, Phys. Rev. B 99, 035110 (2019). M. Hirschberger, S. Kushwaha, Z. Wang, Q. Gibson, S. Liang, C. A. Belvin, B. A. Bernevig, R. J. Cava, and N. P. Ong, Nat. Mater. 15, 1161 (2016). S. N. Guin, P. Vir, Y. Zhang, N. Kumar, S. J. Watzman, C. Fu, E. Liu, K. Manna, W. Schnelle, J. Gooth, C. Shekhar, Y. Sun, and C. Felser, Adv. Mater. 31, 1806622 N. Nagaosa, J. Sinova, S. Onoda, A. H. MacDonald, and N. P. Ong, Rev. Mod. Phys. 82, 1539 (2010). D. Xiao, C. Chang, and Q. Niu, Rev. Mod. Phys. 82, R. Karplus, and J. M. Luttinger, Phys. Rev. 95, 1154 J. Smit, Physica 21, 877 (1955). J. Smit, Physica 24, 39 (1958). L. Berger, Phys. Rev. B 2, 4559 (1970). N. Nagaosa, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 75, 042001 (2006). T. Jungwirth, Q. Niu, and A. H. MacDonald, Phys. Rev. J. Barth, G. H. Fecher, B. Balke, S. Ouardi, T. Graf, C. Felser, A. Shkabko, A. Weidenkaff, P. Klaer, H. J. Elmers, H. Yoshikawa, S. Ueda, and K. Kobayashi, Phys. Rev. B S. Roy, N. Khan, R. Singha, A. Pariari, and P. Mandal, Phys. Rev. B 99, 214414 (2019). J. Barth, G. H. Fecher, B. Balke, T. Graf, A. Shkabko, A. Weidenkaff, P. Klaer, M. Kallmayer, H-J. Elmers, H. Yoshikawa, S. Ueda, K. Kobayashi, and C. Felser, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A 369, 3588 (2011). Q. Wang, S. Sun, X. Zhang, F. Pang, and H. Lei, Phys. Rev. B 94, 075135 (2016). M. Obaida, K. Westerholt, and H. Zabel, Phys. Rev. B B. Ernst, R. Sahoo, Y. Sun, J. Nayak, L. M ̈uchler, A. K. Nayak, N. Kumar, J. Gayles, A. Markou, G. H. Fecher, and C. Felser, Phys. Rev. B 100, 054445 (2019). S. Onoda, N. Sugimoto, and N. Nagaosa, Phys. Rev. Lett. T. Miyasato, N. Abe, T. Fujii, A. Asamitsu, S. Onoda, Y. Onose, N. Nagaosa, and Y. Tokura, Phys. Rev. Lett. K. Kim, J. Seo, E. Lee, K.-T. Ko, B. S. Kim, B. G. Jang, J. M. Ok, J. Lee, Y. J. Jo, W. Kang, J. H. Shim, C. Kim, H. W. Yeom, B. Min, B-J. Yang, and J. S. Kim, Nat. Mater. 17, 794 (2018). Q. Wang, Y. Xu, R. Lou, Z. Liu, M. Li, Y. Huang, D. Shen, H. Weng, S. Wang and H. Lei, Nat. Commun. 9, Y. Liu, E. Stavitski, K. Attenkofer, and C. Petrovic, Phys.Rev. B 97.165415 (2018). C. Zeng, Y. Yao, Q. Niu, and H. H. Weitering, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 037204 (2006). A. Husmann, and L. J. Singh, Phys. Rev. B 73, 172417 Y. Yao, L. Kleinman, A. H. MacDonald, J. Sinova, T. Jungwirth, D-sheng Wang, E Wang, and Q. Niu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 037204 (2004). J. K ̈ubler, and C. Felser, Phys. Rev. B 85, 012405 (2012). B. M. Ludbrook, B. J. Ruck, and S. Granville, Applied Physics Letters 110, 062408 (2017). A. K. Nayak, J. E. Fischer, Y. Sun, B. Yan, J. Karel, A. C. Komarek, C. Shekhar, N. Kumar, W. Schnelle, J. K ̈ubler, C. Felser, and S. S. P. Parkin, Sci. Adv. 2, S. Nakatsuji, N. Kiyohara, and T. Higo, Nature 527, 212 N. Kiyohara, T. Tomita, and S. Nakatsuji, Phys. Rev. Appl. 5, 064009 (2016). 9