S. Vaziri et al.: Ultrahigh Doping of Graphene Using Flame-Deposited MoO3 Abstract— The expected high performance of graphene- based electronics is often hindered by lack of adequate doping, which causes low carrier density and large sheet resistance. Many reported graphene doping schemes also suffer from instability or incompatibility with existing semi- conductor processing. Here we report ultrahigh and stable p-type doping up to ~7×1013 cm-2 (~2×1021 cm-3) of mono- layer graphene grown by chemical vapor deposition. This is achieved by direct polycrystalline MoO3 growth on gra- phene using a rapid flame synthesis technique. With this approach, the metal-graphene contact resistance for holes is reduced to ~200 Ω⋅μm. We also demonstrate that flame- deposited MoO3 provides over 5× higher doping of gra- phene, as well as superior thermal and long-term stability, compared to electron-beam deposited MoO3. Index Terms— Graphene, Doping, Contact resistance. I. INTRODUCTION raphene is a two-dimensional (2D) material with unique physics and intrinsic properties . This has resulted in many reports on proof-of-concept electronic and optoelectronic devices with functionalities that cannot be achieved by conven- tional bulk materials . However, many such devices still suffer from issues such as low performance, poor reliability, de- vice-to-device variation, and lack of reproducibility . This partly occurs because atomically thin graphene (~0.335 nm monolayer) is very sensitive to perturbations introduced during or after its integration with other materials . This high sensi- tivity also makes it challenging to achieve effective, reliable, and uniform doping of graphene without sacrificing its elec- tronic quality . As a result, applying conventional semicon- ductor doping methods (e.g. substituting C atoms with dopants) is very challenging for graphene and other 2D materials. A more promising route to control the doping of graphene and other 2D materials is to introduce charge carriers from the outside, either with a field-effect (electrostatically or with ex- ternal charge dipoles) or by external dopants (similar to modu- lation doping in conventional semiconductors) . For ex- ample, charge transfer from external metal-oxide layers is one of the most promising mechanisms, being compatible with semiconductor device processing while minimally degrading the electronic properties of graphene . In this doping scheme, a metal-oxide with a different electron affinity is brought into contact with graphene, transferring charge carriers across the interface and forming interface dipoles. For example, p-type doping of graphene can be achieved by capping with mo- lybdenum oxide (MoOx where x ~ 3) with large electron affinity > 6 eV . MoO3 also has a sufficiently large band gap (EG ~ 3.7 eV) to be compatible with transparent electronic applica- tions. However, due to varying material quality and measure- ment conditions, reported results have not been consistent . Thus, the effectiveness of graphene doping remains challenging, while little is known about long-term stability . In this letter, we apply MoO3 using a rapid flame vapor dep- osition technique to effectively induce ultrahigh and stable p-type doping of graphene monolayers grown by chemical va- por deposition (CVD). We use electrical measurements, Raman spectroscopy, and modeling to show that a thin layer of ~5 nm flame-deposited MoO3 on monolayer graphene can induce a Sam Vaziri, Victoria Chen, Lili Cai, Yue Jiang, Michelle Chen, Ryan Grady, Xiaolin Zheng, Eric Pop Ultrahigh Doping of Graphene Using Flame-Deposited MoO3 G Fig. 1. Transfer characteristics. (a) Optical image of a TLM test struc- ture with channel lengths of 0.5 μm, 1 μm, 2 μm, 3 μm, 4 μm, 6 μm, 12 μm and 22 μm. (b) Measured current (ID) vs. gate voltage (VGS) of un- capped graphene channels in the TLM. (c) Measured ID-VGS of a gra- phene (Gr) channel with L = 4 μm: uncapped (black line), capped with evaporated (magenta line) and flame deposited (red line) MoO3. The blue line shows the same device as in red, after 8 months. The schematic shows the crystalline MoO3 interface with graphene. This work was supported by Bosch via the Stanford SystemX Al- liance. S.V. also acknowledges partial support from a Wallenberg Fellowship. RWG acknowledges support from the NSF GRFP under Grant No. DGE-1656518. Sam Vaziri, Victoria Chen, Ryan Grady, and Eric Pop are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, Stan- ford, CA 94305, USA. (e-mail: epop@stanford.edu) Lili Cai, Yue Jiang, Xiaolin Zheng are with the Dept. of Mechani- cal Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. Michelle Chen and Eric Pop are with the Dept. of Materials Sci- ence & Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. S. Vaziri et al.: Ultrahigh Doping of Graphene Using Flame-Deposited MoO3 hole density of ~7×1013 cm-2 and a metal-graphene contact re- sistance of ~200 Ω⋅μm. We compare the effectiveness of this method to the conventional approach of electron-beam (e- beam) evaporated MoO3. The results are averaged over tens of test structures and show long-term stability. II. GRAPHENE FIELD-EFFECT TEST STRUCTURES Monolayer graphene was grown on Cu foil using CVD, and subsequently transferred onto 90 nm SiO2 on p+ Si sub- strates which also serve as back-gates. After defining graphene channels by photolithography and oxygen plasma, 50 nm-thick Pd contacts were formed using e-beam lithography, e-beam deposition, and lift-off. Similar steps were repeated to form Ti(3 nm)/Au(70 nm) electrical contact pads. Figure 1(a) shows a rep- resentative TLM test device with 8 channel lengths, 500 nm ≤ L ≤ 22 μm. Then, the samples were annealed at 250°C in vac- uum (5×10-5 Torr). Figure 1(b) shows the transfer characteris- tics of the back-gated graphene field effect transistors (GFETs) in vacuum. These display very symmetric ambipolar behavior with Dirac voltage (V0) near zero and minimal hysteresis, indi- cating clean, nearly intrinsic graphene channels. In previous work we showed that atomically thin layers of MoO3 can be grown on layered materials such as WSe2 and graphene, using flame synthesis by van der Waals epitaxy. Un- like e-beam evaporation, the flame-deposited MoO3 on layered materials shows a high degree of crystallinity. Here, we use this method to deposit thin layers (~5 to 10 nm) of MoO3 on the graphene channels to induce a strong p-type doping effect. vacuum (black line) which exhibits a maximum hole mobility ~2700 cm2V-1s-1 and an on/off current ratio of ~7.5 with a hys- teresis |∆V0| ≈ 0.5 V (not shown). After the flame deposition of MoO3, the transfer characteristics of the same device show a significant positive shift of the Dirac voltage (beyond the VGS range we can apply safely without damaging the back-gate ox- ide), indicative of strong p-type doping [Fig. 1(c), red line]. Importantly, re-measuring the same device after 8 months [Fig. 1(c), blue line] shows no significant variation or degrada- tion in the drain current, indicating excellent long-term stabil- ity. We attribute this stability to the high crystallinity and stoi- chiometry of the flame-deposited MoO3 on graphene . For comparison, e-beam evaporated MoO3 was applied on separate samples, which were then annealed in air at 200 °C for 30 min. The effect of annealing is discussed in the next section. For the same channel length of 4 μm, the GFET capped with the evap- orated MoO3 [Fig. 1(c), magenta curve] has lower drain current than GFETs capped with the flame-deposited MoO3. III. SHEET AND CONTACT RESISTANCE After process development, we performed six MoO3 flame depositions and two MoO3 evaporation runs. Then we charac- terized on average twelve TLM structures for each deposi- tion run, with Fig. 2 showing extracted contact resistance RC and sheet resistance Rsh for the uncapped and MoO3-capped samples. The inset shows the TLM plot of resistance vs. length for uncapped devices. In Fig. 2(a), the uncapped devices (blue line) show relatively symmetric Pd-graphene contacts for elec- trons and holes, suggesting Fermi level pinning near the Dirac point. When approaching the Dirac voltage, RC increases as the graphene density of states decreases. For holes in doped graphene (red line), we note RC ~ 200 Ω⋅μm at room tempera- ture, which improves at least by a factor of 2.5 the lowest RC achieved in the uncapped devices. This contact resistance is comparable to the lowest reported values for Pd with exfoliated monolayer graphene . uncapped and capped graphene channels before and after an- nealing. Interestingly, while the annealing changes the doping of graphene capped with evaporated MoOx [Fig. 2(b), blue and magenta lines], it does not affect the graphene capped with flame-deposited MoO3 [Fig. 2(b), black dashed line]. This shows that the flame-deposited MoO3 is thermally more stable than the evaporated one due to its stoichiometric and crystalline characteristics . Figure 2(b) shows that while electrostatic gating can reduce uncapped graphene sheet resistance by about one order of magnitude, the MoO3 can further and significantly dope graphene, even beyond the electrostatic gating limit. While the large ranges for uncapped samples and those capped with evaporated MoO3 are due to larger hysteresis and device- to-device variation, the annealed graphene devices capped with flame-deposited MoO3 show significantly lower variation. We attribute the higher doping to two underlying causes. The flame deposition method generates highly crystalline, stoi- chiometric MoO3, with more terminal O1 sites that create a di- pole layer to increase its work function . In addition, flame-deposited MoO3 is horizontally oriented with the (010) Fig. 2. Contact and sheet resistance from TLM. (a) Pd-graphene (Gr) contact resistance RC vs. VGS with Gr channel uncapped (blue) and capped with flame-grown MoO3 (red). Inset shows TLM plot and fitting (dashed lines). (b) Extracted graphene sheet resistance for uncapped and capped graphene channels before and after annealing. Solid lines show the average resistance and the shaded regions put bounds on the maximum and minimum values over all the measured TLMs. Black dashes show the average sheet resistance of the flame-deposited MoO3 after annealing. S. Vaziri et al.: Ultrahigh Doping of Graphene Using Flame-Deposited MoO3 planes parallel to the graphene basal plane [Fig. 1(c)]. Because the terminal O1 sites are located on the (010) plane, this orien- tation creates a stronger dipole layer on the surface, which ena- bles higher charge transfer doping of graphene. In contrast, thermal evaporation generates amorphous, sub-stoichiometric and randomly oriented MoOx (x < 3). Using Raman spectroscopy, we further monitored the carrier density through the G and G’ (also known as 2D) peaks . line) and after (red line) the flame deposition of MoO3, meas- ured in air. No significant disorder-related D peak (at 1350 cm-1) indicates good quality of graphene even after MoO3 dep- osition. The capped graphene shows a significant blue shift of G and G’ (2D) peaks from ~1588.4 cm-1 to ~1612.7 cm-1, and from ~2683.6 cm-1 to ~2708.3 cm-1, respectively [inset of Fig. 3(a)]. The G’ peak of the capped graphene in Fig. 3(a) exhibits substantial intensity drop and line broadening, which are mainly ascribed to the large hole doping . Comparing these peak shifts and the intensity ratio of G and G’ peaks for the capped brated graphene in suggests p-doping >3×1013 cm-2 in the graphene capped with flame-deposited MoO3. However, we note that the possible strain effect of the capping layer can con- tribute to the peak shifts and variations affecting the accuracy of the carrier density extraction from the Raman spectra. Because the Dirac voltage is outside the measurable VGS range for the capped devices, it is not possible to directly extract the carrier density from the measured ID vs. VGS. Hence, we ap- plied a well-tested model to estimate the carrier density in the graphene channels from our electrical results. This model is based on the power law behavior of mobility vs. carrier con- centration μ(p) ∝ p-α . We fit our uncapped graphene data with the red line, where μ0 = 3350 cm2V-1s-1, pref = 5.14×1012 cm-2, and α = 0.8. Rsh, p and q are sheet resistance, hole density, and elementary charge, respectively. Then the carrier densities in the capped devices with evaporated [magenta symbols in Fig. 3(b)] and flame-deposited MoO3 [blue symbols in Fig. 3(b)] are extracted. For comparison, the gray lines in Fig. 3(b) show ex- perimental data from previous Hall measurements at high car- rier densities achieved by electrolyte gating and nitric acid doping , demonstrating similar behavior. Table 1 sum- marizes our average sheet resistance, estimated carrier densi- ties, and the resistance ratio (R/R0) at zero gate voltage, where R0 and R are the resistances of uncapped and capped-with- MoO3 graphene channels, respectively. ratio averaged over all the measured graphene devices. Gr in vac. 5700 - - - Gr in air 980 17% - Gr / evap. MoO3 423 7% 43% Gr / flame MoO3 230 4% 23% IV. CONCLUSION In conclusion, we applied our flame vapor deposition tech- nique to grow thin films of stoichiometric crystalline MoO3 on monolayer CVD graphene. The resulting structures exhibit an ul- trahigh and stable p-type charge transfer doping up to ~7×1013 cm-2, five times higher than control samples with e-beam evap- orated MoO3. Using this approach, the metal (Pd)-graphene contact resistance was also reduced by a factor of 2.5 to ~200 Ω⋅μm. Our fabrication process is CMOS-compatible and can be used to realize competitive performance in graphene electron devices, as well as low-sheet-resistance transparent conductors.