1 Observation of plateau-like magnetoresistance in twisted Fe3GeTe2/Fe3GeTe2 junction Junghyun Kim1,2,3, Suhan Son1,2,3, Matthew. J. Coak1,2,4, Inho Hwang1,2,3, Youjin Lee1,2,3, Kaixuan Zhang1,2,3*, and Je-Geun Park1,2,3 1Center for Correlated Electron Systems, Institute for Basic Science, Seoul 08826, South Korea 2Department of Physics and Astronomy, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, South Korea 3Center for Quantum Materials, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, South Korea 4Department of Physics, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, United Kingdom Corresponding Author: kxzhang@snu.ac.kr Controlling the stacking of van der Waals (vdW) materials is found to produce exciting new findings, since hetero- or homo- structures have added the diverse possibility of assembly and manipulated functionalities. However, so far, the homostructure with a twisted angle based on the magnetic vdW materials remains unexplored. Here, we achieved a twisted magnetic vdW Fe3GeTe2/Fe3GeTe2 junction with broken crystalline symmetry. A clean and metallic vdW junction is evidenced by the temperature-dependent resistance and the linear I-V curve. Unlike the pristine FGT, a plateau-like magnetoresistance (PMR) is observed in the magnetotransport of our homojunction due to the antiparallel magnetic configurations of the two FGT layers. The PMR ratio is found to be ~0.05% and gets monotonically enhanced as temperature decreases like a metallic giant magnetoresistance (GMR). Such a tiny PMR ratio is at least three orders of magnitude smaller than the tunneling magnetoresistance (TMR) ratio, justifying our clean metallic junction without a spacer. Our findings demonstrate the feasibility of the controllable homostructure and shed light on future spintronics using magnetic vdW materials. Keywords: magnetic van der Waals materials, magnetic homojunction, plateau-like magnetoresistance, Fe3GeTe2 I. INTRODUCTION After the success of graphene and two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals (vdW) materials, magnetic vdW materials have been recently attracting enormous attention : e.g., insulating antiferromagnets NiPS3 and FePS3 , insulating ferromagnet CrI3 , Cr2GeTe6 , VI3 and metallic ferromagnet Fe3GeTe2 . Among these magnetic vdW materials, the ferromagnetic materials are particularly interesting from the viewpoint of spintronics. They have already been shown to have spin filter effect and tunneling magnetoresistance (TMR) . Besides, the possible assembly of various layered materials, i.e., vdW heterostructures herald more opportunities and flexibilities in the emerging novel spintronics . Metallic ferromagnetic (FM) vdW materials are useful building blocks for new heterostructures due to their compatibilities in spintronic applications . And Fe3GeTe2 (FGT) is the only known example of vdW FM metal (FMM) with topological band structures. It exhibits a large perpendicular magnetic anisotropy with a clear dependence on temperatures and sample thicknesses . Nanometers-thick FGT is a typical hard ferromagnet, exhibiting significant anomalous Hall effect 2 (AHE) with a near-square-shaped hysteresis loop. Furthermore, the recent studies on the tri-layer FGT/Graphite/FGT and FGT/h-BN/FGT heterostructure were reported . Such tri-layer FMM/spacer/FMM constitutes the representative spin-valve model for the well-known giant magnetoresistance (GMR) and tunneling magnetoresistance (TMR) effect , where the spacer is a non-magnetic metallic and insulating layer for the GMR and TMR, respectively. Conventionally, GMR and TMR devices were fabricated with magnetic thin films by the magnetron sputtering or the epitaxial growth. Thereby, it naturally limits the stacking flexibility and diversity of the hetero- or homo- structure, and thus hinders further exciting developments in possible controllable homostructures. In the present work, we achieved a twisted FMM/FMM structure using FGT nanoflake as a model system. Without a spacer between the two FGT nanoflakes, a FGT/FGT structure with a clean interface and a metallic vdW junction was demonstrated. Furthermore, a plateau-like magnetoresistance behavior is found due to the antiparallel magnetic configurations of the two FGT nanoflakes. II. EXPERIMENTAL FGT single crystals were grown by the chemical vapor transport method with iodine as the transport agent. High purity Fe (99.998%), Ge (99.999%), and Te (99.999%) powders were mixed in a stoichiometric ratio 3:1:2. The mixed powder was sealed into an evacuated quartz glass ampoule, which was then placed in a two-zone furnace with a temperature gradient of 750 to 650°C for one week. The nanometers-thick FGT flakes were mechanically exfoliated from the as-synthesized crystals onto the 285 nm-thick SiO2/Si substrates. Starting from the same lattice orientation of the selected nanoflake, we stacked a misoriented structure. Using the dry-transfer method, we took apart half of the FGT nanoflake, then picked it up using a polymer stamp. The picked FGT flake was first rotated by a specific angle and then dropped down on the remaining half of the nanoflake. Finally, the whole entity of the twisted FGT/FGT structure was dry transferred onto the pre-patterned 30/5 nm Au/Ti electrodes on the SiO2/Si substrates. All the fabrication process was performed inside the glove box (Oxygen < 0.6 ppm, H2O < 0.2 ppm) to prevent the surface oxidation of FGT. The transport measurement was conducted using a commercial system (PPMS-9, Quantum Design). III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION In the FGT/FGT structure shown in Fig. 1 (a), a misoriented vdW lattice exists in the interface between Top- and Bottom-FGT. Figure 1(b) shows the optical image of the constructed FGT/FGT sample, where the twisted angle θ is about 87 ̊. In our fabrication process, we could get a freely controlled twisted-stacked structure. Both Top- and Bottom-FGT should have the same properties (e.g., resistance) as they came from the identical nanoflake. The clean interface is essential to achieve a perfect vdW homojunction. The vertical transport property through the junction is suitable for verifying the clean interface because it largely depends on the density of states near the Fermi level and the effective barrier. We were able to prevent an insulating oxidized FGT layer in the junction, by exfoliating FGT nanoflake within the inert gas. as the temperature T decreases. The R-T behavior of the junction is identical to that of pristine FGT, with a high magnetic transition temperature and a resistance minimum . As shown in Fig. 1(d), 3 the perfectly linear I-V curves for both the junction and the single Top-FGT at 2 K confirm the clean metallic interface in the vdW homojunction. Note that, though the interface is metallic, the top surface of Top-FGT might be slightly oxidized due to exposure to the air while transferring the sample from the glove box to the measurement cryostat. The oxidized top surface will reduce the effective thickness and induce possible domain pinning in Top-FGT, resulting in a larger HC compared to that of Bottom-FGT . Next, we investigated the junction magnetoresistance as a function of a perpendicular magnetic field, with current flowing from Top-FGT to Bottom-FGT. The FGT/FGT structure was expected to behave as a single FGT nanoflake due to the absence of the spacer. On the contrary, the junction magnetoresistance turns out to depend mainly on the relative magnetization direction of the Bottom- FGT and Top-FGT. Here, we observed the resistance plateau with the steep jump and drop as well as the linear magnetoresistance below TC (see Fig. 2(b) ~ (e)). Figure 2(a) displays the schematic of the junction magnetoresistance, which is composed of both the single FGT (i.e., dashed line) and the junction (i.e., solid line) contribution. The linear magnetoresistance for single FGT peaks near the coercive field HC, making butterfly-shaped resistance. While the magnetic field H increases, more magnetic moments of the single FGT align along H, leading to magnon-suppressed scattering and linearly reduced resistance . Linear positive magnetoresistance in butterfly-shaped region is arising from the enhanced magnon population, as opposed to the magnon suppression for the linear negative magnetoresistance. Such butterfly-shaped magnetoresistance can be arising from the oxidized surface of FGT. It was revealed that the oxidized surface of FGT can generate tilted spins in the samples , which will lead to the butterfly-shaped magnetoresistance through the well- known anisotropic magnetoresistance effect and the magnon scattering in ferromagnets. As shown in Fig. 2(a), the resistance plateau emerges when the antiparallel magnetic configuration develops in the field range of HC, Bottom < H < HC, Top. We explain that initially, the magnetic moments point along the down direction for both the Bottom-FGT and Top-FGT. When H increases to the positive HC, Bottom, the magnetic moments of Bottom-FGT flip along H while that of Top-FGT remain down against H. When H further increases to HC, Top, the magnetic moments of Top-FGT also flip along the H as that of the Bottom-FGT. Therefore, the antiparallel magnetic configuration develops in HC, Bottom < H < HC, Top in an increasing magnetic field. Since the spin- dependent scattering is more significant for an antiparallel alignment, a high resistance plateau emerges. On the other hand, a decreasing magnetic field also produces a similar antiparallel magnetization state with a corresponding resistance plateau seen in the negative magnetic field range. Here, the higher resistance plateau for the antiparallel than the parallel magnetic configurations in such two metallic FGTs resembles a GMR structure with a metallic spacer. In our results, the symmetrical plateau-like magnetoresistance (PMR) was observed at 100 and 50 K (see Fig. 2(b) and (c)), which is similar to the typical GMR and TMR phenomena. Although the PMR also appears in the lower temperatures (see Fig. 2(d) and (e)), the junction MR shows slightly asymmetric behavior. Accordingly, such asymmetric behavior also exists in the single Top- FGT at low temperatures like 20 K, as shown in Fig. 3. The purple area box covers from the left coercive field HC, L (i.e., left peak) to the right coercive field HC, R (i.e., right peak). The asymmetric behavior HC, L > HC, R is visible in the data taken at 20 K. Due to the asymmetric coercivity, we think that the HC, L difference between the Bottom-FGT and Top-FGT is too small to form a well-defined antiparallel magnetic state. Therefore, the left high- resistance plateau is absent at 10 and 2 K, as seen in Fig. 2(d) and (e). This asymmetricity could also arise from the anisotropic interfacial 4 interaction or the domain pinning effect of Top-FGT. It becomes a dominant factor in reducing the thermal activation at low temperatures, whose detailed study is warranted in the future. The PMR ratio possesses a reasonable value for the metallic vdW FGT/FGT junction. The PMR ratio is defined as [RRAP − RRP]/RRP, where RAP and RP represent the resistance values of the antiparallel and parallel configuration, respectively. As summarized in Fig. 4 (b), the PMR ratio is ~0.05%, which is similar to that of conventional GMR devices (0.1~15%) , but three orders of magnitude smaller than that of typical TMR (70~600%) devices . The small value of PMR ratio in our device implies the metallic interface with the absence of an insulating oxidized FGT spacer, which belongs to the range of the GMR ratio. The temperature dependence of the PMR ratio shows a monotonic increase by ~0.025% from 100 to 2 K, as shown in Fig. 4(b). The PMR effect is suppressed at higher temperatures, which can be explained similarly to the reported GMR spin-valve effect . As the temperature increases, the spin polarization decreases. Meanwhile, the expected momentum transfers between the spin-up and spin-down electrons will occur in the ferromagnetic layers. At the interface, the electron-magnon scattering is anticipated to give rise to spin mixing through spin flipping, which suppresses the relative contribution of the spin-dependent scattering . Therefore, the PMR ratio is reduced at higher temperatures. A passing remark, Fig. 4(b) inset shows that the coercive field HC, Top also increases as the temperature decreases. Previous works revealed that the perpendicular magnetic anisotropy of the FGT increases with decreasing temperature . Moreover, the magnon population is substantially suppressed at lower temperatures . Both factors collectively lead to the enhanced HC, Top and HC, Bottom in decreasing temperatures. Here we would like to discuss the specialty of our spin valve homojunction. In principle, two ferromagnetic metals will not work because they will be strongly coupled with no spacer. However, the vdW gap in the twisted FGT/FGT homojunction could decouple two ferromagnetic layers by much weakening the interlayer coupling . Such weak interlayer coupling between two ferromagnetic layers could help to form different coercivity and stabilize the antiparallel magnetic states, eventually generating the PMR effect. Moreover, the steep resistance changes of plateaus support the absence of the exchange field in the vdW homojunction. Thus, whether the PMR effect is significant enough to be observed depends on a few ingredients including the large spin polarization, weak interlayer magnetic coupling and strong stability of the antiparallel magnetic state for the device, etc. The vdW junction of the FGT/FGT structure can apply to other possible homojunction. And a similar by-layer effect was also reported in other systems like NbSe2/NbSe2 homostructure . Moreover, the twisted interface holds an exciting possibility to develop a crystalline symmetry broken bilayer FGT in the junction. We expect to tailor the interface function by controlling the angle in further study, which may promise the 2D twistronics using magnetic vdW materials. IV. CONCLUSIONS In summary, we achieved a FGT/FGT vdW homojunction structure with the twisted interface. The metallic behavior of the junction resistance confirms the clean interface. In such a homojunction of FGT nanoflake, the plateau-like magnetoresistance (PMR) was observed below TC due to the antiparallel magnetization configuration. Unlike the GMR and TMR devices that require the additional separating spacer, the vdW homojunction here stabilizes a resistance plateau without a spacer. Our findings promise the new type of twisted magnetic vdW devices in 2D spintronics. 5 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The work at IBS CCES was carried out with financial support from the Institute for Basic Science (IBS) of the Republic of Korea (Grant No. IBS-R009-G1) and CQM was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (Grant No. 2020R1A3B2079375). DATA AVAILABILITY The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.