Disentangling Intertwined Quantum States in a Prototypical Cuprate Superconductor J. Choi,1 Q. Wang,1 S. J ̈ohr,1 N. B. Christensen,2 J. K ̈uspert,1 D. Bucher,1 D. Biscette,1 M. H ̈ucker,3 T. Kurosawa,4 N. Momono,4, 5 M. Oda,4 O. Ivashko,6, ∗ M. v. Zimmermann,6 M. Janoschek,1, 7 and J. Chang1, † 1Physik-Institut, Universit ̈at Z ̈urich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, CH-8057 Z ̈urich, Switzerland 2Department of Physics, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark 3Department of Condensed Matter Physics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 7610001, Israel 4Department of Physics, Hokkaido University - Sapporo 060-0810, Japan 5Department of Applied Sciences, Muroran Institute of Technology, Muroran 050-8585, Japan 6Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron DESY, Notkestraße 85, 22607 Hamburg, Germany. 7Laboratory for Neutron and Muon Instrumentation, Paul Scherrer Institut, CH-5232 Villigen PSI, Switzerland Spontaneous symmetry breaking constitutes a paradigmatic classification scheme of matter. However, broken symmetry also entails domain degeneracy that often impedes identification of novel low symmetry states. In quantum matter, this is additionally complicated by competing intertwined symmetry breaking orders. A prime example is that of unconventional superconduc- tivity and density-wave orders in doped cuprates in which their respective symmetry relation re- mains a key question. Using uniaxial pressure as a domain-selective stimulus in combination with x-ray diffraction, we unambiguously reveal that the fundamental symmetry of the charge order in the prototypical cuprate La1.88Sr0.12CuO4 is characterized by uniaxial stripes. We further demonstrate the direct competition of this stripe order with unconventional superconductivity via magnetic field tuning. The stripy nature of the charge-density-wave state established by our study is a prerequisite for the existence of a superconducting pair-density-wave – a theo- retical proposal that clarifies the interrelation of intertwined quantum phases in unconventional superconductors – and paves the way for its high-temperature realization. From subatomic to cosmological length scales, spon- taneously broken symmetry represents a conceptual cor- nerstone with broad relevance in fields such as physics, chemistry, biology and medicine. In condensed matter research, symmetry allows for the classification of mat- ter and can often provide critical insights in their prop- erties without knowledge of microscopic details1,2. No- tably, in quantum materials, which exhibit a delicate interplay between multiple nearly-degenerate states of matter, symmetry is key to understanding the electronic properties. However, experimentally, this inherent com- plexity of multiple coupled phases is a major challenge in determining the all-important symmetry3. This is ex- emplified by a plethora of quantum phases for which the symmetry is not known such as several “hidden order” states4, or exotic superconducting states with complex symmetry5,6. ter. Symmetry breaking is often associated with domain for- mation. (a) Across a ferromagnetic transition, spin rotational symmetry is broken with respect to the underlying atomic lattice. For example, domains with an arbitrary direction of magnetization form in the absence of external stimulus. (b) This domain degeneracy can be lifted by application of an external magnetic field. (c,d) Analogously, by applying uni- axial strain, the degeneracy of charge stripe order is removed in the cuprate superconductor La1.88Sr0.12CuO4. Unconventional superconductivity and symmetry breaking phases are often found to coexist. In cuprate materials, high-temperature superconductivity micro- scopically intertwines with a multitude of electronic quantum states7 including a mysterious pseudogap phase8, charge-density-wave (CDW) order9,10, as well as electronic nematic phases11,12. The mechanism of super- conductivity, the nature of the pseudogap phase and the symmetry properties of the density-wave states remain to be clarified. A central question is whether the entire problem derives from a primary order (a mother state) that breaks all relevant symmetries and induces the for- mation of descendant phases. A pair-density-wave (PDW) a superconducting state characterized by an order parameter that is spatially modulated in such a way that its spatial average van- ishes is a major contender for such a mother state13. arXiv:2009.06967v1 [cond-mat.str-el] 15 Sep 2020 2 a 2 2 (degree) 0.5 1.5 b 0.0 1.0 (counts/ms) no strain 30 K strain 30 K c 7.5 8 8.5 9 9.5 0.2 0.4 0.6 d 0.0 (counts/ms) no strain 30 K strain 30 K 0.18 0.2 0.22 0.24 0.26 4.5 Intensity (counts/ms) e 4.0 no strain 30 K strain 30 K strain 80 K 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 3.8 4.2 f 4.0 no strain 30 K strain 30 K strain 70 K Effect of uniaxial pressure on the charge density wave in La1.88Sr0.12CuO4. (a) Schematic of the experimental scattering geometry. Uniaxial pressure and magnetic field are applied along the b- and c-axes, respectively. (b) Demonstration of how uniaxial pressure along the b-axis enhances the a-axis lattice parameter – smaller scattering angle 2θ implies larger Cu-O-Cu distance. (c) Schematic illustration of the studied part of reciprocal space. Yellow, grey and dark grey lines indicate charge-density-wave ordering vectors without (purple) and with (cyan) application of uniaxial strain, respectively. For the l-scan (d), covering two Brillouin zones (BZs), background subtraction was performed. The h- and k-scans cover only a small fraction of a BZ and hence no subtraction is required. Error bars in (b,d-f), set by counting statistics, are smaller than the used symbols. Horizontal bars in (e,f) indicate the instrumental momentum resolution and solid lines are fits to a Voigt profile. Determination of the CDW order symmetry is an imper- ative step in the search for the putative pair-density-wave order. Experimentally, the outstanding challenge is that due to the existence of domains, the diffraction signa- tures of the proposed uniaxial stripe CDW order is vir- tually indistinguishable from biaxial structures in which the charge density is simultaneously modulated along two perpendicular directions. We address this experimental constraint by employing a domain-selective stimulus to unambiguously establish the existence of unidirectional CDWs in cuprates. This is illustrated in Fig. 1 for the example of spontaneously broken rotational symmetry in a ferromagnet. Notably, spontaneous ferromagnetism involves the formation of domains, leading to a vanishing net magnetization. Only the presence of a weak external magnetic field lifts the domain degeneracy and reveals the low-symmetry prop- erties. Our key finding is that application of uniaxial pressure applied to La1.88Sr0.12CuO4 (LSCO) lifts domain degen- eracy (see Fig. 1) and thereby uncovers a unidirectional stripe structure. The in-plane charge stripe ordering vec- tor is perpendicular to the uniaxial stress. Application of magnetic field amplifies the stripe order within the super- conducting state, demonstrating a unidirectional phase competition. Being generated by a modest uniaxial pres- sure stimulus to La2−xSrxCuO4, the stripe order emerges as an intrinsic electronic property. Charge-density-wave order manifests itself, in La- based cuprates, by satellite reflections at Q = τ + qi. Here τ represents fundamental lattice Bragg peaks and q1 = (δ, 0, 0.5) and q2 = (0, δ, 0.5) with δ ≈ 1/4 recipro- cal lattice units9,15–17 using lattice parameters a ≈ 3.8 ≥ b and c ≈ 13.2 ̊A. In-plane pressure along the b-axis pro- duces a compressive (Cb i ) strain. In turn, tensile strains propagate along the orthogonal in- (T a i ) and out-of- plane (T c o ) directions (Fig. 2a,b). Along these high-symmetry crystallographic axes, compressive or tensile strain is de- fined as εj = (uj − u0 j)/u0 j where uj is the lattice param- eter along one of the three directions Cb i , T a i or T c o , and u0 j refers to the zero-pressure lattice constants. Starting in the normal state (T = 30 K), uniaxial b- axis pressure induces an approximately twofold enhance- 3 0 20 40 60 Intensity (counts/s) a 3 K k-scan strain B = 10 T // c b 3 K h-scan c 3 K 10 T 0.2 0.22 0.24 0.26 0.28 12 12.2 12.4 12.6 d 3 K 10 T Intensity (counts/s) 0.2 0.22 0.24 0.26 0.28 120 140 160 180 e 0 20 40 60 Peak Intensity (counts/s) strain 10 T strain 0 T no strain 0 T Christensen (0 T) Christensen (10 T) f 0 20 40 60 80 Temperature (K) 20 40 60 80 Correlation length (Å) strain 10 T strain 0 T no strain 0 T and k-scans recorded in a c-axis magnetic field of 10 T and with compressive strain along the b-axis direction for l = 12.5. Absence of charge order along the direction of applied strain reveals the unidirectional nature of the charge density wave. Error bars are set by counting statistics. (c,d) Diffraction intensity, displayed in false color scale, around respectively (0, δ, 12.5) and (δ, 0, 12.5) recorded with temperature and magnetic field as indicated. (e,f) CDW peak amplitude and correlation length as a function of temperature for magnetic field and strain conditions as indicated. Grey data points are adopted from Ref. . Error bars reflect standard deviations of the fits (See Methods section). ment of the charge order reflections found at (δ, 0, l) with l = 8.5, 12.5 (See Fig. 2c-e). Along the Cb i direc- tion, by contrast, the charge order reflection (0, δ, 12.5) is completely suppressed (Fig. 2f). The uniaxial-pressure- enhanced CDW order along the T a i axis displays a tem- perature dependence that within a twofold scaling factor is identical to that found under ambient pressure (See Fig. 3e and Extended Data Fig. 6). Upon cooling into the superconducting state (T < Tc), the charge order is par- tially suppressed, as commonly found in the cuprates18. We find that a c-axis magnetic field has no im- pact along the Cb i direction. The CDW order remains completely suppressed even in a 10 T magnetic field (Fig. 3a,c). By contrast, along the T a i direction the CDW diffraction amplitude displays a strong magnetic field effect inside the superconducting state. The stripe order peak is enhanced by an another factor of ∼2.5 upon application of 10 T (Fig. 3b,d). The in-plane correla- tion length (T a i direction) is only marginally improved with the application of strain. Application of magnetic field induces a more significant increase of the correlation length that reaches ξa = 70 ̊A (Fig. 3f). Neither uniax- ial pressure nor magnetic field influences the out-of-plane correlation length (See Extended Data Fig. 7). The enhanced charge order diffraction intensity is in- sensitive to the applied stress magnitude. We find that a strain of εa = 0.01% is enough to trigger the stripe order structure (Fig. 4a). The twofold enhancement remains up to the largest applied strain εa ∼ 0.03%. Finally, we find that the incommensurability δ is marginally larger in the stripe ordered phase (Fig. 4b). This incommensurability effect could indicate a uniaxial-pressure-induced change of orthorhombic struc- ture19. Uniaxial pressure is also likely to influence the low-energy electronic structure. The band structure of LSCO has a van Hove singularity in the vicinity of the Fermi level20. Uniaxial pressure acts to push this sin- gularity closer to the Fermi level (and eventually across) along the T b i -direction21,22. This increase of density of states at the Fermi level may be involved in the stripe order domain lifting. On a phenomenological level, charge-density modula- tion δρ(r) structures are described by19,23: δρ(r) = Re(Φxeiq1·r) + Re(Φyeiq2·r) where r is a two-dimensional spatial coordinate. The am- 4 0 1 2 3 a 30 K 0 1/5 2/5 3/5 4/5 Screw Turns b -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.23 0.24 (r. l. u.) 0 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 Strain-induced stripe charge order detwin- ning. (a) Integrated charge-density-wave intensity as a func- tion of strain εa = ∆a/a and εb = ∆b/b along respective the a− (tensile strain T a i direction) and b− (compressive strain Cb i direction) axis. Insets illustrate the observed diffraction patterns consistent with stripe order (left) and biaxial or do- mains of stripe order (right) respectively. (b) Charge density wave incommensurability, δ, as a function of strain. plitudes |Φx| and |Φy| are non-zero for biaxial structures. Stripe order, by contrast, refers to the case with only one non-zero amplitude. For diffraction experiments, do- mains of stripe order is virtually indistinguishable from biaxial structures. Further more, the amplitudes are dou- bling across both a biaxial to stripe order transition and the detwinning of stripe order. The detwinning or biax- ial to stripe order transitions are captured by a simple Ginzburg-Landau Hamiltonian: − ∆(|Φx|2 − |Φy|2) where κ1, κ2, α, β, γ and ∆ are phenomenological param- eters19,23. A sign change in α models the temperature- driven charge order symmetry breaking. Assuming ∆ = 0, a biaxial to stripe transition appears upon sign change of γ. Only weak uniaxial pressure dependence on γ is expected. A biaxial to stripe order transition therefore requires γ ≪ β to explain our observation. In this limit, higher order terms are important19 and hence ∆ ̸= 0. We therefore define ∆ = η(r) + ε where η(r) takes small negative or positive values to model long range strain disorder and ε is a constant proportional to the applied strain. For α, γ < 0 and ε = 0, stripe order appears with domains as schematically illustrated in Fig. 1. External uniaxial pressure (ε > 0) lifts this domain degeneracy. We interpret the magnetic field effect inside the super- conducting state as evidence for an intertwined compet- ing interaction between these two orders. This competi- tion can be described phenomenologically by adding the superconducting order parameter and a competing inter- action terms to the Ginzburg-Landau model24. First and foremost, our study reveals charge stripe or- der in LSCO in its purest form. Notably, we demonstrate that stripe order that is coupled with unconventional su- perconductivity is an intrinsic electronic property of un- derdoped cuprates. In the limit of static charge stripe ordering, coupling to superconductivity is a key condi- tion to realize an exotic PDW state13, the existence of which offers a natural explanation of the coexistence of a plethora of quantum states including superconductivity in the cuprates. Our demonstration of uniaxial-pressure- induced stripe order in the cuprate LSCO provides a clear recipe for the conditions to disentangle intertwined superconductivity and charge order and to realize high- temperature PDW order. Beyond the cuprates, unconventional superconduc- tivity and charge ordered states such as CDWs and electronic nematic states are coexisting or neighbouring in many material classes such as the iron pnictides25, cuprates11,12, ruthenates26 and heavy-fermion systems27. In the latter, the existence of a PDW has also been proposed28. Although the underlying microscopic details vary across these materials, the concomitant appearance of charge order and superconductivity is universally important. Methods: High-energy (100 keV) x-ray diffraction experiments were carried at the P21.1 beamline at PETRA III (DESY) on La1.88Sr0.12CuO4 single crystals (Tc = 27 K) grown by the floating zone method29. The orthorhombic (Bmab) structure (T < 250 K) generates a spontaneous strain diagonally to the charge density modulations. Our uniaxial pressure device (See Extended Data Fig. 1) is compatible with both a standard displex cryostat and a 10 T cryomagnet. The cryomagnet sample environment restricts the accessible momentum space to the scattering plane spanned by the a− and c− axes. With this configuration, pressure is applied perpendicularly to the scattering plane (along the b-axis direction) while magnetic field points along the c-axis. A zero-field four-circle setup, by contrast, allows access to both the a − c and b − c scattering planes. In this fashion, tensile and compressive strain are accessed directly by lattice parameter measurements30 (See Extended Data Fig. 2). Uniaxial pressure along a Cu-O bond direction detwins the orthorhombic domains (see Extended Data Fig. 8 and 9). Orthorhombic domain detwinning however does not by itself influence charge order in LSCO31,32. Probing the charge order reflections (δ, 0, l) and (0, δ, l) with δ ∼ 0.235 and l = 8.5, 12.5 with or without an analyzer yields consistent results (See Extended Data Fig. 3). Amplitude, position and width of the charge order reflections are extracted from fits to a Voigt function. Correlation lengths are defined by the inverse half-width-at-half-maximum. 5 Authors contributions T.K., N.M., M.O. grew and characterised the LSCO single crystals. D. Bucher and D. Biscette designed and produced the uniaxial pressure cell. J. Choi, Q.W., S.J., N.B.C., J.K., M.H., O.I., M.v.Z., and J. Chang carried out the x-ray diffraction experiments. J. Choi, Q.W., S.J., N.B.C., J.K., and J. Chang analysed the data. M.J. and J. Chang conceived the project. J. Choi and Q. W. contributed equally. All authors contributed to the manuscript.