Skyrmion lattice creep at ultra-low current densities Yongkang Luo1,2,∗ Shi-Zeng Lin1, Maxime Leroux1, Nicholas Wakeham1, David M. Fobes1, Eric D. Bauer1, Jonathan B. Betts1, Joe D. Thompson1, Albert Migliori1, Marc Janoschek1,3,† and Boris Maiorov1‡ 1 Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico 87545, USA; 2 Wuhan National High Magnetic Field Center and School of Physics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China; and 3 Laboratory for Neutron and Muon Instrumentation, Paul Scherrer Institute, 5232 Villigen PSI, Switzerland. (Dated: November 16, 2020) ∗mpzslyk@gmail.com †marc.janoschek@psi.ch ‡maiorov@lanl.gov 1 arXiv:2009.11656v2 [cond-mat.str-el] 12 Nov 2020 Magnetic skyrmions are well-suited for encoding information because they are nano-sized, topologically stable, and only require ultra-low critical current densities jc to depin from the underlying atomic lattice. Above jc skyrmions exhibit well-controlled motion, making them prime candidates for race-track memories. In thin films thermally-activated creep motion of isolated skyrmions was observed below jc as predicted by theory. Uncontrolled skyrmion motion is detrimental for race-track memories and is not fully understood. Notably, the creep of skyrmion lattices in bulk materials remains to be explored. Here we show using resonant ultrasound spectroscopy–a probe highly sensitive to the coupling between skyrmion and atomic lattices–that in the prototypical skyrmion lattice material MnSi depinning occurs at j∗ c that is only 4 percent of jc. Our experiments are in excellent agreement with Anderson-Kim theory for creep and allow us to reveal a new dynamic regime at ultra-low current densities characterized by thermally-activated skyrmion-lattice-creep with important consequences for applications. Introduction In materials that exhibit dynamics under the application of external forces, the onset of motion is determined by the underlying pinning landscape. At zero temperature, a well- defined depinning threshold jc exists below which no motion arises, whereas far above jc linear dynamics occur [blue curve in Fig. 1(a)]. In contrast, at finite temperatures, motion may arise at a much lower threshold j∗ c [red line in Fig. 1(a)] due to thermally-activated creep[Fig. 1(b)]. Creep is technologically-relevant in systems ranging from structural mate- rials exposed to long-term mechanical stress, to wetting front motion on heterogeneous surfaces, to dynamics of domain walls, and to vortex-motion in superconductors. Early on theory suggested that creep may also be important for magnetic skyrmions. Skyrmions are topologically-stabilized objects with a whirl-like spin-texture that emerge from competing magnetic interactions. Due to their topological stability and solitary particle-like behavior, they pin weakly to defects in the underlying atomic lattice, and sub- stantially lower current densities j are required to move skyrmions compared to magnetic domains. In turn, skyrmions are promising for applications in spintronics and racetrack memory devices based on controlled motion of particle-like magnetic nanostructures. 2 Uncontrolled creep motion would be detrimental for devices making the understanding of skyrmion pinning crucial. Indeed, creep motion of solitary skyrmions in thin films has been already observed. However, in bulk materials, where skyrmions typically form a hexagonal skyrmion lattice (SKX) oriented in a plane perpendicular to an external magnetic field (H) [see Fig. 2(a)], creep remains elusive. This raises the question whether the pinning mechanisms in thin films and bulk materials are fundamentally different or if this merely due to differences in pinning landscape. As justified by experiments on both thin films and bulk materials , skyrmion motion is described by weak collective pinning models. For bulk materials, the critical current density (jc), which denotes the onset of movement is expected to be determined by a trade-off between the strength of the pinning potential [V (x), cf Fig. 1(b)] and the SKX stiffness. Distortion of the SKX in response to pinning centers with a characteristic Larkin length ξ [Fig. 1(c)] facilitates pinning. Because a perfectly rigid SKX cannot be pinned, jc depends inversely on the stiffness. The application of a driving current tilts the pinning potential. At zero temperature, skyrmions escape only when ∆U ≤0 [Fig. 1(b)], where ∆U is the height of the tilted V (x). In contrast, for finite temperature, the escape rate from pinning sites due to thermal fluc- tuations is given by Γ ∝ exp (−∆U/kBT), where kB is Boltzmann constant. When the external drive is small, a thermally-activated skyrmion follows an orbital trajectory around the pinning site due to the Magnus force [see Fig. 1(d)]. For j∗ c<j<jc, a skyrmion may escape from a pinning center due to thermal fluctuations; however, it will immediately be trapped by a nearby pinning center, resulting in creep [Fig. 1(e)]. Here j∗ c is a threshold current that denotes that the energy barrier ∆U of the local pinning potential is smaller than the energy kBT of thermal fluctuations. Effectively, skyrmions hop between pinning centers aided by thermal fluctuations, resulting in non-linear motion. The exact creep path depends on the type and distribution of such pinning centers. For SKX thermal fluc- tuations may depin small fractions of the lattice [shown in light yellow in Fig. 1(e)], where each fraction encounters a distinct local pinning landscape, in turn resulting of incoherent movement characteristic of local creep. With increasing j, and thus decreasing ∆U, the fraction of the SKX that may be depinned by fluctuation becomes larger. Eventually global creep occurs, for which the entire SKX becomes depinned and repinned continuously due to a small but but non-zero ∆U that allows to recapture the SKX. For j≫jc, which denotes 3 that ∆U < 0, the SKX flows freely through pinning centers [Fig. 1(f)], leading to a linear regime with coherent motion of the entire SKX [Fig. 1(a)]. The observation of creep motion of solitary skyrmions in thin films was achieved via polar magneto-optical Kerr effect (MOKE) microscopy using current pulses. MOKE also was used to probe skyrmion diffusion, which is interesting in its own right as it has potential for applications in probabilistic computing, was recently observed in a thin film heterostructure that was engineered to have low ∆U . Thermal diffusion of skyrmions can arise at zero current at elevated temperatures that entail a thermal energy kBT larger than the unaltered energy barrier ∆U(j=0). However, the spatial resolution of MOKE is not sufficient to probe SKX motion, because skyrmions in bulk materials are substantially smaller ( 10-100 nm) than in the thin films ( μm). Instead, in bulk materials, microscopic skyrmion movement under current has been in- vestigated by Lorentz Transmission Electron Microscopy (LTEM) and via spin-transfer torque over the lattice by small-angle neutron scattering (SANS). Macroscopically, it has also been inferred from a reduction of the topological Hall effect (THE). However, apart from the associated macroscopic jc, no detailed information on the depinning process is available. In particular, the Hall effect is not suited to identify creep because it provides skyrmions with sufficient time to relax into equilibrium positions on the pinning sites, and thus eliminates side-jump motion caused by the Magnus force. To reveal previously elusive SKX creep in bulk materials we exploit the extreme sensitiv- ity of Resonant Ultrasound Spectroscopy (RUS) to the coupling between the SKX and the atomic lattice. RUS probes the resonant frequencies Fi of a solid which depend on its elasticity to determine the complete elastic tensor (C). Details of how C is computed from the measured Fi are described in Supplementary Information (SI). RUS experiments under applied current on the prototypical SKX material MnSi allow us to probe the depin- ning of SKX with unprecedented resolution and thus to determine j∗ c directly [see Fig. 2(a) and Methods]. We find that in MnSi creep motion occurs at a critical current density j∗ c that is only 4 percent of jc. We show that our experimental results are in excellent agreement with Anderson-Kim theory for creep and connect the creep motion of skyrmion lattices in bulk materials with the previously known creep dynamics in thin films. Results Elastic Response to the Formation of the Skyrmion Lattice 4 First, we briefly discuss RUS experiments at j=0, which establish the magnetic phase diagram [Fig. 2(b)], consistent with AC magnetic susceptibility (χ′) (SI) and literature. The SKX phase appears in a narrow range of temperatures and field within the conically (CO) ordered magnetic phase. A fluctuation-disordered (FD) region can also be seen right above Tc=28.7 K where the system undergoes a paramagnetic-helimagnetic (PM-HM) transition. In the absence of magnetic field, due to the cubic symmetry of MnSi, only three independent elastic moduli C11, C12 and C44 are required. This is corroborated by our measurements [see Figure S4(a-c) in SI]. Under magnetic field H ∥, the symmetry of the elastic tensor is lowered to tetragonal (SI), requiring three additional independent elastic moduli, C33, C23(=C31) and C66. In Figs. 3(a-c), we plot Cij as a function of H at T=28 K. Each subset of Cij splits into two branches under magnetic field. We observe a discontinuous jump in some Cij between Ha1=1.4 kOe and Ha2=2.2 kOe. Based on the field dependence of χ′ shown in Fig. S2(b) (SI), we determine Ha1 and Ha2 as the lower and upper boundaries of the SKX phase, respectively. Below Ha1, there is a weak inflection in Cij(H) near Hc1=1.0 kOe, assigned as the field-induced HM-CO phase transition. Note that the elastic response to the SKX phase has not been seen previously in off-diagonal moduli Cij (i̸=j). Because RUS probes all Cij in a single frequency sweep, it directly reveals the shear modulus C∗≡(C11−C12)/2, which exhibits a much smaller variation than the compression moduli. Further, the jump in C∗ is an order of magnitude bigger than in C66, indicating that hexagonal symmetry of the SKX does not describe the system, as this requires C∗=C66 (SI). Instead, this shows that RUS probes the response of the chemical lattice (which is tetragonal in field) to the formation of the hexagonal SKX. We note that when tracking changes and discontinuities, it is more reliable to plot the raw frequencies. As shown in Table S1 in the SI, the two resonances F1654 and F2419 are predominantly related to C11. For a frequency that depends only on one Cij we have Cij∝F 2, so for small changes in Cij we have δCij ∼2δF. Fig. 3(e) displays the temperature dependence of F2419 at various magnetic fields. For H=0, the profile of F2419(T) resembles that of C11(T) [Fig. S4(a)], confirming the dominance of C11. With increasing magnetic field, Tc is gradually suppressed, and the signature of the phase transition becomes more pronounced for H>2.5 kOe. T ∗, the temperature where the minimum of F2419(T) occurs, initially decreases with increasing H but then broadens and shifts to higher T for H>2.5 kOe where spins become polarized by the external field. The window between T ∗ and Tc 5 describes the FD region in Fig. 2(b). Figure 3(f) shows F1654 as a function of H measured at selected temperatures. The discontinuous jump in F1654(H) can be identified between 26.9 K and 28.5 K similarly as seen in C11 in Fig. 3(a). A positive jump in F1654(H) signifies stiffening in C11 when the system enters the SKX phase. The (maximal) magnitude of the jump in F1654(H), denoted by ∆F [see Fig. 4(e)], is plotted as a function of temperature in Fig. 4(g) with a maximum near the SKX-FD boundary and decreasing as T decreases. The value of ∆F, therefore, is a qualitative measure for the coupling between chemical lattice and SKX. Indeed, the maximum in ∆F near the upper boundary of the SKX (T∼28.2 K) phase can be explained by proximity to the FD regime (see below). Elastic Response under Applied Current Now that we have established the elastic response to the presence of the SKX, we demon- strate the influence of applied electrical current. Figures 4(a-d) display the field dependence of F1654 for various applied electrical currents (I⊥H) at four selected temperatures 28.4, 28.2, 27.7 and 27.1 K inside the SKX phase, respectively. We note that the resonance F1654 is most sensitive to the presence of the SKX because it is related to the elastic moduli C11 which is more than an order of magnitude larger than any other Cij. In addition, F1654 provides the highest quality signal as described in more detail in the SI. Taking T=27.7 K as an example [Fig. 4(c)], ∆F remains essentially unchanged for j up to 56.5 kA/m2, drops abruptly between 59.1 and 64.5 kA/m2, and becomes nearly unresolvable at 67.2 kA/m2, as if the SKX is completely decoupled from the lattice. The threshold current density j∗ c is defined as the midpoint of the drop in ∆F, shown in Fig. 4(f) with j∗ c=62(3) kA/m2 at 27.7 K. The error bar is set by the step size in current. In Fig. 4(f) we also show ∆F(j) for 27.1 K, and the difference in j∗ c is far larger than the measurement uncertainty. We emphasize that the changes observed in the resonance frequencies are not caused by current-induced Joule heating as can be illustrated by several observations. (i) The magnitude of ∆F does not in- crease with j [cf Fig. 4(f)] for temperatures near the lower boundary of the SKX phase (e.g. 27.1 K); (ii) j∗ c does not increase monotonically with decreasing temperature; (iii) the phase boundaries in H depend strongly on temperature as revealed in Fig. 2(b), but the width of the SKX phase with respect to field showing non-zero ∆F remains unaffected for increasing j at all measured temperatures, as expected for constant temperature [Figs. 4(a-e)]. Discussion The drastic changes in the elastic properties above j∗ c suggest that skyrmion depinning 6 occurs at critical current densities that are a factor of 25 smaller than jc ∼1.5 MA/m2 derived from previous measurements. There are several scenarios that may explain this disparity. First, the presence of ultrasonic waves could facilitate depinning by shaking skyrmions off pinning potentials yielding a smaller current for motion threshold as previously observed for superconducting vortices. However, this effect is unlikely here because the same j∗ c is observed with ultrasonic excitation with twice the amplitude [full symbols in Fig. 4(h)]. Another possibility is the difference in pinning defects in our sample compared to previous studies. However, a detailed characterization of our sample (see SI) reveals that it is of the same high-quality as samples used in previous studies, as notably demonstrated by a large residual resistivity ratio (RRR=87). As we discuss in the following, a consistent view on the difference between jc and j∗ c may be established by considering the different sensitivity in detecting the onset of skyrmion motion with distinct techniques. As explained in the introduction, THE is unable to mea- sure incoherent skyrmion motion resulting from creep. Similarly, SANS is only sensitive to coherent rotation of the entire SKX due to spin-transfer torque. In contrast, RUS directly measures the magneto-crystalline coupling, and thus detects skyrmion movement immediately when the SKX decouples from the atomic lattice. Thus, it can detect motion due to creep at much lower current density [cf. Fig. 1(a)] as corroborated by the abrupt change in ∆F as j reaches j∗ c that is contrasted by the gradual decrease of the topological Hall resistivity for j>jc . This is similar to superconducting vortices, where magneti- zation measurements and electrical transport are sensitive to creep and flux-flow changes, respectively. That j∗ c marks the presence of a creep regime is also evidenced by the fits of our data to Anderson-Kim theory for creep for which the local pinning potential vanishes linearly with current ∆U=β(j−j∗ c), where β is a pre-factor . Notably, the measured ∆F is well- described by ∆F(j)−∆F(j=0) ∝ exp[(j − j∗ c)β/kBT] over the entire temperature range of the SKX phase [Fig. 4(f)]. This creep scenario is further in agreement with the observed temperature dependence of j∗ c. As described above, according to weak collective pinning theory, j∗ c is inversely proportional to the SKX stiffness. The temperature dependence of ∆F(j=0) [see Fig. 4(g)] displays two trends. Starting at high temperature from the SKX- FD boundary, ∆F initially increases as T decreases becoming stiffer down to T=28.2 K where j∗ c also minimizes [vertical arrows in Fig. 4(g) and (h)]. The behavior for T >28.2 K 7 is consistent with strong thermal fluctuations near the upper boundary of the SKX phase that soften the SKX lattice which allows to better accommodate local pinning sites, in turn, improving pinning. The resulting enhancement of j∗ c near the SKX-FD phase boundary is called peak effect and was also observed in MnSi via the THE [see orange diamond symbols and line in Fig. 4 (h)] and is well-documented for superconducting vortices. As T continues to decrease, j∗ c and ∆F(j=0) keep displaying an inverse relation consistent with weak collective pinning down to T=27.7 K where j∗ c(T) shows a maximum but ∆F(T) is featureless. To understand the behavior below T=27.7 K, it is important to consider that for bulk materials such as MnSi, the size and shape of the SKX phase is sensitive to the sample geometry due to demagnetization effects . In addition, it has been shown via neutron diffractive imaging that the phase transition to the conical phase is characterized by macro- scopic phase separation where only parts of the sample show SKX order, whereas the rest exhibits conical order . In addition,where in the sample the SKX phase nucleates (edge vs. center) strongly varies as a function of magnetic field . For plate-like samples as were required for our combined RUS and current study, the influence of demagnetization fields is particularly strong in the part of SKX phase that is characterized by T < 27.7 K as the macroscopic phase separation is observed for more than 50% of the field range of the SKX phase . The fraction of the SKX phase showing phase separation increases further when the temperature is lowered. Naturally, the prominent phase separation in the low-temperature regime of the SKX phase, results in magnetic domain boundaries between the conical and SKX phases, which influences the pinning of the SKX. This distinct pinning regime is reflected in a change of the behavior of j∗ c(T) for T < 27.7 K. It is interesting to compare the SKX creep in the bulk material MnSi identified here to the creep of individual observed in thin films reported previously . The ratio of jc/j∗ c found for MnSi varies between 10 and 50 depending on temperature, which is a factor 10-20 larger than the ratio in thin films. Because both the onset of creep at j∗ c and the onset of coherent motion at jc depend on the pinning potential, it is unlikely that this difference is due to a difference in amount and nature of the defects that pin skyrmions in bulk and thin film materials, respectively. Instead this difference originates from a skyrmion lattice being easier to recapture by pinning sites compared to single skyrmions, and therefore a substantially larger jc/j∗ c is needed to enter the linear driven regime. Finally, in contrast 8 to single skyrmions, for SKX we can also differentiate local and global creep motion. As discussed above j∗ c denotes the onset of local creep where only part of the SKX is depinned. Our RUS measurements demonstrate that for current densities j that are a only few percent larger than j∗ c, ∆F vanishes. Because ∆F is a measure of coupling between the SKX and the underlying lattice, this suggest a crossover from local to global creep, where on average the SKX is depinned, but is recaptured continuously. In conclusion, our RUS measurements on the prototypical SKX material MnSi under applied electrical currents provide evidence for the existence of a novel regime of skyrmion lattice dynamics in bulk materials at substantially lower depinning current densities j∗ c than previously reported for thin films. The temperature dependence of this new intermediate regime is consistent with thermally induced creep of a skyrmion lattice. Our results directly connect the creep motion of skyrmion lattices in bulk materials with the known creep dy- namics in thin films, showing that the underlying assumptions for a tilted local weak pinning potential is the correct model for both cases despite obvious differences in the interac- tions that support the emergence of skyrmions. This highlights that our current theoretical understanding of skyrmion creep is complete and will be relevant for applications. Notably, because j∗ c is only about four percent of jc above which coherent skyrmion motion occurs, it is crucial that any devices based on the control of skyrmion dynamics must be carefully engineered to avoid uncontrolled creep. This is particularly critical as real devices will have to work at room temperature, where thermally activated creep will be substantial. Methods The MnSi single crystal was grown by the Bridgman-Stockbarger method followed by a 1-week anneal at 900◦C in vacuum. The stoichiometry of the crystal was examined by energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS). The sample was polished into a parallelepiped along the direction with dimensions 1.446×0.485×0.767 mm3. The orientation of the crystal was verified by Laue X-ray diffraction within 1◦. Electrical resistivity and AC susceptibility measurements revealed a magnetic transition as expected at Tc=28.7 K, and a residual resistance ratio RRR[≡ ρ(300 K)/ρ(T →0)]=87, indicating a high quality single crystal [See Fig. S1 in SI]. All the measurements in this work were performed on the same crystal. Further, the SKX in a different piece of this sample was directly observed using SANS. A schematic diagram of the RUS setup is shown in Fig. 2(a). The sample was mounted between two LiNbO3 transducers. In order to stabilize the sample in a magnetic field and 9 maintain RUS-required weak transducer contact, Al2O3 hemispheres (that also act as wear plates and electrical insulators) were bonded to each transducer. The external magnetic field H was applied along of the cubic crystal structure of MnSi. Frequency sweeps from 1250 to 5300 kHz were performed for each measurement. The resonance peaks were tracked and recorded as a function of temperature and magnetic field. Elastic moduli Cij were extracted from 24 resonance frequencies with an RMS error of 0.2% using an inversion algorithm. Although the absolute error is large (mainly because of uncertainties in the sample dimensions), the precision of the elastic moduli determination is at least 1×10−7. Finally, we note that by measuring all the elastic moduli Cij simultaneously with a fixed magnetic field orientation, accounting for anisotropic demagnetization factors is unnecessary and direct comparisons among Cij can be made. To study the effect of current on moduli, we attached gold wires (13 μm) at opposite sides of the specimen allowing a DC current to be applied along , I⊥H with a cross-section of 0.485×0.767 mm2. To minimize Joule heating at the contacts, the Au wires were spot-welded to the sample and covered with silver paint to improve current homogeneity and reduce contact resistance. The resulting Ohmic electrical contacts were less than 0.5 Ω. Whenever the current was changed, we waited for steady state before recording. A small temperature increase (<30 mK) was observed at the thermometer right after applying relatively larger currents. We compensated for this by adjusting the set-point of the temperature controller. Data Availability Statement (DAS): The data that support the plots within this paper and other findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. Code Availability Statement: The algorithm used to fit the RUS data is detailed in the SI. The computer code itself is available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. Courtney, T. H. Mechanical behavior of materials. (Waveland Press, 2005). Alava, M., Dub ́e, M. & Rost, M. Imbibition in disordered media. Adv. Phys. 53, 83-175 (2004). Cayssol, F., Ravelosona, D., Chappert, C., Ferr ́e, J. & Jamet, J. P. Domain Wall Creep in Magnetic Wires. Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 107202 (2004). 10 Larkin, A. I. & Ovchinnikov, Y. N. Pinning in type II superconductors. J. Low Temp. Phys. Blatter, G., Feigeloman, M. V., Geshkenbein, V. B., Larkin, A. I. & Vinokur, V. M. Vortices in high-temperature superconductors. Rev. Mod. Phys. 66, 1125-1388 (1994). Lin, S. Z., Reichhardt, C., Batista, C. D. & Saxena, A. Particle model for skyrmions in metallic chiral magnets: Dynamics, pinning, and creep. Phys. Rev. B 87, 214419 (2013). M ̈uhlbauer, S. et al. Skyrmion Lattice in a Chiral Magnet. Science 323, 915-919 (2009). Fert, A., Cros, V. & Sampaio, J. Skyrmions on the track. Nat. Nanotech. 8, 152-156 (2013). M ̈uller, J. et al. Magnetic skyrmions on a two-lane racetrack. New J. Phys. 19, 025002 (2017). Jiang, W., et al. Direct observation of the skyrmion Hall effect. Nat. Phys. 13, 162-169 (2017). Reichhardt, C. & Reichhardt, C. J. O. Thermal creep and the skyrmion Hall angle in driven skyrmion crystals. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 31, 07LT01 (2019). Jonietz, F. et al. Spin Transfer Torques in MnSi at Ultralow Current Densities. Science 330, Schulz, T. et al. Emergent electrodynamics of skyrmions in a chiral magnet. Nat. Phys. 8, Z ́azvorka, J. et al., Thermal skyrmion diffusion used in a reshuffler device. Nat. Nanotech. 14, Yu, X. Z. et al. Skyrmion flow near room temperature in an ultralow current density. Nat. Commun. 3, 988 (2012). Reichhardt, C., Ray, D. & Reichhardt, C. J. O. Collective Transport Properties of Driven Skyrmions with Random Disorder. Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 217202 (2015). Dong, L. et al. Current-driven dynamics of skyrmions stabilized in MnSi nanowires revealed by topological Hall effect. Nat. Commun. 6, 8217 (2015). Luo, Y. et al. Anisotropic magnetocrystalline coupling of the skyrmion lattice in MnSi. Phys. Rev. B 97, 104423 (2018). Anderson, P. W. & Kim, Y. B. Hard Superconductivity: Theory of the Motion of Abrikosov Flux Lines. Rev. Mod. Phys. 36, 39-43 (1964). Janoschek, M. et al. Fluctuation induced first-order phase transition in Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya helimagnets. Phys. Rev. B 87, 134407 (2013). Nii, Y., Kikkawa, A., Taguchi, Y., Tokura, Y. & Iwasa, Y. Elastic Stiffness of a Skyrmion 11 Crystal. Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 267203 (2014). Petrova, A. E. & Stishov, S. M. Field evolution of the magnetic phase transition in the helical magnet MnSi inferred from ultrasound studies. Phys. Rev. B 91, 214402 (2015). Migliori, A., & Sarrao, J. L. Resonant Ultrasound Spectroscopy: Applications to Physics, Materials Measurements, and Nondestructive Evaluation. (Wiley, New York, 1997). Migliori, A. et al. Resonant ultrasound spectroscopic techniques for measurement of the elastic moduli of solids. Physica B 183, 1-24 (1993). Evans, D. et al. Defect dynamics and strain coupling to magnetization in the cubic helimagnet Cu2OSeO3. Phys. Rev. B 95, 094426 (2017). Leroux, M. et al. Skyrmion Lattice Topological Hall Effect near Room Temperature. Sci. Rep. Valenzuela, S. O. & Bekeris, V. Oscillatory Dynamics and Organization of the Vortex Solid in YBa2Cu3O7 Single Crystals. Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 504-507 (2001). Maiorov, B. et al. Synergetic combination of different types of defect to optimize pinning landscape using BaZrO3-doped YBa2Cu3O7. Nat. Mat. 8, 398-404 (2009). Campbell, A. M. & Evetts, J. E. Critical currents in superconductors. Adv. Phys. 50, 1249- Valenzuela, S. O., Maiorov, B., Osquiguil, E. & Bekeris, V. Elastic-to-plastic crossover below the peak effect in the vortex solid of YBa2Cu3O7 single crystals. Phys. Rev. B 65, 060504 Bauer, A. & Pfleiderer C. Magnetic phase diagram of MnSi inferred from magnetization and ac susceptibility. Phys. Rev. B 85, 214418 (2012). Reimann, T. et al. Neutron diffractive imaging of the skyrmion lattice nucleation in MnSi. Phys. Rev. B 97, 020406(R) (2018). Fobes, D. et al. Versatile strain-tuning of modulated long-period magnetic structures. Appl. Phys. Lett. 110, 192409 (2017).