Electronic nematic states tuned by isoelectronic substitution in bulk FeSe1−xSx Amalia I. Coldea1, ∗ 1Clarendon Laboratory, Department of Physics, University of Oxford, Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PU, UK (Dated: September 14, 2020) Isoelectronic substitution is an ideal tuning parameter to alter electronic states and correlations in iron-based superconductors. As this substitution takes place outside the conducting Fe planes, the electronic behaviour is less affected by the impurity scattering experimentally and relevant key electronic parameters can be accessed. In this short review, I present the experimental progress made in understanding the electronic behaviour of the nematic electronic superconductors, FeSe1−xSx. A direct signature of the nematic electronic state is in-plane anisotropic distortion of the Fermi surface triggered by orbital ordering effects and electronic interactions that result in multi-band shifts detected by ARPES. Upon sulphur substitution, the electronic correlations and the Fermi velocities decrease in the tetragonal phase. Quantum oscillations are observed for the whole series in ultra-high magnetic fields and show a complex spectra due to the presence of many small orbits. Effective masses associated to the largest orbit display non-divergent behaviour at the nematic end point (x ∼ 0.175(5)), as opposed to critical spin-fluctuations in other iron pnictides. Magnetotransport behaviour has a strong devia- tion from the Fermi liquid behaviour and linear T resistivity is detected at low temperatures inside the nematic phase, where scattering from low energy spin-fluctuations are likely to be present. The superconductivity is not enhanced in FeSe1−xSx and there are no divergent electronic correlations at the nematic end point. These man- ifestations indicate a strong coupling with the lattice in FeSe1−xSx and a pairing mechanism likely promoted by spin fluctuations. INTRODUCTION Iron-based superconductors offer a unique playground to understand unconventional superconductivity and explore the normal competing electronic phases, such as nematic elec- tronic phases and spin-density wave phases. Often the nematic and spin-density phases neighbour each other in the phase di- agrams of iron-based superconductors, making it difficult to assess whether the spin or nematic fluctuations are the most relevant for stabilizing superconductivity . The nematic electronic state of iron-based superconductors breaks the rotational symmetry of the tetragonal Fe plane lat- tice from four-fold symmetric (C4) down to two-fold sym- metric (C2) . This symmetry breaking is expected to have a number of consequences on the electronic properties leading to a series of effects involving anisotropic single-particle prop- erties, showing a distorted Fermi surface (that can be triggered like a Pomeranchuk instability in the presence of interac- tions ), anisotropic spin-fluctuation spectra, and anisotropic transport properties that can lead to non-Fermi-liquid be- haviour . Theoretically, in the proximity to a nematic quan- tum critical point, the nematic fluctuations with wave-vector q = 0 can enhance the critical temperature by pairing through the exchange of nematic fluctuations in all symmetry chan- nels . In real systems, the nematic electronic phase is intimately coupled with the lattice. This coupling has signifi- cant consequences on the observed response, such as the pres- ence of the tetragonal-to-orthorhombic structural transition at the same temperature where the nematic electronic order de- velops. This finite coupling of the electronic system with the lattice is expected to alter the response of the nematic criti- cal fluctuations on superconductivity and the non-Fermi liquid power-law dependencies in transport [7–10]. Isoelectronic substitution is a clean and efficient way to tune phase diagrams of iron-based superconductors, by gen- tly suppressing the relevant electronic interactions and com- peting electronic phases with superconductivity, and to access quantum critical points . A unique system, the chalco- genides FeSe1−xSx, provides an essential route to investigate the interplay between nematicity and superconductivity, in the absence of long-range magnetism. Furthermore, the isoelec- tronic substitution can access the experimental manifestations around a putative nematic critical point, undisturbed by the presence of a magnetic critical point, as found in other sys- tems, like BaFe2(As1−xPx)2 . The parent compound of this family, FeSe, displays a nematic electronic phase and a tetragonal-to-orthorhombic transition below 90 K and no long range magnetic order was detected despite a rich spec- trum of low and high-energy spin fluctuations [14–16]. The bulk superconductivity of FeSe has a relatively low critical temperature close to 9 K but it can be enhanced towards 40 K by applied external pressure . The nematic phase of FeSe is also suppressed at low pressures [17–20] before a new magnetic state is stabilized at high pressures , that competes with the high-Tc phase . Besides applied pres- sure, the bulk superconductivity of FeSe can be enhanced to- wards 40 K via the intercalation between the van der Waals layers of a molecular spacer , and by gating of thin flakes . In a monolayer on FeSe, on a suitable substrate, the transition temperatures reach record values towards 65 K; a strong interfacial electron-phonon coupling and a charge transfer through the interface is proposed as a source for this two-dimensional high-Tc superconductivity . This ef- fect is surprisingly absent in a monolayer of FeS and in the absence of substrate in thin flakes of FeSe . The isoelectronic substitution of the FeSe family can be achieved, by replacing elements with a similar number of electrons outside the Fe planes, using sulphur or tellurium ions on selenium ions sites. The availability of single crys- arXiv:2009.05523v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 11 Sep 2020 2 normalized at room temperature, after Ref. [28–30]. The data are shifted vertically and the arrows indicate the position of the nematic transition that coincides with the tetragonal to orthorhombic transition at Ts. This transition is better visualized using the first derivative of the resistivity, as discussed in Ref. . b) The tetragonal unit cell of FeSe1−xSx (solid lines). FeSe1−xSx crystalizes in the P4/nmm space group z that affects significantly the band structure. Calculated Fermi surface using density functional theory (DFT using GGA approximation and spin-orbit coupling) of FeS in d) and FeSe in e) using experimental lattice parameters at room temperature for FeSe and FeS ). The Fermi surfaces are coloured using the Fermi velocities indicated by the corresponding colour bar. The middle hole band with lower velocity in FeSe has a dominant dxy character whereas the other hole and electron bands have mixed dxz/yz character. The high-symmetry cut of the Fermi surface in the Γ-M plane (kz=0) for FeS in e) and FeSe in f). The dashed line indicates the direction of the high symmetry cuts in ARPES measurements. tals of these materials have allowed intense interest and study of their physical properties, summarized in recent reviews in Refs. 16, 35–37. Furthermore, by combining physical and chemical pressures, the relative position of the nematic elec- tronic phase in relation to the spin-density wave phase can be varied and thus the influence of two competing electronic phases on superconductivity can be disentangled . The scope of this review is to summarize the recent exper- imental efforts in understanding the electronic behaviour of FeSe1−xSx that can provide a unique insight into the role played by the nematicity, Fermi surfaces, proximity to a pu- tative nematic critical point and electronic correlations in re- lation to superconductivity in the absence of any long-range magnetic order. PHASE DIAGRAM OF FESE1−xSx function of isoelectronic substitution with sulphur obtained from transport measurements. The isoelectronic substitution achieved by replacing selenium ions for sulfur ions outside the Fe plane causes an positive internal chemical pressure as these ions have different ionic radii (S2− is 1.70 ̊A compared with 1.87 ̊A for Se2−) . The nematic electronic phase of FeSe, due to its finite coupling with the underlying lat- tice, triggers a structural transition from a tetragonal to an orthorhombic phase at Ts . This transition gives rise to a well-defined anomaly in the transport measurements (Fig- ure 1c) that helps to build the nematic phase diagram and to identify the expected position of each measured single crystal inside the nematic phase, as shown in Figure 1a. The isoelectronic substitution with sulphur in FeSe leads to the efficient suppression of the nematic electronic state, simi- larly to the effect of applied pressure (Figure 1a). In con- trast to applied pressure, the nematic phase can be completely suppressed with sulphur substitution and no spin-density wave phase was detected for any available single crystals. The low- est detected value of Ts is about 25 K, followed by an abrupt drop at the nematic end point (NEP) which occurs close to x ∼ 0.175(5), . Thus, FeSe1−xSx family is unique and permits the exploration of the nematic electronic phase transition in the vicinity of a putative nematic critical point. Inside the nematic phase, the superconducting transition temperature displays a small dome reaching Tc ∼ 11 K close to x ∼ 0.11, varying from 8.7(3) K for FeSe inside the ne- matic phase towards 6.5-5 K just outside it . For higher x values inside the tetragonal phase, the supercon- ductivity hardly changes reaching only 4.5(5) K towards FeS . The suppression of the nematic phase transition in FeSe1−xSx coincides with a decrease in the superconducting transition temperature Tc close to NEP. STM studies have de- tected a rather abrupt change in the superconducting order pa- rameter at the nematic phase boundaries, implying that differ- ent types of pairing may be operational inside (SC1) and out- 3 side the nematic phase (SC2), as shown in Figure 1a . Recently, it has been suggested theoretically that a topological transition associated with the creation of a Bogoliubov Fermi surface could occur as a function of x in FeSe1−xSx . In order to understand in depth the electronic properties of FeSe1−xSx a good knowledge of the exact composition and the sulphur variation in each batch is required. This can be challenging for techniques, like neutron-diffraction and muon spin rotation, that require a large mass of sample made of hundreds of small single crystals . At room temper- ature FeSe1−xSx crystalizes in the P4/nmm space group (No.129), as shown in Figure 1b. The lattice parameters of FeSe are a = 3.7651 ̊A, c = 5.5178 ̊A, zSe = 0.2672 whereas FeS has a much smaller c axis (a = 3.6802 ̊A, c = 5.0307 ̊A, zS = 0.2523) . The lattice parameters mea- sured by X-ray diffraction for each crystal of FeSe1−xSx can be used to determine the composition of each sample. As- suming the formation of a solid solution as a function of com- position, the values of the lattice parameters at room temper- ature, p, (that can be a, b and c or zSe/S) for a certain com- position x can be estimated using an empirical Vegard’s law px=x pS+(1-x) pSe. Single crystal growth Single crystals of FeSe1−xSx are normally grown by the KCl/AlCl3 chemical vapor transport method from the FeSe end towards x ∼ 0.4 . The growth of higher concentrations and FeS was achieved us- ing a hydrothermal reaction of iron powder with sulfide so- lution, which in general is a more invasive method and can lead to single crystals with higher concentration of impuri- ties . Epitaxial thin films of FeSe1−xSx with ≤ 0.43 were grown via pulsed laser deposition . A poten- tial anomaly was observed in the resistivity curves for films with large x, suggested to be linked to a magnetic transition , but these findings have not been yet confirmed in single crystals . The exact x composition for samples in each batch is normally checked using compositional analysis us- ing energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) or electron- probe micro-analysis (EPMA) . The nom- inal composition, xnom, used during the growth process is of- ten smaller than the real composition x (by about 80%) and the higher the composition the larger degree of variation oc- curs within the same batch . For example, the phase diagrams of FeSe1−xSx reported in Refs. uses the nominal values xnom. Thus, the linear resistivity in 35 T oc- curs inside the nematic phase, as the measured zero resistivity shows an anomaly at Ts ∼ 51 K for a nominal composition xnom ∼ 0.16 that would correspond around x ∼ 0.13 . The residual resistivity ratio, defined as the ratio between room temperature resistivity and the resistivity at the onset of superconductivity, varies between 15-44 and it is of- ten used as a proxy to assess the quality of each single crystal. In high magnetic field, quantum oscillations were observed for all composition of FeSe1−xSx reflecting their high quality with large mean free path (up to ∼ 350 ̊A) . For higher x composition, the mean free path decreases slightly and new hexagonal phases could be stabilized . The superconduc- tivity of Fe1+δSe can also be destroyed by very small changes in its stoichiometry . ELECTRONIC STRUCTURE OF FESE1−xSx The main features of the electronic structure of FeSe1−xSx can be understood by considering the two-dimensional square lattice of Fe ions, separated by Se/S atoms residing above and below the Fe layer, as shown in Figure 1b. Due to the strong bonding between the Fe-Fe and Fe-(Se/S) sites, an Fe atom can be placed inside the centre of an almost perfect tetrahe- dron of Fe(Se/S)4 that determines the electronic properties of these materials. Band structure calculations show that the Fermi surface of FeSe1−xSx consists of well-separated hole pockets at the center of the Brillouin zone and electron pock- ets at the zone corners that form quasi-two dimensional Fermi surfaces, as shown in Figure 1d and e. The position of the chalcogen ion in relation to the Fe plane, z, affects signifi- cantly the predicted number and the orbital character of the hole bands, FeSe having an additional middle hole band with dxy character which is pushed below the Fermi level in FeS (Figure 1d and e). There are two predicted cylindrical elec- tron bands which hardly change in shape across this series, similar to the isoelectronic series BaFe2(As1−xPx)2 . The positive chemical pressure in FeSe1−xSx results in a lattice contraction and the reduction of the c axis and it would bring the Fe(Se/S) layers closer together, increasing the band- width and potentially leading to the suppression of the elec- tronic correlations . As discussed below, DFT cal- culations provide essential guide to understand the origin of the observed Fermi surfaces of FeSe1−xSx, but the size are smaller, the number of hole bands is reduced compared with calculations and the kz dependence is changed. ARPES STUDIES OF FESE1−xSx ARPES is highly suited for the exploration of FeSe1−xSx as these systems can be easily cleaved in-situ due to weak van der Waals bonds between the FeSe layers which also enable the development of devices of two-dimensional superconduc- tors by mechanical exfoliation . Furthermore, ARPES studies can evaluate the role of orbital character on the ne- matic electronic states, as the matrix element effects affect the intensity of different bands with different orbital character. In certain conditions, ARPES spectra of iron-based supercon- ductors does not show certain branches due to the underlying symmetry, in particular for the electron bands [58–60], as the intensity depends strongly on the polarisation of the incident beam as well as the incident photon energy. A representation of the orbital character of different pockets at high symmetry 4 using horizontally and vertically linearly polarized synchrotron light (LH and LV) at low temperatures at 13 K for different x compositions (after Refs. 30, 35, and 40). Momentum dependent cuts (MDCs) are shown above each dispersion which allows to extract the kF values at the Fermi level (the instrumental resolution is ∼ 3 meV). The top of the parabolic band dispersion for the outer hole band at the Γ point for x=0.18 is getting closer to the Fermi level (∼ 5 meV) compared with FeSe (∼ 17meV). d) DFT calculations high symmetry cuts for FeS for the same symmetry points like the ARPES data with energies in meV. These dispersions can be compared with experiments to extract the renormalization factor for each band. The colours indicate the different orbital character. The Fermi surface map for the hole bands at the Z point in e) and for the electron bands at the A point in f), after Refs. 30, 35, 40, and 57. Inside the nematic phase, the existence of twining below Ts can cause superposition of the signal from two domains, rotated by 90◦. The orbital character of the map varies around the Fermi surface as depicted for the tetragonal case in h). The dashed line indicates the cuts in a)-c) and the orientation of the maps in e) and f). g) The energy dependent cuts (EDCs) centered at the high symmetry M point for different composition. The energy separation between the two most intense peaks is defined by ∆M, a proxy for the orbital ordering effect. The positions of the high symmetry M1 and M3 points for x = 0.18 are indicated by arrows. h) Schematic of the tetragonal Fermi surfaces in the Z-A plane containing different orbital characters. The the dashed line is a cut along the diagonal of the unit cell used in the ARPES measurements in panels a-c. points is shown in Fig. 2h. Extensive experimental ARPES studies on FeSe found that system has many relevant electronic ingredients for a multi- band system [35, 58, 61–65]. The experimental Fermi surface of FeSe is unusually small having two electron pockets and a single hole pocket (instead of 3), a factor 5 smaller than that predictions of the band-structure calculations (Fig. 1e). Such a small Fermi surface could be sensitive to topological changes in magnetic fields or under applied strain. To bring the DFT calculated Fermi surfaces in agreement with exper- iments, band shifts need to be applied in opposite direction for hole and electrons of more than 200 meV for FeSe and less than 100 meV for FeS . Band shifts also occur at high temperatures inside the tetragonal phase of FeSe and these effects are caused by higher energy interactions as well as the changes in the chemical potential , as found in many iron-based superconductors . Furthermore, like many other iron chalcogenides, FeSe exhibits strong orbitally- dependent electronic correlations due to the larger band renor- malization factor ∼ 7 − 9 of the dxy band compared with ∼ 3 − 4 for the dxz/yz band . These values are obtained by comparing the experimental band dispersion to those from DFT calculations in the tetragonal phase, as shown in Figure 2 . At high binding energies, ARPES spectra detected Hubbard-like bands suggesting the existence of inco- herent many-body excitations originating from Fe 3d states, in addition to the renormalized quasiparticle bands near the Fermi level . Many high energy features of the ob- served ARPES data can be accounted for by considering the strong local Coulomb interactions on the spectral function via dynamical mean-field theory, including the formation of a Hubbard-like band . Another inherent challenge for ARPES studies inside the nematic phase is the likely pres- ence of sample twinning (rotated by 90◦), by cooling thor- ough the structural transition, and a lot of recent effort has been dedicated to address this issue by applying strain to FeSe . 5 Hole pockets of FeSe1−xSx The evolution of the hole pockets of FeSe1−xSx with x sub- stitution for the two high symmetry points Z (at the top of the Brillouin zone) and Γ (at the centre of the Brillouin zone) at low temperatures is shown in Fig. 2(a) and (b), respec- tively. The observed energy dispersions of FeSe1−xSx are all renormalized and shifted, as compared to the DFT disper- sions, leading to much smaller hole and electron pockets, as compared with calculations . The renormalization values corresponding to the two main hole dispersions (with dxz/dxz orbital character) are around 3-4 and hardly change for any compositions inside the nematic phase towards x ∼0.18, but they are reduced to a factor of ∼1-2.3 for FeS, suggesting that the suppression of electronic correlations occurs from FeSe towards FeS . Additionally, the highly renormalized dxy band, found at ∼50 meV below the Fermi level, remains relatively unaffected across the nematic phase transition to x ∼ 0.18 and it cannot be resolved for FeS due to the dis- order effects . The dxy hole band is notoriously difficult to observe in experiments due to matrix element effects and being strongly incoherent in iron-chalcogenides but its dispersion can be revealed due to band mixing caused by the spin-orbit coupling effects . As a function of x sub- stitution, the Fermi velocities increase by ∼10% inside the nematic phase but more significantly outside towards FeS, re- flecting the suppression of electronic correlations, as shown in Fig. 4e. The ARPES studies at the two high symmetry points us- ing different incident energies allows for the evaluation of the kz hole dispersion of the cylindrical Fermi surfaces of FeSe1−xSx and the sensitivity of the second inner hole band to any band shifts inside the nematic phase. The inner hole band, which forms a small 3D inner hole pocket around the Z point, is observed in the tetragonal phase of FeSe but it is pushed below the Fermi level inside the nematic phase . With sulphur substitution, the inner hole band is shifted grad- ually up and it crosses the Fermi level only at the Z point from x ∼ 0.11 and grows in size at x ∼ 0.18. The inner hole band does not cross the Fermi level at the Γ point for any com- positions up to x ∼ 0.18; however, it has been suggested that this pocket could grow in size and become a two-dimensional cylinder for FeS (Fig. 1d and e) . Interestingly, the Fermi surface of the tetragonal phase for x ∼ 0.18 is very sim- ilar to the Fermi surface of FeSe at high temperature. Thus, there is a direct correspondence between the temperature and sulphur substitution in FeSe of the nematic electronic struc- ture of FeSe1−xSx . Simulations of the effect of nematicity To understand the effect of nematicity and the orbital ef- fects at each high symmetry point, simulations based on a model developed in Ref. for a single domain sample are shown in Fig. 3. The parameters for the simulations are ad- justed to match the ARPES experimental data for x = 0.18 in Fig. 2b and c and the other variable are listed in Fig. 3. In the tetragonal phase of FeSe1−xSx, the hole Fermi surface are expected to be circular and C4 symmetric, originating from the dxz/yz bands, as shown in Fig. 2e. In the absence of ne- maticity the two hole dispersions at the centre of the Brillouin zone are expected to be split only by the spin-orbit coupling , as shown in Fig. 3a. Experimentally, the band separa- tion gives a spin-orbit of ∆SO ∼ 13(3) meV for FeSe in the tetragonal phase at high temperatures and for the tetragonal x ∼ 0.18 at low temperatures . As the nematic order is turned on, φΓ, , the hole pocket is expected to become distorted and the splitting between the two hole band dispersions increases, as shown in Figure 3. In addition, the increase in the orbital ordering effects moves the inner 3D hole pocket at the Z point completely below the Fermi level, as shown in Fig. 2 . Experimentally, at low temper- ature FeSe has only one quasi-two dimensional hole Fermi surface (compared with 3 predicted by the DFT calculations) with an elliptical in-plane area at the high symmetry points, as shown in Fig. 2e. The signature of this nematic electronic phase can be induced by orbital-ordering effects and elec- tronic interactions that can drive a Pomeranchuck instability of the Fermi surface . Other scenarios have been addressed theoretically in detail in other works [81–85]. Since samples of FeSe1−xSx inside the nematic phase can form twin do- mains rotated by 90◦ below Ts often ARPES experiments vi- sualizes two superposed ellipses, as shown in Fig. 2e, but only a single ellipse may be observed in detwinned measurements on FeSe . As the orbital ordering is reduced with S substitution, the splitting between the inner dyz bands and outer dyz hole band dispersion is smaller and at low temper- atures from x ∼ 0.11, the inner hole band crosses the Fermi level at the Z point, leading to the formation of the small 3D hole pocket. Inside the nematic phase, the in-plane Fermi sur- faces are highly anisotropic, indicated by the splitting of the two different kF values (obtained from the MDC cuts of two different domains), as shown in Figure 4. With increasing x, in-plane Fermi surface becomes a circle for both hole pock- ets for the tetragonal x ∼ 0.18 but the cylindrical hole Fermi surface has a strong kz dependence . Electron pockets of FeSe1−xSx Whereas the behaviour of the hole bands is well under- stood and consistent between different experimental reports, the behaviour of the electron bands remains a highly debated subject. The P4/nmm unit cell of tetragonal FeSe includes two Fe sites which are related by a glide symmetry and ARPES measurements should detect electron bands emerging from two-crossed ellipses , similar to other systems, such as LiFeAs or NaFeAs . The electron pockets suffer a significant change inside the nematic phase and the relevance of different orbital contribution is still being debated. At the corner of the Brillouin zone (M and A point) in the tetragonal 6 nematic and tetragonal phase, as described in detail in Ref. . This model parameters are adjusted to match the experimental data for the tetragonal x=0.18 in Fig. 2b and c and the spin-orbit coupling is considered as being 10 meV. The starting values used in simulations are the absence of spin-orbit coupling. The orbital order induced affects the electron and holes band dispersion in different way. a) At the Γ point the band splitting is determined both by the spin-orbit coupling and nematicity, giving a band splitting of � ∆2 SO + φ2 Γ, and the hole pockets become elongated in b). One of the inner hole pocket is pushed below the Fermi level. c) At the M point the effect of nematicity is influenced by the anisotropy of the on-site energies of the dxz (φ1) and dyz orbitals, anisotropic dxy hopping (φ3) as well as the spin-orbit coupling and the electron pockets changes shape significantly in d). The in-plane maps illustrate the representation expected for a single domain sample. In real experiments, the superposition of two different domains rotated by 90◦ could occur. phase, there are two degenerate doublet states, M1 and M3, at the zone corner protected by the space-group symmetry, even when spin-orbit coupling is taken into account , as shown in Fig. 3c and d. Therefore, any splitting and shifts of the bands at M (or A) would reduce the crystal symmetry in the presence of the spin-orbit coupling. The nematic order can be triggered by the development of the anisotropy in the on-site energies of the dxz and dyz orbitals (φ1 term) and anisotropic dxy hopping (φ3 term) . The two-crossed ellipse, cor- responding to the electron pockets (Fig. 2h), are expected to have a finite splitting between the inner and outer orbits, due to the spin-orbit coupling in the tetragonal phase, as shown in Fig. 3c. Inside the nematic phase, by increasing both the φ1 and φ3, the degeneracy at the M1 and M3 points are lifted and the bands split apart; this promotes the in-plane distortion of the Fermi surface along its longest axis (Fig. 3c,d). Further increasing φ1, which is related to orbital order induced by the increase orbital polarization of the dxz versus dyz bands, the inner electron band is pushed up and eventually it can disap- pear; thus only a single electron pocket is present, as shown in Fig. 3d. Furthermore, orbitally-induced shifts could shrink the electron pocket along one direction, transforming it into two small Fermi pockets, whereas along the other direction, the electron pocket is enlarged into a peanut shape . Indeed, at low temperatures, the band giving rise to the in- ner electron pocket at the M point is very close to the Fermi level about 3 meV for FeSe (within experimental resolution of 3 meV). This proximity creates the conditions for a topolog- ical transition of the electron pocket into a peanut or Dirac- like crossing, under other perturbations, such as applied strain , as found for thin films of FeSe under internal strain from the substrate . Experimentally, in the tetragonal phase the inner electron band dispersions at M (or A) are expected to have dxz/dyz orbital character when probed along the diagonal of the Bril- louin zone, as shown in Figure 2h. The outer electron band 7 parameter, ∆M, extracted from EDCs at the M point, with x substitution, shown in Fig. 2g. A splitting of 20 meV is already present for the tetragonal x=0.18 suggesting the effect of nematicity is less than ∆M for x=0 . b) The relative distortion of the electron Fermi surface at the M point, ∆kF /kF 0, at T ∼13 K in relation with the tetragonal phase kF 0, as a function of x substitution (after ). c) The variation of the Fermi kF vector with x for the hole pockets extracted from the MDC cuts and assuming that the data arises from two superimposed ellipses. The value of the q/2 scattering vectors from QPI are compared with those from ARPES data, after Ref. . d) The variation of the energy of the top or bottom of the bands at different high-symmetry points. e) The Fermi velocities extracted form the slope of the energy dispersion as a function of momentum for the hole and the electron bands, after Ref. . f) The x variation of the superconducting gap, |∆SC|, extracted for the hole band for FeSe1−xSx and the electron band for FeSe, after Ref. . Another potential small gap of 0.39 meV (open square) was invoked from specific heat data for FeSe . with dxy orbital character is harder to observe due to ma- trix element effects and the incident energy used (Fig. 2c and j). This behaviour is detected for the tetragonal FeSe1−xSx with x = 0.18 shown in Fig. 2(c) and FeSe above Ts . In the nematic phase, the changes for the electron bands are drastic, with M1 point shifting up whereas the M3 shifts down, and additional splitting could take place around these two degenerate points, as shown in Fig. 2c. The energy separation between the two intense features at the M point be- low Ts (EDC cuts), is defined by ∆M which is ∼ 50 meV for bulk FeSe . This splitting is much larger than what would be expected from DFT calculations simply taking into account its small orthorhombic distortion (∼ 5 meV) . The elongated directions of the elliptical Fermi surfaces at the M point are rotated by 90◦ degrees with respect to that at the Γ point due to the momentum-dependent sign-changing orbital polarization, where the dxz band shifts upward at the Γ point but downward at the M point . Interestingly, 20 meV already separates the two doublets in the tetragonal phase at the M point, in the absence of nematicity, for the tetragonal system with x = 0.18 (see Fig. 2g), and FeSe at high temper- atures . This implies that the energy scale of the nematic order could be smaller that 50 meV, as shown in Fig. 4a . A direct signature of the nematicity is the in-plane distor- tion of the Fermi surface. Inside the nematic phase for the electron pockets this can be related to the development of the orbital polarisation ∆n = nxz −nyz. The orbitally dependent band shifts cause the inner sections of the electron pockets with dyz orbital character to contract whereas the dxz sections to expand, but forming a cross-shape due to effect of sam- ple twinning, as shown in Fig. 2f. The degree of anisotropy of the Fermi surface can be related to (kF − kF 0)/kF 0 . where the kF -vector is that corresponding to the inner dyz portion of the electron pocket, and kF 0 is the Fermi k-vector in the tetragonal phase for each compound. Figure 4b shows the evolution of the Fermi surface elongation with x substi- tution and indicates that the nematic phase is responsible for this in-plane distortions, which is completely suppressed in the tetragonal phase. The presence of both highly elongated and isotropic Fermi surfaces of FeSe1−xSx is likely to significantly influence other measurements. STM studies shows highly anisotropic QPI 8 patterns inside the nematic state, becoming isotropic in the tetragonal phase . The resulting QPI spectra exhibit electron-like and hole-like dispersions along different direc- tions (qa and qb, respectively) corresponding to the intraband back-scatterings in the electron bands at the Brillouin zone corner and in the hole band at the zone center, respectively. Thus, the QPI spectra reflect the evolution of the scattering processes across the series FeSe1−xSx. Comparison between ARPES and QPI To clarify the qualitative relation between the QPI branches and the band structure, the scattering q vectors from the intraband backscattering can be compared with the Fermi wavevector extracted directly from ARPES dispersions at the Fermi level, as shown in Fig. 4c. The Fermi momenta of FeSe of a distorted deformed Fermi cylinder can be estimated from the scattering vectors at zero energy (q/2 ∼ kF) to be ∼ 0.05 and 0.08 ̊A−1 for the hole band and ∼ 0.04 ̊A−1 for the elec- tron band . On the other hand, the Fermi wavevec- tor from ARPES for FeSe for the elliptical hole pocket at the Γ point varies between ∼ 0.035 to 0.08 ̊A−1, but is larger at the Z point (∼ 0.1 and 0.15 ̊A−1), as shown in Fig. 4c. These values are close to those from laser ARPES data (which are usually measured around 7 eV which corre- sponds to a kz position closer to the Γ point), varying be- tween 0.036 π/a ∼ 0.038 ̊A−1 and 0.11 π/a ∼ 0.092 ̊A−1. Thus, the resulting elongated hole ellipse of FeSe, with a high aspect ratio (∼3), is one of the most anisotropic Fermi sur- faces among all the iron-based superconductors . Based on the direct comparison between ARPES and QPI data on FeSe1−xSx, the scattering vectors in QPI directly correspond to the in-plane Fermi vectors at the centre of the Brillouin zone (kz = 0). They are less sensitive to kz dependent scatter- ing processes outside of this plane, despite recent theoretical suggestions for FeSe , as the kF vectors at Z are much larger than the scattering vectors (q/2) extracted from QPI, as shown in Fig. 4c. In the case of the electrons pockets, the QPI scattering vector is close to those of the small inner electron wave vector (∼ 0.02(1) ̊A−1) rather than to the long elongated axis of the ellipse (0.14(1) ̊A−1), found in ARPES . Furthermore, the estimated Fermi energies from the QPI dispersions, for the hole bands are of 10-20 meV, in good agreement with the top of the hole band at the Γ point of ∼ 17 meV from ARPES . Laser ARPES data (mea- sured away from a high-symmetry point) give slightly lower values of ∼6.7 meV or 10 meV for the hole band . For the the electron bands the Fermi energies of 5-10 meV from QPI are close to the 3-5 meV corresponding to the inner elec- tron band dispersion . With increasing x, the bottom of the inner electron bands at the M point is pushed lower be- low the Fermi level from about 3 meV towards 15 meV for x=0.18 . The outer hole band crossing at the Z point lies around 25(3) meV from x=0 to x=0.18, but decrease more significantly for the hole point at the Γ point (Fig. 4d). These shifts bring the cylindrical hole band into the regime to un- dergo a possible Lifshitz tranistion at the nematic end point, as suggested by quantum oscillations . The QPI disper- sion associated with the long hole axis scattering vector (Γ point) was suggested to disappear close to x ∼0.11, whereas the short axis scattering vector was suggested to increase to- wards x ∼ 0.25, as shown in Fig. 4c, after Ref. . How- ever, there is no evidence for the disappearance of hole bands up to x=0.18 in ARPES data (Fig. 4c). One can envisage that the two scattering vectors, (q1 and q2) would merge into one value for a isotropic Fermi surface close to x ∼ 0.17. Thus, as the system becomes isotropic a single hole dispersion is vis- ible in the QPI and the scattering vectors are similar to those from ARPES at the Γ point. As QPI is less sensitive to kz de- pendent scattering processes, the small 3D hole band at the Z point in Fig. 4c is not detected . Further theoretical work will be needed to reconcile quantitative features obtained from ARPES and QPI for FeSe1−xSx. QUANTUM OSCILLATIONS IN HIGH MAGNETIC FIELDS A powerful technique to access directly the Fermi surface of FeSe1−xSx is via quantum oscillations in very high mag- netic fields and at low temperatures below 1.5 K . Quantum oscillations originate from the oscillations in the density of states in the presence of the Landau quantisa- tion of a metallic system in an applied magnetic field. The quantum oscillations are periodic in 1/B and the frequency of these oscillations relates directly to extremal areas of the Fermi surface via Osanger relation (Fi = ħ/2πe · Akz,i with frequencies in Tesla ∼ 10−16 ( ̊A−2) of the cross-section area of each orbit). For a slightly-warped cylindrical Fermi surface two frequencies would be observed at the centre (kz = 0) and the top of the Brillouin zone (kz = π/c), and in the case of twinned crystals the cross section areas of different domains would coincide. Quantum oscillations are normally observed only in clean single crystals as the cyclotron en- ergy which separates Landau levels needs to be larger than the broadening of the levels ħ/τ due to scattering. Quan- tum oscillations have been observed for all x compositions of FeSe1−xSx . The isoelectronic substitution result in relatively similar mean free paths (using the Dingle analysis for the maximum hole band orbit ), having val- ues of l ∼ 277(35) ̊A for FeSe and l ∼ 283(20) ̊A for x ∼ 0.19 . Besides impurity scattering effects, the am- plitude of the quantum oscillations is significantly suppressed for heavier quasiparticle masses as a result of the smearing of the Landau levels by the Fermi-Dirac distribution and often heavier masses cannot be observed. Comparison between ARPES and quantum oscillations As compared with ARPES, quantum oscillations are in- sensitive to surface states and the signal is dominated by the 9 x, measured at T ∼ 0.35 K. b) The oscillatory part of the resistivity visualized better by the first derivative of resistance as a function of magnetic field from a-f) at the lowest measured temperature. The horizontal line indicates the period of the low-frequency oscillations ( ∼ 1/λ). c) The frequency spectra of the oscillatory signal (∆ρosc/ρ) obtained by subtracting a polynomial background and using a fast Fourier transform (FFT). A multiplied FFT spectrum is used to emphasize the weak high frequency δ frequency for certain x compositions indicated by vertical arrows. The proposed Fermi surface and the different extremal areas for FeSe1−xSx obtained by shrinking the calculated tetragonal Fermi surface of FeSe from Fig. 1e. Frequencies below 200 T cannot be reliably assigned due to a possible overlap of at least 3 different small frequencies (α1, α2 and χ). These graphs are adapted from Ref. . bulk response thus giving an unambiguous probe of the bulk Fermi surface. Furthermore, they have a much better k-space resolution of 103 of the area of the Brillouin zone that al- lows very accurate determination of the cross-section orbits on the Fermi surface, for a particular magnetic field orienta- tion. However, the location of the orbits in the k-space is not easily known for multiband systems (Fig. 1d-g) making the assignment of the potential frequencies for a multi-band sys- tem difficult. In these circumstances, the angular dependence of the observed orbits is used as a guide to assign the different orbits to Fermi surfaces as the minimum and maximum orbits will have different angular dependencies and it is expected that the cyclotron effective mass for the same band is likely to have similar values . Even in twinned samples, the quantum oscillations are likely to be unaffected as the cross- section areas originating from different domains would be the same, however, any differences only be noticeable at very high rotation angles where the quantum oscillation amplitude dis- appears. The experimental Fermi surface of FeSe1−xSx could potentially have four different sheets, that could generate up to seven or eight extremal orbits at the high symmetry points due the strong kz dependence, as shown in Fig. 5d. In a system with many similar small orbits (with kF values below 0.08 ̊A) the expected frequencies would be found below 200 T. A clear separation between individual small frequencies is hampered by the limited magnetic field window (20-45 T) caused by the presence of superconductivity and large upper critical field (< 20 T) (Fig. 5a. This low frequency region is also affected by extrinsic effects in a fast Fourier transform (Fig. 5c, such as the 1/f noise and the peak created by a background polyno- mial, making any reliable assignment of the small frequencies difficult. An interesting insight into the origin of the quantum oscil- lation amplitudes was provided by magnetotransport and Hall effect in ultra-high magnetic fields up to 90 T in FeSe . By comparing the changes in the relative amplitudes of the quantum oscillations of the ρxx and ρxy components, and con- sidering the positive sign of the high-field Hall signal at very low temperatures , the mobile carriers were assigned to the hole band (β and δ orbits) . The frequencies of quantum oscillations assigned to the quasi-two dimensional hole cylinder of FeSe are 220 T for β orbit at the Γ point and 660 T for the δ orbit at the Z point, when magnetic field B||c. The cyclotron effective masses associated with these two or- bits are around 4.5(5) me, in good agreement between dif- ferent studies . The estimated frequencies of the hole pockets using the kF values from ARPES data (Fig. 4c) are consistently smaller than those assigned in quantum os- 10 cillations (by ∼ 150 T or 24% smaller for the δ orbit at the Z point and ∼ 100 T or 50% smaller for the β orbit at the Γ point for FeSe). One obvious difference between the two techniques is related to sensitivity to surface states in ARPES, compared with bulk, that is normally probed by quantum os- cillations. ARPES resolution, kz dependence and the energy and momentum integrations is expected to affect the precise kF values. Variation of the values for the top of the hole band at the Γ point of 6.7-15 meV is found between different re- ports for FeSe , and this will affect the precise deter- mination of the kF values. On the other hand, the high fre- quency values from quantum oscillations have a much better agreement between different reports . Quantum oscillations are measured below 1 K in high magnetic field above 20 T whereas ARPES is measured in zero field above 10 K (∼ 1meV). As inner pockets of FeSe1−xSx are small, magnetic field could induce additional spin-polarization of the Fermi surfaces in very high magnetic fields (3-4 meV). An- other discrepancy between quantum oscillations and ARPES is related to the orbitally averaged effective masses that are larger for the outer electron bands (∼ 7me) compared with the hole bands (∼ 4.5me) in quantum oscillations . In contrast, the Fermi velocities extracted from ARPES are larger at the A point (0.66 eV ̊A) compared with hole bands at the Z point (0.4-0.5 eV ̊A) . However, the velocities in ARPES are extracted for only one of the highly symmetry direction and the values are not orbitally averaged (Fig. 2). Quantum oscillations in iron-based superconductors detect clearly electron Fermi surfaces with lighter effective masses in LaFePO , LiFe(As/P) and BaFe2As2 . These orbits originate from inner and outer quasi-two dimensional cylinders due to the finite spin-orbit coupling, as depicted for FeSe1−xSx in Fig. 3c. In FeSe, the orbital differentiation is much more pronounced than in iron pnictides, as the dxy band is involved in the formation of outer flower-shaped electron orbit (Fig. 2h). This would lead to a much heavier orbitally averaged cyclotron mass of ∼ 7 me, associated with the outer electron orbit around the A point (γ orbit of ∼ 560 T) for FeSe, as shown in Fig. 6a . Based on kF values at the A point determined from ARPES with Fermi vector values of 0.03(1) and 0.19(1) ̊A−1 , the area of a flower-shaped orbit would be ∼ 350 T (or ∼ 35% of γ orbit) whereas for a single ellipse pocket reaches only ∼ 190 T, which is or ∼ 66% smaller than the γ orbit from quantum oscillations. In ultra high magnetic fields, potential breakdown orbits could be generated by tunneling across the gaps created by the spin- orbit coupling, but the necessary magnetic fields are likely to be very large and the orbits would be smaller than that of the flower-shaped orbit . The nematicity has a drastic effect on the electron bands and it can lead to highly elongated pock- ets with a very small inner electron band, as shown in Fig- ure 3c. At 13 K, the inner band at the M point gets very close to the Fermi level within 3 meV for FeSe (within the experi- mental resolution). Thus, any small changes in the band po- sitions relative to the chemical potential (1-2 meV) that could occur at low temperatures below 1.5 K and in high magnetic fields could potentially push the inner electron bands above the Fermi level at the M point and lead to single elliptical or- bit or an elliptical pocket and two tiny electron pockets, as shown in Figure 3c. Recent studies promotes the idea that FeSe would only have a single electron pocket in the corner of the Brillouin zone. For a peanut-like pocket at the A point its area is al- most a factor 3 smaller than the γ pocket in quantum oscil- lations, the change compensation of the system would be lost and the magnetotransport data of FeSe cannot be explained . The proximity of the inner electron band to the Fermi level is highly sensitive to small energetic alterations within experimental resolution (∼ 3 meV), any differences in Fe sto- ichiometry, surface effects or the possible changes that can occur under applied uniaxial stress, as found for thin films of FeSe under strain from a substrate ). Thus, different sce- narios related to the fate and the number of the electron pock- ets (Fig. 3c) need to be considered, besides other theoretical reasons [64, 65, 101–103]. FeSe1−xSx due to the presence of multiple small Fermi sur- faces areas. The signature associated with the inner electron band in quantum oscillations would be a peak in the Fast Fourier transform below 100 T. Previously, it was assumed that FeSe has a single cylindrical electron pocket, with areas varying between 50 T pocket for its minimum and 550 T (γ) for its maximum . This variation would suggest a much more warped Fermi surface cylinder for the electron band (factor 10 between the two high symmetry areas), as com- pared with the hole band, for FeSe, in disagreement with the kz dependence determined from ARPES studies . The quantum oscillations spectra could assign the lowest fre- quency below 100 T to the inner quasi-two dimensional elec- tron pocket, whereas γ and ε around 440 T could correspond to the outer electron band (Figure 5d) . A small in- ner electron pocket is not easy to observe using spectroscopic techniques, nor does it have a large contribution to the density of states, but it plays an important role in magnetotransport due to its high mobility . With sulphur substitution for small x < 0.09, quantum oscillations show similar features to those of FeSe, as shown in Figure 5c. As the nematic effects are progressively removed, the inner electron orbits would in- crease in size, reaching a value of 200 T in FeS . Evolution of Fermi surface areas of FeSe1−xSx The overall evolution of the Fermi surface of FeSe1−xSx implies that the majority of the cross-sectional areas expand as a function of chemical pressure, in particular the maximum orbits located at the top of the Brillouin zone, as shown in Fig. 6g . For the outer hole band (δ orbit), the increase in areas reflects the transition from an in-plane anisotropic to isotropic Fermi surface, as the ellipse transforms into a circle, and as the in-plane areas increase due to changes in the lattice parameters . These trends are in contrast to the 11 small Fermi surfaces observed under applied pressure in FeSe, suggested to result from Fermi surface reconstruction inside the spin-density phase . However, the Fermi surfaces of FeSe1−xSx are severely reduced in size compared with those predicted by DFT calculations (varying from a factor of 5 for FeSe towards a factor 3 for x ∼ 0.17). This shrinking is an im- portant consequence of strong orbitally-dependent inter- and intra-band electronic interactions, significantly large in iron chalcogenides , but also found in many iron-based superconductors . These effects are suppressed once the bandwidth increases with sulphur substitution towards FeS or with phosphorus substitution in BaFe2(AsxP1−x)2, as shown in Fig. 6g and h . The largest orbit detected in FeS is almost a factor 2 larger than for x ∼ 0.19. but it is still a factor 2 smaller than that predicted by band structure, and band-shifts of 0.1 eV are required to bring experiment in agreement with DFT calculations . The Fermi energies estimated from quantum oscillations of FeS have significantly increased to 27 − 102 meV , compared with 3-18 meV estimated for FeSe . Transport measurements in a multi-band system like FeSe1−xSx are normally dominated by the pockets with the highest mobility carriers in a parallel resistor model. The magnetoresistance at low temperatures shows a prominent low frequency oscillation from x = 0.12 towards NEP (Fig. 5a and b) . Outside the nematic phase, the background mag- netoresistance is almost quadratic in magnetic field and the dominant low-frequency oscillation has disappeared (Fig. 5). This dominant low frequency is not detected at higher sulphur substitution or higher pressures beyond the nematic end point inside the tetragonal phase . In quantum oscillations, the disappearance of a frequency could be linked to a possi- ble Liftshitz transition, which is a topological change of the Fermi surface in which the neck of a quasi-two dimensional is disconnected while the top of the cylinder expands such that the volume remains the same . ARPES data indicate that a small inner 3D hole pocket centered at Z is expected to emerge from x ∼ 0.11, as shown in Fig. 2. This small 3D pocket is supposed to grow in size with x, rather than to dis- appear. However, in high magnetic fields, this 3D hole pocket could become heavily spin-polarized and, therefore, one of its polarized sheet could disappear at the nematic phase bound- aries. Another scenario can rely on the strong increase in the interlayer warping as a function of chemical or applied pres- sure, as the conducting layers come closer together when c axis decreases. DFT calculations of FeSe and FeS show in- deed that the hole bands are highly sensitive to the position of the chalcogen atom above the Fe plane . ARPES studies for the tetragonal x ∼ 0.18 suggest that the hole band at the Γ point is smaller compared with FeSe and the top of the band is about 5 meV above the Fermi level, as shown in Fig. 4d . Thus, the orbit associated with the hole band at the Γ point could be a prime candidate for the observed dis- appearance of a significant frequency in quantum oscillations. Other scenarios could invoke magnetic field-induced Lifshitz transitions affecting the bands with very small Fermi energies, such as the inner hole and electron bands, that are comparable to the Zeeman energy (3-4 meV) . Multi-band interfer- ence effects as well as oscillations of the chemical potential could be considered as other potential theoretical avenues to understand these effects in magnetic fields . Electronic correlations at a putative nematic critical point The cyclotron-averaged effective masses of the quasiparti- cles for each extremal orbit can be extracted from the tem- perature dependence of the amplitude of the quantum oscil- lations . The quasiparticle masses associated with the largest hole orbit δ around the Z point increase slowly from 4.3(3)me towards a local maximum around x < 0.11 before the values continue to decrease outside the nematic phase to around 3.2(5)me for x ∼ 0.19. In the end com- pound FeS, quantum oscillations have revealed very light ef- fective masses ranging from 0.6 − 2.1me . The over- all trends shows that cyclotron masses are larger inside the nematic phase of FeSe1−xSx but they are getting lighter with the increasing bandwidth . The reduction of the electronic correlations towards FeS is supported by the enhanced veloc- ities from ARPES, shown in Fig. 4e . The effective mass of the prominent small frequency oscillation (λ) is small be- low 2me. Due to its heavy mass and its possible proximity to the δ orbit, the γ orbit (with some orbitally averaged dxy character) cannot be detected over the entire range but it is expected to follow similar trends to the hole bands effective mass (δ) and to the electronic contribution to the specific heat (Fig. 6a) . The nematic state of FeSe1−xSx is a correlated electronic state based on the quasiparticle effective masses. Interest- ingly, the electronic correlations assigned to the orbits with predominant dxz/dyz character (outer hole band, δ) follow similar trends as Tc, as shown in Figure 6c and d, suggesting that this quasi-two dimensional hole band is likely to play a dominant role in the pairing mechanism. The trends in the effective masses are in good agreement with those from spe- cific heat studies on FeSe1−xSx that show a slight increase in the Sommerfeld coefficient (7-9 mJ/mol K) inside the ne- matic phase before being smoothly suppressed, without any enhancement at the nematic end point . Ad- ditionally, the Fermi liquid behaviour A1/2 coefficient ex- tracted from the low temperature resistivity measurement has the same trends like the cyclotron mass, as shown in Figure 6 Note that these values of the A1/2 coefficient agree with those reported in Ref. , once adjusted for the correct value of x based on the Ts of each sample, shown by the open trian- gle in Figure 6b. To asses the nematic critical behaviour in FeSe1−xSx, it is worth emphasizing that the electronic correlations and the or- bitally averaged cyclotron masses do not show any divergence close to NEP (x ∼ 0.175(5)), as shown in Figure 6c . Instead, the effective mass of FeSe1−xSx reaches the largest value deep inside the nematic phase, where the superconduc- 12 cies, γ and δ and the dominant low frequency, λ. Solid lines are guides to the eyes. Grey areas indicate either the nematic phase for FeSe1−xSx or the spin-density wave (SDW) for BaFe2(AsxP1−x)2. b) Comparison between the Fermi liquid coefficient A and the effective masses for different compositions of FeSe1−xSx. The band masses of the δ orbit (from Ref. ) are compared to A1/2, extracted from the low temper- atures Fermi-liquid behaviour, and shown as solid triangles (after Ref. ). Data shown as open triangles were reported in Ref. using nominal xnom values and they are shifted in x to smaller values (as indicated by horizontal arrows) to match the real concentration based on the values of Ts, as reported previously . The nematic end point (NEP) occurs close to x ∼ 0.175(5) and the solid thick lines are guides to the eye. The comparison between the effective mass of maximum orbit of the outer hole (at the Z point), δ, in FeSe1−xSx in c) and the maximum orbit β of the outer electron band (at the A point) in tetragonal phase of BaFe2(AsxP1−x)2 in e) together with the evolution of the superconducting critical temperature, Tc in d) and f), respectively. The quantum oscillations data for FeS are from Ref. . A qualitative correlation is found between the Tc and the electronic correlations for the two systems, but superconductivity in the vicinity of the SDW is a fact 3 stronger than in FeSe1−xSx. Superconductivity is enhanced at the magnetic critical point in BaFe2(AsxP1−x)2 but this does not occur at the nematic end point in FeSe1−xSx, suggesting that the nematic fluctuations are not the main driver for superconductivity. Instead, a local peak in Tc inside the nematic phase may signify an enhanced low-energy spin fluctuation in this regime . The evolution of the multiple observed quantum oscillations frequencies of FeSe1−xSx in g) compared with those of BaFe2(AsxP1−x)2 in h). The lines are guides to the eye to indicate the potential origin of the observed frequencies. Frequencies of FeS are also larger . Pronounced Fermi surface shrinking is observed in both systems as the electronic correlations are enhanced. tivity is the strongest and the low-energy spin-fluctuations are expected to be the largest . The lack of divergent effective masses at NEP points towards a finite coupling of the elec- tronic system with the underlying lattice that can suppressed the critical nematic fluctuations, except along certain direc- tions in FeSe1−xSx. Nematic susceptibility as a function of chemical pressure suggest the possibility of having a nematic critical point in FeSe1−xSx . However, at low tempera- tures there are no divergent electronic correlation in any of the measured quantities in the vicinity of the nematic end point, suggesting an important role for the coupling of the electronic system with the lattice in this system . Signatures of quantum criticality caused by diverging spin fluctuations were detected in quantum oscillations in BaFe2(As1−xPx)2, by approaching the spin-density wave phase from the tetragonal phase. The cyclotron effective mass of the outer electron bands increases from 1.8 to 3.5me over a large compositional range (x = 0.4 − 1) in the tetragonal phase, as shown in Figure 6e . This enhancement of the effective mass in BaFe2(As1−xPx)2 correlates directly with the strong increase in the superconducting transition tem- perature. The quantum oscillations frequencies originate from the lighter electron bands in BaFe2(As1−xPx)2 and their fre- quencies get smaller as the system evolves from the metallic tetragonal phase towards the spin-density wave phase. These trends are similar to those expected for FeSe1−xSx. It is worth emphasizing that for both systems only the effective mass is reported, not the mass enhancement in relation to the band mass, due to the complexity involved in establishing the de- tails of the correct band structure for the mixed isoelectronic systems. Figure 6 compares the effective masses for the two isoelectronic systems and it suggests that the relevant inter- actions that enhance the effective masses in FeSe1−xSx are the same that enhance superconductivity. These pairing in- teractions are strongest deep inside the nematic phase not at the nematic end point. Their origin could be the spin fluctua- tions in both systems and they are also likely to be responsi- ble for the linear resistivity observed inside the nematic phase for FeSe1−xSx and for BaFe2(As1−xPx)2 for x ∼ 0.33 . The superconductivity is strongly enhanced in the proximity of a magnetic critical point in BaFe2(As1−xPx)2, as opposed to the small abrupt drop in Tc at the nematic end point FeSe1−xSx (see Figure 6d). This suggests that a strong nematoelastic effect suppresses the critical nematic fluctua- tions and the superconducting mechanism has a non-nematic origin in FeSe1−xSx . 13 THE NEMATIC SUSCEPTIBILITY OF FESE1−xSx A direct measurement to test for the existence of an in- trinsic nematic electronic state is the determination of the ne- matic susceptibility, that is the related to the in-plane resistiv- ity anisotropy under a small amount of external strain . These type of studies have established that the tetragonal-to- orthorhombic structural transition in iron pnictides is driven by the electronic instability of the system . The Curie- Weiss behavior of nematic susceptibility near a nematic transi- tion is expected to display a generic mean-field behavior. The nematic fluctuations of the nematic order parameter, which couple linearly to the orthorhombic distortion via the ne- matoelastic coupling, are expected to be suppressed but this may not be the case if the nematic fluctuations are driven by the spin fluctuations . The nematic susceptibility of Ba(Fe1−xCox)2As2 follows a Curie-Weiss dependence and the mean field nematic critical temperature closely tracks the actual structural transition temperature, being suppressed to zero at the optimal doping . The divergence of the ne- matic susceptibility above Ts indicates the tendency towards an electronic nematic phase transition and the Weiss temper- ature indicates the strength of nematic fluctuations . At a critical nematic point, the nematic susceptibility should di- verge at zero temperature (in proportion to 1/T) and power law behaviours in temperature and composition are expected . Nematic susceptibility measurements for FeSe and FeSe1−xSx indicate a large divergence above the Ts, similar to what was previously observed in Ba(Fe1−xCox)2As2, but in the absence of magnetic order . Nematic susceptibility of FeSe has an opposite sign to other pnictides , but similar to other chalcogenides, like FeTe , as the resistance along the a (AFM) direction is larger than that along b axis (FM direction). A sign-change in the in-plane anisotropy could be induced by the different scattering rates by spin fluctuations corresponding to different Fermi velocities at the hot-spots for electron- and hole-doped pnictides . In FeSe, despite the lack of long-range magnetic order, the anisotropy of the in-plane resistance below Ts follows qualitatively a model assuming that the electrons are mainly scattered by magnetic fluctuations . Elastoresistance measurements in FeSe1−xSx superconductors found that the nematic transition temper- ature decreases with x, whereas the nematic fluctuations are strongly enhanced, similar to Ba(Fe1−xCox)2As2. The observation of strong nematic fluctuations is consistent with the presence of a nematic quantum critical point, but this observation is insufficient to determine whether these fluctuations are driven by quantum criticality. Future studies to establish a suitable power law of the nematic susceptibility are needed in order to identify whether this point represent a critical point in FeSe1−xSx. However, the lack of divergent electronic correlations in quantum oscillations or enhanced superconductivity at the nematic end point suggest a strong suppression of critical fluctuations in FeSe1−xSx. MAGNETOTRANSPORT BEHAVIOUR OF FESE1−xSx In multi-band systems with different carrier mobilities, the magnetoresistivity components ρxx and ρxy have complicated behaviour in magnetic field. In the presence of a single domi- nant scattering time, the magnetoresistance is expected to fol- low Kohler’s rule and a B2 dependence . In the tetrago- nal phase of FeSe1−xSx, a quadratic dependence of the mag- netoresistance is found up to 69 T both at high temperature above Ts or at low temperature outside the nematic phase boundaries for x ≥ 0.19 . On the other hand, inside the nematic phase of FeSe1−xSx, Kohler’s rule is violated and the magnetoresistance of FeSe1−xSx, follows an unusual B∼1.55 power law in high magnetic fields . Furthermore, scal- ing to a modified Kohler’s rule as a function of the Hall an- gle was found in the vicinity of the nematic end point . Another way to understand this complex behaviour is to sepa- rate different components of magnetoresistance, as suggested in Ref. The coefficient of one of the extracted compo- nent has the same temperature dependence as the resistivity slope in 34 T in FeSe (Fig. 7), once adjusted for the cor- rect compositions as Refs. uses the nominal sulphur concentration. Furthermore, other types of magnetoresistivity scaling found for BaFe2(As1−xPx)2 , are not found for FeSe1−xSx , and these effects are likely to occur for samples with higher impurity scattering . Highly mobile small carriers in FeSe1−xSx beyond the two-band model A compensated two-carrier model can describe the be- haviour of the magnetoresistance and the Hall effect of FeSe1−xSx in the tetragonal phase . For a compen- sated metal, the sign of the Hall coefficient depends on the dif- ference between the hole and electron carrier mobilities . At high temperatures in the tetragonal phase, the Hall effect is linear and the Hall coefficient, RH = ρxy/B, is close to zero as the hole and electron pockets have rather similar mobilities . Inside the nematic phase, the Hall coefficient for FeSe, extrapolated in the low-field limit (below 1 T), is negative at low temperatures with a minimum around 20 K . These anomalies indicate that the magnetotransport behaviour of FeSe cannot be described using a two-band compensated model, and an additional higher mobility charge carrier is re- quired (with carrier concentration of 0.7×1020 cm−3, a fac- tor 5 smaller than the size of the largest band) . This component would correspond to a Fermi surface of small volume that could be linked to the inner electron band with frequencies below 100 T and a light effective mass (∼ 2 me) . With increasing x, the Hall coefficient at low temperatures is positive for x ∼ 0.11, suggesting the domi- nance of highly mobile hole carriers, as shown in Figure 7d 14 . This sign change occurs for the same composition at which the highly mobile 3D hole pocket center is detected in ARPES studies at the Z-point around x ∼ 0.11, shown in to dominate the magnetotransport behaviour across the whole nematic phase of FeSe1−xSx , Furthermore, FeSe under pressure shows similar trends to the chemical pressure effect and the normal-state Hall resistivity changes sign from negative to positive, showing dominant highly mobile hole carriers at high pressures . The orbital order significantly affects band shifts for the electron bands and it can generate very small pockets, as shown in Fig. 3. The presence of the small number of highly mobile carrier was suggested to be linked to the Dirac-like dis- persions in the nematic phase on some sections of the electron pockets . Large orbital-dependent shifts of ∆M ∼ 70 meV in FeSe thin films on SrTiO3 have been found to gen- erate Dirac-like dispersion around the M point , but these shifts are much larger than those of ∆M ∼ 50 meV in bulk FeSe. Magnetotransport cannot distinguish whether there are two tiny electron-like pockets or one small electron pocket (Fig. 3c for large φ3 values), besides the almost compensated hole and electron bands in FeSe. It is clear that a two-band picture containing an single electron and hole pocket and as- suming isotropic scattering fails to describe magnetotransport behaviour of FeSe . Significant changes in scattering could occur for a elon- gated nematic Fermi surface of FeSe1−xSx . Two scattering wave-vectors are detected by STM suggesting different scattering processes along certain directions of an elongated ellipse . A flower-shaped electron orbit would have a strongly varying angular velocity and the scat- tering rate could vary strongly due to the changes of the or- bital character on various sections induced by spin fluctua- tions . Hall effect in iron-based superconductors is also affected by the spin fluctuations that induce mixing of the electron and hole currents . All these effects could lead to highly anisotropic scattering rates in FeSe1−xSx that are suppressed with x substitution. Indeed, in the tetrago- nal phase a single scattering process dominates the magne- totransport, as Kohler’s rule is obeyed . Further theoreti- cal work is needed to understand transport and magnetotrans- port data of FeSe1−xSx. Future models should account for anisotropic scattering and scattering of quasiparticles from the domain walls, when the nematic domain size (determined by the quenched disorder) is smaller than the normal state mean- free path . FeSe1−xSx displays deviation from the Fermi liquid theory, expected for conventional metals, that affect the temperature and field dependencies of electron transport. The magnetore- sistance of FeSe1−xSx increases significantly once a system enters the nematic state and shows an unusual temperature de- pendence that varies strongly with x, as shown in Figure 7a and b for FeSe. The temperature dependence of the resistivity slope in 34 T in FeSe changes sign at a characteristic tem- perature, T ∗ below 14 K, and the Hall coefficient RH display a negative maximum, as shown in Fig. 7b and d. Interest- ingly, T ∗ seems to be the characteristic scale for low-energy spin fluctuations in FeSe1−xSx . Magnetostriction measurements in magnetic field for FeSe showed that the lattice distortion continues to increase down to Tc, different from BaFe2As2, where there is a intimate connection between the magnetic order and structural distortion . With sul- phur substitution, T ∗ shifts to a slightly higher temperature of ∼ 20 K, and eventually disappears in the tetragonal phase, as the low-energy spin fluctuations are completely suppressed . Changes in magnetotransport and in the resistivity slope occur from x ∼ 0.11 (Fig. 7h) in the presence of the additional highly mobile 3D band, labelled as the nematic B phase . It is clear that magnetic field could affect scatter- ing inside the nematic phase that could be still dominated by spin fluctuations and it can spin polarize the multi-band small Fermi-surface of FeSe1−xSx. Further theoretical work will be required to explain the observed effects in magnetic fields and experimental studies in single domains crystals are needed to address the extrinsic scattering at the nematic domain bound- aries. Anomalous transport behaviour Linear resistivity at low temperatures is usually found near an antiferromagnetic critical point, such as in BaFe2(As1−xPx) and reflect scattering induced by crit- ical spin-fluctuations . FeSe1−xSx has a low tempera- ture region with a linear resistivity across the whole nematic phase below T ∗ (using extrapolated in-plane high magnetic field data), as shown in Figure 7e and g. Low energy spin- fluctuations are present inside the nematic state in FeSe1−xSx , and μSR studies place FeSe near an itiner- ant antiferromagnetic quantum critical point at very low tem- peratures . This region with linear T resistivity below T ∗ occurs over a limited temperature regime and the Fermi- liquid behaviour recovers below TF L and all compositions show quantum oscillations (Fig. 7e-g) . Deviations from Fermi-liquid behaviour were also reported for FeSe and linear T resistivity was detected in 35 T for xnom ∼ 0.16 with Ts ∼ 50 K, which corresponds to x ∼ 0.13 inside the nematic phase . Thus, all existing experimental trans- port data for FeSe1−xSx in high magnetic fields up to 45 T suggest that the low-temperature linear resistivity occurs in- side the nematic phase, rather than at the nematic end point, and, as in the case of the electronic correlations and Tc, it is likely a manifestation of the spin fluctuation scattering mech- anism inside the nematic phase FeSe1−xSx. In the tetragonal phase of FeSe1−xSx, the resistivity expo- nent seem to vary with temperature and a resistivity with T 3/2 dependence is found over a large temperature range up to 120 K, in agreement with studies under pressure . The- oretical models suggest that the exact temperature exponent of resistivity, in vicinity of nematic critical points is highly dependent on the presence of cold spots on different Fermi 15 different fixed temperatures, after Refs. . The dotted and dashed lines are fits to two-band and three-band models, detailed in . c) The temperature dependence of magnetoresistance in fixed magnetic field indicating significant effects inside the nematic phase. Below T∗ there is an unusual drop in magnetoresistance of FeSe suggesting potential changes in scattering and/or the electronic structure. d) Hall effect coefficient in low magnetic fields (B = μ0H ≤ 1T), indicating a sign change and the dominance of different highly mobile carriers across the nematic phase. The low-temperature linear resistivity for x=0.04 (e) and x=0.25 (f). The solid lines are the zero-field resistivity data. Solid circles represent the zero-field extrapolated values from high field longitudinal resistance measurements when B||(ab) plane . The dashed lines represent fits to a Fermi-liquid behaviour found below TF L, as indicated by arrows. (g) The low-temperature resistivity exponent below T ∗, extrapolated from high magnetic fields, indicating the unusual transport behaviour of the nematic phase. (d) The colour plot of the slope of resistivity in 34 T between the nematic A and B phases. Solid squares represent Ts and solid triangles Tc. T ∗ indicated by stars represents the peak in magnetoresistance and the maximum in of the Hall coefficient RH. Solid lines indicate the nematic and superconducting phase boundaries and the dashed lines are guides to the eye. All the samples show clear quantum oscillations in the transverse magnetoresistance below 1.5 K , consistent with the presence of the Fermi-liquid behaviour at low temperatures for all samples. These data are adapted after Ref. . surfaces, due to the symmetry of the nematic order parameter or due to the scattering from acoustic phonons near the nematic end point. Near a Pomeranchuk insta- bility the transport decay rate is linear in temperature every- where on the Fermi surface except at cold spots on the Bril- louin zone diagonal, leading to a resistivity proportional to T 3/2 for a clean 2D system or to a linear T dependence in the presence of impurities . Furthermore, the scale at which the crossover to Fermi liquid behavior occurs at low tempera- tures depends on the strength of the coupling to the lattice , responsible for the lack of divergent critical fluctuation at the nematic end point in FeSe1−xSx . SUPERCONDUCTIVITY OF FESE1−xSx The normal nematic electronic phase and the anomalous scattering of FeSe1−xSx affects significantly its supercon- ducting state. The gap structure of FeSe is two-fold sym- metric, reaching small values on the major axis of the el- liptical hole pocket and it is changing its sign between the hole and the small electron pocket . While nematic- ity is an intrinsic property of the bulk FeSe1−xSx, nematic fluctuations may not be the primary force driving the super- conducting pairing , despite the fact that the relative or- thorhombic distortion is reduced as the superconductivity in- creases in FeSe1−xSx . Instead, the low-energy spin- fluctuations are likely to provide the pairing channel in FeSe and this can manifest via nesting of dyz sections of the hole and electron bands; the dxy portions do not participate in pairing due to the orbital selective strong correlation ef- fects . In this scenario, a maximum gap on the Fermi surface sections with dyz character, and a small gap on sec- tions with dxz or dxy character would occur, similar to ex- periments . Most of the thermodynamic and ther- mal conductivity studies of bulk FeSe in the superconduct- ing phase have been modelled by accounting for two different nodeless superconducting gaps . The presence of nodes in the superconducting gap of FeSe has also been sug- gested by other studies . The multi-gap super- conductivity is preserved as a function of chemical pressure in FeSe1−xSx , and tunnelling experiments found that the vortex core anisotropy is strongly suppressed once Fermi surface becomes isotropic . High-resolution thermal ex- pansion showed a lack of coupling between the orthorhombic distortion and superconductivity in FeSe , whereas with increasing substitution towards x ∼ 0.15 the effect seems to be the opposite . The jump in specific heat (∆Cel /γn Tc) for different x varies slightly around 2, which is above the weak coupling limit of the BCS theory believed to be caused 16 by the multi-band effects . For isotropic isoelectronic iron-based superconductors, the height of pnictogen acts as a switch between high-Tc nodeless and low-Tc nodal pairings . FeS, like other end member compounds, displays weak correlations and nodal superconductivity, similar to other sys- tems like LaFePO and LiFeP [146–149], as the chalcogen po- sition is closer to the iron planes compared to their isoelec- tronic sister-compounds, like LiFeAs. On the other hand for FeSe, there has been suggestions both of nodal and nodeless superconductivity [112, 150–152]. Abrupt changes in the su- perconductivity occur at the nematic end point, potentially sta- bilized by different pairing channels inside and outside the ne- matic phase . There is no superconductivity enhance- ment at the nematic end point in FeSe1−xSx, suggesting the presence of a non-nematic pairing mechanism and/or the lack of divergent critical fluctuations, similar to the behaviour of the quasiparticle effective masses . The coupling to the relevant lattice strain restrict the critical behaviour only along certain high symmetry directions and this can affect the nematic critical fluctuations and do not enhance superconduc- tivity . BCS-BEC crossover of the multiband FeSe1−xSx FeSe1−xSx are multi-band systems with relatively small Fermi energies at low temperatures. There has been a lot of interest to asses whether these systems are candidates in the crossover regime between the BCS to the BEC state, ex- pected for ∆SC/EF ≤ 1 . These effects have been suggested to occur in Fe1+ySexTe1−x, as the hole band as the Γ point is tuned at the Fermi level by Fe deficiency and ∆SC/EF varies 0.16 to 0.50 . This ratio is also relevant for assessing the possibility of stabilization of a FFLO state in FeSe and a good knowledge of the value of the super- conducting gap and the Fermi energy of the multi-band and highly warped Fermi surfaces is needed. The amplitudes of the highly anisotropic superconducting gaps of FeSe around the hole pocket vary between ∆SC ∼ 2.5 (or 2.3) (Γ point) from STM to 1.5 meV to 3 meV from laser ARPES . For the electron pocket (at the M point) the values of the gap vary between 3.5 or 1.5 meV and another potential small gap of 0.39 meV was invoked from specific heat data (Fig. 4f). The top of the hole band (associated to the Fermi energy EF) is kz dependent having a value of 16 meV at Γ point and 25 meV at the Z point (Fig. 4d) , whereas laser ARPES reports values of 6.7-10 meV . Based on these values, ∆SC/EF ∼ 0.1 − 0.15 for the hole band at the Γ point in FeSe. This ratio will decrease using the parameters at Z point and the correct values of EF need to take into account the strong kz dependence of the cylindrical Fermi surface and the mass anisotropy for each pocket. As a function of x, the gap associated with the hole band remains relatively constant inside the nematic phase, but it is getting smaller towards 1.5 meV in the tetragonal phase (see Fig. 4f) . The top of hole band and the Γ is somewhat reduced towards 5 meV for x ∼ 0.18 but increases slightly for the Z point at 26 meV; the bottom of the inner electron band is around ∼ 15 meV (see Fig. 4f). The variation of these param- eters will affect the estimates of ∆SC/EF and one needs to consider the multiple bands and gaps of FeSe1−xSx together with the kz dependence of the Fermi surface and the super- conducting gap . Furthermore, the Fermi velocities increase with x pushing the system away from the BCS-BEC crossover regime, as not all the bands satisfy the crossover condition. Another way to assess the proximity to the crossover is to check whether the size of the Cooper pair, given by the coherence length ξab, is smaller than the mean inter-particle spacing 1/kF and ξkF ≪ 1. Using the in-plane co- herence length for FeSe of ξ = 4.6-5.7 nm and the values of kF ∼ 0.038 − 0.15 for the hole bands (Fig. 4), it suggests that ξkF ∼ 1.75 − 8.55 is large and the Cooper pairs are quite extended suggesting that the superconductivity of FeSe need to be understood considering its multi-band ef- fects. Further aspects of the pairing mechanism of FeSe and other iron-chalcogenides are discussed in detail in recent re- views . CONCLUSION FeSe1−xSx has opened an new area of exploration of the electronic nematic state and its role in the stabilization of the unconventional superconductivity. These systems are multi-band systems which are highly sensitive to orbitally- dependent electronic interactions that affect the evolution of the electronic structure with sulphur substitution. Fermi sur- face of FeSe1−xSx are mainly quasi-two dimensional warped cylinders but an additional 3D hole pocket is present with in- creasing sulphur concentration from x ∼ 0.11. The Fermi energies have a broad range, that generally increases with x substitution, but they are smaller for the inner electron and hole pockets, making them prone to electronic instabilities. The development of nematic electronic phase with strong anisotropic electronic structure influences the scattering and leads to unusual magnetoresistance inside the nematic phase. Linear resistivity and anomalous magnetotransport is detected inside the nematic phase and is likely to reflect the role played by the spin fluctuations in this regime. FeSe1−xSx show no signatures of enhanced Tc and divergent electronic correla- tions at the nematic end point, which are likely to be quenched by the finite coupling with the lattice. This coupling could also be the origin of the non-Fermi liquid behaviour outside the nematic phase. The superconductivity of FeSe1−xSx has a small enhancement inside the nematic phase and a somehow abrupt change at the nematic end point. This behaviour is dif- ferent from the isoelectronic family BaFe2(As1−xPx)2 where quantum critical fluctuations enhance both superconductivity and effective masses of the quasiparticles on approaching the spin-density phase and linear resistivity is found at the mag- netic critical point. The study of FeSe1−xSx compared with 17 other isoelectronic iron-based superconductors emphasis the important role played by the magnetic rather than nematic fluctuations for enhancing superconductivity in iron-based su- perconductors. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS I am very grateful to numerous collaborators for their im- portant scientific contribution dedicated to the understanding of the electronic structure of FeSe1−xSx. I would like to thank warmly to Amir Haghighirad, Shiv Singh, Thomas Wolf and Shigeru Kasahara for the growth of high quality crystals; Timur Kim, Matthew Watson, Pascal Reiss and Kylie MacFar- quharson for for their contributions to ARPES studies; Pas- cal Reiss, Matthew Bristow, Zachary Zajicek, Samuel Blake, Mara Bruma, David Graf, Alix McCollam,William Knafo for their contributions to high magnetic field studies; Joe Pren- tice, Roemer Hinlopen, Oliver Humphries, Oliver Squire, Gladys Lee, James Bate, Andrew Smith, Tom Nicholas, Ab- hinav Naga, Jan Memedovic, Joshua Bell, Michele Ghini, Nathaniel Davies for their individual contributions to exper- imental and computational aspects that have enhancee our re- search. I am grateful to Rafael Fernandes for sharing his com- puter code and Andreas Kreisel, Peter Hirschfeld, M. Watson, Roser Valenti, Karim Zantout and Zachary Zajicek for use- ful comments on this manuscript. I acknowledge the financial support provided by EPSRC (EP/I004475/1, EP/I017836/1), Oxford Centre for Applied Superconductivity and Diamond Light Source for experimental access to the I05 Beamline. I am also grateful for an EPSRC Career Acceleration Fellow- ship (EP/I004475/1). ∗ corresponding author: amalia.coldea@physics.ox.ac.uk R M Fernandes, A V Chubukov, and J Schmalian, “What drives nematic order in iron-based superconductors?” Nat. Phys. 10, 97 (2014). Eduardo Fradkin, Steven A. Kivelson, Michael J. Lawler, James P. Eisenstein, and Andrew P. Mackenzie, “Nematic fermi fluids in condensed matter physics,” Annual Review of Condensed Matter Physics 1, 153–178 (2010). I. Ia. Pomeranchuk, “On the stability of a fermi liquid,” JETP Matthias Vojta, “Lattice symmetry breaking in cuprate superconductors: stripes, nematics, and supercon- ductivity,” Advances in Physics 58, S. Lederer, Y. Schattner, E. Berg, and S.A. Kivelson, “Su- perconductivity and non-Fermi liquid behavior near a nematic quantum critical point,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 114, 4905 S. Lederer, Y. Schattner, E. Berg, and S. A. Kivelson, “En- hancement of superconductivity near a nematic quantum crit- ical point,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 097001 (2015). I. Paul and M. Garst, “Lattice Effects on Nematic Quan- tum Criticality in Metals,” Physical Review Letters 118, 1–5 D. Labat and I. Paul, “Pairing instability near a lattice- influenced nematic quantum critical point,” Phys. Rev. B 96, V. S. de Carvalho and R. M. Fernandes, “Resistivity near a nematic quantum critical point: impact of acoustic phonons,” Xiaoyu Wang and Erez Berg, “Scattering mechanisms and electrical transport near an ising nematic quantum critical point,” Phys. Rev. B 99, 235136 (2019). Elihu Abrahams and Qimiao Si, “Quantum criticality in the iron pnictides and chalcogenides,” Journal of Physics: Con- densed Matter 23, 223201 (2011). S. Kasahara, T. Shibauchi, K. Hashimoto, K. Ikada, S. Tone- gawa, R. Okazaki, H. Shishido, H. Ikeda, H. Takeya, K. Hirata, T. Terashima, and Y. Matsuda, “Evolution from non-Fermi- to Fermi-liquid transport via isovalent doping in BaFe2(As1−xPx)2 superconductors,” Phys. Rev. B 81, A. E. B ̈ohmer, F. Hardy, F. Eilers, D. Ernst, P. Adelmann, P. Schweiss, T. Wolf, and C. Meingast, “Lack of coupling between superconductivity and orthorhombic distortion in sto- ichiometric single-crystalline FeSe,” Phys. Rev. B 87, 180505 Tong Chen, Youzhe Chen, Andreas Kreisel, Xingye Lu, Astrid Schneidewind, Yiming Qiu, J T Park, Toby G Perring, J Ross Stewart, Huibo Cao, Rui Zhang, Yu Li, Yan Rong, Yuan Wei, Brian M Andersen, P J Hirschfeld, Collin Broholm, and Pengcheng Dai, “Anisotropic spin fluctuations in detwinned FeSe,” Nature Materials 18, 709–716 (2019). Q. Wang, Y. Shen, B. Pan, X. Zhang, K Ikeuchi, K. Iida, A D Christianson, H C Walker, D T Adroja, M. Abdel-Hafiez, X Chen, D A Chareev, A. N. Vasiliev, and J Zhao, “Magnetic ground state of FeSe,” Nat. Commun. 7, 12182 (2016). Andreas Kreisel, P. J. Hirschfeld, and Brian M. Andersen, “On the Remarkable Superconductivity of FeSe and its Close Cousins,” arXiv:2007.02966 (2020). S. Medvedev, T. M. McQueen, I. A. Troyan, T Palasyuk, M I Eremets, R J Cava, S Naghavi, F Casper, V Ksenofontov, G Wortmann, and C Felser, “Electronic and magnetic phase diagram of β-Fe1.01Se with superconductivity at 36.7 K under pressure,” Nat. Mater. 8, 630 (2009). J. P. Sun, K. Matsuura, G. Z. Ye, Y. Mizukami, M. Shimozawa, K. Matsubayashi, M. Yamashita, T. Watashige, S. Kasahara, Y. Matsuda, J.-Q. Yan, B. C. Sales, Y. Uwatoko, J.-G. Cheng, and T. Shibauchi, “Dome-shaped magnetic order competing with high-temperature superconductivity at high pressures in FeSe,” Nat. Commun. 7, 12146 (2016). Taichi Terashima, Naoki Kikugawa, Shigeru Kasahara, Tat- suya Watashige, Takasada Shibauchi, Yuji Matsuda, Thomas Wolf, Anna E. B ̈ohmer, Fr ́ed ́eric Hardy, Christoph Meingast, Hilbert v. L ̈ohneysen, and Shinya Uji, “Pressure-Induced An- tiferromagnetic Transition and Phase Diagram in FeSe,” J. Phys. Soc. Japan 84, 063701 (2015). K. Kothapalli, A. E. B ̈ohmer, W. T. Jayasekara, B. G. Ueland, P. Das, A. Sapkota, V. Taufour, Y. Xiao, E. Alp, S. L. Bud’ko, P. C. Canfield, A. Kreyssig, and A. I. Goldman, “Strong co- operative coupling of pressure-induced magnetic order and ne- maticity in FeSe,” Nat. Comm. 7, 12728 (2016). M. Bendele, A. Ichsanow, Yu. Pashkevich, L. Keller, Th. Str ̈assle, A. Gusev, E. Pomjakushina, K. Conder, R. Khasanov, and H. Keller, “Coexistence of superconductivity and mag- netism in FeSe1−x under pressure,” Phys. Rev. B 85, 064517 18 Matthew Burrard-Lucas, David G Free, Stefan J Sedlmaier, Jack D Wright, Simon J Cassidy, Yoshiaki Hara, Alex J Cor- kett, Tom Lancaster, Peter J Baker, Stephen J Blundell, and Simon J Clarke, “Enhancement of the superconducting transi- tion temperature of FeSe by intercalation of a molecular spacer layer,” Nature Materials 12, 15–19 (2013). B. Lei, J. H. Cui, Z. J. Xiang, C. Shang, N. Z. Wang, G. J. Ye, X. G. Luo, T. Wu, Z. Sun, and X. H. Chen, “Evolution of High-Temperature Superconductivity from a Low-Tc Phase Tuned by Carrier Concentration in FeSe Thin Flakes,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 077002 (2016). Dennis Huang and Jennifer E. Hoffman, “Monolayer FeSe on SrTiO3,” Annual Review of Condensed Matter Physics 8, S. N. Rebec, T. Jia, C. Zhang, M. Hashimoto, D.-H. Lu, R. G. Moore, and Z.-X. Shen, “Coexistence of Replica Bands and Superconductivity in FeSe Monolayer Films,” Phys. Rev. Lett. Koshin Shigekawa, Kosuke Nakayama, Masato Kuno, Giao N. Phan, Kenta Owada, Katsuaki Sugawara, Takashi Takahashi, and Takafumi Sato, “Dichotomy of superconductivity be- tween monolayer FeS and FeSe,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116, 24470–24474 (2019). Liam S Farrar, Matthew Bristow, Amir A Haghighirad, Alix McCollam, Simon J Bending, and Amalia I Coldea, “Sup- pression of superconductivity and enhanced critical field anisotropy in thin flakes of FeSe,” npj Quantum Materials 5, A. I. Coldea, S. F. Blake, S. Kasahara, A. A. Haghighirad, M. D. Watson, W. Knafo, E. S. Choi, A. McCollam, P. Reiss, T. Yamashita, M. Bruma, S. Speller, Y. Matsuda, T. Wolf, T. Shibauchi, and A. J. Schofield, “Evolution of the low- temperature Fermi surface of superconducting FeSe1−xSx across a nematic phase transition,” npj Quantum Materials 4, M. Bristow, P. Reiss, A. A. Haghighirad, Z. Zajicek, S. J. Singh, T. Wolf, D. Graf, W. Knafo, A. McCollam, and A. I. Coldea, “Anomalous high-magnetic field electronic state of the nematic superconductors FeSe1−xSx,” Phys. Rev. Re- search 2, 013309 (2020). P. Reiss, M. D. Watson, T. K. Kim, A. A. Haghighirad, D. N. Woodruff, M. Bruma, S. J. Clarke, and A. I. Coldea, “Sup- pression of electronic correlations by chemical pressure from FeSe to FeS,” Phys. Rev. B 96, 121103 (2017). Yuki Sato, Shigeru Kasahara, Tomoya Taniguchi, Xiangzhuo Xing, Yuichi Kasahara, Yoshifumi Tokiwa, Youichi Ya- makawa, Hiroshi Kontani, Takasada Shibauchi, and Yuji Matsuda, “Abrupt change of the superconducting gap struc- ture at the nematic critical point in FeSe1−xSx,” Pro- ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences T. M. McQueen, Q. Huang, V. Ksenofontov, C. Felser, Q. Xu, H. Zandbergen, Y. S. Hor, J. Allred, A. J. Williams, D. Qu, J. Checkelsky, N. P. Ong, and R. J. Cava, “Extreme sensitivity of superconductivity to stoichiometry in Fe1+δSe,” Phys. Rev. Xiaofang Lai, Hui Zhang, Yingqi Wang, Xin Wang, Xian Zhang, Jianhua Lin, and Fuqiang Huang, “Observation of Su- perconductivity in Tetragonal FeS,” Journal of the American Chemical Society 137, 10148–10151 (2015). Zhongnan Guo, Fan Sun, Yuyuan Chen, Yingluo Mao, Lin Wan, Xiaoxiao Yan, Yang Yang, and Wenxia Yuan, “Synthe- sis, structure and superconductivity of FeS1xSex (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) solid solution crystals,” CrystEngComm 21, 2994–2999 A. I. Coldea and M. D. Watson, “The key ingredients of the electronic structure of FeSe,” Annu. Rev. Cond. Matt. Phys. 9 (2018), 10.1146/annurev-conmatphys-033117-054137. Anna E Bhmer and Andreas Kreisel, “Nematicity, magnetism and superconductivity in FeSe,” Journal of Physics: Con- densed Matter 30, 023001 (2017). Takasada Shibauchi, Tetsuo Hanaguri, and Yuji Matsuda, “Exotic Superconducting States in FeSe-based Materials,” arXiv:2005.07315 (2020), https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.07315. K. Matsuura, Y. Mizukami, Y. Arai, Y. Sugimura, N. Mae- jima, A. Machida, T. Watanuki, T. Fukuda, T. Yajima, Z. Hiroi, K. Y. Yip, Y. C. Chan, Q. Niu, S. Hosoi, K. Ishida, K. Mukasa, S. Kasahara, J.-G. Cheng, S. K. Goh, Y. Matsuda, Y. Uwatoko, and T. Shibauchi, “Maximizing T c by tuning nematicity and magnetism in FeSe1−xSx superconductors,” Nat. Comm. 8, P. Reiss, D. Graf, A. A. Haghighirad, W. Knafo, L. Drigo, M. Bristow, A. J. Schofield, and A. I. Coldea, “Quenched nematic criticality separating two superconducting domes in an iron-based superconductor under pressure,” Nature Physics M. D. Watson, T. K. Kim, A. A. Haghighirad, S. F. Blake, N. R. Davies, M. Hoesch, T. Wolf, and A. I. Coldea, “Suppres- sion of orbital ordering by chemical pressure in FeSe1−xSx,” Phys. Rev. B 92, 121108 (2015). Y. Mizuguchi, F. Tomioka, S. Tsuda, T. Yamaguchi, and Y. Takano, “Substitution Effects on FeSe Superconductor,” Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 78, 074712 (2009). Taichi Terashima, Naoki Kikugawa, Andhika Kiswandhi, Eun-Sang Choi, James S. Brooks, Shigeru Kasahara, Tatsuya Watashige, Hiroaki Ikeda, Takasada Shibauchi, Yuji Matsuda, Thomas Wolf, Anna E. B ̈ohmer, Fr ́ed ́eric Hardy, Christoph Meingast, Hilbert v. L ̈ohneysen, Michi-To Suzuki, Ryotaro Arita, and Shinya Uji, “Anomalous Fermi surface in FeSe seen by Shubnikov-de Haas oscillation measurements,” Phys. Rev. B 90, 144517 (2014). S. Hosoi, K. Matsuura, K. Ishida, Hao Wang, Y. Mizukami, T. Watashige, S. Kasahara, Y. Matsuda, and T. Shibauchi, “Nematic quantum critical point without magnetism in FeSe1−xSx superconductors,” PNAS 113, 8139 (2016). P. Wiecki, K. Rana, A. E. B ̈ohmer, Y. Lee, S. L. Bud’ko, P. C. Canfield, and Y. Furukawa, “Persistent correlation between superconductivity and antiferromagnetic fluctuations near a nematic quantum critical point in FeSe1−xSx,” Phys. Rev. B M Bristow, A. A. Haghighirad, M. D. Watson, P. Reiss, Z. Za- jicek, J. Prentice, S. J. Blundell, A. McCollam, and A. I. Coldea, “Multi-band effects and dominant inter-band pairing responsible for the upper critical fields of bulk FeSe,” in prepa- ration (2020). T. Hanaguri, V. Iwaya, Y. Kohsaka, T. Machida, T. Watashige, S. Kasahara, T. Shibauchi, and Y. Matsuda, “Two distinct su- perconducting pairing states divided by the nematic end point in FeSe1−xSx,” Sci. Adv. 4, eaar6419 (2018). Chandan Setty, Shinibali Bhattacharyya, Yifu Cao, Andreas Kreisel, and P. J. Hirschfeld, “Topological ultranodal pair states in iron-based superconductors,” Nature Communica- tions 11, 523 (2020). Chandan Setty, Yifu Cao, Andreas Kreisel, Shinibali Bhat- tacharyya, and P. J. Hirschfeld, “Bogoliubov Fermi surfaces in spin- 1 2 systems: Model Hamiltonians and experimental conse- quences,” Phys. Rev. B 102, 064504 (2020). 19 S. Holenstein, J. Stahl, Z. Shermadini, G. Simutis, V. Gri- nenko, D. A. Chareev, R. Khasanov, J.-C. Orain, A. Amato, H.-H. Klauss, E. Morenzoni, D. Johrendt, and H. Luetkens, “Extended Magnetic Dome Induced by Low Pressures in Su- perconducting FeSe1−xSx,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 147001 Dmitriy Chareev, Evgeniy Osadchii, Tatiana Kuzmicheva, Jiunn-Yuan Lin, Svetoslav Kuzmichev, Olga Volkova, and Alexander Vasiliev, “Single crystal growth and characteriza- tion of tetragonal FeSe1−x superconductors,” CrystEngComm A. E. B ̈ohmer, V. Taufour, W. E. Straszheim, T. Wolf, and P. C. Canfield, “Variation of transition temperatures and resid- ual resistivity ratio in vapor-grown FeSe,” Phys. Rev. B 94, Fuyuki Nabeshima, Tomoya Ishikawa, Ken-ichi Oyanagi, Masataka Kawai, and Atsutaka Maeda, “Growth of Supercon- ducting Epitaxial Films of Sulfur Substituted FeSe via Pulsed Laser Deposition,” Journal of the Physical Society of Japan S. Licciardello, J. Buhot, J. Lu, J. Ayres, S. Kasahara, Y. Mat- suda, T. Shibauchi, and N. E. Hussey, “Electrical resistiv- ity across a nematic quantum critical point,” Nature 567, 213 S. Licciardello, N. Maksimovic, J. Ayres, J. Buhot, M. ˇCulo, B. Bryant, S. Kasahara, Y. Matsuda, T. Shibauchi, V. Nagara- jan, J. G. Analytis, and N. E. Hussey, “Coexistence of orbital and quantum critical magnetoresistance in FeSe1−xSx,” Phys. Rev. Research 1, 023011 (2019). H. Shishido, A. F. Bangura, A. I. Coldea, S. Tonegawa, K. Hashimoto, S. Kasahara, P. M. C. Rourke, H. Ikeda, T. Terashima, R. Settai, Y. ̄Onuki, D. Vignolles, C. Proust, B. Vignolle, A. McCollam, Y. Matsuda, T. Shibauchi, and A. Carrington, “Evolution of the Fermi Surface of BaFe2(As1−xPx)2 on Entering the Superconducting Dome,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 057008 (2010). J. Miao, X. H. Niu, D. F. Xu, Q. Yao, Q. Y. Chen, T. P. Ying, S. Y. Li, Y. F. Fang, J. C. Zhang, S. Ideta, K. Tanaka, B. P. Xie, D. L. Feng, and Fei Chen, “Electronic structure of FeS,” M. D. Watson, T. K. Kim, L. C. Rhodes, M. Eschrig, M. Hoesch, A. A. Haghighirad, and A. I. Coldea, “Evidence for unidirectional nematic bond ordering in FeSe,” Phys. Rev. Jonathan A. Sobota, Yu He, and Zhi-Xun Shen, “Electronic structure of quantum materials studied by angle-resolved pho- toemission spectroscopy,” arXiv:2008.02378 (2020). V. Brouet, M. Fuglsang Jensen, Ping Hui Lin, A. Taleb- Ibrahimi, P. Le F`evre, F. Bertran, Chia Hui Lin, Wei Ku, A. Forget, and D. Colson, “Impact of the two Fe unit cell on the electronic structure measured by ARPES in iron pnic- tides,” Phys. Rev. B 86, 075123 (2012). L. Moreschini, P.-H. Lin, C.-H. Lin, W. Ku, D. Innocenti, Y. J. Chang, A. L. Walter, K. S. Kim, V. Brouet, K.-W. Yeh, M.- K. Wu, E. Rotenberg, A. Bostwick, and M. Grioni, “Conse- quences of Broken Translational Symmetry in FeSexTe1−x,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 087602 (2014). M. D. Watson, T. K. Kim, A. A. Haghighirad, N. R. Davies, A. McCollam, A. Narayanan, S. F. Blake, Y. L. Chen, S. Ghan- nadzadeh, A. J. Schofield, M. Hoesch, C. Meingast, T. Wolf, and A. I. Coldea, “Emergence of the nematic electronic state in FeSe,” Phys. Rev. B 91, 155106 (2015). Matthew D. Watson, Amir A. Haghighirad, Luke C. Rhodes, Moritz Hoesch, and Timur K. Kim, “Electronic anisotropies revealed by detwinned angle-resolved photo-emission spec- troscopy measurements of FeSe,” New Journal of Physics 19, T. Shimojima, Y. Suzuki, T. Sonobe, A. Nakamura, M. Sakano, J. Omachi, K. Yoshioka, M. Kuwata-Gonokami, K. Ono, H. Kumigashira, A. E. B ̈ohmer, F. Hardy, T. Wolf, C. Meingast, H. V. L ̈ohneysen, H. Ikeda, and K. Ishizaka, “Lifting of xz/yz orbital degeneracy at the structural transi- tion in detwinned FeSe,” Phys. Rev. B 90, 121111 (2014). Matthew D. Watson, Amir A. Haghighirad, Luke C. Rhodes, Moritz Hoesch, and Timur K. Kim, “Electronic anisotropies revealed by detwinned angle-resolved photo-emission spec- troscopy measurements of FeSe,” New Journal of Physics 19, M. Yi, H. Pfau, Y. Zhang, Y. He, H. Wu, T. Chen, Z. R. Ye, M. Hashimoto, R. Yu, Q. Si, D.-H. Lee, Pengcheng Dai, Z.- X. Shen, D. H. Lu, and R. J. Birgeneau, “Nematic Energy Scale and the Missing Electron Pocket in FeSe,” Phys. Rev. X Taichi Terashima, Naoki Kikugawa, David Graf, Hishiro T. Hirose, Shinya Uji, Yoshitaka Matsushita, Hai Lin, Xiyu Zhu, Hai-Hu Wen, Takuya Nomoto, Katsuhiro Suzuki, and Hiroaki Ikeda, “Accurate determination of the Fermi surface of tetrag- onal FeS via quantum oscillation measurements and quasi- particle self-consistent GW calculations,” Phys. Rev. B 99, Y. S. Kushnirenko, A. A. Kordyuk, A. V. Fedorov, E. Haubold, T. Wolf, B. B ̈uchner, and S. V. Borisenko, “Anomalous tem- perature evolution of the electronic structure of FeSe,” Phys. Rev. B 96, 100504 (2017). L. C. Rhodes, M. D. Watson, A. A. Haghighirad, M. Eschrig, and T. K. Kim, “Strongly enhanced temperature dependence of the chemical potential in FeSe,” Phys. Rev. B 95, 195111 V. Brouet, Ping-Hui Lin, Y. Texier, J. Bobroff, A. Taleb- Ibrahimi, P. Le F`evre, F. Bertran, M. Casula, P. Werner, S. Biermann, F. Rullier-Albenque, A. Forget, and D. Colson, “Large Temperature Dependence of the Number of Carriers in Co-Doped BaFe2As2,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 167002 (2013). J. Maletz, V. B. Zabolotnyy, D. V. Evtushinsky, S. Thiru- pathaiah, A. U. B. Wolter, L. Harnagea, A. N. Yaresko, A. N. Vasiliev, D. A. Chareev, A. E. B ̈ohmer, F. Hardy, T. Wolf, C. Meingast, E. D. L. Rienks, B. B ̈uchner, and S. V. Borisenko, “Unusual band renormalization in the simplest iron-based superconductor FeSe,” Phys. Rev. B 89, 220506 D. V. Evtushinsky, M. Aichhorn, Y. Sassa, Z. H. Liu, J. Maletz, T. Wolf, A. N. Yaresko, S. Biermann, S. V. Borisenko, and B. Buchner, “Direct observation of dispersive lower Hubbard band in iron-based superconductor FeSe,” arXiv:1612.02313 (2016), https://arxiv.org/abs/1612.02313. C. Cai, T. T. Han, Z. G. Wang, L. Chen, Y. D. Wang, Z. M. Xin, M. W. Ma, Yuan Li, and Y. Zhang, “Anomalous spectral weight transfer in the nematic state of iron-selenide supercon- ductor,” Chinese Physics B (2020). Z. K. Liu, M. Yi, Y. Zhang, J. Hu, R. Yu, J.-X. Zhu, R.- H. He, Y. L. Chen, M. Hashimoto, R. G. Moore, S.-K. Mo, Z. Hussain, Q. Si, Z. Q. Mao, D. H. Lu, and Z.-X. Shen, “Ex- perimental observation of incoherent-coherent crossover and orbital-dependent band renormalization in iron chalcogenide superconductors,” Phys. Rev. B 92, 235138 (2015). Y. Zhang, C. He, Z. R. Ye, J. Jiang, F. Chen, M. Xu, Q. Q. Ge, B. P. Xie, J. Wei, M. Aeschlimann, X. Y. Cui, M. Shi, J. P. Hu, and D. L. Feng, “Symmetry breaking via orbital- 20 dependent reconstruction of electronic structure in detwinned NaFeAs,” Phys. Rev. B 85, 085121 (2012). Rafael M. Fernandes and Oskar Vafek, “Distinguishing spin- orbit coupling and nematic order in the electronic spectrum of iron-based superconductors,” Phys. Rev. B 90, 214514 (2014). Morten H. Christensen, Rafael M. Fernandes, and Andrey V. Chubukov, “Orbital transmutation and the electronic spectrum of FeSe in the nematic phase,” Phys. Rev. Research 2, 013015 P. O. Sprau, A. Kostin, A. Kreisel, A. E. B ̈ohmer, V. Taufour, P. C. Canfield, S. Mukherjee, P. J. Hirschfeld, B. M. Ander- sen, and J. C. S ́eamus Davis, “Discovery of Orbital-Selective Cooper Pairing in FeSe,” Science 357, 75 (2016). Yue Sun, Shunichiro Kittaka, Shota Nakamura, Toshiro Sakakibara, Koki Irie, Takuya Nomoto, Kazushige Machida, Jingting Chen, and Tsuyoshi Tamegai, “Gap structure of fese determined by angle-resolved specific heat measurements in applied rotating magnetic field,” Phys. Rev. B 96, 220505 S. V. Borisenko, D. V. Evtushinsky, Z.-H. Liu, I. Morozov, R. Kappenberger, S. Wurmehl, B. Buchner, A. N. Yaresko, T. K. Kim, M. Hoesch, T. Wolf, and N. D. Zhigadlo, “Direct observation of spin-orbit coupling in iron-based superconduc- tors,” Nat Phys 12, 311–317 (2016). Y. Suzuki, T. Shimojima, T. Sonobe, A. Nakamura, M. Sakano, H. Tsuji, J. Omachi, K. Yoshioka, M. Kuwata- Gonokami, T. Watashige, R. Kobayashi, S. Kasahara, T. Shibauchi, Y. Matsuda, Y. Yamakawa, H. Kontani, and K. Ishizaka, “Momentum-dependent sign-inversion of orbital polarization in superconducting FeSe,” Phys. Rev. B 92, Andrey V. Chubukov, M. Khodas, and Rafael M. Fernandes, “Magnetism, superconductivity, and spontaneous orbital order in iron-based superconductors: Which comes first and why?” Phys. Rev. X 6, 041045 (2016). Rui-Qi Xing, Laura Classen, Maxim Khodas, and Andrey V. Chubukov, “Competing instabilities, orbital ordering, and splitting of band degeneracies from a parquet renormalization group analysis of a four-pocket model for iron-based super- conductors: Application to FeSe,” Phys. Rev. B 95, 085108 K. Jiang, J. Hu, H. Ding, and Z. Wang, “Interatomic Coulomb interaction and electron nematic bond order in FeSe,” Phys. Rev. B 93, 115138 (2016). Daniel D. Scherer, A. C. Jacko, Christoph Friedrich, Ersoy S ̧as ̧ıo ̆glu, Stefan Bl ̈ugel, Roser Valent ́ı, and Brian M. Ander- sen, “Interplay of nematic and magnetic orders in fese under pressure,” Phys. Rev. B 95, 094504 (2017). J. K. Glasbrenner, I. I. Mazin, H. O. Jeschke, P.J. Hirschfeld, R. M. Fernandes, and R. Valent ́ı, “Effect of magnetic frus- tration on nematicity and superconductivity in iron chalco- genides,” Nature Physics 11, 953 (2015). A. Fedorov, A. Yaresko, T. K. Kim, Y. Kushnirenko, E. Haubold, T. Wolf, M. Hoesch, A. Gr ̈uneis, B. B ̈uchner, and S. V. Borisenko, “Effect of nematic ordering on electronic structure of FeSe,” Sci. Rep. 6, 36834 (2016). Y. Zhang, M. Yi, Z.-K. Liu, W. Li, J. J. Lee, R. G. Moore, M. Hashimoto, M. Nakajima, H. Eisaki, S.-K. Mo, Z. Hussain, T. P. Devereaux, Z.-X. Shen, and D. H. Lu, “Distinctive orbital anisotropy observed in the nematic state of a FeSe thin film,” Phys. Rev. B 94, 115153 (2016). P Zhang, T Qian, P Richard, X P Wang, H Miao, B Q Lv, B B Fu, T Wolf, C Meingast, X X Wu, Z Q Wang, J P Hu, and H Ding, “Observation of two distinct dxz/dyz band splittings in FeSe,” Phys. Rev. B 91, 214503 (2015). Y. Zhang, J. J. Lee, R. G. Moore, W. Li, M. Yi, M. Hashimoto, D. H. Lu, T. P. Devereaux, D.-H. Lee, and Z.-X. Shen, “Super- conducting gap anisotropy in monolayer fese thin film,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 117001 (2016). Defa Liu, Cong Li, Jianwei Huang, Bin Lei, Le Wang, Xianxin Wu, Bing Shen, Qiang Gao, Yuxiao Zhang, Xu Liu, Yong Hu, Yu Xu, Aiji Liang, Jing Liu, Ping Ai, Lin Zhao, Shaolong He, Li Yu, Guodong Liu, Yiyuan Mao, Xiaoli Dong, Xiaowen Jia, Fengfeng Zhang, Shenjin Zhang, Feng Yang, Zhimin Wang, Qinjun Peng, Youguo Shi, Jiangping Hu, Tao Xiang, Xianhui Chen, Zuyan Xu, Chuangtian Chen, and X. J. Zhou, “Orbital Origin of Extremely Anisotropic Superconducting Gap in Ne- matic Phase of FeSe Superconductor,” Phys. Rev. X 8, 031033 Luke C. Rhodes, Matthew D. Watson, Timur K. Kim, and Matthias Eschrig, “kz Selective Scattering within Quasiparti- cle Interference Measurements of FeSe,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, Takahiro Hashimoto, Yuichi Ota, Haruyoshi Q Yamamoto, Yuya Suzuki, Takahiro Shimojima, Shuntaro Watanabe, Chuangtian Chen, Shigeru Kasahara, Yuji Matsuda, Takasada Shibauchi, Kozo Okazaki, and Shik Shin, “Superconducting gap anisotropy sensitive to nematic domains in FeSe,” Nature Communications 9, 282 (2018). K. MacFarquharson, P. Reiss, A. A. Haghighirad, T. Kim, and A. I. Coldea, “Revealing the coexistence of the bulk and sur- face electronic states by in-situ K dosing in the tetragonal su- perconductor FeSe0.82S0.18,” in preparation (2020). Taichi Terashima, Naoki Kikugawa, Hai Lin, Xiyu Zhu, Hai- Hu Wen, Takuya Nomoto, Katsuhiro Suzuki, Hiroaki Ikeda, and Shinya Uji, “Upper critical field and quantum oscillations in tetragonal superconducting FeS,” Phys. Rev. B 94, 100503 A. Audouard, F.. Duc, L. Drigo, P. Toulemonde, S. Karlsson, P. Strobel, and A. Sulpice, “Quantum oscillations and upper critical magnetic field of the iron-based superconductor FeSe,” Europhys. Lett. 109, 27003 (2015). D. Shoenberg, Magnetic Oscillations in Metals (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1984). M. D. Watson, T. Yamashita, S. Kasahara, W. Knafo, M. Nar- done, J. B ́eard, F. Hardy, A. McCollam, A. Narayanan, S. F. Blake, T. Wolf, A. A. Haghighirad, C. Meingast, A. J. Schofield, H. v. L ̈ohneysen, Y. Matsuda, A. I. Coldea, and T. Shibauchi, “Dichotomy between the Hole and Electron Be- havior in Multiband Superconductor FeSe Probed by Ultra- high Magnetic Fields,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 027006 (2015). A. I. Coldea, J. D. Fletcher, A. Carrington, J. G. Analytis, A. F. Bangura, J.-H. Chu, A. S. Erickson, I. R. Fisher, N. E. Hussey, and R. D. McDonald, “Fermi Surface of Superconducting LaFePO Determined from Quantum Oscillations,” Phys. Rev. C. Putzke, A. I. Coldea, I. Guillam ́on, D. Vignolles, A. Mc- Collam, D. LeBoeuf, M. D. Watson, I. I. Mazin, S. Kasahara, T. Terashima, T. Shibauchi, Y. Matsuda, and A. Carrington, “de Haas-van Alphen Study of the Fermi Surfaces of Super- conducting LiFeP and LiFeAs,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 047002 C. Putzke, A. I. Coldea, I. Guillamon, D. Vignolles, A. Mc- Collam, D. LeBoeuf, M. D. Watson, I. I. Mazin, S. Kasahara, T. Terashima, T. Shibauchi, Y. Matsuda, and A. Carrington, “Reply to Comment by Borisenko et al. on article ‘A de Haas- van Alphen study of the Fermi surfaces of superconducting LiFeP and LiFeAs’,” arXiv:1108.3956 (2011). 21 Luke C. Rhodes, Matthew D. Watson, Amir A. Haghighirad, D. V. Evtushinsky, and Timur K. Kim, “Revealing the sin- gle electron pocket of fese in a single orthorhombic domain,” Phys. Rev. B 101, 235128 (2020). S. S. Huh, J. J. Seo, B. S. Kim, S. H. Cho, J. K. Jung, S. Kim, C. I. Kwon, Jun Sung Kim, Y. Y. Koh, W. S. Kyung, J. D. Denlinger, Y. H. Kim, B. N. Chae, N. D. Kim, Y. K. Kim, and C. Kim, “Absence of Y-pocket in 1-Fe Brillouin zone and reversed orbital occupation imbalance in FeSe,” Communica- tions Physics 3, 52 (2020). Luke C. Rhodes, Jakob Bker, Marvin A. Mller, Matthias Es- chrig, and Ilya M. Eremin, “Non-local dxy nematicity and the missing electron pocket in FeSe,” (2020). L. Fanfarillo, J. Mansart, P. Toulemonde, H. Cercellier, P. Le F`evre, F. Bertran, B. Valenzuela, L. Benfatto, and V. Brouet, “Orbital-dependent Fermi surface shrinking as a fingerprint of nematicity in FeSe,” Phys. Rev. B 94, 155138 P. Walmsley, C. Putzke, L. Malone, I. Guillam ́on, D. Vig- nolles, C. Proust, S. Badoux, A. I. Coldea, M. D. Watson, S. Kasahara, Y. Mizukami, T. Shibauchi, Y. Matsuda, and A. Carrington, “Quasiparticle Mass Enhancement Close to the Quantum Critical Point in BaFe2(As1−xPx)2,” Phys. Rev. I. Lifshitz and A. Kosevich, “ On the Theory of the Shubnikov- De Haas Effect ,” Sov. Phys. JETP 2, 636 (1956). Andrzej Ptok, “Lifshitz transitions induced by magnetic field,” Acta Phys. Pol. A 135, 55 (2019). Mark V. Kartsovnik, “High magnetic fields: a tool for study- ing electronic properties of layered organic metals,” Chemical Reviews 104, 5737–5782 (2004). D. Shoenberg, Magnetic Oscillations in Metals (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England, 1984, 1984). Liran Wang, Fr ́ed ́eric Hardy, Thomas Wolf, Peter Adelmann, Rainer Fromknecht, Peter Schweiss, and Christoph Meingast, “Superconductivity-enhanced nematicity and s+d gap sym- metry in Fe(Se1−xSx),” physica status solidi (b) 1-6 (2016), Mahmoud Abdel-Hafiez, Yuan-Yuan Zhang, Zi-Yu Cao, Chun-Gang Duan, G. Karapetrov, V. M. Pudalov, V. A. Vlasenko, A. V. Sadakov, D. A. Knyazev, T. A. Romanova, D. A. Chareev, O. S. Volkova, A. N. Vasiliev, and Xiao-Jia Chen, “Superconducting properties of sulfur-doped iron se- lenide,” Phys. Rev. B 91, 165109 (2015). Shigeru Kasahara, Tatsuya Watashige, Tetsuo Hanaguri, Yuhki Kohsaka, Takuya Yamashita, Yusuke Shimoyama, Yuta Mizukami, Ryota Endo, Hiroaki Ikeda, Kazushi Aoyama, Taichi Terashima, Shinya Uji, Thomas Wolf, Hilbert von L ̈ohneysen, Takasada Shibauchi, and Yuji Matsuda, “Field- induced superconducting phase of FeSe in the BCS-BEC cross-over.” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 111, 16309 (2014). Jiun-Haw Chu, Hsueh-Hui Kuo, James G. Analytis, and Ian R. Fisher, “Divergent nematic susceptibility in an iron ar- senide superconductor,” Science 337, 710–712 (2012). U. Karahasanovic and J. Schmalian, “Elastic coupling and spin-driven nematicity in iron-based superconductors,” Phys. Rev. B 93, 064520 (2016). J. C. Palmstrom, P. Walmsley, J. A. W. Straquadine, M. E. Sorensen, S. T. Hannahs, D. H. Burns, and I. R. Fisher, “Comparison of temperature and doping dependence of ne- matic susceptibility near a putative nematic quantum critical point,” arXiv:1912.07574 (2019). M. A. Tanatar, A. E. B ̈ohmer, E. I. Timmons, M. Sch ̈utt, G. Drachuck, V. Taufour, K. Kothapalli, A. Kreyssig, S. L. Bud’ko, P. C. Canfield, R. M. Fernandes, and R. Prozorov, “Origin of the Resistivity Anisotropy in the Nematic Phase of FeSe,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 127001 (2016). Hsueh-Hui Kuo, Jiun-Haw Chu, Johanna C. Palmstrom, Steven A. Kivelson, and Ian R. Fisher, “Ubiquitous signatures of nematic quantum criticality in optimally doped Fe-based superconductors,” Science 352, 958–962 (2016). E C Blomberg, M A Tanatar, R M Fernandes, I I Mazin, Bing Shen, Hai-Hu Wen, M D Johannes, J Schmalian, and R Pro- zorov, “Sign-reversal of the in-plane resistivity anisotropy in hole-doped iron pnictides,” Nature Communications 4, 1914 Mingquan He, Liran Wang, Fr ́ed ́eric Hardy, Liping Xu, Thomas Wolf, Peter Adelmann, and Christoph Meingast, “Ev- idence for short-range magnetic order in the nematic phase of fese from anisotropic in-plane magnetostriction and suscepti- bility measurements,” Phys. Rev. B 97, 104107 (2018). A.B. Pippard, Magnetoresistance in Metals, Cambridge Stud- ies in Low Temperature Physics (Cambridge University Press, W. K. Huang, S. Hosoi, M. ulo, S. Kasahara, Y. Sato, K. Mat- suura, Y. Mizukami, M. Berben, N. E. Hussey, H. Kontani, T. Shibauchi, and Y. Matsuda, “Non-Fermi liquid transport in the vicinity of nematic quantum critical point of FeSe1−xSx superconductor,” (2020). Ian M. Hayes, Ross D. McDonald, Nicholas P. Breznay, Toni Helm, Philip J. W. Moll, Mark Wartenbe, Arkady Shekhter, and James G. Analytis, “Scaling between magnetic field and temperature in the high-temperature superconductor BaFe2(As1−xPx)2,” Nature Physics 12, 916 (2016). K. K. Huynh, Y. Tanabe, T. Urata, H. Oguro, S. Heguri, K. Watanabe, and K. Tanigaki, “Electric transport of a single- crystal iron chalcogenide fese superconductor: Evidence of symmetry-breakdown nematicity and additional ultrafast dirac cone-like carriers,” Phys. Rev. B 90, 144516 (2014). Yue Sun, Sunseng Pyon, and Tsuyoshi Tamegai, “Elec- tron carriers with possible Dirac-cone-like dispersion in FeSe1−xSx (x=0 and 0.14) single crystals triggered by struc- tural transition,” Phys. Rev. B 93, 104502 (2016). Y A Ovchenkov, D A Chareev, V A Kulbachinskii, V G Kytin, D E Presnov, O S Volkova, and A N Vasiliev, “Highly mobile carriers in iron-based superconductors,” Superconductor Sci- ence and Technology 30, 035017 (2017). S. Y. Tan, Y. Fang, D. H. Xie, W. Feng, C. H. P. Wen, Q. Song, Q. Y. Chen, W. Zhang, Y. Zhang, L. Z. Luo, B. P. Xie, X. C. Lai, and D. L. Feng, “Observation of Dirac cone band dis- persions in FeSe thin films by photoemission spectroscopy,” Phys. Rev. B 93, 104513 (2016). N. P. Ong, “Geometric interpretation of the weak-field Hall conductivity in two-dimensional metals with arbitrary Fermi surface,” Phys. Rev. B 43, 193 (1991). C. W. Luo, P. C. Cheng, S.-H. Wang, J.-C. Chiang, J. Lin, K. H. Wu, J. Y. Juang, D. A. Chareev, O. S. Volkova, and A. N. Vasiliev, “Unveiling the hidden nematicity and spin subsystem in FeSe,” npj Quantum Materials 2, 32 (2017). L. Fanfarillo, E. Cappelluti, C. Castellani, and L. Benfatto, “Unconventional hall effect in pnictides from interband inter- actions,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 096402 (2012). Anlu Shi, Takeshi Arai, Shunsaku Kitagawa, Takayoshi Ya- manaka, Kenji Ishida, Anna E. B ̈ohmer, Christoph Meingast, Thomas Wolf, Michihiro Hirata, and Takahiko Sasaki, “Pseu- dogap Behavior of the Nuclear SpinLattice Relaxation Rate in FeSe Probed by 77Se-NMR,” Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 87, 013704 (2018). 22 V. Grinenko, S. Dengre, R. Sarkar, D. A. Chareev, A. N. Vasiliev, D. V. Efremov, S. L. Drechsler, R. Huehne, K. Nielsch, H. Luetkens, and H. H. Klauss, “Anomalous Knight shift and low-energy spin dynamics in the nematic state of FeSe1−xSx,” arXiv:1903.00530 (2019). A. Rosch, “Interplay of disorder and spin fluctuations in the resistivity near a quantum critical point,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, V. Grinenko, R. Sarkar, P. Materne, S. Kamusella, A. Ya- mamshita, Y. Takano, Y. Sun, T. Tamegai, D. V. Efremov, S.-L. Drechsler, J.-C. Orain, T. Goko, R. Scheuermann, H. Luetkens, and H.-H. Klauss, “Low-temperature breakdown of antiferromagnetic quantum critical behavior in FeSe,” Phys. Rev. B 97, 201102 (2018). Luca Dell’Anna and Walter Metzner, “Electrical resistivity near pomeranchuk instability in two dimensions,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 136402 (2007). Dmitrii L. Maslov, Vladimir I. Yudson, and Andrey V. Chubukov, “Resistivity of a Non-Galilean–Invariant Fermi Liquid near Pomeranchuk Quantum Criticality,” Phys. Rev. H. C. Xu, X. H. Niu, D. F. Xu, J. Jiang, Q. Yao, Q. Y. Chen, Q. Song, M. Abdel-Hafiez, D. A. Chareev, A. N. Vasiliev, Q. S. Wang, H. L. Wo, J. Zhao, R. Peng, and D. L. Feng, “Highly Anisotropic and Twofold Symmetric Superconduct- ing Gap in Nematically Ordered FeSe0.93S0.07,” Phys. Rev. Swagata Acharya, Dimitar Pashov, and Mark van Schilf- gaarde, “Role of nematicity in controlling spin fluctuations and superconducting Tc in bulk FeSe,” arXiv:2005.07729 T. Imai, K. Ahilan, F. L. Ning, T. M. McQueen, and Robert J. Cava, “Why does undoped FeSe become a high-Tc supercon- ductor under pressure?” Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 1 (2009). Andreas Kreisel, Brian M. Andersen, P. O. Sprau, A. Kostin, J. C. S ́eamus Davis, and P. J. Hirschfeld, “Orbital selec- tive pairing and gap structures of iron-based superconductors,” Phys. Rev. B 95, 174504 (2017). Luke C. Rhodes, Matthew D. Watson, Amir A. Haghighirad, Daniil V. Evtushinsky, Matthias Eschrig, and Timur K. Kim, “Scaling of the superconducting gap with orbital character in FeSe,” Phys. Rev. B 98, 180503 (2018). J.-Y. Lin, Y. S. Hsieh, D. A. Chareev, A. N. Vasiliev, Y. Par- sons, and H. D. Yang, “Coexistence of isotropic and ex- tended s-wave order parameters in FeSe as revealed by low- temperature specific heat,” Phys. Rev. B 84, 220507 (2011). P. Bourgeois-Hope, S. Chi, D. A. Bonn, R. Liang, W. N. Hardy, T. Wolf, C. Meingast, N. Doiron-Leyraud, and Louis Taillefer, “Thermal conductivity of the iron-based supercon- ductor fese: Nodeless gap with a strong two-band character,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 097003 (2016). Can-Li Song, Yi-Lin Wang, Peng Cheng, Ye-Ping Jiang, Wei Li, Tong Zhang, Zhi Li, Ke He, Lili Wang, Jin-Feng Jia, Hsiang-Hsuan Hung, Congjun Wu, Xucun Ma, Xi Chen, and Qi-Kun Xue, “Direct observation of nodes and twofold sym- metry in FeSe superconductor.” Science 332, 1410 (2011). S. A. Moore, J. L. Curtis, C. Di Giorgio, E. Lechner, M. Abdel-Hafiez, O. S. Volkova, A. N. Vasiliev, D. A. Cha- reev, G. Karapetrov, and M. Iavarone, “Evolution of the su- perconducting properties in FeSe1−xSx,” Phys. Rev. B 92, Kazuhiko Kuroki, Hidetomo Usui, Seiichiro Onari, Ryotaro Arita, and Hideo Aoki, “Pnictogen height as a possible switch between high-Tc nodeless and low-Tc nodal pairings in the iron-based superconductors,” Phys. Rev. B 79, 224511 (2009). J. D. Fletcher, A. Serafin, L. Malone, J. G. Analytis, J.-H. Chu, A. S. Erickson, I. R. Fisher, and A. Carrington, “Evidence for a nodal-line superconducting state in LaFePO,” Phys. Rev. K. Hashimoto, S. Kasahara, R. Katsumata, Y. Mizukami, M. Yamashita, H. Ikeda, T. Terashima, A. Carrington, Y. Mat- suda, and T. Shibauchi, “Nodal versus Nodeless Behaviors of the Order Parameters of LiFeP and LiFeAs Superconductors from Magnetic Penetration-Depth Measurements,” Phys. Rev. Jie Xing, Hai Lin, Yufeng Li, Sheng Li, Xiyu Zhu, Huan Yang, and Hai-Hu Wen, “Nodal superconducting gap in tetragonal FeS,” Phys. Rev. B 93, 104520 (2016). Yang Yang, Wan-Sheng Wang, Hong-Yan Lu, Yuan-Yuan Xi- ang, and Qiang-Hua Wang, “Electronic structure and dx2−y2- wave superconductivity in FeS,” Phys. Rev. B 93, 104514 Fr ́ed ́eric Hardy, Mingquan He, Liran Wang, Thomas Wolf, Peter Schweiss, Michael Merz, Maik Barth, Peter Adelmann, Robert Eder, Amir-Abbas Haghighirad, and Christoph Mein- gast, “Calorimetric evidence of nodal gaps in the nematic su- perconductor FeSe,” Phys. Rev. B 99, 035157 (2019). P. Bourgeois-Hope, S. Chi, D. A. Bonn, R. Liang, W. N. Hardy, T. Wolf, C. Meingast, N. Doiron-Leyraud, and Louis Taillefer, “Thermal conductivity of the iron-based supercon- ductor fese: Nodeless gap with a strong two-band character,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 097003 (2016). Lin Jiao, Chien-Lung Huang, Sahana R ̈oßler, Cevriye Koz, Ulrich K R ̈oßler, Ulrich Schwarz, and Steffen Wirth, “Super- conducting gap structure of FeSe,” Scientific Reports 7, 44024 Mohit Randeria and Edward Taylor, “Crossover from Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer to Bose-Einstein Condensation and the Unitary Fermi Gas,” Annual Review of Condensed Matter Physics 5, 209–232 (2014). Q. Chen, J. Stajic, S. Tan, and K. Levin, “BCS-BEC crossover: From high temperature superconductors to ultra- cold superfluids,” Phys. Rep 412, 1 (2005). Shahar Rinott, K. B. Chashka, Amit Ribak, Emile D. L. Rienks, Amina Taleb-Ibrahimi, Patrick Le Fevre, Franc ̧ois Bertran, Mohit Randeria, and Amit Kanigel, “Tuning across the BCS-BEC crossover in the multiband superconductor Fe1+ySexTe1−x: An angle-resolved photoemission study,” Science Advances 3 (2017), 10.1126/sciadv.1602372. S. Kasahara, Y. Sato, S. Licciardello, M. ˇCulo, S. Arsenijevi ́c, T. Ottenbros, T. Tominaga, J. B ̈oker, I. Eremin, T. Shibauchi, J. Wosnitza, N. E. Hussey, and Y. Matsuda, “Evidence for an Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov State with Segmented Vor- tices in the BCS-BEC-Crossover Superconductor FeSe,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 124, 107001 (2020). Y. S. Kushnirenko, A. V. Fedorov, E. Haubold, S. Thiru- pathaiah, T. Wolf, S. Aswartham, I. Morozov, T. K. Kim, B. B ̈uchner, and S. V. Borisenko, “Three-dimensional super- conducting gap in FeSe from angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy,” Phys. Rev. B 97, 180501 (2018).