Hybridization mechanism of the dual proximity effect in superconductor-topological insulator interfaces Nicholas Sedlmayra,∗, Alex Levchenkob aInstitute of Physics, M. Curie-Skłodowska University, 20-031 Lublin, Poland bDepartment of Physics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords: Proximity Effect Topological Insulator Topological Superconductor Density of States Scanning Tunneling Microscopy A B S T R A C T In this communication we consider generalities of the proximity effect in a contact between a con- ventional 푠-wave superconductor (S) nano-island and a thin film of a topological insulator (TI). A local hybridization coupling mechanism is considered and a corresponding model is corroborated that captures not only the induced unconventional superconductivity in a TI, but also predicts the spread- ing of topologically protected surface states into the superconducting over-layer. This dual nature of the proximity effect leads specifically to a modified description of topological superconductivity in these systems. Experimentally accessible signatures of this phenomenon are discussed in the context of scanning tunneling microscopy measurements. For this purpose an effective density of states is computed in both the superconductor and topological insulator. As a guiding example, practical ap- plications are made for Nb islands deposited on a surface of Bi2Se3. The obtained results are general and can be applied beyond the particular material system used. Possible implications of these results to proximity circuits and hybrid hardware devices for quantum computation processing are discussed. 1. Introduction The ongoing efforts in developing superconducting hard- ware that enables topologically protected fault-tolerant quan- tum computation relies heavily on the physics associ- ated with the proximity effect (PE) in Josephson junctions (JJ) and other related weak-links, see Ref. for a review and references therein. This general phenomenon occurs at the interfaces between different materials where supercon- ducting correlations can be effectively induced into a nomi- nally non-superconducting material over a distance of the or- der parameter coherence length. The required building block of topological protection is based on the elusive excitations that satisfy non-Abelian exchange statistics such as Majo- rana zero modes (MZMs) . At present there are two lead- ing candidate platforms that host these quantum states and can be integrated into suitable qubit circuit designs. First, is the hybrid superconductor-semiconductor (S-Sm) nanowire junction where an interplay of strong Rashba spin-orbit cou- pling and conventional superconductivity leads to an effec- tive 푝-wave pairing state that supports formation of MZMs in the proper regime of control parameters such as Zeeman splitting, controlled by a magnetic field, and chemical poten- tial, that can be tuned by a gate voltage . A similar ver- sion of this structure with a two-dimensional electron gas re- alizing topological superconductivity in a planar Josephson junction has also been proposed . Second, is the combi- nation of a conventional superconductor (S) and topological insulator (TI) where, similarly, the interplay of induced pair- ing correlations and strong spin-momentum locking of gap- ∗Corresponding author sedlmayr@umcs.pl (N. Sedlmayr); levchenko@physics.wisc.edu (A. Levchenko) nick.sedlmayr.co.uk (N. Sedlmayr) (A. Levchenko) less TI surface excitations results in a phase resembling a spinless 푝-wave superconductor, that does not break time re- versal symmetry. This state supports Majorana bound states that can be nucleated at vortices [8–11]. Apart from hy- brid systems, one should add to the list intrinsic topologi- cal superconductors (TSC) that offer some of the same functionality concerning the MZMs physics. A planar two- dimensional geometry of the S-TI and TSC systems offers great technical advantages for: (i) scalability, as the num- ber of vortices with MZMs scales proportionally to the sam- ple area, (ii) proposed MZMs interferometry , and (iii) ultimately the opportunity to perform braiding opera- tions with seemingly realistic protocols . 2. Hybrid topological hardware platforms The proximity effect and Josephson physics in hybrid topological systems, including various geometrical config- urations and combinations of unconventional superconduct- ing materials, have been extensively studied theoretically. Several designs of proposed circuits were utilized experi- mentally in functional devices. We briefly overview and highlight recent work as well as the outstanding challenges and open questions in the context of physics properties and efforts geared towards topological qubit development. The following presentation is organized by the material platforms. (i) S-Sm platform. Since the original measurements re- ported in Ref. , key signatures of MZMs in supercon- ducting semiconductor (S-Sm) nanowires have been heavily scrutinized in the subsequent detailed experiments [17–22]. Major progress has been made in improving the quality of these devices and hard gap engineering under the proxim- ity effect. A particularly important step forward for com- puting purposes is the implementation of a nanowire based hybrid transmon like qubit (gatemon) that has been validated N. Sedlmayr and A. Levchenko: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 1 of 11 arXiv:2010.14066v3 [cond-mat.supr-con] 16 Feb 2021 Superconductor-topological insulator dual proximity effect and characterized for various configurations in the non-topological regime . However, conclusive evidence for a functional Majorana qubit remains to be demonstrated. One of the major obstacles in this path is that the desired topological phase in a qubit configuration requires the fine- tuned calibration of the chemical potential with the simul- taneous precise control of a high magnetic field, which is notoriously difficult to achieve. Another issue is that defect decoherence, or disorder in general, and multiband effects may result in signatures that could be falsely interpreted as Majorana states [26–30]. We note that while most of the ex- perimental efforts have been focused on S-Sm hybrids based on In(Ga)As and InSb materials, gate-controlled induced su- perconductivity was recently realized in Ge based quantum well heterostructures and a Josephson field effect transistor was achieved thus providing novel avenues for the search of MZMs. (ii) S-TI and TSC platforms. The prospect of incorpo- rating S-TI-S junctions as inductive elements for topological qubits attracted great interest. The proposed 푝-wave symme- try of the induced superconductivity into TI surface states in these structures was tested in numerous experiments by phase-sensitive techniques such as measuring surface super- currents in the Josephson effect [33–44]. Perhaps the most heavily studied proximitized TI materials to date are Bi2Se3, Bi2Te3 and HgTe, while interestingly doping the parent com- pound by either Cu푥 or Nb푥 reveals native topological su- perconductivity in Bi2Se3 . The coexistence of su- perconducting and topological orders in the regime of the proximity effect has been further tested [47–49], including junctions of TI and unconventional 푑-wave superconductors , and a large volume of transport data is available, es- pecially on tunneling conductance and Andreev reflection [51–54]. The key signature of MZMs in S-TI-S junctions, namely 4휋 periodic Josephson current, 퐼퐽(휙) ∝ sin(휙∕2), has not been so far unambiguously detected. However, field induced localization of MZMs in vortex cores and the spatial profile of the Majorana mode have been mapped out by scan- ning tunneling microscopy in epitaxial thin films of Bi2Te3- NbSe2 heterostructures . In addition, robust zero-bias conductance peaks associated with MZMs have been recently identified by STM in iron-based superconductors [56–58]. These topological materials, and FeTe1−푥Se푥 in particular, have been recognized as a promising new candidate for fur- ther study and possible integration into circuits for comput- ing applications. (iii) CPB and JJA platforms. The alternative ideas in su- perconducting electronics to realize quantum states robust against sources of local noise and bit flips are also being ac- tively pursued where the notion of topological protection is encoded in a different system property. The advantages of these approaches is that they employ only conventional ma- terials and mature technologies based on Cooper-pair boxes (CPB) and Josephson junction arrays (JJA). The context of topological protection in these circuits can be introduced in a different way by encoding the state of the qubit by a dis- crete variable that cannot be measured without taking the qubit out of the protected domain. For instance, the simplest example involves two logical states constructed as coherent superpositions of a large number of states with e.g. even or odd quantum numbers. Clearly, such states are physically indistinguishable and thus protected from the environment, provided that transitions between the odd and even sectors are mitigated. The promising implementation of this idea is to identify such discrete quantum states with dual vari- ables of either charge or phase parity representing the num- ber of Cooper pairs on a small superconducting island or the number of trapped fluxons, respectively. This architec- ture requires only conventional materials such as Al-AlO푥- Al junctions with an artificially engineered 휋-periodicity of Josephson energy, 퐸퐽(휙) ∝ cos(2휙). Physically, two differ- ent superconducting circuits have been suggested to imple- ment such charge parity qubits: the 0 − 휋 mirror qubit [59– 61] and the rhombi chains , recently realized exper- imentally [64–67]. Phase dual circuits based on Aharonov- Casher effect have also been studied . (iv) Multiterminal JJ platforms. Another fruitful method tailored towards achieving topological properties with con- ventional materials explores the potential of multiterminal proximity circuits as artificial emulators of topological mat- ter . In this approach when the normal region of a Joseph- son junction is contacted by 푛 superconducting leads the spec- tra of emergent Andreev levels are consequently parametrized by (푛 − 1) phases. Since the spectrum of levels is periodic modulo 2휋, the pairwise difference of phases between each of the two terminals can be thought as an effective dimen- sion in reciprocal momentum space and thus Andreev bands emulate an effective band-structure of a crystal that lives in such a parameter space of phases. Remarkably, under cer- tain experimentally realistic conditions, the Berry flux as- sociated with these sheets of Andreev states can be made finite as the band structure supports stable Dirac (and more generally Weyl) points . These features lead to topo- logical properties such as non-local conductance and current of Cooper pair pumps that are asymptotically quantized [73– 75] (the accuracy of these quantizations is determined by dis- sipative Landau-Zener transitions between Andreev states). Provided that current superconducting qubit circuits contain multiple leads, realizing and operating such a multiterminal Andreev qubit in a parameter space of the topological do- main is of clear interest. Incorporating topological materi- als into such JJs further enriches the spectrum of possibilities . In the past few years the multiterminal Josephson effect was experimentally realized in proximitized graphene and InAs/Al epitaxial heterostructures . In the context of qubit performance, the fundamental is- sue that pertains to each of the above hybrid platforms is the quasiparticle poisoning that severely limits qubit life- times. The combination of disorder effects and magnetic fields, which break time reversal symmetry, contributes to the softening of the proximity gap and induces tails of sub- gap states thus enabling quasiparticle population down to the lowest energies. Experimentally, gap engineering, with a combination of materials in proximity effects with large gap N. Sedlmayr and A. Levchenko: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 2 of 11 Superconductor-topological insulator dual proximity effect TI SC STM Tip TPSS TPSS leaking into the SC SC states leaking into the TI surface the model. A SC island is on top of a bulk 3D topological insulator, with TPSS on its top surface. STM experiments allow one to probe the density of states on both the surfaces of the SC island and TI. mismatch, was effectively used to stimulate quasiparticle re- laxation and trapping. Theoretically, the sub-gap structure in the density of states was exhaustively studied, especially in S-Sm structures. The same set of issues is expected to be a limiting factor in the performance of the Majorana qubit in S-TI platforms, but far fewer detailed studies are available for this system that go beyond the basic models. This moti- vates the current work where we formulate and solve the hy- bridization model of the proximity effect in S-TI interfaces, and discuss its dual nature in Sec. 3. We extract effective density of states in SC and TI in Sec. 4 and develop effective models in Sec. 5. We specify our analysis to a particular ge- ometry amenable to surface state measurement instruments such as scanning tunneling and magnetic force microscopes that can test predictions of the extended model. We close with a brief summary and outlook in Sec. 6. 3. Hybridization model for the topological PE In this work we focus on the frequently overlooked dual nature of the proximity effect in S-TI layers. The term topo- logical PE is used to describe the generically expected phe- nomenon of topologically protected surface states (TPSS) leaking into the adjacent superconducting material, thus ef- fectively inducing properties native to intrinsic TSCs. This effect opens new perspectives for observing and manipulat- ing MZMs. From the recent modeling there exists a substantial sup- porting evidence that TPSS can migrate and spread in mul- tilayer heterostructures . There are two kinds of exper- iments that support this conclusion. First are the ARPES measurements that reveal that a Dirac cone of TPSS can be seen on the surface of superconducting film grown on top of TI. This effect was observed in Pb-TlBiSe2 prox- imity layers. Second are STM data also suggesting clear signatures of Dirac states in SC density of states spec- tra. The theoretical investigation of these features have been carried out in both S-TI systems [83–86] and with numerical simulations in topological superconducting wires . In this study we expand on our earlier proposal, reported in conjunction with the experiment , and demonstrate with a more detailed modeling that hybridization between the TPSS and superconductor results in effective 푝-wave like topological superconductor with striking profiles in the den- sity of states. In particular, we discuss how the Fu and Kane model of proximity induced pairing can be recovered in the proper limit of the present treatment, as induced super- conductivity of the TPSS is not completely equivalent to the latter mechanism. As a practical application, motivated by geometries accessible to surface probes, we investigate the possible experimental setup of a superconducting droplet de- posited on top of a TI, see Fig. 1 for a schematic of the sys- tem. In the subsequent analysis we assume that the interface is clean and contact between the two materials is without po- tential barriers. For estimates we take a combination of Nb islands as SC and paradigmatic Bi2Se3 as TI. The minimal Hamiltonian we use which captures this physics has three terms: 퐻 = 퐻S + 퐻TI + 퐻C . (1) 퐻S is the standard BCS Hamiltonian for a clean two di- mensional metal with mean field 푠-wave pairing. 퐻TI de- scribes the TI surface states (TPSS), and 퐻C is a spin inde- pendent local hybridization between the TPSS and the SC states. These are all described in more detail below. Throughout we will use 퐻j for the Hamiltonian, with the corresponding Hamiltonian density j such that for example 퐻S = ∫ d2퐫Ψ† 퐫SΨ퐫 . (2) 퐫 = (푥, 푦) is the 2D spatial coordinate. For the SC states we use the Nambu basis, with Ψ† 퐫 = {푐† 퐫↑, 푐† 퐫↓, 푐퐫↓, −푐퐫↑}, and a wavefunction 휓푇 퐫 : {푢퐫↑, 푢퐫↓, 푣퐫↓, 푣퐫↑}. 푐† 퐫휎 creates a particle of spin 휎 at position 퐫. Similarly for the TPSS we have 휒† 퐫 = {푎† 퐫↑, 푎† 퐫↓, 푎퐫↓, −푎퐫↑} and 퐻TI = ∫ d퐫휒† 퐫 TI휒퐫 , (3) where 푎† 퐫휎 creates a particle of spin 휎 at position 퐫. Addi- tionally we will set ħ = 푘퐵 = 1 throughout. First, the BCS Hamiltonian density is given by S = ̂휉흉푧 + Δ흉푥 . (4) Note that we follow the convention that identity matrices are not explicitly written, so equation (4) is a 4×4 matrix includ- ing the spin subspace. As is standard ⃗흉 are the Pauli matrices operating in the particle-hole subspace and ⃗흈 are the Pauli matrices operating in the spin subspace. The band operator is ̂휉 = −∇2∕(2푚) − 휇, with 휇 the chemical potential and 푚 the effective electron mass. N. Sedlmayr and A. Levchenko: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 3 of 11 Superconductor-topological insulator dual proximity effect -8 -4 0 4 8 ε [meV] -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 kx [Å -1] -8 -4 0 4 8 ε [meV] (a) (b) approximately flat superconducting bands and the Dirac cone belonging to the TPSS is clearly visible in (a). In both panels 푣퐹 = 10 meVÅ. The coupling is in (a) 훾 = 0.5Δ and in (b) 훾 = 2Δ. For the the TPSS we have TI = (−i푣퐹 ∇ ⋅ ⃗흈 − ̃휇) 흉푧 . (5) ̃휇 is the chemical potential of the TPSS, which in general can be different to 휇. Note that in our hybrid model the ve- locity of the TPSS, 푣퐹 , will depend on the thickness of the superconducting layer. A simple hydrodynamic considera- tion suggests that 푣퐹 = 푣퐹0훽퓁TI∕(퓁TI + 퓁S) where 퓁TI is the penetration depth of the TPSS into the TI bulk and 퓁S is the thickness of the SC layer. 푣퐹0 is the Fermi velocity of the TPSS in the absence of the SC and the dimensionless parameter 훽 has been introduced to model any further effects of the interface itself. For the hybridization we consider the simplest possible coupling term 퐻C = 훾 ∫ d2퐫휒† 퐫 흉푧Ψ퐫 + H.c. , (6) with a strength 훾. For our model we can also expect that the coupling decays exponentially with the thickness. The Hamiltonian (1) can be decoupled into two indepen- dent blocks by a Fourier transform, followed by a spin ro- tation which diagonalizes TI but naturally leaves S and C unaffected. Following the Fourier transform the Hamil- tonian densities are diagonal in momentum space with mo- mentum 퐤 = (푘푥, 푘푦) and 푘 = |퐤|. Now let ̃Ψ퐤 = † 퐤Ψ퐤 and ̃휒퐤 = † 퐤휒퐤, with ̃ = † 퐤퐤 where 퐤 is a spin rotation which commutes with S and c. Its exact form is given by 퐤 = ei휙푘흈푧∕2ei휋흈푥∕4 , (7) where 휙푘 = 휋∕2 − tan−1[푘푥∕푘푦] is the polar angle coordi- nate. The rotated Hamiltonian density for the TPSS becomes ̃TI = † 퐤TI퐤 = (푣퐹 푘흈푧 − ̃휇)흉푧 . (8) As stated previously ̃S = S and ̃C = C. In the new basis the Hamiltonian Eq. (1) can be directly written in block diagonal form ̃ → ( ̃+ 0 0 ̃− ) (9) by a simple reordering. The resulting two independent 4 × 4 Hamiltonian densities are ̃± = ⎛ ⎜ ⎜ ⎜⎝ 휉푘 훾 Δ 0 훾 휁±푘 0 0 Δ 0 −휉푘 −훾 0 0 −훾 −휁±푘 ⎞ ⎟ ⎟ ⎟⎠ , (10) with 휁푘 = 푣퐹 푘 − ̃휇, i.e. the dispersion of the uncoupled TPSS. If we consider the anti-unitary symmetries used to classify topological Hamiltonians in the ten-fold way then strictly this Hamiltonian possesses [, ±]+ = 0 and [ , ̃±]− = 0. These anti-unitary symmetries obey 2 = −1 and  2 = 1 placing it in CI, which has no invariant in two dimensions. Nonetheless we can find effective models, see section 5, which are 2D topological superconductors with the possibility of hosting MZMs. From Eq. (10) it is straightforward to calculate the dis- persion of the resulting energy bands: 휀푎푏푐 푘 = 푎 √ 2 [ 푏 (2훾2 + 휖2 푘 + 휁2 푐푘 ) + √[휖2 푘 − 휁2 푐푘 ]2 + 4훾2 [휖2 푘 + 2휉푘휁푐푘 + 휁2 푐푘 ]] 1 2 , (11) where 푎, 푏, 푐 can each be either ±1, and 휖푘 = √ Δ2 + 휉2 푘. As required, in the limit 훾 → 0 the BCS and TPSS dispersion relations are recovered. A full superconducting gap remains provided that the coupling 훾 is strong enough. However for very small 훾 there are mid-gap states due to the TPSS only having a weak pairing effect. In figure 2 we show exemplary band structures cut across one direction of the 2D plane. As the dispersion relations are circularly symmetric this suffices to show all information. Throughout this paper we use the values 휇 = ̃휇 = 0, an effective mass of 푚 = 3.2푚푒 where 푚푒 is the bare electron mass, and Δ = 3.05meV . In section 4 we calculate the density of states for this model, and compare it to the standard BCS density of states and that for the Fu-Kane model, see section 4.1. Another check one can perform that the hybridized bands have the right properties that can lead to topological super- conductivity in the appropriate limit, is that there is spin mo- mentum locking in the gapped Dirac cones near 푘 = 0. In figure 3 we show the in-plane spin density in momentum space, centred on 푘 = 0, for the lowest positive energy band. Spin-momentum locking is clearly visible, and a similar pat- tern can be seen for all the bands. 4. Density of States The density of states of the hybrid structure can be di- rectly measured on the surface by scanning tunneling mi- N. Sedlmayr and A. Levchenko: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 4 of 11 Superconductor-topological insulator dual proximity effect -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 kx ky 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 |(Sx,Sy)| momentum for the lowest positive energy band where 푣퐹 = 10 meVÅ and 훾 = 0.5Δ, see figure ??(a). The spin momentum locking is clearly visible, and can be seen in all bands. There is also a component of spin in the 푧 direction, not shown. croscopy, see figure 1. In this section we will show that in the right regime the hybridization of the TPSS and the SC states leaves a clear measurable signature in the density of states. For our full hybrid model, given the dispersion relation (11), one can directly calculate the density of states. The density of states is given by 1 √ 휋Γ ∫ d2푘 4휋2 ∑ {푎,푏,푐} e−(휔−휀푎푏푐 퐤 )2∕Γ2 , (12) where the delta function peaks have been broadened into Gaussians of width Γ = 1meV. This we then calculate nu- merically with Eq. (11). To compare to this we consider the density of states of the Fu-Kane model, see section 4.1 be- low, and the standard BCS density of states given by 휈S(휔) = 1 푚휋 Re 휔 √ 휔2 − Δ2 . (13) For the purposes of plotting the density of states we intro- duce a phenomenological broadening via 휔 → 휔 + i훿. 4.1. Fu-Kane model density of states As a comparison we can compare the density of states of our model to that of the Fu-Kane model. In the limit that mo- mentum 푘 → 0, i.e. at the centre of the TPSS Dirac cone, our model (37) can effectively be reduced to the Fu-Kane model, see section 5.1. The Fu-Kane model can be succinctly writ- ten as , FK = (푣퐹 푘흈푧 − ̃휇)흉푧 + Δ흉푥 . (14) An analytical expression for the density of states of this Hamil- tonian can be calculated by starting from Gorkov’s equation (i휔푛 − ′ 풌 횫 −횫† −i휔푛 − [′ −풌 ]∗ ) (퐺푛,풌 † 푛,풌 ) = ( 1 0 ) , (15) with ′ 풌 = ( − ̃휇 푣퐹 푘− 푣퐹 푘+ − ̃휇 ) , (16) where 푘± = 푘푥 ± i푘푦. The matrix 횫 = Δ푖흈푦 is the 푠-wave pairing. This is in the Matsubara representation with the Green’s function 퐺푛,풌 = − ∫ 1 푇 0 d휏ei휔푛휏⟨휏휓풌휎(휏)휓† 풌휎′(0)⟩ , (17) and anomalous Green’s function † 푛,풌 = − ∫ 1 푇 0 d휏ei휔푛휏⟨휏휓† 풌휎(휏)휓† 풌휎′(0)⟩ . (18) The operator 휏 stands for time ordering along the imagi- nary time axis and 휓휎(퐫, 휏) is a Heisenberg operator. The Matsubara frequencies are 휔푛 = 2휋(푛 + 1 2) for 푛 ∈ Z, and temperature 푇 . The anomalous Green’s function is therefore † 푛,풌 = − iΔ흈푦 휀4 푛푘 − 4 ̃휇2푣2 퐹 푘2 ( 휀2 푛푘 −2 ̃휇푣퐹 푘+ −2 ̃휇푣퐹 푘− 휀2 푛푘 ) , (19) where 휀2 푛푘 = ̃휇2 + 휔2 푛 + Δ2 + 푣2 퐹 푘2 . (20) The normal Green’s function can be found from the anoma- lous Green’s function resulting in 퐺푛,풌 = − i휔푛 + [′ −풌 ]∗ 휀4 푛푘 − 4 ̃휇2푣2 퐹 푘2 ( 휀2 푛푘 −2 ̃휇푣퐹 푘+ −2 ̃휇푣퐹 푘− 휀2 푛푘 ) , (21) from which the density of states can be calculated. The Fu-Kane model density of states is calculated from the Green’s function using the standard formula 휈FK(휔) = − 1 휋 Im ∫ 푑2풌 4휋2 tr 퐺푛,풌||i휔푛→휔+i훿 , (22) which after a small amount of manipulation leaves the inte- gral 휈FK(휔) = 2휔 휋 Im ∫ ∞ 0 푑푘 2휋 휀2 푛푘푘 휀4 푛푘 − 4 ̃휇2푣2 퐹 푘2 . (23) This integral can be performed using standard techniques and we find, 휈FK(휔) = |휔| 휋푣2 퐹 [ Re √ 휔2 − Δ2 − ̃휇2 √ |휔2 − Δ2 − ̃휇2| (24) + | ̃휇| √ |휔2 − Δ2| Re √ Δ2 − 휔2 + ̃휇2 √ |휔2 − Δ2 − ̃휇2| ] , and, in the case of interest ̃휇 = 0, this is simply 휈FK(휔) = |휔| 휋푣2 퐹 Θ(휔2 − Δ2) , (25) N. Sedlmayr and A. Levchenko: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 5 of 11 Superconductor-topological insulator dual proximity effect -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 ω/∆ 0 0.1 0.2 ν [Arb. units] Full Model, γ=0.5∆ Full Model, γ=2∆ BCS Fu-Kane Kane model (black circles), the standard BCS model (green squares), and our full model for 훾 = 2Δ (red triangles down), and 훾 = 0.5Δ (blue triangles up). We have used the velocity 푣퐹 = 10 meVÅ. where Θ is the Heaviside theta function. In the limit Δ → 0 (and ̃휇 → 0) one recovers the density of states, 휋푣2 퐹 , (26) for a Dirac cone in two dimensions. 4.2. Density of states results In figure 4 we compare the density of states for our full hybrid model with that of the Fu-Kane model, equation (4.1), and the standard BCS model, equation (13). Although only small differences can be seen between the BCS and hybrid cases inside the gap, the effect becomes very pronounced outside of this where the effect of the Dirac cone becomes very clear. For weak coupling 훾 one finds typical looking co- herence peaks in the hybrid case. However as the coupling is increased more structure becomes apparent near the edge of the gap, including a characteristic reduction in the density of states just outside the coherence peaks. In figure 5 we compare different coupling strengths and Fermi velocities of the TPSS for our hybrid model. We note that for the larger values of the Fermi velocities, 푣퐹 = 20680 meVÅ, which corresponds to the values known for Bi2Se3 , the density of states of the TPSS is too flat to have any visible effect on the density of states. However, as already mentioned, we expect the Fermi velocity of our model to depend on the thickness of the SC layer, 퓁S, as 푣퐹 = 푣퐹0훽 퓁TI 퓁TI + 퓁S , (27) where 퓁TI is the penetration depth of the TPSS into the TI bulk. This is likely to be further reduced by effects of the boundary, which are modelled by the dimensionless param- eter 훽. If 퓁TI ≪ 퓁S then we have 푣퐹 = 푣퐹0퓁TI∕(훽퓁S) and 푣퐹 ≪ 푣퐹0, which is in agreement with experiments . In turn this means that counter-intuitively, the effect is best -5 0 5 ω/∆ 0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 ν [Arb. units] vF=10 meVÅ, γ=0.5∆ vF=20680 meVÅ, γ=0.5∆ -5 0 5 ω/∆ vF=10 meVÅ, γ=2∆ vF=20680 meVÅ, γ=2∆ (a) (b) model with different coupling strengths 훾 and velocities 푣퐹 . Panel (a) shows the density of states for 훾 = 0.5Δ with veloci- ties 푣퐹 = 10 meVÅ (blue triangles up), and 푣퐹 = 20680 meVÅ (red triangles down). Panel (b) shows the density of states for 훾 = 2Δ with velocities 푣퐹 = 10 meVÅ (blue triangles up), and 푣퐹 = 20680 meVÅ (red triangles down). We note that for the velocity 푣퐹 = 20680 meVÅ, as is predicted for Bi2Se3 for exam- ple, the density of states of the TPSS is almost flat and hence shows no visible sign for either coupling strength. However the velocity is expected to be much lower in the hybrid structure , and hence we use an exemplary value of 푣퐹 = 10 meVÅ in panel (a). -10 -5 0 5 10 ω/∆ 0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 ν [Arb. units] lSC=10nm lSC=100nm lSC=500nm lSC=1Ωm brid model for 훾 = 5Δ and different thicknesses of the SC layer 퓁S where the velocity is given by equation (27) with 푣퐹 = 20680 meVÅ, 퓁TI = 2nm and 훽 = 0.25. Further features become visible around the coherence peaks of the BCS states as the velocity is reduced. seen in SC layers of an intermediate thickness. Naturally spin-ARPES measurements would not suffer form this de- fect, and thinner layers would be preferential in that case. At strong coupling, further features appear around the coherence peaks. In figure 6 we show results for the large coupling regime 훾 = 5Δ at a series of SC thicknesses, the effects of which are modelled by equation (27) with 퓁TI = 2nm and 훽 = 0.25. In a real physical system this effect may be reduced by the reduction in the coupling for thicker SC layers, and may be hard to achieve. N. Sedlmayr and A. Levchenko: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 6 of 11 Superconductor-topological insulator dual proximity effect 5. Effective description We will derive two effective models for which either the SC or TPSS degree of freedom has been removed. This leads to a modified topological superconductor like model for the TPSS, and to a superconductor with an induced spin-orbit like coupling term. We will use a functional integral repre- sentation in the Matsubara formalism. For this purpose it is convenient to first diagonalize the SC Hamiltonian 퐻S. Let ̂Ψ퐤 = 푘̃Ψ퐤 with the rotation matrix 푘 = 1 √ 2 ⎛ ⎜ ⎜ ⎜ ⎜ ⎜ ⎜⎝ 0 Δ 훼− 푘 0 − Δ 훼+ 푘 Δ 훼− 푘 0 − Δ 훼+ 푘 0 0 훼− 푘 휖푘 0 훼+ 푘 휖푘 훼− 푘 휖푘 0 훼+ 푘 휖푘 0 ⎞ ⎟ ⎟ ⎟ ⎟ ⎟ ⎟⎠ , (28) where 훼± 푘 = √ 휖2 푘 ± 휖푘휉푘. This results in the diagonal Hamil- tonian density ̂S = 휖푘흉푧 . (29) In this new basis the coupling term is ̂ 퐻C = ∫ d2퐤 ̃휒† 퐤횪푘̂Ψ퐤 + H.c. , 횪푘 = 훾흉푧푘. (30) We make no changes to the field operators for the TPSS. In the following Ψ푛퐤 and 휒푛퐤 are Grassmann fields corre- sponding to the fermionic field operators ̂Ψ퐤 and ̃휒퐤 respec- tively. The functional integrals we will need to perform are over quadratic actions and are given by ⟨...⟩S = ∫ 퐷Ψ ... e−푆S ∫ 퐷Ψe−푆S , where (31) 푆S = − 푇 ∑ 푛 ∫ d2퐤Ψ† 푛퐤 [ 휔푛 + ̂S ] Ψ푛퐤 , for the SC and ⟨...⟩TI = ∫ 퐷휒 ... e−푆TI ∫ 퐷휒e−푆Ti , where (32) 푆TI = − 푇 ∑ 푛 ∫ d2퐤휒† 푛퐤 [ 휔푛 + ̃TI ] 휒푛퐤 , for the TPSS. 5.1. Dual PE effective model for the TI states To find our effective model for the TPSS with the SC states integrated out we must calculate the correction to ̃TI from the coupling term with the BCS states integrated out. We therefore want to calculate e−푆′ = ⟨ e −푇 ∑ 푛 ∫ d2퐤 [ 휒† 푛퐤횪푘Ψ푛퐤+H.c. ]⟩ S . (33) After performing the functional integral, and using standard formula that relates determinant of an operator to its trace, ln det푂 = tr ln 푂, we find 푆′ = 1 2푇 ∑ 푛 ∫ d2퐤 [ 휒† 푛퐤횪† 푘품푛푘횪푘휒푛퐤 + H.c. ] , (34) where 품푛푘 = ⟨Ψ푛푘Ψ† 푛푘⟩S is the Green’s function for the su- perconducting states. This term is in addition to ̃TI and we therefore have for the effective Hamiltonian density eff TI = ̃TI + Δeff 푛푘 흉푥 − 휇eff 푛푘 흉푧 , (35) where Δeff 푛푘 = 훾2Δ 휔2 푛 + 휖2 푘 , and 휇eff 푛푘 = 훾2휉푘 휔2 푛 + 휖2 푘 . (36) Thus in the static limit we are left with the effective model: eff =(푣퐹 푘흈푧 − 휇eff 푘 )흉푧 + Δeff 푘 흉푥 , (37) Δeff 푘 = 훾2Δ Δ2 + 휉2 푘 , and 휇eff 푘 = ̃휇 + 훾2휉푘 Δ2 + 휉2 푘 . The effective s-wave pairing near the Fermi level is therefore ∼ 훾2∕Δ. For an appreciable pairing strength in this model the hybridisation must therefore be similar in magnitude to the s-wave gap of the superconductor. Close to the centre of the Dirac cone the Fu-Kane model is recovered, i.e. with Δeff 푘 → Δ FK = (푣퐹 푘흈푧 − ̃휇)흉푧 + Δ흉푥 . (38) As discussed earlier this model is known to host MZM at the centre of vortices. The effective TPSS model (37) has eigenenergies 휀푎푏 TI;k = 푎 휖푘 √ 푣2 퐹 푘2Δ2 + (푣퐹 푘휉푘 + 푏훾2)2 (39) with 푎 = ±1 and 푏 = ±1. As in the case of the full hybrid model, using (12) we can calculate the corresponding den- sity of states for this model, see figure 7. By increasing the coupling strength top the SC states one finds an induced gap, as expected, with coherence peaks. Additional feature can be seen outside of this region, which for stronger coupling be- come more pronounced, leading to what has the appearance of a second coherence peak. 5.2. Dual PE effective model for the S states Similarly the SC will be modified by the presence of the TPSS. In this case we need to calculate the action 푆′′ from e−푆′′ = ⟨ e −푇 ∑ 푛 ∫ d2퐤 [ 휒† 푛퐤횪푘Ψ푛퐤+H.c. ]⟩ TI . (40) In complete analogy to the preceding calculation, following this standard integral we find the effective Hamiltonian eff S = ̂S + [Σeff 푛푘 − 훼eff 푛푘 푘흈푦] 흉푧 . (41) N. Sedlmayr and A. Levchenko: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 7 of 11 Superconductor-topological insulator dual proximity effect -20 -15 -10 -5 0 5 10 15 20 ω/∆ 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 ν [Arb. units] γ=0.5∆, vF=10meVÅ γ=2∆, vF=10meVÅ γ=5∆, vF=10meVÅ TPSS model equation (37). A gap is induced by coupling to the TPSS, and can induce features at higher energies which are similar to secondary coherence peaks. where Σeff 푛푘 = 훾2휇(휇2 + 휔2 푛 − 푣2 퐹 푘2) 푛 + [휇2 − 휔2 푛 − 푣2 퐹 푘2]2 , (42) and 훼eff 푛푘 = 훾2푣퐹 (휇2 − 휔2 푛 − 푣2 퐹 푘2) 푛 + [휇2 − 휔2 푛 − 푣2 퐹 푘2]2 . (43) 훼eff 푛푘 is an effective spin-orbit like term introduced by the TPSS. In the static limit this gives Σeff 푘 = 훾2휇 휇2 − 푣2 퐹 푘2 and 훼eff 푘 = 훾2푣퐹 휇2 − 푣2 퐹 푘2 . (44) This effective model for the SC has eigenenergies 휀푎푏 S;k = 푎휖푘 + 푎 훾2 휇 + 푏푣퐹 푘 (45) with 푎 = ±1 and 푏 = ±1. As previously we can use (12) to calculate the density of states, see figure 8. The effect of the TPSS as the coupling strength is increased is to both widen the gap and generate mid-gap states. 6. Summary In this communication we have introduced and solved a minimal model which describes the interplay between SC and TPSS in a thin superconducting film on top of a topolog- ical insulator. Due to a dual proximity effect TPSS from the TI tunnel into the SC, and conversely Cooper pairs from the SC tunnel into the TI. Our model describes the hybridiza- tion between these states. We show that this gives rise to low energy bands with the appropriate SC gap and spin mo- mentum locking to potentially give rise to a topological su- perconductor. Second we calculate the density of states of this full hybrid model, and demonstrate that it has distinctive -10 -5 0 5 10 ω/∆ 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 ν [Arb. units] γ=0.5∆, vF=10meVÅ γ=2∆, vF=10meVÅ γ=5∆, vF=10meVÅ SC model equation (41). The coupling to the TPSS widens the superconducting gap and generates mid-gap states. features which could be measured in STM experiments. We benchmark this density of states to the standard BCS density of states and that for the minimal Fu-Kane model of 푠-wave proximitized TPSS. The hybridization leads to a modified gap structure and distinctive slopes outside of the gapped region which originate from the TPSS. We also find that the coherence peaks become modified. We then consider two effective models which describe the effect of the SC states on the TPSS, and the TPSS on the SC states. We find that for the TPSS a modified Fu- Kane like model is formed, with a momentum dependent gap. In the limit 푘 → 0 this tends toward the standard Fu- Kane result. The effect of the TPSS on the SC is rather to introduce a complicated spin-orbit coupling term, due to the spin-momentum locking of the TPSS. For both models we derive an effective Hamiltonian, the resulting band structure, and the density of states. We demonstrate that the effective TPSS model density of states has a proximity induced gap and shows coherence peaks which are absent from the min- imal Fu-Kane model. Further features can also appear in the case of strong hybridization. For the SC, the TPSS tend to widen the gap and coherence peaks, and induce mid-gap states. All of these features would be visible in STM exper- iments. There are several possible extensions of this work which would be interesting to consider. One limitation of the full hybrid model which is introduced here, is that it is strictly two dimensional. A future extension of this work would be to solve the full three dimensional strongly-coupled sys- tem self-consistently, for instance by generalizing the ear- lier analysis of Ref. , and investigate more thoroughly the role played by the thickness of the SC and TI, as well as more general coupling terns at the interface. Similarly, how a more realistic band structure of the TI would affect the results and how disorder in the materials would change the density of states and proximity effects is also of interest. If the final goal is to demonstrate the possible existence of MZMs, then the effects of the magnetic field which causes the vortices would also need to be taken into account. N. Sedlmayr and A. Levchenko: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 8 of 11 Superconductor-topological insulator dual proximity effect Acknowledgements We gratefully acknowledge discussions with Paulo Sessi, Stuart Tessmer, Eric Goodwin, and Dale van Harlingen. Support for this work at the University of Wisconsin- Madison was provided by the National Science Foundation, Quantum Leap Challenge Institute for Hybrid Quantum Ar- chitectures and Networks, NSF Grant No. 2016136. In M. Curie-Skłodowska University N.S. was supported by the National Science Centre (NCN, Poland) under Grant No. UMO-2019/35/B/ST3/03625.