1 Stabilization of hexazine rings in potassium polynitride at high pressure Yu Wang1, Maxim Bykov2,3, Elena Bykova2, Xiao Zhang1, Shu-qing Jiang1, Eran Greenberg4, Stella Chariton4, Vitali B. Prakapenka4, Alexander F. Goncharov1,2, 1 Key Laboratory of Materials Physics, Institute of Solid State Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei 230031, Anhui, People’s Republic of China 2 Earth and Planets Laboratory, Carnegie Institution of Washington, 5251 Broad Branch Road NW, Washington, DC 20015, USA 3 Department of Mathematics, Howard University, Washington, DC 20059, USA 4 Center for Advanced Radiations Sources, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA Correspondence should be addressed to: agoncharov@carnegiescience.edu 2 Polynitrogen molecules represent the ultimate high energy-density materials as they have a huge potential chemical energy originating from their high enthalpy. However, synthesis and storage of such compounds remain a big challenge because of difficulties to find energy efficient synthetic routes and stabilization mechanisms. Compounds of metals with nitrogen represent promising candidates for realization of energetic polynitrogen compounds, which are also environmentally benign. Here we report the synthesis of polynitrogen planar N6 hexazine rings, stabilized in K2N6 compound, which was formed from K azide upon laser heating in a diamond anvil cell at high pressures in excess of 45 GPa and remains metastable down to 20 GPa. Synchrotron X-ray diffraction and Raman spectroscopy are used to identify this material, also exhibiting metallic luster, being all consistent with theoretically predicted structural, vibrational and electronic properties. The documented here N6 hexazine rings represent new highly energetic polynitrogens, which have a potential for future recovery and utilization. 3 Nitrogen-rich compounds have been widely sought as the great potential candidates for extremely high-yield high-energy density materials (HEDM) 1,2. Their substantial potential energy storage or release capacity is related to a large energy difference of the single/double versus the triple bonds between nitrogen atoms. Numerous stable all-nitrogen compounds were predicted theoretically 3- 7, however the existence of such materials at ambient conditions remain largely elusive— only a few radicals have been reported 8. One major obstacle is the low-order N-N bonds tend to be unstable at low pressures, while they stabilize under pressure providing a pathway for synthesis. As a demonstration of a tour de force, the molecular diatomic nitrogen has been shown to transform into an atomic solid with single-bonded crystalline structure with a cubic gauche (cg-N) structure first via theoretical prediction at about 50 GPa 6, and then experimentally in the laser heated diamond anvil cell (DAC) at 110 GPa and 2500 K 9, but the recovery of this and other high- pressure polynitrogens remains problematic. Various doping were thought for stabilization of N-rich compounds. Theoretical calculations predicted a number of high-pressure nitrogen-rich compounds with metals that form unusual low-bonded all-nitrogen groups as well as polymeric networks 10-16. However, only few of them have been synthesized in the laboratory. Polynitrogens in the Mg-N and Fe-N systems containing N4 2− nitrogen chains or network were synthesized at about 50 and 100 GPa, respectively 17,18; the cis-tetranitrogen Mg2N4 units are found to be recoverable at atmospheric pressure yielding great opportunities with regard to their possible use as HEDMs. Even more complex nitrogen rich compounds such as porous frameworks with transition metals (Re, Hf, W, and Os), where the structure combines nitrogen low-order bonded chains and triply bonded nitrogen molecules have been synthesized above 100 GPa 19,20. However, stabilization of polynitrogen groups and large quantity production at ambient pressure remains a problem. For example, synthesis of stable cyclo- 4 N5 − units at ambient pressure with a decomposition temperature below 117°C has required stabilization in very complex compounds such as, for example, (N5)6(H3O)3(NH4)4Cl salt 21,22, at the expense of the energy density yield. Alkali metals-nitrogen compounds were proposed to reduce the pressure of synthesis and to improve the compound stability and energy density of HEDMs as they are predicted to form a wealth of materials with various structures and compositions at high pressures 23-37. The structural motifs include penta-N5 − salts, N6 hexazine rings, and polymeric chains, and some of them are predicted to be preserved at ambient conditions. However, there are only a few experimental reports that support these findings. Steele et al. synthesized a penta-N5 − salts of Cs 30 by laser heating CsN3 azide in molecular N2 medium at 60 GPa in a DAC. The crystal structure of this CsN5 with 6 formula units in the unit cell is very complex and it was determined by comparing the results of powder XRD and Raman spectroscopy with theoretical calculations. Laniel et al. synthesized LiN5 compounds with penta-N5 − ions by heating Li in N2 medium at 45 GPa, but the exact structural refinement could not be performed because of a powder nature of the sample 38,39. They also documented the synthesis of Li diazenide LiN2 at lower pressures. In a more recent work, Bykov et al. 40 synthesized two diazenide structures NaN2 and Na3(N2)4 containing dinitrogens N2- at 4 and 28 GPa, respectively, by laser heating NaN3 azide. Use of azides containing linear N3- groups as precursors allows to reduce substantially (e.g. compared to molecular N2) the activation barrier for the reaction and provide more uniform reaction environment. Polymerization of various azides has been widely investigated in static DAC experiments41,42, mainly at room temperature, and theoretically. The experiments show a rich polymorphism at high pressures, but the azide group remains (meta)stable 42-45 up to at least 60 5 GPa (in Li azide). However, Raman spectroscopy in NaN3 azide above 19 GPa 41 shows an appearance of additional Raman bands at 1800-2000 cm-1, which cannot be explained by the azide groups and likely indicate a chemical transformation as no associated phase transformation has been detected. It is interesting that the Raman bands in this spectral range can be also observed after a photochemical transformation at much lower pressures, 4.8-8.1 GPa, however, no XRD signature of the transformation could be found 46. Here, we report a synthesis from KN3 of previously predicted but never detected K2N6 compound which contains planar N6 hexazine rings at about 50 GPa. Results The synchrotron X-ray diffraction (XRD) and Raman experiments in DAC are described in the Methods and Supplementary Information. Here, we focus on the experiments, where powdered KN3 azide without any pressure medium/reagent was investigated, which gives a preference for formation of compounds with this composition. Additional experiments, where molecular N2 was loaded together with KN3 azide, are used to investigate the room temperature compression and low-temperature decompression behavior via in situ Raman measurements. When compressed at room temperature, KN3 azide experiences phase transformations from I4/mcm to another structure at about 15 GPa 44,45, which has been predicted to be C2/m phase from theoretical calculations 29,32. In this phase the linear N3 azide groups are aligned parallel to each other unlike the low-pressure I4/mcm, where they are alternatively rotated by 90 with respect to each other. Our Raman data (Fig. S1 of Supplementary Information) do show a phase transition above 15 GPa manifested by splitting of the librational modes and appearance of new peaks in good agreement with . Above 30 GPa, the Raman spectra show a broad band near 1900 cm-1 increasing intensity with 6 pressure similar to that reported previously in NaN3 41. Our XRD data at ~50 GPa, which generally agree with the extrapolated results of , reveal a poorly crystallized single crystal of KN3 with extremely broad diffracted peaks (see Supplementary Information, Fig. S2). The unconstrained lattice determination results in the following unit-cell parameters a = 5.4252(13), b this phase is just a heavily distorted I4/mcm ambient pressure structure. Indeed, the refinement against single-crystal data using the undistorted I4/mcm model results in the R1 factor of ~11%, which clearly indicates that no major structural rearrangements take place, thus ruling out the predicted C2/m phase. The best refinement was obtained in a monoclinic space group I2/c (Fig. S3, Table S1, Supplementary Information). It is worth noting that KN3 is sensitive to the X-ray exposure as evidenced by a darkening of the sample (Fig. 1c), a distinct Raman spectrum (Fig. 2), and time dependent XRD patterns (Fig. S4). The irradiated product demonstrates a substantial reduction N3 azide modes and sharpening and strengthening of the Raman peaks, which could be assigned to yet unidentified definitely polynitrogen configuration. However, time-dependent X-ray diffraction measurements do not show the appearance of new diffracted peaks suggesting that the X-ray-induced phase is amorphous in nature (Fig. S4, Supplementary Information). 7 KN3 without a pressure medium. A freshly chosen (no X-ray exposure) spot was laser heated (c), which results in the appearance of the heated spot (circled by red) (inset). X-ray exposed areas that have been created around the heated spot while XRD mapping the area and in a control spot are labeled. The panel (a) shows a representative integrated 1D pattern in the laser heated location; the circles are the data and the line is the Le Bail refinement in the structure shown as a projection along the direction in the panel (d). A few weak non-indexed peaks (e.g., near 8) correspond to the diffraction pattern of the non-reacted sample (Fig. S2). The panel (b) shows a 2D diffractogram. The X-ray wavelength is 0.2952 Å. Shiny laser-heated areas 42 keV X-ray exposed a b c d 8 around 50 GPa. The pink arrows show the Raman peaks that emerge under pressure and due to X- ray radiation and are assigned to yet unidentified polynitrogen species. The grayed areas indicate the spectral ranges, where Raman peaks of the stressed diamond anvils appear. Theoretical structure search calculations predict different than I4/mcm KN3 polymorphs to be stable above 15 GPa27,29,32,37, however the reconstructive phase transitions are hindered due to the high kinetic barriers. In order to overcome these restrictions, we performed high-temperature treatment of cold-compressed KN3. Laser heating of KN3 at 49-53 GPa to 2500 K results in formation of a new material clearly identified by shiny surfaces and a very distinct XRD pattern (Fig. 1). The diffraction pattern indicates the synthesized material is a fine grain powder, which is well suited for powder diffraction methods. The unit cell was indexed with hexagonal unit cell (a KN3 50 GPa Raman shift (cm-1) 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 Raman Intensity (arb. units) N-N-N stretch N-N-N libration Compressed KN3 azide X-ray unexposed Compressed KN3 azide X-ray exposed K2N6 with hexazine rings synthesized via laser heating N-N stretch/ deformation K lattice mode x5 9 pressure polymorphs of KN3 – K2N6 with P6/mmm symmetry29,32,37. In this structure potassium and nitrogen atoms occupy Wyckoff sites 2d (2/3, 1/3, 1/2) and 6j (0, y, 0) respectively. Nitrogen atoms are connected with each other forming planar N6 rings (Fig. 1). The theoretical unit cell parameters slightly differ (a is 5.5 % larger, while c is 4% smaller) from the experimentally determined ones yielding the volume discrepancy within fair 6% (Fig. 3). structure of which was determined up to 15 GPa 45, develops a monoclinic distortion with the space group I2/c, determined at 53 GPa (Figs. S2, S3, Table S1), where upon laser heating it transforms to P6/mmm K2N6 compound with N6 hexazine rings, which is some 17% denser. However, I41/amd K3(N2)4 (which is slightly deficient in nitrogen) synthesized at 30 GPa also assisted by laser heating has about the same density as I2/c azide. To take into account the difference in composition we added a specific volume of nitrogen in molecular and monatomic (cg-N) compounds at the same pressure determined from their equations of states 47,48. The theoretical calculations of the specific Pressure (GPa) 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 Volume (A3/f.u.) 30 40 50 60 This work K3(N2)4+molecular N P6/mmm Zhang et al. 2014 C2/m Zhang et al. 2014 This work K3(N2)4+atomic N This work I41/amd K3(N2)4 This work I2/c KN3 Ji et al. 2011, KN3 azide I4/mcm Zhang et al. 2014 This work P6/mmm K2N6 I4/mcm Li et al. 2013 C2/m Li et al. 2013 P6/mmm Li et al. 2013 10 volumes of I2/c, C2/m (which we do not observe), and P6/mmm K2N6 are shown for comparison Considering the oxidation state of K as +1, each N6 ring must accommodate 2 electrons leading to an 8 π-electron system in N62-. Therefore, this system does not follow the 4n+2 Huckel rule for being an aromatic compound and 2 extra electrons are entering antibonding partially filled π* orbitals leading to metallic character of this compound (Fig. 1(c)). Theoretical calculations 29,32,37 predicted that P6/mmm KN3 would be a stable polymorph above 40-50 GPa, which is consistent with our observations. However, there is a large kinetic barrier for such transformation as the system changes the chemical state. Thus, laser heating is needed for realization of this transformation, while mere compression to higher pressure would largely preserve the metastable azide phase as has been also demonstrated previously in Na 41 and Li 42 azides. The Raman spectra change drastically upon the transformation as seen in Fig. 2, which also shows that X-ray irradiated KN3 also has a distinct Raman spectrum. The newly synthesized P6/mmm KN3 shows a distinct Raman bands in the spectral range characteristic for the stretching vibrations of a low-bonded nitrogen (1000-1300 cm-1), and two low-frequency modes in the spectral range of the N-N bending modes and lattice vibrations. Also weak peaks at about 700 cm- 1 can be seen. We have been able to trace the Raman spectrum of this phase down to approximately 20 GPa (Fig. S5) on unloading thus establishing their pressure behavior and allowing to compare the results with theoretical calculations of vibrational frequencies of P6/mmm KN3 at 20 GPa 32 and 100 GPa 29 (Fig. 4) and a hypothetic N6 hexaazabenzene isomer where the ring is out-of-plane distorted with the D2 symmetry 7. These data provide very important clues for assigning the observed Raman modes of newly synthesized P6/mmm KN3 (Fig. 4). 11 in comparison to the theoretically calculated Brillouin zone center modes of P6/mmm K2N6 29,32 and the Raman-active modes of a N6 ring isomer in the twist-boat D2 structure 7. The group theory predicts four A1g+ 2E2g +E1g Raman active modes of the hexazine rings and one E2g mode for K vibrations; no translation or rotation modes the hexazine rings is expected because there is only one ring in the unit cell. The lowest-frequency mode corresponds to E2g vibrations of K atoms in the xy plane. This assignment is supported by the fact that a similar mode of the isostructural Na2N6 compound (this will be presented elsewhere 40) has a substantially lower frequency, while the spectral positions of the other modes that belong to the hexazine ring are approximately the same. The second in frequency strong mode at approximately 400 cm-1 is assigned to the E2g in-plane deformation mode while the next in frequency weak peak at 700 cm-1 – to the E1g out-of-plane deformation mode of the hexazine ring. This assignment is based on the frequency sequence of the deformation bands calculated in determined based on their Pressure (GPa) 0 20 40 60 80 100 Raman frequency (cm-1) 0 500 1000 1500 A1g E2g E1g E2g (K) E2g This work, 78 K This work, 297 K This work, non-fundamentals Tobita et al. 2001; Raman modes B3LYP calculations Li et al., 2013; BZ Center modes calculations Zhang et al., 2014; BZ Center modes calculations P6/mmm K2N6 12 symmetry correlated to the symmetry of the symmetric D6h planar ring; we also assumed that the E2g in-plane deformation mode must be stronger as it modulates intra-ring N-N bonds while the E1g out-of-plane mode is purely deformational. The two other in-plane vibrations at higher frequencies also yield strong Raman bands corresponding to the E2g in-plane mixed vibration- deformation mode and the symmetric breathing A1g stretching mode; the latter is expected to be the dominant Raman band (Fig. 2). There are weaker and broader Raman peaks between these modes at 1150 cm-1 (Fig. S6), which cannot be assigned to any Raman active fundamental vibrations assuming the D6h symmetry of the planar N6 ring. However, the other vibration- deformation modes, which are nominally IR active, can contribute to Raman processes in the case of the symmetry reduction (e.g. dynamical), for example, to the nonplanar twist-boat D2 structure 7. The frequencies of the characteristic hexazine rings N-N stretching-deformation modes decrease with pressure release and these dependencies extrapolate reasonably well to the theoretically calculated values of the twist-boat N6 isomer at ambient pressure 7. On unloading of K2N6 with hexazine rings at 78 K the Raman spectra show clear signs of deterioration of this compound at 22 GPa, where the characteristic bands become weaker and other broad bands at 400, 1800, 2100, and 2300 cm-1 increase in intensity (Fig. S5). The product is difficult to identify; it is definitely not azide as there is no sign of the characteristic N-N stretching mode of the linear N3 groups. Based on observations of a number of high-frequency modes this product is likely a highly disordered state with elongated N2 dimers. The Raman spectrum of this material is qualitatively similar to that of the cold compressed azide (Fig. 2). Laser heating to 2500 K of unexposed KN3 azide, first pressurized to 50 GPa and then unloaded at room temperature to 30 GPa, results in formation of a shiny material, which visually looks similar to P6/mmm K2N6 but is different in structure and composition judging from single- 13 crystal XRD and Raman spectroscopy measurements (Fig. 5). The reaction products tend to be textured and single crystals of good quality and sufficient sizes can be selected by mapping the heated sample area. The structure and composition of the synthesized material was directly solved to be I41/amd K3(N2)4, which is isostructural to Na3(N2)4 (Table S2), that has been synthesized in similar P-T conditions in our previous work 40. (A) A microphotograph of KN3 sample laser heated in several places revealing shiny areas, where a new material is synthesized. Transparent parts of the sample (unexposed KN3 azide) appear light blue in the transmitted light. (B) A part of the reconstructed (hk7) precession image from the single- crystal XRD dataset of K3N8 at ~27 GPa. Reflections hkl with h+k+l = 2n +1 are absent due to the A B C D 14 I-centering of the lattice. (C) The structure of I41/amd K3(N2)4, which consists of two K sublattices (pink and green spheres) and two elongated N2 dimers sublattices (blue spheres). (D) The Raman spectra of K3N8 at ~27 GPa. A high-frequency band corresponds to the N-N stretching mode of the N-N dimers. The low-frequency modes are vibrations of K atoms and lattice vibrations of N2 dimers. Discussion Previous experiments on various azides at high pressures showed the stability of the linear N3- ion to at least 60 GPa judging from the vibrational spectroscopy 41-45,49 . Theoretical calculations predict a major phase transformation to a monoclinic C2/m within this chemical structure, where the linear N3- groups become collinear forming the C2/m structure29,32. Lithium azide, LiN3, at ambient pressures and -NaN3 at 0.3-17 GPa has the same structure 31,43. However, our experiments show that in K azide this structure cannot be easily realized. At room temperature, KN3 is reported to transform to another phase with the linear N3- groups 44,45 but the structure of this phase is not monoclinic C2/m. Instead our data (Figs. S2-S4) show that it rather remains in an only slightly distorted I4/mcm structure preserving the original lattice to at least 50 GPa. However, the azide ion becomes chemically unstable in this regime as manifested by formation of other yet unidentified polynitrogen species above 30 GPa (evidenced via emergence of a 1900 cm-1 Raman band, Fig. S1), the process, which is accelerated by X-ray radiation exposure. These experiments show that the azide ion N3- configuration becomes unstable at high pressures. Our high-pressure laser heating experiments revealed two new classes of compounds that become stable at these conditions. The structural and vibrational spectroscopy data provide concerted consistent data identifying their physical and chemical structure. 15 Laser heating of KN3 azide at 30 GPa results in formation of an unexpected diazenide I41/amd K3(N2)4 with a complex structure, which contains K atoms and elongated N2 dimers with different site symmetries, and a very large unit cell. It is interesting that this structure does not seem to reveal more efficient packing than azide as the specific volume of K3(N2)4 is very similar to that of KN3 azide (Fig. 3). It is likely that realization of this structure is at least partially due to its high entropy stemming from rotating dimers. In contrast, the formation of P6/mmm K2N6 with hexazine rings at 50 GPa is accompanied by a large volume contraction (about 17%), which explains the importance of pressure in its synthesis. This transformation manifests realization of the long sought low-bonded polynitrogen species at relatively low pressure compared to monatomic polymeric nitrogen. To create compounds with other than explored here polynitrogen species, reagent compositions must be varied in the synthesis, for example by providing an excess of nitrogen. Our preliminary experiments show that laser heating experiments in KN3 in N2 medium results in a wealth of new compounds with different composition and structure, which contain various polynitrogen species; these results will be presented elsewhere. In conclusions, our experiments show the azide group N3 is prompt for chemical destabilization under pressure evidenced by a loss of crystallinity of the compressed at 300 K sample, spontaneous emergence of extra Raman bands, and sensitivity to X-ray radiation. The reactions product is likely comprises chemically modified nitrogen species such as, for example, N2 dimers and/or square plane D2h N4+ 41, however, lack of crystallinity does not allow to identify them. Depending on pressure of the synthesis, two new crystalline materials form upon the laser heating: hexazine ring bearing K2N6 above 45 GPa and unusual K3(N2)4 diazenide at 30 GPa. These compounds reveal a large metastability domain on unloading, however they are not stable 16 at ambient conditions. The high-pressure synthesis of new polynitrides from azides has a lot of potential due to a reduced pressure of synthesis and a wealth of new compounds with a variety of chemical species and compositions that we documented here and others that need to be explored. Methods The high-pressure high-temperature behavior of KN3 was studied on one sample intended for XRD measurements and another four samples for Raman measurements. A powder sample of potassium azide KN3 was placed in sample chambers of DAC (see Supplementary information) equipped with diamond anvils with the culets of 250-300 m diameter for single-crystal and powder diffraction XRD and Raman experiments. Re foil preindented to a thickness of 30 μm served as a gasket. Ruby chips were placed inside the sample chambers for pressure measurement. The XRD sample had no pressure-transmitting medium. All of the Raman samples were loaded with the nitrogen gas at high pressure of 0.15 GPa at room temperature. Raman samples #1 and #2 were quenched to below 2 GPa at room temperature while samples #3 and #4 were quenched to below 3 GPa at liquid nitrogen temperature using a continuous flow He/N2 cryostat. All samples were compressed up to the target pressures and laser-heated (λ = 1064 nm) using double-sided laser- heating systems of the beamline GSECARS (APS, Argonne, USA) or ISSP (Hefei, China) (Supplementary Information). Laser heating of KN3 in the DAC was performed without any absorber by directly coupling near IR laser radiation with the sample. KN3 is a weak absorber at 50-60 GPa, however it can be coupled to the laser via grain boundaries and other defects, although care must be taken as it tends to run away once the temperature becomes higher than approximately 1000 K. Thus, the temperature at which the reported below reactivity is reported should be 17 considered cautiously. The heated area becomes nontransparent; we performed XRD and Raman mapping of these areas where available. XRD measurements were performed at the beamline GSECARS (13IDD, APS, Argonne, USA). We used monochromatic X-ray beam (λ = 0.2952 Å) focused down to 3×3 μm2 by a Kirkpatrick-Baez mirror system and diffraction patterns were collected on a Pilatus 1M detector (CdTe). For the single-crystal XRD measurements samples were rotated around a vertical ω-axis in a range ±35°. The diffraction images were collected with an angular step Δω = 0.5° and an exposure time of 1s or 2s/frame. For the details about the data analysis and structural solution, please see Supplementary Information. Raman spectra of the sample studied at GSECARS using XRD combined with laser heating were measured concomitantly using the GSECARS Raman system with the excitation wavelength of 532 nm in the spectral range of 10 to 4000 cm-1 with a 4 cm-1 spectral resolution. The Raman spectra of the laser heated at ISSP samples were examined with 532 and 660 nm excitation lines using a similar custom system coupled to a continuous flow cryostat (See Supplementary Information for more details). Acknowledgements This work at ISSP was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant CASHIPS Director’s Fund (Grant No. YZJJ201705), the Chinese Academy of Science (Grant Nos. YZ201524 and YZJJ2020QN22), and a Science Challenge Project No. TZ201601. A.F.G. was partially supported by the Chinese Academy of Sciences Visiting Professorship for Senior International Scientists Grant No. 2011T2J20 and Recruitment Program of Foreign Experts. 18 This research at Carnegie and APS was sponsored by the Army Research Office and was accomplished under the Cooperative Agreement Number W911NF-19-2-0172. Concomitant Raman spectroscopy experiments were performed at GeoSoilEnviroCARS (The University of Chicago, Sector 13), Advanced Photon Source (APS), Argonne National Laboratory. GeoSoilEnviroCARS is supported by the National Science Foundation - Earth Sciences (EAR - 1634415) and Department of Energy GeoSciences (DE-FG02-94ER14466). The Advanced Photon Source is a U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Science User Facility operated for the DOE Office of Science by Argonne National Laboratory under Contract No. DE-AC02- Data availability statement The datasets generated during and/or analyzed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.