Molten salt synthesis of a nanolaminated Sc2SnC MAX Phase LI You-Bing12, QIN Yan-Qing12, CHEN Ke12, CHEN Lu12, ZHANG Xiao12, DING Hao-Ming12, LI Mian12, ZHANG Yi-Ming12, DU Shi-Yu12, CHAI Zhi-Fang12, HUANG Qing12 (1. Engineering Laboratory of Advanced Energy Materials, Ningbo Institute of Materials Technology and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 315201, Ningbo, China; 2. Qianwan Institute of CNiTECH, Zhongchuangyi Road, Hangzhou bay District, Ningbo, Zhejiang, 315336) Abstract: The MAX phases are a family of of ternary layered material with both metal and ceramic properties, and it is also precursor materials for synthesis of two-dimensional MXenes. The theory predicted that there are more than 600 stable ternary layered MAX phases. At present, there are more than 80 kinds of ternary MAX phases synthesized through experi- ments, and few reports on MAX phases where M is a rare earth element. In this study, a new MAX phase Sc2SnC with rare earth element Sc at the M sites was synthesized through the reaction sintering of Sc, Sn, and C mixtures. Phase composition and microstructure of Sc2SnC were confirmed by X-ray diffraction, scanning electron microscopy and X-ray energy spec- trum analysis. And structural stability, mechanical and electronic properties of Sc2SnC was investigated via density func- tional theory. This study open a door for explore more unknown ternary layered rare earth compounds Ren+1SnCn (Re=Sc, Y, La-Nd, n=1) and corresponding rare earth MXenes. Key words: MAX phases; Nanolaminated; Scandium; Density-functional theory calculation The MAX phases are a family of nanolayered ter- nary carbides or nitrides with a hexagonal lattice struc- ture (P63/mmc), the chemical formula is Mn+1AXn (where M is an early transition metal; A belongs to group of 13-16; and X is carbon or/and nitrogen, n=1- 3). Generally, the heterodesmic feature of MAX phases contributes to a unique combination of both me- tallic and ceramic properties, and have been investi- gated as promising candidates for structural applica- tions in many fields. Moreover, MAX phases are used as a precursor to synthesize two-dimensional (2D) MXene with many attractive physical and chemical properties, and show promise in a broad range of appli- cations, notably electrochemical energy storage. Due to the continuing efforts from the scientific com- munity, about 155 MAX phases have been reported so far; including some novel MAX phases that A-site ele- ments are late transition metals. The theoretical studies have predicted around 665 ternary MAX phases that could be experimentally synthesized, for exam- ple, the ones whose M site element is rare earth Sc. As previous reported, Sc2InC was listed as one of possible stable MAX phases, where the structure, properties and potential applications are investigated via theoretical predictions; but not been experi- mentally identified yet. The Sc2InC is expected to be a promising candidate for optoelectronic devices for the visible light and ultraviolet regions, as well as coating materials to avoid solar heating. In addition, theoret- ical calculations indicate that the Sc2CT2 (T= F, OH) MXenes can be promising candidate materials for the next generation electronic devices. S. Kuchida et al focused on non-transition metal M2AX com- pounds which embody Sc, Y, and Lu atoms in M site; however, only polycrystalline sample of Lu2SnC was reported. As a result, the study of new MAX phases taking Sc as M site element is an intriguing and chal- lenging work. Now, the common synthesized of MAX phases methods are hot pressing (HP) and spark plasma sinter- ing (SPS). Compared to HP and SPS, the molten salt method is a simple and cost-effective route for prepar- ing MAX phase powders. As a high-temperature ionic solvent, the molten salt bath offers high solvation power and liquid environment for reactants that will greatly facilitate the mass transport and nucleation pro- cesses, thus need lower synthesis temperature and bold time. Some MAX phases (e.g. Ti3SiC2, Ti3AlC2, V2AlC, Cr2AlC) have been synthesized by molten salt method. In the present work, we synthesized a MAX phase of Sc2SnC in molten salts environment where the Sc element belongs to rare earth. The crystal structure and chemical composition were confirmed by XRD and SEM-EDS, respectively. Furthermore, the structure stability, electronic structure and mechanical properties of Sc2SnC are also be investigated via den- sity functional theory (DFT). 1 Experimental The raw materials used to prepare the MAX phase are scandium (Hunan Rare Earth Metal Materials Re- search Institute, Hunan, China; ~300 mesh, 99.5 wt.% purity), tin (Target Research Center of General Re- search Institute for Nonferrous Metals, Beijing, China, ~300 mesh, 99.5 wt.% purity), graphite (Qingdao Tianshengda Graphite Co. Ltd, Shandong, China; ~300 mesh, 99 wt.% purity), sodium chloride (Aladdin In- dustrial Co. Ltd, Shanghai, China; NaCl, 99.5 wt.% pu- rity), potassium chloride (Aladdin Industrial Co. Ltd, Shanghai, China; KCl, 99.5 wt.% purity). The powders were mixed in a stoichiometric ratio of Sc: Sn: C = 2: 1.1: 1 (Due to the melting point of Sn is relatively low, we increased the content ratio of tin for compensating the weight loss of tin at a high tem- perature, as in the preparation of V2(Sn,A)C MAX phases). The starting powders of Sc, Sn and graphite are mixed with inorganic salt (NaCl + KCl), and the mole ratio of (Sc+Sn+C):(NaCl+KCl) was 1:10. After ground for 10 min, the powder mixture was put into an aluminum oxide boat, and then move to a tube furnace and heated to 1000 °C during 3 h with heating rate of 5 °C/min under argon atmosphere, respectively. After the reaction was finished, the product is washed, fil- tered and dried at 40 °C in vacuum; and the excess Sn element is removed by ferric chloride (Aladdim Indus- trial Co. Ltd, Shanghai, China; FeCl3, 99.5 wt.% purity). The phase composition of the samples was deter- mined by X-ray diffraction (XRD, D8 Advance, Bruker AXS, Germany) with Cu Kα radiation. X-ray diffrac- tion patterns were collected at a step size of 0.02° 2θ with a collection time of 1 s per step. The microstruc- ture and chemical composition were observed by scan- ning electron microscopy (SEM, QUANTA 250 FEG, FEI, USA) equipped with an energy-dispersive spec- trometer (EDS), and the EDS values were fitted by XPP (extended Puchou/Pichoir). Density functional theory (DFT) calculations were programmed in the CASTEP code, using the gen- eralized gradient approximation (GGA) as imple- mented in the Perdew-Breke-Ernzerhof (PBE) func- tional. Phonon calculations were carried out to evaluate the dynamical stability using the finite dis- placement approach, as implemented in CASTEP. The equation E=(Ebroken−Ebulk)/S was adopted to cal- culate the cleavage energy E, where Ebulk and Ebroken represent the total energies of bulk MAX and the cleav- ing structures respectively with a 10 Å vacuum separa- tion in the corresponding M and A atomic layers, and S is the cross-sectional surface area of the MAX phase materials. The Rietveld refinement of powder XRD pattern of Sc2SnC was by TOtal PAttern Solution (TOPAS-Academic V6) software. 2 Results and discussion 2.1 Phase analysis of the Sc2SnC Fig. 1. Comparison of XRD patterns between (a) powders syn- thesized through the reaction between Sc, Sn, and C mixtures and (b) the simulated one of Sc2SnC Fig. 1a shows the XRD pattern of as-prepared powders synthesized at 1000 oC for 3 h, with character- istic peaks at 2θ ∼ 12°, 2θ ∼ 24°, and 2θ ∼ 36°, which neither belong to Sn nor other compounds, indicating a new MAX phase of Sc2SnC was synthesized (also with minor amount of Sn metal as by-product). In compari- son with experimental result, the simulated XRD pat- tern of Sc2SnC in Fig. 1b, the peaks positioned at 12.174°, 24.517°, 36.277°, etc., consisting with the ex- perimental peak positions in Fig. 1a, which further val- idates the formation of the new MAX phase Sc2SnC. Fig. 2. Comparison between experimental (blue crosses) and cal- culated XRD (red line) pattern of Sc2SnC. Rietveld refinement Site Element x y z Symmetry Wyckoff symbol M Sc 1/3 2/3 3m 4f A Sn 1/3 2/3 0.25 6 __ m2 2d X C 0 0 0 3 __ m 2a XRD pattern is important for phase identification and structure analysis. Due to no XRD pattern of Sc2SnC is available from literature, the Rietveld refine- ment of powder XRD pattern of Sc2SnC was conducted. As shown in Fig. 2, the blue crosses represent the ex- perimental diffraction profile (the Sn metal was remove by FeCl3 solution), while the red solid line denotes the theoretical pattern. The theoretical Bragg diffraction positions of Sc2SnC are marked as green lines. The gray curve is the deviation between calculated and experi- mental XRD patterns. The obtained reliability factors are Rp = 8.56% and Rwp = 11.19%, respectively; indi- cating good agreement between model and measured data. The space group of Sc2SnC is P63/mmc (No. 194), and the lattice constants measured from XRD pattern are a = 3.3692 Å and c = 14.6374 Å, respectively. The difference between theoretical calculation and the Rietveld refinement is probably ascribed to the exist- ence of defects in the crystal structure, as the case of V2SnC in previous report. The atomic positions of Sc2SnC determined from the Rietveld refinement are listed in Table 1. 2.2 Microstructural of the Sc2SnC It is well known that MAX phases crystallize in hexagonal structures and their grains are generally lay- ered hexagonsin morphology. To confirm that Sc2SnC has a similar microstructure, the microstructure of as-prepared powder was observed by SEM. It can be seen from Fig. 3a that Sc2SnC exhibits the microstruc- ture of typical thin hexagons. EDS equipped in SEM detected all constitutive elements (Sc, Sn and C) within these particles (shown in Fig. 3b). Although the EDS analysis is semi-quantitative and the accurate determi- nation of light elements like C is difficult, the relative atomic ratio of (Sc:Sn:C) could be revealed by EDS as about (2:1:1), consistent with the stoichiometry of 211 MAX phases. The Elemental mapping of Sc, Sn and C corroborated that all of these three elements have the same distribution. The above results further confirmed that the new MAX phase compound Sc2SnC is experi- mentally synthesized. Fig. 3. (a) SEM image of Sc2SnC. (b) The corresponding EDS spectrum indicated that particles contain Sc, Sn and C elements. (c) Elemental mapping clearing proving the uniform distribution 2.3 DFT results The structural analysis of Sc2SnC phase was car- ried out via DFT calculations. Fig. 4a shows the ter- nary-layered carbide crystal structure of Sc2SnC; and the calculated ΔHform (Sc2SnC) is –0.7167 eV, indicat- ing stability of the Sc2SnC phase. The lattice parame- ters, elastic constants and polycrystalline elastic modu- lus of Sc2SnC, as well as for other Sn-containing MAX phases are listed in Table 2. From the DFT calculation result, the a= 3.3686, c= 14.6532 Å, which was very close to experimental results. The mechanical stability of Sc2SnC was justified from the Born stability crite- 0. Besides, the dynamical stability of Sc2SnC can also be identified from the phonon dispersion curves in Fig. 4b. The results performed by theoretical calculations are consistent with experiments. However, compared with other MAX phases (listed in Table 2), it is found that they have lower values of elastic constants (i.e. C11, C33, C44, and C66). Fig. 4. (a) Crystal structure of Sc2SnC; (b) Calculated phonon dispersion of Sc2SnC; (c) Band structure of Sc2SnC; (d)Projected density of Sc, Sn, and C atom states. (GPa), shear modulus, G (GPa), and Young’s modulus, E (GPa), Pugh ratio, G/B, and Poisson ratio, v, of Sc2SnC, V2SnC, Ti2SnC, Zr2SnC, Hf2SnC, and Nb2SnC. Compound a (Å) c (Å) C11 C12 C13 C33 C44 C66 B G E G/B v Ref. Sc2SnC 197 63 47 182 67 53 100 63 157 0.630 0.238 This work V2SnC 336 126 122 304 85 35 Ti2SnC 337 86 102 329 169 39 Zr2SnC 269 80 107 290 148 94 39 Hf2SnC 330 54 126 292 167 39 Nb2SnC 341 106 169 321 183 39 The relative small value of C33 indicates the com- pound is more compressible along the c-axis compared to other compounds studied; while low C44 indicates being subject to shear deformation along [112 __ 0] (0001); and small C66 probably means lower resistance to shear in the <110> direction. The low shear defor- mation of Sc2SnC is also reflected from shear modulus G, which represents the resistance to shape change of the polycrystalline material. The calculated value of G/B > 0.5 indicates that the phase is brittle in nature following Pugh’s criterion. Furthermore, the obtained value of v (0.238) for Sc2SnC shows that it is located at the boundary between covalent and ionic materials. The calculated band structure of Sc2SnC and the projected density of states (DOS) of Sc, Sn, and C atoms with k- points are shown in Fig. 4c and Fig. 4d, respectively. Similar to other MAX phases and MAX phase-like compounds, Sc2SnC exhibits metallic nature; and the overlapping between valence and conduction bands across the Fermi level also reveals the presence of me- tallic bonding, which can be treated as the origin of the quasi-ductility of Sc2SnC (Fig. 4c). As can be seen from Fig. 4d, it is can be observed that the Sc-3d electrons are mainly contributing to the DOS at the Fermi level, and should be involved in the conduction properties; while the contributions from. 3 Conclusions In conclusion, a new MAX phase was successfully synthesized for the first time by heating the Sc, Sn, and C raw powder mixtures. The XRD data of Sc2SnC is use- ful for further phase identification and structure analysis; and Sc2SnC exhibits a typical laminar microstructure similar to other MAX phases. The first-principle calcu- lations were employed to further study structure stability of Sc2SnC MAX phase, and the results showed that Sc2SnC is metallic in nature where the contribution from Sc-3d states dominates the electronic conductivity at the Fermi level. This work implies the great potential of the ternary rare-earth metal carbide Ren+1SnCn (Re=Sc, Y, La-Nd, n = 1) family waiting for further explore. More importantly, the introduction of rare earth elements can give the special properties of MAX phases, and can be used as a precursor material for preparing rare-earth MXenes.