1 Epitaxial single-crystal growth of transition metal dichalcogenide monolayers via atomic sawtooth Au surface Soo Ho Choi, Hyung-Jin Kim, Bumsub Song, Yong In Kim, Gyeongtak Han, Hayoung Ko, Stephen Boandoh, Ji Hoon Choi, Chang Seok Oh, Hyun Je Cho, Jeong Won Jin, Seok Joon Yun, Bong Gyu Shin, Hu Young Jeong, Young-Min Kim, Young-Kyu Han*, Young Hee Lee*, Soo Min Kim*, and Ki Kang Kim* Dr. S. H. Choi, Mr. B. Song, Dr. S. Boandoh, Dr. S. J. Yun, Prof. Y. -M. Kim, Prof. Y. H. Lee, Prof. K. K. Kim Center for Integrated Nanostructure Physics (CINAP), Institute for Basic Science (IBS), Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, 16419, Republic of Korea Dr. H. -J. Kim, Prof. Y. -K. Han Department of Energy and Materials Engineering, Dongguk University, Seoul, 04620, Republic of Korea Mr. B. Song, Mr. Y. I. Kim, Mr. G. Han, Mr. H. Ko, Mr. J. H. Choi, Mr. C. S. Oh, Mr. H. J. Cho, Ms. J. W. Jin, Prof. Y. -M. Kim, Prof. Y. H. Lee, Prof. K. K. Kim Department of Energy Science, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, 16419, Republic of Korea Dr. B. G. Shin Max-Planck Institute for Solid State Research, Heisenbergstrasse 1, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany Prof. H. Y. Jeong UNIST Central Research Facilities, School of Materials Science and Engineering, UNIST, Ulsan, 44919, Republic of Korea Prof. S. M. Kim Department of Chemistry, Sookmyung Women’s University, Seoul, 14072, Republic of Korea E-mail: ykenergy@dongguk.edu, leeyoung@skku.edu, soominkim@sookmyung.ac.kr, kikangkim@skku.edu Keywords: transition metal dichalcogenides, single-crystal, chemical vapor deposition, epitaxial growth, atomic-sawtooth surface 2 Growth of two-dimensional van der Waals layered single-crystal (SC) films is highly desired to manifest intrinsic material sciences and unprecedented devices for industrial applications. While wafer-scale SC hexagonal boron nitride film has been successfully grown, an ideal growth platform for diatomic transition metal dichalcogenide (TMdC) film has not been established to date. Here, we report the SC growth of TMdC monolayers in a centimeter scale via atomic sawtooth gold surface as a universal growth template. Atomic tooth-gullet surface is constructed by the one-step solidification of liquid gold, evidenced by transmission-electron- microscopy. Anisotropic adsorption energy of TMdC cluster, confirmed by density-functional calculations, prevails at the periodic atomic-step edge to yield unidirectional epitaxial growth of triangular TMdC grains, eventually forming the SC film, regardless of Miller indices. Growth using atomic sawtooth gold surface as a universal growth template is demonstrated for several TMdC monolayer films, including WS2, WSe2, MoS2, MoSe2/WSe2 heterostructure, and W1- xMoxS2 alloy. Our strategy provides a general avenue for the SC growth of diatomic van der Waals heterostructures in a wafer scale, to further facilitate the applications of TMdCs in post silicon technology. Two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals (vdW) layered materials, including graphene, transition metal dichalcogenide (TMdC), and hexagonal boron nitride (hBN), have been extensively investigated in various fields owing to their unusual physical and chemical properties for developing unprecedented electronics, valleytronics, twistronics, spintronics, and catalysts. For example, an atomically thin vertical transistor on graphene/hBN/MoS2 heterostructure, PN diode with n-MoS2/p-WSe2 heterostructure, and coulomb drag transistors in MoS2/graphene heterostructure and multilayer WSe2 have been fabricated within a few micrometers in size. Large-area 2D films have been successfully synthesized by merging randomly oriented 2D grains, inevitably forming polycrystalline films. While the intrinsic physical properties of 3 polycrystalline films have been comprehensively investigated in terms of micron-scale grains, its inhomogeneity in a wafer scale limits application to integration challenges associated with structural defects such as grain boundaries and disorder. The growth of single-crystal (SC) monolayer and multilayer graphene films on SC Cu (111) and Cu-Si (111) surfaces has been demonstrated in a wafer scale, whereas the growth of diatomic 2D SC film such as hBN and TMdCs remains still complicated due to their non-centrosymmetric structures. Recently, the self-collimation of hBN grains on liquid Au substrate has been proposed for growing diatomic hBN SC film in a wafer scale but further study is required to grow other 2D vdW materials. Moreover, step-edge guided epitaxial growth has been observed in hBN films on SC Cu (111) and (110). Our primary concern is to discover a growth platform for single-crystal TMdCs in a centimeter scale. While SC hBN and Au (111) vicinal surface have been produced for the growth of SC TMdC film, evidence of seamless stitching, other Miller indices, and more importantly, a growth platform for general diatomic TMdCs still require investigation. We report a growth platform for SC TMdCs in a centimeter scale via an atomic sawtooth Au surface, which is evidenced by cross-sectional high-resolution transmission-electron-microscopy (HRTEM) to further verify the grain boundary (GB)-free SC TMdC film, regardless of Miller indices. The key to achieving SC TMdC growth is to construct the atomic sawtooth Au surface, to serve as a universal growth template, consisting of periodic tooth-gullet step edges to accommodate the self-assembly of unidirectional TMdC grains (Figure 1a). The atomic sawtooth Au surface with periodic step edges and low Miller index terraces, including (100), (110), and (111) facets, was prepared through the one-step solidification of liquid Au on W substrate (see Experimental Section). The atomic sawtooth Au (533) surface with the topmost WS2 monolayer is clearly distinguishable through cross-sectional annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (ADF-STEM) (Figure 1b). A surface with an irregular atomic sawtooth periodicity still yields a robust WS2 monolayer (Supporting Information, Figure S1). 4 The chemical inertness of Au and negligible solubility of metal and chalcogen atoms in Au film make the epitaxial growth of monolayer TMdC film possible. In contrast, conventional Cu film is highly reactive with chalcogen atoms. The electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) inverse pole figure (IPF) maps of the solidified Au foil demonstrate the formation of diverse atomic sawtooth surfaces such as (5,7,11), (169) mappings of high Miller indices are uniformly colored. We note that high-index surfaces were randomly produced after the solidification of liquid Au (Supporting Information, Figures S2, S3, and Table S1), contrary to previous study in which low-index Au (111) surface was obtained using similar preparation procedure. Monolayer WS2 grains were synthesized at 800 °C by injecting ammonium sulfide with a bubbler system onto the W precursor-coated atomic sawtooth Au substrate (see Experimental Section). After the initial growth stage of 5 min, WS2 grains are oriented along a specific direction with coherent triangles in a centimeter scale (Figures 1d, f, h, and Supporting Information, Figure S4), which is persistent with the presence of scarce coherent triangular voids near the final stage of film growth (Supporting Information, triangular TMdC grains on c-plane sapphire substrates reported by other studies. After a growth period of 20 min, a centimeter-scale SC WS2 film is eventually obtained (Figure 1i). Low energy electron diffraction (LEED) pattern clearly indicates a supercell of WS2 hexagonal lattice, Au (111) terrace facet, and atomic sawtooth Au (221) surface (Figure 1j and inset), congruent with the constructed LEED pattern (Supporting Information, Figure S6). The superposition of 25 LEED patterns in 5 × 5 mm2 area clearly confirmed the identical honeycomb lattice to assure SC WS2 film (Figures 1k, l and Supporting Information, Figure S7). The perfect honeycomb WS2 lattice was obtained with a lattice constant of 3.22 Å, indicating that the strain is negligible. This is distinct from previous work involving the growth of strained SC hBN on liquid Au substrate. 5 To verify the existence of GB-free WS2 film, partially merged WS2 grains grown for a period of 5 min were characterized by HRTEM. After the transfer of the WS2 grains onto the TEM grid, the coherent WS2 grains are preserved (Figure 2a). ADF-STEM image depicts a hexagonal crystal structure with d-spacings of 0.28 and 0.16 nm, corresponding to the (10-10) and (11-20) planes of 2H-WS2, consistent with previous work (Figure 2b). The stacked six selective-area-electron-diffraction (SAED) patterns (regions I-VI of Figure 2a) demonstrate the exclusive overlap of the hexagonal dots, confirming the coherent lattice orientation (Figure 2c). The grain boundary in 60° triangular region at the junction between two merged WS2 grains is carefully analyzed (Figure 2d and inset). The monolithic fringes of heavy W atoms are observed without the trace of GB lines (Figure 2e), in contrast with polycrystalline WS2, which possesses structural defects at GBs (Supporting Information, Figure S8). The higher magnification images of three regions in Figure 2e and their stacked fast Fourier transform (FFT) patterns clearly demonstrate the absence of GB lines in the merged regions (Figure 2f). Similar results are also obtained for other merged regions (Supporting Information, Figure S9). The absence of GB lines is analyzed in a macroscopic scale via oxidation in air at 350 °C. No prominent oxidized GB lines are visible between aligned WS2 grains based on SEM and Raman intensity mapping, while oxidized GB lines are apparent between misaligned polycrystalline WS2 grains (Figures 2g-j, and Supporting Information, Figure S10). Density-functional theory (DFT) calculations were carried out to elucidate the underlying mechanism of the coherent WS2 grain growth on an atomic sawtooth Au surface. We presumed that the growth proceeds with the formation of a W3S6 cluster, followed by surface migration, nucleation, and growth. A W3S6 cluster adsorbed onto a flat terrace can freely migrate and anchor at B step edge, owing to preferable energetics with a relatively larger adsorption energy of 1.43 eV at the Au (221) step edge of the Au (111) terrace facet (Supporting Information, 3a, b). Sulfur atoms energetically favor 0° at the step edge over other angles independent of 6 Miller indices (Figure 3c and Supporting Information, Table S3). Another metastable angle is found at 60° with a rotational barrier height of 0.25–0.75 eV, which varies with Miller indices. Such barriers can be overcome at a growth temperature of 800 °C to rotate the W3S6 cluster from 60° to the energetically favorable 0° angle. This theory is congruent with experimental results, where unidirectional WS2 grains were grown at an elevated growth temperature of 800– 880 °C. When the thermal energy is not sufficient to overcome the rotational barrier height, i.e., at low growth temperature such as 750 °C, a proportion of inverted triangular WS2 grains were grown (Supporting Information, Figure S12). In addition, if the terrace facet is consistent over the entire region, the WS2 grains are unidirectionally aligned, regardless of Miller indices. Coherent triangular WS2 grains are consistently obtained, despite the possible generation of several other Miller indices in addition to the main (236) and (2,10,25) surfaces at fixed (111) and (100) terrace facets, respectively (Supporting Information, Figure S11 and Table S2). This is again attributed to the energetically favorable adsorption of W3S6 clusters on a specific ‘B step edge’ of an atomic sawtooth surface confirmed by DFT calculations. Scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) image of the WS2 film grown on, for example, an Au (221) surface, shows aligned hexagonal S atoms along its regular periodic linear features (Figure 3d). Such a periodicity coincides with a terrace width of Au (221), corresponding to the step edge (Supporting Information, Figure S13). STM simulation of a WS2 film on Au (221) substrate, based on the LEED analysis in Figure 1j, demonstrates that the lower height at W sites in the linear feature is attributed to interactions between the step edge of Au (221) and WS2 via charge transfer from Au to the d orbitals of W in WS2 (Figure 3e). A structural model of WS2 monolayer on Au (221) surface including a supercell of WS2 across the step edges for a doubled terrace width in unit cell is constructed (see Experimental Section and indicative of negligible strain formation. 7 The atomic sawtooth Au surface can serve as a universal growth template for synthesizing other SC TMdC monolayers, lateral heterostructure, and alloy such as WSe2, MoS2, MoSe2/WSe2 lateral heterostructure, and W1-xMoxS2 alloy. SC WSe2 was grown with a supply of Se precursor at 780–820 °C under growth conditions similar to that used to produce SC WS2 films (see Experimental Section and Figure 4a). SC MoS2 was grown by supplying H2S gas after spin-coating a liquid Mo precursor, identified by Raman spectra (see Experimental Section and Figures 4b, c). ADF-STEM and SAED analysis of coherent WSe2 grains confirm their GB- free regions (Supporting Information, Figure S14). To strengthen the growth platform, lateral MoSe2/WSe2 heterostructure was prepared using different growth conditions. Se pellets were vaporized with elevating temperature after spin- coating of liquid Mo precursor (see Experimental Section and Figure 4d). At the early growth stage, SC MoSe2 is nucleated first with coherent triangular grains. At a final growth temperature of 800 °C for 10 min, native tungsten oxides on the W foil are decomposed to sublimate W atoms. The W atoms are energetically preferred to anchor to the edge of the MoSe2 layer and eventually substitute Mo atoms to form MoSe2/WSe2 heterostructure, while retaining coherent triangular grains (Figure 4d). Consequently, WSe2 domain is gradually formed, as confirmed by the confocal Raman mapping image of E12g phonon in the WSe2 region and spatially resolved confocal Raman spectra (Figures 4e, f). W1-xMoxS2 alloy can be also grown by supplying H2S gas at a growth temperature of 800 °C (see Experimental Section and Figure 4g). Mo precursors and vaporized WOx are mixed together to form alloy and segregate into a serpentine MoS2 structure in a WS2 lattice, identified by distinct intensity differences in the ADF-STEM image and Raman spectra (Figures 4h-j). Moreover, the absence of GB lines between merged grains indicates the single crystallinity of the alloy, confirmed by ADF-STEM and their stacked FFT patterns (Supporting Information, Figure S15). We propose an atomic sawtooth Au surface as a universal growth platform for SC TMdC monolayers, including WS2, WSe2, MoS2, MoSe2/WSe2 heterostructure, and W1-xMoxS2 alloy 8 in a centimeter scale, regardless of Miller indices. Energetically favorable adsorption sites at periodic gullet step edges promote the growth of coherent TMdC triangular grains to eventually form the GB-free SC TMdC film. Avenues to explore in the future include i) the control of atomic sawtooth Au surface orientation, ii) the scaling up of the fabrication process for industrial applications, and iii) the discovery of appropriate atomic sawtooth surfaces beyond Au films. Our strategy offers new insights into the synthesis of SC diatomic 2D materials in a wafer scale to further facilitate the realization of SC vdW heterostructures. Experimental Section Cleaning procedure of Au and W foils: To remove impurities on the surfaces of Au and W foils, 1.2 × 1.2 cm2 high-purity Au foils (0.2 mm thick, 99.99 %, iNexus, Inc.) and 1.3 × 1.3 cm2 W foils (0.1 mm thick, 99.95%, Alfa Aesar) were respectively dipped into Au etchant (GE-8111, Transene) and Ni etchant (TFB, Transene) for 10 min. After removal of the impurities, the etchant residues were washed away with fresh deionized water. The cleaned Au and W foils were annealed at 1000 °C for 1 h under high-purity Ar and H2 atmosphere with flow rates of 390 and 10 sccm, respectively. Preparation of the atomic sawtooth Au surface via solidification of liquid Au: Au foil stacked on W foil was loaded into the center of a 2-inch quartz tube. The residual gases in the quartz tube were purged using high-purity Ar (99.999 %) with a flow rate of 500 sccm for 30 min. The furnace was ramped to 1080–1100 °C for 1 h and maintained for 20 min. The temperature was then slowly reduced to 1050 °C with a cooling rate of 0.5–60 °C/min. The furnace was naturally cooled down to room temperature from 1050 °C. Precursor preparation: Prior to chemical-vapor-deposition (CVD) growth, transition metal– precursor solutions (sodium molybdate dihydrate (Na2MoO42H2O, ≥ 99.5 %, Sigma Aldrich) for Mo and sodium tungstate dihydrate (Na2WO42H2O, ≥ 99 %, Sigma Aldrich) for W, with 2 wt% in acetylacetone) were spin-coated onto atomic sawtooth Au substrates with 2500 rpm for 9 60 sec. Ammonium sulfide solution ((NH4)2S, 20 wt% in H2O, Sigma Aldrich) and hydrogen sulfide (H2S) were used as sulfur precursors. (NH4)2S was introduced through bubbling system. For a selenium precursor, selenium pellets (< 5 mm, ≥ 99.99%, Sigma Aldrich) were evaporated at 360 °C in a two-zone furnace system. Growth procedures of various single-crystal (SC) transition metal–dichalcogenide (TMdC) monolayers: Metal precursor–coated Au substrate was loaded into the quartz tube and purged by high purity Ar (99.999 %) with a flow rate of 500 sccm for 15 min. The furnace was ramped to the growth temperatures (750–880 °C) and maintained with a supply of chalcogen precursor during the growth of TMdCs for 5–20 minutes. After growth, furnace was naturally cooled down to the room temperature. The overall procedure was performed under Ar and H2 atmosphere with flow rates of 350–500 and 0–20 sccm, respectively. Coherent WS2 grains were grown on W precursor–coated Au/W substrate by supplying (NH4)2S at a flow rate of 2–5 sccm at 800–880 °C for 5–20 min. To confirm the presence of grain boundaries in polycrystalline WS2 film, the growth temperature was reduced to 750 °C while retaining the other growth conditions. Two-zone furnace was used to evaporate Se in the zone upstream from the substrate. The growth of WSe2 grains on W precursor–coated Au/W substrate was conducted at 780–820 °C for 7–10 min under a supply of Se vapor. Coherent MoS2 grains were grown on Mo precursor–coated Au/W substrate by supplying H2S gas at a flow rate of 5–20 sccm at 800 °C for 10 min. To eliminate any interference by W source from native tungsten oxides on W foils, the substrate was annealed at 800 °C for 5 min prior to growing monolayer MoS2. Only Ar gas was used during the entire growth procedure. For the growth of MoSe2/WSe2 heterostructure, triangular MoSe2 grains were first grown on Mo precursor–coated Au/W substrate by supplying Se vapors while the temperature was increased to 800 °C in a two-zone furnace. The MoSe2/WSe2 heterostructure was subsequently grown with a supply of W source from W foil underneath the Au foil via sublimation of native tungsten oxides at 800 °C for 10 min. Coherent W1-xMoxS2 grains were grown on Mo precursor–coated Au/W substrate by 10 supplying H2S gas at a flow rate of 5–20 sccm at 800 °C for 10 min under a mixture of Mo precursor and W, derived from the native tungsten oxides of the W foil. Transfer of SC TMdC grown on Au: As-grown SC TMdC on Au/W substrates were coated with poly(methyl methacrylate) (A9 PMMA, MicroChem) under 4000 rpm for 1 min. The PMMA layer was baked at 200 °C for 5 min. For bubble transfer, the PMMA/TMdC/Au/W sample and Pt foil were used as anode and cathode, respectively. Under a voltage of 3–7 V in 1 M NaOH aqueous solution, the PMMA/TMdC was delaminated from Au substrate by the hydrogen bubbles generated at the interface between the TMdC film and Au substrate. The PMMA/TMdC samples were cleaned by deionized water for 10 min and transferred onto target substrates such as TEM grids and SiO2/Si substrates. To reuse the Au substrates, the Au/W substrate was cleaned in a piranha solution for 3 hours, 10 % nitric acid for 1 h, and buffer oxide etchant for 1 h. Characterizations: Field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, JSM7000F, JEOL) equipped with the electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) was employed to analyze the surface orientation of atomic sawtooth Au substrates. FESEM (JSM7100F, JEOL) was used to characterize the surface morphology and orientation of TMdC grains. The optical properties of TMdC grains were characterized by Raman spectroscopy system using 532 nm wavelength (NTEGRA Spectra, NT-MDT). Scanning tunneling microscope (STM, VT-STM, Omicron, Germany) and low-energy electron diffraction (LEED, Specs, Germany), with a beam diameter of ~1 mm, were utilized to corroborate the crystallographic relationship between WS2 and atomic sawtooth Au substrates under ultrahigh vacuum conditions with a base-pressure of ~1.0 × 10-10 Torr at room temperature. The LEED map of a WS2 film for 5 × 5 mm2 area was obtained by changing the sample position with a precision of 0.01 mm. The crystal lattice and orientation of TMdC films were characterized by STEM (JEM ARM 200F, JEOL) with an electron acceleration voltage of 80 kV. Cross-sectional STEM lamellas of WS2/Au samples were 11 prepared using a focused ion beam (FIB, FEI Helios NanoLab 450). To visualize the grain boundaries in poly-crystal WS2, as-grown WS2 grains were oxidized in air at 350 °C for 30 min. Simulation of STM image: Simulation of STM images was performed by Tersoff–Hamann approximation using Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) based on density functional theory (DFT) with a plane-wave basis set. We used projector augmented wave (PAW) formalism for the pseudopotentials with Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) parametrization of the general gradient approximation (GGA) as implemented in VASP. A slab geometry with a vacuum of ~13 Å was applied to the structural model which consists of monolayer WS2 and 6 layers of Au. The supercell size of WS2 on Au substrate corresponds to the doubled period of Au (221) across the step edges. The supercell size was minimized by compressing WS2 along the step edges due to the heavy computational load, which does not violate the conclusion. Bias for simulated STM images was set ~0.2 eV larger than conduction band minimum similar to experimental conditions. The plane-wave cut-off energy was 400 eV. For the surface Brillouin zone integration, a 1 × 2 grid in Monkhorst–Pack special k-point scheme, including Γ-point, was used as implemented in VASP. All atoms were fully relaxed until the residual forces of each atom were less than 0.01 eV/Å. Energy convergence was achieved with a tolerance of 10- 6 eV. Computational details: Adsorption of W3S6 cluster on the various Au facets were studied by DFT calculations using VASP. The revised PBE exchange-correlation functional and PAW method were used. Periodic supercell geometries were constructed to model (100), (110), 6, 6 × 3, 2 × 1, 2 × 1, 2 × 1, 4 × 2, and 4 × 1 unit cells, respectively, and a vacuum layer lager than 15 Å was added onto each surface to eliminate interlayer interactions. The Brillouin zones were sampled using 3 × 3 × 1 k-point mesh, while the electronic states were smeared using the Methfessel–Paxton scheme with a broadening width of 0.1 eV. The electronic wave functions were expanded on a plane-wave basis set with a cutoff energy of 400 eV, and the atomic- 12 relaxation process continued until the Hellmann–Feynman forces acting on the atoms were less than 0.02 eV/Å. Supporting Information Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from the author. Acknowledgements K. K. K. acknowledges support by Samsung Research Funding & Incubation Center of Samsung Electronics under Project Number SRFC-MA1901-04, the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning (2018R1A2B2002302 and 2020R1A4A3079710). S. M. K. acknowledges support by the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning (2020R1A2B5B03002054). Y. -M. K. acknowledges support by the Creative Materials Discovery Program (2015M3D1A1070672) through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF). S. H. C., S. B., S. J. Y., Y. -M. K. & Y. H. L. acknowledge support by the Institute for Basic Science (IBS-R011-D1). Received: ((will be filled in by the editorial staff)) Revised: ((will be filled in by the editorial staff)) Published online: ((will be filled in by the editorial staff))