Non-Thermal Emergence of an Orbital-Selective Mott Phase in FeTe1−xSex Jianwei Huang,1 Rong Yu,2 Zhijun Xu,3, 4, 5 Jian-Xin Zhu,6, 7 Qianni Jiang,8 Meng Wang,9 Han Wu,1 Tong Chen,1 Jonathan D. Denlinger,10 Sung-Kwan Mo,10 Makoto Hashimoto,11 Genda Gu,12 Pengcheng Dai,1 Jiun-Haw Chu,8 Donghui Lu,11 Qimiao Si,1 Robert J. Birgeneau,5, 13, 14, ∗ and Ming Yi1, 5, † 1Department of Physics and Astronomy, Rice Center for Quantum Materials, Rice University, Houston, Texas 77005, USA 2Department of Physics, Renmin University of China, Beijing 100872, China 3NIST Center for Neutron Research, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg Maryland 20899, USA 4Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland 20742, USA 5Department of Physics, University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, California 94720, USA 6Theoretical Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico 87545, USA 7Center for Integrated Nanotechnologies, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico 87545, USA 8Department of Physics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA 9School of Physics, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510275, China 10Advanced Light Source, Lawrence Berkeley National Lab, Berkeley, California 94720, USA 11Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, California 94025, USA 12Condensed Matter Physics and Materials Science Department, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York, USA 13Materials Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California 94720, USA 14Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, USA (Dated: February 26, 2021) Electronic correlation is of fundamental importance to high temperature superconductivity. Iron- based superconductors are believed to possess moderate correlation strength, which combined with their multi-orbital nature makes them a fascinating platform for the emergence of exotic phenom- ena. A particularly striking form is the emergence of an orbital selective Mott phase, where the localization of a subset of orbitals leads to a drastically reconstructed Fermi surface. Here, we re- port spectroscopic evidence of the reorganization of the Fermi surface from FeSe to FeTe as Se is substituted by Te. We uncover a particularly transparent way to visualize the localization of the dxy electron orbital through the suppression of its hybridization with the more coherent d electron orbitals, which leads to a redistribution of the orbital-dependent spectral weight near the Fermi level. These noteworthy features of the Fermi surface are accompanied by a divergent behavior of a band renormalization in the dxy orbital. All of our observations are further supported by our theoretical calculations to be salient spectroscopic signatures of such a non-thermal evolution from a strongly correlated metallic phase towards an orbital-selective Mott phase in FeTe1−xSex as Se concentration is reduced. INTRODUCTION In multi-orbital quantum materials, orbital-dependent correlations and interactions often lead to exotic emer- gent phenomena. An extreme case is in the heavy fermion systems where the strongly localized f electrons coexist with itinerant electrons, the interactions between which give rise to an abundance of competing magnetic ground states and unconventional superconductivity in proxim- ity to quantum criticality . Orbital-dependent cor- relation effects have also been reported to play impor- tant roles in Ca2−xSrxRuO4 , VO2 , and transition metal dichalcogenide , primarily in a regime where se- lected orbitals experience significant mass enhancements towards a Mott-insulating limit while the remaining or- bitals maintain a degree of itinerancy. Such a phase is known as an orbital-selective Mott phase (OSMP) [5– 11]. As the system approaches an OSMP through the tuning of a non-thermal control parameter at low tem- peratures, the low energy electronic states are expected to undergo dramatic reconstruction such as redistribu- tion in momentum space, leading to signatures in the transport behaviors. Such an evolution, while in princi- ple observable via momentum-resolved spectroscopy, has proven to be difficult to resolve due to either the asso- ciated small energy scales [12–16] or incompatibility of experimental implementation of tuning parameters [17– 19]. Indeed, in the cases where the OSMP has been well established as a competing ground state, i.e. those of heavy fermion metals, there has never been an observa- tion of the OSMP’s reconstructed Fermi surface (FS) by angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES). Recently, orbital-dependent correlation effects have been found in iron-based superconductors (FeSCs) . In particular, while the FeSCs as bad metals are deemed to be moderately correlated compared to the cuprate high temperature superconductors, the electrons belong- ing to different orbitals are found to be correlated to different degrees – stronger in the dxy orbital than in the dxz/dyz orbitals. This orbital-differentiation is en- hanced by Hunds coupling, and increases systematically in sync with the vertical elongation of the iron tetrahe- arXiv:2010.13913v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 25 Feb 2021 2 sured Fermi surfaces for FeTe taken at 80K. (b) Measured FS for FeTe0.56Se0.44 taken at 10K. Both maps were measured with 72eV photons and symmetrized according to C4 rota- tional symmetry of the crystal structure. dron from the iron-phosphides to iron-pnictides to iron- chalcogenides , in which strong orbital-selectivity has been reported . From the electronic degree of free- dom, the effective mass of the dxy orbital dominated band has been reported to be larger than that of the dxz/dyz orbitals. From both nuclear magnetic resonance and neu- tron scattering measurements, coexistence of both itin- erant and local spins has been found , where the dxy orbital contributes dominantly to the local spin suscep- tibility [25–27]. For example, inelastic neutron scatter- ing experiments on detwinned NaFeAs, a parent com- pound of FeSCs, have shown that spin waves of the sys- tem are orbital selective with high energy spin waves arise mostly from the dxy orbital and obey the C4 ro- tational symmetry, while the low energy spin wave are from the dxz/dyz orbitals that break the C4 rotational symmetry below the nematic phase transition tempera- ture . In addition, the neutron spin resonance coupled with superconductivity, seen in most FeSCs , seems to be mostly associated with the dyz orbitals, thus sug- gesting orbital selective superconductivity . Previous works, both experimental and theoretical, have shown that when the material system exhibits sufficient orbital- selectivity in the ground state, it can crossover into an orbital-selective incoherent state or OSMP with increas- ing temperature [31–33]. These developments set the stage to address a crucial question that remains open for the FeSCs: Is there an OSMP among the ground states that compete against the all-orbital-itinerant metallic ground state? To proceed, one must go beyond the study of any thermal crossover and, instead, scan the ground state landscape by tuning a non-thermal control parameter while staying at low tem- peratures. An added benefit of doing the latter is that the FS is only sharply defined at low temperatures, and studying the quantum phase transition through a non- thermal parameter variation allows for unambiguously detecting any FS reconstruction. More broadly, it is par- ticularly opportune to address this issue in 3d-electron systems such as the FeSCs. These systems have energy scales that allow for a direct momentum-space visual- ization – by ARPES – of the Fermi surface and its re- construction across their ground states, a feature that is not possible for alternative materials platforms with much smaller energy scales such as for the heavy fermion systems as mentioned earlier. In this work, we present systematic evidence for a low-temperature tunability towards an OSMP in the FeTe1−xSex family of superconductors without raising temperatures. Remarkably, strong reorganization of the FS is observed in the absence of any symmetry-breaking electronic order. We demonstrate how the more coher- ent d-orbitals, in particular, the dz2 orbital, serve as a transparent means to visualize the suppression of the dxy states at the Fermi energy. In addition, we show that the FS reconstruction is accompanied by an orbital- dependent mass enhancement, and signatures of lower Hubbard band as we tune from the FeSe end towards FeTe. Combined with the temperature axis, we arrive at a comprehensive phase diagram of the orbital-selectivity in FeTe1−xSex, the understanding of which is discussed in connection with anomalies reported in measurements of the Hall coefficient, resistivity, and magnetic excitations. FeTe1−xSex is a prototypical iron-based superconduc- tor with the simplest crystal structure consisting of Fe- chalcogen layers . The Se-Te substitution is isoelec- tronic, retaining the 3d-electron occupancy of n=6 per Fe ion. The parent compound, FeTe, is an antiferromag- netic (AFM) metal [36–39]. Superconductivity emerges with the substitution of Se on Te sites, reaching a maxi- mum Tc of 14.5 K in FeTe0.56Se0.44 . With com- plete substitution of Se, FeSe is a superconductor be- low 8 K with a tetragonal to orthorhombic structural transition at 90 K and no long-range magnetic or- der . As-grown single crystals of FeTe1−xSex espe- cially for low values of x have a tendency to harbor in- terstitial excess iron, which leads to spin-glass behavior and incoherence in the low energy electronic spectra. It has been shown that the excess Fe can be reduced or completely removed by either annealing in an oxygen or Te-vapor environment [43–46]. The removal of excess Fe also suppresses the spin-glass region of the phase dia- gram, resulting in a phase diagram that bares a closer resemblance to that of iron pnictides. Here we adopt Te- vapor annealing method to treat all as-grown single crys- tals to reduce excess iron . Previously, a temperature induced crossover to an OSMP in optimally-substituted FeTe0.56Se0.44 has been reported . In this study, we utilize ARPES to study the low temperature behaviors of FeyTe1−xSex single crystals with varying Se content (nominally x = 0, 0.11, 0.19, 0.28, 0.44, and 1). The Fe contents of the cleaved surface of these crystals are mea- sured via energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy following the ARPES measurements and determined to be y = 1.08, 1.07, 1.03, 1.01, 1.00, and 1.00, respectively. For 3 different Se ratio x under linear horizontal polarization with out-of-plane component with 72 eV photons. The orange squares overlaid with the band dispersions obtained by MDC and EDC fittings. (d) Fermi surface size and spectral weight change as a function of Se ratio x. The solid dark circles represent the ratio between the area-averaged spectral weight within the blue dashed region at X and that of the green dashed region at M after subtracting an area-averaged background from the dark dashed region in (a). The empty dark squares are extracted in the same manner from an independent set of measured Fermi surfaces using a mixed polarization shown in SI Fig. S2 . The green circles mark the extracted size of the dyz electron pocket as marked in (a5), while the blue circles plot the kF points of the band crossing along Γ-X as marked in (a5). simplicity, we drop the y index in further discussions. METHODS The high quality FeTe1−xSex single crystal series was synthesized using the flux method . The FeSe sin- gle crystal was synthesized using chemical vapor trans- port . The excess Fe in as-grown FeTe1−xSex sin- gle crystals was reduced by annealing in Te vapor at- mosphere . ARPES experiments were performed at beamline 5-4 of the Stanford Synchrotron Radia- tion Lightsource, beamline 4.0.3 and beamline 10.0.1 of the Advanced Light Source equipped with hemispheri- cal electron analyzers. The angular resolution was set to 0.3◦. The total energy resolution was set to 15 meV or better. All samples were cleaved in-situ at 10 K and all the measurements were conducted at ultra-high vacuum with a base pressure of 3 × 10−11 torr. RESULTS Fermi Surface Evolution We begin by comparing and contrasting the mea- sured FS of the optimally-substituted FeTe0.56Se0.44 with that of the paramagnetic state of FeTe (Fig. 1). In FeTe0.56Se0.44, as previously reported, the FS consists of small hole pockets near the Brillouin zone (BZ) cen- ter (Γ) and electron pockets near the BZ corner (M). The wavevector difference between them matches the momen- tum transfer, where neutron spin resonance has been ob- served in the superconducting state . In FeTe, the apparent fermiology has drastically changed. While the hole pockets near Γ remain, the other dominant spectral weight appears along the BZ boundary centered at the X point. We note that such a change is not due to the emergence of the magnetic order in FeTe, as the FS is measured above the ordering temperature, and distinct reconstructions are observed across the magnetic transi- tion (see supplementary information (SI) Fig. S1). For the rest of the paper, we only discuss measurements on FeTe above the magnetic phase. To understand the evolution of the change shown in Fig. 1, we present the measured FS of FeTe1−xSex with different Se concentrations across the phase diagram (Fig. 2). The measurements under two distinct light po- larizations reveal features with different orbital symme- tries due to the photoemission matrix elements. Two qualitative changes can be observed with the decrease of the Se ratio (x): i) expansion of the electron pockets near the M point, and ii) emergence of a broad arc-like feature near the X point. We quantify each in turn. The expan- sion of the electron pocket around M with decreasing Se 4 photons at 10 K along the Γ-M direction around the BZ center for different x. (a5) Same measurement as (a4) except taken bands are overlaid. The red arrow in (b4) points at the hybridization of dyz and dxy orbitals. (c) Extracted band enhancement factor m∗/mDF T for dyz and dxy are plotted as a function of x represented by circles. The shaded lines are guides to the eyes. Diamond markers show the inverse of the dxy mass enhancement where the shaded pink line is a linear fit. The empty markers are reproduced from Ref. ratio x is evident in both sets of measurement under dif- ferent polarizations. This expansion can be quantified by extracting the opening of the Fermi pocket in momentum (plotted as green solid circles in Fig. 2d). The second ev- ident FS evolution is the emergence of a broad arc-like feature near the X point of the BZ, marked by a dashed purple line in FeTe (Fig. 2a1). From a consideration of photoemission matrix element effects from maps taken under three different polarizations, we attribute this fea- ture to the dz2 orbital (see SI ). Comparing the FS across different Se content level, this feature evolves from a faint intensity near Γ that is the spectral weight from the outer dxy hole band for x = 0.44. This is evident from the band dispersion measured along the Γ-X direction as shown in Fig. 2c, where the Fermi momentum crossing (kF ) of a hole-like band from the Γ point shifts toward the X point with decreasing x. We employ two methods to quantify the evolution of this feature with Se content by tracking both the location of this feature in momen- tum and its spectral weight. To track the location, we extract the kF of this feature along the Γ-X direction as indicated by the blue arrow in Fig. 2a5, and plot in Fig. 2d. This distance increases with decreasing x which confirms the systematic change. To quantify the emer- gence of the dz2 spectral weight near the X point, we take the ratio of the intensity around the X point and the in- tensity around the M point in the following way. We first obtain the integrated spectral weight normalized by area within the blue box around the X point and the green box around the M point (Fig. 2a). From these we subtract a background from a featureless region in momentum space indicated by the black dashed box (Fig. 2a). For bet- ter comparison across samples, we take the ratio of the background-subtracted spectral weight around X to that of the dyz band around M for each sample and plot the trend in Fig. 2d. As Se content decreases, the intensity at X increases relative to that around M. The trend ex- tracted using the same method for a set of FS measured under a rotated polarization shows the same behavior (SI Fig. S2 ). Taking all the trends extracted from the FS evolution (Fig. 2d), a gradual rise is observed with decreasing Se ratio, and a more rapid change occurs be- low x ≤ 0.2. Such type of FS evolution contrasts with that of any other iron-based superconductor phase di- agrams with symmetry-breaking phase transitions. To understand the origin of this evolution, we examine the orbital-dependent correlation effects. Orbital-Dependent Mass Enhancement We first examine the low-temperature (10 K) band renormalization across the phase diagram. Near the BZ center along the high symmetry direction Γ-M, three hole-like bands are observed near the Fermi level (EF ) for all Se content (Fig. 3a). This can be better visualized from the second energy derivative plots (Fig. 3b). Con- sistent with previous results , these three bands from the innermost band to the outermost are identified as dominantly dxz, dyz, and dxy, respectively. The dashed lines overlaid on the images are fittings to a parabolic curve of the band dispersion, with green representing the dyz orbital and blue the dxy orbital. As the phase dia- gram is traversed along the substitution-axis at 10 K, it is evident that the band curvature of the dyz band does not vary strongly while that of the dxy band flattens consider- ably with decreasing Se content. Since the effective mass for each band is proportional to the inverse of the band curvature, we can extract the orbital-dependent mass en- hancement by taking the ratio between the fitted band effective mass from experimental data m∗ and the cor- responding band effective mass from first-principle cal- culations mDF T . The resulting orbital-dependent mass enhancement as a function of Se content is plotted in 5 indicates a dominantly dz2 band along Γ-X. (b) Same as (a) but for the strongly correlated metallic phase in FeTe0.5Se0.5, where the blue arrow shows the dxy band. (c) Calculated FS for FeTe0.9Se0.1, where reconstructed spectral weight is marked by a pink arrow. (d) Same as (c) but for FeTe0.5Se0.5. (e) Orbital-resolved coherence factor Z as a function of x. Solid line represents U = 3 eV, dashed line represents U = 2.65 eV. Fig. 3c, which is consistent with the trend from pre- viously reported results for higher Se content . First, the mass enhancement of 40 is unusually large for 3d-electrons near the occupancy n = 6, even for the iron chalcogenides. Second, we observe an orbital-dependent band renormalization. The dxy orbital has a much larger band renormalization factor than the dyz orbital. Third, while the mass enhancement of the dyz orbital rises slowly with decreasing Se ratio x, a divergent behavior of the mass enhancement for the dxy orbital is observed with decreasing Se content. We also plot the inverse of the dxy mass enhancement, showing a linear trend versus Se ratio with a fitted intercept of x = -0.1. These results strongly indicate that FeTe is in proximity to an OSMP ground state and suggest that the evolution of the ap- parent fermiology is associated with the gradual disap- pearance of the dxy spectral weight as x is decreased. In addition, a previous report shows that at x = 0.44, the dxy spectral weight gradually disappears with in- creasing temperature . Indeed, when measured at 150 K, the spectral weight for the dxy hole band disap- pears, leaving the itinerant dxz and dyz hole bands near Γ (Fig. 3b5), suggestive of a temperature induced crossover into the OSMP. A similar disappearance of the dxy spec- tral weight is also observed for x = 0.25, with a lower crossover temperature than that of x = 0.44 (See SI Fig. S3 ), suggesting that the ground state of x = 0.11 is closer to that of the OSMP than that of the x = 0.44 compound. Visualizing the Selective Localization of dxy-Electrons via dz2-Electrons The orbital-dependent band renormalization, nearly divergent dxy band effective mass, and redistribution of spectral weight around the FS, taken together can be understood as manifestations of the tendency of the FeTe1−xSex system towards an OSMP when Se is gradu- ally replaced with Te. In the presence of relatively strong electron correlations, orbital-dependent correlations be- come strong, where the dxy orbital-dominated band near EF gradually diminishes together with the divergence of its mass enhancement. This disappearance of the dxy states near EF in turn results in a redistribution of the residual electronic states at EF as the FeTe end of the phase diagram is approached. But why should the dimin- ishing dxy weight at the Fermi level be seen through the crossing of the dz2 band through the Fermi level? Qual- itatively, we attribute this to the hybridization picture. Recall that symmetry dictates a nonzero hybridization matrix between the dxy and dz2 states near X. Just like the f-electron states in a heavy fermion metal pro- duces a ”large” FS, the itinerant dxy states hybridize the dz2 state near X in the Fermi-surface formation. How- ever, just like the localization of the f-electrons in heavy fermion systems leads to a ”small” FS of the spd conduc- tion electrons, localizing the dxy-electron state allows the dz2-electron state to cross the Fermi level near X. To substantiate this qualitative picture, we have car- ried out theoretical calculations based on a five-orbital 6 Hubbard model for FeTe1−xSex (Section VI of SI ). We find that the substitution of larger Te atoms for smaller Se atoms increases the Fe-Se/Te bond length and decreases the Fe-Te/Se-Fe bond angle. The former effect increases the overall correlation strength by lengthening the dominant hopping path while the latter effect sup- presses the effective hopping for the largely in-plane dxy orbital more than that of the other orbitals, pushing the system toward an OSMP. All salient features of our experimental observations presented are captured in this set of calculations, as shown by a direct comparison of the calculations for the correlated metallic phase and the OSMP (Fig. 4). In the strongly correlated metallic phase calculated for x = 0.5 (Fig. 4b), the dxy dominated bands are strongly renor- malized (blue arrow). The calculations at a U of 3 eV are consistent with experimentally observed band renor- malizations (Section VI of SI ). When projected onto a FS mapping within a finite integration energy window about EF , the flattened dxy hole pocket intensity be- comes largely incoherent and enlarged due to its strongly renormalized bandwidth, resulting in a large faint hole pocket around the Γ point (blue arrow in Fig. 4d). When the OSMP phase is entered, the dxy band intensity disap- pears from EF (Fig. 4a). The hybridization between the heavy dxy band and other orbitals disappears, leading to the appearance of restructured FS. This is most apparent along the Γ-X direction. In the strongly correlated metal- lic phase (Fig. 4d), the strongly renormalized dxy cross EF along Γ-X. In the OSMP (Fig. 4c), a band from higher binding energy of dominantly dz2 orbital indeed rises to EF , forming the large pocket around the X point, consis- tent with our observed emergence of the arc-like feature around the X point. Regarding the concomitant evolu- tion of the band dispersions, in the regime approaching the OSMP, the dxy bandwidth would narrow while its spectral weight diminishes, causing the hybridization be- tween this dxy band and the highly dispersive dz2 band to decrease. This is consistent with our observed disper- sions along the Γ-X direction (Fig. 2c and SI Fig. S4 ). For x = 0.44, both momentum distribution curve (MDC) and energy distribution curve (EDC) fitting of the hole- like dispersion near Γ agree well. With decreasing x, the fitting between MDCs and EDCs becomes increasingly distinct. As MDC fitting identifies better the steep dis- persions while EDC flatter dispersions , the increas- ing disagreement is consistent with the tendency of an increasingly flat dxy band and the rising up of a disper- sive dz2 band. Simultaneously, the calculated dxz/dyz electron pocket enlarges, as observed experimentally. As a function of x, the calculated coherence factor, Z, for the dxz/dyz orbital is compared to that of the dxy orbital (Fig. 4e), where localization of the dxy orbital appears for x < 0.2 with U ∼ 3 eV. We stress that, the selective localization of the dxy- electron states also causes the suppression of their hy- and Tc represent the bi-collinear spin-density wave transition, tetragonal to orthorhombic structure transition, and superconducting transition adapted from previous re- ports. The temperatures for RH max and RH = 0 are ex- tracted from the Hall resistivity measurements . Tcoh is the temperature at which the photoemission spectral weight of dxy orbital is observed to vanish (SI Fig. S3 ). The background with gradient color suggests the OSMP crossover. (b) Schematics showing the key features of the band structure of FeTex−1Sex in the OSMP and correlated metal phase re- spectively. The disappearance of band hybridization due to the complete incoherence of dxy orbital is responsible for the FS reconstruction. bridization with dxz/dyz-electron states. Indeed, a hy- bridization between the dxy and dyz hole bands is ob- served near EF in FeTe1−xSex with x = 0.44 (Fig. 3b4) and diminishes towards FeTe. The dxz/dyz-electron states are less dispersive compared with dz2 and the hy- bridization occurs near the band top and is thus less dis- cernable. Moreover, the dxz/dyz bands already cross EF and form a hole pocket around Γ in the presence of hy- bridization with the dxy band (Fig. 3b). The suppres- sion of the hybridization due to the localization of the dxy orbital in the OSMP does not therefore lead to a drastic FS reconstruction but rather the disappearance of the dxy-electron states near EF . However, because the dz2-electron states are considerably more dispersive and gapped-out from EF due to the hybridization with dxy, they serve as an especially transparent diagnostic of the OSMP in the way of FS reconstruction (Fig. 5b). 7 DISCUSSIONS AND SUMMARY Finally, taking all the results together, we arrive at the phase diagram for the FeTe1−xSex material family (Fig. 5). While previous results indicate that for op- timally substituted compound at x = 0.44, the OSMP can be reached via raised temperature at a character- istic temperature of 110 K, our observations reported here show that in the low temperature limit, the replace- ment of Se by Te also leads the material system towards the OSMP. This is supported by spectroscopic evidence of strongly orbital-selective band renormalization where the dxy effective mass tends toward a divergent behavior as the FeTe end is approached. Concomitantly, spectral weight from other orbitals redistribute near the EF to replace the diminishing dxy spectral weight. The char- acteristic crossover temperature for the OSMP therefore decreases with decreasing x. This is confirmed by our measurement for a sample with x = 0.25, where the tem- perature identified by the disappearance of dxy is mea- sured to be 70 K (SI Fig. S3 ). Our understanding of the evolution from an orbital- dependent correlated metallic phase to an OSMP across the FeTe1−xSex phase diagram as observed from ARPES is also consistent with results reported by other probes. It has been reported that the compensated parent com- pounds of multi-band iron-based superconductors ex- hibit a negative Hall coefficient, RH, due to the dom- inance of the electron mobility. This is observed in isovalent-substituted BaFe2(As,P)2, where across the en- tire phase diagram, RH remains negative . For FeTe1−xSex, however, there is a systematic change that varies as a function of substitution . This is clearly shown in the measurement over the phase diagram of Te-vapor treated FeTe1−xSex . Contrary to the be- havior in BaFe2(As,P)2, Hall resistivity measurements on FeTe1−xSex exhibit a maximum and a subsequent sign- change at lower temperatures while the total charge car- rier remains neutral. This turn-over behavior marked by the maximum indicates the onset of a competing behav- ior. This characteristic temperature can be explained by the decoherence of the dxy portions of the electron pocket around the M point, leading to a reduction in the electron contribution to RH. An alternative interpretation of the negative Hall coefficient in the iron pnictides is the (π, π) spin fluctuations that make the hole carriers behave like electron carriers in the Hall measurements . The lo- calization of the dxy orbital could change the fermiology away from the nesting condition associated with the (π, π) spin fluctuations. This in turn suppresses the (π, π) spin fluctuations, which reduces the negative contribu- tion to the Hall coefficient. This characteristic temper- ature scale extracted from RH exhibits a similar trend with Se ratio x, similar to Tcoh, which is the temperature where the spectral weight of dxy orbital vanishes with increasing temperature. We also note that in a recent magneto-transport mea- surement, such coherent-incoherent crossover is also re- ported . It has also been pointed out that this coherent-incoherent crossover temperature scale of the dxy orbital is coupled to the B2g nematic susceptibility measured by elastoresistance, and hence suggests the po- tential important role played by the dxy orbital to ne- maticity in the iron-based superconductors . Previous studies of both Dynamic Mean Field Theory (DMFT) and ARPES have also identified the incoher- ent spectral weight in the high binding energy regime of FeSe as the lower Hubbard band (LHB), indicating the presence of strong electron correlations in this material system . The incoherent feature has also been observed by our ARPES measurements as well as theo- retical calculations (SI Fig. S10 ). Further connection between our ARPES report of OSMP and magnetic excitations via inelastic neutron scattering can also be made. It has been reported that the total magnetic spectral weight at 300 K in FeTe is reduced by roughly half at 10 K, signaling a change in the number of localized electrons as in the scenario of an OSMP . Moreover, along both the temperature axis and substitution axis, low energy magnetic excitations have been observed to change from a com- mensurate U-shape to a double-rod shape in the absence of any symmetry-breaking orders. The trend of such be- havior is consistent with the observation of the modifica- tion of the low energy electronic states along both axes as we have reported, suggesting a common origin. An OSMP is depicted by the coexistence of itiner- ant orbital and localized orbital within one material sys- tem [2–4]. In the FeTe1−xSex case, it is the itinerant dxz/dyz orbitals and the localized dxy orbital. In our work, we have also discovered a surprisingly transpar- ent way for the dz2 electrons to serve as a diagnostic for the selective localization of the dxy electron states as the OSMP emerges (Fig. 5b). To achieve an OSMP in FeTe1−xSex, besides the strong electron-electron inter- action, three other ingredients are necessary: i) Crystal field splitting that separates the dxy orbital from dxz/dyz; ii) Bare bandwidth of the dxy orbital being narrower than that of the dxz/dyz orbitals; iii) Suppression of the inter- orbital interactions due to Hunds J . The observation of a low temperature tunable pathway towards an OSMP in FeTe1−xSex is somewhat reminiscent of the tunability across a quantum critical point in the heavy fermion sys- tems where the heavy f -electrons coexist with the itin- erant d-orbital electrons and the hybridization between the two depends on a non-thermal tuning parameter. In the vicinity of such a quantum critical point, a variety of magnetic and superconducting phases are often found to emerge. The observation of the proximity to such an OSMP ground state in the iron-chalcogenide system may likewise provide the basis to understand its exotic emer- 8 gent phases. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We are thankful to Yu He for enlightening discussions. ARPES experiments were performed at the Advanced Light Source and the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource, which are both operated by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences, U.S. DOE. Work at University of California, Berkeley and Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory was funded by the U.S. Department of En- ergy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences and Engineering Division under Con- tract No. DE-AC02-05-CH11231 within the Quantum Materials Program (KC2202) and the Office of Basic En- ergy Sciences. The ARPES work at Rice University was supported by the Robert A. Welch Foundation Grant No. C-2024 as well as the Alfred P. Sloan Founda- tion. The materials synthesis efforts at Rice are sup- ported by the US Department of Energy (DOE), Ba- sic Energy Sciences (BES), under Contract No. DE- SC0012311 and the Robert A. Welch Foundation, Grant No. C-1839 (P.D.). Theory work at Rice University is supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, under Award No. DE- SC0018197, and by the Robert A. Welch Foundation Grant No. Theory work at Renmin Univer- sity has in part been supported by the National Science Foundation of China Grant No. 11674392, Ministry of Science and Technology of China, National Program on Key Research Project Grant No.2016YFA0300504 and Research Funds of Renmin University of China Grant No. 18XNLG24 (R.Y.). Theory work at Los Alamos was carried out under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy National Nuclear Security Administration under Contract No. 89233218CNA000001, and was supported by the LANL LDRD Program. Work at the Univer- sity of Washington was supported by NSF MRSEC at UW (DMR1719797). Work at Sun Yat-Sen University was supported by the National Natural Science Founda- tion of China (Grant No. 11904414), Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong (No. 2018A030313055), Na- tional Key Research and Development Program of China (No. 2019YFA0705700), and Young Zhujiang Scholar program. Work at Brookhaven is supported by the Ofce of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Materials Sciences and Engineering, U.S. Department of Energy under con- tract Nos. DE-AC02-98CH10886 and DE-SC00112704. ∗ robertjb@berkeley.edu † mingyi@rice.edu S. Kirchner, S. Paschen, Q. Chen, S. Wirth, D. Feng, J. D. Thompson, and Q. Si, Colloquium : Heavy-electron quantum criticality and single-particle spectroscopy, Re- views of Modern Physics 92, 011002 (2020). V. Anisimov, I. Nekrasov, D. Kondakov, T. Rice, and M. Sigrist, Orbital-selective Mott-insulator transition in Ca2−xSrxRuO4, The European Physical Journal B 25, S. Mukherjee, N. F. Quackenbush, H. Paik, C. Schlueter, T.-L. Lee, D. G. Schlom, L. F. J. Piper, and W.-C. Lee, Tuning a strain-induced orbital selective Mott transition in epitaxial VO2, Physical Review B 93, 241110 (2016). S. Qiao, X. Li, N. Wang, W. Ruan, C. Ye, P. Cai, Z. Hao, H. Yao, X. Chen, J. Wu, Y. Wang, and Z. Liu, Mottness Collapse in 1T-TaS2−xSex Transition-Metal Dichalco- genide: An Interplay between Localized and Itinerant Orbitals, Physical Review X 7, 041054 (2017). L. De’Medici, A. Georges, and S. Biermann, Orbital- selective Mott transition in multiband systems: Slave- spin representation and dynamical mean-field theory, Physical Review B 72, 205124 (2005). M. Ferrero, P. S. Cornaglia, L. De Leo, O. Parcollet, G. Kotliar, and A. Georges, Pseudogap opening and for- mation of Fermi arcs as an orbital-selective Mott transi- tion in momentum space, Physical Review B 80, 064501 Z. P. Yin, K. Haule, and G. Kotliar, Kinetic frustration and the nature of the magnetic and paramagnetic states in iron pnictides and iron chalcogenides, Nature Materi- als 10, 932 (2011). M. Greger, M. Kollar, and D. Vollhardt, Emergence of a Common Energy Scale Close to the Orbital-Selective Mott Transition, Physical Review Letters 110, 046403 R. Yu and Q. Si, Orbital-Selective Mott Phase in Multi- orbital Models for Alkaline Iron Selenides K1−xFe2−ySe2, Physical Review Letters 110, 146402 (2013). A. Georges, L. de’ Medici, and J. Mravlje, Strong Cor- relations from Hund’s Coupling, Annual Review of Con- densed Matter Physics 4, 137 (2013). L. de’ Medici, G. Giovannetti, and M. Capone, Selective Mott Physics as a Key to Iron Superconductors, Physical Review Letters 112, 177001 (2014). S. Danzenb ̈acher, Y. Kucherenko, D. V. Vyalikh, M. Holder, C. Laubschat, A. N. Yaresko, C. Krellner, Z. Hossain, C. Geibel, X. J. Zhou, W. L. Yang, N. Man- nella, Z. Hussain, Z.-X. Shen, M. Shi, L. Patthey, and S. L. Molodtsov, Momentum dependence of 4f hybridiza- tion in heavy-fermion compounds: Angle-resolved pho- toemission study of YbIr2Si2 and YbRh2Si2, Physical Re- view B 75, 045109 (2007). S.-i. Fujimori, T. Ohkochi, T. Okane, Y. Saitoh, A. Fuji- mori, H. Yamagami, Y. Haga, E. Yamamoto, and Y. nuki, Itinerant nature of U 5f states in uranium mononitride revealed by angle-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy, Physical Review B 86, 235108 (2012). M. Neupane, N. Alidoust, I. Belopolski, G. Bian, S.-Y. Xu, D.-J. Kim, P. P. Shibayev, D. S. Sanchez, H. Zheng, T.-R. Chang, H.-T. Jeng, P. S. Riseborough, H. Lin, A. Bansil, T. Durakiewicz, Z. Fisk, and M. Z. Hasan, Fermi surface topology and hot spot distribution in the Kondo lattice system CeB6, Physical Review B 92, Q. Y. Chen, D. F. Xu, X. H. Niu, J. Jiang, R. Peng, H. C. Xu, C. H. P. Wen, Z. F. Ding, K. Huang, L. Shu, Y. J. Zhang, H. Lee, V. N. Strocov, M. Shi, F. Bisti, 9 T. Schmitt, Y. B. Huang, P. Dudin, X. C. Lai, S. Kirch- ner, H. Q. Yuan, and D. L. Feng, Direct observation of how the heavy-fermion state develops in CeCoIn5, Phys- ical Review B 96, 045107 (2017). D. Leuenberger, J. A. Sobota, S.-L. Yang, H. Pfau, D.-J. Kim, S.-K. Mo, Z. Fisk, P. S. Kirchmann, and Z.-X. Shen, Dehybridization of f and d states in the heavy-fermion system YbRh2Si2, Physical Review B 97, 165108 (2018). P. Gegenwart, Q. Si, and F. Steglich, Quantum criticality in heavy-fermion metals, Nature Physics 4, 186 (2008). Q. Si and F. Steglich, Heavy Fermions and Quantum Phase Transitions, Science 329, 1161 (2010). E. D. Mun, S. L. Bud’ko, C. Martin, H. Kim, M. A. Tanatar, J.-H. Park, T. Murphy, G. M. Schmiedeshoff, N. Dilley, R. Prozorov, and P. C. Canfield, Magnetic- field-tuned quantum criticality of the heavy-fermion sys- tem YbPtBi, Physical Review B 87, 075120 (2013). Q. Si, R. Yu, and E. Abrahams, High-temperature super- conductivity in iron pnictides and chalcogenides, Nature Reviews Materials 1, 16017 (2016). M. Yi, Y. Zhang, Z.-X. Shen, and D. Lu, Role of the orbital degree of freedom in iron-based superconductors, npj Quantum Materials 2, 57 (2017). Z. P. Yin, K. Haule, and G. Kotliar, Fractional power-law behavior and its origin in iron-chalcogenide and ruthen- ate superconductors: Insights from first-principles calcu- lations, Physical Review B 86, 195141 (2012). M. Yi, Z.-K. Liu, Y. Zhang, R. Yu, J.-X. Zhu, J. Lee, R. Moore, F. Schmitt, W. Li, S. Riggs, J.-H. Chu, B. Lv, J. Hu, M. Hashimoto, S.-K. Mo, Z. Hussain, Z. Mao, C. Chu, I. Fisher, Q. Si, Z.-X. Shen, and D. Lu, Obser- vation of universal strong orbital-dependent correlation effects in iron chalcogenides, Nature Communications 6, P. Dai, J. Hu, and E. Dagotto, Magnetism and its micro- scopic origin in iron-based high-temperature supercon- ductors, Nature Physics 8, 709 (2012). J. Li, B. Lei, D. Zhao, L. P. Nie, D. W. Song, L. X. Zheng, S. J. Li, B. L. Kang, X. G. Luo, T. Wu, and X. H. Chen, Spin-Orbital-Intertwined Nematic State in FeSe, Physical Review X 10, 011034 (2020). Y. Li, Z. Yamani, Y. Song, W. Wang, C. Zhang, D. W. Tam, T. Chen, D. Hu, Z. Xu, S. Chi, K. Xia, L. Zhang, S. Cui, W. Guo, Z. Fang, Y. Liu, and P. Dai, Dy- namic Spin-Lattice Coupling and Nematic Fluctuations in NaFeAs, Physical Review X 8, 021056 (2018). Y. Song, G. Tan, C. Zhang, R. Toft-Petersen, R. Yu, and P. Dai, Unusual suppression of a spin resonance mode by magnetic field in underdoped NaFe1−xCoxAs: Evi- dence for orbital-selective pairing, Physical Review B 98, D. W. Tam, Z. Yin, Y. Xie, W. Wang, M. B. Stone, D. T. Adroja, H. C. Walker, M. Yi, and P. Dai, Orbital selective spin waves in detwinned NaFeAs, Physical Review B 102, P. Dai, Antiferromagnetic order and spin dynamics in iron-based superconductors, Reviews of Modern Physics L. Tian, P. Liu, Z. Xu, Y. Li, Z. Lu, H. C. Walker, U. Stuhr, G. Tan, X. Lu, and P. Dai, Spin fluctuation anisotropy as a probe of orbital- selective hole-electron quasiparticle excitations in de- twinned Ba(Fe1−xCox)2As2, Physical Review B 100, F. Hardy, A. E. B ̈ohmer, D. Aoki, P. Burger, T. Wolf, P. Schweiss, R. Heid, P. Adelmann, Y. X. Yao, G. Kotliar, J. Schmalian, and C. Meingast, Evidence of Strong Corre- lations and Coherence-Incoherence Crossover in the Iron Pnictide Superconductor KFe2As2, Physical Review Let- H. Miao, Z. P. Yin, S. F. Wu, J. M. Li, J. Ma, B.- Q. Lv, X. P. Wang, T. Qian, P. Richard, L.-Y. Xing, X.-C. Wang, C. Q. Jin, K. Haule, G. Kotliar, and H. Ding, Orbital-differentiated coherence-incoherence crossover identified by photoemission spectroscopy in LiFeAs, Physical Review B 94, 201109 (2016). R. Yang, Z. Yin, Y. Wang, Y. Dai, H. Miao, B. Xu, X. Qiu, and C. C. Homes, Observation of an emergent co- herent state in the iron-based superconductor KFe2As2, Physical Review B 96, 201108 (2017). See Supplemental Material at [URL will be inserted by publisher] for Fermi surfaces of FeTe across the magnetic transition, matrix element effects on FS, temperature de- pendence measurement for x = 0.25 FeTe1−xSex, band dispersion along Γ-X-Γ, density functional theory calcu- lations, slave spin theory for the orbital-selective Mott phase and lower Hubbard band in FeTe1−xSex , . F.-C. Hsu, J.-Y. Luo, K.-W. Yeh, T.-K. Chen, T.-W. Huang, P. M. Wu, Y.-C. Lee, Y.-L. Huang, Y.-Y. Chu, D.-C. Yan, and M.-K. Wu, Superconductivity in the PbO-type structure α-FeSe, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105, 14262 (2008). D. Fruchart, P. Convert, P. Wolfers, R. Madar, J. Sena- teur, and R. Fruchart, Structure antiferroma gnetique de Fe1.125Te accompagnee d’une deformation monoclinique, Materials Research Bulletin 10, 169 (1975). W. Bao, Y. Qiu, Q. Huang, M. A. Green, P. Zajdel, M. R. Fitzsimmons, M. Zhernenkov, S. Chang, M. Fang, B. Qian, E. K. Vehstedt, J. Yang, H. M. Pham, L. Spinu, and Z. Q. Mao, Tunable (δπ, δπ)-Type Antiferromagnetic Order in α-Fe(Te,Se) Superconductors, Physical Review Letters 102, 247001 (2009). S. Li, C. de la Cruz, Q. Huang, Y. Chen, J. W. Lynn, J. Hu, Y.-L. Huang, F.-C. Hsu, K.-W. Yeh, M.-K. Wu, and P. Dai, First-order magnetic and structural phase transitions in Fe1+ySexTe1−x, Physical Review B 79, T. J. Liu, J. Hu, B. Qian, D. Fobes, Z. Q. Mao, W. Bao, M. Reehuis, S. A. Kimber, K. ProkeˇS, S. Matas, D. N. Ar- gyriou, A. Hiess, A. Rotaru, H. Pham, L. Spinu, Y. Qiu, V. Thampy, A. T. Savici, J. A. Rodriguez, and C. Bro- holm, From (π,0) magnetic order to superconductivity with (π,π) magnetic resonance in Fe1.02Te1−xSex, Nature Materials 9, 716 (2010). A. Martinelli, A. Palenzona, M. Tropeano, C. Ferdeghini, M. Putti, M. R. Cimberle, T. D. Nguyen, M. Affronte, and C. Ritter, From antiferromagnetism to supercon- ductivity in Fe1+yTe1−xSex (0≤x≤0.20):Neutron pow- der diffraction analysis, Physical Review B 81, 094115 T. M. McQueen, A. J. Williams, P. W. Stephens, J. Tao, Y. Zhu, V. Ksenofontov, F. Casper, C. Felser, and R. J. Cava, Tetragonal-to-Orthorhombic Structural Phase Transition at 90 K in the Superconductor Fe1.01Se, Physical Review Letters 103, 057002 (2009). T. M. McQueen, Q. Huang, V. Ksenofontov, C. Felser, Q. Xu, H. Zandbergen, Y. S. Hor, J. Allred, A. J. Williams, D. Qu, J. Checkelsky, N. P. Ong, and R. J. 10 Cava, Extreme sensitivity of superconductivity to sto- ichiometry in Fe1+δSe, Physical Review B 79, 014522 Y. Sun, T. Taen, T. Yamada, Y. Tsuchiya, S. Pyon, and T. Tamegai, Evolution of superconducting and trans- port properties in annealed FeTe1−xSex (0.1≤x≤0.4) multiband superconductors, Superconductor Science and Technology 28, 044002 (2015). C. Dong, H. Wang, Z. Li, J. Chen, H. Q. Yuan, and M. Fang, Revised phase diagram for the FeTe1−xSex sys- tem with fewer excess Fe atoms, Physical Review B 84, W. Lin, P. Ganesh, A. Gianfrancesco, J. Wang, T. Berlijn, T. A. Maier, S. V. Kalinin, B. C. Sales, and M. Pan, Role of chalcogen vapor annealing in inducing bulk superconductivity in Fe1+yTe1−xSex, Physical Re- view B 91, 060513 (2015). Y. Sun, Y. Tsuchiya, T. Taen, T. Yamada, S. Pyon, A. Sugimoto, T. Ekino, Z. Shi, and T. Tamegai, Dynamics and mechanism of oxygen annealing in Fe1+yTe0.6Se0.4 single crystal, Scientific Reports 4, 4585 Z. Xu, J. A. Schneeloch, M. Yi, Y. Zhao, M. Matsuda, D. M. Pajerowski, S. Chi, R. J. Birgeneau, G. Gu, J. M. Tranquada, and G. Xu, Coexistence of superconductiv- ity and short-range double-stripe spin correlations in Te- vapor annealed FeTe1−xSex (x≤0.2), Physical Review B T. J. Liu, X. Ke, B. Qian, J. Hu, D. Fobes, E. K. Vehstedt, H. Pham, J. H. Yang, M. H. Fang, L. Spinu, P. Schiffer, Y. Liu, and Z. Q. Mao, Charge-carrier lo- calization induced by excess Fe in the superconductor Fe1+yTe1−xSex, Physical Review B 80, 174509 (2009). T. Chen, Y. Chen, A. Kreisel, X. Lu, A. Schneidewind, Y. Qiu, J. T. Park, T. G. Perring, J. R. Stewart, H. Cao, R. Zhang, Y. Li, Y. Rong, Y. Wei, B. M. Andersen, P. J. Hirschfeld, C. Broholm, and P. Dai, Anisotropic spin fluc- tuations in detwinned FeSe, Nature Materials 18, 709 Y. Koshika, T. Usui, S. Adachi, T. Watanabe, K. Sakano, S. Simayi, and M. Yoshizawa, Effects of Annealing un- der Tellurium Vapor for Fe1.03Te0.8Se0.2 Single Crystals, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 82, 023703 Y. Qiu, W. Bao, Y. Zhao, C. Broholm, V. Stanev, Z. Tesanovic, Y. C. Gasparovic, S. Chang, J. Hu, B. Qian, M. Fang, and Z. Mao, Spin Gap and Resonance at the Nesting Wave Vector in Superconducting FeSe0.4Te0.6, Physical Review Letters 103, 067008 (2009). Z. K. Liu, M. Yi, Y. Zhang, J. Hu, R. Yu, J.-X. Zhu, R.- H. He, Y. L. Chen, M. Hashimoto, R. G. Moore, S.-K. Mo, Z. Hussain, Q. Si, Z. Q. Mao, D. H. Lu, and Z.-X. Shen, Experimental observation of incoherent-coherent crossover and orbital-dependent band renormalization in iron chalcogenide superconductors, Physical Review B K. Nakayama, T. Sato, P. Richard, T. Kawahara, Y. Sek- iba, T. Qian, G. F. Chen, J. L. Luo, N. L. Wang, H. Ding, and T. Takahashi, Angle-resolved photoemis- sion spectroscopy of the iron-chalcogenide superconduc- tor Fe1.03Te0.7Se0.3: Strong coupling behavior and the universality of interband scattering, Physical Review Let- J. Maletz, V. B. Zabolotnyy, D. V. Evtushinsky, S. Thiru- pathaiah, A. U. B. Wolter, L. Harnagea, A. N. Yaresko, A. N. Vasiliev, D. A. Chareev, A. E. B ̈ohmer, F. Hardy, T. Wolf, C. Meingast, E. D. L. Rienks, B. B ̈uchner, and S. V. Borisenko, Unusual band renormalization in the simplest iron-based superconductor FeSe1−x, Physi- cal Review B 89, 220506 (2014). W. Zhang, G. Liu, J. Meng, L. Zhao, H. Liu, X. Dong, W. Lu, J. S. Wen, Z. J. Xu, G. D. Gu, T. Sasagawa, G. Wang, Y. Zhu, H. Zhang, Y. Zhou, X. Wang, Z. Zhao, C. Chen, Z. Xu, and X. J. Zhou, High Energy Disper- sion Relations for the High Temperature Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8 Superconductor from Laser-Based Angle-Resolved Pho- toemission Spectroscopy, Physical Review Letters 101, T. Otsuka, S. Hagisawa, Y. Koshika, S. Adachi, T. Usui, N. Sasaki, S. Sasaki, S. Yamaguchi, Y. Nakanishi, M. Yoshizawa, S. Kimura, and T. Watanabe, Incoherent- coherent crossover and the pseudogap in Te-annealed superconducting Fe1+yTe1−xSex revealed by magneto- transport measurements, Physical Review B 99, 184505 Y. A. Ovchenkov, D. A. Chareev, V. A. Kulbachinskii, V. G. Kytin, D. E. Presnov, Y. Skourski, L. V. Shvan- skaya, O. S. Volkova, D. V. Efremov, and A. N. Vasiliev, Nematic properties of FeSe1−xTex crystals with a low Te content, arXiv 1909, 00711 (2019). Q. Jiang, Y. Shi, M. H. Christensen, J. Sanchez, B. Huang, Z. Lin, Z. Liu, P. Malinowski, X. Xu, R. M. Fernandes, and J.-H. Chu, Nematic Fluctuations in an Orbital Selective Superconductor Fe1+yTe1−xSex, arXiv L. Fang, H. Luo, P. Cheng, Z. Wang, Y. Jia, G. Mu, B. Shen, I. I. Mazin, L. Shan, C. Ren, and H.-H. Wen, Roles of multiband effects and electron-hole asymme- try in the superconductivity and normal-state proper- ties of Ba(Fe1−xCox)2As2, Physical Review B 80, 140508 S. Kasahara, T. Shibauchi, K. Hashimoto, K. Ikada, S. Tonegawa, R. Okazaki, H. Shishido, H. Ikeda, H. Takeya, K. Hirata, T. Terashima, and Y. Matsuda, Evolution from non-Fermi- to Fermi-liquid transport via isovalent doping in BaFe2(As1−xPx)2 superconductors., Physical Review B 81, 184519 (2010). L. Fanfarillo, E. Cappelluti, C. Castellani, and L. Ben- fatto, Unconventional Hall Effect in Pnictides from Inter- band Interactions, Physical Review Letters 109, 096402 D. V. Evtushinsky, M. Aichhorn, Y. Sassa, Z. H. Liu, J. Maletz, T. Wolf, A. N. Yaresko, S. Biermann, S. V. Borisenko, and B. Buchner, Direct observation of disper- sive lower Hubbard band in iron-based superconductor FeSe, arXiv 1612, 02313 (2016). M. D. Watson, S. Backes, A. A. Haghighirad, M. Hoesch, T. K. Kim, A. I. Coldea, and R. Valent ́ı, Formation of Hubbard-like bands as a fingerprint of strong electron- electron interactions in FeSe, Physical Review B 95, I. A. Zaliznyak, Z. Xu, J. M. Tranquada, G. Gu, A. M. Tsvelik, and M. B. Stone, Unconventional Temperature Enhanced Magnetism in Fe1.1Te, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, J. M. Tranquada, G. Xu, and I. A. Zaliznyak, Magnetism and superconductivity in Fe1+yTe1−xSex, J. Phys.: Con- 11 dens. Matter 32, 374003 (2020). Z. Xu, J. Wen, J. Schneeloch, A. D. Christian- son, R. J. Birgeneau, G. Gu, J. M. Tranquada, and G. Xu, Low-energy magnetic excitations from the Fe1+y−z(Ni/Cu)zTe1xSex system, Phys. Rev. B 89, A. D. Christianson, M. D. Lumsden, K. Marty, C. H. Wang, S. Calder, D. L. Abernathy, M. B. Stone, H. A. Mook, M. A. McGuire, A. S. Sefat, B. C. Sales, D. Man- drus, and E. A. Goremychkin, Doping dependence of the spin excitations in the Fe-based superconductors Fe1+yTe1xSex, Physical Review B 87, 224410 (2013).