Influence of Temperature, Pressure and Humidity on the Stabilities and Transitions Kinetics of the Various Polymorphs of FAPbI3 Francesco Cordero,∗,† Floriana Craciun,† Francesco Trequattrini,‡,† Amanda Generosi,† Barbara Paci,† Anna Maria Paoletti,¶ and Gloria Zanotti¶ †Istituto di Struttura della Materia-CNR (ISM-CNR), Area della Ricerca di Roma - Tor Vergata, Via del Fosso del Cavaliere 100, I-00133 Roma, Italy ‡Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Roma "La Sapienza", p.le A. Moro 2, I-00185 Roma, Italy ¶Istituto di Struttura della Materia-CNR (ISM-CNR), Area della Ricerca di Roma 1, Via Salaria, Km 29.300, I-00015 Monterotondo Scalo, Roma, Italy E-mail: francesco.cordero@ism.cnr.it Abstract The phase transitions between the various poly- morphs of FAPbI3 (FAPI, FA = formamidinium CH(NH2)+ 2 ) are studied by anelastic, dielectric and X–ray diffraction measurements on samples pressed from δ−FAPI (2H phase) yellow pow- der. The samples become orange after appli- cation of as little as 0.2 GPa, which has been explained in terms of partial transformations to the other hexagonal polymorphs 4H and 6H. The phenomenon is discussed in the light of what is known about the stability of the various polymorphs of hybrid and inorganic perovskites ABX3 with large A cations and hence large tol- erance factor t. Remarkably, FAPI at room and higher temperature behaves like a perovskite with large t, while just below room temperature it behaves like a perovskite with small t. The ki- netics of the transformations between the poly- morphs is enhanced by small amounts of inter- calated water. It seems therefore worthy to try improving the atomic diffusion and crystalliza- tion during synthesis, and hence the final pho- tovoltaic performance, through controlled small amounts of water that should be thoroughly removed after a sufficiently homogeneous and smooth microstructure is achieved. Introduction The hybrid metalorganic and the inorganic halide perovskites, ABX3 with A = organic cation or Cs+, B = Pb2+, Sn2+, X = I−, Br−, Cl−, have been the object of extensive inves- tigations since it was demonstrated that they exhibit excellent photovoltaic performance and may enable the creation of solar cells1,2 and op- toelectronic devices3 with low costs and high performance. What prevents the commercial- ization of devices based on these materials is their poor stability, especially in the presence of humidity, light and heat, all factors that are es- pecially crucial in photovoltaic applications.2,4,5 The main directions for improving the phase stabilities and power conversion efficiencies are compositional engineering or use of additives or surface protecting layers, but the effect of pressure is also explored,6,7 since effects similar to the application of pressure may be obtained by shrinking the lattice of the perovskite film through the choice of the substrate.8,9 In some cases it has been reported that the application of pressure and even of humidity during prepa- 1 arXiv:2010.10589v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 20 Oct 2020 ration have positive roles in improving the sta- bility or morphology and photovoltaic efficiency of films of these perovskites. The main effect of pressure in perovskites with rigid B–X bonds is promoting tilting of the BX6 octahedra. This occurs in order to re- lieve the mismatch between the shrinking A-X framework and the rigid BX6 octahedra, which is usually quantified by how much the Gold- schmidt’s tolerance factor,10,11 defined in terms of the equilibrium ionic radii as t = rA + rX √ 2 (rB + rX) , (1) is less than 1. In fact, t = 1 for radii that perfectly fit the cubic perovskite; when t < 1 the BX6 octahedra are too large to fit the A– X bonds and therefore, if they are also more rigid than the A–X bonds, they tilt without shrinking. In the hybrid perovskites, however, the H bonds between the A organic molecule and the X anions also play a role.12 Much less clear is the role of pressure in promoting the transitions between the various polymorphs of the halide perovskites with different octahe- dral coordinations. This is particularly true for the case of FAPbI3 (FAPI), for which the literature on the effects of pressure is contra- dictory.6 The topic is of particular relevance, since the other polymorphs of these perovskites are also the phases into which they generally transform during degradation, being more sta- ble in ambient conditions. These phases have yellow or orange colors and definitely lower pho- tovoltaic performance. The various phases are often labeled as α for the black cubic perovskite, which at lower temperature transforms into β and γ with tilted BX6 octahedra and δ for the yellow non-perovskite,13,14 though recently it has been shown that a series of intermediate polymorphs of FAPI exist.15 They are recog- nizable by diffraction and from the color, or more quantitatively from the absorption bands in the UV-visible region.15–18 In this context Ramsdell’s notation19 is useful, according to which the cubic perovskite phase is labeled 3C and the δ−FAPI phase is 2H, while the in- termediate phases are 4H and 6H. All first- principle calculations indicate that the lowest energy and therefore stable polymorph of FAPI is the δ phase, and indeed this is the phase obtained at room temperature with chemical methods. Yet, dry grinding or ball milling the starting FAI and PbI2 powders may pro- duce the perovskite phase,13,20,21 and similarly for MAPbI3 22 (MAPI, MA = methylammo- nium (CH3NH3)+). Although a relationship between the application of high pressure and mechanosynthesis is not recognized, it can be estimated that in ball milling the impacting balls generate pressures of several GPa in the contact region.23 There are also reports of new phases, also with improved photovoltaic properties and sta- bilities, obtained after the application of high pressure. These phases generally have shorter bonds, higher orbital overlap and reduced bandgap, resulting in enhanced photocur- rents. They are proposed to be accessible af- ter pressure–induced amorphization and subse- quent recrystallization, as in the case of tetrago- nal MASnI3, which becomes cubic,24 or the 2D perovskite (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 (BA+ = buty- lammonium (CH3(CH2)3NH3)+).25 In FAPI a similar improvement of the bond configuration accompanied by bandgap decrease has been re- ported to persist after removal of a pressure of 2.1 GPa, rather surprisingly, even in the absence of any intermediate pressure–induced phase transition or amorphization.26 However, there are contrasting results on the effect of pressure on α−FAPI.27 It has also been found that as little as 0.1 GPa would promote the α → δ transformation,28 while a single crystal has been found to undergo at 0.49 GPa a transi- tion to the tetragonal P4/mbm structure, due to octahedral tilting,29 presumably the same β phase that is obtained upon cooling below 285 K. Finally, pressures of 4-6 GPa have been found to reversibly turn the black and yellow phases into red,30 and piezochromism has been found also in nanocrystalline FAPI31 and in FAPbBr3,32 interpreted in terms of the depen- dence of the bandgap on the Pb–I–Pb bond lengths and angles in the variously tilted per- ovskite phases.31 Also humidity affects FAPI and generally 2 metal–organic perovskites in different manners. Besides the well established role as catalyst of the degradation of the perovskite α phases into non-perovskite δ and final decomposition, a rel- ative humidity (RH) of 30% has been found to generally improve the quality of films compared to the dry process33 and particularly to im- prove the crystallization and enlarge the grain size of MAPI and FAPI films,.34 Also in the mechanosynthesis of MAPI a RH of 40% accel- erates the reaction between MAI and PbI2 .22 Here we present dielectric, anelastic and x– ray diffraction measurements on samples com- pacted from δ−FAPI powder. The dielectric and elastic properties are particularly sensitive to the level of hydration and volume fractions of α and δ phases, since dry α−FAPI has elastic modulus and dielectric constant at least twice as large as the δ and hydrated phases. These experiments shed light and allow some ratio- nalization to be made on the behavior of the several polytypes of FAPI under pressure and humidity. Methods We performed dielectric, anelastic and X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements on samples compacted from the yellow δ−FAPI powder. The powder was obtained following a proce- dure already reported35 with slight modifica- tions, precipitating with toluene the δ–FAPI phase from a solution of HC(NH2I and PbI2 in GBL. The yellow powder was recovered by cen- trifugation and dried at room temperature in vacuum overnight as described in the Support- ing Information (SI). The powder for one of the bars (FAPI #7) was prepared in water following the procedure reported in with slight modifications, as detailed in the SI, obtaining pure δ−FAPI according to the XRD analysis. The bars for the anelastic and discs for the di- electric measurements were obtained by press- ing the FAPI powder for few minutes at maxi- mum pressures of 0.2 and 0.62 GPa respectively in dies with section 40 × 6 mm2 or 13 mm di- ameter and their thicknesses were between 0.5 and 1 mm. The complex Young’s modulus E = E′ + iE′′ versus temperature was measured in a high vacuum (HV) insert with base pressure < 10−6 mbar, with the introduction of < 0.2 mbar He below room temperature for thermal ex- change or in controlled H2O pressure. The FAPI thin bars were suspended on thermocou- ple wires and electrostatically excited on their flexural modes as described in . The real part of the complex Young’s modulus is proportional to the square of the fundamental resonance frequency f of the first flexural mode as38 f = 1.028 h l2 � E ρ , where l, h, ρ are the sample’s length, thick- ness and density. The elastic energy loss Q−1 = E′′/E′ was measured from the width of the res- onance peaks or the free decay. The dielectric permittivity ε versus tempera- ture was measured in a small closed volume, a modified Linkam cell, that does not allow HV tight conditions. Previous experience taught us that the standard purging procedure of few minutes with dry N2 flux at 40 ◦C is totally ineffective in removing the water absorbed by FAPI.39 In addition, at low temperature some humidity may leak into the cell and condense on the sample, giving rise to a broad peak of ε dur- ing heating back to room temperature. There- fore, in order to remove water as efficiently as possible from the sample, purging was made at the highest temperature possible under the given conditions at the beginning and at the end of each temperature run. The XRD spectra were acquired in air at var- ious stages of the anelastic and dielectric ex- periments and on freshly prepared discs, as de- scribed in more detail in the SI. Results The samples pressed from the yellow δ−FAPI were orange. The discs, with smaller surface and subjected to higher pressure, were of more uniform and intense color, while the bars pre- sented lighter zones corresponding to regions where the initial thickness of the powder and 3 therefore local pressure and final density were smaller (see Figs. 6 and 7(a) in SI). We under- stand this phenomenon as a pressure–induced transformation from the yellow 2H phase to the orange and red 4H and 6H phases,15,16 more complete in the case of the discs subjected to higher pressure. The presence of these phases is evident from the color but does not give clear signatures in the XRD spectra, as shown in the SI. an initially orange disc pressed from yellow δ−FAPI. Dielectric permittivity of the disc FAPI #4 pressed from powder of δ−FAPI mea- sured at 100 kHz during several temperature runs (only few are shown). The colors are in- dicative of the state of the sample; the yellow color of the sample in curve 2 after three days at room temperature in the measurement cell corresponds to the δ phase but has not been checked. We started the first heating (curve 1) with the intention of stopping temperature immedi- ately after the dielectric permittivity started to rise, indicating the onset of the nH→3C tran- sition, where nH indicates some mixture of 2H, 4H and 6H phases. Such a transition, however, was so fast that we were not able to prevent the formation of 3C phase, as indicated by the α → β and β → γ transitions measured dur- ing the subsequent cooling.39 The final purg- ing at 380 K was apparently insufficient to re- move water from the sample, which after three days (curve 2) was back in the δ (presumably 2H) phase with low permittivity, no trace of the α → β and β → γ transitions, and in- stead the transition to the LT-δ phase known to occur at 173 K upon heating (167 K in the cooling curve 2) after thermal expansion40 and neutron diffraction.41 A new temperature run (curve 3) was extended to 450 K, but this time the 2H→3C transition was slower than in curve 1, and, even though a 12 min purging was done at 430 K, the subsequent cooling did not show signs of a more complete transition to the α phase with respect to curve 1. On the con- trary, the permittivity was slightly lower and the transitions less marked. After the series of dielectric measurements the sample had a shiny black surface, with some dark violet reflections, but no signs of cracks, indicating that the tran- sitions between the nH and 3C phases occur in a nearly congruent manner without excessive in- ternal strains. The XRD spectra (pattern 1 of Fig. 2) contained only the peaks of the 3C and 2H phases; the latter was evidently induced by humidity and its presence is in agreement with the lower permittivity during the last dielectric run. After further dielectric runs including a pro- longed aging of 110 min at 430–440 K (not shown) the XRD reflections of the α phase were found more intense, but also some refections of PbI2 started being detected (pattern 2). Even if taken within one day after a dielectric or anelastic experiment, the XRD spectra do not capture the status of the sample at the end of that experiment, as is clear from the near total transformation of these compacted sam- ples from the α to the δ phase in only three days in presence of humidity (Fig. 1). Yet, we noted several times an overemphasized appear- ance of the XRD peaks of the hexagonal δ and PbI2 phases over the α phase with respect to the last anelastic or dielectric experiment and the sample appearance. We speculate that this 4 XRD pattern collected on sample FAPI #4 after the dielectric measurements in Fig. 1 (curve 1) and after further temperature runs including longer annealing at 430–440 K. Black, red and green lines are the expected re- flections of the α, δ and PbI2 phases respec- tively. is due to a superior crystallinity of the hexag- onal phases over cubic α−FAPI, as explained later on. We pass to the description of the results of the anelastic spectra obtained during several temperature runs in HV conditions (10−6 − 10−5 mbar or ∼ 10−2 − 10−1 mbar He below room temperature). ple FAPI #5, an initially orange bar (fig. 7(a)) obtained by pressing yellow powder of freshly prepared δ−FAPI. The initial state is therefore a mixture of 2H, 4H and possibly 6H and similar phases. The upper panel is the relative change of the Young’s modulus E, deduced from the resonance frequency. The reference E0 corre- sponds to f = 2.0 kHz in the α phase. Its absolute value can be estimated as 8.5 GPa but with a large error, of the order of 20%, due to the non uniform thickness and density of the bar. The lower panel is the elastic energy loss coefficient Q−1 = E′′/E′. Below 380 K the ma- jor feature of the anelastic spectrum of δ−FAPI is the phase transformation at TLT = 170 K, also visible in the dielectric spectrum (curve 2 of Fig. 1). We label δ−LT the phase below loss coefficient Q−1 of a bar pressed from pow- der of δ−FAPI during several temperature runs (only few are shown). 170 K, which has been shown to cause a lattice expansion40 and the appearance of new Bragg peaks41 and has a reduced number of possible orientations of the FA molecules.42 The Young’s modulus softens almost linearly at both sides of the minimum at TLT, with higher slope on the low temperature side, suggesting a proper or at least pseudoproper ferroelastic transition,43 where a strain component is the order parame- ter or has its symmetry and the corresponding compliance has a maximum of the Curie-Weiss type.44 Notice that the minimum in the soft- ened elastic constant is more marked than it appears in the polycrystalline Young’s modu- lus E, which contains the contribution of the other elastic constants of the 2H phase not in- volved in the transition and of the other nH phases, which presumably do not undergo the same transition. A similar elastic anomaly has been observed in the metal–organic framework perovskite [(CH2)3NH2]Mn(HCOO)3 in corre- spondence with a phase transition where the azetidinium molecules undergo orientational or- 5 dering,45 which probably is similar to what oc- curs to the formamidinium molecules in the δ−LT phase of FAPI. In that case, in order to maintain that the coupling between strain and order parameter is linear-quadratic, the linear increase of the elastic constant above the transi- tion temperature has been interpreted as due to coupling between strain and strong fluctuations of the order parameter, while the stiffening be- low the transition was explained supposing that the transition is close to tricritical.45 Indeed, there is little hysteresis, ≤ 2 K, in TLT between heating and cooling, but regarding possible fluc- tuations above TLT, they do not seem to appear in the dielectric permittivity, which just has a sharp step below TLT. In addition, there is a marked hysteresis in the value of the minimum of E, since the material is softer during heating and partially recovers at room temperature (not shown). This accounts for the fact that curve 2, measured after a few cycles at low temperature, does not coincide with curve 1. Curve 2 was measured after the sample had been 6 days in the insert for anelasticity measurements in HV or static He atmosphere and therefore the sam- ple was completely dehydrated (at 340 K the vacuum was 7 × 10−7 mbar). Therefore curve 2 represents the transition from the δ phase, ac- tually a mixture of 2H, 4H and possibly other hexagonal phases, to the 3C cubic α phase dur- ing heating at 1.5 K/min in totally anhydrous condition. The transition occurs between 400 and 420 K. Heating was stopped at 443 K since no further stiffening was observed, indicating that the transformation was completed, and in order to avoid the sample decomposition. In this condition the Young’s modulus and losses were perfectly stable and the cooling curves were identical to those previously measured on FAPI,39 with the α → β transition accompa- nied by a negative step in the modulus and rise of dissipation, and the β → γ transition accom- panied by a seemingly critical softening followed by marked stiffening well above the value in the α phase. The dielectric experiments suggested that the transition to the cubic black 3C phase was faster for the orange nH (n > 2) phases induced by pressure than for the yellow 2H phase, but Young’s modulus and elastic en- ergy loss of two bars δ−FAPI (mixture of nH phases) heated in completely anhydrous condi- tion (FAPI #5, same as Fig. 3 ) and under 7 mbar H2O (FAPI #7). After the transforma- tion to the 3C α phase, the transitions to the β and γ structures are observed during cooling. In both cases the heating rate was 1.5 K/min. the above anelastic experiments on an orange sample did not show the sudden transition to 3C at ≤ 400 K. In order to check whether also the content of water has a role in the kinetics of these structural transitions, we prepared a new bar (FAPI #7) from yellow powder and heated it at 1.5 K/min in 7 mbar H2O (up to 445 K and then HV as usual; 7 mbar correspond to a relative humidity of 30% at room tempera- ture). The comparison with the previous mea- surement on FAPI #5, completely dehydrated and heated in a vacuum of 10−6 mbar at the same temperature rate, is presented in Fig. 4. The rise of the modulus indicating the transi- tion to the α phase occurs in advance of about 24 K in the presence of water and, judging from the amplitudes of the elastic anomalies at the α → β and β → γ transitions, the transfor- mation to the α phase is more complete in the 6 hydrated sample. There is also a sudden rise of dissipation when heating through 334 K, which disappears at the δ → α transition. Discussion Relative volumes of the FAPI poly- morphs We will base our discussion of the present exper- imental results on the hexagonal phases that are intermediate between the well known δ phase and the cubic α phase and that have been ob- served in FAPI partially substituted with MA, Cs and Br.15–18 The structures of these ABX3 polymorphs can be described in terms of stack- ing of AX3 close–packed layers between which the B ions are octahedrally coordinated with the X ions.46,47 Adjacent AX3 layers are hori- zontally shifted with respect to each other so that the A cations are never first neighbors and this gives rise to two types of stacking. If a layer is sandwiched between identical layers, the BX6 octahedra do not touch with each other in the planar directions but share faces perpendicu- lar to it and form a hexagonal lattice; instead, in a stack of three different layers the octahe- dra share corners in all directions and form the cubic perovskite. Many combinations of cubic and hexagonal stacking are possible and may be labeled according to Ramsdell’s notation,19 as nY, where n is the number of layers form- ing the unit cell and Y = C, H, R denotes the cubic, hexagonal, rhombohedral symmetry of the resulting lattice. The polytypes found in the FA–based halide perovskites are shown in Fig. 5 and are: cubic (3C = α phase); pure hexagonal (h) stacking (2H = δ phase), where columns of face-sharing octahedra are separated by FA cations; mixed hchc (4H) and chcchc (6H) stacking. In the perovskite based polytypes, the reason why the 2H phase is more stable than 3C is that in the latter the A cation is too large for its cav- ity surrounded by eight BX6 octahedra.48 In the 2H structure the problem of the mismatch be- tween B–X and A–X bonds is completely elim- inated by the fact that the B–X bonds are con- phases of FAPI, based on the data of Gratia et al.15,16 for FA0.85MA0.15PbI3. The red arrows indicate the short Pb–Pb distances across the shared faces of the octahedra; c and h indicate cubic and hexagonal stacking of the FAI3 layers. fined within the columns of octahedra, whose spacing is determined by the A–X bonds. In the columns of face–sharing octahedra, how- ever, the B–B distances are much reduced with respect to corner–sharing (red arrows in Fig. 5), with consequent increase of the electrostatic repulsion. The balance between B–B repulsion and B–X and A–X mismatch makes competitive the intermediate structures with both corner– and face–sharing octahedra, and these trends are confirmed by the distortions of the octahe- dra and displacements of Pb from their centers in the structures of (FA0.85MA0.15)PbI3:15 from the Crystallographic Information Files (CIF) supplied in it can be found that in the 4H and 6H structures Pb2+ is displaced 7 away from the shared face in order to increase the separation from the nearest neighbor Pb2+ atom and the face is shrunk in order to en- hance the electrostatic screening of the three I− anions. Identical observations can be made in 6H–AzPbBr3.49 The fact that pressing the yellow powder of 2H phase induces a change of color to or- ange already at 0.2 GPa and the color becomes more intense and dark with increasing pres- sure, should be explained in terms of pressure– induced transformations from the 2H to the 4H and 6H phases. Indeed, the latter are respec- tively orange and red in FAPI partially sub- stituted with MA, Cs and Br,15,16 and this may be explained in terms of an increase of the band gap when increasing the octahedral connectivity from corner– to edge– and face– sharing.50 To our knowledge, a sequence of pressure–induced transformations of the purely hexagonal 2H structure into the more corner– sharing 4H and 6H structures has not been re- ported so far for hybrid halide perovskites. Yet, this is what happens in other inorganic per- ovskites, notably fluorides and chlorides,46 but also oxides such as BaRuO3,48 though at pres- sures well above 1 GPa and the sequence of phases is not general. The fact that pressure induces transitions to other polymorphs may be put in direct rela- tionship with their smaller volumes per unit formula but a trend of the relative volumes of the hexagonal and cubic polymorphs of ABX3 compounds cannot be deduced simply from ge- ometrical considerations, since there are strong variations depending on the ion types. For ex- ample, among the inorganic lead halides it was found that CsCdBr3 remains in the 2H phase up to 23 GPa, almost isotropically squeezed down to 65% of its original volume.47 On the other hand, CsPbI3 undergoes the δ → α transition at 560 − 600 K, but the cubic perovskite phase has a volume 6.9% larger than that of the δ phase, in spite of a 9% reduction of the volume of the octahedra,51 and CsSnI3 behaves simi- larly.52 It must be noted, however, that those δ phases are not 2H but orthorhombic with double chains of edge–sharing octahedra and among the hybrid halides there is a variety of non–perovskite structures.53,54 Unfortunately, based on our diffraction data and the literature it is not trivial to find solid information on the volumes per formula unit of the various polymorphs of FAPI. Most of our diffraction data were acquired during fast scans in order to minimize possible effects from degra- dation of the compacted powders during the scans in air, and were unsuitable for Rietveld refinement. Therefore we do not deduce cell volumes of the various phases from our data but we refer to the studies of Gratia et al.15,16 on (FAPbI3)1−x(MAPbBr3)x with x ≤ 0.2, which should be indicative also for pure FAPI. Table 1 is based on their cell volumes V with multi- plicity Z with respect to the formula unit. The first row reports the type of layer stacking, ac- cording to Ramsdell’s notation,19 and the table is sorted in order of increasing molecular vol- ume Vm = V/Z (volume per formula unit). It results that indeed the molecular volume de- creases with increase of the cubic coordination, following the sequence 2H, 4H, 6H nd 3C. There is another hybrid halide where the compactness of the 3C phase with respect to the hexagonal ones is even more marked: a stable 6H phase has been found in Az1−xMAxPbBr3 (Az = aze- tidinium = C3H6NH2)+ with a coexistence re- gion 0.4 < x < 0.7 of the 3C and 6H phases where V3C is a remarkable 9.7% smaller than V6H.49 It seems logical to explain the trend of in- creasing volume when passing from the 3C to 2H, 4H, 6H structures of the metal–organic halides in terms of an overall loss of connectiv- ity of the octahedra, whose strong Pb-X bonds restrain the lattice expansion due to the large A molecular cations. When the connectivity is purely one-dimensional along the chains of the octahedra in the 2H phase, the distance be- tween the chains can more freely accommodate the molecular cations, in the absence of strong A-A and A-X bonds. Increasing n in the nH series progressively redistributes the octahedral connectivity from face sharing along c to edge sharing in all directions and is indeed accom- panied by a decrease of the molecular volume. Only based on this concept one would expect that within the nH series shrinking is larger 8 cording to . Ramsdell 3C 6H 4H 2H Z 1 6 4 2 V/Z [Å3] 251 V/ (Z V3C) 1 a [Å] 6.31 8.84 2c/Z [Å] 6.31 7.48 space group Pm3m P63/mmc P63/mmc P63/mmc color black dark red orange yellow within the ab plane than along c (it is not pos- sible to extend the comparison to a of the 3C cubic structure due to the drastic structural re- arrangements, also including rotations of the octahedra by 45◦ with respect to the princi- pal axes). Contrary to the naive expectation, the volume shrinking from 2H to 6H is totally due a contraction along c, while there is even a small expansion within the ab plane. This can be understood in terms of the strong elec- trostatic repulsion between the Pb2+ atoms on either sides of the 3I− faces shared by adjacent octahedra, as explained above.48,49,55,56 It seems therefore that the large size of the FA molecules drives the volume expansion along the 3C to 2H series, but the distortion of the cell is driven by the electrostatic repulsion of the Pb atoms along the columns of face sharing octahedra. In this context it is usual to introduce the concept of tolerance factor defined in Eq. (1). When t < 1 the BX6 octahedra are too large to fit the A–X bonds and therefore, if the B– X bonds are more rigid than the A–X ones, they tilt if an external pressure is applied or when the temperature is lowered and the ther- mal shrinking of the more anharmonic A–X bonds exerts enough pressure.57 On the oppo- site instance of t > 1 the polymorphs with oc- tahedra sharing faces or edges become favored over cubic perovskite, as explained above. A particularity of FAPI is that at room tempera- ture it exhibits both the phenomena typical of perovskites with large t, namely the formation of the hexagonal phases of face–sharing octahe- dra, and small t, namely tilting of the octahedra just below room temperature. This is probably due to an important role of the H bonds be- tween FA and PbI6 octahedra,58 which adds to the usual steric constraint of fitting cations into the spaces between the octahedra, and to an exceptionally large thermal expansion,59 which accelerates the shrinking of the FA–I network with respect to the Pb–I one during cooling and causes tilting. Intercalated water as catalyst of the structural transitions The comparison between the dielectric mea- surement of the initially humid sample in a small closed volume (curve 1 of Fig. 1) and the anelastic measurements in HV reveals that interstitial water molecules promote the trans- formations from the hexagonal nH phases to the perovskite 3C. This is further confirmed by the anelastic experiment with heating in humid atmosphere (Fig. 4). The interstitial water molecules certainly in- terfere with the H bonds between formami- dinium molecules and I− anions, which con- tribute keeping the nH structures, and likely form H bonds with the I− ions, so weakening the Pb-I bonds and helping the rearrangement pro- cess of the PbI6 octahedra. The role of intersti- tial water as catalyst has been demonstrated in MAPI and FAPI for the degradation transfor- mations but may well exist for the reverse trans- formations at higher temperature. In addition, humidity promotes the crystallization of large grains of MAPI and FAPI films,34 and acceler- ates the reaction between MAI and PbI2 in the 9 mechanosynthesis of MAPI.22 Similar mecha- nisms act in other metal-organic frameworks or coordination polymers.60 Remaining with the halide perovskites, it has been demonstrated by DSC under dry and humid conditions that wa- ter catalyzes the α → δ transition in CsPbI3;61 here we see that, at least for FAPI, also the re- verse transition is accelerated. As suggested for CsPbI3, intercalated water lowers the enthalpy barrier between the structural variants without affecting their equilibrium enthalpies. Indeed, in a very recent paper62 it has been demon- strated that, in the presence of vapors of sol- vents such as DMSO, δ−FAPI films transform fast into large grain α−FAPI, a fact attributed to the catalytic effect of the solvent molecules in promoting the δ → α transition at the phase interface.62 Water would be a more effective sol- vent than the organic ones, thanks to its smaller size and stronger polarity (the polarity index of water is 10.2 while that of the most polar of the organic solvents used with FAPI, DMSO, is 7.262). Even interstitial inert gases interfere with the structural transitions in hybrid halide perovskites, as demonstrated by the fact that pressure induced transitions occur at broadly different pressures depending whether the pres- sure transmitting medium is Ne or Ar.63 Other observations are in agreement with a catalytic role of intercalated water: a controlled amount of humidity (20 − 30% RH) improves the morphology of films,64,65 though this fact has been mainly attributed to adsorbed H2O that would help the coalescence of the grains, as in MgO humid sintering.66 Similarly, the im- proved quality of films fabricated in 30% RH compared to dry conditions has been attributed to dissolution of the reactants and enhanced mass transport.33 On the other hand, the accel- eration of the kinetics of the structural transi- tions from the hexagonal to cubic phase points to a role of H2O intercalated within the bulk rather than in liquid form at the grain bound- aries. The latter may rather be responsible for the degradation to PbI2. It seems therefore worth to more accurately explore the role of small controlled amounts of water or humidity in the various phases of the powder or film preparations, in order to find the right balance for a complete forma- tion of α phase with good microstructure but avoiding the decomposition into PbI2 and or- ganic constituents. Indeed, the dielectric ex- periments on FAPI #4 are made in presence of small uncontrolled amounts of water and the resulting XRD spectra contain no trace of PbI2 after the first set of measurements (pattern 1 of Fig. 2). The proof that water was present in the measuring cell is the complete transforma- tion back to the δ phase after three days, while samples of FAPI can be maintained in the α phase for months in the HV insert. On the other hand, beyond some threshold water in- duces decomposition, and indeed traces of PbI2 were detected in sample #4 after additional temperature runs (curve 2 of Fig. 2). Also for FAPI #7 heated in 7 mbar H2O up to 450 K in two hours the subsequent XRD analysis in- dicated decomposition, though the amount of PbI2 is difficult to asses. The anelastic spec- tra measured in HV after the transformation to the α phase showed a perfect perovskite with full transitions to the β and γ phases. Yet, the presence of PbI2 phase probably does not cause any major elastic anomalies and simply results in a slightly lower elastic modulus (and dielectric constant). Once extracted from the HV insert, the sample was black with non uni- form yellow shades (Fig. 7(b)), and was cut into pieces to check that also the interior was black. Against the expectation from the anelas- tic and visual evaluation, the XRD spectrum measured in reflection from the sample surface presented a prevalence of the PbI2 peaks over the α−FAPI ones. As already noted in ref- erence to Fig. 2, we attribute this fact to a superior crystallinity of the hexagonal phases over cubic α−FAPI. Indeed, the transforma- tion of α−FAPI into δ phase or its decomposi- tion into PbI2 catalyzed or induced by water at room temperature occur relatively slowly, pre- sumably from few nuclei with larger concentra- tion of H2O molecules, so allowing large hexago- nal crystallites to grow.67 On the contrary, the transformation from the δ to the cubic phase occurs at high temperature with a faster kinet- ics, especially if catalyzed by intercalated water. As explained above, the transitions from the 10 nH phases to 3C do not require long range ion diffusion but only rearrangements in the stack- ing of the PbI3 planes. If this occurs simulta- neously at closely spaced intervals, nanometric domain configurations may arise, which indeed have been observed in α−FAPI and mimic a trigonal or hexagonal symmetry rather than cu- bic.68,69 It is then possible that the X-ray reflec- tions from the so nanotwinned cubic phase are much less sharp than those from nearly perfect crystallites of PbI2 and δ phase. Conclusions We studied the phase transitions between the various polymorphs of FAPI by anelastic, di- electric and X-ray diffraction measurements on samples pressed from δ−FAPI (2H phase) yel- low powder. The application of a pressure as low as 0.2 GPa changes the color to orange, which has been explained in terms of transfor- mations to the other hexagonal polymorphs 4H and 6H, having smaller volumes. The stabil- ity of these intermediate hexagonal phases has been put in the broader perspective of the hy- brid and inorganic perovskites ABX3 with large A cations, or large tolerance factor. It ap- pears that the several polymorphs of FAPI are rather close in free energy at room temperature and, remarkably, FAPI is susceptible to both the phenomena due to a large tolerance factor, namely the formation of the hexagonal phases of face–sharing octahedra, and small tolerance factor, with octahedral tilting just below room temperature. This structural susceptibility is certainly enhanced by the extremely large ther- mal expansion and is probably a cause for the contrasting observations on the effects of pres- sure, temperature and aging on the FAPI struc- ture. In addition, it is observed that a small amount of water may enhance the kinetics of the trans- formations from the various polytypes to the cubic phase. Rather than to a surface effect of adsorbed H2O, as often assumed for the im- proved grain growth in films in moderately hu- mid atmosphere, this effect is attributed to H2O intercalated in the bulk. The catalytic effect of water presents a similarity with the accom- plishment of fast formation of α−FAPI with large grains from δ−FAPI films in presence of DMSO and other solvents,62 but the highly po- lar H2O should be an even more effective sol- vent. This fact acquires particular interest in the light of the recent observation that the trap- ping of photocarriers, a major cause of reduc- tion of the photovoltaic performance, occurs at specific types of grain boundaries, so that "managing structure and composition on the nanoscale will be essential for optimal perfor- mance of halide perovskite devices."70 It seems therefore promising to explore strategies where controlled small amounts of water are intro- duced during the synthesis in order to improve the atomic diffusion and crystallization, and thoroughly removed after a sufficiently homoge- neous and smooth microstructure is achieved. Acknowledgement The authors thank Paolo Massimiliano Latino and Roberto Scaccia (ISM-Tor Vergata) for their technical assistance in the anelastic experiments, Sara Notaranto- nio (ISM-Montelibretti) for assistance in the synthesis, Marco Guaragno (ISM-Tor Vergata) for his technical support in X-ray experiments.