1 A Thermochemical Database from High-throughput First-Principles Calculations and Its Application to Analyzing Phase Evolution in AM-fabricated IN718 Yi Wang1*, Frederick Lia2, Ke Wang3, Kevin McNamara1,2, Yanzhou Ji1, Xiaoyu Chong1, Shun-Li Shang1, Zi-Kui Liu1, Richard P. Martukanitz4, and Long-Qing Chen1* 1Department of Materials Science and Engineering, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 2Center for Innovative Materials Processing through Direct Digital Deposition (CIMP-3D), Applied Research Laboratory, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802 3Materials Characterization Laboratory, Materials Research Institute, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802 4Materials Science and Engineering, University of Virginia, Wilsdorf Hall, 395 McCormick Road P.O. Box 400745, Charlottesville, VA 22904 Abstract A comprehensive thermochemical database is constructed based on high–throughput first- principles phonon calculations of over 3000 atomic structures in Ni, Fe, and Co alloys involving a total of 26 elements including Al, B, C, Cr, Cu, Hf, La, Mn, Mo, N, Nb, O, P, Re, Ru, S, Si, Ta, Ti, V, W, Y, and Zr, providing thermochemical data largely unavailable from existing experiments. The database can be employed to predict the equilibrium phase compositions and fractions at a given temperature and an overall chemical composition directly from first-principles by minimizing the chemical potential. It is applied to the additively manufactured nickel-based IN718 superalloy to analyze the phase evolution with temperature. In particular, we successfully at low temperatures, γ’-Ni3Al, δ-Ni3Nb, ”-Ni3Nb, α-Cr, and γ-Ni(Fe,Cr,Mo) at intermediate temperatures, and δ-Ni3Nb and γ-Ni(Fe,Cr,Mo) at high temperatures in IN718. These predictions are validated by EDS mapping of compositional distributions and corresponding identifications of phase distributions. The database is expected to be a valuable source for future thermodynamic analysis and microstructure prediction of alloys involving the 26 elements. *Corresponding Authors: Yi Wang: yuw3@psu.edu; Long-Qing Chen: lqc3@psu.edu 2 1 Introduction With advances in both computational power and efficiency during the last two decades , density functional theory (DFT) calculations have been routinely employed to predict energetics and properties of a material with a given structure at both 0K and finite temperatures. Here we make an attempt to build a comprehensive thermochemical database entirely based on DFT calculations. In particular, we obtained chemical potentials (often called Gibbs energies in the existing literature) of individual phases employing a quasi-harmonic phonon approach for the lattice contribution and Mermin statistics for the thermal electronic contribution for nickel based superalloys by performing high-throughput first-principles calculations. The present work was initially motivated by our desire to understand the thermodynamic equilibria among possible precipitate phases formed during heating and cooling cycles in additive manufacturing of IN718 alloys consisting of 10 elements (Ni, Cr, Fe, Nb, Mo, Ti, Al, Co, C, Cu). Due to the high-throughput nature of our calculations, we decided to drastically extend the database by considering 3281 compounds involving 26 elements, namely, Ni, Cr, Fe, Nb, Mo, Ti, Al, Co, C, Cu, B, Hf, La, Mn, N, O, P, Re, Ru, S, Si, Ta, V, W, Y, and Zr, which can potentially be widely applicable to a wide range of metallic alloys way beyond IN718. To facilitate the access to the database, we also develop a computational tool in python to predict the phase stability as a function of temperature. The thermodynamic database is applied to the additively manufactured (AM) nickel-based IN718 superalloy to analyze the phase evolution with temperature. The considered phases include the ordered, disordered, and solution structures that can be potentially relevant to phases observed from the T-T-T (time-temperature-transformation) diagrams [6–9] of IN718. For this purpose, we combine the database and experimental observations from energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy 3 (EDS) measurements in transmission electron microscope (TEM). The input data to the computational tool for analyzing the presence of phases and their volume fractions are then simply the local alloy compositions from EDS. 2 DFT Derived Database 2.1 Stoichiometric phases For stoichiometric crystalline phases, the present calculations include the L12-A3M (’), Fe, Al, B, C, Cr, Cu, Hf, La, Mn, Mo, N, Nb, O, P, Re, Ru, S, Si, Ta, Ti, V, W, Y, and Zr; C14- A2M, A8M, MC, (A,M)6C, and (A,M)23C6 phases with A, M (A)= Ni, Co, Cr, Fe, Al, B, C, Cr, Cu, Hf, La, Mn, Mo, N, Nb, O, P, Re, Ru, S, Si, Ta, Ti, V, W, Y, and Zr; All other known Ni, Co, Cr, or Fe containing stable compounds with Al, B, C, Cr, Cu, Hf, La, Mn, Mo, N, Nb, O, P, Re, Ru, S, Si, Ta, Ti, V, W, Y, and Zr obtained from the Materials Project , including phases such as the  Ni3(Nb,Ti),  A6M7, and  AxMy-type of phases. Possible duplicate phases were excluded by automated inspection of the composition, the size of the primitive unit cell, and the space group symmetry employing the pos2s script (from YPHON) which was developed based on the FINDSYM module of the ISOTROPY package . 2.2 Disordered phases We considered both binary and ternary disordered phases at selected compositions using the special quasirandom structure (SQS) approach [13–15]. The idea of SQS is to construct a special supercell for which the atomic correlation functions mimic the physically most relevant ones of 4 the perfectly random solid solutions. It is used extensively to study formation enthalpies, bond length distributions, density of states, etc. in solution phases . In addition, lattice distortions can be studied with the SQS approach as well, by which the equilibrium position of each atom in a supercell may be obtained through minimizing the interatomic Hellmann-Feynman forces in DFT calculations. The considered phases include: i) the binary face-centered cubic (fcc) phases XxM1-x () at x=0.333, 0.5, 0.625,0.667,0.75, and 0.875 with X=Fe, Co, Ni, and Cr, and M= Al, C, Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, Hf, Mn, Mo, Nb, Ni, Re, Si, Ta, Ti, and W; the ternary fcc phases X1/3M1/3Z1/3 and X3/5M1/5Z1/5 (X=Fe, Co, Ni, and Cr, and M,Z=Al, C, Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, Hf, Mn, Mo, Nb, Ni, Re, Si, Ta, Ti, and W); the binary body-centered cubic (bcc) phases M1/3Z1/3; and the ternary bcc phases X1/3M1/3Z1/3. Note that the present DFT study does not include the ternary σ phase and other TCP phases due to its complicated solution structure and computational cost. 2.3 Dilute solution phases and antiferromagnetic states for Cr and Mn For the dilute solution phases, the present calculations include fcc-based phases NiNM where N=31, 107, and 255 with M= Al, C, Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, Hf, Mn, Mo, Nb, Ni, Re, Si, Ta, Ti, and W. For the magnetic structures, we treat Co, Fe, and Ni as ferromagnetic. Antiferromagnetic states for Cr and Mn are treated with supercell containing 2 Cr and 58 Mn atoms, respectively. 2.4 High-throughput quasiharmonic phonon calculations We automate the challenging high-throughput quasiharmonic calculations according to the procedure flowchart illustrated in Figure 1. We start with collecting structural information from the existing open internet database and discard the duplicates. Then the batch job scripts are 5 prepared that automate the job submissions, monitor numerical convergences both in the electronic step and ionic steps, and detect/correct runtime errors such as runtime over the specified limits, memory leakage, and prematurely aborted jobs. Additional convergence checks are made by examining the fitting errors of the calculated 0 K total energy vs volume data using analytical function, e.g. using the Morse function where Ec is the 0 K total energy per molar volume V and a, b, c, and d as fitting parameters. When convergence criteria are not met, we iterate the calculations by progressively modifying the input settings such as the method to estimate the Fermi energy, the scheme for block iteration, and the mixing scheme in the electronic step, etc. Based on the analytical expressions, we search for the approximate range for the equilibrium volumes to set up phonon calculations that also checks for convergence and the existence of imaginary phonon modes. Finally, we compute the thermodynamic properties while those structures with significant amount of imaginary phonon modes are ignored. 2.5 0 K static first-principles calculations We employed the projector-augmented wave (PAW) method together with the standard Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof functional as implemented in the Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP, version 5.3). For the pseudopotentials, we have chosen those recommended by VASP 5.2. For the quasiharmonic approximation, we perform calculations at 7 fixed volumes with a volume interval of 6% around the 0 K equilibrium volume. To account for the lattice distortion, both lattice shape and internal atomic positions were allowed to relax and the Methfessel-Paxton order 1 method was employed to determine the partial orbital occupancies. 6 The default energy cutoff was determined by setting the VASP keyword “PREC=A” during lattice relaxation, using the  centered k-meshes together with a sampling density of ~1000 points/atom. We found that the energy threshold of 10-6 eV is sufficient for the convergence of the electronic step, whereas it required an energy threshold of 10-8 eV for the relaxation of cell shape and atomic positions. After relaxation, the energy cutoff of 520 eV together with the tetrahedron method with Blöchl corrections were employed to obtain highly accurate 0 K static energies and electronic densities of states, using the  centered k-meshes with a sampling density of ~5000 points/atom. The criterion for convergence check using the Morse function in Eq. 1 was less than or equal to 10-3 eV per atom. 2.6 Supercell phonon calculations We calculate the phonon properties by building supercells based on the relaxed cell shape and atomic positions of the primitive unit cell according to the following matrix transformation Eq. 2 { A B C i1 i2 i3 i4 i5 i6 i7 i8 i9 } { a b c } where a, b, and c are the lattice vectors of the primitive unit cell, and A, B, and C represent the lattice vectors of the supercell. The values of ik (k=1-9) in Eq. 2 were determined by the criteria that the supercell contained ~128 atoms with a smallest possible aspect ratio. We compute the interatomic force constants using the VASP keyword “PREC=A” together with a 3 × 3 × 3  centered k-meshes. The thermodynamic properties were calculated using the YPHON package [24–27]. 7 2.7 Chemical potentials of individual phases The chemical potential of a compound or a solution phase α is the same as its molar Gibbs free energy or Gibbs free energy per atom . If we adopt the unit of energy per atom, the chemical potential of α phase under zero pressure is reduced to the Helmholtz free energy per atom F [29–34], Eq. 3 μα(T) ≈ Fα(T, V) = Ec α(V) + Fvib α (T, V) + Fel α(T, V) − TSconf α where T is temperature, V is the averaged atomic volume, and Ec α is the 0 K static energy per atom of α phase. In Eq 3, Fvib α is the vibrational free energy per atom of α phase, which can be obtained by either the Debye model [35–37] for rough estimates, or phonon calculations for more accurate results, and Fel α is the contribution of thermal electrons to the total free energy of α phase which we computed using Mermin’s finite temperature density functional theory . It should be noted that for superalloys, the electronic contributions can be significant at high temperatures; For instance, it was found that the electronic contribution could account more than 10% of the total heat capacity at 1000 K for Ni . The configurational mixing entropy Sconf α in Eq. 3 is set to zero for a completely ordered structure while for a disordered solution, we approximate it using the ideal entropy of mixing, i.e. Eq. 4 Sconf α = −kB ∑ xi αlnxi α n i where n represents the total number of components, and xi α is the atomic fraction of component i in a phase We first calculate all temperature-dependent thermodynamic properties at the seven fixed volumes based on Eq. 3 , and then use spline interpolation to obtain the thermodynamic properties as a function of volume. 8 3 Application of Database to Analyzing Phase Evolution Inconel 718 (IN718) is a nickel-chromium-iron based superalloy which exhibits excellent strength, creep resistance, and high-temperature corrosion/oxidation resistance and thus has wide applications such as gas turbine blades and nuclear reactors . Due to its relatively good weldability, it has recently been explored for AM . The typical mass compositions of Al, Ti, Cu, Si, C, B, S, and P) . In its solid state, IN718 alloy is generally a multiphase mixture of FCC (face centered cubic) solid solution gamma (γ) matrix with a number of precipitated phases, including γ ́(L12), γʺ (D022), δ (D0a), carbides etc with γ ́(Ni3(Al,Ti)) and γʺ (Ni3Nb) acting as the major strengthening phases. Long-time exposure of the alloy to high temperature leads to the transformation of the metastable γʺ to the stable δ phase with the D0a structure and precipitation of -Cr . The progressive formation of carbides at grain boundaries may result in a gradual transition in the fracture mode of the alloy from trans-granular to inter-granular . 3.1 EDS Data: Sample preparation and TEM/EDS measurements The specimens came from prior research with the experimental procedures described in the work of Promoppatum et al. . The experiments were conducted with an EOS M280 powder- bed fusion system with the process parameters shown in Table 1. Inconel 718 powder with an average powder size of 32.2 μm was supplied by EOS. The deposited part was removed from the build plate by electrical discharge machining (EDM) and sliced. The specimens were then hot 9 mounted in epoxy resin, ground through a sequence of grit papers, and sequentially polished utilizing a 3-micron diamond suspension, a 1-micron diamond suspension, and a colloidal silica on a Struers Pedomax-2. The specimens were rinsed in alcohol and deionized water and examined using EDS in the as-polished condition. The transmission electron microscope (TEM) samples were prepared using an FEI Helios 660 focused ion beam (FIB) system. A thick protective amorphous carbon layer was deposited over the region of interest, and Ga+ ions (30kV then stepped down to 1kV to avoid ion beam damage to the sample surface) were used in the FIB to thin the samples to electron transparency for TEM imaging. The specimens were imaged in TEM directly after FIB sample preparation. Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) was performed at 200 kV in a FEI Talos F200X S/TEM, and EDS elemental maps of the sample surface were collected by using a SuperX EDS system under STEM mode with four detectors surrounding the sample. All the STEM images were captured by using a high angle annular dark field (HAADF) detector (Fischione) for Z- contrast imaging. The EDS elemental mapping in STEM mode was performed at 200 kV with acquisition times up to 10 minutes. 3.2 Elemental compositional data from EDS map The measurements were made at four selected positions at the specimen with resolutions at the scales of 1 m, 500 nm, 200 nm, and 40 nm, and the four HAADF images are provided in coarse-columnar structures observed in the previous works [46–48] with the internal primary dendritic arms growing parallel to the deposition direction or Z-orientation . For each 10 measurement, the elemental distribution data were collected for the 9 element C, Al, Co, Cr, Fe, Mo, Nb, Ni, and Ti, digitalized with image of 512512 pixels. Figure 3 exemplifies the EDS map for the measurement at 200 nm scale (the EDS maps for the measurements at 1 m, 500 nm, and 40 scales were given in Figure S1, Figure S2, and Figure S3 of the supporting materials, respectively). To extract the elemental compositional distribution data, the pixel values of an EDS map are normalized to the overall composition of IN718 with the following equation: Eq. 5 Ci(x, y) = wi Mi ⁄ ∑ wj Mj ⁄ Nel j=1 NXNYpixeli(x,y) ∑ pixeli(x,y) NX,NY x=1,y=1 where Ci(x, y) is the atomic composition for element i at location (x,y) on the EDS map, NX = 512 and NY = 512 represent the EDS image size in pixel, pixeli(x, y) is the pixel value at (x,y), Mi is the atomic mass, and wi is the overall weight percentage composition of IN718: Al:0.52, C:0.021 Co:0.11, Cr:19.06, Fe:18.15, Mo:3.04, Ti:0.93, Nb:5.08, Ni 53.0 . 3.3 Determining phase distributions using Dantzig simplex optimization algorithm To predict the spatial distributions of phases utilizing a combination of the DFT-derived thermochemical database and the EDS compositional data, we compare the chemical potential (molar Gibbs energy) of an individual phase with the so-called convex hull constructed based on the chemical potentials of all phases. We then calculate the phase fractions at a given temperature and composition using the Dantzig simplex optimization algorithm by performing a constrained minimization of the following objective function: Eq. 6 μ(T, x, y) = ∑ fα(T,x, y)μα(T) m α=1 11 where T is temperature, μα is the chemical potential of phase a, m is the number of phases, and fα is the phase fraction of α at the position (x, y). We minimize the local chemical potential μ(T) with respect to fα subject to the following conditions: Eq. 7 Ci(T, x, y) = ∑ fα(T, x, y)xi α m α=1 Eq. 8 ∑ fα(T,x, y) = 1 m α=1 where xi α is the elemental composition of phase α. The set of fα(T, x, y) that minimizes the local μ(T, x, y) represents the spatial distributions of phases at a given temperature T. The overall phase fraction (f̅α) of a phase at a given temperature can be calculated as: Eq. 9 f̅α(T) = 1 NXNY ∑ fα(T, x, y) NX,NY x=1,y=1 The above procedure has been implemented in Python 3 using the Anaconda numerical software distribution, which can directly read pixel values from graphical TEM elemental distribution maps. 3.4 Treatment of grain boundary effects While the intragranular plate-shaped coherent γ” and spherical γ’ precipitates are beneficial to the mechanical properties of IN718 , other precipitates are detrimental. For example, the brittle Laves phase that appears between dendrites from solute segregation [53–56] can negatively affect the high-temperature fatigue behavior of the AM-fabricated IN718 sample . The semi-coherent δ phase particles that also appear preferentially between dendrites and at grain boundaries may act as possible crack initiation sites during high-temperature creep . The transformation of the intragranular γ” into the thermodynamically more stable δ reduces the 12 yield strength of IN718 . To examine the effect due to this transformation, we consider two scenarios: i) with or ii) without imposing a grain boundary constraint. The constraint is only applied to the δ, η, C14, Fe7Mo6, M23C, M6C, AlNb2, AlNi2, and NbFe2 phases by confining them at grain boundaries through imposing chemical potential penalty at the locations away from the grain boundaries. The grain boundaries are located by scanning through the HAADF images for the sharp changes in the pixel values. The grain boundary distributions for the measurement at 200 nm scale are illustrated in Figure 4. 4 DFT-derived thermodynamics and phase evolution of AM-fabricated IN718 We predicted the phase fractions and their temperature dependence for the 1 m, 500 nm, 200 nm, and 40 nm EDS results using the DFT-derived database and they show similar results in terms of overall phase fraction as a function of temperature. In the following, we will mainly discuss the predicted results based on the 200 nm EDS data. It is predicted that the major phases (with phase fractions >1%) in the AM-fabricated IN718 are , ’, ”, , α-Cr, and C14 phases and the L10-FeNi and η-Ni3Ti phases. In principle, the γ phase in IN718 is a solid solution of Ni with 9 alloying elements. However, it is currently not realistic to deal with a 10-component random solid solution using DFT. We approximate the γ phase as a mechanical mixture of binary and ternary solutions through the special quasi-random structure (SQS) model. In particular, we obtain the temperature dependence of the γ phase through the phase fractions of the SQS structures of FeNi2, CrNi2, FeNi, FeNi3, Fe3Ni5, CrFeNi, FeMoNi3, and CrMoNi3 as listed in Table 3 and Table 4. 13 4.1 Predicted phase evolution The list of phases formed up to 1500 K predicted from the 200 nm EDS compositional data are collected in Table 2 while the temperature dependencies of the major phases (with phase fractions higher than 1%) are plotted in Figure 5(a). The temperature dependence of phase stabilities can be roughly grouped into three temperature ranges. Ordered phases are dominant below 680 K whereas the disordered γ phase is dominant at temperature greater than 1140 K with the Order-disordering phase transition temperature ranging 680 to 1140 K. The predicted phase fractions at temperature 600, 800, 1000, 1200, and 1400 K are collected in Table 3. For comparison, we also performed thermodynamic calculations (courtesy of Carpenter Inc.) using Thermo-Calc software and the commercial TCNI9 database . In TCNI9, the fcc and L12 structures are grouped together as the FCC-L12 phase, and it does not include the L10- FeNi phase. For the purpose of comparison with TCNI9, the DFT predicted phase fractions for the ’-FeNi3, ’-AlNi3, and L10-FeNi phases are also combined in Figure 5(a). Both DFT and TCNI9 show two characteristic transition temperatures at ~680 K and ~1310 K. However, according to DFT database, the 680 K transition is due to the complete disordering of L10-FeNi and partially disordering of ’-FeNi3 whereas according to TCNI9 it is due to a transition from FCC-L12#3 phase to FCC-L12#1 phase. The 1310 K transition from the DFT database describes the complete dissolution of α-Cr into the  matrix while according to TCNI9 it is due to the phase transition into 100%  phase. The estimated difference in phase fractions of the γ phase predicted from DFT and TCNI9 databases in the temperature range of 680-1310 K is ~20%. The enthalpy of IN718 alloy as a function of temperature from the DFT database and the TCNI9 database is compared in Figure 6 where we also included the experimental data from Hosaeus et al. and recommended data by Mills . It showed that the enthalpy data from 14 DFT agree much better with the experimental data from Hosaeus et al. and Mills than those from TCNI9. The entropy as a function of temperature from DFT and TCNI9 databases is presented in contributions due to lattice+electronic entropy (S̅vib+el) and configurational entropy (S̅conf) [29– 34] as follows: α (T, α) + ∑ f̅αSconf α (T) The sudden changes in entropy as a function of temperature from the DFT curve are either associated with order-disorder transitions, e.g. those around 680 K and 1310 K, or due to the fact that the S̅conf of the  solution phase is approximated as a linear mixture of the binary and ternary SQS structures at discrete compositions. At 684 K, the entropy from DFT coincides with that from the TCNI9 database. However, above 684 K, the entropy from the TCNI9 database is substantially higher than that from the DFT database while below 684 K, the entropy from the TCNI9 database is slightly lower than that from the DFT database. This discrepancy seems to be mostly due to the much larger entropy change associated with the order-disorder transition around 684 K from the TCNI9 database than the DFT database. Similar to the entropy calculation, we computed the heat capacity of IN718 by considering lattice and electronic contributions (C̅P,vib+el , labeled as “DFT, w/o Cconf ” in Figure 8) and configurational contribution (Cconf): where Cconf can be obtained from S̅conf given in Eq. 10: 15 Eq. 12 Cconf(T) = T dS̅conf(T) dT However, since the  phase was treated as a linear mixture of the binary and ternary SQS structures at discrete compositions, which may result in discontinuous changes in entropy, we cannot directly use Eq. 12 to calculate Cconf. Instead, we employ the following two schemes to calculate Cconf. The scheme#1 (labeled as “DFT, with linear Cconf” in Figure 8) imposes a linear constraint between S̅conf and temperature: Eq. 13 S̅conf(T) ≅ aT So that Eq. 14Cconf(T) = aT In scheme#2 (labeled as “DFT, with non-linear Cconf” in Figure 8), we calculated Cconf as an average through Eq. 15 Cconf(T) = T N ∑ S̅conf(T+n∆T)−S̅conf(T−n∆T) 2n∆T N n=1 where ∆T = 10 K and N have been chosen to be equal to or less than 20, whenever T − N∆T ≥ 0 and T + N∆T ≤ 1600. The DFT calculated heat capacities for IN718 are compared with those using the TCNI9 database in Figure 8 together with measured data for IN718 from Hosaeus et al. , Basak et al. , Brooks et al. , and recommended data for IN718 by Mills . Since no experimental data below room temperature is available for IN718, the measured data for Alloy-718 by Lee et al. is used in Figure 8 for reference. It is seen that the DFT data obtained by scheme#1 agree well with the experimental data below 800 K, while those obtained by scheme#2 show several peaks 16 due to order-disorder transitions. Also, the calculated heat capacity by TCNI9 for IN718 showed two much higher peaks than the experimental data in the temperature range between 400 and 600 K. 4.2 Ordered phases at low temperature and phase stabilities of L10-FeNi, ’-Ni3Fe, and -MoNi3 phases The present DFT calculations for IN718 show that the main ordered phases are L10-FeNi (4%). The spatial distributions of L10-FeNi, ’-Ni3Fe, α-Cr, and -NbNi3 phases at 600 K are displayed in Figure 9. The Fe-Ni binary phase diagram of Yang et al. ) was included in et al. , which largely validates our DFT predictions. It should be pointed out that the stabilities of the L10-FeNi and ’-Ni3Fe phases were less noted in existing literature on IN718. L10-FeNi, named tetrataenite in mineralogy, is a commonly accessible mineral formed naturally in all slow-cooled meteorites . It has a tetragonal structure with lattice parameters a = 2.533 Å and c = 3.582 Å, which are almost identical to the c/a ratio of 1.414 to that of an fcc structure when a corresponding tetragonal unit cell is chosen. Laboratory synthesis of bulk L10-FeNi remains challenging due to the low atomic diffusion coefficients of Fe and Ni near the order-disorder transition temperature of ~600 K . The stability of L10-FeNi had been an open question (see Swartzendruber et al. and Yang et al. and references therein) until recently. For example, the earlier Fe-Ni binary phase diagram showed that the L10-FeNi phase was metastable while the ’-Ni3Fe phase was stable up to 790 K. However, more recent studies demonstrate that L10- 17 FeNi phase is stable below 600 K [79–82], being in agreement with our DFT prediction. In contrast, TCNI9 does not include the L10-FeNi phase. Therefore, TCNI9 predicted a decomposition into the BCC-B2#2” and FCC-L12#3 phases below 600 K at the FeNi composition. In TCNI9 database, the bcc and B2 structures have been grouped together as BCC-B2 phase because they are treated using the same sublattice model. In Figure 5(a), the “BCC-B2#1” phase by TCNI9 is mainly composed of Cr while the “BCC-B2#2” phase by TCNI9 mainly consists of Fe. The present DFT database showed that the  phase is a combination of MoNi3 in D0a structure (labeled as -MoNi3 in the present work) and -NbNi3. The phase fraction of - MoNi3 started to decrease rapidly as temperature increases, from 6% at 700 K to less than 0.5% at 860 K. For comparison, the δ phase was labeled as “NI3TA-D0A” in the TCNI9 database, as shown in Figure 5(a). The TCNI9 database showed roughly the same phase fraction with decreasing  phase from 700 K to 860 K. However, the DFT database predicted that the composition of the  is Ni with mostly Nb and some Mo whereas according to the TCNI9 the  phase is primarily Ni and Nb with minor Ti. The spatial distributions of the γ’, bcc-Cr (α-Cr), and δ phases and the overall phase distributions (the  phase is plotted in cyan color) at 800 K from the DFT databases are shown in decreases from 27% at 670 K to 14% at 680 K and to zero at 870 K. In fact, the absence of ’- Ni3Fe phase at 870 K is in excellent agreement with the Fe-Ni binary phase diagram which indicated that the ’-Ni3Fe phase can be stable up to 790 K. According to our DFT database, the disordered  phase at the temperature of 680 – 1140 K is made of disordered FeNi, FeNi2, FeNi3, and Fe3Ni5. 18 Different from the TCNI9 database, the DFT results showed that the ’-AlNi3 and -NbNi3 phases are stable in IN718 throughout the entire temperature range of 0-1500 K. However, the present DFT calculations fail to reproduce the solvus temperature ~1273 K of -NbNi3 from experiment ; -NbNi3 is a stable phase for all temperatures below it melting temperature . This might be due to the neglect of the anharmonic contributions to the vibrational free energy at high temperature in our DFT and lattice dynamic calculations, or the relatively limited number of compositions considered in the analysis of solution phases containing Nb. The spatial distribution of the -NbNi3 phase, the α-Cr phase, and their overall phase distributions at 1200 K, and the Cr6Fe6Ni6 SQS phase, the -NbNi3 phase, the α-Cr phase, and their overall distributions at 1400 K are marked in Figure 11. The calculations show that the disordered  phase mainly consists of disordered FeNi2, CrNi2, CrFeNi, FeMoNi3, and CrMoNi3. It was found that the ternary random structures are important in describing the disordered  phase at high temperatures. For example, the Cr6Fe6Ni6 SQS structure contributes 42% of the disordered  phase at 1400 K. At ~1120 K, the amount of -Cr phase starts to decrease significantly as temperature increases due to the increase of the Cr-contained ternary solutions. The results are in excellent agreement with the observation by Jia and Gu on AM-fabricated IN718 based on their successive morphological changes showing that the γ phase is mainly composed of Ni–Cr–Fe. We also showed that the -Cr vanishes at ~1310 K which is substantially higher than 890 K according to the TCNI9 database. Our results agree with the T-T-T diagram by Oradei-Basile and Radavich (Figure 5(d)) which indicates that the -Cr phase can be stable up to 1110 K. It is interesting to notice that our DFT-predicted disappearance temperature of ~1310 K for -Cr is the same 19 temperature at which the -NbNi3 phase is predicted to vanish by the TCNI9 database. Experimentally, Bi et al. found that α-Cr always precipitated in the vicinity of δ phase. Wlodek and Filed observed that the precipitation of -Cr and other minor phases in alloy 718 are driven by the almost complete rejection of Cr and Mo from the matrix, leading to the growth of  phase. 4.3 Predicted phase evolution by DFT calculations with grain boundary constraint The predicted phase fractions for the individual phase are collected in Table 4 by artificially imposing preferred precipitation of certain phases at grain boundaries. The stabilities of the major phases (with phase fractions higher than 1%) as a function of temperature are summarized in temperature are quite similar to those calculated without considering grain boundary constraint discussed in the previous section. The phase stabilities can also be roughly grouped into the same three temperature stages: the ordered phases below ~600 K, the order-disordering phase transition temperature range between 800 – 1000 K; and the disordered  phase above 1200 K. The spatial distribution of the ”-NbNi3 phase, the α-Cr phase, and the overall morphology at 1200 K, along with the -NiFeCr, the ”-NbNi3 phase, the α-Cr phase, and the overall morphology at 1400 K are plotted in Figure 12. The ordered phases at 600 K mainly consist of the L10-FeNi (24%), ’-Ni3Fe and -MoNi3 (1%). Due to the imposition of the grain boundary constraint, the  phases have been mostly replaced by the ” phase away from grain boundaries. In the temperature range between 800 – 1000 K, the ordered L10 phase is not present, and the amount of the ’-Ni3Fe phase decreases significantly. The disordered  phase is mainly a mixture of disordered FeNi, FeNi2, and FeNi3. 20 When the temperature goes above 1200 K, the amount of -Cr starts to decrease significantly. The disordered  phase at 1400 K is mainly made of FeNi2, CrNi2, CrFeNi, and CrMoNi3, with fractions of 12%, 14%, 42%, and 7%, respectively. 5 Conclusions A comprehensive thermochemical database for multi-component systems involving 26 elements, Ni, Fe, Co, Al, B, C, Cr, Cu, Hf, La, Mn, Mo, N, Nb, O, P, Re, Ru, S, Si, Ta, Ti, V, W, Y, and Zr was developed by a combination of high-throughput 0K DFT calculations and finite temperature lattice dynamics and electron statistics. In particular, the temperature dependencies of chemical potentials (molar Gibbs free energies) of more than 3000 individual phases are computed using the quaisiharmonic phonon approach for the lattice contribution and the Mermin statistics for the thermal electronic contribution. In combination with TEM-EDS measurements of local compositional distributions of elements, local phase distributions as well as their temperature dependencies can be obtained from the DFT-derived database, which can be extremely useful information for understanding and controlling the mechanical properties of AM-fabricated superalloys. As an example of application, it is examined to determining the appearance of metastable and stable phases and their spatial distributions in additively manufacturing (AM) fabricated IN718 alloys. In addition to AM-fabricated IN718, this database is directly applicable to many practical alloy systems, e.g. other Ni- and Co-based superalloy systems, such as Hastelloy, Inconel, Waspaloy, Rene alloys, Haynes alloys, Incoloy, MP98T, TMS alloys, and CMSX etc. Acknowledgement: Information within this manuscript is based upon research supported through the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency’s (DARPA’s) Open Manufacturing Program. 21 Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of DARPA (Yi Wang, McNamara, Lia, Martukanitz, and Chen). First-principles calculations were mainly carried out on the resources of NERSC supported by the DOE Office of Science under contract no. DE-AC02-05CH11231 and partially on the resources of Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE) supported by NSF with Grant No. ACI-1053575 (Yi Wang, Shang, Liu, and Chen). This work was partially supported by the Office of Naval Research (ONR) via contract No. N00014-17-1-2567, the U. S. Department of Energy (DOE) via award Nos. DE-FE0031553 and DE-EE0008456, and the National Science Foundation of the United States through CMMI-1825538 (Yi Wang, Shang, and Liu). The authors would like to express our great appreciation to Carpenter Technology Corporation for providing some of the thermodynamic calculations. Author Contributions: Yi Wang initiated the manuscript, performed first-principles calculation, and participated EDS measurements and result analysis; Frederick Lia prepared the IN718 sample and participated EDS measurement; Ke Wang was in charge of EDS measurements; Kevin McNamara participated EDS measurements and data collections; Yanzhou Ji and Xiaoyu Chong participated in crystal structure data and literature collections; Shun-Li Shang performed initial CALPHAD calculations; Zi-Kui Liu revised the manuscript; Richard P. Martukanitz initiated EDS measurements and revised the manuscript; and Long-Qing Chen was in charge of the overall quality of the work and comprehensively revised the manuscript. 22