Reaching room temperature superconductivity by optimizing doping in LaH10? José A. Flores-Livas,1, 2 Tianchun Wang,3 Takuya Nomoto,3 Takashi Koretsune,4 Yanming Ma,5, 6 Ryotaro Arita,3, 2 and Mikhail Eremets7 1Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Roma La Sapienza, Piazzale Aldo Moro 5, I-00185 Roma, Italy 2RIKEN Center for Emergent Matter Science, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, 351-0198, Japan 3Department of Applied Physics, University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan 4Department of Physics, Tohoku University, Miyagi 980-8578, Japan 5State Key Laboratory of Superhard Materials, College of Physics, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, China 6International Center of Future Science, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, China 7Max-Planck Institute for Chemistry, Hahn-Meitner-Weg 1 55128 Mainz, Germany (Dated: October 14, 2020) Intuitively, doping represents one of the most promising avenues for optimization of best prospect superconductors (SC) such as conventional high-pressure SCs with record critical temperatures. However, doping at high pressure (HP) is very challenging, and there is not a proved route to achieve it in a controlled fashion. Aided by computing simulations, we show that it may be plausible to start by alloying primary materials and subsequently incorporate high ratios of hydrogen at moderates pressures (≈1.5 Mbar). Our theoretical results evidence the possibility to tune the electronic structure of LaH10, increase the density of states at the Fermi level by doping of various elements and hence change their superconducting properties. We found aluminium to increase the occupation at the Fermi level by more than 30 %. Incorporation of other elements such as Si, Ge, H, Ir, Ca, and others with a varying percentage also play in favour to tune the electronic structure. More importantly, these predictions lie in experimentally attainable doping levels. Also, for the first time, we shed light on how the formation of defects and vacancies influence on the electronic structure of a HP-hydride superconductor. The concepts presented in this work can be extended to other high-pressure, hydrogen-based superconductors such as H3S. Arguably, doping is one of the promising paths to reach room-temperature superconductivity, a Holy grail of condensed matter physics. With the advent of hydrides as high-temperature su- perconductors, particular emphasis has been put in studying systematically binaries and ternaries to find ma- terials higher transition temperatures [1–3]. While there are particular predictions that suggest that some bina- ries such as CaH6 , with predicted transition tem- perature (Tc) of 230 K or ternaries as the electron-doped Li2MgH16 that may show a Tc well above 300 K, their complicated stoichiometry, pressure (> 2.5 Mbar), or other factors make these systems elusive to synthe- sis . An alternative solution to reach the complex synthesis and that has been overlooked experimentally is doping. It is well known that by introducing sufficient electron- or hole-donating impurities, one can transform semicon- ducting systems into metallic phases. This strategy has been successfully demonstrated by inducing supercon- ductivity in several semiconductors (see Ref. for a re- cent review). For instance, doping in carbon allotropes are predicted to be superconductors at zero pressure [10– 12]. Recent predictions points the importance on hy- drogenic bands to enhance Tc in known superconductors such as MgB2 . Similarly, the idea of doping under pressure has been used to predict that insulating systems such as H2O and polyethylene will transform into metallic phases and display BCS superconductivity. Other works have focus on the ternary H-S-C phase, doping , and found the potential to increase Tc for the parental phase (H3S). While these theoretical premises are technically sound, experimentally there is no precise route to reach such doping levels in a controlled way that help to corroborate these predictions . In this work, we screen for the best elements that can dope LaH10, currently the best superconductor with an extraordinarily high-Tc of 250 K. The ensemble of results issued of first principles shows that it is possible to tune the electronic properties of LaH10 and induce a sizable change in the electronic occupation at Fermi level. The interplay between structure and dopant (electronic be- haviour) is discussed, and essential hints are proposed. Finally, to connect our predictions with experimentation, in this first research article we propose a simple, yet clear idea that stands an excellent chance to be generalized in the case of hydrides materials and other materials subject of pressure studies. Based on the conclusions found by Errea et al. and in Ref. . We propose the following series of state- ments as recipe guidance for our study. To maximize Tc in hydrides or other light-mass superconductors under pressure, • It is desirable to opt for highly symmetric cages of hydrogen. • To have a compact (dense) basis of lanthanum po- sitions (or guest element) that minimize enthalpy. • The electronic density of state should ideally show arXiv:2010.06446v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 13 Oct 2020 2 a Van Hove singularity (VHS) pinning at or nearby the Fermi level. • The heat of formation of solid or liquid metal alloy for the guest atoms should be favourable, i.e. the dopant atom should be miscible in the guest matrix, i.e. X atom miscible to La, in the case of LaH10. Finding the best element that holds the above criteria is something that can be accessed using state-of-the-art first principles, in return, there is a large computational over- head (see details in Ref. ). Still, it costs can be min- imized using smart high-throughput with autonomous computing tools (see details in Ref. , on where sim- ilar tools have been deployed). Fig. 1 shows three periodic charts, each for the three dopings (12.5 %, 3.70 % and 1.56 %) and the el- ements considered as substitution on La-matrix. El- ements coloured in dark-grey were not considered in this study, due to its reduced availability or complex physics, most of the 4f-electron valence were excluded except for lutetium. Interestingly, with 12.5 %, there ex- ist only three elements (colored in red) that match per- fectly in the H-cages and leaves them intact, thus pre- serving a high symmetric pattern. In yellow, all the 15 elements that induce distortions in the hydrogen cages, for comparison these are sizable distortions as the ones in LaH10 (monoclinic C2 phase) but preserve a guest- host clathrate chemistry. Coloured in light-blue, 35 ele- ments, and dark-blue 17 elements, that play in favour of phase separation. The analysis based on bonding, XRD patterns and nearest-neighbours, elucidate two levels of phase separation: the first one favours (LaHx + XHx) and the second one a ternary phase separation, (LaHx + XHx) and H2 units detached. Details of the structures for these classifications (colour code in Fig. 1) are included in the Supplemental Materials (SM). For the entire set of elements, we did explore a higher doping percentage, 25 %. However, we notice that the physics of the La-H10 system change enormously. In- deed, for many elements, new crystalline structures are found after a full geometry optimization. At higher dop- ing, i.e. 1 atom every 4 La, enthalpy plays in favour of other more stable structures; making the study of the 25 % to widely deviate from our initial assumptions. To be sure of having meaningful results at such a large per- centage, it would be necessary to calculate the formation enthalpy, which will be cumbersome and computation- ally intractable with such vast channels of decomposi- tion. Based on the structural patterns and results from the high-throughput, we claim that our results are valid for small doping percentage, approximately below 12%, where the enthalpy of the parental phase dominates. For 3.70% doping, it is unusual to find only two ele- ments (coloured in red) Hf and Lu that after a full opti- mization (starting with breaking symmetry) relaxed back to the lock position, preserving the highly symmetrical Periodic charts showing the elements explored as doping-substitution in LaH10. The pressure is 150 GPa for the entire study. For each element, the color code gives the behavior when substituted (see SM for details). At a high percentage, most of the elements destabilized the clathrate. At low doping, many elements preserve the H-cages, and some of them show unusual electronic behavior. On dashed-squares are elements for which DOS is plotted in Fig. 2. pattern of H-cages. In yellow, the elements mostly group I and II, halogen and noble gases that retain symmetric- centres (of fcc La basis) but induce deformation of the hydrogenic cages. In light blue, transition metals and block-p elements for which the local environment of the dopant produces XHx phase (dopant atom off-centred of the fcc basis). Based on the results of 3.70 %, as input for 1.56 %, we optimized the volume only for particular cases. Coloured in red all the elements considered at the centre of cages with highly symmetric hydrogenic cages (no breaking symmetry). Form the electronic perspective; ideally, one should look for a dopant that increases the density of states at 3 the Fermi level. Fig. 2 shows the corresponding density of states (DOS) for selected dopants. At 12.5% doping, the most compelling cases are shown with a solid-line (Ca, Hf and He) and compared to the undoped case of LaH10. The shape of the DOS is preserved for these cases, Hf shifts in the opposite direction the VHS and Ca, inter- estingly, raises the VHS near the Fermi level. At 3.70% doping, Hf and Lu are the only elements that appear to keep a highly symmetric structure. Their DOS however seems to play detrimental to the formation of the VHS. The rest of the elements completely destroys the VHS. For the case of 1.5% doping, the atoms that show a rele- vant DOS are: Ba, Ca, Y, and Hf. However, it is notice- able that the small volume effect of the dopant and the charge transfer within the H-cage and the dopant down- turns the VHS. It is a robust result to confirm that even low dopings, 3.7%, induce sizable changes on the shape near the Fermi level of the LaH10 matrix. For the pres- sure considered in this study (150 GPa) even at the dilute limit ∼1.5% doping, most of the elements produce a van- ish of the electronic singularity. Recently, Akashi has proposed a mechanism for peaking of the density of states in three-dimensional crystals and contrasted for the case of H3S under pressure. Indeed singularities or divergences at DOS are not generally present in the three- dimensional case. What is more appealing, as found by Akashi in H3S, and confirmed in this work for LaH10 is the negligible pressure dependence of the VHS (see SM). The range of stability for the VHS lies on a broad scale, in H3S is from 120 GPa to 240 GPa. In the case of LaH10, it starts from 110 GPa and extends beyond 300 GPa. This evidence of the unique electronic features of hydrides and challenges researchers to find other materials, for which the singularity can be stabilized at much low pressure. It is clear that the crystalline structure of LaH10 and its electronic features are quite unique, and there is very little marge to improve by doping. We can rule out that the following elements, Pt, Ga, Au, B, N, and C, suggested by Grockowiak et al. in a recent work form a higher-order hydride. These elements are likely not forming any ordered structure nor enhancing the su- perconducting properties of LaH10, at least not in the doping, pressure and temperature range studied in this work. Moreover, our results are in line with recent evidence by Seho et al. , that highlight the importance of the metal framework of La atoms poses excess electrons at interstitial regions. Remarkably, the charge transfer from La to H atoms is mostly driven by the electride property of the La framework, where the interaction between La atoms and H cages induces a delocalization of La-5p semi core states to hybridize with H-1s state. Thus the bond- ing nature between La atoms and H cages is characterized as a mixture of ionic and covalent. Based on our results, we hypothesize that hydrides when successfully synthe- sized at high pressure, are indeed very special, and form Electronic density of states near the Fermi level for different doping cases (fully optimized geometry). The pressure is 150 GPa for the entire study. In solid lines inter- esting dopants are shown and lighter-dashed colors cases of less importance. For reference, the DOS of LaH10 is shown in black-line (grey area) calculated in the same supercell. most of them quasi-perfect crystals. We can confirm that in LaH10, for instance, even a low concentration defect (in this case a vacancy, 1 atom missing every 700) breaks the VHS, changing the superconductor properties dras- tically, as seen in the top panel in Fig. 3. We support our claims with the recent evidences by Mikov et al. in D3S that shows that sizeable Tc’s can be measured by performing different annealing procedures . Simi- larly, in LaH10, two different onset exist, above 260 K 4 and close to 250 K with a dome-shape like behaviour un- der pressure . Presumably, in other systems such as yttrium hydride or in thorium hydride , a de- viation on the measured values of Tc seem to correlate more with the annealing procedure and less with the the H-content, for a given stoichiometry. In the present study, we cannot rule out the possi- bilities that a complete quantum treatment of nuclear positions (see the work of Errea et al. ) symmetrize for some of the dopants that otherwise distort at the classical level the H-cages. To verify this, however, is computationally not tractable in the case of simulating dopants through large supercells (hundreds of atoms per primitive cell). To rule any potential conflict in our pre- dictions, arising from the lack of full nuclear quantum treatment, we cross-check our results by imposing the symmetric structure, relaxing the volume and mapped the DOS for all dopants and different percentages. The bottom panel in Fig. 3 shows, for best elements, the ex- pected DOS while preserving a high symmetric pattern. Interestingly, Al, Si, Ir and H, not only shift the VHS, but also populate electrons at the Fermi level substantially. The Bader analysis gives the following ionic charges, for the undoped-LaH10 at 150 GPa is La1.29+, H0.10− WP−1, H0.05− WP−2. For doped cases (assuming quan- tum effects symmetrize the Fm3m phases for low dop- ing): [La1.30+, H0.22− WP−1, H0.05− WP−2, Al3+], [La1.28+, H0.15− WP−1, H0.05− WP−2, Si1.22+], and [La1.22+, H0.05− WP−1, H0.07− WP−2, Ir0.4+]. The number of electrons at the Fermi level correlates with the excess electrons supplied by the dopant. In- terestingly, adding one hydrogen has a positive impact on the electronic structure, for 1.5% the ionic charge is [La1.27+, H0.05− WP−1, H0.07− WP−2, H0.23− center]. However, it should be take with precaution this result; the excess of hydrogen is placed in the centre of the H-cage, position that seems odd for a stable structure. Finding a suitable position (interstitial or in the H32 framework) will have a benefi- cial impact by shift the VHS and populating the Fermi level by adding electrons. Theoretically, incorporating the right dopants can have significant implications in the electronic properties of LaH10. The remaining question is, how do we incorpo- rate these, in a controlled way, without destroying the high symmetry and stoichiometric phase. We propose to start by first, synthesizing the alloy, as for example the La0.9Al0.1 that at low doping limit should follow the ordered fcc of La. Then follow the steps of Drozdov et al. : applied pressure and incorporate high hydrogen rations and eventually laser-heating followed by cycles of thermal annealing to induce crystallization. Recently 813 binary alloys were studied and classified using Miedemas theory . Metallic La is known to be miscible with 15 elements, Al, Tc, Os, Ru, Co, Ir, Rh, N, Pt, Pd, Au, Ag, Cu, Hg, Cd and Zn. The rest of the elements are a practically uncharted territory gle vacancy in the La-site, for three different concentrations. Even 1 atom missing every 704 breaks the VHS. Bottom: DOS of the best dopants (assuming that nuclear quantum effects holds highly symmetric H-cages) found in this work. In solid- line (with grey area) the DOS of LaH10 for a single unit. Al, Si, Ir and H, donate the right amount of electrons to the ma- trix; shifting the VHS and increasing the number of electrons at the Fermi level substantially. and are not knowing to alloy with La. Another potential approach to form alloying is to use the valence skipping nature of some elements; as it was recently found in GeTe the superconductor-semiconductor-superconductor tran- sition controlled by finely-tuned In doping at high pres- sure . In conclusion, this work provides a thorough study of doping and structural stability in LaH10 for a wide vari- ety of elements (see SM for details). The best elements to tune the electronic structure in LaH10 at 150 GPa are Al, Si, Ge, Ir, Mg, Ca, Sr, and Ba at 12.5%. Mn, N, Br, Ru and H at 3.7%. For lower concentrations, the incor- poration of dopants although plays in favour of enthalpy stability, it downturns the stability of the Van Hove sin- gularity. For the first time, we shed some light on forma- tion of charge defects and vacancies at high pressure. In this work we propose the idea that hydrides when suc- cessfully synthesized at HP, these can only be formed in almost perfect crystals (free defect) and in perfect 5 stoichiometries. Assuming a BCS phonon-mediated su- perconductor, where Tc is proportional to ωexp(−1/λ), where ω represents the frequency of the phonon mode mediating the electron pairing, and λ is the electron- phonon dimensionless parameter representing the pair- ing strength. Because the electron-phonon coupling is proportional to the DOS at the Fermi level, a peaked DOS is to be a crucial factor in enhancing Tc . Given the enhanced electronic structure, increased occupation of electrons at the Fermi level by >30 % with Al, and the ratio of masses, these doping represent a reliable route to further increase Tc in LaH10 by tens of Kelvins. However, the current challenge on size supercell, stop of us from performing precise electron-phonon calculations, includ- ing anharmonic effects of the doped phases. Instead, we estimated the value of the Tc at higher pressure (where anharmonic effects become less critical) at 300 GPa, for the doped and the pure phase. We found that up to a 15 % increase in Tc is expected for the Al-doped phase at the harmonic level. Experimentally, to verify our predic- tions, the road to produce these phases is proposed here. First alloying the guest atom. The enthalpy formation of these phases is guaranteed only at low doping concentra- tions (ideally between 15 % to 3.7 %). Second to form an alloy-hydride and subsequently pressurize it, for which standard routes have been mastered and are routinely used in high-pressure experiments. More importantly, the concepts presented in this work can be extended to other high-pressure, hydrogen-based superconductors such as H3S. Arguably, doping is one of the promising paths to reach room-temperature super-conductivity, a Holy grail of condensed matter physics.