1 Revealing the internal luminescence quantum efficiency of perovskite films via accurate quantification of photon recycling Paul Fassl1,2,5*, Vincent Lami5, Felix J. Berger4, Lukas M. Falk5, Jana Zaumseil4, Bryce S. Richards1,2, Ian A. Howard1,2, Yana Vaynzof3,5, Ulrich W. Paetzold1,2* 1Institute of Microstructure Technology (IMT), Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany 2Light Technology Institute (LTI), Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany 3Integrated Center for Applied Physics and Photonic Materials (IAPP) and Centre for Advancing Electronics Dresden (cfaed), Dresden University of Technology, Dresden, Germany 4Institute for Physical Chemistry (PCI) and Centre for Advanced Materials (CAM), Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany 5Kirchhoff-Institute for Physics (KIP) and Centre for Advanced Materials (CAM), Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany *e-mail: paul.fassl@kit.edu; ulrich.paetzold@kit.edu The internal luminescence quantum efficiency (Qi lum) provides an excellent assessment of the optoelectronic quality of semiconductors. To determine Qi lum of perovskite films from the experimentally accessible external luminescence quantum efficiency ( Qe lum ) it is essential to account for photon recycling, and this requires knowledge of the photon escape probability (p̅e). Here, we establish an analysis procedure based on a curve fitting model that accurately determines p̅e of perovskite films from photoluminescence (PL) spectra measured with a confocal microscope and an integrating sphere setup. We show that scattering-induced outcoupling of initially-trapped PL explains commonly observed red-shifted and broadened PL spectral shapes and leads to p̅e being more than 10% higher in absolute terms compared to earlier assumptions. Applying our model to CH3NH3PbI3 films with exceptionally high Qe lum up to 47.4% sets a real benchmark for Qi lum at 78.0 ± 0.5%, revealing there is beyond a factor of two more scope for reducing non-radiative recombination than previously thought. 2 Introduction The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has reached a certified 25.5%.1 Further advance of the PCE towards the fundamental efficiency limit of ~30.5% (for a bandgap of 1.6 eV)2 requires maximizing the external luminescence quantum efficiency (Qe lum) by minimizing non-radiative recombination3 in order to bring the open-circuit voltage (VOC) close to its radiative limit (VOC,rad):2,4,5 VOC = VOC,rad + kT q ln Qe lum (1) Adapting established assumptions for the photon escape probability (p̅e) in perfectly flat GaAs films,5–7 polycrystalline perovskite films are associated with a low p̅e 2,8,9 owing to their rather low surface roughness and relatively high refractive index (n ~ 2.6).10 Therefore, most of the isotropically emitted photoluminescence (PL) is considered trapped and reabsorbed in the perovskite due to the overlap of the emission and absorption spectra.2,11 As previously shown for GaAs,5–7 to maximize photon extraction and therefore Qe lum in this situation, perovskites need to demonstrate efficient photon recycling (PR),8,11,12 which requires a high internal luminescence quantum efficiency ( Qi lum ).2,8,13–16 Considering multiple reabsorption and reemission events, Qe lum can be expressed as (Figure S1)7,13 Qe lum = p̅e ∙ Qi lum 1 − p̅r ∙ Qi lum (2), where p̅r = 1 − p̅e − p̅a is the probability for photon reabsorption in the perovskite and p̅a is the probability for parasitic absorption within the charge transport layers or electrodes.13 For a bare perovskite film on glass, Qi lum can be determined from the experimentally accessible Qe lum by rearranging Equation (2) and making the assumption of no parasitic absorption:8,9 3 Qi lum = Qe lum p̅e + p̅r ∙ Qelum p̅a=0 → Qe lum p̅e + (1 − p̅e) ∙ Qelum (3) Conceptual studies demonstrated that PR could contribute to enhance the VOC of a PSC (∆VOC PR) by up to ~80 mV in the radiative limit and consequently the PCE by ~2% absolute.2,14–16 However, enhancements due to PR are only significant for very high Qi lum and p̅r as derived by Abebe et al. (see Figure S2):14 ∆VOC PR = kT q ∙ ln 1 1 − p̅r ∙ Qi lum (4) Therefore, accurate knowledge of p̅e is paramount to determine Qi lum and thus the scope for minimizing non-radiative recombination in perovskite films as well as to estimate the potential ∆VOC PR of PSCs. Here, we reveal that it is key to account for PL that is initially trapped in guided modes, but coupled out before reabsorption upon scattering after some length of travel within the perovskite film.17–20 Scattered PL exhibits a red-shifted spectrum given the much stronger reabsorption of high-energy photons.11,18,20–22 Extending recent findings,18,20 we show that the measured fractions of directly emitted and scattered PL critically depend on the collection method and film properties. Thereby, the large variety of reported PL spectral shapes (asymmetric/red-shifted/broadened; examples in Figure S12 and Table S1) for perovskite films with direct bandgap behavior23,24 can be explained by simply considering light propagation and scattering. Importantly, previous reports neglected such scattering with approximations for p̅e ranging from ~5-13%;2,8,9,11,14–16,25–27 these were derived based on simple geometric optics or more rigorous considerations developed for perfectly flat films (see Note S3). Employing such values for p̅e in Equation (3), extraordinary high Qi lum ~90% (for experimentally measured Qe lum ~40-50%; Figure S1) have recently been reported for perovskite films.25–27 4 In response to this problem, we establish a novel curve fitting model that reveals the real value of Qi lum by accurately quantifying the effective escape probability p̅e = p̅e_d + p̅e_s, where p̅e_d and p̅e_s are the probabilities for direct emission and scattering-induced outcoupling, respectively. Our model only requires the following inputs: 1) the internal PL spectrum I(λ) (determined by analyzing confocal PL measurements); 2) the total externally emitted PL spectrum Etot exp(λ) (measured with an integrating sphere (IS) setup); and 3) the corresponding Qe lum. We validate our model with Monte Carlo simulations and apply it to high-quality polycrystalline CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPI) films which exhibit exceptionally high Qe lum up to 47.4% without any additional passivation layer. We show that p̅e of these films is more than 10% higher in absolute terms compared to earlier assumptions and set a real benchmark for Qi lum at 78.0 ± 0.5%. This means that there is at least a factor of two more scope for reducing non- radiative recombination in perovskite films than previously thought; there remains more room for material optimization. Our curve fitting model, provided as a user-friendly open-source Matlab app, can be easily employed by researchers to accurately determine Qi lum. We also make use of the scattering properties of perovskite films and propose a new procedure to analyze parasitic absorption in a layer stack. Finally, we discuss the implications of our results on the effect that PR has on enhancing the PCE of state-of-the-art PSCs and underline the importance of further reducing interfacial recombination and parasitic absorption losses on the way towards the radiative efficiency limit. Results and discussion PL spectrum dependence on collection method It has been recently revealed that the PL spectrum of a perovskite film measured at a lateral distance r > 3 μm away from a small illumination spot (< 1 μm) already exhibits asymmetry and a small red-shift (Figure S3).18,28 Bercegol et al. modelled the observed spectral shapes using a linear combination of two PL spectra:18 the high-energy part was assigned to PR,11 that 5 is, reemission of waveguided PL that is reabsorbed outside the illuminated region. This spectrum is equal to that of the direct emission at r = 0 μm due to phonon-assisted upconversion;11,29–31 the low-energy part was assigned to outcoupling of initially-trapped PL (that is, scattered PL) that becomes increasingly red-shifted with lateral distance given the much stronger reabsorption of high-energy photons.11,18,20–22 In addition, Cho et al. recently demonstrated that scattering is one of the main optical loss mechanism competing with photon amplification in a perovskite waveguide.20 Previously, asymmetric and/or red-shifted PL spectra have been regularly observed in case of perovskite single crystals and, in many cases, have been correctly assigned to reabsorption of high-energy photons as the PL travels through the bulk of the crystal before exiting the material.22,31–34 However, in many other cases, such observations (especially for perovskite films) have either been neglected or misinterpreted by trying to explain them with complex physical mechanisms such as the Rashba effect35–37 as recently summarized by Schötz et al.22 We exemplary highlight the large variety of reported PL spectra for MAPI films fabricated by similar perovskite recipes in Note S1, Figure S12 and Table S1. In the following, we demonstrate that scattered PL indeed leads to the observation of dissimilar PL spectral shapes for different collection methods and film properties. We compare the PL spectra for MAPI films with thickness of 80/160/260 nm and corresponding surface roughness (Rq) of ~10.7/19/44 nm (Figure S4) measured by (1) a confocal PL setup, (2) a standard IS setup, and (3) a modified IS setup to observe total front emission (Figure 1A). Film fabrication is based on a lead acetate trihydrate precursor (see Experimental Procedures) which yields high-quality pin-hole free MAPI films with high Qe lum.25,38–42 The conclusions drawn in the following are general for spin- coated perovskite films with various compositions as shown in Figure S5. (1) The confocal setup used in this work detects only PL emitted within a limited field of view (FOV) (~3 μm radius) around a small illumination spot (~2 μm) (see Experimental Procedures and Figure S6). Direct emission dominates the measured PL spectral shape 6 on these length scales with no impact of scattered PL.18,28 The PL spectrum of an 80 nm- thick MAPI film exhibits a peak at ~768.5 nm (full-width-half-maximum (FWHM) ~39.5 nm) (Figure 1B). It proves to be identical at various spots of different samples, revealing the homogeneity and reproducibility of our films (Figure S7).38,39 In comparison, the spectrum of a 260 nm-thick MAPI film exhibits a slightly red-shifted peak at ~771 nm (FWHM ~39.3 nm), which is attributed to more high-energy photons being reabsorbed with increasing film thickness according to the Lambert-Beer law and in line with previous reports.21,43,44 Considering the fundamental interdependence of absorptance and emissivity,43,45,46 in Note S3 we present a comprehensive procedure detailing how to extract the absorption coefficient α(λ) from the confocal spectra (Figures S8 and S10) and provide a comparison with literature (Figure S13). α(λ) is used to determine the internal PL spectrum I(λ) considering the generalized Planck’s law43 (Figures S9 and S10; Equations S1 and S2) and both spectra are used as inputs of our curve fitting model. To confirm the quality of the MAPI films, we determine the Urbach energy (that is, the slope of the exponential decrease in absorption below the bandgap) of MAPI films with different thickness from α(λ, T) extracted at various irradiation intensities (that is, temperatures) and find EU = 13.2 ± 0.1 meV at room temperature (more details in Figure S11), which is one of the lowest reported values for perovskite films to date.3,21,40,45 (2) The standard IS setup detects all PL externally emitted from a film ( Etot exp(λ) ), encompassing PL from the entire front and rear surfaces as well as the edges of the glass substrate; Etot exp(λ) is fitted by our curve fitting model. The PL spectra of exactly the same MAPI samples as measured with setup (1) exhibit an asymmetric and broadened shape (FWHM of ~55.6 nm and ~43.3 nm, respectively) with a significant red-shift that is stronger for the thicker film (peak positions of ~780 nm and ~789 nm, respectively) 7 (Figure 1B). These characteristics result from the measured signal being a superposition of directly emitted and red-shifted scattered PL as in detail discussed in the next section and consistent with recent experimental findings.18,20–22,28,47 (3) A modified IS setup is used to analyze the contribution of scattered PL to the total front emission. We compare the PL spectra of a 160 nm-thick MAPI film measured with setups (1) - (3) in Figure 1C. Note that the peaks are normalized to their intensity at λ = 730 nm as this representation highlights alterations in the peak position and shape due to thickness and scattering, which appear for λ ≳ 735 nm in case of MAPI (see Figure S5 for other compositions). The peak position (~775.8 nm) and FWHM (~50.1 nm) measured with setup (3) are in between the values measured with setup (1) (peak at ~770.3 nm, FWHM of ~39.2 nm) and setup (2) (peak at ~786.2 nm, FWHM of ~50.7 nm). Firstly, this illustrative experiment reveals the significant contribution of scattered PL to the total front emission, which is therefore also detected by typically employed standard front collection PL setups.18,20–22,28,47 Secondly, the reduced red-shift for setup (3) as compared to setup (2) shows that a considerable amount of red-shifted PL is emitted from the substrate edges. In Note S2 we provide a more in-depth analysis of the absolute photon flux (Figure S14) and PL spectral shapes (Figure S15) observed with various setups for the 260 nm-thick MAPI film with the highest Qe lum measured in this work. The results indicate that edge emission, which is a well-studied phenomenon in organic LEDs48,49 yet has not been reported to play a large role for perovskite films before, in fact accounts for ~50% of the total external PL emission and exhibits a strongly red-shifted spectrum (Figure S14a). In Figures S14b and S15 we compare our results to that for MAPI films with similar thickness reported by Braly et al.27 who employed an absolute intensity confocal PL setup with a large FOV (~2.2 mm) in order to collect all photons emitted from the front.50 The shape of their PL spectrum is red-shifted and broadened compared to the one measured with our confocal setup and very similar to that 8 observed with the setups where edge emission is suppressed (Figure S15), indicating a comparable fraction of scattered PL to the measured signal. of the PL setups employed to study the PL spectra of MAPI films with various thicknesses on glass: (1) the confocal PL setup detects only PL emitted within a small field of view (FOV) (~6 μm diameter) around the illumination spot (~2 μm) (see Experimental Procedures; Figure S6); (2) the standard integrating sphere (IS) setup detects all emitted PL; (3) the modified IS setup detects the total front emission by covering the edges and back side of the substrate. The excitation volume using a pulsed 530 nm laser for setup (1) and 525 nm CW laser for setups (2) and (3) is roughly visualized. (B) Normalized PL spectra of an 80 nm- and a 260 nm-thick a 160 nm-thick MAPI film measured with setups (1) - (3) normalized to the value at λ = 730 nm. The arrows indicate the increasing fraction of red-shifted scattered PL to the total externally emitted PL. 9 Photoluminescence emission from perovskite films Compared to solar cells based on the epitaxial grown mature semiconductor GaAs which has a near-atomically flat surface and an extremely low density of defects (~107-108 cm-3),51 perovskite films show heterogeneous material properties on various length scales,52,53 among them: variations in crystal orientation and lattice strain;41,47 inhomogeneous composition,39 electronic structure54 and defect density (~1013-1018 cm-3);38,41 and photo-induced changes in refractive index.55 In addition, polycrystalline perovskite films employed in state-of-the-art PSCs are commonly fabricated by spin-coating and exhibit numerous grain boundaries (grain size ~100-2000 nm) with a low yet non-negligible surface roughness (~10-40 nm).26,27,38– 41,54,56–58 Considering these aspects, it can be expected that some initially-trapped PL couples out upon scattering. Surface scattering effects have been previously discussed for perovskite waveguides,18,20,59,60 luminescent solar concentrators61 and perovskite LEDs (PeLEDs)30 and are a well-known phenomenon in high-index-contrast microphotonic devices.17,19 While it is difficult to ascertain the relative contributions of the above discussed properties to the total magnitude of scattering, we believe that surface roughness plays the major role.17,19,20 In the following, we introduce the fundamental underlying optical processes in a perovskite film, leading to the previously discussed asymmetric, broadened and red-shifted PL spectra. Note that for simplicity we assume a perfect back-reflector here and discuss the more general case of a film on glass in Note S4 and Figure S16. Figure 2A schematically summarizes the various individual events after (0) local initial photoexcitation, namely: (1) initial isotropic PL emission; (A) PL emitted within the escape cone (θ ⪅ θc); (2) reabsorption and isotropic reemission, that is, PR; (Bi) PL emitted within the escape cone following event (2); and (Ci) PL emitted at angles θ ⪆ θc (initially trapped by total internal reflections) coupling out upon scattering. Note that PL can also be scattered into the bottom escape cone or such that it remains trapped within the film. The corresponding alterations of the external PL spectrum E(λ) with respect to I(λ) are shown in Figure 2B and 2C together with α(λ) (see Figure S10): PL emitted 10 within the escape cone (events (A) and (Bi)) exhibits a slightly red-shifted spectrum considering the finite distance dec from the emission center to the film surface, following the Lambert-Beer Ed(λ, dec, θ ⪅ θc) = I(λ) ∙ e−α(λ) dec cosθ (5) Scattered PL (events (Ci)) exhibits a progressively increasing red-shift with increasing number i of total internal reflections prior to a scattering event, since initially-trapped PL propagates a total distance zi within the film before coupling out.18,20,21 The value of zi depends on the emission angle, the vertical depth dec of the emission center and the film thickness d: cosθ+ 2(i−1)∙ d cos θ) (6) It is important to stress that the discussed scattering is not to be mistaken with Lambertian light scattering like in textured silicon solar cells5,62 and assumed for modelling light trapping schemes in PSCs.2,14–16,63 Instead, it describes a small scattering probability every time a photon impinges on a surface, which is strongly suppressed in near-atomically flat III-V semiconductors.19,20,51 Specifically, since low-energy photons ( λ ⪆ 790 nm ) are barely reabsorbed in the perovskite given the exponential drop in absorption, they can travel long distances within the film (Figures 2C, S10 and S17) and thus experience numerous total internal reflections before a scattering event that results in outcoupling.20,30 The magnitude of scattering for a given propagation distance zi is therefore governed by the film thickness (compare Equation (6)) and surface roughness.17,19,20,61 To conclude, while most high-energy photons are reabsorbed within a short distance from the initial point of emission, even a small magnitude of scattering is sufficient to couple out the low-energy photons before possible reabsorption. 11 radiative processes (numbers) and PL emission paths (letters) in a perovskite film: (0) local initial laser excitation; (1) isotropic internal emission; (A) PL emitted within the escape cone (θ ⪅ θc); (2) reabsorption and isotropic reemission, that is, photon recycling; (Bi) PL emitted within the escape cone following (2); and (Ci) PL emitted at angles θ ⪆ θc (initially trapped in the film by total internal reflections) coupling out upon scattering (scattered PL). The color change from red to brown denotes the progressively increasing red-shift of PL propagating in the perovskite film considering the much stronger reabsorption of high-energy photons. Without loss of generality only front-face emission is visualized here by assuming a perfect back-reflector at the bottom (see more general case in Figure S16). (B) and (C) Internal PL spectrum I(λ) (black) and absorption coefficient α(λ) (grey) of the MAPI films as determined exhibits a small red-shift depending on the finite depth dec of the emission center within the increasing number i of total internal reflections prior to a scattering event with total propagation distance zi. 12 Curve fitting model to determine the effective escape probability The curve fitting model introduced in this work fits PL spectra measured with an IS setup (Etot exp(λ)) with I(λ) and α(λ) determined from confocal PL measurements as input (see Note S3 and Figure S10). It allows to accurately determine p̅e and thereby Qi lum of perovskite films via Equation (3) using measured values of Qe lum as input. We provide a user-friendly open- source Matlab app for performing the fitting (user interface shown in Figure S21). The model is visualized in Figure 4A and described in the following. The effective escape probability is simply the ratio of total externally emitted to total internally emitted photons13–15 p̅e = p̅e-d + p̅e-s = ∫ Etot exp(λ) ∫ Itot(λ) (7), where p̅e-d = ∫ Ed-tot(λ) ∫ Itot(λ) and p̅e-s = ∫ Es-tot(λ) ∫ Itot(λ) denote the probabilities for direct emission and scattering-induced outcoupling, respectively. With Etot exp(λ) measured experimentally, we need to derive Itot(λ). In steady-state, Itot(λ) is composed of initially-emitted and reemitted PL scaling parameters atot, a0 and aPR: Etot wavelength-dependent probabilities for direct and scattering-induced escape ( pe-d(λ) and pe-s(λ), respectively) as: Etot 13 pe-d(λ) accounts for the fact that photons that would otherwise directly escape the film (with probability pe-d) are partially reabsorbed (compare Figure 2B and Equation (5)), which is modelled by introducing a Lambert-Beer term with effective film thickness deff (see discussion in Note S6; fits to confocal and simulated PL spectra in Figure S22 and Table S2): All remaining PL is initially trapped with probability (1 − pe-d) and we consider the following to model the effect of scattering: a small fraction Ps of trapped PL couples out after an average propagation distance zav within the film as visualized in Figure 4A (compare Equation (6)). The same continues and the next fraction Ps of the remaining PL couples out after another average distance zav . This continuous sequence can be expressed with a geometrical series by introducing a Lambert-Beer term as ((1 − Ps) ∙ e−α(λ)zav) i = (1−pe-d)∙e−α(λ)∙zav∙Ps 1−(1−Ps)∙e−α(λ)∙zav ∞ i=0 (11), which leads to the following final expression Etot (1 − pe-d) ∙ Ps ∙ e−α(λ)∙zav 1 − (1 − Ps) ∙ e−α(λ)∙zav ) (12) with fitting parameters atot, pe-d, deff, Ps and zav. We emphasize that Equation (11) describes an ‘average scattering’ of PL either trapped in the perovskite film or substrate (compare Figure S16), and, therefore, Ps and zav have no direct physical meaning. We decided to fix Ps for fitting given that it makes the fit more stable (see discussion in Note S6). However, as discussed in more detail later, the fitted value of zav can be related to the film thickness in order to compare the magnitude of scattering for different samples. Fitting with Equation (12) allows the determination of p̅e, p̅e-d and p̅e_s and thereby of Qi lum via Equation (3) using the experimentally measured Qe lum as input. Furthermore, the relative contributions of initially generated PL (I0(λ)) 14 and recycled PL (IPR(λ)) can be derived upon calculating a0 = Qi lum∙∫ Etot(λ) Qelum∙∫ I(λ) and aPR = atot − a0 using the value determined for Qi lum (compare Equation (8)). To validate our curve fitting model, we employ a Monte Carlo approach to simulate ‘externally- observed’ PL spectra with all other parameters known. The Monte Carlo simulation (see Experimental Procedures and detailed description in Note S5) considers all radiative processes and subsequent event-chains illustrated in Figure 2A as well as non-radiative recombination processes that occur subsequent to an absorption event (see decision tree and output parameters in Figure S19). For a given Qi lum, values for Qe lum, p̅e , p̅e_d and p̅e_s are determined in a simulation as well as the shape of the corresponding ‘external’ PL spectra (Etot sim(λ), Ed-tot sim (λ) and Es-tot sim (λ)). This way, we can fit Etot sim(λ) with Equation (12) and validate if the fit results agree with the known values. Figure 3B shows a fit to a representative Etot sim(λ) with an asymmetric and broadened shape similar to that of the 260 nm-thick MAPI film in Figure 1A. The values of Qi lum and p̅e are reproduced with close to perfect agreement for a large range of fixed Ps, while p̅e_d and p̅e_s are sensitive to its choice and agree best for the smallest possible Ps (see related input parameters and fit results for various values of Ps in Table S3). These results corroborate four important aspects: (i) the proposed conception of PL emission (Figure 2A) indeed results in a variety of different PL spectra (red-shifted/broadened/ asymmetric) depending on the magnitude of scattering, which is set by the inverse scattering length (ls −1) in the simulations (see further examples in Figure S20 and Table S4); (ii) in line with intensity dependent measurements of Etot exp(λ) (Figure S18), the spectral shape of Etot sim(λ) is independent of Qi lum and thus is the value of p̅e (see discussion in Note S4); (iii) Etot exp(λ) can be fitted with Equation (12) to accurately determine Qi lum and p̅e and to give a good approximation for p̅e_d and p̅e_s; and (iv) the fitted value of zav is inversely proportional to ls 15 and thereby, considering scattering mainly takes place at interfaces, allows comparing the magnitude of scattering for different samples by relating it to the film thickness via Ms = d zav. Revealing the internal luminescence quantum efficiency We show the excellent agreement of fits with Equation (12) to Etot exp(λ) of MAPI films with different thickness in Figure 3C, with I0 fit(λ) and IPR fit(λ) being highlighted in the upper panel and Etot fit (λ), Ed-tot fit (λ) and Es-tot fit (λ) in the lower panel. The corresponding film properties and fit results are summarized in Table 1. With increasing film thickness, we measure champion Qe-max lum of 21.2%, 42% and 47.4% at an intensity close to an AM1.5G (1 Sun, 100 mW cm-2) steady-state absorbed photon flux (see Experimental Procedures and Note S7 for details). To the best of our knowledge the latter value represents the highest reported Qe lum for a MAPI film measured with an IS setup at ~1 Sun and room temperature to date. We attribute the slightly reduced Qe lum for the thinner films to the higher surface to bulk ratio, being well-established that most defects are located at the perovskite film surface.3,25,26,38,56 The strongly reduced grain size for the thinner films (Figure S4) might play an additional role in reducing Qe lum, however, we note that while there is no general consensus yet if grain boundaries are benign,64 recent reports indicate that the impact of grain boundaries on the optoelectronic properties of high- quality perovskite films is negligible.28,52,53,65,66 Most importantly, our model reveals that Qe lum of 47.4% for the 260 nm-thick MAPI film correlates to Qi lum of 78.0 ± 0.5%, setting a new real benchmark for Qi lum of perovskite films that is more than 10% lower compared to previous reports for similar values of Qe lum. This is due to a high p̅e of 25.4 ± 0.7%, which is more than 10% higher in absolute terms compared to earlier assumptions for p̅e in the range of ~5-13% that were based on simple geometric optics or more rigorous derivations developed for perfectly flat films (see Note S3). In comparison, Qe lum of 42% (21.2%) for the 160 (80) nm-thick MAPI film correlates to Qi lum of 72.2 ± 0.6% (46.4 ± 0.7%) given the even higher p̅e of 28.0 ± 0.8% 16 (30.9 ± 0.9%). As expected for perovskite films with a very low trap density, Qe lum and the corresponding Qi lum of the 260 (160) nm-thick MAPI film increase only slightly from a remarkable ~33.8% (~30.6%) and ~66.8% (61.1%) at ~0.1 Sun up to ~52.2% (~46.6%) and ~81.4% (~75.6%) at ~3 Sun (Figure S23), respectively.8,9,27,67 Despite the very high p̅e, our analysis reveals that PR still accounts for an impressive aPR atot ~58% of the total emission for the 260 nm-thick MAPI film (see upper panels in Figure 3C; ~52% and ~32% for the 160 nm and 80 nm- thick films, respectively) which is comparable to values recently simulated for the best state-of-the-art PeLEDs.30 In addition, our curve fitting model also for the first time allows to estimate values for p̅e_d of perovskite films, and, interestingly, it strongly increases from 6.0 ± 0.5% to 17.4 ± 0.7% with decreasing film thickness, which we attribute to the suppression of waveguide modes resulting in a larger fraction of direct emission.30,48,63 Since at the same time the magnitude of scattering (Ms) exhibits decreasing values of 7.3 ± 0.4, 3.3 ± 0.2 and 1.4 ± 0.1, which is in line with the strong reduction in surface roughness with decreasing film thickness,19,20 p̅e_s decreases from a very high 19.4 ± 0.5% to 13.5 ± 0.3%. Comparing Qi lum determined in our work with Qi lum ~90% reported by Braly et al. and Brenes et al. for MAPI films with comparable Qe lum and thickness, it becomes apparent how crucial the accurate determination of p̅e is (their results and assumptions are included in Table 1).25,27 Given that the MAPI films in Brenes et al. work (reported Qi lum~89%) exhibit a similar surface roughness as our films, we estimate p̅e ≈ 26% for their slightly thinner ~250 nm-thick films which would correlate to Qi lum ~79.4% (measured at ~2.2 Sun). This ~10% absolute difference in the derived Qi lum accounts for a significant underestimation of non-radiative recombination by a factor of about two. In fact, to really reach a value of Qi lum ~90%, the 260 nm-thick MAPI film with p̅e of 25.4% would need to exhibit an extraordinary high Qe lum of ~70% at 1 Sun (compare Figure S1), revealing there is much more scope for future material optimization and surface passivation of perovskite films. 17 internal luminescence quantum efficiency. (A) Visualization of the curve fitting model: in steady state, the total internal PL Itot(λ) (composed of initially emitted and reemitted PL; whereby partial reabsorption is described by an effective film thickness deff following the Lambert-Beer law or (ii) initially trapped with probability 1 − pe-d. Small fractions Ps of initially-trapped PL couple out after every average propagation distance zav within the film, until all PL is either coupled out or reabsorbed considering the Lambert-Beer law (Es-tot(λ) = given by Equation (12). (B) Fit with Equation (12) to a representative simulated ‘external PL spectrum’ (Etot sim(λ)) using a Monte Carlo approach (the corresponding parameters and fit results are summarized in Table S4). (C) Fits with Equation (12) to experimental PL spectra of MAPI films with different thicknesses with I0 fit(λ), IPR fit(λ) being highlighted in the upper panel and Etot fit (λ), Ed-tot fit (λ) and Es-tot fit (λ) in the lower panel. The corresponding input parameters and fit results are summarized in Table 1. 18 Finally, we also apply our curve fitting model to two other commonly employed perovskite compositions, namely a triple-cation (Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3) and a double- cation (FA1-xMAxPb(I0.97Br0.03)3) perovskite film, both of which exhibit a much larger film thickness compared to the MAPI films (see Experimental Procedures). The corresponding confocal and IS PL spectra are discussed in detail in Figures S5 and S24. We measure Qe lum up to 5% for TC and 19.6% for DC films, respectively. Importantly, despite the much larger film thicknesses that might indicate a higher reabsorption probability, we find very high p̅e of ~27.1% and ~20.1% with corresponding Qi lum of ~18.5% and ~54.1%, respectively (see fit results in Figure S25 and Table S5). This confirms that the results discussed in detail for the archetypical MAPI films are exemplary for spin-coated perovskite films. The effects of photon recycling and parasitic absorption We proceed in analyzing the effects of photon recycling by plotting the wavelength-dependence 1 − pe(λ) and Qe lum(λ) = Etot exp(λ) I0 fit(λ) for the 260 nm-thick MAPI film in Figure 4A (see results for other thicknesses in Figure S26). Above the bandgap (λ ≪ 767 nm), reabsorption is dominant resulting in the values of pe(λ) and Qe lum(λ) being below 5% and 20%, respectively. Impressively, Qe lum(λ) already exceeds a value of 100% (250%) for λ ≳ 786 nm (830 nm) together with pr(λ) and pe(λ) approaching 0% and 100% in that spectral range, respectively. The underlying reasons are the exponential drop in absorption (compare Figures S10 and S17) combined with the herein discussed scattering properties of perovskite films. We stress that even the rather low surface roughness of the 80 nm-thick MAPI film (~10 nm; Figure S4) is sufficient to couple out the low-energy photons before reabsorption can take place (Figure S26b). 19 To discuss the implications of our results on PSCs, we calculate the potential ∆VOC PR via Equation (4) using the values that we have determined for Qi lum and p̅e and making the optimistic assumption of negligible parasitic absorption (p̅a = 0).14 We find ∆VOC PR = 22.5 mV for the 260 nm-thick MAPI film, much smaller than ∆VOC PR = 49.1 mV (39.8 mV) deduced using an underestimated p̅e by Braly et al. (Brenes et al.) (see Table 1 and compare Figure S2). More critically, Qe lum of state-of-the-art PSCs is still severely limited by interfacial recombination3,56,68 and parasitic absorption losses.2,14,30,68 Even considering the highest reported Qe lum of 5% for a complete PSC to date69 and neglecting parasitic absorption, p̅e = 25.4% relates to Qi lum = 18.9% and ∆VOC PR = 4.2 mV , revealing that the effect of PR on enhancing the PCE of state-of-the-art PSCs is still small. We analyze the dependence of ∆VOC PR on Qe lum as well as of the reduction in VOC due to non-radiative recombination (∆VOC nr = − kT q ln Qe lum; compare Equation (1)) on Qi lum for various realistic values of p̅e and p̅a in Figures S27a and S27b, respectively. It shows that, considering the range of escape probabilities found in this study (p̅e ~20-30%), ∆VOC PR is limited to values around ~30-40 mV even in case Qi lum approaches the radiative limit and p̅a = 0 (see also Figure S2). We note while p̅r and thus ∆VOC PR might in principle be increased by reducing the magnitude of scattering, for example by imprinting57,58,60 or fabricating perovskite films with a very low surface roughness,20,30 this strategy is not beneficial for the overall PCE of PSCs, because a reduction of p̅e always results in a reduced Qe lum and thus lower total VOC (Equation (1); Figures S1 abd S27b).2,5,8,13,16,70,71 Therefore, p̅e should always be maximized without comprising absorption and the optoelectronic properties of a PSC, for example by employing nanostructures,59,63,70,72 even if this is at the expense of PR as recently discussed by Bowman et al.70,71 In fact, our study reveals that scattering-induced outcoupling of initially-trapped PL is an inherent property of state-of- the-art perovskite films that strongly increases p̅e and therefore Qe lum and VOC (Figures S1 and S27b). At the same time, it limits the effect that PR has on enhancing the PCE of PSCs (Figure 20 S27a). Therefore, the first step to further enhance the PCE of PSCs is to increase Qi lum by minimizing non-radiative recombination,2,3,16,56,68,73 which is regularly done in recent literature by chemical passivation and interface engineering approaches as well as by employing optimized charge transport layers.56,74–79 At a stage for which Qi lum of PSCs exceeds ~40%, minimizing p̅a becomes crucial in order to maximize Qe lum and VOC (Figures S27a and In the following, we make use of the scattering properties of perovskite films and propose a new procedure to analyze parasitic absorption in a layer stack and thereby reveal the importance of minimizing any kind of parasitic absorption in a PSC even in case Qi lum ≪ 40%. To show the concept, we employ a ~130 nm-thick commercial indium-tin-oxide (ITO) layer as used in state-of-the-art PSCs,79,80 which exhibits low (yet non-negligible) absorption in the spectral range of the MAPI PL emission (Figure S28a). In Figure 4B, we compare the PL spectra (measured with an IS setup) of a 160 nm-thick MAPI film spin-coated either on a glass substrate, on the backside of an ITO-coated glass substrate or directly on top of ITO. We do not expect a strong effect of parasitic absorption on directly emitted PL (that is, p̅e-d) considering PL emitted within the bottom escape cone only propagates through the ITO layer once, which is expected to result in a relative absorption of only ~3.2% and no peak shift considering the Lambert-Beer law (Figure S28b). However, the presence of ITO in the layer stack in fact strongly blue-shifts the observed PL peak, with the relative shift being much larger in case MAPI is directly spin- coated on top of ITO. This effect is attributed to efficient parasitic absorption of initially- trapped PL by ITO before it can couple out upon scattering. Thus, this parasitic absorption significantly reduces the emitted fraction of scattered PL (that is, p̅e-s) and thereby the relative PL red-shift as compared to confocal PL measurements (compare Figure 1C). In the case that ITO is at the backside of the substrate, only PL propagating in the substrate mode can be parasitically absorbed, while in the case that MAPI is directly on top of ITO both the waveguide 21 This work Braly et al.27 Brenes et al.25 Setup IS IS IS IS IS + fiber- coupled Intensitya [Sun] d [nm] 80 160 260 250 250 Rq [nm] 10.7 ± 0.7 19.0 ± 0.8 44.0 ± 1.0 ~16 Qe-max lum [%] 36.7%b/45.6%c ~50%d Ps - - deff [nm] - - zav [nm] 56.3 ± 2.7 48.7 ± 2.4 35.8 ± 2.0 - - p̅e-d [%] 17.5 ± 0.7 13.0 ± 0.5 6.0 ± 0.5 - - p̅e-s [%] 13.5 ± 0.3 15.0 ± 0.5 19.4 ± 0.8 - - p̅e [%] 30.9 ± 0.9 28.0 ± 0.8 25.4 ± 0.9 7.4% ( 1 2n2)e 12.7%e aPR/atot [%] 32 52 58 - - Ms 1.4 ± 0.1 3.3 ± 0.2 7.3 ± 0.4 - - Qi lum [%] 46.4 ± 0.7 72.0 ± 0.6 78.0 ± 0.5 91.9 ± 2.7% ~89% ∆VOC PR [mV] 10.0 19.0 22.5 49.1 38.7 d, film thickness; Rq, rms roughness (Figure S4); Qe-max lum , champion value of Qe lum Qi lum, calculated via Equation (3) with p̅e and Qe-max lum as input; ∆VOC PR, calculated via Equation (4) assuming p̅r = 1 − p̅e; Ms = d zav, magnitude of scattering; aPR/atot, fraction of recycled PL to the external emission; All other parameters, see Equations (7) and (12). aIntensity calculated as described in Note S7 bExperimental value measured in IS cIndirectly determined by fitting dPL measured by a front collection setup, Qe-max lum extrapolated from IS measurement eAssumption for the value of p̅e used to determine Qi lum (see Note S3) 22 dependent escape and reabsorption probabilities (left y-axis; see Equations (10) and efficiency (right y-axis; Qe lum(λ) = Etot exp(λ) I0 fit(λ) ) for the 260 nm-thick CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPI) film with the champion Qe lum of 47.4% (see results for other thicknesses in Figure S20). (B) PL spectra measured with an IS setup of a 160-nm thick MAPI film spin-coated either on glass (black), on the backside of ITO-coated glass (Lumtec, 15 Ω/sq) or directly on top of ITO (blue) normalized to the values at 730 nm. The reduction in the red-shift compared to the confocal PL spectra (see initially-trapped PL is parasitically absorbed before coupling out upon scattering (from black to blue; see discussion in main text). The dotted line denotes the wavelength at which the S28a). mode (via evanescent coupling) and substrate mode (via Lambert-Beer like absorption; Figure S28b) are affected (compare Figure S16); this explains the difference between the PL shifts for these two cases. This effect (which has been observed, but was not discussed in previous literature; examples in Figure S29) primarily increases p̅a by reducing p̅e and thereby lowers Qe lum; critically, this has a severe effect on VOC even in case of low Qi lum and thus reduces the PCE state-of-the-art PSCs (Figures S1 and S28b).2,5,13,14,68 In addition, p̅r = 1 − p̅e − p̅a can be expected to be slightly reduced given that potentially less initially-trapped photons have a chance to be reabsorbed by the perovskite; this secondary effect, however, could only have a 23 noticeable effect on ∆VOC PR in case of very high Qi lum (Figures S2 and S28a) and thus can be neglected as potential cause for a reduced PCE of state-of-the-art PSCs. Such parasitic absorption can for example be reduced by employing alternative transparent electrodes with reduced near-infrared absorption such as indium-zinc-oxide or hydrogen-doped indium- oxide,81 as well as by using either non-absorbing or very thin charge transport layers such as self-assembled monolayers.79 While it is beyond the scope of the present work, accurately quantifying the values of p̅e, p̅a, Qi lum and ∆VOC PR for complete PSCs with various perovskite compositions, scattering properties and transport/electrode layers - by implementing the above described effects of parasitic absorption in our curve fitting model - is goal of ongoing work. Such detailed understanding of these ‘hidden’ internal parameters will be a crucial step on the way of PSCs towards the radiative efficiency limit. Conclusion In this work, we establish a curve fitting model that allows accurate determination of the effective photon escape probability (p̅e) and thereby of the internal luminescence quantum efficiency (Qi lum) of perovskite films. We reveal that it is of paramount importance to account for initially-trapped PL that scatters out of the films before being reabsorbed, confirming that the large variety of PL spectral shapes reported in the literature for perovskite films can be explained by simply considering light propagation and scattering. To date, not accounting for scattering has led to a significant underestimation of p̅e by more than 10% in absolute terms and thus to an overestimation of Qi lum and the effect that PR has on enhancing the PCE of PSCs. Applying our model to CH3NH3PbI3 films with exceptionally high external luminescence quantum efficiencies up to 47.4% sets a real benchmark for Qi lum at 78.0 ± 0.5%, revealing there is beyond a factor of two more scope for minimizing non-radiative recombination in perovskite films than previously thought. Finally, we propose a new procedure to analyze 24 parasitic absorption in a layer stack and highlight the importance of further enhancing Qi lum and minimizing parasitic absorption in complete PSCs. This work provides important new insights into the photophysics of perovskite films and establishes a novel method to accurately determine Qi lum that will help develop PSCs towards the radiative efficiency limit. Experimental Procedures Fabrication of perovskite films CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPI) perovskite layers were prepared in dry air (<1% relative humidity) using a lead acetate trihydrate (Pb(OAc)2, Sigma Aldrich, 99.999%) precursor with the addition of hypophosphorous acid (HPA, Sigma Aldrich, 50wt% in H2O) 40. In short, methylammonium iodide (MAI, GreatCell Solar) and Pb(OAc)2 in the intended molar ratio and concentration were dissolved in anhydrous N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, Sigma Aldrich, anhydrous, 99.8%) after which HPA (1.7 μl/100 mg MAI) was added shortly before using the precursor solution. Based upon previous work, an optimized stoichiometry y = MAI : Pb(OAc)2 = 2.99 was employed which yields stable and pin-hole free films with high Qe lum 38,39. To fabricate MAPI films with thicknesses of 80/125 nm and 160/260 nm, precursor solutions with concentrations of 25 wt% and 40 wt% were spin-coated on cleaned (ultrasonic bath in acetone and isopropanol for 10 min) and oxygen plasma treated microscope slides (16x16 mm2) at 2000/6000 rpm for 60 s, respectively. Directly after spin-coating, a flow of dry air was directed towards the samples for ~30 s before annealing them at 100 °C for 5 min. Triple-cation perovskite films (Cs0.05(FA0.83MA0.17)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3) were prepared by dissolving 1 M formamidinium iodide (FAI, GreatCell Solar), 0.2 M methylammonium bromide (MABr, GreatCell Solar), 0.2 M lead bromide (PbBr2, TCI), and 1.1 M lead iodide 25 (PbI2, TCI) in a 4:1 (v/v) mixture of DMF and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, Sigma Aldrich, anhydrous, ≥99.9%). Afterwards, 42.1 μl of a 1.5 M cesium iodide (CsI, Alpha Aesar) stock solution in DMSO was added in the precursor solution in a 5:95 (v/v) ratio. The perovskite films were spin-coated by a two-step process in a N2 filled glovebox: (1) 1000 rpm for 10 s and (2) 6000 rpm for 20 s. 100 μl CB was poured on the spinning substrate 10 s prior to the end of the second step. Afterwards, the samples were annealed at 100 °C for 60 min in an inert atmosphere. Double-cation perovskite films (FA1-xMAxPb(I0.97Br0.03)3) were prepared via a two-step spin- coating process. A 1.3M PbI2 (Sigma-Aldrich, 99.999%) precursor solution was prepared by dissolving PbI2 in a 9.5:0.5 (v/v) solvent mixture of DMF and DMSO. First, the PbI2 solution was spin-coated at 1500 rpm for 30 s in a N2 filled glovebox followed by annealing at 70 °C for 1 min. In the second step, a solution of 60 mg FAI, 6 mg MABr and 6 mg methylammonium chloride (MACl, Lumtec) in 1 ml IPA was loaded onto the PbI2 thin films and spin-coated at 1300 rpm for 30 s followed by a thermal annealing step at 150 °C for 15 min in ambient conditions (~30–40% humidity). Confocal PL measurements The samples were excited by the spectrally filtered output of a pulsed supercontinuum laser source (Fianium WhiteLase SC400, 20 MHz repetition rate, ~10 ps pulse width). The excitation wavelength was 530 nm and measurements were performed at various intensities between ~0.4 W/cm2 and ~4‧104 W/cm2 to study the effect of intensity (and thus film temperature) on the PL spectral shape and Urbach Energy. The confocal spectra used for determining α(λ) and I(λ) μJ/cm2/pulse). These intensities resulted in a good signal-to-noise ratio and film temperatures around ~305-315 K (compare Figures S7 and S11), which are similar to the temperatures determined from the integrating sphere PL spectra. Considering the much higher irradiation intensities as compared to the integrating sphere measurements, a ~100 nm PMMA layer was 26 spin-coated on top of most MAPI films (40 mg/ml at 4000 rpm without annealing step) to protect the films from quick light and moisture-induced degradation. We verified that the additional PMMA layer has a negligible impact on the measured PL spectral shape (Figure S7). An infinity-corrected 50× objective (Olympus, N.A. 0.7, focal length ~3.0 mm) was used to focus the excitation laser onto the sample with a spot size of ~2 μm. The PL was collected through the same objective and focused onto the entrance slit of an Acton SpectraPro SP2358 grating spectrograph (150 lines mm-1, blaze 1200 nm) by a tube lens with 150 mm focal length (see setup schematic in Figure S6). The following geometric considerations define the field-of- view (FOV) for photon collection from the sample: The detection in the direction parallel to the photodiode array is limited by the entrance slit width of 300 μm, whereas the detection in the direction perpendicular to the photodiode array is limited by the sensor pixel height of 500 μm. Hence, we approximate the detected area in the focus of the tube lens as circular with diameter ~300 μm. Due to the 50× magnification of the microscope ( ftube lens fobjective = 150 mm 3 mm = 50), this image translates to a FOV of ~6 μm diameter from which photons are collected from the sample. The emission was detected by a liquid nitrogen cooled InGaAs line camera (Princeton Instruments OMA V). Scattered laser light was blocked by a longpass filter with 700 nm cut-on wavelength. A broadband light source (Thorlabs SLS201/M, 300-2600 nm) with known spectral power distribution was used to correct the emission spectra for the wavelength-dependent detection efficiency and absorption due to optical components. For deriving confocal PL spectra as reported in this work, measurements were performed on ~200 spots on each sample for the respective laser intensity using a XYZ Nano-LP200 piezo- stage and subsequently the data was averaged, smoothed, fitted and extrapolated (see detailed procedure in Figures S7 and S11). 27 Integrating sphere measurements Integrating sphere measurements were carried out inside an integrating sphere (LabSphere, 15 cm diameter) in ambient air (relative humidity < 40%). For cross-check, measurements were performed at two different setups at Heidelberg University and KIT. A green laser (OBIS 532 nm CW LS 50 mW from Coherent or LD-515-10MG from Roithner Lasertechnik, respectively) was directed into the sphere through a small entrance port (4 mm diameter). An optical fiber was used to collect the emission from the exit port of the integrating sphere and transfer it to the spectrometer (QE65 Pro from Ocean Optics or AvaSpec-ULS2048x64TEC from Avantes, respectively). The spectral response of both setups was calibrated using a calibration lamp (HL-3plus-INT-Cal from Ocean Optics). All raw measured spectra were recalculated to give power spectrums using the integration time. The external luminescence quantum efficiency (Qe lum) was determined using the method described by de Mello et al.82 The samples were placed at an angle of ~15° with respect to the laser beam to avoid specular reflectance towards the entrance port. The power density absorbed by the sample was calculated based on the laser intensity shone into the sphere (continuously measured by a power meter calibrated towards the power shone into the sphere using a 90/10 beam splitter), the laser spot size (3 mm2 or 4.5 mm2, respectively) and the absorptance A of the samples which is determined during the analysis82 (see Note S7 for more details). Both setups yielded very similar spectral and absolute results. As previously reported by us and others25,38,83, oxygen (or atmosphere with low levels of humidity) and light can have a positive effect on the value of Qe lum for MAPI films. After such a ‘treatment’, Qe lum typically remains at a high value for months even when the samples are subsequently stored in N2. Specifically, our best samples did not exhibit any severe light-soaking effects and showed very high Qe lum directly after turning on the laser. Therefore, the champion values of Qe lum reported in Table 1 have been measured 28 after a maximum light-soaking time of ~5 min. In general, the measured PL spectral shapes did not exhibit any changes with time or intensity (see Figure S18). Monte Carlo method The Monte Carlo code for simulating ‘externally-observed’ PL spectra has been deposited and is freely available at https://github.com/pfassl/FaMi-model. The code in the repository is associated with a GNU General Public License (GPL 3.0). The Monte Carlo approach is discussed in detail in Note S5 and visualized in Figure S19. Curve fitting model The curve fitting procedure was performed using the curve fitting toolbox in Matlab using the least squares method (lsqcurvefit). A user-friendly Matlab app for performing the fitting (based upon Equation (12)) will be freely available at https://github.com/pfassl/FaMi-model soon. The app in the repository is associated with a GNU General Public License (GPL 3.0). Acknowledgements The authors thank Dmitry Busko for help and fruitful discussions regarding the integrating sphere setup and Mahdi Malekshahi Byranvand for help with fabrication of the two-step double-cation perovskite films. The authors acknowledge the financial supports by the Initiating and Networking funding of the Helmholtz Association (HYIG of Dr. U.W. Paetzold [VH-NG-1148]; Recruitment Initiative of Prof. B.S. Richards; the Helmholtz Energy Materials Foundry (HEMF); PEROSEED [ZT-0024]; Innovationpool); the Helmholtz Association – through the program “Science and Technology of Nanosystems (STN)”; the KIT Young Investigator Network; and the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (grants: PRINTPERO [03SF0557A]). F.J.B. and J.Z. acknowledge funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (Grant agreement No. 817494 “TRIFECTs”). Y. V. acknowledges funding from the European Research Council under the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme 29 (ERC Grant Agreement n° 714067, ENERGYMAPS) as well as the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) in the framework of the Special Priority Program (SPP 2196) project PERFECT PVs (#424216076). The authors gratefully acknowledge the help and support of the Karlsruhe School of Optics & Photonics (KSOP) and Max Planck School of Photonics (MPSP), respectively. Author contributions P.F. conceived the initial idea for this study and developed it further with support of U.W.P. and I.A.H. P.F. designed the experiments, fabricated the perovskite films, performed the integrating sphere measurements and analyzed all data. P.F. and V.L. developed the curve fitting model with helpful advice from L.F. and U.W.P. V.L. and P.F. wrote the code for the provided open-source Matlab app. I.A.H. initiated the idea for conducting Monte Carlo simulation and wrote the Matlab code. F.B. and P.F. performed and J.Z. supervised the work on the confocal PL microscopy measurements. I.A.H., Y.V., B.S.R and U.W.P. supervised the whole project. P.F. and U.W.P drafted the manuscript with support of I.A.H and all authors reviewed and commented on the paper. Declaration of Interests The authors declare no competing interests.