Thermal disorder driven magnetic phases in van der Waals magnet CrI3 Jaume Meseguer-S ́anchez1, Dina Abdul Wahab2, Hubertus Luetkens3, Grigol Taniashvili4, Efr ́en Navarro-Moratalla1,†, Zurab Guguchia3,†, Elton J. G. Santos5,† 1Instituto de Ciencia Molecular, Universitat de Val ́encia, Calle Catedr ́atico Jos ́e Beltr ́an Mart ́ınez 2, 46980, Paterna, Spain 2School of Mathematics and Physics, Queen’s University Belfast, BT7 1NN, United Kingdom 3Laboratory for Muon Spin Spectroscopy, Paul Scherrer Institute, CH-5232 Villigen PSI, Switzer- land 4Department of Physics, Tbilisi State University, Chavchavadze 3, GE-0128 Tbilisi, Georgia 5Institute for Condensed Matter Physics and Complex Systems, School of Physics and Astronomy, The University of Edinburgh, EH9 3FD, UK †Correspondences to: efren.navarro@me.com, zurab.guguchia@psi.ch, esantos@ed.ac.uk Magnetic phase transitions often occur spontaneously at specific critical temperatures and are instrumental to understand the origin of long-range spin order in condensed matter sys- tems. The presence of more than one critical temperature (Tc) has been observed in several compounds1–5 where the coexistence of competing magnetic orders highlights the importance of phase separation driven by different factors such as pressure, temperature and chemical composition. However, it is unknown whether recently discovered two-dimensional (2D) van der Walls (vdW) magnetic materials6,7 show such intriguing phenomena that can result in 1 arXiv:2010.04544v1 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 9 Oct 2020 rich phase diagrams with novel magnetic features to be explored. Here we show the exis- tence of three magnetic phase transitions at different Tc’s in 2D vdW magnet CrI3 revealed by a complementary suite of muon spin relaxation-rotation (μSR), superconducting quan- tum interference device (SQUID) magnetometry, and large-scale micromagnetic simulations including higher-order exchange interactions and dipolar fields8. We find that the tradition- ally identified Curie temperature of bulk CrI3 at 61 K9 does not correspond to the long- range order in the full volume (VM) of the crystal but rather a partial transition with less than ∼25% of VM being magnetically spin-ordered. This transition is composed of highly- disordered domains with the easy-axis component of the magnetization (Sz) not being fully spin-polarized but disordered by in-plane components (Sx, Sy) over the entire layer. As the system cools down, two additional phase transitions at 50 K and 25 K drive the system to 80% and nearly 100% of the magnetically ordered volume, respectively, where the ferromagnetic ground state has a marked Sz character yet also displaying finite contributions of Sx and Sy to the total magnetization. Our results indicate that volume-wise competing electronic phases play an important role in the magnetic properties of CrI3 which set a much lower threshold temperature for exploitation in magnetic device-platforms than initially considered. Competing electronic phases underlie a number of unusual physical phenomena in con- densed matter10–12. From superconductivity up to ferromagnetism, when the competition is size- able the conventional outcome is phase separation. Compounds that have shown such behaviour are mostly of complex magnetic structures including cuprates10, iron-based superconductors12, 2 ruthenates11, topological kagome magnets3 and manganites13,14. A contrasting case is found in the layered transition metal halides15 where the presence of heavy halide atoms like in CrI3 sta- bilises pronounced anisotropy constants resulting in long-range magnetic order in what appears to be a single ferromagnetic transition at a relatively high temperature6,16. Nevertheless, recent experiments17–20 have unveiled the presence of many subtleties in the magnetism of this compound which a single transition fails to capture. Firstly, CrI3 exhibits both antiferromagnetic and fer- romagnetic orders in thin layers driven by hydrostatic pressure17,18. These phases occur at the same critical temperature with a spatial separation of a few hundreds of nanometers and conse- quently there is no prelude of thermally-activated spin ordering. Secondly, multiple anomalies can be observed in the temperature dependence of the magnetic susceptibility below Tc9,19,20. Such anomalies imply that a more complex magnetic ordering involving spins not directly aligned with the easy-axis can emerge. Whether different magnetic phases may exist or competition occurs between them is largely unknown. However, these observations establish a much more intricate scenario than originally pictured for CrI3 with many hidden features that have important implica- tions in the ordering of the magnetic domains in the system. Here we use high-resolution μSR spectroscopy, complemented by SQUID magnometry and large scale micromagnetic simulations, to systematically study the thermal evolution of magnetic states in CrI3. Such suite is instrumental to identify, characterize and understand distinct macroscopic ground states with any competing magnetic phases. In a μSR experiment, positive muons implanted into a sample serve as extremely sensitive local microscopic probes to detect small internal magnetic fields and ordered magnetic volume 3 fractions in the bulk of magnetic systems. See details in Methods and Supplementary Sections S1-S2. Zero-field μSR time-spectra are recorded in a powder sample of CrI3 below (5 K, 30 K, 54 K and 60 K) and above (65 K and 80 K) the magnetic ordering temperature (Fig. 1a-b). A paramagnetic state is generally characterised by a small Gaussian Kubo-Toyabe depolarization of the muon spin originating from the interaction with randomly oriented nuclear magnetic moments. Conversely, the spectra from the highest measured temperature from 150 K down to 62 K, exhibit a relatively high transverse depolarization rate λT ≃ 4.9(2) μs−1. This reflects the occurrence of dense electronic Cr moments and indicates strong interactions between them. In this scenario a novel correlated paramagnetic state may be present in the system at temperatures above the actual Curie temperature. As the crystal is cooled down, in addition to the paramagnetic signal, an oscillating component with a single well defined frequency is observed at T ⪅ 62 K (Fig. 1a- b). Below 50 K, a spontaneous muon spin precession with two well-separated distinct precession frequencies is observed in the μSR spectra and persists down to 5 K. The temperature dependences of the internal fields (μ0Hμ = ω/γ−1 μ ) for the two components are shown in Fig. 2a. The low frequency component shows a monotonous decrease with increasing temperature and disappears at TC2 ≃ 50 K. The high frequency component decreases down to 50 K, above which it keeps a constant value within a few Kelvin’s range and then decreases again to disappear at TC1 ≃ 62 K. Thus, the two oscillatory components have clearly different transition temperatures. This implies the presence of two distinct magnetic transitions in CrI3. We also notice that an upturn on both μ0Hμ,1 and μ0Hμ,2 is seen below TC3 ≃ 30 K. Moreover, a strongly damped component appears below TC3 which is seen as some lost of initial asymmetry of the ZF-μSR signal. This suggests 4 the presence of another magnetic transition at this temperature. The temperature dependences of the relative weights of the individual components in the total μSR signal are shown in Fig. 2b. The weight of the high frequency component (component I) ω1 gradually increases below TC1 and reaches maximum at TC2, below which the second frequency appears. The third component raises below TC3 ≃ 30 K. The components I and II share the weight of (30 - 70) % in the temperature range between 30 K and 50 K. These results portray the existence of a clear phase diagram in the temperature domain, in excellent agreement with the magnetic singularities observed by SQUID measurements performed in a single crystal of CrI3 (see Supplementary Figure S2). Fig. 2c-d show the temperature dependences of the transverse λT and the longitudinal λL depolarisation rates, respectively, of components I and II. The λT is a measure of the width of the static magnetic field distribution at the muon site, and also reflects dynamical effects (spin fluctuations). The λL is determined by dynamic magnetic fluctuations only. For both components, λT is higher than λL in the whole temperature range, indicating that magnetism is mostly static in origin. However, λL1 has a higher overall value than λL2, implying that the magnetic order with TC1 ≃ 62 K contains more dynamics. The presence of three transitions are clearly substantiated by the anomalies, seen in λT and λL (Fig. 2c-d). Namely, the λT,1 starts to increase below TC1 and peaks at TC2, then decreases and tends to saturate. Nevertheless, it increments again below TC3. λT,2 also exhibits an increase below TC3. Similarly, λL,1 goes to high values for T < TC1, saturates at T < TC2 and then enlarges again for T < TC3, followed by a peak at lower temperature. We note that it is not possible to discriminate in the analysis the contribution of strongly damped components and a high frequency component into λL1 below 30 K and thus the peak in λL2 at low 5 temperatures could be due to the contribution from component III. Overall, these results point to the complex, unconventional thermal evolution of the magnetic states in CrI3. The behaviour observed involves a volume-wise interplay between various states, provid- ing an important constraint on theoretical models. One possible interpretation of the data is that below TC1 there is an evolution of the magnetic order in specific volumes of the crystal, which coexists with a correlated paramagnetic state. The second magnetic order thereby occurs within the paramagnetic regions below TC2. This interpretation is supported by the temperature depen- dent measurements of the total magnetic fraction Vm (Fig. 3). The magnetic fraction Vm does not acquire the full volume below TC1 ≃ 62 K. Instead, it gradually increases below TC1 and reaches ≃ 80 % at TC2 ≃ 50 K. An additional increase of Vm takes place below TC3 ≃ 25 K, at which the third strongly damped component appears and reaches nearly ≃ 100 %. The volume wise evolution of magnetic order across TC1, TC2 and TC3 in CrI3 strongly suggests the presence of distinct magnetic states in the separate volumes of the sample. In addition, we propose that while the frequency of the second component disappears above 50 K, this component exhibits a precursor correlated state up to the highest temperature investigated 150 K. To understand the microscopic mechanism of these phase transitions, we undertake macroscale spin dynamics which incorporated atomistic (several ̊A’s) and micromagnetic (μm-level) under- lying details of the magnetic and electronic structure of CrI3. We modelled the atomistic part using strongly correlated density functional theory based on Hubbard-U methods21 whereas the micromagnetic interactions are described through the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert (LLG) equation 6 techniques22. We have also taken into account dipolar fields and higher-order exchange interac- tions at the level of biquadratic exchange since its sizeable magnitude is important in the magnetic features of 2D magnets8. These approaches have been shown to be critical in the description of the spin properties of halide magnets at high-accuracy of critical temperatures, magnetic domains, and topological spin textures23,24. See further details in . We simulated the zero-field cooling processes for a large square flake of bulk CrI3 of dimensions 0.4 μm × 0.4 μm with a thickness above 200 nm thickness to avoid any coexistence of ferro- and anti-ferromagnetic phases in the system25. As a descriptor of the spin dynamics of the system we utilize the ratio between the num- ber of spins along the z−direction or easy-axis N(Sz), relative to the total number N(Stotal), that is, N(Sz)/N(Stotal). This allows us to access the number of sites with a specific spin-polarization into the volume of the material which provides information about the disorder caused by thermal fluctuations. We find that three main phases emerge in CrI3 as function of the temperature, which we name them as Disordered-I, Ordered, and Disordered-II (Figure 4). Each phase is labelled according to the degree of deviation relative to the easy-axis of the magnetization Sz (Fig. 4a). For instance, the Ordered phase is characteristic of magnitudes of |Sz| with high spin polarization along z, whereas Disordered-II indicates the opposite. The Disordered-I however sets an intermediate phase be- tween both states with different amount of disorder (Fig. 4b). Surprisingly, the number of spins in the volume of CrI3 with |Sz| > 0.99, corresponding to the full orientation along the easy-axis, is transitions. Most of the sites have a substantial amount of disorder with spins not completely fol- 7 lowing the easy-axis of the CrI3 but rather stabilising orientations with in-plane orientations (Sx and Sy). Such contributions only become negligible as the temperature drops down below 10 K where a sharp increment of N(Sz)/N(Stotal) appears which coincides with the antagonistic response of the Disordered-I phase. Spin sites with larger amount of disorder (e.g. Disordered-II) tend to disappear as the system cools down below 40 K. A spatial visualization of the spin orientations, shown in Fig. 4c for different temperatures confirm this description. Remarkably, it shows that mutually exclusive spatial magnetic regions with distinct projection of the magnetization exist in a wide temperature range, which is in perfect agreement with μSR results. However, in μSR the inhomogeneous and mutually exclusive spatial regions exist even at the base-T of 5 K, while the calculations show a sharp increment of the homogeneous Sz-axis oriented structure below 10 K (Figure 4b). The reason for this discrepancy could be that: (i) there is not a one-to-one corre- spondence in the temperature values between experiment and theory. (ii) In reality, much lower temperatures than 5 K are most likely required to get homogeneous magnetic states. It is worth mentioning that even when the system reached 0 K, where thermal fluctuations are inexistent, the spins still evolve in time as an effect due to high magnetic anisotropy and meta-stability of the magnetic domains in CrI323 (Fig. 4c). Our results suggest that the magnetic structure of bulk CrI3 is markedly composed by thermal disorder with no apparent formation of anti-ferromagnetic phases as observed in few layers 6,17,18,25. 8 Supplementary Materials Materials and Methods. Supplementary sections S1 to S5, and Figures S1-S2. Data Availability The data that support the findings of this study are available within the paper and its Supplementary Information. Competing interests The Authors declare no conflict of interests. Acknowledgments μSR experiments were performed at at the πM3 beam line (low background GPS instrument) of the Swiss Muon Source (SmuS) of the Paul Scherrer Insitute, Villigen, Switzerland, under pro- posal ID: 20190297 with EJGS as the PI. GT thank Prof. Alexander Shengelaya and the Georgian National Science Foundation (grant PHDF-19-060) for funding support to participate in μSR ex- periments led by ZG and EJGS. EJGS acknowledges computational resources through the UK Materials and Molecular Modelling Hub for access to THOMAS supercluster, which is partially 9 funded by EPSRC (EP/P020194/1); CIRRUS Tier-2 HPC Service (ec131 Cirrus Project) at EPCC (http://www.cirrus.ac.uk) funded by the University of Edinburgh and EPSRC (EP/P020267/1); ARCHER UK National Supercomputing Service (http://www.archer.ac.uk) via Project d429. EJGS acknowledges the EPSRC Early Career Fellowship (EP/T021578/1) and the University of Edin- burgh for funding support. ENM acknowledges the European Research Council (ERC) under the Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (ERC StG, grant agreement No. 803092).