A compact and tunable forward coupler based on high-impedance superconducting nanowires Marco Colangelo,1, ∗ Di Zhu,1, 2, ∗ Daniel F. Santavicca,3 Brenden A. Butters,1 Joshua C. Bienfang,4 and Karl K. Berggren1, † 1Research Laboratory of Electronics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA 2John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Science, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA 3Department of Physics, University of North Florida, Jacksonville, Florida 32224, USA 4National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899, USA (Dated: November 24, 2020) 1 arXiv:2011.11406v1 [physics.app-ph] 23 Nov 2020 Abstract Developing compact, low-dissipation, cryogenic-compatible microwave electronics is essential for scaling up low-temperature quantum computing systems. In this paper, we demonstrate an ultra-compact microwave directional forward coupler based on high-impedance slow-wave superconducting-nanowire transmission lines. The coupling section of the fabricated device has a footprint of 416 μm2. At 4.753 GHz, the input signal couples equally to the through port and forward-coupling port (50:50) at −6.7 dB with −13.5 dB isolation. The coupling ratio can be con- trolled with DC bias current or temperature by exploiting the dependence of the kinetic inductance on these quantities. The material and fabrication-process are suitable for direct integration with superconducting circuits, providing a practical solution to the signal distribution bottlenecks in developing large-scale quantum computers. The scalability of superconducting quantum systems is constrained by the distribution of microwave signals to the quantum processors . Within current designs, each qubit is individually wired for readout and control , entailing an increasing number of devices and cables as the size of the circuit is increased. Inevitably, the present approach will lead to challenges in packaging, routing, thermalization, and footprint . To realize large-scale circuits with thousands of qubits, most of the microwave electronics will need to be integrated on-chip , necessitating the development of miniaturized low-power, low-dissipation RF devices. More broadly, a small-footprint cryogenic microwave electronics platform is also required for the advancement of several other applications relying on processing electrical signals at low temperature, such as single-photon detection , superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) magnetometry , and radio astronomy . Many of the proposals to address scalability in superconducting circuits face several challenges in satisfying the requirements for on-chip integrability. Devices based on semi- conductors [9–13] either dissipate too much power to be operated at a few milliKelvin or are made from unconventional materials for which integration with superconductors has not yet been demonstrated. Among the superconducting solutions, 50 Ω transmission-line-based devices require too large a footprint for large-scale integration. Josephson junction (JJ) electronics are a natural candidate for integration with JJ-based quantum processors ∗ These two authors contributed equally † berggren@mit.edu 2 scanning electron micrographs (SEM) of the fabricated device: (i) device die mounted in the radio- frequency (RF) testing box; (ii) SEM showing the full four-port device before the fabrication of the dielectric spacer and the top ground; (iii) close-up SEM of the impedance-matching taper; (iv) close- up SEM of the coupled nanowire transmission lines. (b) Geometry, model, and implementation of coupler: two nanowire transmission lines brought together for a coupling length l: (i) analytical model: coupled LC ladder, where we explicitly separated the geometric (Faraday) component of the total line inductance per unit length (p.u.l.), LF, from the kinetic inductance p.u.l. Lk; C is the capacitance p.u.l. of each line; E is the coupling capacitance p.u.l.; M is the mutual inductance p.u.l.; (ii) Implementation as side-coupled striplines. In the analytical model, the gold layers (Au) have been treated as perfect electric conductors (PEC) (c) Simulation of the port voltages versus coupler length at 5 GHz for 50:50 forward coupling (Lk = 80 pH per square). [16–21], but they can be challenging to manufacture and require magnetic shielding. Recently, superconducting nanowires have emerged as an alternative approach to realize ultra-compact microwave devices . The high kinetic inductivity achieved with dis- 3 ordered superconducting thin-films provides an effective means of realizing extremely high characteristic-impedance transmission lines with zero DC resistance, minimal microwave dis- sipation, slow phase velocity (high effective refractive index), and very small footprint. The native high-impedance, high-index operation generates electromagnetically-protected mi- crowave environments that could well interface to superinductor-based qubits [24–27]. The compatibility with these applications is guaranteed by the rather conventional materials and by the few-layer fabrication process , making the devices realized with super- conducting nanowires a viable solution to the signal distribution bottlenecks of quantum computers. Conventional directional coupler modules split, combine and distribute microwave fields to the subsequent processing layers or to the readout . They carry out essen- tial processing tasks but take up a significant volume inside the cryostat. Here, we use high kinetic-inductance superconductors to demonstrate a compact high-impedance direc- tional coupler. Our miniaturized coupler is based on niobium nitride (NbN) superconducting nanowire side-coupled striplines embedded in a multilayer dieletric stack. Fig. 1(a) shows op- tical and scanning electron micrographs (SEM) of the fabricated device. We achieve forward coupling in the GHz range in an extremely reduced footprint and with impedance matching flexibility. We further demonstrate that the non-linear dependence of the nanowire’s kinetic inductance on DC current and temperature allow the microwave properties of the coupler to be tuned. We suggest this device may find immediate application in superconducting quan- tum computing systems and in other low-temperature applications where small-footprint on-chip coupling at microwave frequency is needed. Our device is designed following a traditional coupled-line architecture (Fig. 1(b)) where two superconducting nanowires are brought together for a coupling length l. The struc- ture can be modeled as a coupled LC ladder (Fig. 1(b)(i)) using a standard coupled-mode formalism [32–34], with some modifications to capture the kinetic-inductive transmission line . To reflect the high-inductivity behavior of nanowires, we explicitly separate the kinetic contribution (Lk), from the geometric (Faraday) contribution (LF) to the total line inductance per unit length. The coupling produces mode splitting into common (c) and differential (π) modes, with different effective indices and propagation constants (βc and βπ). In a transmission line, a sinusoidal signal with frequency ω is a superposition of these eigenmodes and energy is continuously transferred between the two lines with a periodicity 4 lπ = π/∆β = π/ (βπ − βc). A section of coupled transmission line with a length that is an odd-integer multiple of lπ/2 can perform, in the ideal case, 3 dB forward coupling at ω. In RF transmission lines made of conventional materials, the splitting in propagation constant ∆β is relatively small and the minimum length required to achieve forward cou- pling (at a target frequency) is relatively large. Therefore, it is generally more convenient to exploit the difference in the characteristic impedance of the eigenmodes to realize low- coupling backward directional couplers . With coupled superconducting nanowires, the combination of high-kinetic inductance lines, high coupling capacitance, and low loss boosts ∆β ∝ √LkC � 1 + 2E/C and allows forward coupling in a small footprint (lπ is rela- tively small). Moreover, backward reflections can be minimized by gradually tapering the full derivation of the model. To practically illustrate this concept, we consider the side-coupled stripline implementa- tion, shown in Fig. 1(b)(ii), which we used to realize our device. The lines are made of a 300 nm-wide, 7 nm-thick NbN nanowire with a sheet kinetic inductivity of Lk = 80 pH per square, separated by a 200 nm wide gap. The structures are patterned on silicon and refer- enced to a 60 nm topside gold ground plane through a 450 nm thick hydrogen silsequioxane (HSQ) dielectric layer, with εr = 2.9 . In this microwave environment, the simulated characteristic impedance is Z0 = 1446 Ω and the effective index neff = 54.5, which reduces the phase velocity to 1.8% of c and highly compresses the guided wavelength. See SM for details on the simulations. For clarity, the port naming convention is shown in Fig. 1(b). Fig. 1(c) shows that a 5 GHz signal injected through the input port of the coupling section takes lπ/2 = π/ (2∆β) = 539 μm to forward couple 50% of the power to the other branch. Compared to the same structure realized with conventional conductors , this coupling section achieves almost two orders of magnitude footprint reduction (see SM). The device was fabricated with parameters based on the modeling results. See SM for details on the fabrication. Fig. 1(a) shows micrographs of the device before the fabrication of the dielectric spacer and the top ground. In the final design we used a coupling length l = 520 μm and we included four 2.5 GHz high-pass Klopfenstein impedance-matching ta- were also fabricated to allow wire-bonding and packaging. The footprint of the full super- conducting structure (as outlined in Fig. 1(a)(ii)) was 1.75 mm2, while the high-impedance 5 eling of the coupling section (without taper) and simulation of the impedance-matched coupler. Above 3 GHz the curves match, showing that the impedance-matching taper, interfacing the high- impedance coupling section to the 50 Ω RF electronics, does not disturb the coupling operation. (b) Measured microwave response of the fabricated device at 1.3 K. We compare the data to simu- lation, corrected for fabrication non-idealities, and including normal conductor losses from the Au ground plane and CPW feedlines. The balanced forward coupling is observed at 4.753 GHz. coupling section only occupied 416 μm2. The addition of the tapers, while increasing the total footprint of the device, improves flexibility, affording the possibility to interface the high-impedance coupling section to lower- impedance environments without disturbing the forward coupling operation. In this case we interfaced the high-impedance nanowire transmission line coupler to 50 Ω RF electronics. Fig. 2(a) shows that, in the taper passband (f ≥ 3 GHz), the simulation results (full wave) of the impedance-matched coupler correctly reproduce the analytic calculation of the high- impedance coupling section response. The 50% coupling point is at 4.99 GHz, with the isolation parameter at −21.9 dB. See SM for details on the simulations. We measured the microwave response of the fabricated coupler at 1.3 K with a vec- tor network analyzer providing effective signal power lower than −60 dBm. In the same cooldown, we calibrated the cable and connector loss (cryostat to device box inputs/outputs) to scale the measured data. Fig. 2(b) shows that the forward coupling behavior is observed. At 4.753 GHz, the input signal from Port 1 couples equally to the through port (Port 2) 6 and forward-coupling port (Port 4) with a level of −6.7 dB, and the isolation parameter S31 = −13.5 dB. For comparison, we show simulations of the impedance-matched coupler, including the response of the feed lines, and corrected to account for fabrication non-idealities (see SM for additional details). The slight discrepancy (≈ 500 MHz) between the measured and simulated coupling frequency can be attributed to the uncertainties in the device param- eters. For example, the fabrication process, consisting of several lithographic and etching steps, may induce a degradation of the film leading to an increase in the kinetic inductance that would explain this observation. We attribute the inconsistency in the magnitude of the S parameters to backward reflections, device-level conductor losses, and to additional contributions that were not accounted for in the calibration. In this experiment, the cal- ibration does not account for losses and reflection from the sample holder PCB and wire bonds. The agreement with the simulation improves when we include normal conductor losses for the Au layers. More details can be found in the SM. The isolation parameter is at a significantly different level from the expected value. This discrepancy might be caused by factors such as the impedance-matching taper deviating from the prescribed design, with sub-optimal impedance matching and additional backward reflections, and the specific full device simulation not including element-to-element transitions (e.g. stripline to CPW). See SM for additional details. The microwave response was characterized with effective injected currents much smaller than the device depairing current Id (see SM). In this small-signal condition the device response is independent of the applied microwave power. However, the kinetic inductance strongly depends on carrier density, which can be tuned with current (Ib) and with tem- is the critical temperature. Leveraging these dependencies affords the possibility of dynam- ically modulating the microwave characteristics of the modes in the lines, creating active, tunable devices. When the bias current in the nanowire approaches the depairing current (x → 1), the kinetic inductance diverges hyperbolically Lk(x) ∝ (1 − xα)−1/α, with α de- termined by the operating temperature of the device . Due to fabrication imperfections, superconducting nanowire devices similar to the ones described in this paper typically can only reach a fraction of the depairing current, with the switching current Isw ≈ 70% Id . Fig. 3(a) shows that with this assumption and given the measurement condition (α = 2.27) , a 30% theoretical maximum increment of the kinetic inductance might be expected. 7 response tunability at = 4.75 GHz with bias current and temperature. (a) Kinetic inductance’s dependence on current, for Isw/Id = 0.7, according to the fast relaxation model with α = 2.27. (b) Tunability of the transmission (S21) and coupling (S41) response as a function of the current (nor- malized by Isw) supplied through the isolation port. The measured data (symbols) well match our analytical model (lines) based on coupled-mode formulation with current-dependent kinetic induc- tance. (c) Kinetic inductance’s dependence on temperature calculated from the explicit solution of the temperature dependence of the superconducting gap ∆(T), with N(0)V = 0.32 and Tc = 8 K (see SM). (d) Modulation of transmission and coupling parameters, as a function of the cryostat temperature (normalized by Tc). The measured data (symbols) match our analytical model (lines) based on the coupled-mode formulation with temperature-dependent kinetic inductance. In the coupled-line architecture the two nanowires are galvanically isolated. Hence, the ki- netic inductance of each nanowire can be tuned independently. We characterized the device tunability at 4.75 GHz by biasing the coupler through the isolation port and measuring the coupled and transmitted powers. Fig. 3(b) shows the change of scattering parameters ∆S with the applied current, in agreement with analytical modeling. The increase of kinetic inductance increases S41 and reduces S21 at the original equal-coupling frequency, which in turn shifts the 50:50 coupling point to a lower frequency (see SM). When changing the operating temperature, a much wider variation of the kinetic in- 8 ductance, and hence of the scattering parameters, can be achieved. Fig. 3(c) shows the expected theoretical temperature dependence of the kinetic inductance obtained through numerical calculation of the superconducting gap, and the corresponding kinetic inductance We characterized the coupling tunability by varying the base temperature of the cryostat and measuring the S21 and S41, at 4.75 GHz. With this measurement setup, the variation of the temperature modulates the kinetic inductance of both the nanowires. Fig. 3(d) shows tunability of the parameters with temperature and is in fair agreement with the model. The observed discrepancies with the theoretical curves are attributed to the uncertainty in the modeling parameters used for the calculation of ∆(T). Moreover, as the calculation only in- cludes the coupling section, the impact of other elements of the device (e.g. tapers) was not captured. Note that when the kinetic inductance is far from the design value, the microwave characteristics of the taper can significantly diverge from the intended behavior. The device presented in this work achieves 50:50 forward coupling in a dramatically re- duced footprint by exploiting the properties of high-inductance superconducting nanowire transmission lines. The coupling section, as configured here, occupies only 416 μm2 and can be integrated as-is in high-impedance environment circuits with Z0 ≈ 1.5 kΩ. Moreover, as the characteristic-impedance depends strongly on the device geometry, the device can be matched to a wide variety of high-impedance environments by redesigning the coupling section’s width and length, while keeping a small footprint. As mentioned above, the possi- bility of performing impedance matching using tapered structures allows one to interface the directional coupler to lower-impedance environment as well. The total occupied footprint, even including the tapers, is still lower than other conventional normal-conductor coupler designs, such as hybrid, Lange, or parallel lines , which require ≈ 10 mm2. Additional footprint reduction may be achieved by optimizing the packing of current layouts, or by using a higher effective-index transmission-line architecture . Alternatively, a broadside- coupler architecture might be realized allowing an increase of the capacitive coupling and a further reduction of the coupling length (SM). The model developed to support the design of the device is in agreement with the mea- sured response. The disagreement with the measured data, observed in the magnitude of the scattering parameters, are partially due to backward reflections and to device-level losses which are not accounted for in the system calibration. The effects induced by the use of 9 normal conductors (feed lines and ground plane) or lossy dielectrics can be addressed by redesigning the material stack and adapting the layout. The device model also does not in- clude the power-dependent non-linear effects that might play an additional role when driving the coupler in the highly non-linear kinetic-inductance regime. This could contribute to the discrepancies observed when testing the coupler for t → 1, where t is the reduced tempera- ture. The study of the non-linearities in high-kinetic-inductance transmission lines is beyond the scope of this paper. The tunability of the coupling parameters opens up the opportunity for the realization of high-impedance tunable microwave devices. For example, a high-impedance single-pole double-throw non-linear switch could be realized based on this coupler architecture. Simi- larly, tunability with temperature may become practical if a heater element is fabricated in close proximity to the coupling section. We suggest this device may find application in existing superconducting quantum archi- tectures, where the integration of superconducting nanowires, in the form of superinductors, has already been demonstrated . A high-impedance cryogenic tunable coupler could be used for tunable qubit-qubit coupling , on-chip integration of novel readout techniques , and on-chip signal processing and multiplexing, drastically reducing the necessary wiring from couplers and splitter on the higher temperature stage to the processor at mK. In the effort to scale the size of single-photon detectors arrays, this device could be used to implement architectures based on frequency-multiplexing readout . Further development of this nanowire-based technology may lead to the realization of a family of ultra-compact microwave devices that form the basis of a new superconducting nanowire monolithic microwave integrated circuit technology. See Supplemental Material for more details on modeling, simulation, fabrication and measurements. All files related to a published paper are stored as a single deposit and assigned a Supplemental Material URL. This URL appears in the article’s reference list. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank K. O’Brien, K. Peng, M. Naghiloo for helpful discussions. We thank E. Toomey, J. Simonaitis, and M. Bionta for critical reading of the manuscript. Support for this work was provided in part by the National Science Foundation grants under contract No. ECCS- 10 2000743 and ECCS-2000778 (UNF), and by the Army Research Office (ARO) under Cooper- ative Agreement Number W911NF-16-2-0192. The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of the Army Research Office or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Government purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation herein. Di Zhu was supported by the National Science Scholarship from A*STAR, Singapore, and Harvard Quantum Initiative Postdoctoral Fellowship. A. Blais, S. M. Girvin, and W. D. Oliver, Quantum information processing and quantum optics with circuit quantum electrodynamics, Nat. Phys. 16, 247 (2020). F. Arute, K. Arya, R. Babbush, D. Bacon, J. C. Bardin, R. Barends, R. Biswas, S. Boixo, F. G. Brandao, D. A. Buell, et al., Quantum supremacy using a programmable superconducting processor. Nature 574, 505–510 (2019), Nature 574, 505 (2019). J. M. Gambetta, J. M. Chow, and M. Steffen, Building logical qubits in a superconducting quantum computing system, npj Quantum Inf. 3, 1 (2017), arXiv:1510.04375. I. Holzman and Y. Ivry, Superconducting Nanowires for Single-Photon Detection: Progress, Challenges, and Opportunities, Adv. Quantum Technol. 2, 1800058 (2019). R. Fagaly, Superconducting quantum interference device instruments and applications, Review of Scientific Instruments 77, 101101 (2006). M. Buchner, K. H ̈ofler, B. Henne, V. Ney, and A. Ney, Tutorial: Basic principles, limits of detection, and pitfalls of highly sensitive SQUID magnetometry for nanomagnetism and spintronics, J. Appl. Phys. 124, 161101 (2018). J. Zmuidzinas, Superconducting microresonators: Physics and applications, Annu. Rev. Con- dens. Matter Phys. 3, 169 (2012). S. McHugh, B. A. Mazin, B. Serfass, S. Meeker, K. O’Brien, R. Duan, R. Raffanti, and D. Werthimer, A readout for large arrays of microwave kinetic inductance detectors, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 83, 44702 (2012), arXiv:1203.5861. J. C. Bardin, E. Jeffrey, E. Lucero, T. Huang, O. Naaman, R. Barends, T. White, M. Giustina, D. Sank, P. Roushan, K. Arya, B. Chiaro, J. Kelly, J. Chen, B. Burkett, Y. Chen, 11 A. Dunsworth, A. Fowler, B. Foxen, C. Gidney, R. Graff, P. Klimov, J. Mutus, M. McEwen, A. Megrant, M. Neeley, C. Neill, C. Quintana, A. Vainsencher, H. Neven, and J. Martinis, A 28nm Bulk-CMOS 4-to-8GHz 2mW Cryogenic Pulse Modulator for Scalable Quantum Com- puting, in Dig. Tech. Pap. - IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf., Vol. 2019-February (IEEE, B. Patra, R. M. Incandela, J. P. Van Dijk, H. A. Homulle, L. Song, M. Shahmohammadi, R. B. Staszewski, A. Vladimirescu, M. Babaie, F. Sebastiano, and E. Charbon, Cryo-CMOS Circuits and Systems for Quantum Computing Applications, IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits 53, J. M. Hornibrook, J. I. Colless, I. D. Conway Lamb, S. J. Pauka, H. Lu, A. C. Gossard, J. D. Watson, G. C. Gardner, S. Fallahi, M. J. Manfra, and D. J. Reilly, Cryogenic control architec- ture for large-scale quantum computing, Phys. Rev. Appl. 3, 24010 (2015), arXiv:1409.2202. P. Borodulin, N. El-Hinnawy, A. L. Graninger, M. R. King, C. R. Padilla, L. N. Upton, R. T. Hinkey, T. E. Schlesinger, A. A. Pesetski, M. E. Sherwin, and R. M. Young, Operation of a Latching, Low-Loss, Wideband Microwave Phase-Change Switch Below 1 K, J. Low Temp. Phys. 194, 273 (2019). A. Ruffino, Y. Peng, F. Sebastiano, M. Babaie, and E. Charbon, A 6.5-ghz cryogenic all-pass filter circulator in 40-nm cmos for quantum computing applications, in 2019 IEEE Radio Frequency Integrated Circuits Symposium (RFIC) (IEEE, 2019) pp. 107–110. M. Pechal, J. C. Besse, M. Mondal, M. Oppliger, S. Gasparinetti, and A. Wallraff, Supercon- ducting Switch for Fast On-Chip Routing of Quantum Microwave Fields, Phys. Rev. Appl. 6, H. S. Ku, F. Mallet, L. R. Vale, K. D. Irwin, S. E. Russek, G. C. Hilton, and K. W. Lehnert, Design and testing of superconducting microwave passive components for quantum information processing, IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 21, 452 (2011), arXiv:1010.3232. E. Leonard, M. A. Beck, J. Nelson, B. G. Christensen, T. Thorbeck, C. Howington, A. Oprem- cak, I. V. Pechenezhskiy, K. Dodge, N. P. Dupuis, M. D. Hutchings, J. Ku, F. Schlenker, J. Sut- tle, C. Wilen, S. Zhu, M. G. Vavilov, B. L. Plourde, and R. McDermott, Digital Coherent Control of a Superconducting Qubit, Phys. Rev. Appl. 11, 14009 (2019), arXiv:1806.07930. G. Brummer, R. Rafique, and T. A. Ohki, Phase and amplitude modulator for microwave pulse generation, IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 21, 583 (2011). 12 B. J. Chapman, B. A. Moores, E. I. Rosenthal, J. Kerckhoff, and K. W. Lehnert, General purpose multiplexing device for cryogenic microwave systems, Appl. Phys. Lett. 108, 222602 O. Naaman, J. A. Strong, D. G. Ferguson, J. Egan, N. Bailey, and R. T. Hinkey, Joseph- son junction microwave modulators for qubit control, J. Appl. Phys. 121, 73904 (2017), O. Naaman, M. O. Abutaleb, C. Kirby, and M. Rennie, On-chip Josephson junction microwave switch, Appl. Phys. Lett. 108, 112601 (2016), arXiv:1512.01484. B. Abdo, M. Brink, and J. M. Chow, Gyrator Operation Using Josephson Mixers, Phys. Rev. Appl. 8, 34009 (2017), arXiv:1702.01149. P. J. Lowell, J. A. Mates, W. B. Doriese, G. C. Hilton, K. M. Morgan, D. S. Swetz, J. N. Ullom, and D. R. Schmidt, A thin-film cryotron suitable for use as an ultra-low-temperature switch, Appl. Phys. Lett. 109, 142601 (2016). A. Wagner, L. Ranzani, G. Ribeill, and T. A. Ohki, Demonstration of a superconducting nanowire microwave switch, Appl. Phys. Lett. 115, 172602 (2019), arXiv:1910.09614. N. A. Masluk, I. M. Pop, A. Kamal, Z. K. Minev, and M. H. Devoret, Microwave characteriza- tion of josephson junction arrays: Implementing a low loss superinductance, Phys. Rev. Lett. P. Groszkowski, A. D. Paolo, A. L. Grimsmo, A. Blais, D. I. Schuster, A. A. Houck, and J. Koch, Coherence properties of the 0-π qubit, New J. Phys. 20, 43053 (2018). M. Kjaergaard, M. E. Schwartz, J. Braum ̈uller, P. Krantz, J. I.-J. Wang, S. Gustavsson, and W. D. Oliver, Superconducting qubits: Current state of play, Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys. 11 (2019). L. Gr ̈unhaupt, M. Spiecker, D. Gusenkova, N. Maleeva, S. T. Skacel, I. Takmakov, F. Valenti, P. Winkel, H. Rotzinger, W. Wernsdorfer, A. V. Ustinov, and I. M. Pop, Granular aluminium as a superconducting material for high-impedance quantum circuits, Nat. Mater. 18, 816 T. M. Hazard, A. Gyenis, A. Di Paolo, A. T. Asfaw, S. A. Lyon, A. Blais, and A. A. Houck, Nanowire Superinductance Fluxonium Qubit, Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 10504 (2019), D. Niepce, J. Burnett, and J. Bylander, High kinetic inductance nbn nanowire superinductors, 13 Physical Review Applied 11, 044014 (2019). X. Gu, A. F. Kockum, A. Miranowicz, Y. xi Liu, and F. Nori, Microwave photonics with superconducting quantum circuits, Phys. Rep. 718-719, 1 (2017), arXiv:1707.02046. S. Krinner, S. Storz, P. Kurpiers, P. Magnard, J. Heinsoo, R. Keller, J. L ̈utolf, C. Eichler, and A. Wallraff, Engineering cryogenic setups for 100-qubit scale superconducting circuit systems, EPJ Quantum Technol. 6, 2 (2019), arXiv:1806.07862. K. C. Gupta, R. Garg, I. Bahl, and P. Bhartia, Microstrip Lines and Slotlines (Second Edition) (Artech house, 1996). D. M Pozar, Microwave Engineering, 3rd (2005). R. Crampagne, L. Jinich, and G. Khoo, Asymmetric coupled lines in an inhomogeneous medium, Electron. Lett. 12, 629 (1976). D. Zhu, Microwave Engineering in Superconducting Nanowires for Single-Photon Detection, Ph.D. thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (2019). M. Morgan and S. Weinreb, Octave-bandwidth high-directivity microstrip codirectional cou- plers, in IEEE MTT-S Int. Microw. Symp. Dig., Vol. 2 (IEEE, 2003) pp. 1227–1230. G. Maier, Low dielectric constant polymers for microelectronics (2001). D. Zhu, Q. Y. Zhao, H. Choi, T. J. Lu, A. E. Dane, D. Englund, and K. K. Berggren, A scalable multi-photon coincidence detector based on superconducting nanowires, Nat. Nanotechnol. 13, P. K. Ik ̈al ̈ainen and G. L. Matthaei, Wideband, forward-coupling microstrip hybrids with high directivity, IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech. 35, 719 (1987). R. W. Klopfenstein, A Transmission Line Taper of Improved Design, Proc. IRE 44, 31 (1956). D. Zhu, M. Colangelo, B. A. Korzh, Q. Y. Zhao, S. Frasca, A. E. Dane, A. E. Velasco, A. D. Beyer, J. P. Allmaras, E. Ramirez, W. J. Strickland, D. F. Santavicca, M. D. Shaw, and K. K. Berggren, Superconducting nanowire single-photon detector with integrated impedance- matching taper, Appl. Phys. Lett. 114, 42601 (2019), arXiv:1811.03991. Q. Y. Zhao, D. Zhu, N. Calandri, A. E. Dane, A. N. McCaughan, F. Bellei, H. Z. Wang, D. F. Santavicca, and K. K. Berggren, Single-photon imager based on a superconducting nanowire delay line, Nat. Photonics 11, 247 (2017). D. Zhu, M. Colangelo, C. Chen, B. A. Korzh, F. N. Wong, M. D. Shaw, and K. K. Berggren, Resolving photon numbers using a superconducting nanowire with impedance-matching taper, 14 Nano Lett. 20, 3858 (2020). J. R. Clem and V. G. Kogan, Kinetic impedance and depairing in thin and narrow su- perconducting films, Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 86, 174521 (2012), arXiv:1207.6421. S. Frasca, B. Korzh, M. Colangelo, D. Zhu, A. E. Lita, J. P. Allmaras, E. E. Wollman, V. B. Verma, A. E. Dane, E. Ramirez, A. D. Beyer, S. W. Nam, A. G. Kozorezov, M. D. Shaw, and K. K. Berggren, Determining the depairing current in superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors, Phys. Rev. B 100, 54520 (2019), arXiv:1904.08596. D. F. Santavicca, J. K. Adams, L. E. Grant, A. N. McCaughan, and K. K. Berggren, Microwave dynamics of high aspect ratio superconducting nanowires studied using self-resonance, J. Appl. J. C. Gallop, SQUIDs, Josephson Eff. Supercond. Electron. (Courier Corporation, 2018) pp. T. Polakovic, S. Lendinez, J. E. Pearson, A. Hoffmann, V. Yefremenko, C. L. Chang, W. Arm- strong, K. Hafidi, G. Karapetrov, and V. Novosad, Room temperature deposition of supercon- ducting niobium nitride films by ion beam assisted sputtering, APL Mater. 6, 76107 (2018), J. Ku, V. Manucharyan, and A. Bezryadin, Superconducting nanowires as nonlinear inductive elements for qubits, Physical Review B 82, 134518 (2010). P. Krantz, M. Kjaergaard, F. Yan, T. P. Orlando, S. Gustavsson, and W. D. Oliver, A quantum engineer’s guide to superconducting qubits, Appl. Phys. Rev. 6, 21318 (2019), B. Abdo, N. T. Bronn, O. Jinka, S. Olivadese, A. D. C ́orcoles, V. P. Adiga, M. Brink, R. E. Lake, X. Wu, D. P. Pappas, and J. M. Chow, Active protection of a superconducting qubit with an interferometric Josephson isolator, Nat. Commun. 10, 1 (2019), arXiv:1810.07234. S. Doerner, A. Kuzmin, S. Wuensch, I. Charaev, F. Boes, T. Zwick, and M. Siegel, Frequency- multiplexed bias and readout of a 16-pixel superconducting nanowire single-photon detector array, Appl. Phys. Lett. 111, 32603 (2017). A. K. Sinclair, E. Schroeder, D. Zhu, M. Colangelo, J. Glasby, P. D. Mauskopf, H. Mani, and K. K. Berggren, Demonstration of Microwave Multiplexed Readout of DC-Biased Supercon- ducting Nanowire Detectors, IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 29, 1 (2019), arXiv:1905.06880. 15 Supplemental Materials: A compact and tunable forward coupler based on high-impedance superconducting nanowires Marco Colangelo,1, ∗ Di Zhu,1, 2, ∗ Daniel F. Santavicca,3 Brenden A. Butters,1 Joshua C. Bienfang,4 and Karl K. Berggren1, † 1Research Laboratory of Electronics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA 2John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Science, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA 3Department of Physics, University of North Florida, Jacksonville, Florida 32224, USA 4National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899, USA 1 arXiv:2011.11406v1 [physics.app-ph] 23 Nov 2020 CONTENTS I. Analytic model 3 II. Microwave Simulation and Design 6 A. Generalities 6 B. Single nanowire microstrip 7 C. Coupled nanowire microstrip lines 7 D. Simulation of the full device 7 E. Design of the impedance-matching taper 8 F. Parallel line coupler with asymmetric dielectrics 9 G. Qualitative simulation of a broadside coupler architecture 10 III. Measurement setups, calibration and characterization 12 A. Estimation of Isw and Tc 12 B. Measurement setups for microwave characterization 13 C. Calibration and raw traces 13 D. Coupler phase 14 E. Taper characterization 15 IV. Fabrication process 16 V. Current in the nanowire 18 VI. Kinetic inductance non-linearities 18