1 Synthesis of high-entropy-alloy-type superconductors (Fe,Co,Ni,Rh,Ir)Zr2 with tunable transition temperature Md. Riad Kasem1, Aichi Yamashita1, Yosuke Goto1, Tatsuma D. Matsuda1, Yoshikazu Mizuguchi1* 1. Department of Physics, Tokyo Metropolitan University, 1-1, Minami-osawa, Hachioji, (Corresponding author: mizugu@tmu.ac.jp) KEYWORDS: New superconductors, High-entropy-alloy-type superconductor, TrZr2, Tunable Tc Abstract We report on the synthesis and superconductivity of high-entropy-alloy-type (HEA-type) compounds TrZr2 (Tr = Fe, Co, Ni, Rh, Ir), in which the Tr site satisfies the criterion of HEA. Polycrystalline samples of HEA-type TrZr2 with four different compositions at the Tr site were synthesized by arc melting method. The phase purity and crystal structure were examined by Rietveld refinement of X-ray diffraction profile. It has been confirmed that the obtained samples have a CuAl2-type tetragonal structure. From analyses of elemental composition and mixing entropy at the Tr site, the HEA state for the Tr site was confirmed. The physical properties of obtained samples were characterized by electrical resistivity and magnetization measurements. All the samples show bulk superconductivity with various transition temperature (Tc). The Tc varied according to the compositions and showed correlations with the lattice constant c and Tr-Zr bond lengths. Introduction of an HEA site in TrZr2 is useful to achieve systematic tuning of Tc with a wide temperature range, which would be a merit for superconductivity application. 2 1. Introduction Superconductivity is a macroscopic quantum phenomenon typically characterized by zero-resistivity state, Meissner effect, and Josephson effects. Superconductors are used in large-scale application and device applications . Particularly, low-transition temperature (low-Tc) metals and alloy, which is mostly Nb or Pb-based alloys, are used for device components like Josephson junctions. Since superconducting devices have been expected to be used in various purposes and scales in near future, development of new superconducting materials, which are easy to use in practical application and have tunable superconducting properties, are needed. In this study, to develop new superconducting materials system having tunability of Tc, we focus on high-entropy-alloy-type (HEA-type) compounds. Recently, superconductivity in HEAs have been getting attention due to the possible robustness of superconducting states under extreme conditions and flexible tuning of superconducting properties by alloying , since the discovery of a Ta34Nb33Hf8Zr15Ti11 superconductor with Tc = 7.3 K . HEAs are typically defined as alloys composed of five or more elements with a concentration range between 5 to 35at%. Due to extremely high performance as high-temperature materials, structural materials, medical materials, etc., which are most probably resulted from high configurational mixing entropy (ΔSmix) defined as ΔSmix = -R Σi ci ln ci, where ci and R are compositional ratio and the gas constant, HEAs have been extensively studied in the field of material science, engineering, chemistry and physics . To further extend the field of HEA superconductors, we have synthesized HEA-type compounds, in which the crystal structure possesses an HEA-type site . In addition, by Fujita et al., single crystals of RE(O,F)BiS2 layered superconductors with an HEA-type rare-earth (RE) site were grown . Although the number of the examples of HEA-type superconductors is still limited, various (positive or negative) effect of increased mixing entropy (ΔSmix) to the superconducting characteristics have been observed . Very recently, we reported the synthesis of Co0.2Ni0.1Cu0.1Rh0.3Ir0.3Zr2 and the emergence of bulk superconductivity with Tc = 8 K . This material has a tetragonal CuAl2-type structure (I4/mcm, #140) and is a member of TrZr2 (Tr: transition metal). TrZr2 has been studied as 3 superconducting system with a relatively high Tc up to 11.3 K for Tr = Rh and as hydrogen-storage materials . The Tc of those TrZr2 varies largely by element substitution: Tc = 0.17, 5.5, 1.6, 11.3, 7.5 K for Tr = Fe, Co, Ni, Rh, and Ir, respectively. On the basis of the fact, we considered that the TrZr2 system is suitable for Tc tuning with a wide temperature range. In this study, we choose Tr = Fe, Ni, Co, Rh, and Ir because pure TrZr2 compounds with those Tr elements show superconductivity as mentioned above. We have synthesized four HEA-type (Fe,Co,Ni,Rh,Ir)Zr2 polycrystalline samples and observed bulk superconductivity with variable Tc by changing the Tr-site compositions. 2. Materials and methods Polycrystalline samples of TrZr2 with Tr = (A) Fe0.1Co0.2Ni0.1Rh0.3Ir0.3, (B) Fe0.1Co0.3Ni0.2Rh0.1Ir0.3, (C) Fe0.2Co0.2Ni0.2Rh0.2Ir0.2, and (D) Fe0.3Co0.2Ni0.3Rh0.1Ir0.1 were synthesized by arc melting in Ar atmosphere. Powders of pure Co (99%), Ni (99.9%), Fe (99.9%), Rh (99.9%), and Ir (99.9%), were mixed with a certain composition by mortar and pestle and pelletized into 7mm in diameter. The metal pellet and plates of pure Zr (99.2%) were used as starting materials. To obtain homogeneous sample, arc melting was repeated five times for all the samples. The weight (typically 1 g in total) loss was less than 1 % for all samples. The chemical compositions of the obtained samples were characterized by energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence analysis with a spot size of 0.9 mm on JSX-1000S (JEOL). The phase purity and the crystal structure were examined by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) with Cu-Kα radiation by the θ-2θ method on Miniflex-600 (RIGAKU) equipped with a high-resolution semiconductor detector D/tex-Ultra. The obtained XRD patterns were refined by the Rietveld method using RIETAN-FP , and schematic images of the refined crystal structure were depicted using VESTA . Electrical resistivity was measured by the four-probe method with a current of 5 A on a GM refrigerator system (AXIS). Magnetization measurements were performed by a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) on MPMS-3 (Quantum Design) under a magnetic field of 1 mT. The magnetic Tc was estimated as a temperature where magnetization clearly begins to decrease due to the emergence of diamagnetism. Irreversibility temperature (Tirr), which indicates the 4 emergence of superconducting current, was estimated as the temperature where the zero-field cooling (ZFC) data deviates from field cooling (FC) data. See Supporting Information (Fig. S1) for estimations of Tc and Tirr. 3. Results The analyzed compositions and estimated ΔSmix (Tr site) are listed in Table I. Since the actual compositions for the Tr site are close to starting nominal ones, we use starting nominal composition when displaying the results for the samples in this paper. Examined samples are labeled (A)–(D) according to the nominal compositions described in the synthesis part. In addition, the compositional ratio of all the constituent Tr-site elements for all the samples satisfy the criterion of HEA, which is 5 to 35 at%, and the estimated mixing respectively. impurity peaks for cubic IrZr2 (space group: No. 227) were observed. The main peaks of the XRD patterns were indexed by the tetragonal CuAl2-type structure (space group: I4/mcm). As shown in Fig. 1(b), the XRD peaks shift to higher angles from (A) to (D), which indicates that lattice constants decrease by decreasing average ionic radius of Tr. Figure 2 shows the results of the Rietveld refinements for sample (A)–(D). The reliability factor of the Rietveld refinement (Rwp) in a single-phase analysis was 6.2%, 5.6%, 4.6%, and 3.9% for sample (A), (B), (C), and (D), respectively. Those low Rwp support the synthesis of high-purity polycrystalline samples by arc melting and the appropriateness of the CuAl2-type structural model. The structural parameters obtained from the Rietveld analyses are summarized in Fe0.2Co0.2Ni0.2Rh0.2Ir0.2Zr2, in which the Tr site is occupied by five transition metals. Three Zr-Zr bonds and two Tr-Zr bonds were defined as shown in the images. (D). As shown in Fig. 3(a), zero resistivity was observed at Tczero = 6.8, 5.7, 4.9, 3.9 K for 5 the metallic temperature dependence of resistivity. The large residual resistivity ratio was observed for all the sample, which is a common trend seen in several HEA-type superconductors . All the samples showed large diamagnetic signals. The observed ZFC and FC data show features of a typical type-II superconductor. The ZFC magnetization at 2 K for all the samples exceed a value expected from full shielding volume fraction. Therefore, the superconducting transition observed for all the samples are bulk in nature. Magnetic TcM and Tirr differs for those four samples: TcM = 7.8, 6.7, 5.4, and 4.8 (K) and Tirr = 7.0, 5.9, 5.1, and 4.2 K for sample (A), (B), (C), and (D). The Tcs estimated from resistivity and magnetization are comparable and show variation according to the composition at the Tr site. 4. Discussion One of the notable trends of this system is that the observed Tcs for sample (A)–(D) are close to the Tr-weighted-average Tc of pure systems. Since introduction of disorders of the transition metal site sometimes largely affects superconducting properties of transition- metal-based compounds like Fe-based superconductors , the simple averaging effect on Tc is interesting. Since all the samples show bulk superconductivity, we propose that systematic tuning of Tc can be easily achieved in the TrZr2 system. Such system would be useful for device application containing superconductors. As found in XRD analyses, the lattice constants continuously change according to the ionic radius of elements included in the structure. To obtain information about the relationship between Tc and structural parameters, TcM for various TrZr2 are plotted in Figs. 5(a) and 5(b) as functions of lattice constants a and c. Those figures contain data points for non-HEA (pure) and related TrZr2. The lattice constant-a dependence of Tc (Fig. 5(a)) shows monotonous increase in Tc with increasing a for the present HEA-type samples (A)–(D). However, other data points do not show a significant correlation between Tc and a. In contrast, the lattice constant c shows a clear correlation with Tc (Fig. 5(b)). Actually, the Tr-Zr bonds (Table II) are expanded by increasing concentration of larger Tr such as Rh and Ir, while the Zr-Zr bond length does not show a remarkable dependence on the change in Tr-site concentration. Since the electronic 6 bands near the Fermi energy (EF), which is essential for the superconductivity, are contributed by both Zr-d and Tr-d electrons , the systematic change in bonding states along the c- axis, which is mainly composed of Tr-Zr bonds, may systematically tunes density of states at the EF and hence Tc in the TrZr2 system. We note that the data point for FeZr2 does not obey the relation proposed above. In , the presence of weak ferromagnetism was reported for FeZr2. The presence of magnetism may be related to the low Tc for FeZr2. Although our HEA-type samples contain Fe with various concentration (about 30% for (D)), the presence of Fe does not affect the relation; sample (D) also obeys the trend. The random solution in the HEA-type compounds may be effective to the suppression of magnetic ordering. If the assumption is correct, this fact should positively work on systematic tuning of Tc by compositional manipulation in HEA-type TrZr2. To obtain further knowledge, synchrotron XRD experiments and/or experiments sensitive to local structure, such as X-ray absorption spectroscopy, are needed for the system. 5. Conclusion We have synthesized polycrystalline samples of new HEA-type TrZr2 superconductors with Tr = Fe, Co, Ni, Rh, and Ir by arc melting. By Rietveld refinements of the powder XRD patterns, the crystal structures were confirmed to belong to the CuAl2-type tetragonal structure. All the samples show bulk superconductivity with various Tc. The Tc shows a correlation with lattice constant c and Tr-Zr bond length along the c-axis. This can be related to the electronic states contributed by both Tr-d and Zr-d electrons near the EF in TrZr2. We propose that HEA effects are useful to achieve systematic tuning of Tc with a wide temperature range in TrZr2, which is possibly due to the systematic tuning of density of states at EF and suppression of magnetism in high-entropy alloying. Such trend (functionality) would be useful for device application containing superconductors. 7 Acknowledgements The authors thank O. Miura for their assistance with the experiments. This work was partly supported by JSPS KAKENHI (Grant Number: 18KK0076) and Tokyo Metropolitan Government Advanced Research (Grant Number: H31-1). 8 samples (A)–(D). Label Actual Tr composition (XRF) ΔSmix (Tr site) (A) (B) (C) (D) Label (A) (B) (C) (D) Space group I4/mcm a (Å) c (Å) V (Å3) x (Zr) y (Zr) Rwp (%) 6.2 5.6 4.6 3.9 Zr-Zr 1 (Å) Zr-Zr 2 (Å) Zr-Zr 3 (Å) Tr-Zr 1 (Å) Tr-Zr 2 (Å) Tczero (K) 6.8 5.7 4.9 3.9 TcM (K) 7.8 6.7 5.4 4.8 Tirr (K) 7.0 5.9 5.1 4.2 9 Fig. 1. (a) Powder XRD patterns for the obtained TrZr2 samples (A)–(D). (b) Zoomed profiles near the 211 peak. (c) Schematic images of the crystal structure of sample (C) Fe0.2Co0.2Ni0.2Rh0.2Ir0.2Zr2. 10 Fig. 2. (a) Powder XRD patterns for the obtained TrZr2 samples (A)–(D). (b) Zoomed profiles near the 211 peak. (c) Schematic images of the crystal structure of sample (C) Fe0.2Co0.2Ni0.2Rh0.2Ir0.2Zr2. Fig. 3. Temperature dependences of electrical resistivity for TrZr2 samples (A)–(D) at low temperatures (a) and whole temperature range (b). 11 Fig. 4. Temperature dependences of magnetization for TrZr2 samples (A)–(D). 12 Fig. 5. Lattice constant dependences of Tc for TrZr2. Data of Tc and lattice constants were taken from Refs. 21, 22, 28-31. 13