Synthetic Image Rendering Solves Annotation Problem in Deep Learning Nanoparticle Segmentation Leonid Mill1, 2, *, David Wolff4, Nele Gerrits3, Patrick Philipp5, Lasse Kling4,7, Florian Vollnhals1, 4, Andrew Ignatenko5, Christian Jaremenko2, Yixing Huang2, Olivier De Castro5, Jean-Nicolas Audinot5, Inge Nelissen3, Tom Wirtz5, Andreas Maier2, and Silke Christiansen1, 4, 6, 7 1Institute of Optics, Information and Photonics, Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany 2Pattern Recognition Lab, Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany 3Health Unit, Flemish Institute for Technological Research, Mol, Belgium 4Institut f ̈ur Nanotechnologie und korrelative Mikroskopie, Forchheim, Germany 5Advanced Instrumentation for Ion Nano-Analytics, Materials Research and Technology Department, Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology, Belvaux, Luxembourg 6Physics Department, Free University, Berlin, Germany 7Fraunhofer Institute for Ceramic Technologies and Systems, Dresden, Germany *leonid.mill@fau.de, schrist1@gwdg.de ABSTRACT Nanoparticles occur in various environments as a consequence of man-made processes, which raises concerns about their impact on the environment and human health. To allow for proper risk assessment, a precise and statistically relevant analysis of particle characteristics (such as e.g. size, shape and composition) is required that would greatly benefit from automated image analysis procedures. While deep learning shows impressive results in object detection tasks, its applicability is limited by the amount of representative, experimentally collected and manually annotated training data. Here, we present an elegant, flexible and versatile method to bypass this costly and tedious data acquisition process. We show that using a rendering software allows to generate realistic, synthetic training data to train a state-of-the art deep neural network. Using this approach, we derive a segmentation accuracy that is comparable to man-made annotations for toxicologically relevant metal-oxide nanoparticle ensembles which we chose as examples. Our study paves the way towards the use of deep learning for automated, high-throughput particle detection in a variety of imaging techniques such as microscopies and spectroscopies, for a wide variety of studies and applications, including the detection of plastic micro- and nanoparticles. Introduction Nanoparticles are omnipresent in our daily lifes. They can be found in products ranging from cosmetics, textiles and foods, and are important in various technological fields such as energy, electronics, medicine and many more.1–5 However, as a consequence of industrial processes and man-made pollution, unwanted nanoparticle size distributions and concentrations6 give rise to concerns with respect to human health and environmental pollution. While the nanoparticles’ physicochemical properties (size, shape, surface chemistry, etc.) determine the quality of products7,8, such characteristics are also important in order to evaluate the biological impact of nanoparticles at a molecular, cellular and systemic level for any risk assessment for environmental and human health9. Characterizing nanoparticles in a dynamic context and on a case-by-case basis, microscopic imaging techniques including those that use focused electron or ion beams in scanning electron microscopes (SEMs) or Helium Ion Microscopes10 (HIMs) to generate nanometer scale spatial resolution are frequently applied in the scientific community. Given the substantial information content of digital images, these techniques often benefit from, or require, automated high-throughput data analysis that enables the accurate identification of large numbers of particles in a robust way. Several approaches have been proposed for automated nanoparticle detection using traditional algorithms as well as ma- chine learning techniques.11–15 However, all of these state-of-the art approaches encounter major difficulties caused by irregular object patterns and noise16, or they rely on hand-crafted features for particle shapes14,15, which impair the generalization 1 arXiv:2011.10505v1 [cs.LG] 20 Nov 2020 potential of such algorithms for the characterization of arbitrary nanoparticles or heterogeneous nanoparticle ensembles. In order to handle various sizes, shapes and distributions of nanoparticles more sophisticated image analysis approaches are required. With the recent advancements in machine learning and mainly deep learning17, deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs)18–23 have been developed, which are able to learn from data sets containing millions of images24 to resolve object detection tasks. When trained on such big data sets, CNNs are able to achieve task-relevant object detection performances that are comparable or even superior to the capabilities of humans25,26. While artificial neural networks have already been used for the classification and inverse design of nanoparticles27,28, the key problem to use deep learning for nanoparticle detection is, in general, the large amount of data needed to train such networks. The main difficulty lies in the acquisition of a representative data set of nanoparticle images which ideally contain various sizes, shapes and distributions for a variety of nanoparticle types. Additionally, manual annotation of the acquired data is mandatory to obtain the so called ‘ground truth’ or ‘labels’, which is, in general, error-prone, time-consuming and consequently costly. Although approaches exist such as ‘precision learning’29 or ‘transfer learning’30 that reliably work with a substantially reduced amount of training data, a certain data set size is still required that incorporates human effort, i.e. for manual annotation of the acquired data. To overcome the aforementioned data limitations, we have developed a semi-automated data synthesis scheme using an open-source rendering software. Particularly, we use Blender31 in this work, in order to generate synthetic data based on very limited amounts of real microscopic data sets. The proposed workflow enables the generation of a virtually unlimited number of synthetic and photo-realistic microscopic nanoparticle images comprising various types of particles with different sizes, shapes, compositions and three-dimensional distributions. Thereby, the respective synthetic ground truth segmentation mask is automatically derived for each generated image. We show that the synthetic data is sufficient in terms of realism and size to successfully train a deep learning model for segmentation which is also able to operate on real data. As a demonstration example, we generate photo-realistic synthetic data sets of HIM images of metal-oxid and metal nanoparticles (SiO2, TiO2 and Ag) that serve as training data for a state-of-the art23,32 deep CNN so called U-Net22. For experimental validation, manual annotations of the HIM images have been carried out by experts. We show that training the CNN on synthetic data yields similar segmentation accuracy as using real HIM images. Furthermore, we demonstrate the applicability of the proposed method for images containing very complex shaped and distributed Ag particles, nanorods and nanowires. Novel, semi-automated nanoparticle segmentation workflow Our goal is to extract statistical information on nanoparticle morphology with respect to size, shape and distribution from high resolution microscopy images acquired with electron- or ion microscopes. However, to guide particle segmentation by deep CNNs, a representative amount of training data is required. This is in general a true limitation due to the fact that microscopy image data is usually not available in sufficiently large amounts to be suitable for robust CNN training purposes. Moreover, we want to overcome the manual image annotation process which is very time-consuming and error-prone. Here, we propose a novel workflow that overcomes the data problem for the deep learning based analysis of particle images. The workflow relies on a very limited number of real reference images, e.g. out of electron or ion microscopes, which serve as a blue print for the semi-automated photo-realistic synthetic data generation using a rendering software e.g. such as Blender. The proposed nanoparticle segmentation workflow is composed of the steps shown in Fig. 1. Images of TiO2 nanoparticles on a silicon wafer surface, taken by a Helium ion microscope (HIM) serve as examples for the demonstration of the procedure and the quality of the statistical evaluation of the nanoparticle properties. The starting point of the segmentation workflow is the acquisition of a limited number of high resolution HIM images of TiO2 nanoparticles, spread on a (100) silicon wafer. Fig. 1a shows an example of such an HIM image. Based on a number of images of that type (see Supplementary Fig. S2) a human is able to obtain an overall impression of the average size, shape, potential faceting and orientation of the TiO2 nanoparticles with respect to one another as well as the degree of homogeneity of the particle distribution within those images (Fig. 1b). The knowledge gained from the initial manual assessment of the nanoparticle data is used to reproduce such features virtually using a rendering software, e.g. Blender31, and to automatically generate 3D scenes filled with synthetic TiO2 particle ensembles. During this automated rendering process, details of the individual particles as well as the overall 2D or 3D arrangements on the substrate surface, including potential image artefacts (i.e. such as dirt which may arise from sample preparation procedures), are included in virtual Blender scenes to mimic real TiO2 particle ensembles. An automatically generated TiO2 scene is demonstrated in Supplementary Fig. S8. Details on the automatic Blender scene generation process are provided in the Methods section. Subsequently, after an user-defined number of scenes is generated, each Blender scene is automatically being rendered twice. The first rendering process computes a photo-realistic synthetic microscope image of the TiO2 nanoparticles and potential artefacts, while a subsequent render produces 2/45 the respective error-free ground truth label image (Fig. 1b). images using a deep convolutional neural network (CNN) and synthetic training data. a, HIM images of TiO2 nanoparticle ensembles on a silicon (100) substrate surface. b, A semi-automated procedure to synthesize HIM images of TiO2 particles based on the knowledge of a limited number of real HIM reference images. Using a render software (here Blender31) in combination with the information on particle size, shape and distribution gained from the reference images it is possible to create synthetic images that mimic real HIM data realistically. During this process, the respective ground truth labels for the synthetic TiO2 image data are also generated in a fully automated manner. c, The synthetic data set is used to train a deep CNN (here the U-Net22) for automated particle segmentation and subsequent quantitative, statistical assessment. d, After training the CNN using synthetic data, the model which predicts the most accurate segmentation on a real validation image is selected for further processing. e, The best CNN model is used to predict the segmentation masks for all experimental microscopy images. f, The accurate prediction of the model permits further statistical image analysis. With a sufficient amount of realistic synthetic data, a deep CNN can be properly trained on the nanoparticle segmenta- tion task. In our workflow, we use the so called U-Net22, a the state-of-the art23,32 deep CNN, which was originally proposed and successfully applied for the segmentation of cells in transmission electron microscope images. Fig. 1c shows the U-Net comprising an U-shaped encoder-decoder architecture. The orange boxes represent multi-dimensional feature maps extracted by different convolution layers, while the dashed gray arrows correspond to skip-connections. A detailed description of the architecture is provided by Ronneberger et al.22. During the U-Net training process, the network iteratively optimizes its internal parameters to learn the segmentation of nanoparticles based on our synthetic microscopic images by predicting corresponding segmentation masks. To prevent the network from overfitting on the synthetic data, at least one real HIM ’validation’ image is used during training. In machine learning, ’validation data’ is used during the training process to evaluate the model performance on hold-out data which is not part of the training data set. Therefore, after each complete training iteration, also referred to as an ’epoch’ in machine learning, the model predicts a segmentation for the validation image (Fig. 1d). After the CNN training process, a human observer visually evaluates all predicted segmentation masks for the validation image and selects the model which provides the qualitatively most accurate particle segmentation. Subsequently, the selected model is used to segment all remaining real microscopic (here from a HIM) images (Fig. 1e), while subsequently, all sorts of statistical and quantitative information can be deduced for the microscopic HIM images of interest (Fig. 1f). 3/45 Synthetic image quality We used the aforementioned semi-automated data generation scheme to generate synthetic microscope images such as the HIM images of SiO2, TiO2 and silver nanoparticles of varying overall morphology. A comprehensive set of real HIM images synthetically generated images using the proposed semi-automated rendering process (middle row) with its respective synthetic labels (bottom row). a, Spherical SiO2 nanoparticles with various dimensions on a silicon wafer surface arranged in clusters or a certain degree of alignment in close vicinity to neighboring particles. Also, note the dirt smear on the silicon wafer surface in the rightmost image, which was also covered in the simulation. The synthetic images in the middle row on the contrary show a more statistical distribution of particles compared to the real images, which also include the surface impurity feature. b, Microscopic HIM images of complex shaped and distributed TiO2 nanoparticles. c-d: t-SNE visualization of the SiO2 and TiO2 data sets. Each data point corresponds to an image patch of identical size (144×144 px) of real (blue) and synthetic (orange) images. Both t-SNE plots show a distinct separation between background and foreground (particle) data points, while nearby and overlapping points indicate the high similarity between synthetic and real data. c, The t-SNE result for the SiO2 data set shows two clusters of particle images (left cluster), background images (right cluster) with an additional cluster for image patches, that show surface impurity. The small overlap between real and synthetic SiO2 particle images indicates that the synthetic images are similar, but do not represent a perfect match of the target HIM data d, t-SNE plot for the TiO2 particles. The large overlap between synthetic and real particle images (right cluster) indicates that the synthetic images represent the real TiO2 HIM data quite well. 4/45 of such nanoparticles are shown in the Supplementary Section in figures Figs. S1-S3. However, since no human derived manual annotation was performed for silver nanoparticle ensembles in HIM images due to the complexity of the data, in the following we will set our focus on SiO2 and TiO2 nanoparticles for the quantitative and qualitative evaluation. Fig. 2 provides a direct comparison of SiO2 (Fig. 2a) and TiO2 (Fig. 2b) particles in HIM images (top row) with the corresponding synthetic photo-realistic images (middle row) and its respective synthetic labels (bottom row). The real SiO2 particles essentially show a very regular, spherical shape, which was also considered in the correspond- ing synthetic SiO2 simulations (see Supplementary Fig. S5). The arrangement of the SiO2 particles in the real HIM images is not random, the particles align in close vicinity, ideally in clusters or rows of particles. In contrast, the particles in the synthetic images are distributed randomly (see Supplementary Fig. S6) throughout the substrate in order to generate very complex distribution in contrast to the real images and thus increase the variance in the data. The TiO2 particles on the other hand form agglomerates, are arranged in sheets and have complex shapes. Therefore, in order to cover these characteristics in the synthetic data, we designed a range (we chose four) of virtual 3d so called ’template objects’ (see Supplementary Fig. S8) that were randomly combined to complex agglomerates in the TiO2 render scenes during the automated image creation process (see Supplementary Fig. S9). For both particle types (SiO2 and TiO2), we were able to mimic the characteristics of all relevant particle characteristics in terms of shape and distribution while comprising a more complex localization of particles. Additionally, due to the presence of substrate surface impurity (’dirt’) that stems from imperfect sample preparation, we extended our simulation with a randomized impurity texture creation (see Fig. 1b and Supplementary Figs. S4,S7) to account for such features. Further details on the impurity texture are provided in the Methods section. Further details on the impurity texture are provided in the Methods section. Note that in contrast to manually annotated images, our synthetic labels do not contain any mislabeling and provide error-free, consistent particle contour lines as displayed in Fig. 2a-b (bottom row). Further synthetic images of SiO2 and TiO2, as well as the synthetic representation of more complex silver (Ag) nanoparticles that align in from of particle wires, are shown in Supplementary Figs. S10-S12. To assess the similarity between the real and synthetic HIM nanoparticle images, we analyzed the SiO2 and TiO2 data sets using the t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding33 (t-SNE). t-SNE is an unsupervised dimensionality reduction method which is primarily used to visualize high-dimensional data. In simpler terms, t-SNE provides for an idea of how data is arranged in a high-dimensional space. In general, nearby and overlapping data points in a t-SNE plot indicate similar data, while distant data points correspond to significant differences in the data. The resulting t-SNE plots for the SiO2 and TiO2 nanoparticles are depicted in Fig. 2c and d, respectively. Each scatter point corresponds to an image patch or sample of the size of 144×144 px (with one pixel covering an area of 0.976×0.976 nm2) of a real (blue) or synthetic (orange) HIM image. More technical details on the sample extraction and data visualization methods are provided in the Methods section. In both t-SNE plots, a distinct separation between particle and background images can be observed. The nearby and overlapping blue and orange points indicate the overall high similarity between synthetic and real images. Moreover, for the SiO2 data, the samples that contain substrate surface impurity in both real and synthetic data points show a high comparability which suggest a very accurate dirt simulation. However, the small overlap between real and synthetic SiO2 particle images indicates that although the synthetic images are comparable to the real HIM images, the simulation does not perfectly match the target HIM data. While the real data shows a higher variance of background images in terms of noise distribution and pixel intensities, the opposite holds for the the synthetic particle data, which contains presumably more complex particle shapes, distributions and variable contrasts. Additionally, in both plots an imbalance between synthetic and real particle and background data points can be observed. In this context, synthetic SiO2 and TiO2 images contain significantly more particle than background data. This is an intended and expected behaviour which results from our assumption that the simulation of random particle distributions with a high number of particles leads to a high variance of complex synthetic particle ensembles. As a consequence, it is expected that a deep CNN trained on complex synthetic data is more robust to variations in real images. Model selection Since the U-Net was trained on synthetic data only (Fig. 1c) real validation data is needed to assess the model performance for real HIM particle data. To select the best model, we compared two approaches for the model selection in a user study with 7 participants, consisting of three experts on segmentation and four non-experts. The first approach, referred to as ’analytical’, requires the time-consuming manual annotation of at least one real HIM validation image, which is subsequently used as ground truth (GT) to select the best model based on the highest F1 score34. The F1 score is a metric which is often used to assess the segmentation accuracy of a model compared to a reference segmentation. The second approach relies on a human observer to choose the best model according to the qualitatively (visually) best segmentation performance (Fig. 1d). Further details on the user study and model selection are presented in the Methods section. Fig. 3a illustrates the models, defined by the epoch number, that were selected by each participant for the SiO2 (orange) and TiO2 (blue) data sets, respectively. The plot illustrates 5/45 images of SiO2 and TiO2 nanoparticles. While the ‘analytical’ approach relies on a manual annotation of the validation image in order to find the best model, the second approach is based on the qualitative (visual) evaluation of the segmentation masks predicted by each model. To compare both methods, a user study with seven participants was conducted with non-experts (P1-P4) and experts (P5-6) for segmentation. According to its visual perception, each participant had to choose five best network models based on the model’s segmentation performance for a real HIM validation image. a, Visualization of the five models, defined by the epoch number, that were selected by each of the study participants. b, F1 scores (y-axis) averaged over the 5 chosen models by each participant (P1-P7), using the manually annotated GT as reference segmentation for the validation image. Additionally, the diagram shows the mean F1 score for the ‘analytical’ model selection approach, for comparison reasons also averaged over the 5 best models. c, Visualization of the validation images SiO2 (top row) and TiO2 (bottom row), the corresponding segmentation masks predicted by the model with the best F1 score selected by the ‘analytical’ approach, the segmentation of a representative expert-selected model as well as the manual GT reference segmentation. Although the analytically selected model and the representative expert-selected model both provide an accurate overall segmentation, the expert-selected model is more suitable to separate individual particles (TiO2) which is mandatory for statistical particle analysis. The orange arrows emphasize segmented particles by the U-Net that do not occur in the manually annotated ground truth image. 6/45 that the expert group (P5-P7) mostly selected models towards the end of the training process, while no significant trend could be observed for the non-expert group (P1-P4). A detailed qualitative evaluation of the selected segmentation masks showed that in contrast to the non-expert group, the experts tend to choose models that demonstrated a higher capability of separating particles in more detail, producing more accurate contour lines, whereas non-experts relied on the overall segmentation performance only. Fig. 3b visualizes the segmentation accuracies of the selected (manually and ’analytically’) five best models on the validation image based on the mean F1 score. models that provided almost perfect segmentation results on the validation image (SiO2 - F1 mean (SD): 0.92 (0.01); TiO2 - F1 mean (SD): 0.93 (0.004)). However, the models selected by the ’analytical’ approach demonstrate marginally more accurate comparison between the two approaches is displayed in Fig. 3c. This figure visualizes the validation images, the segmentation masks predicted by the model with the best F1 score according to the ’analytical’ approach, the segmentation of a representative expert-selected model as well as the manual GT reference segmentation. Both approaches resulted in a model selection that showed a very high overall segmentation accuracy on the validation image compared to the GT reference. However, the model selected by the ’analytical’ approach lacks a distinct separation of individual TiO2 particles, while the expert implicitly selected a model that accounted for this behaviour. Moreover, the expert-selected model produces more precise particle contour lines over the ’analytical’ approach. Since statistical analysis of nanoparticle images requires an accurate separation of particles, we further rely on expert-selected models for the particle analysis in the next section. Moreover, we want to emphasize that a human-based model selection is preferable due to the time-consuming and error-prone process of manually annotating a validation image which is required for the ’analytical’ approach. Additionally, it was observed that training on synthetic images also resulted in a robust particle segmentation for the validation images, even for non-trivial cases as illustrated by orange arrows in Fig. 3c, which highlight particles that are segmented as individual particles by the model but are missing in GT segmentation. Segmentation performance and statistical particle analysis Finally, after the model selection, the best model is used for the segmentation of all remaining real HIM images (Fig 1e). In order to compare the U-Net that was trained on simulated data (U-Netsim) with a baseline performance, we manually annotated all real SiO2 and TiO2 HIM images and trained a U-Net on real data (U-Netreal) for each particle type, respectively. Note that the manual annotation of SiO2 and TiO2 HIM images was performed by one individual each. Due to the small number of real HIM images (SiO2: 9, TiO2: 8) in comparison to the number of synthetically generated images (SiO2: 180, TiO2: 180), U-Netreal was trained in a leave-one-out cross-validation35 setup to assess its general segmentation performance. Further details on the training and the post-processing used to enhance the segmentation quality are provided in the Methods section. Fig. 4a provides a quantitative comparison of U-Netreal and U-Netsim for the SiO2 and TiO2 HIM data. According to precision, recall, accuracy and F1 score, U-Netreal (F1 score SiO2: 0.950, F1 score TiO2: 0.943) marginally outperforms the U-Netsim (F1 score SiO2: 0.930, F1 score TiO2: 0.923) for both particle types. However, both models provide nearly perfect segmentations. Additionally, for the SiO2 data, the average number of individual particles (Nparticles) detected by U-Netreal (81.88) and U-Netsim (84.63) matches almost ideally the average number of 83 particles (manual Nparticles) that are present in the manually annotated SiO2 GT images. On the other hand, while the number of TiO2 particles identified by U-Netsim (136.71) is more accurate than the number of particles detected by U-Netreal (128.40), a considerable difference to manual Nparticles (152) can be observed. An explanation for this finding lies in the post-processing used to improve the segmentation output of the U-Nets (U-Netreal as well as U-Netsim). It removes small objects below a certain (pixel) area size using a morphological operation called ’area opening’, which results in a smaller amount of particles that are present in the segmentation masks after the post-processing (see Supplementary Figs. S18-S21). Fig. 4b visualizes the qualitative segmentation results for an exemplary selected real SiO2 (top row) and TiO2 (bottom row) HIM image. According to the visual impression, U-Netreal and U-Netsim provide almost perfect segmentations in comparison to the manually annotated GT segmentation, which also reflect the quantitative results. A direct comparison of the qualitative segmentation results for all real HIM images is illustrated in the Supplementary Figs. S13-S21, including particle size distributions for the GT reference as well as for the segmentations predicted by U-Netreal and U-Netsim. Both, the quantitative as well as qualitative results indicate the human-comparable segmentation capability of U-Netreal and U-Netsim. At this point, we want to highlight the extraordinary results produced by U-Netsim. Although trained on synthetic data only, it is able to achieve impressive segmentation accuracies on real HIM data, which is not only comparable to a U-Net trained on real data but also to the segmentation capability of humans. Due to the human-comparable segmentation accuracy of the U-Netsim, it is possible to derive various features of real-world 7/45 U-Net which was trained on simulated data (U-Netsim). a, Quantitative segmentation results using precision, recall, accuracy and the F1 score as evaluation metrics (see Methods for details). The average number of particles detected by the models is denoted as ’Nparticles’, while the number of individual particles that are present in the manual GT annotation is given by ’manual Nparticles’. b, Qualitative segmentation results for an exemplary selected real SiO2 (top row) and TiO2 (bottom row) HIM image. Both, the quantitative as well as qualitative results show almost perfect segmentations predicted by U-Netreal and U-Netsim for both particle types compared to the manually annotated ground truth segmentation indicating the human-comparable segmentation capabilities of the models. particles including their sizes, shapes, localization, or distributions using a connected component analysis (CCA). Therefore, we analysed the segmentations of U-Netsim using a CCA to assess the particle size distributions of the real HIM SiO2 and TiO2 images as depicted in Fig. 5a-b. A direct comparison of the particle size distributions for all HIM images based on the segmentations of U-Netreal, U-Netsim and the manual annotations is visualized in the Supplementary Figs. S13-S21. While the top row shows raw HIM SiO2 and TiO2 images, the second row displays the corresponding post-processed U-Netsim segmentations. The third row visualizes an overlay of the original HIM images with a connected component labeling (CCL) based on the U-Netsim segmentation. In a CCL each color is associated with an individual particle. Note that due to the limited number of colors used in a CCL, neighboring particles may occur in the same color although being separated, individual particles. The CCL results for all HIM images, including the complex Ag data, are provided in Supplementary Figs. S22-S30. Using the CCA, we can derive accurate particle size distributions (Fig. 5, bottom row), which highlight the number of particles with respect to the square-root of the particle area size in nanometer (nm). While the SiO2 histograms (Fig. 5a) reveal a bimodal character, separating the two groups of small and large particles, TiO2 histograms (Fig. 5b) are characterized by a log-normal 8/45 second row visualizes the post-processed segmentation prediction of the U-Netsim, which was trained on synthetic data only. The third row displays an overlay of the original HIM image with a connected component labeling (CCL) of the post-processed segmentation. In a CCL each color is associated with an individual particle. Note that due to the limited number of colors used in a CCL, neighboring particles may occur in the same color although being separated, individual particles. The bottom row provides a particle size distribution, based on the accurate U-Netsim prediction, for each HIM image which highlights the particle frequency with respect to the square-root of the particle area size denoted nanometer (nm). Np represents the number of particles. While the SiO2 histograms reveal a bimodal character, separating the two groups of small and large particles, TiO2 histograms are characterized by a log-normal distribution. distribution with a modal value of approximately 60 nm. Moreover, due to the accurately simulated substrate surface impurity in the synthetic training data, image artefacts as a result of sample preparation related dirt in real SiO2 HIM images does not affect the segmentation accuracy of the U-Netsim which has properly been trained to deal with this type of image features. Conclusions In summary, we propose a segmentation workflow for complex nanoparticles in high resolution microscopic images which relies on deep learning in combination with a semi-automated synthetic data generation pipeline based on photo-realistic rendering. With this approach an unlimited number of realistic synthetic images can be created with its respective error-free ground truth labels which subsequently can be used to effectively train a deep CNN. The so trained CNN can subsequently be used to accurately segment nanoparticles in microscope images. We have demonstrated the applicability of the workflow on experimental HIM data sets of SiO2 and TiO2 nanoparticles spread on a silicon (100) wafer surface. We showed that the segmentation accuracy of a state-of-the art deep CNN trained only on synthetic data was comparable to segmentations carried out by microscopy experts. Moreover, we have demonstrated quantitative and statistical analysis of microscopy imaged nanoparticles based on the automated deep learning CNN segmentation. We are confident that the method presented in this work has the potential to solve the training data bottleneck and the annotation problem for automated image analysis approaches and paves the way towards a wider use of deep learning in a 9/45 variety of microscopy applications. It permits the implementation of automated high-throughput particle segmentation and characterization methods for all sorts of applications based on microscopic images. This can be particularly relevant for studies related to nano-toxicology and other fields such as nano- and bio-medicine, consumer product efficacy testing, and anti-counterfeiting. The time-consuming, costly and error-prone process of acquiring and manually annotating a representative amount of real data in order to use the power of deep learning is overcome by the proposed approach. Yet, the semi-automated data generation procedure still relies on human input (i.e. for the design of all relevant 3D scene parameters, template particles, shaders etc.) in order to achieve photo-realistic renders. However, with the recent achievements in differentiable rendering36,37, we assume that it will be possible to further automate this process.