Nondestructive Prediction of the Buckling Load of Imperfect Shells Ana ̈ıs Abramian1,2, Emmanuel Virot2,3, Emilio Lozano2,3, Shmuel M. Rubinstein2, and Tobias M. Schneider3 1Institut Jean le Rond d’Alembert, Sorbonne Universit ́e, CNRS, UMR 7190, 75005 Paris, France 2John A, Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA and 3Emergent Complexity in Physical Systems Laboratory (ECPS), ́Ecole Polytechnique F ́ed ́erale de Lausanne, CH 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland (Dated: Received 17 May 2020; revised 7 July 2020; accepted 13 October 2020; published 25 November 2020) From soda cans to space rockets, thin-walled cylindrical shells are abundant, offering exceptional load carrying capacity at relatively low weight. However, the actual load at which any shell buckles and collapses is very sensitive to imperceptible defects and can not be predicted, which challenges the reliable design of such structures. Consequently, probabilistic descriptions in terms of empirical design rules are used and reliable design requires to be very conservative. We introduce a nonlinear description where finite-amplitude perturbations trigger buckling. Drawing from the analogy between imperfect shells which buckle and imperfect pipe flow which becomes turbulent, we experimentally show that lateral probing of cylindrical shells reveals their strength non-destructively. A new ridge-tracking method is applied to commercial cylinders with a hole showing that when the location where buckling is nucleated is known we can accurately predict the buckling load of each individual shell, within ±5%. Our study provides a new promising framework to understand shell buckling, and more generally, imperfection-sensitive instabilities. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.125.225504 Compress an empty soda can from its top and it will remain stable over a considerable range of loads. How- ever, at a critical load, the can eventually buckles, vi- olently collapses, and irreversibly deforms. A classical linear stability analysis greatly overestimates the buck- ling load of thin cylinder shells and domes [1–3], because the system is extremely sensitive to defects [4–9]. Classical theory mostly cannot capture the influence of defects and thus, in general dramatically overestimates the carrying-load of engineered shells, infamously affect- ing structural reliability . The ratio between the ac- tual measured buckling load and the theoretical predic- tion is termed the knock-down factor. The knock-down factor tends to decrease with the ratio of the shell’s ra- dius of curvature to its thickness, R/t, but there are ex- treme stochastic variations between nominally identical shells, as shown in Fig. 1. Fifty years ago, NASA SP- 8007 proposed a conservative phenomenological “design rule” , which estimates a lower bound for the distribu- tion of knock-down factors and remains the basis for US and European design codes even today. Any sound prediction of the knock-down factor of a specific manufactured shell currently requires complete knowledge of the shell’s imperfections. A full charac- terization of imperfections is extremely challenging and practically impossible for real engineered structures. Consequently, the NASA design rule which on average severely underestimates buckling-loads remains still in use. Here we introduce a non-destructive method that accurately predicts the buckling load of an individual de- fected shell without prior knowledge of imperfections. Characterizing defect-sensitivity as observed in shell buckling is notoriously difficult because in any experi- mental setup a multitude of details need to be controlled practically perfectly. Notably, a similarly challenging sit- uation arose in fluid mechanics, where the concepts of finite-amplitude perturbations in combination with very careful experiments lead to a complete rethinking of the transition from laminar flow to turbulence in pipe flows [11–14]. Just as there is no universal buckling load at which real imperfect shells buckle, there is no universal Reynolds number at which turbulence develops in real, imperfect pipes; and the critical flow-speed at which tur- bulence occurs is highly sensitive to imperfections. The challenging problem of the transition to turbu- lence is tackled within a nonlinear framework by consid- ering the response of a perfect system, an ideal pipe, to a jet perturbation of finite-amplitude, Ajet, that can trigger turbulence . In the context of shell buckling, an anal- 0 250 500 750 1000 R/t 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Dimensionless stress / c Unbuckled Catastrophic Buckling NASA SP-8007 Knockdown factor σ/σc vs R/t collected by NASA with the empirical design rule indicated by the dashed line. (Data from Seide et al. (1960) ) arXiv:2011.12937v1 [physics.app-ph] 25 Nov 2020 2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 / c 0 250 500 750 1000 R/t Unbuckled Catastrophic Buckling (b) 1750 2000 2250 2500 Re 2 3 Ajet (a) Decay Turbulence Flow Perturbation (c) Perturbation Axial force (d) (a) Ajet vs Re for experiments by Darbyshire & Mullin (b) R/t vs knockdown factor σ/σc for Nasa’s data (Fig. 1). (c/d) Lateral poking of the shell corresponds to the transverse jet perturbation and probes the stability of the linearly stable shell to well-controlled perturbations. ogous approach implies revisiting the NASA data, shown in Fig. 1, by considering the axial load as an externally- imposed control parameter, like the Reynolds number. Since controlling manufacturing imperfections is harder for thinner shells, the geometrical quantity R/t (radius over thickness) should be treated as a proxy for the vul- nerability to defects of a given size. With this interpreta- tion, the phenomenology of the transition to turbulence in pipe flow and the buckling of cylindrical shells appears strikingly similar, as shown in Fig. 2(a,b). Inspired by the hydrodynamic analogy, we recently de- veloped an experimental and theoretical framework to study shell buckling. The jets, which trigger turbu- lence in pipes correspond to a lateral probe, or a “poker”, in our system, as shown on Fig. 2(c-d). Similar ideas were recently pursued by Hutchinson, Thompson and cowork- ers [16–19] as well as others [20–22]. Analogous exper- iments were performed by Reis and coworkers for pres- surized hemispherical shells and cylindrical shells with radially applied perturbation loads were studied in the context of aerospace applications [25–33]. In contrast to previous work, in our approach the poker-induced deformation is not interpreted as a de- fect; instead, the poker is a probe exploring the system’s nonlinear response to finite-amplitude perturbations. By measuring the poker force applied on the shell FP as a function of displacement, DP , we recently quantified the critical perturbations that triggers buckling for varying axial loads FA. Mapping out the conditions under which buckling occurs, we identified a universal stability land- scape for cylindrical shells, represented as a surface in a (FA, FP , DP ) three-dimensional space . The landscape, which can be probed experimentally, characterizes the stability of a shell, which, in the most general case, is dictated by the complex correlation struc- ture of its many defects. The stability landscape features a valley, a lake and a ridge (as described in and Fig. 4). Advancing the poker beyond the ridge, defined by the peak poker force, will ultimately bring the system to the lake shore, where the shell buckles. As FA is increased, the ridge descents, asymptoting towards a zero maximal poker force where the axial load for spontaneous buck- ling is reached. It is therefore tempting to track the path of the ridge and attempt to infer the critical buckling load without reaching it. Implementing ridge tracking as a non-destructive method to predict the load-carrying capacity of a given shell and rethinking buckling as a nonlinear finite-amplitude instability would enable to fi- nally move beyond the very conservative NASA design rule and develop a fundamental and scalable approach to confront imperfection sensitivity in the design and con- trol of thin shells. Drawing from the analogy between imperfect shells which buckle and imperfect pipe flow which become tur- bulent, we show that lateral probing of cylindrical shells can indeed reveal their strength. By examining the safe regions of the stability landscape and extrapolating to the critical conditions, we use lateral probing to non- destructively predict the strength of individual imper- fect shells. We direct buckling nucleation, by intention- ally introducing a guiding defect in the shell. Doing so, we show, as a proof of concept, that probing near this guiding defect yields an accurate estimate of the shell’s buckling load. Our results show that when the guiding defect is identified, tracking the ridge and extrapolating to where it vanishes works extremely well and predicts the critical buckling load to within 5% precision. This re- sult considerably surpasses the NASA design rule which estimates a lower bound for the distribution of nominally identical shells while we accurately predict the strength of individual shells. Ridge-tracking thereby allows for a deterministic rather than a probabilistic prediction, and thereby opens avenues towards new design and control strategies for thin shell structures. The experimental setup consists of a custom-made bi- axial mechanical tester (ADMET, Inc.) described in de- tail previously . A vertical actuator, equipped with a load cell, applies an axial load FA on the sample by moving at a constant speed of 5 mm/min. The lateral actuator has a steel marble of diameter 4.7 mm at its tip and serves as the poker. Importantly, axial and lateral loading are always displacement-controlled, and lateral poking is performed at set end-shortening; the axial load varies by less than 2% during poking. An acquisition card (National Instrument DAQ USB-6001) records forces and displacements, and controls the actu- ators through an analogue signal, enabling autonomous ridge tracking. The samples are empty 7.5 oz mini Coke cans, made of aluminum. These are cylindrical shells of radius R = 28.6 mm, mid-plane thickness t = 104 ±4 μm (radius-to-thickness ratio R/t = 274) and height L = 107 mm. The buckling load of each shell is dictated by the complex correlation structure of its many defects; it is 3 (a) = 4.7 mm 1 mm Axial force, FA [N] 600 800 Poker displ. Dp [mm] 0 0.5 Poker force, FP [N] 0.5 1.0 Ridge Buckling load (b) 600 800 1000 Axial load, FA [N] 0.0 0.5 1.0 Maximum poker force, Fmax P [N] (c) 700 800 900 1000 1100 1200 Buckling load, Fbuckling A [N] 700 800 900 1000 1100 1200 Predicted buckling load Fpredicted A [N] (d) 100 100 700 800 FA [N] 0.0 0.5 1.0 FP [N] [mm] 1 3 4 5 0.0 0.5 Dp [mm] 0.0 0.5 FP [N] 800 1000 Buckling load [N] -5% +5% (a) Experimental setup with close-ups of hole and poker tip. (b) A typical example of ridge tracking. The star indicates the prediction for the spontaneous buckling load. Inset: Fp vs Dp for FA = 641 N. (c) Five examples of successfull ridge tracking. Each spontaneous buckling load is indicated by a star. Inset: Ridge of one can for four different poking locations. (d) Predicted vs. measured spontaneous buckling load for all 38 tested shells. Green triangles indicate failure initiating far from the guiding hole. Inset: Relative error η. thus practically impossible to predict where buckling will nucleate. We therefore intentionally introduce a guiding defect that fixes the preferential nucleation point to a predefined location close to the probe: A hole of 1 mm in diameter, is drilled 1 mm above the mid-plane of the cylinder as shown in Fig. 3(a). The edge of the hole is circular and slightly curved inwards. At the chosen pa- rameters, with a radius below the characteristic scale of √ Rt = 1.7 mm the strength of the can is not determined by the hole . Instead the distribution of sponta- neous buckling loads remains broad indicating that the stability properties remain dominated by the unknown defects of each specific can. Ridge-tracking requires systematically poking the sam- ple under gradually-increasing axial loads without trig- gering buckling, as shown for a typical experiment in Fig. 3(b). In this example, the sample is initially loaded to an axial load F 0 A = 600 ± 1 N, which is less than 25% of the strength predicted by linear stability anal- ysis. The axial end-shortening is then set, and the poker slowly advances towards the sample at a constant rate of 2 mm/min, contacting the shell 1 mm below the hole. Once the poker contacts the shell, the probe force grad- ually increases. When the force reaches its peak F max p , the poker automatically stops at a displacement Dmax p , and returns to its initial position, as shown in the inset of Fig. 3(b). In this example, the point (FA = 592 N, Dmax p = 0.44 mm, F max p = 0.75 N) defines the first point of the ridge, as plotted in Fig. 3(b). As previously re- ported, this process is reversible and does not damage the sample . The axial load is then sequentially increased in steps of approximately 25 N and the next poker force-displacement curve is measured. These force- displacement curves gradually build-up the sample’s sta- bility landscape, which exhibits a distinct ridge. The pro- cedure is then stopped when the peak poker force F max p falls below 0.3 N. A linear extrapolation of the ridge to vanishing poker force yields a prediction for the sponta- neous buckling load. In this specific experiment, ridge- tracking predicts a buckling load of F predicted A = 893 N. To test this prediction, the sample is compressed until it spontaneously buckles at a load of F buckling A = 887 N, remarkably close (within 0.5%) to the predicted value as shown in Fig. 3(b). In total, 38 samples were tested, with initial loads rang- ing between F 0 A = 522 N to F 0 A = 694 N, and an average load increment of 23 N. One exceptionally fragile sample failed at the first loading, before being probed. Oth- erwise, samples sustained repeated loading cycles, their 4 ridge lake unbuckled state basin boundary lower FA higher FA poker path basin boundary (a) (b) (c) Poker force, Fp Axial load FA Poker displacement, DP stable unstable stable unstable FA=FA Buckling lower FA Schematic 2D projection of the system’s state- space for a perfect shell (a) and one with imperfections (b). The stability landscape (c) probes the basin boundary along a path of dimple-shaped deformations induced by lateral pok- ing. The point on the ridge (blue dot) is located between the basin boundary and the unbuckled state. It varies with FA creating the ridge (blue line in (c)) that asymptotes to zero when the basin of attraction vanishes and spontaneous buck- ling is induced. Shell imperfections distort the basin bound- ary and modify its experimentally accessible representation, the stability landscape. Ridge-tracking reveals the influence of imperfections while non-destructively probing the ridge. ridges follow a straight line in the plane (FA, F max p ), while converging towards a wide range of buckling loads, as shown for 5 examples in Fig. 3(c). Intriguingly, the ridges are only straight when probing is done near the hole. Probing further away from it yields ridges that turn towards the buckling-load prediction, as shown in the inset to Fig. 3(c). When probing beyond a distance of approximately 1 cm from the hole, the ridges do not point towards the actual buckling load, and the prediction fails—hence the importance of introducing a preferred nucleation location and probing close to it. Overall, for the 38 samples tested, the ridge-tracking protocol accurately predicts the buckling load over a wide range of critical loads, from F buckling A = 761 N to F buckling A = 1108 N, as shown in Fig. 3(d). The relative error of the prediction, η = (F predicted A − F buckling A )/F buckling A has a standard deviation of 6.9% for the whole bunch. Even more remarkably, when buck- ling does initiate near the hole, this deviation drops to 2.7% and the average error η is 1.6% (blue diamonds in Fig. 3(d)). This confirms that ridge tracking works ex- tremely well if we probe in the vicinity of the hole guiding nucleation of buckling. Besides providing a promising non-destructive method to probe the load-carrying ca- pacity of a shell, these experiments unambiguously show that the ridge is locally distorted by the defects control- ling the load-carrying capacity. We now propose an in- terpretation of the observed behaviour inspired by the analogy with the onset of turbulence in pipe flow, based on a dynamical-system approach. The dynamical systems approach suggests an appeal- ing conceptual framing for the cylinder buckling problem, illustrated schematically in Fig. 4. All deformations of a given cylinder span the high dimensional state-space of the system. Specific deformations including the unde- formed cylinder, periodic eigenmodes considered in clas- sical stability analysis but also any local deforma- tion induced by a poker at a specific location are points in the state-space. Thus, deforming the shell with an advancing poker corresponds to tracing out a continuous path in state-space. When the shell is compressed at a sub-critical axial load, the unbuckled state is linearly sta- ble, but non-linearly unstable. Small deformations will relax back to the unbuckled state while large amplitude deformations may trigger buckling. The state-space re- gion around the unbuckled state in which deformations decay forms the finite basin of attraction of the unbuck- led state. It can be figuratively thought as a deep con- cave bowl, the unbuckled state at its base, and all stable deformations roll towards it. States outside the basin of attraction will not return to the unbuckled state but lead to a nonlinear instabil- ity and trigger buckling. Separating deformations that trigger buckling from those that return to the unbuckled state is the basin boundary, a co-dimension one mani- fold in state-space defining the nonlinear stability thresh- old. As the axial load increases, the basin of attraction shrinks, until the basin boundary eventually reaches the unbuckled state, as shown in Fig. 4(a). At this load, the basin vanishes, the unbuckled state becomes linearly un- stable and spontaneous buckling is triggered by infinitesi- mal perturbations. For a perfect shell, the basin collapses at the critical load computed by standard linear stability theory. For a real shell with imperfections, we expect all state- space structures and specifically the basin boundary to be distorted compared to the perfect shell, as shown on Fig. 4(b). Consequently, the basin boundary will reach the unbuckled state at a different load, namely the spon- taneous buckling load of the defected shell. Embedded in the basin boundary are unstable sad- dle points including localized single dimple deformations [20, 36–38] which define the critical amplitude of a local- ized perturbation triggering buckling nonlinearly. The advancing poker thus probes a path in state-space that leads to the saddle point within the basin boundary. In- troducing an additional controlled imperfection, such as 5 slightly curved holes deforms the basin of attraction, and likely moves the corresponding single dimple saddle point closer to the unbuckled state. Thus for the real shell, in- creasing the axial load will trigger the localized unstable mode at the location of the this defect first, which ratio- nalizes how the hole controls the location where buckling is preferentially nucleated. We suggest the stability landscape is composed of experimentally-accessible projections of the basin of at- traction along one path of deformations in a direction corresponding to the single dimple deformations and at different axial loads. The stability landscape thus indi- cates how the basin of attraction, measured in the direc- tion of the guiding imperfection shrinks under increas- ing axial load and at which load it vanishes. Probing the shell at one location, passing the ridge and reaching the lake, thus yields the distance between the unbuckled state and the basin boundary, as shown in Fig. 4(c). A convenient feature of ridge tracking, as opposed to lake tracking, is that we are tracking the height of the cliff, and not its width, while both vanish at the critical axial buckling load. This probing protocol keeps the system safely within the basin of attraction. The successful prediction of spontaneous buckling loads highlights the utility of transferring nonlinear con- cepts from the study of turbulence transition in subcrit- ical shear flows to shell buckling. Treating buckling as a nonlinear instability triggered by finite-amplitude per- turbations of a subcritically loaded shell rather than as linear instability problem, rationalizes the striking sensi- tivity to defects. Moreover, it provides avenues for pre- dicting the strength of a shell in the presence of an un- known defect distribution. We have specifically shown that characterizing the load-dependent critical perturba- tion amplitude via ridge tracking can predict the strength of commercial mini-Coke cans. The method involves introducing an additional localized imperfection in the form of a hole and probing in the vicinity of it. Notably, introducing the hole does not determine the strength of the shell which still varies greatly. In fact the hole does not appear to weaken the can at all; thus, introducing holes does not trivialize the challenge of buckling-load prediction. We hypothesize that the additionally intro- duced imperfection guarantees that the unstable mode excited first will indeed be a local dimple buckle near the probing location. Under these conditions, the stability landscape provides the most relevant projection of the basin boundary. Without a priori knowledge of where buckling will initiate, ridge tracking will likely require to probe at numerous locations. The precise conditions un- der which the additional controlled defect aids probing yet not affects the strength of the shell itself remain to be investigated in detail. Interestingly, while the specific hole does not determine the strength of the can, it does seem to serve as a nucleus or lightning rod for the nucle- ation of buckling, forcing a specific initiation location and allowing ridge tracking to work. Introducing controlled defects and ridge tracking opens new and exciting ap- proaches for probing and controlling the stability of thin shell structures. The authors would like to thank John W. Hutchinson and Pedro. M. Reis for insightful discussions. This work was funded by the National Science Foundation through the Harvard Materials Research Science and Engineering Center DMR-1420570 and the Swiss SNSF under Grant No. 200021-165530. S. M. R. acknowledges support from the Alfred P. Sloan Research Foundation (FG2016-6925). P. Seide, V. I. Weingarten, E. J. Morgan, The devel- opment of design criteria for elastic stability of thin shell structures, Space Technology Laboratories, Report , N. Yamaki, Elastic stability of circular cylindrical shells, Elsevier (1984). V. I. Weingarten, P. Seide, A. L. Braslow, Buckling of Thin-Walled doubly curved shells, NASA Space Vehicle Design Criteria, NASA SP-8032 (1969). V. I. Weingarten, P. Seide, E. J. Morgan, Buckling of Thin-Walled Circular Cylinders, NASA Space Vehicle Design Criteria, NASA SP-8007 (1968). W. H. Horton, S. C. Durham, Imperfections, a main contributor to scatter in experimental values of buck- ling load, International Journal of Solids and Structures, W. T. Koiter, The Stability of Elastic Equilibrium, Ph. D. thesis, TH Delft (1945) D. Bushnell, Buckling of shells, pitfall for designers, AIAA Journal 19 1183–1226, (1981). R. C. Davis, F. Carder, Buckling tests of a 10-foot diam- eter stiffened cylinder with rectangular cutouts, NASA Technical Memorandum 88996, (1987). J. Singer, J. Arbocz, T. Weller, Experimental Methods in Buckling of Thin-Walled Structures, John Wiley & sons, New York, Volume 1 and 2 (2002). M. W. Hilburger, W. Allen Waters, W. T. Haynie, Buckling test results from the 8-foot-diameter orthogrid- stiffened cylinder test article TA01, NASA Technical Publication TP-2015-218785, (2015). A. G. Darbyshire, T. Mullin, Transition to turbulence in constant-mass-flux pipe flow, Journal of Fluid Mechan- ics, 289, 83-114 (1995). S. Grossmann, The onset of shear flow turbulence, Re- views of Modern Physics, 72, 603-618 (2000). R. Kerswell, Recent progress in understanding the tran- sition to turbulence in a pipe, Nonlinearity, 18, R17-R44 B. Eckhardt, T. M. Schneider, B. Hof, J. Westerweel, Turbulence Transition in Pipe Flow, Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics, 39, 447-469 (2007). E. Virot, T. Kreilos, T. M. Schneider, S. M. Rubinstein, Stability landscape of shell buckling, Physical Review Letters, 119, 224101 (2017). J. M. T. Thompson, Advances in Shell Buckling: Theory and Experiments, International Journal of Bifurcation and Chaos 25, 1530001 (2015). 6 J. M. T. Thompson, J. Sieber, Shock-Sensitivity in Shell- Like Structures: With Simulations of Spherical Shell Buckling, International Journal of Bifurcation and Chaos J. W. Hutchinson, J. M. T. Thompson, Nonlinear buck- ling interaction for spherical shells subject to pressure and probing forces, Journal of Applied Mechanics 84, J. W. Hutchinson, J. M. T. Thompson, Imperfections and energy barriers in shell buckling, International Journal of Solids and Structures 148, 157-168 (2017). Groh R. M. J., Pirrera A., On the role of localizations in buckling of axially compressed cylinders, Proc. R. Soc. A Groh R. M. J., Pirrera A., Spatial chaos as a govern- ing factor for imperfection sensitivity in shell buckling, Physical Review E 100, 032205 (2019). Neville, R. M., Groh R. M. J., Pirrera A., Schenk, M., Shape Control for Experimental Continuation, Physical Review Letters 120, 254101 (2018). A. Lee, F. L. Jim ́enez, J. Marthelot, J. W. Hutchinson, and P. M. Reis, The geometric role of precisely engineered imperfections on the critical buckling load of spherical elastic shells, Journal of Applied Mechanics, 83, 111005 J. Marthelot, F. Lopez Jimenez, A. Lee, J. W. Hutchin- son, P. M. Reis, Buckling of a pressurized hemispherical shell subjected to a probing force, Journal of Applied Me- chanics 84, 121005 (2017). Kriegesmann, B., Hilburger, M., and Rolfes, R., The Effects of Geometric and Loading Imperfections on the Response and Lower-Bound Buckling Load of a Compression-Loaded Cylindrical Shell, AIAA Paper Wagner, H. N. R., Huhne, C., and Niemann, S.Robust Knockdown Factors for the Design of Spherical Shells Under External Pressure: Development and Validation, Int. J. Mech. Sci. 141 58–77 (2018). Haynie, W., Hilburger, M., Bogge, M., Maspoli, M., and Kriegesmann, B., Validation of Lower-Bound Estimates for Compression-Loaded Cylindrical Shells, AIAA Paper Arbelo, M. A., Degenhardt, R., Castro, S.G.P., Zim- mermann, R., Numerical characterization of imperfection sensitive composite structures Composite Structures 108 Hao, P., Wang, B., Tian, K., Du, K., and Zhang, X., In- fluence of Imperfection Distributions for Cylindrical Stiff- ened Shells With Weld Lands, Thin-Walled Struct. 93 Huhne, C., Rolfes, R., Breitbach, E., and Tessmer, J., Robust Design of Composite Cylinder Shells Under Axial Compression—Simulation and Validation, Thin-Walled Struct. 46 947–962 (2008). P. Jiao, Z. Chen, X. Tang, W. Su, J. Wu, Design of axially loaded isotropic cylindrical shells using multiple perturbation load approach – Simulation and validation Thin-Walled Struct. 133 1-16 (2018) Wullschleger, L., Numerical Investigation of the Buck- ling Behaviour o Axially Compressed Circular Cylinders Having Parametric Initial Dimple Imperfections, Doc- toral thesis, ETH, Zurich, Switzerland (2006). J. I. Craig, M. F. Duggan, Nondestructive Shell-stability Estimation by a Combined-loading Technique, Experi- mental Mechanics, September, 381-388 (1973) S. Gerasimidis, E. Virot, J. W. Hutchinson, S. M. Rubinstein, On Establishing Buckling Knockdowns for Imperfection-Sensitive Shell Structures, Journal of Ap- plied Mechanics 85, 091010 (2018). R. Zoelly, ̈Uber ein Knickungsproblem an der Kugelschale, Thesis, Z ̈urich, 19157). Hor ́ak, J., Lord, G. J., Peletier, M.A., Cylinder buckling: the mountain pass as an organizing center, SIAM J. Appl. T. Kreilos, T. M. Schneider, Fully localized post-buckling states of cylindrical shells under axial compression, Pro- ceedings of the Royal Society of London A, 473 20170177 B. Audoly, J. W. Hutchinson, Localization in Spherical Shell Buckling, J. Mech. Phys. Solids 136 103720 (2017). See supplementary information SI. Toda, S., Buckling of cylinders with cutouts under ax- ial compression. Experimental Mechanics, 23(4), 414-417 Starnes, J. H., The effect of a circular hole on the buck- ling of cylindrical shells (Doctoral dissertation, California Institute of Technology) (1970).