Thermoelectric power factor under strain- induced band-alignment in the half-Heuslers NbCoSn and TiCoSb Chathurangi Kumarasinghe*, and Neophytos Neophytou School of Engineering, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK * Chathu.Kumarasinghe@warwick.ac.uk Abstract Band convergence is an effective strategy to improve the thermoelectric perfor- mance of complex bandstructure thermoelectric materials. Half-Heuslers are good candidates for band convergence studies because they have multiple bands near the valence bad edge that can be converged through various band engineering ap- proaches providing power factor improvement opportunities. Theoretical calcula- tions to identify the outcome of band convergence employ various approximations for the carrier scattering relaxation times (the most common being the constant re- laxation time approximation) due to the high computational complexity involved in extracting them accurately. Here, we compare the outcome of strain-induced band convergence under two such scattering scenarios: i) the most commonly used con- stant relaxation time approximation and ii) energy dependent inter- and intra-valley scattering considerations for the half-Heuslers NbCoSn and TiCoSb. We show that the outcome of band convergence on the power factor depends on the carrier scat- tering assumptions, as well as the temperature. For both materials examined, band convergence improves the power factor. For NbCoSn, however, band convergence becomes more beneficial as temperature increases, under both scattering relaxation time assumptions. In the case of TiCoSb, on the other hand, constant relaxation time considerations also indicate that the relative power factor improvement increases with temperature, but under the energy dependent scattering time considerations, 2 the relative improvement weakens with temperature. This indicates that the scat- tering details need to be accurately considered in band convergence studies to pre- dict more accurate trends. 3 Introduction Thermoelectric materials are capable of direct conversion of thermal energy into electricity and vice versa. They have drawn interest as an environment-friendly and highly reliable energy conversion technology1–4. The efficiency of a thermoe- lectric material is quantified by the thermoelectric figure of merit (ZT) given by: ZT = (σS2T)/κ , (1) where σ is the electrical conductivity, S is the Seebeck coefficient, T is the temper- ature and κ is the thermal conductivity of the material. To obtain a high ZT, a high electrical conductivity, a high Seebeck coefficient, i.e. a high power factor (σS2), and a low thermal conductivity κ is needed, however, simultaneous optimization of these parameters is difficult due to their complex inter-dependencies. Bandstructure engineering approaches such as ‘band-convergence’ also known as ‘band-alignment’, can overcome these inter-dependencies and improve the power factor (PF)5,6. The aim of band-convergence is to increase the number of carriers contributing to electronic transport by increasing the valley or orbital de- generacy near conduction or valence bands edges. In bulk materials, bandstructures can be manipulated to achieve this by applying strain, doping, alloying, and second phasing with other suitable structures 7–9. For example, half-Heusler (HH) alloys 10– 14 have complex bandstructures with the potential for beneficial band convergence. They are also known to have good thermal and mechanical stability, large scale reproducibility, and made out of relatively inexpensive, non-toxic elements. One of the most commonly used theoretical approaches for obtaining ther- moelectric properties of materials is applying the Boltzmann transport theory in the relaxation time approximation using detailed material bandstructures obtained from ab initio density functional theory (DFT) 15,16. The carrier relaxation time is an im- portant input in this calculation, but due to the high computational complexity in calculating accurate carrier relaxation times, a constant relaxation time is generally assumed (usually τ ≈ 10−14s is used). However, such simplifications are known 4 to give less accurate predictions particularly during band-convergence optimization studies 17. This is because, while band-alignment can increase the number of carriers available for conduction, it can also increase the number of states that carriers scat- ter into. Therefore, the energy dependence of the scattering mechanisms, as well as intra- or inter-valley scattering considerations are important in identifying if a given bandstructure engineering approach leads to an improved power factor. In addition, the scattering rate depends on the temperature as well with more scattering of elec- trons/holes by phonons expected at higher temperatures. In this work we study the effect of considering different scattering time scenarios on the strain-induced band-convergence for two Co-based half-Heuslers, NbCoSn and TiCoSb. We consider constant (τC), and energy dependent inter- and intra- valley scattering (τIIV) relaxation time approximations, and quantify the rela- tive power factor improvements that each predict at different temperatures and strain levels. We finally stress the importance of accurate treatment of scattering in arriving to useful predictions. Methods Boltzmann Transport Theory: Thermoelectric coefficients are calculated us- ing the Boltzmann transport formalism within the relaxation time approximation (RTA). We describe the material properties using bandstructures obtained from DFT calculations. The thermoelectric coefficients, electrical conductivity σαβ(T, EF) and Seebeck coefficient Sαβ(T, EF) tensors, can be written as 18,19: σαβ(T, EF) = e2 ∫ Ξαβ(E) ∂f(E, EF, T) ∂E dE (2) Sαβ(T, EF) = e Tσαβ(T, EF) ∫ Ξαβ(E)(−EF) ∂f(E, EF, T) ∂E dE (3) where f(E, EF, T) is the fermi distribution function at a given temperature T and a chemical potential level EF and e is the charge of an electron. Ξαβ(E) is the transport distribution (TD) function, which is given by: 5 i,k , (4) where i and k represent the band index and the k-point, respectively. τi,k(E) is the electron relaxation time and vα(i, k) (α = {x, y, z}) represents the αth compo- nent of the group velocity v(i, k), which can be derived from the gradient of the bands in the bandstructure as: v(i, k) = 1 ħ ∇k Ei,k . (5) Ab initio electronic structure calculations: Ab initio DFT calculations were performed for the Co-based HHs, NbCoSn and TiCoSb with the QUANTUM ESPRESSO package 20. Projector augmented wave technique was used with the PBE-GGA functional. Throughout our calculations, a kinetic energy cutoff greater than 60Ry was used for wavefunctions and an energy convergence criterion of 10-8 Ry was adopted for self-consistency. For transport property calculations, a 15x15x15 Monkhorst–Pack k-point sampling was used for the primitive unit cell with three atoms. Calculations using denser k-points were carried out to confirm the convergence of the results. Relaxation time approximation: By applying the Boltzmann transport theory using the DFT extracted bandstructures, we examine the influence of the nature of scattering times on the power factor for various temperatures and upon strain-in- duced band-convergence. We consider: i) the commonly employed constant relax- ation time (τi = τC) and ii) scattering proportional to total density of states, allowing i ). To obtain a general understanding about these two scattering scenarios, we first analyse them using a simple parabolic band model. Since under the parabolic band approximation, the velocity and density of states of each band is vi(E) = 6 (2E/mi)1/2 , and DOSi(E) = 21/2mi 3/2NiE1/2/(π2ħ3), respectively, the TD func- tion given in Eq.4 for valence bands is reduced to: Ξ(E) ∝ ∑ Niτi(E) mi 1 2 E 3 2 i (H[−ΔEi]). (6) where the subscript i indicates each band, ΔEi indicates the distance to the band edge from the valence band edge, Ni indicates the band degeneracy and H[ΔEi] indicates the Heaviside step function. (For conduction bands, (H[−ΔEi]) should be replace by H[ΔEi].) Under the constant relaxation time approximation, τi(E) = τC, where τC is a constant. Therefore, the TD function relation given by Eq. (6) can be further sim- plified to: Ξ(E) ∝ ∑ i mi 1 2 E 3 2 H[−ΔEi]. (7) This indicates that under a constant relaxation time, aligning a band of any mass will increase the TD function, resulting finally in an increased conductivity, with the larger masses resulting in larger improvements, a common scenario seen in most band-alignment theory literature. The magnitude and sign of the Seebeck coefficient are related to an asymmetry of the electron transport around the Fermi level 21,22, which is indicated by the energy gradient of the TD function. If the band convergence does not additionally introduce significant asymmetry (significant change in gradient of the TD function), there will not be a significant change in the Seebeck coefficient. Therefore, in the case of a constant relaxation time, a power factor improvement is always achieved upon band alignment, driven by improve- ments in the conductivity, with a heavier aligning band being preferred, as it offers a higher density of conducting states (but not more scattering states under τC). As we discuss further below, this is not the case when τ = τIIV(E). In the case of inter- and intra-band scattering (τIIV(E)) that we consider next, carriers are allowed to scatter elastically to the total density of states available 7 at the energy under consideration, without any selection rules, i.e. both intra and inter-band (with inter and intra-valley in multi-valley materials) scattering is al- i ). The TD functions relation given by Eq. (6) in this case can be simplified to: Ξ(E) ∝ ∑ mi 1 2 E 3 2 H[−ΔEi] i ∑ mi 3 2 E 1 2 i H[−ΔEi] (8) From Eq. (8), since the denominator (its appearance being a result of the scat- tering times being inversely proportional to the DOS), has a higher mass exponent, it can be deduced that upon full band alignment, the TD function will only increase when a light band is brought close to the band edge and is aligned with a heavier band. When additional bands are gradually brought close to the band edge to be aligned, three competing effects take place: i) the presence of the additional con- ducting states tends to increase the TD function, ii) the same states increase the scattering of already aligned bands, which tends to reduce the TD function, and iii) scattering from newly aligned bands reduces since there are less states to scatter into at energies closer to valence band edge (due to the energy dependence E1/2 of the DOS), increasing the TD function. These interdependences do not allow for signif- icant improvements in the TD, the conductivity, and the PF as in the previous two scattering scenarios. As a result of these competing effects, aligning bands is not always advantageous for the power factor under τIIV(E)17. Temperature dependent carrier relaxation time: When performing temper- ature dependent studies, and evaluating the trends under increasing temperature, the Fermi distribution broadens, which allows the occupation of more states, however, to satisfy charge neutrality the Fermi level will shift towards the bandgap, increas- ing the Seebeck coefficient. If one compares at the same Fermi level position, rather than carrier density, however, the conductivity increases, while not many changes are observed in the Seebeck coefficient. On the other hand, temperature increases 8 the population of phonons, which increase carrier-phonon scattering. In the most common acoustic deformation potential scattering scenario, under the equipartition approximation, the scattering rate increases linearly with temperature. Thus, we ac- count for the increase in carrier scattering with increase in temperature by scaling the relaxation times by 1/T. We refer to this as ‘T-normalized relaxation time’. In the case of the constant relaxation time, we take τC = 10−14 s at 300 K, and linearly scale for other temperatures as τC = 10−14 ( 300 T ) s, to account for deviations from room temperature In the case of energy dependent relaxation time, temperature scal- ing is implemented as τIIV ∝ 1/ ∑ DOSi(E) i (300/T). Results and Discussion malized and non-normalized relaxation times. Under non-normalized conditions (solid lines), at the same Fermi level position, the power factor rises with the tem- perature because the derivative of the Fermi distribution function ((∂f(E, EF, T))/ ∂E) in the Eq. 2 broadens (for a given Fermi level), increasing the conductivity. However, when we take into account the increase in carrier scattering by normaliz- ing the carrier scattering time by 300/T, the power factor difference almost disap- pears, and only modest differences exist between temperatures for both scattering scenarios. This illustrates that it is important to take increased carrier scattering into consideration when comparing thermoelectric parameters at different temperatures. (Note that it is often the case in experiments to observe that the power factor changes with temperature. That is because those are performed at a constant density, rather than a constant Fermi level position, which would have shifted the two lines com- pared to each other). Band convergence can be achieved using a variety of methods including applying strain 17,23,24 and alloying6,25,26. Here, for the purposes of our investigation into the influence of band alignment on the PF under different scattering scenarios 9 and temperatures, we use the easiest method within DFT, which is the use of hydro- static strain, either compressive or tensile. In Fig. 2(c), in the unstrained NbCoSn bandstructure, it is apparent that multiple bands from several valleys are available close to the valence band edge VB0. Bands at the L and W points are already aligned at VB0. There also exist heavy and light bands at the X and Γ points within 0.3eV of the VB0. Aligning these bands that are in the vicinity of the VB0, particularly the bands at the X point that have a large equivalent valley degeneracy of 3, can lead to an improved conductivity and power factor. As seen in Figure 2(a-d), the bands of NbCoSn can be manipu- lated with compression and expansion. When the material is compressed, the bands at the X point are brought closer to VB0, reducing their energy separation ΔE, and when expanded, ΔE increases. It is important to note, however, that the curvatures of the bands, i.e. the carrier effective masses also change with strain. Compression increases the band curvatures (lower carrier effective mass) in general and expan- sion has the opposite effect. The fact that the masses are reduced with band conver- gence is unfavorable under a constant scattering rate as seen above in Eq.7. It is, however, favorable under τIIV(E) under most situations17 as it brings bands with higher velocities that scatter less within the transport window. We consider large strain values of up to 5% and achieve a degree of alignment, but a compressive strain larger than 5% is required to completely align the bands. We now examine the thermoelectric coefficients of NbCoSn under strain, for three different temperatures 300K, 600K, and 900K (Fig. 3). Figure 3 shows the TE coefficients conductivity, Seebeck coefficient and the power factor calculated under the assumption of a constant scattering time (τC). Later on, we will show how these observations are altered in the case of energy dependent τIIV scattering. At 300K (Fig. 3a-c) we only see a 3% improvement in the PF with band convergence. With increasing temperature, the conductivity for non-degenerate Fermi levels in- creases, while it decreases for higher Fermi levels. The opposite effect is seen in the Seebeck coefficient where its values decrease for non-degenerate conditions and increase for highly degenerate Fermi values (right versus left regions of the sub- 10 figures). Also, the gradients of conductivity and Seebeck coefficient curves are re- ducing with increasing temperature. The combined effect is that with increasing temperature the power factor improves for all compressive strain value, which tend to align the bands, with the improvements at 5% compressive strain to increase from 3% to 13% to 21% at temperatures of 300 K, 600 K, and 900 K, respectively. Note that the absolute PF values do not necessarily increase with temperature, it is the relative increase between the unstrained and strained cases that increases. Next, we examine the behavior of NbCoSn under the energy dependent τIIV scattering for the three temperatures of interest, 300 K, 600 K, and 900 K (Fig.4, column-wise). In this case, the differences in the conductivity are more noticeable between the different strain conditions, compared to the τC case in Fig. 3. The See- beck coefficients as in the τC case are almost unchanged with strain at the same Fermi level position, especially for the higher temperatures. The improvements to the PF, on the other hand, are larger with compressive strain, and they begin to appear and being significant even at 300 K. In this τIIV case, the PF improvements for the 5% compressive strain, at 300 K, 600 K, and 900 K are 20%, 23%, and 33%, respectively. The larger improvements compared to the τC case, originate from the changes in the curvature of the bands in addition to the reduced band separation. The bands that are brought closer to the band edge to be aligned as well as the bands already at the band edge become lighter in the process in NbCoSn 17. Specifically, the masses of the bands at X valley band, changes from 0.48m0 to 0.29m0 while its separation is reduced from 315 meV to 232 meV upon 5% compression. Alignment tends to increase the PF in both τC and τIIV, but in the τC case the fact that the bands become lighter, mitigates this benefit. On the other hand, in the case of τIIV, light bands are beneficial, which provides an additional improvement to the PF. Finally, the reason the benefits increase with temperature in both cases, is due to the simple fact that the broadening of the Fermi distribution with temperature, allows for an exponentially larger percentage contribution of the upper valleys to the total contri- bution. The separation ΔE is still large, even at 5% compression, accounting for 11 several kBTeven at 900 K. Thus, at the same Fermi level position, the overall rela- tive PF improvement with temperature increases with T. For NbCoSn, either τC or τIIV indicate a higher benefits of band alignment at higher temperatures. Next, we apply strain to TiCoSb in the same way. The smaller energy sepa- ration ΔE between bands at L and Γ points (see Fig. 5c) can be reduced by applying compressive strain, leading to band convergence, as shown in Fig. 5 (a-d). The un- strained ΔE value in this situation is only 40 meV ( 1.55 kBT at T = 300 K), i.e. the bands are almost aligned even without strain. The bands can be fully aligned by applying only 2% compressive strain as shown in Fig. 5b (a much more realistic value compared to the one needed for NbCoSn). for the constant time scattering assumption τC for 300 K, 600 K, and 900 K column- wise, in the same manner as earlier for the NbCoSn. We only see 6% improvement when bands are fully aligned using compressive strain (Fig. 6(c)), but the improve- ment increases for higher temperatures, reaching 13% and 19% at 600 K and 900K, respectively (Fig. 6(f), 6(i)). Again, the improvement in the PF with compression at a given temperature originates from the conductivity. Improvements increase in the higher temperatures because the positive contribution from the broadening of the ∂f(E, E_F, T))/∂E function overweight the negative effects on the TD function from increased scattering. We now examine the case where the relaxation time in TiCoSb is energy dependent (τIIV). Figure 7 shows the TE coefficients conductivity, Seebeck coeffi- cient and PF for this energy dependent scattering assumption for the three temper- atures of interest, under 5% expansion, 2% compression, and 5% compression as before in Fig. 6. We observe a 37% improvement when bands are fully aligned using compressive strain (Fig. 7(a)) at 300 K. The fact that band curvatures also increase (carrier effective masses reduce) with alignment, is more favorable under 12 the τIIV scattering scenario, which has contributed to this large improvement ob- served. Interestingly, as opposed to all previous scenarios the improvement reduces with temperature increase, down to 27% and 25% at 600 K and 900 K, respectively (Fig. 6(f), 6(i)). The reason behind the smaller improvement variation with temper- ature upon band alignment for TiCoSb compared to the NbCoSn case, is of course the fact that the bands were closer together to begin with, and thus in all temperature cases the initial and the aligning bands contribute similarly. In other words, the in- fluence of the broadening of ∂f(E, E_F, T))/∂E affects all cases similarly. The increase in scattering with temperature, however, overcomes any positive contribu- tion from this broadening, reducing the PF improvement with temperature. In summary, as seen in Fig.8, band convergence is advantageous for both NbCoSn and TiCoSb (there is an improvement in the PF). Under both scattering scenarios we have considered, band convergence provides larger relative benefits for NbCoSn as the temperature increases (blue lines). Band convergence on the other hand, provides relative improvements in the PF for TiCoSb under τC, but re- ductions under τIIV as the temperature increases. 13 Conclusion In this work we have used strain to align the bands near the valence band edge of the p-type Co-based half-Heuslers NbCoSn and TiCoSb for thermoelectric power factor improvements. Using the Boltzmann transport equation under the relaxation time approximation, we explored the band alignment effect on the power factor under two different scattering conditions (as the detail scattering physics of half- Heuslers are still not known): i) the constant relaxation time approximation – as is common in the literature, ii) scattering rates depending on energy, proportional to the density of final states, with both inter- and intra-band\ inter- and intra-valley scattering considerations. We showed that the outcome of band alignment can be different in each of the different scattering cases and at different temperatures for these materials. It depends on the nature of the bandstructure, particularly on how the curvatures change with band convergence and the relative separations between bands to begin with. When benefits of broadening of ∂f(E, E_F, T))/∂E overcome negative contributions from increased carrier scattering with temperature, we see increasing improvements in the PF with temperature. For NbCoSn, band convergence using strain is more beneficial in higher temperatures in both scattering scenarios, while for TiCoSb higher temperatures are only beneficial under a constant rate of scattering. Our work stresses the importance of more accurate theoretical treatment of carrier relaxation times and their temperature dependences. Acknowledgements This work has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) un- der the European Union's Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme (Grant Agreement No. 678763). 14 Fig. 1. Power factors calculated using normalized (solid-lines) and non-normalized(dashed- lines) carrier relaxation times at 600K (red) and 900K(blue) for (a) constant relaxation time (τC) and (b) energy dependent relaxation time (τIIV) for NbCoSn. Fig. 2. (a)-(d) Application of compressive and tensile strain in NbCoSb to align the X valley with the valence band edge. Strain values and the energy separation ΔE between the X valley and VB0 are noted above the sub-figures. Subfigure (d) shows the unstrained bandstructure. 15 Fig. 3. Thermoelectric coefficients (σ, S, and PF) calculated for NbCoSn using the tempera- and (g)-(i) for 900K. The percentage improvement given is the peak to peak improvement between the unstrained (ΔE=315 meV) and 5% compressive strain (ΔE=232 meV), given by the yellow-solid lines and blue-solid lines, respectively. 16 Fig. 4. Thermoelectric coefficients (σ, S, and PF) calculated for NbCoSn using the tempera- (f) for 600K and (g)-(i) for 900K. The percentage improvement given is the peak to peak improvement between the unstrained (ΔE=315 meV) and 5% compressive strain (ΔE=232 meV), given by the yellow-solid lines and blue-solid lines, respectively. Fig. 5. (a)-(d) Application of compressive and tensile strain in TiCoSb to align the X valley with the valence band edge. Strain values and the energy separation ΔE between the X valley and VB0 are noted above the sub-figures. Subfigure (d) shows the unstrained bandstructure. 17 Fig. 6. Thermoelectric coefficients (σ, S, and PF) calculated for TiCoSb using the tempera- The percentage improvement given is the peak to peak improvement between the unstrained (ΔE=40 meV) and 5% compressive strain (ΔE=-23 meV), given by the yellow-solid lines and blue-solid lines, respectively. 18 Fig. 7. Thermoelectric coefficients (σ, S, and PF) calculated for TiCoSb using the tempera- (g)-(i) for 900K. The percentage improvement given is the peak to peak improvement be- tween the unstrained (ΔE=40 meV) and 5% compressive strain (ΔE=-23 meV), given by the yellow-solid lines and blue-solid lines, respectively. Fig. 8. Percentage improvement of the power factor (from peak to peak between unstrained and 5% compression) under a constant rate of scattering (solid-lines), and energy dependent τIIV scattering(dashed-lines) versus temperature for NbCoSn, and TiCoSb. 19