Hybrid Perovskites, Metal–Organic Frameworks, and Beyond: Unconventional Degrees of Freedom in Molecular Frameworks Hanna L. B. Bostr ̈om1,2 and Andrew L. Goodwin1,∗ 1Department of Chemistry, University of Oxford, Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QR, UK 2Max Planck Institute for Solid State Research, Stuttgart, 70569 Germany CONSPECTUS: The structural degrees of freedom of a solid material are the various distortions most straightforwardly activated by external stimuli such as temperature, or pressure, or adsorption. One of the most successful design strategies in materials chemistry involves controlling these individual distortions to produce useful collective functional responses. In a ferroelectric such as lead titanate, for example, the key degree of freedom involves asymmetric displacements of Pb2+ cations; it is by coupling these together that the system as a whole interacts with external electric fields. Collective rotations of the polyhedral units in oxide ceramics are another commonly exploited distortion, driving anomalous behaviour such as negative thermal expansion— the counterintuitive phenomenon of volume contraction on heating. An exciting development in the field has been to exploit the interplay between different distortion types: generating polarisation by combining two different polyhedral rotations, for example. In this way, degrees of freedom act as geometric ‘elements’ that can themselves be combined to engineer materials with new and interesting properties. Just as the discovery of new chemical elements quite obviously diversified chemical space, so we might expect that identifying new and different types of structural degrees of freedom to be an important strategy for developing new kinds of functional materials. In this context, the broad family of molecular frameworks is emerging as an extraordinarily fertile source of new and unanticipated distortion types, the vast majority of which have no parallel in the established families of conventional solid-state chemistry. Framework materials are solids whose structures are assembled from two fundamental components: nodes and linkers. Quite simply, linkers join the nodes together to form scaffolding-like networks that extend from the atomic to the macroscopic scale. These structures usually contain cavities, which can also accommodate additional ions for charge balance. In the well-established systems—such as lead titanate—node, linker, and extra-framework ions are all individual atoms (Ti, O, and Pb, respectively). But in molecular frameworks, at least one of these components is a molecule. In this Account, we survey the unconventional degrees of freedom introduced through the simple act of replacing atoms by molecules. Our motivation is to understand the role these new distortions play (or might be expected to play) in different materials properties. The various degrees of freedom themselves—unconventional rotational, translational, orientational, and conformational states—are summarised and described in the context of relevant experimental examples. The much-improved prospect for generating emergent functionalities by combining these new distortion types is then discussed. We highlight a number of directions for future research—including the design and application of hierarchically structured phases of matter intermediate to solids and liquid-crystals—which serve to highlight the extraordinary possibilities for this nascent field. Introduction Framework materials are a broad and important family of solids that include zeolites, perovskites, metal–organic frame- works (MOFs), and coordination polymers (CPs).1–8 Their network structures are composed of nodes and linkers, and may incorporate counterions and/or neutral guest molecules within their cavities. A very general formula for the family is AmBXn·{guest}, where A represents the extra-framework counterion(s), B the framework node, and X the correspond- ing linker. The famous ABX3 stoichiometry of perovskites such as BaTiO3 and MAPbI3 (MA = CH3NH3) is an obvious example;8–10 the ReO3 networks are related A-site-deficient systems (m = 0) that include e.g. the archetypal MOF-5, for which B = OZn6+ 4 and X is the terephthalate dianion.11,12 Some canonical examples are shown in Fig. 1. Historically, the task of developing functional framework materials has focussed heavily on purely inorganic systems, such as oxide ceramics.4,22 And for good reason: the charge, spin, spin-state, and orbital degrees of freedom of (e.g.) tran- sition metals are key for many important physical proper- ties, and the interactions amongst these various components are strongest when frameworks are dense. The incorpora- tion of molecular components necessarily opens up a frame- work structure—molecules occupy more space than atoms, af- ter all—such that collective properties dependent on the inter- action of electronic degrees of freedom generally suffer as a consequence. 1 arXiv:2011.13765v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 27 Nov 2020 linkers in red. Interpenetrated framework copies are shown in white. (a) The negative thermal expansion behaviour (NTE) material Zn(CN)2, formula [Zn4O][bdc]3 and PCU topology.11 Neither MOF has any cation on the corresponding A-sites. The flip-side of this coin is that open framework struc- tures tend to be more flexible.23 This flexibility is often cast in terms of structural degrees of freedom, a famous exam- ple of which is the family of octahedral tilt distortions found in perovskites.24,25 From the perspective of exploiting flex- ibility in terms of functional response, it seems obvious to focus on mechanical properties—and, indeed, many molec- ular frameworks exhibit unusual mechanical phenomena such as negative thermal expansion (NTE, contraction on heating) and/or negative linear compression (NLC, expansion on com- pression).26,27 But a remarkable development has been the re- alisation that structural degrees of freedom, chosen carefully, can combine to generate electronic degrees of freedom.28,29 This is the basis of so-called hybrid improper ferroelectricity, whereby bulk polarisation develops as a consequence of cou- pling amongst various non-polar structural distortions.30,31 Molecular frameworks have more structural degrees of free- dom than their conventional counterparts, and so offer many more possibilities for generating emergent physical properties of this type.32 In this Account, we survey the key structural degrees of freedom unique to molecular frameworks—‘unconventional’ in the sense that they are not observed in dense inorganic frameworks. These include ‘forbidden’ tilts, shifts, and ori- entational and conformational degrees of freedom. We cover each of these aspects in turn, emphasising where possible the scope for chemical control and some of the various functional implications. Before doing so we first summarise briefly the compositional space accessible to these molecular systems. Our review concludes with a forward-looking discussion of opportunities and developments in the field. Compositions of molecular frameworks Molecules can be incorporated within an AmBXn framework on any one or combination of the A-, B-, and X-sites. A topical example of molecular substitution on the A-site is that of the organic halide perovskites such as MAPbI3, fa- 2 mous for their photovoltaic performance.33–35 We will come to discuss the importance of molecular shape on the struc- tural behaviour and associated functionality of such sys- tems. Whereas single-atom A-site cations tend to interact with the surrounding BXn framework predominantly in terms of space-filling (e.g. the structure-directing tolerance factors) and electrostatic stabilisation, molecular A-site cations allow for more chemically complex interactions. A good exam- ple is that of hydrogen-bonding between A-site guanidinium (Gua+) cations and X-site formate anions in guanidinium transition-metal formates: the interactions are sufficiently strong and directional as to hold the [Gua]Fe2/3□1/3(HCOO)3 (□ = vacancy) framework together even when one-third of the B sites is absent.36 Another important distinction be- tween monoatomic and molecular cations is that of acces- sible charge states. Molecular cations are predominantly univalent—dabconium, [H–N(C2H4)3N–H]2+, being a no- table exception37,38—whereas inorganic ions can often access higher charges.39 Thus, molecular A-site species offer a larger diversity in terms of interactions and shapes, but a smaller range of available charge states, relative to monoatomic A-site species. The scope for compositional variation of the B-site is nor- mally system dependent. By way of example, molecular per- ovskites generally comprise univalent A and X species, which thus requires B to be a divalent octahedral species. As a result, molecular perovskites are frequently based on first-row transi- tion metals—rather than molecular ions—as these satisfy both the charge and geometry requirements.8 This is in contrast to oxide perovskites, which may feature cations with oxida- tion states as high as 6+.39 However, molecular B-site cations have been incorporated in hybrid perovskite frameworks: a high-profile example is the metal–free ferroelectric perovskite assembled by H–I interactions.20 The concept of molecular nodes is well established in MOF chemistry, with many canon- ical systems based on such architectures: the [OZn4]6+ and spectively, are obvious examples.11,21 One advantage of incor- porating oxometallate clusters is that it allows highly charged metal cations (up to 4+) to be incorporated, which often cor- relates with good thermal and chemical stability.21,40 Molecular substitution on the X-site leads to the rich fami- lies of MOFs and CPs.7,41,42 Organic anions are the predom- inant type of molecular X-site linkers, but metal-containing species may also be used, as in the dicyanometallate43,44 and metalloporphyrin45 frameworks. Even simple inorganic molecules and molecular ions can occupy the X-site: exam- ples include BH− 4 , SiF2− 6 , I2, and CN−.46–49 Quite obviously the scope for variation on this site is essentially without limit, and includes linker functionalisation—an important tool for property optimisation.50,51 For example, the thermal stabil- ity,52 band gap,53 and absorption behaviour54 of molecular frameworks can be optimised through judicious choice of X- site chemistry. The linker shape may also guide the topology of the system and the propensity for distortions.55,56 Hence, of the three site types in molecular frameworks, it is the X- site that offers the richest playground for tuning structure and function. Conventional and forbidden tilt distortions Arguably the best studied type of structural degree of freedom in conventional framework materials is that of tilt distortions. In perovskites, these are the ‘octahedral tilts’ famously cate- gorised by Glazer,24,57 and more generally they are the rigid- unit modes (RUMs) relevant to e.g. the silicate minerals and zeolites.58–60 Their ubiquity arises from the contrast in energy scales between the cost of deforming the tightly bound BX2n coordination polyhedra and flexing the underconstrained B– X–B linkages. As a consequence, a common structural dis- tortion involves correlated rotations of corner-sharing coor- dination polyhedra, themselves behaving effectively as rigid bodies. By way of example, the famous tilt instability in SrTiO3 involves counter-rotation of corner-sharing TiO6 octa- hedra around a common axis—the Ti coordination geometry is preserved in the process, but the Ti–O–Ti angle flexes to re- duce the system volume at low temperatures.61–63 In general, many different tilt distortions are possible for a given frame- work, with each one breaking crystal symmetry in its own par- ticular way. This symmetry breaking can be exploited in the design of hybrid improper ferroelectrics, which has led to the development of so-called ‘tilt engineering’ approaches,28,64 whereby framework composition is cleverly manipulated to introduce tilt distortions of a specific useful symmetry. An important distinction between atomic and molecular X- site linkers is that, loosely speaking, the former requires neigh- bouring [BX2n] polyhedra to rotate in opposite directions but the latter lifts any such constraint.65 In particular, it is possible in molecular frameworks for neighbouring polyhedra to rotate in the same sense as one another—a so-called ‘forbidden’ tilt distortion that has no analogue in conventional frameworks.66 It turns out that forbidden tilts are a relatively common phe- nomenon in many molecular perovskites, with a particu- lar predominance in azide-bridged systems [Fig. 2(a)].56,67,68 In the Prussian blue-like framework [NH4]2SrFe(CN)6, it is even possible to switch between conventional and forbidden tilt distortions through reversible guest binding at the B-site [Fig. 2(b)].66 The accessibility of forbidden tilts to frameworks with molecular X-sites has two clear functional implications. The first is the profound increase in diversity of symmetry- breaking distortions one might introduce, which in turn ex- pands the possibility for tilt engineering.32 The second is an 3 Octahedral tilts in [NMe4]Mn(N3)3 involve a combination of conventional (out-of-phase) and forbidden (in-phase) rotations. [NH4]SrFe(CN)6 can be switched between conventional (left) and forbidden (right) configurations through reversible (de)hydration at the Sr centres. Figure adapted from . (c) The low-energy phonon dispersion curves of Zn(CN)2 include essentially dispersionless branches associated with Zn-tetrahedral tilts (shaded in red); these partition into modes involving translations (2–4 THz) and rotations (8–10 THz) of the X-site cyanide ions. Figure adapted from . (d) The phenomenon of NGA in DUT-49 involves a reversible transition between open (left) and dense (right) states. These two states, which differ in molar volume by a factor of two, are related by a large-magnitude collective rotation of the B-site polyhedra around ⟨111⟩ axes of the cubic unit cell. The flexibility of the polyphenyl X-site linker is key to allowing this transformation.71 increased density of low-energy volume-reducing tilt modes in the vibrational spectrum of these systems. Whereas conventional tilt modes are localised at the Brillouin zone boundary—reflecting the alternation in rotation sense from polyhedron to polyhedron—forbidden tilts can usually be as- sociated with all possible wave-vectors (i.e. periodicities), and so their contribution to macroscopic thermodynamic proper- ties is more substantial.65 This point is thought to help ex- plain why many molecular frameworks exhibit strong NTE effects: on heating, one populates the whole family of volume- reducing tilt modes, which is sufficient to overcome the usual positive thermal expansion contribution from other vibra- tions.26,65 This point is nicely illustrated in the case of the isotropic NTE material Zn(CN)2, for which the phonon spec- trum is well understood [Fig. 2(c)].15,70 As the length of an X-site anion increases, so too does its capacity to allow for extreme flexing in response to external stimuli. A topical example is the phenomenology of nega- tive gas adsorption (NGA), as observed in the Cu-based MOF DUT-49.71 The effect itself is rather bizarre: on exposure to increasing gas pressure, crystals of DUT-49 first expand as the gas fills their pores, before collapsing at a critical pressure and releasing the included gas molecules (under pressure!). The transition between open and dense states is driven by a collective tilt mode of large multi-centre nodes, facilitated by extreme flexing of polyphenyl X-site linkers [Fig. 2(d)]. Al- though the tilt itself turns out to be conventional, rather than forbidden, its magnitude is entirely unconventional—indeed sufficient to drive a volume collapse greater than 50%. Columnar shifts, breathing, and loop moves Molecular linkers also enable new low-energy deformations involving collective translations that are impossible in in- organic frameworks.65 These modes are most straightfor- wardly understood in molecular perovskites, where they are referred to as ‘columnar shifts’.72 They often play an im- portant symmetry-breaking role in these systems and are well placed to drive hybrid improper ferroelectricity.32,72,73 As for unconventional tilts, columnar shifts are frequently observed in frameworks with azide or dicyanamide ligands [Fig. 3(a)].56,67 The asymmetric naphthalenedicarboxylate (ndc) linker in- duces a similar effect in the MOF known as DUT-8(Ni). Here, neighbouring columns of dabco-bridged nickel–carboxylate paddlewheels are shifted relative to one another as a con- sequence of the step-like ndc geometry.77 Whereas in hy- brid perovskites the shifts are usually well ordered, in DUT- 8(Ni) they exhibit a strongly-correlated disorder governed by strict local rules: each square pore is bounded by two ndc step-ups and two step-downs.78 The particular type of disor- dered arrangement can even be controlled reversibly by guest (de)sorption, which imparts the system with an unusual type of structural flexibility.79 In the long-wavelength limit, shift modes correspond to a shear distortion of the framework structure. Hence the propensity for molecular frameworks with cubic or square 4 (a) The columnar shifts of hybrid perovskites involve translations of columns or planes of connected polyhedra, as shown here for the case of [(CH3)4N]Ca(N3)3.72,74 Note the coupling between shift displacement pattern and A-site molecular shape. Figure adapted from . (b) The low shear modulus of MOF-5 is understandable in terms of low-energy planar shift degrees of freedom. Figure reproduced from . (c) The large-pore/narrow-pore transition of MIL-53, involves adsorption-driven framework shear. Figure adapted from . (d) In some molecular frameworks, such as those with the augmented kagome (left) or augmented pyrochlore (right) nets, localised multi-node translational degrees of freedom exist that correspond to collective rotations of large structural units (green regions). These emergent degrees of freedom are termed ‘loop moves’. Figure adapted from . topologies to exhibit shift-type instabilities is reflected also in their low shear moduli—as in MOF-5 (Refs. 75,80)—and e.g. the existence of ferroelastic open-pore/narrow-pore tran- sitions [Fig. 3(b,c)]. Such transitions are known as ‘breathing modes’ in flexible MOFs.41,50,76,81,82 Perhaps the best known example is MIL-53, where hydration leads to a winerack-type contraction of the framework due to the hydrogen bonding interactions between guest water and the terephthalate link- ers.76 Conversely, the isoreticular series of MIL-88 exhibits a remarkable expansion upon guest absorption, with a vol- ume change of up to 300%.83 The breathing ability renders these MOFs suitable candidates for diverse applications such as drug delivery,84 removal of hazardous materials,85 and gas separation.86 In addition to sorption-induced strain, winerack- type hingeing can sometimes be triggered by pressure, leading to the rare and counterintuitive phenomenon of negative linear compressibility—expansion in one or two directions upon the application of hydrostatic pressure.27,87–89 This has been ob- served in several MOFs and CPs, including MIL-53 and the triply interpenetrated Prussian blue-like Ag3[Co(CN)6].17,90 Whereas translational degrees of freedom in cubic and square network topologies are well understood, the case is much less clear for other systems. For molecular frameworks with diamondoid topologies, a very different type of collective translation occurs: hexagonal loops of connected tetrahedral [BX4] units rotate such that each tetrahedron translates along a loop tangent [Fig. 3(d)].65 We term these collective displace- ments ‘loop moves’, by analogy to the collective loop spin degrees of freedom in Ising pyrochlore magnets.91–93 A pecu- liarity of the diamond network is that there are exactly as many loops as tetrahedral nodes, which has the unexpected conse- quence that each BX4 unit retains a full translational degree of freedom.65 Polyhedral displacements are also observed in the quartz-structured molecular framework α-Zn[Au(CN)2]2, where a pressure-induced phase transition is accompanied by a coupled translation of the [ZnN4] tetrahedra.94 The extension from these select few examples to a general understanding of translational degrees of freedom in molecular frameworks of arbitrary topology, however, remains very much an open ques- tion and work-in-progress. Orientational and multipolar order An obvious difference between inorganic and molecular species is the aspherical symmetry of the latter. This distinc- tion can be exploited in the search for non-centrosymmetric structures. Curie’s principle states that a crystal will adopt the common symmetry subgroup of the point symmetries of its components. Hence, non-centrosymmetric structures can be designed by judicious choice of components with specific symmetries.20 Moreover, the anisotropy inherent to molecular species allows for orientational degrees of freedom that simply do not exist in conventional frameworks. Several properties of molecular perovskites depend on ori- entational order and disorder of the A-site molecule. For ex- ample, the dynamics of the methylammonium cations in the photovoltaic material MAPbI3 affects exciton lifetimes, which is crucial for its performance in solar cells [Fig. 4(a)].95,96 Furthermore, cyanoelpasolites—A2B[B′(CN)6], where A is an organic cation—typically display phase transitions upon cool- ing, driven by progressive freezing of the motion of the A-site cation. This can be exploited for the development of materials with switchable dielectric constants.97–99 The metal-free fer- 5 roelectric [MDABCO][NH4]I3 develops a polarisation com- petitive with that in BaTiO3 through orientational order of the polar [MDABCO]2+ cations [Fig. 4(b)].20 Phase transitions relating to orientational order can often be described in terms of multipole moments and map onto rela- tively simple physical models.102–107 For example, the onset of rotation of the imidazolium cation in (H2Im)2K[Fe(CN)6] corresponds to loss of dipolar order, whereas—as the normal of the imidazolium plane is unchanged—the quadrupolar or- der is retained.97 The type of multipolar order is dictated by the symmetry relationship between the point symmetry of the A-site cation and its site in the ideal undistorted parent.106 Some control over the order of the multipole moments may be achieved by considering the packing efficiency and size of the cavity.108 As a result, design rules based on multipole mo- ments may be within reach. An interesting parallel to these examples is the phenomenology of so-called ‘hidden-order transitions’ in strongly-correlated electronic materials, e.g. the heavy-fermion system URu2Si2, which also involve the emergence of multipolar order on lattices of various topolo- gies.109,110 If the symmetry of the B-site species is lower than the point symmetry of its crystallographic site, then orientational B-site order can emerge. A well-known example in conventional frameworks is that of collective Jahn-Teller order—crucial to the physics of many strongly-correlated oxides22,111,112. Re- lated degrees of freedom exist in molecular frameworks. For example, the hexagonal Zr-MOF PCN-223 features a Zr oxy- hydroxide cluster with three-fold orientational disorder at the nodes of the hexagonal lattice.113 Such disorder can compli- cate the structure determination, as recently noted for PCN- 221—a polymorph of PCN-223.114 The unusual cubic Zr oxy- hydroxide cluster initially reported in PCN-221 appears to be the result of a superposition of statically disordered octahedral clusters.114,115 Turning to the X-site, the use of cylindrically asymmet- ric anions leads to potential symmetry breaking by rotation around the B–X–B linkage. This is of particular currency for ZIFs, and has been extensively studied in the specific case of ZIF-8, a porous material with the SOD topology.116 It readily absorbs molecules larger than the size of the pore window,117 which can be attributed to a rotation of the sur- rounding imidazolate linker edges (the so-called ‘swing ef- fect’) [Fig. 4(c)].118,119 Critically, the degree of rotation can be tuned by chemical functionalisation, which has obvious implications for applications within gas storage and sepa- ration.120 Similar gate-opening effects exist for a number of other MOFs.121–123 Furthermore, a variable-temperature study on cristobalite-like Cd(Im)2 (Im = imidazolate) revealed reorientation of the imidazolate linker, causing an anisotropic and nonlinear thermal response.124 Finally, order/disorder processes of the polar dicyanamide ligand, N(CN)− 2 , likely freedom in some molecular frameworks. (a) In MAPbI3, the A-site methylammonium cation is free in principle to orient along a number of directions within the perovskite cage (coloured arrows). The combination of dipolar interactions with either antiferroelectric (left) or ferroelectric (right) couplings leads to polarisation textures that influence exciton dynamics. Figure adapted from . (b) In the metal-free ferroelectric [MDABCO][NH4]I3, bulk polarisation emerges from collective orientational order of the polar [MDABCO]2+ cations. The polarisation can be flipped in an applied electric field. Figure adapted from . (c) Under application of a critical gas pressure, the imidazolate linkers in ZIF-8 switch orientations to increase the pore window size of its sodalite cage structure (the ‘swing effect’). The sorption profiles within closed-pore (grey) and open-pore (white) configurations differ; the latter is particularly dependent on particle size (varying coloured data). Figure adapted from Refs. 100,101. 6 contribute to the dielectric anomaly observed on heating in the terest in these systems arise from the possibility of controlling order via the application of external electric fields.126 Molecular conformations As the structural complexity of molecular components in- creases, so too does their capacity for internal degrees of freedom. A simple example is the conformational state (dihedral angle) of the methylammonium cation, which may influence exciton recombination rates in MAPbI3.96 More complex is the case of bis(trisphenylphosphine)iminium (PPN), which acts as the A-site cation in dicyanometal- late frameworks and which can adopt multiple conforma- tions in the solid state.44,127 When enclosed in the lay- ered [PPN]0.5Cd[Ag(CN)2]2.5(EtOH), for example, the phenyl groups are oriented as to maximise the π-π interaction be- tween the aromatic rings and the framework. By contrast, in the perovskite [PPN]Cd[Au(CN)2]3, inter- and intramolecu- lar interactions are favoured.44 Likewise, internal rotational degrees of freedom distinguish the polymorphic Zr-MOFs NU-1000 and NU-901.128–130 These are chemically identi- cal, but topologically inequivalent, and the particular poly- morph is dictated by the rotational state of a common pyrene- based ligand. The reaction selectivity can be guided by ju- dicious choice of modulator.130,131 The polymorphs deviate in their optical properties, as the conformation of the ligand determines the propensity for excimer formation of the chro- mophoric pyrene linker.132 If molecular conformations can be interchanged by appli- cation of external stimuli, then it is possible to exploit such internal, conformational, degrees of freedom in a functional sense. In azobenzene-based porous covalent organic frame- works, for example, irradiation by ultraviolet light leads to reversible cis/trans isomerism of the linkers.133 This struc- tural change tightens the pore size, which effectively switches on and off the material’s ability to transport molecules be- yond a certain critical size [Fig. 5(a)]. A related effect occurs in the cyclohexane-bridged MOF-5 analogue ZrCDC, where desorption-driven chair/boat conformation inversion results in a reversible transition between crystalline and amorphous states.134 In the dicyanometallate-linked diamondoid frame- ral NEt+ 4 A-site cation adopts a chiral conformation through its interaction with the dicyanometallate network.135 At low temperatures this chirality is coupled in a complex fashion throughout the crystal to give an incommensurately modulated ‘chirality density wave’ of potential interest in advanced pho- tonics [Fig. 5(b)]. On heating, however, the system is even- tually able to overcome the interconversion barrier between enantiomorphic conformations and an achiral state emerges. frameworks. (a) Reversible light-induced cis/trans isomerism in an azobenzene-containing covalent organic framework allows control over pore size and shape. Figure adapted from . (b) When contained within the cavities of the {Ag[Ag(CN)2]2}− network (transparent green), the otherwise achiral NEt+ 4 cations adopt one of two equivalent enantiomeric conformations (shown here in blue and red). Competition between conformational ordering and a shear instability of the lattice leads to an unusual incommensurate chirality density wave (XDW) state, where chirality is modulated over the nanometre lengthscale. Figure adapted from . (c) Entropy change associated with the conformational order/disorder by application of hydrostatic pressure, which provides a strategy for barocaloric cooling. Figure reproduced from . So, again, an external stimulus—in this case temperature— can switch on and off a physical property dependent on molec- ular degrees of freedom. 7 An appealing variation on this theme is the exploita- tion of conformational order/disorder transitions in the de- sign of barocalorics, for which the high-profile example is [NPr4]Mn[N(CN)2]3.136,137 On heating above a critical tem- perature of 331 K, the tetrapropylammonium A-site cations switch from being conformationally ordered to a disordered state. A significant entropy change accompanies the transi- tion. Because the disordered state has a larger molar volume, the transition can be suppressed by applying a very modest hydrostatic pressure [Fig. 5(c)]. A solid-state cooling strategy follows naturally. Starting from the disordered (high temper- ature) state, pressure is applied until the A-site cations order; the entropy loss is expelled as waste heat. As pressure is re- leased, the system disorders, taking in heat (i.e. cooling its environment) in order to provide the necessary entropy gain. Future directions For each of the types of degree of freedom and various ap- plications discussed above, there is obvious need and scope for developing clear strategies for chemical control and per- formance optimisation. This is actually an enormous chal- lenge, given the chemical and structural diversity of the broad family of molecular frameworks. There will also be many other degrees of freedom not covered in this brief Account that are nonetheless worthy of exploration. Examples include the twist-modes of paddlewheel units,138 protonation states of or- ganic linkers,139 binding modes,56 rotational degrees of free- dom of motor-like components,140 and the topological degrees of freedom associated with bond rearrangements;141,142 there will be many others. Just as the manganites have assumed a special role in de- vice physics because they combine many interacting degrees of freedom—charge, spin, lattice, and orbital—so is it the case that we expect the interplay of degrees of freedom in molec- ular frameworks to provide a rich source of future discov- eries. Already there are key signs: an obvious example is the complex interplay of framework distortions and molecu- lar reorientations in the exciton physics of MAPbI3.143,144 In a similar vein lies the development of clear rules for com- bining different distortions of molecular perovskites to en- gineer specific properties, with the case of emergent polar- isation in [Gua]Cu(HCOO)3 as a result of combined Jahn- Teller and multipolar order as an excellent example.108,145 Solid-solution chemistry—termed ‘multivariate’ synthesis in the MOF field—offers a surprisingly underexplored additional dimension for exploration in molecular framework materials design.146,147 Here the scope is especially broad, since substi- tution of molecular components can involve varying not only size or charge, but also shape, or conformation, or rigidity, or functionality. A necessary consequence of the larger physical separa- tion between transition-metal centres in magnetic molecular frameworks is a reduced energy scale associated with collec- tive magnetic order. And while examples of strong148 and un- conventional149 magnetism can be found amongst this broader family of materials, one expects that conventional inorganic or intermetallic systems will always have the upper hand in this regard. Nevertheless the orientational degrees of free- dom of e.g. A-site cations can behave as pseudospins that, in favourable cases, interact in a manner analogous to various types of magnetic exchange with strengths ∼100 K.106 Hence there is enormous scope to exploit the way in which molecu- lar frameworks both organise pseudospin degrees of freedom and control their interactions to access structural analogues of exotic magnetic phases.107 One target, for example, is the realisation of skyrmionic phases of potential application in information storage and manipulation.150,151 In such systems the director field asso- ciated with A-site orientations exhibits the same topologi- cal features as in nematic liquid crystals,152,153 now driven by the Dzyalonshinskii-Moriya physics of skyrmionic mag- nets.154,155 Given the extraordinary diversity of structural de- grees of freedom found in molecular frameworks, and the var- ied types of interaction that exist between those degrees of freedom, one anticipates the discovery of all sorts of emer- gent states (like skyrmions) in molecular frameworks, well beyond those found in the conventional playgrounds of un- conventional physics. Corresponding author andrew.goodwin@chem.ox.ac.uk Acknowledgements The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the E.R.C (Grant 788144), the E.P.S.R.C. (Grant EP/G004528/2). Joshua Hill (UCL) is acknowledged for useful discussion.