Superconductivity beyond Pauli's limit in bulk NbS2: Evidence for the Fulde- Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov state Chang-woo Cho1, Jian Lyu1,2, Cheuk Yin Ng1, James Jun He3, Tarob A. Abdel-Baset4,5, Mahmoud Abdel-Hafiez6 and Rolf Lortz1,* 1Department of Physics, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong. 2Department of Physics, Southern University of Science and Technology, 1088 Xueyuan Road, Nanshan District, Shenzhen, Guangdong Province, China. 3RIKEN Center for Emergent Matter Science (CEMS), Saitama, Wako 351-0198, Japan. 4Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, Taibah University, Yanbu, 46423, Saudi Arabia; 5Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, Fayoum University, Fayoum 63514, Egypt; 6Department of Physics and Astronomy, Uppsala University, Uppsala SE-75120, Sweden. We present magnetic torque, specific heat and thermal expansion measurements combined with a piezo rotary positioner of the bulk transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) superconductor NbS2 in high magnetic fields applied strictly parallel to its layer structure. The upper critical field of superconducting TMDs in the 2D form is known to be dramatically enhanced by a special form of Ising spin orbit coupling. This Ising superconductivity is very robust against the Pauli limit for superconductivity. We find that superconductivity beyond the Pauli limit still exists in bulk single crystals of NbS2. However, the comparison of our upper critical field transition line with numerical simulations rather points to the development of a Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov state above the Pauli limit as a cause. This is also consistent with the observation of a magnetic field driven phase transition in the thermodynamic quantities within the superconducting state near the Pauli limit. Transition metal dichalcogenides have been the focus of recent research due to their wide range of unique electronic properties in their 2D form with high potential for technological applications . Among them are intrinsic superconductors with 2H-NbSe2 and 2H-NbS2 as representatives of the highest critical temperatures. In their 2D form, they have aroused great interest due to the discovery of Ising superconductivity, which allows them to withstand the Pauli limit of superconductivity . While the upper critical field (Hc2) of a spin-singlet type-II superconductor is normally determined by the orbital limit for superconductivity , there are rare cases where the orbital limit is particularly high. Possible reasons are heavy effective masses of the quasiparticles , or a highly anisotropic structure that suppresses the orbital limit due to the open nature of the Fermi surface . In this case, superconductivity is in principle abruptly destroyed at the Pauli limit in the form of a first-order phase transition. There are two ways in which a superconductor can maintain its superconducting (SC) state above the Pauli limit. The first possibility is the formation of a Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) state , in which the Cooper pairs obtain a finite center-of-mass momentum, resulting in a spatially modulated order parameter in a wide range of their magnetic-field vs. temperature phase diagram, * Corresponding author: lortz@ust.hk which can extend far beyond the Pauli limit. Such spatial modulation of superconductivity has been described as a pair density wave state and is also used to explain the pseudogap phase in cuprates . Prominent examples of the FFLO state have been found in some layered organic superconductors , but also in form of the prominent Q-phase the heavy-fermion compound CeCoIn5, where a spatially modulated order parameter coexists with a magnetic spin density wave order , and most recently in the iron-based superconductor KFe2As2 . For 2D dichalcogenides, Ising superconductivity is another possibility . Here, the breaking of the mirror symmetry in the plane leads to a very strong pinning of the electron spins out of the plane due to the Ising-Spin-Orbit interaction (ISOI), resulting in opposite spin directions in the adjacent K and K’ electron pockets. This ISOI effectively protects the Cooper pairs when an in-plane magnetic field is applied to the 2D layer, resulting in enormous enhancements of the critical field. This phase is of particular interest due to the recent theoretical prediction of a topological SC state with Majorana zero modes in high parallel applied fields in monolayer NbSe2 . While reports on Ising superconductivity usually focus on monolayers, it is also clear that Hc2 in 2D materials with multiple layers still exceeds the Pauli limit . It is not clear whether ISOI could still have an influence in the bulk form of these layered materials with very weak interlayer coupling. In this letter, we present magnetic torque, specific heat and thermal expansion measurements on a bulk single crystal of NbS2, where we align the layered structure parallel to the applied magnetic field using a piezo rotary stage with millidegree accuracy. We find that Hc2 significantly exceeds the Pauli limit of 10 T at low temperatures and shows a pronounced characteristic upswing towards low temperatures. This is a clear indication that an unusual SC state is formed . Thermal expansion measurements as a bulk thermodynamic method, which are closely related to the specific heat, indicate a small transition anomaly near the Pauli limit indicating a phase transition within the SC state. Using theoretical simulations , we show that Ising superconductivity is not accountable for such a strong Hc2 upturn in bulk NbS2. The existence of the additional phase transition within the SC state points to a formation of the FFLO state. misalignment of the field with respect to the basal plane of NbS2. At lower temperatures, when Hc2 reaches higher fields, it is obvious that the transition becomes sharper and more step-like, which may be an indication for Pauli-limited first-order behavior . Only a small tail persists above the step-shaped transition, which indicates a certain persistence of superconductivity. Hc2 reaches a maximum at 1.15 K and then decreases again slightly towards 0.35 K. To achieve a strictly parallel field orientation, we aligned the layered structure of the NbS2 single crystal by first minimizing  at a fixed field and temperature by gradually rotating the sample through the parallel orientation . This allowed us to determine the approximate parallel orientation. Subsequently, we repeated field scans at tiny variations of orientation of 0.1o or less until we found torque data with minimum amplitude and minimal opening of the hysteresis loop. This corresponded to the parallel orientation. A sequence of measurements at small angular variation is shown in Fig. 1b. As the field decreases, the torque builds up much more continuously below Hc2, suggesting that the sharp jumps in Fig. 1a are due to screening currents that build up continuously during the field sweep in the SC state and decay abruptly when approaching the Pauli limit in slightly tilted fields. In Fig. 2a, we show  data measured at different fixed temperatures during field sweeps for the field applied parallel to the NbS2 basal plane. Here we identify the Hc2 transition from the onset point where the data starts to deviate from zero, as marked by the additional open circles. In the same field, a hysteretic opening of the two branches, which was recorded when the field was swept up and down, confirms the onset of superconductivity. At 350 mK Hc2 exceeds our highest field of 15 T, and a hysteresis exists up to 15 T (Fig. 2b). In Fig. 2c we present torque data measured in constant, strictly parallel fields as a function of temperature. The SC transition can be identified as a step-like transition. The data were normalized by the jump size at Tc(H) for better clarity. We take the upper onset of the transition to identify Tc(H) as marked by the additional open circles. Note that other criteria to define of Tc(H) or Hc2(T) provide qualitatively similar phase diagrams. In Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 we summarize our specific heat and linear thermal expansion data. To achieve the parallel field orientation, we maximized the Tc in a fixed field of a few Tesla by slightly rotating the sample in repeated measurements . Fig 3a illustrates the specific heat C/T and the linear thermal expansion coefficient  = (1/L0) dL(T)/dT in a parallel field of 15 T. Both thermodynamic quantities, which are closely related via the thermodynamic Ehrenfest relationship, show a SC transition, which demonstrates that 15 T is not sufficient to suppress superconductivity. In the inset (Fig. 3b) we show specific heat data measured with our ac modulated temperature technique measured during field sweeps at constant temperature of the thermal bath. A standard BCS superconductor would show the characteristic step-like transition at Hc2 . However, the NbS2 data only display a broad bump centered at relatively low fields, while the signal fades very gradually towards higher fields to approach the normal state. There are no additional features to be seen here that could indicate additional phase transitions within the SC state. However, in Fig. 4a we illustrate the magnetic field derivative of the 300-mK specific heat data together with the linear magnetostriction coefficient  = (1/L0) dL(H)/dH. For both quantities, a small anomaly indicates a phase transition within the SC state at ~10 T, which occurs at the theoretical Pauli limit. The transition is reproducible when the field is swept up and down. In the following we will attribute it to the transition that separates the ordinary low-field SC state from a high-field FFLO state. In the magnetic torque  in the temperature range of 0.3 to 2.5 K tiny anomalies are hidden in the large slope near 10 T, but become visible after subtraction of a linear background in the form of a downward step, or as a dip-like structure in the field derivative d /dH (Fig. 4b). We summarize our results in the H/T phase diagram in Fig. 5. At high temperatures, the Hc2 transition line begins to rise with a non-vertical slope. This is in contrast to the behavior found in 2D samples and shows that there are significant orbital effects on the upper critical transition, which are naturally absent in 2D samples. We also include scaled Hc2 data of the organic superconductor -(BEDT-TTF)2Cu(NCS)2 , for which numerous studies have demonstrated the existence of an FFLO state . It is obvious that the initial slope of NbS2 is much weaker than for -(BEDT-TTF)2Cu(NCS)2, which proves a smaller Maki parameter αm = √2 Horb(0) HP(0) . A large Maki parameter in the range between 1.7-3.4 is considered one of the decisive prerequisites for the formation of an FFLO state. From a fit with the Werthamer– Helfand–Hohenberg (WHH) model of the initial Hc2 slope of NbS2 we obtain an orbital limit Horb ~23 T, which gives m = 3.25, which is certainly large enough to support an FFLO state. At 3.6 K, the Hc2 line rises above the BCS Pauli limit at ~10 T and then begins to saturate down to 1.5 K. At lower temperatures it shows a characteristic upswing and raises above 15 T, where it leaves the field region accessible in our experiment. The upswing is strikingly similar to that observed in - (BEDT-TTF)2Cu(NCS)2, with both data being almost congruent in the high field region. This upswing is suppressed if the NbS2 sample is misaligned by only one degree. Such an upswing indicates a certain change in the SC properties making it more robust against the strong Zeeman fields. It is generally interpreted as an indication of the development of an FFLO state. In fact, the phase diagram looks remarkably similar to other FFLO systems , including the field- induced transition at ~10 T, which probably indicates the phase change between the ordinary SC state at low fields and the high-field FFLO state. However, in most other FFLO systems, the Hc2 transition typically sharpens and becomes of first order as one approaches the Pauli limit . In NbS2, however, the Hc2 transition in high parallel fields remains very continuous, indicating a very gradual decay of superconductivity towards the normal state in the form of a second order transition. In it was shown that the first-order nature of the Hc2 transition in high fields occurs only in the absence of the orbital effect, while in its presence it remains of second order anywhere. With orbital effect it is expected that only the transition between the FFLO state and the BCS state should be of first-order nature. This is fully consistent with our observation: The finite Hc2 slope in the high temperature range is clearly due to the orbital effect, and the additional transition at 10 T, observed as a spike in the magnetostriction coefficient, indicates a first-order nature of the FFLO to BCS transition. However, a small misalignment of only one degree sharpens the transition observed in torque to a step-like more first-order-like transition and indicates that superconductivity becomes Pauli limited. The fact that the Hc2 transition line then goes through a maximum is indeed expected for the Pauli limited case in tilted fields . It is often claimed that ISOI is a specialty of monolayers with their broken inversion symmetry, which leads to a spin splitting of the Fermis surface, while it is spin degenerate in bilayers and the bulk . In reality bilayers have Hc2 values, which still exceed the Pauli limit by a factor of ~4 . This suggests that ISOI can be weakened by the intra-layer coupling but is not completely quenched because of weak intra-layer coupling in TMD materials. Therefore, one concern regarding the FFLO scenario as an explanation of the phase diagram is that the ISOI should still have a considerable influence in the bulk. ISOI is not compatible with a finite-momentum pair density wave state in the FFLO phase because it suppresses the effect of the in-plane Zeeman field on the Fermi surface. However, NbS2 has multiple Fermi pockets at the  and K/K’ points. While the K pockets are protected by ISOI, the spin-orbit interaction at the  pocket is weak and therefore compatible with the FFLO state. To test whether the phase diagram could alternatively be explained by Ising superconductivity, we performed numerical simulations using a three-band tight-binding model with a spin-orbit coupling strength of SO = 87meV. In order to simulate a bulk sample, we used a thickness of 10 layers, which proved to be sufficient since we found that increasing the thickness further does not affect the critical field much for greater thicknesses. The obtained low-temperature Hc2 line is included in Fig. 5. While for samples in the 2D limit it could be shown that Ising superconductivity can cause very pronounced Hc2 upturns at low temperature similar to FFLO states , it is obvious that for reasonable values of the spin-orbit coupling strength the upturn of bulk NbS2 is much too weak to explain our phase diagram. To conclude, with the additional evidence of a field-driven phase transition within the SC state near the Pauli limit and the good agreement with theoretical simulations, it can be concluded that the phase diagram we observed for a bulk NbS2 single crystal in magnetic fields strictly parallel to its layer structure, with its pronounced upswing of the Hc2 line far above the Pauli limit for superconductivity, is most plausibly explained by an FFLO state that forms in magnetic fields above 10 T. This high-field phase requires further systematic experiments including nuclear magnetic resonance to directly monitor the nature of the FFLO pair density wave state.