1 High-pressure effects on superconducting properties and crystal structure of Bi-based layered superconductor La2O2Bi3Ag0.6Sn0.4S6 Supeng Liu1, Ryo Matsumoto2, Rajveer Jha1,3, Aichi Yamashita1, Saori I. Kawaguchi4, Yosuke Goto1, Yoshihiko Takano3, Yoshikazu Mizuguchi1* 1. Department of Physics, Tokyo Metropolitan University, 1-1, Minami-osawa, Hachioji, 192- 0397, Japan. 2. International Center for Young Scientists (ICYS), National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), 1-1, Sengen, Tsukuba, 305-0047, Japan. 3. International Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (MANA), National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), 1-1, Sengen, Tsukuba, 305-0047, Japan. 4. Japan Synchrotron Radiation Research Institute, SPring-8, 1-1-1 Kouto, Sayo, Hyogo 679- 5198, Japan * Corresponding author: Yoshikazu Mizuguchi (mizugu@tmu.ac.jp) Abstract The effects of pressure on the superconducting properties of a Bi-based layered superconductor La2O2Bi3Ag0.6Sn0.4S6, which possesses a four-layer-type conducting layer, have been studied through the electrical resistance and magnetic susceptibility measurements. The crystal structure under pressure was examined using synchrotron X-ray diffraction at SPring-8. In the low-pressure regime, bulk superconductivity with a transition temperature Tc of ~ 4.5 K was induced by pressure, which was achieved by in-plane chemical pressure effect owing to the compression of the tetragonal structure. In the high-pressure regime above 6.4 GPa, a structural symmetry lowering was observed, and superconducting transitions with a Tc ~ 8 K were observed. Our results suggest the possible commonality on the factor essential for Tc in Bi-based superconductors with two- layer-type and four-layer-type conducting layers. 2 1. Introduction Since the discovery of BiS2-based layered superconductors Bi4O4S3 and La(O,F)BiS2 in 2012 , many superconductors having superconducting BiS2 layers have been synthesized . The typical BiS2-based superconductor system is RE(O,F)BiS2 (RE: La, Ce, Pr, Nd, Sm, Yb, Bi) [2– 9]. The crystal structure of RE(O,F)BiS2 is composed of alternate stacks of a superconducting BiS2 bilayer (Bi2S4 layer) and an insulating RE2O2 layer. In RE(O,F)BiS2, electron carriers generated through the partial substitution of F for the O site are needed for the emergence of superconductivity because the pristine phase, REOBiS2 with no carrier doping, is a semiconductor with a band gap . The notable feature of La(O,F)BiS2 is the superconducting characteristics like a filamentary superconductor, in which the superconducting volume fraction is significantly low as compared to a bulk superconductor . To induce bulk superconductivity in La(O,F)BiS2, two pressure effects were used. One route to induce bulk superconductivity is application of external pressures. The transition temperature (Tc) of LaO0.5F0.5BiS2 increases from 2 K to 10–11 K by the effect of external pressures, and the superconducting characteristics of the high-pressure phase of LaO0.5F0.5BiS2 is bulk in nature [2,12–15]. The dramatic improvement of the superconducting properties can be explained by a structural transition from tetragonal (P4/nmm) to monoclinic (P21/m), which takes place at quite low pressure of ~1 GPa . In addition, the structural transition largely affects electronic structure and the bonding nature in the crystal structure . Another route to induce bulk superconductivity in the RE(O,F)BiS2 system is application of chemical pressures. The chemical pressure effect can be generated through isovalent substitutions. For example, partial substitutions of La by smaller RE induce bulk superconductivity and increases Tc up to 5-6 K in RE(O,F)BiS2 with RE = Nd, Sm . Furthermore, the partial substitutions of S at the conducting layer by larger Se are also effective to induce bulk superconductivity . Those chemical pressure effects do not induce a structural transition but compresses tetragonal lattice. The compression of the Bi-Ch (Ch: S, Se) square network suppresses intrinsic structural disorder [18–20], which is present due to the presence of Bi lone pairs, in RE(O,F)BiS2 . The target phase of this study is La2O2Bi3Ag0.6Sn0.4S6, whose basic crystal structure can be regarded as the stacking of La2O2Bi2S4 and M2S2 (M = Bi0.5Ag0.3Sn0.2) . In La2O2Bi2M2S6- type structure, a rock-salt-type M2S2 layer is inserted into the van-der-Waals gap of LaOBiS2 [23– 25]. Regarding the superconducting layer of RE(O,F)BiS2 as two-layer-type, we can classify that 3 of La2O2Bi2M2S6 as four-layer-type (see Fig. 1). The first La2O2Bi2M2S6-type compound was obtained with M = Pb and was reported as a thermoelectric material . In 2018, we observed superconductivity in La2O2Bi3AgS6 (M = Bi0.5Ag0.5) below 0.5 K . The low Tc in La2O2Bi3AgS6 was found to be related to the charge-density-wave-like (CDW-like) transition, and the partial substitution of Sn for the Ag site was effective to suppress the transition and improve superconducting properties in La2O2Bi3Ag0.6Sn0.4S6, in which Tc reaches 2.5 K . Furthermore, application of chemical pressures in La2O2Bi3Ag0.6Sn0.4S6 further improved Tc up to 4 K in Eu- substituted La1.6Eu0.4O2Bi3Ag0.6Sn0.4S6 and similar phases with various RE [27–29]. On the basis of the knowledge on the dramatic external pressure effects in two-layer-type BiS2-based systems, we expected further increases in Tc by external pressures in La2O2Bi3Ag0.6Sn0.4S6. Therefore, in this study, we have investigated the superconducting properties and crystal structure of La2O2Bi3Ag0.6Sn0.4S6 under high pressures. 2. Experimental details A polycrystalline sample of La2O2Bi3Ag0.6Sn0.4S6 was prepared by solid-state reaction. (99.9999%) were mixed by mortar and pestle in air, pressed into a pellet, sealed in an evacuated quartz tube, and heated at 720 °C for 15 h. The obtained sample was ground, mixed, pelletized, and annealed under the same condition as the first sintering. The sample quality was comparable to that reported in , which was confirmed by laboratory powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX). Electrical resistance measurements were performed at ambient pressure and high pressures using a standard four-probe method on a Physical Property Measurement System (Quantum Design: PPMS). A diamond anvil cell (DAC) with boron-doped diamond electrodes was used for the high-pressure measurements . One side of diamond anvil equipped the electrodes and the polycrystalline sample was mounted on the center part of anvil, as shown in Fig. 2. The opposite anvil is culet-type with a diameter of 400 μm. A stainless-steel (SUS316) and a mixture of cubic boron nitride and ruby powders were used as a sample chamber and a pressure- transmitting medium, respectively. The applied pressure was estimated from the relationship between the pressure and wavelength of the ruby fluorescence measured by an inVia Raman 4 Microscope (RENISHAW). The temperature dependence of magnetic susceptibility was measured using a superconducting quantum interference devise (SQUID) magnetometer (MPMS-3, Quantum Design) under pressures from ambient pressure to ~1.2 GPa. To apply pressures, a piston cylinder cell for MPMS-3 was used. A pressure medium was Daphne 7373, and Pb was used as a manometer. A magnetic field used for the magnetization experiment was 10 Oe. The applied pressure was estimated using a Tc of Pb. The crystal structure investigation was performed using synchrotron X-ray at the beamline BL10XU of SPring-8 under the proposal (No.: 2020A2051). The powder sample was loaded into a sample hole drilled in a SUS gasket together with a pressure medium, He gas. The samples were compressed to the pressures of interest using single crystal diamond anvils with 600 and 400 μm culet. Pressure was determined by wavelength shift of the ruby R1 fluorescence line . The wavelength was 0.413102 Å (Run-1) and 0.41315 Å (Run-2). The experiments Run-1 and Run-2 were performed using different powders. The obtained powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were refined by Rietveld refinement using RIETAN-FP . Crystal structure images were depicted using VESTA . As shown in Fig. 1(b), we regarded that the outer metal site (in the BiS2 layer) is occupied by Bi only according to the site selectivity found in previous structural analyses . Instead, the inner metal site (the M site of the MS layer) is regarded as the solution of Bi, Ag, and Sn. In the refinements, the isotropic displacement parameters (B) for the La, O, and S sites were fixed to 1. 3. Results and discussion 3-1. Electrical resistance To investigate the pressure evolution of Tc, the electrical resistance was measured on DAC. ambient pressure. The Tconset was ~2.5 K, which is consistent with that reported in . Figure 4(a) shows the temperature dependences of the resistance under pressures up to 11.2 GPa. The low-temperature resistance data near the superconducting transition is plotted in Fig. 4(b), and the temperature dependences of normalized resistance R (T) / R (T = 8 K) under pressures up to 20.5 GPa are plotted in Fig. 4(c). At 4.6 GPa, a jump of Tconset was seen, and the Tconset reaches 8 K at 11.2 GPa. To confirm that the resistance drops observed under high pressures were a 5 superconducting transition, the temperature dependences of the resistance under magnetic fields were measured. As shown in Fig. 5, the Tconset for the data at 0.25 and 11.2 GPa clearly decreases with increasing magnetic field. Through the magnetoresistance measurements, we confirmed that the resistance drops are a superconducting transition. 3-2. Magnetic susceptibility Investigation of the temperature dependence of the magnetic susceptibility is useful to obtain information about Tc and bulk nature of the superconductivity under high pressures. Figure 6(a) shows the temperature dependences of the susceptibility for La2O2Bi3Ag0.6Sn0.4S6 under pressures. As reported in , the superconducting states at ambient pressure is not bulk in nature, and bulk superconductivity was induced by chemical pressure effects via partial S substitution by Se or partial La substitution by smaller RE [22,27–29]. With increasing pressure, Tc of La2O2Bi3Ag0.6Sn0.4S6 reached 4 K, and bulk superconductivity was induced at pressures above 0.48 GPa, which was evaluated through the emergence of large shielding volume fraction of magnetic susceptibility. The estimated magnetic Tcmag is plotted as a function of pressure in Fig. 6(b). See supplemental materials for the estimation of Tcmag. The Tc shows a plateau behavior at P = 0.48–1.22 GPa. The origin of the plateau was discussed with the structural evolution in the following section. 3-3. Synchrotron powder X-ray diffraction To discuss the evolution of superconductivity under pressures from structural point of view, we have performed SXRD experiments under high pressures. Figure 7(a) shows the powder SXRD patterns (Run-2) at 2.0–9.9 GPa. The SXRD patterns for Run-1 are displayed in Fig. S2 (Supplemental Materials). The position of the peaks shifts to higher angles with increasing pressure. Figure 7(b) shows the evolution of the 200 peak (tetragonal) by pressure. Since the 200 peak does not split below 6.4 GPa, the data suggests that the tetragonal (P4/nmm) was maintained up to 6.4 GPa. In Figs. S3 and S4 (Supplemental Materials), typical Rietveld refinement results (P = 0.2 and 6.4 GPa) analyzed with the tetragonal model are presented. For all the refinements, the reliability factor Rwp was less than 7%. The refined lattice constants are plotted as a function of pressure in Figs. 7(c) and 7(d). For both lattice constants a and c, a plateau was observed at P = 0.4–2 GPa. This behavior is very similar to the trend in the Tcmag-P plot (Fig. 6(b)). 6 Therefore, the Tcmag plateau observed in the low-pressure regime is related to the unique compression of the lattice by pressure in the low-pressure regime. In a high-pressure regime above 6.4 GPa, the splitting of the tetragonal 200 peak was clearly observed as shown in Fig. 7(b). The peak splitting indicates lowering of the in-plane symmetry from the tetragonal (four-fold) symmetry. Due to broadened peaks under high pressures, we could not refine the high-pressure structure from the SXRD data. From the structural analogy to two-layer-type BiS2-based systems, a monoclinic (P21/m) is one of the candidate space groups . However, there is another structural model suggested for the high-pressure phase of La(O,F)Bi(S,Se)2, in which a stacking faults are yielded due to a loss of long-range order along the stacking direction . Therefore, to clarify the crystal structure of the high-pressure phase of La2O2Bi3Ag0.6Sn0.4S6, single crystal structural analysis and local structure analysis are needed. In Fig. 8, typical atomic distances are plotted as a function of pressure. Herein, we briefly describe the pressure evolution of the atomic distances. First, let us discuss about the structure of the BiS2 layer. The in-plane Bi-S1 distance shows a plateau at lower pressures and decreases with increasing pressure at high pressures. Since the shrinkage of in-plane Bi-S1 distance corresponds to positive in-plane chemical pressure in the tetragonal phase , the improved superconducting properties can be understood by the in-plane chemical pressure effects. Similar shrinkage was found in the M-S3 distance along the in-plane direction. In addition, the decrease in the Bi-S2 distance was also seen; the relationship between the Bi-S2 distance and Tc was suggested in two- layer-type systems . Seeing the interlayer distance between the BiS2 layer and the MS layers, we find a significant shrinkage of the Bi-S3 distance. This trend indicates that the interaction between these two layers are enhanced by applying pressure, and the structural transition finally takes place. Interestingly, the M-S3 distance along the c-axis shows a trend to increase above 1.2 GPa with increasing pressure. These pressure evolutions of the atomic distances suggest that the structural change of La2O2Bi3Ag0.6Sn0.4S6 under pressures is not simple, and dramatic structural modifications at both BiS2 and MS layers are induced by pressure effect even in the tetragonal structure. 3-4. Phase diagram The Tconsets estimated through resistance measurements are plotted as a function of pressure in Fig. 9 with the data of the lattice constant a. In the low-pressure regime, bulk superconductivity 7 is induced in the tetragonal phase by pressure. The states are similar to that achieved by in-plane chemical pressure effects owing to the compression of the tetragonal structure, as described in the section 3-3. In the high-pressure regime above 6.4 GPa, a possible structural transition from tetragonal to a lower-symmetric phase was found, and the Tc reaches 8 K at 11.2 GPa. The jump behavior in the Tc-P is quite similar to that observed in RE(O,F)BiS2 and related BiS2- based systems such as EuFBiS2 and (Sr,La)FBiS2, which show a structural transition from tetragonal to monoclinic . With increasing pressure above 12 GPa, Tc tends to slightly decrease. The high-pressure behavior also resembles that observed in LaO0.5F0.5BiS2 . As reported in Refs. 24 and 40, the band structure, particularly band dispersion near the Fermi Energy, is clearly different between two-layer-type BiS2-based systems like RE(O,F)BiS2 and four-layer- type La2O2Bi2M2S6. However, the observed Tc-P phase diagrams exhibit clear similarity: the jump in Tc is observed where a structural transition is observed. Although we need to further investigate the high-pressure structure for La2O2Bi3Ag0.6Sn0.4S6 and other La2O2Bi2M2S6-type materials to conclude on the commonality between two-layer-type and four-layer-type systems, the present results imply that there is a commonality on the factor essential for Tc in Bi-based layered superconductors with the two-layer-type and four-layer-type conducting layers. 4. Conclusion In this study, we have investigated the effects of pressure on the superconducting properties of a polycrystalline sample of La2O2Bi3Ag0.6Sn0.4S6 through the electrical resistance measurements on a DAC and the magnetic susceptibility measurements on a piston cylinder cell. The crystal structure under pressure was examined using SXRD and Rietveld refinement for the tetragonal phase. In the low-pressure regime below 2.4 GPa, bulk superconductivity with a transition temperature Tc of ~ 4.5 K was induced by pressure, which was achieved by compression of the tetragonal structure. In the high-pressure regime above 6.4 GPa, a structural symmetry lowering was observed. In the high-pressure regime, superconducting transitions with a Tc ~ 8 K were observed. Through structural refinements, we found that the in-plane chemical pressure is essential for the improvement of the superconducting properties in the tetragonal phase. Furthermore, even in the tetragonal phase, both BiS2 and MS layers show dramatic structural change under pressures. The jump of Tc accompanied with a structural phase transition by applying pressure is similar to 8 that observed in two-layer-type BiS2-based systems. Therefore, there should be a commonality on the factor essential for Tc in Bi-based (two-layer-type and four-layer-type) superconductors. Acknowledgment The authors thank O. Miura for his supports in magnetic susceptibility measurements. This work was partly supported by JSPS KAKENHI (Grant Nos: 18KK0076, 19H02177, and 20K22420), JST-CREST (Grant No.: JPMJCR16Q6), JST-Mirai Program (Grant No: JPMJMI17A2), and Tokyo Metropolitan Government Advanced Research (Grant Number: H31- 1).