Absence of superconductivity in topological metal ScInAu2 J. M. DeStefano,1 G. P. Marciaga,1 J. B. Flahavan,1 U. S. Shah,1 T. A. Elmslie,1 M. W. Meisel,1, 2 and J. J. Hamlin1, ∗ 1Department of Physics, University of Florida, Gainesville FL, 32611, USA 2National High Magnetic Field Laboratory, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611-8440, USA (Dated: December 14, 2020) The Heusler compound ScInAu2 was previously reported to have a superconducting ground state with a critical temperature of 3.0 K. Recent high throughput calculations have also predicted that the material harbors a topologically non-trivial band structure similar to that reported for β-PdBi2. In an effort to explore the interplay between the superconducting and topological properties prop- erties, electrical resistance, magnetization, and x-ray diffraction measurements were performed on polycrystalline ScInAu2. The data reveal that high-quality polycrystalline samples lack the super- conducting transition present samples that have not been annealed. These results indicate the earlier reported superconductivity is non-intrinsic. Several compounds in the Au-In-Sc ternary phase space (ScAu2, ScIn3, and Sc2InAu2) were explored in an attempt to identify the secondary phase respon- sible for the non-intrinsic superconductivity. The results suggest that elemental In is responsible for the reported superconductivity in ScInAu2. I. INTRODUCTION Many recent studies in condensed matter physics and materials science have been focused on the investigation of symmetry-protected topological states . On top of the initial efforts to identify and classify different topolog- ical states, increasing efforts have been spent on exploring the interplay between these states and other electronic and magnetic phases . One such avenue of partic- ular interest is materials systems exhibiting both non- trivial topological states and superconductivity . These compounds are candidates for being realized as true topological superconductors which are predicted to host Majorana fermions. One such candidate, the 5.4 K superconductor β- PdBi2, attracted attention when it was found to have topologically non-trivial surface states . Ensuing re- search of the compound revealed a variety of interest- ing properties including complex spin textures and a possible spin-triplet order parameter . Further- more, spectroscopic measurements on thin films of β- PdBi2 were claimed to have shown evidence of non-trivial superconductivity and Majorana fermions . However, other measurements have shown that the topological sur- face states likely play no role in the compound’s bulk superconductivity . Clearly, it would be inter- esting to compare these results to those for a different compound with a similar combination of superconduct- ing and topological properties. The search for candidate materials with certain com- binations of properties has recently been facilitated by the accessibility of new databases of both experimental and computationally predicted properties. In this case, we searched for materials that exhibited an intersection of two properties: 1. Previous experimental reports of superconductivity, and 2. Computational prediction of ∗ Corresponding author: jhamlin@ufl.edu a topologically non-trivial band structure. The list of experimental Tc values was taken from the SuperCon database . Topological classification for these com- pounds were obtained from the the Topological Quantum Chemistry Project [15–17]. The compound ScInAu2 was among a small number of materials that indicated super- conductivity at readily accessible temperatures (above ∼ 2 K) and a “TI” (topological insulator) classification. This combination of properties lead us to investigate ScInAu2 further. The topological classification “topo- logical insulator - split electronic band representation” is the same as that for β-PdBi2 [15–17]. Given the facts above, we thus sought to characterize the potential interplay of superconductivity and topo- logical properties in ScInAu2. Polycrystalline ScInAu2 was synthesized via arc-melting. Annealing the samples yielded nearly single phase ScInAu2 that displayed no superconducting transition down to 1.8 K via electrical resistivity and magnetization measurements. These re- sults are in contrast to earlier work which indicated superconductivity in ScInAu2 with a critical tempera- ture of 3 K. Measurements reveal that only unannealed samples present the previously reported superconducting transition at 3 K, though the shielding in the magnetic susceptibility is incomplete. These results indicate that ScInAu2 is not superconducting down to 1.8 K and that the previously reported critical temperature (Tc) of 3 K is likely due to a secondary phase. Based on these results several other compounds in the Au-In-Sc system were probed in search of a potential superconducting phase that could explain the partial shielding of unannealed ScInAu2 leading to the conclusion that elemental indium is responsible. II. METHODS Arc-melted samples were prepared by combining the raw elements in stoichiometric ratios and melting on a water-cooled copper hearth under Ar atmosphere. Each arXiv:2012.06501v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 11 Dec 2020 2 20 30 40 50 60 70 Data - unannealed In ScAu2 ScInAu2 Data - annealed Background Fit Residual Intensity (arb. units) 2θ (degrees) * indicating expected peaks of In, ScAu2, and ScInAu2. Bot- tom: XRD pattern of annealed ScInAu2. The small residual indicates that a nearly single-phase sample of ScInAu2 was grown. A small impurity peak is marked with an asterisk. sample was melted multiple times, and was flipped in between each melting to ensure homogeneity throughout the boule. Samples that did not contain In had negligible mass loss, whereas samples containing In showed mass losses around 3%. In order to compensate for this, extra In was added and the samples were arc-melted again until the mass of the sample indicated the correct stoichiome- try had been reached. The samples were then annealed while wrapped in Ta foil under partial Ar atmospheres. The crystal structures were characterized with powder x-ray diffraction (XRD) using a Siemans D500 diffrac- tometer or a Panalytical X’Pert Pro diffractometer, and Rietveld refinements using GSAS-II yielded lattice parameters consistent with those given in literature for each compound unless otherwise noted. Electrical trans- port and magnetization measurements were performed in Quantum Design PPMS and MPMS systems respec- tively, at temperatures down to ∼ 2 K. III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS A. ScInAu2 Polycrystalline samples of ScInAu2 were synthesized via arc-melting. Samples were measured both before and after annealing at 700 °C for three days. Figure 1 presents XRD data for both the annealed and unannealed sam- ples. While the unannealed sample shows a mixture of phases, including ScInAu2, ScAu2, and In, the an- nealed data indicates nearly single phase ScInAu2. The annealed sample presents a single unidentified impurity peak near 34° (marked with an asterisk). Electrical resis- tivity measurements performed on the annealed sample (Fig. 2) show metallic behavior from room temperature down to the base temperature of 1.8 K with no indication of the superconductivity at 3 K previously reported . It should be noted that the earlier work did not mention if the samples were subjected to any annealing process. Therefore, we carried out additional measurements on the un-annealed multi-phase sample in order to confirm that the reported superconductivity comes from a sec- ondary phase. measurements on unannealed ScInAu2. The data show a clear drop in the susceptibility beginning slightly be- low 3 K. At the base temperature of 2 K the transition is still incomplete but has reached a shielding fraction of more than 50%. In order to estimate the shielding frac- tion, we included the demagnetization correction of the roughly spherical sample. The substantial shielding indi- cates that the secondary phase likely comprises a sizable fraction of the total sample volume. Hence, the XRD data suggests that either In or ScAu2 is responsible. A measurement of the magnetization vs field at 2 K (in- set of Fig. 3) indicates Hc1 ∼ 40 Oe and complete flux expulsion by ≲ 150 Oe. The critical field of In at 2 K is only 180 Oe, which is roughly consistent with our ob- servations . The low critical field indicates that the superconducting impurity is almost certainly unreacted elemental indium (Tc = 3.4 K). Though the Tc observed here is somewhat lower that that of indium (∼ 3.0 K from the onset in susceptibility), this could be caused by a combination of disorder, impurities, strain, and/or gran- ularity. Nonetheless, we also tested several other com- pounds in the Au-In-Sc system (including ScAu2) that had not previously been measured at low temperatures in order to determine if they could instead be responsi- ble for the superconductivity observed in the unannealed sample. B. ScAu2 Arc melted and annealed samples of ScAu2 show diffraction patterns that matched the expected MoSi2- type structure . Electrical resistivity measurements present metallic behavior with a residual resistivity ratio (RRR) of ∼ 50. No evidence for superconductivity is de- tected down to 1.8 K (see Fig. 4). The weak upturn in resistivity below ∼ 10 K could be due to a Kondo effect arising from magnetic impurities. 3 0 100 200 300 400 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 0 10 20 22 23 24 25 ρ (μΩ cm) T (K) ScInAu2 annealed ρ (μΩ cm) T (K) 1.8 K. No indication of superconductivity is observed. 1 2 3 4 5 100 80 60 40 20 0 0 50 100 150 200 250 -10 -5 0 5 shielding fraction (%) T (K) ScInAu2 ZFC FC H = 10 Oe M (103 emu) H (Oe) T = 2 K Shielding percentage versus temperature on unan- nealed ScInAu2. The incomplete shielding suggests that an impurity phase is responsible. The inset shows the magneti- zation as a function of applied field. Very small fields of order 100 Oe are sufficient to suppress the superconductivity. C. ScIn3 Single crystals of ScIn3 were grown with the molten flux method: 80:20 atomic % In:Sc were heated in an alu- mina crucible sealed in a quartz ampule under 70 torr Ar gas to 1000 °C and then cooled to 400 °C over 240 hours. After holding at this temperature of 8 hours, the ampule was centrifuged to remove the flux. This revealed small, cubic crystals, confirmed by xray diffraction to be cubic ScIn3 . Magnetic measurements on samples yielded a diamag- netic signal with an onset of around 3 K, but the shield- ing fraction of order 1%. Furthermore, a magnetic field 0 100 200 300 400 0 1 2 3 4 5 0 10 20 0.14 0.15 0.16 0.17 ρ (μΩ cm) T (K) ScAu2 ρ (μΩ cm) T (K) measured from 1.8 to 400 K. The sample is non supercon- ducting in this temperature range. of 0.05 T removed this feature. Both of these facts in- dicate that the superconductivity is not intrinsic to the ScIn3 but is due to droplets of In flux on the surfaces of the crystals. Superconducting transitions have been observed at 0.78 K and 0.71 K in YIn3 and LaIn3 respec- tively , suggesting that ScIn3 probably becomes su- perconducting below 1 K. D. Sc2InAu2 Samples of Sc2InAu2 were synthesized by arc melt- ing. The tetragonal Mo2FeB2-type structure was confirmed by x-ray diffraction, though some unidentified secondary phases were present. Nonetheless, magnetic susceptibility measurements from 2-300 K presented no evidence for superconductivity or any other anomalies. IV. CONCLUSIONS The previously reported superconducting behavior of ScInAu2, a material that shares the same topological clas- sification as β-PdBi2, has been re-analyzed. These mea- surements suggest that ScInAu2 is not intrinsically su- perconducting, but that unannealed samples can exhibit partial superconducting shielding in the magnetic suscep- tibility due to a secondary phase - most likely unreacted indium. We also investigated the possibility that another phase is responsible for the superconductivity in unan- nealed samples of ScInAu2. Queries were performed with the Materials Platform for Data Science and the Su- perconducting Material Database to search for com- pounds in the Au-In-Sc family that are reported to be su- perconducting. However, no other phases with reports of 4 Tc ∼ 3 K were found. Several compounds in this ternary phases space had not previously been characterized at low temperature, so we also screened ScAu2, ScIn3, and Sc2InAu2 and found that they are all essentially non- magnetic non-superconducting metals with no anomalies in the resistivity or magnetic susceptibility down to 2 K. With the existence of large databases of experimental and computational properties, the search for materials with certain combinations of properties is now straight- forward. In this case we identified an inaccuracy in the record - ScInAu2 is non-superconducting, though it had previously been reported to have Tc = 3 K . How- ever, it is clear that there are a large number of known superconducting materials with non-trivial band struc- tures awaiting further study. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Work on this project was supported, in part, by the National Science Foundation (NSF) via CAREER award (JJH), REU Program DMR- 1852138 (GPM), DMR-1708410 (MWM), and DMR- 1644779 (NHMFL), and the State of Florida. We thank G. R. Stewart for helpful conversations. C.-K. Chiu, J. C. Teo, A. P. Schnyder, and S. Ryu, Classi- fication of topological quantum matter with symmetries, Reviews of Modern Physics 88, 035005 (2016). H. C. Po, A. Vishwanath, and H. Watanabe, Symmetry- based indicators of band topology in the 230 space groups, Nature Communications 8, 50 (2017). L.-L. Wang, N. H. Jo, B. Kuthanazhi, Y. Wu, R. J. Mc- Queeney, A. Kaminski, and P. C. Canfield, Single pair of Weyl fermions in the half-metallic semimetal EuCd2As2, Physical Review B 99, 245147 (2019). L. Ye, M. Kang, J. Liu, F. von Cube, C. R. Wicker, T. Suzuki, C. Jozwiak, A. Bostwick, E. Rotenberg, D. C. Bell, L. Fu, R. Comin, and J. G. Checkelsky, Massive Dirac fermions in a ferromagnetic kagome metal, Nature M. Sato and Y. Ando, Topological superconductors: a re- view, Reports on Progress in Physics 80, 076501 (2017). X.-L. Qi and S.-C. Zhang, Topological insulators and superconductors, Reviews of Modern Physics 83, 1057 M. Sakano, K. Okawa, M. Kanou, H. Sanjo, T. Okuda, T. Sasagawa, and K. Ishizaka, Topologically protected surface states in a centrosymmetric superconductor β- PdBi2, Nature Communications 6, 8595 (2015). T. Xu, B. T. Wang, M. Wang, Q. Jiang, X. P. Shen, B. Gao, M. Ye, and S. Qiao, Nonhelical spin texture in the normal states of the centrosymmetric superconductor β-PdBi2, Physical Review B 100, 161109 (2019). K. Iwaya, Y. Kohsaka, K. Okawa, T. Machida, M. S. Bahramy, T. Hanaguri, and T. Sasagawa, Full-gap su- perconductivity in spin-polarised surface states of topo- logical semimetal β-PdBi2, Nature Communications 8, Y. Li, X. Xu, M.-H. Lee, M.-W. Chu, and C. L. Chien, Observation of half-quantum flux in the unconventional superconductor β-Bi2Pd, Science 366, 238 (2019). Y.-F. Lv, W.-L. Wang, Y.-M. Zhang, H. Ding, W. Li, L. Wang, K. He, C.-L. Song, X.-C. Ma, and Q.-K. Xue, Experimental signature of topological superconductivity and Majorana zero modes on β-Bi2Pd thin films, Science Bulletin 62, 852 (2017). L. Che, T. Le, C. Q. Xu, X. Z. Xing, Z. Shi, X. Xu, and X. Lu, Absence of Andreev bound states in β-PdBi2 probed by point-contact Andreev reflection spectroscopy, Physical Review B 94, 024519 (2016). P. K. Biswas, D. G. Mazzone, R. Sibille, E. Pom- jakushina, K. Conder, H. Luetkens, C. Baines, J. L. Gavilano, M. Kenzelmann, A. Amato, and E. Moren- zoni, Fully gapped superconductivity in the topological superconductor β-PdBi2, Physical Review B 93, 220504 M. Tanifuji, A. Matsuda, and H. Yoshikawa, Materials Data Platform - a FAIR System for Data-Driven Mate- rials Science, in 2019 8th International Congress on Ad- vanced Applied Informatics (IIAI-AAI) (2019) pp. 1021– B. Bradlyn, L. Elcoro, J. Cano, M. G. Vergniory, Z. Wang, C. Felser, M. I. Aroyo, and B. A. Bernevig, Topological quantum chemistry, Nature 547, 298 (2017). T. Zhang, Y. Jiang, Z. Song, H. Huang, Y. He, Z. Fang, H. Weng, and C. Fang, Catalogue of topological elec- tronic materials, Nature 566, 475 (2019). A. Jain, S. P. Ong, G. Hautier, W. Chen, W. D. Richards, S. Dacek, S. Cholia, D. Gunter, D. Skinner, G. Ceder, and K. A. Persson, Commentary: The Materials Project: A materials genome approach to accelerating materials innovation, APL Materials 1, 011002 (2013). B. Matthias, E. Corenzwit, J. Vandenberg, H. Barz, M. Maple, and R. Shelton, Obstacles to superconductiv- ity in CsCl phases, Journal of the Less Common Metals B. H. Toby and R. B. Von Dreele, GSAS-II : the gene- sis of a modern open-source all purpose crystallography software package, Journal of Applied Crystallography 46, R. W. Shaw, D. E. Mapother, and D. C. Hopkins, Criti- cal fields of superconducting tin, indium, and tantalum, Phys. Rev. 120, 88 (1960). A. E. Dwight, J. W. Downey, and R. A. Conner, Some C11b-type compounds of Sc, Y and the lanthanides with Cu, Ag and Au, Acta Crystallographica 22, 745 (1967). E. Parth ́e, D. Hohnke, W. Jeitschko, and O. Schob, Structure data of new intermetallic compounds, Natur- wissenschaften 52, 155 (1965). R. Sharma, G. Ahmed, and Y. Sharma, Intermediate cou- pled superconductivity in yttrium intermetallics, Physica C: Superconductivity and its Applications 540, 1 (2017). F. Hulliger, On tetragonal M2Au2In and related com- pounds, Journal of Alloys and Compounds 232, 160 5 E. Blokhin and P. Villars, The PAULING FILE Project and Materials Platform for Data Science: From Big Data Toward Materials Genome, in Handbook of Materials Modeling, edited by W. Andreoni and S. Yip (Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2018) pp. 1–26.