1 Van der Waals Heterostructure Magnetic Josephson Junction H. Idzuchi1#, F. Pientka1,2, K.-F. Huang1, K. Harada3, ├¢. G├╝l1, Y. J. Shin1##, L. T. Nguyen4, N. H. Jo5,6, D. Shindo3, R. J. Cava4, P. C. Canfield5,6, and P. Kim1* 1 Department of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA 2 Institut f├╝r Theoretische Physik, Goethe-Universit├żt, 60438 Frankfurt am Main, Germany 3 Center for Emergent Matter Science (CEMS), RIKEN, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan 4 Department of Chemistry, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08540, USA 5 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA 6 Ames Laboratory, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA *pkim@physics.harvard.edu #current affiliation: Tohoku University ##current affiliation: Center for Functional Nanomaterials, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York 11973, United States of America 2 When two superconductors are connected across a ferromagnet, the spin configuration of the transferred Cooper pairs can be modulated due to magnetic exchange interaction. The resulting supercurrent can reverse its sign across the Josephson junction (JJ) . Here we demonstrate Josephson phase modulation in van der Waals heterostructures when Cooper pairs from superconducting NbSe2 tunnel through atomically thin magnetic insulator (MI) Cr2Ge2Te6. Employing a superconducting quantum interference device based on MI JJs, we probe a doubly degenerate non-trivial JJ phase (’ü”) originating from the magnetic barrier. This ’ü”’ĆŁphase JJ is formed by momentum conserving tunneling of Ising Cooper pairs across magnetic domains in the Cr2Ge2Te6 barrier. The doubly degenerate ground states in MI JJs provide a two-level quantum system that can be utilized as a new disipationless component for superconducting quantum devices, including phase batteries , memories , and quantum Ratchets . As a phase difference Žå develops between two superconductors, a DC Josephson supercurrent Is = Ic sin(Žå) flows through the junction. The vanishing supercurrent at the minimum energy imposes the condition that only Žå = 0 or ’ü░. For conventional superconductors with spin-singlet pairing, the spatially symmetric Cooper pair wavefunction enforces Žå = 0 as the ground state. However, when the superconducting (S) electrodes are separated by a ferromagnetic barrier (F), Cooper pairs can acquire an additional phase when tunneling through the magnetic barrier, yielding a spatial oscillation of the superconducting order parameter in the barrier . Carefully tuning the thickness of the F-layer, dF, can reverse the sign of the superconducting order parameter across the barrier owing to an exchange-energy driven phase shift , resulting in a ŽĆ-phase JJ. Engineering the system to achieve an arbitrary’ĆĀ’ü”-phase between 0 and ’ü░ is possible by coherently combining 0- and ’ü░- JJs . For metallic F-JJ, for example, a long channel JJ (typically 100 ’üŁm), combining both 0 and ’ü░ junctions exhibit ’ü”’ĆŁphase characteristics . ’ü”-phase JJs (’ü”-JJs) can serve as useful components for various superconducting quantum electronic devices, such as phase batteries that can be used to bias both classical and quantum circuits, superconducting-magnet hybrid memories and JJ-based quantum ratchets . Often, a metallic ferromagnetic barrier requires d’┐Į ’┐Į 5 nm and a macroscopic lateral junction size, and is not in general suitable for use in dissipationless, compact quantum device components. JJs using magnetic semiconducting GdN barriers in the spin filter device geometry was constructed , exhibiting an unconventional second harmonic current-phase relation and switching characteristics . However, the demonstration of Josephson phase engineering in dissipationless magnetic JJs yet to be realized. Van der Waals (vdW) heterostructures are ideal platforms for creating atomically thin Josephson coupling systems. Here, we use a few atomic layers of the vdW magnetic insulator (MI) Cr2Ge2Te6 as the magnetic barrier to construct ’ü”-JJs. Previous studies show that Josephson coupling can occur between cleaved surfaces of the vdW superconductor NbSe2 . Here we assembled NbSe2/Cr2Ge2Te6/NbSe2 heterostructures (Fig. 1a), 3 with a modified dry-transfer technique (see Methods for device fabrication). Our heterostructures clearly displays Josephson coupling for monolayer (ML) through 6 ML Cr2Ge2Te6 barriers. Fig.1b-d shows the current density (J) versus voltage (V) characteristic across the JJs with 1-, 2-, and 6-ML MI barriers. For all devices, we find a clear Josephson supercurrent regime at low bias current, which turns into normal conduction at high bias current. The J-V characteristic is hysteric indicating a switching current density Jc (transition from superconducting to normal state) larger than the retrapping current density Jr (transition from normal to superconducting state). Jc becomes considerably larger than Jr for thinner junctions, which is expected since the junction capacitance is larger for smaller dF. For J>Jc, we obtain the normal state resistance RN =(1/A)dV/dJ, where A is the effective area of the junction. Fig.1e shows the comparison of RNA obtained from devices with three different dF. We find an exponential increase of RNA, fitted well to a exp(dF/t), where the characteristic quasiparticle tunneling length is t ’é╗ 1.3 nm and the normalized barrier resistance is a ’é╗ 340 ╬® ╬╝m2. Importantly, our junction resistance is much lower than is displayed by one of a typical non-vdW ferromagnetic barrier such as EuS (107 ŌĆō 109 ╬® ╬╝m2 for the thickness of 2.5 nm) . This relatively small junction resistance is consistent with the smaller semiconducting energy gap of Cr2Ge2Te6 (~0.4 eV in plane and ~ 1 eV out-of-plane) . Interestingly, we find that while RNA increases exponentially with increasing dF, the critical current density Jc decreases more rapidly. Fig. 1e shows that the product VC=JcRNA decreases exponentially with increasing dF, following VC = V0 exp(-dF /’üĖF) with the prefactor V0 ’é╗ 0.8 mV and a characteristic barrier tunneling length in Cr2Ge2Te6 ’üĖF ’é╗ 1.4 nm. While V0 is comparable to VC ~ 0.65 mV in NbSe2/Graphene/NbSe2 junctions , the rapid decrease of VC with increasing dF indicates that the JJ coupling becomes weaker with a thicker magnetic barrier, as expected. To demonstrate the role played by the ferromagnetism in Cr2Ge2Te6, we measure the JJ critical current as a function of applied magnetic field. Figs. 2a-b show the in-plane and out-of-plane magnetic-field-dependent switching current IC = JcA of the NbSe2/Cr2Ge2Te6(6ML)/NbSe2 JJ. We observe hysteretic behavior of IC(H) for both field directions. IC(H) also shows a sudden drop near zero magnetic field. Interestingly, we find that the hysteresis in a magnetic field reaches values of ~ ’é▒1.5 T, much larger than the field required to reach the saturation magnetization of our Cr2Ge2Te6 bulk crystals (Fig. 2c). Furthermore, the magnetization of our bulk Cr2Ge2Te6 shows neither a notable hysteresis nor a strong magnetic anisotropy, consistent with earlier reports . The larger hysteresis field compared to the saturation magnetic field of Cr2Ge2Te6 and the strong anisotropy observed in IC(H) thus cannot be simply attributed to the magnetization of Cr2Ge2Te6 alone - rather, the large hysteresis loop for IC(H) can be related to the microscopic magnetic domain structure of Cr2Ge2Te6. Using Lorentz transmission electron microscopy (see Methods for details), we find that thin Cr2Ge2Te6 flakes develop two different magnetic domain structures: stripe-like (Fig. 2d) and bubble-like (Fig. 2e). The characteristic domain size is ~100 nm, consistent with previously reported multiple domain structures in thicker Cr2Ge2Te6 flakes, where the stripe-phase is more stable than the metastable bubble phase . We conclude 4 that the interplay between the magnetic domains of Cr2Ge2Te6 and the field-dependent Abrikosov vortex lattice in NbSe2 can induce a transition between magnetic states and explain the experimental observations, including the sudden drop in Ic(H) near zero magnetic field (Supplement Information). The MI layer in JJs can create a nontrivial phase shift of the tunneling Cooper pairs. To probe this Josephson phase, we have realized SQUIDs consisting of one MI JJ (NbSe2/Cr2Ge2Te6/NbSe2) and one reference JJ (NbSe2/ NbSe2). After the assembly, we create the device by etching away the unnecessary areas (Fig.3a, note the edges of the NbSe2 flakes were aligned parallel to each other (see Methods for details)). The wider MI JJ allows us to balance the critical currents for each JJ for a maximal SQUID critical current I’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į ’┐Į ’┐Į╬”’┐Į as a function of magnetic flux ╬” threaded through the SQUID loop. I’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į ’┐Į ’┐Į╬”’┐Į measured in the SQUID (fig.3b) exhibits oscillations with the periodicity ╬”’┐Į ’┐Į h/2e . However, we observe an irregular SQUID response in the field range between -1.2 mT and -2.2 mT, with a telegraph-like signal oscillating between two metastable critical current branches (Fig.3b) possibly related to the sudden change in critical current seen in Fig.2a. This bistable switching state is an indirect indication of a doubly degenerate ground state of the system. Nevertheless, the regular oscillation around zero magnetic field allows us to extract the phase of the MI JJ (NbSe2/Cr2Ge2Te6/NbSe2). In a previous study of SQUIDs with ferromagnetic metallic spin valves , a controllable switching between 0- and ŽĆ- Josephson junctions has been demonstrated. A SQUID that combines 0/0 or ŽĆ/ŽĆ JJs shows a maximal I’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į ’┐Į ’┐Į0’┐Į (defined as a 0-phase JJ), whereas a SQUID combining 0/’ü░ JJs shows a minimal I’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į ’┐Į ’┐Į0’┐Į (defined as a ŽĆ- phase JJ). For our SQUID with the MI JJ, we use two schemes to measure the two different switching currents (Fig. 3c): a switching current Ic- obtained by sweeping from large negative bias to positive bias and another one, Ic0, obtained by sweeping from large positive bias to zero and then back to positive bias. Generally, we find Ic- > Ic0. More importantly, the phases of their oscillations are different, as shown in Fig. 3d. To obtain the absolute phase of I’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į ’┐Į ’┐Į╬”’┐Į, we have carefully calibrated the setting of the electromagnet that gives zero magnetic field, by using several on-chip Al SQUIDs with different sizes (see SI Fig. S3 for details). Strikingly, we find that none of the switching schemes provide 0 or ’ü░ phase but ’ü”c-= 259’é░ and ’ü”c0 = 59’é░ as shown in Fig. 3d. The presence of these two nontrivial phases (i.e. not simple multiples of 180 degrees) is reminiscent of two switching current states in a metallic ferromagnetic (F) ’ü” -JJ . In those JJs, doubly degenerate ground states are realized by laterally connecting 0- and ’ü░- FJJs. Here, the ’ü░-JJ requires the thickness of the F-layer to be comparable to the wavelength of the order-parameter oscillation, implying dF ~ 10 nm, set by the exchange energy . In addition, the formation of a’ĆĀ’ü” -FJJ in the 0-’ü░ JJ arrays needs a Josephson vortex pinned at the 0-’ü░’ĆĀjunction. This condition restricts the widths of the 0-JJ and ’ü░-JJ perpendicular to the supercurrent flow direction to be much longer than the Josephson length, ╬╗’┐Į ’┐Į ’┐Į╬”’┐Į/2ŽĆ╬╝’┐ĮJ’┐Į╬╗’┐Į , where ╬╗’┐Į is the magnetic penetration length. Such values of dF and ╬╗’┐Į are incompatible with our atomically thin Cr2Ge2Te6 based JJ. Specifically, our Cr2Ge2Te6 barrier is an atomically thin insulator (dF = 1 nm), a case that is too thin to exhibit 5 spatial order-parameter oscillations. Furthermore, the lateral size of our JJ, L < 5 ’üŁm, is much smaller than ╬╗’┐Į ~10 ’üŁm, estimated using our experimentally obtained Jc and ╬╗’┐Į ’┐Į 0.1 ’üŁm for NbSe2 reported previously . Therefore, the observed ’ü” -JJ formation in our atomically thin MI-JJ, signaled by the appearance of doubly degenerate nontrivial phase shifts, requires an alternative mechanism for explanation. The single-crystallinity of our vdW heterostructure combined with the strong spin orbit coupling (SOC) in the quasi-2D superconductor (S) constituent provides two new characteristics for Josephson coupling that are absent in conventional metallic F-JJs. First, in contrast to the F-JJs constructed by sputtered heterostructures , momentum-conserving tunneling in crystalline vdW heterostructures is allowed between the closely- aligned Fermi surfaces of two S-layers in vdW JJ, as the top and bottom S layers in our JJ are aligned along the same crystallographic axis (< 2’é░~5’é░ misalignment; see Methods). Second, the strong SOC in NbSe2 fixes the spin quantization axis of the Cooper pairs normal to the substrate, denoted ’éŁ and ’é». In NbSe2, due to weak interlayer tunneling and strong inversion symmetry breaking within each layer, two spin components remain localized predominantly in even or odd layers with a sizable spin splitting ’üäSOC Ōēā 100 meV . This spin-layer locking results in unconventional Ising Cooper pairing (K’éŁ-K ╠ü’é» or K’é»-K ╠ü’éŁ) inside each layer where K and K ╠ü denote electronic band near K and K ╠ü points. The Josephson phase between Ising Cooper pairs (ICPs) on the surfaces of NbSe2 across the MI barrier can be sensitively modified by the magnetization direction. For out-of-plane magnetization, the spin of the ICPs is aligned parallel or anti-parallel with the spin of the MI. Similar to a previous theoretical study of JJs with magnetic impurities , the wave function of ICPs tunneling across the ferromagnetic junction can acquire an additional minus sign with respect to the nonmagnetic junction for sufficiently strong magnetic scattering (Fig. 4a, see Methods for details). Importantly, this sign flip of the Josephson coupled ICPs sets the phase of the JJ ground state to be Žå=’ü░. As the magnetization of the MI-layer is tilted away from the tunneling direction, the spin of the ICPs can flip during the tunneling process (see Methods and Supplementary Information for details). As a result, the ground state of the Josephson junction is at Žå=’Ć░’Ć«’ĆĀ’Ć©Fig. 4b’Ć®’Ć« Unlike metallic F-JJs, our heterostructure allows for both 0- and ’ü░’ĆŁJJs by adjusting the direction of the magnetization in the MI. A parallel arrangement of 0- and ’ü░’ĆŁJJ can lead to a degenerate ’ü” -JJ. Our MI-JJ offers such lateral arrays, created by magnetic domain structures in the MI, similar to what is shown in Fig. 2d-e. Here, the domains with out-of-plane magnetization separated by boundaries with titled spins could lead to a coexistence of 0 and ’ü░’ĆĀjunction segments. Using a simple model based on a short junction with finite transparency D and a fraction of the plane ’ü¼ that favors a ’ü░ junction, we can estimate the Josephson energy EJ of the junction, which provides two ’ü” values for the degenerate ground states (see method section for more details). As an example, Fig. 4d shows EJ(’ü”) computed using this model with ’ü¼=0.53 and D = 0.75, resulting in the appearance of two ground states at different nontrivial Josephson phases ’ü”1 Ōēā 100’é░ and ’ü”2 Ōēā 260’é░. Experimentally, the presence of two minimal phase angles in EJ(’ü”) can be directly revealed by measuring 6 the JJ switching current distributions. This distribution is sensitively determined by the escape rate ’ü┤ -1 from a tilted washboard potential that is created by biasing EJ(’ü”) with current I (insets of Fig. 4g). Figs. 4e and 4f show the switching current distribution measured using the two above-mentioned sweep schemes, as a function of current I(t) increasing monotonically with time t. The switching current distribution shows not only different values of the critical current but also a much wider distribution for the ’ü”c0 state than for the ’ü”c- state (Fig.4f). Fig. 4g shows the escape rate for both ground states, which is calculated using the normalized distribution function P(Ic) and the Fulton and Dunkleberger formula Žä ’┐Į ’┐Į1 ’┐Į ’┐Į P’┐Įu’┐Įdu’┐Į/’┐ĮP’┐ĮI’┐Į ’┐Į’┐Į ’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į ’┐Į ’┐Į . Generally, we find the escape rate for the ’ü”c0 state to be larger than for the ’ü”c- state, suggesting the ’ü”c- state is more stable than the ’ü”c0 state under a bias current. Assuming thermal activation dominated escape gives Žä’┐Į’┐Į~e’┐Į’┐Į/’┐Į’┐Į, where ╬ö is the barrier height in the tilted washboard potential and k is the Boltzmann constant. Since the experimentally estimated Žä’┐Į’┐Į is smaller for ’ü”c- than that for ’ü”c0, we infer that ╬ö’┐Į<╬ö’┐Į (Fig. 4d), where ╬ö’┐Į is responsible for the switching of ’ü”c0 and ╬ö’┐Į for the switching of ’ü”c-, in agreement with the model presented in Fig. 4d. For an applied bias current I smaller than the switching current of the ’ü”c- state, re-trapping is allowed (inset of Fig. 4g), which consistently explains the slower increase of Žä’┐Į’┐Į of the ’ü”c0 state before the switching of the ’ü”c- state at higher current. In conclusion, we have demonstrated the engineering of doubly degenerate ’ü” -JJs in a vdW system using an atomically thin NbSe2 Ising superconductor and the domain structure in the ferromagnetic insulator Cr2Ge2Te6 to form a coherent combination of 0 and ’ü░ JJ segments. The spin sensitivity of an Ising Josephson junction together with atomically thin magnetic tunneling barriers provides a route to the fabrication of novel superconducting and spintronic devices. Acknowledgments We thank K. F. Mak, J. Shen, and Y. Otani for a fruitful discussion. The major part of the experiment was supported by ARO (W911NF-17-1-0574). The sample fabrication was supported by DOE QPress (DE-SC0019300). P.K. acknowledges support from the DoD Vannevar Bush Faculty Fellowship N00014-18-1-2877. H. I. acknowledges JSPS Overseas Research Fellowship and the Nakajima Foundation for support. L.T. N. and R. J. C. acknowledge the US Department of Energy, Division of Basic Energy Sciences, grant DE-FG02 98ER45706 for supporting the growth of the NbSe2 crystals. Work done at Ames Lab (P. C. C. and N. H. J.) was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Science, Division of Materials Sciences and Engineering. Ames Laboratory is operated for the U.S. Department of Energy by Iowa State University under Contract No. DE-AC02-07CH11358. N. H. J. was supported by the Gordon and Betty Moore FoundationŌĆÖs EPiQS Initiative through Grant GBMF4411. Author Contributions H.I. fabricated the sample and analyzed the data. H.I. and K.F.H. performed the 7 measurements. K.H. and D.S. performed TEM experiments. H.I. and P.K. conceived the experiment. F.P. developed the theoretical description. Y.J.S. provided the polymer and optimized transfer process. N.H.J. and P.C.C. grew and characterized single crystals of Cr2Ge2Te6. L.T.N. and R.J.C. grew the NbSe2 crystals. H.I. and P.K. wrote the manuscript with input from all other authors.