Antiferromagnetic insulating state in layered nickelates at half-filling Myung-Chul Jung,1 Harrison LaBollita,1 Victor Pardo,2, 3, ∗ and Antia S. Botana1, † 1Department of Physics, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA 2Instituto de Materiais iMATUS, Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, E-15782 Santiago de Compostela, Spain 3Departamento de F ́ısica Aplicada, Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, E-15782 Santiago de Compostela, Spain We provide a set of computational experiments based on ab initio calculations to elucidate whether a cuprate-like antiferromagnetic insulating state can be present in the phase diagram of the low- valence layered nickelate family (Rn+1NinO2n+2, R= rare-earth, n = 1 − ∞) in proximity to half- filling. It is well established that at d9 filling the infinite-layer (n = ∞) nickelate is metallic, in contrast to cuprates wherein an antiferromagnetic insulator is expected. We show that for the Ruddlesden-Popper (RP) reduced phases of the series (finite n) an antiferromagnetic insulating ground state can naturally be obtained instead at d9 filling, due to the spacer RO2 fluorite slabs present in their structure that block the c-axis dispersion. In the n = ∞ nickelate, the same type of solution can be derived if the off-plane R-Ni coupling is suppressed. We show how this can be achieved if a structural element that cuts off the c-axis dispersion is introduced (i.e. vacuum in a monolayer of RNiO2, or a blocking layer in multilayers formed by (RNiO2)1/(RNaO2)1). I. BACKGROUND Superconductivity in cuprate-like systems has been long sought for . Among different approaches to achieve cuprate-analog materials, targeting nickelates has been an obvious strategy as nickel and copper are next to each other in the periodic table . After a 30- year search, Li and coworkers reported superconductiv- ity in Sr-doped infinite-layer NdNiO2 in 2019 , and more recently in PrNiO2 and LaNiO2 . These infinite-layer nickelates are formed by NiO2 planes (with a square-planar oxygen environment for the cation, like the CuO2 planes in cuprates), with Ni adopting the un- usual Ni1+ valence, with nine d-electrons, (analogous to Cu2+) . As of now, superconductivity has only been observed in thin films, prompting work on the role played by interfacial effects . Importantly, RNiO2 (R= rare-earth) materials belong to a larger series represented by Rn+1NinO2n+2 (n = 1 − ∞) in which each member contains n-NiO2 layers opening up the door to find a whole family of nickelate superconductors (see Fig. 1). Indeed, very recently the n= 5 Nd-based member of the series (Nd6Ni5O12) was found to be a superconductor as well , and proposals exist for superconductivity to be realized in the n= 3 compound (R4Ni3O8) upon electron doping , so that it falls within the superconducting dome in terms of d-filling in a general phase diagram ap- plicable for the whole series. In spite of the similarities between this nickelate fam- ily and the cuprates described above, a remarkable dif- ference is that while parent cuprates are antiferromag- netic (AF) insulators , parent infinite-layer nickelates are metallic and there is no signature of long-range mag- netic order in LaNiO2 [15–17] or NdNiO2 . Based on these findings, magnetism was at first ruled out as being a ∗ victor.pardo@usc.es † Antia.Botana@asu.edu RNiO2 R7Ni6O14 R6Ni5O12 R5Ni4O10 R4Ni3O8 R Ni O ries for n = 3 − 6 and n = ∞. The common structural motifs can be observed: NiO2 planes with a square-planar coordina- tion of oxygens around the Ni cations. Fluorite RO2 blocking slabs that separate series of n-NiO2 layers appear for n = 3−6. key ingredient for superconductivity in RNiO2-based sys- tems, even though many theories of superconductivity in cuprates rely on the existence of strong AF correlations . Recent RIXS experiments in NdNiO2 point in this direction as they have revealed the presence of strong AF correlations with a superexchange ∼ 60 meV . Also, an NMR study has found the presence of AF fluctua- tions and quasi-static AF order below 40 K in Sr-doped NdNiO2 . Along these lines, first-principles calcula- tions do predict that the main correlations in RNiO2 are indeed AF, but less strong than in the cuprates [9, 22– 25], and embedded in a metallic environment. While magnetism in these infinite-layer nickelates is still under intense study [21, 26–28], it is then important to under- arXiv:2012.02711v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 3 Mar 2022 stand: i) Why parent infinite-layer nickelates are metallic and do not show any signature of long-range magnetic or- der (their cuprate analog CaCuO2 is AF and insulating ). ii) Whether the phase diagram of these newly dis- covered superconducting nickelates can host an AF insu- lating phase close to half-filling by modifying parameters such as dimensionality. iii) If other (finite n) members of the layered nickelate family are more similar to cuprates at d9 filling in terms of their electronic structure. In this paper, using first-principles calculations, we try to address these questions. We argue that the metallic non-cuprate-like behavior of parent infinite-layer nicke- lates can be attributed to the strong Ni-R-Ni off-plane hopping. This gives rise to extremely dispersive R-d bands, strongly hybridized with the Ni-d occupied bands. These R-d bands cross the Fermi level leading to a de- viation from half-filling in the Ni-dx2−y2 band via a self doping mechanism. We show that if structural modi- fications are used to provide a means to suppress the Ni-Ni off-plane hopping, an AF insulating state can be obtained. As such, we reveal that in the purely two- dimensional limit, RNiO2 materials are indeed AF insu- lators. This very same phase can be realized naturally in the finite-n members of the layered nickelate family (with a fluorite blocking slab between NiO2 planes), including the recently found n = 5 layered nickelate superconduc- tor. As such, our calculations show that these finite-n nickelates can be AF insulators at d9 filling without any structural changes. All in all, our results illustrate that a crucial part of the phase diagram of the superconducting cuprates (the parent insulating antiferromagnetic phase) can indeed be present for the whole series of layered nick- elates. In the case of the n = ∞ compound it is simply hindered by strong off-plane band dispersions but a di- mensionality reduction can bring it to light. II. COMPUTATIONAL METHODS Our electronic structure calculations in layered nick- elates were performed within density functional theory using the all-electron, full potential code wien2k based on the augmented plane wave plus local orbital (APW+lo) basis set and the Vienna ab initio Simulation Package (VASP). We present the results obtained for R=La in all materials to avoid problems as- sociated with the 4f electrons of Pr or Nd but no large changes can be anticipated from the R substitution in the electronic structure, as shown for the RNiO2 materi- als in a number of works [9, 28, 35–37]. We did indeed perform calculations in RNiO2 for a different rare-earth (Nd) and only minor changes not affecting the main con- clusions of the paper arose, which will be explained in the Appendix. The generalized gradient approximation in the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (GGA-PBE) scheme was used as the exchange-correlation functional. To deal with possible strong correlation effects we use GGA+U including an on-site repulsion U (U = 5 eV) and Hund’s coupling J (J= 0.7 eV) for the Ni 3d states. For LaNiO2, when thin films are discussed, a suffi- cient vacuum of 20 ̊A was introduced, enough to guaran- tee the lack of interaction between two planes (periodic boundary conditions are utilized along the three spatial directions). Both in thin films and multilayers, atomic positions were fully relaxed within GGA-PBE using the in-plane lattice parameter of LaNiO2. In both cases, re- laxations were done in a checkerboard antiferromagnetic state in a √ 2× √ 2 supercell of the tetragonal (P4/mmm) cell. A C-type antiferromagnetic state has been chosen in the bulk as this is the ground state of the system as soon as a small U is included . The muffin-tin radii used were: 2.50 a.u. for Nd and La, 2.00 a.u. for Ni and 1.72 a.u. for O. An RmtKmax = 7.0 was chosen for all calculations. For the La-based n = 4 − 6 compounds (La5Ni4O10 whose structures have not been experimentally resolved yet, we conducted structural relaxations using VASP within GGA-PBE, optimizing both lattice parameters and internal coordinates in a √ 2× √ 2 supercell of the tetragonal (I4/mmm) cell in a checkerboard (C-type) antiferromagnetic state. As above, a C-type antiferro- magnetic state has been chosen as this is the ground state of the finite n materials as soon as a small U is included to account for correlations in the Ni 3d states. In the VASP calculations, an energy cutoff of 650 eV and a k- mesh of 6×6×1 were adopted with a force convergence criterion of 5 meV/ ̊A. With the VASP-optimized structures for the n = 4−6 nickelates, we then performed further electronic struc- ture calculations using the wien2k code. In these calcu- lations, muffin-tin radii of 2.50 a.u., 2.00 a.u., and 1.72 a.u. were used for La, Ni, and O, respectively. We used RmtKmax = 7.0 and a k-grid of 21×21×21 for all ma- terials in the irreducible Brillouin zone. To modify the chemical potential in the finite-n compounds, the virtual crystal approximation (VCA) was used in both the La- site and Ni-site (to achieve a nominal d9 filling for all materials), both yielding consistent results. III. HIGHER-ORDER LAYERED NICKELATES In order to unravel the nature of the ground state of the whole layered-nickelate family when approaching the d9 nominal filling, we will start by analyzing the elec- tronic structure of the reduced RP compounds as n is varied. As mentioned above, the n = 5 Nd-based layered nickelate has been recently found to be superconducting, increasing the interest in these higher-n layered nicke- lates. We have used the I4/mmm structure of the n = 3 com- pound as a model for constructing the structures of the n = 4 − 6 counterparts, since the latter have not been experimentally resolved yet. The structure of the n = 3 − 6 materials (reduced from Ruddlesden-Popper 2 the structural relaxations for n = 4−6 layered nickelates. The experimental structural data for the n = 3 compound are shown as a reference. Labels i, m, and o denote the inner-, mid-, and outer-layers, respectively. higher-order layered nickelates n=3 (exp) n=4 n=5 n=6 d ( ̊A) a=5.61 a=5.62 a=5.62 a=5.62 Ni(i)-O Ni(m)-O Ni(o)-O phases) can be visually inspected in Fig. 1. The struc- ture is formed by a series of n-NiO2 planes where the Ni coordination is a square plane of oxygens. These n planes are sandwiched by RO2 fluorite blocking layers that confine the Ni-d states along the c-direction con- ferring the Ni-dz2 bands a localized, molecular-like char- acter . The structural parameters (nearest-neighbor distances and lattice parameters) obtained after relax- ation for the La-based n = 4 − 6 nickelates are summa- rized in Table I compared to the experimentally resolved ones for the n = 3 material . Once the relaxations are carried out, we have artifi- cially moved the chemical potential in all compounds (us- ing the virtual crystal approximation) so that a nominal d9 filling is achieved, in order to explore what magnetic and electronic phase is the ground state in this situation. The GGA checkerboard AF solutions at d9 filling are metallic, a U needs to be introduced on the Ni-d states to open up a gap. A summary of the derived AF band structures within GGA+U for the n = 3 − 6 compounds is presented in Fig. 2. In all cases, we show the band structures for the ground state AF checkerboard C-type pattern, where the S = 1/2 (nominally Ni1+) cations couple AF due to the hole in the dx2−y2 orbital. The derived Ni magnetic moments are ∼ 0.8-0.9 μB once a U is added (with some slight variation in inner, outer, and mid-layers, as shown in Table II) and hence consistent with this Ni1+ (S = 1/2) picture. In all cases, a gap appears in the spectrum but its value gets reduced as n increases, that is, as one moves towards the infinite-layer (three-dimensional) limit. This gap opens up between states that are predominantly dz2 in character at the top of the valence band and dx2−y2 at the bottom of the conduction band, as expected (see Appendix A Fig. 6). In this manner, the electronic structure resembles that of parent cuprates, where the ground state at d9 filling is also an AF insulator. A similar result had been al- ready reported for the n = 3 case, when the material is within VCA at d9 filling within both GGA and GGA+U. Here, i, m, and o denote the inner-, mid-, and outer-Ni atoms, respectively. d9 filling compound atom GGA GGA+U n = 3 Ni(i) ±0.59 Ni(o) ±0.59 n = 4 Ni(i) ±0.63 Ni(o) ±0.62 n = 5 Ni(i) ±0.64 Ni(m) ±0.64 Ni(o) ±0.64 n = 6 Ni(i) ±0.66 Ni(m) ±0.66 Ni(o) ±0.66 electron-doped with Ce, Zr, or Th . These results give rise to the following questions: why are the infinite-layer counterparts metallic at the same nominal d-filling?, what happens to the AF correlations that should exist due to the partly filled dx2−y2 band? In the following, we will try to answer this question carefully with the aid of electronic structure calculations through computational experiments in the infinite-layer materi- als. IV. TURNING INFINITE LAYER NICKELATES INTO ANTIFERROMAGNETIC INSULATORS. We start by describing the basic electronic structure of infinite-layer nickelates and how we can understand the differences between the n = ∞ case and the n ̸= ∞ oxygen-reduced RP compounds described in the previous section. states (DOS) of bulk LaNiO2 in its AF C-type (in-plane AF checkerboard) ground state. The metallic character can be seen to be brought about, as it has been analyzed in previous works , by the presence of strongly dispersive bands (in particular along the Γ-Z direction) of mixed La-d and Ni-dz2 character. In the non-magnetic state, La-d bands also cross the Fermi level, as pointed out before . Introducing a large U, either in the La-d or the Ni-d bands, does not lead to a band splitting that would open up a gap in this system . As such, the R-d bands lead to a so-called self-doping effect, i.e. the depletion in occupation of the Ni-dx2−y2 band, away from the nominal half-filling that would correspond to a Ni1+ cation (see Appendix B Fig. 7 for the dx2−y2 fat bands). Note that the presence of a flat Ni-dz2 band pinned at the Fermi level in connection to metallicity in the C-type AF state of infinite-layer nickelates has been highlighted in previous DFT work in connection to instabilities that could limit AF order at low temperature . 3 material, the energy gap is 1.13 eV. (b) For n = 4, the energy gap is 0.63 eV. (c) For n = 5, the energy gap is 0.35 eV. (d) For n = 6, the energy gap is 0.19 eV. The majority dz2 orbital of all Ni atoms is highlighted in the band structure. Now the question arises: is there a way one can get an insulating AF phase from here? To answer this question, we start by taking the system towards the purely two- dimensional limit. For that sake, we have constructed an RNiO2 monolayer from the constituting NiO2 planes, with the standard square planar environment for the Ni cations (see Fig. 4). The additional rare-earth cations are placed alternatively on top and below the NiO2 planes to ensure the stoichiometry and provide the highest pos- sible symmetry. If the rare-earth cations are all placed on a single plane above or below the NiO2 plane, the resulting total energy is much higher. LaNiO2 system at the GGA level (without introducing correlations via DFT+U) in an AF checkerboard ground state. The La-d bands do not cross the Fermi level and the only Ni-d band that remains unoccupied is a single minority-spin dx2−y2 band per Ni (see Appendix B Fig. 8 for the dx2−y2 fat bands). The La-d bands cannot hy- bridize strongly with the Ni-d ones anymore (once the periodicity along c is lost) and as a consequence there is no largely dispersive band crossing the Fermi level, as it occurs in the bulk. As such, the system is no longer self-doped and the nominally Ni1+ purely ionic descrip- tion works nicely, like in parent cuprates and reduced RP nickelates. The half-filled dx2−y2 band yields a spin-1/2 scenario with a strong in-plane AF coupling, that ap- pears even at the GGA level (U= 0 limit). This solution is similar to that obtained for cuprates (such as isostruc- tural CaCuO2) that are AF insulators at the GGA level as well . The magnetic moments within GGA are also somewhat larger (∼ 0.9 μB) than those appearing in bulk LaNiO2 (∼ 0.6 μB) that get reduced by the self-doping effect. If an on-site Coulomb repulsion is introduced, the gap becomes widened as U increases by pushing the un- occupied Ni-dx2−y2 bands higher in energy, and the mag- netic moments approach 1.0 μB per Ni. Even though we have presented our results for La, the same type of so- lution can be derived for the NdNiO2 counterpart (see Appendix C, Fig. 9). In order to illustrate the lack of La-d - Ni-d hybridiza- tion in this case, we have highlighted in the band struc- ture of Fig. 4 the Ni-dz2 character for both Ni atoms in the structure. These dz2 bands become completely occu- pied and are very flat (in contrast to the bulk plot of Fig. 3) and no Ni-dz2 character can be seen in the unoccupied part of the spectrum. The DOS plot helps locate the dif- ferent characters of other bands shown. La-d bands start appearing above 1 eV (only one spin channel is analyzed for clarity). The O-p bands start to emerge below -3 eV in this case, further away from the Fermi level than in the cuprates . In order to study the band(s) that bring about metal- licity in the bulk in more detail, we have constructed a hypothetical system, like the one shown in Fig. 5. This is a multilayer that alternates one LaNiO2 and one LaNaO2 unit cell stacked along the (001) direction. This system provides continuity along the c-axis for the rare-earth La-d-La-d direct hopping. However, in this structure the hopping paths for the transition metal Ni-d bands are largely confined into the ab plane. Their off-plane hopping is largely blocked by the LaNaO2 layer, since the Na atoms do not provide continuity for a direct off- plane Ni-dz2 hopping. Also, the La-d-Ni-d hybridization is largely hampered by the NaO2 blocking layer. Note that LaNaO2 exists but it is not isostructural to LaNiO2 . Here, for the purpose of comparison though, we assume the same crystal structures taking the in-plane lattice parameter of LaNiO2 as a basis, and then all the internal atomic positions and the off-plane lattice param- eter have been relaxed. It is not relevant for our discus- sion whether this system is experimentally achievable or not, it just provides another way of suppressing the c-axis dispersion to confirm the reasoning exposed above. We note that the equivalent Li-based system (LiLa2NiO4) has been shown to be dynamically stable . 4 La Monolayer LaNiO2 La Bulk LaNiO2 Ni in grey, O in red. The structure highlights the NiO4 square planar environment surrounding each Ni cation forming the NiO2 building blocks of the layered structure in supercon- ducting nickelates. Bottom left panel. Band structure of bulk LaNiO2 within GGA in its AF ground state with the fat bands representing the Ni-dz2 states of both Ni atoms in the structure (a Hund splitting can be observed between them). Only one spin channel is shown, with the very flat La-f bands appearing well above the Fermi level. The largely dispersive bands crossing the Fermi level are hybrid La-d - Ni-d bands and lead to metallic behavior in the bulk. Bottom right panel. Corresponding La, O, and Ni atom-resolved density of states (both Ni atoms have opposite spins). The band structure of the multilayer is shown in Fig. 5. Similar to the LaNiO2 monolayer, the system is an AF insulator. The only subtle difference is that a very small U (∼ 1.5 eV) is needed for a gap to be opened up (an even smaller U is required in the case of NdNiO2, see Appendix C, Fig 10). This gapped AF solution occurs even though there is a continuity of the rare-earth sublattice along the off-plane direction. This confirms that the key factor in order to open up a gap is for the geometry to provide a way to suppress the R-Ni off-plane hopping that leads to hybrid bands with a large dispersion, crossing the Fermi level. When the Ni-dz2 bands (highlighted in the band structure shown) have no mechanism to hybridize along the c-direction, these bands remain very flat and fully occupied. Then, the R-d bands do not disperse below the Fermi level and the system is an analog of the reduced RP phases and parent cuprates at d9 filling: an AF insulator, with no self-doping. As such, at the electronic structure level, this computational experiment of a multilayered system works similar to the single-layer LaNiO2. All in La Monolayer LaNiO2 type used for the calculations discussed in the text. Bottom left panel. GGA band structure of the LaNiO2 monolayer with AF ordering of the Ni atoms, showing only one spin channel. The Ni-dz2 states are highlighted for both Ni atoms (a Hund splitting can again be observed between them). The O-p bands (not shown) start to appear below -3 eV. A gap opening occurs. Bottom right panel. Corresponding La, O and Ni atom-resolved density of states (both Ni atoms have opposite spins). all, we can conclude that reducing dimensionality is a way to reach a parent phase that is AF and insulating in parent RNiO2, like that in the cuprates. It is important to explain this result in detail. If one looks at the band character of the band crossing the Fermi level in bulk LaNiO2 or NdNiO2 , it is mostly R-d in character. If this were the whole story, in this multilayered system, such a band would still have room to be largely dispersive. What our calculations show is that its large dispersion requires a strong hy- bridization with the Ni-dz2 band. When this hybridiza- tion is cut by, e.g. introducing NaO2 planes in the struc- ture, then this band is no longer living close to the Fermi level and the electronic structure becomes cuprate-like, AF correlations become stronger (larger moments closer to the nominal ionic S = 1/2 value), and the ground state becomes AF and insulating even at the GGA level (or with a very small U in the case of the multilayer). V. DISCUSSION We have shown that an AF insulating ground state can be obtained in Rn+1NinO2n+2 layered nickelates at d9 filling: in a natural manner in the reduced RP phases 5 LaNaO2/LaNiO2 La Top panel. Supercell constructed alternating one layer of LaNiO2 and one layer of LaNaO2. The Ni-Ni direct off-plane hopping is blocked structurally by a single layer of LaNaO2. However, the La-d off-plane hopping is not blocked. Na atoms in yellow, La atoms in green, O atoms in red, Ni atoms in gray. Bottom left panel. Band structure of a multi- layer (LaNaO2)1/(LaNiO2)1 obtained with a very small U= 1.5 eV. A gap opening together with AF ordering occurs when the off-plane coupling is geometrically suppressed, even when the La-d-La-d off-plane hopping is permitted. Only one spin channel is shown and the La-f states are unoccupied and away from the Fermi level. The Ni-dz2 bands are highlighted for both Ni atoms antiferromagnetically coupled (a Hund split- ting can be noticed between them as before). Bottom right panel. Corresponding La, O (only the O atoms in the NiO2 plane are shown), and Ni atom-resolved density of states. (n = 3 − 6), or introducing a structural element to cut the c-axis dispersion in the n = ∞ compounds. In the infinite-layer nickelates (RNiO2) we have shown that the origin of the celeb self-doping effect is not sim- ply in the rare-earth d bands – the existence of the elec- tron pockets with R-d parentage requires a strong hy- bridization with the Ni-dz2 bands. This hybridization leads to the formation of wide bands that arise due to the large hopping taking place along the c-axis. This provides further evidence of the active role of the Ni-dz2 orbitals in the electronic structure of infinite-layer nicke- lates [26, 48–50]. This situation (a highly dispersive band crossing the Fermi level) does not occur in the parent cuprates. There are various reasons for this. In the isostructural infinite- layer cuprate (CaCuO2) the Ca-d bands are very far above the Fermi level to be able to produce any effects in the electronic structure. In other cuprates containing atoms with available unoccupied d bands (such as the La bands in La2CuO4 or the Y bands in the YBCO family), there are important structural differences. The case of La2CuO4 allows for a direct comparison with the layered nickelate family. Such a structure consists of CuO2 planes but separated by a spacing La2O2 blocking layer (the same can be said about YBCO). These structural elements provide a barrier for the off-plane hoppings (in a similar fashion to the fluorite slab in finite-n members of the layered nickelate family, and the NdNaO2 layer in the hypothetical multilayered system we described for the infinite-layer nickelate) ultimately allowing for an AF insulating phase to appear naturally in the d9 limit. To summarize, we have shown that a parent insulating AF phase can take place in the phase diagram of layered nickelates (Rn+1NinO2n+2) close to half-filling. Our work shows yet another piece of evidence of the similarities between layered nickelates and cuprates, which were not apparent at first but can be elucidated digging deeper into the properties of these new nickel-oxide materials. VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS V.P. is supported by the Ministry of Science of Spain through the project PGC2018-101334-B-C21. H.L. and A.S.B acknowledge NSF Grant No. DMR 2045826. We acknowledge the ASU Research Computing Center for HPC resources. M. R. Norman, Materials design for new superconduc- tors, Reports on Progress in Physics 79, 074502 (2016). V. I. Anisimov, D. Bukhvalov, and T. M. Rice, Electronic structure of possible nickelate analogs to the cuprates, Phys. Rev. B 59, 7901 (1999). D. Li, K. Lee, B. Y. Wang, M. Osada, S. Crossley, H. R. Lee, Y. Cui, Y. Hikita, and H. Y. Hwang, Supercon- ductivity in an infinite-layer nickelate, Nature 572, 624 D. Li, B. Y. Wang, K. Lee, S. P. Harvey, M. Osada, B. H. Goodge, L. F. Kourkoutis, and H. Y. Hwang, Supercon- ducting Dome in Nd1−xSrxNiO2 Infinite Layer Films, Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, 027001 (2020). M. Osada, B. Y. Wang, B. H. Goodge, K. Lee, H. Yoon, K. Sakuma, D. Li, M. Miura, L. F. Kourkoutis, and H. Y. Hwang, A Superconducting Praseodymium Nicke- late with Infinite Layer Structure, Nano Letters 20, 5735 M. Osada, B. Y. Wang, K. Lee, D. Li, and H. Y. Hwang, Phase diagram of infinite layer praseodymium nickelate Pr1−xSrxNiO2 thin films, Phys. Rev. Materials 4, 121801 6 S. W. Zeng, C. J. Li, L. E. Chow, Y. Cao, Z. T. Zhang, C. S. Tang, X. M. Yin, Z. S. Lim, J. X. Hu, P. Yang, and A. Ariando, Superconductivity in infinite-layer lan- thanide nickelates, arXiv:2105.13492 (2021). W. E. Pickett, Electronic structure of the high- temperature oxide superconductors, Rev. Mod. Phys. 61, A. S. Botana and M. R. Norman, Similarities and Dif- ferences between LaNiO2 and CaCuO2 and Implications for Superconductivity, Phys. Rev. X 10, 011024 (2020). Y. Zhang, L.-F. Lin, W. Hu, A. Moreo, S. Dong, and E. Dagotto, Similarities and differences between nickelate and cuprate films grown on a srtio3 substrate, Phys. Rev. B. Geisler and R. Pentcheva, Fundamental difference in the electronic reconstruction of infinite-layer versus per- ovskite neodymium nickelate films on srtio3(001), Phys. Rev. B 102, 020502 (2020). M. Greenblatt, Ruddlesden-Popper Lnn+1NinO3n+1 nickelates: structure and properties, Current Opinion in Solid State and Materials Science 2, 174 (1997). G. A. Pan, D. Ferenc Segedin, H. LaBollita, Q. Song, E. M. Nica, B. H. Goodge, A. T. Pierce, S. Doyle, S. No- vakov, D. C ́ordova Carrizales, A. T. N’Diaye, P. Shafer, H. Paik, J. T. Heron, J. A. Mason, A. Yacoby, L. F. Kourkoutis, O. Erten, C. M. Brooks, A. S. Botana, and J. A. Mundy, Superconductivity in a quintuple-layer square-planar nickelate, Nature Materials 21, 160 (2022). A. S. Botana, V. Pardo, and M. R. Norman, Electron doped layered nickelates: Spanning the phase diagram of the cuprates, Phys. Rev. Materials 1, 021801 (2017). M. Kawai, S. Inoue, M. Mizumaki, N. Kawamura, N. Ichikawa, and Y. Shimakawa, Reversible changes of epitaxial thin films from perovskite LaNiO3 to infinite- layer structure LaNiO2, Applied Physics Letters 94, M. Crespin, O. Isnard, F. Dubois, J. Choisnet, and P. Odier, LaNiO2: Synthesis and structural characteriza- tion, Journal of Solid State Chemistry 178, 1326 (2005). A. Ikeda, Y. Krockenberger, H. Irie, M. Naito, and H. Ya- mamoto, Direct observation of infinite NiO2 planes in LaNiO2 films, Applied Physics Express 9, 061101 (2016). M. Hayward and M. Rosseinsky, Synthesis of the infinite layer Ni(I) phase NdNiO2+x by low temperature reduc- tion of NdNiO3 with sodium hydride, Solid State Sciences P. W. Anderson, The Resonating Valence Bond State in La2CuO4 and Superconductivity, Science 235, 1196 H. Lu, M. Rossi, A. Nag, M. Osada, D. F. Li, K. Lee, B. Y. Wang, M. Garcia-Fernandez, S. Agrestini, Z. X. Shen, E. M. Been, B. Moritz, T. P. Devereaux, J. Zaa- nen, H. Y. Hwang, K.-J. Zhou, and W. S. Lee, Magnetic excitations in infinite-layer nickelates, Science 373, 213 Y. Cui, C. Li, Q. Li, X. Zhu, Z. Hu, Y. feng Yang, J. Zhang, R. Yu, H.-H. Wen, and W. Yu, NMR Evidence of Antiferromagnetic Spin Fluctuations in Nd0.85Sr0.15NiO2, Chinese Physics Letters 38, 067401 K.-W. Lee and W. E. Pickett, Infinite-layer LaNiO2: Ni1+ is not Cu2+, Phys. Rev. B 70, 165109 (2004). M.-Y. Choi, K.-W. Lee, and W. E. Pickett, Role of 4f states in infinite-layer NdNiO2, Phys. Rev. B 101, 020503 Z. Liu, Z. Ren, W. Zhu, Z. Wang, and J. Yang, Electronic and magnetic structure of infinite-layer NdNiO2: trace of antiferromagnetic metal, npj Quantum Mater. 5, 31 Y. Gu, S. Zhu, X. Wang, J. Hu, and H. Chen, A substan- tial hybridization between correlated Ni-d orbital and itinerant electrons in infinite-layer nickelates, Commun. Phys. 3, 84 (2020). M.-Y. Choi, W. E. Pickett, and K.-W. Lee, Fluctuation- frustrated flat band instabilities in NdNiO2, Phys. Rev. Research 2, 033445 (2020). J. Krishna, H. LaBollita, A. O. Fumega, V. Pardo, and A. S. Botana, Effects of Sr doping on the electronic and spin-state properties of infinite-layer nickelates: Nature of holes, Phys. Rev. B 102, 224506 (2020). J. Kapeghian and A. S. Botana, Electronic structure and magnetism in infinite-layer nickelates RNiO2 (R = La−Lu), Phys. Rev. B 102, 205130 (2020). D. Singh, W. Pickett, and H. Krakauer, Electronic struc- ture of CaCuO2, parent of the high-Tc superconductors, Physica C: Superconductivity and its Applications 162- P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn, Inhomogeneous Electron Gas, Phys. Rev. 136, B864 (1964). Peter Blaha, Karlheinz Schwarz, Georg K. H. Madsen, Dieter Kvasnicka, and Joachim Luitz, Wien2k: An Aug- mented Plane Wave + Local Orbitals Program for Cal- culating Crystal Properties, (2001). K. Schwarz and P. Blaha, Solid state calculations us- ing WIEN2k, Computational Materials Science 28, 259 E. Sj ̈ostedt, L. Nordstr ̈om, and D. Singh, An alternative way of linearizing the augmented plane-wave method, Solid State Communications 114, 15 (2000). G. Kresse and J. Furthm ̈uller, Efficient iterative schemes for ab initio total-energy calculations using a plane-wave basis set, Phys. Rev. B 54, 11169 (1996). M. Uchida, K. Ishizaka, P. Hansmann, Y. Kaneko, Y. Ishida, X. Yang, R. Kumai, A. Toschi, Y. Onose, R. Arita, K. Held, O. K. Andersen, S. Shin, and Y. Tokura, Pseudogap of Metallic Layered Nickelate R2−xSrxNiO4 (R = Nd, Eu) Crystals Measured Using Angle-Resolved Photoemission Spectroscopy, Phys. Rev. S. Ryee, H. Yoon, T. J. Kim, M. Y. Jeong, and M. J. Han, Induced magnetic two-dimensionality by hole doping in the superconducting infinite-layer nickelate Nd1−xSrxNiO2, Phys. Rev. B 101, 064513 (2020). E. Been, W.-S. Lee, H. Y. Hwang, Y. Cui, J. Zaanen, T. Devereaux, B. Moritz, and C. Jia, Electronic Structure Trends Across the Rare-Earth Series in Superconduct- ing Infinite-Layer Nickelates, Phys. Rev. X 11, 011050 J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Generalized Gradient Approximation Made Simple, Phys. Rev. Lett. A. I. Liechtenstein, V. I. Anisimov, and J. Zaanen, Density-functional theory and strong interactions: Or- bital ordering in Mott-Hubbard insulators, Phys. Rev. B J. Zhang, Y.-S. Chen, D. Phelan, H. Zheng, M. R. Nor- man, and J. F. Mitchell, Stacked charge stripes in the quasi-2D trilayer nickelate La4Ni3O8, Proceedings of the 7 National Academy of Sciences 113, 8945 (2016). V. V. Poltavets, K. A. Lokshin, M. Croft, T. K. Man- dal, T. Egami, and M. Greenblatt, Crystal structures of Ln4Ni3O8 (Ln= La, Nd) triple layer T ′-type nickelates, Inorg. Chem. 46, 10887 (2007). J.-G. Cheng, J.-S. Zhou, J. B. Goodenough, H. D. Zhou, K. Matsubayashi, Y. Uwatoko, P. P. Kong, C. Q. Jin, W. G. Yang, and G. Y. Shen, Pressure Effect on the Structural Transition and Suppression of the High-Spin State in the Triple-Layer T ′−La4Ni3O8, Phys. Rev. Lett. V. Pardo and W. E. Pickett, Quantum confinement in- duced molecular correlated insulating state in La4Ni3O8, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 266402 (2010). X. Wu, D. Di Sante, T. Schwemmer, W. Hanke, H. Y. Hwang, S. Raghu, and R. Thomale, Robust dx2−y2-wave superconductivity of infinite-layer nickelates, Phys. Rev. A. S. Botana, K.-W. Lee, M. R. Norman, V. Pardo, and W. E. Pickett, Low valence nickelates: Launching the nickel age of superconductivity, Frontiers in Physics 9, G. Blasse, Sodium lanthanide oxides NaLnO2, Journal of Inorganic and Nuclear Chemistry 28, 2444 (1966). M. Hirayama, T. Tadano, Y. Nomura, and R. Arita, Ma- terials design of dynamically stable d9 layered nickelates, Phys. Rev. B 101, 075107 (2020). F. Lechermann, Multiorbital Processes Rule the Nd1−xSrxNiO2 Normal State, Phys. Rev. X 10, 041002 P. Werner and S. Hoshino, Nickelate superconductors: Multiorbital nature and spin freezing, Phys. Rev. B 101, Y. Wang, C.-J. Kang, H. Miao, and G. Kotliar, Hund’s metal physics: From SrNiO2 to LaNiO2, Phys. Rev. B J. Longo and P. Raccah, The structure of La2CuO4 and LaSrVO4, Journal of Solid State Chemistry 6, 526 (1973). Appendix A: Density of states of higher-ordered nickelates The projected densities of states (PDOS) of La-based n=3-6 reduced nickelates corresponding to the band structures in Fig. 2 are shown in Fig. 6. For all ma- terials, the dz2 orbitals, which are dominantly located from -2 eV all the way up to the Fermi energy, are fully occupied. The only Ni-d band that remains unoccupied is a single minority-spin dx2−y2 band per Ni. The oxygen-p states (shown in Fig. 6 in purple color) appear at lower energies. These O-p states shift up in energy with de- creasing n. Appendix B: Fat bands showing the dx2−y2 character We provide in Figs. 7 and 8 the fat bands for bulk and monolayer LaNiO2 highlighting the dx2−y2 orbital contribution, in order to complement the corresponding dz2 bands discussed in the main text. In these plots, we can observe that the self-doping effect in the bulk produces a partial depopulation of the Ni dx2−y2 band. However, in the monolayer limit, the self-doping effect is no longer present and the dx2−y2 is completely half-filled. This latter argument applies to the multilayer system as well. Appendix C: NdNiO2 systems We provide a description of the electronic structure of the NdNiO2 systems analogous to the La-based ones presented in the main text (with the same computational parameters described above). Figure 9 shows the band structure and DOS of the minority-spin channel of the NdNiO2 monolayer (the Nd moments are considered all parallel so that in the minority-spin channel, the Nd-f bands are completely unoccupied away from the Fermi level). The Ni dz2 bands are completely occupied and present a small dispersion. Fig. 10 shows a multilayer system analogous to that in the main text, but using Nd-based materials. Again, the presence of a blocking structure that cuts the c-axis dispersion leads to a gap opening at the Fermi level. In this case, an even smaller U is able to open the gap when compared to the La-based case. Again, the electronic structure is presented for the minority-spin channel only, with the Nd-f bands unoccupied well above the Fermi level. 8 -2 0 2 inner Ni d Ni dz2 Ni dx2-y2 (a) n=3 -2 0 2 outer DOS (States/eV) -2 0 2 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 Energy (eV) O tot La tot -2 0 2 inner Ni d Ni dz2 Ni dx2-y2 (c) n=5 -2 0 2 mid -2 0 2 outer DOS (States/eV) -2 0 2 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 Energy (eV) O tot La tot -2 0 2 inner Ni d Ni dz2 Ni dx2-y2 (b) n=4 -2 0 2 outer DOS (States/eV) -2 0 2 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 Energy (eV) O tot La tot -2 0 2 inner Ni d Ni dz2 Ni dx2-y2 (d) n=6 -2 0 2 mid -2 0 2 outer DOS (States/eV) -2 0 2 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 Energy (eV) O tot La tot 9 uration (in-plane √ 2× √ 2 unit cell). The bands highlighted correspond to the dx2−y2 fat bands coming from the two in- equivalent Ni atoms in the structure (exchange split due to the AF coupling). For each spin channel, there is one unoc- cupied dx2−y2 band and another one which becomes partly depopulated due to the self-doping effect. board AF configuration (in-plane √ 2 × √ 2 unit cell). The bands highlighted correspond to the dx2−y2 fat bands com- ing from the two inequivalent Ni atoms in the structure (ex- change split due to the AF coupling). We see that for each spin channel (only one shown) there is a fully unoccupied dx2−y2 band and another one that is fully occupied, leading to a fully gapped electronic structure. 10 tom left panel. Band structure of the NdNiO2 monolayer with AF ordering of the Ni atoms, showing only the mi- nority spin channel (Nd moments are parallel). The Ni-dz2 states are highlighted for both Ni atoms (a Hund splitting can again be observed between them). The flat Nd-f bands (unoccupied) appear 2-3 eV above the Fermi level. The O-p bands (not shown) start to appear below -3 eV. A gap opening together with the antiferromagnetic ordering occurs when the off-plane coupling is suppressed. This is visible even at the U = 0 limit (bands shown), similar to the sit- uation in bulk CaCuO2, and unlike the self-doped metallic phase appearing in bulk NdNiO2. Bottom right panel. Cor- responding Nd, O and Ni atom-resolved density of states (both Ni atoms have opposite spins). NdNaO2/NdNiO2 layer of NdNiO2 and one layer of NdNaO2. The Ni-Ni di- rect off-plane hopping is blocked structurally by a single layer of NdNaO2. However, the Nd-d off-plane hopping is not blocked. Na atoms in yellow, R atoms in green, O atoms in red, Ni atoms in gray. Bottom left panel. Band struc- ture of a multilayer (NdNaO2)1/(NdNiO2)1 obtained with a very small U= 0.7 eV. A gap opening together with an- tiferromagnetic ordering occurs when the off-plane coupling is geometrically suppressed, even when the Nd-d-Nd-d off- plane hopping is permitted. Only the minority spin is shown so that the Nd-f states are unoccupied and away from the Fermi level. The Ni-dz2 bands are highlighted for both Ni atoms antiferromagnetically coupled (a Hund splitting can be noticed between them, as before). Bottom right panel. Corresponding Nd, O (only the O atoms in the NiO2 plane are shown), and Ni atom-resolved density of states. 11