1 Two-dimensional Cold Electron Transport for Steep-slope Transistors Maomao Liu,1 Hemendra Nath Jaiswal,1 Simran Shahi,1 Sichen Wei,2 Yu Fu,2 Chaoran Chang,2 Anindita Chakravarty,1 Xiaochi Liu,3 Cheng Yang,4 Yanpeng Liu,5 Young Hee Lee,6 Fei Yao,2* and Huamin Li1* 1 Department of Electrical Engineering, University at Buffalo, The State University of New York, Buffalo, New York 14260, US 2 Department of Materials Design and Innovation, University at Buffalo, The State University of New York, Buffalo, New York 14260, US 3 School of Physics and Electronics, Central South University, Changsha 410083, China 4 School of Physics and Electronics, Shandong Normal University, Jinan 250014, China 5 Institute of Nanoscience, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing 210016, China 6 Center for Integrated Nanostructure Physics, Institute for Basic Science, Suwon 16419, Korea * Author to whom correspondence should be addressed. Electronic address: feiyao@buffalo.edu and huaminli@buffalo.edu 2 Abstract Room-temperature Fermi-Dirac electron thermal excitation in conventional three- dimensional (3D) or two-dimensional (2D) semiconductors generates hot electrons with a relatively long thermal tail in energy distribution. These hot electrons set a fundamental obstacle known as the “Boltzmann tyranny” that limits the subthreshold swing (SS) and therefore the minimum power consumption of 3D and 2D field-effect transistors (FETs). Here, we investigated a novel graphene (Gr)-enabled cold electron injection where the Gr acts as the Dirac source to provide the cold electrons with a localized electron density distribution and a short thermal tail at room temperature. These cold electrons correspond to an electronic cooling effect with the effective electron temperature of ~145 K in the monolayer MoS2, which enable the transport factor lowering and thus the steep-slope switching (across for 3 decades with a minimum SS of 29 mV/decade at room temperature) for a monolayer MoS2 FET. Especially, a record-high sub-60-mV/decade current density (over 1 μA/μm) can be achieved compared to conventional steep-slope technologies such as tunneling FETs or negative capacitance FETs using 2D or 3D channel materials. Our work demonstrates the great potential of 2D Dirac-source cold electron transistor as an innovative steep-slope transistor concept, and provides new opportunities for 2D materials toward future energy-efficient nanoelectronics. 3 Main Fermi-Dirac electron thermal excitation is an intrinsic physical phenomenon that grants a tunable electrical conductivity of semiconductors at room temperature, but on the other hand, it also causes excessive power dissipation in various electron systems . Especially in field-effect transistors (FETs), the “Boltzmann tyranny” induced by the thermal excitation of hot electrons sets a fundamental limit in the steepness of the transition slope between off and on states, known as subthreshold swing (SS). To change the current by one order of magnitude at room temperature, (kBT/q)ln10 ~ 60 mV, where VG is the gate voltage, ID is the drain current, s is the channel surface potential, kB,T, and q are the Boltzmann constant, temperature, and electronic charge, respectively. Therefore, various types of steep-slope FETs have been proposed to increase the turn-on steepness and overcome the bottleneck to continue minimizing the power consumption, including tunneling FETs (TFETs) and negative capacitance FETs (NCFETs) . These solutions in principle can achieve a sub-60-mV/decade SS, for example, by lowering the transport factor (∂s/∂(log10ID)), via a band-to-band Zener tunneling effect in TFETs ; or by reducing the body factor (∂VG/∂s) via a ferroelectric gate layer with the negative differential capacitance in NCFETs . However, there are also critical challenges for these technologies to overcome, such as the low current density and source/drain asymmetry in TFETs as well as the lack of fundamental understanding in NCFETs . With the rise of graphene (Gr), two dimensional (2D) van der Waals (vdW) layered materials have been explored as promising material candidates for future energy-efficient nanoelectronics due to the natural quantum confinement in an atomically thin body . MoS2 as one of the most representative semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) acts as 4 an excellent channel material for nano-scale transistors by offering ideal electrostatic tunability, an appropriate direct bandgap, and moderate carrier mobility, etc . The MoS2-based TFETs and NCFETs have been demonstrated with the sub-60-mV/decade SS. However, neither of them can provide the sub-60-mV/decade current density to be higher than 1 μA/μm which is one key metric for a logic transistor to benefit from the steep slope . In this work, we demonstrated a novel Gr-enabled Dirac-source “cold” electron injection which possesses a more localized electron density distribution and a shorter thermal tail, compared to the conventional normal-source hot electron injection in 3D or 2D semiconductors. The cold electron injection has been implemented in a monolayer MoS2 FET to introduce an electronic cooling effect which can lower the transport factor and thus enable an outstanding steep-slope switching (across for 3 decades with a minimum SS of 29 mV/decade at room temperature), an excellent on/off ratio (~107), novel and strong on-current saturation (~10 μA/μm), and especially a record-high sub-60-mV/decade current density (over 1 μA/μm) compared to any TFETs or NCFETs using 2D or 3D channel materials. The effective electron temperature was extracted to be ~145 K, based on the energy distribution of the cold electrons at room temperature. Our work presents the 2D Dirac-source cold electron FET as an innovative steep-slope transistor concept to achieve the sub-60-mV/decade switching, and provides new opportunities for 2D materials toward future energy-efficient nanoelectronics. Graphene-enabled 2D “cold” electron transport. To illustrate the underlying mechanism and the fundamental advantages of the Gr-enabled Dirac-source cold electron transport, we compare it with the conventional normal-source hot electron transport in 3D and 2D semiconductors such as Si and monolayer MoS2. The electron density (n) depends on the energy 5 EF)/kBT]} and the density of states (DOS), where EF is the Fermi energy. Here we use the subscript of 3D, 2D, and Gr to distinguish the properties for 3D semiconductors, 2D semiconductors, and monolayer Gr, respectively. Because DOS is a parabolic function of E in 3D semiconductors as E)/kBT] which follows a sub-exponential decay, as shown in Fig. 1(a), where EC is the minimum conduction band edge. Similarly, since DOS in 2D semiconductors is constant (DOS2D(E) ~ (E– EC)0), the corresponding n(E) possesses an exponential decay described as n2D(E) ~ exp[(EF– E)/kBT], as shown in Fig. 1(b). Assuming EF = 0 eV, the exponential decay of n2D(E) also follows present a relatively long Boltzmann thermal tail at room temperature, and these tails extend to infinity at the non-zero temperature in principle, due to the Fermi-Dirac electron thermal excitation. Considering a conventional FET structure where a gate-controlled potential barrier (φb) is established within the channel, the drain current is attributed to the thermionic injection of the electrons with E higher than φb. Due to the long Boltzmann thermal tail as E increases, the minimum SS for 3D and 2D semiconductor channels suffers from the “hot” electron injection and has a limit of 60 mV/decade at room temperature. As a comparison, the monolayer Gr has a linear energy dispersion near the Dirac point, and its DOS is a linear function of E as DOSGr(E) ~ EDirac–E where EDirac is the energy at the Dirac point. The corresponding n(E) of the monolayer Gr can be expressed as nGr(E) ~ (EDirac– nGr(E) always shows a super-exponential decay compared to n2D(E). The Boltzmann thermal tail in Gr is relatively short, because it is no longer infinite but terminated right at EDirac even at room temperature, as shown in Fig. 1(c). By exploiting the monolayer Gr as the cold electron source in 6 a heterojunction structure, for example, a Gr/MoS2 heterobilayer, φb can be created at the interface and tuned by the gate electrostatically. Compared to the hot electron injection in 3D and 2D semiconductors, the cold electron injection from Gr possesses a more localized distribution near EF and a shorter thermal tail which can be cut off more effectively by φb, giving rise to a faster switching to break the SS limit in principle . To provide a quantitative comparison, we assume n(EF) is the electron density at E = EF, and calculate the normalized carrier density, i.e., n(E)/n(EF) for the monolayer Gr and 2D semiconductors, as shown in Fig. 2(a). Here Gr is p-type doped and EDirac–EF ranges from 0.1 to 0.5 eV. Assuming that a gate-controlled φb increases from 0 to 0.1 eV, n(E)/n(EF) in 2D semiconductors is reduced from 1 to 0.021. A modulation efficiency, defined as η = 1–n(E)/n(EF), suggests that 97.9% electrons above EF is cut off by φb, as shown in Fig. 2(b). In contrast, for the p-type doped Gr where EDirac = 0.1 eV, all the electrons above EF are completely halted by φb, giving rise to η = 1. As the doping level increases in Gr, η slightly decreases but is still higher than that of 2D semiconductors even at EDirac = 0.5 eV. It is worth mentioning that 2D semiconductors in this comparison are considered as an extreme case in which EF aligns with EC as EF= EC = 0 eV. For a more practical situation, EC is usually higher than EF in 2D semiconductors, and the corresponding η would be significantly lowered compared to that in Gr. For example, assuming EF = 0 eV, EC = 0.1 eV, and φb increases from 0.1 to 0.2 eV, η is anticipated to be only 2.1% for 2D semiconductors. Furthermore, when we compare the energy distribution of n(E)/n(EF) in Gr at room temperature with that in 2D semiconductors at low temperature, it is intriguing to see that they are comparable in certain regimes, as shown in Fig. 2(c). To extract the effective temperature of these cold electrons in 2D semiconductors, we start with the ratio of electron density between Gr and 7 2D semiconductors, i.e., nGr(E)/n2D(E) ~ EDirac–E, which strongly depends on the doping level in E)/kBT2D] where TGr and T2D are the electron temperature in Gr and 2D semiconductors, respectively, the relationship between TGr and T2D can be extracted as T2D = [1/TGr+kBln(EDirac– [1/TGr–kBln(EDirac–E)/E]–1. Therefore, when EDirac > E >EF, the electrons in Gr at room temperature (TGr = 300 K) can serve as the cold electrons in 2D semiconductors at low temperature, as shown in Fig. 2(d). The cooling efficiency, defined as γ = 1–T2D/TGr, can be calculated as well, as shown in Fig. 2(e). As TGr rises, γ increases accordingly, suggesting an enhanced capability of suppressing the electron thermal excitation in 2D semiconductors. One can imagine that, by implementing this Gr-enabled cold electron injection in 2D FET devices such as the monolayer MoS2 FET, an electronic cooling effect can be introduced in the electron transport. These cold electrons can equivalently lower the transport factor ((kBT/q)ln10) and thus create a new approach to achieve the energy-efficient steep-slope transistors, in addition to the conventional technique using the band- to-band Zener tunneling. Sub-60-mV/decade switching of 2D MoS2 Dirac-source cold electron FET. Here we designed a 2D steep-slope Dirac-source FET (DSFET) using the monolayer Gr and MoS2 as the cold-electron source and semiconductor channel, respectively, and experimentally demonstrated the electronic cooling effect and thus the outstanding sub-60-mV/decade switching performance at room temperature. Schematic of a 2D MoS2 DSFET and the microscopic images of a device are illustrated in Fig. 3(a-c). The details of material characterization and device fabrication are provided in Supporting Information Note 1 and 2. In brief, a Gr/MoS2 heterobilayer structure was formed, followed by electrode patterning and deposition. Their electronic properties were 8 investigated through various back-gate transistor configurations including Gr FET, MoS2 FET, and Gr/MoS2 FET. The whole device was passivated by a thin Al2O3 layer, except for the gating windows which were opened in the overlapping area and the top-gate electrode. Room-temperature ionic liquid (diethylmethyl(2-methoxyethyl) ammonium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide, or DEME-TFSI) was drop-casted on the device to connect the top-gate electrode to the exposed Gr/MoS2 heterobilayer area, and provide a localized high-efficiency gating through an electric double layer (EDL) effect. For device characterization, drain current density (JD) as a function of drain voltage (VD), back-gate voltage (VBG), and top-gate voltage (VTG) were measured at room temperature. First, we use the Si back gate to modulate the carrier transport. Ohmic contacts are confirmed through the JD-VD output characteristics in the back-gate Gr FET, MoS2 FET, and Gr/MoS2 FET, as shown in Supporting Information Note 3. A comparison of the JD-VBG transfer characteristics is summarized in Fig. 3(d) and Supporting Information Note 4. The Gr FET shows the Dirac point at about –60 V with a weak gate modulation (an on/off ratio less than 2) due to its zero bandgap. The MoS2 FET possesses a typical electron transport branch with an on/off ratio near 106. Similarly, the Gr/MoS2 FET is dominated by electron transport and an intermediate on/off ratio about 104 is obtained. Because the hot carrier injection dominates in all three devices under the back gating, their SS is still constrained by the thermionic limit. Then, we exploit the top gate through the localized EDL effect to precisely control the carrier transport only at the Gr/MoS2 interface, and measure the JD-VTG transfer characteristics for the top-gate MoS2 DSFET at different VBG levels, as shown in Fig. 3(e) and Supporting Information Note 5-8. It is intriguing to see that a sub-60- mV/decade switching at room temperature can be obtained at VBG = –80 V, and the minimum SS value can be obtained as 49 mV/decade in a forward sweep and 29 mV/decade in a backward 9 sweep, as shown in Fig. 3(f). By extracting the SS as a function of JD, the sub-60-mV/decade switching sustains for about one decade in the forward sweep and about three decades in the backward sweep, as shown in Fig. 3(g) and (h). As VBG continues increasing, the minimum SS rises and stabilizes at about 210 mV/decade in the forward sweep and about 90 mV/decade in the backward sweep, as shown in Fig. 3(i). Besides, novel and strong current saturation occurs in both the forward and backward sweeps when the MoS2 DSFET is operated at on state (see Fig. 3(e)), where the on-current density is nearly constant (~ 10 μA/μm at VD = 0.1 V) across a wide sweeping range (~ 5 V in the forward sweep and ~ 3 V in the backward sweep). Such unique independence of the gate voltage is not obtained in either the back-gate Gr FET, MoS2 FET, or Gr/MoS2 FET (see Fig. 3(d)). To better understand the steep-slope switching mechanism of the 2D MoS2 DSFET and its dependence on the top-gate and back-gate electric fields, an energy band diagram along the channel is illustrated in Fig. 4(a). The electron transport path from source to drain can be divided into three regions: (i) VBG-controlled Gr Dirac source region along the in-plane direction (x-axis), VBG-controlled MoS2 channel region along the in-plane direction (x-axis). To enable the cold electron injection into the n-type MoS2 channel, the Gr source region is doped into p-type by applying a constant VBG (VBG < VDirac where VDirac is the gate voltage at the Dirac point). When the MoS2 DSFET is at the off state, the applied VTG turns the Gr into p-type in the heterobilayer region. EF in the p-type Gr and EC in the n-type MoS2 create a large φb at the Gr/MoS2 interface to prevent the electron injection. As VTG increases, both EDirac in Gr and EC in MoS2 in the heterobilayer region are lowered, resulting in a transition of Gr from p-type to n-type as well as a reduced φb. Thus the MoS2 DSFET is operated in the subthreshold regime, and the current increases due to the 10 thermionic injection of the hot electrons which have higher E over φb. As VTG continues increasing, EC in MoS2 becomes lower than EF in Gr. Thus, an energy window defined as EDirac–φb is opened for the cold electron injection from the Gr source to the MoS2 channel. With the expansion of the injection window, JD increases accordingly and eventually reaches the maximum at the on state. Although the carrier transport during the subthreshold regime is still dominated by the thermionic emission over φb, the sub-60-mV/decade switching becomes possible due to the localized electron density distribution and the short Boltzmann thermal tail of the cold electrons from Gr. At the on state, because of a degenerate doping from the EDL effect , the injection window is maximized and stabilized with the minimum φb, giving rise to the strong and steady on-current saturation even when VTG continues increasing. In addition to the sub-60-mV/decade steep slope and the strong on-current saturation, another intriguing feature of the 2D MoS2 DSFET is the “double minima” in the SS during the operation (see Fig. 3(g) and (h), and Supporting Information Note 8). In the normal FET operation, the SS-JD characteristics usually show a single valley, and the minimum SS is attributed to the most efficient thermionic emission of the hot electrons over φb in the subthreshold regime. Whereas in the 2D MoS2 DSFET operation, in addition to the minimum SS induced by the normal- source hot electron injection, the second valley with a sub-60-mV/decade SS occurs, owing to the Dirac-source cold electron injection. Because both the hot and cold electron injections are dominated by the thermionic emission (see Supporting Information Note 9), their currents can be described by the Landauer-Büttiker formula at the ballistic transport limit , and the SS can be plotted as a function of φb–EDirac for a variety of C, as shown in Fig. 4(b) and Supporting Information Note 10. Here C = ∂φb/∂(qVTG) is the reciprocal body factor describing the variation of φb as a function of VTG for 2D heterojunction, and it ranges from 0 to 1. When φb > EDirac, the 11 Gr serves as the normal source to provide the hot electrons, and the SS is always larger than 60 mV/decade at room temperature. As VTG increases, φb is close to EDirac, and the SS approaches to infinity in principle. When φb < EDirac, the Gr acts as the Dirac source that enables the cold electron injection and allows a faster switching by breaking the SS limit. It is noted that, as C decreases, the steep-slope energy window for the cold electron injection is also reduced, but the sub-60- mV/decade switching is still feasible even at C = 0.2. Assuming the EDL capacitance in the ionic liquid is 1 μF/cm2 , the Fermi level shift (EF–EDirac) of Gr under the top gating can be estimated , and the SS as a function of VTG–VDirac is obtained, as shown in Fig. 4(c). As VTG increases, the hot electron injection and cold electron injection are predicted in succession, which are qualitatively consistent with the experimental data obtained from both forward and backward sweeps. Owing to the ultrahigh capacitance of EDL, the body factor is assumed to be unity in the 2D MoS2 DSFET. This is also evidenced by the near-60-mV/decade achieved in the hot carrier injection regime. Therefore, the SS is predominated by the transport factor, as shown in Fig. 5(a). Because of the novel electronic cooling effect from the cold electron injection, the transport factor can be lowered than 60 mV/decade at room temperature, and the effective temperature (Teff) of the cold electrons can be estimated from the SS. Based on the minimum SS of 29 mV/decade at room temperature, the lowest Teff can be calculated as Teff = SSq/(kBln10) = ~145 K, which is more than 50% reduced. Finally, we benchmark our 2D MoS2 DSFET with other state-of-the-art beyond-CMOS technologies. Compared to the 14 nm Si FinFET CMOS technology , the 2D MoS2 DSFET shows the near-60-mV/decade SS at the beginning of the subthreshold regime owing to the hot electron injection. Then it switches sequentially to the cold electron injection with the sub-60- 12 mV/decade SS until the end of the subthreshold regime, as shown in Fig. 5(b). Although the strongly saturated on-current density is lower than the Si technology, it can be further improved in principle by increasing the doping level of the Gr source and thus enlarging the energy window for the cold electron injection. The sub-60-mV/decade SS of 2D MoS2 DSFET is also plotted as a function of JD in comparison with other steep-slope technologies, including the TFETs , NCFETs , and one-dimensional (1D) DSFETs based on a variety of channel materials, as shown in Fig. 5(c). The 2D MoS2 DSFET possesses the ultimately thin channel (~0.65 nm for monolayer MoS2) compared to the conventional bulk channel materials such as Si, Ge, and InGaAs, etc. Furthermore, the 2D MoS2 DSFET shows a superior steep-slope current density (~4 μA/μm) which is the highest compared to any TFET and NCFET technologies based on 2D or 3D channel materials so far. Such a high sub-60-mV/decade current density in the 2D MoS2 DSFET is attributed to the unique operation mechanism. The cold electron injection dominates until the end of the subthreshold regime where the relevant subthreshold current is high and close to the saturated on-current density. Whereas the other steep-slope technologies such as the TFETs dominate only at the beginning of the subthreshold regime where the subthreshold current is relatively low. It is also worth mentioning that the sub-60-mV/decade current density of 2D MoS2 DSFET only remains inferior to that of 1D carbon nanotube (CNT) DSFETs, which can be attributed to the employment of high-density CNT arrays as the channel in their case. Here we chose the monolayer MoS2 as the ultimately thin channel simply because it is the most representative 2D semiconducting material. One can easily expect that the richness of 2D material family will further enable the performance-boosting of the 2D DSFETs, for example, by exploiting other high-mobility 2D semiconductors such as black phosphorus. In conclusion, we investigated the novel Gr-enabled cold electron injection and thus the 13 electronic cooling effect in monolayer MoS2, and demonstrated the first steep-slope 2D MoS2 DSFET which showed the outstanding sub-60-mV/decade SS (across for 3 decades with the minimum SS of 29 mV/decade at room temperature), the excellent on/off ratio (~107), the novel and strong on-current saturation (~10 μA/μm across 5 V sweeping range at VD = 0.1 V), and more importantly, the record-high steep-slope current density (over 1 μA/μm) than any 2D- or 3D- channel-based TFETs or NCFETs. The double-minima SS in the subthreshold regime of the 2D MoS2 DSFET was interpreted, which was attributed to the conventional hot electron injection with the near-60-mV/decade SS and the cold electron injection (Teff of ~145 K at room temperature) with the sub-60-mV/decade SS. Our work demonstrated the 2D DSFET as a new type of emerging steep-slope transistor concept for beyond-CMOS technology, and revealed innovative opportunities for future nanoelectronics based on 2D layered materials and their vdW heterostructures. Data availability The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.