arXiv:2012.04245v1 [math.NA] 8 Dec 2020 EFFICIENT NUMERICAL ALGORITHMS FOR THE GENERALIZED LANGEVIN EQUATIONвҲ— BENEDICT LEIMKUHLERвҖ  AND MATTHIAS SACHS вҖЎ Abstract. We study the design and implementation of numerical methods to solve the gener- alized Langevin equation (GLE) focusing on canonical sampling properties of numerical integrators. For this purpose, we cast the GLE in an extended phase space formulation and derive a family of splitting methods which generalize existing Langevin dynamics integration methods. We show exponential convergence in law and the validity of a central limit theorem for the Markov chains obtained via these integration methods, and we show that the dynamics of a suggested integration scheme is consistent with asymptotic limits of the exact dynamics and can reproduce (in the short memory limit) a superconvergence property for the analogous splitting of underdamped Langevin dynamics. We then apply our proposed integration method to several model systems, including a Bayesian inference problem. We demonstrate in numerical experiments that our method outperforms other proposed GLE integration schemes in terms of the accuracy of sampling. Moreover, using a parameterization of the memory kernel in the GLE as proposed by Ceriotti et al , our experi- ments indicate that the obtained GLE-based sampling scheme outperforms state-of-the-art sampling schemes based on underdamped Langevin dynamics in terms of robustness and efficiency. Key words. Generalized Langevin dynamics, approximate Markov chain Monte Carlo, sym- metric splitting, BAOAB AMS subject classifications. 65C30, 65C40, 82M37 1. Introduction. In this article we study numerical discretization schemes for a generalized Langevin equation (GLE) of the form (GLE) МҮq = M вҲ’1p, МҮp = вҲ’вҲҮqU(q) вҲ’ пҝҪ t 0 K(t вҲ’ s)M вҲ’1p(s)ds + О·(t). where the dynamic variables q вҲҲ О©q = Rn, p вҲҲ О©p = Rn denote the position and momenta of a Hamiltonian system with energy function (1.1) H(q, p) = U(q) + 1 2pT M вҲ’1p. The mass matrix M вҲҲ RnГ—n is assumed to be symmetric positive definite, and U is a smooth confining potential function (i.e., U вҲҲ CвҲһ(О©q, R) and U(q) вҶ’ вҲһ as вҲҘqвҲҘ вҶ’ вҲһ) such that пҝҪ О©q eвҲ’U(q)dq < вҲһ. K : [0, вҲһ) вҶ’ RnГ—n is a matrix-valued (generalized) function, which is referred to as the memory kernel, and О· is a stationary Gaussian process with vanishing mean taking values in Rn and which (in equilibrium) is assumed to be statistically independent of q and p. The dynamical variable О· models a random force, which is such that a fluctuation dissipation relation holds. That is, the auto-covariance function of the random force and the memory kernel K coincide up to a constant pre-factor, i.e., вҲ—Submitted to the editors DATE. Funding: This work was made possible by the RULE project of the European Research Council, grant no. 320823. вҖ School of Mathematics, University of Edinburgh, UK (b.leimkuhler@ed.ac.uk, http://kac.maths. ed.ac.uk/вҲјbl/). вҖЎDepartment of Mathematics, University of British Columbia, Canada (msachs@math.ubc.ca, https://sites.google.com/view/matthiassachs). 1 2 B. LEIMKUHLER, M. SACHS In its general form (GLE) the GLE is a non-Markovian dynamical model, meaning that the evolution of the state of the described system depends not only on the state itself but on the state history. The underdamped Langevin equation is obtained as a special Markovian variant of the GLE when the memory kernel is chosen as K(t) = пҝҪО“Оҙ(t) and О· = пҝҪ 2пҝҪО“ОІвҲ’1 МҮW , where Оҙ(В·) denotes the Dirac delta function, МҮW is a Gaussian white noise in Rn with independent components, i.e., МҮW = [ МҮWi]1вүӨiвүӨn, such that, positive definite matrix which is commonly referred to as the friction matrix. Under this parameterization (GLE) simplifies to the ItЛҶo diffusion (LD) МҮq = M вҲ’1p, МҮp = вҲ’вҲҮqU(q) вҲ’ пҝҪО“M вҲ’1p + пҝҪ 2пҝҪО“ОІвҲ’1 МҮW . 1.1. The GLE as a dynamical model. Traditionally, the generalized Langevin equation is widely used in thermodynamics to model the dynamics of an open system which exchanges energy with one or more heat baths. The equation can be formally derived via the Mori-Zwanzig projection formalism . As such, it provides a dynamical description of the projection of a physical system onto a finite subset of its degrees of freedom. In the absence of a clear scale separation in the time evolution of explicitly modeled degrees of freedom and the traverse degrees of freedom, Markov- ian approximations in the form of (LD) fail to reproduce the dynamical properties of the system. Incorporation of memory effects via the stochastic integro-differential equation (GLE) are key to an accurate description of the system dynamics in such a setup. As such the GLE is used as a dynamical model in a wide range of appli- cations, including coarse grained meso- and macro-scale molecular particle dynamics models , simulation of solids , non-equilibrium dynamics in open sys- tems with temperature gradient , complex fluids and (anomalous) diffusive transport in soft matter . 1.2. Application in sampling. Besides its application as a dynamical model, the GLE has been used in molecular sampling to design (approximate) Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods with enhanced sampling properties , and there are theoretical results showing that GLE-based sampling schemes and annealing schemes can exhibit better convergence properties in comparison to schemes based on an (underdamped) Langevin equation. Indeed, under certain conditions (see subsection 1.4.1) on the memory kernel K, the process defined by (GLE) is exponentially ergodic with unique invariant measure given by the Gibbs- Boltzmann distribution (1.2) ПҖ(dq dp) = 1 Z eвҲ’ОІH(q,p)dqdp, so that in particular, the process q(t), t вүҘ 0 can be used to draw samples from the marginal measure (1.3) ПҖq(dq) вҲқ eвҲ’ОІU(q)dq. In a nutshell, the idea behind the enhanced sampling methods developed in is to equip the GLE with a memory kernel of the form K(t) = K(t)In which is construc- ted such that mixing times associated to (GLE) with U(q) = 1 2Пүq2 are minimized over a prescribed frequency range Пү вҲҲ [Пүmin, Пүmax] вҠӮ (0, вҲһ). The resulting memory kernel is such that the effect of the convolution пҝҪ t 0 K(t вҲ’ s)M вҲ’1p(s)ds behaves like EFFICIENT NUMERICAL ALGORITHMS FOR THE GLE 3 a high-pass filter on the momentum trajectory. This allows slower modes to evolve almost ballistically while faster modes are sufficiently damped to avoid resonance ef- fects in numerical discretizations of the dynamics. Even though this construction assumes the target ПҖq to be Gaussian, the enhanced sampling properties have been shown in practice to extend to the non-Gaussian case . In particular in sam- pling problems where ПҖq is ill conditioned (in the sense that the associated covariance matrix has a large condition number), such constructed sampling schemes may result in drastically improved sampling efficiency and robustness in comparison to schemes obtained by discretization of an underdamped Langevin equation . 1.3. Scope and main results of this article. The purpose of this article is to provide a class of numerical integrators with well understood theoretical properties which are suitable for simulation of the GLE in a wide range of applications. Within this class of numerical integrators we identify one scheme, gle-BAOAB, which we show analytically and in numerical experiments to outperform previously proposed schemes in terms of numerical discretization error and numerical stability. The fact that in any computer simulation only finite memory is available means that any computer simulation of (GLE) inevitably results in a quasi-Markovian process. That is, the obtained process is Markovian in some (generally obscure) state space. Here, we focus on a particular class of quasi-Markovian instances of (GLE), whose Markovian form can be related directly to a certain class of ItЛҶo diffusion processes in an extended state space (see subsection 1.4). Instead of attempting to directly discretize (GLE), we numerically integrate the corresponding equivalent stochastic differential equation (SDE). This approach allows us in applications where the solu- tion process of (GLE) is not quasi-Markovian (this is for example the case if K(t) has the form of a power law) to clearly separate the error due to time-discretization of the process вҖ“the focus of this articleвҖ“ from the error induced by a quasi-Markovian approximation. The focus of this article is on the construction and analysis of integration schemes for the quasi-Markovian approximation. The proposed time discretizations (Sec. Section 2) of the equivalent SDE are constructed as symmetric stochastic splitting schemes. The decomposition (of the associated generator) which is used as the basis for these stochastic splitting schemes is informed by results on stochastic splitting schemes for the underdamped Langevin equation . In terms of the analysis we focus on the properties of the Markov chain obtained by such time-discretization of the quasi-Markovian approximation. That is, we discuss the existence of a stepsize dependent invariant measure ПҖh of that Markov chain (here, h > 0 denotes the stepsize of the time discretization) and provide conditions for geo- metric convergence and the validity of a central limit theorem (Section 3). Moreover, we provide a detailed analysis of the marginal measure ПҖh(dq) of the position variable q and its convergence to the exact marginal measure ПҖ(dq) as h вҶ’ 0 (subsection 3.2). While the approximation accuracy of the measure ПҖh(dq) obviously is highly relevant for sampling applications, we emphasize that an accurate approximation of the mar- ginal measure ПҖ(dq) is also relevant for accurately recovering dynamical properties . Another aspect covered in this article is the behavior of the introduced stochastic splitting schemes in certain limits of parametrization (Section 4). We show that the obtained numerical schemes behave consistently with well known homogenization re- sults (summarized in subsection 1.5) of the continuous dynamics and reduce to numer- ical integrators of the corresponding limiting dynamics with well known numerically 4 B. LEIMKUHLER, M. SACHS favorable properties. This has important implications for both sampling applications and for applications where the GLE is used as a dynamical model. In the former case our results ensure that the convergence order of the stepsize dependent error incurred in the invariant measure ПҖh is not reduced in the respective limits. In fact we show that in the overdamped limit of (GLE) we obtain an increase of convergence order (fourth order instead of second order). A property whichвҖ“in accordance with previous results вҖ“we refer to as super-convergence. In the latter case our results ensure that the dynamical properties of the simulated dynamics remain consistent with the underdamped/white-noise limit of (GLE). In the remainder of this section we set up the basic framework for studying the Markovian reformulation of the GLE. We briefly review the above-mentioned homog- enization results for the continuous dynamics as well as some results on the ergodic properties of the continuous dynamics. 1.4. Quasi-Markovian generalized Langevin equations (QGLE). Con- sider the SDE defined on the extended space О©x = О©q Г— О©p Г— Rm, (QGLE) МҮq = M вҲ’1p dt, пҝҪ МҮp МҮs пҝҪ = пҝҪ вҲ’вҲҮqU(q) 0 пҝҪ вҲ’ О“ пҝҪ M вҲ’1p s пҝҪ + пҝҪ ОІвҲ’1ОЈ МҮW , where О“, ОЈ are block matrices of the form О“ := пҝҪ О“1,1 О“1,2 О“2,1 О“2,2 пҝҪ вҲҲ R(n+m)Г—(n+m), ОЈ := пҝҪ ОЈ1 ОЈ2 пҝҪ = пҝҪ ОЈ1,1 ОЈ1,2 ОЈ2,1 ОЈ2,2 пҝҪ вҲҲ R(n+m)Г—(n+m), with m вүҘ n, and where МҮW is a Gaussian white noise in Rn+m with independent components, i.e., ОҙijОҙ(t вҲ’ s). In what follows we first provide a set of sufficient conditions which ensure that the SDE (QGLE) can be rewritten in the form of the stochastic integro-differential equation (GLE) and possesses an invariant measure which is such that its marginal in q, p coincides with the Gibbs-Boltzmann distribution. Assumption 1. (i) There exists a symmetric positive definite matrix Q вҲҲ RmГ—m such that, (1.4) О“ пҝҪ In 0 0 Q пҝҪ + пҝҪ In 0 0 Q пҝҪ О“T = ОЈОЈT . (ii) the real parts of all eigenvalues of the matrix (1.5) О“M := О“ пҝҪ M вҲ’1 0 0 Im пҝҪ are positive. That is вҲ’О“M is a stable matrix. (iii) the matrices О“1,1 and M commute. A derivation of the following proposition can be found in (see also ). Proposition 1.1. Let Assumption 1 hold and let Q вҲҲ RmГ—m be as specified therein. The SDE (QGLE) conserves the probability measure ПҖ(dq dp ds) with density (1.6) ПҒQ,ОІ(q, p, s) вҲқ eвҲ’ОІ[U(q)+ 1 2 pT M вҲ’1p+ 1 2 sT QвҲ’1s]. EFFICIENT NUMERICAL ALGORITHMS FOR THE GLE 5 can be rewritten in the form of a stochastic integro-differential equation (GLE) with (1.7) K(t) = KО“(t) := О“1,1Оҙ(t) вҲ’ О“1,2eвҲ’tО“2,2О“2,1. We refer to generalized Langevin equations whose memory kernel is of the form specified in (1.6) as Quasi-Markovian Generalized Langevin equations (QGLEs). While more general parametrization of (QGLE) are possible, we focus in this article on two classes of memory kernels which can be characterized by some additional constraints on the form of О“ as summarized in Assumption 2. Memory kernels falling into either of these two classes (or which are positive linear combinations of instances of either class) make up almost all parameterizations of (QGLE) appearing in the literature. Assumption 2. The matrices О“ and Q are such that either (i) О“1,1 = 0 and О“1,2Q = вҲ’О“T 2,1 or (ii) О“1,1 is symmetric positive definite, Q = Im, and О“1,2 = О“T 2,1 Parametrization according to Assumption 2 (i) allows for the representation of memory kernels of the form K(t) = In R пҝҪ l=1 cleвҲ’alt cos(blt), cl, al > 0, bl вүҘ 0, R вҲҲ N. By choosing the matrices О“1,2 and Q appropriately, one can additionally include cross-correlations between components. Typically such parameterizations are used in applications where the GLE is being treated as a dynamical model; see subsection 1.1. Parametrization according to Assumption 2 (ii) allows for the representation of memory kernels where K acts as a high-pass filter. Such parameterizations are most commonly used in sampling applications; see subsection 1.2. For example, the memory kernel K(t) = In пҝҪ ОіОҙ(t) вҲ’ О» Оі П„ eвҲ’t/П„пҝҪ , О» вҲҲ [0, 1), Оі > 0, П„ > 0 used in can be represented in the form (1.7) using О“1,1 = ОіIn, О“1,2 = О“2,1 = пҝҪ О»Оі/П„In and О“2,2 = 1 О»In. 1.4.1. Ergodicity and central limit theorem for QGLEs. Under additional conditions on the coefficients of (QGLE), the solution process is ergodic with unique invariant measure ПҖ and satisfies a central limit theorem. This follows from the fact that the semi-group of the associated evolution operators decays exponentially in a weighted LвҲһ-norm. In order to state this result, we need to first set some notation. For prescribed K вҲҲ CвҲһ(О©x, [1, вҲһ)) with well-defined limit limвҲҘxвҲҘвҶ’вҲһ K(x) = вҲһ, we define the set of functions LвҲһ K (О©x) := пҝҪ ПҶ : О©x вҶ’ R, measurable : sup xвҲҲО©x пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ ПҶ(x) K(x) пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ < вҲһ пҝҪ , which, when equipped with the norm ПҶ пҝҪвҶ’ вҲҘПҶвҲҘLвҲһ K := supxвҲҲО©x|ПҶ(x)/K(x)|, forms a Banach space. We denote by CP (О©x, R) = пҝҪ lвҲҲN LвҲһ Kl(О©x) with Kl(x) = 1+|x|2l the set of at most polynomially growing real-valued functions and by Cp P (О©x, R) вҠҶ CP (О©x, R) the set of real-valued function whose partial derivatives up to order p вҲҲ N exist and grow at most polynomially, i.e., ПҶ вҲҲ Cp P (О©x, R) вҮҗвҮ’ вҲӮxi1 . . . вҲӮxim ПҶ вҲҲ CP (О©x, R) for any differential operator вҲӮxi1 . . . вҲӮxim with m вүӨ p. Unless stated otherwise, we 6 B. LEIMKUHLER, M. SACHS consider operators introduced in the following to be defined on the core (1.8) CвҲһ P (О©x, R) := вҲһ пҝҪ p=1 Cp P (О©x, R). In particular, the infinitesimal generator, LGLE, of (QGLE) when constrained to this set of test functions takes the form (1.9) LGLE = вҲ’вҲҮqU(q) В· вҲҮp + M вҲ’1p В· вҲҮq вҲ’ О“M пҝҪp s пҝҪ В· вҲҮz + ОІвҲ’1 2 ОЈОЈT : вҲҮ2 z, where ОЈОЈT : вҲҮ2 z = пҝҪM i=1 пҝҪM j=1 пҝҪ ОЈОЈT пҝҪ i,j вҲӮziвҲӮzj, M = n + m. Here, as well as in the remainder of this article, z = (p, s) is used as shorthand for the combined vector of momenta and auxiliary variables. We denote the formal L2 adjoint (also known as the Fokker-Planck operator) of LGLE as LвҖ  GLE. For t вүҘ 0, we denote the evolution operator associated with the SDE (QGLE) as etLGLE, i.e., пҝҪ etLGLEПҶ пҝҪ process, W of (QGLE) and x = (q, p, s) is used as a shorthand for the combined vector of positions, momenta, and auxiliary variables. Assumption 3. (i) The matrices О“M and ОЈ are such that the operator вҲӮt вҲ’ LGLE is hypoellip- tic. (see [28, Proposition 7] for sufficient algebraic conditions on О“M, ОЈ for Hypoellipticity of the operator.) In particular, RM = M пҝҪ k=0 M пҝҪ i=0 О“k MОЈi, ОЈ = (ОЈ1, . . . , ОЈM), M = n + m. 1 2qT О©q, with О© вҲҲ RnГ—n being a symmetric positive definite matrix, and U2 вҲҲ CвҲһ(Rn, R) is such that its derivatives are uniformly bounded in Rn, i.e., supqвҲҲRnвҲҘвҲӮqi1вҲӮqi2 В· В· В· вҲӮqik U2(q)вҲҘ < вҲһ for any k вҲҲ N, and i1, . . . , ik вҲҲ {1, . . . , n}. Under the above stated assumptions exponential convergence of the associated semi-group and a central limit theorem for trajectory averages can be established: Proposition 1.2 (). Let Assumptions 1 to 3 be satisfied. (i) For any l вҲҲ N, there exist constants Оәl > 0, Cl > 0 such that вҲҖt вүҘ 0, вҲҖПҶ вҲҲ LвҲһ Kl, пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪetLGLEПҶ вҲ’ пҝҪ ПҶ dПҖ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ LвҲһ Kl вүӨ CleвҲ’tОәl пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪПҶ вҲ’ пҝҪ ПҶ dПҖ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ LвҲһ Kl . (ii) Let ПҶt := tвҲ’1 пҝҪ t 0 ПҶ(x(t))dt. If ПҶ вҲҲ LвҲһ Kl(О©x) for some l вҲҲ N, then there is a finite Пғ2 ПҶ > 0 so that (1.10) вҲҡ t пҝҪ ПҶt вҲ’ пҝҪ ПҶ dПҖ пҝҪ law вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҶ’ tвҶ’+вҲһ N(0, Пғ2 ПҶ). If not explicitly stated otherwise, we assume throughout the remainder of this article that the parameterization of (QGLE) is such that Assumptions 1 to 3 are all satisfied. EFFICIENT NUMERICAL ALGORITHMS FOR THE GLE 7 1.5. Limiting dynamics. The underdamped Langevin and overdamped Langevin dynamics can be obtained as limiting dynamics of the Markovian reformulation of the GLE. In what follows we briefly review two key results from and , which we will later show to hold in slightly modified form for the discretized dynamics. For this purpose we consider the following rescaled process, which is obtained from (QGLE) (QGLE-scaled) МҮqО» = О»pО», пҝҪ МҮpО» МҮsО» пҝҪ = пҝҪ О» пҝҪ вҲ’вҲҮqU(qО») 0 пҝҪ вҲ’ О»О“Ој пҝҪ pО» sО» пҝҪпҝҪ + пҝҪ О»ОІвҲ’1ОЈОј МҮW , with sО»(0) вҲј N(0, In) and (1.11) О“Ој = пҝҪ 0 вҲ’Ој1Da Ој1Da Ој2Db пҝҪ вҲҲ R2nГ—2n, ОЈОј = пҝҪ 0 0 0 вҲҡ2Ој2Db пҝҪ вҲҲ R2nГ—2n, where Da := diag(a1, a2, . . . an) and Db := diag(b1, b2, . . . bn) are positive diag- onal matrices. In the view of the stochastic integro-differential equation (GLE) the form of the matrices О“Ој, ОЈОј corresponds to a rescaling of the memory kernel K(t) = diag(a2 1eвҲ’tb1, . . . , a2 neвҲ’tbn) as KОј(t) = Ој2 1K(Ој2t). Without loss of generality we assume M = In here.1 For the parameter choice О» = 1, Ој1 = З«вҲ’1, Ој2 = З«вҲ’2, the rescaled process (1.11) converges weakly to the solution of an underdamped Langevin equation as З« вҶ’ 0 as detailed in the following proposition. Proposition 1.3 (White noise limit, ). Let О» = 1, Ој1 = З«вҲ’1, Ој2 = З«вҲ’2. For finite T > 0 we have (qО»(t), pО»(t)) law вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҶ’ ОөвҶ’0 (q(t), p(t)), derdamped Langevin equation (LD) with пҝҪО“ = D2 aDвҲ’1 b , M = In, and initial values Similarly, when considering the scaling О» = Ој1 = Ој2 = З«вҲ’1 one can show that the solution of (QGLE-scaled) converges weakly to the solution of an overdamped Langevin equation of the form (BD) МҮq = вҲ’ОӣвҲҮU(q) + пҝҪ 2ОІвҲ’1Оӣ1/2 МҮW . Proposition 1.4 (Overdamped limit). Let О» = Ој1 = Ој2 = З«вҲ’1. sО»(0) вҲј qО»(t) law вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҶ’ ОөвҶ’0 q(t), uniformly in t вҲҲ [0, T ], where (q(t))tвүҘ0 denotes the solution process of the overdamped Langevin equation (BD) with Оӣ = пҝҪ D2 aDвҲ’1 b пҝҪвҲ’1. Proof. This result is a direct consequence of Theorem IV.1 in . The same limit has been also studied in a less general setup in . 1Note that (QGLE) can always be transformed to a system with a isotropic mass matrix by apply- ing a change of variable of the form q пҝҪвҶ’ M1/2q, p пҝҪвҶ’ MвҲ’1/2 to the process resulting in modifications the force, friction matrix and diffusion matrix, respectively. 8 B. LEIMKUHLER, M. SACHS GLE МҮqt = pt, МҮpt = вҲ’вҲҮqU(qt) вҲ’ пҝҪ t 0 K(t вҲ’ s)psds + О·t, with K(t) = вҲ’Ој2 1D2 aeвҲ’Ој2Db|t|. BD МҮqt = вҲ’вҲҮqОӣU(qt) + пҝҪ 2ОӣОІвҲ’1 МҮWt with Оӣ = (D2 aDвҲ’1 b )вҲ’1. LD МҮqt = pt, МҮpt = вҲ’вҲҮqU(qt) вҲ’ ОіпҝҪО“pt + пҝҪ 2ОіпҝҪО“ОІвҲ’1 МҮWt with пҝҪО“ = D2 aDвҲ’1 b , Оі = 1. З« вҶ’ 0 Ој = ( 1 З«, 1 З«), t пҝҪвҶ’ t/З« t пҝҪвҶ’ tОі Оі вҶ’ вҲһ З« вҶ’ 0 Ој = ( 1 З«, 1 З«2 ) Fig. 1. Diagram of Langevin limits. The overdamped limit of the GLE (GLE вҶ’ BD) is detailed in Proposition 1.4. The white noise limit (GLE вҶ’ LD) is detailed in Proposition 1.3. The overdamped limit of the underdamped Langevin equation (LD вҶ’ BD) is a well known result in the literature (see, e.g.,). 2. Symmetric stochastic splitting methods for the QGLE. In this sec- tion we present the basic construction and implementation of the class of proposed stochastic splitting schemes for the Markovian reformulation (QGLE) of the GLE as well as an elementary analysis of the incurred weak error. 2.1. Construction of numerical methods based on splitting. As men- tioned in the introduction, we construct splitting schemes using a similar procedure as that employed for the underdamped Langevin equation in . Such schemes are based on a decomposition of the generator of the underdamped Langevin equa- tion as LLD = LA + LB + LпҝҪO, where LA = вҲ’вҲҮU(q) В· вҲҮp, LB = вҲ’p В· M вҲ’1вҲҮq, and LпҝҪO = вҲ’пҝҪО“M вҲ’1 В· вҲҮp + ОІвҲ’1пҝҪО“ : вҲҮ2 p. By applying a Strang splitting with stepsize h > 0 twice (typically first to treat the Liouville operator LA +LB associated with the Hamiltonian vector field, and then subsequently to compute the combination of that operator with the term LO), a symmetric stochastic splitting scheme with associated evolution operator is obtained: ЛҶPld-OBABO h = exp пҝҪ (h/2)LпҝҪO пҝҪ пҝҪ (h/2)LпҝҪO пҝҪ . Similarly, by either changing the ordering within the Strang splitting or by changing the pair of operators selected for the first application of the Strang splitting, other splitting schemes can be obtained which are uniquely identified by palindromes of the form XYZYX where X, Y, Z вҲҲ {A, B, пҝҪO} are distinct placeholders. (The symmetry of this decomposition is not essential but typically improves the accuracy and efficiency of the resulting scheme with little added computational cost.) This construction can be easily generalized to the Markovian reformulation of the GLE (QGLE) by using the fact that (QGLE) structurally resembles the underdamped Langevin equation (LD). That is, we consider a decomposition of LGLE as LGLE = LA + LB + LO, where LA, LB are defined as above and LO = вҲ’О“ пҝҪ M вҲ’1p s пҝҪ В· вҲҮz + ОІвҲ’1 2 ОЈОЈT : вҲҮ2 z. The only difference between this decomposition and the decomposition of the operator EFFICIENT NUMERICAL ALGORITHMS FOR THE GLE 9 LLD is that LO corresponds to the generator of a linear SDE in p and s, whereas the operator LпҝҪO in the otherwise identical decomposition of LLD is the generator of a linear SDE in p only. Thus, symmetric splitting schemes for (QGLE) can be constructed in the same way as for the underdamped Langevin equation resulting in numerical integrators with associated evolution operators of the form (2.1) ЛҶPgle-XYZYX h = exp пҝҪh 2 LX пҝҪ exp пҝҪh 2 LY пҝҪ exp (hLZ) exp пҝҪh 2 LY пҝҪ exp пҝҪh 2 LX пҝҪ , where X, Y, Z вҲҲ {A, B, O} are again distinct placeholders. 2.2. Implementation. By construction the numerical integrator for the associ- ated evolution operator ЛҶPgle-XYZYX h is of the form (2.2) ЛҶОҰgle-XYZYX h = ОҰX h/2 в—Ұ ОҰY h/2 в—Ұ ОҰZ h в—Ұ ОҰY h/2 в—Ұ ОҰX h/2, where ОҰX h , X вҲҲ {A, B, O} are the solutions maps of the differential equations associated with the operators LX, X вҲҲ {A, B, O}, respectively. A practical implementation of the above-described splitting schemes therefore requires that each differential equation associated with the operators LA, LB and LO can be solved exactly. Indeed, in the case of the operators LA and LB the solution of the associated differential equations МҮq = M вҲ’1p, and МҮp = вҲ’вҲҮU(q) correspond to Euler updates of the form (2.3) ОҰA h : (q, p, s) пҝҪвҶ’ (q + hM вҲ’1p, p, s), ОҰB h : (q, p, s) пҝҪвҶ’ (q, p вҲ’ hвҲҮqU(q), s), respectively. The solution of the SDE associated with the operator LO, (2.4) МҮz = вҲ’О“Mz + пҝҪ ОІвҲ’1ОЈ МҮW , denotes a vector of independent and standard normal distributed random variables in Rn+m, Fh = exp(вҲ’hО“M) is the matrix exponential of the matrix вҲ’hО“M, and Sh solves the equation ShSh T = ОІвҲ’1 пҝҪпҝҪM 0 0 Q пҝҪ вҲ’ Fh пҝҪM 0 0 Q пҝҪ Fh T пҝҪ . The corresponding stochastic flow map which updates the combined state vector x accordingly, is of the form ОҰO h : (q, z) пҝҪвҶ’ (q, Fh z + ShR) , where R is independently resampled at every application of ОҰO h . With the definition of the updates ОҰA h , ОҰB h, ОҰO h at hand, one can find explicit algorithmic forms for the in- tegration map ЛҶОҰgle-XYZYX h . We provide an algorithmic implementation of ЛҶОҰgle-BAOAB h in Algorithm 1. 2.3. Order of convergence of weak error. A numerical scheme with asso- ciated evolution operator Ph is said to have global weak order p when applied to (QGLE) with x(0) вҲј ПҖ0 if, for all ПҶ вҲҲ CвҲһ P (О©x, R), and for all T > 0, there exists a constant C(T, ПҶ) > 0, such that пҝҪпҝҪ(Pn h ПҶ) (x) вҲ’ (enhLGLEПҶ)(x) пҝҪпҝҪ вүӨ hpC(T, ПҶ), for all tn = nh вҲҲ [0, T ], for ПҖ0-almost all x, and for all sufficiently small h > 0. Here, as well as in sequel, Pn = PnвҲ’1P with P0 = Id, denotes the n-th power of the evolution operator P. The above discretization schemes all have weak order p = 2: 10 B. LEIMKUHLER, M. SACHS Algorithm 1: gle-BAOAB input : (q, p, s) p вҶҗ p вҲ’ h 2 вҲҮU(q); q вҶҗ q + h 2 M вҲ’1p; пҝҪ p s пҝҪ вҶҗ Fh пҝҪ p s пҝҪ + ShR; q вҶҗ q + h 2 M вҲ’1p; p вҶҗ p вҲ’ h 2 вҲҮU(q); output: (q, p, s) Proposition 2.1. Let Assumption 3 be satisfied. Then, any symmetric stochas- tic splitting schemes with evolution operator ЛҶPgle-XYZYX h has global weak order 2. Proof. This result is a direct consequence of Theorem 2 in which provides a set of sufficient conditions for the local weak error to coincide with that of the global weak order. We therefore only provide a brief outline of the proof. By Taylor expanding (at h = 0) both (enhLGLEПҶ)(x) and (Pn h ПҶ) (x) with Ph = ЛҶPgle-XYZYX h , and comparing powers in h we obtain an expansion of the local weak error as пҝҪпҝҪ(PhПҶ) (x) вҲ’ (ehLGLEПҶ)(x) пҝҪпҝҪ = h3A3ПҶ(x) + h5rПҶ,Оҙ,5(x), with (2.5) A3 = 1 12 пҝҪ вҲ’ 1 2 [LY, [LY, LZ]] вҲ’ 1 2 [LX, [LX, LY + LZ]] пҝҪ , where [A, B] = AB вҲ’ BA denotes the commutator of the two linear operators A, B. In other words the convergence order of the local weak error is 2. Assumption 3 ensures that for ПҶ вҲҲ CвҲһ P (О©x, R) the remainder term rПҶ,h,5 as well as A3ПҶ are both contained in CвҲһ P (О©x, R). For sufficiently small stepsize h > 0 the existence of a suitable Lyapunov functions (see proof of Theorem 3.1) ensures that moments, E пҝҪ вҲҘпҝҪxkвҲҘ2mпҝҪ , of any order m вҲҲ N are uniformly bounded in the iteration index k вҲҲ N. All together, the conditions of [36, Theorem 2] are met, which implies that the global weak convergence order coincides with the local weak convergence order. 3. Error analysis of ergodic averages. As in the case of the underdamped Langevin equation and the overdamped Langevin equation, Markov chains of the discretized dynamics (3.1) пҝҪxk+1 = ЛҶОҰgle-XYZYX h (пҝҪxk), пҝҪx0 = x(0), k вҲҲ N, can be used as approximate Markov chain Monte Carlo methods for the compu- tation of expectations with respect to the extended Gibbs-Boltzmann distribution ПҖ. That is, expectations of observables ПҶ вҲҲ L2(ПҖ), where L2(ПҖ) := {ПҶ : О©x вҶ’ R measurable | пҝҪ ПҶ2dПҖ}, are approximately computed as trajectory averages of the form пҝҪПҶN := 1 N пҝҪNвҲ’1 k=1 ПҶ(пҝҪxk) from a finite trajectory (xk)k=1,...,N. Such approximate computations are performed under the premise that (пҝҪxk)kвҲҲN is ergodic with respect to the invariant measure ПҖh вүҲ ПҖ, so that lim NвҶ’вҲһ пҝҪПҶN = пҝҪ ПҶ(x)ПҖh(dx), EFFICIENT NUMERICAL ALGORITHMS FOR THE GLE 11 for almost all realizations of the Markov chain (пҝҪxk)kвҲҲN. In this section we provide theoretical justification for such a computation by showing that the above-mentioned assumptions are indeed satisfied. We first show in subsection 3.1 that the proposed numerical schemes result in ergodic Markov chains and the validity a central limit theorem for the Monte Carlo error in the following decomposition of the approximation error (3.2) пҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ Monte Carlo error пҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ Systematic bias . In the next subsection (subsection 3.2) we provide an analysis of the stepsize depen- dent systematic bias. 3.1. Ergodic properties and central limit theorem. In addition to showing the existence and uniqueness of the invariant measure ПҖh, we show geometric ergod- icity of the Markov chain (пҝҪxk)kвҲҲN. Geometric ergodicity is equivalent to exponential convergence of the corresponding evolution operator ЛҶPgle-XYZYX h in some suitably weighted LвҲһ space. By , the latter property implies the validity of a central limit theorem. Theorem 3.1. Let Assumption 1 and Assumption 3 be satisfied and let Ph = ЛҶPgle-XYZYX h . Fix l вҲҲ N, l > 0 and consider (3.3) Kl(q, p, s) = пҝҪ xT Cx пҝҪl + 1, l вҲҲ N, where C вҲҲ Rn+m is a suitably chosen symmetric positive definite matrix (see Appen- dix A.1 for details) Then, there exists hвҲ— > 0, such that for any h вҲҲ (0, hвҲ—) 1. the Markov chain associated with Ph has a unique invariant probability mea- sure ПҖh, which admits a density with respect to the Lebesgue measure on О©x and has finite moments, i.e., (3.4) пҝҪ О©x KldПҖh < вҲһ, for all l вҲҲ N. 2. there are constants Cl > 0, rl вҲҲ (0, 1) such that (3.5) вҲҖ ПҶ вҲҲ LвҲһ Kl вҲҖ k вҲҲ N, пҝҪпҝҪ(Pk hПҶ) вҲ’ EПҖhПҶ пҝҪпҝҪ LвҲһ Kl вүӨ Clrk l вҲҘПҶвҲҘLвҲһ Kl. A complete proof of this result can be found in Appendix A. Here, we provide a brief outline: the proof of the theorem relies on an application of Theorem 1.2 of (see also for similar results) and as such includes the standard steps commonly followed for proving geometric ergodicity of a Markov chain. We first show that under the conditions of Theorem 3.1 a uniform minorization condition is satisfied. That is, Assumption 4 (Minorization condition). Fix any xmax > 0. There exist hвҲ— > 0 such that for any h вҲҲ (0, hвҲ—), there is Оұ > 0 so that (3.6) вҲҖ ПҶ вҲҲ C0(О©x, R) inf |x|вүӨxmax пҝҪ Pk hПҶ пҝҪ (x) вүҘ Оұ пҝҪ О©x ПҶ(x)ОҪ(dx), where k = 2, and ОҪ denotes the Lebesgue measure on О©x. The validity of this minorization condition ensures that within any compact ball which is centered at the origin, the Markov chain (xk)kвҲҲN is mixing within a finite 12 B. LEIMKUHLER, M. SACHS number of steps. As such it already ensures irreducibility of the Markov chain and thus guarantees the uniqueness of the invariant measure ПҖh provided the latter exists. In order to ensure the existence of an invariant measure and exponential converge to that measure, the existence of a suitable Lyapunov function is shown in the second step of the proof. That is, Assumption 5 (Uniform Lyapunov condition). For any l вҲҲ N, l > 0, there exists hвҲ— > 0 and al, bl > 0 such that for any h, 0 < h вүӨ hвҲ—, PhKl вүӨ eвҲ’alhKl + blh. Given the validity of both Assumption 4 and Assumption 5, the remaining statements of Theorem 3.1 then follow as a consequence of [19, Theorem 1.2]. By [29, Corollary 2.26] exponential convergence in the sense of Theorem 3.1 im- plies that the operator (Id вҲ’ Ph) when constrained to the subspace LвҲһ Kl,0 = пҝҪ ПҶ вҲҲ LвҲһ Kl : пҝҪ ПҶПҖh = 0 пҝҪ , is invertible and the corresponding inverse operator is bounded in terms of the operator norm induced by вҲҘВ·вҲҘLвҲһ Kl. By the results in , this is sufficient for a functional central limit theorem to hold (3.7). Corollary 3.2 (Central Limit theorem). Let l вҲҲ N and ПҶ вҲҲ LвҲһ Kl. For suffi- ciently small h > 0, there is finite пҝҪПғ2 ПҶ > 0 so that (3.7) вҲҡ N пҝҪ пҝҪПҶN вҲ’ пҝҪ ПҶ dПҖh пҝҪ law вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҶ’ NвҶ’+вҲһ N(0, пҝҪПғ2 ПҶ). 3.2. Analysis of the systematic bias. In this section we provide results re- garding the convergence order in h of the discretization bias in ergodic averages of symmetric splitting schemes. As discussed in subsection 2.3, the weak convergence order of these schemes is two, which together with the above shown ergodicity result implies that also the convergence order of the systematic discretization bias in ergodic averages is at least two, i.e., lim NвҶ’вҲһ пҝҪПҶN = пҝҪ ПҶ(x)ПҖh(dx) = пҝҪ ПҶ(x)ПҖ(dx) + O(h2), as h вҶ’ 0. In what follows we discuss two special cases where the second order convergence can be improved upon. We first derive the explicit form of the measure ПҖh of the gle-BAOAB scheme in the situation where the target measure ПҖ is Gaussian. Secondly, we analyze the behavior of the discretization error of the gle-BAOAB scheme in the overdamped limit. 3.2.1. Systematic bias for quadratic potentials. An important property of the gle-BAOAB scheme is that its invariant measure ПҖh, when applied to a system with quadratic potential, is such that the marginal in q, ПҖh(dq), coincides with the marginal in q of the exact invariant measure ПҖ(dq) вҲқ eвҲ’ОІqО©вҲ’1q dq, so that lim NвҶ’вҲһ пҝҪПҶN = пҝҪ ПҶ(q)ПҖh(dq), for ПҶ вҲҲ L2 (ПҖ(dq)). More specifically, we have the following theorem. EFFICIENT NUMERICAL ALGORITHMS FOR THE GLE 13 Theorem 3.3. Let U(q) = 1 2qT О© q with О© вҲҲ RnГ—n symmetric positive definite. The Gaussian measure ПҖh(dx) вҲқ exp пҝҪ вҲ’(x вҲ’ Ојh)T V вҲ’1 h (x вҲ’ Ојh) пҝҪ dx, with (3.8) Ојh = 0, Vh = ОІвҲ’1 diag пҝҪ О©вҲ’1, пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ h2/4 пҝҪ M, Q пҝҪ , is invariant under gle-BAOAB with Q as defined in Proposition 1.1. Proof. We take a dual perspective and show that the above specified Gaussian measure ПҖh is the unique stationary solution of the corresponding forward equation, i.e., (3.9) пҝҪ ЛҶPgle-BAOAB h пҝҪвҖ  ПҖh = ПҖh, where пҝҪ ЛҶPgle-BAOAB h пҝҪвҖ  = exp( h 2 LвҖ  B) exp( h 2 LвҖ  A) exp(hLвҖ  O) exp( h 2 LвҖ  A) exp( h 2 LвҖ  B), is the forward operator of the gle-BAOAB scheme, which by construction is simply the concatenation of the forward operators corresponding to the respective B/A/O- steps in the order given by the splitting scheme. The action of these forward operators when applied to a multivariate Gaussian measure N(x|Ој, V )dx вҲқ exp пҝҪ вҲ’(x вҲ’ Ој)T V вҲ’1(x вҲ’ Ој) пҝҪ dx, is found to be exp пҝҪh 2 LвҖ  A пҝҪ N( В· |Ој, V ) = N( В· | ОЁAОј, ОЁAV ОЁT A), exp пҝҪh 2 LвҖ  B пҝҪ N( В· |Ој, V ) = N( В· | ОЁBОј, ОЁBV ОЁT B), where ОЁA = пЈ® пЈ° In h 2 M вҲ’1 0 0 In 0 0 0 Im пЈ№ пЈ» , ОЁB = пЈ® пЈ° In 0 0 вҲ’ h 2 О© In 0 0 0 Im пЈ№ пЈ» , and exp(hLвҖ  O)N( В· |Ој, V ) = N( В· |пҝҪ FhОј, пҝҪ FhV пҝҪ Fh T + пҝҪ Sh пҝҪ Sh T ), where (3.10) пҝҪ Fh = пҝҪIn 0 0 Fh пҝҪ , пҝҪ Sh = пҝҪ0 0 0 Sh пҝҪ . Thus, the Gaussian measure with density N( В· |Ој, V ) is invariant under the action of пҝҪ ЛҶPgle-BAOAB h пҝҪвҖ  exactly if Ој = ОЁBОЁA пҝҪ FhОЁAОЁBОј, V = ОЁBОЁA пҝҪ FhОЁAОЁBV ОЁT BОЁT A пҝҪ Fh T ОЁT AОЁT B + ОЁBОЁA пҝҪ ShпҝҪ Sh T ОЁT AОЁT B. which is satisfied if Ој = Ојh and V = Vh with Ојh = 0 and Vh as specified in the proposition. Since for sufficiently small h > 0 the discretized dynamics are ergodic (see subsection 3.1), this solution is also the unique solution of equation (3.9). Remark 3.4. With the same techniques as in the proof of Theorem 3.3, one may show that for the same quadratic potential function, the invariant measure of the Markov chain generated by gle-ABOBA is identical to the invariant measure of gle- BAOAB, and that the unique invariant measure of the Markov chains generated by gle-OBABO and gle-OABAO is the Gaussian measure N(x; Ојh, Vh)dx with Ојh = 0, and Vh = ОІвҲ’1 diag пҝҪпҝҪ 1 вҲ’ h2/4 пҝҪ О©вҲ’1, M, Q пҝҪ . 14 B. LEIMKUHLER, M. SACHS 3.2.2. Superconvergence of gle-BAOAB in the overdamped limit. The gle-BAOAB scheme possesses a superconvergence property in the discrete time version of the overdamped limit (see subsection 4.2). That is, for observables ПҶ вҲҲ L2(ПҖ) which are purely functions of the position variable q, the incurred discretization bias of the corresponding ergodic average when computed using the gle-BAOAB scheme applied to rescaled process (QGLE-scaled) with О» = 1 and Ој1 = Ој2 = ОөвҲ’1 behaves as (3.11) пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ О©x ПҶ(q)ПҖh(dx) вҲ’ EПҖПҶ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ = O(З«h2) + O(h4), as Оө вҶ’ 0 and h вҶ’ 0. For sufficiently small values of Оө, the magnitude of the leading order term of the discretization bias decreases linearly in Оө. In particular, in the limit Оө = 0, the leading error term O(З«h2) in (3.11) vanishes. This results in the discretization bias to decrease at fourth order in h (instead of second order as one would expect by construction) вҖ“ a property which we refer to as вҖңsuperconvergenceвҖқ. We formally show this result for a particle of unit mass in a one dimensional positional domain and memory kernel corresponding to a matrix of the О“ of the generic form О“ = пҝҪО“1,1 О“1,2 О“2,1 О“2,2 пҝҪ вҲҲ R2. which is assumed to satisfy Assumption 1. Our derivation can be extended to more general forms of (QGLE), but we refrain from doing so in order to keep notation simple. As a starting point of the derivation we consider again a Taylor expansion of the evolution operator (3.12) ЛҶPgle-BAOAB h = Id + hA1 + h3A3ПҶ(x) + O(h5), where A1 = LGLE and A3 as defined in (2.5) with X = B, Y = A, Z = O. By [29, Theorem 3.3] and under suitable regularity conditions on the generator LGLE and on the operators Ak, k вүҘ 1 (see Remark 3.5), there exists hвҲ— > 0 so that the expectation of test functions ПҶ вҲҲ L2(ПҖ) with respect to the perturbed invariant measure ПҖh can be expanded as (3.13) пҝҪ О©x ПҶ(x)ПҖh(dx) = EПҖПҶ + h2 пҝҪ О©x ПҶ(x)f3(x)ПҖ(dx) + h4RПҶ,h with |RПҶ,h| uniformly bounded for h вҲҲ (0, hвҲ—]. The correction term f3 is obtained as the solution of (3.14) LвҲ— GLEf3 = AвҲ— 31, where the explicit form of the right hand side can be computed as AвҲ— 31 = вҲ’1 4ОІ пҝҪ p2О“1,1 + p sО“2,1 вҲ’ ОІвҲ’1О“1,1 пҝҪ U вҖІвҖІ(q) вҲ’ 1 12ОІp3U (3)(q) + 1 4ОІpU вҖІ(q)U вҖІвҖІ(q). Here, and below, we denote L2(ПҖ)-adjoint of an operator A by AвҲ— so that вҹЁAg, fвҹ©L2(ПҖ) = вҹЁg, AвҲ—fвҹ©L2(ПҖ) for all g, f вҲҲ L2(ПҖ), where вҹЁf, gвҹ©L2(ПҖ) := пҝҪ fg dПҖ. By virtue of the Fredholm alternative equation (3.14) possesses a solution iff вҹЁg, AвҲ— 31вҹ©L2(ПҖ) = 0 for all functions g contained in the null space of LGLE. Since the SDE associated with EFFICIENT NUMERICAL ALGORITHMS FOR THE GLE 15 the generator LGLE is by assumption ergodic, the null space of LGLE only contains constant functions for which вҹЁg, AвҲ— 31вҹ©L2(ПҖ) вҲқ вҹЁ1, AвҲ— 31вҹ©L2(ПҖ) = 0 is indeed true. Finding a closed form solution of the PDE (3.14) is still intractable for general potentials. Instead, we employ a singular perturbation approach. Under the scaling О» = 1, Ој1 = Ој2 = ОөвҲ’1 the generator decomposes as LGLE = ОөвҲ’1LO + LH and we can expand the solution f3 in Оө as f3 = f3,0 + Оөf3,1 + Оө2f3,2 + O(Оө3). By plugging this into (3.14) we get (3.15) пҝҪ1 ОөLвҲ— O + LвҲ— H пҝҪ пҝҪ f3,0 + Оөf3,1 + Оө2f3,2 + O(Оө3) пҝҪ = AвҲ— 31 from which we obtain the following collection of PDEs by equating powers of Оө LвҲ— Of3,0 = 1 4ОІp2О“1,1U вҖІвҖІ(q) вҲ’ 1 4О“1,1U вҖІвҖІ(q) + 1 4ОІsT О“2,1pU вҖІвҖІ(q), (3.16) LвҲ— Hf3,0 + LвҲ— Of3,1 = 1 12ОІp3U (3)(q) вҲ’ 1 4ОІpU вҖІ(q)U вҖІвҖІ(q), (3.17) LвҲ— Hf3,1 + LвҲ— Of3,2 = 0, (3.18) LвҲ— Hf3,i + LвҲ— Of3,i+1 = 0, i вүҘ 2. (3.19) Solving this system iteratively, we find (see Appendix D for details): f3,0(q, p, s) = вҲ’1 8ОІp2U вҖІвҖІ(q) + 1 8U вҖІвҖІ(q), which can be verified to satisfy пҝҪ О©x ПҶ(q)f3,0(x)ПҖ(dx) = 0, for any observable ПҶ вҲҲ CвҲһ P (О©x, R) which is purely a function of q. Thus, for such ПҶ, (3.13) can be written as пҝҪ О©x ПҶ(q)ПҖh(x)dx =EПҖПҶ + З«h2 пҝҪ О©x as Оө вҶ’ 0 and h вҶ’ 0, which is the desired statement. Remark 3.5. The formal error analysis can be made rigorous by showing that the remainder terms in expansions (3.13) and (3.15) are uniformly bounded for sufficient small h, and Оө, respectively. For the expansion (3.13) it would be sufficient to show that the conditions of [29, Theorem 3.3] are indeed satisfied. In particular, this would entail showing that the function set CвҲһ P,0(О©x, R) := пҝҪ ПҶ вҲҲ CвҲһ P (О©x, R) : пҝҪ ПҶ dПҖ = 0 пҝҪ , is invariant under application of the operators LвҲ’1 GLE and (LвҲ— GLE)вҲ’1, as well as that CвҲһ P (О©x, R) is invariant under application of the operators Ak, k вҲҲ N. Analogous esti- mates have been shown in for the generators of the overdamped Langevin equation, the underdamped Langevin equation, and Langevin equations with general- ized kinetic energies, respectively. Moreover, in order to make the expansion of (3.15) rigorous one would need to show вҖ“as in вҖ“ a uniform Hypocoercivity property of the form: there is a K > 0 such that вҲҘ(ОөвҲ’1LO + LH)вҲ’1ПҶвҲҘH1(ПҖ) вүӨ KвҲҘПҶвҲҘH1(ПҖ) for any Оө > 0 and all test functions ПҶ contained in the weighted Sobolev space H1(ПҖ) and which are such that for almost all q the mean with respect to the marginal measure ПҖ(dp ds) vanishes. 4. White noise and overdamped limit of the gle-BAOAB method. In this section we analyze the behavior of the gle-BAOAB splitting method in the over- damped and white noise limit discussed in subsection 1.5. For this purpose con- sider the stochastic flow-map of the gle-BAOAB method when applied to the rescaled 16 B. LEIMKUHLER, M. SACHS process (QGLE-scaled), (4.1) ЛҶОҰgle-BAOAB h,Ој = ОҰB h/2 в—Ұ ОҰA h/2 в—Ұ ОҰO h,Ој в—Ұ ОҰA h/2 в—Ұ ОҰB h/2, where (4.2) ОҰO h,Ој : (q, p, s) пҝҪвҶ’ (q, F Ој h (p, s)T + SОј hR), R вҲј N(0, In+m), with F Ој h := exp(вҲ’hО“Ој), (SОј h)T SОј h = пҝҪ In 0 0 Q пҝҪ вҲ’ F Ој h пҝҪ In 0 0 Q пҝҪ F ОјT h , and О“Ој as defined in (1.11). In both limits gle-BAOAB converge to state-of-the-art numerical integration schemes for the corresponding limiting dynamics which have been shown exhibit particularly low discretization bias (see ). 4.1. White noise limit. The gle-BAOAB integration scheme, when applied to the rescaled process (QGLE-scaled) with О» = 1, Ој1 = З«вҲ’1, Ој2 = З«вҲ’2, reduces to the ld-BAOAB discretization of an underdamped Langevin equation in the white noise limit З« вҶ’ 0. More precisely, we have the following result: Theorem 4.1 (White noise limit of gle-BAOAB). Let (qk, pk, sk)kвҲҲN be the Markov chain obtained by with the gle-BAOAB method ЛҶОҰgle-BOAOB h,(З«вҲ’1,З«вҲ’2). Let (ЛҶqk, ЛҶpk)kвҲҲN denote the Markov chain generated by the ld-BAOAB method of (see also Algo- rithm B.1) when applied to (LD) with friction tensor пҝҪО“ = D2 aDвҲ’1 b , diffusion tensor пҝҪОЈ = вҲҡ 2DaDвҲ’1/2 b and stepsize h. Then, for all N вҲҲ N, we have (qk, pk)0вүӨkвүӨN law вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҶ’ ОөвҶ’0 (ЛҶqk, ЛҶpk)0вүӨkвүӨN. Proof. Since (ЛҶqk, ЛҶpk)kвҲҲN is a Markov processes, it is sufficient to show that the transition probabilities converge appropriately, i.e., О  пҝҪ ЛҶОҰgle-BAOAB h,(ОөвҲ’1,ОөвҲ’2)(q, p, s) пҝҪ law вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҶ’ ОөвҶ’0 ЛҶОҰld-BAOAB h (q, p), for all (q, p, s) вҲҲ О©x, where ЛҶОҰld-BAOAB h,Ој denotes the stochastic flow map of the ld- BAOAB splitting scheme, and О  : (q, p, s) пҝҪвҶ’ (q, p) denotes the projection operator on the position and momentum component. The two methods only differ in terms of their respective O-steps. It is therefore sufficient to show that in the limit Оө вҶ’ 0, these become identical in distribution, which is exactly the case if lim З«вҶ’0 exp пҝҪ вҲ’hО“(З«вҲ’1,З«вҲ’2)пҝҪ = пҝҪ exp(вҲ’hD2 aDвҲ’1 b ) 0 0 0 пҝҪ . where О“(З«вҲ’1,З«вҲ’2) = пҝҪ 0 вҲ’З«вҲ’1Da З«вҲ’1Da З«вҲ’2Db пҝҪ . We show this by applying a suitable similarity transformation: without loss of gener- ality let h = 1, and consider the orthogonal matrix, O = ЛҶI(2n) 2nвҲ’1,2nЛҶI(2n) 2nвҲ’3,2nвҲ’1 . . . ЛҶI(2n) 5,n+3ЛҶI(2n) 3,n+2ЛҶI(2n) 1,n+1, EFFICIENT NUMERICAL ALGORITHMS FOR THE GLE 17 where ЛҶI(2n) i,j denotes the elementary matrix whose action when multiplied from the left to a matrix A вҲҲ R2nГ—2n corresponds to a swap of i-th and j-th rows of A, so that О“(З«вҲ’1,З«вҲ’2) = OT diag (AЗ« 1, AЗ« 2, . . . , AЗ« n) O, with AЗ« i = пҝҪ 0 вҲ’З«вҲ’1ai З«вҲ’1ai З«вҲ’2bi пҝҪ , 1 вүӨ i вүӨ n. By Lemma C.1 we have limЗ«вҶ’0 AЗ« i = Bi with Bi = пҝҪ eвҲ’a2 i /bi 0 0 0 пҝҪ . Thus, lim З«вҶ’0 exp(вҲ’О“(З«вҲ’1,З«вҲ’2)) = lim З«вҶ’0 OT diag (exp(вҲ’AЗ« 1), . . . , exp(вҲ’AЗ« n)) O = OT diag пҝҪ lim З«вҶ’0 exp(вҲ’AЗ« 1), . . . , lim З«вҶ’0 exp(вҲ’AЗ« n) пҝҪ O = OT diag (B1, . . . , Bn) O = пҝҪ exp(вҲ’hD2 aDвҲ’1 b ) 0 0 0 пҝҪ . 4.2. Overdamped limit. When applied to the rescaled process (QGLE-scaled) with О» = 1, Ој2 = З«вҲ’1, Ој3 = З«вҲ’1 the gle-BAOAB method reduces to the BAOAB-limit method (вҖңLeimkuhler-Matthews methodвҖқ) of in the asymptotic limit З« вҶ’ 0 as shown in the following: Theorem 4.2. Let (qk, pk, sk)kвҲҲN be the Markov chain obtained by with the gle- BAOAB method ЛҶОҰgle-BOAOB h,(З«вҲ’1,З«вҲ’1) with p0 вҲј N(0, In). Let (пҝҪqk)kвҲҲN denote the Markov chain generated by the BAOAB-limit method, (4.3) пҝҪqk+1 вҶҗ пҝҪqk вҲ’ МғhОӣвҲҮU(qk) + пҝҪ 2 МғhОӣ1 2( пҝҪ Rk + пҝҪ Rk+1), with пҝҪq0 and q0 being identically distributed, пҝҪ Rk вҲј N(0, In), k вҲҲ N independent, and stepsize Мғh = h2/2, and Оӣ = In. Then, for all N вҲҲ N, we have (qk)0вүӨkвүӨN law вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҶ’ ОөвҶ’0 (ЛҶqk)0вүӨkвүӨN. Proof. For Ој = (Оө, ОөвҲ’1), we have О“Ој = ОөвҲ’1 пҝҪ 0 вҲ’Da Da Db пҝҪ , thus, Fh = exp пҝҪ вҲ’h З« пҝҪ 0 вҲ’Da Da Db пҝҪпҝҪ вҶ’ 0 as З« вҶ’ 0, and therefore also Sh вҶ’ ОІвҲ’1/2In+m, as З« вҶ’ 0. Thus, lim З«вҶ’0 ОҰO which removes any coupling between the auxiliary variable s and (q, p). Consequently, in the limit of Оө вҶ’ 0 we can disregard the s-component in the corresponding updating sequence of the positions and momenta. Moreover, since the momentum variables are independently resampled at every iteration, we can eliminate the momentum component from the updating sequence to obtain (4.3) with Оӣ = In, Мғh = h2/2, RвҲ’1 = p0. 5. Numerical experiments. In this section we assess the performance of the splitting methods which we introduced in Section 2 in numerical experiments. 18 B. LEIMKUHLER, M. SACHS 5.1. Comparison of proposed splitting schemes. We first compare the per- formance of the methods discussed in this article against each other. For this purpose we consider a simple QGLE on a one-dimensional positional domain with potential function (5.1) UDW (q) = 1 2q2 + sin(1/4 + 2q), which is an uneven double-well. We evaluate the performance in terms of the incurred stepsize-dependent discretization bias for observables which are purely functions of the position variable. For the parameterization of the noise process in the GLE we consider the memory kernels K(t) = 2rK(t2r), K(t) := 5 2 exp(вҲ’t/4) + 1 2 exp(вҲ’t/8), (5.2) where we let r take values in {0, 1, 2}. The r-dependent parameterization of the memory kernels is chosen such that in the limit of r вҶ’ вҲһ, the corresponding GLE approaches an underdamped Langevin equation. We consider as an error measure EMAE((qk)1вүӨkвүӨN) = nвҲ’1 B nB пҝҪ i=1 пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ 1 N NвҲ’1 пҝҪ k=0 1Bi(qk) вҲ’ пҝҪ О©x 1Bi(q)ПҖ(dx) пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ, where the equal sized bins Bi вҠӮ R, i = 1, . . . , nB are chosen such that they form a partition of an interval [a, b] вҠӮ R, which contains 99.99% of the probability mass of the Gibbs measure associated with R. The quantity EMAE((qk)1вүӨkвүӨN) may be considered as the mean approximate error (MAE) of the discretization bias incurred for the observables ПҶBi : q пҝҪвҶ’ 1Bi(q), i = 1, . . . , nB, or, as an estimate of the total variation distance between the perturbed invariant measure ПҖh and the exact target measure ПҖ. In total, 100 trajectories, all initialized in accordance with the exact equilibrium distribution ПҖ, were simulated over a physical time period of length T = hN = 107 to obtain the statistics. ods displayed are by construction second order. Differences in performance are thus measured in terms of the magnitude of the corresponding pre-factors of the leading error term. We find that the discretization error incurred in gle-OBABO and gle- OABAO is comparable and is not noticeably affected by the parameterization of the memory kernel. In comparison to that, the discretization error of gle-BAOAB and gle-ABOBA is smaller, and the accuracy of gle-BAOAB improves significantly with increasing value of r in the parameterization of the memory kernel. 5.2. Comparison with previously proposed GLE schemes. We next com- pare the performance of gle-BAOAB with methods previously proposed in the lit- erature using the same setup as in subsection 5.1. We compare the gle-BAOAB method with the methods proposed in (BB-BAOB, BB-BACOCAB), (KLS- OBOAB), and (gle-OBABO). These methods are all constructed as weak second- order schemes. For moderate variance and slowly decaying autocorrelation of the noise-process (that is r = 0, 1) we observe that the error incurred by the methods BB-BACOCAB and KLS-OBABO is very similar to the error of the gle-BAOAB method (Figure EFFICIENT NUMERICAL ALGORITHMS FOR THE GLE 19 1 Stepsize 10-3 10-2 10-1 100 Error a) 1 Stepsize 10-3 10-2 10-1 100 Error b) 1 Stepsize 10-3 10-2 10-1 100 Error c) gle-BAOAB gle-ABOBA gle-OBABO gle-OABAO gle-ASA gle-SAS Fig. 2. Log-Log plot of the MAE of numerical integrators proposed in this article. Results for the GLE with potential function (5.1) and memory kernel (5.2) with r = 0, 1, 2, are shown in panel a), b) and c), respectively. Any missing error value indicates numerical instability of the respective method for the corresponding stepsize. The dashed black line corresponds to a second order decay. Details on the integrators gle-ASA and gle-SAS can be found in Appendix E.3. 3, a,b). For all choices of the memory kernel, the error in gle-OBABO and BB- BAOB is at least by a factor of 10 higher than the error of gle-BAOAB, and this factor increases further with increasing value of r. Similarly, with an increasing value of r, the accuracy of the KLS-OBABO method decreases and comparison of gle- BAOAB, and the maximum admissible stepsize of BB-BAOB and BB-BACOCAB decreases significantly, while the maximum admissible step size for schemes discussed in Section 2 is not affected. The high accuracy of BB-BACOCAB is not surprising as the authors in specifically design this method for the sampling of accurate configurational averages. Interestingly, the KLS-OBABO method exhibits comparable accuracy even though the construction of this numerical scheme is not based on a systematic analysis of the discretization error in configurational averages. Finally, it is important to note that the scope of the memory kernels to which the methods proposed in are applicable is very limited in comparison to the class of memory kernels which can be simulated using gle-BAOAB and gle-OBABO. 1 Stepsize 10-3 10-2 10-1 100 Error a) 1 Stepsize 10-3 10-2 10-1 100 Error b) 1 Stepsize 10-3 10-2 10-1 100 Error c) gle-BAOAB gle-OBABO BB-BAOB BB-BACOCAB KLS-OBABO Fig. 3. Different integrators but otherwise same setup as in Figure 2. 5.3. Parameter-dependent accuracy of gle-BAOAB. In order to support the results derived by the singular perturbation ansatz in subsection 3.2.2, we eval- uate the sampling accuracy of gle-BAOAB when applied to a GLE with a simple 20 B. LEIMKUHLER, M. SACHS exponentially decaying memory kernel, i.e., (5.3) K(t) = ОіeвҲ’t/П„, Оі > 0, П„ > 0, and the potential function (5.1). As predicted we find that the discretization bias decreases as the overdamped limit is approached (See Figure 4 b). Moreover, for parameter values О» = 128, П„ = 1/16, we find the predicted 4th order decay of the discretization bias as h tends to 0. For the chosen range of parameter values we further observe (i) a decrease of the MAE in the white noise limit (Figure 4 a).), (ii) a decrease of the MAE for fixed decay rate П„ = 1 as the pre-factor Оі increases (Figure 4 d).), (iii) no systematic change of the magnitude of the MAE for fixed pre-factor Оі = 4 and varying decay rate П„ (Figure 4 c).). 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 Stepsize 10-3 10-2 10-1 100 Error a) Оі = 2, П„ = 2 Оі = 4, П„ = 1 Оі = 8, П„ = 1/2 Оі = 16, П„ = 1/4 Оі = 32, П„ = 1/8 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 Stepsize 10-3 10-2 10-1 100 Error b) Оі = 1/2, П„ = 1 Оі = 2, П„ = 1/2 Оі = 8, П„ = 1/4 Оі = 32, П„ = 1/8 Оі = 128, П„ = 1/16 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 Stepsize 10-3 10-2 10-1 100 Error c) Оі = 4, П„ = 4 Оі = 4, П„ = 2 Оі = 4, П„ = 1 Оі = 4, П„ = 1/2 Оі = 4, П„ = 1/4 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 Stepsize 10-3 10-2 10-1 100 Error d) Оі = 1, П„ = 1 Оі = 2, П„ = 1 Оі = 4, П„ = 1 Оі = 8, П„ = 1 Оі = 16, П„ = 1 4th Order Line 2nd Order Line 2nd Order Line 2nd Order Line 2nd Order Line Fig. 4. Log-Log plot of stepsize vs. MAE of gle-BAOAB applied to the GLE with potential function (5.1) and memory kernel K(t) = ОіeвҲ’t/П„ . Black circles show the observed MAE of the respective limiting dynamics. 5.4. Application to Bayesian posterior sampling. In this section we con- sider Bayesian Gaussian mixture model as a simple application of the discussed sampling methods and we use this application to demonstrate how the gle-BAOAB method when used in combination with the GLE-dynamics developed in results in a sampling scheme which has drastically improved sampling properties in compar- ison to BAOAB discretizations of the underdamped Langevin equation as well as in comparison to the sampling scheme proposed in the above mentioned reference, which in the language used in this article corresponds to the gle-OBABO method. As a benchmark system we consider a Bayesian Gaussian mixture model applied to the Hidalgo stamp dataset , which consists of the measurements {xi}N i=1 вҠӮ R of EFFICIENT NUMERICAL ALGORITHMS FOR THE GLE 21 the thickness of N = 482 postage stamps from the 1872 Hidalgo issue of post stamps. We parametrize the model similarly to as described in ; (See also and ). That is, we choose the number of components as Nc = 3 and assume isotropic Gauss- ian components resulting in a parameter vector q = ((wk)1вүӨkвүӨ3, (Ојk, О»k)1вүӨkвүӨ3 , ОІ) вҲҲ вҲҶ3 Г— R6 Г— R, where вҲҶ3 denotes the standard simplex in R3, and wk is the weight parameter, and Ојk, О»k the mean and precision of the kth Gaussian component, respec- tively, and ОІ вҲҲ R denotes an additional hyper-parameter of the prior distribution. The resulting target distribution is then given as the Gibbs measure of the corresponding negative log-posterior function (5.4) U(q) = вҲ’ N пҝҪ i=1 log p (xi | q) вҲ’ log pprior(q), where the exact form of the likelihood function p(xi | q) and the prior pprior(q) are both specified in Appendix E.1. We parametrize both the gle-BAOAB scheme and the gle-OBABO scheme with the pre-optimized memory kernel kv-8-8 obtained from the website GLE4MD (see also Appendix E.2). We compare the performance of the sampling schemes (i) in terms of the observed discretization bias which we measure by the relative error incurred for the variable specific configurational temperatures ПҶCT,i(q) = qiвҲӮqiU(q), i = 1, . . . , 9. (ii) in terms of mixing which we measure by estimates of the integrated autocor- relation times П„i = пҝҪ вҲһ 0 i = 1, . . . , 9, where q(0) вҲј ПҖ, and E[В·] is the expectation with respect to q(0) and the Wiener process W in (QGLE). For ld-BAOAB we considered the commonly used parameterization with a single scalar friction coefficient, i.e., пҝҪО“ = ОіIn. The simulation run corresponding to the parameter values Оі = 1.0, h = .01 was obtained as the result of minimizing the integrated autocorrelation time for the slowest parameters by varying the stepsize after fixing the friction coefficient to Оі = 1.0. The simulation run corresponding to the parameter values Оі = .1 with h = .01 was obtained as the result of minimizing the integrated autocorrelation time for the вҖңslowest parameterвҖқ (i.e., the parameter with the largest associated integrated autocorrelation time) by simultaneously optimizing both the stepsize as well as the friction coefficient Оі. The results reported for gle-BAOAB and gle-OBABO use a stepsize h = .02, which was determined approximately as the maximum admissible stepsize with a few (short!) test runs. We find that in terms of sampling efficiency which we measured in terms of the integrated autocorrelation time of the вҖңslowestвҖқ sampled parameter О»1, the GLE schemes clearly outperform these as sample obtained from gle-BAOAB is significantly smaller than the discretization error in the sample obtained with gle-OBABO. The improvement in terms of the maximum admissible stable stepsize of the GLE methods in comparison to the Langevin schemes is an interesting feature. Presumably, this is due to resonance effects which occur in the discretized dynamics of the underdamped Langevin due to an insufficient damping of fast frequency modes for the tuned value of the friction coefficient. 22 B. LEIMKUHLER, M. SACHS z1 z2 Ој1 Ој2 Ој3 О»1 О»2 О»3 ОІ -0.5 0 0.25 0.5 Rel Error z1 z2 Ој1 Ој2 Ој3 О»1 О»2 О»3 ОІ Parameter 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 IAC LD-BAOAB, Оі = .1 LD-BAOAB, Оі = 1 GLE-BAOAB kv 8-8 GLE-OBABO kv 8-8 z1 z2 Ој1 Ој2 Ој3 О»1 О»2 О»3 ОІ -0.5 0 0.25 0.5 Rel Error z1 z2 Ој1 Ој2 Ој3 О»1 О»2 О»3 ОІ Parameter -0.5 0 0.25 0.5 Rel Error z1 z2 Ој1 Ој2 Ој3 О»1 О»2 О»3 ОІ Parameter -0.5 0 0.25 0.5 Rel Error Fig. 5. Sampling statistics for the numerical experiments performed on the Hidalgo stamp dataset. The rightmost plot shows the integrated auto-correlation time (labeled as IAC) for each sampled parameter of the Gaussian mixture model. The remaining four plots on the left shows the discretization bias incurred for the variable specific configurational temperature. Acknowledgments. Both authors thank Gabriel Stoltz for helpful discussions. The research of B. Leimkuhler and M. Sachs was supported by the ERC project RULE (grant number 320823). Prof. Leimkuhler was further supported by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council under grant EPSRC EP/P006175/1 вҖқData- Driven Coarse-Graining using Space-Time Diffusion MapsвҖқ. The work of M. Sachs was supported by the Statistical and Applied Mathematical Sciences Institute (grant DMS-1638521) and Duke University.