Ultralow-threshold thin-film lithium niobate optical parametric oscillator Juanjuan Lu,1 Ayed Al Sayem,1 Zheng Gong,1 Joshua B. Surya,1 Chang-Ling Zou,2 and Hong X. Tang1, ∗ 1Department of Electrical Engineering, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06511, USA 2Department of Optics, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, P. R. China. (Dated: January 14, 2021) Materials with strong χ(2) optical nonlinearity, especially lithium niobate, play a critical role in building optical parametric oscillators (OPOs). However, chip-scale integration of low-loss χ(2) materials remains challenging and limits the threshold power of on-chip χ(2) OPO. Here we report the first on-chip lithium niobate optical parametric oscillator at the telecom wavelengths using a quasi-phase matched, high-quality microring resonator, whose threshold power (∼30 μW) is 400 times lower than that in previous χ(2) integrated photonics platforms. An on-chip power conversion efficiency of 11% is obtained at a pump power of 93 μW. The OPO wavelength tuning is achieved by varying the pump frequency and chip temperature. With the lowest power threshold among all on-chip OPOs demonstrated so far, as well as advantages including high conversion efficiency, flexi- bility in quasi-phase matching and device scalability, the thin-film lithium niobate OPO opens new opportunities for chip-based tunable classical and quantum light sources and provides an potential platform for realizing photonic neural networks. Optical parametric oscillators (OPOs) are critical sources of coherent radiation over a wide spectral range and have been workhorses for spectroscopy in the near- and mid-infrared regime [1–3]. They are also widely used as non-classic light sources for applications in quantum information processing, including quantum random num- ber generation, quantum key distribution, and recently demonstrated Ising machines [4–7]. Microcavity-based OPO has been particularly attractive due to its minia- turization and power-efficiency. With ultra-high optical quality (Q) factor of 107–108 afforded by the whispering gallery resonator (WGR) system, low-threshold OPOs have been achieved in various bulk WGRs [8–14], espe- cially the highly polished lithium niobate (LN) WGRs with χ(2) nonlinearity. Over the past decade, the demand for scalability in photonic components has stimulated efforts to produce on-chip OPOs via either χ(2) or χ(3) nonlinearity [15– 20]. Among these, χ(2) OPO has only been demon- strated with an aluminum nitride (AlN) microring res- onator while its threshold power is tens of milliwatts , which is orders of magnitude larger than state-of-the-art value of lithium niobate WGR. Hence, low threshold and scalable χ(2) OPO remains challenging. Recently, thin film LN has emerged as a compelling integrated nonlin- ear and quantum photonics platform, whose favorable performances including but not limited to electro-optic modulation [21–23], frequency comb generation [24–26], frequency conversion [27–30], and entangled photon pair generation , have by now been well demonstrated. In this Letter, we present an ultralow-threshold, chip- integrated OPO using a periodically poled lithium nio- bate microring resonator (PPLNMR). With high opti- cal confinement and strong spatial mode overlap via the quasi-phase matching, a threshold power as low as 30 μW ∗ hong.tang@yale.edu is demonstrated for the parametric oscillation at the in- frared band, which is a state-of-the-art value reported among all current integrated photonics platforms. Mean- while, an absolute power conversion efficiency of 11% is obtained at a pump power of 93 μW. A tuning band- width of 180 nm (23 THz) could be addressed through a small change of 5 nm (2.5 THz) in pump wavelength (fre- quency). Alternatively, the temperature tuning is inves- tigated to fine control the signal and idler wavelengths and a degenerate OPO is achieved at an optimal tem- perature. Overall, low-threshold, wide-tunability, as well as flexibility in phase-matching by domain poling make thin-film LN OPO the ideal candidate for compact, versa- tile light sources for various on-chip optical applications, such as sensing, frequency comb spectroscopy, and quan- tum squeezers. bate microring OPO device, in which χ(2)-based para- metric down-conversion process allows the generation of the infrared signal and idler lights with a near-visible pump. ωp/ωs/ωi represent the pump/signal/idler mode frequencies with their energy conservation (ωp = ωs+ωi) shown in the inset. When the phase-matching and triply- resonant conditions are satisfied for these three optical modes, the parametric process would be enhanced by the high-Q resonator. The theoretical pump power threshold Pth for parametric oscillation could be obtained when the optical loss and parametric gain are balanced : Pth = ħωp 8g2 κsκiκ2 p κp,1 = ħωsωiω2 p 64g2 Qp,1 QsQiQ2p , (1) where g is the vacuum coupling strength between the three interacting modes, Q(κ)s/i/p is their respective loaded Q factor (total dissipation rate), and Q(κ)p,1 is the coupling Q factor (external dissipation rate) of the pump mode. Therefore, a large g and high Q factors are always demanding to reduce the OPO threshold power. In the microring resonator, the coupling rate g is de- arXiv:2101.04735v1 [physics.optics] 12 Jan 2021 2 χ(2) OPO (a) (b) (c) (d) Qs = 290 k Qs,0 = 360 k Qs,1 = 1.5 M Qi = 220 k Qi,0 = 390 k Qi,1 = 510 k 1.9 μm SiO2 610 nm LN 180 nm +z 60° 1.8 μm ωp ωs ωi ωp ωs ωi Qp = 370 k Qp,0 = 590 k Qp,1 = 1 M 0 100 μm Design and fabrication of a quasi-phase-matched optical parametric oscillator. (a) Illustration of the parametric oscillation using a χ(2) PPLNMR. Signal and idler lights are generated by a near-visible pump. ωp, ωs and ωi represent frequencies for pump, signal and idler light, respectively. (b) Cross-sectional view of the microring indicating the key geometric parameters. (c) Optical image of the fabricated PPLNMR devices. (d) Schematics of the mode frequencies and their respective transmission spectrum with the extracted Q values shown in the inset. The subscripts 0, 1 represent the intrinsic and coupling Q factors, respectively. pendent on the material χ(2) coefficient and modal over- lap factor γ through the relation: g ∝ χ(2)γ . Here, to optimize g, we utilize the largest χ(2) tensor element d33 of z-cut LN thin film, and also improve the mode overlap factor γ close to unity by employing fundamen- tal transverse-magnetic modes. In contrast to previ- ous study of on-chip OPO in AlN platform , where high-order mode is leveraged to compensate the disper- sion at the visible wavelength, we realize the quasi-phase matching (momentum conservation) between fundamen- tal modes via the radial periodic-poling of the LN micror- ing. Accordingly, for a microring whose key geometric parameters are indicated in Fig. 1(b), an azimuthal grat- ing number M = 146 (poling period Λ=2πR/M=3 μm) is designed to compensate for the momentum mismatch ∆m = |ms + mi − mp| for the parametric oscillation at 1550 nm with a pump at 775 nm. The phase-matching of the device was verified through the reversal process of degenerate OPO, i.e. second-harmonic generation (SHG), as elaborated in our previous work . Fig- ure 1(c) is an optical image of the fabricated PPLNMR device (See Methods for fabrication details). The cavity transmission spectra of the signal, idler, and pump modes for the subsequent OPO are plotted in Fig. 1(d), where Lorentzian fittings are applied to extract loaded Q factors of 2.9 × 105, 2.2 × 105, and 3.7 × 105, respectively. Their intrinsic Q factors are calculated to be 3.6×105, 3.9×105, and 5.9×105 at under-coupled conditions, which are con- firmed by measuring the dependence of loaded quality factor on the coupling gap in an array of fabricated de- vices. When pumping the device by a near-visible tunable laser (New Focus TLB-6712, 766–781 nm), the paramet- ric oscillation at the infrared wavelengths could be ob- served if the pump power exceeds the threshold. In practice, due to the resonance frequency mismatch (δ = ωp − ωs − ωi) induced during the fabrication process, the OPO threshold rises to Pth · (1 + δ2/κiκs). By control- ling the chip temperature to adjust δ and varying the pump power, the parametric oscillation with the lowest threshold is observed when the device is pumped at the resonance near 774.1 nm at an optimal temperature of 125◦C, as indicated in Fig. 2(a). The measured on-chip OPO power (blue circles) is plotted against the on-chip pump power, where a threshold power Pth of ∼30 μW is identified and corresponds to an intra-cavity pump photon number of ∼5.4×104. The parametric oscilla- tion spectrum at a pump power of 120 μW is captured using an optical spectrum analyzer (Yokogawa AQ6374, 350–1750 nm), where distinct signal and idler waves are resolved at 1529.7 and 1568.4 nm respectively, as shown in the inset. Substituting the measured threshold, and Q factors [Fig. 1(d)] in Eq. (1), we extract a g/2π of 1.2 MHz, con- sistent with the value obtained via the independent SHG measurement . Theoretically, the power of the signal 3 Pth=30 μW (a) (b) OPO wavelength (nm) Pump wavelength (nm) 750 775 800 On-chip pump power (μW) On-chip pump power (μW) 30μm Power dependence of the PPLNMR-based OPO. (a) The experimental (blue circles) and theoretical (solid line) on-chip infrared power versus on-chip pump power for the parametric oscillation process. An example snapshot of off-chip pump (orange), and oscillation (blue) spectra after the device are shown in the inset. (b) On-chip conversion ef- ficiency of pump to both signal and idler fields versus pump power, where a theoretical fit (solid line) is applied. Inset: scanning electron micrograph of a PPLNMR mock-up etched in hydrofluoric acid. and idler OPO emission under the triply-resonant condi- tion could be derived as Ps+i = ( 2Qs Qs,1 + 2Qi Qi,1 ) Qp Qp,1 Pth( � Pp/Pth − 1). (2) The theoretical predictions (solid black lines) based on Eq. (2) are plotted in Figs. 2(a) and 2(b) and match well with the experimental data (blue circles). With an el- evated on-chip near-visible pump power of 93.0 μW, we record an off-chip infrared power of 1.5 μW, correspond- ing to an on-chip OPO power of 10.5 μW, which fur- ther translates to an absolute power conversion efficiency η, defined as η = Ps+i/Pp, of 11% [Fig. 2(b)]. Ac- cording to Eq. (2), the conversion efficiency reaches its maximum on condition that Pp = 4Pth, where ηmax = tion at the high-power regime is mainly attributed to the back-conversion of the signal and idler fields. Different coupling conditions could be adapted by varying the gap between the bus waveguide and microring for various ap- plications. For example, a ηmax of 0.25 is derived with the assumption that all three interacting modes are critical- coupled whilst strong over-coupling condition provides a ηmax approaching unity. In our case, the under-coupling condition provides an ultralow threshold of 30 μW though limits our current ηmax to 11%. We further demonstrate the feasibility of our ultralow- threshold OPO in wavelength tuning over a large spec- trum range, which promises flexible coherent optical sources for future on-chip applications. It is well-known that, in the microring resonators, the phase-matching condition could be satisfied simultaneously by many signal-idler mode pairs, with their wavelength difference increasing at intervals of 2 times of free spectral range (FSR) for a given pump mode and temperature. How- ever, due to the inherent dispersion, the frequency mis- match δ varies for different mode pairs, and only one pair of modes oscillates with the lowest threshold. Therefore, we investigate the tuning of signal and idler wavelengths by varying the resonator temperature as well as the pump mode number. As indicated by the solid color lines in the middle panel of Fig. 3, the theory predicts that the quasi-phase- matched signal and idler wavelengths could be continu- ously tuned as a function of the pump wavelength and the chip temperature (see Methods for simulation details). However, due to the constrain of resonance condition, we can only experimentally access discrete points on the lines, as marked by the blue dots. On one hand, for a given temperature, the spectral separation between the signal and idler increases with the decreasing pump wave- lengths. For example, by fixing the operation tempera- ture at 125◦C, the OPO wavelength could be tuned from 1450 to 1650 nm, with the pump wavelength change of only 5 nm. The detailed spectra are plotted on the right panel, whose signal and idler wavelengths (blue circles) are mapped to the left panel and show good agreement with the theoretical predication. On the other hand, for a given pump mode, the temperature tuning allows for the fine-control of the OPO wavelengths. As indicated on the left panel, for a fixed pump mode around ∼770.5 nm (red shaded region), the signal-idler separation is observed to narrow as the temperature increases and an degenerate OPO is experimentally demonstrated at an optimal tem- perature of 140◦C, which match well with the predic- tion. Hence, our OPO device has shown good poten- tial to realize the relatively precise control of oscillation wavelengths by combining pump wavelength and temper- ature tunings. Noting that the demonstrated wavelength tuning is broad but inherently discrete, continuous tun- ing (mode-hop free) is always demanding and remains to be investigated via several promising strategies: One ap- proach is the material refractive index change via either thermo-optic or electro-optic effect, which allows tens of GHz tuning range . Another is cascading multiple microrings with varying geometry parameters on each in- dividual bus waveguide , so that the tuning range of multiple resonators could possibly overlap and cover one single FSR. 4 138 ̊C Simulated Measured 140 ̊C 125 ̊C 136 ̊C lines) and measured (colored circles) OPO wavelengths as a function of pump wavelength at various temperatures. As an example, the right panel plots the recorded spectra with different pump wavelengths at 125◦C. The left panel indicates the occurrence of degenerate parametric oscillation by varying the temperature. Finally, we compare the performances of various integrated platforms, including both χ(3) and χ(2) mechanisms, for their respective state-of-the-art cavity- enhanced OPOs in terms of the material, refractive in- dex n0, nonlinear coefficients, device structure, oper- ating wavelengths, Q factor, and threshold power, as presented in Tab. I. Theoretically, Pth ∝ 1/Q2 for the χ(3) OPO . However, in the case of χ(2) process, Pth ∝ 1/Q3 [Eq. (1)]. Therefore, to reach the same threshold, χ(2) OPO has a less stringent requirement on its Q factor. Despite the fact that silicon photonics, in- cluding Si, Si3N4 and SiO2, have much higher Q factors due to their mature fabrication techniques, the demon- stration in this work, to the best of our knowledge, deliv- ers the lowest threshold power among all on-chip OPOs so far. Moreover, due to the three-wave mixing nature, χ(2) OPO offers broader spectral-separation between the pump and signal(idler) fields intrinsically, which promises for sufficient on-chip filtering. We note that piezoelectric III–V materials, such as Al(Ga)N, (Al)GaAs and GaP, feature both significant χ(2) and χ(3) nonlinear coeffi- cients, while relying on challenging waveguide geomet- rical engineering to achieve modal phase matching be- tween fundamental and high-order modes which limits their OPO performance as well as operation wavelengths. Overall, the periodically poled thin-film lithium niobate microresonator prove to be an efficient OPO with the lowest power threshold. In addition, due to its flexibility in ferroelectric domain control for quasi-phase matching and greatly enhanced light-matter interaction afforded by its high effective χ(2) nonlinearity and Q factor, our device on a integrated photonic chip opens new possibil- ities for various applications and alternative device de- signs could be envisioned based on target applications. Firstly, PPLNMR device promises chip-based tunable classical and quantum light sources. For example, the poling grating number M could be tailored to realize parametric oscillation at the mid-infrared wavelengths for the molecule spectroscopy . Over-coupling the degenerate signal modes could lead to efficient on-chip squeezers, which play a crucial role in continuous vari- able quantum information processing . Secondly, due to the multiple modes and nonlinear optical processes present in the same device, the OPO dynamics could be an indicator for novel physics of light-matter interactions in the microresonator . For example, inspired by the recent demonstration on AlN , ultra-efficient pockels soliton microcomb could be foreseen in the same device with the efforts of coordinating its Kerr, quadratic, and photorefractive effects . Lastly, by coupling several PPLNMRs, significant nonlinear interplay between the OPOs offers an platform for realizing the photonic neu- ral networks and Ising models, which find applications in artificial machine learning . In conclusion, we demonstrate χ(2) optical parametric oscillation in lithium niobate nanophotonics. Leveraging the high optical confinement, as well as optimized quasi- phase matching condition, an ultra-low power thresh- old (30 μW) of optical parametric oscillation is obtained and an on-chip conversion efficiency of 11 % is measured with an on-chip pump power of 93 μW. The tunability of the OPO wavelengths is also investigated via the pump- wavelength and temperature tuning, and the experimen- tal results indicate a wide tuning range. By further push- ing the Q factor to that of bulk LN WGRs, approaching 108, a pump threshold down to several picowatts could be attainable in PPLNMR devices, allowing the study of OPO at a few-photon level and is critical for the scala- 5 Materials n0 χ(3) (10−18m2/W) Structure Process λp − λs(nm) Q(×106) Pth(mW) Ref. LN 2.2 0.18 40 microring χ(2) 0.6 this work χ(3) 1.1 80 AlN 2.1 0.23 6 microring χ(2) 1.0 12 χ(3) 1.6 25 Si3N4 2 0.25 — microring χ(3) 37 0.33 2.5 0.90 AlGaAs 3.4 26 120 microring χ(3) 1.5 GaP 3.1 11 82 microring χ(3) 0.2 3.0 SiC 2.7 1 12 microring χ(3) 1.1 8.5 Si 3.5 10 — microring χ(3) 0.6 3.1 SiO2 1.4 — microtoroid χ(3) 100 microdisk 1100 0.95 bility of photonic quantum systems. In light of the most recent works on near-octave comb generation, efficient SHG, and bright photon pair generation, PPLNMR de- vices hold promise for the chip-based tunable coherent light sources as well as the monolithic realization of non- linear and quantum photonics. METHODS Nanofabrication. The devices are fabricated on a com- mercial LNOI wafer (supplied by NANOLN) with 610 nm thick Z-cut LN thin film on 1.8 μm silicon dioxide (SiO2) on a silicon substrate. The bus waveguide is ultimately tapered to a width of 4 μm at both facets to improve the fiber-to-chip coupling efficiency. The pattern is defined by a 100 kV electron beam lithography system (Raith EBPG 5000+) with a negative FOx-16 resist, which is then developed in 25% TMAH solution to ensure a high contrast. The exposed pattern is transferred onto the LN thin film using an optimized inductively couple plasma (ICP) reactive ion etching (RIE) process with Ar+ plasma. For the subsequent poling process, the ra- dial nickel electrodes are initially patterned on top of the LN microring via the lift-off process. The periodic domain inversion is then enabled by keeping the silicon substrate as the electrical ground while applying several 600 V, 250 ms pulses on the electrodes at an elevated temperature of 250 ◦C. After removing the nickel elec- trodes, the chip is cleaved to expose the waveguide facets for fiber-to-chip coupling. The insertion losses are cali- brated to be 8.4 and 11.1 dB/facet for the infrared and near-visible lights, respectively. Numerical simulation. The parametric signal and idler wavelengths as a function of the pump wavelength and temperature are numerically investigated using a commercial finite-difference-eigenmode solver (Lumerical MODE) based on the equations: 1 λp = 1 λs + 1 λi , (3) np(T) λp = ns(T) λs + ni(T) λi + M 2πR, (4) where λp/s/i and np/s/i denote the wavelengths and re- fractive indices for the pump, signal, and idler lights, re- spectively. In the simulation, we used the Sellmeier equa- tion for congruent LN in Ref. and its wavelength- dependent thermo-optic coefficient is also considered .