1 Non-volatile programmable silicon photonics using an ultralow loss Sb2Se3 phase change material Matthew Delaney1,2, Ioannis Zeimpekis1, Han Du1, Xingzhao Yan1, Mehdi Banakar1, David J. Thomson1, Daniel W. Hewak1, Otto L. Muskens2* Affiliations 1Zepler Institute, Faculty of Engineering and Physical Sciences, University of Southampton, SO17 1BJ, Southampton, UK. 2 Physics and Astronomy, Faculty of Engineering and Physical Sciences, University of Southampton, SO17 1BJ, Southampton, UK. *Correspondence to: O.Muskens@soton.ac.uk. Abstract Adaptable, reconfigurable and programmable are key functionalities for the next generation of silicon-based photonic processors, neural and quantum networks. Phase change technology offers proven non-volatile electronic programmability, however the materials used to date have shown prohibitively high optical losses which are incompatible with integrated photonic platforms. Here, we demonstrate the capability of the previously unexplored material Sb2Se3 for ultralow-loss programmable silicon photonics. The favorable combination of large refractive index contrast and ultralow losses seen in Sb2Se3 facilitates an unprecedented optical phase control exceeding 10π radians in a Mach-Zehnder interferometer. To demonstrate full control over the flow of light, we introduce nanophotonic digital patterning as a conceptually new approach at a footprint orders of magnitude smaller than state of the art interferometer meshes. Our approach enables a wealth of possibilities in high-density reconfiguration of optical functionalities on silicon chip. Main Text The birth of coherent nanophotonic processors, photonic tensor cores, quantum computing and neuromorphic networks signifies a large paradigm shift towards emerging optical information platforms (1-6). Post-fabrication programming of devices is one of the most desirable functionalities for agile reconfigurable photonic functionalities (7,8). Despite the great success of implementations based on cascaded interferometer meshes (2, 9-12), there are inherent strong limitations in footprint, scalability and volatility. Therefore, the development of new concepts and technologies is of extreme interest. The fundamental benefits of using non-volatile phase change materials (PCMs) in reconfigurable photonics have resulted in their extensive exploration for photonic modulation and resonance tuning, with Ge2Sb2Te5 (GST) (13-15) and, more recently, Ge2Sb2Se4Te1 (GSST) (16), being the most considered materials. The multiple non-volatile states these materials offer provide unparalleled energy per bit operation in a highly stable platform. Indeed commercial GST phase change memory has been shown to be stable over 1012 write cycles. Both materials operate based on a large change in complex refractive index ñ=n+ik between their crystalline and amorphous phases. Despite improvements in materials design, the absorption losses in one or 2 both phases of current PCMs prevent optical phase control independent of changes in the amplitude of propagated light in the telecommunication band, severely limiting phase modulation schemes. In several recent studies, the antimony-based chalcogenides Sb2S3 (17) and Sb2Se3 (18) have been identified as a family of highly promising ultralow loss PCMs for photonics applications. The materials exhibit no intrinsic absorption losses (k < 10-5) in either phase over the telecommunications transmission band and show a low switching temperature around 200 °C whilst remaining non-volatile at operating temperatures. Furthermore, the proximity of their refractive index to that of silicon allows for straightforward direct integration of PCM patches onto standard silicon-on-insulator (SOI) integrated photonics platforms with excellent mode matching to the SOI waveguide. Here, we demonstrate the exceptional capabilities of the PCM Sb2Se3 for use in ultralow loss optical phase control of photonic integrated circuits. To achieve this, we make use of 23 nm thin patches of Sb2Se3 deposited on top of a 220 nm SOI rib waveguide, where the thickness of materials is chosen to maintain a single mode of propagation. An optical phase shift of the propagating wave is induced by changing the material of the PCM from a crystalline to an amorphous state. In our studies, following the example of optical storage media, we start from a fully crystallized PCM as this provides a uniform background, fast writing speeds and stable amorphous written areas. Switching of individual pixels in the PCM is achieved using tightly focused optical pulses from a diode laser operating at 638 nm wavelength (see Methods). From mode calculations we found that an amorphous (n = 3.29) single pixel in an otherwise crystalline (n = 4.05) Sb2Se3 layer changes the effective refractive index of the waveguide, neff, by an amount Δneff = -0.072. By selective switching of the PCM in one arm of an asymmetric Mach Zehnder Interferometer (MZI), the optical phase shift is translated into a change of the transmission function of the device. A first demonstration is shown in Fig. 1A in which we achieve phase tuning of an MZI with a 125 μm long patch of Sb2Se3. The figure shows a succession of vertically offset recorded spectra (grey) from the initial state (red) to the fully switched state (black), followed by a reset to the final state (blue). Spectra were taken every 25 pixels, where each 750nm diameter pixel is spaced by 1000 nm along the MZI. A detailed view shown at the bottom of Fig. 1a shows the initial, set and reset states, with the insertion loss for each spectrum normalized to the initial spectrum. The insertion loss remains unchanged during this process highlighting the lack of any losses induced by the amorphization or recrystallization. A reversible 2π phase shift was obtained as a result of 100 separate crystallization/amorphization pulses. Regardless of the small imperfections introduced by the motorised stage (backlash) during recrystallization, the full 2π range was set and reset with a 0.1 nm offset which results in an accumulated error within 2.5% of the full range. More importantly, this measurement demonstrated that a 750 nm pixel size results in a resolution of 0.02π shift allowing for very fine phase control. As the induced optical phase change scales linearly with amorphized distance and given the ultralow loss of the material, very large phase tuning ranges can be readily achieved by employing longer PCM structures. Figure 1B shows a 10π phase shift obtained by switching a 250 μm length of PCM patch, with no measurable change to insertion loss or modulation depth. The effect of the PCM on insertion loss and extinction of the MZIs is explored in more detail in the Supporting Information Fig. S2 which shows that for PCM patch lengths of up to 250 μm, no 3 additional rebalancing of the MZI is required to compensate for losses in the PCM. Apart from using the focused laser spot size for calibration of the switched pixel, the induced optical phase can be fine-tuned by small changes in the laser power. In fact the phase shift was tuned to 0.04π per pixel in the experiment of Fig. 1B by a small increase in optical peak power of the diode write laser. To complement the broadband measurements, we performed additional narrowband measurements on a MZI with a shorter, 50 μm patch length as shown in Fig. 1C. Starting at the wavelength of 1553 nm, we tuned the MZI from the maximum transmission (set to 0 dB) to the minimum (-17 dB) and subsequently reset part of this device by recrystallization of a 20 μm length of the PCM patch (red curve). The curve shows the individual levels in transmission induced by switching subsequent pixels in steps of 500 nm along the PCM. This result highlights the ability to define stable multilevel switching processes for highly dense and accurate modulation with very fine quantization. Next, the endurance of the phase change was probed by repeatedly switching a single pixel of the MZI. We used a pixel at the -13.5 dB point of the MZI response curve on the steepest part of the slope where the sensitivity to individual pixels is high. By repeatedly cycling between the amorphous and crystalline phases in a single spot, the transmission modulation gives a good indication of the lifetime of the phase change. Figure 1D shows the transmission in each phase for the first 600 switches, with red dots corresponding to the crystalline and blue to the amorphous material phase. A long-term drift due to environmental fluctuations of the device transmission was observed and we used a 50-point moving average to normalize the drift as shown in the bottom panel of Fig. 1D. The first 350 full set-reset cycles resulted in a constant transmission change, with a small increase seen towards the 100th cycle. This increase was observed in most tested devices and is attributed to the settling of the switching dynamics after the first few burn-in cycles of the PCM resulting in a slightly increased responsivity. A reduction of the switching contrast below 50% of the initial value is seen after around 500 cycles. Another example of an endurance experiment is shown in the Supporting Information Fig. S4. We note that the endurance seen in our work is a factor 10 lower than that observed for Sb2Se3 on planar films (18) which is attributed to the somewhat more challenging thermal environment of the PCM on the waveguide and may require further improvements in thermal design. Having successfully demonstrated than an optical phase shift can be induced by switching thin Sb2Se3 patch on top of a MZI, we moved on to demonstrate a new approach for a programmable optical router based on a multimode interference (MMI) patch. MMIs are of interest for their small footprint as well as for their significantly reduced sensitivity to the environment when compared to MZIs. The device principle is based on the concept of wavefront shaping where a distribution of weak perturbation pixels is used to effectively steer the light with very low loss (19). The perturbation induced by switching of the PCM layer is sufficient to apply this device concept in a practical scalable device configuration. Furthermore, a high level of control is achieved allowing us to independently set and reset pixels spaced at 800 nm pitch in complex patterns. A 1 x 2 MMI device of 33 × 6 μm2, covered with a 23 nm crystalline Sb2Se3 film, was simulated using a 2D FDTD approach, and a pixel perturbation pattern was optimized using an iterative scheme (19). By switching each pixel on the MMI from the input to the output ports, we maximized the transmission from one of the outputs. Repeating this optimization two times 4 resulted in a pattern with high single-port transmission. Figure 2A and B show the calculated intensity in the device before and after patterning. The designed pattern was subsequently written onto an experimental device. Figure 2C,D show the fabricated MMI with the same dimensions and cladding as the simulated ones, before phase change (C) and after the perturbation pattern was written (D). A residual structure can be seen in the MMI in the unperturbed state (Fig. 2C), which is caused by the crystalline domains of the Sb2Se3 in the crystalline (unswitched) state. In Fig. 2D, a very good agreement is seen in the pattern registration, with only a small ~0.5° tilt present in the experimental pattern due to limitations in the alignment of the setup. Each pixel was written sequentially in columns and rows from the input to the output. transmission in the top and bottom outputs for both the set (amorphization) and reset (crystallization) steps. Experimentally a 92%:8% splitting ratio was found between the top and bottom outputs respectively for the full pattern. Running the final pattern from the 2D optimization sweep in a full 3D simulation for the fully patterned MMI provides a 97%:3% splitting ratio as shown by the dots in Fig. 2E. The 3D simulation results indicate that optimization using a 2D effective-index model provides a good approximation despite the complex 3D geometry of the perturbation positioned on top of the waveguide. The 5% difference between experimental and simulated results is attributed to experimental limitations in pattern registration onto the device which are as yet not fully understood. The device reset was done pixel-wise in the same way as the write sequence, i.e. from start to end of the pattern, therefore the curves in Fig. 2E and F are not the inverse of each other. Also we point out that the reset was not perfect, this is likely due to some small changes to the film stoichiometry at the edges, where the thermal properties of the MMI are different due to the surrounding insulating ZnS:SiO2 capping layer changing the quenching dynamics. Other examples of writing pixel patterns are presented in the Supporting Information Fig. S7 and S8, where we used an alternative scheme of iterative optimization of the actual device. Rather than pre-calculating the pixel pattern and writing it to the MMI, here we switched individual pixels and tested their effectiveness on the target transmission. If a pixel contributed positively to the target, its switched state was preserved, otherwise it was erased. Whereas a single pass optimization already resulted in a significant power splitting between the two ports, additional passes are shown to further improve the target transmission function. Both pre-calculated and iterative optimization patterns result in a target performance exceeding 8 dB extinction between the transmission from the two ports. Importantly, the impact of the patterning on the total device throughput is not strongly affected with up to 0.5 dB additional loss for all devices under study. In some cases an improvement in device transmission was seen, as shown for example in Fig. S8. Such a small improvement in overall device throughput can be attributed to the effect of iterative wavefront shaping which compensates for some of the imperfections of the original device, as seen in earlier studies (19). To show that the pixel pattern writing approach is both reconfigurable and free-form, the same pattern was written into an MMI multiple times, with a full reset between each pattern for both the simulated pattern and the mirror image of the pattern in the vertical direction which, due to symmetry, guides light towards the bottom output. Figure 3A shows the MMI before (1) and after (2) the first write cycle. To improve the visibility of any changes with respect to the original 5 MMI patterns, images of all set and reset states were processed by differencing with the original MMI as shown in Fig. 3B. A good repeatability was shown between each pattern, with the reset state showing no memory of the patterns written. After several switching cycles, incremental damage to the Sb2Se3 film occurred at the edges of the MMI. The damage appears from the corners of the device where the lower local thermal conductivity of the surrounding ZnS:SiO2 capping layer and the abrupt interfaces result in a higher maximum temperature, making the Sb2Se3 film more prone to delamination or void formation. These effects can be compensated by a variety of methods such as reducing the pulse power for these areas or by reducing the actively written area of the MMI. Figure 3B shows the transmission of both outputs for all the perturbations when writing and resetting the patterns shown in Fig. 3A. A repeatable transmission change was seen for both orientations, which was not strongly affected by the increasing presence of the damaged areas (see Fig. 3A). The splitting ratio was higher for the inverse pattern, suggesting either a small misalignment between the pixel pattern and the MMI, or a non-symmetrical design due to fabrication tolerances in the Sb2Se3 film. The results presented here unequivocally show the capabilities of the new phase change technology in providing low-loss programmable optical phase control. This approach is expected to open many new applications in post-fabrication device tuning, programmable weight banks, unitary matrix operations and ultimately all-optical field-programmable arrays (20). We envision that important aspects enabling the mass commercial use of this technology such as the reproducibility, switching endurance, optical and electrical switching will be addressed in follow-on studies, as has been the case with decades of work in optimizing materials like GST. In conclusion, we have demonstrated the first low loss reconfigurable approach for optical routing in an integrated silicon photonics device. The new phase change material Sb2Se3 allows the decoupling of optical phase control from amplitude modulation seen in the conventional PCMs. The advances in device footprint and energy consumption of this approach compared to conventional cascaded switch fabrics could enable a range of complex photonic circuits needed for applications such as on-chip LiDAR, photonic quantum technology, AI hardware, or optical tensorcores of the future, whilst providinga powerful post-fabrication programming technique for high-volume PIC ecosystems. Our demonstrated technique provides a general approach that could be easily extended to larger devices and could ultimately achieve a platform for a universal optical chip technology.