Thermally-Driven Charge-Density-Wave Transitions in 1T-TaS2 Thin-Film Devices: Prospects for GHz Switching Speed 1 | P a g e Thermally-Driven Charge-Density-Wave Transitions in 1T- TaS2 Thin-Film Devices: Prospects for GHz Switching Speed Amirmahdi Mohammadzadeh1, Saba Baraghani1, Shenchu Yin2, Fariborz Kargar1, Jonathan P. Bird2, and Alexander A. Balandin1, 1Nano-Device Laboratory (NDL) and Phonon Optimized Engineered Materials (POEM) Center, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Riverside, California 92521 USA 2Department of Electrical Engineering, University at Buffalo, the State University of New York, Buffalo, New York 14260 USA Abstract We report on the room-temperature switching of 1T-TaS2 thin-film charge-density-wave devices, using nanosecond-duration electrical pulsing to construct their time-resolved current-voltage char- acteristics. The switching action is based upon the nearly-commensurate to incommensurate charge-density-wave phase transition in this material, which has a characteristic temperature of 350 K at thermal equilibrium. For sufficiently short pulses, with rise times in the nanosecond range, self-heating of the devices is suppressed, and their current-voltage characteristics are weakly non- linear and free of hysteresis. This changes as the pulse duration is increased to ~200 ns, where the current develops pronounced hysteresis that evolves non-monotonically with the pulse duration. By combining the results of our experiments with a numerical analysis of transient heat diffusion in these devices, we clearly reveal the thermal origins of their switching. In spite of this thermal character, our modeling suggests that suitable reduction of the size of these devices should allow their operation at GHz frequencies. Keywords: charge-density-wave devices; van der Waals materials; 2D materials; pulsed electrical switching, 1T-TaS2; transient Joule heating  Corresponding author (A.A.B.): balandin@ece.ucr.edu ; web-site: http://balandingroup.ucr.edu/ Thermally-Driven Charge-Density-Wave Transitions in 1T-TaS2 Thin-Film Devices: Prospects for GHz Switching Speed 2 | P a g e Charge-density wave (CDW) phenomena have recently witnessed renewed interest, particularly in the context of two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals materials.1–8 This interest is driven by both exciting physics, and possible practical applications, that can be derived from such materials. CDW transitions can be induced by various perturbations, including heating, 9 doping, 10–14 elec- trical pulsing, 15–17 substrate effects, 18 gate biasing, 17,19,20 and alteration of the thickness of the material. 21–23 The 1T polymorph of TaS2 is one of the 2D van der Waals materials of the transi- tion-metal dichalcogenide (TMD) group that reveals phase transitions in the form of abrupt resis- tivity changes and hysteresis. 24,25 Since two of these transitions are above room temperature (RT), 1T-TaS2 has attracted attention for applications, such as high-speed memory devices, 17 oscilla- tors, 26–28 transistor-less logic circuits, 29 oscillatory neural networks, 30 and logic gates. 31–33 The fact that two-terminal devices implemented with 1T-TaS2 are radiation hard is an additional ben- efit. 27,34 The resistivity changes exhibited by several TMDs, e.g. 1T-TaS2 and 1T-TaSe2, are attributed to transitions among different CDW phases. 24 The CDW phase is defined as a periodic modulation of the electronic charge density, accompanied by distortions in the underlying crystal lattice, and may be commensurate or incommensurate with the underlying crystal lattice. 16,35–43 The com- mensurate CDW (C-CDW) phase is typically observed at low temperature. It exhibits a stronger charge density distortion, and it is often pinned to the lattice. 44,45 The C-CDW phase only appears if the thickness of the films is sufficiently large. The lattice distortion in the C-CDW phase forms aggregates of 13 Ta atoms in the shape of a star in the basal plane, with 12 atoms at the vertices of the star inclines and 1 atom at its center. 46–50 From 180 K to 350 K, the aggregates partially melt, forming separate star-shaped islands that represent the nearly commensurate CDW (NC- CDW) phase. Increasing the temperature beyond 350 K, all the aggregate islands melt, and an incommensurate CDW (IC-CDW) phase emerges. Finally, the transition to the normal metallic phase (NP) happens in the range of 500-600 K. 17,20,58–61,24,51–57 The transition temperature be- tween the NC and IC-CDW phases – at 350 K, conveniently above RT – makes 1T-TaS2 partic- ularly promising for device applications. The transition temperature is normally determined from transport measurements, in which the temperature of the sample is controlled externally while the electric bias is kept low to avoid local Joule heating. 62 While switching with the bias can pave the way to new electronic devices, different from conventional transistors, there are unanswered Thermally-Driven Charge-Density-Wave Transitions in 1T-TaS2 Thin-Film Devices: Prospects for GHz Switching Speed 3 | P a g e questions regarding the mechanism of the phase transitions in 2D CDW materials and devices. In principle, at least, the application of an electric field can trigger the CDW phase transition directly, by affecting the charged ions and electrons in the crystal. If CDW-device operation relies on depinning of the CDW from defects, the electric field can set the CDW in motion above a certain threshold field. 63,64 Alternatively, however, the electric current induced by the field is responsible for Joule heating, which, in turn, can also trigger CDW phase transitions. The strength of the Joule heating should depend on details of the specific material, the device structure, and bias mode (DC vs. pulse) and duration. For these reasons, the mechanism of the different phase transitions that arise in different devices is still the subject of debate. 59,65–67 We have previously argued that, in 1T-TaS2 devices on Si/SiO2 substrates, the switching among different CDW phases that is caused by the application of an electric bias results from local Joule heating. 62 This con- clusion was reached for devices for which the switching speeds were relatively slow, i.e. in the range of milliseconds to seconds. A recent study, on the other hand, which measured 1T-TaS2 devices with electric pulses of duration 0.1 s, observed that Joule heating could be mostly inhib- ited. 53 Other related work, also based upon a pulsing technique, came to a different conclusion, namely that, even for pulses as short as ~0.1 ms, local Joule heating was not eliminated. 68 Else- where, a third possible outcome has also been reported, with the NC-CDW to IC-CDW transition being attributed to the electric-field action while the IC-CDW to NC-CDW transition was at- tributed to local Joule heating. 61 An extra factor that complicates the separation of field- and heating-driven effects arises from the difficulty of making a direct and accurate measurement of local temperature in the m-scale channels of CDW devices. Here, we report the results of an experimental investigation of 1T-TaS2 devices under ultra-short electric pulses, combined with a computational study of heat dissipation in these structures. The 1T-TaS2 CDW devices were fabricated on a highly resistive Si/SiO2 substrate in order to allow for ns-duration electrical pulsing. We find that hysteresis, characteristic of the NC- to IC-CDW phase transition, emerges in the current-voltage characteristics of these devices at pulse durations in excess of ~200 ns, and that it exhibits a non-monotonic dependence with increasing pulse length. The experimentally observed evolution of the hysteresis, and our numerical solutions of the heat-diffusion equation, indicate that the switching is thermally driven. Despite this thermal Thermally-Driven Charge-Density-Wave Transitions in 1T-TaS2 Thin-Film Devices: Prospects for GHz Switching Speed 4 | P a g e nature, however, our modeling also suggests that downscaling of the device dimensions, and fine- tuning of the thermal resistance of the structure, should allow for fast operation of such devices, in the GHz frequency range. High-quality single-crystal 1T-TaS2 (HQ Graphene Co.) was used as the source material in our studies. Thin films of 1T-TaS2 were mechanically exfoliated and transferred to a highly resistive that was built in-house. Uniform rectangular flakes were selected for device fabrication to match the pattern of the required on-chip co-planar waveguide (see figure 1e). The signal lines of this waveguide were 9-μm wide and were separated on either side by 3-μm gaps from two large ground planes, ensuring the 50-Ω matching needed for high-speed measurements.69 To help pre- serve this matching, the 1T-TaS2 crystals were chosen to be of the same width as the signal lines. posited by electron-beam evaporation. To avoid degradation of the quasi-2D 1T-TaS2 from expo- sure to chemicals and air, successive fabrication steps were performed with minimal delay. Fab- ricated devices were then stored and tested under vacuum conditions. nel (<10 nm) of 1T-TaS2, showing the NC to IC-CDW phase transition at ~350 K. The current – voltage (I-V) characteristics measured for the same 1T-TaS2 device are presented in Figure 1b. The straight line is an example of the load-resistance characteristic required to make the oscillator shown schematically in Figure 1c. The implementation of such voltage-controlled oscillators from 1T-TaS2 CDW devices has been reported previously by some of us. 20,27 Other fabricated devices had larger thicknesses (~70 nm) to make them more robust for the testing and to ensure contact quality. A schematic of the pulsed-measurement setup is presented in Figure 1d. This includes a pulse generator that sources ramped (triangular) current pulses of duration as short as 8 ns, and a mixed-signal oscilloscope (Keysight DSOX6004A, 6 GHz bandwidth) that is used to measure the time-dependent variation of the generated current. The pulsed measurements were performed in a custom-designed setup with full impedance matching (50 Ω). The device chip was mounted on an FR-4 laminate carrier, which allowed the Thermally-Driven Charge-Density-Wave Transitions in 1T-TaS2 Thin-Film Devices: Prospects for GHz Switching Speed 5 | P a g e signal line of the previously mentioned on-chip coplanar waveguide to be connected to the meas- urement instruments, through semirigid coaxial cables and high-bandwidth SMA connectors. A 50-Ω RuO2 thick film resistor, soldered onto the chip carrier, provided a matched termination for the input signal. An Aim-TTi TGP3151 pulse generator was used to provide the pulses. In this study, repetitive (75 kHz) triangular pulses of various width (8 – 13,333 ns) were applied to the CDW device input. The resulting output pulses were then captured at the 50-Ω input channel of the oscilloscope and correlated to the input signal to generate a pulsed I-V characteristic. All measurements were performed with the CDW devices mounted inside a customized, light-tight vacuum chamber (~10-6 mbar), held at RT. [Figure 1: Device schematic; microscopy image; measurement setup] mentary Figure S1). In all panels, only the I-V results of the first generated pulse are presented. This is essential to eliminate the influence of heat accumulation, originating from the application of repetitive pulses, on the I-V characteristics of the device. The most important observation is that, when the pulse duration is too short (see Figure 2a with the 8-ns pulse), the I-V curves do not reveal any hysteresis. As the pulse duration is increased, however, the hysteresis, associated with the NC to IC-CDW phase transition, emerges (Figure 2b, bias voltage of ~1.65 V). Visual inspection of the form of the I-V curves in this figure shows that the area associated with the hysteresis increases rather rapidly at first (compare Figures 2a and 2b), but then starts to decrease (Figure 2c and d). This behavior is attributed to the difference in the time constants for the rate of heat accumulation as a result of Joule heating and the rate of the heat dissipation to the underlying substrate. Overall, these data are consistent with the thermally-driven transition scenario; while the maximum strength of the electric field is the same for all of the pulses, the rate of the generated heat in the device and the dissipated heat depend strongly on the pulse duration. More specifically, we suggest that the ultra-short pulses of a few-ns duration are not sufficiently long to increase the local temperature to the vicinity of ~350 K, and to thereby drive the NC to IC-CDW phase tran- sition. As the pulse duration is increased, however, heat should accumulate increasingly in the channel, leading to a rise of the local temperature and the emergence of the NC to IC-CDW hys- teresis. The further evolution can then be understood as arising from an interplay of two time- Thermally-Driven Charge-Density-Wave Transitions in 1T-TaS2 Thin-Film Devices: Prospects for GHz Switching Speed 6 | P a g e constants – one associated with how fast heat accumulates in the channel, and the other with how fast heat escapes from it. These time constants will depend on the pulse duration, the thermal resistance of the device, and its size. When the pulse becomes too long (of s duration, as in size hysteresis, resulting in the decrease of the hysteresis window and saturation. Figure S2 ex- hibits the derivative of the I-V curves, dI/dV, shown in Figure 2. The phase transitions occur at bias voltages where abrupt changes in dI/dV are observed. [Figure 2: Experimental I-V characteristics with different current pulse durations] To verify the proposed description of the switching mechanism, we analyzed the time-dependent heat dissipation in the device by solving the transient heat-diffusion equation. Calculations were performed for the specific layered structure of the experimentally tested devices, using the finite element method (COMSOL Multiphysics). The instantaneous Joule power generated in the chan- 1T-TaS2 channel.62 The layered structure (see Figure 1-d) considered in the calculations includes the 0.5 mm-thick Si wafer, the SiO2 gate dielectric, and the 1T-TaS2 channel and metal electrodes. The through-plane thermal resistance of the Si/SiO2 substrate includes three terms: Rth = Rc + RSiO2 + RSi, where Rc is the thermal contact resistance between the 1T-TaS2 film and the SiO2, and RSiO2 and RSi are the thermal resistances of the SiO2 and Si layers, respectively. The thermal resistance of the SiO2 layer is defined as RSiO2 = tSiO2 (kSiO2 × A) ⁄ , where tSiO2 is the thickness (300 nm) of the SiO2, kSiO2 is its thermal conductivity, and A is the cross-sectional area of the channel. The interfacial contact resistance is Rc = [Ginterface × A] −1in which Ginterface is the interfacial thermal conductance and varies in a rather limited range for common 2D materials and substrates. For example, Ginterface for graphene, WTe2, and MoS2 with Si/SiO2 substrates is 50, 33, and 15 MW/m2K, respectively.70–73 Note that, for long current pulses, where the system is close to the steady-state condition, the average temperature rise in the device structure with SiO2 layer rises to about ∆T ≈ P × RSiO2, without even taking thermal contact resistance into account. 62. The temperature rise driven by the interfacial contact resistance can be as high as 100-200 K. Thermally-Driven Charge-Density-Wave Transitions in 1T-TaS2 Thin-Film Devices: Prospects for GHz Switching Speed 7 | P a g e midpoint of 8 ns and 13335 ns pulses, respectively. The dimensions of the channel are W × L × tf = 7 μm × 3 μm × 140 nm, where W, L, and tf are the width, length, and the thickness, respectively. The Joule heat generated by the pulse mostly diffuses through the under- laying SiO2 layer owing to the substantial difference in the in-plane and through-plane thermal resistance. The in-plane thermal conductivity of 1T-TaS2 is almost three folds higher than that of SiO2.74,75 However, owing to the small thickness of the 1T-TaS2 channel, the total in-plane thermal resistance of the TaS2 active layer, defined as Rth,in−plane = L (kf × tf × W ⁄ ), is approximately two orders of magnitude higher than the total through-plane thermal resistance, Rth,through, of the underlying SiO2/Si layers. Consequently, almost all the generated heat is dissipated through the Si/SiO2 layer as seen in Figure 3. One can notice that the SiO2 layer acts as an efficient thermal barrier owing to its small thermal conductivity and the thermal boundary resistance at the TaS2- SiO2 interface. While the heating is insufficient for 8-ns pulse duration (Figure 3a) to drive the NC- to IC-CDW phase transition, by increasing the pulse duration to 13.3 s the local temperature in the TaS2 rises well above 350 K (Figure 3b). [Figure 3: Simulated temperature distribution along the cross-section of the device channel] To further support our interpretation of the experimental results, we have simulated the I-V curves of the device tested experimentally (see Figure 4 and Supplementary Figure S3). The pulse dura- tion in these simulations was chosen to match the different values used in the experiments. The pulses were implemented in the model by applying them at various predefined ramp rates. The current at each time step was then calculated using the equations embedded in the COMSOL electromagnetic module. Additional simulation details are provided in the Supplemental Infor- mation. One can clearly see from Figure 4 that the calculated trend for the evolution of the hys- teresis is highly reminiscent of the experimentally measured one (see Figure 2). This is due to the temperature rise in the 1T-TaS2 which causes a drastic decrease in resistance (Figure 1a) as a result of phase transition and thus, an increase in the amount of current that passes through the channel. Thermally-Driven Charge-Density-Wave Transitions in 1T-TaS2 Thin-Film Devices: Prospects for GHz Switching Speed 8 | P a g e [Figure 4: Simulated pulsed measurement results at various pulse durations] For a quantitative comparison of the experimental and modeled trends, we define the width of the hysteresis (Vmax − Vmin) as the difference in the voltage values observed during the up and down ramps of the voltage at a constant current. This width is a meaningful parameter as it defines the operational range of voltages for CDW voltage-controlled oscillators and other types of switches. Measured and calculated values of this parameter, determined for a current of ISD = 8 mA, are presented in Figure 5. It is evident that both the experiment and simulations exhibit a peak at some particular value of the pulse duration, which should be defined by the interplay of the time constants for the generation and escape of heat. The absolute values of the measured and simu- lated hysteresis windows are different due to the fact that not all experimental factors, e.g. the heat dissipated to the environment, are accounted for in the simulation. The fine details of the simulation curve, i.e. deviations from a smooth trend, are numerical due to the relatively coarse mesh used. [Figure 5: Experimental and simulated hysteresis window width] Our experimental results show that for the tested device the hysteresis window appears for a pulse duration of ~200 ns. This corresponds to a CDW-device switching speed of ~5 MHz. From the discussion above, it is clear that the speed can be increased if one optimizes the device structure and decreases its size, to drive the desired phase transition by allowing heating to develop more rapidly. To demonstrate this point, in Figure 6 we have used our experimentally validated physics- based model to simulate the I-V curves of a device with channel length, width and thickness of 1 μm, 2 μm, and 10 nm, respectively. From this figure, one can see that the hysteresis appears at substantially shorter pulses than in Figure 2 and Figure 4. For a pulse duration of 20 ns, the cal- culated channel temperature reaches ~360 K (see Supplemental Figure S4), which is already above the NC to IC-CDW transition temperature. The hysteresis in fact begins to develop for pulses as short as ~1 ns (see Figure 6d), which corresponds to a CDW device speed of ~1 GHz. The obtained data therefore suggest that CDW devices implemented with quasi-2D 1T-TaS2 chan- nels can operate at high frequency, even if the NC-CDW to IC-CDW transition is thermally driven. We note that our study proves that this switching is achieved via thermal mechanism for Thermally-Driven Charge-Density-Wave Transitions in 1T-TaS2 Thin-Film Devices: Prospects for GHz Switching Speed 9 | P a g e the specific device design, and characteristic thermal resistance of the structure. This does not preclude the possibility of purely electrically driven CDW transitions in other device designs and structures. If the pure-electric field regime is achieved, our estimates for the device operational speed should increase to even higher values. [Figure 6: Operation speed projection.] In conclusion, we have reported on the room-temperature switching of 1T-TaS2 thin-film CDW devices using nanosecond-duration electrical pulses. The switching action utilized the NC- to IC- CDW phase transition, which has a characteristic temperature of 350 K. The results of our rapid pulsed measurements, and numerical transient analysis of heat diffusion in the device structure, indicate the thermal nature of the switching in this type of CDW device. The modeling results suggest that a proper tuning of the device size and thermal resistance can allow these devices to operate at GHz frequencies, even when the switching is thermally driven. Acknowledgements The work at UC Riverside was supported, in part, by the U.S. Department of Energy under the contract No. DE-SC0021020 “Physical Mechanisms and Electric-Bias Control of Phase Transi- tions in Quasi-2D Charge-Density-Wave Quantum Materials”. The fabrication of the CDW de- vices was performed at the UCR Nanofabrication Facility. The high-speed pulsed measurements were performed in Buffalo, under support from the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Materials Sciences and Engineering (DE-FG02-04ER46180). Contributions A.A.B. conceived the idea, coordinated the project, contributed to experimental data analysis, and led the manuscript preparation; A.M. fabricated the devices, conducted current-voltage measure- ments, contributed to data analysis; S.B. conducted simulations and contributed to data analysis; F.K. contributed to analysis of experimental and simulation data and performed analytical deri- vations; S.Y. conducted pulse measurements. J.P.B. contributed to experimental data analysis. All authors contributed to writing the manuscript. Thermally-Driven Charge-Density-Wave Transitions in 1T-TaS2 Thin-Film Devices: Prospects for GHz Switching Speed 10 | P a g e The Data Availability Statement The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. The supplemental information is available at the Applied Physics Letters journal web-site for free of charge. Thermally-Driven Charge-Density-Wave Transitions in 1T-TaS2 Thin-Film Devices: Prospects for GHz Switching Speed 11 | P a g e