Two distinct superconducting states controlled by orientation of local wrinkles in LiFeAs Lu Cao1,2*, Wenyao Liu1,2*, Geng Li1,2,3,4*,†, Guangyang Dai1,2, Qi Zheng1,2, Kun Jiang1,2, Shiyu Zhu1,2, Li Huang1,2,3, Lingyuan Kong1, Fazhi Yang1,2, Xiancheng Wang1,3,4, Wu Zhou2,3, Xiao Lin2,1, Jiangping Hu1,2,3, Changqing Jin1,3,4, Hong Ding1,3,4,‡, Hong-Jun Gao1,2,3,4,§ 1Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China 2School of Physical Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China 3CAS Center for Excellence in Topological Quantum Computation, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China 4Songshan Lake Materials Laboratory, Dongguan, Guangdong 523808, China We observe two types of superconducting states controlled by orientations of local wrinkles on the surface of LiFeAs. Using scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy, we find type-I wrinkles enlarge the superconducting gaps and enhance the transition temperature, whereas type-II wrinkles significantly suppress the superconducting gaps. The vortices on wrinkles show a C2 symmetry, indicating the strain effects on the wrinkles. A discontinuous switch of superconductivity occurs at the border between two different wrinkles. Our results demonstrate that the local strain effect could affect superconducting order parameter of LiFeAs with a possible Lifshitz transition, by alternating crystal structure in different directions. The origin of superconductivity in iron-based superconductors (FeSCs) remains elusive despite intensive research efforts over a dozen years . The large orbital degrees of freedom as well as the presence of intertwining orders hinder a microscopic understanding of the pairing mechanism in FeSCs . As a perturbation method, external pressure can lift the ground state degeneracy and offer detailed information about how the unconventional superconductivity evolve with other electronic orders. For example, an in-plane resistivity anisotropy and an spin excitation have been observed in electron-doped BaFe2As2 under uniaxial pressure; in FeSe with external pressure, the magnetic order could emerge and coexist with the high-temperature superconductivity , while enhanced spin fluctuation is evidenced as well . Among FeSCs, LiFeAs is unique as its phase diagram is not intervened by any magnetic or nematic order, which provides an appropriate platform to detect the relationship between pressure and superconductivity in strong-correlation system . Using scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy (STM/S), we report the observation of orientation-dependent superconductivity at two types of wrinkle on LiFeAs surface. The tunneling spectra show an increase of superconducting (SC) gaps on type-I wrinkles and a reduction on type-II wrinkles. Temperature-dependent measurements of the SC gap show that the gap closing temperature on type-I wrinkles is enhanced by 20 ~ 30 %, but it remains almost unchanged on type-II wrinkles. While wrinkles are a commonly consequence of relieving transverse strain induced by the change of atom coordination , the spatial feature of superconducting vortices observed on wrinkles confirms the exist of local strains. Our results demonstrate that strains with different orientations can enhance or suppress superconductivity of LiFeAs, offering new insights into the SC mechanism of FeSCs. The atomic model of LiFeAs is shown in Fig. 1(a). Unlike many other FeSCs , the cleavage of LiFeAs crystal occurs at a non-polar plane between the two Li layers [dashed line in Fig. 1(a)], presenting a good platform for investigating and tuning the unconventional superconductivity at nanoscale . The stoichiometric LiFeAs shows superconductivity below transition temperature Tc (~17 K) . Two types of wrinkles are observed on LiFeAs surface [Figs. 1(b)-1(d)], appearing as straight 1D ridges. Type-I wrinkles extend along the direction (with respect to Li surface, also the Fe-Fe direction) or its neighboring directions, spanning a width about 15 nm with a maximum height of ~1.0 Å [lower panel, Fig. 1(c)]. Type-II wrinkles extend along the direction (also the Fe-As direction) or its neighboring directions, with a width of ~10 nm and a maximum height of ~0.7 Å [lower panel, Fig. 1(d)]. Both types of wrinkles are uniform in width and extend from several tens of to hundreds of nanometers. Atomic resolution image of type-I wrinkle in Fig. 1(e) shows continuous and perfect Li lattice, excluding the possibility of formation of twin boundary , domain wall or line defects . Within the resolution of STM, no obvious lattice constant change can be detected. We propose that these wrinkles are likely induced by releasing of local strain during the creation of LiFeAs surface upon cleavage. Indeed, by atomic force microscopy (AFM), we explicitly demonstrate that the wrinkles on LiFeAs surface have real spatial corrugations, instead of purely reflecting as enhancement of local density of states (LDOS) (Supplemental Material Fig. S1 ). Here we find the remarkable difference between type-I and II wrinkles lies in their LDOS. Figure 1(f) displays the differential conductance spectra (dI/dV) taken at the on the surface, as marked by the crosses in Figs. 1(c) and 1(d). In the wrinkle-free region, dI/dV spectrum shows multiband features of LiFeAs, with a large gap of ~5.8 meV (may come from the inter-hole pocket at the Γ point) and a small gap of ~2.9 meV (may come from the outer-hole pocket at the Γ point), consistent with previous reports . Interestingly, the tunneling spectrum on type-I wrinkle yields a coherence peak at 7.3 meV and a shoulder at 3.6 meV, and type-II wrinkle has a single V-shaped gap of 2.5 meV. We note that electron doping and application of external pressure normally lead to reduction of SC gap or Tc, and that increase of SC gap is not commonly seen in LiFeAs. Inspired by the novel gap features observed on the wrinkles, we carry out spatial dI/dV spectra line-cut across and along the wrinkles, as displayed in Figs. 2(a)-2(d). On type- I wrinkle, the coherence peaks of Δ1 start to shift to higher energies when getting close to the wrinkle edge and show constant values of ±7.3 meV across the wrinkle [Fig. 2(a)]. At the same time, the shoulders of Δ2 follow a similar tendency. The enlarged gaps Δ1 and Δ2 remain homogeneous along the type-I wrinkle [Fig. 2(b)]. Furthermore, the gap map of a type-I wrinkle (Supplemental Material Figs. S2a,b ) reveals the maximum gap size (Δ1) distribution. It is evident that the type-I wrinkle has larger SC gap sizes compared with the wrinkle-free region. Also, the edges of the wrinkle (Supplemental Material Figs. S2a,b ) show the largest SC gap, possibly suggesting the highest strain at the edges. We compare the SC gaps between wrinkle-free region and type-I region under different axis scales (Supplemental Material Fig. S2c ). The results show that the enhancement of the two SC gaps is of the same ratio (20~30 %). On type-II wrinkle, however, the coherence peaks of Δ1 are strongly suppressed when getting close to the wrinkle edge and totally disappear on the wrinkle region, meanwhile, the shoulder of Δ2 evolves into a pair of coherence peaks on the wrinkle [Fig. 2(c)]. Note that the gap features are robust and homogenous along type-II wrinkle [Fig. 2(d)]. We next perform the temperature-dependent dI/dV measurements. On type-I wrinkle, the SC gap Δ1 can be well differentiated at 17 K (Tc of bulk LiFeAs) and gradually closes at ~20.5 K [Fig. 3(a)], while the gap closes at 17 K at wrinkle-free region [Fig. 3(b)]. The SC gap of type-II wrinkle also closes at ~17 K [Fig. 3(c)]. We note that there is bump near EF at high temperature (black rows in Fig. 3(a)-3(b)), which should suggest the band top of dxz . In Fig. 3(d), we plot the extracted gap values as a function of temperature. The wrinkle-free region (black squares) and type-I region (red triangles) follow the same tendency, which is more obvious after rescaling the data of type-I region (pink triangles). This coincidence suggests that type-I region has similar coupling strength with that of the wrinkle-free region. However, on the type-II regions, superconductivity behaves differently. Compared with its gap size, such Tc on type-II wrinkle is quite high and maybe come from the bulk superconducting proximity effect while the intrinsic superconductivity on type-II wrinkle is already suppressed. To explain the exotic superconducting behaviors we observed, the first step is understanding the circumstances on these wrinkles. Here, we image the vortex structure by zero-bias conductance (ZBC) map (large scale map in Supplemental Material Fig. S4 ). The vortex on wrinkle-free region present four-pointed-star like structure due to the C4 symmetry of the Fermi surface [Fig. 4(a)], in contrast, the vortex at wrinkles change from C4 symmetric to C2 symmetric shape with the long axis extending along the wrinkle orientation [Fig. 4(b)]. We point out that our vortex structure results not only clarify the existence and orientation of local uniaxial strain on the wrinkles, but also suggests that the configuration of Fermi surface changes consequently . Next, we plot the statistics of the orientation of the wrinkles and the corresponding SC gaps, which reveals that the direction favors the type-I wrinkles while the direction favors the type-II wrinkles. Interestingly, wrinkles along other orientations are also found in our experiment [Fig. 4(c)], whereas the gap size versus orientation yields an abrupt change at ~20° with respect to the direction. The statistical results suggest that the SC gaps do not gradually evolve with wrinkle orientations, but resemble a discontinuous transition [Fig. 4(c)]. We also note that the wrinkles can make turns on the surface, leading to a transition from type-I to type-II (Supplemental Material Fig. S5 ). The transition is smooth without observable boundaries. Further analysis indicates that the switch of the superconductivity on two-type wrinkles is coincidence with the band structure changing under different orientations of local strain. First, the bump features in Figs. 3(a)-(b) indicate the band of dxz shifts above the Fermi level on the type-I wrinkles. Next, our results indicate that the wrinkles impact the LDOS away from the Fermi level as well [Fig. 4(d)]. Note that there is a shoulder around 30 meV which has a slight move comparing to the one in wrinkle-free region (Supplemental Material Fig. S3 ), suggesting the band top of the dxy shifts up at the type-I wrinkle and down at the type-II wrinkle . In addition, the whole gap feature changes from U-shape to V-shape with non-zero density of states at the zero energy type-II has a large loss compare to others as well, both indicate a possibility that the inter-hole band sinks down to the Fermi level on the type-II region. Based on the observations discussed above, we propose a possible scenario that the local strain on wrinkle cause a Lifshitz transition . In bulk LiFeAs, the dxz/dyz band splits possibly due to the spin-orbit coupling , with dyz crossing EF and dxz sinking below [Fig. 4(f)]. When local strain is present along the direction (Fe-Fe direction), the dxz band top shifts above EF, giving rise to an increase of DOS near Γ point [Fig. 4(e)]. The enhanced DOS increase the SC gap and Tc. The same increasing ratio of Δ1 and Δ2 on type-I wrinkle also supports this scenario. On the other hand, once the strain is along direction (Fe-As direction), both the dyz and dxz band sink below EF, leaving only the dxy band crossing EF [Fig. 4(g)]. In this case, the Lifshitz transition of Fermi surface leads to the disappearance of the Δ1 gap, and that only the Δ2 gap can be observed, yet the V-shape of the in-gap states is quite puzzling. This V-shape SC gap resemble the tunneling spectra in electron-doped LiFe1-xCoxAs . We also note that since the superconductivity in LiFeAs might relates to spin fluctuations , it is possible that As anion height from Fe atoms which will be affected by the local strain may modify the spin fluctuations and consequently affects the superconductivity. Nevertheless, we cannot rule out other scenarios of superconducting changing and further theoretical understanding of mechanism is required. In summary, we have identified two types of wrinkles on LiFeAs surface. The orientation dependent wrinkles accompanied with local uniaxial strains have very different influence on the superconductivity at the nanoscale, with one get an enhancement while the other is suppressed. A Lifshitz transition scenario is proposed to explain these two distinct states of superconductivity in the vicinity of wrinkles on LiFeAs. Our observations suggest that the change of band structure has strong influence for unconventional superconductivity in LiFeAs. We thank Hu Miao and Fuchun Zhang for helpful discussion. This work is supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (2019YFA0308500, 2018YFA0305700, 2016YFA0401000), the National Natural Science Foundation of 11674371), and the Chinese Academy of Sciences (XDB28000000, XDB07000000). *These authors contributed equally to this work. †Corresponding author. gengli.iop@iphy.ac.cn ‡Corresponding author. dingh@iphy.ac.cn §Corresponding author. hjgao@iphy.ac.cn