Neutron scattering studies on spin fluctuations in Sr2RuO4 K. Jenni,1, ∗ S. Kunkem ̈oller,1 P. Steffens,2 Y. Sidis,3 R. Bewley,4 Z. Q. Mao,5, 6, 7 Y. Maeno,5 and M. Braden1, † 1II. Physikalisches Institut, Universit ̈at zu K ̈oln, Z ̈ulpicher Str. 77, D-50937 K ̈oln, Germany 2Institut Laue Langevin,71 avenue des Martyrs, 38000 Grenoble, France 3Laboratoire L ́eon Brillouin, C.E.A./C.N.R.S., F-91191 Gif-sur-Yvette CEDEX, France 4ISIS, United Kingdom 5Department of Physics, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan 6Department of Physics, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA 70118, USA 7Department of Physics, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA (Dated: February 15, 2021) The magnetic excitations in Sr2RuO4 are studied by polarized and unpolarized neutron scattering experiments as a function of temperature. At the scattering vector of the Fermi-surface nesting with a half-integer out-of-plane component, there is no evidence for the appearance of a resonance excitation in the superconducting phase. The body of existing data indicates weakening of the scattered intensity in the nesting spectrum to occur at very low energies. The nesting signal persists up to 290 K but is strongly reduced. In contrast, a quasi-ferromagnetic contribution maintains its strength and still exhibits a finite width in momentum space. I. INTRODUCTION A quarter century after the discovery of superconduc- tivity in Sr2RuO4 its character and its pairing mech- anism remain mysterious. Inspired by the ferromagnetic order appearing in the metallic sister compound SrRuO3 it was initially proposed that ferromagnetic fluctua- tions drive the superconductivity in Sr2RuO4 rendering its superconductivity similar to the A-phase of superfluid 3He . For a long time chiral p-wave superconductiv- ity with spin-triplet pairing has been considered to best describe the majority of experimental studies al- though the absence of detectable edge currents and the constant Knight-shift observed for fields perpendicu- lar to the Ru layers were not easily explained in this scenario . Further insight was gained from experiments performed under large uniaxial strain that revealed a con- siderable enhancement of the superconducting transition temperature by more than a factor two , similar to the enhancement in the eutectic crystals . How- ever, the breaking of the four-fold axis should split the superconducting transition of the chiral state in contra- diction with a single anomaly appearing in the specific heat under strain . Furthermore, the strain depen- dence of the transition temperature close to zero strain is flat , whereas one expects a linear dependence for the chiral state. The picture of chiral p-wave superconductivity was fully shaken, when the two experiments yielding the strongest support for triplet pairing were revised. The new studies of the Knight shift in NMR and those of the polarized neutron diffraction reveal an unambiguous drop of the electronic susceptibility that is inconsistent with spin-triplet pairs parallel to Ru layers. ∗ [e-mail: ]jenni@ph2.uni-koeln.de † [e-mail: ]braden@ph2.uni-koeln.de Since then, numerous proposals for the superconducting state were made mostly invoking some d-wave state and the discussion of the superconducting pairing has become very active [19–26]. The observations of broken time- reversal symmetry in muon spin relaxation experiments and in measurements of the magneto-optical Kerr effect may require interpretations other than the chi- ral p-wave scenario. Many theories discuss a supercon- ducting state with a complex combination of components [19–25]. Assuming a simple boson-mediated pairing following BCS theory, phonons and magnetic fluctuations or a com- bination of both can be relevant. There are anoma- lies in the phonon dispersion that could be fingerprints of electron phonon coupling . The phonon mode that describes the rotation of the RuO6 octahedra around the c axis exhibits an anomalous temperature dependence and severe broadening . This mode can be associated with the structural phase transition and with the shift of the van Hove singularity in the γ band through the Fermi level. Both effects occur upon small Ca substitution . In addition, the Ru-O bond-stretching modes that exhibit an anomalous downwards dispersion in many oxides with perovskite-related structure exhibit an anomalous dispersion in Sr2RuO4 as well . Compar- ing the first-principles calculated and measured phonon dispersion in Sr2RuO4 the agreement is worst for these longitudinal bond-stretching modes, which ex- hibit a flatter dispersion indicating better screening com- pared to the density functional theory (DFT) calcula- tions. Note, however, that perovskite oxides close to charge ordering exhibit a much stronger renormalization of the zone-boundary modes with breathing character that is frequently labeled overscreening . On the other side there is clear evidence for strong magnetic fluctuations deduced from NMR and inelas- tic neutron scattering (INS) experiments [39–45]. The dominating magnetic signal is incommensurate and stems from nesting in the one-dimensional bands associated arXiv:2102.06636v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 12 Feb 2021 2 with dxz and dyz orbitals, see Fig. 1. The relevance of this instability towards an incommensurate spin-density wave (SDW) is underlined by the observation of static magnetic order emerging at this q position in recipro- cal space for minor substitution of Ru by Ti or of Sr by Ca . A repulsive impurity potential was recently proposed to form the nucleation center for the magnetic ordering that should strongly couple to charge currents . Furthermore, the temperature dependence of these incommensurate magnetic fluctuations in pure Sr2RuO4 agrees with a closeness to a quantum critical point . These nesting-induced magnetic fluctuations can easily be explained by DFT calculations using the random phase approximations (RPA) but their rel- evance for the superconducting pairing remains contro- versial . Inelastic neutron scattering in the supercon- ducting state can exclude the opening of a large gap for these nesting-driven . Since magnetic excitations are particle hole excitations one expects in the most simple isotropic case a magnetic gap comparable to twice the su- perconducting one, which can be safely excluded. How- ever, the anisotropy of the gap function and interactions can strongly modify the magnetic response in the super- conducting state. A more recent TOF inelastic neutron scattering experiments confirms the absence of a large gap but reports weak evidence for suppression of spectral weight at very low energies . This experiment also claims the occurrence of a spin resonance mode at the nesting position with a finite perpendicular wave-vector component, which would point to an essential modulation of the superconducting gap perpendicular to the RuO2 layers but which is inconsistent with the results of this work. In addition to the incommensurate nesting-induced fluctuations, macroscopic susceptibility , NMR and also polarized inelastic neutron scattering exper- iments reveal the existence of magnetic fluctua- tions centered at the origin of the Brillouin zone, which typically can be associated with ferromagnetism. Futher- more, a small concentration Co doping can lead to static short-range ferromagnetic order . All techniques find almost temperature independent quasi-ferromagnetic ex- citations in pure Sr2RuO4. This ferromagnetic response qualitatively agrees with a recent dynamical mean field theory (DMFT) analysis of magnetic fluctuations , which finds essentially local magnetic fluctuations super- posed on the well known nesting signal. However, the neutron data disagree with a fully local character as they show a finite q dependence . The quasi-ferromagnetic fluctuations also disagree with the expectations for a nearly ferromagnetic system that exhibits paramagnon scattering . SrRuO3 clearly exhibits such param- agnon scattering with its well-defined structure in q and energy space . Here we present additional neutron scattering exper- iments on the magnetic fluctuations in Sr2RuO4, which focus on several aspects that are particularly relevant for the superconducting pairing mechanism involving mag- based on LDA+SO calculations from and marked by dif- ferent colors. The black arrow represents the dominant nest- ing vector between the one-dimensional sheets α (red) and β (blue). The incommensurate positions of the in-plane nesting signal are marked by different symbols. The circles repre- sent the crystallographically equivalent positions (±0.3,±0.3) and (±0.7,±0.7). The positions (±0.3,±0.7) and (±0.7,±0.3) shown by stars are equivalent to those on the diagonals only in a purely two-dimensional picture, because (1 0 0) is not an allowed Bragg peak in the body-centered lattice. netic fluctuations or for the general understanding of magnetic excitations in a strongly correlated electron sys- tem. We discuss the possibility of important out-of-plane dispersion in the magnetic response in the superconduct- ing and normal states, the shape of nesting scattering away from the peak position and the non-local character of the quasi-ferromagnetic response. II. EXPERIMENTAL INS experiments were carried out on the ThALES and IN20 triple-axis spectrometers (TAS) at the Institut Laue Langevin and on the LET time- of-flight (TOF) spectrometer at the ISIS Neutron and Muon Source. We used an assembly of 12 Sr2RuO4 crys- tals with a total volume of 2.2 cm3 in all experiments. At Kyoto University, the crystals were grown using the floating zone method and similar crystals were studied in many experiments . The crystal assembly was ori- ented in the / scattering plane (corresponding to a vertical c axis) to study the in-plane physics of the Ru layers. Additionally, with the instruments ThALES and LET it was possible to access parts of the q space perpendicular to the plane which enables an analysis of the out-of-plane dispersion of the magnetic response. To conduct experiments inside the superconducting phase a dilution refrigerator was used, reaching a temperature of ∼200 mK, well below the transition temperature of 3 ∼1.5 K. ThALES and LET are operating with a cold neu- tron source providing the energy resolution to study the magnetic response down to ∼200 μeV. The TOF spec- trometer LET records data simultaneously with four dif- ferent values of the incidental energies, Ei and resolu- tions, while the energy resolution of the TAS ThALES is determined by the chosen final neutron wave vector kf of 1.57 ̊A −1 combined with the collimations. On ThALES the best intensity to background ratio was achieved by using a Si(111) monochromator and PG(002) analyzer combined with a radial collimator in front of the analyzer for further background reduction. The same configura- tion was also used in an earlier study . A polarized neutron scattering experiment was per- formed on the thermal TAS IN20 using Heusler crystals as monochromator and analyzer. A spin flipper in front of the analyzer enabled the polarization analysis. The scans were performed with a fixed final momentum of kf = 4.1 ̊A −1, where the graphite filter in front of the analyzer cuts higher order contaminations. Longitudinal polar- ization analysis was performed with a set of Helmholtz coils. III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION A. q dependence of fluctuations associated with nesting The TOF technique enables an imaging of the com- plete Q-E-space, which gives insight on the distribution of scattering intensity in the reciprocal space. Through- out the paper, the scattering vector Q=(H,K,L) and the propagation vector in the first Brillouin zone q=(qh,qk,ql) are given in reciprocal lattice units (rlu). We mostly consider only the planar wave vector Q2d=(H,K) pro- jection. Fig. 2 shows the inelastic scattering plotted against the H,K components of the scattering vector in the superconducting phase. The four different pan- els display sections of the two-dimensional (H,K) plane for different incident energies and hence different reso- lutions. The intensities are fully integrated along the energy transfer (depending on the incident energy) and along the out-of-plane component of the scattering vec- tor, -0.7< L <0.7. The high scattering intensities at the incommensurate positions (±0.3,0.3), (±0.3,0.7), and (±0.7,0.7) are clearly visible, arising from the well known antiferromagnetic fluctuations [39–41, 43, 44]. Addition- ally there are ridges of scattering intensities connecting these positions in [ξ,0] and [0,ξ] directions that were first reported in . The arc visible in Fig. 2(d) connect- ing (-0.3,0.3) and (0.3,0.3) is a spurious signal; it does not appear for the other incidental energies. Neglecting electronic dispersion perpendicular to the planes and assuming an idealized scheme of flat one- dimensional bands originating from the dxz and dyz or- bitals, one expects nesting induced magnetic excitations = 0.2 K). The TOF data at four different incidental ener- gies display the magnetic scattering distribution in the ab plane. The intense signal at the incommensurate positions (0.3,0.3), (0.7,0.7), and (0.3,0.7) is visible for all Ei. Addition- ally there is magnetic scattering between the incommensurate positions in [ξ,0] and [0,ξ] directions, respectively. To increase the statistics the data is integrated over the maximum L range of [-0.7,0.7] and full E range depending on the inciden- tal energy (1.75< E <10 for Ei = 14.13meV, 0.8< E <6.7 for Ei = 8.78meV, 0.7< E <4.5 for Ei = 5.64meV, and 0.5< E <3.5 for Ei = 4.52meV). The overlayed rectangles in (a) represent the integration area of the one-dimensional cuts displayed in Fig. 3(a)-(c). 4 for any two-dimensional vector Q2d=(0.3,ξ) and (ξ,0.3) and accordingly a peak at (0.3,0.3) . The peaks clearly dominate but the ridges are also detectable - mostly for the positions connecting the nesting peaks, i.e. 0.3< ξ <0.7. This is in accordance with the calcula- tion of the bare susceptibility which shows an enhanced signal only between the peaks, i.e. for the paths from (0.3,0.3) to (0.7,0.3) . To analyze the ridge scattering and the anisotropy of the incommensurate signals in detail, Fig. 3(a) shows one-dimensional cuts along the ridge in [ξ,0] direction calculated from the data taken with Ei=14.13 meV (Fig. By subtracting the background obtained from the average of (ξ,0.15) and (ξ,0.45), shown in Fig. 3(b) and (c) respectively, we isolate the signal along the line (ξ,0.3) shown in Fig. 3(d). The ridge scattering is mainly detectable between the peaks at the incommensu- rate positions, as it is visible in the two one-dimensional cuts representing the background parallel to the ridge on both sides (Fig. 3(b) and (c)). While the (ξ,0.15) cut exhibits only a weak signal around (-0.3,0.15) the (ξ,0.45) cut shows clearly two peaks at the (-0.7,0.45) and (-0.3,0.45) positions representing the ridges in [0,ξ] direction. The rounding of the one-dimensional Fermi- surface sheets suppresses the susceptibility at (0.3,ξ) with ξ lower than 0.3, but this suppression is not abrupt. Be- sides the ridge scattering we may also confirm the pro- nounced asymmetry of the nesting peak with a shoulder near (0.25,0.3) and equivalent positions. This shoulder was reported in and was also found in the full RPA calculations. The asymmetry of the nesting peaks and the ridge scat- tering between the incommensurate positions can also be seen in the data of lower incident energies (see Fig. 3(e) and (f)). The one-dimensional cuts for different K val- ues confirm the asymmetric shape of the nesting peaks. A thorough analysis of the pure magnetic signal as in the case of Ei = 14.13 meV is not possible due to uncertainty in the background. Furthermore, the ridge scattering is less pronounced in the data obtained with lower incident energies, which indicates a higher characteristic energy of the ridge scattering. This further explains why the much weaker scattering in the ridges has not been detected in early TAS studies [39–41]. B. Search for gap opening or a resonance mode below Tc The opening of a superconductivity-induced gap in the spectrum of magnetic fluctuations would have strong im- pact on the discussion of the superconducting character in Sr2RuO4. Previous INS experiments using a TAS re- vealed the clear absence of a large gap at the nesting po- sition , whereas a recent TOF experiment reports a tiny gap although the statistics remained very poor . Studying the magnetic response of Sr2RuO4 in its su- perconducting phase by INS is challenging, because one commensurate positions. (a)-(c) show one-dimensional cuts from Fig. 2(a) along the (ξ,K) paths for K = 0.15 (a), 0.3 (b), and 0.45 (c). The background at both sides of the incom- mensurate positions is displayed in (a) and (c) (represented by the same colored rectangles in 3(a)). An averaged background is formed from both (gray open circles) and fitted with a lin- ear contribution and two Gaussians (black solid line). This is compared to the incommensurate signal in (b). In (d) the lin- ear background contribution (black dashed line) is subtracted and the signal along the [ξ,0] direction is fitted with two skew Gaussians for the incommensurate signal and a broad Gaus- sian fixed at ξ = 0.5 (red area) taking into account the ridge scattering. (e) and (f) represent one-dimensional cuts for dif- ferent K and two different incident energies 8.78 meV and 5.64 meV taken from Fig. 2(b) and (c). The integration range in [0,ξ] direction is ±0.025 around the K value and the scans are shifted vertically for better visibility. needs to focus on small energies of the order of 0.2 to 0.5 meV. At these energies the signal in the normal state is at least one order of magnitude below its maximum strength at 6 meV, and the required high-energy reso- lution further suppresses statistics. Fig. 4 presents the TOF data obtained with Ei = 3 meV by calculating the energy dependence at the nesting position integrated over all L values. The full L integration is needed to enhance the statistics. In Fig. 4 (a) and (b) we compare the raw data for both temperatures with the background signal. In (c) the background subtracted magnetic response in the superconducting phase is compared to that in the 5 Low energy dependence of incommensurate signal below and above the superconducting transition extracted from TOF data. (a) and (b) display the energy scans at superconducting phase transition. The background in both panels is derived from the constant Q cut at (0.09,0.41) for both temperatures (|QIC| = |Qbg|). To increase statistics the TOF data with an incidental energy of 3 meV is fully inte- grated over L (range [-0.7,0.7]) and symmetrized by folding in q space at (0.3,0.7) along the (1,-1,0) plane. The H and K component is integrated with the range [0.25,0.35] (c) Back- ground subtraction and Bose factor correction yields the pure magnetic response at low energies which is compared inside and outside the superconducting phase. normal phase. There is no evidence for the opening of a gap within the statistics of this TOF experiment. Also a resonance at a finite energy cannot be detected. Admit- tedly the statistics of this TOF data is too poor to detect small signals or their suppression. Following the claim of Iida et al. the TOF data is also analyzed in terms of a possible resonance mode appearing at a finite value of the L component, i.e. at (0.3,0.3,0.5). Therefore, the L dependence of the mag- netic signal at (0.3,0.3,L) is determined by background subtraction and compared for the two temperatures (see Fig. 5). The different panels represent the energy ranges from reference 53, where a resonance appearing at 0.56 meV is proposed for L=0.5. In our data shown in Fig. 5(b), there is no difference visible between superconduct- ing and normal phase at L=±0.5. To study the low-energy response and its L dependence in more detail and with better statistics the TAS is bet- ter suited since measurements can be focused to single Q,E points. Using ThALES and its high flux and en- ergy resolution constant Q scans at the incommensurate position (0.3,0.7,L) with L=0, 0.25, and 0.5 were mea- ergies extracted from TOF data. Constant E cuts with an integration width of 0.2 meV at the incommensurate position (0.3,0.3,L) were adjusted for the measured background at the same energy at (0.09,0.41,L) and corrected for the Bose factor. The L dependence of the magnetic response in the supercon- ducting phase (blue) is compared to the normal phase (red). Additionally, the square of the Ru1+ form factor is depicted in each panel (black dashed line). There is no evidence for a peak at L=0.5. sured to investigate the L dependence of the low energy response (see Fig. 6). This incommensurate position was chosen due to a better signal-to-noise ratio compared to (0.3,0.3,L) and because the larger |Q| value allows one to reach finite L values by tilting the cryostat. Similar to Fig. 4 (a) and (b) the raw data for two tempera- tures is shown in Fig. 6 (a)-(c). The background was measured by rotating ω by 20 degrees for each L value and then combining all three backgrounds to an aver- age. For all L values the intensity of the incommen- surate signal increases approximately linearly for small energies, following the established single relaxor behav- ior. Comparing the two temperatures there is no differ- ence noticable for any L value down to the energy res- olution. Especially around 0.56 meV where Iida et al. propose a resonance at the incommensurate position 6 (0.3,0.3,0.5) the two temperatures yield comparable sig- nals. It should be noted here that while the incommen- surate positions (0.3,0.3,0) and (0.3,0.7,0) are crystallo- graphically not equivalent both positions become equiva- lent with the L component 0.5, see Fig. 1. Therefore, the data taken at (0.3,0.3,0.5) and (0.7,0.3,0.5) can be com- pared. To emphasize the absence of a resonance mode around 0.56 meV the data from Fig. 6 is plotted with a larger energy binning to further increase the statistics (see Fig. 7, which also indicates the broad energy integra- tion used in ). There is no significant deviation from the general linear behavior for any L value at low tem- peratures detectable. Iida et al. report an increase of signal of ∼60% for L=0.5 in the superconducting phase, which clearly is incompatible with our data that offer higher statistics. Since no L dependence of the magnetic low energy response can be established (Fig. 6 and 7) we merge the data and compare it with the former published low- energy dependence of the incommensurate signal (see Fig. 8). The new experiments below Tc fully confirm that the nesting excitations in Sr2RuO4 do not exhibit a large gap, i.e. a magnetic gap comparable to twice the su- perconducting one. Combining all the previous and new data there is, however, some weak evidence for the sup- pression of magnetic scattering at very low energies below 0.25 meV. With the neutron instrumentation of today it seems very difficult to further characterize the suppres- sion of the small signal at such low energy. For the previously assumed superconducting state de- tailed theoretical analyzes of the magnetic response were reported , but concerning the more recently proposed superconducting symmetries [19–26] such investigations lack. The dx2−y2 state deduced from quasiparticle in- terference imaging exhibits nodes at Fermi-surface positions that are connected through the nesting vector. This implies that even at very low energies, the nest- ing induced excitations are not fully suppressed in such dx2−y2 superconducting state, in agreement with the ex- perimental absence of a large gap in the nesting spectrum . Within the dx2−y2 superconducting state the nest- ing vector also connects Fermi-surface regions with maxi- mum and minimum gap values and it connects either two regions of the β sheet or one β region with an α region. Therefore the conditions for a spin-resonance mode are more complex and less favorable than in the case of the FeAs-based superconductors, where the s+− supercon- ducting symmetry and the nesting magnetic fluctuations perfectly match each other . C. Shape of the quasi-ferromagnetic fluctuations The polarization analysis of inelastic neutron scatter- ing provides the separation of the magnetic from any other scattering contribution. It is therefore possible to identify a tiny magnetic response that is little struc- tured in q space. This technique was used to detect ergies extracted from TAS data. The constant q scans were conducted at the incommensurate positions (0.3,0.7,L) with L = 0, 0.25, and 0.5 in the superconducting and normal phase. The background for each L is measured after ω rotation of 20 deg, thus keeping |q| constant, and later averaged for all scans, yielding the presented background (black circles) and its fit (gray). The intensity is normalized with 1980000 mon- itor counts which corresponds to a measuring time of about 15 min per point. Comparison of the background-free incommensu- rate signal Q=(0.3,0.7,L) for different L values and temper- atures. The compared data originates from the constant q scans shown in Fig. 6. The binning is increased to ∆ E = 0.1 meV which yields better statistics. A linear fit (red line) provides a guide to the eye. The energy range of the proposed spin resonance is indicated by the red box. 7 Comparison of the energy dependence of the in- commensurate signal with former published data from (labelled: Kunkem ̈oller PRL). Background corrected data recorded at (0.3, 0.3, 0) (circles) is given in panel (a); the background free signal at (0.3, 0.7) is averaged over all L values for both temperatures (diamonds), panel (b), and the incommensurate signal reported in (triangles) is shown in (c). Data were corrected for the Bose and magnetic form factors. quasi-ferromagnetic fluctuations and to determine their strength in comparison to the incommensurate fluctua- tions in Sr2RuO4. We wished to extend this study focusing on the q dependence of the magnetic quasi- ferromagnetic response. Recent DMFT calculations find evidence for local fluctuations superposing the well- established nesting excitations, which qualitatively agree with the experimental quasi-ferromagnetic signal. How- ever, while the neutron experiments indicate a finite sup- pression of the quasi-ferromagnetic response towards the boundaries of the Brillouin zone, the DMFT calculation obtains an essentially local feature without such q de- pendence. The polarized neutron study was performed on the thermal TAS IN20 and the results are shown in Fig. 9. An example of the raw data with different spin channels that are needed for the polarization analysis, is given diagonal of the 1st Brillouin zone. (a) Example of constant energy scans for all three spin flip channels displays the in- creased scattering at the incommensurate position (0.7,0.3,0) at 8 meV and 1.6 K. The polarization analysis of all channels yields the purely magnetic scattering signal displayed in (b) for different energies and temperatures. The black circles rep- resent data of the previously reported polarization analysis, taken from . This data set was as well measured at 8 meV and 1.6 K. (c) The magnetic signal at 290 K can be described by the susceptibility model used in (light red line). The intensity in (a) is normalized with 7800000 monitor counts which corresponds to a measuring time of about 20 minutes per point. in Fig. 9(a) where a diagonal constant energy scan at 8 meV, reaching from the zone boundary (0.5,0.5) over the incommensurate position (0.7,0.3) to the zone center (1,0), is shown. The x, y, z indices refer to the common coordinate system used in neutron polarization analysis in respect to the scattering vector Q . The three spin flip channels SFx, SFy, and SFz clearly exhibit a maximum at the incommensurate position. While SFy and SFz exhibit comparable amplitudes SFx carries the doubled intensity as it senses both magnetic components perpendicular to the scattering vector. There is an en- hancement of magnetic excitations polarized along the c direction, that can be seen in the stronger SFy and that was studied in reference 42. Assuming a polarization in- dependent background, 2I(SFx)-I(SFy)-I(SFz) yields the background free magnetic signal, see discussion in refer- ence 45. Fig. 9(b) displays the magnetic signal, corrected for Bose factor, i.e. the imaginary part of the susceptibil- ity, for different energies and temperatures. The data well agrees with the results for 8 meV and 1.6 K pre- 8 Comparison of magnetic scattering (T=1.6 K) at prominent points in k-space with L=0. The magnetic signal was extracted using the polarization analysis (2I(SFx)-I(SFy)- I(SFz)) and is displayed for the points in the Brillouin zone and different energies: Γ point, the incommensurate position, and the different zone boundaries X and M. The inset mag- nifies the intensity region around zero. sented in . Additionally, the data at 290 K indi- cates a significant drop of the incommensurate nesting signal, which however still is finite and clearly observ- able. The temperature dependence of the incommensu- rate signal was first discussed in reference 39, where the neutron scattering results are compared to the NMR re- sults from reference 38. The incommensurate signal was found to strongly decrease with increasing temperature up to room temperature while the ferromagnetic com- ponent of the NMR is nearly temperature independent. Also the previous polarized neutron experiment found the quasi-ferromagnetic contribution to be almost iden- tical at 1.6 and 160 K . As indicated in Fig. 9(b) the quasi-ferromagnetic signal does not change up to 290 K, so that the peak heights of incommensurate and quasi-ferromagnetic contributions are comparable at am- bient temperature. Taking the much broader q shape of the quasi-ferromagnetic excitations into account, the q- integrated spectral weight of the latter clearly dominates. Around room temperature the quasi-ferromagnetic fluc- tuations possess thus a larger impact on any integrat- ing processes such as electron scattering. The quasi- ferromagnetic fluctuations at 290 K, however, do not ex- hibit a local character as the signal is significantly re- duced at the antiferromagnetic zone boundary (0.5,0.5,0) (Fig. 9(c)). This confirms the conclusion of Steffens et al. that the quasi-ferromagnetic fluctuations are sharper in q space than expected from the calculations. Also at the other zone boundary (0.5,0,0) there is no significant magnetic signal detectable (see Fig. 10). IV. CONCLUSION Polarized and unpolarized neutron scattering experi- ments were performed to study several aspects of the magnetic fluctuations in Sr2RuO4 that are particularly relevant for a possible superconducting pairing scenario. The TOF instrument LET yields full mapping of the excitations and reveals the well-studied incommensurate fluctuations at (0.3,0.3) in the two-dimensional recipro- cal space. There is also ridge scattering at (0.3,ξ) re- flecting the one-dimensional character of the dxz and dyz bands, as first reported in references 43 and 44. These ridges are stronger between the four peaks surrounding (0.5,0.5), i.e. for ξ>0.3, but the suppression of the sig- nal at smaller ξ is gradual. The TOF data confirm the pronounced asymmetry of the nesting peaks. Concerning the study of the nesting fluctuations at very low energy in the superconducting phase, TAS experiments yield higher statistics due to the possibility to focus the ex- periment on the particular position in Q,E space. Data taken at different out-of-plane components of the scatter- ing vector exclude a sizeable resonance mode emerging at L=0.5 in the superconducting phase. Only by combining the results of several experiments one can obtain some evidence for the suppression of spectral weight at very low energies. With neutron polarization analysis the magnetic exci- tations were further characterized at 290 K. The incom- mensurate nesting signal is strongly reduced but still vis- ible, while the quasi-ferromagnetic contribution is almost unchanged. At this temperature there is a suppression of this quasiferromagnetic scattering at the Brillouin-zone boundaries, which underlines that this response is not fully local. We acknowledge stimulating discussions with Ilya Eremin. This work was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foun- dation) - Project number 277146847 - CRC 1238, project B04, the JSPS KAKENHI Nos. JP15H05852 and JP17H06136, and the JSPS core-to-core program. Y. Maeno, H. Hashimoto, K. Yoshida, S. Nishizaki, T. Fujita, J. G. Bednorz, and F. Lichtenberg, Supercon- ductivity in a layered perovskite without copper, Nature G. Koster, L. Klein, W. Siemons, G. Rijnders, J. S. Dodge, C. B. Eom, D. H. Blank, and M. R. Beasley, Structure, physical properties, and applications of SrRuO3 thin films, Rev. Mod. Phys. 84, 253 (2012). G. Baskaran, Why is Sr2RuO4 not a high Tc super- conductor? Electron correlation, Hund’s coupling and p-wave instability, Phys. B Condens. Matter 223, 490 T. M. Rice and M. Sigrist, Sr2RuO4: an electronic ana- logue of 3He?, J. Phys. Cond. Matter 7, L643 (1995). 9 A. P. Mackenzie and Y. Maeno, The superconductivity of Sr2RuO4 and the physics of spin-triplet pairing, Rev. Mod. Phys. 75, 657 (2003). Y. Maeno, S. Kittaka, T. Nomura, S. Yonezawa, and K. Ishida, Evaluation of Spin-Triplet Superconductivity in Sr2RuO4, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 81, C. W. Hicks, J. R. Kirtley, T. M. Lippman, N. C. Koshnick, M. E. Huber, Y. Maeno, W. M. Yuhasz, M. B. Maple, and K. A. Moler, Limits on superconductivity- related magnetization in Sr2RuO4 and PrOs4Sb12 from scanning SQUID microscopy, Phys. Rev. B 81, 214501 H. Murakawa, K. Ishida, K. Kitagawa, Z. Q. Mao, and Y. Maeno, Measurement of the 101Ru-Knight Shift of Superconducting Sr2RuO4 in a Parallel Magnetic Field, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 167004 (2004). C. Kallin, Chiral p-wave order in Sr2RuO4, Reports Prog. Phys. 75, 42501 (2012). C. W. Hicks, D. O. Brodsky, E. A. Yelland, A. S. Gibbs, J. A. N. Bruin, M. E. Barber, S. D. Edkins, K. Nishimura, S. Yonezawa, Y. Maeno, and A. P. Mackenzie, Strong In- crease of Tc of Sr2RuO4 Under Both Tensile and Com- pressive Strain, Science 344, 283 (2014). A. Steppke, L. Zhao, M. E. Barber, T. Scaffidi, F. Jerzembeck, H. Rosner, A. S. Gibbs, Y. Maeno, S. H. Simon, A. P. Mackenzie, and C. W. Hicks, Strong peak in Tc of Sr2RuO4 under uniaxial pressure, Science 355, Y. S. Li, N. Kikugawa, D. A. Sokolov, F. Jerzembeck, A. S. Gibbs, Y. Maeno, C. W. Hicks, M. Nicklas, and A. P. Mackenzie, High sensitivity heat capacity mea- surements on Sr2RuO4 under uniaxial pressure (2020), arXiv:1906.07597 [cond-mat.supr-con]. M. E. Barber, F. Lechermann, S. V. Streltsov, S. L. Sko- rnyakov, S. Ghosh, B. J. Ramshaw, N. Kikugawa, D. A. Sokolov, A. P. Mackenzie, C. W. Hicks, and I. I. Mazin, Role of correlations in determining the Van Hove strain in Sr2RuO4, Phys. Rev. B 100, 245139 (2019). K. Ishida, H. Mukuda, Y. Kitaoka, K. Asayama, Z. Q. Mao, Y. Mori, and Y. Maeno, Spin-triplet superconduc- tivity in Sr2RuO4 identified by 17O Knight shift, Nat. J. A. Duffy, S. M. Hayden, Y. Maeno, Z. Mao, J. Kulda, and G. J. McIntyre, Polarized-Neutron Scattering Study of the Cooper-Pair Moment in Sr2RuO4, Phys. Rev. Lett. A. Pustogow, Y. Luo, A. Chronister, Y. S. Su, D. A. Sokolov, F. Jerzembeck, A. P. Mackenzie, C. W. Hicks, N. Kikugawa, S. Raghu, E. D. Bauer, and S. E. Brown, Constraints on the superconducting order parameter in Sr2RuO4 from oxygen-17 nuclear magnetic resonance, Nature 574, 72 (2019). K. Ishida, M. Manago, K. Kinjo, and Y. Maeno, Re- duction of the 17O Knight Shift in the Superconduct- ing State and the Heat-up Effect by NMR Pulses on Sr2RuO4, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 89, A. N. Petsch, M. Zhu, M. Enderle, Z. Q. Mao, Y. Maeno, I. I. Mazin, and S. M. Hayden, Reduction of the spin sus- ceptibility in the superconducting state of Sr2RuO4 ob- served by polarized neutron scattering, Phys. Rev. Lett. H. S. Røising, T. Scaffidi, F. Flicker, G. F. Lange, and S. H. Simon, Superconducting order of Sr2RuO4 from a three-dimensional microscopic model, Phys. Rev. Re- search 1, 033108 (2019). A. T. Rømer, D. D. Scherer, I. M. Eremin, P. J. Hirschfeld, and B. M. Andersen, Knight Shift and Lead- ing Superconducting Instability from Spin Fluctuations in Sr2RuO4, Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 247001 (2019). W.-S. Wang, C.-C. Zhang, F.-C. Zhang, and Q.-H. Wang, Theory of Chiral p-Wave Superconductivity with Near Nodes for Sr2RuO4, Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 027002 (2019). Z. Wang, X. Wang, and C. Kallin, Spin-orbit coupling and spin-triplet pairing symmetry in Sr2RuO4, Phys. Rev. B 101, 064507 (2020). H. G. Suh, H. Menke, P. M. R. Brydon, C. Timm, A. Ramires, and D. F. Agterberg, Stabilizing even-parity chiral superconductivity in Sr2RuO4, Phys. Rev. Re- search 2, 032023 (2020). A. T. Rømer, A. Kreisel, M. A. M ̈uller, P. J. Hirschfeld, I. M. Eremin, and B. M. Andersen, Theory of strain- induced magnetic order and splitting of Tc and TTRSB in Sr2RuO4, Phys. Rev. B 102, 054506 (2020). S. A. Kivelson, A. C. Yuan, B. Ramshaw, and R. Thomale, A proposal for reconciling diverse exper- iments on the superconducting state in Sr2RuO4, npj Quantum Materials 5, 43 (2020). R. Sharma, S. D. Edkins, Z. Wang, A. Kostin, C. Sow, Y. Maeno, A. P. Mackenzie, J. C. S. Davis, and V. Mad- havan, Momentum-resolved superconducting energy gaps of Sr2RuO4 from quasiparticle interference imaging, Pro- ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117, 5222 G. M. Luke, Y. Fudamoto, K. M. Kojima, M. I. Larkin, J. Merrin, B. Nachumi, Y. J. Uemura, Y. Maeno, Z. Q. Mao, Y. Mori, H. Nakamura, and M. Sigrist, Time-reversal symmetry-breaking superconductivity in Sr2RuO4, Nature 394, 558 (1998). V. Grinenko, R. Sarkar, K. Kihou, C. H. Lee, I. Morozov, S. Aswartham, B. B ̈uchner, P. Chekhonin, W. Skrotzki, K. Nenkov, R. H ̈uhne, K. Nielsch, S. L. Drechsler, V. L. Vadimov, M. A. Silaev, P. A. Volkov, I. Eremin, H. Luetkens, and H. H. Klauss, Superconductivity with broken time-reversal symmetry inside a superconducting s-wave state, Nat. Phys. 16, 789 (2020). J. Xia, Y. Maeno, P. T. Beyersdorf, M. M. Fejer, and A. Kapitulnik, High Resolution Polar Kerr Effect Measurements of Sr2RuO4: Evidence for Broken Time- Reversal Symmetry in the Superconducting State, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 167002 (2006). I. Schnell, I. I. Mazin, and A. Y. Liu, Unconventional superconducting pairing symmetry induced by phonons, Phys. Rev. B 74, 184503 (2006). M. Braden, A. H. Moudden, S. Nishizaki, Y. Maeno, and T. Fujita, Structural analysis of Sr2RuO4, Phys. C Su- percond. 273, 248 (1997). M. Braden, W. Reichardt, Y. Sidis, Z. Mao, and Y. Maeno, Lattice dynamics and electron-phonon cou- pling in Sr2RuO4 : Inelastic neutron scattering and shell- model calculations, Phys. Rev. B 76, 014505 (2007). Z. Fang and K. Terakura, Magnetic phase diagram of Ca2−xSrxRuO4 governed by structural distortions, Phys. Rev. B 64, 10.1103/PhysRevB.64.020509 (2001). O. Friedt, M. Braden, G. Andr ́e, P. Adelmann, S. Nakat- suji, and Y. Maeno, Structural and magnetic aspects of the metal-insulator transition in Ca2−xSrxRuO4, Phys. 10 Rev. B 63, 174432 (2001). M. Braden, W. Reichardt, S. Shiryaev, and S. Barilo, Giant phonon anomalies in the bond-stretching modes in doped BaBiO3: comparison to cuprates manganites and nickelates, Physica C: Superconductivity 378-381, Y. Wang, J. J. Wang, J. E. Saal, S. L. Shang, L.-Q. Chen, and Z.-K. Liu, Phonon dispersion in Sr2RuO4 studied by a first-principles cumulative force-constant approach, Phys. Rev. B 82, 172503 (2010). M. Braden, L. Pintschovius, T. Uefuji, and K. Ya- mada, Dispersion of the high-energy phonon modes in Nd1.85Ce0.15CuO4, Phys. Rev. B 72, 184517 (2005). T. Imai, A. W. Hunt, K. R. Thurber, and F. C. Chou, 17O NMR Evidence for Orbital Dependent Ferromag- netic Correlations in Sr2RuO4, Phys. Re 81, 3006 (1998). Y. Sidis, M. Braden, P. Bourges, B. Hennion, S. Nishizaki, Y. Maeno, and Y. Mori, Evidence for In- commensurate Spin Fluctuations in Sr2RuO4, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 3320 (1999). M. Braden, Y. Sidis, P. Bourges, P. Pfeuty, J. Kulda, Z. Mao, and Y. Maeno, Inelastic neutron scattering study of magnetic excitations in Sr2RuO4, Phys. Rev. B 66, F. Servant, B. F ̊ak, S. Raymond, J. P. Brison, P. Lejay, and J. Flouquet, Magnetic excitations in the normal and superconducting states of Sr2RuO4, Phys. Rev. B 65, M. Braden, P. Steffens, Y. Sidis, J. Kulda, P. Bourges, S. Hayden, N. Kikugawa, and Y. Maeno, Anisotropy of the Incommensurate Fluctuations in Sr2RuO4: A Study with Polarized Neutrons, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 097402 K. Iida, M. Kofu, N. Katayama, J. Lee, R. Kajimoto, Y. Inamura, M. Nakamura, M. Arai, Y. Yoshida, M. Fu- jita, K. Yamada, and S.-H. Lee, Inelastic neutron scatter- ing study of the magnetic fluctuations in Sr2RuO4, Phys. Rev. B 84, 060402 (2011). K. Iida, J. Lee, M. B. Stone, M. Kofu, Y. Yoshida, and S. Lee, Two-Dimensional Incommensurate Magnetic Fluctuations in Sr2(Ru0.99Ti0.01)O4, Journal of the Phys- ical Society of Japan 81, 124710 (2012). P. Steffens, Y. Sidis, J. Kulda, Z. Q. Mao, Y. Maeno, I. I. Mazin, and M. Braden, Spin Fluctuations in Sr2RuO4 from Polarized Neutron Scattering: Implications for Su- perconductivity, Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 047004 (2019). M. Braden, O. Friedt, Y. Sidis, P. Bourges, M. Minakata, and Y. Maeno, Incommensurate Magnetic Ordering in Sr2Ru1−xTixO4, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 197002 (2002). J. P. Carlo, T. Goko, I. M. Gat-Malureanu, P. L. Russo, A. T. Savici, A. A. Aczel, G. J. MacDougall, J. A. Rodriguez, T. J. Williams, G. M. Luke, C. R. Wiebe, Y. Yoshida, S. Nakatsuji, Y. Maeno, T. Taniguchi, and Y. J. Uemura, New magnetic phase diagram of (Sr,Ca)2RuO4, Nature Materials 11, 323 (2012). S. Kunkem ̈oller, A. A. Nugroho, Y. Sidis, and M. Braden, Spin-density-wave ordering in Ca0.5Sr1.5RuO4 studied by neutron scattering, Phys. Rev. B 89, 045119 (2014). B. Zinkl and M. Sigrist, Impurity induced double transi- tions for accidentally degenerate unconventional pairing states (2020), arXiv:2009.10089 [cond-mat.supr-con]. I. I. Mazin and D. J. Singh, Competitions in Layered Ruthenates: Ferromagnetism versus Antiferromagnetism and Triplet versus Singlet Pairing, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, J.-W. Huo, T. M. Rice, and F.-C. Zhang, Spin density wave fluctuations and p-wave pairing in Sr2RuO4, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 167003 (2013). S. Kunkem ̈oller, P. Steffens, P. Link, Y. Sidis, Z. Q. Mao, Y. Maeno, and M. Braden, Absence of a Large Superconductivity-Induced Gap in Magnetic Fluctua- tions of Sr2RuO4, Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 147002 (2017). K. Iida, M. Kofu, K. Suzuki, N. Murai, S. Ohira- Kawamura, R. Kajimoto, Y. Inamura, M. Ishikado, S. Hasegawa, T. Masuda, Y. Yoshida, K. Kakurai, K. Machida, and S. Lee, Horizontal Line Nodes in Sr2RuO4 Proved by Spin Resonance, J. Phys. Soc. Japan Y. Maeno, K. Yoshida, H. Hashimoto, S. Nishizaki, S.-i. Ikeda, M. Nohara, T. Fujita, A. Mackenzie, N. Hussey, J. Bednorz, and F. Lichtenberg, Two-Dimensional Fermi Liquid Behavior of the Superconductor Sr2RuO4, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 66, 1405 (1997). H. Mukuda, K. Ishida, Y. Kitaoka, K. Asayama, Z. Q. Mao, Y. Mori, and Y. Maeno, 17O NMR probe of spin fluctuations in triplet superconductor Sr2RuO4, Phys. B Condens. Matter 259-261, 944 (1999). J. E. Ortmann, J. Y. Liu, J. Hu, M. Zhu, J. Peng, M. Matsuda, X. Ke, and Z. Q. Mao, Competition Between Antiferromagnetism and Ferromagnetism in Sr2RuO4 Probed by Mn and Co Doping, Scientific Re- ports 3, 2950 (2013). H. U. R. Strand, M. Zingl, N. Wentzell, O. Parcollet, and A. Georges, Magnetic response of Sr2RuO4: Quasi-local spin fluctuations due to Hund’s coupling, Phys. Rev. B T. Moriya, Spin Fluctuations in Itinerant Electron Mag- netism (Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 1985). K. Jenni, S. Kunkem ̈oller, D. Br ̈uning, T. Lorenz, Y. Sidis, A. Schneidewind, A. A. Nugroho, A. Rosch, D. I. Khomskii, and M. Braden, Interplay of Electronic and Spin Degrees in Ferromagnetic SrRuO3: Anomalous Softening of the Magnon Gap and Stiffness, Phys. Rev. C. N. Veenstra, Z. H. Zhu, B. Ludbrook, M. Capsoni, G. Levy, A. Nicolaou, J. A. Rosen, R. Comin, S. Kit- taka, Y. Maeno, I. S. Elfimov, and A. Damascelli, De- termining the surface-to-bulk progression in the normal- state electronic structure of Sr2RuO4 by angle-resolved photoemission and density functional theory, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 1 (2013). K. Jenni, M. Braden, P. Steffens, and Y. Sidis, In- terplay of magnetic excitations and superconductiv- ity in Sr2RuO4 (2018), Institut Laue-Langevin (ILL), DOI:10.5291/ILL-DATA.4-02-537. K. Jenni, M. Braden, P. Steffens, and Y. Sidis, pi,pi res- onance mode in the superconducting state of Sr2RuO4 (2020), Institut Laue-Langevin (ILL), DOI:10.5291/ILL- DATA.4-02-586. K. Jenni, M. Braden, P. Steffens, and Y. Sidis, Elec- tronic interaction in the unconventional superconduc- tor Sr2RuO4 Institut Laue-Langevin (ILL), DOI:10.5291/ILL-DATA.4-02-565. M. Braden, K. Jenni, S. Kunkem ̈oller, P. Steffens, and Y. Sidis, Low-energy magnetic excitations in the superconducting state of Sr2RuO4: opening of a gap? (2017), STFC ISIS Neutron and Muon Source, DOI:10.5286/ISIS.E.RB1710381. 11 I. I. Mazin, D. J. Singh, M. D. Johannes, and M. H. Du, Unconventional superconductivity with a sign rever- sal in the order parameter of lafeaso1−xfx, Phys. Rev.