1 Double superconducting dome and triple enhancement of Tc in the kagome superconductor CsV3Sb5 under high pressure K. Y. Chen1,2=, N. N. Wang1,2=, Q. W. Yin3=, Z. J. Tu3, C. S. Gong3, J. P. Sun1,2*, H. C. Lei3*, Y. Uwatoko4, and J.-G. Cheng1,2* 1Beijing National Laboratory for Condensed Matter Physics and Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China 2School of Physical Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China 3Department of Physics and Beijing Key Laboratory of Opto-electronic Functional Materials & Micro-nano Devices, Renmin University of China, Beijing 100872, China 4Institute for Solid State Physics, University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, Chiba 277-8581, Japan = These authors contributed equally to this work. E-mails: jpsun@iphy.ac.cn, hlei@ruc.edu.cn, jgcheng@iphy.ac.cn Abstract CsV3Sb5 is a newly discovered Z2 topological kagome metal showing the coexistence of a charge density wave (CDW)-like order at T* = 94 K and superconductivity (SC) at Tc = 2.5 K at ambient pressure. Here we study the interplay between CDW and SC in CsV3Sb5 via measurements of resistivity and magnetic susceptibility under hydrostatic pressures. We find that the CDW transition decreases with pressure and experience a subtle modification at Pc1  0.6-0.9 GPa before it vanishes completely at Pc2  2 GPa. Correspondingly, Tc(P) displays an unusual M-shaped double dome character with two maxima around Pc1 and Pc2, respectively, leading to a tripled enhancement of Tc to about 8 K at 2 GPa. The obtained temperature-pressure phase diagram resembles those of many unconventional superconductors, illustrating an intimated competition between CDW-like order and SC. The competition is found to be particularly strong for the intermediate pressure range Pc1  P  Pc2 as evidenced by the broad superconducting transition and reduced superconducting volume fraction. This work not only demonstrates the potential to raise the Tc of the V-based kagome superconductors, but also offers more insights into the rich physics related to the electronic correlations in this novel family of topological kagome metals. Keywords: CsV3Sb5, high pressure, superconductivity, charge density wave 2 The newly discovered Kagome metals AV3Sb5 (A = K, Rb, Cs) have attracted considerable attention due to the observation of many intriguing phenomena, including superconductivity (SC), nontrivial band topology, and charge order . At ambient conditions, these materials crystallize into a layered structure with hexagonal symmetry (space group P6/mmm), consisting of alkali-metal A layer and V-Sb slab stacked alternatively along the c-axis . The most prominent feature of this structure is the presence of quasi-two-dimensional ideal kagome layers of V ions coordinated by Sb. These compounds are found to be metallic and even enter a superconducting ground state below the transition temperatures of Tc = 0.93 K, 0.92 K, and 2.5 K for A= K, Rb, and Cs , respectively. Moreover, recent measurements of thermal conductivity on CsV3Sb5 single crystal at ultra-low temperature evidenced a finite residual linear term, pointing to an unconventional nodal SC . Interestingly, proximity-induced spin-triplet SC and edge supercurrent were observed in the Nb/K1- xV3Sb5 devices . In addition, in the normal state they all exhibit a clear anomaly at T* ~ 78-104 K in the electrical transport and magnetic properties due to the formation of charge order (CDW-like) as revealed by the X-ray diffraction and scanning tunning microscopy measurements . The charge order in KV3Sb5 has been found to display a chiral anisotropy , which can lead to giant anomalous Hall effect in the absence of magnetic order or local moments . It has also been argued as a strong precursor of unconventional SC . Moreover, angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy measurements and density-functional-theory calculations have characterized their normal state as a Z2 topological metal with multiple Dirac nodal points near the Fermi level . The observations of pronounced Shubnikov-de Haas quantum oscillations and small Fermi surfaces with low effective mass in RbV3Sb5 single crystals are consistent with the existence of multiple highly dispersive Dirac band near the Fermi level . In addition, similar to staggered arrangement of hexagonal graphene , theoretical calculations on the kagome Hubbard model with different electron fillings have shown the stabilization of many exotic phases, such as the spinless fermions , Mott transition , charge density waves , chiral spin-density-wave state , exotic superconducting state and topological point defects . Therefore, these V-based kagome metals AV3Sb5 have been regarded as a novel platform to study the interplay between SC, nontrivial band topology, and electronic correlations . At present, the topologically related phenomena and SC have been actively studied in these AV3Sb5 compounds, but the possible rich physics related to the electronic correlation, especially the relationship between the intertwined electronic orders, has been barely revealed. In this regard, it is highly interesting to unveil the correlation between the CDW-like order and SC commonly observed in these AV3Sb5 materials. Here we have chosen to study CsV3Sb5 single crystal with the highest Tc = 2.5 K among this series of compounds by applying the high-pressure approach, which has been widely used in disentangling the competing electronic orders of the strongly 3 correlated metals . Through detailed measurements of resistivity, DC and AC magnetic susceptibility on CsV3Sb5 single crystals under hydrostatic pressure, we successfully uncover an M- shaped double superconducting dome associated with the modification of the CDW- like order and its complete suppression under pressure, respectively. Interestingly, the Tc of CsV3Sb5 is triply enhanced to about 8 K at 2 GPa, indicating that the Tc of these V-based kagome superconductors can be raised considerably. By revealing the coexistence and competition of SC with the CDW-like order, the temperature-pressure phase diagram of CsV3Sb5 resembles those of many unconventional superconductors, and thus offer more insights into the rich correlation-related physics pertinent to this novel family of kagome metals. Single crystals of CsV3Sb5 were grown from Cs ingot (purity 99.9%), V powder (purity 99.9%) and Sb grains (purity 99.999%) using the self-flux method, similar to the growth of RbV3Sb5 . Temperature dependences of resistivity for two CsV3Sb5 samples (#1, #2) and ac magnetic susceptibility for sample #3 were measured simultaneously by using a self-clamped piston cylinder cell (PCC) under various hydrostatic pressures up to 2.2 GPa . Daphne 7373 was used as the pressure transmitting medium (PTM) in PCC. The pressure values in PCC were determined from the superconducting transition of Pb according to the equation: P (GPa) = (T0 - Tc)/0.365, where T0 = 7.20 K is the Tc of Pb at ambient pressure. We also measured the temperature-dependent resistivity on sample #4 up to 6.6 GPa with a palm-type cubic anvil cell (CAC) . Glycerol was employed as the liquid PTM for CAC. DC magnetization measurements on sample #5 under various pressures up to 1.06 GPa were also performed in a miniature BeCu PCC fitted into the commercial magnetic property measurement system (MPMS-3, Quantum Design). Details about the crystal growth procedures and high-pressure measurements can be found in the Supplementary Materials (SM). derivative d/dT of sample #1 under various pressures up to 2.2 GPa measured with a PCC. These data illustrate clearly how the CDW-like order evolve with pressure. At 0 GPa, the CDW transition at T*  94 K is manifested as a kink-like anomaly in (T) and a corresponding peak in d/dT, respectively. With increasing pressure, T* moves to lower temperature progressively and reaches about 15 K at 1.86 GPa, above which it cannot be discerned any more in resistivity, implying a complete suppression of CDW-like order by pressure. It is noteworthy that the kink feature in (T) at T* become much diminished at 0.6-0.9 GPa, and changes at P  1.2 GPa to a hump-like anomaly, Fig. 1(a), i.e., the resistivity experiences an enhancement rather than a rapid decrease upon cooling through T*. This is a typical character for the CDW transition due to the gap opening over part of the Fermi surfaces . Accordingly, the anomaly in d/dT changes from a peak for P < 0.6 GPa through an intermediate 4 crossover region 0.6-0.9 GPa to a dip for P  1.2 GPa as shown in Fig. 1(b). These observations are confirmed in sample #2 measured in the sample PCC, as seen in Fig. S1 of SM. These results indicate that the CDW-like order at ambient pressure undergoes a subtle change and might evolve into a distinct CDW state at P > 0.6-0.9 GPa. Such a change at the normal state has a profound impact on the superconducting transition as shown below. highlighting a complex, non-monotonic variation with pressure of the superconducting transition. As marked by arrows in Fig. 2(a), the onset of superconducting transition, Tconset, is determined from the cross point of two straight lines above and below the transition, while the Tczero is defined as the zero-resistance temperature. The (T) at 0 GPa shows a relatively sharp superconducting transition with Tconset  3.5 K and Tczero  2.8 K, consistent with the previous result . With increasing pressure, the normal-state resistivity is enhanced, and the Tconset and Tczero are raised up quickly to ~ 5 K and ~ 4.3 K at 0.37 GPa, and to ~ 6.8 K and ~ 5 K at 0.61 GPa, respectively. At 0.61 GPa, there exists a small step before reaching zero resistivity, indicating the presence of two superconducting phases. This small resistivity-step feature seems to evolve into a stronger shoulder at 0.9 GPa, resulting in a significantly broad superconducting transition width Tc  4.2 K with the Tconset ~7.2 K and the Tczero ~ 3 K. When applying pressure to 1.2 GPa, the normal-state resistivity is reduced gradually, and the two-step feature of the superconducting transition is weakened by reducing the Tconset to ~ 5.7 K but leaving the Tczero at ~ 2.8 K, which is close to that at 0.9 GPa. But the transition width Tc  3 K is still large. Interestingly, Tc is shifted again to higher temperatures upon further increasing pressure; the Tconset and Tczero at 1.86 GPa reaches ~ 8 K and ~ 6 K, respectively. In this pressure range 1.2-1.86 GPa, the superconducting transition width Tc  2-3 K is still relatively large, featured by either a broad onset or a long-tail when approaching zero. It should be noted that such a broad superconducting transition is not caused by the pressure inhomogeneity but is an intrinsic phenomenon, originating from the microscopic phase coexistence and competition as discussed below. When the CDW-like order just vanishes at about 2 GPa, the superconducting transition becomes very sharp with a Tc  0.3 K. As seen in Fig. 2(a), the values of Tconset and Tczero are 7.96 and 7.63 K for 2.03 GPa, and 7.68 and 7.43 K for 2.19 GPa, respectively. It seems that Tc will decrease again at higher pressures. To track the evolution of Tc(P) in a larger pressure range, we measured (T) of sample #4 up to 6.6 GPa with a CAC. The (T) data at low temperatures are shown in Fig. 2(b), and those in the whole temperature range are given in Fig. S2. The results in CAC are highly consistent with those in PCC. As can be seen, the (T) of 1.9 GPa in CAC resembles that of 1.86 GPa in PCC, showing a relatively sharp onset but a long tail with Tconset  7.8 K and Tczero  6.5 K. When increasing pressure to 2.5 GPa and above, the 5 superconducting transition becomes very sharp with Tc  0.3 K and shifts to lower temperatures monotonically. The Tconset and Tczero are reduced to 2.82 and 2.58 K at 6.6 GPa. Since Tc(P) exhibits a complex variation with pressure and the Tc is quite wide in the pressure range 0.6-1.9 GPa where the high-temperature CDW order coexists, it is essential to further characterize the superconducting transition via detailed magnetic measurements. To this end, we measured the dc magnetization M(T) of sample #5 up to 1.06 GPa in MPMS and the ac susceptibility ′(T) of sample #3 up to 2.2 GPa with mutual induction method in PCC. Figure 2(c) shows the M(T) data collected upon warming up under an external magnetic field of H = 20 Oe after zero-field cooled from room temperature. As can be seen, the diamagnetic signal in M(T) appears at TcM = 2.5 K for 0 GPa, in agreement with the resistivity data, and it moves quickly to ~ 6.3 K at 0.54 GPa. In this pressure range, the bulk nature of SC is also confirmed by the large diamagnetic response of M(T). However, for P = 0.74 and 0.88 GPa, the diamagnetic response in M(T) appears at high temperature of ~ 6-7 K, but the transition is very broad and its magnitude is dramatically lowered. These observations suggest that the superconducting volume fraction is substantially reduced, consistent with the (T) data in the similar pressure range as shown in Fig. 2(a). At 1.06 GPa, a large diamagnetic signal emerges again below 3 K, signaling the resurgence of a new bulk superconducting phase. The ′(T) results in Fig. 2(d) show one-to-one correspondence to the (T) data shown in Fig. 2(a), including the two-step feature of ′(T) at 0.61 and 0.9 GPa (inset of Fig. 2(d)), the reduction of Tc from 0.6 to 1.2 GPa followed by a resurgence of Tc up to 1.86 GPa with a relatively broad transition, and a sharp superconducting transition at P  2 GPa. It is noteworthy that the superconducting volume fraction is relatively small, ~30-50%, in the pressure range 0.6 -1.86 GPa when the CDW order coexists, while a nearly 100% bulk SC is finally realized at 2 GPa when the CDW order vanishes completely. These results thus provide direct evidences for the microscopic coexistence and competition between CDW and SC . Based on the above comprehensive high-pressure characterizations, we can construct the T-P phase diagram of CsV3Sb5, Fig. 3(a, b), which depicts explicitly the evolution and correlations of T* and Tc as a function of pressure. As can be seen, T*(P) decreases monotonically with pressure and vanishes completely around Pc2  2 GPa, while Tc(P) displays an M-shaped double-dome character with two maxima around Pc1  0.8±0.2 GPa and Pc2, respectively. As shown in Figs. 3(b) and 3(c), the superconducting transition width Tc in the pressure range Pc1  P  Pc2 is significantly larger that at the lower and higher pressures. The highest Tc  8 K is achieved around Pc2 and it is three times higher than that at ambient pressure. This observation immediately calls attention to further raise the Tc of these V-based kagome superconductors. 6 Discussions. The major finding of the present work is the observation of an M-shaped double superconducting dome that has an intimated interplay with the high- temperature CDW-like order. As shown in Fig. 1(a), the (T) anomaly around T* displays a subtle change from a kink-like rapid reduction at P < 0.6 GPa to a hump- like weak upturn at P > 0.9 GPa through an intermediate crossover region 0.6 - 0.9 GPa. Accordingly, the anomaly in d/dT around T* changes from a peak to a dip. To illustrate such a change, the symbols of T* in Fig. 3(a) are color-coded in terms of the sign of (d/dT) at T* as defined in Fig. 1(b), which shows a clear crossover around Pc1. This means that, although the suppression of CDW-like order by pressure leads to an initial enhancement of Tc, the modification of the CDW state around Pc1 shows a stronger competition with the superconducting pairing, leading to the first extremum of Tc shown in Fig. 3(b). As mentioned above, the weak upturn of (T) upon cooling through T* in the pressure range Pc1  P  Pc2 is a typical character for the formation of CDW-like state that opens a gap over part of the Fermi surfaces. Although the density wave instability in this class of kagome metals is not unexpected, this pressure-induced CDW order should be distinct from the ambient-pressure one given the different responses in (T). At first, it seems to fulfill a better nesting condition across the in-plane two- dimensional Fermi surface, which can be finely tuned by compression . As a result, the resistivity exhibits an enhancement across T*. Secondly, this new CDW order has a stronger tendency to compete for the electronic state responsible for SC , featured by a microscopic phase separation, leading to very broad superconducting transitions and substantially reduced superconducting volume fraction as observed in Figs. 2, and 3(b, c). The continuous suppression of the CDW order by pressure results in the resurgence of SC at higher pressures, leading to a second extremum of Tc around Pc2 where the CDW order just vanishes. However, the observed maximal Tc in the vicinity of Pc2 followed by a subsequent monotonic reduction of Tc at higher pressure do not conform the typical behaviors of conventional two-dimensional CDW superconductors, such as transition-metal dichalcogenides Ta(Se,S)2, in which the Tc(P) shows a plateau or broad spectrum even after the CDW is suppressed by doping or pressure . Instead, the T-P phase diagram of CsV3Sb5 shown in Fig. 3(a, b) resembles those of many unconventional superconducting systems, such as heavy-fermion , cuprates , iron-based superconductors and Lu(Pt1-xPdx)2In , which are characterized by the presence of quantum criticality. To examine such a possibility, we probe the evolution of the electronic states by evaluating the upper critical field 0Hc2 of the superconducting state. Figure S3 shows all the (T) data under various magnetic fields at different pressures for sample #1 in PCC and sample #4 in CAC. As can be seen, the superconducting transition is shifted gradually to lower temperatures with increasing magnetic fields as expected. 7 However, the critical field required to eliminate the superconducting transition exhibits a strong dependence as a function of pressure. In order to quantify this evolution, here we determined Tc as the middle-point temperature of superconducting transition and plotted μ0Hc2 versus Tc in Fig. 4. Then, we can estimate the zero- temperature upper critical field μ0Hc2(0) by fitting the μ0Hc2(T) with the empirical μ0Hc2(0) is zero-temperature upper critical field and t is the reduced temperature T/Tc. The fitting curves are shown as the broken lines in Fig. 4 and the extracted μ0Hc2(0) values are plotted in Fig. 3(d) as a function of pressure. Interestingly, the μ0Hc2(0) also displays two pronounced peaks around Pc1 and Pc2, respectively. The corresponding μ0Hc2(0) values are larger than 3 T, which is about one order of magnitude higher than that at ambient pressure. Similar double-peak features are also observed in the pressure dependence of the initial slope μ0Hc2(T), i.e., -dHc2/dT|Tc, which is proportional to the effective mass of charge carriers . As shown in Fig. S4, the divergence behaviors of -dHc2/dT|Tc around Pc1 and Pc2, especially the latter, signal the dramatic enhancement of effective mass, which has been regarded as a hallmark of quantum criticality . The presence of quantum criticality around Pc2 is conceivable due to complete suppression of the CDW order, in line with many unconventional superconductors . However, whether there is a buried quantum critical point around Pc1 deserves further investigations. To unveil the nature of the subtle change of the CDW-like order around Pc1 should be key to understand these peculiar behaviors. Conclusion In summary, we performed a comprehensive high-pressure study on the electrical transport and magnetic properties of the CsV3Sb5 single crystal, which is a newly discovered Z2 topological kagome metal showing the coexistence of a CDW-like order at T* = 94 K and SC at Tc = 2.5 K at ambient pressure. Our results uncover a hitherto unknown pressure-induced modification of the CDW order around Pc1  0.6- 0.9 GPa before it is completely suppressed around Pc2  2 GPa. Accordingly, Tc(P) exhibits an unusual M-shaped double superconducting dome with two maxima occurring right at Pc1 and Pc2, respectively, thus revealing an intimated interplay between the CDW and SC. The competition between these two electronic orders is particularly strong for the intermediate pressure range Pc1  P  Pc2 as evidenced by the strong reduction of superconducting volume fraction and the broad transition width. The Tc of CsV3Sb5 can be triply enhanced to ~ 8 K at a moderate pressure of 2 GPa, implying that the Tc of these V-based kagome superconductors still has a room to go higher. In addition, the double-peak character has also been observed in the 0Hc2(0), and characteristics of quantum criticality around Pc1 and Pc2 has also been indicated. The determined T-P phase diagram with a quantum criticality around Pc2 resemble those of many unconventional superconductors, thus providing more 8 ingredients related to the strong electron correlations into the rich physics of this novel family of topological kagome metals. Several open issues still need to be addressed in the future studies, such as the nature of the CDW-like order in the intermediate pressure range, and the plausible buried quantum critical point around Pc1. Acknowledgements This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China the Beijing Natural Science Foundation (Z190008 and Z200005), the National Key R&D Program of China (2018YFA0305700, 2018YFE0202600 and 2016YFA0300504), the Strategic Priority Research Program and Key Research Program of Frontier Sciences of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (XDB25000000, XDB33000000 and QYZDB-SSW-SLH013), and the CAS Interdisciplinary Innovation Team.