Origin of Topological Order in a Cooper Pair Insulator Siddhartha Patra∗ and Siddhartha Lal† Department of Physical Sciences, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research-Kolkata, W.B. 741246, India (Dated: February 26, 2021) While a topologically ordered counterpart of the s-wave superconductor has been proposed in the literature on phenomenological grounds, its microscopic origin remains unknown. In meeting this goal, we employ the recently developed unitary renormalisation group (URG) method on a generalised model of electrons in two spatial dimensions with attractive interactions. We show that the effective Hamiltonian obtained at the stable low-energy fixed point of the RG flow corresponds to a gapped, insulating state of quantum matter we call the Cooper pair insulator (CPI). Detailed analyses show that the CPI ground state manifold displays several signatures of topological order, including a four-fold degeneracy when placed on the torus. Spectral flow based arguments reveal the emergent gauge-theoretic structure of the effective theory: the CPI effective Hamiltonian can be written entirely in terms of non-local Wilson loops. Further, it contains a topological θ-term whose coefficient is quantised in keeping with the requirement of invariance of the ground state under large gauge transformations. This θ-term is known to be equivalent to the Chern-Simons term in two spatial dimensions. Passage from the CPI to the metal by tuning the θ coefficient reveals a plateaux structure of the CPI ground state in terms of the steadily decreasing number of condensed Cooper pairs. Investigations reveal that the long-ranged many-particle entanglement content of the CPI ground state is driven by inter-helicity two-particle scattering processes. The plateau with θ = 0 possesses the largest bipartite entanglement entropy (EE), scaling logarithmically with subsystem size (L) and falling rapidly upon tuning θ towards the metal. The bipartite EE for inter-plateau transitions shows universal signatures in its variations with L and θ. While the EE signatures for plateaux and transitions can be distinguished at low temperatures, such distinctions are smeared out as temperature is raised. We also study the passage from the CPI to the s-wave BCS superconducting ground state under RG, and find that the RG flow promotes fluctuations in the number of condensed Cooper pairs and lowers those in the conjugate global phase of the ground state wavefunction. Consequently, we find that the distinct signatures of long-ranged entanglement in the CPI are replaced by the well-known short-ranged entanglement of the BCS state. Analysing the effects of Josephson effects reveals that while a Cooper pair tunnel coupling between two CPI systems does not lead to phase stiffening, breaking the global U(1) phase rotation symmetry in one of them induces a phase coherence in the other. However, the generation of a Josephson current requires the separate breaking of the U(1) symmetry in the two systems. Finally, we study the renormalisation of the entanglement in k-space for both the CPI and BCS ground states. The topologically ordered CPI state is shown to possess an emergent hierarchy of scales of entanglement, and that this hierarchy collapses in the BCS state. Our work offers clear evidence for the microscopic origins of topological order in this prototypical system, and lays the foundation for similar investigations in other systems of correlated electrons. CONTENTS I. Introduction 1 II. Effective theory of the Cooper Pair Insulator (CPI) 4 III. Topological Features of CPI 6 A. Topological nature of the effective theory 6 B. Topological degeneracy at Φ = 0. 8 C. Spectral flow, plateau ground states and topological quantum numbers 9 IV. Entanglement Features of CPI 10 A. Entanglement Spectrum 10 B. Entanglement Entropy of the plateau ground states and transitions 12 V. Passage to the BCS ground state 14 A. Properties of the ground state 14 B. The effect of a Josephson coupling 17 VI. Entanglement Renormalisation 17 VII. Conclusions and Discussions 20 Acknowledgments 21 A. Hamiltonian RG 22 B. URG with symmetry breaking field 23