Evidence of Andreev blockade in a double quantum dot coupled to a superconductor Po Zhang,1 Hao Wu,1 Jun Chen,2 Sabbir A. Khan,3, 4 Peter Krogstrup,3, 4 David Pekker,1 and Sergey M. Frolov1, ∗ 1Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, 15260, USA 2Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, 15260, USA 3Microsoft Quantum Materials Lab Copenhagen, 2800 Lyngby, Denmark 4Center for Quantum Devices, Niels Bohr Institute, University of Copenhagen, 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark We design and investigate an experimental system capable of entering an electron transport blockade regime in which a spin-triplet localized in the path of current is forbidden from entering a spin-singlet superconductor. To stabilize the triplet a double quantum dot is created electrostatically near a superconducting lead in an InAs nanowire. The superconducting lead is a molecular beam epitaxy grown Al shell. The shell is etched away over a wire segment to make room for the double dot and the normal metal gold lead. The quantum dot closest to the normal lead exhibits Coulomb diamonds, the dot closest to the superconducting lead exhibits Andreev bound states and an induced gap. The experimental observations compare favorably to a theoretical model of Andreev blockade, named so because the triplet double dot configuration suppresses Andreev reflections. Observed leakage currents can be accounted for by finite temperature. We observe the predicted quadruple level degeneracy points of high current and a periodic conductance pattern controlled by the occu- pation of the normal dot. Even-odd transport asymmetry is lifted with increased temperature and magnetic field. This blockade phenomenon can be used to study spin structure of superconductors. It may also find utility in quantum computing devices that utilize Andreev or Majorana states. Superconductor-semiconductor nanostructures are of interest in the context of quantum computing devices. Most prominently, they are a platform investigated as a host of Majorana zero modes that can be used to build topological qubits [1–7]. While these qubits have not been achieved, other types of qubits namely An- dreev, fluxonium and transmon have all been created out of super-semi structures [8–12]. Spin qubits can also be hosted by quantum dots defined in semiconducting nanowires [13–15]. Quantum dots exhibit iconic trans- port blockade phenomena: Coulomb blockade which is used in metrology to set quantum current standard and Pauli spin blockade which is used for readout and initialization of spin qubits . In quantum dots coupled to superconductors Andreev bound states form. They are hybrids of quantum dot energy levels and many-body Bogoliubov quasiparti- cles . Andreev double quantum dots have also been realized [20–22]. Here, we ask a question: can a blockade phenomenon unique to superconductors be demonstrated in Andreev quantum dots? Our goal is to observe Andreev blockade which is a suppression of Andreev reflection by a spin-triplet double dot configu- ration . We fabricate a double quantum dot with one super- conducting and one non-superconducting dot in an InAs semiconductor nanowire device (Fig. 1). The right dot exhibits an induced gap and Andreev bound states (see Figs. 2(a) and (b)). The left dot is characterized by Coulomb diamonds and shows no dramatic supercon- gap) transport reveals patterns that theory predicted for the four-step Andreev charge transport cycle which arises (a) Schematic of Andreev blockade. The blockaded configuration is indicated with a red cross showing how a spin- triplet in double dot is prevented from forming a spin-singlet Cooper pair. (b) Scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of a device similar to the one studied in the main text. Section marked ’Al/InAs’ is an InAs nanowire covered by an Al shell. A section where the shell is etched is marked ’InAs’. Vertical white lines mark gate electrodes used in creating the double dot. when two electrons required to form a Cooper pair are transported through the double dot (Fig. 3). As evi- dence of Andreev blockade we find asymmetry between quadruple charge degeneracy points at even-to-odd and odd-to-even transitions in the normal dot (Figs. 3 and 4). The observed asymmetry has the properties predicted by theory : the pattern is flipped at opposite volt- age bias and it disappears at higher temperature and at higher magnetic field (Figs. 5 and S2). Experimen- tally, we find that current is not completely blocked in the regimes that we label as Andreev blockade. Our nu- arXiv:2102.03283v1 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 5 Feb 2021 2 Bias (mV) 0.5 -0.5 (a) (b) (c) (d) Bias (mV) 0.5 -0.5 354 VN (mV) 379 354 VN (mV) 379 375 VS (mV) 340 340 VS (mV) 375 0.1 0.0 dI/dV (2e2/h) 0.05 0.0 dI/dV (2e2/h) 2Δ 360 VN (mV) VN (mV) 373 VS (mV) VS (mV) Differential conductance spectra for (a-b) QDS and (c-d) QDN. Spectra are taken by fixing one dot at a de- generate state while tuning the other dot with the (VS, VN) combination. The voltage combinations are indicated in Fig. 3(a). The large white arrows and small blue arrows indicate resonance peaks with different amplitudes. merical model, based on Ref. , accounts for this by introducing finite temperature. OUR APPROACH We experimentally realize conditions required for the observation of Andreev blockade following a theoreti- cal proposal . We use a double quantum dot to trap a spin triplet state in an semiconductor nanowire (Fig. 1(a)). The right side side of the double dot is con- nected to a superconductor, forming QDS, the left side is connected to a non-superconductor lead, such that QDN is a normal dot in the multi-electron regime. Fig. 1(b) shows a scanning electron microscope image of the nanowire device. An InAs nanowire covered with ∼ 15 nm epitaxial Al is placed on top of 60 nm pitch gate electrodes. The double dot is defined electrostatically by voltages on gate electrodes indicated in the image. VN and VS are the gate voltages primarily used for tuning the dot states. Al on the left section of the wire is selectively etched to make the normal lead. The device is measured in a dilution fridge with a base temperature of about 40 mK. We demonstrate that dot QDS exhibits Andreev bound states, while dot QDN exhibits Coulomb dia- monds, a staple of non-superconducting quantum dot transport (Fig. 2). The double dot configuration is set up by tuning all of the electrostatic gates adjacent to the superconducting lead. Spectra are then taken by fixing one dot at a degeneracy point while tuning the other dot. Spectra of QDS show induced superconducting hard gap which is a stripe of suppressed current at voltage biases below ∆/e = 0.2 mV, consistent with earlier works [24– 27]. Inside the induced gap, loop-like resonances due to gate-tuned Andreev bound states are observed. Spectra of QDN show Coulomb diamonds and no clear induced gap. To better understand the four panels of Fig. 2, it is helpful to look at Fig. 3(a) which shows a charge stabil- ity diagram and cuts in VN-VS space that correspond to Fig. 2. There are also more subtle conditions that the system must meet for Andreev blockade to be observable. The induced superconducting gap should be hard in order to suppress single-particle transport below the gap. Any single-particle transport is an Andreev blockade lifting mechanism, thus the softer the induced gap the weaker are the Andreev blockade signatures. The barrier to the superconducting lead should be low in order to in- duce Andreev bound states. This is in contrast with Pauli blockade setups which typically require few elec- tron regimes and hence high barriers to facilitate strong confinement. The inter-dot charging energy should be smaller than the induced gap because the Andreev trans- port regions shrink rapidly with the increasing of the inter-dot charging energy . To match experimental results we set the inter-dot charging energy to 10 μeV, whic correponds to a weakly coupled double dot regime. PREDICTED SIGNATURES OF ANDREEV BLOCKADE Following Ref. , we are looking for the following four experimental signatures (A-D) of Andreev transport and blockade in a N-QDN-QDS-S system. We describe the charge sates in both dots by their parity, which can be either even or odd. The parity of states in QDN can be inferred by studying how the degeneracy points shift in magnetic field, with odd regions expanding and even regions shrinking at higher fields (see Fig. S7). The parity of states in QDS can be inferred from Andreev spectra, with regions inside loop-like resonances being odd (see Fig. 2(a)-(b)). See supplementary materials and Ref. for theoretical background underlying these signatures. (A) At subgap voltage biases current is confined to tri- angular regions of the charge stability diagram. The triangles do not appear in closely spaced pairs as in non-superconducting double dots where they form around triple points. Instead, triangles ap- pear at quadruple Andreev degeneracy points, a consequence of the two-electron charge transfer cy- cle, form a parallelogram grid in VS vs VN space. (B) An alternating pattern of blockade/no-blockade is observed when quadruple points are tuned by VN. VS does not affect whether blockade is present or not. 3 (C) The sign of source-drain bias voltage flips Andreev blockade. A quadruple point that is blockaded in positive bias is not blockaded in negative bias, and vice versa. (D) Andreev blockade is not present when supercon- ductivity is suppressed by magnetic field or tem- perature. Signatures (A)-(C) should no longer be manifest. Signatures (B) and (C) can be formulated to- gether as follows. Andreev blockade is expected for (odd,odd)→(even,even) charge parity transitions and for (odd,even)→(even,odd) transitions, where the arrows in- dicate the direction of charge transfer, so that the condi- tions are valid for both signs of the applied bias. An ideal blockade corresponds to total suppression of current below the gap. Blockade can be suppressed by the presence of sub-gap quasi-particles and thermally ex- cited quasi-particles . If Andreev blockade is only partially suppressed, a reduced current, known as leak- age current, indicates blockade. In principle there should be no fine-tuning required to observe Andreev blockade. All that is needed is one normal dot, one superconducting dot and a hard gap su- perconductor lead. Thus we are looking for a region of VS vs VN that includes many charge degeneracy points that exhibit blockade signatures. In practice, mesoscopic factors such as additional quantum dots in the nanowire segments covered by the leads can introduce their own current modulations. Thus some gate tuning may still be required to clearly observe Andreev blockade. MEASURED ANDREEV BLOCKADE SIGNATURES Signature (A) which is current confined to single, not double, triangles in the charge stability diagram is il- lustrated by Figs. 3(a,b). Stability diagrams are taken at two opposite bias voltages. For both bias directions we observe elongated triangles, rounded due to relatively low bias voltages required to stay below the induced gap of aluminum. Numerical model results in Figs. 3(c,d) closely reproduce the experiment. Larger gate range shown in Fig. 4 confirms the single-triangle character of the charge degeneracy points. Signature (B) in experiment presents itself as an al- ternating pattern of high current/low current when the occupation of QDN is changed. It is illustrated by Figs. 3 and 4. We see dim degeneracy points followed by bright ones. In Fig. 4 the dim columns are marked by dim arrows, while the bright columns are marked by bright arrows. The region of (VS, VN) parameter space depicted contains 6 × 6 degenerate points. All degeneracy points are detectable, even those that are supposed to be block- aded. In the context of Andreev blockade this means E O (a) (b) 0.1 mV -0.1 mV 2a 2b 2c 2d E O E E 375 340 VS (mV) 354 VN (mV) 379 354 VN (mV) 379 0.56 0.0 Iexperiment (nA) (c) (d) 0 1 Isimulation (a.u.) simulation simulation (a-b) Experimental and (c-d) simulated results of a ”unit” stability diagram with 2 × 2 quadruple degeneracy points. Parities in QDN and QDS are labeled on top and right axes in panel (a), respectively (E - even, O - odd). Dashed lines are traces along which spectra in Fig. 2 are taken. The source-drain bias voltage is indicated in white. Parameters for simulation (in a.u. which match system energies in meV for convenience): source-drain bias μS − μN = -0.1 in (c), 0.1 in (d), charging energy UN = 4, US = 0.7, inter-dot charging energy UNS = 0.01, induced gap ∆S = 0.2, temperature T = 0.02 . that the blockade is partially lifted. In the simulation of Figs. 3(c,d) we assume finite temperature to reproduce this behavior. Finite temperature enables single particle tunneling into a hard-gap superconducting lead via ther- mally excited quasi-particles, and provides a way around the blocked Andreev processes. Signature (C) is the reversal of the high/low current pattern in opposite bias. In Fig. 3(a), at −0.1 mV, cur- rent is smaller for the degeneracy points on the left. In Fig. 3(b), at +0.1 mV, the current is smaller for the de- generacy points on the right. Simulated Andreev block- ade regime shows good agreement with this observation (see Figs. 3(a),(b)). The same behavior largely holds in Figs. 4(a) and (b) over an expanded range of gate volt- ages covering 6×6 degeneracy points. Bias asymmetry can also be seen in Fig. 2. In the upper panels, Andreev loops have non-symmetric amplitudes between positive and negative bias voltages marked by large and small arrows: either the upper or the lower half of the loop is brighter than the other half. In Coulomb diamonds shown in the lower panels, the pattern of in- tensity is anti-symmetric with respect to the center of the figure. For example, in panel 2(c), the left region is bright at positive bias, while the right region is bright at negative bias - when looking at biases below 0.2 mV, the induced gap (also marked by arrows). These patterns are consistent with Andreev blockade: when the occupation 4 (a) -0.15 mV E E E E O O O O E O E O E 350 300 VS (mV) (b) 0.15 mV 350 300 VS (mV) 350 400 VN (mV) 2 0 I (nA) Stability diagrams in a larger (VS, VN) parameter space. The yellow dashed rectangle in panel (a) encloses the region studied in Figs. 2, 3 and 5. Parities in QDN and QDS are labeled on top and right axes, respectively. Blue (white) arrows indicate columns of conductance triangles with low (high) current. The source-drain bias voltage is indicated in white. of QDS is changed AB is not affected, and when the oc- cupation of QDN is changed AB appears at the opposite bias. The full picture is more complicated as certain bias asymmetries are also observed at currents above the in- duced gap. However, Figs. S3 and S4 illustrate that in general bias asymmetry at high bias does not follow the same pattern as subgap low-bias asymmetry, suggesting that they are of different origin. Finally, signature (D) which is the disappearance of other signatures when superconductivity is suppressed is presented in Fig. 5 and supplementary figures S2, S6, S9, S10. Figs. 5(a-d) reproduce the same regime as in Fig. 3 for different bias voltages. When a magnetic field of 0.6 T is applied, in Figs. 5(e-h), we observe that the alternating patterns of bright/dim degeneracy points are no longer present, and neither is the bias voltage asymmetry. The same holds true at elevated temperature, as illustrated in Fig. S2. Single elongated degeneracy points are replaced by less elongated points at higher fields where superconductivity of the aluminum shell is suppressed (Figs. 5(e-h)) - in this regime the charge degeneracy points appear more similar to those of a normal double dot with pairs of triangular triple points, but with significant rounding and blurring and a weak interdot capacitive coupling. In future ex- periments using a larger gap superconductor such as Sn or Pb [27–29] as a shell can provide a larger bias voltage range for the observation of Andreev blockade and make this observation more clear by reducing the relative role of feature broadening. -0.2 mV 0.2 mV -0.5 mV 0.5 mV -0.2 mV 0.2 mV -0.5 mV 0.5 mV (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h) 375 VS (mV) 340 375 340 354 379 354 379 VN (mV) I (nA) 0.6 0.0 1.5 0.0 VS (mV) I (nA) 354 379 0 T 0.6 T Stability diagrams at different bias voltages and magnetic fields (a-d) B = 0 and (e-h) B = 0.6 T. The bias voltage is indicated in each panel. The magnetic field is in the sample plane at a 24 degree angle with the nanowire. ALTERNATIVE EXPLANATIONS We have considered the possibility that signatures (A- D) were only identified due to fine-tuning in a deliberate search for predicted patterns. In this scenario, signatures such as alternating bright/dim degeneracy points and bias asymmetries are not due to Andreev blockade, but rather they arise accidentally due to additional states co- existing with the QDN-QDS system in the same nanowire - for example spurious Andreev and normal quantum dots in the nanowire lead segments. Those other states are fine-tuned to modulate transport in the double dot in just the right way to be consistent with Andreev block- ade. We cannot fully exclude the possibility of the pres- ence of extra mesoscopic states beyond the two quantum dots. We see, e.g. Fig. 4 lower left part, that while the stability points form a dominating double-dot pattern, their intensities vary across a large VS-VN range suggest- ing non-monotonic coupling to states outside the dots or non-monotonic inter-dot barriers. This is typical for a wide variety of quantum dots, including those made in the Intel cleanroom . Additional data in supplementary materials and full experimental data on Zenodo also demonstrate that within the same device other regimes do not show pat- terns of Andreev blockade, when all gates used to define a double dot are set differently. Our argument to not favor the above explanation is that a pattern consistent with Andreev blockade signa- tures (A-C) are observed over a regime covering 6×6 de- generacy points, in several sufficiently different double dot configurations, and, in a more limited range in other devices. Furthermore, the fact that bias asymmetry and alternating current patterns disappear when supercon- ductivity is suppressed (signature D) convinces us that these phenomena have to do with subgap superconduct- ing transport which is the regime of Andreev reflection. 5 FOLLOW-ON WORK Recently larger hard gaps have been induced in semi- conductor nanowires in experiments with tin (gap of 0.6 mV) and lead (gap of 1.2 mV) shells . It would be interesting to repeat Andreev blockade experiments using these superconductors. First, larger ratio of gap to measurement temperature may result in stronger block- ade. Second, the ability to work at higher bias and larger charging energies would make the observation of various blockade features such as bias triangles more conclusive, and reduce the role that rounding plays at low biases. Finally, blockade can be studied to higher magnetic field allowing for a detailed investigation of spin structure in the parent superconductor. Several improvements can be done in immediate follow- on work related to materials processing and device fabri- cation. This would impact not only Andreev blockade ex- periments but many works aimed at searching for Majo- rana modes and building superconductor-semiconductor qubits. For instance, the wet etch degrades the quality of nanowires by introducing defects. The supplementary information in Ref. shows that even using the standard etchant for InAs-Al wires may result in InAs damage or Al islands. The use of in-situ shadowing or dry etching are promising avenues to explore. FUTURE RELEVANCE At the most basic level, Andreev blockade offers a means of studying spin-resolved transport in hybrid de- vices at zero magnetic field. We foresee application of Andreev blockade in experiments that probe spin pairing in superconductors. Much like Pauli blockade was used to investigate spin mixing mechanisms in semiconduc- tors due to hyperfine, spin-orbit or electron-phonon cou- pling, Andreev blockade can be potentially used to detect triplet pairing or admixtures thereof, spin-flip scattering, spin polarization or textures such as Larkin-Ovchnnikov- Fulde-Ferrel state in the superconductor. A two-arm An- dreev blockade device with two double dots in parallel can in principle be used as a spin-sensitive probe for crossed Andreev reflection. Quantum dots with superconduct- ing leads are building blocks of Andreev qubits, Kitaev emulators and of topological qubits . These devices may manifest Andreev blockade or utilize it to detect the state of a qubit or an emulator by providing a spin-dependent transport or transition rate element. COMPARISON TO OTHER WORKS Several versions of a triplet blockade in quantum dots closely related to Andreev blockade have been consid- ered theoretically [34–38], with several works focusing on a parallel combination of quantum dots, which is rele- vant for crossed Andreev reflection [39–41]. Other types of blockade related to Andreev reflection such as chiral blockade have been proposed . A recent experiment in a similar double dot setup with two rather than one superconducting lead has studied a triplet blockade that develops at large magnetic field, where spin triplet is the unique ground state of the double dot . In contrast, Andreev blockade demonstrated in this work occurs at zero magnetic field, due to the stochastic filling of a quantum dot by random spins. FUNDING SOURCES S.F. and D.P. are supported by NSF PIRE-1743717. S.F. is supported by NSF DMR-1906325, ONR and ARO. P.K. is supported by European Union Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under the Marie Sk�lodowska-Curie Grant No. 722176 (INDEED), Mi- crosoft Quantum and the European Research Council (ERC) under Grant No. 716655 (HEMs-DAM).