Topological surface currents accessed through reversible hydrogenation of the three-dimensional bulk Haiming Deng1, Lukas Zhao1, Kyungwha Park2, Jiaqiang Yan3, Kamil Sobczak4, and Lia Krusin-Elbaum1,5† 1Department of Physics, The City College of New York - CUNY, New York 10031, USA 2Department of Physics, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia 24061, USA 3Materials Science and Technology Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee 37831, USA 4Faculty of Chemistry, Biological and Chemical Research Center, University of Warsaw, 02-089 Warsaw, Poland 5City University of New York Graduate Center, New York, New York 10016, USA Hydrogen, the smallest and most abundant element in nature, can be efficiently in- corporated within a solid and drastically modify its electronic state — it has been known to induce novel magnetoelectric effects in complex perovskites and modu- late insulator-to-metal transition in a correlated Mott oxide. Here we demonstrate that hydrogenation resolves an outstanding challenge in chalcogenide classes of three-dimensional (3D) topological insulators and magnets — the control of intrin- sic bulk conduction that denies access to quantum surface transport. With elec- trons donated by a reversible binding of H+ ions to Te(Se) chalcogens, carrier den- sities are easily changed by over 1020 cm−3, allowing tuning the Fermi level into the bulk bandgap to enter surface/edge current channels. The hydrogen-tuned topo- logical materials are stable at room temperature and tunable disregarding bulk size, opening a breadth of platforms for harnessing emergent topological states. 1 arXiv:2102.06639v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 12 Feb 2021 The ability to control carrier density — a key parameter of the electronic state of condensed mat- ter — is central to achieving access to the topologically protected surface states in three-dimensional (3D) topological materials (TIs) that ideally are insulating in the bulk (1). In the absence of magnetic dopants, the 2D electronic surface states with Dirac-type (linear) energy-momentum dispersion (1) are gapless and fully spin-polarized, with protection against backscattering by local disorder guaran- teed by time-reversal symmetry. These important layered van der Waals (vdW) quantum materials have narrow (≃ 300 meV) bulk gaps (2) and charge carriers donated by intrinsic lattice defects (3). As a result, bulk conduction can dominate the surface channels, hindering the studies of the Dirac states and their implementation in topological spintronics and fault-tolerant quantum computing (4). Recent realizations of a nontrivial quantum anomalous Hall (QAH) state, featuring dissipation- free chiral edge currents (5), made it apparent that when long-range magnetism and band topology combine (6) the problem of bulk conduction can be particularly acute. Magnetic dopants, by break- ing time-reversal symmetry, gap out the Dirac surface channels (7), and when the Fermi level is in the Dirac (mass) gap the QAH state is expected to emerge. However, in addition to magnetic moment, the dopants also donate charge. Indeed, QAH was first observed in heavily Cr-doped (Bi,Sb)2Te3 ultrathin films (8) in which to minimize bulk conduction a non-stoichiometric alloying of the con- stituent elements was employed and the film thickness had to be precisely controlled. Moreover, doping disorder restricted QAH temperature to the mK range. In a newly discovered important class of intrinsic topological magnets (ITM) (9) the doping and alloying disorders are avoided because the magnetic dopants are arranged as an atomic layer in a layered van der Waals (vdW) crystal structure. For example, the Mn-based ITM MnBi2Te4 tiferromagnetically (10). As a consequence, the anomalous Hall (near) quantization was observed at higher temperatures (11). However, such materials show high bulk carrier densities (typically > 1020 cm−3) (12,13), and observation of QAH required delicate tuning of charge density that was again only possible in ultrathin (3-5 nm) samples with odd number of SLs. In thicker (hundreds of nanometers) samples ferromagnetism and quantization could be achieved when SLs were separated by a topological spacer (14), yet tuning to quantization of either ferromagnetic (FM) or antiferro- magnetic (AFM) ITMs without imposing severe thickness constraints is a major obstacle to realizing novel topological quantum states. Here we demonstrate a remarkably efficient and facile way to reversibly tune bulk carrier densi- ties by over ≃ 1020 cm−3 in different classes of layered topological materials by using insertion and extraction of ionic hydrogen to achieve access to topological surface states. The source of H+ ions is a dilute aqueous hydrochloric acid (HCl) solution, which leaves the TI crystal structure intact and has an extra benefit of removing native surface oxide while passivating surfaces and preventing reox- 2 idation under exposure to air. We show that H+ in TIs, by preferentially forming an H-Te(Se) moiety within van der Waals gaps, donates electrons to the system and moves Fermi level from the bulk- valence (BVB) to bulk-conduction (BCB) bands, crossing the bulk bandgap to display an ambipolar p- to n-type conductance conversion at the charge neutrality point. The process is fully reversible, as hydrogen-chalcogen moiety can be disassociated by a low-temperature annealing protocol under which hydrogen is easily removed. It is also multiply-cyclable and reproducible, thereby resolving one of the key limitations of magnetic and nonmagnetic TIs. Generally, crystal growth of tetradymite crystals such as Bi2Te3 and Bi2Se3 results in equilibrium defect configurations comprising vacancies and antisites on different sublattices (3). In undoped Bi2Se3, where Se vacancies tend to dominate, the net conduction is by electron carriers or n-type. In Bi2Te3, where antisites are prevalent (15) the conductivity is usually p-type, namely by hole carriers, although by varying stoichiometry it has been grown of either conductivity type. Exploring growth and the exact doping/alloying conditions for the Fermi level EF to lie within the narrow bulk gap is a lengthy and often chancy process. By contrast, we show that a post-growth hydrogenation can tune EF to charge neutrality in hours, and can be effective in single crystals and in nano-devices, where the evolution of resistance under hydrogenation is easily monitored over time. The ultralight hydrogen diffuses rapidly and easily incorporates into many materials (16), al- though it shows qualitatively different behavior in different hosts (17). It has been shown to modify both electronic and structural states (18–21) — turning graphene into graphane (20), inducing new magnetic phases in complex perovskites (21) and modulating insulator-to-metal transition in a cor- related Mott oxide VO2 (22). In most semiconductors interstitial hydrogen binds to defects (17) and is known to be amphoteric (23), namely it can act either as a donor (H+) or an acceptor (H−) of charge, nearly always counteracting the prevailing conductivity type. To ascertain the effects of hydrogen uptake on charge transport in the topological materials we first chose well characterized Bi2Te3 crystals with the conductivity flavor initially of a net acceptor type. The level of hydro- genation was controlled by timing the diffusion of H+ ions from a dilute (0.5 molar) HCl + H2O = H+(H2O) + Cl- solution maintained at room temperature in which the samples were immersed for a period of minutes to hours (see Figs. 1A,B and Materials and Methods). Our key and a most immediately notable result shown in Figure 1 is a nearly two orders of magnitude increase in the low-temperature longitudinal resistance Rxx as a function of HCl exposure time to a maximum Rmax xx and a subsequent decrease as the exposure time is prolonged (Fig. 1C). The resistance maximum Rmax xx (conductance minimum) is at the charge-neutral point (CNP) where conduction is converted from p- to n-type, as determined from the corresponding Hall resistance (Fig. 1D). We surmise then that hydrogen, through the process of in-diffusion into the bulk (see Supplementary Note 1), indeed donates electrons. This process is not self-limiting: at long (≥ 24 h) 3 exposure times a decrease in Rxx on the deep n-side slows down yet continues. The observed ambipolar conduction, with well-distinguished p (hole) and n (electron) conduction regions, can be reproducibly reversed when hydrogen is removed by a low-temperature anneal (sketch in Fig. 1B) in the easily accessible range that depends on sample thickness. For the ∼ 200 nm thick Bi2Te3 crystal shown here the de-hydrogenation and a return from n-type across the CNP back to p-type is obtained within ∼ 100oC. Importantly, the carrier mobility during the entire process is not affected — e.g. in the sample in Fig. 1 it remains at ∼= 7, 000 cm2V−1s−1 (Supplementary Table 1). After each annealing step the system is room-temperature stable and can be further finetuned by the conventional electrostatic gating. Figure 1E shows that once the carrier density is sufficiently reduced by H+, the vicinity of the CNP can be reproducibly explored by applying a gate voltage Vg. Rxx(Vg) is precisely reversible upon changing the direction of the Vg sweep — the absence of hysteresis is a clear indication that hydrogenation does not create surface traps (24) and is consistent with hydrogen permeating the bulk. We emphasize that in thick (≥ 100 nm) materials, far away from the CNP where carrier densities are in the high ∼ 1019 cm−3 range, the CNP can not be reached by gating within a practically accessible voltage sweep (Fig. 1F). The type conversion on hydrogenation and de-hydrogenation is clearly seen in the magnetic field dependence of Hall resistance Rxy (Fig. 2A), with Rxy flipping its slope dRxy/dH and Hall coeffi- cient RH = − 1 nbe changing sign in the conversion region. Figure 2B shows a characteristic low-field ambipolar behavior of Rxy near the CNP, where the net residual bulk carrier density is very low. As we approach the CNP, weak antilocalization (WAL) quantum correction to ‘classical’ conductivity emerges at low magnetic fields as a positive magnetoresistance cusp (Fig. 2C), characteristic of a TI (25). The number nQ of quantum conduction channels contributing to WAL can be estimated from 2D localization theory (26) ∆G(B) ≃ α e2 2π2 ̄hf( Bφ B ), where ∆G(B) is the low-field quantum correction to 2D magnetoconductance, coefficient α = nQ/2 equals to 1/2 for a single 2D channel, f(x) ≡ lnx−ψ(1/2+x), ψ is the digamma function, and field Bφ = ̄h 4el2 φ is related to the dephasing length lφ of interfering electron paths. The fit to WAL conductance (see Supplementary Fig. 1) yields α ≃ 1.004 ± 0.001, corresponding to two 2D quantum channels we associate with top and bottom topological surfaces (25). Figure 2D schematically depicts the Bi2Te3 bandstructure (2) as the Fermi level EF moves from BVB to BCB (hydrogen in) and in reverse (hydrogen out). The 2D WAL cusp is seen when EF is within the Dirac bands. The change in the net carrier density induced by hydrogenation is reflected in the Shubnikov-de Haas (SdH) quantum oscillations of Hall resistance at higher fields (Fig. 2B). An estimate of the Fermi surface size obtained from the change of the oscillation period in δRxy/δμ0H (Fig. 2E-G) shows that the Fermi vector kF is much reduced after hydrogenation (Supplementary Table 2) — near the CNP kF ≈ 0.014Å−1 and the corresponding carrier density n ∼= ×1016cm−3 is very low. 4 After a longer time exposure (5.8 h) to HCl, as EF enters BCB the Fermi surface size becomes large again, albeit a more complex one (with three oscillation periods, see Fig. 2, Supplementary Fig. 2), reflecting the Bi2Te3 bandstructure with n-type Dirac bands mixing with BVB. Next we ask, where does hydrogen go? Our transport experiments demonstrate that in Bi2Te3 hydrogen donates electrons and stabilizes in its positive charge state as H+, a proton. To optimize its Coulomb interaction with the host electrons, it will tend to locate in the regions of higher electron charge density, i.e. in the vicinity of a more electronegative Te. To chase its physical presence we first utilize time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS), focusing on Te (Figs. 3A-D, Supplementary Fig. 3). A negative bias mass spectrum of secondary ions (see Materials and Methods) ejected from Bi2Te3 shows a cluster of peaks in the 120-130 u (atomic mass) range (Fig. 3C) that belong to several naturally occurring isotopes of Te, see Supplementary Table 3. A closer look at the Te isotope cluster (Fig. 3D) clearly shows additional peaks that differ from each Te isotope by exactly ∆u = 1, consistent with each isotope binding with one hydrogen. On a microscopic scale, we confirm the affinity between H and Te by x-ray photoelectron spec- troscopy (XPS), see Methods. XPS spectra near the Bi 4f and Te 3d core levels show that, despite a strong doping effect of hydrogen, the Bi core levels (27) are unperturbed (Fig. 3E), while the spec- tral shapes of Te 3d peaks are quantifiably modified (Fig. 3F,G). The upshift ∆ = 1 eV in binding energy due to [Te-H]− moiety is easily distinguished from free hydrogen or surface oxidation, as seen, for example, during hydrogen electro-catalysis (28), where Bi 4f spectral shapes are upshifted by ∼ 2 eV and both Bi2O3 and TeO2 peaks are present. By contrast, XPS shows that surface oxide is cleanly removed by HCl, and that Cl is entirely absent (Supplementary Fig. 4 and Table 4). The electron-donor action of hydrogen in a vdW TI through formation of hydrogen-chalcogen moiety is borne out by the density functional theory (DFT) calculations (see Supplementary Note 2 and Supplementary Figs. 5-7). The calculated band structures of Bi2Te3 (Fig. 4A-C) show that after hydrogenation the Dirac bands are preserved while the Fermi level EF is upshifted into the BCB. This n-type doping is independent of whether H+ goes in interstitially or into the van der Waals gaps, however the H-Te moiety appears most stable within the vdW gap (the formation energies are in line with XPS). The calculated local density of states (DOS) (Fig. 4D) highlights the shift of EF relative to the Dirac point (DP). Bi2Te3 structure maintains charge balance within each quintuple layer (QL) Supplementary Fig. 6a). The Te-Bi bonds are polar-covalent while only weak vdW type bonding exists between the neighboring Te(1)–Te(1) planes with relatively weak and highly polarizable bonds. The hydrogen prefers going to the region between these planes (Fig. S7), while the crystal structure remains intact (Supplementary Fig. 8). The Fermi level tuning by hydrogenation demonstrated here is very general, indeed it is remark- 5 ably effective in other chalcogen-based TI. We have achieved the type conversion across the CNP in Se-containing materials, such as Bi2Te2Se (Supplementary Fig. 9) and Ca-doped Bi2Se3 (Supple- mentary Figs. 10,11). Our DFT calculations confirm that a stable [H-Se]− moiety similarly acts to move the Fermi level towards the conduction bands (Supplementary Figs. 6,7). The technique is also very powerful in magnetic TI, and particularly in a very promising ITM class. One example is the intrinsic ferromagnetic MnBi2Te4/Bi2Te3 superlattice (14) where initial bulk carrier density is in the 1020 cm−3 range, yet type conversion across the CNP by hydrogen is obtained (Supplementary Figs. 12,13). Hydrogenation can also deliver an essentially continuous EF tuning across the bulk gap of an intrinsic topological antiferromagnet, where the axion insulator behavior was very recently reported when the antiferromagnetic ITM was made thin enough (∼ 6 SLs or ∼ 8 nm) (29) to reduce the contribution from bulk conduction channels and to be able to deplete bulk carriers by electrostatic gating. We demonstrate that through hydrogen-tuning of EF we can turn the bulk AFM ITM into an insulating state sans voltage gating. Figure 4E shows how the longitudinal resistance Rxx(T) of a ten times thicker MnBi2−xSbxTe4 (x = 0.6) crystal continuously transforms under hydrogenation from a metallic-like into a strongly insulating-like — a feat not achieved by a step-wise Bi-Sb alloying (12). Under hydrogen uptake the Néel temperature TN ∼ 25 K remains unchanged while the low-temperature Rxx(T) increases by about two orders of magnitude, reaching maximum value at the CNP (Fig. 4F). The Hall resistance Rxy (Fig. 4G) at the CNP displays ambipolar behavior, akin to the one in Bi2Te3 (Fig. 1D). The field dependencies of Rxx(H) and Rxy(H) under hydrogenation are consistent with the results in thin flakes under voltage gating (11, 29), also see Supplementary Fig. 14. Near the CNP the magnetoresistance Rxx(H) sharply changes at two characteristic fields: H1, above which the spin order is driven into a canted AFM state (12,13), and H2 at which all spins align in a FM state (Fig. 4H). Below H1, Hall resistance Rxy(H) exhibits a distinct plateau (where some of the SLs align with field) and a ‘zero-plateau’ (Fig. 4I). Together with the rapidly decreasing Rxx(H1 < H < H2) these are the key signatures of surface currents in close proximity to the Chern (30) and axion (31) insulator states. Finally, we remark that a paucity of bulk-insulating topological materials significantly impedes the search for emergent topological quantum phenomena, with the prospect for real-world applica- tions remaining far off. Hydrogen-tunability of high bulk carrier densities expands the availability of robust and easily accessible platforms for observing and harnessing distinct topological phases with stunning macroscopic manifestations, such as dissipationless edge transport of charge and axion electrodynamics (30) in topological magnets. It should facilitate the search for quantized magneto- electric (32) and magnetooptical (33) effects, and could lead to higher-temperature and higher-order topological states for future antiferromagnetic spintronics (34) and quantum computing. 6