1 Superhydrophobic sand mulches increase agricultural productivity in arid regions Adair Gallo Jr.1, Kennedy Odokonyero1, Magdi A. A. Mousa2,3, Joel Reihmer1, Samir Al- Mashharawi1, Ramona Marasco4, Edelberto Manalastas1, Mitchell J. L. Morton4, Daniele Daffonchio4, Matthew F. McCabe1, Mark Tester4, Himanshu Mishra1* 1King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Water Desalination and Reuse Center, Division of Biological and Environmental Sciences and Engineering, Thuwal 23955-6900, Saudi Arabia 2Department of Arid Land Agriculture, Faculty of Meteorology, Environment and Arid Land Agriculture, King Abdulaziz University, 80208 Jeddah, Saudi Arabia 3Department of Vegetables, Faculty of Agriculture, Assiut University, 71526 Assiut, Egypt 4King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Division of Biological and Environmental Sciences and Engineering, Thuwal 23955-6900, Saudi Arabia *Corresponding author: Himanshu.Mishra@kaust.edu.sa 2 Abstract Excessive evaporative loss of water from the topsoil in arid-land agriculture is compensated via irrigation, which exploits massive freshwater resources. The cumulative effects of decades of unsustainable freshwater consumption in many arid regions are now threatening food–water security. While plastic mulches can reduce evaporation from the topsoil, their cost and non- biodegradability limit their utility. In response, we report on superhydrophobic sand (SHS), a bio-inspired enhancement of common sand with a nanoscale wax coating. When SHS was applied as a 5 mm-thick mulch over the soil, evaporation dramatically reduced and crop yields increased. Multi-year field trials of SHS application with tomato (Solanum lycopersicum), barley (Hordeum vulgare), and wheat (Triticum aestivum) under normal irrigation enhanced yields by 17%–73%. Under brackish water irrigation (5500 ppm NaCl), SHS mulching produced 53%– 208% higher fruit yield and grain gains for tomato and barley. Thus, SHS could benefit agriculture and city-greening in arid regions. Keywords: food–water security; superhydrophobic sand; bio-inspiration; mulching; sustainable agrotechnology 3 The importance of irrigation toward humanity’s ability to produce food cannot be overstated. For example, while only 20% of cultivated land is irrigated, this fraction contributes 33%–40% of the total world food production1, 2. Unfortunately, this outsized contribution to food production comes at a price, consuming over 70% of global freshwater withdrawals annually2, 3, 4. Regions with arid and semi-arid climates, such as the Middle East, northern Africa, the northwest Indian subcontinent, and western Australia, rely on their limited freshwater resources to grow food for sustenance and trade3. The plants growing in these regions depend on soil moisture content for nutrient uptake, optimal temperature regulation, and salt stress reduction5. However, due to intense solar radiation and direct exposure to dry air and winds, a significant fraction of the water supplied to soils is lost to evaporation (Fig. 1A)6. Therefore, to ensure sufficient water availability to support plant growth, excessive volumes of ground and river waters are routinely withdrawn; this has critically depleted water supplies in many parts of the world7, resulting in food and water security concerns to become issues of international importance8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Technologies for enhancing the water-use efficiency of irrigated agriculture, i.e., growing more food/biomass with less water, are warranted for a sustainable future. Subsurface impermeable layers are sometimes employed to limit water loss due to percolation; however, their installation is expensive and labor-intensive14, 15. As an alternative, the soil surface can be covered with plastic mulches to reduce evaporation, enhance crop yield, and reduce the incidence of pests and weeds as well as nutrient leaching5, 16. However, this approach is infrastructure-intensive and plastic landfilling is unsustainable16; harmful effects of residual plastic films in soils on crop yields have also been reported17. Biodegradable plastics are being vigorously pursued, but their success has been limited to date due to their high cost, slow or incomplete biodegradability, and time-varying wetting properties after deployment16, 18, 19. Recently, engineered nanomaterials (ENMs) have been demonstrated to enhance the water-use efficiency of soils20. For example, a pot-scale study revealed that an ENM comprising electron beam-dispersed attapulgite and sodium polyacrylate polyacrylamide reduced water and nutrient loss and boosted plant growth21. Nevertheless, to avoid unintended environmental consequences caused by the use of ENMs, multiscale transdisciplinary efforts have been undertaken to pinpoint their effects on soils and the microbiome20, 22. 4 Based on the aforementioned concerns, in the present study, we developed an innovative approach to control evaporation from soils by combining (i) common sand, a material readily available in soils of arid regions, and (ii) paraffin wax, a low-cost and biodegradable hydrophobic material that is available at an industrial scale23, 24, 25. Our results demonstrate that superhydrophobic sand (SHS) mulching reduces water evaporation from moist soils under authentic arid-land conditions (Fig. 1B) and that the enhanced soil moisture promotes plant health and yield. Results Materials synthesis We drew inspiration from several super-water-repellent plants and animals that exploit waxy cocktails and micro- or nano-textures to achieve extreme water-repellency, also known as superhydrophobicity, to perform critical functions, including fog harvesting in arid conditions,26 skating on and launching from the water surface to avoid predators,27, 28 directing the movement of condensed water,29, 30 and respiring under water31. Analogously, SHS comprises common sand grains coated with a nanoscale layer of paraffin wax (Figs. 1B and 2A). SHS was produced by dissolving common paraffin wax in hexane, mixing the solution with common sand, and evaporating hexane from the mixture at ~100 mbar and 55°C (Fig. S1). Then, hexane was simultaneously condensed and collected in a separate container for reuse during the process. The sand comprised silica particles 100–700 μm in diameter (Fig. 2B; particle-size distribution of a common sandy soil for comparison). Paraffin wax was a mixture of hydrocarbons with tails of 27–37 carbons (Fig. 2C, Fig. S2, Table S1). This process led to the formation of a 20-nm thick wax coating onto the sand grains, which we estimated from the mass, volume, and density of the wax, BET surface area of the sand (0.11 m2/g), and wax-to-sand mass ratio of 1:600. In addition to hexane, pentane octane, cyclohexane, diethyl ether, dichloromethane, methyl-t-butyl ether, petroleum ether (ligroin), chloroform, tetrahydrofuran, and triethyl amine were tested as solvents; however, no significant differences were observed with respect to their water-repellent properties. Further, a variety of natural waxes were also tested, including palm wax, soy wax, and beeswax; the resultant sand exhibited superhydrophobicity. Given the scale of agricultural operations, we chose to use paraffin wax. 5 Fig. 1 Concept of superhydrophobic sand (SHS) mulches to reduce water evaporation from soils in arid regions. Water movements for subsurface irrigated (A) bare soil and (B) soil mulched with SHS. SHS prevents the capillary rise of water, thereby creating a dry diffusion barrier that allows water vapor to diffuse at a rate significantly lower than bare or unmulched soil. Water repellency The water repellency of sand grains dramatically increased after the above-described surface enhancement (Fig. 2A). The grain-level apparent contact angles, θ!, of water microdroplets formed by condensing water vapor on individual sand grains increased from θ! ≈ 30° (for ordinary sand) to θ! ≈ 105° for SHS (Fig. 2D-E). The advancing (θ") and receding (θ#) contact angles of ≈10 μL of water droplets advanced and retracted at 0.2 μL/s on ~10 mm-thick SHS layers were θ" ≈ 160° and θ# ≈ 150°, respectively, which are characteristics of superhydrophobicity (Methods). Water droplets of ~30 μL impacted a 5 mm-thick layer of SHS from a height of ~2 cm and bounced off and re-landed, forming liquid marbles32 (Fig. 2F). The factors and mechanisms underlying the superhydrophobicity of SHS are presented in the Discussion section. Next, we characterized the breakthrough pressure of water on SHS, defined A B 6 as the pressure at which water penetrates into the microtexture33. While water spontaneously imbibes into common sand, due to capillarity34, a 5 mm-thick SHS layer could prevent imbibition of the water column up to a height of h ≤ 12 cm, thereby presenting a breakthrough pressure of P$ = ρgh ≈ 1.2 kPa (as explained in the Discussion section). Based on these results, we envisioned that when placed on moist topsoil, SHS would create a capillary and diffusion barrier for soil moisture as well as insulate it from direct exposure to solar radiation, wind, and dry air (Fig. 1B). Fig. 2 Characterization of superhydrophobic sand (SHS). (A) (C) A photograph of SHS with water on top, demonstrating its superhydrophobicity (B) Particle-size distribution of SHS and sandy soil (loamy sand as per USDA soil texture characterization) collected at a local agriculture research facility. The fractions above and below 63 μm were determined using sieving and the hydrometer method35, respectively. (C) Gas chromatography of paraffin wax (~0.1 M in cyclohexane) pinpointing the chain lengths of the constituent alkanes (n) in red. The relative compositions of the alkanes are presented in Table S1. Note: hexadecane and hexadecanoic acid were used as internal standards. Representative environmental scanning electron micrographs of water droplets condensed on (D) common sand grains and (E) SHS grains. The apparent contact angles of water droplets are significantly higher in (E) than in (D). (F) High-speed images of a 30 μL water droplet dropped onto a 5 mm-thick SHS layer from a height of 2 cm (Movie S1). 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 Signal intensity (a.u) Time (min.) n=16 hexadecane Paraffin wax: Hydrocarbon CnH2n+2 hexadecanoic acid 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 Signal intensity Time (min.) D Common sand E SHS F Droplet bouncing on SHS A SHS 1 10 100 1000 0 25 50 75 100 Mass fraction (%) Particle size (μm) Sandy soil SHS 63 μm 2 μm Mass of particles (%) Particle size (μm) B Particle size distribution C Wax characterization (GC) 7 Effects of SHS mulching on evaporation flux and soil moisture content We evaluated the effects of SHS mulching on evaporation rates from the topsoil and actual moisture content and compared them with the effects of mulching with common sand and unmulched (control) sand. For this, bottom-closed pots were filled with 75 g potting soil and saturated with 130 g water. Some of these pots were then covered with either SHS or common sand, both with layer thicknesses ranging from 2.5–20.0 mm; the remaining unmulched pots were used as controls. The pots were exposed to day/night cycles for 26 days and the loss of soil moisture via evaporation was recorded (Fig. 3A-B). During this period, temperatures ranged from 23°C to 34°C and relative humidity ranged from 40% to 90% (Fig. 3C). Compared to mulching with untreated sand and unmulched controls, SHS mulching dramatically decreased water loss via evaporation (Fig. 3D). During the first few days, while the soil moisture was still high, the evaporation flux of the pots mulched with untreated sand was high, similar to that of the controls (Fig. 3F). In contrast, the evaporation flux of SHS mulched pots was lower and mostly independent of soil moisture content (Fig. 3E). Remarkably, a 5 mm- thick SHS mulch layer reduced the evaporation flux from approximately 78% to 56% during the first 4 days of the experiment (Fig. 3F). Evaporation flux, J, was inversely proportional to SHS mulch thickness, LSHS, such that J ∝ (L%&%)'(; as mulch thickness doubled, evaporative flux decreased by approximately 50% (Fig. 3G). 8 Fig. 3 Effects of superhydrophobic sand (SHS) mulching on water loss via evaporation from soil. We gravimetrically measured water loss from (bottom-closed) pots containing initially wet soil under various thicknesses of common sand and SHS mulches (0–20 mm, indicated by the number preceding the unit “mm”) exposed to environmental conditions. SHS mulch reduced evaporation from the topsoil in proportion to its thickness. (A) Schematic of the experimental setup showing evaporation loss from a single pot. (B) Photograph of the pots on the first day reveal mulches with dark-colored common sand as they absorbed water from the soil underneath, whereas SHS stayed dry. (C) Weather conditions during the period of the experiment. (D) 0 5 10 15 20 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 0 5 10 15 20 Common sand Superhydrophobic sand days days 26.4 15.4 6.2 5.2 4.2 0.5 Evaporation flux (kg/m2/day) Mulch thickness (mm) 1.3 26.4 15.4 6.2 5.2 4.2 0.5 1.3 0 5 10 15 20 25 0 4 8 12 16 -56% -56% Evaporation flux (kg/m2/day) Days Superhydrophobic sands Bare soil Common sands -78% 0 4 8 12 16 0.25 0.5 1 2 4 8 Evaporation flux (kg/m2/day) 2.5 mm 5 mm 7.5 mm 10 mm 20 mm 2.5 mm 5 mm 7.5 mm 10 mm 20 mm Days 0 5 10 15 20 25 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Relative soil moiture content Days 20 mm 10 mm 7.5 mm 5 mm 2.5 mm 2.5 mm 5 mm 7.5 mm 10 mm 20 mm Common sands SHS Bare soil 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0 0 4 8 12 16 Evaporation flux (kg/m2/day) Relative soil moisture content Bare soil 20 SHS 10 SHS 7.5 SHS 5 SHS 2.5 SHS 20 Common 10 Common 7.5 Common 5 Common 2.5 Common Bare soil (Smooth) 5 Common (smooth) 5 SHS (smooth) 5 mm SHS 5 mm Common sand Bare soil 0 5 10 15 20 25 20 25 30 35 0 5 10 15 20 25 40 60 80 100 0 5 10 15 20 25 0 200 400 600 Temperature (°C) Relative air humidity (%) Net radiation Days D E Weather conditions sun F G C B 6.5 cm! SHS! Common sand! Bare soil! A balance wet soil mulch evaporation ~1/2× scaling Lines represent days 9 Relative water loss from soil under different mulching conditions. (E) Evaporation flux as a function of relative soil moisture content. (F) Evaporation flux as a function of time. (G) Evaporation flux as a function of mulch thickness (Note: each curve represents the evaporative flux on a specific day as a function of mulch thickness; zero on the abscissa represents unmulched soil). The standard error was below 7% (σ)̅ = σ √N ⁄ , where σ is the standard deviation of the duplicates, N = 2). Next, we quantified the effects of 5 mm-thick SHS mulches on soil moisture content at a farm with loamy sand soil at a field station located in Hada Al-Sham, Saudi Arabia (21.79° N, 39.72° E) and compared it with those of unmulched soil (control). Unlike the pot-scale experiment, this setup facilitated percolation. We installed soil moisture and temperature sensors that were specifically calibrated for this soil in bottom-perforated buckets that prevented the lateral flow of water while maintaining vertical flux. The buckets were then buried to soil level to minimize unrealistic soil temperature profiles during day/night cycles (Fig. 4A-C). We studied two irrigation scenarios: (i) single irrigation starting from supersaturated soil with no further water application (Fig. 4D) and (ii) daily irrigation using a subsurface drip system, also started from supersaturated soil (Fig. 4E, B). As both systems started from supersaturation, there were minimal differences in the beginning due to water loss via percolation in either case. However, as percolation abated, the effects of mulching on the soil moisture content became apparent: the moisture content in the top 5 cm of the unmulched soil was lost after approximately 14 days; in contrast, while it took approximately 23 days for mulched soil to dry out (Fig. 4D). Next, in the daily irrigation setup, soil moisture achieved steady states in approximately a week, such that the soil moisture of mulched soil was approximately 25%–45% higher than that of unmulched soil (Fig. 4E). Interestingly, the evaporation rates from unmulched supersaturated soil were quite high during the first few days, resulting in evaporative cooling, as evidenced by temperature data. These trends, however, reversed after a few days because evaporative cooling diminished at a steady state, such that the temperature of mulched soil was 1°C–3°C cooler than that of unmulched soil (Fig. 4D-E; bottom panels). 10 Fig. 4 Effects of superhydrophobic sand (SHS) mulching on soil moisture content. We used sensors to measure the effects of a 5 mm-thick SHS mulch layer on soil moisture content and soil temperature exposed to field conditions. (A) Schematic of the experimental setup showing evaporation loss and soil moisture/temperature sensors in a bottom-perforated bucket buried at soil level for a more realistic soil temperature profile. One irrigation line with a single dripping point passed through the buckets at a depth of approximately 10 cm. (B-C) Photographs of the experimental setup during installation and just after SHS application in one of the buckets. (D-E) Average soil moisture and temperature for two sets of experiments: (D) a single initial irrigation event up to saturation and another with (E) one initial irrigation to saturation followed by daily irrigation. In (D), the data were collected at a depth of 5 cm. In (E), the data represent the average of soil moisture and temperature from the following depths: 15, 20, and 25 cm. Soil moisture content significantly increased after SHS mulching, particularly in the case of daily irrigation. Mulching also reduced the highest daily temperatures, except during the first few days, when evaporative cooling was very high for unmulched soil. Effects of SHS mulching on crop yields Next, we investigated the effects of SHS mulching on agricultural productivity under true arid conditions at our field station located at Hada Al-Sham, Saudi Arabia (21.79° N, 39.72° E). Here, we conducted multiyear field trials using a high-value crop (tomato, Solanum lycopersicum percolation mulch Jan 24 Jan 31 Feb 7 Feb 14 Feb 21 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Jan 24 Jan 31 Feb 7 Feb 14 Feb 21 15 20 25 30 35 40 Relative soil moisture content Temperature (°C) Feb 28 Mar 7 Mar 14 Mar 21 Mar 28 Apr 4 Apr 11 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Feb 28 Mar 7 Mar 14 Mar 21 Mar 28 Apr 4 Apr 11 24 28 32 36 Relative soil moisture content Temperature (°C) D Single initial irrigation sun A SHS Bare soil SHS Bare soil SHS Bare soil SHS Bare soil B C sub-surface irrigation sensors evaporation soil level wet soil Sub-surface irrigation Perforated bottoms Bare SHS sun E Daily irrigation Sensors Sensors 11 – variety A, cv. Bushra; variety B, cv. Nunhem’s Tristar F1) and two large-scale grass crops (barley, Hordeum vulgare, cv. Morex and wheat, Triticum aestivum, cv. Balady). We compared the beneficial effects of SHS mulches of varying thicknesses with those of 120 μm-thick polyethylene sheets (hereafter referred to as plastic mulches) and unmulched soil (control). Two types of irrigation scenarios were investigated: (i) normal freshwater irrigation (<900 ppm NaCl) applied twice a day through subsurface drip irrigation and (ii) brackish irrigation (5000 ppm NaCl) applied twice a day (Fig. 5). Due to mild weather conditions, the crops were sown during the November–December period (winter 2017 and 2018) and were subsequently harvested during March–April of the following years (Figs. S4–S10). Compared with unmulched controls, SHS mulching led to significant improvements in tomato yields under both normal and brackish water irrigation (Fig. 5A). The most significant result was obtained for the 5 mm-thick SHS mulch under normal irrigation for tomato, variety B (2018 season), which achieved a 72% improvement in yield relative to that obtained for unmulched controls. The yield enhancements for variety A with 5 mm and 10 mm-thick SHS mulches under normal irrigation were 27% and 40%, respectively, compared with those for unmulched controls. In fact, the performance of SHS mulching was on par with plastic mulches for tomato variety A, where black and clear plastic mulches enhanced crop yields by 28% and 43%, respectively. In our experiments with brackish water irrigation, the 5 mm-thick SHS mulch enhanced the yield of tomato variety B by 53% compared with unmulched controls (Fig. 5A). All of these results were statistically significant at p < 0.05 (Kruskal–Wallis H test). We also observed statistically significant enhancements in the yield of barley mulched with the 5 mm-thick SHS mulch under normal (73%) and brackish water (208%) irrigation compared with unmulched controls (Fig. 5B). For wheat, SHS mulching led to a 17% enhancement in grain yield under normal fresh water irrigation. Under brackish water irrigation, only the dry biomass of barley plant that underwent SHS mulching was significantly higher (+44%) than that of barley plant grown in unmulched controls (Fig. S13). Mulching-enhanced soil moisture likely played a key role in transporting salts away from the root region via percolation/capillarity, as evidenced by the 39%–60% lower sodium concentration in the topsoil (p < 0.05, Table S2). Detailed insights into this mass transport necessitate further research, which falls beyond the scope of this study. 12 In 2020, we established an experiment with 450 tomato plants. However, this time, instead of assigning separate plots for specific treatments, we intercalated SHS and bare treatments in the same plots. These tomato plants produced a modest 10% increase in fruit yield compared with unmulched controls (Fig. S14). We consider that the experimental (intercalated) configuration led to the inadvertent sharing of the enhanced soil moisture beneath the SHS mulch with the neighboring unmulched regions/plants due to capillarity (note: the plants were separated by a distance of approximately 20–40 cm). Nevertheless, the results demonstrated statistical significance (p = 0.02) due to the greater number of replicates for this crop cycle. Fig. 5 Effects of superhydrophobic sand (SHS) mulching on the performance of tomatoes, barley, and wheat in field trials. Results for plants grown under 5–10 mm superhydrophobic sand (5–10 SHS) mulches (blue) versus bare soil (red) and plastic mulches (orange) on tomato 13 (A) fresh fruit yield and (B) barley and wheat grain yield. (C) Schematics of the field designs for grains with the SHS mulch completely covering the plot and tomato with the SHS mulch as 40- cm strips or circles around the plants. Photographs showing (D–E) tomato and (F) barley fields with arrows detailing the bare, SHS, and plastic mulch plots. SHS mulching significantly increased the yields of tomatoes, barley, and wheat. Dots in the boxplots represent the measurements for individual plants from replicate plots. Each dot represents the total mass of fruits produced per plant for tomatoes. The mass of grains per area is presented for barley and wheat. Each treatment was compared with the control (bare) case using the Kruskal–Wallis H test, where (S) represents statistical significance (p < 0.05) and percent change is the relative difference of the means. The boxes contain the middle 50% of the data points, with the horizontal line indicating the median and the diamond inside the box indicating the mean. Lastly, out of curiosity, we investigated the effects of SHS mulching with reduced irrigation (50% of normal irrigation, once a day). Under this condition, the results were not promising, presumably due to the acute water stress (Figs. S11-12). This aspect needs to be investigated further. Effects of SHS mulching on soil and the root microbiome Unlike plastic mulches, which must be disposed of via landfilling16, SHS mulches are environmentally benign. After crop harvesting in our field trials, we left SHS mulches in the field, where they lost their hydrophobicity in 7–9 months presumably due to the breakdown of wax by solar irradiation. Prior to the next crop cycle, we plowed the field and integrated the depleted SHS into the local sandy soil (for soil characterization, please refer to Supplementary Information, Section III, Fig. S15). To detect the impact of SHS mulching on the soil microbiome, we characterized the structure and composition of edaphic and plant root microbial communities of tomato and barley plants (2018 season) by collecting and analyzing root, rhizosphere, and bulk soil samples for unique sequence variants (SVs) of the bacterial 16S rRNA gene. We identified a total of 6,912 bacterial 16S rRNA gene unique SVs associated with root system compartments (root tissues and rhizosphere) and bulk soil samples of barley (6,338 SVs) and tomato (6,350 SVs; Table S5). Of the tested experimental factors (root system compartments, irrigation type, and the SHS mulch overlay), variation (beta-diversity) in bacterial community was mainly affected by niche-compartmentalization of the root system (barley: R2 = 0.26, F2,98 = 18.04, p = 0.001 and tomato: R2 = 0.22, F2,99 = 14.99, p = 0.001; Fig. 6A, D), followed by irrigation type, i.e., fresh versus brackish water, (barley: R2 = 0.04, F1,99 = 5.29, p = 0.001 and tomato: R2 = 0.04, F1,100 = 5.76, p = 0.001; Fig. 6B, E). The application of the SHS 14 mulch overlay did not affect the composition of bacterial communities (barley: R2 = 0.011, F1,99 = 1.54, p = 0.06 and tomato: R2 = 0.009, F1,100 = 1.27, p = 0.15; Fig. 6C, F). Multiple comparison tests showed that in both crops, irrigation type induced a significant change in the composition of the bacterial communities associated with different plant root system compartments; in contrast, SHS mulch overlay had no effect on the composition of the bacterial communities (Table S6). This finding was supported by the number of SVs shared between the treatment with SHS mulches and normal soil, 4,954 (78%) for barley and 5,024 (79%) for tomato, accounting for 98% of the relative abundance in both crops, (Fig. 6G-H). Gammaproteobacteria, Alphaproteobacteria and Bacteroidetes, followed by Firmicutes, Gemmatimonadetes and Actinobacteria were dominant in the bacterial communities (Fig. S16). Fig. 6 Unconstrained analysis of principal coordinates conducted on the root-system- associated bacterial communities. We used the tested experimental factors (compartmentalization, irrigation type, and overlay treatment) to evaluate the variations in the overall composition of the bacterial communities in (A-C) barley and (D-F) tomato. Venn diagram shows the percentages of bacterial sequence variants (SV) shared among overlay treatments (bare soil and SHS mulch) in the root system (root and rhizosphere) and bulk soil of (G) barley and (H) tomato. SVs percentages are indicated by large areas, whereas the relative abundances of SVs are reported in parenthesis. A D Barley Rhizosphere Rhizosphere Bulk soil Bulk soil Root tissue Root tissue Root-system compartment Irrigation Brackish water Fresh water Brackish water Fresh water Tomato E B C F Overlay treatment SHS Bare SHS Bare 78 (98) 10 (1) SHS Bare 79 (98) 11 (1) SHS Bare 11 (1) 10 (1) G H 15 Discussion The results of the present study underscore the potential of SHS mulching for growing more food and vegetation with limited freshwater resources in arid regions. In this section, we explain the mechanisms and factors underlying the water-repellency of SHS and its ability to reduce water loss via evaporation from the topsoil, followed by some arguments for the scalability of this approach. First, we explain why micron-scale water droplets on individual SHS grains exhibit apparent contact angles of θ+ ≈ 105° (Fig. 2E), whereas millimeter-scale water droplets placed on SHS mulches, e.g., a 5 mm-thick layer, exhibit much higher values, i.e., θ" ≈ 160° (Fig. 2A). This dramatic enhancement in water repellence arises from the entrapment of air between the SHS grains as they come into contact with water—a hallmark of superhydrophobicity26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 36. In fact, the apparent macroscale angles can be related to grain-level (actual) angles via the Cassie–Baxter model, cos θ, = φ-% × cos θ+ − φ-., where φ-% and φ-. are the area fractions of the real liquid–solid area and liquid–vapor area normalized by the projected area37, 38 (see reference39 for the terminology used here). Assuming minimal liquid penetration into the SHS and that the SHS grains are smooth and devoid of reentrant geometries34, 40, the predicted apparent (macroscopic) contact angle for φ-% = 0.1 and φ-. = 0.9 yields θ,,0 = 158°, which is in reasonable agreement with the experimental observation of θ" ≈ 160°. This means that when a water droplet is placed on an SHS mulch, it is practically hovering on air (because only 10% of its area touches the solid). This also underlies the effortless de-pinning of water from SHS (or ultralow contact angle hysteresis of water). Next, we explain how SHS governs the fate of water loss via evaporation from the topsoil. First, we emphasize that all the field-scale experiments reported in this study utilized subsurface irrigation. When water comes in contact with common hydrophilic soil particles, the mechanical equilibrium between the interfacial tensions creates a concave meniscus, which drives it in all directions, including upwards, due to capillarity (Figs. 7A-B). Considering that the particle size of soil ranges from 1 to 1000 μm (Fig. 2B), pore sizes between the grains could yield an average radius of curvature of the water meniscus of r2 ≈ 5 μm. For an actual contact angle of θ+ ≈ 39° for silica, the major component of our soil (please refer to Supplementary Information, Section III, Fig. S15), the magnitude of the Laplace or the curvature pressure can be determined by the formula: P- = γ-. × C3 , where γ is the surface tension of water, C3 = 16 (1 R( ⁄ + 1 R4 ⁄ ) is the mean curvature of the liquid–air interface, and R1 and R2 are the mutually orthogonal radii of the interfacial curvature. Assuming spherical symmetry of the air–water interface, R( = R4 = r2 ≈ 5 μm, which yields P5 ≈ 29 kPa. This pressure drives the water radially from the subsurface dripping point in all directions, including upwards to the topsoil–air interface, where it evaporates (Figs. 7A and 1A). Conversely, when soil moisture rises upward and touches the SHS mulch, the curvature of the air–water interface at the interface of the SHS grains becomes convex (Fig. 7C–D). Therefore, the same Laplace pressure that drives the capillary rise of water prevents its imbibition into the SHS layer; thus, keeping it dry (Fig. 7D). In fact, the magnitude of this preventive (or negative) Laplace pressure can be calculated using the formula P- = γ-. × C3. We presume that the average value of the C3 of the air–water interface in contact with SHS grains of sizes ranging from 100–700 μm is ≈ 1/60 μm-1, which yields P- = 1.2 kPa, a result in reasonable agreement with that of breakthrough pressure experiments. This analysis explains how an SHS layer facilitates a dry porous barrier for water vapor (and other gases). Fig. 7 Mechanism for limiting water evaporation from the soil. (A) Water from subsurface irrigation is spontaneously imbibed by the soil media due to (B) positive Laplace pressure, P5 ! "∘ #" R ! "∘ #" $# $# R %$%$ A Bare soil C SHS mulch Diffusion-limited evaporation Higher evaporation Wet soil grain Wet soil grain SHS grain Wax coating ~20 nm B Hydrophilic interface D Hydrophobic interface Wet soil grain SHS grain 17 (red arrows). This results in the capillary rise of water, leading to evaporation loss. (C) Water from subsurface irrigation is imbibed by the soil, but this imbibition is arrested at the soil–SHS interface due to (D) negative Laplace pressure. Subsequently, SHS acts as a barrier limiting dry diffusion, significantly reducing water loss from the soil. While liquid water is unable to spontaneously imbibe into SHS, water vapor can diffuse through the SHS mulch layer. In fact, the evaporation flux of water from the topsoil and across the SHS mulch can be estimated using the Fick’s diffusion model J = −D × ∆φ/L%&%, where ∆φ is the gradient in the water vapor concentration across the SHS layer, L%&%, and D = Dw ×ε ×δ τ is the effective diffusivity that depends on the diffusivity of water vapor in air, D' , porosity, ε, constrictivity, δ, and tortuosity, τ, of the granular mulch41. As evident from this equation, the thicker the SHS mulch, the lower the evaporation flux, as observed by the ~ ( 4 × scaling of the evaporation fluxes with the doubling of the SHS mulch thickness (Fig. 3G). SHS also decreases ∆φ by physically covering the topsoil, which insulates the soil-moisture underneath from sunlight and wind. During the course of the trials, the field station experienced dust storms and daily wind speeds of ~0–15 ms−1 without noticeable loss of SHS or its water-conserving properties42. This was due to the relatively larger size and mass of the SHS relative to soil particles (Figs. 2B) as well as due to the interparticle friction between SHS grains (Fig. S2F). During the later stages of the crop cycle (March–April), soil temperatures in our fields were more than 70°C. However, this did not compromise the wax coating (bulk melting point ~60°C–65°C); the adhesive force at the sand–wax interface exceeded the weight of the wax, preempting its dripping43. Conclusion Taken together, the results presented in this study underscore the potential of our bio- inspired approach for boosting food production in arid regions. Among its ingredients, paraffin wax is the most inexpensive hydrophobic coating available at an industrial scale, in contrast with costly organic/perfluorinated silanes14, 44. Furthermore, sand can be acquired directly from sandy soils, which are common in arid regions, such as the Middle East. For example, the soil in our field station comprised ~80% sand (Figs. 2B, S15, and SI Section III). Presently, we are developing a solvent-free manufacturing protocol that directly exploits sandy soils and paraffin 18 wax to produce SHS. The resulting SHS also exhibits excellent water repellency (Fig. S3) and its field trials are underway. To summarize, this translational research demonstrates how sands or sandy soils – abundant resources in arid regions – can be processed into SHS via nanoscale wax coating to produce more food with limited water resources. The simplicity of this manufacturing process is underscored by the fact that we manufactured over 10,000 kg of SHS in our laboratory and that we could manually apply it to conduct these field trials (Movie S2). In addition to annual crops, we believe that SHS can be applied to perennial orchards, vineyards, or green zones in cities, such as public parks and green corridors. Arid lands with limited freshwater sources, including parts of South America, Africa, the Middle East, the United States, Australia, China, and India, present vast underused regions with untapped potential to expand their agricultural operations by leveraging this sustainable technology. 19 Methods Process of manufacturing SHS 1. Starting materials: a. Common sand (characteristic size in the range: 100–700 μm; Fig. 2B). b. Blocks of paraffin wax (molecular weight, 487 Da, melting point 60–65°C), grated to shavings of <1-mm size. 2. These wax shavings were dissolved in approximately 10 L of hexane. 3. Then, 50 kg of common sand was added to a 60-L evaporator (Fig. S1). 4. The wax/hexane mixture was added to the evaporator flask to achieve a wax-to-sand ratio of 1:600. Note that concentrations as low as 1:2000 (wax/sand) achieved superhydrophobicity. 5. Next, the temperature of the evaporator was gradually increased from 22°C to 55°C and the pressure was reduced from 1 atm to 100 mbar to evaporate the hexane, which was condensed and collected for reuse (recovery rate of ~99%). 6. The pressure was normalized and SHS was collected and stored for use. Note: Due to the flammability of the organic solvents used in this manufacturing protocol, potential sources of electrical sparks, such as cell phones, match sticks, and static charge, must be avoided and the setup must be installed in a well-ventilated area. All components of the setup were electrically grounded to avoid any electric spark. More recent developments have shown that the solvent can be completely eliminated and replaced by vigorous mixing at 70°C–80°C for approximately 30 min without noticeably compromising the coating. SHS and wax characterization The wax used was characterized via gas chromatography–mass spectroscopy (Agilent 7890A–5975C) (~10−1 M in cyclohexane). The wetting of individual particles was observed under an environmental scanning electron micrograph (FEI Quanta 600). Contact angles on a 10- mm bed of SHS were measured by placing a 10-μL water droplet with advancing and receding rates of 0.2 μL/s (Kruss Drop Shape Analyzer DSA100, Advance software). The thickness of the wax layer on the sand granules was estimated from the surface area of sand grains and the volume of wax used. The surface area of the sand was estimated using the Brunauer–Emmet– Teller (BET) method using krypton gas45. We found it to be 0.11 m2/g. For 1 g of wax of mass 20 density 800 kg/m3, the volume was 1.25 ×10-6 m3, whereas for 600 g of sand, the surface area was 600 g × 0.11 m2/g = 66 m2. Assuming uniform coating, the average thickness of the wax layer was 1.25 × 10-6 m3/66 m2 = 1.8×10-8 m » 20 nm). More details are presented in Section I of the Supplementary Information. Field trials with tomato, barley, and wheat Field trials were conducted at the agricultural research station of King Abdulaziz University, Hada Al Sham, Saudi Arabia (21.7963° N, 39.7265° E). Tomato (S. lycopersicum) varieties A (Bushra) and B (Nunhem’s Tristar F1), wheat (T. aestivum) variety Balady, and barley (Hordeum vulgare) variety Morex. The field was divided into plots of 2.5 × 2.5 m for each treatment, with plants uniformly spaced within each plot. The plots were evenly distributed over the field (Fig. 5C). The total number of tomato plants per plot was 12 and 15 in the years 2018 and 2019, respectively. For barley and wheat, the seeds were spread in a line 2.5 m long and 5 cm deep, with 15-cm lines in between. The distance between the plants was adjusted at approximately 2 cm by thinning them after full germination. To control the thickness of the SHS mulch, we used a cardboard template of known area and homogeneously applied a specific mass of SHS (Movie S2). Tomato fields received SHS mulch as a 40-cm strip around the plants in a line for the 2018 season and as 40-cm diameter circles around each plant for the 2019 season to save on material. On the other hand, barley and wheat fields were completely covered with the SHS mulch due to the close proximity between plants. Plastic mulches (120-μm thick polyethylene sheets) were also applied over the whole plot. For the subsurface drip irrigation system, we used Rain Bird LD-06-12-1000 Landscape drip 0.9 Gallon/h (3.4 L/h per dripping point). The plants were fertilized through the irrigation system using common compound fertilizers on a weekly basis (N:P:K 20:20:20 during the vegetative stage and N:P:K 10:10:40 at the flowering and fruiting stages). For the 2019 season, there were two plots with 5-mm thick SHS mulch, clear plastic (transparent 120-μm thick polyethylene sheet), and black plastic (120- μm thick polyethylene sheet) and four plots with 10-mm thick SHS and unmulched controls. The number of plots and replicates (n) varied according to the treatment, as evidenced by the number of dots in Fig. 5A–B. More details are presented in Section II of the Supplementary Information. Tomato fruits were harvested weekly and collected in plastic bags labeled with plant identity number, followed by counting and weighing. Weekly harvests were conducted for 6 21 weeks, and the total number and mass of fruits per plant was considered for data analysis (Fig. 5A). Barley and wheat plants were collected at the end of the cycle and counted over a homogeneous area of 1 m2 inside each plot. The plants were manually separated and counted, followed by extrapolating the yield per plant to yield per hectare by multiplying the total number of plants in the measured area by the mass of grains per plant (Fig. 5B). Extrapolation to hectare was preferred to avoid the inherent difficulty in separating one plant from another due to their close proximity and tangled roots. Statistical analysis of the treatments was performed in Matlab R2019b using the Kruskal–Wallis H test, where (S) in Fig. 5 represents statistical significance (p < 0.05). In addition, we performed soil analysis for all plots to guarantee homogeneity within the field; the details are presented in Section III of the Supplementary Information. Quantification of evaporation flux Pots containing 75 g of Metro Mix 360TM soil and 132 g of water were covered with 15-, and 20-mm thick) or were not subjected to any mulching (bare) and placed outside the lab under environmental conditions (Fig. 3). All pots were in duplicates. The masses of individual pots were tracked over time with a mass balance. The experiment was started on October 10, 2016 at 9:45 a.m. at Thuwal, Saudi Arabia (22.3084° N, 39.1030° E). The environmental data were obtained from KAUST weather station. Quantification of soil moisture We buried 30 L plastic buckets with a diameter of 35 cm at the ground level and filled them up with local sandy soil (Fig. 4A-C), which was sieved to remove gravel of size >1 cm. We compared the 5-mm thick SHS mulch with the unmulched control. Bottom -perforated buckets were used to circumvent the issue of lateral percolation as well as to measure vertical flows, i.e., evaporation and percolation. To quantify soil moisture and temperature, we used HydraprobeTM sensors (Stevens Water, LLC), which exploit the principle of coaxial impedance dielectric reflectometry46, 47. Briefly, we compared mulched and unmulched soil under two irrigation regimes: (i) single irrigation starting with supersaturated soil with no further irrigation and (ii) daily subsurface drip irrigation (1.1 L/day). The data for case (i) were determined as the average measurement of two sensors buried at a depth of 5 cm (Fig. 4D). The data for case (ii) were 22 estimated as the average measurement of three sensors at depths of 15, 20, and 25 cm (Fig. 4E). The experiments were performed from January to April (2018) at the same site as our field trials (21.79° N, 39.72° E). The weather conditions of the site are presented in Fig. S4. Analysis of soil–root microbiome Samples were collected during the 2018 crop season on February 20 at the same site as our field trials (21.79° N, 39.72° E). For each field treatment (irrigation: fresh/brackish water and overlay: SHS mulches presence/absence), the root systems of barley and tomato plants were randomly selected from each experimental plot (barley, n = 18; tomato, n = 18; Table S5). After gently removing the plants from the soil, the root system was sampled using a pair of sterile scissors and tweezers. The rhizosphere was separated from the root tissues, as described previously48. The obtained root tissues were surface-sterilized according to a previously reported methodology49. All samples were stored at −20°C for molecular analysis. Bulk soil samples were also collected from the unvegetated portions of each experimental plot (0.5–10-cm depth; n = 18 for each of the two crops). DNA was extracted from 0.5 ± 0.05 g of bulk and rhizosphere soils using the PowerSoil® DNA Isolation kit (MoBio Inc., USA). Surface-sterilized root tissues were ground in a mortar and pestle using liquid nitrogen, followed by DNA extraction from 1 gram of the ground root tissues using the DNeasy Plant Maxi kit (Qiagen, Germany). The V3–V4 hypervariable regions of the 16S rRNA gene were PCR-amplified using the universal primers 341F and 785R50. Libraries were constructed using the 96 Nextera XT Index Kit (Illumina) following the manufacturer’s instructions and sequenced using the Illumina MiSeq platform at the Bioscience Core Lab at KAUST. Raw sequences were analyzed using the DADA2 pipeline, including quality filtering, trimming, dereplication, and paired-end merging of the sequences51. Chloroplast- and mitochondria-classified SVs were discarded and non-prevalent SVs (defined as SV present in <1% of our samples) were removed from the SV table. A total of 13,568,983 sequences (barley: 8,611,818 and tomato: 4,194,505) divided into 6,912 SVs were obtained. Only samples with suitable sequencing depth and diversity (Good’s coverage value > 99%) were used for the further analysis. The raw reads have been deposited in the Short Reads Archive of NCBI under the accession numbers SUB7136748, SUB7211346, and SUB7137862. 23 The beta-diversity of the bacterial communities in barley and tomato was analyzed using the compositional similarity matrices (Bray–Curtis) of the relative log-transformed SV tables using a previously reported methodology52. The same matrices were also used to perform unconstrained analysis of principal coordinates and to assess the compositional variation explained by each experimental factor. Permutational multivariate analyses of variance (PERMANOVA) were performed using the adonis function from the “vegan” package53 to statistically test the impact of each experimental factor: “irrigation” (two levels: fresh and brackish water), “overlay” (two levels: SHS mulch and bare soil), and “compartment” (three levels: root tissues, rhizosphere, and bulk soil). Further, PERMANOVA pair-wise tests were conducted to evaluate the effect of “overlay” on each interaction category “Compartment” × “Irrigation” using PRIMER52. 24 Data availability: The authors declare that all the data supporting the findings of this study are available within the paper and in its Supplementary Information. Acknowledgments: We thank the following colleagues from KAUST: Ms. Jamilya Nauruzbayeva for her assistance in applying SHS in the fields; Mr. Vinicius Luis dos Santos for his assistance in conducting soil analysis; Dr. Mahmoud Ibrahim and Dr. Andreia Farinha for troubleshooting during soil analysis; Prof. Simon Krattinger for data analysis; Mr. Sankara Arunachalam and Dr. Eddy Domingues for environmental scanning electron microscopy and energy-dispersive spectroscopy; Dr. Erqiang Li and Professor Sigurdur Thoroddsen for high- speed imaging; Dr. Yoann Malbeteau and Mr. Bruno Aragon for their assistance in soil moisture data analysis; Dr. Nishan Abdul Jaleel, Dr. Gabriele Fiene, and Dr. Muppala Reddy for their assistance in greenhouse experiments. We would also like to thank Dr. Adel D. Al-Qurashi, Prof. Dr. Abdullah S. Al-Wagdany, and Dr. Khalid Asseri from KAU, Jeddah. The co-authors thank Mr. Xavier Pita, Scientific Illustrator at KAUST, for creating Fig. 1A-B and Dr. Michael Cusack (KAUST) and Prof. Kevin Plaxco (University of California, Santa Barbara) for their assistance in scientific editing. Funding: We acknowledge research support from King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST) through award # BAS/1/1070-0101 to HM. Author contributions: HM conceived the idea of superhydrophobic sand, supervised this research, and coordinated the collaboration; AGJ scaled-up the SHS manufacturing protocol and led field-scale experiments with the assistance of MAAM, KO, and EM; JR performed initial feasibility studies with SHS, assisted by MJLM, MT, and MAAM; AGJ and SM performed the soil-moisture measurements and MFM advised them on sensor calibration and data analysis; MAAM and MT provided expert guidance on field-scale experiments; DD, RM, and KO performed microbial analysis and analyzed the data; AGJ and HM analyzed the data from the field-scale experiments; HM and AGJ wrote the manuscript and the co-authors edited it. Competing interests: HM, AGJ, and JR have filed a patent application WO2018091986A1. 25 Data and materials: Raw data have been deposited in the Short Reads Archive of NCBI (Accession numbers: rhizosphere, SUB7136748; root tissue, SUB7211346; and bulk soil, SUB7137862); remaining data are available in the main text and supporting information. Code is available upon request. 26