1 HIGHLY POROUS SUPERCONDUCTORS: SYNTHESIS, RESEARCH, AND PROSPECTS D. M. Gokhfelda, b, M. R. Koblischkac, and A. Koblischka-Venevac aKirensky Institute of Physics, Federal Research Center KSC SB RAS, Krasnoyarsk, Russia bSiberian Federal University, Krasnoyarsk, Russia cShibura Institute of Technology,Tokyo, Japan e-mail: gokhfeld@iph.krasn.ru This paper gives a review of studies of superconductors with a porosity above 50%. The pores in such su- perconducting materials provide refrigerant penetration, efficient heat dissipation and stable operation. Methods for the synthesis of the main groups of porous superconductors are described. The results of stud- ies of the structural, magnetic, and electrical transport properties are presented, and the features of the cur- rent flow through porous superconductors of various types are considered. INTRODUCTION Advances in raising the critical temperature and critical current open up new avenues to the wide- spread use of superconductors. Progress in the crea- tion of superconducting high-current devices is based on theoretical studies of the pinning of Abrikosov vor- tices at artificial pinning centers . Modern super- conductingwires are capable of transmitting up to 500 A/cm per unit width at a temperature of 77 K , while massive superconductors can hold a magnetic field up to 18 T [3–5]. The development of new syn- thesis technologies and the creation of new forms of superconducting materials are promising areas of study, even if they do not lead to an increase in the critical temperature and critical current. The search for new forms has led to the advent of porous supercon- ductors (PSs). The main feature of this form is its open porous structure. Upon pulsed magnetization and high currents flow- ing in a superconductor, heating regions and hot spots may appear . If the outflow of heat is insuffi- cient, then such heating regions spread, which leads to an increase in temperature and the destruction of the superconducting state in the entire volume. The unin- terrupted functioning of superconducting devices re- quires constant removal of the generated heat. For effective cooling, it is necessary that liquid or gaseous refrigerant penetrate deep into the samples . The access of the coolant deep into the material is possible if there are open macroscopic pores with a size of over 50 nm . Thus, an important advantage of PSs is a large specific surface area, which provides the possibility of efficient cooling and preventing the growth of hot spots. When creating a PS, scaling, i.e., the ability to cre- ate objects of various sizes, is available . The syn- thesis of bulk superconducting samples larger than 5‒ 10 cm is difficult due to cracking and uneven distribu- tion of chemical elements. Another common problem for high-temperature superconductors (HTSCs), is the nonuniform oxygen saturation in the bulk. For materi- als with macroscopic pores, these problems are elimi- nated and PSs can have large sizes. YBa2Cu3O7–δ (YBCO) porous materials with a foam structure were obtained for the first time in the early 2000s . This discovery sparked a wave of works on the creation of new superconducting materials with macropores. A brief review of experimental works devoted to the study of porous HTSCs was presented in . In the present review, we expand the range of PSs under consideration and analyze the distinctions and com- mon features of their structural, magnetic, and electric transport characteristics. 1. TRAJECTORIES OF CURRENT IN POROUS SUPERCONDUCTORS The thermal and mechanical properties of porous materials were analyzed using various structural mod- els [14–23]. The shapes of structural elements (struts between pores) and the way they are packed deter- mine the implements structure of the porous material . Structural elements form a percolation system. In porous superconductors, superconducting clusters that ensure the flow of electric current, and clusters of pores, through which a coolant can flow, are formed. The coexistence of various types of percolation (poly- chromatic percolation ) is the property of PSs that is important for practical applications. The trajectories of currents in a PS are more rami- fied and entangled than in dense bulk superconduc- tors, and the current circulation pattern is more com- plicated [26–28]. PSs are internally heterogeneous at different scales. The ramified pattern of granules, pores, and clusters of porous materials can be charac- terized by the fractal dimension . The frac- tal dimension of the pores, D, is related to the porosity φ as φ = 1 – (rmin/rmax)3-D , where rmin and rmax are the minimum and maximum radii of pores for which the dimensional analysis is carried out. The account 2 for the fractal dimension of structural elements was made in a number of works [32–35] to describe the flow of fluids through porous media. The thermal and electrical conductivity of porous media also depends on the fractal dimension . In nonhomogeneous superconductors, the fractal dimension of the bounda- ries separating the superconducting regions and pores affects the pinning, magnetic flux creep, and electrical transport properties . The effect of the porosity of samples on their criti- cal current was considered in [39–41]. Due to the presence of pores, the effective cross section for the current in a PS is smaller than in a superconductor without pores. With an increase in porosity, there is a sharp decrease in the area of contact areas of granules and, accordingly, a significant decrease in the critical current density through the PS. When describing the magnetic and electric transport properties of PSs, the model of a two-level superconductor is used [42–48]. Inhomogeneous and polycrystalline superconductors are considered in the model as a Josephson medium [49–51] consisting of superconducting regions and weak links between them. The subsystem of weak links is responsible for the dissipation of energy in weak magnetic fields, while dissipation in strong magnetic fields occurs in the subsystem of superconducting regions. In magnet- ic fields H smaller than the critical field of the Joseph- son medium, HcJ, a polycrystalline superconductor behaves like a homogeneous superconductor, with a critical current density equal to the critical intergranu- lar current density JcJ. The magnetic flux begins to penetrate into the grain boundaries at H > HcJ . In fields above ~0.01 T, the magnetic properties of the sample are mainly determined by the magnetization of the granules . As a rule, the intragranular critical current density is several orders of magnitude higher than JcJ . With increasing temperature or magnetic field, the critical values of both intragranular and intergranular currents decrease, but the corresponding functional dependences of the critical currents of these subsys- tems are different, since they are associated with dif- ferent physical processes . The critical density JcJ is determined by the parameters of the grain boundary and the mutual orientation of anisotropic granules . Also, the intergranular current is influ- enced by the pinning of the magnetic flux in the su- perconducting circuits around the pores . Intragranular currents are controlled by pinning the magnetic flux at the inner and surface pinning centers . Non-dissipative currents in a polycrystalline su- perconductor can circulate along two types of closed trajectories. A trajectory of the first type covers the entire sample, and the radius of current circulation Rc is equal to the radius of the sample. A current with a density JcJ circulates along the perimeter of the sample through the granules and grain boundaries as long as the magnetic field is smaller than HcJ. When H > HcJ, the currents circulate inside the superconducting gran- ules and the circulation scale is smaller than the sam- ple size corresponding to the average size of granules or clusters formed by several linked gran- ules. Thus, the circulation radius Rc is determined by both the material structure and external conditions. To determine the average critical current density Jc from magnetic measurements, the Bean formula Jc(H) = ΔM(H)/kRc is used, where ΔM is the height of the hysteresis loop in A/m and the coefficient k depends on the geometric shape of the sample; for polycrystal- line samples, k = 2/3 is taken. The value of ΔM in an external magnetic field H is determined as ΔM(H) = M↓(H) – M↑(H), where M↑(H) and M↓(H) are the magnetization values with increasing and decreasing H, respectively. For the correct determination of Jc, a correct choice of Rc is necessary. For polycrystalline superconductors, the use of Rc as the sample radius often leads to a significant underestimation of Jc. A method for determining the current circulation scale was proposed in . This method can be ap- plied to superconducting single crystals and films with a small thickness t such that Rc/t > 2. The demagnetiz- ing factor of the samples that depends on the ratio Rc/t, influences the slope of the linear section of the dependence M↓(H) that appears immediately after switching the external field from increase to decrease. The circulation radius is determined from the equation dM↓(H)/dH = –π2Rc 3/[V (ln(8Rc/t)–0.5)], here V is the sample volume. For samples with a negligible demagnetizing factor Rc/t <<1) and polycrystalline superconductors, the following expression to determine the scale of current circulation was proposed in : (1) where λ is the magnetic field penetration depth for the superconductor at the measurement temperature and the values of M↑ and ΔM are determined at H = Hp. 2. SYNTHESIS OF POROUS SUPERCONDUCTING MATERIALS Superconducting materials with macropores can be obtained using various techniques. Previously synthe- sized PSs can be divided into several groups, differing in methods of preparation and structural features. To date, foams, porous polycrystals, sponges, and fabrics are known. 3 The synthesis of superconducting YBCO foams was carried out in two stages . At the first stage, Y2BaCuO5 (Y211) foam was prepared . A standard technology for the production of ceramic foam was used, including impregnation of polyure- thane foam with an aqueous suspension of Y211 pow- der and subsequent annealing. At the second stage, the top-seed growth (TSG) method was used. An NdBa2Cu3O7−δ seed crystal was placed on the foam surface. The Y211 foam was impregnated with a melt of a mixture of barium cuprate and copper oxide , and the crystallization process into the YBCO phase repeating the structure of the initial foam occurred. The porosity of the YBCO foam obtained is deter- mined by the structure of the polyurethane foam used in the first stage of the synthesis. Porous polycrystals have a loose structure and con- tain a significant number of pores between crystallites, but the crystallites in these materials are the same as in bulk polycrystalline superconductors. (Bi,Pb)2Sr2Ca2Cu3O10 (Bi2223) porous polycrystals were prepared by annealing a mixture of Bi2223 and CaCO3 powders . The precursor was a poly- crystalline superconductor of nominal composition Bi1.8Pb0.3Sr1.9Ca2Cu3O10 prepared from the corre- sponding oxides and carbonates Bi2O3, PbO, SrCO3, and CaCO3 by the standard solid phase synthesis technique . From a mixture of milled Bi2223 and CaCO3, tablets 20 mm in diameter and 4–5 mm in height are pressed. Highly porous samples are ob- tained by annealing tablets for 400 hours at a tempera- ture of 820°C. The density of the samples obtained ranged from 1.55 to 2.26 g/cm3, i.e., 26–38% of the theoretical density of Bi2223. The porosity of the pre- pared samples was controlled by the content of the CaCO3 precursor. Porous MgB2 polycrystals were prepared by an- nealing a mixture of MgB2 and Mg powders at a tem- perature of 900°C in a He atmosphere at a pressure of 1.5–1.7 bar . The samples obtained had a po- rosity of 30 to 84%. The porosity was controlled by the Mg content. Porous YBCO polycrystals were prepared by an- nealing a mixture of YBCO particles and sugar . The porosity depends on the sugar content. Superconducting sponges are formed by interwo- ven superconducting fibers. Sponges are synthesized based on various biopolymers and can repeat the structure of the biopolymers used. To synthesize su- perconducting sponges, a sol-gel process is used. YBCO sponges prepared by the annealing of a solidi- fied mixture of polysaccharide dextran and an aque- ous solution of yttrium, barium, and copper nitrates were studied [71–78]. Also, YBCO sponges were made using chitosan , biogenic aragonite (cut- tlefish bones) , graphene oxide , alginic acid , oligosaccharides , and xylan . The crea- tion of such sponges is possible on the basis of bi- opolymers replaced by Bi2223 . The relative con- tent of the polymer in the initial mixture seems to af- fect the porosity of the prepared superconducting sponge. Nonwoven fabric is a felt-like material, similar to porous sponges, but formed by entangled supercon- ducting nanofilaments. A nonwoven fabric of Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8 (Bi2212) nanowires was prepared by electrospinning (ES) . A solution of Bi, Sr, Ca, and Cu acetates, taken in a molar ratio Bi : Sr : Ca : Cu = 1 : 1 : 1 : 2 in propionic acid with the addition of polyvinylpyrrolidone to increase the viscosity was used. During electrospinning, nanowires were formed when an electric discharge was passed through a drop- let of solution. The entangled nanofilaments formed a fabric. Finally, the fabric was held at 800°C in a pure O2 atmosphere. The material has a highly porous structure, and the density of the fabric is 0.05 g/cm3 that is only 0.72% of the theoretical density of Bi2212. A similar technology was used to synthesize fabrics from YBCO nanowires [88–90] and LSCO nanowires . Similar Bi2212 fabrics were ob- tained with an addition of Pb . Doping with lithi- um makes it possible to lower the temperature of syn- thesis of Bi2212 fabrics . Superconducting fabrics of YBCO and Bi2212 with a similar structure were obtained by solution blow spinning (SBS). The fabrics obtained using ES or SBS are ex- tremely loose; their porosity is up to 99.9%. Reducing the porosity of the fabrics is possible with additional processing of the material, e.g., by pressing and tex- turing. 4 3. ANALYSIS OF THE STRUCTURE OF POROUS SUPERCONDUCTORS YBCO foams have a cellular structure with large pores (Fig. 1a). In the central region of the sample in Fig. 1a, a remnant of the seed crystal is seen. Figures 1b and 1c show scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of a Bi2223 porous polycrystal and a Bi2212 fabric, demonstrating the loose structure of these ma- terials. The mean pore sizes in the PSs under study (Ta- ble 1) were determined from SEM images of PSs with pores smaller than 100 μm and optical images of PSs with pores larger than 100 μm. The investigated mate- rials can be divided into three groups differing in the mean pore size dp: (1) large pores, dp ~ 1 mm (YBCO foams and polycrystals); (2) medium pores, dp ~ 1– 100 μm (Bi2223 and MgB2 porous polycrystals and sponges synthesized on the basis of biopolymers); and (3) small pores, dp ~ 1 μm (YBCO, Bi2212, and LSCO fabrics). Table 1 presents the mean crystallite sizes ds in the samples under study. The crystal orientation and phase distribution in the PSs were investigated using electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD) . EBSD is included in the set of functions of SEM devices and allows measuring crystal orientation with a relatively high spatial reso- lution. EBSD measurements of the cross sections of the YBCO foam struts show that almost the entire Y211 phase was converted to YBCO. Only tiny Y211 particles are distributed along characteristic fac- es. The orientation of the YBCO matrix in each strut corresponds to the geometric position of the strut in the foam. Thus, in contrast to the YBCO single crys- tal, the struts do not follow the dominant direction (0 0 1), but are oriented differently. Due to charge effects that limit the spatial resolu- tion, the standard EBSD technique is not suitable for studying the finest (~10–50 nm) Y211 particles in the YBCO phase. This problem is solved using the recent- ly developed transmission EBSD technique that pro- vides a resolution of up to 10 nm even in ceramic ma- terials . Owing to the transmission EBSD, it be- comes possible to determine the orientation of crystal- lites in nanowires obtained using ES or SBS . For Bi2223 porous polycrystals, the fractal dimen- sion of the boundaries of pores and granules was de- termined from micrographs by covering with squares . The fractal dimension of boundaries on a plane can range from 1 (smooth boundaries and nar- row pore size distribution) to 2 (maximum tortuosity and wide pore size distribution). The resulting fractal dimension of ≈1.8 indicates a strong tortuosity of the pore boundaries and the presence of both very small and very large pores. It should be noted that the structure of PSs has not been studied in sufficient detail in comparison with other porous materials . New information on the features of the PS structure and the formation of an end-to-end pore cluster can be obtained using X- ray computed tomography , nuclear magnetic resonance, mercury porosimetry, and capillary flow porosimetry . Fig. 1. (a) Photograph of YBCO foam, (b) micro- photographs of Bi2223 porous polycrystal, and (c) Bi2212 fabric. а b с 5 4. MAGNETIZATION AND CURRENTS IN POROUS SUPERCONDUCTORS Does high porosity affect the magnetic and electri- cal transport properties of superconductors? The fea- tures of magnetic flux pinning have been studied in YBCO foams [28, 39, 99, 106–111], Bi2212 fabrics [87, 93, 109, 112–115], and porous polycrystals of Bi2223 [64, 116–120] and MgB2 . For YBCO fab- rics, porous polycrystalline YBCO, and LSCO fabrics, the results of magnetic measurements have not been presented in published articles. However, it can be assumed that the magnetic characteristics considered here are characteristic of all PSs. For most of the created highly porous supercon- ductors, magnetization hysteresis loops have been measured at different temperatures. The magnetic hys- teresis of porous superconductors (Fig. 2a) has the same features as the typical hysteresis loops of poly- crystalline superconductors. These features include the increasing asymmetry of the loop with respect to the axis M = 0 with increasing temperature. This asymmetry is caused by the contribution from the equilibrium magnetization of the granule surfaces . Another feature is the presence of an irre- versibility field Hirr; at H = Hirr, the branches M↑(H) and M↓(H) of the loop merge. For the magnetic hyste- resis of Bi2223 porous polycrystal shown in Fig. 2a , the irreversibility field is 5 T at T = 40 K. With increasing T, Hirr decreases; at T = 80 K, the de- pendence M(H) is irreversible only in the range of fields from –0.15 to 0.15 T. The observed asymmetry of the magnetization hys- teresis loop makes it possible to determine the current circulation scale. Using formula (1) for magnetic hys- teresis at T = 4.2 K (Fig. 2a), we estimate λ/Rc ≈ 0.03. The magnetic field penetration depth λ for Bi2223 is 150 nm ; hence, Rc ~ 5 μm. This scale corre- sponds to the size of Bi2223 crystallites in the ab plane. The value of Rc obtained confirms the fact that, in strong magnetic fields, the circulation of currents occurs in the ab planes of crystallites. The total magnetization of a polycrystalline sample along the external field is the projection of the mag- netic moments created by circulating currents in all crystallites. The proportionality between ΔM and the circulating current allows one to determine the critical current density from the magnetic hysteresis using the Bean formula. In this case, to determine the values of ΔM in A/m, one should use the physical density of the crystallites rather than the density of the porous mate- rial. For Bi2223 porous polycrystal and Bi2212 fabric, the critical current density, determined from the mag- netization hysteresis loops, decreases with increasing magnetic field as Jc(H) ~ H–α (Fig. 2b). Using the modified dependence Jc(H) , the coefficient α ≈ 0.6 was obtained for the PSs Bi2223 and Bi2212 at all temperatures . The dependences of the pin- ning force Fp on the magnetic field, determined by the formula Fp(H) = μ0HJc(H), have a maximum at H ≈ 0.11–0.13 Hirr(T) (Fig. 2c). The critical current density Jc at H = 0 decreases exponentially with increasing temperature. The exponential decreasing dependence Jc(T) is typical of the superconductors Bi2212 and Bi2223 . This temperature dependence of Jc corresponds to the collective pinning of the vortex lattice at weak pinning centers . Due to thermal fluctuations, the vortices detach from the pinning cen- ters, which leads to a creep of the vortex lattice and the rise of dissipation. resis height ΔM at H = 0 and critical temperature Tc Material Synthesis Porosity, % dp, μm ds, μm ΔM, A m/kg Tc, K YBCO foam TSG,Y211 foam 100 20* 91 Polycr. YBCO YBCO + sugar 60 - 93 Bi2223 Bi2223 + CaCO3 74 1-10 10 50**, 2* 110 MgB2 MgB2 + Mg 84 1-10 1-10 38 YBCO sponge Sol-gel - 20**, 1* Fabric YBCO ES , SBS - 1-2 - ES , SBS 99.9 1-2 0.32 2** LSCO ES - 1 0.12 - 19 6 Measurements of the field trapped in YBCO foam demonstrate the presence of two current subsystems. B(x, y) over a ≈ 50 × 20 × 20 mm foam sample upon cooling in a magnetic field of 0.5 T . The present- ed distribution has a main peak and several small peaks. The main peak of the trapped field is caused by the currents flowing along the perimeter of the sam- ple. Numerous smaller peaks are created by currents circulating in superconducting loops around individu- al pore clusters. The position of the peaks is repro- duced on repeated scanning, although their height may change. It should be noted that only the z component of the internal field generated by the circulating cur- rents was determined in the measurements. However, currents of both types (with different circulation scales) flow through the superconducting regions along complicated three-dimensional trajectories that do not always coincide with the sample plane. There- fore, only the (x, y)-projection of real circulating cur- rents is reflected in the measurements of the trapped field. Measurements of the magnetic flux relaxation re- veal interesting features of magnetic flux pinning and creep in YBCO foam. In measurements on individual struts, when all effects from pores are absent, the re- laxation coefficient of the trapped magnetic flux is about 4% in the temperature range 20–60 K and mag- netic fields up to 2 T . This indicates the realiza- tion of strong pinning provided by small Y211 parti- cles distributed in the YBCO matrix. Due to strong pinning, the values of Hirr for YBCO struts are higher than in Bi2212 and Bi2223 porous polycrystals and the position of the maximum of the dependences Fp(H) in the temperature range 60–85 K is in the field H ≈ 0.5 Hirr(T) . The relaxation of the trapped magnetic flux in large lumps of foam has contributions from all types of currents: the currents flowing along the perimeter of the sample and responsible for the main peak; the currents around the pores that are responsible for nar- row secondary peaks; and the local currents inside the Fig. 2. (a) Magnetization hysteresis loops and field dependences of (b) the critical current density and (c) pinning force of porous Bi2223. The curves rep- resent modified dependences of the critical current density . Fig. 3. (a) Trapped field B in YBCO foam upon cooling in a magnetic field of 0.5 T and (b) time de- pendence of the magnetic flux Φ around some peaks. -40 -20 0 20 40 -1 0 1 -1.5 0.0 1.5 T = 80 K T = 4.2 K T = 15 K T = 25 K T = 40 K M [A * м 2/кг] 10 4 10 5 10 6 10 7 80 K 60 K 40 K 4.2 K Jc [A/cм 2] 15 K 25 K 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 10 7 10 8 10 9 Fp [Н/м 3] μ0H [Тл] 40 K 25 K 60 K 80 K 10 20 30 40 10 20 30 40 x [мм] y [мм] 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5 20.0 22.5 23.0 B [мТл] 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1500 2000 2500 пик 1 пик 2 пик 3  [усл. ед.] время [сек] а b с а b M [A m2/kg] Jc [A/m2] Fp [N/m3] μ0H [T] y [mm] time [sek] x [mm] B[mT] Φ [arb. un.] 7 struts. The total relaxation factor of the magnetic flux is 8% at T = 77 K . Upon the relaxation of the magnetic flux, a rearrangement of the circulating cur- rents occurs. Due to the rearrangement of currents, the relaxation rate of the secondary peaks of the trapped field begins to increase after a certain characteristic time (Fig. 3b). The relaxation coefficient for second- ary peaks reaches 20%. The current–voltage characteristics of Bi2223 po- rous polycrystals and Bi2212 fab- rics have a nonlinear form, typical of bulk HTSCs . With increasing current, the voltage drop across the samples gradually increases. The criti- cal current transport density Jc determined at T = 77 K from the parameter 1 μV/cm is ~1000 A/cm2 for the YBCO foam and up to 10 A/cm2 for the Bi2223 porous polycrystal . At H > HcJ, in polycrystalline superconductors, nonzero resistance appears. Since the area of contact points of neighboring granules is one to two orders of magnitude smaller than that in dense polycrystalline HTSCs, the resistance of Bi2223 porous polycrystals is more sensitive to changes in the external magnetic field . The magnetoresistance of the Bi2223 porous polycrystal exhibits an inverse hystere- sis : the resistance with an increase in the exter- nal field is greater than that with a decrease. This be- havior is caused by the trapping and compression of the magnetic flux in the grain boundaries of polycrys- talline superconductors . The temperature dependences of the resistance of polycrystalline superconductors have a characteristic two-step form: a jump in resistance at the critical tem- perature Тc and an extended decrease in resistance to 0 as T decreases from Тc to Тc0. A similar picture was observed for YBCO foam , YBCO porous poly- crystals , Bi2223 , and Bi2212 fabrics . The observed behavior of the resistance corre- sponds to the two-level model of a polycrystalline su- perconductor. At Т = Тc, superconducting granules pass into the superconducting state, which leads to a sharp jump in resistance. In the temperature range Тc0 < Т < Тc, the resistance decreases to 0, due to the es- tablishment of superconductivity in the Josephson network formed by granules and grain boundaries. The width of the resistive transition in a zero magnetic field, ΔTc = Тc – Тc0, is equal to ≈3 K for YBCO foam and YBCO polycrystal and Bi2223 . In Bi2212 fabrics, the resistive transition is more extended, ΔTc ~ 20–50 K . To compare different PS samples, it is convenient, in our opinion, to use a parameter such as the height of the magnetic hysteresis ΔM in zero magnetic field at a low temperature (10 K) or at a technologically important boiling point of liquid nitrogen (77 K). Such values of ΔM can be estimated for a number of samples from the graphs and data presented in pub- lished articles (Table 1). Of course, for a full compari- son of the properties of various PSs, it is necessary to fill all the empty cells in Table 1. Nevertheless, the available data allow us to draw some conclusions about the effect of structural features on the magnetic properties. For all PSs, a correlation between the val- ues of ΔM and ds is observed. This correlation indi- cates that the magnetization is mainly determined by the circulation of currents on the scale 2Rc ≈ ds. The values of the local intragranular current density for various HTSCs and MgB2, apparently, differ insignif- icantly . The highest values are found in YBCO foam, for which ΔM (77 K) ≥ 20 A m/kg. First of all, the high values of ΔM are associated with the large size of the superconducting struts in the foam (~0.1 mm), which determines the scale of current cir- culation in strong fields. Also, the value of ΔM is pos- itively influenced by the low anisotropy of YBCO and strong pinning in the struts, which lead to high values of the current density. Experimental studies show that high porosity does not lead to significant differences in the behavior of magnetization and resistance in comparison with the temperature and field dependences of the magnetiza- tion and resistance of dense polycrystalline supercon- ductors. 5. PROSPECTS FOR USE OF POROUS SUPERCONDUCTORS YBCO foam is currently the most suitable material in terms of characteristics important for practical ap- plications. The foam exhibits the best mechanical properties and the highest Jc values among the mate- rials studied. Polycrystalline PSs, fabrics, and sponges also have potential for development and applications. Polycrystalline PSs can be used as a basis for the creation of textured superconducting materials . An advantage of porous polycrystals, which is important for many researchers, is the relative sim- plicity of their preparation. The polycrystalline nature is the main weakness of all types of PSs obtained to date. Measures for enhancing intercrystalline connec- tivity and a decrease in the disordering of crystallites can significantly improve the transport critical current density . The mechanical properties of the porous materials presented are inferior to those of dense superconduc- tors. An improvement of both mechanical and current- carrying properties in PSs can be achieved by creating composites with silver . To improve the mechanical properties, it was proposed in to 8 impregnate a porous material with rubber. However, such an impregnation will prevent the penetration of he coolant into the interior of the sample and elimi- nate the important advantage of the porous structure. Acceptable methods of reinforcement should not pre- vent refrigerant from penetrating deep into the sample. The use of a steel frame to reinforce a PS satisfies this condition and will allow it to withstand significant trapped fields. PSs can find their niche among materials for a va- riety of applications that require both large size, light weight, and high cooling rates. Due to the presence of pore clusters, a liquid or gaseous refrigerant such as liquid nitrogen can be pumped through the PS and provide extremely efficient cooling. This prevents the growth of hot spots arising from the flow of currents close to critical. An efficient heat removal makes PSs attractive for use as short-circuit current limiters . Due to their low physical density, PSs are suitable for creating ultra-light devices . Particularly stringent requirements to the mass of working ele- ments are imposed in aviation and space technology. There are projects for the use of superconductors for docking systems of spacecraft , devices for micrometeorite protection and space debris collection , and aircraft electric motors . The use of PSs in these devices should provide addi- tional advantages in ensuring stable operation and re- ducing weight. For some problems, e.g., to increase the dynamic stability during magnetic levitation , a combination of porous and dense superconductors may be a good solution. We hope that this review of works on porous su- perconductors will give impetus to further research on these promising materials. It is expected that new re- sults will be obtained through the development of methods of synthesis, computer simulation, and ma- chine learning.