Absence of magnetic evidence for superconductivity in hydrides under high pressure J. E. Hirscha and F. Marsigliob aDepartment of Physics, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0319 bDepartment of Physics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada T6G 2E1 It is generally believed that magnetization measurements on sulfur hydride under high pressure performed in 2015 provided “final convincing evidence of superconductivity” in that material, in agreement with theoretical predictions . Supported by this precedent, drops in resistance that were later observed in several other hydrides under high pressure have been generally accepted as evidence of superconductivity without corroborating evidence from magnetic measurements. In this paper we challenge the original interpretation that the magnetic measurements on sulfur hydride performed in 2015 were evidence of superconductivity. We point out that a large paramagnetic contribution to the magnetic susceptibility was detected below Tc and argue that its temperature dependence rules out the possibility that it would be a background signal; instead the temperature dependence indicates that the paramagnetic behavior originated in the sample. We discuss possible explanations for this remarkable behavior and conclude that standard superconductors would not show such behavior. We also survey all the other published data from magnetic measurements on this class of materials and conclude that they do not provide strong evidence for superconductivity. Consequently, we call into question the generally accepted view that conventional superconductivity in hydrogen-rich materials at high temperature and pressure is a reality, and discuss the implications if it is not. PACS numbers: I. INTRODUCTION High-temperature conventional superconductivity has reportedly been found in several hydrogen-rich materials under high pressure in recent years . This behav- ior is predicted by calculations based on the conventional theory of superconductivity [2, 5–7]. The first material where this phenomenon was reportedly observed was sul- fur hydride under pressures above 100GPa , reaching a critical temperature of 203K for pressure 155GPa. In this paper we analyze the magnetic evidence on which that claim was based. We argue that it indicates that the ma- terial is either a non-standard superconductor [8–10] or more likely is not a superconductor. More generally, in recent work we and others have called into question the interpretation that resis- tance drops measured in several high pressure hydrides are evidence of superconductivity. In a carbonaceous sul- fur hydride claimed to become superconducting at room temperature , the resistance versus temperature data show extremely sharp drops, uncharacteristic of high- temperature superconductivity . Even more un- usual is the fact that under application of a magnetic field the drops in resistance remain equally sharp. That is not the behaviour expected from standard superconductors, whether conventional or unconventional . We further- more pointed out that similar unphysical behaviour is observed in several other hydrides claimed to become su- perconducting under high pressure. We proposed a new category of ‘nonstandard superconductors’ to describe superconducting materials with such unusual behavior, and raised the possibility that the behavior observed is not due to superconductivity . In this paper we focus on magnetic evidence of super- conductivity in hydrides under high pressure. We start by analyzing the claim that the magnetization data for sulfur hydride reported in 2015 demonstrated that sulfur hydride under high pressure is a high-temperature superconductor. II. MAGNETIZATION OF SULFUR HYDRIDE data reported in Ref. (see also ) from which it is in- ferred that the material is a superconductor below 203 K. It is argued in Refs. that the graphs show the dia- magnetic response of the superconductor superposed to a paramagnetic signal originating in the diamond anvil cell (DAC) where the sample resides. However, from the data shown in Fig. 1 we can ex- tract the paramagnetic contribution to the magnetiza- tion. We plot the corresponding magnetic susceptibility χ = M/H, with M the magnetization and H the applied field) versus temperature in Fig. 2. Fig. 2 shows that the paramagnetic contribution goes to zero, or very close to zero, at or around the inferred su- perconducting critical temperature of the sample, 203 K. The three data points shown in the figure at tempera- tures above 200 K were obtained from Fig. 4d of Ref. . If the paramagnetic contribution resulted from a mag- netic background signal in the DAC, we would expect it to follow a Curie-Weiss or Curie law. In Fig. 2 we have fitted such laws to the measured values of the paramag- netic susceptibility at 50 K and 200 K. It can be seen that neither of them fits the observed behavior. Let us consider for comparison similar data obtained for the superconductor GdBa2Cu3O7 in Ref. , shown in Fig. 3. This paper was cited in Ref. as giving anal- arXiv:2103.00701v3 [cond-mat.supr-con] 5 Apr 2021 2 100 150 200 250 –5 0 ZFC Magne Magnetization (10–5 emu) Magnetization (10–5 emu) Temperature (K) –0.4 0.0 0.4 –0.1 0.0 0.1 Magnetic field (T) 200 202 204 0 500 Critical field (Oe) Temperature (K) Tc = 203.5 K c d e –0.2 –0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 0 –0.5 0 0 1 –2 1 0 50 K Magnetic field (T) –1 –2 –1 0 –1 g p y a significant input to the signal from the periphery of the sam expanded beyond the culet where pressure is smaller than in t (Tc increases with decreasing pressure (Fig. 2b)). b, Non-mag anvil cell (DAC) of diameter 8.8 mm. c, Magnetization meas M(H) of sulfur hydride at a pressure of 155 GPa at different (givenas curve labels). The magnetizationcurves show hystere type II superconductor. The magnetization curves are howev by obvious paramagnetic input (which is also observed in oth superconductors31). In our case, the paramagnetic signal is pr the DAC, but further study of the origin of this input is requ paramagnetic background increases when temperature is dec minima of the magnetization curves (,35 mT) are the result diamagnetic input from superconductivity and the paramagn background. The first critical field Hc1 < 30 mT can be rough the point where magnetization deviates from linear behaviou fields, magnetization increases due to the penetration of mag As the sign of the field change reverses, the magnetic flux in Shubnikov phase remains trapped and therefore the back run decreasing field) is irreversible—the returning branch of the (shown by filled points) runs above the direct one. Hysteretic of the magnetization becomes more clearly visible as the tem decreases. d, At high temperatures T . 200 K, the magnetiza sharply. e, Extrapolation of the pronounced minima at the m curves to higher temperatures gives the onset of superconduc T 5 203.5 K. G2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved 3 S E P T E M B E R 2 0 1 5 | V O L 5 2 5 | N pressure of 155GPa from Fig. 4c of ref. . The open (closed) circles correspond to magnetic field increasing (decreasing). inferred from Fig. 1, in units 10−5 emu/T. The experimental data are the points, the dotted line is a guide to the eye. ogous behavior to the one shown in Fig. 1 due to the presence of the magnetic Gd atoms. Indeed, we see a similarity in the magnetization data of Fig. 3 and Fig. 1: a diamagnetic signal for small fields is superposed with a paramagnetic signal that persists to much larger fields. Following the same procedure as in obtaining Fig. 2 from Fig. 1, we show in Fig. 4 the paramagnetic contribution to the susceptibility inferred from the data in Fig. 3. It can be seen that a simple Curie law fits the para- magnetic susceptibility data inferred from Fig. 3 quite well, in contrast to the situation in Fig. 2. Therefore, it is completely plausible that the diamagnetic part of Abstract. - We report magnetization measurements on single-phase sintered GdBa2Cu307 between 1.5 and 100 K and in fields up to 35 kG. The shape of the low-field diamagnetic loop at 4.2 K is typical of the high-Tc Y-Ba-Cu-O systems and is imposed by Josephson junctions. The high-field regime is influenced by the paramagnetic response of Gd-ions. Saturation effects are observed near the Neel temperature TN ~ 2.5 K. The intra-grain magnetic critical current Jc is roughly the same (~ 106 A/cm2 at 4.2 K) as in Y-Ba-Cu-0 systems either granular of single crystals. One of the surprising features of the YBa2Cu307 high-Tc superconductors is the insensitivity of the transition temperature Tc to the substitution of Y by the trivalent magnetic rare earth ions . A sec- ond question which will be emphasized here concerns the influence of the rare-earth elements on the critical curent densities and the associated diamagnetic cycles. The sample investigated in this paper (GdBaaCuaCV) is granular with grain diameter prob- ably of order 10-20 /an. The magnetic measurements were done with a vibrating sample magnetometer as described in reference . different temperatures ranging from 1.5 to 100 K and in fields up to 35 kG. As in the case of YBa2Cu307 and Lai_a!SrxCu04 the M vs. H relationship of GdBa2Cu3C>7 ex- hibits several irreversibility regimes. First, at low enough field (H < 100 G at T < Tc) we observe (inset Fig. 1) a very small loop characterized by a lower threshold field (if^) below which the initial branch of the curve is fairly linear and reversible and by an upper threshold field {HTM2) above which the curve again becomes reversible and linear but with a strong reduction of the magnetic susceptibility x, that is X (-H20 / X {H7i) ~50 % in the present case, the \aw-H cycle discussed above is ascribed to the penetra- tion of the field within the sample through the weakly- superconducting links connecting more strongly super- conducting grains . As the field is further increased from HTM2 we ob- serve the onset of a regime of strong irreversibilities at a third critical field Hci (~ 300 G at 4.2 K) iden- tified as the first critical field of the grains. It can be seen (Fig. 1) that the shape of the high field cycle changes considereably with T : on the one hand, at the lowest temperatures (T = 1.5 and 2.5 K) there are some tendencies toward saturation at the highest field available (35 kG). However, the M (H) curve hardly Fig. 1. — The magnetization as a function of field for GdBa2Cu3C>7 at various temperatures. The inset shows the magnetic heehaviour at very low fields. obeys a Brillouin function even in a limited field range (15-35 kG). On the other hand, at the highest temper- atures (see isotherm 90 K) the curve once again be- comes reversible above a fourth threshold field Hr (T) . It will be shown later (see formula 1) that Hr (T) de- fines a line in the (H, T) plane above which the critical current density is zero (within the experimental un- certainties). Finally, the sample behaves like a perfect Article published online by EDP Sciences and available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1051/jphyscol:19888969 Fig. 1 of Ref. . inferred from Fig. 3, in units emu/g/kG. The experimental data are the points. the response in Fig. 3 originates in superconductivity while the paramagnetic part originates in the large mag- netic moment of Gd atoms that behave essentially as isolated magnetic impurities. A more detailed analysis performed in Ref. yields a Curie-Weiss temperature θ ∼ −2 ± 1 K. We argue that the explanation proposed by the authors of for the behavior of the magnetization displayed in Fig. 1 is completely implausible. The key point is that there would be no reason for the paramagnetic contri- bution to the susceptibility originating in a background signal to go to zero at essentially the same temperature at which the diamagnetic contribution from the sample goes 3 to zero, as Fig. 2 indicates. Instead, the fact that it does, indicates that the paramagnetic contribution and the dia- magnetic contribution originate from the same physical object, presumably the sample. We then have to ask: is there any other standard super- conductor where such a behavior of the magnetic suscep- tibility below Tc is observed? We define ‘standard super- conductor’ theoretically by superconductors described in Tinkham’s book , and experimentally by supercon- ductors belonging to any of the 32 families of conven- tional, unconventional and possibly unconventional su- perconductors surveyed in Ref. , that cover all su- perconducting materials known in 2015. In Ref. , materials were classified as ‘conventional’ (classes C1 to C12), ‘unconventional’ (classes U1 to U11) and ‘possibly unconventional’ (classes P1 to P9). Among these superconducting material classes there are the conventional magnetic superconductors (C10) and the ferromagnetic superconductors (U7), that one could consider as prime candidates for exhibiting large paramagnetic susceptibility below Tc superposed to a diamagnetic response. One may also consider numerous other classes that exhibit magnetic phases nearby in the phase boundary such as Chevel phases (C9), borocar- bides (P3), plutonium compounds (P4), heavy-fermion superconductors (U1), organic compounds (U2), cuprate superconductors (U3, U4), strontium ruthenate (U5), cobalt oxyde hydrate (U8), iron-based superconductors (U10, U11). However, none of these materials exhibit the anomalous behavior of magnetic susceptibility below Tc exhibited by sulfur hydride shown in Fig. 1. Regarding theory, Tinkham’s book describes the phe- nomenology of the magnetic behavior of standard type I and type II superconductors expected from London theory and Ginzburg-Landau theory, irrespective of the particular microscopic mechanism giving rise to super- conductivity . That physics does not give rise to the behavior of magnetization versus field shown in Fig. 1. III. NEW PHYSICS OR EXPERIMENTAL ARTIFACT? Forgetting for the moment about superconductivity, we know of no magnetic material that would show a be- havior of its magnetic susceptibility like the one shown in Fig. 2. The magnetic response of materials originates in or- bital magnetism or spin magnetism or a combination of both. Let us recall the known behaviours: 1) Temperature independent paramagnetic susceptibil- ity is seen in metals due to the electron magnetic moment and Fermi statistics. 2) Small temperature independent diamagnetic suscep- tibility is seen in insulators with atoms with closed shells. 3) Temperature dependent paramagnetic susceptibil- ity originates in localized magnetic moments or in the magnetic moment of itinerant electrons in magnetic met- als, and results in Curie or Curie-Weiss behavior with a Curie-Weiss temperature θ. If θ is positive the material undergoes a transition to a ferromagnetic state at T = θ. If θ is negative the material may undergo a transition to an antiferromagnetic state at a finite temperature. The magnetic susceptibility shown in Fig. 2 increases by a factor of over 60 from 200 K to 50 K, i.e. in a tem- perature range where the absolute temperature decreases by a factor of 4. We know of no other way that this could happen other than the system undergoing a transition to a ferromagnetic state at temperature slightly below 50 K (the fit shown in Fig. 2 assumed a Curie-Weiss temper- ature θ = 47.5 K). However it is impossible to fit the susceptibility data at temperatures in-between 50 K and 200 K with such behavior, as seen in Fig. 2. Within mean field theory, the critical temperature for onset of ferromagnetic order in a system of magnetic mo- ments interacting through a ferromagnetic coupling J can be written in the form Tc = zJ kB (1) where z is the number of nearest neighbors to a moment and kB is Boltzmann constant. The magnetic suscepti- bility is given by (Curie-Weiss law) χP (T) = χ0 T/Tc(T) − 1 (2) with χ0 a constant. To describe the behavior shown in Fig. 2 we would have to assume that Tc in Eq. (2) is itself a function of temperature, as indicated in Eq. (2), smaller than T and decreasing as T decreases with increasingly smaller (T −Tc(T)), so as to give the approximately linear behavior shown in Fig. 2. This could result from a tem- perature dependent z(T) or J(T) in Eq. (1) decreasing as T decreases. However we know of no physical mechanism that would give rise to such behavior. There have been suggestions in the literature that hy- drogen or hydrogen-rich compounds under high pres- sure would undergo a transition to a magnetic phase at low temperatures rather than a superconducting phase . Such models would possibly explain the large paramagnetic response seen at low temperatures, but are unlikely to yield the peculiar linear temperature depen- dence of the magnetic susceptibility shown in Fig. 2. Considering now the superconductivity, note that the magnetic field range in Fig. 1 is a very small fraction of the assumed upper critical field in this material, approx- imately 70 T . Nonetheless, since the field values are likely higher than Hc1, we assume the system is in the mixed state, with normal vortex cores of radius ξ, the coherence length. and the magnetic field screened over a radius λL, the London penetration depth, around each vortex. The total magnetic field is given by B = H + 4πM (3) where H is the applied field and M the magnetization. Since each vortex can hold exactly one quantum of flux 4 φ0, as the temperature is lowered the number of vortices must increase to accommodate the extra magnetic flux resulting from the induced magnetization (in the range where the sample is in the mixed state). This should cause the diamagnetic response to decrease as the tem- perature is lowered rather than increase rapidly as indi- cated by the data in Fig. 1. In summary, we cannot imagine a plausible explana- tion for the reported linear increase in paramagnetic re- sponse as the temperature is lowered within the con- ventional understanding of magnetism in solids, and the joint increase in paramagnetic and diamagnetic response as the temperature is lowered shown in Fig. 1 appears to contradict everything we know about superconductiv- ity in standard superconductors. Furthermore we have argued that it is not plausible that the paramagnetic response originates in a different physical region of the apparatus used in the experiment, given the fact that it goes essentially to zero at the same temperature where the diamagnetism disappears. We conclude that it is highly likely that the experimen- tal data shown in Fig. 1 that were reported in Ref. are an experimental artifact and do not reflect real physics. IV. OTHER MAGNETIC EVIDENCE FOR SUPERCONDUCTIVITY IN HYDRIDES UNDER HIGH PRESSURE Since 2015, superconductivity in high pressure hy- drides evidenced by resistance measurements in diamond anvil cells has been reported in the following compounds: SHx up to 203K , PHx above 100K , LaHx at 250K , above 260K and above 550K , Y Hx at 243K [25–27], ThHx at 161K , PrHx at 9K , LaY Hx at 253K , CSH at room temperature , CeHx above 120K , SnHx at 70K , BaHx around 20K , and CaHx around 215K . That is 19 different reports on 12 different materials. These papers have been cited 2,450 times according to Google Scholar (2/24/21), with essentially all citing papers as- suming that superconductivity in these materials is an es- tablished fact. Numerous news media have also informed the general public that superconductivity in these mate- rials is an established fact. However, to establish that a material is a superconduc- tor it is essential to show that it exhibits a response to magnetic fields expected for superconductors. Many of the papers cited above limit themselves to consider the effect of magnetic field on resistance. We will discuss that effect at the end of this section. However, concerning the magnetic response to magnetic fields, we have reviewed the existing literature on high pressure superconductivity in hydrides looking for such information and have found only 5 papers, on three different materials, namely: • The magnetization measurements on sulfur hydride discussed in the previous sections. • Ac magnetic susceptibility measurements for CSH . • Ac magnetic susceptibility measurements for sulfur hydride . • Ac magnetic susceptibility measurements for LaHx . • Nuclear resonant scattering (NRS) measurements for sulfur hydride . Let us consider each of these. A. Magnetization of sulfur hydride As discussed in the previous sections, the magnetiza- tion versus magnetic field data given in shown in Fig. 1 of this paper are not consistent with the behavior of stan- dard superconductors and magnetic materials. The pa- per also plots magnetization versus temperature in its Fig. 4a, which we reproduce in Fig. 5, showing that it increases sharply from approximately −4 × 10−7 emu to +7×10−7 emu as the temperature is raised across 200 K. different magnetic fields. a, The shift ofthe,60K superconduc in magnetic fields of 0–7 T (colour coded). The upper and lowe transition are shown enlarged in the insets (axes as in main pan temperature dependence of the resistance without an applied m was measured three times: before applying the field, after apply and finally after applying 2, 4, 6 T (black, grey and dark grey co 100 150 200 250 –5 0 5 10 Tonset ZFC FC Ø Magnetization (10–7 emu) Magnetization (10–5 emu) Magnetization (10–5 emu) Temperature (K) –0.4 0 –0.1 0.0 0.1 Critical feld (Oe) Temper a b c d e 100 μm –0.2 –0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 0 –0.5 0 0 1 –2 1 0 50 K Magnetic feld (T) –1 –2 –1 0 –1 (Fig. 4(a)), for field cooling (FC) and zero field cooling (ZFC), or more accurately, field heating. The red dots are resistance data “scaled and moved vertically to compare with the mag- netization data” . However, in their extended data Figure 6 the authors show that there is a ‘background’ magnetization signal that is two orders of magnitude larger than the signal shown in Fig. 5. As explained in the figure caption of ex- tended data Figure 6, a background signal was subtracted in order to plot the data in Fig. 5. However because there is no precise way to tell what part of the raw signal is ‘background’, it means there is no way to know whether the sample signal actually does change sign from nega- tive to positive as the temperature is raised, as Fig. 5 purports to show. In fact, the measured data did not provide information that the signal below 200 K is dia- magnetic and above 200 K paramagnetic, and therefore 5 CSH Eu Yb Yb (). The insets show the raw data, from which the signal shown is extracted by substraction of a background signal. the authors’ statement in reference to their fig. 4(a) “a sharp transition from the diamagnetic to the paramag- netic state (Fig. 4a) was observed for zero-field-cooled (ZFC) material” is profoundly misleading. The reality is that there was no evidence from the measured data that the low temperature state of the sample was diamagnetic. The myth has persisted for the ensuing 5 years until the present. In a recent review paper the authors (one of whom also coauthored ) state in reference to this figure “The ZFC curve demonstrates a rather sharp transition from the diamagnetic to the paramagnetic state, which classified as a superconducting one. The onset tempera- ture is Tc = 203 K.” It should also be noted that the field cooled (FC) data shown in Fig. 5 show absolutely no signature of anything happening around 200 K. This is also in contradiction with the behavior of standard superconductors, where typically a smaller but non-zero signal of the transition is seen also in FC measurements. B. Ac magnetic susceptibility for CSH Reference reports ac magnetic susceptibility mea- surements on a carbonaceous sulfur hydride (CSH) that show sharp drops at temperatures close to where the re- sistance versus temperature curves show drops. An ex- ample from Ref. is shown on the left panel of Fig. 6. We will compare this behavior with other such data for materials in diamond anvil cells under high pressure, namely the elements Eu (middle panel) and Yb (right panel). As pointed out in Ref. there is a problem with the data for both CSH and Eu. It is well known that in these experiments there is a large background signal that needs to be substracted from the raw data to extract the susceptibility of the sample. In the right panel of Fig. 6, the inset shows raw data obtained for Yb under pres- sure by Song et al. , and the right panel shows the extracted signal. The raw data reflect a smooth linear background, and superposed to it a small drop that is plotted in the main right panel. These measurements to- gether with the resistance measurements reported in give clear and unambiguous evidence that Yb becomes superconducting in these experiments. Instead, the raw data shown in the insets of the left and middle panels of Fig. 6, for both CSH and the element Eu show features that are inconsistent with superconduc- tivity, namely: (i) the fact that the raw signal is flat for temperatures above the drop, and (ii) the fact that the raw signal rises steeply for temperatures below the drop. These data are qualitatively different from the feature- less linear background seen in the right panel of Fig. 6 which is typical for these measurements. As discussed in Ref. , this indicates that both the data for CSH and Eu are either (a) an experimental artifact and do not re- flect real physics, or (b) an indication that a magnetic transition instead of a superconducting transition is tak- ing place, which could account for the steep rise in the raw susceptibility data at lower temperature. The initial drop could be attributed to the sample becoming more conducting as it develops magnetic order. As noted in Ref. , the measurements of the left and middle panels of Fig. 6 were performed with the same equipment and by the same researcher, which supports the possibility that they could be due to an experimental artifact. C. Ac magnetic susceptibility for sulfur hydride Reference (see also ) reports results of ac mag- netic susceptibility measurements for sulfur hydride, that look qualitatively similar to the data for CSH reported in 6 n increase in Tc in the relatively narrow pressure e transition. An indirect confirmation can be in- theoretical calculations of Tc in LaH10 by Kruglov —who find a dramatic increase in Tc in a narrow close to 200 GPa from Tc ∼ 270 K to nearly 10. Such an enhancement of Tc was not found in the Liu et al.22 (Fig. 10), and they did not show any data below 205 GPa. Given the relatively large nts in the samples, such a transition is easy to miss, whole volume of the sample is not probed, as in es. We note here that only one pressure point in the GPa is reported in the paper by Drozdov et al.26 nt arXiv contribution, Errea et al.31 calculated Tc LaH10 Fm-3m phase, taking into account the stabilization of the Fm-3m structure by quantum atomic tuations. They found that quantum fluctuations stabilize Fm-3m phase down to 140 GPa, and found Tc values in agree with Drozdov et al.26 It is not currently clear why the transit the R-3m phase, reported by Geballe et al.,24 is not reprodu this quantum fluctuations approach, but it is evident that calculations are missing the soft mode scenario we disc above. Kruglov et al.40 also presented a Tc calculation for the phase of LaH10 and obtained Tc ∼ 200 K at 150 GPa, which nificantly lower than reported Tc’s at 150 GPa (∼250 K).26 The r for this discrepancy is not clear, and further, more extended retical efforts would be helpful in understanding how the soft may influence Tc in the LaH10 samples around the dynamic inst pressure range. shows the magnetic response signals from the LaH10 sample in a DAC. The superimposed signals at several pressures are shown by dots: blue—164 ed—180GPa; the background isshownas a red dashed line(approximatedby 3rd degree polynomial). Rightpanel: Signalafter background subtraction,s n (from bottom to top: blue—164 GPa, green—169 GPa, red—180 GPa). Electrical resistance measurements using the four-probe technique (sample F). At the lowest current of 0.1 mA, the sample resistance displays an abrupt drop (grey curve, first heating cycle), and the transition temperature decreases with increasing current, as shown for 1 mA (blue curve, third heating cycle) and 10 mA (red curve, fifth heating cycle). The inset shows I-V curves obtained from this experiment and compares data mea- sured at 300 K (mV scale, left axis) and at 180 K (μV scale, right axis), well below the transition temperature. These data were obtained in situ on the synchrotron beam line with different instrumentation and data collection protocols compared to the data presented in Fig. 3 (sample A). The flat response for temperatures above the transition reflects the dynamic range setting of the instrument needed for these smaller samples, and there is a lower density of points on the R-T curves; see Ref. for further details. PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS 122, 027001 (2019) Magnetic response signals for LaHx from Ref. . The blue, green and red points correspond to pressures 164GPa, 169GPa and 180GPa. The assumed background is shown by a red dashed line . The inset shows resistance versus temperature results for this material, from Ref. . , left panel of Fig. 6. However, Ref. does not give essential information to allow the reader to evaluate the significance of the data presented. It states “The proto- col of the magnetic-susceptibility technique for measuring the superconductivity is described in previous works” and cites three references, [44–46]. However, it does not tell the reader what frequency was used in the measurements, which is essential in order to understand the significance of the amplitude of the signal reported (the frequencies used in Refs. [44–46] are all different, as are the detailed procedures). Nor does Ref. give any information on the background signal, nor does it inform the reader that a subtraction of background signal was performed, nor does it provide any raw data. We have attempted to obtain additional information to evaluate the significance of these data by contacting the authors of Ref. but did not receive any response. Given the limited information in the published paper, we argue that it cannot be taken as clear evidence for a superconducting transition in sulfur hydride. D. Ac magnetic susceptibility for lanthanum hydride Reference reports ac magnetic susceptibility mea- surements on LaHx, using a low-frequency modulation technique discussed in Refs. . The data are shown in Fig. 7. This technique was not used in Ref. , de- spite the ambiguous statement in Ref. quoted above that suggests otherwise. With this technique the evi- dence for superconductivity is detected as a peak in the signal rather than a drop. Fig. 7 shows very broad fea- tures, much broader than the width of the resistive tran- sitions reported in [21–23] for this compound (see inset in Fig. 7). Note that their amplitude relative to the back- ground cannot be ascertained since no vertical scale is given. Ref. states “We were able to detect a measur- able signal, however, the estimated sample size proved to be very small”, and suggests the possible existence of multiple phases and pressure gradients to account for the broad signals. Note in contrast that in sulfur hydride the width of the transition was reported to be the same in magnetic and resistive measurements (Fig. 5, black points for ZFC and red points for resistance). E. Nuclear resonant scattering for sulfur hydride Reference reports results of a nuclear resonance scattering (NRS) experiment as evidence that that sul- fur hydride expels magnetic fields. In Ref. we have carefully analyzed the data presented in Ref. . Fig. 8 shows schematically the magnetic field configuration that Ref. claims is detected in their NRS experiment, proving that the sample excludes magnetic fields. How- ever, if this was true it would imply, given that the ap- plied magnetic field was 0.68T, that the magnetic field at the edge of the sample was 2.5 T , hence that Hc1, the lower critical field of this material, is larger than 2.5 T at temperatures below 50 K, where it is claimed that the field is totally excluded . This value of Hc1 differs from the lower critical field for this material estimated in Ref. from the magnetization data, Hc1 ∼ 0.003T, by three orders of magnitude. It is also more than two orders of magnitude larger than any lower critical field known for any other superconductor, and incompatible with other properties of the material as discussed in . 5μm 30μm 20μm Sn-119 foil Hext 2.6 μm H3S Sn-119 foil perpendicular to the sensor film . The applied mag- netic field was 0.68T. It should also be noted that such an experiment to detect the Meissner effect using nuclear resonance scattering has never been used, either before or after the experiment reported in , to detect the Meissner effect for this or any other superconducting material according to the published literature. 7 The data surveyed above comprise the totality of mea- surements of the magnetic response of hydrides under high pressure to applied magnetic fields that exist in the scientific literature to date. We argue that they do not provide strong evidence for the existence of supercon- ductivity in these materials, for the variety of reasons discussed above. F. Effect of magnetic field on resistance Most of the 19 papers cited above that report the find- ing of high temperature superconductivity in hydrides measured the effect of magnetic field on resistance, and found that a large magnetic field lowers the apparent transition temperature. From these measurements they extract values of the upper critical magnetic field Hc2, in the range approximately between 50T and 150T. However, we have pointed out in Refs. that the resistance in the presence of magnetic field that was found often does not follow the behavior expected for normal superconductors, which is that the resistive tran- sition broadens under application of a magnetic field. This led us to conclude that either these materi- als are “nonstandard superconductors”, with properties markedly different from those of standard conventional and unconventional superconductors, or more likely that they are not superconductors. If the latter, the reason that the apparent Tc shifts downward when a magnetic field is applied would not be related to superconductivity. To test this hypothesis, we propose that the effect of magnetic field on resistance as a function of the orien- tation of the magnetic field with respect to the sample should be explored. To our knowledge, all the experi- ments performed to date that measured resistance ap- plied the magnetic field in the direction perpendicular to the plane of the sample; this plane is defined as perpen- dicular to the short dimension of the sample, which is parallel to the applied pressure. As shown in Fig. 8, the plane is horizontal. So in particular we suggest that the experiments should be repeated with the magnetic field applied in the plane of the sample. We note that the lattice structures that have been hy- pothesized for these compounds are isotropic and the pressure is assumed to be hydrostatic , so that the upper critical field Hc2 should be the same in directions perpendicular and parallel to the plane of the sample. Therefore, if the effect of the magnetic field on resistance is due to the onset of superconductivity, the temperature at which the resistance begins to drop should be independent of the orientation of applied mag- netic field. The resistance below that temperature on the other hand may have some variation with orientation of magnetic field perpendicular and parallel to the plane as well as for the two orthogonal orientations possible within the plane. Instead, if the drop of resistance is not due to supercon- ductivity but for example to the action of the magnetic Lorentz force on normal charge carriers giving rise to ‘ge- ometrical magnetoresistance’ we would expect a much smaller effect of magnetic field parallel versus per- pendicular to the plane. Or, if the drop in resistance is related to the system developing magnetic order in some particular direction, the effect of an applied mag- netic field would be expected to depend on its orientation. V. DISCUSSION Electrical resistivity in materials that are not su- perconducting covers a range from about 10−8Ωm to 1020Ωm, that is, 28 orders of magnitude. For that reason a drop of two or three orders of magnitude in the resis- tance of a material as a function of temperature or pres- sure, as typically reported for the hydrides, could be due to many reasons other than superconductivity. It should also be noted that papers in this field almost always show resistance rather than resistivity data due to the dif- ficulty of obtaining reliable information on samples’ di- mensions. This precludes the possibility of evaluating the significance of the magnitude of the resistivity in these materials. It should also be recalled that throughout the history of superconductivity there have been many re- ports of ‘USO’s, “unidentified superconducting objects,” based on observations of resistance drops, that were never confirmed . Unlike what has been the tradition in the field of superconducting materials, for the particular class of hydrides under high pressure even drops of resistance versus temperature by less than an order of magnitude are interpreted as unmistakable signs of a superconduct- ing transition . To establish that a material is a superconductor it is essential to show that it exhibits the characteristic be- havior in external magnetic fields that only supercon- ducting materials do. As we have shown in this paper, such evidence for the hydrides is scant and ambiguous at best. Furthermore it is incomprehensible that such mea- surements once performed are not repeated in the same or in different labs with the same or higher accuracy to either confirm or rule out the initial conclusions. The 2015 measurements of magnetization in sulfur hydride discussed in this paper required the development of a new high pressure technique, a specially designed miniature nonmagnetic DAC cell made of Cu-Ti alloy that could accomodate a SQUID magnetometer . Yet no re- sults using this sophisticated apparatus other than the ones shown in Fig. 1, neither for sulfur hydride nor for any other hydride, have been reported in the ensuing 6 years to the present, during which the number of suppos- edly superconducting hydrides mushroomed from 1 to 11. The nuclear resonant study that supposedly proved the Meissner effect for sulfur hydride in 2016 , discussed in Sect. IV and in Ref. , has never been repeated for any other superconductor, hydride or otherwise. Based on the analysis of the magnetic evidence dis- cussed in this paper, together with the anomalous re- 8 sistance versus temperature behavior in several hydrides discussed in our recent work and that of others , we conclude that the existence of high temperature su- perconductivity in hydrides under high pressure is not an established fact. This conclusion is in contradiction with the general consensus. So we may ask: why have most scientists, both those that work in the field and those that watch it from nearby, uncritically accepted the existence of high temperature superconductivity in pressurized hydrides as a fact, on the basis of flimsy ex- perimental evidence? Examination of the literature in this field suggests the reason for this anomalous state of affairs: the field is en- tirely driven by theory. Essentially every experimental paper reporting measurements interpreted as supercon- ductivity in a hydride starts with a lengthy exposition of why the conventional BCS-Eliashberg-electron-phonon theory of superconductivity makes the existence of high temperature superconductivity in the material inevitable and unavoidable. Sometimes experimental evidence for superconductivity is only presented towards the end of the paper, almost as an afterthought . In cases where the experiment doesn’t find what the theory predicted, the experiment is not interpreted as casting doubt into the applicability of the theoretical framework used, in- stead a new twist is added to the theory to agree with the experimental observation, or it is concluded that ‘the sample made a mistake’ . Purely theoretical pa- pers are written and titled in such a way that they appear to report the finding of a new superconducting material in real life when in actual fact it was only found in a computer [53–55]. If BCS-Eliashberg-electron-phonon theory is the cor- rect theory to describe the superconductivity of a large set of materials in nature, the so-called conventional su- perconductors, such an approach may be justified. How- ever, it should be recalled that historically, conventional BCS-Eliashberg theory coupled with density-functional band structure calculations has not been an effective tool to predict and find new superconductors . Are we to believe that among the 32 classes of superconducting ma- terials surveyed in , the theory is singularly effective in predicting new superconducting materials [2, 5–7] in class C7, compressed hydrogen-rich materials , and not in the other 31 classes? Why would that be the case? For the moment, unless or until the high temperature superconductivity of hydrides under pressure is convinc- ingly established through experiments that reproducibly measure the magnetic response expected for supercon- ductors, we suggest that an alternative possibility should be considered: that the high pressure hydrides may in fact not be high temperature superconductors; hence that BCS-Eliashberg theory may not be an effective tool to predict superconducting materials in any of the 32 classes of materials surveyed in ; hence that specifically the very definite prediction of the theory that high tempera- ture superconductivity exists in pressurized hydrides may not be correct. If that is proven to be the case, if such a compelling prediction of the theory is proven wrong, the possibility that BCS-Eliashberg-electron-phonon theory may not correctly describe the physics of superconduc- tivity of any superconducting material, as was proposed by one of us in Refs. , should become compelling.