Theory for heating of metals assisted by Surface Plasmon Polaritons O. Benhayouna,ŌłŚ, P. N. Terekhinb, D. S. Ivanovc, B. Rethfeldb, M. E. Garciaa aInstitute of Physics and Center for Interdisciplinary Nanostructure Science and Technology (CINSaT), University of Kassel, 34132 Kassel, Germany bDepartment of Physics and Research Center OPTIMAS, Technische Universit ╠łat Kaiserslautern, 67663 Kaiserslautern, Germany cLebedev Physical Institute, 119991 Moscow, Russia Abstract We propose a model accounting for plasmons within a two temperature de- scription, to investigate the role of surface plasmon polaritons (SPP) in the energy redistribution between laser excited electrons and the lattice, leading to surface restructuring of the material. This energy transfer can lead to the cre- ation of laser induced surface structures in metals illuminated by an ultrashort laser pulse. The Two Temperature Model + Plasmon (TTM+P) equations are constructed by applying perturbation theory on the energy-, momentum- and density conservation equations of free electrons in metals. We consider three subsystems: the lattice, the thermalized electrons and the SPP, subject to an external laser field irradiation. The interference between the laser and SPP fields leads to spatially modulated energy absorption by the electronic system, and, through electron-phonon collisions, periodically shapes the lattice temper- ature. A numerical analysis is performed on a 1D model for gold. We show the emergence of a periodic modulation of the lattice temperature, which may contribute to laser induced periodic surface structures (LIPSS). Keywords: Ultrashort laser pulses, surface Plasmon Polaritons, Hydrodynamic model, TTM, LIPSS. ŌłŚCorresponding author at: Institute of Physics and Center for Interdisciplinary Nanostruc- ture Science and Technology (CINSaT), University of Kassel, 34132 Kassel, Germany Email address: obenhayoun@uni-kassel.de (O. Benhayoun) Preprint submitted to Journal of Applied Surface Science May 20, 2021 arXiv:2103.05044v2 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 19 May 2021 1. Introduction Surface Plasmon Polaritons (SPP) are collective electronic excitations cou- pled with light. They motivate considerable interest in the scientific commu- nity for both their theoretical and technological aspects, as they provide a wide spectrum of applications, ranging from biosensing , surface wetting , sub- wavelength optics and laser induced periodic surface structures (LIPSS) . SPP can only be excited when their momentum matches that of the in- coming light. Thus, for an ideal planar metal surface, this cannot be achieved, and one has to provide the requisite momentum to the laser via attenuated total reflection , or via surface roughness or gratings . Con- sequently, the electromagnetic fields associated with SPP are confined to the surface, and decay outside and inside the material, hence propagating along the metal-dielectric interface until their energy is dissipated as heat. In order to understand the influence of the electromagnetic fields of SPP on the lattice temperature distribution, we use the phenomenological Two Tem- perature Model (TTM) . This model is widely applied to study the energy dissipation inside the material after an ultrafast laser pulse excitation. The external laser field drives the electronic and lattice systems out of thermal equilibrium, subsequently the subsystems exchange energy via electron-phonon coupling. This is described with the following equations: CeŌłétTe + Ōłć ┬Ę Qe = ŌłÆGe-ph(Te ŌłÆ Tl) + Se, ClŌłétTl + Ōłć ┬Ę Ql = Ge-ph(Te ŌłÆ Tl). (1a) (1b) where Te and Tl are the electronic and lattice temperatures, Qe and Ql are the heat fluxes, Ge-ph is the electron-phonon coupling parameter and Se is the source term, which describes laser energy absorbed by the electronic system. The inclusion of SPP fields can be done by modifying the source term Se using MaxwellŌĆÖs equations . This is a quite useful approach in the context of studying the contribution of SPP fields in the LIPSS formation. In this case, the electronic temperature distribution is spatially modulated by 2 the interference of SPP with the laser source. Then, as a result of the electron- phonon relaxation, this spatial modulation is transferred to the lattice tempera- ture, hence inducing surface topography modifications via ablation and material transport, creating ripples . However, the derivation of the new source term often relies on arbitrary parameters to complete the description of the SPP fields, and sometimes even impose arbitrary spatial distributions . Recently, it was shown that the number of free arbitrary parameters can be reduced down to only two . In this paper, we propose a new approach for deriving the source term in Eq. (1), by describing the SPP as an independent degree of freedom, using the hydrodynamic model. For this, we write the energy-, momentum- and mass- conservation equations for the electronic system, and linearize them via pertur- bation theory. We end up with a coupled system of equations that describes the electronic collective excitations, as well as the energy exchange between SPP, thermalized electrons and the lattice. Note that the topographical and the lattice re-organization effects are not included and are beyond the scope of this letter. We find from our 1D simulations of a gold sample, that upon irradiation with an ultrafast laser pulse, we obtain an oscillatory pattern in the lattice temperature, whose periodicity is then compared with predictions from an analytical dielectric function of Au. 2. The TTM+P model 2.1. Conservation laws To develop a model describing collective electronic excitation without mak- ing arbitrary constraints on the shape of the SPP fields, we start by obtaining the conservation equations governing our electronic system. We then follow a similar approach as in the work of Chen et al. to derive the TTM+P equa- tions. We describe a nonequilibrium system of free electrons irradiated by an ex- ternal laser field using the moments of the Boltzmann equation for mass, mo- 3 mentum and energy, which reads: Ōłétn + Ōłć ┬Ę (nv) = 0, mDtv = eFe ŌłÆ 1 nŌłćp, Dt╬Š + 1 n(pŌłć ┬Ę v + Ōłć ┬Ę Q) = (Ōłét╬Š)c. (2a) (2b) (2c) with n the electronic particle density, v the mean velocity vector, ╬Š the internal energy, p the electronic pressure and the energy flux vector Q, Fe = e(E+v├ŚB) the Lorentz force resulting from the electromagnetic field E and B, (Ōłét╬Š)c the collision term, Ōłét = Ōłé Ōłét and Dt = Ōłét + v ┬Ę Ōłć. Note that the above equations are coupled via n, v and Fe to the microscopic MaxwellŌĆÖs equations: Ōłć ├Ś B = ╬╝0J + 1 c2 ŌłétE, Ōłć ├Ś E = ŌłÆŌłétB, Ōłć ┬Ę B = 0, Ōłć ┬Ę E = e ╬Ą0 (n ŌłÆ l). (3a) (3b) (3c) (3d) with ╬Ąo and ╬╝0 are the permittivity and permeability of free space respec- tively, l = ’┐Į i Zi╬┤(r ŌłÆ ri) is the distribution function of the positive ion back- ground, Zi being the effective charge of the ions and ri is the position of the i-th ion, and the electronic current J = env. These two sets of equations are the basis for the derivation of our model. 2.2. Perturbation equations From the system of Eqs. (2), we are able to describe collective electronic excitations. We thus use the perturbation theory on the Hamiltonian of the electronic system to split it into two parts: a ŌĆ£non-perturbedŌĆØ zero-th order system, describing a uniform and static electronic background (i.e. n0(r, t) = n0 and v0(r, t) = 0, respectively), and a ŌĆ£perturbedŌĆØ system to the first order consisting of plasmons, which provides a linear correction to the zero-th order 4 equations, and hence describes the deviations of the electronic density from uniformity. We now expand our variables as follow : n(r, t) = n0 + n1(r, t), v(r, t) = v1(r, t), p(r, t) = p0(r, t) + p1(r, t), E(r, t) = E0(r, t) + E1(r, t), B(r, t) = B1(r, t), ╬Š(r, t) = ╬Š0(r, t) + ╬Š1(r, t). (4a) (4b) (4c) (4d) (4e) (4f) The linear deviations are only small corrections to the unperturbed system, and satisfy the inequality: n1(r, t) << n0. (5) which assumes that the number of excited electrons is small compared to the total number of electrons in the system. This perturbative approach gives us approximate solutions to an otherwise, difficult problem to solve. We now insert (4) into equations (2) and (3). After separating the zero-th and first order variables, we find: Dt╬Š0 + 1 n0 Ōłć ┬Ę Qe = (Ōłét╬Š0)c, Ōłétn1 + n0Ōłć ┬Ę v1 = 0, Ōłć ┬Ę E1 = e ╬Ą0 n1, Ōłétv1 + ╬▓2 n0 Ōłćn1 = e mE1, n0Ōłét╬Š1 + n1Ōłét╬Š0 + n0v1 ┬Ę Ōłć╬Š0 + p0Ōłć ┬Ę v1 = (Ōłét╬Š1)c, Ōłć ├Ś B1 = ╬╝0J1 + 1 c2 ŌłétE1. (6a) (6b) (6c) (6d) (6e) (6f) where we have used the condition for the conservation of the generalized vortex Ōłć ├Ś vj + e mBj = 0 for j Ōłł {0, 1}, n0 is the uniform electron density and v0 = 0. We also replaced in Eq. (4.c), the first order pressure term by the 5 degeneracy Fermi pressure and is written as p1 = mn1╬▓2 with ╬▓ = (3ŽĆ2n0)1/3 ╠äh m the perturbation velocity . The model can be improved by making ╬▓ a function of position as well as of plasmon frequency , however this is beyond the scope of our study. Finally, the electric current J1 = en0v1. We also wish to indicate here, that the fields E1 and B1 are already coupled with light, and can be decomposed as E1 = Esp + Elas and B1 = Bsp + Blas, with Esp and Bsp the electromagnetic fields of surface plasmons in the absence of external irradiation. We note that the condition (5), can be re-written, using Eq. (6.d) as: eŽå1 + mŌłéts1 << m╬▓2, (7) where Žå1 and s1 are the electric and velocity potentials respectively, which are related to E1 and v1 with: E1 = ŌłÆŌłćŽå1 ŌłÆ ŌłétA1 and v1 = ŌłÆŌłćs1 + eA1/mc, A1 being the vector potential in the Coulomb gauge. The left hand side of the Eq. (7) represents the sum of the potential electric energy and an effective potential, and the right hand side can be described as the kinetic energy of the perturbation. In order to be able to describe SPP, we impose on the system of Eqs. (6) the following boundary conditions : 1- Continuity of the normal and tangential components of the electromag- netic field across the interface. 2- The normal component of the electronic velocity v1z vanishes at z = 0. 2.3. Energy balance From Eqs. (6e, 6a, 1b), we finally end up with : n0Ōłét╬Š1 + n1CeŌłétTe + n0Ce(v1 ┬Ę Ōłć)Te +2 3CeTeŌłć ┬Ę v1 = (╬Š1)c, CeŌłétTe + Ōłć ┬Ę Qe = (Te)c + Se, ClŌłétTl + Ōłć ┬Ę Ql = (Tl)c. (8a) (8b) (8c) 6 Eqs. (8) describe the energy balance of the SPP, the thermalized electrons and the lattice subsystems respectively, where Qi = ŌłÆKiŌłćTi is the heat flux vector for (i = e, l) and Se = ŌłÆŌłć ┬Ę Etot ├Ś Btot is the source term describing the interference of the SPP fields with the laser fields, with Etot = (E1 + Elas) and Btot = (B1 + Blas). The BhatnagarŌĆōGrossŌĆōKrook (BGK) model has been used for the collision terms (╬Š1)c, (Te)c and (Tl)c. We thus have: (╬Š1)c = ŌłÆGe-pl( ╬Š1 Ce ŌłÆ Te), Ce ŌłÆ Te), (Tl)c = Ge-ph(Te ŌłÆ Tl). (9a) (9b) (9c) with Ge-ph and Ge-pl are the electron-phonon and electron-plasmon coupling parameters, respectively. 3. Numerical simulations In this section, we perform a numerical analysis of the system of equations (6-8). Fig.(1) shows the geometry of the modeled sample. We have reduced the 3D problem into 1D by supposing homogeneity in the y-direction and focusing on the surface modes of the plasmons at z = 0. We note that in this case, the penetration and damping of SPP inside and outside of the material is beyond the scope of this letter. 7 problem, by supposing homogeneity in the y-direction and considering only the surface of the material (at z = 0). At t = 0, we excite SPP using an obliquely incident laser field with an angle ╬Ė and the surface of the material has no predefined structures. During the simulations, SPP start to emerge and contribute to the appearance of periodic surface structures at the gold-air interface. 3.1. LaserŌĆÖs electromagnetic field The laserŌĆÖs electromagnetic field at z = 0 is described by the real part of: Ex las(x, t) = Eabs 0 Ez las(x, t) = ŌłÆEabs 0 By las(x, t) = Babs 0 ╬Šlas(t)eŌłÆi(k0 sin(╬Ėi)x+Žēt). (10a) (10b) (10c) with ╬Šlas(t) = ’┐Į 1 Žä ŌłÜŽā ŌłÜŽĆ exp ’┐Į ŌłÆ Žāt2 2Žä 2 ’┐Į , (11) 8 where Žē and k0 = Žē/c are the laser frequency and light wave vector respec- tively, the parameter Žā = 4 ln (2). The laser pulse duration is Žä. Eabs 0 = 2╬Ę cos(╬Ėa) ╬Ę cos(╬Ėa)+╬Ę0 cos(╬Ėi)Einc 0 and Babs 0 = ŌłÆ ╠ānEabs 0 /c are the amplitude of electric and magnetic fields inside the material respectively, ╬Ę = ’┐Į ╬╝ ╬Ą and ╬Ę0 = ’┐Į ╬╝0 ╬Ą0 are the material and vacuum impedance respectively, ╬Ėa = arcsin(sin(╬Ėi)/ ╠ān) is the angle of transmittance related to the angle of incidence ╬Ėi, ╠ān is the material complex refractive index, Einc 0 is the incident amplitude of the laser electromag- netic field. The fields in Eq. (10) are used to derive the SPP fields, and to calculate the source term Se in Eq. (8.b). We note that in the case of non-flat surfaces (periodic grating or roughness, for instance), one should use analytical expressions for the laser field that account for its scattering on the specific sur- face topography. Hence, we would suggest changing the absorbed and reflected laser fields . We note that in the case of multiple pulses, the model does not provide a description of the lattice surface modification and thus fails to take the interpulse feedback mechanism into consideration. This however, goes beyond the scope of our study. 3.2. Algorithm of the numerical simulation In 1D, our system of equations reads as follow: 2cB1 = 0, 2╬▓n1 = 0, 2cE1 = e ╬Ą0 (╬▓2 ŌłÆ c2)Ōłéxn1ex, 2╬▓v1 = ŌłÆ e m((╬▓2 ŌłÆ c2)Ōłć ├Ś B1 ┬Ę ez). (12a) (12b) (12c) (12d) with the operators 2c = Ōłé2 t ŌłÆ c2Ōłé2 x + Žē2 p + Ōłét Žäep and 2╬▓ = Ōłé2 t ŌłÆ ╬▓2Ōłé2 x + Žē2 p + Ōłét Žäep , ex and ez are the unit vectors, and Žäep is the electron-plasmon relaxation time. We start by solving the system of Eqs. (12) for the SPP fields at each time step, and the values of these calculated variables are used to solve Eqs. (8). Along with the diffusion equations, the wave equations were solved using a central finite difference scheme. 9 A uniform mesh of grid spacing of 4 nm size was employed for a total length of L = 4 ╬╝m, along with a time increment of 5 ┬Ę 10ŌłÆ18 s, for a duration of 50 ps. As for the boundaries, reflective boundary conditions are used for the wave equations, so that the variables in Eqs. (12) satisfy f(x, t) = 0 at x = 0 and x = L, and convective boundaries were adopted for the diffusion equation, i.e. ŌłéxTe,l = 0. 3.3. Material parameters The material parameters that were used are as follows: n0 = 5 9 ┬Ę 1028mŌłÆ3 , and we write Ge-pl = Ce/Žäep, with Žäep = ╠ähŽēp ( ╠äh2k2 0/m)( k2 k2 0 )Žēp the SPP life- time due to electron-plasmon collisions , k0 being the momentum of an electron at the top of the Fermi distribution and k the SPP wave vec- tor. Moreover, Ge-ph(Te) and Ce(Te) were taken from the work by Lin et al. . The electronic thermal conductivity ke was approximated as in : ke = K (a2 e+0 16)5/4(a2 e+0 44)ae energy) and K and b, are constants depending on the material, here taken as K = 353 WmŌłÆ1KŌłÆ1 and b = 0, 16 for gold, and kl = 1 WmŌłÆ1KŌłÆ1 . We note that these parameters do not take into account phase transitions or boiling processes of the lattice, since they do not influence the periodicity emerging in the temperature distribution, which is the main focus of our calculations. Also, the ballistic transport of the electrons can be omitted for the range of laser fluence used in our simulations . ╬Ą1(x, t = 0) = CeTin, and for the SPP fields, the initial conditions were derived 10 from the laser electromagnetic field at the interface as: E1x(x, t = 0) = Ex las(x, t = 0), E1z(x, t = 0) = Ez las(x, t = 0), B1y(x, t = 0) = By las(x, t = 0), n1(x, t = 0) = ╬Ą0 e ŌłéxE1x|t=0, v1x(x, t = 0) = ŌłÆ ╬Ą0 en0 ŌłétE1x|t=0, v1z(x, t = 0) = 0. (13a) (13b) (13c) (13d) (13e) (13f) 4. Results and discussion We now present the results of our simulations, performed for gold and a laser pulse of different wavelengths and angles of incidence. The goal of these simulations is to model the influence of the electromagnetic field of SPP on the lattice temperature distribution. Fig. 2 displays the evolution in space and time of the electric field of the SPP. One can see at t = 0 the fieldŌĆÖs distribution due to the imposed initial conditions in Eqs. (13), and how the field progresses in time. These initial conditions have a great influence on the SPP modes, propagation and their 11 amplitudes, and have been chosen in such a way to remove arbitrary parameters in our model. This choice can be regarded as being in the ideal case where one has a perfect coupling between the laser and the surface plasmon fields. The intensification of the SPP eventually becomes clearer as the laser reaches its peak at around t = 0.25 ps. As mentioned before, this will then lead to an interference between the SPP fields and the laser fields, which will introduce a periodic distribution in the lattice temperature as a result of the electron-phonon relaxation . irradiated by a laser pulse incident at ╬Ė = 60┬░, with a 250 mJ/cm2 incident fluence at 700 nm wavelength and a 100 fs duration . The gray line indicates the ablation temperature of gold. In Fig. 3 we show the evolution of the lattice temperature of the sample which has been irradiated by a single pulse of 250 mJ/cm2. We can see from this picture that around t = 10 ps, some peaks from the lattice temperature 12 already reach the melting threshold of gold (Tmelting = 1337 K). At t = 50 ps, the lattice temperature increase becomes negligible, and its peaks exceed the ablation threshold, leading to a periodic material removal and transport, which after solidification, results in structural changes at the surface of the sample. In order to be able to see the complete picture, one has to incorporate matter reorganization theories into the model to accurately describe the surface topog- raphy evolution, since these would include hydrodynamic effects of the melted surface, diffusion and defects accumulation. However, for the purposes of this study, these effects are not taken into account, since they only play an important role after longer periods of time (> 1 ns). pulses with different angles of incidence, with a 250 mJ/cm2 incident fluence at a 700 nm wavelength and a 100 fs duration. The dashed gray line indicates the ablation temperature of gold. Fig. 4 demonstrates that, depending on the angle of incidence, we give to the SPP fields different amounts of energy. This can be seen from the temperatures 13 reached by the lattice, and also by the amplitude of its oscillations. The closer we get to a grazing incidence, the greater the normal component of the laser field becomes, and hence the stronger we excite the SPP fields. We note, that with this particular implementation of initial conditions, one cannot excite SPP with a normal incidence, thus one would need to describe the initial state (density and velocity) of the electronic system independently of the laser source, to then be able to couple the surface plasmon fields and laser. This however, is beyond the scope of this study. We note that the increase of the lattice temperatures at the boundaries in Fig. 3 and 4 is merely an artefact induced by the reflective boundary conditions used for solving the wave equations. Unfortunately, we are not aware of other papers that use the TTM+Maxwell approach for a 1D gold sample to have a reasonable comparison with. However, a Maxwell + TTM + Hydrodynamics model was reported for stainless steel in , and combined TTM and Maxwell simulations were performed in other studies on dielectrics and semiconductors (see ). In order to investigate the SPP periodicity predicted by the hydrodynamic model, one can write its dielectric function using the Fourier transform of Eq. (6.f) and the condition Ōłć ├Ś v1 + e mB1 = 0, as: ╬ĄHydro = 1 ŌłÆ Žē2 p Žē2 + iŽē/Žäep ŌłÆ ╬▓2k2 , (14) which when ╬▓ ŌłÆŌåÆ 0, is simply the dielectric function from the local Drude model. We recall that the dispersion relation of the SPP obtained using the interface conditions of the MaxwellŌĆÖs equation can be written as : kSPP = k0 ’┐Į ╬Ąair╬ĄAu ╬Ąair + ╬ĄAu , (15) where ╬Ąair and ╬ĄAu are the dielectric constants for air and gold, respectively. From this relation, one can calculate the predicted wavelength of the SPP at an oblique incidence propagating in the positive direction of x, using the relation : ╬╗SPP = 2ŽĆ Re(kSPP) + k0sin(╬Ėa). (16) 14 hydrodynamic dielectric functions respectively, with respect to the laser wavelength. Fig. 5 shows a comparison between the ratio of ╬╗SPP and ╬╗las, calculated using the dielectric function from Hydrodynamic model and an analytical di- electric function. This analytical dielectric function ╬ĄAu has been fitted with experimental data for gold, and takes interband transitions into account using the critical points method (see ref. ). We can see from the figure that the predictions from both dielectric functions converge to the same values and have a good agreement at long wavelengths, however for shorter wavelengths, the hydrodynamic model is no longer reliable, and fails to reproduce some proper- ties of the electronic system, such as the dip around 500 nm, which represents photo-excitation processes of d-band electrons of gold. This is due to the fact that the hydrodynamic model, does not yet include interband transitions. How- ever, these effects can be incorporated as polarisation currents using the Lorentz 15 oscillators, see for instance . 5. Conclusions A two temperature (plus) plasmon model was derived from conservation equations of the electronic system. The model consists of three equations for energy conservation of the three subsystems (thermalized electrons, SPP and the lattice), coupled with four other equations governing the dynamics of the electromagnetic field created by the SPP. This field has been shown to have a great influence on the total energy redistribution in the system. The model solves the field equations of these collective oscillations without imposing an arbitrary functions to shape the SPP fields. The resulting interference between SPP and the laser source periodically shapes the lattice temperature profile above the ablation threshold. We have also shown, an overall agreement at long wavelengths, between the predictions of the SPP periodicity between the Hydrodynamic dielectric function and the one fitted from experimental data. Finally, we would like to point out some of the limitations of the TTM+P. This model cannot be applied for electronic energies comparable or higher than the Fermi energy. Also, at short laser wavelengths, the hydrodynamic modelŌĆÖs predictions become inaccurate since it needs to integrate interband effects. We further mention the absence of Landau damping in the collision term between the SPP and the electrons. As a consequence, the model does not account for processes like electron-hole pair creation and electron photo-emission, thus more accurate terms could prove to be beneficial to improve the TTM+P. This model, at its current stage, takes the plasmonic system as a separate degree of freedom. This enables us to not only derive the SPP electromagnetic fields, but also investigate the interaction between the different subsystems (i.e. electrons, plasmons and lattice). Also, extending the theory to higher orders of perturbations (second and third orders), one is able to study nonlinear effects occurring in the plasmonic system (see for instance ). Overall, we hope that in the future, our model can be easily adapted for different use cases, and 16 provide good quantitative results for plasmonic investigations. 6. Declaration of Competing Interest The authors declared that there is no conflict of interest. 7. Acknowledgments We wish to acknowledge the financial support of the Deutsche Forschungsge- meinschaft for the project GA465/15-2 as well as for the project RE1141/14-2.