Roton pair density wave in a strong-coupling kagome superconductor Hui Chen1,2,3,4#, Haitao Yang1,2,3,4#, Bin Hu1,2#, Zhen Zhao1,2, Jie Yuan1,2, Yuqing Xing1,2, Guojian Qian1,2, Zihao Huang1,2, Geng Li1,2,3, Yuhan Ye1,2, Sheng Ma1,2, Shunli Ni1,2, Hua Zhang1,2, Qiangwei Yin5, Chunsheng Gong5, Zhijun Tu5, Hechang Lei5, Hengxin Tan6, Sen Zhou7,2,3, Chengmin Shen1,2, Xiaoli Dong1,2, Binghai Yan6, Ziqiang Wang8*, and Hong-Jun Gao1,2,3,4* 1 Beijing National Center for Condensed Matter Physics and Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, PR China 2 School of Physical Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, PR China 3 CAS Center for Excellence in Topological Quantum Computation, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, PR China 4 Songshan Lake Materials Laboratory, Dongguan, Guangdong 523808, PR China 5 Beijing Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Functional Materials & Micro-Nano Devices, Department of Physics, Renmin University of China, Beijing 100872, PR China 6 Department of Condensed Matter Physics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel 7CAS Key Laboratory of Theoretical Physics, Institute of Theoretical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China 8 Department of Physics, Boston College, Chestnut Hill, MA, USA #These authors contributed equally to this work *Correspondence to: wangzi@bc.edu hjgao@iphy.ac.cn The transition-metal kagome lattice materials host frustrated, correlated, and topological quantum states of matter1-9. Recently, a new family of vanadium-based kagome metals AV3Sb5 (A=K, Rb, and Cs) with topological band structures has been discovered10,11. These layered compounds are nonmagnetic and undergo charge density wave transitions before developing superconductivity at low temperatures11-19. Here we report the observation of unconventional superconductivity and pair density wave (PDW) in CsV3Sb5 using scanning tunneling microscope/spectroscopy (STM/STS) and Josephson STS. We find that CsV3Sb5 exhibits a V-shaped pairing gap Δ~0.5 meV and is a strong- coupling superconductor (2∆/kBTc~5) that coexists with 4a0 unidirectional and 2a0×2a0 charge order. Remarkably, we discover a 3Q PDW accompanied by bidirectional 4a0/3 spatial modulations of the superconducting gap, coherence peak and gap-depth in the tunneling conductance. We term this novel quantum state a roton-PDW associated with an underlying vortex-antivortex lattice that can account for the observed conductance modulations. Probing the electronic states in the vortex halo in an applied magnetic field, in strong-field that suppresses superconductivity, and in zero-field above Tc reveals that the PDW is a primary state responsible for an emergent pseudogap and intertwined electronic order. Our findings show striking analogies and distinctions to the phenomenology of high-Tc cuprate superconductors, and provide groundwork for understanding the microscopic origin of correlated electronic states and superconductivity in vanadium-based kagome metals. High-quality as-grown CsV3Sb5 crystals (Methods and Fig. S1) exhibit a stacking structure of Cs-Sb2- VSb1-Sb2-Cs layers with hexagonal symmetry (space group P 6/mmm) (Fig. 1a). In the VSb1 layer, the kagome net of vanadium is interwoven with a simple hexagonal net formed by the Sb1 atoms (Fig. 1b). The Cs and Sb2 layers form hexagon and honeycomb lattices, respectively (Fig. 1b). Samples characterized and the bulk electronic properties determined by temperature dependent magnetization, resistivity, and heat capacity (Methods). All measurements indicate the presence of an anomaly at T ~ 94 K (Fig. S2) associated with the charge density wave (CDW) transition11,17. At low temperatures, the magnetization, resistivity, and heat capacity measurements show a transition to the superconducting (SC) state at a critical superconducting temperature (Tc) of ~ 2.8 K. The somewhat higher Tc than the one reported in the literature (2.5 K)11 is consistent with the high quality of the as-grown CsV3Sb5 sample, which provides the opportunity for deeper understanding of the nature of superconductivity and coexisting electronic order through atomically-resolved STM/S. In the STM measurements at 4.2 K, we observe both types of the surfaces (Figs. 1c-d). Based on the atomically-resolved STM image combined with crystal structure, we identify the two cleaved terminations as √3×√3R30° reconstructed Cs surface and 1×1 Sb surface (Methods and Extended Data Fig. 1). In this work, the STM/S imaging of the density waves is conducted on large and clean areas of the Sb surfaces (Fig. 1e). Unconventional strong-coupling superconductor We first study the SC ground state using the STS described in Methods at an electron temperature 300 mK (see calibration of electron temperatures in Fig. S3). We observe particle-hole symmetric differential shaped gap on both Cs and Sb surfaces with two gap-edge peaks at energies symmetric with respect to EF. The V-shaped gap is consistent with the gap nodes seen in the thermal transport19, but the non-zero local density of states (LDOS) at zero-bias, lower on the Sb than the Cs surface (Fig. S4), indicates additional in-gap quasiparticle states possibly due to line nodes or ungapped Fermi surface sections. From the dI/dV spectra collected over nearly fifty 30 nm×30 nm regions, we obtain the average SC gap size (Δ) ~ 0.52±0.1 meV (Fig. S5). The temperature evolution of the dI/dV spectra on the Cs surface (Fig. 2b) shows that the V-shaped gap reduces with increasing electron temperature and vanishes around ~ 2.3 K. Since the suppression of the LDOS near EF can arise from physics other than superconductivity20,21, it is crucial to directly probe the superfluid for superconducting phase coherence. We thus construct a Josephson STM (Fig. 2c) by fabricating a SC Nb STM tip (see Methods and Fig. S6). A sharp zero-bias peak with two negative differential conductance dips are observed due to Josephson tunneling of Cooper pairs (Fig. 2d), which provides strong evidence that the CsV3Sb5 surface is in the SC phase (Fig. S7). The temperature dependent dI/dV spectra are then obtained (Figs. 2e-f). When the electron temperature increases to about 900 mK, two sets of peaks can be clearly resolved with particle-hole symmetry. The outer peaks correspond to the sum ∆tip+∆sample of the paring gaps in the tip and the sample, while the inner peaks relate to the difference ∆tip-∆sample. Upon further increasing the temperature, the inner peaks disappear at a transition temperature of ~2.3 K, leaving the two remaining peaks from ∆tip. Since the Tc of the Nb tip is higher than 4.2 K (Fig. S6), the transition indicates that superconductivity in the sample is completely suppressed at this temperature. The SC gap of the sample is in excellent agreement with the value measured by the normal W tip. We thus conclude that the observed V-shaped gap (Fig. 2a) is the SC gap that opens at a Tc ~ 2.3 K on the surface of the CsV3Sb5. The V-shaped SC gap with non-zero LDOS at EFis strongly indicative of unconventional superconductivity22,23. Moreover, the measured gap– to–Tc ratio 2Δ/kBTc ~ 5.2 puts the unconventional superconductor in the strong-coupling regime. Coexisting charge density waves We next probe the spatial distribution of the off-diagonal long-range ordered quantum states using the high-resolution STM/STS at an electron temperature 300 mK well below Tc. Since the Cs atoms are unstable on the Cs terminated surface and strongly affect the tip states, we perform the measurements on the Sb surface directly above the V kagome plane (Fig. 1e). The STM topography (Fig. 3a) over a large 70 nm×70 nm area (Methods) shows periodic modulations indicating the presence of CDWs. The corresponding Fourier transform after the Lawler-Fujita drift-correction24,25 (Methods) reveals in Fig. 3b that, in addition to the atomic Bragg peaks QBragg (a,b) of the pristine Sb lattice, two sets of new peaks. One set comprises six hexagonal wave vectors at Q3q-2a = 1 2 QBragg (a,b) , corresponding to a 2a0×2a0 superstructure on the kagome lattice. The other set is at uniaxial wave vectors marked by Q1q-4a = 1 4 QBragg a , corresponding to unidirectional 4a0 modulations. These robust modulations are clearly visible in the topography (Fig. 3a, inset) and suggest the coexistence of superconductivity with 2a0 bidirectional and 4a0 unidirectional positional and rotational order, i.e. a smectic state in the language of liquid crystals26,27. The dI/dV(r,V) conductance map at V=-5 mV over the same field of view (Fig. 3c) and the corresponding Lawler-Fujita drift corrected Fourier transform (Fig. 3d) reveals the outstanding Q3q-2a and Q1q-4a peaks and the quasiparticle interference (QPI) patterns. The Bogoliubov QPI patterns in the SC state are notably different, but with certain unidirectional features similar to the normal state QPI14. Acquiring additional dI/dV maps and Fourier transforms at different bias energies and over different regions, two examples are shown in Figs. 3e-f around the SC gap energy, we find that the two sets of peaks at Q3q-2a and Q1q-4a in dI/dV maps are nondispersive in energy (Fig. 3g, Extended Data Fig. 2 and Fig. S8). We thus conclude that 2a0×2a0 and 4a0 unidirectional CDWs14 coexists with superconductivity, giving rise to the smectic superconductor. 3Q PDW with 4a0/3 period A striking feature of the dI/dV maps, absence in the topography (Fig. 3b), is the new set of prominent peaks at hexagonal wave vectors Q3q-4a/3 = 3 4 QBragg (a,b) in the Fourier transform (Figs. 3d-f). Note that the 3Q peaks at Q3q-4a/3 are distinct from the uniaxial Q1q-4a, despite the overlap with a higher harmonic of Q1q-4a along the qa-direction. These peaks do not exist in the dI/dV maps at energies much higher than the SC gap energy (Extended Data Fig. 3). They suggest an emergent 4a0/3 bidirectional 3Q electronic modulations without long-range charge order. The Q3q-4a/3 peaks are nondispersive at low energies around the SC gap (Fig. 3g), indicating the possible formation of a primary 3Q PDW. This is in contrast to the long-range CDWs at Q3q-2a and Q1q-4a that induce subsidiary PDWs at the same wave vectors in the SC condensate28-34. The dI/dV (r,0.4 mV) map after Fourier filtering of atomic Bragg peaks at QBragg and noise from the small-q quasiparticle scattering (Fig. S9), reveals the spatial pattern of the PDW (Fig. 3h). A hexagonal pattern of the bidirectional PDW with period 4a0/3 (Fig. S9) is clearly observed in the background of the 4a0 charge stripes. Spatial modulations of SC gap, coherence peak height, and gap depth at PDW wave vector To investigate the properties of the PDW and its effects on superconductivity, we measure the dI/dV(r,V) spectra along a line cut parallel to the 4a0 stripes indicated in the topography (Fig. 3i). This direction corresponds to the qb-direction in reciprocal space (Fig. 3b), thus avoids the 4a0 modulations due to the unidirectional charge order. The spatial evolution of the differential conductance (Fig. 3j) displays intricate modulations in the SC gap Δ(r), the coherence peak height at the gap edge, and the zero-bias conductance. To extract quantitative information, we take the second derivative of each conductance coherence peak locations (especially at negative bias) and the SC gap Δ(r), similar to a recent study of the PDW modulation of the SC coherence in underdoped cuprates29. The spatial modulation of the local SC gap Δ(r) (Fig. 3l), having an amplitude on the order of 7% of the average gap, is clearly visible with underlying periodicities. Its Fourier spectrum (Fig. 3l) displays pronounced peaks at 3 4QBragg associated with the PDW, in addition to the Bragg peak at QBragg and the 2a0 CDW peak at 1 2QBragg. The modulation of the SC gap further supports the identification of the Q3q-4a/3 peaks in the dI/dV maps (Figs. 3e,f) with the 3Q PDW coupled to the SC condensate. More data, including the SC gap maps acquired in different regions exhibiting Q3q-4a/3 peaks in the Fourier transforms, are presented in Figs. S10 and S11. To demonstrate the modulation of the SC coherence by the PDW, we determine from the conductance G0(r) (Fig. 3m) display intriguing periodic modulations along the line cut. Remarkably, the modulations of the coherence peak P(r) and zero-bias conductance G0(r) are out of phase (Figs. 3m, S12a), leading to in-phase modulations of coherence peak P(r) and gap-depth H(r). Since a higher coherence peak in STS usually reflects a higher superfluid density29, the correlated modulations among P(r), H(r), and G0(r) amount to a concomitant deeper SC gap and less normal fluid density, demonstrating an unprecedented electronic density wave modulation of superconductivity. After filtering out atomic Bragg oscillations and small-q noise due to quasiparticle scattering from the raw data, the spatial modulation of the coherence peak height P(r) and the SC gap-depth H(r) exhibit remarkable beating patterns of two primary frequencies corresponding to the leading bidirectional 4a0/3 PDW and a weaker 2a0 CDW (Fig. 3n and Fig. S12b). These results demonstrate that the emergent PDW involves both the superfluid and the normal fluid, such that the total electron density in the ground state is only weakly perturbed at the bidirectional Q3q-4a/3. The observation of the PDW at Qpdw =Q3q-4a/3 in the superconductor is consistent with the existence of a shallow roton minimum at same wave vector Qroton = Q3q-4a/3 in the dynamical density-density response function of the superfluid (Extended Data Fig. 4). The roton gap protects the superfluid from crystallization, allowing only short-ranged charge density correlations. The 3Q PDW is described by an inhomogeneous order parameter ∆pdw(r) = ∑ ∆Qpα(r), α where ∆Qpα (r)= ∆α cos(Qp α · r − φα) and Qp α, α = 1, 2, 3, are the momenta corresponding to Q3q-4a/3 in the 3Q directions and φα is a relative phase. Below Tc, it couples to the uniform SC condensate Δsc. Thus, the intertwined density wave order has the character of delocalized Cooper pair excitations and localized charge excitations. To stress this distinction, we refer to this novel quantum state as a roton-PDW, without implying direct observation of roton excitations, which may be visible in the conductance spectrum at higher energies through mode coupling. In this scenario, the low energy excitations involve both gapless quasiparticles and roton-PDW excitations. Since a roton is a bound vortex-antivortex pair35-38, the roton-PDW can be viewed as a commensurate hexagonal vortex-antivortex lattice (Extended Data Fig. 4) from the zeroes in the complex PDW order parameter ∆pdw(r) that coexists with the uniform component of the SC order parameter Δsc. Such an unconventional SC state necessarily breaks the time-reversal symmetry, exhibiting spontaneous phase windings associated with ∆pdw(r) and unconventional SC vortices30,33. The roton-PDW provides a qualitative explanation for our observations. The low energy states inside the V-shaped SC gap (Fig. 2a) are composed of both localized vortex-antivortex core states and itinerant nodal quasiparticles contributing to the observed thermal transport19. The spatial modulation of the coherence peak height and zero-bias conductance can be accounted for by those in the local superfluid density and the anti-correlated normal fluid density on the vortex-antivortex lattice (Extended Data Fig. 4) under weak modulations of the SC gap. PDW as a “mother state” and emergent pseudogap We further investigate the nature of the PDW by applying a magnetic field along the c-axis. The magnetic field dependent dI/dV spectra on the Sb surface away from field-induced vortices show that the SC gap is gradually reduced with increasing field and vanishes at about 2 T (Fig. S13). At 0.04 T, we observed SC vortices (Fig. S14). Fig. 4a centers on a vortex in the hexagonal vortex lattice. In the vortex halo marked in Fig. 4a, we obtain the dI/dV(r,-5 mV) map (Fig. 4b). The Fourier transform shows that the 3Q PDW at Q3q-4a/3 survives in the vortex halo, with somewhat split peaks (Fig. 4c). In contrast to the cuprates, where the 8a0 PDW appears only in the vortex halo with suppressed but nonzero superconductivity33,39, the 4a0/3 roton-PDW is strong enough to emerge both in the vortex halo and in the full-fledged superconductor in zero-field. When the magnetic field is raised to 2 T, the SC gap disappears and superconductivity is that, while the QPI pattern changes substantially, all the density wave peaks remain including the Q3q-4a/3 associated with the 4a0/3 PDW. With superconductivity removed by the magnetic-field, these coexisting density waves define a “zero-temperature” pseudogap phase with a suppression of the LDOS over ±5 meV in the spatially-averaged dI/dV spectrum shown in Fig. 4h. In contrast to the 1×4 and 2×2 CDW peaks that exist at all energies, the nondispersive Q3q-4a/3 peaks are visible only in the energy range of the pseudogap (~ ±5 meV) and are absent at higher energies (Extended Data Fig. 3). This suggests an intriguing possibility that the observed 4a0/3 3Q PDW is a “mother state” responsible for the pseudogap, as proposed in theories of the cuprates32,40. A Gizsburg-Landau analysis (Methods ‘Discussions of PDW as a ‘mother state’’) shows that due to the hexagonal symmetry, the 3Q PDW induces a secondary 3Q CDW of identical period, giving rise to an intertwined electronic order at Q3q-4a/3 as the “mother state” responsible for the pseudogap. We have identified the PDW pseudogap with the energy of the peak in the LDOS near 5 mV in the SC state at 300 mK (Methods and Extended Data Fig. 5) and acquired the pseudogap map, which indeed exhibits spatial gap modulations with Fourier peaks at the PDW vector Q3q- 4a/3. Finally, we warm up the sample to the normal state above Tc and acquired dI/dV maps (Fig. 4f) in the same region at 4.2 K. The corresponding Fourier transform (Fig. 4g) shows modified QPI patterns from the SC state at 300 mK (Fig. 3d) due to the closing of the SC gap. The PDW peaks at Q3q-4a/3 are somewhat more diffused, but clearly present, demonstrating that the PDW and the intertwined electronic order persist to the normal state. The spatially-averaged dI/dV spectrum at 4.2 K (Fig. 4h) indeed exhibits a broad incoherent normal state pseudogap correlated with the primary PDW over the energy range ~±5 meV. The comparison of the averaged dI/dV spectra (Fig. 4h) obtained in different states including the SC state at 0 T, the vortex halo at 0.04 T, the “zero-temperature” pseudogap state at 2 T and 300 mK, and the normal state pseudogap phase at 4.2 K, reveals a rather consistent and enlightening picture of the interplay between superconductivity, the primary PDW, the intertwined density waves and the pseudogap with striking analogy and distinction to the physics of the high-Tc cuprates. The dI/dV map and Fourier transform (Fig. 4f-g) indicate 2a0×2a0 CDW and 4a0 unidirectional charge order persist above the SC transition. The properties of the CDWs in the normal state, discussed in more detail in Methods together with our DFT calculations (Extended Data Fig. 6 and Figs. S15, S16), are in good agreement with the recent STM work14.The angular-dependent magnetoresistance measurements reveal a twofold resistivity anisotropy (Extended Data Fig. 7) with a sharp onset below ~50 K, which matches well with the onset temperature Tstripe~50 K of the 4a0 stripes detected by STM14. This suggests an incipient rotational symmetry breaking bulk electronic state below Tstripe, which can be either a quasi- 3D 4a0 stripe phase with interlayer coupling, or a different state that manifests as the 4a0 unidirectional charge order on the Sb terminated surface of CsV3Sb5. Unconventional superconductivity can arise in model calculations from local and extended electron correlations on the kagome lattice41-43. We stress, however, that the physics discovered here goes well beyond CsV3Sb5 being another candidate unconventional superconductor. It embodies a set of highly provoking quantum electronic states and excitations that show striking analogies and distinctions and may hold the common set of keys to resolve some of the outstanding issues in the cuprate high-Tc superconductors, including smectic electronic liquid crystal states, the interplay among PDW, CDW and intertwined electronic order, as well as their impact on the pseudogap phenomenon and unconventional superconductivity. Our findings provide groundwork and insights for future studies on how the unconventional SC state, the roton-PDW, and the coexisting charge order originate microscopically from the correlated Z2 topological kagome bands, and on the prospects of emergent topological superconductivity in AV3Sb5.