1 Improvement of local critical current density of REBa2Cu3O7- by the increase in configurational entropy of mixing at the RE site Aichi Yamashita*, Yuta Shukunami, Yoshikazu Mizuguchi* Department of Physics, Tokyo Metropolitan University, Hachioji 192-0397, Japan *Corresponding authors: Aichi Yamashita (aichi@tmu.ac.jp), Yoshikazu Mizuguchi (mizugu@tmu.ac.jp) Abstract REBa2Cu3O7- (RE123, RE: rare earth) is one of the high-temperature superconductors with a transition temperature (Tc) exceeding 90 K. Because of its high Tc and large critical current density (Jc) under magnetic fields, RE123 superconductors have been expected to play a key role in superconductivity application. To accelerate application researches on RE123-based devices, further improvements of Jc characteristics have been desired. In this study, we investigated the effects of high-entropy alloying at the RE site on the superconducting properties, through the measurements of local (intra-grain) Jc (Jclocal) by a remanent magnetization method. We found that Jclocal shows a trend to be improved when four or five RE elements are solved at the RE site, which results in high configurational entropy of mixing (Smix). Because high-entropy alloying can improve Jclocal of RE123 superconductors by modification of the RE site composition and Smix, and the technique would be applicable together with other techniques, such as introduction of nanoscale disorders, our entropy-engineering strategy introduced here would be useful for development of RE123 superconducting materials available under high magnetic fields. 2 Introduction Since the discovery of high-transition temperature (high-Tc) Cu-oxide superconductor1, various kinds of Cu-oxide superconductors have been discovered2-5. Among them, REBa2Cu3O7- (RE123, RE: rare earth) in a thin-film form is a promising material for high-field superconductivity application because of its high Tc exceeding 90 K and high critical current density (Jc) under magnetic fields6. To improve Jc of RE123 films, nanoscale disorders, such as nanoparticles, nanocomposite structure, defects etc., were introduced7-10. However, the current record of Jc of RE123 films are far from the limit expected for an ideal RE123 materials11. To achieve higher Jc in RE123 materials, further development of the method for Jc engineering is needed. Having considered the structural and physical properties of various Cu-oxide superconductors, we find that the RE123 system is relatively difficult to utilize in superconductivity applications because it contains structural and compositional fluctuations. High-Tc and high-Jc superconductivity of RE123 is generally observed in the orthorhombic structure with the space group of Pmmm (#47)12. Decrease in oxygen amount in RE123 in the blocking layer results in a decrease in hole carriers and suppression of high performance of RE123. Recently, improvement of Jc in RE123 film was achieved by over-doping of holes13. The improvement of Jc by chemical-composition tuning would be a desired progress because that can be applied together with the nanoscale fabrication techniques mentioned above. Here, we show another strategy to improve local (intra-grain) Jc (Jclocal) by introducing high-entropy-alloy-type (HEA-type) RE site in RE123 grains. HEA is an alloy containing five or more elements with a concentration range between 5 to 35 at% and hence has a high configurational entropy of mixing (ΔSmix), which is defined as ΔSmix = -R Σi ci ln ci, where ci and R are compositional ratio and the gas constant, respectively13,14. Although the field of HEA had mostly focused on structural materials for the use under extreme conditions, various functionalities have been found in HEAs14,15. In 2014, superconductivity was observed in a HEA, Ti-Zr-Hf-Nb-Ta16. Although the expected pairing mechanisms of superconductivity for the HEA was conventional type, the unique structural and compositional character were welcomed in the field of new superconducting materials. As reviewed in and 18, many HEA superconductors were discovered after the first discovery by Koželj et al. Since 2018, we have developed 3 HEA-type superconducting compounds, in which the HEA concept was applied to complicated compounds having two or more crystallographic sites19. Comparing the HEA effects for superconductors with various crystal structural dimensionality, we found that the disordering effects introduced by the HEA-type site in layered system (BiS2-based superconductor)20 and quasi-two-dimensional system (tetragonal TrZr2, Tr: transition metals)21,22 does not suppress its original Tc in pure phases. In contrast, in three-dimensional systems (NaCl-type metal tellurides23–25 and A15 niobium-based compounds26), Tc of HEA-type phases was clearly lower than that for pure phases. Therefore, in a two-dimensional crystal structure, introduction of HEA-type site does not negatively work on Tc of the superconductor. As a result, we previously reported the synthesis of HEA- type RE123 polycrystalline samples and reported that the increase in ΔSmix does not suppress superconducting properties including Jc26. Let us remind that the technique of mixing RE elements have been used for improvement of Jc in some RE123 materials27. To the best of our knowledge, however, superconducting properties including Jc for RE123 with remarkably high ΔSmix at the RE site was examined in for the first time. In this study, we expanded the study and synthesized various samples of RE123 using lighter RE elements including Dy, Ho, Yb, and Lu. Here, we show that tuning Smix at the RE site could improve intra- grain Jc (Jclocal) of RE123 superconductors. Materials and methods Sample preparation and characterization Polycrystalline samples of REBa2Cu3O7- (RE: Y, La, Nd, Sm, Eu, Dy, Ho, Yb, Lu) were prepared by and CuO (99.9%) were used for the synthesis. To obtain the best superconducting properties of each sample, two-step or three-step sintering was performed. The raw chemicals with a nominal compositional ratio of RE : Ba : Cu = 1 : 2 : 3 were well mixed and pelletized with a diameter of 1 cm. The first sintering condition was 930°C for 20 h, followed by furnace cooling. For the second sintering process, the sample was ground, mixed, 4 pelletized in the same manner as the first one, and heated at 930°C for 8 h and 350°C for 18 h, followed by furnace cooling. The third sintering was performed for samples which showed lower Tc and shielding volume fraction after the second sintering. The condition of the third sintering was 930°C for 8 h, 350°C for 18 h, and 175°C for 12 h, followed by furnace cooling. Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were collected on MiniFlex-600 (RIGAKU), equipped with a D/tex-Ultra high-resolution detector, with a Cu-Kα radiation by a conventional −2 method. Rietveld refinement was performed using RIETAN-FP28. Crystal structure images were drawn using VESTA29. The actual composition of the synthesized polycrystalline samples was investigated by energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) on a scanning electron microscope SEM, TM-3030 (Hitachi), with Swift-ED (Oxford). The obtained compositions are listed in Table S1 (Supplemental data). Measurements of superconducting properties The superconducting properties were investigated using a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) magnetometer on MPMS-3 (Quantum Design). The temperature dependence of magnetic susceptibility (4) was measured after both zero-field cooling (ZFC) and field cooling (FC) with an applied field of ~10 Oe. The temperature dependences of susceptibility for all the samples are shown in Fig. S1 (Supplemental data), and the estimated Tc is listed in Table S1. To estimate Jcglobal of cube-shaped samples, magnetization-magnetic field (M-H) loops were measured. From the obtained M-H loops, Jcglobal was estimated shape, and M is obtained from the width of the M-H curve. Typical results on Jcglobal are plotted as a function of field in Fig. S2 (Supplemental data). To estimate Jclocal, remanent magnetization (mR) was measured31. The Hm dependence of dmR/dlogHm was measured using a sequence for remanent magnetization measurements. First of all, maximum magnetic field (Hm) was applied to the sample, and the magnetic field was set to zero, followed by magnetization measurement, which gives mR (Hm). The same measurements were performed at different maximum fields and temperatures. From the Hm dependence of dmR/dlogHm, Hp2 was estimated from the peak 5 position (Hpeak)31: Hpeak = (6-2√2)Hp2 / 7. Jclocal was calculated from Hp2 = Jclocal r, where r is average grain size. RE123 powder with grain sizes close to 20 m was prepared using micro sieves and used for remanent magnetization measurements. The grain size was estimated using ImageJ32. Results and discussion HEA-type site at the RE site. With increasing number of RE in the site, ΔSmix (ideal value) increases and exceeds 1.5R when five RE ions are solved. Therefore, RE123 samples with more than four RE ions are expected to be HEA-type RE123. In Fig. 1b, inter-grain global Jc (Jcglobal) estimated from the M-H loops is plotted as a function properties because, as mentioned earlier, orthorhombicity is a key structural parameter to achieve higher superconducting characteristics in the RE123 system12,26. Since OP is a good scale for estimating oxygen deficiency in the RE123 system, the use of OP in plotting superconducting properties is useful to extract the effects of Smix at the RE site of REBa2Cu3O7- on the Jc characteristics in the system. According to the data in Fig. 1b, we found that a higher Jcglobals are achieved for samples containing four, six, and seven RE elements. The results motivated us to study Jclocal of RE123 samples with different Smix to clarify the effect of high configurational entropy of mixing to Jc characteristics. Then, seven samples having different Smix and almost comparable OP were selected for this study (highlighted with a square in Fig. 1b). As well, bulk nature of superconductivity of the sample was confirmed through M-T measurements as displayed in Fig. S1 (Supplemental data). According to the number of RE elements, examined samples are labeled RE-1–RE-7 (see Through EDX analyses, we confirmed that the actual composition of the examined samples is comparable to the nominal value, as summarized in Table I. Figure 2a shows powder XRD patterns for all the samples (RE-1–RE-7). All the peaks could be indexed with the orthorhombic RE123 model with a space group of Pmmm (#47). As displayed in Fig. 2b, no peak broadening was observed among seven samples, indicating 6 that the increase in Smix does not affect crystallinity of the polycrystalline RE123 samples. The major peaks shifted according to the average ionic radius at the RE site. As mentioned earlier, however, in the RE123 system, OP is the essential parameter for superconducting properties rather than lattice constants. We, therefore, estimated lattice constants, a and b, using the Rietveld refinements. The typical refinement result with a reliability factor, Rwp = 5.8%, for RE-5 is shown in Fig. 2c, which shows that the orthorhombic model can nicely reproduce the XRD patterns even for a HEA-type sample with five different RE. The estimated lattice constants and the calculated OP are summarized in Table I. To perform remanent magnetization (mR) measurements, powders with similar grain sizes are prepared and observed by SEM. As shown in Fig. 3, the grain size of the powders was almost homogeneous, and the estimation of the average grain size was successful using ImageJ software. The estimated average grain size for RE-1–RE-7 is summarized in Table II. dmR/dlogHm as a function of maximum applied field (Hm). Basically, we observed two peaks in the plots; the first peak observed at lower fields is originating from Jcglobal. Since powder samples were used for the mR measurements, Jcglobal is reasonably quite low. The second peak at higher fields is originating from Jclocal. From the peak position (Hpeak), Jclocal was calculated using the equations Hpeak = (6-2√2)Hp2 / 7 and Hp2 = Jclocal r, where r is average grain size, as described in Materials and methods. The estimated Jclocal at T = 2.0, 4.2, 10.0, 20.0 K for RE-1–RE-7 is plotted in Fig. 5 as a function of number of RE elements. At 20.0 K, there is no clear difference in Jclocal among the seven samples except for slightly higher values for RE-1 and RE-4. At lower temperatures, the difference in Jclocal becomes remarkable. At 4.2 K, Jclocal of RE-3, RE-4, and RE-5 is higher than that of RE-1. Furthermore, at 2.0 K, Jclocal of RE-4 and RE-5 is clearly higher than that of RE-1, RE-2, and RE-3. Our results on Jclocal measured for the polycrystalline RE123 powders suggest that optimization of Smix at the RE site can improve Jclocal of RE123 materials at low temperatures. Having compared the OP parameter for RE-1, RE-4, and RE-5, we found that OP for those samples is almost the same. Therefore, the oxygen amount would be comparable in those samples. Therefore, the 7 improvement of Jclocal by the increase in Smix observed between RE-1, RE-4, and RE-5 would be originating from local structural modification by the disordered RE site and chemical bonds near the RE site. In BiS2-based RE(O,F)BiS2 superconductors, local structure modification in the conducting BiS2 layers by the increase in Smix was observed33. Therefore, we expect that structural modulation was generated in the CuO2 planes by introduction of middle- or high-entropy-alloy-type RE site. The highly disordered RE site and the bonds would modify electronic states and microscopic characteristics of superconductivity in the samples. The lower Jclocal observed for RE-6 and RE-7 than that for RE-4 or RE-5 may be caused by huge disordered states. Although we have no clear scenario of the enhancement of pinning properties by the increase in Smix, our current results encourage further studies on the relationship between configurational entropy of mixing and critical current properties in the RE123 materials. Synthesis of single crystals or thin films of HEA-type REBa2Cu3O7- and investigation on local structure modulations and microscopic characteristics of superconductivity are needed to clarify the HEA effects in RE123. Conclusion Here, we reported the improvement of Jclocal in REBa2Cu3O7- by the increase in Smix at the RE site. Polycrystalline RE123 samples with different Smix were synthesized by solid-state reaction. Through characterization of structural (lattice constants and OP), compositional, and superconducting properties (Tc and shielding fraction), seven samples labeled RE-1–RE-7 were chosen, and remanent magnetization measurements were performed on those samples. At higher temperatures (T = 20.0 K), clear difference in Jclocal was not observed. At lower temperatures (T = 2.0 and 4.2 K), higher Jclocal was observed for RE-4 and RE-5 with a higher Smix as compared to that for RE-1, RE-2, and RE-3 with zero or low entropy of mixing at the RE site. Although the results of the current work showed the merit of high-entropy alloying at lower temperatures only, there should be optimal conditions on constituent RE element, mixing ratio, and Smix, which will achieve higher Jclocal at higher temperatures as well. If the trial was achieved, the HEA concept can be applied to all RE123 practical materials to additionally improve their critical current properties. 8 in this study. Label RE site (EDX) Smix (RE) a (Å) b (Å) OP Tc (K) RE-1 Y 0 92.9 RE-2 92.2 RE-3 93.2 RE-4 92.8 RE-5 93.0 RE-6 92.0 RE-7 91.4 Label Average grain area (m2) Average grain size (m) RE-1 21.7 RE-2 22.6 RE-3 20.5 RE-4 17.9 RE-5 20.7 RE-6 21.0 RE-7 20.9 9 Fig. 1. Structural and in-field Jcglobal characteristics of polycrystalline REBa2Cu3O7-. a. Schematic images of crystal structure of REBa2Cu3O7- and high-entropy alloying at the RE site. The ΔSmix was calculated according to the nominal values of RE concentration. b. Magnetic Jcglobal (T = 2 K, B = 1 T) as a function of by an orange square in the figure 1b. Because of low shielding volume fraction (SVF) estimated from temperature dependence of susceptibility, one RE-2 sample containing Y and Sm was excluded in this study. Some of the Jcglobal data have already been published in . 10 Fig. 2. XRD patterns of REBa2Cu3O7- samples. a. Powder XRD patterns of all the examined samples, RE- 1–RE-7. b. Zoomed plots near the (013) peak for RE-1–RE-7. c. Rietveld refinement result for RE-5. 11 Fig. 3. Grain characterization. a–g. SEM images of REBa2Cu3O7- grains (upper panels) and grain-size analyses (lower panels) for all the samples, RE-1–RE-7. SEM images were analyzed using ImageJ software32. 12 Fig. 4. Results of remanent magnetization measurements. a–g. Maximum magnetic field (0Hm) dependences of the Hm derivative of remanent magnetization (mR), in a form of dmR/dlogHm, for RE-1–RE-7. Fig. 5. Estimated Jclocal as a function of number of RE elements. 13