Arbitrary controlled-phase gate on fluxonium qubits using differential ac-Stark shifts Haonan Xiong,1, ∗ Quentin Ficheux,1, ∗ Aaron Somoroff,1 Long B. Nguyen,1 Ebru Dogan,2 Dario Rosenstock,2 Chen Wang,2 Konstantin N. Nesterov,3 Maxim G. Vavilov,3 and Vladimir E. Manucharyan1 1Department of Physics, Joint Quantum Institute, and Center for Nanophysics and Advanced Materials, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA 2Department of Physics, University of Massachusetts-Amherst, Amherst, MA, 01003, USA 3Department of Physics and Wisconsin Quantum Institute, University of Wisconsin - Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA (Dated: March 9, 2021) Large scale quantum computing motivates the invention of two-qubit gate schemes that not only maximize the gate fidelity but also draw minimal resources. In the case of superconducting qubits, the weak anharmonicity of transmons imposes profound constraints on the gate design, leading to increased complexity of devices and control protocols. Here we demonstrate a resource-efficient control over the interaction of strongly-anharmonic fluxonium qubits. Namely, applying an off- resonant drive to non-computational transitions in a pair of capacitively-coupled fluxoniums induces a ZZ-interaction due to unequal ac-Stark shifts of the computational levels. With a continuous choice of frequency and amplitude, the drive can either cancel the static ZZ-term or increase it by an order of magnitude to enable a controlled-phase (CP) gate with an arbitrary programmed phase shift. The cross-entropy benchmarking of these non-Clifford operations yields a sub 1% error, limited solely by incoherent processes. Our result demonstrates the advantages of strongly-anharmonic circuits over transmons in designing the next generation of quantum processors. Wiring up a pair of superconducting qubits creates an unintentional ZZ-term in the two-qubit Hamiltonian, where Z is the single-qubit Pauli σz-operator. This ZZ- interaction arises from the repulsion between computa- tional and non-computational energy levels of the cou- pled circuit; the effect would be absent for purely two- level systems. On one hand, such an interaction realizes a controlled-phase logical operation, inducing a phase shift on one qubit depending on the state of the other one . On the other hand, a small but non-zero ZZ- term would induce coherent errors during single-qubit operations and lead to quantum cross-talk across the qubit register [3–9]. Therefore, any high-fidelity multi- qubit system must either achieve an in situ control over the ZZ-term or have it permanently eliminated. The for- mer approach invokes flux-tunable qubits and coupler cir- cuits [5, 10–14], which comes at the price of limiting the qubit coherence time by the 1/f flux noise and introduc- ing a new error channel due to the leakage of quantum information into the coupler degrees of freedom . The latter approach critically relies on fine-tuning the circuit parameters at the nanofabrication stage, which both reduces the device yield and narrows the parameter space available for performance optimization [16–20]. A technologically attractive control scheme would be to tune the ZZ-term in a fixed-parameter circuit using a microwave drive [21–23]. Indeed, as long as the drive does not resonantly excite the circuit transitions, its ef- fect would be reduced to ac-Stark shifts, which generally modify the level repulsion structure and hence the mag- nitude of the ZZ-term. Unfortunately, such ideas proved ∗ Equal contribution author impractical for transmon qubits, largely due to their weak anharmonicity, responsible for leakage of quantum infor- mation outside the computational subspace. Recently, a complete suppression of the static ZZ-term was demon- strated in a weakly-anharmonic capacitively-shunted flux qubit thanks to breaking the parity selection rule with an external flux-bias . However, the qubit is unavoidably exposed to the first-order 1/f flux noise, which limits the qubit coherence and hence the gate error. In this work we develop the ideas from Refs. [21–24] for strongly-anharmonic qubits – fluxoniums . We consider fluxoniums that are coupled by a fixed capaci- tance, which is compatible with transmon-based proces- sors, and biased at the half-integer flux quantum, prac- tically eliminating the flux-noise decoherence channel. Previously, we have demonstrated a controlled-Z (CZ) gate in such a system by applying a near-resonant drive to the transition between first and second excited states of one of the qubits . In that experiment, the ZZ- term was naturally suppressed by the special choice of relatively low qubit frequencies (about 100 MHz). Here we (i) explore a much broader range of qubit frequen- cies (up to 1.3 GHz), for which the static ZZ-term is significant, and (ii) use off-resonant driving, the effect of which can be understood in terms of radiation-dressing and light-shifts. Our key new result is that the static ZZ-term can be either suppressed to zero or enhanced to about 10 MHz on demand, resulting in a resource- efficient controlled-phase (CP) gate free of appreciable spurious effects, such as coherent state leakage. The practicality of our scheme is illustrated by the performance of the controlled-phase (CP) gate with an arbitrary programmed phase, implemented by rapidly turning the ZZ-term on and off. We used the arXiv:2103.04491v1 [quant-ph] 8 Mar 2021 2 device is similar to that reported in Ref. . (b) Photograph of the cavity that has the same design as the one used in this experiment. All the microwave drives share the same drive port. The transmitted signal at the cavity frequency is collected from the readout port. The two halves of the cavity are sealed with indium [not shown]. The size of the fluxoniums in this picture is exaggerated for better visibility. (c) Spectrum of allowed transitions of the two-fluxonium circuit extracted from spectroscopy data. The simulated quantity Ωkl−k′l′ defines an on-resonance Rabi frequency that a drive field would induce, assuming the field amplitude is frequency-independent. Note that only transitions between states with different parity are allowed. The green arrow indicates the drive frequency fd used to induce the differential ac-Stark shift. (d) Schematic of the energy level diagram for qubit B in the ground state (left) and qubit B in the excited state (right). A drive at frequency fd pulls the energy level |11⟩ more than the energy level |10⟩, without affecting levels |00⟩ and |01⟩, which is equivalent to a differential ac-Stark shift ξdrive ZZ > 0. (e) Calculated total ZZ-interaction rate ξZZ = −|ξstatic ZZ |+ξdrive ZZ for a fixed drive amplitude (Ω11−21 = 52 MHz). Note, at an appropriate detuning δ, the total qubit-qubit interaction is switched off, we get ξZZ = 0. cross-entropy benchmarking technique to measure the CP gate error for a set of 16 equally spaced phase values, obtaining an error of about 3 × 10−3 per radian, while the single qubit error reaches 1 × 10−3. Notably, both numbers are limited by a manifestly sub-optimal coherence in the current experimental setup, yet, they are already close to the state-of-the-art for transmons. In fact, our phase-averaged CP gate error of 8 × 10−3 is only few times larger than the best result recently demonstrated on a flux-controlled processor . This direct access to the complete family of CP gates is important since they can reduce the required circuit depth in a number of useful algo- rithms [12, 30–34] such as the quantum approximate optimization algorithms (QAOA) and variational quan- tum eigensolvers (VQE) [35–37]. The minimalism of our qubit-qubit interaction control scheme, enabled in large part by the strong anharmonicity of fluxoniums, can provide a significant advantage for constructing large-scale quantum processors. Results We describe experiments on two devices with signifi- cantly distinct spectral properties. In the main article, we focus on the first device, while the Supplementary Note 7 supports our conclusions with the data obtained with the second device. The device geometry (shown in Fig. 1a) and the measurement setup are similar to those previously reported in Ref. . We conventionally label the coupled energy eigenstates as |kl⟩, where the k and l indices are the uncoupled eigenstates of qubits A and B, respectively. For example, qubit A’s (B’s) computational transition is labeled |00⟩ − |10⟩ (|00⟩ − |01⟩) and has a frequency fA = 217.2 MHz (fB = 488.9 MHz). While the qubit lifetimes are above 100 μs, the Ramsey coherence times are in the 10−14 μs interval, limited by insufficient thermalization of the measurement lines. The relevant part of the measured two-qubit spectrum is shown in Fig. 1c. The simulated quantity Ωkl−k′l′ attached to every transition is the Rabi frequency that would be induced by a resonant drive with the same amplitude for all transitions. This frequency scale quantifies the effective coupling of the external drive to the circuit transitions, reflecting both the values of matrix elements of fluxonium charge operators and the asymmetric coupling of the drive field to each qubit (we use only one port to drive both qubits at shown in Fig. 1b). Details of spectroscopic and time-domain characterization of our device are provided 3 in the Supplementary Note 2. Differential ac-Stark shift. The computational states |00⟩, |10⟩, |01⟩, and |11⟩ are separated in energy from non-computational states by at least a few GHz, which exceeds the qubit frequencies by almost an order of mag- nitude. Within the computational subspace, the two- qubit dynamics obeys the Hamiltonian ˆH h = fA ZI 2 + fB IZ 2 + ξZZ ZZ 4 , (1) where Z is the corresponding Pauli matrix and ξZZ = ξstatic ZZ = −357 kHz is the ZZ-interaction strength in the present device. The quantity ξstatic ZZ has a negative sign because the non-computational levels push stronger on level |11⟩ than on the other computational levels. Tuning the magnitude of ξZZ by an externally applied microwave drive can be understood as follows. First, let us note that capacitive coupling splits the otherwise degenerate transitions |10⟩ − |20⟩ and |11⟩ − |21⟩ by ∆ = 8.47 MHz. The same is true for other transition pairs, e.g. |11⟩ − |12⟩, |01⟩ − |02⟩, or |00⟩ − |03⟩, |10⟩ − |13⟩, although the splitting may vary. Consider driving the circuit at the frequency fd, blue-detuned from the |10⟩ − |20⟩ resonance by an amount δ ≫ ∆ (see Fig. 1d). Except for the paired transition |11⟩ − |21⟩, there are no other circuit transitions in the GHz-vicinity, which reduces the effect of the off-resonant drive to creating ac-Stark shifts. Specifically, if qubit B is in the ground state, there is a positive ac-Stark shift δf Stark(Ω, δ) = ( √ Ω2 + δ2 − δ)/2 on the qubit A fre- quency, which can be thought of as pulling level |10⟩ towards level |20⟩ by the δ-detuned drive. However, this shift is larger when qubit B is in the excited state, because the detuning (δ − ∆) is smaller and the effective drive amplitude Ω is larger. Therefore, each qubit ac- quires a differential ac-Stark shift, which is equivalent to modifying the ZZ-term in Eq. (1) as ξZZ = ξstatic ZZ +ξdrive ZZ , where ξdrive ZZ = δf Stark(Ω11−21, δ−∆)−δf Stark(Ω10−20, δ). Because ξstatic ZZ < 0 and ξdrive ZZ > 0 for typical fluxonium parameters, the total qubit-qubit interaction ξZZ in Eq. (1) can be tuned through zero or increased by about an order of magnitude compared to the static value by adjusting the drive frequency and amplitude (see Fig. 1e and Fig. 2b, right panel). Tomography of drive-tuned ZZ-interaction. We verify that the qubit-qubit interaction indeed takes the form of Eq. (1) using a tomography protocol depicted in Fig. 2a . The pulse sequence shown results in the observation of Ramsey-type fringes oscillating at the fre- quency ξZZ. Figure 2b shows the measured oscillations by sweeping the driving frequency around fd ≈ 4.5 GHz and fixing the amplitude such that Ω11−21 = 52 MHz. As the drive frequency approaches either the |10⟩ − |20⟩ or |11⟩ − |21⟩ transitions (marked by the black dashed lines at 4.488 GHz and 4.496 GHz, respectively), the ZZ-interaction rate reaches about 6 MHz before the off- used to measure the interaction rate ξZZ. The qubits evolve under Uac that corresponds to the ZZ-term in Eq. 1. We use a refocusing pulse on each qubit in the middle of the sequence to cancel single-qubit Z rotations. (b) Induced ZZ-interactions (a two-qubit Ramsey-type fringe) as a function of drive fre- quency and amplitude around the |10⟩ − |20⟩ and |11⟩ − |21⟩ transitions. The color scale is proportional to ⟨ZI⟩. The os- cillation rate expectedly increases on approaching a resonance condition (left panel). The induced interaction rate reaches about ξZZ = 5 MHz (right panel). (c) Cancellation of the qubit-qubit interaction. When applying a drive at 4.65 GHz, the ZZ-oscillations slow down and speed back up as the drive amplitude passes though the value Ω11−21 = 30.4 MHz. At this point, we can extract that ξZZ < 20 kHz. resonant ac-Stark shift picture breaks down (Fig. 2c. b, right inset). Beyond that point, the drive field and the two non-computational transitions undergo a coherent energy exchange, witnessed by the detection of rapidly oscillating ripple features in Fig. 2b. The ZZ-interaction can also be controlled by off-resonantly driving the pair of doublets of transitions |00⟩−|03⟩, |10⟩−|13⟩, |01⟩−|31⟩, |00⟩ − |30⟩, near the frequency f ′ d ≈ 6.5 GHz, where we obtained ξZZ > 10 MHz (Supplementary Note 6 and Supplementary Fig. 6). Furthermore, with a more op- timal structure of the non-computational transitions, we observed ξZZ > 23 MHz in the second device (Supple- mentary Note 7). The immediate application of our differential ac-Stark shift phenomenon is to permanently cancel the static ZZ- interaction between qubits. This is achieved by applying a microwave tone at the frequency fd = 4.65 GHz and the amplitude such that Ω11−21 = 30 MHz (see Fig. 2 c). 4 values. The process tomography χ-matrix reproduces the ideal process with a fidelity F QP T φ=π = 0.959 and F QP T φ=π/2 = 0.977. (c) Cross-entropy benchmarking (XEB) for the phases φ = π/2 and π corresponding to the process tomography shown in (a,b). We extract the Pauli and gate errors from the decay of the XEB sequence fidelity with the number of cycles. The gate fidelity at φ = π/2 reaches (99.2 ± 0.1)%. (d) Fidelity of the controlled-phase gate family. The green circles are obtained by cross-entropy benchmarking and the magenta squares are obtained by master equation simulations using the average T1 and T E 2 shown in As we fine-tune the drive amplitude, the two-qubit Ram- sey fringe slows down from the static value of 357 kHz to the value ξZZ < 20 kHz, beyond which the oscil- lations cannot be resolved due to the qubit’s finite co- herence time. We characterized single-qubit operations, in the presence of the ZZ-canceling drive, using conven- tional randomized benchmarking sequences . In the case of individual bechmarking, the average single-qubit gate fidelity is 0.9969 (45 ns long pulses) for qubit A and 0.9991 for qubit B (26 ns long pulses). The simultane- ous qubit benchmarking requires longer pulse sequences, which reduces the fidelity to 0.9963 ± 0.0001 for qubit A and 0.9957±0.0001 for qubit B (See Supplementary Note 4 for details). Arbitrary controlled-phase (CP) gate. The ZZ- term in Eq. (1) can be switched on and off on a time scale of about 10 ns using Gaussian-edge pulses supplemented with the commonly used derivative removal (DRAG) dis- tortion . During the time interval of ξZZ(t) ̸= 0, the states |10⟩ and |11⟩ accumulate different phases φ10 and φ11, which is equivalent to the action of a unitary evolution operator U = diag(1, e−iφ10, 1, e−iφ11) in the computational subspace. Using virtual Z rotations , the accumulated phase can be entirely assigned to any state such as |11⟩ to implement a controlled-phase oper- ation UCP(φ) = diag(1, 1, 1, e−iφ) where φ = φ11 − φ10. In principle, one can modulate both the drive frequency and amplitude during the gate pulse, but for simplicity we fixed the drive frequency and tried two different val- ues, fd = 4.545 GHz (detuned by 49 MHz from transition |11⟩−|21⟩) and f ′ d = 6.665 GHz (detuned by 55 MHz from |00⟩ − |30⟩, see Supplementary Note 6). We start the CP gate characterization by performing quantum process tomography (QPT). The process to- mography matrix (the χ-matrix) is obtained by preparing 16 independent input states, applying the CP gate, and performing the state tomography of the final quantum state (see Supplementary Note 5). By com- paring the measured χ-matrix to the theoretical one, we perform the initial tune-up of the pulse parameters re- quired to implement the CP gate with the given phase φ: gate duration, drive amplitude, DRAG coefficient, and the phases of the virtual Z-rotations. Optimized QPT examples for φ = π and φ = π/2, with the single-qubit Z-rotations adjusted to exhibit only the ZZ evolution, are shown in Figs. 3a,b. The χ-matrix fidelity reached 0.959 for φ = π and 0.977 for φ = π/2, likely limited by the state preparation and measurement (SPAM) errors. At φ = π the CP gate belongs to the Clifford group, i.e. it becomes the controlled-Z gate. Hence, it can 5 be characterized using randomized benchmarking (RB), which evades SPAM limitations. Using procedures simi- lar to those described in Ref. , we optimized the gate pulses and obtained a CZ gate fidelity of 0.989 ± 0.001 at fd = 4.545 GHz and 0.991 ± 0.001 at f ′ d = 6.665 GHz. Next, we characterize the CP gate at φ = π using the cross-entropy (XEB) benchmarking technique, which is applicable to non-Clifford operations, and also evades the SPAM errors . The XEB procedure consists of a succession of cycles, each composed of one randomly cho- sen single-qubit Clifford gate on each qubit and a given CP gate. The sequence fidelity is calculated from the cross-entropy between the measured and expected qubit state distribution , which decays exponentially with the number of cycles (see Methods). The optimal gate parameters are found by optimizing the sequence fidelity at a fixed number of cycles with the Nelder-Mead algo- rithm. The XEB procedure applied to the CZ gate at fd = 4.545 GHz yields a gate fidelity of 0.988 ± 0.001 which agrees with the results of randomized benchmark- ing and hence validates the use of XEB for other values φ of the controlled phase. Finally, we apply the XEB procedure to a family of CP gates with the value of φ equally spaced by π/16. The extracted gate error grows approximately linearly in φ with a slope of about 3 × 10−3 per radian (Fig. 3d, cir- cular markers). For φ = π/16, the CP gate error reaches 2 × 10−3, which is close to the experimental resolution limit. In order to understand the origin of the gate error, we performed detailed master-equation simulations of the driven two-fluxonium system (see Supplementary Note 8). Our numerical model closely reproduces the data while relying only on experimentally measured parameters (Fig. 3d, square markers). According to the model, the error is entirely due to incoherent processes, while the coherent error is absent down to the 10−4 level thanks to the strong anharmonicity of fluxonium’s non-computational transitions. Discussion The off-resonant drive in our experiment essentially re- places the original (undriven) qubit states with the “dressed” ones, e.g. |10⟩ → |10⟩ + (λ/2)|20⟩ and |11⟩ → |11⟩ + (λ/2)|21⟩ in the case shown in Fig. 1d, where λ ≈ Ω/δ. It is this dressing that leads to the tunable in- teraction rate ξZZ in Eq. 1. One can further show that in the presence of energy relaxation between the undressed single-qubit states |20⟩ and |10⟩ at a rate 1/T (2→1) 1 , the dressed qubit transition |00⟩−|10⟩ inherits a pure dephas- ing rate λ2/8T (2→1) 1 . Remarkably, dressing due to the ZZ-cancellation drive is so weak, λ2 ≈ 0.04, that even for a low relaxation time T (2→1) 1 ≈ 5 μs in our present experi- ment, the extra dephasing becomes significant only at the 1 ms level. Thus, the highest measured single-dressed- qubit gate fidelity reached 0.999, and it is limited by the undressed coherence time of about 10 − 15 μs. In other words, our scheme for eliminating the ZZ-interaction has practically no adverse effects, and hence can be generally used to cancel the quantum cross-talk in fluxonium-based processors. During the CP gate, both ξZZ and λ temporarily grow stronger, and hence the energy relaxation of the non- computational transitions becomes an important contrib- utor to the incoherent gate error. Let us note that the |1⟩ − |2⟩ transition of fluxoniums has the frequency and charge matrix element of typical transmons, whose re- laxation time usually belongs to the 10 − 100 μs range. Therefore, we expect the same range for T (2→1) 1 in flux- oniums once the fabrication and thermalization pro- cedures are properly optimized. In this case, a ZZ- interaction rate in the range ξZZ = 5 − 10 MHz can be induced with no decoherence exposure at the level of a few hundred microseconds. In fact, the numerical model projects a CP gate error (for φ = π) well in the 10−4 range for the next generation of fluxonium devices. The demonstrated all-microwave control over the ZZ- interaction is technologically attractive for scaling-up su- perconducting quantum processors. Our scheme does not require a close arrangement of qubit frequencies, in con- trast to the case of the cross-resonance (CR) gate for transmons, which would mitigate the spectral crowd- ing issues and enable multiplexing of the qubit control (for example, here we used only one input port for the entire experiment). Furthermore, the CP gate can be activated by a broad selection of drive frequencies in the GHz-range and the required drive power is com- parable to single-qubit rotations . Most importantly, while certain circuit parameter combinations would fur- ther mitigate the errors, the CP gate requires no special parameter combinations and hence would be tolerant to fabrication variability. For example, the qubit frequency could be as low as 100 MHz, as in our earlier demon- stration of the CZ-gate , but it can also be around 200−500 MHz (main device here) or even 700−1.3 GHz (second device here). Among the previously explored two-qubit gates with a high degree of flexibility, our scheme is most reminiscent of the resonator-induced phase (RIP) gate for transmons. The RIP gate populates an auxiliary bus mode with off-resonant photons to induce a differential Stark shift. In comparison, our CP gate requires no auxiliary modes or complex pulse-shaping, has closely- confined driven dynamics, and already enables a higher fidelity in devices with very sub-optimal coherence, all thanks to the strong anharmonicity of fluxoniums. Methods Experimental setup. We use the same readout and initialization procedures described in Ref. . The de- vice is embedded into a rectangular copper cavity res- onator with a resonance frequency fC = 7.538 GHz and linewidth κ/2π = 5 MHz, thermally anchored to the base plate of a dilution refrigerator at 14 mK. External driv- ing is provided through a single input port to the cavity 6 and the transmission signal is monitored using a stronger coupled output port. Spectroscopy vs. flux data was used to accurately extract circuit parameters and cal- culate transition matrix elements. The table of relevant coherence times is provided below. T1 (μs) T R 2 (μs) T E 2 (μs) |00⟩ − |10⟩ 158 − 207 10 − 12 |00⟩ − |01⟩ 116 − 141 13 |11⟩ − |21⟩ 4.9 − 6.2 2.6 − 2.8 3.3 T R 2 , and spin echo coherence time T E 2 . The ranges corre- sponds to time fluctuations during the experiment. We perform a single-shot joint readout of the two qubit states by preamplifying the readout signal with the Josephson Traveling Parametric Wave Ampli- fier (JTWPA) . The equilibrium population of the two qubit states are obtained by fitting the single-shot histograms with 4 Gaussian distributions, and we compensate the readout error with an empirical model. Prior to each experiment, the qubits are intialized by populating the cavity with a large number of photons, which conveniently prepares the two qubits in a mixed state with the excited state populations of 69 % and 82 %, respectively. Such a degree of state initialization is sufficient to perform accurate gate error measurement, including the quantum process tomography. The details of experimental procedures are provided in the supple- mentary material. Cross-entropy benchmarking (XEB). The corrected populations are used to calculate the cross-entropy be- tween the experimental populations and the expected populations starting from the state after the initializa- tion pulse. The cross-entropy yields the XEB sequence fidelity. By fitting the sequence fidelity versus number of cycles with Apm + B, the Pauli error per cycle rP cycle is given by rcycle = N − 1 N (1 − p) (2) rP cycle = N + 1 N rcycle (3) where N is the dimension of the system. Then we extract the CP gate Pauli error rP CP from the equation (1−rP cycle) = (1−rP A)(1−rP B)(1−rP CP), where rP A, rP B are the average single-qubit Pauli error measured from the simultaneous RB experiment described in Supplemen- tary Note 4. The arbitrary CP gate fidelity is calculated by converting Pauli error back to the gate error rCP as shown in Fig. 3c and Fig. 3d.