Absence of conventional room temperature superconductivity at high pressure in carbon doped H3S Tianchun Wang,1, ∗ Motoaki Hirayama,1, 2 Takuya Nomoto,1 Takashi Koretsune,3 Ryotaro Arita,1, 2 and José A. Flores-Livas4, 2, † 1Department of Applied Physics, University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan 2RIKEN Center for Emergent Matter Science, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, 351-0198, Japan 3Department of Physics, Tohoku University, 6-3 Aza-Aoba, Sendai, 980-8578 Japan 4Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Roma La Sapienza, Piazzale Aldo Moro 5, I-00185 Roma, Italy (Dated: April 13, 2021) In this work, we show that the same theoretical tools that successfully explain other hydrides sys- tems under pressure seem to be at odds with the recently claimed conventional room temperature superconductivity of the carbonaceous sulfur hydride. We support our conclusions with I) the ab- sence of a dominant low-enthalpy stoichiometry and crystal structure in the ternary phase diagram. II) Only the thermodynamics of C-doping phases appears to be marginally competing in enthalpy against H3S. III) Accurate results of the transition temperature given by ab initio Migdal-Eliashberg calculations differ by more than 110 K to recently theoretical claims explaining the high-temperature superconductivity in carbonaceous-hydrogen sulfide. A novel mechanism of superconductivity or a breakdown of current theories in this system is possibly behind the disagreement. Over the last decade, pressurized hydride compounds have led the path to many important landmarks in su- perconductivity. Notable cases include silane in 2008 , H3S in 2014 which has triggered most of the field, and the confirmation of high-Tc in LaH10 by independent teams in 2019 [4–6]. This unfolding success of important breakthroughs is largely due to the symbiosis of theory, computation, and experimental sciences, which has accel- erated the discovery by pointing to niches of interesting systems [7–11]. Recently, Snider et al. achieved a decades-old quest; they reported solid evidence of the first room- temperature superconductor (RTS) made of carbon- sulfur-hydrogen. Although the report set a landmark in the annals of science, there are still many open ques- tions surrounding this important discovery. For in- stance, the exact stoichiometry of the claimed carbona- ceous hydrogen sulfide that exhibits RTS is still elusive. Moreover, there is a debate with confronted arguments on the possibility of unusual superconducting features in all superhydrides at odds with the Bardeen-Cooper- Schrieffer theory [13–15]. It includes the sharp drop of electric resistivity at Tc and its dependence on a mag- netic field . It is worth noticing that the room-temperature superconductor reported at 287.7 K at 267 GPa, has not been confirmed by magnetic suscepti- bility measurements . But, amidst such unsolved puz- zles, perhaps the most intriguing question is: what is the crystalline structure of the RTS? Certainly, it is difficult to measure the crystalline struc- ture of a tiny sample under extremely high pressure, ad- ditionally complicated by the small scattering ratio of low-Z hydrogen. Hence, to clarify the mechanism of su- perconductivity and electronic and phonon properties, it is highly desirable to know the crystalline structure from the theoretical side. So far, there have been two works on crystal structure prediction for C-S-H ternary systems . In these works, plausible structures were explored under high-pressure p = 100 GPa and 100- 200 GPa , which reported many structure candidates for high-Tc superconductivity, including CSH7. How- ever, these candidates are not thermodynamically sta- ble, and also, the pressure explored is much lower than p ∼270 GPa, at which the RTS was reported. In this Letter, we shed light on different open issues of the RTS. Resorting to structure prediction, we en- larged the chemical composition search and estimated C-S-H ternary systems’ formation enthalpy at 250 GPa. We also analyzed the doped phases, from their ther- modynamic stability to superconducting properties and found flagrant differences compared to recent theoreti- cal reports on C-doped H3S . On the transition temperatures obtained within virtual crystal approxima- tion (VCA) and McMillan-Allen-Dynes (MAD) theory, presumably, an electronic smearing parameter holds to overestimate Tc’s theoretical value. In contrast, we found more than 110 K difference in Tc between experimen- tal and the converged ab initio values. Our theoretical results show that the room-temperature superconductor cannot be explained by conventional superconductivity of carbon-doped H3S phases nor other stoichiometries ex- plored so far. Due to the prohibited computational overhead of cal- culating a huge number of available compositions in the ternary system, we focus our strategy on exploring only representative sections of the compositional landscape in detail. Fig. 1 shows the C-S-H ternary convex hull for se- lected compositions at 250 GPa (see details in Ref. ). We find CSH7 (enthalpy of formation ∼0 meV) and the absence of a dominant (low enthalpy) phase, which is in agreement with previous works . In our searches, we observed that different sections of the compositional arXiv:2104.03710v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 12 Apr 2021 2 C-S-H convex hull of the formation enthalpy calculated for selected stoichiometries at 250 GPa. Elemental phases and other low-lying enthalpy compositions are coloured in yellow, in red, unstable, and from blue to dark-blue, chemical compositions with negative formation enthalpy. At this pressure, the lowest enthalpy phase is H3S (130 meV), followed by doped phases. However, already at 3.7 % of C incorporation, the enthalpy difference between the parental phase and the dope one changes by 25 meV or ∼290 K. Representative low-enthalpy structures of selected compositions are displayed outside the ternary hull. Intriguingly, in all the different regions studied in the phase diagram, the motifs with the lowest enthalpy correspond to molecular parts, either HxC and HxS, but nothing points towards a fused, covalently bonded C-S-H compound. space were governed by anticipated trends. The high content of carbon and hydrogen (top left ar- eas of the Gibbs triangle) will form CH2 and CH4. In- creasing hydrogen content (H5−16) in these areas will then produce phase separation to H2 and CHx, which are compositions with formation enthalpy well above 100 meV/atom (not shown). Moving to the middle sec- tion of the triangle, for C and S on 1:1 ratio with in- creasing H; H3, H4, H5 and H6; these stoichiometries are highly energetic and unlikely to occur. In these phases, decompositions to H2, H3S or CHx are seen. CSH7 and CSH10 are interesting compositions that be- come metastable due to their conformation and "poor" metallicity. These compositions are formed by H3S and CHx units with weak Van der Walls interac- tion between them (detrimental to high-Tc phonon- superconductivity). Increasing the hydrogen above H10 in the ternary compounds, C-H binaries or S-H binaries also results in phase separation. Most of the found phases present simple patterns, and these can be classified al- most as amorphous phases. Coming back to the ratio of C0.25S0.75, the same pattern emerges, shown in the plotted figure (C0.25S0.75H3; the characteristic cubic ar- rangement of sulfur-hydrogen with distinctive layers and enclosed CH4 units (a poor metal). Moving to C0.5S and lower hydrogen (below H2) content seems odd for high-Tc superconductivity since decreasing the hydrogen content reduces the chances of finding key ingredients: metallic phases with light atomic mass. Explorations below the CSH3 range with C points towards the C-C formation of stable covalent bonds; however, these are semiconduct- ing phases. In sulfur-rich areas, S-S metallic phases are found. However, these are unlikely to be responsible for the RTS. The region close to the lowest enthalpy (H3S) phase is the most relevant in the compositional space. The vary- ing C doping into the matrix of H3S (C-substitution in S sites) is the most reasonable solution from the ther- modynamical point of view: we report that enthalpy de- creases from -2 meV/atom at 25%C to -50 for 12.5%C, to -77 meV/atom for 8.3%C, to -95 meV/atom for 5.5%C, and finally to -105 meV/atom for 3.7%C, and so on un- til reaching the H3S with enthalpy of -130 meV/atom (clearly the dominant composition). Judging by the con- vex hull of stability, C-doping offers a possible structure model to explain the RTS, which is not new for other sys- tems (see Ref. for a review). Nevertheless, introducing carbon into the H3S lattice comes at a price: it plays a 3 Calculated doping-superconductivity-pressure phase diagrams using two protocols: the left panel shows Tc with a non-converged parameter (see text) and the right panel with the controlled and converged protocol. The abscissa in both panels displays pressure in the range where the RTS was reported. The ordinate represents the carbon doping as simulated by the VCA and the colour bar shows the estimated Tc given by the MAD-formula. The Coulomb parameter μ∗ is set to 0.1. Maximum and minimum Tc’s for each panel are shown. Beyond the technical validity of the VCA, it is clear that independently of doping and pressure, an RTS is absent for the converged case. detrimental role to single-phase stability (at 3.7 % of C doping level, the enthalpy difference between the parental phase and the doped one changes by 25 meV or ∼290 K), and excessive doping could also worsen the pristine elec- tronic structure of H3S. It has been reported that, at least in the other two major systems (H3S and LaH10), the highly symmetric arrangements of atoms in hydrides under pressure dis- play a van Hove singularity (VHS) near the Fermi level (EF) . In the case of H3S (close to the C-S-H case), the VHS peak resides slightly lower than EF . From the electronic point of view, it is favourable for super- conductivity to attempt electron doping. Recent studies based on the McMillan-Allen-Dynes (MAD) for- mula have shown exceptionally that Tc of CxS1−xH3 can be as high as room-temperature when x is ∼0.05 . However, it is also well documented that the MAD for- mula is not a good approximation when the electron- phonon coupling is strong or when the density of states (DOS) has a significant energy dependence around the VHS (as for electron doping) . Let us first examine the effects of carrier doping onto the possible explanation of the RTS. Fig. 2 confronts two phase diagrams of doping-pressure-Tc: the left one repro- duces satisfactorily the one presented by Ge et al. . The right panel (this work) shows quite the opposite phase diagram, with much lower Tc values. Notice- able, when calculating the Eliashberg function α2F(ω), a sensitive parameter is the broadening width δ of the smearing for the double-delta integral. The left dia- gram in Fig. 2 is the result using the broadening width δ = 0.002 Ry, and the right one is the result produced by δ = 0.014 Ry. Since the results have significant de- pendence on the broadening width δ, to reach conver- gence, we choose the value of δ so that it can reproduce N(0), where N(0) is the DOS at the Fermi level given by the tetrahedron method using a sufficiently dense mesh . We ascribe the difference between the plots from a lack of convergence in the article by Ge et al. ; Tc is overestimated, especially with the MAD formula when too narrow smearing is used for the integral of the electron-phonon line width in the momentum space. The right panel summarizes Tc using a protocol and carefully tested electronic parameters that reproduce theoret- ical values for H3S and LaH10 . Besides the discussions above, another shortcoming of the MAD-formula is the Coulomb interaction, which is introduced phenomenologically by a pseudo Coulomb pa- rameter, μ∗, with a value set around 0.1. However, there is no reason why these values should be transferred at high pressure. In our case, the Migdal-Eliashberg (ME) calculation used the Coulomb interaction kernel, in which we solved the gap equation directly to get rid of μ∗. Thus, the ME calculation is more robust and straight- forward, without any empirical parameters involved . Using accurate first-principles Migdal-Eliashberg calcu- lations (see details in ), for which the doping effects are described by the VCA, we found that Tc of 4 Tc vs pressure: Theoretical results (this work) are estimated using different methods. Experimental results reported by Dias’s group on C-S-H , Eremets’s group on H-S and D-H and theoretic results on H3S are also shown. Independent of the methodology used, our results suggest a sizable deviation as large as 110 K between the most reliable theoretical estimations and experiments on Tc (see details in Ref. and Supplemental Information). the doped phases of H3S are hardly enhanced by ∼20 K and decreases as a function of pressure (red line shown in Fig. 3). This tendency is also observed in H3S [33–36] and LaH10 . In addition to the shortcomings of the MAD formula used in Fig. 2, another concern is the validity of VCA when mixing atomic potentials for non-neighbouring species. The theoretical accuracy of VCA to estimate doping phase diagrams of hydrides under pressure is be- yond the scope of this work. However, we would like to briefly discuss and compare the VCA and the supercell calculation, a more conventional scheme to treat the dop- ing simulations. The VCA calculation is performed in the primitive unit cell (4 atoms) and depends enormously on the atomic potential, alchemically constructed via a sin- gle virtual atom. For systems with a low doping ratio, the supercell contains 50 to 100 atoms. Compared to VCA, the supercell calculation is computationally costly, especially for the electron-phonon estimation. Neverthe- less, it is presently the most accurate method for treating doping since it can capture electronic features and crystal symmetry breaking. Fig. 3 summarizes the up-to-date available values of Tc from experiments (Snider et al. ) and theory (this work). We compare the supercell calculation with the one using the VCA approximation for estimations with C atom substitution. In Fig. 3, lines indicate the Tc de- pendence upon pressure calculated in this work with dif- ferent levels of theory, from VCA (MAD-formula), VCA (ME) and supercell (ME). It is noticeable that the level of theory employed does not play a role in describing what one could consider as an RTS. While the results given by the three methods are qualitatively consistent, it con- firms the absence of RTS in carbon-doped phases of H3S. In the same figure, we include the ME-Tc for H3S and CxS1−xH3 with x = 8.3%. At 250 GPa, Tc is marginally increased by only ∼ 5 K, and at 300 GPa, Tc for the C-doped phase is even lower than that of H3S. The en- hancement of superconductivity by C atoms, which has lighter mass, is not significant because CxS1−xH3 with a low doping ratio has a similar electronic structure and electron-phonon coupling characteristics as compared to H3S. We refer the readers to the Supplemental Informa- tion for extensive details on the electronic band struc- tures, phonon density of states, and a thorough investi- gation of different doping models and how the electronic singularity is altered by carbon. Finally, we reach two contradicting points: on the one hand, doping appears to be the most likely explanation for the RTS. However, a low degree of doping does not alter the electronic structure, and Tc is close to the re- ported Tc of H3S, as shown in Fig. 2. And on the other hand, large doping alters the so-called fine-tuning of the VHS drastically. In summary, from the thermodynamic perspective, substituting carbon in sulfur sites or interstitial space increases the formation enthalpy (it becomes less sta- ble). Introducing carbon in the Im3m phase of H3S plays against high-Tc, changes the shape of DOS, de- couples phonons, slightly modify the lattice and factors down Tc. Perhaps the current level of theory is insuf- ficient to reconcile the scenario with the present experi- mental results. We conclude by asserting that in previous systems (H3S and LaH10 ), remarkable compati- bility between theoretical and experimental sides in Tc and phase diagram is found; for the carbonaceous-sulfur hydride, this might not be the case. We would like to thank M. Eremets for fruitful discus- sions. This work was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (No. 19K14654 and No. 19H05825), "Program for Promoting Researches on the Supercom- puter Fugaku" from MEXT, Japan. ∗ tianchun.wang@riken.jp † jose.flores@uniroma1.it M. Eremets, I. Trojan, S. Medvedev, J. Tse, and Y. Yao, Science 319, 1506 (2008). A. P. Drozdov, M. I. Eremets, I. A. Troyan, V. Kseno- fontov, and S. I. Shylin, Nature 525, 73 (2015). 5 M. Einaga, M. Sakata, T. Ishikawa, K. Shimizu, M. I. Eremets, A. P. Drozdov, I. A. Troyan, N. Hirao, and Y. Ohishi, Nature Physics (2016). M. Somayazulu, M. Ahart, A. K. Mishra, Z. M. Geballe, M. Baldini, Y. Meng, V. V. Struzhkin, and R. J. Hemley, Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 027001 (2019). A. P. Drozdov, P. P. Kong, V. S. Minkov, S. P. Besedin, M. A. Kuzovnikov, S. Mozaffari, L. Balicas, F. F. Bal- akirev, D. E. Graf, V. B. Prakapenka, E. Greenberg, D. A. Knyazev, M. Tkacz, and M. I. Eremets, Nature I. Errea, F. Belli, L. Monacelli, A. Sanna, T. Koretsune, T. Tadano, R. Bianco, M. Calandra, R. Arita, F. Mauri, and J. A. Flores-Livas, Nature 578, 66 (2020). J. A. Flores-Livas, L. Boeri, A. Sanna, G. Profeta, R. Arita, and M. Eremets, Physics Reports 856, 1 (2020), a perspective on conventional high-temperature superconductors at high pressure: Methods and materi- als. T. Bi, N. Zarifi, T. Terpstra, and E. Zurek, in Reference Module in Chemistry, Molecular Sciences and Chemical Engineering (Elsevier, 2019). C. J. Pickard, I. Errea, and M. I. Eremets, Annual Re- view of Condensed Matter Physics 11, 57 (2020). L. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Lv, and Y. Ma, Nature Reviews Materials 2, 1 (2017). A. R. Oganov, C. J. Pickard, Q. Zhu, and R. J. Needs, Nature Reviews Materials 4, 331 (2019). E. Snider, N. Dasenbrock-Gammon, R. McBride, M. Debessai, H. Vindana, K. Vencatasamy, K. V. Lawler, A. Salamat, and R. P. Dias, Nature 586, 373 (2020). J. E. Hirsch and F. Marsiglio, “Absence of high tem- perature superconductivity in hydrides under pressure,” (2020), arXiv:2010.10307 [cond-mat.supr-con]. J. Hirsch and F. Marsiglio, Physica C: Superconductivity and its Applications , 1353866 (2021). J. E. Hirsch and F. Marsiglio, Phys. Rev. B 103, 134505 E. F. Talantsev, Superconductor Science and Technology M. Dogan and M. L. Cohen, Physica C: Superconductiv- ity and its Applications , 1353851 (2021). Y. Sun, Y. Tian, B. Jiang, X. Li, H. Li, T. Iitaka, X. Zhong, and Y. Xie, Phys. Rev. B 101, 174102 (2020). W. Cui, T. Bi, J. Shi, Y. Li, H. Liu, E. Zurek, and R. J. Hemley, Phys. Rev. B 101, 134504 (2020). Y. Ge, F. Zhang, R. P. Dias, R. J. Hemley, and Y. Yao, Materials Today Physics 15, 100330 (2020). S. X. Hu, R. Paul, V. V. Karasiev, and R. P. Dias, “Carbon-Doped Sulfur Hydrides as Room-Temperature Superconductors at 270 GPa,” (2020), arXiv:2012.10259 [cond-mat.supr-con]. The compositional and configurational space of C-S-H was explored using the minima-hopping method [39–42]. The representative compositions of the ternary phase di- agram were carried out with different formula units (con- taining up to 48 atoms) and carried out under pressure. Energy, atomic forces, and stresses were evaluated using the density-functional theory (further details are included in the Supplemental Information). J. A. Flores-Livas, T. Wang, T. Nomoto, T. Koret- sune, Y. Ma, R. Arita, and M. Eremets, arXiv preprint R. Akashi, Phys. Rev. B 101, 075126 (2020). W. L. McMillan, Phys. Rev. 167, 331 (1968). P. B. Allen and R. C. Dynes, Phys. Rev. B 12, 905 (1975). P. B. Allen and B. Mitrović, Theory of Superconducting Tc, Solid State Physics, Vol. 37 (Academic Press, 1983) pp. 1 – 92. P. E. Blöchl, O. Jepsen, and O. K. Andersen, Phys. Rev. T. Koretsune and R. Arita, Computer Physics Commu- nications 220, 239 (2017). T. Wang, T. Nomoto, Y. Nomura, H. Shinaoka, J. Ot- suki, T. Koretsune, and R. Arita, Phys. Rev. B 102, W. Sano, T. Koretsune, T. Tadano, R. Akashi, and R. Arita, Phys. Rev. B 93, 094525 (2016). To study the doping effect of C atoms in CxS1−xH3, we used I) the virtual crystal approximation (VCA) and performed a thorough examination of CxS1−xH3 with x ranging from 1% to 8.3%, in which for the vir- tual atom we use the potential VVCA = xVC + (1 − x)VS; II) the actual supercell calculation for C atoms doping with 8% ratio. We use Quantum ESPRESSO for the DFT and DFPT calculations , with the exchange- correlation functional proposed by Perdew, Burke, and Ernzerhof . For C and S atoms, the optimized norm- conserving Vanderbilt pseudopotential (ONCVPSP) was employed. For H atom, we use the ultrasoft pseu- dopotentials provided in PSLibrary . To gener- ate VVCA, we use the tool virtualv2.x implemented in Quantum ESPRESSO. For the DFT calculation, the cutoff energy of the plane waves for wavefunction expan- sion is set to be 80 Ry, and cutoff of the charge den- sity is 320 Ry. For calculations using VVCA, we use an 18×18×18 k-mesh and a 9×9×9 q-mesh for the phonon calculation and a 36×36×36 k-mesh for the electron- phonon calculation. For the electron-phonon calculation and the Eliashberg calculation, the electronic eigenener- gies and wave-functions are calculated using a 36×36×36 k-mesh. We have also performed supercell calculation for CxS1−xH3 with x = 0.083, using a 3×2×2 supercell. The supercell calculation is performed on a 6×6×6 k-mesh and a 3×3×3 q-mesh for the DFPT calculation, and a 12×12×12 k-mesh is employed for the electron-phonon interaction and Eliashberg calculation. In the Eliashberg calculation, we use an RPA-type static Coulomb ker- nel, with a 6×6×6 k-mesh and a 3×3×3 q-mesh for the Coulomb calculation. A. J. Flores-Livas, A. Sanna, and E. Gross, Eur. Phys. J. B 89, 1 (2016). R. Akashi, M. Kawamura, S. Tsuneyuki, Y. Nomura, and R. Arita, Phys. Rev. B 91, 224513 (2015). R. Akashi, W. Sano, R. Arita, and S. Tsuneyuki, Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 075503 (2016). I. Errea, M. Calandra, C. J. Pickard, J. R. Nelson, R. J. Needs, Y. Li, H. Liu, Y. Zhang, Y. Ma, and F. Mauri, Nature 532, 81 (2016). V. S. Minkov, V. B. Prakapenka, E. Greenberg, and M. I. Eremets, Angewandte Chemie International Edition 59, S. Mozaffari, D. Sun, V. S. Minkov, A. P. Drozdov, D. Knyazev, J. B. Betts, M. Einaga, K. Shimizu, M. I. Eremets, L. Balicas, et al., Nature communications 10, S. Goedecker, The Journal of Chemical Physics 120, 9911 6 M. Amsler and S. Goedecker, The Journal of Chemical Physics 133, 224104 (2010). J. A. Flores-Livas, M. Amsler, C. Heil, A. Sanna, L. Boeri, G. Profeta, C. Wolverton, S. Goedecker, and E. K. U. Gross, Phys. Rev. B 93, 020508(R) (2016). J. A. Flores-Livas, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter L. Nordheim, Annalen der Physik 401, 607 (1931). L. Bellaiche and D. Vanderbilt, Phys. Rev. B 61, 7877 P. Giannozzi, O. Andreussi, T. Brumme, O. Bunau, M. B. Nardelli, M. Calandra, R. Car, C. Cavazzoni, D. Ceresoli, M. Cococcioni, et al., Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 29, 465901 (2017). S. Baroni, S. de Gironcoli, A. Dal Corso, and P. Gian- nozzi, Rev. Mod. Phys. 73, 515 (2001). J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3865 (1996). D. R. Hamann, Phys. Rev. B 88, 085117 (2013). D. Vanderbilt, Phys. Rev. B 41, 7892 (1990). A. Dal Corso, Computational Materials Science 95, 337