1 Roadmap of spin-orbit torques Qiming Shao, Member, IEEE, email: eeqshao@ust.hk Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology Peng Li, email: peng.li@auburn.edu Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Auburn University Luqiao Liu, Member, IEEE, email: luqiao@mit.edu Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology Hyunsoo Yang, email: eleyang@nus.edu.sg Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore Shunsuke Fukami, Member, IEEE, email: s-fukami@riec.tohoku.ac.jp Research Institute of Electrical Communication, Tohoku University Armin Razavi, Hao Wu, Member, IEEE, Kang Wang, Fellow, IEEE, email: arvinrazavi@ucla.edu, wuhaoiphy@gmail.com, klwang@ucla.edu Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles Frank Freimuth, Yuriy Mokrousov, email: f.freimuth@fz-juelich.de, y.mokrousov@fz-juelich.de Forschungszentrum Juelich GmbH, University of Mainz Mark D. Stiles, Senior Member, IEEE, email: mark.stiles@nist.gov Alternative Computing Group, National Institute of Standards and Technology Satoru Emori, email: semori@vt.edu Department of Physics, Virginia Tech Axel Hoffmann, Fellow, IEEE, email: axelh@illinois.edu Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign Johan Åkerman, email: johan.akerman@physics.gu.se Physics Department, University of Gotherburg Kaushik Roy, Fellow, IEEE, email: kaushik@purdue.edu Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University Jian-Ping Wang, Fellow, IEEE, email: jpwang@umn.edu Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Minnesota See-Hun Yang, email: seeyang@us.ibm.com IBM Research – Almaden Kevin Garello, Member, IEEE, email: kevin.garello@cea.fr IMEC, Leuven, Belgium; CEA-Spintec, Grenoble, France Wei Zhang, email: weizhang@oakland.edu Physics Department, Oakland University 2 Outline 1. Introduction 2. Theory of spin-orbit torques a. Spin Hall effect and Rashba-Edelstein effect as origins of SOTs b. First principles calculations c. Orbital Hall effect-induced SOTs d. Thermal generation of SOTs e. Strain control of SOTs f. Magnonic SOTs 3. Materials for spin-orbit torques a. SOTs from metals and metallic alloys b. SOTs from topological insulators c. SOTs from 2D materials d. SOTs with oxides and magnetic insulators e. SOTs with antiferromagnets f. SOTs with ferrimagnets g. SOTs with low-damping ferromagnets 4. Devices based on spin-orbit torques a. Three-terminal SOT memory b. Two-terminal SOT memory c. SOT neuromorphic devices and circuits d. Field-free switching e. Terahertz generation using SOT f. SOT nano-oscillators g. SOTs with domain walls and skyrmions h. Industrialization considerations 5. Conclusion 6.