arXiv:2104.01020v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 29 Mar 2021 Analog of gravitational anomaly in topological chiral superconductors G.E. Volovik1, 2 1Low Temperature Laboratory, Aalto University, P.O. Box 15100, FI-00076 Aalto, Finland 2Landau Institute for Theoretical Physics, acad. Semyonov av., 1a, 142432, Chernogolovka, Russia (Dated: April 5, 2021) It is known that the contribution of torsion to the equation for the chiral Weyl fermions can be equivalently considered in terms of the axial U(1) gauge field. In this scenario the gravitational field transforms to the U(1) gauge field. Here we show that in chiral superconductors the opposite scenario takes place: the electromagnetic U(1) field serves as the spin connection for the Bogoliubov fermionic quasiparticles. As a result the electromagnetic field gives rise to the gravitational anomaly, which contains the extra factor 1/3 in the corresponding Adler-Bell-Jackiw equation as compared with the conventional chiral anomaly. We also consider the gravitational anomaly produced in neutral Weyl superfluids by the analog of the gravitational instanton, the process of creation and annihilation of the 3D topological objects вҖ“ hopfions. The gravitational instanton leads to creation of the chiral charge. PACS numbers: I. INTRODUCTION Topological materials with Weyl fermions provide the possibility to study quantum anomalies, such as the Adler-Bell-Jackiw (ABJ) chiral anomaly.1вҖ“3 The con- densed matter analog of the ABJ anomaly has been ex- perimentally probed in the Weyl superfluid вҖ“ the chiral A-phase of liquid 3He.4 In this electrically neutral matter, the chiral anomaly is caused by the effective electromag- netic field produced by deformations, which lead to the the space-time dependence of the superfluid order param- eter. Recent discussion of anomalies in Weyl materials can be found in . Reviews on chiral anomaly effects in the heavy-ion collisions see in Refs.6,7. The gravitational anomalies have been also discussed in Weyl materials. These anomalies are produced by the effective gravitational fields acting on Weyl fermions. These fields are represented by tetrads, spin connec- tion and torsion fields. In particular, the analog of the Nieh-Yan anomaly in terms of torsion8вҖ“11 has been developed.12вҖ“18 Here we consider the chiral superconductors and show that the U(1) electromagnetic field plays the role of spin connection in the effective tetrad gravity. As a result, these superconductors experience the analog of gravita- tional anomaly. As distinct from the conventional chiral anomaly, the corresponding Adler-Bell-Jackiw equation contains the extra factor 1/3. II. FROM GAUGE FIELD TO SPIN CONNECTION The Hamiltonian for Bogoliubov quasiparticles in the p-wave homogeneous superfluid 3He-A in a simplest model, which neglects Fermi-liquid corrections, has the following form19 пҝҪ p2 2m вҲ’ Ој0 e1 В· p + ie2 В· p e1 В· p вҲ’ ie2 В· p вҲ’ p2 2m + Ој0 пҝҪ . (1) Here e1 and e2 are the real vectors satisfying conditions e1 В· e2 = 0, e2 1 = e2 2. For simplicity we do not consider the spin structure, i.e. our quasiparticles are considered as spinless. The Hamiltonian (1) describes the homoge- neous system, and Ој0 = p2 0/2m is the equilibrium chem- ical potential. This Hamiltonian contains two Weyl points вҖ“ topolog- ically stable point nodes in the energy spectrum, which represent monopoles in the Berry phase in momentum space20 (classification in terms of two different topologi- cal invariants in the interacting systems can be found in ). The nodes are at pВұ = Вұp0ЛҶl, where the unit vector ЛҶl вҲҘ e1 Г—e2. The space and time dependence of the Weyl points in the inhomogeneous superfluid produces the effective electromagnetic field Aeff(r, t) = p0ЛҶl(r, t), which acts on the Weyl fermions (the pseudo electormag- netic field in terminology of ): H(p) = ei aП„ a пҝҪ pi вҲ’ Aeff i пҝҪ . (2) Here П„ a are Pauli matrices in the particle-hole space; and ei a = (e1, e2, e3 = vFЛҶl) are the space components of the gravitational tetrads, where vF = p0/m is the Fermi ve- locity in the normal Fermi liquid. The motion of the Bogoliubov quasiparticles in this ef- fective field gives rise to the analog of the chiral anomaly вҖ“ the anomalous nonconservation of the chiral current1вҖ“3. For 3He-A the ABJ equation has the following form: вҲӮОјJОј 5 = 1 32ПҖ2 eОјОҪПҒПғF eff ОјОҪ F eff ПҒПғ . (3) The prefactor in the ABJ Eq.(3) has been confirmed in the experiments on vortex dynamics4, where the space and time dependence of the effective gauge field 2 Aeff(r, t) = p0ЛҶl(r, t) has been created by moving contin- uous vortices вҖ“ skyrmions in the ЛҶl field. Let us now consider the electrically charged p-wave superfluid, i.e. the superconductor with the same order parameter, and consider the role of the real electromag- netic field in the chiral anomaly. Here we are interested in the influence of the electromagnetic field only, and ne- glect the effective electromagnetic field, F eff ОјОҪ = 0, i.e. the order parameter is assumed to be fixed. The inverse GreenвҖҷs function of Bogoliubov quasipar- ticles in the external electromagnetic field is: (4) where AОј is the vector potential of electromagnetic field. This field acts in the opposite ways on particle and hole and hole components of Bogoliubov spinor, that is why the vector potential is accompanied by the matrix П„3. Here q = вҲ’1 is electric charge. Since П„3 = 1 2i(П„1П„2 вҲ’П„2П„1), the GreenвҖҷs function can be rewritten in terms of the вҖқcovariant derivativeвҖқ: Di = вҲӮi+1 8Cab i (П„aП„bвҲ’П„bП„a) , Dt = вҲӮt+1 8Cab 0 (П„aП„bвҲ’П„bП„a) , (5) where Cab Оұ are the elements of spin connection, see e.g. . Let us show that in our case the nonzero com- ponents of spin connection are expressed in terms of the vector potential of electromagnetic field: C12 i = вҲ’C21 i = 2Ai(r, t) , C12 0 = вҲ’C21 0 = 2A0(r, t) . (6) Expanding the GreenвҖҷs function (4) near the Weyl node at p0ЛҶl, one obtains GвҲ’1 = вҲ’iвҲӮt + П„3 пҝҪ A0 + A2 2m пҝҪ +П„3e3 В· (p вҲ’ AП„3 вҲ’ p0ЛҶl) +1 2 пҝҪ П„1e1 В· (p вҲ’ AП„3 вҲ’ p0ЛҶl) + e1 В· (p вҲ’ AП„3 вҲ’ p0ЛҶl)П„1 пҝҪ +1 2 пҝҪ П„2e2 В· (p вҲ’ AП„3 вҲ’ p0ЛҶl) + e2 В· (p вҲ’ AП„3 вҲ’ p0ЛҶl)П„2 пҝҪ + 1 mA В· (p вҲ’ AП„3 вҲ’ p0ЛҶl) +(p вҲ’ p0ЛҶl)2 2m .(7) This expansion is not gauge invariant, because we omit- ted the gradients of the order parameter. When they are included the gauge invariance is restored. The quadratic term (p вҲ’ p0ЛҶl)2/2m can be neglected. Then the resulting Lagrangian can be expressed in terms of effective tetrads eОј a, which in our case are constant fields except for the vector ei 0 = Ai/m. This element may produce only the higher order terms in anomaly equation and thus can be neglected. The relevant nonzero ele- ments of the effective spin connection are C12 Оұ = вҲ’C21 Оұ = (A, A0)/2 in Eq.(6). As we already mentioned, the effec- tive vector potential Aeff = p0ЛҶl is kept constant and thus does not contribute to the anomaly. III. GRAVITATIONAL ANOMALY FROM ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELD Since we neglect the effective gauge field, F eff ОјОҪ = 0, the chiral anomaly comes only from the curvature of the effective gravitational field. For a single Weyl node one has the following equation for the gravitational anomaly (see e.g. ): вҲӮОјJОј 5 = 1 768ПҖ2 eОјОҪПҒПғRab ОјОҪRcd ПҒПғО·adО·bc , (8) where the curvature is: Rab ОјОҪ = вҲҮОјCab ОҪ вҲ’ вҲҮОҪCab Ој + (Cac Ој Cdb ОҪ вҲ’ Cac ОҪ Cdb Ој )О·cd . (9) According to Eq.(6) the nonzero elements of the curva- ture tensor are R12ОјОҪ = вҲ’R21ОјОҪ = вҲҮОјC12 ОҪ вҲ’ вҲҮОҪC12 Ој . (10) Since the elements of spin connections are expressed in terms of the vector potential of the electromagnetic field, the components of curvature tensor are expressed in terms of external electric and magnetic fields: R12ОјОҪ = 2(вҲӮОјAОҪ вҲ’ вҲӮОҪAОј) = 2FОјОҪ . (11) Then from the anomaly equation (8) one obtains: вҲӮОјJОј 5 = 1 384ПҖ2 eОјОҪПҒПғR12 ОјОҪR21 ПҒПғ = 1 96ПҖ2 eОјОҪПҒПғFОјОҪFПҒПғ =(12) = 1 3 1 32ПҖ2 eОјОҪПҒПғFОјОҪFПҒПғ ,(13) or вҲӮОјJОј 5 = 1 24ПҖ2 E В· B = 1 3 1 8ПҖ2 E В· B . (14) This means that in the superconducting states with Weyl points, the gravitational anomaly becomes the gauge anomaly, but with the extra factor 1/3 when compared with ABJ equation (3) coming from the effective gauge field Aeff = p0ЛҶl. This factor 1/3 may have relation to the consis- tent anomaly22, and also to the factor 1/3 obtained in for the electromagnetic response and Оё-term in the gapped topological superconductors.25вҖ“27 IV. GRAVITATIONAL ANOMALY IN NEUTRAL CHIRAL SUPERFLUID AND CREATION OF HOPFIONS In the electrically neutral superfluids, such as super- fluid 3He-A, the vector potential of external field is sub- stituted by superfluid velocity: A вҶ’ mvs, and the grav- itational anomaly becomes вҲӮОјJОј 5 = m2 24ПҖ2 вҲӮtvs В· (вҲҮ Г— vs) . (15) 3 Such anomaly can be produced by the instanton, which represents the process of creation or annihilation of the 3D skyrmions вҖ“ hopfions in the vector filed ЛҶl.28 Hopfions are described by the ПҖ3(S2) = Z topological charge вҖ“ the Hopf invariant.29 Recent papers on hopfions in condensed matter can be found in . In superfluid 3He-A, the density of the hopfion topo- logical charge is expressed in terms of the helicity of the superfluid velocity28: n0 H = m2 4ПҖ2 (vs В· (вҲҮ Г— vs)) , NH = пҝҪ d3r n0 H . (16) Introducing the current density of the topological charge: nH = m2 4ПҖ2 (vs Г— вҲӮtvs)) , (17) one obtains the (non)conservation law for the topological charge: вҲӮОјnОј H = m2 2ПҖ2 (вҲӮtvs В· (вҲҮ Г— vs)) . (18) The process of the change of the topological charge repre- sents the ПҖ3 instanton: вҲӮОјnОј H = Оҙ(t)Оҙ(r). In high energy physics this is the gravitational instanton, or the so-called torsion vortex.31,32 Then from the anomaly equation (15) one obtains the connection between the creation of the chiral charge and the creation of the hopfion: вҲӮОјJОј 5 = 1 6вҲӮОјnОј H . (19) Here we added the factor 2 to take into account the contribution of two Weyl point into the gravitational anomaly. Eq.(19) means that due to the gravitational anomaly, the gravitational instanton process of creation of single hopfion is accompanied by creation of 6 chiral fermions. This is the gravitational analog of the Kuzmin- Rubakov-Shaposhnikov scenario of the anomalous elec- troweak baryogenesis.33 V. HIGHER VALUES OF TOPOLOGICAL INVARIANTS Let us consider the gravitational anomaly in case of the higher order Weyl points. The Hamiltonian in for Weyl points with topological charges N and вҲ’N in chiral superfluids/superconductors has the following form: пҝҪ p2 2m вҲ’ Ој0 (e1 В· p + ie2 В· p)N (e1 В· p вҲ’ ie2 В· p)N вҲ’ p2 2m + Ој0 пҝҪ . (20) The corresponding spectrum of Bogoliubov quasiparti- cles near the Weyl points E2( Мғp) = (gвҠҘik Мғpi Мғpk)N + gвҲҘik Мғpi Мғpk , (21) where Мғp = pвҲ“p0ЛҶl is the momentu counted from the Weyl points, and the elements of the effective metric tensor are: gвҠҘik = ei 1ek 1 + ei 2ek 2 = gik вҲ’ gвҲҘik , gвҲҘik = ei 3ek 3 . (22) For corresponding superconductors the Hamiltonian is: H(p) = П„ 3e3 В· ( Мғp вҲ’ П„ 3A) + +(П„ 1 вҲ’ iП„ 2) пҝҪ (e1 + ie2) В· ( Мғp вҲ’ П„ 3A) пҝҪN +(П„ 1 + iП„2) пҝҪ (e1 вҲ’ ie2) В· ( Мғp вҲ’ П„ 3A) пҝҪN . (23) The equation (23) represents the analog of the HoЛҮrava gravity.35 Without the first term this is the 2 + 1 HoЛҮrava gravity, which takes place in graphene, see . With the first term it becomes the anisotropic extension of the 3 + 1 HoЛҮrava gravity. While the relativistic invariance is missing, the tetrad contribution to topology and anomaly is still valid. As before, the gravitational anomaly gives rise to the U(1) anomaly in the external electromagnetic field, again with the extra factor 1/3: вҲӮОјJОј 5 = N 96ПҖ2 eОјОҪПҒПғFОјОҪFПҒПғ . (24) For the electric current one has the same expression вҲӮОјJОј = N 96ПҖ2 eОјОҪПҒПғFОјОҪFПҒПғ , (25) but the creation of the electric charge is cancelled by the anomaly at the opposite Weyl point with topological charge вҲ’N. The electric charge created at one node is annihilated at the opposite node. The chiral currents for two nodes are added to give the total chiral current вҲӮОјJОј 5tot = N 48ПҖ2 eОјОҪПҒПғFОјОҪFПҒПғ = 1 3 N 16ПҖ2 eОјОҪПҒПғFОјОҪFПҒПғ . (26) VI. CONCLUSION We demonstrated that in the chiral superconduc- tors with Weyl fermions the external electromagnetic field serves as the spin connection for the Bogoliubov fermionic quasiparticles. As a result the electromagnetic field gives rise to the gravitational anomaly, which is de- scribed by the Adler-Bell-Jackiw equation with an extra factor 1/3 compared with the ABJ equation for the con- ventional chiral anomaly. In neutral chiral superfluids this gravitational anomaly takes place during creation and annihilation of the 3D topological objects вҖ“ hopfions. The process analogous to the gravitational instanton leads to creation of the chiral charge. This is the gravitational analog of the Kuzmin- Rubakov-Shaposhnikov electroweak baryogenesis.