1 Dual Universality and Unconventional Phase Diagram of a Clean 2D Superconductor with Tunable Disorders Puhua Wan1, Qihong Chen1,2, Oleksandr Zheliuk1, Le Zhang3,1, Minpeng Liang1, Xiaoli Peng1, Jianting Ye1* 1 Device Physics of Complex Materials, Zernike Institute for Advanced Materials, University of Groningen, 9747 AG Groningen, The Netherlands. 2 Beijing National Laboratory for Condensed Matter Physics, Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China. 3 Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Laser Engineering, College of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China. * e-mail: j.ye@rug.nl Weakly disordered two-dimensional (2D) superconductors can host richer quantum phase transitions than their highly-disordered counterparts1–6. This is due to the insertion of a metallic state in the transition between a superconductor and an insulator. Disorders were predicted to show profound influences on the boundaries surrounding this intermediate metallic phase, affecting the existence of a metallic ground state called Bose metal1,2 and the dynamic processes in a quantum Griffiths state7,8. Here we present a study on quantum phase transitions of a clean 2D superconductor, MoS2, under a perpendicular magnetic field as a function of disorder strength that is tuned electrostatically. We found two universal scaling behaviors independent of disorders: a power-law scaling applies for all metallic states, and an activated dynamical scaling characterizes transitions between quantum Griffiths state and weakly localized metal. The phase diagram in this unexplored clean regime shows that a Bose metal ground state is expected only below a critical disorder. Whereas, stronger disorders can stabilize a true 2D superconductivity and enhances the quantum Griffiths phase. These behaviors are diametrically different from the conventional understanding of the clean regime. 2 The disorder has significant influences on macroscopic quantum coherent states of superconductors. Physically, the presence of disorders requires treating the disorder scattering prior to superconductivity, where the electrons in the normal state are described by a diffusive motion. The mean free path lm of the electron, which is determined by the strength of disorder scattering, becomes an important parameter that defines the so-called “cleanness” of a superconductor. Compared with coherence length 0 found in the superconducting state, lm ~ dimensional (2D) systems, the increase of disorder can drastically suppress the superconductivity by reducing the transition temperature Tc and increasing the normal state resistance RN. When the disorder reaches a critical strength in many granular films, these highly-disordered 2D superconductors (lm << 0) turn into insulators at a universal resistance close to h/4e2 9,10. Transport properties measured in the vicinity of the transitions often exhibit a universal scaling behavior, belonging to the universal class of dirty bosons11–13. On the other hand, two distinct features were observed in many weakly-disordered systems (lm ~ 0)based on 2D single crystals6,14,15 and granular thin films with enhanced crystallinity16,17. First of all, an intermediate metallic state emerges after suppressing the superconductivity in a magnetic field B, which was theoretically proposed to be a quantum metallic phase. At zero temperature, the ground state of this metallic state was predicted to be a Bose metal1–4. As described in the Bose metal model, the superconductor to quantum metal transition (SMT) originates from the activation of free vortex dislocations following a power-law dependence on the B field. This gives rise to a finite resistance even if the field is infinitesimal1–3,14. Secondly, a quantum Griffiths state, in which the Cooper pairs are isolated in superconducting rare regions under a large B field, dominates the phase transitions from a quantum metal to a weakly-localized metal (normal-metal state)5,6. The transition dynamics are increasingly frozen when temperature decreases. At zero temperature, the dynamical exponent zν becomes infinite reaching the so-called quantum Griffith singularity8,18,19. Compared with the constant dynamical rate found in dirty Bosons, here, the zν value varies as a function of temperature at the phase boundary between the quantum Griffiths and the weakly-localized metallic states. Although the phase diagram in the dirty regime has been studied extensively11,20,21, the clean regime (lm > 0) remains largely unexplored, where disorders are predicted to influence both quantum metal and quantum Griffith state as a function of external magnetic field B applied perpendicular to the 2D plane. It was theoretically proposed that depending on the 3 interplay between disorder strength and quantum fluctuation at zero temperature1,2, in the low B field regime, the critical field Bc0 –the external magnetic field required for the system to enter the metallic state– can be either Bc0 = 0 or Bc0 > 0. This corresponds to a proposed ground state of either a Bose metal or the zero-resistance state of a true 2D superconductor, respectively. Experimentally, although having different disorders can lead to zero or non-zero Bc0 values for different ground states, it is an open question whether the intermediate metallic states all belong to a universality class of power-law scaling. In the large B field regime, where the superconducting rare regions dominate the phase transitions, a quantum Griffiths state is theoretically predicted for all systems with non-zero disorders7,8. The activated dynamic scaling has been widely studied in the quantum Griffiths states of many 2D superconductors6,17,22,23 at individual states of static disorders. Whereas, studying the universality requires preparing a range of states, where the scaling behavior can be analyzed for different disorders in searching for identical behaviors. It is encouraging that a recent preprint reported that the activated dynamical scaling is universal in the dirty regime by varying the film thickness24. Nevertheless, it remains unknown whether the rare region effect will also dominate the clean regime since the spatial fluctuation of the order parameter decreases when the disorder is weakened25. Therefore, it is also highly demanded to find a clean system with variable disorders to exam the validity of the proposed universal exponent ψν7,8,26,27. Compared with the extensive studies on universal scaling in the dirty regime11,20,21,24, the research in the clean regime (lm > 0) is seriously limited by the available 2D systems where scaling analyses can be performed. As shown in Fig. 1a, the clean regime of 2D superconductors is mostly accessed by bulk 3D single crystals with strong anisotropy, which behaves as 2D superconductors (the third quadrant, lower left). The granular films and atomically thin superconducting single crystals are affected by the intrinsic defects and being air unstable28,29. Except for monolayer NbSe2 protected by h-BN14,30, other films and interfaces all reside on the dirty side (first quadrant, upper-right). To resolve these difficulties, ionic gating on intrinsically semiconducting 2D crystals stands out as the choice, which can induce 2D superconductivity on air-stable single-crystalline channels31,32, hence achieving weak disorders15. Nevertheless, the conventional ionic gating33 is still hampered by the low mobility, therefore, remains at the first quadrant. To prepare a range of states in the second quadrant of Fig. 1a, we developed the following ionic gating with enhanced mobility. This starts with preparing ion-gated MoS2 transistors as 4 shown in Fig. 1b and c. The Hall bar channel is shaped by a 50 nm thick Al2O3 film that isolates the field effect of ionic liquid. All carriers are induced by a single ionic gating and fixed by freezing the device below the glass transition temperature Tg of the ionic liquid. This initial gating (up to 6 V) is also limited to the electrostatic regime, where identical states can be reproduced in two consecutive gatings (Fig. S1). As shown in the simplified Helmholtz double layer formed on the channel (Fig. 1d), strong gating pushed the ions close to the channel surface (upper panel) generating non-uniform potentials, acting as disorders. In the cases of monolayer channels, these disorders can be strong enough to completely localize the electrical transport, reentering highly insulating states34,35. On the other hand, the discreteness of ion can be smoothed out by thermally releasing the ions away from the channel, forming a more uniform potential when the double layer thickness z becomes larger (lower panel of Fig. 1d). Therefore, the strength of the disorder can be tuned electrostatically by varying the distance z between the ions and the induced carriers. By grounding the ionic gate and warming the device up to a temperature slightly higher than Tg, disorder states with different strengths can be accessed through sequential thermal releases. It worth noting that the thermally activated ionic motion is limited to the z-direction out of the channel plane. Whereas, the in-plane motion of ions is restrained due to the rubbery state of high viscosity. As a result, different disorder strengths can be accessed in a single device with identical disorder distribution in the xy plane. Compared with different disorders accessed by preparing multiple samples, either by thin film deposition or post annealing20,36, varying disorder strength in the same device also maintains the identical intrinsic disorders caused by structural defects and impurities. The disorder strength can be parameterized as W~lm −1 2 ⁄ 37,38 (section 1 of the supplementary materials). From the band structure calculation of the ion-gated MoS2 39, the carriers are primarily doped on the outmost layer at the K/K’ points of the Brillouin zone. Since transport measurement can determine the 2D carrier density n2D (by Hall effect, Fig. S2) and sheet resistance Rs measured right before superconducting transition, we can obtain lm = vF, where Fermi velocity vF and scattering time  are calculated in section 1 of the supplementary materials. As shown in Fig. 1f, we prepared in situ 11 different states on a single device (device A). The effect of having different disorders is conspicuous because the Rs varies oppositely to the change of n2D when both parameters are measured at a normal state (T = 13 K) above the superconducting transition. With the decrease of n2D, the Rs conversely decrease as well due to 5 a faster increase of Hall mobility  (derived in Eq. 5 of supplementary materials) from 119 to 834 cm2V-1s-1 (inset of Fig. 1e). Therefore, the lm values increase from 12.4 to 71.6 nm when the disorder strength reduces. The first state, having a Tc = 7.1 K (with lm = 12.4 nm) is induced by the initial gating at the right side of the superconducting dome of MoS2 induced by field effect32. The Tc is defined at the temperature when transition reaches half of the normal resistance RN (measured at T = 13 K). By thermal releasing, both , and lm follow the variation of the superconducting dome as a function of the n2D (inset of Fig. 1e). When a magnetic field is applied to a highly-disordered 2D superconductor, the superconducting islands gradually lose the long-range correlations. At the zero-temperature limit, transition appears at the quantum resistance, h/4e2, where the islands are isolated by insulating regions25. In the vortex tunneling model, the magnetoresistance of such a system varies exponentially with the B field as logR ~ B 40–42. In contrast, even for the most disordered state (lm = 12.4 nm shown in Fig. 1f), the RN of our sample –after suppressing the superconductivity at a high field– is one order of magnitude smaller than h/4e2. Unlike the dome-like variation of Tc, the upper critical field Bc2 (derived from Fig. S3a by extrapolating to T = 0 K) decreases monotonically when the system is tuned to a cleaner state with larger lm (inset of Fig. 1e). Compared with the coherence length 0 extracted from Bc2 = Φ0/2π02, where Φ0 is the magnetic flux quantum, the mean-free path lm is a few times larger than ξ0 (Fig. S3). Therefore, our system is located inside the clean regime, where lm > 0. Both analyses above suggest that our states are in the weakly disordered regime, which is beyond the description of the dirty boson model20. Consistently, the magnetoresistances of all states, with different mean- free paths, cannot be fitted with the vortex tunneling model in the framework of dirty Bosons (Fig. S4). Instead, the magnetoresistances can be well described by the Bose metal model2, where R(B) follows the power-law scaling R~(B − Bc0)2νSMT. Here, Bc0 is the critical field that can cause the transition from a zero-resistance state to a metallic state (SMT), νSMT the exponent of the superfluid correlation length. By fitting the magnetoresistance isotherm (shown in Fig. 2a) with power-law scaling as a function of external B field for different disordered states, we can obtain the Bc0 and νSMT as the fitting parameters. As shown in Fig. 2a, we plot Rs as a function of ∆B = B − Bc0 for different disordered states measured at T = 1.9 K. The gray dashed lines show the best fitting using the power-law scaling. For a representative state with lm = 28.4 nm (Fig. 2b), the magnetoresistances at different temperatures can also be well 6 described by the power-law scaling yielding the temperature dependence of νSMT. In the present system with a wide range of disorders in the clean regime, the power-law scaling shows universal validity. The varying exponent νSMT from each disordered state are plotted in Fig. 2c as a function of temperature. Note the νSMT values are all obtained below TQ, a temperature below which the exponentially diminishing thermal effect is overwhelmed by the quantum fluctuations (section 3 of supplementary materials). The dashed line at νSMT = 0.5 (Fig. 2c) indicates the limit of unhindered flux flow, where the vortex-pinning effect is absent. Consequently, vortexes can move freely, and the Rs shows a linear dependence on the B field: Rs ~ B/Bc2 14,43,44. Crossing the SMT boundary, the superfluid correlation length scales as ξ+~(B − Bc0)−νSMT in the quantum-metal phase2. Since the νSMT ≥ 0.5, the state with larger νSMT shows a slower divergence in ξ+ with the increase of the magnetic field. Following each disorder state shown in Fig. 2c, an increase in temperature enhances the dynamics, causing a decrease of νSMT due to the enhanced thermal fluctuation (section 3 of supplementary materials). For a vertical cut in Fig. 2c at T = 1.9 K, when the system is thermally released towards the cleaner states, the νSMT for different disorder states decreases and approaches the limit νSMT = 0.5 for the cleanest state with lm = 65.2 nm. At higher temperatures (T = 2.5, 3.6, and 4.4 K, etc.), where the thermal fluctuation is stronger, unhindered vortex flow can be accessed by states with larger disorders (lm = 59.5, 51.1, and 44.3 nm, etc.). The excitation current can also assist the vortex motion via Lorentz force43,44. In another measurement (device B), a zero-resistance state below the superconducting transition can be observed only by applying a small excitation current (Fig. S5). The leveling of Rs, which has been interpreted as the evidence of quantum metal at T = 0 14,15,41, appears when current excitations are applied. With a small excitation (0.4 A) in the measurement of device A, approaching νSMT = 0.5 (Fig. 2c) is assisted by the thermal fluctuations at finite temperature, alongside the quantum fluctuation. In the T → 0 limit, where the thermal fluctuation is absent, the quantum fluctuation is expected to destroy the phase coherence in a critical-clean 2D superconductor, forming Bose metal ground state1. Compared with the smooth decrease of νSMT as a function of temperature shown in clean states with large lm values, it is noted in Fig. 2c that a signature of saturation in the temperature dependence of νSMT showing in the state with lm = 12.4 nm below T = 3 K. Such a saturation is also observed in another crystalline 2D superconductor14. 7 As shown in Fig. 3, we then move to a higher magnetic field to explore the superconducting rare regions, where nearly isolated superconductivity islands are embraced by normal metals6,22,45. In panel A-C, we show the magnetoresistances of three representative states with high, medium, and low disorder strengths (the other states are shown in Fig. S7). Multiple crossing points can be identified in panels A and B for the states with large and medium disorders, forming a phase boundary in the B–T phase diagram6,45. For the case of weak disorder strength shown in panel C, the magnetoresistances tend to saturate and collapse together at a high magnetic field. We can divide the multiple crossing points into narrow temperature ranges45 (Fig. S8a-h). Within each division, the magnetoresistances can be analyzed by the finite-size scaling: R(B, T) = Rcf ( |B−Bc| (T/TL)1 zν ⁄ ), where Rc and Bc are the critical resistance and critical magnetic field defined by the crossing point of the adjacent Rs(B) curves, and f is an arbitrary function with f(0) = 1, z the dynamical critical exponent, ν the correlation length exponent, TL the lowest temperature of the division. When our system is released to cleaner states with lm > 44.3 nm, determining the crossing points and extract accurate exponent zν becomes increasingly difficult because the magnetoresistance curves merge (Fig. 3c). As shown in Fig. 3d, the magnetic field dependence of zν increases from a plateau zν ≈ 0.5 for all disordered states. In a clean (2+1)D XY superconductor (the extra dimension is imaginary time), z is general set as 1 due to the long-range correlation5,45, and ν = 0.5 5,6,17,18. Here, the plateau at zν ≈ 0.5 (Fig. 3d) corresponds to the clean states free from the rare region effects, which is caused by thermal fluctuation at finite temperature. Above the plateau, superconducting rare regions can be locally ordered. In the present 2D system (d = 2), the Harris criterion dν > 2 is violated when ν = 0.5. Therefore, z is expected to diverge when the temperature approaches zero 5. Starting from the initial state with the highest disorder strength (lm = 12.4 nm, purple dots), zν increases from the plateau and grows rapidly towards a zero- temperature crossing point Bc* = 8.5 T (extrapolated from Fig. S10). A similar trend can be observed in less disordered states, where the fast increase of zν occurs at a lower Bc*. Above the plateau zν ≈ 0.5 (Fig. 3d), the phase transition is increasingly affected by the rare region effect. In the vicinity of Bc*, the optimal rare regions (ORR) become exponentially rare to find and dominate the phase transition. The size of ORR, LORR, can be obtained from Bc*~ Φ0 LORR ⁄ 2 , where Φ0 is the magnetic flux quantum45,46. Consistently, as disorder strength decreases towards cleaner states in Fig. 3d, the LORR increases accordingly, hence showing smaller Bc*. 8 In contrast to the strong influence of disorders on the magnetic field dependences shown in Fig 3D, the temperature dependence of zν shows a very similar trend for all disorder states (Fig. 3e). We analyzed the magnetoresistances following the activated dynamical scaling: R (B, ln T0 T ) = φ [δ (ln T0 T ) 1 ψν ]. Here, T0 is a fitting parameter, ψ tunneling exponent, ν the correlation length exponent, δ = |B − Bc|/Bc characterize the difference from the crossing point17,47. At finite temperature, we can obtain the (ψν)eff from 1 zν = ( 1 ψν) eff 1 ln(T0 T ⁄ ) by two- parameter fitting, which approaches ψν at zero temperature17 (section 4 of the supplementary materials). As shown in Fig. 3e, the scaling analysis collapses independent of disorders, yielding (ψν)eff = 0.68. This is in good agreement with the theoretically predicted ψν = 0.6 for a critical point with infinite randomness19,48,49. Unlike the multiple curves found in zν(B), the collapse of zν(T), for different strengths of disorders, suggests a universal scenario for weakly disordered 2D superconductors. Theoretically, a weak disorder can always enhance to be a strong disorder after renormalization. Thus, phase transitions with any finite disorder are governed by a critical point of infinite randomness with a universal exponent ψν 7,8,26,27. To further exam the universality, we apply the same scaling to several similar 2D superconductors with weak disorders. This includes MBE-grown Ga thin films6, annealed single-crystalline InOx films17, and LaAlO3/SrTiO3 interfaces50. As shown in Fig. 3e, the extracted zν can be well fitted with (ψν)eff equals 0.61, 0.62, and 0.64, where T0 = 0.38, 1.21, and 4.3 K, respectively. In addition to MoS2, the consistent (ψν)eff values also found in different materials strongly support a general universality of activated dynamical scaling in the weakly-disordered 2D superconductors. As shown in Fig. 3e, the universality is valid when the rare region effect exists, corresponding to T < Tc 0. Here, Tc 0 is the critical temperature above which the system enters the clean state free from rare region effects. Therefore, we can obtain Tc 0 from zν(Tc 0) = 0.5. When T > Tc 0 = 5.5 K, a deviation was observed from activated dynamical scaling for the data enclosed by the dashed box (Fig. 3e), which corresponds to the plateau of zν ≈ 0.5 shown in Fig. 3d. When T < Tc 0, rare regions can be locally ordered, dominating the scaling behavior18. The Tc 0 extracted from activated dynamical scaling is also in good agreement with that (5.8 K) derived from the Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg (WHH) analysis (Fig. S10) for the onset of rare region effect. 9 For different disorders, the LORR varies with the disorder's strength. Each disorder state has a LORR that corresponds to a specific Bc value (Fig. 3d). However, the T0 = 10. 4 K, obtained from fitting 1 zν = ( 1 ψν) eff 1 ln(T0 T ⁄ ) and extrapolating to zν(T0) = 0, turns out to be identical for all accessed states in gated MoS2. As a result, an identical critical temperature Tc 0 is obtained for states with different disorder strengths. In the rare region regime, the probability ω of finding a superconducting rare region scales with the rare region size LRR as a Gaussian distribution ω(LRR)~exp (−pLRR d), where p is the disorder concentration, d the dimensionality of the rare region18. Since the thermal release of gating only varies the disorder strength while keeping the p constant, we expect the same distribution of rare regions in the vicinity of Tc 0 . Consequently, when ( 1 ψν) eff is universally valid, the fitting parameter T0 is expected to be identical for different disordered states, as long as the disorder concentration holds constant. In comparison, the consistency in T0 values cannot be observed the -W thin films, where the disorder is tuned by varying the thickness of thin films in separate samples24. Based on the scaling analysis on MoS2 in the clean regime, we could propose a phase diagram of the 2D superconductor as a function of the disorder strength in the clean regime. The phase diagram can be then compared with that proposed 30 years ago by Fisher11, which is still widely used as general guidance for the quantum phases in 2D superconductors10,13,20,51,52. The magnetoresistance isotherms measured at a finite temperature corresponds to the shaded slice shown in Fig. 4a. The Fisher diagram predicts that the 2D superconductivity persists though out the clean regime up to the clean limit. For the variable disorder states with lm < 0, at finite T = 1.9 K, the magnetoresistances measured for different disorders are plotted as a function of applied B field and disorder strength, which scales as ~lm −1 2 ⁄ . With the increase of B field, quantum phases appear at both low and high field regimes, and the transitions occur between zero-resistance, quantum metal, quantum Griffiths (rare region state), and weakly-localized metal (normal metal state). In the low field regime of the phase diagram, a universal power-law scaling applies to all metallic states of different disorders, showing different νSMT and Bc0 values. With the reduction of disorder strengths, zero-resistance states gradually disappear due to the weaker pinning effect from the disorders. The extracted Bc0 decreases from 1.1 T for the most disordered state (lm = 12.4 nm) to nearly zero for the critical state with lm c = 31.7 nm. Above this critical disorder, the vortex motion is collectively pinned. The large pinning energy might not be overcome by 10 the quantum fluctuation when disorder strength is sufficiently high53. As a result, a zero- resistance can exist in states with strong disorders (lm < 31.7 nm). The vortexes can be unpinned also by the enhanced quantum fluctuation2, which is fulfilled when a magnetic field B > Bc0 is applied. Whereas, in cleaner states having lm > lm c , free vortex dislocation can be generated by applying an infinitesimal B field, forming a quantum metal. It worth noting that present samples are measured at finite temperature and finite current excitation (Fig. S5). Nevertheless, we can expect that the true 2D superconducting regime would expand if we lower the temperature further towards zero. Therefore, the Bose metal ground state (at T = 0) is expected in even cleaner states below the critical disorder (lm > lm c ). In the high field regime above the quantum metal states, where BRR <B < Bc, the quantum Griffiths states appear when the locally ordered rare regions are embraced by normal metallic regions. Here, BRR is extrapolated from Fig. S10, marking the B field, above which the rare region effect starts to develop6. Considering the fast increase of zv found in Fig. 3d, the quantum Griffith transition corresponds to a quick frozen of dynamics toward zero temperature, which is governed by infinite randomness. Since disorder enhances the spatial fluctuation of order parameter25, the distribution of rare regions can then be extended to a wider B field range. Therefore, the quantum Griffiths state (BRR <B < Bc) expands with the increase of disorder in the phase diagram. Towards the clean side, the LORR grows when the disorder strength decreases. Theoretically, an infinitesimal amount of disorder can already cause infinite randomness7,8, hence, the rare-region regime is expected to close only in the ideal state with zero disorder. The order parameter of the superconducting rare regions is gradually suppressed by the increase of the B field up to Bc (T = 1.9 K), at which the system eventually enters the normal state as a weakly localized metal. Along the phase boundary (blue line in Fig. 4), the transitions from the quantum Griffiths to the weakly localized metal in the vicinity of Bc (T = 1.9 K) can be described by an activated dynamical scaling function with a universal exponent (ψν)eff (Fig. 3e). In conclusion, we’ve presented a clean 2D superconductor with in-situ tunable disorders. The quantum phase transitions in the unexplored clean regime are characterized by two universal scaling behaviors in a perpendicular magnetic field. In the low field, the superconductor-quantum metal transitions follow a power-law scaling. While, in the high field, the quantum metal-normal metal transition is characterized by an activated power-law scaling. Besides the dual universality, a clean 2D superconductor shows an unconventional phase 11 diagram. The true zero-resistance states appear only at a critical disorder and the 2D superconductivity enhances by the stronger disorders. Below the critical disorder, the system enters the quantum metal state at B = 0; where the quantum Griffiths region diminishes gradually toward the clean limit. These behaviors observed in the clean regime are strikingly different from the widely accepted Fisher diagram. Our phase diagram can act as a guide to both clean and dirty limits. To the clean limit, our result indicates that a super-clean superconductor should have a ground state of Bose metal that is also affected by infinite randomness from even infinitesimal defects. Namely, it is intriguing to study whether the Griffith regime will eventually close if we can go closer to the clean limit. On the other hand, following our phase diagram to the dirty side, variable disorders can also be prepared by strong ionic gating34,35. The variable strong disorder could be used to bridge the activated power-law scaling with multiple zv values and the single zv scaling observed towards the limit of critical disorder c (Fig. 4a, the Fisher diagram), where the process of crossover in scaling behaviors remains unknown. Methods MoS2 thin flakes are mechanically exfoliated from a bulk single crystal onto the silicon substrate with an oxide layer of ~285 nm thick. The electrodes (50 nm Au on 1 nm Ti) and an Al2O3 isolation layer (50 nm) are deposited by electron beam evaporation after standard electron-beam lithography processes. Three SR830 DSP lock-in amplifiers were used for 4- probe measurement and a Keithley 2450 DC meter was used for applying gate bias Vg. The data presented in this work were collected from 2 devices. The 11 different disordered states were achieved on a single device (device A). Device A (channel width = 3 m) was measured with a constant AC current of 0.4 A. And the data shown in Fig. S5 were collected from device B (channel width = 3 m) with various current excitations. The first state with the highest disorder strength (smallest mean free path lm) is prepared at 220 K by applying a gate voltage Vg = 6 V through an ionic liquid: N, N-Diethyl-N-methyl- applied Vg breaks the equilibrium distribution of ions and accumulates excess cations on the channel surface. This then induces free carriers on the channel by field-effect, forming the so- called Helmholtz double layer. The device is then cooled down with applied Vg to 170 K (below 12 the glass transition temperature Tg  190 K of DEME-TSFI) to freeze the ionic motion. The Vg is then removed for the remaining experiments by grounding the ionic gate electrode. The following states with decreasing disorder strengths are subsequently obtained by warming the device to a temperature slightly higher than Tg. With a grounded gate, the accumulated ions tend to diffuse away from the MoS2 surface towards the equilibrium state. Since applying Vg breaks the equilibrium of ion distribution only along the z-direction, the thermal release of the accumulated ions is also along the same direction to larger z values. Therefore, a smoother potential on the channel surface can be obtained after each thermal release corresponding to the different disorder strengths. Due to the very slow ionic motion near the Tg, new states can be then controllably accessed by freezing the ionic motion again by fast cooling down. The disorder strength stays constant as long as the ions are frozen below the Tg. This disorder-tuning method can ensure a few crucial technical details that substantiate the whole analysis. First of all, the disorder is variable only for its strength. The 2D disorder distribution is kept for all states due to the lack of ionic diffusion in the xy plane because the ions are in a very viscous state close to Tg. Moreover, all states are accessed after one ionic gating on the same device, which maintains the intrinsic disorder and eliminates any possible difference in chemical details accessed by two different gatings. In reality, the sample is chemically inert if gated at 220 K. Identical states can be achieved by applying the same Vg (Fig. S1). 13