1 Quantum phase transitions and superconductivity in the pressurized heavy-fermion compound CeCuP2 Erjian Cheng1, Chuchu Zhu1, Tianping Ying1, Yuanji Xu2, Darren C. Peets3, Jiamin Ni1, Binglin Pan1, Yeyu Huang1, Linshu Wang1, Yi-feng Yang2,* and Shiyan Li1,4,5,* 1 State Key Laboratory of Surface Physics, Department of Physics, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China 2 Beijing National Laboratory for Condensed Matter Physics and Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China 3 Ningbo Institute of Materials Technology and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Ningbo, Zhejiang 315201, China 4 Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Microstructures, Nanjing 210093, China 5 Shanghai Research Center for Quantum Sciences, Shanghai 201315, China Corresponding author. Email: yifeng@iphy.ac.cn (Y.-F.Y.); shiyan_li@fudan.edu.cn (S.Y.L.) Abstract The tilted balance among competing interactions can yield a rich variety of ground states of quantum matter. In most Ce-based heavy fermion systems, this can often be qualitatively described by the famous Doniach phase diagram, owing to the competition between the Kondo screening and the Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yoshida exchange interaction. Here, we report an 2 unusual pressure-temperature phase diagram beyond the Doniach one in CeCuP2. At ambient pressure, CeCuP2 displays typical heavy-fermion behavior, albeit with a very low carrier density. With lowering temperature, it shows a crossover from a non-Fermi liquid to a Fermi liquid at around 2.4 K. But surprisingly, the Kondo coherence temperature decreases with increasing pressure, opposite to that in most Ce-based heavy fermion compounds. Upon further compression, two superconducting phases are revealed. At 48.0 GPa, the transition temperature reaches 6.1 K, the highest among all Ce-based heavy fermion superconductors. We argue for possible roles of valence tuning and fluctuations associated with its special crystal structure in addition to the hybridization effect. These unusual phase diagrams suggest that CeCuP2 is a novel platform for studying the rich heavy fermions physics beyond the conventional Doniach paradigm. Introduction As prototype examples of strongly correlated electron systems, heavy-fermion (HF) compounds have been intensively investigated due to their various fascinating properties 1-4. They are mostly rare earth or actinide (Ce, Yb, U, etc.) intermetallics with partially filled 4f or 5f orbitals 1-6. The f-electrons are often localized, in particular in Ce-based compounds, and coupled with conduction electrons through a local antiferromagnetic exchange interaction. The resulting Kondo screening effect competes with the induced long-range Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yoshida (RKKY) interaction between f-moments, causing a quantum phase transition between magnetically ordered states and a disordered heavy Fermi liquid state under external tuning such as the pressure, doping or magnetic field 3,7. This is qualitatively described by the famous Doniach phase diagram 7, as schematically 3 shown in the inset of Fig. 1(b). In most Ce-based HF compounds, the Doniach paradigm has been extensively examined, with only few possible exceptions 3. In proximity to the magnetic quantum critical point (QCP), superconductivity often emerges, mostly ascribed to the spin-fluctuation-mediated pairing mechanism, and shares some common features with other unconventional superconductors such as the cuprate, iron-based and organic superconductors 3,4. Other pairing mechanisms such as valence or orbital fluctuations have also been proposed, but no concrete evidences have been established 8-11. A unified explanation is still lacking and the role of quantum criticality in driving superconductivity is not yet fully understood. Seeking new materials with potentially different low-energy quantum fluctuations and pairing mechanisms may shed light on this long-standing issue. In this work, we report systematic magnetic susceptibility, specific heat and electrical transport measurements of the heavy-fermion compound CeCuP2. Our results are summarized in the P-T phase diagrams of Figs. 1(a) and (b). At ambient pressure, CeCuP2 exhibits typical NFL behavior featuring a quasi-linear temperature-dependent resistivity and divergent specific heat and magnetic susceptibility above 2.4 K. Around 2.4 K, a crossover turns the system into a FL state at low temperatures. Scaling analyses of the magnetic susceptibility and Grüneisen ratio confirm the quantum critical behavior at ambient pressure and zero magnetic field. Under pressure, electrical transport measurements identify multiple quantum phase transitions. For pressure P < Pc1 ~ 0.7 GPa, the system always turns into a metallic Kondo coherent state with lowering temperature. But in contrast to most Ce-based HF compounds, the coherence temperature Tcoh is gradually suppressed with increasing pressure and diminishes at Pc1, where the insulating-like Kondo incoherent state persists down to our lowest measured temperature of 0.3 K. For Pc1 < P < Pc2 ~ 4.0 GPa, the 4 incoherent state is gradually weakened. A second metallic state takes over at low temperatures above Pc2, accompanied by the first superconducting transition. The Tcs for the first superconducting state (SC1) display a clear dome shape with a maximum transition temperature of 4.3 K at 7.8 GPa. At Pc3 ∼ 11.0 GPa, the first superconducting state disappears. With further pressurization beyond Pc3, the second superconducting state (SC2) arises, and spans over a wide pressure range, which is much broader in pressure than that in usual HF superconductors 3. The Tc for SC2 exhibits a dip at Pc4 ~ 34.0 GPa, and then goes up again. At 48.0 GPa, Tc reaches 6.1 K, the highest among all Ce-based heavy fermion superconductors 3. The overall phase diagram is shown in Figs. 1(a) and (b) and looks strikingly different from the usual Doniach one, which suggests that other essential factors such as the valence change of Ce-ions should be considered for understanding CeCuP2. Results Non-Fermi liquid behavior and anomalous crossover transition. The growth of CeCuP2 was first reported by Chykhrij et al. 12 with the space group I4/mmm (139) and the Ce : Cu : P stoichiometric ratio of 1 : 1.09 : 1.8. Each unit cell has one Wyckoff position (4e) for Cerium atoms located between neighboring layers and forming a tetragonal structure. Copper atoms are distributed on two different Wyckoff positions denoted as Cu1 and Cu2, with Cu1 (4d) atoms forming a 12-vertex polyhedron. Phosphorus atoms occupy three Wyckoff positions denoted as P1, P2 and P3. The P1 (4e) and Cu2 (4e) atoms form Platonic solids, and the P2 (4c) and P3 (8j) atoms have distorted cubic co-ordinations. The crystal structure is displayed in the inset of Fig. 1(a). According to the ICSD data (No. 83894) of CeCu1.09P1.87 built on Chykhrij’s work 12, we found fractional occupancies on Cu2, P2, and P3, which explain the non-integral stoichiometric ratio. To determine the accurate chemical 5 composition and crystallographic parameters of our crystals, we have conducted the inductively coupled plasma (ICP) spectroscopy and the Rietveld refinement of powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) studies. Detailed results and discussions can be found in the Supplementary Information (Supplementary Note 1) 13, yielding the Ce : Cu : P ratio of 1 : 1.14 : 2 for our samples. For simplification, we still use CeCuP2 throughout this work. Single crystals of CeCuP2 were grown from molten Sn flux and demonstrated by XRD measurements (see Supplementary Fig. 1) 13. Figure 2(a) displays the in-plane resistivity from 0.3 to 4 K at zero magnetic field and shows three distinct regimes. Below ∼1.5 K, the data follows exactly the Fermi liquid power law, ρ (T) = ρ0 + ATn with n = 2, where ρ0 is the residual resistivity and A the electronic scattering coefficient. Our best fit gives ρ0 = 0.058 mΩ cm and A = 0.0048 mΩ cm K-2. Above 2.4 K, the resistivity exhibits linear temperature dependence, typical of NFL behavior. In between, there is an abrupt crossover from the NFL to FL states. At higher temperatures as shown in the inset of Fig. 2(a), CeCuP2 behaves like a typical heavy fermion metal, with a resistivity maximum at Tcoh ~ 20.5 K marking the transition from a metallic Kondo coherent state to a high-temperature insulating-like Kondo incoherent state. For contrast, the resistivity of LaCuP2 (see Supplementary Fig. 2) is also displayed in the Supplementary Information 13. To clarify the NFL-to-FL crossover around 2.4 K, we have conducted the specific heat measurements. Figure 2(b) shows the specific heats of CeCuP2, LaCuP2, and the magnetic contributions (Cm/T) extracted by comparison against that of the nonmagnetic analogue LaCuP2 from CeCuP2. Herein, we presume that the electron and phonon contributions in LaCuP2 are identical to those in CeCuP2, which is less rigorous due to the special crystal structure. We note that the specific heat in CeCuP2 and LaCuP2 shows similar behavior above the coherence temperature, and in 6 particular both have peaks around T~100K. The specific heat of CeCuP2 is larger than that of LaCuP2 over the entire measured range, and this enhancement may stem from the integrated effects of the f-electron excitations, the hybridization between the conduction electrons and the excited crystalline electric field (CEF) doublets, and the sample quality. The solid curve in Fig. 2(b) represents the magnetic entropy Sm calculated from Cm/T. The effective Kondo temperature (TK), estimated from Sm(TK)= 0.65 Rln2 14, is about 9.5 K. Sm reaches 0.38 Rln2 at the low-temperature hump and the remaining entropy of the Kramers doublet is gradually released till 29 K somewhat above Tcoh. The green points in Fig. 2(b) shows the resulting Cm/T of CeCuP2 at zero field, which is seen to diverge logarithmically below 10 K but interrupted by a hump at ∼ 1.8 K. The hump causes a departure from the logarithmic divergence below 2.4 K (marked as T∗). This is in exact correspondence with the NFL-to-FL crossover in the resistivity. The hump cannot be described by a two-level Schottky function (Supplementary Fig. 3(a)) 13, excluding the possibility of a Schottky anomaly indirectly. The shape of the hump also does not follow a distinct first-order ‘λ’-anomaly or a jump characteristic of a second-order phase transition; therefore, it likely cannot be attributed to a long-range magnetic order. A similar feature has also been found in the arsenic analogue CeCuAs2 around 4 K, where it has been explained as a disorder-driven continuous metal-insulator transition resulting in a gradual loss of density of states (DOS) with decreasing temperature, although the low-temperature downturn in C/T in CeCuAs2 is still not well understood 15,16. The absence of long-range magnetic order is more clearly demonstrated in Fig. 2(c), where the temperature dependence of the magnetic susceptibility is plotted down to 1.8 K, and below 2 K (left inset) measured in a 3He cryostat. Short-range magnetic order is also excluded by field cooling (FC) and zero FC (ZFC) (Fig. S4(a)), and ac magnetic susceptibility measurements (Supplementary Fig. 7 4(b)) 13. In CeCuAs2, spin-glass freezing and Schottky anomaly origin behind the low-temperature hump in specific heat have also been excluded 14, as we did for CeCuP2. The right inset gives the inverse susceptibility at 0.5 T. By fitting the linear part of the data with the Curie-Weiss law, χ = C/(T-θ), we obtain θ ∼ -284 K and an effective magnetic moment (μeff) of 1.44 μB. The former indicates an effective antiferromagnetic exchange interaction between f-moments, but the size of the moment is significantly reduced compared to the expected value of 2.54 μB for a free Ce3+ ion, suggesting possible mixed-valence of the Ce ions in CeCuP2. Interestingly, the magnetic susceptibility at 0.05 T exhibits an evident power-law divergence with T-0.71 at low temperatures. A comparable exponent has been observed previously in YbRh2(Si0.95Ge0.05)2 with T-(0.6 ± 0.1) and explained in terms of local quantum criticality 17. The similarity suggests potential magnetic quantum-critical fluctuations in CeCuP2 at ambient pressure. More insight on the NFL-to-FL crossover can be obtained from the Hall measurements (Supplementary Fig. 5) 13. Figure 2(d) shows the temperature-dependent Hall coefficient (RH) obtained by fitting the Hall resistivity from 0 to 3 T. We found dominant electron carriers from 0.3 to 20 K. With lowering temperature to 4 K, the magnitude of RH increases monotonously, indicating the increasement of concentration of electron carriers. Upon decreasing the temperature to ∼ 2.4 K, a peak in RH emerges, and then RH decreases. The peak observed in RH may arise from phase transitions smeared by disorders. Since magnetic ordering has been excluded in our experiments, the peak in RH possibly comes from structural variations in consideration of the fractional occupancies on Cu2, P2 and P3 18,19. At the lowest measured temperature, the density of electrons can be estimated to be about 0.006 e- per formula unit, ten times smaller than that in usual HF metals such as CeCoIn5. According to Nozières’ argument 20,21, this may produce a protracted Kondo screening 8 22,23, as the f-moments cannot be fully screened. In CeCuP2, we anticipate that the special electronic structures of the fractionally occupied Cu2, P2, and P3 atoms may tune the Fermi level and leave only few carriers in the conduction bands. Thus, CeCuP2 provides a unique platform for valence tuning in HF materials. The NFL-to-FL anomalies may be associated with this special property of CeCuP2, an interesting topic to be investigated using the state-of-the-art angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) or scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) in the future. The above anomalous features are also reflected in the field measurements. Figure 3(a) plots the in-plane resistivity as a function of the magnetic field applied along the c axis. All resistivity curves cross roughly at a single point at ∼ 2.4 K, around which the magnetoresistance (MR) changes sign. This coincides with the abrupt change in the carrier concentration. The crossing point shifts slightly to higher temperature with increasing field. Isothermal MR measurements (Supplementary Fig. 6(a)) demonstrate the evolution of the MR 13. In Fig. 3(b), the hump in the field-dependent specific heat also shifts gradually to higher temperatures, as observed in CeCuAs2 15. The overall suppression of the specific heat indicates the suppression of quasi-particle excitations with increasing field 13. The field measurements provide crucial information on the QCP in CeCuP2 at ambient pressure. To investigate the origin of the NFL above 2.4 K, we measured the magnetic susceptibility under high fields (see Supplementary Fig. 4(c)). In many HF systems, the critical scaling may be described within a fermion-condensed picture 24-26. Motivated by the established scaling method 25,26, we identify a scaling of its free energy in the scaling variable x = T*(B) ∼ B0.4. The exponent of B is acquired by fitting the maximum value of – dχ/dT in different fields. Its value of 0.4 is smaller than in other QC systems, for example, 1 in β-YbAlB4 23, 0.59 in YFe2Al10 26, and 1.05 in CeNi2Ge2 27. As shown in Fig. 3(c), the magnetic susceptibility in different fields shows a remarkable scaling collapse 9 for 1.8 K  T  18 K and B  7 T, extending over about three orders of magnitude in the scaling variable x, where . This scaling behavior reveals an important property of the underlying free energy. Inspired by the scaling functions fF (x) that were found in β-YbAlB4 25 and YFe2Al10 26, we propose a similar expression for CeCuP2— with and x = T/By. The scaling function fM is related to the original scaling function of the free energy fF, as described in , and y is a magnetic field tuning parameter. By taking the temperature derivative of χ = M/B, we deduce the scaling equation— . Here, c, a, α and ε are the fitting parameters. In the limit of a field-driven FL phase (x << 1), the parameter α is 2 25,26. As shown in Fig. 3(c), the scaling equation can fit the data very well in the limit of quantum criticality (x >>1) with α = 2, but fails in the limit of the field-driven FL phase it would be expected to describe. The reason for this failure may be ascribed to which the system is in the mixed-valence state under ambient pressure. The parameters c, a and ε from the fit with α = 2 are 0.026 ± 0.001, 1.842 ± 0.005, and 0.75 ± 0.05, respectively. The parameter ε = 0.71 can be determined experimentally (see Fig. 2(c)), thus the data agrees well with each other within the fitting uncertainty. We can also treat α as a free parameter to fit the data for all x, yielding an excellent fit. The parameters of c, a, α and ε in this case are 0.024 ± 0.001, 2.743 ± 0.003, 2.80 ± 0.01, and 0.6 ± 0.1, respectively, and ε is again consistent with the experimental value. In contrast to the exponent of x, the parameter α = 2.8 is significantly larger than that expected for a FL phase. To explain this, more theoretical efforts will be required. A T-2.00(2) divergence is also found in the Grüneisen ratio divided by the magnetic field, as shown in the inset to Fig. 3(c). This observation implies further critical behavior 25,26, although the validity of establishing the QCPs through the Grüneisen ratio is still under debate 28. Putting together, all 10 evidence supports quantum criticality possibly interrupted by the NFL-to-FL crossover at zero field and ambient pressure in CeCuP2. We have also checked the field dependence of the resistivity coefficient A and the upper boundary of the Fermi liquid regime T0. As shown in Fig. 3(d), T0 changes slightly from 1.7 to 1.5 and A also decreases, suggesting reduced electronic scatterings. Pressure-induced quantum phase transitions and superconductivity. Next, we turn to pressure measurements. Due to the low magnitude of the energy scales in HF materials, pressure is an efficient tool to tune the ground state properties. Figures 4(a) and 4(b) show the resistivity under pressure up to 2.16 GPa measured from 2 to 300 K in PPMS and from 0.3 to 5 K using a 3He refrigerator, respectively. With increasing pressure up to Pc1 ~ 0.7 GPa, Tcoh is gradually suppressed to zero and the magnitude of the resistivity below Tcoh increases correspondingly. The resistivity exhibits semi-metallic behavior at 0.71 GPa (left panel of Fig. 4(b)) and its value at 0.3 K is about 22 times larger than that at ambient pressure. The inset of Fig. S7 summarizes the evolution of Tcoh and the resistivity at 0.3 K with increasing pressure 13. It is well-known that Tcoh marks the emergence of heavy quasiparticles and its magnitude reflects the effective strength of collective hybridization between f and conduction electrons 29,30. The decrease of Tcoh in CeCuP2 is in sharp contrast to most Ce-based HF materials, where pressure usually enhances the hybridization. In the Doniach paradigm, this is caused by the increase of the Kondo coupling |J|, namely |J|/P > 0 30,31. The situation in CeCuP2 is therefore highly unusual. Similar suppression has also been observed in CeRhIn5 below 1.2 GPa 31, but ascribed to other effects such as the spin freezing or enhanced 2D AFM fluctuations associated with its low-temperature AFM order 31, and UTe2 32, the increase in valence towards a U4+ (5f2) state, which is generally expected to drive the system from superconducting to 11 antiferromagnetic 32. In Yb-based HF compounds, Tcoh also decreases with pressure due to the shift of the f levels away from the Fermi energy, which, would typically lead to magnetic ordering at high pressure. Regardless of Ce-based, U-based or Yb-based, the reduced coherence temperature is proposed to be related to magnetic fluctuations. Therefore, the decrease in the Kondo coherence temperature in CeCuP2 motivates us to check the magnetic field effect under pressure. Supplementary Figure 6(b) shows the pressure dependence of the MR investigated at 2 K (detail discussions can be found in the Supplementary Note 7 13), finding the change of the scattering mechanism, indicative of the possible magnetic fluctuations, although there is no any indication for magnetic transitions in resistivity under pressure (Figs. 4(a) and 4(b)). In Supplementary Fig. 10, we demonstrate the existence of pressure-induced valence fluctuations of Ce 4f electrons in CeCuP2 by means of the scaling of resistivity under pressure. As a result, the decrease of coherence temperature and the change of MR under pressure are maybe related to the pressure-induced fluctuations of the Ce 4f electrons in CeCuP2. To confirm this proposal, more works are expected to investigate the magnetic behavior under pressure in the future. The critical behavior around Pc1 is also different. For a pressure-induced magnetic QCP, the electronic scattering coefficient A usually diverges in the vicinity of the QCP 3, but this is not observed in CeCuP2. Rather, we found a moderate enhancement near Pc1 (Supplementary Fig. 7) 13. This suggests that the coherent-to-incoherent transition at Pc1 is not associated with a usual magnetic or delocalization transition often observed in other HF compounds. Upon further increasing pressure up to Pc2 ~ 4.0 GPa, the resistivity becomes suppressed but the system remains in an incoherent state down to the lowest measured temperature. In this intermediate region, the resistivity responds very differently to the magnetic field compared to the low-pressure region. Fig. 4(c) shows the resistivity 12 at 2.16 GPa, which decreases monotonically with increasing field, indicating a change in the scattering mechanism. Thus, the phase diagram of CeCuP2 cannot be simply understood within the Doniach paradigm based on the competition between long-range magnetism and Kondo hybridization. It is essential to take other important factors into consideration, for example, charge fluctuations. HF superconductivity has often been observed in the vicinity of magnetic or valance instabilities 3. Inspired by this, we have carried out further pressure measurements on CeCuP2 polycrystal obtained by crushing a single crystal. Figure 4(d) plots the temperature dependence of the normalized resistance at different pressures without pressure transmitting medium (denoted as Run1). The Kondo incoherent phase persists up to 4.6 GPa, above which a small drop in the resistance is seen to emerge at low temperatures. At 6.3 GPa, the resistance starts to display typical metallic behavior. Surprisingly, a superconducting drop emerges around the same pressure. The superconducting temperature (Tconset) defined by the onset of the transition reaches 4.7 K at 14.8 GPa, as shown in the inset. To verify the superconductivity observed in CeCuP2, pressure experiments were repeated in another device with NaCl as the pressure transmitting pressure (denoted as Run2), as displayed in Fig. 4(e). A small drop in the resistance emerges at 4.0 GPa. With increasing pressure to 7.8 GPa, Tc increases to a maximum of 4.3 K, and then decreases beyond 7.8 GPa. At 11.0 GPa and down to 1.9 K the lowest temperature we measured, there is no any indications of superconductivity. The pressure-dependent Tc ranging from 4.0 to 11.0 GPa displays a clear dome shape, as plotted in Fig. 1(b). Upon further compression beyond 11.0 GPa, the second superconducting state (SC2) arises, it spans over a wide pressure range, which is much broader in pressure than that in usual HF 13 superconductors 3. At ~ 34.0 GPa, the Tc displays a dip, which is a mystery for now. At 48.0 GPa the highest pressure we measured, Tc reaches 6.1 K 3. To verify the superconducting transition and obtain the upper critical fields (μ0Hc2s), we applied the magnetic field at several pressures. As shown in Supplementary Fig. 9, the transition is gradually suppressed by magnetic field, as expected for superconductivity, although zero resistance hasn’t been achieved. Considering the fractional occupancies of the crystal sites in CeCuP2, we propose several scenarios for the nonzero resistance. The first one is the poor grain contact in the polycrystalline sample and an anisotropic superconducting order parameter 33. A single crystal high-pressure transport study may thus help to find zero resistance, and an even higher transition temperature in the superconducting phases of CeCuP2. The second is that the actual stoichiometric ratio of Ce : Cu : P = 1 : 1.14 : 2 is not optimal for superconductivity. The crystal structure of CeCuP2 provides a unique platform for chemical doping. Therefore, tuning the concentration of copper and phosphorus may facilitate the observation of zero resistance. The third is the local inhomogeneity under pressure, which would be associated with a spatial variation of the copper and phosphorus concentration, local density of states, and superconducting order parameter 34. This inhomogeneity would lead to filamentary superconductivity 34. The last one is that the pressure is inhomogeneous and not locally hydrostatic. This could drastically smear out the transition, especially if the order parameter is anisotropic and especially at higher pressures. Determining the reason for nonzero resistance is left for a future study. Previously, the highest transition temperatures reported among all Ce-based HF superconductors are 2.3 K for CeCoIn5 at ambient pressure 35 and 2.5 K for CeAu2Si2 at ∼ 22.5 GPa 9. Our observed transition temperature in CeCuP2 is the new highest record among all Ce-based HF superconductors. To understand the pairing mechanism, we plot in Fig. 4(f) the temperature dependence of μ0Hc2 14 for 8.4 GPa, 9.7 GPa, 15.4 GPa, Tconset at 23.3 GPa, Tc10% at 23.3 GPa (denoted as 23.3 ́ GPa) and 42.5 GPa, respectively, which are much lower than the Pauli limiting fields HP(0) = 1.84Tc ∼ 7.9, 6.9, 7.7, 8.0, 5.9 and 10.3 T, respectively, indicating that Pauli pair breaking is not relevant 36,37. To get some insight into the superconducting pairing, the initial slopes of the upper critical field at 8.4, 9.7, 15.4, 23.3 and 42.5 GPa have been calculated, yielding -0.012, -0.005, -0.096, -0.428 and -0.372 T/K, respectively. The magnitudes of the initial slopes are much smaller than in other heavy-fermion superconductors 3, suggestive of conventional superconducting pairing. However, this quantity can be affected by other factors, such as disorder, so a small initial slope of the upper critical field cannot serve as a smoking gun for the conventional superconducting pairing. For HF superconductors, a μ0Hc2 not exceeding HP(0) can be also found in other Ce-based systems, for example, CeRh2Si2 38, CePd2Si2 39, Ce3PtIn11 40. To better show the μ0Hc2 behavior of CeCuP2 among Ce-based HF superconductors, we list the ratio of μ0Hc2(0) to HP(0), as displayed in Supplementary Fig. 9. For CeRh2Si2, the resistivity decreases below 0.5 K at ~ 1.05 GPa, and the μ0Hc2 is estimated to be 0.28 T, less than 0.92 T calculated from the Pauli rule 38. Therefore, the low μ0Hc2s in CeCuP2 could not exclude the possibility of unconventional superconducting pairing completely, although the possibility of BCS-like origin cannot be ruled out either. We also note that the low value of upper critical field in CeCuP2 may suggest flux pinning at grain boundaries. In spite of this, two separated superconducting phases observed in CeCuP2 are quite unconventional 3,41,42. Often, superconductivity near an AFM QCP as in CeCoIn5 may be ascribed to a spin-fluctuation-mediated pairing mechanism 3. In CeCuP2, however, the superconductivity develops 15 on the far side of the phase diagram. At ambient pressure, there is no evidence of superconductivity down to the lowest measured temperature. If and to what extent the f electrons may participate in the Cooper pairing remains to be examined in the future. On the other hand, valence fluctuations may also play a role and even promote the pairing 3,41. In CeCu2(Si1-xGex)2 and CeAu2Si2, superconductivity extends to very high pressure far away from the magnetic QCP with a greatly enhanced Tc 3,8,9. It is thus speculated that superconductivity in CeCuP2 near Pc2 or Pc3 may potentially involve a valence mechanism. Discussion Putting together, our systematic measurements can be summarized in the overall P-T phase diagram presented in Figs. 1(a) and 1(b), indicating a rich variation in the electronic properties of CeCuP2 at ambient and high pressure, which is not only different from most other Ce-based HF compounds but also beyond the conventional Doniach paradigm. At ambient pressure, a crossover drives this system from NFL to FL, which is not well understood so far. Scaling analysis demonstrates the quantum critical behavior at ambient pressure and zero field. With increasing pressure, the Kondo coherence state is first suppressed, in contrast to most Ce-based HF compounds, and an intermediate Kondo semi-metallic state emerges in the intermediate pressure region, before a second metallic state emerges at even higher pressures. The unusual phase diagram may be associated with the particular crystal, low-carrier and mixed-valence properties of CeCuP2. The fractional occupancies of the crystal sites provide a rare platform apt for chemical tuning. On the other hand, the low carrier density usually favors a magnetically ordered state. Recent experiments on the HF material CeNi2-δAs2 with a low carrier density of ∼ 0.032 e- per formula unit observed a pressure-induced 16 quantum phase transition from an AFM order to a coherent Kondo screening state 22, with Tcoh emerging and increasing with pressure across the QCP, in line with predictions of the Doniach picture. Thus, the low carrier density alone cannot explain the unusual phase diagram in CeCuP2 and it might be essential to consider other key factors. Since the Ce ions are in a mixed-valence state, we speculate that not only the Kondo hybridization but also the Ce valence is tuned by pressure, which would in turn affect the carrier concentration and the ground state of CeCuP2. As a matter of fact, following previous analysis on CeCu2Si2 and CeRhGe3 43,44, we find a rough resistivity scaling that tentatively points towards a potential pressure-induced valence transition near Pc1 in CeCuP2 (Supplementary Fig. 10). More details can be found in the Supplementary Information 13. If this is the case, the system can no longer be described by the usual Kondo lattice model, which ignores the charge degrees of freedom of the Ce-ions 3. This might cause the breakdown of the Doniach picture. As proposed by Hattori, pressure can drive the ground state of HFs from heavy Fermi liquid to “light” Fermi liquid, where the effective mass is smaller than that in the former, across a first-order meta-orbital transition based on both a two-orbital Anderson lattice model and the self-consistent renormalization (SCR) theory 11. For CeCuP2, the temperature dependence of the resistivity displays typical heavy-fermion behavior. Under high pressure where the superconducting transitions occur, the resistivity shows typical metallic behavior, and the f-electrons may be partially decoupled from the conduction electrons and localized. The small magnitude of the initial upper critical field slopes further indicates conventional superconducting pairing as well as a “light” effective mass compared with other HF superconductors, although this quantity can be affected by disorder and the nonzero resistance. We nonetheless get strong hints that CeCuP2 is on the left side of the first-order transition line, and pressure drives it 17 from heavy Fermi liquid to “light” Fermi liquid across the transition. In the temperature dependence of the resistivity, the valence fluctuations lead to a Tn (n = 1, 4/3, 5/3) dependence near the critical end point (CEP). We then check the temperature dependence of the resistivity (R/R300K) for CeCuP2 at several critical pressures, as shown in Supplementary Fig. 11, finding a Tn (n  2) dependence, which is beyond the SCR picture. Moreover, the P-T phase diagrams obtained here is also different from other Ce-based HF compounds with potential valence instabilities, e.g., CeCu2(Si1-xGex)2, CeAu2Si2, and possibly also CeIrIn5 3,8,9,41. It therefore remains to be understood with more sophisticated models. The superconductivity with enhanced Tc at high pressures might only be fully explained when the valence or other effects are taken into consideration. All these special features make CeCuP2 a unique platform for studying the rich variety of heavy fermion physics beyond the usual Doniach paradigm. Methods Sample preparation. High-purity starting materials of Ce powder (99.9%, Alfa Aesar), Cu powder (99.9%, Alfa Aesar), P flakes (99.999 %, Aladdin) and Sn powder (99.99%, Aladdin) were mixed in a molar ratio of 1 : 1 : 10 : 60 and loaded into an alumina crucible, which was sealed under vacuum in a quartz ampoule. The sealed ampoule was very slowly heated to 1150°C and kept there for 3 days, then cooled at a rate of 1.5 °C/h. The ampoule was taken out and the excess Sn flux decanted with a centrifuge at 500°C. LaCuP2 is prepared by an arc-melting method. High-purity starting materials of La chunk (99.9%, Alfa Aesar), Cu lump (99.9%, Alfa Aesar), P flakes (99.999%, Aladdin) in a molar ratio of 1 : 1.15 : 5 were loaded in a water-cooled copper boat, and the mixture was then arc-melted several times. The obtained compound was ground in a glove box, and the powder was 18 pressed into pills. These pills were sealed in a quartz ampoule, and then annealed at 1000°C for 3 days. Chemical composition and crystal structure determinations can be found in the Supplementary Information 13. Electrical transport and thermodynamics measurements. Resistance measurements from 300 to 2 K and below 2 K were performed in a physical property measurement system (PPMS; Quantum Design) and a 3He cryostat, respectively. dc magnetic susceptibility measurements were performed in a magnetic property measurement system (MPMS; Quantum Design) equipped with a 3He cryostat, with magnetic field applied perpendicular to the ab plane of the CeCuP2 single crystal. ac magnetic susceptibility measurements were performed in a PPMS equipped with a dilution refrigerator. Heat capacity measurements were conducted using the relaxation method in a PPMS equipped with a 3He cryostat and magnetic field was also applied along c axis of the CeCuP2 single crystal. Pressure measurements. For high-pressure experiments, samples were loaded in a piston-cylinder clamp cell made of Be-Cu alloy, with Daphne oil as the pressure medium. The pressure inside the cell was determined from the Tc of a tin wire. A CeCuP2 single crystal was cut into a bar shape, and the standard four-probe method was used for resistivity measurements, with contacts made using silver epoxy. Higher-pressure measurements were performed on powder samples comprising crushed single crystals using a diamond anvil cell (DAC). For Run1 measurements, no pressure transmitting medium was adopted, while, for Run2 measurements, NaCl was used as the pressure transmitting medium. The experimental pressures were determined by the pressure-induced fluorescence shift of ruby 2 at room temperature before and after each experiment. A direct-current van der Pauw 19 technique was adopted. Data availability The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.