High-performance lasers for fully integrated silicon nitride photonics Chao Xiang,1, ∗ Joel Guo,1 Warren Jin,1 Jonathan Peters,1 Weiqiang Xie,1 Lin Chang,1 Boqiang Shen,2 Heming Wang,2 Qi-Fan Yang,2 Lue Wu,2 David Kinghorn,1, 3 Mario Paniccia,4 Kerry J. Vahala,2 Paul A. Morton,5 and John E. Bowers1, † 1Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, California 93106, USA 2T. J. Watson Laboratory of Applied Physics, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA 3Pro Precision Process and Reliability LLC, Carpinteria, CA, USA 4Anello Photonics, Santa Clara, CA, USA 5Morton Photonics,West Friendship, Maryland 21794, USA Silicon nitride (SiN) waveguides with ultra-low optical loss enable integrated photonic applica- tions including low noise, narrow linewidth lasers, chip-scale nonlinear photonics, and microwave photonics1. Lasers are key components to SiN photonic integrated circuits (PICs), but are diffi- cult to fully integrate with low-index SiN waveg- uides due to their large mismatch with the high- index III-V gain materials. The recent demon- stration of multilayer heterogeneous integration provides a practical solution and enabled the first- generation of lasers fully integrated with SiN waveguides2–4. However a laser with high device yield and high output power at telecommunica- tion wavelengths, where photonics applications are clustered, is still missing, hindered by large mode transition loss, nonoptimized cavity design, and a complicated fabrication process. Here, we report high-performance lasers on SiN with tens of milliwatts output through the SiN waveg- uide and sub-kHz fundamental linewidth, ad- dressing all of the aforementioned issues. We also show Hertz-level linewidth lasers are achievable with the developed integration techniques. These lasers, together with high-Q SiN resonators, mark a milestone towards a fully-integrated low-noise silicon nitride photonics platform. This laser should find potential applications in LIDAR, mi- crowave photonics and coherent optical commu- nications. Silicon nitride photonics is emerging in recent years as advanced photonic devices require better performance than is available from traditional Si or InGaAsP waveg- uides. As a fully CMOS-compatible material, SiN- based waveguides offer low optical propagation loss, wide transparency from the visible to the infrared, a low thermo-optic coefficient and absence of nonlinear ab- sorption loss5–8, thus forming the backbone of chip- scale nonlinear photonics9–12, high-fidelity integrated mi- crowave photonics systems13 and ultra-broadband inte- grated photonic circuits14,15. As a result, SiN-based photonic components, benefiting from the superior pas- sive properties of SiN material, represent the state-of- the-art performance of integrated photonics, including frequency comb generators16–19, optical gyroscopes20, radio-frequency filtering21 and so on. SiN photonics has been largely restricted at the stand- alone component level as the integration with active de- vices including lasers, modulators, amplifiers and pho- todetectors has been difficult. First of all, as a dielec- tric material, SiN lacks a direct energy bandgap for effi- cient carrier radiative recombination or electro-optic ef- fect, which are the basis of lasers and modulators. In addition, the refractive index of SiNx at telecommunica- tion wavelength (1.55 μm) is around 2, depending on the silicon content. This low refractive index possess sig- nificant difficulties in its integration with active III-V gain materials through direct heterogeneous III-V/SiN integration, analogous to heterogeneous III-V/Si integra- tion, which has achieved success in optical interconnect applications22,23. Recent progress in multilayer integration leverages an intermediate Si layer as the index matching layer to cre- ate III-V/Si/SiN structures2. This structure not only provides optical gain to SiN photonic circuits so that lasers or amplifiers can be formed, but can also enrich the photonic functionalities of SiN photonic circuits as opti- cal modulation24 and detection25 are also enabled using existing III-V/Si or Si devices. Another compelling op- portunity through the integration of ultra-low-loss SiN into various photonic device is that the device perfor- mance can be optimized with another degree of free- dom. One prominent example is the semiconductor laser linewidth, which is largely restricted to the MHz range for monolithic III-V lasers26. The underlying prospect is that low-loss Si waveguides and ultra-low loss SiN waveg- uides can offer orders-of-magnitude longer optical cavities compared to III-V or Si waveguides, to reduce the laser linewidth due to the reduced optical loss. Sub-kHz and Hz-level fundamental linewidth semiconductor lasers are demonstrated though heterogeneous or hybrid integra- tion of III-V gain with low-loss Si27–29 or SiN30–33. High-power, low-noise semiconductor lasers are of crit- ical importance in many applications including coherent communications, LIDAR and remote sensing34. Here we demonstrate high-power (>10 mW), low-noise (<1 kHz fundamental linewidth) and <-150 dBc/Hz RIN (rel- ative intensity noise) lasers using multilayer heteroge- neous integration. These lasers, in a proven integra- tion scheme with ultra-high-Q SiN microresonators, yield arXiv:2104.08414v1 [physics.optics] 17 Apr 2021 2 InP/Si SiN Si N-InP P-InP H+ H+ In0.53Al0.183Ga0.287As QW P-InGaAs N-contact P-contact Si substrate Buried SiO2 Spacer SiO2 Upper SiO2 SiN Si photonic circuits InP/Si Si/SiN SiN photonic circuits Si SiN core SiN post SiN laser output SOI 1. SiN processing 2. Si processing 3. InP processing InP 4. Passivation and metallization Si loop mirror Si reflector P-InP N-InP Si N contact P contact H+ implant InP/Si gain Ti/Pt heater Phase tuner Si MZI SiN grating Probe pad a b heater laser integrated with Si photonic circuits and SiN photonic circuits after the laser passivation and before probe metal deposition (top). Three insets on the bottom show the fabrication process including SiN processing and SOI bonding (left), Si processing and InP bonding (middle), and InP processing (right). b. A device optical photograph showing InP/Si/SiN DBR laser arrays. The lasers consist of four sections including the SiN grating, InP/Si gain section, Si reflector and phase tuner, with each schematic shown respectively. Hertz-level fundamental linewidth on-chip lasers, and can also directly generate optical frequency combs. Our high-performance laser could be a key enabler for fully- integrated SiN photonics featured with on-chip frequency comb generation capability35–37, ultra-low phase noise enabled by self-injection locking32, high fidelity for mi- crowave photonics38–41, high channel-count for DWDM (dense wavelength division multiplexing) systems42 and so on. Laser design. The laser is constructed in a way that the Si layer, sandwiched between the III-V epi layer and SiN layer, bridges the refractive indices and provides ad- ditional intra-cavity phase control capability. As shown in Fig. 1a, two wafer bonding steps, including SOI bond- ing and InP bonding, follow SiN processing and Si pro- cessing respectively. SOI bonding uses a large piece of SOI (500-nm thick Si layer) to cover the entire device area including laser gain area and SiN photonic circuits, which helps to maintain the low loss of SiN waveguides during III-V processing. As a result, in addition to standard III-V processing as used in III-V/Si lasers, the removal of excess Si on top of the SiN photonic circuits except the taper needs to be performed before laser passivation. Equipped by this multilayer structure, our laser con- tains the following main sections as shown in Fig. 1b: SiN Bragg grating, InP/Si gain, Si reflector and phase tuner. The SiN grating is a low-κ (coupling constant) side post grating, made by placing SiN posts along the SiN waveguide core on both sides. The gap width be- tween the core and posts is constant and can be tailored 3 103 104 105 106 107 108 Offset frequency (Hz) 102 103 104 105 Frequency noise (Hz2/Hz) -0.1 0 0.05 0.1 (nm) -15 -10 -5 0 Normalized reflection (dB) 50 100 150 200 250 300 Current (mA) 0 5 10 15 20 25 SiN waveguide power (mW) 2.5 mm, 0.25 cm -1 2.5 mm, 0.75 cm -1 1.5 mm, 0.875 cm -1 1520 1530 1540 1550 1560 1570 Wavelength (nm) -60 -40 -20 0 Power (dBm) 0 5 10 15 20 RF frequency (GHz) -170 -160 -150 -140 -130 -120 RIN (dBc/Hz) a b c e d and grating κ values (0.25 cm-1, 0.75 cm-1 and 0.875 cm-1). b. Corresponding grating reflection response of lasers measured in a. c. Optical spectrum of high-power laser (shown in blue in a and b) at a gain current of 300 mA. d. Laser frequency noise spectrum of a laser with sub-kHz fundamental linewidth and low frequency noise. e. Laser RIN measurements of a low-threshold laser (shown in green in a and b). to achieve the desired κ value. In order to achieve a long cavity length with high singlemode selectivity, the grat- ings use the maximum available 20 mm in length to fit the laser within a deep ultra-violet (DUV) stepper mask reti- cle, providing an extended-distributed Bragg reflector (E- DBR). The InP/Si gain section uses a hybrid InP/Si ac- tive waveguide with mode transition tapers to the under- neath Si waveguide. Details of this type of hybrid section can be found in previous work43. The gain section lengths are chosen to be 2.5 mm or 1.5 mm in different laser de- signs. Here the Si waveguide is shallow etched with 231 nm etch depth to support single transverse-electric (TE) mode in the hybrid InP/Si waveguide section. After for- mation of the wide InP mesa and laser passivation, pro- ton implantation is implemented to define the electrical current channels for efficient carrier injection. While the SiN grating provides narrow-band feedback for one mir- ror, the other mirror is a broadband Si reflector based on a tunable Si loop mirror. A thermally-controlled Si MZI (Mach–Zehnder interferometer) is used to tune the interferometer power splitting ratio and, consequently, the total reflectivity. The Si reflector is designed to pro- vide 100 % power reflectivity with zero bias as the initial state. A phase tuner using a thermally tuned heater is included between the InP/Si gain and SiN grating, to tune the cavity phase condition. The E-DBR laser out- put is taken through the SiN grating in a SiN waveguide, followed by a SiN inverse taper for efficient chip-to-fiber coupling and off-chip laser characterization. The laser output could also be directed to other SiN photonic in- tegrated circuits and devices on demand. In our E-DBR laser, the SiN waveguide is 90-nm thick and 2.8-μm wide, with an effective mode refractive index around 1.46 and effective mode area of 5.3 μm2. In order to enable a highly efficient mode conversion between the Si waveguide and SiN waveguide, the shallow-etched Si waveguide mode is transformed to 269-nm thick Si fully- etch waveguide mode and then tapered to a 150-nm wide taper tip over a 50-μm length. The laser fabrication is a wafer-scale process, which is performed on a 100-mm di- 4 ameter wafer and all the optical lithography is performed using a DUV stepper. Details of the fabrication process can be found in Methods. Laser characterization. laser characterization results. The laser output power is measured from the output-coupled optical lensed fiber. The coupling loss is 3.5 dB from the SiN inverse taper at the chip facet. The light-current (LI) curves are shown in Fig. 2a for three lasers with different gain section lengths (1.5 mm or 2.5 mm) and different SiN grating κ designs (0.25 cm-1, 0.75 cm-1 and 0.875 cm-1). The SiN output waveguide power is above 10 mW for each of these lasers. The LI measurements show that a longer gain section length together with a smaller grating κ value (weaker grating feedback) are advantageous for higher laser out- put power, as a smaller κ corresponds to a larger mirror loss at the output facet. The minimum κ value, which represents the minimum grating feedback strength sus- taining lasing conditions, is determined with a combi- nation of factors including the laser gain, intrinsic loss, Si/SiN taper loss and SiN waveguide loss30. The laser threshold also depends on the laser gain section length and the grating feedback. A short gain section length of 1.5 mm together with a large grating κ value of 0.875 cm-1 results in the low laser threshold of 42 mA for the long external cavity laser (20 mm-long external cavity). The SiN grating reflection responses for the three lasers in Fig. 2a are shown in Fig. 2b. From the normalized reflec- tion, it is clear that the smaller grating κ design results in a narrower reflection bandwidth, however with limited side lobe suppression (3.5 dB). For larger κ values, the grating reflection bandwidth would increase. The side lobe suppression would have a maximum ratio at certain κ, and see a decrease with further increased κ value, as indicated by the red and green curve in Fig. 2b. As the SiN grating provides the narrow-band reflec- tion and the Si reflector feedback is broadband, the laser wavelength is determined by the SiN grating. Here the grating period is 526 nm and the lasing wavelength is around 1548 nm. Single mode operation is achieved with proper phase conditions and the single-mode laser out- puts high power within the mode hop areas as shown in Fig. 2a. Side mode suppression ratio (SMSR) as high as 54 dB is achieved for the high-power laser with 2.5 mm long gain section and 0.25 cm-1 grating κ, at a gain current of 300 mA (Fig. 2c). The extended SiN grating provides a long external cav- ity which enables a narrow laser linewidth. For an exter- nal cavity laser, the laser linewidth ∆υ = ∆υ0/(1 + A + B), where ∆υ0 is the laser Schawlow-Townes linewidth without external feedback, which is determined by the III-V/Si gain section, factor A is the ratio of external passive cavity length (Si waveguide within the laser cav- ity and SiN grating) to the active III-V/Si gain section length, and factor B includes the detuned loading ef- fect which requires a slight red-detuning of the operation wavelength relative to the grating reflection peak44–46. The frequency noise spectrum of a laser with a relatively strong grating κ value and 2.5-mm long gain section is shown in Fig. 2d. The Lorentzian linewidth is around 780 Hz, thanks to the large grating slope on the long wavelength side of the reflection response, which provides a strong negative feedback to reduce the laser linewidth. We also measured the relative-intensity-noise (RIN) of the 1.5 mm-long gain section laser (0.875 cm-1 grating κ). The results are shown in Fig. 2e. For gain currents around 230 mA and 300 mA, the RIN are measured be- low -150 dBc/Hz up to 20 GHz. This low RIN is due to the narrow bandwidth feedback from the SiN grating. Integration with ultra-high-Q SiN photonics. With the laser fully-integrated within SiN photonic inte- grated circuits, its performance can be further enhanced by the addition of ultra-low-loss and ultra-high-Q SiN photonics devices. Moving towards an ultra low phase noise system, our laser can be integrated with an ultra- high-Q SiN ring resonator. For a proof-of-concept, here we butt coupled our SiN laser with a stand-alone SiN high-Q ring resonator with nominal intrinsic Q factor around 40 million. ity feedback from the resonator on the laser coherence. Within the E-DBR laser, due to the large mode mismatch between the Si and SiN waveguides, efficient mode tran- sition with low reflection is only possible when the taper tip is narrow. On the other hand, in devices where the taper tip is wider and provides enough feedback, the laser can lase from the wide taper tip and high-reflection re- flector in a Fabry-Pérot (FP) mode (in mode competition with SiN grating based lasing), with the output coupled to the SiN waveguide. This results in a low-coherence lasing condition, lasing from a coupled FP cavity formed by the series of tapers (III-V/Si to Si taper and Si to SiN taper) and the Si reflector. Due to the lack of long external cavity, the laser exhibits very low coherence, i.e. a broad laser linewidth. For a properly designed and highly-efficient Si/SiN transition taper with low back-reflection, the laser feed- back is provided by the SiN grating, enabling high- coherence lasing and the laser fundamental linewidth is sub-kHz or kHz. In this case, the SiN grating is part of the external cavity and needs to be low-loss to pro- vide enough feedback to facilitate the SiN grating based lasing. However, as the grating length is limited by its physical length (the grating effective cavity length is al- ways shorter than physical length) this approach cannot be extended beyond the physical cavity length limit. As a comparison, resonant structures like ring resonators offer optical length enhancement depending on Q-factor and the bus waveguide to ring resonator coupling ratio. To further reduce the laser linewidth, one solution is to self-injection lock the laser to an ultra-high-Q ring resonator on the same SiN platform. Both E-DBR and FP laser operation worked well with external resonator feedback in self-injection locked operation; the E-DBR providing the best frequency noise results (Fig. 3c), while the FP-based operation can be used to generate 5 100 101 102 103 104 105 106 107 Offset frequency (Hz) 10-1 101 103 105 107 109 1011 1013 Frequency noise (Hz2/Hz) SiN laser SiN laser locked to SiN resonator Phase SiN cavity Gain 1. Low-coherence lasing 2. High-coherence lasing 3. Self-injection locking 1572 1574 1576 1578 Wavelength (nm) Power (20 dB/div) 30 GHz a c 100 SiN waveguide Wavelength (nm) 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 Transmission (a.u.) 40 41 42 43 44 45 Intrinsic Q (M) 0 Frequency (MHz) 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 Transmission (a.u.) 5 GHz d b SiN high-Q ring resonator Q0 = 42 x 106 Heterogeneous laser on SiN self-injection locking with SiN high-Q ring resonators. a. Schematic illustration of three lasing conditions with a III-V/Si/SiN platform. Each condition relies on different feedback mechanism and results in different laser coherence. b. Transmission of a high-Q SiN ring resonator with 5 GHz FSR and the corresponding intrinsic Q factor around the SiN laser resonance. Bottom shows the zoom-in resonance transmission used for self-injection locking with fitted curve (shown in red). c. Laser frequency noise of a high-coherence SiN laser with (purple) and without (blue) self-injection-locked to a high-Q SiN ring resonator. The red reference line shows 1 Hz2/Hz frequency noise. d. Optical spectrum showing frequency comb generation of a high-power laser on III-V/Si/SiN platform self-injection locked to a 30 GHz FSR high-Q ring resonator. frequency combs once it exceeds the parametric oscil- lation threshold (Fig. 3d). Our E-DBR laser and the SiN resonator use identical facet inverse taper and iden- tical SiN waveguide geometry. The SiN ring resonator has 5 GHz free spectral range (FSR). The measured Q factor around the laser wavelength (1548 nm) is shown in Fig. 3b. For the resonance used for the laser self- injection locking, the intrinsic Q factor is around 42 mil- lion. The laser self-injection locking happens when the laser wavelength coincides with the SiN ring resonance, where the feedback signal results from Rayleigh scatter- ing at the high-Q resonance within the ring resonator. The E-DBR laser frequency noise before and after self- injection locking is shown in Fig. 3c. It can be seen that the laser frequency noise is reduced by around 30 dB across the full frequency range, resulting in below 1 Hz2/Hz white noise floor which corresponds to around 3 Hz Lorentzian linewidth. The phase noise can be further decreased by introducing an add-drop ring configuration and taking the laser output from the drop port of the ring resonator32. Another capability with this integration platform is optical frequency comb generation, as the laser output power exceeds the high-Q SiN ring parametric oscilla- tion threshold. Figure 3d shows frequency comb genera- tion from a high-Q SiN ring resonator with 30 GHz line spacing, directly pumped by a low-coherence FP laser from a SiN waveguide output. With further increased output power, dark pulses are achievable using this inte- gration platform with normal-dispersion SiN waveguides. It needs to be noted, the direct pumping scheme us- ing laser self-injection locking can also be extended us- ing our platform with dispersion-engineered thick SiN waveguides for bright soliton generation19. The laser and fully-integrated III-V/Si/SiN structure can thus form an ultra-low-noise laser and nonlinear photonics plat- form for various applications including coherent optical communications47, optical clocks48 and optical/RF fre- 6 quency synthesizers49. In summary, we have demonstrated high-power, low noise lasers heterogeneously integrated with SiN photonic integrated circuits. The laser also enabled Hertz-level linewidth laser output and optical frequency comb gen- eration on the same platform, paving the way for the next-generation ultra-low-noise integrated photonics for a wide variety of applications. Moreover, our integration platform can be extended to other material systems by re- placing either the gain medium (e.g. quantum dots50) or low loss waveguiding material (e.g. lithium niobate51–53), enabling seamless integration of high-performance lasers in various photonic platforms.