Ultralow Threshold, Single-Mode InGaAs/GaAs Multi- Quantum Disk Nanowire Lasers Xutao Zhang†, Ruixuan Yi†, Nikita Gagraniξ, Ziyuan Liξ, Fanlu Zhangξ, Xuetao Gan†*, Xiaomei Yaoψ§, Xiaoming Yuan#, Naiyin Wangξ, Jianlin Zhao†, Pingping Chenψ§*, Wei Luψ§*, Lan Fuξ@, Hark Hoe Tanξ@, and Chennupati Jagadishξ@ †Key Laboratory of Light Field Manipulation and Information Acquisition, Ministry of Industry and Information Technology, and Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Optical Information Technology, School of Physical Science and Technology, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710129, China ξDepartment of Electronic Materials Engineering, Research School of Physics, The Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia. ψState Key Laboratory for Infrared Physics, Shanghai Institute of Technical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 500 Yutian Road, Shanghai 200083, China §University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 19 Yuquan Road, Beijing 100049, China #Hunan Key Laboratory of Nanophotonics and Devices, School of Physics and Electronics, Central South University, 932 South Lushan Road, Changsha, Hunan 410083, P. R. China. School of Physical Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, 393 Middle Huaxia Road, Pudong District, Shanghai 201210, China. @ARC Centre of Excellence for Transformative Meta-Optical Systems, Research School of Physics, The Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia. ABSTRACT: We present single-mode nanowire (NW) lasers with ultralow threshold in the near-infrared spectral range. To ensure the single-mode operation, the NW diameter and length are reduced specifically to minimize the longitudinal and transverse modes of the NW cavity. Increased optical losses and reduced gain volume by the dimension reduction are compensated by excellent NW morphology and InGaAs/GaAs multi-quantum disks. At 5 K, a threshold low as 1.6 μJ/cm2 per pulse is achieved with a resulting quality factor exceeding 6400. By further passivating the NW with an AlGaAs shell to suppress surface non-radiative recombination, single-mode lasing operation is obtained with a threshold of only 48 μJ/cm2 per pulse at room temperature with a high characteristic temperature of 223 K and power output of ~ 0.9 μW. These single-mode, ultralow threshold, high power output NW lasers are promising for the development of near-infrared nanoscale coherent light sources for integrated photonic circuits, sensing, and spectroscopy. Keywords:nanowire laser, single-mode, quantum disks, low threshold, near-infrared Nanowire (NW) lasers with their ultracompact footprint, ease of integration, and low energy consumption are of great interests for future integrated photonic devices in optical interconnects and super-resolution imaging.1-7 Due to its natural geometry, the NW itself forms an optical cavity and by using materials such as III-V semiconductors as the NW, gain can also be achieved simultaneously. The NW's two end facets function as the mirrors of a Fabry-Perot (F-P) cavity.8-10 Unfortunately, despite its physical dimension, there are normally multiple longitudinal and transverse modes of NW-based F-P cavity that overlap with the NW gain spectrum.11 It results in the multimode operation of the NW lasers, which is undesirable in many applications and would hinder the future applications of NW lasers. For instance, multimode operation could cause time-domain pulse broadening and signal crosstalk in optical communications, limiting the bandwidth.12-14 In past decades, a variety of strategies have been developed to achieve single-mode NW lasers. Coupling multiple NW cavities could increase the free spectral range (FSR) of the resonant modes using the Vernier effect,15, 16 thereby allowing only one mode to overlap with the gain curve for the single-mode lasing. However, this would involve awkward manipulations of NWs down to the nm-scale accuracy in order to align the NWs. By patterning the NW with a periodic nanostructure or placing the NW on a grating, single lasing mode could be achieved via the distributed feedback effect.12, 17 However, this implementation involves the complicated nanofabrication processes on the NW, which can degrade the material properties. The number of resonant modes in NW F-P cavity can also be reduced by reducing the NW diameter and length, and single-mode NW lasers have been reported.11, 18 However, reduction in NW dimension increases the optical loss significantly considerably, especially in the near-infrared range.19-21 In addition, the active gain volume is reduced by reducing the NW dimension, leading to higher lasing threshold. In this work, we report single-mode NW lasers with ultralow threshold at the wavelengths around 950 nm. Through computational methods, the NW length and diameter are optimized to ~ 2.2 μm and ~ 200 nm, respectively, to support single-mode lasing. This is the smallest dimension reported to date for NW lasers. To overcome the large optical loss and small gain volume, multiple GaAs/InGaAs quantum disks (QDs) are grown in the central region of the GaAs NW to provide sufficient optical gains. At 5 K, the lasing threshold is low as 1.6 μJ/cm2 per pulse with a Q-factor exceeding 6400. By further passivating the NW with an AlGaAs shell uniformly to suppress surface non- radiative recombination, room temperature single-mode lasing operation is obtained with a low threshold of 48 μJ/cm2 per pulse and a power output ~ 0.9 μW. The merits of single-mode, ultralow threshold, and room temperature operation make near-infrared NW laser a promising nanoscale coherent light source for integrated photonic circuits, sensing and spectroscopy. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION The inserted GaAs/InGaAs QDs in the GaAs NW have a spontaneous emission around 1 μm in wavelength with a linewidth of 50 nm (see Figure S1). To realize single- mode lasing, the geometry of the NW is designed with the assistance of mode simulations using the two dimensional finite difference eigenmode (FDE) solver. The number of transverse and longitudinal optical modes of the NW cavity is minimized around the gain spectral range. In the simulation, a pure GaAs NW lying on a SiO2 substrate (index ~ 1.45) is employed considering the refractive indices of GaAs and InGaAs are similar. Due to the large refractive index of GaAs, the NW supports multiple transverse modes, including HE11, HE21, EH11, TE01, TM01, etc. The effective refractive indices of these modes are calculated for NWs of different diameters, as shown in considering the underlying SiO2 substrate. Note, because the SiO2 substrate breaks the symmetry of the NW modes, the degenerate modes are separated slightly, such as HE11a and HE11b, HE21a and HE21b. When the NW diameter is larger than 165 nm, the effective refractive index of the HE11a mode is higher than 1.45, which could support a resonance mode. As the diameter increases, the number of supported resonance modes in the NW cavity also increases. When the diameter of the NW is in the range of 165 - 230 nm, only two transverse modes HE11a and HE11b are supported in the cavity. This is the preferred range of the NW diameter for realizing single transverse mode lasing. The mode spacing (Δλ) can be obtained through: Δλ = λ2 2L (neff − λ dneff dλ ) −1 in which λ is center wavelength (1000 nm), L is the length of NW and neff is the effective refractive index of guided mode. According to the definition of group index ng, the mode spacing could also be expressed as follows: Δλ = λ2 2L ng −1 By simulation in Lumerical MODE analysis, the group index of HE11a and HE11b are calculated to be 5.60 and 5.99, respectively. Figure 1b shows the change of the mode spacings of HE11a and HE11b modes with NW length for a fixed diameter of 200 nm. When the length of NW equals to 3.3 μm, the mode spacings of HE11a and HE11b are approximate 30 and 25 nm. Moreover, the mode spacings increase as the length of NW decreases. For a gain curve with a spectral width of ~ 50 nm (in the case of our InGaAs/GaAs QDs), then there only one mode within this bandwidth when the length is less than 3.3 μm (see the inset of Figure 1b). Therefore single longitudinal mode lasing can be expected. refractive index for different modes as a function of the NW diameter. (b) Modal optical mode spacing as a function of reciprocal of NW length with a diameter of 200 nm. The inset plot shows the QD gain spectrum, the expected NW laser output and the various F-P modes sustained by the NW cavity. (c) SEM image at 30° tilt angle of NW array standing on the GaAs(111)B substrate (the diameter of the mask opening is 40 nm). (d) Top view of a vertical NW, showing a diameter of about 200 nm. (e) STEM image of a transferred NW, showing that the QDs are located about 1.2 m from the bottom of the NW. The inset in the upper right corner shows that the NW contains 10 InGaAs QDs. (f) Magnified view showing that the thickness of the QD is approximately 19 nm. With the optimized design, the GaAs NWs with ten In0.2Ga0.8As/GaAs QDs are grown by selective area metal-organic vapor phase epitaxy (SA-MOVPE) to the required dimensions (see Figure S2 and the Methods details). To obtain high optical efficiency, the composition and thickness of these ten QDs should be as uniform as possible. Figure 1c shows the 30° tilted scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of the NW array on the growth substrate. The NWs are hexagonal prisms with a length of 2.2 μm, which are uniform and smooth from the bottom to the top without any tapering. These features are important to maintain a stable guided mode along the NW to obtain a high Q factor in the optical cavity. The top view shown in Figure 1d indicates the NWs have a diameter of 200 nm, which can only support the HE11a and HE11b modes. High-angle annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF- STEM) analyses show that multi-QD region (brighter regions correspond to InGaAs QDs), is located about 1.2 μm above the bottom of the NW. The magnified view of the QDs region in the inset of Figure 1e shows the ten InGaAs QDs, separated by GaAs barriers. Figure 1f further shows a higher magnification image of the QDs region where the average thickness of the QDs and barrier are ~ 19 and ~ 35 nm, respectively. These relatively thick QDs (and 10 QDs) are designed and grown to provide sufficient gain.22 Through statistical analysis, we found that the QDs are quite uniform in thickness, an important criterion to obtain high gain and realize low lasing threshold. Emission spectra at different pump fluences. (The y-axis is plotted on a logarithmic scale). The inset in the upper right corner is an SEM image of single NW transferred onto 285 nm-thick SiO2/Si substrate. (b) Spectral map of normalized emission intensity vs pump fluence. (c) Lasing emission intensity (red) and the corresponding FWHM of the spectrum (blue) vs pump fluence plotted on a logarithmic-logarithmic scale. (d-f) Optical images from single NW under a pump fluence of 0.3 Pth (d), 1.0 Pth (e) and 1.5 Pth (f). To evaluate the lasing properties of these NWs, individual NWs were mechanically transferred to a 285 nm-thick SiO2/Si substrate by using a tungsten wire probe, as shown in the upper right corner of Figure 2a. Optical pumping of individual NWs was conducted at 5 K in confocal micro-photoluminescence (μ-PL) system (see the schematic diagram of the experimental setup in Figure S3). Figure 2a shows the emission spectrum from the NW with increasing pump fluence. A broad PL spectrum of about 50 nm in width centered at 975 nm appears at low pump fluences. As the excitation pump fluence is increased, the PL spectrum blue shifts due to band filling effects.20, 23 When the excitation pump fluence is increased to 1.6 μJ/cm2 per pulse, a narrow peak appeared at 959 nm. With further increase in pump fluence, the intensity of this narrow peak increases significantly and dominates the entire emission spectrum with clamping spontaneous emission becoming apparent. Figure 2b shows the spectral map of the NW with increasing pump fluence. A narrow single-mode lasing emission can be clearly observed beyond a fluence of 1.6 μJ/cm2 per pulse. The light output vs light input curve (L-L curve) plotted on a log-log scale in Figure 2c exhibits a typical “S”-shape, a clear indication of the transition from spontaneous emission to amplified spontaneous emission to stimulated emission, which increasing fluence. The full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the lasing peak vs excitation fluence is also shown in but drop suddenly above the lasing threshold. A minimum linewidth of 0.15 nm is achieved (Figure S4), but increases with further increase pump fluence due to thermal broadening effect. The Q-factor is calculated to be 6400 using the formula24 Q = λ/Δλ (λ is the wavelength of lasing peak). The high Q-factor is a result of the highly uniform and regular NW cavity, resulting in a very low lasing threshold Pth of ~1.6 μJ/cm2 per pulse, which is much lower than previously reported for NW lasers.25-29 Furthermore, the threshold can be further reduced by increasing the number of QDs. It is worth mentioning that the free spectral range is ~ 40 nm for our NWs with a length of 2.2 μm, so only one optical longitudinal mode can be supported in the 50 nm gain curve of the InGaAs QDs. Optical imaging is used to further verify the coherence of stimulated emission from the NW laser, as shown in Figures 2d-f. When the pump fluence intensity is 0.3 Pth, two bright spots can be seen on the two end facets of the NW (Figure 2d), indicating the NW forms a good waveguide. At threshold, emission from the two end facets start to interact coherently, forming fringes as seen in Figure 2e. These coherent fringes become more pronounced beyond lasing threshold as shown in Figure 2e at a fluence of 1.5 Pth, conclusively showing that the NW is lasing. NW under a pump fluence of 1.3 Pth at 5 K. (b) Polarization dependence of the lasing intensity (red data points) from experiment and different guides modes (HE11a blue curve, HE11b green curve) from 3D FDTD simulations, which are plotted in polar coordinates relative to the orientation of NW. (c) Normalized time-resolved emission decays from the NW under a pump fluence of 0.25 Pth (d), 0.9 Pth (e) and 1.8 Pth (f). To determine the transverse mode of lasing, we evaluate the polarization dependence of the emission spectrum by changing the angle of the linear polarizer placed along in the signal collection path, which is shown in Figure 3a. The lasing peak intensities under different polarization angles are then extracted from Figure 3a and plotted in polar coordinates relative to the orientation of NW, as shown in Figure 3b. The lasing intensity shows strong linear polarization dependence with a high extinction ratio ρ = (I∥ − I⊥) (I∥ + I⊥) ⁄ of 84%, in which the polarization direction is perpendicular to NW axis caused by the characteristic of lasing transverse mode. 3D finite difference time domain (FDTD) simulation30 is further used to understand the polarization dependence of the HE11a/HE11b modes (these two transverse modes are only supported in these NWs with a diameter of 200 nm), as shown in Figure 3b (see supporting information for details). The experimentally measured polarization direction is the same as HE11b mode, and perpendicular to HE11a mode. Furthermore, the experimentally measured polarization extinction ratio also matches well with the simulation results of HE11b mode, suggesting that the lasing mode is HE11b. fluence, which further confirms lasing from the NWs. At low excitation (0.25 Pth), most of carriers are consumed by spontaneous emission and such a long lifetime of 1010 ps even in NWs without surface passivation indicates the surface recombination is suppressed at low temperature. Above threshold, the carrier lifetime significantly shortens to 46 ps, at 1.8 Pth, indicating that stimulated emission now dominates the carrier recombination process. Noted that 46 ps has reached temporal resolution of our system (~ 50 ps), the actual carrier lifetime after stimulated emission could be shorter. In addition, the morphology and quality of each NW in the array are very good, resulting in a high yield and performance (see Figure S5). (a) Emission spectra at different pump fluences plotted on a logarithmic scale in the y- axis. (b) Spectral map of normalized emission intensity vs pump fluence. (c) Lasing emission intensity (red) and the corresponding FWHM of the spectrum (blue) vs pump fluence plotted on a logarithmic-logarithmic scale. (d) Threshold pump fluence vs temperature. Fitting the experimental data points yields a characteristic temperature of 233 K. The inset shows the emission spectra at various temperatures pumped at 1.1 Pth. Due to the high Q-factor and optical gain of these NWs, lasing operation can be sustained up to a temperature of 180 K (see Figure S7). However, to further increase the operating temperature, an AlGaAs shell followed GaAs cap were grown on the NWs to passivate and suppress surface non-radiative recombination. Figures 4a-b and Figure S8 show the emission spectra at different pump fluences. The single mode narrow lasing peak centered at 945.6 nm generates at a pump fluence of 48 μJ/cm2 per pulse has an extremely narrow linewidth about 0.5 nm at 300 K (see Figure 4c). Figure 4d shows lasing threshold fluence Pth versus temperature from 5 to 300 K for the core-shell NW. The Pth~eT T0 ⁄ is used to fit the data, resulting in T0 = 233 K. Such a high characteristic temperature T0 indicates strong quantum confinement of carriers in the QDs. The lasing spectra at various temperatures are shown in the inset of Figure 4d. From 5 to 150 K, the lasing peak shows a slight redshift. The slight redshift of lasing peak is caused by the change of refractive index with temperature. However, at 150 K, a new peak at 918 nm emerges (see also Figure S8) which then continues to redshift slightly with temperature. The emergence of new lasing peak from different transverse modes could be ascribed to the redshift of gain spectrum (see the details in Supporting information), with temperature increasing.31 NW lasers operating in the near-infrared region. Material Cavity length/μm Threshold/μJ cm-2 per pulse Lasing peak/nm Q- factor Temperature