1 Enhanced passive thermal stealth properties of VO2 thin films via gradient W doping Hyuk Jin Kim,a,† Young Hwan Choi,a,† Dongkyu Lee,a,b In Hak Lee,a,c Byoung Ki Choi,a Soo-Hyon Phark,d,e and Young Jun Changa,b,* aDepartment of Physics, University of Seoul, Seoul 02504, Korea, bDepartment of Smart Cities, University of Seoul, Seoul 02504, Korea, cCenter for Spintronics, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul 02792, Korea, dCenter for Quantum Nanoscience, Institute for Basic Science, Seoul 03760, Korea, eDepartment of Physics, Ewha Womans University, Seoul 03760, Korea. ABSTRACT Thermal stealth and camouflage have been intensively studied for blending objects with their surroundings against remote thermal image detection. Adaptive control of infrared emissivity has been explored extensively as a promising way of thermal stealth, but it still requires an additional feedback control. Passive modulation of emissivity, however, has been remained as a great challenge which requires a precise engineering of emissivity over wide temperature range. Here, we report a drastic improvement of passive camouflage thin films capable of concealing thermal objects at near room temperature without any feedback control, which consists of a vanadium dioxide (VO2) layer with gradient tungsten (W) concentration. The gradient W-doping widens the metal-insulator transition width, accomplishing self-adaptive thermal stealth with a smooth change of emissivity. Our simple approach, applicable to other similar thermal camouflage materials for improving their passive cloaking, will find wide applications, such as passive thermal camouflage, urban energy-saving smart windows, and improved infrared sensors. 2 Keywords: Vanadium dioxide (VO2), Thermal stealth, Infrared emission, Metal-insulator transition (MIT), Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) *Corresponding author.: * yjchang@uos.ac.kr (Y.J. Chang) † These authors have contributed equally to this work. 3 I. INTRODUCTION Thermal stealth and camouflage concern the hiding of objects, such as military artillery and soldiers, from remote thermal detection devices like infrared (IR) cameras[1–4]. Thermal radiation is proportional to not only surface temperature of an object, but also its thermal radiation emissivity (ε) for a given radiation wavelength. The IR cameras sense thermal radiation in the wavelength range 7.5 to 14 μm, and are capable of detecting objects with elevated surface temperatures in the dark. However, if ε of the object surface is artificially manipulated, the IR detection cannot distinguish a hot object with reduced ε value. Therefore, an ability to control ε would be beneficial for thermal stealth applications. Electrochromic materials[5–7], optical nanostructures, plasmonic resonators, and metal-insulator transition (MIT) materials[12–15], have been reported to enable control of thermal emissivity. In particular, VO2, (La,Sr)MnO3 and rare earth nickelate, have been recently suggested to be MIT materials promising for thermochromic switching and urban energy-saving smart window applications[17–19]. MIT is the result of band gap opening at the MIT temperature (TMIT), which results in huge changes of ε in IR region (for example, metallic silver (ε = 0.02) and dielectric glass (0.95)) and corresponding changes in surface temperatures measured by IR sensor (TIR). Thermal stealth application requires a wide range of active temperature (>30°C) at near the room temperature, however the reported MIT materials have been limited in applications due to their narrow TMIT window (usually, <10°C)[12–15]. To extend the temperature window, active control systems, such as a joule heater, are required. Vanadium dioxide (VO2) is one of the most widely studied MIT materials. In the bulk phase, VO2 undergoes a very sharp MIT at 68°C with MIT width (WMIT) of <1°C and a band gap opening of ~0.5 eV. This results in large reversible changes in its IR absorption coefficient and 4 electrical resistance, and it is the reason why VO2 films are being considered for thermochromic, thermal stealth, smart window, and IR-sensing bolometer applications. VO2 thin films exhibit MIT-induced electrical resistivity changes of 2–4 orders of magnitude and WMIT of 5-10°C. Variety of oxidation phases (V2O3, V2O5, V6O13, and so on) are found to coexist with VO2, and the MIT properties of VO2 show a considerable dependence on the strain and stoichiometry. Meanwhile there have been studies on VO2 thin films doped with tungsten[24–27] or molybdenum to tune their MIT characteristics. Despite enormous efforts to understand the VO2 thin films by means of various growth techniques such as using sol-gel, chemical vapor deposition, pulsed laser deposition, molecular beam epitaxy, atomic layer deposition and reactive sputtering, however, a straightforward method of synthesizing VO2 thin films with predetermined TMIT and WMIT values are remained as a challenging task. In this work, we studied the near-room temperature IR emission properties of W-doped VO2 (W-VO2) films prepared on SiO2, quartz, or mica substrates by vacuum evaporation and subsequent thermal oxidation. In contrast to a narrow emissivity transition temperature window, i.e. WMIT ~5°C, observed in the pure VO2 films, the W-VO2 films showed much enhanced WMIT up to 45°C, which is large enough for practical thermal stealth application. A cross- sectional transmission electron microscopy (TEM) examination of the W-VO2 films revealed that the W concentration is gradually distributed with the distance from the film-substrate interface within W-VO2 layer. We discuss the implications of this observation in terms of the increased WMIT in the W-VO2 films and the large deviation of the TMIT behavior from that in the pure VO2 films as well. 5 II. EXPERIMENTAL We prepared VO2 and W-VO2 films on SiO2/Si, quartz, and mica substrates in two steps. Initially, V or WO3 layers were deposited by electron-beam evaporation at room temperature at a deposition rate of 0.6 Å/s in a high-vacuum chamber (base pressure of 5×10-8 torr). For VO2 films, we controlled the thickness of the V layer (tV) from 20 to 100 nm and investigated the effect of VO2 film thickness on IR emission. To form W-VO2 films, a stack of alternating V and WO3 layers (V-W) of 96 nm thick in total were deposited (tV-W) by three V (30 nm) and WO3 (2 nm) deposition cycles, which resulted in a tungsten to vanadium ratio of 0.03:1. Both the deposited V and V-W layers were then annealed in the tube vacuum furnace at 400-430°C for 4-5 h (for VO2) or 480-500°C for 1 h (for W-VO2), respectively. During the annealing, an oxygen partial pressure (PO2) of 0.2 torr was maintained with 99.999% O2 gas flow (45 sccm) while pumping the tube furnace with a rotary vacuum pump . The PO2 was chosen after comparing the MIT behavior of VO2 films treated at several different conditions. Crystallinities of samples were checked by high-resolution x-ray diffraction (HRXRD, Smartlab 9kW, Rigaku) and by cross-sectional TEM imaging with chemical analysis (JEM- ARM200F, JEOL). For TEM, we used a Schottky-type field-emission gun (FEG) operated at 200 keV and prepared cross-sectional specimens by conventional cutting, gluing, polishing, and ion milling (PIPS 691, GATAN) at 5 keV. To study the MIT behaviors of the films, we measured four-probe electrical resistances in the temperature range of 20-100°C by using a closed-cycle refrigerator equipped with a nanovoltmeter (Keithley 2182A), a programmable current source (Keithley 224), and a temperature controller (Lakeshore 330) under a vacuum condition (<1×10-4 torr). An IR camera (FLK-Ti400 (detector resolution 320×240 pixels), FLUKE) was used to measure TIR values of films and bare substrates, while specimens were uniformly heated on a Shamal hot plate (HHP-411, Iuchi Seiei Dou). TIR values of films were 6 determined by comparing them with the temperature of substrates (TS), where TIR values of the hot plate were calibrated with a thermocouple sensor attached to the hot plate for each time. Also, the emissivity was measured by changing the emissivity of the thin films in the IR camera until TIR values of films equals to the hot plate temperature . III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS Figs. 1(a) and (b) show HRXRD data of a VO2 film on SiO2/Si and a W-VO2 film on quartz respectively. For both films, various peaks corresponding to different crystalline orientations indicate their polycrystalline character with monoclinic VO2 phase, except negligible fraction of V2O3 phase. As shown in the inset of Fig. 1(b), the W-VO2 film shows slight shifts and broadening of (002) peaks. Compared to the undoped VO2 film, the W-VO2 film has 0.05% elongation of c-axis. According to the previous studies of thin films, 4 % W-doping is required to induce 0.8% elongation of c-axis and to lower the TMIT by 120 K . The relatively small change of c-axis in our W-VO2 film is probably due to both small doping concentration and possible doping gradient, which also influences broadening of the (002) peak. Figs. 1(c) and (d) show their electrical resistivity curves for increasing (red) and decreasing (blue) temperature sweeps. For the VO2 thin film, the dramatic resistivity changes with large hysteresis indicate the characteristic 1st order MIT behavior. From the sharp MIT temperatures at 71.4°C and 56.0°C during heating and cooling, the hysteresis width, MIT = TMIT(heating) - TMIT(cooling), is calculated to be 15.4°C. Note that TMIT was determined as the temperature corresponding to the inflection point of the resistivity switching curve. The resistivity change of nearly three orders of magnitude observed in the VO2 films was comparable to those reported for both polycrystalline and epitaxial VO2 thin films. On the other hand, the W-VO2 film shows small resistivity change with nearly one order of magnitude, strongly suppressed than that of the VO2 film.According to previous studies of uniformly W-doped VO2 films, W doping 7 gradually reduces the magnitude of resistivity change and also lowers TMIT. However, the uniformly W-doped ones could not account the small resistivity change in our W-VO2 film. This discrepancy may suggest that the W-VO2 film may have gradual W distribution along the out-of-plane direction, which we will discuss later. dependent resistivity of (c) the VO2 and (d) W-VO2 thin films. (Inset of (b) shows comparison of VO2 (002) peaks between VO2 (black) and W-VO2 (red) films.) To check the thermal stealth characteristics of the VO2 and W-VO2 films, we captured IR images of the films and substrates on a hot plate (Fig. 2) for an increasing TS from 35 to 90°C. At a given TS, contrast of the images provided measures of sample TIR values. Figs. 2(a-d) show the IR images of the samples taken at TS values of (a) 35°C, (b) 60°C, (c) 75°C, and (d) 90°C. At TS values of 35°C and 60°C (below the TMIT=71°C, chosen at the midpoint of the 8 slope for an increasing TS sweep) of VO2 films, the TIR values of the film were almost the same as that of the SiO2/Si substrate (white arrows in Figs. 2(a) and (b)). At TS values above the TMIT, the TIR values of the films were lower than that of the SiO2/Si substrate (black arrows in Figs. 2(c) and (d)). On the other hand, the W-VO2 film showed a nearly fixed TIR value (sky blue to green color scales, black stars in Fig. 2) regardless of TS values (35–90°C), with a much wider TS range than that of VO2 film. Such constant TIR behavior weakens the IR detection of an object, which deserves an improved thermal stealth function. Although previous studies of W doping showed reduced TMIT in VO2 film[25–27], such constant TIR behavior has not been reported for doped VO2 films as far as our best efforts. In addition, all the films exhibit lateral uniformity in color contrast at each temperature, which is related to the lateral homogeneity of film constituents. We note that the color deviation at the perimeters or corners (‘’ in Fig. 2(d)) of the samples is because the region is not covered with the films due to clamps during the film growth. Small suppressions in TIR values of the substrates from that of the hot plate (Fig. 2(a): 1.6°C for SiO2 and 1.5°C on quartz) were predominantly due to thermal contact and/or thermal gradient across the substrates. 9 tV=70 nm) and the W-VO2 film (right, tV-W=96 nm) along with their uncoated substrates (SiO2/Si and quartz). The IR images captured at different substrate temperatures (TS); (a) 35, (b) 60, (c) 75, and (d) 90°C. To obtain quantitative insight of the IR transition behaviors of the VO2 and W-VO2 films, we examined TIR values during heating and cooling sweeps over the TS range from 25 to 95°C (Fig. 3). VO2/SiO2/Si films showed abrupt TIR transitions at TMIT of 70°C (heating) and 55°C (cooling), which give a TMIT = 15°C (Fig. 3(a)) for different film thicknesses. Furthermore, the temperature difference between TS and TIR (TIR = TS - TIR) was monotonically enhanced on increasing tV, which lead to a TIR of ~35°C for a VO2 film of tV = 100 nm at TS = 80°C (inset of Fig. 3(a)). This observation implies that the increased thickness largely strengthens the magnitude of TIR, while change of TMIT is limited within ~5°C. 10 (TIR) as a function of substrate temperature (TS) for (a) VO2 films grown on SiO2/Si substrates 96 nm) grown on quartz and mica substrates. Filled and empty symbols indicate heating and cooling processes, respectively. Insets in (a) and (b) are difference between TS and TIR of each thin film. Emissivity values for (c) VO2 films on SiO2/Si substrates and for (d) VO2 and W- VO2 films on quartz and mica substrates, extracted from the TIR data in (a) and (b), respectively. Inset in (c) shows thickness dependance of emissivity. prepared on quartz and mica. Similar to the films on SiO2/Si, the VO2 films showed sharp TIR transitions with MIT of 15–25°C, which were barely observed for the W-VO2 films; the TIR values remained in the range 31 to 40°C (a vertical green arrow) over a wide TS range of 43°C 11 (a horizontal green arrow). In addition, the broadening of the WMIT, led to the collapse of hysteresis; as shown by linear changes in TIR curves in the inset of Fig. 3(b). It is worth noting that the TIR values of W-VO2 films became similar to those of VO2 films at TS ~ 80°C, indicative of thermal screening effects similar to that of a VO2 film at a TS above the TMIT. Hence, the W-doping was found to dramatically improve the thermal stealth effect of W-VO2 films by transforming the sharp MIT in the VO2 thin film into the gradual one for a wide temperature range. Emissivity () of a IR spectrum band can be related a TIR-TS curve via thermal radiance, as expressed by: M(λ, TA) = MB(λ, TA) ε(λ, TA) = 2πhc2 λ5 1 ehc λkTA ⁄ −1 ε(λ, TA), where M and MB are the thermal radiances of material and blackbody, λ is wavelength, h is Planck’s constant, c is speed of light, k is Boltzmann’s constant, and TA is the absolute temperature. TS-dependent emissivity (TS), shown in Figs. 3(c) and (d), is extracted from the TIR versus TS curves in Fig. 3(a) and (b), respectively. (Ts) curves of VO2 films at a given tV show two saturated values, indicative of two electronic states below and above the MIT. Above the MIT, the tV dependence of  at TS = 90°C (90), shows a saturation behavior approaching ~0.2, indicating an optimal VO2 film thickness (tV) of 100 nm. In Fig. 3(d), we show the (TS) values of W-VO2 films together with VO2 films, grown on quartz and mica. Here, the (TS) also saturates at 0.2-0.3, which is similar to that observed for VO2 films above the TMIT. However, during MIT in W- VO2 films, the (TS) curves show a slow decrease over the TS range of 30-70°C, which explains the monotonic behavior of the TIR curves in the inset of Fig. 3(b). Furthermore, we note that substrate type has little effect on the features of (Ts) curves. Fig. 4 shows the microscopic chemical analysis to examine the correlation between the chemical compositions of W-VO2 films and their TIR curves (Fig. 3(b)). Fig. 4(a) shows a cross- 12 sectional TEM image of a W-VO2 film on quartz (tV-W = 96 nm) and its chemical composition profile (Fig. 4(b)). The average film thickness was about 205 nm, which was in-line with thickness estimated from the volume of the VO2 formed from the metallic V film as previously described. The chemical composition mappings show laterally uniform distribution of V and W along the in-plane direction. Fig. 4(c) shows averaged concentration profiles for V, W, O, and Si along the dashed arrow shown in Fig. 4(b). Interestingly, W was densely confined towards the film surface while V was distributed rather evenly throughout the whole film thickness. These results clearly show that the doped W were distributed with concentration gradient, where the gradually modulated ratio between W and V is also shown in the inset of Fig. 4(c). Since we initially prepared the alternating layers of V and WO3 at room temperature, the followed thermal oxidation process should play a critical role to form such inhomogeneous concentration distribution. According to the microscopic diffusion model, it should be noted that the oxygen anion diffusion from the surface may promotes a diffusion of cation (probably V) toward the surface to maintain the charge neutrality during the thermal oxidation[39–41]. In the meantime, the oxidation of diffused V forms granular structures, supported with the rough surface morphology in Fig. 4(a). This concentration depth profile supports the notion that the W concentration is indeed modulated and should be related with the exceptionally slow MIT character of our W-VO2 films. 13 dispersive spectroscopy mapping of four elements (V, W, O, and Si), and (c) elemental depth profiles of a W-VO2 film (tV = 96 nm) on a quartz substrate. (d) Calculation of TIR versus TS curve for the W-VO2 film. We duplicated and shifted the temperature measured by IR camera (TIR) of tV = 40 nm sample with 10°C decrement of transition temperature. By averaging the shifted curves, we could fit the experimental curves with the calculated one. To understand the relation between the modulated concentration profile and the thermal stealth effect, we attempted to calculate the TIR-TS curves of the W-VO2 films with simple assumptions. Previous studies on W-VO2 films have revealed that a homogeneous W doping weakens the MIT characteristics of VO2 films and lowers the TMIT of pure VO2 films in a concentration dependent manner. Based on this and the concentration depth profile in Fig. 4(c), we 14 calculated a TIR versus TS curve for the W-VO2 films with W dopant concentration gradient. First, we choose the TIR versus TS data of a VO2 film (tV = 40 nm) as a reference layer. For simplicity, we assume a stack of four W-VO2 layers with four different tungsten dopant concentration and TMIT values (= 72, 62, 52, and 42°C). Those W-VO2 layers are expected to give four TIR versus TS curves with shifted TMIT values, shown as four dashed gray curves in Fig. 4(d), respectively. By calculating the average of those four different TIR versus TS curves, we generated a TIR versus TS curve (a black curve in Fig. 4(d)), which follows the experimental curve for both the W-VO2 films on quartz (a red one) and mica (a pink one). The similarity between the calculated and experimental curves demonstrates that the thermal stealth behavior improved in W-VO2 films might stem from the inhomogeneous W concentration in the films. Finally, we demonstrated a remarkable improvement of the thermal stealth properties from W- doping-induced attenuation of MIT in VO2 films. On a flexible mica substrate, we also showed the thermal stealth behavior similar to that on the quartz, brightening application of the films highly feasible to curved surfaces. Combined with passive operation without external electrical power, we believe that our findings may provide a low cost and low energy method for a practical application of MIT materials to the military stealth equipment, and passive smart window devices. We also showed that such an improvement in the passive thermal stealth characteristics is reproduced also in a stack of VO2 layers with a control of spatial W concentration. Similar improvement of thermal stealth capability has been observed in multilayered thin films. In addition, tuning the temperature coefficient of resistance of W-VO2 films may improve the IR sensing performance of the bolometer, a key component for IR-temperature and -image sensors. 15 IV. CONCLUSION We fabricated VO2 and W-VO2 thin films by e-beam evaporation with subsequent oxidation and studied the thermal stealth effects of these films by investigating their IR emission properties. The W-VO2 films exhibited the thermal stealth effects at lower temperatures and over a wider range of temperature than the VO2 films, and the microscopic chemical composition analysis revealed that the tungsten dopant was gradually distributed toward the substrate/film interface during the thermal oxidation process. We conclude that the enhanced thermal stealth effects of the W-VO2 films are primarily due to the W gradient doping. Our results suggest a unique solution to overcome the drawbacks of VO2 film stemming from its sharp MIT and large hysteresis characteristics, which may bring the applications of MIT materials to the fields, such as passive thermal camouflage, flexible smart windows, and improved IR sensors, forward. Acknowledgements This work is supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grants funded by the Korea government (NRF-2020R1A2C200373211). This research was supported by Nano·Material Technology Development Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning, Korea (2009- 0082580). S.-H. Phark acknowledges support from IBS-R027-D1. 16