1 Tin(II) thiocyanate Sn(SCN)2 as an ultrathin anode interlayer in organic photovoltaics Jidapa Chaopaknam,1 Chayanit Wechwithayakhlung,1 Hideki Nakajima,2 Tossaporn Lertvanithphol,3 Mati Horprathum,3 Taweesak Sudyoadsuk,1,4 Vinich Promarak,1,4 Akinori Saeki,5 and Pichaya Pattanasattayavong1,4,a) 1 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, School of Molecular Science and Engineering, Vidyasirimedhi Institute of Science and Technology (VISTEC), Rayong 21210, Thailand 2 Synchrotron Light Research Institute (Public Organization), 111 University Avenue, Muang, Nakhon Ratchasima 30000, Thailand 3 Spectroscopic and Sensing Devices Research Group, National Electronics and Computer Technology Center, Pathum Thani, 12120, Thailand 4 Research Network of NANOTEC-VISTEC on Nanotechnology for Energy, Vidyasirimedhi Institute of Science and Technology (VISTEC), Rayong 21210, Thailand 5 Department of Applied Chemistry, Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka University, 2-1 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan a) Author to whom correspondence should be addressed: pichaya.p@vistec.ac.th This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset. PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0055649 2 Abstract We report the application of a coordination polymer semiconductor, tin(II) thiocyanate [Sn(SCN)2] as an ultrathin anode interlayer in organic photovoltaics (OPVs). Sub-10 nm layers of Sn(SCN)2 with high smoothness and excellent transparency having an optical band gap of 3.9 eV were deposited from an alcohol-based solution at room temperature without post-deposition annealing. Inserting Sn(SCN)2 as an anode interlayer in polymer:fullerene OPVs drastically reduces the recombination loss due to the exciton-blocking energy levels of Sn(SCN)2. At the optimum thickness of 7 nm, an average power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 7.6% and a maximum of 8.1% were obtained. The simple processability using common solvents gives Sn(SCN)2 a distinct advantage over the more well-known copper(I) thiocyanate (CuSCN). The electronic and optical properties of Sn(SCN)2 make it interesting for applications in large-area electronic devices. Keywords: coordination polymers, metal thiocyanates, organic photovoltaics, interlayers, solution-processing Metal thiocyanates (MSCN) are emerging as promising materials for electronic and optoelectronic applications. In particular, copper(I) thiocyanate (CuSCN) is now a well- known transparent p-type coordination polymer semiconductor with extensive applications.1,2 Recently, CuSCN has been employed as a hole-transporting layer (HTL) in organic photovoltaics (OPVs),3–6 organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs),7–10 and perovskite solar cells (PSCs).11–14 The key highlights of CuSCN that allow its pervasive use as a HTL are high hole mobility of >0.01 cm2 V-1 s-1 and excellent optical transparency.15,16 CuSCN is also solution-processable, allowing for simple and cost-effective methods of device fabrication. However, the solvents typically used for processing CuSCN are either alkyl sulfides or This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset. PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0055649 3 ammonium hydroxide,3,17–19 which are malodorous or corrosive and hence could place restrictions on the manufacturability of CuSCN-based devices. Other MSCN compounds also exist, but their applications in opto/electronic devices have not been explored. In fact, the electronic properties of MSCN can be systematically tuned by varying the metal ions.20 We have recently reported the electronic properties of tin(II) thiocyanate [Sn(SCN)2] which shows high potential for device applications.21 Specifically, Sn(SCN)2 also has a large band gap due to the π* SCN– states, and its valence band (VB) consists of Sn(II) 5s states at the top. The latter could be promising for charge carrier transport as in the case of Sn(II) oxide (SnO) that yields excellent p-type conductivity.22,23 Importantly, Sn(SCN)2 is soluble in common solvents such as alcohols, leading to better processing versatility when compared to the solvents required for processing CuSCN. Seitkhan et al. exploited the processability of Sn(SCN)2 by mixing it with an organic electron-transporting small molecule in an alcohol-based solution; the resulting OPVs employing the organic electron-transporting layer (ETL) doped with Sn(SCN)2 showed significant improvement in the power conversion efficiency (PCE).24 Nonetheless, the applications of Sn(SCN)2 by itself in opto/electronic devices have not yet been developed. In addition, Sn(SCN)2 (or MSCN in general) belongs to a larger family of coordination polymers (CPs), but the practical applications of CPs in opto/electronic devices have been scarce despite the strong research effort to develop electrically conductive CPs and the related group of porous CPs or metal-organic frameworks (MOFs).25–28 One of the major limitations is the difficulty in the processing of CPs/MOFs. To this end, the facile processing of Sn(SCN)2 and its use in devices represent a major advancement step for functional CPs/MOFs. This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset. PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0055649 4 Herein, we report the use of Sn(SCN)2 as an ultrathin anode interlayer in OPVs based The Sn(SCN)2 layer is processed from an ethanol solution and requires no annealing, allowing for the whole fabrication process to be carried out at room temperature. At an optimized Sn(SCN)2 thickness of 7 nm, a PCE of up to 8% is obtained. Sn(SCN)2 can be dissolved with a variety of solvents as listed in Table S1 (Supplementary Material), most of which are common solvents, showing the more flexible processability when compared to CuSCN. The full experimental procedures are included in the Supplementary Material. We note that thin films of Sn(SCN)2 fabricated by spin-coating can form aggregates and pinholes when annealed at >80 °C (Fig. S1a-b), which is possibly due to the higher coordination and more extensive intermolecular interactions of Sn(II) when compared to Cu(I) of CuSCN.21 The inhomogeneous films after annealing are detrimental to device operation; however, by processing Sn(SCN)2 films at room temperature, optically clear and uniform films are consistently obtained. The surface morphologies of 7-nm Sn(SCN)2 films spin-cast from a 6 mg ml-1 solution in ethanol (optimum condition for OPV devices as discussed later) were studied by atomic force microscopy (AFM) as shown in Fig. 1a-d (image size 1×1 μm2) and Fig. S1c-f (5×5 μm2). The latter were used for determining the root-mean-square roughness (σRMS) as shown in Fig. 1e to account for variations over a larger area. Coating with Sn(SCN)2 decreases σRMS of the bare glass and ITO substrates from 2.1 and 3.1 nm [without Sn(SCN)2] to 0.3 and 1.7 nm [with Sn(SCN)2], respectively, showing the extremely smooth nature of Sn(SCN)2 films. The films are also highly conformal, as the ITO feature underneath the ultrathin Sn(SCN)2 layer is still visible (Fig. 1d). This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset. PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0055649 5 image size 1×1 μm2. (e) Height histograms from AFM images of size 5×5 μm2 (Supplementary Material). The number in the parentheses denotes the root-mean-square roughness (σRMS). (f) Extinction coefficient (k) and refractive index (n) of a Sn(SCN)2 film from spectroscopic ellipsometry. (g) Optical transmittance (%T) spectra of a Sn(SCN)2 film on a fused silica substrate before and after correction by reflectance (%R). (h) Determination of the optical band gap (Egopt) of Sn(SCN)2. All Sn(SCN)2 films in this figure are 7-nm thick, which is the optimum condition for OPVs. This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset. PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0055649 6 The thicknesses of films prepared from solutions with concentrations between 2-20 mg ml-1 were found to be between 3-23 nm by spectroscopic ellipsometry (SE) as shown in from SE measurements are shown in Fig. 1f. Between 500-1500 nm, n is between 1.72-1.76 whereas k starts to rise for wavelengths below 400 nm. The optical transmittance (%T) spectra (before and after correction by reflectance, %R) of a 7-nm Sn(SCN)2 film coated on a fused silica substrate are displayed in Fig. 1g. The onset of the absorbance (i.e., reduction in %T) is also found below 400 nm, corroborating the SE data. The optical band gap (Egopt) determined from the (Ahν)2 vs hν plot shown in Fig. 1h is 3.91 eV. In addition, the relative dielectric constant (ε) of Sn(SCN)2 was determined from capacitance measurements of a nm)/Al (100 nm) (Fig. S2a). The polystyrene (PS) layer was added to minimize the device leakage that could occur due to the ultrathin Sn(SCN)2 layer. The capacitance vs frequency results are shown in Fig. S2b for both the bilayer Sn(SCN)2/PS and the PS-only MIM devices. By considering the bilayer insulator as two capacitors in series (Fig. S2c), ε of Sn(SCN)2 was estimated using the capacitance value at 1 kHz to be ~5.7 (see Table S3). This value is slightly higher than ~5.1 for CuSCN and can be attributed to the larger atomic size of Sn that contributes more electronic polarization. The results further show that highly transparent and uniform films of Sn(SCN)2 with ultrathin thicknesses of sub-10 nm are easily obtained by spin-coating at room temperature without post-deposition annealing, highlighting the excellent film quality and processability of Sn(SCN)2. To demonstrate the application of Sn(SCN)2, we incorporated Sn(SCN)2 films as the ultrathin exciton blocking layer (EBL) in OPVs as schematically shown in Fig. 2a. The device structure consisted of ITO as the anode; Sn(SCN)2 as the anode interlayer; PTB7- Th:PC71BM as the photoactive BHJ layer; bathocuproine (BCP) as the cathode interlayer; and This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset. PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0055649 7 Al as the cathode. The Sn(II) coordination environment and extended 2D network of Sn(SCN)2 from single crystal data are also shown in Fig. 2b-c for reference. However, the ultrathin films obtained from spin-coating without annealing were amorphous as no diffraction patterns were detected from X-ray diffractometry (XRD) even in grazing- incidence mode (Fig. S3a). The crystallinity of the films could be induced by annealing which resulted in aggregation (as mentioned earlier) or forming thicker layers by drop- casting, and the XRD patterns of these aggregated or thick films could be matched with that of Sn(SCN)2 powder. This confirms that the films processed from the ethanol solution are Sn(SCN)2. Unlike the smooth amorphous films of Sn(SCN)2, the crystalline films showed high roughness or incomplete substrate coverage and hence were not suitable for device fabrication. The ultrathin amorphous films were further verified to be Sn(SCN)2 by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements which showed similar features of Sn 3d, S 2p, C 1s, and N 1s states to those of as-synthesized Sn(SCN)2 powder sample (Fig. S3b-e). The energy levels of the various OPV layers are shown in Fig. 2d. For Sn(SCN)2, the VB edge was determined from photoelectron yield spectroscopy (PYS) under vacuum (5×10-3 Pa) to be -6.2 eV (Fig. S4). The energy diagram of Sn(SCN)2 agrees with the recent report,24 and the energy levels of other layers are known from the literature.18 The large band gap and the deep VB of Sn(SCN)2 infers its possible function as an EBL, which is an interlayer used for preventing the parasitic loss of excitons due to quenching or recombining at the interfaces between the light-absorbing organic layer and the electrodes.30–35 EBLs should have a wide band gap for effective exciton blocking as well as a transport pathway for carrier collection.36,37 In fact, BCP, employed on the cathode side, was one of the first EBLs investigated (,38) and still remains a standard choice for the cathode interlayer up to present (for example, see ). This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset. PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0055649 8 Fig. 2 (a) Schematic diagram showing the OPV structure. (b) Coordination geometry of Sn(II) in Sn(SCN)2. The 5s2 lone pair is visualized as the orange isosurface. The interatomic short contacts are shown as dotted red lines. (c) Polymeric network structure of Sn(SCN)2 on the bc-plane. (d) Simplified energy band diagrams of the layers in the OPVs. (e) Representative current density-voltage (J-V) characteristics of OPVs with varying Sn(SCN)2 thickness. (f) External and internal quantum efficiency (EQE and IQE) spectra of an OPV cell with the optimum Sn(SCN)2 thickness of 7 nm. In the present work, ultrathin Sn(SCN)2 was used as an EBL on the anode side; the resulting current density-voltage (J-V) characteristics of OPVs with different Sn(SCN)2 layer thicknesses are shown in Fig. 2e. The OPV cells with no anode interlayer (denoted as 0 nm) This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset. PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0055649 9 exhibit low open-circuit voltage (Voc) between 0.20 to 0.30 V, signifying high recombination loss at the anode/BHJ interface. The presence of a 3-nm Sn(SCN)2 interlayer dramatically mitigates this loss and increases Voc to around 0.70 V. The highest performance is obtained with 7-nm Sn(SCN)2 which yields average Voc of 0.79 V, short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 16.3 mA cm-2, fill factor (FF) of 59%, and power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 7.6% (averaged from 40 devices). Increasing Sn(SCN)2 thickness further to 10 nm still yields high Voc of 0.77 V but leads to a significant decrease in Jsc and FF, and hence a reduction in PCE. For the best cell with 7-nm Sn(SCN)2, the highest PCE is 8.1%. The external and internal quantum efficiency (EQE and IQE) spectra of the OPV cell with the 7-nm Sn(SCN)2 EBL are also shown in Fig. 2f. The integration of the EQE spectrum yields Jsc of 15.6 mA cm-2 which agrees well with the average Jsc value reported above. The IQE reaches a maximum value of 84% at 700 nm. The statistics for OPV metrics for different Sn(SCN)2 thicknesses are reported in outperforms other conditions in all aspects, suggesting that this is the optimal condition that can effectively prevent the recombination loss, yet allowing efficient hole extraction, as evident from the high Voc, Jsc, and FF. To put the results in context, reference OPV devices with poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) as a HTL were also fabricated. A representative J-V plot is shown in Fig. S6, and the OPV metrics are also included in Table S4. Although OPVs with Sn(SCN)2 anode EBL show slightly lower performance compared to those with PEDOT:PSS HTL, the results are highly encouraging. The deficit seems to stem mainly from the lower FF for Sn(SCN)2-based devices. An ongoing work is in progress to improve this by increasing the conductivity of Sn(SCN)2 layer through doping. This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset. PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0055649 10 To study the electrical characteristics of Sn(SCN)2-based devices further, impedance spectroscopy (IS) was carried out under dark condition with a dc bias of 0.8 V. The Nyquist plot of the data is shown in Fig. 3a-b along with the fit obtained from the equivalent circuit for BHJ devices.40 The impedance of the cell increases with Sn(SCN)2 layer thickness in general; the fitting results are listed in Table S5. We focus on two parameters: Rt or transport resistance which in this case includes the transport across the Sn(SCN)2/BHJ/BCP stack and Rrec or the recombination resistance. Rt should be small whereas Rrec should be large for optimum OPV performance.40,41 For the thinnest Sn(SCN)2 layer of 3 nm, both Rt and Rrec are low, signifying that even though the charge transport through the OPV cell is efficient, the recombination loss is still relatively high. On the other hand, for the thickest film of 10 nm, Rt and Rrec are both high, meaning that while the recombination loss can be prevented, the cells suffer from poor charge transport. Thus, 7-nm Sn(SCN)2 layer yields the optimal condition in our case, effectively suppressing the recombination loss while providing efficient hole transport from the BHJ layer to the anode. The results corroborate well with the discussion of the OPV device metrics mentioned above. Furthermore, hole-only devices with a structure of ITO (90 nm)/Sn(SCN)2 (varying the space-charge limited current (SCLC) regime, plotted in Fig. 3c (full data range shown in Fig. S7), show a decrease in the hole current with the increasing thickness of Sn(SCN)2. Fitting the data with the SCLC model (Supplementary Material) indicates that the hole mobility (representing hole transport across the whole device stack) also decreases from 2.5 to 1.5 and 0.7 ×10-6 cm2 V-1 s-1 for devices with 3-, 7-, and 10-nm Sn(SCN)2, respectively. The thicker Sn(SCN)2 layer indeed leads to reduced hole transport, this is likely the key factor that currently limits the full potential of Sn(SCN)2 in OPV applications. Further work therefore should focus on improving the conductivity of Sn(SCN)2. This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset. PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0055649 11 Fig. 3 (a) Nyquist plots (circles) from impedance spectroscopy and fitting (solid lines) of the OPV cells with varying Sn(SCN)2 thickness. The inset shows the equivalent circuit. (b) Zoomed-in of (a) varying Sn(SCN)2 thickness and fitting (solid lines) from the space charge limited current (SCLC) analysis. This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset. PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0055649 12 In addition, in order to investigate the energy barriers between the Sn(SCN)2 and BHJ layers in detail, we also performed photoelectron spectroscopy (PES) using synchrotron radiation at Beamline BL3.2Ua, Synchrotron Light Research Institute (SLRI), Thailand.42 nm)/BHJ (90 nm) films on ITO substates. The measured PES spectra are included in Fig. S8a-b, and the analyzed energy levels are included in Table S6. We note that the results of the two BHJ samples are nearly identical (slight differences attributed to experimental errors), suggesting that the PES probes the same BHJ electronic states at these two thicknesses. The comparable results also ensure the reproducibility of the experiments. As a result, for the BHJ sample, only the data of the 90-nm film is shown in Fig. 4 along with those of ITO substrate and Sn(SCN)2. Ev of Sn(SCN)2 and BHJ layers are found at approximately 1.7 and 0.9 eV below the work function of ITO, respectively. Therefore, the hole energy barrier (ΔEv) is around 0.8 eV whereas the electron energy barrier (ΔEc) is much larger at around 1.5 eV. These values are consistent with the simple energy band diagram shown earlier in Fig. 2d, confirming the EBL nature of Sn(SCN)2. We remark that since the Ec levels were calculated from Ev+Egopt, the Ec of the BHJ is likely associated with the PTB7-Th donor polymer due to its shallower Ev level and the smaller band gap that dominates the optical absorption. Once the electrons are transferred to the PC71BM acceptor, ΔEc is expected to increase further to approximately ~1.8 eV. This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset. PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0055649 13 Fig. 4 Energy levels of ITO, ITO/Sn(SCN)2, and ITO/Sn(SCN)2/BHJ obtained from photoelectron spectroscopy using synchrotron radiation with a photon energy of 60 eV. Lastly, we discuss the possible mechanisms of hole extraction through the Sn(SCN)2 EBL. One possibility is that there could exist band-bending at Sn(SCN)2/BHJ interface that facilitates hole extraction by lowering the ΔEv. However, a detailed study within several nm of the BHJ would be required to characterize such characteristics. Our results compare relatively thick BHJ layers as the attempt at forming ultrathin BHJ layers yielded inhomogeneous layers. Another possibility is the transport through gap states, which is similar to the mechanism of electron transport through BCP that also has a wide band gap with both electron- and hole-blocking energy levels.30 Detailed studies of the electronic structure of BCP by PES and inverse PES (IPES) show that low work function metals (i.e., cathode materials) can form complexes with BCP and generate electronic states within the This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset. PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0055649 14 band gap of BCP that provide the electron transport path.43–45 In our case, no occupied states were detected within ~3 eV above the VB edge of Sn(SCN)2 under the current measurement conditions. Nevertheless, the gap states cannot be ruled out yet, and an in-depth investigation would be required to fully elucidate the hole transport mechanism in Sn(SCN)2. In summary, we have demonstrated the application of a coordination polymer semiconductor Sn(SCN)2 as an ultrathin anode exciton blocking layer in OPVs. Sub-10 nm layers of Sn(SCN)2 with ultrasmooth and conformal morphology can be deposited by simple spin-coating and does not require a heat treatment step. OPVs based on Sn(SCN)2 as the anode interlayer and PTB7-Th:PC71BM BHJ were fabricated at room temperature. With the optimum Sn(SCN)2 thickness of 7 nm, the resulting OPV cells yield an average PCE of 7.6% and achieve a maximum PCE value of 8.1%. This work shows that Sn(SCN)2 has potential to be developed further for electronic and optoelectronic applications, and this may be extended to other metal thiocyanates as well. Supplementary Material See supplementary material for experimental methods and additional data in supporting tables and figures. Acknowledgements P.P. acknowledges funding from grant FRB640087 from Thailand Science Research and Innovation (TSRI) and grant TRG6280013 jointly awarded by Thailand Research Fund (TRF) and Synchrotron Light Research Institute (SLRI), Thailand. J.C., C.W., and P.P. This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset. PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0055649 15 acknowledge scholarships and financial support from Vidyasirimedhi Institute of Science and Technology (VISTEC). The authors thank Dr. Pattanaphong Janphuang from SLRI for supplying the shadow masks used in the OPV fabrication. Data Availability The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.