Journal of the Physical Society of Japan Magnetic Properties under Pressure in Novel Spin-Triplet Superconductor UTe2 Dexin Li1, Ai Nakamura1, Fuminori Honda1,2, Yoshiki J. Sato1, Yoshiya Homma1, Yusei Shimizu1, Jun Ishizuka3, Youichi Yanase4,5, Georg Knebel6, Jacques Flouquet6, and Dai Aoki1,6 * 1IMR, Tohoku University, Oarai, Ibaraki, 311-1313, Japan 2Central Institute of Radioisotope Science and Safety Management, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, 819-0395, Japan 3Institute for Theoretical Physics, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland 4Department of Physics, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan 5Institute for Molecular Science, Okazaki 444-8585, Japan 6Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CEA, Grenoble INP, IRIG, PHELIQS, F-38000 Grenoble, France We report the magnetic susceptibility and the magnetization under pressures up to 1.7 GPa above the critical pressure, Pc ∼ 1.5 GPa, for H ∥ a, b and c-axes in the novel spin triplet superconductor UTe2. The anisotropic magnetic sus- ceptibility at low pressure with the easy magnetization a-axis changes to the quasi-isotropic behavior at high pressure, revealing a rapid suppression of the susceptibility for a-axis, and a gradual increase of the susceptibility for the b-axis. At 1.7 GPa above Pc, magnetic anomalies are detected at TMO ∼ 3 K and TWMO ∼ 10 K. The former anomaly corresponds to long-range magnetic order, most likely antiferromagnetism, while the latter shows a broad anomaly, which is probably due to the development of short range order. The unusual decrease and increase of the susceptibility below TWMO for H ∥ a and b-axes, respectively, indicate the complex magnetic properties at low temperatures above Pc. This is related to the interplay between multiple fluctuations dominated by antiferromagnetism, ferroamgnetism, valence and Fermi surface instabilities. The observation of unconventional superconductivity in UTe2 is one of the most interesting topics in heavy-fermion physics.1,2) UTe2 crystallizes a body centered orthorhombic structure with the space group Immm (No. 71, D25 2h). No long range magnetic order is detected down to low temperatures and the ground state is paramagnetic.3,4) The Sommerfeld co- efficient of the specific heat is γ ≈ 120 mJK−2mol−1, revealing a heavy electronic state, which is also demonstrated by a typ- ical heavy-fermion behavior in electrical resistivity with the large A coefficient for the T 2 dependence below 5 K. Super- conductivity is observed below Tc = 1.6 K associated with a large specific heat jump indicating the strong coupling nature. One of the most remarkable features in UTe2 is the huge superconducting upper critical field Hc2. For H ∥ b-axis, field- reentrant superconductivity is observed up to Hm ≈ 35 T, at which a first order metamagnetic transition occurs.5,6) Su- perconductivity is cutoff above Hm probably due to a dras- tic change of the electronic state.7) It is pointed out that the huge Hc2 displaying the reentrant behavior resembles those observed in ferromagnetic superconductors, URhGe8) and UCoGe,9) where field-reentrant (-reinforced) supercon- ductivity is induced due to the development of ferromagnetic fluctuations associated with the collapse of the Curie temper- ature TCurie.2,10–12) However, UTe2 is a paramagnet and the values of Hc2 are large in all field directions. Ferromagnetic fluctuations in μSR3) and longitudinal magnetic fluctuations in NMR13) are reported. On the other hand, inelastic neutron experiments reveal incommensurate antiferromagnetic exci- tations.14) Thus, the magnetic properties and fluctuations in UTe2 are more complicated than those in ferromagnetic super- conductors, although spin-triplet superconductivity is most likely realized in both systems. Strongest evidence for spin- triplet superconductivity in UTe2 was given by the Knight *aoki@imr.tohoku.ac.jp shift of NMR experiments, which shows only a tiny decrease of the spin susceptibility below Tc.15,16) Another important point in UTe2 is the appearance of mul- tiple superconducting phases under pressure.17) The super- conducting transition at Tc splits into two above 0.25 GPa. The lower Tc decreases continuously with pressure, while the higher Tc takes a maximum of 3 K at ∼ 1 GPa, and de- creases rapidly at higher pressures. The split of Tc under pres- sure gives rise to the unusual Hc2 curve under pressure. For H ∥ a-axis, Hc2(T) shows an abrupt enhancement at low tem- perature, which is connected to the lower Tc at zero field, revealing the occurence of multiple superconducting phases under magnetic field as well.18) Above the critical pressure, Pc ∼ 1.5 GPa, superconductivity is suppressed and a magneti- cally ordered state appears. Interestingly, just above Pc, field- induced superconductivity is detected far above 20 T in the spin-polarized state above the critical field, where the mag- netic ordered state is suppressed.19) In order to clarify the magnetic properties under pres- sure, we performed magnetization and magnetic susceptibil- ity measurements up to pressures above Pc for H ∥ a, b and c-axes. We show that the magnetic anisotropy changes with pressure and the magnetic easy-axis is reversed at low tem- perature between a and b-axes. Two magnetic anomalies were clearly detected above Pc. Single crystals of UTe2 were grown using the chemical vapor transport method as described elsewhere.20) The mag- netic susceptibility and the magnetization measurements un- der pressure were performed at temperatures down to 2 K and at fields up to 5 T using a piston cylinder cell up to 1.7 GPa in a commercial SQUID magnetometer.21) a, b, and c-axes (χa, χb, and χc) at 1 T at different pressures. It is obvious that the magnetic anisotropy can be tuned by the external parameters. Already at ambient pressure the easy- 1 arXiv:2105.08593v1 [cond-mat.str-el] 18 May 2021 J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 50 40 30 20 10 0 M/H (x10 -3 emu/mol) 200 100 0 T (K) 0 GPa a b c 200 100 0 T (K) 0.6 GPa 200 100 0 T (K) 0.9 GPa 200 100 0 T (K) 1.1 GPa 200 100 0 T (K) 1.4 GPa 300 200 100 0 T (K) 1.7 GPa (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) Fig. 1. (Color online) Magnetic susceptibilities, χa, χb and χc for H ∥ a, b and c-axes, respectively at 1 T at different pressures, 0, 0.6, 0.9, 1.1, 1.4 and 1.7 GPa in UTe2. magnetization axis switches from the a to the b-axis under magnetic field at the metamagnetic transition at Hm = 35 T. At ambient pressure, the a-axis is the easy-magnetization axis at low field, revealing the rapid increase of χa on cooling without the saturation down to Tc. χb shows a broad maxi- mum around Tχ,max ∼ 35 K, which is connected to the first order metamagnetic transition Hm = 35 T at low tempera- ture. It should be noted that the anisotropy between χa and χb is small at high temperatures above 150 K contrary to the large anisotropy at low temperatures, where χa is by a factor 7 higher than χb at ambient pressure. Increasing pressure leads to an decrease of χa, while χb in- creases with pressure, as shown in Fig. 1. These results are consistent with the prediction through the Maxwell relation by magnetostriction measurements.22) χc is slightly reduced with pressure. These different pressure responses give rise to the change of magnetic anisotropy by applying the pressure. The susceptibility ratio between a, b and c-axes represented by χa/χb, χa/χc and χb/χc23) also indicates that the magnetic anisotropy becomes small with pressure, retaining the hard- magnetization c-axis. At 1.7 GPa (> Pc), the b-axis becomes the easy-magnetization axis at low temperature. The decrease of χa seems to be driven by the creation of an antiferromag- netic molecular field. Above Pc it is speculated that the anti- ferromagnetic moment might be aligned along the a-axis by an exchange antiferromagnetic molecular field from the fact that the magnetization for H ∥ a-axis is slightly smaller than that for H ∥ b-axis. Note that recent magnetostriction exper- iments along the c-axis for H ∥ a, b and c-axes predict a switching of the easy-magnetization axis between a and b- axis under uniaxial stress along c-axis.24) The change from anisotropic to quasi-isotropic magnetic properties is also seen in the pressure dependence of the Weiss constants, Θ. The inverse magnetic susceptibilities follow a Curie-Weiss behavior χ = C/(T − Θ) at high temperatures for a, b and c-axes in all pressure range.25) A linear fitting to the inverse magnetic susceptibility from 300 to 150 K yields the effective moment μeff and the Weiss constant Θ, as shown in Fig. 2. The Weiss constants are always negative, indicat- ing that antiferromagnetic correlations are dominant in first approximation. Increasing pressure, the Weiss constants for a-axis are almost the same, whereas the Weiss constants for b and c-axes increase, getting close to the value of the a-axis; this indicates that the magnetic anisotropy becomes small 3.5 3.0 2.5 μeff (μB/U) b-axis a-axis c-axis -150 -100 -50 0 Θ (K) 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0 P (GPa) a-axis b-axis c-axis (a) (b) Fig. 2. (Color online) Pressure dependence of (a) the effective moments and (b) the Weiss constants for H ∥ a, b, and c in UTe2. with increasing the pressure at least at high temperature re- gion. The pressure evolution of the effective moments are also derived from the fitting, as shown in Fig. 2(a). At ambi- ent pressure, the effective moments are ranging from 3.55 to 3.14 μB, which are close to the free ion values, 3.58 μB and 3.62 μB for 5f 2 (U4+) or 5 f 3 (U3+). The effective moments decrease with pressure, suggesting the deviation from the 5 f 2 or 5f 3 configurations, or combined effects of crystalline elec- tric field and antiferromagnetic correlations. At 1.7 GPa, above the critical pressure Pc, magnetic anoma- lies are clearly detected at TWMO and TMO in χa, χb and χc, as shown in Fig. 3(c). χa shows a broad maximum at TWMO ≈ 9.5 K. χc also displays a small and broad maximum at TWMO ≈ 10.5 K. In difference, χb shows the gradual in- crease through TWMO on cooling, and clearly, the easy mag- netization axis changes from a to b-axis. Since the anomaly at TWMO is very broad with a crossover-like behavior, it cannot 2 J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 20 15 10 5 M/H (x10 -3 emu/mol) 30 20 10 0 T (K) a b c TWMO TMO 1.7 GPa 1 T 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 0 M (μB/U) 5 4 3 2 1 0 H (T) 1.7 GPa 2 K a b c 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 0 M (μB/U) UTe2 0 GPa 2 K a b c (a) (b) (c) Fig. 3. (Color online) Magnetization curves at 2 K for H ∥ a, b and c-axes at (a) ambient pressure and (b) 1.7 GPa. (c) Temperature dependence of the magnetic susceptibilities at 1.7 GPa for H ∥ a, b and c-axes. be defined as a clear appearance of the long range magnetic order. The increase of χb below TWMO may reflect the strong feedback between antiferromagnetic and ferromagnetic inter- actions with a far weaker effect than that at ambient pressure, but seems to be due to the particular crystal structure of UTe2. If the anomaly at TWMO corresponds to a ferromagnetic order, the anomaly should be immediately smeared out at high fields for b-axis. However, TWMO is still visible up to 5 T, indicat- ing that it does not correspond to the ferromagnetism. Note that TWMO is also observed in resistivity and AC calorimetry measurements, but the anomaly due to TWMO is rather broad at low fields. At low temperature, another magnetic anomaly is detected around 3 K, as denoted by TMO in Fig. 3(c). The anomaly at TMO is much sharper than that of TWMO, as it is also detected more clearly in resistivity and AC calorimetry.19) It seems obvious that TMO corresponds to long range magnetic order, most likely antiferromagnetism.17,18,37) At least one can say that no evidence for ferromagnetic order appears at TMO and TWMO. ambient pressure and at 1.7 GPa, above the critical pressure Pc at 2 K. The b-axis is clearly above Pc the easy magnetization axis, and no more the a-axis. The anisotropy is rather small for the a, b and c-axes . This is clear contrast to ambient pressure, where the easy a-axis reveals more Ising-like behavior. tibility at low temperatures for H ∥ a and b-axes at different pressures. For H ∥ a-axis, a broad shoulder appears around T ∗ ∼ 12 K, which shifts to the lower temperatures with in- creasing pressure. Correspondingly, the sharp increase of the susceptibility on cooling at ambient pressure tends to be sup- 50 40 30 20 10 M/H (x10 -3 emu/mol) 0 GPa 0.6 0.9 1.1 1.4 1.7 H || a-axis T* Tc TWMO TMO 20 15 10 5 M/H (x10 -3 emu/mol) 50 40 30 20 10 0 T (K) H || b-axis 1.7 GPa 1.4 1.1 0.9 0.6 0 Tχ,max TWMO Tc TMO (a) (b) Fig. 4. (Color online) Temperature dependence of the magnetic suscepti- bilities measured at 1 T for H ∥ a and b-axes at different pressure. pressed with pressure. At pressures in the range from 0.9 to 1.4 GPa, the susceptibility drops rapidly below ∼ 3 K due to the onset of superconductivity. For H ∥ b-axis, a broad maximum of the susceptibility around Tχ,max ∼ 35 K becomes sharp and shifts to the lower temperature with increasing pressure. The decrease of Tχ,max is well scaled with the decrease of the metamagnetic field Hm under pressure.26) Above Pc the maximum has vanished and the magnetic state develops below TWMO. together with TWMO and TMO above Pc. Both Tχ,max and T ∗ decrease with increasing pressure, and are supposed to be- come zero around 2 GPa. But they have finite values just be- low Pc and abruptly disappear; this implies that the magnetic properties and electronic states drastically change at Pc with the first order transition. TMO and TWMO detected by sus- ceptibility measurements are consistent with those detected by resistivity and AC calorimetry measurements. Note that TMO and TWMO are not connected continuously, revealing the appearance of the first order transition at Pc again. The slope for T ∗ is ∂T ∗/∂P ∼ −5.8 K/GPa, which is in excel- lent agreement with the value of −6 K/GPa estimated from the thermal expansion and the electronic Gr ̈uneisen parame- ter, Γe = −30.22,24) The decrease of T ∗ is also consistent with the results of resistivity measurements under pressure.27) The rather high compressibility of UTe2 leads to a volume reduction close to 3 % at 1.7 GPa,28) which is a large volume change in condensed matter. For example, nearly the same volume reduction in 3He (∼ 5 %) occurs, where the param- agnetic Fermi liquid phase30) changes to the solid phase on the melting curve at very low temperature.29) It is far from ferromagnetic instability,31) and phase transitions to the spin triplet superfluid phases A and B occur on cooling. Further on cooling, the antiferromagnetic order also develops in the solid phase in the millikelvin range.32,33) Many examples for the 3 J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 40 30 20 10 0 T (K) 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0 P (GPa) T* (a-axis) Pc Tχ,max (b-axis) TWMO TMO Fig. 5. (Color online) Pressure dependence of Tχ,max and T ∗ at 1 T for H ∥ a and b-axes, respectively. TWMO and TMO at 1 T are also plotted. The open symbols for TWMO and TMO are the results of resistivity and AC calorimetry measurements at zero field cited from –19. large volume reduction have been found in the heavy fermion systems31) as well as in a ladder system with a few % of the volume reduction,34) where drastic changes of electronic and magnetic properties were observed. Indeed, in UTe2, a sub- stantial shrink in the volume may cause the Lifshitz transition under the pressure, as indicated by a first-principles band cal- culation based on the GGA+U method. As shown in the sup- plemental material,35) a Fermi surface may appear around the Γ point in the Brillouin zone, which has not been found in cal- culations at ambient pressure.36,43) It may affect the magnetic properties. The particularity in U compounds is the switch from a nor- malization of the wave function to the U3+ configuration to- ward the U4+ configuration (see similar discussion on Tm and Sm intermediate valence compounds for Tm2+/Tm3+ and Sm2+/Sm3+, respectively in ref. 38). On the other hand, the sit- uation is very different from that in Ce compounds,39) where valence fluctuations occur between a single occupied 4 f 1 electron for Ce3+ and and an empty 4 f shell for Ce4+; while in Yb compounds the situation correspond to the case of one hole in 4f shell (Yb3+) and a full occupancy (Yb2+). In Ce compounds, starting with a nearly trivalent valence, the pres- sure will generally increase the Kondo interaction and thus the Kondo temperature TK increases; when TK reaches the crystal field value ∆cf/kB (∆cf: the crystal field splitting energy) this last one is no more efficient to lift the six fold degeneracy of the total angular momentum J = 5/2.39) Recently, the dual nature of 5 f electrons in U compounds is nicely proved mi- croscopically by high energy spectroscopy experiments.40) A small valence change under pressure in UTe2 has already been emphasized18) and directly shown by x-ray spectroscopy.37) A strong indication for the mixed valence state with a dominant 5 f 3 (U3+) configuration has been recently reported in a Core- level spectroscopy study.41) The interplay of the U3+ and U4+ configurations has been also observed in high resolution angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy.42) A supplementary ingredient is that UTe2 forms a unique or- thorhombic structure with the space group Immm, which can- not be seen in other dichalcogenide family, such as USe2 and US2. In UTe2 the two U chains form a two-leg ladder along the a-axis. Thus, the possibility of strong magnetic frustrations and the absence of long-range orders are pointed out.43) The unique crystal structure of UTe2 leads to a singular band struc- ture emerging from a Kondo semiconductor44) at the limit of vanishing correlation linked to the weakness of the Coulomb repulsion U in regards to the transfer hopping integral p in reference.3) As observed in SmB646) or SmS,47) pressure will add another channel to close the Kondo gap . A remarkable point is that crossing Pc the magnetic anisotropy between a and b-axes collapses and is even re- versed in its sign. At ambient pressure, a ratio χa/χb of 7 just above Tc has been taken as a possible classification of UTe2 has an Ising system. The pressure has led to a full undressing of the initial crystal field splitting i. e. in the selection be- tween the j = 5/2 and j = 7/2 angular component of the 5 f electrons. It was already stressed in a theoretical model3) that the strength of U/p (U: Coulomb repulsion, p: hopping inte- gral) will push towards an Ising limit for the spin and that pressure by lowering U/p will weaken the Ising character. In this model no direct link was made between a drastic or slightly change of valence through Pc and a deep modifica- tion of the crystal field. In ref.3 it has been argued that the pressure will lower the strength of the Coulomb repulsion U and thus modify the strength of the ferromagnetic and antifer- romagnetic interactions, as observed in experiment. Despite the Ising character of ferromagnetic fluctuation, the antifer- romagnetic fluctuations are predicted to show a moderately quasi-isotropic property (Heisenberg character). In general, the Ising ferromagnetic fluctuations are favorable for spin- triplet superconductivity, while the antiferromagnetic fluctu- ations are favorable for the spin-singlet state. The change to the quasi-isotropic properties with pressure suggests the de- velopment of the antiferromagnetic fluctuations, implying the parity mixing. This is also inferred from the experimental re- sults of multiple superconducting phases and Hc2(T) curves under pressure.17,18,26) In the trivalent U3+ with the 5f 3 configuration, the crystal field level scheme leads to the series of five Kramers doublets for J = 9/2 in the orthorhombic structure, which gives rise to heavy fermions properties quite similar to those of Ce3+ or Yb3+. On the other hand, the tetravalent U4+ with the 5 f 2 con- figuration will lead to the nine singlets for J = 4, which may leave the possibility of deep change of the crystal field and thus of the magnetic anisotropy. For the 4 f systems it is equiv- alent of the 4 f 2 configuration, such as Pr3+. For UTe2, the dual localized and itinerant character of the 5 f electrons40,48) seems the origin of the observed drastic change of the mag- netic anisotropy with pressure; at high temperature signature of the localized character is marked by the nice Curie-Weiss behaviors in the all pressure range. In summary, our experiments reveal that the anisotropic magnetic susceptibility at ambient pressure in UTe2 changes to the quasi-isotropic behavior under pressure. Above Pc, two magnetic anomalies are detected at TMO corresponding to the antiferromagnetic order and TWMO, which is most likely a crossover rather than a static magnetic order, revealing the complex magnetic properties. These pressure sensitive mag- netic properties are probably due to the unique crystal struc- ture associated with the strong volume reduction, ferromag- netic/antiferromagnetic fluctuations, valence and Fermi sur- face instabilities. 4 J. Phys. Soc. Jpn.