1 Optical control of 4f orbital state in rare-earth metals Authors Nele Thielemann-Kühn1*, Tim Amrhein1, Wibke Bronsch1,2, Somnath Jana3†, Niko Pontius3, Robin Y. Engel4‡, Piter S. Miedema4, Dominik Legut5,6, Karel Carva6, Unai Atxitia1,8, Benjamin E. van Kuiken7, Martin Teichmann7, Robert E. Carley7, Laurent Mercadier7, Alexander Yaroslavtsev7,9, Giuseppe Mercurio7, Loïc Le Guyader7, Naman Agarwal7§, Rafael Gort7, Andres Scherz7, Siarhei Dziarzhytski4, Günter Brenner4, Federico Pressacco4, Ru-Pan Wang4,11, Jan O. Schunck4,11, Mangalika Sinha4¶, Martin Beye4‡, Gheorghe S. Chiuzbăian10, Peter M. Oppeneer9, Martin Weinelt1# and Christian Schüßler-Langeheine3# Affiliations 1Freie Universität Berlin, Fachbereich Physik, Arnimallee 14, 14195 Berlin, Germany. 2Elettra-Sincrotrone Trieste S.C.p.A., Strada statale 14 – km 163,5, 34149 Basovizza, Trieste, Italy. 3Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie GmbH, Albert-Einstein-Str. 15, 12489 Berlin, Germany. 4Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron DESY, Notkestraße 85, 22607 Hamburg, Germany. 5VSB - Technical University Ostrava, IT4Innovations, 708 00 Ostrava, Czech Republic. 6Charles University, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, DCMP, 12116 Prague 2, Czech Republic. 7European XFEL, Holzkoppel 4, 22869 Schenefeld, Germany. 8Instituto de Ciencia de Materiales de Madrid, CSIC, Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain. 9Uppsala University, Department of Physics and Astronomy, P.O. Box 516, 75120 Uppsala, Sweden. 10Sorbonne Université, CNRS, Laboratoire de Chimie Physique, - Matière et Rayonnement,75005 Paris, France. 11Universität Hamburg, Physics Department, Luruper Chaussee 149, 22761 Hamburg, Germany. *Corresponding author. Email: nele.thielemann-kuehn@fu-berlin.de † present address: Max Born Institute for Nonlinear Optics and Short Pulse Spectroscopy, 12489 Berlin, Germany. ‡ present address: Department of Physics, AlbaNova University Center, Stockholm University, S-10691 Stockholm, Sweden. § present address: Department of Physics and Astronomy (IFA), Aarhus University, Ny. Munkegade 120, 8000 Aarhus C, Denmark. ¶ present address: Institute for X-ray Physics, University of Göttingen, 37077, Göttingen, Germany. # These authors contributed equally to this work. 2 Abstract A change of orbital state alters the coupling between ions and their surroundings drastically. Orbital excitations are hence key to understand and control interaction of ions. Rare-earth (RE) elements with strong magneto-crystalline anisotropy (MCA) are important ingredients for magnetic devices. Thus, control of their localized 4f magnetic moments and anisotropy is one major challenge in ultrafast spin physics. With time-resolved X-ray absorption and resonant inelastic scattering experiments, we show for Tb metal that 4f-electronic excitations out of the ground state multiplet occur after optical pumping. These excitations are driven by inelastic 5d-4f-electron scattering, alter the 4f-orbital state and consequently the MCA with important implications for magnetization dynamics in 4f-metals, and more general for the excitation of localized electronic states in correlated materials. Introduction In ultrafast spin dynamics in metals, optically induced transitions in valence electronic states are the first excitation step. Recent experiments and theory identified direct consequences of these initial excitations for the spin dynamics: optical inter-site spin transfer (OISTR) between different atomic sites of transition metal (TM) compounds leads to enhanced speed and efficiency of demagnetization (1). Excitations of 4f electronic states in RE metals have not been considered to contribute to magnetization dynamics so far. X-ray magnetic circular dichroism studies, searching for separate spin and orbital dynamics in TM-RE ferrimagnets (2,3) were implicitly looking for changes of the f electronic state, albeit without stating that. They ultimately remained without conclusions. In contrast to valence states in TMs, which can be easily optically excited, the dipole selection rules make the cross section for optical 4f excitations in RE metals very small (4) in particular for pump-photon energies not resonant with 4f-4f transitions. Therefore, laser-driven 4f-spin dynamics must result from coupling to other degrees of freedom, such as to the lattice via phonons or to the directly laser excited 5d6s valence electrons. While non-parallel 4f-spin order can be efficiently quenched via angular momentum redistribution (5,6), the speed of demagnetization in 4f-ferromagnets is closely connected to the 4f-spin-lattice coupling (7-15). Launching phonons in 4f metals requires energies of few meV, which is enough to generate spin waves (16) and excitations within the 4f ground state multiplet (17), but not enough to reach higher lying 4f electronic multiplet states: the lowest-lying f-f multiplet transitions that change the total angular momentum J usually require energies of hundreds of meV (18). The spin-polarized itinerant 5d electrons mediate the indirect exchange coupling between the 4f states of neighboring atoms (Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida (RKKY) interaction) and thus enable in equilibrium long-range order of the strongly localized 4f magnetic moments (16). Distinct 5d and 4f magnetic order dynamics observed in state selective studies on different RE metals (6,7,9) indicate a more intricate interplay of 4f and 5d states in non- equilibrium, but details of the 5d-4f interaction after optical pumping have rarely been explored. Partly, this is the case because a combined theoretical description of d and f electronic structure is difficult (19); magnetic dynamics simulation based on models like Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation (7,20-22) or the Microscopic Three Temperature Model (14,23,24) usually treat the 4f and 5d magnetic systems as a single spin system. We present here an analysis of the 5d-4f coupling mechanisms in non-equilibrium and show that this coupling induces changes in the 4f electronic state that are directly linked to spin and orbital 3 dynamics: orbital state transitions altering the total angular momentum J, have immediate consequences for the 4f-spin lattice coupling, which should be reflected in spin-dynamics. With new pulsed X-ray sources and instrumentation at the European X-ray Free Electron Laser (EuXFEL) and the Free Electron Laser in Hamburg (FLASH), experimental approaches have recently become feasible that merge high energy and time resolution with core-state selective probing. For detecting the 4f electronic dynamics we combined two complementary methods: X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) and resonant inelastic X-ray scattering (RIXS), as schematically illustrated in Fig. 1A. The time-resolved XAS and RIXS experiments were performed at EuXFEL and FLASH, respectively (see Figs. 1B and 1C for experimental schemes). XAS (at the 3d-4f transition) probes the full 4f multiplet and hence the sum of all changes to the electronic structure (25). RIXS (at the 4d-4f transition) allows for a selective detection of a specific electronic excitation with high sensitivity (26). We combined these two techniques to track femtosecond changes in the 4f multiplet structure after exciting the 5d6s valence electrons in paramagnetic hcp Tb metal with near-infrared laser pulses, and we observed distinct 4f orbital excitations. We show that variations of the 4f state are primarily driven by 5d-4f electron-electron scattering, but we also find indications of 5d-4f electron transfer in the 4f electron dynamics. The effect is not small: Under our experimental conditions we observe 5d-4f electronic scattering to excite about 20 % of the atoms in the probed volume. And it is relevant: The altered spin and orbital angular momenta of the excited 4f electronic state affect the coupling of the 4f magnetic system to the environment: Density functional theory (DFT) calculations show that the observed orbital transitions can affect the MCA such that the magnetic easy axis locally flips on a femtosecond time scale. Results Time-resolved XAS and RIXS As depicted by the experimental scheme in Fig. 1B, we recorded XAS spectra by probing the transmission through a thin Tb layer deposited on a silicon nitride membrane. We excited our sample with 800-nm-laser pulses (1.55 eV) and probed the XAS signal with monochromatized X-ray pulses from EuXFEL (see Materials and Methods). Time and energy resolution in the experiment was 65 fs and 350 meV, respectively. Figure 2A shows spectra recorded at the M5 resonance, a transition into 3d94f9 states, which leaves behind a 3d5/2 core- hole. The blue dots reflect the Tb M5 absorption spectrum with 4f electrons in the 4f8 7F6 ground state (‘unpumped’). Recorded 150 fs after near-IR-laser excitation the orange dots (‘pumped’) show a spectrum with varied line shape, indicating that pumping has changed the 4f electronic state. A reference measurement on Gd under identical conditions (see Supplementary Materials (SM), Fig. S1), shows no pump effect in the XAS signal. As we explain further below this confirms that the effects seen for Tb XAS are in fact caused by changes of the 4f electronic structure. In the RIXS setup shown in Fig. 1C, we excited a Tb metal layer epitaxially grown on a W(110) crystal with 1030 nm laser pulses (1.2 eV) and recorded the RIXS signal with monochromatic X-ray pulses from the FLASH (see Materials and Methods). The time resolution was 300 fs and we recorded spectra with an energy resolution of 140 meV. The RIXS spectra measured at the N4,5 (4d → 4f) transition (147.2 eV) are shown in Fig. 2B; the peaks in the spectra are related to electronic transitions into different final states in the 4f shell (Fig. 1A). The orange dots represent the spectrum 300 fs after excitation with the pump-laser pulse (‘pumped’), which differs from that of the sample in the 4f8 7F6 ground state (blue dots, ‘unpumped’). Both spectra are plotted over energy loss, i.e., the energy difference between incoming and scattered photons. The spectrum of the pumped sample shows a transfer of 4 intensity from the main features at 2.7 and 3.4 eV to losses of around 2.4 and 3.1 eV, respectively, again indicating an excited 4f initial state. In order to identify the particular excitations in the 4f multiplet we describe the 4f ground and excited state XAS and RIXS spectra with atomic multiplet calculations (27,28) (see SM for details). Based on these calculated spectra we simulate the spectra for the pumped and unpumped sample (see Figs. 2C & 2D), as well as the differential change (relative change compared to the ground state spectrum in %) in XAS and RIXS, respectively (see. Figs. 2E & 2F). 4f-5d inelastic scattering We start with analyzing the RIXS spectra presented in Figs. 2B. The main pump-induced change is a shift of the two ground-state RIXS features at around 2.64 eV and 3.4 eV by about 0.26 eV to lower energies (black horizontal arrows in Fig. 2D). The observed energy difference matches the lowest-lying multiplet excitation that involves a change of J in the Tb 4f8 multiplets (7F6 → 7F5, ΔJ = – 1). We verify this interpretation by the simulation shown in Fig. 2D and Fig. 2F. We can reproduce the pump-induced spectral changes by including an admixture of 4f-excited-states to the description of the ground-state spectrum. As depicted by the orange line in Fig. 2D and the green line in Fig. 2F, adding a contribution of about 5% 7F5 to the 7F6 ground state spectrum (blue line in Fig. 2D) yields already a reasonably good description of the transient changes in the RIXS data. The RIXS cross-section for specific 4f multiplets across the Tb N4,5 resonance strongly depends on the incoming photon energy; their spectral weight is therefore not a good measure of the admixture of excited states in the probed volume. We better quantify the overall contribution of 7F5 excitations from the XAS spectra measured at 150 fs pump-probe delay (Fig. 2A). The purple solid line in Fig. 2E with an admixture of about (16 ± 1) % 7F5 qualitatively describes the overall shape of the differential absorption, thus giving a measure of the total contribution of 7F5 excited states at 150 fs delay. How is this excitation possible? As argued above, 4f-4f transitions directly induced by the pump pulse are negligible. For optical d-f excitations from the itinerant 5d valence states into the localized 4f states or vice versa our pump-laser-photon energies are too low: Such excitations require energies of 2.8 and 2.3 eV, respectively (29), while we pump with 1.55 eV photons for XAS and 1.2 eV photons for RIXS (two-photon absorption processes are negligible under our experimental conditions; see SM). The pump-laser excitation hence cannot alter the 4f state directly, but it heats the valence electrons of mixed 5d and 6s character, which then can transfer the excitation to the 4f system. That such a 5d6s-4f energy transfer is the relevant process here, is revealed by the temporal evolution of XAS and RIXS spectral changes. In Fig. 3 we present the differential absorption measured at 1236 eV (marked by the vertical line in Figs. 2A and 2E) versus the delay between the IR-pump and X-ray-probe pulse (black data points). The absorption at this energy drops rapidly with a decay constant of 70 fs, reaches a maximum deviation from the ground state of 3 % after 200 fs and recovers with a time constant of about 3 ps (see SM, Fig. S2). The transient change in the energy-loss region 2.7 – 3.2 eV of the RIXS spectra (hatched area in Figs. 2B and 2F) recorded with a lower time resolution of 300 fs follows the same trend (see Fig. 3, green markers). These observed time scales resemble those for optically excited valence electrons in metals (30,31): The blue line in Fig. 3 shows the temperature of the 5d6s electronic system calculated with a two-temperature model (2TM), involving 5d6s-electrons and phonons (see SM). The electron-temperature curve qualitatively matches the transient differential change in the XAS and RIXS signal at 1236 eV. We infer that the 4f multiplet is 5 only excited, in the presence of hot 5d6s electrons. We assign the mechanism for the 7F6 → 7F5 excitations in the 4f shell to inelastic 5d-4f electronic scattering, involving transfer of energy and angular momentum from the optically excited 5d6s electrons to the 4f system. As only 5d6s electrons with enough energy can induce the 4f transition, we better compare the differential spectral changes with the transient population of those hot electrons, that actually can transfer the energy required for the 7F6 → 7F5 transition by filling a 5d holes at respectively lower energies (black line in Fig.3, see SM for details). This curve yields an even better fit to the XAS and RIXS data, supporting our assumption about the underlying scattering process. In Fig. 4 we illustrate the supposed mechanism in a total-energy scheme for the relevant channels in XAS and RIXS, explaining the spectroscopic signatures of the 4f-multiplet excitation. In XAS at the M5 resonance 3d electrons are excited from the initial state 3d104d104f8(5d6s)3 to the 3d94f9 final states (purple arrows). In RIXS at the N4 edge, 4d electrons are excited from the initial state 3d104d104f8(5d6s)3 to the 4d94f9 intermediate states (blue arrows). In the Tb ground state, the 4f8 electrons occupy the 7F6 multiplet. Optical excitation by the pump laser elevates the complete ground state (red arrow) by exciting the (5d6s)3 electrons. They rapidly thermalize by screened Coulomb interaction and become Fermi distributed (indicated by the red area in the middle section of Fig. 4). By inelastic electronic 5d-4f scattering (Feynman diagram in the top middle section) energy and angular momentum is transferred between the (5d6s)3 and 4f8 electronic system. A 4f electron is excited from 7F6 to 7F5 and a 5d electron fills a hole of lower energy. On sites where this happens, the initial state in XAS and RIXS changes (right side of Fig. 4). In XAS this affects the spectral line shape (compare Fig. 2A). In RIXS the raise of the initial state energy causes a red shift of the energy loss features (compare Figs. 2B & 2D with the energy loss values given in the right section of Fig. 4). The 7F6 → 7F5 transition implies a change of angular momentum ΔJ = – 1. A spin flip, altering the 5d spin by ΔS = 1 would conserve the total angular momentum in the scattering process. How about the excitations of energetically higher lying multiplets 7FJ with J = 4,3,2,1,0? Such transitions require an angular momentum transfer ΔJ < – 1. Either multiple 5d-4f electronic scattering events each involving ΔS = 1 or a transfer of angular momentum from the reservoir of quenched 5d orbital momenta might permit higher ΔJ changes. Indeed, by including the contribution of higher 4f8 multiplets to the ‘pumped’ XAS spectrum (assuming a thermal occupation, weighted with a Boltzmann factor and degeneracy 2J + 1; see SM for details) improves the fit to the differential XAS (dashed purple line in Fig. 2E). Also, the asymmetric peak profile in the differential RIXS (black markers in Fig. 2F) could come from energetically higher lying excitations within the 4f states. Yet, with the presently available experimental data, we cannot answer the question unequivocally: The slightly better fit to the XAS data does not really prove these transitions; and the discontinues variation of energy resolution along the energy axis in the RIXS spectra makes the detection of the corresponding RIXS features difficult. We further found no evidence for these higher 4f8 states from features on the anti-Stokes side of the spectra (see SM for details). But we find indications for other 4f excitations as we discuss in the following. 6 5d-4f electron transfer We notice that the shape of the pumped XAS spectrum is not constant but changes with pump-probe delay. Figure 5A presents an energy vs. delay map illustrating the differential absorption up to 430 fs after pumping. Difference spectra (dots in Figs. 5B & 5C) averaged over two successive delay ranges (I) and (II) (marked in Fig. 5A by black vertical lines and color-coded in Fig. 3) show that the dip at 1235.8 eV becomes more pronounced at larger pump-probe delays while the one at 1237.5 eV changes only slightly: Obviously the 4f state evolves in time. The simulated differential XAS changes from excitation of higher 7FJ multiplets (J = 4,3,2,1,0) do not explain the evolution of the pronounced pump effect at 1235.8 eV (see SM for spectral contribution of different 7FJ multiplets). Therefore, we discuss the possibility of excitation into 4f9 and 4f7 multiplets. The pump-excitation energy in our experiment is not sufficient to directly excite states with varied 4f electron number: The transitions to a 4f9 (6H15/2) or 4f7 (8S7/2) multiplet requires 2.8 eV and 2.3 eV, respectively (29). However, once thermalized, the Fermi distribution of the hot valence electrons extends beyond the initial pump energy; electrons at 2.8 eV above the Fermi energy can fill an empty 4f state and holes 2.3 eV below EF can accept the most lightly bound minority spin electron of Tb via elastic tunnelling processes (see illustration in Fig. 5D). In fact, by including 4f9 and 4f7 multiplets in our XAS simulation we can achieve a quantitative description of the reported spectral changes at 150 fs delay in Fig. 2A. The best fit (blue solid line in Fig. 2E) contains (20 ± 1) % of the 7F5 excited 4f8 states, and (4.5 ± 0.7) % of 4f9 and (3.3 ± 0.2) % of 4f7 electron-transfer contributions. We find our assumption of 4f7 and 4f9 contributions supported by the spectral changes on short delay scales presented in Fig. 5. As these states become populated only after the 5d6s-electron system has thermalized, we expect lower contributions before the maximum electron temperature is reached. In fact, we can describe the spectral changes with delay in Figs. 5B and 5C by different 4f7 and 4f9 contributions (solid lines). The 4f9 weight grows from (1.2 ± 0.5) % in interval (I) to (4.8 ± 0.4) % in interval (II), for 4f7 it grows from (2 ± 0.2) % to (2.8 ± 0.2) %. Including 4f7 and 4f9 multiplets in the simulation requires some assumptions. The spectral shape itself can readily be simulated (and experimentally observed in Gd and Dy, respectively). Unlike for the orbital-excited 4f8 states, though, our atomic multiplet calculation does not provide the energy position of the 4f7 and 4f9 multiplets relative to 4f8. The relative energy depends critically on core-hole screening, which is altered by adding or removing a localized 4f electron. We determined the effect on the core-hole screening by optimizing the energy shift to match the experimental data (see SM for details). There are issues with the 5d-4f electron transfer interpretation, that we discuss in the following: First, only about 0.1% of the 5d electrons/holes at 4000 K (peak temperature from the 2TM calculations) will exhibit energies compatible with respective tunnelling processes. To cause the observed effects, this channel must be very efficient. This at least is possible as the coupling between 5d and 4f states is rather strong (32). Second, we observe no indications of 4f-5d transitions in the RIXS data. As stated above, however, the RIXS cross section for specific 4f multiplets strongly varies with X-ray energy. We may have just missed these excitations with the particular photon energy of 147.2 eV. Finally, the contribution of the 4f9 seems to increase more than that of the 4f7 when going to longer delays. We speculate that this may be related to the different 5d density of states below and above EF, affecting the 5d- 4f overlap. We note here again that there is no common way to describe both the 4f and 5d electronic structure of RE metals in the same model and that a quantitative calculation of d-f scattering and electron transfer is currently beyond the state-of-the-art. 7 For Gd, which we used for a reference XAS measurement (see SM, Fig. S1), all the excitations discussed for Tb would occur at much higher energies; the lowest possible excitation out of the 8S7/2 4f multiplet requires an energy of 4.1 eV (29). The fact that we observe no spectral change in Gd XAS shows that all changes seen in Tb XAS are related to 4f electronic changes and not caused by other pump effects. Discussion Transient angular momentum change While open questions remain for the excitations of higher 4f8 multiplets and the 5d-4f electron transfer, the XAS and RIXS data show the 4f8 7F6 → 7F5 multiplet excitation without any doubt as the dominant effect. This helps understanding angular momentum transfer in non- equilibrium magnetization dynamics of Tb and other RE ions. 4f-state excitations need to be included in a full description of non-equilibrium processes, particularly because they could affect the coupling between the 4f system and the lattice, an important channel in magnetic dynamics of RE metals (3,7). The effect of 4f orbital excitation goes beyond a mere rescaling of the 4f-phonon coupling. We validate this effect, by investigating the influence of the 4f8 7F5 excited states on the MCA. At room temperature in the paramagnetic phase of Tb all mJ levels (J = – 6 ... + 6) of the 7F6 multiplet are occupied (17). In the ferromagnetic phase at low temperatures the mJ level splitting increases and the energetically lowest configuration mJ = 6 (ml = 3, ms = 3) becomes preferentially occupied. To estimate the MCA change, we compare a Tb ml = 3 ground state with an ml = 2 state, which (together with spin-flip ms = 2 states) forms the 1/√2 |ml = 3, ms = 2 >. From the ms = 2 contributions, we expect a minor impact on the MCA, but a considerable one from ml = 2. We therefore determined the MCA for the Tb ml = 3 ground state and the ml = 2 excited state from all-electron first-principles calculations (see Materials and Methods). For the ground state our ab initio calculations provide an MCA of 15 meV per atom with a preferential orientation of magnetic moments (easy axis) in the hcp basal plane along the crystallographic a axis, both of which are consistent with experiment (33). When we modify the minority Tb 4f-electron occupation to the ml = 2 state and perform a one-step calculation of the total energies, we find a rotation of the easy axis: magnetization along the c axis perpendicular to the basal plane becomes favourable. We verified this result by creating a self-consistent state with dominant ml = 2 occupation by modifying the Coulomb repulsion between the 4f electrons (adjustment of Hubbard U), which, likewise flips the easy axis. While we could prove the 7F6 → 7F5 transition, the data indicate additional 4f excitations with minor weight and a time-dependent contribution of different excited states. In addition to the changes of the MCA, also contributions to ultrafast demagnetization could matter, e.g., by thermal occupation of the 4f states or via electron-transfer transitions. The latter could principally quench the MCA by orders of magnitude by creating Gd-like configurations (7). Our work stands apart from studies on 4f orthoferrites, where the rare-earth ions (R) are placed in non-centrosymmetric positions of the RFeO3 crystal lattice (34-38). As a consequence of symmetry breaking, resonantly driven electric dipole transitions dominate the observed dynamics. A resulting change of MCA provokes reorientation of the Fe spins in the crystal lattice; a transition which is also induced by thermal heating (39). We report on an ultrafast change of 4f orbital states, based on inelastic electron-electron scattering between itinerant 5d and localized 4f electrons. 8 Perspectives In the Tb XAS experiment we altered the 4f state of about 20 % of all atoms (compare best fit, blue solid lines in Fig. 2E), which is quite sizeable. With a simple estimate we find a transfer of roughly 10 % of the absorbed laser energy into the 4f system (see SM). The excitation density might be further enhanced and specific transitions selectively driven by resonant pump-laser excitation. Shaping of the valence band structure by combining, e.g., 3d and 4f metals in alloys or multilayers could also affect the efficiency and selectivity of the 4f electronic excitations. Our findings are particularly relevant in view of recent reports on all-optical switching (AOS) in Tb-based compounds (40-42). Compared to AOS-materials comprising magnetically soft Gd, the strong MCA in Tb promises stable domains on nanometer scale. The dynamics, however, appear to be more intricate in Tb-based systems; the accepted model describing AOS in Gd-based compounds fails. Our conclusion about the suppressed 4f excitations in Gd and their dominant contribution in Tb, gives another context to the discussion on AOS in Tb based compounds. Our findings identify a fundamental excitation mechanism, based on 5d-4f inelastic electronic scattering. This so far disregarded process is highly relevant for optically induced magnetization dynamics in 4f metals and their compounds, as it provides basic insights to atomic spin and orbital dynamics, as well as to non-equilibrium 5d-4f coupling mechanisms. The presented electronic scattering channel might be exploited to optically control material parameters in magnetically ordered metals and further correlated materials. The ultrafast handle to transiently manipulate MCA may be functionalized for, e.g., writing bits in high density magnetic storage devices. Materials and Methods X-ray absorption at the SCS station of EuXFEL We performed the X-ray absorption experiment at the EuXFEL SCS Instrument (43), making use of the high energy resolution (E/ΔE ≈ 3500) in the energy range around the Tb and Gd 3d to 4f (M5,4) resonances. We recorded high-resolution X-ray absorption spectra using the X-ray gas monitor (XGM) for measurement of the incident intensity I0 and the transmission intensity monitor (TIM) - a cwd diamond scintillator - to determine the sample transmission IT. The XAS signals (Fig. 2A) are calculated via – log(IT/I0). The time-resolved XAS measurements were performed with 350 meV energy resolution. The 65 fs time resolution was determined by cross-correlation of optical pump and X-ray probe pulses. For longer intervals of data recording the time resolution was 100 – 200 fs (data shown in Fig. 5). For exciting the samples, we used 800-nm pulses (hν = 1.55 eV) from the SASE3 PP laser system. The incident pump fluence was (10 ± 2) mJ/cm2. The laser-spot size was (0.28 x 0.2) mm2 and thus larger than the X-ray-probe beam of (0.1 x 0.1) mm2 ensuring a nearly homogeneous excitation profile in the X-ray spot. Resonant inelastic X-ray scattering at the PG1 beamline of FLASH I We conducted the RIXS experiments at the PG1 - TRIXS permanent end station (44) (RIXS spectrometer for Time-resolved Resonant X-Ray Scattering) located at FLASH. The PG1 beamline can reach energies from 36 to 250 eV with high intensity and an energy resolution of about 0.07%, ideal for investigating RIXS at the N4,5 resonance of Tb around 147 eV. The experiment was performed at a grazing incident angle of about 25° and photons were 9 collected under 105° with respect to the sample surface. The outgoing photons are dispersed according to their energy by a grating spectrometer and recorded on an X-ray CCD camera. In focus the RIXS grating spectrometer provides a resolution of about 100 meV/px at 147 eV, corresponding to about 140 meV total resolution in the spectrum. Off-focus the resolving power decreases according to the dispersion and due to the refocusing off-axial parabolic mirror. This results in a variation of the energy-resolution across the probed energy-loss region. For the RIXS data shown in Figs. 2B & 2F the spectrometer focus was optimized at 2.5 eV energy loss. For pumping we used near-infrared-laser pulses of 1030 nm wavelength (hν = 1.2 eV) and achieved a time resolution of 300 fs (45). The incident pump fluence was 20 mJ/cm2. The laser-spot size was (150 x 150) μm2 and X-ray probe beam on the sample was (20 x 40) μm2, ensuring a nearly homogeneous pump profile within the probed area. To record time traces (Fig. 3) we used a delay hopping routine randomly switching between delays to exclude unknown cross correlations. Statistical Analysis For the XAS and RIXS signals from the pumped and unpumped sample, we take the standard error for absorption and scattered signal respectively. For the differential change of the signals (Figs. 2E, 2F & 3) we deduce uncertainties from error propagation. The uncertainties for the differential change of absorption in the time intervals I and II of the energy-delay map (Fig. 5B & 5C) stem from the standard deviation in each energy-delay-bin. Samples In the XAS experiment we studied polycrystalline Tb and Gd transmission samples of 10 nm thickness. To prevent oxidation, the RE metal was sandwiched between yttrium layers. The samples were grown on an aluminum heat sink on a silicon nitride membrane, resulting in the in brackets give the layer thickness in nanometers. The Tb and Gd samples were measured at room temperature in the paramagnetic phase. For the RIXS study we grew a thicker Tb film (40 nm) to maximize the number of absorbed photons and therewith the count rate in the RIXS signal. The film was grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) on a W(110) single crystal, prepared and characterized by X-ray magnetic circular dichroism at the PM3 beamline of BESSY II (Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin) (46). To prevent the Tb film from oxidation the sample was capped with a sputtered 4 nm layer of Ta resulting in the following sample composition: Ta(4 nm)/Tb(40 nm)/W(110). The RIXS measurements were performed in the paramagnetic phase of Tb at room temperature. Atomic multiplet calculations of M4,5 edge XAS and N4,5 edge RIXS Because of the localized character of the 4f states, the shape of the absorption multiplets can be simulated even for laser-excited samples (27). The atomic multiplet calculations are performed using the Quanty simulation package (47-49). Details on the quantum chemical treatment of the atomic multiplet calculations of the X-ray spectra can be found in Section 4 – 6 of the Supplementary Text as well as in the book by de Groot and Kotani (27,50). We do not simulate 4f-5d interaction; we calculate atomistic XAS and RIXS spectra for different 4f configuration and occupation, which are superposed to describe the spectral changes. For our approach in treating the X-ray absorption cross-section, it is assumed that for 4f RE compounds the 4f-4f as well as the 3d-4f-two-particle interactions are most important for the description of the M4,5 (3d) X-ray absorption spectrum. Due to the large wave-function overlap the dipole term is dominated by 4f n to 3d 9 4f n+1 transitions. The calculations are 10 based on spherical wave functions; a good approximation as spin-orbit interaction dominates crystal field effects in RE 4f metals. The interactions between the 3d core and 4f states in these atomic multiplet calculations are explicitly taken into account via the so-called Slater- Condon parameters. The Slater-Condon parameters used in this work were taken from Theo Thole’s multiplet extension (51) to the Cowan code (52), which underlies the CTM4XAS interface maintained by de Groot et al. (50). The complete set of values can be found in the Slater reduction factors were set to Fff = 0.61, Gdf = 0.70 and Fdf = 0.80 for the M4,5 edge XAS calculations. For the simulation of RIXS at the N4,5 edge, the Kramers-Heisenberg formula was applied. The scattering geometry was set to 105° emission and 25° incident angles according to the experimental set-up. The reduction factors were set to Fff2 = 0.80, Fff4 = 0.91 and Fff6 = 0.91, Gdf = 0.60 and Fdf = 0.60 for the N4,5 edge calculations. DFT calculations We performed DFT calculations, using the full-potential linear augmented plane wave (FP- LAPW) method in the local spin-density approximation (LSDA), as implemented in the programs ELK (53) and WIEN2k (54). Spin-orbit coupling is crucial in 4f systems, where it is stronger than the crystal field, and has been included in the calculations. The full Brillouin zone has been sampled by about 2000 k-points. Strong electron-electron correlations present in the Tb 4f states were included in terms of the Hubbard correction U and Hund’s parameter J (55). The DFT+U double counting was treated in the fully localized limit. For U = 9 eV and J = 0.5 eV we obtain the self-consistent ground state Tb configuration with ml = 3 and 15- meV MCA. The Tb configuration with ml = 2 is self-consistently obtained for U = 4 eV and J = 0.5 eV. In the calculations where the ml = 2 configuration was enforced without changing U, we employed the magnetic force theorem to obtain the MCA through a one-step total energy calculation. For the MCA calculations an increased accuracy of the muffin-tin potential and charge density expansion into spherical harmonics was used, with lmax = 14. MCA calculations for 4f based systems are often performed by mapping the full Hamiltonian to a crystal field (CF) Hamiltonian, where DFT calculations essentially provide the relevant CF parameters. The inaccuracies introduced by this mapping have been compared previously to LSDA based calculations (56,57), or DFT+U calculations similar to ours (58). These approaches involve different approximations, for example the CF mapping assumes that the crystal field is independent of the orientation of the 4f shell. On the other hand, the DFT+U calculations are highly sensitive to the choice of U. 11