1 High Infrared Reflectance Modulation in VO2 Films Synthesized on Glass and ITO coated Glass substrates using Atmospheric Oxidation of Vanadium Ashok P, Yogesh Singh Chauhan, and Amit Verma Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 208016, India Email: ashok@iitk.ac.in and amitkver@iitk.ac.in ABSTRACT: Vanadium Dioxide (VO2) is a strongly correlated material, which exhibits insulator to metal transition at ~68 ̊C along with large resistivity and infrared optical reflectance modulation. In this work, we use atmospheric pressure thermal oxidation of Vanadium to synthesize VO2 films on glass and ITO coated glass substrates. With the optimized short oxidation durations of 2 min and 4 min, the synthesized VO2 film shows high optical reflectance switching in long-wavelength infrared (8-14 μm) on glass substrates and mid- wavelength infrared (3-5 μm) on ITO coated glass substrates, respectively. Peak reflectance switching values of ~76% (at 9 μm) and ~ 79% (at 4.6 μm) are obtained on the respective substrates, which are among the highest reported values. Using the reflectance data, we extract VO2 complex refractive index in infrared wavelengths, in both the insulating and metallic phases. The extracted refractive index shows good agreement with VO2 synthesized using other methods. This demonstration of high optical reflectance switching in VO2 thin films, grown on low cost glass and ITO coated glass substrates, using a simple low thermal budget process will aid in enhancing VO2 applications in the optical domain. Keywords: Vanadium-Dioxide, Phase transition, Thin film deposition, FTIR, Temperature-dependent infrared reflectance, Infrared reflectance switching. 1. Introduction VO2 is a phase change material, which shows a sharp reversible insulator to metal transition around 68 °C, with upto five orders of change in resistivity . Associated with this phase transition is a structural transition from insulating monoclinic phase to metallic rutile phase . The resistivity jump in VO2 is useful for electrical switching applications such as oscillators , memristors , radio-frequency switches , reconfigurable filters and antennas , steep switching field-effect transistors , and selectors for resistive random-access memory . The phase transition in VO2 also significantly changes its optical reflectance in infrared wavelengths . This reflectance variation is useful for realizing various optical applications such as ultra-thin absorbers , tunable radiators , infrared camouflage , microbolometers , metamaterials , and thermochromic films . Most of these 2 of the electromagnetic spectrum. As multiple Vanadium oxide compounds are possible due to multiple valence states of Vanadium , precise control of oxygen partial pressure is needed for synthesizing high quality VO2 thin films using traditional thin film deposition methods such as reactive sputtering , chemical vapor deposition , sol-gel synthesis , pulsed laser deposition , reactive-evaporation , molecular beam epitaxy , atomic layer deposition , and thermal oxidation of Vanadium . Polymer assisted solution based process is an alternative method to synthesize VO2 thin films without precise control of oxygen gas flow . This method however requires high temperature (600 ̊C) annealing in nitrogen environment for long duration (3 hours) . Atmospheric pressure thermal oxidation (APTO) is another synthesis method that does not need precise control of oxygen partial pressure as atmospheric oxygen is used to oxidize Vanadium thin films to synthesize VO2 . APTO method is relatively simple as the oxidation time and the oxidation temperature are the only parameters requiring precise control to synthesize VO2 with good phase transition properties. Recently, we demonstrated low thermal budget synthesis of VO2 with good electrical and optical switching properties on c-plane Sapphire substrates using a modified APTO method with a step oxidation temperature profile, which allows for precise control of oxygen content in the films . As the oxidation duration increases, VO2 content of the film increases till a certain optimum duration, leading to improved electrical and optical switching performance . After this optimum time, V2O5 content of the film starts to increase, leading to reduction in electrical and optical switching properties. For very long oxidation durations, phase pure V2O5 films are formed . Integration of VO2 on low cost substrates such as glass and ITO/FTO/Al-ZnO coated glass is desired for widespread optical applications of VO2. In this work, we apply the modified APTO method to synthesize VO2 films on glass and ITO coated glass substrates, demonstrating among the highest reported LWIR/MWIR optical switching performance with an extremely low thermal budget process. In section 2, we present the vanadium RF sputtering deposition conditions and the APTO process to synthesize the vanadium oxide films. In section 3, the optical characterization results of the samples using temperature-dependent Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) reflectance measurements are presented to find the optical switching performance as a function of oxidation time. Temperature-dependent electrical resistance as a function of oxidation duration and surface morphology Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) images are also presented. For samples with highest infrared reflectance switching, optical modeling of the reflectance data to extract the VO2 complex refractive index in infrared wavelengths on glass and ITO coated glass substrates is also presented. Conclusions are presented in section 4. 2. Experimental Procedure The complete experimental process to synthesize the vanadium oxide films is schematically shown in Fig. 1. Glass and ITO coated glass substrates (ITO thickness:150 nm, Sheet Resistance: 20 Ω/sq ) were first cleaned using acetone and isopropyl alcohol in a sonicator, and blow dried using dry nitrogen before loading into the sputtering chamber. 3 Prior to the deposition, the sputtering chamber was pumped to base pressure of 5 x10-4 Pa. Vanadium thin films were deposited using RF magnetron sputtering from a 2-inch diameter Vanadium target of 99.9% purity. During the deposition, Argon gas flow rate was kept at 30 sccm using a mass flow controller to maintain the chamber pressure at 1 Pa and RF power to the sputtering gun was maintained at 90 W. Substrates were kept at room temperature during 90 minutes of V deposition. The deposited V film thickness was measured using KLA-Tencor stylus profilometer and was found to be ~130 nm. The V deposited substrates were unloaded from the sputtering chamber and diced into smaller pieces to have a total of 10 V/glass samples and 7 V/ITO/glass samples. These samples were then oxidized in open atmosphere at 450 ̊C for different durations (Toxd) upto 20 minutes followed by quenching on a cold plate (at room temperature). More details on the process can be obtained from our previous work . After sample preparation, room temperature infrared optical reflectance of all the samples was measured by an IR microscope (Agilent, Cary 600) connected to the FTIR spectrometer (Agilent, Cary 660). VO2 features low infrared reflectance in the insulating phase and high infrared reflectance in the metallic phase. The reflectance modulation was obtained by repeating the FTIR measurements with samples kept at 100 ̊C which is beyond the phase transition temperature of VO2. Temperature- dependent electrical resistance was measured using four-point probe set up with a temperature controlled oven. Surface morphological characterization was done using AFM (Oxford Instruments MFP-3D). 3. Characterization and Modeling Atmospheric oxidation of V thin film proceeds with the formation of VO2 in the initial oxidation phase and V2O5 in the latter stage. This oxidation behavior has been confirmed by previous APTO works . The electrical and infrared optical switching properties of the vanadium oxide films maximizes for an optimum Toxd with high VO2 content in the films . Figure 2 shows the measured optical reflectance switching as a function of Toxd for the vanadium oxide on glass substrates at 9 μm wavelength (Fig. 2(a)) and on ITO coated glass substrates at 4.6 μm (Fig. 2(b)). Peak reflectance switching values of ~76% is obtained for Toxd = 2 minutes on glass substrate and ~79% for Toxd = 4 minutes on ITO coated glass substrate. Beyond these optimum oxidation times, optical reflectance switching decreases because of increasing V2O5 content of the films. The rate of decrease of optical reflectance modulation with increasing Toxd is observed to be much faster on glass substrate compared to ITO coated substrates. Fig. 2(c) shows four-point probe resistance switching ratio (R30 oC/R110 oC) of the Vanadium oxide samples on glass substrate as a function of the oxidation duration Toxd. The resistance switching first increases with increasing Toxd, peaking at Toxd = 2 min, and decreases with further increase in Toxd because of increasing V2O5 content of the films. The resistance switching data and the infrared optical reflectance switching data are in agreement. Both characterizations suggest that Toxd = 2 min sample has the highest VO2 content. Fig. 2(d) shows the resistance variation as a function of temperature for the Toxd = 2 min VO2/glass sample, showing more than one order of resistance switching with phase transition temperature close to bulk VO2 phase transition temperature of ~ 68 oC. For vanadium 4 oxide films on ITO substrates, we were not able to measure the electrical switching properties reliably as the highly conducting ITO layer provides a low resistance current pathway, dominating the electrical measurements. AFM images (10μm x 10μm) for peak reflectance switching samples on glass and ITO coated glass substrate are shown in Fig. 2(e) and Fig. 2(f), respectively. Grain size is observed to be larger for the VO2 sample on ITO coated glass substrate compared to the VO2 sample on glass substrate. The surface RMS roughness is ~ 6.5 nm for VO2/Glass sample and ~8.2 nm for VO2/ITO sample. The room temperature and high temperature (100 ̊C) FTIR reflectance data (4.5-14 μm) for the sample with optimum oxidation duration on glass substrate (Toxd = 2 minutes) is shown in Fig. 3(a). Large reflectance switching in LWIR (8-14 μm) wavelengths is clearly observed with maximum switching (~76%) observed at ~ 9 μm. To extract the complex refractive index of VO2 from this data, we use Drude-Lorentz oscillator model to describe the optical properties of the film and substrates . According to this model, the complex dielectric response of any material at frequency ω is given as: ε(ω) = ε ∞ − ωp2 ω(ω+iωc) + ∑ fj 1−ω2 ωj 2−iγjω/ωj j (1) where, the first term of Ɛ∞ is the high frequency permittivity, the second term is Drude oscillator in which ωp corresponds to plasma frequency and ωc is the collision frequency. The third term is the Lorentz oscillator, where ωj is the resonance frequency, fj is the strength of oscillator, and γj is the line width. We have calculated reflectance spectra using the Drude-Lorentz oscillator to extract the complex refractive index (n,k) of the VO2 film in the insulating and the metallic states. To find the optimized oscillator parameters, we used constrained non-linear least-square fitting of the data. Three Lorentz oscillators are used to fit the measured reflectance spectra of VO2 thin films grown on glass in the insulating phase, whereas, Drude oscillator alone is used to fit VO2 reflectance in the metallic state. The optimized Lorentz and Drude oscillator parameters are summarized in table 1 and the calculated reflectance is shown in Fig. 3(a). Good fit is obtained with the measured reflectance data. The extracted n-k of VO2 on glass is shown in Fig. 3(b) for the insulating phase and in Fig. 3(c) for the metallic phase. For comparison, n-k values of VO2 deposited using sputtering and sol-gel methods from literature is also shown. The extracted values of n and k match reasonably well with previous reports . Fig. 4(a) shows the FTIR reflectance data (2.8-14 μm) at room temperature and at high temperature (100 oC) for Toxd = 4 min sample on ITO coated glass substrate. Large reflectance switching in MWIR (3-5 μm) wavelengths is observed with maximum switching (~79%) observed at ~ 4.6 μm. Drude-Lorentz oscillator fit to the reflectance data is also shown in Fig. 4(a) and the optimized model parameters are summarized in table 1. In the VO2 insulating phase, our fit exactly matches the measured reflectance spectra valley around 4.6 μm. For high-temperature metallic phase, fit matches reasonably well with the measured reflectance except for the small dip around 10 μm. The origin of this dip is not clear, it has been suggested that such a dip can be due to surface V2O5 layer which does not switch to metallic 5 phase . The extracted plasma frequency from Drude term agrees well with previous reports . From this fitted reflectance spectra, we extracted n and k for both the insulating and the metallic phases which are shown in Fig. 4(b,c). The extracted (n,k) values match reasonably well with the reported (n,k) values of VO2 films synthesized using other methods . different substrates. The synthesized VO2 films in this work, using the modified APTO method, show among the highest reported optical reflectance switching performance. 4. Conclusion In this work, we used a simple atmospheric pressure thermal oxidation method to synthesize optically switching VO2 thin films on glass and ITO coated glass substrates. Highest optical switching of ~76% is obtained on glass substrate in LWIR and ~79% on ITO coated glass substrate in MWIR, with low thermal oxidation budgets of 450 oC/2 minutes and 450 oC/4 minutes, respectively. We also performed fitting of the reflectance data to extract the complex refractive indices of the VO2 films which matches well with the optical properties of VO2 synthesized using other methods. This demonstration of a simple VO2 synthesis process with low thermal budget and low RMS roughness while giving extremely good optical switching performance on low cost substrates should expand the optical applications space of this phase transition material. Acknowledgements This project was supported by IIT Kanpur initiation grant. Ashok P would like to thank Dr.Jitendra Pradhan for useful discussions on reflectance modeling. 6