1 Thermal conductivity of intercalation, conversion, and alloying lithium-ion battery electrode materials as function of their state of charge Jungwoo Shin 1,2,†,a, Sanghyeon Kim 1,2, †,b, Hoonkee Park 3, Ho Won Jang 3, David G. Cahill 1,2*, Paul V. Braun 1,2,4,5* 1Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA. 2Materials Research Laboratory, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA. 3Department of Materials Science Engineering, Research Institute of Advanced Materials, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, South Korea. 4Department of Chemistry, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA. 5Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology, University of Illinois Urbana- Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA. *Corresponding author: d-cahill@illinois.edu or pbraun@illinois.edu. *Postal address: 201 Materials Science and Engineering Building, 1304 W. Green St. MC 246, Urbana, IL 61801, USA †J. Shin and S. Kim contributed equally to this work. a Current address: Department of Mechanical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. b Current address: Chemical Sciences and Engineering Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, IL, 60439, USA. Keywords: Thermal conductivity, elastic modulus, lithium-ion battery, electrode materials, time- domain thermoreflectance (TDTR). Abstract Upon insertion and extraction of lithium, materials important for electrochemical energy storage can undergo changes in thermal conductivity (Λ) and elastic modulus (M). These changes are 2 attributed to evolution of the intrinsic thermal carrier lifetime and interatomic bonding strength associated with structural transitions of electrode materials with varying degrees of reversibility. Using in situ time-domain thermoreflectance (TDTR) and picosecond acoustics, we systemically study Λ and M of conversion, intercalation and alloying electrode materials during cycling. The intercalation V2O5 and TiO2 exhibit non-monotonic reversible Λ and M switching up to a factor of 1.8 (Λ) and 1.5 (M) as a function of lithium content. The conversion Fe2O3 and NiO undergo irreversible decays in Λ and M upon the first lithiation. The alloying Sb shows the largest and partially reversible order of the magnitude switching in Λ between the delithiated (18 W m-1 K-1) and lithiated states (<1 W m-1 K-1). The irreversible Λ is attributed to structural degradation and pulverization resulting from substantial volume changes during cycling. These findings provide new understandings of the thermal and mechanical property evolution of electrode materials during cycling of importance for battery design, and also point to pathways for forming materials with thermally switchable properties. 1. Introduction Understanding the thermal conductivity (Λ) of lithium-ion (Li-ion) battery electrode materials is important because of the critical role temperature and temperature gradients play in the performance, cycle life and safety of Li-ion batteries . Electrode materials are a major heat source in Li-ion batteries, heat which originates from exothermic redox reactions, entropic heating and joule heating during cycling . If this heat cannot be dissipated, the result is overheating, which in the worst-case scenario can result in fires and explosions . Thus, in designing, modeling and predicting thermal behavior of Li-ion batteries, understanding the thermal properties of the electrode materials is important . 3 The majority of Li-ion battery research has treated temperature as a macroscopic indicator, focusing on the balance between heat generation within the cell and dissipation out of the cell . This cell-level of granularity, however, does not provide information into how the thermal properties of the electrode materials change with cycling, and how these changes impact long-term performance. It is worth noting that the primary change in thermal properties of the electrode is due to changes in the internal nanostructure of the constituent materials comprising the electrodes; no information about these changes is provided by cell-level thermal measurements. Li-ion battery electrodes exhibit materials specific reversible and irreversible electrochemical reactions with lithium-ions, some of which result in significant changes in thermal conductivity. While Cu or Al current collectors common to most Li-ion batteries have high- thermal-conductivities, in all except a few designs, the majority of the heat is dissipated normal to the current collectors, and thus must flow through the anode and cathode active material, as well as the electrolyte and separator to exit the cell . A degree of lithiation decrease in thermal conductivity of electrode materials has potential to create hot spots within a cell, which may trigger undesirable effects including lithium dendrite growth and thermal decomposition of battery components (e.g. electrolyte) . Along with the direct technological impact, measurement of thermal conductivity changes of electrode materials during cycling could provide insights into the physical basis of changes in the properties of electrode materials during cycling. Electrochemical reactions of electrode materials can be generally classified into three reaction categories: intercalation, conversion, and alloying. Intercalation systems are the most mature, have been shown to exhibit reversible lithium storage for thousands of cycles, and are the basis of most current Li-ion batteries. Conversion and alloying reactions offer potentially higher energy densities than intercalation systems, however, so far at the cost of cycle life . A few 4 studies are present in the literature on the thermal and elastic properties of intercalation systems including LiCoO2 , MoS2 and black phosphorus as a function of state of charge (SOC) and cycle number, while prior to the work here, Λ of emerging high capacity conversion and alloying electrode materials had yet to be investigated. Here, we present a systematic study of Λ and longitudinal modulus (M) evolution of five lithium storage materials cross-cutting all three lithiation/delithiation processes: intercalation (TiO2 and V2O5), conversion (Fe2O3 and NiO) and alloying (Sb). These electrodes are chosen to represent these three classes of materials, with small (< 10%) to large (~ 150%) volume changes during lithiation/delithiation, and a range of reversible and irreversible structural and electronic transitions . We show Λ of these materials changes up to an order of magnitude with SOC and cycle number with varying degrees of reversibility. Our comparative study of these electrode materials provides insights on the relationship between electrochemical reaction mechanisms and their changes in Λ and M, and thermal and elastic data that will hopefully be useful to the energy storage community. 2. Results and Discussion Accurate analysis of thermal transport in a nanoscale thin-films requires a precise design and control of thermal penetration depth to confines thermal waves in a limited region. We apply in situ TDTR to measure Λ of electrode materials in a sub-micron thin-film geometry (See methods and Supporting Figure S1-3) . Schematics of in situ TDTR measurement of electrode materials are shown in liquid (Figure 1a) or solid-state (Figure 1b) electrochemical cells. The liquid cell is used for intercalation and conversion electrodes (TiO2,V2O5, Fe2O3 and NiO on Al/SiO2/sapphire). As intercalation and conversion electrodes exhibit small or moderate volume changes (≤ 100%) 5 during cycling, they can be electrochemically cycled in a liquid cell without delaminating. The alloying electrode (Sb on Au/Al/SiO2/sapphire) undergoes immediate delamination in a liquid cell during the first cycle because of a large volume change > 100% during lithiation. To prevent delamination, we employ an all-solid-state cell and apply ~30 MPa of pressure. Details for the design and assembly of liquid and solid-state cells are described in Supporting Figure S4-5. During lithiation and delithiation, we measure Λ changes of electrode materials as a function of state of charge and cycle number. As electrode materials with different lithium storage mechanisms undergo a series of phase transitions with varying degrees of reversibility, they show different trends in thermal conductivity change. Figure 1c-f shows representative thermal conductivity curves of intercalation (TiO2), conversion (Fe2O3) and alloying (Sb) electrode materials during the first lithiation/delithiation cycle. Thermal conductivity at the initial state (Λ0), the lowest state (Λlow) and after completing nth cycle (Λn) are recorded and compared. Figure 1f shows an example of measured and fitted TDTR curves for Sb and lithiated Sb. TDTR also generates and detects acoustic echoes within the electrode materials. During cycling, volume and density changes associated uptake of lithium ions result in a shift in this picosecond acoustic signal that is captured by TDTR (Figure 1f, inset). 2.1. Intercalation electrode materials Intercalation materials exhibit fast and reversible lithium insertion/desertion kinetics. Previous reports have shown reversible Λ switching of intercalation electrode materials during lithiation/delithiation. LixCoO2, LixMoS2 and LixP are found to exhibit Λ switching contrasts (Λhigh/Λlow) of 1.5 – 2.0 . These intercalation electrode materials consist of 2-D octahedra sheets (CoO6, MoS6) or six‐membered phosphorous ring (P6) hosting energetically 6 favorable sites for lithium-ions. Insertion of lithium-ions into these guest sites triggers a phase transition and in various ways can reduce Λ. To expand on these systems, we choose the prototypical intercalation electrode materials TiO2 (anatase) and V2O5. TiO2 is tetragonal and consists of edge-sharing TiO6 octahedra chains forming 1-D vacancy channels for lithium-ion storage and transport . V2O5 consists of 2-D sheets of VO5 square pyramids that are held together by van der Waals (vdW) force and provide 2-D channels for lithium-ion storage and transport. TiO2 and V2O5 exhibit theoretical volume expansions of less than 6% upon lithium intercalation . Using cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) we compare the thicknesses of TiO2 and V2O5 before and after the lithiation (Supporting Figure S6). We find the volume expansion of TiO2 and V2O5 as 16% and 4%, respectively. The overall lithiation- delithiation processes with lithium-ions for TiO2 and V2O5 are: TiO2 + xLi ↔ LixTiO2 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) (1) V2O5 + xLi ↔ LixV2O5 (0 ≤ x ≤ 2) (2) For TiO2, intercalated lithium-ions within the 1-D vacancy channels form LiO6 octahedra with oxygen atoms of the TiO6 chains. As a result, the O-Ti-O bond angle octahedra changes with the inserted lithium-ions, resulting in reversible phase transition between tetragonal α-TiO2 (x < 0.1) and orthorhombic β-LixTiO2 (0.1 < x < 0.6) phases . Intercalated lithium-ions between 2-D vdW sheets of V2O5 distort and the 2-D sheet of VO5 pyramids , triggering a series of We stop at x ≈ 2 since further insertion of lithium-ions can trigger a transition to ω-phase (2 < x < 3), which appears to be irreversible . 7 We measured Λ and M of LixTiO2 and LixV2O5 as a function of the lithiation state, x, using in situ TDTR and picosecond acoustics. Prior to TDTR measurement, we confirm the metal/oxygen stoichiometries of TiO2 and V2O5 using Rutherford backscattering spectrometry (RBS, Supporting Figure S7). We perform X-ray diffraction (XRD, Supporting Figure S8) to confirm the crystallographic orientation and phase transitions of TiO2 and V2O5. As TiO2 and V2O5 films are (001) textured, M ≈ C33 of TiO2 and V2O5 (Supporting Figure S9). M is estimated as M(x)= ρ(x)v(x)2 where ρ is the density and v is the longitudinal speed of sound of the electrode material measured by picosecond acoustics at x (Supplementary Figure S9). As TiO2 and V2O5 films are (001) textured, M ≈ C33 of TiO2 and V2O5. x of LixTiO2 was estimated based on the theoretical electrochemical capacity. 164 to 250 GPa, within the range of calculated values of C33 = 185 and 276 GPa of anatase and Li-titanite . In contrast to the monotonic increase of M, we also observe a decrease in Λ from delithiation, Λ recovers to 8.0 W m-1 K-1 (x = 0.1). cycles. During lithiation, initially a small amount of lithium forms a solid solution with α-TiO2 . This region corresponds to a small potential slope before the discharge plateau in Figure 2b. Λ of TiO2 does not measurably change in this region. As lithium insertion progresses, TiO2 phase equilibrium in this lithiation region is confirmed by the discharge potential plateau at ~1.75 V vs Li/Li+. Λ of TiO2 decreases within this region as the Li-rich phase and biphasic boundaries grow as the concentration of lithium increases. For intercalation electrode materials such as MoS2, 8 Λ decreases could be attributed to phonon scattering with inserted lithium . Because Λ decrease is concentrated at the early stage of lithiation, we speculate that phonon boundary scattering between Li-rich and Li-poor phase is the major reason that Λ is suppressed . Further lithiation has less effect on Λ as the effect of boundary scattering decreases with growth of the low-thermal-conductivity β phase. This region is indicated by a gradual potential slope from 1.75 V vs Li/Li+ to the cut-off voltage. We note, we do not observe a second discharge potential plateau corresponding to the β to γ phase transition because of the thickness of the TiO2 film. Size- dependent lithium-insertion experiments show that lithiation of anatase above x > 0.6 (γ-TiO2) is kinetically limited to a few tens of nanometers within a practical cycling rate at room temperature (γ-TiO2 is a poor lithium-ion conductor due to fully occupied vacancy channels) . With each cycle, we observe horizontal shifts in potential curves due to the irreversible electrochemical capacity loss at each cycle. Λ of LixTiO2 shows a decreasing trend with an increasing number of cycles, probably due to accumulation of defects within the material. However, the Λ contrast between the lithiated and delithiated states remains nearly constant at a 1.6 (7.7 vs. 4.7 W m-1 K-1 during the 1st cycle, 6.3 vs. 4.0 W m-1 K-1 during the 5th cycle). TiO2 (x < 0.4), V2O5 fully lithiates up to x = 2. We estimate x in LixV2O5 based on three phases. Due to the presence of 2-D diffusion pathways, V2O5 exhibits higher lithium-ion diffusion coefficients (DLi ~10-112 cm2 s-1) relative to TiO2 (DLi ~ 10-132 cm2 s-1) . We estimate M of as-prepared V2O5 as 24 GPa from picosecond acoustics (Supporting Information the speed of sounds and elastic modulus of V2O5 vary significantly with preparation conditions 9 . The elastic modulus of V2O5 is highly sensitive to sample geometry, synthesis condition, stoichiometry, orientation, crystallinity and defects . Ab-initio calculations also show variation in bulk modulus of V2O5 as (18 – 68 GPa) . Similar to TiO2, M gradually increases to 28 GPa during lithiation to x = 2. Contrary to the monotonic increase in M with lithiation, we observe a non-linear Λ response of LixV2O5, including a Λ decrease from 7.2 W m-1 K-1 (x = 0) to 4.7 W Λ gradually decreases to 4.8 W m-1 K-1. galvanostatic cycles. During the first lithiation process, V2O5 exhibits three distinct discharge potential plateaus at around 3.0, 2.5 and 2.0 V vs. Li/Li+, respectively. These plateaus are found lower than the discharge plateaus during the subsequent cycling (3.2, 3.0 and 2.1 V vs. Li/Li+) due to large overpotential during the first lithiation process . Λ of V2O5 decreases during the first discharge plateau (α to ε), reaches a local minimum at the end of the first discharge plateau (ε), increases during the second plateau region (ε to δ) and reaches a local maximum at the start of the third discharge plateau (δ). Then, Λ of V2O5 gradually decreases within the third plateau region (δ to γ). During the subsequent delithiation process (charge), three potential plateaus regions are reduced as some lithium-ions are trapped. The Λ valley is also shifted with respect to the potential plateau shift. Specifically, the Λ (open circles) of V2O5 slightly increases within the third charge potential plateau region (γ to δ). Then, Λ starts to decrease at the beginning of the second charge potential plateau (δ to ε), reaches a local minimum at the end of the second charge potential plateau (ε) and increases again with the first potential plateau (ε to α). Λ during the rest of delithiation processes are shown in Supporting information Figure S10. During the subsequent 10 lithiation/delithiation cycle (2nd), we limit the lithiation state up to x = 1 (Figure 2d, inset) to confirm the non-monotonic thermal response of V2O5 within two potential plateaus (α to ε and ε to δ). The local Λ minimum is found at the inflection point between the first and second potential plateaus during the lithiation and delithiation processes. During the rest of lithiation/delithiation cycles, the local Λ minima consistently appear. We hypothesize this “thermal conductivity valley” originates from accumulation and relaxation of local disorder and puckering of pyramidal VO5 layers . Λ and elastic modulus of LixTiO2 and LixV2O5 show opposite trends with respect to x. This behavior is similar to computational results for Li-intercalated graphite and LixMoS2 where, at low lithium content, randomly intercalated lithium ions scatter phonons but at higher lithium contents eventually increases Λ due to acoustic phonon stiffening . With each cycle, we observe horizontal shifts in potential curves due to the irreversible electrochemical capacity loss at each cycle. Λ of intercalation electrode materials shows a decreasing trend with an increasing number of cycles, probably due to accumulation of defects within the material. The electrochemical charge/discharge capacities of TiO2 and V2O5 during in situ TDTR measurements are presented in Supporting Figure S11. 2.2. Conversion electrode materials Since the discovery of conversion reactions of metal-oxides with lithium , conversion electrodes have been studied as promising Li-ion battery electrode materials due to their high theoretical capacities. Conversion electrode materials typically lithiate via a kinetically slow process in which lithium at the electrode surface diffuse into and react with the bulk, forming a moving reaction front between Li-rich and poor phases . As the reaction front advances into 11 Li-poor phase, the conversion reaction takes place. The conversion reaction involves a complete reconfiguration of metal and oxygen atoms where metal oxide (MOx) is converted into lithium oxide (Li2O) and pure metal phases. After Li2O/metal phases form, lithium diffusion in this region is further suppressed .Thus, the overall kinetics is controlled by both diffusion and conversion reaction at the reaction front. During the lithiation/delithiation, conversion electrode materials undergo substantial volume expansion/contraction along with amorphization. We choose Fe2O3 and NiO as model conversion systems. Due to slow diffusion kinetics for alloying electrode materials, diffusion coefficients of lithium in Fe2O3 (DLi ~ 10-141 cm2 s-1) and NiO (DLi ~ 10-131 cm2 s-1) are orders of magnitude lower than intercalation electrode materials. Both Fe2O3 and NiO are poor electrical conductors, in both lithiated and delithiated forms. Thus, heat is carried by phonons, and crystallinity plays an important role in thermal conductivity. The overall lithiation processes for Fe2O3 and NiO are as follows: Fe2O3 + 6xLi ↔ 3xLi2O + 2xFe + (1 − x)Fe2O3 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) (3) NiO + 2xLi ↔ xLi2O + xNi + (1 − x)NiO (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) (4) One mole of Fe2O3 and NiO can take up to six and two moles of Li-ions, respectively. The degree of lithiation x is defined as the maximum molar lithium capacity per one mole of Fe2O3 and NiO. RBS data suggest that Fe2O3 and NiO films contain inhomogeneous metal-rich phases (Fe3O4 and Ni) (Supporting Figure S7). We confirm irreversible amorphization of Fe2O3 and NiO using ex- situ XRD analysis (Supporting Figure S8). measure M of Fe2O3 electrode as 287 GPa from picosecond acoustic echoes (Supporting Figure S9). This value is larger than the bulk modulus of polycrystalline Fe2O3 (223 GPa) and slightly smaller than the measured C33 = 299 GPa of a single crystal α-Fe2O3 . After the first lithiation 12 (x = 1), the picosecond acoustic echoes diminish along with a significant Λ drop from 3.9 W m-1 K-1 to 0.9 W m-1 K-1. Λ of Fe2O3 does not recover during delithiation. Regardless of the initial Λ of Fe2O3 (1.7 ~ 7.6 W m-1 K-1, depending on annealing conditions. See Supporting Figure S3), Λ of Fe2O3 reduces to a similar level (< 1 W m-1 K-1) after the first lithiation. cycles. During the first lithiation, a small potential shoulder at 0.8 V vs Li/Li+ is observed, indicating the formation of a solid solution of the cubic γ-LixFe2O3 phase at the early stage of lithiation . In this region, Λ of Fe2O3 gradually decreases by 10 %. Further lithiation triggers a biphasic reaction involving a reduction of Fe(III) to Fe(0) and the formation of Li2O. During the biphasic conversion reaction, Fe2O3 shows a distinct potential plateau at 0.75 V vs Li/Li+. In this region, Λ of Fe2O3 decreases more rapidly (0.4 < x < 0.8) than the initial Λ slope. As Fe2O3 lithiates close to its theoretical capacity, Λ shows a sharp drop in a narrow region (0.8 < x < 0.9). Fe2O3 loses about 70% of its Λ in this region. Starting with second cycle, Fe2O3 no longer exhibits the discharge plateau at 0.75 V vs Li/Li+, but a gradual potential slope from 1.5 V, followed by a potential shoulder at 0.9 V. This potential slope indicates Fe2O3 becomes amorphous after the first cycle . m-1 K-1. We measure M = 296 GPa estimated from the longitudinal acoustic echoes (Supporting (C11+2C12+4C44)/3 = 310 GPa, measured by a longitudinal wave propagating along the direction of a single-crystal NiO . Upon lithiation to x = 0.71, Λ reduces to 3.1 W m-1 K-1 and M decreases to 190 GPa. As lithiation of NiO triggers amorphization, M at x = 0.71 is equivalent to C11 = 190 GPa of an isotropic matrix. Λ and M do not recover during delithiation. 13 discharge potential plateau at 0.7 V vs Li/Li+. Similar to Fe2O3, the potential plateau is replaced with a gradual potential slope from 1.5 V vs Li/Li+ and a small potential shoulder at 0.75 V vs Li/Li+ after the first cycle (Figure 3d). The difference between the discharge curves of Fe2O3 and NiO suggests that the first and the rest of the electrochemical cycles take different lithiation/delithiation pathways. The first lithiation involves irreversible processes. During the first lithiation microcracks, voids, defects and vacancies can be formed along with formation of SEI, breaking of M-O bonds, rearrangement of atoms and even pulverization of the electrode materials . As electrochemical potential is related to the total change in Gibbs free energy ΔG, these irreversible processes result in large overpotentials and poor coulombic efficiency. From the second cycle, microcracks and voids act as facile lithium-ion diffusion pathways. Defects and vacancies provide energetically favorable sites for lithium-ions . Lithiation in a random network of metal-oxide (MOx) polyhedra with defects and vacancies requires a smaller ΔG compared with crystalline counterparts upon conversion reaction with lithium . Therefore, metal-oxide conversion electrodes exhibit improved coulombic efficiencies and less potential hysteresis from the second cycle . Though cracks, voids, defects and amorphization could help to enhance lithiation/delithiation kinetics, they strongly scatter phonons and significantly reduce Λ of conversion electrodes after the first cycle. As thermal transport is mediated by phonons, Λ of Fe2O3 and NiO decreases with the growth of the amorphous phase. Λ of amorphous materials can be estimated using the atomic density and speed of sounds where the minimum mean-free-path of vibrational modes is reduced to the interatomic distance. With this approach, we have successfully predicted asymptotic Λ of 14 disordered materials including dielectrics and polymers . We estimate the minimum lattice thermal conductivity for NiO and Fe2O3 as Λmin ~ 1.4 W m-1 K-1 and Li2O as Λmin ~ 1.7 W m-1 K-1. While Λ of NiO remains above Λmin, Λ of Fe2O3 drops below Λmin during lithiation x > 0.8. We note that Fe2O3 exhibits a volume expansion 40% larger than theory while NiO shows a volume expansion similar to that theoretically expected. The excess volume expansion could explain why Λ of Fe2O3 drops below Λmin. We speculate that this additional reduction in Λ is extrinsic to the material property and due to the formation of voids, microcracks and low thermal conductivity SEI within the electrode materials. The electrochemical charge/discharge capacities and coulombic efficiencies of Fe2O3 and NiO during in situ TDTR experiments are presented in Supporting Figure S12. 2.3. Alloying electrode materials Alloying electrodes, e.g., Si, Sn and Sb, form binary alloys with up to 4.4 Li-atoms per host atom. Li-sulfur and Li-air electrode materials also fall into this class. As a result, alloying electrode materials exhibit high theoretical capacities, ranging from 660 mA h g-1 to 4200 mA h g-1, however, at a cost of up to a 300% volume expansion during lithiation . The considerable volume changes often result in large irreversible capacities, as well as continuous formation/breakage of SEI and structural degradation (pulverization) during cycling . Among alloying electrode materials, we choose Sb because it undergoes fewer phase transformations than Si and Sn (which exhibit many intermediate phases), and has a moderate lithium diffusion coefficient (DLi ~ 10-92 cm2 s-1) and a discharge potential plateau above 0.5 V vs Li/Li+, making it compatible with the Al transducer. Upon reaction with lithium, Sb undergoes a reversible phase transition between Sb and Li3Sb as follows: 15 Sb + xLi ↔ LixSb (0 ≤ x ≤ 3) (5) The corresponding phase transition between Sb and Li3Sb was confirmed using XRD (Supporting Figure S8). The theoretical volume expansion of Sb is calculated as 130% at the fully lithiated state. Using this solid-state design, a volume expansion ratio of 110% is observed, which is however largely associated with the surface deformation (Supporting Figure S6). The lithiation state x is defined by the theoretical capacity (x = 3, Q = 660 mA h g-1), the density and the thickness of the Sb film. First, we measure Λ = 18 W m-1 K-1 for pristine Sb using frontside and backside TDTR. Sb is a semimetal with overlapping valence and conduction bands at EF. We estimate the electronic thermal conductivity Λe = 12 W m-1 K-1 using the Wiedemann Franz law and the electrical conductivity measured by four-point probe. The lattice thermal conductivity ΛL is estimated by subtracting Λ with Λe. The estimated value of ΛL = 6 W m-1 K-1 agrees with the first principle calculation for crystalline Sb . During the first lithiation process, we observe a dramatic Λ decrease from 18 W m-1 K-1 (x = 0) to 0.6 m-1 K-1 (x = 2.9). This markedly large Λ change can be primarily attributed to the elimination of the electronic contribution to Λ during the semimetal to semiconductor (Li3Sb) transition. A similar degree of Λ reduction is predicted for Zn3Sb, GaSb and CdSbAg during semiconductor-to-metal transitions at the melting point . Along with the electronic transition, ΛL plays an important role in decreasing Λ at the lithiated state. Sb alloys show significantly low ΛL compared with Sb. For example, amorphous Sb2Te3 shows Λ = 0.23 W m-1 K-1 and disordered Zn4Sb3 shows Λ = 0.6 W m-1 K-1 at 300 K , due tothe large phonon anharmonicity induced loose coupling of atoms with different masses . A first-principles calculation predicts the suppression of ΛL in the lithiated state (crystalline 16 Li3Sb, ΛL = 2.2 W m-1 K-1) . Further decrease in measured Λ below 1 m-1 K-1 can be attributed to the loss of crystallinity. We estimate the minimum lattice thermal conductivity as Λmin = 0.43 W m-1 K-1 for amorphous Li3Sb. Along with a decrease in Λ, Sb shows a decreasing trend in M with increasing x. We estimate M of Sb (x = 0) as 81 GPa. This value is slightly lower than the measured C11 = 99 GPa of single-crystal Sb (Supporting Figure S9) . Upon lithiation to x = 1, M decreases to 56 GPa. x > 1 remains uncertain because further lithiation results in large surface deformation and thickness uncertainty. lithiation/delithiation cycles. First, Sb shows a gradual Λ decrease from 18 to 12 W m-1 K-1 up to x = 0.9, followed by a sharp drop in Λ at x ~ 1. Λ of Sb decreases to 0.7 W m-1 K-1 at the fully lithiated state. During the subsequent delithiation, Λ of Sb recovers up to 9.4 W m-1 K-1 with a large Λ hysteresis, suggesting that Sb loses about 50% of Λ after one full lithiation/delithiation cycle. This thermal conductivity hysteresis can be attributed to the phase transition pathway of Sb. Lithium insertion into Sb forms hexagonal Li2Sb phase, followed by cubic Li3Sb phase. During delithiation, Li3Sb directly transforms to Sb without forming Li2Sb first . During the remaining lithiation/delithiation cycles, Λ of Sb gradually decreases to ~ 1.3 W m-1 K-1, and eventually becomes constant when cycling between the lithiated and delithiated states. During five lithiation/delithiation cycles, Sb exhibits discharge plateaus at around 0.8 – 0.85 V vs Li/Li+ due to the phase transition between the Sb, Li2Sb and Li3Sb phases. The discharge plateaus for Li2Sb and Li3Sb are difficult to distinguish, as they are only separated by ~ 0.05 V. However, we observe a large irreversible capacity and poor coulombic efficiency, which appears as horizontal shifts of potential curves. 17 This large irreversible Λ loss of Sb is not a result of intrinsic electronic and phase transitions, but rather electrode pulverization associated with repeated volume expansion and contraction. Electrode pulverization introduces cracks and pores in the films during cycling . This structural degradation can contribute to capacity fading, electric contact loss and large irreversible capacity of alloying electrode materials. Since a majority of phonons carrying heat in Sb and Li3Sb have a mean free path between 10 nm to 100 nm , electrode pulverization introduces substantial phonon scattering. Furthermore, the loss of electric contact between the pulverized particles leads to a loss of Λe. These changes are detrimental to Λ of electrode materials because they add boundary and defect scattering, and introduce low-thermal-conductivity phases including SEI and voids. In this regard, we hypothesize that the degree of lithiation (or volume expansion) is directly related to irreversible Λ. To test our hypothesis, we limit lithium intake of Sb to Q = 250 mA h g-1 (equivalent to x = 1.14) per each lithiation process. After lithiation, we freely delithiated Sb up to 1.5 V vs Li/Li+. Figure 4c shows Λ and electrochemical potential curves of Sb with the limited discharge. Both full and limited Sb show a similar trend in Λ decrease up to x ~ 1, which is about the irreversible capacity of the fully activated Sb at the first cycle. However, further cycling results in a noticeable difference in Λ retention and hysteresis. As limiting the discharge avoids formation of Li3Sb, we do not observe noticeable Λ hysteresis during lithiation and delithiation. Sb cycled over a limited range shows much higher Λ at the delithiated state (10.4 – 4.9 W m-1 K-1) and lithiated state (8.2 – 3.1 W m-1 K-1), and shows Λ switching ratios Λhigh/Λlow > 1.5 from 2nd to 5th cycle, similar to intercalation electrode materials. 3. Reversible and Irreversible Thermal Conductivity Trends 18 From the lithium-ion electrode materials was investigated, several trends emerge. Figure 5 summarizes the Λ changes of the electrode materials in this study, V2O5, TiO2, NiO, Fe2O3 and Sb. We plot Λ of each electrode at the initial state (Λ0, high thermal conductivity state) and Λ contrast, using the lowest Λ state (Λlow) at each cycle in Figure 6a and include previous reports. It is worth noting black phosphorus (BP) could be both an intercalation and conversion electrode material depending on their lithiation. For x < 0.4 (in LixP), BP is an intercalation electrode material showing reversible thermal conductivity switching . However, it is also subject to an alloying reaction upon further lithiation, during which P-P bonds break, and Li3P forms concurrent with a large volume expansion of ~200% . In the alloying reaction regime, LixP shows irreversible thermal conductivity loss of up to a factor of five, in both the in-plane and out-of-plane direction. Intercalation and alloying LixP are plotted separately. Intercalation electrodes, including V2O5 and TiO2, show reversible Λ and elastic modulus switching, ascribed to their reversible crystalline phase transitions during lithiation/delithiation. In all these systems, Λlow > 1 W m-1 K-1. On the contrary, conversion electrodes undergo irreversible Λ decrease of a factor of two to five during the first lithiation process and no further change in Λ during subsequent cycling. Therefore, they show low Λlow and small Λlow/Λ0. Conversion Sb shows the largest changes in thermal conductivity between Λ0 = 18 W m-1 K-1 and Λlow = 0.6 – 8.2 W m-1 K-1, depending on the cycle number and the degree to which it is lithiated. M of electrode materials strongly depends on SOC and electrochemical reaction mechanism. We observe reversible lattice stiffening of intercalation materials (M increases with x) while conversion and alloying materials show lattice softening (M decreases with x) with varying reversibility. 19 The irreversible Λ loss of conversion and alloying electrode materials are closely related to the degree of lithiation (degree of volume expansion required to accommodate lithium). During cycling, conversion and alloying electrode materials can undergo structural degradation and pulverization, creating defects, voids, cracks and SEI within the electrode materials. As these factors are extrinsic to the properties of the electrode material, the observed decrease in Λ of the electrode material during cycling is best considered to be a convolution of the material properties and large scale defects which further inhibit the flow of heat . The fact that the measured value of Λ drops below the minimum thermal conductivity in some cases is strong evidence for defects extrinsic to the electrode material. electrode materials up to five electrochemical cycles. Intercalation electrode materials exhibit small volume expansion and excellent thermal conductivity retention over cycling. Conversion and alloying electrode materials show a large variation of volume expansion depending on their theoretical capacity and cycling condition. Irreversible Λ loss increases with the volume expansion of conversion and alloying electrode materials. As thermal conductivity of Sb decreases with increasing number of cycles, Sb exhibits wide Y-ranges. A simple but effective answer to irreversible thermal conductivity loss of alloying electrode materials would be setting capacity limits below the theoretical capacity to reduce volume expansion and the extrinsic defects. Use of “Single crystal” electrode materials could significantly reduce irreversible thermal conductivity due to their excellent thermal and structural stability over cycling . 4. Conclusion 20 We report clear trends in thermal conductivity and elastic modulus of three important classes of electrode materials and provide a comprehensive comparison as a function of their state-of-charge, number of cycles and electrochemical lithium storage mechanism. Thermal conductivity changes range from 1.5 times to a factor of ten during cycling, and we draw the lowest bound of thermal conductivity of electrode materials achieved during cycling. While many of the advances in Li- ion battery technology have been based on new high-power and energy density electrode materials, prior to this report there was little information on the reversible and irreversible thermal conductivity changes during cycling. This study emphasizes the state-of-charge dependent thermal properties of Li-ion batteries and the nature of volatile thermal conductivity of certain classes of electrode materials. The thermal conductivity of electrode materials is important for engineering design, and the experimental method studied here can be used to characterize changes in the physical properties of electrode materials during cycling. Understanding how the thermal conductivity of electrode materials change during cycling could be used to enhance the window of operation of Li-ion batteries and provide insights into the thermal evolution of Li-ion battery electrode materials. The thermal conductivity contrast of alloying electrode (Sb) is the largest among the reported materials, providing insights into materials with thermally switchable properties. 5. Material and methods Sample preparation: Substrates were prepared by plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition subsequently deposited on the SiO2/sapphire by magnetron sputtering. Then, Fe2O3, NiO, V2O5, and TiO2 films were deposited on the Al/SiO2/sapphire substrate using electron beam evaporation 21 (Rocky Mountain Vacuum Tech, Englewood, CO). The base pressure, e-beam voltage and current were set to 10-6 Torr, 3.4 kV and 20 mA, respectively. The SiO2 on sapphire substrate is optically transparent, and provides a low thermal conductivity barrier to drive most heat flow through the electrode material. The Al film simultaneously acts as the current collector and the optical transducer for TDTR measurement . Al is electrochemically stable above 0.5 V vs. Li/Li+ and chemically compatible with the electrode materials studied here (Supporting Figure S2-3) (Si, Sn and carbon-based anode materials are incompatible with Al due to their low lithiation voltage, and thus not investigated) . To improve crystallinity, the as-deposited electrode samples were annealed with the following conditions: Fe2O3 in air at 400 °C for 1 h; NiO in Ar at 300 °C for 2 h; V2O5 in air at 500 °C for 1 h; TiO2 in air at 400 °C for 2 h. The heat treatment improves the initial thermal conductivity of the electrodes (Supporting Information Figure S2). Sb was deposited by thermal evaporation of Sb pellets (1 –3 mm, Kurt J. Lesker, 99.999%) on a Au/Al/SiO2/sapphire substrate. 15-nm Au film was deposited on top of an optically thick Al transducer to improve adherence with Sb as Au can form a thin intermetallic AuSb2 layer . Electrochemical Measurements: Fe2O3, NiO, V2O5, and TiO2 electrodes were assembled with a liquid cell consisting of 1.0 M LiClO4 in EC (ethylene carbonate)/DMC (dimethyl carbonate) electrolyte (1:1 by vol) and a lithium metal foil (Alfa Aesar, 99.9%) as a counter electrode. The solid-state cell was employed to perform the electrochemical test of Sb with Li2S-P2S5 solid electrolyte (Sigma Aldrich, 77.5 to 22.5 molar ratio) and an In-Li counter electrode. The solid- state cell was pressed with a vise clamp during measurement. A complete description regarding the design and assembly of the liquid and solid cells can be found in Supporting Figure S3-4. Electrochemical cycling of electrode materials was performed using a portable potentiostat (Bio- Logic SP-200) at room temperature. 22 TDTR: TDTR detects the transient temperature excursion of an Al transducer film in contact with the material of interest from the time-resolved thermoreflectance signal at the modulation frequency f. We performed TDTR operated with 785 nm mode-locked Ti-sapphire laser pulses with a full width at half maximum (FWHM) of 10 nm with a repetition frequency of 80 MHz. A polarized beam splitter (PBS) and sharp-edged optical filters with a cut-off wavelength of 785 nm were used to separate spectrally distinct pump and probe beams. The pump beam was modulated by the electro-optical modulator connected to a function generator (SRS DS345) imposing a square wave modulation at f = 1 – 11 MHz. The probe beam was modulated by a mechanical chopper operated at 200 Hz. Both pump and probe beams were focused on the Al/SiO2 interphase through the transparent sapphire substrate. We used an optical delay stage to advance the arrival time of the pump pulses with respect to the probe pulses from t = –20 ps to t = 3.6 ns. We measured the temperature excursion of the transducer film as intensity changes of the probe beam with a RF lock-in amplifier (SRS SR844) synchronized to the function generator at f. In situ TDTR measurements were performed during galvanostatic cycling of electrode materials. We solved the analytical heat transport model for layered structures with Λ of the electrode material as a free parameter. In this model, heat capacity and thickness of each electrode material were interpolated between the lithiated and delithiated states (Supporting Figure S1). 23 materials. (a) Schematic setup of the liquid electrolyte cell with intercalation and conversion metal- oxide (MOx) electrode materials (TiO2, V2O5, Fe2O3 and NiO). (b) Schematic setup of the solid- state cell with the alloying electrode material Sb. Features are not drawn to scale. See Supporting information for details. (c)-(e) Thermal conductivity changes of intercalation (TiO2), conversion (Fe2O3) and alloying (Sb) electrode materials during lithiation and delithiation. (f) Measured and fitted TDTR curves for Sb and fully lithiated Sb. The inset shows cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of Sb and lithiated Sb electrode 24 the lithiation state x. The inserted schematic shows the phase transition between the tetragonal TiO2 (left) and orthogonal LixTiO2 (right). Li intercalation sites are highlighted with green circles having an occupation probability of x. Black dashed lines indicate the irreversible capacity loss at the first discharge. The red dashed line indicates the reference C33. (b) Λ and potential curves of LixTiO2 over five galvanostatic cycles at the current density of 50 mA g-1 (3.0 – 1.3 V vs. Li/Li+). (c) Λ and M of LixV2O5 as a function of x. The inserted graphic illustrates α, δ and γ-LixV2O5 phases. (d) Λ and potential curve of LixV2O5 over five galvanostatic cycles at the current density of 100 mA g-1. We limit the lithiation of LixV2O5 by setting potential windows differently for each 25 cycle (1st, 1.9 – 4.2 V; 2nd, 2.6 – 4.2 V; and 3rd to 5th, 2.0 – 4.2 V vs. Li/Li+). The inset highlights Λ valley (2nd cycle) over a limited potential window. Open circles show Λ during 1st delithiation. lithiation state x. x of LixTiO2 is estimated based on the theoretical electrochemical capacity. Black dashed lines indicate the irreversible capacity loss after the first discharge. The red dashed line indicates the reference C33. (b) Λ and cycling curve of Fe2O3 during five galvanostatic lithiation/delithiation cycles at the current density of 300 mA g-1 (2.5 – 0.5 V vs. Li/Li+). (c) Λ and M of NiO as a function of x. (d) Λ and cycling curve of NiO over five galvanostatic cycles at the current density of 182 mA g-1 (3.0 – 0.5 V vs. Li/Li+). The inserted schematics in a and c show the 26 primitive cell of Fe2O3 and NiO crystals with the nearest atoms and bonds, and their lithiated amorphous structures. 27 black dashed line indicates the irreversible capacity loss at the first discharge. The red dashed line indicates the reference C11 value. The inserted schematics show the crystal structures of Sb, Li2Sb and Li3Sb. (b) Λ and cycling curve of Sb during five galvanostatic charge/discharge cycles at the current density of 200 mA g-1 (1.5 – 0.5 V vs. Li/Li+). (c) Λ and cycling curve of Sb with the limited discharge capacity (250 mA h g-1 for each cycle) and the current density of 250 mA g-1. Sb is charged to 1.5 V vs Li/Li+ without capacity limit. (d) Electrochemical capacity of Sb with and without the discharge capacity limit. 28 conversion and (c) alloying electrode materials at the initial state (Λ0), the lowest state (Λlow) at each cycle and the delithiated state after completing nth cycle (Λn) plotted. 29 battery electrode materials. Reference values include through-plane LiCoO2 ; in-plane (//) and and through-plane (⟂) MoS2 ; and through-plane (⟂) graphite . X-error bars show sample variations and uncertainties of Λ0. Y-range shows the uncertainty and Λlow with varying cycle numbers. The diagonal lines are labeled with different Λlow to estimate the lower bound of the Λ of electrode materials during cycling. (b) Volume expansion and Λ retention (Λn/Λ0) of electrode materials over cycling with n = 1 ~ 5. The volume expansion of LiCoO2 is estimated from in situ XRD . The volume expansion of BP is calculated from a first-principle study . X-error bar shows experimental uncertainty of volume expansion. Y-error bars show the range of Λn observed over a number of cycles. 30 Acknowledgements Samples were prepared at the Research Institute of Advanced Materials at Seoul National University and the Materials Research Laboratory at the University of Illinois Urbana–Champaign. Materials, thermal and electrochemical characterization were performed at the Materials Research Laboratory at the University of Illinois Urbana–Champaign. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation Engineering Research Center for Power Optimization of Electro- Thermal Systems, with Cooperative Agreement EEC-1449548 and the US Army CERL W9132T- 19-2-0008. S.K. appreciates the Kwanjeong Educational Foundation scholarship. Conflict of interests The authors declare no competing interests. Author contributions J.S., S.K., D.G.C. and P.V.B. conceived the idea. J.S. and S.K. designed the liquid and solid electrochemical cells. J.S. prepared the substrates. H.P., H.J. and S.K. deposited the electrode materials. S.K. conducted thermal annealing of the samples and assembled the cells. J.S. conducted TDTR, picosecond acoustics and RBS measurements. S.K. performed SEM, XRD and electrochemical experiments. J.S., S.K., D.G.C. and P.V.B. analyzed the data. J.S., S.K., D.G.C. and P.V.B. wrote the manuscript. All authors read and edited the manuscript. D.G.C. and P.V.B supervised the research. 31