A. Bhattacharyya et al.: Multi-kV class β-Ga2O3 Lateral MESFETs with a Lateral Figure of Merit up to 355 MW/cm2 Abstract—We demonstrate over 3 kV gate-pad-connected field plated (GPFP) β-Ga2O3 lateral MESFETs with high lateral figure of merit (LFOM) using metalorganic vapor phase epitaxy (MOVPE) grown channel layers and regrown ohmic contact layers. Using an improved low-temperature MOVPE selective area epitaxy process, we show that a total contact resistance to the channel as low as 1.4 Ω.mm can be achieved. The GPFP design adopted here using plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposited (PECVD) SiNx dielectric and SiNX/SiO2 wrap-around passivation exhibits up to ~14% improved RON, up to ~70% improved breakdown voltage (VBR = VDS-VGS) resulting in up to 3× higher LFOM compared to non-FP β-Ga2O3 lateral MESFETs. The VBR (~2.5 kV) and LFOM (355 MW/cm2) measured simultaneously in our GPFP β-Ga2O3 lateral MESFET (with LGD = 10μm) is the highest value achieved in any depletion-mode β-Ga2O3 lateral device to date. Index Terms—Ga2O3, MESFETs, MOVPE, regrown contacts, breakdown, kilovolt, lateral figure of merit, passivation, field plates. I. INTRODUCTION a2O3-based devices have increasingly gained momentum as a potential technology that demonstrates numerous strengths for high voltage/power applications. The high projected breakdown field (~8 MV/cm) of β-Ga2O3 and the availability of high-quality melt-grown β-Ga2O3 bulk substrates offers compelling promise for high efficiency power devices–. The β-Ga2O3–based device performance has rapidly progressed in both lateral and vertical geometries thanks to the simultaneous progress in high-quality epilayer growth technologies that includes mainly molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), metalorganic vapor phase epitaxy (MOVPE), halide vapor phase epitaxy (HVPE) and low-pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD) as well as device processing techniques –. Of all these epitaxial growth techniques, MOVPE has captivated widespread attention due to its This material is based upon work supported by the II-VI foundation Block Gift Program 2020-2021 and the DoD SBIR Phase I – AF203- CS01 (Contract #: FA864921P0304). This work was performed in part at the Utah Nanofab sponsored by the College of Engineering and the Office of the Vice President for Research (The University of Utah). A. Bhattacharyya, P. Ranga, S. Roy, C. Peterson and S. Krishnamoorthy are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA 84112.(email: sriram.krishnamoorthy@utah.edu) Sriram Krishnamoorthy is also with Materials Department, University of California, Santa Barbara, California, USA 93106.(email: sriramkrishnamoorthy@ucsb.edu) F. Alema, G. Seryogin and A. Osinsky are with Agnitron Technology Incorporated, Chanhassen, Minnesota 55317, USA. * Corresponding author e-mail: a.bhattacharyya@utah.edu versatility and ability to grow comparatively higher-quality epilayers that enables high room-temperature electron mobility values (close to the theoretical limit) and could be promising for fabricating Ga2O3 lateral FETs with high current densities as well as high breakdown voltages , –. Many new field management techniques have been successfully demonstrated in lateral β-Ga2O3-based devices that enabled high-breakdown voltages, high average breakdown fields, and high (VBR2/Ron,sp) lateral figures of merit but not simultaneously in the same device , , . In other words, VBR >2kV, lateral VBR2/Ron,sp > 300MW/cm2, and EBR,AVG > 2MV/cm could not be achieved simultaneously in the same device. This could be due to a combination of factors such as device design, device processing techniques (bulk or surface leakage paths) and more importantly the epilayer material quality. In this work, we address these issues using a gate-pad connected field plate (GPFP) design using a PECVD deposited SiNx dielectric in a β-Ga2O3 MESFET with MOVPE-grown channel and contact layers. Fig. 1. (a) Schematic of the GPFP β-Ga2O3 MESFET with a SiNX/SiO2 wrap-around passivation. The FP metal is electrically connected to the gate pad outside the mesa (not shown). (b) top-view optical image of a fabricated GPFP MESFET. II. DEVICE GROWTH AND FABRICATION The epitaxial structure shown in Fig. 1(a) consists of a β- Ga2O3 channel (230 nm thick Si-doped ~3.6×1017 cm-3) on a Fe-doped (010) bulk substrate grown using Agnitron Technology’s Agilis 700 MOVPE reactor with TEGa, O2, and silane (SiH4) as precursors and argon as carrier gas. The 10×15 mm2 edge-defined film fed grown (EFG) semi-insulating Fe- doped (010) Ga2O3 bulk substrate was acquired from Novel Crystal Technology (NCT), Japan. Before the channel layer growth, the substrate was cleaned using HF for 30 mins. From Hall measurement, the channel charge and mobility were measured to be 5.7×1012 cm-2 and 95 cm2/Vs respectively, yielding a channel sheet resistance, Rsh,ch = 11.7 kΩ/□. The device mesa isolation and the source/drain ohmic contacts were selectively regrown by MOVPE technique using a Ni/SiO2 mask pattern . The contact recess etch was performed using a low power SF6/Ar ICP-RIE dry etching, followed by a quick dip in a diluted BOE solution. The etching Multi-kV class β-Ga2O3 MESFETs with a Lateral Figure of Merit up to 355 MW/cm2 Arkka Bhattacharyya, Praneeth Ranga, Saurav Roy, Carl Peterson, Fikadu Alema, George Seryogin, Andrei Osinsky and Sriram Krishnamoorthy G A. Bhattacharyya et al.: Multi-kV class β-Ga2O3 Lateral MESFETs with a Lateral Figure of Merit up to 355 MW/cm2 in the contact regions was extended down to the Ga2O3 epitaxial layer with an estimated Ga2O3 trench depths of 10-20 nm (Ga2O3 etch rate ~ 1.5 nm/min). The Si-doping in the regrown n+ layer was ~ 2.6×1020 cm-3. Following the contact regrowth process, ohmic metal stack Ti/Au/Ni (20 nm/100 nm/30 nm) was evaporated on the regrown contact regions using photolithography patterning and lift off, followed by a 450°C anneal in N2 for 1.5 mins. Ni/Au/Ni (30 nm/100 nm/30 nm) metal stack was then evaporated to form the Schottky gate for the MESFET structure. The gate field plate design used in this work is shown in Fig.1(a), where the gate field plate metal was electrically connected to the gate pad (shorted) outside the device mesa, hence, named gate-pad-connected field plate (GPFP). This design was adopted to protect the channel region from the dry- etching plasma damage that occurs in the conventional gate field plate etch process flow and has been reported to cause plasma-damage induced RON increase , . Unlike MOSFETs, due to the absence of any gate dielectric that can act as etch stop/protective layer, avoiding the etch step in the active region played a key role to maintain RON in our FP MESFETs as discussed later. The gate field plate metal was deposited following a SiNx (170 nm thick) passivation layer deposited using plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD at 300°C). The field plate extension (LFP) was varied from ~ 0.3 to 3.5 μm as the gate-to-drain distance (LGD) varied from 2 to 45 μm. Finally, the whole active region was passivated using an SiNx/SiO2 (50 nm/50nm) bilayer dielectric deposited using the same PECVD (300°C) technique. The SiNx/SiO2 wrap-around bi-layer allowed for a thicker overall dielectric passivation with lower SiNx thickness to prevent excessive stress in the SiNx film. The final device optical image is shown in Fig.1(b). The non-FP MESFET devices had no dielectric surface passivation. III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS Fig. 2(a) & 2(b) show the DC output and transfer curves for the GPFP MESFET (solid lines) and the unpassivated non-FP MESFET (dashed lines) for device with dimensions LGS/LG/LGD = 1.0/2.8/2.4 μm. No hysteresis was observed in the DC current-voltage dual sweeps. The ID,MAX (at VGS = 0V) measured was 88 mA/mm for the passivated GPFP MESFET and 81 mA/mm for the un-passivated non-FP MESFET. The ON resistance (RON) @ VGS = 0V extracted from the linear region of the output curves were found to be 55.8 Ω.mm for the GPFP MESFET and 63.2 Ω.mm for the non-FP MESFET. From TLM measurements, the total RC (contact resistance) measured was 1.4 Ω.mm (< 3% of the total device RON) as shown in Fig. 2(c). This total RC value consists of metal/n+ regrown Ga2O3 interface contact resistance, resistance of the regrown n+-Ga2O3 region and the n+ regrown Ga2O3/lightly doped Ga2O3 channel interface resistance. Compared to our previous work, the ten-fold improvement in RC was achieved using a low etch rate SF6/Ar dry etching during the contact region recessing . The transfer curves show that both devices have low leakage (~10-12 A/mm) and high ION/IOFF ratio ~1010. The passivated GPFP MESFETs show ~14% lower RON, ~8% higher ON currents, and ~13% higher transconductance compared to the non-FP MESFETs clearly indicating the FP design used here not only preserves the RON in these devices, rather improves it possibly due to reduction of upward surface band-bending in the open access regions due to the SiNx passivation . Fig. 2(d) shows the three-terminal breakdown characteristics (at VGS = -20 V) for the non-FP MESFETs and the GPFP MESFETs with various LGD values. All the breakdown measurements were performed with the wafer submerged in FC-40 Fluorinert dielectric liquid. Comparing devices with identical LGD values, the GPFP MESFETs show significant improvement in breakdown voltage (VBR = VDS – VGS) over the non-FP MESFETs. The highest measurable VBR recorded was 2462V (LGD = 10μm) for the GPFP MESFET, which is ~70% higher compared to the non-FP MESFET (1462V) of the same dimension showing the efficacy of the FP design demonstrated here. The reverse leakage current rise was mainly due to gate leakage for both types of MESFETs. Fig. 2(e) and 2(f) show the OFF-state gate and drain terminal currents of the non-FP and GPFP MESFETs respectively with LGD of 10 μm, showing that the leakage current is dominated by the gate leakage before the catastrophic breakdown. Fig. 2. (a) Output and (b) transfer curves for the GPFP (solid lines) and non-FP (dashed lines) β-Ga2O3 MESFETs. (c) Total resistance vs spacing for the TLM patterns (schematic shown in inset). (d) Breakdown characteristics of the non-FP (top) and GPFP (bottom) β- Ga2O3 MESFETs with various LGD values. Reverse leakage plots for the (e) non-FP MESFET with LGD of 10 μm and (f) GPFP MESFET with LGD of 10 μm. It can be seen that for the GPFP MESFET, the VBR scales more linearly with LGD compared to the non-FP MESFETs (Fig.3(a)). Even though the E-field profile is highly non- uniform in the gate-drain region of a lateral device, an effective average lateral field (EAVG = VBR/LGD) can be defined to be used as a metric to understand the scaling of breakdown A. Bhattacharyya et al.: Multi-kV class β-Ga2O3 Lateral MESFETs with a Lateral Figure of Merit up to 355 MW/cm2 voltage vs spacing and helps with lateral device design. Non- linear scaling of field peaking around the contact edges and transition from punch through to non-punch field profile occurs with increasing LGD. This reduces EBR, AVG values and, therefore, results in non-linear VBR vs LGD relationship. However, the calculated EAVG values remained uniform ~2.5 MV/cm for GPFP MESFETs with LGD up to 10 μm. This combination of EAVG (~2.5 MV/cm) and VBR (~2.5 kV) demonstrated here for a MESFET with LGD = 10 μm is the highest to date for any depletion-mode Ga2O3 lateral device. GPFP MESFETs with LGD 20 μm and above did not breakdown and were measured repeatedly up to 3 kV (our measurement tool limit) without showing any degradation, demonstrating the robustness of these devices to high voltage stresses. It should be noted that all the devices in this work exhibit catastrophic breakdown. Fig. 3. (a) VBR as a function of LGD for the non-FP and GPFP MESFETs showing the increase in EBR,AVG, and improved VBR vs LGD linearity. (b) LFOM of the MESFETs as a function of LGD. The lateral figures of merit (VBR2/Ron,sp) of the GPFP MESFETs were calculated, where Ron,sp is RON normalized to the device length (LSD +2LT). The LFOM values for the GPFP and non-FP MESFETs are plotted as a function of LGD (Fig.3(b)). The highest LFOM of 355 MW/cm2 was calculated for GPFP MESFET (VBR = 2462V, Ron,sp = 17.05 mΩ.cm2) with an LGD of 10 μm which is more than 3× higher compared to the non-FP MESFET (LFOM = 115 MW/cm2, VBR = 1466V, Ron,sp = 18.6 mΩ.cm2). Overall, the GPFP design is found to have 2-3 times higher LFOM compared to the non-FP design. This is because of the improved Ron,sp (up to 14% lower) and VBR (up to 70% higher) values simultaneously with the GPFP design. Given the GPFP MESFET with LGD = 20 μm have VBR >3 kV, these devices can demonstrate LFOM >200 MW/cm2 for >3kV class transistors. Fig. 4 (a) Simulated 2D electric field contour and (b) Lateral E-field profile in Ga2O3 under the gate along cutline A-A’ and for a device with LGD = 10μm at the experimental breakdown condition of VDG = 1466V for the non-FP MESFET. (c) Simulated 2D electric field contour and (d) Lateral E-field profile along cutline A-A’ & B-B’ for a device with LGD = 10μm at the experimental breakdown condition of VDG = 2462V for the GPFP MESFET. To understand the electric field profiles, the device structures were simulated using Sentaurus TCAD under the breakdown condition. For the GPFP design, the Epeak was found to be at the FP edge as expected (Fig. 4(d)). The sharp metal edges used in the simulation act as points of singularity in the Poisson solver and may overestimate actual peak field values in real devices. From the simulated lateral field profile under the gate, the GPFP MESFET with an LGD of 10 μm was found to have a punchthrough field profile for the reported breakdown voltage.The electric field under the gate was found to be < 2 MV/cm, but the Epeak values in the SiNx at the FP edge were found to be much higher (1.4 – 1.8× higher) than in Ga2O3 under the FP edge. Therefore, it is possible that the dielectric breakdown could also be the dominant breakdown mechanism for large LGD values rather than just the gate (tunneling) leakage in the GPFP design. Fig. 5: Differential Ron,sp-VBR benchmark plot of our β-Ga2O3 MESFETs with the lateral β-Ga2O3 FETs in the literature , , –. Fig. 5 benchmarks our VBR-Ron,sp values with the existing literature reports showing that the reported GPFP β-Ga2O3 MESFET shows the highest LFOM for VBR > 2 kV, outperforming the likes of Ga2O3 MOSFETs and even advanced device designs like (AlGa)2O3/Ga2O3 HFETs and NiOx/Ga2O3 p-n hetero-Junction FETs (hJFETs) , . With the implementation of a gate dielectric, we expect the LFOM values could be further improved, provided gate dielectrics with low-leakage, cleaner interface and more importantly, dielectrics with high breakdown fields could be deposited along with high-quality β-Ga2O3 epitaxial layers. IV. CONCLUSION We demonstrate gate-pad connected field plated MOVPE- grown kV-class β-Ga2O3 lateral MESFETs with high LFOM and EBR,AVG using PECVD deposited SiNx and SiO2 field/passivation dielectrics. A record high LFOM of 355 MW/cm2 with a VBR of ~2.5 kV and EAVG of ~2.5 MV/cm simultaneously is demonstrated in a GPFP β-Ga2O3 MESFET with LGD = 10 μm. This LFOM value is the highest for any β- Ga2O3 lateral device with VBR > 2kV. These devices show great potential of MOVPE-grown β-Ga2O3 FETs for future power device applications in the low to medium voltage range. A. Bhattacharyya et al.: Multi-kV class β-Ga2O3 Lateral MESFETs with a Lateral Figure of Merit up to 355 MW/cm2