Rich Nature of Van Hove Singularities in Kagome Superconductor CsV3Sb5 Yong Hu1,#,*, Xianxin Wu2,#, Brenden R. Ortiz3,#, Sailong Ju1, Xinlong Han4, J. Z. Ma5, N. C. Plumb1, Milan Radovic1, Ronny Thomale6,7, S. D. Wilson3, Andreas P. Schnyder2,*, and M. Shi1,* 1Swiss Light Source, Paul Scherrer Institute, CH-5232 Villigen PSI, Switzerland 2Max-Planck-Institut fu ̈r Festko ̈rperforschung, Heisenbergstrasse 1, D-70569 Stuttgart, Germany 3Materials Department and California Nanosystems Institute, University of California Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, California 93106, USA 4Department of Physics and Center of Theoretical and Computational Physics, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. 5Department of Physics, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China 6Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of Würzburg, Am Hubland, D-97074 Würzburg, Germany 7Department of Physics and Quantum Centers in Diamond and Emerging Materials (QuCenDiEM) group, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 600036, India #These authors contributed equally to this work. *To whom correspondence should be addressed: Y.H. (yong.hu@psi.ch), A.P.S. (a.schnyder@fkf.mpg.de), M.S. (ming.shi@psi.ch). The recently discovered layered kagome metals AV3Sb5 (A=K, Rb, Cs) exhibit diverse correlated phenomena, which are intertwined with a topological electronic structure with multiple van Hove singularities (VHSs) in the vicinity of the Fermi level. As the VHSs with their large density of states enhance correlation effects, it is of crucial importance to determine their nature and properties. Here, we combine polarization-dependent angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy with density functional theory to directly reveal the sublattice properties of 3d-orbital VHSs in CsV3Sb5. Four VHSs are identified around the M point and three of them are close to the Fermi level, with two having sublattice-pure and one sublattice-mixed nature. Remarkably, the VHS just below the Fermi level displays an extremely flat dispersion along MK, establishing the experimental discovery of higher-order VHS. The characteristic intensity modulation of Dirac cones around K further demonstrates the sublattice interference embedded in the electronic structure. The crucial insights into the electronic structure, revealed by our work, provide a solid starting point for the understanding of the intriguing correlation phenomena in the kagome metals AV3Sb5. Transition-metal based kagome materials, hosting corner-sharing triangles, offer an exciting platform to explore intriguing correlated and topological phenomena , including quantum spin liquid , unconventional superconductivity , Dirac/Weyl semimetals and charge density wave (CDW) order . Their emergence originates from the inherent features of the kagome lattice: substantial geometric spin frustration, flat bands, Dirac cones and van Hove singularities (VHSs) at different electron fillings. Recently, a new family of kagome metal AV3Sb5 (A= K, Rb, Cs) with V kagome nets, was found to feature a Z2 topological band structure and superconductivity was realized with a maximum Tc of 2.5 K at ambient pressure . Moreover, they exhibit CDW order below TCDW≈78-103 K . Aside from the translational symmetry breaking in this CDW phase, the breaking of additional symmetries, i.e., rotation and time-reversal, was observed upon cooling down towards Tc . Despite evidence supporting a nodeless gap from magnetic penetration depth measurements , double superconducting domes under pressure , a large residual in the thermal conductivity and an edge supercurrent in Nb/K1-xV3Sb5 suggest electronically driven and unconventional superconductivity . It’s widely believed that these exotic correlated phenomena are intimately connected with the multiple VHSs in the vicinity of the Fermi level . The characteristics of VHS bands are crucial in determining the Fermi surface instabilities . From the perspective of band dispersion around the saddle point, VHSs can be classified into two types: conventional and higher-order , as shown in Figs. 1e (i) and (ii). The higher-order VHS displays a flat dispersion along one direction with less pronounced Fermi surface nesting, generating a power-law divergent density of states (DOS) in two dimensions (2D) instead of a logarithmic divergent one . Moreover, VHSs in kagome lattices possess distinct sublattice features: sublattice pure (p-type) and sublattice mixing (m-type), as shown in Fig. 1c. They induce an effective reduction of the local Coulomb interaction, thereby enhancing the role of non-local Coulomb terms . Therefore, the nature of VHSs is pivotal to understand correlated phenomena, but still remains elusive in the kagome metals AV3Sb5 so far. In this work, we perform a comprehensive study on the electronic structure of CsV3Sb5 by combining polarization-dependent angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) measurements with Density Functional theory (DFT). The diverse nature of the four VHSs in the vicinity of the Fermi level (EF) is directly revealed. We observe three VHSs around the M point below the EF, formed by Vanadium 3d orbitals. Two of them are of conventional p-type, while the other one is of higher-order p-type. In addition, we find a conventional m-type VHS slightly above EF from our theoretical calculations. Furthermore, we show that the sublattice features are also embedded in the Dirac cone around the K point, exhibiting characteristic intensity modulations under various polarization conditions. Our study provides crucial insights into the electronic structure, thereby laying down the basis for a solid understanding of the correlation phenomena in the kagome metals AV3Sb5. CsV3Sb5 crystalizes in a layered hexagonal lattice consisting of alternately stacked V-Sb sheets and Cs layers. Each V-Sb sheet contains a 2D vanadium kagome net interweaved by a hexagonal lattice of Sb atoms (Fig. 1a). The vanadium kagome lattice, shown in Fig. 1b, hosts three distinct sublattices located at 3f Wyckoff positions. The toy band of the kagome lattice displays two different types of VHSs: p-type and m-type. For the p-type VHS, the states near the three M points are contributed by mutually different sublattices, while the eigenstates of the m-type VHS are equally distributed over mutually different sets of two sublattices for each M point, as illustrated in Fig. 1c. The band structure of CsV3Sb5 from DFT calculations is displayed in Fig. 1d, where four VHS points occur at M in the vicinity of EF (indicated by the red arrows and labeled as VHS1-4). Interestingly, VHS1 exhibits a much flatter dispersion along MK compared with the orthogonal direction MG. Further analysis shows that the quadratic contribution along MK is substantially reduced, indicating that VHS1 realizes a higher- order VHS (see Supplementary Materials for details). This is in contrast to the other three VHSs near EF which are all of conventional type with dominant quadratic dispersions in both directions. Motived by these observations, we perform ARPES measurements to investigate the electronic structure and focus on the nature of the VHSs in CsV3Sb5 which we infer from the polarization analysis. The overall band dispersion and constant energy contours of CsV3Sb5 obtained via ARPES experiment are summarized in Fig. 2. The evolution of the electronic bands with different binding energy in Fig. 2a display sophisticated structures, including Sb contributed electron pockets near the zone center and kagome-derived Dirac cones at the K points with binding energy ~0.27 eV (Figs. 2a and 2b). To reveal the VHS around`M point, we display the band structure along the`G -`K -`M -`G direction in Figs. 2c and 2d, which are in good agreement with our DFT calculations (Fig. 2e). From the dispersion around`M point, we clearly identify three saddle points, denoted by VHS1, VHS2 and VHS3. Particularly, VHS1 and VHS2 are just slightly below EF with strong intensity. Remarkably, VHS1 exhibits a pronounced flat dispersion that extends over more than half of the`M -`K path. Indeed, by fitting the experimental spectra we find that the quadratic term is substantially smaller than the quartic one, revealing the higher-order nature of VHS1 (see Supplementary Fig. S1). Notably, the measured dispersion around VHS1 is much flatter than the theoretical one, indicating that renormalizations due to interactions enhance the higher-order nature of VHS1. After directly identifying the VHSs in CsV3Sb5 from the band dispersion, we now turn to determining the sublattice nature of VHSs from the orbital symmetries by employing polarization-dependent ARPES measurements (see Supplementary Materials for experimental details). According to the selection rules in photoemission, bands can be selectively detected depending on their symmetry with respect to given mirror planes of the geometry . Specifically, even- (resp. odd-) parity orbitals with respect to a mirror plane will be detected by the polarization whose electric field vector is in (resp. out of) the mirror plane. Our ARPES geometry is sketched in Fig. 3a. Polarization- dependent measurements were performed on the band structures along two orthogonal paths,`G - `K -`M -`K and`G -`M -`G directions (Fig. 3b). We first employ circular polarization that can detect both even- and odd-parity orbitals to map out the full dispersions, as shown in Figs. 3c and 3d. To determine the orbital character of the bands, we further adopt linear horizontal (LH) polarization (Figs. 3e and 3f) and linear vertical (LV) (Figs. 3g and 3h) polarization. The electric field vector of LH and LV polarized light is in and out the mirror plane, respectively. Thus, when aligning the`G -`M direction of the sample to along the analyzer slit, dxz, dz2 and dx2-y2 are all of even symmetry with respect to the mirror plane and are detectable in the LH geometry. However, dyz and dxy are odd with respect to the mirror plane, and thus photoemission signals are only detectable in the LV geometry. Likewise, when the slit is along the`G -`K direction, the orbitals can be selected accordingly (see supplementary Table I). Based on these selection rules (see supplementary Fig. S2 for details of the matrix element analysis), the orbital characters of the bands constituting the VHSs below EF can be clearly identified, as shown in Fig. 3i. The VHS1, VHS2 and VHS3 are attributed to dx2-y2/dz2, dyz an dxy orbitals, respectively. With the experimental determination of the orbital character around the`M point, we plot the theoretical orbital-resolved band dispersion in Fig. 3j originating from sublattice A (Fig. 1b), which is invariant under mirror reflection Mxz and Myz. Comparing the orbital characters around M point in Figs. 3i and 3j, we find a good agreement between the experimental and theoretical results. Furthermore, the states at VHS1, VHS2 and VHS3 at`M point, characterized by Ag, B2g and B1g irrep., are solely attributed to the A sublattice and inversion-even, confirming their p-type nature (Fig.3k). The band top of dxz band at`M is above EF and beyond experimental observation (Figs. 3i and 3j). However, our calculations show that this band belongs to B1u irrep. (inversion-odd, Fig. 3k) and is attributed to a mixed contribution from sublattices B and C, implying its m-type nature. The four p- type and m-type VHSs, especially, the three of them (the VHS1, VHS2 and VHS4) are close to the Fermi level, suggesting that these VHSs with their large DOS and nontrivial sublattice and higher- order natures play a key role in driving the exotic correlated electronic states in AV3Sb5. We further discuss the sublattice features of the Dirac cone bands around the`K point. The polarization dependent intensity patterns of the Dirac cones can convey the phase information of electronic wave functions, providing a way to determine the chirality of the Dirac cone . spectral intensity is strongly modulated around the kagome-derived Dirac cone for the LH polarization (Fig. 4b), with the maximum and minimum along the`G -`K direction but at opposite Similar behavior is observed in LV polarization but in a reversed fashion (Figs. 4c and 4d). The intensity modulation around the Dirac cone, mimicking the case of graphene and the kagome metal FeSn , indicates the chirality of the kagome-derived Dirac fermions in CsV3Sb5. The spectral intensity patterns (Figs. 4a and 4c) can be excellently reproduced in a spectral simulation based on sublattice interference of kagome initial states (Fig. 4e), further illustrating the sublattice interference embedded in the band structure of CsV3Sb5. Our ARPES measurements, combined with DFT calculations, reveal the different natures of the four 3d-orbital VHSs near EF and the chiralities of the kagome-derived Dirac cones in CsV3Sb5. These are general features in the family of kagome metals AV3Sb5 and have important physical implications. For example, the nontrivial sublattice texture of the p-type VHSs leads, via sublattice interference, to a suppression of local Hubbard interactions and promotes the relevance of non-local Coulomb terms . The bands from the conventional p-type VHS2 feature a good Fermi surface nesting, which could be responsible for the observed CDW order. The higher-order p-type VHS1, on the other hand, exhibits less pronounced Fermi surface nesting with large DOS but can promote a nematic order , which may provide a possible explanation for the additional crystal symmetry breaking in the CDW phase at lower temperature. The appearance of multiple types of VHSs near EF including both p-type and m-type, derived from the multi-orbital nature, can induce a rich competition for various pairing instabilities and thus generate numerous different orders depending on small changes in the electron filling . The kagome metals AV3Sb5 offer the tantalizing opportunity to access and tune these orders via carrier doping or external pressure , which remains to be further investigated both experimentally and theoretically.