1 A Brewster route to Cherenkov detectors Xiao Lin1,2,#, Hao Hu3,#, Sajan Easo4, Yi Yang5, Yichen Shen6, Kezhen Yin7, Michele Piero Blago8,9, Ido Kaminer10,*, Baile Zhang11,12,*, Hongsheng Chen1,2, John Joannopoulos5, Marin Soljačić5, and Yu Luo3,* 1Interdisciplinary Center for Quantum Information, State Key Laboratory of Modern Optical Instrumentation, ZJU-Hangzhou Global Science and Technology Innovation Center, College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China. 2International Joint Innovation Center, ZJU-UIUC Institute, Zhejiang University, Haining 314400, China. 3School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798, Singapore. 4Particle Physics Department, Rutherford-Appleton Laboratory (STFC), Didcot, OX110QX, UK. 5Research Laboratory of Electronics and Department of Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA. 6Lightelligence, 268 Summer Street, Boston, Massachusetts 02210, USA. 7Mantaline Corporation, 4754 E High Street, Mantua, OH44106, USA. 8European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN), Geneva 1211, Switzerland. 9Cavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB3 0HE, UK. 10Department of Electrical Engineering, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 32000, Israel. 11Division of Physics and Applied Physics, School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 21 Nanyang Link, Singapore 637371, Singapore. 12Centre for Disruptive Photonic Technologies, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 637371, Singapore. #These authors contributed equally. *E-mail: kaminer@technion.ac.il (I. Kaminer); blzhang@ntu.edu.sg (B. Zhang); luoyu@ntu.edu.sg (Y. Luo). The Cherenkov effect enables a valuable tool, known as the Cherenkov detector, to identify high- energy particles via the measurement of the Cherenkov cone. However, the sensitivity and momentum coverage of such detectors are intrinsically limited by the refractive index of the host material. Especially, identifying particles with energy above multiple gigaelectronvolts requires host materials with a near-unity refractive index, which are often limited to large and bulky gas chambers. Overcoming this fundamental material limit is important for future particle detectors yet remains a long-standing scientific challenge. Here, we propose a different paradigm for Cherenkov detectors that utilizes the broadband angular filter made from stacks of variable one- dimensional photonic crystals. Owing to the Brewster effect, the angular filter is transparent only to Cherenkov photons from a precise incident angle, and particle identification is achieved by mapping each Cherenkov angle to the peak-intensity position of transmitted photons in the detection plane. This unique property of the angular filter is exceptionally beneficial to Cherenkov detection as it enables the realization of a non-dispersive pseudo refractive index over the entire visible spectrum. Moreover, such a pseudo refractive index can be flexibly tuned to arbitrary values, 2 including those close to unity. Our angular-selective Brewster paradigm offers a feasible solution to implement compact and highly sensitive Cherenkov detectors especially in beam lines and it can cover a wide momentum range using readily available dielectric materials. A charged particle travelling in a transparent host medium emits photons when it travels faster than the phase velocity of the photons in that medium. This phenomenon is known as Cherenkov radiation, which is first observed experimentally by P. A. Cherenkov (under the guidance of S. Vavilov) and later interpreted theoretically by I. M. Frank and I. Tamm . Remarkably, Cherenkov radiation has enabled the invention of Cherenkov detectors for identifying particles over a large momentum range in high-energy physics and astrophysics. The Cherenkov detector has played an essential role during the discovery of many elementary particles, including anti-protons , J/ψ particles , neutrino oscillations , etc. According to Frank and Tamm’s theory of Cherenkov radiation , the particle velocity v can be determined by measuring the light emission angle θCR (also known as the Cherenkov angle) cosθCR = c nv, (1) where n is the refractive index of the host medium, and c is the speed of light in vacuum. Although larger refractive indices give rise to lower Cherenkov thresholds and higher photon yield, they are not always desirable in Cherenkov detectors. The reason is that large refractive index decreases the sensitivity of the Cherenkov angle to small changes in the velocity. In general, the highest detection sensitivity is obtained at θCR → 0 or n → c/v (The detection sensitivity is defined as dθCR dv = n c ∙ cos2 θCR sinθCR , which reaches its maximum at θCR → 0 ). In other words, to identify high-energy particles (i.e. v → c ), transparent dielectrics with a near-unity refractive index are often required. Such a constraint limits the host materials used in many Cherenkov radiators to low-index. This is for example the case in ring imaging Cherenkov (RICH) detectors that use gases for the identification of particles with momenta larger than 10 GeV/c . 3 Another limitation in state-of-the-art Cherenkov detectors is related to the photon emission efficiency: the use of low-index materials inevitably leads to low efficiency (i.e. the photon yield is proportional to 1 − c2 n2v2 according to Frank and Tamm’s theory). Especially when operating near- threshold (i.e. v → c/n ), the photon yield approaches zero. Consequently, traditional gas radiators generally require bulky gas chambers to produce sufficient photons for detection . Regular dielectrics offer a possible route to increase the photon emission efficiency, but their large refractive indices (generally far above unity) effectuate different types of high-energy particles to generate the same Cherenkov angle, namely θCR → cos−1(1/n), which thus makes particle identification impossible. As an example, quartz has a refractive index around 1.4, and its corresponding momentum coverage is limited below 3.5 GeV/c . All high-energy particles with momenta above this value emit light at θCR ∈ [44.30°, 44.42°], independent of the particle velocity and particle type. Under this scenario, measuring θCR cannot lead to the identification of the corresponding particle type. Recently, several theoretical attempts have been made to relax the material limitations in Cherenkov detectors by using modern concepts from nanophotonics and metamaterials . One attempt proposes metal-based anisotropic metamaterials with one component of the effective refractive index close to unity . Another study makes use of all-dielectric one-dimensional (1D) photonic crystals, where the constructive interference of resonance transition radiation is adopted to control the effective Cherenkov angle . These nanophotonic Cherenkov detectors can achieve an enhanced sensitivity for any desired momenta range, however only at a specific working frequency. In fact, the working frequency is the major drawback of all nanophotonics-based Cherenkov detectors, i.e. they all have a narrow working bandwidth, resulting from the inherent chromatic dispersion of the constitutive materials (e.g., metal) and the resonant nature of periodic structures (e.g., photonic crystals). There are many more recent advances and ongoing efforts on the Cherenkov effect in nanophotonic settings and in novel material platforms . Nevertheless, the design of a broadband Cherenkov detector using 4 regular transparent dielectrics and at the same time with enhanced performance has remained a long- standing scientific challenge. Here we propose a new paradigm for Cherenkov detectors by exploiting a broadband angular filter. This broadband angular filter is comprised of stacks of many 1D photonic crystals of different periodicities but identical constituent materials [Fig. S1a]. As a result, the Brewster effect makes the angular filter transparent only to p-polarized (i.e. transverse magnetic, TM) light incident at the Brewster angle, while the light with other polarizations or incident at other angles is totally reflected. Moreover, we can readily tailor the band gaps of these 1D photonic crystals to cover a broad spectral range, thus also making the angular selectivity broadband, spanning the entire visible spectrum . After transmitting through the broadband angular filter, the Cherenkov radiation in the detection plane features a pseudo Brewster-Cherenkov angle θBCR, namely the angle between the particle velocity and the tangential wavevector parallel to the detection plane [Fig. 1]. Remarkably, we find that the measurement of θBCR can provide an approach for particle identification at any momentum coverage with wide bandwidth and high sensitivity. This approach thus can tackle the key drawback listed above for nanophotonic Cherenkov detectors. Our approach is especially useful for the identification of a beam of charged particles with different momenta, even when the flux of charged particles is high. We now proceed to analyze the essential role of the Brewster effect in our proposed particle detectors. As schematically shown in Fig. 1, we consider the charged particle travelling at a constant velocity v in a host material with the relative permittivity of εh and along a trajectory parallel to the surface of the broadband angular filter. Without loss of generality, we set the broadband angular filter composed of two regular transparent dielectrics with relative permittivities εr1 and εr2 [Fig. S1a]. The detection plane is located at y = y0 beneath the broadband angular filter, and it is parallel to but far away from the particle trajectory [Fig. 1]. The Cherenkov radiation transmitting through the broadband angular filter has a tangential wavevector k̅BCR = x̂kx + ẑkz parallel to the detection plane. On the one hand, kz = ω/v is fixed by the kinematic feature of the charged particle . On the other hand, the 5 magnitude of k̅BCR is locked by the intrinsic electromagnetic property of the broadband angular filter. To be specific, only the p-polarized light incident at the Brewster angle can transmit through our angular filter for the entire spectral range of 400 to 700 nm [Figs. S1-S3], and our particle detector will operate over this broadband wavelength range. According to the Brewster effect, |k̅BCR| = √ εr1εr2 εr1+εr2 ω c , which enables us to define a pseudo refractive index nBCR = √ εr1εr2 εr1+εr2 . (2) We highlight that the broadband angular filter is treated as a realistic multilayered structure, instead of an effectively homogeneous material, and hence nBCR [see Methods for its derivations] is completely different from the effective refractive index obtained using the standard homogenization theory. Interestingly, nBCR is related to the pseudo Brewster-Cherenkov angle θBCR [see inset of Fig. 1] by the following equation, cosθBCR = kz |k̅ BCR| = c nBCRv. (3) Equation (3) generalizes the regular Frank-Tamm formula (i.e. equation (1)), providing a general route to engineer the Cherenkov radiation through the Brewster effect. In what follows, we shall explore the potential applications of this generalized Frank-Tamm formula for particle identification. As our approach exploits the Brewster effect, we refer to the particle detector depicted in Fig. 1 as the Brewster-Cherenkov detector. To facilitate the conceptual demonstration, Fig. 2 plots the spatial distribution of Cherenkov radiation in the detection plane. After penetrating the broadband angular filter, the transmitted Cherenkov photons feature two tails, which are symmetric with respect to the z-axis [Figs. 2a-d & S4-S5; movie S1]. The pseudo Brewster-Cherenkov angle, and hence the particle velocity, can be further determined with 6 high sensitivity by measuring the peak-intensity position of Cherenkov radiation in the detection plane [Figs. 2e & S5]. To illustrate the distinct advantages of our Brewster-Cherenkov detector, we also plot the Cherenkov radiation in the detection plane without the angular filter [Fig. 2(f-i)]. Through the comparison, we find that the pseudo Brewster-Cherenkov angle θBCR [Fig. 2a-d] is much more sensitive to the variation in particle velocity than the regular Cherenkov angle θCR [Fig. 2f-i]. This remarkable property clearly demonstrates that the broadband angular filter can effectively improve the sensitivity of Cherenkov detectors. We highlight that such sensitivity improvement occurs over a broadband frequency range because the pseudo refractive index nBCR in the generalized Frank-Tamm formula can be made approximately non-dispersive using regular transparent dielectrics that have a negligible dispersion in the visible range . To illustrate this point, we plot nBCR as a function of the Brewster angle. As shown in Fig. 3, nBCR can be flexibly engineered to arbitrary values (including those close to unity) by a suitable choice of εr1 and εr2 for the two constituent materials of the broadband angular filter. For example, according to equation (2), εr1 = 2.18 (e.g., SiO2) and εr2 = 3.07 (Al2O3) give rise to a pseudo refractive index nBCR = 1.13, which is much smaller (and hence more close to unity) than the lowest refractive index found in natural solid materials (i.e. 1.37 for MgF2) . A pseudo refractive index even closer to unity can be achieved using other material combinations. For example, nBCR = 1.0026, if taking polymers with εr1 = 1.8578 (tetrafluoroethylene-co-hexafluoropropylene-co-vinylidene fluoride (THV, 3M Dyneon 221AZ)) and εr2 = 2.1904 (poly(methyl methacrylate), namely PMMA) . A key feature of Brewster-Cherenkov detectors is that the pseudo refractive index nBCR determines their sensitivity and momentum range. Figure 4a shows the relation between the pseudo Brewster-Cherenkov angle θBCR and particle momenta for four elementary particles, namely electron, pion, kaon, and proton. In this exemplary case, we take nBCR = 1.13 and a particle momentum fixed at 2 GeV/c. The resulting values of θBCR are 27.8o for electron, 27.5o for pion, 24.3o for kaon, and 12.2o for proton [Fig. 4a]. Such a variation in θBCR indicates that nBCR = 1.13 is suitable for the identification of 7 particles with a momentum less than 10 GeV/c. In comparison, nBCR = 1.0026 gives rise to a Brewster- Cherenkov detector capable of identifying particles with a momentum larger than 10 GeV/c. More interestingly, when nBCR = 1.000001, the corresponding Brewster-Cherenkov detector can even identify particles with ultra-high momenta in the TeV/c range. These results clearly demonstrate that the proposed Brewster-Cherenkov detector can achieve arbitrary momentum coverage with high sensitivity through a proper design of the pseudo refractive index. The pseudo Brewster-Cherenkov angle and the particle velocity can be determined by directly measuring the peak-intensity position xBCR of Cherenkov radiation in the detection plane [Figs. 4b & S6- S7]. Mathematically, we have | xBCR y0 | = nBCR∙ sinθBCR √εr1−nBCR 2 + ∆(y0) , where ∆(y0) is the normalized displacement resulting from the refraction of light through the broadband angular filter. For simplicity but without loss of generality, we choose nBCR = 1.13 and y0 = 2.3 mm, and plot in Fig. 4b the ratio | xBCR y0 | as a function of momentum for the four elementary particles. At the fixed momentum of 2 GeV/c, the ratio | xBCR y0 | gradually varies from 0.49, 0.48, 0.43 to 0.22 for electrons, pions, kaons and protons, respectively [e.g., see the corresponding intensity distributions of Cherenkov radiation in the detection plane in Fig. 2a-e]. As a final remark, we highlight that our Brewster approach has several unique advantages over the traditional methods for particle identification. First, the Brewster approach eliminates the strict requirement of near-unity-index host materials for the design of Cherenkov radiators. In other words, distinct from traditional Cherenkov detectors such as the RICH detector , our Brewster approach does not have any special requirements on the refractive index of the host material where the particle is travelling, since the sensitivity of Brewster-Cherenkov detectors is directly determined by nBCR of the broadband angular filter. Consequently, high-index transparent solids or gases with low atomic numbers can now be used as the host material. Such a high-index host material can significantly enhance the 8 number of photons penetrating the broadband angular filter and reaching the detection plane, enabling a higher-efficiency Cherenkov detector. Another important advantage of our Brewster approach in comparison with all previous nanophotonic approaches is that the broadband angular filter does not need to be placed in the path of the high-energy particle beam. The charged particles can travel at a large distance away from the surface of the broadband angular filter so that all the Cherenkov photons are produced in the host material in which the particle is travelling. This way, the generation of secondary particles from the broadband angular filter can be effectively reduced. Last but not least, the performance of the proposed particle detector is robust to fabrication imperfections and geometric fluctuations of the broadband angular filter (see analysis in Refs. ). Therefore, this Brewster approach provides promising options to facilitate the design of advanced Cherenkov detectors with enhanced sensitivity, large bandwidth, miniaturized size, ultralight weight and wide momentum coverage, all using readily available regular dielectrics. These enhanced capabilities are especially attractive in the identification of high-energy particles in beam lines.