arXiv:2107.06926v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 14 Sep 2021 Time reversal symmetry protected chaotic fixed point in the quench dynamics of a topological p-wave superfluid Aidan Zabalo and Emil A. Yuzbashyan Department of Physics and Astronomy, Center for Materials Theory, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854 USA (Dated: September 15, 2021) We study the quench dynamics of a topological p-wave superfluid with two competing order parameters, ‚àÜ¬±(t). When the system is prepared in the p + ip ground state and the interaction strength is quenched, only ‚àÜ+(t) is nonzero. However, we show that fluctuations in the initial conditions result in the growth of ‚àÜ‚àí(t) and chaotic oscillations of both order parameters. We term this behavior phase III‚Äô. In addition, there are two other types of late time dynamics ‚Äì phase I where both order parameters decay to zero and phase II where ‚àÜ+(t) asymptotes to a nonzero constant while ‚àÜ‚àí(t) oscillates near zero. Although the model is nonintegrable, we are able to map out the exact phase boundaries in parameter space. Interestingly, we find phase III‚Äô is unstable with respect to breaking the time reversal symmetry of the interaction. When one of the order parameters is favored in the Hamiltonian, the other one rapidly vanishes and the previously chaotic phase III‚Äô is replaced by the Floquet topological phase III that is seen in the integrable chiral p-wave model. I. INTRODUCTION One of the most significant problems challenging our modern understanding of physics is the characterization of many body systems that are far from equilibrium. The extent to which conventional tools and frameworks such as the Landau-Ginzburg-Wilson theory, topological or- der, and universality remain valid descriptions of systems out of equilibrium is not readily understood. Fortunately, in recent years, there has been great progress in the devel- opment of both experimental and theoretical tools that allow us to begin answering such questions. Advances in ultra cold atomic systems [1‚Äì14], quantum devices [15‚Äì19], and high frequency pump-probe spec- troscopy [20‚Äì26] have provided a platform for simulating quantum many body dynamics. These experiments have shown great promise in their ability to both guide and verify our understanding of thermalization and nonequi- librium dynamical phases. There have also been numeri- cal and analytical techniques developed for studying the dynamics of systems far from equilibrium [27‚Äì35] as well as efforts at defining a notion of nonequilibrium topol- ogy [36‚Äì50]. In this work, we characterize the late time quantum quench dynamics of a topological 2D p-wave superfluid with two competing order parameters . Such a system can, in principle, be realized in the context of cold atomic gases where an attractive interaction be- tween identical fermions can be tuned through a Fes- hbach resonance . The system is expected to have p + ip and p ‚àí ip ground states, where p ¬± ip refers to the symmetry of the superfluid order param- eter: ‚àÜp = (px ‚àì ipy)‚àÜ¬±, px and py are the x and y components of the 2D momentum p, and ‚àÜ+ and ‚àÜ‚àí are the p+ip and p‚àíip pairing amplitudes, respectively. In the p + ip ground state ‚àÜ‚àí = 0 while in the p ‚àí ip ground state ‚àÜ+ = 0. Remarkably, the ground state can be tuned across a quantum phase transition by varying the chemical potential, Œº, of the system. For Œº < 0, the system is in the topologically trivial strong pairing BEC phase while for Œº > 0 it is in the topologically nontriv- ial weak pairing BCS phase. The transition occurs at the quantum critical point Œº = 0 where the ground state pairing amplitude takes on the value ‚àÜQCP, see Sec. II A for details. Unfortunately, attempts to experimentally realize such a gas have proven difficult due to the short lifetimes be- fore losses induced by three-body processes destabilize the gas . However, the ability to tune interactions via resonances has led to the consideration of using out of equilibrium dynamics as a means to induce metastable phases. In particular, it was argued that from a weakly paired p + ip or, equivalently, p ‚àí ip ground state it is possible to induce a Floquet topological superfluid by a sudden interaction quench in the time before the insta- bility occurs . Though this seems promising, a deeper understanding of the nonequilibrium p-wave superfluid is necessary be- fore conclusions can be drawn. The degree of fine tuning required to realize this behavior has not been understood and, naturally, the question arises as to whether these dy- namics are stable against small fluctuations around the p + ip ground state due to, e.g., additional interactions, finite temperature, or coupling to the environment. In other words, do deviations from the p + ip ground state affect the existence of this phase? Instabilities in oscilla- tory dynamical phases have been shown to occur in simi- lar models of superfluids . There, the instabilities are driven by spatial, thermal or quantum fluctuations. Through the use of analytical techniques and numeri- cal simulations we are able to map out the entire interac- tion quench phase diagram of the p-wave superfluid, see Fig. 1. We start in a slightly perturbed p + ip ground state with initial superfluid interaction strength Gi and then abruptly change the interaction to Gf. The ground state value of the pairing amplitude ‚àÜ0,+(G) is a mono- tonic function of the interaction strength G and we find it convenient to represent the Gi ‚Üí Gf quench as a point with coordinates (‚àÜi, ‚àÜf) in the phase diagram, where ‚àÜi = ‚àÜ0,+(Gi) and ‚àÜf = ‚àÜ0,+(Gf). By symmetry, the 2 superfluid. Each point represents an interaction quench from a slightly perturbed p+ip ground state, where ‚àÜi and ‚àÜf are the ground state p-wave order parameter amplitudes for the initial and final couplings. In equilibrium, there is a quan- tum critical point at ‚àÜ = ‚àÜQCP, which separates the topo- logically nontrivial BCS (‚àÜ < ‚àÜQCP) and topologically triv- ial BEC (‚àÜ > ‚àÜQCP) ground states. The red dashed line is the nonequilibrium extension of this critical point. Away from equilibrium, the system exhibits competing p¬±ip orders each with its own time dependent complex amplitude ‚àÜ¬±(t). In phase I, both amplitudes decay to zero due to dephasing, |‚àÜ¬±(t)| ‚Üí 0. In phase II, the p + ip amplitude has damped oscillations and decays to a nonzero constant, while the p‚àíip one shows small oscillations. In phase III‚Äô, both amplitudes grow and exhibit chaotic dynamics. phase diagram for quenches from a slightly perturbed p ‚àí ip ground state is obtained via a simple interchange of ‚àÜ+ and ‚àÜ‚àí. Unfortunately, we find that small fluctuations com- pletely destroy the Floquet topological superfluid. The quench phase diagram of the p-wave superfluid consists of three nonequilibrium phases classified according to the late time dynamics of the two order parameter pairing amplitudes ‚àÜ+(t) and ‚àÜ‚àí(t). In phase I, both ampli- tudes decay to zero due to dephasing. In phase II, ‚àÜ+(t) has damped oscillations and decays to a nonzero constant while ‚àÜ‚àí(t) stays small and shows persistent nonperiodic oscillations. In phase III‚Äô, the two order parameter ampli- tudes grow and exhibit chaotic oscillations. Surprisingly, even though the p-wave Hamiltonian is nonintegrable, we find an analytic description of the phase boundaries that is consistent with our numerical simulations. The result- ing quantum quench phase diagram is shown in Fig. 1. The quench phase diagram of the chiral p-wave model studied in is the same except our new chaotic and nontopological phase III‚Äô is replaced with the Flo- quet topological phase III . To gain insight into the properties of phase III‚Äô, we A diagram illustrating the effect of time reversal symmetry breaking on p-wave superfluid dynamics. G¬± are coupling constants of the p + ip and p ‚àí ip interaction terms. The symmetry is broken whenever G+ Ã∏= G‚àí. In much of this paper we study a time reversal invariant superfluid where G+ = G‚àí. For a chiral p-wave superfluid either G‚àí = 0 or G+ = 0 leading to a quench phase diagram which differs from Fig. 1 by a replacement of phase III‚Äô with a Floquet topo- logical phase III. For G+ Ã∏= G‚àí, we find that the pairing amplitude associated with the weaker channel rapidly van- ishes. The amplitude of the stronger channel survives to late times and its dynamics resemble the quench dynamics of the chiral p-wave superfluid. Phase III‚Äô is thus an unstable fixed point protected by time reversal symmetry. consider the limit ‚àÜi ‚Üí 0, which corresponds to the hor- izontal axis of the quench phase diagram in Fig. 1. In this case, the initial state is close to the ground state of a free Fermi gas (the normal state) and we can understand the short time pairing dynamics by performing a linear stability analysis around this state. We find that both amplitudes grow as ‚àÜ¬±(t) ‚àù eŒ≥t with the same rate Œ≥. For small interaction strengths, Œ≥ = ‚àÜf ‚àö2«´F , where «´F is the Fermi energy. As we increase ‚àÜf moving towards the phase III‚Äô‚ÄìII transition point along the ‚àÜi = 0 line, Œ≥ decreases until it vanishes at the transition becoming purely imaginary afterwards. We find that the transition point is at ‚àÜf = ‚àÜQCP. Thus, three transitions occur at the same value of the ground state pairing amplitude ‚àÜf = ‚àÜQCP: (i) the equilibrium BCS‚ÄìBEC quantum phase transition, (ii) the transition between nonequilib- rium phases III‚Äô and II for ‚àÜi = 0 and (iii) change in the stability of the normal state with respect to superfluid in- teractions. A rather remarkable byproduct of this anal- ysis is that the equilibrium BCS‚ÄìBEC quantum phase transition can be defined solely in terms of the stability of the normal state ‚Äì the BCS phase is when the normal state is dynamically unstable and the BEC phase is when it is stable. Finally, we study the effects of time reversal symmetry breaking on the late time dynamics of the quenched p- wave superfluid. The p-wave interactions can be divided into p + ip and p ‚àí ip interaction channels. Time rever- sal invariance requires that interaction strengths of the two channels be equal to each other, G+ = G‚àí = G. This is the model we consider throughout this paper (ex- cept Sec. V) and whose quench phase diagram appears in Fig. 1. The chiral p-wave model has either G+ = 0 or G‚àí = 0 and accordingly there is only one nonzero pairing amplitude, ‚àÜ+ or ‚àÜ‚àí. To better understand the effect of time reversal symmetry breaking, we con- sider the situation when both couplings are nonzero and unequal, G+ Ã∏= G‚àí, in Sec. V. We find that the pair- ing amplitude associated with the weaker channel rapidly 3 vanishes while the amplitude of the stronger channel sur- vives to late times regardless of the initial state, i.e., the stronger channel always wins. These late time dynamics closely resemble the quench dynamics of a chiral p-wave superfluid, though for a modified set of quench parame- ters. The p-wave phase III‚Äô therefore represents an un- stable fixed point protected by time reversal symmetry, see Fig. 2. As soon as we make G+ Ã∏= G‚àí, the dynamics that previously lead to phase III‚Äô take the system into the Floquet phase III of . This result indicates that it is still possible to observe a quench induced Floquet topological superfluid phase provided the time reversal symmetry of the interaction term is explicitly broken. II. EQUILIBRIUM PROPERTIES OF THE BCS HAMILTONIAN The simplest realistic 2-D p-wave BCS Hamiltonian is given by ÀÜH = ÔøΩ k k2 m ÀÜc‚ÄÝ kÀÜck‚àí 2G m ÔøΩ p,k,q k¬∑qÀÜc‚ÄÝ p 2 +kÀÜc‚ÄÝ p 2 ‚àíkÀÜc p 2 ‚àíqÀÜc p 2 +q (1) where the operator ÀÜc‚ÄÝ k (ÀÜck) creates (annihilates) a spinless fermion with momentum k and G > 0 is the dimension- less BCS coupling. We will focus only on the interaction terms with p = 0, i.e. the reduced BCS model, and ne- glect the pair breaking terms, p Ã∏= 0. This approximation is valid away from equilibrium as long as the character- istic timescale of the dynamics is less than the time for pair breaking processes to occur. We expect this to be the case away from the quantum critical point (and its nonequilibrium extension) where the chemical potential, Œº (Œº‚àû), vanishes . It is convenient to express Eq. (1) in terms of Anderson pseudospins defined through the relationships ÀÜsz k = 1 2 ÔøΩ ÀÜc‚ÄÝ kÀÜck + ÀÜc‚ÄÝ ‚àíkÀÜc‚àík ‚àí 1 ÔøΩ , ÀÜs+ k = ÀÜc‚ÄÝ kÀÜc‚ÄÝ ‚àík, ÀÜs‚àí k = ÀÜc‚àíkÀÜck. (2) With this replacement, the reduced (p = 0) Hamiltonian becomes ÀÜH = ‚Ä≤ ÔøΩ k k2ÀÜsz k ‚àí 2G ‚Ä≤ ÔøΩ k,q k ¬∑ qÀÜs+ k ÀÜs‚àí q (3) where, without loss of generality, we have set m = 1. The primed sums indicate that the momenta are restricted to the upper half plane so that k = {kx ‚àà R, ky ‚â• 0} and double counting is avoided. It is easily verified that the pseudospins satisfy the usual commutation relations ÔøΩ ÀÜsa k, ÀÜsb q ÔøΩ = iŒ¥k,q«´abcÀÜsc k. In a mean-field treatment, the Hamiltonian in Eq. (3) can be rewritten as ÀÜHMF = ‚Ä≤ ÔøΩ k k2ÀÜsz k + ‚Ä≤ ÔøΩ k k ÔøΩ e‚àíiœÜk‚àÜ+ + e+iœÜk‚àÜ‚àí ÔøΩ ÀÜs+ k + ‚Ä≤ ÔøΩ k k ÔøΩ e+iœÜk‚àÜ‚àó + + e‚àíiœÜk‚àÜ‚àó ‚àí ÔøΩ ÀÜs‚àí k (4) where ‚àÜ¬± ‚â° ‚àíG ÔøΩ k ke¬±iœÜk‚ü®ÀÜs‚àí k ‚ü© (5) is the pairing amplitude associated with the p¬±ip super- fluid order parameter, œÜk is the polar angle in the kx, ky plane, and the expectation values are taken with respect to the many-body wavefunction of the system. The Heisenberg equations of motion for the operators are dÀÜsk dt = ÀÜsk √ó Hk, (6) with Hk an effective magnetic field given by Hk = Ô£Æ Ô£∞ ‚àík(e‚àíiœÜk‚àÜ+ + e+iœÜk‚àÜ‚àí) + c.c. ‚àíik(e‚àíiœÜk‚àÜ+ + e+iœÜk‚àÜ‚àí) + c.c. ‚àík2 Ô£π Ô£ª . (7) This mean-field treatment is generally exact for pairing models such as our Hamiltonian, Eq. (4), where interac- tions are all to all [60‚Äì62] and should remain valid away from equilibrium at times smaller than the Ehren- fest time tE. This time is proportional to ‚àöNs, where Ns is the number of spins (equivalently, number of momenta k), except for quenches from the Fermi gas ground state where tE ‚àù log Ns , see also for similar results in the transverse field Ising model. Upon taking the expectation value of both sides of Eq. (6), the equations of motion reduce to Bloch equa- tions Ãásk = sk √ó Hk for classical spin variables, sk = ‚ü®ÀÜsk‚ü©. More explicitly, we have the classical equations of motion Ãás‚àí k = ‚àí ik2s‚àí k + 2iksz k ÔøΩ e‚àíiœÜk‚àÜ+ + e+iœÜk‚àÜ‚àí ÔøΩ , Ãász k = ‚àí iks+ k ÔøΩ e‚àíiœÜk‚àÜ+ + e+iœÜk‚àÜ‚àí ÔøΩ + iks‚àí k ÔøΩ e+iœÜk‚àÜ‚àó + + e‚àíiœÜk‚àÜ‚àó ‚àí ÔøΩ . (8) In equilibrium, the two order parameter amplitudes have a time dependent phase that winds with frequency 2Œº, ‚àÜ¬±(t) = ‚àÜ0,¬±e‚àí2iŒºt, (9) where the amplitude ‚àÜ0,¬± is time independent and Œº is the chemical potential to be determined self-consistently. This phase arises due to the requirement that the expec- tation values in Eq. (5) are taken between states which differ by two particles. To eliminate this evolution we move into the rotating frame, s‚àí k ‚Üí s‚àí k e‚àí2iŒºt. In this frame, the field which acts on the spins is static and given 4 by hk = Hk + 2ŒºÀÜz. The spin configuration which mini- mizes the energy can now be found by aligning each spin parallel to its local magnetic field s‚àí k0 = ‚àí k ÔøΩ e‚àíiœÜk‚àÜ0,+ + e+iœÜk‚àÜ0,‚àí ÔøΩ ÔøΩ (k2 ‚àí 2Œº)2 + 4k2|e‚àíiœÜk‚àÜ0,+ + e+iœÜk‚àÜ0,‚àí|2 , sz k0 = ‚àí k2 ‚àí 2Œº 2 ÔøΩ (k2 ‚àí 2Œº)2 + 4k2|e‚àíiœÜk‚àÜ0,+ + e+iœÜk‚àÜ0,‚àí|2 . (10) Minimizing with respect to ‚àÜ0,¬± one finds that the ab- solute minimum corresponds to one of the two order pa- rameter amplitudes being zero: {‚àÜ0,+ Ã∏= 0, ‚àÜ0,‚àí = 0} for the p + ip ground state or {‚àÜ0,+ = 0, ‚àÜ0,‚àí Ã∏= 0} for the p ‚àí ip ground state . This ground state degeneracy appears due to the presence of time reversal symmetry in the Hamiltonian. Without loss of generality, we choose to work with the p + ip ground state and set ‚àÜ0,‚àí = 0 in Eq. (10). The ground state pairing amplitude and chemical potential can then be determined self-consistently with the help of Eq. (5) 1 G = ÔøΩ k k2 ÔøΩ (k2 ‚àí 2Œº)2 + 4k2|‚àÜ0,+|2 , (11) and by relating the total particle number N to ÔøΩ k sz k0 N = ÔøΩ k Ô£´ Ô£≠1 ‚àí k2 ‚àí 2Œº ÔøΩ (k2 ‚àí 2Œº)2 + 4k2|‚àÜ0,+|2 Ô£∂ Ô£∏ . (12) It is often more convenient to work with the continuum limit of Eq. (11) and Eq. (12). Introducing a high energy cutoff, Œõ, for a system of size L the equations become 2œÄ g = ÔøΩ 2Œõ 0 d«´ «´ ÔøΩ («´ ‚àí 2Œº)2 + 4«´|‚àÜ0,+|2 , (13) and n = 1 8œÄ ÔøΩ 2Œõ 0 d«´ Ô£´ Ô£≠1 ‚àí «´ ‚àí 2Œº ÔøΩ («´ ‚àí 2Œº)2 + 4«´|‚àÜ0,+|2 Ô£∂ Ô£∏ , (14) where we have performed the integral over the polar an- gle, œÜk, and defined «´ = k2, g = GL2/4, and n = N/L2. We evaluate these integrals in Appendix B. A. Equilibrium topology An important feature of the p-wave superfluid ground state is that it can be tuned across a topological phase transition by varying the chemical potential. In the weak pairing BCS phase (Œº > 0), the system is topologically nontrivial and can support chiral Majorana edge modes while in the strong pairing BEC phase (Œº < 0), the sys- tem is topologically trivial . At the quantum critical point separating the two phases (Œº = 0) the quasi- particle spectrum becomes gapless. The corresponding value of the order parameter amplitude at the critical point, ‚àÜQCP, can be determined from Eq. (14) to give ‚àÜQCP = ÔøΩ ‚àí4œÄn W‚àí1 ÔøΩ ‚àí 2eœÄn Œõ ÔøΩ, (15) where W‚àí1 is the k = ‚àí1 branch of the Lambert W-function. To see how this transition comes about, we can look at the topological invariant characterizing the two phases. There are two possible formulations of the invariant based on the winding of the two vector fields underlying the problem. One definition of the invariant can be given in terms of the winding of the static magnetic field, hk, which acts on the pseudospins. The field winding number is defined as W = 1 8œÄ «´ab ÔøΩ d2k ÀÜhk ¬∑ ÔøΩ ‚àÇaÀÜhk √ó ‚àÇbÀÜhk ÔøΩ , (16) with ÀÜhk = hk |hk|. In both the BCS and BEC ground states hk is given by hk = Hk + 2ŒºÀÜz = ‚àí(2k cos œÜk‚àÜ0,+)ÀÜx‚àí (2k sin œÜk‚àÜ0,+)ÀÜy ‚àí (k2 ‚àí 2Œº)ÀÜz, (17) where, without loss of generality, we have taken ‚àÜ0,+ to be real. Computing the integral yields W = 1 2 [1 + sgn(Œº)] . (18) For Œº > 0, the field winding number gives W = 1 while for Œº < 0 it gives W = 0. At the critical point, the field winding number is not a well defined quantity. An alternative definition of the topological invariant can be given in terms of the winding of the pseudospins, sk. The pseudospin winding number is defined as Q ‚â° 1 8œÄ «´ab ÔøΩ d2ksk ¬∑ (‚àÇask √ó ‚àÇbsk) |sk|3 . (19) Substituting the ground state configuration from Eq. (10) with ‚àÜ0,‚àí = 0 and computing the integral gives Q = W since in the ground state each spin is parallel to its local field. The equivalence between these two definitions of the topological invariant only holds in equilibrium. The pseu- dospin winding number, Q, depends only on the initial state of the system and is conserved throughout the dy- namics so it is of little interest to us . On the other hand, the field winding number, W, is encoded in the asymptotic dynamics of the system and can change after 5 a quench across the quantum critical point. For states in which ‚àÜ¬±(t) has the form in Eq. (9), our W coincides with the topological invariant introduced in in terms of the retarded single particle Green‚Äôs function . Therefore, it can be argued that for such states, it is W (not Q) that determines the presence of Majorana edge modes in the post quench asymptotic state . III. QUENCH DYNAMICS In this work, we are interested in studying the dynam- ics of the two superfluid order parameters after a sudden quench of the interaction strength. We consider a system that is initially prepared in a state arbitrarily close to the p+ip ground state of the mean-field p-wave Hamiltonian Eq. (4) for some initial coupling Gi. The interaction strength is then instantaneously changed to Gf and the system evolves as a superposition of eigenstates of the new Hamiltonian. Below we explore the quench phase diagram for various values of Gi and Gf. We parame- terize a quench through the use of quench coordinates of the form {‚àÜi, ‚àÜf}, where ‚àÜi,f denotes the value of ‚àÜ0,+ in the pure p + ip ground state of the Hamiltonian with interaction strength Gi,f. A. Pure p + ip dynamics We begin by considering the dynamics of the two or- der parameters following a quench from the exact p + ip ground state ‚Äì Eq. (10) with ‚àÜ0,‚àí = 0. For such an initial state, the dynamics significantly simplify and it can formally be shown that they are equivalent to those generated from the pure p + ip Hamiltonian . To see this, we note that any time dependent p + ip state can be written in the form s‚àí k ‚â° e‚àíiœÜks‚àí k , sk ‚â° sz k. (20) Substituting Eq. (20) into Eq. (5), we find ‚àÜ‚àí = ‚àíG ÔøΩ k ke‚àí2iœÜks‚àí k = ‚àí g 2œÄ2 ÔøΩ 2Œõ 0 «´s‚àí(«´)d«´ ÔøΩ œÄ 0 e‚àí2iœÜdœÜ = 0, (21) where in the second line we have taken the continuum limit and performed the integral over œÜ. The above equa- tion shows that for any p + ip initial state ‚àÜ‚àí remains zero throughout the entire evolution. A similar substitution into the equations of motion Eq. (8) gives Ãás‚àí k = ‚àí ik2s‚àí k + 2iksz k‚àÜ+, Ãász k = ‚àí ik ÔøΩ s+ k ‚àÜ+ ‚àí s‚àí k ‚àÜ‚àó + ÔøΩ . (22) Eq. (22) is identical to the equations of motion that are generated by the p+ip Hamiltonian. The p+ip Hamilto- nian is a truncated version of the full p-wave Hamiltonian Eq. (1) where by writing, k ¬∑ q = 1 (23) discarding the second term, keeping only p = 0 terms in the interaction as before, and rewriting the fermionic operators in terms of the Anderson pseudospins we arrive at ÀÜH = ‚Ä≤ ÔøΩ k k2ÀÜsz k ‚àí G ‚Ä≤ ÔøΩ k,q (kx ‚àí iky)(qx + iqy)ÀÜs+ k ÀÜs‚àí q . (24) The mean field Hamiltonian simplifies to ÀÜHp+ip MF = ‚Ä≤ ÔøΩ k k2ÀÜsz k + ‚Ä≤ ÔøΩ k k ÔøΩ e‚àíiœÜk‚àÜ+ÀÜs+ k + e+iœÜk‚àÜ‚àó +ÀÜs‚àí k ÔøΩ . (25) The equations of motion generated by this Hamiltonian after applying Eq. (20) are Eq. (22). Note that we can alternatively start from a p ‚àí ip ground state and follow a similar logic. The result is again Eq. (22), but with the replacement ‚àÜ+ ‚Üí ‚àÜ‚àí. The p ‚àí ip Hamiltonian analo- gous to Eq. (24) would then correspond to discarding the first term in Eq. (23). This simplification is crucial in understanding the p + ip dynamics of the p-wave superfluid as the mean field p + ip model was shown to be classically integrable using a Lax vector construction , which implies Lax pair representation of the equations of motion Eq. (22), see Ref. for details. By studying the behavior of the isolated roots of the Lax vector norm, the quench phase diagram can be mapped out . We repeat this procedure in Appendix C for the parameters used in our numerical simulations. The resulting phase diagram contains three distinct dynamical phases characterized by the late time behavior of the order parameter amplitude In phase I, the order parameter amplitude decays to zero due to dephasing, |‚àÜ+(t)| ‚Üí 0. At late times, the spins precess with frequencies k2 around the z-axis and the system is in a gapless superconducting state. This is different from the normal state which would have all spins aligned along the z-axis. In phase II, |‚àÜ+(t)| exhibits damped oscillations and decays to a nonzero constant, |‚àÜ+(t)| ‚Üí ‚àÜ‚àû > 0. The order parameter amplitude has a time dependent phase that winds with frequency 2Œº‚àû, i.e., ‚àÜ+(t) = ‚àÜ‚àûe‚àí2iŒº‚àût, (26) similar to its ground state behavior in Eq. (9). This suggests that that Œº‚àû is an out of equilibrium chemical potential whose value is determined by the details of the quench. In the rotating frame, the pseudospins precess around an effective field hk = ‚àí(2k cos œÜk‚àÜ‚àû)ÀÜx‚àí(2k sin œÜk‚àÜ‚àû)ÀÜy‚àí(k2 ‚àí2Œº‚àû)ÀÜz. 6 p + ip model Eq. (25). The behavior for the full p-wave Hamiltonian is the same when quenched exactly from the p + ip ground state. The quench coordinates {‚àÜi, ‚àÜf} correspond to the ground state value of the order parameter amplitude, ‚àÜ0,+, for the initial and final couplings Gi and Gf, respectively. In phase I, the order parameter amplitude decays to zero due to dephasing, in phase II it exhibits power law damped oscillations and decays to a constant, and in phase III it exhibits persistent oscillations. The numerical simulations were performed on Eq. (22) for N = 50, 000 pseudospins, see Appendix A for details. The expression for the field is of the same form as in the ground state, see Eq. (17), and therefore, W = 1 2 [1 + sgn(Œº‚àû)] . (27) This is similar to the ground state result, Eq. (18), but with the replacement Œº ‚Üí Œº‚àû. We conclude that the change in W at Œº‚àû = 0 marks the nonequilibrium ex- tension of the quantum critical point. In Appendix D, we show that Œº‚àû = 0 defines a straight vertical line ‚àÜf = ‚àÜQCP in the quench phase diagram as shown in Fig. 1. In phase III, the order parameter amplitude undergoes persistent oscillations that can be described in terms of elliptic functions. Additionally, it was shown in that in multiple regions of this phase there are crossing edge states suggesting that the entire phase is Floquet topological. The order parameter dynamics for each of the phases are shown in Fig. 3 using a numerical simula- tion of Eq. (22). For details regarding the numerics see Appendix A. It is somewhat surprising that the quench dynamics of the full p-wave Hamiltonian can be solved exactly for quenches from a pure p + ip ground state given that this Hamiltonian is nonintegrable. To what extent the dy- namics and topological structure survive infinitesimally small perturbations from this fine tuned initial state is studied in the following sections. IV. FULL P-WAVE DYNAMICS Naturally, the system cannot be prepared in a p + ip ground state, where ‚àÜ0,‚àí = 0, with absolute purity. In- evitably, there are fluctuations around this state that can come from a variety of sources. We will see below that pure p+ip oscillatory dynamics are unstable towards ex- ponential growth of the competing p‚àíip order associated with ‚àÜ0,‚àí. Therefore, the precise mechanism of the fluc- tuations is unimportant as long as they seed a nonzero initial ‚àÜ0,‚àí. To understand the effect of such fluctua- tions we study quenches from an initial state described by Eq. (10) with 0 < ‚àÜ0,‚àí ‚â™ ‚àÜ0,+. We find that, in the limit ‚àÜ0,‚àí ‚Üí 0, the phase diagram remains largely un- affected with the exception of phase III, wherein ‚àÜ‚àí(t) undergoes an unstable growth and the smooth oscillatory dynamics of ‚àÜ+(t) are destroyed. A. Stable phases I and II For quenches whose coordinates lie within phases I or II of the p + ip phase diagram, the dynamics of the full p-wave Hamiltonian closely mirror that of the truncated p+ ip model, as shown in Fig. 4. In phase I, we find that both ‚àÜ+(t) and ‚àÜ‚àí(t) decay to zero in a similar fashion. As before, at late times the pseudospins precess around the the z-axis with frequencies k2. In phase II, ‚àÜ+(t) exhibits damped oscillations and decays to a constant. On the other hand, ‚àÜ‚àí(t) exhibits smooth oscillations that do not seem to decay. The perturbation to the initial state does not affect the dynamics significantly since at t = 0 we have ‚àÜ‚àí(0)/‚àÜ+(0) ‚â™ 1 and as t ‚Üí ‚àû the size of ‚àÜ‚àí(t) remains bounded and is negligible as compared to ‚àÜ+(t). The asymptotic state of the system is largely unaffected by the perturbation to the initial state and thus we expect the nonequilibrium topology of phases I and II to remain unchanged. B. Unstable phase III From numerical simulations we find the persistent os- cillations observed in phase III are not stable to the ‚àÜ‚àí perturbation. Unlike in phases I and II, the p ‚àí ip or- der parameter amplitude exhibits unstable growth, and 7 perturbed p + ip ground state. In phase I, (a) and (b), both order parameter amplitudes decay to zero. In phase II, (c) and (d), ‚àÜ+(t) has damped oscillations and decays to a nonzero constant while ‚àÜ‚àí(t) has small and smooth oscillations. In both grows and destroys the persistent oscillations exhibited by the p + ip model, see Fig. 3c. At late times, the irregular oscillations of both order parameter amplitudes are out of phase with each other. As in the previous figure, the numbers in the curly brackets are the ground state values of ‚àÜ0,+ for the initial and final couplings. The numerical simulations were performed on Eq. (8) for N = 200, 025 pseudospins with initial conditions Eq. (10) and ‚àÜ0,‚àí = 10‚àí5‚àÜ0,+, see Appendix A for details. after some delay time, œÑ, the persistent oscillations are destroyed and the system enters a regime of chaotic dy- namics which we label as phase III‚Äô. Since quenches from gi = 0 to not too large gf belong to phase III‚Äô, we can understand the behavior in this phase by linearizing the equations of motion about the unpaired (free Fermi gas) ground state, which has ‚àÜi = 0 and Œºi = 2œÄn. In the continuum limit, the growth exponent Œ≥ is defined through the self-consistency equation of the linearized problem 2œÄ gf = ÔøΩ 2Œõ 0 d«´«´ sgn(«´ ‚àí 2Œºi) «´ ‚àí Œ∂ (28) where Œ∂ = œâ + iŒ≥. We can rewrite gf in terms of ‚àÜf through Eq. (13) and perform the corresponding integrals on both sides of the equation. Discarding terms of order 8 O(Œõ‚àí1), we obtain Œ∂ log ÔøΩ‚àí(2Œºi ‚àí Œ∂)2 2ŒõŒ∂ ÔøΩ = 2Œºf log ÔøΩ ‚àÜ2 f + 2|Œºf|Œò(‚àíŒºf) 2Œõ ÔøΩ . (29) To simplify the analysis we may consider a quench to weak final pairing ‚àÜf ‚â™ ‚àÜQCP. In this case we can take Œºi ‚àº Œºf ‚â´ ‚àÜ2 f and look for solutions of the form Œ∂ = 2Œºi + iŒ≥ for which we find Œ≥ = ‚àÜf ‚àö2Œºi. From numerical simulations we find the initial growth of ‚àÜ‚àí(t) to be suppressed by nonlinear effects and occurring at later times than predicted by the linear analysis. We can also use Eq. (29) to determine the point sep- arating nonequilibrium phases II and III‚Äô along the ‚àÜf axis. As we cross from phase III‚Äô to II, the imaginary part of Œ∂ vanishes, removing the exponential growth of ‚àÜ‚àí(t). Setting Œ≥ = 0, we see that the only possible solu- tions are for œâ ‚â§ 0. Rewriting Eq. (29) in terms of œâ we have ‚àí|œâ| log ÔøΩ(2Œºi + |œâ|)2 2Œõ|œâ| ÔøΩ = 2Œºf log ÔøΩ ‚àÜ2 f + 2|Œºf|Œò(‚àíŒºf) 2Œõ ÔøΩ . (30) In order to have real solutions for œâ, we must require that Œºf ‚â§ 0. This first happens when ‚àÜf = ‚àÜQCP where Œºf = 0 and, therefore, the quantum critical point defines the separation point, see Fig. 1. Interestingly, this stability analysis also has important implications for the equilibrium physics of the p-wave superfluid. Indeed, we investigated here the stability of the unpaired ground state (normal state) with respect to the p-wave Hamiltonian Eq. (3) with coupling G = Gf and found that this state is unstable in the BCS phase, when the ground state pairing amplitude is smaller then ‚àÜQCP, and stable in the BEC phase, when it exceeds ‚àÜQCP. Thus, the change in stability of the normal state state identifies the BCS-BEC quantum phase transition. We note also that our analysis of the free energy shows that even though the normal state is dynamically stable in the BEC state, it is not a local minimum of the free energy. C. Signatures of chaos The late time dynamics in phase III‚Äô appear to be chaotic in contrast to phase III of the p + ip model. We believe this is because the full p-wave model, Eq. (3), is nonintegrable unlike its truncated p + ip counterpart, Eq. (24). One piece of evidence of chaos is that the dy- namics are sensitive to the initial conditions, as demon- strated in Fig. 5, where varying the magnitude of the ‚àÜ‚àí perturbation yields vastly different late time trajectories. This behavior makes it difficult to obtain reliable numer- ical results at late times since increasing the number of spins effectively modifies the initial conditions. However, the qualitative behavior, i.e., the appearance of irregular tial conditions vary only slightly will rapidly diverge. The ‚àÜ‚àí perturbations are given by ‚àÜ0,‚àí = 1 ¬∑ 10‚àí5‚àÜ0,+ and ‚àÜ0,‚àí = 2¬∑10‚àí5‚àÜ0,+ for a quench with coordinates {‚àÜi, ‚àÜf} = {0.005, 1.32}. Other parameters and conventions are the same as in the previous figure. oscillations, is the same. Additionally, the Fourier spec- trum of the time series changes from a discrete frequency in the classically integrable p + ip case to a continuous spectrum in the full p-wave case as shown in Fig. 6. D. Phase III‚Äô topology At late times, the irregular oscillations of the two or- der parameters are out of phase with one another. The system dynamics are no longer periodic and the Floquet topological superfluid phase seen in Ref. is therefore destroyed. Due to the chaotic nature of the dynamics there is no remnant of topological order in any known sense in the system. E. Determination of the phase boundaries Although the full p-wave Hamiltonian is nonintegrable, it is possible to determine the phase boundaries analyti- cally. We have seen that the dynamics of ‚àÜ+(t) in phases I and II are nearly identical to those of the p + ip model. We can therefore expect this phase boundary to remain unchanged. In phase III‚Äô, we have seen that there is an instability of ‚àÜ‚àí(t) that leads to chaotic dynamics of both the orders at late times. However, this instability is confined to the phase III region of the p + ip model and again there is no choice but for the phase boundary to remain unchanged between phases II and III‚Äô. The exact phase boundaries for the full p-wave model can then be determined by performing the same analysis of the Lax roots outlined in . This is done in Appendix C and the result is used to generate the phase diagram shown in Fig. 1. These phase boundaries are in agreement with direct numerical simulations of the dynamics. We also expect the Œº‚àû = 0 line to remain unchanged since it lies entirely within the stable phase II. There are differences between shapes of the various lines in our phase diagram as compared to that of 9 p + ip ground state in the full p-wave model. The perturbation and quench parameters are the same as in Fig. 5. Spectrum (a) shows a single independent frequency characteristic of the Floquet topological superfluid phase III of the truncated p + ip model. The perturbation makes the spectrum continuous in (b) suggesting chaotic dynamics in phase III‚Äô, which replaces phase III in the full p-wave model, and indicating the destruction of the Floquet topological order. due to the cutoff prescription of , which incorpo- rates the chemical potential, i.e., replaces our Œõ with Œõ + Œº with Œº being the equilibrium chemical potential. Because Œº depends on the coupling constant, this cutoff changes as a result of a quench. The cutoff represents an energy scale governed by physics at higher energies, such as, e.g., the Debye energy in phonon mediated super- conductors. It is more natural to keep this energy scale fixed and unaffected by the quench. We therefore use a fixed cutoff throughout the quench phase diagram, which also results in simpler and more intuitive line shapes. In particular, our phase III‚Äô boundary terminates at ‚àÜQCP along the ‚àÜf axis and our Œº‚àû = 0 line is a straight ver- tical line defined by the equation ‚àÜf = ‚àÜQCP. V. STABILITY OF THE P-WAVE SUPERFLUID WITH RESPECT TO TIME REVERSAL SYMMETRY BREAKING In the previous section, we have seen that the phase III dynamics are unstable to a perturbation of the pure p + ip initial state. To understand the nature of this instability we study a variation of the Hamiltonian in Eq. (3) which explicitly breaks time reversal symmetry due to an asymmetry in the coupling. To each interaction channel we associate a distinct coupling constant, G+ Ã∏= G‚àí, ÀÜHasym = ‚Ä≤ ÔøΩ k k2ÀÜsz k ‚àí G+ ‚Ä≤ ÔøΩ k,q (kx ‚àí iky)(qx + iqy)ÀÜs+ k ÀÜs‚àí q ‚àíG‚àí ‚Ä≤ ÔøΩ k,q (kx + iky)(qx ‚àí iqy)ÀÜs+ k ÀÜs‚àí q (31) and define new order parameter amplitudes ‚àÜ¬± ‚â° ‚àíG¬± ÔøΩ k ke¬±iœÜk‚ü®s‚àí k ‚ü©. (32) For G+ = G‚àí this Hamiltonian turns into the full p-wave Hamiltonian Eq. (3) we studied above, see Eq. (23). We consider quenches from a perturbed p + ip initial state for the two cases where one channel dominates over the other employing the same approach to dynamics as before. For G+ > G‚àí, the dominant channel corresponds to the p+ip channel. Using numerical simulations we find that for any quench, the p ‚àí ip order parameter, ‚àÜ‚àí(t), quickly vanishes, as shown in Fig. 7. This result is to be expected as the p ‚àí ip order is suppressed in both the initial state as well as by the equations of motion themselves. For G+ < G‚àí, the dominant channel corresponds to the p ‚àí ip channel and it is not immediately clear which channel the dynamics should favor. On one hand, the initial state favors the p + ip channel while the p ‚àí ip channel only acts as a perturbation, on the other hand, the equations of motion suppress the p + ip channel and favor the p ‚àí ip channel. We find that, in this case, the p+ip order parameter is the one to rapidly decay to zero while the p ‚àí ip order parameter survives to exhibit the late time dynamics (in phase I both order parameters decay to zero). This behavior is shown in Fig. 8, where even though ‚àÜ‚àí(0)/‚àÜ+(0) ‚â™ 1, the p ‚àí ip order param- eter amplitude is the one with nonvanishing dynamics in phases II and III. These late time dynamics resemble the three phases of the pure p¬±ip quench dynamics but with a renormalized set of quench coordinates. It is an inter- esting question as to whether the phase boundaries of the asymetric model, particularly for G+ < G‚àí, remain the same as in the chiral model or are deformed in some way. We see that the stronger channel always wins at late times regardless of the initial state. This means that the time reversal invariant p-wave Hamiltonian is an unstable 10 here we have used G+ > G‚àí. The figures shown are representative of the two order parameter amplitudes in all three phases for a quench from a slightly perturbed p + ip ground state. The ‚àÜ‚àí perturbation is irrelevant to the late time dynamics of ‚àÜ+(t) as it rapidly vanishes in all three phases. The resulting dynamics of ‚àÜ+(t) closely resemble the pure p + ip quench dynamics. Notations and unspecified parameters are the same as in Fig. 4. survive out to late times. The p + ip order parameter amplitude vanishes in all three phases and the dynamics of ‚àÜ‚àí(t) closely resemble the pure p ‚àí ip quench dynamics, though for a different set of quench coordinates. Note, in (a), ‚àÜ+(t) vanishes slower than ‚àÜ‚àí(t) due to the relative sizes of G+ and G‚àí and so it does not show up with the scales used in the figure. fixed point with regards to the p¬±ip phase diagram. Only at the special point G+ = G‚àí protected by time reversal symmetry does the chaotic phase III‚Äô regime emerge, see Fig. 2. VI. CONCLUSION In this work we have studied the quench dynamics of a p-wave BCS superfluid with two competing order pa- rameters, ‚àÜ¬±(t). We have shown that when the system is prepared near its p + ip ground state and the interac- tion strength is quenched, the late time dynamics can be characterized into three distinct phases: in phase I both order parameters decay to zero, in phase II ‚àÜ+(t) decays to a nonzero constant and ‚àÜ‚àí(t) oscillates near zero, and in phase III‚Äô the two order parameters are nonzero and undergo chaotic dynamics, see Fig. 4. Remarkably, even though this model is nonintegrable, we are able to map out the exact phase boundaries in parameter space as shown in Fig. 1. Additionally, we study the role that time reversal symmetry plays in determining the late time dy- namics. We consider a Hamiltonian that has an asymme- try in the coupling strength and prefers one of the order parameters over the other, i.e., G+ Ã∏= G‚àí in Eq. (31). We find that the late time dynamics of the weaker chan- nel order parameter vanish and only the stronger channel survives. This causes the chaotic dynamics of phase III‚Äô to disappear and the topological phase III of the chiral p- wave model studied in Ref. to emerge. The fact that the stronger channel always wins suggests that it may be possible to experimentally realize a quench induced Flo- quet topological superfluid without any fine tuning of the initial state provided that time reversal symmetry can be broken in the interaction channels. Although our analysis has only been performed for the p-wave BCS superfluid, we expect a similar chaotic phase to emerge in far from equilibrium dynamics of other mod- els where there are competing order parameters related by a symmetry, for example, in a Fermi gas with more than two species of fermions with pairwise attraction be- tween them [70‚Äì73]. 11 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank M. Dzero, M. S. Foster, and V. Gurarie for helpful discussions. A. Z. is partially supported by Grant No. 2018058 from the United States-Israel Bina- tional Science Foundation (BSF), Jerusalem, Israel and through a Fellowship from the Rutgers Discovery Infor- matics Institute. Appendix A: Details of numerical simulations The numerical simulations were done using the parameters listed in Table I and Table II. For the full p-wave simulations, we use a radial momentum space grid so that «´ = k2 are uniformly spaced for «´ ‚àà [0, 2Œõ] and along the angular direction Œ∏ is uniformly spaced in the upper half plane for Œ∏ ‚àà [0, œÄ]. For the chiral dynamics, the problem reduces to one dimension and we can neglect the Œ∏ dependence. The number of spins used in the numerical simulations is chosen such that the results are converged at the times of interest. We find that to obtain converging results at late times, it is important to have a large number of points along the radial direction, N«´, whereas the results are not as sensitive to the number of points along the angular direction, NŒ∏. Since we have few N«´ points in the full p-wave model, we use the composite Simpson‚Äôs rule to have a more accurate estimate of the integrals in the problem while for the chiral model we simply use the trapezoidal rule. Obtaining convergent results becomes difficult for quenches in phase III‚Äô where the dynamics are chaotic. In order to reach later times we must increase N«´, but changing the number of points effectively changes the initial conditions. The results, however, are qualitatively the same, i.e., the Floquet phase is destroyed and irregular oscillations appear. Quantity Symbol Value Number of «´ points N«´ 8001 Number of Œ∏ points NŒ∏ 25 Density n Fermi Energy «´F 2œÄn High energy cutoff Œõ 50«´F Quantum critical point ‚àÜQCP Ground state order parameter amplitude ‚àÜ0,+ See figures for details ‚àÜ‚àí perturbation ‚àÜ0,‚àí 10‚àí5‚àÜ0,+ Quantity Symbol Value Number of «´ points N«´ Density n Fermi Energy «´F 2œÄn High energy cutoff Œõ 50«´F Quantum critical point ‚àÜQCP Ground state order parameter amplitude ‚àÜ0,+ See figures for details Appendix B: BCS equations The integral on the right hand side of Eq. (14) for the particle density can be evaluated exactly n = 1 8œÄ Ô£´ Ô£≠2Œõ + |2Œº| ‚àí ÔøΩ (2Œõ ‚àí 2Œº)2 + 8‚àÜ2 +Œõ + 2‚àÜ2 + ln Ô£Æ Ô£∞ 2Œõ ‚àí 2Œº + 2‚àÜ2 + + ÔøΩ (2Œõ ‚àí 2Œº)2 + 8‚àÜ2 +Œõ 2‚àÜ2 + + |2Œº| ‚àí 2Œº Ô£π Ô£ª Ô£∂ Ô£∏ . (B1) 12 Expanding the square root in 1/Œõ and neglecting terms of order Œõ‚àí1 and smaller leads to 4œÄn = 2ŒºŒò(Œº) ‚àí ‚àÜ2 + + ‚àÜ2 + ln ÔøΩ 2Œõ ‚àÜ2 ÔøΩ , (B2) Similarly, Eq. (13) becomes 2œÄ g = 2Œõ ‚àí 8œÄn + 2Œº ln ÔøΩ 2Œõ ‚àÜ2 ÔøΩ . (B3) We use these results in Appendix C to derive the phase boundaries. Appendix C: Lax roots and quench phase diagram In the p + ip model, the components of the Lax vector are given by L¬±(u) = N ÔøΩ i=1 ‚àö«´is¬± i «´i ‚àí u , Lz(u) = N ÔøΩ i=1 «´isz i «´i ‚àí u + 1 2Gf (C1) and one can define a Lax vector norm (C2) that is conserved under the dynamics. The Lax vector norm is a polynomial of degree 2N whose isolated roots encode information about the late time dynamics . Specifically, phase I occurs when L2(u) has no isolated roots (the remaining roots form a continuum on the positive real axis). Phase II corresponds to a single pair and phase III to two pairs of isolated roots. To find the roots, we can evaluate L2(u) in the initial state which has the configuration described by Eq. (10) with ‚àÜ0,‚àí = 0 and ‚àÜ0,+ ‚â° ‚àÜi, i.e., s‚àí i = ‚àí ‚àö«´i‚àÜi E(«´i) , sz i = ‚àí(«´i ‚àí 2Œºi) 2E(«´i) , ÔøΩ («´ ‚àí 2Œºi)2 + 4«´|‚àÜi|2. (C3) Substituting into the above equations, the Lax vector norm becomes L2(u) = u|‚àÜi|2 ÔøΩÔøΩ i «´i («´i ‚àí u)E(«´i) ÔøΩ2 + ÔøΩ ‚àí ÔøΩ i «´i(«´i ‚àí 2Œºi) 2(«´i ‚àí u)E(«´i) + 1 2Gf ÔøΩ2 . (C4) This equation can be simplified to ÔøΩ ‚àí(u ‚àí 2Œºi) 2 ÃÉŒ≤ 2 ÔøΩ2 (C5) by defining ÃÉŒ≤ ‚â° 1 Gf ‚àí 1 Gi , F(u) ‚â° ÔøΩ i «´i («´i ‚àí u)E(«´i). (C6) The roots of the Lax vector norm are found by solving the quadratic equation for F(u) (C7) with solutions given by E(u)2 . (C8) 13 Isolated roots are located away from the positive real axis. Eq. (C8) for such roots in the continuum limit becomes ÔøΩ 2Œõ 0 «´d«´ E(u)2 , (C9) with Œ≤ = 2œÄ ÔøΩ 1 gf ‚àí 1 gi ÔøΩ . (C10) To determine the phase boundaries we look for a pair of complex roots that just separate from (or collapse to) the real axis. To do this, we replace u ‚Üí u ¬± iŒ¥ in Eq. (C9), with Œ¥ infinitesimally small. Through a change of variables x = «´ ‚àí u we may write ÔøΩ 2Œõ‚àíu ‚àíu (x + u)dx (x ‚àì iŒ¥)E(x + u) = P ÔøΩ (x + u)dx xE(x + u) ¬± iœÄ u E(u) (C11) where P denotes the principal value. Comparing the imaginary parts of the right hand sides of Eq. (C11) and Eq. (C9) we find |Œ≤| = œÄ‚àöuE(u) 2|‚àÜi| , (C12) and comparing the real parts we find ln ÔøΩ 2Œõ ‚àÜ2 i + 2|Œºi|Œò(‚àíŒºi) ÔøΩ + u E(u) ln ÔøΩ ‚àí2 ÔøΩ u(‚àÜ2 i ‚àí Œºi) + 2Œº2 i + |Œºi|E(u) ÔøΩ u [u + 2‚àÜ2 i ‚àí 2Œºi + E(u)] ÔøΩ = sgn(Œ≤)œÄ‚àöu(u ‚àí 2Œºi) 2|‚àÜi|E(u) , (C13) where we have neglected terms of order O(Œõ‚àí1). Equations (C10), (C12), and (C13) form a system of equations that paramaterize the phase boundaries. By choosing a value for ‚àÜi and sgn(Œ≤), Eq. (C13) can be solved for u which can be substituted into Eq. (C12) to determine Œ≤. Then, with the help of Eq. (C10), ‚àÜi can be written as a function of ‚àÜf to map out the phase boundaries. This is the approach we used to obtain the phase boundaries shown in Fig. 1. Appendix D: Nonequilibrium extension of the quantum critical point The nonequilibrium extension of the quantum critical point corresponds to the curve in phase II which has Œº‚àû = 0. This line separates the two topological regions with field winding number, W, either zero or one. To determine the curve we look for the vanishing of an isolated root i.e., u = 0 . Substituting u = 0 into Eq. (C9) we have ÔøΩ 2Œõ 0 «´d«´ «´E(«´) = ‚àí Œ≤ 2Œºi . (D1) Evaluating the integral we find Œ≤ = ‚àí2Œºi log ÔøΩ 2Œõ ‚àÜ2 i + 2|Œºi|Œò(‚àíŒºi) ÔøΩ . (D2) As before, we can use Eq. (C10) to write ‚àÜi as a function of ‚àÜf. The result simplifies to Œºf log ÔøΩ 2Œõ ‚àÜ2 f + 2|Œºf|Œò(‚àíŒºf) ÔøΩ = 0 (D3) which can only be solved when Œºf = 0. In other words, for any ‚àÜi the value of ‚àÜf for which Œº‚àû = 0 is given by ‚àÜf = ‚àÜQCP, see the dashed line in the phase diagram in Fig. 1. This line remains unchanged in the full p-wave phase diagram since it lies entirely within the stable phase II. T. Kinoshita, T. Wenger, and D. S. Weiss, A quantum Newton‚Äôs cradle, Nature 440, 900 (2006). H. Lignier, C. Sias, D. Ciampini, Y. Singh, A. Zen- esini, O. Morsch, and E. Arimondo, Dynamical con- 14 trol of matter-wave tunneling in periodic potentials, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 220403 (2007). S. Smale, P. He, B. A. Olsen, K. G. Jackson, H. Sharum, S. Trotzky, J. Marino, A. M. Rey, and J. H. Thywissen, Observation of a transition between dynamical phases in a quantum degenerate Fermi gas, Sci. Adv. 5, eaax1568 (2019). Y. Tang, W. Kao, K.-Y. Li, S. Seo, K. Mallayya, M. Rigol, S. Gopalakrishnan, and B. L. Lev, Thermal- ization near integrability in a dipolar quantum Newton‚Äôs cradle, Phys. Rev. X 8, 021030 (2018). T. Langen, S. Erne, R. Geiger, B. Rauer, T. Schweigler, M. Kuhnert, W. Rohringer, I. E. Mazets, T. Gasenzer, and J. Schmiedmayer, Experimental observation of a gen- eralized Gibbs ensemble, Science 348, 207 (2015). S. Hofferberth, I. Lesanovsky, B. Fischer, T. Schumm, and J. Schmiedmayer, Non-equilibrium coher- ence dynamics in one-dimensional Bose gases, Nature 449, 324 (2007). C. N. Weiler, T. W. Neely, D. R. Scherer, A. S. Bradley, M. J. Davis, and B. P. Anderson, Spontaneous vor- tices in the formation of Bose‚ÄìEinstein condensates, Nature 455, 948 (2008). A. Widera, S. Trotzky, P. Cheinet, S. F Ãàolling, F. Gerbier, I. Bloch, V. Gritsev, M. D. Lukin, and E. Demler, Quantum spin dynamics of mode- squeezed Luttinger liquids in two-component atomic gases, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 140401 (2008). M. Gring, M. Kuhnert, T. Langen, T. Kitagawa, B. Rauer, M. Schreitl, I. Mazets, D. A. Smith, E. Demler, and J. Schmiedmayer, Relaxation and prethermalization in an isolated quantum system, Science 337, 1318 (2012). I. Bloch, J. Dalibard, and W. Zwerger, Many-body physics with ultracold gases, Rev. Mod. Phys. 80, 885 (2008). C. A. Regal, M. Greiner, and D. S. Jin, Observa- tion of resonance condensation of fermionic atom pairs, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 040403 (2004). I. Bloch, J. Dalibard, and S. Nascimbene, Quan- tum simulations with ultracold quantum gases, Nat. Phys. 8, 267 (2012). M. W. Zwierlein, J. R. Abo-Shaeer, A. Schirotzek, C. H. Schunck, and W. Ketterle, Vortices and superfluidity in a strongly interacting Fermi gas, Nature 435, 1047 (2005). M. W. Zwierlein, C. A. Stan, C. H. Schunck, S. M. F. Raupach, A. J. Kerman, and W. Ketterle, Condensation of pairs of fermionic atoms near a Feshbach resonance, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 120403 (2004). F. Arute, K. Arya, R. Babbush, D. Bacon, J. C. Bardin, R. Barends, S. Boixo, M. Broughton, B. B. Buckley, D. A. Buell, et al., Hartree-Fock on a superconducting qubit quantum computer, Science 369, 1084 (2020). M. Gong, S. Wang, C. Zha, M.-C. Chen, H.-L. Huang, Y. Wu, Q. Zhu, Y. Zhao, S. Li, S. Guo, et al., Quan- tum walks on a programmable two-dimensional 62-qubit superconducting processor, Science 372, 948 (2021). K. Satzinger, Y. Liu, A. Smith, C. Knapp, M. Newman, C. Jones, Z. Chen, C. Quintana, X. Mi, A. Dunsworth, et al., Realizing topologically ordered states on a quan- tum processor (2021), arXiv:2104.01180 [quant-ph]. I. Cong, S.-T. Wang, H. Levine, A. Keesling, and M. D. Lukin, Hardware-efficient, fault-tolerant quantum computation with Rydberg atoms arXiv:2105.13501 [quant-ph]. C. Monroe, W. C. Campbell, L.-M. Duan, Z.-X. Gong, A. V. Gorshkov, P. W. Hess, R. Islam, K. Kim, N. M. Linke, G. Pagano, et al., Programmable quan- tum simulations of spin systems with trapped ions, Rev. Mod. Phys. 93, 025001 (2021). D. Fausti, R. Tobey, N. Dean, S. Kaiser, A. Dienst, M. C. Hoffmann, S. Pyon, T. Takayama, H. Takagi, and A. Cavalleri, Light-induced superconductivity in a stripe- ordered cuprate, Science 331, 189 (2011). C. Giannetti, M. Capone, D. Fausti, M. Fabrizio, F. Parmigiani, and D. Mihailovic, Ultrafast optical spectroscopy of strongly correlated materials and high- temperature superconductors: a non-equilibrium ap- proach, Adv. Phys. 65, 58 (2016). T. Kampfrath, K. Tanaka, and K. A. Nelson, Resonant and nonresonant control over matter and light by intense terahertz transients, Nat. Photonics 7, 680 (2013). R. Matsunaga, N. Tsuji, H. Fujita, A. Sugioka, K. Makise, Y. Uzawa, H. Terai, Z. Wang, H. Aoki, and R. Shimano, Light-induced collective pseudospin preces- sion resonating with Higgs mode in a superconductor, Science 345, 1145 (2014). R. Shimano and N. Tsuji, Higgs mode in superconduc- tors, Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys. 11, 103 (2020). R. Matsunaga, Y. I. Hamada, K. Makise, Y. Uzawa, H. Terai, Z. Wang, and R. Shimano, Higgs amplitude mode in the BCS superconductors Nb1‚àíxTixN induced by terahertz pulse excitation, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 057002 (2013). J. Demsar, Non-equilibrium phenomena in superconduc- tors probed by femtosecond time-domain spectroscopy, J. Low Temp. Phys. 201, 676 (2020). U. Schollw Ãàock, The density-matrix renormalization group, Rev. Mod. Phys. 77, 259 (2005). M. Rigol, V. Dunjko, V. Yurovsky, and M. Olshanii, Relaxation in a completely integrable many-body quan- tum system: an ab initio study of the dynamics of the highly excited states of 1D lattice hard-core bosons, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 050405 (2007). A. Kamenev and A. Levchenko, Keldysh technique and non-linear œÉ-model: basic principles and applications, Adv. Phys. (2010). A. Polkovnikov, Phase space representation of quantum dynamics, Ann. Phys. 325, 1790 (2010). F. H. Essler and M. Fagotti, Quench dynamics and relaxation in isolated integrable quantum spin chains, J. Stat. Mech. Theory Exp. 2016, 064002 (2016). P. Calabrese and J. Cardy, Quantum quenches in 1+1 dimensional conformal field theories, J. Stat. Mech. Theory Exp. 2016, 064003 (2016). P. Calabrese and J. Cardy, Time dependence of correlation functions following a quantum quench, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 136801 (2006). R. Vasseur and J. E. Moore, Nonequi- librium quantum dynamics and transport: from integrability to many-body localization, J. Stat. Mech. Theory Exp. 2016, 064010 (2016). J. Eisert, M. Friesdorf, and C. Gogolin, Quan- tum many-body systems out of equilibrium, Nat. Phys. 11, 124 (2015). M. S. Foster, M. Dzero, V. Gurarie, and E. A. Yuzbashyan, Quantum quench in a p+ip superfluid: Winding numbers and topological states far from equi- 15 librium, Phys. Rev. B 88, 104511 (2013). M. S. Foster, V. Gurarie, M. Dzero, and E. A. Yuzbashyan, Quench-induced Floquet topological p-wave superfluids, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 076403 (2014). L. D‚ÄôAlessio and M. Rigol, Dynamical preparation of Flo- quet Chern insulators, Nat. Commun. 6, 1 (2015). R. Moessner and S. L. Sondhi, Equilibration and order in quantum Floquet matter, Nat. Phys. 13, 424428 (2017). C. Yang, L. Li, and S. Chen, Dynamical topological invariant after a quantum quench, Phys. Rev. B 97, 060304(R) (2018). Z. Gong and M. Ueda, Topological entanglement- spectrum crossing in quench dynamics, Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 250601 (2018). W. Sun, C.-R. Yi, B.-Z. Wang, W.-W. Zhang, B. C. Sanders, X.-T. Xu, Z.-Y. Wang, J. Schmied- mayer, Y. Deng, X.-J. Liu, and et al., Un- cover topology by quantum quench dynamics, Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 250403 (2018). M. McGinley and N. R. Cooper, Interacting symmetry- protected topological phases out of equilibrium, Phys. Rev. Res. 1, 033204 (2019). F. Tonielli, J. C. Budich, A. Altland, and S. Diehl, Topological field theory far from equilibrium, Phys. Rev. Lett. 124, 240404 (2020). M. Tarnowski, F. N. ÃàUnal, N. Fl Ãàaschner, B. S. Rem, A. Eckardt, K. Sengstock, and C. Weitenberg, Measuring topology from dynamics by obtaining the Chern number from a linking number, Nat. Commun. 10, 1 (2019). T. Kitagawa, E. Berg, M. Rudner, and E. Demler, Topo- logical characterization of periodically driven quantum systems, Phys. Rev. B 82, 235114 (2010). D. V. Else and C. Nayak, Classification of topologi- cal phases in periodically driven interacting systems, Phys. Rev. B 93, 201103(R) (2016). A. C. Potter, T. Morimoto, and A. Vishwanath, Classi- fication of interacting topological Floquet phases in one dimension, Phys. Rev. X 6, 041001 (2016). R. Roy and F. Harper, Periodic table for Floquet topo- logical insulators, Phys. Rev. B 96, 155118 (2017). C. Wang, P. Zhang, X. Chen, J. Yu, and H. Zhai, Scheme to measure the topological num- ber of a Chern insulator from quench dynamics, Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 185701 (2017). N. Read and D. Green, Paired states of fermions in two dimensions with breaking of parity and time-reversal symmetries and the fractional quantum Hall effect, Phys. Rev. B 61, 10267 (2000). G. E. Volovik, The universe in a helium droplet, Vol. 117 (Oxford University Press on Demand, 2003). V. Gurarie and L. Radzihovsky, Resonantly paired fermionic superfluids, Ann. Phys. 322, 2 (2007). C. Chin, R. Grimm, P. Julienne, and E. Tiesinga, Feshbach resonances in ultracold gases, Rev. Mod. Phys. 82, 1225 (2010). E. A. Yuzbashyan and O. Tsyplyatyev, Dynamics of emergent Cooper pairing at finite temperatures, Phys. Rev. B 79, 132504 (2009). M. Dzero, E. A. Yuzbashyan, and B. L. Alt- shuler, Cooper pair turbulence in atomic fermi gases, Europhys. Lett. 85, 20004 (2009). There are differences in the shapes of phase boundaries and Œº‚àû = 0 line between our Fig. 1 and due to different cutoff conventions, see the end of Sec. IV E. E. A. Yuzbashyan, M. Dzero, V. Gurarie, and M. S. Fos- ter, Quantum quench phase diagrams of an s-wave BCS- BEC condensate, Phys. Rev. A 91, 033628 (2015). P. W. Anderson, Random-phase approxi- mation in the theory of superconductivity, Phys. Rev. 112, 1900 (1958). R. W. Richardson, Pairing in the limit of a large number of particles, J. Math. Phys. 18, 1802 (1977). J. Roman, G. Sierra, and J. Dukelsky, Large N limit of the exactly solvable BCS model: Analytics versus numer- ics, Nucl. Phys. B 634, 483 (2002). E. A. Yuzbashyan, A. A. Baytin, and B. L. Alt- shuler, Finite-size corrections for the pairing Hamilto- nian, Phys. Rev. B 71, 094505 (2005). A. Faribault, P. Calabrese, and J.-S. Caux, Quantum quenches from integrability: the fermionic pairing model, J. Stat. Mech. Theory Exp. , P03018 (2009). A. Wu, A. Zabalo, J. H. Pixley, and E. A. Yuzbashyan, to appear. I. Homrighausen and S. Kehrein, Out of equilibrium mean field dynamics in the transverse field ising model (2019), arXiv:1908.02596 [cond-mat]. J. Alicea, New directions in the pursuit of majorana fermions in solid state systems, Rep. Prog. Phys. 75, 076501 (2012). C. Rylands, E. A. Yuzbashyan, V. Gurarie, A. Zabalo, and V. Galitski, Loschmidt echo of far-from-equilibrium fermionic superfluids, Ann. Phys. , 168554 (2021). E. A. Yuzbashyan, O. Tsyplyatyev, and B. L. Altshuler, Relaxation and persistent oscillations of the order parameter in fermionic condensates, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 097005 (2006). E. A. Yuzbashyan and M. Dzero, Dynamical vanish- ing of the order parameter in a fermionic condensate, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 230404 (2006). C. Honerkamp and W. Hofstetter, BCS pairing in Fermi systems with N different hyperfine states, Phys. Rev. B 70, 094521 (2004). R. W. Cherng, G. Refael, and E. Demler, Superfluidity and magnetism in multicomponent ultracold fermions, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99 13, 130406 (2007). G. Catelani and E. A. Yuzbashyan, Phase dia- gram, extended domain walls, and soft collective modes in a three-component fermionic superfluid, Phys. Rev. A 78, 033615 (2008). G. Catelani and E. A. Yuzbashyan, Coreless vortic- ity in multicomponent Bose and Fermi superfluids, Phys. Rev. A 81, 033629 (2010).