1 Adiabatic quantum-flux-parametron with delay-line clocking: logic gate demonstration and phase skipping operation Taiki Yamae,1,2 Naoki Takeuchi,3,4,* and Nobuyuki Yoshikawa1,4 1 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Yokohama National University, 79-5 Tokiwadai, Hodogaya, Yokohama 240-8501, Japan 2 Research Fellow of Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, 5-3-1 Kojimachi, Chiyoda, Tokyo 102-0083, Japan 3 Research Center for Emerging Computing Technologies, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), 1-1-1 Umezono, Tsukuba 305-8568, Japan 4 Institute of Advanced Sciences, Yokohama National University, 79-5 Tokiwadai, Hodogaya, Yokohama 240-8501, Japan * n-takeuchi@aist.go.jp Abstract. Adiabatic quantum-flux-parametron (AQFP) logic is an energy-efficient superconductor logic family. The latency of AQFP circuits is relatively long compared to that of other superconductor logic families and thus such circuits require low-latency clocking schemes. In a previous study, we proposed a low-latency clocking scheme called delay-line clocking, in which the latency for each logic operation is determined by the propagation delay of the excitation current, and demonstrated a simple AQFP buffer chain that adopts delay-line clocking. However, it is unclear whether more complex AQFP circuits can adopt delay-line clocking. In the present study, we demonstrate AQFP logic gates (AND and XOR gates) that use delay-line clocking as a step towards implementing large-scale AQFP circuits with delay-line clocking. 2 AND and XOR gates with a latency of approximately 20 ps per gate are shown to operate at up to 5 and 4 GHz, respectively, in experiments. We also demonstrate that delay-line clocking enables phase skipping operation, in which some of the AQFP buffers for phase synchronization are removed to reduce the junction count and energy dissipation. The results indicate that delay-line clocking can enable low-latency, low-energy, large-scale AQFP circuits. 3 1. Introduction Josephson junctions can be used as superconducting switching devices with a few-picosecond characteristic time and a sub-aJ energy barrier height. Superconducting digital circuits based on Josephson junctions [1–4] can thus achieve high operating speed and low switching energy, making them a key technology for developing superconducting information systems, such as microprocessors [5–8], neuromorphic computing systems , and reversible computers . To realize large-scale, high-performance superconducting systems, fabrication processes have been continuously improved [13–15] and many types of circuit design tool have been developed [16–18]. Adiabatic quantum-flux-parametron (AQFP) logic is an energy-efficient superconductor logic family based on the quantum flux parametron . Because adiabatic switching enables a logic gate to switch without rapid state transition, the switching energy of an AQFP gate can be reduced to less than the Josephson energy . Recently, we designed and demonstrated the 4-bit Monolithic Adiabatic iNtegration Architecture (MANA) microprocessor that uses AQFP logic , thereby proving the high robustness and high energy efficiency of AQFP circuits. We found that the latency of this microprocessor is relatively long (for instance, 5400 ps for a 5-GHz clock frequency). The reason for this long latency is that the microprocessor is driven by four-phase clocking , in which AQFP circuits are driven by a pair of excitation currents with a phase separation of 90° and a latency of a quarter clock cycle (50 ps at 5 GHz) per gate is required. To reduce the latency of AQFP microprocessors, it is necessary to adopt low-latency clocking schemes such as delay-line clocking , in which the latency of each logic operation is determined by the propagation delay of the excitation current. In a previous study, we demonstrated an AQFP buffer chain with a latency of approximately 10 ps per gate achieved using delay-line clocking . This suggests that the latency of 4 large-scale AQFP circuits, such as microprocessors, can be significantly reduced by adopting delay-line clocking. In the present study, we conduct a simulation and experiments as a step toward implementing large-scale AQFP circuits with delay-line clocking. Specifically, we show that (i) delay-line clocking can be used to operate AQFP logic gates with low latency and that (ii) delay-line clocking can reduce the number of buffers required for phase synchronization. Because delay-line clocking adoption has been limited to buffers , we first demonstrate AQFP logic gates (AND and XOR gates) that use delay-line clocking to show that delay-line clocking is applicable to complex AQFP circuits. Then, we show that delay-line clocking can remove some buffers required for phase synchronization, i.e., it enables the skipping of some excitation phases. This is an important advantage of delay-line clocking because large-scale AQFP circuits typically require many additional buffers for phase synchronization . Finally, we fabricate and operate a test circuit to demonstrate these properties at high clock frequencies. 2. Logic gate demonstration numerical simulation, where the circuit under test (CUT) is surrounded by peripheral AQFP buffers that prevent unwanted interaction with the input ports and output termination. Here, the CUT is an XOR gate. The entire circuit is powered and clocked by the excitation current Ix, which applies an ac magnetic flux with an amplitude of 0.5Φ0 to each gate, where Φ0 is the flux quantum. The dc offset current Id applies a dc magnetic flux of 0.5Φ0 to each gate. Ix and Id flow through the AQFP gates and delay lines, which are 50-Ω transmission lines, and are terminated by 50-Ω resistors. In this way, logic operations are performed at the rising edge of Ix with a latency of T per gate, where T is the propagation delay of each delay line. In the numerical 5 simulation, the device parameters are based on the AIST 10 kA cm-2 Nb high-speed standard process (HSTP) . The numerical simulation is conducted using the Josephson circuit simulator JSIM . Figure 1(b) shows transient analysis results for an XOR gate at 5 GHz for T = 10 ps, where Ista, Istb, and Istq are the signal currents that represent the logic states of buffers A, B, and Q in figure 1(a), respectively. Note that the XOR gate is composed of splitters, AND gates, and an OR gate, and thus requires three excitation phases. Hence, seven excitation phases are included between gates A (B) and Q, so that the latency between Ista (Istb) and Istq is 70 ps. This figure shows that the XOR gate operates correctly with a latency of 10 ps per gate. (a) 6 (b) (a) Schematic diagram of an AQFP circuit that uses delay-line clocking for numerical simulation. (b) Transient analysis results for an XOR gate operating at 5 GHz for T = 10 ps. We investigated the operating margins for an AND gate and an XOR gate that use delay-line clocking to show that AQFP logic gates can operate with wide operating margins for small T. Figure 2 shows numerical simulation results of the operating margins in terms of excitation power Px (i.e., the power of Ix) applied to AND and XOR gates as a function of T at 5 GHz. The results for a buffer are also shown for comparison. The enclosed regions represent the operation regions of the logic gates. Each logic gate was simulated using the schematic shown in figure 1(a). Figure 2 shows that both AND and XOR gates operate with wide operating margins for small T, as is the case for a buffer. Of note, the XOR gate achieves wide operating margins even though it is composed of multiple logic gates (i.e., splitters, AND gates, and an OR gate) that comprise different building blocks . This suggests that delay-line clocking is applicable to complex AQFP circuits. 7 Simulation results of operating margins for a buffer, an AND gate, and an XOR gate that use delay-line clocking as a function of T at 5 GHz. We also calculated the energy dissipation of AND and XOR gates to show that AQFP logic gates that adopt delay-line clocking can achieve both low energy dissipation and low latency. Figure 3 shows the numerical simulation results of the energy dissipation per operation E for AND and XOR gates with delay-line clocking as a function of T for an operating frequency of 5 GHz. The results for a buffer are also shown. The energy dissipation was calculated by integrating the product of the excitation current and voltage across the excitation inductor in each gate over time; more details can be found in the literature . Because the energy dissipation of AQFP circuits depends on input data combinations , the energy dissipation for AND and XOR gates shown in figure 3 is the average among all input data combinations. Figure 3 shows that E does not change significantly for a T value of between 10 and 50 ps for both AND and XOR gates, indicating that AQFP logic gates that adopt delay-line clocking can operate with small energy dissipation and a latency that is much less than that for conventional four-phase clocking (50 ps at 5 GHz). For a T value of less than 10 ps, E increases 8 significantly as T decreases for all logic gates. This is because for very small T, each AQFP gate switches before the previous gate is fully excited and the amplitude of the input current becomes sufficiently large . Simulation results of energy dissipation for a buffer, an AND gate, and an XOR gate that use delay-line clocking as a function of T at 5 GHz. 3. Phase skipping operation In general, most logic gates in a large-scale AQFP circuit are buffers because a buffer must be inserted to transmit data from an excitation phase to the next excitation phase for four-phase clocking ; if this were not done, a gate that transmits data would reset before the next gate is excited, thereby losing the data. For instance, in our previous 4-bit microprocessor , approximately 70% of the Josephson junctions are used for buffers. Thus, to further reduce energy dissipation, it is necessary to reduce the number of buffers in the circuit design. An advantage of delay-line clocking is that it is not always necessary to insert a buffer for data transmission because the latency, or clock skew, between adjacent excitation phases (i.e., T) can be much shorter than that for four-phase clocking (i.e., a quarter clock cycle), so that in some 9 cases data can be transmitted across excitation phases without buffers . This type of data transmission is hereafter referred to as phase skipping operation. Figure 4(a) shows a schematic diagram of AQFP buffer chains for demonstrating phase skipping operation. Three types of buffer chain are shown, namely a conventional buffer chain without phase skipping operation, a 1-phase skipping buffer chain, and a 2-phase skipping buffer chain. Here, φ1 through φ5 denote excitation phases. In the 1-phase skipping buffer chain, a buffer is not placed in the third excitation phase φ3; thus, data are transmitted directly from the buffer in the second phase φ2 to that in the fourth phase φ4, across φ3. Note that the latency between the buffers in φ2 and φ4 is 2T, so that 1-phase skipping must be conducted with 2T that is smaller than the maximum allowable latency Tmax. Similarly, 2-phase skipping must be conducted with 3T that is smaller than Tmax. For instance, Tmax is approximately 70 ps at 5 GHz for a buffer, as shown in figure 2. In this case, 1-phase skipping can be conducted when 2T is less than approximately 70 ps, i.e., T ≲ 35 ps. = 10 ps, where Ist1 through Ist5 are the signal currents of the buffers in φ1 through φ5, respectively. This figure shows that although a buffer is not placed in φ3, the 1-phase skipping buffer chain operates correctly because the latency between φ2 and φ4 (2T = 20 ps) is much smaller than Tmax. 10 (a) (b) (a) Schematic diagram of AQFP buffer chains for demonstrating phase skipping operation with delay-line clocking. (b) Transient analysis results for the 1-phase skipping buffer chain at 5 GHz for T = 10 ps. We investigated the operating margins for phase skipping buffer chains to determine 11 the relation between latency and the number of excitation phases that a buffer can skip. Figure 5 shows the numerical simulation results of the operating margins in terms of the excitation power Px applied to phase skipping buffer chains (0-, 1-, 2-, 3-, and 4-phase skipping buffer chains) as a function of T for an operating frequency of 5 GHz. The enclosed regions represent the operation regions of the phase skipping buffer chains. These simulation results indicate that the number of excitation phases that a buffer can skip increases as T decreases. For example, 0-, 1-, and 2-phase skipping operations are possible for T = 20 ps, and 0-, 1-, 2-, 3-, and 4-phase skipping operations are possible for T = 10 ps. Simulation results of operating margins for 0-, 1-, 2-, 3-, and 4-phase skipping buffer chains that use delay-line clocking as a function of T at 5 GHz. 4. Measurement results skipping operation with delay-line clocking. The circuits include an AND gate, an XOR gate, 12 shows a close-up view of the phase skipping buffer chains. The circuits were designed and fabricated using the HSTP. The characteristic impedance of the excitation lines in the AQFP gates was designed to be 50 Ω using InductEx , which is a 3D simulator for extracting circuit parameters for superconducting integrated circuits, to allow the microwave excitation current to propagate without reflections . These circuits were powered and clocked by a sinusoidal excitation current Ix with a dc offset current Id. Ix and Id flow through 50-Ω delay-lines and are terminated by off-chip 50-Ω terminators . In the present study, T was designed to be approximately 20 ps for safety. Ix was supplied by a signal generator (Anritsu, MG3710A) and the input currents were supplied by a pattern generator (Agilent, N4906B). The output voltages of the circuits were amplified by voltage drivers that use stacked dc superconducting quantum interference devices. During the experiments, the circuits were immersed in liquid He at 4.2 K. (a) 13 (b) Micrograph of AQFP circuits. (a) AQFP circuits that include phase skipping buffer chains, an AND gate, and an XOR gate. (b) Close-up view of the phase skipping buffer chains. the pseudorandom binary input current applied to input B. Vxor,0 (Vxor,1) is the output voltage when input A is fixed to 0 (1) by a dc signal current. The output should be equal to B for A = 0 and equal to ¬B for A = 1, which was confirmed by an error detector (Agilent, N4906B). Note that this cannot be confirmed by the waveforms shown in figure 7 because the latency between Iinb and Vxor,0 or Vxor,1 is large (~27 ns) due to the propagation delay in the dipping probe and cables. Vxor,1 is the inversion of Vxor,0, which shows that the XOR gate operates correctly. The measured operating margin, in which bit error rates are less than 10-5, for Px at 3 GHz was 5.9 dB (−21.9 to −16.0 dBm). For the AND gate at 4 GHz, we found an operating margin for Px of 4.4 dB (−20.1 to −15.7 dBm). Figure 8 shows the operating margins in terms of the excitation power Px applied to the AND and XOR gates as a function of operating frequency f. The results 14 for a buffer chain are also shown for comparison. We found that the AND and XOR gates can operate up to 5 and 4 GHz, respectively. These results indicate that AQFP logic gates with delay-line clocking can operate at frequencies in the gigahertz range. Unfortunately, the AND and XOR gates could not operate at 6 GHz, at which the output waveforms were unstable and the bit error rates were high. A possible reason for this is that the bandwidth of the measurement setup (e.g., dipping probe) caused unwanted reflections in the excitation current. Measurement waveforms obtained at 3 GHz for the XOR gate. 15 Measurement results of operating margins for a buffer, an AND gate, and an XOR gate as a function of operating frequency. 5.5 GHz, where Iin0 is the pseudorandom binary input current. As with the case of the XOR gate, the relation between the input (Iin0) and output (Vbuf0) was analyzed by an error detector, whereas this relation cannot be confirmed by the waveforms shown in figure 9 because of the latency between Iin0 and Vbuf0. The measured operating margin for Px was 4.4 dB (−18.7 to −14.3 dBm). skipping buffer chains as a function of f. We tested each buffer chain up to 6 GHz. We found that the 0-phase skipping buffer chain can operate at up to 6 GHz, the 1- and 2-phase skipping buffer chains can operate at up to 5.5 GHz, and the 3- and 4-phase skipping buffer chains can operate at up to 4.5 and 3.5 GHz, respectively. These latter values agree with the maximum operating frequencies estimated in the numerical simulation (approximately 4.4 and 3.5 GHz for the 3- and 4-phase skipping buffer chains, respectively). The maximum operating frequency 16 decreases with increasing number of skipped phases because the clock skew between adjacent buffers increases with the number of skipped phases and thus exceeds Tmax at some point. Measurement waveforms obtained at 5.5 GHz for a buffer chain. Measurement results of operating margins for phase skipping buffer chains as a function of operating frequency. 17 5. Conclusion We demonstrated AND and XOR gates that use delay-line clocking at clock frequencies in the gigahertz range to show that delay-line clocking is applicable to complex AQFP circuits. We also demonstrated phase skipping operation to show that some of the buffers for phase synchronization can be removed when using delay-line clocking, which results in a reduction in the junction count and energy dissipation. Our simulation and measurement results indicate that delay-line clocking can reduce both the latency and energy dissipation of large-scale AQFP circuits. To clarify the advantage of delay-line clocking, here we compare AQFP logic using delay-line clocking with that using four-phase clocking and another superconductor logic, rapid single-flux-quantum (RSFQ) logic . Specifically, we compare the energy-delay product (EDP), i.e., the product of energy dissipation per clock cycle and gate delay, of each logic. The EDP of an AQFP gate using delay-line clocking is 2.8 zJ × 10 ps = 2.8 × 10−32 J∙s, and that using four-phase clocking is 2.8 zJ × 50 ps = 1.4 × 10−31 J∙s, where the energy dissipation is based on our previous study . The EDP of an RSFQ gate is 17 aJ × 4 ps = 6.8 × 10−29 J∙s, which was estimated from the literature for an operating frequency of 50 GHz. The above comparison indicates the extremely high energy efficiency of AQFP logic using delay-line clocking. Acknowledgements The present study was supported by JSPS KAKENHI (Grants No. 18H01493, No. 18H05245, No. 19H05614, and No. 20J20495). The devices were fabricated in the clean room for analog-digital superconductivity (CRAVITY) of the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST). We would like to thank C. J. Fourie for providing a 3D inductance extractor, InductEx, and H. Suzuki for supporting measurements. 18