Triplet Superconductivity from Nonlocal Coulomb Repulsion in an Atomic Sn Layer Deposited onto a Si(111) Substrate Sebastian Wolf,1 Domenico Di Sante,2, 3 Tilman Schwemmer,4 Ronny Thomale,4 and Stephan Rachel1 1School of Physics, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3010, Australia 2Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy 3Center for Computational Quantum Physics, Flatiron Institute, New York, NY, USA 4Institut f ̈ur Theoretische Physik und Astrophysik, Universit ̈at W ̈urzburg, Am Hubland Campus S ̈ud, W ̈urzburg 97074, Germany (Dated: May 12, 2022) Atomic layers deposited on semiconductor substrates introduce a platform for the realization of the extended electronic Hubbard model, where the consideration of electronic repulsion beyond the onsite term is paramount. Recently, the onset of superconductivity at 4.7K has been reported in the hole-doped triangular lattice of tin atoms on a silicon substrate. Through renormalization group methods designed for weak and intermediate coupling, we investigate the nature of the su- perconducting instability in hole-doped Sn/Si(111). We find that the extended Hubbard nature of interactions is crucial to yield triplet pairing, which is f-wave (p-wave) for moderate (higher) hole doping. In light of persisting challenges to tailor triplet pairing in an electronic material, our finding promises to pave unprecedented ways for engineering unconventional triplet superconductivity. Introduction.— Unconventional superconductivity is one of the most active and exciting fields of physics re- search. The discovery of high-temperature superconduc- tivity in doped cuprate materials in 1986 and in iron- based superconductors 20 years later mark most notable events and has continuously fueled the search for room temperature superconductors. Similarly, in- herent topological superconductivity [4–7] has recently gained high importance, as the quasiparticles at zero en- ergy (referred to as Majorana zero modes) exhibit non- Abelian braiding statistics , rendering them promis- ing candidates for topological qubits and fault-tolerant quantum computing . Note that in order to narrow down the meaning of topological superconductors that is henceforth implied in this manuscript, it should be distinguised from proximity-induced topological super- conductors, where in general a conventional supercon- ductor induces topological pairing in an adjacent spin- orbit coupled electron liquid [10–14]. The list of candi- date materials for inherent topological superconductivity as a potential Majorana platform is rather short. This is because at least at a moderate level of sophistication where one intends to accomplish an odd number of vor- tex core Majorana zero modes, one is primarily interested in chiral triplet superconductors, which as a predomi- nant initial challenge brings about the task to identify triplet pairing candidate materials in the first place. Ex- amples which have attracted much attention lately are CePt3Si , CuxBi2Se3 , FeSe0.45Te0.55 [19– 21] and UTe2 . The most prominent example, how- ever, had been Sr2RuO4 – for decades the prime can- didate for p-wave superconductivity. Yet, only recently, it was realized that the Knight shift evidence in favor of triplet pairing had to be reconsidered, now favouring sin- glet pairing which, in order to comply with the other experimental evidence for strontium ruthenate, has to be described by a two-component complex order param- eter [25–27]. Two-dimensional atom lattices on semiconductor sub- strates are a material platform with a rather simple electronic structure. The adsorption of only 1/3 mono- layer of group-IV elements such as Pb and Sn forms a ( √ 3 × √ 3)R30○ structure, realizing a triangular lattice. Three out of four of the adatoms’ valence orbitals are engaged in covalent back bonds with the substrate, leav- ing the fourth orbital as a half-filled dangling bond. As a consequence for the electronic structure, a single metallic surface band is present within the substrate’s band gap. Such a half-filled surface band is subject to significant electron-electron interactions. For some of these mate- rials, the presence of non-negligble non-local Coulomb interactions was suggested as the driving mechanism for their charge-ordered ground states (e.g. in Pb/Ge(111), For Sn/Si(111), it was shown in angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) that the observed band folding was deemed consistent with an antiferromagnetic ordering of the Sn lattice, in agreement with theoretical modeling of a Mott insulator . Soon after, it was also argued that a Slater- type insulator might be the source of the observed mag- netism . In , spectral weight transfer as well as the formation of a quasi-particle peak was demonstrated experimentally, establishing the Mott picture. Moreover, non-local Coulomb interactions seem to be non-negligible and play an important role in Sn/Si(111) . Most recently, the onset of superconductivity at 4.7±0.3K has been observed in strongly boron-doped Sn/Si(111) . The hole-doped silicon substrate was grown first, and the tin surface layer was deposited afterwards, keeping the perfect triangular structure of the tin lattice. Dop- ing levels of up to ten percent could be reached. A sharp tunneling dip near zero bias is observed for low tem- peratures, compatible with a superconducting gap. It is further shown that the gap can be suppressed with increasing magnetic field strength. Detailed analysis of the superconducting gap deviates from conventional BCS arXiv:2107.03482v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 11 May 2022 2 G G K M Energy [eV] a) c) b) 0.2 0.0 -0.2 -0.4 Fermi surfaces for different fillings are shown for Sn/Si(111) (b) and for the nearest-neighbor triangular lattice (c) as black lines. The van-Hove fillings are shown in red. behavior, hinting at the unconventional character of the pairing state , in agreement with the Mott insulating state of the undoped material . The results reproduce many features of the correlated electron physics seen in complex oxides such as high-Tc square lattice cuprate superconductors. In contrast to cuprates, Sn/Si(111) is much simpler, both chemically and electronically, and would thus provide the cleanest platform for studying superconductivity emerging from a doped Mott insula- tor . In this Letter, we investigate the competing pairing channels of correlated electrons in Sn/Si(111). By apply- ing the weak-coupling renormalization group (WCRG) method, we are able to find the leading superconduct- ing instabilities in an analytically controlled way in the limit of weak interactions. While correlated electrons on a hexagonal lattice have a generic propensity towards chiral d-wave pairing [38–46], we find that the Fermi sur- face (FS) structure of Sn/Si(111) leads to a competition between singlet and triplet pairing channels. The in- clusion of non-local Coulomb interactions strongly sup- presses the chiral d-wave state, and instead favors f- wave and chiral p-wave triplet pairing. We further sub- stantiate our findings by an intermediate coupling analy- sis through functional renormalization group (FRG) cal- culations ; in addition, we can test competing ordering tendencies and rule out other many-body in- stabilities. From the synopsis of all results, we find that significant hole-doping in combination with signif- icant non-local Coulomb interactions–as proposed ear- lier –might stabilize topologically non-trivial chi- ral p-wave pairing in Sn/Si(111). Model and Method.— We assume that boron-doped Sn/Si(111) is well-described by an extended Hubbard model on the triangular lattice. The electronic band- structure is derived from Local Density Approximation (LDA) first-principle calculations , resulting in a single metallic band well-separated from other bands. A tight-binding fit to the LDA band yields hopping terms up to fourth-nearest neighbors, H0 = ∑ij tijc† iσcjσ and tij ≡ t∣j−i∣; the bandstructure reads εk = − 2t1 [coskx + 2cos √ 3/2ky coskx/2] − 2t2 [cos √ 3ky + 2cos2/3kx cos √ 3/2ky] − 2t3 [cos2kx + 2coskx cos √ 3/2ky] − 4t4 [cos5/2kx cos √ 3/2ky + cos2kx cos √ 3ky +coskx/2cos3 √ 3/2ky] (1) with t1 = −52.7 meV and t2/t1 = −0.389, t3/t1 = 0.144, t4/t1 = −0.027 (see Sec. III in the supplement for a discussion about variations of the hopping am- plitudes). The bandstructure along the high-symmetry path is shown in Fig. 1 (a) along with its contour plot in the Brillouin zone in Fig. 1 (b) where constant-energy lines correspond to the FSs at different fillings. For comparison, Fig. 1 (c) displays the analogous plot for an isotropic, nearest-neighbor triangular lattice. The extended Hubbard Hamiltonian is given by H = H0 + U0 ∑ i ni↑ni↓ + U1 ∑ ⟨ij⟩ ninj, (2) with niσ ≡ c† iσciσ, ni ≡ ni↑ + ni↓, and the local (near- est neighbour) Hubbard interaction strength U0 (U1). Longer-ranged interactions are generically present, but are often screened and hence mostly assumed subdom- inant by comparison to U0. Notably, the situation is different for several group-IV adsorbates on semicon- ductor substrates many of which possess charge-ordered ground states, which likewise tend to be favoured by long- range Coulomb repulsion . Sn/Si(111) features a homogeneous charge distribution, but instead orders magnetically, albeit with significant non-local Coulomb interaction being present : the strongest spectral weight of the single-particle spectral function as mea- sured in ARPES is shifted from the K to and beyond the M point , as observed in experiments and in agreement with previous theoretical work . The experimental data is best described by assuming a ra- tio of nearest-neighbor and local Hubbard interactions 1/3 ≤ U1/U0 ≤ 1/2 . This appears to be reasonable, and we will consider these parameters for the remainder part of the work . We investigate the superconducting instabilities and form factors of the model Hamiltonian (2) for the hole- doped case by virtue of the WCRG method [52–58] which builds upon the pioneering work of Kohn and Lut- tinger . The main idea is to remain in a regime where a renormalized interaction near the FS can be safely cal- culated, what can be accomplished by sufficiently small 3 interactions. A standard renormalization group proce- dure is applied for the remaining effective degrees of freedom, where the weak coupling approximation high- lights the renormalization of couplings in the Cooper channel, since superconductivity generically is the lead- ing instability channel in the weak coupling limit. In the vicinity of fine tuned points such as van Hove sin- gularities or quadratic band touchings, however, other competing channels can be induced even by infinitesi- mal interactions, hence this treatment only holds away from these points [which is the case for the studied model (2)]. We first calculate the lowest order diagrams shown in Fig. S1 of the supplement , from which we obtain the effective interaction Ueff, quantifying the supercon- ducting instabilities. The largest Ueff corresponds to the leading instability. Ueff is also a measure of the criti- cal temperature. We note that these diagrams contain as integrands the static particle-hole susceptibility χph and the static particle-particle susceptibility χpp. While the latter diverges at the superconducting instability, the former does not, and is hence evaluated in order to iden- tify the symmetries of the superconducting order param- eter. The methodological steps of the method are ex- plained in detail in the supplement ; we emphasize that the method is asymptotically exact only in the limit of infinitesimal interactions, hence leading to a poten- tially limited predictive power beyond the weak-coupling regime. For all WCRG calculations we choose between 228 and 312 patching points on the FS and an adaptive integration grid , with effectively (640)2 points in the Brillouin zone . Results.— For the particular bandstructure of Sn/Si(111), at U1 = 0, we find a leading chiral d-wave instability only in a comparably small range of dopings 0.9 ≤ n ≤ 0.95 [see Fig. 2 (a) and (b)]. Instead, for 0.95 < n < 1 we find a close-to-degeneracy of d-wave and f-wave solutions (E2 and B2 irreps). For electron doping n > 1, the f-wave instability is most favorable. Considering hole dopings n < 0.9, chiral d-wave and chi- ral p-wave solutions are close-to-degenerate (E2 and E1 irreps). The amplitude of the superconducting form fac- tor, Ueff, is shown in Fig. 2 (c) and reveals the aforemen- tioned competition between the different pairing channels (the symmetry of the form factor is shown in Fig. S2 ). This competition between odd- (f- and p-wave) and even- parity pairing (d-wave) is a priori unexpected as most often chiral d-wave is the leading instability for hexag- onal tight-binding models [40, 42–46]. For comparison, in Fig. 1 b) and c) we display the FSs of the Sn/Si(111) band and of an isotropic nearest-neighbor triangular lat- tice, respectively. Pronounced peaks in the bare suscep- tibility for the latter are suppressed when switching to Sn/Si(111) where the FS is warped due to longer-ranged hoppings. Thus, even without the inclusion of U1, we can see why singlet-pairing is less favorable than in other hexagonal systems. Motivated by previous work , we assume that non-local Coulomb interactions – modeled via nearest- 0 0.02 0.8 0.9 1 1.1 U1/U0 n chiral p-wave f-wave d nvH p/d d/f B2 E1 E2 B2 E1 E2 Ueff [a.u.] n n 0.8 0.9 1 0.9 1 1.1 a) b) 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 U1/U0=0 U1/U0=1/3 c) d) non-local Coulomb interaction U1/U0 vs. band filling n for Sn/Si(111). For band fillings above the van Hove singularity, triplet superconductivity with fy(3x2−y2)-wave symmetry (B2 irrep in red) is found. For fillings below van Hove (correspond- ing to hole-dopings larger than 8.5%) chiral triplet supercon- ductivity with px + ipy-wave symmetry (E1 irrep in grey) is present. (b) Zoom into the phase diagram with very small non-local Coulomb interactions reveal a small area with chi- ral d-wave (E2 irrep in cyan) pairing as well as regions where d-wave is degenerate with f-wave (electron-doped) and with p-wave (hole-doped). (c) Effective interaction Ueff for U1 = 0: p- and d-wave pairings (n < nvH) and f- and d-wave pairings (n > nvH) are degenerate. (d) For significant U1/U0 as as- sumed for Sn/Si(111) d-wave pairing is suppressed, leading to chiral p-wave and f-wave superconductivity. neighbor repulsion U1 – are crucial for boron-doped Sn/Si(111). The presence of U1 further suppresses chiral d-wave, and leaves odd-parity f-wave pairing (n > 0.91) or chiral p-wave pairing (n < 0.91) as the leading insta- bility (see Fig. 2 a for U1/U0 = 1/3 and Fig. S2 in the sup- plement for U1/U0 = 1/2). The suppression of chiral d- wave also leads to a significant energetic gap between the leading and the first subleading instability (see Fig. 2 d), indicating the stability of the superconducting ground state with respect to small perturbations as well as finite Coulomb interactions. As a central result we identify sufficiently hole-doped Sn/Si(111) as a topological super- conductor stabilized by non-local Coulomb repulsion. We complement our WCRG analysis by numerical FRG calculations based on two key approximations: (i) neglecting the one-particle irreducible (1PI) three parti- cle vertex function and (ii) a Fermi surface based dis- cretization of the 1PI two particle vertex. Since all de- tails of the derivation and limits of the scheme have been extensively reviewed [47–49] we focus on the key results 4 10 1 100 101 RG scale (t1) T -1.5 -1 -0.5 0.0 Leading Eigenvalues (x103) U1/U0 = 0.5 n = 0.73 p + ip d + id SDW CDW NEM tex, as a function of Λ, for superconducting, charge and spin density wave (CDW and SDW, respectively) and nematic (NEM) instabilities. Λ is the FRG cutoff energy which is pro- portional to the temperature. The most negative eigenvalue corresponds to the leading instability. The chiral triplet p+ip ordering dominates over all other ordering tendencies at low temperatures. Its strongest competitor is chiral d + id-wave pairing. of our calculation in the following and present a concise summary of our approach in the supplement including Refs. . As a diagrammatic resummation scheme that includes leading order vertex corrections and treats all two-particle interactions on equal footing, we use the FRG to assess the stability of our WCRG results towards an increase in coupling strength from weak to intermedi- ate coupling. Moreover, the FRG allows us to rule out other competing many-body instabilities due to its unbi- ased treatment of the particle-hole and particle-particle channels. For U0 = 5t1 and U1 = 0, d-wave becomes the dominant instability within FRG. This is in line with previous FRG studies: for a Fermiology such as given by Sn/Si(111), sufficient onsite Hubbard coupling strength tends to give preference to singlet pairing. In line with WCRG, however, the addition of U1 indeed can tilt the balance in favor of triplet pairing, as we observe the d- wave state in FRG to start to destabilize at finite U1 in favor of f-wave pairing at half filling n ≈ 1 and p-wave pairing at n < 0.75. Fig. 3 depicts a representative FRG flow diagram for U1/U0 = 1/2 where the p-wave instability turns out to dominate, and to eventually yield a preferred chiral p-wave order parameter in order to maximize con- densation energy. FRG further reveals, that competing many-body instabilities such as spin and charge density waves and a nematic phase are subleading compared to superconductivity (Fig. 3). Note that if the interaction scale is increased even further within FRG which would likely be out of the scope of Sn/Si(111), density wave in- stabilities start to become competitive to the supercon- ducting instability. In total, aside from constraining the preferred doping regime a bit further, WCRG and FRG confirm the propensity of triplet pairing in Sn/Si(111), which in particular turns out to be strong by comparison to previous models studied within FRG. Discussion.— The FS of the bandstructure of Sn/Si(111) is warped due to the longer-ranged hoppings, which leads to a competition between singlet d-wave and triplet p-wave instabilities. The key for stabilizing triplet p-wave superconductivity, however, is the non- local Coulomb interaction U1. When transforming U1 to momentum space, it can be decoupled into contribu- tions associated with the different irreps. They include p (E1 irrep) and d-wave (E2 irrep), but not the f-wave (B2 irrep) form factors. While this explains why the f-wave solution in Fig. 2 c and d is not affected by U1, one would expect p and d-wave states to be equally affected by U1 from this analysis. Representative form factors shown in Fig. S2 reveal, however, that the p-wave instability has additional nodes. That is the reason why such an “ex- tended” p-wave is hardly affected by U1, in contrast to the conventional d-wave state [see Fig. 2 c and d]. We stress that extended p-wave leads to fully gapped topo- logical superconductivity just like the ordinary p-wave state. Single layers of ordered metal atoms such as Pb and In on Si(111) offer themselves as interesting platforms for conventional electron-phonon mediated superconductiv- ity up to 3K . We have calculated the electron- phonon coupling for Sn/Si(111), leading to an estimate of λ = 0.07. This value of λ is deeply in the weak coupling regime, and far from the value of λ ∼ 1 typical of high- Tc electron-phonon coupling-mediated superconductors. Details have been delegated to the supplement including Refs. [66–69]. Moreover, the experimentally observed an- tiferromagnetic order for the undoped system hints at an unconventional pairing mechanism. Our work thus propounds a purely unconventional scenario, where su- perconductivity emerges upon hole doping of a Mott in- sulating phase. In this work we have neglected the role of spin-orbit coupling (SOC). LDA calculations including SOC show that its effect is rather small. In addition, small to mod- est contributions of SOC only give rise to some mild mix- ing of the different pairing channels and the conclu- sions regarding the dominant superconducting instability will not change. Our work emphasizes the role of non-local Coulomb in- teractions in order to stabilize spin-triplet pairing. The same had been previously observed for one-band Hub- bard models on the square, triangular, and honeycomb lattice . In a recent paper it was found for a Rashba-Hubbard model on the square lattice that the inclusion of U1 leads to an enhancement of triplet pairing. Another group-IV adsorbate, which features essentially the same bandstructure as Sn/Si(111) and is also believed to have significant non-local Coulomb interactions, is Pb/Si(111) ; it was estimated that U1/U0 = 3/5 and, according to Fig. 2 (a), we find the same pairing in- stabilities as for Sn/Si(111). Given the experimental ef- forts to dope Pb/Si(111), this might be another promis- ing candidate to search for spin-triplet pairing. 5 Conclusion.— We have shown theoretically that the re- cently discovered superconductivity in Sn/Si(111) could realize the elusive case of spin-triplet pairing. In con- trast to most scenarios on hexagonal lattices where chi- ral d-wave dominates, we show that the bandstructure of Sn/Si(111) leads to a competition between d-wave and spin-triplet pairings. We further argue that non-local Coulomb interactions are non-negligible in Sn/Si(111); including them suppresses the chiral d-wave state. For moderate hole-dopings we find f-wave pairing; most in- terestingly, hole dopings larger than 8.5%, as achieved in recent experiments, stabilize the archetypal topologically non-trivial p+ip-wave state. Our weak-coupling analysis is backed up by intermediate-coupling FRG simulations which further substantiate our results. Given the simple chemical and electronic structure of Sn/Si(111) and other adatom lattices on semiconductor substrates, they might provide the cleanest platform for studying (topological) superconductivity emerging from a doped Mott insulator in the future.