B1g phonon anomaly driven by Fermi surface instability at intermediate temperature in YBa2Cu3O7−δ Dongjin Oh,1, 2 Dongjoon Song,1, 2 Younsik Kim,1, 2 Shigeki Miyasaka,3 Setsuko Tajima,3 Yunkyu Bang,4 Seung Ryong Park,5, ∗ and Changyoung Kim1, 2, † 1Center for Correlated Electron Systems, Institute for Basic Science, Seoul, 08826, Korea 2Department of Physics and Astronomy, Seoul National University, Seoul, 08826, Korea 3Department of Physics, Osaka University, Osaka 560-0043, Japan 4Asia Pacific Center for Theoretical Physics, Pohang 37673, Korea 5Department of Physics, Incheon National University, Incheon 22012, Republic of Korea We performed temperature- and doping-dependent high-resolution Raman spectroscopy experi- ments on YBa2Cu3O7−δ to study B1g phonons. The temperature dependence of the real part of the phonon self-energy shows a distinct kink at T = TB1g above T c due to softening, in addition to the one due to the onset of the superconductivity. T B1g is clearly different from the pseudogap temperature with a maximum in the underdoped region. The region between T B1g and T c resembles that of superconducting fluctuation or charge density wave order. While the true origin of the B1g phonon softening is not known, we can attribute it to a gap on the Fermi surface due to an electronic order. Our results may reveal the role of the B1g phonon not only in the superconducting state but also in the intertwined orders in multilayer copper oxide high-T c superconductors. In strongly correlated electron systems, instabilities with complex order parameters are often accompanied by electronic orders that cause various broken symme- tries and Fermi surface instabilities in the ground state. The instabilities generically lead to an energy gap at the Fermi surface to lower the energy of the system. The most representative cases are Cooper pair and Peierls in- stabilities which are associated with superconductivity and charge density wave (CDW), respectively. In the former case, the superconducting ground state is created through coherent superposition of Cooper pairs and the superconducting gap is opened in the presence of a weak attractive interaction between electrons. Similarly in the latter case, coherent electron-hole pairs create CDW gap . The gap opening driven by an electronic instability af- fects not only the electronic but also phononic excitation spectra. For example, it is well known that the B1g oxy- gen bond-buckling phonon in copper oxide high-T c super- conductors shows a drastic softening when the tempera- ture is lowered below T c [3–6]. The origin of the phonon anomaly was understood to be from a phonon self-energy effect caused by the opening of the superconducting gap (2∆); the phonon peak in the Raman spectrum exhibits narrowing due to the reduced scattering rate upon gap opening. In contrast, phonons with ω>2∆ show broad- ening since, for such phonons, scattering channels are available and their scattering rate increases due to the increased quasiparticle density of states (DOS). In this way, we can indirectly infer the existence of a supercon- ducting gap. In addition to the superconductivity, this explanation can be also applied to other electronic orders such as CDW which gives rise to an energy gap . ∗ Electronic address: AbePark@inu.ac.kr † Electronic address: changyoung@snu.ac.kr Among the various phonon modes in copper oxide superconductors, only the B1g phonon shows a dras- tic renormalization in the Raman spectra as we men- tioned above. This result drew much interest since it may reflect the intimate link between superconductivity and B1g phonon. Indeed, the coupling matrix between electrons and B1g phonon at the Brillouin zone center (q=0) possesses a d-wave nature, which is the symmetry of the superconductivity as well as CDW form factor in cuprates [8–12]. Such character allows the B1g phonon to strongly couple with the electrons near the antinode where the superconducting gap is the maximum. As a re- sult, a strong renormalization in the electronic structure appears in the form of kink or peak-dip-hump feature near the anti-nodal region . A recent theoreti- cal work pointed out that the B1g phonon may induce charge order in underdoped copper oxide superconduc- tors . In spite of the predicted close relationship between the B1g phonon and electronic orders, a direct evidence for the relationship has not been observed. Discovery of such evidence may allow us to unify the understanding of the novel multiple orders in the phase diagram of high T c ma- terials. In this Letter, we present results of comprehen- sive doping- and temperature-dependent high-resolution Raman spectroscopy studies on YBa2Cu3O7−δ. Owing to the very high-statistics data, our results clearly show that phonon softening occurs not only in the supercon- ducting state, but also at a temperature higher than T c which has not yet been reported. The softening is ro- bust in the underdoped region but is not observed for the most overdoped sample. The onset temperature of the phonon anomaly, T B1g, is distinguished from the pseu- dogap temperature T ∗. It is rather close to the CDW temperature T CDW or superconducting fluctuation temperature T pair . Even though our experi- mental results cannot point to the origin of the phonon arXiv:2107.00891v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 2 Jul 2021 2 anomaly, it is clear that a Fermi surface instability of an electronic order causes the softening of the B1g phonon. Our results not only highlight the important role of B1g phonon in the intertwined orders but also shed light on the possibility of their unified understanding in copper oxide superconductors. We performed Raman spectroscopy with back- scattering geometry using 532 nm (2.3 eV) diode pumped solid state (DPSS) laser (Cobolt). The incident light was focused on the surface of the sample by a ×40 (N.A. 0.6) objective lens (Olympus). A spot size of the focused light was approximately 2 × 2 μm2 and laser power was set below 0.6 mW to avoid laser-induced local heating. To re- ject the stray light close to 10 cm−1, BragGrate notch fil- ters (OptiGrate) were used. The superachromatic wave- plate (Thorlabs) was used for polarization resolved Ra- man spectroscopy. The polarization of the incident and scattered light was set to be perpendicular to each other and parallel to the diagonal direction of the CuO2 pla- quette [Fig. 2(a), inset] to probe the signal from the B1g channel. The direction of the Cu−O bonding was determined by the angle-resolved polarized Raman scat- tering measurement. The Raman scattered light was col- lected by the same objective lens and collimated before entering the focusing lens in front of the spectrometer. The collected light was dispersed by a Jobin-Yvon Horiba iHR320 spectrometer with 1800 grooves/mm grating and EF EF T < Tc T > Tc E k k (a) (b) E Intensity Raman shift (c) ω1 < 2Δ ω2 > 2Δ T > Tc 2 Δk ω1 < 2Δ ω2 > 2Δ ω1 ω2 T < Tc T < Tc a superconductor (a) below and (b) above the critical tem- perature, T c. (c) Sketch of the phonon renormalization due to the phonon self-energy effect. The red curve represents a phononic Raman spectrum in the normal state. Blue and green curves correspond to the spectrum in the ordered state for the phonon energy ω < 2∆ and ω > 2∆, respectively. 400 350 300 2 6 10 χ''B1g (cps) Raman shift (cm-1) 2 6 10 2 6 10 95 K 95 K 65 K 341 342 343 340 Frequency (cm-1) Temperature (K) 12 14 16 Linewidth (cm-1) 100 200 300 Tc Tc TB1g TB1g 500 400 300 Raman shift (cm-1) 600 200 100 χ''B1g (cps) 0 5 10 15 20 20 K 30 K 40 K 50 K 60 K 70 K 80 K 90 K B1g 2∆AN (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) timally doped YBa2Cu3O7−δ (OP94) single crystal below 110K. The peak at 340 cm−1 corresponds to the B1g phonon and the broad peak around 550 cm−1 is due to pair break- ing peak. Compared are B1g phonon spectra measured at (b) 300 and 150 K, (c) 150 and 95 K, and (d) 95 and 65 K. Temperature-dependent frequency (e) and linewidth (f) extracted from a Fano line shape fitting. The black dashed curve corresponds to simulated frequency and linewidth of B1g phonon from the phonon anharmonicity model. The blue and red vertical dashed lines represent the superconduct- ing transition temperature (T c) and onset temperature of the phonon anomaly (T B1g), respectively. detected by a thermoelectric cooled CCD. YBa2Cu3O7−δ single crystals were mounted on an optical cryostat (Ox- ford) for temperature-dependent measurements. Opti- mally doped YBa2Cu3O7−δ single crystals were annealed in a tube furnace with oxygen flow to control the oxygen content. The superconducting transition temperature was determined from the diamagnetic signal measured with a magnetic property measurement system (Quan- tum Design). We first briefly touch upon how the gap in the elec- tronic phase can affect the phonon peaks in Raman spec- tra. Plotted in Fig. 1 is a schematic of the low energy sin- gle particle spectral function across the superconducting gap and its effect on a phonon peak in Raman spectra. In the superconducting state, the superconducting gap 3 UD62 (p=0.105) UD68 (p=0.125) UD85 (p=0.144) (a) (b) (c) Frequency (cm-1) OD91 (p=0.179) OD89 (p=0.185) (d) (e) Temperature (K) TB1g 342 340 338 336 346 344 342 300 200 100 Tc TB1g Tc TB1g Tc Tc TB1g 342 341 340 Tc TB1g YBa2Cu3O7−δ single crystals with different dopings. Results hole doping concentration was determined using the method in Ref. . T c and T B1g are indicated by blue and red vertical dashed lines, respectively. opens at the Fermi surface while quasiparticle DOS at ω = ±∆ is enhanced. It results in a singularity at ω = 2∆ in the real and imaginary parts of the phonon self-energy . At T < Tc, for a phonon with ωph smaller (larger) than 2∆, softening (hardening) and narrowing (broadening) of the phonon is expected, in comparison to the T > Tc case [Fig. 1(c)]. This phenomenon can be intuitively understood as follows. In the normal state, all phonons can be scattered by coupling to the electrons near the Fermi level [Fig. 1(b)]. In the superconduct- ing state, however, phonons with ωph < 2∆ cannot be scattered by electrons due to the lack of scattering chan- nels. On the other hand, the scattering rate of ωph > 2∆ phonons increases due to the enhanced quasiparticle DOS [Fig. 1(a)]. Fig. 2(a) shows the B1g Raman response of optimally doped (T c = 94 K) YBa2Cu3O7−δ. As the temperature decreases below T c, a broad electronic Raman continuum appears near 550 cm−1. It is a signature of supercon- ducting pair breaking, representing the superconducting gap near the antinodal region in the Brillouin zone [Fig. 2(a), inset] . The strongest peak at 340 cm−1 corresponds to the B1g phonon. Consistent with previ- ous results, our results also show hardening in the nor- mal state [Fig. 2(b)] and strong softening below T c [Fig. Temperature (K) Raman (this work) SC fluctuation Conductivity Nernst Specificheat Torque Superconductivity Pseudogap Hole doping, p 300 200 100 0 0.25 0.20 0.15 0.10 CDW X-ray T* Tc YBa2Cu3O7−δ phase diagram with various phases determined by various techniques. T B1g extracted from our Raman spectroscopy data is plotted as red circles. Super- conducting fluctuation temperature (T pair) in YBa2Cu3O7−δ measured by various methods are also plotted: magnetocon- ductivity (blue circles) , Nernst (violet inverted triangles) , torque magnetometry (orange diamonds) and spe- cific heat (purple diamonds) . T CDW measured by reso- nant x-ray scattering (RXS) is plotted as yellow circles. Black shaded line represents the T ∗ that can be found else- where . 2(d)] [3–6]. However, an additional weak phonon soft- ening was observed for a temperature range just above T c [Fig. 2(c)]. To quantify the phonon softening, we ex- tracted the frequency and linewidth of the B1g phonon by fitting the peak with a Fano line shape . Figs. 2(e) and (f) show the frequency and linewidth of the B1g phonon, respectively, as a function of temperature. The black dashed curves represent the simulated frequency and linewidth behavior using a phonon anharmonicity model . Above 150 K, phonon hardening was well described by the phonon anharmonicity. The frequency of the B1g phonon begins to deviate from the anhar- monic behavior around 150 K. The frequency decreases slowly until the temperature reaches T c, then decreases rapidly below T c. In Fig. 2(f), the linewidth of the B1g phonon also appears to deviate from the black dashed curve above T c. However, if higher order terms are added to the phonon anharmonicity model, the linewidth data can be fitted well from T c to 300 K. Hence, we define the onset temperature of the phonon anomaly, dubbed as T B1g, from the temperature versus frequency data. To verify the doping dependence of T B1g, we per- formed the same experiment and analysis on samples with various dopings. We find that not only the opti- mally doped sample but also underdoped samples (UD62, 4 UD68 and UD85) [Fig. 3(a)-(c), respectively] clearly show the B1g phonon anomaly between T c and T B1g. On the other hand, the phonon anomaly significantly weakens for slightly overdoped sample [Fig. 3(d)] and vanishes for the most overdoped sample [Fig. 3(e)]. This alludes to the fact that the instability that causes the B1g phonon anomaly disappears in the overdoped region. Plotted in Fig. 4 are the measured T B1g (filled red circle) with the onset temperatures of various phases. The value of T B1g is highest near slightly under doping (p=0.144) and decreases as the hole doping concentra- tion increases or decreases. It is clearly seen that the doping dependence of T B1g is quite different from that of T ∗ because T ∗ monotonously increases with decreasing hole doping concentration. This strongly suggests that the B1g phonon anomaly is not caused by the pseudo- gap. Instead, T B1g appears to be close to the tempera- ture scales of superconducting fluctuation, T pair. Except for T pair measured by Nernst effect , T pair measured by magnetoconductivity , torque magnetometry and specific heat are quite close to T B1g. In addition, there is also a reasonable similarity between T CDW and T B1g . From the point of view that T B1g corresponds to T pair, it can be understood that the phonon softening above T c is caused by phonon self-energy effect due to formation of preformed Cooper pairs. Above T c, preformed Cooper pairs open a gap at the Fermi surface and enhance the quasiparticle DOS at ω = ±∆ which has been clearly observed in a recent angle-resolved photoemission spec- troscopy (ARPES) study on Bi2212 . As a result, a singularity appears in the phonon self-energy which in turn causes the phonon softening as we mentioned ear- lier (Fig. 1). On the other hand, we also note that T B1g is considerably higher than T pair measured by Nernst ef- fect . The difference might be due to the uncertainty in the analysis to define T pair. Since the Nernst effect is very sensitive to formation of Cooper pairs, it is a powerful way to measure T pair. Nevertheless, there is a debate on how to determine the T pair since the pseu- dogap also contributes to the Nenst signal. In the case of YBa2Cu3O7−δ, superconductivity and pseudogap con- tribute to a positive and negative Nernst signal, respec- tively . The pseudogap contribution interferes with the signal from preformed Cooper pairs and makes it dif- ficult to precisely define T pair. As a result, the T pair measured by the Nernst effect underestimates the actual T pair where Cooper pairs start forming. Although T B1g does not match previously reported T CDW very well, we cannot entirely rule out the possibility that CDW order is the origin of B1g phonon softening in the intermediate temperature range since the overall doping dependence of T B1g is very similar to that of T CDW. CDW is the most common electronic order which softens phonon through the Kohn anomaly . In this case, a giant phonon anomaly can occurs at q = qCDW. However, B1g phonon softening in our results cannot be reconciled with the Kohn anomaly since Ra- man spectroscopy can probe only q ∼ 0 phonons. It is more natural to interpret that phonon softening comes from the phonon self-energy effect due to the Fermi sur- face instability induced by CDW . Based on these considerations, the mismatch between T CDW and T B1g can be understood as follows. Although no CDW peak was observed in resonant X-ray scattering (RXS) stud- ies, inelastic neutron scattering results showed the soft- ening of B1g phonon at q = qCDW even for the most overdoped YBa2Ca3O7 . It suggests existence of CDW fluctuation even for the doping range where no static CDW order is observed. If the dynamic CDW af- fects the phonon self-energy, T B1g may exhibit a different temperature scale than that measured by RXS. This calls for further studies with various experimental tools in the doping range where CDW order exists. If the observed B1g phonon softening is indeed due to a CDW order, it is suggestive of an important role played by the B1g phonon in both the high tempera- ture superconductivity and charge order. This notion is indeed supported by the result of a recent electronic Ra- man study in which the energy scale of 2∆CDW was found to be the same as that of antinodal superconducting gap 2∆AN . This result suggests the possibility that the B1g phonon might play a role (a secondary, if not the pri- mary role) for the superconductivity and CDW orders. Our result may lend another evidence for the connection between the superconductivity and CDW. Regardless of its origin, it is likely that the B1g phonon softening occurs due to a gap at the Fermi surface. Both Cooper pairing and Peierls instabilities result in an en- ergy gap at the Fermi surface in their single particle ex- citation spectra even though the pairing channels for su- perconductivity (electron-electron) and CDW (electron- hole) are different . Since these two orders induce the Fermi surface gap, in particular, share the maximum gap near the antinodal region, both can induce the renormal- ization in the phonon self-energy and softening of the B1g phonon. It is also worth noting that both electronic orders have a d-wave nature. The link between d-wave symmetry and B1g phonon has been considered for a long time and has recently attracted renewed attention . It is argued that the electron-phonon coupling in the presence of strong electronic correlation can create elec- tronic orders such as CDW with a d-wave symmetry form factor and d-wave superconductivity. Within this pic- ture, our experimental results may be viewed as an addi- tional evidence that the B1g phonon plays an important role in the formation of electronic orders with a d-wave character. The remaining question is why B1g phonon anomaly is not observed in the pseudogap phase. A possible ex- planation may come from the different nature of the pseudogap. Spectroscopic studies have shown that the pseudogap phase are not accompanied by a sharply de- pleted Fermi surface gapping (and thus no quasiparticle DOS enhancement at ω = ±∆), which should result in 5 a smooth change in the phonon self-energy. Such effect can be expected in the pair density wave (PDW) sce- nario, where the spatial modulation of the d-wave pairing should lead to an almost cancelled coherence factor . Further investigations of the pseudogap and electronic order (CDW or preformed pairs) using complementary experimental techniques should lead to a comprehensive understanding of the novel phases. We acknowledge the fruitful discussion with S. Jung and D. Wulferding. This work was supported by the Institute for Basic Science in Korea (Grant No. IBS- R009-G2). S. R. P. acknowledges support from the NRF (Grant No. 2020R1A2C1011439). G. Gruner, Density Waves in Solids (CRC press, 2018). J. Li and R. Comin, Nature Physics 15, 736 (2019). E. Altendorf, X. K. Chen, J. C. Irwin, R. Liang, and W. N. Hardy, Physical Review B 47, 8140 (1993). M. F. Limonov, A. I. Rykov, S. Tajima, and A. Ya- manaka, Physical Review B 61, 12412 (2000). K. C. Hewitt, X. K. Chen, C. Roch, J. Chrzanowski, J. C. Irwin, E. H. Altendorf, R. Liang, D. Bonn, and W. N. Hardy, Physical Review B 69, 064514 (2004). M. Bakr, A. P. Schnyder, L. Klam, D. Manske, C. T. Lin, B. Keimer, M. Cardona, and C. Ulrich, Physical Review M. Raichle, D. Reznik, D. Lamago, R. Heid, Y. Li, M. Bakr, C. Ulrich, V. Hinkov, K. Hradil, C. T. Lin, et al., Physical Review Letters 107, 177004 (2011). T. P. Devereaux, A. Virosztek, and A. Zawadowski, Physical Review B 51, 505 (1995). M. Opel, R. Hackl, T. P. Devereaux, A. Virosztek, A. Za- wadowski, A. Erb, E. Walker, H. Berger, and L. Forr ́o, Physical Review B 60, 9836 (1999). K. Fujita, M. H. Hamidian, S. D. Edkins, C. K. Kim, Y. Kohsaka, M. Azuma, M. Takano, H. Takagi, H. Eisaki, S.-I. Uchida, et al., Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111, E3026 (2014). R. Comin, R. Sutarto, F. He, E. da Silva Neto, L. Chauviere, A. Frano, R. Liang, W. Hardy, D. Bonn, Y. Yoshida, et al., Nature Materials 14, 796 (2015). M. Hamidian, S. D. Edkins, C. K. Kim, J. C. Davis, A. Mackenzie, H. Eisaki, S. Uchida, M. Lawler, E.-A. Kim, S. Sachdev, et al., Nature Physics 12, 150 (2016). T. P. Devereaux, T. Cuk, Z.-X. Shen, and N. Nagaosa, Physical Review Letters 93, 117004 (2004). T. Cuk, F. Baumberger, D. H. Lu, N. Ingle, X. J. Zhou, H. Eisaki, N. Kaneko, Z. Hussain, T. P. Devereaux, N. Nagaosa, et al., Physical Review Letters 93, 117003 S. Banerjee, W. Atkinson, and A. P. Kampf, Communi- cations Physics 3, 1 (2020). S. Banerjee, W. Atkinson, and A. Kampf, arXiv preprint R. Liang, D. A. Bonn, and W. N. Hardy, Physical Review F. Rullier-Albenque, H. Alloul, and G. Rikken, Physical Review B 84, 014522 (2011). O. Cyr-Choini`ere, R. Daou, F. Lalibert ́e, C. Collignon, S. Badoux, D. LeBoeuf, J. Chang, B. J. Ramshaw, D. A. Bonn, W. N. Hardy, et al., Physical Review B 97, 064502 L. Li, Y. Wang, S. Komiya, S. Ono, Y. Ando, G. D. Gu, and N. P. Ong, Physical Review B 81, 054510 (2010). J. L. Tallon, J. G. Storey, and J. W. Loram, Physical Review B 83, 092502 (2011). S. Blanco-Canosa, A. Frano, E. Schierle, J. Por- ras, T. Loew, M. Minola, M. Bluschke, E. Weschke, B. Keimer, and M. Le Tacon, Physical Review B 90, L. Zhao, C. Belvin, R. Liang, D. Bonn, W. Hardy, N. Ar- mitage, and D. Hsieh, Nature Physics 13, 250 (2017). B. Loret, N. Auvray, Y. Gallais, M. Cazayous, A. For- get, D. Colson, M.-H. Julien, I. Paul, M. Civelli, and A. Sacuto, Nature Physics 15, 771 (2019). R. Zeyher and G. Zwicknagl, Zeitschrift f ̈ur Physik B Condensed Matter 78, 175 (1990). E. J. Nicol, C. Jiang, and J. P. Carbotte, Physical Re- view B 47, 8131 (1993). T. P. Devereaux and R. Hackl, Reviews of Modern Physics 79, 175 (2007). T. P. Devereaux, D. Einzel, B. Stadlober, R. Hackl, D. H. Leach, and J. J. Neumeier, Physical Review Letters 72, N. Driza, S. Blanco-Canosa, M. Bakr, S. Soltan, M. Khalid, L. Mustafa, K. Kawashima, G. Christiani, H. Habermeier, G. Khaliullin, et al., Nature Materials S.-D. Chen, M. Hashimoto, Y. He, D. Song, K.-J. Xu, J.- F. He, T. P. Devereaux, H. Eisaki, D.-H. Lu, J. Zaanen, et al., Science 366, 1099 (2019). M. Le Tacon, A. Bosak, S. Souliou, G. Dellea, T. Loew, R. Heid, K. Bohnen, G. Ghiringhelli, M. Krisch, and B. Keimer, Nature Physics 10, 52 (2014). D. Newns and C. Tsuei, Nature Physics 3, 184 (2007). Y. He, M. Hashimoto, D. Song, S.-D. Chen, J. He, I. Vishik, B. Moritz, D.-H. Lee, N. Nagaosa, J. Zaanen, et al., Science 362, 62 (2018). D. F. Agterberg, J. S. Davis, S. D. Edkins, E. Fradkin, D. J. Van Harlingen, S. A. Kivelson, P. A. Lee, L. Radzi- hovsky, J. M. Tranquada, and Y. Wang, Annual Review of Condensed Matter Physics 11, 231 (2020).