1 Phase-change perovskite tunable microlaser Jingyi Tian1†, Giorgio Adamo1†, Hailong Liu2, Mengfei Wu2, Maciej Klein1,3, Jie Deng2, Norman Soo Seng Ang2, Ramón Paniagua-Domínguez2, Hong Liu2, Arseniy I. Kuznetsov2, Cesare Soci1,3* 1 Centre for Disruptive Photonic Technologies; TPI, SPMS, Nanyang Technological University, 21 Nanyang Link, Singapore 637371 2 Institute of Materials Research and Engineering, A*STAR (Agency for Science Technology and Research); 2 Fusionopolis Way, #08-03, Innovis, Singapore 138634 3 Energy Research Institute @ NTU (ERI@N); Research Techno Plaza, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637553 † These authors contributed equally to this work. *Corresponding author. Email: csoci@ntu.edu.sg Abstract: Since the invention of the laser, adoption of new gain media and device architectures has provided solutions to a variety of applications requiring specific power, size, spectral, spatial, and temporal tunability. Here we introduce a fundamentally new type of tunable semiconductor laser based on a phase-change perovskite metasurface that acts simultaneously as gain medium and optical cavity. As a proof of principle demonstration, we fabricate a subwavelength-thin perovskite metasurface supporting bound states in the continuum (BICs). Upon the perovskite structural phase transitions, both its refractive index and gain vary substantially, inducing fast and broad spectral tunability (1.35 nm/K rate, Δλ>15 nm in the near-infrared), deterministic spatial mode hopping between polarization vortexes, and hysteretic optical bistability of the microlaser. These features highlight the uniqueness of phase-change perovskite tunable lasers, which may find wide applications in compact and low-cost optical multiplexers, sensors, memories, and LIDARs. 2 Introduction A little more than half a century after the first demonstration of the laser, its varieties and applications have grown enormously. From fundamental spectroscopy, astronomy and quantum optics to atmospheric sensing, optical communications, biomedicine and defense counter measures (1,2), many of such applications rely on dynamic tunability of the laser, which typically requires external optical elements and modulation of the resonator/cavity length to control spectral and spatial mode profiles of the beam (1,3). In the digital era, where lasers are set to become ever more pervasive and integrated, the use of additional optics poses severe limitations to cost and size reduction. Hence, new types of compact and tunable lasers are in high demand. Functional metasurfaces relying on phase-change media like chalcogenides (4-6), metal-oxides (7) and liquid crystals (8) offer solutions for dynamically tunable devices in a compact footprint (9). However, while conventional phase-change media are widely exploited in passive reflective and transmissive devices, they are not suitable for active light emitting devices like lasers due to the lack of optical gain. Thus, identifying a class of phase-change materials with tunable refractive index and optical gain could truly transform the landscape of active nanophotonic devices. Halide perovskites are an emerging class of photonic materials that combine, in a single platform, excellent luminescence properties and high refractive index. This has allowed realization of efficient light emitting devices (10, 11) and dielectric nanophotonic structures (12) such as high- resolution color displays (13-15), photoluminescence enhanced metasurfaces (16, 17), and low- threshold lasers (18, 19). In addition, due to the strong interplay between inorganic framework and organic ligands, halide perovskites display a rich variety of crystallographic phases which depend on chemical composition (20), pressure (21) and temperature (22). Transitions between these phases are often associated with a large variation of the refractive index and the emission characteristics (22-24). However, the potential of halide perovskites as phase-change tunable gain media has yet to be harvested. In this work, we demonstrate a new type of spectrally and spatially tunable semiconductor microlaser, using a subwavelength-thin halide perovskite film as phase-change tunable gain medium and high-quality factor cavity. The cavity design is based on a dielectric metasurface embossed in the perovskite that supports bound states in the continuum (BICs) (25-28), giving a highly directional polarization-vortex emission. The variation in optical constants and luminescence upon phase transition results in a wide spectral tunability over 15 nm range in the near-infrared, with large tuning rate up to 1.35 nm/K - one order of magnitude higher than conventional semiconductor lasers (29). At the same time, hopping between two different BICs across the phase transition temperature enables spatial tunability of the laser emission profile between two polarization vortexes carrying opposite topological winding numbers. Furthermore, the thermal modulation of both, spectral and spatial characteristics, shows hysteresis-induced optical bistability. Together, these results demonstrate the potential of phase-change halide perovskites as a new material platform for active nanophotonic devices, such as compact tunable lasers and optical memories. Results and discussions For the demonstration of the phase-change perovskite tunable polarization-vortex microlaser, we select a prototypical halide perovskite, methylammonium lead iodide CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3). MAPbI3 has proven to be a dependable high refractive index platform for all-dielectric perovskite metasurfaces and exhibits a tetragonal-orthorhombic structural phase transition at 130-160 K (22, 23), associated with considerable modification in refractive index and gain spectrum. The phase- 3 refractive index and k1 + k2 the sum of extinction coefficients of the two phases), is higher than the prototypical phase-change chalcogenide material Ge2Sb2Te5 with FOM~0.2 at the same wavelength (30) (see Supporting Information I and II). The metasurface microlaser consists of a square lattice of circular holes patterned in a 250 nm thick MAPbI3 film, sandwiched between a thick polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) layer and a quartz substrate (n=1.5), as depicted in Fig. 1A. Upon temperature change, the MAPbI3 perovskite adopts two distinct crystal structures, i.e., the room-temperature tetragonal phase and the low-temperature orthorhombic phase (Fig. 1B). As indicated by the optical band diagrams in Fig. 1C, the metasurface supports two high-Q modes (solid lines) within the optical gain region above the and a magnetic quadrupole mode (MQ). The two modes give rise to symmetry-protected BICs (MDz-BIC and MQ-BIC) at kx=0, appearing as singularity point at the centre of far-field polarization vortexes. BICs are perfectly confined optical modes, located in the continuum spectrum of free-space radiation, that allow the realization of lasing cavities with ultra-high Q- factors, low lasing thresholds and vortex emission (18,26-28). The Q factors of both MDz and MQ modes of the microlaser diverge to infinity near kx= 0, as denoted by the shaded red and blue areas in Fig. 1C. By controlling the ambient temperature, the two BICs can be tuned across the MAPbI3 structural phase transition. As the temperature decreases from 298 to 130 K, the change of refractive index induces a large shift of the spectral position of MDz-BIC (MQ-BIC), from 797 to 782 nm (from 789 to 776 nm) (Fig. 1C). Fig. 1. Design of a phase-change BIC metasurface (A) Schematic of a tunable microlaser based on phase-change perovskite BIC metasurface, sandwiched between two n=1.5 layers (quartz and PDMS), pumped with blue laser (λ = 405 nm), and emitting a highly collimated polarization vortex beam in the near-IR. (B) Conceptual illustration of the two distinct crystal structures of MAPbI3, the room-temperature tetragonal phase and the low-temperature orthorhombic phase. (C) Calculated band structures (solid and dotted lines) of the MAPbI3 metasurface, within the optical gain spectral region, at room temperature, 298 K, (tetragonal phase) and 130 K (orthorhombic phase). The two modes (MDz mode and MQ mode) above the absorption edge are denoted with 4 solid lines. The corresponding Q factors of the two modes are denoted by the shaded red and blue areas, respectively, which diverge at kx=0. The spectral shift of the BICs with temperature reveals three distinct regions, i.e. a high temperature region with T>160 K where the perovskite is in the tetragonal phase, an intermediate temperature region with 130 K<T<160 K where both tetragonal and orthorhombic phases of the perovskite coexist, and a low temperature region with T<130 K where the perovskite is in the orthorhombic phase (Fig. 2A). When the temperature decreases from 298 to 160 K, the two BICs at 797 and 789 nm gradually redshift by more than 10 nm, corresponding to a tuning rate of 0.1 nm/K. Upon entering the intermediate region (yellow band in Fig. 2A), the peak positions of the MDz-BIC and MQ- BIC blue shift at a much higher rates of -0.97 and -0.85 nm/K, respectively and stabilize at 782 nm and 776 nm when the phase transition is completed. Throughout these regions, the electromagnetic fields of both MDz-BIC and MQ-BIC remain mostly confined within the perovskite film, guaranteeing optimal spatial mode-gain overlap (inset of Fig. 2A). Fig.2. BIC shifting of the phase-change metasurface upon temperature change. (A) Calculated shifting of the MDz-BIC (red dashed line) and MQ-BIC (blue dashed line) due to temperature-induced refractive-index change. The inset shows the Hz and Ez field distribution of the two BICs in the x-y plane, with antinodes confined within the perovskites film (B) SEM image of a MAPbI3 film patterned with a square lattice of circular holes. The scale bar is 800 nm. The inset denotes the cross section of the perovskite metasurface with a scale bar of 400 nm. Measured 5 (tetragonal phase), 160 K (tetragonal phase) and 130 K (orthorhombic phase), under 405 nm continuous wave (CW) laser excitation. The MAPbI3 metasurface is fabricated by nanoimprint lithography (NIL) (see Materials and Methods). The circular holes, with a diameter of 300 nm, are arranged in a square lattice with 400 nm period and imprinted to a depth of ~200 nm within the 250 nm thick film, as shown in Fig. 2B. Besides large area nanostructuring, NIL provides additional advantages such as a dramatic improvement of surface morphology (Fig. S4) and increase of environmental stability of the perovskite film (31). Since both BICs are located within the emission region of MAPbI3, its photoluminescence (PL) is expected to efficiently couple to these optical modes with angular emission pattern closely resembling the optical bands in Fig. 1C. Angle-resolved PL is measured at three representative temperatures for transverse magnetic (TM) and transverse electric (TE) polarizations, and the corresponding spectral maps are shown in Figs. 2, C and D. The BIC nature of the MQ mode (TM-polarized) and MDz mode (TE-polarized) is revealed by the PL bands with vanishing emission linewidth near the normal direction (kx=0) while resonances disappear in the absorption region above the MAPbI3 band edge. As predicted by the simulations in Fig. 2A, the PL bands redshift when the temperature decreases from 298 to 160 K, and rapidly blueshift when the temperature decreases further to 130 K. Fig. 3. Laser performance of polarization-vortex microlasers (A) Room-temperature emission spectra of the MAPbI3 BIC metasurface as function of pump fluence. The inset shows the absorption coefficient (grey shaded spectrum), PL spectrum (black curve) of a MAPbI3 film, together with the MDz-BIC lasing emission (red shaded peak). (B) Light-light curve of the laser at room-temperature. (C) i: schematic of a TE-polarized polarization vortex emission with +1 topological winding number; ii: donut-shaped, room temperature, unpolarized far-field radiation pattern of the MAPbI3 BIC metasurface; iii-vi: far-field laser beam profiles passing through a polarizer at four different orientations. (D) Emission spectra of the MAPbI3 BIC metasurface as function of pump fluence, at 135K. The inset shows the absorption coefficient (grey shaded spectrum) and PL spectrum (black curve) of a MAPbI3 film, together with the MQ-BIC lasing emission (blue shaded peak). (E) Light-light curve of the laser at 135 K. (F) i: schematic of a TM- 6 polarized vector beam with -1 topological winding number; ii: unpolarized far-field radiation pattern of the BIC metasurface, at 135 K; iii-vi: far-field laser beam profiles passing through a polarizer at four different orientations. Lasing from the BIC metasurface is characterized under frequency-doubled fs-laser pump (λ = 400 nm), with 100 fs pulse duration and 1 kHz repetition rate. The pump-fluence dependence of the room temperature emission spectra are shown in Fig. 3A. A broad emission spectrum is observed at low pump fluences, which is overtaken by a single narrow lasing peak (λ = 797 nm) at higher fluences. The dominant lasing mode is the MDz-BIC, while the MQ-BIC is inhibited by the higher absorption of MAPbI3 at shorter wavelengths (inset of Fig.3A). The onset of lasing at room temperature can be easily identified in the light-light curve in Fig. 3B, yielding a lasing threshold of 8 μJ/cm2. The expected far-field vector distribution of a MDz-BIC is a TE polarization vortex in the k-space with the topological winding number +1 (refer to Fig. 3C and discussion in Supporting Information V on the topological nature of the BICs). The measured unpolarized far- field radiation shows the typical donut shape of polarization vortex beams, whereas the polarization dependent beam profiles confirm the winding of the electric field vector around the singularity point (Fig. 3C). The lasing mode changes from a MDz-BIC (λ = 797 nm) to a MQ-BIC (λ = 791 nm) across the MAPbI3 phase transition (Fig. 3D). As seen in the in the inset of Fig. 3D, the phase transition induces a blue shift of the absorption edge of MAPbI3, resulting in better spectral overlap between the MQ-BIC and the optical gain. Consequently, the lasing threshold reduces to ~2.5 μJ/cm2 at 135 K (Fig. 3E). In this case, the MQ-BIC is expected to generate a TM polarization vortex beam with a -1 topological winding number (Fig. 3F and Supporting Information V). Indeed, far-field imaging of the unpolarized and polarized radiation patterns reveal a polarization vortex underpinned by the MQ-BIC (Fig. 3F). Fig. 4. Cyclability of the tunable microlaser. (A) Shifting and switching of the laser modes by decreasing and increasing the temperature. Bistability (hysteresis behavior) can be observed in the 7 phase-transition region (130-160 K). (B) Peak position of the bistable laser within two cooling and heating cycles between 135 K and 155 K at the rate of 6 K/min while keeping a constant pump power of 0.64 μW. The two modes are denoted by red and blue colors, respectively. The insets denote their corresponding far-field radiation patterns after a y-polarized linear polarizer at different time period. Cyclability of the tunable microlaser is studied between 298 and 130 K (Fig. 4 and Fig. S3). Fig. 4A shows the change of laser peak position across a full cooling and heating cycle. The MDz-BIC generated by the perovskite metasurface in the tetragonal phase (160 K< T < 298 K) can be tuned continuously between 797 and 811 nm at a rate of 0.1 nm/K. As the perovskite enters the intermediate region (yellow), the sign of the tuning rate is inverted and the laser wavelength moves between 811 and 788 nm at a much faster rate of -1.35 nm/K. Notably, within the phase transition region, the laser mode switches between the MDz-BIC and the MQ-BIC. Interestingly, the temperature dependence of the laser emission wavelength does not follow the same path during the cooling and the heating cycles, forming a hysteresis loop. This is underpinned by the hysteresis of the dielectric permittivity of MAPbI3 across the phase transition (22). Bistable operation of the microlaser is attainable within the hysteresis region when the laser switches between the MDz-BIC and the MQ-BIC. This allows generating two stable polarization vortex beams with opposite topological winding numbers at the same temperature, that can be addressed within the heating or cooling branches of the temperature hysteresis loop (green-dashed lines at 140 and 147 K). This is further illustrated in Fig. 4B, where the microlaser undergoes several cooling and heating cycles between 135 and 155 K at a rate of 6 K/min. The microlaser can be switched repeatedly between the two stable modes (red and blue curves), showing good retentivity, spectral and spatial mode reproducibility, and minimal intensity degradation over more than 10 cycles (a video of the continuous mode switching is available in Supporting Information). The energy required to switch the microlaser may be further lowered in chemically engineered perovskites with phase transition close-to-room-temperature (e.g., (C4H9NH3)2PbI4 with phase transition temperature greater than 250 K) (24), which may enable fast and efficient dynamic tunability by thermoelectric cooling. Conclusions Overall, the unprecedented combination of reversible spectral and spatial tunability with optical bistability of the subwavelength-thin phase-change perovskite polarization-vortex microlaser makes it a unique concept for emergent applications of wavelength and space division multiplexing in classical and quantum optical communications, compact optical memory and neuromorphic devices, optical readout sensors and embedded LIDAR systems.