Meta-Programmable Analog Differentiator Jérôme Sol1, David R. Smith2, and Philipp del Hougne3* 1 INSA Rennes, CNRS, IETR - UMR 6164, F-35000, Rennes, France 2 Center for Metamaterials and Integrated Plasmonics, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC, 27708 USA 3 Univ Rennes, CNRS, IETR - UMR 6164, F-35000, Rennes, France * Correspondance to philipp.del-hougne@univ-rennes1.fr. Abstract We show experimentally that the fundamental ingredient of wave-based signal differentiation, namely zeros of the scattering matrix that lie exactly on the real axis, can be imposed at will and in situ by purposefully perturbing an overmoded random scattering system. The resulting unprecedented flexibility overcomes current limitations of wave-based differentiators, both regarding their extreme vulnerability due to fabrication inaccuracies or environmental perturbations as well as their lack of in situ adaptability. Moreover, in addition to current miniaturization efforts, we suggest that integrability of wave processors can also be achieved by endowing existing bulky everyday-life systems that naturally scatter waves with a second signal-processing functionality. We demonstrate our technique by placing a programmable metasurface inside a 3D disordered metallic box: the hundreds of available degrees of freedom allow us to impose at will reflection zeros on a connected port, such that the reflected signal envelope is the temporal derivative of the incident one. We demonstrate our ability to toggle between differentiation of envelopes modulated onto distinct carriers. We also parallelize multiple differentiation operations on the same device and implement higher- order differentiators. Our “over-the-air” temporal differentiator for microwave carriers may find civilian and military applications in processing wireless communication or radar signals, for data segmentation and compression, as well as machine vision and hearing. Our generic concept is also applicable to optical, acoustic, and elastic scattering. Introduction Differentiation is a pivotal mathematical operation with signal processing applications including edge-based segmentation for data compression or image sharpening, FM-to- AM demodulation for communication or Doppler-radar processing, as well as machine vision and hearing. Analog implementations of differentiation on wave processors promise much higher speeds and minimal power consumption in contrast to their digital electronic counterparts1,2. Yet, current wave-based differentiators are plagued by excessive sensitivity to fabrication inaccuracies and environmental conditions, and lack in situ adaptability. In this Article, instead of fabricating a carefully designed single-mode structure, we take an overmoded random scattering system as starting point and show that purposeful perturbations of its scattering properties, here with hundreds of degrees of freedom offered by an array of programmable meta-atoms3,4, enable unprecedented flexibility and fidelity of “over-the-air” wave-based differentiators by imposing that zeros of the scattering matrix lie exactly on the real axis, at will and in situ. Any linear wave system’s input-output relation is a linear transformation that can be either a discretized or a continuous operator. The input and output channels can originate from various degrees of freedom, such as space (guided or propagating in free space), frequency and polarization, or even a mix thereof. The needs of artificial intelligence have recently driven the implementation of arbitrary matrix multiplications5–11, mostly for discretized spatial channels12. At the same time, “basic” operations like differentiation continue to be of fundamental importance, for instance, in machine and human vision13 for data compression via edge detection. These mathematical operations are typically implemented as continuous operators. A differentiator is a linear filter whose transfer function, H(ω) = i(ω − ω0) for first-order differentiation of the envelope of a carrier at ω0, can be found in many natural and artificial special physical scattering scenarios. If information is encoded spatially such as in an optical image, then critical-coupling (CC) settings14,15, the Brewster effect16, and various (metamaterial) layer structures17–20 have been shown to yield this transfer function. For temporally encoded information, implementations based on fiber gratings21–24, critically coupled microring resonators25, directional couplers26, or interferometers27–29 have been put forward. All these settings require very careful fabrication and/or alignment and are hence highly vulnerable to inaccuracies in the fabrication or operation environment. Wave-based differentiators are some of the most vulnerable wave processors because the underlying wave system is operated at a scattering anomaly (H(ω0) = 0); the origin of this extreme sensitivity can be traced back to a fundamental quantity in mesoscopic physics: the dwell time of the wave in the system30. We will elaborate on this link for the concrete case of CC for temporal differentiation in the following, which is also directly relevant to our experiments. A longstanding question in wave physics and material science is how to excite a structure such that no wave energy is reflected back. CC is the simplest case of zero reflection and usually refers to coupling a single (guided) incident channel to an isolated mode of the structure31,32, requiring perfect matching of the structure’s excitation and decay rate. Moreover, perfect absorption has also been demonstrated for normal incidence of plane waves on thin metamaterials33–35. A generalized version of CC is coherent perfect absorption36–40 (CPA) of multi-channel radiation by a resonant structure (with possibly overlapping modes). In all these cases, one zero of the scattering matrix is real-valued such that the structure can act as a steady-state sink: all incident radiation can be perfectly absorbed 1. Since this zero’s imaginary part vanishes, the dwell time of the 1 Because CPA has been introduced as the time-reverse of lasing (at threshold)36, the loss mechanisms should originate from matter susceptibility rather than from undetected elastic scattering. Recently, there has been a growing interest in reflectionless coupling into (often quasi-lossless) structures which let radiation escape through unobserved channels41– 43. Sometimes this has also been referred to as CPA44 even though in these cases wave energy is not irreversibly transduced into other degrees of freedom such as heat. In the experiments we present, losses originate from absorption at the cavity boundaries (in line with the original definition of CPA), but the loss mechanism’s nature is irrelevant for our general idea. corresponding wavefront in the system diverges36,45–47. 2 The latter makes for extremely sensitive detectors46,48, but conversely means that minute detuning of any system parameter moves the zero away from the real axis. As soon as the zero leaves the real axis, the spectrum’s linear “V” shape and the associated abrupt π phase jump in the vicinity of ω0 are no longer possible. Consequently, minute imperfections severely deteriorate and rapidly undermine the faithfulness of an analog differentiator, to the point that it becomes unsatisfactory, as illustrated in detail in Supplementary Note 2. This clarifies why tiny fabrication or alignment imperfections, or minute environmental perturbations, can severely impact the fidelity of a wave-based differentiator. Similarly, adapting, for instance, the filter’s ω0 in situ in order to consecutively process envelopes on different carriers is generally very difficult or impossible. Wave processors realizing other functionalities which do not involve diverging dwell times are expected to display significantly less sensitivity. To overcome the excessive sensitivity of wave processors, a recent trend has been to explore ideas from topological photonics49–51 but the lack of in situ adaptability remains. In parallel, the switching between different functionalities (differentiation, equation solving, etc.) has been studied29,52,53 but this does not offer in situ adaptability of a given functionality, e.g. to the signal carrier, nor robustness to fabrication inaccuracies or environmental perturbations. A clear route to address the aforementioned challenges are wave processors that can be reprogrammed in situ. A notable application thereof to temporal differentiation involved a photonic integrated interferometer equipped with programmable phase modulators29. On paper, it appears that a single degree of freedom is sufficient to introduce a relative phase shift of (2m + 1)π at ω0 between the two interferometer arms29, yielding a perfect differentiator. In practice, however, the transfer function’s magnitude minimum in appears to be around 0.16; this system has a 2 The divergence of the dwell time can also be understood from considering the phase delay time which is defined as the frequency derivative of the scattering phase: τ = d(arg(S11))/dω.30 Given the discontinuity of the phase of the transfer function i(ω − ω0) at ω = ω0, namely its phase jump of π, its derivative at ω = ω0 diverges. zero close to rather than on the real frequency axis, which jeopardizes a linear “V” shape and the associated abrupt π phase jump. Such limitations are inherent in the use of a single or few degrees of freedom in systems with a single or few resonances, and these limitations are also found in tunable microwave notch filters54–57. 3 The limitations originate from unaccounted non-idealities in real-life implementations such as coupling dispersion, transmission-line length variation, parasitic coupling, and other properties of the microstrip lines. Using a single or few degrees of freedom, it is certainly possible to tune few-resonance systems such that the zeros move in the complex plane; however, only under special conditions of PT-symmetry41,42 that are certainly not met by simple tunable notch filters (the uncompensated presence of absorption already trivially breaks PT-symmetry) there is a guarantee that the zeros move exactly on the real frequency axis upon tuning. Hence, upon tuning simple notch filters in practice, zeros do not remain on the real frequency axis, and a few degrees of freedom tend to be insufficient to prevent that they drift away from the real frequency axis. In contrast, our approach offers at least two orders of magnitude more degrees of freedom. This massive increase in programmability, together with the high density of zeros inherent to overmoded random scattering systems, makes it easy for us to perturb the system such that one of its zeros is placed, at a desired frequency, on the real frequency axis with extremely high precision (notch depth < −70 dB). Moreover, we can also switch to different functionalities and simultaneously create multiple zeros at arbitrary frequencies which is of importance for parallel wave processing at distinct frequencies, exploiting the wave equation’s linearity58. Unlike conventional electronic processors, a single wave processor can simultaneously process various streams of information encoded on independent (spectral, polarization, etc.) channels53,58–60, directly 3 Tunable microwave notch filters are developed for applications other than analog differentiation where different metrics matter, resulting in filter shapes that are typically not only insufficiently deep but also oftentimes deformed with respect to the shape needed for analog differentiation. multiplying its effective speed by the number of independent channels. Our approach to rely on potentially bulky complex scattering systems such as a 3D disordered metallic box for microwave carriers may, at first sight, appear to be at odds with substantial efforts from the metamaterials community to miniaturize wave processors17,61–64. Indeed, the bulkiness of early optical processors, which relied on free- space propagation65,66, but also the need for additional refractive elements (prisms, lenses) of many recent “flat” designs, thwarts integrability. Our technique, however, does not have any special requirements regarding the complex scattering system such that it can be implemented based on any existing bulky system whose primary functionality is not related to signal processing. We envision that ubiquitous metallic enclosures, such as a military toolbox or a microwave oven, can be endowed with a second signal processing functionality simply by inserting an ultrathin programmable metasurface3,4 at an arbitrary location in order to tune their scattering properties. Thereby, we introduce a new perspective on integrability that decouples it from device volume and related miniaturization efforts. As such, our approach is arguably at least as convenient regarding integrability as are miniaturized wave processors. Its strength becomes particularly apparent for processing long-wavelength signals such as microwaves or sound in their native analog domain. In such scenarios relevant to radar, wireless communication, gesture recognition, ambient-assisted living, untethered virtual reality or voice- commanded devices, even metamaterial-based processors are cumbersome whereas our technique only requires the user to place an ultrathin programmable metasurface3,4 at an arbitrary location inside an existing enclosure. A related alternative view on the integrability of wave processors was introduced in , but for less vulnerable spatially discrete monochromatic arbitrary matrix multiplications. Moreover, in the configuration of the programmable metasurface was interpreted as input, that is, the wave processor did not operate in the signal’s native domain, and furthermore averaging over multiple realizations was necessary as a consequence. If specific applications require far more compact implementations, it is also possible to implement our technique in flat quasi-2D programmable chaotic cavities with currently available technology67. The technique underlying the present work to purposefully perturb a complex scattering system to impose real-valued scattering zeros “on demand” is, on the one hand, conceptually a topic of significant contemporary interest in mesoscopic physics. The concept was proposed and experimentally demonstrated in for single-channel CPA in a lossy chaotic microwave cavity, with applications to precision sensing and secure communication. The idea was subsequently generalized to multiple channels46,68, including cases with additional constraints on the allowed input wavefront69. The notion of parameter tuning is also central to various other recent works on scattering anomalies42,70. On the other hand, our specific experimental implementation in the microwave domain leveraging programmable metasurfaces relates to a large body of literature: these arrays of meta-atoms with individually reconfigurable scattering properties (usually reflection coefficient) are primarily used for free-space applications such as adaptive beamforming3, holography71, diffuse scattering72, wireless communication73–75, (intelligent) imaging76–80,67,81,82 and spatio-temporal wave control83. However, they also find increasingly use inside rich scattering environments84 as evidenced by various experiments on focusing85–88, (sub-wavelength) sensing89,90 and transmission matrix engineering9,91–93. Nonetheless, the generality of the discussed wave concepts implies that our idea can also be implemented in tunable acoustic or optical scattering systems94–97. In this paper, we establish the unprecedented flexibility offered for wave-based differentiators based on judiciously tuned overmoded random scattering systems, through a series of microwave experiments in a prototypical metallic disordered box equipped with 1-bit programmable metasurfaces. Our work is realized in the WLAN 5-GHz band and hence of potentially direct technological relevance. First, we demonstrate our ability to impose in situ a scattering zero at any desired frequency in this band, and to toggle at will between them. We directly inject various complicated waveforms in time-domain experiments to provide direct experimental evidence of our ability to compute the temporal derivative of an envelope of an arbitrary carrier (within the 5-GHz band). Second, we generalize this concept to toggling between multiple simultaneous zeros of the scattering matrix—that lie on the real axis—of various spectral separations in order to demonstrate parallel wave processing on the same device. Finally, we cascade two tunable chaotic cavities to compute second order derivatives, thereby engineering a transfer function usually associated with CPA exceptional points98–101 that may also be enticing for applications in broadband near-perfect absorption. Results Operation principle. To start, our goal is to compute the temporal derivative of a function e(t) that modulates an arbitrary carrier ω0 by letting it bounce off the interface between a port and an irregularly shaped electrically large metallic box – see Figure 1. For the differentiation operation to happen, the system’s transfer function H(ω) (i.e., the port’s reflection spectrum) should approximate i(ω − ω0) in the vicinity of ω0 , as sketched in the inset. A zero of the scattering matrix that lies on the real axis at ω0, which we define as a real-valued zero, yields this functional form of the reflection spectrum upon excitation46,99. However, the chances of observing a real-valued zero at the desired frequency ω0 within a random scattering system are extremely low48. By tuning a continuous system parameter, it is possible to observe a real-valued zero but most likely not at the targeted operating frequency42. Yet, our goal is to be able to re-program our analog wave-based differentiator in situ depending on the use case; specifically, as shown in Figure 1, we would like to adapt its transfer function to the incident carrier. To that end, we must be able to perfectly place a zero on the real-frequency axis “on demand” at any desired frequency. To accomplish this goal, we mount two programmable metasurfaces3,4 on the walls of the disordered box at arbitrary locations. These metasurfaces are ultrathin arrays of meta-atoms whose scattering properties can be controlled via a simple bias voltage. Our generic technique is not limited to implementations based on a specific programmable metasurface design, all that matters is that the programmable meta-atoms control as many rays as possible. Each meta-atom of the utilized prototype (see Supplementary Note 3 for technical details) has two possible states and is capable of roughly mimicking Dirichlet or Neuman boundary conditions under normal incidence86. By judiciously choosing the coding matrix of the programmable metasurface (see Supplementary Note 4), it is possible to impose a real-valued zero “on demand” at a desired frequency48. For instance, if the incident carrier is ω1 (blue), metasurface configuration C1 (blue) is used; if the incident carrier is ω2 (red), metasurface configuration C2 (red) is used, etc. A signal e(t) is modulated as envelope onto a carrier ω0 and incident via a guided single-mode channel on a disordered metallic electrically large box. The scattering properties of the latter can be tuned via programmable metasurfaces mounted on its walls such that the port’s reflection spectrum has a zero at the carrier frequency. Then, the port’s transfer function matches that of an ideal differentiator, displaying in the zero’s vicinity a linear “V” shape centered on ω0 as well as an abrupt π phase jump at ω0 (see inset). Consequently, the reflected signal’s envelope is the temporal derivative of e(t). Incident and reflected signals are separated via a circulator, see Supplementary Note 4 for details. A computer program digitally controls the realized differentiation operation by toggling between different metasurface configurations (color-coded) depending on the current needs in terms of the incident signal’s carrier frequency. Direct observation of meta-programmable differentiation. We begin by identifying eight metasurface configurations that yield a real-valued scattering matrix zero at eight distinct, evenly spaced frequencies between 5.05 GHz and 5.4 GHz. The resulting transfer functions are shown in Figure 2a,b. The desired linear “V” shapes, accompanied by abrupt phase shifts of π, are observed exactly at the eight chosen frequencies. In each case, the magnitude of the transfer function is below −70 dB at the central frequency (see Supplementary Note 5). The bandwidth over which the transfer functions are a good approximation to an ideal differentiator is around 15 MHz (see Supplementary Note 6). A global phase drift is observed and distinct for each operating frequency – however, as explained in Supplementary Note 1, this does not impact the desired differentiator functionality. Relative to the operating frequency, our fractional bandwidth of 3 × 10−3 outperforms a number of previously reported temporal differentiators; only , a static non-programmable differentiator, achieves a considerably larger fractional bandwidth (see Supplementary Note 6). In comparison to the previously reported reconfigurable temporal differentiator from , our device’s fractional bandwidth is an order of magnitude larger. More importantly, our device implements true real-valued zeros as evidenced by the depth of the reflection dips, their magnitude’s linearity in the vicinity of the central frequency and the abruptness of the phase jump. A direct experimental observation of meta-programmable differentiation requires the injection of various waveforms modulated onto various carriers and the observation of their reflections. We modulate each of the considered carriers in turn with one of three envelope functions shown in Figure 2c,f,i. For a given carrier, we toggle the metasurface to its corresponding configuration, we let the signal impinge on the port-cavity interface, and we measure the reflected signal – technical details are provided in Supplementary Notes 3 and 4. The first waveform, a Gaussian pulse (0.1 μs duration, 10 MHz bandwidth), is a typical function to test the quality of analog differentiators. Its derivative, if correctly computed, should be perfectly symmetric and have exactly zero amplitude at its center (see Figure 2d). In Figure 2e we superpose the envelopes of the output signals measured in the eight different carrier use cases. It is apparent that they are all highly similar and extremely close to the ideal analytical derivative. We also test our meta- programmable differentiator’s performance with two more complicated functions: a quadratic polynomial and the skyline of Rennes, France. For these two functions, some less dominant spectral components lie outside the differentiator’s operating bandwidth. In the former case (Figure 2h), the measured output signals faithfully reproduce the linear slopes expected for the derivative of a quadratic function, as well as the expected amplitudes. In the latter case (Figure 2k), the agreement with the analytical result is also very good; only for some very sharp peaks the measured magnitude is slightly below the expected one. Besides demonstrating differentiation based on a random scattering system, the major technological relevance of our work is the unprecedented flexibility of our differentiator: in this section, we leveraged its flexibility to toggle between differentiation for different carriers; in the following sections, we will further leverage this flexibility for more advanced and unique features. Direct experimental results of meta-programmable analog temporal differentiation. a,b, Amplitude (a) and phase (b) of the system’s transfer function for eight different metasurface configurations (color-coded) that correspond to reflection zeros at eight equally spaced carrier frequencies in the 5-GHz band. c,f,i, Envelopes e(t) of experimentally injected waveforms corresponding to a Gaussian function (c), a set of quadratic polynomial functions (f), and a skyline of Rennes, France, composed of Basilique Saint-Sauveur, a traditional timber-framed house and Cathédrale Saint-Pierre (i). d,g,j, Corresponding analytical derivatives de(t) dt . e,h,k, Corresponding experimentally measured output signals. For a given waveform and carrier, the metasurface is toggled to the configuration optimized for this carrier, the input signal is injected, and the reflected signal is measured. The envelopes of the measured output signals for all eight considered carriers are superposed on these figures using the same colors to identify different carriers as in (a,b). Parallelized meta-programmable differentiation. A unique but to date largely underexploited advantage of wave processors over their electronic counterparts is that a single device can simultaneously process multiple data streams thanks to the linearity of the wave equation53,58–60. Thereby, its computational efficiency in terms of equivalent digital operations per unit time can be multiplied by the number of independent data streams. The differentiation operation that we are concerned with in this paper can be parallelized, for instance, by encoding different data streams onto different carriers. The reflection spectrum of the system should then simultaneously present multiple real-valued scattering zeros corresponding to the targeted carrier frequencies. The experimental setup remains that from Figure 1, except that the impinging wave is now the sum of multiple independent carriers, each modulated by an independent data stream. This principle is illustrated in Figure 3a. Our parallelized meta-programmable analog differentiator can toggle between different simultaneously targeted carrier frequencies. As shown in Figure 3a, for a first use case, a blue metasurface configuration may be used that imposes simultaneous real-valued scattering zeros for carriers ω1,A and ω1,B; for a second use case, a red metasurface configuration may be used for carriers ω2,A and ω2,B, etc. In Figure 3b,c,f,g,j,k, three examples of experimental measurements of optimized transfer functions with two simultaneous real-valued zeros at different frequencies are shown. In all cases, the transfer function magnitude displays the linear “V” shape and the phase the corresponding abrupt π jump. Examples with more than two simultaneous zeros are shown in Supplementary Note 8 but in the following we focus on two simultaneous zeros to directly test the meta-programmable parallelized differentiation ability of our system. To that end, we generate two independent signals and inject their sum into our system which is toggled to a state that corresponds to the two chosen carriers. We measure the reflected signal and bandpass-filter it around each of the two carriers, respectively. The resulting two demultiplexed data streams are shown in Figure 3d,e,h,i,l,m. The obtained signal output envelops match very well the analytically expected ones for both carriers in all three cases. These results illustrate our ability to perform parallelized meta-programmable differentiation. based on a tunable interferometer did not discuss parallel computing but it is clear that if at all possible, the simultaneous real-valued zeros would have to be spaced according to the free spectral range as opposed to being able to place them at arbitrary locations as in our system. If the carrier frequencies’ separation exceeds the metasurface’s operation bandwidth, separate metasurfaces (one for each carrier) may be deployed. In that case, only the designated metasurface would modulate the corresponding carrier frequency such that the different metasurface configurations could be optimized independently from each other9. of parallel computing with spectral degrees of freedom. The injected waveform is the sum of two signals (two independent envelopes eA(t) and eB(t) modulated onto distinct carriers ω1,A and ω1,B) and the reflected signal is the sum of the derivatives of these two envelopes, modulated onto the respective carriers. b,c,f,g,j,k, Amplitude and phase of the system’s transfer function for three examples (color-coded) of choices of two simultaneously imposed reflection zeros. The computer program can toggle between these by changing the metasurface configuration. d,e,h,i,l,m, Envelope of experimentally measured output signal (spectrally bandpass-filtered around the respective carrier frequencies) upon injecting the indicated waveforms (see Supplementary Note 4 for details) in the three considered use cases. Higher-order meta-programmable differentiation. To this point, we have considered only first-order temporal differentiation; in this section, we generalize the previous concepts to higher-order differentiation. An n-th-order differentiator’s transfer function is [i(ω − ω0)]n, which can be physically implemented in various manners. For instance, instead of tuning our system to CPA, one could attempt to tune it to a CPA exceptional point (EP) at which two eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the wave operator associated with purely incoming boundary conditions coalesce99; such a CPA-EP would yield the transfer function associated with a second-order differentiator (see inset in that more degrees of freedom and/or more elaborate optimization protocols may be necessary. Another route to obtain the desired transfer function of a second-order differentiator is to cascade two first-order differentiators. If the input signal was known to have a sufficient temporal sparsity, a combination of directional couplers and delay loop could be added to the setup in Figure 1 to realize the higher-order differentiation via multiple passes across the same port-cavity interface. A more generic implementation is to physically cascade multiple setups akin to the one from Figure 1, all tuned to simultaneously have a real-valued scattering zero at the same frequency, as shown in Our goal is now to simultaneously impose a real-valued scattering zero at the same frequency in two similar but distinct chaotic cavities, and to toggle between different examples thereof that differ in terms of the chosen frequency, in order to then directly illustrate our ability to perform meta-programmable second-order differentiation. Given that our experimentally available number of programmable meta-atoms is limited, we now split them equally between the two cavities. The optimization problem is now much harder since we have only half of the previously available degrees of freedom in each cavity. This is of course not a general limitation of our concept but related to our experimental constraints, and we cater to it by allowing some flexibility regarding the chosen frequency in our optimization protocol. In the left columns of Figures 4b,c,d,e, we report four examples of magnitude and phase of experimentally measured transfer functions for second-order differentiation. The flat phase (modulo 2π and ignoring the irrelevant background phase drift) matches that of the ideal transfer function shown in the inset of Figure 4a. The magnitudes also display the desired quadratic behavior in the vicinity of ω0 but appear to offer a more limited useable bandwidth than those from injecting the Gaussian signal from Figure 2c, modulated onto different carriers, and in each case toggling the metasurfaces to the configuration corresponding to the carrier. Compared to first-order differentiation, the output signals are much weaker and hence noisier, such that we average the output measurements over 20 acquisitions. The averaged output envelopes for the four considered carriers in Figure 4b,c,d,e are close to the analytically expected output (see Figure 4a). The symmetry with respect to the central peak is very good, and the two dips on either side go as low as possible given the measurement noise. The measurement noise is also evident far away from the central peak where the output signal is analytically zero. Beyond the wave computing functionality discussed so far, the setup from Figure 4 emulates, as previously noted, the transfer function of CPA-EPs which are thus far mainly investigated for broadband near-perfect absorption applications. In contrast to the intensity-dependent nonlinear CPA-EP in , our experiment offers this transfer function irrespective of the incident power signal. Moreover, the homogeneous absorption in our system due to Ohmic losses on the walls, as opposed to localized absorption mechanisms, enables the absorption of high-power incident signals without significant localized heating. Furthermore, the programmability of our setup regarding the CPA-EP frequency may be important for future absorption applications, too. setups akin to the one from Figure 1 are cascaded (using circulators as shown) in order to implement the transfer function associated with an ideal second-order differentiator (see inset). Again, the computer program can toggle between metasurface configurations such that second-order derivatives of signal envelopes are computed for different carriers (color-coded). b-e,Examples of four experimentally measured use cases corresponding to the four distinct indicated carrier frequencies. In each case, amplitude and phase of the system’s transfer function are shown, as well as the experimentally measured output signal envelope upon injection of a Gaussian pulse. The displayed output signal envelopes are averaged over 20 acquisitions to alleviate the impact of measurement noise. Discussion Besides speed and the ease of processing signals in their native domain, a compelling argument for wave-based computing is its energy efficiency. Indeed, a passive material can offer a desired transfer function without any energy consumption. However, a passive material cannot serve as the basis of a fair comparison with our technique since a passive material lacks all the features and advantages of reconfigurability that motivate our present work. Our device is “quasi-passive”: the programmable metasurface does not provide any energy to the wave and only requires minimal power, as low as a few μW per meta-atom85, to maintain the meta-atom in the desired state or to flip it. Future metasurface technologies, such as those based on chalcogenide glasses, may even overcome the need for energy to maintain a state and only require minimal energy to flip the state. All this is in contrast to the proposed reconfigurable photonic interferometer- based processor from which, besides phase modulators, also intrinsically relies on a multitude of signal amplifiers. To summarize, we demonstrated experimentally the essential steps to implement a meta-programmable “over-the-air” wave-based differentiator. The unprecedented flexibility of our approach is enabled by not fabricating a carefully designed device with a single resonance and a few degrees of freedom but leveraging in situ the massive amount of degrees of freedom offered by a programmable metasurface inside a complex scattering system in order to tune scattering zeros onto the real axis at will. The resulting in situ adaptability overcomes the extreme sensitivity of analog differentiators to any sort of detuning which originates from the fact that they operate at a scattering anomaly associated with a diverging dwell time. We demonstrated with direct temporal measurements of the output signal that our technique can (i) toggle between operation at different carrier frequencies, (ii) parallelize the computational operation based on the wave equation’s linearity, and (iii) implement higher-order differentiation. Our approach can be extended to process spatially encoded information, to using overmoded random scattering systems based on guided waves, and to optical or acoustic scattering, as detailed in Supplementary Note 9. Besides the implementation of analog differentiation, the unprecedented flexibility and precision of the implemented filters is relevant to applications in wideband defense systems such as cognitive radio. Looking forward, we envision that a frequency sensing module is integrated with the entire system such that the latter can autonomously adapt itself to the incident signal; such an “intelligent” control of the metasurface configuration based on sensor measurements is easily implemented with current technology102,103. We also note that the switching time between metasurface configurations can be as low as 20 μs with state-of- the-art microcontrollers (see, for instance, ). The proposed meta-programmable differentiator can also serve as the pivotal ingredient of analog solvers of differential equations104. Another avenue that can prove fruitful is to explore potential benefits of continuously programmable meta-atoms77 as well as multi-channel CPA46,68 for meta-programmable analog differentiators. The former may drastically simplify gradient-based search methods for the optimal configuration, and hence be worthwhile the additional electronic burden. The latter may, according to indications in our ongoing work, facilitate imposing real-valued zeros in our system which potentially offsets the requirement for multi- channel amplitude and phase control, or an additional constraint to make the CPA eigenvector coincide with a predefined one69. Methods Experimental setup. A photographic image of the experimental setup from Figure 1 is shown in Supplementary Figure 2. A waveguide-to-coax adapter (RA13PBZ012-B-SMA- F) couples a guided wave to an electrically large disordered metallic box. Two programmable metasurfaces, each containing 76 meta-atoms, cover 16.2% of the cavity surface. Within a 400 MHz interval centered on 5.2 GHz, this metasurface can efficiently manipulate the scattered field. Each meta-atom offers independent 1-bit control over two orthogonal field polarizations, mimicking approximately Dirichlet or Neuman boundary conditions under normal incidence. Ohmic losses on the cavity walls result in a quality factor of the enclosure on the order of 410 such that approximately 21 modes overlap at a given frequency on average. Further details about the experimental setup and the characterization of the metasurface prototype are provided in Supplementary Note 4. Note that our concept is generic and could be implemented with any other programmable metasurface design, too. Determination of metasurface configurations. Identifying a metasurface configuration that yields a desired scattering response, e.g., a real-valued scattering zero at a desired frequency, is an inverse problem. For our proof-of-principle experiments, we solved this inverse problem via an iterative experimental trial-and-error algorithm detailed in Supplementary Note 4 which involved roughly 800 measurements with a vector network analyzer (Agilent Technologies PNA-L Network Analyzer N5230C, 0 dBm emitted power, 10 kHz intermediate-frequency bandwidth). In the future, the inverse design of metasurface configurations can be performed much faster and in software, once an artificial neural network has been trained to approximate the function that maps the configuration to the scattering response. already employs a learned forward model to predict the scattering response of a programmable metasurface, albeit in quasi free space rather than inside a complex scattering enclosure. Next-generation meta-atoms with fine-grained programmability (> 1-bit) will expedite the optimization through their compatibility with continuous gradient-descent protocols. In certain settings without environmental perturbations during runtime, the identification of suitable metasurface configurations can be completed offline during a calibration phase and presents no burden during runtime. Generally speaking, when the optimization objectives are challenging and the available number of degrees of freedom is limited, in many applications one can find significant constraint relaxations such as not requiring the zero to occur at a specific frequency but within a certain interval. Time-domain experiments. For a given test scenario involving a specific function e(t) to be derived and a specific carrier ω0, we generated the waveform e(t)eiω0t with a signal generator (Aeroflex IFR 3416, 2 dBm emitted power, 33 MHz sampling rate) and toggled the metasurface to the configuration suitable for the chosen carrier. The input signal was injected via Port 1 of a circulator (PE83CR006; see Supplementary Figure 4b), impinged on the system interface via Port 2 of the circulator, and the output signal which exited through Port 3 of the circulator was measured on an oscilloscope (SDA 816Zi-B 16GHz Serial Data Analyzer, 40GS/s sampling rate). For the experiments on parallelized computing, a second signal generator (Agilent MXG Analog N5183A) generated the second input signal, and the two input signals were summed before being injected via Port 1 of the circulator. More details on the time-domain experiments can be found in Supplementary Note 4. Data Availability The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon request. Code Availability Code that supports the findings of this study is available upon reasonable request from the corresponding author. Author Contributions P.d.H. conceived the project. J.S. and P.d.H. conducted the experiments. D.R.S. and P.d.H. interpreted the results. All authors contributed with thorough discussions. P.d.H. wrote the manuscript. Acknowledgements The authors thank Steven M. Anlage, Thomas M. Antonsen, Matthieu Davy, Edward Ott and A. Douglas Stone for stimulating discussions, and François Yven for helpful exchanges regarding the time-domain measurement setup. The authors acknowledge funding from the European Union through the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF), and the French region of Brittany and Rennes Metropole through the CPER Project SOPHIE/STIC & Ondes. The metasurface prototypes were purchased from Greenerwave. Additional Information Supplementary Information accompanies this article. Competing Interests: The authors declare no competing interests.