> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 1 1 Abstract—Positive-feedback (PF) device and its operation scheme to implement pulse width modulation (PWM) function was proposed and demonstrated, and the device operation mechanism for implementing PWM function was analyzed. By adjusting the amount of the charge stored in the n- floating body (Qn), the potential of the floating body linearly changes with time. When Qn reaches to a threshold value (Qth), the PF device turns on abruptly. From the linear time-varying property of Qn and the gate bias dependency of Qth, fully functionable PWM neuron properties including voltage to pulse width conversion and hard-sigmoid activation function were successfully obtained from a single PF device. A PWM neuron can be implemented by using a single PF device, thus it is beneficial to extremely reduce the area of a PWM neuron circuit than the previously reported one. Index Terms—positive feedback, pulse width modulation, neuron device, hard-sigmoid activation function. I. INTRODUCTION s a result of recent interest in deep neural networks (DNNs), DNNs show similar level of inference performance to human for specific tasks, such as recognizing hand-written digits and classifying certain images -. However, the more complex the work required for DNN, the more complex the structure of the DNN and the more computations required. Hardware-based neural networks (HNNs) efficiently perform large-scale parallel multiply- accumulation (MAC) operations based on Ohm’s and Kirchhoff’s laws, and exponentially save power consumption compared to conventional computing systems -. There has been a lot of researches to utilize memory devices, such as resistive change memory (RRAM), phase change memory (PCRAM), and charge trap devices like FLASH -, to represent synaptic weights and performing MAC operation. For MAC operation using the memory array, input data which is a set of raw data or the results of a MAC operation should be coded into a different form of signal by using a neuron circuit . There are three mainstreams of the ways to input coding: pulse amplitude modulation (PAM), pulse width modulation (PWM), and pulse rate modulation (rate coding) -. PAM is simplest way for data coding, but it is inadequate for HNN because of the nonlinear output characteristics of most synaptic devices. Rate coding and PWM use voltage pulse with This work was supported in part by the (ERC) and the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF- 2016M3A7B4909604). The review of this letter was arranged by Editor XXX. (Corresponding authors: Jong-Ho Lee; Jong-Ho Bae.) S. Y. Woo, D. Kwon, B.-G. Park and J.-H. Lee are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and Inter-University Semiconductor constant amplitude, thus those are beneficial in terms of accurate MAC operation . Fig. 1 (a) A TEM image and (b) a schematic cross-sectional view of the PF device. (c) The measured IA-VG1 characteristics of the fabricated PF device at different VG2, and VA of 1 V. Previously, we simulated an HNN using SPICE with a pulse- width modulation (PWM) neuron circuit consists of 13 transistors and one capacitor (13T-1C) . It is noteworthy that the neuron circuit should be able to be integrated in a small area, considering that an HNN requires a very large number of neurons. In this paper, a positive-feedback (PF) device and the novel operation scheme for implementing a PWM neuron is proposed. The PWM function was successfully demonstrated using a single PF device. Considering the size and the number of transistors for the previously reported PWM neuron circuit, the size of the PWM neuron can be extremely reduced with a single PF device . In addition, the voltage amplitude to pulse width conversion can be performed without capacitor in the PF device, thus the PWM neuron size would be reduced more. II. DEVICE STRUCTURE AND POSITIVE FEEDBACK OPERATION PF devices have been used to implement neuronal functions -, thanks to their unique behavior. Fig. 1(a) and (b) show the cross-sectional schematic and SEM images of the PF device used in this work. The detailed fabrication step is described elsewhere . The device has p+/n-/p-/n+ doped Research Center (ISRC), Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Korea (e- mail: jhl@snu.ac.kr). J.-H. Bae is with the School of Electrical Engineering, Kookmin University, Seoul 02707, Korea (e-mail: jbae@kookmin.ac.kr).. G2 G1 p- n- 200 nm 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 10-9 10-8 10-7 10-6 10-5 VA (V) = 1.0 V IA (A) VG1 (V) - 0.2 V - 0.1 V 0.0 V 0.1 V 0.2 V 0.3 V 0.4 V 0.5 V 0.6 V 0.7 V VG2 (V) (a) (b) (c) SiO2 SiO2 LG1 = 0.6 μm, LG2 = 1.0 μm, TSi = 100 nm TG1ox = 10 nm, TG2ox = 15 nm p+ p- n- n+ G1 G2 Anode Cathode Sung Yun Woo, Member, IEEE, Dongseok Kwon, Byung-Gook Park, Fellow, IEEE, Jong-Ho Lee, Fellow, IEEE and Jong-Ho Bae, Member, IEEE Pulse-Width Modulation Neuron Implemented by Single Positive-Feedback Device A > REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 2 channel and two gates (G1 and G2) located next to each other on p-- and n--doped region. The doping concentrations of n- /p- channel are 1×1018 and 3×1017 cm-3, respectively. The lengths of G1 and G2 are 0.6 μm and 1.0 μm, respectively, and the thickness of p+/n-/p-/n+ doped channel is 100 nm. Gate insulator for G1 is SiO2 with thickness of 10 nm and for G2 has EOT of 15 nm. This PF device is basically two connected floating body MOSFETs: n- and p-MOSFET having G1 and G2 as a gate, respectively. These MOSFETs are Fig. 2 (a) A schematic diagram of a PWM circuit [F1] (reproduced from [F1] with permission). (b) Schematic diagram of elements for implementing PWM function. (c) The functional element of a PF device for implementing PWM function. Fig. 3 (a) A bias scheme for measuring the PF device. (b) The measured transient responses (t–IA) of the PF device under different Vin and (c) the relationship between Vin and ton. connected in series and their drains are respectively connected to the bodies of each other. When both the MOSFETs are turned-off, applying a positive anode bias (VA > 0) with grounded cathode (VC = 0) cannot turn on the device due to the reverse-biased p-n diode formed by n-/p- junction. However, when a positive G1 bias (VG1) is applied, which is a gate bias of n-MOSFET, electrons are injected from the cathode to the n- region and stored, which is the drain of the n-MOSFET and the body of the p-MOSFET. In that case, the threshold voltage of p-MOSFET(VTp) increases due to the floating body effect. As VTp increases, the amount of the hole injection from anode to p- region exponentially increases and it also reduces the threshold voltage of n-MOSFET (VTn), therefore, more holes are injected from the anode to the p- region. In summary, the drain current of n-MOSFET (IDn) injects electron and the stored electron in n- floating body (Qn) change VTp to increase IDp, thus p- MOSFET turns on and a positive feedback loop is formed. When |Qn| is larger than a threshold value (Qth), the device is turned on and operates as a diode. Fig. 1(c) shows the anode current (IA) versus VG1 as a function of G2 bias (VG2). Due to the positive-feedback operation, IA changes abruptly as VG1 changes. It is worth noting that the turn-on VG1 (VG1,on) increases as VG2 increases. As VG2 increases, VTp should be larger to turn- on the PF device, which means larger Qth is required. III. PULSE-WIDTH-MODULATION (PWM) OPERATION The previously proposed PWM circuit consists of three functional circuit elements, a sawtooth wave generator, a differential amplifier and a level shifter (see Fig. 2(a)). The two inputs of Fig. 4 (a) Energy band diagrams of a PF device along the silicon channel at different VG2s (=Vins). (b) Energy band diagrams of a PF device along the silicon channel over time, at VG1 = 0.45 V, VG2 = 1.5 V and VA = 1 V. the differential amplifier are the input data coded in a constant voltage amplitude (Vin) and a triangular voltage pulse train (Vsaw(t)) generated by the sawtooth wave generator. In the sawtooth wave generator, a signal of Vsaw(t) = I/Csaw(t – t0) is generated when clock (CLK) is 1, where t0 is the time when CLK becomes 1 and the voltage increasing rate is the ratio between the pull-up current of the p-MOSFET(I) and the capacitance (Csaw). As shown in Fig. 2(b), if Vin > Vsaw(t), the result of the differential amplifier (VDiff) is 1 and if not, VDiff is 0. Considering Vsaw(t) is linear function of the time, the time for Vin > Vsaw(t) and the pulse width (tp) of Vdiff are linearly proportional to Vin. Note that Vsaw = VDD and Vsaw(t) > Vin when CLK is 0, thus maximum tp (tmax) is 1/fCLK where fCLK is the clock frequency. Therefore, Vin is linearly converted to a VDiff pulse with tp in the range of [0, tmax]. VDiff pulse is shifted to a desired voltage level in the level shifter as an output voltage pulse (Vout), and is used as a signal for the next layer. To summarize, the basic principle to implement PWM function is comparing a input signal (Vin) and a signal (Vsaw(t)) that varies linearly with time during a clock cycle. Those can be realized by a single PF device as described in Fig. 2(b) and (c), which will be discussed in the following. PWM Circuit PF device Input VIn VIn ∝ Qth Comparison (ref.) Vsaw Qn- ∝ ID,G1 * t Output VOut Iout = IC = IA Sawtooth wave generator Differential amplifier Level shifter Vout Vsaw VIn V, Iout t Vout , Iout Q,V t Qth Vsaw, Qn- VIn t VIn (a) (b) (c) 6 0 2 4 6 8 tinput = 10 s IA (A) Time (s) VCLK = 0.5 V, VA = 1.1 V VIn = 0.0 ~ 1.0 V, VIn = 0.1 V 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 ton (s) Vin (V) VIn = 0.5 V VA = 1.1 V (a) (b) (c) p+ p- n- n+ G1 G2 Anode Cathode Integrator VG2 = VIn VG1 = VCLK 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 VG1 = 0.45 V VG2 = 1.5 V VA = 1 V Distance (m) tstart = 0s 10 s 20 s 30 s 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 -3.0 -2.5 -2.0 -1.5 -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 VG1 = 0.45 V VA = 1 V t = 0 s Energy level (eV) Distance (m) VG2 = 0.5 V 1.0 V 1.5 V 2.0 V (a) (b) p+ n- n+ p- p+ n- n+ p- > REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 3 IV. IMPLEMENTATION OF PWM FUNCTION USING A SINGLE PF DEVICE The PWM function was implemented from a fabricated PF device by applying VG1 and VG2 as a CLK bias (VCLK) and Vin, respectively, as shown in Fig. 3. As VG2= Vin increases, the time to turn-on the PF device (ton) increases (Fig. 3(b)), and Vin and ton has a linear relationship (Fig. 3(c)). This result implies that the fabricated PF device can operate as a linear Vin–tp converter in a certain range. In order to analyze the origin of the linear relationship between Vin and ton which is a key mechanism of implementing PWM function, a simulation study was conducted with a TCAD simulator (Sentaurus) of Synopsys (Figs. 4 and 5). As VG2 = Vin increase, the energy band at n- region linearly moves down and VTp linearly decreases (Fig. 4(a)), because the n- region is floated and is deep-depleted. The key is that the degree of deep- depletion is linearly proportional to the VG2 = Vin, and Qth linearly increases. Considering VG1 = VCLK = 0.45 V and assuming the source of Qn is IDn, |Qn| increases linearly proportional to the time and |Qn| = IDn(t – t0). Thus, the energy band at n- region moves upward as time goes by, as shown in Fig. 4(b). In terms of implementing PWM function, Qth(Vin) at t = t0 is the constant input signal and |Qn(t)| is the linear time- varying signal (see Fig. 2(b) and (c)). These two signals are MOSFET turns on and the PF device turns on due to the positive feedback operation, as explained in Section II. Vin – ton (left y-axis) and Vin – (tmax – ton) (right y-axis) plots which indicates activation function of the proposed PWM function implemented by a PF device. Fig. 5(b) shows |Qn(t)| where VG2 = Vin varies from 0.5 V to 2.0 V, when VG1 = VCLK = 0.45 V (see Fig. 5(a)). As VG2 = Vin increases, Qth and ton linearly increases, as shown in Fig. 5(b) and (c). Therefore, a linear relationship between VG2 = Vin and ton is obtained. PF device is off (IA ~ 1 pA) when VCLK = 0, thus tmax is 1/fCLK. This result indicates Vin is successfully converted to ton with linear relationship in the range of [0, tmax], and the pulse width is tmax – ton. The relationship between Vin and ton is the hard-sigmoid activation function between 0 and tmax, and it can be modulated by using additional circuitry, such as a simple inverter. Therefore, the proposed PF device with this operation scheme is a PWM neuron that effectively implements both a Vin to tp converter and a hard-sigmoid activation function. V. CONCLUSION PWM function is implemented by using a single PF device with two gates. VG1 is VCLK which is linearly increase |Qn| when CLK = 1, and VTp linearly increases as time goes by. By applying input signal to VG2, Qth is linearly changed and comparison between |Qn| and Qth is performed, and the result is amplified by the positive feedback operation. The proposed positive feedback device effectively integrates the two basic function elements of PWM circuits: generating linear time-varying variable (|Qn|) and comparing it with input signal (Qth). Therefore, the PWM circuit including a capacitor can be replaced by a single positive feedback, which is beneficial to integrate neuron circuits for neural network area.