Majorana modes with side features in magnet-superconductor hybrid systems Daniel Crawford,1 Eric Mascot,1, 2 Makoto Shimizu,3 Philip Beck,4 Jens Wiebe,4 Roland Wiesendanger,4 Harald O. Jeschke,5 Dirk K. Morr,2 and Stephan Rachel1, ∗ 1School of Physics, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3010, Australia 2Department of Physics, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60607, USA 3Department of Physics, Okayama University, Okayama 700-8530, Japan 4Department of Physics, University of Hamburg, D-20355 Hamburg, Germany 5Research Institute for Interdisciplinary Science, Okayama University, Okayama 700-8530, Japan (Dated: December 15, 2022) Magnet-superconductor hybrid (MSH) systems represent promising platforms to host Majorana zero modes (MZMs), the elemental building blocks for fault-tolerant quantum computers. Theoret- ical description of such MSH structures is mostly based on simplified models, not accounting for the complexity of real materials. Here, based on density functional theory, we derive a superconducting 80-band model to study an MSH system consisting of a magnetic manganese chain on the s wave superconductor niobium. For a wide range of values of the superconducting order parameter, the system is a topological superconductor, with MZMs exhibiting non-universal spatial patterns and a drastic accumulation of spectral weight on both sides along the magnetic chain. These side feature states can be explained by an effective model which is guided by the ab initio results. Performing scanning tunneling spectroscopy experiments on the same system, we observe a spatial structure in the low-energy local density of states that is consistent with the theoretical findings. Our results open a first-principle approach to the discovery of topological superconductors. I. INTRODUCTION Topological superconductors are amongst the most de- sirable materials, as their quasiparticles at zero energy, known as Majorana zero modes (MZMs) [1–4], exhibit non-Abelian braiding statistics . These MZMs are promising candidates for topological qubits and for next-generation quantum computing devices. Magnet- superconductor hybrid (MSH) systems [7–12] offer a par- ticularly appealing platform: (i) they are comprised of well-understood components, magnetic atoms such as Mn, Fe or Co deposited on the surface of a conventional superconductor such as Nb, Re or Pb; (ii) by virtue of single-atom manipulation techniques the magnetic struc- tures can be assembled on the atomic level; (iii) scanning tunneling methods allow the local measurement and ma- nipulation of such structures. Despite the tremendous progress, both experimentally and theoretically, in the past years, one-dimensional MSH structures [13–20], i.e., magnetic chains on the surface of superconductors with spin-orbit coupling due to the inversion-symmetry break- ing at that surface, still struggle with either sample qual- ity or the size of the spectral gap necessary to separate the MZMs from the low-lying excited states. On the theoretical side, most simulations are (i) based on sim- plified models [7, 9, 21–23] and (ii) often done for entirely one-dimensional structures , thus ignoring the com- plexity and the two- or three-dimensional character of the materials involved. In addition, such models often cou- ple both the magnetic Zeeman field (accounting for the magnetic moments) and the superconducting order pa- rameter (accounting for the superconducting proximity ∗ Corresponding author: stephan.rachel@unimelb.edu.au effect) to the same orbitals, which is unphysical. Despite these simplifications, such models clearly show topologi- cal phases with localized MZMs at chain ends. Early ex- periments for Fe chains on Pb(110) seemed to be in good agreement with such modeling. Subsequent experi- ments on Fe/Pb(110) revealed a peculiar double eye fea- ture , which was explained by the authors of Ref. through the interplay of a local suppression of the order parameter in the vicinity of the magnetic chain and the tunneling geometry including the tip trajectory. How- ever, the aforementioned simplified models in the litera- ture cannot capture features such as the double eye. In the experimental part of this paper, we present dI/dV scanning tunneling spectroscopy data for Mn/Nb(110) and Fe/Nb(110) systems where characteristic low-energy states are present on the sides of the magnetic chain. We perform ab initio modeling of Mn chains along on Nb(110). We construct an effective superconducting 80-band Bogoliubov-de Gennes model, which turns out to be topologically non-trivial for most of the considered parameter range of the superconducting order parameter. Analysis of this model guides us to construct a further simplified model–still containing a four-atomic unit cell and a non-trivial amount of hoppings beyond nearest- neighbors–where the zero-energy states for the topolog- ical phase exhibit side-features. Further investigation of this model reveals that the spatial structure of the emerg- ing MZMs sensitively depends on the size of the spectral gap, with low-energy features varying between localized along the side of the magnetic chains and localized near the end, with the latter resembling the previously ob- served double-eye feature. Due to the promising agree- ment of the modeling with our scanning tunneling ex- periments for Mn chains on Nb(110) and the similarities to other MSH structures such as Fe chains on Nb(110) arXiv:2109.06894v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 14 Dec 2022 2 are shown; each unit cell contains 36 Nb and one Mn atom. The unit cell is oriented such that a ∣∣ x, b ∣∣ y and c ∣∣ z, and on the Nb surface, a ∣∣ , b ∣∣ [1 ̄10]. b and d, DFT band structure for spin up and down, respectively, where the orbital character of the Mn d-orbitals is highlighted in color while all other orbitals are shown in grey. c and e, Density of states (DOS) for the Mn d-orbitals from b and d. Comparison of c and e clearly reveals the spin polarization. or Pb(110), our work questions the notion of point-like MZMs as the hallmark of one-dimensional topological su- perconductors. We furthermore propose that MZMs ap- pearing as side features might be a common property of topologically non-trivial MSH structures in the small gap regime due to the complex interplay of the MZM’s orbital composition and their repulsion from the magnetic chain. II. RESULTS DFT modelling. Using density functional theory (DFT) and projective Wannier functions, we study the electronic structure of Mn chains on Nb(110), and map it onto a tight-binding model to extract the orbital de- pendence, spin splitting and spin-orbit coupling. To this end, we construct a slab supercell for the Mn chains along the direction with dMn−Mn = 3.30 ̊A on Nb(110). There is little previous work on ab initio based model- ing of MSH structures, see for two notable ex- ceptions. Fig. 1a shows the largest supercell that we can study computationally. The distortions of the relaxed Nb surface with Mn in the optimal hollow position entail that the Nb(110) electronic structure with a Mn chain at- tached differs from the bulk band structure both because of surface relaxation and because of distortions due to the Mn chain. Fig. 1b and d shows the fully relativis- tic (GGA+SO) spin-polarized band structure of our sys- tem, with Mn orbital character highlighted. We find that the ferromagnetic arrangement is 29.4 meV/Mn lower in energy than the antiferromagnetic one, indicating that Fig. 1b and d represents the DFT electronic ground state of the system. We find that an out-of-plane alignment of the magnetic moments is slightly lower in energy (by about 0.1 meV/Mn) compared to an in-plane alignment. To construct a tight-binding model of the bandstructure obtained from the DFT calculations, we use projective Wannier functions within FPLO . However, the in- clusion of all relevant orbitals, the Mn 3d, 4s and 4p as well as all Nb 4d, 5s and 5d orbitals, would result in a 666 band tight-binding model, whose investigation, for example in terms of the topological invariant or its real- space properties, is computationally beyond our current abilities. To arrive at a tractable tight-binding model, we therefore restrict our attention to the Mn 3d orbitals and the Nb 4d orbitals that bond with them (see highlighted Nb sites in Fig. 1a). This results in a 40-band tight bind- ing model, which (i) correctly reproduces the spectral weight of the Mn 3d bands (as given by the DFT results Fig. 1 c and e), which are relevant for the emergence of topological superconductivity due to their magnetic mo- ments, and (ii) contains the direction dependent d orbital overlaps as well as the effects of Mn spin splitting and Nb spin-orbit coupling. 80-band model. We convert the DFT-based 40-band tight-binding model into a superconducting 80-band Bo- goliubov–de Gennes model with the bare superconduct- ing order parameter ∆ as the only free parameter . Note that we apply the superconducting onsite pairing term only to the orbitals of the three Nb atoms but not to the Mn atom; we assume that superconductiv- ity is proximitized into the Mn orbitals, thus accurately describing the experimental system. It is important to emphasize that ∆ here only serves as a phenomenologi- cal parameter and does not have a one-to-one correspon- dence with the superconducting gap (which is known to be ∆Nb=1.51 meV for Nb). In fact, it is quite clear that the bare ∆ must be chosen to be much larger since the three Nb atoms represent the superconducting proximity effect of the entire (three-dimensional) Nb substrate. In order to investigate the topological phase diagram of this model we compute the gap size and the topological in- 3 bare superconducting amplitude ∆ (topological region in blue with M = −1, and white is trivial). The gap size is shown as the blue curve. b, Zero-energy LDOS as a function of lattice site along x and ∆ (the y-dependence has been summed up such that the LDOS appears one-dimensional) for chain length N = 51. c, Examples of zero-energy LDOS(x, y) for various values of ∆, as indicated by the dashed vertical lines in a, with pronounced side features. Chain length and ∆ are given within the panels. The theoretical LDOS is always evaluated in the plane of the chain (for a discussion of the three-dimensional LDOS see SI section S4). variant M characteristic of topological class D . The system is gapped, but the spectral gap is tiny for ∆ < 130 meV (Fig. 2a) and ranges between 7 μeV and 188 μeV for periodic boundary conditions (mean value 69 μeV). Moreover, we find for 0 < ∆ < 120 meV and for ∆ > 130 meV the ground state to be topologically non- trivial, i.e., M = −1 (Fig. 2 a). Gap sizes for the regime ∆ > 130 meV are in the range from 33 μeV to 1.83 meV (mean value 1.19 meV). Only the narrow region 120 meV < ∆ < 130 meV turns out to be trivial. Our momentum space analysis thus reveals that Mn chains in the di- rection on Nb(110) realize a topological superconductor, which due to bulk-boundary correspondence is accom- panied by MZMs that are localized at the chain ends. Chain length and effective gap size might, however, influ- ence MZMs and cause them to hybridize in an oscillatory fashion as a function of length, which is one of the key signatures of hybridized MZMs in short chains . Next, we study the real-space electronic structure, and in particular that of the MZMs of the DFT-based 80- band model. For short chains, it is very difficult to find localized zero-energy states due to the tiny gap size lead- ing to a severe hybridization of MZMs (Fig. 2b). Fig. 2b reveals that there is no unique structure of MZMs, mak- ing it difficult to identify topological phases solely based on the spatial structure of the zero-energy local density of states (LDOS). However, our computation of the topo- logical invariant in real-space shows that, as long as chains exceed ∼ 10 sites, we find perfect agreement with our momentum space analysis shown in Fig. 2 a. For ∆ > 200 meV we find examples of zero-energy LDOS where the hybridization leads to an oscillatory pattern and, quite astonishingly, the spectral weight of the MZMs is not located in the center of the chain but instead on the Nb atoms on the side of the magnetic chain. These side features show a striking similarity to recently re- ported scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) measure- ments on a Mn34 chain on Nb(110) (i.e., a chain consisting of 34 Mn atoms). We show in Fig. 2 c three examples of the zero-energy LDOS corresponding to dif- ferent values of ∆ and different chain lengths: a Mn34 chain with ∆ = 320 meV (three maxima), a Mn51 chain with ∆ = 300 meV (five maxima) and a Mn52 chain with ∆ = 270 meV (six maxima). Their topological gap sizes for open boundary conditions are 3.10 meV, 1.37 meV and 0.88 meV, respectively. We note that a self-consistent treatment will typically suppress ∆ near the magnetic chain, reducing the effective gap by a size- able amount. This reduction can easily be as large as a factor of 3 or 4, which would bring the theoretical gap size to the same range as the experimental gap size of 180 μeV of one of the multi-orbital YSR-bands in the vicinity of the Mn chains on Nb(110) (which is a factor of 8 smaller than the superconducting bulk gap, ∆Nb = 1.51 meV). We emphasize that localization is gov- erned by the correlation length, and thus longer chains lead to stronger localization of MZMs at the chain ends (see SI section S3.D). We note that side features can be observed for several values of ∆ per chain length; we fur- ther note that MZMs can also appear in the chain centre or combinations of side and centre atoms (see for instance Fig. S3 in SI section S2). It turns out that contributions from different orbitals are sensitive to the chosen value of ∆, leading to a complex, non-trivial interplay of the five d-orbitals in the low-energy LDOS. All theoretical LDOS plots shown in the main text are purely two-dimensional. In SI section S4 we extend our analysis by including tip trajectory and tunneling geometry and show that the 3D 4 Properties of simplified model for Majorana modes with side features. a, Definition of unit cell and hoppings of the simplified model. b, Evolution of the side features with chain length N in analogy to the experimental Fig. 4 b. Parameters: (∆, α, μ, J) = (0.05, 0.01, 2.05, 3.4)t. c, Representative topological phase diagram for ∆ = 0.05t, α = 0.01t and N = 51. Topologically non-trivial (trivial) regions are shown in red (blue), and are multiplied with the side feature weight (SFW) which quantifies how much spectral weight is accumulated on the side-Nb atoms (see SI section S3.B for details). Grey regions correspond to lowest energy states with E > 0.04 t, which are thus not of interest. The white dot marks the parametric location of Fig.1 e. d, Real-space zero-energy LDOS(x, y) with side features revealing a periodic pattern reminiscent of a Mn34 chain on Nb(110) . Parameters: (∆, α, μ, J) = (0.05, 0.01, 2.05, 3.4)t. e, Real-space zero-energy LDOS(x, y) with side features revealing a periodic pattern reminiscent of a Mn51 and Mn52 chains on Nb(110), c. f. Fig. 4 a. Parameters: in the bulk reminiscent of a Fe16 chain on Nb(110), c. f. Fig. 4 c. Parameters: (∆, α, μ, J) = (0.1, 0.05, 2, 4.9)t. g, Real-space zero-energy LDOS(x, y) with side feature only at the chain ends, reminiscent of the observed double-eye feature for Fe chains on Pb(110) . Parameters: (∆, α, μ, J) = (0.15, 0.1, 1.35, 6)t. The zero-energy LDOS states shown in d–g are in the topological phase. LDOS still contains sides features; all our conclusions re- main, hence, unchanged. Throughout the manuscript, we use the term MZM for the low-energy or zero-energy states of the topolog- ical superconducting phase. The latter is determined by the topological invariant for both infinite and finite chains. Clearly several of the considered examples of MZM are (strongly) hybridized, and in the literature al- ternative names such as ‘precursor of MZMs’ have been introduced . It is unknown whether hybridized MZMs are useful for braiding and thus for topological quantum computing, but that is not the topic of our paper. The aim of this paper is to demonstrate that a DFT-based modeling leads to a topological superconductor with low- energy states which are exceedingly similar to what has been observed in the experiments. Majorana zero modes with side features. In order to deepen our understanding of the side features in the zero-energy LDOS, we analyze in the following a simpli- fied model. Inspired by relevant orbitals of the 80-band DFT-based model which lead to side features (see SI sec- tion S2), we construct a one-orbital model which still has three “substrate” atoms carrying superconductivity and one magnetic atom (modeled by a Zeeman term), see Fig. 3 a. We stress that the model still contains a non-trivial hopping structure which could not have been guessed by an ad hoc toy model; the multi-band DFT input is key to derive and justify this ‘simplified’ model. We find for large gaps localized MZMs in the center of the chain ends (either on the magnetic or on the substrate atom), in agreement with previous modeling. However, when reducing the gap size (in an attempt to simulate the small experimental gap size), we find that the spectral weight of the MZMs drops to almost zero on the mag- netic atoms. Moreover, spectral weight appears on the side-Nb atoms, in agreement with the DFT-based model, reminiscent of previous experimental findings . A log- ical explanation for the formation of side features is as follows: the gap size corresponds to the strength of the superconductivity and thus to the proximity effect. In case of a large gap, i.e., of a significant superconducting proximity effect, superconductivity can be induced into the magnetic atoms and the MZM can be localized on the magnetic atoms at the chain ends. If the gap is small, however, the proximity induced superconductivity com- petes with the magnetism of the Mn atoms, leading to suppressed superconducting correlations, and the MZMs are pushed away and localize along both sides instead. The simplified model allows us to tune various param- eters such as Rashba spin-orbit coupling, magnetic mo- ment, chemical potential and superconducting pairing amplitude. We have analyzed the corresponding phase diagram and computed the fraction of the zero-energy LDOS which is localized on the side next to the magnetic 5 a, Constant-current image (top panel) and deconvoluted dI/dV map (bottom panel) at E = 128 μeV for a Mn51 chain along the direction. The white bar corresponds to 1 nm. The apparent extent of the chain from the upper panel is marked by the dark dashed lines in the dI/dV map. b, Deconvoluted dI/dV spectra measured on the side of MnN chains’ one end while additional Mn atoms were attached to the chain on the other end, thereby mainly showing the evolution of the side features with chain length N (c. f. Refs. ). c, Constant-current image (top panel) and deconvoluted dI/dV map (bottom panel) at zero energy for a Fe16 chain along the direction, which is structurally identical to the Mn chain in panel a. The white bar corresponds to 1 nm. The apparent extent of the chain from the upper panel is marked by the dark dashed lines in the dI/dV maps. Parameters: Vstab = −6 mV, Istab = 1 nA, Vmod = 20 μV. chain. 40 percent of the topological region of the phase diagram Fig. 3 c turns out to exhibit notable side features, and ten percent of the examined parameter space possess 70-99 percent of the total spectral weight on the sides of the chain. We have also analyzed a variant of the model with an extended substrate in both x− and y−direction to rule out confinement effects perpendicular to the chain. We find that side features persist regardless of the size of the substrate or its boundary conditions (see SI section S3.F for details). These findings emphasize that side fea- tures in the low-energy LDOS are not the exception but can be rather common. The oscillating behavior of the low-energy modes is a more ordinary hybridization ef- fect, which has previously been discussed in the context of other systems [3, 31, 34–36]. We find that the smallest considered gap sizes lead to an equal-distributed pattern of oscillatory maxima along the chain (Fig. 3 e, as found for the Mn51 chain in Fig. 2 c). We also computed the evolution of side-feature states with chain length N dis- playing an oscillatory behavior of the low-energy states, see Fig. 3 b. When slightly increasing the gap size, these maxima disappear in the middle of the chain, but persist closer to the chain ends (an example with two such maxima at the chain ends is shown in Fig. 3 f). Finally, we also find situations where MZMs are confined to the ends of the chains, still showing the side feature (Fig. 3 g). We obtain a clear physical picture which emerges from our analysis: (i) when the substrate is included (via the three extra atoms per unit cell) and the gap is small, MZMs are forced to localize beside the magnetic chain on the substrate; (ii) for the smallest gap sizes considered, hy- bridization of MZMs are so strong that we obtain a pe- riodic pattern of maxima in the zero-energy LDOS [see Fig. 3 d and e], as previously observed for the ab initio computed Mn51 chain in Fig. 2 c and for a measured Mn34 chain in Ref. . This is in agreement with a very large coherence length ξ ∼ vF /∆gap exceeding the chain length (see SI section S3.D). Increasing the gap size reduces ξ and leads to a decaying envelope of the wavefunction, such that spectral weight in the bulk of the chain is sup- pressed. Larger gap sizes result in even stronger localization of the MZMs [see Fig. 3 g], showing a remarkable similar- ity to what was observed for an Fe chain on a Pb(110) substrate . We have computed coherence lengths and low-energy LDOS for small, medium and large gap sizes for extended parameter ranges, all in support of our pre- vious conclusions (see SI sections S3.C and S3.D). While our ab initio model does not describe the Fe/Pb(110) system, we can still speculate that the topological low- energy features might not depend on the specific system: there is clearly a strong similarity of the observed side feature with shorter coherence length (Fig. 3 g) and the “double eye” seen in experiments . Due to the topo- logical character we propose that the double eye feature found in Fe/Pb(110) has the same origin as the side fea- tures reported and modeled in this paper. Experiment. To test the theoretical findings presented above, we studied linear chains of Mn and Fe assem- bled via lateral atom manipulation techniques on a clean Nb(110) surface (see Refs. for details on sample preparation and chain construction). Fig. 4 a shows the topography of a Mn51 chain assembled 6 along the direction (upper panel), together with the spatial form of dI/dV for a state close to zero en- ergy. The side features visible in dI/dV exhibit a close spatial similarity with those that exist in the theoreti- cal LDOS shown in Figs. 2 c and 3 e (previously reported side features, such as those shown in Fig. 3 of Ref. , also exhibit a close similarity with Figs. 2 c and 3 d). The energy at which these side features are visible varies with the chain length N ; the evolution of the side features’ energies with N is shown in Fig. 4 b. Notably, the lowest energy state exhibiting these side features does not con- verge to E = 0 for chain lengths up to N = 36 but rather oscillates around zero energy. This result resembles the theoretical predictions shown in Fig. 3 b (see also SI sec- tion S3.E) for a system with a small superconducting gap, and a chain length that is smaller than the coher- ence length. The combination of these two renders the experimental resolution of a topological gap exceedingly difficult. Indeed, our numerical simulations show that for the case shown in Fig. 3 b, the chain length has to be significantly larger before a topological gap can be re- solved and the Majorana mode is clearly separated from the bulk states. To study the universality of the observed side features, we also investigated the low-energy properties of a Fe16 chain along the direction. This chain is structurally identical (see upper panel in Fig. 4 c) to the Mn chains presented in Fig. 4 a and Ref. , and predicted to have a ferromagnetic ground state as well . It also exhibits an enhanced zero energy dI/dV at both sides of the chain ends (lower panel in Fig. 4 c). The notable similarity of these results with the theoretical calculations presented in Fig. 3 f, suggests a common origin of the side features observed for the Mn51 and Fe16 chains on Nb(110). III. DISCUSSION The side features of the Mn chains were previously ascribed to bands formed by hybridization of Yu-Shiba- Rusinov (YSR) states of particular orbital character of the individual Mn impurities . Individual Fe atoms do not exhibit clear signatures of multi-orbital YSR states (see SI section S6 for details), due to their close proximity to the coherence peaks of the substrate. Nevertheless, the linear Fe chains along the direction, mentioned above, show an enhanced zero- energy LDOS at the sides of both ends (Fig. 4 c). This surprising observation, which cannot be explained by a linear combination of YSR states of the individual atoms (see SI section S6), shows obvious similarities with the theoretical calculations presented in Fig. 2 c and Fig. 3. The interpretation of the observed side features as hy- bridized Majorana modes, as advocated in the theoretical part of this paper, is thus substantiated by the attempt to simultaneously explain the low-energy features for Mn and Fe chains on Nb(110). Motivated by our analysis relating these findings with the previously discovered double-eye feature , we thus conclude that MZMs with side features might be a com- mon phenomenon in MSH materials with small supercon- ducting gap size. We note, however, counter examples do exist such as Fe/Re(0001) and Mn chains along [1 ̄10] on Nb(110) . This is in fact consistent with our analysis of the superconducting 80-band model: side fea- tures appear only for certain values of ∆, and changing ∆ leads to a redistribution of the relative orbital weight. Since some of the Mn d-orbitals support side features and others do not (see discussion of Fig. S3 in SI section S2), these ‘counter examples’ are compatible with the main re- sults of our work. We emphasize that our results have far- reaching consequences: the presence of point-like zero- energy modes at chain ends is considered as a necessary condition for the identification of one-dimensional topo- logical superconductors. Our work suggests that MZMs could in fact come in a large variety, ranging from de- localized, hybridized MZMs along the chain to localized MZMs on the chain. What determines whether a system is topological or not is not the spatial form of the lowest energy state, but the calculated value of the topological invariant. Our findings raise the important question whether MZMs with side features can be used for braid- ing and topological quantum computing, emphasizing the necessity to perform further theoretical and experimental work on one-dimensional MSH structures. METHODS Density Functional Theory Calculations We are us- ing fully relativistic all electron DFT calculations based on the full potential local orbital (FPLO) basis in combination with a generalized gradient approximation (GGA) to the exchange correlation functional. We obtain low energy tight binding models using projective Wannier functions . The considered slab supercell is shown in Fig. 1 a. We have fully relaxed the top half of the system while keeping the two bottom layers fixed at the Nb bulk lattice parameters and internal coordinates in order to simulate the experimental Nb(110) surface. We find that the top Nb layers contract slightly, lowering the near- est neighbour bond lengths. High symmetry positions for the placement of Mn are on top of Nb atoms and in the central hollow of the diamond arrangement of four Nb surface atoms. Energetically, the hollow position is 1.4 eV/Mn more favorable, in agreement with experimen- tal observations and the calculations in Ref. . The Nb atoms forming bonds with Mn are measurably distorted out of their equilibrium Nb surface positions. Superconducting 80-Band Modeling The projected 40-band tight-binding model is given by H = ∑ i,j;o,o′;σ,σ′ ti,o;j,o′ σσ′ c† i,o,σ cj,o′,σ′ + H.c. (1) 7 including essentially all possible hopping combinations up to fifth neighbors. Hopping amplitudes ti,o;j,o′ σσ′ are given as an input from DFT, and c† i,o,σ creates an electron with spin σ at orbital o at site i. We add the supercon- ducting onsite pairing term H∆ = ∑i,o ∆c† i,o,↑c† i,o,↓ + H.c. and convert the model into an 80-band Bogoliubov–de Gennes model. As stressed before, the orbital index o only runs over the orbitals of the Nb atoms. We have calculated the topological invariant both in momen- tum and real space for this model. By virtue of Fourier transformation we obtained the real-space repre- sentation, leading to matrix dimensions of 80N for chain length N which can be diagonalized numerically. Open boundary conditions are enforced by setting all hopping amplitudes connecting the two chain ends to zero; to make the chain mirror symmetric, the central Nb atom is removed on the left side of the chain. In the SI section S3.F, we investigate finite chains embedded in a larger substrate in order to rule out edge and confinement ef- fects. Scanning Tunneling Microscopy and Spec- troscopy The STM experiments were performed in a home-built UHV facility operated at a base temperature of T = 320 mK . The Nb(110) single crystal substrate was cleaned by high temperature flashes to T > 2700 K, following . Single Mn and Fe atoms were de- posited onto the cold sample surface held at T < 7 K. A superconducting tip was prepared by indenting an elec- trochemically etched W tip into the substrate, thereby transferring large clusters of superconducting Nb onto the tip apex. STM topography images were measured in a constant-current mode with the current setpoint I while applying a constant bias voltage VDC across the tunnel- ing junction. Differential tunneling conductance (dI/dV ) spectra were measured by stabilizing the tip at bias volt- age Vstab and current Istab. In a next step, the feedback loop was opened and VDC was swept between -4 mV and +4 mV. The dI/dV signal was measured using a standard lock-in technique with a small modulation voltage Vmod (RMS) of modulation frequency f = 4.142 kHz added to VDC. The dI/dV maps were acquired by recording a set of dI/dV spectra on a rectangular grid. Superconduct- ing Nb tips have been used in order to achieve a higher effective energy resolution. The measured differential tunneling conductance dI/dV is thus approximately pro- portional to a convolution of the LDOS of the sample and the superconducting tip density of states (DOS). We show numerically deconvoluted STS data throughout the manuscript, resembling the sample’s LDOS (see Refs. 20 and 32 for details on the deconvolution process and de- termination of the tip gap). The Mn and Fe chains were assembled using lateral atom manipulation techniques at low tunneling resistances of R ≈ 12−60 kΩ. Data availability. All data and materials needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Information and are available for download at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6522954.