Mirror symmetric on-chip frequency circulation of light Jason F. Herrmann1,∗ Vahid Ansari1, Jiahui Wang1, Jeremy D. Witmer1, Shanhui Fan2, and Amir H. Safavi-Naeini1 1. Ginzton Laboratory and Department of Applied Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 USA 2. Ginzton Laboratory and Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 USA (Dated: September 29, 2021) Integrated circulators and isolators are important for developing on-chip optical technologies, such as laser cavities, communication systems, and quantum information processors. These de- vices appear to inherently require mirror symmetry breaking to separate backwards from forwards propagation, so existing implementations rely upon magnetic materials, or interactions driven by propagating waves. In contrast to previous work, we demonstrate a mirror symmetric nonreciprocal device. Our device comprises three coupled photonic resonators implemented in thin-film lithium niobate. Applying radio frequency modulation, we drive conversion between the frequency eigen- modes of this system. We measure nearly 40 dB of isolation for approximately 75 mW of RF power near 1550 nm. We simultaneously generate nonreciprocal conversion between all of the eigenmodes in order to demonstrate circulation. Mirror symmetric circulation significantly simplifies the fabri- cation and operation of nonreciprocal integrated devices. Finally, we consider applications of such on-chip isolators and circulators, such as full-duplex isolation within a single waveguide. Circulators are nonreciprocal devices that allow prop- agating signals to cycle between three channels, e.g., in1 → out3, in3 → out2, in2 → out1 as shown in Fig 1a. A circulator can isolate components from each other, i.e., it can prevent reflections from returning to the source of a signal, simply by terminating one of its three channels through absorption. For example if we terminate port 2 in Fig. 1a, signals will propagate from in1 → out3, but in3 → out2 would be terminated, thereby prevent- ing reflections on the third port from propagating back to the first port. There is flexibility in selecting the in- put and output channels. In many realizations, the chan- nels ink/outk are the incoming and outgoing waves in the waveguides connected to port k. However, other realiza- tions are also possible. In this work, our input channels correspond to the incoming waves at different frequencies in one waveguide (on the left in Fig. 1b), and the output channels correspond to the outgoing waves at different frequencies in the other side of the waveguide (on the right in Fig. 1b). Unlike more typical three-waveguide configurations, this type of circulator is compatible with mirror symmetry:1 by imposing the same scattering re- lations between the frequency channels for light traveling from right to left in the device, we obtain a second fre- quency circulation, related to the first by reflection about the center axis (dashed line in Fig. 1b). The mirror symmetry of our circulator means that its physical implementation can be simpler than more tra- ditional circulators and isolators, which require mirror symmetry breaking. Many of these demonstrations use magnetic materials,2–7 traveling waves,8–18 or multiple modulators emitting with different phases19–23 to induce a sense of direction and nonreciprocal propagation. As a consequence of mirror symmetry in our device, a sin- gle radio frequency (RF) electro-optic modulator (EOM) is sufficient to generate circulation between three opti- cal frequency channels. As we show here, this signifi- cantly simplifies hardware implementations of nonrecip- rocal photonic circuits. Results We demonstrate a device on a thin film lithium niobate (TFLN) platform that consists of three coupled photonic racetrack resonators. The first resonator is coupled to a bus waveguide, as shown in Fig. 1c. The modes of race- track resonators 1 (2) and 2 (3) are coupled at a rate μ12 (μ23), while 1 and 3 are not directly coupled (μ13 = 0). Our device uses the TE00 guided mode, which on X-cut TFLN has large electro-optic coupling to fields parallel to both the chip surface and the crystal Z axis. Electrodes fabricated across each racetrack enable independent DC bias tuning of the uncoupled or bare mode frequencies via the linear electro-optic effect.24 This is necessary to counteract drift and fabrication disorder. We set the desired operating point by using the DC bias to tune all of the bare mode frequencies to be equal, which yields three evenly spaced resonances in the cou- pled or dressed basis with frequencies ωi. In an ideal system, the spacing is Ω = √ 2μ with μ ≡ |μ12| = |μ23|. These three resonances couple to the bus waveguide through their spatial overlaps with the first racetrack and therefore lead to dips in the transmission spectrum, as shown in Fig. 1d. This overlap also means that RF mod- ulation of the racetrack adjacent to the bus waveguide couples all three resonances together, as depicted by the schematic three-level system in Fig. 1d. We apply an RF modulation of the form: (1) The frequency Ω corresponds to the microwave modu- lation frequency. In an ideal system with equal inter- modal couplings μ, we would set Ω to √ 2μ. Fabrication disorder and tuning imprecision means that the μij’s are slightly different. For example, μ12/2π = 1.864 GHz and μ23/2π = 1.861 GHz, as inferred for the data in Fig. 1d, so we drive at Ω/2π = 2.63 GHz, the average of the difference between the measured coupled resonance fre- quencies ω1 −ω2 and ω2 −ω3. Driving at Ω scatters light arXiv:2109.13864v1 [physics.optics] 28 Sep 2021 2 Ω Ω 2Ω c 1 3 2 a b d RFin 400 μm inputs/outputs. (b) Schematic of a circulator in frequency space operating within a single waveguide. The circulator can operate equivalently by inputting light from the left-side waveguide (top) or from the right-side waveguide (bot). The solid arrows emphasize the conversion from ω1 to ω3, the dashed arrows indicate alternative frequency conversions, and the vertical dashed line depicts the structural mirror plane of the device. (c) SEM image (false-colored) of an identical device to that used in this experiment. Modulation is applied across both straight-lengths of the first (leftmost) racetrack. DC tuning is applied to the electrodes across the second (middle) racetrack. Lithium niobate (red) and gold electrodes (blue). (d) Optical spectrum of the hybridized super-modes of the device operating at 1543 nm. (d, inset) Schematic of the three-level system formed by the hybridized modes. Frequency conversion between any two modes can occur by two possible pathways; one path is a direct transition, and the other occurs in two steps, mediated by the third level. between dressed modes ω1 and ω2, whereas the 2Ω drive scatters light between modes ω1 and ω3. For any pair of dressed modes, two possible transition pathways ex- ist, as depicted by the schematic inset in Fig. 1d. One pathway is a direct transition, whereas the other is a two-step transition through the third mode. By varying the amplitudes and relative phases of the two RF tones, we enhance or suppress different pathways by generating interference. In the ideal disorder-free model, forward isolation (mode ω1 → ω3) is maximized for the phase condition 2φ1 − φ2 = π/2. We characterize the performance of our circulator by measuring the scattering parameters Sij, which quantify how the amplitude aj of each incoming wave at frequency ωj is converted to the amplitude of an outgoing wave bi at frequency ωi, propagating in the same direction in the opposite waveguide. This is depicted in Fig. 2a. We define an isolation parameter as Iij ≡ |Sij|2/|Sji|2. This characterizes the asymmetry between forward and backward frequency conversion for a pair of modes. As shown in Fig. 2b for channels 1 and 3, it is clear that forward scattering from 1 → 3 occurs efficiently while the backward scattering is strongly suppressed. This leads to I31 approaching 40 dB when the driving phase condition is π/2 and Ai are correctly tuned, as explained below. Similar isolation is observed for other pairs of channels. We obtain the scattering and isolation parameters de- scribed above by first characterizing the device’s linear spectrum, with the RF modulation turned off. We mea- sure the optical transmission parameter t(ω)|RF,off as a function of frequency, which we then use to infer and DC- tune the device’s parameters. This transmission ampli- tude evaluated at frequencies ωj corresponds to Sjj|RF,off since it describes transmission through the device with- out a change in frequency. We place a laser tone at frequency ω0, blue-detuned from all of the resonances, and feed it through a commercial electro-optic modula- tor (EOM) before sending it to the device. Driving the EOM with a vector network analyzer (VNA), we generate two sidebands at ω0 ± ∆. By sweeping the VNA modu- lation frequency, we move one sideband across the cav- ity response, which then beats against the optical feed- 3 S31 S13 I31(on) I31 |S13|2 |S31|2 I23 I31 I12 a b c ∆φ = 2φ1 − φ2. (a) Schematic of frequency-domain circu- lator. Solid arrows indicate light input from the waveguide on the left (as measured), and dashed arrows indicate the same conversions when light is input from the waveguide on the right. (b) Isolation for ω1 → ω3 conversion. The line labeled “off” corresponds to decreasing the Ω frequency RF drive (P1) while keeping the 2Ω drive (P2) high, indicating the importance of coherent interference of the two processes for nonreciprocity. P1 = 73.2 mW, P2 = 59.0 mW. (c) Mu- tual isolation for all conversions observed for the fixed power condition in (b). Shifts between the peaks and the ideal phase condition stem from disorder in the mode hybridization. through, ω0, on a subsequent RF photodiode connected to the VNA. Sweeping the VNA frequency allows us to see, nearly in real-time, the hybridized mode structure of the device, as shown in Fig. 3b. Our device exhibits DC bias drift as a result of photorefraction, a common challenge in lithium niobate devices.25–27 This measure- ment technique enables us to observe and compensate for these changes as the optical input power and DC bias both affect the spectrum. We fit a complete model of the measurement, including the EOM transmission, cav- ity response, and phase response measured by the VNA in order to determine all of the device’s optical parame- ters (loss rates, resonant frequencies, etc.). An example of such a fit is depicted in Fig. 3c. We can also extract the sideband transmission t(ω)|RF,off from these spectra. We then measure the “active” device by turning on the RF drive and characterizing the scattering between frequency channels. Since VNA measurements only find linear scattering parameters, characterizing the scatter- ing between frequencies requires a different measurement scheme than that described above. Keeping the laser at ω0, we modulate the EOM at frequency ∆ in order to generate and input light at frequency ωj = ω0 − ∆. We infer all of the optical powers in the different channels by making RF measurements of their beating against the feed-through light at ω0. This presents a minor complica- tion for inferring Sjj, as the beat notes generated by both EOM sidebands ω0±∆ interfere at RF frequency ∆. This ambiguity can be resolved by comparing measurements of Sjj to the independently measured scattering param- eters (see previous paragraph) when RF modulation to the chip is turned off. Note that the other scattering parameters Sij, i ̸= j can be inferred without this com- plication, so the isolation parameters Iij are unaffected. For all scattering parameters, we record the RF power in the beat note corresponding to optical frequency ωi, while varying the RF phase φ2. This power is propor- tional to |bi|2. We take the ratio of the measured power in ωi to that of the unmodulated transmission at the sig- nal frequency ωj. By factoring out the contribution from the non-resonant input tone at ω0 + ∆, we obtain the scattering parameters |Sij|2 = |bi/aj|2 (see SI). The scattering parameter measurements shown in Fig. 2 are taken for optimized values of the RF drive amplitude Ai. When the Ω RF drive is turned down, i.e., A1 ≈ 0, but the 2Ω drive is kept on, we do not observe isolation (dashed line in Fig. 2b). For tuned val- ues of A1 and A2, we observe simultaneous isolation be- tween the three pairs of dressed frequencies, demonstrat- ing circulator-like behavior, as depicted in Fig. 2c. We next characterize the RF power-dependent opera- tion of our device by varying the modulation amplitudes A1 and A2. For each power combination, we sweep the phase condition of the RF sources through multiple pe- riods and extract the peak isolation observed for each transition. We generate maps of the isolation versus RF power, depicted in Fig. 4a-c. Each pixel is normalized by linear scattering parameters, analogously to the data in Fig. 2. The optical device characteristics used for this normalization are extracted from the VNA trace in Fig. 3, taken prior to varying the RF power. mance obtained from coupled mode theory and show 4 Laser VNA RF EOM PC SA W-meter a b Experiment characterization scheme. (a) Schematic of the characterization setup. (b) Background- normalized amplitude and phase of the VNA spectrum pro- duced by the EOM response filtered through the optical cav- ity. The EOM is set to an approximately π DC phase shift. The fit is made to the phase response and used to predict the amplitude response. good agreement with the measured trends. We attribute differences between theory and experiment, such as the slopes in the I31 maps and the locations of peak isolation in I12 and I23, to mode drifts over the full course of mea- surement. This drift could emerge from either DC bias drift, which introduces disorder in the mode hybridiza- tion, or from high-power RF-induced drift (see SI). We assume this drift does not significantly affect the nor- malization factor we use for data processing, which is obtained from the initial VNA trace. From the theo- retical plots, we infer a high-frequency bare mode mod- ulation rate gEO/2π ≈ 330 MHz. This rate closely matches the directly measured low-frequency modulation rate gEO,DC/2π = 328.5 MHz. We can understand the trends in the isolation factor RF power dependence by studying the coupled mode the- ory description of the dynamics.1 The RF modulation scatters photons between the dressed modes at a rate pro- portional to ̃Ai = gEOAi, where gEO is the electro-optic tuning of the bare RF-coupled mode. We observe strong enhancement in I31 in Fig. 4a,d along a locus correspond- ing to ̃A2 1 ∝ ̃A2. This condition is found by noting that for cancellation to occur, the rate at which direct 1 → 3 scattering occurs, ̃A2, needs to match the rate of indirect scattering 1 → 2 → 3, which is approximately ̃A2 Here, γ2 is the linewidth (full-width, half-max – FWHM) of the second dressed mode. A more detailed analysis1 indicates that maximum I13 isolation is given by: ̃A2 = ̃A2 1 2γ2 , where γ2 = (κ1 + κ3)/2. A similar line of reasoning explains the large isolation regions in Fig. 4b,c,e,f. For example, note that a peak I12 requires interference between two scattering processes – a direct process 1 → 2, occurring with a rate ̃A1, and an indirect process 1 → 3 → 2, occurring at a rate ̃A1 ̃A2/γ3. This interference is maximized when the rates are nearly equal. A more detailed coupled mode analysis confirms that the ideal condition ̃ A2 ̃ A1 = 4γ1,3 ̃ A1, where γ1,3 = (κ1+2κ2+κ3)/4, maximizes the isolation parameter. The isolation parameters I12 and I23 are therefore maximized when: ̃ A2 = 4γ1,3, independently of the direct scattering rate ̃A1. Inhomo- geneity in the mode hybridization causes deviations from this exact condition for I23 versus I12, i.e., they appear at slightly different power conditions in Fig. 4b,c. Discussion Our platform’s most significant limit is due to optical loss in the cavities. In the ideal realization the dressed mode linewidths are entirely due to coupling out into the feed waveguide. When the RF drives are off, the absence of intrinsic loss means that the dressed modes are over- coupled, so |Skk| = 1. As we increase the RF driving power, the scattering between dressed modes appears as additional loss at the signal frequency. This moves the mode from being over-coupled into a critically coupled condition, when the scattering-induced loss at mode k equals the mode’s coupling rate to the waveguide and leads to |Skk| = 0. However, in the experimentally real- ized system, there is additional intrinsic loss in all three cavities, and the dressed modes are already close to being critically coupled when the RF drives are off. The RF in- duced scattering then acts to increase transmission |Skk| as it moves the mode farther away from being critically coupled. This means that in contrast to the ideal circu- lator, the diagonal elements of the scattering matrix are 5 0 4 8 12 16 20 P2 (dBm) 0 4 8 12 16 20 P1 (dBm) 0 4 8 12 16 20 P2 (dBm) 0 4 8 12 16 20 P2 (dBm) -10 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 0 4 8 12 16 20 0 4 8 12 16 20 P1 (dBm) 0 4 8 12 16 20 0 4 8 12 16 20 -10 0 10 20 30 40 I31 I23 I12 Theory Experiment a b c d e f (dB) (dB) drive). For each power combination, the phase of the 2Ω drive (φ2) is swept across multiple periods. Each pixel corresponds to the maximum observed isolation for each RF power combination for a given isolation parameter. The phase condition varies between pixels of different maps. The top row corresponds to measurements, and the bottom row are theoretical predictions of isolation. We attribute differences between experiment and theory to shifting system parameters over time and as the RF power increases (see SI). Predictions are based on the fit system parameters, which also have some degree of uncertainty. nonzero in our realization. We expect that with improve- ments in optical Q of on-chip LN devices, this problem can be largely eliminated.29 One possible way to circum- vent this challenge in the shorter term is to include an additional resonator after the device at frequency ωk in order to filter out any feed-through and make Skk = 0 for a single channel. Another approach that does not require major improvements in the Q is to increase the cavity- waveguide coupling and start within a more over-coupled regime. However, this approach would require larger RF powers and we are already power-limited. The off-chip microwave amplifier saturates at approximately 35 dBm. Moreover, as power to the device increases above roughly 120 mW, we observe dressed mode drifts on the order of MHz, which disrupts the resonance condition required for high isolation (see SI). Another limit of our approach is due to its resonant nature. The isolation bandwidth of our device depends on the dressed mode linewidths, and we measured sus- tained isolation over more than a few hundred megahertz. This too can be increased, but at the cost of greater RF power as the ̃Ak also scale with bandwidth. One strat- egy to make the modulation more efficient would be to include modulation into the third racetrack. Alterna- tively, since we only need narrowband RF modulation, we could use the extremely efficient optomechanical mod- ulation schemes recently demonstrated on LN30–32 to sig- nificantly reduce the needed RF power and realize larger bandwidth. Finally, we note that the bandwidth of the device is potentially larger than the linewidth of a single mode as there are families of modes repeating with the cavity free spectral range, and under low disorder, these would also behave as circulators for signals at different sets of frequencies. A novel feature of our device is its operation as a bi- directional isolator – a property that emerges from mir- ror symmetry and frequency-domain operation. For ex- ample, two transmitters/receivers can operate simulta- neously along a single channel. Node 1 can transmit a signal down a waveguide at frequency ω1 to node 2, who 6 recieves at ω3. This communication is isolated. Mean- while, node 2 can then send a signal backwards along the waveguide at ω1 to node 1, who also receives at ω3. This communication is also isolated. With the standard optical isolator, this behavior would require two optical channels, one for each direction of transmission. Overall, we have demonstrated an integrated fre- quency isolator/circulator on thin-film lithium niobate, an emerging platform for classical and quantum photon- ics. We measured peak isolation of nearly 40 dB with 4.4 dB insertion loss for dual RF drive powers of P1 = 73.2 mW P2 = 59.0 mW. Our device is reconfigurable, en- abling isolation over a wide range of powers for differ- ent operating frequencies. For example, we also measure ω1 → ω3 isolation of more than 25 dB for dual RF pow- ers of P1 = 7.32 mW and P2 = 0.74 mW, but with a commensurate increase of insertion loss (∼ 16 dB). Fur- thermore, we also measured insertion loss as low as 3 dB for different power and isolation conditions. Ulti- mately, the mirror symmetry and frequency-domain op- eration of our device provide for novel applications as an isolator/circulator and frequency router in photonic circuits. Methods Fabrication. The device is fabricated in a two-mask process from 500 nm-thick film of lithium niobate (LN) atop a sapphire (Sa) handle. The components are air-clad, and the electrodes are fabricated as a Ti:Au metal bilayer. The first mask, for photonics fabrication, is defined from hydrogen silsequioxane (HSQ), a negative-tone electron beam resist, patterned with 100 kV electron beam lithography (JEOL JBX-6300FS). We transfer the patterns into the LN with argon ion mill etching (IntlVac ion mill), followed by an acid cleaning procedure. We confirm the device’s optical performance prior to fabricating electrodes. The electrodes are defined with a standard photoresist lift-off bilayer. The patterns are written using direct-write lithography (Heidelberg MLA150), and metal is evaporated (Kurt J. Lesker LAB18) prior to solvent-based liftoff. Lastly, we wirebond on-chip to connect electrodes across the optics, thereby defining proper modulation polarity on-chip (West Bond 7476E). Characterization. The device is optically pumped from a telecommunications wavelength diode laser (Santec TSL-550). We lock the optical pump blue-detuned from the modes at 1543.6 nm (via a Bristol Wavemeter). The light is passed through a polar- ization control wheel and in-line fiber polarizer to maximize TE transmission. This light is passed into a commercial electro-optic amplitude modulator (EOM). We drive the EOM from a VNA (R&S ZNB20) in order to generate sidebands. The pump and side- bands are then passed through another polarization controller, into a variable optical attenuator (VOA), then a power meter before be- ing passed onto the chip. By sweeping the frequency of the VNA output (or by driving a particular frequency) we can sweep the sideband across (or directly drive) the optical dressed modes of the system. The light undergoes modulation on-chip. Output light from the optical waveguide passes through an erbium-doped fiber amplifier (EDFA) and an X-switch, which switches our detector be- tween a photodiode for linear optical characterization, and a fast photo-diode (Optilab PD-40M), which records beat tones between the optical pump, the EOM sideband, and converted sidebands when applying on-chip modulation. The output of the fast photo- diode passes through a bias-tee. One arm passes back to the VNA to record the broad-band response of the cavity, and the other arm passes to a spectrum analyzer (R&S FSW26) to record converted sideband powers with high precision. This setup enables us to si- multaneously observe the full cavity response on the VNA in nearly real-time while adjusting DC bias across the device and manipu- lating the optical pump, while also observing sideband powers at particular frequencies when driving on-chip modulation. In order to characterize our device mirror symmetry, we sepa- rately insert a second X-switch and polarization control just be- fore the device. We record transmission through the device from both waveguide propagation directions, demonstrating equivalence of scattering matrix elements (see SI). On-chip modulation is driven from two pulsed signal generators (PSG, Keysight E8257D). One PSG drives the Ω tone while the other drives the 2Ω tone. We vary the relative phase between these sources. The clocks of the PSGs are locked together, and these are in turn locked to the clock of the FSW26. The two PSG outputs are combined at a power splitter and passed through a high-power microwave amplifier. The output of the amplifier is then passed to a probe, which is contacted to the on-chip electrical pads. Importantly, the rate of direct phase modulation on the PSG is much faster than the global phase drift of the system, enabling us to visualize power modulations at sideband frequencies on the FSW26. Author contribution. J.F.H. fabricated the device. J.F.H. and V.A. led the experimental effort. J.W. developed the de- vice operating theory and characterized theoretical device perfor- mance. J.F.H, J.D.W., and J.W. determined physical device de- signs. J.D.W. assisted in early experimentation. A.H.S.N and S.F. provided experimental and theoretical guidance and support for this experiment.