Faulty evidence for superconductivity in ac magnetic susceptibility of sulfur hydride under pressure J. E. Hirsch Department of Physics, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0319 It is generally believed that sulfur hydride under high pressure is a high temperature supercon- ductor [1–7]. In National Science Review 6, 713 (2019) Huang and coworkers Ref. reported detection of superconductivity in sulfur hydride through a highly sensitive ac magnetic susceptibil- ity technique and an unambiguous determination of the superconducting phase diagram. In this paper we present evidence showing that the experimental results reported in that paper do not support the conclusion that sulfur hydride is a superconductor. PACS numbers: I. INTRODUCTION In 2015, Drozdov and coworkers reported the discovery of high temperature superconductivity in sulfur hydride . The result is generally assumed to be true [2–7]. In- dependently, Huang and coworkers measured ac magnetic susceptibility of sulfur hydride and in appearance con- firmed the existence of superconductivity. According to ref. , that work “sets a new standard for experimental studies of superconductivity at high pressure”. However, we have recently argued that the experimen- tal evidence supporting superconductivity in sulfur hy- dride presented in ref. is not convincing , and that neither is the one presented in refs. concerning the Meissner effect . In this paper we argue that the ac susceptibility measurements of ref. provide no support for the existence of superconductivity in sulfur hydride either. No other studies of ac magnetic suscepti- bility nor of other magnetic properties of sulfur hydride besides those mentioned above have been reported so far. Ac magnetic susceptibility is a superior test for super- conductivity in materials under high pressure [15–20]. A superconductor excludes magnetic flux, so upon cooling into the superconducting state a sharp drop in the ac magnetic susceptibility is observed. For experiments un- der high pressures, because of the smallness of the sam- ple required by the geometry of the diamond anvil cell, the detected signal is a tiny drop in a large signal aris- ing from the superposition of the sample and the back- ground magnetic responses, with the background signal being several orders of magnitude larger than the sample signal . For that reason, it is customary to subtract from the total signal (the so-called ”raw data”) the background signal, according to the relation data = raw data − background signal. (1) The background signal is usually obtained by measuring the susceptibility at a pressure value such that no super- conducting transition occurs in the temperature range of interest . Reference reports measurements of ac magnetic sus- ceptibility measurements for sulfur hydride at seven dif- ferent pressure values. It only shows results for ac suscep- tibility for four values of pressure. These results (figure 2 of ref. ) are reproduced in Fig. 1. The drops in the signals seen in the figure were interpreted as due to the onset of superconductivity at the critical temperatures Tc shown in the figure . various pressures, Fig. 2 of ref. . II. THE MEASURED RAW DATA The results shown in Fig. 1 are for the left side of Eq. (1), i.e. are obtained by subtracting a background signal from raw data. In order to assess the validity and signifi- cance of these results, we requested from the authors the raw data and background signal measured, from which the results shown in Fig. 1 were obtained. Following generally accepted proper scientific practice, the authors kindly sent us these data recently as well as gave us ad- arXiv:2109.08517v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 6 Feb 2024 2 raw background raw - background Fig 2a 2a of ref. plotted from data supplied by the authors . The lower left panel shows the difference between the upper left and right panels, in agreement with the published results shown on the lower right panel. raw background raw - background Fig 2b 2b of ref. plotted from data supplied by the authors . The lower left panel shows the difference between the upper left and right panels, in agreement with the published results shown on the lower right panel. ditional details of the measurements upon our request . From the data supplied by the authors, we made plots of the raw data and the background signal and of their difference according to Eq. (1). These are shown in Figs. 2 to 5. It can be seen that the difference calculated from the raw data and background signal supplied by the au- thors properly reproduces the data plotted in Fig. 2 of ref. . We also learn from these figures that the background signal, which was collected separately for each tempera- Fig 2c raw - background raw background 2c of ref. plotted from data supplied by the authors . The lower left panel shows the difference between the upper left and right panels, in agreement with the published results shown on the lower right panel. RESEARCH ARTICLE H show typical amplitude records from the coil system during each temperature scan at (a) 117 GPa, (b) 130 GPa, (c) 149 GPa and (d) 155 GPa. To obtain the strong amplitude signal, we kept the sample and compensating coil signals in phase. The critical tem- perature Tc is estimated from the onset of the superconducting transition. targetpressurerangewasfrom155–171GPa.Awell- defined and reproducible superconducting signal was triggered at about 168 K at 155 GPa (Fig. 2d). When the pressure was increased further, there was an abrupt decrease in Tc, which shifted down to 140 K at 171 GPa. In the third run, we first ap- plied 130 GPa on the sample at temperatures T < 100 K. Upon cooling the sample, at 130 GPa, the superconducting transition appeared at about 55 K. Thereafter, the sample was rapidly warmed to 300 K with the pressure maintained at 130 GPa. Upon fur- ther compression, the superconducting transition appeared at about 173 K and 168 K at 143 GPa and 155 GPa, respectively. The variation tendency of Tc with pressure is identical with the first and second runs.However,whenthesamplewascompressedup to 170 GPa, the diamond failed. To shed further insight on the pressure de- pendence of Tc in the high-temperature supercon- ducting sulfur hydride system, we have plotted our experimental data together with all previous exper- imental measurements and our previous theoreti- cal calculations (Fig. 3a) . The uncer- tainties in determining Tc are especially large above 150 GPa. To reach ultrahigh pressure the diameter of the diamond anvil culets is reduc reduction of the magnetic signal that tothevolumeofthesample.The ratio is thus reduced, resulting in th tainty in Tc upon further compressio of Fig. 3a shows that there is a pron the pressure dependence of Tc at a and the diagram can be divided into t low 130 GPa the onset temperature T 100 K, which was also observed in th trical resistance measurements . high-Tc superconductivity appears ously the H3S phase becomes the d ponent in the sample, as shown b X-ray diffraction data . In this oretical discussions are focused on agram from magnetic susceptibility and the inherent mechanism. To d portant points are addressed in the d in the hydrogen sulfur system, the a complex superconducting behavio sures with a change in both crysta stoichiometry. It is almost impossibl thecomplexsuperconductingbehavi experimental techniques, as reporte ous experiment by Drozdov et al. [ the crystal structure and stoichiomet gen sulfur system under high pressur alyzed by the reported first-principl based on density functional theory (D known that H2S is the only known sta intheH–Ssystematambientpressur dicted that H2S is stable below 43 G poses into H3S and S above this pres Except for H3S, other hydrogen-r tries were also reported to be stable and the superconducting critical te calculated for various H–S compoun with our experimental results, for temperature Tc phase below 140 G retically calculated Tc of the vario tries H–S phase may quantitatively low-Tc data . It is propos H–S stoichiometries may be mainly the measured superconductivity of t low 140 GPa. We have tried to e composition process of H2S under and deeply understand the format H3S, through ab initio variable-cell namics (MD) simulations. Our M with the orthorhombic Pbcm for ph ploying a simulation cell of 96 mol tegrated radial distribution at 140 G gives a reasonable H–S bond length Fig. 4, the instantaneous snapshot of works at 140 GPa shows that an SH Fig 2d raw - background raw background 2d of ref. plotted from data supplied by the authors . The lower left panel shows the difference between the upper left and right panels, in agreement with the published results shown on the lower right panel. ture range at a lower pressure , is smooth in all cases, with nearly constant slope around the region where the transition occurs. This is what one expects for these measurements, as also seen for example in ref. . As a consequence, the raw data shown in the top left panels of Figs. 2 to 5 show similar slope versus temperature above and below Tc. This is in stark contrast with the raw data for ac magnetic susceptibility of a carbonaceous sulfur hydride (CSH) under pressure, claimed to be superconducting at room temperature, shown in ref. . For that mate- 3 (a) (b) (c) (d) Temperature versus line number for background. T T T T line number background signal measurements used to obtain the data in Fig. 1, measured at pressures lower than the values where superconducting transitions occur. rial, the published raw data for ac magnetic susceptibility (Extended Data Fig. 7 d of ref. ) show a very sig- nificant change in slope across the transition, similar to what such data look like for the element europium at low temperature . I have suggested that this implies that the published data for ac susceptibility of CSH are invalid [24–26]. Instead, the authors of ref. state that the background signal is responsible for this unusual behav- ior . This would imply a very anomalous background signal, qualitatively different from that seen in Figs. 2-5 here, arguably impossible . The authors of ref. have declined to supply their raw data and background signal measurements to verify or disprove their claim. III. FURTHER ANALYSIS To further examine the validity and significance of the susceptibility data for sulfur hydride reported in un- der discussion here, we have made graphs of the mea- sured temperature versus line number in the data files supplied by the authors . The authors did not give us a a time track record for each measurement, but in- formed us that data were taken at a constant rate of temperature change, mostly about 0.1K/min, sometimes no bigger than 0.5K/min . With the reasonable as- sumption that data were taken at regular time intervals, we would expect a smooth curve for the temperature as a function of line number on the data file. Indeed, that is what we see for the background signal measurements, shown in Fig. 6. Instead, when we do the same plots for the different temperature ranges shown in Fig. 1 at the pressure values given in Fig. 1 where the supposed superconducting tran- sitions occur, we find the very surprising results shown in Temperature versus line number for raw data. dashed line is nominal Tc. (a) (b) (c) (d) T T T T line number 117 GPa 130 GPa 149 GPa 155 GPa data measurements for the four cases given in Fig. 1. The dashed lines indicate the superconducting transition temper- atures given in Fig. 1. Temperature step versus T for raw data. dashed line is nominal Tc. ΔT T T Tc Tc ΔT (a) (b) 117 GPa 130 GPa lines in the data file for the first two cases of Fig. 1, versus temperature. Fig. 7. Particularly for cases (a) and (b), a sharp break in the temperature versus line number in the file occurs right at the point where the assumed superconducting transition takes place. The behavior shown in Fig. 7 is very unexpected. It suggests that the rate of temperature change is not con- stant in time, contrary to what we were told was the experimental protocol . Indeed, in Fig. 8 we plot ∆T, the change in temperature between two subsequent lines in the data file, versus temperature for two cases. There is a sharp break at the critical temperature, with the temperature changing faster above than below Tc. If the system is being heated at a constant rate, as we were informed , the sudden increase in the tempera- ture change could indicate that the heat capacity of the system suddenly decreased. For a superconducting tran- sition this is in fact expected: the specific heat jump at the critical temperature is given by (cs − cn)/cn = 1.43, with cn and cs the heat capacities in the normal and superconducting states. However, the temperature sensor cannot be placed in the diamond anvil cell next to the sample, that is phys- ically impossible . Assuming the temperature sensor 4 ΔT T T Tc Tc ΔT (c) (d) 149 GPa 155 GPa lines in the data file for the last two cases of Fig. 1, versus temperature. The insets show the regions enclosed in the red rectangles enlarged, showing the change across Tc. is located at a distance R ∼ 1cm from the sample, the temperature measured would correspond to that of a vol- ume of order ∼ 107 times larger than the volume of the sample, so it cannot possibly be influenced to the degree shown in Fig. 8 by a change in the heat capacity of the sample. Therefore, we have to conclude that the sudden change in the temperature increment coinciding with the as- sumed critical temperature is an experimental artifact. This indicates that the observed change in slope in the ac susceptibility observed at those temperatures is a con- sequence of the same experimental artifact and cannot be taken as evidence of a superconducting transition. Fig. 9 shows the corresponding plots for the other two values of pressure, 149 GPa and 155 GPa. There is also evidence here that there are changes in the rate of tem- perature change right at the assumed superconducting transitions, which again is not expected and casts doubt on the conclusion that the observed drops in Figs. 1c and 1d indicate superconductivity. IV. SPECULATION ON A POSSIBLE SCENARIO In this section we ask: assuming the sample did not go superconducting at the Tc’s indicated in Fig. 1, what could be a possible scenario that led to the obtention of Fig. 1, which indicates that there were superconducting transitions when in fact there were none? Given the anomalous temperature steps found in Fig. 8, we hypothesize that there may also have been a prob- lem with the temperature determination, i.e. that the readings in the thermometer did not accurately reflect the temperature of the sample. As a simple scenario, let us assume that for 117 GPa the temperature step at the sample location was in fact constant below Tc, given by the average value of what was measured below Tc, ∆T = 0.0068K, and jumped up by a factor of three at Tc, similarly to what the left panel of Fig. 8 shows, remaining constant above Tc. This is indicated by the dashed red lines on the left panel of Fig. 10, which is not too different from what was measured (black lines). The Temperature step versus T for raw data. dashed line is nominal Tc. ΔT T Tc (a) 117 GPa rawnew Fig 2a were in reality given by the red dashed lines, constant below and above Tc, changing by a factor of 3 at Tc. The right panel shows the resulting raw data plotted versus this new temperature scale. rawnew - background raw - background (a) 117 GPa (a) 117 GPa ground subtraction assuming the raw data given in the right panel of Fig. 10, i.e. with the new temperature scale. Note that the jump reported to occur around 38 K, shown in the right panel, is no longer there. resulting raw data versus this new temperature scale are shown on the right panel of Fig. 10, and no longer show the structure near Tc that the original raw data showed (top left panel of Fig. 2). If we now subtract the back- ground, we obtain what is shown on the left panel of Fig. 11. The steep susceptibility drop at a temperature in- terpreted as the superconducting transition temperature has disappeared. For 130 GPa, we assume again that the step was con- stant below Tc and above Tc, but here we will assume that the value was the same below and above Tc, given by the average of the step value over the entire tempera- Temperature step versus T for raw data. dashed line is nominal Tc. ΔT T Tc rawnew Fig 2b (b) 130 GPa were in reality given by the red dashed line, i.e. the same for all temperatures. The right panel shows the resulting raw data plotted versus this new temperature scale. 5 rawnew - background raw - background (b) 130 GPa (b) 130 GPa ground subtraction assuming the raw data given in the right panel of Fig. 12, i.e. with the new temperature scale. Note that the jump reported to occur around 55 K, shown in the right panel, is no longer there. ture range where data were given, ∆T = 0.0066K, shown by the red dashed line in the left panel of Fig. 12. The resulting raw data versus this new temperature scale are shown on the right panel of Fig. 12, and again no longer show the structure near Tc that the original raw data showed (top left panel of Fig. 3). If we now subtract the background, we obtain what is shown on the left panel of Fig. 13. There is no structure around the original Tc ∼ 55K, both the rise above Tc and the steep drop below Tc seen in the right panel of Fig. 13 are gone. We conclude from this analysis that in the experiment there may have been some unwanted/uncontrolled varia- tions in the temperature step, as well as some discrepan- cies between what was the actual value of the tempera- ture at the sample position versus what the thermometer measured at a different position. This, combined with a bias towards taking seriously results that seemed to agree with expectations, and discarding other results that did not, may have led to ending up with the results shown in Fig. 1 that did not properly reflect the physics going on in the sample. V. CONCLUSIONS In this paper we have analyzed the raw data asso- ciated with the ac magnetic susceptibility measurements of sulfur hydride that were interpreted as providing evidence that sulfur hydride under pressure becomes su- perconducting , supporting the claim of ref. . We concluded that the published data were correctly inferred from obtained measurements of raw data and background signal by subtraction, as given by Eq. (1). However, when considering the rate of change of tem- perature of the system shown in the raw data for the cases where a superconducting transition was supposedly de- tected, we found an anomalous jump that exactly lines up with the inferred transition temperature. This, and the fact that the anomaly is not found in the background signal measurements, strongly suggests that the observed change in slope of the susceptibility curves is not an indi- cation of a superconducting transition but instead is an experimental artifact. Furthermore, we hypothesized that as a consequence of this experimental problem the measurements of the tem- perature were not necessarily accurate, and with small modifications of the temperature scale we showed for two cases that the jumps interpreted as indicating a super- conducting transition completely disappear. It should also be noted that the rise in the amplitude of the signal right before the assumed superconducting transition as the temperature is lowered seen in Fig. 1b, for 130 GPa, is anomalous. The drop in susceptibility due to the onset of superconductivity should not be preceded by a susceptibility rise. In the raw data, this is signaled by the flattening of the curve seen in the upper left panel of Fig. 3. This fact alone should cast doubt on the validity of the results reported in Fig. 1b, even in the absence of the other anomalies pointed out in this paper. Ac magnetic susceptibility measurements of sulfur hy- dride have not been independently reproduced. In view of the results presented here, we urge that these experi- ments be repeated to establish whether or not they pro- vide support for the claimed superconductivity of sulfur hydride . We predict they will not. Nor has other claimed magnetic evidence for superconductivity of sul- fur hydride been independently reproduced, and its validity has been questioned .