Testing for pair-density-wave order in La1.875Ba0.125CuO4 P. M. Lozano,1, 2 Tianhao Ren,1 G. D. Gu,1 A. M. Tsvelik,1 J. M. Tranquada,1, ∗ and Qiang Li1, 2, † 1Condensed Matter Physics and Materials Science Division, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York 11973, USA 2Department of Physics and Astronomy, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York 11794-3800, USA (Dated: June 9, 2022) Charge order is commonly believed to compete with superconducting order. An intertwined form of superconducting wave function, known as pair-density-wave (PDW) order, has been proposed; however, there has been no direct evidence, theoretical or experimental, that it forms the ground state of any cuprate superconductor. As a test case, we consider La2−xBaxCuO4 with x = 1/8, where charge and spin stripe orders within the CuO2 planes compete with three-dimensional super- conducting order. We report measurements of the superconducting critical current perpendicular to the planes in the presence of an in-plane magnetic field. The variation of the critical current with orientation of the field is inconsistent with a theoretical prediction specific to the PDW model. It appears, instead, that the orientation dependence of the critical-current density might be determined by a minority phase of d-wave superconductivity that is present as a consequence of doped-charge inhomogeneity. I. INTRODUCTION In a superconductor, a collective state of paired elec- trons supports dissipationless transport, corresponding to current flow without resistance. For a solid with charge order, there is a static spatial modulation of the density of conduction electrons. While charge order has now been observed in most cuprate superconductors , charge and superconducting orders are typically viewed as com- petitors [3–6]. An extreme case occurs in La2−xBaxCuO4 (LBCO) with x = 1/8, where the crystal structure at low temperature has anisotropic Cu-O bonds that sta- bilize charge and spin stripe orders . Unusual two- dimensional (2D) superconductivity develops at the onset of spin-stripe order . Evidence for the 2D superconductivity is illustrated in Fig. 1(a), where one can see that the in-plane resistiv- ity, labelled ρb (where b is one of the two equivalent axes aligned with Cu-O bonds), in the absence of a magnetic field shows a substantial drop at ∼ 40 K, indicating the onset of phase-disordered superconductivity, with phase order developing below 20 K in the form of a Berezinskii- Kosterlitz-Thouless transition . Meanwhile, the resis- tivity along the c axis, ρc (measured perpendicular to the planes), remains large until the temperature drops below 10 K, demonstrating the 2D character of the supercon- ducting fluctuations. Application of a strong in-plane magnetic field lowers these transition temperatures, but they remain finite. It is extremely unusual to observe 2D superconduc- tivity within equivalent layers of a bulk crystal because one would normally expect some type of effective Joseph- son coupling between neighboring layers that results in three-dimensional superconducting order. To explain the ∗ jtran@bnl.gov † liqiang@bnl.gov apparent frustration of the interlayer Josephson coupling , PDW order was proposed . In this state, the pair wave function has extrema on the charge stripes, where the amplitude oscillates from positive to negative on neighboring charge stripes. The suggested PDW state corresponds to a situation where the super- conducting pairs have finite momenta along the direction of the charge modulation. The frustration of the inter- layer coupling comes from a 90◦ rotation of the PDW order between layers, following the pinning of the charge stripes to the lattice anisotropy , as indicated in the upper inset of Fig. 1(a). While the PDW proposal is consistent with experi- ment, its relevance remains uncertain. The PDW is a strongly-correlated state that is difficult to reconcile with the conventional theory of superconductivity , which is based on a model of nearly-free, spatially- extended electron waves. On the other hand, evaluations of relevant theoretical models appropriate to hole-doped cuprates using advanced numerical techniques find that, while there is evidence for charge- and spin-stripe orders for a hole concentration of 1/8, the measure of super- conducting coherence is strongly depressed and spatially uniform [17–19]. Calculations show that the PDW state is close in energy to other solutions , but none have identified conditions where it is the ground state. Yang proposed an experimental test directly sensi- tive to the putative PDW state in LBCO. He noted that the mismatch between the momenta of the Cooper pairs located in adjacent CuO2 planes can be reduced by appli- cation of an in-plane magnetic field ; measurements on the closely-related compound La1.7Eu0.2Sr0.1CuO4 have demonstrated that a strong in-plane field can re- duce ρc . A phase-sensitive prediction is that the superconducting critical-current density along the c axis should be maximum when the field is at 45◦ to the Cu- O bonds. Unfortunately, our results find the maxima to occur when the field is parallel to Cu-O bonds, as pre- viously observed in stripe-ordered La1.6−xNd0.4SrxCuO4 arXiv:2110.05513v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 8 Jun 2022 2 (a) Resistivity vs. temperature for ρb (open symbols) and ρc (filled symbols) in zero field (magenta squares) and full field of 14 T applied along the b axis (blue circles), corresponding to field angle θ = 90◦ measured relative to the a axis. (a and b are equivalent, and correspond to Cu-O bond directions.) Upper inset indicates the proposed PDW order, with the superconducting wave function oscillating from positive (dark) to negative (light), and rotating by 90◦ between layers . Insets also indicate relative positions of voltage contacts. (b) Variation of ρc with θ at T = 5, 10, 20, and 30 K. (c) Variation of ρb with θ at T = 20, 30, 32.5, and 40 K. . It now appears that the anisotropy might be the result of an “extrinsic” effect due to inevitable charge inhomogeneity . The rest of this article is organized as follows. After a brief description of the experimental methods, the results are presented in Sec. III. A comparison with previous results and a discussion of a new proposed interpretation are given in Sec. IV. Our conclusions appear in Sec. V. II. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS Single crystals of LBCO with x = 1/8 studied here were grown in an infrared image furnace by the floating-zone technique. They are pieces from the same cylindrical crystal used previously to characterize two- dimensional fluctuating superconductivity . Single- crystal samples were cut and aligned into slabs, then fixed on a 0.5-mm-thick sapphire substrate. The imperfection in the sample alignment, estimated from X-ray diffrac- tion, is less than 0.5◦. For transport measurements, cur- rent contacts were made at the ends of the longest di- mension of crystals (e.g., a c-axis-oriented crystal with dimensions along axes c×b×a of 3.50×0.94×0.20 mm3) to ensure uniform current flow, while the voltage contacts were made on both the top and side of the crystals. We used a low-temperature contact annealing procedure leading to low contact resistance (< 0.2 Ω) that allows us to measure the resistivity over seven orders of magni- tude. The angle-dependent magnetoresistance (ADMR) was measured using the 4-point probe in-line method in a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement Sys- tem (PPMS) equipped with a 14-T superconducting mag- net. The resistivity measurements have been performed with the current applied along either the a(b)-direction or the c-direction using dc and ac transport options with a current range of 50 μA – 1 mA. Both dc and ac methods produced the same results. The data shown are from the ac transport measurements (17 Hz). For crystal align- ment with magnetic field, horizontal and vertical sample rotators were used with the angular resolution ∼ 0.1◦. Temperature dependent ADMR data were taken from 1.8 to 300 K, at various fields up to 14 T. ADMR data at fixed temperatures and magnetic fields were taken in- situ with a vertical sample rotator as a function of the in-plane magnetic field angles (θ) in a range of −15◦ to 360◦. The ADMR results were confirmed by measure- ments on a second crystal . Note that we use a and b to label the in-plane crystal axes aligned with the Cu-O bonds, which are equivalent and indistinguishable in the low-temperature-tetragonal phase relevant to all measurements presented here. 3 Examples of voltage vs. current applied along the c axis with the in-plane magnetic field of 14 T oriented (a) at 45◦ to the b axis (θ = 135◦), and (b) along the b axis (θ = 90◦), for several temperatures. Dashed line indicates the threshold criterion, corresponding to an electric field Ec = 1 μV/cm, used to determine the critical current. (c) Variation of the critical current density along c, Jc, with field angle θ for several temperatures and a magnetic field of 14 T. Maxima are distinctly aligned with the directions with the Cu-O bond directions. (d) Similar to (c), but comparison of results for three values of the magnetic field (1, 5, and 14 T) at T = 4 K; note that the scale for Jc is logarithmic. III. RESULTS Consider the ADMR results in Fig. 1(b), obtained in the maximum field of 14 T. There is no significant modu- lation at T = 30 K, where, as one can see in Fig. 1(a), ρc is at its maximum; however, oscillations become appar- ent at 20 K, where ρc has begun to decrease, and they become stronger with further cooling. The minima in ρc occur whenever the field is along a Cu-O bond direction. The lack of perfect 4-fold symmetry is a consequence of the sample shape. The crystal for this measurement is longest along c, and it has unequal widths of the a and b faces, as described in the previous section. This leads to anisotropy in the demagnetization factor , which means that the internal magnetic field is not precisely identical when the field is along a or b. For comparison, we show the impact of field orienta- tion on in-plane resistivity ρb in Fig. 1(c). In this ge- ometry, we have an anisotropy that is controlled by the orientation of the field relative to the measurement cur- rent, which is along b, resulting from the variation in the Lorentz force on magnetic vortices. The resistivity is a minimum when the current is parallel to the applied field, which means that we have a two-fold variation, and not the four-fold modulation of ρc, when the temperature is below the onset of in-plane superconductivity. To explore the critical-current density along the c axis, we have to cool to below 5 K. Figures 2(a) and (b) show examples of voltage vs. current measurements for field at 45◦ to the b axis and along the b axis, respectively, and temperatures from 4 K down to 1.9 K. Following standard procedure, we identify the critical current as the value at which the voltage crosses a threshold value indicated by the dashed line, which corresponds to an electric field along the c axis of 1 μV/cm. The variation of the c-axis critical-current density, Jc, with field angle is plotted in Fig. 2(c) at maximum field for several temperatures. As one can see, it peaks period- ically when the field is along a Cu-O bond. Figure 2(d) shows that the effect is detectable with magnetic fields of smaller magnitude, as well. Of course, at fixed temper- ature there is a large change in Jc with field magnitude due to its effect on the superconductivity in the CuO2 planes, as one can see in Fig. 1(a). The observed angle dependence of Jc is precisely out of phase with the pre- diction based on orthogonally-stacked PDW order . 4 IV. DISCUSSION The ADMR that we observe in ρc below 30 K has the same fourfold symmetry and orientation as that reported for stripe-ordered La1.6−xNd0.4SrxCuO4 with x = 0.15 . In that work, it was attributed to anisotropic pin- ning of magnetic vortices by charge stripes. That ex- planation seems unlikely given the fact that the ADMR is observed at temperatures where ρb is finite, and without superconducting phase order within the planes there cannot be pinning of vortices. We also note that the ADMR observed here is distinct from the normal- state ADMR reported for strongly overdoped cuprates such as La1.6−xNd0.4SrxCuO4 with x = 0.24 and Tl2Ba2CuO6+δ . To evaluate an alternative explanation of the mod- ulation in ρc and Jc, it is necessary to take account of all possible superconducting paths in the sample. Clearly, the decrease of ρc below ∼ 25 K is not what one would expect from an ideal system of 2D superconducting layers with a uniformly-frustrated interlayer Josephson coupling. The observed T-dependence of ρc resembles the behavior of one-dimensional (1D) superconducting nanowires in which phase slips result in finite resistivity . It suggests that in the temperature interval be- tween 4 and ∼ 25 K we have the peculiar situation of two types of liquids of superconducting pairs: one type involving 2D PDW order, and the other type consist- ing of pairs located on effective nanowires traversing the sample along the c direction. It is important to note that the effective 1D superconducting fluctuations along c must be decoupled from the 2D PDW superconductiv- ity. If they were coherent with one another, this would provide an interlayer coupling between the PDW order in the layers and the superconductivity would immediately become 3D. One likely origin of such a situation lies in charge inhomogeneities. As discussed in detail elsewhere , charge disorder is significant in cuprates, as demon- strated by local probes such as nuclear magnetic reso- nance . Hence, we can expect to have some patches in each plane with a local hole concentration ≳ 0.14 that can support spatially-uniform superconductivity. Some of these patches will be able to couple along the c axis, causing ρc to drop. A subset of these may form effective 1D “trails” crossing the sample. Another contribution may come from crystallographic twin boundaries, where the local variation in symmetry might allow finite patches of uniform superconductivity that could commu- nicate along the c axis. The fraction of the full Meissner response observed at 2 K in a field of 0.2 mT parallel to the planes is only 0.1% , which contrasts with a value of at least 20% measured in polycrystalline La2−xSrxCuO4 for a large range of x . This is compatible with a minority phase of uniform superconductivity being responsible for the drop of ρc to zero at low temperature. A mechanism ex- plaining the observed ADMR in terms of such a minority phase has been proposed in . Assuming that PDW order is present, as suggested by the high-temperature onset of 2D superconductivity, the lack of a dominant re- sponse to an in-plane magnetic field might be evidence for the strong degree of frustration of the interlayer Joseph- son coupling. We should also note that positive phase- sensitive evidence for PDW order has been reported in studies of Josephson junctions with La2−xBaxCuO4 x = 1/8 crystals . There have been several previous reports of local PDW order by scanning tunneling microscopy. These include detecting PDW order in the vicinity of magnetic vortex cores through interference with uniform superconductiv- ity and through local periodic modulations of the superconducting gap . It is possible that local per- turbations, such as a magnetic vortex core, may change the energy balance, stabilizing PDW locally even when the energetically-favored order in the bulk is spatially- uniform superconductivity . V. CONCLUSION In conclusion, we have observed a fourfold modula- tion of Jc as a function of the orientation of an in-plane magnetic field. The maximum Jc occurs when the field is along a Cu-O bond direction, which is inconsistent with a prediction based on the idea of partial relief of the frustration of interlayer Josephson coupling due to PDW order . The observations are consistent with an earlier study of stripe-ordered La1.6−xNd0.4SrxCuO4 with x = 0.15 . It appears that the anisotropy may actually be a consequence of minority regions of uniform superconductivity, as proposed in . VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We acknowledge helpful comments from E. H. Fradkin, S. A. Kivelson, V. Oganesyan, and K. Yang. This work was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Materials Sciences and Engineering, under Contract No. DE-SC0012704. R. Comin and A. Damascelli, Resonant X-Ray Scattering Studies of Charge Order in Cuprates, Annu. Rev. Con- dens. Matter Phys. 7, 369 (2016). A. Frano, S. Blanco-Canosa, B. Keimer, and R. J. Birge- neau, Charge ordering in superconducting copper oxides, J. Phys. Condens. Matter 32, 374005 (2020). 5 B. Keimer, S. A. Kivelson, M. R. Norman, S. Uchida, and J. Zaanen, From quantum matter to high-temperature superconductivity in copper oxides, Nature 518, 179 M. Imada, Charge Order and Superconductivity as Com- peting Brothers in Cuprate High-Tc Superconductors, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 90, 111009 (2021). J. Chang, E. Blackburn, A. T. Holmes, N. B. Chris- tensen, J. Larsen, J. Mesot, R. Liang, D. A. Bonn, W. N. Hardy, A. Watenphul, M. v. Zimmermann, E. M. Forgan, and S. M. Hayden, Direct observation of competition be- tween superconductivity and charge density wave order in YBa2Cu3O6.67, Nat. Phys. 8, 871 (2012). Y. Caplan, G. Wachtel, and D. Orgad, Long-range order and pinning of charge-density waves in competition with superconductivity, Phys. Rev. B 92, 224504 (2015). M. Fujita, H. Goka, K. Yamada, J. M. Tranquada, and L. P. Regnault, Stripe order, depinning, and fluctuations in La1.875Ba0.125CuO4 and La1.875Ba0.075Sr0.050CuO4, Phys. Rev. B 70, 104517 (2004). M. H ̈ucker, M. v. Zimmermann, G. D. Gu, Z. J. Xu, J. S. Wen, G. Xu, H. J. Kang, A. Zheludev, and J. M. Tran- quada, Stripe order in superconducting La2−xBaxCuO4 (0.095 ≤ x ≤ 0.155), Phys. Rev. B 83, 104506 (2011). Q. Li, M. H ̈ucker, G. D. Gu, A. M. Tsvelik, and J. M. Tranquada, Two-Dimensional Superconducting Fluctua- tions in Stripe-Ordered La1.875Ba0.125CuO4, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 067001 (2007). E. Fradkin, S. A. Kivelson, and J. M. Tranquada, Collo- quium : Theory of intertwined orders in high tempera- ture superconductors, Rev. Mod. Phys. 87, 457 (2015). E. Berg, E. Fradkin, E.-A. Kim, S. A. Kivelson, V. Oganesyan, J. M. Tranquada, and S. C. Zhang, Dy- namical Layer Decoupling in a Stripe-Ordered High-Tc Superconductor, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 127003 (2007). S. Tajima, T. Noda, H. Eisaki, and S. Uchida, c-Axis Optical Response in the Static Stripe Ordered Phase of the Cuprates, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 500 (2001). A. Himeda, T. Kato, and M. Ogata, Stripe States with Spatially Oscillating d-Wave Superconductivity in the Two-Dimensional t − t′ − J Model, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, D. F. Agterberg, J. S. Davis, S. D. Edkins, E. Fradkin, D. J. Van Harlingen, S. A. Kivelson, P. A. Lee, L. Radz- ihovsky, J. M. Tranquada, and Y. Wang, The Physics of Pair-Density Waves: Cuprate Superconductors and Be- yond, Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys. 11, 231 (2020). M. v Zimmermann, A. Vigliante, T. Niem ̈oller, N. Ichikawa, T. Frello, J. Madsen, P. Wochner, S. Uchida, N. H. Andersen, J. M. Tranquada, D. Gibbs, and J. R. Schneider, Hard–X-ray diffraction study of charge stripe order in La1.48Nd0.4Sr0.12CuO4, Europhys. Lett. 41, 629 J. Bardeen, L. N. Cooper, and J. R. Schrieffer, Theory of Superconductivity, Phys. Rev. 108, 1175 (1957). S. R. White and D. J. Scalapino, Pairing on striped t-t′-J lattices, Phys. Rev. B 79, 220504 (2009). S. R. White and D. J. Scalapino, Doping asymmetry and striping in a three-orbital CuO2 Hubbard model, Phys. Rev. B 92, 205112 (2015). S. Jiang, D. J. Scalapino, and S. R. White, Ground-state phase diagram of the t-t′-J model, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. P. Corboz, T. M. Rice, and M. Troyer, Competing States in the t-J Model: Uniform d-Wave State versus Stripe State, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 046402 (2014). K. Yang, Detection of Striped Superconductors Using Magnetic Field Modulated Josephson Effect, J. Super- cond. Nov. Magn. 26, 2741 (2013). K. Yang and D. F. Agterberg, Josephson Effect in Fulde- Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov Superconductors, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 4970 (2000). Z. Shi, P. G. Baity, J. Terzic, T. Sasagawa, and D. Popovi ́c, Pair density wave at high magnetic fields in cuprates with charge and spin orders, Nat. Commun. X. Q. Xiang, J. F. Ding, Y. Q. Zhang, and X. G. Li, Four- fold symmetry in the anisotropy of the magnetoresistance of stripe-ordered La1.6−xNd0.4SrxCuO4 single crystals, Phys. Rev. B 79, 012501 (2009). T. Ren, P. M. Lozano, Q. Li, G. Gu, and A. M. Tsvelik, Two weakly coupled subsystems in stripe-ordered LBCO: evidence from the resistivity measurements, (in prepara- tion). The measurements on the second crystal were done af- ter we had prepared a manuscript on the results from the first crystal. The second set of measurements led us to realize that the a and b axes of the first crystal had been misidentified, as confirmed by analysis of X- ray Laue diffraction. R. Prozorov and V. G. Kogan, Effective Demagnetizing Factors of Diamagnetic Samples of Various Shapes, Phys. Rev. Applied 10, 014030 (2018). Y. Fang, G. Grissonnanche, A. Legros, S. Verret, F. Lal- ibert ́e, C. Collignon, A. Ataei, M. Dion, J. Zhou, D. Graf, M. J. Lawler, P. A. Goddard, L. Taillefer, and B. J. Ramshaw, Fermi surface transformation at the pseudo- gap critical point of a cuprate superconductor, Nat. Phys. N. E. Hussey, M. Abdel-Jawad, A. Carrington, A. P. Mackenzie, and L. Balicas, A coherent three-dimensional Fermi surface in a high-transition-temperature supercon- ductor, Nature 425, 814 (2003). A. Rogachev and A. Bezryadin, Superconducting proper- ties of polycrystalline Nb nanowires templated by carbon nanotubes, Appl. Phys. Lett. 83, 512 (2003). J. M. Tranquada, Cuprate superconductors as viewed through a striped lens, Adv. Phys. 69, 437 (2020). P. M. Singer, A. W. Hunt, and T. Imai, 63Cu NQR Evidence for Spatial Variation of Hole Concentration in La2−xSrxCuO4, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 047602 (2002). Y. Zhu, A. R. Moodenbaugh, Z. X. Cai, J. Tafto, M. Suenaga, and D. O. Welch, Tetragonal-Orthorhombic Structural Modulation at Low Temperature in La2−xBaxCuO4, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 3026 (1994). J. M. Tranquada, G. D. Gu, M. H ̈ucker, Q. Jie, H.-J. Kang, R. Klingeler, Q. Li, N. Tristan, J. S. Wen, G. Y. Xu, Z. J. Xu, J. Zhou, and M. v. Zimmermann, Evi- dence for unusual superconducting correlations coexist- ing with stripe order in La1.875Ba0.125CuO4, Phys. Rev. T. Nagano, Y. Tomioka, Y. Nakayama, K. Kishio, and K. Kitazawa, Bulk superconductivity in both tetragonal and orthorhombic solid solutions of (La1−xSrx)2CuO4−δ, Phys. Rev. B 48, 9689 (1993). D. Hamilton, G. Gu, E. Fradkin, and D. V. Harlingen, Signatures of pair-density wave order in phase-sensitive 6 measurements of La2−xBaxCuO4–Nb Josephson junc- tions and SQUIDs, arXiv:1811.02048 (2018). S. D. Edkins, A. Kostin, K. Fujita, A. P. Mackenzie, H. Eisaki, S. Uchida, S. Sachdev, M. J. Lawler, E.-A. Kim, J. C. S ́eamus Davis, and M. H. Hamidian, Mag- netic field–induced pair density wave state in the cuprate vortex halo, Science 364, 976 (2019). Z. Du, H. Li, S. H. Joo, E. P. Donoway, J. Lee, J. C. S. Davis, G. Gu, P. D. Johnson, and K. Fujita, Imaging the energy gap modulations of the cuprate pair-density-wave state, Nature 580, 65 (2020). P. M. Lozano, G. D. Gu, J. M. Tranquada, and Q. Li, Experimental evidence that zinc impurities pin pair- density-wave order in La2−xBaxCuO4, Phys. Rev. B 103,