1 Filamentary superconductivity of resistively-switched strontium titanate K. Szot1,2, C. Rodenbücher3,*, K. Rogacki4, G. Bihlmayer5,6, W. Speier6 , K. Roleder1, F. Krok7, H. Keller8, A. Simon9 and A. Bussmann-Holder9 1 A. Chełkowski Institute of Physics, University of Silesia, 41-500 Chorzów, Poland 2 aixACCT Systems GmbH, 52068 Aachen, Germany 3 Institute of Energy and Climate Research (IEK-14), Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, 52425 Jülich, Germany 4 Institute of Low Temperature and Structure Research, PAS, 50-050 Wrocław, Poland 5 Peter Grünberg Institute (PGI-1), Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, 52425 Jülich, Germany 6 JARA-FIT and Peter Grünberg Institute (PGI-SO), Forschungszentrum Jülich, 52425 Jülich, Germany 7 M. Smoluchowski Institute of Physics, Jagiellonian University, 30-348 Kraków, Poland 8 Physik-Institut der Universität Zürich, 8057 Zürich, Switzerland 9 Max-Planck-Institute for Solid State Research, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany Correspondence to c.rodenbuecher@fz-juelich.de Abstract SrTiO3, although a wide gap insulator, has long been known to become metallic and superconducting at extremely low doping levels. This has given rise to questions concerning the coexistence or interdependence of metallicity, superconductivity, and the material’s polar properties. This issue becomes especially intriguing in conjunction with the observation that filamentary metallicity can be induced by means of resistive switching at conditions well below relevant doping levels for homogeneous metallicity. In this study, we demonstrate that resistive switching can also be employed to generate superconductivity at the superconducting transition temperature of Tc ≈ 0.2 K in SrTiO3. By combining local characterization of the conductivity with theoretical analysis, we propose that the superconducting properties are associated with the electro-formation of columnar-like bundles with a diameter of 40–50 nm, consisting of metallic filaments surrounded by polar regions. We provide a theoretical model identifying the coexistence of metallic and polar regions as a prerequisite for the filamentary-like superconductivity observed. Introduction The electrical manipulation of nanoscale transport phenomena has enabled the development of resistive switching devices with enormous application potential for microelectronics, e.g., neuromorphic computing1. The first important step in the fabrication of a resistively-switchable structure is the formation of filaments by means of electro-reduction/- degradation2–4. This local introduction of inhomogeneity by oxygen vacancies enables to engineer the properties, from insulating, to semiconducting or metallic, by controlling the size and distribution of the nanofilaments. For an SrTiO3 (STO) single crystal, a model material for transition metal perovskite oxides, the evolution of filaments in conjunction with 2 electroforming does not occur randomly in the matrix, but is predetermined by the existence of a dislocation network in the surface region5. The extraordinary crystallographic geometry6, electronic defect structure7, flexoelectric or ferroelectric polarization8, magnetic properties9, and local chemical composition10 of the dislocation cores combined with the invariance of the Burgers vector11, induce the channeling of the current flow along the dislocation network within the non-conducting/dielectric matrix of STO. Experimentally, it has been proven by local- conductivity atomic force microscopy (LC-AFM) that the electrochemical or thermal deoxidation of STO crystals is restricted to dislocation cores3,12,13. This observation is consistent with the theoretical calculation of the formation enthalpy of oxygen vacancies close to dislocations, which is significantly lower than in the matrix14. As a result of the preferential removal of oxygen, the regions close to the dislocation cores are enriched by oxygen vacancies leading to a local phase transformation towards TiOx suboxides providing excess d1 electrons, which are necessary for metallic conductivity15. In this manner, the idea of generating conducting nanowires along dislocations in insulating materials16 can be easily realized; in our case, however, by means of electrically-induced self-doping. Through thermographic studies of crystalline samples with artificially-introduced bands of extended defects connecting the cathode with the anode, the preferential current channeling along the predefined dislocation network during electro-reduction has been experimentally-illustrated5. It has been shown that transformation into the metallic state occurs at temperatures of 300–500 °C, which is too low to permit the thermal removal of oxygen3. Nevertheless, an effusion of oxygen during electro- reduction has been detected via mass spectrometry15,17. Accordingly, such an electro- deoxidation effect changes the chemical composition of the oxide locally, as has already been observed in various metal oxides18–21. During electro-formation, oxygen ions move within the electric field from the cathode towards the anode22. Hence, the evolution of metallic filaments starts at the cathode, shifting a virtual cathode through the crystal until a galvanic shortcut is achieved. It must be noted that such a short-circuit should not be mistakenly associated with a macroscopic transition of the “whole crystal” into a metal23. Superconductivity in STO has been well known since many years, and has been induced by (nominally) homogeneous doping using extrinsic donors or self-doping by oxygen vacancies upon thermal reduction24–26, by modulating the charge carrier density via transistor-like configurations27, by generating two-dimensional electron gases, e.g., in LaAlO3/SrTiO3 structures or on modified STO surfaces28,29, as well as by exploiting interface effects, e.g., in FeSe/STO structures30. Early on, the superconductivity in STO has been associated with the long wave length transverse soft optic (the ferroelectric) mode. With the discovery of 3 superconductivity at even lower doping levels, this viewpoint has again been adopted, in addition to novel approaches that have been suggested that are beyond BCS theory. Here, we demonstrate that electro-formation can be employed to generate metallic filaments, which are clustered in bundles with diameters of 40–50 nm. The regions between the filaments, the embedding matrix, are polar in character. Electro-reduced STO is therefore a highly inhomogeneous material with coexisting charge-rich and charge-poor regions, i.e., metallicity with insulating properties being intimately entangled. Results Electro-reduction experimental situation for electro-reduction of STO with cross-sectional LC-AFM maps obtained after cleaving the crystal in the anode and cathode regions (with magnification, mag.); b) micrograph of the distribution of dislocations in the cathode region revealed by the etch-pits technique; c) I/V measurements obtained by LC-AFM on a bundle of filaments and in the bulk region; d) average current as a function of the distance to the surface as calculated from the LC-AFM maps close to the anode (A) and in two positions close to the cathode (C1, C2). An STO (100) single crystal was subjected to electro-reduction under vacuum conditions (I = 10 mA, t = 2 h, p = 10-7–10-8 mbar, T = 350 °C; for details, see the supplementary 4 information). After the macroscopic resistance of the sample had dropped by many orders of magnitude, indicating metallic properties, the crystal was investigated by means of LC-AFM and optical microscopy, as shown in Figure 1. The LC-AFM maps obtained in the cathode region after cleaving the crystal (Figure 1a) and the optical micrograph of the exits of dislocations as revealed by etch-pits technique (Figure 1b) reveal the inhomogeneous distribution of filamentary structures following electro-reduction. Close to the cathode, a higher concentration of electro-reduced filaments was present than in the vicinity of the anode due to the electro-migration of the oxygen ions in the electrical field gradient. The LC-AFM maps exhibit a hierarchical character of the conducting filaments in the surface region, similar to the filaments in the surface region of thermally-reduced crystals, thus supporting the idea that dislocations predefine the shape of the filamentary network. In all regions of the sample, well- conducting filaments only existed in the last few tens of micrometers of the surface region, whereas the cross-sectional LC-AFM maps of the bulk do not show conducting filaments, and so evidence that the bulk of the crystal remains insulating. The lack of electrical conductivity can also be identified for the matrix region between the filaments if the distance between the filaments is larger than a few nanometers. This is indicated by I/V measurements obtained by contacting either a filament or matrix with the LC-AFM tip (Figure 1c). The results for the filaments exhibit a linear current–voltage dependence (which is curved in the logarithmic representation), whereas the current in the bulk region was below the detection limit. To illustrate the depth dependence of the conductivity, the mean current flow at the cathode (C1 and C2) and anode (A) is presented in Figure 1d. Each point of the curves was calculated by integrating the current of an “LC-AFM strip” with an area of 5 × 1 μm2, starting from the surface to the strip at a distance of 19 μm below the surface. Close to the surface, the averaged current was highest, and then dropped significantly within a few micrometers, revealing the “skin-like character” of the electric transport, with the electro-formed surface region carrying the lion’s share of the total macroscopic current. Using a grain analysis, the dimension of the conducting spots in the LC-AFM maps was determined to be approximately 45 nm. A strong agglomeration of filaments into orthogonal bands in the direction was present near the cathode as can be seen as stripe-like structures, both in the etch-pits and the LC-AFM maps of Figure 1. The LC-AFM maps indicate that the filaments do not occur as single filaments isolated from each other, but form filament bundles. In fact, the LC-AFM maps indicate that the filaments do not occur as single filaments isolated from each other but form filament bundles. This bundling effect was also observed in thermally-reduced crystals13, but is much more pronounced for electro-reduced crystals. In order to investigate the arrangement of 5 the filaments in more detail, the conducting spots were measured in a higher magnification. Therefore, a region with a high density of dislocations close to the cathode was identified using the etch-pits technique, as is shown in Figure 2a. An arrangement of the etch-pits marking the exits of the dislocations in the direction, perpendicular to the cathode, was observed, which confirmed the agglomeration of filaments in the form of a linear band. In order to investigate the distribution of the filaments within the band, LC-AFM maps were made for the surface close to the cathode (Figure 2b). The current map shows that the filaments were not statistically distributed within the bands, but were instead clustered in bundles. From the magnified LC-AFM maps (Figure 2c, 2d) it can be seen that the bundles with a radius of 40– 45 nm had a discrete conductivity character and consisted of nanofilaments with radii of approximately 2 nm (Figure 2e). Using the simple statistics obtained for a few bundles (Figure 2c), the average number of nanofilaments per bundle was estimated to be 200–300. Figure 2d shows that between the highly conducting spots marking the nanofilaments, an increased conductivity can also be observed, which is one-to-two orders of magnitude lower than in the center of the filaments, but still significantly higher than in the insulating matrix. For most of the nanofilaments in a bundle, the distance to the neighboring nanofilament was less than 3– 4 nm, suggesting that the nanofilaments act as collective electron sources that dope the region between themselves. In contrast to this, the conductivity between a nanofilament and matrix at the edge of a bundle is three orders of magnitude smaller, within only 1 nm (Figure 2e). This is in agreement with the DFT calculations of TiO2 that predict a highly confined spatial spread of the electron density near an oxygen vacancy-rich filament31. In order to gain more insight into the structure of the nanofilaments themselves, one nanofilament was mapped using LC-AFM with atomic resolution (Figure 2f), which displayed a direct correlation to the dislocations. Close to the exit of a dislocation, whose position could be identified by analyzing the course of the atomic rows, the local conductivity reached a maximum. This behavior supports the hypothesis that the dislocation core is slightly reduced, or in our case electro-reduced by the local removal of oxygen, which is equivalent to strong local doping. Moreover, the temperature dependence of the conductivity of the selected sets of bundles measured by LC-AFM (Figure 2g) exhibits an increasing resistance and thus metallic behavior, which is typical, e.g., for low TiOx phases. In summary, the high-resolution LC-AFM investigation reveals that the conducting spots that were seen in Figure 1 and 2 are, in fact, bundles of highly conductive nanofilaments with a self-doped region between them, and can be considered “thick nanoscopic wires”. 6 the etch pit distribution marking dislocations in a band along the <100> direction; b) in-plane LC-AFM map obtained near the cathode (Usample = -0.01 V); c) magnification of b) with filament bundles of 40-50 nm marked by a black dashed line; d) LC-AFM map showing the discrete structure of conductivity in a typical bundle. The very good conducting filaments and weaker conducting regions of the matrix are visible between the closely located filaments in the bundle; e–f) LC-AFM maps of a nanofilament obtained with atomic resolution; and g) temperature dependence of the resistance, measured by placing the LC-AFM tip above a nanofilament. Simulation of the electronic structure In order to shed some light on the nature of metallic filaments forming in an insulating perovskite matrix, we performed DFT calculations (for computational details see Al-Zubi et al.32) of extended defects, as is shown in Figure a. A one-dimensional, stoichiometric defect creates an “inner surface” where an oxygen vacancy (VO) leads to the formation of a defect state at the bottom of the conduction band. As the formation energy of VO is lower at an (inner) surface than in the bulk33, the accumulation of such defects at inner surfaces is likely. In addition, tendencies for the clustering of these defects have been reported34. The charge density of the defect states is primarily located on the nearby Ti ion (the blue DOS curve in Figure a) and in the region between the atomic spheres (red line). In Figure b, we estimated the charge density locally by integrating the induced defect charges in the Ti atomic spheres of the individual unit cells (red bars). A charge density of the order of 5 × 1020 electrons per cm3 extends into the region between two such extended defects (columns 1 and 6). In the matrix, 7 this defect charge density decays quickly, but in a bundle of one-dimensional defects, larger conductive areas can form. We investigated how these local charges influence the local, static polarizations as the formation of polar regions will be essential for superconductivity. To estimate this quantity, we employed a simple ionic model based on the formal charges and the positions of O (rO) and Sr (rSr) relative to Ti ions, calculating PTi= ∑(rSr/4-rO). These polarizations are indicated by yellow arrows in the inset of Figure a and their norm is summarized in Figure b (black bars). We compare them to the polarization of a stoichiometric extended defect without VO (grey bars). As is apparent, a small electronic density (below 5 x 1020) does not quench the local polarizations (of course, some reconstruction also results from the presence of the additional defect), and larger densities (position B1 and B2) can lead to some local reduction of PTi. Measurements of the superconducting properties Having induced a network of bundled-conducting nanofilaments in the surface region of STO by electro-reduction, we analyzed the superconducting properties via low-temperature conductivity measurements in a magnetic field. For comparison, we also investigated a Illustration of the electronic structure. The relaxed structure is shown in the inset with oxygen atoms marked in red and Ti atoms in blue. The vacancy-induced states are visible in the density of states (DOS) at the bottom of the conduction band. The total DOS is shown in black, the local DOS on the Ti atoms adjacent to the vacancy in blue and the interstitial DOS (between the atomic spheres) in red. A cut through the induced charge density is shown in the inset underlying the atomic structure. Bright areas indicate a high electronic density (see thermometer inset). Large local polarizations are indicated by yellow arrows. b) Polarization (black) and defect-induced charge densities (red) in STO near the extended defect. The vertical and horizontal positions of the Ti atoms are labeled with (A,B) and (1,...,6), respectively, and are visualized in the inset of (a). For comparison, the size of the local polarizations in an extended defect without the oxygen vacancy are indicated by the gray bars. 8 reduced) STO samples with the same cross-sectional area, where l is the distance between the voltage leads; b) R/Rn0.25K ratio for the thermally- and electro-reduced STO samples below the superconducting transition temperature Tc (Rn0.25K is the value of R in the normal state at 0.25 K). Note that in the electro-reduced STO sample, Tc is considerably larger than that for the thermally-reduced one; c) resistance, R/l, vs. temperature for the thermally-reduced STO sample measured in different magnetic fields at a current of I = 0.1 mA; d) resistance, R/l, vs. temperature for the electro-reduced STO sample measured in different magnetic fields at a current of I = 0.1 mA; e) upper critical field, Hc2, vs. temperature for the electro-reduced STO sample. The results were obtained using the data displayed in d) with the criterion 0.5ΔR (open triangles) and 0.9ΔR (closed triangles), where ΔR is the change in the resistance at the transition to the superconducting state – the dashed lines show the fitting of the experimental temperature for the electro-reduced STO sample measured in different magnetic fields and at two measuring currents: I = 0.05 mA (open symbols) and I = 0.1 mA (closed symbols) for comparison. 9 crystal, in which a network of nanofilaments was generated by means of pure thermal annealing and thus was not as pronounced and bundled as for the electro-reduced one13. As our previous study demonstrated that the progression of deoxidation could differ in crystals from different manufacturers, we utilized samples from the same crystal to ensure comparability. For the thermally- and electro-reduced STO samples described above, the temperature dependencies of the resistance were measured, and the results are shown in Figure 4a. The resistance was divided by the distance between voltage contacts, R/l, such that for samples with the same cross-section, the linear resistance characterizing a given material was obtained. As is evident from Figure 4a, R/l decreases with temperature designating metallic properties. The resistance of the electro- reduced sample was significantly lower than that of the thermally-reduced one, indicating that the increasing density of metallic nanofilaments in the electro-reduced sample correlates with the macroscopic resistance of the sample. This confirms that the metallic properties of deoxidized STO are, as we demonstrated, determined by the nanofilaments. In the temperature regime below 0.25 K, both samples exhibit a sudden drop in the resistance, which is characteristic of superconductivity. This is shown in Figure 4b, where the resistance R normalized to the normal-state resistance Rn0.25K at 0.25 K is presented in the temperature region of the transition temperature, Tc. The superconducting transition temperature for the electro-reduced sample (Tc ≈ 0.2 K), is more than a factor of 2 larger than that for the thermally-reduced sample (Tc ≈ 0.09 K), suggesting that superconductivity in the electro-reduced sample is caused by the bundled nanofilaments, and can be enhanced by their increased density. An increase in Tc with the volume of the superconducting phase has been observed for “nano-sized” materials, e.g., in In and Pb nanoparticles35 and Mo-Ge nanowires36, with sizes comparable to the diameters of the nanofilaments (2–5 nm) and filamentary bundles (40–50 nm) found in our samples. Moreover, the resistance of the electro-reduced sample reveals a pronounced hump around 0.15 K (Figure 4b). A similar behavior of the resistance was reported for the ideal inhomogeneous nanofilamentary superconductor, Na2-δMo6Se637. Note that in the superconducting state, none of the samples exhibited zero resistance, which serves as another strong argument for non-percolative filamentary superconductivity (spatially- separated, phase-coherent superconducting regions) in deoxidized STO37. The behavior of R/l(T) in a magnetic field for the thermally- and electro-reduced STO sample is shown in Figure 4c and d, respectively. The results prove the superconducting nature of the transition to a lower resistance state and allow the temperature dependences of the upper critical field, Hc2(T) to be determined. Criteria 0.5R and 0.9R were used, where R is the change in resistance upon entering the superconducting state. Figure 4e shows the Hc2(T) results 10 for the electro-reduced sample, with fitting of the experimental data to equation Hc2(T) = superconducting transition temperature at H = 0. Depending on the criterion, 0.5R or 0.9R, the values Hc2(0) = 1.4 kOe and 2.2 kOe, respectively, extracted from the fitted Hc2(T) dependences. These 0 values are similar to those extracted from the linear extrapolation of Hc2(T) to Hc2(0) from the last experimental point in the high fields, namely 47 nm and 35 nm (Hc2(0) ≈ 1.50 and 2.73 kOe, for the 0.5R and 0.9R criteria, respectively), which are lower limits for 0. In order to test which of the criteria (0.5R or 0.9R) provides more correct Hc2(T) values, the magnetic field dependence of R(T) for the electro-reduced STO sample was analyzed using two different measurement currents (0.05 mA and 0.1 mA). The results are shown in Figure 4f. For both currents, the transition to the superconducting state occurred at the same temperature, but for I = 0.1 mA, the transition was significantly broader than for I = 0.05 mA, indicating an influence from the vortex dynamics on the transition. In order to minimize this effect, the more appropriate 0.9R criterion was used to extract Hc2 and 0 from the resistance data for the electro-reduced STO sample, yielding Hc2(0) ≈ 2.2 kOe , 0 ≈ 39 nm, and Tc ≈ 0.20 K. A coherence length of ξ0 ≈ 40–50 nm is typical for conventional low-temperature bulk superconductors, such as e.g. Hg, Nb or In. Moreover, the value of 0  40 nm approximately corresponds to the diameter of the filament bundles, 40–50 nm, as obtained from the LC-AFM studies (see Figure 2), supporting our assertion that superconductivity, as well as the metallicity of STO, is filamentary in nature and restricted to the deoxidized cores of dislocations. Theoretical description of superconductivity Before discussing our model of the superconductivity of the electroformed filament bundles, we consider the conditions that are necessary to induce superconductivity in (self-) doped STO in general. Theoretically, the polarizability model38–40 and DFT calculations have been employed to confirm the heterogeneous character of doped STO. The polarizability model is based on the nonlinear polarizability of the oxygen ion, i.e., O2-, which is unstable as a free ion. In a crystal, the 2p6 state is stabilized by the surrounding ions through dynamic covalency, i.e., by sharing an electron with its surrounding neighbors. This implies that the introduction of additional electrons, as in doped or electro-degraded STO, only affects the Ti ions and causes 11 their d1 configuration. In view of the additional charge on Ti, the surrounding O2- ions move away from it and cause locally strongly distorted regions. The essential task for both approaches is, however, to demonstrate the coexistence of a polar matrix with regions that have a different chemical composition and crystallographic structure. By concentrating on the dynamic properties of STO and knowing their development with carrier concentration n, the STO-related double-well potential has been self-consistently extracted and has been shown to change its character from double- to single-well with n, where nc defines the border line for this change23. As for n > nc, the superconductivity vanishes and a truly homogeneous metallic state is realized, we only concentrate on the region n < nc. The essential phonons in the STO are the lowest lying soft transverse optic and acoustic modes. Anomalies in these two branches have been shown to be signatures of the formation of local polar nano-regions41. By calculating the phonon group velocities for the two considered branches42, these become very apparent and yield the momentum at which the local, spatially- confined soft modes occur, namely the point where the scattering between the two modes is the strongest43. The corresponding squared polar optic mode frequency ωTO 2 (q) is displayed in of the squared soft optic mode frequency ωTO 2 of the STO for different carrier concentrations as indicated by the color code in the figure; b) temperature dependence of the local dipole moment p for different carrier concentrations; and c) dependence of the dipole moment p on the carrier concentration n for T = 0 K. 12 As is obvious from the figure, this local polar mode softens with decreasing temperature and simultaneously moves to lower momentum values but never reaches the homogeneous q = 0 limit. In addition, the softening is reduced with increasing carrier concentration and its momentum space spread decreases indicating the growing spatial confinement and thus shrinking of these polar nano-domains. In contrast to a long wavelength “true” soft mode, it is nonlinearly dependent on temperature below ≈150 K. As ωTO 2 (q) ≈ 1 ε0, the dielectric permittivity ε0 is extracted from it, and is approximately 40 % smaller than the long wavelength limit, but still exhibits an appreciable temperature dependence, which is typical for an almost ferroelectric compound. From the calculated thermal average of the displacement-displacement correlation function, a local dipole moment has been derived that shrinks with decreasing temperature and increasing carrier concentration (Figure 5b). The zero temperature limit as a function of the carrier concentration is shown in Figure 5c. As expected, it rapidly decreases with increasing carrier concentration and approaches a constant value for small densities, thus clearly supporting the polar character of the matrix. The carrier concentration range is compatible with our estimates from the DFT calculations shown above. electro-reduced STO. a) Arrangement of bundled metallic dislocations according to LC- AFM and etch-pit studies; b) LC-AFM line profile across the dislocation cores, revealing that they have an extremely high conductivity, whereas the region between the neighboring dislocation cores exhibits lower but still measurable conductivity; c) LC-AFM line profile in the region without electro-reduced dislocations revealing insulating behavior with a current 13 The above analysis demonstrates that in the metallic and superconducting low carrier density limit of STO, metallicity is not globally present but only appears in filaments that coexist with elastically- and polar-distorted domains where the latter shrink in size with increasing carrier density. These have fully vanished beyond a critical carrier density to provide space for a homogeneous metal where superconductivity is absent. The electronic band structure can be interpreted in terms of localized polaronic bands attributed to the matrix, whereas Fermi liquid-type behavior must be present in the filaments. With increasing carrier density, the localized band adopts dispersion from the itinerant one, and is analogous to a steep band/flat band scenario44 in which superconductivity is a consequence of interband interactions. Discussion We have shown that the electro-reduction of STO at moderate temperatures (T < 400 oC) induces superconductivity with a Tc ≈ 0.20 K, which is significantly higher than that of thermally-reduced STO (Tc ≈ 0.09 K). The global removal of oxygen is extremely low and only limited to the cores of the dislocations, where oxygen vacancies are preferentially generated. In this way, bundled metallic filaments form along of the dislocation network, which short-circuit the dielectric matrix and induce macroscopically detectable metallic behavior. Thus, this finding explains why the very low global carrier densities observed in STO can give rise to conductivity and even superconductivity. The metallic dislocation cores exhibit similar properties to TiO nanowires, and are undoubtedly the carrier of the metallic conductivity above Tc, but cannot alone be responsible for the superconductivity. The radius of the filaments (about 2 nm) is smaller than the necessary coherence length found in TiO thin films (about 20 nm)45 and smaller than the coherence length determined for our electro-reduced crystal by the upper critical field and LC-AFM measurements (40–50 nm). Therefore, we assume that superconductivity is related to a collective phenomenon involving the metallic cores of dislocations and the polar nano-regions between them. As schematically illustrated in Figure 6, we assume that the d-electrons in the metallic dislocations can be coupled by the polar properties of the STO matrix. This behavior is consistent with the results of the DFT simulations, which indicate that a static polarization in the STO matrix beside in the range of the noise of the current-voltage converter; and d) illustration of the proposed coupling mechanism of pairs of d1 (and, possibly, d2) electrons in metallic dislocations mediated by a polar nano-region between. 14 a metallic filament is present, although the electrons provided by the filament lightly dope the surrounding matrix. The possibility of generating a polarization in nanoregions at such a doping level was confirmed by lattice dynamic calculations. In other words, the proximity of the metallic filaments does not eliminate the polar character of the STO matrix. We propose that the interaction of the polar regions of the STO with the d1 and d2 electronic states in different filaments of a bundle constitutes the pairing glue of the Cooper electrons. The determined coherence length perfectly correlates with the average radius of the bundles formed by electro-degradation. As the bundling tendency of the nanofilaments in the electro-degraded crystals is higher than in the thermally-reduced ones, their superconducting properties are also more pronounced, as evidenced by their higher Tc. Methods A detailed description of the applied methods is provided in the supplementary information.