1 / 63 Intelligent Meta-Imagers: From Compressed to Learned Sensing Chloé Saigre-Tardif1,2,*, Rashid Faqiri1,3,*, Hanting Zhao4, Lianlin Li4, and Philipp del Hougne1,† 1 Univ Rennes, CNRS, IETR - UMR 6164, F-35000, Rennes, France 2 INSA Rennes, CNRS, IETR - UMR 6164, F-35000, Rennes, France 3 The Blackett Laboratory, Department of Physics, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK 4 State Key Laboratory of Advanced Optical Communication Systems and Networks, Department of Electronics, Peking University, 100871 Beijing, China. * These authors contributed equally. † Correspondence to philipp.del-hougne@univ-rennes1.fr. 2 / 63 Abstract Computational meta-imagers synergize metamaterial hardware with advanced signal processing approaches such as compressed sensing. Recent advances in artificial intelligence (AI) are gradually reshaping the landscape of meta-imaging. Most recent works use AI for data analysis, but some also use it to program the physical meta-hardware. The role of “intelligence” in the measurement process and its implications for critical metrics like latency are often not immediately clear. Here, we comprehensively review the evolution of computational meta-imaging from the earliest frequency-diverse compressive systems to modern programmable intelligent meta-imagers. We introduce a clear taxonomy in terms of the flow of task-relevant information that has direct links to information theory: compressive meta-imagers indiscriminately acquire all scene information in a task- agnostic measurement process that aims at a near-isometric embedding; intelligent meta- imagers highlight task-relevant information in a task-aware measurement process that is purposefully non-isometric. The measurement process of intelligent meta-imagers is thus simultaneously an analog wave processor that implements a first task-specific inference step “over-the-air”. We provide explicit design tutorials for the integration of programmable meta-atoms as trainable physical weights into an intelligent end-to-end sensing pipeline. This merging of the physical world of metamaterial engineering and the digital world of AI enables the remarkable latency gains of intelligent meta-imagers. We further outline emerging opportunities for cognitive meta-imagers with reverberation- enhanced resolution and we point out how the meta-imaging community can reap recent advances in the vibrant field of metamaterial wave processors to reach the holy grail of low-energy ultra-fast all-analog intelligent meta-sensors. 3 / 63 CONTENTS 1. Introduction 2. Compressive Meta-Imagers 2.1 Fundamentals 2.2 Implementations 2.2.1 Frequency-Diverse Pseudo-Random Patterns 2.2.2 Configuration-Diverse Pseudo-Random Patterns 2.2.3 Orthogonal Patterns 2.2.4 Principle Scene Components 2.3 Image Reconstruction Algorithms 3. Intelligent Meta-Imagers 3.1 Autonomous Region-of-Interest Identification and Analysis 3.2 Information Flow and Operation Principle 3.3 Implementations 3.3.1 Forward Model 3.3.2 Digital Neural Network Architecture 3.3.3 Training Data 3.3.4 Back-Propagation Under Quantization Constraints 3.3.5 Noise 4. Future Directions 4.1 Cognitive Meta-Imagers 4.2 Meta-Programmable Reverberation-Coded Apertures 4.3 All-Analog Sensing Pipelines 4.3.1 Bulk Metamaterial Block 4.3.2 Waveguide Mesh 4.3.3 Cascaded Diffractive Layers 4.3.4 Complex Scattering System 5. Conclusions