The Persistence of Memory in Solid-State Ionic Conduction Probed by Nonlinear Optics Andrey D. Poletayev1,2,3,*, Matthias C. Hoffmann4, James A. Dawson5,6, Samuel W. Teitelbaum1,7,8, Mariano Trigo1,7, M. Saiful Islam3,9 , Aaron M. Lindenberg1,2,7,* Predicting practical rates of ion transport from atomistic descriptors enables the rational design of materials, devices, and processes, which is especially critical to developing low-carbon energy technologies such as rechargeable batteries1–3. The correlated mechanisms of ionic conduction4,5, variation of conductivity with timescale6–8 and confinement9,10, and ambiguity in the vibrational origin of translation, the attempt frequency11,12, call for a direct atomic probe of the most fundamental steps of ionic diffusion: ion hops. However, such hops are rare-event large-amplitude translations, and are challenging to excite and detect. Here we use single-cycle terahertz pumps to impulsively trigger ionic hopping in battery solid electrolytes. This is visualized by an induced transient birefringence enabling direct probing of anisotropy in ionic hopping on the picosecond timescale. The relaxation of the transient signal measures the decay of orientational memory, and the production of entropy in diffusion. We extend experimental results using in silico transient birefringence to identify attempt frequencies for ion hopping. Using nonlinear optical methods, we probe ion transport at its fastest limit, distinguish correlated conduction mechanisms from a true random walk at the atomic scale, and demonstrate the connection between activated transport and the thermodynamics of information. Models of Ion Transport Fast-ion conduction in the solid state commands particular attention due to its importance in energy technologies, such as solid state batteries1,2. Linking the mechanistic features of ion conduction at the atomic level to the collective descriptors of macroscopic transport within a multi-scale model, or as measured in a device, yields opportunities to design novel processes and applications3,9,13. However, the links are often not well characterized in part because nanoscale ionic conductivity is dispersive and non-ergodic6,7. Macroscopic solid-state ionic conduction is considered a random-walk process composed of rapid translations between lattice sites. These fundamental steps of diffusion and conduction are called ion hops (Figure 1a). Hops originate randomly with an attempt frequency ν0, and succeed with a probability determined by the Gibbs free energy of a transition state6,11,12,14. Random-walk models15,16 treat every step (hop) as uncorrelated from the preceding ones: 1 Stanford Institute for Materials and Energy Sciences, SLAC National Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA, USA 2 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA 3 Department of Materials, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK 4 Linac Coherent Light Source, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA, USA 5 Chemistry – School of Natural and Environmental Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK 6 Centre for Energy, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK 7 Stanford PULSE Institute, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA 8 Present Address: Department of Physics, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA 9 Department of Chemistry, University of Bath, Bath, UK * Correspondence to andrey.poletayev@gmail.com, aaronl@stanford.edu. all memory is lost with every hop. From the standpoint of information theory17, the full entropy of conduction is evolved at every hop. By contrast, models of correlated transport allow for the macroscopic process of conduction to consist of multiple interconnected steps. Examples include memory kernels in generalized master equations18,19, Burnett-order nonlinear hydrodynamics8,10, or kinetic competition6,20. In such models, the state of the material at time zero (Figure 1b, green) influences transport dynamics over some non-negligible timescale (e.g., t1 in Figure 1b). The information entropy of transport is expressed as a mutual entropy between configurations a time lag t1 apart. This quantity increases (equivalently, mutual information decreases) until the full entropy of transport is produced. Only at longer timescales (e.g., at t2 in Figure 1b) can transport parameters such as the diffusion coefficient and ionic conductivity be constant-valued, as in a random-walk process. Indeed, picosecond to nanosecond studies of ion conductors11,21,22 yield reduced activation energies, suggesting that the processes being probed at those frequencies may be incomplete with respect to overall conduction due to the persistence of such memory. Understanding correlation effects in transport remains necessary to predict practical performance of ionic conductors from the atoms up3,13, and to exploit nonlinear nanoscale transport phenomena9 in devices. Here, we study the correspondence between the thermodynamics of ion transport and those of information23,24. Such a mechanistic investigation requires the ability to (1) impulsively trigger ion hops3 on the short timescale of 1/ν0, typically ≤ 1 ps, and (2) track their outcomes over potentially much longer times7,8. Such a combination is inaccessible to current techniques11, and even the vibrational nature of ν0 remains under debate2,25,26. Furthermore, since ion hops, unlike those of electronic carriers, are stochastic and lack spectral resonance signatures, single-pulse reciprocal-space or Fourier-transform probes are insufficient for probing them. Instead, correlations in nanoscale transport7–10 could be probed using time-domain nonlinear optical pump-probe methods such as transient birefringence27–29 via their sensitivity to polarization. However, pump-probe studies of ionic dynamics have so far focused on coherent displacements of bound vibrational modes or order parameters30,31, where many ions undergo coherent sub- angstrom motions, rather than rare large-amplitude displacements (typically 2-3 Å) such as ionic hops. Probing Correlated Hopping We probe orientational correlations between ionic hops using a nonlinear optical method sensitive to ionic velocities (Figure 1c). We trigger ionic hops with an impulsive single- optical-cycle pump (Figure 1d) and measure the anisotropy in the directions of subsequent hops (Figure 1ef) as transient birefringence. The ionic response is pumped impulsively using single-cycle terahertz pulses with center frequency ≈0.7 THz32,33, and transient birefringence is probed in transmission mode (Extended Data Figure 1). The general solution for electric fields E in the sample at position z along the pulse paths at pump-probe delay t1 is34,35 E!"#$%(z, t) − E(z, t) ∝ ∂ ∂t *P(z, t + t&)E!"#$%(z, t)- Here, the polarization P arises from coherent displacements of vibrational modes or bound dipoles Qi, plus an additional component from the history of hopping rates H: P(t + t&) = / Q'(t + t&) ' + 1 H(τ)dτ ()(! *+ The integral is zero until the pump drives ionic hops in a preferential direction (Figure 1d). Because the emitted signal at t1 is proportional to the time derivative of the polarization, it arises from ionic velocities, to which hopping rates H(t1) contribute. In the terahertz-pumped Kerr effect (TKE) geometry, the anisotropy of velocities and hopping rates is measured specifically (Figure 1c). This corresponds to a time-dependent preference for hopping along the direction defined by the terahertz pump versus in an orthogonal direction. The relaxation of hopping anisotropy corresponds to the loss of memory of the pump-driven impulse by the conducting ions during the temperature-activated solid-state diffusion process. If conduction occurs via a random walk, then hopping immediately returns to isotropy, and no relaxation should be observable. Additionally, the modes Qi that couple appreciably to H contribute to attempt frequencies ν0. between energetically distinct lattice sites with two- and six-fold coordination by oxygen ions (black). The same lattice sites are depicted schematically in d-f. b. At time t0 = 0 (green) there is perfect knowledge of the state of the system. At time t1 > 0 some correlations persist. By time t2 >> 0 all correlations and memory are lost, and the full entropy of transport is produced as for a random walk (dotted line). c. Transient birefringence experiment in β-aluminas: At time t0 = 0 (green) the terahertz pump triggers ion hops along its electric field vector, as shown in d. At time t1 > 0, the subsequent hops retain a correlation with the impulse at t0: back-hopping is predominant, as shown in e, which yields a birefringence signal (c, red). The anisotropic distribution of hopping directions at t1 is probed as a contribution to the anisotropy in ionic velocities (c, pink). The pump energy fully thermalizes by time t2 when the hopping directions reach isotropy (f). Time Kerr signal t0 = 0 t1 t2 c isotropic v⟂ v|| anisotropic v⟂ v|| isotropic v⟂ v|| d pump t0 = 0 b Time Information Entropy t0 = 0 t1 t2 random walk probe t1 > 0 e probe t2 >> 0 f a Picosecond Hopping Dynamics in β-aluminas We first use the fast ionic conductors β-aluminas (M1+2xAl11O17+x, where x≈0.1, and the mobile ion M+ = Na+, K+, Ag+) as model systems. In β-aluminas, ion conduction occurs over two non-equivalent lattice sites (Figure 1a), and correlations persist over timescales corresponding to multiple (≥2) consecutive hops7. The vibrational modes of the mobile ions fall between 0.7-3.0 THz, depending on the mobile ion36,37. To match the direction of ionic hopping, the pump electric field E is perpendicular to the crystalline c axis and parallel to the two-dimensional conduction planes. Figure 2a shows the time traces of the terahertz- pumped transient birefringence in β-aluminas at 300 K. All samples show both oscillatory and non-oscillatory responses at 300 K and 620 K (Extended Data Figure 1). Such incoherent, non-oscillatory relaxation has been previously observed in liquids27,29,38,39 and solids40, but attributed to overdamped rotations or librations, which are absent in β- aluminas. While the magnitude of the birefringence response scales with the square of the pump field (Figure S3), as expected for a Kerr effect signal, we do not observe any spectral changes with increasing pump fluence in either TKE or terahertz transmission experiments (Figures S3, S5), indicating that we are probing a response intrinsic to the material, and not a threshold-dependent response only relevant at high fields41. The non-oscillatory relaxation is substantially slower than any vibrational components. Therefore, we also rule out nonlinear phonon coupling42,43. Otherwise, the vibrational components of the TKE signals (Figure 2b) are consistent with established far-infrared and Raman modes37 of mobile ions. electro-optic sampling trace of the pump field (green), smoothed with a 30-fs Gaussian window. The shaded regions correspond to ±1 s.e. of the mean signal at each time delay. The labeled feature at 8.4 ps is the rotational coherence of atmospheric nitrogen44 within a Rayleigh length (> 500 μm) of the samples (≤ 30 μm thick). (b) Fourier transform power spectra (points) of the signals in (a), and smoothed with a Gaussian filter of 0.1 THz st. dev. (lines), with peaks highlighted by arrows. We investigate the possible connection between temperature-activated hopping conduction and the picosecond TKE relaxation by varying the temperature of the samples. In all materials, the signals from thinner (<30 μm) vs thicker (100-300 μm) samples match after the short-time oscillations dephase (Extended Data Figure 2). The subsequent non- !! a b oscillatory relaxation represents a bulk material response. We analyze a thick sample of K+ β- alumina (Figure 3a) here to highlight this long-time signal. We model the response as the sum of an instantaneous response arising from intrinsic nonlinearity and a mismatch in optical constants between the pump and probe frequencies45,46 (Supplementary Notes 1-2, and Extended Data Figures 3-5), and single-exponential decay, shown together as dashed lines. The slow non-oscillatory component is absent in the non-resonant optical Kerr response (Extended Data Figure 6), and the residuals of the TKE fit (Extended Data suggests that both pumps (THz and optical) excite coherent ionic vibrations, but the terahertz pump excites an additional response that decays incoherently. For K+ β-alumina, this non-oscillatory relaxation accelerates from ≈10 ps at 300 K to ≈4 ps at 620 K (Figure 3b), with an activation energy of ≈45 meV. In ambient atmosphere, the apparent time constants are slightly slower due to the overlaid signal from atmospheric water vapor27 (Figure S1), which is slower than the sample response and is not temperature-activated. traces of transient birefringence in K+ β-alumina, measured in ambient atmosphere (solid lines), normalized and offset for clarity. The shaded regions correspond to ±1 s.e. of the mean signal. Colored dashed lines are fits to the sum of single-exponent relaxation and an instantaneous polarization. The labeled feature at 8.4 picoseconds is the rotational coherence of atmospheric nitrogen. (b) Time constants of single-exponential fits to the long-lived TKE component in ambient atmosphere (filled symbols) and dry atmosphere (empty symbols). Error bars are ±1 s.e. of least-squares fitting. The dashed line at an activation energy of 45 meV is a guide to the eye. (c) Molecular dynamics simulation showing normalized anisotropy of hopping under applied electric field mimicking the experimental terahertz pump at 300 K (blue) and 600 K (pink). Black dashed line: square of the simulated electric field. Eliminating several other plausible assignments, we propose that the liquid-like picosecond- timescale component of the TKE response arises from the incoherent hopping of mobile ions. a !! 45 meV b c 2-6 ps average: 300 K: 290 ± 40 hops μm-3 600 K: 60 ± 100 hops μm-3 We use large-scale molecular dynamics simulations with a pulsed electrical field27,47,48 mimicking the experimental THz pump in frequency and magnitude to verify this hypothesis. Following the simulated terahertz pump, the anisotropy of hopping rates is calculated from the times and crystallographic directions of all hops (Figure 3c). The pump selectively accelerates mobile ions (Supplementary Note 4) and drives hopping along its electric field. In K+ β-alumina at 300 K, the anisotropy of hopping is distinguishable from zero until ≥6 ps after the peak applied field (Figure 3c, blue), but relaxes to zero by ≈3-4 ps at 600 K, in agreement with experiment. The simulated relaxation of the hopping anisotropy is only slightly faster than the experimental TKE relaxation. We conclude that the liquid-like picosecond-timescale TKE response in β-aluminas is indeed a signature of anisotropy in the hopping of mobile ions caused by the pump, the decay of which is heat-activated with an energy of ≈40-50 meV in K+ β-alumina (Figure 3b). Correlations and Memory in Ion Hopping We now discuss the physical meaning of the TKE signal. The contribution of hopping to the TKE signal for any time delay scales with the hopping rate H, weighed by the hop directions to the pump contribute positively to the TKE signal, whereas hopping orthogonal to the pump contributes negatively as ±v^ (Figure 1c). The existence of the slow TKE signal signifies a mismatch between v|| and v^, and implies that directions of consecutive hops are correlated. This is consistent with previous simulations6,7: following pump-driven hops at t0 (Figure 1d), the mobile ions have a preference to hop backwards (correlation factors f, fI << 1 using solid- state ionics nomenclature15,16), which randomizes only slowly. TKE measures the decay of this preference and verifies that the atomistic mechanism of ion transport in β-aluminas differs from a random walk. The hopping component of the TKE signal is temperature-activated, but the activation is much smaller than for low-frequency conductivity (≈45 meV in Figure 3b vs >200 meV49). However, any hop in isolation is not timescale-dependent. The difference between hopping at picosecond versus macroscopic timescales is not within individual hops, but in the mutual information between successive hops (Supplementary Note 5), conceptually similar to a viscoelastic effect. Small activation energies measured with TKE are consistent with the slow loss of such correlation via production of entropy (Figure 1b), being the origin of increasing measured activation energies toward macroscopic timescales22. At picosecond timescales, as probed here, even though hopping is triggered, correlations persist throughout the measurement, and only partial activation is measurable. Conversely, the full activation for macroscopic conduction is measured only at timescales sufficient for the decay of all correlations. Random-Walk Ion Conduction in K+ β”-alumina All β-aluminas exhibit the picosecond “tail” in the TKE response, and the hopping remains correlated for longer than the TKE response is measurable7. This is expected due to the presence of non-equivalent lattice sites (Figure 1). To verify the above interpretation, we next seek a control system where ion transport could proceed via a true atomistic random walk. In such a system, any TKE “tail” could be expected to vanish rapidly. In the closely analogous β”-aluminas (M1.67Al10.67Li0.33O17, where the mobile ion M+ = Na+, K+, Ag+) all lattice sites for ion hopping are equivalent (Figure 4a, inset). The β”-aluminas are expected to have true random-walk conduction at elevated temperature, but not at 300 K7. In the TKE response of K+ β”-alumina, we observe a long-lived non-oscillatory relaxation at 300 K (Figure 4a), as in the β-aluminas. At 620 K, this component is absent, and a more field- following response is observed, which suggests the absence of long-time correlations, and a more field-following response overall. In agreement with experiment, the simulated anisotropy of hopping following a 0.7-THz pump exhibits a long-lived relaxation at 300 K, but not at 600 K (Figure 4b). The simulation reproduces the most important feature of experimental TKE: a picosecond-timescale anisotropy of hopping at 300 K that disappears by 600 K. The experiment and simulation are consistent with the expected change of transport mechanism: correlated at 300 K changing to a true random walk by 600 K7. We conclude that the non-oscillatory picosecond-timescale relaxation of the terahertz Kerr effect indeed probes the decay of orientational memory in ionic hopping at the level of individual ionic hops. Attempt Frequencies for Ion Hopping Finally, we use the TKE measurements and simulations of K+ β”-alumina to identify the vibrational origin of ionic hops: the attempt frequency ν0. To cause an anisotropy in hopping, a pump field must excite the vibrational modes Qi that couple directly to hopping, and trigger hopping aligned with the applied field. This must happen before thermalization, or else pump-driven heating enhances hopping rates in all directions isotropically. Having established the correspondence of the experimental TKE and simulated anisotropy of ionic hopping, we use further molecular dynamics simulations as in silico TKE at pump frequencies presently inaccessible to us experimentally. We simulate the anisotropy of hopping in K+ β”- alumina following a 2.5-THz pulse that overlaps with the strong infrared-active vibration of the K+ ions in the conduction plane at 3.0 THz (Figure 4c, orange). Despite the material absorbing nearly the same amount of energy from simulated 0.7-THz and 2.5-THz pulses (Figure S6), and despite the 3.0-THz vibration being coherently driven by the 2.5-THz pulse (Figure S7), the 0.7-THz pulse creates a ≈20x stronger anisotropy of hopping than the 2.5- alumina. (a) Normalized time-domain transient birefringence in thin polycrystalline K+ β”-alumina at 300 K (blue) and 620 K (pink). The shaded regions are ±1 s.e. of the mean. Inset: in β”- aluminas mobile ions (purple) hop (arrows) between equivalent four- coordinate sites. (b) Normalized simulated anisotropy of hopping directions in polycrystalline K+ β”-alumina under applied electric field centered at 0.7 THz mimicking the experimental pump, 300 K (blue) and 600 K (pink). Black dashed line: square of the simulated pump electric field. Inset zooms in on the post-pump times: simulated hopping anisotropy at 300 K is nonzero for ≥5 ps. (c) Simulated anisotropy of hopping in polycrystalline K+ β”-alumina at 300 K under applied electric fields centered at 0.7 THz (teal), and 2.5 THz (orange). Inset: Simulated in-plane optical K+ conductivity of K+ β”-alumina in the terahertz region (blue). Peaks at ≈1, 3, and ≈5 THz are in agreement with literature50. Shaded: spectra of simulated pumps with center frequencies 0.7 THz (teal) mimicking the experimental pump (ab), and 2.5 THz (orange). a b 1 5 2 3 4 0 0.05 c 1 5 2 3 4 Frequency, THz Amplitude, a.u. THz pulse (Figure 4c). This suggests that the pulse at ≈1 THz couples directly to hops, whereas the 2.5-THz pulse heats the material isotropically. We conclude that the attempt frequency in K+ β”-alumina is ≈1 THz. The excitation of this vibration is evident in the experimental TKE response (Figure 4a, Extended Data Figure 7b). The attempt frequencies in β-aluminas can be similarly identified once the distinct dynamics of bound defect clusters and non-equivalent lattice sites are dis-aggregated (Supplementary Note 6). For example, in Na β-alumina the simulated attempt frequencies are ≈1.2 THz for the dominant ion-pair hopping mechanism, and ≈2.3 THz for rare single-ion hopping. The latter corresponds to the known vibration37 commonly taken as the attempt frequency41 and verified here with THz transmission (2.1 THz, Figure S5, and Supplementary Note 6). Instead, the 1.2-THz vibration, highlighted by neutron scattering36, drives most hopping at 300K, despite constituting a minor part of the vibrational density of states for the mobile ion. Conclusions In summary, we have used impulsive near-resonant terahertz excitation to trigger ionic hopping in solid-state ionic conductors. Picosecond transient birefringence arises from correlations in the hopping of mobile ions. Therefore we establish TKE, a nonlinear optical measurement, as a direct probe of path dependence in ionic transport7,8. TKE highlights both the vibrational origination of ionic conduction, and the the slow loss of memory during diffusion. Ionic conductivity and its activation reach their low-frequency limits only at timescales sufficiently long to scramble all memory within the system. The transport of ions can be characterized by a random walk only at timescales longer than the persistence of correlations - but such a phenomenological random walk may not correspond to a true atomistic one. In other words, macroscopic measurements cannot be interpreted in terms of atomistic quantities without accounting for such correlations. By distinguishing rapid ion hops from the persistent correlations connecting them, our work demonstrates the correspondence between thermodynamics and information for thermally activated mass transport. In addition to probing the mechanisms of ionic conduction, the correlation effects we highlight are of importance for transport under strong driving forces, at short timescales, and in confined dimensions9,10, such as in switching applications3. This study provides a framework for the use of nonlinear optical techniques to probe the atomistic mechanisms of non-equilibrium transport phenomena, which will be highly valuable in the development of energy technologies such as solid state batteries, and in the related fields of nanofluidics, engineering phase transformations, and neuromorphic computing. Acknowledgements This work was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Materials Sciences and Engineering (contract DE-AC02-76SF00515). MSI and JAD gratefully acknowledge the EPSRC Programme Grant “Enabling next generation lithium batteries” (EP/M009521/1). JAD gratefully acknowledges the EPSRC (EP/V013130/1), Research England (Newcastle University Centre for Energy QR Strategic Priorities Fund) and Newcastle University (Newcastle Academic Track (NUAcT) Fellowship) for funding. We are indebted to Prof. Osamu Kamishima (Setsunan University) for sharing single-crystalline samples of Na β-alumina with us. Author Contributions The probing of ionic transport with nonlinear techniques was proposed by AML, MT, SWT, and ADP. Simulations incorporating the terahertz pump were proposed by AML, JAD, and MSI. ADP and MCH performed the terahertz Kerr effect and transmission measurements. ADP, SWT, and MT performed the optical Kerr effect measurements. ADP analyzed the experimental data. ADP performed and analyzed the molecular dynamics simulations with advice from JAD and MSI. AML advised and supervised the work. All authors contributed to the writing of the manuscript. Extended Data Figure 1 | Terahertz Kerr effect (TKE) in β-aluminas at elevated temperature. (a) Schematic of the transient birefringence experiment: terahertz pump (green) perturbs mobile ions (purple) in the ionic conductor. The 800 nm probe pulse (pink) delayed by a time Δt is split with a quarter wave plate and a Wollaston prism. The polarization rotation of the probe pulse is detected with a pair of Si photodiodes in a balanced detection scheme. (b) Polarizations of the pump and probe pulses relative to each other and the β-alumina crystals. (c) Time-domain traces of transient birefringence in thin optic sampling trace of the pump field (green). The shaded regions correspond to ±1 s.e. of the mean signal at each time delay. (d) Fourier transform power spectra (points) of the signals in (c), and smoothed with a Gaussian filter of 0.1 THz st. dev. (lines), with peaks highlighted by arrows. b c d ETHz E800nm 45° k || crystal c axis ETHz ⟂ crystal c E800nm ⟂ crystal c PD1 PD2 Wollaston prism probe pump !/4 $-alumina a Extended Data Figure 2 | TKE in β-aluminas with varying sample thickness. TKE signals normalized to their values at a pump-probe delay time when short-time oscillatory signal components have decayed. For all materials at 300 K (ace) and 620 K (bdf) the longer-time relaxation of the signals overlap: their kinetics are independent of sample thickness. Since the TKE signal is phase accumulated over the sample thickness, thicker samples yield lower- noise signals at long time delays. a b c d e f Extended Data Figure 3 | Fitting TKE signals of Na β-alumina. Each signal (blue in aceg) was measured in a purged atmosphere and modeled as the sum of an instantaneous component (orange) and a single-exponential relaxation (green) with a long-time constant (Supplementary Notes 1 and 2). For the thin sample (e-h), the strength of the instantaneous component was small. The strong vibrational component in the thick-sample signal (a-d) precluded unambiguous fitting at short times, so the exponential component was fit to the long-time part of the signal. The residuals (dark red) are oscillatory. Their Fourier transforms (bdfh), plotted with 0.1-THz Gaussian-filter smoothing, show main frequency components at 1.8 and 3.0 THz in agreement with non-resonant OKE (3.0 THz, Extended Data Figure 6), literature, and simulation (1.7 THz, Figure S7). a c e g b f d h Extended Data Figure 4 | Fitting TKE signals of K β-alumina. Each signal (blue in aceg) was measured in a purged atmosphere and modeled as the sum of an instantaneous component (orange) and a single-exponential relaxation (green) with a long-time constant (Supplementary Notes 1 and 2). For the thin sample (e-h), the instantaneous component was non-negligible, and at 300 K a weakly determined second exponential was identifiable. The residuals (dark red) are oscillatory and most interpretable in the signals from the thin sample (e-h). Their Fourier transforms (bdfh), plotted with 0.1-THz Gaussian-filter smoothing, show main frequency components at ≈1.2, ≈2.0, and ≈2.7 THz in agreement with non-resonant OKE (2.0 THz, Extended Data Figure 6), literature, and simulation (1.3 THz and 1.9 THz, Figure S7). a c e g b f d h Extended Data Figure 5 | Fitting TKE signals of Ag β-alumina. Each signal (blue in aceg) was measured in a purged atmosphere and modeled as the sum of an instantaneous component (orange) and a single-exponential relaxation (green) (Supplementary Notes 1 and 2). For the thin sample (e-h), the instantaneous component was negligible. The Fourier transforms (bdfh) of residuals (dark red), plotted with 0.1-THz Gaussian-filter smoothing, show a frequency component at ≈1.2 THz in agreement with literature (infrared-active mode at 1.0-1.2 THz) and simulation (1.0 THz, Figure S7). The signal is very similar between the thick and thin samples (Extended Data Figure 2), consistent with it arising from a thin layer of the material and consistent with strong absorption (Supplementary Note 3). a c e g b f d h Extended Data Figure 6 | Non-resonant optical Kerr effect in β-aluminas. Schematic of the experimental configuration (a) and signals from thick Na (orange), K (purple), and Ag (dark red) β-alumina crystals (b) at positive time delays following a strong coherent artifact at zero time delay. The frequency components are extracted from linear prediction fitting results (Methods) shown as black dashed lines. Wollaston prism probe pump !/4 $-alumina PD1 PD2 a 7.8 THz, 3.0 THz 2.0 THz, 2.3 THz 0.7 THz, 3.0 THz b Extended Data Figure 7 | Fourier Transforms of TKE Signals in K+ β- and β”-alumina. (a) Fourier transforms of oscillatory residuals in TKE signals of thick crystals of K β-alumina measured in ambient atmosphere (Figure 3a). (b) Fourier transforms of the TKE signals of thin polycrystalline K+ β”-alumina (Figure 4a). a b