Intrinsic RESET speed limit of valence change memories M. von Witzleben1,2,*, S. Wiefels2, A. Kindsm ̈uller1, P. Stasner1, F. Berg1, F. C ̈uppers3, S. Hoffmann-Eifert3, R. Waser1,2,3, S. Menzel2, and U. B ̈ottger1 1Institut f ̈ur Werkstoffe der Elektrotechnik 2, RWTH Aachen University, Sommerfeldstraße 24, D-52074 Aachen, Germany 2Peter Gr ̈unberg Institut 7, Forschungszentrum J ̈ulich and JARA-FIT, Wilhelm Johnen Straße, D-52428 J ̈ulich, Germany 3Peter Gr ̈unberg Institut 10, Forschungszentrum J ̈ulich and JARA-FIT, Wilhelm Johnen Straße, D-52428 J ̈ulich, Germany *Corresponding author: witzleben@iwe.rwth-aachen.de Abstract During the last decade, valence change memory (VCM) has been extensively studied due to its promis- ing features, such as a high endurance and fast switching times. The information is stored in a high resistive state (logcial ‘0’, HRS) and a low resistive state (logcial ‘1’, LRS). It can also be operated in two different writing schemes, namely a unipolar switching mode (LRS and HRS are written at the same voltage polarity) and a bipolar switching mode (LRS and HRS are written at opposite voltage polari- ties). VCM, however, still suffers from a large variability during writing operations and also faults occur, which are not yet fully understood and, therefore, require a better understanding of the underlying fault mechanisms. In this study, a new intrinsic failure mechanism is identified, which prohibits RESET times (transition from LRS to HRS) faster than 400 ps and possibly also limits the endurance. We demonstrate this RESET speed limitation by measuring the RESET kinetics of two valence change memory devices (namely Pt/TaOx/Ta and Pt/ZrOx/Ta) in the time regime from 50 ns to 50 ps, corresponding to the fastest writing time reported for VCM. Faster RESET times were achieved by increasing the applied pulse voltage. Above a voltage threshold it was, however, no longer possible to reset both types of de- vices. Instead a unipolar SET (transition from HRS to LRS) event occurred, preventing faster RESET times. The occurrence of the unipolar SET is attributed to an oxygen exchange at the interface to the Pt electrode, which can be suppressed by introducing an oxygen blocking layer at this interface, which also allowed for 50 ps fast RESET times. 1 Introduction Among other emerging memory technologies, valence change memory (VCM) can not only be used as binary storage class memory, but also to perform in-memory calculations or to realize neuromorphic applications [1– 4]. In the binary mode, the information is encoded in a high and a low resistive state (HRS and LRS). These two states can be programmed with electrical stimuli. The transition from the HRS to LRS is referred to as SET and the opposite transition as RESET. A VCM device usually consists of a mixed electronic-ionic conducting layer (e.g. TaOx or ZrOx), sandwiched between two asymmetric metallic electrodes [5–8]. One of the two electrodes is inert (e.g. Pt) and referred to as active electrode, whereas the opposite electrode is oxygen affine (e.g. Ta). The devices are programmed by applying electrical stimuli, during which an n- conducting filament consisting of mobile donors is either formed (SET) or ruptured (RESET). Spectroscopic studies have identified these mobile donors as oxygen vacancies [9–13]. Especially for TaOx-based devices also a movement of metallic cations was observed [14–16]. During the SET, a negative voltage is applied to the active electrode (attracting mobile donors) and a positive voltage during the RESET (repelling mobile donors). As the voltages required for the SET and RESET have opposite signs, this corresponds to a bipolar switching mode. 1 arXiv:2110.02036v2 [physics.app-ph] 6 Oct 2021 For the binary switching mode, a high endurance of up to 1012 cycles and writing times below 1 ns [19–24] have been reported. A successful market launch also requires high storage densities and, consequently, the integration of VCM devices into 3D structures . Due to the presence of Joule heating during the SET and during the RESET operation , the writing time depends strongly non-linearly on the applied voltage . This non-linearity allows VCM devices to overcome the voltage-time-dilemma , which describes the necessity for high data retention during the read-out (at low voltages) and fast writing times (at high voltages) . Programming VCM devices with shorter electrical stimuli also enhances the devices’ endurance . Calculations and simulations show that for nanoscale devices faster writing times of 1 ps are possible . Sub-nanosecond switching times are still realizable, if the VCM devices were integrated into nanoscale crossbar array structures . Also, first neuromorphic applications have been demonstrated on a sub-nanosecond timescale: Ma et al. recently demonstrated spike timing-dependent plasticity (STDP) in memristive devices with 600 ps pulses . Concepts of GHz deep neural networks were developed, which are potentially faster than today’s CPUs and GPUs by a factor of 30,000 . Most applications in the GHz regime require, consequently, fast writing times. So far, the speed limit was always attributed to the electrical charging of the devices, assuming that the intrinsic speed limit is only limited by the attempt frequency of the mobile donors in the THz domain . Recently, we have shown that 50 ps fast SET times can be achieved for TaOx- and ZrOx-based VCM devices , which corresponds to the limitation of the experimental setup. We also demonstrated that the SET kinetics are mainly delayed by the electrical charging time in the sub-nanosecond regime and not by intrinsic processes, such as the migration of ions or the heating of the filamentary region . The fast heating results from the narrow filament, which has only a diameter in the range from 1 nm to 3 nm . While the SET kinetics have been studied quite extensively, studies investigating possible intrinsic RESET speed limits are rare. Most studies show only 10 or fewer successful RESET operations [19–21] and are not discussing possible RESET speed limitations. Only Wang et al. studied RESET kinetics in dependence on the applied voltage in the sub-nanosecond regime and observed a lower change in resistance at shorter pulse widths than 800 ps . At pulse widths below 200 ps the VCM device switched randomly between the HRS and LRS. They explain this observation with a lower heating of the filamentary region during the RESET at shorter pulse widths than 800 ps. Their argumentation, however, does not account for the random switching between the LRS and the HRS. In this study, we propose a different failure mechanism limiting the RESET kinetics in the sub-nanosecond regime: For this purpose, we focus on the RESET kinetics in the regime from 50 ns to 50 ps and show that they are intrinsically limited by the presence of a unipolar switching mode . Different to previous studies, we also acquired a much larger dataset to demonstrate the reproducibility of successful RESET operations. At slower timescales (above 700 ps) the RESET kinetics depend exponentially on the applied voltage, which was already demonstrated in other studies [28,44–47]. By increasing the applied voltage we could successfully reset the TaOx-based device within 670 ps at a voltage of 1.6 V and the ZrOx-based device within 480 ps at an voltage of 1.8 V. At higher voltages, the devices could not be driven to the HRS. Instead of an increase in resistance, a unipolar SET could be observed, decreasing the device’s resistance and, thereby, preventing faster RESET times. This unipolar switching mode has already been observed for TaOx- and ZrOx-based devices , but has never been considered as failure meachanism for neither the RESET kinetics, nor the endurance. It can be triggered by applying a positive voltage to the active electrode, with a higher amplitude compared to the RESET. This could result in a higher heating of the filamentary region than during the bipolar SET and RESET, which in turn could initiate thermo-diffusion of the mobile donors (also referred to as thermophoresis) . To protect the device from damage, a current compliance is crucial during the unipolar SET, which also exhibits abrupt threshold switching. This switching mode was strongly investigated in the years up to 2013 in the hope of achieving a similar performance as for the bipolar switching mode. However, the current compliance to achieve the unipolar SET, has to be in the range of 1 mA , which increases the power consumption and the devices’ degradation during cycling. To our knowledge, the highest measured endurance of a unipolar switching mode amounts to only 106 cycles , being far worse than the endurance of the bipolar switching mode (1012 cycles ). As this mode prohibits faster RESET times and only achieves a poor performance with regard to power consumption and endurance, and also limits the writing time, it constitutes a failure mechanism. The kinetics of this unipolar SET are also investigated in the time regime from 250 ps to 50 ps. We 2 demonstrate that this unipolar SET event can be conducted within 50 ps. From the RESET and unipolar SET kinetics, we derive voltage programming windows, from which the intrinsic RESET speed limitation can be derived. Finally, we suppressed the oxygen exchange at the Pt electrodes with a 1.0 nm thin Al2O3 layer, which also allowed for 50 ps fast RESET times for both devices, which is - to our knowledge - the fastest reported RESET time of redox based random access memories (ReRAMs). 2 RESET kinetics The RESET and unipolar SET kinetics measurements were conducted on a Pt/TaOx/Ta and a Pt/ZrOx/Ta device. Both devices have a size of 2 × 2 μm2 and were also used in , showing that the SET operation can occur within 50 ps. The 30 nm thick Pt bottom electrode serves as active electrode. The film thickness of the TaOx and the ZrOx amounts to 5 nm and the film thickness of the Ta top electrode to 20 nm. Further information are given in the methods section. In recent publications, we have shown that devices with these material stacks have an endurance of at least 106 cycles . DC Bias tee SMU Pt TaOx/ZrOx Ta Oscilloscope DC+AC Pulse generator AC (a) DC SET DC RESET t V 1.6 V at 0.5 V/s -1.2 V at 0.5V/s, CC = 300 μA AC RESET 3 ns to 100 ns, 1.2 V to 1.8 V Read PRE at -0.2 V Read POST at -0.2 V (b) −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 Voltage (V) 10−3 10−2 10−1 Current (mA) TaOx ZrOx SET RESET Pt TaOx/ZrOx Ta V (c) bias tee and the SMU to the DC port (green). The combined output of the bias tee (DC + AC) is connected to the Pt bottom electrode of the VCM device. The current response is measured with an oscilloscope, connected at the Ta top electrode. (b) Measurement procedure to determine the RESET kinetics in the range from 50 ns to 400 ps. Read operations are indicated in blue, SET operations in green and RESET operations in red. All voltages are applied to the Pt active electrode. The green and orange shaded areas mark the part measured at the DC and the AC port of the bias tee, respectively. (c) I(V) characteristics of both devices (sweep rate: 0.5 V/s). Reprinted from , with the permission of AIP Publishing. The experimental setup is sketched in Fig. 1(a) and is explained in detail in . A pulse generator is connected to the alternating current (AC) port and a source measure unit (SMU) to the direct current 3 (DC) port of a broadband bias tee. The combined DC + AC port of the bias tee is connected to the Pt bottom electrode of the VCM device, to which all indicated voltages in this paper were applied. Finally, the current response is measured with a real-time oscilloscope at the Ta top electrode. More information on the experimental setup is given in the methods section. The I(V)-characteristics of both devices are shown in Fig. 1(c). To achieve proper impedance matching, both devices were integrated into coplanar waveguide (CPW) structures, consisting of three parallel stripes (ground-signal-ground, GSG). These CPW structures have gained more attention in recent years, as they can be used to realize radio frequency (RF) switches with memristive devices . Recently, we have shown for the TaOx-based device that the electrical charging occurs within less than 80 ps, if the device is integrated in a proper CPW structure . The scattering parameters of both devices are shown in the supplementary Fig. S1. For these scattering parameters the devices’ charging times were derived in the supplementary Fig. S2, showing that the ZrOx-based device can even be charged within less than 70 ps. The measurement procedure to determine the RESET kinetics on the timescale from 50 ns to 400 ps is depicted in Fig. 1(b). At the beginning of every cycle, the devices were driven to the LRS (ranging from 1.0 kΩ to 3.0 kΩ) by using a voltage sweep with an amplitude of -1.2 V at a sweep rate of 0.5 V/s. To protect the devices from damage a current compliance of 100 μA was used. The devices’ resistance was measured at a voltage of -0.2 V before and after the application of the pulse and is referred to as RPRE and RPOST, respectively. The RESET pulses’ amplitudes were adjusted between 1.2 V and 1.6 V1. At the end of each cycle, the device was driven to the HRS by applying a voltage sweep with an amplitude of 1.6 V at a sweep rate of 0.5 V/s. The pulse width was reduced with every increase in amplitude to reduce the stress on the device. Two exemplary current responses to the applied voltage pulse are shown Fig. 2(a) and (b) for the TaOx and ZrOx-based device, respectively. In both cases, the current increases rapidly at the beginning of the pulse and decreases, subsequently, to values between 400 μA to 500 μA, which corresponds to the RESET. The contribution of the capacitive current is negligible. This can be seen at the end of the pulse applied to the ZrOx-based device in Fig. 2(b). The negative current peak corresponds to the capacitive current and is much smaller than the current peak at the beginning of the pulse. The RESET time tRESET is defined as the time difference between the time at which the current surpasses 20 % of the maximum current at the beginning of the pulse (first vertical dotted line in Fig. 2(a) and (b)) and the time at which the current reaches its half value (second vertical dotted line). The half value of the current ∆I/2 is defined as half the current difference between the minimum and the maximum current ∆I (see illustrations in Fig. 2(a) and (b)). A similar definition was used in our previous publications . In case of the current response of the TaOx-based device in Fig. 2(a), a 10 ns pulse with an amplitude of 1.6 V was applied. During this pulse the device’s resistance increased from 1.39 kΩ to 18.2 kΩ and a RESET time of 670 ps was determined. By using higher pulse amplitudes, faster RESET times could be possible. Increasing the pulse amplitude to 1.8 V, however, resulted in dielectric breakdown and the device’s resistance started to decrease. This is shown in the supplementary Fig. S3. All determined RESET times tRESET are shown in Fig. 2(c) in dependence of the applied voltage. Up to a voltage of 1.6 V, the RESET time depends strongly non-linearly on the applied voltage, which was expected. At a voltage of 1.8 V (only values for ZrOx) the kinetics start to bend towards slower RESET times, which is attributed to the influence of the pulse generator’s rise time (≈ 360 ps). To decrease the influence of the pulse generator’s rise time, the RESET kinetic measurements in the range from 250 ps to 50 ps were conducted with a faster pulse generator, having a rise time of only ≈ 35 ps. The measurement cycle is sketched in Fig. 3(a), and is almost identical to the previous (Fig. 1(b)), only the applied RESET pulse has changed. The pulse amplitude was once chosen to 1.6 V and once to 2.2 V. As in , the pulse width was increased from 50 ps to 250 ps in steps of 5 ps. Each cycle was repeated 10 times2. An exemplary measurement on the TaOx-based device at a voltage of 1.6 V is shown in Fig. 3(b). The ratio of the resistance before RPRE and after RPOST the pulse’s application is plotted as boxplot against the 1This is the effective pulse voltage seen by the device. The pulses emitted by the pulse generator only have half the amplitude. As the 50 Ω transmission line is terminated with a high ohmic VCM device (even the resistance of the LRS is much larger than 50 Ω), the voltage at the device effectively doubles. This is due to the overlap of incoming pulse and the reflected pulse at the VCM device (see also supplementary section S.1 or ) 2The measurement cycles of the ZrOx-based device at a voltage of 1.6 V were repeated 20 times to achieve a smooth line of RPost/RPRE. 4 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 Time [ns] 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 Current [mA] ΔI ΔI/2 670 ps RPre = 1.39 kΩ RPost = 18.2 kΩ TaOx (a) 0 1 2 3 4 Time [ns] 0.0 0.5 1.0 Current [mA] ΔI ΔI/2 480 ps RPre = 1.55 kΩ RPost = 132 kΩ ZrOx (b) 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 Voltage [V] 1 n 10 n tRESET [s] TaOx ZrOx (c) The horizontal dotted lines mark the maximum current, the half value current, and the minimum current (top to bottom). The determined RESET time is denoted by the vertical dotted lines. On the lower right, the change in resistance is indicated. (b) Current response to a pulse with an amplitude of 1.8 V, applied to the ZrOx-based device. The additional horizontal dotted line indicates the zero current baseline. (c) Reset times tRESET, plotted against the applied voltage. FWHM of the applied pulse. The red bar marks the median. As expected, the ratio RPOST/RPRE increases with increasing FWHM. The median of RPOST/RPRE, however, remains below 1.5 for all FWHMs, which means that no successful RESET occurs in this time interval3. The median values of RPOST/RPRE of all four measurements are shown in Fig. 3(c). The corresponding boxplots can be found in the supplementary Fig. S4. As the ratio RPOST/RPRE does not yield any information about the absolute resistance values, the RPOST values are shown in the supplementary Fig. S5. The initial resistances RPRE were always in the range from 1.0 kΩ to 2.5 kΩ. At 1.6 V, the ratio RPOST/RPRE of the ZrOx-based device (dashed blue line in Fig. 3(c)) also remains below 2.0 for all FWHMs, indicating that the ZrOx-based device cannot be driven to HRS within 250 ps. At an amplitude of 2.2 V, RPOST/RPRE of the TaOx-based device (solid orange line in Fig. 3(c)) remained near unity for all FWHMs, while RPOST/RPRE of the ZrOx-based device (dotted orange line in Fig. 3(c)) decreased with increasing FWHM. Consequently, it is not possible with both devices to achieve RESET times faster than 250 ps by increasing the pulse amplitude. The decrease in resistance of the ZrOx-based device at 2.2 V indicates the presence of a unipolar switching mode. 3 Unipolar SET kinetics The measurement procedure to determine the unipolar SET kinetics is depicted in Fig. 4(a). Different to the measurement procedures of the RESET kinetics, the device is driven to the HRS at the beginning of the measurement cycle by applying a voltage sweep with an amplitude of 1.6 V. The resulting resistance values 3For a successful RESET operation the ratio of RPOST/RPRE should be greater than 3 5 DC SET DC RESET t V 1.6 V at 0.5 V/s -1.2 V at 0.5V/s, CC = 300 μA AC RESET 50 ps to 250 ps, 1.6 V or 2.2 V Read PRE at -0.2 V Read POST at -0.2 V (a) 50 100 150 200 250 FWHM [ps] 1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75 RPOST/RPRE (b) 50 100 150 200 250 FWHM [ps] 0.5 1.0 1.5 RPOST/RPRE TaOx ZrOx 1.6 V 2.2 V (c) (b) Exemplary result for the TaOx-based device at a voltage of 1.6 V. The boxplots indicate the scattering of the ratio RPOST/RPRE at a specific full width half maximum (FWHM). The red bar indicates the median value. (c) Median values of all measurements. The solid and dotted lines indicate the results of the TaOx and ZrOx-based devices, respectively. The pulse amplitude amount to 1.6 V (blue) and 2.2 V (orange). The solid blue line in (c) represents the median values of (b). were again in the range from 10 kΩ to 30 kΩ. At the end, it is driven to the LRS with a voltage sweep of -1.2 V. The sweep rate (0.5 V/s) and the current compliance during the SET sweep (300 μA) are identical to the values chosen in the RESET kinetics. The pulse amplitude was again varied from 50 ps to 250 ps and the amplitude from 1.6 V to 5.0 V. As the unipolar switching mode has a large variabilty for TaOx- and ZrOx-based devices , this cycle was repeated at least 10 times4, until smooth curves were achieved for RPOST/RPRE. An exemplary measurements is shown in Fig. 4(b), in which voltage pulses with an amplitude of 3.2 V were applied to the TaOx-based device. A short FWHMs, the ratio RPOST/RPRE remains near unity, indicating that the resistance of the device does not change during the pulse’s application. At FWHMs of about 95 ps, RPOST/RPRE drops towards zero, indicating that the device was successfully driven to the LRS by applying a positive voltage pulse to the active Pt electrode. As the device is also driven to the HRS with a positive voltage pulse, this corresponds to a unipolar SET. At longer FWHMs, the measurement was aborted to prevent the device from damage. This measurement procedure was repeated at different amplitudes (from 1.6 V to 5.0 V) for the TaOx- and ZrOx-based devices. The median values are plotted in Fig. 4(c). The boxplot representation of RPOST/RPRE and the absolute values of RPOST are shown in the supplement Fig. S6-S9. Similar to our previous study, we defined the unipolar SET time, as the time, at which RPOST/RPRE reaches a value below 0.5 . This threshold is indicated as horizontal dashed line in Fig. 4(c). The resulting unipolar SET times are shown in Fig. 4(d) in dependence of the pulse voltage. The unipolar SET kinetics have similar fast switching times compared to the bipolar SET kinetics from . Only the voltage has been shifted to higher absolute values. The fastest unipolar SET time amounts to 50 ps, which 4The exact numbers are listed in Table S1 of the supplementary information. 6 DC SET DC RESET t V 1.6 V at 0.5 V/s -1.2 V at 0.5V/s, CC = 300 μA AC SET 50 ps to 250 ps, 1.6 V to 5.0 V Read PRE at -0.2 V Read POST at -0.2 V (a) 50 100 150 200 250 FWHM [ps] 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 RPOST/RPRE (b) 50 100 150 200 250 FWHM [ps] 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 RPOST/RPRE TaOx ZrOx 3.2 V 5.0 V 1.6 V 2.2 V (c) 2 3 4 5 6 7 Voltage [V] 50 100 150 200 250 SET time [ps] TaOx ZrOx (d) Exemplary result for the TaOx-based device at a voltage of 3.2 V. (c) Median values of all measurements. The solid and dotted lines indicate the results of the TaOx and ZrOx-based devices, respectively. The pulse amplitude amount of (b). is - to our knowledge - the fastest unipolar SET measured in ReRAM devices. The fastest reported unipolar SET time, so far, amounts to 16 ns . As the TaOx-based device did not switch at a pulse width of 50 ps an amplitude of 5.0 V to the LRS, a single measurement cycle with a pulse width of 50 ps and an amplitude of 7.1 V was repeated, during which the TaOx-based device switched to the LRS. Exemplary measured current transients, during which a unipolar SET time of 50 ps was realized, are shown in Fig. S10 of the supplementary information for both devices. The endurance of the unipolar switching mode was also tested. The TaOx and the ZrOx-based device reached an endurance of 104 cycles and 3590 cycles, respectively. The description of the measurement procedure and the results are shown in the supplementary Fig. S11. Usually, current compliances are required to realize unipolar switching modes . In this study, the FWHM of the electrical stimuli is much shorter than state-of-the-art current compliances (often operating at time-scales above 1 μs ) and, therefore, the unipolar switching mode can be realized without current compliance. 4 Intrinsic RESET speed limitation Although fast switching times are usually considered as promising feature, our interpretation of the fast unipolar SET time is that it should be considered as failure mechanism. At higher voltage amplitudes, the unipolar SET occurs faster than the RESET and, thereby, prohibits fast bipolar switching in both directions. This RESET speed limitation is illustrated in the following with RESET programming windows. These windows were estimated with the results from the RESET and the unipolar SET kinetics. As mentioned in the introduction, the unipolar switching mode observed in ReRAM devices, has less promising attributes with regards to endurance and switching power compared to the bipolar switching mode. The results from the RESET kinetics (Fig. 2(c)) and the results from the unipolar SET kinetics (Fig. 4(d)) are plotted in Fig. 5. The red points mark the measured RESET times and the green points the measured 7 unipolar SET times. The red and green shaded areas mark the voltage-time combinations at which either a RESET or a unipolar SET event is triggered. The green and red lines, encircling the red and green shaded area, are drawn by the eye. Their intersection is an estimate of the fastest possible RESET time, demonstrating that the presence of the unipolar switching mode intrinsically limits faster RESET times. In case of the TaOx-based device, this intersection occurs at 510 ps and in case of the ZrOx-based device at 400 ps, which marks their intrinsic RESET speed limit. It has, however, to be noted that this RESET programming window will vary from device to device and possibly also from cycle to cycle due to the high variability of the unipolar SET. This might also be the origin of the random switching between the HRS and the LRS in the results of Wang et al. . In the sub-100 ps regime the measured unipolar SET events are also influenced by the electrical charging of the devices. At slower timescales, the unipolar SET is assumed to be time-independent. 1 2 3 5 7 Voltage [V] 1 n 10 n Time [s] Intrinsic RESET speed limit RESET unipolar SET (a) TaOx-based device 1 2 3 4 5 Voltage [V] 1 n 10 n Time [s] Intrinsic RESET speed limit RESET unipolar SET (b) ZrOx-based device the measured RESET times from Fig. 2(c) and the green points the measured unipolar SET times from Fig. 4(d). The red and green areas (drawn by the eye) mark time-voltage combinations, at which either a RESET or a unipolar SET is triggered. 5 Discussion From Fig. 5, two possibilities to achieve faster RESET times can be derived: 1. Lowering the RESET voltage 2. Suppressing the unipolar switching mode Torrezan et al. achieved 120 ps fast RESET times with a TaOx-based device . The I(V) characteristics of their devices show that the RESET sets in at about 0.35 V . In contrast, the RESET of the devices used in this study sets in above 0.5 V (see Fig. 1(c)). The device stack of both devices is very similar ( : different fabrication processes are responsible for the lower RESET voltage. Suppressing the unipolar SET or mitigating its impact on the bipolar RESET kinetics requires a better understanding of the underlying physical processes. The abrupt nature of the unipolar SET results from a thermal runaway (similar to the bipolar SET) . This thermal runaway, however, does not necessarily lead to a permanent change in resistance. Especially TaOx also exhibits threshold switching . The sudden current increase, may initiate an oxygen exchange between the oxide and the active Pt electrode, which leads to a permanent change in the device’s resistance. Such an exchange was also observed in the so-called “eightwise” switching mode, which has been observed in many transition metal oxides [63–66], including TaOx-based devices . This oxygen exchange could also be the origin of the permanent decrease 8 in resistance during the unipolar SET, and could be suppressed in other studies by introducing an oxygen blocking layer such as C or Al2O3 . To test if an oxygen exchange also occurs during the unipolar SET between the oxide and the active Pt elec- trode, we introduced a 1.0 nm thick Al2O3 layer between the active Pt electrodes and the oxides, resulting in stack (referred to as Al2O3/TaOx and Al2O3/ZrOx device, respectively). We tested to reset both devices with 50 ps pulses. The measurement cycle is similar to the one from Fig. 3(a), only that this time the pulse width was fixed at 50 ps and the pulse amplitude was chosen to 5.0 V and 4.0 V for the Al2O3/TaOx and the Al2O3/ZrOx device, respectively. This measurement cycle was repeated 100 times for each device. The results for RPRE and RPOST of the Al2O3/TaOx and the Al2O3/ZrOx device are shown in Fig. 6(a) and (b), respectively. During most cycles the devices switched to a higher resistance value after the ap- plication, showing that the additional Al2O3 layer improves the feasibility of fast RESET operations. As shown in Fig. 4(c) the devices without additional Al2O3 already started to switch to the LRS at a pulse amplitude of 5.0 V (red lines). To our knowledge, this is the first time that a 50 ps fast RESET process has been demonstrated for a ReRAM device. Two exemplary current responses are shown in Fig. 6(c) and (d) for the Al2O3/TaOx and Al2O3/ZrOx device, respectively. The FHWM of 50 ps has been preserved in both cases. 10 k Resistance [Ω] 0 5 10 15 20 25 # RPRE RPOST (a) Al2O3/TaOx device, V = 5.0 V, FWHM = 50 ps 10 k Resistance [Ω] 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 # RPRE RPOST (b) Al2O3/ZrOx device, V = 4.0 V, FWHM = 50 ps 0 100 200 300 Time [ps] −5.0 −2.5 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 Current [mA] 46.0 ps RPRE = 3.01 kΩ RPOST = 30.4 kΩ (c) Al2O3/TaOx device, V = 5.0 V, FWHM = 50 ps −50 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 Time [ps] −4 −2 0 2 4 6 8 10 Current [mA] 44.0 ps RPRE = 4.34 kΩ RPOST = 39.7 kΩ (d) Al2O3/ZrOx device, V = 4.0 V, FWHM = 50 ps responses during the RESET of the (c) Al2O3/TaOx and (d) Al2O3/ZrOx device. The change in resistance is indicated on the upper right. The devices did, however, also remain in the LRS sometimes, indicating that the 1.0 nm thick Al2O3 layer 9 might only partially prohibit the oxygen exchange at the Pt active electrode and the remaining oxygen exchange might prohibit successful RESET operations. A similar observation was made by Zhang et al., who have placed an Al2O3 layer at the active electrode of a TiOx-based device to suppress the oxygen exchange at the active interface . Their approach, however, only worked for Al2O3 layers thicker than 2 nm. Further studies with different oxygen blocking layers or different active electrodes are, consequently, necessary to achieve better control over the RESET process at these fast timescales. Another aspect of the unipolar SET is that it might limit the endurance of VCM based devices. During endurance measurements on ZrOx and TaOx-based devices, with very similar device fabrication, we observed that the devices were usually trapped in the LRS , which might have been triggered by a unipolar SET event. An exemplary endurance measurement from , during which a ZrOx-based device got trapped in the LRS is shown in Fig. 7. In the endurance limitation of TaOx-based devices was referred to as “RESET Failure”, which is characterized by an abrupt current increase during a RESET sweep. Afterwards, the devices were stuck in the LRS. This abrupt current increase is also observed during the unipolar SET, only that it is usually controlled with a current compliance . 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 Cycle # / 1000 100 101 102 103 104 105 106 Resistance RRead / HRS LRS versibly stuck in the LRS after about 2.8·105 cycles. 6 Conclusion In this study, we have demonstrated that the RESET kinetics of VCM-based devices are intrinsically limited by the coexistance of a unipolar switching mode. Therefore, the RESET kinetics of a TaOx and a ZrOx-based device were investigated in the regime from 50 ns to 50 ps. RESET times down to 480 ps could be achieved by increasing the voltage amplitude of the RESET pulse. At higher amplitudes, a unipolar SET event was triggered which prohibits faster RESET times and rather decreases the devices’ resistances. The unipolar SET kinetics were subsequently measured, showing that the unipolar SET can occur within 50 ps. We attribute the unipolar SET event to a thermal runaway, which followed by an oxygen exchange between the oxide and the active Pt electrode. This oxygen exchange could be partially suppressed by introducing a 1.0 nm thick Al2O3 layer between the oxide and the active electrode. With these devices 50 ps fast RESET operations could be repeated, but only stochastically. We also show, with the data from previous publications, that the occurrence of the unipolar SET limits the endurance of both devices. As the unipolar switching mode has less promising attributes than the bipolar switching mode, the unipolar SET needs to be treated as failure mechanism and further strategies should be developed to suppress its occurrence. Methods Device fabrication and structure: As substrate served a Si-wafer (ρ > 10 kΩcm). The top of the wafer was oxidized resulting in a 430 nm thick SiO2 layer. All deposition steps were conducted by means of RF magnetron sputtering. The 2 × 2 μm2 devices were structured with optical lithography. More details on 10 the device fabrication can be found in and for the TaOx- and the ZrOx-based device, respectively. The 1.0 nm Al2O3 layer was grown by atomic layer deposition (ALD), using trimethylaluminum (TMA) and a remote RF oxygen plasma source . This process ensures a uniform and dense Al2O3 layer on the sample surface. The devices were formed with a voltage sweep with an amplitude of -4.0 V at a sweep rate of 0.5 V/s, applied to the active Pt electrode. A current compliance of 100 μA was used during the forming. Both devices were integrated into a coplanar waveguide structure, having a length of 590 μm. The center signal stripe has a width of 100 μm and a spacing of 60 μm to the outer grounded stripes. At the center the inner conductor is tapered to 2 μm, matching the dimensions of the 2 × 2 μm2 devices. More information and illustrations of this structures are given in . Electrical characterization: The experimental setup is sketched in Fig. 1. The voltage sweeps and read- outs were conducted with a Keithley 2634B SMU. Two pulse generators were used: pulses with a pulse width above 1.0 ns were applied with a Picosecond 2600C pulse generator (rise time ≈ 360 ps) and pulses between 250 ps and 50 ps with a customized pulse generator from the Sympuls GmbH (rise time ≈ 35 ps). It has a fixed pulse amplitude of 5.0 V (at 50 Ω), which was adjusted with fixed broadband attenuators. The current responses of the pulse were measured with a Tektronix DPO73304D real-time oscilloscope, having a bandwidth of 33.0 GHz and a sample rate of 100 GS/s. The devices were connected with GSG Z-probes from FormFactor. All components of the setup (except of the oscilloscope) have a bandwidth of 40 GHz. The measurement procedure is more explicitly described in . Acknowledgements This work was supported in part by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft under Project SFB 917 and in part by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF, Germany) in the Project Neuro-inspirierte Technologien der k ̈unstlichen Intelligenz (NEUROTEC) under grants 16ES1134 and 16ES1133K. It is based on the J ̈ulich Aachen Research Alliance (JARA-FIT).