1 LaIr3Ga2: A Superconductor based on a Kagome Lattice of Ir Xin Gui and Robert J. Cava* Department of Chemistry, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08540, USA Abstract New materials based on Kagome lattices, predicted to host exotic quantum physics because they can display flat electronic bands, Dirac cones and topologically nontrivial surface states, are strongly desired. Here we report the crystal structure and superconducting properties of LaIr3Ga2, a previously unreported material that is based on a Kagome lattice of the heavy atom Ir. LaIr3Ga2 is a type II superconductor with Tc ~ 5.2 K, μ0Hc1(0) ~ 7.1 mT and μ0Hc2(0) ~ 4.7 T. The normalized heat capacity jump at the superconducting transition, (∆C/γTc), 1.41, is within error of the value expected for a weak coupling BCS superconductor (1.43). Strong electron-electron correlation is inferred from the superconducting coherence length. Calculations show that the influence of spin orbit coupling on the electronic structure is significant, that the 5d states of the Ir in the Kagome planes are dominant near the Fermi energy (EF), that a nearly flat band is calculated to occur at about 100 meV below EF, and that two Dirac points are close to EF. This material is of interest for investigating the coupling between topological physics and superconductivity in a system with significant spin orbit coupling. 2 Introduction Kagome lattice materials, made from corner-sharing triangles of magnetic atoms, have attracted much attention recent years. In addition to geometric magnetic frustration, the Kagome lattice structural motif can exhibit forefront quantum physics, such as the quantum spin liquid (QSL) state,1– 6 topological quantum state,7–11 and superconductivity12–19. Flat bands, Dirac cones, and topologically nontrivial surface states are predicted and known for Kagome lattice materials7,8,10,20–26, while insulating Kagome lattice compounds are well known frustrated magnets, such as SrCr12-xGaxO19 (SCGO)27, and the QSL candidate ZnCu3(OH)Cl2.28–30 In recent years, non-trivial electronic states in conducting Kagome-based systems have been explored in materials such as Fe3Sn2,31 Co3Sn2S2,32 and TbMn6Sn633. Directly related to this work, a novel family of layered materials based on a Kagome lattice of the light element vanadium, AV3Sb5 (A = K, Rb and Cs), has recently been found to host suprconductivity.34 (Tc = 0.93 K, 0.92 K and 2.5 K for the K, Rb and Cs variants, respectively).14,35,36 One of the members of this family, KV3Sb5, was found to be a Z2 topological metal14 and a giant anomalous Hall effect was observed at low temperature.37 Both of these features were attributed to the presence of an unconventional chiral charge density wave.12 Another family of layered materials based on the Kagome lattice has also attracted attention. These intermetallic “132”, RT3X2 phases, where R stands for a rare-earth element, T represents a transition metal and X is either Si or B38,39 are derivatives of the hexagonal symmetry CaCu5-type structure, with the CaCu2 layer in that structure replaced by a LaX2 layer. Some 132 type materials display a distorted transition metal Kagome lattice, while maintaining hexagonal symmetry.13 Many superconductors have been found in this family, with the highest Tc assigned to LaRu3Si2 (Tc ~ 7.3 K).13,15,38. Nodeless Kagome superconductivity has been observed in that material by muon spin rotation (SR) experiments and flat bands based on Ru 4d states were found a few meV above the Fermi energy.13 These two families of superconductors, based on materials with 3d and 4d elements on their Kagome lattices, suggest that materials based on heavier, 5d-element-based Kagome lattices, if found to be superconducting, would be strong candidates for investigating spin-orbit-coupling-dominated-physics on superconducting Kagome lattices. Thus, here we report the novel superconductor LaIr3Ga2. This material crystallizes with the same hexagonal symmetry as AV3Sb5 and, unlike reported LaRu3Si2 which has a distorted Kagome lattice 3 of Ru, possesses a perfect Kagome lattice made from the 5d element Ir. The new material shows superconducting behavior below Tc ~ 5.2 K, observed via by magnetization, resistivity and heat capacity measurements on arc-melted polycrystals. The superconducting parameters show a potentially stronger electron-electron interaction in LaIr3Ga2 than is reported for LaRu3Si2. Calculations are also presented to show that the electronic structure of the material is dominated by Ir 5d states that exhibit the influence of spin orbit coupling. Results and Discussion Crystal Structure: LaIr3Ga2 crystallizes in a CeCo3B2-type structure in the space group P 6/mmm (no. 191), which is the same as some other reported 132-phases, and the recently reported 135- superconductors.34,38 The crystallographic data, including atomic positions, site occupancies, and refined anisotropic thermal displacement parameters are listed in Tables 1, 2 and 3. Single crystal X- ray diffraction patterns from the (hk0), (h0l) and (0kl) reciprocal lattice planes are shown in Figure S1 in the Supporting Information (SI); these support the high crystal quality. The crystal structure of LaIr3Ga2 is shown in Figure 1(a) and 1(b). The material adopts a simple layered structure where the two-dimensional Kagome lattice of Ir atoms is sandwiched by LaGa2 layers. The layers are stacked along the crystal c axis. The In-plane Ir-Ir distance in the Kagome lattice plane is 2.7942 (2) Å, a little bit larger than the value observed in Ir metal (~2.714 Å). The La atoms form a triangular planar lattice with a separation of 5.5884 (4) Å. The Ga atoms, in the centers of the La triangles, construct a planar honeycomb lattice. Laboratory powder diffraction characterization of crushed as-melted polycrystalline material is shown in Figure S2. La2Ir7 and La5Ir2 are found as minor impurities. The lattice parameters of LaIr3Ga2 from Rietveld fitting of the powder diffraction data are a = 5.5830 (1) Å, c = 3.9108 (1) Å, consistent with the results from single crystal XRD. The refinement parameters Rp, Rwp and 2 are 5.68%, 7.78% and 2.46, respectively, indicating reliable refined results. A representative polycrystal sample is shown in Figure 1(c). Magnetic Properties: The temperature-dependence of the magnetic susceptibility for LaIr3Ga2 was measured under multiple magnetic fields from 1.8 K to 7 K, as shown in the main panel of Figure 2(a). The diamagnetic state emerges below Tc ~ 5.2 K. The diamagnetism is rapidly suppressed by low magnetic fields and almost disappears under the field of 100 mT, indicating a small lower critical field 4 for this material. To most accurately characterize the magnetic properties of LaIr3Ga2, a demagnetization factor (N) was calculated by the equation −b = 1 4π(1−N) where b is the slope in Mfit = bH and Mfit is obtained by conducting linear fitting for the low-field region of the magnetization curve at 1.8 K in Figure 2(b). The resulting N is 0.56 for LaIr3Ga2, consistent with the theoretical value for a cylindrical sample.40 This N value has been used to correct the magnetic susceptibility data in zero-field-cooling (ZFC) and field-cooling (FC) under an external magnetic field of 2 mT. The weak signal seen below the superconducting transition in the field-cooled data is exactly what is expected for flux pinning in a type II superconductor. We have investigated the field-dependence of the magnetization (Mv) at various temperatures between 1.8 K and 5.4 K. With increasing magnetic field, Mv rapidly decreases, with an upturn under a small magnetic field (~ 8 mT at 1.8 K, as shown in Figure 2(b)). To obtain a more accurate 0Hc1, Mfit, as mentioned above, is subtracted from Mv, as can be seen in Figure 2(c). A black dashed line Mv – Mfit = 0.2 emu/cm3 is also shown in Figure 2(c), to indicate where the data points in Figure 2(d) have been extracted from. Note that the value 0.2 emu/cm3 was determined to be less than 2% of Mv at 1.8 K so that 0Hc1 can be estimated more accurately. The extracted data is fitted by using the equation below: μ0Hc1 ∗ (T) = μ0Hc1 ∗ (0) [1 − (T Tc ⁄ ) 2 ] where μ0Hc1 ∗ (0) is the lower critical field at 0 K and Tc is superconducting transition temperature. The fitted lower critical field μ0Hc1 ∗ (0) is 3.1 (1) mT and Tc-fit = 5.3 (1) K, within experimental error of the temperature where the diamagnetism appears (Figure 2(a)). Moreover, when taking the demagnetization factor N into account, the lower critical field can be obtained from: μ0Hc1(0) = μ0Hc1 ∗ (0)/(1 − N) Thus, the corrected lower critical field μ0Hc1(0) is 7.1 (2) mT. Resistivity: In the inset of Figure 3(b), we show the temperature-dependence of the resistivity measured from 1.8 K to 300 K, for the same sample that was used for magnetic measurements. The sample shows metallic behavior with a residual-resistance ratio of ~3.4, which is either intrinsic or attributable to the sample’s polycrystalline nature and grain boundaries. The low-temperature resistivity (7 K to 40 K) before entering superconducting state is fitted by using 5 ρ(T) = ρ0 + ATn where ρ0 is the residual resistivity due to defect scattering, A is a constant and n is an integer determined by the interaction pattern. Thus, for polycrystalline samples of LaIr3Ga2, ρ0 is fitted to be 89.0 (4)  cm, A is 0.022 (1)  cm/K3 and n is 2, which suggests that electron-electron interactions may dominate the resistivity between 7 K and 40 K. Figure 3(a) presents the temperature- dependence of resistivity measured from 1.8 K to 7 K under various magnetic fields. As is customary for such measurements, Tc is defined as the temperature corresponding to the midpoint of the resistivity drop, as shown by the dashed arrow in Figure 3(a). In such measurements, Tc-onset is ~5.95 K and zero resistivity is achieved at Tzero ~ 5.28 K The Tc is gradually suppressed by increasing magnetic field, and zero resistivity cannot be achieved at 1.8 K for 0H = 3 T and greater; for 0H = 4 T, no evidence for a superconducting transition can be seen in the resistivity above 1.8 K. The data points in Figure 3(b) are extracted from the intersections between dashed arrow and resistivity curves in Figure 3(a) and are utilized for fitting higher critical field using following Ginzburg-Landau relation: μ0Hc2(T) = μ0Hc2(0) (1 − t2) (1 + t2) where t = T/Tc and Tc is a fitting parameter (transition temperature at zero magnetic field). The fitting line from GL relation well describes the observed superconducting behavior and results in μ0Hc2(0) = 4.71 (4) T and Tc-fit = 5.16 (2) K. Based on BCS theory, the Pauli-limiting field for a superconductor can be described as μ0Hc2 p (0) = 1.85 Tc, that is, μ0Hc2 p (0) ~ 9.6 T for LaIr3Ga2, which is much larger than the experimental μ0Hc2(0). The Ginzburg-Landau coherence length, ξGL can be calculated from the given relation: μ0Hc2(0) = Φ0 2πξGL 2 (0) where Φ0= h/2e is the quantum flux and μ0Hc2(0) is as-measured-above. This makes the GL coherence length ξGL(0) 84 Å, a zero-K GL coherence length that is very similar to that seen in heavy fermion superconductors, such as UPd2Al3 (85 Å),41 and the previously reported 132-type superconductor LaRu3Si2 (107 Å).19 This indicates that stronger electron-electron interaction exists in LaIr3Ga2 than is reported for LaRu3Si2 and that it is near that of heavy fermion superconductors. Moreover, the Ginzburg-Landau penetration depth at 0 K, λGL(0), is calculated to be 2860 Å using given relation shown below with lower critical field μ0Hc1(0) determined previously 6 μ0Hc1(0) = Φ0 4πλGL 2 (0) ln λGL(0) ξGL(0) The GL penetration depth found in LaIr3Ga2 is comparable to that previously reported to that for the noncentrosymmetric superconductor TaIr2B2 (3420 Å).44 Furthermore, the Ginzburg-Landau implying that LaIr3Ga2 is a type-II superconductor. The thermodynamic critical field at 0 K (μ0Hc(0)) is estimated as well by using the following relation Hc1(0)Hc2(0) = Hc 2(0)lnκGL(0) yielding μ0Hc(0) = 97 mT for LaIr3Ga2. Heat Capacity: After observation of both the Meissner effect in the magnetization and the zero resistivity, in order to fully confirm the bulk nature of the superconductivity in LaIr3Ga2, low- temperature heat capacity measurements were performed from 2 K to 10 K under applied magnetic fields of 0 T and 8 T, as shown in Figure 4(a). An obvious anomaly in the 0 applied field heat capacity, corresponding with the emergence of superconducting state, can be observed beginning at ~5.6 K, reaching a peak value at ~4.7 K, which is consistent with both magnetization and resistivity measurements. Under the magnetic field of 8 T, the superconducting heat capacity jump has disappeared consistent with the resistivity data, i.e., that the superconducting state is suppressed by the applied magnetic field in the measured temperature region. The normal-state (non-superconducting- state) heat capacity (Cp) - the heat capacity measured under 8 T in this case - often shows a linear relation between Cp ⁄T and T2 according to the given relation Cp ⁄T = γ + βT2 where γ is the Sommerfeld coefficient, corresponding to electronic contribution to Cp, and β is related to the phononic contribution. However, as shown in Figure S3 in the SI, this simple kind of relationship cannot describe the data from 2 K to 10 K, indicating that the simple Debye model cannot describe the material in this temperature range. Therefore, the following equation is employed to fit the normal-state heat capacity Cp ⁄T = γ + βT2 + ηT4 where two terms, βT2 and ηT4, are used to express the phononic contribution. Such fitting has been applied to some unconventional superconductors as well.15 As shown by the green solid line in Figure 7 4(a), this relation matches the experimental data well and yields γ = 15.0 (2) mJ/mol/K2, β = 0.32 the superconducting state, the normal state heat capacity measured under magnetic field of 8 T is subtracted from that measured under 0 T, as shown in Figure 4(b) By using the equal area construction, the normalized heat capacity jump (∆C/γTc) is calculated to be 1.41, close to the expected value of 1.43 for BCS superconductivity in the weak coupling limit. Moreover, we calculate the Debye temperature using the given relation ΘD = (12π4 5β nR) 1 3 ⁄ where R is the gas constant with the value of 8.31 J/mol/K, n is the number of atoms per formula unit (n = 6 for LaIr3Ga2). Thus, ΘD is found to be 331 (5) K. With that information, the electron- phonon coupling constant λep can be estimated by using the inverted McMillan equation43 λep = 1.04 + μ∗ln ( ΘD 1.45Tc) (1 − 0.62μ∗)ln ( ΘD 1.45Tc) − 1.04 where μ∗ is the Coulomb pseudopotential parameter and is typically given a value of 0.13.42,44–46 The value of λep is determined to be 0.63, indicating weakly coupled superconductivity. Finally, all the superconducting parameters obtained from experiments are summarized in Table 4. Electronic Structures: To better interpret the properties of LaIr3Ga2, the electronic band structure, the orbital origin of its features, and the density of electronic states (DOS)) were calculated. The results of these calculations, with and without the inclusion of spin-orbit coupling (SOC) are plotted in Figure 5. By comparing Figure 5(a) & 5(b), various band splittings can be found throughout the Brillouin Zone (BZ) when SOC is included. When SOC is not involved, the calculated band structure of LaIr3Ga2 shows several intriguing features. Along the A-L direction, a Dirac point can be observed ~80 meV below the Fermi energy (EF) while another Dirac point is seen exactly at EF along the H-A direction. Both of these Dirac points are gapped once SOC is taken into account. According to the projections of the La-d, Ir-d and Ga-p states on band structures, La-d electrons are found near the A point around EF and along the -M-K- direction ~ 1.5 eV above EF while Ga-p states are rarely found between -2 eV and 2 eV. However, the d states from Ir atoms, i.e., the Kagome lattice, are dominant from -2 eV to ~ 0.15 eV, which suggests that the d electrons of Ir play a significant role in determining the electronic 8 properties of LaIr3Ga2. A nearly flat band dominated by Ir-d states can be observed after inclusion of SOC along the -A direction at ~ -100 meV. A peak in the calculated electronic DOS may correspond to an instability, such as structural, electronic or magnetic instabilities. when SOC is involved, a broad peak presents at ~130 meV below EF which corresponds to the flat band along the -A direction. Based on the DOS plots, SOC has a negligible effect on the DOS below ~ -0.5 eV and shows nearly no difference in the DOS (EF), i.e., 4.87 states/eV/f.u. without SOC vs 4.84 states/eV/f.u. with SOC – thus the effect of spin orbit coupling is not simply to influence the total electronic DOS. Conclusions In summary, we describe the structure and superconducting characteristics of a novel material, LaIr3Ga2, obtained by using the arc melting synthetic method. The new material has a layered structure in space group P 6/mmm, with an ideal highly symmetric Kagome lattice of Ir. Polycrystals were used to characterize the superconducting properties. Superconductivity was observed below a critical temperature of ~ 5.2 K, while lower and upper critical magnetic fields at 0 K were found to be ~7.1 m T and 4.7 T, respectively. The heat capacity measurements suggest weakly coupled BCS superconductivity with a relatively high Sommerfeld constant (about 15 mJ/mole/K2) and the Ginzburg-Landau coherence length, ξGL, indicates stronger electron-electron correlation in LaIr3Ga2 than in LaRu3Si2. Electronic structure calculations of LaIr3Ga2 are consistent with the metallic behavior observed and reveal a nearly flat band ~100 meV below the Fermi energy when SOC effect is considered; two calculated Dirac points at EF are also observed while SOC is not included. This new material will be of interest for elucidating in the interactions between topologically nontrivial electronic states and superconductivity. Experimental Details Synthesis: LaIr3Ga2 was synthesized by the arc-melting method. Elemental La (≥99.9%, ingot, Stream Chemicals), Ir (99.99%, ~22 mesh, Alfa Aesar) and Ga (99.99999%, ingot, Alfa Aesar) were utilized as starting materials. The La was handled in an Ar-filled glovebox. Iridium powder was first pressed into a pellet and arc melted to an Ir button. This step reduced the mass loss of Ir during the full synthesis. 100-150 mg of the starting materials with a molar ratio of 1:3.03:2.5 was then arc-melted twice under a high purity, Zr-gettered, argon atmosphere, with the button flipped over between melts. The resulting 9 air-stable material was annealed at 500 oC for 2 days, but the phase purity and homogeneity did not change compared to that of the arc-melted buttons. Small polycrystalline samples with shiny faces were used in the property measurements. Crystal Structure: Multiple small LaIr3Ga2 crystals (up to 80×80×10 m3) were tested by single crystal X-ray diffraction (XRD) to determine the crystal structure of the new material. The crystal structure, consistent among all crystals, was determined using a Bruker D8 QUEST single crystal diffractometer equipped with APEX III software and Mo radiation (K= 0.71073 Å) at 300 K. The crystals were mounted on a Kapton loop protected by glycerol. Data acquisition was made via the Bruker SMART software with corrections for Lorentz and polarization effects included. A numerical absorption correction based on crystal-face-indexing was applied using XPREP. The direct method and full-matrix least-squares on F2 procedure within the SHELXTL package were employed to solve the crystal structure.47,48 Powder Xray diffraction patterns on crushed arc-melted buttons, obtained with a Bruker D8 Advance Eco diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation and a LynxEye-XE detector, were consistent with the structure determined by single crystal diffraction. Physical Property Measurement: The DC magnetization was measured from 1.8 to 300 K under various applied magnetic fields using a Quantum Design Dynacool Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS), equipped with a vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM) option. The magnetic susceptibility was defined as M(emu)/H(Oe). Field-dependent magnetization data was collected at different temperatures with applied magnetic fields ranging from μ0H = -9 T to 9 T. The resistivity measurements were carried out in in the same system using the four-probe method between 1.8 K and 300 K under magnetic fields up to μ0H = 9 T. Platinum wires were attached to the samples by silver epoxy to ensure ohmic contact. Heat capacity was measured using a standard relaxation method in the PPMS. Electronic Structure Calculations: The electronic structure and electronic density of states (DOS) of LaIr3Ga2 were calculated using WIEN2k, which employs the full-potential linearized augmented plane wave method (FP-LAPW) with local orbitals implemented.49,50 The electron exchange-correlation potential used was the generalized gradient approximation.51 The conjugate gradient algorithm was applied. Reciprocal space integrations were completed over a 5×5×6 Monkhorst-Pack k-point mesh.52 Spin-orbit coupling (SOC) was applied to both the La and Ir atoms. The lattice parameters and atomic 10 positions obtained from single crystal XRD were used in all calculations. With these settings, the calculated total energy converged to less than 0.1 meV per atom. Data Availability The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding authors upon reasonable request.