Chiral Phase Change Nanomaterials Joshua A. Burrow,∗,†,‡ Md Shah Alam,† Evan M. Smith,¶ Riad Yahiaoui,§ Ryan Laing,† Piyush J. Shah,∥ Thomas A. Searles,§,@ Shivashankar Vangala,⊥ Joshua R. Hendrickson,⊥ Andrew Sarangan,† and Imad Agha∗,#,† †Department of Electro-Optics, University of Dayton, Dayton, OH, USA ‡Department of Electrical Engineering, Brown University, Providence, RI, USA ¶KBR, Inc., Beavercreek, OH 45431, USA §Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Illinois Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA ∥Apex Microdevices LLC, West Chester, OH 45069, USA ⊥Air Force Research Laboratory, Sensors Directorate, Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio 45433, USA #Department of Physics, University of Dayton, Dayton, OH, USA @Department of Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA E-mail: joshua burrow@brown.edu; iagha1@udayton.edu Abstract Chiral nanostructures offer the ability to respond to the vector nature of a light beam at the nanoscale. While naturally chiral materials offer a path towards scala- bility, engineered structures offer a path to wavelength tunability through geometric manipulation. Neither approach, however, allows for temporal control of chirality. Therefore, in the best of all worlds, it is crucial to realize chiral materials that possess the quality of scalability, tailored wavelength response, and dynamic control at high 1 arXiv:2111.09940v1 [physics.optics] 18 Nov 2021 speeds. Here, a new class of intrinsically chiral phase change nanomaterials (PCNMs) is proposed and explored, based on a scalable bottom-up fabrication technique with a high degree of control in three dimensions. Angular resolved Mueller Matrix and spectroscopic ellipsometry are performed to characterize the optical birefringence and dichroism, and a numerical model is provided to explain the origin of optical activity. This work achieves the critical goal of demonstrating high-speed dynamic switching of chirality over 50,000 cycles via the underlying PCNM. Introduction Nature’s ability to mass-produce chiral elements has inspired engineers and scientists to adopt the design concepts for preferential light-matter interactions and experimental char- acterization techniques by exploiting the interaction between electromagnetic radiation and sub-wavelength natural or synthetic chiral structures. Mathematically speaking, a chiral object cannot be mapped to its image by rotations and translations alone; it requires a re- flection transformation across a mirror plane. Unfortunately, for most natural or synthetic media, the optical response is typically fixed after fabrication making it highly challeng- ing to dynamically tune the chirality,1 which would open the door towards an entire suite of fundamental and applied interdisciplinary studies.2 Recently, considerable effort has been ex- pended to control handedness in nano chiral materials by exploring plasmonics3–6 and high index dielectrics7,8 where the refractive index is fixed, resulting in a need for mechanical deformation and reconfigured particles for tunable opto-chirality.9 Alternatively, phase change materials, such as Ge2Sb2Te5 (GST) possess a controllable refractive index. The tunable glass chalcogen can be reversibly cycled between amorphous (aGST) and crystalline (cGST) phase states upon thermal actuation in nanoseconds or less. With each state having unique and vastly different optical and electrical properties, GST has served as an inexpensive, robust, and scalable material for tunable electronic and photonic platforms. As an example, GST has gained tremendous traction due to the vastly 2 differing high index optical properties between amorphous and crystalline states in the near- and mid-infrared regimes. In fact, there has been a wide range of reconfigurable photonics demonstrations derived from GST over the last several years focusing on amplitude and phase modulation governed by Mie resonances10,11 for beam steering,12,13 color modulation14 and tunable integrated photonic memories.15 In the context of circular polarization control, recent studies investigating circular dichroism (CD) in chalcogenide PCMs include hybrid metal-PCM structures which exhibit strong tunability in the IR regime using gammadion chiral phase-change metamaterials,16 and switchable CD in periodic absorbers17 and three- dimensional layered split ring resonators.18 These realizations demonstrate active CD control in the IR regime, which can be very useful for vibrational CD applications where fabrication constraints are less critical. For visible applications, Shanmugam et al., demonstrated a programmable CD response by atomically encoding handedness into isotropic doped and undoped GST bulk thin films via 15 mJ/cm2 circularly polarized light pulses.19,20 However, the CD signatures are minimal (1.16◦ ellipticity) due to the short optical path length and low chirality parameter of the optically induced medium. While, to date, considerable effort has been expended to demonstrate nanostructures of a particular handedness, these structures require top-down, low-yield lithographic pattern- ing. As an alternate approach in this work, a bottom-up fabrication technique for achieving nanostructure architectures based on GST with controllable three-dimensional shapes is de- veloped. The versatility of this approach enables the facilitation and realization, at high yields, of chiral phase change nanomaterials (PCNMs) which can bolster distinct and bene- ficial properties relevant for selective coupling and high-speed polarization control of exotic light beams. In more detail, intrinsic chiral structure design and its implementation via glancing an- gle evaporative deposition of GST are introduced. Figure 6a displays the schematic for the approach where LCP (blue) and RCP (red) exhibit dissimilar transmissive polarization prop- erties. Moreover, the amorphous and crystalline states exhibit unique optochiral properties. 3 A bright-field micrograph imaged in transmission mode from a white light source is shown in Fig. 6b where the light and dark regions correspond to aGST and cGST, respectively. The bright and dark regions correspond to small and large chirality, where the Archimedean spiral is produced by local optical switching. Mueller Matrix characterization of the phase depen- dent optical activity is presented for the normal and oblique angle of incidence of thermally activated chiral PCNMs. Circular birefringence and dichroism are presented and compared with numerical calculations which indicate preferential absorption strictly between circular eigenpolarization states at normal incidence. change nanomaterials for aGST (green) and cGST (gold), (b) Bright field microscope image of aGST (bright) and optically switched cGST (dark) regions. Furthermore, a quantitative analysis is performed on the near-field coupling on and off res- onance where stronger coupling is observed when the circular polarization state matches the handedness of the GST structure for a particular wavelength regime. Finally, the dimension- ality of the individual helices, which matches that of state-of-the-art phase change random 4 access memories (PCRAMs), enables the material to reversibly switch- point-by-point - the chiral nanostructures between their amorphous and crystalline states over 50, 000+ cycles, corresponding to reversible, high-speed amplitude and wavelength modulation of the chiral response as shown through rigorous metrology. Self-assembled GST nanomaterials enabled by shadow- ing mechanism The fabrication approach implemented here is the glancing angle deposition (GLAD) tech- nique, which is a proven and robust method for sculpting various materials into a wide variety of exotic nanostructured columnar films21 via electron beam evaporation. Unfortu- nately, there is very limited reporting on chalcogenide glass material growth via GLAD, as it presents particular challenges owing to the uncertainty of stoichiometry conservation in the evaporation of alloys.22–24 In this work, nevertheless, the aim is to generate cylindrical helical nanostructures for non-mechanical tunable optical activity exploration enabled by the high- speed structural phase transition in GST through a systematic study on the self-assembly growth process. Growth analysis is first performed on e-beam evaporated Ge2Sb2Te5 onto a stationary substrate mounted at normal incidence, and verification of the stoichiometry is enabled by energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) and UV/VIS ellipsometry. The results of an ellipsometric gradient-index fit reveal a Ge3Sb1Te4 (herein, referred to as GST) stoichiometry on average, with an increasing Te/Ge ratio as a function of dis- tance from the substrate. GST is highly dependent on the deposition method and chamber conditions,25 thus it is worth noting that material properties exhibited by evaporated GST are very similar to our previously reported undoped sputtered GST films.26,27 Supplemental Note S1 compares the optical properties of evaporated and sputtered bulk thin films where evaporated films exhibit slightly lower refractive index and higher extinction, when compared with conventional sputtered GST. 5 (Middle) Schematic of evaporative growth growth, and (c) SEMs of resulting PCM thin films. Next, Oblique Angle Deposition (OAD) is employed to obtain directional tilted GST nanorods. Here, the sample is mounted at an oblique angle α with respect to the vapor flux. A series of angled depositions are carried out for discrete α values, including 65◦, 75◦, and 85◦ for a fixed deposition rate and shown in Supplemental Note S2. Next, the GLAD method is implemented, which is an extension of the OAD technique, where in GLADs the substrate is translated, rotated and/or titled during the growth processes to finely control the assembly process of the nanorods. Figure 2 depicts chamber configurations that have a sample mounted at normal incidence, oblique incidence, and oblique incidence where the 6 substrate is continuously rotated during deposition (highlighted by the vector). Prior to the GLAD, α is fixed to 85◦ and held constant throughout the programmed growth process. During the deposition the substrates is rotated at a constant angular velocity φ and the deposition rate r is fixed and monitored using a current feedback mechanism via the quartz crystal microbalance (QCM). Initially, adatoms form a non-uniform distribution of nano clusters that act as shadows for neighboring nanosites. Owing to low mobility and limited surface diffusion, GST read- ily forms distinct nanostructures at room temperature. According to the Structure Zone Model for extreme shadowing conditions,28 GST shadowed growth falls into Zone II where distinct rods are formed at room temperature because GST has a homologous temperature θ = Ts/Tm ≈ 0.34 where Ts and Tm are the substrate and GST melting temperatures, respectively. Furthermore, by controlling the ratio (γ) between the sample rotation and deposition rates, one may precisely tune the helical pitch, P and radius, R of the revolving structures; however, the nanorod diameters d are constant at 15 nm. Complete details of the resulting chiral CPNMs morphology is discussed in Supplemental Note S3. Optical-activity medium characterization Normal incidence spectroscopy and FDTD modeling Transmissive Mueller Matrix spectroscopy is employed to characterize the optical activity of chiral PCNMs where the pitch P = 2R = 45 nm and the number of revolutions N = 5. The measurements are performed using a dual compensator spectroscopic ellipsometer (JA Woollam RC2) with incident angle and in-plane rotation sweep capabilities. Focusing objectives allow typical spot sizes 3-4 mm that can be reduced to 100 μm in reflection mode at 55◦. For amorphous GST, there exists a peak circular birefringence (CB) 250 nm and the largest CD amplitude is observed at 375 nm. Upon thermal annealing the chiral molecules 7 where dashed lines are FDTD calculations (c) azimuthal angle and ellipticity. (d)-(g) are current distribution plots of max and min CD spectral responses. to the crystalline state, the measured CD spectrum is enhanced and exhibits a redshift in the broad CD profile as shown in Figs. 3a and b. The m14 is in good agreement with the numerical calculations where the attenuation is calculated from the normalized difference 8 from spectra calculated from LCP and RCP excitations. The full Mueller Matrix spectra can be found in Supplemental Note S5. Additionally, the output state of polarization for a randomly polarized source is given by the azimuthal angle ψ and ellipticity η as plotted in Fig. 3c. Upon the phase change process, the enhancement, CD resonance shift, and broadening, can be attributed to the shift in the complex refractive index when the atomic bonds are reconfigured into a FCC crystal lattice. The difference in CD amplitude between numerical calculations and measurements can be interpreted as a result of the aperiodic stochastic distribution of PCNMs. Homogeneous ordered structures result in more significant transmission and reflection coefficients due to an enhancement of electromagnetic activity, but typically the resonances are wavelength invariant. To account for signal attenuation, the long-range order is relaxed by assuming periodic boundary conditions and averaging the transmission coefficient over a range of square periodicities within one standard deviation of the normally distributed nanorods, which is highlighted in Supplemental Note S4. Below 410 nm the CD begins to decrease, then exhibiting a CD reversal point near 320 nm. At longer wavelengths, the CD signal exponentially decays to near-zero CD. Next, the current density J is accessed inside the chiral PCNMs when excited by each circular eigenpolarization state. Figure 3d-g plots the displacement current density at 410 and 900 nm for LCP and RCP where the vector field plot distributions have been scaled for visual clarity and plotted on a common colorbar for ease of comparison. The current distribution is calculated as J = −iω(ε − ε0)E where E is the electric field, ω is the angular frequency of electromagnetic radiation, ε is the material permittivity, and ε0 is the permittivity of free-space. At maximal CD, one can observe that the circularly polarized light couples only to a helix of matching handedness; thus, a stronger J is observed in Fig. 3d relative to an unmatched polarization in Fig. 3e. Thus, when the circular polarization matches the handedness of the helix it impinges on, large opposing loop currents are observed in that helix (aGST-LCP). If, however, the circular polarization does not match that of the helix (aGST-RCP), less pronounced currents 9 will also be observed in the helices because of coupling. As expected, in the case of a low CD at 900 nm, there is minimal interaction under LCP [Fig. 3f] and RCP [Fig. 3g], where the extinction coefficient of amorphous and crystalline GST is lower. Moreover, a rather interesting current distribution pattern is observed along the surface of the partially conductive rod where converging (red) and diverging (blue) points are formed, tracing out a rotating wave with a wavelength equal to that of the polarized plane wave source. Angular resolved Mueller Matrix spectroscopic ellipsometry In this subsection, spectral results when the AOI (angle of incidence) is tuned from normal incidence to 70◦ are reported. Since the GST chiral PCNMs possess in-plane rotational sym- metry, when displaced on a transparent substrate, one can arbitrarily select θ and sweep the angle of elevation defined as φ as shown in SEM in Fig. 4. The Mueller Matrix measurement technique is over-specified, which results in several redundancies observed in the Mueller Matrix results. As such, only 6 elements need to be extracted to analyze the birefringence and diattenuation (i.e. dichroism) for the intensities of the three polarization basis pairs displayed in Fig. 4. There is no noticeable spectral depolarization in the medium when φ ≥ 40◦. As shown in the previous subsection for normal incidence measurements, a strong CB peak exists at the CD crossover point. Interesting enough, optical activity, manifested in the CB and CD polar plots, remains stable up until φ = 40◦, in which the medium begins to exhibit strong linear birefringence and dichorism at longer wavelengths. The signals are relatively weak in the amorphous and crystalline states for the rotated LP basis set. Moreover, the right-handed structure exhibits a negative cotton effect. Angular resolved Mueller Matrix measurements in reflection mode were also performed to calculate the g-factor in terms of Mueller Matrix elements29 as g-factor = 2(AL − AR) (AL + AR) = 2 M T 14 + M R 14 1 − M T 11 − M R 11 . 10 pairs measured using transmissive angular resolved Mueller Matrix spectroscopic ellipsome- try In the g-factor spectra measured at φ = 20◦, a broadband response is observed in the amorphous state where the strongest response is around 0.1; however, there is an increase in the g-factor upon crystallization and a reversal point coincides with the maximum circular birefringence response. 11 ◦. Reversible opto-thermal operation Single-pulse transient transmission characterization The chiral PCNM medium must be capped with a thin layer of material to prevent GST from evaporating during the melt-quench process to cycle between amorphous and metastable crystalline states. The capping layer, consisting of sputtered indium tin oxide (ITO), also assists with heat dissipation properties as it is reported to have a thermal conductivity of 10 W/mK, twenty times that of GST. To further improve the thermal response, the chiral medium is deposited on a transparent glass substrate featuring a second sputter layer (provided commercially by 2spi) that reports a refractive index of about 2+0.004i in the visible regime. The capping layer is grown in-house from an ITO target at room temperature directly after the GLAD growth of GST chiral nanorods. During the capping layer deposition, the ITO condenses on the individual tips of the chiral PCNMs forming a semi-porous medium of ITO clusters as shown in Fig 6(a). The encapsulated samples are mounted in a custom-built optical microscopy setup fea- turing a 532 nm switching laser and a coaligned 632 nm read Gaussian beam of which are 12 Transient single-pulse threshold characterization comparing PCNMs to traditional bulk thin films both focused onto a substrate using a 100X 1.3 NA oil immersion objective. A backward propagating incoherent white light halogen source is used to image the surface of the sample. The sample is mounted onto a closed-loop XYZ piezo stage allowing for precise spatial con- trol for patterning applications. The intensity of the continuous-wave 532 nm fundamental lasing mode is varied in time using an amplitude modulator where the electrical signal is en- coded by a multi-channel, high-speed pulse delay generator. This feature in the optical setup allows for precise control of the pulse duration and amplitude for programmable sequences. A series of optical transient threshold experiments are first conducted to identify the pulse dynamics required to achieve controlled reversible cycles between crystallization and amorphization states of the chalcogenide medium. Using a focused beam with a spot size of 400 nm, the word “NANO” is optically written into the region where dark regions correspond to crystalline GST. For single pulse threshold testing, the coaligned beams are defocused by 3 μm steps, and the fluence of a 532 nm single-pulse is monotonically increased to determine the opto-thermal threshold parameters. In Fig 6(b), the transient transmission for a 2.5 μs pulse is plotted for increasing powers. The respective bright-field images are displayed, indi- cating a crystallization region with high extinction and good consistency with the transient measurements. The dynamic range saturates near 300 nJ/cm2 before exhibiting amorphiza- 13 tion in the most intense region of the Gaussian beam. Overall, the PCNMs exhibits lower fluences for switching due to the reduction in volume when compared to traditional bulk thin GST demonstrations.30–33 While the volume fraction is reduced, the dynamic range of crystallization is comparable with bulk thin-film materials but requires much less energy, as exhibited in the opto-thermal threshold testing. Chirality preservation To confirm the chiral structural preservation and tunable response, spot-by-spot crystalliza- tion and re-amorphization is employed to create a measurement area of 160 × 160 μm2 which is sufficient for reflective Mueller Matrix measurements at a φ = 55◦ incident angle. First, one region is crystallized, then a second region is crystallized, followed by reamorphous single pulses using appropriate opto-thermal pulse characteristics. The regions are then measured on the Mueller Matrix spectroscopic ellipsometer, and the resulting m23 and m14 elements are plotted in Fig 7(a). As-deposited (AD) chiral PCNMs exhibit a noticeable peak in the m23 spectra which is proportional to circular birefringence at 2.5 eV, which increases in mag- nitude upon crystallization. Moreover, the medium exhibits a circular dichroism response at 2 eV. Upon crystallization, the resonance is doubled and reversed back to the AD state after the material has been melt-quenched (The slight residual difference in CD can be attributed to the standard difference between the pristine AD and the MQ states). Notably, the non- zero m23 and m14 features indicate that the structural properties are indeed preserved (Fig Optical switching material lifetime measurements Opto-thermal material lifetime measurements are also carried out, where a crystallization and amorphization programming sequence consisting of a series of 25 μs pulses followed by one 400 ns pulse as shown in Fig. 7c are employed. The 532 nm Gaussian beam is defocused by 3 μm to improve the uniformity of the heat distribution in the switching region, which 14 quench (MQ) intrinsically chiral GST PCNMs, (b) SEM of cycled GST PCNMs, (c) Snapshot of lifetime measurements, and (d) Transmission difference as a function of number of cycles. provides the switching reliability and prevents undesirable “hot-spots”. As shown in Fig. 7c, the transmission contrast upon cycling is perfectly preserved over the first 15 cycles, with appreciable contrast still maintained even after 50,000 cycles (Fig 7d). Additional cycles are shown in Supplemental Note S6. Crucially, this structural integrity of the chiral PCNMs after thousands of cycles of melt-quench/crystallization shows their promise as a robust solid- state platform for dynamic polarization control at the nanoscale. In fact, as a preliminary demonstration, an electrically addressed micro-pixel based on the PCNMs platform is shown in Supplemental Note 7 and the supplemental video with an integrated planar microheater providing uniform switching over 7 × 7 μm2 area. 15 Conclusion In summary, intrinsically chiral nanorods consisting of phase change material GST exhibit- ing optical activity are fabricated, experimentally characterized, and numerically investi- gated. The angular resolved Mueller Matrix method measured differential absorption of left and right circularly polarized light components and circular birefringence. Additionally, endurance testing shows the stability of the platform up to 50,000 cycles of amorphiza- tion/crystallization. As discussed, the amorphous and crystalline stable phase states of GST offer a novel route for tunability due to the stark difference in the complex refractive index where selective material absorption between circular eigenpolarization states is the driving factor in this scheme. The research outlined here has led to a much better understanding of the material properties that affect the optical performance of chalcogenides and illustrates an alternative bottom-up growth approach for developing high-performance dual-mode electro- optic devices targeted for the visible regime and beyond. The results of this work could be pivotal in realizing large area, reconfigurable chalcogenide optical devices with high en- durance and longer lifetimes. Methods Nanomaterial fabrication Chiral PCNMs are synthesized via the GLAD technique using a MDC evap4000 e-beam evaporator. The substrates are mounted 35 cm above the evaporant source at a fixed depo- sition angle (α) while a voltage-controlled motor enables continuous rotation at pre-selected angular speeds ranging between 2-9 revolutions per ms about the surface normal in a CW or ACW fashion. The chamber base pressure is kept around <1 μT with minimal increase in pressure during deposition. In addition, a QCM is enabled for precise control over the deposition rate. For all films, the deposition material Ge2Sb2Te5 (99.99% pellets Plasmate- 16 rials) is evaporated at relatively low e-beam filament currents (2-4 mA) when compared to transition metals and dielectrics, presumably due to the low vapor pressure of Te in a Te dominated glass composition. Finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations Finite-difference-time-domain (FDTD) full-wave analysis numerical solver (Lumerical, AN- SYS) is implemented to calculate the resulting transmittance, reflectance, and absorptance from left and right-handed circularly polarized light. The nanostructure array is simulated using periodic boundary conditions. Perfectly matched layer BCs is assigned to the input and output ports. Two orthogonal plane wave sources are assigned that are out of phase by ± 90◦ to implement circularly polarized light excitations. Absolute and relative (trans- missive dissymmetry) CD are calculated from independent calculations for LCP and RCP excitations. In-situ optical measurements Reversible optical crystallization is achieved using a 532 nm diode laser that is modulated by a programmable pulse generator to produce optical pulses of varying time durations with a fixed 5 ns decay time. A coaligned continuous wave 633 nm HeNe laser is focused using a 1.3 NA objective with 100X magnification to create sub-micron spot sizes with high fluences for reversible switching experiments. The maximum input power of the 532 nm laser to the focusing objective is roughly 65 mW for an 8V input into the AOM. A 50X Mitutoyo Plan Apo infinity corrected, 0.42 numerical aperture objective is used to collect the transmitted beams and for transmissive imaging on a CCD camera from a backward propagating white light source. The sample is mounted onto a 3D piezo stage (Newport) to control the XYZ position precisely. For reliable crystallization, a slightly defocused spot is used, which ensures no damage in the center of the spot. 17 In-situ electrical switching measurements The microstrip sample is created by spot-by-spot ablation using the 532 nm laser with high fluence to remove the ITO/chiral PCNMs/ITO layers to altogether. This maskless approach patterning approach allows for one to create an electrically isolated pixel. High- speed probe tips are placed onto the bottom ITO layer by digging through the fragile capped nanostructured layer. A single 8V 25 μs pulse is sent through the ITO for localized heating in a 7 × 7 μm2. Acknowledgement The authors thank Professor Qiwen Zhan for fruitful discussion and guidance. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation (Collaborative Research, Grant No 1710273) and Thorlabs Inc. J.A.B. gratefully acknowledges financial support from the National Academies under the Ford Foundation Fellowship Program. T.A.S. is supported by the ONR HBCU/MI Program: N00014-20-1-2541 and acknowledges support from the Martin Luther King Visiting Scholars Program at MIT. Data availability The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding authors upon reasonable request.