Ultrahigh-Q on-chip silicon-germanium microresonators RYAN SCHILLING*, CHI XIONG, SWETHA KAMLAPURKAR, ABRAM FALK, NATHAN MARCHACK, STEPHEN BEDELL, RICHARD HAIGHT, CHRISTOPHER SCERBO, HANHEE PAIK, AND JASON S. ORCUTT IBM Quantum, T.J. Watson Research Center, 1101 Kitchawan Road, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA *ryan.schilling@ibm.com We demonstrate fully crystalline, single-mode ultrahigh quality factor integrated microresonators comprising epitaxially grown Si0.86Ge0.14 waveguide cores with silicon claddings. These waveguides support resonances with internal Q > 108 for both polarization modes, a nearly order-of-magnitude improvement over that seen in prior integrated Si photonics platforms. The maximum Q is 1. 71 ± 0. 06 × 108 for the transverse magnetic (TM) polarization mode, corresponding to a loss of 0. 39 ± 0. 02 dB/m. Together with silicon’s strong Kerr nonlinearity and low losses in the optical, microwave and acoustic regimes, our results could lead to the Si1-xGex/Si architecture unlocking important new avenues for Kerr frequency combs, optomechanics, and quantum transduction. Whispering gallery mode resonators, which use continuously curved loops to guide electromagnetic waves by total internal reflection, have been extensively studied for more than half a century due to their ability to support very high quality (Q) factors. The highest Q resonators have been fabricated with macroscopic machining techniques, such as manually polishing Si and melting silica fibers into spheres , resulting in Q > 10" in both cases. An extensive effort is now underway to microfabricate resonators that can match or even exceed these Q values. Indeed, in amorphous systems recent progress has significantly narrowed the gap between the quality of macroscopic and microfabrication processes. The best results for integrated silica resonators use wet etching to achieve Q = 2.1 × 10# . Recent progress in silicon nitride devices has utilized high temperature annealing to demonstrate Q = 4.2 × 10# . However, there remains a large gap in the performance of Si resonators. Despite much effort invested in silicon photonics, the best Q achieved in silicon resonators has been Q = 2.2 × 10$ and requires a silica top cladding . The many benefits of integrated optical resonators, including their capability of forming more complicated optical circuits and their compatibility with proximate electrodes, has led to their use in many applications [6–11]. Typically, these applications also demand high intrinsic Q factors, such as for Kerr combs and microwave-optical quantum transducers . Silicon is particularly well suited Fig. 1. (a) SEM of Si0.86Ge0.14 resonator core surrounded by epitaxial silicon. The corresponding dimensions of the waveguide and cladding layer with overlaid finite element model of TE mode electric field are illustrated in (b). to many of these applications due to its high refractive index, strong Kerr nonlinearity, broad infrared transparency, low acoustic loss, low microwave loss and compatibility with CMOS fabrication techniques. For that reason, there is broad interest in improving the performance of on-chip silicon resonators. By significantly improving the Q factors of silicon-based integrated photonic resonators in this work, we are taking a major step in bridging the disparity in optical loss between microfabricated amorphous dielectric and crystalline silicon systems. Our fully monocrystalline and epitaxial waveguide platform comprises a low mole-fraction silicon-germanium core that is fully clad by silicon. Optical losses due to pinned surfaces resulting in free carrier and/or defect state absorption are eliminated by extending the single-crystalline region throughout the region occupied by the optical mode. Furthermore, scattering losses are minimized by the low index contrast of our SixGe1-x waveguide relative to its Si cladding (an order of magnitude lower than that of Si relative to SiO2). Although SixGe1-x waveguides have attracted attention for linear and nonlinear applications , the best propagation loss in a SixGe1-x waveguide at telecom Fig. 2. Characterization setup used to measure transmission spectra around resonance at both through and drop ports. The input waveguide is seen at the right side lensed fiber and the through port is seen at the left side lensed fiber (drop port is above). The ring resonator is highlighted in yellow. wavelengths was reported to be 65 dB/m in Si0.9Ge0.1 waveguides . In contrast, our optimization of waveguide loss focuses on maintaining a fully strained SixGe1-x layer, which is achieved through experimental determination of the maximum metastable thickness, as well as minimizing thermal shock during and thermal budget during the epitaxial silicon cladding growth. In addition, we focus on minimizing processing contamination that can lead to interface defects. We are thus able to achieve a loss rate of 0.39 ± 0.02 dB/m. With a fully strained SixGe1-x waveguide core and epitaxial silicon cladding, the core/cladding index contrast can be optimized, and defect-state absorption minimized. Our waveguides are defined in epitaxial Si0.86Ge0.14 layers grown on high resistivity Cz-Si wafers. An important performance parameter is the Si0.86Ge0.14 thickness. If it is too thin, radiation loss will affect the performance. On the other hand, when Si0.86Ge0.14 is grown beyond the Matthews- Blakeslee critical thickness , plastic relaxation emerges that can degrade the strain and create defects. Thus, our target thickness for Si0.86Ge0.14 is near the expected metastable critical thickness observed in prior work . The grown layers are determined to be fully strained within the precision of X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis and then more precisely evaluated with defect-selective etching (see S5). Waveguides are then defined in the Si0.86Ge0.14 by optical lithography followed by inductively coupled plasma (ICP) etching. The surface is then cleaned, and an epitaxial silicon cladding layer is grown on top, with a controlled ramp rate and minimum growth temperature to reduce relaxation of the Si0.86Ge0.14. A dichlorosilane (DCS) precursor is chosen for the epitaxial silicon top cladding to prevent keyholing in narrow waveguide gaps, which arises due to crystallographic orientation-dependent growth rates . Careful control over the growth conditions is critical in order to maintain strain in the metastable films (see S5). The chips are then either cleaved or diced from the wafer to expose the waveguide facets. All devices studied in this work employ a ring resonator with a radius of 4.8 mm, coupled to two (through/drop) waveguides with the same coupling gap. Characterization is carried out using the setup shown in Fig. 2. A lensed fiber on a precision stage couples light into the input waveguide, and a second lensed fiber collects the light either at the through or drop ports. Three wideband tunable diode lasers are used to collect the transmission port data (Figs. 3 and 4) over the range of 1300 nm to 1640 nm. For each measurement, the laser is tuned to the resonance wavelength of interest and a function generator is used to modulate the laser cavity length in order to perform a narrow continuous sweep across the resonance. Light is split off from the input fiber to a fiber loop cavity with a calibrated free-spectral range (FSR), which serves as a frequency reference for the narrow scan. Light is also split off to a pair of crossed polarizers that allows for tracking of the input polarization. An example of this type of scan is shown in Fig. 3(b), where the input polarization has been tuned to the TM mode. Here, the through and drop port data have been fitted Fig. 3. (a) Extracted free-spectral ranges for both polarizations as a function of wavelength (one standard deviation error bars). Solid lines show a quadratic fit to the data. (b) Zoom-in and fitting to the through and drop port data to determine intrinsic loss rate of the TM mode at 1450 nm. in order to extract the internal Q of the ring resonator itself. In this case an internal Q = 1.71 ± 0.06 × 10# is measured for the TM mode at 1450 nm (see S3 for Q extraction). This characterization was carried out for modes across a broad spectral range, for TM and TE polarizations (Fig. 4(a) and (b)). For both, Q was maximized near 1450 nm, with a trend of decreasing Q at both shorter and longer wavelengths. The increasing loss at shorter wavelengths is attributed to the expected effect of band edge absorption. At longer wavelengths, the dominant loss mechanism for the TE mode is radiation deriving from to the bending of the waveguide – an effect known as radiation loss. The TM mode, which exhibits a higher refractive index due to the birefringence of strained SixGe1-x, is not radiation loss-limited. The radiation loss model plotted in Fig. 4(b) utilizes a single fitting parameter, which is the Si0.86Ge0.14 refractive index, n%&'( (see S4). The geometry of the modelled waveguide is fixed by the measured parameters of the physical waveguide. The fitted result for the in-plane (TE) index, infers n%&'(,*+ = 1.013n%& . The close agreement between data and radiation loss-limited scaling in the L-band strongly suggests this is the dominant loss mechanism. The birefringence between TE and TM polarizations in our system is inferred from the differing free-spectral ranges (FSR) shown in figure 3(a), combined with numerical mode simulation (see S4). The TM index is determined to be n%&'(,*, = 1.023n%&. These results agree fairly well with the result n%&'( = 1.0115n%& that was obtained through ellipsometry (S1), using an isotropic model for the refractive index. We determine that nSiGe = 1.015nSi is sufficient for the radiation loss-limit to exceed the Qs measured in Fig. 4(a). A previous study of the polarization dependent refractive index for pseudomorphic SixGe1-x waveguides grown on Si also observed an anisotropy between the out-of-plane and in- plane indices . This work, based on experimentally tracing out the mode profiles, inferred an index difference of δn*, − δn*+ = (0.21 ± 0.07)x, for strained Si1-xGex films. For Si0.86Ge0.14 studied in this work, the index difference is experimentally determined from quadratic fits to the polarization dependent FSRs. Taking the difference of the quadratic fits, allows us to establish the birefringence in terms of the ratio of effective group indices, n- (//,*,/ determined from the radiation loss model and a finite difference eigenmode (FDE) solver to translate between real and effective index, n%&'(,*, is determined (see Fig. S8). The result gives a birefringent index difference of δn*, − δn*+ = 0.24x, in close agreement with prior literature. As can be seen in Fig 4(b), the agreement between experiment and radiation-limited Q does not hold at wavelengths below 1500 nm for the TE mode. In fact, at 1450 nm, the limit to Q imposed by curvature-derived radiation is nearly an order of magnitude higher than experiment. As discussed, the TM data is not radiation- limited at any measured wavelength. Therefore, neither loss Fig. 4. Provides a comparison of experimentally measured optical Q as a function of wavelength, for (a) TM and (b) TE polarizations in a single mode microresonator (open circles, with one standard deviation error bars). Overlaid with a solid red line for TE, is a radiation loss model utilizing the Si0.86Ge0.14 refractive index as a single fitting parameter. mechanism -- neither band edge absorption nor radiation loss – is setting the Q limit in the E- and S-bands. Although the mechanism is not identified here, a likely candidate is scattering at the etched Si0.86Ge0.14 / Si interface. At longer wavelengths the Q may be degraded as a result of strong coupling to the bus waveguides leading to hybridization. One of the main features of the radiation loss regime is the extreme sensitivity of Q to material and design parameters. For instance, in our regime, the calculated radiation-limited Q improves by three orders of magnitude by doubling R from 4.8 mm to 9.6 mm. Alternatively, increasing the Si0.86Ge0.14 thickness from 500 nm to 600 nm would result in an order of magnitude lower radiative loss in the C-band. We have demonstrated an ultrahigh quality factor on- chip silicon-germanium microresonator system with unprecedented low loss rates. It uses a novel fully crystalline design based on the low refractive index contrast between Si and Si0.86Ge0.14 to minimize interface scattering losses. Relative to the prior state-of-the-art in silicon ring resonators , our results improve waveguide loss by nearly an order of magnitude. Moreover, there is clear space to improve substantially on these current results by optimizing the SixGe1-x growth process and exploring other Ge mole fractions. Currently, our Q values are nearly on par with the best on-chip, waveguide coupled microresonators, which are formed by wet etching of silica . Moreover, our system has the added advantage of being single mode, allowing precise and reproducible control over dimensions by dry etching, being solid and thus immune to mechanical vibrations, and being hermitically sealed from the environment by way of an encapsulating silicon layer. The SixGe1-x system is also particularly well suited to build microwave-optical transducers for quantum state transfer In addition to the low optical losses demonstrated here, this epitaxial system has very low microwave losses, as has been recently demonstrated by the fabrication of transmon qubits with > 100 us coherence times on similar substrates . Moreover, it is also expected that the low acoustic loss of silicon is expected to make this a favorable direction for optomechanics-based transducers . Beyond transducers, the favorable properties of a platform with extraordinarily low losses in the optical, microwave, and acoustic regimes should enable figure of merit improvements for a wide variety of applications, including compact spectrometers, precision mass sensors and optically generated microwave sources. Acknowledgments We acknowledge funding under the Army Research Office / Laboratory for Physical Sciences Cross-Quantum Technology Systems Contract Number W911NF-18-1-0022. The authors wish to acknowledge support in device fabrication from the IBM Microelectronics Research Laboratory and IBM Central Scientific Services.