1 A correlation between energy gap, critical current density and relaxation of a superconductor Harald Reiss# Department of Physics University of Wuerzburg, Am Hubland, D-97074 Wuerzburg, FRG harald.reiss@physik.uni-wuerzburg.de Abstract Superconductors like other solids cannot relax instantaneously from excited states to thermodynamic equilibrium. In this paper, relaxation from thermal excitations is investigated, like after absorption of radiation or, under conductor movement, release and transformation of mechanical tension to thermal energy. Relaxation proceeds within finite periods of time the length of which increases the more strongly the closer the superconductor temperature has already approached its critical value. Properties of many-particle systems (as explained, by an analogy to nuclear physics), basic thermodynamic considerations (temperature uniquely defined under solely equilibrium condition) and standard, multi-component heat transfer principles (solid conduction plus radiation in thin films) are applied as tools to prove this expectation. Energy gap, superconductor critical current density and critical temperature, as a result, are tightly related to relaxation rates and relaxation times of the superconductor electron system. By numerical simulations, an attempt is made to find a quantitative correlation of these properties in a thin film superconductor. Keywords Superconductor; critical current density and temperature; phase transition; relaxation; correlation 1 Overview: Superconductor critical parameters and relaxation This paper presents an attempt to correlate superconductor critical current density and critical temperature with relaxation of its electron system. Focus is on relaxation from thermally excited states. These may result from absorption of radiation or, under conductor movement, release and transformation of mechanical to thermal energy. The reported numerical investigations shall describe how long it takes a disturbed superconductor to relax to thermodynamic equilibrium. # Associate (Außerplanmäßiger) Professor 2 Critical current density becomes zero if, under such disturbances, density of charge carriers (electron pairs) becomes too small to support zero-loss current transport. The relaxation (re-organisation) rate of the disturbed electron system might not be able to compensate decay of electron pairs to single electrons. Accordingly, critical current density should be correlated with relaxation rate and relaxation time of the electron system. The same applies to critical temperature. As will be shown, if relaxation time after a disturbance is too long, or even might diverge, critical temperature cannot uniquely be defined within reasonable experimental or simulation periods of time. The literature reports a large number of magnetic relaxation measurements to determine pinning potentials in Nb3Sn, in the BSCCO family and in MgB2/Fe superconductors. Instead, focus in the present paper is on decay of the excited electron system. Relaxation of this system becomes most interesting when, under a thermal disturbance, the superconductor has already approached very closely its superconducting to normal conducting phase transition. Superconductor stability against quench thus is an aspect of the relaxation problem. In the first, formal part of this paper, therefore, superconductor temperature excursion under a disturbance is revisited in more detail. The presented investigations do not duplicate previous papers ; in particular, superconductor stability is not in the foreground of these investigations. The simulations instead shall safely identify uncertainties of results that might touch or hide the possibly existing correlation between critical parameters and superconductor relaxation. 3 In the second part, justification of the said, tentative correlation shall be confirmed by quantitative results. In comparison to numerous studies of magnetization, its relaxation and the pinning potentials, it appears this discussion, relaxation rate and relaxation time of the disturbed electron system, has not thoroughly been analyzed in the physical and engineering literature. This paper is a new edition of the everlasting, general question: What can we really know about superconductor properties? This paper is focused on one just one, yet strongly important aspect of this problem. For this purpose, the reported investigations are applied to a coated (2G) YBaCuO 123, thin film superconductor (Figure 1), for it is this superconductor the knowledge of its materials and transport properties is superior against other superconductors. 2 Temperature excursion under a disturbance To provide a safe basis for investigating the said, possibly existing correlation, criteria and constraints to obtain reliable numerical results by simulation of temperature excursion in a superconductor have to be provided. 2.1 Formal calculation of JCrit Critical current density, JCrit, depends on temperature, (1a) using 4 JCrit(T) = JCrit0 ( 1 - T/TCrit)n (1b) In a coil, B(t) in Eq. (1a) describes magnetic induction, like from neighbouring windings (B0 is a constant). 2.2 Decision on the exponent n As far as possible, the exponent n in Eq. (1b) has to be chosen with respect to materials and current transport properties. A decision on the value of the exponent can be made if, when using Eq. (1a,b) in numerical simulations, convergence of the simulated temperature fields has been achieved. Eq. (1b) is derived from Ginzburg-Landau (GL) theory, as reported in Eq. (4-35) of . This result follows from ∂Js/∂vs = 0, to find the maximum of Js, a super-current (and with vs the velocity of its constituents). In Eq. (4- 36) of this reference, Js is identified as the critical current, JCrit. This result of the Ginzburg-Landau equation for JCrit applies to a continuum by assuming the amplitude of the order parameter is uniform in the sample; in thin films, it cannot vary over thickness. Accordingly, we find its applicability to metals and alloys in Sect. 5.6 of , at temperature near critical temperature. But the Ginzburg-Landau theory does not take into account anisotropic materials and transport properties of type II, hard superconductors and thus might not be applicable in these cases. Yet Clem et al explained that Eq. (1b) was applicable for calculation of critical current density near critical temperature in a granular superconductor (NbN; the authors assume an array of Josephson couplings between grains). More 5 applications of Eq. (1b) were reported in several papers to that describe current transport even in granular or thin film, high-temperature superconductors. We cannot safely apply Eq. (1b) with inclusion of an exponential suggested in for investigation of coated superconductors. While this would fit the architecture of the superconductor investigated in the present paper (Figure 1), application of the exponential term would cause serious convergence problems, and JCrit(T) is reduced too strongly. The traditional Eq. (1b), without an exponential term, therefore has been applied in the present simulations, using the interval 0.5 ≤ n ≤ 2, to look for divergences, and after a variety of test calculations, we finally returned to the Ginzburg-Landau value n = 3/2. 2.3 Decision on TCrit For calculation of the critical current density, JCrit(T) = JCrit0 ( 1 - T/TCrit)n, first the difference ΔT = T - TCrit between superconductor temperature, T, and critical temperature, TCrit, has to be determined. Second, JCrit contains TCrit by the ratio T/TCrit. In both cases, for ΔT and for T/TCrit, a decision has to be made which value of TCrit has to be applied in the simulations. At first sight, this is an unexpected question, but we will show that it has strong impacts on calculated temperature excursions. As a result of the calculations, the most probable, realistic approach is to apply in T - TCrit and T/TCrit local values of both conductor temperature 6 and of critical temperature. Instead of the standard ΔT = T - TCrit0 and ratio T/TCrit0 (using uniform TCrit0 = 92 K), we have applied ΔT(x,y,t) = T(x,y,t) - TCrit(x,y,t) (2a) (2b) section. This differentiation is not just academic, and the temperature fields should be simulated as exact as possible. Safety in prediction of temperature excursions with time, of critical current density (and, trivially, also of stability functions and thus on onset of a quench) rely on how exact the sharp condition T ≤ TCrit can be verified, which means it relies on the uniqueness by which temperature fields, T(x,y,t) and critical temperature, TCrit(x,y,t), both as local values, can be determined. Emphasis in this paper is on "local". 2.4 Non-uniformity of temperature resulting from statistical parameter variations Under disturbances, and in particular in situations close to the superconducting/normal conducting phase transition, there is hardly a uniform distribution of temperature and of critical and transport current in the superconductor cross section or volume, compare the results reported in . Non-uniformity is expected from a variety of potential, materials and physical origins. First, there are materials deficiencies resulting from materials preparation (deposition, handling, conductor winding), 7 application and operation of a superconductor device. Non-local materials properties on a microscopic scale go back to local deviations from perfect stoichiometry, inclusion of foreign atoms, weak links in the grained BSCCO superconductor family, voids, cracks, mechanical tensions arising from conductor movement under Lorentz forces. There is also non-local, magnetic induction induced by currents in neighbouring thin films or filaments, and there are non-local heat transfer mechanisms like scattering of radiation in thin films and non-local solid/liquid interactions at the interface to the coolant. Trivially, as far as the set of available simulation parameters is concerned, non-uniformity of the temperature fields and excursions with time may arise also from experimental errors during measurements of TCrit and of the other critical variables of the superconductor. The simulations of the coated, (2G) YBaCuO 123 thin film superconductor like in previous paper apply statistical variations ΔTCrit, ΔJCrit and ΔBCrit (the upper critical magnetic field). In the present paper, as an additional aspect, also a statistical uncertainty of the thermal diffusivity of the superconductor material is considered. As an optimistic, provisional estimate, a spacing ΔTCrit < ± 1 K and likewise variations ΔJCrit0 and ΔBCrit20 are assumed as within 1 percent and ± 5 Tesla, respectively, in the simulations. The variations ΔTCrit, ΔJCrit0 within these given, maximum uncertainty intervals are shown in the assumed ΔJCrit = ±1 percent and ΔBCrit20 = ± 5 T; the calculations presented here shall demonstrate the principal impact of these uncertainties on calculated results, see later, Figure 5b. 8 Though experimental methods meanwhile have significantly been refined by increasingly sharp detection criteria (like electrical field constraints below 10-6 V/cm in transport measurements of TCrit), the extension by which experimental results really deviate from expected (true) values has remained an open question. What we mostly find in the literature are error bars resulting from estimates applied to final experimental results. A statistical approach applied in the most early stage of the simulations, like the one presented in the present paper, is a better solution. Random variations of the thermal conductivity, within ± 5 per cent and first results showing their impact on centroid element temperature are described in the Appendix, Figure 10 (it would be extremely difficult to achieve experimental uncertainty of less than five percent in the conductivity or thermal diffusivity of thin films). Simulations using non-uniform superconductor critical parameters is contrary to all traditional, numerical calculations of temperature fields under disturbances (and also to all standard stability calculations). But the most interesting question is whether critical temperature of a superconductor can uniquely be defined at all. Existence of a uniquely defined TCrit depends on the thermodynamic state of the superconductor electron system1. Trivially, any uncertainty of TCrit would concern the differences ΔT(x,y,t) and the ratios T(x,y,t)/TCrit(x,y,t)] when calculating JCrit[T(x,y,t)] by Eq. (2b). 1 Critical temperature like critical current density is a property of solely the electron system. It is an interesting question which temperature is measured, electron or phonon temperature, when sensors attached to a superconductor solid or thin film, or remotely by radiation detectors. It is not clear that both temperatures would be identical, compare Sect. 4.3 in for results obtained with different superconductors. 9 2.5 Uncertainty of TCrit from relaxation time Relaxation of the superconductor electron system from a disturbance is expected to follow an exponential decay law. Let ς(t) denote an excitation like a sudden temperature increase following e. g. absorption of a radiative pulse. The excitation disturbs the dynamic equilibrium between statistical but permanent, single electron (quasi- particle) generation and their recombination to electron pairs. The excitation decays proportional to exp(- t/τ), with τ the relaxation time, traditionally assumed as constant. But it is not clear that τ is really constant; the density, nS(T), of electron pairs strongly depends on temperature that in turn, under a disturbance, is a function of time, t. The point is: Relaxation cannot be completed instantaneously. Trivially, relaxation time is correlated with relaxation rates. Spontaneously, one would assume that relaxation time increases the stronger, the smaller the relaxation rate (the longer it takes the superconductor to relax to a new thermodynamic equilibrium). Regardless how relaxation rates are calculated, like in , see below, or from Eq. (8) of , the rates converge to zero when temperature approaches critical temperature of the superconductor. An approach how to calculate relaxation time, τ, and its dependence on temperature has been suggested by the recently reported, "microscopic stability model" Its details shall not be repeated here, a short description can be found in when the model was applied to a (2G) thin film superconductor. But its consequences have to be taken into account when inspecting the said relaxation problem. 10 In short, the model is a multi-physics approach using four formal analogues to describe the temporal aspect of the re-organisation of the total electron system after a disturbance. Relaxation not only means recombination of a limited number of single electrons (the decay products from a disturbance) to electron pairs but re-organisation of the total electron body, i. e. all electrons in dynamic equilibrium with electron pairs of the superconductor. The method accordingly includes (a) Calculation of “coefficients of fractional parentage” (cfp's), a concept applied in atomic and nuclear physics; here, this concept describes the total number of electron states involved in the re-organisation of the total electron body and, after completion of the relaxation, allows to calculate the total time needed to arrive at the new, thermodynamic equilibrium, (b) a “time of flight”-concept with a mediating Boson. In nuclear physics, the Yukawa-model, as one of possible analogues, a pion, π, mediates coupling (binding) of two nucleons, like the n and p in a Deuteron. (c) the Pauli selection rule, and (d) the uncertainty principle. In comparison to this model, derivation of the superconducting electron density, nS(T)/n0 = 1 - (T/TCrit)4, Eq. 8 of , with n0 the total number of electrons at T = 0, from Eqs. (2) to (7) of the same reference, neglects the dynamic aspects (statistical, quasi-particle generation and corresponding recombination processes) of the problem. Yet comparison of the curves "relaxation rate vs. temperature" obtained from both and shows at least qualitative agreement (yellow and green diamonds in the Appendix, Figure 12a).Differences result just from assumptions on numerical values of electron density, nS(T). 11 Both the direct, multi-step method described in and, with some additional assumptions, the possibly heuristic Eq. (8) of , not only allow calculation of relaxation rates and relaxation time. A far-reaching conclusion from relaxation time obtained in (here reproduced with drawn about existence of critical temperature, to be understood as a unambiguously defined, thermodynamic quantity. If TCrit exists, it can be understood as being either  a rough description of a thermodynamic non-equilibrium electron state (this is a standard but only approximate interpretation), which means, from purely thermodynamic standpoints, TCrit cannot be explained as a thermodynamic temperature of uniquely defined value,  or TCrit correlates, as a thermodynamic equilibrium variable, with a corresponding, completed (which means, really existing) equilibrium electron state. The prediction from (and could be drawn also from Eq. (8) in ) is that in this case the new equilibrium electron state cannot be reached within finite process or simulation time. The situation is schematically described in Figure 3. Relaxation time increases the more the closer the electron system approaches the phase transition because the more electrons have to be re-organised to electron pairs to obtain the new equilibrium. This conclusion is not in conflict with Buckel and Kleiner , Chap. 4, p. 262: The authors say that "in conventional superconductors the concentration of unpaired electrons decreases exponentially with 12 decreasing temperature, and hence the probability that an unpaired electron finds a suitable partner for recombination to form a Cooper pair also decreases." This is not in conflict with the prediction from because the situation described in is strongly different. In the present case, under increasing temperature, the number of single electrons increases (quasi-particles as thermally, not permanent, statistically initiated decay products). Starting from an original dynamic equilibrium state at a temperature, T, followed by a disturbance at this temperature, increasingly more single particles have to recombined to pairs in order to generate, by reorganisation of the total number, NTotal, the new dynamic equilibrium, at the new equilibrium temperature, T'. There, again a statistical, un-displaced dynamic equilibrium between generation and recombination processes would be obtained when relaxation is completed. Conservation of energy requests T' > T; this temperature increase, from T to T', concerns all electrons (the total electron body). The increased number, NTotal(T'), of electrons to be reorganised accordingly increases relaxation time (while, reversely, relaxation time decreases with decreasing temperature). It is the fractional parentage principle that causes the enormous increase of τ observed near TCrit in Figure 12b. Instead, the explanation and the original papers by Gray et al. do not refer to a temperature increase from absorption of a radiation pulse or from other thermal disturbances that would affect the total body of electrons. Contrary to the situation described in , they describe injection experiments to create an additional number ΔN of quasi- particles above the "core" (N) of bound electrons in the undisturbed superconductor. The excursion with time of the number ΔN, the 13 relaxation time, τ, is described by equations of the type ∂ΔN/∂t = A + B, with sources, A, and sinks , B. The contribution A contains the injection rate, B comprises different types of quasi-particle losses resulting from e. g. escape processes and by interaction with lattice phonons. These equations do not take into account the whole electron body (N) but only the additional, injected number ΔN of particles. It is thus not the total body of electrons that has to be re-organised in this model under observation of the fractional parentage principle. The relaxation time reported in therefore is strongly different from the predictions made in . The model does not contradict but simply cannot be applied to the injection experiments , and, reversely, the relaxation time obtained from quasi-particle injection has little relevance for relaxation of from thermal excitation. As a consequence, even if it in a warm-up experiment the temperature of the electron system might become infinitely close to the traditional TCrit, re-organisation of the corresponding, total electron state still is not completed and thus cannot be understood as a thermodynamic equilibrium. Critical temperature, as a thermodynamic equilibrium quantity, accordingly is not uniquely defined. If temperature evolution in a superconductor is not uniform, the phase transition at critical temperature can be completed neither spatial uniformly nor will this final state be attained simultaneously in the superconductor cross section or volume. The consequence to be taken from concerning non-existence of a uniquely defined TCrit is absolutely contrary to standard understanding of 14 critical temperature (traditionally, TCrit is, so to speak, under "monumental protection"). Instead, electron states near the phase transition, and thus near (traditional) critical temperature, are hidden from direct experimental observation and from the results obtainable in simulations. Critical temperature, if understood as a sharply defined quantity, therefore is a fiction, it remains out of sight during finite (experimental or simulated) periods of time. Rather, it is not at TCrit that simulations can be performed but in a time interval within which events and their distance from the phase transition can be studied. The conclusion from also specifies a note that Annett , p. 52, added to the left column of his book. There we have "The word superconductor is used only to mean a material with a definite phase transition and critical temperature." (correction by the present author: "definite" probably means "completed"). Yes, but the phase transition, here the completion of relaxation after a disturbance, takes finite, possibly diverging time. Critical temperature is the dynamic equilibrium of the electron state when no more disturbances, besides the statistical fluctuations in dynamic equilibrium, have to be compensated. Critical temperature thus may become out of sight within reasonable time scales in standard experiments or in computer simulations. This conclusion is not new physics but results from properties of many- particle systems (an analogy to nuclear physics), basic thermodynamic considerations (temperature uniquely defined under thermodynamic equilibrium) and from standard, multi-component heat transfer principles (solid conduction plus radiation in thin films). 15 Consequences from this conclusion not only concern experiments and simulations but might concern also levitation: Levitation height might not converge within reasonable periods of time to a final, equilibrium vertical co-ordinate. Even more important, but obviously inevitable under reasonably limited experimental efforts, results of standard measurements of critical current density might not reflect perfect equilibrium conditions. All results reported in the following Figures therefore are provisional in the sense that, strictly speaking, simulations can safely be performed only if a convergence limes of a series TCrit really would exist. 3 Simulation Scheme The following relations between critical current density and relaxation time, τ, or relaxation rate, ζ, dJCrit/dτ ~ JCrit, or (3a) dJCrit/dζ ~ JCrit (3b) are strongly non-linear, solutions can be found only in numerical simulations, and they can be quantified only if JCrit, τ and ζ depend on a common variable, which here is temperature. The simulated temperature excursions with time shall contribute to quantitative solutions of Eq. (3a,b). If inspected under the item "simulation time", the overall procedure yielding relaxation rates and relaxation time in dependence of (and correlated with) critical current density is schematically explained in 16 3.1 Overall procedure We start with simulations of transient temperature fields, T(x,y,t), developing from initial values, T(x,y,t0), in a superconductor coil. The coil integrates 100 turns prepared from a coated, (2G) YBaCuO 123 thin film superconductor (Figure 1). Details of conductor architecture are described in and will not be repeated here. The transient temperature distributions under disturbances in this paper are obtained from 2D solutions of Fourier's differential equation obtained by means of the Finite Element (FE) method using a standard, commercially available FE code. This start of the simulations is chosen because temperature, like magnetic field, is a thermodynamic variable that deserves primary attention, while current is not. We do not apply a multi-physics approach like H- or T/A formulations that beyond doubt are suitable for large-scale superconductor applications, see and references cited therein, in particular the review by Shen B, Grilli F, and Coombs T (August 2019). Instead, what is needed in the present paper, with respect to the said, possibly existing correlation, requests electromagnetic/thermal coupling without homogenization but with modelling the physics on microscopic scales. We have to consider, in each of the Finite Elements, the Meissner effect, weak links and viscous, thermally assisted flux flow resistivity and flux creep if the superconductor is very close to critical temperature and contact resistances between super- and normal conducting layers - how else could non-uniformity of the temperature distributions be considered. We do not apply constant temperature approximations but describe the local interplay of temperature-, field- and current-dependent variables with the transient temperature fields. 17 Standard Finite Element codes provide multi-physics element options (like the electric field, heat transfer, structural mechanics couplings by the FE code Ansys). But it is not clear that convergence can safely be achieved if the superconducting/normal phase transition, with its complicated consequences for the other superconductor variables, would be involved in the solutions obtained from standard FE codes. Therefore, we first calculate the solution, T(x,y,t), by application of the FE code to highly differentiated, geometrical and materials boundary conditions. From this solution, all physical variables that depend on temperature are calculated. In successive load-steps, the Finite Element integration is restarted with the new variables; Bi-directional interconnection between electric/magnetic and thermal interplay is realised by this sequential procedure. The convergence problem is reduced to that of solely the temperature field, yet the procedure requires considerable computational efforts. The FE procedure for this purpose is embedded in a comprehensive, "master scheme". This scheme, a flow chart that is extended against the previously published Figure 12 of , is shown in the Appendix of the present paper, Figure 11a). Step by step repetitions of the proper Finite Element integration cycles are intersected by intermediate, analytic calculations of electrical and magnetic variables (penetration of magnetic field, Meissner effect, local resistances, local critical and transport current distribution and local losses like flux flow, Ohmic or inductive). The FE procedure during its many repetitions allows to introduce corrections (adjustments) to physically reasonable values like the 77 K 18 coolant temperature constraint in case of divergences. This is realised without restarts of the simulations. 3.2 Selection of the number of simulated turns Another serious problem arises from the number of turns that can be simulated to yield high spatial and temporal resolution, without application of any continuous, spatially averaged structures. The number of simulated turns for this purpose has to be limited. In the present simulations, the procedure has been applied to only the five uppermost turns of the coil. Accordingly, a thermal boundary condition near the interface between turns 96 and 95 has to be specified appropriately. If y96 denotes vertical position at half the thickness of the Hastelloy block, the condition T(y96) Ξ 77 K (temperature of the coolant) would not be realistic because temperature of turn 95 is much larger, at least in case of a fault current. Any values T(y96) > 77 K at this position could only be estimated, but estimates shall be avoided. In order to solve this problem, the plane y96 = const in the present calculations has been defined as plane of vertical symmetry, with temperature of turn 96 reflecting temperature of turn 95 which in turn is close to temperature of turns 94 and so on. This is because all turns are tightly, by strong, solid/solid contacts, coupled to each other. Physically, deviations from symmetry can arise only close near the upper boundary of the coil with its solid/liquid contact. At this co-ordinate, temperature of turn 100 physically (with respect to thermal transport) does not reflect temperature of turn 92 while it numerically does. 19 This deviation from reality is acceptable because, physically, there are many intermediate layers between turns 92 and 96, and these are expected to thermally insulate turn 96 from the turns below (needless to say, the turns are also electrically insulated against each other). Numerically, symmetry is specified by leaving the boundary condition open at the co-ordinate y96, a measure that is frequently applied in numerical (Finite Differences or Element) calculations. For the upper five turns (96 to 100) of the coil, the FE model applies between 65 000 and 198 000 Finite Elements (Ansys 16, plane55 with 4 nodes). From these, the proper superconductor thin films in each turn occupy between 5 000 and 15 000 elements. 3.3 Compensation of convergence problems We have compensated 2D interfacial layers (IFL) between the thin SC, Ag and MgO-films (that otherwise might be approximated with shell elements) by assuming regular, 2D thin films of very small thickness. In the total winding cross sections, film thicknesses are between 40 nm (interfacial layers) and 100 μm (stabilizer). With a width of the windings of about 6 mm, and in particular with respect to details of the previously suggested flux flow cell model , the element aspect ratio might become larger than limits set by the Finite Element method, but this was avoided by limiting the horizontal element width by increasing the number of elements in each turn. The cell model simply replaces well- known standard relations for solid state, normal conduction resistivity, ρNC, by a conducting network incorporating weak-links to estimate flux 20 flow resistivity, ρFF = ρNC,eff B/BCrit,2, from the effective electrical resistivity, ρNC,eff, of this network. Divergences like T < 77 K, or thermal run-away to extremely high temperature, were observed in only rare situations during the iteration cycles. These were located outside the proper superconductor cross section (compare Figure 11c in the Appendix) and could result from too large a time step, too small an element volume in the numerical procedure or from inappropriate convergence criteria. Control of stagnation temperature confirmed the FE mesh was correctly designed in the present simulations. Multiple repetitions of the FE calculation steps, as indicated in Figure 11a,b, are unconventional, but this scheme is justified in view of the non- linearity of almost all input variables and parameters, in particular near the phase transition. Against standard, Finite Differences or multi-physics Finite Element procedures, control of convergence by this concept seems to be strongly improved. 3.4 Thermal and radiative parameters Like in the previous papers , the simulations apply temperature- dependent thermal conductivity and specific heat of all materials, see (manuscript and Table 1); these values and the anisotropy of YBaCuO 123 material are based on experiments, either reported in the literature or result from co-operations of the present author with J. Fricke's group in experiments performed at Wuerzburg University. 21 Radiative transfer in thin films has been modelled as a conduction process since the films are non-transparent to mid-IR radiation . The extinction and scattering properties have been calculated from application of rigorous scattering theory and of the Drude-Lorentz model to estimate the complex refractive indices as a function of temperature, see the results obtained in the mid-IR spectral range for refractive index, extinction coefficients and Albedo shown in Figures 12 to 15 of . More details of the general simulation procedure (meshing, integration time steps, heat transfer to coolant, depairing current density) have been reported in Sects. 2 and 3 of , there for the (1G) BSCCO 2223 multi- filamentary superconductor. 4 Transient temperature excursions the thin superconductor film is not uniform, with approximately a linear temperature gradient within the 2μm thin YBaCuO 123 film. Figure 4a is a detail of the present results and confirms non-uniform temperature distributions like those reported in previous papers . Non-uniformity of the temperature distribution is also confirmed by the standard deviations from mean value of the curves in Figure 4b (turns 96 and 100 of the coil). In the outer turns (here turn 100, lower diagram), almost no difference (within their standard deviations) can be detected if calculations are performed with or without the random variations of TCrit, JCrit and BCrit1,2. Because of the non-uniform temperature distribution, local zero and Ohmic resistances during finite time intervals exist in parallel, even in 22 turn 100. Also local flux flow resistances, between 77 ≤ T(x,y,t) ≤ TCrit(x,y,t) then exist if local transport exceeds local critical current density at these positions. For T < TCrit, it is thus nominal current, flux flow resistance and corresponding losses (and the random fluctuations of the critical parameters) that are responsible for the local increase of T(x,y,t) > 77 K, the start value of the simulations, seen in Figure 4b (and later, upper diagram of Figure 11c). We have applied the ratio of transport to critical current, ITransp/ICrit = 1. While this defines the overall transport current ratio in the conductor cross section, it does not exclude any local overrun of local critical current density, JCrit(x,y,t), by the transport current density, under its random variations ΔJCrit(x,y,t). Since distribution of flux flow and Ohmic resistances may be different at each longitudinal (z) co-ordinate of a thin film or filamentary superconductor, transport current may percolate through length of the conductor. Its distribution at different z-co-ordinates then does not reflect profiles of laminar liquid flow. Random, local variations of TCrit0 and JCrit0 obviously are sufficient to induce, without any fault current, just with transport current equal to nominal current, non-uniform temperature distributions. The results, here obtained under parameter sensitivity testing, confirm the findings reported in Figures 4 to 7 of . Without the random variations of TCrit, JCrit and BCrit, and if density of transport current is below critical current density, the temperature distributions would be flat and would not show any temperature run-away to catastrophic divergence. 23 By the very large number of elements, trivially the average of the random distributions of JCrit0, TCrit0 and BCrit20 almost perfectly coincides with their physical (standard) values. However, the problem is that a certain number of local values of JCrit, TCrit and BCrit2 possibly might diverge from the uncertainty (percentage) range in Figure 2. A specific value TCrit(x,y,t) < T(x,y,t) then would be responsible for development of a hot spot at the temporal position (x,y,t) even if the stability function, Φ(t) remains below Φ(t) = 1 (explanation of Φ(t) and an example is given in The superconductor literature speaks of quench as an event during which its total magnetic and mechanical tension energy is suddenly released to the total volume. It does not seem inappropriate to apply the term "quench" to also local, sudden transformations of magnetic and mechanical to thermal energy: The mechanisms of this transformation is, on a macroscopic scale, the same as their macroscopic counterpart; roughly speaking, they proceed on just different spatial and time scales. But a local quench in many situations may well be the origin of a subsequent, total and catastrophic quench that would cover the total superconductor volume. Like in , the calculations are not design calculations. The numerical experiments instead investigate basic superconductor problems using the Finite Element procedure, and like in , Monte Carlo simulations, and radiative transfer calculations in thin films, as a tool to explore, as far as possible, the physics behind quench. The investigations rather demonstrate potentials and also limitations of numerical methods in the field of superconductivity. Yet the simulations 24 and the reported results might allow conclusions for materials development, see the second part of this paper. Computational efforts are enormous. Simulations shown in Figures 4a,b, 5a,b and 11c, over a period of below 5 ms, on a standard PC, with 4- core processor PC and 16 GB workspace under Windows 7, frequently took more than 24 hrs. This mainly results from the large number of IF...THEN...ELSE-steps to be executed separately in each of numerous FE elements, within each under a large number of calculation steps and iteration cycles (Figure 11a,b) and with respect to all potentially open superconductor, zero, flux flow or Ohmic resistance states. 4.1 Centroid temperature under parameter variation In Figure 5a, dependence of the centroid temperature, T(x,y,t), on variations of the exponent n in Eq. (1b) is reported. The observed temporal structures of T(x,y,t) at t = 4.1 and t > 4.2 ms in the centroid element at first sight indicate onset of a first and of a second (apparent), local temperature run-away. It becomes "real" not before we enter during the iterations the convergence circles indicating the periods (load steps) within which convergence of temperature is achieved. That in both cases the local temperature increase might indicate also a total quench, in at least one turn, is confirmed in Figure 5b (lower diagram) and, in the Appendix, in Figure 9a-c by the calculated stability functions and heat fluxes. on local (again centroid) temperature is explained by JCrit(T) = JCrit0 ( 1 - T/TCrit)n, Eq. (1b), that can be interpreted in two ways: 25 (1) the larger exponent, n = 1.5, decreases JCrit rather strongly while for below TCrit. At constant T(x,y,t), and if n = 1.5, superconductor temperature thus becomes more vulnerable to occurrence of flux flow losses. Flux flow losses (if transport current density exceeds JCrit) then occur with increasing probability, and T(x,y,t), because of these very losses, becomes larger for n = 1.5, in comparison to n = 0.5. (2) under given JCrit(T), JCrit0 and exponent n, Eq. (1b) after elementary transformations yields (4) for temperature, T, calculated for different JCrit(T) and exponents n, see explains the results shown in Figure 5a,b: The smaller the exponent n, the larger the conductor temperature. This is not in contradiction to item (1) that predicts at constant T, that critical current density JCrit(T) (not temperature, T) increases (and thus flux flow loss decreases) if n decreases. random values given in Figure 2 and of ΔBCrit20 are reduced by a divisor (here between 5 and 100) applied to the originally assumed uncertainties of these parameters. In the top turn 100, the mean temperature near TCritt0 (lower diagram of Figure 5b) increases by about 1.7 K. Optimistically, this is about the experimental uncertainty of a traditional TCrit measurement itself when it is obtained from transport measurements 26 (with sharp electrical field criteria). In the inner turns, the impact is even larger than in turn 100. In conclusion from this Section, uncertainties in materials and transport properties of the superconductor cannot be neglected, not in the present simulations (and also not in any stability analysis). Simulations of superconductor transient temperature excursion have to apply  ΔT(x,y,t) = T(x,y,t) - TCrit(x,y,t), in both cases with local TCrit(x,y,t), instead of the simple comparison T vs. TCrit0 and instead of uniform TCrit0 = 92 K. More details showing the impact of variations of the exponent n and of TCrit (uniform or spatial resolved) are shown in the Appendix, Figure 9a,b (the impact on the stability function). It is interesting to note that the (first) steep increase of centroid and mean temperatures of the turns (Figures 4b and 5a,b) at about t = 4.1 ms after start of the disturbance (and correspondingly also of the stability function), all correlate with onset of divergence of the numerical calculation scheme. The same correlation can be seen from the sudden increase of the number of FE equilibrium integrations to obtain convergence when in Figure 1 of the multi-filamentary (1G) superconductor BSCCO 2223 was investigated. The question now is: How often will JCrit(x,y,t), TCrit(x,y,t) and BCrit2(x,y,t) , at a given simulation time, really fall into the uncertainty intervals of 27 parameters? The following discussion is focused on TCrit(x,y,t). 4.2 Frequency by which TCrit(x,y,t) falls into uncertainty intervals around TCrit0 In Figure 7, we control the number of element temperatures falling into deviation intervals δT from critical temperature. Results are calculated for either the deviation δT from TCrit0 = 92 K (TCrit0 uniform, solid diamonds) or from TCrit(x,y,t), solid triangles (the latter are those of Figure 2, lower diagram). Clear differences are seen only for simulation time t < 4.16 ms. The calculations are performed using the anisotropy ratio, Dab/Dc = 5, of the thermal diffusivity and the exponent n = 1.5 in JCrit(x,y,t) = JCrit(x,y,t=0) [1 - T(x,y,t)/TCrit)]n. When instead using n = 0.5, the results are almost identical. The results show that the statistical frequency distribution of deviations between local element temperature from critical temperature in only rare cases is below 0.01 K. In this case, differentiation would be of little importance for the present simulations since the frequency of these deviation accounts for only 0.14 percent of the total. But deviations of 0.1, 1 and 10 K at t = 4.1 ms amount to about 1.3, 12.3 and 86.3 percent, respectively. The impact exerted by δT = 1 K on the results, by its approximately 12 percent contribution, is already substantial. 28 5 Second part of the paper: Correlation of critical current density with relaxation 5.1 The link provided by temperature The investigation as before is focused on situations near the phase transition. Element temperature serves for calculation of the critical current density (Eq. 1a,b), without field dependence. The fields T(x,y,t) and JCrit(x,y,t) so far rely on solely results of the Finite Element (FE) simulations, with application of the relation JCrit(x,y,t) = (2a) for temperature difference ΔT and ratio T/TCrit in Eq. (2b). In any electrical conductor, the relationship between current density, J, and the density, nq, of involved charge carriers, by conservation of charge, is J = nq v q (5) with v the velocity of the charge carriers and q the moving electric charge. Eq. (5) applies to stationary current flow. It uniquely couples charge density, nq, with current density, J. The density, nq, has to be provided from a model or from experiments. In superconductors, transport or screening currents all flow with critical current density, J = JCrit, at a temperature, T, JCrit(T) = JCrit,0 ( 1 - T/TCrit)n (6a) = nS(T) vFermi 2e (6b) 29 The temperature fields, T(x,y,t), are mapped onto the field of critical temperatures to yield the fields JCrit(x,y,t). Density of the charge carriers, nS(T), in the superconductor YBaCuO 123 has been calculated in Figure 8a of . We have used Eq. (6a,b) in this carriers), nS(T), necessary to support a given critical current density. The results were safely below the available nS(T) obtained from application of the microscopic stability model . Density, nS(T), of charge carriers and critical current density according to Eq. (6a,b) are coupled to each other. The same applies to their finite variations, ΔnS(T) and ΔJCrit, both within Eq. (6b), and thus applies to also their ratio ΔJCrit(T)/ΔnS(T), at given ΔJCrit. In the following, with the decay shall be calculated from the transient temperature fields obtained in the first part of this paper. The decay rate ζ = ΔnS(T)/Δt) becomes very small (see Figure 13 in the Appendix). the (finite) ΔJCrit and Δζ (not of the variables JCrit and ζ), in dependence of JCrit. The ratio in the following is considered as a continuum variable, i. e. as an approximation to dΔJCrit/dΔζ = f(JCrit). When this curve is integrated, it yields the variation dJCrit of JCrit (not the proper JCrit itself) under given relaxation rates, dζ, and at given JCrit, see next Subsection. Variations of JCrit according to Figure 8a (upper diagram) depend strongly on variations of the relaxation rate: The smaller JCrit (i. e. at temperature close to TCrit), the more increases the derivative dΔJCrit/dΔζ, and the more 30 sensitive will JCrit react to variations of the decay rate. Obtaining large dΔJCrit/dΔζ, therefore, under this specific aspect, could be of practical, possibly also of theoretical interest. Coupling between JCrit with also materials properties in type I and type II superconductors simply is a matter of fact. A key to increase JCrit thus might be found not only from progress in materials development (like increase of flux pinning, reduction of weak-links) but also if a correlation (in its exact sense, see next Subsection) could be identified between relaxation rates and materials properties. Critical (and transport) current density of thin film superconductors is not, or only weakly, limited by grain boundaries, in contrast to grain structure and corresponding weak link behaviour of the BSCCO superconductor family. What then can be done, from materials transport property aspects, to accelerate relaxation rates? 5.2 A correlation between relaxation and materials properties? Correlation has to be differentiated from causality and from simple coupling. Coupling is a weak, not necessarily quantifiable relation between two or more objects, events or variables. Correlation indicates strength by which two or more of these are coupled to each other. Coupling might be statistical. If an event 1 leads to a change of the properties (or simply of co- ordinates) of an event 2, and if this change depends solely on the interaction of event 2 with event 1 (not by others), and if the interaction can be detected and is quantifiable (and possibly reversible like in a 31 resonance), we speak of causality. Causality is stronger than correlation. Correlation trivially includes coupling. An indicative relation, in the strict mathematical sense, exists between conductor temperature and critical current density of a superconductor. The relation neither is surjective nor is it bijective. Increase of conductor temperature from all experience reduces critical current density, which means both variables are correlated under uni-directional causality. Causality in this case is not bijective (is not reversible). Consider Figures 12a,b and 13: The larger the conductor temperature (the smaller the remaining difference to critical temperature), the larger are decay rates, and, based on , the longer takes it the system to relax to a new thermodynamic equilibrium. Accordingly, temperature, decay rates and relaxation time apparently are correlated, directly or inversely (though again not reversibly). By analogy, can we explain the apparently existing relations described in Figure 8a between critical current density and relaxation as correlations and, in particular, as also of causal order? The curves and arrows in Figure 8b, while they suggest that correlations would exist, perhaps could alternatively be explained on just numerical grounds; in reality, the correlations could be spurious (or even nonsense correlations). Also calculation of correlation coefficients would not prove physical correlations (and thus causal order) among the variables because these coefficients would have to be based on the same numerical data. To answer the above question "causality or not?", it has to be checked whether the apparent correlations are uni- or bi-directional and can be 32 explained from the physics behind. Can we, from the physics behind, verify that the arrows 1 to 4 in Figure 8b indicate causal relations? Compare again the blue diamonds in Figure 8a (upper diagram). The smaller the critical current density, which means, the higher the the derivative of the variations of critical current density and relaxation rate, ζ, of the thin film YBaCuO 123 superconductor. During warm-up, this means that the ratio ΔJCrit/dΔζ increases with increasing simulation time (or duration of an experiment), as follows from integration of Eq. (3b), i. e. of the curve dΔJCrit/dΔζ, ln(ΔJCrit) = ∫ dΔζ + C (7a) under the condition Δζ(JCrit) = 0 at JCrit = JCrit0 = const (almost zero decay or recombination rates that compensate each other). This yields ΔJCrit = ΔJCrit0 exp(-Δζ) (7b) Variation of critical current density, coupled by the exponential factor, exp(-Δζ) in Eq. (7b), to the decay rate, decreases strongly if the relaxation rate, Δζ, increases. On the other hand, variation of the relaxation rate is very small if temperature is close to the phase transition, compare Figure 13 in the Appendix. If the system continuously creates new, intermediate dynamic equilibrium states, decay rates in this transition, variations of the decay rate, like a variation exp(-20) ≤ Δζ [m-3 s-1] ≤ exp(-1) results in a variation of approximately 2 10-9 ≤ ΔJCrit/ΔJCrit0 ≤ 0.37. Over the total period, variations of critical current density and of relaxation rates obviously are weakly correlated numerically. 33 By analogy, conclusions in the same way can be drawn from the derivative dΔJCrit/dΔτ of critical current density with relaxation time, τ (the red diamonds in Figure 8a, upper diagram). But because of the plus- sign, the integral of dΔJCrit/dΔτ would diverge too strongly to allow conclusions on how critical current density could be increased by variation of relaxation time within reasonable duration of experiments or numerical simulations (the question is how relaxation time can directly be tailored at all). But finite, possibly tailored decay rates, Δζ [(A/m2)/m-3 s-1) could be helpful to protect JCrit from decrease under disturbances (large dΔJCrit/dΔζ may "heal" deficiencies). This is because the top and bottom diagrams in Figure 8a explain that, as mentioned, at temperature close to critical temperature, and this is the interval of most interest, the (small) critical current density reacts more sensitive to the (large) variations of dΔJCrit/dΔζ. Conversely, at temperature far away from the superconducting/normal conducting phase transition (which means, at large JCrit), the variation dΔJCrit/dΔζ is comparatively small, The above question how to increase dΔJCrit/dΔζ at temperature close to the phase transition has to be answered with respect to solely the proper superconductor material. In type I superconductors, for application of Eq. (1b) with the Ginzburg- Landau exponent n, it is the de-pairing or pair-breaking current density up to which the said correlations may be investigated (this means, as long as the kinetic energy of the super-current carriers does not exceed condensation energy to the superconducting state). 34 In type II superconductors, it is in addition (i) the critical current density, at the transition from zero to flux flow resistance (magnetic flux quanta leaving their pinning sites) and (ii) decoupling by layers or other aggregates of non-super-conducting material between neighbouring superconductor thin films that both limit the range of applicability of Eq. (1b). No doubt, perfect crystallography and stoichiometry are the first requisites to be fulfilled (a single crystal would be an optimum sample). But when this is fulfilled, what then would be suitable to promote the rates dΔJCrit/dΔζ? The model and its application to calculate relaxation rates within the same range (items i and ii) could give an answer: Since relaxation rate is inversely proportional to relaxation time (compare Figures 12a,b and 13), it is relaxation time that has to be decreased in order to increase dΔJCrit/dΔζ. Apart from constraints set by “coefficients of fractional parentage” and the "time of flight" concept, which both are just formalistic issues, it is essentially the density of electron pair states, nS, and its temperature dependence that both enter into the calculations of relaxation time in this model. Smaller (than usually applied values) dnS/dt, according to the calculation steps in , would contribute to reduction of relaxation time, which means future materials development might increase dΔJCrit/dΔζ provided magnitude and temperature dependence of the energy gap in the superconductor could be modified. 35 depends on the energy gap, ΔE(T). In the calculations, its temperature dependence is modelled using the expression ΔE(t) = 1.73 ΔE0 (1 - T/TCrit)0.5 for T/TCrit →1 (Eq. 2-54 of ). The calculations in the upper diagram of Figure 8a apply ΔE0 = 60 meV. In the bottom diagram, the impact of ΔE0 on dΔJCrit/dΔζ, in the interval 50 ≤ ΔE0 ≤ 70 meV, is very strong (near JCrit = 108 A/m2, dΔJCrit/dΔζ increases by about a factor of four when ΔE0 is increased from 50 to 60 meV). Accordingly, size of the energy gap is correlated with dΔJCrit/dΔζ, still from solely numerically arguments. Are the variables also causally ordered? The model explains relaxation time as resulting from a two- step process within two successive time intervals, compare Sects. 3.2.1 and 3.2.2 of this reference. Because of the Pauli exclusion principle (and in view of the Racah coefficients), calculation of total lifetime, τ, has to proceed in a step-wise, sequential manner by the following steps (a) and (b): (a) Decay widths Гij for two arbitrary particles i and j, that determine, by correlation, an “intrinsic lifetime”, τ1 = (h/2π)/Гij, of the non-equilibrium state, to be taken for re-combination of particles i and j out of a very large number, N. It requires a tiny, finite time interval needed first to initiate the proper condensation or recombination event to a pair. “Correlation”, in the sense used in this model, strictly speaking means exchange of “information” between two quantum states; in reality, and from analogy in nuclear physics (with a pion mediating n,p-coupling), it is the exchange of phonons that mediate binding interaction between single particles, like the pion does in the Deuteron. 36 (h indicates Planck's constant), for the proper condensation or recombination, energy dependent event, once the particles i and j are identified in step (a) (note that this condition specifies the qualitative assumptions made in ). Decreasing size of the energy gap, ΔE(T), which happens under increase of temperature, increases relaxation time, roughly τ = τ1 + τ2. Since relaxation time, τ, is inversely proportional to relaxation rate, ζ, decreasing ΔE(T), under increasing temperature, decreases relaxation rates. As mentioned, seen from the physics behind, the higher the temperature, provided T < TCrit, the more decay electrons have to be re- organised to pairs in a new equilibrium by the two steps (a) and (b). The larger the energy gap, the more will excitations (decay of electron pairs) be blocked, and the more is an entrance channel opened for increased zero-loss current transport. Single (decay) electrons cannot contribute, current transport by single electrons is resistive. Therefore, the larger the energy gap, at given constant temperature, the larger critical current density (red diamonds in Figure 8b). Accordingly, since the energy gap, ΔE(T), physically (arrow 2 in Figure 8b) correlates with critical current density, both variables, ΔE(T) and JCrit (T), are definitely (because causally) correlated. This result is of practical use since modifications of ΔE0 can easier be realized and controlled (IR- absorption, ultra-sonic or tunnelling experiments) than modifications of relaxation rates. Yet, via arrow 3, the energy gap is causally correlated with relaxation rate, and relaxation rate, via arrow 4, causally correlates with critical 37 current density. Large relaxation rates quickly provide electron pairs to "repair" (support) critical current density. Another uni-directional, causal relation (the reverse of arrow 4, after a 180 degrees turn) is not true. In summary, arrow 4 indicates, as the final result of this paper, the causally, but uni-directionally oriented correlation between relaxation rate and critical current density. Neutron and heavy ion irradiation are well-known tools to provide effective pinning centres (tracks or point defects). Irradiation increases critical current density, causes variations of irreversibility line and variations of the value of the energy gap. The same can be achieved, again a well-known procedure, with tiny concentrations of paramagnetic impurities (however, gapless superconductivity, yet with strong pair correlations, cannot be explained by the curves in Figure 8a,b). Another potential concerns the relation between de-pairing critical current density, Jd, and coherence length, ξ. In high temperature superconductor materials, ξ is very small. Since Jd ~ 1/ξ, a correlation could exist, via JCrit ~ ΔE (at constant temperature), between also relaxation rate and coherence length. Materials development thus might perhaps be improved if these apparently existing correlations and their potentials could be exploited. Search for new superconductor materials, from the correlations listed above, with tailored energy gap could significantly increase critical current density or, reversely, allow to determine relaxation rates arising from thermal disturbances by measuring critical current density. 38 6 Summary Near the superconducting/normal conducting phase transition, quench, if any, starts locally. This is the consequence of non-uniform temperature fields, T(x,y,t), that result from disturbances and from inhomogeneity of materials and transport properties. For the same reason, quench neither starts at exactly the same time nor at the same position within of the conductor cross section. Temperature dependence of JCrit on the exponent n in JCrit(x,y,t) = excursions and for prediction of a quench. Convergence tests have confirmed that safely the exponent should apply the Ginzburg-Landau value n = 1.5. Critical superconductor parameters JCrit, TCrit and lower and upper critical fields, BCrit1,2, all have to be understood as local values. Local temperature differences, T(x,y,t) - TCrit(x,y,t), and local ratios, T(x,y,t)/TCrit(x,y,t) in modelling critical current density, have to be applied instead of simple (standard) differences T - TCrit0 and ratios T/TCrit0. This decision is important for success when investigating the said correlations and for stability calculations. During warm-up, critical temperature exists only as a convergence limes of a series of equilibrium superconductor states and corresponding equilibrium temperatures, which all are increasingly distant on the time scale. The limes cannot be obtained in standard experiments or simulations if a disturbance at temperature already close to the superconducting/normal conducting phase transition. Critical 39 temperature, if understood as a sharply, with zero tolerance defined quantity, accordingly is a fiction. Relaxation rates, critical current density and the energy gap of superconductors are physically correlated. In particular, arrow 4 in Figure 8b indicates, as the final result of this paper, a causal but uni- directionally oriented correlation between relaxation rate and critical current density. This result might open a guide line for materials development to increase critical current density or, reversely, provide relaxation rates from measured critical current density. Experiments to verify these predictions would be difficult to perform. But this is not new physics. The results reported in this paper simply reflect aspects of many-particle physics, analogies from nuclear physics and standard methods of multi-component heat transfer in superconductor thin films. Thank you for your patience. This paper results from my lectures "Applied Superconductivity" given in the Department of Physics at the Unversity of Wuerzburg., Germany. Comments and nominations of potential referees are highly welcome. 7