1 Ambi-chiral anomalous Hall effect in magnetically doped topological insulators Chang Liu1,2†, Yunyi Zang1,2†, Yan Gong1, Ke He1,2,3*, Xucun Ma1,3, Qi-Kun Xue1,2,3, Yayu Wang1,3* 1State Key Laboratory of Low Dimensional Quantum Physics, Department of Physics, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, P. R. China 2Beijing Academy of Quantum Information Sciences, Beijing 100193, P. R. China 3Frontier Science Center for Quantum Information, Beijing 100084, P. R. China † These authors contributed equally to this work. * Emails: kehe@tsinghua.edu.cn; yayuwang@tsinghua.edu.cn Abstract: The chirality associated with broken time reversal symmetry in magnetically doped topological insulators have important implications to the quantum transport phenomena. Here we report the anomalous Hall effect studies in Mn- and Cr-doped Bi2Te3 topological insulators with varied thickness and doping content. By tracing the chirality of the Hall loops, we find that the Mn-type anomalous Hall effect with clockwise chirality is strengthened by the reduction of film thickness, which is opposite to that of the Cr-type anomalous Hall effect with counterclockwise chirality. We provide a phenomenological model to explain the evolution of magnetic order and anomalous Hall effect chirality in magnetically doped topological insulators. Key words: Topological insulator, anomalous Hall effect, chirality, magnetic order 2 Introduction Chirality is defined as an asymmetric property that is used to describe a system that cannot be distinguished from its mirror image. It plays a crucial role in a wide range of systems, ranging from fundamental particles in high energy physics, to grand-scale objects like spiral galaxies in astrophysics. In condensed matter physics, chiral phenomena not only manifest itself in material structure but also in emergent electromagnetic responses . Magnetic topological insulators (TIs) represent versatile platforms for exploring the exotic quantum phenomena with chiral nature. For example, ferromagnetic (FM) order breaks the time-reversal symmetry (TRS) of TIs and endows the Dirac fermions with finite mass through the exchange coupling . The helicity of the topological surface states is lifted and the resulting nonzero Berry curvature leads to pronounced anomalous Hall effect (AHE) that exhibits hysteresis with a specific chirality. In the two-dimensional (2D) limit when Fermi level is tuned to the band gap, the one-dimensional (1D) helical channels of TIs is split into chiral edge state that contributes to the quantized AHE . The realization of quantized AHE undoubtedly demonstrates the critical roles of Berry curvature on the electronic properties of TIs, and provides a new building block for realizing other exotic topological quantum phenomena such as magnetic monopoles and chiral Majorana fermions . Despite considerable efforts on magnetic TIs, particularly in pursuing the quantized AHE, there are still intriguing open questions. In previous studies, the AHE behaviors in magnetic TIs can be divided into two different groups. In the first group, exemplified by the Cr- and V-doped Bi2Te3 family TI films, the magnetic field dependent Hall traces display hysteresis loops with counterclockwise chirality , as schematically shown on the left of Figure 1(a). Here, ρyx+ and ρyx- denote the Hall resistivity ρyx profiles when magnetic field is swept back to zero from positive and negative polarizations respectively. The violet arrows represent the magnetization at corresponding magnetic field. At positive magnetization, the AH resistivity ρyx0 (defined as ρyx+ at zero magnetic field) has a positive value. For the quantized AHE such as in the Cr-doped (Bi,Sb)2Te3 TI system, ρyx0 reaches h/e2, where h denotes the Plank constant and e is the electron charge, corresponding to the Chern number C = +1 . In the second group, represented by Mn-doped Bi2Te3, the Hall traces display hysteresis loop with clockwise 3 chirality and the sign of ρyx0 is negative . Thus, for its quantized AHE version, the Chern number is C = -1 and ρyx0 is quantized at -h/e2, which has recently been realized in MnBi2Te4 intrinsic antiferromagnetic TI with odd number of layers .The schematic picture of the AHE with clockwise chirality is displayed on the right of Figure 1(a). Accompanied by the rise of chiral spintronics in topological matter , the chirality issue of the AHE has attracted more attention in recent years. A variety of exotic topological quantum phenomenon are found to be associated with chirality . For example, theoretical calculations propose that the opposite chirality of the AHE in Mn- and Cr-doped Bi2Te3 can be utilized to realize the long-sought quantized topological magnetoelectric effect when they are constructed into heterostructures . Very recently, transport studies in pulsed magnetic field demonstrates that the Chern insulator phase in Mn-based magnetic TI with clockwise chirality and C = -1 evolves into a helical phase with C = 0 . In contrast, the Chern insulator phase in Cr-based magnetic TI with counterclockwise chirality and C = +1 becomes more stable in the high field limit . These results provide more motivations for understanding and controlling the chirality of AHE in magnetic TIs. Although there have been several experiments studying the AHE in Mn- and Cr-doped TIs , for a certain magnetic TI thin film, the chirality of AHE is usually fixed. It is difficult to switch between opposite chirality in one sample. Moreover, the different sample fabrication methods , selections of dopants and parent TI compounds , effects of interface , and even dimensionality , make it elusive to figure out how the AHE with opposite chirality evolves under different parameters. Therefore, it is highly desired to have an accurate control of parameters in one system to study the chirality of the AHE. In this work, we report systematic transport studies of Cr- and Mn-doped (Bi0.9MnxCr0.1- x)2Te3 magnetic TIs with various thickness d and doping level x at different temperature T and gate voltage Vg. We find that the Mn-type AHE with clockwise chirality is strengthened as d is reduced from 8 quintuple-layer (QL) to 6 QL, whereas the Cr-type AHE with counterclockwise chirality exhibits totally opposite behavior. The different response of AHE to film thickness are universally present in the x, T and Vg dependent measurements, consistent with the distinct mechanisms for FM order found in Mn- and Cr-doped TIs. We propose a simple model to 4 explain the observed ambi-chiral AHE in magnetically doped TIs. Methods The ten magnetically doped TI samples studied in this work are grown by molecular beam epitaxy on insulating SrTiO3(111) substrates following the similar method reported previously . Mn and Cr are uniformly deposited during the sample growth. The SrTiO3 substrate also acts as a back gate due to its large dielectric constant at low T. Figure 1(b) shows the crystal structure and the schematic cross-section of a (Bi0.9MnxCr0.1-x)2Te3 TI. The black and red arrows mark the Mn and Cr magnetic moments respectively. Two film thicknesses d = 8 QL and 6 QL are chosen because they are small enough to ensure sufficient gating ability and large enough to avoid the effect of surface hybridization on the magnetic properties . For transport measurement, standard four-probe AC lock-in method is carried out after the samples are manually scratched into Hall bar structures. Indium pieces are pressed directly on the top surface of the samples as electrical contacts. The magnetic field is applied perpendicular to the sample plane, and the Hall signals are antisymmetrized with respect to magnetic field to correct the errors caused by geometric misalignments. An excitation current of 0.2 μAis applied by a Keithley 6221 current source, and a Vg is applied by a Keithley 2400 source meter. Experimental results We first study the magnetic field dependent ρyx at different Ts for five 8-QL (Bi0.9MnxCr0.1- x)2Te3 samples, as shown in Figure 2(a). With the decrease of T, ρyx exhibits a hysteresis loop as magnetic field is swept back and forth, indicating the formation of FM order. The blue and red arrows denote the opposite chirality of the Hall traces. In the purely Cr-doped Bi2Te3 sample (x = 0), ρyx0 reaches ~1.5 kΩ at T = 1.6 K. With the increase of x, ρyx0 progressively decreases as more Cr dopants are substituted by Mn. At x = 0.08, ρyx0 is suppressed to a vanishingly small value. As x is further increased to 0.10, the sample becomes purely Mn-doped, in which ρyx0 turns to negative and the chirality of the hysteresis loop becomes clockwise. In the next, we study ρyx in another set of samples but with d = 6 QL, where the contribution from bulk state is reduced. The overall behaviors are similar to that of the 8-QL samples, but there is an obvious difference in the x value when the ρyx0 sign change occurs. As indicated by 5 the data set enclosed by the red frames, it is reduced from x = 0.08 in the 8-QL samples to x = 0.07 in the 6-QL samples. To better visualize the thickness dependent chirality change, we plot the difference between ρyx+ and ρyx- (defined as △ρyx = ρyx+ – ρyx-) as a function of magnetic field for different x and d, as shown in Figures 2(c) and 2(d). The peak and valley in △ρyx near zero field directly reflects the chirality of AHE. Clearly, in the thinner samples with d = 6 QL, less Mn is required to tune the chirality from counterclockwise to clockwise. The effect of film thickness on the AHE is also reflected by the value of ρyx0. In the purely Cr-doped sample, with the reduction of d, |ρyx0| decreases from ~0.85 kΩ to ~0.35 kΩ at T = 1.6 K. In contrast, |ρyx0| increases from ~0.15 kΩ to ~0.25 kΩ in the purely Mn-doped sample. The above results suggest that the Mn-type clockwise AHE is strengthened in thinner samples, whereas the Cr-type AHE with counterclockwise chirality is preferred in thicker ones. Because tuning the doping contents can only tune the AHE in a discrete way, to gain more detailed knowledge about the chirality change, we explore the magnetic field dependent ρyx at varied Vgs in these samples. Figures 3(a) and 3(b) display the main results for the two critically doped samples (x = 0.08 for 8-QL and x = 0.07 for 6-QL) that are close to the boundary of the chirality change. Interestingly, the chirality in the two samples exhibit quite different evolutions with the variation of Vg. For the 8-QL sample, the chirality remains counterclockwise for the entire Vg range, suggesting the Cr-related AHE dominates the transport. In contrast, for the 6- QL sample, increasing Vg dramatically changes the shape of ρyx loop and even cause a change of chirality. At Vg = -100 V, the hysteresis is clockwise, and the sign of ρyx0 is negative. As Vg increases to -25 V, the two ρyx curves from opposite field sweeps touch together at zero field, forming a hysteresis with ill-defined chirality. As Vg is further increased to 100 V, the two ρyx curves form a hysteresis loop again but now with counterclockwise chirality and positive ρyx0. In the insets of Figure 3(b), we plot the zoomed-in data in the field range of 0.3 T, which clearly shows the change of chirality with Vg. To visualize the Vg dependent ambi-chiral AHE more clearly, we display the magnetic field dependent △ρyx for varied Vg, as shown in Figures 4(a) and 4(b). In the 8-QL sample, a positive peak near zero field is universally present throughout the Vg range, in accord with the positive sign of ρyx0 (ρyx+ > 0 at zero field). However, in the 6-QL sample, the crossing of ρyx+ and ρyx- 6 curves give rise to a more complex evolution in △ρyx, as displayed in Figure 4(b). With the decrease of Vg, the peak value at zero field shifts downward, accompanied by the sign change from positive to negative. Eventually, △ρyx becomes an overall negative curve characterized by two negative dips near zero field. The above Vg dependent chirality change is highly reminiscent of the doping dependent chirality change as shown in Figures 2(c) and 2(d). To further illustrate the distinct dimensionality dependence of Mn- and Cr-type AHE, in for samples with different x values. In each figure, d is fixed and x increases from panel (i) to (iii). The dotted data represent the position where ρyx+ and ρyx- crosses, and the red and blue colors represent the area with △ρyx > 0 and △ρyx < 0. In the purely Mn-doped Bi2Te3, ρyx+ is always smaller than ρyx- in the hysteretic regime, thus △ρyx is negative near zero field. Whereas in the purely Cr-doped sample, △ρyx has a positive value. Therefore, we can use the sign of △ρyx to characterize the Mn- and Cr-type AHE. Clearly, at d = 8 QL, the Mn-type AHE is not favored until x is increased to 0.08 and when negative Vg is applied. However, in the 6-QL samples, a smaller Mn doping level (x = 0.05) is sufficient to induce similar trend in △ρyx, as also shown by the growing area with △ρyx > 0 (red). Again, it suggests that the Mn-type AHE is strengthened in thinner samples, opposite to that of the Cr-type AHE. Discussions and conclusions Previous theories have proposed that the topologically protected surface states in TIs could be more susceptible to magnetic order than the insulating bulk states, thus is anticipated to give rise to distinct magnetic ordering phenomenon in Mn-doped Bi2Se3 TIs . In fact, there has been several transport and spectroscopy experiments suggesting that the FM order in Mn-doped TIs is mediated by the surface states , while it is the bulk that mainly contributes to FM order in Cr-doped system . The opposite dimensionality dependence of the Mn- and Cr-related AHE observed here suggests a scenario of dopant-selective surface and bulk magnetic order in Mn- and Cr-doped Bi2Te3, consistent with previous reports. In Figures 5(a) and 5(b), we summarize the T dependent ρyx0 for all ten samples, and the two insets show the zoomed-in data for the two critical samples. Clearly, not only the value of |ρyx0| but also the onset temperature (TAH) responses oppositely to thickness in Mn- and Cr-doped Bi2Te3. As d is 7 reduced from 8 QL to 6 QL, TAH of the Mn-Bi2Te3 sample remains almost unchanged (red arrows). However, TAH of the Cr-Bi2Te3 sample decreases from 26 K to 14 K (black arrows). Such effect is more clearly visualized in the color plot of ρyx0 in Figures 5(c) and 5(d). These results demonstrate that reducing d from 8 QL to 6 QL have more dramatic effect on the Cr- type AHE than the Mn-type one. According to previous measurements , the penetration depth of the topological surface state is about 2 QL, thus reducing d from 8 QL to 6 QL mainly suppresses the bulk volume while keeps the surface states less-affected. These results strongly indicate the dimensionality dependent chirality change in our samples is related to the different surface and bulk FM order in Mn- and Cr-doped TIs . Finally, we discuss about the possible factors that lead to the opposite chirality in Mn- and Cr-doped TIs. Theoretically, theAHE in magnetic TIs is induced through the exchange coupling JMzSz between local moments Mz and electron spins Sz, where J denotes the coupling constant . For fixed direction of Mz, opposite J could endow Dirac fermions with opposite mass, thus leading to opposite sign and chirality of the AHE. However, the microscopic mechanism of the sign of J still remains unclear. Here, we propose a phenomenological picture to address the chirality issue in terms of the d-orbit configurations of Mn and Cr dopants. According to previous studies, the spin states of Mn and Cr dopants in TIs are S = 5/2 and 3/2 respectively . Therefore, in Mn-based TIs, each of the five 3d-orbits of Mn2+ is singly occupied. When the itinerant electron spins couple with Mn2+, only electron with opposite spin is allowed to virtually hop to the unoccupied orbits. However, in Cr-based TIs, each Cr3+ has three singly occupied and two empty orbits. In this case, it is energetically more favorable for electrons with the same spin to hop to the empty orbits. Consequently, the exchange coupling and the resulting Dirac fermion mass in the two systems are expected to have opposite sign, which in turn leads to opposite chirality in their AHE. The above physical pictures are schematically illustrated in In summary, we perform systematic studies of the AHE in Mn- and Cr-codoped Bi2Te3 TI thin films. By varying the Cr/Mn doping levels and film thickness, we can actively control the chirality of the AHE. These results can be interpreted by the different mechanisms for FM order and AHE chirality in Mn- and Cr-doped TIs. Our experiments shed new light on manipulating 8 the interplay between FM order and band topology in magnetic TIs. denote the Hall resistivity acquired as magnetic field swept back from positive and negative polarization. The vertical violet arrows represent the magnetization at according magnetic field. (b) Schematic illustrations of crystal structure and cross-section of a (Bi0.9MnxCr0.1-x)2Te3 device. The red and black arrows denote the Cr and Mn magnetic moments. different thickness at varied temperatures. The blue and red color represent the different chirality of Hall traces. (c)-(d) Magnetic field dependent △ρyx for samples with different d and x. with x = 0.07 (b) for varied Vgs. The blue and red color represent the data obtained from different field sweep direction, as labeled by ρyx+ and ρyx- respectively. The insets present the zoomed-in data at low magnetic field range of 0.3 T. All the data are acquired at T = 1.6 K. sample with x = 0.07 (b). (c) Color plots of △ρyx as a function of magnetic field and Vg for three the areas for Cr- and Mn-type AHE. (d) Color plots of △ρyx for three 6-QL samples with x = 0.05 (i), x = 0.07 (ii), and x = 0.8 (iii). The dotted data represent the position where Hall traces of opposite field sweep cross. level. The insets display the zoomed-in data for the two critical samples with x = 0.08 for the 8-QL sample and x = 0.07 for the 6-QL sample. (c)-(d) Color plots of ρyx0 as functions of doping level and temperature. The red and blue colors represent the regimes for ρyx0 > 0 and ρyx0 < 0, 9 respectively. The magenta dots denote the onset temperatures of AHE in purely Mn- and Cr- doped Bi2Te3 samples. (e)-(f) Schematic pictures of the Dirac gap opening process in Mn- and Cr-based TI systems. The blue and red arrows represent the spin states for localized d-electrons and itinerant electron respectively.