Electrical detection of the spin-flop and room-temperature magnetic ordering in van der Waals CrPS4/(Pt, Pd) heterostructures Rui Wu1,2,3, Andrew Ross1,4, Shilei Ding1,5, Yuxuan Peng5, Fangge He1, Yi Ren3, Romain Lebrun1,4, Yong Wu1,6, Zhen Wang1,7, Jinbo Yang5, Arne Brataas2,*, Mathias Kläui1,2,* 1. Institute of Physics, Johannes Gutenberg-University Mainz, Staudingerweg 7, Mainz 55128, Germany 2. Center for Quantum Spintronics, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim 7491, Norway 3. Beijing Academy of Quantum Information Sciences, Beijing, 100193, P. R. China 4. Unité Mixte de Physique, CNRS, Thales, Université Paris-Saclay, Palaiseau, 91767, France. 5. State Key Laboratory for Mesoscopic Physics, School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China 6. School of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, China 7. Department of Applied Physics, Chang’an University, Xi’an 710064, China *Corresponding authors: arne.brataas@ntnu.no; klaeui@uni-mainz.de We study magneto-transport in heterostructures composed of the van der Waals antiferromagnet CrPS4 and the heavy metals Pt and Pd. The transverse resistance (Rxy) signal reveals the spin-flop transition of CrPS4 and a strongly enhanced magnetic ordering temperature (>300 K), which might originate from a strong spin-orbit coupling at the interface. While CrPS4/Pt devices allow for easy detection of the spin-flop transition, CrPS4/Pd devices show a more substantial enhancement in magnetic ordering temperature and exhibit a topological Hall effect signal, possibly related to chiral spin structures at the interface. The longitudinal magnetoresistance (Rxx) results from a combination of spin-Hall magnetoresistance and the negative magnetoresistance that can be explained by a field-induced change of the electronic band structure of CrPS4. The coupling between spin and orbital degrees of freedom in materials, especially in heavy metals such as Pt, Pd and W, and in topological insulators, has led to new directions in spintronics, such as spin-orbitronics1-4. In metals with significant spin- orbit coupling, the spin Hall effect (SHE)5 generates a spin current from a charge current that in turn interacts with adjacent magnetic materials6. Spin-orbit coupling has opened a new route to detect and manipulate the magnetic properties of magnetic materials. For example, the spin-Hall magnetoresistance (SMR)6, originating from the interaction of the spin currents generated by the heavy metals and the magnetic layer that can be described as a nonequilibrium proximity effect, is a useful tool to probe the magnetic moments of the magnetic materials. The SMR is especially important in magnetic insulators, where a direct measurement with electric currents flowing in the magnetic layer is not possible. Van der Waals (vdW) magnets show extraordinary prospects for spintronic devices with reduced dimensionality, high flexibility, and tunability7-13. The CrX3 (X = I, Cl, Br) series is an example of typical vdW magnets. The bulk materials have A-type antiferromagnetic ordering so that the magnetic moments within each layer are parallel as in ferromagnets, while the inter-layer coupling is antiferromagnetic14. Significantly, the properties are maintained even at the monolayer scale despite the Mermin-Wagner theorem15 because of the sizeable magnetic anisotropy. Furthermore, the antiferromagnetic coupling between layers causes the magnetic properties to differ for odd and even numbers of stacking layers14, 16. An applied electric field can control the magnetism of a double-layer vdW magnet by controlling the relative electron occupancy of the two sublattices and the inter-layer exchange coupling17. Additionally, mechanical pressure can control the inter-layer coupling to switch the configuration from antiferromagnetic to ferromagnetic16. At present, spintronic devices based on this series of vdW magnets are of considerable interest, and there have been observations of a large tunneling magnetoresistance in the MTJs18, 19. However, the CrX3 class of materials is unstable in both air and light, limiting their easy application in practical devices. A more robust alternative is the thiophosphate (CrPS4) that also belongs to the A-type antiferromagnet family and has a layered structure with vdW interlayer interactions, where spins within each monolayer are aligned ferromagnetically out-of-plane, as schematically shown in Figure 1(a)20, 21. Both density functional theory (DFT) calculations 22 and experimental results23 have indicated that single-layer CrPS4 is a 2- dimensional ferromagnet. Compared with some members of the CrX3 series, CrPS4 is air-stable and has a sizeable Néel temperature (TN=36 K)24. A TC = 25 K is observed in single-layer CrPS4, which is smaller than the bulk TN 23. In addition, CrPS4 exhibits a spin-flop (SF) transition, where the Néel vector n is rotated by the external magnetic field H from n//H to n⊥H configurations. The SF can minimize the effective anisotropic energy that the spin experiences and allows for tuning of the effective anisotropy, for instance crucial for realizing devices based on the long-distance spin transport in antiferromagnetic materials in the superfluid or diffusion regimes25-29. Moreover, the SF field is Hsf = 0.9 T at 5 K for bulk CrPS424, which is relatively accessible compared to other antiferromagnetic systems with a Hsf of several Tesla or tens of Tesla24, 30, 31. For application, electrical detection of the antiferromagnetic order is key. However, the electrical readout of CrPS4 has not been reported to date, calling for the identification of magnetoresistance effects that lend themselves to electrical detection of the magnetic order. In this paper, we report measurements of magneto-transport in CrPS4/heavy metal (Pt, Pd) heterostructures. The Hall effect measurement reveals the SF transition, indicating a spin transparent vdW/heavy metal interface. Moreover, we measure a persistence of the AHE in the heterostructures at temperatures above the TN of the bulk CrPS4, and up to 300 K. Especially, we report a topological Hall effect (THE) in the high-temperature range up to 240 K in the device with Pd but not in the device with Pt, that can be explained by a smaller Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya interaction (DMI) at the vdW/heavy metal interface in the Pt based devices possibly related to the different Pt and Pd work functions. Furthermore, for a Pd based heterostructure, the field dependence of the longitudinal resistance shows a strong ferromagnetic-like signal at temperatures up to 300 Kas well as a strong negative magnetoresistance at temperatures below TN, possibly related to the electronic band structure change in CrPS4 induced by the external magnetic field.The angular dependence of longitudinal resistance confirms the ferromagnetic ordering above the bulk TN of CrPS4 and shows a signature of the SF at temperatures below TN. We ascribe the enhancement of the ordering temperature to the strong spin-orbit interaction supplied by the heavy metal layer, which makes the top layer of CrPS4 in contact with heavy metals stay ferromagnetic at elevated temperatures. The CrPS4 flakes are mechanically exfoliated from CrPS4 single crystals with adhesive tape and transferred to an α-Al2O3(0001) substrate. Raman spectroscopy shown in image of a typical flake is shown in Figure 1(b). The profile across the flake edge indicates that its thickness is about 40 nm. To maintain a clean interface, we complete the entire process in a glove box directly connected to a Molecular-beam epitaxy (MBE) deposition system. Next, we transfer the substrates with CrPS4 flakes to the MBE without exposure to air. During the metal deposition process, the substrate is cooled to about 90 K by liquid nitrogen to reduce any damage to the CrPS4 surface during the deposition process. The deposition rate is 1 nm/min. A reference CrPS4/Pd sample with Pd deposited using magnetron sputtering at room temperature also without exposure to air does not significantly alter the transport properties. Thus, we prepared the CrPS4/Pt sample by magnetron sputtering, exfoliating the flakes in a load-lock chamber connected to the main sputtering chamber in a vacuum of about 5×10-6 mbar. The thickness of the heavy metal layers is about 10 nm. Finally, we obtained Hall devices illustrated in Figure 1(c) by photolithography and ion beam etching. To obtain better conductivity at the edge of the sheet, we deposited 60 nm thick Au contacts to cover the flake’s edge, as shown in Figure 1(d). microscopy image of a CrPS4 flake with a thickness of about 40 nm. The inset shows the profile across the flake edge. (c) Schematic of the CrPS4/(Pt, Pd) device. (d) Optical microscope image of a CrPS4/Pd device. We first studied the transport in the Hall geometry of the CrPS4/(Pt, Pd) devices. With the magnetic field applied in the out-of-plane direction (z-axis) and a constant current Ixx=1 mA applied along the longitudinal channel, the Vxy was measured while varying the magnetic field and external temperature and shown in Figure 1(d). Considering that the width of the current channel in the Hall bar is about 9 μm, the current density J is about 1.1×106 A/cm2. The transverse resistance is defined as Rxy = Vxy/Ixx. We have subtracted a linear background for the Rxy signal due to the normal Hall effect of Pt and Pd, as shown in Figure S2. inset shows the zoomed-in curves obtained at 5 K and 25 K. (b) The even component (Rxy even) odd component (Rxy odd) of Rxy of the CrPS4/Pt device are presented. (d) The Rxy of CrPS4/Pd device measured at different temperatures, and the inset shows the zoomed-in curves obtained at 15 K, 30 K, and 45 K. (e) The SF fields obtained from CrPS4/Pt (red triangle) and CrPS4/Pd (blue diamond) devices in comparison with values from the bulk CrPS4 (black sphere, data adapted from Ref. ). (f) The comparison of the saturation of the Rxy odd versus temperature plots for the CrPS4/Pd (black square) and CrPS4/Pt (red circle) devices. As shown in Figure 2(a), there are two central features in the Rxy curves of the CrPS4/Pt device. Firstly, at temperatures T < TN, the Rxy curves show significant jumps at a field Hsf, and they are asymmetric as a function of magnetic field, see the inset of Figure 2(a). This feature has, to the best of our knowledge, not been seen in other magnetic systems and we next check if it is related to the SF of the CrPS4. In order to separate the possible SF signal from the aforementioned AHE, which should be symmetric, we separate Rxy into an even component and an odd component, i.e. Rxy(H) = Rxy even(H) + Rxy odd(H), where Rxy odd(H) = Rxy(H)−Rxy(−H) 2 , Rxy even(H) = Rxy(H)+Rxy(−H) 2 . even(H) and Rxy odd(H) at different temperatures. It is found that the jumps in the Rxy curves are only observed in Rxy even signal at temperature below TN . The slow increase of Rxy even at higher fields is likely caused by a small contribution from the longitudinal resistance Rxx due to the small (inevitable) offset of the Vxy contacts32. Finally, we now plot the positions of the jumps as a function of the temperature in Figure 2(e). The position of the jumps agrees extremely well with the SF field Hsf in the bulk CrPS4 obtained from torque measurements21, as compared in other (see the results for T=35 K in Figure 2(b)). Thus, this shows that we can detect the spin-flop electrically in this system as a key step for electrical read-out. Secondly, as shown in Figure 2(a), the amplitude of Rxy shows a non-monotonic temperature dependance. This feature is majorly reflected in the Rxy odd signal as shown in Figure 2(c). The saturation Rxy odd monotonically increases with increasing temperature when T < 70 K and then decreases when T > 70 K, as shown in Figure 2(f). It is found that a non-zero Rxy odd can be found even at room temperature, far above the bulk TN . This behavior contrasts with the usual situation where Rxy due to the anomalous Hall effect (AHE) in ferromagnetic thin films decreases with the increase of the temperature and disappears at the Curie temperature (TC)33. It is noted that no AHE observed in the Hall bar of pure heavy metals (Pt or Pd) in our experiment, the observed FM-like signal of the CrPS4/Pt at above TN is ascribed to the enhanced ordering temperature of the interface CrPS4 layer in contact with Pt and with an enhanced spin- orbit coupling34. The enhancement of magnetic ordering temperature has been observed in several vdW/heavy metal heterostructures, including the Cr2Ge2Te6/W and Cr2Ge2Te6/Ta systems, due to the proximity effect from the heavy metals35. As we know, the bulk CrPS4 has a layered structure and a weak interlayer exchange coupling. When T > TN , the bulk CrPS4 becomes paramagnetic while the interface CrPS4 can stay ferromagnetic because the extended 5d orbitals of heavy metals with strong SOC can participate in the reconstructed orbital hybridization in the adjacent CrPS4 layer and promote the intralayer exchange interaction35. The different temperature dependence below and above 70 K is from the competition of thermally enhanced charge transfer between Pt and CrPS4, which enhances the magnetic ordering, and the ferromagnetic to paramagnetic transition induced by increasing the temperature. As shown in the Figure 2(d), the main features of the Rxy signal are also observed in the CrPS4/Pd sample. Firstly, when T < TN , the asymmetry and jumps in the Rxy curves is also present in CrPS4/Pd device, as shown in the inset of Figure 2(d) and even and Rxy odd are calculated and given in Figure S3(b) and S3(c), respectively. As shown in Figure S3(b), the jumps in the Rxy are clearly visible in the Rxy even(H) signal in a narrow temperature range of 15 K-30 K. The position of the jumps again agrees extremely well with the Hsf obtained from the torque measurement of the bulk CrPS421, as compared in Figure 2(e), confirming that the mechanism for the jumps in the Rxy curves is the SF transition in the CrPS4 flake thus showing that again we can realize electrical read-out. Secondly, the Rxy signal of the CrPS4/Pd sample shows a steady increase with increasing temperature, even above the TN of bulk CrPS4. The difference between these two samples is that the amplitude of Rxy of the CrPS4/Pd sample does not reach its maximum even when the temperature is above room temperature as shown in Figure 2(f), while it reaches the maximum at 70 K in the CrPS4/Pt sample. When the temperature is lower than TN of bulk CrPS4, the two curves almost completely overlap. But when the temperature is higher than TN , they start to diverge, and show a completely different temperature-dependent trend above 70 K. The difference between those two heterostructures can be possibly ascribed to the different electronic properties of the two heavy metals, e.g., the larger work function of Pt (ΦPt,vac = 5.65 eV ) compared to Pd (ΦPd,vac = 5.12 eV )36 can make the charge transfer process at the CrPS4/Pd interface much easier than that at the CrPS4/Pt interface and give a more prominent TC enhancement in CrPS4. Thirdly, as shown in Figure S3(a) and the inset in Figure 2(d), we observe a non- monotonic field dependence in some Rxy curves of the CrPS4/Pd device, i.e., when the magnetic field is larger than a particular value, the Hall coefficient Rxy drops anomalously and presents a peak in the curve. This behavior becomes visible at 25 K and stronger between 60 K and 120 K before vanishing at 180 K (see the inset in Figure S3(c)). It is reminiscent of signals resulting from a topological Hall effect (THE) 37-39 and usually associated with topological chiral magnetic structures, such as skyrmions and chiral domain walls40, 41. These are stabilized by interfaces with DMI, which can be introduced in the ultrathin ferromagnetic layer adjacent to a heavy metal layer due to strong spin-orbit coupling and broken inversion symmetry41. The thermal fluctuations have been demonstrated to play a key role in the formation of topological spin textures in Cr2O3/Pt heterostructure, where a THE was observed at 345 K, higher than the TN of Cr2O3 (~307 K)42. The THE in the CrPS4/Pd device at above TN could result from the same mechanisms. However, the THE is not observed in the CrPS4/Pt device, as shown in Figure 2(a) and 2(b). This absence might arise from different DMI strength at the interfaces in two systems since the DMI is also correlated with the work functions of the heavy metals43. Although the SF transition in the Rxy signal has been reported in the CoO(001)/Pt system44, some other systems also show SF transition in the Rxx signal, such as CrI3/Pt 45 and α-Fe2O3/Pt46 systems. Different spin dynamics could yield different behaviors in SMR during the SF transition, considering that the transverse SMR signal is proportional to the in-plane Néel vector components nx·ny, while the longitudinal signal is proportional to ny·ny6, 47, according to the geometry shown in Figure 2(c). We next study the field and angular dependance of longitudinal transport properties of the CrPS4/Pd sample to compare this with the transverse signals. For the field dependence, the longitudinal magnetoresistance is defined as MRxx = [Rxx(H)−Rxx(H=0)] Rxx(H=0) , where the longitudinal resistances Rxx = Vxx Ixx, and the current Ixx has the same value as in the Hall measurement. Since Pd exhibits a significant Hanle- induced MRxx 48, we obtain a signature of CrPS4 in Figure 3 by subtracting the signal of a control Pd device from the signal of the CrPS4/Pd device, i.e., δMRxx = MRxx(CrPS4/Pd) − MRxx(Pd) (details in Figure S4). function of magnetic field applied along z axis. (b) The corresponding saturation δMRxx (at 10 T) versus temperature. (c-d) The DFT-calculated DOS of the CrPS4 with antiferromagnetic and ferromagnetic spin structures, respectively. temperatures with the magnetic field applied along the z-axis. The δMRxx is negative when the temperature is lower than TN, while it is positive at temperatures above TN and remains observable even at 300 K. Figure 3(b) plots the nominal saturation δMRxx value at the maximum magnetic field (10 T) as a function of temperature, demonstrating a sharp change at low temperature and saturation above 60 K. The sign change is around the Néel temperature TN of CrPS4. We find a magnetic response at temperature much higher than the TN, which may result from an enhanced magnetic order temperature. The anomalous negative magnetoresistance was found in the measurements with a magnetic field applied along the x and y axes, and all found only below TN of CrPS4 (details in Figure S5). Thus, this must be related to the electronic structure change in the CrPS4 correlated with a magnetic structure transition from AFM to FM (i.e. the spin- flip process) induced by the magnetic field. This conjecture is supported by DFT calculations (details in the supplementary information), which indicate that the AFM state has a larger bandgap (1.047 eV) than the FM state (0.977 eV), as shown in Figure 3(c) and 3(d), respectively. Furthermore, the Rxy signal obtained in the H//x and H//y configurations shows some features related to the spin-flip and magnetic ordering transitions of the bulk CrPS4, respectively (details in Figure S6(a) and S6(b)). This again demonstrates the transparency of the vdW/heavy metal interface in those samples. It is found that δMRxx does not show any SF-related signal in the CrPS4/Pd device, which is different from the previously reported CrI3/Pt device45, where Rxx shows a signal from current induced SF. We conjecture two reasons for this. The first reason is that although CrPS4 has a quite similar magnetic structure to CrI3, the spin dynamics in these two systems are quite different, because here the bulk CrPS4 properties are detected while a surface SF is detected in CrI3 as there is not an intrinsic bulk SF transition in CrI3. Thus, our result represents the first direct electrical readout of the intrinsic SF of a vdW antiferromagnet using transport measurement. Another possible reason is that the SF signal is overwhelmed by the bulk CrPS4 resistance change induced by the magnetic field, and thus cannot be detected, while in the Rxy signal, the interference from the bulk CrPS4 signal will be much smaller. show the β angle dependence at 30 K and 60 K, respectively. (c) and (d) show the γ angle dependence at 30 K and 60 K, respectively. The scatter indicates the experimental results, and the solid curves indicate the best-fitting of the experimental results. Finally, we probe the angular variation of the signals by rotating the magnetic field to understand the possible AFM and the FM-like signals and the SMR and the AMR origin better. The angular dependence of the resistance of the CrPS4/Pd device are measured at two different temperatures, 30 K (below TN ) and 60 K (above TN ). In the SMR scenario, the MR depends on the angle between the nonequilibrium spin accumulation σ in the heavy metal layer and the magnetization M of the magnetic layer. In contrast, the AMR depends on the angle between the current J and the magnetization M. between the field and the y axis when the field is rotated in the yz plane, which is zero when the field is parallel to y. Since M is always perpendicular to J in this rotation plane, the magnetoresistance, if detected, should result from SMR only. It is found that the δRxx(β) shows maxima at 90° and 270° when the field is about 0.5 T. However, it shows minima at the same angles at higher fields. While the latter behavior can be well explained with the SMR scenario, i.e. the Rxx is minimum when M//σ, the anomalous behavior at 0.5 T can be ascribed to the SF. This behavior disappears at a higher temperature (T=60 K), as shown in Figure 4(b), where a larger SMR effect is observed, indicating possibly a higher interfacial ferromagnetic magnetization, coming from the top CrPS4 layer in contact with the heavy metal. This is in good agreement with the larger Rxy that we observe at a higher temperature. respectively. Here, γ is defined as the angle between the field and x axis when field rotates in the x-z plane, which is zero when the field is along the z axis. Since M is always perpendicular to σ in this rotation plane, the magnetoresistance should be a result of only AMR. It is found that no obvious AMR was visible at 60 K, however, a weak AMR signal was observed at 0.5 T and 30 K. This can be ascribed to the AMR effect of the CrPS4 due to the electronic band structure modification by the magnetic field, which is more pronounced at temperatures below TN. In conclusion, we have determined the magnetic transport properties of the CrPS4/(Pd, Pt) heterostructures. The SF can be unambiguously detected in both systems, indicating the spin-transparent interfaces are formed in those vdW/heavy metal heterostructures. Furthermore, a major enhancement of the magnetic ordering temperature up to room temperature is observed in the Hall effect due to the large spin-orbit coupling at the interface, which suggests potentially a route to achieve room temperature 2D magnetic ordering using a proximity effect. A negative magnetoresistance observed below TN is explained by the magnetic field modified electronic band structure of the CrPS4. The total magnetoresistance is a superposition of the SMR and the magnetoresistance from CrPS4. Our results realize the electrical detection of two-dimensional magnetism and provide a new route to realize two-dimensional magnetism above room temperature, highlighting the potential of vdW magnets for spintronic device applications. Acknowledgements We acknowledge funding from Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) – Spin+X TRR 173 – 268565370 (Projects No. A01 and No. B02), DFG Project No. 358671374, Graduate School of Excellence Materials Science in Mainz (MAINZ) DFG 266, the MaHoJeRo (DAAD Spintronics network, Projects No.57334897 and No. 57524834), the Research Council of Norway (QuSpin Center 262633), National Key Research and Development Program of China (Grants No. 2016YFB0700901, No. 2017YFA0206303, and No. 2017YFA0403701), and National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grants No. 51731001, No. 11675006,