arXiv:2112.03956v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 7 Dec 2021 Crossover from nematic to magnetic low-temperature ground state in Fe(Se,Te) compounds Y.A. Ovchenkov,1, ∗ D.A. Chareev,2, 3, 4 D.E. Presnov,5 O.S. Volkova,1, 3, 4 and A.N. Vasiliev1, 4, 6 1Faculty of Physics, M.V. Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow 119991, Russia 2Institute of Experimental Mineralogy, RAS, Chernogolovka, 123456, Russia 3Ural Federal University, Ekaterinburg, 620002, Russia 4National University of Science and Technology ‘MISiS’ 119049 Moscow, Russia 5Skobeltsyn Institute of Nuclear Physics, Moscow 119991, Russia 6National Research South Ural State University, 454080 Chelyabinsk, Russia A comparative analysis of the properties of FeSe1−xTex crystals in the range of x values of about 0.4 and pure FeSe crystals is presented. We found that the anomaly in R (T) at the structural transition for the former differs significantly from the corresponding anomaly for the latter. This indicates a change in the type of the ground state in the studied compounds. Within the framework of the crystal field model, this can be explained as a consequence of a change in the distortion of the tetrahedral environment of iron, which leads to a change in the positions of the energy levels within t2g multiplet. Depending on the mutual position of the degenerate xz and yz levels and the xy level, the type of transition can change from orbital ordering to magnetic ordering. I. INTRODUCTION The electronic and magnetic instability of the tetrago- nal plane of iron atoms surrounded by pnictides or chalco- genides is an important factor1,2 in the onset of super- conductivity in iron-based compounds (IBS). The phase diagram of the 11 series of IBS is very rich3–8. Fig.1 shows the main details of this phase diagram at ambient pressure. The binary compositions in this series, FeSe and FeTe have phase transitions of different types. For FeTe, the structural transition around 70 K is accompanied by an- tiferromagnetic ordering and at low temperatures FeTe remains non-superconducting. In the case of FeSe no magnetic ordering occurs below the structural transition at around 90 K and at low temperatures FeSe is super- conducting. It should be noted that the nature of the structural transition in these materials is still under de- bate. Any substitutions at chalcogen positions in FeSe and FeTe suppress structural transitions. For FeTe, the suppression of the magnetic transition is accompanied by the onset of superconductivity, which is very sim- ilar to the scenario for the onset of superconductivity in cuprate superconductors and suggests related mecha- nisms of high-temperature superconductivity. For FeSe1−xSx materials, with increasing x the value of TC first increases slightly, and then rapidly decreases. The structural transition in this series is completely sup- pressed for compositions with x about 0.29,10. In this series, only crystals with x lower than 0.25 have been grown11. For FeSe1−xTex materials, there is a local min- imum of TC for compositions with a low tellurium con- tent and a global maximum of TC at x ≈ 0.5. In the high-quality crystals of FeSe0.5Te0.5 there are no struc- tural or magnetic transitions, although with an excess of iron, magnetism in FeSe1−xTex can be retained12. An excess of iron in Fe1+δSe1−xTex crystals signifi- cantly changes their properties13. Recent progress in ob- Substitution-temperature phase diagram of FeSe1−xTex and FeSe1−xSx. taining high-quality crystals of compositions with a low tellurium content made it possible to obtain data on the properties of compositions with a low tellurium content. Here we present the results of studies of the transport properties of two compositions FeSe1−xTex with a tel- lurium content of about 30-40%. For these compositions, the change in the electronic properties during the struc- tural transition is intrinsically different from that of pure FeSe. It may indicate that the low-temperature ground state has changed from the orbital order to the magnetic order. II. EXPERIMENT The FeSe and FeSe1−xTex crystals were grown us- ing recrystallization in AlCl3/NaCl/KCl flux technique with a constant temperature gradient along the quartz ampoule14. A driving force of the recrystallization pro- cess is the temperature gradient. For FeSe the tempera- ture of the hot end of the ampoule was 430 ◦C and the 2 temperature of the cold end was 360 ◦C. The synthesis was carried out for about 55 days. FeSe1−xTex crys- tals were grown in 70 days at 585 ◦C and 495 ◦C. The chemical composition of the crystals was determined us- ing a Tescan Vega II XMU scanning electron microscope equipped with an INCA Energy 450 energy-dispersive spectrometer; the accelerating voltage was 20 kV. For the batch designated further as FeSe0.7Te0.3, the ex- perimentally determined chemical composition values of Fe1+δSe1−xTex are δ ≈-0.02 and 0.3 > x > 0.23. For the batch designated further as FeSe0.6Te0.4 the experimen- tal values are δ ≈-0.02 and 0.42 > x > 0.33. Electrical measurements were done on cleaved samples with Au/Ti or Pt contacts made by sputtering. III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION The temperature dependencies of the resistivity ρxx of compositions with 30-40% tellurium and pure FeSe dif- fer significantly (see Fig.2a)). At temperatures above the structural transition, the resistivity of compositions with tellurium depends rather weakly on temperature, which corresponds to the bad-metal state. At the same time, the temperature dependence of the derivative of resistiv- ity dρxx/dT (Fig.2b)) have no qualitative difference be- tween the FeSe and compositions with tellurium. These dependencies in both cases are linear functions with a moderate negative slope. A negative slope may be due to the presence of an activation contribution to the re- sistance, which for FeSe was previously demonstrated at high temperatures15. and 0.4. (a) Temperature dependence of the resistivity ρxx. (b) Temperature dependence of the derivative of the resistiv- ity dρxx/dT . The inset shows the linear fit for dρxx/dT (T) below the structural transition temperature. (c) Tempera- ture dependence of the resistive upper critical field for H//c. (d) Temperature dependence of the Hall constant RH. On the contrary, at low temperatures, the shape of the dρxx/dT (T) curves for the compositions with tellurium and FeSe is qualitatively different. In our opinion, this can indicate a change in the ground state at low temper- atures. Fig.2c) shows the temperature dependence of the re- sistive upper critical field for H//c. For pure FeSe and the studied compositions with tellurium, the critical tem- peratures and upper critical fields have similar values. It may be because the temperature of the superconducting transition reaches the local minimum for FeSe1−xTex at intermediate tellurium concentrations8,16. The temperature dependence of the Hall constant RH is shown in Fig.2d). For FeSe1−xTex, there is only one inversion point on RH(T). At temperatures of structural transitions, curves RH(T) have kinks. Fig.3 shows the field dependence of the Hall component of the resistivity ρxy and the transverse magnetoresistance MR=(ρxx(B)- ρxx(0))/ρxx(0) versus B2. The magnetoresistance of compositions with tellurium decreases significantly in comparison with the magnetoresistance of FeSe. This in- dicates a significant decrease in mobility in compositions with tellurium. Against the background of low values of magnetoresistance, a particular case of negative magne- toresistance of the composition x = 0.3 may be due to the presence of magnetic impurities. Knowing the slope of the MR(B2) curve and the conductivity, the carrier mobility for FeSe0.6Te0.4 can be estimated17 at about 60 cm2/V s, and the carrier concentration - at about 4×1020 cm−3. As mentioned above, the behavior of resistance near the structural transition and below for FeSe1−xTex x ≥ 0.3 is significantly different from that of FeSe. First, the form of the singularity at the structural transition changes. For FeSe, when the temperature decreases, the value of the derivative dρxx/dT drops sharply and is then restored approximately to the original value. This roughly corresponds to the formation of a small step on the temperature dependence of the resistivity ρxx(T). Similar shape have anomalies on curves ρxx(T) for FeSe1−xSx9 and FeSe1−xTex with a low tellurium content16. At a concentration of tellurium of about 30%, the form of the singularity changes7 and a sharp kink appears instead of a step. On the derivative chart, it looks like a sharp rise in the derivative dρxx/dT at the transition (see Fig.2b) ). Formally, one could argue that for substituted compo- sitions the singularity at the transition is similar to the left half of the singularity for FeSe - the transition from the flat region of ρxx(T) to the low-temperature part. Therefore a change in the shape of the singularity could be caused by a change in the slope of ρxx(T) in the high- temperature part due to the transition to the bad-metal state. This description of the evolution of the shape of singularity during a structural transition may be correct. Nevertheless, a noticeable change in the behavior of the resistance in the region between the superconducting and structural transitions also deserves attention. The inset in Fig.2b) shows the temperature depen- dence of the derivative of the resistivity dρxx/dT in the temperature range between the superconducting and 3 Specification of the studied FeSe1−xTex samples. The Tc value is the midpoint in the R(T) superconducting transition. Ts is the point with the maximum of absolute value of the second derivative of ρxx. C1T+C0 is the best linear fit for dρxx/dT (T) in the specified temperature range. Sample TC (K) TS (K) Linear fit for dρxx/dT Range C1 ( ΩcmK−2) C0 ( ΩcmK−1) FeSe 8.5 90 15 K - 65 K FeSe0.7Te0.3 7.3 31 15 K - 23 K FeSe0.6Te0.4 8.3 33 15 K - 26 K The properties of FeSe1−xTex crystals with x=0, 0.3, and 0.4 at 15 K. (a) Magnetic field dependence of the Hall resistivity ρxy. (b) Magnetoresistance MR=(ρxx(B)- ρxx(0))/ρxx(0) versus B2. The inset shows the zoom-in view at low MR. structural transitions. For the studied FeSe1−xTex com- positions, these dependencies are near-linear functions. The coefficients of linear regression of dρxx/dT (T) are given in Table I. It can be seen that for the substituted compositions the derivative is described with good accu- racy by the linear function aT , and for the FeSe com- position the derivative of the resistance is a constant. Therefore, the type of temperature dependence of resis- tance changes from linear for pure FeSe to quadratic aT 2 for compositions FeSe1−xTex with x = 0.3 and 0.4. The change in the power of the ρxx(T) function may indicate a change in the type of the ground state. From the phase diagram shown in Fig.1, it can be seen that the temperature of the structural transition in the 11-type iron-based superconductors reaches its lo- cal maximums in pure FeSe and FeTe. In our opinion, this may be due to a lowering of the local symmetry in the substituted compositions. In all three cases shown on the diagram, the structural transition is suppressed at a substitution level close to 25%, that roughly corre- sponds to the substitution of one of the four chalcogens near each iron atom. Thus this substitution level can re- move the degeneracy of the energy levels caused by the tetragonal symmetry and makes symmetry lowering in the structural transition redundant. If we suppose that the two domes shape of the phase diagram is the result of the modulation of excess elec- tron energy by disorder, then there can be an immedi- ate boundary between two types of the low-temperature order which exist in FeTe and FeSe. In the vicinity of this quantum phase transition, various anomalies in the properties of the compounds should be observed. For FeSe1−xTex, significant changes in the properties occur at x < 0.4. In this range of compositions, the piezore- sistivity coefficient changes the sign, and the type of the majority carriers changes, which may also be connected with changes in the crystal field18. The crystal field can influence the type of ordering. In the studied compounds, the dispersion for d-orbitals is several electron volts. Nevertheless, the crystal field determines which orbitals are at the Fermi level. Under substitution, the lattice parameters change anisotropi- cally. In this case, the distortion of the tetragonal en- vironment of iron changes, which should cause changes in the relative position of the levels in the t2g multiplet. Depending on the degree of the population of the states corresponding to different orbitals, either conditions for orbital ordering ( see Fig.4) or for magnetic ordering can be realized. Jahn-Teller type depending on the distortion in the tetrahe- dral environment of Fe. IV. CONCLUSION The study of the electron transport properties in FeSe1−xTex compositions with x=0, 0.3, and 0.4 sug- gests the crossover in the ground state from nematic or- bital order in compositions with a low tellurium content to magnetic order in compositions with x greater than about 0.3. If confirmed, this can be an example of the itinerant system with magnetic and orbital order compe- tition, that deserves further in-depth study. 4 V. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work has been supported by Russian Founda- tion for Basic Research through Grant 20-02-00561A and by Interdisciplinary Scientific and Educational School of Moscow State University “Photonic and Quantum Technologies. Digital Medicine”, the research infras- tructure of the “Educational and Methodical Center of Lithography and Microscopy”, M.V. Lomonosov Moscow State University was used . OSV acknowledge the fi- nancial support by Russian Science Foundation through the project 22-42-08002. ANV acknowledge the financial support by the Megagrant 075-15-2021-604 of the Gov- ernment of Russian Federation.