Ascendance of Superconductivity in Magic-Angle Graphene Multilayers Yiran Zhang1,2,3∗, Robert Polski1,2∗, Cyprian Lewandowski2,3, Alex Thomson2,3,4, Yang Peng5, Youngjoon Choi1,2,3, Hyunjin Kim1,2,3, Kenji Watanabe6, Takashi Taniguchi6, Jason Alicea2,3, Fe- lix von Oppen7, Gil Refael2,3, and Stevan Nadj-Perge1,2† 1T. J. Watson Laboratory of Applied Physics, California Institute of Technology, 1200 East Cali- fornia Boulevard, Pasadena, California 91125, USA 2Institute for Quantum Information and Matter, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, Cal- ifornia 91125, USA 3Department of Physics, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125, USA 4Department of Physics, University of California, Davis, California 95616, USA 5Department of Physics and Astronomy, California State University, Northridge, California 91330, USA 6National Institute for Materials Science, Namiki 1-1, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305 0044, Japan 7Dahlem Center for Complex Quantum Systems and Fachbereich Physik, Freie Universit ̈at Berlin, 14195 Berlin, Germany *These authors contributed equally to this work †Correspondence: s.nadj-perge@caltech.edu Graphene moir ́e superlattices have emerged as a platform hosting an abundance of corre- lated insulating, topological, and superconducting phases. While the origins of strong cor- relations and non-trivial topology are shown to be directly linked to flat moir ́e bands1–7, the nature and mechanism of superconductivity remain enigmatic. In particular, only al- ternating twisted stacking geometries8 of bilayer and trilayer graphene are found to ex- hibit robust superconductivity manifesting as zero resistance and Fraunhofer interference patterns9–11. Here we demonstrate that magic-angle twisted tri-, quadri-, and pentalayers placed on monolayer tungsten diselenide exhibit flavour polarization and superconductivity. We also observe insulating states in the trilayer and quadrilayer arising at finite electric dis- placement fields, despite the presence of dispersive bands introduced by additional graphene layers. Moreover, the three multilayer geometries allow us to identify universal features in the family of graphene moir ́e structures arising from the intricate relations between super- conducting states, symmetry-breaking transitions, and van Hove singularities. Remarkably, as the number of layers increases, superconductivity emerges over a dramatically enhanced filling-factor range. In particular, in twisted pentalayers, superconductivity extends well be- yond the filling of four electrons per moir ́e unit cell, demonstrating the non-trivial role of the additional bands. Our results highlight the importance of the interplay between flat and dispersive bands in extending superconducting regions in graphene moir ́e superlattices and open new frontiers for developing graphene-based superconductors. While a rich phase diagram of quantum electronic phases has been realized in many graphene 1 arXiv:2112.09270v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 27 Dec 2021 superlattice structures, robust superconductivity is so far exclusive to twisted bilayer graphene (TBG)1,9 and twisted trilayer graphene (TTG)10,11. Striking differences between TBG and TTG (e.g., Pauli limit violation12 and Bose-Einstein condensate type superconductivity10,11 observed in TTG) may serve as clues to the origin of their phenomenology; nevertheless, our ability to identify the truly universal features of these systems is ultimately limited by the relative dearth of robust superconducting moir ́e materials, suggesting that further progress lies not only in a better understanding of TBG and TTG, but also in the discovery of new superconducting systems. We investigate twisted graphene multilayers where each successive layer is twisted by an angle ±θ relative to the previous one in an alternating sequence (Fig. 1a). For an even number n of layers, the spectrum at zero displacement field D is expected to separate into n/2 independent TBG-like bands, each characterized by a different effective twist angle. When the number of layers n is (essentially a Dirac cone) is expected8 (see left column of Fig. 1b for examples when n is 3, 4 and 5). The system may be conveniently modified through the application of a displacement field D, which controllably hybridizes the different bands (Fig. 1b right column). Experimentally, we explore properties of alternating twisted trilayer, quadrilayer, and pentalayer graphene (TTG, TQG, TPG) structures with θ = 1.52° (device D1, trilayer), θ = 1.80° (D2, quadrilayer), and θ = 1.82° (D3, pentalayer), respectively (see Methods and Supplementary Information (SI), section 1 for fabrication and twist-angle characterization). These twist angles all lie close to the theoretically predicted “magic” values needed to obtain one set of flat TBG-like bands (θmagic TTG = √ 2θmagic TBG ≈ 1.53°, θmagic TQG = ( √ 5 + 1)θmagic TBG /2 ≈ 1.75°, and θmagic TPG = √ 3θmagic TBG ≈ 1.87° assuming an effective TBG twist angle θmagic TBG = 1.08°; see SI, section 4a)8. We find that TTG, TQG, and TPG all exhibit hallmark signatures of strong correlations (Fig. 1c-e), including robust superconductivity and flavour symmetry breaking as revealed by pronounced resistance peaks around certain integer filling factors ν (number of electrons per moir ́e site; see SI, section 1 for assignment of ν). In addition to the symmetry-breaking transitions previously reported in TTG10,11,13, our TTG struc- ture (coupled to a coupled to tungsten diselenide (WSe2) monolayer14) exhibits a previously un- observed correlated insulating state near ν = +2 at finite D (inset in Fig. 1c; see also SI Fig. 4 for more complete D and ν dependence). This insulating state cannot arise at the non-interacting band theory level (Fig. 1b right column; also see SI, sections 3 and 4 for more data and further dis- cussion) and is instead attributed to the interplay between an interaction-driven cascade transition and hybridization induced by the D field (e.g., as captured by ,16). We have also detected an insulating state developing at finite D fields in TQG near charge neutrality (Fig. 1d inset and Fig. 1g). However, in contrast to TTG, the TQG insulating state can be explained through the D- induced hybridization only. Importantly, the detection of insulating gaps in TTG and TQG implies a low level of disorder in our samples (see also SI Fig. 1). The superconducting regions in all three structures extend over significantly larger filling factor ranges in comparison to TBG where superconductivity is typically observed within 2 < |ν| < 3. Moreover, as the layer number is increased, superconductivity on both electron and hole sides 2 persists to progressively higher fillings, reaching ν ≈ +5 on the electron side for TPG (Fig. 1c- e). Along with a zero longitudinal resistance Rxx observed in the characteristic ν vs. T dome (Fig. 1h-j), we also measure well-resolved Fraunhofer-like patterns exhibiting large critical cur- rents (∼ 400 nA), substantiating the robustness of phase coherence (see SI Fig. 3). Moreover, high critical perpendicular magnetic fields Bc (typically ∼ 0.8 T) indicate that the corresponding Ginzburg–Landau coherence lengths ξGL (approximately 10 − 30 nm) are significantly smaller than those observed in TBG and deviate from the weak-coupling prediction, ξGL ≈ ħvF/π∆ with ∆ ≈ 1.76kBTc—suggesting a strong-coupling origin of superconductivity10,11 (see SI, section 2). When combined with other recent experiments12,17,18, these observations affirm the unconventional nature of superconductivity within the entire class of graphene moir ́e systems. Further, the mea- surements on three to five layers indicate that the addition of layers promotes superconductivity over a broader filling window despite the coexisting dispersive bands as well as the ostensibly increased vulnerability to disorder—both from the additional twist angles as well as from the sen- sitivity to the relative displacement between layers. In addition to the pronounced ν-dependence, the observed superconducting pockets are highly tunable with electric displacement field D (Fig. 2). A comparison of the three structures reveals, however, that TQG and TPG are more tunable than TTG. This is apparent both in the D-dependent evolution of the filling range where superconductivity is measured (Fig. 2a-c) as well as in the crit- ical temperature Tc (Fig. 2d-f). Notably, superconductivity in TQG and TPG is fully quenched for all fillings at D/ε0 = 0.75 V nm−1 and D/ε0 = 0.6 V nm−1, respectively. In the case of TTG, how- ever, superconductivity is present up to the maximum accessible electric field D/ε0 = 1 V nm−1. Nevertheless, Rxx versus D and temperature measurements do show that superconductivity is sup- pressed at optimal doping in all three heterostructures; further, they reveal that Tc forms a D sym- metric dome maximized at small finite D fields (Fig. 2d-f, for electron-side data showing similar behaviour see SI Fig. 5). We also note that TTG, TQG, and TPG all exhibit a similar variation of Tc when viewed as a function of the potential difference U between the top and bottom layers (SI Fig. 5d,e; see also SI, section 3 for the energy conversion from D to U). This layer-number invariance is consistent with non-interacting continuum-model calculations tracking the evolution of the inverse of the flat-band bandwidth with U (Fig. 2g bottom). The dependence of Tc on D in all devices qualitatively matches the predictions of for TTG with one marked exception: the observed vanishing of superconductivity and the decay of Tc appears to be linear in D (Fig. 2e,f and SI Fig. 5), in line with predictions for multilayer graphene with rhombohedral stacking20 and in contrast to the exponential ‘tail’ typically expected from the weak-coupling theory (and seen in the model of ). Comparing the location of the superconducting regions with the evolution of the Hall density as a function of D and ν in TTG, TQG, and TPG provides further insight into the intricate relationship between the superconducting phase and the correlation-modified Fermi surface (Fig. 3). As in previous TBG and TTG measurements, we observe symmetry-breaking electronic transitions (a ‘cascade’ of transitions) that are signalled by sudden drops in the Hall density magnitude (a ‘reset’) without a change in sign. These resets (see dashed lines in Fig. 3a-d) indicate a rearrangement 3 of spin/valley sub-bands and typically occur near integer fillings of the flat bands3,5. At low D fields, superconducting pockets onset around the |ν| = 2 resets (purple dashed line), and the filling extent of superconductivity varies depending on the presence or absence of a |ν| = 3 flavour symmetry-breaking transition (grey dashed line). For electron- and hole-doped TTG as well as for electron-doped TQG (Fig. 3a,b,d), a flavour symmetry-breaking transition appears at |ν| = 3 and superconductivity accordingly terminates. By contrast, when signatures of the |ν| = 3 reset are completely absent (for example in hole-doped TQG, Fig. 3c, or in TPG), superconductivity extends much further. Combined, these observations suggest that superconductivity is favoured when only two out of the four flavours are significantly populated (|ν| = 2 cascade) and suppressed beyond |ν| = 3 resets. This behaviour can be understood within the simplest iteration of the cascade scenario: resets at |ν| = 3 produce spin- and valley-polarized bands21–23 and naturally disfavour Cooper pairing of time-reversed partners. At high D fields, signatures of the cascade vanish and instead van Hove singularities (vHs) become more prominent, reflecting qualitative changes in the band structure (see yellow lines in Fig. 3a-d and SI Fig. 6 that track the vHs). Consistent with previous TTG measurements10,11, the vHs in our TTG sample (as well as in TPG, see Fig. 3e,f) crudely bound the superconducting regions. By contrast, the vHs in TQG cross well into the superconducting pockets—in fact, for electron doping, Tc reaches its maximum exactly at the position of the vHs (Fig. 3d, orange dot and SI Fig. 7d-f). The interplay between the vHs and superconductivity is thus not a universal property of graphene moir ́e systems but rather depends on the layer number and possibly the precise twist angle. Pentalayer measurements provide additional signatures that point towards a close relation between superconducting phase boundaries and flavour symmetry-breaking cascades (Fig. 3e,f). In contrast to TTG, in TPG we can access D fields that are large enough to stifle superconductivity—which occurs simultaneously with the onset of the vHs and the apparent suppression of the cascade tran- sitions (see red and light blue lines in Fig. 3f that mark the superconducting boundaries and the cascade transitions, respectively). For example, at low D fields (|D|/ε0 < 0.6 V nm−1) around ν = +2, the Hall density resets close to zero, in line with a nearly complete flavour symmetry- breaking polarization. However, at higher D fields (|D|/ε0 > 0.6 V nm−1), the Hall density is dominated by a vHs around ν = +2, while the cascade signatures are diminished. Superconduc- tivity accordingly also vanishes. For hole doping, the disappearance of superconductivity similarly coincides with the weakening of the cascade. This on/off correspondence between the two phe- nomena suggests that they either share a common origin, such as a large DOS, or that the cascade serves as a prerequisite for robust superconductivity in graphene moir ́e superlattices. As mentioned above, for low D fields in TPG, the superconducting pockets are extraordinarily large, spanning −4 ≲ ν < −2 for hole doping and +2 ≲ ν ≲ +5 for electron doping (Fig. 1e, Fig. 2c, and Fig. 4). In particular, the electron-side range corresponds roughly to a density window of 6 × 1012 cm−2, which is the largest filling range so far reported in a graphene-based supercon- ductor. The observed superconductivity exhibits similar values of Tc and Bc as the trilayer and quadrilayer samples and is likewise accompanied by a Fraunhofer pattern (Fig. 4c inset), confirm- 4 ing its robust nature. We emphasize that the unprecedented persistence of superconductivity across a large filling factor range in TPG (and also TQG in comparison to TTG or TBG) cannot be ex- plained in a minimal framework of alternating twisted graphene multilayers8,24 without invoking the non-trivial role of the additional bands. Explanations for the enlarged superconducting intervals can generically be organized into three scenarios depending on the filling of the flat TBG-like bands νflat, relative to the total filling νmax at which superconductivity terminates (νmax = +5 for electron-doped TPG and |νmax| = 4 for TQG and hole-doped TPG). In scenario (i), νmax corresponds to νflat ≈ +3, the flat-band filling at which superconductivity is typically suppressed in TBG, whereas in scenario (ii), νmax coincides with νflat ≈ +4, precluding any simple analogy with TBG. Finally, scenario (iii) assumes full filling of the flat bands before superconductivity is suppressed at νmax. This scenario includes the possibility that the distinction between the different TBG- and MLG-like bands breaks down even at D = 0 due to hybridization (for a more complete description of the three scenarios, see SI, section 5). From the perspective of the non-interacting band structure, scenarios (i) and (ii) are completely implausible. In particular, although the presence of the dispersive bands implies that δν = |ν| − |νflat| > 0, this effect is much smaller than needed for these two scenarios. However, δν may nevertheless be significantly enhanced by Coulomb interactions. First, the Hartree correction ac- counts for the system’s desire for a spatially uniform charge distribution. Since the flat bands are highly localized on the AA sites, the Hartree correction, so far primarily studied in TBG, manifests mainly as a band deformation and flattening25–29—shifting the density of states to spread out the charge. When dispersive bands, whose wavefunctions are more uniformly distributed within the unit cell, are also present as in TTG, TQG, and TPG, charge may be redistributed by shifting the energy of these bands relative to the flat bands18,30. More generally, the Coulomb interaction can facilitate symmetry breaking, as reflected in the flat-band cascade resets and gap openings (which in TBG yields correlated insulators1). In this context, gap formation pushes the flat bands up in energy, allowing additional charge to accumulate in the dispersive bands, thus further increasing δν. Finally, multilayer structures beyond TBG can additionally have non-uniform layer-to-layer charge distribution or next-layer coupling which may further deform the bands, leading to self- generated shifts between the flat and the other bands as well as introducing coupling between them (see SI, sections 4d and 4e). A toy model for TPG incorporating these mechanisms (see SI, section 4e) suggests a minimal flat-band occupation νflat ≳ +3.8 at ν ≈ +5, diminishing the plausibility of scenario (i) for electron-doped TPG which has νmax ≈ +5. The relevance of this scenario is further undermined by the observation of vHs at ν ≈ +6 (SI Fig. 10d): under the reasonable assumption that the non- interacting band structure remains valid for the dispersive TBG-like bands (apart from a Hartree shift), scenario (i) would instead place the observed vHs near ν ≈ +5. Taken together, these arguments effectively rule out scenario (i). Note, however, that the presented line of reasoning is not straightforward for the other superconducting pockets (see SI, section 5). 5 Both scenarios (ii) and (iii) are indicative of the non-trivial role of additional bands in stabilizing superconductivity. Assuming well-defined flat and dispersive bands, in scenario (iii) the former bands are completely filled, and superconductivity is supported fully by the latter non-flat bands. This assertion is at odds with the large dispersion of the remaining TBG- and MLG-like bands. However, while the exact mechanism underlying scenario (iii) is difficult to pin down, it is not without experimental support. For instance, a natural interpretation of the Hall density minimum around ν ≈ +4 for |D| ≲ 0.4 V nm−1 is that it marks the complete filling of the flat bands, νflat ≈ +4 (Fig. 4e and SI Fig. 9; see also SI, section 5 for more discussion). One possible realization of scenario (iii) consistent with the experimental observations is that the division of the electronic states into simple TBG- and MLG-like bands fails completely—obviating our very definition of νflat and potentially allowing flavour polarization, and accompanying super- conductivity, to persist well beyond ν = +4. While such hybridization is expected for finite D fields, mixing between flat, dispersive TBG- and MLG-like bands for |ν| < |νmax| may occur even at D = 0. For example, hybridization could result from mirror symmetry breaking due to interactions or proximity to WSe2. Importantly, in TQG and TPG even terms that preserve mirror symmetry, such as layer-to-layer charge inhomogeneity or distant-layer coupling, allow for band hybridization (see SI, sections 4d and 4e). This feature distinguishes TPG and TQG structures from TTG and may therefore play a role in explaining extensive superconducting regions. Finally, we mention that other effects, such as strain31, or a different stacking order, may yield multiple sets of flat bands32 (see SI, section 4b) even at the non-interacting level, in which case multiple bands can host superconductivity independently. Importantly, however, invoking this explanation would place TQG and TPG well outside a simple TBG paradigm, as coexisting but independent sets of flat TBG-like bands are expected to produce more cascade resets than observed experimentally, and therefore are unlikely. Our measurements demonstrate the increasing predominance of superconductivity in twisted gra- phene multilayer structures as the number of layers is increased from three to five and highlight the close relationship between the flavour symmetry-breaking transitions and superconductivity. Moreover, our findings suggest a scenario in which the symmetry-broken ν = ±2 state strongly favours the formation of the superconducting state while the cascade corresponding to ν = ±3 suppresses it. Interestingly, this scenario is consistent not only with previous TBG observations but also in part with the recently investigated ABC trilayers33 and Bernal bilayers34 where super- conductivity is observed near symmetry-breaking transitions. This universality appears to suggest a possibility that superconductivity in graphene-based superconductors originates from a common underlying symmetry-broken state. In this context, our discovery of superconductivity in TQG and TPG together with recent work on untwisted bi- and trilayers dramatically expands the scope of graphene-based superconductors. This expansion holds promise for resolving important ques- tions related to the nature of the pairing mechanism in these systems and provides guidance for developing novel graphene-based superconductors and their applications. 6 Methods Device fabrication: All devices were fabricated using a ‘cut and stack’ method, in which graphe- ne flakes were separated into pieces using a sharp tip (made out Platinum-Iridium); this ap- proach prevents unwanted twisting and strain during tearing while allowing more control over the flake size and shape. After cutting, stacking procedure was as follows: first, a thin hBN flake (10 − 30 nm) is picked up using a propylene carbonate (PC) film previously placed on a poly- dimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamp. Then the hBN flake is used to pick up an exfoliated monolayer of WSe2 (commercial source, HQ graphene) before approaching the graphene. After picking up the first piece of the graphene flake, the following layers are twisted by an angle ±θ relative to the previous one in an alternating sequence. Transfer stage rotation θ overshoots the target angle by 0.1−0.2° to construct the measured angles. Care was taken to approach and pick up each stacking step slowly. In the last step, a thicker hBN (30 − 70 nm) is picked up, and the whole stack is dropped on a predefined local gold back gate at 150°C while the PC is released at 170°C. The PC is then cleaned off with N-Methyl-2-Pyrrolidinone (NMP). The final geometry is defined by dry etching with a CHF3/O2 plasma and deposition of ohmic edge contacts (Ti/Au, 5 nm/100 nm) and top gate. Measurements: All measurements were performed in a dilution refrigerator (Oxford Triton) with a base temperature of ∼ 25 mK, using standard low-frequency lock-in amplifier techniques. Unless otherwise specified, measurements are taken at the base temperature. Frequencies of the lock-in amplifiers (Stanford Research, models 830 and 865a) were kept in the range of 7 − 20 Hz in order to measure the device’s DC properties and the AC excitation was kept < 5 nA (most measurements were taken at 0.5 − 1 nA to preserve the linearity of the system and avoid disturbing the fragile states at low temperatures). Each of the DC fridge lines pass through cold filters, including 4 Pi filters that filter out a range from ∼ 80 MHz to > 10 GHz, as well as a two-pole RC low-pass filter.