1 Switchable and unswitchable bulk photovoltaic effect in two-dimensional interlayer-sliding ferroelectrics Rui-Chun Xiao1, Yang Gao2,*, Hua Jiang3, Wei Gan1, Changjin Zhang1,4, Hui Li1,* 1Institute of Physical Science and Information Technology and Information Materials and Intelligent Sensing Laboratory of Anhui Province, Anhui University, Hefei 230601, China 2Department of Physics, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China 3School of Physical Science and Technology, Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, China 4High Magnetic Field Laboratory, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei 230031, China Email: ygao87@ustc.edu.cn (Y. G.), huili@ahu.edu.cn (H. L.) Abstract Spontaneous polarization and bulk photovoltaic effect (BPVE) are two concomitant physical properties in ferroelectric materials. The flipping of ferroelectric order usually accompanies with the switching of BPVE as both of them are reversed under the inversion symmetry. In this study, we report the distinctive BPVE characters in two-dimensional (2D) interlayer sliding ferroelectric materials featuring unswitchable in-plane BPVE (light-induced photocurrent in the xy plane) and switchable out-of-plane BPVE (light-induced polarization along the z-direction). Symmetry analysis within abstract bilayer crystal model and first-principles calculations validate these BPVE properties. It is because the positive and negative ferroelectric states caused by interlayer sliding are related by mirror symmetry which cannot flip all the BPVE tensor elements. This finding extends the understanding of the relationship between ferroelectricity and BPVE. On one hand, the switchable out-of- plane BPVE can be used to design switchable photoelectric devices. On the other hand, the in-plane BPVE is robust against the ferroelectric flipping, and the unswitchable character is beneficial to construct larger-scale photoelectric devices. Introduction Ferroelectricity and bulk photovoltaic effect (BPVE)1,2 are two basic physical phenomena that emerge in condensed matter materials due to symmetry breaking. Generally speaking, BPVE, an intrinsic optical rectification phenomenon, appears in materials without inversion symmetry which can convert light to electricity as solar cells, hence is naturally fulfilled the symmetry requirement in ferroelectric materials. As a result, the ferroelectric materials with switchable electronic polarization are one 2 of the most studied BPVE materials1-3, and the corresponding energy conversion efficiency can exceed the Shockley-Queisser limit3-5. Under the inversion operation, both ferroelectric order and BPVE switch sign. Therefore, the ferroelectric polarization is often taken as a handle to manipulate the direction of BPVE photocurrent in, e.g., perovskite oxides BiFeO36-8, Pt/BiFeO3/SrRuO39, 2D (two-dimensional) CuInP2Se610, charge-transfer complex11, SnTe monolayer12, etc.. However, from the aspect of symmetry, the ferroelectric polarization is a polar vector, while the BPVE coefficients form a rank-three tensor. They are hence subject to distinct symmetry transformation rules, and should not always synchronize. For example, a mirror reflection perpendicular to the polarization will reverse the polarization just as the inversion operation does, while it cannot flip all the components of the BPVE. Thus, precise understanding of the relationship between the ferroelectric order and the BPVE is of tremendous significance in both fundamental research and the design of photoelectric devices. In this work, we think the exceptional case that BPVE and ferroelectric order are in-step can be found in 2D interlayer-sliding ferroelectric materials13. As demonstrated in recent experiments, the out-of-plane ferroelectricity can be achieved in bilayer WTe214-17, BN18,19, InSe20,21, MoS222,23 etc. by interlayer sliding, which effectively extends the family of 2D ferroelectric materials24-27. This unique ferroelectric flip mechanism may lead to the BPVE property beyond the switchable scenario. Focusing on four most common stacking cases of 2D bilayers with interlayer sliding, we use an abstract bilayer crystal model to locate the available configurations and symmetries with nontrivial ferroelectric order. We find two cases (Case 1b and Case 2a) can have the possibility to achieve the interlayer-sliding ferroelectricity, moreover the opposite ferroelectric states in the two cases are all related by the mirror operator. Coincidentally, the interlayer-sliding ferroelectric materials found in the experiments are attributed to these two cases. Using bilayer MoS2 and WTe2 as representative examples, we performed first-principles calculations, and find that the in-plane BPVE does not change the sign with ferroelectric order, which is different from conventional ferroelectrics. In contrast to in-plane BPVE, out-of-plane BPVE switches with the reverse of the ferroelectric order. These characters will lead to distinct photovoltaic phenomena in experiments. 3 Polarization flipping via interlayer sliding Now we introduce the mechanism of the polarization flipping via interlayer sliding. material without inversion nor horizontal mirror symmetry. Because the in-plane polarization is usually annihilated by in-plane rotational symmetry in real materials, the +Pz and –Pz polarization are denoted as +P and –P for short. The out-of-plane polarization can be flipped in two different ways: (i) intralayer movement, i.e., atomic relative displacements in each monolayer [Fig. 1(b)], and (ii) interlayer sliding13 where the crystal structure of each monolayer is invariant [Fig. 1(c)]. Although polarization flipping can be achieved in both situations, the underlying symmetries of the switch of ferroelectric states are different. For situation (i), the +P and –P ferroelectric states are correlated by the inversion operator, as indicated in unit cells in Fig. 1(a) and Fig. 1(b). While for situation (ii), the +P and –P ferroelectric states are correlated by the mirror symmetry MM�xxxx, as seen in unit cells in Fig. 1(a) and Fig. 1(c) (detailed analyses are presented in the Symmetry analysis section for real materials). The interlayer sliding mechanism is feasible experimentally, and has been observed in bilayer vdW materials14-16,18-23 as stated above, which further extends the family of 2D ferroelectric materials24-27 effectively. Figure 1(d)-(f) shows the basis vectors transformation under the inversion symmetry and mirror symmetry. The BPVE in these interlayer-sliding ferroelectric materials should not always change with the ferroelectric order. Fig. 1 Polarization flipping in a 2D vdW bilayer material via intralayer movement or interlayer sliding, and related symmetries. (a) A 2D system with positive out-of-plane 4 polarization +P. (b) The polarization is reversed to –P by atom displacements in each monolayer, and the black arrow means the movement of the cations relative to the anions. (c) The polarization is reversed by interlayer sliding, and the black arrows mean the interlayer sliding direction. (d) Three basis vectors and their transformations under (e) inversion symmetry (f) horizontal mirror symmetry. The black rectangles denote the bilayer unit cells in (a)-(c), and the gray rectangles denote the monolayer unit cells. Symmetry analysis Next, we analyze how to design the bilayer vdW materials with the out-of-plane polarization via interlayer sliding in Fig. 1(a), and analyze how positive and negative polarizations are related by symmetry operator. Most of the discovered monolayer materials are non-polar and non-ferroelectric (such as BN, transition-metal dichalcogenides, metal trihalide, post-transition metal chalcogenides), and their monolayer crystal structures belong to the following two different cases, as shown in Fig. S1 and Fig. S2 in the Supplementary Information28,29: 1. Monolayer has the inversion symmetry I, but has no horizontal mirror symmetry  xy M , such as monolayer 1T-PtS2, 1T’-WTe2, BiI3, etc.; 2. Monolayer has no inversion symmetry I but has horizontal mirror symmetry  xy M , such as monolayer BN, 1H-MoS2, 1H-WSe2, GaSe, InSe, etc. Besides, the bilayer can be further divided into two subcases according to the stacking manner of two layers: (a) A/A stacking, i.e. two adjacent layers are identical where the A represents the crystal structure of the monolayer. (b) A/B stacking, i.e. two adjacent layers are relatively rotated by 180° with BB = CĈ2zzAA (A and B mean the crystal types). The above considerations can form four cases for 2D bilayer materials with interlayer sliding, and we can analyze their symmetries with an abstract bilayer crystal model which only considers the above crystal symmetries and ignores the specific crystal structures. The complete symmetry analysis for each case is summarized in Supplementary Note 1, and the corresponding results are shown in Table I. As can be seen, Case 1b and Case 2a host the out-of-plane polarization, and the two opposite interlayer-sliding states are correlated by  xy M operator, instead of inversion I operator. In contrast, the crystal structures in Case 1a and Case 2b possess the inversion 5 symmetry whatever the interlayer-sliding vector, which forbids the occurrence of ferroelectricity and BPVE. Stacking way Monolayer symmetry a. A/A b. A/B 1.  : xy I M  √  ×   Case 1a:  : xy I M  √  ×   Case 1b:   : : xy xy M M S I S + −  ×  ×   =   2.  : xy I M  ×  √   Case 2a:   : : xy xy M M S I S + −  ×  ×   =   Case 2b:  : : xy I M  √  ×   Note: (1) The crystal structures here are abstract bilayers, and the orange quadrilateral indicates abstract unit cell of monolayer; (2) S+ and S- represent the bilayer with opposite sliding vectors. experimentally realized by either simply mechanical exfoliation or “tear and stack” methods. In particular, the out-of-plane ferroelectricity of the bilayer WTe214-17 with Case 1b and BN18,19, InSe20,21, bilayer-TMD22,23 with Case 2a have been discovered in experiments recently. 6 Candidate materials Symmetry of bulk parents Case 1a 1T-MX2 (PtSe2, PtS2, TiS2, SnS2) 3 1 P m (164) TX3 (BiI3) 3 R (148) Case 1b Td/1T’-WTe2, MoTe2, ZrI2 Pmn21 (31) or P21m (11) Case 2a GaSe, InSe, InS 6 2 P m (187) 3R-MX2 (MoS2, MoSe2) R3m (160) BN R3m (160) Case 2b h-BN P63/mmc (194) 2H-MX2 (MoS2) GaS P63/mmc (194) GeSe, SnSe Pnma (62) Note: (1) MX2 means the transition metal dichalcogenides, and MX3 means the transition metal trihalides, (2) bulk parents mean the bulk materials which staking with the same manners, (3) the structure data are from Materials Project30. Now we analyze the characters of in-plane and out-of-plane BPVE of the interlayer-sliding ferroelectric materials in Case 1b and Case 2a under the normal incidence of light. The in-plane BPVE current density is ( ) ( ), a a bc b c bc J E E σ ω ω = − ∑ (1) where { } , , , a b c ∈ x y , Eb and Ec are electric fields of light along b and c direction, ω is the frequency of light, and a σbc is the BPVE coefficient. In contrast to x and y directions, a static electric polarization instead of the current is formed along the z- direction because the z-direction of 2D materials is discontinuous. The out-of-plane BPVE polarization is31 ( ) ( ), z c c b b z bc p E E σ ω ω ′ = − ∑ (2) where zp is z-component polarizability. Similar to other nonlinear optics tensors, the BPVE tensor c σab × ×     in Eq. (1) [or Eq. (2)] obeys , i c jk ia jb kc ab abc R R R σ σ =∑ (3) where [ Ria ] is the 3×3 matrix of the symmetry operator R . As shown in Fig. 1(f),  xy M will result in the reverse of the out-of-plane vector with invariant in-plane vectors, and the corresponding operator matrix is 7 1 0 0 0 1 0 . 0 0 1 [ Mxy ]     =    −    (4) The opposite states are connected by the mirror operator [  ( ) M xy P P + = − ] in interlayer- sliding ferroelectric materials. Therefore, the in-plane BPVE coefficient is invariant with the change of ferroelectric orders, i.e. σσaaaa cc (+PP) = σσaaaa cc (−PP), aa, bb, cc ∈ {xx, yy} , according to Eq. (3). This is strikingly different from the out-of-plane case where the BPVE coefficient is reversed with the switch of ferroelectric orders, as indicated by ( ) ( ) z z bc bc P P σ σ + = − − ′ ′ ( { } , , b c ∈ x y ). The calculated BPVE characters in Fig. 1 (a) and (c) by a 1D effective model are also consistent with our symmetry analysis (see Supplementary Note 2). In contrast, for the ferroelectric states correlated by inversion symmetry (IÎ(+PP) = −PP), the inversion operator IÎ will lead to the reverse of all the vectors (Fig. 1(d)), i.e. σσaacc aa (+PP) = −σσaacc aa (−PP) (aa, bb, cc ∈ {xx, yy, zz}) according to Eq. (3). It is the reason why the BPVE coefficients reverse with ferroelectric orders in the conventional ferroelectric materials. The in-plane BPVE coefficients can be calculated by the standard second-order Kubo formalism theory32,33, and the out-of-plane BPVE coefficients can be obtained by a modified second-order Kubo formalism theory31 that was proposed recently. In the following part, we choose a representative material for each case: bilayer MoS222,23 (Case 2a) and bilayer-WTe214-17 (Case 1b) to perform the numerical first-principles calculations (see Methods section for calculation details). First-principles calculation results Bilayer MoS2 Bilayer MoS2 (Case 2a) that is consisted of two identical non- ferroelectric monolayers shows out-of-plane ferroelectricity13, which has been confirmed in experiments recently22,23. Noting that conventional bilayer MoS2 is stacked in A/B form (Case 2b) with inversion symmetry, which is different from the crystal structure discussed here. As shown in Fig. 2(a), the out-of-plane ferroelectricity is reversed by the in-plane interlayer motion along the armchair direction. The monolayer possesses the D3h symmetry. However, the interlayer-sliding bilayer breaks the  xy M and in-plane  2 C rotation symmetries, which results in the bilayer 8 MoS2 only having 3v C symmetry (  3 3 3 xy h v v D C M C = + ). Therefore, +P and –P states only have out-of-plane polarization. Moreover, the two ferroelectric states are connected by the  xy M symmetry22,23, which is consistent with the above symmetry analysis. The calculated band structures of the +P and –P states are shown in Fig. 2 (b), which are invariant with the ferroelectric orders. Fig. 2 Calculated results of ferroelectric bilayer MoS2. (a) Crystal structures of ferroelectric states (upper panel: side view, lower panel: top view). The arrows denote the transformation of the +P and –P states by interlayer  xy M In-plane BPVE photocurrent and (f) out-of-plane BPVE polarization (in arbitrary unit) with the direction of normal-incidence polarization of light in the +P states. θ in (d) and (f) is the azimuthal angle of the polarization of light relative to the x axis, and the dash lines mean the vertical mirror planes. As shown in Fig. 2(c), the calculated in-plane BPVE coefficients with +P and –P states are equal. The in-plane BPVE is invariant with the change of the ferroelectric order as predicted. In addition, x y y xy xx yy σ σ σ = = − , and 0 x x y xx yy xy σ σ σ = = = for each ferroelectric state due to the C3v symmetry [see Supplementary Note 3]. It is noted that this unswtichable in-plane BPVE character of interlayer-sliding ferroelectric materials is different from those of conventional ferroelectric materials6-12,34 and antiferromagnets35,36 where the BPVE is switched with the ferroelectric/ferromagnetic order. The in-plane BPVE photocurrent as a function of the polarization direction of light (see Supplementary Note 4 for details) is shown in Fig. 2(d). The in-plane BPVE 9 photocurrent shows the C3v symmetry, and its magnitude is independent of the direction of light. The calculated out-of-plane BPVE coefficients are shown in Fig. 2(e). For each ferroelectric state, z z xx yy σ σ ′ = ′ , and 0 z z xy yx σ σ ′ ′ = = . Moreover, the out-of-plane BPVE coefficients switch with the ferroelectric order following ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) z z z z xx yy xx yy P P P P σ σ σ σ ′ ′ ′ ′ + = + = − − = − − , which is consistent with our symmetry analysis. The out-of-plane BPVE is isotropic, and photo-induced polarization is independent of the polarization direction of light due to C3v symmetry, as shown in Fig. 2(f). Similarly, experimentally prepared bilayer BN18,19, InSe20 21, GaSe, etc., possess similar interlayer-sliding ferroelectricity (Case 2a) and the same symmetry. Therefore, similar in-plane and out-of-plane BPVE features are also expected to exhibit in these materials. Bilayer WTe2 Bilayer WTe2 is composed of two 180°-rotated two monolayers (Case 1b), as shown in Fig. 3(a). Even though each monolayer (with   2 2 { , , , yz} x C h E I C M =  symmetry) has the inversion I symmetry, the bilayer breaks this symmetry. Besides, the interlayer-sliding vector along b axis further breaks  xy M and in-plane  2 C symmetry. Thereby the bilayer has the  1 { , yz} C v = E M symmetry (  2 1 1 xy h v v C C M C = + ). Interlayer sliding37,38 induced out-of-plane ferroelectricity in bilayer WTe2 has been verified experimentally14-17. The –P state is the mirror image of +P state, as shown in Fig. 3(a). Figure 3(b) shows the band structures of +P and –P states, where the valence and conduction bands overlap in our calculation. 10 Fig. 3 Calculated results of ferroelectric bilayer WTe2. (a) Crystal structure. +P and –P states are adopted from . Rectangle in (a) represents the unit cell, and the double-arrows line means the monolayer transformation under  xy M symmetry. The lower panel in (a) denotes the top view polarization of the +P states with the different direction of polarization of light. The length of arrows in (d) indicates the magnitude of in-plane BPVE response (in arbitrary unit), where : : 1:0.7: 1.6 x y y xy xx yy σ σ σ = − . The width and the color of the ribbon in (f) denote the magnitude and direction of out-of-plane BPVE response, and : 1: 0.6 z z xx yy σ σ ′ ′ = − . The calculated in-plane BPVE coefficients are shown in Fig. 3 (c). There are three independent tensor elements x σxy , y σxx , y σ yy , and 0 x x y xx yy xy σ σ σ = = = due to the C1v symmetry. The calculated in-plane BPVE coefficients are the same in two opposite ferroelectric orders: ( ) ( ) x x xy xy P P σ σ + = − , ( ) ( ) y y xx xx P P σ σ + = − , ( ) ( ) y y yy yy P P σ σ + = − , which is consistent with the above symmetry analysis. The in-plane BPVE photo-current with the direction of polarization of light is shown in Fig. 3 (d), which shows  yz M symmetry, and its magnitude is dependent on the light (see Supplementary Note 4 for details). On the contrary, the out-of-plane BPVE coefficients switch with the change of ferroelectric order, ( ) ( ) z z xx xx P P σ σ ′ ′ + = − − , ( ) ( ) z z yy yy P P σ σ ′ ′ + = − − [Fig. 3 (e)]. Unlike the bilayer MoS2, the out-of-plane BPVE coefficients show anisotropy z z xx yy σ σ ′ ≠ ′ ( 0 z z xy yx σ σ ′ ′ = = ) for each ferroelectric state due to the absence of in-plane C3 symmetry, 11 leading to the out-of-plane BPVE polarization is dependent on the polarization of light as shown in Fig. 3 (f). Recently, ZrI2, a sister material of polar semimetals WTe2, is also demonstrated39- 41 to have interlayer-sliding ferroelectricity. Similar BPVE behaviors with bilayer WTe2 are expected to be observed due to the same symmetry and interlayer-stacking way (Case 1b). The calculated values of the in-plane BVPE coefficient of bilayer MoS2 and bilayer WTe2 are comparable to the reported monolayer SnTe42,43 and 3D conventional ferroelectric materials (such as BiFeO344, BiTiO3, and PbTiO32), and out-of-plane coefficients are comparable to twisted bilayers graphene31, which are detectable experimentally. Discussion and conclusion According to the above two specific examples, the in-plane BPVE is invariant, while the out-of-plane BPVE reverses with the change of ferroelectric order in interlayer-sliding ferroelectric materials. The study of the ferroelectric order and the BPVE in mirror-symmetry-related ferroelectric materials allows the comprehension of the relationship between them in another view. Moreover, these BPVE characters in 2D interlayer-siding ferroelectric materials will lead to distinctive photovoltaic phenomena and applications in photoelectric devices. The in-plane BPVE photocurrents in a single crystal of interlayer-siding ferroelectric materials are invariant with two opposite ferroelectric domains, thus the photovoltaic currents between different domains superimpose rather than cancel, as shown in Fig. 4. Since ferroelectric domains are often unavoidable in real materials, especially for the interlayer-sliding ferroelectric materials fabricated via the “tear and stack” method18,19,23,45. Therefore, this unswitchable BPVE feature boosts the development of large-scale photoelectric devices that are immune to the polarization of ferroelectric domains. Nevertheless, the out-of-plane BPVE inverses between the opposite ferroelectric orders (Fig. 4), which can be utilized to construct switchable photoelectric devices. 12 Fig. 4 In-plane and out-of-plane BPVE response with opposite ferroelectric domains for interlayer-sliding ferroelectric materials. The horizontal and vertical arrows denote the in-plane BPVE current and out-of-plane BPVE polarization, respectively. In conclusion, we use the abstract bilayer crystal model to analyze the symmetries of the four most common cases of bilayer vdW materials with interlayer sliding, and found two cases (Case 1b and Case 2a) can have the possibility to achieve the interlayer sliding ferroelectricity, which the interlayer sliding ferroelectric materials found in experiments fall into. We revealed that the opposite ferroelectric states in the interlayer- sliding ferroelectric materials are linked by the horizontal mirror symmetry, leading to the in-plane BPVE being invariant while the out-of-plane BPVE switches with opposite ferroelectric states. Our theoretical study provides a strategy towards a comprehensive understanding of the relationship between the ferroelectric order and BPVE in 2D interlayer sliding ferroelectric materials. Moreover, the switchable out-of-plane BPVE can be used to design switchable photoelectric devices. On the other hand, the in-plane BPVE is robust against the ferroelectric order, and the unswitchable character is beneficial to construct larger-scale photoelectric devices. Methods In-plane and out-of-plane BPVE theory According to the second-order Kubo formalism theory32,33, a σbc in the Eq. (1) of the main text can be expressed as { } 1 Re , 2 a a a bc bc cb σ χ χ ≡ + (5) where 2 3 3 ( ) , (2 ) lm lm mn nl mn nl bc mnl ml mn b a c c a nl a f v v v e d i i v v E i E E χ ω ω π ω δ δ δ   = − −   − + + +   ∑ ∫ k  (6) 13 δ =  τ , and τ is the lifetime, ω is the frequency of the light, lm f and ml E are the difference of occupation number and band energy between bands l and m. Within a modified second-order Kubo formalism theory31, the out-of-plane BPVE coefficient in Eq. (2) of the main text can be expressed as { } 1 Re , 2 z z z bc bc cb σ χ χ ′ ′ ′ ≡ + (7) and , 2 , 2 3 ˆ ˆ ( ) ( ) , (2 ) i z nm nl mn i z nm z lm lm bc i c mnl ml mn n b l c E E p v v p f E v e d i i i χ ω π ω δ δ δ   ′ = × −     − + + +   ∑ ∫ k  (8) where , , ˆi z i z p = er is a position operator, and r,i z is the z-component position of the i- th atom. We define the middle of the 2D materials as the origin: , 0 i z i r = ∑ . Eq. (6) is very similar to Eq. (8), except for the position operator ,ˆi z p instead of the velocity operator. First-principles calculations The first-principles calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) are performed by using the VASP package. General gradient approximation (GGA) according to the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) functional is used. The energy cutoff of the plane wave basis is set to 400 eV. The Brillouin zone is sampled with a 12×12×1 (12×8×1) mesh of kk-points for MoS2 (WTe2). To simulate the monolayers, vacuum layers (~15 Å) are introduced. The vdW force with DFT-D2 correction is considered. Spin-orbital coupling effects are considered in our calculation. The DFT Bloch wave functions are iteratively transformed into maximally localized Wannier functions by the Wannier90 code46,47. Mo-d and S-p (W-d and Te-p) orbitals are used to construct the Wannier functions for MoS2 (WTe2). The in-plane and out-of-plane BPVE coefficients are calculated by our own program WNLOP (Wannier Non-Linear Optics Package) based on effective tight-binding (TB) Hamiltonian. Convergence test of k-mesh is performed, and 500×500×1 (600×300×1) k-mesh is sufficient in BPVE calculations of MoS2 (WTe2). We adopt δ=0.02 eV for Eq. (6) and Eq. (8) in our calculation to take into account various relaxation processes. The 3D-like BPVE coefficients are obtained assuming an active single-layer with the thickness of LLaaccaaaaaaaa 13 14 3 slab D slab active L L σ σ = (9) where σσssssaaaa is the calculated BPVE coefficient, and LLssssaaaa (LLaaccaaaaaaaa < LLssssaaaa) is the effective thickness slab.