Evolution of ordered nanoporous phases during h-BN growth: Controlling the route from gas-phase precursor to 2D material by in-situ monitoring. Adrian Ruckhofer,† Marco Sacchi,‡ Anthony Payne,‡ Andrew P. Jardine,¶ Wolfgang E. Ernst,† Nadav Avidor,∗,¶ and Anton Tamt ̈ogl∗,† †Institute of Experimental Physics, Graz University of Technology, Graz, Austria ‡Department of Chemistry, University of Surrey, Guildford GU2 7XH, United Kingdom ¶Cavendish Laboratory, J. J. Thompson Avenue, Cambridge CB3 0HE, United Kingdom E-mail: nadavavidor@gmail.com; tamtoegl@gmail.com ABSTRACT: Large-area single-crystal monolayers of two-dimensional (2D) materials such as graphene and hexago- nal boron nitride (h-BN) can be grown by chemical vapour deposition (CVD). However, the high temperatures and fast timescales at which the conversion from a gas-phase precursor to the 2D material appear, make it extremely challenging to simultaneously follow the atomic arrangements. We utilise helium atom scattering to discover and control the growth of novel 2D h-BN nanoporous phases during the CVD process. We find that prior to the formation of h-BN from the gas-phase precursor, a metastable (3 × 3) structure is formed, and that excess deposition on the resulting 2D h-BN leads to the emergence of a (3 × 4) structure. We illustrate that these nanoporous structures are produced by partial dehydrogenation and polymerisation of the borazine precursor upon adsorption. These steps are largely unexplored during the synthesis of 2D materials and we unveil the rich phases during CVD growth. Our results provide significant foundations for 2D materials engineering in CVD, by adjusting or carefully controlling the growth conditions and thus exploiting these intermediate structures for the synthesis of covalent self-assembled 2D networks. Introduction Two-dimensional (2D) materials such as graphene and hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) offer technological promise1,2, e.g. with h-BN being considered to be the “ideal” dielectric for 2D based field-effect transistors3. However, their properties are highly dependent on the perfection of the 2D layers. For this reason, in- tense efforts have been devoted to study and improve the growth of defect-free 2D materials.4,5 A promising method of synthesising large-area 2D layers is chemi- cal vapour deposition (CVD) and the CVD synthesis of atomically thin h-BN on metal substrates is described in several review articles.6,7 The process, which is il- lustrated in Figure 1, involves a gas-phase precursor deposited on a solid substrate at elevated temperatures. By diffusion and dehydrogenation or fragmentation of the precursor, the adsorbates are attached to growing clusters and eventually form the 2D layer. A complete dehydrogenation of the precursor requires overcom- ing multiple energy barriers. As a result, it might be expected that at intermediate temperatures, dehydro- genation would not be complete, which in-turn can result in metastable or intermediate structures. For the synthesis of bulk h-BN it is known that the process involves several steps of borazine-polymerisation.8–11 There are several routes, but even in the bulk the pro- cess has not been studied in great detail. Here, we follow a series of structural changes to identify inter- mediate structures in 2D growth. by chemical vapour deposition: A gaseous precursor (e.g. bo- razine, B3N3H6) is brought into contact with a (hot) catalyst surface (Ru), triggering the chemical reactions such as break- ing of the borazine rings and dehydrogenation, followed by the assembly of the epitaxial overlayer. While it is crucial to understand the growth process, mechanistic and kinetic studies are rare and mostly focus on the growth of nanocarbons.12–15 Dehydro- 1 arXiv:2201.06440v2 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 2 Sep 2022 genation and intermediate structures during CVD of 2D materials have been proposed,16–22 but to the best of our knowledge have not been studied experimen- tally. In general, kinetics and the thermochemistry of intermediate products, may lead to metastable struc- tures. However, phase-diagrams due to partially dehy- drogenated precursors have not been reported. Most studies report completed overlayer structures while the complexity and individual steps, as illustrated in BN studies using real space methods23–26 concentrate on local order in completed h-BN structures, while re- ciprocal space studies27–29 have provided information about long-range order.30 In this paper we present a systematic analysis, at various temperatures beyond the ones reported for best growth conditions (1050 K–1100 K23,25,28) and at various dosing rates. By following h-BN growth in situ using helium atom scattering (HAS) we demon- strate the existence of metastable structures during the formation of h-BN from borazine (B3N3H6). HAS is a well-established technique for monitoring thin- film growth modes31–33 and has been used to study the quality of CVD-grown 2D materials34–37 and inter- layer interaction,38 yet investigations of intermediate structures have not been performed. In particular, we find that there is one precursor structure with a well- defined (3 × 3) periodicity, meaning a well-defined route for the polymerisation reaction which leads to h-BN. We further find that by dosing excess borazine, a (3 × 4) structure forms, which could be attributed to a partially polymerised second-layer on top of the formed h-BN. Our experimental results are complemented by van der Waals (vdW) corrected density functional theory (DFT) calculations which confirm the nature of the system, helping us to determine which self-assembled structures are compatible with the experimental re- sults. Results and Discussion The adsorption of the precursor gas (borazine, B3N3H6) on the Ru substrate has been investigated in several other studies using Auger electron spec- troscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, electron energy loss spectroscopy and low energy electron diffraction.39–41 There is general consensus in the literature, that borazine only adsorbs molecularly at low (¡140 K) temperatures40–42 with dehydrogenation setting in at temperatures of 150-250 K, depending on the substrate.40,41,43 Starting from about 600 K, again depending on the metallic substrate, the B-N ring is re- ported to break down into its atomic constituents.42,43 According to Paffet et al. 1000 K are necessary for h-BN formation on Ru(0001)39,40 while hydrogen desorption occurs over a wide temperature range41 and may even intercalate in the h-BN layer.44,45 Helium diffraction allows in situ measurements even at growth temperature, and is known for its unique sen- sitivity to adsorbates, including hydrogen atoms.46–54 Furthermore, unlike other established techniques,55 HAS is completely inert and does not modify the pro- cess under investigation.56 While the specular reflec- tion gives an estimate of adsorbate coverage on the clean surface, the angular distribution provides in- sight in the time evolution of periodic structures be- ing formed on the surface.30,35 In the present work, CVD growth was performed at a set crystal tempera- ture while monitoring the surface using repeated one- dimensional angular diffraction scans, where we ob- serve the emergence and disappearance of additional superstructures followed by the formation of h-BN. All experimental data was obtained with the Cam- bridge spin-echo apparatus which uses a nearly monochromatic atomic beam of 3He, scattered off the sample in a total scattering angle of 44.4° and with an incident energy of 8 meV (see Experimental Section in the Supporting Information). The parallel momentum transfer ∆K is given by ∆K = |∆K| = |Kf − Ki| = |ki| (sin θf − sin θi), with ki being the incident wavevector and θi and θf the incident and final angles with respect to the surface normal, re- spectively.57–59 Compared to techniques such as scan- ning tunnelling microscopy (STM), HAS averages over larger surface areas, typically ≈ 3 mm2. Therefore, the advantage of HAS is to give precise information about any long-range periodicity of surface structures. For ease of comparison, the diffraction scans for the different structures are plotted as a function of the par- allel momentum transfer, ∆K, relative to the G01 peak of the Ru(0001) substrate, |∆K/G01|. By converting the abscissa in this way, the position of the observed diffraction peaks directly reflects their periodicity with respect to the substrate lattice spacing. A precursor structure to h-BN growth First, we describe how borazine exposure at low tem- perature (T < 880 K) reveals a precursor structure on Ru(0001), which by further annealing at T = 880 K can be converted to h-BN. The purple line in Figure 2(a) shows a diffraction scan of the clean Ru(0001) substrate. Exposing Ru to 7 Langmuir (L) of borazine at a surface temperature of 600 K, results in decreased diffraction intensities and helium reflectivity. Moreover, the lack of any ad- ditional diffraction peaks is typical of a disordered structure.54 The behaviour is consistent with earlier studies showing that the B-N ring starts to break down into its constituents only above about 600 K.39,42,43 Upon increasing the temperature to 750 K while maintaining borazine overpressure, additional peaks start to appear between the specular and first order Ru diffraction peaks. Figure 2(b) (blue curve) shows the 2 for clean Ru(0001) in purple and the completed h-BN over- layer on Ru in red. The ⟨01 ̄10⟩ scanning direction (ΓM) is shown in the inset. The purple dash-dotted line indicates the position of the first order Ru diffraction peak and the red dotted lines the h-BN Moir ́e peaks. (b) Diffraction scans during borazine exposure reveal additional superstructures, depending on the growth temperature and total exposure. The position (shown by the arrows at the top) and spacing of the additional peaks reveal a (3 × 3) / (3 × 4) superstructure plotted in blue / green. Low exposure at lower temperatures reveals a (3 × 3) structure (blue curve, grown at 950 K), while at higher exposures and higher temperatures an in- termediate (3 × 4) pattern emerges (green curve, grown at 1020 K). To improve the signal to noise ratio, the sample was subsequently cooled down for the duration of both scans and the blue curve was scaled by a factor of 3 to facilitate comparison. characteristic diffraction pattern that emerges. Equidis- tant peaks at |∆K/G01| = 0.33 and 0.66 indicate a (3 × 3) periodic structure on the surface, which we label BNI. If dosing is performed at even higher tem- peratures (T ≥ 880 K), in addition to the observed BNI structure, a shoulder appears to the right-hand side of the first order Ru diffraction peak, indicating the formation of a h-BN structure on the surface (vertical red dotted line in Figure 2). The peak, which occurs at |∆K/G01| = 1.08, is a result of the commensurate Moir ́e pattern on Ru28 (see also h-BN periodicity in the SI). Since a (3 × 3) superstructure composed of intact borazine molecules shows only weak binding to the substrate, the observed BNI structure, as shown later in our DFT calculations, must be composed of partly dehydrogenated borazine molecules, in line with the reported low experimental dehydrogenation temper- ature on other substrates.43 Figure 3 illustrates in situ monitoring of the integrated peak intensities, which demonstrates that the BNI structure precedes the growth of h-BN. The exposure dependent inten- sities are obtained from repeated angular diffraction scans. Immediately after dosing begins, the (3 × 3) peaks start to rise rapidly (blue line), while only after a short delay the h-BN diffraction peak increases (red line), although less quickly than the BNI structure. The h-BN peak intensity reaches its maximum at the same point where the BNI structure disappears. We conclude that the BNI structure is converted into h-BN and acts as a precursor structure to the complete h-BN over- layer. Since the intensity of the BNI structure drops to almost zero at ≈9 L, it indicates that virtually all (3 × 3) domains are converted to h-BN. ties reveals that the BNI structure acts as precursor to the h-BN overlayer. The characteristic diffraction peaks for the BNI structure and the h-BN peak are plotted versus borazine exposure at a substrate temperature of 880 K. The BNI struc- ture increases prior to the h-BN intensity and has already disappeared when the h-BN intensity exhibits its maximum. The temperature region where the BNI structure evolves is in excellent agreement with the desorption temperature of hydrogen reported by Paffett et al.,39 which helps confirm the dehydrogenation process. Fur- ther, as mentioned earlier, bulk h-BN is known to form by a sequence of dehydrogenation processes, in which borazine polymerises to polyborazylene, which is then cross-linked in one or more steps.9,10 Our results sug- gest that a similar process happens at the ruthenium surface, but that in the 2D case, there is one clear intermediate step, i.e. the BNI structure, before the for- mation of h-BN. There are several possible real space structures, which are in line with the observed period- icity and composition22. We concentrate on providing experimental proof that such intermediate / precursor structures with long-range order exist, while the ex- act chemical composition of these structures is better probed with X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) studies40, beyond the mentioned structural analysis. Moreover, the precursor gas imposes a B/N ratio of 1:1 which we do not expect to change and we have there- fore focussed on supporting our structural characteri- 3 sation through detailed DFT modelling of appropriate candidate structures. DFT structural modelling We understand the BNI structure to consist of partially dehydrogenated, polymerised borazine analogous to the synthesis of bulk h-BN. Thus it is apparent that the 2D growth occurs in a step-by-step process and that not all hydrogen atoms are expected to be removed at the same time, due to the different bonding strengths to N and B atoms, as well as the bond formation between the N and the Ru atoms. Based on this attribution, we have made a vdW-corrected DFT investigation into the energetics of the BNI structure, from adsorption of the precursor gas to the complete h-BN overlayer. We start by considering a single borazine molecule in a (3 × 3) supercell (see Computational Methods in the Supporting Information), and move on to par- tially dehydrogenated borazine polymers. From the adsorption energies of isolated borazine molecules we observe that the bonding becomes much stronger with dehydrogenation, but the calculations cannot provide a definitive answer in terms of the dehydrogenation sequence (dehydrogenation of the B atoms is slightly more favourable than of the N atoms by ≈15 meV). However, as shown later for two borazine molecules per supercell, the N atoms can dehydrogenate more easily than the B atoms and the candidate structures for our observations can be clearly distinguished in terms of the adsorption energies. of the borazine precursor on Ru(0001), based on one molecule per (3 × 3) supercell. The results are shown for an intact (B3N3H6) and partially dehydrogenated (B3N3H3) adsorbate, considering various initial adsorp- tion sites and a rotation of 60◦ (see Figure 4(a)). The adsorption energies Eads are given for the final opti- mised adsorption sites and ∆E is the difference with respect to the minimum energy configuration of the system with the same dehydrogenation state. B3N3H6 B3N3H3 Site Eads (eV) ∆E (eV) Site Eads (eV) ∆E (eV) fcc 0.00 fcc 0.00 top 2.86 top 2.35 b→fcc 0.00 b→fcc 0.00 hcp 2.77 hcp 3.07 In Table 1 we compare the binding energies from vdW-corrected DFT for an intact (B3N3H6) and a par- tially dehydrogenated (B3N3H3) borazine molecule with one molecule per (3 × 3) supercell, confirming a much stronger bonding of B3N3H3. We consider various initial adsorption sites (Figure 4(a)) with re- spect to the C3 rotational axis through the centre of the molecule and a rotation of 60◦. Adsorption occurs in a flat face-to-face configuration, while bonding of the same adsorbates with a rotation of 0◦ is slightly weaker – the results are shown in the Supplementary Information (see Supplementary DFT calculations). In Table 1 the energy differences ∆E are given with respect to the minimum energy of the same dehydro- genation state in addition to the respective adsorption energies Eads. For both stoichiometric configurations the most favourable position is the fcc site and if the borazine molecule is initially placed on a bridge site it undergoes a transition to this position. The fcc config- uration for partially dehydrogenated borazine yields an adsorption energy of Eads=−8.95 eV and is shown in Figure 4(a) with the (3 × 3) supercell highlighted by the black dashed rhombus. The results for the in- tact borazine molecule (B3N3H6) are very similar with respect to the adsorption site, however, we obtain sig- nificantly weaker bonding strengths compared to the dehydrogenated molecule. Based on bulk h-BN studies we conclude that it is more likely that polymerised networks are formed.9,10 Starting from the minimum energy configuration of a single borazine molecule on the fcc site we continue by adding a second borazine molecule in the supercell. By considering various initial rotations of the additional molecule the energetically most favourable configura- tions were then identified. In contrast to the case of an isolated borazine molecule, the dehydrogenation sequence becomes clearly discernible in terms of the adsorption energies, with two borazine molecules. The N atoms in the ring adsorb on top of the Ru atoms and the borazine molecules lose all hydrogen atoms associated with the N atoms upon bond formation, in line with experimental results of the completed h-BN overlayer where inter-layer bonding is facilitated via the N atoms.6,23 Such a scenario is, however, different to bulk h-BN growth where ruthenium is not present and thus interaction with the substrate may give rise to an even faster loss of hydrogen compared to bulk studies. The calculations for two intact borazine molecules per supercell (2B3N3H6, not shown) yield weak bind- ing, since the H atoms start to overlap resulting in a tilt of the complete molecules with respect to the surface. Moreover, due to desorption of hydrogen atoms from the borazine at low temperatures it is unlikely that intact borazine will remain and so intact molecules will not be considered further.39 Therefore, we concentrate on partially and fully de- hydrogenated borazine molecules. Figure 4(b,c) shows the final optimised structure for 2B3N3H3 per supercell, illustrating that individual borazine molecules form bonds to each other. The bound B-N rings build up a nanostructured network with nanopores, i.e. where in between the B-N rings vacancies/pores of the Ru sub- strate are left behind. The high binding energy of the structure in Figure 4(b) with −6.28 eV compared to 4 −6.74 eV for the complete h-BN/Ru, may therefore ex- plain the stability of the BNI structure at temperatures ≈750 K as observed in the experiments. The structure in Figure 4(b) acts as an intermediate prior to complete dehydrogenation which is expected at elevated temperatures. The calculations show that first the hydrogen atoms detach from the nitrogen and bind to the Ru substrate on the hcp sites, inside the nanopores. The excess hydrogen adatoms inside the nanopores are likely to desorb relatively quickly at the temperature of the experiment.60 Therefore, Fig- ure 4(c) shows the optimised structure, starting with two fully dehydrogenated borazine molecules per su- percell, leading again to the formation of nanopores. Such an open structure could easily act as a precursor to the complete h-BN overlayer, since each pore only has to be “filled” with an additional dehydrogenated borazine molecule. Finally, the addition of further borazine molecules in the calculations, i.e. three per supercell, essentially leads to the formation of h-BN which gives rise to the strongest binding energy in the calculations. The route from the precursor BNI structure to the final h-BN overlayer, with several inter- mediate steps, is illustrated in Supplementary Figure 3. In addition to providing us with real-space struc- tures of the observed BNI precursor, there are several points which we note from the vdW DFT calculations: Dehydrogenation of borazine always gives rise to a stronger bonding to the substrate and the results show that the thermodynamically most stable configuration for three adsorbed borazine molecules is h-BN (Sup- plementary Figure 2(b)). We also see from the side views in Figure 4 that there occurs always some buck- ling (0.21 − 0.35 ̊A) and the adlayer is never perfectly flat. The results show that by carefully controlling the substrate temperature and thus the amount of excess hydrogen in future experiments, several BN nano-structures could be synthesized as shown for two cases in Figure 4(b,c). Moreover, careful changes of the starting conditions in the DFT calculations may even yield a “local” minimum energy configuration as in Supplementary Figure 2(c). Thus the system may be an ideal playground for the growth of different nano- structures and further metastable networks beside the ones reported in this work. Additional structures accompanying the h- BN growth So far, we have described the formation of a BNI struc- ture at T ≥ 750 K, which is converted to h-BN at T ≥ 880 K. However, upon complete conversion of the BNI structure to h-BN, exposing the surface to ex- cess borazine results in the emergence of an additional structure with a (3×4) periodicity, which we label BNII. The green line in Figure 2(b) illustrates the correspond- ing diffraction pattern with the h-BN Moir ́e diffraction peak being still present next to the first order Ru peak. As shown in a two-dimensional diffraction scan in Sup- plementary Figure 5, the (3 × 4) peaks are not a subset of the h-BN Moir ́e pattern. In addition, a smaller peak to the left of the first order Ru peak becomes visible which can be attributed to a substrate reconstruction peak28 due to the h-BN growth. To monitor the growth of the BNII structure we use a smaller borazine overpressure while holding the sam- ple temperature at 915 K. Figure 5(a) shows the evo- lution of the BNII and the BNI structure as blue and green curves, respectively. Here, the red line is again the integrated peak intensity of the h-BN diffraction peak. Immediately after exposing the surface to bo- razine, the BNI structure increases together with the h-BN peak. Further exposure leads to a decay of the BNI structure, while the h-BN feature still rises, indi- cating the growth of h-BN islands. At 7 L the h-BN diffraction peak saturates, while at the same time the BNI structure disappears. At this stage the h-BN over- layer is complete and after further dosing of borazine, the BNII structure starts to emerge. As discussed later this may be interpreted as a second layer being formed on top of h-BN. The measurement was repeated at an even lower dosing pressure, while holding the sample at the lower temperature of 880 K. In Figure 5(b) the same be- haviour is reproduced, yielding a h-BN layer with two additional structures, except that the emergence is de- layed to longer/higher exposures, thus indicating a kinetically driven conversion. With continuing borazine exposure to 20 L in Fig- ure 5(b), the BNII structure reaches its maximum with no further changes in the scattered intensity. Together with the rise of the BNII structure the h-BN peak inten- sity slowly starts to decay, likely due to diffuse scatter- ing from additional adsorbates at the surface or from domain walls of the BNII structure. Increasing the sur- face temperature to 1000 K gives rise to a decay of the BNII structure while the h-BN peak intensity starts to recover to its original value. Further temperature increase accelerates this process giving rise to a faster transition/conversion until the intermediate peaks dis- appear, leaving behind only the h-BN layer. Such a behaviour illustrates that ultimately h-BN is the most stable structure. Even though the borazine overpres- sure was still present, no additional peaks formed and the h-BN overlayer is the only remaining structure at the surface. From Figure 5(b) it becomes evident, that in contrast to the BNI structure, the BNII structure is much more stable at higher temperatures since the (3 × 4) diffrac- tion peaks are observed up to 1000 K. Further increase of the temperature to ≈ 1200 K gives rise to the sur- face migration of bulk-dissolved carbon, leading to the formation of graphene (see Supplementary diffraction scans) and thus eventually destroys the h-BN overlayer. The latter may open up the possibility to study the growth of h-BN/graphene heterostructures61–64 but is 5 borazine molecules per supercell. (a) For one partially dehydrogenated borazine molecule (B3N3H3) adsorption occurs on the fcc site, forming a (3 × 3) structure. (b) shows the structure for two partially dehydrogenated B3N3H3 molecules per supercell, where bound B-N rings form a nanostructured network and hydrogen atoms remain adsorbed on the Ru lattice inside the nanopores. In (c) the optimised structure for two fully dehydrogenated borazine molecules is shown, leading to the same nanopore structure with a (3 × 3) periodicity. beyond the scope of the current study. From our experiments it is likely that the BNII struc- ture is a second chemisorbed layer on top of already grown h-BN. Earlier works on an Ir(111) substrate showed the evolution of additional compact recon- structed regions with a (6 × 2) superstructure, which were attributed to reconstructed boron areas.65 On the other hand, CVD growth on polycrystalline Cu provided evidence for boron dissolution into the bulk together with multilayer h-BN formation via intercala- tion.66 However, both systems and studies are signifi- cantly different from our approach. E.g., the different behaviour in the first study could be due to changes of both the lattice constant and the h-BN-substrate bonding between Ru and Ir. Moreover, in light of the recent observation of h-BN multilayer growth3, a sec- ond chemisorbed layer is much more plausible. The BNII structure, as a second chemisorbed layer, consists of partly or completely dehydrogenated borazine molecules with a desorption temperature slightly above our performed measurements, since we see an adsorption/desorption equilibrium at tempera- tures <≈ 1000 K with an ultimate desorption at tem- peratures above this value. The existence of such a structure might be a precursor to multilayer synthesis if the original h-BN layer is of poor quality providing a high density of growth nuclei and thus explaining the reports of multilayer growth.3,66–69 In a set of additional DFT calculations summarised in Supplementary Table 2, we considered also the pos- sibility of borazine adsorption on top of h-BN/Ru as well as the formation of bi-layer h-BN.66–69 However, we can rule out the latter according to our deposition measurements, since we do not detect oscillations of the BNII structure or observations of any other peri- odicity, that would be indicative of multilayer h-BN growth. In line with the multi-stage process of h-BN bulk formation it is more likely that the BNII struc- ture consists of adsorbed molecules or polymerised borazine structures - with a weaker bonding compared to the first h-BN layer and therefore more likely to desorb. Further unlikely scenarios are discussed in Supplementary discussion. h-BN growth diagram on Ru(0001) The combination of measurements and DFT calcula- tions allows us to conclude that the whole system passes through various structural phases: Ru + BZ → BNI + h-BN → h-BN → BNII + h-BN → h-BN , with the outcome depending strongly on substrate tem- perature, borazine exposure and the point where one stops. In particular, the surface temperature strongly influences the kinetics and thus the duration and ap- pearance of the additional superstructures. Combin- ing the experimental results we derive a growth dia- gram as shown in Figure 6, which describes the phe- nomenology of various structures arising during the CVD growth of h-BN on Ru(0001). Below 750 K no periodic overlayer structure on the Ru(0001) surface is found. Between 750 and 880 K the BNI structure forms on the surface which upon further borazine exposure vanishes and leaves a disordered phase behind. The minimum temperature to form a h-BN overlayer on the surface was determined to be 880 K. Above this temperature we observe additional structures, starting with a (3 × 3) structure (BNI) fol- lowed by a (3 × 4) periodic diffraction pattern (BNII). These structures always appear in addition to the h- BN layer and ultimately vanish, leaving a complete h-BN overlayer behind (see Figure 2(a) for a diffrac- tion scan of a complete h-BN overlayer without any additional structures). We have thus identified two 6 representing the different structures versus borazine expo- sure. After the BNI structure has disappeared the h-BN peak saturates giving rise to a conversion and further exposure leads to the rise of the BNII structure. Due to a higher sub- strate temperature of 915 K in (a), the BNI structure disap- pears already after an exposure of ≈7 L compared to 10 L at 880 K in (b), thus indicating a kinetically driven conver- sion. Dosing in (b) is then further continued with subse- quent changes of the surface temperature as stated above the diagram. After long enough exposure the BNII structure disappears leaving a strong h-BN intensity behind. kinetic barriers which need to be overcome in order to form ordered structures on the Ru substrate: A temper- ature of 750 K is necessary for the precursor structure to result, while at 880 K the h-BN formation sets in. As mentioned above, the BNI precursor structure is always present, however, with increasing temperature its transformation into h-BN becomes faster. As further illustrated in h-BN periodicity in the SI, the h-BN periodicity and superstructure are strongly dependent on the experimental parameters, in partic- ular the growth temperature. The exact h-BN peri- odicity and the Moir ́e pattern upon h-BN formation on Ru(0001)23,25, due to the small lattice mismatch between ah−BN and aRu(0001), is determined by the growth temperature due to a so-called a “lock-in” ef- fect at that respective growth temperature70. Together with the above reported additional structures, it con- firms the complexity of the whole system and its depen- dence on minute changes of the growth parameters. structures observed on a Ru surface within various tempera- ture ranges and with increasing borazine exposure. At tem- peratures below 750 K no periodic structure is formed, while above, a (3 × 3) pattern is observed, disappearing again at higher exposures. Above 880 K the (3×3) structure precedes the growth of h-BN, with the temperature being necessary for the formation of h-BN. With increasing borazine exposure, the latter is followed by a structure with (3 × 4) periodicity with respect to the Ru lattice, leading again to h-BN after long enough exposure. (See text for a precise explanation of the structures.) Discussion and summary In summary, we investigated the growth of h-BN on a Ru(0001) substrate using helium atom scattering. Em- ploying various growth conditions, characteristic peri- odic structures are measured during borazine exposure in addition to the h-BN diffraction peak as outlined in the diagram of Figure 6. Between 750 and 880 K a structure with (3 × 3) periodicity, that precedes the growth of h-BN, is observed with the minimum temper- ature necessary to form a h-BN overlayer being 880 K. Above this temperature, in addition to the emerging h-BN layer, we observe additional structures with a (3 × 3) superstructure followed by a (3 × 4) diffrac- tion pattern, eventually disappearing and leaving a complete h-BN overlayer behind. It is clearly evident from our observations that a pre- cursor structure precedes the growth of h-BN at lower temperatures and an additional structure co-exists with h-BN at higher temperatures. Both are strongly depen- dent on the growth conditions, but always transform into a fully h-BN covered substrate at sufficiently high temperatures, thus confirming that the latter is the thermodynamically most stable structure. Our study of the structural evolution during the arrangement of h-BN from the precursor gas illustrates steps in the formation process itself and we hope to encourage future studies linking our structural information with chemical characterisation. We believe that these intermediate metastable struc- 7 tures may be present in many more systems where 2D materials are grown based on precursor-based CVD, at least at lower temperatures and for higher amounts of excess hydrogen compared to the “ideal” growth conditions (see Outlook for other 2D materials in the supplementary information). In the case studied here, they ultimately always transform into the complete 2D layer - and thus usually higher temperatures are reported as the “ideal” growth conditions for h-BN in the literature. These intermediate structures seem to have been largely overlooked so far. Possibly, because they are difficult to detect owing to experimental complications since the structural advent of 2D materials is often not investigated during the growth itself, or is only accessible ex situ. More importantly, with increasing growth temperature the transformation to h-BN may occur so fast that they are easily missed.26 The strong dependence regarding the emergence of these structures on temperature and exposure sug- gests that further uncovered “routes” and polymeri- sation steps are viable and the system may present an ideal playground to end up with different nano- structures. It further suggests that a careful tuning of the growth conditions via temperature and excess hydrogen from the precursor may provide new broadly applicable strategies for controlling the growth of spe- cific nanostructures. Additional possibilities involve changing the substrate or the precursor gas, and hence tuning the thermochemistry of the surface-adsorbate complex which may further alter the subsequent re- action pathway. E.g. by changing the substrate, the metal-N bond strength may be tuned since one expects the bonding strength to increase as one moves from right to left in the transition metal series. We hope that the wide ranging implications for a controlled growth of 2D materials and nanostructures will stim- ulate a broad range of new research, understanding and application. Conflicts of interest The authors declare no competing financial interest. Acknowledgements This research was funded in whole, or in part, by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF) [P29641-N36 & P34704- N]. For the purpose of open access, the author has applied a CC BY public copyright licence to any Au- thor Accepted Manuscript version arising from this submission. We would also like to thank W. Allison for helpful discussion regarding the interpretation of the data, Chris Pickard for additional structure cal- culations based on a neural network approach and Moritz Will for his advice in terms of the precursor (bo- razine) purchase and treatment. A. R. acknowledges funding by the Doctoral School and a scholarship of TU Graz. The authors acknowledge use of facilities at and support by the Cambridge Atom Scattering Cen- tre (https://atomscattering.phy.cam.ac.uk) and the EPSRC award EP/T00634X/1 with the help of J. Ellis. M.S. is grateful for support from the Royal Soci- ety (URF/R/191029) and funding through the EPSRC (EP/S029834/1). This work used the ARCHER2 UK Na- tional Supercomputing Service (http://www.archer2. ac.uk) via membership of the UK’s HEC Materials Chemistry Consortium, which is funded by the EPSRC (EP/R029431). Supplemental information Supplementary material can be found online. Data availability The datasets generated and analysed during the cur- rent study are available from the TU Graz repository, with the identifier 10.3217/n9db1-sf358.