Reconfigurable Enhancement of Actuation Forces by Engineered Losses in non-Hermitian Metamaterials Abhishek Guptaa, Arkady Kurnosovb, Tsampikos Kottosb,вҲ—, Ramathasan Thevamarana,вҲ—вҲ— aDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, 53706, USA bWave Transport in Complex Systems Lab, Physics Department, Wesleyan University; Middletown, CT-06459, USA Abstract While boosting signals with amplification mechanisms is a well-established approach, attenuation mecha- nisms are typically considered an anathema because they degrade the efficiency of the structures employed to perform useful operations on these signals. An emerging alternate viewpoint promotes losses as a novel design element by utilizing the notion of exceptional point degeneracies (EPDs)вҖ”points in parameter space where the eigenvalues of the underlying system and the associated eigenvectors simultaneously coalesce. Here, we demonstrate a direct consequence of such eigenbasis collapse in elastodynamicsвҖ”an unusual enhancement of actuation force by a judiciously designed non-Hermitian metamaterial supporting an EPD that is cou- pled to an actuation source. Intriguingly, the EPD enables this enhancement while maintaining a constant signal quality. Our work constitutes a proof-of-principle design which can promote a new class of reconfig- urable nano-indenters and robotic-actuators. Importantly, it reveals the ramifications of non-Hermiticity in boosting the Purcell emissivity enhancement factor beyond its expected value, which can guide the design of metamaterials with enhanced emission that does not deteriorate signal quality for mechanical, acoustic, optical, and photonic applications. Keywords: Exceptional point degeneracies, Purcell effect, Non-Hermitian elastodynamics, Viscoelasticity, Enhanced actuation Unusual wave phenomena associated with phononic crystals and locally resonant metamaterials have been utilized for various engineering applications from tunable acoustic bandgaps to wave rectification , cloaking , and non-reciprocal and topological wave guides . On the other hand, the unveiled wealth of underlying mathematical structures of the non-Hermitian wave systems and their utilization in new technologies have flourished over the last few years. The non-Hermitian notions have influenced various areas of physics and engineering such as optics and photonics , RF and microwaves , optomechanics , acoustics , physics of cold atoms , magnonics , and most recently elastodynamics . Consequently, new concepts have been developed and realized in these frameworks. Examples include a loss-induced transparency , unidirectional invisibility , asymmetric transport with вҲ—Corresponding author вҲ—вҲ—Corresponding author Email addresses: tkottos@wesleyan.edu (Tsampikos Kottos), thevamaran@wisc.edu (Ramathasan Thevamaran) Preprint submitted to Elsevier February 14, 2023 arXiv:2201.10744v4 [physics.app-ph] 10 Feb 2023 frequency purity , parity-time-symmetric lasers , hypersensitive sensors , etc. Many of these phenomena are reliant on the existence of EPDs. Their implementation requires judicious design of attenuation (and/or amplification) and impedance profiles that lead to enhanced wave-matter interactions. As opposed to many of these previous studies that emphasized the topology of the eigenfrequency surfaces in the parameter space near an EPD, here we exploit phenomena intimately related to the eigenvector coalescence at EPDs and its ramifications in the shape of the Local Density of States (LDoS). The latter has recently attracted a lot of attention in the optics framework . Specifically, it was theoretically argued that a direct consequence of such eigenbasis collapse is an anomalous emissivity enhancement of a source when it is brought at the proximity of an environment (e.g., a cavity) featuring EPDs. The underlying physics of emissivity enhancement of a source due to a surrounding environment is known as Purcell effect and has been initially developed in the framework of quantum electrodynamics . It described the modification of the spontaneous emission rate of a quantum source by changing its environment via manipulation of the local density of states (LDoS) of the quantum system. The latter information is imprinted in the GreenвҖҷs function that describes the surrounding environment. Interestingly, this same physics is intimately connected with one of the most fundamental rules of quantum mechanics: The FermiвҖҷs Golden Rule (FGR) which links emission rates to the LDoS of the system. Elucidating the Purcell physics from this angle allows for expanding its applications to various wave systems where cavity manipulation can be employed to tailor the LDoS of the environment to which a source is coupled. Purcell effect has benefitted numerous technologies such as nano-optical spectroscopy, nanolasing, quantum information processing, energy harvesting, emission enhancement of sound and elastodynamic sources, etc . An investigation, therefore, of non-Hermiticity and EPDs and their ramifications in FGR and Purcell physics constitutes a dual benefit: on a fundamental level, it will provide us a deeper understanding of the connection between engineered impedance and one of the basic rules, i.e., FGR, while on the technological level, it will allow us to exploit the effects of non-Hermitian spectral singularities like EPDs to enhance the emissivity of mechanical sources. To this end, we have designed a two-mode cavity made by a non-Hermitian elastodynamic metamaterial consisting of two coupled resonant elements with differential damping (or non-proportional damping) between are coupled by a coiled Hookean spring of stiffness Оә, see Figure 1(a,b). When the Hookean coupling strength between the two resonators acquires a critical value, the system exhibits an EPD associated with a coalescence of its eigenmodes (Figure 1(c)) and the corresponding eigenfrequencies (Figure 1(d)). Beyond this critical coupling, the eigenfrequencies bifurcate into two resonant modes with approximately the same constant linewidths (Figure 1(d)). Linewidth is a measure of the spectral width of a resonance peakвҖ” characterized by the half-width of the resonance force peak at 1/ вҲҡ 2 of the peakвҖҷs height. It is equal to the imaginary part of the complex eigenfrequency. In this domain, a constant-amplitude dynamic force 2 (a) A schematic and (b) a photograph of the experimental setup used in this study showing a non-Hermitian metamaterial consisting of two coupled resonators with one made of a Hookean aluminum spring and the other made of a viscoelastic material (PDMS) with controlled crosslinking. This metamaterial is mounted between a piezoelectric actuator (forced boundary condition) and a dynamic force sensor with an applied static precompression and supported by a low-friction Teflon surface mount. A frequency sweep is performed by applying a sinusoidal displacement excitation U sin(Пүt) (U is amplitude and Пү is frequency) on the left side (undamped resonator/mass). The exerted force Fout sin(Пүt + Оұ), (Fout is force amplitude and Оұ is phase lag) is measured on the right side for various coupling spring stiffnesses (Оә). (c) The eigenmodes of the non- Hermitian system are skewed and become degenerate at the exceptional point corresponding to a critical coupling Оә = ОәEP . (d) Theoretically predicted reaction force amplitude as a function of excitation frequency (Пү) and coupling (Оә). The force exerted on the force sensor is twice as large in the proximity of the EPD (red dot) as compared to when metamaterial is operating away from the EPD, i.e., with higher coupling spring stiffness (Оә >> ОәEP ). applied on the undamped resonator side of the metamaterial results in an actuation forceвҖ”i.e., the force exerted by the damped resonator side of the metamaterial onto the dynamic force sensorвҖ”whose amplitude is controlled by the coupling strength between the two masses without any deterioration of force-signal quality. The input force is enhanced by 6.4 times at the proximity of an EPD compared to the 3.2 times enhancement produced by the same cavity-source system when the metamaterial does not support an EPD, see Figure 1(d) and Figure S2 in SI. A relation between the actuation force and the dissipative power from the viscous element allows to employ a mapping between electrodynamics and elastodynamics: a monochromatic source (actuator) emits light into a вҖңdarkвҖқmode, i.e., non-radiative mode (undamped resonator), which is coupled to a вҖңbrightвҖқmode (damped resonator). At some critical coupling the emission power (dissipative power) from the вҖңbrightвҖқmode experiences a four-fold enhancement, related to a two-fold enhancement 3 analysis (DMA) of frequency-dependent storage and loss moduli of PDMS and corresponding power law fits. (c) Conceptual design of non-Hermitian coupled resonators with differential damping under fixed boundary condition. Viscoelastic material (damped component) is represented by a parallel combination of an elastic spring and a springpot, where k2 is the complex dynamic stiffness of the viscoelastic material. Undamped component is represented by a Hookean spring of stiffness k1. Damped and undamped components are coupled together by a coiled spring of spring constant Оә. of the exerted actuation force. This phenomenon cannot be explained by conventional Purcell physics as the cavity quality factor remains constant. Its origin is traced back to the coalescence of super-modes (eigenvectors of the coupled resonators system) near the EPD. It is reflected in a narrowing of the GreenвҖҷs function that describes the metamaterialвҖ”and consequently its LDoSвҖ”which acquires a square Lorentzian line-shape whose peak has a fourfold enhancement with respect to the peak of a single resonance. Our proof-of-principle metamaterial system promotes a new class of nano-indenters, atomic force microscopes and robotic-actuators. To achieve differential damping between the two resonant elements of the metamaterial, we have designed and fabricated two types of springs: a compliant aluminum spring with specifically designed stiffness for the undamped component and a viscoelastic Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) for the damped component (Figure 2(a,b)). For the undamped component, we fabricated a lightweight aluminum spring (T6-6061), whose geometry was designed using finite element modeling such that the spring does not yield plastically 4 under static pre-stress. Its effective stiffness allows for an EPD to form as we vary the coupling between the two elements. Quasistatic and dynamic mechanical analysis of the aluminum spring (Figure 2(a)) indicates that it follows HookeвҖҷs law with a spring constant k1 = 67.86 N/mm as designed, resulting in a natural frequency of Пү0 = пҝҪ k1/m вүҲ 609 Hz for the undamped resonator. We fabricated the PDMS films with different amounts of crosslinking, which was controlled by varying the percentage of the curing-agent (5 to 10% wt.) to tailor its dynamic modulus and loss-tangent. Then, 6 mm diameter cylindrical specimens were cutout and preconditioned through five quasistatic compressive loading-unloading cycles up to 30% strain to remove any potential variations in the constitutive response of the pristine material. We used an optimal cylindrical specimenвҖ”a softer PDMS with large loss-tangent identified from the materialвҖҷs storage and loss moduli measured by dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA)вҖ”as the damped spring component of the metamaterial. The DMA was performed by first applying a 10% static precompression strain to the cylindrical PDMS specimens and then harmonically exciting them with a piezoelectric actuator (Physik Instrumente P841.10) at prescribed strain amplitudes and at frequencies ranging from 1 Hz to 1200 Hz while measuring the response force by a dynamic force sensor (PCB 208C01). The measured amplitude and phase lag between the actuation and the dynamic force signal were then used to calculate the frequency- by measuring the damping properties of different materials with known loss-tangents such that any phase lag occurring due to the force sensor and the actuator at higher frequencies is corrected for in the measurements. Also, the actuator and the force sensor in our setup are orders of magnitude stiffer than the materials and metamaterial we tested. Hence, any effect due to their deformation on the measurements is negligible. The measured storage and loss moduli were then fitted using power-law functions (see Figure 2(b)). The fits were used for the numerical modeling as well as the design of the metamaterial. We model the dynamics of the metamaterial by the following integro-differential equations (1) (2) Assuming E(t) is the relaxation modulus and Оө(t) is the axial strain in PDMS, then Пғ(t) is given by the Boltzmann superposition integral as follows t пҝҪ 0 E(t вҲ’ П„)dОө(П„) dП„ dП„ (3) Above equations describes two coupled masses m1, m2 with displacements x1(t), x2(t) respectively. The Hookean spring constant of the aluminum spring is k1, and x0(t) = U sin(Пүt) is the displacement prescribed by the actuator, while Fout = вҲ’Пғ(t)A is the force exerted on the mass m2 with A(= 28.274 mm2) and Пғ(t) being the cross-sectional area and the stress response of the PDMS specimen respectively. After taking the 5 Fourier transform, Eqs. (1,2) in the frequency domain takes the form (4) (5) where Пғ(Пү) is the dynamic stress amplitude which can be expressed as a function of frequency dependent storage (EвҖІ) and loss modulus (EвҖІвҖІ) as follows , i = вҲҡ вҲ’1 (6) specimen. (5) can be rewritten as follows (7) In our metamaterial design, the real part of the effective stiffness of the PDMS specimen (EвҖІ(Пү)(A/h)) is approximately equal to the Hookean springвҖҷs stiffness (k1) in the frequency range of our experiment, which makes the natural frequency of both damped and undamped oscillators (when they are not coupled part because they are causally linked via the Kramers-Kronig relations due to their common originвҖ”Fourier transform of a time-dependent relaxation modulus . Both storage and loss modulus stay almost constant in the frequency range of our experiment (Figure 2(b)), thus keeping the differential damping constant. In systems with an independent source of dissipation, the damping factor can be tuned to tailor the location of the exceptional point . However, in our case, damping (EвҖІвҖІ) and stiffness (EвҖІ) are connected. Thus, our system exhibits constant differential damping and zero detuning with coupling as the tunable parameter. Eqs. (4,7) can be written in matrix form as follows пЈұ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈІ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈі вҲ’Пү2 пЈ® пЈ° m 0 0 m пЈ№ пЈ» пҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ M + пЈ® пЈ° k1 + Оә вҲ’Оә вҲ’Оә Оә + Re (k2(Пү)) пЈ№ пЈ» пҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ K +i пЈ® пЈ° 0 0 0 Im (k2(Пү)) пЈ№ пЈ» пҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ C пЈј пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҪ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҫ пЈұ пЈІ пЈі x1(Пү) x2(Пү) пЈј пЈҪ пЈҫ = пЈұ пЈІ пЈі k1U 0 пЈј пЈҪ пЈҫ (8) where M, K, and C are the mass, stiffness, and damping matrices. Noteworthily, the damping matrix (C) doesnвҖҷt commute with the stiffness (K) and mass (M) matrices, which suggests that our system exhibits non-proportional damping . The corresponding eigenfrequencies ПүВұ of the metamaterial are found by solving the characteristic equation associated with Eqs. (4,7). Figure 3(a,b) shows the real and imaginary parts of ПүВұ as functions of the stiffness Оә of the coiled coupling spring. A critical coupling, ОәEP enforces an EPD, a coalescence of the resonant frequencies, ПүвҲ’ = Пү+ = ПүEP , as well as the corresponding eigenvectors. 6 (b) (a) ПүвҲ’ Пү+ ПүвҲ’ Пү+ (a) The real part (peak position) and (b) the imaginary part (half of peak width at 1/ вҲҡ 2 of peak height) of resonant frequencies (ПүВұ) vs. coupling strength, obtained by a modal curve-fitting of the experimentally measured force spectra (Figure 4(a)). The solid and dotted lines are the results of the simulations with the model described by Eqs. (4,5) where dispersion effects are considered. The Hookean spring constant was taken to be k1 = 67.86 N/mm. As the coupling stiffness Оә is increased above ОәEP the modes separate from one another, i.e. ПүR вҲ’ вүЎ Re (ПүвҲ’) Мё= Re (Пү+) вүЎ ПүR +, while their linewidths remain approximately the same, i.e. ПүI вҲ’ вүЎ Im(ПүвҲ’) вүҲ Im(Пү+) вүЎ ПүI + (see methods in SI). Our modeling is further validated by a direct comparison with the measured eigenvalues (see methods in SI), see Figure 3(a,b). We further evaluate the mechanical power dissipated from mass m2, which takes the form (see methods in SI) Pd(Пү) = Пү 2ПҖ Wd = ОҰe В· Оҫ(Пү) , Оҫ(Пү) = 2Пү ПҖ Im(G11(Пү)) (9) where Wd(Пү) = Ah пҝҪ 2ПҖ/Пү 0 Пғ(t) dОө ПҖ 4 F 2 in m depends only on the equivalent input force from the actuator Fin = k1U acting on the mass m1 = m, and G11(Пү) is the element of the GreenвҖҷs function that describes the system of Eqs. (4,5) The Eq. (9) establishes a connection between the power dissipated by the elastodynamic metamaterial shown in Figure 1(a,b) and the Purcell physics of quantum optics. The analogies become clearer once we interpret the imaginary part of the GreenвҖҷs function Оҫ(Пү) as the LDoS of the mechanical resonant cavity formed by the metamaterial, and the piezoelectric actuator that excites the system as an emitter placed in the proximity of this cavity. Then the mechanical power emitted by the metamaterial is the analogue of the emissive power in the quantum optics framework. In the latter framework, Purcell realized that the spontaneous emission rate of a quantum emitter is enhanced (or suppressed) by appropriately engineering its surrounding environment, and therefore, the LDoS . Further theoretical progress can be made by assuming that the storage and loss moduli take a constant value in the frequency range of our experiments which are EвҖІ = k1h A = 4.675 MPa and EвҖІвҖІ = 1.5235 MPa (see methods in SI). This approximation is justified by the slow frequency dependence that the PDMS 7 exhibits, see Figure 2(b). Under this approximation, the critical coupling is ОәEP = A 2hEвҖІвҖІ, and for Оә вүҘ ОәEP the two resonant modes exhibit approximately the same decay rate 2ПүI Вұ вүҲ О“ вүЎ A 2mhПү0 EвҖІвҖІ (Figure 3(b)). In this case Оҫ(Пү) becomes Оҫ(Пү) = 1 ПҖ О“ В· Пү0 В· (Оә/m)2Пү (Пү2 вҲ’ Пү2 0)2 (Пү2 вҲ’ Пү2 0 вҲ’ 2Оә/m)2 + (2О“Пү0)2 (Пү2 вҲ’ Пү2 0 вҲ’ Оә/m)2 (10) where Пү0 = пҝҪ k1/m. Because at the proximity of the EPD the two eigenfrequencies degenerate at ПүR Вұ = ПүEP вүҲ Пү0 пҝҪ 1 + О“/Пү0 вүҲ Пү0 (see methods in SI), one naturally expects that Оҫ(Пү), and subsequently Pd(Пү), will also be modified. To better understand the consequence of EPD on them, we first evaluate Оҫ(Пү) in the vicinity of Пү вүҲ ПүEP . From Eq. (10), we get that (see SI) ОҫEP(Пү) вүҲ 1 2ПҖ пҝҪ (Пү вҲ’ ПүEP)2 + (О“/2)2 пҝҪ2 (11) corresponding to a square-LorentzianвҖ”as opposed to the more traditional Lorentzian line-shape charac- terizing the LDoS away from an EPD. In the other limiting case of Оә >> ОәEP , the two resonant frequencies ПүR вҲ’ вүҲ Пү0 and ПүR + вүҲ пҝҪ Пү2 0 + (2Оә/m) (see methods in SI) are well separated from each other. In this case one can approximate Eq. (10) as a sum of two Lorentzians centered at ПүВұ and having the same linewidth О“. Specifically, we have ОҫвҲһ(Пү) вүҲ 1 8ПҖ пҝҪ Вұ О“/2 пҝҪ Пү вҲ’ ПүR Вұ пҝҪ2 + (О“/2)2 (12) which can be used as a reference for measuring the effects of EPD in the power emission. At this point, it is instructive to introduce the rescaled dissipated power P (Пүe) = Pd (Пүe) /P вҲһ d пҝҪ ПүR Вұ пҝҪ where P вҲһ d (ПүВұ) вүЎ ПҖ 2 ОҰe В· ОҫвҲһ (ПүВұ) and Пүe = ПүR Вұ is the frequency of the actuation force which is considered to be monochromatic and at resonant frequency. Substituting Eqs. (11) and (12) back in the general expression for the emissivity might be slightly larger/smaller than a factor of four, i.e., P(Пүe = ПүEP ) вүҲ 4 + O пҝҪ О“ Пү0 пҝҪ + O пҝҪ Оә k1 пҝҪ , where О“ Пү0 << 1; Оә k1 < 1. The enhanced dissipated power due to the four-fold enhancement of the peak of Оҫ(Пү) is also reflected in the actuation force emitted from the metamaterial and measured by the dynamic force sensor attached to frequency of the actuator. At the same time, the emitted force amplitude |Fout(Пүe)| is пҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪ2A пҝҪ hПүeEвҖІвҖІ (Пүe) Pd (Пүe) (13) used Eq. (9) to express the strain in terms of the emitted power as |Оө(Пү)| = пҝҪ 4Pd(Пү)/ (ПҖEвҖІвҖІAh). From Eq. 8 single sharp peak into two broad peaks can be observed as coupling increases. (b) Emitted force amplification factor F(ПүВұ) vs. the rescaled coupling. The experimental data are indicated in filled diamonds. The solid black line indicates the results of the dispersionless modeling with k1 = 70 N/mm. Black dashed line indicate the results of the simulation of model Eqs. (4,5) for k1 = 67.86 N/mmвҖ”corresponding to best fit model. Curves corresponding to k1 = 70 N/mm and k1 = 65 N/mm represent the upper and lower uncertainty bounds of data fitting in Figure 2. A two-fold enhancement is observed in all cases. (13) we can further estimate the force amplification factor F(Пүe) вүЎ Fout (Пүe) F вҲһ out (ПүR Вұ) = пҝҪ P (Пүe), which for ОәEP and driving frequency Пүe = ПүEP is F(Пүe = ПүEP ) = 2. We point out that the force amplification factor F(Пүe) indicates an additional enhancement relative to the typical Purcell force enhancement occurring in the actuating force F вҲһ out(ПүR Вұ) (see Figure S2 in SI) for the same metamaterial-source configuration when the metamaterial does not support an EPD. We have tested the validity of the above predictions by direct measurements of the emitted actuation force amplitude (Figure 4(a)) for various coupling stiffness Оә versus the driving frequency Пүe (see methods in SI). From these data we extracted the force amplification factor F(Пүe = ПүВұ) and report it as a function of the coupling stiffness Оә normalized by the coupling stiffness corresponding to the EPD, ОәEP , in Figure 4(b). The experimental data confirm the above theoretical predictions very well. In the same figure, we also report the force amplification factor calculated numerically from Eqs. (4,5). From these equations, we extracted the frequency-dependent displacement amplitude x2(Пү) using the dispersion characteristics of the stress function, in Eq. (13), we have calculated F(Пүe = ПүR Вұ) for three different k1 constants to evaluate the robustness of the observed two-fold enhancement. In the same figure, we also report the theoretical results of the non-dispersive model (solid black line). All curves confirm the two-fold enhancement in exerted actuation force at the proximity of the EPD with respect to the actuation force value corresponding to large coupling constants where a standard cavity-enhancement Purcell effect occurs. In conclusion, we have demonstrated experimentally and analyzed theoretically an enhancement in the exerted actuation force and the emitted mechanical power by a non-Hermitian elastodynamic cavityвҖ”a 9 metamaterial consisting of undamped and damped resonators. It occurs when the actuation source is coupled only to the undamped resonator (a вҖңdarkвҖқmode) while the emission is measured on the viscoelastic element (the вҖңbrightвҖқmode). The origin of this enhancement has been traced to the reorganization of the super- modes of the metamaterial in the proximity of an EPD. Our experiments pave the way for understanding the ramifications of non-Hermiticity and EPD engineering in the manipulation of the Purcell factor of narrow- band emitters. Additionally, while coupled oscillators and periodic structures have been extensively studied in vibroacoustics under various scenarios, our work provides a unique metamaterial design pathway that utilizes differential damping as a design element to realize exceptional point degeneracies experimentally and demonstrates a novel phenomenon of enhanced emission at constant quality factor. Our work paves the way to an unexplored realm of physics in non-Hermitian systems and their potential in various applications, such as a new class of indenters for material hardness measurements or enhanced reconfigurable actuators in robotics. Acknowledgements RT and AG acknowledge the financial support from the Solid Mechanics Program of the Army Research Office (ARO) (Award No.: W911NF2010160) and the Dynamics, Control, and System Diagnostics (DCSD) Program of the National Science Foundation (NSF) (Award No.: NSF-CMMI-1925530). TK and AK ac- knowledge the financial support from the DCSD Program of the NSF (Award No.: NSF-CMMI-1925543) and from the Simons Foundation for Collaboration in MPS grant No 733698. We also acknowledge the assistance of Dr. Jizhe Cai on PDMS sample fabrication Appendix A. Supplementary data Supplementary material related to this article can be found online