1 Pseudo-hydrodynamic flow of quasiparticles in semimetal WTe2 at room temperature Young-Gwan Choi1†, Manh-Ha Doan1,2†, Gyung-Min Choi1,3*, Maxim N. Chernodub4,5* 1 Department of Energy Science, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, Korea 2 Department of Physics, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby 2800, Denmark 3 Center for Integrated Nanostructure Physics, Institute for Basic Science, Suwon 16419, Korea 4 Institut Denis Poisson UMR 7013, Université de Tours, 37200, France 5 Pacific Quantum Center, Far Eastern Federal University, Sukhanova 8, Vladivostok, Russia †These authors contribute equally *Corresponding authors (gmchoi@skku.edu; maxim.chernodub@cnrs.fr) Recently, much interest has emerged in fluid-like electric charge transport in various solid-state systems. The hydrodynamic behavior of the electronic fluid reveals itself as a decrease of the electrical resistance with increasing temperature (the Gurzhi effect1,2) in narrow conducting channels3,4, polynomial scaling of the resistance as a function of the channel width5, substantial violation of the Wiedemann–Franz law6,7 supported by the emergence of the Poiseuille flow4,8-10. Similarly to whirlpools in flowing water, the viscous electronic flow generates vortices, resulting in abnormal sign-changing electrical response driven by the backflow of electrical current11. Experimentally, the presence of the hydrodynamic vortices was observed in low-temperature graphene as a negative voltage drop near the current-injecting contacts12. However, the question of whether the long-ranged sign-changing electrical response can be produced by a mechanism other than hydrodynamics has not been addressed so far. Here we use polarization-sensitive laser microscopy to demonstrate the emergence of visually similar abnormal sign-alternating patterns in charge density in multilayer tungsten ditelluride at room temperature where this material does not exhibit true electronic hydrodynamics13. We argue that this pseudo-hydrodynamic behavior appears due to a subtle interplay between the diffusive transport of electrons and holes. In particular, the sign-alternating charge accumulation in WTe2 is supported by the unexpected backflow of compressible neutral electron-hole current, which creates charge-neutral whirlpools in the bulk of this nearly compensated semimetal. We demonstrate that the exceptionally large spatial size of the charge domains is sustained by the long recombination time of electron-hole pairs. 2 Tungsten ditelluride (WTe2) is a remarkable representative of a family of non-magnetic layered transition-metal dichalcogenides, which provides a ubiquitous arena for investigation of diverse quantum effects including the quantum spin Hall effect14-16 in a single-layered WTe2 and a type-II Weyl semimetal phase in thick crystals17,18. The electronic transport in semimetallic WTe2 at temperature 20 K demonstrates collective hydrodynamic behavior that appears to be in sharp contrast with the expected diffusive drift of a Fermi liquid13. The charge flow resembles a classical fluid when the momentum-conserving carrier-carrier scattering length becomes substantially shorter than the momentum-relaxing length governed by interactions of the charge carriers with phonons and impurities. Outside of a narrow temperature window (in particular, at room temperature), the charge transport in narrow WTe2 flakes cannot be described as a hydrodynamic flow because the above condition is not fulfilled liquid13. The hydrodynamic flow of electrons can lead to a nonlocal macroscopic signature of viscosity18-20. In graphene, a localized injection of the electronic current creates whirlpools in the electron flow thus resembling a classical fluid11. The whirlpools drive the electric current against the applied electric field, resulting in a negative nonlocal voltage near narrow electrodes. The sign-flipping voltage pattern is an experimentally detectable signature of the electronic viscous behavior12. We experimentally observe visually similar sign-alternating patterns of charge accumulation close to the injection electrodes in a film of semimetallic WTe2 with a thickness of about 70 nm at room temperature (see Methods and SM S1, S2). The observed structures in electronic charge density possess exceptionally long relaxation profiles of the micrometer length scale exceeding by three orders of magnitude the electrostatic screening length. Despite the bulk WTe2 does not exhibit true electronic hydrodynamics at room temperature13, we argue that the observed long-range patterns appear due to the formation of fluid-like whirlpools of a neutral quasiparticle current. We induce charge accumulation on WTe2 by applying an electrical bias. To visualize charge distribution, we use the optical microscopy technique (see Methods and SM S3). Charge accumulation affects the optical refractive index via the electro-optic effect21,22. A change of the refractive index in an anisotropic crystal leads to a rotation in the polarization (Δ") of the reflected light, which can be detected with a high precession of 10-7 radian (SM S4). To ascertain the sensitivity of the optical measurement of the accumulated charge, we induce a charge density in the capacitor structure of Si/SiO2/ WTe2 by applying a back-gate bias as 3 shown in Fig. 1a. The optical penetration depth in WTe2 is about 30 nm (ref. 23) so that the probe beam can detect charge accumulation near the WTe2/SiO2 interface. A homogeneous Δ" is observed on the whole surface of the WTe2 (Fig. 1b). The dependence of the polarization rotation Δ" on the incident angle ", shown in Fig. 1c, exhibits a sin 2" behavior without any offset thus showing that charge accumulation modulates the diagonal part of the dielectric tensor, Δ6!! (SM S5). Charge accumulation changes the Fermi level of WTe2, which, in turn, modifies the interband transition rate, and, consequently, modulates the diagonal part of the dielectric tensor, Δ6!! (SM S5). Thereby, we establish a linear relationship between the Δ" and the charge accumulation, Δ" ∝ Δ6!! ∝ Δ8, where n is the charge density21,22. An entirely different distribution of charge emerges when electrical current is injected at the edges of the WTe2 device through two long metal electrodes (Fig. 1d). We clearly observe the Δ" signals near the longitudinal boundaries of the devices, i.e., near the Au/WTe2 interface with an opposite sign at an opposite boundary (Fig. 1e). It is worth noticing that the charge accumulation possesses exceptionally long spatial profiles with a characteristic length of 9" = 1.4 <m along the a-axis (Fig. 1f and SM S6). The magnitude of Δ" is linearly proportional to current density (J) with the same 9" (inset of Fig. 1f). A similar measurement along the b-axis produces a slightly different value 9# = 0.7 <m highlighting the anisotropic nature of WTe2 (SM S7). These lengths are anomalously long given the fact that the WTe2 semimetal has a high carrier concentration, ~1020 cm-3 (ref. 24), which leads to a short screening length smaller than 1 nm (ref. 25). We argue that the charge accumulation is driven by the flow of quasiparticles (both electrons and holes). The size of the charge accumulation region is determined by the recombination length, ~1 μm, of the electrons and holes. We argue below that the quasiparticle flow is responsible for both the long-range charge accumulation and the pseudo-hydrodynamic behavior. To clarify the origin of the long-relaxing charge distribution, we fabricate a device that has four narrow electrodes a width of 2.5 <m attached to the edges of a WTe2 flake. The electrodes are aligned along a- and b-axis as shown in Fig. 2a and d, respectively. Surprisingly, our optical measurements indicate the emergence of unexpected negative-positive-negative patterns of charge accumulation in the proximity of the electrodes. A visually similar nonlocal sign-changing voltage pattern reflects the hydrodynamic behavior of electrons caused by a backflow of emergent electronic whirlpools in graphene11. In this material, the hydrodynamic response was experimentally observed as a negative voltage drop in the vicinity of the contacts12. We argue that the observed sign-alternating charge pattern in the room-temperature 4 WTe2 is caused by similar whirlpools of an electrically neutral quasiparticle current of electrons and holes, associated with a pseudo-hydrodynamic behavior in this two-carrier material. WTe2 is a nearly compensated semimetal that hosts both types of charge carriers, electrons, and holes. In the disorder-dominated regime, the two-carrier models admit simple kinetic descriptions with deep consequences for transport properties in confined geometries26- 28. The electronic (A = e) and hole (A = h) currents B$, and the corresponding charge densities, 8$(D) = 8%,$ + G8$(D), obey, in the background of the electric field H = −JK, the steady- state transport relations (SI 8), L$JG8$ − sign(M$)N$H = −B$, (1) where L$ and N$ are the diffusion constants and the normalized conductivities, respectively. The electron and hole currents are not separately conserved due to the e-h recombination process characterized by relatively long recombination time O'. The charge density G8 = G8( − G8) satisfies the following fourth-order differential equation (SI 9): (Δ − 9* +,)(Δ − 9, +,)G8(P) = 0, (2) where Δ = Q- , + Q. , is the two-dimensional Laplacian appropriate for a thin-film geometry. In a near-neutrality regime, the length parameters in Eq. (2) are related, respectively, to the short Thomas-Fermi length 9* ≈ 9/0 ≈ 1 nm and much longer electron-hole recombination length 9, ≈ 91 ≈ 1 <m. One notices that charge-density structures characterized by a length scale shorter than the recombination length 9', Eq. (2) acquires a formal mathematical resemblance with the hydrodynamic relation11, Δ SΔ − * 2!"T U = 0, (3) imposed on the stream function ψ in a real electronic fluid system. The stream function describes the electronic velocity V = WX × JU of a two-dimensional incompressible electric current Z = −MV in a one-component conductor (here WX is a unit out-of-plane vector). Equation (3) can be derived from the linearized Navier-Stokes equation which describes, for example, the non-Ohmic electron flow Z = −MV in graphene11: S 3# 4 T JK([) − L5 ,ΔV(\) + V([) = 0, (4) with conductivity N%. The quantity L5 ∝ ]^ plays a role of a diffusion constant expressed via the electronic shear viscosity ^. At zero viscosity, ^ = 0, the diffusion constant vanishes, L5 = 5 0, and the Navier-Stokes equation (4) reduces to the usual Ohmic flow Z = N%H. The non- harmonicity of the charge accumulation (2) in the two-component diffusive system (1) resembles non-harmonic behavior (3) of the viscous non-Ohmic electric flow (4) in the one- carrier viscous electronic system such as graphene11-12. An unexpected analogy of the diffusive two-component system (1) with hydrodynamics can also be established in the opposite limit of large distances where the geometric features of charge accumulation domains are set by the recombination length 9'. In this regime, the pseudoparticle current, V ≡ ` = a( + a), is described by the suggestive linearized Navier- Stokes equation (SM S9): −^̅ΔV − Sc̅ + 67 8T J(J ∙ V) = e̅ − * 9$% V + ⋯ . (5) Here the ellipsis denotes the higher-derivative (Burnett-like29) terms that are irrelevant in the long-distance limit, g ≫ 9', but important to maintain the potential nature of the non-conserved, compressible flow P. If the quasiparticle current P were conserved, then the lowest-derivate terms in (5) would acquire the hydrodynamic form (4). As we show below, at these large distances, the system (1) supports the formation of whirlpools and backflow of the neutral quasiparticle current, hence we call this regime “pseudo-hydrodynamics”. In Eq.(5), the kinematic shear viscosity ^̅ ≡ 9: , /O' is expressed via the length c̅ ≡ (L( + L()/2 − 9: , /(3O'). The electron-hole recombination time O' is identified with the momentum-relaxation time O;< ≡ O' related to disorder scattering while the force acting on the neutral quasiparticles is e̅ ≡ 3&+3' 9( H. The whirlpools in the electrically neutral quasiparticle current P cannot be detected experimentally in a direct way. However, outside of the neutrality point, the quasiparticle flow is known to lead27,28 to accumulation of local electric charge density G8(\) at the boundaries (SM S10) which can detectable experimentally. Our optical data allows us to reconstruct the quasiparticle current via theoretical analysis. In Figs. 2c,f, we show the theoretical results for the charge distribution corresponding to the experimentally realized geometry of Figs. 2a and d, respectively, with the two pairs of electrodes attached at the opposite edges of the sample. We obtain the charge density accumulation by solving the continuity and Maxwell equations supplemented by the transport relations (1), with appropriate boundary conditions (the method is described in detail in Supplementary Materials S12). We took the width of the electrodes m = 2.5 <m and set the 6 distance between the electrodes n = 15 <m. The difference in the recombination lengths in the a and b axes of the crystal has no qualitative effect on the charge accumulation except for a global re-scaling. The almost symmetric charge accumulation pattern (Fig. 2a,b), generated by the current injection to the vertical electrodes, with the zoom-in of the experimental data given in Fig. 2b, agrees very well with the prediction coming from the theoretical model with symmetrically positioned electrodes (Fig. 2c). The theoretical model excellently describes all seven regions of the charge-alternating pattern including three sign-changing regions close to each of the electrodes and the vanishing charge in the central region of the sample. The asymmetric charge accumulation pattern (Fig. 2d,e), generated by the current injection to the horizontal electrodes, can be reproduced theoretically by introducing a vertical mismatch in 3 <m between the electrode centers (Fig. 2f). The two-carrier theory shows that the experimentally observed picture arises at any non-negligible shift between the electrodes. Contrary to the seven disentangled regions produced in the symmetric arrangement of the electrodes, Fig. 2a, the mismatch reduces the number of the same-sign charge regions to four, Fig. 2d. The upper and lower accumulation regions are separated by the wiggling boundary curve which stretches in the predominantly horizontal direction between the electrodes. In the experiment, this curve has a smaller amplitude compared to the theoretical prediction, presumably due to imperfections in the electrode positions. The electric charge accumulation shown in Figs. 2a and 2d is the experimentally detectable part of a more complicated picture emerging in imbalanced two-carrier (semi)metals: the neutral particle current necessarily leads to a neutral charge accumulation at the boundaries which generates, in turn, the large domains of nonvanishing electric charge density (SM 10-13). The neutral quasiparticle flow P contains, besides a featureless Ohmic part, a nontrivial non-Ohmic part that leads to the experimentally observable electric charge accumulation. The neutral flow, shown in Fig. 3, possesses several remarkable (pseudo-)hydrodynamic features which are usually attributable to a collective fluid-like behavior rather than to the disorder- dominated transport. Unexpected in WTe2 at the room-temperature, the hydrodynamic-like behavior manifests itself via the backflow of the neutral current at the corners of both electrodes which leads to the appearance of the sign-alternating regions of the accumulated electric charge of Fig. 2c,f. The picture is strikingly similar to the viscous behavior of the electronic fluid in graphene, where the sign-alternating electrostatic potential near the contacts is generated by the fluid backflow. In WTe2, the sign-alternating charge density is generated by the 7 compressible backflow of non-conserved neutral quasiparticle currents which terminate at the boundaries of the sample and generate, outside of the exact particle-hole compensation regime, the nonvanishing electric charge density. It is worth stressing that the quantities which exhibit the charge-alternating patterns, the underlying mechanisms that generate these patterns, and the temperature regimes are different in graphene and WTe2. The pseudo-hydrodynamic picture of neutral currents is supported by two well- pronounced symmetric whirlpools of the neutral quasiparticle flow, Fig. 3a. The whirlpool cores are localized in the regions with depleted electric charge density. The misaligned electrodes also generate the whirlpools, which possess sink/source attractor-like points in their cores, Fig. 3b. These whirlpool structures share similarities with electronic vortices in graphene: they correlate with the quasiparticle backflow which generates the sign-alternating charge density near the contacts, Fig. 3c. The whirlpool size is determined by the recombination length 9R~1 <m which is typical for (nearly-)compensated semimetals27. The very existence of the whirlpools is largely insensitive to the value of the electrostatic (Thomas-Fermi) screening length 9TF provided 9TF ≪ 9R. Both our experimental data and the results of the theoretical model demonstrate that the sign-alternating charge patterns (Fig. 2) and the positions of the neutral whirlpools (Fig. 3) and can be controlled by the sizes and positions of the electrodes. This work opens the possibility of observing hydrodynamic-like effects of neutral quasiparticle currents in a wide range of two-component nearly compensated materials in which the true hydrodynamics regime of charge carriers cannot be realized. The comparison of theoretical predictions and experimental observations of accumulation patterns via polarization-sensitive laser microscopy allows us to uncover, at room temperature, the existence of the steady-state whirlpools and the backflow of the neutral currents in WTe2. Our approach allows us to explore and quantify the pseudo-hydrodynamic neutral flows, suggesting an intriguing possibility to control and manipulate the charge accumulation patterns in (semi)metallic materials, which could be useful in future microelectronics. 8 Methods Device fabrication: WTe2 multilayer with a thickness about 70 nm is exfoliated onto SiO2/Si substrate by using the scotch tape method inside a glove box with an argon environment to prevent oxidation. The sample is then coated by a PMMA layer before being taken out for device fabrication. The thickness and the in-plane crystal orientation (a- and b-axes) of the exfoliated WTe2 flake is determined by using atomic force microscopy and an angle-dependent polarized Raman spectroscopy, respectively (SM S1). The Cr/Au metal electrodes are fabricated along these two axes by the e-beam lithography and e-beam evaporation processes. The device is then etched by a reactive ion etching system using SF6 gas to form a well-defined shape and coated by a thin SiN passivation layer to prevent surface degradation of WTe2 during the electrical and optical measurements. The temperature dependence and crystal-axis dependence of the electrical resistivity manifest the metallic behavior of WTe2 (SM S2). Optical measurement of charge accumulation: A linearly polarized laser beam is incident onto WTe2 devices in a surface normal direction with a center wavelength of 780 nm. After passing through a 50x objective, the beam radius is about 1.4 <m, and the input power density is about 1 mW/<m,. The charge accumulation on WTe2 rotates the polarization of the reflected light. The polarization angle of the incident laser beam was controlled by using a motorized rotational stage and a half-wave plate. The reflected laser beam is passing through a quarter-wave plate, half-wave plate, and Wollaston prism successively, and its polarization rotation is detected by a balanced detector. With the initial polarization along the azimuthal angle of " to the a-axis of WTe2 (the inset in Fig. 1c), we measure the current-induced signal-to-noise ratio, a lock-in detection technique is implemented by applying an alternating current to WTe2 devices at a modulation frequency of 3 kHz. The 2D spatial mapping of the optical signals is conducted by using a 2-axes motorized stage. Methods for theoretical calculations are described in Supplementary Information (Sections 8-13). 9 Acknowledgments Y.-G.C. and G.-M.C. are supported by Samsung Research Funding & Incubation Center of Samsung Electronics under Project Number SRFC-MA2001-03. This work was supported in part by Advanced Facility Center for Quantum Technology. The work of M.C. was partially supported by Grant No. 0657-2020-0015 of the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of Russia. G.-M.C. thanks Jungcheol Kim and Hyeonsik Cheong at Sogang University for their help in Raman Spectroscopy. Author contributions Y.-G.C. and M.-H.D equally contributed to this work. M.C. and G.-M.C supervised the study. Y.-G.C. performed the optical measurement and analysis. M.-H.D and Y.-G.C. fabricated samples and characterized optical and electrical properties. M.C. developed the theory part of the paper and participated in the writing of the text. Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests Additional Information Supporting information is available for this paper. 10