1 Physical realization of topological Roman surface by spin-induced ferroelectric polarization in cubic lattice Guangxiu Liu1,2,†, Maocai Pi3,4,†, Long Zhou1, Zhehong Liu1,2, Xudong Shen5,1, Xubin Ye1,2, Shijun Qin1,2, Xinrun Mi3,4, Xue Chen3,4, Lin Zhao1,2, Bowen Zhou1,2, Jia Guo1,2, Xiaohui Yu1,2, Yisheng Chai3,4,*, Hongming Weng1,2,5,*, Youwen Long1,2,5,* 1Beijing National Laboratory for Condensed Matter Physics, Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China 2School of Physics, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China 3Center of Quantum Materials and Devices, Chongqing University, Chongqing 401331, China. 4Low Temperature Physics Laboratory and Chongqing Key Laboratory of Soft Condensed Matter Physics and Smart Materials, College of Physics, Chongqing University, Chongqing 401331, China 5Songshan Lake Materials Laboratory, Dongguan, Guangdong 523808, China *Corresponding email: yschai@cqu.edu.cn, hmweng@iphy.ac.cn, ywlong@iphy.ac.cn †These authors contributed equally to this work 2 Topology, a mathematical concept in geometry, has become an ideal theoretical tool for describing topological states1-3 and phase transitions4. Many topological concepts have found their physical entities in real or reciprocal spaces identified by topological/geometrical invariants2,5,6, which are usually defined on orientable surfaces such as torus and sphere. It is natural to quest whether it is possible to find the physical realization of more intriguing non-orientable surfaces. Herein, we show that the set of spin-induced ferroelectric polarizations in cubic perovskite oxides AMn3Cr4O12 (A = La and Tb) resides on the topological Roman surface7, a non-orientable two-dimensional manifold formed by sewing a Möbius strip edge to that of a disc. The induced polarization may travel in a loop along the non- orientable Möbius strip or orientable disc depending on how the spin evolves as controlled by external magnetic field. Experimentally, the periodicity of polarization can be the same or the twice of the rotating magnetic field, being well consistent with the orientability of disc and Möbius strip, respectively. This path dependent topological magnetoelectric effect presents a way to detect the global geometry of the surface and deepens our understanding of topology in both mathematics and physics. Topological physics is one of the most successful combinations of mathematics and physics. As one of the branches of pure mathematics, topology has recently been employed to describe and understand many intriguing physical phenomena such as the quantum Hall effect,1,8 topological insulators, topological semimetals, and topological superconductors.9-11 These topological electronic states can be classified by various 3 topological invariants, such as Chern number N,2,5 topological class Z2,12 Z4,13 and Euler class χ14,15. It is well known that Chern number is defined as the integral of vector field—Berry curvature over the first Brillouin zone of a two-dimensional (2D) periodic system, which is looked as a torus (T2) and serves as the base manifold. On the other hand, the magnetic spins and electric dipoles in real space can form topological objects or defects such as skyrmions,16,17 polar skyrmions,18 and polar merons.19 These can be identified with an integer winding number6 based on the field of spin or electrical dipole orientations over a base manifold of sphere (S2). In this sense, topological invariants are the global characteristics and the topology-related physical properties are typically robust against perturbations.9,10,12 Besides torus and sphere, there are other three fundamental 2D manifolds found in algebraic topology as listed in Supplementary Table 1, namely Möbius strip, Klein bottle, and Roman surface. Torus and sphere are orientable and have two sides. Berry curvature flux enclosed by them can be nonzero quantized value and taken as topological invariant like Chern number. In contrast, the other three are non-orientable surfaces and have just one side. The flux of any vector field through them is zero. The well-known example is that the one-side Klein bottle cannot be filled with water, but a two-side bottle can. In addition, the non-orientable surfaces are featured with a geometrical property that a person can be mirror-reflected when he travels along a special loop path on the surface, such as along the Möbius strip (M) without crossing the boundary, and he recovers after a second loop travel. It is intriguing to realize a physical system that can evolve globally on a non-orientable surface to reflect such 4 unique geometrical property. In the real space, a Möbius strip with a single boundary has been visualized in nanocrystal/DNA bands.20,21 In reciprocal space of electronic22-24 and acoustic crystals,25,26 Möbius insulator has been proposed and realized. Under proper nonsymmorphic symmetry or projective translation symmetry, the Bloch wavefunctions of its boundary states have 4π periodicity instead of 2π, which mimics a Möbius strip. Recently, the nonorientability has been regarded as Z2 gauge charge to describe the topological defect of shear deformation on a Möbius strip.27 However, how to evolve a physical quantity smoothly and globally on a non-orientable surface and to detect its intrinsic geometry is still challenge. Furthermore, a non-orientable 2D surface without a boundary must self-intersect in three-dimensional (3D) space, as shown by the Klein bottle28 (K, one-sided bottle) and Roman surface7 (RP2, real projective plane). This inhibits the physical realization and exhibition of topological behaviors in 3D real space. Therefore, it is very natural to ask whether Roman surface, the simplest non- orientable 2D manifold without boundary, can be realized or not by some physical entity and even can demonstrate some exotic topological properties or phenomena? The Roman surface was named by Jakob Steiner, who discovered it during his visit to Rome in early 1844. It is composed of a Möbius strip sewing to the edge of a disc and has quite high tetrahedral Td symmetry, being different from other non-orientable 2D surfaces. There are three self-intersecting double lines Di (i = a, b, and c are three mutually perpendicular Cartesian axes) that form a right trihedron in a Euclidean 3D phase space. Each double line ends with two pinch points and they all intersect at the 5 Fig. 1 | Schematic diagram of Roman surface. a, b, Roman surface with four three-fold axes (3), one triple point, six pinch points, and three double lines (Da, Db, Dc). c, Three geometrically different fundamental loops on a Roman surface. The red loop effectively winds twice to pass the two sides of the triple point since it rides on a Möbius strip being part of the Roman surface. The blue one winds the double line Dc once to have Wc = 1. The green loop does not enclose any double line with zero Wi (i = a, b, c). Both blue and green loops only wind once to close the path. triple point (see Fig. 1 and Supplementary Fig. 1). The triple point at the Roman surface indicates the intersection of three surfaces. The analytical equation of the Roman surface RP2 in mathematics is x2y2 + x2z2 + y2z2 - δxyz = 0, (1) where δ is a constant and (x, y, z) is a point in a, b, c coordinate system. As a 2D manifold, there are three types of fundamental closed loops on a Roman surface, and other closed loops can be formed by their combinations. As shown in Fig. 1c, the first type of loop is the red one that passes through at least one point twice (e.g., this point can be the triple point). It winds twice to close the path on this non-orientable surface since it rides on a Möbius strip, a component of Roman surface. The other two types of loop are the blue and green ones. They are topologically different from the red one since they do not pass any point twice and wind once to close the path. The blue loop can only wind one of the double lines Di (i = a, b, c) by Wi = 1 times. The green loop does 6 not enclose any double line and it is topologically trivial. The physical entity that matches Eq. 1 may provide an opportunity to realize Roman surface and exhibit path dependent properties. Therefore, realizing Roman surface is quite intriguing and might extend the territory in the field of topological physics. Magnetoelectric (ME) multiferroics with spin-induced ferroelectric polarization (P) have received much attention owing to the coupled spin and electrical dipole orders,29 where the electric polarization can be switched using a magnetic field (B), and conversely the magnetization (M) can be switched using an electric field (E),29,30 giving rise to significant ME effects. A few physical mechanisms have been proposed for ME multiferroics,31-34 providing a fertile and unique playground for investigating the topological properties as a mapping between the spin vector space and electric dipole vector space. Although some structurally and ferroelectrically coupled vortex domain patterns have been observed in hexagonal RMnO3 (R = rare earth or Y, In) and BiFeO3,29,35 spin-dependent topological multiferroics remain to be elucidated, as do topological ME effects with versatile controls of P by B or M by E. Here, we discovered that the set of spin-induced ferroelectric polarizations in A-site ordered cubic perovskites AMn3Cr4O12 can be described by the non-orientable Roman surface, as deduced through a 3D symmetry analysis. Various angle-dependent P oscillations under different magnetic fields were observed and can be understood based on the changes in the local topological structure and the symmetry of the magnetoelectricity. result of the newly synthesized TbMn3Cr4O12 (TMCO) polycrystalline sample at room 7 Fig. 2 | Structure characterization, magnetic, specific heat and polarization measurements for TMCO. a, XRD pattern measured at room temperature and the Rietveld refinement results. The observed (black circles), calculated (red line), and difference (blue line) values are shown. The ticks indicate the allowed Bragg reflections with space group Im-3. b, Crystal structure of A-site ordered perovskite AA3B4O12 with Im-3 symmetry. c, Temperature dependence of magnetic susceptibility χ measured at 0.1 T and its inverse χ-1. Both zero-field-cooling (ZFC) and field-cooling (FC) modes were adopted to measure χ. The yellow line shows the Curie-Weiss fitting above 175 K. The fitted effective moment μeff (15.52 μB f.u.-1) is comparable to the theoretical one (15.04 μB f.u.-1) by considering the contribution from Tb3+, Mn3+ and Cr3+ ions. The inset shows the derivative of inverse susceptibility versus temperature. d, Temperature dependence of specific heat Cp measured at zero field. e, f, Temperature dependent P after poling the sample under an electric field (= Epole) and different magnetic fields B, where B was not removed until the temperature increased to 50 K. For B//E and B⊥E configurations, both +Poled and -Poled conditions were measured. temperature. The Rietveld analysis demonstrates that the compound crystallizes in an A-site ordered perovskite structure with the chemical formula AA3B4O12 (see Fig. 2b).36,37 The space group is a cubic Im-3 with central symmetry, where Tb and Mn are 1:3 ordered at special Wyckoff sites 2a (0, 0, 0) and 6b (0, 0.5, 0.5), and Cr and O at special 8c (0.25, 0.25, 0.25) and 24g (x, y, 0) sites, respectively. Compared with a simple 8 ABO3 perovskite, the introduction of a transition metal into the A site in the ordered AA3B4O12 perovskite causes the formation of square-coordinated AO4 units and heavily tilting BO6 octahedra, as shown in Fig. 2b and described in detail elsewhere.38,39 The refined structural parameters of TMCO are listed in Supplementary Table 2. According to the refined Cr-O and Mn-O bond lengths, the bond valence sum calculations illustrate that the valence states of Mn and Cr are both close to +3, in agreement with the reported isostructural compound LaMn3Cr4O12 (LMCO).40 Moreover, with decreasing temperature to 5 K, there is no trace of the structural phase transition in TMCO (see Supplementary Fig. 2). specific heat of TMCO, respectively. With decreasing temperature to TN1  136 K, a sharp -type anomaly is observed in the specific heat, suggesting the occurrence of a second-order long-range magnetic phase transition. The derivative of the inverse susceptibility also displays a variation at TN1 (see the inset of Fig. 2c). Upon further cooling to TN2  36 K, both susceptibility and specific heat show a clear anomaly, illustrating a second long-range magnetic transition. Below TN2, the specific heat does not show any visible anomaly, indicating the absence of spin ordering of Tb3+ at temperatures down to 2 K. The inverse susceptibility above 175 K follows the Curie- Weiss law (Fig. 2c). The fitted Weiss temperature of −28.0 K is indicative of the AFM interactions. The linear isothermal magnetization behaviors within 2 T further confirm the AFM orders occurring at TN1 and TN2, as shown in Supplementary Fig. 3a. However, at higher fields, a metamagnetic transition occurs near 2.5 T at temperatures below TN1 9  136 K, as demonstrated by the field derivative of magnetization, indicating field- induced variation of spin alignment (Supplementary Fig. 3b). Similar to LMCO,40 at zero field, the B-site Cr3+ spins are antiferromagnetically ordered in a collinear G-type fashion at TN1, and the A-site Mn3+ sublattice experiences another G-type AFM ordering at TN2 in the current TMCO (see Fig. 3a for a detailed spin structure). The total spin structure composed of Cr3+ and Mn3+ magnetic sublattices with spin moments along the direction forms a type-II polar magnetic point group of 31, which breaks the space inversion symmetry. Therefore, a spin-induced ferroelectric phase transition is expected to occur at TN2. Corresponding to the AFM phase transition, a frequency-independent dielectric peak is observed at TN2  36 K in TMCO, whereas no dielectric anomaly emerges at TN1 (Supplementary Fig. 4a and b). When a magnetic field B and an electric field E are simultaneously applied to measure the dielectric constant, an apparent anisotropic behavior can be observed. Specifically, a sharp dielectric peak is always observed with B up to 9 T, if B//E (Supplementary Fig. 4c). By contrast, B significantly suppresses the dielectric peak in the B⊥E configuration, whereas the dielectric anomaly nearly disappears at 6 T (Supplementary Fig. 4d). These results strongly suggest the spin- induced ferroelectric polarization as well as the anisotropic ME properties in TMCO. Furthermore, when the pyroelectric current Ip was measured to obtain the temperature- dependent polarization, a sharp ferroelectric phase transition was found to occur at TN2 (Fig. 2e), as expected from the formation of the polar magnetic point group mentioned above. Moreover, the polarization is completely reversible without changing the 10 magnitude if the sign of the poling electric field (Epole) is reversed, further confirming the spin-induced ferroelectric phase transition in TMCO. Similar to the dielectric measurements, applying a magnetic field with a B//E configuration can significantly enhance the polarization from 33.3 C/m2 at 0 T to 84.4 C/m2 at 6 T (Fig. 2e). In the B⊥E configuration, however, the spin-induced polarization is suppressed to 10.7 C/m2 at B = 3 T, and only 4.51 C/m2 at B = 6 T (Fig. 2f). All experimental results indicate that TMCO has the same crystal and magnetic structures and spin-induced polarization as those observed in LMCO.40 Based on the crystal and spin structure symmetry analysis, we now show that the peculiar ME multiferroicity of AMn3Cr4O12 can be well described through the topological Roman surface RP2. As mentioned above, both TMCO and LMCO have a cubic crystal symmetry of Im-3, where inversion centers are located on each Cr atom, with four 3-fold rotation axes along four body diagonals, and three mirror planes perpendicular to the three Cartesian axes (Fig. 3a). The total magnetic structure composed of Cr3+ spins (we use Néel vector SCr to trace the coherent motion of spins in AFM ordering of Cr ions) and Mn3+ spins (Néel vector SMn) forms a polar magnetic point group 31 with SMn//SCr//, as shown in Fig. 3a. According to the proposed anisotropic symmetric exchange mechanism41 (see Supplementary Section 1) originating from the spin-orbit coupling, such special ME coupling induces polarization P⃗ along the direction. To describe a more general relationship between the spin and polarization directions, we assign SCr = (μCr, θ, φ) and SMn = (μMn, θ, φ). Both are on a sphere S2 (Fig. 3a and c), where θ ∈ [0, π] and φ ∈ [−π, π] with fixed magnitudes 11 Fig. 3 | Schematic diagram of crystal, magnetic, and ferroelectric structures in AMn3Cr4O12. a, Crystal and spin configurations where Cr and Mn atoms are presented in yellow and blue, respectively, and O atoms are omitted for clarity. Two space inversions 1̅ located at the center and at the Cr atom, one of the mirror planes (see the light-blue plane), and one of the 3-fold rotation axes (see the dash line) are also indicated. All spins composed of Mn and Cr magnetic sublattices are parallel or antiparallel to the direction. AFM sublattices of Cr and Mn are denoted by Néel vectors SCr and SMn, respectively, and the induced polarization P is shown by the arrow in green. b, Distribution of P vectors along four of the eight diagonal directions. The yellow sphere and the black arrow denote the Cr atom and its spin moment. SMn is always parallel to SCr and it is not shown for clarity. Thus, AFM configuration composed of Mn and Cr sublattices is only indicated by SCr. The black cube represents the crystal unit cell. c, Orientation of SCr represented in spherical coordinates (μCr, θ, φ). d, The complete set of allowed spin-induced P vectors in three dimensions by the magnetic structure shown in a is a Roman surface. μCr and μMn. Thus, the polarization P is expressed as a function of spins P⃗ (SMn, SCr) = P⃗ (θ, φ) mapping from S2 to RP2. Based on the strict symmetrical analysis,42 as described in the Supplementary Sections 2 and 3, one can see that P⃗ (θ, φ) has the following form: 12 where the coefficients  and  depend on the temperature and crystal properties. The polarization vector P⃗ (θ, φ) = (Pa, Pb, Pc) can be rewritten using an analytical equation as follows: Pa2Pb2 + Pa2Pc2 + Pb2Pc2 − 2μCrμMnPaPbPc = 0. (3) Clearly, Eq. 3 is a specific case of Eq. 1 with x = Pa, y = Pb, z = Pc, and δ = 2μCrμMn. This result indicates that the induced P vectors in AMn3Cr4O12 may constitute a non- orientable Roman surface RP2, as shown in Fig. 3d. In this cubic multiferroic family, the collinear G-type AFM locks Néel vectors SMn and SCr parallelly and they pass through all eight equivalent diagonal directions coherently (see Supplementary Section 3 for details). Only four of the eight diagonal directions are allowed for the polarization P vectors, which form a regular tetrahedron and agrees well with the tetrahedral symmetry of the Roman surface (Fig. 3b). It is noted that there is another AFM configuration with SMn antiparallel to SCr as shown in Supplementary Fig. 5, which leads to a set of polarization vectors P forming the Roman surface with negative δ and having similar features as the positive one discussed here. The spin-polarization relationship in the cubic perovskites AMn3Cr4O12 leads to topological multiferroicity owing to the topological and symmetry properties of the Roman surface discussed above. The mapping from S2 to RP2 covers the Roman surface twice because SCr and -SCr induce the identical P vectors. This is very similar to the spin-momentum locking effect on the Fermi surface enclosing Weyl nodes. The Hamiltonian around Weyl node maps the momentum space (Fermi sphere S2) to spin 13 space (another sphere named as Bloch sphere). If the enclosed Weyl node is of topological charge one or two, the momentum moves around the node once and the spin rotates once or twice, respectively. The relative rotation directions of momentum and spin are determined by the sign of the charge.43 In this sense, a closed evolution loop of Néel vectors SCr on the sphere may map to a non-trivial path of the P vector on the Roman surface showing topological ME effects. The red loop in Fig. 1c passes through the triple point of the Roman surface twice where P = 0. This can be induced by the evolution of SCr on sphere S2 that includes the six special points where sphere intersects a-, b-, c-axis (shown in Fig. 4a). For a longitudinal great circle of the sphere with φ fixed as shown in Fig. 4a, SCr passes through the special points twice (the north and south poles) if φ is not 0, π/2, π nor 3π/2. This leads to a double-winding ellipse trajectory of the P vector passing through the triple point twice (see Fig. 4b). The induced P rotates twice while SCr travels one loop. When φ = 0, π/2, π or 3π/2, the trajectories of P collapse to the double lines and passes through the special points four times (see Fig. 4b). One can see that only the magnitude of P vibrates, and the period is twice of loop evolution of SCr. When the Néel vectors evolve along the latitudinal parallels with polar axis being c- axis and fixed θ value (θ is not 0 or π/2) as shown in Fig. 4c, the induced saddle-like trajectory of P on Roman surface only winds around the c-axis (Fig. 4d). This trajectory of P is nontrivial in the sense that the Wc = 1. Its projection onto the ab-plane is a circle. The rotation direction, clockwise or counter- clockwise, of the projection of P vector on the circle is opposite to that of the Néel vector. It is noted that the rotation period of 14 Fig. 4 | Various loops on sphere of Néel vectors (top panels) and the induced fundamental polarization trajectories on Roman surface (bottom panels). a, Longitudinal (fixed φ) path of Néel vector rotation mode with a series of selected φ values and continuously varying θ ∈ [0,2π]. b, Trajectories of P induced by loops in a. c, Latitudinal (fixed θ) Néel vector rotation mode with a series of selected θ values and continuously varying φ ∈ [−π, π]. d, Trajectories of P induced by loops in c. The six special points, the intersections between sphere and a-, b- and c-axis, are illustrated in black point in a and c. The thicker lines in a and c represent two special cases where four diagonal directions are passed through; the resultant trajectories of P are indicated by the thicker lines in b and d, respectively. Rotation directions of SCr and P are indicated by black arrows toward opposite directions away from direction. e, Two closed loops winding the a and b axes once are shown in orange and purple, respectively. f, Two closed trajectories of P on the Roman surface induced by the loops in e. The loops with Wa = 1 (orange) and Wb = 1 (purple). g, A band included the equator of the Néel vector sphere is mapped to h, a self-crossed Möbius strip as a part of the Roman surface. The residual upper and lower caps are mapped to a disc on the Roman surface at the same time. All the loops in b, d and f are fundamental loops defined in Fig. 1c. P vector is the same as SCr instead of double of that in cases of Fig. 4b. Similarly, when SCr winds either the a- or b-axis once, the corresponding P vector loop on Roman surface is characterized by Wa = 1 or Wb = 1, respectively, as indicated in Fig. 4e and f. 15 It is notable that nonzero Wi corresponds to the component of P vector perpendicular to i-axis reverses Wi times during one loop evolution. The green circle shown in Fig. 1c is topologically trivial with zero values of Wi. It can be mapped from a loop on SCr sphere that satisfies these conditions: there is no any special point being wound and -SCr will not be passed by for any SCr on the path. To reveal the underlying topological origins of double-winding and single-winding paths in Figs. 4b, 4d and 1c, we find that a strip composed by the neighborhoods of equator and itself on the spin sphere (Fig. 4g) is mapped to a Möbius strip (Fig. 4h) on the Roman surface. In the meantime, the residual upper and lower caps on sphere are both mapped to a saddle-like disc. Thus, according to the orientable and non-orientable nature of the disc and the Möbius strip, the paths on them will wind once and twice to form a closed loop, respectively. We experimentally present the topological ME effects in TMCO and LMCO polycrystalline samples, which possess identical crystal and spin structures. First, the samples were cooled down to 10 K under Epole//y at zero B. Subsequently, we removed the electric field Epole and measured the B-dependent P by sweeping B in either the B//y or B//x configuration (Fig. 5a). In both configurations, quadratic ME effects were dominant in TMCO (Fig. 5b). This is consistent with the 31 point group with independent time reversal symmetry where a quadratic rather than a linear ME effect is allowed. To investigate the postulated topological ME effects in TMCO, a rotating B was applied to tune the orientation of the Néel vector SCr continuously. The B direction dependence of Py under selected field strengths by changing ψ (initially ψ = 0 with B//y; Fig. 5c–f) was measured after electrical poling down to 10 K. The ψ dependence of Py 16 Fig. 5 | Polarization variations under sweeping and rotating B at 10 K for TMCO and LMCO. a, Schematic illustration of measurements for ME current under rotating B within xy-plane; ψ denotes the angle between B and the y-direction. b, g, Magnetic-field-dependent Py at T = 10 K after +E poling for B//E and B⊥E configurations of TMCO and LMCO, respectively. Py is defined as the component of P red and black arrows indicate angle an increase and decrease, respectively. h, i, ψ-dependent polarization of LMCO at B = 1 T (h) and 6 T (i). All polarizations were integrated from the ME current as a function of time. exhibited double-angle sinusoidal modulation curves at B within ~2 T without changing the sign (Fig. 5c). This is a direct manifestation of the intrinsic quadratic ME behaviors in this system. Based on the Monte Carlo simulations, we find that, under a relatively small rotating B without inducing metamagnetic transition, the Néel vector SCr will slightly tilt away from the diagonal direction, leading to a topologically trivial path on 17 the sphere, but it is noted that SCr itself is double period of the rotating B (see Supplementary Section 4 and Supplementary Fig. 6a). The resulting loop of P vector on the Roman surface is also a small perturbation to its original position with zero values of Wi (Supplementary Fig. 6b), as exemplified by the green loop in Fig. 1c. Therefore, the SCr will travel along green-type path twice when the B rotates by 360° (Supplementary Fig. 7). This results in a double winding of the loop on Roman surface, consistent with the experimentally observed double-angle sinusoidal modulation of Py for small B, indicating the trivial mapping from SCr to P along the green loop. For B values greater than 3 T, a sinusoidal Py variation appeared, owing to the metamagnetic transition occurring at a critical field of approximately 2.5 T (Supplementary Fig. 3b). At B = 6 and 9 T, the Py value can be fully reversed with a pure sinusoidal behavior (Fig. 5e and f). The energy barrier of magnetic anisotropy among diagonal directions can be overcome by increasing the Zeeman energy, and a spin flop transition will finally occur at a larger rotating B (> 3 T) to induce a nontrivial loop of the Néel vector on the sphere. The loop of Néel vector winds its principal axis under a sufficiently high B, which induces P vector loop with one of Wi = 1 (i = a, b, c) on Roman surface accordingly. This can lead to reversing of the P components perpendicular to i-axis like the blue loop in Fig. 1c. The pure sinusoidal P behavior at 6 and 9 T in the TMCO can thus be understood. As shown in Fig. 5d, both single- and double-angle sinusoidal Py features coexist at B = 3 T with clear hysteresis behavior. The P = 0 values have been reached multiple times in one period. There is a possibility that the loops of Néel vector pass some of the 18 crystal axes, and some naught P values occur during a 360° rotation of B like the red loop in Fig. 1c. Note that, owing to the polycrystalline specimens used in experiments, it is impossible to determine the detailed grain configurations or P rotating paths of each grain for the TMCO. In the isostructural LMCO, all of the above-mentioned ME behaviors can be reproduced (Fig. 5g-i), indicating the universality of these phenomena in the cubic multiferroic perovskite family of AMn3Cr4O12. Moreover, we propose that the topological nontrivial rotation of P can be realized in the multiferroic domain walls of AMn3Cr4O12 without external magnetic field. As shown in Supplementary Fig. 8, there are three types of multiferroic domains with SMn parallel to SCr on considering the Néel vectors prefer to eight diagonal directions, i.e. the 71, 109 and 180 deg. AFM domains induced 109, 109 and 360 deg. ferroelectric domains, respectively. In particular, the induced 360 deg. ferroelectric domain wall represents a half winding of Möbius strip since a 180 deg. rotation of SCr leads to one loop of P and mirror reflected on Roman surface (Supplementary Fig. 8c). This type of multiferroic domain wall cannot be destroyed by external electric field due to the fact that the polarizations in two neighboring ferroelectric domains can be coherently aligned to the electric field direction while the related AFM configurations will always be opposite. This would be a new type of topological object unique in AMn3Cr4O12 which deserves further investigation. In summary, we investigated the unusual spin-polarization relationship in A-site- ordered cubic perovskite oxides AMn3Cr4O12. The uncommon polarization occurring in the cubic system is strongly coupled with the inversion symmetry breaking caused by 19 a G-type collinear AFM ordering composed of Mn3+ and Cr3+ magnetic sublattices. We discovered that the magnetoelectric behavior, namely the mapping from spin to the induced polarization, can be looked as a physical entity realizing Roman surface, one of the non-orientable 2D manifolds. This is essentially different from other topological objects defined on orientable manifolds, such as Chern insulator defined on torus and skyrmion defined on sphere. The nonorientability of Roman surface leads to topological ME effects depending on the evolution of path. In our experiments, different kinds of angle-dependent polarization are observed in polycrystalline TMCO and LMCO under different magnetic fields. The evolution paths of spin vectors are controlled by magnetic field and the induced P evolves along orientable or non-orientable surface to show different topological properties of them. This study provides an interesting fact that the topology has a close and deep relationship with the physical world, opening up a new avenue to achieve more topological objects from orientable manifold to non-orientable one. 20