1 Band bending and ratcheting explain triboelectricity in a flexoelectric contact diode K. P. Olson, C. A. Mizzi, L. D. Marks* Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Northwestern University; Evanston, Illinois, United States of America. *Corresponding author. Email: l-marks@northwestern.edu Abstract Triboelectricity was recognized millennia ago, but the fundamental mechanism of charge transfer is still not understood. We have recently proposed a model where flexoelectric band bending due to local asperity contacts drives triboelectric charge transfer in non-metals. While this ab-initio model is consistent with a wide range of observed phenomena, to date there have been no quantitative analyses of the proposed band bending. In this work we use a Pt0.8Ir0.2 conductive atomic force microscope probe to simultaneously deform a Nb-doped SrTiO3 sample and collect current-bias data. The current that one expects based upon an analysis including the relevant flexoelectric band-bending for a deformed semiconductor quantitively agrees with the experiments. The analysis indicates a general ratcheting mechanism for triboelectric transfer and strong experimental evidence that flexoelectric band-bending is of fundamental importance for triboelectric contacts. 2 Triboelectricity is a wide-spread phenomenon of importance in areas ranging from the processing of pharmaceutical powders1-3, nanoscale energy harvesting4-9, the electrification of blowing sand, snow or volcanic plumes10-14, damage to wind turbines15, combing human hair16,17 and even planetary formation18. It occurs whenever two materials rub together or discrete particles collide – the latter is often called contact or granular electrification. The current literature includes older experiments where hypotheses such as the “triboelectric series” were shown to be false19-24, to recent work in specialized areas which sometimes miss the earlier work. It is generally accepted that the triboelectric effect depends upon transfer of electrons25-27, ions28,29, and/or charged molecular fragments30. While there is some experimental evidence in support of many of these processes, at present there is little consensus in the literature. For instance, one common idea is that differences in the work function drive charge transfer, often called the Volta-Helmholtz hypothesis21. As summarized in 1967 by Harper24, this fails to explain many experimental observations; for instance, that charging can occur when two pieces of the same material are rubbed against each other. While work function differences matter, alone they do not explain triboelectricity. For many decades the missing terms in triboelectricity have been unknown, despite numerous applications of the phenomenon. We have recently31 argued that the missing term is the flexoelectric effect, i.e., the coupling of strain gradients during asperity contacts and polarization, and subsequently extended it to include analysis of the local band bending32. The circumstantial evidence is strong that at a qualitative to semi-quantitative level, flexoelectricity plays a major role in triboelectricity, as our approach semi-quantitatively explains more experimental results than other approaches. To move the field forward requires rigorously testing the connection between flexoelectricity and triboelectricity, performing a quantitative experimental and theoretical analysis of the band bending during asperity contact including both the electromechanical terms and other established 3 terms such as work function differences and semiconductor depletion regions, all without unknown parameters. Such an analysis has many components, some of which are already partially understood. Since the early works of Terris et al.33 and Jeffery et al.34 it has been known force applied using a conductive atomic force microscope (CAFM) probe changes the local electronic structure. When the two materials are a metal and semiconductor, in 1953 Vick35 pointed out the importance of Schottky barriers for triboelectricity, while in 1967 Harper24 analyzed the triboelectric importance of the band bending of metal/semiconductor contacts. There are potentials created by the strains of a spherical indentation, which have been analyzed for piezoelectric materials36, and more recently for flexoelectric31,32,37,38 materials. Other aspects have been analyzed such as the variation of the effective barrier for an indentation Schottky diode as measured by Sun et al.38. A variety of works39-42 have calculated the flexoelectric polarization or field and noted their importance in triboelectric contacts; for instance, sliding Schottky energy-harvesting devices are common8,43-46. Despite extensive efforts, no work has been able to develop a complete theory that quantitatively agrees with experiment for the flexoelectric case. (It should be remembered that only a small number of materials are piezoelectric, and even then in materials such as quartz, piezoelectricity is not important for triboelectricity24.) A review of the current state of flexoelectric AFM tip pressing experiments has recently been published that covers many aspects of these experiments47. However, as will become apparent herein, the problem is more complex than the existing literature analysis with important terms such as the mean inner potential contributions not included in any of the prior analyses. In this note, we develop a detailed band-bending model that quantitatively agrees with the force-dependent current-bias behavior in a CAFM Schottky diode between a Pt0.8Ir0.2 (PtIr) tip 4 and Nb-doped strontium titanate (STO). The model follows conventional semiconductor analyses48,49, taking into account depletion layers and image forces. A Hertzian model50 for strains and strain gradients is used for flexoelectric and strain-dependent terms that consider the shift of the mean inner potential. Simple but appropriate models for transport are used to connect the band-bending to the experimental data in both forward and reverse bias. The analysis contains only two adjustable parameters, namely the ideality factor of the diode and the height of the Schottky barrier formed by the PtIr and STO. These are established parameters, which we fit from the experimental data. All other relevant parameters such as the elastic constants, flexoelectric coefficients, and the strain derivative of the mean inner potential are either well known or are calculated ab-initio. Based upon the analysis we can also explain how the trend of current transfer in sliding Schottky generator experiments43,51 is surprisingly weakly dependent upon exact details of flexoelectric coefficient signs as well as shear versus tensile contributions during contacts. We argue that the experimental verification of the theoretical analysis very strongly indicates a significant if not dominant role for flexoelectricity in triboelectricity. Fig. 1. Experiemental I − V data for a Pt0.8Ir0.2 AFM tip contacting an 0.7% Nb-doped SrTiO3 sample. Colors indicate different forces, with the current generally increasing towards no bias. Four repeated, but non-consecutive, measurements we collected at each tip force; the line styles 5 for the 8.6 μN data represent a typical set. For clarity, the remaining repetitions and some tip forces are omitted (see the Supporting Information for complete data). force F for both forward and reverse bias. Increasing force shifted the bias at which a significant current was observed in all cases. Fig. 2. Band-bending diagram and electron path schematics. a, A band diagram corresponding to the experimental setup under no strain. The metal tip is on the left and the semiconductor is on the right. The barrier height φ is the difference between the metal work function Φm and the semiconductor electron affinity χ. Ec, EF, and EV are the conduction band minimum, Fermi level, and valence band maximum, respectively. Black lines show the system under no bias, and the blue and red lines show the system under a forward bias VFor and a reverse bias VRev, respectively. VD is the depletion potential. The valence bands are omitted because we are working with a n-type semiconductor. (i) When a forward bias is applied, a current IFor is produced by thermally excited electrons crossing into the metal over the barrier. (ii) When a reverse bias is applied, a current IRev is produced by thermally-assisted tunneling of electrons from the metal. b, The key point in conduction occurs at a saddle point in the conduction band minimum Ec(F, r). As shown schematically, electrons may take different paths through the space-varying Ec, starting at different points and (i) crossing over or (ii) tunneling through the same barrier – a variational calculus problem. In both cases, the current follows paths that (i) cross over or (ii) tunnel through the inflection point. We will first analyze the forward bias. Without any force, the system behaves as a Schottky diode with the Fermi level of the semiconductor pinned by defect states, where the pinning is 6 with respect to the metal. (For completeness, an analysis with the pinning a fixed energy difference with respect to the semiconductor states can be found in the Supporting Information, and the results are not close to fitting the experiment.) The band structure of the zero-force case is illustrated in Fig. 2. Under forward bias, electrons in the semiconductor enter the metal by thermionic emission over a barrier of height φ. The Schottky-Mott barrier height, unmodified by strain, defects, interfacial charge redistribution, or external potentials, is φ0 = Φm − χ, where Φm is the work function of the metal and χ is the electron affinity of the semiconductor52,53. When force is applied to the tip, there is electromechanical band bending which shifts the valence/conduction bands. For forward bias using standard thermionic emission theory49 and electromechanical band- bending, with the assumption that V ≫ kBT/q, the current as a function of both bias and applied force F is given by IF(V, F) = A(F)B∗T2 exp (− qφ kBT) exp (− kBT ) (1) where A(F) is the contact area, B∗ the Richardson constant, T the temperature, q the electron charge, kB the Boltzmann constant, VEM(F) the potential due to electromechanical terms, and n the ideality factor. To interpret the experimental results, it is convenient to substitute φeff(F) = φ + VEM(F). The area A(F) was modeled by a sphere-half-space Hertzian contact50 as A(F) = π ( 3RF 2E∗) 2/3 (2) where R is the radius of the sphere (AFM probe tip) and 1 E∗ = 1 2 ( 1−νSTO 2 ESTO + 1−νPtIr 2 EPtIr ). We use for the Young’s moduli and Poisson’s ratios54,55: ESTO = 270 GPa, νSTO = 0.24, EPtIr = 230 GPa, and 7 νPtIr = 0.37. Due to the range of applied forces F, typical values of A(F) range from 300 − 900 nm2 for the AFM experiments described herein. With A(F) determined, φeff(F) and the ideality factor n were directly fit to each forward- bias I − V curve using equation (1). We assumed B∗ = 156 A cm-2 K-2 for Nb:STO samples56, and the experiments were performed at room temperature, T = 295 K. Details of the fitting process appear in the Supporting Information. By plotting φeff as a function of the force, Figure 3a condensates the forward bias data presented in Figure 1 into a manageable form. Figure 3b does the same for the reverse bias data and is discussed later. Fitting φeff gave φeff(F) = φ0 + bF1/3 with φ0 = 1.31 ± 0.10 eV and b = −0.38 ± 0.05 eV/μN1/3 (95% confidence intervals), plotted in Fig. 3a. This Hertzian-type F1/3 scaling matches previous calculations31 and experimental observations of tribocurrents57. The average value of the ideality factor n was 2.04 ± 0.09 (95% confidence interval). Ideality factors of 1-2 are known to be appropriate depending upon carrier details49, values of n = 1.2 − 1.8 have been observed58 for progressively decreasing interface quality, and an AFM tip contact is expected to be a low quality interface. The intercept, φ0, is the unmodified barrier height and, in the Schottky-Mott limit, is the difference between the PtIr work function Φm and the unmodified STO electron affinity χ0. For STO, the electron affinity is approximately59 χ0 = 4 eV. Though we find no reports of Φm, it is bounded by60-62 ΦPt = 5.6 eV and ΦIr = 4.65 eV. Using a simple linear interpolation, Φm = 0.8ΦPt + 0.2ΦIr = 5.4 eV. From this, we should expect the intercept of the fit curve to be 1.4 eV, close to the experimental result. 8 Fig. 3. Comparison of the experimental and calculated effective barriers (forward) and threshold biases (reverse). a, Experimental effective barrier heights φeff plotted against the tip force F (dots), with a curve fit (black line) of the form φ0 − bF1/3, with φ0 = 1.31 ± 0.10 eV and b = −0.38 ± 0.05 eV/μN1/3 and the numerically calculated barrier (blue line). b, Experimental (black dots) and calculated (solid blue line) threshold biases VRev,t at a threshold current of I = 0.03 nA in reverse bias. The experimental data suggests a breakdown bias of 1.5 V (dotted blue line). We now turn to modelling the effective barrier φeff(F) with force F. Assuming cylindrical symmetry, we consider the conduction band energy Ec(F, r) as a function of applied force and position r = (ρ, z). Assuming that any metal work function shifts due to strain are small relative to the other effects63, then (3a) VEM(F, r) = dEc dε ε(F, r) + qΦFXE(F, r) (3b) Equation (3b) has two electromechanical terms on the right: the first is the deformation potential and average Coulomb potential shift due to strain (which includes “surface” effects as described later64) and the second is the flexoelectric potential that develops due to the strain gradient. The other terms on the right in equation (3a) are conventional diode contributions: the second term is the depletion potential that develops in the doped STO and the third the image potential on an electron crossing the semiconductor-metal interface. Since STO is 9 centrosymmetric, we do not include any piezoelectric terms beyond the surface contributions that are already included. We use analytical solutions of Hertzian contact theory for a PtIr sphere with radius R indenting an STO half-space to calculate the strains and strain gradients necessary to quantitatively analyze equation (3). First, we consider the effects of strain without any strain gradients, which can be split into two terms, a volumetric strain and the remaining deviatoric shear strain. While volumetric strains modify the conduction band level uniformly, the shear strains cause band splitting65, lifting degeneracies. We will consider only the volumetric strains εvol and assume that the band splitting cancels on average in the experiments. The quantity of interest is then dEc dε ≈ d dεvol (Ec − V) + d dεvol (V − Evac) = DBS C + φ (4) where V is the average Coulomb potential in the crystal and we split dEc dε into two known derivatives. The first, the strain-induced change in the conduction band level, is the conduction band-specific deformation potential DBS C , as described and calculated by Stengel66. This term describes the shift of the conduction band edge with respect to V, so we must also consider how the mean inner potential, V − Evac changes with strain. The important mean inner potential term has often been called a “surface flexoelectric” contribution64,66, but we prefer an interpretation consistent with electron diffraction as discussed in detail recently64. This is the second term in equation (4), φ, and is determined analytically using the Ibers approximation64,67-69, which is accurate to ~10%. Thus, we have dEc dε ≈ DBS C + φ = −17.2 eV + 22.2 eV = 5 eV (5) Returning to equation (3), we next consider the bulk flexoelectric response. The polarization P due to the strain gradient is given by 10 Pi(F, r) = μijkl dεkl(F,r) dxj (6) where μijkl is the flexoelectric tensor. We assume cubic symmetry (and switch to Voigt notation), with the values70 for STO: μ11 = −36.9 nC/m, μ12 = −40.2 nC/m, and μ44 = −1.4 nC/m. The potential is therefore ΦFXE(F, r) = 1 4πεS ∫ P(F,r′)⋅(r−r′) |r−r′|3 dr′ Ω (7) with εS = 365ε0 the STO dielectric constant71. Beyond electromechanical effects, the applied bias and the formation of a depletion region near the surface of doped STO must both be accounted for in ΦDEP. We assume ΦDEP follows the form given for Nb-doped STO by Yamamoto71, depending only upon the distance z from the surface: ΦDEP(r) = √abε0 qN {cosh [cosh-1 (1 + qN √a bε0 Vd) − qN bε0 z] − 1} + (V/n − (EF − Ec)) (8) where N is the dopant concentration, a and b parameterize the field (E) dependence of the permittivity of STO as εSTO = bε0/√a + E2 and have values 1.64 ⋅ 1015 V2/m2 and 1.48 ⋅ 1010 V/m respectively at room temperature71, Vd = φ0 + EF − Ec − V/n is the diffusion potential, and V is the applied potential. We included the image charge potential, ΦIMG, generated as the electrons approach the surface of the semiconductor; however, it is very small relative to the other terms (details appear in the Supporting Information). 11 Fig. 4. Calculated conduction band minima for different forces. Calculated Ec(F, r) − EF for tip radius R = 60 nm and three different forces using cylindrical polars with z into the STO and ρ radial. 0 eV marks the unstrained bulk conduction band minimum. Contour lines are marked on the color bar. Therefore, we have for Ec: Ec(F, r) − EF = (DBS C + φ) + 1 4πεS ∫ P(F,r′)⋅(r−r′) |r−r′|3 dr′ Ω + ΦDEP(r) (9) The total band bending (radially symmetric) for the PtIr-STO system is shown in Fig. 4 for three representative forces. To compare with the experimental results, φeff was then calculated numerically by considering the paths an electron may take through the STO to the interface – a variational calculus problem. For a given path, the barrier is the maximum value of Ec along that path. Then, there is a non-uniform barrier, a function of ρ, which is the minimum of the barriers of the possible paths to that point at the interface. Finally, a single-valued φeff was calculated from this non-uniform barrier. These calculations indicate that the current flows through a thin ring just inside the edge of contact. Further details of the calculation appear in the Supporting Information. The results for the effective barrier are shown in Fig. 3a and are in excellent agreement with the experimental data. Turning next to the reverse bias case, we considered a reverse threshold bias VRev,t at which the current reaches some threshold magnitude, |I(Vt)| = It (see Fig. 3b). The value It = 0.03 nA was just large enough to avoid instrumental noise; as seen in the Supporting Information, this localizes the current to a small region and reduces the range of different tunneling barrier heights that contribute significantly. We calculate the current by integrating for fixed radial values across the thermally-assisted tunneling barrier defined by the maximum of the STO conduction band and the metal Fermi level. This neglects the charge-transfer that can occur with electrons moving from the metal into parts of the STO very close to the tip. The current density is72 12 JTun(V, F, ρ) = B∗T kB ∫ PTun(Em, V, F, ρ) ln [ 1+exp(−(Em+ξF)/kBT) φmax eff 0 (10) where PTun(Em, V, F, ρ) is the tunneling probability for an electron with energy Em where Em = 0 is the metal Fermi level. We note that this is a general form that includes thermally assisted tunneling. Using the WKB approximation73, PTun(Em, V, F, ρ) = exp [−2 ∫ √2m∗ ħ2 (φeff(V, F, r) − Em) dr C ] (11) where m∗ is the STO conduction band effective mass and C is a path from the interface at radius ρ to a point in the STO far away (where Ec is constant). Of the possible paths, that with the highest tunneling probability determines PTun – another variational calculus problem. The experimentally observed current at the threshold applied bias VRev,t and tip force F is given by equation 12. I(VRev,t, F) = It = ∫ JTun(VRev,t/n, F, ρ)2πρ dρ ρmax 0 (12) By restricting the analysis to low currents, the thermally-assisted tunneling is almost exclusively through the lowest part of the barrier near the edge of the contact region, the same location of current flow calculated in the forward bias case. At higher currents, the tunneling occurs over a larger region, as detailed in the Supporting Information. A plot of VRev,t with respect to the force F is shown in Fig. 3b. The calculations and the experimental data agree well except for reverse biases above 1.5 V. This can be attributed to force-independent breakdown: in addition to the system missing the guard rings of modern Schottky devices74, the sharp radius of curvature of the interface and the relatively high doping level of the STO both suggest breakdown is possible75. The experimental results and modelling herein are in excellent agreement, well within the experimental limits. The analysis only contains two unknown parameters, namely the ideality of the diode in forward and reverse bias and the value for the Schottky barrier between the PtIr tip 13 and the STO substrate. All other relevant terms in the model, such as the elastic constants, flexocoupling voltage and strain derivative of the mean inner potential are either well known or are calculated ab-initio. For any specific system, the details depend on many terms, including the flexoelectric terms, temperature, elastic constants, and differences in work function. The Supporting Information discusses the contributions of the strain gradient and polarization components, and the Supporting Information discusses the contributions of the terms in equations (4), (7), and (8). One point of some importance in a general sense is that we obtained good agreement between experiment and calculations without having atomically ordered and clean surfaces. This is because the barriers for both forward and reverse bias are beneath the surface by 1 − 3 nm (see the Supporting Information). This means that the behavior of a particular material will be somewhat consistent, which is what has been found experimentally. Of course, chemisorbed polar molecules or water will have an effect on the zero-force barrier, but they will not change that much the band-bending change due to the flexoelectric effect. Though the calculations do not explicitly address charge transfer, they offer some insights that agree with experiments for sliding Schottky generator experiments43,51 that observe electron transfer from a semiconductor to a metal, surprisingly independent of the sign of the flexoelectric coefficients and details of shear versus indentation or plowing. What one has is a type of ratchetting charge pump. More details are provided in the Supporting Information; we will summarize here and in Fig. 5. Near the contact there is a region where the bands bend down in the semiconductor as force is applied, these regions will pull in electrons from the body of the semiconductor far from the contact region. As the force is released there is automatically a barrier for these electrons to move back into the semiconductor, so transfer to the metal is favored. Changing the sign of the flexoelectric coefficients will change whether this downwards 14 region is towards the outside or the inside of the circular contact region, but not its presence. Similarly, details of shear versus compression or other types of asperity contact will change the exact magnitude of the region where the band bends significantly down, but the overall details will remain the same. Fig. 5. Ratcheting mechanism for charge transfer in metal-semiconductor contacts. a-h, Ec(F, r) − EF in the range 0 ≤ ρ ≤ 20 nm and 0 ≤ z ≤ 3 nm for increasing and decreasing forces F, as in contact and pull-off of an asperity. a, For very low forces, the depletion potential is most important. b-d, As the force increases, electrons (white circles, schematically arrowed) move from regions with an increasing potential to regions with decreasing potential. e-g, As the force decreases, the number of available states in the potential well decreases, forcing some electrons into the metal rather than back across the barrier in the semiconductor, where states near the metal Fermi level EF,M = 0 are available. h, After the force is completely released, electrons have transferred to the metal. We have presented a model of electromechanical band-bending in a triboelectric metal- semiconductor system that quantitatively agrees with the force-dependent current-bias experiments performed herein and qualitatively agrees with charge transfer observed in other works. This offers insight into the details of the triboelectric effect in metal-semiconductor systems and provides strong evidence of the importance of flexoelectric band-bending to triboelectricity. Rather complex mechanics, band-bending physics and device physics combine to end up producing a relatively simple and quite general result. While details are of course very 15 strongly dependent upon specifics of the materials, broad-brush results for charge transfer are surprisingly invariant of, for instance, the amount of shear at the contact. If this was not the case, then the simple concepts such as the 19th century triboelectric series would never have had even enough limited success such that it could be taught to generations of high-school students. Is triboelectricity as a ratchetting charge pump generalizable from the Schottky contacts herein to other cases? Perhaps. Acknowledgments: The authors acknowedge financial support from the National Science Foundation (NSF) under grant number DMR-1507101 and the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, under Award No. DE-FG02-01ER4594. Author contributions: K. P. O. performed the experiments and analysis with advice from C. A. M. and supervision from L. D. M. All authors contributed to the writing of the Letter. Competing interests: The authors declare no competing financial interest.