1 Surface charge writing and non-volatile control of superconductivity in LaAlO3/KTaO3(111) heterostructure Siyuan Hong1, Yanqiu Sun1, Yuan Liu1, Yishuai Wang1, and Yanwu Xie1,2* 1Interdisciplinary Center for Quantum Information, State Key Laboratory of Modern Optical Instrumentation, and Zhejiang Province Key Laboratory of Quantum Technology and Device, Department of Physics, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China 2Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Microstructures, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China *To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: ywxie@zju.edu.cn Abstract The oxide interface between LaAlO3 and KTaO3(111) can host an electron gas that condenses into superconductivity at low temperatures. In this work, we demonstrate a local and non-volatile control of this electron gas using a biased conducting atomic force microscope tip. By scanning the tip, charges can be accumulated on the surface of LaAlO3, which subsequently tune the conduction of the buried LaAlO3/KTaO3(111) interface largely, varying from conducting (superconducting) to insulating states. The tuning effects are stable for > 20 h at room temperature. The maximum modulation of carrier density is > 8 × 1013/cm2. This result suggests a new model system in which rewritable superconducting, normal, and insulating states can be flexibly defined in the same material on demand. 2 Controlling conduction locally and non-volatilely is appealing for both science and technology. Oxide heterostructures provide a fertile ground for such a control. A straightforward way to achieve it is exploiting the non-volatile polarization of epitaxial ferroelectric oxides . By forming conducting oxide-ferroelectric heterostructures, and using electrically biased conducting atomic force microscope (cAFM) tip to locally switch the polarization, control of conduction, as well as superconductivity, has been demonstrated in a few systems including Pb(Zr,Ti)O3/SrRuO3 , Pb(Zr,Ti)O3/Nb- doped SrTiO3 , and BiFeO3/YBa2Cu3O7-δ heterostructures . Even more strikingly, such a control can be achieved in an oxide heterostructure in which no ferroelectric oxide is involved at all, as discovered in LaAlO3/SrTiO3 (LAO/STO) [6–10]. It was proposed that LAO, as an excellent insulator, can stabilize the cAFM tip-induced charges on its surface, which in turn tunes the conduction at the buried interface . Using LAO/STO as a magic template, fruitful physical phenomena and novel devices such as erasable nanoscale conduction , on-demand nanoelectronics , rewritable nanoscale oxide photodetector , sketched oxide single-electron transistor , electron pairing without superconductivity , one-dimensional Pascal conductance series , and one-dimensional Kronig-Penney superlattices have been demonstrated. Very recently, a new family of oxide interface superconductors were discovered in heterostructures composed of KTaO3 (KTO) and other oxides (EuO or LAO) [17–22]. Their optimal superconducting transition temperature Tc is nearly one order of magnitude higher than that of LAO/STO, and exhibits an unusual strong dependence on the orientation of KTO . Among them, LAO/KTO resembles with LAO/STO in many aspects. Analogous to LAO/STO, the conduction in LAO/KTO locates at a few-nanometer-thick KTO layer close to the interface and is capped by a thin and highly insulating LAO film [17–19]. This key feature provides us an opportunity to control its interface conduction in a similar fashion as that in LAO/STO. In this work, using the (111)-oriented LAO/KTO heterostructure as an example, we demonstrate that we are able to write robust surface charges on LAO/KTO, and reversibly tune its interfacial conduction in a local and nonvolatile manner. The tuning effect is enormous. By varying the sign and magnitude of the tip bias, we can tune the interface into superconducting, insulating (beyond the measurement limit), and intermediate states. This control ability of superconductivity is much larger than that observed in previous ferroelectric heterostructures . Charge writing on the surface of LAO/KTO We first demonstrate that we can reliably write charges, as well as switch their sign, on the surface of LAO/KTO heterostructure by scanning the surface with a biased cAFM tip. Figure 1(a) schematically shows the experimental configuration. The LAO/KTO interface was grounded and a voltage bias, Vtip, was applied on the cAFM tip. Details of sample fabrication and cAFM writing can be found in the Supplemental Material (SM) . For demonstration, we wrote a 3×3 μm2 square with Vtip = -9 V on a LAO(10 nm)/KTO sample, and then wrote its central 1×1 μm2 square with Vtip = +9 V. AFM topographic images (Fig. 1(b)) showed no detectable difference in the written and 3 unwritten areas. The dusts located on the edges of the written squares were likely due to an electrostatic attraction from the biased tip. In sharp contrast, surface potential measured by Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) shows clear patterns (Fig. 1(c)): the area written purely with Vtip = -9 V is dark (low potential); the central 1×1 μm2 area written first with Vtip = -9 V and followed with Vtip = +9 V is bright (high potential). These observations resemble with that observed previously in LAO/STO , and indicate that a negative Vtip can accumulate negative, while a positive Vtip can accumulate positive, charges on the surface of LAO/KTO. The KPFM patterns, even the border, were robust for many hours (Figs. 1(d) and 1(e)), showing that the written surface charges are very stable. The sign of Vtip is relative to the interface. (b) AFM topographic image captured on the area immediately after the writings. The dashed squares indicate the written regions. The values of Vtip are as labeled. (c) KPFM surface potential image measured simultaneously with the topographic image shown in (b). (d) KPFM surface potential image measured after the written sample was stored in ambient condition for 53 hours. (e) Line profiles across images (c, d) along the dashed lines. Mechanism for charge writing We then explore the mechanism for the surface charge writing. In Fig. 2 we present a KPFM surface potential image on the LAO(10 nm)/KTO surface of which we have used Vtip = ± 9 V to write side-by-side two rectangle areas in air and another two rectangle areas under a gentle N2 flow (see Fig. S1 for the experimental setup). The role of the N2 flow is to create a local environment where the air that composes of ambient water vapor is replaced with dry N2. As shown in Fig. 2, in contrast to the writings in air, writings under a N2 flow cannot accumulate charges on the sample surface. This provides a clear evidence that ambient water vapor is crucial for the present surface 4 charge writing. Thus we propose that the “water-cycle” mechanism found in LAO/STO applies to LAO/KTO as well. In this mechanism , the biased cAFM tip condenses ambient water to form a water bridge between the tip and the sample surface, and at the same time dissociates some water molecular into OH- and H+ (or H3O+) adsorbates. During the writing process, the positively (negatively) biased tip will remove some of the OH- (H+ or H3O+) adsorbates, leaving the surface with excess positive (negative) charges . Vtip = ±9 V in both air and N2 flow. The dashed rectangles indicate the written areas. Control the interface conduction of LAO/KTO at room temperature From a simple electrostatic consideration, to satisfy charge neutrality, the accumulation of negative (positive) surface charges will deplete (accumulate) interface electrons, which will in turn decrease (increase) the interface conduction. In the following we show that the charges written on the surface of LAO/KTO can indeed modulate the interface conduction hugely. In order to enable more quantitative measurements of sheet resistance Rsheet and sheet carrier density nsheet, we fabricated a LAO(10 nm)/KTO sample into a standard Hall-bar configuration (see a photograph of the device in Fig. S2). As schemed in the inset of Fig. 3(a), we wrote surface charges on the central area containing the active conduction bridge, and then measured the transport properties using the electrodes as indicated. We found that the tuning effect of the conduction is non-volatile (with no Vtip applied during measurements) and depends on the sign and magnitude of the applied Vtip. Roughly speaking, it is relatively easier to tune the interface to a more insulating state by applying a negative Vtip rather than to tune the interface to a more conducting state by applying a positive Vtip. A Vtip = -12 V writing can fully suppress the room-temperature conduction to an unmeasurably tiny value, and a following Vtip ≥ +13 V writing was typically needed to recover the conduction to a measurable value. The tuned conduction is very stable. We have prepared the device into a high and low resistance states and found that both of them decayed only slightly, in ambient condition, in a time of ~20 hours (Fig. 3(a)). The tuning is reversible. By writing using Vtip alternately with -13 V and +15 V, we could reversibly switch Rsheet between an 5 unmeasurably large value >2.8×107 Ω/sq and ~2×104 Ω/sq (Fig. 3(b)). These non- volatile, stable, and reversible tunings of interface conduction are in excellent agreement with the behaviors of surface charges as characterized by KPFM (Fig. 1), confirming their close correlations. Furthermore, given the fact that the nsheet of the unwritten LAO/KTO samples is ~5-10×1013 cm-2 , the ability to fully exhaust nsheet (become highly insulating) revealing that the tuning ability of surface charges is indeed huge. as a function of time for the device in a high-resistance state (high R) and in a low-resistance state (low R). Both states were stable and decayed only slightly after ~20 hours. Here the “high R” was prepared by scanning the device with Vtip = -12 V first, which set Rsheet to an unmeasurably large value, and then with Vtip = +13 V to recover some conduction; the “low R” was prepared by scanning the device with Vtip = +15 V. The inset shows a schematic view of writings and measurements of the Hall-bar device. The amorphous AlOx was used as a hard mask and the active LAO/KTO was confined within the Hall-bar area. Note that all the measurements were performed after (not during) writings. (b) By applying Vtip alternately with -13 V and +15 V, we could reversibly switch Rsheet between an unmeasurable value >2.8×107 Ω/sq and ~2×104 Ω/sq. The dashed line indicates the measurement limit. In both (a) and (b) the measurements were performed in air, at room temperature, and in four-point configurations. Control superconductivity Finally, we demonstrate our control of superconductivity of LAO/KTO using surface charge writing. It has been a long-standing challenge to control superconductivity electrostatically because the nsheet of most superconducting systems is larger than the 6 tuning ability of the conventional electrical field effect . Up to now, there are only handful systems, such as LAO/STO and magic-angle graphene superlattices , which can be controlled in a sense like a conventional field effect transistor. For LAO/KTO, in a previous work we have demonstrated a successful control of its superconductivity by applying an external electric field. Surprisingly, in that control, the interplay of disorders and carriers, rather than nsheet, played a crucial role . Here, the huge tuning ability resulting from the cAFM tip-induced surface charges provides us a new way to control the superconductivity of LAO/KTO. for the LAO/KTO Hall-bar device scanned with different Vtips. Before tuning, the device was in “high R” (see Fig. 3(a)). The data were measured one-by-one after subsequently scanning the device LAO/KTO sample is shown in Fig. S3 for comparison. (b) A close view of the two Rsheet(T) curves that exhibit superconductivity. (c) The sheet carrier density nsheet measured at 2 K for different Vtips. In Fig. 4 we studied the low-temperature transport properties of the LAO/KTO Hall- bar device after it experienced charge writings with different Vtips. To better demonstrate the creation and suppression of superconductivity, at the very beginning we set the device to a high-resistance state (see Fig. 3(a)), in which the device was too insulating to be measured in low temperatures. A following Vtip = +14 V writing changed the device into a low-resistance state of a room-temperature Rsheet ~2×104 Ω/sq. This time the device exhibited a metallic behavior down to ~2 K, where a A following Vtip = -9 V writing fully suppressed the superconductivity and increased the overall Rsheet(T) by about one order of magnitude (Fig. 4(a)). A further following Vtip = +16 V writing recovered the device into a superconducting state again, with a slightly enhanced Tc ~1.0 K (Figs. 4(a) and 4(b)). The subsequent writings with Vtip = - 10 V, -11 V and -11.5 V suppressed the superconductivity and increased Rsheet gradually until an unmeasurably large value (Fig. 4(a)). This set of experiments unambiguously demonstrated that the superconductivity, as well as the overall conduction, of LAO/KTO can be efficiently controlled by the surface charge writing using cAFM tip. To quantitatively evaluate the tuning ability of surface charges on nsheet, we performed Hall-effect measurements immediately after the respective Rsheet(T) measurements, on the device at 2 K. As shown in Fig. 4(c), in the measurable range the nsheet varied from ~3.8 to ~8.0×1013 cm-2. Note that here the ~3.8×1013 cm-2 is not the lower bound of 7 nsheet. It was simply because we could not make a reliable Hall-effect measurement when the channel resistance was too large due to a low nsheet. The real lower bound of nsheet should be zero when the device was in a highly insulating state. Thus, the tuning ability of nsheet is at least up to ~8.0×1013 cm-2. In summary, we have demonstrated for the first time a non-volatile control of conduction and superconductivity at LAO/KTO interface by locally writing surface charges. The non-volatile characteristic is reminiscent of ferroelectric field-effect devices. However, unlike the ferroelectric polarization, the charge writing-induced resistive states, which depend on Vtips, can be varied in a wide range by designing. Compared with LAO/STO , LAO/KTO has a higher Tc and a stronger spin-orbit coupling effect [22,29–33], and in principle can work as a more friendly platform for rewritable superconducting electronic devices in which the superconducting, normal, and insulating components are realized by locally defining in the same material. Acknowledgements This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (11934016, 12074334), the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2017YFA0303002), the Key R&D Program of Zhejiang Province, China (2020C01019, 2021C01002), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities of China.