Competition between orbital effects, Pauli limiting, and Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin- Ovchinnikov states in 2D transition metal dichalcogenide superconductors Chang-woo Cho1, Cheuk Yin Ng1, Mahmoud Abdel-Hafiez2, Alexander N. Vasiliev3,4,5, Dmitriy A. Chareev4,5,6, A. G. Lebed7,8 and Rolf Lortz1,* 1Department of Physics, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong 2Department of Physics and Astronomy, Uppsala University, Uppsala SE-75120, Sweden 3Department of Low Temperature Physics and Superconductivity, Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow 119991, Russia 4Quantum Functional Materials Laboratory, National University of Science and Technology “MISiS” Moscow 119049, Russia 5Ural Federal University, Ekaterinburg 620002, Russia 6Institute of Experimental Mineralogy, RAS, Chernogolovka, Moscow Region 142432. Russia 7Department of Physics, University of Arizona, 1118 E. 4-th Street, Tucson, AZ 85721, USA 8Landau Institute for Theoretical Physics, RAS, 2 Kosygina Street, Moscow 117334, Russia *Correspondence to Rolf Lortz (lortz@ust.hk). We compare the upper critical field of bulk single-crystalline samples of the two intrinsic transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) superconductors, 2H-NbSe2 and 2H-NbS2, in high magnetic fields where their layer structure is aligned strictly parallel and perpendicular to the field, using magnetic torque experiments and a high-precision piezo-rotary positioner. While both superconductors show that orbital effects still have a significant impact when the layer structure is aligned parallel to the field, the upper critical field of NbS2 rises above the Pauli limiting field and forms a Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) state, while orbital effects suppress superconductivity in NbSe2 just below the Pauli limit. From the out-of-plane anisotropies, the coherence length perpendicular to the layers of 31 Å in NbSe2 is much larger than the interlayer distance, leading to a significant orbital effect suppressing superconductivity before the Pauli limit is reached, in contrast to the more 2D NbS2. Type-II spin-singlet superconductors have upper critical fields Bc2, usually dominated by the orbital limit for superconductivity , when the superconducting screening currents reach a value at which the Cooper pairs break apart. Strongly anisotropic layered superconductors can be an exception if the magnetic field is applied strictly parallel to the layer structure . If the coupling between the layers is weak, the orbital effect is suppressed and the orbital limit can exceed the Pauli limit for superconductivity . At the Pauli limiting field, the energy of Zeeman splitting between the two electrons forming the Cooper pair reaches a value at which pair formation is abruptly suppressed and the normal state is restored via a discontinuous first- order phase transition. In contrast, the orbital limit of type-II superconductor induces a continuous second-order transition to the normal state. Transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) superconductors such as 2H-NbSe2, 2H-NbS2 and 2H- TaS2 are strongly anisotropic layered superconductors in which two-dimensional planes are weakly coupled by van der Waals forces. TMD materials can be exfoliated down to monolayer thickness and have been the focus of recent research due to their wide range of unique electronic properties with high potential for technological applications . In their 2D form, they have aroused great interest due to the discovery of Ising superconductivity, which allows them to exceed the Pauli limit of superconductivity . However, there is also another mechanism that allows superconductors to maintain their superconducting state above the Pauli limit, which is the formation of a Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) state . It arises when Cooper pairs acquire finite centre-of-mass momentum, leading to a spatially modulated order parameter that stabilizes the superconducting condensate. Superconductivity can then exist well beyond the theoretical Pauli limit in the form of a pair density wave state . FFLO states have been reported in layered organic superconductors , and in the form of the Q-phase in the layered heavy-fermion superconductor CeCoIn5 . Other examples include the iron-based superconductors KFe2As2 , and FeSe . The formation of the FFLO state requires that the superconductor is in the clean limit and the mean-free path l of the electrons exceeds the coherence length ξ . This is the case in TMD superconductors, where, for example, l = 320 Å in 2H-NbSe2 exceeding the very short ξ by a factor of 10 . We recently reported the observation of an FFLO state in 2H-NbS2 bulk samples when we applied the magnetic field exactly parallel to its layer structure with an accuracy of one millidegree using a piezo rotary stage in combination with magnetic torque, specific heat and thermal expansion experiments . In this article, we report magnetic torque measurements for 2H-NbSe2 for precisely parallel alignment of the magnetic field with respect to the layer structure and compare the magnetic field phase diagram with the one of 2H-NbS2. Results In layered superconductors with strong 2D character, it is essential to achieve a strictly parallel field orientation to minimize the orbital effect and find the maximum critical field Bc2. We achieved this by first minimizing  at a fixed temperature and field (0.3 K, 4T) by rotating the sample stepwise through the parallel orientation . In this way, we could approximately estimate the parallel alignment. We then repeated the field scans at tiny angular variations of 0.1o or less until we found torque data with minimum amplitude, minimal hysteresis loop opening and maximum Bc2. This is consistent with parallel alignment. Fig. 1a shows data for NbS2 where the hysteresis loop almost disappears when a maximum Bc2 indicates that the parallel orientation has been reached. NbSe2, for which data near parallel orientation are shown in Fig. 1b at two very small angles of  = 0.1° and 0°, does not show this dramatic change in torque behaviour near parallel alignment. Even when Bc2 is maximized at 11.2 T, the hysteresis loop remains wide open. Note that, like bulk magnetization, the torque is composed of a reversible thermodynamic contribution and an irreversible contribution resulting from current loops induced by flux pinning. Macroscopic screening currents can flow in the out-of-plane direction only if there is a certain coupling among the planes. Here, hysteresis indicates sufficient coupling between the planes for such screening currents to flow and contribute to torque, whereas in NbS2 they almost vanish for strictly parallel fields. In the weak coupling BCS limit the Pauli limit for superconductivity can be estimated as BP = 1.84 Tc. Note that the Bc2 value of NbSe2 is slightly smaller than the theoretical Pauli limit at 13 T. In contrast, as previously reported , Bc2 of NbSe2 clearly exceeds the Pauli limit at ~10 T. Fig. 1 a Magnetic torque measured at T = 0.3 K at  = 1.0°. 0.5° and 0.0° (field parallel to basal plane) for 2H-NbS2. The exactly parallel alignment can be seen from the closure of the hysteresis loop and the maximum Bc2. The inset shows a magnified view of the high-field region for the  = 0.0° data. Note that Bc2 cannot be reached in the field range up to 15 T for this angle. b Similar data for 2H-NbSe2 for  = 0.1° and 0.0°, where the hysteresis loop remains wide open even at such small angles, unlike NbS2. Fig. 2a shows the magnetic torque for the exactly parallel field orientation at different fixed temperatures. The torque signal increases rapidly at small fields, reaches a maximum, and then initially decreases. At 5 K the torque continuously disappears at Bc2 near 4 T, except for a tiny anomaly indicating enhanced flux pinning known as the peak effect . At lower temperatures, the torque begins to rise again at higher fields, forming a pronounced peak before abruptly dropping to a small background value in the normal state at Bc2. Such a sharp decay of the screening currents is usually observed in Pauli-limited superconductors and associated with a first-order nature of the Bc2 transition triggered by the Pauli paramagnetic effect . However, NbSe2 does not reach the Pauli limit, even if it comes close to it. Therefore, it remains unclear whether this strong decay is already triggered by the influence of the Pauli paramagnetic effect, which certainly plays a role near the theoretical Pauli limit. A complete hysteresis loop recorded at 0.3 K is shown in Fig. 1b. It shows how the shielding currents drop abruptly as Bc2 is approached, but build up much more continuously as the field is reduced. Fig. 2b shows the magnetic torque in various fixed fields measured under field-cooled conditions during temperature sweeps across the superconducting transition. 0 2 4 6 8 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 8 10 12 14 b 2H-NbSe2  (arb. units)  0.0 o 0.1 o B (T) a 2H-NbS2  (arb. units)  0.0 o 0.5 o 1.0 o B (T)  (arb. units) 0.0 o Fig. 2 Magnetic torque data in parallel fields of 2H-NbSe2. a Magnetic torque magnitude  (B) measured at fixed temperatures as a function of increasing magnetic field applied strictly parallel to the basal plane ( = 0°). b Magnetic torque  (T) measured in fixed parallel fields as a function of temperature. The data have been normalized for clarity. The additional circles mark the critical fields Bc2(T) (a) or critical temperatures Tc(B) (b) to be added in a magnetic field vs. temperature phase diagram (Fig. 3). Tc BP Bc2 exp. Bc2⊥ exp. Bc2 orb. WHH/GL Bc2⊥ orb. WHH/GL 0 0⊥ 0 /0⊥ NbSe2 7.1 K 13 T 11.2 T 5 T 11.2 T \ 15 T 5 T / 6.2 T 71 Å 31 Å 2.29 7.5 NbS2 5.5 K 10 T   1.8T 24 T \ 33 T 1.8 T / 2.2 T 8 Å 15 0.8 theoretical Pauli limit BP = 1.84Tc in the weak coupling limit, experimentally determined upper critical field in parallel (Bc2) and perpendicular fields (Bc2⊥ ), extrapolated upper critical fields according to the between electron quasi-classical motion length and layer distance (l(H)/d). For details see text. Discussion In Fig. 3, we plot the extracted Bc2 values of NbSe2 for both the parallel (Bc2) and perpendicular (Bc2⊥) field directions with respect to the layer structure in a magnetic phase diagram, compared to the one of NbS2 we reported in Ref. (see Table 1 for an overview of the relevant superconducting parameters). Bc2 was taken as the upper limit at which the torque deviates from the small normal state background. Additional DC magnetization data were used to determine Bc2⊥ for which accurate alignment is much less critical and which agree perfectly with Ref. . The theoretical Pauli limits of 10 T (NbS2) and 13 T (NbSe2) for both compounds are indicated by the dotted horizontal lines. The dashed lines represent fits with the standard Werthamer–Helfand–Hohenberg (WHH) model that illustrate the expected temperature dependence of the orbital limit for superconductivity if there were no Pauli paramagnetic effect. The WHH model describes well the temperature dependence of Bc2 for NbSe2 in both field directions. Bc2 comes close to the Pauli limit but does not reach it. For a 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2  (arb. units) b a 0.9K 0.7K 0.5K 0.3K 1.2K 2K 2.4K 3.3K 6K 4.2K 5K B (T) 7.5T 11T 9T 2T 4T  (normalized) T (K) layered superconductor, the anisotropy is comparatively weak, with Bc2 =11.2T being just over twice the value of Bc2⊥ =5T. Note that our Bc2 values at low temperatures differ slightly from those found in the literature , which is due to the fact that these previously reported values are based on extrapolations of critical field values or anisotropies at higher temperatures, which may be affected by the positive curvature of the Bc2 line near the zero field Tc. In contrast, Bc2 for NbS2 clearly exceeds the Pauli limit of 10 T. Above the Pauli limit, the Bc2 curve begins to deviate from the WHH model, indicating the sudden effect of the Pauli paramagnetic effect, before rising again. This upturn, together with the thermodynamic signature of an additional phase transition occurring near 10 T in the specific heat and magnetostriction, has been interpreted as consequence of the formation of the FFLO state , which allows the superconductor to maintain its state above the Pauli limit. The anisotropic coherence lengths can be deducted from the linear Ginzburg-Landau (GL) fits (dotted lines), which provide an estimation of the GL orbital limit for superconductivity in parallel fields at Bc2 = 33 T, as opposed to a low Bc2⊥ = 2.2 T. Fig. 3 Magnetic phase diagram of 2H-NbSe2 (a) and 2H-NbS2 (b) in fields applied strictly parallel and perpendicular to the layer structure. The horizontal lines mark the Pauli limits at 13 and 10 T, respectively. The data in (a) were obtained from magnetic torque measurements supplemented below 7 T by DC magnetization measurements. Data from Ref. were added for the perpendicular direction. It shows the upper critical field lines for both field orientations. The data in (b) were compiled from magnetic torque, specific heat and thermal expansion data (see for details). The olive squares in (a) mark a phase transition boundary within the superconducting state of NbS2 attributed to the transition to an FFLO state in the high field region . The dashed and dotted lines are fits with the standard Werthamer–Helfand–Hohenberg (WHH) model and the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) model, respectively, providing estimates of the orbital limits for superconductivity. 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 a 2H-NbSe2 Pauli limit Bc2 ( : field sweep) Bc2 ( : temp sweep) Bc2 (magnetization) Ref. B perpendicular to layers B parallel to layers B (T) T (K) B (T) b 2H-NbS2 FFLO transition Pauli limit B perpendicular to layers B parallel to layers T (K) Note that the NbSe2 Bc2 data deviate somewhat from the GL and WHH models at high temperatures, as the data exhibit some concave temperature dependence. This has been observed previously and is likely the effect of fluctuations near Tc that are enhanced by the low-dimensionality and the relatively high Tc value of NbSe2. From the anisotropy of the Bc2 values at low temperatures, we can derive the perpendicular and parallel coherence lengths 0⊥= 31 Å and 0 = 71 Å for NbSe2 from Eq. 1 and 2, respectively. If we use the GL linear extrapolated orbital limit in parallel fields (Fig. 3a) as input for the orbital upper critical field in NbS2, we obtain 0⊥ = 8 Å and 0 = 120 Å. Bc2 () =0/(20⊥0) (1) Bc2⊥ () =0/(20) (2) Our comparison of the magnetic phase diagrams NbSe2 and NbS2 demonstrates that NbSe2 is much less 2D than NbS2 with a much weaker anisotropy 0 /0⊥ = 2.29 in contrast to the large value of NbS2 0 /0⊥ = 15. This explains why the 3D orbital effects in NbSe2 are very strong, as shown by the rapid suppression of the critical temperature in parallel magnetic fields driven by the orbital effect. The difference in the phase diagram for high magnetic fields is certainly related to the ratio of 0⊥ to the interlayer spacing, d . For both compounds, the c-axis lattice parameter in the out-of-plane direction is about d = 18 Å , and it is evident that for NbSe2 0⊥= 31 Å causes strong coupling of the superconducting layers with significant Meissner currents in the out-of-plane direction, suppressing superconductivity by the orbital effect before the Pauli limit is reached at 13 T. For NbS2, the much shorter 0⊥ = 8 Å brings the superconductor to the borderline of the 2D limit where the layers begin to decouple, and the orbital effect is significantly weakened, allowing the Pauli limit to be reached and the FFLO state to be formed. A more rigorous theory of the competition between the orbital effects and the FFLO phase has been recently suggested in Ref. , where the quantum effects of electron motion in a parallel magnetic field in layered superconductors are considered. It was shown that the destructive 3D orbital effects against superconductivity destroy the FFLO phase if l(H)/d >> 1, and that the FFLO phase occurs if l(H)/d < 1, where l(H) is the magnitude of the electron quasi-classical motion in a direction perpendicular to the conducting layers. By applying of the results of Ref. to the experimental data obtained in this paper, we find that, indeed, in NbSe2 l(H)/d = 7.5, whereas in NbS2 l(H)/d = 0.8, which explains the destruction of the FFLO phase by the 3D Meissner currents in NbSe2 and its stability in NbS2. In conclusion, the two TMD superconductors 2H-NbSe2 and 2H-NbS2 are sister compounds with very similar superconducting characteristics. However, the larger Se ions in 2H-NbSe2 significantly reduce the out-of-plane anisotropy, so they exhibit different magnetic field vs. temperature phase diagrams in strictly parallel fields. In 2H-NbSe2, the weaker anisotropy enhances the coupling between the planes, allowing sufficiently strong Meissner shielding currents to flow between the layers so that the orbital effect becomes the leading mechanism for suppressing superconductivity near, but still below, the Pauli limit for superconductivity. In contrast, the smaller S ions in 2H-NbS2 suppress orbital effects sufficiently for the upper critical field Bc2 to reach the Pauli limit at ~4 K. At lower temperatures, the formation of an unusual FFLO state leads to a strong enhancement of Bc2. Most previous work on FFLO states has been performed on layered organic superconductors, which require very high magnetic fields on the order of 20 T to study, which are only available in large scale high magnetic field facilities. 2H-NbS2 allows the study of the FFLO state in a field and temperature range accessible in a standard cryogenic laboratory. The availability of two very similar TMD superconducting compounds provides a unique opportunity to determine the parameters required for an FFLO state and encourages experiments in which the interlayer coupling is varied by either ion substitution or high pressure. Methods Sample Preparation High quality single crystals of transition metal dichalcogenides were prepared by an evaporation method in a fused silica ampoule. To achieve supersaturation, the ampoule was subjected to a controlled temperature gradient of 100 – 70 °C, with the hot side maintained at 850 – 400 °C. Crystallization was initiated over a period of ~3 weeks by slowly cooling the multicomponent flux to reduce the solubility of the components. The chalcogenide feed was introduced into the hot part of the reaction vessel, where it dissolved in a growth medium in the form of an eutectic CsCl-KCl-NaCl salt melt mixture, from where it migrated to the cold side to crystallize. A detailed characterization of the process can be found in . The resulting high-quality single-crystalline platelets with optically flat surfaces on both sides were cut into a square shape of ~1 mm side length. Magnetic Torque Measurements The magnetic torque  is a vector quantity directly related to the anisotropic DC magnetization: τ = M × B, where B is the applied magnetic field. It was measured using a capacitive cantilever technique . The sample was attached to a circular plate with a diameter of 5 mm at the end of the cantilever leg, forming one of the plates of a parallel plate capacitor. The plates are electrically insulated by a sapphire disk to allow reversible measurements as a function of field and temperature. The sensor was mounted on a piezo rotary stage in a 3He probe of a 15 T magnet cryostat, so that the layered structure of the sample could be aligned with millidegree accuracy with respect to the field direction. Field or temperature sweeps were performed at a rate of 0.1 - 0.5 T/min and 0.04 K/min, respectively. To achieve perfectly parallel field alignment, it is essential that the crystals are mounted absolutely flat on the cantilever. Since our sample was only about 100 microns thin, this was ensured by using the adhesive force of highly diluted GE 7031 varnish to firmly attach the sample to the flat, polished cantilever plate. Capacitance was measured using a General Radio 1615-A capacitance bridge and a SR830 digital lock-in amplifier. Note that even with parallel alignment,  usually does not completely vanish because of quadrupole moments . All data present the magnitude  of the torque. Data availability The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.