Page | 1 Broadband Microwave Spectroscopy for Two-Dimensional Material Systems Antonio L. Levy* and Neil M. Zimmerman Physical Measurement Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), Gaithersburg, Maryland, 20899-8171, USA I. Abstract In recent years, interesting materials have emerged which are only available as μm- scale flakes, and whose novel physics might be better understood through broadband microwave spectroscopy; examples include twisted bilayer graphene , 2D materials in which many-body phases are observed , and artificial lattices for analog quantum simulations . Most previous techniques are unfortunately not sensitive for flakes below mm lateral sizes. We propose a simple technique which does not require sophisticated sample preparation nor Ohmic contact and show through theory and simulations that one will be able to qualitatively measure spectral features of interest, and quantitatively measure the frequency-dependent complex conductivity. II. Introduction In recent years, two-dimensional materials, such as twisted bilayer graphene , 2D materials in which many-body phases are observed , and artificial lattices , have emerged; the novel physics of these materials might be better understood through broadband microwave spectroscopy . Also, understanding the physics behind the novel phenomena exhibited by these material systems may prove necessary to realizing applications based on them. One difficulty with such measurements is that often the thin films can only be grown in small flakes, of order 1 μm in lateral size; this work proposes a new broadband measurement which can be conveniently applied to such small flakes and does not require Ohmic contact. Broadband conductivity spectroscopy has helped demystify the physics of some thin film materials. Such a system’s conductivity spectrum depends strongly on its energy level spectrum, and thus is a direct reflection of the ground state and excited state physics. Previously, broadband microwave spectroscopy has been used to study novel physics of thin film materials which can Page | 2 be grown in large mm-scale flakes, such as charge density wave ground states of 2D electron systems , multiferroics , superconductor , metal-insulator transitions , and other correlated systems . In analogy, microwave spectroscopy could also provide critical insights into material systems with novel physics that are harder to experimentally access, such as thin films with flake sizes1restricted to about 10 μm; an example of particular interest to our group is analog quantum simulators (AQS) with spins in semiconductors . There are several existing techniques for GHz broadband spectroscopy. Please see Table III for comparison of the previous techniques to our technique. This paper presents a new technique for performing broadband microwave spectroscopy on flakes with lateral sizes as small as one μm (could be even smaller using lithography with finer resolution) and nm-sized thicknesses. The crucial aspect is a coplanar waveguide (CPW) with a series gap in the signal line over the flake. This series gap concentrates the sensitivity of the macroscopic device into the area of the flake; as a result, the macroscopic transmission in a transmission line (of length meters, going through various magnetic field, temperature, etc.) is dominated by the ac conductance of the flake. After introducing the technique, we present simulations for a candidate system (twisted bilayer graphene), and thus demonstrate a simulated ability to deduce the ac conductance (including interesting frequency dependence due to the superconducting gap) while including real-world irreproducibility. III. The Proposed Technique Definition Stage of Experiment 1 We note that, throughout this paper, our use of the word “flake” includes samples which are not exfoliated but which, because of other fabrication limitations, cannot be made larger than 10 m in lateral size Page | 3 ZCPW Characteristic impedance Z(ω) Sample impedance (Fig. 2) t(ω) Transmission (Eq. 3) V1 Amplitude of AC voltage Zgap impedance from the combination of CCouple, CSeries, and Z(ω) CSeries Series capacitance (Fig. 2) CCouple Coupling capacitance (Fig. 2) CSH Shunt capacitance (Fig. A1) tsimZ (ω) Simulated transmission with material Z() and non-ideal wiring Simulated Measurement tsim∞ (ω) Simulated transmission with insulator ( Z(ω)=∞) and non-ideal wiring Simulated Control twir-a (ω), twir-b (ω) Measured transmission in wiring α Constant near unity σ1, σ2 Real and imaginary parts of sample 2-D conductivity (units sq/) t∞ Similar to tsim∞ (ω), but with ideal wiring tR (ω) Sample transmission relative to control Both texpflake (ω) Experimental transmission with material Z() and non-ideal wiring Experimental Measurement texpcontrol (ω) Experimental transmission with sample in insulating regime and non-ideal wiring Experimental Control sample Z(ω)or ii) “Control” with Z(ω) = ∞. Page | 4 The basic idea (see Fig. 1) is to fabricate a CPW with a series gap in the signal line over the flake of interest. The crucial item here is that the gap in the signal line means that transmission is dominated by the conductivity of the thin-film flake; because of this, we will show that modest changes in the conductivity of the thin film effect large changes in the transmitted signal. This technique will allow groups to sensitively and easily measure conductivity spectra for a wide variety of materials without requiring obscure or specialized fabrication or measurement techniques. Once fabricated, one would conveniently measure the transmission characteristic using standard Vector Network Analyzer methods. The equivalent circuit is shown in Fig. 2, including the characteristic impedance ZCPW. As mentioned above, we emphasize that the desired large signal arises in the parameter regime where conduction from left to right is dominated by 1/Z(ω) , the ac conductance of the flake of interest. In Appendix A, we give a full derivation of Equations, and also include a discussion of grey signal line) signal line would be located directly over the thin-film flake (black), which would be separated from the CPW by a dielectric; VNA is a network analyzer. Dimensions are illustrative, chosen to ensure ease of fabrication (requiring only photo-lithography as opposed to techniques such as electron- beam lithography) and impedance matching with 50 Ω cables. The crucial theme: the gap in the signal line means that transmission is dominated by the conductivity of the thin-film flake. Page | 5 the fact that the change in geometry near the gap does not significantly perturb the current flow nor the value of transmission t().We now present a brief derivation of the relationship between the t() and the thin film’s ac conductance. This derivation just uses continuity of current, and voltage drops across impedances. To start, assuming the gap is much smaller than the wavelength of the microwave signal, continuity of current yields [in this derivation, we do not carry along the explicit frequency dependence of t()]: 1 = r + t Equation (1) Similarly, combining this with voltage drops yields: V1(1 + r) = V1 t + V1 ZCPW tZgap = V1 t + V1 ZCPW iωCSeries + 1 2 iωCCouple t Equation (2) Here, V1 is the amplitude of the incoming signal at frequency , r and t are the reflection and transmission coefficients, respectively, and Zgap is the impedance from the combination of Ccouple, Cseries and Z(). If the system were resistively coupled to the signal lines instead, we would replace 1 iωCCouple by a contact resistance in Equation (2). Combining the above equations yields: line, CSeries is the direct capacitance (in the absence of the conducting flake) across the gap, CCouple is the (vertical) capacitance due to the overlap between the signal line and the flake, Z() is the complex conductance of the flake; typically, CCouple≫CSeries Page | 6 2[ 1 2 iωCCouple +Z(ω)+iωCSeries] 2[ 1 2 iωCCouple +Z(ω)+iωCSeries]+ 1 ZCPW Equation (3) Finally, a VNA (vector network analyzer) typically reports magnitude and phase of t(ω). We can note some simple, appealing limits for Equation (3): i) In the limit of a continuous (vanishingly small gap) CPW (where the series capacitance dominates the conduction, and where |1/(iωCSeries )|≪ZCPW, t(ω)  1; this is appealing because it shows that a continuous CPW has ideal transmission. ii) in the opposite limit where the conduction is dominated by the flake |1/(iωCSeries and its frequency dependence allow deduction of the flake ac conductance. We note that, for the parameters in Table II, all three conditions in limit ii) can be satisfied for |Z(ω)| varying by a range of a factor of 25; for instance, at 1 GHz, all three conditions are satisfied if |Z(ω)|∈kΩ (please see Fig. 4 for a graphical elucidation of parameter range). Parameter Value or limit Source Z (2  108 Hz) CSeries 500 aF Simulation (see Appendix) 3 X 106  CCouple 50 fF Simulation (see Appendix) 3 X 104  CSH (see Fig. A1 and discussion in Appendix) Less than 1 fF Bounds on simulation (see Appendix) greater than 2 X Flake size 7 m X 7 m Insulating layer thickness 30 nm Page | 7 including the approximate impedance at 100 MHz. Please see the Appendix for details. Simulated Spectral Measurements We now discuss simulations for broadband measurements of superconducting twisted bilayer graphene encapsulated in h-BN on a Si substrate with the setup depicted in Figure 1 (the graphene is represented by the black rectangle). We chose this material because i) the superconducting transition temperature of about 0.5 K means that there is interesting frequency dependence near 10 GHz, ii) the microwave spectrum has not been previously measured, and iii) the superconducting and insulating states of such sample offer a convenient in-situ way to perform a control experiment, i.e., to measure with non-zero flake conductance and then with essentially zero flake conductance (these two stages are referred to in Table I as “Measurement” and “Control”). However, as we discuss later, we note that the typical superconducting complex conductivity (pure imaginary below the gap frequency) leads to some complications which are not present in most materials of interest. We will now show simulations, with the ultimate goal of demonstrating the ability to deduce, from a simple GHz transmission measurement, i) qualitative spectral features such as resonant states in an AQS structure or a superconducting gap and ii) quantitative information of the complex conductivity of a m-scale flake (Figure 3 (d)) while including real-world non- idealities in wiring. We also show the large difference between the situations of flake conductivity present versus absent (insets in Figures 3 (b) and (c)); we will refer to the flake absent (i.e., zero conductivity) as the “control” experiment. The large difference demonstrates both i) the inherent ability to observe resonant features such as those in AQS samples, and ii) the large signal-to-noise ratio inherent in our technique. The proposed experiment depends on taking transmission spectra of the twisted bilayer Page | 8 magnetic field and then under a magnetic field large enough to make the twisted bilayer graphene non-superconducting). superconducting twisted bilayer graphene, using the dimensions in Figure 1; please note that the dimensions are illustrative; our technique is applicable over a wide range of sizes. We assume appropriate sizes and thicknesses as in Table II; amongst other conditions, this gives a large enough Ccouple to allow us to satisfy conditions ii) above. We start with the real and imaginary parts of the complex two-dimensional conductivity spectra (σ1 and σ2, respectively, with units of sq/) in Fig. 3(a), as calculated using the Mattis- Bardeen theory for an ideal superconductor. The calculation is based on superconducting gap energy 2Δ=3.5kBTC≌0.09 meV for TC = 300 mK, and non-superconducting (pure real) conductivity σn=4×10-4 Ω-1; we obtained both values from transport measurements taken on twisted bilayer graphene with a twist angle of 1. 16° . We note that the conductivity has the classic features for a superconductor: i) σ2→∞at low frequency, and ii) the dissipation 1/σ1 becomes finite above the frequency Δ/h. Please see Appendix for details. We then simulate the measured complex transmission tsimZ(ω) and tsim∞ (), for the conducting and insulating cases [Table I “Measurement” and “Control] (Figures 3 (b) and (c) show the complex magnitude and phase). In these two graphs, the insets show the “raw” simulations, and the main parts show the normalized ratio tsimZ () / tsim (). These two simulations allow us to take into account the effects of non-ideal wiring, and using the ratio allows us to minimize those effects. Taking into account non-ideal wiring through two different wiring transmission functions twir-a () and twir-b () (please see Appendix for details), we have used where α is a constant of order one to estimate the number of squares in the flake (we use Page | 9 in the main parts of Figures 3b and 3c we have used the protocol of flake stage and then control stage to minimize the effects of non-ideal wiring: tR(ω) ≡ tsim Z (ω) tsim ∞ t(ω) t∞ [ twir−a(ω) twir−b(ω)] Equation (4) most of the non-ideal wiring transmission and has only the irreproducible parts of the transmission. We note that Figures 3(b) and 3(c) demonstrate clearly the two claims made at the beginning of this section: Transmission measurements will allow us to immediately observe resonant features, and there is a large difference in magnitude and phase between the measurement with the flake and without (conductivity turned off). In particular, please note the easily-detectible resonance at about 20 GHz in Fig. 3c, due to the superconducting transition; it is this type of frequency feature for which we have devised our technique. We also note, as mentioned earlier, that the atypical complex conductivity of a superconductor means that magnitude of t does not show the spectral feature [the peak at about 14 GHz in Fig. 3b is an artifact arising from the pure imaginary value of Z(w), which leads to the series impedance of Ccouple and Z() going through zero]; this is because near 20 GHz, || is dominated by 2 which does not exhibit a large spectral feature at the gap, and thus t  2 ZCPW / Z() does not exhibit a large spectral feature. In contrast, we have verified (not shown) that for a more typical pure real feature of the resonance. We now go beyond demonstrating the ability to qualitatively see spectral structure, and demonstrate how accurately we can deduce the complex conductivity of a m-scale flake. In real-world non-idealities (twir-a () and twir-b), to recover quantitative complex conductivity data (please see Appendix for details). In the following prescription, we explain both i) how we simulated results for Figure 3(d), and ii) how we propose to use a parallel prescription for experimental data (for which one would start with data equivalent to that in Figures 3b and 3c). Page | 10 We start with the ratio defined in Equation 4, and extend it to include either the simulation or the proposed protocol in the actual experiment: OR tR(ω)=texpflake (ω)/texpcontrol (ω) Next, we calculate the effective where the first possibility was used to generate Figure 3(d), and in the second possibility we would use the conducting and control data in the experiment, and where the parameter values in t = t|Z() =  came from Table II for the simulations in Figure 3(d), but for the experiment would come from either i) estimates using device geometry or ii) as deduced from low-frequency data (please see Appendix). Finally, we have tR(ω) 2 ZCPW(1 − tR(ω)) − iωCSeries) −1 − 2 iωCCouple] −1 Equation (5) Using this prescription, we note in Figure 3d the excellent sensitivity, and the ability to deduce the true complex conductivity [note the excellent agreement between Figures 3 (a) and 3 (d)]. We note that we lose sensitivity to Z() at low frequencies, where Ccouple dominates. Finally, for quantitative comparison to the “Shunt in CPW” technique in Table III, please see Appendix B for simulation results with the same flake dimensions. In this case, the analogous signal sizes are about 1 dB and /20. We can now consider the optimum regime for our technique. In order for this prescription to work, we need the impedance in the gap of the CPW to be dominated by the flake impedance (condition ii above); this sets limits on the flake impedance which are functions of frequency. In Fig. 4, we show these frequency-dependent limits for the parameters in Table II. Finally, having shown the qualitative and quantitative advantages and limitations of our proposed technique, we can now show in a condensed fashion the comparison with previous techniques – please see Table III. Page | 11 reversion to obtain complex conductivity. a) Complex conductivity obtained from Mattis- Bardeen theory (see Appendix); b) magnitude and c) phase (main part) predicted normalized transmission signals – note that the spectral features arising from the superconducting gap would be represented as a large feature in the phase, demonstrating the qualitative strength of the proposed technique. Please also note that these simulations include effects of non-ideal wiring. b) magnitude and c) phase (insets) show the un-normalized spectra, where the effects of non- ideal wiring are manifestly obvious. d) Demonstration of ability to revert data back to complex Page | 12 conductivity, using the prescription in Equations 5 in the main text; the excellent agreement between panels a) and d) demonstrate the quantitative strength of the proposed technique. Technique Advantage(s) Disadvantage(s) Reference(s) Free-space No fabrication Can’t measure m-scale Shunt in CPW Can’t measure m-scale; may require insulator on top of film. AC Transport Convenient fabrication Can’t measure m-scale nor above 5 MHz Dielectric properties of biological cells Convenient fabrication. Was only applied to measuring frequency-independent R and C, not Z(); requires insulator on top of film. AFM wave spectroscopy Good spatial resolution and signal sensitivity (about 1 dB); can measure m-scale flakes. Requires AFM. Quite slow due to need to move between each frequency. Gapped CPW (present technique) Convenient fabrication; wide range of thin film resistivities; can get quantitative frequency dependence with excellent sensitivity (1 dB or less) Requires insulator on top of film; requires location with respect to flake(s). Page | 13 discussed above. As discussed in the text, the range of sensitive measurements would be extended by at least a factor of ten in |Z()| if we use fabrication techniques with better resolution than optical lithography. IV. Experimental considerations One could improve the sensitivity of the new measurement technique to less conducting and/or smaller flakes (well below a few m) by using fabrication techniques with better spatial resolution. In particular, since in general the sensitivity is limited by the condition CPW, fabricating a device whose width and gap are n times smaller can increase the maximum detectable resistivity by n. We could easily achieve a factor of ten larger range of |Z()| by using electron-beam lithography for the central portion of the series-gapped CPW. In addition, as mentioned above, making reliable Ohmic contact to 2-D materials with lateral sizes of order mm is often challenging ; we note that it is even more challenging to Page | 14 make such contacts with high-quality transmission line characteristics (e.g., avoiding large impedance mismatch in vias). In contrast, with our proposed technique, we have obviated the need for such contacts. Challenges are also present: The first is driven by the need to have a control (i.e., insulating) measurement for comparison. We have chosen graphene as a candidate material in part because the superconducting transition provides a very convenient control. However, for twisted bilayer graphene in particular, we may need to implement a buried gate to achieve superconductivity , or we might apply gate voltages on the CPW centerline. For other candidate materials, it may be necessary to run a control experiment with a separate chip in the same cryostat cooldown, or perhaps even in different cooldowns; we note that in the simulations in Fig. 3, we used an irreproducibility in the wiring transmission which is appropriate for a single cooldown with controllable Z(), but probably smaller than that which we could expect for different cooldowns. In addition, we note that in some cases the finite real conductivity 1 will be a complicating factor. In particular, the effective RC delay in the bottom plate of the capacitor Ccouple could possibly distort the reversion to (). We have analyzed the case of a distributed RC network , and found that the distortion is minimal (of order 10 %) in the optimum range of Figure 4. We plan on presenting the details of this in a future publication. Also, we note that the magnitude of the total transmission (including real-world insertion loss) as shown in Fig. 3b is quite small. We note that i) much of the insertion loss occurs in the wiring before the sample, so that a larger input power will help; ii) it may be necessary to use low-temperature amplifiers (a common technique). Another challenge is presented by the sparsity of flake coverage in many two-dimensional materials (often of order 1 % relative areal density). In such case, one will need to take care to either/both i) orient the CPW and gap with respect to predetermined flake locations or ii) fabricate many gapped CPW’s in order to have a good statistical chance to overlap flake(s). We note that choice ii) would also naturally provide the desired control device on the same chip. Page | 15 Finally, we hope to extend the usefulness of this technique by making wafer-scale buried gapped CPW’s before deposition/exfoliation/deposition of the flakes of interest, a la’ the work of . V. Conclusions We have proposed a technique for performing sensitive broadband microwave conductivity spectroscopy on materials only available as micron-scale flakes, using a coplanar waveguide with a series gap above the material of interest. We have shown through theory and simulations that the conductivity of the flake effects large changes in the amplitude and phase of the transmitted signal, and can allow us to qualitatively measure important spectral features. By including real- world non-idealities, we have also shown that the new technique can be used to accurately measure broadband spectral conductivity, even if the spectral reproducibility of measurements is limited. We note the relative advantages and disadvantages summarized in Table III. More broadly, this setup could be used to measure the conductivity spectrum of many two- dimensional materials of interest, even when the lateral size is limited to m scale, ranging from metallic systems to pinned modes of charge density waves to AQS structures . These results are also striking for the range of resistivity for which the transmitted signal is sensitive, which is large enough to characterize such diverse systems as pinning modes from insulating electron solids and the free carrier response in highly conducting systems like twisted bilayer graphene. VI. Acknowledgements The authors would like to offer special thanks to Josh Pomeroy of NIST for numerous insightful conversations and logistical and technical assistance with the low-temperature transmission measurements. We would also like to thank Zac Barcikowski, Richard Silver, Pradeep Namboodiri, Ranjit Kashid, Richard Silver, Nikolai Zhitenev, and Michael Stewart (all of NIST) for insightful conversations, and for technical training and assistance throughout this process. Page | 16 AUTHOR DECLARATIONS Conflict of Interest The authors declare no conflict of interest. DATA AVAILABILITY Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no new data were created or analyzed in this study.