1 Van der Waals π Josephson junctions Kaifei Kang1*, Helmuth Berger2, Kenji Watanabe3, Takashi Taniguchi3, László Forró2,4, Jie Shan1,5,6* and Kin Fai Mak1,5,6* 1 School of Applied and Engineering Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA 2 Institute of Condensed Matter Physics, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland 3 National Institute for Materials Science, Tsukuba, Japan 4 Stavropoulos Center for Complex Quantum Matter, Department of Physics, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA 5 Department of Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA 6 Kavli Institute at Cornell for Nanoscale Science, Ithaca, NY, USA * Email: kk726@cornell.edu; jie.shan@cornell.edu; kinfai.mak@cornell.edu Proximity-induced superconductivity in a ferromagnet can induce Cooper pairs with a finite center-of-mass momentum 1,2. The resultant spatially modulated superconducting order parameter is able to stabilize Josephson junctions (JJs) with π phase difference in superconductor-ferromagnet heterostructures and realize “quiet” phase qubits 3-5. The emergence of two-dimensional (2D) layered superconducting 6-9 and magnetic materials 10- 12 promises a new platform for realizing π JJs with atomically sharp interfaces by van der Waals stacking 13. Here we demonstrate a thickness-driven 0-π transition in JJs made of NbSe2 (an Ising superconductor) with a Cr2Ge2Te6 (a ferromagnetic semiconductor) weak link. By systematically varying the Cr2Ge2Te6 thickness, we observe a vanishing supercurrent at a critical thickness around 8 nm, followed by a re-entrant supercurrent upon further increase in thickness. Near the critical thickness, we further observe unusual supercurrent interference patterns with vanishing critical current around zero in-plane magnetic field. They signify the formation of 0-π JJs (with both 0 and π regions) likely induced by the nanoscale magnetic domains in Cr2Ge2Te6. Our work highlights the potential of van der Waals superconductor-ferromagnet heterostructures for the explorations of unconventional superconductivity and superconducting electronics. Superconductivity and ferromagnetism are two generally incompatible states of matter and do not coexist in a homogeneous material 1. At a superconductor-ferromagnet interface, however, Cooper pairs can leak into the ferromagnet and give rise to exotic states, such as the Fulde– Ferrell–Larkin–Ovchinnikov (FFLO) state 1,2, spin triplet superconductivity 14,15, and topological superconductivity 16-18. In particular, spin-singlet pairing in the ferromagnet with spin-split energy bands would force the Cooper pairs to acquire a center-of-mass momentum; a spatially periodic modulation in the superconducting order parameter known as the FFLO state is developed 1,2. When the ferromagnet is sandwiched between two superconducting banks to form a JJ, the superconducting banks can have a 0 or π phase difference in the ground state depending on the thickness of the ferromagnetic weak link 1,2 (Fig. 1a). Specifically, when the superconducting order parameter at the two interfaces has opposite signs, a π JJ with negative Josephson coupling is stabilized. Although π JJs have been demonstrated in superconductor- ferromagnet-superconductor (SFS) heterostructures fabricated by evaporation and sputtering 2 techniques 19,20, the recent discoveries of 2D layered superconducting 6-9 and magnetic materials 10-12 have provided a new platform to realize π JJs with atomically uniform thickness and sharp interfaces via van der Waals stacking 13. In this study, we report π JJs and a 0-π transition in SFS heterostructures that are made of multilayer NbSe2 (3-10 nm) and Cr2Ge2Te6 (CGT for short, 3-13 nm) (Fig. 1b). Although such SFS heterostructures have been realized by recent experiments 21,22, clear evidence of FFLO physics and π JJs has not been demonstrated. Two-dimensional NbSe2 is an Ising superconductor with a thickness dependent transition temperature around 3-7 K . The film thickness is substantially smaller than the out-of-plane penetration depth (≈ 120 nm 23) of bulk NbSe2; an in- plane magnetic field thus penetrates the superconductor evenly without flux trapping. The extremely high in-plane upper critical field ≈ 30-40 T of 2D NbSe2 also renders the superconductor unperturbed by the weak magnetic fields examined in this study. Multilayer CGT is a hole-doped ferromagnetic semiconductor with a band gap around 0.38 eV and a Curie temperature ≈ 64 K . The in-plane saturation magnetic field is about 0.5 T (Extended Data Fig. 2), corresponding to relatively weak (out-of-plane) magnetic anisotropy among the known 2D magnetic materials 10. Moreover, the remanent magnetization is negligible at low temperatures, which is consistent with the formation of nanoscale magnetic domains as revealed by a recent Lorentz TEM (transmission electron microscopy) study 22. We examine the Josephson critical current of the junctions as a function of the in-plane magnetic field B and the CGT thickness d. The critical current, Ic , is determined by measuring the differential resistance of the junction, R = dV dI , versus a dc bias current I (V denoting the dc voltage across the junction). The junctions are nearly rectangular in shape. The magnetic field is applied along one of the principal axes. Because the junction dimension is negligible compared to the Josephson penetration depth (Methods), the junctions are point-like in space; the magnetic flux is uniform in the 2D plane and the Josephson supercurrent has negligible effects on the flux distribution. Unless otherwise specified, all results are obtained at T = 1.6 K, a temperature that is substantially lower than the superconducting transition temperature (Tc ≈ 6-7 K) of our devices. See Methods for details on the device fabrication and measurements. The basic characterization of the JJs is illustrated in Fig. 1c-f with device JJ01 as an example (CGT thickness d ≈ 3.6 nm, total junction thickness 15 nm, and junction width w ≈ 2 μm). sharp resistance drop to zero is observed at Tc ≈ 6.5 K, below which a Josephson supercurrent is established. The I − V characteristic and R versus I at 1.6 K are shown in Fig. 1e. Zero resistance (R = 0 and V = 0) is observed below the Josephson critical current Ic ≈ 62 μA, at which sharp differential resistance peaks are also observed. The normal state resistance above Ic is Rn ≈ 4 Ω. The corresponding voltage jump at Ic is Vc = IcRn ≈ 240 μV, which is substantially smaller than the NbSe2 superconducting gap Δ ≈ 1 meV (-28) and consistent with proximity-induced superconductivity. No hysteresis is detected in the I − V characteristic, showing that the JJ is overdamped 29. These results suggest a diffusive junction 30 (see below for further discussions). A substantially larger voltage jump that shows hysteresis is observed at much larger bias current near 400 μA. The voltage jump (> 3 mV) exceeds the NbSe2 superconducting gap. It corresponds to the critical current of the superconducting banks and is not related to the Josephson effect investigated in this study. 3 boundary separating the finite and zero resistance marks the magnetic-field dependence of the critical current Ic. The critical current is maximum near B = 0 T and shows a damped oscillatory dependence on field, which is well captured by a Fraunhofer pattern (dashed line). The oscillation period (70 mT) is consistent with ΔB = Φ0 A⊥, where Φ0 is the magnetic flux quantum and A⊥ ≈ 3 × 10−14 m2 is the cross-sectional area of the junction. The deviation from the ideal Fraunhofer pattern at larger magnetic fields is presumably caused by the internal magnetic field inside the ferromagnetic weak link. These results demonstrate the uniformity of the supercurrent and magnetic flux distributions in the 2D plane of the JJ. No magnetic hysteresis in the interference pattern can be detected for JJs with thin CGTs; this is consistent with negligible remanent magnetization in thin CGTs and negligible flux trapping in the JJ. We now investigate the CGT thickness dependence of the JJ characteristics. We use the geometry-independent quantity Vc = IcRn to characterize the Josephson coupling strength 20. representative CGT thicknesses. The superconducting transition temperature (marked by arrows) varies slightly among different devices because of the slight variations in the NbSe2 thickness. In all cases, Vc ( < Δ ) becomes finite below Tc and increases monotonically with decreasing temperatures. For JJs with thin CGT barriers (e.g. 3.6 nm and 5.9 nm), Vc increases linearly near Tc and saturates at low temperatures. The temperature dependence is well described by the Ambegaokar-Baratoff (AB) relation initially derived for tunnel JJs 30. For thicker CGT (e.g. 9.9 nm), the temperature dependence substantially deviates from the AB relation; Vc scales approximately as Vc ∝ Tc−T T near Tc. We approximate the saturated Vc by its value at 1.6 K, the lowest measurement temperature in this study, and show its dependence on the CGT thickness d (bottom axis) and layer number N (top axis) in Fig. 3. As CGT thickness increases, Vc first drops quickly, nearly reaches zero at dc ≈ 8.4 nm, followed by a revival, and vanishes again at d ≈ 12.3 nm. (At d ≈ 8.4 and 12.3 nm, Vc drops below the measurement sensitivity that is limited by the electronic temperature in our experiment, see Methods). The observed oscillatory behavior of Vc as a function of the barrier thickness in SFS JJs is a distinctive signature of a thickness-driven 0-π transition in the current-phase relationship induced by FFLO physics 1,2. In particular, JJs with d ≲ 8.2 nm and 8.2 ≲ d ≲ 12.3 nm have a 0 and π phase difference between the two superconducting electrodes in the ground state, respectively. In contrast, oscillatory dependence of Vc on temperature is not observed in any junctions (Fig. 2). The observed thickness dependence of Vc in Fig. 3 can be well described by a damped oscillatory dependence derived for diffusive SFS junctions with d substantially larger than the coherence lengths 31 Vc = Vc0 ∙ e − d ξF1 ∙ sin ( dc−d ξF2 ). (1) The best fit (solid line) corresponds to amplitude Vc0 ≈ 0.94 mV (which is comparable to the NbSe2 superconducting gap Δ) and coherence lengths ξF1 ≈ 2.5 ± 0.5 nm and ξF2 ≈ 2.4 ± 0.5 nm for CGT. 4 In general, the coherence lengths, ξF1,2 ≈ √ ħvfl Ex∓πkBT , of a ferromagnetic weak link are determined by its scattering mean free path (l), out-of-plane Fermi velocity (vf) and exchange interaction energy (Ex) with ħ and kB denoting the Planck and Boltzmann constants, respectively. Because the CGT Curie temperature 64 K is much higher than the NbSe2 superconducting transition temperature ≈ 6 K, the coherence lengths are short below Tc, and the use of Eqn. (1) for diffusive SFS junctions is justified. The coherence lengths are also nearly temperature independent; for the entire range of 0 < T < Tc they change by about 0.1 nm, which is substantially smaller than the CGT interlayer distance of ~ 0.7 nm. Temperature-driven 0-π transitions are thus not expected at any fixed CGT thicknesses near dc. The different temperature dependence of the JJ behavior with different weak link thicknesses (Fig. 2) can also be accounted for. For JJs with thin CGT (e.g. 3.6 nm), the junction length (≈ d) is comparable to the coherence lengths; the temperature dependence of Vc for a diffusive JJ in this limit is shown to approximately follow the AB relation as in tunnel JJs 30. As d becomes substantially larger than the coherence lengths (e.g. 9.9 nm), Vc is exponentially suppressed compared to Δ and can be shown to scale as Vc ∝ Tc−T T near Tc , as observed in experiment. The discussion above treats the CGT weak link as a ferromagnetic conductor with a constant carrier density. The semiconducting nature of CGT and the charge transfer process at the NbSe2- CGT interfaces are expected to give rise to a non-uniform charge density distribution inside the CGT weak link. Indeed, the junction resistivity (ρn ≡ RnA) in the normal state scales with the CGT thickness d exponentially (inset of Fig. 3, Methods), rather than linearly for a constant carrier density (A is the overlap area of the two superconducting banks). The non-uniform charge density distribution also gives rise to a spatially varying Fermi velocity and coherence lengths in the CGT weak link, which can lead to a faster decay of Vc with d compared to the case of a spatially uniform case. Evidence of faster decay at the largest d’s is observed in Fig. 3 (the JJ with d = 12.3 nm has no measurable critical current). Finally, we examine in Fig. 4 the supercurrent interference patterns in JJs with different CGT thicknesses. The differential resistance contour plots in Fig. 4a-d correspond to the forward field scanning direction. The extracted Ic for both field-scanning directions are shown in Fig. 4e-h (arrows denoting the field scanning directions). For CGT thickness away from the critical thickness dc (i.e. 5.2 and 9.9 nm), a Fraunhofer-like pattern is observed with Ic maximized near B = 0 T. A magnetic hysteresis due to the remanent magnetization and the associated flux lines in CGT is also observed. The hysteresis is more pronounced for the d = 9.9 nm device because it has a much larger cross-sectional area (corresponding to a smaller oscillation period). Remarkably, the interference pattern for CGT thicknesses just one monolayer away from dc (i.e. 7.7 and 9.1 nm) deviates substantially from the Fraunhofer pattern (Fig. 4b, c). The main central lobe is absent and a vanishing Ic is observed near B = 0 T. For the reversed field scanning direction, a Ic maximum near B = 0 T is restored (Fig. 4f, g). These interference patterns are robust for repeated forward and backward field scans within the illustrated magnetic-field range (Extended Data Fig. 3). They are, however, sensitive to magnetic-field cycles to higher fields and to thermal cycles to temperatures above the CGT Curie temperature (Extended Data Fig. 4 and 5). The sensitivity to magnetic-field and thermal cycles is only observed for JJs with d ≈ dc. 5 The vanishing Ic for d ≈ dc (for one scanning direction) indicates the presence of regions of opposite-direction supercurrent within the junction area that nearly cancels each other at B = 0 T. A finite magnetic field destroys the perfect supercurrent cancellation and yields two nearly symmetric critical current lobes around B = 0 T. Such unusual interference pattern is an experimental signature of the formation of a 0-π JJ, a special JJ that possesses spatially separated regions with a 0- and π-phase difference 32-34. The magnetic hysteresis in the interference patterns and the sensitivity of the patterns to magnetic-field and thermal cycles suggest that the magnetic domain structure of the CGT weak link plays an important role in the formation of 0-π JJs. In particular, a different magnetic domain structure induced by field and thermal cycles destroys the supercurrent cancellation near B = 0 T and the 0-π JJ. The possibility of stabilizing a 0-π JJ by magnetic domains in a ferromagnetic weak link of uniform thickness is suggested in ,35. The magnetic domain walls introduce additional spin-flip scatterings locally and therefore spatial modulations in the coherence lengths, which in turn modulate the sign of the Josephson coupling across the domain walls for a constant d near dc and stabilize a 0-π JJ. This mechanism is distinct from what is demonstrated in SFS JJs with varying d within the junction area 33,34. It is plausible in our devices given the abundance of nanoscale magnetic domains in multilayer CGT 22. Future studies are required to understand the microscopic origin of 0-π JJs formed for d ≈ dc. In conclusion, we have demonstrated π JJs and a 0-π transition in NbSe2/CGT/NbSe2 SFS heterostructures by systematically varying the CGT thickness. Signatures of 0-π JJs are also observed for thicknesses near the critical thickness dc. Because of the small band gap and unintentional hole doping in CGT, the JJs are in the diffusive limit. Future studies using large band gap ferromagnetic barriers, such as CrBr3 and CrCl3 (,28), can potentially realize tunnel π JJs 36 and ‘quiet’ phase qubits 3-5. Methods Device fabrications. The NbSe2/CGT/NbSe2 heterostructures are assembled using the standard layer-by-layer transfer technique 13. They are encapsulated in hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) flakes to prevent sample degradation under ambient conditions. Details of the fabrication process are reported in . In short, multilayer NbSe2 and CGT flakes are mechanically exfoliated onto Si substrates covered by a 300-nm thick oxide layer inside a glovebox filled with nitrogen gas; the hBN flakes are exfoliated in air. Their thicknesses are first estimated by optical reflection contrast, and characterized by atomic force microscopy (AFM). The selected flakes are picked up sequentially inside the glovebox by a polymer stamp made of a polycarbonate (PC) film on top of a dome-shaped polypropylene carbonate (PPC) droplet on a 0.5-mm-thick polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) slab. The finished stack are released at 190 °C onto Si/SiO2 substrates with pre-patterned platinum electrodes. Multiple devices with varying CGT thicknesses are examined in this study. A summary of all the devices is provided in Extended Data Figs. 1. Electrical measurements. The differential resistance measurements are performed in an Oxford TeslatronPT closed cycle He-4 cryostat with a base temperature of ~ 1.6 K. The magnetic field is 6 aligned parallel to the sample plane and along one of the principal axes of the nearly rectangular JJs. Flexible stainless steel coaxial cables are used as electrical connections to the devices. High frequency noise is filtered by three low-pass filters in series: a π-filter at room temperature, a homemade silver-epoxy filter and a low-temperature RC filter at about 10 K. They have cutoff frequencies at 30 MHz, 1 GHz and 30 kHz, respectively. These filters allow equilibration of the JJ electronic temperature with that of the exchange gas in a range of 1.6 - 7 K, limiting the measurable critical current to Ic ~ 100 nA. The JJs are biased by a DC current I, which is superposed by an AC current with RMS (root mean square) amplitude dI = 50 nA and frequency of 37 Hz. Both DC and AC voltage drops across the junction (V and dV, respectively) are measured. The differential resistance is obtained as R = dV dI. Estimate of the Josephson penetration depth. Uniform supercurrent in a planar JJ is expected if the JJ width is much smaller than the Josephson penetration depth λJ = √ Φ0 2πμ0jcdtot . Here μ0 is the vacuum permeability and jc is the critical current density. Because the NbSe2 thickness is substantially smaller than its out-of-plane penetration depth of ~ 120 nm, λJ is determined by the total thickness dtot~10 − 30 nm of the JJ. For JJs with thin CGT in our experiment (dtot ≈ 15 nm), the typical junction width is ~ 2 μm; jc is about 2 × 107 A/m2. The Josephson penetration depth is λJ ~ 30 μm, which is much larger than the junction width. For JJs with thicker CGT, the typical junction width increases to ~ 10 μm in order to measure the small Ic . Meanwhile, jc decreases exponentially with thickness, and correspondingly, λJ increases exponentially and remains much larger than the junction width. All JJs in this study are safely in the small junction limit with uniform supercurrent and magnetic flux through the entire junction area. Inhomogeneous carrier density in CGT. Due to charge transfer at the NbSe2/CGT interface, the interfacial CGT layers are expected to be more hole-doped than the interior layers when the CGT thickness is long compared to its screening length, which is inversely proportional to the square root of its thermodynamic density of states. (Because of the large density of states associated with the Cr d-orbitals and the large out-of-plane band mass due to the layered structure of CGT, a short screening length is expected.) The strong density dependence of the CGT resistivity near its mobility edge 24 therefore explains the observed exponential dependence of ρn on d in Fig. 3. (The substantial fluctuation in ρn for devices with similar CGT thicknesses is likely caused by random variations in the unintentional doping density in the CGT flakes.)