Frequency-dependent Inter-pseudospin Solutions to Superconducting Strontium Ruthenate O. Gingras,1, 2, 3, a N. Allaglo,2 R. Nourafkan,2 M. Cˆot ́e,3 and A.-M. S. Tremblay2 1Center for Computational Quantum Physics, Flatiron Institute, 162 Fifth Avenue, New York, New York 10010, USA 2D ́epartement de Physique, Institut quantique, Universit ́e de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Qu ́ebec, Canada 3D ́epartement de Physique, Universit ́e de Montr ́eal, C. P. 6128, Succursale Centre-Ville, Montr ́eal, Qu ́ebec H3C 3J7, Canada (Dated: February 2, 2022) The lasting puzzle of the superconducting order parameter of Sr2RuO4 calls for theoretical studies that in- clude seldom-considered effects. Here we include spin-orbit coupling effects on the electronic structure and then solve the linearized Eliashberg equation in a pseudospin basis, including the possibility that spin and charge fluc- tuations induce frequency-dependent superconducting order parameters. We find that spin-orbit coupling mixes even and odd contributions in orbital, spin and frequency spaces and that leading inter-pseudospin symmetries, B+ 1g and A− 2g, have intra-orbital components respectively even and odd in Matsubara frequency. An accidental degeneracy between these could resolve apparent experimental contradictions. For several decades, the paradigm of s-wave superconduc- tivity has been found inadequate to describe superconductivity in correlated systems. A large variety of superconducting or- der parameters (SCOP) have already been identified. For ex- ample, cuprate high-temperature superconductors are d-wave with B1g symmetry . Pnictides can exhibit s±-wave, an A1g symmetry with a sign change between different Fermi surfaces . Usually, the symmetry of the SCOP of new sys- tems is identified rather quickly. It is thus surprising that after several decades of work and recent remarkable progress of experimental probes, the symmetry of the SCOP of Sr2RuO4 (SRO) has not yet been unambiguously established . The reason is that certain measurements appear contradictory. This is not only an experimental challenge but also one for theories of strong electronic correlations in multi-orbital sys- tem with important spin-orbit coupling (SOC), where a large variety of symmetries are possible . Initially reckoned a spin-triplet state due to its constant Knight-shift , independent verification has highlighted a heating effect so that a dominantly spin-singlet state appears more credible [9–11]. Another experiment probing spins us- ing polarized neutrons met a similar fate . Previously in contradiction with evidences for Pauli limiting , these experiments now agree. Another critical characteristic of SRO is its two-component nature inferred by evidences of time-reversal (TR) symme- try breaking . Ultrasound experiments also sup- port a two-component SCOP which couples to the B2g shear mode . Additionally, the enhancement of the critical temperature under uniaxial pressure not only provides a strong evidence for an even-parity (e-p) SCOP , it is also a useful knob to study this two-component property. Indeed, muon spin relaxation (μSR) measurements observed two tran- sition temperatures under pressure, indicative of a lift in de- generacy between the two components . But specific heat measurements, extremely sensitive to superconducting transi- tions, detected a single transition temperature . Consequently, various theoretical proposals have been for- mulated in replacement to the initial chiral p-wave , in- cluding domain-wall physics and inhomogeneities . A two-component character can be realized in two ways. First, the components can be degenerate by symmetry if the SCOP transforms like a two-dimensional (2D) irreducible represen- tation (irrep) of the D4h point group. The only e-p such possibility is the Eg irrep. One such proposed state is the dxz + idyz which could originate from momentum dependent k-SOC . However, density-functional theory (DFT) expects this coupling to be negligibly small in SRO, known to have a quasi-2D character . Moreover, these Eg states under uniaxial stress should generate two transitions in spe- cific heat. Another symmetry protected possibility is an odd- orbital spin-singlet odd-frequency (odd-ω) state , which is gapless contrary to experiments. Another possibility for two components is that they are degenerate by accident and transform like different irreps. The most natural of the two components is a dx2−y2 B1g state, since thermal conductivity and scanning tunneling mi- croscopy point in this direction and it should originate from antiferromagnetic fluctuations predicted by DFT . Such a symmetry was well studied in the context of the cuprates . For the second component, some works have proposed an extended s-wave [33–35] or odd-parity (o-p) states [36–40] originating from spin fluctuations caused by the nesting of the quasi-one-dimensional bands . Un- fortunately, these combination would not couple to the B2g shear mode. Other works proposed gxy(x2−y2) A2g, a higher angular momentum version of dx2−y2 [42–45]. The similar nodal structures of dx2−y2 and gxy(x2−y2) could reduce the signature on specific heat, but not remove it entirely. It has been proposed theoretically that this accidental degeneracy is more consistent with ultrasound experiments than the other symmetry-protected dxz + idyz proposal . Moving away from the dx2−y2 state, a dxy ±is∗ state was proposed . Accidental degeneracies should be lifted by small pertur- bations. Although not definitive, μSR measurements under isotropic conditions did not observe a split in the critical tem- peratures . Additionally, disorder by non-magnetic impu- rities could help split the transition temperatures . The broad richness of possible superconducting states in SRO is due to the extreme sensitivity of pairing interactions arXiv:2201.08917v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 31 Jan 2022 2 Orbital character projected on the α, β and γ Fermi sheets as also calculated in . The blue color corresponds to xy orbital character while the red color corresponds to yz and xz orbital characters without distinction between these two. to the normal state electronic structure and many-body ef- fects. Most theoretical studies have so far neglected SOC whose importance for SRO has been demonstrated in detailed comparisons between photoemission spectroscopy and first- principles calculations . Here, it is included on the normal state electronic structure that we project on the rel- evant t2g subspace. Spin and charge fluctuations driven by electronic correlations in that subspace provide the pairing in- teraction [53–55]. We treat their frequency-dependence and find that SOC leads to coexistence between even- and odd-ω components. Two leading superconducting states dominates: the usual B+ 1g state and an A− 2g. Their intra-orbital (intra-l) components are respectively even- and odd-ω. Their acciden- tal degeneracy could resolve the observed contradictions. Normal state. – The layered perovskite structure of SRO is characterized by the D4h space group. The main physics re- sides within the ruthenium (Ru) and oxygen (O) planes, mak- ing it quasi-2D. The Ru atom is at the center of an elongated octahedron of O atoms. The resulting crystal field splits its 4d electrons into the unoccupied eg and the partially filled t2g subsets. The t2g orbitals xy, yz, xz, hybridize with the O’s p electrons to form the α, β and γ Fermi sheets shown in Fig. 1. Since the eg orbitals are far from the Fermi level, the elec- tronic fluctuations responsible for mediating superconductiv- ity are be solely hosted by the t2g orbitals. We compute the electronic structure from the projected- augmented-wave pseudopotential ABINIT imple- mentation of DFT in the local density approxima- tion . We downfold the bands onto the t2g states. The large SOC on the Ru atom couples the xy with the xz and yz orbitals with opposite spins. Without SOC, spin conservation makes the normal state Hamiltonian diagonal in spins while crystal-field symmetry preserves the block diagonal form of the xz, yz sector. With SOC, the spin and orbital sectors are coupled . The colors in Fig. 1 represent the orbital characters of the resulting Fermi sheets in the first Brillouin zone. The α and β sheets mainly comes from quasi-one- dimensional bands with xz and yz orbital characters, while the γ sheet is mostly a quasi-2D band with xy orbital charac- ter. The color code clearly shows that SOC introduces spin- orbital entanglement around the kx = ±ky diagonals. Considering local SOC, the Hamiltonian can be block di- agonalized into pseudospin up (+) and down (−) sectors de- noted by ρ = ±. Non-local k-dependent SOC effects arise from SOC on the O atoms when the Hamiltonian is down- folded onto t2g orbitals. Through inter-layer coupling, this mechanism breaks pseudospin symmetry. However, this ef- fect is negligibly small at the DFT level and is less en- hanced by correlations than local SOC . We can thus work in a 2D k-space where normal state Green functions Gρ Kl1l2 are block diagonal in the pseudospin ρ and energy-momentum K ≡ (iωm, k) basis but need an orbital l1 to l2 dependence. Linearized Eliashberg equation. – Details and deriva- tions are given in the companion paper . The pairing mechanism is contained in an effective interaction that com- bines with the pair susceptibility to yield a pairing function Vpp that must be diagonalized to find the superconducting in- stabilities of the normal state. This can be written in the form of a linearized Eliashberg equation λ∆(1, 2) = −Vpp(1, 2, ̄1, ̄2)∆( ̄1, ̄2). (1) Boldface numerals such as 1 stand for Matsubara frequen- cies and quantum numbers described above. Overbars stand for implied integration/summation. Given the linear nature of the equation, the eigenvectors ∆ transform as the irreps of D4h and a superconducting instability occurs when one of the eigenvalues λ reaches unity. The corresponding ∆ reflects the symmetry of the Gorkov function ⟨Tτψ(1)ψ(2)⟩ just be- low the transition temperature. Here, ψ(1) is the destruction operator and Tτ is the imaginary-time-ordering operator. Isoelectronic doping suggests that SRO lies in the vicin- ity of magnetic orderings , consistent with the important spin fluctuations found by neutron scattering [41, 67–69]. In addition, the well established correlated character of Ru t2g electrons [70–75] makes SRO the archetypal representative of superconductivity mediated by spin and charge fluctuations. Spin and charge fluctuations. – The bare interactions be- tween electrons are diagonal in the basis of isolated atoms. We model these with the rotationally invariant Kanamori-Slater Hamiltonian (KSH) characterized by two parameters: the on-site Coulomb repulsion U and Hund’s coupling J. Since J favours same spin alignment, the inter-orbital (inter-l) repul- sion is stronger in the inter-spin channel U ′ = U − 2J than in the intra-spin one U ′′ = U − 3J, imposing J/U ≥ 0. In the paring function Vpp, the binding glue for electron pairs consists of low-energy collective modes formed by an 3 avalanche of electron-hole pairs. In other words, electrons scatter-off each other through exchange of spin- and charge- density fluctuations. These fluctuations are captured by the particle-hole (p-h) polarizability χph. Here, we compute χph using the random phase approximation (RPA) where the irre- ducible p-h vertex Γph is replaced by local interactions that have the symmetries of the local interactions described above. The resulting phase diagrams exhibit a rich variety of com- peting ordered states in either the p-h or the particle-particle (p-p) channels. The interaction-induced enhancement of spin (charge) fluc- tuations is quantified by the magnetic (density) Stoner factor Sm(d). We enforce Sm(d) < 1 to prevent the system from falling into a magnetic (charge) ordered state. In spin- and charge-fluctuation mediated superconductivity, χph serves as an effective interaction for pairing electrons in the p-p chan- nel. The irreducible pairing vertex Γpp is expressed in terms of χph and Γph through Parquet-like equations, but with- out the self-consistency . The full pairing susceptibility χpp(Q) is thus enhanced compared to the bare p-p suscepti- bility χ0 pp(Q). In the absence of magnetic fields, an instabil- ity cascades into a superconducting phase when χpp(Q = 0) diverges, or equivalently when the pairing function Vpp ≡ Γpp(0)χ0 pp(0) has an eigenvalue equal to unity, as seen in Eq. (1). We are interested in the symmetry of the SCOP ∆. Pseudospin basis. – The KSH conserves spins but not pseudospins . However, it is still block diagonal and Vpp can be decomposed into the intra- and inter-pseudospin (intra-ρ and inter-ρ) channels. Inversion symmetry forces all solutions to have e-p or o-p and Pauli principle leads to ∆ep/op Kl1l2 = ∆+− Kl1l2 ∓ ∆−+ K∗l2l1 where K∗ ≡ (−iωm, k). In this basis, Eq. (1) can be reduced to λ∆α K = −1 2 � K′ V α KK′∆α K′ (2) for α the e-p (o-p) channel, with the effective vertices V α KK′ given in . This problem does not introduce new nu- merical challenges compared with the spin-diagonal case. The intra-ρ channel however could not be simplified using Pauli principle. Fortunately, we observe that intra-ρ solutions are nearly degenerate to an inter-ρ one, thus the inter-ρ chan- nel is sufficient to discuss solutions. Moreover, we note that Eq. (2) applies regardless of the method to compute Γph as long as it satisfies the pseudospin block diagonal property. Results. – In principle, the parameters U and J enter- ing the KSH can be calculated, but their effective values are different due to screening. We thus explore this parameter space. Instead of U and J, we quantify the interactions by J/U and Sm. In addition to J > 0, the repulsive nature of the KSH constrains J/U < 1/3 but we consider J/U ≤ 0.45 to allow some attractive interactions. Sm quantifies the prox- imity to a magnetic transition. The closer to Sm = 1, the larger the magnetic fluctuations. Because SRO is in proxim- ity to magnetic orderings , we study Sm ≥ 0.5 to tune the system in the vicinity of a magnetic instability. We never at T = 250 K. A square’s transparency represents the eigenvalue between 0 and 1. Notice a bigger black triangle ▲ (star ⋆) symbol for J/U = 0.15 (0) and Sm = 0.9 (0.75), referred to in the text. reach Sm (Sd) ≥ 1 since it would correspond to a magnetic (charge) instability of the p-h channel. Fig. 2 shows a phase diagram in the Sm vs J/U parameter space of the irrep that characterizes how the leading eigen- vector of Eq. (2) transforms. An irrep classifies how symme- tries of the normal state are broken upon entering the ordered state. For SCOPs, ∆μ1μ2 K transforms like two electrons with four quantum numbers each: the energy-momenta K and −K and the spin-orbital indices μ1 ≡ (σ1, l1) and μ2. The nor- mal state transforms spatially like the D4h group. It also has TR symmetry, which is always satisfied within a global phase. Given that even- and odd-ω contributions can mixed when pairing between different orbitals is considered , we label the irreps with +/− based on the intra-l components since these are pure in even-/odd-ω. Another way to characterize SCOPs is to use the SPOT classification or generalizations . The operations of exchanging the spins, momenta, orbitals and frequencies are respectively designated by ˆS, ˆP ∗, ˆO and ˆT ∗. Using those, the Pauli principle for a two-fermion gap function reads ˆS ˆP ∗ ˆO ˆT ∗∆ = −∆. They are idempotent, thus each opera- tion has eigenvalue ±1 labelled S, P, O, T. Since D4h has in- version symmetry, ˆP ∗∆ = +(−)∆ and corresponding irreps are labelled by g (u), respectively noted +P (−P). Neglecting SOC, we similarly have ˆS∆ = +(−)∆ for triplet +S (singlet −S) solutions. However, SOC in multi-orbital systems intro- duces spin-flip and inter-l interactions that mix +S and −S solutions , along with ±O and ±T. Consequently SCOPs no longer are eigenvectors of either ˆS, ˆO and ˆT ∗ operators. Only two different irreps appear in the phase diagram Fig. 2: a B+ 1g and a A− 2g. For each, we selected a SCOP la- belled by ▲ and ⋆ respectively. In Table I, we show their respective projections on SPOT eigenvectors. In Fig. 3, we display the real and imaginary momentum distribution in the pseudospin-orbital basis at iω0 of ▲ in a) and ⋆ in b). 4 1g) and b) ⋆ (A− 2g) symbols in Fig. 2. Each 3 × 3 matrix is for one pseudospin component. Each square in the matrix is the momentum distribution of a component of the gap function. It is shown in the first Brillouin zone for kz = 0 and kz = 2π/c. The color goes from −1 (blue) to 1 (red) and components were rescaled with a coefficient printed at their respective Γ point. The colors around the squares show the SPOT character of each component as in Table I. Here, PSP OT ∆ is the ratio of the absolute values of the projected gap function ∆ for a specific SPOT on the total one. S P O T PSP OT ∆▲(B+ 1g) PSP OT ∆⋆(A− 2g) - + + + 95% <1% + + + - 10% 81% + + - + 29% 58% - + - - 0% <1% We first discuss the ▲ (B+ 1g) SCOP. Details are given in . All the contributions are e-p +P. The intra-l pairs form spin-singlet −S with even-ω +T character. We fix the global phase such that they are purely real. The l1 = l2 = xy component is the largest and, as seen in the 11 component in Fig. 3 a), it transforms like a B1g dx2−y2 function in k- space. It was attributed to the γ band’s antiferromagnetic nest- ing vector . Globally, these pairs transform like B+ 1g with −S+P +O+T character. Because one of the paired xy electrons can propagate to the {xz, yz} orbitals by flipping a spin yet preserving pseudospin, SOC generates inter-l pairs which now have equal spins, i.e. +S. These xy; {yz, zx} inter-l components are compara- ble in magnitude to the xy; xy one. They transform glob- ally like B1g. There are two possibles SPOT characters that can entangle without affecting TR symmetry: +S+P −O+T and +S+P +O−T. In Fig. 3 a), the real (imaginary) parts of ∆↓↓ yz,xy and ∆↑↑ xy,yz (∆↓↓ zx,xy and ∆↑↑ xy,zx) have +S+P −O+T character while their complementary imaginary (real) parts have +S+P +O−T character. Finally, the other xy electron can also flip its spin and prop- agate to {yz, zx} orbitals. All orbital sectors are connected and the intra-l ∆−σ,σ yz,yz and ∆−σ,σ zx,zx are the second largest com- ponents. They globally transform like the ∆σ,−σ xy,xy component as B+ 1g with −S+P +O+T character. This B+ 1g state is a prime candidate for accidental degenera- cies in SRO, yet the entanglement of SPOT characters was rarely discussed. We see that SOC couples all orbital sec- tors into a single global irrep with ubiquitous even- and odd-ω correlations . Although arguably responsible for the finite polar Kerr effect , they are insuffisant to explain the two- component signatures in SRO, which motivates revisiting the polar Kerr experiment under uniaxial pressure. Moving to the ⋆ (A− 2g) SCOP shown in Fig. 3 b), we fix the global phase so the −T intra-l components are purely imaginary. They transform like +S+P +O−T. Because they form +S spin-triplets for σ1 = −σ2, a spin-flip induced by SOC preserves +S in inter-l sectors. Those have dominant +S+P −O+T and subdominant +S+P +O−T characters. The interest in this SCOP is two-fold. First, it transforms like A2g, consistent with ultrasound experiments. Second, intra-l odd-ω SCOP are gapless at the Fermi surface and their contribution to the specific heat could be extremely subtle. Consequently, an accidental degeneracy between B+ 1g and A− 2g could explain the discrepancy between specific heat and μSR under uniaxial strain, motivating further investigations. Finally, the absence of the dyz ± idzx (E+ g ) , E− g , s∗-wave (A+ 1g) [33–35] and gxy(x2−y2) (A+ 2g) [42– 45] solutions as dominant instabilities is explained by the re- quirement from SOC in 2D that all orbital components partic- ipate in pairing and transform like a unique global irrep. In- stead, we find that most subleading eigenvectors have odd-ω intra-l components . Summary. – We found that SOC leads to multi-orbital SCOP with multiple SPOT contributions. In proximity to a magnetic instability, we found the B+ 1g state often considered to explain SRO. Further away from the magnetic instability, we found an A− 2g whose intra-l components are odd-ω. Their combination into an accidental degeneracy could explain su- perconducting SRO since this solution has the potential to ex- plain all experiments, notably the discrepancy between spe- cific heat and μSR for uniaxial strain. Their study requires calculations of observables for gap functions that contain odd- ω contributions.