Hyperspectral nanoscale mapping of hybrid perovskite photophysics at the single grain level Ethan J. Taylor,† Vasudevan Iyer,‡ Bibek S. Dhami,† Clay Klein,¶ Benjamin J. Lawrie,∗,‡ and Kannatassen Appavoo∗,† †Department of Physics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham AL ‡Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge TN ¶Department of Physics, Clarion University, Clarion PA §Materials Science and Technology Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge TN E-mail: lawriebj@ornl.gov; appavoo@uab.edu Abstract Hybrid organic-inorganic perovskites have drawn significant interest for applications in optoelectronics over the last few years. De- spite rapid progress in understanding the pho- tophysics of perovskite, there remains a need for improved understanding of the effect of mi- crostructure on perovskite emission. Here, we combine unsupervised machine learning and cathodoluminescence microscopy of a proto- typical hybrid perovskite film to decode pho- tophysical processes that are otherwise lost with conventional Gaussian image processing. Hyperspectral maps are decoded with non- negative matrix factorization, revealing compo- nents relating to primary band-edge emission, photon recycling, and defect emission. A blind- spectral non-negative matrix factorization pro- cedure provides additional understanding of changes in an intermediate perovskite phase under electron beam exposure and illustrates how traditional Gaussian techniques may hide relevant emission features that are critical to the development of environmentally robust per- ovskite devices. Introduction Over the last decade, hybrid organic-inorganic perovskites have garnered widespread interest for applications in photovoltaics,1–6 sensing,7–9 and neuromorphic computing10,11 because of their impressive electronic properties that in- clude a high absorption coefficient, band-gap tunability, low exciton binding energy, and long carrier lifetimes and diffusion lengths. De- spite the potential of hybrid perovskite devices, improved long-term stability and phase engi- neering will be essential to continue progress. Improved understanding and control of intra- grain structure has become critical to optimiz- ing charge carrier dynamics to satisfy specific device requirements. Indeed, the exact role that grain boundaries play, beneficial12,13 or detri- mental,14,15 is yet to be fully understood. Various microscopy and spectroscopy tech- niques have been employed to characterize the effect of grain structure and morphol- ogy on charge carrier dynamics and transport. For example, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) has been used to characterize how lead- related defects are formed and how they are localizes at boundaries.16 TEM has also been used to characterize a temperature-dependent phase transition from tetragonal MAPbI3 to 1 arXiv:2201.06546v1 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 17 Jan 2022 trigonal PbI2,17 with some recent work point- ing towards humidity as a driving factor in how grain boundaries influence film degrada- tion.18 Furthermore, various emission spectro- scopies have been used to map the excited- state energetics and dynamics in grain interi- ors and grain boundaries through intensity and lifetime measurements.19–21 Other methods in- cluding atomic force microscopy, confocal mi- croscopy, electron backscatter diffraction, and computational techniques have been used to better understand the effect of grain boundaries on the optoelectronic properties of perovskite thin films.21–27 Cathodoluminescence (CL) mi- croscopy now serves as a powerful tool for high resolution mapping of hybrid perovskite photo- physics,28 but the electron beam is not a com- pletely non-perturbative probe. Large electron beam energies and currents can locally heat and decompose perovskite films, resulting in increased PbI2 luminescence and in the emer- gence of an unstable intermediate perovskite phase that emits light at higher energy than the primary perovskite band-edge emission.28,29 In this Letter, we employ CL microscopy and machine-learning techniques to provide insights into the photophysical properties of a single grain of a prototypical MAPbI3 perovskite with a spatial resolution of better than 10 nm. The raw CL spectrum images highlight the complex spectral variation within the grain interior and at its boundary. Secondary electrons are mea- sured concurrently with the CL in order to pro- vide correlated maps of the grain morphology and the perovskite photophysics. We also sys- tematically vary the electron beam energy in order to probe both depth-dependent effects30 and beam induced perovskite decomposition.29 The raw CL spectrum images are analyzed us- ing non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) techniques that allows us to map spectral com- ponents across the grain. This unsupervised analysis highlights how degradation, as probed by PbI2 formation, is more likely to occur near grain boundaries. Increasing the beam energy initially increases the amount of damage at the boundaries of the grain, though additional in- creases in beam energy and current result in damage to the center of the grain. Furthermore, we also show how primary band-edge emis- sion is distributed within the body of the grain and how the morphology of the thin film dic- tates nanometer scale regions where photon re- cycling takes place. A secondary characteriza- tion technique using Gaussian-restricted NMF shows that, in contrast to recent reports,19 the “disordered” phase for these perovskites ap- pears to be uncorrelated with the PbI2 grain boundary behaviour. Cathodoluminescence Mi- croscopy Cathodoluminescence microscopy is now a workhorse tool for the characterization of nanophotonic materials. When a high-energy converged electron beam interacts with a sam- ple, the transmitted, secondary, and backscat- tered electrons are routinely used to character- ize the sample morphology. The CL signal can provide a clear nanoscale picture of the energet- ics and dynamics of excited states in materials; it complements electron-energy loss spectro- scopies (EELS) because EELS measures the energy lost by the electron beam as it interacts with matter while CL characterizes the photons emitted by matter after electron excitation. CL microscopy is often delineated into coherent and incoherent CL.31 Coherent CL, so named because the emitted photons have a defined phase relationship with the electron excitation, results from incident electrons polarizing mate- rial at material interfaces; it is frequently used to probe the local density of states of nanopho- tonic and plasmonic media.32–35 Incoherent CL measures the spontaneous emission of excited states after the electron beam deposits energy in matter, and so is a powerful tool for mea- suring the nanoscale energetics and dynamics of defects and excitons in heterogeneous mate- rials.14,28,29,36–40 Here, as shown schematically in Figure 1(a), we probe the incoherent CL generated by a perovskite thin film using a FEI Quattro en- vironmental SEM with a Delmic Sparc CL col- lection module that utilizes a parabolic mirror to collect the CL generated by the film after 2 collection mirror before impacting the sample. The resulting photons are collected and directed through a focusing path before being spectrally dispersed onto a CCD. (b) Optical absorption, PL and CL at the center of a grain. (c) SEM images of sample collected with 5 kV accelerating voltage with a horizontal field of view of 63 μm. (d-e) CL intensity maps at 758 nm and 545 nm respectively. 3 electron beam excitation. An electron beam with beam energy of 5-20 kV passes through a small hole in the parabolic mirror before excit- ing the sample with a spot size of order 1 nm. The parabolic mirror then collects the result- ing emission and directs it through a focusing lens into an Andor Kymera spectrograph. An Everhart-Thornley detector is used to measure the secondary electron (SE) signal concurrently with the CL signal. An SE map of a prototypi- cal grain is shown in Figure 1(c) for 5 kV beam energy. Normalized optical absorption, photo- luminescence(PL) and CL from the center of a grain are shown in Figure 1(b) and CL maps at 758 nm and 545 nm are shown in Figure 1(d) and (e) respectively. All CL measurements were performed with a beam current of 110 pA. The 5 kV measurement utilized a 1 s acquisition time per spectrum and the 10 kV and 20 kV mea- surements utilized 100 ms acquisition times per spectrum. Unmixing spectral compo- nents NMF is a powerful tool for spectral unmix- ing that separates overlapping signals in hyper- spectral images. Here, we use an unsupervised “blind-spectral” NMF where the only physical constraint is that the spectral components must be non-negative41,42 and a Gaussian-restricted NMF that adds additional constraints to the NMF decomposition based on initial Bayesian inference fitting methods. All NMF decom- positions were performed using the scikit-learn Python package. Gaussian NMF Previous reports of perovskite CL microscopies have relied on either maps of the CL intensity within given wavelength bins29 or least-squares Gaussian fits.43,44 The former can be a viable solution when the number of detected photons is too small to fit the CL spectra with high confidence. The latter can be computationally expensive, and it requires prior knowledge of the functional form of the CL spectrum, but it is sufficient for many applications. Here, we use a Bayesian inference fitting method45 to fit three Gaussian modes to the average spec- tral response for each accelerating voltage and then perform a restricted NMF procedure us- ing these fitted Gaussians as fixed row vectors in the encoding matrix while optimizing the weight matrix. The results of this Bayesian re- stricted NMF decomposition for a prototypical perovskite-grain CL spectrum image are shown in Figure 2 for beam energies of 5, 10, and 20 kV. The images were acquired for the same grain beginning with the low energy electron beam and progressing to higher energy. Blind-Spectral NMF When performing blind-spectral NMF, we must first determine the appropriate number of com- ponents to include in the decomposition. Here, the explained variance ratio(EVR) was calcu- lated for each accelerating voltage as shown in for over 97 % of the variance in the data, no ad- ditional components were deemed necessary for the Blind-Spectral NMF calculations. spectral NMF for the same perovskite grain for the same three beam energies. As above, the spectral components shown in Figure 4(d) correspond to the spatial maps in Figure 4(a- c). Looking just at the low energy 5 kV excita- tion, we see the NMF has decomposed the CL into three primary components, two localized in the grain interior and one at the grain bound- ary. As the accelerating voltage increases, cor- responding to a greater depth of excitation30 and increased damage,29 the weights of these contributions vary. Discussion The SEM images in Figure 2(a) reveal a uni- form grain structure for a grain of size ∼ 50 μm, characteristic of MAPbI3 perovskite grains with a strong separation between grain interior and boundary. The grain structure is consistent with the proposed Voronoi growth detailed 4 SEM images collected simultaneously with CL. (b-d) Weight vectors with corresponding color for encoding matrix shown in (e). Captures (b) transitory damage states and primary band-edge emission, (c) primary band-edge emission and photon recycling, and (d) PbI2 emission suggestive of perovskite decomposition. 5 for 1-5 components. Three components account for over 97 % of the variance. in past studies,46 but as excitation depth in- creases, more intra-grain structures become vis- ible. The CL spectrum images are well corre- lated with this intra-grain structure, so we ar- gue that the crystallization process inside the grain strongly influences the emission parame- ters. However, because increased beam energy yields both increased electron-beam interaction volumes and increased damage, it is critical to minimize the electron-beam dose in order to fa- cilitate depth dependent probes without caus- ing excess damage. At 5 kV, the electron beam probes the top 100 nm of the film,28 and we see that the primary band-edge emission contribution out- weighs the photon recycling contribution in Fig- ures 2 and 4. This aligns with understanding of the photon recycling process, as the amount of available material to contribute to the pro- cess is smaller and primary band-edge emis- sion dominates across the surface of the grain in a uniform manner as shown in the spatial map. The photon recycling contribution is most prominent at the center of the grain and lacks any contribution at the grain boundary. The electron-beam conditions for the data reported here were intentionally chosen to minimize PbI2 damage, and the beam-induced damage is visi- bly minimized and localized to the grain bound- ary at 5 kV. At 10 kV, the weight of the two primary emission peak contributions flip, with the contribution assigned to photon recycling becoming the most prominent as a higher per- centage of energy is deposited deeper within the grain. The contribution from primary band- edge emission localizes more along the interior of the grain in the spatial map and the pho- ton recycling contribution remains strongest in the center of the grain. The PbI2 contribu- tion grows slightly but remains localized at the boundary of the grain. At 20 kV, the grain is now being damaged by the electron beam to a much larger degree. The primary band-edge contribution remains unchanged and is local- ized along the grain interior, with only slight variations due to the micro-structuring of the grain itself. Photon recycling can be seen to be entirely localized within the center of the grain. The intermediate degradation phase is substantially enhanced at 20 kV. This is con- sistent with past studies of the progression of damage in perovskite grains,28,29 but it is cap- tured here without distorting the contributions from relevant grain interior emission processes. Because the Gaussian-restricted NMF decom- position shown in Figure 2 is constrained by Gaussian priors, it suppresses some spatial structure that is present in the raw hyperspec- tral CL maps. The same issue is present in the literature where frequentist Gaussian fits have been used to analyze CL spectrum images.43,44 The PbI2 CL (shown in Figure 2d) and the primary band-edge and photon recycling CL (shown in Figure 2c) remain well spatially re- solved, but the CL from the intermediate per- ovskite phase (shown in Figure 2b) is poorly resolved because of the inappropriate choice of priors. The blind spectral NMF shown in Figure 4 exhibits substantial similarities with the Gaussian-restricted NMF. However, the ab- sence of Gaussian constraints allows for more complex spectral components to emerge in Fig- ure 4(d) and for spatial structure that is present in the raw CL hyperspectral data but sup- pressed by the Gaussian-NMF to emerge in Fig- ure 4(a-c). While the Gaussian constraints con- volved the primary band-edge and photon recy- cling CL into a single Gaussian component, the blind spectral NMF shown in Figure 4 clearly delineates the primary band-edge emission in 6 (a) NMF component corresponding to primary band-edge emission, (b) photon recycling, and (c) defect and intermediate phase emission. The normalized spectral components corresponding to the image decompositions are shown in (d). (a) from the photon recycling CL in (b). More- over, the blind spectral NMF combines the PbI2 defect CL and the intermediate phase CL into a single non-Gaussian spectral component illus- trated in Figure 4(c). Because the three compo- nents used here yield a greater than 97% EVR, it is reasonable to conclude that the PbI2 defect CL and the intermediate phase CL are in fact spatially correlated with one another because of an increased likelihood of defect formation at grain boundaries. This is consistent with the limited literature that has explored beam- induced damage in hybrid perovskites.28,29 Conclusion In this study, we investigated the electron- beam energy-dependent hyperspectral CL of an MAPbI3 perovskite grain with a spatial resolu- tion of 10nm using a combination of Gaussian- constrained NMF and blind-spectral NMF. We highlighted four prominent components of the spectrum images, including the primary band- edge perovskite CL, photon recycling CL, an intermediate phase associated with localized beam induced heating, and a fully decomposed PbI2 CL. While CL microscopy has become a well-used tool for probing perovskite films, the use of blind-spectral NMF allowed us to learn more about nanoscale perovskite photo- physics, and, critically, to demonstrate a clear correlation between the intermediate perovskite phase and decomposed PbI2 CL near grain boundaries. Indeed, this method allowed us to map the growth of the intermediate phase as a function of damage from the electron beam. This highlights the importance of understand- ing the optical properties of perovskite films near grain boundaries. Because the interme- diate perovskite phase is chemically unstable, increased focus on understanding and minimiz- ing the emergence of this intermediate phase will be critical to the development of environ- mentally robust perovskite devices. Acknowledgement Support for this project was provided by NASA EPSCoR RID (award 7 number 80NSSC19M0051) and UAB startup funds. Cathodoluminescence microscopy was conducted at the Center for Nanophase Mate- rials Sciences, which is a DOE Office of Sci- ence User Facility. BSD acknowledges financial support from the Alabama Graduate Research Scholars Program (GRSP) funded through the Alabama Commission for Higher Education and administered by the Alabama EPSCoR. We thank Dr. Sergei Kalinin for insightful discus- sion about data analysis.