Anomalous metals: From “failed superconductor” to “failed insulator” Xinyang Zhang,1, 2 Alexander Palevski,3 and Aharon Kapitulnik1, 2, 4 1Geballe Laboratory for Advanced Materials, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 2Department of Applied Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 3School of Physics and Astronomy, Raymond and Beverly Sackler, Faculty of Exact Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 6997801, Israel 4Department of Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA (Dated: January 24, 2022) Resistivity saturation is found on both superconducting and insulating sides of an “avoided” composite, where the anomalous metallic behaviors cut off conductivity or resistivity divergence in the zero-temperature limit. The granular morphology of the material implies a system of Josephson junctions (JJ) with a broad distribution of Josephson coupling EJ and charging energy EC, with a H-SIT determined by the competition between EJ and EC. By virtue of self-duality across the true H-SIT, we invoke macroscopic quantum tunneling effects to explain the temperature-independent resistance where the “failed superconductor” side is a consequence of phase fluctuations and the “failed insulator” side results from charge fluctuations. While true self-duality is lost in the avoided transition, its vestiges are argued to persist, owing to the incipient duality of the percolative nature of the dissipative path in the underlying random JJ system. INTRODUCTION An increasing number of recent experiments on dis- ordered superconducting films, initially searching for a superconductor-to-insulator transition (SIT), end up in- stead with an “avoided” transition, where scaling about a putative zero-temperature quantum critical point fails in the limit T → 0, giving way to a phase characterized by a resistance that levels off to a constant value inde- pendent of temperature [1–8]. This “anomalous metal- lic state” (AMS) seems to exhibit electronic properties that cannot be understood on the basis of the standard paradigms for transport in disordered two-dimensional (2d) metals (for a recent review see ). While extensive efforts have been devoted to understanding AMS on the superconducting side, termed a “failed superconductor,” and its transition to a “true” superconducting state , the complementary leveling of resistance on the insu- lating side of the same avoided SIT is often overlooked. Here, an initial resistivity divergence trend for T → 0 is replaced with distinct saturation, exhibiting resistivity values that can be orders of magnitude higher than quan- tum of resistance for Cooper pairs RQ = h/e2 ∼ 6.45 kΩ. This ubiquitous behavior of a “failed insulator” can be found in studies of ultrathin granular metal films , amorphous metal-insulator films , and Josephson junction (JJ) arrays . In this letter we propose a unified phenomenology for the emergence of anomalous metallic states from an avoided SIT in disordered superconducting films. Focus- ing on the magnetic-field tuned SIT (H-SIT) in strongly granular system of In-on-InOx composites, we show that vestiges of the self-duality observed in a true H-SIT are still pronounced in the AMS on both sides of the avoided-H-SIT , including the resistance satura- tion. Bearing in mind that from its nature, the critical point of any SIT yields an anomalous metal, we propose that the broadening of the metallic phase on both sides of the H-SIT has the same origin modulo the dual relation between phase of the order parameter (or vortices) and charge (both cooper-pairs and single electrons). Specifi- cally, we argue that the low-temperature resistance can be interpreted as a sum of a temperature-dependent ac- tivation term and a temperature-independent term asso- ciated with quantum fluctuations leading to macroscopic quantum tunneling (MQT) of the phase and/or the charge. On the superconducting side, a superconductor- to-quantum-metal transition (SQMT) appears with the destruction of global phase coherence , while on the insulating side quantum charge fluctuations pre- vent the establishment of a Coulomb-blockade-driven in- sulating state driving a quantum-metal-to- insulator transition (QMIT). The robustness of the anomalous metallic phase in the In/InOx system further enforces these expanded observations, while strongly contending interpretations solely based on non-equilibrium effects and response to external effects of the electronic system (see also “Methods” section). At the same time, the temperature- independent term associated with MQT depends deli- cately on the details of the distribution of grains and junctions, which may be controlled by external effects leading to different saturation value of the resistance, emphasizing its non-universal value in the anomalous metal regime. This in turn leads us to propose the phase-diagram of Fig. 1 and suggest a unified under- standing of anomalous metallic states in disordered su- perconducting films. Excluding the regime where pairs are no longer present, this phase diagram has strong re- semblance to that of two-dimensional electron gas about arXiv:2201.08801v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 21 Jan 2022 2 half-filled Landau levels . Zero-temperature phase diagram of a 2d granu- lar superconductor with two controlling parameters. In the present study X1=magnetic field and X2=inter-grain cou- pling. Shaded area represents the region in parameter space where anomalous metal appears. Thick solid line represents a true H-SIT (Ref. ) while the other solid lines represent the transition from a superconductor to a quantum anoma- lous metal (SQMT) and from quantum anomalous metal to an insulator (QMIT). Dashed line represents crossover from a Bose-dominated system, where superconducting In islands provide the source of pairing, to a normal-electrons insula- tor. Dash-dotted line represents the crossover from phase to charge dominated quantum anomalous metal state. Each full circle represents a quantum critical point for a particular re- alization of the control parameters, while an open circle is a crossover point. Whether samples are inherently inhomogeneous such as arrays of Josephson-junctions (JJ), or morphologically uniform such as amorphous films, superconducting pair- ing interaction tends to “amplify” mesoscopic fluctua- tions of the disorder and its associated Coulomb interac- tion, resulting in an effective granular morphology [22– 25]. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that the su- perconducting transition in 2d disordered metallic films is dominated by phase fluctuations and the material can be modeled as superconducting grains em- bedded in a tunable intergrain coupling matrix. While local pair amplitude fluctuations depend on the grain size , global superconductivity is achieved via the estab- lishment of a percolating path of phase coherence [28–31] through Josephson coupling of pairs of adjacent grains. For a given pair {ij}, Eij J is a function of the local gaps ∆i and ∆j and the intergrain normal-state resistance Rij n . However, the granular nature of 2d disordered films also requires that we consider the capacitance (both inter- grain and self) involved and the associated charging en- ergy Eij C which is a function of the local density at the grains ni and nj, and the dielectric constant of the in- tergrain material χij n . An insulating phase is the result of Coulomb blockade which prevent Cooper-pairs tun- neling between adjacent grains. For a granular film with typical Josephson energy EJ and charging energy EC, the ratio γ ≡ EJ/EC determines the occurrence of SIT . Besides the initial film morphology, other external parameters such as an applied magnetic field or carrier density modulation through an applied gate can be used to control γ. METHODS InOx/In granular composites were grown by electron- beam evaporation of In2O3 in oxygen partial pressure, followed by that of In under high vacuum. Consecutive in situ depositions of the two components result in clean interface that is crucial for optimal interface coupling. The uniform underlying amorphous InOx is specifically prepared to be weakly insulating to mediate couplings among the In grains and nearby proximitized regions. Details of the sample preparation process were provided in Ref. . Here we emphasize the granular morphology of the system as shown in Fig. 2. This will be a key to our understanding of the data. Morphology of the In/InOx system: a) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) micrograph of the In/InOx sam- ple. Bright grains are metallic indium islands, while dark background is a uniform underlying layer of weakly-insulating amorphous InOx. Note the broad distribution of grain sizes including the interstitial ones. Scale bar at lower right corner indicates 1μm. b) Distribution of grain size. Note the two broad peaks at ∼ 0.03μm and ∼ 0.5μm. Resistivity measurements were carried out using stan- dard four-point lock-in measurement on a patterned hall- bar sample. Current excitation was provided by reference ac voltage source in series with a 1 GΩ resistor that is much more resistive than any measured sample resistance in this study. The current intensity ranged from 0.1 nA to 1 nA while the frequency varied between 0.7–7 Hz depending on sample resistance. Linear response to ex- citation current was confirmed at the highest resistance. 3 Temperature ramps were sufficiently slow compared to the prolonged time constant. In our dilution refrigerator, all measurement wires were filtered at both room temperature and mixing chamber temperature (T ≳ 10 mK) using commercial in-line pi- filters and cryogenic filters, achieving over 100 dB at- tenuation throughout 100 MHz–5 GHz range. Sample phonon temperature was measured by a calibrated on- chip RuO2 thermometer subject to the same mounting and wiring as the sample. Data is not considered in our analysis when sample temperature differs more than 10% from mixing chamber temperature. The refrigerator was operating at the highest cooling power with an extra cir- culation pump running, despite at the cost of a higher base (mixing chamber) temperature. RESULTS In Fig. 3, we plot temperature dependence of resistiv- ity in different perpendicular magnetic fields across three annealing stages S0, S1, and S2 of the same initial sam- ple. Low-temperature annealing (< 50 ◦C) is well-known to irreversibly reduce sample resistance yet maintain an amorphous nature of the underlying InOx, thus alter- ing the dielectric response in the insulating matrix that couples superconducting grains. We restrict the range of magnetic field in this analysis to under 600 Oe to ensure robust superconductivity within the single grain . for three successive annealing stages. Dotted lines in S0 con- nects cooling data < 0.7 K with a field sweep at 1.1 K. Annealing stage S0 shows the most salient signatures of resistivity saturation on the insulating side of an “avoided” SIT. In zero field as temperature is lowered, resistivity decreases and saturates at around 6.2 kΩ/□ as a failed superconductor. A magnetic field as low as 30 Oe flips temperature coefficient of resistance (TCR) to negative as in an insulator. However, the resistiv- ity divergence gives way to saturation at around 0.2 K, eventually settling at a finite value as T → 0. In higher fields the features are qualitatively similar, until at 600 Oe where resistivity strongly diverges and no saturation is found above our base temperature. In a broad range of magnetic field, we identify an insulator where resistivity fails to diverge as T → 0, dubbed as a “failed insulator.” In contrast, annealing stage S1 or S2 develops a su- perconducting ground state in zero field, where the Tc is just below our base temperature for S0 while Tc ≈ 0.4 K for S1. Nevertheless, in low field ≲ 400 Oe, the ground state is a failed superconductor and has been discussed extensively . For S1 at 400 Oe, the system is right on the insulating side of the transition, yet the resistivity is saturating as T → 0 despite an upturn at ∼ 0.2 K. In higher field ≳ 400 Oe for both S1 and S2, resistiv- ity saturation is substantially reduced and the tempera- ture dependence can be fitted by a logarithmic divergence with a large pre-factor . Such logarithmic divergence is in stark contrast with the saturated resistivity in S0. Resistivity of insulators typically have exponential (hop- ping) or weak, granularity-induced divergence persisting to zero-temperature, meaning their curvature d2ρ/dT 2 remains positive as T → 0. However, in S0 the resistiv- ity divergence is cutoff by a saturation, marked by a sign change in the curvature in the temperature dependence at around 0.2 K (see Fig. 4(a)). To quantitatively analyze the evolution of resistivity behavior as a function of magnetic field on the insulat- ing side, we adopt an empirical functional form Eq. 1, which satisfactorily fits S0 data as shown in Fig. 4(a). This empirical law was previously employed to de- scribe an analogous conductivity saturation in insulating JJ arrays. The saturation was modeled as a consequence of a temperature-independent quantum fluctuation term σQF , in addition to thermally-activated tunneling con- ductivity on the insulating side with activation energy EaI and a proportionality constant σ0. In writing this equation we assume hall conductivity is zero: ρ = [σQF + σ0 · exp(−EaI/kBT)]−1 (1) Fig. 4(a) shows an overlay of the extracted quantum fluctuation contribution σQF (left axis) and activation temperature Ea/kB (right axis) as a function of mag- netic field. Since σQF is intimately related to the satura- tion, it decreases as field increases until around 600 Oe, where the divergence is restored and the saturation dis- appears. Meanwhile, the activation temperature starts off at around 0.3 K, peaks at just below 0.6 K near 300 Oe, and subsequently decreases before leveling off at high fields. Since the overall tendency for an insulating behav- ior is governed by the charging energy, we may estimate EaI ≈ αEC, where α ≈ 1/⟨z⟩ and ⟨z⟩ ≈ 6 is the aver- age coordination number of the random array of indium 4 grains of average size ∼ 0.1 μm . Taking a dielectric constant of ∼ 10 for the InOx, and average distance be- tween grains of ∼ 10 nm, we obtain EaI in the range that we find experimentally in Fig. 4(a). The corresponding (σQF )−1 increases in the high field limit to order of ∼ 1 MΩ, emphasizing the fact that this saturated resistance is much larger than the quantum of resistance RQ. and activation temperature Ea/kB (right axis) extracted from the fits. Also shown are the zeros (light red) in the curvatures of ρ(T). Inset: Temperature dependence of resistivity in S0 fitted by empirical law Eq. 1. b) Temperature independent term ρ−1 QF (■) or σQF (♦) (left axis) and activation tempera- ture Ea/kB (right axis) extracted from the fits. Inset: Tem- perature dependence of resistivity in S1 fitted by empirical laws Eq. 2. for H ≤ H∗ and Eq. 1. for H ≥ H∗. Also shown is Cooper pair quantum of resistance RQ = h/4e2 ∼ 6.5 kΩ/□ as the red separatrix. Dotted and dashed lines are guidance to the eye. To quantitatively analyze resistivity saturation on the superconducting side, we adopt a similar empirical law by exchanging the role of resistivity ρ and conductivity σ, justified as a manifestation of charge-phase correspon- dence (or particle-vortex duality) near either a direct SIT or an “avoided” SIT – a crossover between failed super- conductors and failed insulators . ρ = ρQF + ρ0 · exp(−EaS/kBT) (2) where ρQF is an analogous temperature-independent con- tribution to resistivity and EaS is activation energy on the superconducting side. Fits of this form to resistiv- ity of S1 are shown in Fig. 4(b), where Eq. 1 is used for H ≥ 350 Oe and Eq. 2 for H ≤ 300 Oe. The left y-axis shows ρ−1 QF from low field and σQF from high field in the same plot. Quantum fluctuation contribution ρQF grows (or equivalently, ρ−1 QF shrinks) upon increasing field, while quantum fluctuation contribution σQF shrinks in higher fields. The field dependence for both branches are power laws with ρ−1 QF ∝ H−0.45 and σQF ∝ H−4.7. Activation temperature on the low field side is around 1.5 K and gradually decreasing, until a sharp drop at H∗ ∼ 300 Oe where the sample switches to insulating behavior. Be- sides a factor of ∼4 lower activation temperature, its qualitative trend in field is consistent with those in S0. The dome-shaped presence of ρQF and σQF suggests that quantum fluctuations play important roles in both regimes of anomalous metallic phase. DISCUSSION The evolution of zero-temperature behaviors of resis- tivity in S0 and S1 leads us to a holistic understand- ing of the T = 0 phase diagram in Fig. 1. We identify the blue trace (SQMT) as a magnetic-field-tuned quan- tum superconductor–anomalous-metal transition (solid line), followed by a transition to an insulating ground state (solid line). The anomalous metallic regime can be further divided into failed-superconductor and failed- insulator regimes, separated by an “avoided” SIT (dash- dot line) representing a wide crossover regime. We also identify the green trace as an annealing-tuned failed- insulator–failed-superconductor transition (QMIC), sim- ilar to the magnetic-field controlled scenario despite a fundamental difference in the nature of these two con- trol parameters. As an example, universal anomalous metallic behaviors under different tuning parameter was recently discussed in Ref. . Finally, a direct SIT that is typically found in homogeneous films or granu- lar materials with stronger coupling is shown as the red trace (SIT), while transition to a disordered 2D metal- lic phase appears when Cooper-pairs are broken (dashed line). Within our granular system of In/InOx compos- ite, a true H-SIT can be tuned to unveil an avoided H-SIT, which was previously shown to exhibit vestiges of self duality around the putative quantum critical point . The analysis presented in the previous section ex- plores the duality idea in a wider temperature range which includes the resistance saturation associated with the AMS, thus provides further insight into the possible origin of this enigmatic phase. The fact that the data shows a continuous evolution from an AMS with very low sheet resistance to one with very large sheet resistance that far exceeds even the fermion quantum of resistance, h/e2, suggests that the superconducting grains and the intergrain tunneling play the key role in determining the 5 saturation value, that is, (σQF )−1 in Eqn. 1 smoothly connects to ρQF in Eqn. 2. Focusing on Fig. 4(b), it shows that the separating saturation resistance between the two regimes is ∼ 6.5 kΩ/□ at the field of H∗ ≈ 300 Oe where the curves change character as a result of the avoided H-SIT. The drop in activation energy between |Ea|H≲H∗ and |Ea|H≫H∗ is a factor of 4. Since H∗ marks an avoided transition where we expect EJ ∼ EC, then we conclude that EaI saturates to 1 4EC as was previously observed for ordered arrays of JJ . This further suggests that for H ≫ H∗ the saturation is associated with charge fluctuations. Examination of the samples in the reverse direction of annealing (S2 to S1 to S0), we sug- gest that we observe a smooth crossover of macroscopic quantum effect from a regime dominated by Josephson coupling to a regime dominated by Coulomb interaction, which for each realization of coupling (annealing) and magnetic field could be attributed to a single junction behavior in the respective regime. Starting from a single resistively-shunted-JJ with EJ ≫ EC, for a small bias current a phase difference is established along the junction resulting in a zero-voltage supercurrent. However, at very low temperatures where activation is exponentially small, quantum fluctuations of the phase induce quantum tunneling of the phase vari- able and thus a finite voltage . With increas- ing charging energy, and in the limit EJ ≪ EC, a dual situation is expected, where the electric charge on the junction capacitance, which conjugates to the junction’s phase, results in Coulomb blockade and thus an insulat- ing state. For a small bias voltage, quantum fluctuations of the charge may give rise to a coherent current of cooper pairs and to dissipation due to single electron tunneling . The latter is also a macroscopic quantum effect due to the participation of the collective electron system in the process . To rationalize the analogy with a single resistively- shunted-JJ we follow Fisher assuming that junctions in the EJ ≫ EC regime (Samples S2 and S1) are re- sistively shunted with a wide distribution of shunt resis- tors. While in general the idea of a normal conductance channel was challenged in the limit of T ≪ Tc for an or- dered array of JJs , we believe that it is natural to expect normal regions in a random array of grains such as in our In/InOx composite, especially in the presence of magnetic field . Using an Ambegaokar, Halperin and Langer approach , we assume that there exists a set of junctions which are coupled to shunt resistors large enough to allow phase slips and are connected to form an infinite network that spans the system. By the nature of the effect where the phase slips span the size of the sam- ple for a magnetic field HSM ≪ H∗ c , we can map it on a random-resistor network (RRN) percolation problem, which at very low temperature, for a given tuning pa- rameter (here the magnetic field) is self-organized to be at criticality. A well known result for percolation theory is that the resistance above percolation is bounded from below by the total resistance of the so-called “singly con- nected bonds” [46–48], that is, the bonds that if cut will disrupt the integrity of the infinite network. Near criti- cality, for a system of size L, the average conductance is given by ⟨G⟩ = Ld−1⟨g1⟩, where d is the dimensionality and g1 is the linear conductance of the chain of singly con- nected bonds estimated here as ⟨g1⟩ ∼ 1/Lrs, where rs is the limiting shunt resistance . In two-dimensions, the value of the saturated resistivity within this RRN- percolation model is easily estimated as ρs ≈ ⟨G⟩−1 ≈ rs. Thus, the regime of anomalous metal is a consequence of MQT through junctions characterized by rs ≪ RQ. Turning to the more insulating samples (S0, and high- field S1), the intergrain mediating InOx layer is insulating enough (single junction resistance ≫ RQ), to prevent an infinite cluster of percolating phase-coherent supercon- ducting grains. In this regime, the small grains, which appear interstitially between the larger superconducting islands, become the bottleneck for continuous conduction due to their large charging energy satisfying EC ≫ EJ. This situation is amplified with increasing magnetic field where more of the weaker junctions between large su- perconducting islands lose phase coherence. At the same time, a true insulating state as a consequence of Coulomb blockade may fail because of MQT of charge . This dual behavior to the phase-MQT suggests to extend the percolation description according to Ambegaokar, Halperin and Langer results to the insulating side where a saturated resistivity is expected with limiting junction shunt resistance rs ≫ RQ and EC ≫ EJ. The phase-charge duality is further understood by the intrinsic duality of the RRN of the randomly distributed shunt resistances underlying the JJ array. Indeed, there is an exact relation between the bulk effective conductiv- ity of a 2D continuing composite made of two isotropic components and that of the dual composite [48, 50–53]. For a rectangular array of JJ representing bonds with re- sistances {ri} and conductances {gi} (where gD i = 1/gi ≡ ri), the dual total conductance GD x (gD 1 , gD 2 ....gD N) along x-direction is related to the conductance along the y- direction Gy(g1, g2, ...gN) ≡ Ry(r1, r2, ...rN) as: GD x = 1/Gy. The same average behavior is expected for the ran- dom system, which is manifested in our random In/InOx composite : ⟨GD x ⟩ = ⟨Ry⟩. The charge-phase correspondence maps onto the RRN duality and further reinforces the vestiges of duality that originate from the H-SIT as previously suggested by Shimshoni et al., . A further consequence of the above model is the re- alization of the fragility of the superconducting or in- sulating states from which the failed superconductor and failed insulator emerge. Besides the annealing and magnetic field, any perturbation applied to the system strongly affects the distribution of junctions properties, thus leading to a shift in the potential barrier for the MQT process resulting in a shift of the saturated re- 6 sistance. For example, external radiation can work to enhance the quantum fluctuations and thus AMS will emerge with larger saturated resistance as T → 0 , or reduce them thus pin the superconducting state . Sim- ilarly, a ground plane near a sample can provide another dissipation channel to pin the superconducting state, as well as alter the charging energies to modify the satura- tion on the insulating side, both effects were observed in JJ arrays and in highly disordered films . In summary, we identify two regimes in anomalous metallic phase – a “failed superconductor” and a “failed insulator,” as clearly suggested by resistivity saturation on both sides of an “avoided” SIT. The close connec- tion between our granular composite and Josephson junc- tion arrays is revealed by a set of empirical fit to the temperature dependence of resistivity. Quantum fluctu- ations of phase drive the transition from superconductor to anomalous metal when superconductors fail to estab- lish global phase coherence, while quantum fluctuations of charge number drive the transition from insulator to anomalous metal when charge localization gives way to dissipative transport. A duality picture is strongly jus- tified in our discussions by interchanging the roles of N and φ and corroborated by the resemblance of transport behaviors when exchanging the roles of ρ and σ.