Laser-patterned submicron Bi2Se3-WS2 pixels with tunable circular polarization at room temperature Zachariah Hennighausen1,*, Darshana Wickramaratne2, Kathleen M. McCreary2, Bethany M. Hudak2, Todd Brintlinger2, Hsun-Jen Chuang3, Mehmet A. Noyan2, Berend T. Jonker2, Rhonda M. Stroud2, and Olaf M. van ’t Erve2,* 1 NRC Postdoc Residing at the Materials Science and Technology Division, United States Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C. 20375, USA 2 Materials Science and Technology Division, United States Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C. 20375, USA 3 Nova Research, Inc., Alexandria, VA 22308, USA Abstract Characterizing and manipulating the circular polarization of light is central to numerous emerging technologies, including spintronics and quantum computing. Separately, monolayer tungsten disulfide (WS2) is a versatile material that has demonstrated promise in a variety of applications, including single photon emitters and valleytronics. Here, we demonstrate a method to tune the photoluminescence (PL) intensity (factor of x161), peak position (38.4meV range), circular polarization (39.4% range), and valley polarization of a Bi2Se3-WS2 2D heterostructure using a low-power laser (0.762μW) in ambient. Changes are spatially confined to the laser spot, enabling submicron (814nm) features, and are long-term stable (>334 days). PL and valley polarization changes can be controllably reversed through laser exposure in vacuum, allowing the material to be erased and reused. Atmospheric experiments and first- principles calculations indicate oxygen diffusion modulates the exciton radiative vs. non- radiative recombination pathways, where oxygen absorption leads to brightening, and desorption to darkening. * Authors for correspondence, E-mail: zachariah.hennighausen.ctr@mail.nrl.navy.mil; olaf.vanterve@nrl.navy.mil; Keywords: circular polarization, valleytronics, transition metal dichalcogenide, 2D material, WS2, photoluminescence, optical data storage Introduction Circularly polarized light (CPL) interacts differently with materials than linearly polarized light, providing a separate avenue to probe and manipulate materials. This property has facilitated a variety of existing and emerging technologies, including bioinspired navigation,1 spintronics,2 quantum computing,3,4 quantum communication,5,6 non-linear image encryption,7 valleytronics,8 and non-invasive cancer screening.9 Manipulating circular polarization traditionally requires bulky optical elements and intricate setups, which limits its application and greater adoption. Recent advances in nanophotonics,10 organic chiral molecules,11 and metasurfaces12 have produced impressive results, but such nanoscale fabrication can be challenging, and often the properties cannot be modified after fabrication. In this work, we demonstrate technology where the circular polarization can be modified across a large range, at room temperature, using a low- power laser, and with submicron resolution. The changes can be reversed using a laser in vacuum, enabling write-read-erase-reuse applications. Amongst other applications, the findings pave the way for laser-patterned, submicron circular polarization sensors, pixels, and optical elements. Two-dimensional (2D) transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) - notably MoSe2, MoS2, WSe2, and WS2 - have demonstrated considerable promise for CPL applications. Additionally, the materials can be grown on an economical scale using chemical vapor deposition (CVD), providing a facile route toward application. Using CVD, we first grow monolayer WS2 and then few-layer Bi2Se3 on top. We use Bi2Se3 as a medium to manipulate the optical, exciton, and valley properties of WS2. Monolayer WS2 is a direct band gap semiconductor with s + and s − transitions at the K and K’ valleys, respectively, due to time-reversal symmetry and a strong spin-orbit coupling.13,14 When exposed to s + (s −) CPL with energies above the band gap, tightly-bound excitons and trions (i.e., electron-hole quasiparticles) form in the K (K’) valley. When these excitons recombine, CPL is emitted with a circular polarization corresponding to the valley. The valley-dependent selection rules allow the K and K’ valleys to be selectively populated and manipulated using only CPL, suggesting WS2 is ideal for advanced information processing schemes and other valleytronics applications.8 Excitons formed in TMDs can scatter between the valleys and recombine with the opposite CPL, which reduces the degree of circular polarization (DoCP) of the material. Several intervalley scattering mechanisms have been demonstrated (See Section S7 for additional information). Phonon-assisted scattering15–18 and the Maialle-Silva-Sham (MSS) exchange interaction16,19–21 are considered to be the most dominant mechanisms in monolayer TMDs, providing a framework to engineer better materials. A variety of factors influence a TMD’s DoCP, including defects,22 exciton lifetime,23–26 dopants,27 temperature,28 magnetic fields,29 excitation wavelength,30 and carrier density.31 Despite these advances, manipulating the material deterministically in situ with submicron resolution remains a challenge. Using a back-gated device, the carrier density and DoCP can be tuned real-time, but the effect is not stable and disappears when power is removed.26,31 A laser can be used to dope H2-activated monolayer MoS2 with spatial-selectivity and manipulate the DoCP, but it was only demonstrated at very low-temperatures (4K) and the changes are not reversible.27 In this work, we demonstrate a method to manipulate the valley polarization and DoCP across a large 39.4% range, using a low-power laser (0.762μW) in ambient and at room temperature. Additionally, the photoluminescence (PL) intensity and peak position can be tuned with high precision across a factor of x161, and 38.4meV range, respectively. The changes are locally confined, enabling features as small as 814nm, and are long-term stable (>334 days). Applying a laser in vacuum controllably reverses changes to the PL and DoCP. The PL and DoCP can be reliably manipulated within a range, allowing the material to be erased and reused. Atmospheric measurements, Fick’s 2nd Law of Diffusion fitting, and first-principles calculations indicate oxygen absorption and desorption, facilitated by the few-layer Bi2Se3, is responsible for the large modulation of the exciton radiative vs. non-radiative recombination pathways. We propose a framework to understand the changes in PL and valley polarization due to oxygen absorption and desorption. Our work demonstrates precision tuning of spatially-selective submicron pixels furthering numerous technologies, including multistate multidimensional optical data storage, valleytronics, and quantum information sciences. Experiment and Results Optical microscope image. (c) TEM diffraction pattern showing crystalline Bi2Se3 and WS2. The majority of the Bi2Se3 is oriented within ±2° of the 0° twist angle. (d) AFM scan of sample in (b), showing Bi2Se3 grows uniformly. (e) Height line profile along the blue line inset in (d). Bi2Se3 grew mostly bilayer, with gaps of monolayer, and islands of trilayer. Monolayer WS2 is grown on an Si/SiO2 substrate, and then 1-3 quintuple layers of Bi2Se3 are grown on top of the WS2. Both growths use chemical vapor deposition (CVD), suggesting the method is economically scalable, providing a route to application. Figure 1a shows a schematic of the 2D heterostructure, and Figure 1b shows an optical image of a representative sample. majority of the Bi2Se3 is oriented within ±2° of the 0° twist angle, although some crystallites with disorientations up to 10° were observed, in line with previous work.32 While WS2 was crystalline throughout, Bi2Se3 was found to have nanoscale areas of high crystallinity, surrounded by a discontinuous BixSey alloy that showed no clear structure. We suspect the few-layer Bi2Se3 becomes unstable and is altered during transfer from its initial SiO2 growth substrate onto TEM- suitable support. profile along the blue line inset. The Bi2Se3 grew primarily as bilayers, with regions of monolayers and islands of trilayers (Figure S1 contains amplifying AFM data and discussion). The Bi2Se3 exhibits a pronounced Raman signal typical of few layer Bi2Se3 (Figure 2),33,34 and it grows as well- defined hexagons (Figure S2), suggesting it grows with long-range crystallinity. A majority of the hexagons’ sharp edges are qualitatively parallel to that of WS2, in agreement with TEM measurements. spectra after different laser exposure times in ambient. The PL intensity increases and peak position shifts with laser- oxygen exposure. (b) Optical microscope and (c) fluorescence images of a sample with the letter “N” patterned. The optical image shows a color change from purple to white, and the fluorescence image demonstrates the ability to write submicron (814nm) pixels. (d) Raman spectra before and after laser exposure, where the Bi2Se3 and WS2 peaks are labeled with green and black, respectively. Bi2Se3 peaks decline, likely due to degradation of the crystal structure, while power (0.762μW) laser exposure with a 50x objective (0.050μW/μm2). Inset: PL spectrum after 200s laser exposure with a Lorentzian fit, and the concurrent low-resolution Raman spectrum. (g)-(h) Evolution of three Raman peaks and the backscattered laser peak as a function of laser exposure. The peaks were collected concurrent with the PL spectra using is a combination of both the Bi2Se3 (A1g2) and a WS2 (LA(M)) Raman peak. (h) The silicon peak increase suggests that the transmission increases. The backscattered peak increases faster than the silicon peak, suggesting the reflection increases. spectra of a Bi2Se3-WS2 2D heterostructure, where the changes are confined to the laser spot. laser with a 50x objective (0.050μW/μm2). Initially, the PL intensity is quenched; however, as time progresses, the intensity increases and peak position shifts to higher energies, before reversing direction and shifting to lower energies. Figure 2b-c are optical and fluorescence images, respectively, of a 2D heterostructure with the letter “N” patterned. Laser exposure in an atmosphere with oxygen induces a color change from purple to a variant of white. The fluorescence image demonstrates submicron (814nm) feature resolution and pixel size. As discussed later, oxygen is required concurrent with laser exposure to induce changes. exposure in ambient, where green and black writing correspond to Bi2Se3 and WS2, respectively. The well-formed peaks suggest both Bi2Se3 and WS2 are crystalline, in agreement with TEM diffraction measurements (Figure 1c). All the peaks match previously published literature for monolayer WS2 and few-layer Bi2Se3.33,34 Of note, Bi2Se3 Raman modes evolve as the material is thinned from bulk to monolayer. Our data suggests the Bi2Se3 is between 1-4 layers, in agreement with AFM measurements (Figure 1d). After laser exposure in an atmosphere with oxygen, the Bi2Se3 Raman peaks decrease intensity, eventually disappearing, suggesting the crystal structure is being altered. This is in agreement with previous work that showed laser exposure in ambient of Bi2Se3-TMD 2D heterostructures disrupts the Bi2Se3 crystal structure.35,36 Conversely, the WS2 Raman peaks, silicon Raman peak, and backscattered laser all increase intensity. of uninterrupted low-power (0.762μW) 532nm laser exposure with a 50x objective (0.050μW/μm2) in ambient. A spectrum was collected every two seconds, for 620 seconds, demonstrating the material’s smooth and controlled response with very low noise. The intensity increases a factor x39.8, while the peak position shifts 13.5meV. The line-shape contains multiple non-linear features, such as the plateau in the middle, that likely are due to the Bi2Se3 crystal being altered. The PL intensity and peak position data were extracted from each spectrum by fitting with a Lorentzian function and linear background. A robust fitting algorithm written in Python Spyder software ensured the global minimum was found with low uncertainty.37 The good fit suggests only one quasiparticle recombination dominates the PL, and that the model captures the system well (see inset and Section S2 for representative fits). The inset shows the PL spectrum at 200s with a Lorentzian fit, and the low-resolution Raman spectrum measured concurrently. The spectra in Figure 2a correspond to the data in Figure 2e-f. function of laser exposure in ambient. The peaks were collected concurrent with the PL spectra in Figure 2e-f using a low-resolution grating (150g/mm), allowing the data to be directly compared. Figure 2g shows the Bi2Se3 (A1g2) and WS2 LA(M) peaks centered at 176cm-1, and the WS2 2LA(M) peak at 352cm-1. The 176cm-1 peak initially declines, likely due to the Bi2Se3 (A1g2) peak decreasing, suggesting the Bi2Se3 crystal is being altered. The LA(M) peak increases on average 36.3% with laser exposure, in agreement with Figure 2d. Figure 2h shows the silicon Raman peak and the backscattered laser increase 20.3% and 37.4%, respectively. The silicon peak increase suggests that the Bi2Se3-WS2 transmission increases. The backscattered peak is a measure of both the reflection and transmission because a portion of the signal is reflected from the silicon. The backscattered peak increases faster than the silicon peak, suggesting the reflection increases. Together, this data offers a possible explanation why the WS2 Raman peaks increase with laser exposure (Figure 2d,g): As Bi2Se3 becomes more transparent, more light enters WS2. intensity, (b) peak position, and (c) DoCP (valley polarization) subject to intermittent exposure of a 13.5μW s+ circular polarized 588nm laser with a 100x objective (1.25μW/μm2). (c) The circular polarization and valley polarization shifts 39.4%, demonstrating the large range the material can be manipulated. Insets: The s++ and s+- spectra with Lorentzian fits for the 7th and 33rd data points, demonstrating the robust fitting captures the spectra. Error bars are plotted on all data points, showing 2-sigma (95.4%) confidence intervals. 13.5μW positive helicity (s+) circular polarized 588nm laser with a 100x objective (1.25μW/μm2). Data was collected for both positive (s++) and negative (s+-) helicity. The DoCP is calculated using Eq. (1). P!"#$ = (1) and s+- states. The intensity increases over a factor of ́161, while the peak position decreases 38.4meV. The DoCP (Figure 3c) initially increases before steadily decreasing and plateauing. We highlight that the PL behavior was reproduced over multiple trials on different samples. Section S2 contains representative Lorentzian fitting of the s++ and s+- spectra and amplifying analysis. All measurements were done in ambient at room temperature, and changes can be reversed and reliably manipulated within a range (discussed later), making the technology attractive for applications. To the best of our knowledge, we demonstrate one of the largest ranges of in situ, spatially-selective, and tunable DoCP at room temperature, where changes can be reversed allowing the material to be erased and reused. Error bars are calculated by finding the 2-sigma (95.4% confidence) value around the chi-squared minima for the applicable variables, and propagating the error as appropriate.37 Note, as the spectra intensity and signal-to-noise ratio increase, the uncertainty decreases, making error bars difficult to distinguish on the graph. Fluorescence images and (g-j) optical images corresponding to the data in (a) and (b). Fluorescence images demonstrate how the pixel brightness can be modulated, and state flipped between “on” and “off”. (c) Post 1st vacuum. (d) Post 1st air. (e) Post 2nd vacuum. (f) Post peak position from 2nd vacuum exposure and 2nd air exposure shown in (a) and (b) are replotted. The close fit with Fick’s 2nd Law of Diffusion suggests diffusion into and out of the material is present. Laser exposure in vacuum reverses local changes to the PL intensity and peak position (Figure 4). Our findings suggest the PL is manipulated through oxygen diffusion into and out of the 2D heterostructure. The sample was exposed without interruption to a 38.8μW 532nm laser at a 50x long working distance objective (1.65μW/μm2). of two atmospheres (i.e., air and vacuum), and laser exposure. When the laser is initially applied in vacuum, the PL intensity decreases 54.1% and the peak position shifts slightly (3meV) lower in energy. When the environment is switched to air, the PL increases by a factor ́16.9, and the peak position initially shifts slightly upward (2.3meV), before shifting lower in energy (11.5meV). When the environment is switched back to vacuum (2nd round), the PL intensity decreases 86.5% and the peak position shifts 9.4meV upward. When the environment is switched back to air (2nd round), the PL intensity increases a factor ́11.1 and the peak position decreases 10.4meV. The fluorescence and optical images shown in Figure 4c-f and Figure 4g-j, respectively, were taken after the last data point in each atmosphere. The fluorescence images demonstrate a pixel’s state can be flipped between “on” and “off”, and its brightness modulated with spatial selectivity. The optical images show the characteristic color change appears after the first laser exposure in air, but does not reverse through laser exposure in vacuum. Similarly, changes to the Raman spectra are not readily reversed (Figure S5). When exposed to a laser in air, numerous peaks increase intensity, but do not reverse in vacuum. These findings suggest the material undergoes an irreversible, structural transformation of the Bi2Se3 crystal structure during the first laser- oxygen exposure. Previous work using Bi2Se3-MoS235 and Bi2Se3-MoSe236 2D heterostructures demonstrated that laser-oxygen induced optical and Raman changes could be reversed through >3 hours of annealing in an argon environment, possibly because the Bi2Se3 was recrystallized. As shown in Figure 4a-b, the first laser-oxygen exposure has a different curve shape compared to subsequent exposures, possibly because the Bi2Se3 crystal is being altered during exposure. Notably, the first laser-oxygen exposure evolves slower and contains numerous non-linear features that are not present in subsequent exposures. For example, the peak position increases before decreasing, and the intensity curve plateaus before increasing again. This behavior is repeated across numerous samples (Figure 2, Figure S6, Figure S7, and Figure S12). Conversely, subsequent exposures (i.e., 2nd vacuum and 2nd Air) evolve much faster, and have a recurring “logarithmic” curve shape that suggests the response is deterministic, and the underlying mechanisms facilitates repeatable behavior. To elucidate the mechanism behind the 2nd vacuum and 2nd air curves, we fit the data with Fick’s 2nd Law of Diffusion (Figure 4k-l).38 Fick’s 2nd law predicts how the concentration changes with respect to time. Assuming fixed concentration boundary conditions (i.e., air, and the SiO2 substrate), Fick’s 2nd law reduces to Eq. (2), where c is the concentration, x is the distance from the 2D heterostructure surface, D is the diffusion coefficient, and t is the time. Since a majority of the sample probed had two quintuple layers of Bi2Se3, we set x = 2nm, √1 ∫ e)2#dy 3 4 ; z = 5 /√6- (2) The close fit of the 2nd vacuum and 2nd air curves suggests that diffusion is central to the mechanism (Figure 4k-l). Air is approximately comprised of 78% nitrogen, 21% oxygen, and 1% of various gases. We performed atmospheric measurements to determine the effect from the dominant species. Under laser exposure, nitrogen does not appear to have any detectable effect (Figure S6), while oxygen induces the characteristic change (Figure S7), suggesting oxygen is required for the mechanism. This is in agreement with previous work on Bi2Se3-MoS2 2D heterostructures.39 Additionally, previous work found that oxygen in ambient is able to diffuse into Bi2Se3, and that is able to disrupt the surface crystal structure, suggesting a unique relationship exists between the two.40 Fick’s 2nd Law of Diffusion fit both the PL intensity and peak position curves well, suggesting both values are closely coupled to the concentration of absorbed oxygen. The 2nd air PL intensity curve follows Fick’s 2nd Law of Diffusion fit until ~150s (Figure 4k), but deviates after, following a linear behavior. This discrepancy is likely due to either residual Bi2Se3 remaining from the 1st air exposure, or a slight laser-spot shift as a result of atmosphere exchanges. The diffusion coefficients for the 2nd vacuum and 2nd air PL intensity were found to be 2.46 nm2/s and 0.180 nm2/s, respectively, while the peak positions were found to be 0.171 nm2/s and 1.04 nm2/s, respectively. Our findings suggest oxygen desorbs faster in vacuum compared to absorption in ambient, demonstrating hysteretic behavior. Additionally, we show a correlation between laser power and rate of diffusion, where higher laser powers facilitate faster diffusion (Figure S14). Further work is needed to elucidate changes to the diffusion rate as a function of atmosphere, temperature, and number of cycles. The curves are smooth, deterministic, and low noise, suggesting multiple states are accessible, and that each pixel can store numerous bits of information for superdense multistate multidimensional data storage. The changes are long-term stable in a N2 atmosphere at room temperature for over 334 days (Figure S8), an attractive feature for applications. each laser-atmosphere exposure. (b) Both s+ and s- circular polarizations were probed, demonstrating that both valleys can be tuned and accessed. (c) DoCP is reversible and can be reliably tuned within a range. (d-g) Evolution of the PL intensity and peak position during 3rd air and 3rd vacuum. As expected, the PL intensity (peak position) increases (decreases) in air and decreases (increases) in vacuum. The behavior follows Fick’s 2nd Law of Diffusion closely. As the response plateaued, both s-- and s-+ configurations were probed, allowing the DoCP to be extracted. Insets show final PL spectra with Lorentzian fits. More work is need to determine whether the difference in peak positions between s-- and s-+ is real or due to error. can be reversed and reliably modulated within a range. Fluorescence images after each laser- atmosphere exposure (Figure 5a), show the PL intensity can be modulated between “bright” and “dark” states with spatial selectivity. Figure 5b show spectra from s++, s+-, s--, and s-+, demonstrating that both valleys can be accessed. exposures. The DoCP was reliably tuned between ~0.6% and ~7% after air and vacuum, respectively, a sizeable range considering that the intensity and peak position shifts are comparatively small. More specifically, consistent with our observations in Figure 3, previous work found an anticorrelation between PL intensity and DoCP, where greater intensity corresponded to higher DoCP.23–26 Exciton lifetime likely plays a role (i.e., greater exciton lifetime corresponds to lower DoCP),23–26 allowing more time for both a radiative transition or an intervalley scattering event. ranges (factor ́5 and 6meV, respectively). In contrast, Figure 3 demonstrates much larger ranges (factor ́161 and 38.4meV, respectively), suggesting much larger reversible DoCP shifts are feasible, and likely sample dependent. We believe sample response is influenced by Bi2Se3 stoichiometry, coverage, and layer thickness, along with TMD quality, suggesting material engineering is essential to increase the range of tunable and reversible DoCP. increased (decreased) and decreased (increased) in air (vacuum), respectively. All PL behavior follows Fick’s 2nd Law of Diffusion closely (Eq. 2), suggesting oxygen is being absorbed and desorbed. Due to equipment limitations, both the s-- and s-+ cannot be collected at the same time. To overcome this, the measurement system was switched between s-+ and s-- after the curves plateaued. Qualitatively a change in DoCP can be observed when examining the relative intensities of the s-+ and s-- curves. Each data point is extracted from robust fitting to a spectrum. Over 500 spectra were collected to produce the curves in Figure 5d-g, demonstrating the high control and low-error of the technology. The close fit to Fick’s 2nd law of Diffusion suggests the system is deterministic, enabling high predictability and greater tunability. 1st Air, 1st Vacuum, 2nd Air, and 2nd Vacuum along with analysis are shown in Section S6 of the SI. with spin-orbit coupling. The color of each state denotes the relative WS2 (blue) versus Bi2Se3 (red) character. (b) Relative contribution of WS2 to the CBM at G as a function of the change in the interlayer separation distance with respect to the equilibrium separation distance, 3.221Å. The red triangle denotes the increase in dSe-S due to two O2 molecules that are intercalated within the heterostructure. We exposed bare monolayer WS2 to a laser in ambient, but observed only comparatively small changes to the PL intensity and peak position, and DoCP (Section S5), demonstrating that both Bi2Se3 and oxygen diffusion are required to modulate the PL and valley polarization. In order to understand these changes, we perform first-principles calculations. The electronic structure of a monolayer Bi2Se3/monolayer WS2 heterostructure calculated using density functional theory (DFT) calculations is illustrated in Figure 6. The valence band maximum (VBM) of the heterostructure is a pure WS2 state while the conduction band minimum (CBM) is hybridized with predominantly Bi2Se3 character and approximately 20% WS2 character (Figure 6a). The band extrema at G are comprised of out-of- plane pz orbitals of Bi2Se3 and WS2 and therefore are sensitive to the minimum separation distance between Se and S, dSe-S which is 3.221Å in the equilibrium heterostructure. If laser exposure in an O2 environment leads to the intercalation of O2 between WS2 and Bi2Se3, this would increase dSe-S, which would decrease the magnitude of the spatial overlap between the pz orbitals of S and Se. Indeed, when we optimize the atomic coordinates of the heterostructure with two O2 molecules intercalated within the van-der-Waals interface of Bi2Se3-WS2, we find dSe- S increases by 0.59 Å. In Figure 6b we plot the change in the degree of hybridization at G as a function of increasing values of dSe-S. It is clear that as the interlayer separation distance increases, the degree of hybridization decreases. Discussion Our calculations and proposed mechanism of O2 intercalation imply the following. One process that is capable of causing changes in PL intensity is a nonradiative relaxation of photoexcited carriers from K. Prior to O2 being intercalated, the hybridized CB state at G is a nonradiative pathway that photoexcited electrons at K can relax in to. If the contribution of WS2 states to the CBM at G decreases, as we show can occur with intercalation, the probability for a nonradiative transition from a WS2 derived state at K to G decreases. This would manifest in an increase in PL intensity. As O2 de-intercalates, the interlayer separation decreases, the contribution of WS2 to the CBM at G increases and the PL intensity decreases again. This is consistent with what we observe experimentally in Figure 4 and Figure 5. Understanding the origins of the tunable DoCP is difficult. The combination of spin-orbit coupling and broken inversion symmetry in monolayer WS2 leads to spin-valley locking at the K and K' valleys. The band extrema at K and K' can be independently accessed using CPL, enabling information processing schemes and other valleytronics applications. The excitons are able to steadily scatter to the opposite valley, which reduces the material’s valley and circular polarization. Numerous intervalley scattering mechanisms have been proposed, which are discussed further in Section S7. Phonon-assisted scattering15–18 and the Maialle-Silva-Sham (MSS) exchange interaction16,19–21 are considered to be the most dominant mechanisms in monolayer TMDs. We propose two ideas by which oxygen absorption and desorption in Bi2Se3 shifts the WS2 DoCP. First, higher exciton lifetime correlates to lower DoCP.23–26 Changes in the interlayer coupling strength between the Bi2Se3 and WS2 may facilitate the presence (absence) of a non-radiative recombination pathway that decreases (increases) exciton lifetime. Second, the MSS mechanism, which requires the exchange interaction, is sensitive to the surrounding dielectric environment.41 As oxygen modifies the Bi2Se3 crystal structure and the interlayer region, the dielectric environment is modified, thereby altering the intervalley scattering dynamics. Section S7 contains additional discussion and information. We observe a PL peak position shift due to laser-air exposure, that is reversed through laser- vacuum exposure. After the 1st laser-oxygen exposure, both the PL intensity and peak position evolution follow Fick’s 2nd Law of Diffusion, suggesting they are influenced by the same underlying mechanism. Monolayer TMDs are highly sensitive to their environment, and numerous factors affect the PL peak position,42,43 due in part to tightly bound excitons, whose field lines extend outside the material. As the dielectric environment is modified, the exciton recombination energy and PL peak position can shift. One inconsistency is the observed difference in PL peak position between the s- and s+ configurations (Figure 5g). Although we suspect unidentified equipment error to be most likely, we cannot exclude the possibility that external effects from the Bi2Se3 and oxygen are asymmetrically modifying the K and K’ valleys in WS2. Section S8 contains additional discussion and information. Conclusion We demonstrate a method to tune the PL intensity, peak position, circular polarization, and valley polarization with high spatial selectivity using a laser in ambient on a Bi2Se3-WS2 2D heterostructure. The PL and DoCP can be reliably manipulated within a range, allowing the material to be erased and reused. Experiment and first-principles calculations suggest oxygen diffusion modulates the excitonic recombination pathways, where intercalation (deintercalation), increases (decreases) the probability of radiative recombination. The close fit to Fick’s 2nd law of Diffusion suggests the system is deterministic, enabling high predictability and greater tunability. We demonstrate the possibility for high-resolution and precise tuning of submicron pixels for a variety of technologies, including multistate multidimensional optical data storage, valleytronics, and quantum communications. Methods Material Growth: Monolayer WS2 is synthesized at ambient pressure in 2-inch diameter quartz tube furnaces on SiO2/Si substrates (275 nm thickness of SiO2). Prior to use, all SiO2/Si substrates are cleaned in acetone, IPA, and Piranha etch (H2SO4+H2O2) then thoroughly rinsed in DI water. At the center of the furnace is positioned a quartz boat containing ~1g of WO3 powder. Two SiO2/Si wafers are positioned face-down, directly above the oxide precursor. A separate quartz boat containing sulfur powder is placed upstream, outside the furnace-heating zone, for the synthesis of WS2. The upstream SiO2/Si wafer contains perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylic acid tetrapotassium salt (PTAS) seeding molecules, while the downstream substrate is untreated. The hexagonal PTAS molecules are carried downstream to the untreated substrate and promote lateral growth of the monolayer WS2. Pure argon (65 sccm) is used as the furnace heats to the target temperature. Upon reaching the target temperature of 825 °C, 10 sccm H2 is added to the Ar flow and maintained throughout the 10-minute soak and subsequent cooling to room temperature. Bi2Se3 was grown on top of the monolayer WS2 using chemical vapor deposition (CVD) in a two- zone furnace with a 2” quartz tube. High-purity Bi2Se3 flakes are ground using a mortar and pestle into a fine dust. The powdered Bi2Se3 is placed in a ceramic boat and inserted into the furnace’s quartz tube, and pushed into the center of the furnace’s first zone. The monolayer TMD, which is on an SiO2 substrate, is placed downstream of the Bi2Se3 into the center of the furnace’s second zone. The furnace is pumped down to ~20mTorr. An argon (Ar) carrier gas is flown into the furnace at 80sccm. The Bi2Se3 is heated to 520°C, and the WS2 are heated to 210°C. The ramp rate is ~55°C/min, and the total growth is 27 min. Transmission Electron Microscopy Bi2Se3-WS2 2D heterostructures were transferred onto a holey amorphous SiNx TEM grid using the water-assisted-pick-up transfer method.44 Bright-field imaging, high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) were performed with a JEOL JEM2200FS operating at 200 kV, equipped with a high-speed Gatan OneView camera. The HRTEM images were acquired at selected regions-of-interest as rapidly as possible to minimize sample alteration from the electron beam. The SAED patterns were internally calibrated to the WS2, and an aperture of approximately 200nm was used. Atmospheric measurements: Atmospheric measurements were conducted inside a Janis ST-500 with vacuum, air, N2 and O2 connections. Figure 4 applied a 38.8μW 532nm laser without interruption at a 50x long working distance objective (1.65μW/μm2). Spectra were measured at various intervals with a 0.8 sec. collection time. Figure 5 and Section S6 applied 84.7 μW 588nm laser without interruption at a 50x long working distance objective. Spectra were measured at various intervals with a 0.4 sec. collection time. Computational analysis and fitting: All code as written in Python using the Spyder integrated development environment (IDE). Spyder belongs to the MIT License and is distributed through the Anaconda environment. Each spectrum is time stamped, and our algorithm extracted this info. The curve_fit() function with a variety of initial values and boundary conditions were used to verify fit robustness. The 1-s uncertainty (error) was obtained from the curve_fit() function around the chi-squared minima for the applicable variables, and the error was propagated as appropriate to produce the 2-sigma (95.4% confidence) value shown.37 The fitting and error values were corroborated using cross-validation, where we uniformly removed 20% of the data points from a spectrum and repeated fitting. This was completed five iterations on each spectrum removing a different 20% each time. No notable changes to the fitting were detected, suggesting noise is not skewing the fit. Laser exposure recipes in ambient: Figure 2 applied a low-power (0.762μW) 532nm laser with a 50x objective (0.050μW/μm2) for 620s. A spectra were measured every 2 sec. for a 1 sec. collection time. Intermittent Laser Exposure Recipe for circular polarization data collection: The s++ and s+- spectra are collected at a significantly diminished laser intensity (0.899μW) s+ circular polarized 588nm laser for 10s each using a 100x objective (0.083μW/μm2). The very low laser power at 588nm laser does not appear to modify the sample. The laser intensity is then increased ́15 to 13.5μW for ~125s to controllably modify the 2D heterostructure. Such a recipe ensures that acquired s++ and s+- spectra accurately describe the system, and that the 2D heterostructure is not modified during data collection. Measuring and Removing Circular Polarization System Error: To collect the different circular polarization configurations, the system rotates quarter and half wave plates, which have different transmission profiles, leading to error. To correct for intensity error, we collected numerous made the ansatz that there should be no circular polarization in GaAs, and define the error as the computed the difference. To correct for peak position error, we collected numerous spectra of an as-grown WS2 sample. We made the ansatz that the WS2 peak position between – and -+ should be the same, and define the error as the computed the difference. More work is need to determine whether the difference in peak positions between s-- and s-+ is real or due to error. We do not imply that any difference between the s-- and s-+ peaks is necessarily physically significant. Density Functional Theory Calculations: Our first-principles calculations are based on density functional theory within the projector-augmented wave method45 as implemented in the VASP code.46,47 We use the generalized gradient approximation defined by the Perdew-Burke- Ernzerhof (PBE) functional.48 To determine the properties of the Bi2Se3/WS2 heterostructure we use a 3x3x1 supercell of a single quintuple layer of Bi2Se3 and a 4x4x1 supercell of a single monolayer of WS2 and strain the in-plane lattice parameters of Bi2Se3 to match the in-plane lattice parameters of WS2. We treat the 6s, 6p electrons in Bi, 6s, 5d electrons in W, 3s,3p electrons in S and 4s,4p electrons in Se as valence in our PAW calculations. For the heterostructure calculations we use a (4x4x1) k-point grid when optimizing the structure and a (6x6x1) k—point grid to obtain total energies and electronic structure. We use a vacuum spacing of 20Å along the c-axis to avoid spurious interactions with periodically repeated surfaces. All of our calculations of the electronic structure include spin-orbit coupling. The atomic positions of the heterostructure were optimized with the Grimme-D3 van der Waals correction49 with a force convergence criteria of 5 meV/Å. We note that the PBE functional we use leads to an underestimated band gap for monolayer WS2 and likely underestimates the band gap of single quintuple layer of Bi2Se3. We performed hybrid functional calculations using the Heyd-Scuseria-Ernzerhof HSE06 functional50 to verify that our calculations on the degree of hybridization are not impacted by the magnitude of the band gap in our calculation. Supporting Information AFM Scans (Section S1); Visual Demonstration of Robust Fit Quality (Section S2); Evolution of PL and Raman under laser exposure in different atmospheres (Section S3); Long Term Stability (Section S4); Control Experiments with monolayer WS2 (Section S5); Demonstrating Reversibility of DoCP and valley polarization (Section S6); Amplifying Information on possible origin of tunable DoCP (Section S7).