Unusual Ferrimagnetic Ground State in Rhenium Ferrite M. Hussein N. Assadi∗ School of Materials Science and Engineering, University of New South Wales, Sydney NSW 2052, Australia. Marco Fronzi College of Engineering, Shibaura Institute of Technology, Toyosu, Koto City, Tokyo 135–8548, Japan. Dorian A. H. Hanaor Fachgebiet Keramische Werkstoffe, Technische Universit ̈at Berlin, 10623 Berlin, Germany. (Dated: 2022) Through comprehensive density functional calculations, we predict the stability of a rhenium- based ferrite, ReFe2O4, in a distorted spinel-based structure. In ReFe2O4, all Re and half of the Fe ions occupy the octahedral sites while the remaining Fe ions occupy the tetrahedral sites. All Re ions are predicted to be at a +4 oxidation state with a low spin configuration (S = 3/2), while all Fe ions are predicted to be at a +2 oxidation state with a high spin state configuration (S = 2). Magnetically, ReFe2O4 adopts an unconventional ferrimagnetic state in which the magnetic moment of Re opposes the magnetic moments of both tetrahedral and octahedral Fe ions. The spin-orbit coupling is found to cause a slight spin canting of ∼ 1.5◦. The predicted magnetic ground state is unlike the magnetic alignment usually observed in ferrites, where the tetrahedral cations oppose the spin of the octahedral cations. Given that the density of states analysis predicts a half-metallic character driven by the presence of Re t2g states at the Fermi level, this compound shows promise towards potential spintronics applications. Keywords: Rhenium ferrite, unconventional magnetism, ferrimagnetism, spin canting, density functional theory, spin-orbit coupling INTRODUCTION Searching for and investigating exotic magnetic phases deepens our fundamental knowledge of complex func- tional materials and opens new horizons for novel ap- plications . Ferrites are among the most studied mag- netic materials, with broad applications in spintronics , magnetic data storage , magnetically recoverable catalysts , and microwave guides . The utility of ferrites stems from their high magnetic saturation, high Curie temperatures and controllable coercivity. Fer- rites, most commonly synthesised by reactions of Fe2O3 with a smaller proportion of other metal oxides, encom- pass a wide range of chemical compositions, stoichiome- tries, and crystal structures. However, they mostly crys- tallise into cubic spinel structures, distorted spinels with lower symmetry, or hexagonal structures . Fer- rite cations are situated between octahedral and tetra- hedral voids, created through the oxygens’ closed packed arrangement . Alongside Fe, cation sites may be oc- cupied by Sr, Ba, Pb, or transition metals (TMs). Gen- erally, ferrites are ferrimagnetic where the spin of the tetrahedral cations opposes but does not cancel the spin of the octahedral cations . The second cation’s type and its abundance determine the magnetic hardness and saturation of the resultant ferrite, enabling the design of materials with desirable magnetic phase transition tem- peratures and magnetic coercivity . Typically, in complex materials containing multiple magnetic cations, the magnetic ground state is stabilised through competing ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic superexchange interactions, resulting in frustrated sys- tems with multiple magnetic phase transitions. In fer- rites with only fourth row 3d TM ions, these competi- tions simply stabilise the ferrimagnetic state where the cations on the octahedral site align antiparallel to the cations on the tetrahedral sites . However, in other classes of complex oxides, such as double perovskites, magnetic interactions between 3d and heavier 4d and 5d elements has demonstrated substantially more com- plex magnetic behaviour , often deviating from the rules of thumb established by Goodenough and Kanamori , where exotic magnetic behaviours are often the result of the strong spin-orbit coupling, structural distor- tions and higher bond covalency between heavier TM ions and oxygen. A detailed review of Goodenough-Kanamori rules can be found in the literature . With all these exciting developments in perovskite magnetism, one wonders if there are any similar coun- terparts in ferrites. The idea of harnessing heavier 4d and 5d TM ion ferrites to control anisotropy and magne- tostriction in ferrite was proposed by Hansen and Krish- nan in 1977 . However, since then, this idea has not attracted the attention it deserves. In the present work, we demonstrate the stability of a rhenium-based ferrite ReFe2O4 and discusses its unconventional ferrimagnetic ground state through comprehensive density functional calculations. arXiv:2202.08115v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 16 Feb 2022 2 COMPUTATIONAL SETTINGS Spin-polarised collinear and noncollinear density func- tional calculations were performed with VASP code , using the projector augmented wave method (PAW) and the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange-correlation functional . To improve the electronic band description, adequate intra-atomic inter- action terms (Ueff), based on the Liechtenstein et al. ap- proach , were added to the Fe 3d electrons. The U and J parameters were 3.5 eV and 0.5 eV, respectively, result- ing in an effective U (Ueff) of 3 eV. Comparable values were reported to improve the band description accuracy of ferrites . More specifically a Ueff value of 3 eV is necessary to adequately describe the Fe 3d electrons in oxides . Furthermore, our comprehensive test demon- strated the adequacy of these values (Fig. S1). Accu- rate electronic localisation through the GGA+U formal- ism is essential for obtaining reliable structures as the atomic forces are sensitive to magnetic moments borne on cations . The energy cut-off was set at 650 eV. The precision key for the rest of the parameters was set ACCURATE. The noncollinear calculations were initi- ated with the WAVECAR files calculated with the spin- polarised collinear method to facilitate convergence. To simulate the ReFe2O4 structure, as shown in Fig. 1, two Fe ions in the primitive magnetite cell, with the chemical formula Fe6O8 , were substituted with Re ions. As shown in Fig. 1a–j, we considered all possible rhenium placement scenarios, and for each scenario, we examined various spin alignments, searching for the most stable structure. Substitution at the octahedral sites con- sistently resulted in lower total energy, so we further in- vestigated all plausible spin alignments in ReFe2O4 with only octahedral Re. A dense 7×7×7 k-point mesh, gen- erated with the Monkhorst-Pack scheme of ∼ 0.015 ̊A −1 spacing, consisting of 172 irreducible sampling points in the Brillouin zone, was used for geometry optimisation. For geometry optimisation, the internal coordinates and the lattice parameters were relaxed to energy and force thresholds smaller than 10−6 eV and 0.02 eV ̊A −1 , re- spectively. No symmetry restriction was applied in ge- ometry optimisation to allow relaxation to lower symme- try, should it be more stable. It is well-known that even the simplest of the spinel ferrites, Fe3O4, although cu- bic (Fd ̄3m) at room temperature, transforms to a lower symmetry monoclinic structure (P21/c) below ∼ 125 K, through a Verwey phase transition . RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Two cation types based on coordination exist in the spinel ferrite structure: one that is tetrahedrally coordi- nated and another that is octahedrally coordinated with oxygen ions. The first type represents one-third, while the second represents two-thirds of the total cations in the crystal. We examined three possible rhenium place- ments to identify the most stable position of the Re ions in ReFe2O4. First, both Re ions were placed at the tetra- hedral sites while all Fe ions were left at the octahedral site, which is the typical cationic distribution in spinels. Secondly, one Re ion was placed at the tetrahedral site, and the other Re ion was placed at the octahedral site, a configuration usually referred to as an intermediate spinel. Lastly, both Fe ions were placed at tetrahedral sites, while the octahedral sites were equally occupied with Re and Fe, which is referred to as an inverse spinel. We investigated all these cationic distributions by cal- culating the total energy for two possible ferrimagnetic and ferromagnetic spin alignments. In the ferromagnetic structure, all cations’ spin was set parallel, while in the ferrimagnetic structure, the tetrahedral cations’ spin was set antiparallel to the spin of the octahedral cations. As shown in Fig. 1a and b, when Re ions are located at tetrahedral sites, the total energy is relatively high re- gardless of the direction of the Re spin. However, the ferrimagnetic state is still more stable than the ferro- magnetic one. For intermediate rhenium occupancy, as in Fig. 1c, d, the total energies for both spin alignments were slightly higher than the previous case of complete tetrahedral Re occupation. When Re ions are located at octahedral sites (Fig. 1e– j), the compound’s total energy generally decreased sig- nificantly, indicating greater stability. For instance, the aforementioned ferrimagnetic spin alignment of Fig. 1e was more stable than the counterparts with tetrahedral Re (Fig. 1a) and the mixed Re (Fig. 1c) configurations by approximately 2 eV per unitcell. The stability of the octahedral Re warranted further investigations of other possible spin alignments of ReFe2O4 with octahedrally coordinated rhenium. Accordingly, we calculated all dif- ferent possible ferrimagnetic spin alignments for this fer- rite compound with octahedral Re [see configurations (g) and (h)]. In particular, configuration (h) was the most stable among all. In this ferrimagnetic configuration, the Re ions’ spin direction is antiparallel to the spins of both octahedral Fe and tetrahedral Fe ions. In this case, the spins of the octahedral Fe and tetrahedral Fe ions were parallel. Configuration (e), with similar spin align- ment to a conventional ferrimagnetic inverse spinel such as magnetite, was higher in total energy relative to con- figuration (h) by 0.4446 eV/u.c. (u.c. is unitcell). Con- figuration (g), representing the other possible realisation of the ferrimagnetic alignment, also had higher total en- ergy than configuration (h) by 2.1606 eV/u.c. Likewise, the ferromagnetic state in configuration (f) had higher total energy of 1.1251 eV/u.c. To unambiguously confirm the stability of configura- tion (h), we further calculated the total energy of con- figuration (i), which is quite similar to configuration (h) 3 except that the spins of the two Re ions were set an- tiparallel to examine the strength of the magnetic cou- pling among Re ions. We also examined configuration (j), which is antiferromagnetic; that is, every cation has an antiparallel spin to the one adjacent. Both configu- rations (i) and (j) had total energies higher than that of configuration (h) by more than 1 eV/u.c. The stability of configuration (h) relative to configurations (i) and (j) demonstrates that pairs of ReOct, FeOct and FeTet ions have a strong tendency towards parallel spin alignment among themselves. For the most stable placement of Re which can be expressed as FeTet(ReFe)OctO4, configuration (h), which represents the magnetic ground state, is remarkably sta- ble as flipping to even the second most stable spin con- figuration (e) has an energy cost of 0.4446 eV/u.c. This level of stability is likely to correspond to an ambient Curie temperature in ReFe2O4. This prediction is based on a comparison with CoFe2O4’s stability margin. A spin-flip from ferrimagnetic to ferromagnetic order in CoFe2O4 costs 0.536 eV/u.c. , resulting in a Curie temperature (TC) of 793 K in bulk cobalt ferrite . Furthermore, the mean-field approximation can estimate the Curie temperature based on the magnetic exchange between Fe and Re sublattice systems as follows : 3 2kBTC = � i̸=j J ij, (1) in which kB is the Boltzmann constant and J ij is the pair exchange coupling parameter between sites i and j. Assuming the nearest neighbour interaction between Re and Fe to be the most significant, Equation 1 yields TC = 734.9 K, which is close to the comparison made earlier. Given that Re is a relatively heavier sixth-row tran- sition element, we anticipate that the role of spin-orbit coupling (SOC) is potentially significant in ReFe2O4 . To examine the significance of SOC, we re-optimised the most stable configuration (h) with spin-orbit coupling taken into consideration. The structural relaxation was minor as none of the internal coordinates and the lattice parameters changed by more than ∼ 1%. However, the total energy was lowered to −107.7975 eV/u.c., indicat- ing that SOC accounts for ∼ 0.67% of the total energy. Similarly, SOC is not anticipated to change the magnetic alignment in ReFe2O4 as other competing configurations are also estimated to have their total energy lowered by approximately the same amount when SOC is considered (Table S1). SOC brings about magnetic noncollinearity by coupling the spin to the orbital degrees of freedom, of which the latter depends on the lattice environment. The noncollinear magnetic alignment of ReFe2O4 is shown in Fig. 2a. More precisely, the spins of the Re ions formed a tight angle of 1.329◦ between each other, i.e., nearly par- allel; and the net spin of the Re ions formed an angle of 177.593◦ with the net spin of the Fe ions, i.e., nearly an- tiparallel. It can be seen that the degree of noncollinear- ity is relatively small as the spin directions are to a great extent similar to that of the collinear alignment of con- figuration (h). The net magnetisation of the whole com- pound was calculated to be 6.090 μB/f.u. (f.u. stands for formula unit), which is approximately 1.5 times larger than that of the saturation magnetic moment of mag- netite . A more qualitative description of the effect of the Ueff choice on the total magnetisation and the local magnetisation of the Re and Fe ions in this configuration is given in Table S2. The density of states (DOS) in ReFe2O4, calculated considering SOC, are presented in Fig. 3. Here, DOS is projected onto the axes of an orthogonal frame of which the z axis is parallel to the cp direction of the ReFe2O4 primitive cell. First, we notice that the DOS magnitude along the x and y axes is ∼ 3% of the DOS magnitude along the z axis, indicating a slight deviation from linear- ity and corroborating the magnetic moment orientations obtained in Fig. 2a. Along the z axis, (Fig. 3c), we can see that both FeTet and FeOct are in high-spin and +2 oxidisation states as one spin channel, comprising of five electrons per Fe, for both FeTet and FeOct, is fully occu- pied while the other spin channel is only partly occupied. Therefore, the electronic configuration for Fe2+ Tet is e2 ↑ t3 2 ↑ e1 ↓, while for Fe2+ Oct, the electronic configuration is t3 2g ↑ e2 g ↑ t1 2g ↓. Moreover, Re is in low-spin state with +4 oxidation. According to its partial DOS, Re has a fully occupied t2g ↑ states, which are immediately followed by its empty t2g ↓ states. The Fermi level crosses the tail of t2g ↑ states, giving rise to half-metallic conduction, as no states are available at the Fermi level with opposing net spin direction. Moreover, because of the larger crys- tal field acting on Re’s 5d states, Re’s empty eg states are located at ∼ 4 eV above the Fermi level (Fig. S2). The ReFe2O4 half-metallicity can be utilised for magneto- resistive response or near-perfect spin-polarised current injection . As shown in Fig. 3, the Fe 3d states are spread through the conduction band, hybridising extensively with O, while Re 5d states are mainly concentrated within 2 eV below the Fermi level. Nonetheless, in the region of −2 < E − EFermi < 0, the spin-down Re and Fe states and O 2p states hybridise together, facilitating the mag- netic superexchange interactions that stabilise the mag- netic ground state. Furthermore, the net magnetic mo- ments borne on all cations, as shown in Fig. 2, are smaller than ideal ions. For high spin Fe2+ (3d6), either in tetra- hedral or octahedral coordination, the magnetic moment should have been 4μB. For octahedral Re4+ (5d3), the magnetic moment should have been 3μB. However, since Fe–O or Re–O bonds are not purely ionic but possess a degree of covalency, the magnetisation of transition metal ions is expected to be lower than the purely ionic values . The reduction in magnetisation is more profound 4 (b) Et = –103.7775 eV (FM) (f) Et = –105.9444 eV (FM) (j) Et = –104.2201 eV (AFM) ap bp cp Et = –105.9039 eV (i) Fe Re O (e) Et = –106.6249 eV (FiM-a) Et = –107.0695 eV (FiM-c) (h) Oct Tet (g) Et = –104.9089 eV (FiM-b) Oct Tet Oct Tet (d) Et = –103.5364 eV (FM) Oct Tet (c) Et = –103.7854 eV (FiM) Et = –104.6162 eV (FiM) (a) Tet Oct All starting at ap = bp = cp = 5.961 Å αp = βp = γp = 60o ( ) Fd ̄3m Fig. 1. The spin configurations used for determining the magnetic ground state of ReFe2O4. In configurations a and b, Re ions are at the tetrahedral sites. In c and d, one Re ion is located at the tetrahedral site while the other is located at the octahedral site. In e, f, g, h, i, and j, both Re ions are located at the octahedral sites. The density functional total energy (Et) of each configuration is also shown. FM, FiM, and AFM refer to ferromagnetic, ferrimagnetic and antiferromagnetic, respectively. ∠ReOct–O–ReOct: 86.626o, 86.634o ∠FeOct–O–FeOct: 93.52o, 97.13o ∠FeOct–O–ReOct: 91.29o, 91.32o, 98.81o, 98.84o ∠ReOct–O–FeTet: 123.55o, 124.98o, 128.61o, 134.50o ∠FeOct–O–FeTet: 111.94o, 112.10o, 114.02o, 114.05o, 127.39o, 127.42o cc ac bc (b) ReOct 4+ FeTet 2+ ap = 6.243, bp = 6.198, cp = 6.243 Å αp = 60.24o, βp = 54.43o, γp = 60.24o ac = 5.710 , bc = 6.198, cc = 6.243 Å αc = 119.76o, βc = 117.21o, γc = 90.00o FeOct 2+ ReOct 4+ FeOct 2+ FeTet 2+ ap bp cp 3.549 μB 3.549 μB 3.614 μB 3.614 μB 1.280 μB 1.092 μB (a) FeTet 2+ FeOct 2+ Fe Re O Fig. 2. a The optimised primitive cell of ReFe2O4 with SOC taken into account, along with the magnetic moments borne on all cations. b The conventional representation of the optimised ReFe2O4, which has a triclinic symmetry. In b, all possible bond angles between cations are also presented. The corresponding yellow marks show a representative of each given angle. The lattice parameters shown are either indexed with p or c, indicating the primitive and conventional cell dimensions, respectively. 5 in heavier transition metal ions are their bonds are more covalent . A more quantitative description of the elec- tronic localisation function is provided in Fig. S3. As shown in Fig. 2a, the primitive cell of ReFe2O4 is substantially transformed by geometry optimisation. The lattice parameters of the optimised primitive cell do not conform to the high symmetry of the initial structure as its lattice parameters asymmetrically changed and its volume expanded. The initial structure volume, which was based on magnetite, was 155.225 ̊A 3, while the opti- mised structure had a volume of 163.025 ̊A 3. The ionic radius of Fe can explain the expansion of the volume upon Re substitution at the tetrahedral site. The radius of high-spin Fe2+ Tet in ReFe2O4 is 0.63 ̊A. In magnetite, the tetrahedral site is occupied by Fe3+ with a smaller radius of 0.49 ̊A. The Re4+ radius in octahedral coordi- nation is 0.63 ̊A which is quite close to the replaced Fe3+ radius (0.65 ̊A) and is not expected to be a substantial drive in the structural transformation. We examined the optimised ReFe2O4 primitive cell’s symmetry to investigate the magnetic exchange among all cations. A triclinic symmetry was detected through the FINDSYM symmetry detection algorithm with a tight tolerance of 0.00001 ̊A for lattice parameters (CIF provided in the supplementary information). The con- ventional cell with triclinic symmetry is shown in Fig. 2b. Detecting all possible magnetic exchanges that stabilise the predicted ground state magnetism—configuration (h) re-optimised with SOC considered–is easier in the symmetry-imposed structure. The TM–O–TM bond an- gles for this structure are all listed in Fig. 2. The TM– O–TM bond angles between cations on tetrahedral and octahedral sites are obtuse and thus dominate the mag- netic exchange interactions, as the superexchange inter- action magnitude is proportional to cos2(̸ TM–O–TM). The higher total energy of configuration (g) indicates the superexchange between Re4+ Oct and Fe2+ Tet is antiferromag- netic, while the higher total energy of configuration (e) indicates that the superexchange between Fe2+ Oct and Fe2+ Tet is ferromagnetic. The TM–O–TM bonds among tetrahe- dral sites are all nearly right angles, indicating a minimal orbital overlap favouring weaker ferromagnetic superex- change. The strength of this ferromagnetic exchange can be estimated from the total energy of configurations (g) and (h) of Fig. 1, showing that setting adjacent cations to antiferromagnetic coupling raises the total energy. Finally, we examine the stability of ReFe2O4 in com- peting metallic and oxide phases. The compound’s for- mation enthalpy (∆Hmetallic) was calculated relative to the metallic Re (hexagonal paramagnetic) and Fe (body- centred ferromagnetic) phases, and gaseous O2 was cal- culated as (2) Here, Et is the density functional total energy. ∆Hmetallic -0.4 0.0 0.4 O 2p FeTet 3d FeOct 3d ReOct 4d E − EFermi (eV) (a) ReFe2O4 (x) -0.3 0.0 0.3 (c) ReFe2O4 (z) (b) ReFe2O4 (y) -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 -3 0 3 DOS (eV−1) DOS (eV−1) t2g t2g t2g & eg t2g e & t2 e t2g & eg e & t2 DOS (eV−1) Fig. 3. Partial density of states of ReFe2O4 at its most stable magnetic state [configuration (h) of Fig. 1], calculated with spin-orbital coupling considered. The density of states is projected along an orthogonal frame having the x, y, and z axes. The z axis of this frame coincides along the lattice parameter cp of the primitive lattice parameter, shown in the lower row of Fig. 1. was found to be −5.1924 eV/f.u. The formation enthalpy relative to the competing oxide phase ( ∆Hoxide) was calculated as ∆Hoxide = Et(ReFe2O4) − Et(ReO2)–2Et(FeO). (3) Here, ReO2 was the most stable Re4+ oxide in orthorhom- bic structure (materials project identifier mp-7228 ), and FeO was the most stable Fe2+ oxide in monoclinic structure (materials project identifier mp-1279742 ). ∆Hoxide was found to be −1.1903 eV/f.u. Given the neg- ative ∆H values, we can conclude that ReFe2O4 is stable against decomposition to oxides of its constituent ele- ments and Re4+ and Fe2+. For the future synthesis of ReFe2O4, one can draw inspiration from the recently de- veloped green fabrication methods for ferrites . CONCLUSIONS Using density functional calculations, considering spin- orbit coupling, we predict that a Re-based ferrite ReFe2O4 is stable in a distorted spinel structure with reduced triclinic symmetry (P ̄1), and adopts an uncon- ventional magnetic ordering in where Re spin opposes the spin of both FeTet and FeOct, while FeTet and FeOct 6 have parallel spin alignment among themselves. The net magnetic moment of this compound is evaluated at 6.090 μB/f.u. which is about 1.5 times greater than that of magnetite. The magnetic ground state is remarkably sta- ble as flipping any spin incurs an energetic cost of at least 0.2223 eV/f.u., which is likely to correspond to an am- bient Curie temperature. The compound is predicted to be half-metallic, which implies that this compound may be useful towards applications in spintronics where the spin polarisation of conduction electrons is desired. CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors gratefully acknowledge the funding of this project by computing time provided by the Paderborn Center for Parallel Computing (PC2). VERSION OF RECORD M. Hussein N. Assadi, Marco Fronzi and Dorian A. H. Hanaor Unusual ferrimagnetic ground state in rhenium ferrite Eur. Phys. J. Plus 21. https: //doi.org/10.1140/epjp/s13360-021-02277-z