Metasurface Magnetless Specular Isolator Guillaume Lavigne, Toshiro Kodera and Christophe Caloz February 22, 2022 Abstract We present a (nongyrotropic) metasurface magnetless specular iso- lator. This device reflects as a mirror a wave incident under a specified angle in one direction and absorbs it in the opposite direction. The metasurface is synthesized in terms of bianisotropic susceptibility ten- sors, whose nonreciprocity resides in normal components and exhibits a hybrid electric, magneto-electric nature. The metaparticle is imple- mented in the form of a U-shaped conducting structure loaded by a transistor. The operation principle of the specular isolator is demon- strated by both full-wave simulation and experiment, with isolation levels reaching 41 and 38 dB respectively. This system represents the first realization of a metasurface involving nonreciprocal normal susceptibilities and features a previously unreported type of nonre- ciprocity. Introduction Magnetless nonreciprocity has recently arisen as a solution for breaking Lorentz reciprocity without the drawbacks of the dominant magnetized fer- rite or terbium gallium garnet (TGGs) technologies , namely incom- patibility with integrated circuits, large size, heavy weigth and high cost. Magnetless nonreciprocity can be achieved in linear or nonlinear forms. The latter, being restricted to fixed intensity ranges and non-simultaneous ex- citations in opposite directions , does not represent a viable solution for practical devices . In contrast, linear nonreciprocity may be highly efficient, while bearing potential for novel types of nonreciprocities. In the 1 arXiv:2202.10319v1 [physics.app-ph] 18 Feb 2022 microwave and millimeter-wave regimes, it subdivides into space-time mod- ulated systems (dynamic bias) and transistor-loaded systems (static bias) . The transistor approach is particularly suitable for typical, monochromatic nonre- ciprocal operations (isolation, circulation and nonreciprocal phase-shifting), given their simple, low consumption and inexpensive (DC) biasing scheme, and immunity to spurious harmonics and intermodulation products. Metasurfaces, which have already led to myriad of novel electromagnetic applications , represent an unprecedented opportunity for magnetless nonreciprocity. This opportunity largely stems from the great diversity asso- ciated with bianisotropic metasurface designs, which provides superior con- trol over the fundamental properties of electromagnetic waves , and from the recent development of corresponding powerful synthesis techniques . A number of magnetless nonreciprocal metasurface have been recently reported in transistor-loaded technology, including meta- surfaces realizing nonreciprocal polarization rotation in reflection and in transmission , reflective spatial circulation , transmissive isolation and nonreciprocal reflective beamsteering . However, these metasurfaces are either purely theoretical , or limited in terms of functionality or yet relying on antenna-array technology . This paper reports a transistor-loaded magnetless nonreciprocal metasur- face providing specular isolation, i.e. reflecting the wave incident from one direction as a mirror and absorbing the wave incident from the opposite di- rection. The related asymmetric reflection coefficient is realized by leveraging nonreciprocal normal metasurface susceptibilities . The metasurface is synthesized using Generalized Sheet Transition Conditions (GSTCs) and a corresponding transistor-loaded metaparticle is proposed. The specular iso- lation operation is demonstrated by both full-wave simulation and prototype measurement. Results Specular Isolator Concept A wave incident in the xz-plane at an angle θi = sin−1(kx,i/k) = θ0, with k = ω/c, where θ0 is the operation angle, is specularly reflected, while a 2 wave incident at the angle θi = −θ0 is absorbed by the metasurface. (a) (b) x y z θr = θi θi = −θ0 < 0 θi = θ0 > 0 at an angle θi = θ0 is specularly reflected. (b) A wave incident at an angle θi = −θ0 is absorbed by the structure without reflections. This operation implies the following three conditions on the metasur- face. First, the specular nature of the reflection (θr = θi) requires that the metasurface has no phase gradient, which implies that it must be uniform. Second, the fact that there is only one scattered wave, and hence no diffrac- tion orders, implies, assuming a periodic metasurface structure of period d, that d < |λ/(sin θi ± 1)|. Third, the spatial asymmetry of the reflection im- plies breaking Lorentz reciprocity, which means that the metasurface must be nonreciprocal. In addition, we assume that the metasurface is nongyrotropic, i.e., that it does not rotate the polarization of the incident wave upon reflection. More- over, we shall consider only the p-polarized problem with incidence in the xz-plane, whose nonzero electromagnetic field components are Ex, Ez and Hy, the s-polarized problem being solvable in an analog fashion. 3 Required Susceptibility Components Given its deeply subwavelength thickness, a metasurface can be conveniently modeled by the so-called Generalized Sheet Transition Conditions (GSTCs) . The GSTCs read ˆz × ∆H = jωP∥ − ˆz × ∇Mz, (1a) ˆz × ∆E = −jωM∥ − 1 ε ˆz × ∇Pz, (1b) where the ∆ symbol represents the difference of the fields on both sides of the metasurface, and where P and M are the induced electric and magnetic surface polarization densities, which may be expressed as P = εχeeEav + 1 cχemHav, (2a) M = μχmmHav + 1 cχmeEav, (2b) where the “av” subscript represents the difference of the field on both sides of the metasurface and χee, χem, χme and χmm are the bianisotropic surface susceptibility tensors characterizing the metasurface . Assuming that the metasurface is placed in the xy-plane at z = 0, the field differences and averages are Φav = Φ0+ + Φ0− 2 , ∆Φ = Φ0+ − Φ0−, (3) where Φ denotes either the electric or magnetic field. In general, each of the susceptibility tensors in (2) includes 3 × 3 = 9 components, which leads to a total of 4 × 9 = 36 independent parameters. In the case of the proposed specular isolator, these components should be independent on x and y to satisfy the metasurface uniformity condition. Moreover, the required nonreciprocity implies the global condition χee ̸= χ T ee, χmm ̸= χ T mm or χem ̸= −χ T me. (4) Finally, the nongyrotropy and p-polarized incidence assumptions eliminate 24 out of the 36 susceptibility components, simplifying the bianisotropic sus- ceptibility tensors to χee =   χxx ee 0 χxz ee 0 0 0 χzx ee 0 χzz ee   , χem =   0 χxy em 0 0 0 0 0 χzy em 0   , (5a) 4 χme =   0 0 0 χyx me 0 χyz me 0 0 0   , χmm =   0 0 0 0 χyy mm 0 0 0 0   , (5b) which include overall 9 parameters, where the nonreciprocity condition (4) translate into χxz ee ̸= χzx ee , χxy em ̸= −χyx me or χzy em ̸= −χyz me. (6) The corresponding metasurface for the s-polarization would involve the dual susceptibility components χxx mm, χxz mm, χzx mm, χzz mm, χyx em, χyz em, χxy me, χzy me and χyy ee , with the nonreciprocity condition χxz mm ̸= χzx mm, χyx em ̸= −χxy me or χyz em ̸= −χzy me . Inserting (2) into (1) with (5) leads the following explicit scalar GSTC equations ∆Hy = −jωεχxx ee Eav,x − jωεχxz ee Eav,z − jkχxy emHav,y, (7a) ∆Ex = − jωμχyy mmHav,y − jkχyx meEav,x − jkχyz meEav,z − χxz ee ∂xEav,z − χzz ee∂xEav,z − ηχzy em∂xHav,y, (7b) where ∂x denotes the spatial derivative versus x. Assuming plane wave inci- dence, which allows the substitution ∂x → −jkx, where kx = k sin θ, reduces then (7) to ∆Hy = −jωεχxx ee Eav,x − jωεχxz ee Eav,z − jkχxy emHav,y, (8a) ∆Ex = − jωμχyy mmHav,y − jkχyx meEav,x − jkχyz meEav,z + jkxχxz ee Eav,z + jkxχzz eeEav,z + jkxηχzy emHav,y, (8b) which are the final GSTC equations for the problem at hand. In these relations, the field differences and averages are found from (3) in terms of the reflection and transmission coefficients, R and T. Assuming incidence in the +z direction, theses quantities read ∆Ex = kz k (T − 1 − R), (9a) ∆Hy = (−1 + R + T)/η, (9b) Eav,x = kz 2k(1 + R + T), (9c) Eav,z = kx 2k(1 + T − R), (9d) 5 Hav,y = (1 + T − R)/2η, (9e) where kz = k cos θ. Substituting (9) into (8), and solving for R gives R = 2 C {k2 xχzz ee − k2 zχxx ee − kz[kx(χxz ee − χzx ee ) − k(χxy em − χyx me)] − kkx(χzy em + χyz me) + k2χyy mm}, (10a) where C =2[k2 zχxx ee + k2 xχzz ee − kkx(χzy em + χyz me) + k2χyy mm] + k2(χxx ee χyy mm − χxy emχyx me) − jkz{k2 x(χxz ee χzx ee − χxx ee χzz ee) + 4 − kkx[χzx ee χxy em + χxz ee χyx me − χxx ee (χzy em + χyz (10b) Realizing the specular isolation operation (see Fig. 1) requires breaking the symmetry of the reflection coefficient with respect to x or, equivalently, with respect to kx. In other words, the reflection coefficient (10) must be a non-even function of kx, i.e., R(kx) ̸= R(−kx). (11) Inspecting (10) reveals that this condition requires χxz ee ̸= χzx ee or χzy em ̸= −χyz me, (12) which correspond to the first and third relations in (6), respectively. Thus, breaking reciprocity in reflection can be accomplished only via normal sus- ceptibilities (under the prevailing nongyrotropy assumption ). It can be shown that the second relation in (6), involving tangential susceptibil- ities, breaks reciprocity in the z-direction , which would be useful for transmission-type nonreciprocity. Metasurface Design Susceptibility Derivation The specular isolator metasurface may be designed in the following three steps: i) define the fields related to the desired wave transformations; ii) in- sert these fields into (3) to determine the appropriate field differences and averages; iii) insert these last quantities into (8), and solve the resulting equa- tions for the susceptibility components. According to the analysis performed 6 in Sec. , the susceptibility components obtained by this procedure should automatically respect the condition (12). The field definitions in i) correspond here to the two field transformations represented in Fig. 1. The first field transformation is the specular reflection of the wave incident in the +z-direction at the operation angle θ0 [Fig. 1 (a)]. The related fields are E1,i = cos θ0e−jkxxˆx − sin θ0e−jkxxˆz, H1,i = (e−jkxx/η)ˆy, (13a) E1,r = − cos θ0ejφe−jkxxˆx − sin θ0ejφe−jkxxˆz, H1,r = (ejφe−jkxx/η)ˆy, (13b) where φ is the reflection phase induced by the metasurface. The second trans- formation is the absorption of the wave incident at the angle −θ0 [Fig. 1 (b)]. The related fields are E2,i = cos θ0e−jkxxˆx + sin θ0e−jkxxˆz, H2,i = (e−jkxx/η)ˆy, (14a) E2,r = 0, H2,r = 0. (14b) Successively substituting both (13) and (14) into (3), according to ii), and inserting the resulting expressions into (8), according to iii), leads a system of 2 × 2 = 4 scalar equations with 9 unknowns. This is an underdetermined system with an infinite number of possible sets of susceptibilities. Since the operation of the metasurface has been completely determined at θ0, these sets correspond to different responses at other (unspecified) angles of inci- dence, and represent therefore degrees of freedom, which may be generally leveraged in the design of the metaparticle. Among these degrees of free- dom, the parameters χxy em and χyx me correspond to structural asymmetry along the z-direction , which would imply considerable complexity in the metaparticle design. Therefore, we heuristically set these parameters to zero (χxy em = χyx me = 0). This reduces the number of unknowns to 7, which we shall maintain as degrees of freedom at this point. The resulting system of equations leads to the 2 explicit susceptibility solutions χxx ee = −2j(1 + ejφ) sec θ0 k , (15a) χxz ee = 2jejφ csc θ0 k , (15b) and to the 2 constraint relations χyy mm = −2j cos θ0 + kχzz ee sin2 θ0 + ejφk sin θ0(χzx ee cos θ0 + χzz ee sin θ0) (1 + ejφ)k , (15c) 7 χzy em = −kχyz me + kχzx ee cos θ0 + ejφ(kχyz me + 2j cot θ0) (1 + ejφ)k , (15d) between the remaining 5 susceptibilities. Transistor-loaded Metaparticle The metaparticle structure satisfying the condition (12) (nonreciprocity along the x-direction for p-polarization) and the relations (15) (reflection and ab- sorption at ±θ0) may be devised as follows. Let us start by enforcing the first nonreciprocity condition in (12), namely χxz ee ̸= χzx ee . This condition implies the existence of nonreciprocally related electric dipole responses along x and z, which immediately suggests an L-shape conducting structure loaded by a transistor, operating as a unilateral element (e.g., common-source configu- ration in the case of a FET), in the xz-plane; this configuration is inciden- tally consistent with (15a) and (15b). Such a structure implies in particular a χzz ee response, which generally implies in turn a χyy mm response according to (15c). The latter corresponds to a y-directed magnetic dipole moment, which prompts us to close the L-shape into a loop in the xz-plane. We shall leave the loop open, as is customarily done for compactness in ring res- onators, and we shall terminate the opened ends of the resulting U-shaped loop by T-shaped strips to reduce the size of the metaparticle. All these con- siderations lead to the metaparticle structure represented in Fig. 2, which is composed of conducting strips in the three directions of space, with the spacing between the two xy-plane metallization planes being much smaller than the wavelength (v ≪ l < λ, figure not to scale). We shall next analyze this metaparticle in details to verify that it indeed satisfies all the required conditions and to fully characterize it. tions (incident fields) and responses (dipole moments) in order to determine how the metaparticle realizes the sought after nonreciprocal susceptibility components, although all of the excitations and responses naturally occur simultaneously. Using this approach, we shall next examine the polarizabil- ity responses of the isolated metaparticle, which are directly related to the susceptibilities of the metasurface formed by its periodic repetition . a response of the type χxz ee ̸= χzx ee . On the left, the x-directed incident electric field induces in-phase (v ≪ λ) currents in the two x-directed strips. When they reach the z-directed strip, these currents cancel out, which implies that the electric response along z to the electric excitation along x is zero (pzx ee = 8 x y (a) (b) z pzx ee → χzx ee pxz ee → χxz ee pzy em → χzy em pyz me → χyz me Ex Ex Ez Ez Ez Hy k k k k k H E l v entation corresponding to Fig. 1. (a) Excitation Ex (left) and Ez (right), showing that χzx ee ̸= χxz ee . (b) Excitation from Hy (left) and Ez (right), show- ing that χzy em ̸= −χyz me. The drawing is not to scale: in reality, v ≪ l. The notation pzy em represents the z component of the electric dipole response due to the y component of the magnetic field excitation, and so on. 9 0 → χzx ee = 0). On the right, the z-directed incident electric field induces a current in the z-directed strip. This induces a current only in one of the x-directed strips, given the orientation of the transistor, which implies that the electric response along x to the electric field along z is nonzero (pxz ee ̸= 0 → χxz ee ̸= 0). Thus, the metaparticle corresponds to a specific set of solutions of (15c) and (15d) that is characterized by χzx ee = 0, which simplifies these constraint equations to χyy mm = −2j cos θ0 + (1 + ejφ)kχzz ee sin2 θ0 (1 + ejφ)k , (16a) and χzy em = −χyz me − 2jejφ cot θ0 (1 + ejφ)k . (16b) Equation (16b) reveals that the metaparticle must also satisfy the second nonreciprocity condition in (12). Let us see whether this is indeed the case with the help of Fig. 2 (b). On the left, the y-directed incident magnetic field induces a current in the metaparticle loop. The current flowing in the z-directed strip implies an electric response along z due to the magnetic excitation along y (pzy em → χzy em). On the right, the z-directed incident electric field induces a current in z-directed strip. This can induce a current only in one of the two x-directed strips given the to the orientation of the transistor, which produces only a weak magnetic loop along y (pyz me → χyz me). This implies that χzy em ̸= −χyz me, which is consistent with the requirement of (16b). We have thus found that the metasurface constituted of the heuristic metaparticle shown in Fig. 2 breaks reciprocity in two distinct fashions, through χzx ee ̸= χxz ee and χyz me ̸= χzy em. These two types of nonreciprocity repre- sent, both in isolation and in combination, novel metasurface nonreciprocal responses. Moreover, these responses, involving normal susceptibility compo- nents, were deemed particularly difficult to realize in practice . The asym- metry of the electric susceptibility tensor, χee ̸= χ T ee, also appears in magne- tized plasmas, but conjunctly with gyrotropy, while the non-antisymmetry between the magneto-electric susceptibility tensors, χem ̸= −χ T me, also ap- pears in the transmissive nonreciprocal metasurface in , but in terms of tangential nonreciprocal components. This unit cell corresponds to the metaparticle in Fig. 2, except for the ad- ditional supporting substrate, backing ground plane and conducting front 10 frame, where the ground plane ensures impenetrability of the structure for all angles of incidence (extra specification) and the front frame isolates the unit cells from each other (hence ensuring direct correspondence between the polarizabilities and the susceptibilities). The parameters of the unit cell were optimized to satisfy (15a) and (15b) and one of the possible solutions of (16). f x x y y z ground plane p p p p l w v d q q h t t (a) (b) substrate of relative permittivity εr = 4.5, backed by a ground plane and with a front conducting frame. (a) Perspective view (without the front frame, for visibility). (b) Top view. Simulation and Experiment The transistor-loaded unit cell in Fig. 3 was simulated with periodic bound- ary conditions using a full-wave electromagnetic simulator (CST Microwave Studio) and the unilateral transistor circuit was modelled as an ideal iso- lator with a phase shifter. An FR4 slab with εr = 4.5 was used as the substrate and the geometrical parameters of the metasurface were optimized to realize the specular isolation operation. The metasurface was designed to provide specular isolation between the angles ±18◦ at the frequency of f sim 0 = 6.56 GHz for p-polarization. Figure 4 presents the simulation results. R(−18◦)/R(+18◦) (see Fig. 1) reaching 41.75 dB at f sim 0 . Figure 4(b) shows the angular response of the reflection coefficient at the operating frequency 11 of f sim 0 , whose strong asymmetry with respect to broadside (θi = 0) is the expected signature of the device. -20 -10 0 10 20 -50 -40 -30 -20 -10 0 6 6.2 6.4 6.6 6.8 7 -50 -40 -30 -20 -10 0 (a) (b) reflection (dB) frequency (GHz) θi isolation (dB) f sim 0 = 6.56 GHz R(−18◦) R(+18◦) θi = −18◦ θi = +18◦ in Fig. 3 and parameters p = 22.5 mm, w = 14 mm, l = 20 mm, v = 1.6 mm, d = 3.2 mm, q = 32.5 mm, h = 1 mm and t = 2 mm. (a) Isolation versus frequency for incidence at θi = ±18◦ (design angle of isolation). (b) Specular reflection coefficient versus incidence angle (θi) at the operating frequency f sim 0 = 6.58 GHz. type, composed of 2×3 unit cells. It includes two FR4 substrates of thickness 1.6 mm glued together. The device was measured by a bistatic measurement system with two horn antennas symmetrically aiming (under the same an- gle with respect to the normal of the metasurface) at the metasurface. The reflection coefficient was measured for angles sweeping the sector extending frequency for the incidence angle of θi = ±20◦. An isolation of more than 38 dB is observed at the frequency of f exp 0 = 6.797 GHz, whose discrepancy (0.217 GHz, i.e., 3.3%) may be explained by the small gap between the two substrates that was not taken into account in the simulation and by the dif- ference between the actual transistor circuit response and the ideal isolator model used in simulation. Figure 5(c) shows the measured angular reflec- tion coefficient at the operating frequency of f exp 0 . Here, the discrepancy 12 translates into an angular difference (2◦). -20 -10 0 10 20 -40 -30 -20 -10 0 6 6.2 6.4 6.6 6.8 7 -40 -30 -20 -10 0 (a) (b) (c) reflection (dB) frequency (GHz) θi isolation (dB) port 2 port 1 S12 S21 f sim 0 f exp 0 (a) Fabricated prototype (left) and experimental setup (right). (b) Isolation versus frequency for incidence at θi = ±20◦ (maximal isolation angle). (c) Specular reflection coefficient versus incidence angle (θi) the operating frequency of f exp 0 = 6.797 GHz. Discussion We reported a metasurface magnetless specular isolator. We derived, under the assumption of nongyrotropy, the corresponding bianisotropic susceptibil- ity tensors, which include unusual, normal components, and which represent a novel type of nonreciprocity. We designed a metaparticle realizing these susceptibility tensors under the form of a U-shaped conducting structure loaded by a transistor, and demonstrated the overall metasurface by full- wave simulation and experimental results in the microwave regime. 13 Potential applications of this device include nonreciprocal reflectors, non- reciprocal waveguide walls, nonreciprocal quantum state mediation, advanced analog processing, as well as more sophisticated nonreciprocal electromag- netic wave transformations.