Quantum phase diagram of high-pressure hydrogen Lorenzo Monacelli,1∗ Michele Casula,2∗ Kosuke Nakano,3,4 Sandro Sorella,4 Francesco Mauri1∗ 1University of Rome, “Sapienza”, Dipartimento di Fisica, Piaz.le Aldo Moro 5, 00185, Rome, Italy 2Institut de Minéralogie, de Physique des Matériaux et de Cosmochimie, Sorbonne Université, CNRS UMR7590, MNHN, 4 Place Jussieu, 75005, Paris, France 3Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (JAIST), Asahidai 1-1, Nomi, Ishikawa 923-1292, Japan 4International School for Advanced Studies (SISSA), Via Bonomea 265, 34136, Trieste, Italy ∗To whom correspondence should be addressed: lorenzo92monacelli@gmail.com; francesco.mauri@uniroma1.it; michele.casula@impmc.upmc.fr The interplay between electron correlation and nuclear quantum effects makes our understanding of elemental hydrogen a formidable challenge. Here, we present the phase diagram of hydrogen and deuterium at low temperatures and high-pressure (P > 300 GPa) by accounting for highly accurate elec- tronic and nuclear enthalpies. We evaluated internal electronic energies by diffusion quantum Monte Carlo, while nuclear quantum motion and anhar- monicity have been included by the stochastic self-consistent harmonic ap- proximation. Our results show that the long-sought atomic metallic hydrogen, predicted to host room-temperature superconductivity, forms at 577(10) GPa (640(14) GPa in deuterium). Indeed, anharmonicity pushes the stability of this phase towards pressures much larger than previous theoretical estimates or attained experimental values. Before atomization, molecular hydrogen trans- 1 arXiv:2202.05740v2 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 14 Feb 2022 forms from a conductive phase III to another metallic structure that is still molecular (phase VI) at 422(40) GPa (442(30) GPa in deuterium). We predict clear-cut signatures in optical spectroscopy and DC conductivity that can be used experimentally to distinguish between the two structural transitions. Ac- cording to our findings, the experimental evidence of metallic hydrogen has so far been limited to molecular phases. In 1968, Ashcroft predicted that atomic metallic hydrogen is a room temperature supercon- ductor (1). During the last fifty years, a lot of effort was devised to synthesize atomic hydrogen in laboratory under stable conditions. Nonetheless, the challenge proved more difficult than ex- pected. Solid hydrogen at high pressures exhibits a very rich phase diagram with the presence of five different molecular phases, labeled from I to V (2–4). Recently, a new phase transition has been observed above 420 GPa into a metallic state by infrared (IR) absorption measure- ments (5), i.e. phase VI. However, Eremets et al. (6) measured the Raman and reflectivity spectra of hydrogen up to 480 GPa without incurring in any evidence of a sudden change in the sample. At even larger pressures, Diaz and Silvera (7) claimed to have synthesized the atomic metallic hydrogen from reflectivity measurements at 495 GPa, with reflectivity data in good agreement with theoretical predictions (8), although the reliability of their observation has been questioned (9, 10). Further uncertainties come from technical difficulties in determining pressure at these extreme conditions, which could lead to a mismatch of up to 80 GPa (11), jeopardizing the possibility to reproduce results by independent studies. The structural characterization of these phases is challenging since both neutron and X-ray diffraction experiments require sample sizes non-compatible with pressures larger than 250 GPa (12) in hydrostatic conditions. Numerical ab initio simulations play consequently a crucial role in understanding the phase diagram and can in principle address the following questions: Have atomic metallic hydrogen been synthesized yet? At which pressure do we expect to stabilize it? 2 What is the effect of isotope substitution? Nevertheless, also ab initio approaches have been plagued so far by severe limitations. In- deed, as hydrogen is the lightest element, its nucleus is subject to huge quantum fluctuations that can largely affect its structural properties. Indeed, nuclear quantum effects have been shown to completely reshape the Born-Oppenheimer (BO) energy landscape in hydrogen-rich materials at high-pressure (13–15), invalidating the phase diagram obtained with classical simulations. Furthermore, many competing structures differ in enthalpy by less than 1 meV per atom in a broad range of pressures (16). This makes the identification of the ground state very sensitive to approximations, like the choice of the exchange-correlation functional in density functional theory (DFT) calculations. To overcome this issue, more sophisticated and accurate theories are required, such as the quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) methods (17). For these reasons, the es- tablishment of theoretical calculations fully accounting for both electron correlation energy and lattice anharmonicity at the same level of accuracy is fundamental to determine the hydrogen phase diagram at such high pressure. To answer the aforementioned questions, we performed hydrogen phase-diagram calcula- tions at a methodological cutting edge, by combining the highly accurate description of electron correlation, within diffusion quantum Monte Carlo (DMC), and the anharmonic lattice opti- mization accounting for nuclear quantum effects, within the stochastic self-consistent harmonic approximation (18–21) (SSCHA). DMC is a well-established framework that provides the most accurate internal energies of solid hydrogen (16,22–24). Here, it has been coupled to SSCHA in a seamless fashion with the aim of including both electronic and nuclear contributions in a non-perturbative way. Indeed, SSCHA can outperform other approximations to compute anhar- monic phase diagrams in hydrogen (16, 24, 25) thanks to its variational nature in determining free energy differences and its ability to relax atomic positions and lattice vectors. In our ap- proach, SSCHA provides both vibrational energies and average nuclear positions (centroids), 3 calculated from nuclear quantum fluctuations developing on the top of a DFT-BLYP (26) energy landscape. The resulting centroids crystal structure is used to compute DMC electronic internal energies, that are combined with the SSCHA zero-point energies of the anharmonic lattice. We modeled phase III as the monoclinic C2/c-24 structure (27)1, which is the best represen- tative of this phase (Fig. 1a). Indeed, not only is it the most stable in its pressure range, but also it reproduces optical transmission and reflectivity, Raman and IR experimental data (28). Besides C2/c-24, we took into account the Cmca-12 crystalline symmetry (Fig. 1b), a new hexagonal structure with P62/c-24 symmetry (Fig. 1c), and the Cmca-4 structure (Fig. 1d) as the most promising molecular geometries for phase VI. Cmca-12 has firstly been suggested by Pickard and Needs as an alternative candidate for phase III (27), and more recently proposed as phase VI (22). Cmca-4 (27) is the ground state in the harmonic DFT phase diagram with common functionals (PBE and BLYP) over a large pressure range, but considerably disfavored by the most accurate QMC internal energies (16, 22). We discovered the new P62/c-24 struc- ture by relaxing the symmetry constraint on the C2/c-24 with quantum anharmonic fluctuations above 320 GPa at the DFT-BLYP level of theory. It is made of graphene-like sheets alternat- ing with molecular layers, conferring to the phase similar optical properties to graphite. It is a saddle-point of the BO energy landscape, stabilized by quantum fluctuations (see Supplemen- tary Materials (SM)). However, it turns out that also this crystalline symmetry is disfavored by the QMC energies. Finally, we simulated the atomic phase I4/amd-2, also named Cs-IV (22) (Fig. 1e). Accord- ing to DFT, it is the most stable atomic symmetry beyond the molecular phases, and it is the one where room-temperature superconductivity has been predicted (29). In Figure 1, we report the centroid positions of these structures at 650 GPa with a visualization of the amplitude of quantum fluctuations. 1In line with previous literature, we name phases with the symmetry group followed by the number of atoms in 4 Structures considered for the low-temperature high-pressure phase diagram of hy- drogen. Colored balls are the average centroid positions, sticks represent the H2 molecules, the cloud of smaller gray balls is a set of 250 configurations that sample the quantum probability distribution at 0 K. All structures, apart from the atomic one, are made of layers, of which we report only one. P62/c-24 is made of alternating layers, one with atoms arranged in a hon- eycomb lattice (panel b), the other with molecular H2 in a C2/c-24 arrangement (not reported here). 5 PHASE III PHASE VI Static Phase Diagram 503 GPa PHASE III PHASE VI Static Phase Diagram 503 GPa PHASE III ATOMIC Harmonic Phase Diagram (H) 490 GPa PHASE III PHASE VI ATOMIC Harmonic Phase Diagram (D) 503 GPa 604 GPa 300 350 400 450 500 550 600 650 700 P [GPa] 10 0 10 20 30 Enthalpy [meV/atom] III VI ATOMIC a) Anharmonic Phase Diagram (H) 300 350 400 450 500 550 600 650 700 P [GPa] III VI ATO MIC b) Anharmonic Phase Diagram (D) Legend C2/c-24 Cmca-12 Cs-IV Cmca-4 P62/c-24 Stochastic error Systematic error top we report the phase diagram obtained by neglecting nuclear zero-point energy (static lattice) and with the harmonic zero-point energy. For the final anharmonic phase diagram we explicitly report the enthalpies of different phase with respect to phase III (C2/c-24). The most stable structure is the lowest in enthalpy at a given pressure. Enthalpies are evaluated at the DMC level. Hydrogen transforms from the transition pressures and qualitatively affects the phase diagram of hydrogen. Stochastic errors (black bars) are linearly propagated from DMC and SSCHA errors in total energy to pressure. Systematic errors (red bars) are estimated by changing the reference structure for DMC calculation (see SM for more details). 6 We present the complete phase diagram for hydrogen (H) and deuterium (D) in Figs. 2(a) and 2(b), respectively. On the top of Figure 2, we report also the phase diagram computed by neglecting the nuclear zero-point motion (static lattice), and the one with the harmonic zero- point energy. Hydrogen transforms into the atomic metal at 577(15) GPa, much above the pressure pre- dicted neglecting anharmonicity. The isotope shift of this transition is one of the biggest ever reported, as deuterium transits into its atomic metallic state at 640(14) GPa. Anharmonicity modifies the structure of all molecular phases, stretching the molecular bonds and softening the H2 molecular vibrations by about 1000 cm−1 (28). Thus, the relaxation of anharmonic energy strongly favors molecular phases. Even though the anharmonic contributions significantly impact the energy difference be- tween molecular and atomic phases, the latter turns out not to be as harmonic as suggested previously (29). Indeed, we found that Cs-IV exhibits a prominent anharmonicity in the cell shape. The only free parameter of the Cs-IV structure is the c/a ratio of the tetragonal lattice. The anharmonicity increases the c/a ratio by about 0.12, independently of the pressure and the level of the electronic theory employed. A recent path integral molecular dynamics calculation also showed a nontrivial anharmonicity in the Cs-IV phase (30), in agreement with us. The cor- rect simulation of the c/a structural parameter has relevant consequences on the superconduct- ing properties: by varying the c/a at a fixed volume, the Cs-IV undergoes a Lifshitz transition that enhances the density of states (DOS) at the Fermi level. Quantum anharmonic fluctuations shift c/a away from the Lifshitz transition, preventing the enhancement of the superconducting critical temperature in the range of pressure where this phase is stable (see SM). Before becoming an atomic metal, hydrogen undergoes another phase transition between two molecular phases (III→ VI). This transition occurs at 422(40) GPa for H (442(30) GPa for the primitive cell. 7 D), in agreement with the experimental results of Loubeyre et al. (5). The experimental marker of this phase transition is a sudden drop of the transmittance in the near IR region, ascribed to the closure of the direct bandgap in correspondence to a structural rearrangement. However, other experiments exploring the same pressure range observed the sample under visible light without spotting any trace of phase transition (6,10). To investigate this situation, we computed the optical properties in the near IR and visible range for phase III (C2/c-24), and for the struc- ture we predict to be stable above 422 GPa, namely Cmca-12. Our calculations account for electron-phonon interaction non-perturbatively. The electronic bands are computed within the modified Becke-Jonson meta-GGA (31), which shares a similar accuracy with hybrid function- als and self-consistent GW calculations, by following the same methodology discussed in (28). We find that the Cmca-12 structure does not transmit light in the IR around the transition pres- sure, in contrast with phase III (C2/c-24), as shown in Figure 3. Our data explain the drop in IR transmittance observed in the experiment (5) and, thus, support the assignment of phase VI to the Cmca-12 symmetry. Moreover, both phase III and VI display an almost identical low reflectivity in the visible window of 1.8-3.2 eV (Figure 4), so they are almost indistinguishable under visible light. This explains why experiments that explored the required pressure did not observe the phase transition (6,7). We also predict a resistance drop at the phase transition, as- sociated with an increase of the electronic DOS at the Fermi level. Conductivity measurements on hydrogen (6) stop just before the transition pressure. The sudden rise in conductivity is an independent feature that can unambiguously prove the transition to phase VI. Our results differ from a previous theoretical work (32), which adopted a different approximation, where optical electron-hole excitations involving phonons outside the center of the Brillouin zone are not in- cluded. Interestingly, Cmca-12 is never the ground state of hydrogen with harmonic zero-point energy, and it is stabilized by anharmonicity. In Figure 4, we report the reflectivity data for the phases III, VI and the atomic one as 8 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Transmittance P = 260 GPa 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 P = 355 GPa 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 P = 460 GPa Cmca-12 (VI) C2/c-24 (III) 0 1 2 3 Energy [eV] 105 106 Conductivity [ 1m 1] Both Insulators 0 1 2 3 Energy [eV] 105 106 Metal Insulator 0 1 2 3 Energy [eV] 105 106 Both Metals panels) at various pressures, comparing phase III (C2/c-24, blue solid lines) with phase VI (Cmca-12, vi- olet dashed lines). The rainbow colors match their respective energy in the visible spectrum. The arrows highlight differences in the optical properties between the two phases. We observe the transmittance of phase VI dropping down at lower energies than phase III. This phase is already completely opaque at 355 GPa. Also, DC conductivity is higher in phase VI than phase III. The increase of conductivity around zero energy is the Drude peak and it is a signature of the indirect band gap closure (metallicity). Reflectivity and electronic density of states are reported in SM (Figure 18). 9 pressure increases. At each pressure, we show a photo-realistic render of high-pressure solid hydrogen sample in vacuum, simulated by solving the Fresnel equation as implemented in the Mitsuba2 software (33). Phase VI becomes gradually more reflective upon increasing pressure, until it transforms into the atomic Cs-IV at about 577 GPa, where it becomes shiny, reflecting almost 80 % of the visible light. Despite being significantly attenuated by vibrational disorder, the sudden rise of reflectivity in the visible light is a key signature of the molecular-to-atomic transition. Together with reflectivity, also the static conductivity gradually increases upon load- ing pressure and jumps to higher value at the transition to the atomic Cs-IV phase (see SM). In contrast to phase VI, the atomic phase shows no significant variation of reflectivity and conduc- tivity with pressure. Interestingly, the quantum nuclear fluctuations have an opposite effect on molecular phases, where they enhance reflectivity, than on the atomic phase, in which the re- flectivity is strongly suppressed. The suppression of reflectivity in the atomic phase was already found in other works (8,34). In conclusion, the hydrogen phase diagram based on both highly accurate electronic internal energies computed by QMC and anharmonic nuclear quantum fluctuations provided by SSCHA, confirms that hydrogen undergoes a first-order phase transition from a conductive phase III with experiments (5). We predict the transition towards atomic metallic hydrogen to occur at about 577 GPa, a much larger pressure than those reached so far by experiments (7). Our results indicate that the synthesis of atomic hydrogen has still to be fulfilled.