1 Metal-insulator transition via control of spin liquidity in a doped Mott insulator Hiroshi Oike1*, Kazuya Miyagawa1, Hiromi Taniguchi2, Hiroyuki Okamoto3, Kazushi Kanoda1* 1 Department of Applied Physics, University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0032, Japan. 2 Department of Physics, Saitama University, Saitama, Saitama 338-8570, Japan. 3 Department of Quantum Medical Technology, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa 920-0942, Japan *Corresponding author. E-mail: oike@ap.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp (H.O.); kanoda@ap.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp (K.K.) 2 Quantum spin liquid states, in which spins are quantum-mechanically delocalized in direction, have been so far studied for charge-localized Mott insulators arising from strong repulsive interaction1-11. Recently, however, it was found that the doped Mott insulator with a triangular lattice, -(ET)4Hg2.89Br8, exhibits both spin-liquid-like magnetism12 and metallic electrical conduction12-17. Thus, it is now possible to experimentally explore how the spin liquidity affects the electrical conduction, an issue that has received a great deal of theoretical attention9-11,18-20. Here, with a newly developed method to combine uniaxial and hydrostatic pressures, we investigate the electrical conduction in the doped Mott insulator with controlling the triangular lattice geometry and the repulsion strength which determines the spin-liquidity1-8 and Mottness21-23, respectively. We found that, in a strongly interacting regime, the electronic state drastically changes from an insulator to a Fermi liquid via a non-Fermi liquid with varying geometrical frustration, which suggests that spin liquidity promotes delocalization of charges. This result indicates that frustration in spin degrees of freedom has a decisive impact on the transport of charges through the entanglement of spin and charge in a doped Mott insulator. Correlated electrons in solids harbor a range of emergent phenomena stemming from the competition between localization and delocalization. The particle-like charge localization is induced by mutual interactions as best manifested in the Mott insulator or Wigner crystal, however, which is delocalized into extended waves by reducing the interactions, or partially removing or adding electrons24. Diverse phenomena of current interest such as unconventional superconductivity emerge on the verge between localization and delocalization, regulated by the interaction strength or carrier doping12-26. On the other hand, spin degrees of freedom also exhibit a similar competition in a different way. Akin to the localization of charges, interacting spins usually fix their directions in a classical manner at low temperatures, where quantum nature barely appears as spin contraction27. However, when spins stay on lattices of particular geometries like triangular lattices where inter-site 3 interactions are geometrically frustrated, the quantum fluctuations are vitalized and most highlighted by the emergence of the quantum spin liquid (QSL) free from the classical orders even at absolute zero1-11. Thus, interaction strength, doping and frustration are key parameters to emergent phenomena, which have been indeed fertilized through varying these parameters albeit independently so far. If they are controlled in a combined manner, it would open new parameter space for exploring electronic phases and phenomena because, in strongly correlated electron systems, charge and spin degrees of freedom are intertwined28-32. As an experimental challenge in this line, the present work investigates a doped QSL candidate under the combined variation of interaction and frustration, using a sophisticated pressure technique developed here. A global metal-insulator phase diagram illustrating highly susceptible charge-state in the doped QSL to frustration as well as interaction is revealed. The material investigated here is the layered organic conductor, -(ET)4Hg2.89Br8 (-HgBr hereafter), comprised of conducting ET layers and insulating Hg2.89Br8 layers (Fig. 1a)13,33,34. In the ET layer, ET dimers form a triangular lattice represented by the transfer integrals of t and t’ with t’/t of 1.02, suggesting a nearly isotropic triangular lattice (Fig. 1b, c)7,26. The ratio of the on-dimer-site Coulomb repulsion U to the bandwidth W is 1.11, which exceeds the value for the triangular-lattice QSL Mott insulator, -(ET)2Cu2(CN)3 (-Cu2(CN)3 hereafter)1,12,15. Noticeably, the nonstoichiometric Hg2+ ions forming a fixed incommensurate lattice with the ET dimer lattice shifts the filling of the antibonding band of the ET dimers from half-filling by 11%33,34, as confirmed by Raman spectroscopy35. According to previous studies, -HgBr is a non-Fermi liquid metal with spin susceptibility nearly perfectly scaled to that of the QSL candidate, -Cu2(CN)3, and thus is a doped QSL candidate12. From experimental point of view, the high compressibility of organic materials is an advantage for the pressure control of electronic states22,23. Previous experiments revealed that hydrostatic pressure induces a non-Fermi liquid to Fermi liquid crossover in the normal state15,16 and a BEC to BCS crossover in the superconducting condensate16. The application 4 of uniaxial pressure deforms the triangular lattice and is expected to vary frustration strength1-8, 36. We simultaneously compress and deform the triangular lattice of -HgBr by hydrostatic and uniaxial pressures combined in a controllable manner. A single crystal of -HgBr is placed in a conventional piston cylinder cell filled with Demnum oil s-20, a liquid pressure medium, which solidifies on cooling (for more details, see methods). Thus, pressure applied by pressing the piston is hydrostatic when the oil remains liquid (blue region in Fig.1d) but is uniaxial under the solidified oil at high pressure and/or low temperature (yellow region in Fig. 1d). In pressure sequences #1 and #2, we push the piston at room temperature until the piston pressure reaches a target value Pt exceeding 1.1 GPa, at which the resistance of the strain gauges confirms that the oil has solidified (Supplementary Fig. 1a); in these processes, the sample is under hydrostatic pressure up to 1.1 GPa and then subjected to a uniaxial pressure of Pt −1.1 GPa. In pressure-temperature sequences #3 and #4, we initially push the piston at ambient temperature until a target hydrostatic pressure (< 1.1 GPa) was reached. Then, the pressure cell is cooled down to a temperature below the solidification point of the oil and further pushed the piston up to a target piston pressure Pt (for more details, see methods); in the sequence #3 (#4), a hydrostatic pressure of 0.5 GPa (0.2 GPa) and a uniaxial pressure of Pt − 0.5 GPa (Pt − 0.2 GPa) were applied (Supplementary Fig. 1b). This pressurization method allows one to simultaneously apply hydrostatic pressure Ph and uniaxial pressure Pu in a combined way (Fig. 1e). The application of hydrostatic pressure to -HgBr inevitably causes deformation as well as compression of the triangular lattice and likewise the uniaxial pressure induces compression as well. Thus, it is required to relate the pressure values (Ph, Pu) to the parameters (U/W, t'/t) based on the structure and band calculation. Because of difficulty in experimentally determining the exact atomic configurations in the present pressure conditions, we made the following assumptions on the molecular arrangements under pressure. Firstly, 5 we determined the lattice constants of -HgBr with using the reported compressibility values of -(ET)2Cu(NCS)2 under hydrostatic pressure and the strain values separately measured with strain gauge under uniaxial pressure. Then, we determined the molecular arrangements, assuming that ET molecules are so rigid as not to deform, the relative coordinates of the molecular centers are invariant and the orientation of ET changes by the same angle as the arctan(b/c), where b and c are the lattice constants of the b- and c-axes. Using the molecular arrangements thus determined, we calculated the transfer integrals between the molecular orbitals by the extended Hückel plus tight binding method, which gave the values of U, W, t, and t’ of the dimer model. Thus, we could locate the pressure sequences #1-4 in the U/W-t'/t plane as shown in Fig. 1f. The detail and validity of the present method is discussed in supplementary information. We compare the temperature variation of in-plane resistivity  under different pressure conditions, (Ph, Pu), prepared by the pressurization sequences for generating uniaxial sequences reproduced the previous results under hydrostatic pressure. The behaviour of  strongly depends on the direction of the applied uniaxial strain as well as on the value of Ph indicating that the electronic phase depends on both uniaxial and hydrostatic pressures. First, we examine the directional dependence of the uniaxial strain effect on . #1 and #2, where pressure up to 1.1 GPa is hydrostatic and further pressure exceeding 1.1 GPa gives uniaxial strains parallel to b-axis (#1) and c-axis (#2) with Ph = 1.1 GPa. At hydrostatic pressures up to 1.1 GPa,  shows metallic behavior with smaller values at higher Ph. Under b-axis strain caused by further press (Pub= 0.3, 0.6, 0.9 and 1.3 GPa with Ph = 1.1 GPa on sequence #1), the metallic behavior is further enhanced with the increase of Pu. However, under c-axis strain (Puc = 0.2, 0.5, 0.8, 1.1 and 1.3 GPa with Ph = 1.1 GPa on sequence #2), non-metallic behaviour appears at high temperatures in a high-Pu range, (Fig. 6 2a). To characterize the temperature dependence of  in the low-temperature metallic state, we examined the temperature-dependent exponent  by fitting the form of  = o + AT to the experimental data for various Pu values with Ph = 1.1 GPa below 15 K. As seen in Fig. 2b, the c-axis pressurization makes the system trend toward a non-Fermi liquid ( = 1), whereas the b-axis pressurization stabilizes a Fermi liquid ( = 2). Evidently, electrons show contrasting responses to the distortion direction of the triangular lattice. The appearance of non-metallic behavior under c-axis strain was totally unexpected. Thus, we further examined the c-axis strain effect with lower values of Ph = 0.5 GPa (Puc = 0.5, 0.7, 1.0, 1.3, 1.6 and 2.0 GPa with Ph =0.5 GPa on sequence #3) and Ph = 0.2 GPa (Puc = 0.9, 1.1, 1.4 and 1.7 GPa with Ph =0.2 GPa on sequence #4); namely, the triangular lattice is distorted under more strongly interacting conditions. The results are shown in Fig.3: note that the scale of the vertical axis is logarithmic. As Ph is lowered, the magnitude of  increases and exceeds 1  cm under uniaxial pressure with Ph of 0.2 GPa (Fig. 3). The  values at room temperature are on the order of 10-2  cm in all pressures measured; however,  increases by two orders of magnitude on cooling from 300 K down to 100 K, indicating the emergence of an insulating state with a charge gap of about 1000 K (Supplementary Fig. 2), which is comparable to the values of the Mott insulating phases in non-doped -ET compounds. The resistivity drops at low temperatures possibly come from a tiny fraction of metallic domains; the residual resistivity of 1  cm under Puc = 0.9, 1.1, 1.4 and 1.7 GPa with Ph = 0.2 GP is two or three orders of magnitude over the Mott-Ioffe-Regel limit, ruling out the bulk metallicity. To situate the low-temperature electronic states in the U/W-t’/t plane, we made a contour plot of the  values at 10 K in this plane (Fig. 4a).  takes large values in a low t’/t region and decreases with increasing t’/t, indicating the pronounced frustration-dependence of the ground state of -HgBr. Figure 4b represents the t’/t dependences of the  values at U/W ~ 1 in the contour plot and the temperature exponent  of  and the inset shows the 7 temperature dependence of  for t’/t =0.87, 0.89, 0.97 and 1.12 at a fixed U/W value of ~ 1. It is evident that the insulating state emerging at low t’/t crosses over to a non-Fermi liquid and then to a Fermi liquid as t’/t increases; namely, a non-Fermi liquid on the triangular lattice transitions to an insulator when the lattice is distorted towards a square lattice, but to a Fermi liquid when it is oppositely distorted toward the quasi-one-dimensional coupled chains. Thus, the degree of frustration makes enormous influence on the localization/itinerancy nature of charge in the doped Mott insulator. Finally, we discuss the origin of the emergence of the insulating state in the low-t’/t region, where the spin frustration is released. In -ET compounds with half-filled bands, a spin liquid insulator is predicted to change to an antiferromagnetic insulator as t’/t decreases2,3,6,7. Additional charge carriers to the Mott insulators do not significantly cost extra energy for charge transfer in a background with translational symmetry preserved as in a spin liquid (Fig. 4c). However, in a antiferromagnetically ordered or correlated background, the travelling of the carriers to the nearest neighbor sites costs several times the spin exchange energy as depicted in Fig. 4d. Because the time scale of charge transfer is generally faster than that of magnetic fluctuations, antiferromagnetic fluctuations can cause such a suppression of charge transfer even in the absence of a static antiferromagnetic order. Then, the doped carriers lose mobility and are likely localized through polaron formation28 or stripe/charge ordering29 when spin frustration is weakened by the deformation of the triangular lattice. Since the discovery of high temperature superconductors, carrier doping to Mott insulators has provided a wide variety of electronic states, which arise from the complex quantum mechanical entanglement exhibited by the charge and spin degrees of freedom. The present study shows that the spin frustration controlled by lattice geometry play a decisive role in the behavior of charge carriers. Further studies with controlled lattice deformation 8 would unravel further complex entanglement between charge and spin, leading to the discovery of novel phases of quantum many-body systems. Methods Sample preparation and transport measurements under pressure A single crystal of -(ET)4Hg2.89Br8 (-HgBr), which is grown by the conventional electrochemical methods, is placed in a dual structured clamp-type cell formed by BeCu and NiCrAl cylinders with Demnum oil s-20 as the pressure medium. The relationship between the shape of the sample and the crystal axis was investigated by either X-ray diffraction or angle dependence of electron spin resonance. To evaluate the quality of applied pressure, we put strain gauges (KFLB-2-120-C1-11, Kyowa Electronic Instruments) in the pressure medium together with the sample. In pressure sequences #1 and #2, the pressure is applied at room temperature exceeding the solidification pressure of the pressure medium. The solidification pressure at room temperature is confirmed by the pressure dependence of the resistance of the strain gauges (Supplementary Fig. 1a). In pressure sequences #3 and #4, the pressure medium is cooled and solidified by pouring refrigerant (ethanol with dry ice, or liquid nitrogen) into the container containing the pressure cell with a pressure load applied. Because the solidification temperature can be seen in the temperature dependence of the in-plane resistivity of -HgBr (Supplementary Fig. 3), the resistivity was monitored to ensure that the sample space was below the solidification temperature, and then the pressure load was increased to apply uniaxial pressure. To measure the in-plane resistivity of -HgBr under pressure, four gold wires are connected to a sample at electrodes made of carbon paste. The electrodes are aligned in the direction of conducting plane and perpendicular to the pressure axis. Electrical current is applied with a source meter (Keithley 2400), and the voltage is measured with a nanovolt meter (Keithley 2182A). 9