The Superconducting Plateau Yaron Kedem1 1Department of Physics, Stockholm University, AlbaNova University Center, 106 91 Stockholm, Sweden∗ Two recent experiments in lightly doped strontium titanate have shown that the superconducting critical tem- perature remains constant in a range of carrier concentrations covering almost three orders of magnitude. The importance of this phenomenon, hereby dubbed a superconducting plateau, is comparable to the celebrated superconducting dome. The dramatic empirical evidence impose severe constraints on any proposal for a su- perconducting mechanism at low doping. We analyze the experimental results to see what type of theoretical models can be suitable in this regime. We show that the low critical current, absence of diamagnetic screening and the high critical field are all related to the small momentum of the carriers, which is expected at low densi- ties. We quantify the dependency of the critical temperature on density by introducing the “density exponent”. We discuss the role of a quantum critical point in the formation of a plateau and comment on the need for more experimental data. Superconductivity in low doping systems, and in particu- lar strontium titanate(STO), is a standing mystery for more than half a century. While there is a wide agreement that the conventional theories, namely BCS and its exten- sions to strong coupling, are not applicable, since many of the necessary assumptions are not valid in this regime and many of their predictions are false, there is no consensus on any alternative theory. Two recent experiments placed a crucial constraint to the nature of such theory. They showed that the critical temperature, Tc, is essentially constant for a range of carrier densities, n, covering almost three orders of magnitude. This vast plateau was predicted in but it is in a stark contradiction with almost any other theory of supercon- ductivity. A widely celebrated feature arising from the dependency Tc on the level of doping is the superconducting dome. The su- perconducting plateau shares some of the properties that made the dome such a prolific phenomenon for physics research. First, it is a distinct qualitative feature. While the numeric value of Tc or the particular level of doping where it starts/ends might vary, the marked shape can be easily recognized. Sec- ond, it sets a heavy burden on theoretical models. The conflict with the excepted behavior, based on conventional theories, together with irrefutable experimental evidence that cannot be tuned or misinterpreted, imply numerical calculations would not suffice here and a new paradigm must rise. It might also be interesting to note that STO was (one of) the first material where a superconducting dome was observed. One can won- der whether more plateaus might appear if experimentalists would actively search for them. In recent years, the long lasting discussion regarding the superconducting mechanism in STO, has shifted focus. Fol- lowing early work on the quantum nature of its paraelectric phase some experiments observed a zero temperature transition to a ferroelectric (FE) phase , implying the existence of a quantum critical point (QCP). This motivated some authors to propose it is the accompanying FE soft modes that mediate superconductivity and predicted an unusual iso- tope effect . The experimental confirmation of this effect is all but a smoking gun connecting super- conductivity and FE. The controversy is not over due to the widespread notion that those soft modes are nothing but the transverse optical phonons, which hardly couple to charge car- riers. Different authors have proposed different solutions to this conundrum [17–19]. However, the problem does not ex- ist if one note that close to a QCP and when the continuous spherical symmetry is explicitly broken to a discrete cubic or D4, which is likely the case for STO, the longitudinal modes soften as well . A major challenge in the context of low doping supercon- ductivity is the invalidity of the so-called adiabatic approxi- mation, EF ≯ ωc, (1) where EF is the Fermi Eenergy and ωc is the typical frequency of the phonons. The challenge is multifaceted with issues con- cerning technical, physical and phenomenological aspects of the problem. The technical side manifests in the introduction of ωc as a natural cutoff that considerably simplify the deriva- tion. Since it is rather hard to make any analytical progress without this simplification, many authors introduce a cutoff even when there is no clear justification. The physical pic- ture of superconductivity relies often on retardation, where an electron is attracted to the positively charged wake left by an- other fast electron due to the slow moving ions. In the case of Eq. (1), the ions can be quicker than the electrons and there is no obvious way to overcome the Coulomb repulsion. From a phenomenological perspective, the simple question is how would Tc, the critical current, the tunneling gap and other observed quantities depend on EF, or rather on the chemical potential μ, as μ → 0. In it was shown that one can employ the properties of a quantum phase transition to solve these issues. The diver- gent correlation length associated with phase transitions im- plies extremely long range interactions that are then limited to tiny momenta. This scenario, sometimes called forward scattering, justifies introducing a delta function in momentum space, relieving us from the need for a cutoff while also sim- plifying the derivation. The vanishing energy scale at a QCP means vanishing frequencies for the associated modes so the system reacts infinitely slowly allowing retardation even for arXiv:2202.12072v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 24 Feb 2022 2 and for oxygen reduced samples and no other major modifica- tions, such as isotope or calcium replacement, stress etc. The plateau is most evident in the data of (red squares) and indeed the authors clearly stated “Tc does not vary appreciably when n changes by more than an order of magnitude”. The focus of was on the supercon- ducting dome, occurring at higher densities (not shown here) so the authors did not comment on the behavior at this regime. Nonetheless, their results (green circles) also show a range larger than an order of magnitude where Tc varies by no more than 30%, a variation that is comparable to the uncertainty in Tc, manifesting the same qualita- tive plateau. Any dome-like feature or some general trend one might want to infer from this data, would be extremely fine tuned and frag- ile. Considering the data from both groups together, the lower Tc for lower densities seems to stem mainly from technical/methodological issues as the the difference persist even for samples with overlapping densities. slow electrons. The model led to bold predictions: at vanish- ing levels of doping, close to a FE QCP, the critical temper- ature is independent of the chemical potential, i.e. the super- conducting plateau that was observed in . Fig. 1 shows the experimental evidence for the supercon- ducting plateau. Measurements of Tc in a range of densities covering almost three orders of magnitudes reveal no qualita- tive change. We focus on samples in which the density of car- riers is the only proclaimed tuning parameter. Other published results, which are not shown here, do not alter the conclusion. These experimental results pose a major theoretical challenge. The challenge is not calculating the numerical value of Tc but conceiving a theory where Tc does not depend on the density of carriers. Any proposal for the superconducting mechanism for low doping systems and in particular STO must, at the very least, reproduce the plateau. At the higher density side, the plateau ends at the start of the dome, roughly around n ≃ 2 ∗ 1019cm−3. It is not clear how long it can stretch into lower densities. One possible bound- ary is the intersection of EF and Tc as beyond this point the carriers do not form a degenerate Fermi Gas. In it was suggested that thermally excited electrons can still bind via certain interactions but it is not clear if such bound states can form a condensate and allow a superconducting current. A naive approximation, based on free electrons at n = 1015cm−3 yield EF ≃ 40mK, lower than the measured Tc at the plateau. Even when EF > Tc it is possible that EF ≃ ∆, the supercon- ducting gap as usually ∆ > Tc. The ratio ∆/Tc is 3.5 in BCS theory, in it was derived to be 4, estimate it to 2 -17 and used microwave stripline resonators to measure values in agreement with BCS at higher densities. When EF < ∆ the superconducting gap and the ordinary band gap of the parent insulator are intermixed. More theoretical work is required to clarify what phenomenology is expected in this regime. Let us now comment the relevance of percolation, weak- link, or disorder driven transition to the superconducting dome. In the authors attempted to use percolative mod- els to explain the width of the transition and obtained partial agreement with the data. Indeed it is likely that the transition has a percolative comportment, but it is important to note that percolation theory itself does not explain, let alone predict, the vast plateau. See Appendix for a more detailed discussion regrading these type of models. We look now more closely at the results of these exper- iments and their implications. The first takeaway from the plateau is that one has to abandon the Fermi surface paradigm, or more informally stated, it is not longer true that everything happens on the Fermi surface. Indeed, in elemental metal like iron with EF ≃ 105K, it is likely only the electrons closest to the Fermi surface participate in most relevant processes. However, already when we lose the adiabatic approximation (1) we lose justification to neglect electrons from the bottom of the band. Nonetheless, quantities such as the Fermi ve- locity, Fermi momenta,⃗kF or the density of states at the Fermi surface, play a prominent role in many derivations that refer to non adiabatic scenarios. The vast superconducting plateau ag- gravate the issue as those quantities vary over orders of mag- nitude while the critical temperature remain constant. We can demonstrate this point by looking on the estimation of the critical current density jc. In they have found a dis- crepancy of four orders of magnitudes between the measured jc and the estimated jdepairing = en ∆ ̄hkF , (2) where e is the elementary charge. The derivation of Eq. (2) is based on assuming a Galilean boost to a velocity ⃗v increases the energy of carriers with momentum ⃗p = ̄h⃗k by an additional contribution of ⃗p ·⃗v, which has to be smaller than ∆. The derivation neglects another contribution to the energy 1 2mv2, where m is the (effective) mass of the carriers. This approxi- mation is justified in many cases since the relevant carriers are those close to the Fermi surface |⃗k| ≃ kF and the boost veloc- ity is small compared to the Fermi velocity vF = ̄hkF/m ≫ v. But not in our case. In fact when ∆ ≃ EF it is possible for carriers at the bottom of the conduction band, with vanishing momenta k → 0, to still contribute to the critical current. 3 Taking into account 1 2mv2 < ∆ (and neglecting ⃗p·⃗v) we ob- tain another estimate jdepairing = en � ∆ 2m, (3) which yield the correct order of magnitude. Note that we do not attempt to get a precise quantitative agreement with the measured results. For example, setting in Eq. (3) ∆ = 2kBTc and m = 2me, with me the electron mass, yields a jdepairing that is larger by a factor of 2-4 than the measured results. It is hard to know, without further measurements, whether this factor is due to the neglected ⃗p·⃗v or simply because we did not use the correct values for ∆ and m. Two other features discussed in are high upper critical fields and an absence of diamagnetic screening. At first one might see these as contradicting since high critical field might be associated with a large gap and weak screening with a van- ishing gap. However, both are explained by low velocity car- riers. To gain intuition let us consider first classical electrody- namics. A slow moving charge produces weak magnetic filed, on the one hand, and is weakly affected by the Lorentz force, on the other hand. In quantum mechanics the coupling term between charge and field is ⃗p ·⃗A, where ⃗p is the momentum of the charge and ⃗A is the vector potential. Small ⃗p of mobile electrons means they cannot efficiently screen magnetic fields and also that strong fields are required to modify their energy significantly. The superconducting dome is often associated with a QCP and in it was shown that a QCP is indeed responsible to the appearance of a superconducting plateau. In contrast to the typical situation in High-Tc superconductivity, in the case of STO one can study the QCP directly. Without introduc- ing carriers STO is an insulator and by fabricating isotope- substituted SrTi(18O16 y O1−y)3 samples one can tune the zero temperature phase to be paraelectric, for y < 0.33 or ferroelec- tric for y > 0.33. Naively one might think the atoms do not move at zero temperature, i.e. there are no phonos, so how would the atomic mass come in the equations and alter the ground state of the system? Indeed it seems that in the para- electric ground state the ions are not in a well-defined sym- metric position but rather in a superposition of two symmetry breaking positions, the so called “quantum fluctuations”. At y ≃ 0.33 the paraelectric and ferroelectric states become de- generate so one can easily shift the system from one state to another. In this QCP the system is highly susceptible with extreme long range correlations, a most beneficial disposition for mediating superconductivity. Introducing charge carriers complicates the picture. In a conductor one cannot directly measure the dielectric constant, whose divergence is the most distinct feature of a FE transi- tion. In fact certain definitions of FE do not apply to conduct- ing materials and often in the literature people refer to it as “ferroelectric-like” (FEL). The possible coexistence of super- conductivity and FEL was shown in by substituting of a tiny fraction of strontium atoms with calcium. This method creates local fields at the substitution sites which can then per- discrete derivative β ≃ ∆T/(T ∗ ∆lnn) of the data presented in . Dashed lines at β = ±2/3 represent the case Tc ∝ EF ∝ n2/3. We see moderate values of β ≃ ±1 at the edge of the dome, n ≃ 5∗1019,2∗ 1020cm−3. For n < 2∗1019cm−3 β is small and essentially fluctuate around 0. colate but do not necessarily bring the system closer to the QCP. In the case of isotope substitution, we know the location of the QCP without carriers but for a finite n we do not know what value of y, if any, is required to make the ground state FEL. In the parameter space (n,y) was investigated exten- sively. Their focus was on the dome and indeed they con- firmed the predicted shift to lower densities when y is in- creased . The shift, together with a broadening of the dome, reduces the extent of the plateau and somewhat blurs the boundary between the dome and the plateau. For y = 0,0.28,0.52 Tc drops sharply at n ≃ 8 ∗ 1019,4 ∗ 1019,3 ∗ 1019cm−3 respectively. For higher values of y, Tc decreases more gradually with n. To quantify the dependency Tc(n) we introduce, analogously to the isotope exponent, the carrier density exponent, β = ∂ lnTc ∂ lnn . (4) Fig. 2 shows a discrete estimation of β based on data from . In conventional theories, the minimal value β = 2/3 can be obtain in case T ∝ EF ∝ n2/3, assuming three dimensional system with quadratic dispersion. We can see a wide range of densities with |β| < 2/3 that we consider as a plateau. According to the model in within the plateau the dis- tance from the QCP is the main factor determining Tc. The location of the QCP, or rather the critical line this point traces out in (n,y) parameter space, is not known. In the location of an anomaly in resistivity in this parameter space was mea- sured. However this anomaly occurs even for y < 33 where we do not expect a FEL transition. Raman spectroscopy of a transverse optical phonon for y = 0.47,n = 0 revealed it 4 taken from . Each panel shows results from samples with sim- ilar densities. Solid lines are a second degree polynomial fit. For high densities (top two panels and also for higher densities not shown here) one can see a monotonous enhancement of superconductivity with increasing y. For lower densities (bottom two panels) the effect seems to saturate or even reverse. It is possible that samples with small n and and high y are already in a FEL phase at the relevant temperatures. In these phase increasing y would move the system further away from the QCP and suppress superconductivity. softens in a different temperature than the divergence of the dielectric constant, the most distinctive feature of a FE transi- tions. Thus while these measurements give us much informa- tion and provide circumstantial evidence for a FEL transition, is not likely we can use them to pinpoint the location of the QCP. We attempt to gain further insight into this issue by looking on the dependency of Tc on y for different n, as shown in Fig. 3. The negative trend of Tc(y) for n < 5 ∗ 1018cm−3,y > 0.5 is another circumstantial evidence that the system is in a FEL phase in this parameter subspace. Unlike the existence of the plateau, which is based on tens of samples in a wide range, this conclusion is somewhat speculative and relies only on a handful measurements. Thus, while currently the plateau is mostly a theoretical challenge, the problem of locating the QCP seems to lie at the experimentalists doorstep. We have analyzed the recent experimental observation of a superconducting plateau in STO. This remarkable phe- nomenon opens a new research avenue where theoretical mod- els can be tested experimentally. The experimental observa- tion is a strong support for the model and the assumptions that led to the prediction of the plateau in . Any other model or theory for superconductivity in this regime would have to reproduce the plateau to be considered. We have shown that many of the widespread methods are not applicable in this regime and physicists have to adopt new ways of thinking to approach the relevant problems. Many questions remain open: What are the boundaries of the plateau? Can we enhance su- perconductivity by moving closer to a QCP? Will we find sim- ilar plateaus in other materials? I would like to thank D. van der Marel for useful discus- sions ∗ kedem@kth.se J. F. Schooley, W. R. Hosler, E. Ambler, J. H. Becker, M. L. Cohen, and C. S. Koonce, Phys. Rev. Lett. 14, 305 (1965). J. F. Schooley, W. R. Hosler, and M. L. Cohen, Phys. Rev. Lett. J. Bardeen, L. N. Cooper, and J. R. Schrieffer, Phys. Rev. 108, A. Migdal, Sov. Phys. JETP 7, 996 (1958). G. Eliashberg, Sov. Phys. JETP 11, 696 (1960). T. M. Bretz-Sullivan, A. Edelman, J. S. Jiang, A. Suslov, D. Graf, J. Zhang, G. Wang, C. Chang, J. E. Pearson, A. B. Martinson, P. B. Littlewood, and A. Bhattacharya, arXiv:1904.03121 [cond-mat.supr-con]. C. W. Rischau, D. Pulmannov ́a, G. W. Scheerer, A. Stucky, E. Giannini, and D. van der Marel, Phys. Rev. Research 4, Y. Kedem, Phys. Rev. B 98, 220505 (2018). K. A. M ̈uller and H. Burkard, Phys. Rev. B 19, 3593 (1979). W. Zhong and D. Vanderbilt, Phys. Rev. B 53, 5047 (1996). M. Itoh, R. Wang, Y. Inaguma, T. Yamaguchi, Y.-J. Shan, and T. Nakamura, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 3540 (1999). S. Rowley, L. Spalek, R. Smith, M. Dean, M. Itoh, J. Scott, G. Lonzarich, and S. Saxena, Nature Physics 10, 367 (2014). J. M. Edge, Y. Kedem, U. Aschauer, N. A. Spaldin, and A. V. Balatsky, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 247002 (2015). Y. Kedem, J.-X. Zhu, and A. V. Balatsky, Phys. Rev. B 93, A. Stucky, G. Scheerer, Z. Ren, D. Jaccard, J.-M. Poumirol, C. Barreteau, E. Giannini, and D. van der Marel, Scientific Reports 6 (2016). Y. Tomioka, N. Shirakawa, K. Shibuya, and I. H. Inoue, Nature communications 10, 1 (2019). P. W ̈olfle and A. V. Balatsky, Phys. Rev. B 98, 104505 (2018). D. van der Marel, F. Barantani, and C. W. Rischau, Phys. Rev. Research 1, 013003 (2019). M. N. Gastiasoro, J. Ruhman, and R. M. Fernandes, Annals of Physics 417, 168107 (2020), eliashberg theory at 60: Strong- coupling superconductivity and beyond. Y. Kedem, arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.00029 (2020). M. Thiemann, M. H. Beutel, M. Dressel, N. R. Lee-Hone, D. M. Broun, E. Fillis-Tsirakis, H. Boschker, J. Mannhart, and M. Scheffler, Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 237002 (2018). C. W. Rischau, X. Lin, C. P. Grams, D. Finck, S. Harms, J. En- gelmayer, T. Lorenz, Y. Gallais, B. Fauqu ́e, J. Hemberger, et al., Nature Physics 13, 643 (2017). 5 APPENDIX: RULING OUT PERCOLATION Let us first clarify the issue we are going to discuss in this section. The question is not whether there is a percolation process in the transition to superconductivity, but whether such a model can explain the plateau itself, i.e. can we use disorder to obtain Tc that is independent of doping? Or alternatively should we see the plateau as evidence for a percolation transition? While the answer seems to be negative, the arguments might suffer from a straw man fallacy, since no one has formally presented any such explanation. However, the notions of percolation, disordered or weak-link transitions are often mentioned in less formal settings such as private communications, seminars or as side remarks in the literature. Thus, it is constructive to constraint this narrative by analyzing its validity. The general idea is that even above Tc there are already superconducting regions and the transition occur when they are sufficiently connected to transfer charge across the sample. From the start we see that the superconducting plateau is in contrast to the usual percolation scenario, which is typically tuned by density, or characteristic length, and not by temperature. Nonetheless, one can still imagine that somehow the connectivity of the regions is controlled by the temperature and not so much by the density of carriers. For this to be the case, we need three conditions to occur: (a) The onset of superconductivity inside the regions at temperature higher than the measured Tc all across the plateau. (b) The properties of the regions, such as size or density, to be largely independent of doping. (c) A strong temperature driven effect that connects the regions at Tc. To obtain (a) we should consider T intra c (n), the onset temperature of superconductivity inside the regions. T intra c (n) is unob- served since the regions are unconnected above Tc. We still require T intra c (n = 4 ∗ 1016cm−3) > 60mK since sample with this density become superconducting at this temperate. Now the question is T intra c (n = 1019cm−3) =?. The usual exponential depen- dency might give us room temperature. Even the “strong coupling” sub linear dependency Tc ∝ EF ∝ n2/3 would yield a sizable temperature. Alternatively one might argue that carrier density inside the regions is constant due to some clustering in the doping procedure. This is at odds with the experimental observation of a homogeneous Fermi gas. In any case the density of such clusters would vary strongly and it seems unlikely this will have no effect on the measured Tc. It is hard to infer the implication of (b) without a particular model for the appearance of these regions. One would assume they could be described by quantities such as coherence length, penetration depth etc., which typically depend on the density. For example, if one would consider clusters of doping sites, it is hard to imagine that neither the density inside the cluster, nor the density of clusters would be affected by the overall density. To obtain (c) one might postulate a variety of phases or microscopic effects. It is not possible to completely rule out some drastic change in the material, unrelated to the presence of carriers, occurring at Tc and connecting the isolated regions. However it seems unlikely that such transformation can only be observed via the onset of superconductivity. Unless the additional effect can be seen independently, we should apply Occam razor and discard it.