Ultrafast Melting of Superconductivity in an Iron-Based Superconductor D. Nevola,1, ∗ N. Zaki,1 J.M. Tranquada,1 W.-G. Yin,1 G.D. Gu,1 Q. Li,1, 2 and P. D. Johnson1, † 1Condensed Matter Physics and Materials Science Department, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York 11973, USA 2Department of Physics and Astronomy, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York 11794-3800, USA (Dated: September 20, 2022) Intense debate has recently arisen regarding the photoinduced changes to the iron-chalcogenide superconductors, including the enhancement of superconductivity and a metastable state. Here, by employing high energy resolution, we directly observe the melting of superconductivity on ultrafast timescales. We demonstrate a distinctly nonequilibrium response on short timescales, where the gap fills in prior to the destruction of the superconducting peak, followed by a metastable response. We propose that the former is due to pair phase decoherence and speculate that the latter is due to the increase in double stripe correlations that are known to compete with superconductivity. Our results add to exciting new developments on the iron-based superconductors, indicating that the photoinduced metastable state possibly competes with superconductivity. INTRODUCTION The superconducting iron chalcogenides have recently generated considerable attention with the recognition that they bring together superconductivity, topology and magnetism in a single material[1–3]. Superconductiv- ity and topology offer the possibility of topological su- perconductivity which in turn presents a platform for hosting Majorana Fermions, potentially important in qubit technology. Magnetism and topology on the other hand offer a platform for the Quantum Anoma- lous Hall Effect (QAHE). However, superconductivity and the QAHE represent competing states, and it is therefore important that an understanding is obtained of the different phenomena driving the system one way or the other. The FeSe1−xTex (FST) phase diagram is com- plex with the system displaying superconductivity for x = 0 and antiferromagnetism for x = 1. At around x = 0.5 and higher the possibility of a topological state exist- ing on the surface has also been predicted. The chiral nature of the latter topological surface state (TSS) has been demonstrated using spin polarized photoemission in one study and incident circularly polarized light in another. It has also been shown that for x > 0.5 fer- romagnetism develops in the surface region with the su- perconducting transition. The associated time reversal symmetry breaking (TRSB) results in a gap at the Dirac point in the TSS. There have also been a number of studies of this ma- terial using time-resolved pump-probe techniques where the system is pumped out of equilibrium and the path- way back to equilibrium provides further insights into the complex interactions that take place between the elec- trons and collective modes[8–13]. Such techniques also have been applied to the cuprate superconductors for Fermi surface wave vectors rang- ing from the nodal direction to the anti-nodal direction. In general, these studies show a return to equilibrium via different stages. First the non-equilibrium state de- cays via e-e interactions on time scales of the order of 100 femtoseconds, establishing a state with a “pseudo- equilibrium” Fermi-Dirac distribution[14–21]. At longer time-scales, of the order of picoseconds, energy is sub- sequently transferred to the lattice via electron-phonon interactions. Studies have also concluded that with IR excitation, the superconducting gap fills in, rather than closing, due to loss of coherence of the superconduct- ing condensate near the node, while more ex- otic behavior due to Mott physics may be present at the antinode. Pump-probe studies of the Fe-chalcogenide supercon- ductors show a different behavior. These systems still show the fast electron-electron equilibration but then the material appears to enter a metastable phase that ex- ists on the order of nanoseconds or longer. The nature of this metastable behavior has been the topic of considerable discussion. Photoemission stud- ies have speculated about various behaviors, ranging from light-induced superconductivity to light-induced nematicity. The concept of light-induced or enhanced superconductivity appears to follow the pioneering stud- ies on this subject in a number of materials by Cavalleri and coworkers[26–29]. By the very nature of the experi- mental probes, these studies have tended to focus on high timing resolution. In the present study we take a dif- ferent approach. Acknowledging that the light induced state is metastable and therefore long lived, we reduce the timing resolution and push for high energy resolution in the probe beam. Such an approach offers immediate and important new insights into the metastable state. Not only can we now for the first time identify the co- herent peak associated with the bulk superconductivity in a time-resolved study of this material, but we clearly demonstrate from its transient behavior that the incident infrared (IR) pulse kills the superconductivity and that it does not recover in the time scale associated with the metastable phase. In systems with closely competing quantum states, it Typeset by REVTEX arXiv:2203.00678v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 17 Sep 2022 2 is known that an incident IR pulse can push the system from one state to another. In the FST materials, it is well established that two different spin or magnetic con- figurations exist. The low temperature superconducting phase is characterized by spin correlations of the single- stripe type. At slightly higher temperatures above 40 K the material adopts double-stripe spin correlations that do not support superconductivity. Equilibrium studies have suggested that this second phase is closely related to the electron coupling with the A1g phonon mode, which is the out-of-plane oscillation of the chalco- gen atoms. Interestingly, the out-of-plane chalco- gen position has been theoretically tied to the magnetic phase, supporting the significant role of the electron- A1g phonon coupling in determining the magnetic ground state. Similarly, out-of-equilibrium studies have shown that the pump-induced, metastable state is dis- tinctly related to the A1g phonon mode, eventually lead- ing to a renormalized chalcogen position. This renormalized position shows an increased c-axis lattice constant, consistent with increasing the value of x on the FeSe1−xTex phase diagram. It is then naturally expected that this metastable state will lead to an asso- ciated modification of the superconducting and magnetic behavior. In the present study we find that supercon- ductivity is not supported in this metastable phase, and therefore postulate that it reflects a transition from the superconducting single-stripe phase to the double-stripe non-superconducting state, driven by photoinduced or- bital fluctuations. METHODS Single crystals were grown by the unidirectional solid- ification method. The superconducting properties of the single crystals studied here were previously characterized by magnetization measurements, having a superconduct- ing transition temperature, Tc of 14.5 K. The time-resolved ARPES was performed at Brookhaven National Laboratory using a SES-2002 analyzer. The probe pulse was generated using the output of a Coherent Vitara-T/RegA 9050 setup, which consists of 70 fs long, 800 nm pulses at 250 kHz. A cas- cade of nonlinear process was then used to produce the fourth harmonic (200 nm). The fourth harmonic pulses were finally passed through a monochromator before entering the vacuum chamber. The 800 nm fundamental pulses were used to pump the system. The energy and time resolutions were 6.6 meV and 500 fs, respectively. Space charge effects were carefully monitored before each experiment. The temperature-dependent measurements were acquired first at 5 K, then by increasing to 15 K, and finally reproduced again at 5 K on the sample spot, in order to ensure that the effect was reproducible over a full temperature cycle. The results in this paper have Band structure of FeSe0.45Te0.55. (a) and (b) schematically show the band structures near the Γ point above and below Tc, respectively, and are based off of the results in