Micro-fabricated mirrors with finesse exceeding one million Naijun Jin,1 Charles A. McLemore,2, 3 David Mason,1 James P. Hendrie,2, 3 Yizhi Luo,1 Megan L. Kelleher,2, 3 Prashanta Kharel,1 Franklyn Quinlan,3 Scott A. Diddams,2, 4, 3 and Peter T. Rakich1 1Department of Applied Physics, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA 2Department of Physics, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO 80309, USA 3National Institute of Standards and Technology, Boulder, CO 80305, USA 4Department of Electrical, Computer and Energy Engineering, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO 80309, USA (Dated: March 29, 2022) The Fabry-P ́erot resonator is one of the most widely used optical devices, enabling scientific and technological breakthroughs in diverse fields including cavity QED, optical clocks, precision length metrology and spectroscopy. Though resonator designs vary widely, all high-end applications benefit from mirrors with the lowest loss and highest finesse possible. Fabrication of the highest finesse mir- rors relies on centuries-old mechanical polishing techniques, which offer losses at the part-per-million (ppm) level. However, no existing fabrication techniques are able to produce high finesse resonators with the large range of mirror geometries needed for scalable quantum devices and next-generation compact atomic clocks. In this paper, we introduce a new and scalable approach to fabricate mirrors with ultrahigh finesse (≥ 106) and user-defined radius of curvature spanning four orders of magni- tude (10−4 − 100 m). We employ photoresist reflow and reactive ion etching to shape and transfer mirror templates onto a substrate while maintaining sub-Angstrom roughness. This substrate is coated with a dielectric stack and used to create arrays of compact Fabry-P ́erot resonators with finesse values as high as 1.3 million and measured excess loss < 1 ppm. Optical ringdown measure- ments of 43 devices across 5 substrates reveal that the fabricated cavity mirrors—with both small and large radii of curvature—produce an average coating-limited finesse of 1.05 million. This ver- satile new approach opens the door to scalable fabrication of high-finesse miniaturized Fabry-P ́erot cavities needed for emerging quantum optics and frequency metrology technologies. MAIN Among optical resonators, high-finesse Fabry-P ́erot cavities produce unrivaled frequency stability, quality factors, and power handling, enabling scientific and technological breakthroughs in a broad range of applications[1–6]. For the next generation in quantum communications, computation, and time-keeping systems, it will be necessary to bring these performance advantages to compact, inte- grated platforms[7–9]. This will require a scalable fabrication technique that is flexible enough to meet the varied demands of disparate applications. Many applications benefit from increased finesse, which translates to larger intracavity fields, increased storage times, and narrower linewidths. But geometry can be equally important, as the optimal mode volumes and spot size can vary dramatically for different applications, placing different requirements on the mirror radius of curvature (R). In quantum optics, where the cooperativity between single atoms and optical resonators scales inversely with mode area, microcavity geometries with small radius of curvature (R ∼ 10−4 − 10−2 m) are desirable. Conversely, for ultra-stable reference cavities in timekeeping applications, frequency noise can be minimized by averaging over thermal fluctuations with large mode areas, requiring a large radius of curvature (R ∼ 1 m). To maximize finesse (F ), it is necessary to minimize all sources of optical loss within the cavity. This is seen from the definition, F = π/(T + A + S ), where T , A , and S represent the fractional energy loss (per mirror) resulting from transmission, absorption, and scattering, respectively. Thus, an ultrahigh-finesse resonator (F > 106) requires T + A + S to be at the few ppm level. Using ion- beam sputtering deposition techniques, highly uniform dielectric coatings with absorptive losses (A ) of ∼ 1 ppm are available. However, roughness on the mirror surface and subtle imperfections in the mirror shape can both contribute to unwanted scattering losses, resulting in stringent requirements on the surface quality of the mirror template. For example, at telecom wavelengths, a mirror template with an ideal surface profile (i.e., without any low spatial frequency shape imperfections) must have sub-Angstrom RMS surface roughness to achieve scattering losses (S ) below 1 ppm. Specialized chemical-mechanical polishing techniques, sometimes referred to as super-polishing, are used to meet these stringent requirements on individually polished discrete mirror components. arXiv:2203.15931v2 [physics.optics] 8 Jun 2022 2 1 0 1 2 3 0 1 2 3 x (mm) y (mm) (μm) z Ablation Si Etching Polishing Reflow + RIE Measured Estimated L R 10mm (a) (b) (c) (d) Micromirror Solutions (a) Survey of micromirror fabrication techniques. The shaded regions and points illustrate the achievable geometry (radius of curvature) and finesse of different techniques. Grey corresponds to prior work including laser ablation (circles), isotropic chemical etching (triangles) and traditional polishing. Blue corresponds to this work. Filled points indicate measured finesses, while unfilled points indicate fabricated mirror templates with finesse predicted based on surface scattering estimates/simulations. Note that these reference finesse values were measured at different optical wavelengths, which will modify the impact of surface scattering. Further details on the literature values are available in Supplementary Section S1. (b) Illustration of the cavities built in this work. (c) Image of an array of 58 reflowed photoresist disks on a two- inch wafer that can be etched to make mirror templates. Non-circular devices on the outer ring are intended for alignment purposes. (d) Measured profile of a fabricated mirror template with R ≈ 1 m. This polishing technique can achieve the necessary sub-Angstrom roughness, but only for large radius of curvature mirrors (R ∼ 10 mm−1000 mm). Motivated by quantum optics, new fabrication techniques utilizing laser ablation of glass[10, 14–17], and chemical etching of silicon[18–21] have been developed in recent years, finding applications in a wide range of experiments[4, 22–28]. While these new techniques have the potential for scalable fabrication, they are limited to the production of small R (≲ 1 mm) mirrors, with finesse values that fall short of traditional polishing techniques (see comparison in Fig 1(a)). Thus, it remains an outstanding challenge to identify a scalable fabrication technique that yields ultrahigh-finesse mirrors, with access to both small and large mode volumes. In this paper, we demonstrate a wafer-scale fabrication technique that produces ultrahigh-finesse (≥ 106) mirrors with a user-defined R spanning from 100 microns to 1 meter, necessary to satisfy the demanding needs of applications ranging from quantum optics to low-noise laser oscillators. Arrays of microfabricated mirrors are formed on a single substrate using a solvent-vapor based resist reflow process. Through this process, photoresist defines mirror shapes that are transferred into a substrate using an optimized dry etch, maintaining sub-Angstrom surface roughness. Multilayer mirror coatings are then deposited, creating arrays of compact Fabry-P ́erot resonators whose performance is evaluated using optical ring-down measurements. Measurements of 43 devices across 5 substrates (with both small and large R) reveal that the fabricated cavity mirrors produce a mean (maximum) coating- limited finesse of 1.05 million (1.3 million), which, to the best of our knowledge, sets a record among micro-fabricated mirrors (and R < 10mm mirrors in general). This new method thus enables the scalable production of compact Fabry-P ́erot cavities with the state-of-the-art performance required by emerging technologies. Results Through this fabrication approach, we use reflow techniques to create a resist profile that defines the shape of the mirror. Photoresist patterns are first created on a super-polished substrate (e.g. fused silica) using UV lithography. The single- and multi-level photoresist patterns, seen in Fig. 2a and Fig. 2f, are used to form large- and small-R devices, respectively. These resist patterns undergo reflow in a purpose-built solvent-vapor chamber; as the photoresist absorbs the solvent vapor, surface tension rounds any sharp corners as it seeks to minimize the surface area of the resist pattern. In the limit of complete reflow, this disk is transformed into a dome; however, for intermediate reflow times, 3 = = = R R Pattern Resist Vapor Reflow RIE Pattern Transfer Mirror Coating (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h) (i) (j) (k) (l) (m) sist pattern. After a timed solvent vapor reflow, a large (b) or small(g) concave photoresist pattern is formed. A reactive ion etch transfers this into the substrate (c,d,h,i), before final application of mirror coating (e,j). Exemplary measured profiles (black) of reflowed structures with R from 1 m to 100 μm are shown in (k-n). Illustrations of the approximate photoresist shape before reflow are shown in blue. a smooth parabolic surface is formed in the center of the resist pattern, as illustrated in Fig. 2b and Fig. 2g. An array of 58 such reflowed surfaces formed on a two-inch wafer is shown in Fig. 1c. When the photoresist pattern reaches the desired shape, the reflow process is halted, and the resist pattern is transferred into the substrate using an optimized reactive ion etch, as illustrated in Fig. 2c-d and 2h-i. Note that different etch rates for the photoresist and substrate result in a vertical rescaling of the pattern. After these mirror templates are etched, a multilayer dielectric coating is deposited (Fig. 2e and 2j), producing an array of concave mirrors. Further details of the fabrication process can be found in Supplement Section S2. Using this process, one can readily vary the mirror radius of curvature by 4 orders of magnitude through control of the initial photoresist geometry and reflow time. from R = 1 m to R = 100 μm; approximate resist profiles, used at the beginning of the fabrication process, are illustrated in blue. Note that R > 1 m and R < 100 μm should be possible with modified photoresist patterns and techniques. While the measured mirror curvature permits us to leverage Gaussian beam optics as the basis for resonator design, it is important to note that these mirror shapes deviate from a paraboloid at larger radial distances, and the mirrors have a finite size. Thus, in principle, the nontrivial surface profiles produced by the reflow process could contribute to clipping losses, limiting the performance of these mirrors. To investigate limitations posed by these shape-induced losses, we developed a numerical mode solver that builds on the techniques described in Refs. Using a standard (e.g. Hermite-Gaussian) mode basis, this solver encodes a round-trip of optical propagation (including the exact mirror profile) into a mode scattering matrix. This scattering matrix is then used to compute the eigenmodes of the resonator, including their associated loss rates. Simulating a plano-concave resonator geometry (Fig. 1b) using the measured mirror profile as the input, we find that the shape-induced diffractive losses of optimized mirror templates (Fig. 2f-j) are very small (i.e., Sshape ≤ 0.1 ppm). In general, this low clipping loss is afforded by relatively deep mirror recesses, which produce large usable apertures. Further details on mirror depth and aperture constraints are available in Supplementary Section S2D. Roughness induced scattering losses are perhaps the most significant barrier to realizing a finesse of greater than 1 million. One can show that the scattering loss associated with an RMS surface roughness, σrms, is given by Srough = (4πσ/λ)2, where λ is the wavelength of light. Hence, at λ = 1550 nm, each mirror must have sub-Angstrom surface roughness (σ ≤ 1.2 ̊A) to meet the requirement S ≤ 1 ppm. Therefore, the etch process that transfers the photoresist pattern must not appreciably alter the roughness of the super polished substrate. For this task, we utilize a reactive ion etch that removes material primarily through ion bombardment (i.e., a physical etch) rather than 4 chemical processes (see Supplementary Section S2E for further details). Figure 3a shows a typical surface roughness measurement taken in the center of a microfabricated mirror; this measurement reveals an RMS surface roughness of 0.59 ̊A, corresponding to an estimated scattering loss of S ∼= 0.23 ppm at 1550 nm wavelengths. 100 101 102 103 ROC (mm) 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 Finesse (×106) Fused Silica ULE 0 1 2 Time (μs) 1 Trans. (arb.) 10-2 0 Time (μs) 0 1 Finesse (×10 ) 6 0 10 # RMS=0.59Å (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) 25.4mm 1.5mm (f) (g) 10-1 25μm 20 0 200 400 600 800 1000 0 200 400 600 800 1000 0.87 0.88 0.89 0.90 0.91 0.92 0.93 0.94 R=4mm F=1.2M R=1.2m F=1.04M the center of a large-R (≈ 1 m) microfabricated mirror, revealing an RMS surface roughness of 0.59 ̊A. (b-c) Histogram and summary of cavity finesse measurements for different R micromirrors. 43 cavities, formed on 5 substrates (both fused silica and ULE) were measured. Exemplary small- and large-R cavities are highlighted in blue and red respectively, with underlying ringdown data shown in (f) and (g). The dashed box corresponds to the mirror array shown in (d). The 9 ULE mirrors are from the substrate shown in (e). (d) Profilometry image of small-R mirror array, corresponding to the dashed box in (c). (e) Image of large-R mirror array on ULE substrate (triangles in (c)). Mirrors highlighted in false color. (f-g) Averaged transmission ringdown of at t = 0. Black line is exponential fit yielding 410 ns and 6.1 μs decay time, corresponding to a finesse of 1.20 million and 1.04 million, respectively. The performance of these devices was evaluated by applying a state-of-the-art, ultralow-loss dielectric mirror coating, with alternating SiO2/Ta2O5 layers designed to produce reflectivity > 0.99999. We then paired these substrates with flat mirrors from the same coating run, forming arrays of plano- concave Fabry-P ́erot resonators. These cavities were held in kinematic mounts, or clamped/bonded to an annular spacer. Both small- and large-R mirrors were tested, spanning mode waists from 23 μm to 220 μm. To evaluate the finesse of each resonator, a laser was mode-matched to the fundamental cavity mode, and switched off rapidly after being brought on resonance. Sample transmission ringdowns of small- and large-R cavities are shown in Fig. 3f and 3g. Exponential fits of these measurements reveal cavity lifetimes (τ) of 410 ns and 6.1 μs for the small and large R resonator devices, corresponding to finesse values of 1.20 million and 1.04 million (using F = πτc/L, where c is the speed of light and L is the cavity length). These lifetime measurements were corroborated using microwave-calibrated frequency sweep measurements. Note that the smallest fabricated devices (with R ≈ 100 μm) did not receive mirror coatings, but simulations based on their surface profiles predict comparable finesse to the measured devices. Further measurement details are available in the Supplement Section S3B. Ringdown measurements were performed on 43 cavities created using 5 different patterned micromir- ror substrates, with results summarized in Fig. 3b and 3c. These measurements indicate consistent performance across the fabricated samples. The small R cavities all come from a single substrate, con- taining a grid of 81 micromirrors. Out of 27 mirrors tested, 24 were found to have a finesse > 1 million (1.13±0.13 million). The large R cavities show slightly increased variability (0.91±0.20 million), but still reach a maximum finesse of 1.31 million. This variability is likely due to the increased tilt sensi- tivity of large-mode-waist cavities, which places more stringent requirements on the mirror symmetry and cavity alignment. We also note that the large R devices are fabricated on both fused silica and ultra-low-expansion (ULE) glass, confirming compatibility with these two technologically important materials. 5 While the finesse permits us to quantify the total mirror loss (T +A +S ), it is also instructive to separate the different loss contributions. Since both mirrors of all tested microcavities were simultane- ously coated, receiving an identical multilayer coating, it is reasonable to assume that the transmission coefficients (T ) are identical for both mirrors. With this assumption, we can extract (A +S ) from the relative transmitted and reflected powers on resonance. Doing so, we estimate T = 1.9 ppm for this coating, which means that, for our measured F = 1.2 × 106, we infer the excess loss to be (A + S ) ≈ 0.74 ppm. Note that since these dissipative loss channels are smaller than the external loss (T ), this resonator technology offers a path to efficient light extraction at these ultrahigh finesse levels. waveguide PIC grating coupler Wafer sample Bond (a) (b) (c) integration, in which a planar mirror wafer is bonded to a micromachined spacer layer and a micromirror array wafer. (b-c) Illustration of possible applications: (b) Integration of micro-Fabry-P ́erot with photonic integrated circuit (PIC). c Bonding of recessed mirrors to form low-volume resonators for cavity QED. Building on these techniques, one could envision using wafer-scale fabrication approaches (pictured in Fig. 4) to bring the unique advantages offered by high-finesse Fabry-P ́erot resonators to integrated systems. In contrast to dielectric waveguide resonators, the modes of Fabry-P ́erot resonators can be engineered to live almost entirely in vaccum, avoiding problematic sources of thermorefractive noise produced by dielectrics. For this reason, ultrahigh-finesse cavities, of the type fabricated in this paper, could prove instrumental to satisfy the growing demand for frequency stabilized ultra-narrow linewidth lasers for atomic clocks, communications, and sensing applications. For such applications, large mode sizes (≳ 200 μm) produced by larger radius of curvature (≳ 1 m) mirrors are used to suppress residual noise generated by the mirror coating. Such frequency-stabilized cavities are typically constructed from ultra-low-expansion (ULE) glass to eliminate expansion-induced frequency drift. Through a separate study, a bonded cavity assembly, using 1 m-ROC micromirrors from Fig. 3c, was shown to produce a thermal-noise-limited fractional frequency instability of 7 × 10−15 at 1 second, in a volume of only 8 mL. This same device was also used to lock an integrated semiconductor laser using the Pound-Drever-Hall (PDH) technique, yielding ∼ 1 Hz integral linewidth on the timescale of a second. Conversely, the small-ROC mirrors can yield small mode-volumes necessary to produce enhanced coupling rates with atoms, ions, and defect centers for quantum applications (see Fig. 4c). For example, the smallest microcavities studied here (R = 4mm, L = 320μm) produce modes with a waist radius of 23 μm and finesse of 1.2 million, corresponding to a Purcell enhancement factor of ∼ 1000 , which could already enable strong coupling to quantum emitters. Since the modes of such Gaussian beam resonators are readily mode-matched to optical fibers, they permit highly efficient collection of photons required for cavity QED and quantum networking applications. To harness these and other performance advantages, one could envision integrating such high finesse resonators with planar photonic circuits using vertical-emission grating couplers, as seen in Fig 4b. In the context of integrated photonics, these high finesse resonators are also remarkable for their ability to produce very high Q-factors (Q > 10 billion) within compact footprints (∼ 1 mm2) Hence, these resonators could offer compelling performance advantages relative to state-of-the-art ring resonators and dielectric resonators, opening the door to scalable integrated photonic technologies. 6 CONTRIBUTIONS P.K. developed early reflow techniques. N.J. carried out device fabrication, with assistance from Y.L. and D.M.. Y.L. developed numerical simulation tools. N.J., C.A.M., D.M., J.P.H., and Y.L. contributed to cavity characterization. All authors contributed to manuscript preparation. F.Q., S.A.D., and P.R. supervised and led the collaboration. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Device fabrication was carried out with support from the Yale SEAS Cleanroom and Yale West Campus Cleanroom. We thank Yong Sun, Sean Rinehart, Kelly Woods, Min Li, Lei Wang, Yubo Wang and Hong X. Tang for their assistance in device fabrication. We thank Lindsay Sonderhouse and Jules Stuart for helpful comments on the manuscript, and Ramin Lalezari of FiveNine Optics for assistance in characterizing mirror surface quality. This work was supported by NIST, the DARPA A-Phi under Award FA9453-19-C0029, and U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Materials Sciences and Engineering under Award DE-SC0019406. This work is a contribution of an agency of the U.S. government and not subject to copyright in the USA. Identification of commercial vendors is for scientific clarity only and does not represent endorsement by NIST. METHODS Mirror fabrication Shipley S18 series photoresist is patterned on a super-polished glass substrate provided by Coastline Optics. After priming the substrate with Hexamethyldisilazane (HMDS), we reflow the photoresist by mounting the substrate in the top of a home-made chamber filled with propylene glycol methyl ether acetate (PGMEA) vapor. The vapor is heated to approximately 45◦C and the substrate is kept at an elevated temperature of approximately 50◦C, so that the photoresist gradually undergoes reflow without being dissolved by the vapor. When the resist disks reach the desired shape, we stop the reflow by removing the substrate from the chamber and baking out the excess solvent. This shape is then transferred into the substrate with SF6/Ar-based reactive ion etching. High reflectivity coatings are applied by FiveNine Optics Inc. Further details are available in Supplementary Information. Mirror characterization Micromirror profiles are characterized using a Zygo Nexview. These profiles are used as input for simulation tools based on numerical beam propagation and an eigenmode solver to estimate scattering loss (S in main text). In finesse measurements, cavity arrays are formed by pairing micromirrors with flat mirrors coated simultaneously. Their optical lifetimes are determined through ring-down measurements, where the decay of transmitted light is recorded after switching off a resonant excitation laser. Cavity free-spectral ranges are either measured by scanning a tunable laser or inferred from cavity length. In addition to finesse, following Ref, we are able to determine the excess loss (S +A ) of each mirror by measuring the resonant transmission and reflection. R. J. Thompson, G. Rempe, and H. J. Kimble, “Observation of normal-mode splitting for an atom in an optical cavity,” Physical Review Letters 68, 1132–1135 (1992). Andreas Reiserer and Gerhard Rempe, “Cavity-based quantum networks with single atoms and optical photons,” Reviews of Modern Physics 87, 1379–1418 (2015). J. McKeever, A. Boca, A. D. Boozer, R. Miller, J. R. Buck, A. Kuzmich, and H. J. Kimble, “Deterministic generation of single photons from one atom trapped in a cavity,” Science (New York, N.Y.) 303, 1992–1994 Yves Colombe, Tilo Steinmetz, Guilhem Dubois, Felix Linke, David Hunger, and Jakob Reichel, “Strong atom-field coupling for Bose-Einstein condensates in an optical cavity on a chip,” Nature 450, 272–6 (2007). D. G. Matei, T. Legero, S. H ̈afner, C. Grebing, R. Weyrich, W. Zhang, L. Sonderhouse, J. M. Robinson, J. Ye, F. Riehle, and U. Sterr, “1.5 μm lasers with sub-10 mhz linewidth,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 263202 T. M. Fortier, M. S. Kirchner, F. Quinlan, J. Taylor, J. C. Bergquist, T. Rosenband, N. Lemke, A. Ludlow, Y. Jiang, C. W. Oates, and S. A. Diddams, “Generation of ultrastable microwaves via optical frequency division,” Nature Photonics 5, 425–429 (2011). 7 Zachary L. Newman, Vincent Maurice, Tara Drake, Jordan R. Stone, Travis C. Briles, Daryl T. Spencer, Connor Fredrick, Qing Li, Daron Westly, B. R. Ilic, Boqiang Shen, Myoung-Gyun Suh, Ki Youl Yang, Cort Johnson, David M. S. Johnson, Leo Hollberg, Kerry J. Vahala, Kartik Srinivasan, Scott A. Diddams, John Kitching, Scott B. Papp, and Matthew T. Hummon, “Architecture for the photonic integration of an optical atomic clock,” Optica 6, 680–685 (2019). Vincent Maurice, Zachary L. Newman, Susannah Dickerson, Morgan Rivers, James Hsiao, Phillip Greene, Mark Mescher, John Kitching, Matthew T. Hummon, and Cort Johnson, “Miniaturized optical frequency reference for next-generation portable optical clocks,” Optics Express 28, 24708–24720 (2020). Daryl T. Spencer, Tara Drake, Travis C. Briles, Jordan Stone, Laura C. Sinclair, Connor Fredrick, Qing Li, Daron Westly, B. Robert Ilic, Aaron Bluestone, Nicolas Volet, Tin Komljenovic, Lin Chang, Seung Hoon Lee, Dong Yoon Oh, Myoung-Gyun Suh, Ki Youl Yang, Martin H. P. Pfeiffer, Tobias J. Kippenberg, Erik Norberg, Luke Theogarajan, Kerry Vahala, Nathan R. Newbury, Kartik Srinivasan, John E. Bowers, Scott A. Diddams, and Scott B. Papp, “An optical-frequency synthesizer using integrated photonics,” Nature 557, 81–85 (2018). D. Hunger, T. Steinmetz, Y. Colombe, C. Deutsch, T. W. H ̈ansch, and J. Reichel, “A fiber Fabry-Perot cavity with high finesse,” New Journal of Physics 12, 065038–065038 (2010). Yu. Levin, “Internal thermal noise in the LIGO test masses: A direct approach,” Physical Review D 57, 659–663 (1998), publisher: American Physical Society. G. Rempe, R. J. Thompson, H. J. Kimble, and R. Lalezari, “Measurement of ultralow losses in an optical interferometer,” Optics Letters 17, 363–365 (1992). J. Nelson and S. Iles, “Creating sub angstrom surfaces on planar and spherical substrates,” in Optifab 2019, Vol. 11175 (SPIE, 2019) pp. 6–16. Andreas Muller, Edward B. Flagg, John R. Lawall, and Glenn S. Solomon, “Ultrahigh-finesse, low-mode- volume Fabry-Perot microcavity,” Optics Letters 35, 2293–2295 (2010). D. Hunger, C. Deutsch, R. J. Barbour, R. J. Warburton, and J. Reichel, “Laser micro-fabrication of concave, low-roughness features in silica,” AIP Advances 2, 012119 (2012). Manuel Uphoff, Manuel Brekenfeld, Gerhard Rempe, and Stephan Ritter, “Frequency splitting of polar- ization eigenmodes in microscopic Fabry-P ́erot cavities,” New Journal of Physics 17, 013053 (2015). Hiroki Takahashi, Jack Morphew, Fedja Oruˇcevi ́c, Atsushi Noguchi, Ezra Kassa, and Matthias Keller, “Novel laser machining of optical fibers for long cavities with low birefringence,” Optics Express 22, 31317– M. Trupke, E. A. Hinds, S. Eriksson, E. A. Curtis, Z. Moktadir, E. Kukharenka, and M. Kraft, “Micro- fabricated high-finesse optical cavity with open access and small volume,” Applied Physics Letters 87, 1–3 Georg Wachter, Stefan Kuhn, Stefan Minniberger, Cameron Salter, Peter Asenbaum, James Millen, Michael Schneider, Johannes Schalko, Ulrich Schmid, Andr ́e Felgner, Dorothee H ̈user, Markus Arndt, and Michael Trupke, “Silicon microcavity arrays with open access and a finesse of half a million,” Light: Science & Applications 8, 37 (2019). G. W. Biedermann, F. M. Benito, K. M. Fortier, D. L. Stick, T. K. Loyd, P. D.D. Schwindt, C. Y. Nakakura, R. L. Jarecki, and M. G. Blain, “Ultrasmooth microfabricated mirrors for quantum information,” Applied Physics Letters 97, 181110–181110 (2010). J. Fait, S. Putz, G. Wachter, J. Schalko, U. Schmid, M. Arndt, and M. Trupke, “High finesse microcavities in the optical telecom O-band,” Applied Physics Letters 119, 221112 (2021). Benjamin Merkel, Alexander Ulanowski, and Andreas Reiserer, “Coherent and Purcell-Enhanced Emission from Erbium Dopants in a Cryogenic High-Q Resonator,” Physical Review X 10, 041025 (2020). Hiroki Takahashi, Ezra Kassa, Costas Christoforou, and Matthias Keller, “Strong Coupling of a Single Ion to an Optical Cavity,” Physical Review Letters 124, 013602 (2020). Matthias Steiner, Hendrik M. Meyer, Christian Deutsch, Jakob Reichel, and Michael K ̈ohl, “Single Ion Coupled to an Optical Fiber Cavity,” Physical Review Letters 110, 043003 (2013). A. D. Kashkanova, A. B. Shkarin, C. D. Brown, N. E. Flowers-Jacobs, L. Childress, S. W. Hoch, L. Hohmann, K. Ott, J. Reichel, and J. G. E. Harris, “Superfluid Brillouin optomechanics,” Nature Physics 13, 74–79 (2017). N. E. Flowers-Jacobs, S. W. Hoch, J. C. Sankey, A. Kashkanova, A. M. Jayich, C. Deutsch, J. Reichel, and J. G. E. Harris, “Fiber-cavity-based optomechanical device,” Applied Physics Letters 101, 221109 (2012). Erika Janitz, Maximilian Ruf, Mark Dimock, Alexandre Bourassa, Jack Sankey, and Lilian Childress, “Fabry-Perot microcavity for diamond-based photonics,” Physical Review A 92, 043844 (2015). Roland Albrecht, Alexander Bommer, Christian Deutsch, Jakob Reichel, and Christoph Becher, “Coupling of a Single Nitrogen-Vacancy Center in Diamond to a Fiber-Based Microcavity,” Physical Review Letters Konstantin Ott, Sebastien Garcia, Ralf Kohlhaas, Klemens Sch ̈uppert, Peter Rosenbusch, Romain Long, and Jakob Reichel, “Millimeter-long fiber Fabry-Perot cavities,” Optics Express 24, 9839–9853 (2016). A. Emadi, H. Wu, S. Grabarnik, G. de Graaf, and R. F. Wolffenbuttel, “Vertically tapered layers for optical applications fabricated using resist reflow,” Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineering 19, 8 Prashanta Kharel, Yiwen Chu, Michael Power, William H. Renninger, Robert J. Schoelkopf, and Peter T. Rakich, “Ultra-high-Q phononic resonators on-chip at cryogenic temperatures,” APL Photonics 3, 066101 Li Li, Takashi Abe, and Masayoshi Esashi, “Fabrication of miniaturized bi-convex quartz crystal mi- crobalance using reactive ion etching and melting photoresist,” Sensors and Actuators, A: Physical 114, Li Li, Takashi Abe, and Masayoshi Esashi, “Smooth surface glass etching by deep reactive ion etching with SF6 and Xe gases,” Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B: Microelectronics and Nanometer Structures Processing, Measurement, and Phenomena 21, 2545–2549 (2003). M. D. Minnick, G. A. Devenyi, and R. N. Kleiman, “Optimum reactive ion etching of x-cut quartz using SF6 and Ar,” Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineering 23, 117002 (2013). Dustin Kleckner, William TM Irvine, Sumant SR Oemrawsingh, and Dirk Bouwmeester, “Diffraction- limited high-finesse optical cavities,” Physical Review A 81, 043814 (2010). Julia Benedikter, Thomas H ̈ummer, Matthias Mader, Benedikt Schlederer, Jakob Reichel, Theodor W H ̈ansch, and David Hunger, “Transverse-mode coupling and diffraction loss in tunable Fabry-P ́erot micro- cavities,” New Journal of Physics 17, 053051 (2015). H.E. Bennett and J.O. Porteus, “Relation between surface roughness and specular reflectance at normal incidence,” JOSA 51, 123–129 (1961). Christina J. Hood, H. J. Kimble, and Jun Ye, “Characterization of high-finesse mirrors: Loss, phase shifts, and mode structure in an optical cavity,” Phys. Rev. A 64, 033804 (2001). Michael L Gorodetsky and Ivan S Grudinin, “Fundamental thermal fluctuations in microspheres,” JOSA VB Braginsky, ML Gorodetsky, and SP Vyatchanin, “Thermo-refractive noise in gravitational wave antennae,” Physics Letters A 271, 303–307 (2000). Charles A. McLemore, Naijun Jin, Megan L. Kelleher, James P. Hendrie, David Mason, Yizhi Luo, Dahyeon Lee, Peter Rakich, Scott A. Diddams, and Franklyn Quinlan, “Thermal noise-limited laser stabi- lization to an 8 mL volume Fabry-P ́erot reference cavity with microfabricated mirrors,” ArXiv:2203.15915. Joel Guo, Charles A. McLemore, Chao Xiang, Dahyeon Lee, Lue Qu, Warren Jin, Megan Kelleher, Naijun Jin, David Mason, Lin Chang, Avi Feshali, Mario Paniccia, Peter T. Rakich, Kerry J. Vahala, Scott A. Diddams, Franklyn Quinlan, and John E. Bowers, “Chip-based laser with 1 Hertz integrated linewidth,” E. M. Purcell, “Spontaneous Emission Probabilities at Radio Frequencies,” in Confined Electrons and Photons: New Physics and Applications, NATO ASI Series, edited by Elias Burstein and Claude Weisbuch (Springer US, Boston, MA, 1995) pp. 839–839. Lirong Cheng, Simei Mao, Zhi Li, Yaqi Han, and H. Y. Fu, “Grating couplers on silicon photonics: Design principles, emerging trends and practical issues,” Micromachines 11, 666 (2020). Matthew W Puckett, Kaikai Liu, Nitesh Chauhan, Qiancheng Zhao, Naijun Jin, Haotian Cheng, Jianfeng Wu, Ryan O Behunin, Peter T Rakich, Karl D Nelson,“422 million intrinsic quality factor planar integrated all-waveguide resonator with sub-Mhz linewidth,” Nature Communications 12, 1–8 (2021). Hansuek Lee, Myoung-Gyun Suh, Tong Chen, Jiang Li, Scott A. Diddams, and Kerry J. Vahala, “Spiral resonators for on-chip laser frequency stabilization,” Nature Communications 4, 2468 (2013), number: 1 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group. Anatoliy A. Savchenkov, Andrey B. Matsko, Vladimir S. Ilchenko, and Lute Maleki, “Optical resonators with ten million finesse,” Optics Express 15, 6768–6773 (2007), publisher: Optica Publishing Group. 9 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION CONTENTS I. Literature Survey 10 II. Mirror Fabrication 11 A. Reflow Apparatus 11 B. Reflow strategy: Large R 11 C. Reflow Strategy: Small R 13 D. Aperture Constraints 13 E. Surface quality control 14 III. Mirror Characterization 15 A. Cavity mode simulation 15 B. Finesse measurement 15