1 Layer-by-Layer Epitaxy of Multilayer MoS2 Wafers Qinqin Wang1,2†, Jian Tang1,2†, Xiaomei Li1,2, Jinpeng Tian1,2, Jing Liang4, Na Li1,3, Depeng Ji3, Lede Xian3, Yutuo Guo1,2, Lu Li1,2, Qinghua Zhang1,2, Yanbang Chu1,2, Zheng Wei1,2, Yanchong Zhao1,2, Luojun Du1, Hua Yu1,3, Xuedong Bai1,2, Lin Gu1,2, Kaihui Liu4, Wei Yang1,2, Rong Yang1,2,3, Dongxia Shi1,2 & Guangyu Zhang1,2,3* 1 Beijing National Laboratory for Condensed Matter Physics and Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China 2 School of Physical Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China 3 Songshan Lake Materials Laboratory, Dongguan 523808, China 4 Collaborative Innovation Center of Quantum Matter and School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China † Authors contribute equally to this work. * Corresponding author. Email: gyzhang@iphy.ac.cn Two-dimensional (2D) semiconductor of MoS2 has great potential for advanced electronics technologies beyond silicon1-9. So far, high-quality monolayer MoS2 wafers10-12 are already available and various demonstrations from individual transistors to integrated circuits have also been shown13-15. In addition to the monolayer, multilayers have narrower band gaps but improved carrier mobilities and current capacities over the monolayer5,16-18. However, achieving high-quality multilayer MoS2 wafers remains a challenge. Here we report the growth of high quality multilayer MoS2 4-inch wafers via the layer-by-layer epitaxy process. The epitaxy leads to well-defined stacking orders between adjacent epitaxial layers and offers a delicate control of layer numbers up to 6. Systematic evaluations on the atomic structures and electronic properties were carried out for achieved wafers with different layer numbers. Significant improvements on device performances were found in thicker-layer field effect transistors (FETs), as expected. For example, the average field-effect mobility (μFE) at room temperature (RT) can increase from ~80 cm2·V-1·s-1 for monolayer to ~110/145 cm2·V-1·s-1 for bilayer/trilayer devices. The highest RT μFE=234.7 cm2·V-1·s-1 and a record-high on-current densities of 1.704 mA·μm-1 at Vds=2 V were also achieved in trilayer MoS2 FETs with a high on/off ratio exceeding 107. Our work hence moves a step closer to practical applications of 2D MoS2 in electronics. 2 Since the successful exfoliation of 2D MoS219, these ultrathin semiconductors have attracted great attentions in the field of electronics4,10,13-15,20. Tremendous efforts have been devoted to exploring their scaled-up potentials, including both wafter-scale synthesis of high-quality materials and application of them in large-area devices, with a specific focus on the monolayer MoS2 (ML- MoS2)10,11,20-23. Up to now, high-quality ML-MoS2 wafers are already available from various growth approaches including chemical vapor deposition (CVD)11,12 and metal organic CVD (MOCVD)10. Depending on the growth approaches and substrates, the MOCVD/CVD ML-MoS2 films are generally stitched from random/aligned domains with sizes featured at 1/100 micron level and have a state-of-the-art room temperature electron mobility of ~30/~70 cm2·V-1·s-1 in average, an electronic quality comparable with or even better than the exfoliated monolayers. In terms of a further improvement of the electronic quality of the large-scale 2D-MoS2, structural imperfections should be eliminated as much as possible; however, there is not much space left for monolayer MoS2 after ten years of synthesis optimizations in this field. Another direction is to switch to multilayer MoS2, e.g. bilayers or trilayers, since they have intrinsically higher electronic quality than monolayers16,18,24-27. Indeed, with increased number of MoS2 layers, decreased band gaps but enhanced electron mobilities and current densities have been demonstrated in exfoliated or CVD flakes16,27,28. However, it currently remains a significant challenge to produce high-quality and large- scale MoS2 multilayers with well-controlled number of layers. Previously, CVD and sulfurization have been used to produce multilayer MoS2 in form of flakes. While those flakes are of good crystal quality, their sizes are small, typically less than ~300 μm25,29. Large-scale multilayer MoS2 films have been also synthesized, e.g. from sulfurization of precoated Mo/MoO3 films30 and atomic layer deposition (ALD)31. As-produced films are typically polycrystalline with the many randomly oriented domains in sizes of less than 100 nm and include co-existence of different layer thicknesses. Such poor crystalline quality, subjected to bad domain stitching and less control on the number of layers, leads to low electronic performances even worse than those achieved in MoS2 monolayers32-35. Generally, to produce MoS2 multilayers, the best practice is to begin with monolayers, then increase their thicknesses by gradually growing additional layers. However, considering the case of free- standing MoS2, this route is problematic in the thermodynamic point of view. The surface energy of free-standing MoS2 increases with the number of layers36,37, it is thus energetically unfavorable to increase additional layers38. This fundamental thermodynamic limitation is likely to prevent large area multilayer MoS2 with well-controlled layer numbers from being demonstrated previously. It is expected that this thermodynamic limitation might be overcome by engineering the surface energy of MoS2 via the proximity effect. In this work, we developed a new technique, i.e. layer-by-layer epitaxy, to grow high-quality 4-inch multilayer MoS2 wafers with controlled number of layers. By using sapphire (0001) as the starting substrate, we successfully achieved the growth of uniform NL-MoS2 (N=1, 2, 3), where N is the number of layers, in a layer-by-layer manner. All sapphire wafers used in our growth are 4-inch wafers cut along the zero-degree plane, or C-Cut, which were vacuum annealed at ~1000 oC to form atomically flat surfaces before epitaxy. Note that sapphire wafers are cheap and widely used for various semiconductor thin film epitaxy; and sapphire (0001) surface is so far one of the best substrate for MoS2 epitaxy due to a negligible lattice mismatch. Obviously, two processes are involved in this 3 layer-by-layer growth, i.e. heteroepitaxy of 1st layer on sapphire and homoepitaxy of (N+1)th layer on NL with N > 0, as illustrated in Figure 1a. Both heteroepitaxy and homoepitaxy growth were performed in a multi-source oxygen-enhanced CVD system. As shown in our previous studies, this new CVD approach for monolayer MoS2 growth features greatly enhanced growth rate and excellent film uniformity across the entire 4-inch sapphire surface (benefited from the stable and uniform S- and Mo- source supply during the growth process)11. Usually, the 1st layer epitaxy on sapphire starts from nucleation at multiple sites, proceeds with the edge growth of those nuclei and eventually reaches a layer completion (i.e. full coverage on the substrate surface) via the domain-domain coalescence mechanism. Note that monolayer MoS2 growth on sapphire or SiO2 substrates follows a unique self-limiting process21 in which additional layers can hardly be nucleated on the monolayer till its completion. After completing the 1st layer, we then increased both temperature of Mo-source (TMo) and substrate (Tsubstrate) to enable dense nucleation of the 2nd layer (see Methods). A higher TMo, in other words, a higher Mo-source flux, is found to be beneficial to achieve a higher nucleation density of the 2nd layer. As shown above, the dedicate control of the growth kinetic process, e.g., nucleation and edge growth, is the key to achieve continuous layer epitaxy. In our growth tests, we achieved MoS2 wafers with N up to 6. It was noticed that the ideal 2D growth mode is difficult to keep for Nth layer when N ≥ 3, leading to appearance of additional mono- or multilayer domains on NL-/MoS2. Such failure is more and more significant with increasing N and the growth mode evolves gradually from 2D to 3D, in consistence with the classical Stranski-Kranstanov growth mode40. This layer-dependent growth mode evolution could be attributed to several reasons. Firstly, surface proximity effect reduces quickly for those thicker layers with upper surfaces farther away the sapphire surface. Besides, once the additional layers appear, their presence would amplify in the growth of subsequent layers. Since as-grown MoS2 films are very uniform for mono-/bilayers and quite uniform for trilayers across entire 4-inch wafers, we thus mainly focus on the bilayer and trilayer samples in the following characterizations. Fig. 1b shows typical optical images of the as-grown 4-inch mono-, bi- and trilayer MoS2wafers. Fig. 1c-h show typical zoom-in optic and atomic force microscope (AFM) images from these wafers, indicating the full coverage and very clean surfaces. The trilayer continuous films have certain additional small quadrilayer domains, and the coverage of them is ~30 %. The layer numbers were further confirmed by high resolution cross-section high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) imaging (Fig. 1i-k). We can see clearly that each layer consists of one layer Mo and two layer S atoms with layer thickness of ~0.62 nm and the interface between the adjacent layers is atomically clean and sharp, reflecting the superiority of epitaxy. In order to elucidate the layer stacking orders in these multilayer MoS2 wafers, we further performed atomic structure characterizations by STEM. As shown in Fig. 2, there are two stacking orders in our bilayer samples, i.e. AA stacking (2L-AA, 3R phase) and AB stacking (2L-AB, 2H phase) and the corresponding atomic configurations are shown in Fig. 2a. Fig. 2b/2c show STEM images of a typical AA/AB-stacked bilayer MoS2. Note that the AA stacked layers have no inversion symmetry while the AB stacked layers have. Fig. 2d&e also show the TEM images of a bilayer MoS2 film with a grain 4 boundary. AA and AB stacked domains can be clearly distinguished and these two different stacking domains can coalesce together without any disconnect gap, revealing a crystalline continuity. Fig. 2f shows the selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern at the grain boundary area, exhibiting only one set of hexagonal diffraction spots, as expected. We also characterized the trilayer samples. Different from the bilayer case, the stacking orders in trilayers are much more complicated. AAA, AAB/ABB, and ABA stacking configurations all exist, as show in Fig. 2 g-i. All these STEM images for bi- or trilayers reveal our epitaxial multilayer films having excellent lattice alignments. Benefiting from the epitaxy technique, the seamless stitching of these aligned domains leads to high crystalline quality of multilayer MoS2 on sapphire, as will be confirmed by our latter device characterizations. As mentioned above, MoS2 multilayers would have N-dependent band gaps. In order to confirm it in our epitaxial samples, we thus collected optical spectra for our mono-, bi- and trilayer MoS2 wafers. Corresponding Raman spectra are shown in Fig. 3a. In control samples of monolayer MoS2 films, the peak frequency difference (∆) between the E2g and A1g vibration modes is about ~20 cm-1. As a comparison, ∆ in bilayer and trilayer films are wider to a number of ~23 and ~24 cm-1, respectively. Fig. 3b shows the photoluminescence (PL) spectra of our mono-, bi- and trilayer MoS2 films. We can see a strong A-exciton peak at ~1.88 eV in the monolayer, while A- and B-exciton peaks are greatly suppressed in bi- and trilayer films due to the transition from the direct band gap to the indirect ones42,43. The indirect bandgaps are of ~1.50 eV and ~1.42 eV for bilayers and trilayers, respectively, confirming the N-dependent band gaps of the multilayer MoS2. Note that those sharp peaks at 1.79 eV are from sapphire substrates. Fig. 3c shows the optical transmittance spectra of mono-, bi-, and trilayer MoS2 films transferred on quartz substrates and the corresponding transmittances are 94.2%, 91.6% and 84.5 % at a wavelength of ~550 nm. Due to the release of the strain after transfer, the A- and B-exciton peaks in the transmittance spectra are a little bit shifted. Using the Raman line scanning, we also investigated the wafer-scale uniformity of the as-grown mono-, bi- and trilayer MoS2 wafers, as shown in Fig. 3 d-i. We can see these Raman peaks locate nearly the same along the entire wafer diameter, revealing a high uniformity. Based on the obtained high-quality multilayer MoS2 wafers, we hence fabricated FETs for performance benchmark testing. Let’s look at the short channel trilayer MoS2FETs first. The structure of these back-gated MoS2 FETs is illustrated in Fig. 4a. High-resolution STEM imaging at the MoS2- Au interface (as illustrated in the bottom image of Fig. 4a) reveals a sharp contact interface without obvious damages, filamentous breaks or wrinkles6,44-46. The output and transfer curves of a device with channel length (Lch) of 40 nm are shown in Fig. 4 b-c. Linear output characteristics at small bias voltages (Vds) suggest the ohmic contact behavior, and the source-drain currents (Ids) quickly approach to saturation at small gate voltages subjected to the employment of HfO2 (εr=15-20) dielectric layer. The device features high on/off ratio of >107, sharp subthreshold swing (SS) of 200 mV/dec over 4 magnitudes, and small hysteresis of ∆Vg≈0.02 V (at 0.1 μA·μm-1). The current density the highest ever achieved in MoS2 transistors. Transfer curves of mono-, bi- and trilayer devices with Lch=100 nm are shown in Fig. 4d. We can see a significant improvement of the on-current densities while increasing the number of layers, and the corresponding Ids/W of mono-, bi- and trilayer devices are 0.40, 0.64 and 0.81 mA·μm-1, respectively, at Vds=1 V and Vg=5 V. It was also noted that thicker MoS2 devices show saturated currents at much 5 smaller Vg. In Fig. 4e, we plotted the current densities (Vds=1 V) and on/off ratios of our devices, compared with previous data from the state-of-the-art MoS2 devices. The good balance between high current density and high on/off ratio suggests a great potential of these epitaxial multilayer MoS2 wafters for fabrication of integrated, high-performance and low-power electronics. Next, we also fabricated long-channel FETs with Lch varying from 5 to 50 μm and Wch varying from 10 μm to 30 μm based on our multilayer MoS2 wafers, as illustrated in the inset of Fig. 4f. Transfer curves of 150 randomly picked trilayer MoS2 FETs with different Lch and Wch are shown in Fig. 4f. The overall yield of all devices is >95 %. All these devices exhibit small device-to-device variations, reflecting the uniformity of epitaxial wafers. On/off ratios, subthreshold voltages (Vth) and SS of these devices are also plotted in Fig. 4g. The highest on/off ratio can reach to 108-109 and averages at 4.5×108, much higher than that achieved in the previous multilayer MoS2 devices32,35,47. Vth is mainly located at -1.25±0.4 V and the average SS is ~115 mV/dec. Finally, let’s compare film conductivities of mono-, bi- and trilayer MoS2. The sheet resistances (ρ) were extracted by transfer length method (TLM)48 as shown in Fig. 4h. At a carrier density of ni≈4×1013 cm-2, ρ is 9.3, 5.4 and 3.0 kΩ for mono-, bi- and trilayer MoS2 channels, respectively, revealing that multilayer MoS2 is more conductive. Besides, the extracted contact resistance (Rc) is ~0.61 kΩ·μm at ni≈4×1013 cm-2. Although the achieved Rc is slightly larger than that of Bi-contacts reported recently9, Au-contacts are advantageous considering that Au is stable and widely used in the nowadays semiconductor technology. Better device performances might be achievable in future by further optimizing contact techniques. In Fig. 4i, we summarize the field effect mobilities (μFE) of these long-channel MoS2 FETs. A significant improvement on μFE with channel layer numbers can be clearly seen, just as expected. The average μFE is ~80, ~110 and ~145 cm2·V-1·s-1 for mono-, bi- and trilayer FETs, respectively. The mobility distributions in each type of devices are fitted by Lorentz curves. The full width at the half maximum (FWHM) of the fitting is ~40, ~50 and ~60 cm2·V-1·s-1 for mono-, bi- and trilayer devices, and the increased FWHM with number of layers is partially attributed to the inhomogeneity from additional layers and need to be optimized in further studies. Remarkably, the highest μFE reaches 131.6, 217.3 and 234.7 cm2·V-1·s-1 in our mono-, bi- and trilayer devices, and all these numbers are record-high in wafer scale MoS2 devices. Considering that, in well-developed thin film transistors (TFTs), μFE is 10-40 cm2·V-1·s-1 for indium–gallium–zinc- oxide (IGZO) TFTs and 50-100 cm2·V-1·s-1 for low-temperature polycrystalline silicon (LTPS) TFTs49, the competitive average μFE (larger than 100 cm2·V-1·s-1) achieved in this work also reveal a great potential of these multilayer MoS2 films for TFT applications. As shown above, the developed layer-by-layer epitaxy on sapphire can yield uniform and large-scale multilayer MoS2 with clean interfaces and well-controlled number of layers, e.g. 1, 2, 3. In each individual layer, the high lattice continuity/quality are accomplished via seamless stitching of large domains aligned along sapphire<11-20>. Bilayer and trilayer MoS2 wafers exhibit remarkably improved electrical quality with respect to their monolayer counterparts, as evidenced from higher on-current densities and higher electron mobilities, suggesting a great potential of using them for 2D electronics. Regarding technological improvements, further investigations are required. Firstly, the high-temperature growth process is less compatible with the conventional semiconductor processes thus needs to be lowered. Secondly, steady improvements of wafer sizes and control of single- alignment of domains are also required for producing single-crystalline multilayers at large scale. 6 Besides, it is also very interesting to apply this layer-by-layer epitaxy technique for large-scale and high-quality heterogeneous 2D layers to broaden the application field of 2D semiconductors. Methods Layer-by-layer epitaxy of MoS2. All growths were carried out in a home-built multi-source CVD system with three temperature zones, named zone-I, zone-II and zone-III. In a typical growth, one S- source (Alfa Aesar, 99.9%, 15 g) was loaded in zone-I and carried by Ar (40 sccm) and six MoO3- source (Alfa Aesar, 99.999%, 30 mg each) were loaded in zone-II and carried by Ar/O2 (40/1.7 sccm) individually. Sapphire substrates (single side polished, c-plane (0001) with off-set angle (M-axis) of 0.2±0.1 deg., 4-inch wafers) were loaded in zone-III. During the heteroepitaxy of MoS2 on sapphire, the temperature in zone-I, zone-II, and zone-III is kept at 120 oC, 540 oC and 910 oC, respectively; while the temperature in zone-II and zone-III was increased to 570 oC and 940 oC, respectively, for homoepitaxy of MoS2. Structural and spectroscopic characterizations. AFM imaging was performed with Asylum Research Cypher S system. Raman and PL spectra were collected with Horiba Jobin Yvon LabRAM HR-Evolution Raman system with the excitation laser wavelength of 532 nm. SAED was performed in a TEM (JEOL Grand ARM 300 CFEG) operating at 80 kV, and atomic resolution images were achieved with an Aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscope Grand ARM 300 (JEOL) operating at 80 kV. Device Fabrications and Measurements. FETs were fabricated by lithography and etching process. The device fabrication process is illustrated in Fig. S6. First, buried back-gates of Ti/Au/Ti (1/5/1 nm) were patterned on substrates by lithography and e-beam evaporation at a deposition rate of 0.01- 0.05 Å/s. Second, HfO2 with a thickness of 5-15 nm was deposited by ALD (Savannah-100 system, Cambridge NanoTech. Inc. Precursors: H2O and tetrakis dimethylamino hafnium; Deposition temperature: 200 oC) as the gate dielectric layer. Third, MoS2 films were etched off from sapphire substrates in KOH solution (1 Mol/L) at 110 oC and transferred onto the as-prepared HfO2/metal- gate/sapphire surfaces. After transfer, lithography and oxygen plasma etching (Plasma Lab 80 Plus, Oxford Instruments Company) were used to define MoS2 channel region. Finally, e-beam evaporated Au (20 nm) were deposited for source-drain contact metal. For short channel (L<100 nm) FETs, the substrate is SiO2 and the channels were defined by standard e-beam lithography (EBL, Raith e-Line plus system) with PMMA (495 A2) as the resist layer (spin-coated at 2000-3000 rpm and baked at 180 oC for 2 min). For long channel (L>2 μm) FETs, the substrate is sapphire and the channels were defined by UV-lithography (MA6, Karl Suss) with AR-P 5350 (ALLRESIST GmbH) as positive photoresist with thickness of ~1 μm (spin-coated at 4000 rpm and baked at 100 oC for 4 min). Note that we also use oxygen plasma to clean the photoresist residues before depositing the Ti/Au/Ti back- gate electrodes before ALD. All electrical measurements were carried out in a four-probe vacuum station (base pressure ~10−6 mbar) equipped with a semiconductor parameter analyzer (Agilent