1 Direct visualization of ultrafast lattice ordering triggered by an electron-hole plasma in 2D perovskites Hao Zhang1,2, Wenbin Li1,2, Joseph Essman1, Claudio Quarti3,4, Isaac Metcalf5, Wei-Yi Chiang6, Siraj Sidhik1,5, Jin Hou5, Austin Fehr1, Andrew Attar7, Ming-Fu Lin7, Alexander Britz7, Xiaozhe Shen7, Stephan Link6, Xijie Wang7, Uwe Bergmann8,9, Mercouri G. Kanatzidis10,Claudine Katan3, Jacky Even11, Jean-Christophe Blancon1* and Aditya D. Mohite1* 1Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Rice University, Houston, Texas 77005, USA. 2Applied Physics Program, Smalley‐Curl Institute, Rice University, Houston, TX, 77005, USA. 3Univ Rennes, ENSCR, INSA Rennes, CNRS, ISCR (Institut des Sciences Chimiques de Rennes) - UMR 6226, F-35000 Rennes, France. 4Laboratory for Chemistry of Novel Materials, Department of Chemistry, University of Mons, Place du Parc 20, 7000 Mons, Belgium 5Department of Materials Science and NanoEngineering, Rice University, Houston, TX, 77005, USA. 6Department of Chemistry, Rice University, Houston, Texas 77005, USA. 7SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA. 8PULSE Institute, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA 9Department of Physics, University of Wisconsin–Madison, Madison, WI 53706 USA. 10Department of Chemistry, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois 60208, USA. 11Univ Rennes, CNRS, Institut FOTON (Fonctions Optiques pour les Technologies de l'Information), UMR 6082, CNRS, INSA de Rennes, 35708 Rennes, France. *Correspondence: blanconjc@gmail.com and adm4@rice.edu Direct visualization of ultrafast coupling between charge carriers and lattice degrees of freedom in photo-excited semiconductors has remained a long-standing challenge and is critical for understanding the light-induced physical behavior of materials under extreme non-equilibrium conditions. Here, by monitoring the evolution of the wave-vector resolved ultrafast electron diffraction intensity following above-bandgap photo-excitation, we obtain a direct visual of the structural dynamics in monocrystalline 2D perovskites. Analysis reveals a surprising, light-induced ultrafast lattice ordering resulting from a strong interaction between hot-carriers and the perovskite lattice, which induces an in-plane octahedra rotation, towards a more symmetric phase. Correlated ultrafast spectroscopy performed at the same 2 carrier density as ultrafast electron diffraction reveals that the creation of a hot and dense electron-hole plasma triggers lattice ordering at short timescales by modulating the crystal cohesive energy. Finally, we show that the interaction between the carrier gas and the lattice can be altered by tailoring the rigidity of the 2D perovskite by choosing the appropriate organic spacer layer. Organic-inorganic (hybrid) two-dimensional (2D) halide perovskites are constructed by a superlattice of interlocking organic and inorganic nanometer-thick layers and have demonstrated unique and non-classical behaviors and are being extensively explored for a wide range of technologies such as photovoltaics, photodetectors, photocatalysts, light emitting diodes, lasers, and quantum emitters.1–9 The underlying design principles for each of these devices are strongly correlated to the exact details of how photoexcited or electronically injected charge carriers dissipate their energy via electron-phonon coupling. For example, it has been shown recently, that unusual electron-phonon coupling mechanisms are likely to promote emission of single photons or correlated photons pairs from perovskite quantum sources.10 There have been only handful experimental studies, which have employed ultrafast or temperature dependent optical spectroscopy to elucidate carrier dynamics in 2D perovskites. Room temperature coherent oscillations were observed from two-dimensional coherent excitation spectroscopy in 2D perovskites with aromatic barriers as organic barriers.11 These oscillations were attributed to a combination of a resonant effect within the exciton fine structure and to electron-phonon coupling with low–frequency optical modes. Recent work by Quan et al used optical pump-probe spectroscopy to show that vibrational relaxation dynamics in 2D perovskites formed from flexible alkyl-amines as organic barriers is fast and relatively independent of the lattice temperature, whereas from aromatic amines is slower, and are temperature dependent.12 Moreover, Gong et al has shown the crystal rigidity strongly affects the strength of electron-phonon coupling and therefore promotes carrier trapping, leading to a fast non-radiative decay.5 These measurements show that presence of an organic cation in close proximity to the inorganic perovskite lattice strongly modulates the nature of electron-phonon interactions,5,11–18 and suggested that electron- phonon scattering in 2D perovskites occur via, local dynamic disorder.6 These short-range carrier- lattice interactions modulates the quantum-well thickness and octahedral tilts, leading to exciton self-trapping and broadband emission, thanks to the lattice softness, suggesting potential benefit of 2D perovskites in white-light applications. However, there exists no direct ultrafast structural 3 measurement of 2D perovskites, which elucidates the underlying carrier-lattice interaction mechanisms upon optical excitation. Moreover, the exact geometry and dynamics of these lattice distortions are unknown. This is largely due to the challenges in visualizing the carrier-lattice coupling and dynamics that result after optical excitation above the band-gap. Here we report the first direct measurement of structural dynamics in 2D perovskites obtained by monitoring the change in the ultrafast femtosecond electron diffraction (UED) after optical excitation. This technique enables a time-resolved structural evolution of the 2D perovskites by tracking the changes in the diffraction pattern, thus providing a direct visualization of lattice response during carrier cooling. Detailed analysis of the Bragg peak intensities and temporal signatures reveals a non-classical light-induced lattice ordering at early times (≤1 ps), which is attributed to the light-induced in-plane rotation of the perovskite octahedra from a distorted toward a symmetrical phase. Complementary transient absorption measurements further reveal a high excitation regime (beyond Mott transition),19,20 where hot and dense electron-hole plasma strongly modulates the crystal cohesive energy,21 leading to an ultrafast lattice ordering. In parallel, a classical energy transfer to the whole phonon bath via thermal atomic displacements was observed, which was attributed to the Debye-Waller effect. The Debye-Waller effect was associated with a slower rise time (~ 5ps) of the thermal dissipation (or lattice heating) leading to coherent acoustic oscillations over longer time. Concomitant with the Debye-Waller effect, we also observe an increase in the diffused scattering, which confirms the activation of thermal transfer to the phonon bath. Finally, we show that the mechanism and dynamics of the interaction between the charge carriers and the lattice are acutely tunable and sensitive to the rigidity of the 2D perovskites dictated by the choice of the organic spacer layer. These findings reveal new and distinct carrier-lattice interactions and counterintuitive mechanisms in 2D perovskites, which have not been reported in classical materials such as Si, GaAs or even in 3D halide perovskites.22,23 UED experiment on 2D perovskites The UED experiments are performed in a pump-probe setup in which sub-micron thick 2D hybrid perovskite single crystals are photoexcited with a 75-fs pulse laser and the structural dynamics are probed with a pulsed electron beam with 150 fs temporal width after specific delay times (t) (Fig. 4 1a). A diffraction image is acquired at each delay time after above-gap excitation (Fig. 1b), which reflects the instantaneous 2D perovskite crystal structure. Monitoring the characteristics of the diffraction peaks (or Bragg peaks) on the image allows us to directly probe the dynamic changes in the lattice structure after light excitation. These changes directly reflect the carrier-lattice Fig. 1 | UED measurements on 4AMP-MAPb2I7 (DJ n=2) 2D perovskite. a, Schematics of UED apparatus. The directions of light pump and electron probe with respect to crystal orientation is illustrated. (inset) Optical microscopic top-view image of DJ n=2 single crystal. The dashed yellow line idicates the transmission window for the electron beam. Scale bar is 50μm. b, Electron diffraction pattern of DJ n=2 crystal at different pump-probe delay time: t = 0 ps, 1 ps and 35 ps. c, Static diffraction pattern (t≤0) and indexing of Bragg planes (hk0). Diffraction peaks circled with white, brown, cyan, green, and yellow colors belong to {200}, {110}, {400}, {310}, and {220} Bragg peak families, respectively. The diffraction peaks {110} are partialled blocked by the direct beam filter (q<1Å-1). d, Crystal structure of DJ n=2 viewing at and directions, showing intrinsic antiferro-distortion (in-plane octahedral rotations). The corresponding Bragg plane directions are displayed for {400} 5 interactions during energy relaxation (cooling) of the high-energy photoexcited carriers (hot carriers) to the 2D perovskite semiconductors band-edge. We start with a phase-pure (homogenous perovskite layer thickness) 2D perovskite crystal of Dion-Jacobson 4AMP-MAPb2I7 (DJ n=2) with thickness of 270 nm (Fig. 1a and Fig. S1), which is excited with 3.1 eV light, i.e. 0.9 eV above its ground state optical transition24. The diffraction pattern of DJ n=2 at rest is consistent with the static crystal structure reported previously (Fig. 1c and 1d, and details in Fig. S2),24 which exhibits antiferro-distortions (clockwise and anticlockwise octahedral rotations around the c axis) associated with an in-plane doubling of the unit cell (in-plane is defined by a and b axes).25,26 The diffraction pattern also indicates that the orientation of the crystal layers is parallel to the substrate (see Supplementary discussion 1 and Fig. S2), with both the light excitation and the probe electron beams impinging along the DJ n=2 stacking axis (c axis), as depicted in Fig. 1a. Fig. 2a shows the differential diffraction map indicating the change in the Bragg peak intensities of the DJ n=2 crystal that occurs within a few picoseconds (t =2 ps, averaged within 1~3ps) after light excitation with a fluence of 2 mJ/cm2 (corresponds to a carrier density of 2.5×1013cm-2, see Supplementary discussion 2). In this map, the blue and red spots correspond, respectively, to a relative decrease and increase in the peak intensities after photoexcitation with respect to the sample at rest. A first visual inspection of this data reveals both an anisotropic response with respect to the in-plane directions in the 2D perovskite lattice and a monotonically decreasing of absolute intensity response with respect to the magnitude of the scattering vector |q|. The Bragg peaks that show a detectable increase in their intensity after light excitation are (400), of 3.2 Å (Pb-I bonds) along the octahedra diagonal (shown as the highlighted yellow rectangle in Fig. 2b), whereas the (400) and (040) Bragg peaks are in the {h00} family correlated with the d- spacing of 2.25 Å (half of octahedron length) along the edge of the octahedra (a and b directions, shown as cyan in Fig. 2b). On the contrary, higher orders of these two Bragg families such as (800), all exhibit a decrease in their intensities after photoexcitation. Details of these Bragg peak traces 6 Fig. 2 | Collective lattice ordering observed from UED response of DJ n=2 crystal. a, Differential diffraction map at t=2 (±1) ps, acquired by subtracting the averaged response of 1~3 ps after light excitation by the response at rest (t≤0 ps). The intensity change ΔI (increase and decrease) of each specific Bragg peak (hk0) is indicated by red and blue colors, respectively. The map is zoomed in to the first quadrant (0<qx, qy<6Å-1). b, Crystal structure at rest showing intrinsic antiferro-distortion (top) and simulated structure reducing the distortion (bottom), with disorder parameter θ defined as half of the interlayer octahedral rotations. For clarity the organic cations are omitted. c, Simulated differential diffraction map between the two crystal structures in Fig. 2b, showing intensity change (ΔI) of each Bragg peak after reducing the disorder parameter θ. d, Angular-integrated differential diffraction (filtering out diffuse scattering regions), comparing the experimental data (t=2 (±1) ps) (gray solid line and shadow), the expected Debye-Waller response (gray dashed line), and simulated signal acquired from Fig. 2c (black solid line). Note that the {110} peaks are partially filtered by the direct beam blocker (Fig. 1c). 7 are illustrated in Fig. S3. Furthermore, these transient intensity response scales monotonically with the pump fluence (1mJ/cm2, estimated carrier density 1.3×1013cm-3), as shown in Fig. S4 for the representative Bragg peaks. We note that opposite to our results, classical semiconductors (such as Si and GaAs), including inorganic 2D materials (for example, transition metal dichalcogenides such as MoS2 and MoSe2), exhibit in most cases a decrease in Bragg peak intensities after photoexcitation.22,27,28 In layered 2D materials an increase of Bragg peaks has been reported, which results from a suppression of charge density waves leading to a change of crystal symmetry,29 however no evidence of charge density waves has been reported in halide perovskites. Additionally, large multiple scattering effects in monocrystalline samples can also spuriously induce unexpected increase of Bragg peak intensities upon photoexcitation.30 However, our estimation of extinction distance of DJ n=2 perovskite is much larger than its sample thickness, implying that the multiple scattering effects are not likely to occur for our 2D perovskites, especially under MeV electron beams, whose cross sections are much lower than KeV electrons (see Supplementary discussion 3). In classical materials, the UED signal is attributed to a typical Debye-Waller response, which corresponds to an energy transfer from hot carriers to the low-frequency vibrational density of states, which scale as |q|2.22,31 Recent study on hybrid three-dimensional (3D) perovskites (MAPbI3) also suggests a Debye-Waller like response, where octahedral rotational disorder induces additional structural deformations.23 The counterintuitive and opposite behavior of light-induced ordering in some specific crystal directions in DJ n=2 crystals implies that there must exist another competing mechanism, via which the photogenerated hot carriers strongly interact with the lattice resulting in transient structural change, instead of thermal activation of the phonon bath leading to lattice heating. The increase in the intensities of specific Bragg peaks, thereby counteracting the Debye-Waller effect at short time scale and enhancing the lattice ordering in specific directions. Mechanism of transient lattice ordering Qualitative analysis of the diffraction peaks in Fig. 2a suggests that the light-induced transformation may be related to the in-plane lattice ordering along specific directions. Therefore, we hypothesize that this observed anisotropic lattice ordering originates from the reduction of antiferro-distortions, a specific type of structural deformation involving the rotations of octahedra, which are widely expected in perovskites materials.9,23,32 To quantify this distortion, we define the 8 in-plane distortion angle θ as the half of the interlayer Pb-I bonds tilt (Fig. 2b), where 2θ is around 24o for the intrinsic structural distortion.24 To further testify this hypothesis of octahedral rotations, we slightly reduced the distortion parameter θ to match the extent of Bragg peak increase in Fig. 2a, and simulated the differential diffraction pattern with respect to the crystal structure in the dark (θ0 = 12o). Compared with the relative intensity changes at short time, the optimal angle tilt is found to be ~0.25o (details of simulation shown in Supplementary discussion 4 and Fig. S5), and the simulated differential diffraction map in Fig. 2c. Compared to the distorted crystal structure at rest, the new structure reduces the adjacent octahedral tilt along the stacking axis (antiferro- distortion), and better aligns the iodine atoms for both octahedral edge {h00} and diagonal directions {hh0}, especially the distance spacings of Pb-I bonds {220} and half of octahedral edge lengths {400} (yellow and cyan in Fig. 2b). This structural change intensifies the in-plane Bragg peaks including {400} and {200}, consistent with the experimental observation at short time (Fig. 2a). Furthermore, we note that the expected intensity increase is not observed for the higher orders of the Bragg peaks in these two families, such as {800}, {330} and {550}, (Fig. 2a). We attribute this deviation to the combination of both the light-induced ordering and the Debye-Waller response. However, because the Debye-Waller effect scales with a |q|2 dependence, it dominates and thus neutralizes the effect of ordering for the higher order Bragg peaks. We note that the response of {110} peaks are partially blocked by the direct electron beam filter, resulting a lower-than expected intensity increase in Fig. 2d. To quantitively compare these intensity changes, we also perform an angular integration at constant |q| of these differential diffraction images (t=2ps and the simulated one after ordering) (Fig. 2d). The experimental and simulated results are in fair agreement, Therefore, these observations support the hypothesis that the light-induced ordering in DJ n=2, is due to the collective lattice reorganization that reduces the octahedral rotations (Fig. 2b). As the in-plane octahedra antiferro-distortion of the perovskite lattice at rest is non-polar and the light- induced atomic motions are essentially affecting the magnitude of the distortion (Fig. 2a), our results imply that carrier coupling to the related optical phonon mode is associated with a non- polar deformation potential mechanism.6 This analysis is further confirmed by our calculations of vibrational modes, which reveals that antiferro-distortive phonon modes associated with the octahedra rotations are predicted for the crystal structure at rest (Fig. S6). 9 Next, in order to gain a deeper insight into the time evolution of the light-induced structural dynamics in 2D hybrid perovskites, we performed a full analysis (up to 100 ps) of the time- dependent intensity changes of the diffraction images after optical excitation. The time traces of the two Bragg peaks {400} and {530} are displayed in Fig. 3a, where the {400} peaks exhibit a significant faster rise-time (~1ps, Fig. S3), revealing a diverse response in Bragg peak dynamics besides the intensity change. Furthermore, an overall increase of diffuse scatterings in-between the Bragg peaks spots is visualized, in the differential diffraction images as shown in Fig. 3b. Bragg peaks spots appear redder as most of the Bragg peaks intensifies toward a negative response. The evolution of the integrated diffuse scattering intensities yields an average increase with ~0.5% (Fig. S3), suggesting a broad energy transfer process to the phonon bath, along with the Debye Waller effect specified at Bragg peak locations. To further quantify the different types of lattice dynamics, we fit each Bragg peak intensity curve with a single exponential function, yielding a rise-time constant τ and relative intensity change Δ = (I − I0)/I0, where I0 and I correspond to the diffraction intensity at rest and after delay time t, respectively. Here, the parameter Δ represents the total peak intensity change due to carrier- lattice interactions and τ the time to achieve 1/e intensity change as shown in Fig. S7a and S7b, respectively. The maximum positive change (increase in intensity) is 4% and the negative change (decrease in intensity) is 12% (detailed plots in Fig. S3a). The time constant map shows a clear disparity between the dynamics from different Bragg peak groups. First, the Bragg peaks with positively changing intensity for which the light-induced lattice ordering mechanism dominates ({400} and {040}), exhibit a very fast time constant of 1 ps or shorter, whereas the peaks with negative intensity response yield a longer time constant of the order of 5 ps. Similar time constants have also been reported in 3D perovskites and have been attributed to the Debye-Waller like response originating from the rotational disorder of the iodine atoms in the perovskite octahedra, leading exclusively to a decrease in peak intensities.23 A modification of our model including the Debye-Waller effect at long time scale is shown to give a better prediction of intensity changes at large q range than the lattice ordering effect (Fig. S8), confirming the existence of multiple energy transfer process in 2D perovskites. Second, both the intensity changes and time constants show a significant anisotropy with respect to directions in the DJ n=2 crystals, which reflects the lack of a tetragonal axis in the monoclinic centered structure (space group Cc n°9) of the crystals at rest 10 Fig. 3 | Lattice (in-plane) and carrier response of DJ n=2 crystal under light excitation. a, Intensity dynamic plots of peak families {400} and {530}. b, 2D differential diffraction map averaged at t = 2ps (left half) and t = 65ps (right half), with blue for intensity decrease and red for increase. The dashed region indicates the area with the most increase of diffuse scatterings. c, Schematics of light-induced reduction of antiferro-distortion and thermally activated atomic displacement from Debye-Waller effect. d, Evolution of carrier temperatures (Tc) as a function of delay times at different excitation densities (1.1~8.4×1012 cm-2). e, Estimation of saturation densities (N2D) for DJ n=2 (red) and RP n=2 (blue) crystals at different temperatures. The saturation densities due to electron-hole plasma and exciton gas are shown in solid and dashed lines, respectively. 11 because of the geometry and structure of the 4AMP cation. We also note that the intensity traces of some Bragg peaks such as {330} and {550} show a long recovery time (>30 ps, Fig. S3a), which could be related to other heat transfer mechanisms and phonon-phonon interactions.27 All these observations from UED suggest that there are multiple competing mechanisms at play, which attest to the different origins and time scales of carrier-lattice interactions, as illustrated in Fig. 3d. We propose that the light-induced lattice ordering, which was attributed to the reduction of the in-plane lattice antiferro-distortion at ultrafast time scale (≤ 1 ps), and at longer timescales (~5 ps) a Debye-Waller like response. Here, the transient increase in the collective ordering in the DJ n=2 lattice may be viewed as an incomplete transformation towards a completely ordered phase. Indeed, differential calorimetry measurements on DJ n=2 single crystals do not show any evidence of a temperature-induced phase transition above ambient temperature toward a perfectly ordered phase (Fig. S9). Besides, temperature dependent XRD exhibits no sign of phase transition, and rather results in a global decrease of the Bragg peak intensities due to a Debye-Waller effect and linear thermal expansion (Fig. S10). Additionally, the perfectly undistorted 2D perovskite reference phase has only been observed in the fully inorganic Cs-based Cs2PbI2Cl2 2D perovskite at room temperature,33 which emphasize the importance of the anisotropy of the 4AMP organic cations in the structure for the lattice distortion in hybrid 2D perovskites. On the contrary, undistorted phases are common for hybrid 3D perovskite compounds at room temperature and therefore any ultrafast light-induced ordering is lacking.34 Ultrafast carrier-lattice interactions triggered by dense electron-hole plasma In order to gain a complete picture of energy transfer and understand the structural dynamics observed in UED measurements, we performed transient absorption (TA) measurements in the same temporal window with the similar excitation fluences as the UED experiments on DJ n=2 crystal, (SI discussion 5 and Methods). By monitoring the transmission variations following above-band optical pump et 3.1eV, we estimated the evolution of effective temperature (Tc) of hot-carrier gas, by fitting the high-energy tail near the band edge with the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution. (analysis details in supplementary discussion 5 and Fig. S11).35 The hot-carrier dynamics for various fluences are displayed in Fig. 3c. We observe a fast build-up time of initial carrier temperature within hundreds of femtoseconds, corresponding to carrier-carrier scattering before quasi-equilibrium distribution of hot-carriers. The carrier cooling time is estimated to be 12 sub-ps to 1ps, which increases monotonically with excitation fluence. This carrier cooling time constant is consistent with previous reports on DJ perovskites poly-crystalline films ((4AMP) PbI4).36 The extracted hot-carrier cooling time was 1.1 ps at 8.4×1012cm-2, which also corresponds to the rise time of (400) Bragg peaks that exhibit lattice ordering, thus hinting at correlated processes that govern the structural change and the carrier dynamics measured using ultrafast spectroscopy. To elucidate the microscopic origin of ultrafast lattice ordering, and how the role of photoexcited carriers in activating the reduction of antiferro-distortion, we performed an in-depth analysis of the excitation regime (electron-hole pair plasma vs exciton gas) of DJ n=2 samples in UED. In order to achieve this, we followed the seminal analysis proposed by Schmitt-Rink, Chemla and Miller for excitonic non-linear optical effects in 2D semiconductors.19,20 First, at a fluence of 1 mJ/cm2 in UED experiment, a high electron-hole pair density of 1.3×1013 cm2 is generated. The effective temperature of initial carrier gas is estimated to be 4100K, extrapolated from the carrier temperature plotted in Fig. 3c. Next, we computed the saturation densities for excitonic responses in DJ n=2 perovskites, by taking into account the exciton binding energy and Bohr radius of 1s exciton resonance, and comparing these values with RP n=2 compound (see supplementary discussion 6).19,37 A summary of these saturation densities at different carrier temperatures is plotted in Fig. 3e. Here, the dashed horizontal lines correspond to the saturation due to the exciton gas (Mott transition), above which photoexcited carriers are not described by excitons but by a hot electron-hole plasma.19 The solid line draws the saturation by electron-hole plasma at low and high temperature ranges. As analyzed by Schmitt-Rink, Chemla and Miller, a cold exciton gas is more efficient in saturating the exciton resonance than a hot carrier plasma. The very high plasma pair density of 1.3×1013cm-2 (for 1 mJ/cm2 in the UED experiment) nonetheless exceeds the saturation densities for both hot carrier plasma and cold exciton gas regimes by one order of magnitude. Therefore, we conclude that the observed energy transfer at short time in the UED experiment is rather related to the coupling of a hot and dense carrier plasma to the lattice, instead of exciton polaronic couplings as reported in other studies at low temperature and low excitation power.18 In the case of a dense electron-hole plasma, strong transient lattice distortions different from Debye-Waller effects can be induced in semiconductors. For example, transient strain pulses 13 can be generated by supersonically propagating plasmas, traveling deep into crystal bulk beyond the speed of sound.38,39 Moreover, complex lattice organizations have been also recently observed, such as the suppression of the ferroelectric instability KaTO3,40 and the activation of the antiferro- distorsive rotation of octahedra in SrTiO3.41 The last case, which was interpreted on the basis of a photodoping-induced modification of the structural soft-mode potential, might be closely related to our present study on 2D perovskites. Furthermore, it was shown that the ultrafast dynamics (~0.2 ps) of the observed antiferro-distortion in SrTiO3 is non-thermally driven by changes of the phonon potential.41 These results and analysis have enabled us to propose a complete picture involving carrier-lattice interactions in short time, where high-density injection of carriers generates a hot and dense electron-hole plasma. The electron-hole plasma that produces a strong modification of the lattice dielectric properties on one hand results in the screening of bound electron-hole (exciton) pair formation, and on the other hand modifies the interatomic force constants. This last mechanism of plasma-induced modulation of the interatomic force must be considered because halide perovskites are strongly ionic materials like SrTiO3. The resulting modification of the crystal cohesive energy, manifests as a strong lattice reorganization with antiferro-distortive rotation of octahedra in 2D DJ perovskites. In parallel, a more classical decay of the plasma energy occurs through electron-phonon interactions and observed in structural dynamics associated with a Debye-Waller effect. This classical process is mainly associated to an initial activation of optical phonons, that decay later toward acoustic phonons producing coherent acoustic oscillations (as shown in Fig. S11e).36 Role of organic cations and structural phases of 2D perovskites Finally, in order to understand if the mechanism of light-induced transformation is generally applicable to the other 2D perovskites with different organic cations and structural phases, we perform UED experiments on three other hybrid 2D perovskites: 4AMP-MA2Pb3I10 (DJ n=3) exhibiting the same composition as DJ n=2 but a thicker perovskite layer, BA2MAPb2I7 (RP n=2) of Ruddlesden-Popper (RP) phase type with same perovskite layer as DJ n=2 but different spacer organic cations (with BA butylammonium), and BA2MA3Pb4I13 (RP n=4) with a different perovskite layer and spacer organic cations. The structures of these 2D perovskites are illustrated in Fig. 4a and Fig. 4b, respectively. The experimental UED static diffraction pattern of DJ n=3 (shown in Fig. S12) resembles that of DJ n=2, suggesting that changing the perovskite layer 14 thickness for the DJ 2D perovskites has a negligible effect on the in-plane diffraction pattern.24 From the response of DJ n=3 (shown in Fig. S13), we also observe similar intensity increase for peak (040) and (004), as was observed for DJ n=2 (Fig. 2a). Furthermore, the rise time of these Fig. 4 | Comparison between different 2D perovskite structures with different organic cations. Crystal structures of the a, DJ n=3 and b, RP n=2 and n=4 perovskites. c, Angular integrated differential diffraction plot (20~40ps) for the DJ n=2, DJ n=3, RP n=2 and RP n=4 perovskites. The yellow and cyan colors label the Bragg peaks showing positive responses in DJ systems. d, Histogram of rise-time constants of DJ n=2, DJ n=3 and RP n=4 structures. 15 Bragg peaks are at similar time scale of ~1ps (Fig. S14). These analysis of the DJ n=2 and n=3 indicate that the phenomena of light-induced ordering at short time scales is generally applicable to the DJ type 2D perovskites. In contrast, the RP crystal no signature of fast rising peaks with positive intensity was observed (Fig. S14 to Fig. S16). The non-existence of light-induced ordering in RP phase could be attributed to the fact that the crystal structure is already highly ordered in RP perovskites for higher n-values (Fig. 4a and Fig. 4b).6 In order to quantify the different behaviors between the DJ and the RP phase 2D perovskites we evaluated the differential intensity and the time constant of the relevant Bragg peaks. First, we analyzed the differential intensity comparison between DJ n=2 and DJ n=3 as illustrated in Fig. 4c. Both DJ n=2 and n=3 exhibit similar behaviors. We observed an increase in the intensity of the in-plane Bragg peaks for DJ n=2 {400} and DJ n=3 {040}, and a decrease for However, in sharp contrast to the DJ case, all the observed Bragg peaks in RP n=2 and n=4 yield a global decrease in intensity. Furthermore, comparison of the histograms of the time constant τ for DJ n=2, DJ n=3, and RP n=4 (Fig. 4d, see also Fig. S17 for the corresponding scatter plots), shows a generally slower response (up to 15 ps) of RP perovskites as compared to the DJ crystals. As similarly observed in DJ n=2, an increased diffuse scattering at longer time scales (Fig. S13, Fig. S15 and Fig. S16) indicates a thermal energy transfer to phonon populations, with similar time constant as the Debye-Waller decrease. These results demonstrate that there is a fundamental difference in the mechanism of carrier-lattice coupling and structural dynamics between the DJ and RP 2D perovskite phases, which implies that the competing mechanism of ultrafast lattice ordering during an antiferro- distortive phase transformation is mitigated in the RP phase. As described in Fig. 4b, the diffraction patterns of RP n=2 and n=4 at rest are consistent with the static crystal structures reported previously, which exhibits almost no antiferro-distortions in plane,42 contrary to DJ n=2 and n=3 (Fig. 1d and 4a)24. Therefore, in the RP case the initial ordering step (Fig. 3d) is by-passed and the energy of the hot carriers is directly released to the lattice without the initial resonant energy transfer. We also note that the RP n=4 case is more consistent with the results on 3D MAPbI3, which only shows the Debye-Waller like effect with similar time scales (~ 10 ps).23 In addition, the slow response time in RP systems arises from the differences in the lattice softness between 16 the BA and the DJ 2D perovskites. The BA molecules reduce the rigidity of the 2D lattice by comparison to the DJ case, leading to an enhancement of the lower-energy part of the vibrational density of states.43 It was indeed shown experimentally to enhance the deformation potential mechanism in BA compounds, leading to carrier trapping.5 This results is also consistent with a recent high-resolution resonant impulsive stimulated Raman spectroscopy,12 showing that the vibrational relaxation in monolayered bromide perovskites formed from flexible alkyl-amines as organic barriers is fast and relatively independent of the lattice temperature, while a resonant effect is observed for aromatic amines. These results comparing the nature of carrier lattice interaction in 2D perovskites with different organic spacer layers provides clear design principle in controlling of carrier dynamics in 2D perovskites-based devices. Thus, in summary, our work elucidates that the photoexcited carrier relaxation depends on a competition between: i) a fast lattice ordering induced by hot electron-hole plasma, which strongly modulates the crystal cohesive energy by reducing the lattice antiferro-distortions; and ii) more classical ones related to a decay toward the low-energy part of the vibrational density of states. The strongly contrasting behaviors observed by changing the interlayer cations and thereby the structural phase of 2D perovskites demonstrates that UED measurements can be further extended systematically to the study of different perovskite compounds, such as organic cations and halides, providing an ideal platform of controlling structure-energy dissipation channels in organic-inorganic materials relevant for a wide range of novel applications including hot-carrier photovoltaics and photocatalysis and ultrafast optical communication devices. Methods Materials The materials used for 2D perovskites (DJ and RP) precursors were purchased from Sigma Aldrich, including methylamine hydrochloride (MACl), lead oxide (PbO), 4-aminomethyl piperidine (4AMP), butylamine (BA), Hypophosphorous acid (H3PO2), and hydroiodic (HI). Methylamine iodide (MAI) was purchased from Greatcell Solar. Single crystal synthesis and transfer Single Crystal Synthesis: BA n=2,4 perovskites solution was synthesized by adopting the previously reported procedure, using 0.4 times the scale.24 4AMP n=2,3 perovskites solution was 17 synthesized by adopting the previously reported procedure, using 0.5 times the scale.42 Glass was used as the substrate for the 2D perovskite growth. Glass substrates were cut into 2.5 cm × 2.5 cm squares, then cleaned in soapy water, isopropanol, acetone by ultrasonication for 20 min each, and then were dried using an argon gun. The substrates were transferred into a UV-Ozone cleaner, and cleaned for 20 min. 10 μL of the diluted solution was deposited dropwise onto the glass surface, another glass was put on top to fully cover the bottom glass and dried overnight at 80 °C for BA and 75 °C for 4AMP. Thin single crystal grew spontaneously as the solvent evaporated. Crystal Exfoliation and Transfer: Large-flake single-crystal perovskites were mechanically exfoliated and then transferred onto 100 × 100μm TEM transmission window with silicon nitride membranes. All samples were prepared and sealed in Argon gas until UED measurements. A comparison of diffraction images between first and last scans suggests no new peaks showing, confirming no degradation during measurement period (Fig. S18). Sample characterization Optical absorbance: The optical absorbance of the single crystals was determined based on confocal microscopy, by focusing a broad-spectrum white light beam (Thorlabs SOLIS-3C) into a 50um spot and measuring the transmission spectrum through a TEM window. The spectrum was acquired using a spectrometer (Andor Kymera 328i) and CCD (Andor iDus 416). Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC): Differential scanning calorimetry was performed from room temperature to 150°C with a ramp rate of 15°C/min. The heat capacity of the sample was calculated from the heat flow (W/g) and was calibrated using a sapphire sample as a reference. Ultrafast electron diffraction (UED) UED experiments were performed at SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory. Electrons were accelerated to 3.7 MeV by Klystron with ~150fs temporal width. Normal incident pulses were diffracted by the sample in transmission geometry on TEM transmission window, and diffracted intensities were captured by EMCCD. The electron pules were synchronized with a laser beam (3.1eV, ~75fs) at the frequency of 180Hz, with temporal delay typically from -20ps to 100ps. The delay time was tuned by adjusting the relative path length difference using a delay stage. To reduce the confounding effect of mechanical shift and possible crystal structural change during time evolution (~hrs.), the sequence of stage locations was configured randomly during each scan. Each 18 typical UED run contained 20~30 pump-probe scans and each diffraction image was averaged over ~ 8000 shots to reduce statistical fluctuations. UED Bragg peaks indexing: The Bragg peaks of the measured samples (DJ n=2, DJ n=3, RP n=2 and RP n=4) were indexed by comparing the diffraction patterns with the simulated diffraction images calculated via SingleCrystal software (http://crystalmaker.com/singlecrystal/), using structure files (.cif) from Mao et al.24 These comparisons were shown in Fig. S2 (DJ n=2), Fig. UED data processing: A stack of diffraction maps at different time step was collected for each sample measurement. Each diffraction image was background-removed by CCD dark count and normalized by total diffraction intensity. To extract the time traces of relative intensity response of each Bragg peak (ΔI(t)/I0), we first integrated the intensity within ROI centered at each peak (0.2Å in diameter), and then normalized the intensity curve by averaging over negative delays (t<0). Time traces of each Bragg peaks were fitted globally by a single exponential curve: ΔI(t)/I0 = { 0 , t < t0 Δ (exp (t − t0 τ ) − 1) , t ≥ t0 Where Δ stands for intensity change (%), τ for time constant (ps), and t0 for time zero offset (calibrated by the response of bismuth crystal and fixed globally). Fitting results were plotted in Fig. S7 (DJ n=2) and Fig. S17 (DJ n=3 and RP n=4). Results of selected peak families of DJ n=2 are displayed in Fig. S3. Error intervals of the fitting parameters Δ and τ were estimated from one standard deviation calculated from the square root of the covariance matrix diagonal. Fitting methods were based on least squares optimization performed by ‘curve_fitting’ function using Python (version 3.7.4). Transient absorption spectroscopy (TA) Transient absorption (TA) experiments for 2D perovskites were done by using a 400 nm pump laser and a supercontinuum white light probe laser ranging from 450 to 750 nm. The pump laser was obtained from a 2nd harmonic generator (Ultrafast System) derived by a fundamental 60 fs- pulsed laser (Coherent, Inc.) at 800 nm with a repetition rate of 1 kHz. The 1 kHz pump laser passed through a chopper to yield a 500 Hz frequency. The pump fluence was controlled within 19 0.1~0.75 mJ/cm2. The supercontinuum white light laser was generated by introducing the fundamental laser into a nonlinear crystal, CaF2 (Ultrafast System). Pump and probe laser pulses were temporally and spatially overlapped and focused on the 2D perovskites. 2D perovskites were performed in ambient air condition with DJ n=2 sample sealed in ~50nm thick PMMA. Phonon simulation methods Phonon modes simulation: these were based on periodic Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations, performed within Linear Combination of Atomic Orbital (LCAO) formalism, as implemented in the CRYSTAL17 code.44 Electronic ground state was computed within the GGA approximation, employing the PBE exchange-correlation functional,45 along with double split basis set quality and core potentials for heavy Pb and I atoms. Dispersion D3 scheme was included to account for van-der Waals interactions,46 as these are expected to play an important role in the packing of the organic component. As it is not currently implemented in CRYSTAL17, Spin-Orbit- Coupling (SOC) has been is neglected in the present calculations. Nevertheless, SOC is not expected to heavily affect the ion dynamics, with current computational set-up providing vibrational frequencies in nice agreement with experimental data, for the reference orthorhombic phase of the 3D methylammonium lead iodide perovskite.47 Calculations have been performed on the reference crystalline structure of the DJ n=2 system from , adopting 2x4x4 sampling of the first Brillouin zone, in the Monkhorst-Pack scheme48 (with the less dense sampling associated to the longer plane-stacking direction). Crystalline structure was fully relaxed with only constraint related to the native space group symmetry (Cc n°9). The hessian was estimated at the  point of the Brillouin zone, via finite displacements,49 resulting in zero negative frequencies. Resulting normal modes were used as special coordinates along which to distort the crystal structure and to evaluate the change in the electron diffraction pattern, as exemplified in Fig. S6. Electron diffraction simulation: snapshots of the crystalline structure as distorted along all the computed normal modes were then provided as crystallographic information files (.cif) and used to simulate electron diffraction intensities using SingleCrystal software. The simulated 2D patterns 20 and 1D azimuthally integrated plots were reconstructed by convolving the localized Bragg peaks with gaussian shape with FWHM of 0.17Å. Data availability The authors declare that the main data supporting the findings of this study are available within the article and its Supplementary information. Extra data are available from the authors upon request.