Superconducting quantum fluctuations in one dimension Andrew G. Semenov1, 2 and Andrei D. Zaikin3, 1, 2 1I.E. Tamm Department of Theoretical Physics, P.N. Lebedev Physical Institute, 119991 Moscow, Russia 2National Research University Higher School of Economics, 101000 Moscow, Russia 3Institute for Quantum Materials and Technologies, Karlsruhe Institute of Nanotechnology (KIT), 76021, Karlsruhe, Germany (Dated: April 18, 2022) We review some recent developments in the field of quasi-one-dimensional super- conductivity. We demonstrate that low temperature properties of superconducting nanowires are essentially determined by quantum fluctuations. Smooth (Gaussian) fluctuations of the superconducting phase (also associated with plasma modes prop- agating along the wire) may significantly affect the electron density of states in such nanowires and induce persistent current noise in superconducting nanorings. Further interesting phenomena such as, e.g., non-vanishing resistance and shot noise of the voltage in current-biased superconducting nanowires, are caused by non-Gaussian fluctuations of the order parameter – quantum phase slips (QPS). Such phenomena may be interpreted in terms of tunneling of fluxons playing the role of effective quan- tum "particles" dual to Cooper pairs and obeying complicated full counting statistics which reduces to Poissonian one in the low frequency limit. We also demonstrate that QPS effects may be particularly pronounced in thinnest wires and rings where quan- tum phase slips remain unbound and determine a non-perturbative length scale Lc beyond which the supercurrent gets suppressed by quantum fluctuations. Accord- ingly, for T → 0 such nanowires should become insulating at scales exceeding Lc, whereas at shorter length scales they may still exhibit superconducting properties. We argue that certain non-trivial features associated with quantum fluctuations of the order parameter may be sensitive to specific circuit topology and may be observed in structures like, e.g., a system of capacitively coupled superconducting nanowires. arXiv:2204.07477v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 15 Apr 2022 2 CONTENTS I. Introduction 3 II. Quantum phase fluctuations and local density of states 9 A. Green functions in the presence of phase fluctuations 10 B. Effective action for phase fluctuations 11 C. Density of states 13 D. Summary and comparison with experiments 16 III. Gaussian phase fluctuations in superconducting rings 18 A. Grand partition function 19 B. Coherent fluctuations of supercurrent 20 IV. Quantum phase slips and phase-charge duality 24 A. Phase-charge duality in the operator formalism 25 B. Path integral analysis 30 V. Superconducting nanorings with quantum phase slips 34 A. Supercurrent in quantum phase slip rings 36 B. Supercurrent noise in QPS rings 38 VI. Shot noise from quantum phase slips 43 A. Keldysh technique and perturbation theory 44 B. I-V curve and voltage noise 45 VII. Full counting statistics of quantum phase slips 50 A. Cumulant generating function 51 B. Voltage cumulants in the zero frequency limit 53 C. Noise power in the short wire limit 56 D. Higher voltage cumulants 58 VIII. Topology-controlled phase coherence in superconducting nanowires 61 A. Effective action 63 B. Variational analysis and propagators 65 3 C. Quantum phase transition and supercurrent 68 D. Effect of QPS and localization of Cooper pairs 70 E. An alternative setup 73 F. Discussion 76 IX. Quantum phase slips in capacitively coupled superconducting nanowires 77 A. The model 78 B. Plasma mode splitting 79 C. Quantum phase transitions: renormalization group analysis 81 X. Concluding remarks 87