1 3D printed acoustically programmable soft microactuators Authors: Murat Kaynak1†, Amit Dolev1†, and Mahmut Selman Sakar1* Affiliations: 1Institute of Mechanical Engineering, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland † These authors equally contributed to this work. *Corresponding author: Mahmut Selman Sakar, PhD Institute of Mechanical Engineering, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, MED3 2916 Station 9, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. Email: selman.sakar@epfl.ch Keywords: microactuators, soft robotics, acoustic actuation, bistable mechanisms, physical intelligence, 3D printing 2 Abstract The concept of creating all-mechanical soft microrobotic systems has great potential to address outstanding challenges in biomedical applications, and introduce more sustainable and multifunctional products. To this end, magnetic fields and light have been extensively studied as potential energy sources. On the other hand, coupling the response of materials to pressure waves has been overlooked despite the abundant use of acoustics in nature and engineering solutions. Here, we show that programmed commands can be contained on 3D nanoprinted polymer systems with the introduction of selectively excited air bubbles and rationally designed compliant mechanisms. A repertoire of micromechanical systems is engineered using experimentally validated computational models that consider the effects of primary and secondary pressure fields on entrapped air bubbles and the surrounding fluid. Coupling the dynamics of bubble oscillators reveals rich acoustofluidic interactions that can be programmed in space and time. We prescribe kinematics by harnessing the forces generated through these interactions to deform structural elements, which can be remotely reconfigured on-demand with the incorporation of mechanical switches. These basic micromechanical systems will serve as the building blocks for the development of a novel class of untethered soft microrobots powered and controlled by acoustic signals. 3 Introduction Soft materials can be programmed to change their physical properties such as shape and stiffness on-the-fly by the externally applied light, heat, mechanical forces or magnetic fields1–5. Such material formulations have great potential, particularly at small scales, to achieve functionalities that are unattainable by conventional mechatronic systems6–13. Notably, simple mechanical structures fabricated from magnetorheological or liquid crystal elastomers displayed a virtually unlimited number of degrees of freedom (DOF), as a result of either the spatial complexity of the magnetization profile14–16 or the use of structured illumination17,18. Moreover, rationally designed flexible structures, also known as mechanical metamaterials, can realize programmable digital logic19–29. This route for physical intelligence has already been pursued by living organisms30–32, and extensively studied for the development of autonomous soft robots33–36. Acoustofluidics has several unique properties that can reveal the full potential of programmable soft matter. Air bubbles are efficient transducers that generate forces through interactions with the external pressure waves, the surrounding fluid, and with each other37–45. Therefore, these interactions can be programmed by modulating the acoustic wave as well as the geometry and the spatial distribution of bubbles. The generated forces are determined by primary and secondary acoustic effects that are highly nonlinear. Thus, a detailed understanding of the underlying physics is instrumental to use air bubbles for controlling deformable elements. To address this unmet challenge, we combined analytical modeling, finite element simulations, and experimental analysis that involved detailed characterization of acoustic pressure, bubble oscillations, and forces generated by bubbles with coupled dynamics. Here, we present an integrated design, fabrication, and control methodology that transforms monolithically printed flexible structures into programmable soft robotic systems. The key innovation is the spatial patterning of polymer capsules that stably contain individual air bubbles along ultraflexible beams using direct laser writing. By tuning the geometry of the capsules and the architecture of the material, we precisely controlled the acoustofluidic interactions. We demonstrate the compatibility of our acousto-active systems with mechanical logic by constructing actuated bistable mechanisms. 4 Results and Discussion The basic actuator module consists of a 3D printed cylindrical capsule with a single circular orifice (Fig. 1a). We printed all the structures as a monolithic piece from a single biocompatible soft polymer, trimethylolpropane ethoxylate triacrylate (TPETA)46, using two-photon polymerization (Fig. 1b). A detailed description of the experimental methods is given in Supplementary Note 1. Within this capsule, the bubble is physically isolated from the surrounding fluid except at the side of the opening (Fig. 1c). Acoustic excitation of a single bubble submerged in liquid generates microstreaming.47 By entrapping bubbles inside cavities, their oscillations are constrained to regions defined by the orifices. In this configuration, acoustic streaming generated counter-rotating vortices and a jet localized in the center, which was captured using high-speed recordings of tracer particles around the actuator module (Fig. 1d). Once an actuator is connected to a clamped cantilever beam, it is expected to generate thrust normal to the orifice’s plane, thereby deforming the beam. By carefully tuning the acoustic frequency, different vibration modes of the coupled fluid-structure system can be excited. The vibration modes are manifested by the unique deformation patterns of the bubble at the interface. Nevertheless, we focused our attention to the first mode because, assuming a uniform distribution, the projection of the impinging pressure is maximal on this mode. Large deformation and complex motion can be generated with slender structural elements including beams, plates, and shells48–50. We based our design methodology on beams and flexures because they are easier to manufacture, experimentally characterize, and computationally model. We have recently developed an analytical model that calculates the natural frequencies and corresponding vibration modes of bubbles entrapped inside arbitrarily shaped cavities with multiple circular orifices51. In brief, we extended a previously published model52 to accommodate multiple orifices on the same cavity, incorporate all the possible mode shapes, and consider the geometry adjacent to the office. We recorded the power spectrum of the ultrasound transducer using a hydrophone to determine the frequency bands at which the actuators could be effectively powered (Fig. S1). Using our model, we designed the geometry (i.e., volume and orifice radii) so that the first natural frequencies of the entrapped bubbles are within these bands (Fig. 1e). Accordingly, we printed two capsules with orifice radii of 7.75 μm and 13 μm, respectively (Table S1). Entrapped bubbles were actuated selectively at their estimated 5 natural frequencies of either 85 kHz or 170 kHz, which led to a sequential deformation of the beams (Fig. 1f and Movie S1). Mechanisms printed parallel to the substrate are not ideal for the quantification of forces because the bubbles may interact with the substrate’s surface44,45. To minimize such perturbations, we printed the beams vertically, raising the actuator modules 50 μm above the substrate (Fig. 2a). Laser scanning confocal microscope images of fluorescently labeled samples verified that the structures were printed according to the CAD design (Fig. S2). In this configuration, beam bending could be followed from the actuator’s in-plane displacement (Fig. 2b), which increased quadratically with the input voltage (Fig. 2c). The bending modulus was calculated from the material’s Young’s modulus, E = 13 MPa46, and the dimensions of the beam were measured using electron microscopy (Fig. S2). The generated force was then estimated using linear beam theory (Supplementary Note 2). Although the linear theory was used, the displacement is a nonlinear function of the applied force because the part of the beam corresponding to the location of the actuator was taken as rigid. The tip displacement, δ, is given as: (1) where L is the length of the beam, l is the length of half the actuator, E is Young’s modulus, I is the second moment of inertia of the cross-section and P is the applied force. Finite element method (FEM) simulations of a nonlinear model were in perfect agreement with the analytical model, thus confirming that the linearity assumption was acceptable for the given range of deflections (Fig. 2d). The analytical model was used to calculate the total force acting on a deforming beam from the recorded deflection. We observed a linear relationship between the voltage applied to the transducer and the resultant acoustic pressure measured by a hydrophone (Fig. 2e), as predicted by the theory53. The acoustic energy density in the workspace quadratically increases with increasing pressure54, and so does the streaming velocity around the bubble. Sequentially increasing the input voltage resulted with a new configuration within milliseconds. Furthermore, when the input voltage was turned off the beam immediately returned to its original position, confirming that the actuation was in the elastic range. We characterized the oscillation amplitude at the bubble’s first natural frequency using a custom-built δ = LP 6EI L 3l + 2L ( )+ 6l 2l + L ( ) 4 + L2 2l + L ( ) 2 P2 E2I 2 ⎡ ⎣ ⎢ ⎢ ⎢ ⎢ ⎢ ⎤ ⎦ ⎥ ⎥ ⎥ ⎥ ⎥ 6 experimental platform (Fig. S3). The data showed that the deflection amplitude at the air-fluid interface increases linearly for the range of pressure we applied (Fig. 2f). An actuator module with multiple DOF would drastically increase the dexterity and form factor of printed structures. We postulated that a capsule that contains multiple orifices of different sizes would serve this purpose. To test this idea, we printed an actuator module in the shape of an equilateral triangular prism with three orifices at the center of each face (Fig. 3a). The actuator module was connected atop a 50 μm long and 2 μm diameter cantilever beam. The sizes of the orifices (15, 9.5 and 7 μm) were chosen in a way that corresponding natural frequencies were well spaced and within the effective range of the transducer (Fig.3b). Simulation results have shown that primarily one interface is deformed at each mode (Fig. 3c). We excited the system at multiple frequencies simultaneously to control the position. The force is unidirectional, therefore, at least three frequencies are required to fully control the 2D position. Ideally, these frequencies are the ones where the largest displacement is obtained, which are expected to be the bubble’s natural frequencies. However, the transducer has its own dynamical response, and the input pressure varies with the excitation frequency. We addressed this issue by experimentally calibrating the response of the system. We recorded the actuator motion while sweeping the frequency from 40 kHz to 160 kHz at a constant input voltage. Using a subpixel resolution image processing algorithm56, we extracted the planar position of the module (Fig. S4). We then selected three frequencies where the largest deflections in different axes were recorded. Figure 3d shows the undeformed and deformed states of the system at the chosen frequencies. Next, we measured the actuator’s deflection at each frequency and built the vectors spanning the planar displacement field. We implemented a controller that leverages the superposition principle, and excites the system with a signal comprising three harmonic terms which corresponds to the aforementioned vectors. We control two DOF with three forces, thus, there are infinite combinations. We solved a constrained linear least-squares problem57, where we minimized the total amplitude of the applied signal. We performed a series of experiments to evaluate the control strategy. First, we programmed a calibrated device to repeatedly follow a rectangular trajectory, slightly offset from the origin where we had better control over the motion (Fig. 3e). Second, we programmed several circular trajectories with different radii and offsets (Movie S2). The position error increased with the distance from the origin (Fig. 7 3f). Third, we used the calibration parameters of one device to control another with the same design (Fig. S4). The trajectories of the two devices were close, suggesting that calibration might be performed once and used repeatedly for different devices. As a final demonstration, we designed four trajectories prescribing the initials EPFL to show that control was not limited to specific geometries (Fig. 3g). Acoustically excited bubbles interact with each other through the surrounding fluid when they reside in close proximity. The total force acting on a bubble is the result of the exciting primary pressure field, and higher order fields emanating from neighboring bubbles that also act as acoustic sources38,58. The distances between bubbles are significantly smaller than the acoustic wavelength in all our prototypes. Therefore, we can assume that the acoustic radiation forces caused by the primary field do not affect the relative displacement of the actuators. The secondary forces that act on the coupled actuators are thrust, drag-induced acoustic streaming, and secondary acoustic radiation force (also known as secondary acoustic radiation force or secondary Bjerknes force). Identical bubbles are expected to generate the same acoustic streaming; thus, the generated thrust would push the bubbles away from each other. On the other hand, the magnitude of the acoustic radiation force, which primarily acts to pull the bubbles toward each other, depends on the distance between them38,58. The total force, FB, acting on a bubble is F! = F" + F#$ + F% (2) where FR denotes the acoustic radiation force, FAS denotes thrust generated by streaming, and Fd is the drag force acting on a bubble due to the streaming generated by the adjacent bubble. To quantify the total force generated by interacting bubbles, we printed two adjacent cantilever beams with identical actuators that were faced toward each other (Table S1). The initial distance between the actuators, di, was systematically varied to study the effect of spacing. At equilibrium, FB in Eq.(2) represent the elastic force applied by the cantilever beam, denoted by P in Eq.(1). We observed two distinct regimes in the dynamics of the coupled actuators (Movie S3). When the initial distance between the actuators was smaller than a critical distance, dc, the radiation forces dominated the thrust generated by acoustic streaming (Fig. 4a). For the given actuator design, this critical distance was 50 μm (i.e., dc = 50 μm). As a result, the beams bent towards each other until the bubbles made contact (Fig. 4b). With increasing di, the magnitude of the acoustic radiation force decreased, emphasizing the 8 contribution of streaming forces (Fig. 4c). For di > dc, the sign of the total force switched, where the beams started to move away from each other (Fig. 4d). distance and the input voltage. The further away the actuators were from each other at rest, the more the beam deflection resembled that of the isolated single beam (see Fig. 2c). Based on this empirical observation, we hypothesized that the dynamics could be captured by an analytical model where all forces are proportional to the input voltage squared55. We assumed that Fd did not depend on the distance between the actuators, therefore FAS = Fd at all times. This assumption is reasonable as the distance between the bubbles was always comparable to the bubble size, which was significantly shorter than the acoustic wavelength. We also assumed that FR inversely depend on the distance squared38,58. The force balance equation, Eq.(2), is then re-written as: F! = (αd&' + 2γ)V' (3) where α and γ are functions of the excitation frequency and geometry, and d is the distance between the bubbles’ vibrating surface. We fitted α = 174.5 nN V-2 μm-2, and γ = 0.027 nN V-2 at 125 kHz to the empirical data shown in Figure 3e. The model could capture the dynamics represented in the experimental data (Fig. S5). This analytical model has been used to design the prototypes presented in the rest of the article. Our results have shown that radiation forces between identical actuator modules do not change direction for a given spacing. Actuators with different orifice sizes displayed more complex interactions. We discovered that depending on the excitation frequency, actuators with the same initial distance attracted or repelled each other. An analogous phenomenon was observed between acoustically excited free-floating spherical bubbles with different radii38,58. Bubbles with distinct natural frequencies oscillate with a relative phase that dictates the direction of the radiation force. When the bubbles oscillate in a relative phase of less than a quarter of a period, the force is attractive, but if the phase differ by more than a quarter but less than three quarters of a period, the force is repulsive (Fig. 4f). Therefore, identical bubbles tend to attract each other, and non-identical bubbles can either attract or repeal each other, depending on the excitation frequency (Fig. 4g). In our experiments, actuator modules with cavity radii 9 of 25 μm and 17.5 μm and orifice radii of 10 μm, attracted or repelled one another at 85 kHz and 125 kHz, respectively (Fig. 4h and Movie S4). We designed a flextensional mechanism that leverages this frequency-dependent behavior to manifest multiple distinct deformation patterns on the same system (Fig. S6 and Movie S5). Both couples of arms simultaneously closed at one frequency, and one couple opened while the other closed at another frequency. The frequencies at which the arms would open or close were determined by the relative phase of oscillations, which was modified by capsule geometry. Both operation modes were independent of the input signal amplitude, therefore, the angle between the arms could be tuned with the applied voltage. So far, we focused on a paradigm where actuator modules were patterned on different structures. In this arrangement, rapid increase in radiation forces with decreasing distance limits the range of motion that the actuators can generate. To extend the interval at which the structure bends in a graded fashion, we constrained the actuators’ motion. To this end, we connected two actuators with a truss so that they were not allowed to come very close to each other (Fig. 5a and Fig. S7). As expected, the arms progressively bent out of plane for a large range of input voltage (Movie S6). To report the deformation, we recorded the displacement of the actuators along the y-axis (Fig. 5b). Although the arms bent under the dominant radiation forces, the displacement curve did not follow the highly nonlinear trend presented in Figure 4e. We built a FEM model of the mechanism based on the CAD design and the material properties (Fig. S7). The radiation force magnitude and direction are expected to change as the arms bend due to the relative position of the bubbles. We simplified the model by assuming that the radiation force always acted to pull the actuators towards each other, and its magnitude was proportional to the thrust. We took the thrust calculated for a single actuator module (see Fig. 2) as an input and estimated the acoustic radiation force for the applied voltage values by fitting the empirical data shown in Figure 5b. Here, the acoustic radiation force was taken as F" = βV'd&' following Eq.(2), where β was estimated as 745.6 nN V-2 μm-2 (Supplementary Note 3). In the experiments, at relatively high voltage values, further increment did not cause further deformation (Fig. 5b). The experimentally observed plateau may be due to the drag force applied to the moving actuators by the anchored ones. The out-of-axis bending is a classic example for unimorph actuators where we control the angular displacement. By simply connecting a microbubble pair with an ultraflexible spring mechanism, 10 we developed a linear microactuator (Fig. 5c). Acoustic forces were primarily uniaxial and, as expected, we did not observe out-of-axis deflection during operation (Movie S7). Attractive radiation forces between the two microbubbles caused the gap to narrow. The deflection of the spring followed an almost linear trend with respect to applied voltage until the bubbles were 20 μm apart from each other, at which point the radiation forces snapped the mechanism (Fig. 5d). When the excitation signal was turned off, the acoustic forces vanished, and the actuator returned to its initial position. We calculated the magnitude of forces that correspond to the input voltage using Eq.(3) and applied these forces to an FEM model. The model captured the behavior of the experimentally recorded spring deflection, verifying that we have a reliable way of calculating forces generated by the acoustic actuator modules (Fig. 5e). We calculated the stiffness of the spring as 0.7563 nN/μm by computing the derivative of the displacement with respect to the total force (Fig. S8). Constrained elastic beams can exhibit complex mechanical responses depending on the geometry, degree of confinement, and boundary conditions. Previous work has shown that such mechanisms instantiate embodied logic and programmable functionality in soft machines. We designed beams to present a snap-through instability so that application of a relatively small thrust would be sufficient to cross the energy barrier and trigger rapid and large deformation towards a second stable configuration. Key geometric parameters for the beam design are the inclination angle of the beam, θ, and the slenderness ratio, w L ⁄ , where w and L denote the width and length of the beam, respectively (Fig. 6a). The mechanism was driven by a single actuator module that operated in acoustic streaming mode (Fig. 6b). The modules stayed indefinitely in both stable states, and the thrust generated by the actuator module was high enough to pass the energy barrier. For a fixed beam length and cross-sectional profile, as θ increases, the input pressure required to switch the mechanism state is expected to increase while the deformed position becomes more stable20. We fabricated three different prototypes that only differ in inclination angle (θ = 30°, 45°, and 60°) to validate the theoretical predictions. We observed a monotonic increase in the pressure at which the beam managed to switch states (Fig. 6c). We used a 2D FEM model to obtain the double well potential energy landscape for the same design parameters (Fig. 6d). The simulation results showed that the strain energy quadrupoles when θ is increased from 30° to 70°, and the module displacement doubles. We calculated the force required to switch the mechanism at different θ from the empirical data 11 using Eq.(3), where we only considered the thrust generated by a single actuator module (i.e., F! = 0.027V'). Comparing these values with the simulated force showed that the switching occurred at lower levels than predicted (Table S2). The rationale behind this discrepancy is that the actuator module did not move along a straight line as simulated, and, instead, moved in 3D by following a more favorable energy landscape. We harnessed frequency selective thrust generation to realize reversible actuation for the bistable mechanism (Fig. 6e). We kept the bubble size constant and tuned the actuators’ orifice size to be able to activate them at distinct frequencies, 85 kHz and 170 kHz (see Fig. 1f). Connecting two actuator modules with a single beam to the anchor point proved to be undesirable. To stabilize the structure and ensure reliable operation, we extended the mechanism by adding support structures. The resulting mechanism could be switched repeatedly at the same amplitude and excitation frequency (Movie S8). As a final demonstration, we programmed the motion of a continuously bending cantilever beam using an actuated bistable mechanism, which we refer to as the control module (Fig. 6f-left). Here, triggering the control module changes the direction of bending by introducing radiation forces to a system otherwise driven solely by acoustic streaming (Movie S9). To trigger the controller and actuate the beam at different frequencies, we engineered capsules with different geometries. At 125 kHz, the beam bent clockwise while the control module stayed idle (Fig. 6f-middle). Exciting the system at 85 kHz activated the bubble located on the left of the control module, moving the right one closer to the actuator connected to the beam. The control module stayed in this stable state when the system was turned off, as expected. Then, exciting the system again at 125 kHz bent the beam counterclockwise due to the attractive radiation forces generated between the two neighboring bubbles (Fig. 6f-right). In this prototype, the control module must be reset manually because the radiation forces are stronger than the thrust. However, by tuning the bubbles’ geometry, we can introduce a third frequency at which the control module would be reset. 12 Conclusions We introduced a suite of mechanical microsystems with relatively basic design yet complex motion. Precise control over geometric parameters facilitated detailed analysis of forces and fluid- structure interactions. We made two important discoveries. First, we showed that a single bubble can provide multiple-degrees-of-freedom motion along prescribed trajectories with high fidelity through the application of frequency and amplitude modulated acoustic signals. The realization of this feature required printing of capsules with multiple orifices at different sizes and a real-time calibration process. Second, as a result of higher order interactions, forces between oscillating bubbles emerge, and their direction can be programmed by tuning the excitation frequency. We developed a control scheme that drives a mechanical system to follow prescribed trajectories by applying a complex signal. The position errors between the programmed and executed motion are not negligible, which may stem from multiple sources. We assumed that the 3D printed cantilever beam has an isotropic stiffness. However, the material stiffness depends on the degree of polymerization, which might show spatial variations along the vertical axis. Moreover, we assumed small deflections although the beam deflected beyond the limit defined by the theoretical linear model. Finally, at relatively large deflections, the beam started to tilt out of plane and rotate around its axis while we only considered in-plane translation. We focused our attention on geometric arrangements of entrapped bubbles, as a means to program the soft robotic system. Leveraging frequency selective bubble excitation, we could operate systems in different modes at different frequencies. Considering the interactions among neighboring actuators would advance the programming framework. An actuator may be attracted to other actuators from multiple directions, realizing a sophisticated motion that highly depends on the excitation frequency and time-varying spacing among bubbles. We have also incorporated acoustically actuated bistable mechanisms as on-board control units to introduce the capability to operate in different modes under the same input signal. This last functionality represents a first step towards reconfigurable mechanical systems that operate analogous to mechatronic systems. To this end, reversible switching of several bistable structures will be instrumental. Moving forward, bistable beams could be replaced by 3D architected materials that display sensing, pattern analysis, and multi-stability61–63. The fabrication of 13 such complex structures is feasible with two-photon lithography, and local actuation initiated by entrapped bubbles will reveal unprecedented reconfigurability and multifunctionality. 14 Acknowledgements We thank Dr. Guillermo Villanueva for generously providing the vibrometer, Dr. Pedro Reis for fruitful discussions, and Furkan Ayhan for his assistance with electron microscopy imaging. Author Disclosure Statement Authors declare no competing financial interests. Funding Information This work was supported by the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program (Grant agreement No. 714609). 15