Volumetric-mapping-based inverse design of 3D architected materials and mobility control by topology reconstruction Kai Xiao1, Xiang Zhou2*, Jaehyung Ju1* 1. UM-SJTU Joint Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai, China 2. School of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai, China Abstract: The recent development of modular origami structures has ushered in a new era for active metamaterials with multiple degrees of freedom (multi-DOF). Notably, no systematic inverse design approach for volumetric modular origami structures has been reported. Moreover, very few topologies of modular origami have been studied for the design of active metamaterials with multi-DOF. Herein, we develop an inverse design method and reconfigurable algorithm for constructing 3D active architected structures — we synthesize modular origami structures that can be volumetrically mapped to a target 3D shape. We can control the reconfigurability by reconstructing the topology of the architected structures. Our inverse design based on volumetric mapping with mobility control by topology reconstruction can be used to construct architected metamaterials with any 3D complex shape that are also transformable with multi-DOF. Our work opens a new path toward 3D reconfigurable structures based on volumetric inverse design. This work is significant for the design of 3D active metamaterials and 3D morphing devices for automotive, aerospace, and biomedical engineering applications. Keywords: architected materials, modular origami, volumetric mapping, topology reconstruction, reconfigurable structures, active metamaterials Introduction With the advancement of conventional manufacturing in both additive and subtractive ways, the fabrication of complex 3D structures is being realized on nano , micro , meso , and large scales . Researchers are even pushing the limit of complex 3D structural design to motion structures that can change their shapes from one to another states, tuning their physical properties in adapted and active ways to varying physical environments . Many groups have employed origami and kirigami techniques, the ancient folding and cutting arts , given the potential of future intelligent reconfigurable structures. Starting from 2D flexible structures using a Miura-ori sheet , Waterbomb base , or Ron-Resch pattern , researchers have recently explored the design of 3D architected structures using modular origami. Stacking multiple origami sheets and assembling foldable modules are the currently available methods to construct 3D architected structures. Stacked Miura-ori and Tachi–Miura polyhedron are deployable with flat-foldability while a single origami sheet serves as a building block. Assembled structures with folding modules using prismatic polyhedrons , tubular bellows , and kirigami have shown the potential of isotropic design by spatial symmetry while displaying single and multiple degrees of freedom (DOFs) . All these methods require the construction of a building block (unit cell) with crease patterns and spatial periodicity (tessellation). This bottom-up design approach is convenient for controlling the kinematic and kinetic properties of the overall 3D architected structures with only a unit-cell design. However, this bottom-up design approach has a critical limitation when constructing practical engineering and artistic structures, whose shapes are mostly 3D curvilinear (e.g., automotive and aerospace structures with various curvatures), which require that the size and shape of the building blocks no longer be homogeneous in the design domain. Notably, most rectangular or cubic engineering structures have curved edges for minimum stress concentration and safety. Because of the break in spatial periodicity in curvilinear geometries, the kinematic and kinetic properties of the unit cell tend to differ from the properties of the tessellated structure, limiting the structural implementation of the architected origami materials. Very few studies have explored a top-down approach to the design of 3D architected origami structures . The existing inverse-design methods can only be applied to 2D curvilinear surfaces with origami and kirigami and not to volumetric 3D spatial geometries. In the current work, we explore a top-down approach for the design of architected origami materials. Without tessellating a constant building block, our inverse design produces volumetric gradient cells mapped into complex curvilinear 3D geometries. Furthermore, we can provide mobility to the architected structures built in the curvilinear 3D space, yielding reconfigurable architected structures. Unlike the traditional bottom-up method, our top-down approach can generate volumetrically gradient cells for spheres, cones, twisted cylinders, toruses, and any combined curvilinear shapes with tunable mobility. Even though we focus on the non-periodic structural application of architected materials in this work, our method can be universally applied to conventional periodic structural design. Our inverse design can be used for various 3D active morphing structures in automotive, aerospace, and biomedical engineering applications and 3D active metamaterials to tune both the dynamic properties (acoustic and elastic wave) and static properties (directional stiffness). Inverse design of nonperiodic structures a space-filling tessellation, we construct a reference template consisting of polyhedrons, as shown in transform the reference template into a prescribed curvilinear geometry in Figure 1b, building a transformed template in Figure 1c. To construct the transformed template, we implement the optimum transport algorithm , obtaining deformed polyhedrons based on the minimum energy for deformation. Notably, the transformed template still has single or multiple combinations of deformed polyhedrons. Now, we spatially shrink the deformed polyhedrons of the transformed template while implementing a scaling constraint, as illustrated in Figure 1d: Sa1,p = Sb1,p = Sa2,p = Sb2,p, (1) with the scaling ratios Sai,p = |ai,p−Ap| |oi−Ap| and Sbi,p = |bi,p−Bp | ⌈oi−Bp⌉ (i = 1,2). oi is the centroid of the deformed i-th polyhedrons in the transformed template. Ap and Bp belong to the edge of the p-th face shared by two adjacent polyhedrons in the transformed template. The scaling constraint in Equation (1) forces the direction of connection on the p-th face to be parallel after shrinking; i.e., a1,p − a2,p = b1,p − b2,p, which is the critical condition for building a connection with adjacent polyhedron units. Our work is different from previous work , where the connecting direction was normal to the regular polyhedron; instead, we determine the connecting direction by bridging the centroids of the transformed templates. We can also obtain the length of the connection Lp between the adjacent polyhedron units after shrinking: Lp = Sa1,p|o2 − o1|. (2) Next, we connect the shrunken polyhedrons by extruding prismatic tubes on each shared face inside the transformed template, as shown in Figure 1e. For the faces of the shrunken polyhedrons that initially lie on the boundary of the transformed template, for example, the boundary face indicated by nodes b2,p, c2,m and d2,m, any extruding direction can be applied as long as there is no intersection of prismatic tubes, and the extrusion distance usually matches the boundary of the template. Finally, we generate a modular origami structure with a curvilinear shape. The connected tubes serve as structural components, whereas the shrunken polyhedrons function as porous holes. The inverse-design method of the spatial architected materials can also be applied to planar cases, as illustrated in Figure 1g. Notably, our design method is universal, meaning that any combination of polyhedrons can be used to build a reference template whether the target geometry is a curvilinear 3D shape or planar shape. (b) a target shape, (c) transformed template with deformed polyhedrons. The details of volumetric mapping from ‘a’ to ‘c’ are provided in Section 1.1 “Optimal mass transport” of the Supplementary Information. (d) Shrunken polyhedron units highlighted in purple, (e) extrusion of prismatic tubes to connect adjacent polyhedron units, (f) an architected material of a sphere with modular origami, and (g) inverse design of a planar architected material with a different target shape. We can build complex 3D architected materials using the inverse-design algorithm based on various spatial-filling tessellations for volumetric mapping into an arbitrary target shape, as illustrated in Figure 2. (cube) to generate a spherical structure; additional examples of the inverse design with the volumetric mapping are provided in Supplementary Fig. 5. Notably, the initial polyhedron in the reference template is involved in the nonhomogeneous deformation during the construction of the transformed template. Moreover, we can apply the volumetric mapping to generate a concave template, as illustrated in Figure 2b–2e. printed prototypes (See Section 1.2 “Fabrication of physical model” in the Supplementary Information). Scale bar, 1 cm. Construction of tunable motion Although our inverse-design method generates arbitrary 3D curvilinear structures through volumetric mapping, it hardly produces reconfigurability. From a macroscopic perspective, the fully connected origami modules (i.e., the structural unit) produce spatial loops and constrain inter-and intra-modular motions, delivering immobility to motion structures . From a microscopic perspective, the irregular polyhedron units in the transformed template result in limited mobility (see Supplementary Figure 2), which is analogous to a kinematic linkage with lengths of different links and limited mobility according to Grashof theory . To obtain 3D curvilinear structures with tunable motion, we developed a topology reconstruction method using a simple numerical algorithm. Adapting graph theory, we re-design the spatial loops of 3D curvilinear structures where neighboring modules are tightly connected. A graph consists of vertices and edges representing polyhedron units and tubular connections, respectively, among adjacent units. We selectively remove loops (cycles) from the graph at the connection of modules to provide mobility. We formulate the construction of the graph using a constrained optimization problem, solving it using a genetic algorithm tool in MATLAB; the objective of the algorithm is to identify graphs with a smaller number of basic cycles (nbc) while retaining the structural integrity. After screening the spatial loops, we reconstruct the microscopic topology of origami modules by selecting flexible ones from a library for each polyhedron unit of the transformed template. Note that the previous screening of spatial loops using graph theory does not cover a secondary connection by the geometry of modules. Combining the spatial loops with the selection of modules, we can generate 3D curvilinear structures with tunable motion (see details in Section 1.3, “The algorithm of enhancing reconfigurability” in the Supplementary Information.) template with a sphere comprises irregular tetrahedra and octahedra. We construct a fully connected graph for a sphere with nDOF = 0. Then, we reconstruct the nodes with fewer loops and select modules with nonzero mobility in Figure 3b, producing a deformable assembly with three DOFs (nDOF = 3), as shown in Figure 3c and Supplementary Video 2. As demonstrated by the numerical simulation and experiments in Figure 3d, this new structure can change its shape from a sphere to other shapes via rotational motion at the hinges (see the transformation process in Supplementary Video 3). shapes — a cone and hyperboloid. Notably, the cone and hyperboloid structures in Figures 3e and 3f have the same spatial connection topology and modules as the spherical motion structures in Figure 3d, producing the same nDOF and similar tunable motion (see Supplementary Video 4). Therefore, the tunable motion is controlled by the spatial connection and modules, not by the geometry of the transformed template. comprises irregular tetrahedra and octahedra; (a.2) construction of a fully connected graph with basic cycles: the number of basic cycles nbc = 11; (a.3) an edge passing their symbolic nodes on two adjacent polyhedra for the graph; (a.4) faces of two adjacent shrunken polyhedrons and extrusion of tubes to form a connection; (a.5) the resulting assembly following the fully connected graph has zero DOFs; (a.6) a reconstructed graph with fewer basic cycles, where nbc = 5; (a.7) two disconnected nodes; (a.8) two adjacent shrunken polyhedrons are disconnected; (a.9) a rigid module; (a.10) extruding process of the rigid module; (b.1) a polyhedron unit selected from the fully connected graph; (b.2) the same polyhedron unit from the graph with reduced nbc; (b.3) selection of a module with nonzero mobility from a library; (b.4) a disqualified rigid module with the same connectivity as (b.3); (c) a deformable assembly with 3 DOFs; (d) the transformation of the structure c where the DOFs are denoted by three dihedral angles with colored hinges. See details of the physical prototypes in Section 1.2 “Fabrication of physical model” in the Supplementary Information. (e–f) Templates in cone and hyperboloid shapes having the same graph as a.7 with basic cycle, where nbc = 5, producing a reconfigurable structure with the same DOFs (nDOF = 3). Scale bar in d, 1 cm. We implement a numerical algorithm to identify mobility as a form of independent dihedral angles to simulate the transformation within the configuration space. Following the assumption of the rigid plate and flexible hinges of the prismatic modular structures, we identify the independent angles from a linearized constraint matrix. We apply kinematic constraints to the structures during transformation: the distance between two vertices on the edge remains constant, e.g., |v1 − v2| = const. The position vectors v1,v2, v3, and v4 on the surface remain in a plane, e.g., (v1 − v2) × (v3 − v2) ∙ (v4 − v1) = 0 (see Supplementary Figure 4). Imposing the constraints on every vertex and linearizing them with a constraint matrix form Jv , we obtain Jv ∙ dv = 0 , where dv is the infinitesimal displacement of vertices. We can also obtain the infinitesimal displacement of all the dihedral angles as dφ = Jh ∙ dv. In matrix form, the constraints can be expressed as [Jv 0 Jh −1] [dv dφ] = 0. (3) By calculating the reduced row echelon form of J (= [Jv 0 Jh −1] ), we can determine the free variables in terms of dφ , which can produce the motion of the structures. Section 1.4 “Kinematics” of the Supplementary Information provides further details. To investigate the tunable range of mobility of 3D prismatic architected materials, we applied our algorithm to transformed templates with 28 uniform space-filling tessellations ; we limited the template to a maximum of 40 polyhedra. We searched 360 reconfigurable structures in each transformed template by constructing graphs with a specific range of nbc ( 2 ≤ nbc ≤ 12) and assembling different modules. The algorithm generated reconfigurability of a sphere motion structure for different transformed templates. For example, Figure 4 shows the reconfigurable structures constructed using the transformed templates #14 and #22, leading to DOFs ranging from 1 to 47 with varying deformation modes including shear and biaxial expansion (see other deformation modes of these examples in Supplementary Video 5). Our algorithm can be used to find the range of mobility of the motion structures by controlling the number of basic cycles nbc of the graph, as shown in Figure 4. for specific templates (#22 and #14). Each point represents one transformed template; the points with the same nDOFs and nbc overlap in the plot. Right-hand side: selective reconfigurable structures with (a) shear deformation and (b) biaxial expansion. Discussion 3D curvilinear structures are ubiquitous in automotive, aerospace, and ocean engineering structures. To date, the design of architected materials has relied on the bottom-up design approach, using planar and orthogonal periodic tessellation of modules , which is convenient for structural design. However, this bottom-up approach has a critical limitation when constructing curvilinear 3D engineering and artistic structures, where the size and shape of the building blocks are no longer homogeneous in the design domain. The reconstruction of geometry and topology in this study provides a solution for the design of 3D modular origami for non-periodic and curvilinear 3D structures and their tunable motion. The geometric reconstruction by volumetric mapping of reference templates can be used to construct a stress- free 3D curvilinear structure. The fully connected irregular polyhedron units produce spatial loops and constrain inter-and intra-modular motions, delivering a rigid yet stiff curvilinear structure. The topology reconstruction of primary and secondary connections can yield tunable motion with multi-DOF. The tunable motion is controlled by the topology of the spatial connection and modules, not by the geometry of the transformed template. The inverse design of 2D origami structures can generate a curvilinear surface with local control of the variable curvature . Because of the instability (local snapping) of the out-of-plane deformation during reconfiguration, relatively high local energy is needed for the transformation . The bottom-up approach with periodic modular origami structures can be used to build a curved shape by filling building blocks inside the curvilinear space . However, this approach cannot yield a smooth surface; it only provides discrete curves, whereas the geometric reconstruction in this work can produce a smooth 3D curvilinear structure. Notably, the 3D curvilinear structures still cannot provide the exact 3D motions we desire at the initial design level because the topology reconstruction in this work is not fully integrated with the inverse design, which can be explored further. The geometric and topology reconstruction can expand the design space of 3D modular origami, opening a new avenue for the design of 3D active metamaterials. The spatial scaling of space-filled polyhedrons can be applied for both orthogonal and curvilinear coordinates, meaning that our inverse design method is a universal approach that can be applied for both periodic and non-periodic structures. Our physical prototypes of 3D curvilinear structures fabricated by additive manufacturing validate the tunable motion, demonstrating untethered actuation by embedded hard magnets and moving external magnetic fields (see Supplementary Video 3 and 4). The noncontact actuation of motion structures demonstrates the potential of active metamaterials, morphing devices, and soft robots on the mesoscale. Advanced micro- fabrication techniques such as two-photon lithography and micro-stereolithography can be applied to our reconfiguration systems on the microscale, e.g., for the design of battery electrodes and microelectronic mechanical systems . Conclusion In summary, we introduce a top-down design approach of modular origami structures to produce 3D curvilinear structures with tunable motion. The volumetric-mapping-based inverse design can be used to construct stress-free 3D curvilinear structures. Topology reconstruction (primary connection) of spatial connection and selection of modules (secondary connection) in the library can yield tunable motion with multi-DOF. Our geometry and topology reconstruction method of 3D curvilinear motion structures can be directly applied for i) 3D active metamaterials to achieve tunable acoustic and static properties on the nano-, micro-, and mesoscale and ii) 3D morphing devices with curvilinear shapes in automotive, aerospace, and biomedical engineering applications. Our top-down approach can expand the design space of modular origami to 3D non-periodic structures and 3D curvilinear geometries — spheres, cones, twisted cylinders, toruses, overcoming the limitation of planar and spatial tessellations for periodic structural design. Unlike 2D reconfigurable curvilinear origami structures, our 3D motion structures can be reconfigured into other shapes with multi-DOF and are frustration-free. This work will greatly advance the design of 3D architected materials with reconfigurability, shaking up traditional periodic tessellation- based 3D metamaterial design. Reference: 1 Zhang, Y., Zhang, F., Yan, Z., Ma, Q., Li, X., Huang, Y. & Rogers, J. A. Printing, folding and assembly methods for forming 3D mesostructures in advanced materials. Nature Reviews Materials 2, 1-17 2 Leong, T. G., Zarafshar, A. M. & Gracias, D. H. Three‐dimensional fabrication at small size scales. Small 6, 792-806 (2010). 3 Schmidt, O. G. & Eberl, K. Thin solid films roll up into nanotubes. Nature 410, 168-168 (2001). 4 Stellacci, F., Bauer, C. A., Meyer‐Friedrichsen, T., Wenseleers, W., Alain, V., Kuebler, S. M., Pond, S. J., Zhang, Y., Marder, S. R. & Perry, J. W. Laser and electron‐beam induced growth of nanoparticles for 2D and 3D metal patterning. Advanced Materials 14, 194-198 (2002). 5 Li, X. Strain induced semiconductor nanotubes: from formation process to device applications. Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 41, 193001 (2008). 6 Shenoy, V. B. & Gracias, D. H. Self-folding thin-film materials: From nanopolyhedra to graphene origami. Mrs Bulletin 37, 847-854 (2012). 7 Vyatskikh, A., Delalande, S., Kudo, A., Zhang, X., Portela, C. M. & Greer, J. R. Additive manufacturing of 3D nano-architected metals. Nature communications 9, 1-8 (2018). 8 Pandey, S., Ewing, M., Kunas, A., Nguyen, N., Gracias, D. H. & Menon, G. Algorithmic design of self-folding polyhedra. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108, 19885-19890 9 Bassik, N., Stern, G. M. & Gracias, D. H. Microassembly based on hands free origami with bidirectional curvature. Applied physics letters 95, 091901 (2009). 10 Blees, M. K., Barnard, A. W., Rose, P. A., Roberts, S. P., McGill, K. L., Huang, P. Y., Ruyack, A. R., Kevek, J. W., Kobrin, B. & Muller, D. A. Graphene kirigami. Nature 524, 204-207 (2015). 11 Ling, C., Cernicchi, A., Gilchrist, M. D. & Cardiff, P. Mechanical behaviour of additively- manufactured polymeric octet-truss lattice structures under quasi-static and dynamic compressive loading. Materials & Design 162, 106-118 (2019). 12 Lin, Z., Novelino, L. S., Wei, H., Alderete, N. A., Paulino, G. H., Espinosa, H. D. & Krishnaswamy, S. Folding at the Microscale: Enabling Multifunctional 3D Origami‐Architected Metamaterials. Small 16, 2002229 (2020). 13 Hawkes, E., An, B., Benbernou, N. M., Tanaka, H., Kim, S., Demaine, E. D., Rus, D. & Wood, R. J. Programmable matter by folding. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107, 12441- 14 Haghpanah, B., Salari‐Sharif, L., Pourrajab, P., Hopkins, J. & Valdevit, L. Multistable shape‐ reconfigurable architected materials. Advanced Materials 28, 7915-7920 (2016). 15 Overvelde, J. T., De Jong, T. A., Shevchenko, Y., Becerra, S. A., Whitesides, G. M., Weaver, J. C., Hoberman, C. & Bertoldi, K. A three-dimensional actuated origami-inspired transformable metamaterial with multiple degrees of freedom. Nature communications 7, 1-8 (2016). 16 Overvelde, J. T., Weaver, J. C., Hoberman, C. & Bertoldi, K. Rational design of reconfigurable prismatic architected materials. Nature 541, 347-352 (2017). 17 Zhao, Z., Kuang, X., Wu, J., Zhang, Q., Paulino, G. H., Qi, H. J. & Fang, D. 3D printing of complex origami assemblages for reconfigurable structures. Soft Matter 14, 8051-8059 (2018). 18 An, N., Domel, A. G., Zhou, J., Rafsanjani, A. & Bertoldi, K. Programmable hierarchical kirigami. Advanced Functional Materials 30, 1906711 (2020). 19 McClintock, H. D., Doshi, N., Iniguez‐Rabago, A., Weaver, J. C., Jafferis, N. T., Jayaram, K., Wood, R. J. & Overvelde, J. T. A Fabrication Strategy for Reconfigurable Millimeter‐Scale Metamaterials. Advanced Functional Materials 31, 2103428 (2021). 20 Zirbel, S. A., Lang, R. J., Thomson, M. W., Sigel, D. A., Walkemeyer, P. E., Trease, B. P., Magleby, S. P. & Howell, L. L. Accommodating thickness in origami-based deployable arrays. Journal of Mechanical Design 135 (2013). 21 Schenk, M., Viquerat, A. D., Seffen, K. A. & Guest, S. D. Review of inflatable booms for deployable space structures: packing and rigidization. Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets 51, 762-778 (2014). 22 Melancon, D., Gorissen, B., García-Mora, C. J., Hoberman, C. & Bertoldi, K. Multistable inflatable origami structures at the metre scale. Nature 592, 545-550 (2021). 23 Bertoldi, K., Vitelli, V., Christensen, J. & Van Hecke, M. Flexible mechanical metamaterials. Nature Reviews Materials 2, 1-11 (2017). 24 Lang, R. J. Origami design secrets: mathematical methods for an ancient art. (CRC Press, 2012). 25 Miura, K. Method of packaging and deployment of large membranes in space. The Institute of Space and Astronautical Science report, 1-9 (1985). 26 Chen, Y., Feng, H., Ma, J., Peng, R. & You, Z. Symmetric waterbomb origami. Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 472, 20150846 (2016). 27 Lv, C., Krishnaraju, D., Konjevod, G., Yu, H. & Jiang, H. Origami based mechanical metamaterials. Scientific reports 4, 1-6 (2014). 28 Schenk, M. & Guest, S. D. Geometry of Miura-folded metamaterials. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110, 3276-3281 (2013). 29 Fang, H., Li, S., Ji, H. & Wang, K. Uncovering the deformation mechanisms of origami metamaterials by introducing generic degree-four vertices. Physical Review E 94, 043002 (2016). 30 Yasuda, H., Yein, T., Tachi, T., Miura, K. & Taya, M. Folding behavior of Tachi–Miura polyhedron bellows. Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 469, 31 Filipov, E., Paulino, G. & Tachi, T. Origami tubes with reconfigurable polygonal cross- sections. Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 472, 32 Yang, N. & Silverberg, J. L. Decoupling local mechanics from large-scale structure in modular metamaterials. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114, 3590-3595 (2017). 33 Iniguez-Rabago, A., Li, Y. & Overvelde, J. T. Exploring multistability in prismatic metamaterials through local actuation. Nature communications 10, 1-10 (2019). 34 Kamrava, S., Mousanezhad, D., Ebrahimi, H., Ghosh, R. & Vaziri, A. Origami-based cellular metamaterial with auxetic, bistable, and self-locking properties. Scientific reports 7, 1-9 (2017). 35 Yasuda, H. & Yang, J. Reentrant origami-based metamaterials with negative Poisson’s ratio and bistability. Physical review letters 114, 185502 (2015). 36 Li, Y. & Yin, J. Metamorphosis of three-dimensional kirigami-inspired reconfigurable and reprogrammable architected matter. Materials Today Physics 21, 100511 (2021). 37 Dudte, L. H., Vouga, E., Tachi, T. & Mahadevan, L. Programming curvature using origami tessellations. Nature materials 15, 583-588 (2016). 38 Dieleman, P., Vasmel, N., Waitukaitis, S. & van Hecke, M. Jigsaw puzzle design of pluripotent origami. Nature Physics 16, 63-68 (2020). 39 Callens, S. J. & Zadpoor, A. A. From flat sheets to curved geometries: Origami and kirigami approaches. Materials Today 21, 241-264 (2018). 40 Choi, G. P., Dudte, L. H. & Mahadevan, L. Programming shape using kirigami tessellations. Nature materials 18, 999-1004 (2019). 41 Chen, T., Panetta, J., Schnaubelt, M. & Pauly, M. Bistable auxetic surface structures. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 40, 1-9 (2021). 42 Griniasty, I., Mostajeran, C. & Cohen, I. Multivalued Inverse Design: Multiple Surface Geometries from One Flat Sheet. Physical Review Letters 127, 128001 (2021). 43 Dudte, L. H., Choi, G. P. & Mahadevan, L. An additive algorithm for origami design. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118 (2021). 44 Choi, G. P., Dudte, L. H. & Mahadevan, L. Compact reconfigurable kirigami. Physical Review Research 3, 043030 (2021). 45 Lévy, B. A numerical algorithm for L2 semi-discrete optimal transport in 3D. ESAIM: Mathematical Modelling and Numerical Analysis 49, 1693-1715 (2015). 46 Xiao, K., Zhou, X. & Ju, J. Effect of disconnection of deformable units on the mobility and stiffness of 3D prismatic modular origami structures using angular kinematics. Scientific reports 11, 1-12 47 Grashof, F. Theoretische maschinenlehre. Vol. 1 (L. Voss, 1875). 48 Laliberté, T. & Gosselin, C. Construction, mobility analysis and synthesis of polyhedra with articulated faces. Journal of Mechanisms and Robotics 6, 011007 (2014). 49 Grünbaum, B. Uniform tilings of 3-space. Geombinatorics 4, 49-56 (1994). 50 Deza, M. & Shtogrin, M. Uniform partitions of 3-space, their relatives and embedding. European Journal of Combinatorics 21, 807-814 (2000). 51 Li, S., Fang, H., Sadeghi, S., Bhovad, P. & Wang, K. W. Architected origami materials: How folding creates sophisticated mechanical properties. Advanced materials 31, 1805282 (2019). 52 Xu, C., Gallant, B. M., Wunderlich, P. U., Lohmann, T. & Greer, J. R. Three-dimensional Au microlattices as positive electrodes for Li–O2 batteries. ACS nano 9, 5876-5883 (2015). 53 Rogers, J., Huang, Y., Schmidt, O. G. & Gracias, D. H. Origami mems and nems. Mrs Bulletin 41,