1 A Nanometer-Thick Oxide Semiconductor Transistor with Ultra-High Drain Current Zehao Lin,1 Mengwei Si,1 Vahid Askarpour,2 Chang Niu,1 Adam Charnas,1 Zhongxia Shang,3 Yizhi Zhang,3 Yaoqiao Hu,4 Zhuocheng Zhang,1 Pai-Ying Liao,1 Kyeongjae Cho,4 Haiyan Wang,3 Mark Lundstrom,1 Jesse Maassen,2,* Peide D. Ye1,* 1Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering and Birck Nanotechnology Center, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, United States 2Department of Physics and Atmospheric Science, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia B3H 4R2, Canada 3School of Materials Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, United States 4Department of Materials Science and Engineering, The University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX 75080, United States *Address correspondence to: jmaassen@dal.ca (J.M.) and yep@purdue.edu (P.D.Y.) Abstract High drive current is a critical performance parameter in semiconductor devices for high- speed, low-power logic applications or high-efficiency, high-power, high-speed radio frequency (RF) analog applications. In this work, we demonstrate an In2O3 transistor grown by atomic layer deposition (ALD) at back-end-of-line (BEOL) compatible temperatures with a record high drain current exceeding 10 A/mm, the performance of which is 2-3 times better than all known transistors with semiconductor channels. A record high transconductance of 4 S/mm is also achieved among all transistors with a planar structure. It is found that a high carrier density and high electron velocity both contribute to this remarkably high on-state performance in ALD In2O3 2 transistors, which is made possible by the high-quality oxide/oxide interface, the metal-like charge-neutrality-level (CNL) alignment, and the high band velocities induced by the low density- of-state (DOS). Experimental Hall, I-V and split C-V measurements at room temperature confirm a high carrier density up to 6-7×1013 /cm2 and a high velocity of about 107 cm/s. Ultra-thin oxide semiconductors, with a CNL located deep inside the conduction band, represent a promising new direction for the search of alternative channel materials for high-performance semiconductor devices. 3 Looking for a transistor with higher drain current (ID) at low voltages has been a key pursuit in the development of modern semiconductor devices. High drain current is essential for high- speed, low-power logic applications for microelectronics and high-efficiency, high-power, high- speed applications for radio frequency (RF) power electronics. The criteria for achieving a transistor with high ID is rather simple because ID is determined by the product of carrier density (n2D) and average velocity.1 However, the demonstration of simultaneous high carrier density and high velocity has been difficult with the maximum ID (ID,max) of reported semiconductor devices reaching 1-2 A/mm with Si1, 3-4 A/mm with GaN2 and 5 A/mm with graphene3 (although graphene does not have a bandgap and therefore cannot be regarded as a semiconductor). The control of mobile carriers in conventional semiconductor devices is achieved by carrier accumulation at the oxide/semiconductor interface for enhancement-mode devices or carriers doped in the channel for depletion-mode devices. In this case, the maximum supported n2D is determined by 2EBDεoxε0/q, where EBD is the breakdown electric field of the gate oxide, εox is the dielectric constant, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, and q is the elementary charge. For example, HfO2 has a typical breakdown electric field of 0.5 V/nm and dielectric constant of 15, leading to a maximum carrier density is about 8×1013 /cm2. However, in practical devices, such high carrier densities are difficult to achieve due to the U-shape distribution of interface traps.4 As a result, the experimental n2D for actual inversion-mode Si devices is about 2×1013 /cm2, which is much lower than the ideal case. Moreover, the average carrier velocity can benefit from high n2D because the electrons sample higher energy states in the conduction band with increased velocities, which will be discussed later in this work. Such an effect is amplified in semiconductor materials with a single conduction band with low density of states (DOS). 4 Oxide semiconductor transistors are a mature technology in flat-panel display applications5–7 and are being considered as promising high-performance devices for back-end-of- line (BEOL) compatible monolithic 3D integration.8–11 An atomic layer deposition (ALD) based indium oxide (In2O3) transistor has been reported, featuring an atomically thin channel down to 0.5 nm and a high field-effect mobility (μFE) over 100 cm2/V⋅s, enabled by an atomically smooth surface and a charge neutrality level (CNL) located above the conduction band edge (EC) for low resistance contacts.12–17 The oxide insulator and oxide semiconductor interface was found to have a low interface trap density (Dit), resulting in a subthreshold slope (SS) down to 63.8 mV/dec at room temperature.13 Note that although the SS of III-V compound semiconductor transistors can also be near 60 mV/dec, however, such low Dit is located in their subthreshold regions. As a result, n2D is strongly affected by Dit in the on-state due to the U-shape distribution of interface traps. Therefore, considering the CNL alignment above EC and the U-shape distribution of interface traps, an ALD In2O3 transistor is expected to have low Dit in the on-state, leading to a high carrier density and a high electron velocity in scaled transistors. In this work, we report an ALD In2O3 transistor with scaled channel length (Lch) down to 7 nm achieving a high ID,max exceeding 10 A/mm, which is 2-3 times higher than the best known semiconducting materials such as Si, GaN, InGaAs, graphene, etc. A high transconductance (gm) of 4 S/mm is also achieved, which is higher than all known transistors with a planar structure. This remarkably high on-state performance is attributed to the high carrier density up to 6-7×1013 /cm2 and the high velocity of about 107 cm/s, confirmed experimentally by Hall, I-V and split C-V measurements at room temperature. The simultaneous achievement of high density and high velocity, originating from a low DOS and high average electron energy, leads to the high near- ballistic current over 10 A/mm. The low contact resistance/resistivity induced by the unique CNL 5 alignment of the metal/In2O3 interface in the conduction band and the wide bandgap of 3.0 eV for In2O3 being sustainable for ultra-scaled lateral devices are another two factors for remarkable high drain current. This work demonstrates how ultra-thin oxide semiconductors with a CNL located deep inside the conduction band can enable low contact resistance/resistivity, and highlights a new direction in the search of alternative channel materials for high-performance semiconductor devices. devices are comprised of a 3 nm-thick HfO2 gate insulator, an ALD In2O3 channel with thickness (Tch) from 2.5 nm to 3.5 nm, and Ni used as the gate electrode and the source/drain contacts. The detailed device fabrication is discussed in the Methods section. Figure 1b shows the high-angle annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) cross-sectional image with energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) to highlight the Ni/In/Hf elements in a representative In2O3 transistor with Lch of 7 nm and Tch of 3.5 nm. Figure 1c and 1d present the ID- VGS and ID-VDS characteristics obtained by pulsed I-V measurements. A pulse width of 90 ns is used (unless otherwise specified) to suppress self-heating effects from the ultra-high drain current, so that the intrinsic electron transport properties of the devices can be probed, as described in the Methods section. Here, a high ID,max of 10.2 A/mm is achieved at VGS=1.5 V and VDS=1.4 V, which is 2-3 times higher than any best reported ID,max from devices with other semiconducting materials, including graphene. Figure 1e and 1f show the ID-VGS on a linear scale and the gm-VGS characteristics for a VDS of 1.4 V, both for the same device. A high gm of 4 S/mm for a VDS of 1.4 V is achieved, which is also higher than all known planar semiconductor devices. The ID-VGS, ID- VDS and gm-VGS characteristics of a device with the same gate stack and Lch of 100 nm are shown in Extended Data Fig. 1, which shows a high ID,max of 4.1 A/mm and a high gm of 1.3 S/mm even 6 with this relatively long channel. The same characteristics of a long channel device with Lch of 1 μm are presented in Extended Data Fig. 2, showing clear current saturation. The remarkably high on-state performance is ascribed to the high electron density and high velocity of ALD In2O3, coupled with low contact resistance. Moreover, the wide bandgap of 3.0 eV in In2O3 makes it possible to sustain the high estimated lateral electric fields of ~ 2 MV/cm (VDS=1.4 V and Lch=7 nm). Similar electrical characterization of devices with Tch of 2.5 nm are also presented in Extended Data Fig. 3. To understand the origin of the observed high current in ALD In2O3 transistors, the carrier density and velocity are characterized by Hall, I-V and split C-V measurements at room temperature. Figure 2a shows a photo image of the experimental Hall bar device, with a similar Ni/HfO2/In2O3/Ni gate stack, having undergone the same thermal treatment process as the ALD In2O3 transistors. To minimize the impact of gate leakage current, a thickness of 16 nm HfO2 is used in the Hall measurements. Figure 1b shows the Rxy versus B field characteristics with Tch of 2.5 nm. A n2D of 5.4×1013 /cm2 and Hall mobility (μHall) of 48.2 cm2/V⋅s are achieved. Figure 2c shows the VGS-dependent n2D and μHall. A maximum n2D of 7×1013 /cm2 is obtained, which can be depleted or modulated by gate voltage, and is significantly higher than other semiconducting materials such as Si, GaN, etc. The high n2D is very close to the maximum charge density supported by HfO2 as calculated above, indicating a high-quality oxide/oxide semiconductor interface without significant trapped charges. Extended Data Fig. 5 presents a typical ID-VGS curve of an ALD In2O3 transistor with Tch of 1.2 nm, Lch of 800 nm and 5 nm HfO2 thickness, showing a steep subthreshold slope (SS) of 63.5 mV/dec corresponding to a Dit of 6×1011 cm-1⋅eV-1, suggesting a high-quality HfO2/In2O3 interface. The SS in Fig. 1 is much larger due to the relatively thick channel designed to achieve high drain current and short-channel effects, but the Dit at the 7 HfO2/In2O3 interface is expected to be similar and independent of channel thickness because of the similar atomic configuration at the interface. More importantly, the maximum charge density is not limited by the high Dit in the tail of the U-shape distribution as with conventional metal- oxide-semiconductor (MOS) devices like InGaAs. This is because In2O3 has a CNL about 0.4 eV above the EC, so that Dit in the on-state is expected to be even lower than in the subthreshold region. Thus, with ALD In2O3 transistors containing an oxide/oxide interface, the capability of carrier density modulation by gate oxide is much higher than those with a conventional III-V oxide/semiconductor interface. The high carrier density is also further verified by split C-V measurements as shown in Extended Data Fig. 6. ID can be calculated simply by the product of charge density and average velocity. Because of the ultra-scaled channel length of 7 nm compared to the estimated mean free path for backscattering of roughly 8 nm in In2O3 (see Extended Data Fig. 4), the average velocity is estimated to be the ballistic injection velocity. Using the transfer characteristics in Fig. 1c for ID and the Hall measurements in Fig. 2c for n2D, a high electron velocity in the range 0.85-1.05×107 cm/s is obtained at high n2D and shown in Fig. 2d. This electron velocity might still be under-estimated because non-ideal effects, such as contact resistance, short channel effects etc., are not considered, suggesting that the electron injection velocity in ALD In2O3 transistors can be even higher. Such high carrier density and velocity have contributed to a high ID,max over 10 A/mm, which is significantly higher than other state-of-the-art semiconductor devices. To elucidate the nature of the high current in In2O3, density functional theory (DFT) calculations of the electronic properties were conducted (see Methods section for details). Figure 3b shows the band structure of bulk In2O3 and two In2O3 2D slabs with thicknesses of 1.98 nm and 0.95 nm; the corresponding atomic structures are presented in Fig. 3a. In all cases there is a single 8 nearly-isotropic conduction band located at the zone center, comprised of mostly In s-orbital character, with effective masses of 0.17 m0 (bulk), 0.23 m0 (1.98 nm slab) and 0.30 m0 (0.95 nm slab). A key feature of the band structure is the absence of higher-energy secondary bands until well above 0.5 eV relative to the conduction band edge. Figure 3c shows the DOS of bulk In2O3 with an assumed thickness of 3.5 nm, the two In2O3 slabs, and for comparison bulk Si with an assumed thickness of 3.5 nm. In2O3 displays a much smaller DOS than Si, due to its lower effective mass and single conduction band (the DOS effective mass of bulk In2O3 is 0.17 m0 compared to 1.06 m0 for bulk Si). Thus, for a given n2D, the Fermi level is located deeper inside the conduction band of In2O3 compared to Si. For example, a carrier density of 5×1013 /cm2 corresponds to a Fermi level of roughly 0.5 eV and 0.1 eV above the band edge for bulk In2O3 and Si, respectively, as seen in Extended Data Fig. 7. Moreover, from Extended Data Fig. 7 one finds that the smaller effective mass of In2O3 results in a higher average band velocity at a given energy. From the DFT band structure the ideal ballistic current is computed versus n2D and shown in Fig. 3d. This current represents an ideal upper limit for a short-channel device in which transport is ballistic, the current is controlled by injection from the source contact only (VDS ≫ kBT/q), and there is no potential barrier. With In2O3 the minimum carrier concentration needed to achieve a current of 10 A/mm is 2×1013 /cm2, while with Si a carrier concentration near 5×1013 /cm2 is required. To understand why In2O3 can carry a larger current than Si, the ballistic injection velocity is obtained from the ratio of the ideal ballistic current over the charge density, which is plotted in Fig. 3e. The velocities of In2O3 are significantly higher than Si, particularly for large n2D. For 5×1013 /cm2, In2O3 shows velocities ranging from 3.4×107 cm/s (0.95 nm slab) to 3.7×107 cm/s (1.98 nm slab) compared to 1.4×107 cm/s with Si. The origin of this 2-3 times velocity enhancement is traced back to In2O3 having a single conduction band with relatively low effective mass, leading to a combination of 9 higher band velocities and a Fermi level located deep in the band where electrons sample higher energy states. In2O3 also benefits from its secondary bands being high enough in energy to not play a significant role in transport, which would otherwise lower the average electron velocity and energy. Therefore, the two major contributors to the high ID,max in ALD In2O3 transistors are high carrier density and high velocity, with the former originating from the high-quality oxide/oxide interface and a metal-like CNL alignment and the latter arising from the low DOS and high-carrier- induced velocity enhancement. Moreover, the ALD In2O3 transistors are aided by low contact resistances and the wide bandgap of In2O3 for laterally scaled channel lengths. The above first- principles calculations are based on a single crystal structure. The crystal structure of the experimental devices is confirmed to be polycrystalline. As shown in the TEM cross-sectional image and X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) data in Extended Data Fig. 8, unannealed ALD In2O3 is amorphous while annealed ALD In2O3 at 275 °C in O2 for 60 s, the same process condition for device fabrication, is polycrystalline. It would be natural to assume that the charge transport has much more scatterings in the polycrystalline boundaries and that carrier mobility (velocity) might be reduced significantly. However, our DFT calculations on polycrystalline In2O3 reveals that there is a possible mobility enhancement effect such that polycrystalline and single crystalline In2O3 could have similar charge transport behavior and comparable electron mobility and velocity, as supported by Extended Data Fig. 9. high performance semiconductor devices with different channel materials. ALD In2O3 displays a ID,max that is 2-3 times better than the best reported transistors with different channel materials 10 including Si, InGaAs, GaN, graphene etc., and also demonstrates the best gm compared to all other semiconductor materials with a planar device structure, due to the simultaneous high carrier density and high velocity. Data used in this work is summarized in Extended Data Table I.2,3,8,11,18– 28 In summary, an ALD In2O3 transistor with a record high ID,max exceeding 10 A/mm is reported, which is 2-3 times higher than that of all known semiconductor devices. It is found that high carrier densities, resulting from the high-quality oxide/oxide interface and a metal-like CNL alignment, and high carrier velocities, originating from the low DOS and high-carrier-induced velocity enhancement, are the two major contributors to the remarkably high ID,max in ALD In2O3 transistors. Hall, I-V and split C-V measurements at room temperature confirm a high carrier density up to 6-8×1013 /cm2 and a high velocity of about 107 cm/s. Ultra-thin oxide semiconductors with a CNL located deep inside the band represent a new route in the search of alternative channel materials for high-performance semiconductor devices. 11 Methods Device Fabrication. The device fabrication process started with solvent cleaning of the p+ Si substrate with thermally grown 90 nm SiO2. A bi-layer lift-off process was then adopted for the sharp lift-off of 30 nm Ni buried metal gate formed by e-beam evaporation, utilizing photoresist PMGI SF9 + AZ1518 stack, patterned by Heidelberg MLA150 Maskless Aligner. This step is critical to avoid sidewall metal coverage and to enable a high-quality ultra-scaled ALD gate dielectric and semiconducting channel. HfO2 of 3.0 nm as a gate dielectric was grown by ALD at 200°C using [(CH3)2N]4Hf (TDMAHf) and H2O as Hf and O precursors, respectively. Then, In2O3 thin films with various thicknesses were grown by ALD at 225°C using (CH3)3In (TMIn) and H2O as In and O precursors, respectively. N2 is used as the carrier gas at a flow rate of 40 sccm. The base pressure is 169 and 437 mTorr at a N2 flow rate of 0 sccm and 40 sccm, respectively. Concentrated hydrochloric acid was applied for the channel isolation. S/D ohmic contacts were formed by e-beam evaporation of 30 nm Ni in two steps to avoid the difficulty of the sub-10 nm lift-off process, as employed before. A two-step e-beam lithography process was performed by the formation of first the source electrode and then the drain electrode, utilizing diluted e-beam resist AR-P 6200 (2.5%), patterned by a JEOL JBX-8100FS E-Beam Writer. Then, inductively coupled plasma (ICP) dry etching using BCl3/Ar plasma was applied to accurately define the channel width. The devices were annealed in O2 at 275 °C for 1 min to further improve the performance. Material Characterization. The cross-sectional TEM specimens were fabricated by focused ion beam (FIB) using a FEI Helios G4 UX dual beam scanning electron microscope (SEM). Before FIB milling, a platinum (Pt) layer was deposited to protect the surface from ion damage. To remove FIB induced damages, the TEM samples were ion polished using a low current (27 pA) at a low voltage (2 keV) multiple times during the final steps. 12 Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analyses and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) element mapping were carried out on a Thermo-Fischer FEI Talos 200X TEM microscope operated at 200 kV equipped with a high angle annular dark field (HAADF) detector and SuperX EDS with four silicon drift detectors. All the EDX maps were captured under the drift correction mode. Device Characterization. The DC characterization is performed using a B1500A Semiconductor Device Analyzer. The pulse characterization is performed using a B1530A Waveform Generator/Fast Measurement Unit (WGFMU). The device is grounded at the source, while the drain and gate are connected to two channels of the WGFMU via Remote Sense/Switch Units (RSU). A waveform with a pulse delay time (PD) of 2 μs, a rise time (RT) of 60 ns, a pulse width (PW) of 90 ns and a fall time (FT) of 60 ns is adopted to maximize device reliability while minimizing pulse-induced AC response during measurements. Two channels carry the waveform simultaneously with a chronological difference less than 1 ns, confirmed with TDS5000 Digital Phosphor Oscilloscopes. Data is collected during an averaging time (AT) of 50 ns after a measurement delay (MD) of 2.1 μs to wait for the signal to stabilize. No bias is applied at each channel during the pulse interval to dissipate generated heat. During output characterization, the amplitude of the VDS pulse increases in 100 mV steps while the amplitude of the VGS pulse remains constant. During transfer characterization, the amplitude of the VDS pulse increases in 50 mV steps while the amplitude of the VGS pulse remains constant. The transfer data is spliced with the on- state data from the pulse characterization while the off-state data comes from the DC characterization, due to the limited signal sensing range of the B1530A WGFMU in the high- current mode (100 μA-10 mA) and the relatively low resolution of the RSUs. 13 Pulse characterization is critical to alleviate severe self-heating-induced burning and minimize time-dependent dielectric breakdown of the ultra-thin gate insulator. The pulse data is in line with the DC data in the low power range. While DC characterization inevitably causes severe self- heating and resulting device failure, pulse characterization enables repeatable measurements. The details of pulsed I-V measurements and the impact of self-heating effects are shown in Extended Data Fig. 10. Theoretical and computational details. The density functional theory (DFT) calculations were carried out using the Quantum Espresso (QE) code29,30. Optimized norm-conserving Vanderbilt pseudopotentials31 and the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE)32 exchange-correlation were adopted. A kinetic energy cut-off of 140 Ry and a Monkhorst-Pack33 Brillouin zone sampling of 6×6×6 for bulk (primitive cell) In2O3 and 3×3×1 for the 2D slabs of In2O3 were used. Crystalline In2O3 is body-centered cubic with 40 atoms in the primitive cell.34 The 80-atom conventional cubic cell, was used to generate the 0.95 nm In2O3 slab. The indium layer at the boundary of the cell was removed and the top and bottom oxygen layers were passivated with hydrogen atoms (one hydrogen per oxygen). The same process was used to generate the 1.98 nm slab, but starting with a 1×1×2 supercell of the bulk cubic cell. A vacuum layer of 25 Å was added to both slabs. With bulk silicon an energy cut-off of 120 Ry and a Brillouin zone sampling of 16×16×16 (primitive cell) was employed. All atoms and lattice vectors were fully relaxed, with energies and forces converged to 10-5 Ry and 10-4 Ry/Bohr, respectively. Spin-orbit coupling was not included.35 The optimized lattice constant of bulk In2O3 is 10.30 Å, which is consistent with other studies.34-37 The in-plane lattice constants for the 1.98 nm slab are 10.28 Å and 10.32 Å, and those for the 0.95 nm slab are 10.26 Å and 10.36 Å. Bulk Si has an optimized lattice constant of 5.47 Å, which is close to the measured value of 5.43 Å.38 The calculated band gaps for bulk In2O3, the 1.98 nm slab, the 14 0.95 nm slab, and bulk Si are 0.94 eV, 1.27 eV, 1.88 eV, and 0.61 eV, respectively. The band gaps of bulk In2O3 and Si are below the experimental values of 2.7-3.25 eV37,39-42 and 1.12 eV43, however this study focuses only the conduction states. The effective mass of bulk In2O3, equal to 0.17 m0, is consistent with some reported values.36-37,44-46 The Wannier code47 was employed to generate maximally localized Wannier functions, which were used to calculate electron energies and velocities on the following k-grids: 200×200×200 for bulk In2O3 and bulk Si, and 200×200×1 for the In2O3 slabs. Calculated quantities include the density of states (DOS), D(E) = 2 ∑ k,n δ(E − Ek,n) /Ω , the distribution of modes (DOM), M(E) = (h/2) ∑ k,n |vx(k, n)|δ(E − Ek,n) /Ω , and the average velocity along the transport direction (the x-direction), vx k,n |vx(k, n)|δ(E − Ek,n) / ∑ δ(E − Ek,n) k,n 48, where Ek,n are the electron eigen-energies for a given wavevector k and band index n , and vx(k) = (1/ħ)∂Ek/∂kx. The carrier concentration and ideal ballistic current are calculated using n2D = (1/2) ∫ D(E)f0(E, EF)dE ∞ Ec and Iball = (2q/h) ∫ M(E)f0(E, EF)dE ∞ Ec 49, where f0(E, EF) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution and EF is the Fermi energy (the factor of two in n2D accounts for only half the states being occupied in an ideal ballistic device50). The ballistic injection velocity is obtained from vinj = Iball/(qn2D). From the experimental Hall data, the average mean free path for backscattering is fitted by: 1) finding the location of the Fermi level for which the calculated and measured n2D are the same, 2) calculating the average distribution of modes at that Fermi level, ⟨M⟩ = ∫ M(E)[−∂f0/∂E]dE ∞ Ec , and 3) obtaining the average mean free path for backscattering using the relation ⟨λ⟩ = (h/2q)n2DμHall/⟨M⟩. 15