Hierarchy of Symmetry Breaking Correlated Phases in Twisted Bilayer Graphene Robert Polski,1, 2, ∗ Yiran Zhang,1, 2, 3, ∗ Yang Peng,4 Harpreet Singh Arora,1, 2 Youngjoon Choi,1, 2, 3 Hyunjin Kim,1, 2, 3 Kenji Watanabe,5 Takashi Taniguchi,5 Gil Refael,2, 3 Felix von Oppen,6 and Stevan Nadj-Perge1, 2, † 1T. J. Watson Laboratory of Applied Physics, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125, USA 2Institute for Quantum Information and Matter, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125, USA 3Department of Physics, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125, USA 4Department of Physics and Astronomy, California State University, Northridge, California 91330, USA 5National Institute for Materials Science, Namiki 1-1, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305 0044, Japan 6Dahlem Center for Complex Quantum Systems and Fachbereich Physik, Freie Universit ̈at Berlin, 14195 Berlin, Germany (Dated: May 12, 2022) Twisted bilayer graphene (TBG) near the magic twist angle of ∼1.1° exhibits a rich phase diagram. However, the interplay between different phases and their dependence on twist angle is still elusive. Here, we explore the stability of various TBG phases and demonstrate that superconductivity near filling of two electrons per moir ́e unit cell alongside Fermi surface reconstructions, as well as entropy- driven high-temperature phase transitions and linear-in-T resistance occur over a range of twist an- gles which extends far beyond those exhibiting correlated insulating phases. In the vicinity of the magic angle, we also find a metallic phase that displays a hysteretic anomalous Hall effect and incip- ient Chern insulating behaviour. Such a metallic phase can be rationalized in terms of the interplay between interaction-driven deformations of TBG bands leading to Berry curvature redistribution and Fermi surface reconstruction. Our results provide an extensive perspective on the hierarchy of correlated phases in TBG as classified by their robustness against deviations from the magic angle or, equivalently, their electronic interaction requirements. TBG is a highly tunable platform for exploring the effects of strong electronic interactions and topolog- ical bands1–9. At the magic angle, i.e., when the strength of the interactions among electrons is maximized relative to their kinetic energy, pronounced signatures of correlated phases emerge1,2,10. Away from the magic angle, the effective interaction strength is reduced and the correlated phases are believed to disappear rapidly. However, despite the strong impact of the twist angle on the phase diagram of nearly-magic TBG, this dependence is still experimentally under-explored. Here we report systematic measurements on multi- ple devices covering a wide range of twist angles between 0.79° and 1.23° (see Supplementary Table I for an overview) and examine the overall impact of twist angle, and thus strength of interactions, on the phase ∗ These authors contributed equally to this work † Correspondence: s.nadj-perge@caltech.edu arXiv:2205.05225v1 [cond-mat.str-el] 11 May 2022 2 diagram of TBG. the hexagonal boron nitride (hBN)-encapsulated TBG-WSe2 structure with WSe2 placed on top of TBG (see Methods for details of fabrication, comparison to TBG devices without WSe2, and discussion of disorder). b, c, Phase diagram as a function of twist angle, indicating the regions which exhibit the AHE due to ferromagnetism, ν = +2 correlated insulators (CI), superconductivity (SC), and symmetry breaking cascade effects as deduced from Rxx peaks and Hall density resets. The cascade and superconductivity start to disappear on either side of the diagram, as indicated by the fading bar color. c, Critical temperatures Tc of superconductivity for both holes and electrons over a range of twist angles between 0.79° and 1.23° (squares indicate 50% Rn and the error bars 10% and 90% Rn; for more details, see Supplementary Fig. 2). The gradient-filled domes are guides to the eye. d, Hall density vs. moir ́e filling factor. Flavor symmetry breaking correlations manifest as Hall density resets (as seen clearly for 1.04°–1.23° on the hole side, for instance, indicated by colored arrows) and occasionally as singularities or hole-like regions (as seen at 1.10° and 0.97° on the electron side). e, f, Rxx values measured for device D3, revealing the emerging hole-side superconductivity (e) and the uniformity of the sample over multiple contact pairs (f). The right inset of f shows contact pairs corresponding to the colors in the main plot, and the left inset shows that the device behavior is independent of a D field induced by a top gate in this device. for more details on device fabrication and the effects of WSe2). We find correlated insulators with well defined activation gaps for twist angles in the relatively narrow range of 0.97°–1.15°, indicating that the addition of WSe2 leaves the value of the magic angle unaffected (Fig. 1b). Unlike the correlated insulators, we find that the cascade of high-temperature symmetry breaking transitions11,12 (discussed in more detail 3 below) and superconductivity near ν = ±2 (where ν is the number of electrons per unit cell) persist over a much wider range of twist angles (Fig. 1b,c; see also Supplementary Fig. 2 and for more data). While all devices exhibit pronounced electron-hole asymmetry and a peak Tc on the electron (hole) side which is shifted towards lower (higher) angles, superconductivity can be found well above (θ = 1.23°, D2) and below (θ = 0.88°, D3) the magic angle for both negative and positive filling factors (see Fig. 1c). To the best of our knowledge, this is the largest reported range of twist angles exhibiting superconductivity for both electron and hole doping. Importantly, the observed superconducting regions are consistently accompanied by Fermi surface re- constructions around ν = ±2, as manifested by a low-temperature reset in the Hall density. Consider, for example, the Hall density plots for the two lowest twist angles in Fig. 1d (blue and black curves). For 0.88°, hole-side SC around ν = –2 has Tc = 130 mK and is accompanied by the formation of a kink in the Hall density (black arrow), which is separate from the van Hove singularity. At larger twist angles, the kink becomes a fully-developed Hall density reset to zero (colored arrows), corresponding to a more complete flavor symmetry breaking-induced Fermi surface reconstruction (see Supplementary Fig. 3 for more data). In contrast, the device with twist angle 0.79° reveals a linear Hall density on the hole side that extends well beyond ν = −2, ultimately reaching a van Hove singularity13. This signals the absence of an interaction- driven Fermi surface reconstruction. Interestingly, we also no longer find hole-side superconductivity for this twist angle. On the electron side, both twist angles exhibit superconductivity and a kink in the Hall density due to Fermi surface reconstructions. We note that the addition of WSe2, while not changing the magic angle value, may help stabilize superconductivity5 due to a reduction in disorder. We find in the best devices that four-point measurements almost perfectly overlap for different contact configurations (Fig. 1f), signaling high twist angle uniformity. Moreover, in a dual-gated geometry no dependence on the displacement field is found (Fig. 1f, inset). How- ever, we note that typical schemes of assessing disorder such as estimating the full width at half-maximum near charge neutrality that work well for monolayer graphene do not correlate with the superconducting Tc or other disorder signatures in our samples (see methods and Supplementary Fig. 4). Our observations indicate that a fully flavor (i.e., spin and valley) symmetric state strongly disfavors the formation of superconductivity. This rules out the simplest scenario for superconductivity based on electron-phonon coupling, which relies only on the local density of states14. Alternatively, and indepen- dently of the pairing mechanism, in the case of multiflavor pairing, superconductivity and magnetism (i.e., flavor polarization) can be inherently connected. This connection emerges from a simple energetic argu- ment. If two flavors pair, they could increase their condensation energy by exchanging particles with the other flavors, such that they maximize their density of states. Roughly, this is captured through a term akin to ∆2M in the free energy, but with M (and ∆) being a matrix indicating the density of the various flavors on its diagonal, and correlations (pairing) in the off diagonal15. This term in the free energy implies that 4 strong flavor polarization (manifested in M) will generally increase the superconducting gap, and thus Tc, of a multiflavor superconductor. Conversely, a finite superconducting order parameter could also induce polarization. Our experimental observation that enhanced superconductivity occurs only in regions with prominent Hall density resets is thus in line with multiflavor pairing. This could potentially reconcile ex- periments with electron-phonon mechanisms of superconductivity, although we note that our results do not rule out unconventional mechanisms, based e.g., on flavor fluctuations16 or the Kohn-Luttinger scenario17. a peak fit at ν ≈ 1 for a device at twist angle 0.88°. b, Rxx peak positions near filling factor ν ≈ 1 as a function of temperature for devices with various twist angles. The vertical colored lines represent the ν = 1 filling factor for the respectively colored twist angle data. c, d, Fit parameters ∆μ and ∆γ representing change in the chemical potential and specific heat (see Equation 1 in the Supplementary Information and ) for the phase transition represented by the Rxx peaks in b. Error bars are 95% confidence intervals (the hollow square for 0.95° was set to the same ∆γ value as the 0.97° device due to the unconstrained ∆γ value for the data points). e, f, The derivative dρ dT (where ρ = RxxW/L is the resistance scaled by the width W and length L of the sample) for devices at twist angles 0.88° and 1.10°, respectively. Rxx peaks corresponding to Pomeranchuk-like transitions are shown with black dots (corresponding to slight minima in dρ/dT), superconductivity (SC) pockets are shown with arrows, and the magenta lines are guides to the eye representing the approximate regions of T-linear resistivity. The green lines reveal the inflection points under which low-temperature resistivity is super-linear. g, The resistivity slope dρ dT for a range of twist angles, where red(blue) is for electrons(holes). The values come from the average derivative over the area spanned by 1.5 < ν < 1.8 angle 1.10° is represented by hollow squares. The principal features emerging at higher temperatures (above 5–10 K), such as the cascade of phase 5 transitions between symmetry broken states near integer filling factors and the linear-in-T dependence of Rxx, are also present over a wide range of angles (Fig. 2 and Supplementary Fig. 2). In the case of |ν| ≈ 1, Rxx peaks are associated with a Pomeranchuk-like phase transition18,19 between a flavor symmetric state near charge neutrality and a symmetry broken phase with free local spin moments. The evolution of this phase boundary with temperature can be fit using a simple thermodynamic model including the entropy of localized spins19. The main parameters entering this model are the shift in the chemical potential ∆μ due to the cascade transition and the change in specific heat ∆γ between the two phases. Our data suggest that this description works reasonably well over the entire range of angles investigated here (Fig. 2a-d). Moreover, ∆γ appears to be roughly constant except for device D1 at 1.10° right at the magic angle, perhaps indicating additional correlation effects emerging for this angle. We note that this device also exhibits a metallic anomalous Hall phase near ν = 1 at low temperatures, discussed be- low. The slowly increasing ∆μ signals stronger shifts of the bands as the twist angle is increased, which is consistent with the reduction of the moir ́e length scale and thus stronger electronic interactions. The ap- pearance of superconductivity, high-temperature symmetry breaking cascade transitions, and in particular Pomeranchuk-like transitions over similar twist angle ranges (see Supplementary Fig. 2 and to see the fading cascade at the limits of twist angles studied here) suggests a possible connection between these instabilities and points to similarities between TBG and heavy-fermion systems20 which also show rich phase diagrams exhibiting similar phases21–23. The twist angle dependence of the linear-in-T resistivity behavior is shown in Fig. 2e-g. A linear temper- ature dependence of the resistivity can be due to electron-phonon scattering, at least at higher temperatures (above 5–10K)24–26. Alternatively, this dependence has also been associated with strange metal behavior due to its onset at low temperatures and its strength near the |ν| = 2 correlated phases8,27. Our data show that the linear-in-T behavior is qualitatively similar in devices away from (Fig. 2e; see Supplementary Fig. 5 for more examples) and close to the magic angle (Fig. 2f). Both cases exhibit broad regions of linear-in-T behaviour fanning out from approximately |ν| = 2 (delineated by magenta lines in Fig. 2e,f). At lower |ν|, this region is bordered by a broad region near charge neutrality, where the increase in resistance is quadratic (consistent with expectations for Fermi liquid behaviour). At higher |ν| > 2, there is a region where the temperature dependence of the resistivity crosses over from strongly super-linear to sub-linear as tempera- ture increases. The intermediate inflection points, shown as green lines in Fig. 2e,f, appear to be intertwined with other TBG phases as they occasionally touch the superconducting domes (both for electrons and holes at 0.88° as well as for holes at 1.10°) or onset near ν ≈ 2, when a correlated insulating gap is present. This observation contrasts with the suggestion that the entire superconducting dome emerges below a linear-in-T phase27. Note that both the magnitude of the T dependence (as measured by the slope near the green lines) and the linear-in-T slope measured at higher temperatures (within the magenta regions) are enhanced near the magic angle (Fig. 2g). This is to be expected, as the Fermi velocity is minimized for this angle and 6 could be even further reduced by interaction effects causing band flattening at nonzero filling28. Finally we note that, in general, the linear-in-T slope peaks around the same angle value for both electrons and holes. This contrasts with the observed doping asymmetry of the twist angles at which the superconducting Tc becomes maximal, further highlighting the differences between high- and low-temperature symmetry breaking phenomena. Now we focus on a magic-angle device with θ = 1.10° (Fig. 3). Upon cooldown, this device exhibits clear Rxx peaks below T ≈ 40 K at every integer 0 < |ν| < 4. As temperature is lowered further, a correlated insulator (CI) develops near ν = +2, while other resistance peaks remain metallic or disappear gradually (Fig. 3a). For hole doping (Fig. 3b), the corresponding superconducting dome near ν = –2 reaches a maximal transition temperature of Tc = 1.6 K, featuring vanishing longitudinal resistance Rxx and a Fraunhofer-like pattern in line with previously reported hBN-encapsulated, high-quality magic-angle TBG devices2–4,29,30 (see also Methods for more detailed information). In contrast to the features at ν = ±2, the evolution of Rxx near ν = ±1 is more subtle. In the temperature range 6 K < T < 40 K, the Rxx peaks near both ν = +1 and ν = –1 evolve towards lower filling factors |ν| as temperature increases, following the phase boundary discussed above (Fig. 3a,e). However, at lower temperatures, T < 6 K, the two peaks show distinctly different behavior. While the hole-side peak com- pletely disappears, reflecting simple metallic behavior from charge neutrality to ν ≈ –2, the peak near ν = 1 gradually gives way to another peak emerging in the filling range 0.8 < ν < 0.95 that persists to the lowest temperatures (Fig. 3c). Careful inspection reveals that Rxx exhibits switching behavior around the peak, discontinuous resistance changes between the same sweep across ν taken at slightly different temperatures (Fig. 3d) presumably due to switching of domains. Further measurements in the ν and temperature range of this low-temperature Rxx peak reveal an anomalous Hall effect (AHE). Figure 3f shows hysteresis loops in the Hall resistance, Rxy, for ν = 0.9 as measured from 0.3 K to 7 K. The loop has a coercive field of up to about 150 mT and is centered about zero magnetic field. The jump in resistance ∆Rxy = RB↑ xy – RB↓ xy reaches a maximal value of 2.5 kΩ, significantly smaller than the resistance quantum, which persists until the Curie temperature ∼ 5 K (Fig. 3f inset). Signatures of an AHE phase are also observed at twist angles of 1.04° and 0.99°, as shown in Supplementary Fig. 8. Importantly, the observed AHE phase appears well below filling factor ν = 1, existing in the range 0.7 < ν < 1, with the maximal ∆Rxy occurring near ν = 0.88 (Fig. 4a). Upon approaching ν = 0.95, the filling at which Rxx peaks, the coercive field diverges accompanied by a sudden decrease in ∆Rxy. Then signatures of small hysteresis loops in the opposite direction appear (see Supplementary Fig. 7 for a more clear example). Additionally, hysteresis is observed when sweeping ν in opposite directions (Fig. 4b) and holding the magnetic field constant. Measurements of Rxy at elevated temperatures and over a wider doping range further reveal the unusual nature of the observed AHE phase (Fig. 4c,d). Surprisingly, within the range of ν exhibiting the AHE and 7 versus filling factor ν for a range of temperatures (shown is 25 mK, then 1, 3, 5, and 7 K, followed by every 5 K from 10 to 40 K). Superconductivity, correlated insulators, and orbital magnetism (incipient Chern insulator) emerge below 10K, whereas the symmetry breaking cascade transitions survive up to 40 K. b, Rxx versus temperature and filling factor on the hole side, showing a superconducting dome around ν= –2. Insets, temperature dependence of Rxx at ν = –2.16, showing the SC transition and Fraunhofer-like interference pattern (ν = –2.3). c, Rxx versus temperature and filling factor focusing around ν = 1. d, Zoom into the black box in c, revealing the switching behavior of the resistance, representative of the ferromagnetic state. e, Dense line-cut plots for the area around ν = 1, showing that the evolution of Rxx maxima above 10 K (magenta line) are distinct from the ferromagnetic peak. These peaks mark the T-dependent cascade transition previously studied around filling factor one in TBG18,19. f, Temperature dependence of Rxy versus B at ν = 0.90 from 300 mK to 7 K. Successive curves are offset by 2.2 kΩ, and the arrows indicate the B field sweep directions. The inset demonstrates ∆Rxy = RB↑ xy – RB↓ xy versus B field and temperature at the same filling factor. up to magnetic fields greater than 1 T, the sign of Rxy is opposite to that of the surrounding doping range. Also, Rxy changes sign when the temperature reaches ∼5 K, consistent with the measured AHE Curie temperature. While naively this behaviour might be due to a change of carrier type from electrons to holes, the measurements show a linear increase in Rxy with increasing magnetic field throughout the entire doping range (Fig. 3f and Fig. 4e), consistent with dominant electron conduction. The observation of hysteresis signals the emergence of an orbital ferromagnetic phase that arises from a band carrying nonzero Chern number C31,32. A finite Chern number is also expected to result in Rxy and 8 Rxx features that follow the Streda formula in an out-of-plane magnetic field B = h Cen. We observe clear maxima and minima in Rxx approximately following the Streda formula at fields less than 3T (Fig. 4e), and specifically point to the Rxx minimum following C = –1 that extrapolates to ν = 0.95 at zero field, near where the coercivity diverges. The low-field features disappear by B = 3–4 T, where a finite-field Chern insulating phase corresponding to C = 3 takes over. The observed switch in Chern number indicates the competing nature of these phases9,33. However, our observations stand in contrast to discussions of zero-field Chern insulators, where the chemical potential falls into an insulating gap9,33–35. Throughout the entire doping range, the AHE phase observed here appears metallic. This is implied by the electron-like Hall resistivity and the finite Rxx peak at 0 T that is small compared to h/e2 and increases with temperature. This contrasts with the expected vanishing of Rxx for a gapped bulk with gapless edge channels6 or a resistance ∼ h/e2 that can originate from domain walls extending between the contacts36. We note that while disorder effects and the presence of domains observed in can, to some extent, explain the absence of a gap and imperfect quantization, local compressibility11,37 and scanning tunneling spectroscopy measurements38,39 typically do not resolve a gapped state near ν = 1. In the following, we present a scenario which would be consistent with the metallicity as well as the electron-like behaviour of Rxy in the AHE phase seen in Fig. 3f and Fig. 4e. Our scenario relies on the fact that strong interactions can heavily deform the TBG bands, such that the Γ point of the mini-Brillouin zone can be inverted, as reported by local spectroscopy measurements40. To model TBG, we employ a ten-band model41 that includes short-range Coulomb interactions42. First we show that this model, which uses a Hartree-Fock approximation, can capture the existence of the symme- try breaking cascade11,12 and TBG band structure deformations13,28,40,43 (see Supplementary Information for further discussion). Flavor-resolved mean-field band structures at ν = 0.81 are shown in Fig. 4f,g. Here, the symmetry breaking cascade occurs well before ν reaches 1, with one of the spin-valley flavor bands being almost filled while the other three develop a gap and are shifted back to the vicinity of the charge neutrality point. Focusing on the three gapped bands, one can obtain a total Chern number of C = ± 3 or C = ±133, depending on the exact symmetry breaking mechanism, when the chemical potential is within the gap. For example, broken T symmetry naturally leads to C = ±3, and broken C2 symmetry can give rise to C = ±1 phases38. Now consider the case displayed in Fig. 4g where the chemical potential for three flavors touches the bottom of the inverted electron pocket at the Γ point. Despite being slightly electron doped, the three flavors still contribute to the anomalous Hall conductance. Since the Berry curvature of the upper band is small near the bottom of the inverted electron pocket, as shown in Fig. 4i, the Chern number remains approximately conserved. The consistently positive slope dRxy dB of the Hall resistivity arises from the electron-like bands of the barely filled flavors, while the apparent hole-like sign of Rxy originates from the negative offset caused by the anomalous Hall effect. The experimentally observed hysteresis, in this scenario, would 9 filling factor 1 measured at 1.5K. The divergence of the coercive field happens around ν = 0.95. b, Hall density difference as a result of sweeping ν while holding magnetic field constant, ∆Rν xy = Rν↑ xy – Rν↓ xy. c, Hall density 1K to 15K. nHall changes sign when entering the anomalous Hall region in (ν, T, B) parameter space, due to the AHE negative offset to Rxy as a result of the zero-field symmetry breaking. However, the slope of the Rxy vs. B measurements remain positive, as seen in d and Fig. 3f, meaning the overall behavior is still electron-like. d, e, Magnetic field and ν dependence of Rxy (d) and Rxx (e) around filling factor 1 measured at 3K. In addition to the C = +3 Chern insulator developed at high magnetic field, features associated with C = ±1 also emerge from filling factor 1, as labeled in e. The origin of the C = –1 line is at ν = 0.94, indicating that an incipient Chern insulator C = –1 is responsible for anomalous Hall signal observed around ν = 1. f, g, The band structure obtained for each spin and mini-valley (K, K’) flavor from the 10-band model for the case of broken C2T symmetry at ν ≃ 0.81. The K↑ flavor, which is nearly filled, preserves the Dirac-like band structure (f), whereas the other three flavors have a C2T -broken mass (g). The gray planes represent the chemical potential. Here we assume the mass term is invariant under T operation, which gives overall Chern number C = ±1. h, i, Berry curvature Ωkx,ky for the conduction flat band in the K↑ flavor (h) and for K↓ (i), where the Berry curvature is concentrated above the Γ pocket. The Fermi surface is plotted as a dotted circle. The other two flavors, from the opposite valley K’, have the same Berry curvature as i but opposite sign. 10 still be explained by orbital ferromagnetism31. Due the metallic nature of the system, the Streda formula with C = −1; ν = 1 at B = 0 T is only approximately satisfied. We note, that while the mean-field calculations presented here successfully capture a possible metallic AHE phase, other ground states with similar characteristics may also be possible13,33,44,45 and are hard to rule out based on our data. Finally similar scenario to the one proposed here can also explain AHE phases observed recently near ν = ±246,47. Our results show that the robustness to deviations of the twist angle from the magic angle divides TBG phases into two categories. Superconductivity, cascade transitions, as well as the linear-in-T dependence of the resistivity are robust over a wide range of twist angles, spanning at least 0.8° ≲ θ ≲ 1.23°. Moreover, the cascade transitions near ν = ±2 appear to be a necessary prerequisite for the appearance of super- conductivity, implying close relations between these two phases. In contrast, the correlated insulating and orbital ferromagnetic states require a more subtle interplay of strong interactions, kinetic energy scales, and possible breaking of spatial symmetries. Due to this sensitivity, these phases appear in a more immediate vicinity of the magic angle, where the close competition between various phases can result in differing behaviour of devices with the same twist angle (e.g., see Supplementary Fig. 6). This hierarchy of TBG phases will guide future theoretical frameworks aiming to explain the rich phenomenology of TBG and related structures. METHODS Device Fabrication: The devices were fabricated using a ‘cut and stack’ method, in which graphene flakes were separated into two pieces using a sharp Platinum-Iridium tip; this prevents unwanted twisting and strain during tearing while allowing more control over the flake size and shape. First, a thin hBN flake (10–30 nm) is picked up using a propylene carbonate film (PC) previously placed on a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamp. Then the hBN is used to pick up an exfoliated monolayer of WSe2 (commercial source, HQ graphene) before approaching the graphene. After picking up the first half of the graphene flake, the transfer stage is rotated by approximately 1.1–1.3° (overshooting the target angle slightly), and then the second half is picked up, forming the twisted bilayer. Care was taken to approach and pick up each stacking step slowly. In the last step, a thicker hBN (30–70 nm) is picked up, and the whole stack is dropped on a predefined local gold back-gate at 150° C while the PC is released at 170° C. The PC is then cleaned off with N-Methyl-2-Pyrrolidinone (NMP). The final geometry is defined by dry etching with a CHF3/O2 plasma and deposition of ohmic edge contacts (Ti/Au, 5 nm/100 nm). Measurements: All measurements were performed in a dilution refrigerator (Oxford Triton) with a base temperature of ∼25 mK, using standard low-frequency lock-in amplifier techniques. Unless otherwise specified, measurements are taken at the base temperature. Frequencies of the lock-in amplifiers (Stanford Research, models 830 and 865a) were kept in the range of 7–20 Hz in order to measure the device’s DC 11 properties and the AC excitation was kept <5 nA (most measurements were taken at 0.5–1 nA to preserve the linearity of the system and avoid disturbing the fragile states at low temperatures). Each of the DC fridge lines pass through cold filters, including 4 Pi filters that filter out a range from ∼80 MHz to >10 GHz, as well as a two-pole RC low-pass filter. Similarities to hBN-encapsulated samples: Here we briefly discuss similarities between devices stud- ied here and hBN-encapsulated devices. While we showed previously that WSe2 induces some amount of spin-orbit coupling5, it does not change the magic angle significantly since both the most prominent cor- related insulating states at ν = +2 and highest Tc-superconductivity are observed near 1.1°. Moreover, the trends of metallic resistance peaks at high temperature (Supplementary Fig. 2) and the gaps between the flat and dispersive bands are consistent with hBN-encapsulated devices25. Note that the samples showing similar full-filling gaps likely have the same ratio between the tunneling energies on AA sites and AB sites (often represented as wAA/wAB in the continuum model)48. In this context, our main finding is that adding a WSe2 layer decreases the amount of twist angle disorder on the hundreds-of-nanometer to μm scale in de- vices, as confirmed separately by STM measurements39. This finding is also consistent with our four point measurements for some of our best devices (see for example Fig. 1f). Another sign of decreased disorder is found in the well developed Rxy plateaus at relatively low magnetic fields in our devices5 (see also Sup- plementary Fig. 6). This may explain our observation, in part, of superconductivity over a large angle range although the spin-orbit coupling may still play a role, particularly in the electron-side superconductivity away from the magic angle where hBN encapsulated TBG data is lacking and comparison is not possible. Disorder in TBG-WSe2 devices: In all TBG devices studied so far, it appears that there are significant device-to-device variations that are often associated with disorder. In addition to disorder that is intrinsic to graphene (such as charge disorder originating from residual polymers and other impurities, disordered edges, strain from wrinkles or bubbles, strain from the substrate or back gate), in TBG twist angle disorder is believed to play an important role. As previously reported, it generates domains and gradual twist-angle shifts on length scales from 100 nm to a micron39,49. In this context, characterizing TBG disorder through transport measurements is somewhat more elusive as transport averages over device length scales (a few μm). It is important to emphasize that measurements of disorder that are typically used in a single layer of graphene and commonly detected through broadening of of charge-neutrality peaks in longitudinal or Hall resistance (full width at half max—FWHM—of Rxx), do not correlate well with superconductivity or other features that may point towards disorder in the TBG samples (Fig. 1g). Occasionally, we see evidence in transport of the presence of domains with slightly different twist angles (on the scale of the contact separation, or slightly smaller, a few hundred nm to a few μm), resulting in multiple resistance features near ν = 2 (Supplementary Fig. 9d), and a Landau fan diagram that is not as distinct as other devices. Other devices show variation in the twist angle over a range of contact pairs (length scales 2-20 μm, see Supplementary Table I) but still show less disorder in fan diagrams and strong 12 correlations for each individual pair of contacts, owing likely to large domains. In the least disordered devices (in the context of transport measurements), the global twist-angle devi- ation between different contact pairs is below the detectable limit. For instance, Fig. 1f shows a device with longitudinal resistance traces that almost exactly match over four pairs of contacts. This device, made with Au top and back gates and a monolayer of WSe2 on top of the TBG, also shows uniform resistance and superconducting features over the applicable electric displacement field D range (Fig. 1f, inset). This suggests a low disorder as probed by D-field asymmetry that occurs in some previous hBN encapsulated devices3. The D-invariant superconductivity also implies that the substrate asymmetry introduced by WSe2 is minimal, at least for twist angle of 0.88°. Moreover, we note that different contact pairs in this study are checked in a four-point measurement configuration (the standard used for measuring correlated states such as SC) and cross-checked with temperature dependence and magnetic field dependence for extraneous features, a process we find is more sensitive to disorder compared to the verification of twist angle disorder using two point measurements performed previously on hBN encapsulated devices. Further work (both in theory and experiment) is needed for more precise characterization of the role of disorder in TBG devices. Y. Cao, V. Fatemi, A. Demir, S. Fang, S. L. Tomarken, J. Y. Luo, J. D. Sanchez-Yamagishi, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, E. Kaxiras, R. C. Ashoori, and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Nature 556, 80 (2018). Y. Cao, V. Fatemi, S. Fang, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, E. Kaxiras, and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Nature 556, 43 (2018). M. Yankowitz, S. Chen, H. Polshyn, Y. Zhang, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, D. Graf, A. F. Young, and C. R. Dean, Science 363, 1059 (2019). X. Lu, P. Stepanov, W. Yang, M. Xie, M. A. Aamir, I. Das, C. Urgell, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, G. Zhang, A. Bachtold, A. H. MacDonald, and D. K. Efetov, Nature 574, 653 (2019). H. S. Arora, R. Polski, Y. Zhang, A. Thomson, Y. Choi, H. Kim, Z. Lin, I. Z. Wilson, X. Xu, J.-H. Chu, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, J. Alicea, and S. Nadj-Perge, Nature 583, 379 (2020). M. Serlin, C. L. Tschirhart, H. Polshyn, Y. Zhang, J. Zhu, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, L. Balents, and A. F. Young, Science 367, 900 (2019). A. L. Sharpe, E. J. Fox, A. W. Barnard, J. Finney, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, M. A. Kastner, and D. Goldhaber- Gordon, Science 365, 605 (2019). Y. Cao, D. Chowdhury, D. Rodan-Legrain, O. Rubies-Bigorda, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, T. Senthil, and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Physical Review Letters 124, 076801 (2020), arXiv:1901.03710. P. Stepanov, M. Xie, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, X. Lu, A. H. MacDonald, B. A. Bernevig, and D. K. Efetov, arXiv:2012.15126 [cond-mat] (2020), arXiv:2012.15126 [cond-mat]. R. Bistritzer and A. H. MacDonald, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108, 12233 (2011). U. Zondiner, A. Rozen, D. Rodan-Legrain, Y. Cao, R. Queiroz, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, Y. Oreg, F. von Oppen, A. Stern, E. Berg, P. Jarillo-Herrero, and S. Ilani, Nature 582, 203 (2020). D. Wong, K. P. Nuckolls, M. Oh, B. Lian, Y. Xie, S. Jeon, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, B. A. Bernevig, and 13 A. Yazdani, Nature 582, 198 (2020). M. Xie and A. H. MacDonald, arXiv:2010.07928 [cond-mat] (2020), arXiv:2010.07928 [cond-mat]. W. Qin, B. Zou, and A. H. MacDonald, arXiv:2102.10504 [cond-mat] (2021), arXiv:2102.10504 [cond-mat]. R. W. Cherng, G. Refael, and E. Demler, Physical Review Letters 99, 130406 (2007). Y.-Z. You and A. Vishwanath, npj Quantum Materials 4, 1 (2019). J. Gonz ́alez and T. Stauber, Physical Review Letters 122, 026801 (2019). Y. Saito, F. Yang, J. Ge, X. Liu, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, J. I. A. Li, E. Berg, and A. F. Young, Nature 592, A. Rozen, J. M. Park, U. Zondiner, Y. Cao, D. Rodan-Legrain, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, Y. Oreg, A. Stern, E. Berg, P. Jarillo-Herrero, and S. Ilani, Nature 592, 214 (2021), arXiv:2009.01836. G. R. Stewart, Reviews of Modern Physics 56, 755 (1984). G. Lonzarich, D. Pines, and Y.-f. Yang, Reports on Progress in Physics 80, 024501 (2016). M. A. Continentino and A. S. Ferreira, Physical Review B 69, 233104 (2004). F. Wu, E. Hwang, and S. Das Sarma, Physical Review B 99, 165112 (2019). H. Polshyn, M. Yankowitz, S. Chen, Y. Zhang, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, C. R. Dean, and A. F. Young, Nature Physics 15, 1011 (2019). S. D. Sarma and F. Wu, arXiv:2201.10270 [cond-mat] (2022), arXiv:2201.10270 [cond-mat]. A. Jaoui, I. Das, G. Di Battista, J. D ́ıez-M ́erida, X. Lu, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, H. Ishizuka, L. Levitov, and D. K. Efetov, arXiv:2108.07753 [cond-mat] (2022), arXiv:2108.07753 [cond-mat]. Z. A. H. Goodwin, V. Vitale, X. Liang, A. A. Mostofi, and J. Lischner, Electronic Structure 2, 034001 (2020), Y. Saito, J. Ge, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, and A. F. Young, Nature Physics 16, 926 (2020). P. Stepanov, I. Das, X. Lu, A. Fahimniya, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, F. H. L. Koppens, J. Lischner, L. Levitov, and D. K. Efetov, Nature 583, 375 (2020). J. Zhu, J.-J. Su, and A. H. MacDonald, Physical Review Letters 125, 227702 (2020). H. Polshyn, J. Zhu, M. A. Kumar, Y. Zhang, F. Yang, C. L. Tschirhart, M. Serlin, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, A. H. MacDonald, and A. F. Young, Nature 588, 66 (2020). B. Lian, Z.-D. Song, N. Regnault, D. K. Efetov, A. Yazdani, and B. A. Bernevig, Physical Review B 103, 205414 J.-X. Lin, Y.-H. Zhang, E. Morissette, Z. Wang, S. Liu, D. Rhodes, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, J. Hone, and J. I. A. Li, arXiv:2102.06566 [cond-mat] (2021), arXiv:2102.06566 [cond-mat]. S. Grover, M. Bocarsly, A. Uri, P. Stepanov, G. Di Battista, I. Roy, J. Xiao, A. Y. Meltzer, Y. Myasoedov, K. Pareek, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, B. Yan, A. Stern, E. Berg, D. K. Efetov, and E. Zeldov, arXiv:2201.06901 [cond-mat] (2022), arXiv:2201.06901 [cond-mat]. H. Polshyn, Y. Zhang, M. A. Kumar, T. Soejima, P. Ledwith, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, A. Vishwanath, M. P. Zaletel, and A. F. Young, arXiv:2104.01178 [cond-mat] (2021), arXiv:2104.01178 [cond-mat]. J. Yu, B. A. Foutty, Z. Han, M. E. Barber, Y. Schattner, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, P. Phillips, Z.-X. Shen, S. A. Kivelson, and B. E. Feldman, arXiv:2108.00009 [cond-mat] (2021), arXiv:2108.00009 [cond-mat]. K. P. Nuckolls, M. Oh, D. Wong, B. Lian, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, B. A. Bernevig, and A. Yazdani, Nature 14 Y. Choi, H. Kim, Y. Peng, A. Thomson, C. Lewandowski, R. Polski, Y. Zhang, H. S. Arora, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, J. Alicea, and S. Nadj-Perge, Nature 589, 536 (2021). Y. Choi, H. Kim, C. Lewandowski, Y. Peng, A. Thomson, R. Polski, Y. Zhang, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, J. Alicea, and S. Nadj-Perge, Nature Physics 17, 1375 (2021). H. C. Po, L. Zou, T. Senthil, and A. Vishwanath, Physical Review B 99, 195455 (2019). Y. Choi, J. Kemmer, Y. Peng, A. Thomson, H. Arora, R. Polski, Y. Zhang, H. Ren, J. Alicea, G. Refael, F. von Oppen, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, and S. Nadj-Perge, Nature Physics 15, 1174 (2019). T. Cea and F. Guinea, Physical Review B 102, 045107 (2020). Y. H. Kwan, G. Wagner, T. Soejima, M. P. Zaletel, S. H. Simon, S. A. Parameswaran, and N. Bultinck, arXiv:2105.05857 [cond-mat] (2021), arXiv:2105.05857 [cond-mat]. G. Shavit, E. Berg, A. Stern, and Y. Oreg, arXiv:2107.08486 [cond-mat] (2021), arXiv:2107.08486 [cond-mat]. C.-C. Tseng, X. Ma, Z. Liu, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, J.-H. Chu, and M. Yankowitz, arXiv:2202.01734 [cond- mat] (2022), arXiv:2202.01734 [cond-mat]. J.-X. Lin, Y.-H. Zhang, E. Morissette, Z. Wang, S. Liu, D. Rhodes, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, J. Hone, and J. I. A. Li, Science 375, 437 (2022). N. N. T. Nam and M. Koshino, Physical Review B 96, 075311 (2017). A. Uri, S. Grover, Y. Cao, J. A. Crosse, K. Bagani, D. Rodan-Legrain, Y. Myasoedov, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, P. Moon, M. Koshino, P. Jarillo-Herrero, and E. Zeldov, Nature 581, 47 (2020).