1 Rare-Earth Control of the Superconducting Upper Critical Field in Infinite- Layer Nickelates Authors: Bai Yang Wang1,2*†, Tiffany C. Wang1,3*†, Yu-Te Hsu4, Motoki Osada1,5, Kyuho Lee1,2, Chunjing Jia1, Caitlin Duffy4, Danfeng Li1, Jennifer Fowlie1,3, Malcolm R. Beasley3, Thomas P. Devereaux1,5, Ian R. Fisher1,3, Nigel E. Hussey4,6, Harold Y. Hwang1,3* Affiliations: 1Stanford Institute for Materials and Energy Sciences, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory; Menlo Park, CA 94025, United States. 2Department of Physics, Stanford University; Stanford, CA 94305, United States. 3Department of Applied Physics, Stanford University; Stanford, CA 94305, United States. 4High Field Magnet Laboratory (HFML-EMFL) and Institute for Molecules and Materials, Radboud University; Toernooiveld 7, 6525 ED Nijmegen, Netherlands. 5Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Stanford University; Stanford, CA 94305, United States. 6H. H. Wills Physics Laboratory, University of Bristol; Tyndall Avenue, Bristol BS8 1TL, United Kingdom. *Corresponding author. Email: bwang87@stanford.edu; catwang@stanford.edu; hyhwang@stanford.edu. †Both authors contributed equally. 2 Abstract: The consequences of varying the rare-earth element in the superconducting infinite-layer nickelates have been much debated. Here we show striking differences in the magnitude and anisotropy of the superconducting upper critical field across the La-, Pr-, and Nd-nickelates. These distinctions originate from the 4f electron characteristics of the rare-earth ions in the lattice: they are absent for La3+, nonmagnetic for the Pr3+ singlet ground state, and magnetic for the Nd3+ Kramer’s doublet. The unique polar and azimuthal angle-dependent magnetoresistance found in the Nd-nickelates can be understood to arise from the magnetic contribution of the Nd3+ 4f moments. In the absence of rare-earth effects, we find that the nickelates broadly violate the Pauli limit. Such robust and tunable superconductivity suggests potential in future high-field applications. 3 Main Text: Following the initial discovery of superconductivity in Nd0.8Sr0.2NiO2 (1), the subsequent development of rare-earth (R) variants with Pr and La in place of Nd (2–4) has created an emerging new family of superconducting infinite-layer nickelates (Fig. 1A). Unlike the cuprates, with which the nickelates are often compared, R-site variations are expected to have impact beyond ionic size effects. There is consistent transport, spectroscopic, and theoretical evidence for hybridization between the R 5d and the Ni 3d orbitals (2–15). An open question currently under debate is the potential role of the R 4f electrons (16–19). Here we report that the R-site directly controls the magnitude and anisotropy of the superconducting upper critical field Hc2. superconductivity differs widely among R-variants, which does not scale with Tc0, the superconducting transition temperature in zero external magnetic field. Magnetoresistance measurements up to 35 T of representative (R,Sr)NiO2 (R = La, Pr, Nd) samples at optimal doping corresponding resistively determined upper critical fields (Hc2^ and Hc2||; defined as 50% of the normal state resistivity) are shown (Fig. 1E), where the drastically different scales for Hc2 are evident. For a superconductor in the dirty limit, which describes the nickelates (20), the effective Ginzburg- Landau coherence length x is the geometric mean of the Pippard coherence length x0 and the mean- free-path (21). Then, as !"#^ = %& #'() (1 − - -.&), Hc2^ μ 1/x0 μ Δ0 μ Tc0 . Here 01 is the magnetic flux quantum and Δ0 the superconducting gap. As for Hc2||, the observed (1-T/Tc0)1/2 temperature 4 dependence indicates dominant paramagnetic de-pairing near Tc0 (20). Hc2|| is also proportional to Tc0 at temperatures near Tc0, described by − ln 4 - -.&5 = 77(3) 4 9&:.)|| #'<=-.&5 # (22), where >? is the Boltzmann constant, @1 is the vacuum magnetic permeability, and 7(A) is the Riemann zeta function. Therefore, we normalize both Hc2 and T by Tc0 (Fig. 1F) for all samples. We observe a systematic variation in Hc2/Tc0, which is largest for La-nickelates, somewhat smaller for Pr, and significantly reduced for Nd. Furthermore, this variation between R-sites is persistent across the respective superconducting domes via Sr doping (Fig. 1F; see figs. S1 and S2 for complete data sets). To probe the origin of this striking variation in Hc2, we measure in detail the magnetoresistance as a function of the polar (B) and azimuthal (0) angle of the applied magnetic field direction, as illustrated in Fig. 2A. In the normal state, negligible angular dependence is observed for all samples (Fig. 2C and D). Therefore, we focus on the superconducting transition region with finite sample resistance below the normal state value. We first present the characteristic features through representative measurements (Fig. 2E; see figs. S3-S5 for complete data sets). The La- and Pr- nickelates both show conventional angular dependence; their ‘¥’-shaped B-dependence shows that superconductivity is more robust to in-plane magnetic fields than perpendicular fields, as commonly seen in layered superconductors (23). Their ‘figure-of-eight’-shaped 0-dependence, arising from vortex motion, also follows previous studies of other type-II superconductors (23, 24). In sharp contrast, the Nd-nickelates show qualitatively distinct magnetoresistance. The orientation of the B-dependence is opposite to that of La-/Pr-nickelates and other layered superconductors, - i.e. superconductivity is more suppressed by an in-plane magnetic field, indicating a complete 5 reversal of the superconducting anisotropy. Furthermore, a striking clover-leaf 0-dependence is observed for Nd. As shown in fig. S6, we can rule out a vortex-related origin of these features. How can we understand this clear difference between the Nd-nickelates versus the La-/Pr- nickelates? In all cases the in-plane lattice parameters are clamped to that of the SrTiO3 substrate, while the c-axis variations reflect the R-site ionic radii (1–3): La3+ is the largest, ~4.5% larger than the closely similar Pr3+ and Nd3+ (within 1.5% of each other) (25). Thus cation size effects do not seem to account for the unique Hc2 features in Nd. Rather, the clover-leaf 0-dependent magnetoresistance in Nd is more suggestive of a potential role of local magnetic moments, leading to a consideration of the 4f electrons and their crystal electric field (CEF) structure. To examine this, we use theoretical approaches including ab initio density functional theory (DFT) calculations (26, 27), Bader charge analysis (28), and symmetry arguments to determine the 4f levels split by the tetragonal CEF (see supplementary materials for details). In Fig. 3A, we show the electron density iso-surface of the Ni 3d, 4s, O 2p, and R 5d, 6s orbital electrons within a unit cell where the contours correspond to 2.5% of the maximum electron density. Despite the appreciable hybridization, especially between the O 2p and Ni 3d orbitals, most of the electron density remains within the vicinity of the parent ion. This motivates the use of a point charge approximation in determining the CEF-split 4f energy levels, as shown for Pr3+ and Nd3+ as a function of c-axis lattice constant (Fig. 3, B and C), where the range of experimental values is highlighted by the vertical blue bands. While La3+ has no 4f electrons, we find a singlet crystal field ground state for Pr3+ which to first order is also nonmagnetic. By contrast, Nd3+ has a doublet ground state as expected for a Kramer’s ion, making this the lone magnetic R-site ion among the 6 three. Furthermore, by adding an external field term to the CEF perturbation Hamiltonian, we find that the Nd 4f moment shows an easy-plane magnetic anisotropy (fig. S7). Following these CEF considerations, we can construct a simple model that quantitatively describes all of the angular magnetoresistance data, based on the assumption that the Nd 4f moment contributes purely to the background magnetization and magnetic permeability of the lattice. For the B-dependent magnetoresistance, all of the nickelates have in common anisotropic orbital de- pairing (AOD; Fig. 4A) as a natural consequence of the shorter c-axis coherence length (21), and hence an Hc2|| larger than Hc2^. This can be seen to dominate at all temperatures for La-/Pr- nickelates (fig. S3). For Nd-nickelates, there is an additional competing term due to the enhanced magnetic permeability (EMP; Fig. 4B) arising from the 4f moments, which has crucially the opposite anisotropy given the easy-plane magnetic anisotropy. The temperature-dependent balance of this competition (Fig. 4F) underlies the remarkable reversal of the B-dependent magnetoresistance anisotropy we observe for highly-doped Nd-nickelates (Fig. 4G) – i.e. the temperature-dependent crossing of Hc2^ and Hc2||. Our minimal model is surprisingly quantitative; the measured magnetoresistance of all samples (La, Pr, Nd), doping levels, temperatures, and magnetic fields can be described by one generic form for the resistance CDEF(B) arising from AOD, and another generic form for the resistance CGHI(B) from EMP for Nd, such that the total B-dependent resistance CIJ(B) can be expressed as: (1) Here C is a constant, and MDEF and MGHI are the temperature- and magnetic-field-dependent coefficients of the two functional forms (fig. S8). The dashed lines in Figs. 4G and S4 show the accuracy of this two-component description. In particular, as the polar anisotropy reverses with 7 temperature, the competing AOD and EMP terms produce complex B-dependences with up to 6 local resistance maxima (fig. S4) which can be well described by Eq. 1. As for the 0-dependent magnetoresistance, we see a competition between a 2-fold symmetric (C2) 0-dependence and a 4-fold symmetric (C4) 0-dependence (Fig. 4D, E, and H). The C2 response has been seen previously (23, 24) and is a generic result of the 0-dependence of the Lorentz force exerted by the measurement current on vortices, since only the perpendicular component contributes. Thus this 0-dependence is seen in all R-variants of the nickelates. However, uniquely in the Nd-nickelates, we observe an additional sin (40) component (clover-leaf pattern, Fig. 4I), such that the total 0-dependent resistance CDR(0) can be then expressed as: (2) Here C, 0"#, and 0"T are constants, and M"# and M"T are the temperature- and magnetic-field- dependent coefficients (fig. S5 and S8). We attribute the C4 symmetric dependence again to the 4f moments, since the occupied CEF levels are necessarily invariant to C4 symmetry operations. This implies an in-plane magnetic easy axis along the and equivalent directions. This interpretation is bolstered by the experimental observation that 0"# follows the applied current direction, while 0"T is locked to the lattice (fig. S9). The extracted coefficients MDEF, MGHI, M"#, and M"T exhibit peaks in magnetic field for a given constant temperature (fig. S8), which is a natural result of the boundary conditions: in either the fully superconducting or normal state, no angle-dependent magnetoresistance is seen. With decreasing temperature, both the peaks in MGHI and MDEF shift to higher magnetic fields, tracing the superconducting phase boundary in the temperature-field plane (Fig. 2B). However, the 8 magnitude of MDEF drops significantly with decreasing temperature, contrasting with the increase in MGHI. The pair-breaking framework of superconductivity is useful to discuss these observations. To leading order, the external magnetic field suppresses superconductivity through either orbital or paramagnetic de-pairing (21). While orbital de-pairing has an intrinsic B-dependence rooted in the superconducting anisotropy, paramagnetic de-pairing is largely isotropic as it suppresses superconductivity by the Zeeman energy cost. Therefore, although both effects are enhanced by the local magnetic field arising from the Nd 4f moments, an underlying B-dependence of the local magnetic field intensity is more readily visible when paramagnetic de-pairing is dominant. With this in mind, we can associate MDEFCDEF(B) with orbital de-pairing, and MGHICGHI(B) with paramagnetic de-pairing which dominates at low temperatures. In contrast, neither de-pairing effect has intrinsic 0-dependence, and both would faithfully exhibit the structure of the local magnetic field. Therefore, the clover leaf pattern is a direct manifestation of the 0-dependence of the local magnetic field intensity, particularly since M"T is consistently an order of magnitude larger than M"# where it is observed (fig. S8). With decreasing temperature, the onset and dramatic increase of M"T signal the growing contribution of the 4f moments, which in turn enhances MGHI. Note that while the magnetic response of the 4f moments likely exists over a broader range of temperature and magnetic field, it only appears in the magnetoresistance in the vicinity of Hc2 through pair-breaking effects, and in this process becomes intertwined with the superconducting response. Therefore, the exact temperature or field dependence of the 4f magnetic moment magnetization cannot be simply extracted from these data. However, the impact of Nd on 9 Hc2 is suggestive of low temperature Nd 4f antiferromagnetic exchange, as is typically observed for complex materials hosting magnetic R-sites (29) (figs. S10). With these developments, we finally return to the significant differences in Hc2 across R-variants shown in Fig. 1. With important 4f moment enhancements of the field, Nd has the lowest Hc2/Tc0; in their absence, Hc2/Tc0 is highest for La. Pr is intermediate, consistent with the contribution of a Pr3+ 4f moment induced by magnetic field. Thus we see that the underlying intrinsic behavior of Hc2 appears to be similar across the infinite-layer nickelates, once the additional suppression due to the R-site magnetism has been taken into account. This leads to the conclusion that the conventional weak-coupling Pauli limit !"# = 1.86 XY1 (30) is broadly exceeded. Although the (Nd,Sr)NiO2 samples obey this limit (Fig. 1F) (20), we now understand this to occur due to Nd 4f moment contributions. We observe that the Pauli limit is surpassed by up to a factor of 3.5 in the La series (Fig. 1F). Note that we use a 50% resistance criterion for Hc2, to minimize contributions from superconducting fluctuations and vortex creep (20); adopting higher resistance thresholds would make this Pauli-limit violation even larger. While the magnitude of Hc2 presents an important question for future research, we discuss potentially relevant scenarios. We observe that the angular magnetoresistance in the Nd-nickelates can be fully captured by considering only the 4f moment contribution to the background magnetization and magnetic permeability. However, it is important to note that this does not preclude other contributions from the hybridization between the R 5d and the Ni 3d orbitals – in the presence of finite spin-orbit coupling, multi-orbital mixing could enhance Hc2. Perhaps the most straightforward explanation is that the experimentally observed Tc0 via transport occurs in the presence of significant phase fluctuations/disorder and does not reflect the pairing scale Δ0. 10 Indeed, tunneling spectroscopy indicates a large Δ0 to Tc0 ratio, although surface effects and variations remain to be clarified (31). Further evidence for this scenario may be found in a recent study of La0.8Sr0.2NiO2 with higher Tc0 but comparable extrapolations of Hc2 to what we observe (32). The fact that experimentally, nickelate superconductivity is in the dirty limit appears to us to disfavor more exotic mean-field enhancements. Independent of origin, the unusually large Hc2/Tc0 ratios in the nickelates, combined with sensitive control through the R-site, promise exciting potential in high-field applications. NOTE: During the preparation of this manuscript, we became aware of two reports on Hc2 in La-nickelates (32, 33). 11