Tuning charge-density wave order and superconductivity in the kagome metals KV3Sb5−xSnx and RbV3Sb5−xSnx Yuzki M. Oey,1 Farnaz Kaboudvand,1 Brenden R. Ortiz,1 Ram Seshadri,1 and Stephen D. Wilson1 1Materials Department, Materials Research Laboratory, and California NanoSystems Institute University of California Santa Barbara, California 93106 United States∗ (Dated: May 16, 2022) The family of AV3Sb5 (A = K, Rb, Cs) kagome metals exhibit charge density wave (CDW) order, proposed to be chiral, followed by a lower temperature superconducting state. Recent studies have proposed the importance of band structure saddle points proximal to the Fermi energy in governing these two transitions. Here we show the effects of hole-doping achieved via chemical substitution of Sn for Sb on the CDW and superconducting states in both KV3Sb5 and RbV3Sb5, and generate a phase diagram. Hole-doping lifts the Γ pocket and van Hove singularities (vHs) toward EF causing the superconducting TC in both systems to increase to about 4.5 K, while rapidly suppressing the CDW state. INTRODUCTION The AV3Sb5 (A: K, Rb, Cs) class of kagome supercon- ductors [1–4] are proposed to host both unconventional CDW [5–7] and SC states [8–10] and are candidates for realizing these two states intertwined together within a host, pair density wave state [11–14]. One means of ex- ploring this coupling is through chemical or mechanical perturbation of the host lattice and the parent electronic state of AV3Sb5 compounds. Recently, the effects of mak- ing small changes in the electronic band structures on SC and CDW order parameters have been studied computa- tionally and experimentally by applying external hydrostatic pressure [17–20] and hole doping on various sites [21–23]. The electron pocket comprising Sb pz orbitals at Γ and saddle points arising from V d-orbitals at M-points are regarded as playing important roles within the SC and CDW states. Consequently, resolving their behaviors when subject to external perturbations such as pressure and chemical doping is important to understand. Re- cently, the effect of hole doping in CsV3Sb5 with Sn sub- stituting Sb was reported, and a double superconducting dome was observed under light hole-substitution . The termination of the second dome was attributed to the lifting of the Γ pocket above EF and the removal of the Sb pz orbitals from the Fermi surface; however the formation of the first dome remains anomalous. Within the first SC dome, CDW order rapidly vanishes at doping levels corresponding to only slight movement of the the van Hove singularities (vHs) at the M point toward EF . Curiously, while applied external pressure moves the M saddle points away from EF , it achieves a similar phase diagram suggesting a delicate balance of energy scales within the unperturbed parent structure and the dominance of removing the CDW state in gov- erning the formation of the first SC dome. In contrast to the above, pressure studies of KV3Sb5 and RbV3Sb5 have reported only a single superconduct- ing dome coinciding with the suppression of CDW order ; however studies of carrier-induced perturba- tions of these variants remain unexplored. To further ex- plore similarities between pressure-induced and carrier- induced perturbations of the interplay between CDW and SC orders, here the effect of hole doping AV3Sb5 with in solid solutions with A = K, Rb is presented. In both systems, only one superconducting dome is observed in contrast with CsV3Sb5−xSnx, although a similar, rapid CDW suppression is observed. The solubility limit of Sn in KV3Sb5 is the lowest in the family, with phase sepa- ration observed by x = 0.30. In contrast RbV3Sb5 sup- ports up to x = 0.70 of Sn replacing Sb. While the dif- ferences in solubility can be explained by A cation size effects, the difference between the single dome hole- doping phase diagrams of KV3Sb5 and RbV3Sb5 relative to double dome phase diagram of CsV3Sb5 suggests a difference in the parent CDW state between the three materials. The potential origins of these differences are discussed. EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS Powder samples of KV3Sb5−xSnx and RbV3Sb5−xSnx for 0 ≤ x ≤ 1 were synthesized as described previ- ously . Structural analysis was performed via a Panalytical Empyrean laboratory x-ray powder diffrac- tometer. A Hitachi TM4000Plus scanning electron mi- croscope (SEM) was used to perform energy–dispersive X–ray spectroscopy (EDS). A Quantum Design Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS) was used to col- lect magnetization data and a Quantum Design Physi- cal Property Measurement System (PPMS) Dynacool was used for resistivity measurements. To gain insight into the electronic states of all compounds, first-principles calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) within the Vienna ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) were performed . arXiv:2205.06317v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 12 May 2022 2 Sb2 sites, but from studies on CsV3Sb5−xSnx it is clear that Sn preferentially substitutes in the in-plane kagome Sb1. (b-c) Sn integration into KV3Sb5−xSnx causes the c/a ratio to decrease, and the solubility limit of Sn is x ≈ 0.25, at which point the c/a ratio deviates from the linear trend. (e-f) The solubility limit of Sn in RbV3Sb5−xSnx is a bit higher, at x ≈ 0.70. (d, g) For samples with concentrations above the EDS sensitivity threshold, nominal Sn and measured Sn content agree. Error bars are shown unless they are smaller than associated point size. EXPERIMENTAL AND COMPUTATIONAL RESULTS AV3Sb5−xSnx all adopt the parent hexagonal P6/mmm structure at room temperature, with the V atoms making up an ideal kagome network. nuclear quadrupole resonance (NQR) studies on CsV3Sb5−xSnx have shown that the Sn atoms prefer- entially occupy the Sb1 sublattice site in the kagome plane . Due to the similarity in structure in all of the AV3Sb5 compounds, we assume that the Sn atoms occupy the Sb1 sublattice for A = K, Rb as well. For KV3Sb5−xSnx, polycrystalline samples were found to be single phase for x ≤ 0.25, while for RbV3Sb5−xSnx, polycrystalline samples were single phase for x ≤ 0.7, at which point the limit of the solid solution was reached and secondary phases were observed in both families. Powder diffraction data were fitted using the Paw- ley method to study changes in unit cell as a func- tion of Sn content. Similar to the changes observed in CsV3Sb5−xSnx, a increases as c decreases with increasing Sn content in both A = K, Rb as seen in Fig. 1(b,e), while the volume is independent of Sn content (Fig. 1(c,f)). The solubility limit of Sn is clearly reached once the c/a ratio deviates from its linear trend (x ≈ 0.30 for KV3Sb5−xSnx and x ≈ 0.70 for RbV3Sb5−xSnx), and a secondary phase emerges in the powder diffraction data. EDS was performed on samples with a critical Sn content to confirm the nominal Sn content (Fig. 1(d, g)). Single crystal KV3Sb5 has a superconducting TC of 0.93 K. Here, the TC of polycrystalline KV3Sb5 is lower than 1.8 K, the lowest achievable temperature on the MPMS, but as Sn was incorporated, the supercon- ducting transition temperature increases and can be de- tected by x = 0.03. Figure 2(a) shows the evolution of the superconducting transition up to x = 0.25, where TC is at a maximum of 4.5 K. Beyond this Sn content, a sec- ondary phase appears, so an eventual suppression of su- perconductivity is not observed within the solid solution of KV3Sb5−xSnx. RbV3Sb5 shows similar behavior, with undoped crystals showing a TC of 0.92 K. Again, al- though the superconducting transition for RbV3Sb5 can- not be detected with an MPMS, by x = 0.05 the transition appears at 1.93 K and increases to a maximum of 4.5 K for x = 0.40, as seen in Figure 2(c). For x > 0.40, TC de- creases to 3.55 K until a clear secondary phase appears. All of the superconducting volume fractions are approxi- mately 4πχv ≈ −1 and are normalized to −1 for ease of comparison; fractions that deviate slightly from this ideal value can be attributed to errors in packing density. The CDW T ∗ was determined by looking at the inflec- tion point of χ−1 vs. T. Polycrystalline KV3Sb5 as ob- served here has a T ∗ of 86 K, which is in good agree- ment with reported CDW transition temperatures of ≈ 80 K in crystals . Using this metric, the CDW transi- tion is quickly suppressed with increasing hole-doping, decreases to 60 K by x = 0.06, and is fully suppressed by x = 0.06. In RbV3Sb5, the CDW T ∗ using the same metric is ≈ 112 K, similar to the literature reported value . The CDW is quickly suppressed to 91 K for x = 0.10 at which point it fully disappears (Fig. 2(d)). In both sys- tems, the CDW transition is fully suppressed with much less Sn content than that required to reach the peak of 3 in compositions up to x = 0.30. The superconducting fraction is normalized to account for errors in mass and packing fraction so all data have a minimum of −1, the theoretical minimum. (b) 1/χ for compositions x ≤ 0.05 in KV3Sb5−xSnx show the CDW T ∗ decreases from 86 K to 59 K and disappears for x ≥ 0.05. (c) The superconducting TC of RbV3Sb5−xSnx measured under a field of H = 5 Oe systematically shifts to higher temperature in compositions up to x = 0.40. (d) 1/χ for compositions x ≤ 0.10 in RbV3Sb5−xSnx show the CDW T ∗ decreases and eventually disappears for x ≥ 0.10. (e) Resistivity data for KV3Sb4.8Sn0.2 and RbV3Sb4.6Sn0.4 confirm the TC transitions and lack of CDW transitions for these higher Sn content samples. the superconductivity dome, suggesting that the inter- play between superconductivity and CDW is different in A = K, Rb than in CsV3Sb5, where the CDW persists through the peak of the first superconducting dome. Electrical resistivity measurements of samples near the superconducting peak concentrations are shown in Fig- ure 2(e). The superconducting states are clearly ob- served as zero-resistivity conditions and the transitions at 4.25 K for KV3Sb4.80Sn0.20 and 4.4 K for RbV3Sb4.60Sn0.40 agree well with those seen in the magnetization data, while signatures of CDW transitions are also not present. Consistent with CsV3Sb5−xSnx, the residual resistance increases in RbV3Sb5−xSnx and KV3Sb5−xSnx under Sn- substitution while TC increases. The effects of Sn-substitution on SC and CDW orders in KV3Sb5−xSnx and RbV3Sb5−xSnx are summarized in ture is rapidly suppressed with small levels of hole dop- ing and fully disappears before the maximum supercon- ducting transition temperatures. With the exception of the soluability limit of Sn in each lattice, the two phase diagrams are qualitatively similar. Due to size considerations, the solubility limits of Sn in KV3Sb5 and RbV3Sb5 are much lower than in CsV3Sb5. However in all of these systems, the changes in electronic structure for the compositions of interest can be extrap- olated by computing band structures of substitution one Sb atom for an Sn atom within the kagome plane and out of the kagome plane. Figure 4(a) and (d) shows the band structure of undoped KV3Sb5 and RbV3Sb5, respec- tively, with the range of achievable Fermi levels with the loss of 1 electron per unit cell indicated in gray. Figure 4(b) and (e) show a hypothetical structure where the Sb1 lattice is fully substituted for Sn. The shifts in band structure are similar to those seen in CsV3Sb4Sn, with the Γ pocket and M-point vHs lifted above the Fermi level. 4 The progression of superconducting TC and CDW order T ∗ is plotted as a function of Sn composition for KV3Sb5−xSnx and RbV3Sb5−xSnx. In KV3Sb5−xSnx, the solu- bility limit of Sn is reached before a full superconducting dome is achieved, but the suppression of CDW T ∗ is still fully re- alized. RbV3Sb5−xSnx shows a single superconducting dome before the solubility limit is reached, with an accompanying suppression of CDW order by x = 0.1. Band structures for Sn substituted within the Sb2 sublat- tice are plotted in Figure 4(c) and (f) and show signifi- cant reconstructions at multiple points, including K, L, and H. DISCUSSION Given the close structural and electronic properties across the AV3Sb5 series, the difference in the hole- doping phase diagrams of KV3Sb5 and RbV3Sb5 relative to CsV3Sb5 is anomalous. The changes in band structure for Sn substitution on the Sb1 sublattice in KV3Sb4Sn and RbV3Sb4Sn at first sight, appear to be very simi- lar to those in CsV3Sb4Sn. However, subtle differences are nevertheless present and potentially lead to distinct electronic phase diagrams. A closer examination of the saddle points around M reveals that the irreducible rep- resentations of the two points are not the same for A = K, Rb and Cs . As a consequence of the sad- dle point inversions, bands cross near EF in CsV3Sb5 but not in KV3Sb5. This may play a role in the nature of the CDW states stabilized, whose proximity to one another may modify SC in unique ways. One unifying theme amongst doping and pressure studies of AV3Sb5 is the similarity of two SC domes present uniquely in CsV3Sb5. If one envisions either pressure/doping empirically as a perturbation that sim- ply destabilizes CDW order, then the data suggest that CsV3Sb5 hosts a CDW state distinct from the other two variants. In this scenario, there is a transition between CDW states within the phase diagram of CsV3Sb5 that is naively absent in KV3Sb5 and RbV3Sb5. While the details of the intermediate states differ be- tween pressure and hole-doping studies, investigations of the parent CDW order in AV3Sb5 have shown differ- ences between A=Cs and A =Rb/K. The out-of-plane modulation for Cs is four times that of K , and the in-plane structure of the CDW state in CsV3Sb5 hosts both star-of-David and tri-hexagonal character [27–29], a pattern seemingly not present in the other variants. Given these differences, one possibility is a doping- induced transition from an (L, L, L)-type order to an (M, L, L)-type of order upon doping CsV3Sb5 that is not present in the other two compounds. Future scat- tering studies across the carrier-tuned phase diagrams of these systems will be required to fully explore any poten- tial crossover. CONCLUSION The Sn-substitution or hole-doping phase diagrams of KV3Sb5 and RbV3Sb5 were explored. The solubility of Sn within the AV3Sb5 lattice varies with A-site cation size with A=K having the smallest solubility and A=Cs having the largest. Prior to reaching the solubility limit, hole-doping achieved via substitution of Sn on Sb sites in KV3Sb5 and RbV3Sb5 reveals similar phase diagrams consisting of a single SC dome and rapidly suppressed CDW order. This contrasts the recently reported double dome observed in CsV3Sb5 and suggests a distinct parent 5 proximation for substitution of one Sn atom per formula unit (one electron less Fermi energy). (b,e) Calculation for a hypothetical structure where one Sn has been substituted within the kagome plan (Sb1 sublattice). The majority of the electronic structure is preserved as KV3Sb5 and RbV3Sb5, except the Γ pocket and M point van Hove singularities which have been shifted far above and may contribute to the changing observable properties. (c,f) Calculation for a hypothetical structure where one Sn has been substituted out of the kagome plane (Sb2 sublattice). Here a strong reconstruction of many bands can be observed, in particular near K, H, and K-Γ. CDW state for the latter. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) through Enabling Quantum Leap: Convergent Accelerated Discovery Foundries for Quan- tum Materials Science, Engineering and Information (Q-AMASE-i): Quantum Foundry at UC Santa Barbara (DMR-1906325). The research reported here made use of shared facilities of the NSF Materials Research Sci- ence and Engineering Center at UC Santa Barbara DMR- 1720256, a member of the Materials Research Facilities Network (www.mrfn.org). Use of the Advanced Photon Source at Argonne National Laboratory was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, under Contract No. DE-AC02- 06CH11357. YMO is supported by the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program un- der Grant No. DGE-1650114. FK acknowledges the Roy T. Eddleman Center for Quantum Innovation (ECQI) for their support.