Exploring strong and weak topological states on isostructural substitutions in TlBiSe2 Ankita Phutela,∗ Preeti Bhumla, Manjari Jain, and Saswata Bhattacharya∗ Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi, India E-mail: Ankita@physics.iitd.ac.in[AP]; saswata@physics.iitd.ac.in[SB] 1 arXiv:2205.08950v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 18 May 2022 Abstract Topological Insulators (TIs) are unique materials where insulating bulk hosts linearly dis- persing surface states protected by the Time-Reversal Symmetry (TRS). These states lead to dissipationless current flow, which makes this class of materials highly promising for spin- tronic applications. Here, we predict new TIs via high-throughput screening by employing state-of-the-art first-principles based methodologies, viz., Density Functional Theory (DFT) and many-body perturbation theory (G0W0) combined with Spin-Orbit Coupling (SOC). For this, we take a well-known 3D TI, TlBiSe2 and perform complete substitution with suitable materials at different sites to check if the obtained isostructural materials exhibit topological properties. Subsequently, we scan these materials based on SOC-induced parity inversion at Time-Reversal Invariant Momenta (TRIM). Later, to confirm the topological nature of selected materials, we plot their surface states along with calculation of Z2 invariants. Our results show that GaBiSe2 is a Strong Topological Insulator (STI). Besides, we report six Weak Topological Insulators (WTIs) viz. PbBiSe2, SnBiSe2, SbBiSe2, Bi2Se2, TlSnSe2 and PbSbSe2. We have further verified that all the reported TIs are dynamically stable showing all real phonon modes of vibration. Graphical TOC Entry Keywords Topological Insulator, Surface States, Z2 invariant, Spin-Orbit Coupling, DFT 2 Introduction Since the discovery of Topological Insulators (TIs) about a decade ago, there has been an enormous increase in interest towards topological condensed matter systems1–8. TIs show great potential ap- plications in quantum computing and spintronics due to the insensitivity of the transport property towards non-magnetic perturbations7,9. TIs also pave the way for realizing novel quantum phe- nomena such as Weyl semimetals10, Majorana-fermions11 and Higgs mechanism12. These allur- ing materials are insulating in bulk but support the flow of electrons on their surface. As a result, their surface consists of linear states that are protected by the Time-Reversal Symmetry (TRS)13. A necessary condition for the appearance of these states is the inversion of bands, which takes place at the Time-Reversal Invariant Momenta (TRIM) in the bulk Brillouin Zone (BZ)14,15. The natural ordering of the energy levels forming the edges of the gap is inverted owing to the strong Spin-Orbit Coupling (SOC) associated with heavy elements. The topology of TRS invariant insu- lators is characterized by the Z2 index, ν0, which can either be 0 or 1, depicting a topologically trivial or non-trivial phase, respectively. However, it has been recently reported that even when ν0 = 0, the system can show non-trivial characteristics16. Based on whether the material hosts odd or even number of Dirac cones in the electronic structure of its surface, TIs are further classified as Strong Topological Insulator (STI) having Z2 invariant, ν0 = 1 or Weak Topological Insulator (WTI) with Z2 invariant, ν0 = 017,18. Nevertheless, the complete characterization of 3D TIs re- quires a set of, in total, four Z2 numbers: (ν0;ν1ν2ν3). The indices ν1, ν2 and ν3 are called weak indices and are believed to be nonrobust quantities19,20. Therefore, the calculation of surface states and Z2 invariant give complete information about the topological nature of material. First-principles calculations led to the prediction of a large number of 2D and 3D TIs21–23. Among the various well established families of 3D TIs, Bi2Se3 and Bi2Te3 have been most widely studied for investigating topological states and their properties24. Their crystal structures consist of quintuple layers held together by weak van der Waals (vdW) forces, providing natural cleavage planes without breaking strong bonds. The band structure calculations in Bi2Se3 have shown that the Dirac point of surface state lies close to the valence band maximum (VBM)25. This leads to the 3 opening of electron scattering channel from surface states to bulk continuum states, and the topo- logical transport regime begins to collapse. Therefore, there is a strong need for new materials with ideal and relatively isolated Dirac cones. A variety of candidates with non-trivial electronic states including HgTe26, InAs27, ternary tetramytes GemBi2nTe(m+3n) 28, half-Huesler compounds29–34, LiAuSe honeycomb lattice35, β-Ag2Te36 to non-centrosymmetric BiTeX (X=Cl, Br, I)37–39 have been suggested. Theoretical studies have shown that Tl-based ternary chalcogenides viz., TlSbTe2, TlBiSe2 and TlBiTe2 are 3D TIs with a single Dirac cone surface state at the Γ point, which is well isolated from the bulk continuum40,41. Tl-based materials have a 3D character because each Tl (Bi) layer is sandwiched between two Se layers with strong coupling between neighboring atomic layers instead of weak vdW forces as in Bi2Se3. The electronic structure of many Tl-based TIs, viz. TlAB2 (A = Sb, Bi and B = Se, Te, S), have been investigated by Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations15,42. The role of surface termination has also been explored in TlBiSe2 and TlBiTe2 43. Following this the isostructural substitution of the above base material is been endeav- oured to retain it’s topological properties. For example, In-based compounds like InBiTe2 and InSbTe2, crystallizing in the TlBiSe2 like crystal structure have been studied. Surprisingly, these materials lack the Dirac cone feature, which depicts their topologically trivial nature44. Therefore, despite TlAB2 (A = Sb, Bi and B = Se, Te, S) shows topologically non-trivial band structure, any other isostructural substitution to retain its topological nature is hitherto unknown. Motivated with this idea, in this letter, we have explored the possibility of having new mate- rials belonging to same class of ternary chalcogenides via a thorough isostructural substitutions. First, we have performed substitution at suitable sites of TlBiSe2 and scanned for those materials whose band structure shows band inversion at odd/even number of TRIMs. After that, to determine the accurate band gap of TlBiSe2, we have employed various exchange-correlation (εxc) function- als viz., PBE+SOC, HSE06+SOC, G0W0@PBE+SOC and G0W0@HSE06+SOC. The band gap obtained from G0W0@PBE+SOC functional is in close agreement with the experimental value. Therefore, we have further calculated the band gap of all materials using G0W0@PBE+SOC. Sub- sequently, we have examined the potential materials for their dynamical stability. The stable ma- 4 terials are then characterised as STI/WTI depending on whether they show odd/even number of surface states, respectively. To confirm their topological nature, we have also calculated the Z2 topological invariants. TlBiSe2 belongs to the Tl-family of compounds having a rhombohedral crystal structure with space group R ̄3m40,41. There are four atoms in the primitive unit cell which are placed in layers normal to the three-fold axis with the sequence -Tl-Se-Bi-Se-, i.e., along axis of rhombo- hedral unit cell (see Figure 1(a)). The 3D BZ for rhombohedral unit cell having high symmetry points F, Γ, L and Z, along with its projected (111) surface BZ is shown in Figure 1(b). The structure has inversion symmetry where both Bi and Tl act as inversion centers. We have first es- timated the band gap of TlBiSe2 using PBE+SOC. The calculated band gap is 215 meV (Direct), whereas, the experimental band gap is 350 meV45. The band gap is thus underestimated due to the DFT limitation arising from the approximations used in the εxc functional. Therefore, we have used hybrid εxc functional (HSE06) with default α = 0.25, i.e., incorporating 25% of Hartree-Fock exact exchange to capture the electron’s self-interaction error along with SOC. It gives a direct band gap of 85 meV, which is also not in accordance with previously reported theoretical calcula- tions43. Therefore, we have performed G0W0 calculations on top of the orbitals obtained from the PBE+SOC (G0W0@PBE+SOC) and HSE06+SOC (G0W0@HSE06+SOC). The respective band gaps are 280 meV and 249 meV (see Table 1). G0W0@PBE+SOC gives the most accurate band gap, however, the band profile is not much affected by the choice of εxc functional (see Section I of Supplementary Information (SI)). Therefore, we have used PBE εxc functional to plot the band structures in view of its low computational cost. The band structure of TlBiSe2 with the projected wavefunctions to atomic orbitals is shown in Figure 2(a). The Conduction Band (CB) is dominated by Bi-p and Tl-p orbitals, while Se-p orbitals dominate the Valence Band (VB). The inclusion of SOC has led to an increase in the band gap around the Γ point. The valence and conduction band edges switch their orbital character around this point, indicating the band inversion. The p orbitals of Se and Bi are involved in this band inversion, as can be clearly seen from Figure 2(b). The similar band inversion has also been observed in TlBiTe2 and TlSbSe2 43. Following the 5 time-reversal invariant points Γ, Z, F and L along with the projected surface BZ, and (c) Complete substitution with various elements at Tl, Bi, Se and Tl, Bi sites simultaneously. PBE+SOC HSE06+SOC G0W0@PBE+SOC G0W0@HSE06+SOC 215 85 280 249 6 respective k-points. 7 trend, we have carried out complete substitution in TlBiSe2 at Tl, Bi or Se sites and Tl, Bi sites simultaneously to obtain different materials belonging to the same class (see Figure 1(c)). The band structure of these materials are plotted to see the effect of SOC on the orbital contribution projected on the bands lying near Fermi level. Firstly, Ga is substituted at the Tl site (GaTl) to form GaBiSe2. It also crystallizes in R ̄3m phase with lattice parameters given as a = b = c = 7.18 Å (in rhombohedral setting) and yields the band structure shown in Figure 2(c). SOC driven inversion of energy levels along with opening of band gap takes place at high symmetry point Γ (Figure 2(d)). The projected wavefunctions to atomic orbitals show that p orbitals of all atoms contribute near the Fermi level. The inversion involves Bi-p and Se-p orbitals (similar to the case of TlBiSe2), giving an initial indication that the material can harbor non-trivial topological phase. The indirect band gap as calculated by G0W0@PBE+SOC is 183 meV. Material Indirect Band Gap GaBiSe2 183 PbBiSe2 3 SnBiSe2 20 SbBiSe2 118 Bi2Se2 327 TlSnSe2 44 PbSbSe2 41 After GaBiSe2, we have substituted PbTl to get PbBiSe2 having lattice parameters as a = b = c = 8.27 Å, and crystallizing in the R ̄3m phase. G0W0@PBE+SOC yields an indirect band gap of 3 meV. The VB and CB are mainly composed of p orbitals of Pb, Bi and Se, as shown in Figure 2(e) and 2(f). The parity inversion occurs at Γ and F points, unlike the former. In this BZ, there are 8 TRIMs, i.e., Γ, Z (non-degenerate) and F, L (triply-degenerate). Therefore, the inversion is occurring at even number of TRIMs, which means that the system should be in trivial state. However, it has been found that if even number of band inversions occur in the first quadrant, but if one or more BZ sides possess odd number of band inversions, then a WTI can be obtained21. 8 A similar type of parity inversion at even number of TRIMs is obtained for SnBiSe2, SbBiSe2, Bi2Se2, TlSnSe2 and PbSbSe2 (refer Section II and Section III of SI for band structures and op- timized lattice parameters, respectively). The band gap of all these materials calculated using G0W0@PBE+SOC are given in Table 2. After screening the systems for SOC-induced inversion in the band structures, we have analyzed them for dynamical stability. Figure 3 shows the phonon band structures for GaBiSe2 and PbBiSe2. The absence of negative frequencies confirms the dy- namical stability of these materials. For other systems viz. SnBiSe2, SbBiSe2, Bi2Se2, TlSnSe2 and PbSbSe2, see Section IV of SI. The presence of band inversion on inclusion of SOC is a telltale signature of possibility of non-trivial phase. However, an inverted band structure cannot be considered as a sole criterion to assure the existence of a non-trivial phase. Therefore, further analysis is required to establish its topological nature. Previous studies have reported that non-trivial band topology generates metal- lic surface states which are the hallmark of TIs46. In view of this, we have computed the spectrum of surface states by considering a semi infinite slab of 3D material. These lattice surfaces possess Dirac cones, lying at the same k-point where the band inversion has occurred in the corresponding bulk band structure. Furthermore, to elucidate the topological nature of the materials, Z2 topologi- cal invariants are calculated. TRS yields four distinct Z2 invariants (ν0;ν1ν2ν3) in 3D case. Each of these four invariants takes up value either 0 or 1, indicating a total of 16 phases with three general 9 classes: a normal insulator, a STI and a WTI20. An ordinary or trivial insulator is obtained when all four invariants are zero, i.e., (0;000), while a STI is obtained when ν0 = 1. This type of system is robust against weak time-reversal invariant perturbations. However, when ν0 = 0, and at least one of the indices out of ν1, ν2 or ν3 is nonzero, then the material is WTI. It can be viewed as a stacking of 2D TIs, and is less robust against perturbations. Material Z2:(ν0;ν1ν2ν3) Number of surface states Type GaBiSe2 1 STI PbBiSe2 2 WTI SnBiSe2 2 WTI SbBiSe2 2 WTI Bi2Se2 2 WTI TlSnSe2 2 WTI PbSbSe2 2 WTI It has already been established that TlBiSe2 is a strong 3D TI47, on that account, we first obtain its surface band structure. For this, a tight-binding Hamiltonian with MLWFs considering the projection of p orbitals of Bi/Se and sp orbitals of Tl is constructed. Since the left and right surface for TlBiSe2 terminates with different atoms (Tl and Se, respectively), therefore, we have plotted surface state spectra of (111) surface for both the surface terminations. Figure 4(a) and 4(b) show a single surface state protected by TRS at the Γ point in the projected 2D BZ. Alongside, we have calculated the topological invariant, ν0, which comes out to be 1, confirming that TlBiSe2 is a STI. Following this, we have explored GaBiSe2 for topological properties. In this case, the p orbitals of Bi/Se and sp orbitals of Ga are considered in constructing the tight-binding Hamiltonian. A single Dirac cone protected by TRS has been observed for (111) surface (see Figure 4(c) and 4(d)), and the corresponding topological invariant is (1;000), which is a signature of non-trivial topology. Hence, to the best of our knowledge, we report here GaBiSe2 to be a STI presumably for the first time. Afterwards, we have performed surface band structure calculation for PbBiSe2. We have ob- 10 represent surface states, whereas, the shaded regions show the spectral weight of projected bulk bands. 11 tained even (two) number of surface states lying at Γ and M (see Figure 4(e) and 4(f)). The presence of even number of surface states yields ν0 = 0, and the weak indices come out to be ν1 = 0, ν2 = 0 and ν3 = 1. As even number of surface states lead to scattering and thus are not topologically protected, hence this material is categorized as a WTI. The similar calculations are performed for SnBiSe2, SbBiSe2, Bi2Se2, TlSnSe2 and PbSbSe2. All of them show even number of surface states, as shown in Section V of SI, and corresponding Z2 invariants are given in Table 3. These materials belong to the class of Z2 WTI. Nowadays, WTIs are also getting attention as it has been found that their surface states are robust against imperfections, owing to the delocalization of surface electrons48. In summary, we have performed isostructural substitutions of materials based on SOC-induced parity inversion in the band structure. Using first-principles based methodologies, viz., PBE, HSE06, and many-body perturbation theory (G0W0), we have systematically studied the elec- tronic structure of topological materials belonging to R ̄3m space group. The band gap calculated using G0W0@PBE+SOC is in close agreement with the experimental value. We have revealed that GaBiSe2 is a STI as its surface accommodates a single crossing at the Γ point. PbBiSe2, SnBiSe2, SbBiSe2, Bi2Se2, TlSnSe2 and PbSbSe2 are WTI catering even number of surface states within the bulk band gap. The absence of negative frequencies in the phonon band structures indicates dynamical stability. The calculated Z2 invariants are in accordance with the surface state plots confirming their topological nature. Discovery of these materials will offer a great platform for studying novel quantum effects. Compulational Methods The calculations are performed using DFT49,50 with the Projected Augmented Wave (PAW)51,52 method implemented in Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP)53 code. All the structures are optimized with the Generalized Gradient Approximation (GGA) of Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE)54 until the Hellmann-Feynman forces are smaller than 0.001 eV/Å. The plane wave basis is 12 used with 400 eV cutoff energy. The Γ-centered 6×6×4 k-grid is used to sample the irreducible BZ of rhombohedral phase with the R ̄3m space group. SOC is included in all calculations except in ionic optimization. The advanced hybrid εxc functional (HSE06) including SOC and many- body perturbation methods, G0W0@PBE+SOC and G0W0@HSE06+SOC are used for the better estimation of the band gap55. For this, we have used 4×4×4 k-grid, and the number of bands is set to six times the number of occupied bands. The phonon calculations are performed with 4×4×4 supercells using the PHONOPY package56,57. In order to investigate the topological properties of the materials, we have performed DFT calculations using fully relativistic norm-conserving pseudopotentials as implemented in the QUANTUM ESPRESSO code58. The results of these DFT calculations are then fed as input to WANNIER9059 for constructing a tight-binding model based on Maximally Localized Wannier Functions (MLWFs) with p orbitals of Se, Bi and sp orbitals of Ga, Tl, Sn, Sb, Pb. The surface states and topological invariants are then calculated using the Green’s function method as implemented in the Wannier-TOOLS package60. Acknowledgement A.P. acknowledges IIT Delhi for the junior research fellowship. P.B. acknowledges UGC, In- dia, for the senior research fellowship [Grant no. 1392/(CSIR-UGC NET JUNE 2018)]. M.J. acknowledges CSIR, India, for the senior research fellowship [Grant No. 09/086(1344)/2018- EMR-I]. S.B. acknowledges financial support from SERB under a core research grant (grant no. CRG/2019/000647) to set up his High Performance Computing (HPC) facility “Veena” at IIT Delhi for computational resources. Supporting Information Available Band profile of TlBiSe2 using PBE+SOC and G0W0@PBE+SOC εxc functionals; Band structures of SnBiSe2, SbBiSe2, Bi2Se2, TlSnSe2 and PbSbSe2; Optimized lattice parameters of SnBiSe2, SbBiSe2, Bi2Se2, TlSnSe2 and PbSbSe2; Phonon band structures of SbBiSe2, SnBiSe2, Bi2Se2, 13 TlSnSe2 and PbSbSe2; Surface state band structures of SnBiSe2, SbBiSe2, Bi2Se2, TlSnSe2 and PbSbSe2; Band gap (in meV) of different materials using G0W0@HSE06+SOC εxc functional.