Robust and programmable logic-in-memory devices exploiting skyrmion confinement and channeling using local energy barriers Naveen Sisodia,1 Johan Pelloux-Prayer,1 Liliana D. Buda-Prejbeanu,1 Lorena Anghel,1 Gilles Gaudin,1 and Olivier Boulle1 1Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, CEA, SPINTEC, F-38000 Grenoble, France (Dated: May 18, 2022) Magnetic skyrmions are promising candidates for logic-in-memory applications, intrinsically merg- ing high density non-volatile data storage with computing capabilities, owing to their nanoscale size, fast motion, and mutual repulsions. However, concepts proposed so far suffer from reliability issues as well as inefficient conversion of magnetic information to electrical signals. In this paper, we pro- pose a logic-in-memory device which exploits skyrmion confinement and channeling using anisotropy energy barriers to achieve reliable data storage and synchronous shift in racetracks combined with cascadable and reprogrammable logics relying purely on magnetic interactions. The device com- bines a racetrack shift register based on skyrmions confined in nanodots with Full Adder (FA) gates. The designed FA is reprogrammable and cascadable and can also be used to perform simple logic operations such as AND, OR, NOT, NAND, XOR and NXOR. The monolithic design of the logic gate and the absence of any complex electrical contacts makes the device ideal for integration with conventional CMOS circuitry. INTRODUCTION “Logic-In-Memory” (LIM) architectures have recently emerged as an alternative to Von Neumann architec- tures, where the constant shuttle of data between logic and memory units leads to a critical rise in energy con- sumption and delay when downscaling. This has led to the search for novel technologies that combine memory and logic functionalities. Recently, magnetic skyrmions have been proposed as the building block of such logic- in-memory technologies. Magnetic skyrmions are local chiral whirling of the magnetization. Their small lateral dimensions, down to the nanometer size and topological stability grant them particle-like properties, which, com- bined with the possibility to be manipulated via electrical currents, can be exploited to code data and achieve com- putation at the nanoscale. These textures appear promis- ing for logic-in-memory applications since they intrinsi- cally merge high density non-volatile storage and logic ca- pabilities. However, while a number of memory and logic concepts have been proposed based on skyrmions [1–12], several major issues have hindered their technological ad- vancement. In the first concepts of the skyrmion race- track , data was encoded through the distance be- tween neighboring skyrmions and the memory operation relies on the synchronous shift of skyrmion trains, where the skyrmion interdistance remains constant. However, the latter can be easily perturbed by thermal activation or small variation in the skyrmion velocities, induced for instance by local changes in the magnetic properties in the material or process variations. Different pathways have been proposed to solve this issue such as double lanes or local gate control . However, these so- lutions appear difficult to implement. For instance, local gate control requires numerous gate contacts leading to increased periphery area, limited density and increasing complexity. Regarding skyrmion based logic, the funda- mental building blocks need to fulfill a set of criteria, including cascading, fan-out, logic level restoration, im- munity to noise, mitigation of potential loss of informa- tion, and input-to-output isolation. However, concepts proposed so far required complex operations and faced serious limitations. These include skyrmion-charge inter- conversion which limits the advantage of a full skyrmionic signal , large skyrmion circuits requiring com- plex synchronization of data , multiple gate voltages with complex implementation , etc. In addition, several proposals do not fulfill the aforementioned ba- sic requirements of logic, namely cascading, input and clock synchronization, etc . . . Thus, there is currently no concept for a full skyrmionic computer, incorporating logic, memory and interconnects using exclusively mag- netic signals without the need for intermediate conversion to charge signals. Besides the aforementioned limitations, moving skyrmions are subject to the skyrmion Hall effect (skHE), namely a motion transverse to the driving force. To ad- dress this problem, topological spin textures with van- ishing topological charges and thus skHE have been pro- posed as alternatives of skyrmions [16–23]. Of particu- lar interest are skyrmions in synthetic antiferromagnets (SAF), which have been recently demonstrated to be sta- ble at room temperature [20–22]. These skyrmions are resilient against external stray magnetic fields and pos- sess velocities which are much higher than their ferro- magnetic counterparts, making them good candidates for elementary building blocks in storage and logic. In addi- tion to using magnetic configurations with zero topolog- ical charge, skHE can also be suppressed with different confinement techniques [24–29]. In particular, we have shown that skyrmion channels can be defined by a local arXiv:2205.08200v1 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 17 May 2022 2 150 nm C1 C2 C3 5mT BK,eff 80 nm 60 nm Shift (a) (c) (d) 8-bit Data encoding Nucleate Fire + Nucleate t=0 ns t=2.0 ns t=0.3 ns t=0.55 ns t=0 ns t=2.5 ns t=0.6 ns t=1.6 ns t=0 ns t=3.0 ns t=1.0 ns t=1.5 ns 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 t=33.5 ns t=0.0 ns (b) 60 nm R1 R2 R3 R2 R3 C1 − C2 or C2 − C3. (b) Energy as the skyrmion moves between two bit cells R2 and R3. E0 is the energy of the skyrmions inside the bit cell. The anisotropy fields are indicated in the different regions. (c) Protocol for data encoding: a skyrmion is first nucleated in the low anisotropy region (row 1) by sending current between C1 − C2 (J=15 MA/m2 for 0.3 ns) and then pushed ("fired") to the 80nm cells (row 2) which work as memory bits (J = 35 MA/cm2 for 0.55 ns). A shift operation is carried out by sending current between C2 − C3 (row 3) (J = 15 MA/cm2 for 0.9 ns). We show only the top layer magnetization of the SAF as the bottom layer is magnetized symmetrically opposite to the top layer due to strong RKKY coupling. (d) Full 8-bit skyrmion data encoding of an 8-bit binary number “10001011" using operations given in (c). Note that the data is encoded starting first from the least significant digit. modification of the magnetic properties using light ion irradiation. This can be exploited to guide the skyrmion dynamics and suppress the skyrmion Hall effect . This technique can also be leveraged for a reliable con- trol of the skyrmion position in racetracks as well as guide their motion in complex geometries to achieve logic op- erations. In this work, using micromagnetic simulations, we pro- pose a Logic-In-Memory (LIM) device based on SAF skyrmions which leverages skyrmion confinement using local variation of the anisotropy. It combines two main innovations: Firstly, a novel concept of racetrack shift register where the skyrmion position is defined by low anisotropy dots and moved reliably using current in- duced spin-orbit torques. This provides an elegant so- lution to the longstanding issue of reliability of data re- tention and shift operation in racetracks. We develop elementary protocols for basic “nucleate" and “shift" op- erations on a train of skyrmions. Secondly, a compact Full Adder logic gate extendable to n-bit FA by cascading is designed. The designed FA can be re-programmed to perform different logic operations (e.g. NOT, BUFFER, AND, OR, XOR, NXOR, NAND). Our proposal allows a simple and intuitive synchronization scheme which in turn enables us to seamlessly cascade logic design to im- plement large-scale networks without any additional elec- tronic circuitry. The designed logic architecture can also tolerate deviations in the amplitude or width of the cur- rent pulses which may arise from the electrical part of the design. SKYRMION NUCLEATION AND CONFINEMENT As shown in our previous work , it is possible to artificially create an energy barrier for a skyrmion us- ing focused He+ ion-irradiation which locally modifies the material properties (anisotropy and Dzyaloshinskii- Moriya interaction (DMI)) of the ferromagnet. Using this 3 feature, we can engineer regions of different anisotropy values specifically tuned for two different tasks, namely nucleation and confinement of skyrmions. For the micromagnetic simulations, a SAF structure is assumed composed of two Co layers with a thickness of 0.9nm antiferromagnetically coupled by RKKY inter- action and separated by a thin spacer [see Appendix. A for details regarding the micromagnetic model and pa- rameters]. The magnetic parameters for the irradiated and non-irradiated areas are close to the ones of the Pt/Co/MgO stacks measured experimentally in Ref. . The He+ ion irradiation leads to a decrease of the per- pendicular magnetic anisotropy as well as the DMI. In Fig. 1(a), we show the schematic of a skyrmion gen- erator device coupled with a memory (bit) cell which can physically confine and hold a skyrmion inside of it. There are three different regions of anisotropy. The larger 150nm square-shaped cell (R1) with a very small effec- tive anisotropy of BK,eff = 5mT is used to nucleate the skyrmion. The anisotropy of this region is intention- ally kept smaller to reduce the current density required to nucleate the skyrmion. The second region is com- posed of the 80nm bit cells (R2 and R3) with BK,eff = 100mT, which are surrounded by high anisotropy re- gions of BK,eff = 165mT. These act as a barrier for the skyrmion, effectively trapping the skyrmion inside the bit cells. In Fig. 1(b), we show the energy of the skyrmion as a function of its position x as it passes from region R2 to R3. The energy is highest in the middle of regions R2 and R3. The energy barrier is ∼ 33kBT providing reasonable stability to the device against thermal noise. More information on the calculation and optimization of the energy barrier is given in Appendix. B. To nucleate and shift the skyrmions, three separate contacts C1, C2 and C3 are used (Fig. 1(a)). To nucle- ate a skyrmion in R1 (first panel of Fig. 1(c)), a short (0.3 ns) current pulse (J = 15 MA/cm2) is first injected in between contacts C1−C2. A second current pulse with a higher current density (J = 35 MA/cm2 for 0.55 ns) allows the skyrmion to overcome the barrier and move from R1 towards R2. Simultaneously, due to the high current density, another skyrmion nucleates in the re- gion R1. This whole operation can thus be dubbed as “fire+nucleate" as one skyrmion is nucleated and another skyrmion is simultaneously fired (panel 2 of Fig. 1(c)). Once nucleated, the shift operation is performed by in- jecting a current between contacts C2 and C3 such that the skyrmions move between R2−R3 without influencing the nucleation region R1 (third row panel in Fig. 1(c)). Overall, to encode a full data stream, the following pro- tocol is adopted: 1.) Nucleate in region R1, 2.) If Bit 1 is required, use “fire+nucleate" followed by “shift" 3.) If Bit 0 is required, use only “shift". We show in Fig. 1(d) and in video SV1 the encoding of an 8-bit binary num- ber “10001011" in a racetrack composed of 9 cells us- ing this protocol. After nucleation, the skyrmion train shifts synchronously along the cell track when injecting the current pulses. Thus, our proposed racetrack design based on confinement cells and current induced tunnel- ing provides large bit stability and natural synchroniza- tion of the bit train, solving an important issue of initial skyrmion racetrack design. FULL ADDER DESIGN A Compact full Adder (FA) logic gate can also be de- signed using anisotropy energy barriers in irradiated SAF stacks. A Full Adder is considered as the basic unit in Arithmetic Logic Unit (ALUs) performing bitwise addi- tion of two binary numbers. It has three inputs, A, B and carry−in (Cin) and produces two outputs, Sum and carry − out (Cout). The logic gate is divided into three parts (see Figure. 2(a)). The left part of the device is made of three bit cells, which are the inputs A, B and Cin. Similarly, at the right-hand side of the logic gate, three other bit cells hold the two outputs Sum and Cout of the FA. The middle region of the design represents the part of the device which performs the logic opera- tion. All three regions and the individual bit cells are separated from each other by anisotropy energy barriers. We show the operation of the designed Full Adder gate in Figs. 2(b)-(f) and in video SV2: The skyrmions which are present inside the bit cells inputs A, B and Cin on the left region are pushed inside the middle region after passing over the energy barrier by sending a current pulse uniformly through the device (J1 = 15 MA/cm2). When skyrmions are inside the middle region, different possibil- ities arise depending on the total number of skyrmions in- side the middle region. For only one skyrmion [Figs. 2(b)- (c)], the most stable state for the skyrmion is to stay at the center of the middle region. However, when there are two skyrmions [Figs. 2(d)-(e)], they repel each other and would stay near the top and bottom edge of the middle region to minimize their mutual interaction. When the total number of skyrmions in the middle region is three [Figs. 2(f)], the skyrmions will maximize the individual distances between them and will acquire a position at the top, middle and bottom parts. To achieve the re- laxation of the interacting skyrmions in the middle part, two pulses with smaller amplitude J2 = 5 MA.cm−2 are then injected. The skyrmions are then pushed into the rightmost region by sending a current pulse with a larger amplitude J1. At the output end, the middle cell will only have a skyrmion if the total number of skyrmions on the input side is either one or three. This represents the Sum output of the Full Adder. Similarly, the top and bottom outputs will only have a skyrmion if the total number of input skyrmions is either two or three. This is the same as the Cout (carry-out) output of the Full Adder. We thus achieve an entire full adder operation with a single logic gate. We have specifically designed our FA logic gate in Fig. 2(a) keeping in mind an easy integration with race- track storage such as the one in Fig. 1(a). Using this architecture, the FA logic gate can be easily extended 4 Cin B A Cout Cout Sum Inputs Outputs (a) (g) 0 ns 3.1 ns 6.7 ns 10.8 ns 12.6 ns 0 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 FA with Bitstream in out operate J1 J2 (d) (e) (f) (b) (c) 0 current pulses which are designed to move the skyrmions from their respective bits on the left to the middle region where the operation takes place and then to the output bits on the right. The current pulses J1 and J2 have an amplitude and duration of FA gate for various test cases. Snapshot of the magnetization at different times are overlayed to show the complete trajectories of the skyrmions (black solid curves). (g) Serial FA operation on a stream of Cin, A and B inputs. to perform logic operations with a continuous stream of data to serially compute Sum and Cout outputs for each input set of data bits. Such an operation is shown in Fig. 2(g), where we show serial 1-bit FA calculation on streams of input A, B and Cin [see also video SV3]. The current pulses, in general, follow the same protocol and can be easily extended to perform n operations, where n is the total number of bits in the bit-stream. FULL ADDER MULTI-BIT OPERATION One limitation of the FA gate is that it only operates on 1-bit inputs. For instance, the actual operation on the bitstreams shown in Fig. 2(g) is a 1-bit FA operation done serially on each arriving set of input bits, since the carry-bit (Cout) is not taken forward in each successive computation. We show here that N-bit FA gates can be easily designed by properly cascading 1-bit FA gates. As an example, we present in Fig. 3(a) the design of a 3-bit FA gate composed of three cascaded FA gates where the carry bit from each computation is used in the next com- putation. The bottom Cout from the FA1 is connected to the top bit cell of FA2, such that the output Cout from FA1 operation is used as one of the inputs of FA2 oper- ation. To ensure that the two other inputs of FA2 reach at the same time as the output Cout of FA1, we add some delay gates Sync-In (green boxes) before FA2. These syn- chronization gates can be cascaded to vary the delay time and provide on-demand synchronization between various segments of logic operations. Similar gates are also added to synchronize the outputs (Sync-Out, black). In Fig. 3(b) and video SV4, we show the operation of a 3-bit FA using cascaded 1-bit FAs. The calculation performed is (a3 a2 a1) + (b3 b2 b1) = (c4 c3 c2 c1), where output is (c4 c3 c2 c1)=(1100) which is correctly obtained by bit cells c4, c3, c2 and c1 shown by dotted yellow boxes. The design of Fig. 3(a) is very promising for fast n- bit FA operation and for further modifications using cascading and synchronization. However, a more com- pact and low power design can be implemented by di- rectly computing the n-bits FA operation using streams of skyrmions in two racetracks and a single FA gate. 5 a1=1 b1=1 a2=0 b2=1 a3=1 b3=1 c4 c3 c2 c1 Full Adder Sync In Sync Out a3 b3 a2 b2 a1 b1 c1 c2 c3 c4 a3 a2 a1 b3 b2 b1 c3 c2 c1 c4 (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) 0 ns 4.2 ns FA1 FA2 FA3 (f) (g) (h) t = 0 ns t = 34.2 ns 15 -10 5 0 J (MA/m2) Cout→Cin 3.2 ns 1 ns 100 mT 150 mT 165 mT BK,eff (a) Design of a 3-bit Full-Adder (FA) by cascading three 1-bit FAs. Additional components have been added to synchronize inputs application and the entire operation (b) shows the micromagnetic simulation for the case of (101+111=1100). The current pulses used to perform the logic operation are exactly the same as the 1-bit FA operation repeated 3-times. (c) and (d) show the design and operation of an FA where the carry-bit can be sent back using current of negative polarity with approaches for 3-bits addition in terms of device area, energy consumption and operation time, respectively. This would be similar to the operation of FA shown in Fig. 2(g), however, with bit-streams replaced with N-bit numbers. For this purpose, we modify our FA design to include another region of different anisotropy value as shown in Fig. 3(c). This new region (light blue) which covers the area joining the input bits to middle region and the area to the left of top Cout bit has an anisotropy in-between the anisotropy of the regular bit cells and the barrier region. This enables us to send a negative polar- ity current pulse which is enough to move only the Cout bit while keeping the other skyrmions at their respective places. This pulse is shown alongside in Fig. 3(c) [high- lighted part]. In Fig. 3(d), we show how the Cout bit is moved back to the input end by this current pulse of negative polarity. During the entire operation, none of the other skyrmions are affected. Using this, we can now compute the addition operation of two N-bit numbers by successively sending them through the top and bottom inputs of the FA (middle input is left empty). The de- sign and operation for a 3-bit FA using this strategy is shown in Fig. 3(e) and video SV5. It may be noted that we need to add an empty bit between each successive bit as no operation can take place during the movement of Cout bit using negative polarity current. The snapshots in Fig. 3(e) correspond to the initial and final stage of the addition operation (a3 a2 a1) + (b3 b2 b1) = (c4 c3 c2 c1), pected output is (c4 c3 c2 c1)=(1010) which is correctly computed with our implementation. The inputs and out- puts are shown in dotted yellow boxes. The performance of the two methods for N-bit FA computation described above can be compared on the basis of three important characteristic metrics: (i) De- vice Area, (ii) Energy consumption and (iii) Operation time. In Fig. 3(f), we show the variation of the device area with the number of bits (N). For the cascaded FA shown in Fig. 3(a), both dimensions in the x − y plane increase linearly with N leading to an ‘O (N2) variation of device area. However, since only one FA gate is needed for the alternative approach (without cascading) shown in Figs. 3(c)-(e), the device area remains the same as ‘N’ increases. Note that in Fig. 3(e), the increase in the length along x-axis is not included in the calculation as the extended regions are considered as a part of the race- track storage rather than logic. In Fig. 3(g), we show the total energy consumption of the FA logic gate as a func- tion of number of bits. For a 1-bit operation, the energy of the operation is 9 fJ. In the case of cascaded FA op- 6 (a) NOT/COPY Gate (d) NAND Gate (e) NAND Gate : A=1; B=1 A B 1 A. B = 0 A. B = 1 A. B = 1 A. B = 1 A ⊕ B = 0 (b) XOR/AND Gate 1 A ҧA 0 A A (c) NXOR/OR Gate A B A ⊕ B A ⋅ B A ⋅ B 0 A B A ⊙ B A + B A + B 1 1 A B AND NAND AND XOR AND XOR AND AND 0 0 fixed to either "0" or "1". Similarly, (b) and (c) show XOR/AND and NXOR/OR gates derived from FA. (d) shows a universal NAND gate designed by cascading AND and NOT gates, both of which are modified versions of FA. (e) shows the operation of NAND for both inputs as 1. eration, the energy dramatically increases with the num- ber of bits as O (N3) due to linear increase in operation time and quadratic increase in the device area. How- ever, when using the FA design shown in Fig. 3(c)-(e), the total energy only increases linearly with the number of bits. For a 32-bit operation, the total energy consump- tion is ∼ 0.8 pJ which is more than two orders lower than the cascaded FA operation. However, this design suffers from a larger operation time compared to cascaded FA gate since each operation is delayed by 4.2 ns to move the carry-out bit back to the input position [Fig. 3(h)]. Due to the Joule dissipation in the metallic conductors, the proposed device consumes 1-2 orders of magnitude more energy for individual logic operations compared to state-of-art CMOS full adder . However, owing to its intrinsic logic-in-memory approach, a large gain in en- ergy and delay is expected at the device level, since it minimizes the energy dissipated in interconnects and the stand-by power. Note that the speed of both designs can be further increased by using skyrmions with higher ve- locity (> 1000m/s is expected for SAF which is 6 times the maximum velocity of skyrmions in this work). RE-PROGRAMMING FA LOGIC Full adder logic gates can be easily modified in order to build a number of basic logic functions, which in turn can be combined to perform complex logic operations. The output of the full adder gate is given as: Sum = Cin ⊕ (A ⊕ B) ; Cout = AB + BCin + ACin. By fixing one or more of the inputs, different logic gates can be achieved. Note that the inputs of a FA logic gate are all interchangeable, so it does not matter which of the inputs are fixed. Figures 4(a)-(c) show the modified FA gates which can perform COPY, NOT, AND, XOR, OR and XNOR operations. The universal NAND gate can also be designed by cas- cading two modified FA gates [Fig. 4(d)]. The first gate is modified by setting one of the inputs to “0" such that the Cout represents the output of an AND gate. The second FA gate is modified to perform an inversion operation by setting two of the inputs to “0” and “1”. The operation of this gate for a test case of A = 1 and B = 1 is shown in Fig. 4(e). The output A.B = 0 corresponding to the NAND gate is highlighted. It may be noted that we also obtain AND and XOR outputs along with the NAND output. ELECTRICAL TOLERANCES AND FAILURE MECHANISMS For practical application of our design, it is important to probe its tolerance against variations in the current amplitude or pulse width. In Fig. 5(a), we show the set of pulses used for the 1-bit Full Adder operation. There are two different current density values used in the cir- cuit : J1 = 15 MA/cm2 and J2 = 5 MA/cm2 with pulse widths of t1 = 0.8 ns and t2 = 0.9 ns, respectively. There 7 in out operate J2= 5 MA.cm-2 J1=15 MA.cm-2 t1 t1 t2 t2 t0 t0 t0=0.5ns t1=0.8ns t2=0.9ns J1 J2 (a) (b) 0 (c) Cout=1 Sum=0 1 1 0 (b) Acceptable change (%) in different parameter values in the current pulse. (c) Test case with inputs (0,1,1) for FA operation with random anisotropy grains. is also an off-pulse of width t0 = 0.5 ns. We individually vary each of these parameters by fixing other parame- ters at their reference values. We also try to vary J1, J2 or t0, t1 and t2, simultaneously. The results are shown in Fig. 5(b) depicting the acceptable level of variation for each case for which the logic operations are executed without any errors. Note that these results are also valid for the NAND as well as other derived logic gates. These tolerance values provide valuable input for further mod- eling with large-scale electrical circuit designing tools. We also performed simulations to check the robustness of device against variations in anisotropy. We varied the effective anisotropy field of the barrier region and found that the Full Adder works correctly for the range of values 155mT−167mT. Further, we also perform simulations by adding grains of size 15nm with random 0.5% variation of anisotropy constant (equivalent to ∼ 5% − 8% change in effective anisotropy field), similar to previous works and show that the Full Adder works correctly. The motion of skyrmions for a test case with inputs (0,1,1) is shown in Fig. 5(c). However, we note that a stronger anisotropy variation may lead to incorrect operations. In our device, this happens as the skyrmions are stabilized for the parameter values which are close to in-plane to out-of-plane transition regime. Therefore, a small change in the anisotropy constant rapidly changes the skyrmion energy and hence its trajectory. A possible strategy to mitigate this is to use higher anisotropy thin films as the pristine sample and then irradiating them to obtain the tracks/barriers with the same anisotropy difference as used in this work. An important part of the logic gate design involves de- vice testing against a possible failure during operation. To investigate this point, we include thermal noise corre- sponding to T = 350 K in our simulations . We sim- ulate 20 instances for each of the possible 8 test cases for the Full Adder (total 160 attempts). Despite high ther- mal noise, the Full Adder worked correctly for ∼ 85% of the total attempts. For the cases in which it failed, three different failure mechanisms were found. The first one is caused by the annihilation of input skyrmions during the operation. We predict that a stronger RKKY cou- pling could counter the thermal noise and improve the overall stability of the SAF skyrmions. The second fail- ure mechanism is due to the presence of skyrmions at the wrong output after the operation has ended. This happens when the skyrmion diffusion due to thermal noise significantly perturbs the intended trajectory of the skyrmions. Higher Gilbert damping is expected to min- imize this effect. However, the trade-off will be an in- creased energy consumption as higher current densities will be required to move the skyrmions. The third pos- sibility is a skyrmion getting stuck in between two bit cells. This occurs when the skyrmion finds a local min- ima in between two memory bits. Our barrier has already been optimized to avoid this situation [see Appendix. B], however, further optimization is needed to comply with high-temperature conditions. This will involve increas- ing the difference of anisotropy between the low and high anisotropy regions which will increase the barrier height. CONCLUSION To conclude, we proposed a logic-in-memory de- vice based on skyrmion confinement and channeling by anisotropy energy barriers in synthetic antiferromag- nets. We first designed a racetrack shift register memory based on skyrmions confined by anisotropy energy bar- riers as memory bits, allowing reliable data storage with large stability and robust synchronous shift operations on skyrmion train. This design naturally solves the sta- bility and synchronization issues of the initial racetrack 8 concept without introducing additional gates or com- plex geometries. We then combine our racetrack stor- age with a newly designed 1-bit Full Adder (FA) gate extendable to N-bits FA by cascading. The designed FA is reprogrammable and can also be used to perform AND/OR/NOT/NAND/XOR/NXOR operations. The device is expected to perform well even with some fluc- tuations in the amplitude/width of the injected current pulses and in presence of thermal noise. The simplicity and compactness of the design combined with the mini- mal use of electrical circuitry brings the proposed device to the same level as the current technological capabilities of fabrication/manufacturing processes, thus providing an important advance for the development of skyrmion- based logic-in-memory technology. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors acknowledge financial support from the French national research agency (ANR) (Grant Nos. ANR-15-CE24-0015-01 and ANR-17-CE24-0045) and the American defense advanced research project agency (DARPA) TEE program (Grant No. MIPR HR0011831554). This work has been partially supported by MIAI@Grenoble Alpes, (ANR-19-P3IA-0003). Appendix A: Micromagnetic Simulation Model We use the micromagnetic package Mumax3 to simulate the magnetization dynamics of a Synthetic An- tiferromagnet having a Heavy Metal (HM)/Ferromagnet ing Landau Lifshitz Gilbert (LLG) equation with an ad- ditional Spin-Orbit Torque (SOT) term. dmi dt = − γ(mi × Beff,i) + α(mi × dmi dt ) − η � mi × (mi × ep) + ε ′(mi × ep) � η = ħθHJ 2|e|MSd (A1) Here mi is the normalized magnetic moment of ith fer- romagnetic layer. Beff,i is the effective field on each of the layers which contain contributions from the anisotropy, exchange, DMI and magnetostatic interactions along with the additional field to account for RKKY coupling between layers. We assume that SOT acts only on the top ferromagnetic layer of the SAF which is in con- tact with a Heavy Metal which generates a spin-orbit torque. The spin Hall angle is assumed to be θH = 0.4. The ratio of field-like torque to damping-like torque is ε ′ = 0.01. The RKKY coupling strength between FM layers is −0.2 mJ/m2. The thickness of each layer in the FM/S/FM trilayer structure is 0.9 nm (HM not Parameter Irradiated Non-irradiated Ms (MA/m) 1.32 1.32 BK,eff (mT) 100 165 A (pJ/m) 16 16 α 0.05 0.05 included in micromagnetic simulations). The simula- tion region is divided into micromagnetic cells of size 2 nm × 2nm × 0.9nm. Unless specified explicitly, we use the two sets of parameters corresponding to irradiated and non-irradiated regions of the SAF, given in Table I. These parameters are similar to our previous experimen- tal work on He+-ion irradiated Co-based FM . How- ever, we have assumed higher anisotropy values to sta- bilize the skyrmions at zero-field, while keeping the dif- ference between the anisotropy values of irradiated and non-irradiated region same. We also note that for the He ion dosage (< 2 × 1014ions/cm2) required to create the anisotropy barriers used in this work, the irradiation is expected to change the resistivity of Heavy Metal which generates the SOT (Pt in the reference experiments ) by < 1%. Therefore, we do not expect any changes in the dynamics of the skyrmions due to non-uniform cur- rent flow. Appendix B: Energy Barrier Calculation The energy of the skyrmion crossing the anisotropy barrier is dependent on the position of the skyrmion as well as the skyrmion radius: E ′ = f(x, R). From our simulations, we calculate the total micromagnetic energy for all values of x and R for a particular barrier width w. We then reduce the map E ′ using E = min(E ′) = min[(f(x, R)] taking the minimum along the R dimen- sion. We show E ′ scans along x with varying R in Fig. 6(a). The curve corresponding to minima of E ′ is shown by solid black circles. This corresponds to Fig. 1(b) in the main text for w = 60 nm. In Fig. 6(b), we show the anisotropy barrier as a function of the width of the barrier. For low barrier width w = 10 nm, the barrier has lower peak value (< 10kBT). Moreover, the barrier also has a local minima at the center. This is not desir- able for skyrmion confinement as there is a possibility of skyrmion getting stuck in the middle of the barrier during logic operation. For high barrier width (w = 100 nm), while the barrier height is sufficient (∼ 33kBT), the shape of the barrier is flat around the center region. This is also an unfavourable situation as in the absence of cur- rent, there will be no driving force on the skyrmion to push it towards the regions of confinement. In compari- son, w = 60 nm (which is used in main text) has an ideal shape. Due to the sharp peak at the center, the barrier is always forcing the skyrmions to move towards lower 9 E’ for each R w =60 nm min(E’) (a) (b) barrier as a function of its position for different values of skyrmion radius. (b) Barrier energy as a function of skyrmion position for different values of barrier widths, w. anisotropy regions where they can be confined. Appendix C: 4-input Logic Device The FA design shown in the main text can also be used as a template to design logic gates with more than 3 inputs. We show one such example in Fig. 7 which supports 4 skyrmion inputs. Using the same protocol as for the FA gate, we perform full micromagnetic simula- tions to obtain the truth table corresponding to the logic functionality of the 4-input gate [Table II]. This truth table can be used to customize the logic gate to calcu- late different logic functions. For example, if the input A is set to 0, the output of O2 represents the operation B ⊕ (C · D). A B C D O1 O2 O3 O4 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 1 0 1 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 Appendix D: Supplementary Videos • SV1 : 8-bit data encoding using “Fire+Nucleate" and “Shift" operations • SV2 : Operation of 1-bit FA for all test cases • SV3 : 1-bit FA operating on a stream of inputs A, B and Cin • SV4 : 3-bit addition using three cascaded FA gates • SV5 : 3-bit addition using a single modified FA gate M. Song, M. G. Park, S. Ko, S. K. Jang, M. Je, and K.-J. Kim, Logic device based on skyrmion annihilation, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices (2021). L. Gnoli, F. Riente, M. Vacca, M. Ruo Roch, and M. Graziano, Skyrmion logic-in-memory architecture for maximum/minimum search, Electronics 10, 155 (2021). H. Zhang, D. Zhu, W. Kang, Y. Zhang, and W. Zhao, Stochastic computing implemented by skyrmionic logic 10 devices, Phys. Rev. Appl. 13, 054049 (2020). M. Chauwin, X. Hu, F. Garcia-Sanchez, N. Betrabet, A. Paler, C. Moutafis, and J. S. Friedman, Skyrmion logic system for large-scale reversible computation, Phys. Rev. Appl. 12, 064053 (2019). Z. Zhang, Y. Zhu, Y. Zhang, K. Zhang, J. Nan, Z. Zheng, Y. Zhang, and W. Zhao, Skyrmion-based ultra-low power electric-field-controlled reconfigurable (super) logic gate, IEEE Electron Device Lett. 40, 1984 (2019). Z. He, S. Angizi, and D. Fan, Current-induced dynam- ics of multiple skyrmions with domain-wall pair and skyrmion-based majority gate design, IEEE Magn. Lett. 8, 1 (2017). X. Xing, P. W. Pong, and Y. Zhou, Skyrmion domain wall collision and domain wall-gated skyrmion logic, Phys. Rev. B 94, 054408 (2016). X. Zhang, M. Ezawa, and Y. Zhou, Magnetic skyrmion logic gates: conversion, duplication and merging of skyrmions, Sci. Rep. 5, 1 (2015). S. Luo, M. Song, X. Li, Y. Zhang, J. Hong, X. Yang, X. Zou, N. Xu, and L. You, Reconfigurable skyrmion logic gates, Nano Lett. 18, 1180 (2018). Z. Yan, Y. Liu, Y. Guang, K. Yue, J. Feng, R. Lake, G. Yu, and X. Han, Skyrmion-based programmable logic device with complete boolean logic functions, Phys. Rev. Applied 15, 064004 (2021). M. G. Mankalale, Z. Zhao, J.-P. Wang, and S. S. Sap- atnekar, Skylogic—a proposal for a skyrmion-based logic device, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 66, 1990 (2019). M. Fattouhi, K. Y. Mak, Y. Zhou, X. Zhang, X. Liu, and M. El Hafidi, Logic gates based on synthetic anti- ferromagnetic bilayer skyrmions, Phys. Rev. Applied 16, A. Fert, V. Cros, and J. Sampaio, Skyrmions on the track, Nat. Nano. 8, 152 (2013). J. Müller, Magnetic skyrmions on a two-lane racetrack, New J. of Phys. 19, 025002 (2017). W. Kang, C. Zheng, Y. Huang, X. Zhang, Y. Zhou, W. Lv, and W. Zhao, Complementary skyrmion race- track memory with voltage manipulation, IEEE Electron Device Lett. 37, 924 (2016). X. Zhang, Y. Zhou, and M. Ezawa, Antiferromagnetic skyrmion: stability, creation and manipulation, Sci. Rep. 6, 1 (2016). C. Jin, C. Song, J. Wang, and Q. Liu, Dynamics of an- tiferromagnetic skyrmion driven by the spin hall effect, Appl. Phys. Lett. 109, 182404 (2016). A. G. Kolesnikov, M. E. Stebliy, A. S. Samardak, and A. V. Ognev, Skyrmionium –high velocity without the skyrmion hall effect, Sci. Rep. 8, 16966 (2018). N. Sisodia, P. K. Muduli, N. Papanicolaou, and S. Komineas, Chiral droplets and current-driven motion in ferromagnets, Phys. Rev. B 103, 024431 (2021). T. Dohi, S. DuttaGupta, S. Fukami, and H. Ohno, For- mation and current-induced motion of synthetic antifer- romagnetic skyrmion bubbles, Nat. Comm. 10, 1 (2019). W. Legrand, D. Maccariello, F. Ajejas, S. Collin, A. Vec- chiola, K. Bouzehouane, N. Reyren, V. Cros, and A. Fert, Room-temperature stabilization of antiferro- magnetic skyrmions in synthetic antiferromagnets, Nat. Mater. 19, 34 (2020). R. Juge, N. Sisodia, J. U. Larrañaga, Q. Zhang, V. T. Pham, K. G. Rana, B. Sarpi, N. Mille, S. Stanescu, R. Belkhou, M.-A. Mawass, N. Novakovic-Marinkovic, F. Kronast, M. Weigand, J. Gräfe, S. Wintz, S. Finizio, J. Raabe, L. Aballe, M. Foerster, M. Belmegue- nai, L. Buda-Prejbeanu, J. M. Shaw, H. T. Nem- bach, L. Ranno, G. Gaudin, and O. Boulle, Skyrmions in synthetic antiferromagnets and their nucleation via electrical current and ultrafast laser illumination, arXiv:2111.11878 [cond-mat] (2021), arXiv: 2111.11878. X. Zhang, Y. Zhou, and M. Ezawa, Magnetic bilayer- skyrmions without skyrmion hall effect, Nat. Comm. 7, S. A. Pathak and R. Hertel, Geometrically constrained skyrmions, Magnetochemistry 7 (2021). E. Albisetti, D. Petti, M. Pancaldi, M. Madami, S. Tac- chi, J. Curtis, W. King, A. Papp, G. Csaba, W. Porod, et al., Nanopatterning reconfigurable magnetic land- scapes via thermally assisted scanning probe lithography, Nat. Nano. 11, 545 (2016). E. Albisetti, D. Petti, M. Madami, S. Tacchi, P. Vavas- sori, E. Riedo, and R. Bertacco, Nanopatterning spin- textures: A route to reconfigurable magnonics, AIP Adv. Y. Guang, I. Bykova, Y. Liu, G. Yu, E. Goering, M. Weigand, J. Gräfe, S. K. Kim, J. Zhang, H. Zhang, et al., Creating zero-field skyrmions in exchange-biased multilayers through x-ray illumination, Nat. Comm. 11, R. Juge, K. Bairagi, K. G. Rana, J. Vogel, M. Sall, D. Mailly, V. T. Pham, Q. Zhang, N. Sisodia, M. Fo- erster, L. Aballe, M. Belmeguenai, Y. Roussigné, S. Auf- fret, L. D. Buda-Prejbeanu, G. Gaudin, D. Ravelosona, and O. Boulle, Helium ions put magnetic skyrmions on the track, Nano Lett. 21, 2989 (2021). X. Xing, J. Åkerman, and Y. Zhou, Enhanced skyrmion motion via strip domain wall, Phys. Rev. B 101, 214432 The only modification needed in the current pulses is the merging of J1 pulse of outgoing operation with the J1 pulse of incoming operation as both of these operations can be carried out simultaneously without affecting the logic operation. D. E. Nikonov and I. A. Young, Benchmarking of beyond- cmos exploratory devices for logic integrated circuits, IEEE J. Explor. Solid-State Comput. Devices Circuits 1, 3 (2015). R. Tomasello, V. Puliafito, E. Martinez, A. Manchon, M. Ricci, M. Carpentieri, and G. Finocchio, Performance of synthetic antiferromagnetic racetrack memory: do- main wall versus skyrmion, J. Phys. D : Appl. Phys. 50, R. Juge, S.-G. Je, D. de Souza Chaves, S. Pizzini, L. D. Buda-Prejbeanu, L. Aballe, M. Foerster, A. Locatelli, T. O. Menteş, A. Sala, et al., Magnetic skyrmions in confined geometries: Effect of the magnetic field and the disorder, J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 455, 3 (2018). I. Gross, W. Akhtar, A. Hrabec, J. Sampaio, L. J. Martínez, S. Chouaieb, B. J. Shields, P. Maletinsky, A. Thiaville, S. Rohart, and V. Jacques, Skyrmion mor- phology in ultrathin magnetic films, Phys. Rev. Mater. As we are already doing simulations with experimental parameters extracted at T=300K, we only include ther- mal noise corresponding to T=50K to avoid overestimat- ing the effect of temperature. A. Vansteenkiste, J. Leliaert, M. Dvornik, M. Helsen, 11 F. Garcia-Sanchez, and B. Van Waeyenberge, The design and verification of MuMax3, AIP Adv. 4, 107133 (2014).