Sudden adiabaticity entering field-induced state in UTe2 Rico Sch ̈onemann,1, ∗ Priscila F. S. Rosa,2 Sean M. Thomas,2 You Lai,1 Doan N. Nguyen,1 John Singleton,1 Eric L. Brosha,3 Ross D. McDonald,1 Vivien Zapf,1 Boris Maiorov,1 and Marcelo Jaime1, † 1MPA-MAGLAB, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico 87545, USA. 2MPA-Q, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico 87545, USA. 3MPA-11, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico 87545, USA (Dated: July 4, 2023) There has been a recent surge of interest in UTe2 due to its unconventional magnetic field (H) reinforced spin-triplet superconducting phases persisting at fields far above the simple Pauli limit for H ∥ . Magnetic fields in excess of 35 T then induce a field-polarized magnetic state via a first-order-like phase transition. More controversially, for field orientations close to H ∥ and above 40 T, electrical resistivity measurements suggest that a further superconducting state may exist. However, no Meissner effect or thermodynamic evidence exists to date for this phase making it difficult to exclude a simple low-resistance metallic state. In this paper, we describe a study using thermal, electrical, and magnetic probes in magnetic fields of up to 55 T applied between the (b) and (c) directions. Our MHz conductivity data reveal the field-induced state of low or vanishing electrical resistance; simultaneous magnetocaloric effect measurements (i.e. changes in sample temperature due to changing magnetic field), show the first definitive evidence for adiabaticity and thermal behavior characteristic of bulk field-induced superconductivity. I. INTRODUCTION The recently discovered actinide superconductor UTe2 has been predicted as a promising candidate for the realization of chiral spin-triplet superconductivity with equal-spin pairing. Support for this picture comes from its close proximity to magnetic order, its unusually large critical magnetic field (far exceeding the Pauli limit for a weakly coupled BCS superconductor in the absence of spin-orbit coupling), as well as the observation of only a small change in the Knight shift below its supercon- ducting transition temperature Tc ≈ 1.6 − 2.1 K [1–9]. UTe2 crystallizes in a body-centered orthorhombic struc- ture (Immm) . Unlike closely related orthorhombic UGe2, URhGe and UCoGe, for which superconductivity emerges within the ferromagnetically ordered state , no signs of superconductivity coexisting with magnetic order were observed in UTe2 down to 25 mK . Magnetic fluctuations are believed to play a major role in facilitating superconductivity in UTe2 , yet the nature of the fluctuations is still a matter of contention. Indeed, whilst some experiments give evidence for ferromagnetic fluctuations , recent neutron scattering data show exci- tations at an antiferromagnetic wave-vector . Studies under hydrostatic pressure also support the presence of antiferromagnetic fluctuations . When a magnetic field is applied along the magnet- ically hard b-axis, a reinforcement of superconductiv- ity is observed above 15 T, which is extended up to μ0Hm ≈ 35 T establishing the reinforcement of the critical field. At 35 T, a first-order metamagnetic tran- sition into a field-polarized paramagnetic phase occurs ∗ rschoenemann@lanl.gov † mjaime@lanl.gov below 8 K, leading to a jump of 0.5 μB in the mag- netization and the termination of the superconducting state . A smaller anomaly around 6.5 T was also reported in magnetization data for H ∥ . It is likely that a Fermi-surface reconstruction, as well as a volume/valence change, accompanies the metamag- netic transition . Thermopower and Hall data show a change of the majority charge and heat carriers from electrons to holes with a step-like increase in the electri- cal resistivity . Based on the Hall data, the estimated carrier density for H > Hm is around a factor of six lower than that for H < Hm . On rotating the magnetic field from H ∥ towards H ∥ , the metamagnetic transition at Hm shifts up- wards in field. Interestingly, when the field lies in a nar- row angular range around the direction i.e., ≈ 23.7◦ away from the axis), transport measurements sug- gest that a state with an undetectable low resistance emerges within the field polarized paramagnetic phase above Hm. This state has been interpreted as super- conductivity , see Fig.[1(a)]; however, it is impossible to tell from simple transport experiments if the high-field, low-resistance, state is filamentary or bulk in nature. Constructing a theoretical model for super- conductivity in strongly correlated electron systems has proven to be a phenomenally complex task. Until its bulk nature is established, extrinsic effects such as local stoichiometry, strain, lattice defects, impurities, etc. can- not be ruled out; all bets to explain the phenomenon are off. Crucial bulk thermodynamic evidence is still rather scarce though. Indeed, thus far low-temperature thermo- dynamic measurements have focused on magnetic fields along the principal axis a, b, and c, yet none for H ∥ . Here we report complementary proximity detector os- cillator (PDO) , magnetocaloric effect (MCE) , and angular dependent torque magnetometry mea- arXiv:2206.06508v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 2 Jul 2023 2 gram of UTe2, where θ = 0◦ corresponds to H ∥ b and θ = 90◦ to H ∥ c. Blue squares mark the transition from the super- conducting ground state (SCPM) to the paramagnetic state or the re-entrant superconducting state (SCRE) measured at T ≈ 0.6 K. Note that the region of the SCRE state is just roughly indicated to extend to θ ≃ 5◦. The black circles and open triangles denote the first-order transition into the field- polarized paramagnetic state (FP). Critical fields were ob- tained from PDO (black circles, T ≈ 0.9 K) and torque τup/dn measurements (black open triangles, for up- and down-sweep, T ≈ 0.7 K) in this work. The green triangles encircle the pro- posed high-field superconducting phase (SCFP); points were taken from Ran et al. . (b) Specific heat vs. tempera- ture for a UTe2 single-crystal synthesized in the same batch as the ones used for MCE measurements. (c) Schematic of the sample arrangements for simultaneous MCE and PDO measurements in pulsed fields. (d) Magnetic field H (black line) and dH/dt (red line) as a function of time for the pulsed magnet used in the MCE measurements. surements to 55 T that are eminently applicable in this context, as they provide together an unambiguous ther- modynamic detection of phase transitions and were con- ducted in the pulsed magnetic fields required to observe the high-field phase. Our combined results show the first bulk evidence for a state characterized by extremely high electrical conductivity, reversible increase in tem- perature, and thermal decoupling from the bath, likely due to fully gaped bulk superconductivity. RESULTS Fig. 1(a) shows the phase diagram of UTe2 for mag- netic field magnitude and orientation (H − θ); with the (θ = 0). Data for the up-sweep (rising field) portion of the field pulse are shown in black and those for the down-sweep (falling field) are in red. The background color indicates the superconducting and magnetic phases displayed in Fig. 1(a). Note that the critical fields for the low-field superconducting state (arrows) are marked for the down-sweep curves. (b) T versus H data for θ = 33◦. (c, d) PDO data, shown as inverse frequency 1/f, a proxy for electrical resistance, versus applied field, was recorded simultaneously with the thermal measurements shown in (a, b). The color scheme is the same as in (a, b). angle θ describing the field rotating from parallel to the crystallographic b-axis (θ = 0◦) towards the c-axis (θ = 90◦). The phase diagram is based on prior magneti- zation, electric and thermal transport measurements [1– 4, 7, 18]; the points surrounding the high-field phase SCFP were taken from Ran et al. . Despite sample temperature T excursions of up to ≈ 1.0 K (described in detail below), far from equilibrium with the 3He bath temperature (≈ 0.6 K), the field positions of both the high-field metamagnetic and low-field transition out of the SCPM phase obtained from our PDO and MCE mea- surements are in good agreement with prior data. In the case of the metamagnetic transition, this is unsur- prising as Hm is virtually temperature independent for T < 4 K . Examples of sample temperature T versus field curves for H ∥ b (θ = 0) and θ = 33◦ are shown in Fig. 2(a, b) on top of data from simultaneous PDO measurements (c, d). Referring to the phase diagram [Fig. 1(a)], at sub- Kelvin temperatures and θ = 0, the up-sweep of a 55 T field pulse first traverses the low-field SCPM phase, then the so-called re-entrant superconducting phase (SCRE) and the metamagnetic transition at Hm before finally entering the field-polarized (FP) (non-superconducting) phase. By contrast, at θ = 33◦, a similar pulse goes through the SCPM phase, a metallic (paramagnetic, non- superconducting) phase, and the metamagnetic transi- 3 tion (shifted to higher fields), where it enters the SCFP phase. As we see, these different paths across the phase diagram result in different thermal responses. Turning first to the MCE data at θ = 0 [Fig. 2(a)], as H initially rises (black curve) there is a steep in- crease in T from the 3He bath temperature (≈ 0.6 K) to ≈ 1.1 K. This heating is attributable to an avalanche- like, dissipative vortex movement in the superconducting SCPM phase, a phenomenon frequently seen in pulsed- field measurements of more conventional superconduc- tors (e.g., Ref. ). Thereafter, T relaxes towards the bath temperature until a sharp step upwards denotes the first-order phase transition at Hm. Once in the FP state, T again relaxes for the rest of the up-sweep and during the start of the down-sweep (red curve). However, at Hm on the down-sweep there is another sharp increase in T, followed by further relaxation down to around 15 T; below ≈ 13 T there is a gentle increase in T, likely due to a combination of SC gap opening and dissipative vor- tex motion as the removed field enables the SCPM phase. Note that the down-sweep of H is much slower than the up-sweep, allowing more time for heat generated to dissi- pate . The most significant results for θ = 0◦ are (a) the irreversible processes that cause heating at the meta- magnetic transition regardless of field-change direction, which dominates the thermodynamics (likely due to this phase boundary being mostly temperature-independent ; (b) the thermalization (cooling off) of the sample in the high- field/high-resistance FP state. Here the field changes do not cause eddy-current heating, and thermal coupling to the bath dominates the sample thermal re- sponse, and (c) irreversible and reversible processes as- sociated with the low field SCPM phase. The simultaneous PDO data at θ = 0 [Fig. 2(c)] re- flect these T changes. As the field increases (black curve) there is a sharp fall in f at about 15 T, indicating the SCPM to SCRE transition (the corresponding T versus H curve in (a) flattens at about the same field). The sample exits the SCRE phase at μ0Hm = 35 T; once in the non-superconducting FP phase, shifts ∆f in the PDO frequency are dominated by changes in the sam- ple resistivity ∆ρ, with an approximate proportionality ∆f ∝ 1/∆ρ . At Hm, ρ is known to exhibit a sharp increase , leading to a downward step in f. Above Hm, the normal-state resistivity of UTe2 is rather T−independent in the range 0.6 − 2 K ; hence, despite the varying T seen in the MCE data, the PDO frequency on the downsweep of the field (red curve) overlies the up- sweep data. Below Hm, slight hysteresis between down- sweep (red) and up-sweep PDO data marks the presence of the SCRE phase before a step upwards (marked by an arrow) shows the transition back to the SCPM phase; as T is lower on the down-sweep [Fig. 2(a)], this latter feature occurs at a slightly higher field than the corresponding feature in the up-sweep. The MCE and PDO data for θ = 33◦ [Fig. 2(b,d)], below about 15 T, behave in a similar way to their coun- terparts at θ = 0. However, the lack of the SCRE phase ity) vs. magnetic field for different angles θ displayed on the left of each curve. The field up- and down-sweeps are shown as black and red curves respectively. (b) Derivative of the down-sweep curves shown in (a). The inset shows a low-field feature indicating the transition between the SCPM and SCRE superconducting states close to θ = 0. Curves in (a) and (b) are shifted vertically by an offset ∆ for clarity. at θ = 33◦ means that T, rather than flattening, con- tinues to fall until Hm is reached. Correspondingly, the PDO signal above 15 T at θ = 33◦ decreases roughly lin- early, reflecting the increasing normal-state magnetore- sistance, rather than flattening out as it did at θ = 0 due to the presence of the SCRE phase. However, the biggest contrast for θ = 33◦ compared to θ = 0 oc- curs on crossing Hm. A temperature increase slightly less abrupt is seen followed by a temperature drop inside the SCFP phase which, quite remarkably, retraces itself during the field down sweep in an adiabatic fashion. The cooling continues upon crossing the phase boundary back to the paramagnetic normal state. (The full angular de- pendence of the MCE at Hm is discussed further along). Continuing along the down-sweep curves, the 33◦ PDO data show an increase in f due to the normal-to-SCPM transition, accompanied by slight heating due to vortex motion revealed by the MCE data. The most significant results for θ = 33◦ are (a) The largely reversible change in temperature observed at Hm with minimal dissipative mechanisms. Here a temperature increase on the up- sweep is suggestive of the opening of an energy gap for excitations. The drop in temperature during the down- sweep marks concomitantly the reversible closing of the gap. (b) The re-tracing of the sample temperature inside the pink shadow region (upsweep and downsweep over- lap) indicates adiabaticity, also compatible with a gaped state where superconducting pairs carry no entropy, de- 4 the up-sweep (a) and down-sweep (b). The black circles indicate the metamagnetic phase transitions discussed in the text, green squares and triangles enveloping the high-field superconducting state were taken from Ran et al. . The reversible temperature increase and adiabaticity observed for H > 40 T and 30o < θ < 40o, quite distinct from results at all other angles and fields, coupled with high electrical conductivity, are together consistent with a field-induced superconducting state in UTe2. The initial temperature before the field pulses is T0 ∼ (0.6 ± 0.1) K, variations in T0 cause vertical stripes to appear in both contour plots. coupling the sample from the thermal bath. Note that a hypothetical low-resistance metallic state would result in enhanced eddy-current heating for both upsweep and downsweep traces (lifting the overlap) in the high field state, a result very different from our observations. Having described the signatures of the various phase boundaries in the PDO and MCE data, we now turn to Fig. 3(a), which shows PDO frequencies for 15 angles in the range 0 ≤ θ ≤ 48◦; as before, black curves signify rising H and red curves falling H. Note that the field at which the drop in f associated with the exit from the SCPM phase (either into the SCRE phase (θ ≤ 10◦) or normal state (θ > 10◦) occurs at lower fields on the field up-sweep due to the heating seen in the MCE experiment; the sample is much closer to the bath temperature on the downsweep, so that the corresponding step is at higher fields . Corresponding derivatives of the down-sweep data are shown in Fig. 3(b). The critical fields Hc and HFP shown in Fig. 1(a) were extracted from the extrema of this data set. For the three lowest θ values (0, 5◦, 10◦) there is only a weak, broad feature between 15 and 20 T, reflecting that the transition is between two superconducting phases (SCPM and SCRE). For θ > 10◦, the weak feature is replaced by a well-defined minimum, as it now corresponds to a superconductor (SCPM)-to- normal transition. The MCE measurements are summarized in Fig. 4; the increase in T in the SCFP phase around θ = 33◦ clearly stands out, staying hot in the down-sweep data. This provides thermodynamic evidence that the sample be- comes thermally decoupled from the bath (indeed, the SCFP region does not change color for upsweep and down- sweep, unlike the rest of the H,θ phase space), and a compelling proof for the bulk nature of the SCFP state observed in UTe2. On the other hand, due to the large heating effect caused by vortex motion at the onset of the magnet pulse, near H=0, no clear phase boundary of the low field superconducting phase can be identified in the up-sweep MCE data. Based on the PDO data (Fig. 3), the SCPM phase is suppressed at a field of a few Tesla on the up-sweep. During the down-sweep, the phase boundary into the SCPM phase coincides with the onset of gentle sample heating below ≈ 15 T and the cor- responding upward step in the PDO data (Fig. 3). At the close of this section, we emphasize that though the corresponding features in the PDO and MCE data are weak, there are distinct indications of the boundary between the SCPMand SCRE phases. This seems to con- firm that though both states are superconducting, they are distinct phases with subtly different properties . DISCUSSION Before treating the thermodynamics of the onset of the high-field SCFP state in more detail, it is worth consid- ering whether there is an alternative explanation for the 5 Metamagnetic transition in UTe2 as seen in the magnetic torque signal measured at different angles at T = (0.7 ± 0.1) K. Up- and down-sweep of the magnetic field are indicated by arrows. In general, the curve with the higher transition field corresponds to the upsweep. previous (non-thermodynamic) data used to identify the apparent superconductivity of this phase. One possibility might be a low (but nonzero) resistivity metallic phase caused by a field-induced Fermi-surface reconstruction at Hm that occurs over a restricted range of field orientations. However, existing experimental data provide a number of objections to such an interpretation. 1. As mentioned in the Introduction, Hall-effect and thermopower measurements for H ∥ b indicate a very significant decrease in the charge-carrier den- sity as one crosses Hm into the FP (normal) state, leading to a strong increase in the resistivity . 2. To counter the previous point, one might argue that a significantly different change in electrical proper- ties (i.e., a large increase in carrier density and/or mobility) occurs at Hm, but only over a special, restricted range of θ. In such a case, one would ex- pect that the metamagnetic transition would also change in character for these angles. However, torque magnetometry data (Fig. 5) carried out over a wide range of field orientations show that the po- sition and size of the magnetization jump at Hm vary smoothly and monotonically with θ. 3. An increase in the charge-carrier density at Hm (such as due to the closing of an energy gap) leads to cooling (see for Ce3Bi4Pt3 and for URu2Si2) of the sample during the field up-sweep and heating in the down-sweep, which is incompat- ible with the data in this report. A highly con- ductive field-induced gap-less metallic state would also likely lead to eddy-current heating in changing fields of both directions, which is not present in the MCE data. 4. The observation of reversible heating upon entering the high field SCFP phase indicating the opening of an energy gap in excitations, is accompanied by sample thermal decoupling (adiabaticity). This is the consequence of an increase in the sample ther- mal relaxation time constant τ ∝ C/K, where C is the sample heat capacity and K is its thermal conductance. Since the opening of an energy gap leads to a reduction of C, the observed increase in τ points to a significant drop in K reminiscent of a superconducting state, as seen in numerous U-based compounds such as UBe13, UPt3, UCoGe, and URhGe [29–32], as well as in UTe2 in low fields . 5. The PDO data used to detect the SCFP state in Ref. (and those in this paper) behave in a qual- itatively similar manner to PDO measurements on more conventional superconductors such as pnic- tides and cuprates , especially in the hysteresis observed between up-sweeps and down- sweeps of the field. By contrast, PDO data mea- sured in systems where there is a large field-induced increase in carrier density but no superconductiv- ity behave in a very different way, e.g. showing different hysteretic characteristics. 6. The typical energy scales associated with the transition at Hm are ∼ 40 K (see Introduction above). Any phenomenon associated with in- creased (normal-state) conductivity due to a Fermi- surface change at Hm would be expected to persist (or slowly die away) over a temperature range sim- ilar to this. By contrast, the upper-temperature limit of the SCFP phase is about 1.9 K , very similar to the critical temperatures of the SCPM and SCRE superconducting phases , suggesting a common or closely related origin. Yet another proposal for the field-induced state is that of an sliding density wave (sDW), as observed in low- dimensional materials when a depining electric field is applied. Since the Fermi surface in UTe2 is quasi-2D, a sDW cannot be ruled out from transport experiments, in part because these are run in the presence of an elec- trical current and, hence, an electrical field on the sam- ple. Our MCE experiments are, however, conducted in zero-current/zero-electrical field and a sDW condensate is unlikely. In view of the above points, the following discussion of the thermodynamics occurring at and around Hm as- sumes that the SCFP phase is superconducting. As shown in a previous study for H ∥ b, the meta- magnetic transition at Hm is first-order at low tempera- tures and accompanied by hysteresis losses. In the cur- rent, field-orientation-dependent study, the temperature change ∆TFP observed at Hm can be described as follows (see Fig. 6). (i) During the up-sweep, ∆TFP is positive and decreases with increasing θ (dashed line in Fig. 6(b)). 6 (ii) ∆TFP increases for θ between 25◦ and 35◦ as the sam- ple transitions into the SCFP state. (iii) ∆TFP decreases with θ once again when the SCFP state is suppressed at larger θ. During the down-sweep of the field, ∆TFP (Fig. 6(b), red points) is always smaller than that during the up-sweep. For the falling field, ∆TFP is positive for θ < 27◦ and becomes negative for larger angles. In making a quantitative description of the thermody- namics of the metamagnetic transition, we assume that the overall entropy change is a sum of reversible and ir- reversible processes, ∆S = ∆Srev + ∆Sirr = Cp∆T T + ∂Qloss T . (1) where ∆Srev describes the latent heat released during the transition, which is recovered when the field crosses Hm in the opposite sense; and CP is the heat capacity at constant pressure. The small field width of the metamag- netic transition leads us to assume adiabatic conditions and extract the temperature change ∆T directly from the magnetocaloric measurements. The time to cross the transition at Hm is ∼ 0.6 ms - significantly shorter than the thermal relaxation timescale τ of the sample in the FP state which is around 10 ms for our equip- ment. τ was estimated from the T(t) behavior above Hm [Fig. 6(a)], yet it is clearly longer in the SCFP region of the phase diagram. We obtain the reversible temper- ature changes at the metamagnetic transition through ∆Trev = (∆TFPup − ∆TFPdown)/2, where the subscripts “up” and “down” refer to the up- and downsweeps of the field respectively. On the other hand, irreversible processes such as Joule heating contribute to the tem- perature change in both field-sweep directions, therefore ∆Tirr = (∆TFPup + ∆TFPdown)/2. Using that Cp/T ≈ 250 mJmol−1K−2 and assum- ing that Cp shows weak temperature dependence be- low 2 K at 35 T , for θ < 25◦ we obtain an al- most constant value, ∆Srev ≈ 30 mJmol−1K−1. Within the SCFP phase, ∆Srev increases, peaking at ∆Srev ≈ 80 mJmol−1K−1 close to θ = 35◦ [Fig. 6(c)] There- fore, entering the SCFP phase releases an additional ≈ 50 mJmol−1K−1 in latent heat. Assuming (as justified above) that the SCFP represents a field-induced super- conducting state, the additional latent heat is likely to result from the formation of a gap at the Fermi energy and an entropy reduction due to pair condensation . The irreversible component ∆Sirr mainly consists of hysteretic losses during the first-order metamagnetic transition and, bearing in mind the similarity of the be- havior of the PDO data in the SCFP state to that in the SCPM phase (see also Ref. ), what is likely to be dissi- pation due to vortex movement. As shown in Fig. 6(d), rotating H to higher θ leads to an overall decrease in ∆Sirr, apart from a small local uptick around θ = 35◦. As this is roughly in the middle of the θ range over which the SCFP phase occurs, it possibly coincides with dissipa- tion caused by a combination of metamagnetism, some magnetic field pulse for H ∥ b. The time frame shows the metamagnetic transition and the subsequent relaxation back to the bath temperature, which is approximated by an ex- ponential decay (red line). (b) Temperature change ∆TFP(θ) at the metamagnetic transition during the up-sweep (black triangles) and down-sweep (red circles) of the magnetic field. (c) Reversible and (d) irreversible component of ∆TFP as a function of the angle θ (left axes). While reversible processes are prevalent in the SCFP phase at θ ≃ 33o, irreversible mech- anisms or dissipation dominate in the small θ region.The cor- responding entropy changes are shown on the right axes of each figure. vortex motion, and lack of perfect adiabaticity. Note that while Hm increases with increasing θ, the jump in the magnetization at Hm at 1.4 K does not change sig- nificantly between H ∥ b and H ∥ . Torque measurements shown in Fig. 5 also vary smoothly as a function of angle. Therefore it is unlikely that the small irreversible heat involved when entering the SCFP phase is of magnetic origin. Finally, we remark that the boundaries between the various low-temperature/high-magnetic-field phases of UTe2 derived in this work from PDO and MCE data match those for CVT-grown samples in the literature very closely. This is of interest because the zero- or low- field behaviour of UTe2 seems very sensitive to the source, growth method, and quality of the crystals used (an ex- cellent summary is given in Ref. ). The present study employs crystals from different sources to those used to produce the phase diagrams reported in Refs. , per- haps suggesting that the high-field properties of UTe2 are less sensitive to sample dependent disorder than those in zero or small magnetic fields . 7 CONCLUSIONS The simultaneous zero-electric current magnetocaloric effect, MHz conductivity measurements, and angular de- pendent torque magnetometry are carried out on single crystals of UTe2 as a function of magnetic field magnitude and orientation, using pulsed magnetic fields of up to 55 T. A pronounced and fully reversible magnetocaloric ef- fect characteristic of a thermally decoupled (adiabatic) state is observed close to the metamagnetic transition into the proposed high field SCFP phase. This amounts to compelling evidence for the stabilization of a field- induced energy-gaped state of concurrent high electrical- and poor thermal conductivity, i.e., the first thermody- namic evidence that the SCFP state represents a field- stabilized bulk superconducting phase of UTe2, of likely node-less order parameter. Additionally, with the mag- netic field aligned close to the b-axis, a more subtle fea- ture is observed around 15 T, supporting the notion that the superconducting SCPM and SCRE states represent separate, distinct phases. EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS Single crystals of UTe2 are grown using chemical vapor transport; the conditions are the same as for sample s4 described in Ref. , where further details can be found. To provide initial characterization prior to the pulsed- field experiments, heat-capacity measurements are per- formed using a commercial calorimeter that utilizes a quasi-adiabatic thermal relaxation technique. In addi- tion, the electrical resistivity ρ is characterized using a standard four-probe configuration with an AC resistance bridge. Resistivity (not shown) and heat-capacity mea- surements on crystals from this batch show a single sharp transition around 1.9 K [Fig. 1(b)]. Fig. 1(c) shows a schematic drawing of the sample en- vironment for the pulsed-field experiments. The pancake coil for the PDO measurements (10 turns of insulated 50- gauge copper wire) is sandwiched between a G10 holder and the single-crystal UTe2 sample. The sample was coated with a thin film of GE varnish to avoid electrical contact with the layers above. The MCE thermometer is an approximately 100 nm thick semiconducting AuGe film (16 at% Au) deposited directly on the varnish-coated sample to ensure good thermal coupling between sam- ple and film. To improve the contact resistance, Au pads are deposited on the AuGe film. The AuGe film is calibrated against a commercial Cernox sensor; film resistances range from 6 Ω at room temperature to 250 Ω at 0.6 K. The sample is glued to the holder with Sty- cast® epoxy to prevent any sample movement due to the large magnetic torque when the field is aligned close to the b-axis. The PDO measurements employ equipment similar to that described in Refs. ; the tech- nique is well established for mapping the irreversibility and upper critical fields of superconductors in pulsed magnetic fields . The magnetocaloric and PDO experiments were performed in the NHMFL’s mid-pulse magnet, which provides a peak magnetic field of 55 T with a rise time of approximately 30 ms and a total pulse duration of 500 ms. A typical field pulse and its deriva- tive are shown in Fig. 1(d). The sample holder was fixed to the rotating platform of a cryogenic goniometer placed within a 3He cryostat. The sample was immersed in liquid 3He at a bath temperature of 0.6±0.1 K during the field pulses. Additionally, we conducted piezo torque magnetome- try measurements in pulsed magnetic fields up to 75 T by using membrane-type surface-stress sensors at the NHMFL at LANL with a high-frequency (≈ 300 kHz) AC excitation current of ≈ 500 μA. The angular dependent torque measurements were performed at 0.7 K with the sample immersed in liquid 3He. In the experiments, we used a balanced Wheatstone bridge between the piezore- sistive pathways. Crystals were mounted with the b axis perpendicular to the cantilever plane. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We thank M. Lee, L. Civale, and A. Shehter for in- sightful discussions. A portion of this work was per- formed at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory, which is supported by the NSF Cooperative Agreement No. DMR-1644779, the U.S. DOE and the State of Florida. This material is based upon work supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, National Quantum Information Science Research Cen- ters. S.M.T acknowledges support from the Los Alamos Laboratory Directed Research and Development program through project 20210064DR. J.S. and M.J. thank the DoE BES FWP “Science of 100 T” for support in devel- oping techniques used in these experiments. R.S., Y. L., and M.J. acknowledge support by the NHMFL UCGP program and the G. T. Seaborg Institute Postdoctoral Fellow Program under project number 20210527CR. APENDIX A: COMPLETE ANGULAR DEPENDENT MAGNETOCALORIC DATA SET Here we show the entire angular dependent magne- tocaloric data set (Fig. 7) measured with the sample immersed in liquid 3He. The data was used to generate the contour plots shown in Fig 4. 8 [h] Field up- and down-sweep data are depicted as black and red lines respectively. S. Ran, C. Eckberg, Q.-P. Ding, Y. Furukawa, T. Metz, S. R. Saha, I.-L. Liu, M. Zic, H. Kim, J. Paglione, and N. P. Butch, Science 365, 684 (2019). 9 S. Ran, I.-L. Liu, Y. S. Eo, D. J. Campbell, P. M. Neves, W. T. Fuhrman, S. R. Saha, C. Eckberg, H. Kim, D. Graf, F. Balakirev, J. Singleton, J. Paglione, and N. P. Butch, Nature Physics 15, 1250 (2019). W. Knafo, M. Valiˇska, D. Braithwaite, G. Lapertot, G. Knebel, A. Pourret, J.-P. Brison, J. Flouquet, and D. Aoki, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 88, G. Knebel, W. Knafo, A. Pourret, Q. Niu, M. Valiˇska, D. Braithwaite, G. Lapertot, M. Nardone, A. Zitouni, S. Mishra, I. Sheikin, G. Seyfarth, J.-P. Brison, D. Aoki, and J. Flouquet, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan G. Nakamine, S. Kitagawa, K. Ishida, Y. Tokunaga, H. Sakai, S. Kambe, A. Nakamura, Y. Shimizu, Y. Homma, D. Li, F. Honda, and D. Aoki, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 88, 113703 (2019). L. Jiao, S. Howard, S. Ran, Z. Wang, J. O. Rodriguez, M. Sigrist, Z. Wang, N. P. Butch, and V. Madhavan, Nature 579, 523 (2020). D. Aoki, J.-P. Brison, J. Flouquet, K. Ishida, G. Knebel, Y. Tokunaga, and Y. Yanase, Journal of Physics: Con- densed Matter 34, 243002 (2022). A. Rosuel, C. Marcenat, G. Knebel, T. Klein, A. Pourret, N. Marquardt, Q. Niu, S. Rousseau, A. Demuer, G. Sey- farth, G. Lapertot, D. Aoki, D. Braithwaite, J. Flouquet, and J. P. Brison, Phys. Rev. X 13, 011022 (2023). H. Matsumura, H. Fujibayashi, K. Kinjo, S. Kitagawa, K. Ishida, Y. Tokunaga, H. Sakai, S. Kambe, A. Naka- mura, Y. Shimizu, D. Homma, Y. Li, F. Honda, , and D. Aoki, Jou. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 92, 063701 (2023). S. Sundar, S. Gheidi, K. Akintola, A. M. Cote, S. R. Dun- siger, S. Ran, N. P. Butch, S. R. Saha, J. Paglione, and J. E. Sonier, Physical Review B 100, 140502(R) (2019). C. Paulsen, G. Knebel, G. Lapertot, D. Braithwaite, A. Pourret, D. Aoki, F. Hardy, J. Flouquet, and J.-P. Brison, Physical Review B 103, L180501 (2021). C. Duan, K. Sasmal, M. B. Maple, A. Podlesnyak, J.-X. Zhu, Q. Si, and P. Dai, Physical Review Letters 125, S. M. Thomas, F. B. Santos, M. H. Christensen, T. Asaba, F. Ronning, J. D. Thompson, E. D. Bauer, R. M. Fernandes, G. Fabbris, and P. F. S. Rosa, Science Advances 6, eabc8709 (2020). D. Aoki, F. Honda, G. Knebel, D. Braithwaite, A. Nakamura, D. Li, Y. Homma, Y. Shimizu, Y. J. Sato, J.-P. Brison, and J. Flouquet, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 89, https://doi.org/10.7566/JPSJ.89.053705. A. Miyake, Y. Shimizu, Y. J. Sato, D. Li, A. Nakamura, Y. Homma, F. Honda, J. Flouquet, M. Tokunaga, and D. Aoki, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 88, A. Miyake, M. Gen, A. Ikeda, K. Miyake, Y. Shimizu, Y. J. Sato, D. Li, A. Nakamura, Y. Homma, F. Honda, J. Flouquet, M. Tokunaga, and D. Aoki, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 91, 063703 (2022), https://doi.org/10.7566/JPSJ.91.063703. Q. Niu, G. Knebel, D. Braithwaite, D. Aoki, G. Laper- tot, M. Valiska, G. Seyfarth, W. Knafo, T. Helm, J.-P. Brison, J. Flouquet, and A. Pourret, Physical Review Research 2, 033179 (2020). W. Knafo, M. Nardone, M. Valiˇska, A. Zitouni, G. Laper- tot, D. Aoki, G. Knebel, and D. Braithwaite, Commu- nications Physics 4, 40 (2021). T. Helm, M. Kimata, K. Sudo, A. Miyata, J. Stir- nat, T. F ̈orster, J. Hornung, M. K ̈onig, I. Sheikin, A. Pourret, G. Lapertot, D. Aoki, G. Knebel, J. Wos- nitza, and J.-P. Brison, arXiv.2207.08261. doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2207.08261. S. Imajo, Y. Kohama, A. Miyake, C. Dong, M. Toku- naga, J. Flouquet, K. Kindo, and D. Aoki, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 88, 083705 (2019). M. M. Altarawneh, C. H. Mielke, and J. S. Brooks, Re- view of Scientific Instruments 80, 066104 (2009). S. Ghannadzadeh, M. Coak, I. Franke, P. A. Goddard, J. Singleton, and J. L. Manson, Review of Scientific In- struments 82, 113902 (2011). M. Jaime, K. H. Kim, G. Jorge, S. McCall, and J. A. Mydosh, Physical Review Letters 89, 287201 (2002). A. V. Silhanek, M. Jaime, N. Harrison, V. R. Fanelli, C. D. Batista, H. Amitsuka, S. Nakatsuji, L. Balicas, K. H. Kim, Z. Fisk, J. L. Sarrao, L. Civale, and J. A. Mydosh, Physical Review Letters 96, 136403 (2006). M. P. Smylie, A. E. Koshelev, K. Willa, R. Willa, W.- K. Kwok, J.-K. Bao, D. Y. Chung, M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Singleton, F. F. Balakirev, H. Hebbeker, P. Niraula, E. Bokari, A. Kayani, and U. Welp, Phys. Rev. B 100, In the PDO circuit, the resonant frequency f = 1/ √ LC, where L is the circuit inductance and C the capacitance. The inductance of a solenoid of N turns, area A, and length l is L = μN 2A/l, where μ is the permeability of the core material. Due to the skin-depth effect in metallic samples of low resistance the effective volume, and hence inductance, of the coil is reduced. Hence, ∆f ∝ (∆ρ)−1. In UTe2 this frequency shift is most evident upon en- tering the superconducting state where the penetration depth is significantly smaller than the normal state skin depth. M. Jaime, R. Movshovich, G. Steward, W. Beyermann, M. Gomez Berisso, M. Hundley, P. Canfield, and J. Sar- rao, Nature 405, 160 (2000). M. Jaime, Netsu Sokutei 37, 26 (2010). A. Ravex, J. Flouquet, J. Tholence, D. Jaccard, and A. Meyer, Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials H. Suderow, J. Brison, A. Huxley, and F. J., Journal of Low Temperature Physics 108, 11 (1997). L. Howald, Interactions entre la supraconductivit ́e et la criticit ́e quantique, dans les composes CeCoIn5, URhGe et UCoGe, Ph.D. thesis, Universit ́e de Grenoble, Greno- ble, France (2006). M. Taupin, L. Howald, D. Aoki, and J.-P. Brison, Phys. Rev. B 90, 180501 (2014). M. Nikolo, J. Singleton, D. Solenov, J. Jiang, J. Weiss, and E. Hellstrom, Physica B: Condensed Matter 536, 833 J. Singleton, C. de la Cruz, R. D. McDonald, S. Li, M. Al- tarawneh, P. Goddard, I. Franke, D. Rickel, C. H. Mielke, X. Yao, and P. Dai, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 086403 (2010). Z. Xiang, L. Chen, K.-W. Chen, C. Tinsman, Y. Sato, T. Asaba, H. Lu, Y. Kasahara, M. Jaime, F. Balakirev, F. Iga, Y. Matsuda, J. Singleton, and L. Li, Nature Physics 17, 788 (2021). K. G ̈otze, M. J. Pearce, P. A. Goddard, M. Jaime, M. B. Maple, K. Sasmal, T. Yanagisawa, A. McCollam, 10 T. Khouri, P.-C. Ho, and J. Singleton, Phys. Rev. B J. Stokes, A. Bloch, A. Janossy, and G. Gruner, Phys. Rev. Lett. 52, 372 (1984). We note a discrepancy in the entropy change at the metamagnetic transition between the present results and the values reported in the brief report by Imajo et al. Ref. . The difference is likely related to the condi- tions in the present work, i.e. a stronger link to the ther- mal bath needed to reach lower 3He temperatures leading to the quasi-adiabatic magnetization of the sample. The difference does not affect the conclusions of the current paper. A. Miyake, Y. Shimizu, Y. J. Sato, D. Li, A. Nakamura, Y. Homma, F. Honda, J. Flouquet, M. Tokunaga, and D. Aoki, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 90, Z. Wu, T. Weinberger, J. Chen, A. Cabala, D. Chichi- nadze, D. Shaffer, J. Pospisil, J. Prokleska, T. Haidamak, G. Bastien, V. Sechovsky, A. Hickey, M. Mancera-Ugarte, S. Benjamin, D. E. Graf, Y. Skourski, G. Lonzarich, M. Valiska, F. Grosche, and A. Eaton, arXiv.2305.19033 (2023), doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2305.19033. C. Frank, S. Lewin, G. Saucedo Salas, P. Czajka, I. Hayes, H. Yoon, T. Metz, J. Paglione, J. Sin- gleton, and N. Butch, doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2304.12392. P. F. S. Rosa, A. Weiland, S. S. Fender, B. L. Scott, F. Ronning, J. D. Thompson, E. D. Bauer, and S. M. Thomas, Communications Materials 3, 33 (2022). X. Willis, X. Ding, J. Singleton, and F. F. Balakirev, Review of Scientific Instruments 91, 036102 (2020).