1 Submitted to the Proceedings The African Conference on Fundamental and Applied Physics Second Edition, ACP2021, March 7-11, 2022 -Virtual Event Development of Ni doped SnO2 Dilute magnetic oxides for electronics and spintronics applications Y.S. Worku a, V. V. Srinivasua , Dipti R. Sahub* a Department of Physics, University of South Africa, Florida science campus, Johannesburg, South Africa b Department of Applied Sciences, Namibia University of Science and Technology, Windhoek, Namibia Abstract We used a solid-state reaction method to prepare Sn1-xNixO2 with x = 0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.15 polycrystalline compounds. A rutile phase with tetragonal crystal structure was confirmed by X-ray diffraction. At room temperature, the magnetisation study shows that the saturation magnetization increases with Ni doping content whereas the coercive field decreases after x= 0.1. The spin number increases as the Ni doping concentration increases, indicating that the incorporation of Ni into the Sn sites increases the number of spins interacting to improve the ferromagnetic phase , which is like saturation magnetization and coercive field. Keywords: Ferromagnetism, Diluted Magnetic Semiconductors, SnO2 and doping 1. Introduction In recent years, dilute magnetic semiconductors have gained the interest of the scientific community due to their use in spintronics applications . According to recent experimental findings the existence of ferromagnetism at room temperature in Ni doped SnO2 has made it promising material for spintronics applications . However, the cause of ferromagnetism properties in these materials is not clearly understood and whether the ferromagnetism is originates from intrinsic property or extrinsic factors is not certain. Few studies have demonstrated that doping SnO2 with Mn does not show ferromagnetism . On the other side Cr:SnO2, Al: SnO2, Fe:SnO2, Co:SnO2 and V:SnO2 exhibit ferromagnetism at room temperature . There are reports showing oxygen vacancies and structural defects might be the possible cause for the establishment of ferromagnetism . In some situations the addition of more dopants Ni ions can bring the magnetic moment of each Ni ion to decrease, which is attributed to antiferromagnetic super-exchange interactions between Ni ions in the system . In this study we study the magnetic behaviour in Ni doped SnO2 materials with different Ni content for possible spintronics application. 2. Experimental Method The polycrystalline powder samples of Sn1−xNixO2 with x = 0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.15 were prepared by the slow state solid state reaction using SnO2 and NiO. The calcination and presintering of the *Corresponding author Email: dsahu@nust.na (D. R. Sahu) 2 ACP2021, March 7–11, 2022 — Virtual Edition samples were carried out at 200 °C and 400 °C for 8 h at each temperature. The final sintering of the samples was performed at 800 °C for 16 h in pellet form. X-ray diffraction (XRD) was carried out for structural analysis using Philips diffractometer (Model 1715). Magnetic measurements were carried out using superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) magnetometer. The spin system of Sn1-xNixO2 is examined using electron spin resonance (ESR) spectroscopy. 3. Results and discussion The X-ray diffraction patterns indicates tetragonal rutile-type crystal structure [JCPDS card no. 14- 4145] as shown in Fig. 1. The average crystal size for Sn1-xNixO2 (x = 0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.15) particles can be obtained utilizing Debye Scherrer’s formula (Dv) and from the Debye formula we found that increaing Ni doping content in the SnO2 lattice causes the crystallite size to reduce. This indicates Ni2+ ion replacement disrupts the SnO2 lattice, resulting in lattice deformation and a reduction in crystallite size . The TEM images for SnO2 and Sn0.9Ni0.1O2 particles are shown in Fig. 2. The images shows that grain becomes more spherical and small. This happens as Ni radius is smaller than Sn atom resulting in a decrease of particle size inducing vlume reduction due to the restricted solubility and surface segregation of the solid solution . The magnetization study indicates that saturation magnetization increases with Ni doping content , whereas coercivity field (HC) rise first up to x = 0.1 of Ni doping and there after drop as Ni doping increases. A deviation from a linear relation between magnetization and Ni concentration is indicated by the presence of antiferromagnetic interactions between Ni ions through O atoms resulting in the observed decline in coercivity value . 3 ACP2021, March 7–11, 2022 — Virtual Edition 0 5400 0 5500 0 5900 0 1200 2400 3600 4800 6000 0 5400 Ni=0% g=2.02 Intensity (a.u) Ni=0.05 Ni=0.1 Ni doping composition Ni=0.15 The spin system of Sn1-xNixO2 nano-crystalline is examined using electron spin resonance (ESR) spectroscopy .As shown in Fig. 4 the value of g factor equals to g =2.02 which is interpret as an oxygen vacancy trapped in Ni2+ producing Ni3+ that Ni+3 ions interact via oxygen vacancy to create ferromagnetim. The total number of spins (N) involved in ESR spectra was calculated using the equation N=0.285( IP−P ) (∆H)2 where Ip-p is the peak-to-peak height of the ESR signal measured from the center of the origin, ∆H is the line width in Gauss units . The spin number increases with increasing of Ni doping content between Ni content (0≤ x ≤ 0.1) this is due to the incorporation of Ni into the Sn sites increases the number of spins interacting to enhance ferromagnetic phase. Further Ni doping at x=0.15 decreases spin number which might be due to antiferromagnetic interaction indicates that both extrinsic and intrinsic factors are ultimately responsible for the magnetic behavior of this Ni doped SnO2 system. 4. Conclusion Ni doped SnO2 synthesized using slow step solid state sintering technique shows rutile-type tetragonal structure. Magnetization study indicates coercive field declines after 0.1 of Ni doping content. ESR spectra results corroborates that the number of spins interacting for the formation of ferromagnetic is similar to the result of coercivity versus Ni doping content. This result implies that good dilute magnetic semiconductors with increased magnetic behavior may 4 ACP2021, March 7–11, 2022 — Virtual Edition be developed by optimizing the Ni percent doping ratio for spintronics applications. Acknowledgment The authors thank University of South Africa and Namibia University of Science and Technology for funding this research.