Hybrid electroluminescent devices composed of (In,Ga)N micro-LEDs and monolayers of transition metal dichalcogenides K. Oreszczuk1, J. Slawinska2, A. Rodek1, M. Potemski1,3, C. Skierbiszewski2, and P. Kossacki1 1 Institute of Experimental Physics, Faculty of Physics, University of Warsaw, Pasteura 5, 02-093 Warsaw, Poland 2 Institute of High Pressure Physics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Sokołowska 29/37, 01-142 Warsaw, Poland and 3 Laboratoire National des Champs Magnétiques Intenses, CNRS-UGA-UPS-INSA-EMFL, 25 rue des Martyrs, 38042 Grenoble, France We demonstrate a novel electro-luminescence device in which GaN-based μ-LEDs are used to trigger the emission spectra of monolayers of transition metal dichalcogenides, which are deposited directly on μ-LED surface. A special μ-LED design enables the operation of our structures even in the limit of low temperatures. A device equipped with a selected WSe2 monolayer flake is shown to act as a stand-alone, electrically-driven single-photon source. PACS numbers: I. INTRODUCTION Atomically thin semiconductors, such as monolayers of transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) and their homo- and hetero-structures, exhibit interesting optical properties. The list of prominent attributes of these two- dimensional (2D) structures includes: strong excitonic binding1–3 which favors room temperature capabilities4, possibilities to manipulate the valley degree freedom5–8, and emergence of new class of quantum emitters9–15. In parallel to the intense fundamental research, pertinent efforts are also undertaken to exploit the TMD semi- conductors in designing and fabricating of new optoelec- tronic devices of possible practical use16,17. The opera- tion of such devices is desired to be electrically driven. Controlled doping of TMD materials, although essential for the operation of conventional electroluminescent p-n diodes, still remains a largely unresolved challenge18–20. Therefore, alternative methods are being developed, relying most often on tunneling mechanisms of carrier injection into the active 2D component of the device. In fact, the electrically driven emission from TMD semicon- ductors has been successfully demonstrated in a num- ber of differently designed structures21–27. However, the architecture of such structures implies rather complex manufacturing processes, and the performance of the re- ported devices remains not yet fully satisfying. This calls for further efforts to improve/optimize the already pro- posed device schemes and/or to search for optional solu- tions. Taking advantage of the advanced technology of nitrides28, we put here forward a new concept of a compact pseudo-electroluminescent device by integrating the TMD semiconductors into (In,Ga)N light-emitting diodes (LEDs). Our devices are composed of micro- (In,Ga)N-LEDs (μ-LEDs), on top of which we directly deposit the TMD layers: the electrically driven (In,Ga)N μ-LEDs serve as the excitation sources to generate the PL emission from TMDs. A special design of our (In,Ga)N diodes ensures their functionality at cryogenic temper- atures, which are preferential conditions for generating light from TMD monolayers and an unavoidable require- ment when tracing the quantum emission centres from these layers. Low-temperature operation of our electrolu- minescent devices comprised of different: MoS2, MoSe2, WSe2 and WS2 monolayers, is demonstrated. Impor- tantly, the hybrid (In,Ga)N-μ-LED/WSe2-monolayer de- vice is also shown to function as an electrically driven source of single photons. While the fabrication of the present devices implies a laborious exfoliation manufac- turing, we speculate that the industrial scalability of such devices could be approached in the future, taking into account the progress in the growth of TMDs by epitaxy methods and thus evoking a possibility to grow the TMDs directly on (In,Ga)N LEDs, particularly with molecular beam epitaxy techniques29. The technology of nitride LEDs has undergone intense development in recent years28. Relevant efforts have been made to respond to pertinent demands for low energy consumption, that is, to achieve high luminous efficacy of LEDs, but also to improve their brightness and contrast, their shock resistance, and degradation time28. Although many nitride LEDs already find relevant applications in display technology30,31, the new possibilities for nitride optoelectronics have been raised more recently by em- ploying a scheme of a tunnel junction (TJ)32–34. Such ar- chitecture of (In,Ga)N LEDs is also crucial for the present work. The buried TJ enables the nitride LEDs to operate at cryogenic temperatures35. Equally important is that the use of the TJ allows us to replace the top p-type layer (of a conventional LED) with a highly conductive n-type layer. This enhances the current spreading and enables the n-type application of the side contacts to the device. Thus, TMD flakes can be directly deposited on the GaN surface, and the experiments can be carried out at low temperatures. arXiv:2206.04807v2 [physics.app-ph] 26 Jun 2022 2 grown by plasma assisted molecular beam epitaxy, with a characteristic sequence of epitaxial sections. (c) Ion-implantation profile for the implemented He+ energy of 100 keV and dose of 1.5 · 1014 cm−2. II. EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS The epitaxial structure, schematically shown in Figure 1, was grown by plasma-assisted molecular beam epitaxy (PAMBE) on (0001) bulk GaN crystals. The PAMBE grown TJ (90 nm) and μ-LED structure that emits light at a wavelength of 450 nm was capped with the n-type GaN of 150 nm (Figure 1b). The emission area of μ- LEDs was defined by a photolithography mask and He+ implantation (100 keV, D = 1.5 · 1014 cm−2) of the μ- LED structure. Ion energy and dose were adjusted to penetrate the region at the location of the TJ (Figure 1c). The vacancies produced during the ion implantation of the TJ deteriorate the p-type and n-type conductiv- ity and significantly increase the resistance of the TJ in the areas outside the μ-LEDs. After the ion implanta- tion, the regrowth of 200 nm of high conductive n-type GaN enhances the current spreading at the top of μ- LEDs and allows the creation of the side contacts to the device. After regrowth, the 150 × 300 μm devices con- taining arrays of individual microdevices were separated by reactive-ion etching. Next, on the Ga-polar side of the samples, the Ti/Al/Ni/Au metal contact was deposited with a photolithographic mask, followed by lift-off. The same metal contacts were used for bottom contact on the nitrogen polar side. The TMD monolayers have been placed on top of (In,Ga)N μ-LEDs (see Figure 1a) using deterministic transfer procedures. Monolayer flakes were mechanically exfoliated from bulk crystals with chemically pure back- grinding tape and transferred to the μ-LED surface using Gel-Pak DGL-X4 elastomeric films. A number of devices have been fabricated, comprising different, MoS2, MoSe2, WSe2 and WS2 monolayers. The optical measurements were carried out in the two experimental configurations. Time-integrated stud- ies were performed with the samples placed in the cold- finger cryostat. The emission of TMD monolayers has been measured in two different configurations. Primar- ily, the measurements have been carried out using the ex- ternal laser excitation at 532 nm (2330 meV). Secondly, the luminescence was triggered from underneath with (In,Ga)N μ-LEDs. The spectra composed of sharp emission lines charac- teristic of a WSe2 monolayer have also been examined with photon correlation experiments. These experiments have been carried out in the Hanbury-Brown-Twiss con- figuration, under (In,Ga)N LED excitation, and required the device to be immersed in superfluid helium to mini- mize the undesirable effects of heating (when large cur- rents are driven to trigger the (In,Ga)N LEDs). III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION The optical microscopy images of four different, WSe2, MoSe2, WS2 and MoS2 monolayers deposited on top of individual (In,Ga)N μ-LEDs are illustrated in Figure 2a- d. The characteristic, low temperature (10 K) microlumi- nescence spectra of these layers are shown, correspond- ingly, in Figure 2e-h. The spectra shown with blue traces were measured under excitation with the external laser (532 nm), whereas those shown in red have been activated by the underneath (In,Ga)N μ–LEDs. The photolumi- nescence signals measured under external excitation are typical (with respect to spectral shape and characteris- tic energies and intensities) of TMD monolayers, as often studied when they are directly deposited on conventional 3 1850 1900 1950 1550 1600 1650 1700 1600 1650 1700 1750 0 1 2 3 4 1950 2000 2050 0 1 2 3 4 Energy (m eV) internal LED excitation background lum inescence from LED external laser excitation (norm alized) (h) MoS 2 Energy (m eV) (f) MoSe 2 Energy (m eV) (e) W Se 2 Normalized Luminescence Energy (m eV) (g) W S 2 Normalized Luminescence (a) W Se 2 (b) MoSe 2 (c) W S 2 (d) MoS 2 (a-d) Images of the four different monolayers of TMDs. The flakes are exfoliated on μ-LEDs, which span the whole photo area. The μ-LED current density is equal to 0.3 μA μm−2. Red circles mark the area from which the lu- minescence was acquired. (e-h) Spectra of the monolayers ac- quired under μ-LED excitation (red) and 532 nm (2330 meV) external laser excitation (blue). Dashed line: μ-LED lumi- nescence acquired at the off-flake spot on the sample. Si/SiO2 substrates. Characteristic spectra of our WSe2, MoSe2 and WS2 monolayers are fairly well reproduced when they are excited with (In,Ga)N μ-LEDs. On the other hand, the apparent background signal (see dashed traces in Figure 2e-f), which is due to an unfiltered low- energy tail of the (In,Ga)N emission, largely distorts the spectrum of the MoS2 monolayer. This is, in fact, be- cause of a rather weak luminescence efficiency of MoS2 monolayers, as commonly reported when this particular TMD monolayer is not protected by hexagonal boron ni- tride. Having established the overall functionality of our pseudo-electroluminescence devices, we now turn our at- tention to structures displaying sharp emission lines, pos- sibly comprising the quantum emitter centers. Such cen- ters preferentially appear in WSe2 layers. Several μ- (In,Ga)N-LED/WSe2-monolayer devices have been fab- ricated and tested. The irregular shape of WSe2 flakes has been found to favour the observation of sharp emis- (a) Map of the luminescence of a long and narrow flake of a monolayer WSe2. The signal is integrated over 1625 meV - 1640 meV range, at the μ-LED current density of 0.5 μA μm−2. Blue circles mark the outlines of the two circular μ-LEDs. Symbols A-D mark the spots presented in panels (b-c). (b) μ-LED excited PL of the homogeneous part of the WSe2 flake (black) and the background luminescence of the μ-LED (grey). (c) μ-LED excited PL from the two spots with the narrow-line emitters. (d) The dependence of the luminescence intensity of line D on the μ-LED current density. The excitation sublinearity is caused by the elevated sample surface temperature at the highest current densities. sion lines. One may speculate this is due to the increased probability of the formation of the specific centers trapping the photoexcited carries at the edges of TMD flakes9,10 or induced by inhomogenous strain distribution11–15. The representative example of a device displaying sharp emission lines contains a narrow, elongated flake of a WSe2 monolayer. The device has been mounted on a cold finger of the cryostat, cooled down to 10 K and primarily tested under such conditions. After turning on the (In,Ga)N diodes, the emission spectra, in the spectral range 1590 − 1775 meV, were measured when scanning the surface of the WSe2 flake and its surrounding, with a spatial resolution of 2 μm. A map of the intensity of the PL integrated over the spectral range of 1625−1640 meV is shown in Figure 3a. This image illustrates well the shape of the flake, which extends over the active areas of two neighbouring (In,Ga)N μ-LEDs. The background 4 signal due to the emission tail of the (In,Ga)N diode is fairly weak - see the spectrum measured outside the flake area (Figure 3b). The spectra measured in the areas in the middle of the flake, away from its edges, exhibit a broad feature, centered at 1660 meV – a typical response of WSe2 ML with significant spatial inhomogeneity (see of the flake, the luminescence spectra often display sharp lines; see Figure 3c. Notably, the low activation current (below 1 nA μm−2) of our device permits the measurements of the emission spectra of the WSe2 monolayer over a broad range of cur- rent densities driving the (In,Ga)N diodes and thus en- ables the straightforward tuning of the excitation power to match the saturation point of a particular emitter. To illustrate this effect, we present a typical PL intensity of the emitter as a function of the current density (Fig- ure 3d). As the luminescence intensity of narrow lines in WSe2 monolayers is known to drop down upon increase of temperature36 we conclude that the observed effect is likely due to a low cooling efficiency of our device under the current arrangement (limited by the heat transfer ef- fectiveness between our device and the mounting base in the cryostat). However, the heat generation process can be suppressed by reducing the size of the μ-LED and the precise positioning of the TMD flakes. To demonstrate the operation of our device as a single- photon source, the device was immersed in a superfluid helium bath and cooled down to a temperature of 1.65 K. This resulted in an improved cooling efficiency of the de- vice, enabling the application of higher diode currents, and at the same time gaining higher emission intensities of narrow emission lines. This allowed for the correlation measurements of the photon statistics emitted from the particular centre. In Figure 4a we present the spectrum of the narrow line emitter in the WSe2 monolayer under the (In,Ga)N μ-LED excitation that was powered with 1.8 μA μm−2 current. We note the particularly low ratio of the back- ground μ-LED spectral tail to the narrow emission line intensity. Any uncorrelated photons detected in the Hanbury-Brown-Twiss experiment would proportionally reduce the amplitude of coincidence dip as well as the feasibility of our device as a single-photon source. The acquired photon coincidence correlation function, g2(τ), is presented in Figure 4b. The photon coin- cidence correlation function g2(τ) denotes the relative probability density of an event with a time separation τ. The decrease in the g2 value around τ = 0 evi- dences the single-photon component in the emission. The emission has predominantly single-photon characteristics when g2(0) < 0.5. The amplitude of the correlation function at zero de- lay is significantly low (g2(0) = 0.22), which attests to the single-photon character of the emission. The pho- ton coincidence correlation can also be used to deter- mine the lifetime of the emitter state (Figure 4b). The lifetime is equal to the characteristic decay time of the 1690 1700 1710 1720 1730 0 1 2 3 4 Lum ines c enc e (arb. units ) Energy (meV) (a) -100 -50 0 50 100 0.0 0.5 1.0 g 2 (t ) t (ns ) (b) g 2 (0) = 0.22 t decay = 4.8 ns (a) Luminescence spectrum of the narrow emission line chosen for the single-photon correlation experiment. (b) Coincidence correlation counts as a function of the time inter- val between photons. The photoluminescence is excited with μ-LED. The broad background luminescence from the μ-LED was not subtracted in the post-processing. antibunching feature in the g2(τ) profile at the low pho- ton rate limit. The lifetime obtained in our experiment (tdecay = 4.8 ns) is in agreement with the results obtained in other studies9,13,37–39. We also used the photon coincidence correlation ex- periment to verify the temporal stability of the emitter. Fluctuations of either the emitter intensity or the inten- sity of its excitation source would result in the effect of photon bunching. We observe no decrease of g2 at large τ, confirming the good stability of the emission center and the μ-LED. We also observed good long-term stabil- ity of our device. During several days of measurements, we have observed no significant variation in the emission efficiency of the selected center. IV. CONCLUSION In conclusion, we have demonstrated that light emis- sion from TMD monolayers can be efficiently generated when they are directly deposited on, and excited by the (In,Ga)N μ-LEDs. Our hybrid devices, 100 μm in size, can be seen as an optional route towards the effective, electrically driven generation of light from TMD semi- conductors. The devices equipped with different MoS2, WSe2, WS2 and MoSe2 monolayers have been shown to be operational at low temperatures thanks to the unique design of our (In,Ga)N micro-LEDs. A proof of con- cept for a new, electrically driven source of single pho- tons has been demonstrated with one of our (In,Ga)N μ-LEDs/WSe2-monolayer devices. 5