Force-detected Magnetic Resonance Imaging of Influenza Viruses in the Overcoupled Sensor Regime Marc-Dominik Krass,1 Nils Prumbaum,1 Raphael Pachlatko,1 Urs Grob,1 Hiroki Takahashi,1, ∗ Yohei Yamauchi,2, 3 Christian L. Degen,1 and Alexander Eichler1 1Laboratory for Solid State Physics, ETH Zurich, CH-8093 Zurich, Switzerland. 2School of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Life Sciences, Biomedical Sciences Building, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1TD, UK. 3Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, CH-8057, Zurich, Switzerland. (Dated: June 8, 2022) Long and thin scanning force cantilevers are sensitive to small forces, but also vulnerable to detri- mental non-contact interactions. Here we present an experiment with a cantilever whose spring constant and static deflection are dominated by the interaction between the tip and the surface, a regime that we refer to as “overcoupled”. The interactions are an obstacle for ultrasensitive measurements like nanoscale magnetic resonance imaging (nanoMRI). We discuss several strate- gies to overcome the challenges presented by the overcoupling, and demonstrate proton nanoMRI measurements of individual influenza virus particles. Introduction - Scanning force microscopy (SFM) is a wide and mature field that finds applications in physics, biology, chemistry, as well as the materials and surface sciences [1–5]. State-of-the-art SFM can attain atomi- cally resolved surface scans or follow nanoscale processes with video rates, making these instruments invaluable for both academic and industrial research. An open target of the community is to reach the zeptonewton force range, which is expected to enable the detection of individual nuclear spins. This is a crucial precondition for mag- netic resonance force microscopy [6–8] with near-atomic spatial resolution, with exciting prospects in structural biology and for the characterization of quantum devices. In order to realize zeptonewton force detection, the in- ternal damping and stiffness of nanomechanical sensors must be reduced as much as possible. Many groups are striving to optimize different devices as force sensors, in- cluding cantilevers [9–11], doubly-clamped beams [12– 17], membranes [18–22], nanowires [23–26], graphene sheets , carbon nanotubes , and levitated par- ticles . The main challenge, in most cases, is to preserve the excellent internal characteristics of a force sensor in close proximity to a sample. When the distance between a sensor and the sample is sufficiently reduced, non-contact forces set in, providing an external source for damping (dissipative forces) and stiffness (spring forces). For sensors with extremely low intrinsic spring or damp- ing forces, the non-contact forces can dominate the fre- quency and linewidth of a sensor. In this case, we speak of an “overcoupled” resonator, in analogy to the termi- nology used for superconducting circuits and optical cav- ities . Dissipative non-contact forces have been the subject of intense research efforts for more than two decades [34– 44]. By reducing the quality factor of a resonator, dissi- pation generally impedes a sensor’s ability to detect small forces. Conservative non-contact forces, by contrast, act in phase with the oscillation and do not produce damp- ing. These forces are responsible for changes of the sensor frequency close to a sample surface, which is the basis of a detection method used in high-resolution scanning force experiments . In the overcoupled regime, the en- ergy potential created by conservative non-contact forces can overwhelm the intrinsic spring force of the resonator. As a consequence, the resonator experiences large static deflections, frequency shifts that exceed its natural res- onance frequency, and even instabilities at certain po- sitions. While such effects are mostly observed at tip- surface distances up to a few nanometers in most SFM setups , they can already become a serious obstacle at larger distances for resonators with very low spring con- stants. Conservative non-contact forces therefore deserve to be considered for the next generations of ultrasensitive probes. In this paper, we experimentally investigate the im- pact of conservative non-contact forces in the overcou- pled regime. Our measurement setup is a Magnetic Res- onance Force Microscope (MRFM) , which we use to detect ensembles of nuclear spins and to perform three- dimensional nanoscale magnetic resonance imaging. Be- cause of the small spring constant of the cantilever, the apparatus is highly sensitive to the influence of static forces. We demonstrate how conservative non-contact forces impact our measurements and how their detrimen- tal effect can be partially mitigated with various strate- gies. As a result, we are able to reconstruct nanoMRI images of individual influenza viruses from our data. We further show that our cantilever sensor can be used as a static probe for surface forces with a sensitivity of 30 fN. SETUP Our sensor is a silicon cantilever with dimensions 150 μm × 4 μm × 130 nm, a bare resonance frequency of f0 = 3500 Hz, a mass of m = 10−13 kg, and a quality arXiv:2206.03168v1 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 7 Jun 2022 2 Static cantilever deflection. (a) Illustration of the spatial arrangement of the cantilever apex positioned 10 nm − 100 nm above a nanomagnet that is fabricated on top of a microstrip antenna. The image is composed of two individual SEM micrographs taken of the cantilever and the antenna chip. Inset: image of a nanorod apex (a different device was used in this study). Individual virus particles are marked by the arrows. The scale bar has a length of 200 nm. (b) Cantilever tip position during an approach curve next to the nanomagnet. Inset: schematics of the bent cantilever (not to scale). We define the cantilever deflection as the dif- ference between the tip position and the scanner position, which is set to acant = 0 nm at the starting point in this case. (c) Cantilever deflection and (d) cantilever frequency during an MRFM scan across the microstrip antenna at a cantilever-nanomagnet distance of 10 nm. Points indicate the measurement positions. In this measurement, a virus parti- cle was centered above the nanomagnet at x = 910 nm and interacting strongly with it between x ≈ 650 nm and 1165 nm. factor of Q = 25000 in vacuum and at the base tempera- ture T = 4.7 K of our helium bath cryostat. These num- bers translate into an intrinsic spring constant of k0 = 50 μN/m and a friction coefficient of γ0 = 10−13 kg/s . The sensor displacement is detected via a laser in- terferometer with a power of 10 nW − 100 nW directed onto a paddle near the cantilever tip. The interferome- ter has a displacement detection sensitivity of roughly 2 × 10−12 m/ √ Hz around the cantilever resonance fre- quency. Importantly, the interferometer can also be used to monitor slow deflections of the cantilever tip through the total reflected power . The detection uncer- tainty of this method is limited by temperature drift of the laser, which induces wavelength changes that pro- duce the same signature as mechanical motion. By con- trolling the laser temperature actively with a precision of ca. 10 mK, we achieve a root-mean-square uncertainty of about 0.2 nm in a DC − 500 Hz bandwidth. To attach the influenza virus particles to the cantilever, we use a two-step approach. First, a silicon chip contain- ing cleanroom-fabricated nanorods with a bottom cross section of ca. 500 nm × 500 nm is dipped into a low- concentration virus suspension. The concentration is ad- justed to result in a small number of well-separated virus particles on the bottom surface of the nanorod. After a chemical fixation step, a single nanorod is glued man- ually to the end of a cantilever. This process conserves the three-dimensional structure of the virus and does not degrade the mechanical properties of the cantilever . cantilever in an MRFM experiment. The cantilever is mounted in a pendulum geometry to avoid vertical snap- into-contact. For nanoMRI measurements, the cantilever apex is positioned 10 nm − 150 nm above the top surface of a nanomagnet, which is a truncated cone fabricated on top of a microstrip antenna . The nanomagnet is made of FeCo, has a top/bottom diameter and a height of dtop = 300 nm, dbottom = 500 nm, and hmag = 200 nm, respectively, and an estimated saturation magnetization of μ0Msat = 1.88 T. This nanomagnet provides the mag- netic field gradient G that generates the measured spin- mechanics coupling . As the cantilever approaches the nanomagnet, it expe- riences strong conservative non-contact forces that bend its tip away from the nominal position, cf. Fig. 1(b). This deflection is caused by inhomogeneous lateral tip-surface forces. In Fig. 1(c) and (d), we show discontinuities of the cantilever’s position and frequency due to these forces during a sweep along the x direction (at constant height z). At each discontinuity, the cantilever position changes abruptly by more than 100 nm and the frequency fcant jumps by several kHz. The maximum frequency of ca. 10 kHz at xscan = 1000 nm is almost three times larger than f0. Similar patterns are typically observed with lateral force microscopy in the regime of atomic stick- slip motion, however on a much smaller length scale (on the order of 100 pm rather than 100 nm). Dissipative non-contact forces, which we also observe, are shown in the Appendix A. MRFM CASE STUDY In MRFM, spins are coupled to the cantilever via a nanomagnetic field gradient . To create a force that acts resonantly on the cantilever, the spins are periodi- cally inverted via radio-frequency pulses . Spatial resolution is achieved by the condition that the spin’s Larmor frequency must match the pulse carrier frequency 3 nant slices, and the position of blind spots for positive (blue) and negative (red) scan directions in x. The color coding inside the resonance slices indicates the absolute value of the magnetic field gradient G generated by the nanomagnet (light gray), see Appendix C for details. The dashed yellow line in- dicates the height of a typical x − y scan with various blind spots. The tip-surface interactions decrease with increasing separation ∆z and the blind spots vanish for ∆z ≳ 100 nm. frf in order to allow inversions. This condition defines “resonant slices” in space where the inversion protocol is effective. The width of a slice is controlled by the frequency modulation depth ∆frf of the pulse, which ex- tends the resonance condition to a range of Larmor fre- quencies frf ± ∆frf. Two such slices are illustrated in Fig. 2, corresponding to different carrier frequencies frf. Nuclear spins at different positions inside the sample are brought into the slice for different scanner positions, and the force measured at each position is used as a measure to count spins. Since the acquired signal is a convolution of the spin density in the sample with the slice geome- try, a reconstruction step is necessary to obtain the true sample structure . To visualize the impact of conservative non-contact forces on our MRFM measurements, we show an exam- ple of a two-dimensional MRFM scan at constant z po- sition in Fig. 3(a). Each data point corresponds to a force measurement at a certain scanner position. Bright (dark) data points indicate that a large (small) number of hydrogen atoms is located inside the resonant slice and contributes to the spin signal. This image, however, does not reflect the true spatial distribution of the signal: in Fig. 3(b), we show the same data after correcting for the static tip deflection along x measured with the interfer- ometer. We observe that the cantilever is pushed away from certain regions by conservative non-contact forces, creating “blind spots” in real space where no signal can be measured. The spots appear around the positions where we expect maximum signal, depriving us of cru- cial information. trasensitive, overcoupled sensors: to achieve the desired sensitivity to small forces, our cantilever is designed to have a very low spring constant. This, however, makes it also sensitive to arbitrary surface forces that create instabilities and obstruct the collection of data in cer- tain regions of space. We can at present not identify the microscopic origin of these forces with certainty, but be- cause of their long-range characteristics, it is likely that they are related to trapped charges at the interface be- tween the nanomagnet and the microstrip antenna . In the following, we discuss three strategies to overcome the problems arising from the blind spots, and to perform nanoscale MRI even in the presence of strong non-contact forces. The strategies are illustrated in Fig. 2. Example plots showcasing the results for our instrument are col- lected in the Appendix B. Strategy (i): increasing the tip-surface distance - non-contact forces usually drop off quickly as a function of the distance between tip and surface. In our case, increasing the height over the nanomagnet surface from 30 nm to 100 nm leads to significantly smaller blind spots. At a separation of 150 nm, the influence of conservative non-contact interactions is negligible. In Fig. 2, this ef- fect is schematically shown as a gradual closing of the blue (red) petal-shaped blind-spot regions when scanning in positive (negative) x direction. In many experiments, an increased separation will also somewhat reduce the ability of the sensor to resolve small forces of interest, e.g. small nuclear spin forces. Strategy (ii): combining different scan directions - in general, the blind spots for scans in positive and nega- tive scan directions do not overlap fully, cf. blue and red petals in Fig. 2. This hysteresis can be exploited by scan- ning in both directions and combining the results in one data set. As a result of this strategy, only the overlap regions shown in black remain inaccessible. Strategy (iii): changing the shape of the PSF - in MRFM, the fact that the spin signal is not collected from a single point but from an extended point-spread func- tion (PSF) opens a third possibility to avoid the blind spots. On the one hand, any spin inside the sample can be detected at various tip positions that place the spin in different parts of an active resonant slice. On the other hand, different resonant slices can be activated by changing the carrier frequency. For the example shown in Fig. 2, while the regions of strong signal, i.e. large gra- dient G (dark green), are inaccessible with the low-frf slice because of the blind spots, one half of the high- frf slice is clear of blind spots for either scan direction. This strategy, or variants thereof with several slices used simultaneously , only applies to scanning probe mi- croscopy methods whose PSFs are not concentrated at a single point. 4 of x and y position of the scanning stage on a regular grid with a step size of ca. 30 nm. We used frf = 255.5 MHz and ∆frf = 800 kHz at a cantilever-nanomagnet separation of 30 nm to detect 1H spins (see main text for explanation). The position of the nanomagnet was approximately in the center of the field of view. (b) Same data as in panel (a), but plotted as a function of the actual cantilever tip position. Arrows indicate the opening of the blind spots. To obtain the tip position, the scanner position is corrected by the static cantilever deflection. Note that the y position of the tip is not corrected, as the cantilever is much stiffer in this direction and static deflections are assumed to be negligible. (a) Measured MRFM data Im recorded at a cantilever-nanomagnet distance of ∆z = 110 nm. For the reconstruction, the cantilever tip positions are coerced to nearest-neighbor positions on a 10×10×10 nm grid. (b) Example of the calculated MRFM signal Ir at ∆z = 110 nm after a successful reconstruction with three x − y planes (110 nm, 130 nm, 150 nm). During each iteration, the reconstruction algorithm reduces the error ∆I = Im − Ir between both data sets until it drops below a threshold. APPLICATION AND RESULT In our MRFM experiment, we selected strategy (i) to obtain an optimal compromise between high magnetic field gradient and small blind spots. Strategies (ii) and (iii) are potentially more powerful, but the reconstruction algorithm we currently use cannot efficiently handle the large differences in the point-to-point separations. Fur- ther, we chose the y-axis as fast scanning direction in order to reduce the number of discontinuities in one line and the mechanical hysteresis, cf. Fig. 1(c) and (d) and Fig. 7, respectively. The blind spots decrease significantly at distances greater than 100 nm above the magnet surface, leading to a maximum static deflection of less than dmax = 70 nm and a mean deflection of dmean = (30 ± 16) nm, compared to dmax,10nm = 170 nm and dmean,10nm = (61 ± 39) nm at a distance of 10 nm. In Fig. 4, we show one out of three measured x − y planes (at distances 110 nm to 150 nm) that contained only small blind spots and thus were used for the reconstruction. Notice that the signal is not dra- matically lower than for the data in Fig. 3 because the 5 Reconstructed nanoMRI image Or of influenza viruses. (a) Isosurface image of the three-dimensional hy- drogen nuclear spin density calculated from the MRFM data. The image shows two regions of high spin density whose sizes agree with an interpretation of a single virus (left) and an aggregation of 2-3 viruses (right). The three monochro- matic images show hydrogen nuclear spin density in planes at lines in panel (b) indicate the positions of the planes shown in panel (c)/(d). All scale bars are 500 nm long. Bright (dark) color scale corresponds to high (low) measured spin density. magnetic gradient falls off roughly on the length scale of the magnet itself, which is about 250 nm. The measured image Im does not directly correspond to the spin density O of the attached sample. The mea- sured signal at one measurement position is given by the convolution of O with the PSF, which in turn is controlled by the nanomagnet shape and the pulse parameters. In our image-formation model, we write Im = PSF ∗ O , (1) where Im is the measured image. To recover the ob- ject structure from the measured data, we use a regular- ized least-squares optimization. The approach we chose, along with a possible algorithm, is described in the Ap- pendix D. tained from our experiment. In spite of the challenges presented by the strong non-contact interaction, the re- constructed image clearly shows two regions of large nu- clear spin signal. The small and large blobs possibly correspond to a single virus and the aggregation of 2-3 viruses, respectively. The nanoMRI image agrees qualita- tively with a topography scan performed in our setup, cf. Appendix E. We conclude that our strategy is successful and that the influence of conservative non-contact forces can be mitigated to some degree. Nevertheless, the spa- tial resolution of the image in Fig. 5 is affected by the fact that we were not able to include the blind spot-corrupted data from the highest magnetic field gradient regions into the reconstruction. While static deflection presented a problem for our MRFM experiments, it can potentially be a useful probe in some surface studies. With a root-mean-square po- sition uncertainty of 0.2 nm and a spring constant of 50 μN/m, our cantilever is sensitive to static forces down to 30 fN, which is close to the performance of other force sensors read out at much higher laser powers . OUTLOOK Conservative non-contact forces will become increas- ingly important in future generations of nanomechanical scanning probes with optimized sensitivity. Operating such devices in the overcoupled regime changes the reso- nance frequency, alters the mode structure, and, specif- ically for MRFM, can dramatically reduce the inversion pulse efficiency. In combination, these effects can sig- nificantly reduce the resonator’s force sensitivity. It is therefore important to be aware of this potential issue, monitoring the relevant signatures (like large frequency shifts), and implementing counter-strategies when neces- sary. Our work outlines the basic problem and demon- strates how it can be handled even in a very complex type of experiment.