Cataloguing MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4 van der Waals Heterostructures: An Exceptional Material Platform for Excitonic Solar Cell Applications Che Chen Tho, Chenjiang Yu, Qin Tang, Qianqian Wang, Tong Su, Zhuoer Feng, Qingyun Wu, C. V. Nguyen, Wee-Liat Ong, Shi-Jun Liang, San-Dong Guo, Liemao Cao, Shengli Zhang, Shengyuan A. Yang, Lay Kee Ang, Guangzhao Wang*, Yee Sin Ang* Che Chen Tho, Qianqian Wang, Tong Su, Zhuoer Feng, Dr. Qingyun Wu, Prof. Shengyuan A. Yang, Prof. Lay Kee Ang, Dr. Yee Sin Ang* Science Mathematics and Technology Cluster, Singapore University of Technology and Design, 487372, Singapore Email: yeesin_ang@sutd.edu.sg Chenjiang Yu, Qing Tang, Prof. Guangzhao Wang* School of Electronic Information Engineering, Key Laboratory of Extraordinary Bond Engineering and Advanced Materials Technology of Chongqing, Yangtze Normal University, Chongqing, China, 408100 E-mail: wangyan6930@yznu.edu.cn Prof. C. V. Nguyen Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Le Quy Don Technical University, Ha Noi, Vietnam, 100000 Prof. Wee-Liat Ong ZJU-UIUC Institute, College of Energy Engineering, Zhejiang University, Jiaxing, Haining, Zhejiang, China, 314400 State Key Laboratory of Clean Energy Utilization, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China, 310027 Prof. Shi-Jun Liang Institute of Brain-Inspired Intelligence, National Laboratory of Solid State Microstructures, School of Physics, Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Microstructures, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China, 210093 Prof. San-Dong Guo School of Electronic Engineering, Xi’an University of Posts and Telecommunications, Xi’an, China, 710121 Prof. Liemao Cao College of Physics and Electronic Engineering, Hengyang Normal University, Hengyang, China, 421002 Prof. Shengli Zhang MIIT Key Laboratory of Advanced Display Materials and Devices, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China, Keywords: density functional theory simulations, van der Waals heterostructures, 2D materials, excitonic solar cells, electrical contacts Abstract Two-dimensional (2D) materials van der Waals heterostructures (vdWHs) provides a revolutionary route towards high-performance solar energy conversion devices beyond the conventional silicon-based pn junction solar cells. Despite tremendous research progress accomplished in recent years, the searches of vdWHs with exceptional excitonic solar cell conversion efficiency and optical properties remain an open theoretical and experimental quest. Here we show that the vdWH family composed of MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4 monolayers provides a compelling material platform for developing high-performance ultrathin excitonic solar cells and photonics devices. Using first-principle calculations, we construct and classify 51 types of MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4-based [(Mo,W)Si2N4] vdWHs composed of various metallic, semimetallic, semiconducting, insulating and topological 2D materials. Intriguingly, MoSi2N4/(InSe, WSe2) are identified as Type-II vdWHs with exceptional excitonic solar cell power conversion efficiency reaching well over 20%, which are competitive to state-of-art silicon solar cells. The (Mo,W)Si2N4 vdWH family exhibits strong optical absorption in both the visible and ultraviolet regimes. Exceedingly large peak ultraviolet absorptions over 40%, approaching the maximum absorption limit of a free-standing 2D material, can be achieved in (Mo,W)Si2N4/α2-(Mo,W)Ge2P4 vdWHs. Our findings unravel the enormous potential of (Mo,W)Si2N4 vdWHs in designing ultimately compact excitonic solar cell device technology. 1. Introduction Solar-to-electricity conversion offers a promising clean energy source to power a more sustainable technology landscape in the future. Despite the widespread deployment of conventional silicon-based solar cell, the continual improvement of the solar-to-electricity conversion efficiency remains a formidable challenge. Conventional crystalline silicon pn junction solar cell is plagued by nonradiative recombination of photogenerated electron-hole pairs,1 which severely limits its solar-to-electricity conversion efficiency.2 Silicon solar cells also entails the use of thicker layers to achieve longer optical path for better light absorption, which fundamentally limits their deployment in ultracompact and low-mass solar cell design.3 The search of novel nanomaterials and device architectures beyond the conventional silicon pn junction solar cell remain an open research challenge that urgently needs to be addressed. Excitonic solar cell has recently emerged as a compelling candidate for high-efficiency solar-to-electricity conversion. In contrast to conventional semiconductor-based pn junction solar cell where light-to-electricity conversion occurs exclusively within the same bulk material, excitonic solar energy conversion is an interfacial effect that arises from the band discontinuity across a heterojunction.4, 5 Unlike the pn junction solar cell in which a built-in potential is needed to separate the photogenerated electron-hole pairs in the bulk, electrons and hole are spontaneously dissociated onto the two sides of the interface in an excitonic solar cell. The interfacial band alignment thus provides an exothermic pathway for exciton dissociation even though they do not possess sufficient energy to dissociate in the bulk. The huge chemical potential gradient created across the interface significantly increases the open-circuit voltage beyond the built-in potential.6 Recent advances of two-dimensional (2D) materials and their van der Waals heterostructures (vdWHs)7-9 unravel an exciting route towards advanced excitonic solar cell technology.10, 11 The vertical coupling of different 2D materials via weak van der Waals (vdW) forces results in ‘designer’ heterostructures with physical properties not easily found in the nature, thus enabling myriads of high-performance nanoelectronics, optoelectronics, photonics and neuromorphic devices to be realized.4, 5, 12-23 The optical absorption, band alignment and band gap of vdWHs can be custom made with ease. Together with the long exciton lifetime and the capability of efficient charge harvesting at ultrafast timescales13-15, vdWH has become a compelling and potentially disruptive platform for the development of ultimately compact excitonic solar cell technology.5, 24, 25 Designing high-performance vdWH excitonic solar cell is, however, a complex technological challenge both theoretically and experimentally. Computationally, the design space of vdWHs is enormously large due to nearly unlimited material combinations and the continual discovery of new 2D materials. The maximum power conversion efficiency (PCE) of vdWHs is predicted to lie within the range of 10% to 20%, with only a minority of vdWHs20, 21, 26 (e.g. GaAs/InAs, HfSe2/GeO2 and BAs/BP) capable of achieving large PCE over 20%. Experimentally, the PCE of fabricated devices are only a small fraction of the theoretical limit10 due to material defects and carrier recombination losses.5 Furthermore, the experimentally realizable material combinations of vdWHs are constrained by the material synthesis and assembly processes.27, 28 The limited availability of high-PCE vdWHs and the formidable challenges of fabricating high-quality vdWHs highlight the urgency and importance of continual computationally searching for high-PCE vdWH, so to further expand the ground for the experimental realization of high-performance excitonic solar cell technology. In this work, we show that the vdWH family composed of septuple-layered MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4 monolayers29 – the recently discovered archetypes of the emerging MA2Z4 monolayer family – offers a versatile material platform towards high-efficiency solar energy harvesting, optoelectronics and photonics applications. Using first-principle density functional theory (DFT) simulations, we constructed 51 types of (Mo,W)Si2N4-based vdWHs and characterized their electronic and optical properties. The vdWHs are systematically classified according to their contact types and band alignments.30 Remarkably, we found that MoSi2N4/(ZnO, WGe2N4) and MoSi2N4/(InSe, WSe2) are Type-II vdWHs with PCE reaching well over 15% and 20% respectively, which are comparable to many state-of-art solar cells composed of silicon and perovskite31 as well as vdWHs.20, 26 Furthermore, majority of the 51 types vdWHs exhibit substantial optical absorption in the visible and ultraviolet (UV) spectrum. Nearly all vdWHs exhibit peak optical absorption in the UV regime, thus suggesting their potential in UV photonics applications. Our work unravels the enormous potential of (Mo,W)Si2N4-based vdWHs in UV photonics, optoelectronics and solar energy harvesting applications, and call for a more comprehensive computational and experimental search of vdWHs with exceptional physical properties in the expansive MA2Z4 material family. 2. Computational Methods QuantumATK32 is used to construct the heterostructures with lattice mismatch of less than 5%33, 34 between monolayers using supercell structure and applying the appropriate rotation. A vacuum layer of thickness ~25 Å is inserted between adjacent bilayer unit cell to eliminate the interactions from periodic images. We used the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP)35 for structural optimization, energy and charge calculation, and VASPKIT36 for optical properties calculation. For structural optimization and self-consistent field calculations, a Gamma-centered Brillouin zone k-point sampling grid of 11 x 11 x 1 with Monkhorst-Pack method is used. In the structural optimization step, the supercell volume is kept constant while the cell shape and ion positions are allowed to change. The break condition for each ionic relaxation loop is set to 10-3eV Å-1 such that the forces acting on the unit cell after convergence is less than this value and the break condition for each electronic relaxation loop is set to 10-6 eV. To take into account the weak van der Waals interactions between the monolayers, we adopted the DFT-D3 method with the Grimme scheme. We chose the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) with the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) form for the exchange correlation functional in the calculations for all our heterostructures, since MoSi2N4 band gap obtained from PBE (i.e. 1.73 eV and 1.78 eV)37, 38 is closer to the experimental value of 1.94 eV,29 as compared to the Heyd-Scuseria-Ernzerhof hybrid functional form (HSE06) with bandgap of 2.30 eV.29 Moreover, it has been demonstrated that the band alignment types – one of the key results of this work – predicted using PBE is in good agreement with that obtained using HSE06.30 The supercells of the vdWHs are shown in Figures S1-S6. The electronic band structures, plane-averaged electrostatic potential profiles, plane-averaged differential charge density profiles, dielectric constants, optical absorption spectra and the general calculation data of all 51 types of vdWHs are compiled and systematically presented in Figures S7-S13, S14- S19, S20-S25, S26-S31, Tables S1 and S2 of the Supporting Information respectively. 3. Results and Discussion 3.1 MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4: An Overview of their van der Waals Heterostructures The discovery of MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4 open an exciting avenue towards the development of novel two-dimensional (2D) material device technology.29 Monolayer MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4 are synthetic 2D semiconductor with exceptional electrical mobilities that outperforms the widely studied MoS2 monolayer and hold great promises in nanoelectronics and sub-10-nm transistor applications.39-41 Structurally, MoSi2N4 is a septuple-layered composed of a transition metal nitride sub-monolayer (Mo-N) intercalated between two outer silicon-nitride (Si-N) sub-monolayers. Such intercalated architecture gives rise to a large family of six- membered ring monolayers with septuple-atomic-layer structure, known as the MA2Z4 monolayer family.42 Intriguingly, the band edge states of MoSi2N4 are localized around the inner Mo-N sublayer and are protected by the outer Si-N sublayer37, 43 from external influences. Such unusual built-in atomic-layer protection mechanism renders MoSi2N4 as exceptional robust against environmental coupling effects and enables the formation of highly energy- efficient Ohmic contact without severe degradation of its electronic properties.37 Recent studies have unravelled myriads of exceptional behaviours in MoSi2N4,44-47 including strong exciton- phonon coupling at room temperature,48 strain-tunable optical response,49 tunable electronic properties via molecular doping,50 field-induced metal-semiconductor transition,44 large piezoelectric coefficient,51 sizable thermoelectric figure of merit,45 strained enhanced solar energy absorption52 and ultrahigh thermal conductivities.53 Beyond MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4 monolayers, the family of MA2Z4 monolayers42 also exhibit enormously rich physical and chemical behaviours, including nontrivial topological phases,42 valley-contrasting physics,54-57 nonlinear optical response,58 hydrogen evolution catalytic performance,59 and superior electrocatalytic activity for energy storage application.60 Driven by the success of vdWH material engineering, MoSi2N4-based vdWHs have also been intensively studied recently. For example, MoSi2N4 interfaced with InSe,61 blue phosphorus,62 C2N,63 CrCl3,64 C3N4,65 MoS2,66 graphene,38 NbS2,38 GaN,67 ZnO,67 MoSe2,68 Cs3Bi2I9,69 MoGe2N4,70 MoGeSiN4,71 and MoSH72 have been computationally predicted to exhibit efficient photocatalytic water splitting,61-63 strain-tunable valley splitting effect,64 strong optical absorption in the visible light regime with strain and field-effect tunable band structures.38, 65-73 Nonetheless, the catalogue of (Mo,W)Si2N4-based vdWHs remains largely incomplete thus far. As summarized in Figure 1, 51 types of (Mo,W)Si2N4-based vdWHs are constructed in this work, which are composed of (Mo,W)Si2N4 monolayers in contact with seven classes of 2D materials [see Figure 1(A)]: (i) semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDC), such as MoS2 and WS2; (ii) Janus semiconducting TMDC, such as MoSSe and WSSe; (iii) metallic TMDC, such as NbS2 and 1T-MoS2; (iv) Honeycomb monolayers, such as the semimetallic graphene and insulating hBN; (v) Group III-IV monolayer of InSe; (vi) ultrathin topological Dirac semimetals of Na3Bi monolayer; and (vii) other members from the MA2Z4 family, such as α2-MoGe2P4, MoGe2N4, as well as the vdWH formed by the mutual stack of MoSi2N4/WSi2N4. In Figure 1(B), the 51 vdWHs are systematically categorized into six sub- type (5 species) band alignments [see Figure 1(C) for schematic drawings of the band diagram of different contact types]. The band alignment diagrams of the 25 types of 2D monolayers considered in this work are shown in Figure 2(A) which provides a qualitative understanding on the contact type and band alignment formation via Anderson rule (AR).74 Due to the finite interaction between the two constituent monolayers,75 AR may no longer be valid in vdWHs with sizable interlayer coupling and interface dipole.76, 77 As shown in Figure 2(B), AR remains valid for most of the metallic TMDC, graphene, InSe, hBN and MA2Z4 family due to their weak coupling nature. In contrast, the disagreement between AR and direct DFT calculations is rather severe for semiconducting and Janus TMDC monolayers as well as the honeycomb semiconducting monolayers of GaN, BP and ZnO. This disagreement highlights the importance of direct DFT calculations for contact type and band alignment determination. 3.2 Metal/Semiconductor (MS) Contacts We first consider (Mo,W)Si2N4-based vdWHs of MS contact type. In this case, either Ohmic or Schottky contacts can be formed at the interface.78, 79 For an Ohmic contact, the absence of a Schottky barrier greatly facilitate charge injection across an MS contact and is much sought after for creating energy-efficient electrical contacts.80 MS vdWH contacts are particularly attractive due to the strong suppression of the Fermi level pinning effect, a detrimental effect that severely impedes the engineering of energy-efficient electrical contacts.81, 82 Here we identify 4 species of p-type Ohmic contacts formed by MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4 in contact with NbS2 and NbSe2 [see Figure 3(A-D)]. The formation of these p-type Ohmic vdWHs can be readily understood from the band alignment diagram in Figure 2(A), where the relatively larger work functions of NbS2 (6.06 eV) and NbSe2 (5.35 eV) align with the valence band maximum (VBM) energies of MoSi2N4 (5.30 eV) and WSi2N4 (5.14 eV) to yield p-type Ohmic contact by virtue of AR. We note that the MoSi2N4/NbS2 contact is predicted to be an p-type Schottky contact with ultralow Schottky barrier height (SBH)38 where the strain arising from lattice mismatch upon forming the vdWH is entirely distributed on the NbS2 monolayer only. In contrary, strain is distributed evenly between the two monolayers in our calculations, which yields a p-type Ohmic contact instead. For a bilayer vdWH made up of monolayer A and monolayer B, the plane-averaged differential charge density (Δρ) is calculated as, Δρ = ρAB − ρA − ρB, where ρAB is the charge density of the heterostructure AB, ρA is the charge density of monolayer A, ρB is the charge density of monolayer B. The charge redistribution of MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4 contacted by NbS2 and NbSe2 are examined from the Δρ plots in the upper panel of Figure 3(E-H). Significant electrons redistribution from the (Mo,W)Si2N4 monolayer towards the Nb(S2,Se2) monolayer occurs due to the higher VBM energies of the semiconducting monolayers when compared to the Fermi levels of the metallic monolayers. Such electron migration causes the p-doped characteristics of the (Mo,W)Si2N4 sub-monolayers upon contact formation. We further note that the interfacial charge redistribution occurs universally for all vdWHs as evident from the differential charge density plots in Figures S20-S25. The interfacial charge redistribution creates an interface dipole potential (ΔΦ) that manifests as an electrostatic potential energy difference between the two sides of the vdWHs. The ΔΦ are marked directly in the plane- averaged electrostatic profile plots in Figures S14-S19 for all vdWHs studied in this work. Although SBH is absent in Ohmic vdWH contact, a van der Waals gap is present between the two contacting monolayers that may impede charge ejection efficiency.83 The tunneling potential barrier ΦTB and the barrier width dTB can be extracted from the plane- averaged electrostatic potential plots with reference to the Fermi level [see bottom panel of tunneling potential barriers are 5.14, 4.70, 5.04, 4.60 eV respectively, and the barrier widths are 1.88, 1.86, 1.85, 1.84 Å respectively. Accordingly, the charge injection efficiency across the van der Waals gap can then be characterized by the tunneling-specific resistivity (ρt) using Simmons formula:84 ρt = 8π2ħ2dTB 3e2√2meΦTB exp (2dTB√2meΦTB ħ ) (1) where ħ, e, me is the Planck’s constant, charge magnitude and mass of the free electron respectively. The calculated ρt lies in the order of 10-9 which are comparable to those of metal/MoSi2N4 and metal/WSi2N4 contacts (i.e. from 0.1 × 10−9 to 3.85 × 10−9 Ωcm2)37 and that in the semimetal contact of Bi/MoS2 contact (1.81 × 10−9 Ωcm2 ).85 Finally, when (Mo,W)Si2N4 monolayers are interfaced with (Mo,W)S2 in metallic 1T-phase and with graphene, the resulting (Mo,W)Si2N4/(1T-MoS2, 1T-WS2, graphene) vdWHs form p-type Schottky contacts [see Figure 4(B)]. For Schottky type vdWHs, the charge transfer follows the same trend of electron migration from (Mo,W)Si2N4 towards the metallic monolayers, but the overall plane-averaged magnitude of Δρ are far lesser than that of the Ohmic counterparts [see the electronic band structure as the energy difference between the Fermi level of the metallic monolayer and the VBM of the semiconducting monolayer.38 The SBHs of these MS vdWHs cover a broad energy range between 0.3 eV and 0.9 eV [see Figure 4(C)], which can be useful for Schottky diode and current rectification applications. 3.3 Semiconductor/Semiconductor (SS) Contacts We classify all SS vdWHs according to the relative location of the conduction band minimum (CBM) and VBM in the energy space, i.e. the three conventional band alignment types:86-88 (i) Type-I straddling gap band alignment where the CBM and VBM arises dominantly from only one of the constituent monolayers; (ii) Type-II staggered gap band alignment where the CBM and VBM resides dominantly in different sub-monolayers; and (iii) Type-III broken gap band alignment where the CBM of one sub-monolayer overlaps with the VBM of another sub- monolayer. Unconventional band alignment types can also occur in vdWH in which the CBM and VBM energies cannot be straightforwardly classified according to these conventional band/or alignment types (denoted as Type-H in this work).89 In this Section, the 41 types of SS (Mo,W)Si2N4-based vdWHs are classified according to their band alignment types [see Figure 5(A)]. The electronic band structures of representative Type-I, II, III and H vdWHs are shown in Figure 5(B-E) respectively. Band Alignment Types The band gap values, the direct or indirect nature of the band gap, and the band alignment types (i.e. Type-I, II and H) are summarized in Figure 5(A). We identify 19 species of Type-I vdWHs – a band alignment type that is useful for photoluminescence applications, such as light- emitting diodes and lasers, due to the localization of CBM and VBM states within the same sub-monolayer. Among these Type-I vdWHs, 15 species possess direct band gap that is highly beneficial for engineering efficient excited electron-hole pair recombination.90 The electronic band structure of a representative Type-I vdWH, MoSi2N4/hBN is shown in Figure 5(B). We note that the MoSi2N4/MoS2 calculated using PBE (HSE06) here shows a direct band gap of 0.60 eV (1.06 eV) at the Γ point which is in stark contrast to the 1.26 eV (1.84 eV) reported in a previous work.66 We attribute this difference to the stacking orientation of the vdWH construction. The biaxial strain arising from lattice mismatch of the supercell considered in this work is only 2.7% (i.e. 30° rotation between the two monolayers), as compared to the substantially larger biaxial strain of 7.8% in the previous work.66 For Type-II band alignment, 15 species of vdWHs are identified. Figure 5(C) shows the electronic band structure of MoSi2N4/WSi2N4, a Type-II vdWH compose entirely of MA2Z4 monolayers. The Type-II band alignment and the indirect nature of MoSi2N4/WSi2N4 is in good agreement with a recent DFT calculation of the same vdWH but under different stacking configuration.91 Type-II vdWHs are potential candidates for excitonic solar cell application. The maximum PCEs calculated for each Type-II vdWHs are presented in Section 5.2 below. Finally, we note that (Mo,W)Si2N4/Na3Bi are the only Type-III vdWHs. Such band alignment arises from the ultralow work function92 and the narrow band gap39 nature of Na3Bi monolayer [see Figure 2(A)]. The VBM of Na3Bi overlap strongly with the CBM of (Mo,W)Si2N4, thus leading to the formation of Type-III SS contacts. Figure 5(D) shows the electronic band structure of WSi2N4/Na3Bi as an illustrative example. Beyond the conventional band alignment types discussed above, we further observed 5 vdWHs with unconventional band alignments, namely the (Mo,W)Si2N4/MoS2, MoSi2N4/SMoSe, MoSi2N4/α2-WGe2P4 and WSi2N4/SWSe [see Figure 5(E) for the electronic band structure of a representative vdWH, WSi2N4/MoS2]. As the VBM electronic states are delocalized and distributed rather evenly among the two sub-monolayers, the conventional Type-(I, II ,III) classification scheme is no longer applicable and we denote these vdWHs as the hybridized type (denoted as Type-H), which are intermediate between Type-I and Type-II vdWHs due to the spatial distribution of VBM states in both sub-monolayers. The Type-H contacts are also observed in vdWHs composed of TMDC monolayers30, 93 and binary semiconducting monolayers composed of group IV–V elements89 which arise due to the orbital hybridization of the out-of-plane pz-states. As the VBM states are distributed among the two sub-monolayers in Type-H contacts, some of the excited electron-hole pairs can recombine within the same sub-monolayers, thus rendering charge separation much less effective and may impede the potential of Type-H vdWHs for optoelectronics applications. We further note that to verify these unusual band structures, we employ the HSE06 exchange correlation functional in the electronic band structure calculations of these heterostructures. The Gamma-centered Brillouin zone k-point sampling grid of 6 x 6 x 1 is used due to computational resources constraint. Interestingly, the VBM hybridization is removed in MoSi2N4/2H-MoS2 and MoSi2N4/α2-WGe2P4 under the HSE06 calculations [see Figure S13]. Excitonic Solar Cell Maximum Conversion Efficiency of Type-II vdWHs Optically excited electron-hole pairs are spatially well-separated in Type-II vdWHs, which enables the efficient dissociation of these carriers to form conduction current. Such vdWHs are thus practically useful for applications where long-live and/or delocalized electron-hole pairs are needed, such as photodetector, excitonic solar cell and photocatalytic water splitting.87 We calculated the maximum solar cell PCE of these Type-II vdWHs, which represents the theoretical upper limit of solar-to-electricity conversion in a heterostructure device. The PCE is calculated as:86, 94 η = 0.65(Eg d − ΔEc − 0.3) ∫ P( ħω) ħω d(ħω) ∞ Egd ∫ P( ħω) d(ħω) ∞ 0 (2) where Eg d is the bandgap of the donor monolayer, ΔEc is the conduction band offset (CBO) between the two monolayers, P( ħω) is the solar spectral irradiance as a function of photon frequency ω, and the 0.3 eV term in Equation (2) is an empirical parameter to account for the energy loss during the conversion process.95 The AM1.5G standard solar spectrum is used for the solar spectral irradiance P(ħω), which yields an integrated solar intensity of Psolar = ∫ P( ħω) d(ħω) ∞ 0 ≈ 1000 W/m2. A representative value of 0.65 is assumed for the electrical fill factor of the solar cell95 which corresponds to the typical situation where ~60% of the excited electron-hole pair are dissociated to form the short-circuit current as observed experimentally.96 To achieve high PCE, the donor monolayer band gap should be within the desirable range of 1.0 to 1.7 eV, while the CBO should be as small as possible so to suppress the energy loss. The calculated PCEs are listed in Figure 6(A) and 6(B) for MoSi2N4-and WSi2N4- based Type-II vdWHs, except for WSi2N4/MoGe2N4 in which the overly small band gap of Eg − ΔEc < 0.3 is unsuitable for solar cell application. In general, MoSi2N4-based Type-II SS contacts exhibit higher overall PCE when compared to the WSi2N4-based Type-II vdWHs. Recent high throughput screening of 581 Type-II vdWHs26 based on Anderson rule has uncovered 17 candidate vdWHs with exceptional PCE higher than 20%, and the highest being that of HfSe2/GeO2 (PCE = 22.6%). In our case, the PCE of MoSi2N4/InSe and MoSi2N4/WSe2 vdWHs reaches 20.5% and 22.0% respectively, which is comparable to that of HfSe2/GeO2 and higher than many other vdWHs, such as phorphorus-based vdWHs (e.g. MoS2/Phosphorene with PCE of 17.5%).97 The exceedingly large PCE of MoSi2N4/InSe and MoSi2N4/WSe2 can be attributed to the small CBO of 0.03 eV and 0.05 eV respectively. Furthermore, MoSi2N4/InSe and MoSi2N4/WSe2 are indirect band gap Type-II heterostructures in which the recombination of excitons is expected to be less effective due to the need of phonon-assisted process to compensate the momentum-mismatch between CBM and the VBM states.98 MoSi2N4/InSe and MoSi2N4/WSe2 are thus expected to host long-live interlayer exciton that are highly beneficial for highly efficient light-to-electricity conversion. For the four MoSi2N4-based Type-II vdWHs with PCE over 15%, we calculated the real and imaginary parts of their dielectric function as well as the optical absorption spectra [see Figure 6(C-F)]. All four heterostructures exhibit substantial optical absorption of >10% in the visible light regime [denoted by dashed vertical lines in Figure 6(C-F)]. Particularly, the vdWH with the highest PCE, i.e. MoSi2N4/WSe2 exhibits a strong optical absorption shoulder (>20%) in the visible light regime of energies 2.5 eV and above, thus suggesting their potential usefulness for solar energy absorption and photodetection applications.99-101 Comparing to the isolated MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4 monolayers [see Figure 6(G) and 6(H)], the overall optical absorption in the visible light regime is significantly enhanced upon forming the vdWHs, thus establishing the importance of vdW engineering in boosting the solar energy conversion capability of MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4. 3.4 Optical Properties The optical properties of the 51 vdWHs are calculated based on quantum mechanical interband transition process from the valence bands to the conduction bands. The macroscopic frequency- dependent complex dielectric function ε() is calculated based on the random phase approximation formalism (RPA).36 The optical absorbance ( α ) of a free-standing 2D monolayer under normal illumination can then be calculated as:102 α = Re(̃()) |1 + ̃() 2 | 2 (3) is the frequency-dependent complex 2D optical conductivity, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, L is the length of the in-plane lattice constant, c is the speed of light in vacuum. Equation (3) yields a maximum absorbance absorption limit of a free-standing monolayer.102 The complex dielectric function and optical absorbance of the 51 types of vdWHs are calculated and presented in Figures S26-S31. In general, the (Mo,W)Si2N4 vdWH family exhibits sizable optical absorption in the visible regime with optical absorbance up to 25%. We compiled the peak absorbance for photon energies up to 5 eV for all vdWHs as shown in for MoSi2N4/2H-WS2 vdWH which has a peak absorbance at the visible photon energy of 3.2 eV. The peak absorbance of the isolated MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4 monolayers [see Figure 6(G) and 6(H) for the optical absorption spectra of MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4 monolayers] is 20% at 4.0 eV and 17% at 4.4 eV respectively, which are comparable to some of the strongest mid-UV- absorbing 2D materials (e.g. SnS2 and SnSe2).102 More importantly, the peak absorbance is significantly enhanced upon forming the vdWHs, with many vdWHs reaching a peak absorbance of over 30% in the UV regime. In general, the WSi2N4 vdWHs exhibit peak absorbance at higher photon energies as compared to that of MoSi2N4 counterpart in the energy range being studied, owing to the slightly higher peak absorbance photon energies of 4.4 eV of the WSi2N4 monolayer, as compared to that of monolayer MoSi2N4 at 4.0 eV [see Figure 6(G) and 6(H)]. We grouped the vdWHs into the sub-groups of near-UV (3.5 eV to 4.0 eV), mid- UV (4.1 eV to 4.4 eV) and deep-UV (>4.5 eV) according to the peak absorbance photon energies. Intriguingly for the vdWHs composed of entirely MA2Z4, (i.e. (Mo,W)Si2N4/α2- (Mo,W)Ge2P4) the vdWHs exhibit exceptionally strong UV absorption of over 40%, which approaches the optical absorption limit of a free-standing monolayer, and a broadband strong absorption shoulder between 3 eV and 5 eV [see Figure S29 and S31]. These findings suggest the potential strength of MA2Z4-based vdWHs in photonics device applications. 4. Conclusion In summary, we investigated 51 types of MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4 vdWHs and categorized these heterostructures based on their contact and band alignment types. For MS Ohmic contacts, the tunnelling-specific resistivities are comparable or lower than many of the previously reported 2D semiconductor electrical contacts. Multiple Type-II heterostructures are identified. Particularly, MoSi2N4/InSe and MoSi2N4/WSe2 exhibit excellent solar cell energy conversion efficiency greater than 20% and substantial optical absorption in the visible light regime, making them potential candidates for photovoltaic applications. In terms of optical absorption, the family of (Mo,W)Si2N4-based bilayer van der Waals heterostructures generally exhibit much enhanced ultraviolet optical absorption when compared to their isolated counterparts. The (Mo,W)Si2N4/(α2-MoGe2P4,α2-WGe2P4) heterostructures have an exceedingly high ultraviolet peak absorbance of over 40% that approaches the theoretical maximum absorption limit of a free-standing monolayer, thus revealing their strength in ultraviolet photonics applications. Our findings reveal the promising role of (Mo,W)Si2N4-based van der Waals heterostructures as a versatile platform for designing novel optoelectronics and photonics applications, and call for a more comprehensive screening of the expansive MA2Z4 vdWH family to fully unlock their potential as building blocks of high-performance nanodevice technology. Supporting Information Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library. Acknowledgements This work is supported by the Singapore Ministry of Education (MOE) Academic Research Fund (AcRF) Tier 2 grant (Grant No. MOE-T2EP50221-0019) and SUTD-ZJU IDEA Collaboration (Grant No. SUTD-ZJU (VP) 202001). G.W. is supported by the Science and Technology Research Program of Chongqing Municipal Education Commission (Grant No. KJQN202001402). C.C.T. is supported by the Singapore University of Technology and Design (SUTD) President’s Graduate Fellowship (PGF) scholarship. L.C. is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 12104136). S.-J.L. is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61974176). We thank Li Ling Tan and Jin Quan Ng for their assistance in data generation and analysis. Conflict of Interest The authors declare no conflict of interest.