1 Field-free superconducting diode effect in noncentrosymmetric superconductor/ferromagnet multilayers Hideki Narita1*, Jun Ishizuka2, Ryo Kawarazaki1, Daisuke Kan1,3, Yoichi Shiota1,3, Takahiro Moriyama1,3, Yuichi Shimakawa1,3, Alexey V. Ognev4, Alexander S. Samardak4, Youichi Yanase5, 6 and Teruo Ono1,3,4,7* 1 Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University, Gokasho, Uji, Kyoto, 611- 0011, Japan. 2Institute for Theoretical Physics, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland 3 Center for Spintronics Research Network, Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University, Gokasho, Uji, Kyoto, 611-0011, Japan. 4 Laboratory of Spin-Orbitronics, Institute of High Technologies and Advanced Materials, Far Eastern Federal University, Vladivostok 690950, Russia 5 Department of Physics, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto, 606-8502, Japan 6 Institute for Molecular Science, Okazaki, 444-8585, Japan 7 Center for Spintronics Research Network, Graduate School of Engineering Science, Osaka University, Machikaneyama 1-3, Toyonaka, Osaka 560-8531, Japan * Correspondence: E-mail: narita.hideki.3x@kyoto-u.ac.jp (Hideki Narita); ono@scl.kyoto-u.ac.jp (Teruo Ono) 2 The diode effect is fundamental to electronic devices and is widely used in rectifiers and AC–DC converters. At low temperatures, however, conventional semiconductor diodes possess a high resistivity, which yields energy loss and heating during operation. The superconducting diode effect (SDE)1-8, which relies on broken inversion symmetry in a superconductor may mitigate this obstacle: in one direction a zero-resistance supercurrent can flow through the diode, but for the opposite direction of current flow, the device enters the normal state with ohmic resistance. The application of a magnetic field can induce SDE in Nb/V/Ta superlattices with a polar structure1,2, in superconducting devices with asymmetric patterning of pinning centres9, or in superconductor/ferromagnet hybrid devices with induced vortices10,11. The need for an external magnetic field limits their practical application. Recently, a field-free SDE was observed in a NbSe2/Nb3Br8/NbSe2 junction, and it originates from asymmetric Josephson tunneling that is induced by the Nb3Br8 barrier and the associated NbSe2/Nb3Br8 interfaces12. Here, we present another implementation of zero-field SDE using noncentrosymmetric [Nb/V/Co/V/Ta]20 multilayers. The magnetic layers provide the necessary symmetry breaking and we can tune the SDE by adjusting the structural parameters, such as the constituent elements, film thickness, stacking order, and number of repetitions. We control the polarity of the SDE through the magnetization direction of the ferromagnetic layers. Artificially stacked structures13-18, as the one used in this work, are of particular interest as they are compatible with microfabrication techniques and can be integrated with devices such as Josephson junctions19-22. Energy-loss-free SDEs as presented in this work may therefore enable novel non-volatile memories and logic circuits with ultralow power consumption. 3 In this regard, we fabricated noncentrosymmetric ferromagnet/superconductor the V layers in Nb/V/Ta superlattices1,2,23,24 with symmetric V/Co/V units to control the Rashba superconductor25 by magnetization. The crystalline structure of the multilayers was characterized by low- and high-angle X-ray diffraction (XRD) profiles (see Methods and Supplementary Fig. S1). Figure 1a shows a schematic of the measurement configuration, wherein the magnetic field, electrical current, and polar axis are perpendicular to each other. Figure 1b shows a photomicrograph of the device with the polar axis along the z-direction. Electric current and magnetic field were applied along the y- and x-directions, respectively. electrical current density of 0.455 kA/cm2 under various magnetic fields ranging from 0 to 0.5 T. The superconducting transition temperature, Tc (the temperature at which the resistivity drops to half of that above the transition), of the device was determined to be 2.6 K in the absence of a magnetic field. The Tc of the present device is lower than that to the pair-breaking effect of the Co layers16 and/or the difference in the repetition number (see Supplementary Fig. S2). Furthermore, vortices were observed to start breaking the superconducting phase with increasing magnetic field, and the superconducting phase completely disappeared above 0.5 T at the lowest measurement temperature of 1.9 K. The superconducting coherence length ξ(0) was estimated to be 24 nm (see Supplementary Fig. S3). The magnetization curves of the multilayers at different temperatures in Fig. 1d show the 4 characteristic ferromagnetic responses with a coercive field of 0.065 T in the multilayers above and below the Tc. electrical current densities evaluated at 1.9 K. We observed switching between normal and superconducting states, similar to that observed in previous studies13,14. This is caused by the interplay between superconductivity and ferromagnetism. Previous reports have suggested that the switching between the normal and superconducting states is due to the internal exchange field at the superconductor/ferromagnet interface13,14. In our experiments, the switching between the normal and superconducting states was observed in the current density range of 0.455–20.45 kA/cm2. Because of the suppression of superconductivity by the external magnetic fields, the electrical resistivity increases monotonically with the magnetic fields at a low current density of 0.455 kA/cm2. As the current density increases, the hysteresis of magnetoresistance becomes more pronounced, and the conventional magnetoresistance of Co is observed above 22.72 kA/cm2, where the superconductivity is completely destroyed. The observation of the conventional magnetoresistance of Co also indicates that the device fabrication process does not alter the ferromagnetic properties of the multilayers. various magnetic fields for positive and negative currents at 1.9 K. We observed the SDE in our noncentrosymmetric superconductor/ferromagnet multilayers; the critical current density Jc (the current density at which the resistivity increases to half of that above the transition) depends on the polarity of the current. Note that Jc is determined by the transition from the superconducting state to the normal conductive state. Therefore, there is no influence from the Joule heating. The variation in Jc with the magnetic field at 1.9 5 K is shown in Fig. 2c. In these Jc measurements, the magnetic field was initially set to +0.5 T, which is sufficiently large to saturate the magnetization, determined from the results in Fig. 1c. Subsequently, Jc was measured by sweeping the magnetic field in the order of +0.5, 0, −0.5, 0, +0.5 T. Jc also exhibits hysteresis, reflecting the magnetic hysteresis of the Co layer. Jc shows a symmetric behavior with respect to zero field (dashed line) for the sweep of the magnetic field in the order of −0.5, 0, +0.5, 0 T. The pronounced peak around the coercive field can be attributed to enhanced vortex pinning on the network of proliferating domain walls26. of the critical current densities, Jc = |+Jc| − |−Jc|, at different temperatures (+Jc and −Jc are the critical current densities corresponding to positive and negative currents, respectively). Here, the magnetic field was initially set to +0.5 T. Then, Jc was measured by sweeping the magnetic field in the order of +0.5, 0, −0.5, 0, +0.5 T. In the downward sweep from the magnetic field of +0.5 T at 1.9 K (black dots), a negative peak of Jc appears at approximately +0.008 T, and Jc approaches zero at 0 T. As the magnetic field decreases further, large negative and positive peaks of Jc appear at approximately −0.008 and −0.04 T, respectively. Jc then gradually decreases to zero at around −0.5 T. After saturating the magnetization at −0.5 T, Jc was measured again by sweeping the magnetic field in the order of −0.5, 0, +0.5 T. Moreover, the magnetic field dependence of Jc in the upward sweep shows a trend (red dots) opposite to that of the downward sweep (black dots). The microscopic origin of the observed peaks and dip structures in the magnetic field dependence of Jc is not clear. However, it is possibly related to the evolution of complex magnetic domains. We also checked the reproducibilities of Jc and 6 Jc in additional two devices (see Supplementary Fig. S4), and we observed that there was no clear hysteresis of Jc in the configurations of B // x and B //z (see Supplementary Fig. S5). This hysteresis behavior of Jc for B // y is in clear contrast with the SDE observed in Nb/V/Ta superlattices1, wherein no hysteresis is observed. Note that the symmetric [Nb/V/Co/V/Nb]20 multilayers without a polar structure do not exhibit the clear nonreciprocal components of the critical current densities even though they exhibit hysteresis in the magnetization curves (see Supplementary Fig. S6). Therefore, the polar structure is essential to realize the magnetization-mediated SDE. The polarity control of SDE in a zero field is essential to develop non-volatile devices based on SDEs. We demonstrate it using the minor hysteresis loops of the magnetization. Figure 3a shows the magnetic field dependences of Jc for positive and negative currents in minor hysteresis loops. For this, the magnetic field was swept in the order of +0.5, 0, −0.15 T (downward sweep) and then −0.15, 0, +0.15 T (upward sweep). The limiting field of the minor loops is 0.15 T, as shown by the dashed line in Fig. 1d. Owing to the asymmetrical magnetic field sweeping, Jc shows asymmetry with respect to the zero field (dashed line). Consequently, we observe the positive Jc in the zero-field after sweeping the magnetic field in the order of +0.5, 0, −0.15, 0 T, as shown in Fig. 3b. Moreover, Jc also shows asymmetry with respect to zero field after sweeping the magnetic field in the order of −0.5, 0, +0.15, 0 T, resulting in a negative Jc under the zero-field condition, as shown in Figs. 3c and 3d, respectively. Therefore, we could control the polarity of SDE by magnetization. Here, we demonstrate the non-volatile SDE. The red and black dots in Fig. 3e represent the resistivities measured with J = 72.7 kA/cm2 at 1.9 K for negative (−M) and positive magnetizations (+M), respectively. The −M (+M) is the state after sweeping the 7 magnetic field in the order of +0.5, 0, −0.15, 0 T (−0.5, 0, +0.15, 0 T). The device exhibits a superconducting state or a normal conducting state depending on the polarity of the current, and the polarity of SDE depends on the direction of magnetization. Finally, we discuss theoretical viewpoints in detail. We performed first- principles band structure calculation in the nonmagnetic electronic state for a [Nb/V/Co/V/Ta] supercell, where two atomic layers of bcc-Nb, V, Co, V, and Ta were repeatedly stacked, as shown in Figs. 4a and b. The Rashba splitting of bands at the Fermi energy EF was observed as ER = 1–10 meV, which is close to the value of a [Nb/V/Ta] superlattice. Although the Rashba splitting of Co bands was minor (~ 1 meV), the density of states due to the Co bands near EF was predominantly larger than that due to the Nb, V, and Ta bands, as shown in Fig. 4b. To gain more insight, we also performed a spin-polarized band structure calculation with the magnetization direction (010) and obtained a ferromagnetic ground state, where the total energy was lower than the nonmagnetic state, as shown in Figs. 4c and d. The magnitude of magnetic moment |M| at Co atoms was calculated as |M| = 1.93 B. The V atoms adjacent to Co atoms had a considerable magnetization |M| = 0.5–1 B, while others had only |M| = 0.01–0.05 B. Thus, the atoms that are not adjacent to Co atoms can stabilize the superconductivity against the Pauli depairing effect due to the ferromagnetic spin polarization. We indeed noticed that the partial densities of states are almost unchanged for Nb, V, and Ta atoms, and all atoms contribute at EF in the ferromagnetic state, as shown in Fig. 4d. In other words, the superconducting transition temperature of this system may be determined from the total density of states consisting of three types of atoms. Pairing states that exhibit the diode effect would correspond to helical superconductivity, which has been investigated in noncentrosymmetric superconductors 8 such as CePt3Si27,28, the surface/interface of SrTiO3/LaAlO329, and heavy-fermion superlattices30. The asymmetric band dispersion is essential for the helical superconductivity, and it appears in the noncentrosymmetric ferromagnet. Our spin- polarized band structure calculation indeed shows asymmetric behaviors (see Supplementary Fig. S7). The SDE has been analyzed by the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) theory and microscopic Hamiltonian3, 6-8. Higher-order gradient terms in the GL expansion exhibit the nonreciprocity of critical current, and the microscopic calculation predicts an anomalous “sign-reversal effect” in the helical superconducting state6. Thus, it is intriguing to clarify the asymmetric and sign-reversing behavior observed in Fig. 2d in future works. The experiments revealed that noncentrosymmetric superconductor/ferromagnet multilayers exhibited magnetization-mediated nonreciprocal critical currents, i.e., a magnetization-mediated SDE. The field-free SDE demonstrated here enables rectification without an external magnetic field. However, significant issues still need to be overcome for practical application. The rectification still requires precise controls of the applied current and temperature, which are major limitations for practical device operation. Therefore, it is essential to explore materials with a larger Jc and higher Tc to realize a wide temperature range of operation. The proposed method of symmetry breaking using artificial stacked structures is versatile and controllable. Furthermore, the electronic band structure can be controlled by modulating the thickness and period of each constituent layer, which offers a promising route for exploring new materials for practical application. Our findings pave the way for obtaining rewritable superconducting diode logic circuits using the nonvolatility of magnetic materials. 9 Acknowledgments This work was partly supported by JSPS KAKENHI (Grant No. 15H05702, 15H05884, 21K18145); the Cooperative Research Project Program of the Research Institute of Electrical Communication, Tohoku University; and the Collaborative Research Program of the Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University. This study was also supported by the Futaba Foundation's Futaba Research Grant Program, and Iketani Science and Technology Foundation. A. V. O, A. S. S. and T. O. acknowledge the Russian Ministry of Science and Higher Education for state support of scientific research conducted under the supervision of leading scientists in Russian institutions of higher education, scientific foundations and state research centers (Project No. 075-15-2021-607). Author contributions H. N. and T. O. conceived the project. H. N. deposited the multilayers and fabricated the devices. H. N. performed the measurements and data analysis. H. N. and T. O. wrote the manuscript with the assistance of the other authors. J. I. and Y. Y. calculated the band structure and assisted with the analysis of the experimental results. All authors contributed jointly to the interpretation of the results. Competing Interests The authors declare no competing financial interests. Fig. 1. Device structure, transport, magnetic properties, and SDE. a, Schematic of the SDE and measurement configuration. The magnetic field is applied perpendicular to 10 both the polar axis and the electrical current. b, Photomicrograph of the device. The wires (5.0 nm) metal electrodes. c, Temperature dependence of the device resistivity at an electrical current density (0.455 kA/cm2) in the multilayers under a magnetic field in the range of 0 to 0.5 T. d, Magnetization loops at several temperatures for the multilayers above and below Tc. e, Magnetic field dependence of the resistivity in the multilayers for several electrical current densities at 1.9 K. The direction of the magnetic field was perpendicular to the polar axis and the electrical current. Fig. 2. Magnetic field and temperature dependences of SDE. a, Current density (J) dependence of the resistivity under various magnetic fields for positive and negative currents at 1.9 K. The magnetic field was swept from +0.5 T to −0.5 T (downward sweep). b, Dependence of the resistivity on J under various magnetic fields for positive and negative currents at 1.9 K. The magnetic field was swept from −0.5 T to +0.5 T (upward sweep). c, Jc as a function of the magnetic field at 1.9 K. First, the magnetic hysteresis of Jc was measured from +0.5 to −0.5 T (downward sweep) for positive (red) and negative (black) currents. Subsequently, the sweep direction was reversed, and the magnetic field was swept from −0.5 to +0.5 T (upward sweep) for positive (blue) and negative (green) currents. The arrows indicate the sweep directions. d, Nonreciprocal component of the critical current density, Jc, as a function of the magnetic field at various temperatures. The magnetic hysteresis of Jc was measured from +0.5 to −0.5 T (downward sweep, black). Subsequently, the sweep direction was reversed, and the magnetic field was swept from −0.5 to +0.5 T (upward sweep, red). The arrows indicate the sweep direction. 11 Fig. 3. Field-free SDE controlled by magnetization a, Magnetic field dependences of Jc for positive and negative currents in minor hysteresis loops at 1.9 K. Magnetic field was swept in the order of +0.5, 0, −0.15 T (downward sweep) and then −0.15, 0, +0.15 T (upward sweep). b, Magnetic field dependence of Jc in the minor hysteresis loops obtained by Fig. 3a. c, Magnetic field dependences of Jc for positive and negative currents in minor hysteresis loops at 1.9 K. Magnetic field was swept in the order of −0.5, 0, +0.15 T (upward sweep), and then +0.15, 0, −0.15 T (downward sweep). d, Magnetic field dependence of Jc in the minor hysteresis loops obtained by Fig. 3c. e, Repeated application of current densities J = 72.7 kA/cm2 and J = −72.7 kA/cm2 at 1.9 K without a magnetic field. f, Non-volatile SDE at 1.9 K. Red and black dots represent the results for negative magnetization (-M) and positive magnetization (+M), respectively. The device shows a superconducting state or normal conducting state depending on the polarity of the current. Note that the polarity of SDE depends on the direction of magnetization. The -M or +M state is achieved after sweeping the magnetic field in the order of +0.5, 0, −0.15, 0 T or −0.5, 0, +0.15, 0 T. Fig. 4. Band structure of a bulk [Nb/V/Co/V/Ta] superlattice a, Band structure obtained from first-principles calculation for paramagnetic state. b, Partial density of states for paramagnetic state. c, Band structure for ferromagnetic state. d, Partial density of states for ferromagnetic state. 12