Ordered and tunable Majorana-zero-mode lattice in naturally strained LiFeAs Meng Li1,2#, Geng Li1,2,3,4#, Lu Cao1,2#, Xingtai Zhou1,2, Xiancheng Wang1,2, Changqing Jin1,2,4, Ching- Kai Chiu5, Stephen J. Pennycook1,2, Ziqiang Wang6*, and Hong-Jun Gao1,2,3,4* 1 Beijing National Center for Condensed Matter Physics and Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, PR China 2 School of Physical Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, PR China 3 CAS Center for Excellence in Topological Quantum Computation, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, PR China 4 Songshan Lake Materials Laboratory, Dongguan, Guangdong 523808, PR China 5 RIKEN Interdisciplinary Theoretical and Mathematical Sciences (iTHEMS), Wako, Saitama 351- 0198, Japan 6 Department of Physics, Boston College, Chestnut Hill, MA 02467, USA #These authors contributed equally to this work. *Correspondence to: hjgao@iphy.ac.cn; wangzi@bc.edu Majorana zero modes (MZMs) obey non-Abelian statistics and are considered building blocks for constructing topological qubits1,2. Iron-based superconductors with topological band structures have emerged as promising hosting materials, since isolated candidate MZMs in the quantum limit have been observed inside the topological vortex cores3-9. However, these materials suffer from issues related to alloying-induced disorder, uncontrolled vortex lattices10- 13 and a low yield of topological vortices5-8. Here, we report the formation of an ordered and tunable MZM lattice in naturally-strained stoichiometric LiFeAs by scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy (STM/S). We observe biaxial charge density wave (CDW) stripes along the Fe-Fe and As-As directions in the strained regions. The vortices are pinned on the CDW stripes in the As-As direction and form an ordered lattice. We detect more than 90 percent of the vortices to be topological and possess the characteristics of isolated MZMs at the vortex center, forming an ordered MZM lattice with the density and the geometry tunable by an external magnetic field. Remarkably, with decreasing the spacing of neighboring vortices, the MZMs start to couple with each other. Our findings provide a new pathway towards tunable and ordered MZM lattices as a platform for future topological quantum computation. The long quest for Majorana excitations14-19 has been fueled by recent experimental progress in material platforms where the localized MZM has been observed16,20-23. Among these platforms, iron- based superconductors are considered promising for the observation of clean and robust MZMs3-5. FeTe0.55Se0.45 was the first iron-based superconductor found to possess topological surface states (TSS)24,25. The large ∆2 EF ratio, where Δ is the superconducting (SC) energy gap and EF is the Fermi energy, allows the observation of an isolated MZM in the center of a topological vortex4, which exhibits nearly quantized plateaus in differential conductance9. Later on, stoichiometric iron pnictides were investigated and the existence of MZMs has been verified in CaKFe4As4 (ref. 8) and LiFeAs (ref. 6). Very recently, 1D dispersing Majorana modes and MZMs have been observed in the layered 2D superconductors with topological band structures26-28. However, these platforms suffer from alloying- induced disorder, uncontrolled vortex lattice and a low yield of topological vortices, hindering their potential applications. We start with LiFeAs crystal due to its homogeneous bulk electronic structure, well-defined cleaving surface and rich topological band structures29. LiFeAs belongs to the tetragonal crystal system, with lattice constants a=b=3.8 Å and c=6.3 Å (Fig. 1a). The As-As atomic direction defines the high- symmetry lattice orientations ( and in Fig. 1b) of the mechanically cleaved nonpolar surface (Extended Data Fig. 1). The existence of strain in the LiFeAs lattice leads to the formation of wrinkles30 or electronic ordering such as CDWs31. We identified such strained regions with a biaxial CDW phase (Fig. 1c), which appears as a coexistence of small periodic (2.7±0.2 nm) stripe patterns orienting along the Fe-Fe () direction (CDWFe-Fe) and large periodic (24.3±0.9 nm) stripe patterns orienting along the As-As () direction (CDWAs-As). To corroborate the effect of the local strain on the formation of the CDWs, we performed atomically-resolved STM imaging of the surface regions with and without the CDWs (Extended Data Fig. 2, Table S1). The distortion of the lattice in the CDW regions reveals the existence of biaxial and shear strain. The observed CDWs are reproducible in different LiFeAs samples and using different STM instruments (Extended Data Fig. 3). Both CDW wavevectors can be clearly resolved in the Fourier transformed (FT) image (Fig. 1d), with an angle of 45±1°, breaking the C4 rotation and reflection symmetry of the crystal lattice. Interestingly, the bright stripes of both CDWFe-Fe and CDWAs-As show abnormal splitting and recombination behavior with increasing bias voltages near EF (Extended Data Fig. 4), which are accompanied by a π-phase shift in the stripe pattern (Extended Data Fig. 4c,d,k,p). The similar energy-dependent evolution of the stripes indicates that the two CDW phases are coupled with each other. We note that both CDW wavevectors are nondispersive with energy (Extended Data Figs. 4,5), precluding other possibilities such as quasi-particle interference32,33. To investigate the influence of the biaxial CDW phase on the SC behavior, we measure the dI/dV spectra in different regions. In the unstrained region (black dot in Fig. 1b), the dI/dV spectrum shows the multigap feature of LiFeAs, with a large gap of ~ 5.8 meV and a small gap of ~ 2.9 meV (black curve in Fig. 1e), consistent with previous reports10,32,34,35. In the strained region, the SC gap on the bright stripe (2.1±0.1 mV) of CDWAs-As is smaller than that off the stripe (3.4±0.2 mV) (brown and yellow curves in Fig. 1e). Importantly, the two CDW orders affect the local superconductivity in very different ways. While the CDWAs-As clearly modulates the SC gap size (Fig. 1f, left panel), the CDWFe- Fe only modulates the intensity of the SC coherence peak without altering the gap size (Fig. 1f, right panel). The modulation of the SC gap suggests a strong coupling of the CDW to the superconductivity. We note that the periodicity of CDWAs-As is significantly larger than the SC coherence length (4.8 nm, ref. 36) in LiFeAs, and the modulation of SC behavior at such large scale is rare. To provide a straightforward visualization of the coupling between the CDW and the superconductivity, we conduct a series of dI/dV maps at different energies and extract the SC gap values across the region in Fig. 1g. The SC gap map (Fig. 1h) shows clearly the modulation of the SC gap size by CDWAs-As. We then apply an external field of 0.5 T normal to the sample surface, and find magnetic vortices emerging exclusively on the bright stripes of CDWAs-As (Fig. 2a). The strong pinning effect of the vortices by the CDWAs-As stripes is likely due to the suppressed SC gap in the bright As-As stripe regions. We take dI/dV spectra across a typical vortex (along the red arrow in Fig. 2a), and find sharp zero-bias conductance peaks (ZBCPs) near the vortex center in the waterfall plot (Fig. 2b) and intensity map (Fig. 2c), together with a novel “X” like feature and discrete peaks on the two sides of the ZBCP. The ZBCP decays without splitting when the tip moves away from the vortex center (Fig. 2c), which is reminiscent of a MZM in the vortex core of other iron-based superconductors with TSS4,6,8. To better differentiate the energy positions of the discrete peaks, we show the negative 2nd derivative of the waterfall plot (Fig. 2d) and the intensity map (Fig. 2e) of the dI/dV curves in Fig. 2b,c. A series of discrete vortex core states can be resolved (Fig. 2d,e), suggesting that the vortex is in the quantum limit4,37. The spatial evolution of the peak energy of the core states roughly follow straight lines (dashed drop lines in Fig. 2e), as expected for the low-lying Caroli-de-Gennes-Matricon (CdGM) bound states38-40. The other vortices exhibit similar spectroscopic features (Extended Data Fig. 6). In order to determine the energies of the vortex core states, five individual dI/dV spectra close to the center of the vortex core (red arrows in Fig. 2d) are replotted in Fig. 2f. The discrete vortex core states manifest as peaks marked by the vertical arrows. The CdGM states are bound states inside the SC gap and spatially localized in a vortex core. In an ordinary vortex, the energy of the bound states is half- integer quantized, Ej=j×E0, where j=±1/2, ±3/2... is the total angular momentum quantum number. However, for a topological vortex, the topological Dirac fermion surface states contribute an additional π phase, leading to a half-integer shift in the quantum number of the total angular momentum. As a result, the energy of the CdGM states is integer-quantized, Ej=j×E0, where j=0, ±1, ±2..., in the topological vortex. The average values and the deviations of the core states are summarized in Fig. 2g. (L2) meV are extracted, which approximately follow an integer-quantized sequence. Different from conventional CdGM states, the vortex core states exhibit weak spatial dispersions (horizontal black arrows in Fig. 2e and the extracted core states in Fig. 2g). To accurately determine the energy of the L0 state, we decompose the original dI/dV spectra into multiple Gaussian-like peaks7,40 (Extended Data Fig. 7 and left panel in Fig. 2h). Utilizing this approach, we calibrate the L0 states (right panel in Fig. 2h), and find that they locate at the Fermi energy. The robust ZBCP with a decaying intensity away from the vortex center is strong evidence of a MZM in a topological vortex4. The full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the fitted ZBCPs are ~ 0.4 meV, which is comparable to the energy resolution of our instrument (0.3 meV). These results strongly support the existence of MZMs in the vortex centers. We then investigate the influence of the CDW stripes on the dI/dV spectra of the vortices for further understanding of the spatial evolution of the CdGM states. In the negative 2nd derivative of the intensity maps of dI/dV spectra across a topological vortex (Extended Data Fig. 8a), the dispersion happens at positions marked by the horizontal white dashed lines (left panel in Extended Data Fig. 8a). Remarkably, these horizontal lines are in good agreement with the positions of the dark Fe-Fe stripes (see height profile in the right panel in Extended Data Fig. 8a), indicating that the CDWFe-Fe has strong influence on the vortex core states. The CdGM states are usually understood as eigenstates of a vortex under rotation symmetry. Once the rotation and reflection symmetries are broken, hybridization between the eigenstates can cause the spatial dispersions of the CdGM states (Fig. 2g and Extended Data Fig. 8b). We note that this is the first experimental observation of hybridization between vortex core states. The MZMs, however, do not disperse and remain at zero-energy, consistent with its topologically protected robustness against local perturbations. Increasing the external field to 3 T, we observe that more vortices emerge, pinned to the bright CDWAs- As stripes (Extended Data Fig. 9). Figure 3a shows the intensity map of dI/dV spectra across a topological vortex in the upper panel and an ordinary vortex in the lower panel. Remarkably, its negative 2nd derivative shows a half-integer level shift in the energy of the vortex core states (Fig. 3b), which was considered as strong evidence distinguishing the topological vortex and the ordinary vortex40. We also plot the individual dI/dV spectra at the two vortex cores as marked by the red and black dashed lines in Fig. 3a. A sharp ZBCP is seen in the topological vortex (upper panel in Fig. 3c). However, the ZBCP is absent for the ordinary vortex (lower panel in Fig. 3c). We measure the dI/dV spectra at the center of each topological vortex as shown in Extended Data Fig. 10. All spectra show similar profiles, suggesting the electronic structure of the vortices are uniform. More than 90 percent of vortices are topological vortices, giving rise to an ordered MZM lattice (Extended Data Fig. 10). This conclusion holds for different magnetic fields from 0.5 to 6 T (see Methods, Extended Data Fig. 11 and Extended Data Fig. 12). Now we discuss the possible origin of the MZM lattice. The topological nature of the pristine LiFeAs is very intriguing and contains two parts. First there is a set of helical Dirac fermion TSS akin to that in a 3D topological insulator, which are located closest to the Fermi level. Second and unique to LiFeAs, there is a set of bulk Dirac fermion states sitting ~ 10 meV above the Fermi level, which is characteristic of a topological Dirac semimetal. This dual topological nature complicates the vortex core spectrum for the unstrained LiFeAs, which appeared gapless, and prohibited the identification of the discrete vortex core states6,10,41,42. To uncover the electronic structure of the strained LiFeAs, we take wide energy scale dI/dV spectra in the unstrained (lower region in Extended Data Fig. 13) and the CDWFe- Fe (upper left region in Extended Data Fig. 13) regions, and in the biaxial CDW region on and off the As-As stripes (Fig. 3d and Extended Data Fig. 15). In the unstrained region, a hump can be recognized at an energy of ~ 33 meV (black curves in Fig. 3d and Extended Data Fig. 14), which is assigned to the top of dxy band6. In the strained regions, however, the hump feature disappears (brown, yellow and blue curves in Fig. 3d and Extended Data Fig. 14), indicating a renormalization in the local electronic structure by the CDW orders. In the uniaxial CDWFe-Fe region, the coherence peak of the CDWFe-Fe is identified at ~ 10 mV (blue arrow in Fig. 3d), in accordance with previous reports31. In the biaxial CDW region, additional peaks indicated by the brown and yellow arrows can be resolved (Fig. 3d and Extended Data Fig. 14). This new peak corresponds to the coherence peak of the CDWAs-As order, since it is strongly modulated by the As-As stripes (Extended Data Fig. 15). The above assigned CDW coherence peaks, together with the SC coherence peaks, lie on a background of a “V” shaped envelope in the dI/dV spectra (Fig. 3e and Extended Data Fig. 16) with the dip locating at ~ -10 mV. This V-shaped envelope is a signature for the existence of a Dirac cone4,43 in two dimensions. These observations together suggest that the most significant changes in the electronic structure in the strained biaxial CDW regions come from the breaking of the rotation and reflection symmetries, which gaps out the bulk Dirac cone protected by the rotation symmetry. This turns the local electronic structure of the stoichiometric, but strained biaxial CDW regions into a strong topological insulator exclusively, hosting the prominent helical Dirac fermion TSS (Fig. 3f) and generates the robust topological Majorana vortices in the SC state. This conclusion is corroborated by the fact that in the unstrained and the uniaxial CDWFe-Fe regions, only ordinary vortices with no MZMs are observed (Extended Data Fig. 17). We finally demonstrate the tunability of the ordered MZM lattice by external magnetic field. The ordered MZM lattice originates from the fact that all vortices are firmly pinned to the periodic bright stripes along the As-As direction (Fig. 4). At 0.5 T, the vortices have relatively low density and arrange themselves amorphously. Upon increasing the magnetic field to 5 T, the MZM lattice gradually evolves into the triangular lattice shape. It should be noted that at -0.5 mV, the vortices are ring-shaped, while at 0 and 0.5 mV they appear as solid circles. The dI/dV maps reflect the wavefunctions of the bound states inside the vortex cores which are described by Bessel functions38,44,45. The ring structure for the negative energy branch suggests that the chemical potential lies above the Dirac point8,45 (Fig. 3f). The pinning effect of the vortices by the stripes is so strong that the mobility of the vortices is limited to only one direction – along the stripe. By increasing the field, the newly emerged vortices are “doped” into the bright stripes, forming regular 1D vortex chains. The inter-chain vortex interactions are fixed due to the pinning effect, while the intra-chain vortex interactions can be manipulated by the applied magnetic field (Extended Data Fig. 18). The strong pinning effect provides better control over the vortex motion, as compared to the traditional two-dimensional disordered Abrikosov vortex lattices10,11. It is further demonstrated that the ordered lattice is tunable by the external magnetic fields. The overall size of the MZM lattice can be brought up to the micron level, only limited by the STM scanning capability, and could extend to an even larger area (bottom panel of Fig. 4). We have also obtained the correlation between the vortex spacing and the dI/dV spectra of the vortices, indicating a coupling between the MZMs under high magnetic fields (Extended Data Fig. 19). In summary, we have observed a micron-scale MZM lattice on naturally strained LiFeAs surface. The vortices are pinned to the CDWAs-As stripes, giving rise to an ordered Abrikosov vortex lattice. We have demonstrated that the ordered lattice is tunable by external magnetic fields and observed the coupling between the MZMs under high magnetic fields. Our findings provide a promising platform for manipulating and braiding MZMs in the future. The large ordered array of MZMs can be suitable for realizing the “braiding by measurement-only” algorithm using interferometry46.