Diamond surface engineering for molecular sensing with nitrogenŌĆōvacancy centers Erika Janitz, Konstantin Herb, Laura A. V├Člker, William S. Huxter, Christian L. Degen and John M. Abendroth Department of Physics, ETH Z├╝rich, Otto-Stern-Weg 1, 8093 Z├╝rich, Switzerland Quantum sensing using optically addressable atomic-scale defects, such as the nitrogenŌĆōvacancy (NV) center in diamond, provides new opportunities for sensitive and highly localized characterization of chemical functionality. Notably, near-surface defects facilitate detection of the minute magnetic fields generated by nuclear or electron spins outside of the diamond crystal, such as those in chemisorbed and physisorbed molecules. However, the promise of NV centers is hindered by a severe degradation of critical sensor properties, namely charge stability and spin coherence, near surfaces (< ca. 10 nm deep). Moreover, applications in the chemical sciences require methods for covalent bonding of target molecules to diamond with robust control over density, orientation, and binding configuration. This forward-looking Review provides a survey of the rapidly converging fields of diamond surface science and NV-center physics, highlighting their combined potential for quantum sensing of molecules. We outline the diamond surface properties that are advantageous for NV-sensing applications, and discuss strategies to mitigate deleterious effects while simultaneously providing avenues for chemical attachment. Finally, we present an outlook on emerging applications in which the unprecedented sensitivity and spatial resolution of NV-based sensing could provide unique insight into chemically functionalized surfaces at the single-molecule level. surface optimization chemical functionalization ionization dephasing NV center h+ 1 arXiv:2207.07509v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 15 Jul 2022 1 Introduction Nuclear and electron spins within molecules provide invaluable handles with which to identify chemical structures and inter- molecular interactions, allowing for visualization of physiological processes and biological matter for medical diagnostics. More- over, observing the spin dynamics of transient reaction interme- diates could provide new insights into spin-selective chemistries. Traditional methods for performing such characterizations in- clude nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and electron param- agnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy.1ŌĆō4 Unfortunately, these conventional techniques commonly rely on large spin ensem- bles to overcome low thermal polarization and suffer from poor detection efficiency, which preclude the study of dilute spin samples.5ŌĆō7 In addition, spatial resolution is hampered by the challenge of applying large magnetic gradients with nanoscale precision.8,9 Therefore, the grand goal of studying individual molecules (spins) requires a fundamentally different experimen- tal approach. One such approach replaces traditional NMR and EPR detec- tors with single, individually addressable quantum spins, which are capable of detecting the minute magnetic fields generated by nuclei or unpaired electrons in nearby molecules.10,11 In particu- lar, the nitrogenŌĆōvacancy (NV) center in diamond has emerged as a promising candidate sensor for molecular analysis due to its exquisite magnetic-field sensitivity, nanoscale spatial resolu- tion, biocompatibility, and operational capacity under ambient conditions.12ŌĆō20 Already in the context of chemical sensing, the atomic scale of such defects has been exploited to probe nanotesla magnetic fluctuations with nanoscale resolution,21,22 facilitating the study of dilute protein assemblies,23,24 DNA,25 and paramag- netic species26 with single NVs, as well as detecting NMR chemi- cal shifts in proximal molecules.27ŌĆō29 However, the weak dipo- lar fields generated by target spins decay rapidly with targetŌĆō sensor separation, motivating the use of near-surface NVs and direct molecular functionalization of the diamond surface. In such cases, the exquisite sensitivity of the NV center presents a challenge in the presence of surface noise, which degrades charge stability and spin coherence for shallow defects.30,31 Thus, improving near-surface NV properties while simultaneously en- abling chemical functionalization of the diamond surface repre- sents a critical multidisciplinary challenge. This Review begins with a tutorial-style introduction to the NV center electronic structure and sensing properties, focusing on detection of magnetic fields since it is the most prevalent sens- ing modality. We include a brief complementary summary of electric-field, strain, and temperature sensing, which may prove useful in future surface-chemistry characterization. We follow with a discussion of measurement sensitivity and other relevant figures of merit, elucidating which experimental parameters are most important for chemical characterization with shallow de- fects. Next, we explore the origins of instabilities that plague near-surface NV centers along with experimental progress toward mitigating these effects. Focus is given mainly to experiments on NV centers hosted in bulk diamond materials as opposed to scanning probe experiments and nanodiamonds, although, we note that many of the surface engineering techniques described here can be applied to those systems. Ultimately, applications in chemical sciences require precise and optimal placement of ana- lytes on the diamond surface; we therefore highlight advances in chemical functionalization techniques that are compatible with near-surface NVs. This discussion is accompanied by a survey of measurement-based strategies for further improving detection sensitivities. Finally, we combine the aforementioned chemical toolbox and library of quantum control strategies to offer a per- spective on untapped applications for NV-based quantum sensing of chemical systems. 2 Quantum sensing with the NV center The NV center is the most widely used and best understood crys- tallographic defect in diamond.32 Its utility as a quantum sensor stems from a number of valuable properties: i) atomic size, which provides nanoscale resolution, ii) energetic coupling to a variety of physical quantities, iii) long spin lifetimes (even at room tem- perature), iv) coherent spin-state manipulation using microwave or optical fields, and v) spin readout via spin-dependent fluores- cence. In this section, we will introduce the NV center, discuss its basic sensing properties, and walk through several canonical sensing schemes with the goal of elucidating which sensor param- eters are critical in the NV-sensing community. 2.1 Physical and electronic structure of the NV center The NV center comprises a substitutional nitrogen atom and adja- cent vacancy occurring along the Ō¤©111Ō¤®-family of crystallographic directions (Fig. 1a).16 Due to the diamond crystallographic struc- ture, the NV center has threefold C3v symmetry, where the z-axis is typically defined along the nitrogenŌĆōvacancy bond and the x- axis points orthogonally towards one of the three carbons closest to the vacancy. In its neutral state, five electrons contribute to the net electronic spin; one from each of the three carbon dan- gling bonds and two from the nitrogen lone pair. When nega- tively charged by an additional electron, it develops a S = 1 spin character, which is essential for its use as a quantum sensor.33ŌĆō35 The relevant low-energy states of the NV lie within the band gap of diamond, hosting an electronic ground-state (|gŌ¤®) with orbital-singlet, spin-triplet character (Fig. 1b). This state cou- ples to the environment according to the ground-state Hamilto- nian,16,35 which can be written as Hgs = hDgs ’┐Į ╦åS2 z ŌłÆ 2 31 ’┐Į ’┐Į ’┐Į’┐Į ’┐Į ZFS + ╠äh╬│NVŌāŚS┬ĘŌāŚB ’┐Į ’┐Į’┐Į ’┐Į Zeeman +h M Ōłæ i=1 ŌāŚSAi(ŌāŚri)ŌāŚIi ’┐Į ’┐Į’┐Į ’┐Į HFI +hdz Ez ’┐Į ╦åS2 z ŌłÆ 2 31 ’┐Į +hdŌŖź ’┐Į Ex( ╦åS2 y ŌłÆ ╦åS2 x) +Ey ( ╦åSx ╦åSy + ╦åSy ╦åSx) ’┐Į ’┐Į ’┐Į’┐Į ’┐Į Stark . (1) Here, h ( ╠äh) is the (reduced) Planck constant, ŌāŚS = [ ╦åSx, ╦åSy, ╦åSz] are the spin-1 operators, ŌāŚI is the nuclear spin operator and 1 is the identity operator. The simplified Hamiltonian in Eq. 1 is spanned by the three S = 1 spin states: |ms = 0Ō¤®, |ms = +1Ō¤®, and |ms = ŌłÆ1Ō¤®, 2 and is grouped into four terms. First, there is a zero-field splitting (ZFS) term caused by electron spinŌĆōspin interaction, which shifts the |ms = ┬▒1Ō¤® states in energy by Dgs = 2.87 GHz relative to |ms = 0Ō¤®. The second term describes the Zeeman interaction for the |ms = ┬▒1Ō¤® states, which is used to lift their degeneracy in quantum sensing experiments (Sec. 2.3); most commonly, the anisotropy of the interaction is neglected and the energy splitting is given by the product of the gyromagnetic ratio of the NV center ╬│NV and the strength of the magnetic field. Here, the gyromagnetic ratio is ╬│NV = 2ŽĆ ├Ś╬│e (1+357ppm) = 2ŽĆ ├Ś28.0345(28)GHz/T36,37 differing only slightly from the free electron value as typical for carbon-based materials.38 The third term of Hgs includes coher- ent coupling to M proximal nuclear spins via the hyperfine in- teraction (HFI). The hyperfine tensor Ai(ŌāŚri) comprises a dipolar component and a contact contribution for nearby nuclear spins. Finally, the fourth term describes the coupling to both electric fields ŌāŚE and strain ŌāŚŽā, (ŌāŚE = ŌāŚE +ŌāŚŽā), which impact the NV cen- ter through electric dipole interaction, piezoelectric coupling, and spinŌĆōspin interaction that distort the electron orbitals.34,35 Con- sequently, the three-dimensional structure (and C3v symmetry) of the NV necessitates a directional dependence on ŌāŚE . The coupling is mediated via the ground-state electric susceptibility parame- ters of the NV center dz = 3.5├Ś10ŌłÆ3 Hz/(V/m)39 and dŌŖź = 0.165 Hz/(V/m)40. An additional perpendicular electric term (propor- tional to the coupling parameter d ŌĆ▓ ŌŖź) is omitted from Eq. 1, as it can be ignored when d ŌĆ▓ ŌŖź ’┐Į E 2x +E 2y Ōē¬ Dgs,35 which is the case in most experiments. In addition, the NV center is optically addressable, with an excited state (|eŌ¤®, Fig. 1b) located 1.945 eV (637 nm) above the ground state. This state has spin-triplet, orbital-doublet character (see other reviews for a detailed description16,32,42,43) resulting in a fine structure containing six energy levels, which can be re- solved under cryogenic conditions (T < 10 K).44 At elevated tem- peratures, these orbitals undergo rapid averaging caused by the dynamic Jahn-Teller effect,44,45 resulting in an effective three- level (spin-triplet) system at room temperature. In either case, decay from the NV excited state exhibits spin-dependent fluores- cence (discussed in Sec. 2.2) that is exploited for spin-state read- out in most NV-based quantum sensing schemes. 2.2 Photophysics and sensing properties An ideal quantum sensor would offer mechanisms for coherent control of the sensor state, as well as methods for efficient state preparation and readout. Such a system can be realized within the NV ground state using the ms = 0 and one of the ms = ┬▒1 states (hereafter generalized as |0Ō¤® and |1Ō¤®, Fig. 1b) by applying a magnetic field along the z-axis to split the ms = ┬▒1 energy levels (see Fig. 1d). Impressively, resonant microwave fields have been used to achieve universal quantum control within the ground- state manifold13 with fidelities exceeding 99%46 Furthermore, the NV center optical transitions can be leveraged for initializing and reading out the spin state.13,47 Excitation to the excited state is typically achieved using an off-resonant laser (usually Ōł╝ 532 nm, see green arrows in Fig. 1b). The resulting NV fluorescence spectrum (radiative decay from the excited state to the ground state) comprises a zero phonon line (ZPL, 3% of emission)48 and a broad phonon sideband (PSB, 97% of emis- sion) that extends to 800 nm49 (see red arrow in Figs. 1b and c ). Such off-resonant schemes allow for spin preparation and read- out using an intermediate singlet state (|sŌ¤®, see Fig. 1b): ms = ┬▒1 spin projections are more likely to decay non-radiatively from the excited state into |sŌ¤®, from which there is a roughly equal prob- ability to decay (non-radiatively) to any spin projection in the ground state (grey arrow in Fig. 1b).50,51 Consequently, continu- ous 532 nm optical illumination results in a net ground-state spin polarization into ms = 0.50 Such spin polarization is illustrated in Fig. 1e, where both spin states reach the same fluorescence levels after Ōł╝ 1 ╬╝s of laser excitation. Moreover, this nonradiative de- cay process provides a readout mechanism for the spin state since it yields reduced fluorescence for ms ┬▒ 1 states with up to Ōł╝ 40% contrast (Figs. 1d-e).52 The simplest experiment demonstrating this phenomenon is continuous-wave optically detected magnetic resonance (CW ODMR), in which microwave and laser excita- tion are applied simultaneously. When the microwave frequency is resonant the splittings between |ms = 0Ō¤® and |ms = ┬▒1Ō¤®, popu- lation is transferred and a reduction in fluorescence is observed (Fig. 1d). The aforementioned preparation, control, and readout mecha- nisms for the NV offer a powerful toolbox for detection of envi- ronmental signals. In practice, sensing applications benefit from several additional experimental constraints: i) proximity to the sensing target for increased signal and spatial resolution, ii) long measurement times for maximizing signal integration and spec- tral resolution, and iii) efficient mechanisms for spin preparation and readout of the sensor. In the following, we describe relevant sensing properties that are directly influenced by these experi- mental constraints. First, we note that the signal strength and detection volume of an NV sensor scales sensitively with experimental geometry, namely with the NVŌĆōtarget distance d. Indeed, for high-spatial- resolution detection of rapidly decaying signals, this distance must be minimized through both the NVŌĆōinterface distance and the interface-target distance. Thus, there has been significant ef- fort toward deterministic fabrication of near-surface NVs for sens- ing applications, which are outlined in Sec. 3.1. Furthermore, di- amond surface functionalization methods yielding minimal stand- off distance are discussed in detail in Sec. 4. The sensor spatial resolution is parameterized by the NV sens- ing volume, which depends on the specific protocol used and the NV orientation,53 and scales as V = (0.98d)3 for a (100)-cut dia- mond. Figure 2 shows an example sensitivity profile for an echo- like variance detection scheme (protocol details in Sec. 2.3). The regions outlined in black contribute 50% of the B2rms signal (or equivalently 70% of Brms) for a monolayer of spins on the dia- mond surface. The specific details of the sensing scheme play an important role, e.g., for phase canceling effects. In general, such sensitivity maps can be obtained by numerically evaluating the signal contribution of a single spin at every location of the diamond surface for a given measurement protocol. In addition, these maps vary strongly with the NV-center crystallographic ori- entation and cut of the diamond (the surface plane), motivating 3 Ōēź637nm mS=0 MW mS=+1 mS= ŌłÆ1 } (a) (b) N V C |0 |1 |s 2.5 3.0 3.5 Microwave frequency (GHz) 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 ODMR contrast (a.u.) (d) (e) 650 700 800 Wavelength (nm) Intensity (a. u.) (c) ZPL PSB |e |g 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 Time (╬╝s) 0 20k 40k 60k 80k Photon counts mS=ŌĆō1 mS=0 B=0 mT B=16 mT B=25 mT Fig. 1 The NV center. (a) Crystallographic structure. (b) Simplified NV electronic structure including ground-state fine structure. (c) NV low- temperature emission spectrum. (d) Continuous-wave optically detected magnetic-resonance (CW ODMR) measurements corresponding to different on-axis DC magnetic fields (B0). Continuous optical and microwave excitation is applied to the NV and the microwave frequency is scanned across ground-state splitting. Dips in fluorescence with contrast C appear when the microwave frequency is resonant with the transitions between ms = 0 states. (c) Adapted from , Copyright 2006 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA careful consideration of the substrate.53 Next, the measurement time Tm impacts signal integration and spectral resolution, and is fundamentally limited by the spin life- times of the NV center (either T1, T ŌłŚ 2 or T2 depending on the mea- surement sequence). The largest of these values is the spinŌĆōlattice relaxation lifetime T1 (also known as the longitudinal relaxation lifetime), which characterizes the time for the spin population to reach thermal equilibrium. Impressively, spinŌĆōlattice relaxation times within the ground-state manifold can reach a few millisec- onds at room temperature54 and hours at 4 K.55 In contrast, T ŌłŚ 2 and T2 refer to the transverse relaxation or spin-coherence life- times, which are theoretically limited to 2T1 although they are typically much shorter. T ŌłŚ 2 refers to the DC coherence decay time and T2 is used to indicate general, pulsed (AC) coherence decay times. Spin-coherence times of T2 > 1 ms at room-temperature56 and T2 Ōł╝ 1 s at 4 K55 have been achieved using multi-pulse ex- periments (see Sec. 5). In practice, low-frequency noise leads to faster dephasing, resulting in T ŌłŚ 2 Ōē¬ T2, which limits the ability to measure DC signals. Furthermore, the spectral resolution Ōłåf is an additional con- sideration for signals that may exhibit closely spaced resonances, such as detection of small chemical shifts, hyperfine couplings, or even spurious harmonics.57,58 For relatively simple sensing proto- cols, such as those described in the following section, Ōłå f is limited by the coherence lifetime of the NV center and sensing protocol (Ōłåf Ōł╝ 1/T2). However, frequency resolution can be made arbi- trarily small59,60 and it is possible to decouple the NV coherence time such that resolution is only constrained by the target spin co- herence time,61,62 which can be significantly longer (see Sec. 5). Next, the magnetic field sensitivity improves for increased spin initialization fidelity. Off-resonant, optical spin polarization effi- ciency for deep NV centers depends on the applied laser power and can approach Ōł╝ 80%.50 However, we note that this value can vary considerably for shallow defects due to charge instabil- ity.31 Promisingly, logic-based charge initialization (of the nega- tive NVŌłÆ state, see Sec. 3.2.1) has been employed to increase the average spin initialization fidelity of near-surface defects, with values approaching unity.31 Consequently, we ignore this quan- tity in subsequent calculations. Finally, the readout fidelity F quantifies the ability to measure the spin state of the NV at the end of a single experiment, with F = 1 corresponding to an ideal, single-shot readout. This value varies considerably for different experimental conditions, and is therefore explored extensively in this text. Since quantum sensing requires repeated measurements for statistical averaging, a larger readout fidelity can speed up experiments significantly. For off- resonant readout, the fidelity is given by63,64 F = ’┐Į 1+2 (╬▒0 +╬▒1) (╬▒0 ŌłÆ╬▒1)2 ’┐ĮŌłÆ1/2 , (2) where ╬▒0 and ╬▒1 are the expected number of measured photons for |0Ō¤® and |1Ō¤®, respectively. Here, ╬▒1 = (1 ŌłÆC)╬▒0, where C is the measurement contrast. Moreover, ╬▒0 = ╬Š ╬│ TR, where ╬Š is the photon collection efficiency, ╬│ is the radiative decay rate, and TR is the readout time, yielding F = ’┐Į 1+4ŽĆ ’┐Į 2ŌłÆC C2 ╬│ ╬Š TR ’┐Į’┐ĮŌłÆ1/2 . (3) Typical off-resonance fidelities are quite poor (F Ōł╝ 0.03)63 and much experimental work has been directed at increasing these values (details in Sec. 2.6). 4 ŌłÆ1 0 1 ŌłÆ1 0 1 y x (d) ŌłÆ1 0 1 1 0 2 z x (c) ŌłÆ1 0 1 ŌłÆ1 0 1 x y (b) ŌłÆ1 0 1 1 2 ŌłÆ1 0 1 ŌłÆ1 0 1 ŌłÆ1 0 1 1 2 z x (e) z x y x (a) (f) 0 0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Signal contribution (a.u.) Fig. 2 Simulated sensitivity profiles for variance detection of surface spins with different NV orientations. These plots display B2 rms (in arbitrary units) for an NV at depth d = 1 below the diamond surface, where all length scales are normalized to this quantity. The areas enclosed with black lines in (b), (d), and (f) contribute 50% of the integrated B2 rms signal for an infinitesimally-thin 2D layer of surface spins. Note that only fluctuations perpendicular to the NV axis were considered. 2.3 Magnetic sensing The vast majority of NV sensing focuses on magnetic interactions owing primarily to its strong coupling constant (╬│NV), which im- pacts detection of external fields as well as the strength of the (dipolar) hyperfine interaction. In the following section, we will explore the sensitivities obtained for some of the simplest detec- tion protocols, including DC and AC schemes with the Ramsey and spin-echo experiments, as well as T1 and T2 relaxation exper- iments. While these represent only a small fraction of possible sensing schemes, they illustrate which experimental parameters should be considered and optimized when implementing an NV sensor. For these examples, we simplify Eq. 1 to include only contribu- tions related to a small, time-dependent magnetic field ŌāŚB(t) and a relatively large magnetic-field bias B0 along the z-axis of the NV center, yielding Hgs = hDgs ╦åS2 z + ╠äh╬│NV (B0 +Bz(t)) ╦åSz. (4) Note that Eq. 4 is only accurate in the limiting case where ╠äh╬│NVBi(t) Ōē¬ hDgs and Bi(t) Ōē¬ B0 for i = {x,y,z}, such that that the NV center becomes insensitive to Bx(t) and By(t). The transi- tion energies (e┬▒) between the ms = 0 and ms = ┬▒1 spin levels are then e┬▒ = hDgs ┬▒ ╠äh╬│NV (B0 +Bz(t)). (5) In this Review, we consider a simplified sensor utilizing a two- level subspace spanned by the |ms = 0Ō¤® and one of the |ms = ┬▒1Ō¤® states, resulting in the following effective Hamiltonian Hgs = ┬▒ ╠äh╬│NVBz(t) ╦åSz. (6) Here, a rotating frame was used to remove the contributions from Dgs and B0. We note that an alternative effective Hamiltonian yielding twice the signal can be obtained by instead using the subspace spanned by the two |ms ┬▒1Ō¤® states (details in Sec. 5.4). The basic sensing premise is as follows: first, the NV state |ŽłŌ¤® is initialized to |0Ō¤® via optical pumping; subsequently, a superposi- tion state |Žł(t = 0)Ō¤® ŌłØ |0Ō¤®+|1Ō¤® is created through the application of a ’┐Į ŽĆ/2 ’┐Į y rotation (e.g., with a microwave pulse), which can be visualized on the Bloch sphere65 (Fig. 3). While |0Ō¤® and |1Ō¤® are eigenstates of Eq. 6, superposition states are not and will there- fore evolve in time. In particular, |0Ō¤® and |1Ō¤® will acquire a relative phase ’┐Į |Žł(Žä)Ō¤® ŌłØ |0Ō¤®+eiŽå(Žä) |1Ō¤® ’┐Į that is a function of the applied magnetic field Žå(Žä) = ╬│NV ’┐Į Žä 0 Bz(t)dt, (7) where Žä is the total evolution time. |Žł(Žä)Ō¤® will remain in an equal superposition (with equal population in |0Ō¤® and |1Ō¤®) for all val- ues of Žå; however, NV fluorescence can only be used to mea- sure the state populations and not coherences. Application of a second ’┐Į ŽĆ/2 ’┐Į y rotation can convert Žå into a population differ- ence, which can be read out via spin-dependent fluorescence. By comparing the resulting fluorescence level against that of the |0Ō¤® and |1Ō¤® states, one can infer Žå through the transition probabili- ties p0 = sin2(Žå/2) or p1 = cos2(Žå/2), respectively, for the sensing scheme shown in Fig. 3a. Equivalently, pi is the expectation value of being in state |iŌ¤® after the last ’┐Į ŽĆ/2 ’┐Į y rotation. Typically, one characterizes the magnetic field by measuring the deviation of the transition probability ╬┤ p = piŌłÆ p, where p is some fixed bias point. If the measurement protocol can be synchro- nized with the target signal, the highest sensitivity is obtained for "slope detection",61,63 wherein p = 0.5 (corresponding to an equal superposition) or Žå = kŽĆ/2 for odd integers k. In the small signal limit (╬┤Žå Ōē¬ ŽĆ), this yields ╬┤ p = ╬┤Žå/2 (for k = 1). How- ever, many experimental applications preclude synchronization with the signal of interest, resulting in Ō¤©╬┤ pŌ¤® = Ō¤©╬┤ŽåŌ¤® = 0 for multi- ple measurements. In such cases, it is beneficial to instead apply "variance detection",66ŌĆō68 wherein the system is biased at p = 0 and the variance in transition probability Ō¤©╬┤ p2Ō¤® = 1 4Ō¤©╬┤Žå2Ō¤® = 1 4Žå2rms is measured. 5 x -y (b) (a) (c) x y + + - Ramsey (ŽĆ)y Hahn echo ’┐Į ’┐Į ’┐Į ’┐Į ’┐Į ’┐Į ’┐Į ’┐Į ’┐Į ’┐Į ’┐Į ’┐Į ’┐Į ’┐Į ’┐Į ’┐Į ’┐Į ’┐Į ’┐Į ’┐Į - - Fig. 3 Ramsey and spin-echo sensing experiments. (a) Pulse sequences for the Ramsey and the Hahn-echo protocols. Laser pulses are indicated in green, microwave manipulations are shown in yellow, and phase evolution periods are shaded in grey. (b) Bloch-sphere evolution throughout a Ramsey experiment, (c) Bloch-sphere evolution throughout a spin-echo experiment (steps 1-3 are identical to those of the Ramsey sequence). The SNR of slope-detection-based experiments is defined as SNR = ╬┤ p/Žāp, where Žāp = 1/(2 ŌłÜ NF) is a combination of the quantum projection noise for N experimental repetitions and the classical readout noise associated with the finite readout effi- ciency (described by F).10 This analysis can be applied directly in determining the sen- sitivity of the Ramsey experiment,69 which is one of the sim- plest methods for determining a DC magnetic field of the form Bz(t) = BDC. Following Eq. 7, such a field would result in an ac- quired phase of Žå(Žä) = ╬│NV BDCŽä for an evolution time Žä (Fig. 3a). Subsequent conversion to NV population followed by slope detec- tion yields ╬┤ p = ╬│NVŽä╬┤BDC/2 with SNR = F╬│NV╬┤BDC ŌłÜ Žä T for a total experiment duration T = NŽä. The sensitivity can then be cal- culated as ╬ĘDC Ōēł 1/(F╬│NV ŌłÜŽä), which is optimized by maximizing the acquisition time Žä. For the Ramsey experiment, Žä is funda- mentally limited to the natural dephasing time of the sensor spin T ŌłŚ 2 , resulting in a minimum sensitivity of ╬ĘDC Ōēł 1/ ’┐Į F╬│NV ’┐Į T ŌłŚ 2 ’┐Į . (8) While Ramsey experiments are ideal for sensing DC fields, they are ill-suited for detection of signals that vary quickly compared to Žä since the acquired phase is averaged away over the course of the measurement. For detection of AC magnetic fields, the canonical spin-echo experiment70 incorporates an intermediate (ŽĆ)y pulse (Fig. 3b) that flips the spin, allowing for an effective reversal of the detected field Bz(t) according to Žåecho(Žä) = ╬│NV ’┐Į Žä/2 0 Bz(t)dt ŌłÆ╬│NV ’┐Į Žä Žä/2 Bz(t)dt. (9) We consider a magnetic field with frequency Žē and phase ╬Ė described by Bz(t) = BAC sin(Žēt + ╬Ė); if ╬Ė is known, slope de- tection can be employed, yielding Žåecho = ŌłÆ 4BAC╬│NV Žē cos(ŽēŽä/2 + ╬Ė)sin2(ŽēŽä/4). This quantity is maximized for Žē = 2ŽĆ/Žä and ╬Ė = 0, resulting in Žåecho = 2BAC╬│NVŽä/ŽĆ. The sensitivity can then be cal- culated as ╬ĘAC Ōēł ŽĆ/ ’┐Į 2F╬│NV ’┐Į T2 ’┐Į . (10) Here, we set Žä = T2 where T2 is the spin-echo coherence time. This protocol has the added benefit of cancelling low-frequency noise occurring on timescales slower than Žä; consequently T2 often far exceeds the natural decoherence time T ŌłŚ 2 , resulting in an improve- ment in slope-detection sensitivity of ╬ĘDC/╬ĘAC Ōēł ’┐Į T2/T ŌłŚ 2 . Similarly, the sensitivity for variance detection of an AC field can be calculated from Žårms = ŌłÜ 2BAC╬│NVŽä/ŽĆ and SNR = Ō¤©╬┤ p2Ō¤®/Žāp resulting in ╬Ęvar Ōēł ŽĆ/ ’┐Į ╬│NV ŌłÜ F 4’┐Į T 3 2 ’┐Į . (11) Complementing these widely used DC and AC measurement techniques, relaxometry71,72 offers a sensing modality for detect- ing magnetic and electric noise at Žē 01 = e┬▒/ ╠äh, the frequency split- ting between |ms = 0Ō¤® and |ms = ┬▒1Ō¤®. While the Ramsey and spin- echo protocols operate in the 0 Hz (DC) to < 1 GHz regimes, Žē 01 may exist in the few GHz regime, extending the frequency range over which NV sensors can be employed.73,74 In such experiments, the system is initialized to |0Ō¤® and allowed to evolve for time Žä. Subsequently, ╬┤ p is measured, displaying an exponential decay as a function of time with rate ╬ō1 = 1 T1 = ╬│2 NV 2 SB,ŌŖź(Žē 01). (12) 6 Here, SB,ŌŖź(Žē) is the power spectral density of the transverse mag- netic field,10 which appears since perpendicular magnetic fields induce spin flips resulting in T1 relaxation. In addition, relaxom- etry involving high-frequency noise related to electric fields has also been demonstrated.75,76 If the system is instead prepared in a superposition state |Žł(t = 0)Ō¤® ŌłØ |0Ō¤® + |1Ō¤® then the associated decay time also depends on the parallel component of the noise spectral density SB,z(Žē), yielding ╬ō2 = 1 2T1 + 1 T ŌłŚ 2 = ╬│2 NV 4 SB,ŌŖź(Žē 01)+ ╬│2 NV 2 SB,z(0), (13) where SB,z is probed at Žē = 0 since phase flips do not require en- ergy.10 Typically, T1 Ōē½ T ŌłŚ 2 such that ╬ō2 Ōēł 1/T ŌłŚ 2 , yielding the nat- ural dephasing time observed in Ramsey experiments. Indeed, this decay rate can be thought of in terms of the rms phase pre- viously mentioned in the context of variance detection, where Žå2rms = 2╬ōŽä. Moreover, extension of this technique with multi- pulse sequences (such as spin-echo or the dynamical decoupling sequences described in Sec. 5) enable measurements of SB,z for non-zero Žē.77,78 2.4 Electric sensing Electric-field sensing with NV centers is possible through a piezo- electric coupling that produces a Stark shift in the NV resonance levels.32,34,35,79 While such schemes suffer from poor sensitiv- ities (in comparison to magnetic detection), bulk and surface charge screening,80,81 and complications from strain interactions, electric-field sensing may prove useful for the chemical sciences. For example, the NV is capable of mapping a single electron via its electric field from a distance of roughly 25 nm82 and of detecting surface electrons at even smaller distances.75,76 Consequently, improved surface preparation techniques may enable sensing of electrons involved in various chemical processes. Additionally, measurements of local strain83 and local band bending80 would inform the fabrication of stable and shallow NV centers. Further- more, electric-field sensing could complement magnetic sensing of surface molecules, providing a route to disentangle signal con- tributions from magnetic fields (arising from electron spins and currents) and electric fields (due to electron charge). An electric-field sensor can be realized using a single energy- level transition (Sec. 2.3) with a sensitivity defined similarly to those of magnetic-field protocols except that the electric suscepti- bility parameters (dz and dŌŖź) take the place of the gyromagnetic ratio (╬│NV). With established techniques for sensing DC and AC electric fields with deeply implanted NV centers,40,84,85 current research efforts are focused on nanoscale sensing of external elec- tric fields with shallow NV centers.86ŌĆō88 In this section, we will highlight two common sensing schemes for measuring electric fields. Both schemes derive from a second order perturbation theory under the assumption of ╠äh╬│NVBi Ōē¬ hDgs and neglecting nuclear spin coupling.35,84 For simplicity, we also ignore contributions from strain; however, we note that in the high-strain limit (|ŌāŚŽā| Ōē½ |ŌāŚE|), electric-field sensing is only possible along the strain direction. The first scheme for electric-field sensing requires a weak mag- netic bias field along the z-axis of the NV center (B0 = Bz), similar to magnetic sensing. In the presence of an electric field, the tran- sition energies are e┬▒(Bz,ŌāŚE) = e┬▒(Bz)+hdzEz(t)┬▒ ŽĆhd2 ŌŖź ╬│NVBz E2 ŌŖź(t), (14) where e┬▒(Bz) is the contribution from the ZFS and bias field (Eq. 5) and E2 ŌŖź(t) = E2x (t) + E2y (t). By applying sufficiently large Bz, it is possible to isolate the Ez component of the field.75 The second scheme employs a weak perpendicular magnetic figuration, the transition energies are (15) where e┬▒(BŌŖź) includes the contribution from the ZFS and a non- linear shift from BŌŖź. The additional cosine term involving two for control over the electric-field detection axis through variation of ŽåB.84 Since dŌŖź/dz Ōł╝ 47, this detection scheme is significantly more sensitive to perpendicular electric fields; consequently, the Ez term is often excluded for simplicity. 2.5 Additional sensing modalities The NV center is susceptible to additional physical quantities through the dependencies of the Hamiltonian coupling terms; for example, the ZFS splitting is both a function of temperature and pressure (Dgs(T,P)).89,90 Consequently, careful attention must be taken to correctly attribute energy-level shifts that occur un- der non-ambient experimental conditions, e.g., elevated temper- atures or pressures required for specific reactions or temperature changes resulting from exothermic and endothermic reactions. Lastly, it is also possible to utilize the excited-state coupling terms, which can greatly differ from those found in the ground- state Hamiltonian.16,34 Of particular note, the excited-state elec- tric susceptibility parameters are much larger than those of the ground state, enabling significantly more sensitive electric-field detection.91 However, such techniques employ resonant optical pumping that is only possible at cryogenic temperatures, preclud- ing general use.91 2.6 Experimental Considerations As an illustrative example, we explore the experimental consider- ations for the detection of a single nuclear spin external to the di- amond using variance detection. The magnitude of the magnetic variance generated by the Larmor precession of a single nuclear spin at distance d from the NV is24 B2 n = (╬╝0 ╠äh╬│n)2 16ŽĆ2d6 , (16) where ╬╝0 is the vacuum permeability and ╬│n is the gyromagnetic ratio of the nuclear spin. Following the calculations in Sec. 2.3, the minimum detectable variance after N repetitions of the spin- 7 echo experiment is ╬┤B2 = ŽĆ2 ╬│2 NVT 2 2 F ŌłÜ N , (17) and the expected number of detectable nuclear spins is Nnuc = ╬┤B2 B2n = ’┐Į 4ŽĆ2 ╬│NV╬│n ╠äh╬╝0 ’┐Į2 d6 T 2 2 F ŌłÜ N . (18) The contributions of parameters d, T2, F, and N allow us to iden- tify potential avenues for minimizing Nnuc, ideally approaching the single-spin regime of Nnuc = 1. Eq. 18 scales with the sixth power of d, emphasizing the crucial importance of minimizing the NVŌĆōtarget distance. While the exact dependence of the magnetic-field strength on d varies for differ- ent target geometries (B2rms Ōł╝ 1/d6 for a single spin, B2rms Ōł╝ 1/d4 for a two-dimensional spin layer, and B2rms Ōł╝ 1/d3 for a volume of spins),66,92 reducing this distance will always result in a larger field at the NV. Eq. 18 also illustrates the effect of extending T2, which has in- spired large bodies of work aimed at fabricating coherent, near- surface emitters (Sec. 3) in addition to development of sensing protocols for extending T2 by mitigating surface noise (Sec. 5). Finally, improving the readout fidelity is another avenue for experimental optimization. For off-resonant excitation, the read- out fidelity is limited by short readout times (TR Ōēł 400 ns) due to the transient nature of the spin contrast (Fig. 1e), the low radiative emission rate of the NV (╬│ = 2ŽĆ ├Ś 13 MHz), and poor optical collection efficiency (╬Š Ōł╝ 0.01 is typical for confocal mea- surements of bulk diamond). Such schemes are further limited for C < 1, resulting in an overall readout fidelity of only F Ōł╝ 0.03 (Eqs. 2 and 3). For such a low value, more than 500 experimen- tal repetitions would be required to achieve SNR = 1. Encourag- ingly, several routes have been explored to increase off-resonant readout fidelity, including nuclear-spin-assisted techniques (ob- taining F = 0.5)24 and spin-to-charge conversion93 with near- unity fidelity (F > 0.99).94 However, such protocols come at the expense of additional experimental overhead and significantly longer readout times. The best combination of NV preparation and readout fidelities have been achieved using resonant excitation of spin-dependent optical transitions within the ZPL.95 Below 10 K, the ZPL transi- tions of such emitters can be spectrally resolved and optically cy- cled multiple times before spin flips occur. This cyclicity allows for spin-state readout via excitation and the subsequent presence or absence of corresponding emission, yielding F = 0.97.96,97 Mean- while, a small degree of spin mixing within the excited state is used as a resource for spin preparation via resonant optical pumping, yielding near-perfect preparation efficiencies (99.8% into ms = 0).96 These techniques have been combined to demon- strate imaging of a 27-spin 13C cluster within a diamond substrate at cryogenic temperatures.98 Finally, access to resonant optical transitions can facilitate all-optical spin manipulation,99 albeit with substantially lower fidelity than microwave techniques due to spontaneous emission. Unfortunately, this set of techniques have largely relied on the exceptional optical stability of natu- rally occurring NV centers located microns below the diamond surface.100 Indeed, resonant excitation of near-surface NV cen- ters is not possible due to instability of the ZPL frequency over time referred to as spectral diffusion.101,102 The asymmetry of the nitrogen and vacancy sites (Fig. 1a) leads to inequivalent electric dipole moments in the ground and excited states, which makes it extremely sensitive to electric-field noise on nearby sur- faces. Such noise can cause spectral diffusion of the optical tran- sition of many GHz, precluding spectral selectivity within the ZPL fine structure. Consequently, near-surface NV centers required for studying external targets rely on off-resonant excitation. We conclude by noting that chemical sensing at diamond sur- faces may be performed using either single NV centers or ensem- bles of shallow defects. Single emitters boast nanoscale spatial resolution but are limited in signal by their radiative emission rate ╬│ and optical collection efficiency ╬Š.63,103 A reduction in excited-state lifetime can be achieved via coupling to an optical resonator structure,104 while higher optical collection efficiencies can be obtained using nanophotonic structures such as waveg- uides, lenses, cavities, or gratings.95,105ŌĆō114 In contrast to single NV sensors, dense ensembles offers accel- erated measurement times due to an increase in optical emission that scales with NNV, the number of NVs.10 Moreover, the sensi- tivity scales with ŌłÜNNV per unit time, with a best predicted sen- sitivity of ca. 250 aT/( ŌłÜ Hz cmŌłÆ3/2) in the high-density limit.63 Higher density, however, may be accompanied by reduced coher- ence times that ultimately limit sensor utility.103,115 Furthermore, the efficient collection of fluorescence from ensembles of NV cen- ters remains difficult; some nanofabricated structures that offer improvement for single NVs may not be suitable for ensembles. Still, alternative strategies that rely on absorptive and dispersive schemes could improve light collection from ensembles.116ŌĆō119 Finally, we note that nanostructured diamond surfaces hosting high NV densities benefit from increased sensorŌĆōanalyte contact area.120 3 Surface influence on NV center stability Achieving the excellent magnetic-field sensitivity and spatial res- olution required for detecting single molecules necessitates shal- low NV centers (i.e., depths < ca. 10 nm). Unfortunately, emitter optical and spin properties deteriorate within ca. 100 nm of the diamond surface,30 presenting a critical challenge. In this sec- tion, we introduce how shallow NV centers are typically gener- ated and then detail the leading sources of their charge instabil- ity and spin dephasing (summarized in Fig. 4). Finally, we de- scribe suitable surface terminations that have been theoretically and experimentally identified to promote preservation of NV cen- ter properties. 3.1 Generation of shallow NV centers Magnetic sensing of external targets necessitates fabrication pro- cesses that yield a deterministic density of shallow NVs with high spin coherence.121 Most commonly, NV-forming nitrogen atoms are incorporated into electronic-grade diamond through post-growth, blanket implantation,122ŌĆō124 forming a randomly 8 P1 center Surface roughness Proximal spins Unscreened charge Band bending Charge traps Acceptor states NVŌĆō H H H H NEA surface termination h+ + + NVŌĆō Ōźé NV0 NVŌĆō Ōźé NV0 NVŌĆō Ōźé NV0 unpaired electrons surface nuclear spins 13C NVŌĆō Ōźé NV0 Charge-state instability Magnetic noise Electronic noise Diamond source of charge state instability, magnetic noise & electronic noise surface termination, or adsorbed molecules e.g., sp2 carbon, P1 centers, vacancy centers NVŌĆō vacancy complex + - photoluminescence quenching Fig. 4 Summary of sources of charge-state instability and decoherence for near-surface NV centers. distributed, two-dimensional layer of impurities at a depth and density determined by the acceleration energy and fluence, re- spectively.125 In contrast, deterministic impurity placement can be achieved by performing implantation with a focused ion beam (FIB),126ŌĆō129 or through a mask.130ŌĆō133 In fact, a combination of shallow masked implantation and diamond overgrowth has been used to achieve sub-nm placement accuracy for alternative de- fect centers.134 Subsequent high-temperature, high-vacuum an- nealing (ca. 800 ŌĆō 880 ┬░C) mobilizes vacancies created by im- plantation, which combine with nitrogen to form NV centers with varying efficiency.123,135ŌĆō137 Unfortunately, the implanta- tion and annealing process can lead to formation of unwanted vacancy complexes that degrade coherence. This effect increases with implantation energy, but there is evidence that annealing at higher temperatures (i.e., 1000 ŌĆō 1500 ┬░C) can eliminate lo- calized defects that degrade the spin and optical properties of emitters.136ŌĆō139 Furthermore, Fermi-level engineering through co-doping with donor impurities may preclude the formation of vacancy chains.140 An alternative strategy for defect formation is impurity in- corporation during diamond growth via chemical vapor deposi- tion (CVD) or high-pressure, high-temperature (HPHT) synthe- sis. In both cases, NV centers can be formed naturally from non- negligible native nitrogen levels. However, such defects occur at random positions within the diamond crystal, limiting their util- ity. In HPHT synthesis, higher nitrogen content is typically ob- served (up to hundreds of ppm) than during CVD growth (typi- cally ppb), with varying densities related to the efficiency of ni- trogen incorporation along different crystallographic growth di- rections.141,142 Conversely, nitrogen incorporation during CVD growth can localize emitters into a single growth layer (referred to as delta doping).143ŌĆō147 Advantageously, delta-doped emitters may exhibit preferential alignment along one of the four possi- ble crystallographic orientations.148ŌĆō150 Such alignment is use- ful both for higher experimental throughput in single NV stud- ies as well as for obtaining higher contrast in ensemble NV mea- surements. Following impurity incorporation, techniques such as electron irradiation,100,151ŌĆō153 laser writing,154,155 or implanta- tion with additional species140,156,157 can be used to generate the vacancies necessary for emitter formation through subsequent an- nealing. 3.2 Origins of instability In this section, we explore physical phenomena leading to reduced measurement sensitivity for near-surface NV centers, namely charge instability and magnetic and electronic noise. NV charge state conversion. The NV center has three physically relevant charge configura- tions comprising the negative (NVŌłÆ), neutral (NV0), and positive (NV+) states. So far, only the long-lived, S = 1 ground state (see Sec. 2) of the negatively charged state has proven useful for quan- tum sensing applications. Indeed, the S = 1/2 ground state of NV0 is subject to line broadening caused by Jahn-Teller distortion that precludes EPR detection.158 Moreover, the neutral charge state is also excited by green laser light (ZPL at 575 nm), contribut- ing fluorescent background that reduces measurement contrast. Conversely, the positively charged NV+ state is expected to be spinless, and is traditionally treated as a dark state since no opti- cal signature has been observed thus far.159 Proximity to surfaces can exacerbate dynamic or permanent switching to other charge states,31 reducing the charge-state efficiency, defined as ╬Č = [NVŌłÆ] [NVŌłÆ] [NVŌłÆ]+[NV0]. (19) While the NV0 state has garnered interest for super-resolution microscopy,160ŌĆō165 optical data storage,166,167 quantum informa- tion processing,168 and as an electrically driven single-photon source,169,170 it contributes an undesirable fluorescence back- ground when probing NVŌłÆ centers. Therefore, ╬Č should be maxi- mized for magnetic sensing. However, due to unavoidable charge- state cycling between NVŌłÆ and NV0, the maximum achievable ╬Č is limited under normal measurement conditions.163 Photoinduced charge conversion between the NVŌłÆ and NV0 states can occur via one-photon (energy >2.6 eV) or two-photon (energy >1.946 eV) absorption processes that eject an electron 9 into the conduction band of diamond.167 The reverse process, re- duction of NV0 back to its negative state, may also occur via both one-photon (energy >2.94 eV) or two-photon (energy >2.156 eV) absorption processes by receiving an electron from the dia- mond valence band.167 Consequently, green laser excitation that is commonly used for spin preparation and readout results in unavoidable modulation between NVŌłÆ and NV0, leading to a steady-state ╬Č Ōēł 0.75.161,171,172 This value can be even smaller for NV ensembles,173 where tunneling between proximal NV centers and nearby nitrogen atoms may occur upon photoexcitation.174 Multicolor illumination with near-infrared light94,175,176 (result- ing in spin-dependent charge transfer177,178), doping,179ŌĆō181 and high laser powers182 provide possible routes to increase the rela- tive population of NVŌłÆ. Moreover, spin-dependent ionization of NVŌłÆ versus NV0 states has been used as a resource for achieving single-shot spin readout.93,94,183 Proximal surfaces preferentially convert NVŌłÆ to NV0 following photoionization since local electronic traps and acceptor states inhibit electron exchange between the NV and the diamond elec- tronic bands (Fig. 4).31,184 Moreover, charge-state instability has also been observed in the dark (without photoexcitation), which is hypothesized to occur by tunneling to electron traps.31,167,185 Such non-optical discharge of NVŌłÆ is exacerbated near surfaces, where primal sp2 carbon serves as an efficient charge trap.81 While it cannot account for all processes leading to NV-center destabilization,167,186,187 a band-bending model provides a sim- plified picture of how the NVŌłÆ state is affected by surface proxim- ity.188 An electric dipole layer at the surface, due to the terminat- ing species or chemical adsorbates, can lead to accumulation of positive or negative charge at the diamond interface. In the case of hole accumulation, electrons are withdrawn from shallow NV centers, yielding the neutral charge state.189ŌĆō191 This is captured by the electron affinity of the surface, defined as Žć = Evac ŌłÆECBM, (20) where Evac and ECBM are the energies of the vacuum level and conduction band minimum, respectively (Table 1). A negative electron affinity (NEA) surface, corresponding to upward bend- ing of the the valence and conduction bands, occurs when ECBM is shifted above the vacuum level. Such bending is induced by the bond polarization at the surface when adsorbates of lower elec- tronegativity than carbon are present. For instance, hydrogen- terminated diamond is known to exhibit NEA with Žć = ŌłÆ1.3 eV measured in vacuum, which depletes the electron density avail- able for near-surface NV centers.192ŌĆō195 Conversely, a positive electron affinity (PEA) surface occurs when the conduction band minimum lies below Evac, and is generally desirable for stabilizing the NVŌłÆ state. In such cases, chemical terminations or adsorbates with higher electronegativity than carbon increase Žć compared to that of a pristine diamond surface. Surface terminations that have been found to achieve PEA for NV sensing are described in detail in Sec. 3.3. Magnetic and electronic noise. As discussed in Sec. 2.3, the best detection sensitivities are ob- tained by maximizing T2, which is hampered by unwanted noise. For near-surface NV centers, this noise comes from magnetic and electronic sources (Fig. 4), though decoherence of shallow emit- ters is primarily ascribed to magnetic noise.30 Deleterious spin impurities occurring in the bulk crystal, such as substitutional ni- trogen (P1) centers,214 can be limited through use of ultra-pure diamond substrates; however, the surface is always problematic, regardless of substrate purity. Indeed, surface spins may con- tribute considerable magnetic noise through spin flips and pre- cession,215,216 leading to a reduction in NV-center T1 and T2 via dipoleŌĆōdipole coupling. In both bulk materials78,92,217ŌĆō222 and nanodiamonds,223ŌĆō227 this magnetic noise may arise from sur- face nuclear spins, unpaired electrons in dangling bonds, surface adatoms, and molecular adsorbates. Moreover, spin-orbit interac- tions in sp2 carbon, as well as potential biradical spin character or magnetization in mixed sp2/sp3 material, may also contribute.81 The influence of a surface spin bath on shallow NV centers can be exploited as a useful probe of the local chemical envi- ronment,228,229 which has been widely used for chemical and biochemical sensing with NV centers both in bulk diamond and nanodiamond systems. In such experiments, relaxometry mea- surements that do not require microwave irradiation are used to characterize changes in T1 caused by e.g., proximal paramagnetic species,230 redox reactions,231 changes in pH232, and radical production.233ŌĆō235 Nevertheless, for highly sensitive techniques such as NMR spectroscopy, these sources of magnetic noise are often undesirable. Consequently, the optimization of diamond surface chemistries is a critical step toward realizing the full po- tential of NV sensing for dilute assemblies of external spins. The influence of electric-field noise on the NV is thought to be comparatively minor,30 unless operating in a regime where the NV EPR frequencies exhibit anticrossings236 or in an off-axis magnetic field.84,237,238 However, in some cases, electric noise has been shown to dominate magnetic noise. Indeed, Kim et al. showed an almost factor-of-5 increase in T2 for shallow NV cen- ters when bare diamond surfaces were coated in dielectric liq- uid to shield fluctuating surface charges.75 In contrast, the mag- netic noise generated by dark spins was unaffected by the coating. In addition, Myers et al. used complementary double-quantum relaxometry measurements to differentiate between electric and magnetic noise sources, demonstrating that T1 was limited by sur- face electric-field noise at low magnetic fields.239 Moving forward, systematic investigations using multiple mea- surement techniques will be essential in optimizing surface prepa- rations for attaching molecules of interest. For (bio)chemical sensing, functionalization with dense, highly charged, and mobile biomolecules contributes additional sources of electric-field noise and may pose a challenge for highly sensitive measurements. One solution would be to operate at large magnetic-field strengths; in addition, dielectric surface layers (e.g., solid- or solution-phase capping material) may mitigate electric-field-driven decoherence of shallow NV centers.75,240 Still, the choice of dielectric coat- ing depends critically on the operational frequency range of the 10 Orientation Reconstruction Termination Sample preparation Žć (eV) Notes Ref. (1├Ś1) O theory ketone termination 196 O theory ketone termination 197 O theory ether termination 196 O theory ether termination 197 O thermal oxygen annealing single crystal 30 O chemically oxidized +1.7 natural, single-crystal type IIb 192 O chemically oxidized ca. +1.0ŌĆō1.5 natural, single-crystal type IIb 198 O plasma oxidation homoepitaxial boron-doped CVD film 199 H theory ŌĆō3.4 ŌĆō 200 (2├Ś1) N theory ŌĆō 201 F theory ŌĆō 187 F thermal dissociation of XeF2 single-crystal, boron-doped CVD 202 O theory ether termination 187 F theory ŌĆō 196 C UHV annealing +1.3 natural, single-crystal type IIb 203 C theory +0.8 ŌĆō 200 C UHV annealing natural, single-crystal type IIb 198 C theory ŌĆō 196 C theory ŌĆō 197 C UHV annealing natural, single-crystal type IIb 192 H plasma hydrogenation homoepitaxial, boron-doped CVD film 199 H/F theory 50% F coverage 196 H hydrogenation via hot filament ca. ŌĆō0.4 natural, single-crystal type IIb 204 O theory ŌĆō0.6 hydroxyl termination 187 H plasma hydrogenation ca. ŌĆō0.8 natural, single-crystal type IIb 205 H plasma hydrogenation Ōēż ŌĆō1.0 natural, single-crystal type IIb 203 H plasma hydrogenation ŌĆō1.3 natural, single-crystal type IIb 192 H theory ŌĆō1.7 ŌĆō 187 H theory ŌĆō 196 H theory ŌĆō 197 O theory hydroxl termination 206 H UHV annealing ca. ŌĆō2.2 single crystal 207 H theory ŌĆō2.2 ŌĆō 200 (2├Ś2) H/O theory +0.5 mixed H/O/OH termination 187 H/N theory 50% N coverage 201 ŌĆō O chemically oxidized single crystal 30 (1├Ś1) O theory ŌĆō 208 O theory ketone termination 208 N theory ŌĆō 209 F theory ŌĆō 196 O theory epoxy termination 208 C theory ŌĆō 196 H hydrogenation via hot filament Ōēż +0.7 natural, single-crystal type IIb 210 H/F theory 50% F coverage 196 H plasma hydrogenation < 0 single crystal, first chemically oxidized 198 H plasma hydrogenation Ōēż ŌĆō0.9 natural, single-crystal type IIb 203 H plasma hydrogenation natural, single-crystal type IIb 211 H theory ŌĆō 209 H theory ŌĆō 196 H theory ŌĆō (2├Ś1) F theory ŌĆō 196 C UHV annealing (1000 K) +1.5 natural, single-crystal type IIb 203 H/F theory 50% F coverage 196 C UHV annealing +0.5 natural, single-crystal type IIb C UHV annealing (1000 K) natural, single-crystal type IIb 211 C theory ŌĆō C theory ŌĆō 196 H theory ŌĆō 196 ŌĆō C UHV annealing (1400 K) +0.8 single crystal, graphitized surface 211 (1├Ś1) F theory ŌĆō 196 C theory ŌĆō 196 C theory +0.9 ŌĆō 212 H/F theory 50% F coverage 196 H theory ŌĆō 196 (2├Ś1) H theory +2.4 ŌĆō 212 (2├Ś1) N theory ŌĆō 213 F theory ca. +3.3 ŌĆō 213 O theory ether termination 213 O theory hydroxl termination 213 H theory ŌĆō 213 11 sensor240 and its compatibility with the analytes of interest. An as-yet unexplored strategy to shield near-surface NVs from fluc- tuating electric fields could leverage surface dipole control using self-assembled monolayers (SAMs).241,242 More generally, mag- netic and electric noise sources from surface traps could be re- duced using highly homogeneous chemical surface functionaliza- tion, which is detailed in Section 4. 3.3 Surface terminations for increasing NV stability Common diamond CVD growth employs hydrogen gas, resulting in hydrogen termination of dangling bonds at interfaces.243,244 This termination induces a highly unfavorable NEA that destabi- lizes the NVŌłÆ state. Furthermore, H termination is expected to introduce sub-bandgap states resulting in delocalization and loss of NV electrons upon photoexcitation.187 While hydrogen termi- nation will naturally degrade when exposed to air, the systematic chemical control of diamond surfaces offers a solution to com- bat this destabilization of shallow NV centers.187,245 Below, we summarize methods for tailoring the diamond surface termina- tion and explore the resulting influence on NV-sensing properties. Subsequent chemical functionalization with molecular films of in- terest is described in Sec. 4. Fluorine surface termination. Halogen termination of diamond may occur naturally during CVD growth processes that employ halogenated carbon precursors, or by post-growth treatments including plasma exposure,246ŌĆō248 electrochemical techniques,249 atomic beams,250 X-ray irradia- tion,251 and others.252ŌĆō254 In particular, termination with flu- orine has received considerable attention in the context of NV sensing; as the most electronegative element, fluorine is a promis- ing surface termination for inducing PEA.196 Moreover, the 100% natural abundance of the I = 1/2, 19F isotope would enable its proposed use as a platform for nuclear-spin-based quantum sim- ulation,255 further motivating its exploration. Theoretically, fully fluorinated surfaces are expected to yield favorable PEA. For example, (100)-cut diamonds, which are most commonly used, are estimated to have Žć = 2.13ŌłÆ3 eV.187,196 Fur- thermore, (111) surfaces are theoretically predicted to have up to Žć = 2.63 eV,196 while fluorinated (113) interfaces are estimated to yield Žć = 3.30 eV.213 In addition, recent density functional the- ory calculations suggest that this termination is also highly suit- able for the less-studied (110) interface.257 Experimentally, fluorine termination has been achieved using several techniques. Rietwyk et al. utilized exposure to disso- ciated XeF2, measuring a PEA of Žć = 2.56 eV for a (100) sur- face.202 In addition, Cui and Hu tested the influence of fluorine- terminated (100) diamond, prepared using a CF4 plasma (Fig. 5).256 Analysis with X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy revealed that a 5-minute exposure led to a ca. 3-nm-thick polymerized fluorocarbon on the surface. Moreover, charge-state-dependent NV fluorescence measurements revealed a higher ╬Č for fluorine- terminated diamond than for oxygen and hydrogen termination. Similar results were obtained for nanodiamonds treated with electron-beam-induced fluorination, which allows for highly lo- calized surface modification.258 Finally, Osterkamp et al. demon- (a) (b) (c) Fig. 5 Characterization of the impact of fluorine-terminated diamond on shallow NV centers. (a) Schematic showing use of CF4 plasma to induce surface fluorination of oxygen-terminated diamond. (b) Representative photoluminescence spectra comparing oxygen- and fluorine-terminated surfaces. Zero-phonon lines (ZPL) of the NV0 and NVŌłÆ are indicated. (c) Ratio of the NVŌłÆ ZPL area to that of the sum of NVŌłÆ ZPL and NV0 ZPL areas after different surface preparation conditions. Adapted with permission from . Copyright 2013 AIP Publishing LLC. strated the stabilization of shallow (ca. 5-nm-deep) NVs using SF6 plasma exposure, enabling NMR signal detection from protons in immersion oil on the diamond surface.145 In contrast to these results, Ohashi et al. found that a brief (15 s) treatment with CF4 plasma led to permanent bleaching of ca. 30% of shallow NV centers.218 This experiment underlines the critical importance of reducing acceptor states and charge traps at the diamond surface, even for interfaces with large global PEA. Oxygen surface termination. Oxygen-terminated surfaces offer a highly promising route to sta- bilize shallow NV centers while allowing for subsequent chemical functionalization. Importantly, we note that coverage by different oxygen-containing functional groups, such as hydroxyl (CŌĆōOH), carboxylic acid (COOH), carbonyl (C=O) and ether (CŌĆōOŌĆōC) 12 groups, impact both Žć and as the presence of deleterious sub- bandgap surface states. Such states may perturb the excited-state energy levels of nearby NV centers, impacting their charge stabil- ity.187 In addition, we note that different diamond surface planes may also strongly impact Žć and the presence of surface states. Indeed, recent theoretical work by Li et al. suggests that the oxy- genated (113) diamond surfaces may increase optical stability of near-surface NV centers compared to the commonly used (100)- and (111)-cut diamonds.213 Full termination with hydroxyl groups is theoretically predicted to yield NEA of Žć = ŌłÆ0.6 eV and PEA of Žć = 0.2 eV for (100) and (111) diamond surfaces, respectively,245 and may yield sub- bandgap states.187 Similarly, carboxyl groups can introduce deep, localized acceptor states that quench NV luminescence.187 More- over, ether-like bridges on oxidized (100) surfaces were theoret- ically calculated to induce a PEA of Žć = 2.4 ŌłÆ 2.61 eV;187,196,197 however, photo-excited electrons from NVŌłÆ may be trapped by such surfaces, resulting in blinking.187 Encouragingly, epoxy- oxidized (111) surfaces were recently predicted to have PEA of Žć = 1.85 eV without generation of sub-bandgap states.208 Mov- ing forward, it is likely that a combination of these terminators will yield the optimal combination of PEA and reduced surface states.187,261 In practice, oxygen termination results from the use of strongly oxidizing acids (e.g., piranha solution and "tri-acid" mix- tures of 1:1:1 H2SO4:HClO4:HNO3),21,22,68,219,224,262,263 oxy- gen plasma,194,259,264 thermal annealing in an oxygen atmo- sphere,30,260,264 UV/ozone,265 or ozone treatments.266 Impor- tantly, such treatments often result in a surface that is deco- rated by a mixture of oxygen containing functional groups. Var- ious surface characterization methods can be used to distinguish between these terminal groups and to measure their influence on the surface electronic structure267 including X-ray photoelec- tron spectroscopy (XPS), ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS), near-edge X-ray absorption fine-structure (NEXAFS) spec- troscopy, high-resolution electron-loss spectroscopy (HREELS), and Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy. However, deterministic control over the relative ratio of these groups is not trivial, and different oxidation procedures yield variable composi- tions.268 Moreover, surface roughness and crystallographic orien- tation also influence the coverage,269,270. Finally, depending on how harsh the oxidation process is, some procedures may result in undesired graphitization. Experimentally, surface oxidation treatments have consistently shown improvements in T2 times for near-surface NVs, in addi- tion to higher ╬Č both for bulk194,264,271 and nanodiamond ma- terials.49,272,273 Fu et al. showed efficient conversion of NV0 to NVŌłÆ for ca. 10 ŌĆō 75-nm-deep emitters after annealing at 465 ┬░C in an oxygen atmosphere (Fig. 6a).191 Moreover, de Oliveira et al. observed a threefold increase in T2 following an O2 soft plasma exposure compared to tri-acid-cleaned surfaces (Fig. 6b).259 In addition, Yamano et al. demonstrated an improvement in Rabi oscillation contrast; the C = 0.14 observed for shallow NV centers in acid-cleaned diamond increased to C = 0.30 after UV/ozone treatment, further improving to C = 0.43 following oxygen ther- mal annealing (Fig. 6c).260 More recently, Sangtawesin et al. reported on the impact of thermal oxygen annealing on shallow NV-center spin coherence, along with complementary character- ization of the surface morphology (Fig. 6d-f).30 They reported up to a factor-of-four improvement in T2 for shallow NV centers compared to samples prepared with tri-acid cleaning alone. These improved properties were attributed to the formation of a highly ordered, predominantly ether-terminated surface. This ordering was facilitated by fabrication of extremely flat (100) surfaces with rms roughness of < 0.4 nm. In contrast, Braunbeck et al. stud- ied the impact of mechanical polishing and etching techniques on coherence times for shallow emitters and found minimal correla- tion with surface roughness.274 These findings suggest that the particular method of preparing flat diamond surfaces (i.e., etch- ing, polishing, etc.) likely has a strong influence on the chemical termination. In some cases, surface oxidation can have minimal impact on T2 while having a significant influence on T1 for shallow emit- ters. For example, Ohashi et al. observed no significant change in T2 after oxidation (compared to H-terminated surfaces after tri- acid cleaning) but observed a larger spread in relaxation times (T1 Ōēł 0.54ŌłÆ4.2 ms compared to T1 Ōēł 2.7ŌłÆ3.8 ms).218 Moreover, Tetienne et al. saw that thermal annealing in oxygen for 4 h at 465 ┬░C had little influence on T2 and no effect on the average photoluminescence rate or Rabi contrast.275 In contrast, such an- nealing resulted in a two-order-of-magnitude reduction in T1 for some emitters; however, longer T1 times could be recovered after tri-acid cleaning. In summary, the experimental results reported for oxygenated diamond surfaces underline the complexity of the relevant spin and charge dynamics that impact shallow NV cen- ters. Nitrogen surface termination. Nitrogen-terminated surfaces have recently received increased at- tention as an alternative to the more widely employed oxygen treatments. Crucially, the band bending (and resulting electron affinity) at the surface depends sensitively on the bonding na- ture of the nitrogen atoms.276ŌĆō278 In addition, termination with nitrogen has additional side benefits, including reduced electron- spin noise as well as the potential to create well-defined arrays of nitrogen nuclear spins (I = 1 or I = 1/2 for 14N and 15N, respec- tively) that can be probed with NVs. Theoretical results from Stacey et al. showed that (2 ├Ś 1)- reconstructed (100) surfaces that are fully terminated with nitro- gen exhibit a PEA of Žć = 3.46 eV, while (2├Ś2)-reconstructed sur- faces with 50/50 N/H termination exhibit a PEA of only Žć = 0.32 eV (Fig. 7a).201 Furthermore, Chou et al. performed first- principles calculations of (111) diamond surfaces in which ter- minal carbon atoms could bind to a single hydrogen. With this model, they found that an over 50% substitution of C-H units by isovalent nitrogen led to PEA (Fig. 7b,c),209 with full nitrogen coverage resulting in Žć = 3.23 eV. Interestingly, unlike the (100) and (111) surfaces, nitrogen termination of (113) diamond was proposed as unsuitable for NV sensing since surface-state mixing with the NV excited state would lead to photoionization.213 Experimentally, nitrogenation of diamond surfaces has been achieved using anodic polarization in liquid ammonia (requir- 13 (d) (e) (f) (c) (a) (b) Fig. 6 Experimental characterization of oxygen-terminated diamond for stabilizing shallow NV centers. (a) Confocal images (top) and photolumi- nescence spectra (bottom) before and after thermal annealing of diamond surfaces containing shallow NV centers in O2. (b) Spin coherence times T2 (Hahn echo) as a function of depth for NV centers before and after oxygen plasma exposure. (c) Representative Rabi oscillations for a single NV after acid treatment, after UV/ozone treatment, and following thermal annealing in O2. (d) T2 (Hahn echo) decay curves from the same NV center and (e) coherence time as a function of the number of dynamical decoupling pulses before (bue) and after (red) O2 thermal annealing. (f) Reversibility and reproducibility of O2 thermal annealing shown by comparing T2 from Hahn echo (opaque) and XY-8 (transparent). (a) Adapted with permission from . Copyright 2010 American Institute of Physics. (b) Adapted with permission from . Copyright 2015 AIP Publishing LLC. (c) Adapted with permission from . Copyright 2017 The Japan Society of Applied Physics. (d)ŌĆō(f) Adapted with permission from . Copyright 2019 American Physical Society. 14 (f) (b) (c) (d) (a) Fig. 7 Theoretical prediction and experimental characterization of nitrogen-terminated diamond for near-surface NV stabilization. (a) Surface surfaces. Both cases show minimal leakage of surface states into the diamond bandgap. (b) Comparison of H- and N-terminated (111) diamond surfaces. Unlike the N-terminated surface, the H-termination introduces delocalized surface-related image states into the bandgap. (c) Electron affinity as a function of N coverage. (d) Analysis of charge stability for NV centers via Rabi oscillations; contrast is compared between oxygen-terminating treatments and after nitrogen termination using nitrogen radical exposure. (a) Adapted with permission from . Copyright 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (b) and (c) Adapted with permission from . Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (d) Adapted with permission from . Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 15 ing conductive, e.g., boron-doped diamond),280 plasma treat- ment with nitrogen (N2),201,281ŌĆō284 ammonia (NH3),285ŌĆō288 or mixed sources,280 radical beam exposure,279 and UV irradia- tion in NH3 gas.289 In these experiments, photoelectron spectro- scopies including XPS, NEXAFS, and HREELS were used to probe the binding configuration of nitrogen atoms. The resulting nitro- gen may be incorporated as nitrile (CN) groups, imines (C=N), single-bonded (CŌĆōN, NŌĆōN), or amine (NHx) species. In a recent study, Kawai et al. demonstrated the stabilization of the NVŌłÆ charge state in shallow defects using nitrogen radical beam exposure (Fig. 7d).279 This method is suspected to pro- duce diamond surfaces with a mixture of nitrogen terminations, as characterized by XPS and NEXAFS. Using this technique, the authors reported increased Rabi oscillation contrast compared to NV centers in oxygen-terminated diamond (prepared by hot acid treatment and VUV/ozone exposure). Furthermore, measured T2 values were comparable to prior reports on oxygen-terminated surfaces.290 Subsequently, 4ŌĆō10 nm-deep emitters were used for NV NMR detection of 1H spins in immersion oil. Interestingly, nitrogenation can also impact the fractional cov- erage of sp2 and sp3 carbon, a phenomenon that is heavily depen- dent on the process parameters and diamond surface morphol- ogy. For example, an rf plasma based on a mixture of NH3/N2 diluted in H2 was shown to induce surface graphitization on poly- crystalline, boron-doped diamond.280 In contrast, we recently showed that exposure of oxygen-terminated, single-crystalline (100) diamond surfaces to NH3 plasma resulted in a reduction of residual sp2 carbon, which may be linked to an observed increase in T2 for shallow NV centers.288 Moving forward, derivatization (e.g., of amines) enables complementary tests of chemical functionality. While the in- troduction of reactive amine functional groups enables facile attachment of molecules, fully amine-terminated diamond surfaces were experimentally shown to exhibit NEA,287 and are thus incompatible with near-surface NV centers. Therefore, mixed surface terminations are likely preferable to maintain NV stability while allowing for covalent molecular attachment.201,288 4 Surface functionalization for molecular sensing with NV centers NV-center detection of external molecular targets requires both molecular immobilization on the diamond surface and preser- vation of emitter properties via the aforementioned techniques. While the detection of magnetic noise arising from electron291,292 and nuclear spins21,22,27ŌĆō29,145,279,293 external to the diamond has been demonstrated, robust and deterministic functionaliza- tion of the diamond surface will prove critical for future ex- periments. Indeed, such functionalization could facilitate ob- servation of, e.g., surface reactions, conformational changes in biomolecules, spin-dependent effects in charge transfer, and tar- get binding to receptors (such as antibodies or aptamers). More- over, directed and self-assembly of molecules on surfaces pro- vides well-defined specificity and selectivity, as well as control over molecular orientation (e.g., the availability of binding sites or functional groups) and density, further motivating its develop- ment. Despite being widely regarded as chemically inert, numerous techniques exist to functionalize diamond surfaces, which are the focus of recent reviews.268,294 However, not all strategies for molecular attachment to diamond are compatible with high- quality, shallow NV centers; for example, electrochemical meth- ods, such as diazonium grafting,295,296 require conductive (e.g., boron-doped) diamond. These substrates are typically incompati- ble with NV sensing experiments, which require ultra-high-purity substrates. In addition, while direct modification of hydrogen- terminated diamond is possible,253,297ŌĆō301 it is not be suitable for charge stabilization of near-surface NVŌłÆ since local band bend- ing promotes the neutral charge state.194 In this section, we explore strategies for stable non-covalent and covalent grafting of molecules to diamond that are compatible with near-surface NV centers. In particular, we focus on covalent attachment for oxygen- and nitrogen-terminated surfaces, in addition to molec- ular self-assembly on oxide adhesion layers that are grown on diamond. 4.1 Noncovalent Functionalization One functionalization approach employs non-covalent attach- ment by physisorption, which is stabilized by, e.g., hydrogen- bond interactions or electrostatic attraction. Alternatively, large molecules of interest (e.g., proteins) could be immobilized within solid polymer matrices that restrict translational and rotational degrees of freedom. Indeed, such a route may prove useful for NV-NMR-based approaches for elucidation of structural informa- tion. Moreover, solid supports could take advantage of dielectric shielding to mitigate the impact of electronic noise on NV-center sensors. For example, Shi et al. used a polylysine matrix to immobi- lize mitotic arrest deficient-2 (MAD2) proteins that were mod- ified with nitroxide spin labels.23 These molecules were drop- cast onto the diamond surface before freeze drying with liquid nitrogen (Fig. 8a,b).23 Shallow NV centers were subsequently used to monitor dilute densities of these proteins using EPR mea- surements. Notably, even though motion was restricted by the polylysine matrix, protein dynamics persisted on the millisecond time scale, resulting in spectral broadening of the EPR spectra. Consequently, improved surface functionalization and NV sens- ing schemes are required for detection of hierarchical ordering and conformational changes in biomolecules. Interestingly, Kayci et al. recently developed a sandwich bioas- say that bypasses diamond functionalization in favor of modify- ing glass substrates with indexed droplets of hydrogel microstruc- tures. These substrates are then brought into close proximity to a diamond containing near-surface NV centers for sensing (Fig. 8c-e).302 This approach relied on magnetic-nanoparticle-tagged DNA for nucleic acid detection; briefly, poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate-based hydrogel microstructure networks were poly- merized with acrylamide-functionalized oligonucleotides. Com- plementary target DNA (conjugated with magnetic nanoparticles) then hybridized with probe sequences, resulting in a modified 16 (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) Fig. 8 NV studies with non-covalently modified surfaces. (a) Schematic of proteins labeled with nitroxide spins and dispersed within a polylysine matrix layer on a diamond surface. (b) EPR spectrum characteristic of the nitroxide spin label tethered to proteins under study. Signals disappear after removal of the proteins from the surface. (c) Illustration of probe DNA immobilization in hydrogel microstructures on glass substrates and hybridization with complementary strands bound to magnetic nanoparticles. (d) Scheme for NV-center detection of magnetic fields arising from magnetic nanoparticles upon DNA capture. (e) Dose response curve of shifts in NV ODMR frequency for increasing concentration of target DNA. permission from . Copyright 2021 National Academy of Science. 17 NV ODMR signal. Three-dimensional hydrogel structures hosting bioreceptors could also be patterned directly on planar diamond substrates for applications necessitating direct diamond surface modification. Overall, non-covalent functionalization is attractive due to the ease of achieving physisorption compared to chemisorption, par- ticularly for diamond substrates where the density of functional groups may be limited. Nevertheless, under normal sensing con- ditions, desorption of physisorbed molecules occurs more readily than covalently tethered species. Furthermore, non-specific bind- ing may pose a significant issue when relying on non-covalent attachment methods alone.303 4.2 Covalent Functionalization In contrast to non-covalent techniques, chemisorption offers greater stability and control over molecular attachment to sur- faces that exhibit well-defined chemical terminations. In prac- tice, the optimal chemical modification procedure and starting diamond surface termination are dependent on the available functional groups of the target molecule. Fig. 9 highlights some selected pathways to functionalize oxygen- and nitrogen- terminated diamond surfaces, which are of great interest due to their compatibility with near-surface NV centers for sensing ap- plications. Functionalizing oxygen-terminated diamond. Conveniently, residual carboxylic acid groups resulting from sur- face oxidation may be functionalized directly.270,304 However, the fraction of carboxylic acid groups is typically low,305 resulting in dilute attachment that is most suitable for single- to few-molecule experiments. For example, Sushkov et al. employed a 1-ethyl- 3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) crosslinking chemistry to tether paramagnetic molecules composed of a gadolinium ion (Gd3+) chelated by an amine-terminated ligand to carboxylic-acid moieties on diamond (Fig. 10a,b).26 Co-localization of isolated molecules using single NV centers allowed for detection of an individual S = 7/2 electron spin from a (Gd3+) chelated molecule using T1 relaxometry. Lovchinsky et al. later used the same crosslinking chemistry to immobilize ubiquitin proteins via exposed carboxylic acid groups on the protein (Fig. 10c,d).24 This dilute attachment, in combination with enrichment of the protein with 2H and 13C, allowed the authors to detect proteins on the surface using single, shallow NV centers. Moving forward, more precise control over specific binding to orient proteins (e.g., antibodies), such as labeling with His-tags, or targeting thiolated cysteine residues, will prove highly useful. In particular, specific binding will enable subsequent target attachment to immobilized receptors, as well as positioning of active sites in close proximity to the surface. Oligonucleotide probes may also be tethered using readily available modifications to the ends of the sugar phosphate back- bone. For example, Shi et al. functionalized carboxylic acid groups on diamond nanopillars hosting single NV centers with NH2-modified probe sequences. They subsequently detected hy- bridization with nitroxide-labeled complementary strands using EPR measurements (Fig. 10e,f).25 Finally, hydroxl groups can be used to attach molecules of in- terest by esterification306ŌĆō309 and thermal alkylation.310 More- over, hydroxl groups may serve as anchoring points for phos- phonic acid headgroups,311 for silanization,312ŌĆō314 or for pre- cursor molecules in growth of capping films via atomic layer deposition (see Sec. 4.2.3). Starting with oxygen-annealed diamond substrates, Grotz et al. used silanization to co- valently bind the 4-maleimido-TEMPO spin label.315 The au- thors employed DEER techniques to monitor Rabi nutations of surface-bound electron spins and measured the coupling strength between spin labels and NV-center probes. In ad- dition, we demonstrated surface NMR detection using vapor- deposited trimethoxy(3,3,3-trifluoropropyl)silane, as well as (3- aminopropyl)trimethoxysilane, that were subsequently exposed to trifluoromethyl tags for amine-reactive crosslinking.288 Signal from 19F spins were readily detected via NV NMR, however, mul- tilayer film formation could not be ruled out. Generally, prevent- ing multilayer formation or silane film degradation under aque- ous conditions or air exposure is difficult and the mechanism for molecular assembly on oxidized surfaces is not fully understood. Still, silanization provides a facile route toward dense surface functionalization. Functionalizing nitrogen-terminated diamond. Nitrogen-terminated diamond surfaces decorated with amine groups can be used to anchor molecules in a variety of ways.286 Analogous to crosslinking of molecules hosting amine groups to carboxylic acid moieties on oxygen-terminated diamond, amide bond formation via EDC/NHS coupling chemistry can also be used in the reverse way for amine-terminated sub- strates.304,316 Such experiments use bifunctional linkers to ex- pose COOH groups on initially amine-terminated surfaces for subsequent NHS/EDC reactions.317 Amine-to-sulfydryl crosslink- ing with m-maleimidobenzoyl-N-hydroxysuccinimide ester is then used for directed attachment, e.g., of thiolated oligonucleotide probes and peptides or proteins containing cysteine residues. Indeed, aminolysis with 4-pentynoic acid in the presence of N,NŌĆÖ-dicyclohexylcarbodiimide (DCC) and 4-(dimethylamino)- pyridine (DMAP) was shown to enable catalyst-free thiol-yne cou- pling on diamond.318 Moreover, amine-functionalized molecules may also be crosslinked to amines on the diamond surface using glutaraldehyde.289 Recently, we introduced a strategy for direct chemical function- alization of terminal amine groups using mixed nitrogen- and oxygen-terminated (N/O) surfaces prepared using NH3 plasma following a thermal oxygen anneal.288 Importantly, short plasma exposure times (ca. 20 s) resulted in increased coherence times for NV centers < 10 nm from the surface and signifi- cantly reduced background fluorescence from the diamond inter- face. Subsequent chemical functionalization of the mixed N/O- terminated diamond surfaces via highly generalizable amine- reactive crosslinking allowed for tunable molecular density and recyclable functionalization. Finally, NV-NMR measurements were used to detect surface-bound analytes with trifluoromethyl 18 Diamond carbonyl hydroxyl carboxylic acid ether amine nitrile imine single-bonded CN single-bonded NN amide Amidification Esterification Thermal alkylation Silanization Phosphonation Amidification Fig. 9 Schematic depiction of common functional groups at the surface of oxygen- and nitrogen-terminated diamond, and selected pathways for covalent functionalization as described in detail in the main text. tags in the few-molecule (< 200 molecules) regime. While promising, this approach is hampered by a decrease in the num- ber of NV centers that exhibited ODMR signal for long NH3 plasma exposure times. The mechanism of this destabilization is not well understood, but may be linked to a concomitant increase of reactive amine groups that can contribute to NEA surfaces.287 Moving forward, situations requiring a high surface density of analytes crosslinked to surface-bound amine groups may benefit from co-doping with electron donors to aid in stabilizing the NVŌłÆ state.140 Atomic layer deposition of oxide adhesion films. An alternative to directly binding molecules on the diamond surface employs an intermediate amorphous oxide capping lay- ers that enables straightforward chemical functionalization.319 Specifically, atomic layer deposition (ALD) can be used to deposit adhesion films for subsequent molecular attachment via well- established oxide chemistries, e.g., with phosphonate or silane headgroups. Recently, Liu et al. used ALD to grow ca. 1-nm-thick capping layers of Al2O3 on diamond substrates before molecular assembly using phosphonate anchoring groups (Fig. 11).320 In- troduction of the ALD layer was found to slightly reduce T1 and T2 times for NV centers located ca. 5ŌĆō12 nm below the surface; how- ever, the resulting sensitivity was sufficient to perform ensemble NV-NMR measurements of 19F and 1H in molecules during the formation of a self-assembled monolayer. Such real-time obser- vation of molecular signals highlights the exciting potential for NV-NMR spectroscopy to track a wide range of surface chemical reactions over the timescales of minutes to hours. Similarly, Xie et al. used ca. 2-nm-thick ALD-grown Al2O3 ad- hesion layers on oxygen-terminated diamond to test surface func- tionalization, chemical stability, and preservation of shallow NV sensors (Fig. 12).321 Subsequent silanization of these layers en- abled grafting of polyethylene glycol (PEG) moieties and attach- ment of proteins and DNA molecules. Functionalization with PEG molecules is promising as it yields highly biocompatibile surfaces and minimizes non-specific binding.303,322 While ALD and func- tionalization resulted in decreased coherence times for shallow (2.3 ŌĆō 11 nm deep) NV centers compared to pristine diamond surfaces, some NVs still exhibited coherence times of up to 100 ╬╝s, which are sufficiently long for quantum sensing experiments. Moreover, the authors showed that the Al2O3 layer can be re- moved by KOH, providing an easily recyclable NV-sensing plat- form. In summary, these recent examples show the benefit of amor- phous oxide capping layers for NV-center sensing of functional- ized diamond surfaces. Specifically, ALD affords precise control of adhesion layer thickness, enables the formation of dense mono- layer coverage of molecular adsorbates, and facilitates recyclable surfaces through removal and regrowth. Nevertheless, there are challenges that accompany this functionalization strategy; the ad- hesion layer leads to increased distance between the NV and tar- get spin, resulting in decreased signal (see Sec. 2.3). Moreover, the spin and charge properties of shallow NV centers were ob- served to degrade with application of ALD layers. Indeed, de- pending on the stoichiometry of aluminum and oxygen in AlxOy films, the layers can induce unfavorable electron affinity.323 In addition, these films may also host paramagnetic defects leading to reduced T2 times.324,325 5 Measurement strategies to mitigate sur- face noise In addition to the aforementioned materials optimization and sur- face chemistries, several strategies can be employed during mea- surement to mitigate the effects of noise on the NV center. Typi- cally, such measurement sequences increase the sensor coherence time or realize a detection method that is immune to certain noise sources. While a complete overview of the methods for reducing the effects of noise via careful engineering of the measurement protocol (or measurement "hardenings") is beyond the scope of this work, we point the reader towards dedicated review arti- cles.10,43 In the following section, we discuss illustrative exam- ples for combating unwanted surface effects through experimen- 19 (d) (a) (c) (b) (e) (f) Fig. 10 Characterization of chemically functionalized, oxygen-terminated diamond surfaces for shallow NV centers. (a) Schematic of single-electron- spin detection from isolated Gd3+-chelated molecules bound to carboxylic acids on the diamond surface. (b) Magnetic noise measurements from Gd3+-chelated molecules. (c) Schematic for probing isolated proteins by NMR detection with single NV centers (left) and chemical attachment (e) Schematic of diamond nanopillar arrays functionalized with DNA probes attached to carboxylic acid groups on the diamond surface. (f) Double electronŌĆōelectron resonance (DEER) pulse sequence used for electron spin detection in hybridized complementary DNA strands. (a) and (b) Adapted with permission from . Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (c) and (d) Adapted with permission from . Copyright 2016 American Association for the Advancement of Science. (e) and (f) Adapted with permission from . Copyright 2018 Springer Nature Limited. 20 (a) (c) (b) Fig. 11 Surface NMR with ensembles of shallow NV centers to probe self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) on diamond capped with Al2O3. (a) Com- parison of 19F resonance linewidth for SAMs of 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluoroctanephosphonic acid (PFOPA) and 2-pentafluorophenoxydodecylphosphonic acid (PFPDPA). (b) Comparison of 31P resonance linewidth of SAMs of molecules containing phosphonate headgroups on Al2O3 capping layers vs bare diamond surfaces. (c) SAM formation probed by monitoring increase in 19F resonance signal upon chemical binding of PFPDPA from ethanolic solutions. Adapted with permission from . Copyright 2022 National Academy of Science. tal implementation. Importantly, the improvements in sensitivity afforded by such techniques are complementary to the advanced surface chemistry discussed thus far. 5.1 Dynamical decoupling While dynamical decoupling (DD) sequences were not initially developed for sensing, they have proven exceptionally useful for detecting signals at the specific frequencies where they do not refocus the signal10,78,219,326,327; a phenomenon known as "re- coupling". The simplest DD sequence is the Hahn-echo protocol70, com- prising a single ŽĆ pulse that protects the NV center from dephas- ing caused by variations in the magnetic field that are slow com- pared to the experiment duration. The basic idea is illustrated in Figure 3: any phase accumulation on the NV center caused by variations in B0 are refocused. Similarly, decoherence from magnetic-field fluctuations at higher frequencies can be mitigated by instead applying a train of ŽĆ pulses, with the interpulse delay Žä dictating the high-frequency cut-off (1/Žä) of the noise spectrum. In this case, the magnetic field must remain constant over shorter interpulse delays to achieve a refocusing. As a result, dynamical decoupling protocols can substantially enhance observed coher- ence times; in contrast, the magnetic noise at f = 1/(2Žä) is instead integrated. This phenomenon can be exploited for sensing environmen- tal noise via changes in coherence at specific frequencies, essen- tially using the NV as a magnetic spectrum analyzer. Already, such sequences have been used to detect signals originating from AC-modulated single spins,328 currents,329,330 magnetic gradi- ents331,332 and electric fields.84 For noise with frequency f, refo- 21 (c) (a) (d) (b) Fig. 12 Surface functionalization of Al2O3-capped diamond and sub- sequent characterization of shallow NV properties. (a) Recyclable func- tionalization scheme showing Al2O3 growth by atomic layer deposition, silanization of the oxide film, and chemical attachment. (b) Illustration of biomolecule attachment on silanized surfaces. (c) Confocal fluorescence image showing near-surface NV centers characterized following surface modification. (d) Representative (YY-8)N=8 sensing sequence before and after functionalization for an NV center with depth 4.8 nm. Adapted with permission from Copyright 2022 National Academy of Science. cusing will occur for sequences with Žä = 1/(2f) as well as for har- monics ŽäŌĆ▓ = 1/(2N f), where N = 2n+1. Moreover, DD sequences may exhibit spurious sub-harmonics for finite-width pulses (de- pendent on the phase cycling).57 Application of over 104 ŽĆ pulses have been successfully applied to a target NV center,55,333 resulting in coherence times exceed- ing one second at cryogenic temperatures.55 It is therefore of crucial importance that DD sequences do not themselves intro- duce significant errors, necessitating either high-fidelity pulses46 or fault-tolerant sequences. A significant reduction in error can be achieved using a scheme proposed by Meiboom and Gill,334 who adapted the Carr-Purcell (CP) sequence ’┐ĮŽĆ 2 ’┐Į x (ŌłÆŽä/2ŌłÆŽĆx ŌłÆŽä/2ŌłÆ)n ’┐ĮŽĆ 2 ’┐Į ╬Ė (21) into a sequence that is now referred to as ŌĆ£CPMGŌĆØ ’┐ĮŽĆ 2 ’┐Į x (ŌłÆŽä/2ŌłÆŽĆy ŌłÆŽä/2ŌłÆ)n ’┐ĮŽĆ 2 ’┐Į ╬Ė , (22) which provides first-order correction for amplitude, frequency, and timing errors. The phase ╬Ė of the last ŽĆ/2 pulse can be tuned to select different sensing schemes10 and can prevent the accu- mulation of pulse errors under realistic experimental conditions. Further error correcting protocols of note include the XYXY se- quence, the popular XY ŌłÆN protocols,335 and the Knill dynamical decoupling protocol (KDD).336 Such sequences have proven exceptionally useful for detecting, and even controlling, proximal nuclear spins. As with any other source of magnetic noise, DD sequences can very efficiently de- couple the NV center from a bath of proximal spins if they are not also refocused by the DD pulses,55 which is typically the case due to the large zero-field splitting of the NV center. Additionally, DD protocols can impart back-action on coupled nuclear spins, which can be used as a resource for realizing coherent control over a multi-spin system.337,338 Encouragingly, recent efforts have made progress in designing DD sequences that refocus noise at only one frequency, suppressing spurious harmonics at the expense of a reduction in signal.339,340 In summary, the detection of nuclear spins via DD protocols provides an ideal combination of coher- ence time enhancement as well as lock-in detection capability for nuclear spins. 5.2 Coherent driving of surface spins Dynamical decoupling alone cannot mitigate noise from residual paramagnetic impurities (e.g., electron spins associated with dan- gling bonds at the surface or substitutional nitrogen centers) due to their fast Larmor precession at typical magnetic bias fields. However, if such spins have sufficiently long T1 times, one can combat noise by employing continuous, coherent driving of the spin bath.341,342 This complementary approach aims at engineer- ing the spectral density of the magnetic noise generated by the electron spin bath itself. In practice, the bath spins are driven with Rabi frequency ╬®, which leads to periodic modulation in the resulting noise at the NV location. Essentially, such driving shifts the magnetic noise spectrum from f = 0 to f = ╬®, which can re- duce the spectral overlap with the NV measurement window,10 resulting in an increased NV coherence time. Noise can be re- duced further by spectral engineering of the applied field343 or by using pulsed schemes.344,345 Previously, such techniques have been used to reduce dephas- ing for NV-rich diamonds with large nitrogen content. However, coherent driving of the spin bath is applicable to any paramag- netic spins that exhibit sufficiently long T1 times, including nu- clear spins. However, in this case, low nuclear gyromagnetic ra- tios pose a challenge in achieving high driving frequencies but also reduce the magnetic noise generated by such species. 5.3 Repetitive measurement and readout schemes Often the sensor coherence time is insufficient for achieving the desired spectral resolution using standard DD protocols; in such cases, weak-measurement techniques may serve as a viable al- ternative.61,62 Such measurement schemes are appropriate only when coherent detection is possible (e.g., measuring coherently coupled nuclear spins) and involve applying sequential, weak measurements that result in limited back-action on the target spin. Since the NV center can be reinitialized between sequen- tial measurements, the spectral resolution is no longer limited by the NV-center T2 time and instead by that of the target nuclear spin. Importantly, we note that the measurement sensitivity is still limited by the NV T2, motivating the use of highly coherent emitters. 22 5.4 Double-quantum sensing Most measurement protocols leverage only two of the three spin states within the ground-state manifold (|ms = 0Ō¤® and |ms = ┬▒1Ō¤®, see Sec. 2). In contrast, double-quantum protocols make use of the full spin-triplet subspace to obtain higher sensitivity. For ex- ample, in the Ramsey-like experiment shown in Fig. 3a, the first (ŽĆ/2) pulse would be replaced by two pulses: a (ŽĆ/2)y pulse on the |0Ō¤® Ōåö |ŌłÆ1Ō¤® transition followed by a (ŌłÆŽĆ)y pulse on the |0Ō¤® Ōåö |+1Ō¤® transition. These rotations result in an equal superpo- sition of both the |ŌłÆ1Ō¤® and |+1Ō¤® states |ŽłŌ¤® = 1/ ŌłÜ (23) During the measurement evolution period, phases are imprinted on both basis states with opposite sign |ŽłŌ¤® = 1 ŌłÜ 2 ’┐Į eŌłÆi╬│NV ’┐Į B(t)dt |ŌłÆ1Ō¤®+ei╬│NV ’┐Į B(t)dt |+1Ō¤® ’┐Į . (24) Finally, this state is mapped back to the starting basis through ap- plication of the same pulses in reverse order. The resulting mea- surement yields double the signal when compared to the single- quantum approaches described in Sec. 2. An additional benefit of double-quantum techniques are their immunity to common-mode shifts that affect both sub-levels in the same manner. For exam- ple, variations of the zero-field-splitting constant caused by tem- perature shifts,89 axial electric or strain fields345, and transverse magnetic-field fluctuations.345 If such noise sources dominate the coherence loss, double-quantum DD may yield longer coherence times than single-quantum approaches. However, for longitudi- nal magnetic fluctuations, the doubled phase accumulation often comes at the cost of a Ōł╝ 2├Ś reduction in T2.346,347 6 Emerging Applications The previously surveyed methods for diamond-surface function- alization could be used in concert with the exceptional sensitivity and spatial resolution of the NV to enable molecular-level detec- tion. Indeed, NV sensors could revolutionize many active areas of research since they operate at ambient conditions with min- imal perturbation to the system of interest.348 In the following section, we highlight a selection of emerging applications within various fields of chemistry and biology that would benefit from (or necessitate) covalent attachment to a well-defined, function- alized diamond surface (summarized in Fig. 13), underscoring the immense potential of the NV-center sensing platform. 6.1 StructureŌĆōfunction relationships in biomolecules The potential for NV sensors to elucidate the structure of small to hierarchically more complex biomolecules (e.g., proteins) has been widely posited.17,23,24,349 While the first demonstration of NV-center NMR of external nuclear spins dates back to 2013,22 21 three-dimensional mapping of such spins within a molecule re- mains an outstanding challenge. In contrast to conventional solid-state NMR, which has made tremendous progress in structural analysis by employing fast magic-angle spinning (MAS)350 and high magnetic fields,351 NV NMR has poor spectral resolution. This limited resolution pre- cludes the detection of small chemical shift differences since mea- surements are typically carried out at low applied magnetic field and MAS cannot (yet) be applied. Nevertheless, NV centers could still be used to measure structure-function relationships in biomolecules via position-dependent hyperfine interaction with nuclear spins rather than chemical-shift differences.352,353 Fur- thermore, changes in the magnitude of magnetic noise detected from the Larmor precession of nuclear spin labels can serve as a proxy for conformational changes (e.g., opening of DNA hair- pins). Finally, optical pumping of the NV-center spin can provide a lo- cal, low-entropy source of nuclear-spin polarization that could provide complementary structural information to conventional NMR and EPR techniques. In such experiments, nuclear spins coupled to the NV center are polarized beyond the thermal limit by transferring polarization from the NV.354ŌĆō357 Subsequently, the polarized spin bath can be detected classically (using NMR pick-up coils) or coherently using the NV center.61 6.2 Biosensing The biocompatibility of diamond supports the use of NV centers for bio-sensing applications.358,359 In addition, there is increased interest in developing biosensors for detection of communicable diseases in light of the COVID-19 pandemic. To that end, the in vitro detection of viral RNA using NV centers was first demon- strated in 2020 using a lateral-flow format for HIV diagnosis.360 In this work, the presence of HIV-1-RNA caused immobilization of antibody functionalized nanodiamonds; this was subsequently observed via fluorescent readout of the NVs. In addition, Li et al. proposed a sensing scheme for SARS-CoV-2 RNA that exploits T1 relaxation of NV centers in nanodiamonds.361 In analogy to earlier work on pH and redox sensing,362 they propose Gd3+ as a source for magnetic noise. Specifically, nanodiamonds could be coated with DNA strands containing electrostatically bound Gd3+; upon base-pair matching with the complementary viral RNA, the DNA molecules including Gd3+ complexes would be re- leased from the diamond surface. This reaction would result in decreased noise and therefore longer relaxation times for near- surface NV centers. Notably, the majority of NV biosensing research has thus far leveraged nanodiamonds rather than bulk substrates, which can directly utilize many of the diamond surface preparation and functionalization strategies described in this Review. Further supported by significant advancements in production and pu- rification of nanodiamonds, this alternate platform has seen ap- plication in biomedical sensing and imaging,363ŌĆō367 drug deliv- ery,368 and reaction monitoring,231,369 as discussed in recent re- views.348,370,371 Specifically, these experiments have monitored physiological variables, such as concentration of ions, radicals, and biomolecules, in addition to pH, temperature, and redox po- tential or forces.359 Informed by these efforts, bulk diamond sub- strates offer a complementary or alternative sensing platform for hosting NV centers with significantly improved spin properties. It is worth noting that motivations for chemical control of bulk sur- faces may differ from those of nanodiamonds intended for stud- 23 Diamond NV ŌłÆ Attached molecules of interest controllable density of anchoring sites (i.e., -OH, -NH2) for covalent attachment Well-defined surface chemistry StructureŌĆōfunction relationships in biomolecules Catalysis Radical-pair sensing Chiral-induced spin selectivity Biosensing and target capture short distance between sensor and target spins conserved NV properties left right h╬Į DŌ”ü+ AŌ”ü- e- high pressure, high temperature, + reactant Fig. 13 Schematic overview of emerging applications for shallow NV centers that are discussed in Sec. 6. All applications highlighted in this Review make use of diamond with well-defined surface termination (i.e., controllable density of anchoring sites and layer thickness as well as conserved NV properties) to which molecules of interest are covalently attached. ies of aggregation, protein corona formation, cellular uptake, and targeted delivery. In addition, alignment of the magnetic field required for NV-center experiments is simpler for bulk substrates than for randomly orientated nanocrystals.372,373 Nevertheless, both nano- and bulk-diamond platforms would benefit from im- proved NV-center properties and deterministic surface functional- ization protocols, motivating progress in this field. 6.3 The radical-pair reaction Radical pairs are reaction intermediates that either encounter each other in solution or are created simultaneously, usually by a chemical reaction such as homolytic bond cleavage or photo- induced electron transfer (e.g., in blue-light photoreceptive cryp- tochromes).374 375 376 Research on radical pairs began in the late 20th century in the context of Chemically Induced Dynamic Nuclear Polariza- tion (CIDNP)377 and Chemically Induced Dynamic Electron Po- larization (CIDEP). Later, this research gained interest in the area of magnetic-field effects (MFE),378 379 380 including low-field ef- fects with biological significance381 382 (e.g., magnetoreception in birds383 384). Currently, most radical-pair research focuses on spin-correlated states, which may be either a spin singlet or triplet state.385 Since radical recombination commonly occurs solely from the singlet state, the inter-conversion between sin- glet and triplet states, which is mainly driven by differences in Zeeman frequencies and hyperfine interactions with surrounding nuclei, is a crucial parameter for the chemical outcome. Recently, Finkler et al. proposed to use the NV as a sensor for observing this radical-pair mechanism.386 In such an experiment, a nearby radical pair would experience an effective magnetic field (and therefore singlet-to-triplet conversion rate) that depends on the spin state of the NV sensor. An alternate strategy was in- troduced by Liu et al.387, who proposed to use the electric-field sensitivity of the NV to measure radical-pair recombination rates. Essentially, the charge-separated state of the pair generates a non- zero electric field at the NV position that vanishes upon recombi- nation. Consequently, detection of this field would enable mea- surement of recombination rates at the single-molecule level. We note that both proposals rely on radical-pair generation in a cova- lently attached bio-molecule (via photo-induced electron transfer with a blue light source), which would benefit greatly from the advances in diamond functionalization discussed in this Review. 6.4 Chiral-induced spin selectivity Chiral-induced spin selectivity (CISS) refers to enantioselective and electron spin-dependent transmission of electrons through chiral molecules and crystalline materials.388,389 While spin- selective electron transfer is typically associated with magnetic materials or those possessing substantial spin-orbit coupling, the discovery of the CISS effect suggests that organic molecules lack- ing inversion symmetry that are composed of low-atomic-weight building blocks may also be promising systems for spintron- ics applications.390 Since this discovery, experiments have re- vealed large asymmetry in the scattering probability of polar- ized photoelectrons traversing thin organized films of chiral or- ganic molecules,390ŌĆō394 observed spin selectivity in the conduc- 24 tion regime,395ŌĆō398 and measured spin-dependent charge polar- ization within molecules and at surfaces.399ŌĆō401 However, de- spite concurrent advances in theoretical models to describe this effect,402ŌĆō408 questions remain regarding the role of spin coher- ence and the magnitude of spin polarization accompanying elec- tron transport within chiral molecules. Moreover, the majority of CISS measurements have relied on ferromagnetic electrodes, which may perturb observed polarizations due to the interface be- tween ferromagnetic surfaces and the chiral material.409 410ŌĆō412 Recent proposals outline methods for studying CISS via magnetic-resonance experiments.413ŌĆō415 Chiesa et al. described methods for detection through either asymmetry in the dipolar coupling between the sensor and the polarized spin or via polar- ization transfer from the polarized spin to the sensor.413 Mean- while, Fay et al. suggested monitoring coherence associated with CISS in the presence of a magnetic field that is orthogonal to the chiral axis.414 Critically, proposed experiments necessitate well- aligned molecular assemblies. Moreover, application of conven- tional NMR and EPR measurements may be limited by the need for substantial magnetic fields and large spin ensembles. In con- trast, NV centers present a promising method for detection of CISS locally at the nanoscale. Notably, NVs were used to indi- rectly probe CISS by Merzeida et al,416 who measured the mag- netization orientation in a ferromagnetic layer that exhibited per- pendicular anisotropy from chiral molecular adsorption. In future experiments, chiral molecules could be instead assembled directly on diamond surfaces, in close proximity to NV centers, with exter- nally driven charge transfer to generate spin polarization with a chiral bridge.395,417ŌĆō420 Adsorbed molecules supporting charge- and spin-polarized electrons would induce both electric and mag- netic fields at the NV position, enabling new methods for charac- terization of CISS that could provide novel mechanistic insight. 6.5 Catalysis As previously mentioned, solid-state NMR is a powerful tool for studying the structure of heterogeneous catalysts421 due to ad- vancements in magnetic-field strength,351 fast MAS,350 and dy- namic nuclear polarization (DNP).422 However, it is often un- clear whether the relevant, active species are observed since the working conditions of most catalysts include either high tempera- tures or pressures, which differ dramatically from standard mea- surement conditions.423 Consequently, the development of tech- niques for variable temperature and pressure operando NMR424 are viewed as an important step towards in situ characterization of catalytic materials. However, such schemes are still limited to probing sensitive NMR nuclei that are in high abundance. More- over, the detection of active sites in supported single-site cata- lysts is not compatible with this technique since such studies rely on solid-effect DNP and therefore must be performed at liquid- nitrogen temperatures in frozen glassy matrices of radical solu- tion.425 In contrast, the high pressure and temperature stability of diamond, in combination with exquisitely sensitive NV sensors, could enable detection of dilute, insensitive nuclear species at rel- evant catalytic working conditions. For such experiments, single- site catalysts would be prepared in the vicinity of NV sensor spins using a surface-organometallic chemistry.426 The conventional metal-oxide support (e.g., SiO2, Al2O3) could be replaced either by well-defined diamond surface terminations with controllable densities of anchoring sites (e.g., hydroxyls or amines) or by a thin layer of oxide320. The latter option would utilize the original grafting chemistry at the cost of larger NV-sample distances, as ex- emplified in Fig.13 for selected heterogeneous olefin-metathesis catalysts.426 Subsequently, structural changes resulting from cat- alytic reactions (e.g., loss of a ligand or change in oxidation state of the metal) would be detected using the NV center. Notably, while the large chemical-shift range and quadrupolar nature of many interesting NMR-active metals (e.g., 195Pt, 71Ga) are a ma- jor challenge in conventional NMR spectroscopy, they could serve as a resource for NV-center sensing. 7 Outlook NMR and EPR spectroscopy of molecules are powerful tools for elucidating details of chemical structure, intermolecular inter- actions, and chemical reactions. The experimental approach wherein traditional inductive detectors are replaced with NV cen- ters in diamond has facilitated highly sensitive and localized spec- troscopy, allowing for detection of electron and nuclear spins in external targets at the single- or few-spin level. Encourag- ingly, vast improvements in measurement sensitivity have been obtained through advances in diamond surface engineering that reduce charge instability and decoherence for shallow emitters. In addition, novel methods for chemical functionalization of di- amond allows for deterministic, covalent attachment of target molecular species. Despite this impressive progress, further ex- perimental advances are required to achieve coherent detection of single nuclear spins on the diamond surface. Additional experimental challenges must also be overcome. For instance, the stability of molecular films or of hierarchically or- dered structures in biomolecules may be compromised by ex- tended exposure to laser- and microwave-induced heating. Nev- ertheless, use of low laser power as well as reduced experi- mental duty cycles may help to prevent ablation of specifically bound molecules during extended measurement times. Likewise, reduced microwave duty cycles, or elimination of microwave sources entirely (e.g., for relaxometry measurements) can mit- igate heating issues. In addition, current detection sensitivi- ties necessitate long integration times, placing limits on reaction monitoring or tracking of transient paramagnetic intermediates. Greater control over molecular density, orientation, and binding configurations at diamond surfaces will circumvent rapid diffu- sion of analytes into and out of NV sensing volumes, allowing for longer measurements. Moreover, motional dynamics and thermal fluctuations in large molecules induce signal broadening, com- plicating the extraction of structural and functional information and localized imaging of surface spins. Depending on the sens- ing application, immobilization approaches that restrict motional degrees of freedom can be employed to reduce spectral broad- ening. Finally, despite the exquisite sensitivity and spatial res- olution, NV-center spectroscopy cannot achieve the spectral res- olution of conventional spectroscopy methods. Indeed, typical magnetic-field biases applied in NV experiments are on the or- 25 der of ca. 10ŌłÆ3 ŌłÆ 10ŌłÆ1 T, compared to ca. 100 ŌłÆ 101 T in con- ventional NMR. Therefore, a 5 ppm 1H chemical shift, easily re- solved in conventional NMR with an operating field strength of, e.g., 600 MHz, would result in an absolute shift of < 1 Hz at 20 mT. However, novel NV approaches including homonuclear de- coupling sequences,27 ensemble measurements,28 or hyperpolar- ization techniques29 provide promising paths forward. In conclusion, advances in diamond surface engineering and chemical functionalization have facilitated landmark advances in nanoscale NMR and EPR using NV centers. Moving forward, the simultaneous immobilization of chemical analytes and preserva- tion of NV sensing properties represents a critical step toward single-spin, coherent detection in chemically and biologically rel- evant systems. Efforts to overcome these challenges will benefit from the interdisciplinary nature of this research field, which lies at the intersection of surface chemistry, materials science, and quantum metrology. Motivated by the promise of new insights into molecular structure, spin transport, and reaction monitor- ing, the utility of NV-center sensing for the chemical sciences has only just begun to be realized. Author Contributions Following CRediT definitions: conceptualization: E. J., K. H., L. A. V., W. S. H., C. L. D., J. M. A.; funding acquisition: C. L. D., J. M. A.; investigation: E. J., K. H., L. A. V., W. S. H., J. M. A.; project administration: J. M. A.; supervision: J. M. A.; validation: E. J., K. H., L. A. V., W. S. H., C. L. D., J. M. A.; visualization: E. J., K. H., L. A. V., J. M. A.; writing ŌĆō original draft: E. J., K. H., L. A. V., W. S. H., J. M. A.; writing ŌĆō review & editing: E. J., K. H., L. A. V., W. S. H., C. L. D., J. M. A. Conflicts of interest There are no conflicts to declare.