1 Nanoscale optical switching of photochromic material by ultraviolet and visible plasmon nanofocusing Takayuki Umakoshi1,2,3,#,*, Hiroshi Arata1,#, and Prabhat Verma1 1. Department of Applied Physics, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan 2. Institute for Advanced Co-Creation Studies, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan 3. PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Kawaguchi, Saitama 332- 0012, Japan #contributed equally *Email: umakoshi@ap.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp 2 ABSTRACT Optical control of electronic properties is essential for future electric devices1,2. Manipulating such properties has been limited to the microscale in spatial volume due to the wave nature of light; however, scaling down the volume is in extremely high demand. In this study, we demonstrate optical switching within a nanometric spatial volume in an organic electric material. Photochromic materials such as diarylethene derivatives exhibit semiconducting and insulating properties on ultraviolet (UV) and visible light, respectively, which are promising for optical switching and memory3,4. To control the wavelength between visible and UV light at the nanoscale, we employed plasmon nanofocusing, which allows the creation of a nanolight source at the apex of a metallic tapered structure over a broad frequency range by focusing of propagating plasmons5,6. We utilized an aluminum tapered structure and realized in-situ wavelength control between visible and UV light at the nanoscale. Using this method, nanoscale optical switching between the two states of diarylethene was demonstrated. The switching performance was confirmed for at least nine cycles without degradation. This demonstration would make a significant step forward toward next-generation nanoscale optoelectronic devices and stimulate diverse scientific fields owing to the unique concept of broadband plasmon nanofocusing. 3 Organic materials have played a vital role in the past few decades, contributing to drastic developments in flexible electronic technologies and devices, such as electronic memories, displays, and solar cells. The unique and multifunctional nature of organic electronic materials promises future applications that cannot be developed using silicon-based technologies1,7–12. Organic photochromic materials such as diarylethene derivatives, for instance, have garnered particular attention because of state control by light between semiconductors and insulators, which gives interesting functions to electronic devices, and thus holds significant potential for next-generation optical switching and memory3,4,13–18. Multilevel optical memory has recently been realized by employing photochromic materials10,19, which has further stimulated related fields to accelerate its development. For such optoelectronic devices, scaling down the photochromic reaction volume has always been in exceptionally high demand for miniaturizing future optoelectronic devices, and is also an interesting subject for providing a new direction for fundamental chemistry and organic electronics. Meanwhile, it has been a long-standing challenge because of the diffraction limit of light, which does not allow light to be focused to less than approximately half the wavelength of light. Only under specific conditions, such as on an isolated single photochromic fluorescent molecule, the optical switching has been demonstrated20,21. In general, shrinking the illumination area of light is enabled by localizing light near a metallic nanostructure, which works as an optical antenna for light confinement through localized plasmon resonance22,23. It has been widely exploited as a popular tool for creating nanoscale reaction fields and inducing various photochemical reactions at the nanoscale with high efficiencies24–29. However, this is literally a resonant phenomenon that occurs within a narrow wavelength range22,23,30. It is useful for some photochemical reactions that require only a single light wavelength by tuning the resonance wavelength to a target wavelength. However, it is not a suitable method for photochemical events that involve multiple wavelengths, such as, optical switching of photochromic materials, because it requires visible and ultraviolet (UV) light for switching between two states3,4. In-situ control of the light wavelength is still highly challenging at the nanoscale. This fact has strongly restricted photochromic reactions at the nanoscale in a reversible manner for a few decades. Aperture probes have also been used as a near-field optical tool for photochromic reactions in the past few decades31,32, however switching between two states at the nanoscale has not been demonstrated mostly due to a low throughput of UV 4 light and several technical difficulties. Also, the light confinement volume has typically been limited to approximately one hundred nanometers, not truly down to the nanoscale. In this study, we achieved optical switching within a nanometric volume of photochromic materials. To this end, we completely abandoned the method to create nanoscale light field from the optical antenna technique based on localized plasmon resonance. In this study, we adopted plasmon nanofocusing as an alternative method for inducing a nanoscale light source. Plasmon nanofocusing is a phenomenon in which plasmons are excited near the broader end of a metallic tapered structure and propagate toward the apex with adiabatically compressing their energies, which eventually create a strong light field localized at the nanometrically sharp apex of the tapered structure33–37. Because a nanoscale light source is excited through the propagation of plasmons, rather than the localized plasmon resonance, we have demonstrated in our previous studies that it works over an extremely wide frequency range from the entire visible to near-infrared regions5,6. We have proposed the generation of a white nanolight source through broadband plasmon nanofocusing and successfully exploited it for super-resolution hyperspectral optical imaging5, which has exhibited great potential for broadband plasmon nanofocusing not only for optical imaging but also for diverse scientific fields as a novel tiny light source38–40. Therefore, we adopted broadband plasmon nanofocusing for nanoscale optical switching in this study. Figure 1 illustrates an overview of the nanoscale optical switching that we demonstrated using plasmon nanofocusing. We developed a totally different system for plasmon nanofocusing in this study, while we used it on a cantilever tip in the previous study. We fabricated a metallic tapered structure on a substrate, and further fabricated a protective layer and a hole to realize optical switching at a nanometrically sharp apex of the tapered structure, details of which are described later. We further expanded the wavelength range of plasmon nanofocusing even down to the UV region for the optical switching. To this end, we employed aluminum as a plasmonic material suitable in the UV region. We prepared the aluminum tapered structure, and fabricated a slit structure as the plasmon coupler because the slit works for a wide wavelength range. We successfully controlled the wavelength of the nanolight source from the UV to visible regions. Plasmon nanofocusing provides another advantage, which is the background-free characteristic of unwanted noise caused by an excitation laser35–37. Because plasmons are excited by an excitation laser at the slit located far from the apex of the tapered structure, 5 the nanolight source is spatially well separated from the excitation light, which is not the case for optical antennas because it requires directional illumination of the optical antennas. In particular, this is highly effective for optical switching because we can avoid unwanted photochromic reactions by the excitation light near the nanolight source. Considering the high freedom of the choice of wavelength and background-free features, we utilized plasmon nanofocusing as the best suitable way to achieve optical switching within a small volume. Nanoscale visible and UV light sources created at the apex of the aluminum tapered structure optically switch electric properties of photochromic material at the nanoscale. Photochromic materials for optical switching We selected diarylethene derivative among various types of photochromic materials, such as azobenzene and spiropyran, because it is one of the most popular and best-suited materials for device applications owing to its high thermal stability and excellent electrical properties3,4. The diarylethene molecule takes a closed-ring form that exhibits semiconducting properties when irradiated with UV light and is converted to an open-ring form when irradiated with visible light, which shows insulating properties. Figure 2 shows the absorption spectra of 6 the open- and closed-ring forms of diarylethene molecules in which the molecules are dissolved in PMMA/anisole solution (see Methods and Fig. S1 for further detail). The absorption spectra of the open- and closed-ring forms of the sample solution were measured after visible and UV light irradiation, respectively. Upon visible light illumination of closed-ring diarylethene molecules, the broad absorption peak at approximately 530 nm disappeared while the absorbance increased in the UV range. This spectral change indicates a conversion from the closed-ring form to the open-ring form. In contrast, the absorption peak at 530 nm appeared upon UV light illumination to convert open-ring diarylethene molecules to closed-ring molecules. It was also visually evident as the color of the solution changed from transparent to red. We can thus understand through the absorption measurement which state the diarylethene molecules take between semiconductor and insulator. molecules (yellow curve) and closed-ring diarylethene molecules (purple curve). Plasmon nanofocusing of visible and UV light for optical switching Plasmon nanofocusing can be excited over a wide frequency range; however, the excitation of plasmon nanofocusing in the UV range is not straightforward. Broadband plasmon nanofocusing has been demonstrated with a silver or gold tapered structure in previous studies, in which it covers the entire visible F F F F F F S S F F F F F F S S closed-ring form open-ring form Vis. UV 0.8 absorbance 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 350 400 wavelength (nm) 600 550 500 450 open-ring form closed-ring form 7 range to the entire near-infrared range5,6. However, plasmon nanofocusing is comparatively inefficient in the shorter wavelength region due to the much shorter propagation length of plasmons, and thus UV plasmon nanofocusing has not yet been demonstrated. Therefore, we selected aluminum instead of silver or gold to push the wavelength range down toward the UV range, as aluminum exhibits great plasmonic properties even in the UV range41,42. We evaluated the optical properties of an aluminum tapered structure for UV plasmon nanofocusing via numerical simulation (See Methods and Fig. S2 for details). First, we used an incident light with wavelength of 530 nm for testing plasmon nanofocusing in the visible range, which corresponds to the absorption wavelength of a closed-ring diarylethene molecule. A distribution map of the electric field intensity was simulated around the apex of the tapered structure during the plasmon nanofocusing process (Fig. 3(a)). We confirmed that the light field was well confined within a nanometric volume at the apex through plasmon nanofocusing. The wavelength was thereafter changed to 375 nm on the same simulation model. 375 nm is an efficient wavelength for the conformational change of diarylethene molecules from an open-ring to a closed-ring form. As shown in Fig. 3(b), the UV plasmon nanofocusing was also observed at 375 nm. Although the electric field intensity was 3–4 times weaker than that for visible light because of the shorter plasmon propagation length, we still obtained sufficient intensity for practical use. We therefore concluded that aluminum is a highly promising material for UV plasmon nanofocusing. These results suggest that a nanolight source can be created in both wavelength ranges, and thus plasmon nanofocusing efficiently enables optical switching of diarylethene molecules in such a tiny volume. We also found that other metals, such as silver and gold, were not capable of exciting UV plasmon nanofocusing, as shown in Fig. S3. 10 0 2 4 6 3 2 8 0 1 intensity intensity 50 nm (a) wavelength: 530 nm (b) wavelength: 375 nm 50 nm 8 Distribution maps of electric field intensity near the apex of an aluminum tapered structure during plasmon nanofocusing. (a) wavelength: 530 nm. (b) wavelength: 375 nm. It should be emphasized as another crucial property that plasmon nanofocusing is free from chromatic aberration, as the nanofocusing process is based on propagating plasmons bound on a tapered structure as a surface wave. It is usually difficult to focus both UV and visible light in a similar focal size at the same location using ordinary optics because of the chromatic aberration caused by the large wavelength difference between visible and UV light. This can result in a large difference in the photochromic reaction volume and a deteriorated switching performance. However, by nanofocusing light through a metallic tapered structure, both UV and visible light are focused exactly at the same location because the propagating plasmons automatically go to the apex. In addition, we confirmed in the simulation that the spatial extent of the localized light field for both UV and visible light was also the same at the nanoscale, which was approximately 12–13 nm (Fig. S4), because it was determined by the apex size rather than the wavelength itself22,23. This outstanding property is highly effective, particularly for switching applications because we can reversibly excite photochromic reactions at exactly the same location and volume with nanometric precision. After confirming both the UV and visible plasmon nanofocusing on an aluminum tapered structure for nanoscale optical switching in the numerical simulation, we went ahead to fabricate a tapered structure similar to the simulation model on a glass substrate as a switching platform, followed by the fabrication procedure shown in Figure 4(a). Aluminum tapered structures were fabricated by the physical vapor deposition of a thin and smooth aluminum layer and subsequent focused ion beam (FIB) lithography. Because propagating plasmons can cause photochromic reactions during propagation on the surface of a tapered structure before reaching the apex, we made a 100-nm-thick polymer (PMMA) coating by spin coating as a protective layer to prevent diarylethene molecules from directly touching the tapered structure. We further created a hole by FIB milling to expose the apex of the tapered structure such that diarylethene molecules could only be present near the apex of the tapered structure. The fabrication details are described in Methods and in Fig. S5. We also 9 examined the surface roughness of the aluminum layer, which was less than a few nanometers and sufficiently smooth for plasmon propagations (Fig. S6.)37. Figure 4(b) shows the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the fabricated structure. The tapered structure was not clearly visible because it was embedded in the polymer layer. In the enlarged SEM image of the hole, as shown in the inset of Fig. 4(b), we observed a tapered structure apex exposed from the polymer coating, as indicated by the white dotted circle. In Fig. 4(b), to clearly show the apex exposed from the polymer coating, we purposely etched a large portion of the apex by FIB milling such that the apex size was as large as ~50 nm. In practice, it is possible to maintain a much sharper apex by precisely adjusting the hole position in the FIB process. (a) Fabrication procedure of aluminum tapered structures. (b) SEM image of the fabricated tapered structure imbedded in a polymer film. The inset shows an enlarged SEM image near the apex, where the apex exposed from the polymer coating was observed in the hole. (c) Optical image of plasmon nanofocusing with super continuum laser. (d) Optical image of plasmon nanofocusing excited on the same tapered structure as (c) with (a) 500 nm 1 μm ~200 nm apex PMMA layer glass substrate (b) deposition of aluminum layer FIB milling PMMA coating FIB milling aluminum tapered sturcutre ~40 nm ~100 nm hole (c) supercontinuum laser (d) wavelength: 375 nm 1 μm ×5 ×5 1 μm 10 the UV laser (wavelength: 375 nm). The image contrast was increased five times in the white dotted squares for visual clarity. We implemented optical measurements with the fabricated structure to observe plasmon nanofocusing under both visible and UV light. Figure 4(c) shows an optical image of an aluminum tapered structure in which a supercontinuum laser that covers the entire visible range irradiates the slit. We observed a bright optical spot at the apex as a scattering signal from the nanolight source generated through plasmon nanofocusing, which was spatially well separated from the incident laser. We thereafter switched from a supercontinuum laser to a UV laser with a wavelength of 375 nm. A bright optical spot was clearly observed on the same tapered structure even with the UV laser (Fig. 4(d)). This confirms that our fabricated tapered structure is effective for both the UV and visible plasmon nanofocusing to implement nanoscale optical switching. Optical switching at nanoscale As we developed a switching system for diarylethene molecules, in which we can freely switch the wavelength of the nanolight source between the visible and UV range, we performed optical switching of diarylethene molecules in this setup. We dropped a 100 mM diarylethene solution on the tapered structure and allowed it to dry. First, we excited plasmon nanofocusing with a supercontinuum laser as visible light in this setup. All diarylethene molecules were converted to a closed-ring form by shining the entire substrate with a UV lamp prior to the open-ring reaction using visible plasmon nanofocusing. While broadband plasmon nanofocusing is utilized for optical switching, it is also useful for monitoring the optical properties of the diarylethene molecules at the apex. By detecting the broadband scattering spectrum from the apex, it is possible to evaluate changes in the absorption properties of the samples only near the apex5 (See Methods and Fig. S7 for more details). We excited the photochromic reaction around the apex through plasmon nanofocusing with a supercontinuum laser while observing changes in the scattering spectra. A reference spectrum was also obtained prior to the experiment. The detected scattering spectra and the reference spectrum were used to obtain the absorption spectra. As shown in Fig. 5(a), we observed the conversion from the closed-ring form to the 11 open-ring form, which was induced at the nanoscale only near the apex through the plasmon nanofocusing of the supercontinuum laser. The absorption peak at approximately 530 nm, which originated from closed-ring diarylethene molecules, gradually disappeared within 10 s. The flat absorption feature in the visible range corresponds to that of open-ring diarylethene molecules. This confirms that molecules within the nanofocused light were converted to the open-ring form in 10 s. We then illuminated the slit of the same tapered structure with the UV laser and observed the recovery of the absorption peak within 10 s, as shown in Fig. 5(b). Here, while we illuminated the UV laser for the photochromic reaction, the supercontinuum laser was also used for a short duration to obtain the scattering spectra. However, this short exposure did not make any noticeable change in absorption spectra. Figures 5(a) and (b) clearly indicate that the closed-ring diarylethene molecules turned to the open-ring form and returned to the closed-ring form by visible and UV plasmon nanofocusing. The absorption spectra of the diarylethene solution, measured with an ordinary UV-Vis spectrometer, are shown in Fig. 5(c) as a reference, which corresponds well with the change in the absorption spectra obtained with the plasmon nanofocusing technique. As a control experiment, we conducted the same experiment without a hole at the apex (Fig. S8), indicating that the tapered structure was fully covered with the polymer layer, and diarylethene molecules could not exist near the apex of the tapered structure. In this situation, we did not observe any changes in the absorption spectra, suggesting that the observed absorption change was attributed to the photochromic reaction induced only at the apex. We confirmed that the two states of diarylethene were optically switched within a nanometric volume. 12 absorption spectra by plasmon nanofocusing of visible light to turn diarylethene molecules from closed-ring form to open-ring form. (b) Time variation of absorption spectra by plasmon nanofocusing of UV light to turn back to closed-ring form. (c) Absorption spectra of diarylethene solution as a reference. Furthermore, we repeated this switching cycle to evaluate the performance of nanoscale optical switching. As shown in Fig. 6(a), we confirmed that the closed-ring form and open-ring form were switchable multiple times by alternate visible and UV plasmon nanofocusing. We observed it up to nine cycles without any degradation in the absorbance amplitude (Fig. 6(b)). Here, the absorbance change at 530 nm was plotted for each cycle. All the absorption spectra are shown in Fig. S9. We successfully demonstrated nanoscale optical switching of photochromic materials by employing a novel broadband plasmon nanofocusing. (a) 4 absorbance (×10-2) 0 1 2 3 -1 wavelength (nm) 600 550 500 450 wavelength (nm) 600 550 500 450 (b) visilbe UV diarylethene 4 absorbance (×10-2) 0 1 2 3 -1 visilbe UV closed-ring form open-ring form closed-ring form open-ring form wavelength (nm) 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.0 550 500 450 absorbance closed-ring form open-ring form 600 (c) 0 s 1 s 3 s 6 s 10 s 10 s 6 s 3 s 1 s 0 s 10 s 6 s 3 s 1 s 0 s 13 Absorption spectral change of diarylethene molecules during the nanoscale optical switching. (b) Repeatability of the nanoscale optical switching. Absorbance change at the wavelength of 530 nm was plotted. Conclusion and Discussion Nanoscale optical switching of organic photochromic materials was achieved by exploiting the unique advantages of plasmon nanofocusing. As organic photochromic materials such as diarylethene molecules are indispensable materials for future organic optoelectronic devices, this demonstration would be a significant step forward for employing photochromic materials in the nanoscale regime and for realizing nanoscale organic optoelectronic devices. It was not possible to evaluate the actual size of the nanoscale optical switching at this moment; however, it should be as small as the apex size (10–20 nm)22,23. An aperture probe would also be used as another tool to generate near-field visible and UV light31,32. However, the size is typically limited to ~100 nm Vis. UV UV Vis. wavelength (nm) 600 550 500 450 4 absorbance (×10-2) 2 6 0 8 1st cycle 2nd cycle (a) (b) 4 absorbance (×10-2) 2 6 0 8 4 absorbance (×10-2) 2 6 0 8 4 absorbance (×10-2) 2 6 0 8 wavelength (nm) 600 550 500 450 wavelength (nm) 600 550 500 450 wavelength (nm) 600 550 500 450 switching cycles 4 absorbance (×10-2) 2 6 0 7 5 3 1 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 UV Vis. 14 due to limited throughput. In this sense, plasmon nanofocusing has a strong benefit in truly accessing the nanoscale. Although more developments will be necessary to exploit this technique for actual devices, we expect that further improvements will be made in the near future. The scaling down of a photochemical phenomenon that we achieved using broadband plasmon nanofocusing would have a huge impact not only for organic electronics but also for various scientific fields. Our concept of broadband plasmon nanofocusing provides an innovative tool for photochemistry, as it can be applied to several different photochemical reactions. Different photochemical reactions can be induced at exactly the same location within a nanometric volume by applying different wavelengths sequentially, which significantly improves the flexibility of nanoscale photochemistry. We can provide a small reaction field where the light wavelength can be freely controlled from the UV to the near-infrared range for chemical reactions. Furthermore, the background-free scheme effectively works as another strong advantage, as no by-products are produced by incident light. We have also made several developments in this research to realize nanoscale optical switching, and the first demonstration of UV plasmon nanofocusing is of great importance. This extremely expanded the capability of the plasmon nanofocusing technique. The wavelength range of plasmon nanofocusing has now been extended to such a high-energy wavelength region, which will call for several other potential applications not only in photochemistry but also in wide fields of optics and photonics. The broadband property of plasmon nanofocusing spanning over the UV to near-infrared regions would be highly beneficial for various optical analytical techniques such as absorption spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy, and photoluminescence measurements. Moreover, further extending the wavelength range toward the mid-infrared region to create a mid-infrared broadband nanolight source, highly sensitive molecular sensing and analysis through infrared absorption spectroscopy would be possible. In this study, we have used broadband plasmon nanofocusing in a more active way to manipulate physical and chemical properties of samples. More precise and flexible manipulation of samples would be expected by involving nanoscale optical trapping via the broadband plasmon nanofocusing. Plasmon nanofocusing is becoming an innovative but practical tool for providing high freedom of wavelength to nanoscale experiments, which possesses great promise in diverse scientific fields. The nanoscale 15 optical switching that we achieved in this study would be a milestone for future developments in fields ranging from organic electronics and photochemistry to nanophotonics and nanotechnology. 16