1 Role of Polarization-Photon Coupling in Ultrafast Terahertz Excitation of Ferroelectrics Shihao Zhuang and Jia-Mian Hu* Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, 53706, USA Abstract We investigate the role of polarization-photon coupling (specifically, polarization-oscillation- induced radiation electric field) in the excitation of ferroelectric thin films by an ultrafast terahertz (THz) electric-field pulse. Analytical theory is developed to predict how the frequencies and relaxation time of three-dimensional soft mode phonons (intrinsic polarization oscillation) are modulated by radiation electric field and epitaxial strain. Ultrafast THz-pulse-driven excitation of harmonic polarization oscillation in strained single-domain ferroelectric thin film is then simulated using a dynamical phase-field model that considers the coupled strain-polarization-photon dynamics. The frequencies and relaxational time extracted from such numerical simulations agree well with analytical predictions. In relatively thin films, it is predicted that the radiation electric field slightly reduces the frequencies but significantly shortens the relaxational time. These results demonstrate the necessity of considering polarization-photon coupling in understanding and predicting the response of ferroelectric materials to ultrafast pulses of THz and higher frequencies. *E-mail: jhu238@wisc.edu 2 I. Introduction Ultrafast light-matter interaction is a promising route to understanding and controlling quantum materials where the four fundamental degrees of freedoms (charge, spin, orbit, and lattice) are dynamically intertwined . By tailoring the wavelength, duration, and amplitude of ultrafast light pulse, one can probe the coupling among different quasiparticles (e.g., phonons, magnons), switch the material to a degenerate ground-state or a hidden metastable state of matter, or induce phase transitions . Ferroelectric materials have a spontaneous polarization that can be switched by its conjugate electric field or other non-conjugate stimuli. Ultrafast light control of ferroelectrics offers potential for developing photoferroic devices with order of magnitude higher operation speed than those controlled by voltage . In archetypal ferroelectric system such as PbTiO3 and BaTiO3, the development of spontaneous polarization P is attributed to the condensation of a particular soft mode phonon A1(TO) (see Fig. 1a) below the Curie temperature [6–8]. Depending on wavelength of the light pulse, ultrafast light control of polarization in ferroelectrics can occur through various nonthermal mechanisms. These include the nonlinear coupling between the soft mode phonons and the electric-field of the near-infrared pluses via impulsive stimulated Raman Scattering , linear coupling between soft mode phonon and the electric field of terahertz (THz) pulse [11–19], indirect manipulation of soft mode phonons by mid-infrared pulses [20–25], and above-bandgap photo-carrier excitation [26–29]. Among these mechanisms, the use of THz electric-field pulse to drive soft mode phonons is most straightforward . Since the proposal for achieving picosecond (ps) polarization reversal in single-domain PbTiO3 by shaped THz electric-field pulses , ultrafast THz-field induced ps polarization modulation were experimentally observed in various ferroelectric materials systems [12,14–17,19]. Moreover, a recent experiment shows that THz electric-field pulse can transiently drive the quantum paraelectric SrTiO3 into a ferroelectric state . Furthermore, molecular dynamics simulations predict that ultrafast THz electric-field pulse can uncover hidden phase of polarization order in relaxor ferroelectric systems . Despite these extensive works, the role of bidirectional polarization-photon coupling, i.e., the emission of electromagnetic (EM) waves from the oscillating polarization and the backaction of the emitted EM waves on polarization dynamics, has not yet been addressed. Experimental reports on time-resolved THz pump-THz probe measurement of ferroelectrics remain scarce. Computationally, the polarization- photon coupling has not yet been considered in existing atomistic and mesoscale simulations, which is partly due to the high computational burden of modeling the generation and propagation of long-wavelength (millimeter-scale) EM waves in nanometer-scale systems. In this article, we computationally demonstrated the necessity of considering bidirectional polarization-photon coupling in understanding and predicting ultrafast THz excitation of ferroelectrics. This paper is organized as follows. In Sect. II, we analytically calculate the frequencies and relaxation time of the soft mode phonon by considering a harmonic polarization oscillation in single-domain ferroelectrics. Influences of polarization-oscillation-induced radiation electric field on the frequencies and relaxation time of the soft mode phonons are analytically predicted. Effects of epitaxial strain in ferroelectric thin films on the soft mode phonon frequencies are also calculated. In Sect. III, we numerically simulate the excitation of a single-domain, in- plane-polarized (100)pc BaTiO3 thin film (pc: pseudocubic) by applying an ultrafast THz electric- field pulse. This is achieved using an in-house dynamical phase-field model that considers coupled dynamics of strain, polarization, and EM waves, where Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) acceleration was performed to mitigate the high computational cost. The simulations results 3 confirmed the analytical predictions. Since our analytical and numerical models are independent from each other, the consistency in the prediction results simultaneously demonstrates the physical validity of our analytical theory and high numerical accuracy of our dynamical phase-field model. The paper is concluded with discussion in Sect. IV. II. Analytical theory for the frequencies and relaxation time of soft mode phonons In this section, we derive analytical expressions for the frequencies of three-dimensional soft mode phonons, i.e., the intrinsic oscillation frequencies of the Px, Py, Pz of the spontaneous polarization P, as well as their relaxation time. Our analytical formulations are developed partly based on the work by Morozovska and colleagues , but considers the influence of both the substrate-induced strain (via lattice/thermal mismatch) in an epitaxial ferroelectric film and the polarization-oscillation-induced radiation electric field. As an example, let us consider a (100)pc BaTiO3 film epitaxially grown on a (110)O PrScO3 substrate (O: orthorhombic), as shown in Fig. 1b. In such heterostructure, the combination of anisotropic mismatch strain and interfacial symmetry breaking can stabilize an in-plane-polarized single ferroelectric domain in the BaTiO3 film, which has been demonstrated experimentally . (100)pc BaTiO3 thin film at thermodynamic equilibrium, where the anisotropy mismatch strain, εxx mis = 0.5%, εyy mis = 0.01% and εxy mis = 0 . The total free energy density in Fig. 1c, which includes the Landau free energy and elastic energy densities, is calculated as a function of the Px and Py. As shown, the equilibrium polarizations are located at the two degenerate energy minima at P0, where P0=(Px 0, Py 0, Pz 0) = (0.294, 0, 0) C m-2 . We note that Pz is always 0 at equilibrium because of the depolarization field and because the anisotropic mismatch strain favors an in-plane polarization along the x-axis. An ultrafast external stimulus such as a THz light pulse can perturb the polarization away from the P0. After then, the polarization will oscillate around the P0 at its intrinsic frequency (i.e., the frequency of soft mode phonon) until it returns to equilibrium via damping. A larger slope of the local free energy landscape will lead to a higher intrinsic oscillation frequency. Figure 1d shows the free energy landscape near the P0. As shown, the slope of the line AB (along which Py=0 and Px varies from 0.25 to 0.35 C m-2) is larger than the slope of the line CD (along which Px=0.294 C m-2 and Py varies from -0.2 to 0.2 C m-2). Therefore, the intrinsic oscillation frequency of the Px should be larger than that of the Py. For clearer comparison, Figure 1e shows the data along the line AB and CD in a two-dimensional plot within a smaller range of variation (below 0.05 C m-2). It is noteworthy that such large discrepancy in slope mainly results from the landscape of the Landau free energy density rather than the anisotropic mismatch strain. For demonstration, the line profiles of the Landau free energy density along Px and Py near the P0 are also plotted in Fig. 1e. As seen, the slope for the variation of Px is still larger than that for the Py. Comparing the solid and dashed lines, it can be seen that the anisotropic mismatch strain increases the slope for both the variation of Px and Py, indicating strain-induced enhancement in their oscillation frequencies. Note that the P0=(Px 0, Py 0, Pz 0) = (0.26, 0, 0) C m-2 under zero strain. To derive the frequency and relaxation time of the soft mode phonons, we start by considering a harmonic polarization oscillation in single-domain ferroelectric materials and write the equation of motion of the polarization, given as, μ ∂2Pi ∂t2 +γ ∂Pi ∂t =Ei eff (1) 4 where Pi (i = x, y, z) are the three components of the spontaneous polarization in Cartesian coordinates; μ and γ are the mass and damping coefficient of the polarization dynamics, respectively; Ei eff = − ∂f tot ∂Pi is the total effective electric field, where f tot is the total free energy density. For a single-domain strained ferroelectric thin film, f tot = f Landau + f elas + f elec is a sum of the Landau, elastic, and electrical free energy density, respectively. For BaTiO3, an eighth-order Landau free energy density is utilized, and its expression can be found in ref. . The corresponding effective field Ei Landau is calculated as - ∂f Landau ∂Pi , Ei Landau=-2α1Pi -4α11Pi 3-2α12Pi(Pj 2+Pk 2) -6α111Pi 3(Pj 2+Pk 2)-2α112Pi(Pj 4+Pk 4)-2α123PiPj 2Pk 2 7-2α1112Pi[Pj 6+Pk 6+3Pi 4(Pj 2+Pk 2)]-4α1122Pi 3(Pj 4+Pk 4)-2α1123PiPj 2Pk 2(2Pi 2+Pj 2+Pk 2), (2) where i = x, y, z, and j ≠ i, k ≠ i, j; α are Landau–Devonshire coefficients among which α1=α0(T- Tc) is a linear function of temperature, and Tc is the Curie temperature. The values of these coefficients are also provided in ref. . The Ei elas is contributed by the elastic energy f elas and calculated as - ∂f elas ∂Pi , and the expression of f elas can be found in ref. , Ei elas = [2q11(εii − εii 0)+2q12(εjj + εkk − εjj 0 − εkk 0 )]Pi+2q44[(εij − εij 0)Pj+(εik − εik 0 )Pk]. (3) Here q11=c11Q11+2c12Q12, q12 = c11Q12+c12(Q11+Q12) and q44 = 2c44Q44, where c and Q are the elastic stiffness and electrostrictive tensor, respectively ; ε is total strain and ε0 is stress-free strain caused by the polarization via electrostriction, given by, εii 0=Q11Pi 2+Q12(Pj 2+Pk 2) (4a) εij 0=Q44PiPj (4b) with i = x, y, z, and j ≠ i, k ≠ i, j. For a strained single-domain ferroelectric film, the total strain ε(P0) at the initial equilibrium state can be analytically obtained by solving the mechanical equilibrium equation ∂σiz ∂z =0 (i=x,y,z) with the stress σij=cijkl(εkl-εkl 0 ). After some algebra, one has, εzz(P0)=- c12 c11 (εxx mis+εyy mis)+εzz 0 (P0), (5a) εyz(P0)=εyz 0 (P0), (5b) εxz(P0)=εxz 0 (P0). (5c) Here εmis is the mismatch strain in the ferroelectric film induced by the substrate, and, εxx(P0) = εxx mis+εxx 0 (P0), (5d) εyy(P0) = εyy mis+εyy 0 (P0), (5e) εxy(P0) = εxy mis+εxy 0 (P0). (5f) 5 Strictly speaking, the total strain in Eq. (3) should also contain a temporal variation component, Δε(t), which is produced by the polarization oscillation ΔP(t) via electrostriction. However, the magnitude of such secondary strain would be negligible (~10-5) for a harmonic polarization oscillation with relatively small ΔP(t) (see Supplementary Material 1). The electrical energy density felec=-(Eext+Ed) ∙ P, where the external electric field Eext=Eapp+EEM is the sum of the applied electric field and the radiation electric field inside the ferroelectric thin film. EEM describes the backaction of the emitted EM wave on polarization dynamics. For a film that is infinitely large in the xy plane, EEM propagates along the film thickness direction in the form of a plane wave with Ez EM = 0. The magnitudes of Ex EM and Ey EM are proportional to ∂P ∂t. When the film is thin enough (d ≪ v/f), one has Ei EM(t) ≈ - 1 2 √ μ0 0 d ∂Pi ∂t (t) over the entire film thickness, where f and v are the frequency and propagation speed of the EM wave in the ferroelectric film, respectively (see detailed derivation in Supplementary Material 2). The depolarizing field Ed satisfies the Gauss’s law ∇∙ D = ρf, where D= 0bEd+P is electric displacement field; 0 and b are vacuum permittivity and background dielectric constant respectively; ρf is the free charge density. For a thin film with a spatially uniform P, an infinitely large xy plane, and ρf = 0, Ed can be solved analytically as (Ex d, Ey d, Ez d)= (0, 0, - Pz 0b). We have now derived a complete analytical expression of the Ei eff in Eq. (1), with Ei eff = Ei Landau+Ei elas+Ei app+Ei EM+Ei d. Next, we linearize Eq. (1) by assuming that Pi=Pi 0+∆Pi(t), where the temporal polarization oscillation ∆Pi(t)=∆Pi 0eiωte-λt takes the form of a damped perturbation; ω and ∆Pi 0 are the angular frequency and peak amplitude of the oscillation, respectively; λ is an auxiliary damping coefficient. Based on these, Eq. (1) can be linearized into, eff (6) Regarding the effective fields on the right-hand side, the depolarization field can be written as Ed Pz0 0b) is the field at the initial equilibrium state and ΔEd(t)=(0, 0, - ∆Pz 0b) describes its temporal variation. The radiating electric field can be rewritten as Ei EM(t) ≈ - 1 2 √ μ0 Landau and Ei elas, we perform Taylor expansion for the function of these two effective fields near the equilibrium point P0 using ΔPi as the only variable, Ei Landau=Ei Landau(P0)+ ∂Ei Landau ∂Pi (P0)×∆Pi+ 1 2! ∂2Ei Landau ∂Pi 2 (P0)×∆Pi 2+⋯ (7) Ei elas=Ei elas(P0)+ ∂Ei elas ∂Pi (P0)×∆Pi+ 1 2! ∂2Ei elas ∂Pi 2 (P0)×∆Pi 2+⋯ (8) where the third and higher order terms are not shown for simplicity. For near-equilibrium excitation, ∆Pi 2 and higher orders are negligibly small and can be omitted. As a result, the linearized equation of motion for polarization (Eq. 6) can be further rewritten as 6 (μλ2-μω2-γλ)+i (γω-2ωλμ+ 1 2 √ μ0 0 dω) = ∂Ei Landau ∂Pi (P0)+ ∂Ei elas ∂Pi (P0)+ 1 2 √ μ0 0 dλ, (i = x, y) (9a) Landau ∂Pz (P0)+ ∂Ez elas ∂Pz 1 0b . (9b) Note that Ei Landau(P0) + Ei elas(P0) + Ei d(P0) + Ei app, which refers to the total effective field at initial equilibrium state, equals to 0. By letting the imaginary terms on the left-hand side of Eqs. (9a-b) be 0, the expression for the auxiliary damping coefficient λ can be derived as, λi= (γ + 1 2 √ μ0 0 d) ⁄(2μ) (10a) for Px and Py (i = x, y), and λz = γ (2μ) ⁄ (10b) for Pz. Equation (10a) indicates that the in-plane polarization dynamics is subjected to both the intrinsic damping (described by γ) and an additional term associated with the radiation electric field EEM, and that such radiation-induced damping is more significant in thicker films. As shown by Eq. (10b), the out-plane polarization oscillation in the film is not subjected to radiation-induced damping. This is reasonable because Ez EM=0. The angular frequency of oscillation is given as ωi =√- Ai+Bi μ -λi 2, (11a) for Px and Py (i = x, y), and for Pz, ωz =√- Az+Bz- 1 0b μ -λz 2, (11b) where, Ai = ∂Ei Landau ∂Pi (P0) = -2α1-12α11Pi 02-2α12 (Pj 02+Pk 02) 02 (Pj 02+Pk 02) -2α112 (Pj 04+Pk 02Pk 02 06+Pk 04 (Pj 02+Pk 02)] 02 (Pj 04+Pk 02Pj 02Pk 02+Pj 04Pk 02+Pj 02Pk 04), (12a) Bi = ∂Ei elas ∂Pi (P0) 7 =2[q11(εii-εii 0)+q12(εjj+εkk-εjj 0-εkk -4(q11Q11+2q12Q12)Pi 02-2q44Q44 (Pj 02+Pk 02), (12b) with i= x, y, z, and j ≠ i, k ≠ i, j. Based on Eqs. (11-12), we can calculate the intrinsic oscillation frequencies of polarization, i.e., the soft mode phonon frequencies, via fi = ωi 2π. The relaxation time i is the time for the polarization variation Pi(t) to decrease from its peak amplitude ∆Pi 0 to 1/e of that value. i can be calculated as i=1/λi, where the expressions of λi are in Eqs. (10a-b). oscillation as a function of the film thickness d in the in-plane-polarized single-domain (100)pc BaTiO3 film, respectively. It is noteworthy that the thickness dependence of both the fi and i results from the thickness-dependent radiation electric field EEM. For simplicity, we assume the film is always coherently strained and maintains a single-domain state in all thicknesses. As shown in Fig. 2a, fx and fy (the oscillation frequencies of polarization Px and Py) differ significantly from each other in the (100)pc BaTiO3 film due to the discrepancies in the slope of the local free energy landscape along Px and Py (see Figs. 1d and 1e). Both the fx and fy decrease as the film thickness d increases due to the more significant radiation-induced damping at larger thickneses, as mentioned above. Specifically, fx decreases from 5.59 THz to 0 when d increases from 5 nm to 503 nm, while the fy decreases from 1.36 THz to 0 when d increases from 5 nm to 122 nm. A zero frequency indicates that the polarization dynamics is critically damped. At larger film thickness, the polarization dynamics is overdamped. There is no polarization oscillation for critically damped or overdamped dynamics, which is analogous to mechanical oscillation. The values of fx and fy at d=5 nm are almost the same as those calculated without considering EEM (see dashed lines in Fig. 2a). For completeness, we note that fz = 20.66 THz is thickness-independent (not shown in Fig. 2a) because Ez EM=0. The fz is much higher than the fx and fy because of the additional term of 1 0b that results from the depolarization field, and this can be seen by comparing Eqs. (11a) and (11b). frequency is relatively weak in thin ferroelectric films. For example, in a 10-nm-thick film, the EEM reduces the fx from 5.590 THz to 5.589 THz, while reduces the fy from 1.363 THz to 1.357 THz. However, the trend is reverse for the thickness dependence of the oscillation relaxation time , which is the same for Px and Py (see Eq. 10a). For example, the relaxation time  calculated with EEM is only 1.3 ps in a 10-nm-thick (100)pc BaTiO3 film, which is less than 1/10th of the value (13.5 ps) calculated without EEM, as shown in Fig. 2b. This result demonstrates the necessity of incorporating the radiation electric field to achieve an accurate prediction of ultrafast (THz) polarization dynamics in ferroelectric thin films. Figure 2c shows that mismatch strain can induce large modulation of the fx and fy in the in-plane-polarized, 10-nm-thick (100)pc BaTiO3 film. Specifically, when the εxx mis increases from 0.01% to 1% (εyy mis is fixed at 0.01%), fx increases from 4.14 THz to 6.7 THz, while fy increases from 1.04 THz to 1.56 THz. This is consistent with the indication from the slope of the total free energy landscapes (c.f. Fig.1e). Note that the oscillation relaxation time  is not influenced by the mismatch strain according to Eq. (10). 8 III. Dynamical phase-field simulations In order to demonstrate the analytically predicted effects of radiation electric field on both the frequency (Fig. 2a) and relaxation time (Fig. 2b) of the soft mode phonons, we performed dynamical phase-field simulations to compute the dynamical oscillation of the polarization in anisotropically strained, single-domain (100)pc BaTiO3 film following the excitation of a single ultrafast THz electric-field pulse. Compared to existing dynamical phase-field models that only consider coupled polarization and strain dynamics , our model considers the coupled dynamics of strain, polarization, and EM waves by solving the nonlinear equations of motions for the polarization P (see Eq. 1), mechanical displacement u, and the radiation electric field EEM in a coupled fashion. Specifically, the spatiotemporal distribution of the EEM and associated radiation magnetic field HEM are obtained by solving the Maxwell’s equations, ∂EEM ∂t = 1 κ0κb (∇×HEM- ∂P ∂t ) (13a) ∂HEM ∂t =- 1 μ0 ∇×EEM (13b) where the term ∂P ∂t describes the time-varying polarization as the source of electric dipole radiation. The polarization and strain dynamics are coupled since the elastic effective electric field Eelas is a function of the polarization P, stress-free strain ε0, and total strain ε, as shown in Eq. (3). Here, the total strain is calculated as the sum of the component at the initial equilibrium state and the temporal variation component, that is, ε=ε(P0)+Δε(t). The expression of the ε(P0) is given by Eq. (5). The Δε(t) is calculated as Δεij= 1 2 ( ∂Δui ∂j + ∂Δuj ∂i ), where Δu(t) is the temporal variation of the mechanical displacement u with i, j = x, y, z. The Δu(t) is obtained by solving the elastodynamics equation for the entire film-on-substrate heterostructure, ρ ∂2Δu ∂t2 =∇∙[c(Δε-Δε0)] (14) where ρ and c are phase-dependent mass density and elastic stiffness tensor, respectively; Δε0(t) = ε0(t)-ε0(P0) is the temporal variation of the stress-free strain. Free surface mechanical boundary condition σiz=0 (i = x, y, z) is applied on the top surface of the ferroelectric film during the dynamics. The entire heterostructure is discretized into one-dimensional computational cells along z axis with the cell size being 1 nm. The (110)O PrScO3 substrate and the free space above the ferroelectric film are discretized into 100 and 10 cells, respectively. Absorbing boundary condition (ABC) is applied on both bottom and top surfaces of the computational system when solving the Maxwell’s equations for the generation and propagation of EM waves. The ABC is also applied at the bottom surface of the substrate for making the substrate a perfect sink for elastic waves. Central finite difference is used to calculate spatial derivatives in all dynamical equations (Eqs. 1, 13 and 14). And these equations are solved simultaneously in a coupled manner using classical Runge- Kutta method for time marching with a time step of 10-18 s. Specifically, the Maxwell’s equations are solved using classical finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) method. Relevant materials parameters for the BaTiO3 film and PrScO3 substrate are provide in Supplementary Material 3. Moreover, our in-house numerical solvers for all equations are GPU-accelerated where the computations for each simulation cell are performed parallelly. 9 To numerically demonstrate the analytical prediction for in-plane-polarized (100)pc BaTiO3 film, harmonic oscillation of both the Px and Py component needs to be excited. Here, this is achieved by applying the THz electric-field pulse Eapp(t) along the y axis. The waveform of Eapp(t), as shown in the inset of Fig. 3a, takes the form of Ey app(t)=E0 appexp [- (t-t0)2 w2 ] cos[ωapp(t-t0)] following ref. . Here ωapp/2π =1.5 THz defines the peak frequency of the electric-field pulse. E0 app = 106 V m-1and t0 = 0.6 ps are the amplitude and temporal position of the peak electric field, respectively, while w = 0.2 ps is the width of Gaussian function. The selection of the values for these parameters follows two criteria. First, the electric-field pulse cannot be too strong and/or long, otherwise the polarization dynamics will be driven into the anharmonic region. Second, the frequency spectrum of THz electric-field pulse needs to contain the frequencies of the soft mode phonons. Specifically, the ΔP will have larger amplitude in real-space when the THz pulse has a larger spectral amplitude at the soft mode phonon frequencies (see Supplementary Material 4). At the initial equilibrium state, the polarization in the 10-nm-thick single-domain (100)pc BaTiO3 film is along the +x-axis. Once a nonzero Py is induced by Ey app, a nonzero ΔPx(t)=[Px(t)-Px 0] will also be developed due to the nonzero but much smaller Ex Landau (see Eq. 2). As a result, both the Ey EM and Ex EM are nonzero, but the amplitude of the Ey EM is two orders of magnitude larger, as shown in Fig. 3a and 3b. Of course, one can also apply the electric-field pulse along the in-plane diagonal axis, in which case Px and Py can be directly excited by the nonzero Ex app and Ey app, respectively. without considering the radiation electric field Ey EM. Note that ΔPy(t)=Py(t) since Py 0=0. As shown, the Py reaches its peak amplitude at ~1.1 ps and decreases monotonically due to the damping. According to the analytical prediction, the Ey EM reduces the intrinsic oscillation frequency of Py from 1.363 THz to 1.357 THz (Fig. 2a) and the relaxation time from 13.5 ps to 1.3 ps (Fig. 2b) due to the enhanced damping. The reduced relaxation time can be clearly seen from Fig. 3c. Notably, the decrease in the peak values of ΔPy at each oscillation period can be well described by the analytical expression |∆Py|(t)=|∆Py τ , where τ is the analytically calculated relaxation time (13.5 ps or 1.3 ps) and ∆Py 0=Py(t = 1.1 ps) is the peak amplitude (indicated in Fig. 3c). The analytically calculated decreasing trajectories are shown as the dashed lines. The remarkable agreement demonstrates that the analytically calculated τ is accurate. Figure 3e shows the frequency spectra of the simulated ΔPy(t) curves with and without Ey EM (see red and black curves). Both curves show a single peak at the 1.36 THz, which is consistent with analytical prediction but the predicted frequency shift from 1.363 THz to 1.357 THz (0.006 THz discrepancy) is too small to resolve numerically. However, our simulations using thicker BTO film and adjusted materials parameters clearly confirms the analytically predicted frequency shift (see Supplementary Material 5). For completeness, the frequency spectrum of the Ey EM(t) is also plotted in Fig. 3e, which displays a single peak at 1.36 THz as expected. The numerically simulated ΔPx(t) in the 10-nm-thick (100)pc BTO film is analyzed in a similar manner to ΔPy(t). The results are summarized in Fig. 3d and 3f. One notable difference is that the Px(t) and Ex EM(t) have two peak frequencies at 2.72 THz and 5.6 THz. The peak of 5.6 THz is consistent with the analytically calculated intrinsic frequency of the Px (Fig. 2a). Likewise, the analytically predicted frequency shift from 5.59 THz (without Ex EM) to 5.589 THz (with Ex EM) is too small to resolve with the present numerical accuracy. The peak of 2.72 THz, which is exactly 10 twice the intrinsic frequency of the Py (1.36 THz), results from the second-order harmonic of the Py oscillation, which is described by the terms containing Py 2 in the expression of Ex Landau (Eq. 2). From the frequency spectra in Fig. 3f, it can be seen that the second order harmonic component (2.72 THz) associated with Py 2 outweighs the intrinsic component (5.6 THz) associated with the oscillating Px. In view of this, we use a modified analytical formula |∆Px|(t)=|∆Px τ to predict the decrease in the peak values of ΔPx at each oscillation period, where τ is again the analytically calculated relaxation time (13.5 ps or 1.3 ps) and ∆Px 0=Px(t=1.1 ps) is the peak amplitude (indicated in Fig. 3d). As shown by the dashed lines in Fig. 3d, the analytical calculations are mostly consistent with numerical simulations with discrepancies arising due to the simultaneous presence of the 5.6 THz component. Likewise, the frequency spectrum of the radiation electric field Ex EM is plotted in Fig. 3f for comparison, which also displays two distinct peaks at 2.72 THz and 5.6 THz, respectively. Furthermore, it is worth remarking that both the Ex EM and Ey EM have a sufficiently large amplitude in the time-domain (Figs. 3a-b) for near-field detection. In this regard, the predicted THz-pulse-induced polarization oscillation in single-domain (100)pc BaTiO3 thin film on (110)O PrScO3 substrate can in principle be experimentally validated by THz-pump THz-probe spectroscopy, through which both the soft mode phonon frequencies and relaxation time can be experimentally determined. IV. Conclusions In summary, our results show that an accurate modeling of ultrafast THz-field excitation of ferroelectrics requires considering the polarization-photon coupling. Using ultrafast THz-field- induced harmonic polarization oscillation in single-domain ferroelectric thin film as an example, we analytically and numerically demonstrate that the polarization-oscillation-induced radiation electric field can reduce the frequency and relaxation time of soft mode phonons by increasing the effective damping. We have derived the analytical expressions on the variation of the soft mode phonon frequencies as a function of epitaxial strain and thin film thickness, which can be utilized to guide the synthesis of thin films and shape engineering of THz pulse for achieving more efficient resonant excitation. The soft mode phonon (i.e., intrinsic polarization oscillation) frequency is analogous to ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) frequency in ferromagnetic system, which describes the intrinsic precession frequency of uniform magnetization and can likewise be modulated by epitaxial strain . However, in contrast with the strong influence of the radiation electric field on polarization dynamics demonstrated herein, the radiation magnetic field produced by the uniform magnetization precession is negligible in nanometer-thick ferromagnetic thin films and hence barely influence the FMR frequency and effective magnetic damping. Furthermore, our GPU-accelerated dynamical phase-field model, which considers fully coupled dynamics of strain, polarization, and EM waves, can be extended to model polarization dynamics in more complex ferroelectric materials under the excitation by other types of ultrafast light pulses. 11