Magnetoelectric effects in Josephson junctions I. V. Bobkova,1, 2, 3 A. M. Bobkov,1 and M.A. Silaev4 1Institute of Solid State Physics, Chernogolovka, Moscow reg., 142432 Russia 2Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudny, 141700 Russia 3National Research University Higher School of Economics, Moscow, 101000 Russia 4Independent researcher (Dated: July 20, 2022) The review is devoted to the fundamental aspects and characteristic features of the magnetoelec- tric effects, reported in the literature on Josephson junctions (JJs). The main focus of the review is on the manifestations of the direct and inverse magnetoelectric effects in various types of Josephson sys- tems. They provide a coupling of the magnetization in superconductor/ferromagnet/superconductor JJs to the Josephson current. The direct magnetoelectric effect is a driving force of spin torques acting on the ferromagnet inside the JJ. Therefore it is of key importance for the electrical con- trol of the magnetization. The inverse magnetoelectric effect accounts for the back action of the magnetization dynamics on the Josephson subsystem, in particular, making the JJ to be in the resistive state in the presence of the magnetization dynamics of any origin. The perspectives of the coupling of the magnetization in JJs with ferromagnetic interlayers to the Josephson current via the magnetoelectric effects are discussed. CONTENTS I. Introduction 1 II. Direct and inverse magnetoelectric effects in Josephson junctions: main properties and physical systems 4 A. Anomalous phase shift - a realization of inverse magnetoelectric effect in Josephson junctions with spin-orbit coupling and Zeeman field 4 B. Anomalous phase shift in topological insulator-based S/F/S junctions 7 C. Anomalous phase shift in S/F/S junctions via inhomogeneous ferromagnets 9 D. Direct magnetoelectric effect in Josephson junctions via spin-orbit materials 10 E. Direct magnetoelectric effect in S/TI/S junctions 13 III. Magnetoelectric effects and magnetization dynamics 13 A. Direct coupling between magnetization and superconducting condensate: basic physics and equations 13 B. Supercurrent-induced magnetization dynamics in S/F/S junctions via spin-textured ferromagnets 14 C. Resistive state of the Josephson junctions in the presence of magnetization dynamics 16 D. Electrical control of magnetization in S/F/S junctions 17 1. Magnetization dynamics under the applied voltage 17 2. Electrical control of the magnetization easy axis 18 3. Magnetization reversal by electric current pulses. Cryogenic memory elements. 20 IV. Triplet correlations generated by the moving condensate 22 A. Triplets induced by the static Meissner currents 22 B. Dynamic triplets induced by alternating electric fields 23 V. Conclusions 25 Acknowledgments 25