Revealing 3-dimensional core-shell interface structures at the single- atom level Hyesung Jo1, Dae Han Wi2, Taegu Lee3, Yongmin Kwon2, Chaehwa Jeong1, Juhyeok Lee1, Hionsuck Baik4, Alexander J. Pattison5,6, Wolfgang Theis5, Colin Ophus6, Peter Ercius6, Yea-Lee Lee7, Seunghwa Ryu3, Sang Woo Han2,* and Yongsoo Yang1,* 1 Department of Physics, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon 34141, South Korea 2 Department of Chemistry, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon 34141, South Korea 3 Department of Mechanical Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon 34141, South Korea 4 Korea Basic Science Institute (KBSI), Seoul 02841, South Korea 5Nanoscale Physics Research Laboratory, School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK 6 National Center for Electron Microscopy, Molecular Foundry, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California 94720, USA 7 Chemical Data-Driven Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology (KRICT), Daejeon 34114, South Korea *Email: sangwoohan@kaist.ac.kr, yongsoo.yang@kaist.ac.kr Abstract Nanomaterials with core-shell architectures are prominent examples of strain-engineered materials, where material properties can be designed by fine-tuning the misfit strain at the interface. Here, we elucidate the full 3D atomic structure of Pd@Pt core-shell nanoparticles at the single-atom level via atomic electron tomography. Full 3D displacement fields and strain profiles of core-shell nanoparticles were obtained, which revealed a direct correlation between the surface and interface strain. It also showed clear Poisson effects at the scale of the full nanoparticle as well as the local atomic bonds. The strain distributions show a strong shape-dependent anisotropy, whose nature was further corroborated by molecular statics simulations. From the observed surface strains, the surface oxygen reduction reaction activities were predicted. These findings give a deep understanding of structure- property relationships in strain-engineerable core-shell systems, which could pave a new way toward direct control over the resulting catalytic properties. Introduction By utilizing epitaxy between two different materials, the misfit strain at the interface can be finely controlled, and depending on the strain-induced structural change, the properties of materials can be dramatically altered1–7. Strain engineering techniques are now widely being studied and used in broad disciplines, allowing systematic optimization of optical, chemical, magnetic, and catalytic properties2,5– 10. One of the prominent examples of strain engineering is the core-shell nanoarchitecture4,5,7. Notably, metallic core-shell nanoparticles can show enhanced catalytic activities via interface strain effects and therefore have received great attention for their potential to be superior electronic catalysts for fuel cells2,5–7,11,12. The binding energy of adsorbates is especially influenced by strain5,6,13,14, where it can be finely tuned by controlling the shell thickness or the core size4,15–19. To fully utilize the interfacial strain effect, it is essential to have an atomic-scale understanding of the 3D interface structure. However, studies to date have been mostly limited to ensemble-averaged structure or lower dimensional (2D) imaging, which cannot provide the full 3D atomic structural detail of the core-shell interface4,7,17,19,20. Due to the intrinsic limitation of 2D projection-based analyses, most of the studies have only focused on cubic-shaped nanoparticles terminated by {100} facets17,19–21, although {111} facets are technologically more important for their superior catalytic properties, for example, in the case of Pt-based catalysts14,22,23. Also, misfit strain not only affects the structure of the shell but can also propagate into the core. Nevertheless, the full 3D strain profiles of core-shell particles remain elusive due to the difficulty in analyzing the 3D internal structures. Moreover, the effect of interface strain on the surface atoms can include lattice expansion/contraction along the direction of the surface normal and the in-plane directions, related to the Poisson effect21,24–26. All spatial degrees of freedom must be considered for an accurate description of surface/interface atomic behavior such as a local atomic displacement and strain. Therefore, many studies emphasize the Poisson effect to properly understand nanomaterial structure-property relationships, but it has not been experimentally realized in 3D atomic detail21,25–28. Here, we reveal the largely unexplored nature of a 3D core-shell interface via atomic electron tomography (AET)29–32 by using cuboctahedron-like core-shell nanoparticles with a Pd core and a Pt shell (Pd@Pt) as a model system, which has notable application potential especially in the field of catalysts16,17,33–37. We determined the full 3D arrangement of atoms for two such nanoparticles from the tomograms of atomic resolution. From the experimentally determined 3D atomic structures, full strain profiles of the core-shell nanoparticles were obtained, which revealed a direct correlation between the surface and interface strain as well as the extension of the strain field into both the core and shell regions. Strong shape-dependent anisotropy was observed from the strain distributions, whose origin was further investigated via molecular statics (MS) simulations. The opposite behavior of displacements along perpendicular directions, generally known as the Poisson effect, was clearly seen at the global nanoparticle scale and also on the scale of individual atomic bonds. Finally, based on the observed surface strains, oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) activities at the surface were predicted at the atomic scale via the strain-adsorption energy relation. Results and Discussion Experimental identification of core-shell 3D atomic structure Pd@Pt nanoparticles with a core-shell structure were synthesized by a previously reported method16 (Methods). Using aberration-corrected microscopes operated in annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (ADF-STEM) mode, we measured tomographic tilt series for two nanoparticles: one with an average diameter of 8.56 nm (Particle 1) and another with an average diameter of 5.76 nm (Particle 2) (Methods). These nanoparticles are not fully spherical, and actual 3D shape and size information is provided in Supplementary Videos 3 and 7. After post-processing29–31 of the obtained tilt series images, 3D tomograms of the two Pd@Pt nanoparticles (Particles 1 and 2) were reconstructed using the GENFIRE algorithm38 (Methods). Full 3D atomic coordinates and chemical species of the atoms contained in each nanoparticle were determined from the tomograms by atom tracing and classification techniques with the precisions of 23.9 pm (Particle 1) and 24.6 pm (Particle 2) (Methods). the expected overall core-shell structure. Interestingly, the Pd core is not fully covered by the Pt shell, and a part of the Pd core is exposed to the surface near the (111) facet. The tomogram intensity and traced atom position maps given in Fig. 1d-g and Supplementary Video 1 also confirm the observation, showing a clear core-shell structure with some part of the core Pd atoms being exposed. While most Pd atoms are located in the core of the nanoparticle, some Pd atoms (lower intensity blobs in the tomogram; see Fig. 1d-g) were also observed on the particle surface. This is not surprising because residual Pd precursors in the growth solution were reduced on the surface of the generated core-shell nanoparticles during the synthesis. To verify the existence of surface Pd atoms, an energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) experiment was conducted. The STEM-EDS map (Supplementary Fig. 1) shows the Pd signal near the surface, evidencing that the observed surface Pd atoms are real. However, since our main interest lies in the relation between the interfacial strain (induced from the lattice mismatch) and the Pt surface structure, we focused on the core Pd atoms and shell Pt atoms for further analysis. Having full atomic structural information (3D atomic coordinates and chemical species) allows us to quantitatively analyze the structural properties of the nanoparticle. We first compared the 3D atomic structure with an ideal face-centered cubic (fcc) lattice (Methods). Most of the atoms can be assigned to fcc lattice sites, suggesting that the core-shell nanoparticle can structurally be regarded as a single fcc crystal, as can be seen in Supplementary Video 2, Fig. 1b and the inset of Fig. 1d. An fcc lattice was fitted to the atomic coordinates, and the best-fit lattice constant was determined to be 3.90 Å. Local lattice assignments and fittings were further performed for each atom in the nanoparticle (Methods), resulting in the averaged local lattice constants of 3.92±0.06 Å for Pd and 3.87±0.08 Å for Pt (the errors represent the standard deviation). Interestingly, the averaged Pd lattice constant shows a value larger than that of bulk Pd (3.88 Å)39,40, while the averaged Pt lattice constant is smaller than that of bulk Pt (3.91 Å)40,41, resulting in the Pd lattice constant exceeding that of Pt. These findings are consistent with the reported shrinkage of the Pt lattice when synthesized as nanoparticles42,43 and the expected expansion of the Pd lattice as a result of hydrogenation of the Pd precursor in the synthesis process44–48. The averaged volumetric strains can be calculated from the local lattice constants, which can be compared with those from a previous X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) study of a similar Pd@Pt system49. The averaged volumetric strains of Pd@Pt core-shell nanoparticles from the XAFS experiments are 1.6% for Pd and -0.3% for Pt. Averaging the volumetric strain obtained from AET for every atom in the two nanoparticles yields volumetric strains of 2.1 % for Pd and -0.4 % for Pt. Both of the results from XAFS and AET consistently show relatively large tensile strains at the core part and mild compressive strains in the shell. XAFS experiments sample a wide range of nanoparticle sizes to obtain the average strain information of the target system to provide averaged information and are blind to any local atomic-scale details. AET currently can only be applied to a few nanoparticles rather than providing global information of nanoparticle ensembles, but it can detect individual atom level details regarding the core-shell system and provide detailed local information at the single-atom scale throughout each individual nanoparticle. Displacement and strain analysis of a core-shell nanoparticle at the single-atom scale Since each atom was assigned to a specific site in an fcc lattice, the 3D displacements between the atomic coordinates and corresponding fcc lattice sites can be directly obtained. The displacements were mapped onto a Cartesian grid by Gaussian kernel averaging, and 3D strain tensor maps were obtained by taking their derivative (Methods). Figure 2a-e shows the atomic structure, displacement map, and strain map of Particle 1 for each atomic layer sliced along the direction. Again, a clear core-shell structure can be observed from the sliced atomic structure map (Fig. 2a). The displacement maps (Fig. 2b-c) show an interesting anisotropy throughout the nanoparticle, exhibiting positive radial and azimuthal displacements along the x-direction and negative displacements along the y-direction. Note that this overall behavior of opposite displacement along the two perpendicular directions is consistent with the Poisson effect for metallic compounds24–26. In the radial strain map (Fig. 2d), the effect of the core-shell structure is clearly visible; tensile strains dominate in the core, while the shell mainly shows the compressive strain. The volumetric strain obtained by summing the three principal strain components in Cartesian coordinates (Supplementary Fig. 2k) shows a clear contrast between the core and shell regions confirming the existence of core-shell misfit strain throughout the nanoparticle. The azimuthal direction strain (Fig. 2e) does not show a clear bimodal distribution expected from the core-shell structure, but instead an alternating tensile and compressive behavior along the φ direction can be seen, consistent with the anisotropy observed in the displacement map. To analyze the local atomic-scale details of the core-shell structure, the atomic displacement vectors and strain maps for the atomic layer in the middle of the nanoparticle were investigated (Fig. 2f-g). The aforementioned Poisson effect is observed in the overall displacement along the x- and y- directions. Interestingly, we can also see local displacements at the atomic scale which resembles the global Poisson effect (i.e., opposite displacement along two perpendicular directions). In the region where radial displacements are most strongly pointing outward, the azimuthal displacements converge inward, i.e., the arrows meet head-to-head (the region pointed by red arrows in Fig. 2f-g). The opposite behavior is observed in the region of radial displacements pointing inward (converge), where the azimuthal displacements diverge outward, i.e., the arrows meet tail-to-tail (the region pointed by blue arrows in Fig. 2f-g). This not only emphasizes that atomic-scale tailoring of the local structural behavior is possible (controlling the in-plane displacement by tuning the radial strain, and vice versa), but also suggests that a simple unit cell volume-based description of surface strain2,4,5,7,50 might not be sufficient to properly predict the surface catalytic activity, necessitating more detailed study incorporating the in- plane and out-of-plane strain behavior separately. Observation of interface-surface correlation and full strain profile From the calculated strain information, we can directly address the relationship between the misfit strain at the interface and that at the surface, as visualized in Fig. 3a-b (pole figures) and Supplementary Video 3 (Methods). It can be clearly seen from the pole figures and the 3D video that the interface and surface strains overall exhibit very similar behavior, suggesting that they are strongly correlated. To quantitatively analyze these correlations, the radial strain values of each atom at the interface were paired with those of corresponding surface atoms as described in Fig. 3c (Methods). Again, a strong positive correlation between the interface and surface strains can be observed, and the Pearson correlation coefficient (R) of 0.74 and a slope of 0.87 were obtained via linear regression. To further verify the correlation, the out-of-plane strain was plotted following a path connecting high- symmetry facets (Supplementary Fig. 3 and Methods) for the interface and surface, separately. The results also clearly show that the interface and surface strains are directly correlated. The strong correlations we observe from several analyses described above indicate that the strain at the interface caused by the lattice mismatch can propagate through the thin shell and commensurately affect the surface strain, suggesting that the surface strain can indeed be controlled by turning the misfit strain at the interface. The overall strain behavior of the nanoparticle along the radial direction was also investigated. tensile strain can be observed in the deep core region of the nanoparticle, and the strain gradually becomes compressive as the interface is approached. This behavior is consistent with the fact that the Pd core has a larger local lattice parameter than that of Pt. In the Pt shell region, the strain gradually increases from the interface toward the surface, showing the expected lattice relaxation behavior4,7,17. Note that the propagation of misfit strain towards the center of the core is also prominent, not only towards the surface of the shell. This suggests that the misfit strain effect for both core and shell should be considered together for fine tailoring of the core-shell structure, for which the determination of the full 3D strain profiles will be essential. Calculation of the ORR activity from surface strain Having a full 3D atomic structure allows a direct calculation of the surface ORR activity (Fig. 3f) via the relation between the surface volumetric strain (Fig. 3e), type of facet, and OH binding energy14,22,51,52 (Methods). A clear facet-dependence can be observed from the ORR activity (Fig. 3f and Supplementary Video 4), showing much higher ORR activity for {111} facets compared to that of {100} and {110} facets, as expected from the known big difference between the ORR activity of different facets14,22,23 (Supplementary Fig. 4). While the ORR activity does depend primarily on the surface facets, we also observe a strong dependence of activity on the local strain. For the {111} facets, the ORR activity becomes low in the regions of tensile strain, and high ORR activity is observed at compressively strained parts (Fig. 3e-f and Supplementary Video 4). Interestingly, due to the interface-induced strain, most of the {111} facets show enhanced ORR activity compared to unstrained cases, suggesting that the ORR activity can indeed be controlled by the proper design of the surface strain, as reported in a recent study19. Note that the strain maps show an obviously anisotropic distribution for both the interface and the surface. Surprisingly, there is no strong relation visible between the observed anisotropy and (Supplementary Fig. 3) further confirms this behavior; the type of facets is not directly related to the anisotropy. Considering the fact that the region of the exposed Pd core shows a particularly strong tensile strain, we speculate that the anisotropy is mainly due to the core-shell geometry and overall shape rather than the facet structure. MS simulation of core-shell structures To verify the interface-surface correlation and investigate the origin of the strain anisotropy, MS simulations were performed using the same core-shell geometry and shape of the experimentally measured nanoparticles. Starting from an ideal fcc lattice model fitted to the experimental atomic structure of Particle 1, the atomic coordinate relaxation was simulated at 0 K using the embedded atom model (EAM) potential (Methods). Note that we used the chemical species of Ag and Al instead of Pd and Pt (Methods), to mimic the lattice constant ratio between hydrogenated Pd and Pt while capturing the elastic anisotropy of cubic crystals. Although several EAM potentials53,54 for the binary Pd-Pt system exist, they cannot describe the ternary interaction involving hydrogen and cannot account for the dilatation of the Pd lattice constant from hydrogenation. Because of the elastic isotropy originated from the Cauchy constraint, C12 = C44, a pair potential such as Lennard-Jones (LJ) model is not suitable to describe the strain distribution inside the nanoparticle, although we can easily tune the parameters to exactly match the ratios of lattice constants and bulk moduli. As shown in Fig. 4a-c, the simulation reproduces several features observed in the experiment: positively strained core, compressively strained shell, and the high tensile strain of the region where the core is exposed to the surface. Alternating compressive and tensile behavior of the εφφφφ strain along the azimuthal direction is also visible. The pole figures for the interface and surface radial strains (Fig. 4d-e) indicate a strong correlation between the surface and interface strain. MS simulations performed with a truncated LJ potential designed to match the ratios of lattice constants and bulk moduli show a notably distinct strain distribution (Supplementary Fig. 15), which manifests that the elastic anisotropy of cubic crystals plays a crucial role to induce the experimentally observed strain distribution and simple explanation based on Poisson effect is insufficient to explain it. The strong anisotropy of the radial strain is also well reproduced, supporting our speculation that the core-shell geometry and shape are the main parameters governing the anisotropy. To further verify this, we conducted two additional simulations (Supplementary Figs. 5 and 6). We first tried a similar MS relaxation using an atomic model of a perfectly spherical core-shell nanoparticle. As can be seen in Supplementary Figs. 5b and 6b, no clear anisotropy can be found from this simulation, showing a symmetric distribution of strains. In contrast, if we change the initial shape of the nanoparticle by partially cutting the spherical core-shell to expose a part of the core to the surface, the simulation produces more anisotropic strain behavior similar to the experiment (Supplementary Figs. 5c, 6c, and 7). These results demonstrate that the anisotropic distribution of strains observed in our experiment is mainly governed by the core-shell geometry and shape of the nanoparticle, rather than the facet structure. The behavior of the Particle 2 All the analyses (displacement, strain, and ORR calculation) were conducted in the same way for Particle 2 (Supplementary Figs. 8-14 and Supplementary Video 5-8). There are a few different features found compared to those of Particle 1. First, the displacements and strains are distributed differently (Supplementary Figs. 9 and 11). The difference may originate from a combination of effects; the two particles have different core sizes, shell thickness, and overall shape (especially, there is no exposed Pd core on the surface in the case of Particle 2). Second, the surface-interface strain correlation is weaker for Particle 2 compared to that of Particle 1. It can be attributed to the larger surface atomic deviation from the lattice positions for Particle 2, which can result from the relatively larger surface curvature (i.e., smaller radius). Particle 2 shows a larger root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) between the surface atoms and their lattice positions compared to that of Particle 1 (68.5 pm and 71.2 pm RMSDs for Particle 1 and Particle 2, respectively), supporting our assertion. Third, the enhancement of ORR activities at the {111} facets is less pronounced (Fig. 3f and Supplementary Fig. 11f: ORR pole figures). This is related to the distributions of the surface volumetric strains (Supplementary Figs. 11e-f, 13 and Supplementary Video 8); the peak of the surface strain distribution for Particle 2 shows slightly more tensile behavior compared to that of Particle 1 (consistent with the larger local lattice constant of the Pt shell of Particle 2), resulting in relatively poorer ORR activity. This can be explained by the thickness effect: the Pt surface lattice is not fully relaxed due to a thinner Pt shell thickness (Supplementary Figs. 11d and 25). From Supplementary Fig. 20, it can be seen that the in-plane lattice constant gradually decreases as the distance from the interface increases for both Particle 1 and Particle 2, showing a clear thickness-dependent lattice relaxation behavior. Considering the average shell thickness of 9.75 Å for Particle 1 and 6.77 Å for Particle 2 (Methods and Supplementary Fig. 25), this analysis demonstrates that the relatively larger local surface lattice constants of the Pt shell observed for Particle 2 can be (at least partially) attributed to the thickness effect; since the lattice constant decreases as a function of the distance from the interface, the surface lattice constant is expected to be smaller for a thicker shell. However, as can be seen from the differences in the interface lattice constants and lattice relaxation rates, other effects (the overall shape, size, larger core lattice constant [this might be due to the different degree of hydrogenation of the Pd], etc.) can also affect the behavior of the surface lattice constant. Experimental ORR activity measurements were also performed on two groups of nanoparticles with similar sizes to Particle 1 and Particle 2 (Methods and Supplementary Figs. 22 and 23). From Supplementary Fig. 23, it can be seen that the group of particles having a size similar to Particle 1 shows a better ORR activity than the group with the size similar to Particle 2. In spite of these differences, the overall core-shell effects we discussed above can be consistently observed in the two nanoparticles. The overall strain distribution shows tensile and compressive radial strains in the core and shell, respectively, while azimuthal strains exhibit alternating behavior (Supplementary Fig. 9d,e). The Poisson effect can also be observed at the global and local scales (Supplementary Fig. 9f,g). Strong surface-interface correlations (Supplementary Figs. 11a-c,12 and Supplementary Video 7) and shape-dependent strain anisotropy (Supplementary Figs. 11a-b,12,14 and Supplementary Video 7) can be clearly seen as well. The facet-dependent ORR distribution with a clear strain-induced enhancement is also found (Supplementary Fig. 11e,f and Supplementary Video 8). This suggests that the overall structural behaviors (surface-interface correlation, Poisson effect, shape- dependent anisotropic strain, facet/strain dependent ORR activities) represent a general core-shell structural effect. Conclusion The full 3D atomic structures of core-shell nanoparticles were determined via AET, and their 3D displacement and strain distributions were mapped, leading to the following conclusions. First, partial exposure of the core part on the surface resulted in a remarkable tensile strain effect in the local region for the larger nanoparticle. Second, the misfit of lattice and thus intrinsic strain can be observed both on the surface and along the interface, and the relationship between them suggests a linear tendency. Third, the surface displacement behavior clearly demonstrated the Poisson effect globally as well as locally. Fourth, the prominent anisotropy of strain displacement shall be attributed to the core-shell geometry and the shape of the nanoparticles, rather than surface facet effects, as confirmed by MS simulations. These observations suggest that the strain at the surface can be controlled through the misfit strain at the interface as well as core-shell design, which would allow the optimization of catalytic activity as desired. These novel characterization results are the first demonstration of probing the 3D structure of the core-shell nanoparticles at the individual atom level, directly providing the structure- property relations regarding strain-engineerable core-shell systems. Looking forward, controlled AET experiments via fine-tuning of the particle shape, core size, shell thickness, and the degree of hydrogenation of the Pd can shed light on the size and thickness effect, which can bring valuable information in the field of nanocrystal fabrication and catalysis. Furthermore, if in-situ capability can be properly implemented in the AET by overcoming some technical obstacles (e.g., sample durability, time resolution, and TEM holder design), it will allow us to unveil the 3D atomic dynamics of nanomaterials during dynamical processes such as segregation/diffusion, sintering, and device operation. layer slices along the crystallographic direction, to show the overall core-shell structure. b, Overall 3D view of the nanoparticle with one octant of the sphere separated to visualize the core-shell architecture. c, Overall 3D structure with separated core and shell. The shell is cut in half showing the core and shell interface structure. d-g, 1.06 Å thick slices of the 3D tomogram, showing four consecutive atomic layers along the direction, respectively. The grayscale background represents the intensity of the tomogram, and the red and blue dots represent the traced atomic coordinates of Pd and Pt, respectively. The Pd and Pt atoms can be well distinguished from the intensity contrast. The inset in (d) shows a magnified view of the area near the interface (indicated by a yellow box). Scale bar, 1 nm. along the direction) of the core-shell nanoparticle. Note that only one layer per every two atomic layers is plotted. Red and blue dots represent the positions of the Pd and Pt atoms assigned to the fcc lattice, respectively, and black dots represent the positions of atoms not assigned to the fcc lattice (Methods). b-c, 3D atomic displacement maps, along the radial direction (ddrr) (b), and along the azimuthal direction (ddφφ) (c) in the spherical coordinate system. d-e, 3D strain maps in spherical coordinates, representing radial (εεrrrr) (d) and azimuthal (εεφφφφ) (e) strains, respectively (Methods). The atomic displacement and strain maps presented in (b-e) were calculated from the corresponding layer presented in (a). f, A map showing the 3D radial strain, atomic positions (only half of the atomic positions are plotted for better visualization), and radial displacement vectors of an atomic layer at the middle of the particle. g, Similar plot with (f), for azimuthal strain and displacements. Note that the radial displacements (ddrr) point outward in the region where the azimuthal displacements (ddφφ) converge in (the region pointed by red arrows), and the opposite behavior can be observed in the region where radial displacements point inward, where the azimuthal displacements diverge (the region pointed by blue arrows). behavior, radial strain profile, and surface ORR activity. a-b, Pole figures obtained from stereographic projections of the radial strain at the interface and surface for the upper (a), and lower (b) hemispheres, respectively. The Miller indices of low-index facets are marked at the average position of the surface atoms assigned to each facet (Methods). c, A scatter plot showing the relation between the observed radial strains of surface and interface atoms. Each data point was obtained by paring each interface atom with the corresponding surface atom along the radial direction (Methods). A Pearson correlation coefficient (R) of 0.74 and slope of 0.87 were obtained from a linear regression (red line). d, The radial strain plotted as a function of the distance from the interface. Each data point and error bar represent an average and standard deviation of the strain values within the bins of 3 Å distance interval, respectively. e, Pole figures obtained by stereographic projections of the volumetric strain at the surface for the upper and lower hemispheres. f, Pole figures obtained from stereographic projections of the surface ORR activity for the upper and lower hemispheres. The ORR activity is represented as ln (jj/ jjPt,(111)) where jj is the current density. The Miller indices of low-index facets are marked at the average position of the surface atoms assigned to each facet (Methods). core-shell atomic structure resulting from the MS simulation (Methods), which is divided into atomic layers along the direction. Note that only one layer per every two atomic layers is plotted. The red and blue dots represent the positions of Pd and Pt atoms assigned to the fcc lattice, respectively. b-c, The calculated strain maps from the MS simulation result for the radial (εεrrrr) (b) and azimuthal (εεφφφφ) (c) strains in the spherical coordinate system, respectively. The strain maps were calculated from the corresponding layers presented in (a). d-e, Pole figures showing the interface and surface strains of the MS simulation result. The pole figures were obtained from stereographic projections of the radial strain at the interface and surface for the upper (d), and lower (e) hemispheres, respectively. The Miller indices of low-index facets are marked at the average position of the surface atoms assigned to each facet (Methods).