Enhancing All-Optical Switching of Magnetization by He Ion Irradiation Pingzhi Li∗,1, a) Johannes W. van der Jagt,2, 3 Maarten Beens,1 Julian Hintermayr,1 Marcel Verheijen,1 Ren ́e Bruikman,1 Beatriz Barcones,4 Rom ́eo Juge,2 Reinoud Lavrijsen,1 Dafin ́e Ravelosona,2, 5 and Bert Koopmans1 1)Department of Applied Physics, Eindhoven University of Technology, P. O. Box 513, 5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands 2)Spin-Ion Technologies, 10 boulevard Thomas Gobert, 91120 Palaiseau, France 3)Universit ́e Paris-Saclay, 3 rue Juliot Curie, 91190 Gif-sur-Yvette, France 4)NanoLab@TU/e, Eindhoven University of Technology, P. O. Box 513, 5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands 5)Centre de Nanosciences et de Nanotechnologies, CNRS, Universit ́e Paris-Saclay, 10 boulevard Thomas Gobert, 91120 Palaiseau, France (Dated: 19 July 2022) All-optical switching (AOS) of magnetization by a single femtosecond laser pulse in Co/Gd based synthetic ferrimagnets is the fastest magnetization switching process. On the other hand, He ion irradiation has become a promising tool for interface engineering of spintronic material platforms, giving rise to significant modification of magnetic properties. In this paper, we explore the use of He ion irradiation to enhance single pulse AOS of Co/Gd bilayer-based synthetic ferrimagnets. The intermixing of the constituent magnetic layers by He ion irradiation was both numerically simulated and experimentally verified. We theoretically modelled the effects of intermixing on AOS using the layered microscopic 3-temperature model and found that AOS is enhanced significantly by breaking the pristine Co/Gd interface through intermixing. Following this notion, we studied the threshold fluence of AOS as a function of He ion irradiation fluence. We found that the AOS threshold fluence can be reduced by almost 30%. Our study reveals the control of AOS by He ion irradiation, which opens up an industrially compatible approach for local AOS engineering. It is well-known that single pulse all-optical switch- ing (AOS) of the magnetization in 3d-4f ferrimagnets is the fastest and one of the least dissipative ways of magnetization switching1–5. This mechanism not only offers means for ultrafast memory operations, but also gives rise to integration between integrated photonics and spintronics2,6, in which the 3d-4f ferrimagnets should prevail7. Initially observed in a 3d-4f alloy systems4, recently, it was found that the Co/Gd bilayer8,9 based synthetic ferrimagnets exhibit likewise this ultrafast (ps switching time scale10,11) single pulse AOS process. The switching threshold fluence for this system is low8,12,13. On the other hand, the high process tolerance14 of this system also gives rise to an AOS-switchable magnetic tunnel junction with a high tunnel magneto-resistance11 as the only material platform with such successful demon- stration up today. Particularly, a unique merit of this Co/Gd material platform is that the presence of AOS is not composi- tion dependent15, unlike GdFeCo alloys4 and [Co/Tb]n multilayer systems16, where only a narrow composition window of ±2% from magnetic compensation is allowed15 for AOS. Such a difference is rooted in the AOS reversal mechanism15,17. Conventionally, for alloy systems, the switching relies on the angular momentum exchange15,18 between 3d ferromagnet (Co) and Gd when the Co mag- netic moment is quenched to zero while a proper amount of Gd is not fully demagnetized yet3. This results in the switching of Co magnetization, which is followed by the a)p.li1@tue.nl switching of Gd via the antiferromagnetic exchange cou- pling between Co and Gd. These properties of an alloy impose significant challenges on the possible wafer scale integration and leave no room for tunability of its AOS properties. On the other hand, for the Co/Gd layered system, the strict ratio between Co and Gd is lifted by the spatial asymmetry15,17, as the switching takes place first at the Co/Gd interface which then initiates the switching of the rest of the ferromagnet. Following this notion, it was found that the AOS in Co/Gd based synthetic fer- rimagnetic systems is independent of composition8,9,12,15 making it one of its unique properties. This creates an additional degree of freedom for nanoscale engineering of the properties of AOS. One of the methods to utilize this degree of free- dom is to explore the intermixing at the Co and Gd interface14,19. It was found that the threshold fluence of AOS can be largely reduced when the sharp inter- face between Co and Gd is replaced by a very thin layer of CoGd alloy. Interestingly, AOS still persists, despite the fact that the composition of this intermediate alloy is not the value pertaining AOS for the stand-alone al- loy. Compared to the case with a pure interface, the switching mechanism remains the same, however, the ini- tial switching at the interface region requires less energy. Such a property can be experimentally verified as well as adopted for application purposes. To this end, it has been discovered that controlled promotion of intermixing in spintronic material systems can be realized by He ion irradiation20. Furthermore, local control can be realized by irradiation through a mask21,22. Such a post-growth process was shown to al- low for a dramatic degree of modification of interfacial arXiv:2207.07766v1 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 15 Jul 2022 2 TEM image of the as-deposited sample (As-Dep) and the sample treated with an irradiation fluence of 50 × 1014 ions/cm2. The scale bar as well as the label for each layer is marked in the figure. (c) Depth profile of the element mapping (Pt, Co, Gd) from EDX measurements for both As-Dep and irradiated sample with fluence of 5×1015 ions/cm2. (d) Hysteresis loops, characterized by the polar-MOKE at the same field scanning speed, of As-Dep and irradiated sample with various irradiation fluence. (e) The surface anistropy energy density characterized from the VSM-SQUID measurement in the hard axis direction. The magnetic moment as a function of the field for As-Dep and the sample with irradiation fluence of 5×1015 ions/cm2 is shown in the inset. spintronic effects23–28, including the perpendicular mag- netic anisotropy (PMA), Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interac- tion, and damping, which are critical parameters for var- ious types of spintronic applications. This process can be potentially up-scaled to standard wafer-scale processing. So far, He ion irradiation has not yet been adopted in the field of single pulse AOS, despite being highly ex- plored already in the field of spintronics and optically driven domain wall motion29. In this work, we study the effect of He ion irradiation on AOS of a Co/Gd bilayer- based synthetic ferrimagnet. We first present the physi- cal evidence of the layer intermixing as a result of He ion irradiation as well as its the magneto-static properties. We then discuss our theoretical microscopic simulation for the intermixing effects in Co/Gd on AOS based on the numerically modeled intermixing profile, where we found AOS switching energy decreases with increased extend of intermixing. We further experimentally show that, as the irradiation fluence increases, the threshold fluence of AOS reduces by almost 30 %. Our study bridges the link between the single-shot AOS and He ion irradiation, which paves the way for local and wafer-scale control of AOS properties, potentially useful for AOS threshold en- ergy engineering. To conduct the study as mentioned above, we de- 3 to top, thickness in parenthesis in nm) on top of a Si/SiO2(100) substrate using DC magnetron sputtering at a base pressure of 10−9 mbar. The magneto-static properties of this material system have already been de- scribed in ,30. The sample is further processed using a Helium-S system from Spin-Ion Technologies with uni- form He+ ion irradiation with an energy of 15 keV, and irradiation fluences up to 5 × 1015 ions/cm2. The irradiation is known to induce intermixing20, which is schematically illustrated in Fig. 1a. The accel- erated He ions release their kinetic energy upon collid- ing with the metal atoms in the film, which have much higher charge numbers and mass. This action agitates the atoms of the metallic layers such that the (positive) enthalpy of intermixing is released, promoting an inter- mixing between metal layers. By choosing a kinetic en- ergy of 15 keV31, the majority of the He ions will be im- planted into the substrate instead of remaining in the film, while still an appreciable amount of intermixing is induced at the metallic interfaces. A physical evidence of induced intermixing can be visualized in the bright field transmission electron microscope (TEM) image shown in Fig. 1b, where the cross section of an as-deposited sam- ple is compared to one irradiated by an exposure irra- diation fluence of 5 × 1015 ions/cm2. Pt/Co and Co/Gd interfaces in the as-deposited stack are well separated, as found in comparable transition–metal/Gd interfaces32,33. A darker region on top of Pt and Gd can be observed in the irradiated sample as a result of intermixing at Pt/Co, Co/Gd, and Gd/TaN interfaces. Further evidence can be found in the elemental mapping of the energy dispersive X-Ray analysis (EDX) of the samples as deposited and irradiated with a fluence of 5×1015 ions/cm2 as shown in Fig. 1c (concentration of He is below the resolution limit). The elements in the irradiated sample clearly have a broadened elemental distribution with respect to the thickness, which qualitatively indicates intermixing. Here, we note that the results shown in Fig. 1c allow for qualitative comparison only and do not reflect a direct measure of the real element concentration, due to the fi- nite spot size of the electron beam and signal from the background, such as from the detector. We further investigated the magneto-static properties of the samples as a function of He ion irradiation flu- ence using the magneto-optic Kerr effect (MOKE). We first measured the hysteresis loop obtained using a po- lar MOKE configuration, some examples of which are shown in Fig. 1d. Here we observed square hystere- sis loops both for as deposited and irradiated samples with a fluence up to 5×1015 ions/cm2, which suggests all samples exhibit PMA. It is found that the coercive field is reduced as the He ion irradiation fluence increases. This is associated with the reduction of PMA induced at the Pt/Co interface due to increased intermixing34. We further quantified the interfacial anisotropy energy den- sity, obtained by an in-plane field sweep measurement using a vibrating sample magnetometer-superconducting quantum interference device (VSM-SQUID), as a func- tion of the irradiation fluence, which is shown in Fig. 1e. The measurement result for such a field sweep for the as-deposited sample and the sample with irradiation flu- ence of 5×1015 ions/cm2 are shown in the inset of Fig. 1e. We found that the PMA decreases monotonically with irradiation fluence, which is consistent with earlier studies24,35. Here, we specifically note that PMA per- sists up to a very large degree of intermixing (irradia- tion fluence), which is much higher than previous studies on ferromagnets24,28,36. We attribute this to the lowered magnetic moment (demagnetization field) upon intermix- ing between Co and Gd, where more antiparallel (to Co) magnetic moment in Gd is induced. Next, we both theoretically and experimentally inves- tigated the effects of intermixing on AOS. We used a lay- ered microscopic 3-temperature model (M3TM)37 with angular momentum exchange between Co and Gd medi- ated by exchange scattering, which successfully described the AOS behaviour of both Co/Gd bilayers and CoGd alloys15. In our simulation, we keep the material param- eters identical to those of our earlier works15,19. In order to obtain the intermixing profile as a function of the He ion irradiation fluence, we carried out numerical simu- lations using TRIDYN38, which dynamically models the effects of ion irradiation on multilayer systems. We took into account the full layer stack and substrate, which was formerly adopted in earlier studies27,39 successfully ad- dressing intermixing. Here, we specifically incorporated the element profile of Pt, Co and Gd (see Fig. 2a) ex- tracted from the TRIDYN simulations into our theoret- ical M3TM framework, where the Pt atoms are mod- eled as a magnetically dead component with the same exchange scattering properties as Gd. We found that the presence of Pt does neither significantly alter the AOS- ability nor the switching dynamics, which is governed by the Co/Gd interface. We further found that AOS still persists as long as the intermixing induced material gradient is present, moreover, as the pristine interface is gradually replaced by a CoGdPt alloy following the spa- tial composition gradient created by induced intermixing, the threshold fluence monotonically decreases (see Fig. 2. b). To determine the physical origin of this change, we traced the reduction of the Curie temperature15,19,22 upon intermixing, which was found to be almost linearly decreasing with the threshold fluence up to about 4% for the irradiation fluence of 5×1015 ions/cm2. By artificially lowering the Curie temperature of the non-irradiated and lightly irradiated configuration by 4%, we found a reduc- tion of AOS switching energy only by < 1×108 J/m3, which could not explain the more drastic reduction as shown in Fig. 2b. Therefore, we attribute the reduction of the switching energy mainly to the change of switch- ing dynamics incurred by the intermixing induced Co/Gd concentration gradient at the interface. As the degree of intermixing increases, effectively more efficient angu- lar momentum transfer between Co and Gd takes place. On the other hand, the composition gradient ensures the presence of AOS by maintaining the typical switching 4 obtained from TRIDYN simulations. (b) Simulated threshold AOS energy of Co/Gd obtained from M3TM as a function of irradiation fluence, the concentration profiles obtained from TRIDYN simulations. (c) AOS threshold as a red curve. Inset shows some example Kerr images of domains for samples with different irradiation fluences, created by a single linearly polarized laser pulse of different pulse energies. mechanisms of a synthetic ferrimagnet15,17. In order to experimentally verify the reduction of the AOS threshold fluence by He irradiation, we charac- terized the threshold fluence of irradiated samples of Here, we adopted the approach used in . We illuminated the sam- ple with a single ∼ 100 fs-laser pulse with various pulse energies and imaged the reversed domain using polar- Kerr microscopy. Some exemplary images are shown in the inset of Fig. 2c, from which the threshold fluence is obtained by fitting the switched area as a function of the laser pulse energy. The obtained results are plotted in Fig. 2c. We found that the threshold fluence of AOS reduces monotonically at first with respect to the He ir- radiation fluence, which is followed by a saturation at higher irradiation fluences. We found as much as 30% of reduction in the AOS threshold fluence for irradiation fluence below 2.5×1015 ions/cm2, the qualitative trend of which matches our theoretical expectations. To un- ravel the origin of the saturation of AOS threshold flu- ence (with respect to the irradiation fluence) is beyond the scope of this work, but as the magnetic anisotropy for this fluence is low, this fluence region is less techno- logically relevant. In summary, we have explored the use of He ion irradi- ation to enhance AOS through the intermixing between the Co and Gd. We first presented the physical evidence of this intermixing as well as its effect on static magnetic properties. We show the square hysteresis is maintained upon He ion irradiation, while the anisotropy reduces monotonically. We theoretically predicted the reduction of AOS threshold fluence upon intermixing. We further experimentally verified that He ion irradiation leads to a 30% reduction in threshold fluence paving the way for local and high-throughput control of AOS at wafer-scale. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This project has received funding from the Euro- pean Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation pro- gramme under the Marie Sk�lodowska-Curie grant agree- ment No.860060 and No.861300. This project is also part of the research programme financed by the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO). 1M. L. Alexey V.Kimel, “Writing magnetic memory with ultra- short light pulses,” Nature Reviews Materials 4, 189–200 (2019). 2D. Polley, A. Pattabi, J. Chatterjee, S. Mondal, K. Jhuria, H. Singh, J. Gorchon, and J. Bokor, “Progress toward picosec- ond on-chip magnetic memory,” Applied Physics Letters 120, 3I. Radu, K. Vahaplar, C. Stamm, T. Kachel, N. Pontius, H. A. D ̈urr, T. A. Ostler, J. Barker, R. F. L. Evans, R. W. Chantrell, A. Tsukamoto, A. Itoh, A. Kirilyuk, T. Rasing, and A. V. Kimel, “Transient ferromagnetic-like state mediating ultrafast reversal of antiferromagnetically coupled spins,” Nature 472, 205–208 4T. A. Ostler, J. Barker, R. F. L. Evans, R. W. Chantrell, U. Atxi- tia, O. Chubykalo-Fesenko, S. El Moussaoui, L. Le Guyader, E. Mengotti, L. J. Heyderman, F. Nolting, A. Tsukamoto, A. Itoh, D. Afanasiev, B. A. Ivanov, A. M. Kalashnikova, K. Va- haplar, J. Mentink, A. Kirilyuk, T. Rasing, and A. V. Kimel, “Ultrafast heating as a sufficient stimulus for magnetization re- versal in a ferrimagnet,” Nature Communications 3, 666 (2012). 5A. El-Ghazaly, J. Gorchon, R. B. Wilson, A. Pattabi, and J. Bokor, “Progress towards ultrafast spintronics applications,” Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials 502, 166478 5 6M. L. M. Lalieu, R. Lavrijsen, and B. Koopmans, “Integrating all-optical switching with spintronics,” Nature Communications 7S. K. Kim, G. S. D. Beach, K.-J. Lee, T. Ono, T. Rasing, and H. Yang, “Ferrimagnetic spintronics,” Nature Materials 21, 24– 8M. L. M. Lalieu, M. J. G. Peeters, S. R. R. Haenen, R. Lavrijsen, and B. Koopmans, “Deterministic all-optical switching of syn- thetic ferrimagnets using single femtosecond laser pulses,” Phys- ical Review B 96, 220411 (2017). 9P. Li, T. J. Kools, R. Lavrijsen, and B. Koopmans, “Ultra- fast racetrack based on compensated Co/Gd-based synthetic fer- rimagnet with all-optical switching,” arxiv , arxiv.2204.11595 10M. J. G. Peeters, Y. M. van Ballegooie, and B. Koopmans, “Influence of magnetic fields on ultrafast laser-induced switching dynamics in co/gd bilayers,” Physical Review B 105, 014429– 11W. Luding, C. Houyi, L. Pingzhi, van Hees Youri L. W., L. Yang, C. Kaihua, L. Reinoud, L. Xiaoyang, K. Bert, and Z. Weisheng, “Picosecond optospintronic tunnel junctions,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 119, e2204732119 (2022). 12P. Li, M. J. G. Peeters, Y. L. W. van Hees, R. Lavrijsen, and B. Koopmans, “Ultra-low energy threshold engineering for all-optical switching of magnetization in dielectric-coated co/gd based synthetic-ferrimagnet,” Applied Physics Letters 13Y. L. W. van Hees, P. van de Meugheuvel, B. Koopmans, and R. Lavrijsen, “Deterministic all-optical magnetization writing fa- cilitated by non-local transfer of spin angular momentum,” Na- ture Communications 11, 3835 (2020). 14L. Wang, Y. L. W. van Hees, R. Lavrijsen, W. Zhao, and B. Koopmans, “Enhanced all-optical switching and domain wall velocity in annealed synthetic-ferrimagnetic multilayers,” Ap- plied Physics Letters 117, 022408 (2020). 15M. Beens, M. L. M. Lalieu, A. J. M. Deenen, R. A. Duine, and B. Koopmans, “Comparing all-optical switching in synthetic- ferrimagnetic multilayers and alloys,” Physical Review B 100, 16L. Avil ́es-F ́elix, A. Olivier, G. Li, C. S. Davies, L. ́Alvaro-G ́omez, M. Rubio-Roy, S. Auffret, A. Kirilyuk, A. V. Kimel, T. Ras- ing, L. D. Buda-Prejbeanu, R. C. Sousa, B. Dieny, and I. L. Prejbeanu, “Single-shot all-optical switching of magnetization in Tb/Co multilayer-based electrodes,” Scientific Reports 10, 5211 17S. Gerlach, L. Oroszlany, D. Hinzke, S. Sievering, S. Wien- holdt, L. Szunyogh, and U. Nowak, “Modeling ultrafast all- optical switching in synthetic ferrimagnets,” Physical Review B 18J. H. Mentink, J. Hellsvik, D. V. Afanasiev, B. A. Ivanov, A. Kiri- lyuk, A. V. Kimel, O. Eriksson, M. I. Katsnelson, and T. Rasing, “Ultrafast spin dynamics in multisublattice magnets,” Physical Review Letters 108, 057202– (2012). 19M. Beens, M. L. M. Lalieu, R. A. Duine, and B. Koopmans, “The role of intermixing in all-optical switching of synthetic- ferrimagnetic multilayers,” AIP Advances 9, 125133 (2019). 20J. Fassbender, D. Ravelosona, and Y. Samson, “Tailoring mag- netism by light-ion irradiation,” Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 37, R179–R196 (2004). 21C. Chappert, H. Bernas, J. Ferr ́e, V. Kottler, J. P. Jamet, Y. Chen, E. Cambril, T. Devolder, F. Rousseaux, V. Mathet, and H. Launois, “Planar patterned magnetic media obtained by ion irradiation,” Science 280, 1919 (1998). 22T. Devolder, J. Ferr ́e, C. Chappert, H. Bernas, J. P. Jamet, irradiated pt/co/pt ultrathin films,” Physical Review B 64, 23L. Herrera Diez, F. Ummelen, V. Jeudy, G. Durin, L. Lopez-Diaz, R. Diaz-Pardo, A. Casiraghi, G. Agnus, D. Bouville, J. Langer, B. Ocker, R. Lavrijsen, H. J. M. Swagten, and D. Ravelosona, “Magnetic domain wall curvature induced by wire edge pinning,” Applied Physics Letters 117, 062406 (2020). 24X. Zhao, B. Zhang, N. Vernier, X. Zhang, M. Sall, T. Xing, L. H. Diez, C. Hepburn, L. Wang, G. Durin, A. Casiraghi, M. Belmeguenai, Y. Roussign ́e, A. Stashkevich, S. M. Ch ́erif, J. Langer, B. Ocker, S. Jaiswal, G. Jakob, M. Kl ̈aui, W. Zhao, and D. Ravelosona, “Enhancing domain wall velocity through in- terface intermixing in W-CoFeB-MgO films with perpendicular anisotropy,” Applied Physics Letters 115, 122404 (2019). 25T. Devolder, I. Barisic, S. Eimer, K. Garcia, J. P. Adam, B. Ock- ert, and D. Ravelosona, “Irradiation-induced tailoring of the magnetism of CoFeB/MgO ultrathin films,” Journal of Applied Physics 113, 203912 (2013). 26X. Zhao, Y. Liu, D. Zhu, M. Sall, X. Zhang, H. Ma, J. Langer, B. Ocker, S. Jaiswal, G. Jakob, M. Kl ̈aui, W. Zhao, and D. Ravelosona, “Spin–orbit torque driven multi-level switching in He+ irradiated W/CoFeB/MgO hall bars with perpendicular anisotropy,” Applied Physics Letters 116, 242401 (2020). 27M. Krupinski, J. Hintermayr, P. Sobieszczyk, and M. Albrecht, “Control of magnetic properties in ferrimagnetic gdfe and tbfe thin films by he+ and ne+ irradiation,” Phys. Rev. Materials 5, 28R. Juge, K. Bairagi, K. G. Rana, J. Vogel, M. Sall, D. Mailly, V. T. Pham, Q. Zhang, N. Sisodia, M. Foerster, L. Aballe, M. Belmeguenai, Y. Roussign ́e, S. Auffret, L. D. Buda- Prejbeanu, G. Gaudin, D. Ravelosona, and O. Boulle, “Helium ions put magnetic skyrmions on the track,” Nano Letters 21, 29M. S. El Hadri, M. Hehn, G. Malinowski, C. Beign ́e, E. E. Fuller- ton, D. Ravelosona, and S. Mangin, “Suppression of all-optical switching in He+ -irradiated Co/Pt multilayers: influence of the domain-wall energy,” 51, 215004 (2018). 30B. Wang, Y. Guo, B. Han, Z. Yan, T. Wang, D. Yang, X. Fan, and J. Cao, “The accurate measurement of spin orbit torque by utilizing the harmonic longitudinal voltage with wheatstone bridge structure,” Applied Physics Letters 116, 222402 (2020). 31C. T. Rettner, S. Anders, J. E. E. Baglin, T. Thomson, and B. D. Terris, “Characterization of the magnetic modification of Co/Pt multilayer films by He+, Ar+, and Ga+ ion irradiation,” Applied Physics Letters 80, 279–281 (2002). 32J. Hintermayr, A. Ullrich, and M. Albrecht, “Structure and magnetic properties of ferrimagnetic [Gd/Fe]n multilayer and GdxFe100−x thin films,” AIP Advances 11, 095214 (2021). 33J. Hintermayr, N. Y. Safonova, A. Ullrich, and M. Albrecht, “Magnetic properties and structure of Gd-implanted L10 FePt thin films,” AIP Advances 9, 055020 (2019). 34T. Devolder, “Light ion irradiation of co/pt systems: Structural origin of the decrease in magnetic anisotropy,” Physical Review 35M. C. H. de Jong, M. J. Meijer, J. Lucassen, J. van Liempt, H. J. M. Swagten, B. Koopmans, and R. Lavrijsen, “Local control of magnetic interface effects in chiral Ir/Co/Pt multilay- ers using Ga+ ion irradiation,” Physical Review B 105, 064429 36L. H. Diez, M. Voto, A. Casiraghi, M. Belmeguenai, Y. Rous- sign ́e, G. Durin, A. Lamperti, R. Mantovan, V. Sluka, V. Jeudy, Y. T. Liu, A. Stashkevich, S. M. Ch ́erif, J. Langer, B. Ocker, L. Lopez-Diaz, and D. Ravelosona, “Enhancement of the dzyaloshinskii-moriya interaction and domain wall velocity through interface intermixing in Ta/CoFeB/MgO,” Physical Re- view B 99, 054431– (2019). 37A. J. Schellekens and B. Koopmans, “Microscopic model for ultrafast magnetization dynamics of multisublattice magnets,” Physical Review B 87, 020407– (2013). 38W. M ̈oller, W. Eckstein, and J. Biersack, “Tridyn-binary col- lision simulation of atomic collisions and dynamic composition changes in solids,” Computer Physics Communications 51, 355– 39M. M. Jakubowski, M. O. Liedke, M. Butterling, E. Dynowska, I. Sveklo, E. Mili ́nska, Z. Kurant, R. B ̈ottger, J. von Borany, 6 A. Maziewski, A. Wagner, and A. Wawro, “On defects’ role in enhanced perpendicular magnetic anisotropy in Pt/Co/Pt, in- duced by ion irradiation,” Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter