A Sport and a Pastime: Model Design and Computation in Quantum Many-Body Systems Gaopei Pan and Weilun Jiang Beijing National Laboratory for Condensed Matter Physics and Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China School of Physical Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China Zi Yang Meng∗ Department of Physics and HKU-UCAS Joint Institute of Theoretical and Computational Physics, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong SAR, China (Dated: November 23, 2022) We summarize the recent developments in the model design and computation for a few representative quantum many-body systems, encompassing quantum critical metals be- yond the Hertz-Millis-Moriya framework with pseudogap and superconductivity, SYK non-Fermi-liquid with self-tuned quantum criticality and fluctuation induced supercon- ductivity, and the flat-band quantum Moir ́e lattice models in continuum where the interplay of quantum geometry of flat-band wave function and the long-range Coulomb interactions gives rise to novel insulating phases at integer fillings and superconductivity away from them. Although the narrative choreography seems simple, we show how im- portant the appropriate model design and their tailor-made algorithmic developments – in other words, the scientific imagination inspired by the corresponding fast experimen- tal developments in the aforementioned systems – compel us to invent and discover new knowledge and insights in the sport and pastime of quantum many-body research. CONTENTS I. Introduction 1 II. Lattice model and simulations for quantum critical metals 3 A. Antiferromagnetic and ferromagnetic quantum critical metal models 3 B. Pseudogap and superconductivity near ferromagnetic critical point 5 C. nFL behavior and fermionic self-energy analysis 7 D. Bosonic dynamics 8 III. Yukawa-Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev Model 11 A. Spin-1/2 Yukawa-SYK model and its phase diagram 11 B. Normal-state results at N, M → ∞ 13 C. nFL Green’s functions 13 D. Self-tuned quantum criticality 15 E. Superconductivity emerging from nFL 15 F. Planckian metals, spin glass and open questions 16 IV. Quantum Moir ́e lattice models and their computation 18 A. Real-space lattice models 19 B. Momentum-space models and quantum Monte Carlo method 21 C. Dynamical and thermodynamic signatures of the flat-band correlations 22 D. Symmetry, Pairing mechanism and Superconductivity 24 ∗ zymeng@hku.hk V. Discussions 25 Acknowledgement 26