Thermal boundary conductance of CVD-grown MoS2 monolayer-on-silica substrate determined by scanning thermal microscopy C.M. Frausto-Avilaa,b , V. Arellano-Arreolab, J.M. Yañez-Limonb, A. De Luna-Bugallob,c,*, S. Gomèsa, P.-O. Chapuisa,* a Univ Lyon, CNRS, INSA-Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CETHIL UMR5008, F-69621, Villeurbanne, France b Cinvestav Unidad Querétaro, Querétaro, Qro. 76230, Mexico c Departamento de Nanotecnología, Centro de Física Aplicada y Tecnología Avanzada, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, CP 76000, Querétaro, Qro., Mexico. *Corresponding authors: aluna@fata.unam.mx, olivier.chapuis@insa-lyon.fr We characterize heat dissipation of supported MoS2 monolayers grown by chemical vapour deposition (CVD) by means of ambient-condition scanning thermal microscopy (SThM). We find that the thermal boundary conductance of the MoS2 monolayers in contact with 300 nm of SiO2 is around 4.6 ± 2 MW.m-2.K-1. This value is in the low range of the values determined for exfoliated flakes with other techniques such as Raman thermometry, which span an order of magnitude (0.44 - 50 MW.m-2.K-1) and underlines the dispersion of the measurements. The sensitivity to the in-plane thermal conductivity of supported MoS2 is very low, highlighting that the thermal boundary conductance is the key driver of heat dissipation for the MoS2 monolayer when it is not suspended. In addition, this work also demonstrates that SThM calibration using different thicknesses of SiO2, generally employed in bulk materials, can be extended to 2D materials. Over the last two decades, there has been a growing interest in 2D materials due to their low dimensionality, making them attractive for various fields such as electronics, condensed matter, photonics, catalysis, among others. After the popularization of graphene, different layered materials have been discovered, including borophene1, hexagonal boron nitride hBN2, and transition metal dichalcogenides3 (TMDCs). Molybdenum disulfide (MoS2), a member of the family of TMDCs, is a semiconductor whose synthesis has been quite well developed and established by different approaches4–9 . In the case of a single layer (thickness around 6 Å) MoS2 exhibits a direct bandgap10 (≈1.82 eV), reasonable electrical conductivity, large spin-orbit coupling, strong exciton binding, which makes it suitable for several optoelectronic applications11,12. Investigating the properties of 2D materials and implementing various characterization techniques are challenging in many cases, particularly for thermal studies, due to the complexity associated with their extremely-low thickness. With the advent of atomically thin materials, different thermal characterization techniques have been extrapolated from bulk to nanostructured materials. Techniques such as the 3ω method13, photothermal characterization14, as well as Raman thermometry15, have been efficiently translated for thermal conductivity measurements of such materials. Some of the techniques require depositing metallic contacts onto the samples16, which is unfeasible for certain configurations of the systems, or high-frequency equipment17 with assumptions on the (ideal) optical absorption. Thermal characterization aims mainly at obtaining parameters such as thermal conductivity and thermal boundary conductances (TBCs). Due to the quick preparation and crystal quality, most of the reports regarding the thermal properties of MoS2 are normally performed using exfoliated samples (either supported by an arbitrary substrate or suspended in a micrometer-sized hole), however MoS2 crystals can also be grown by chemical vapor deposition (CVD), which appears more appropriate for device integration and scaling18. For supported exfoliated monolayers (flakes), thermal conductivity values in the range 34.5-62.0 W.m-1.K-1 are reported, while TBCs span 0.44-50 MW.m-2.K-1 19–22. For the suspended configuration, thermal conductivity values between 23.2 and 84.0 W.m-1.K-1 are reported21,23,24. These values are more accurate when averaged over large areas and were obtained by techniques with inherent limitations such as optical diffraction25 in the best cases. Beyond such scales scanning thermal microscopy (SThM), developed since the 1990s25 on the atomic force microscopy (AFM) platform, is attractive since the spatial resolution can depend only on the radius of the thermal contact between the probe and the sample. Such radius can reach the sub- 100 nm scale under certain operation conditions, making it an option for nanoscale thermal measurements, in particular thermometry26. Although SThM was already used on structures involving MoS2 for thermometry in complex devices26 and for an analysis of heat dissipation in samples where MoS2 was coupled to graphene27, it has not been used for quantitative thermal-property determination of the TMDC yet. In the present work, we propose a methodology based on ambient-condition SThM to determine the TBC value for MoS2 monolayers grown by CVD on SiO2/Si substrates. It is demonstrated that (in-plane) thermal conductivity is not useful in practice for samples with several microns of lateral lengths, since heat dissipation takes place towards the substrate. The MoS2 crystals are grown by atmospheric CVD, further details can be found in previous reports28. The studied systems are composed of a MoS2 monolayer supported by a 300 nm-thick silica layer standing over a silicon wafer. monolayer, and the overall stack is reminded in the insert. The typical lateral size of the crystals is around 70-100 μm. As a large number of MoS2 monolayers crystals (typical shapes as that of Fig. 1) can be present on the substrate, careful attention is paid to avoid thermal or optical crosstalk. Moreover, we use Raman spectroscopy to monitor the frequency difference between the E2g and A1g peaks7 to select only the single-layered MoS2 crystals (see Suppl. Fig. 1). with a triangular shape. The light dot corresponds to a laser spot irradiating the surface. (b) Cross-section schematic of the analyzed system. Thermal scans are acquired by means of thermoresistive SThM, with two different thermal probes25. The data reported here are obtained using a Wollaston probe, whose sensor is a 5 μm-in-diameter Pt90/Rh10 filament with a length of ≈200 μm. It is bent in a V shape with the tip contacting the sample, and anchored between unetched parts of the Wollaston wire, where the Pt90/Rh10 alloy is surrounded by a silver shell (≈75 μm of diameter in total). This makes the sides of the filament less electrically- resistive. As a consequence, the filament is self-heated when fed by an electrical current I. The SThM operation mode typically used in this work consists in bringing the heated probe into contact with the sample in order to heat it locally and scanning its surface at constant force as in AFM. Noticeably, the electrical resistance of the sensor R depends on the average temperature of the probe T̅, so in addition to being a heat source the probe is a thermometer: R = R0. (1 + αθ), (1) where α = (1/R). dR/dT̅ is the temperature coefficient of the Pt90/Rh10 electrical resistance known to be 1.66×10-3 K-1, R0 = R(T0) and θ = T̅ − T0 is the temperature rise above ambient temperature T0 (see Suppl. Sec. 2 for more details on SThM). The ratio between the heat input to the sensor P = RI2and the sensor average temperature rise θ provides a qualitative estimation of the sample ability to dissipate heat, it is known as the probe thermal conductance Gprobe (see Suppl. Secs. 2-4) and its value is close to 95 μW.K-1 in ambient condition. In our setup, the current supplied to the probe is constant, and the voltage variation ΔV is monitored at the same time than the topography during the scan25 of the sample surface. The voltage reference (ΔV = 0) is taken at an arbitrary point on the surface. Note that thermal stabilization is reached by waiting around 45 min before scanning to minimize the impact of thermal drifts on the images. topography, and (b) the raw thermal image (ΔV) of a MoS2 monolayer. It is possible to directly correlate the crystal topography (here slightly different from the crystal of Fig. 1) with the thermal contrast. One can notice the strong difference between the thermal signal on the MoS2 monolayer and that in the region around (SiO2/Si substrate). Artifacts linked to scan direction are observed in the topography image, and are also present in the raw thermal image. Fig 2. (a) Topography image obtained by atomic force microscopy with a Wollaston probe. A flat plane was subtracted from the raw image. (b) Raw thermal signal (ΔV) obtained during the same scan. The raw thermal image can be translated into a probe average temperature image with Eq. (1). One obtains the (a) (b) probe temperature variation Δθ as a function of location on the sample (with respect to some reference, here arbitrarily taken as the lowest value of the image). In order to smoothen the thermal signal fluctuations, we average the signal close to an edge as shown in Fig. 3 (the image is rotated with respect to that of Fig. 2). It is found that the probe temperature increases by approximately 0.1 K when it moves from SiO2 to MoS2, indicating that the MoS2 layer induces an additional thermal resistance for the flux being dissipated into the sample. At first sight, this effect could be ascribed either to a worse contact between the SThM probe with MoS2 than silica or to a weak thermal contact between MoS2 and the silica. This is in striking contrast to supported graphene, which increases heat dissipation properties29,30. The temperature map is then translated into a map of the probe thermal conductance Gprobe (again with respect to an arbitrary reference, see Suppl. Sec. 2). It is found that Gprobe varies by ΔGprobe = 55 × 10−9 W.K-1 close to the edge of the MoS2 crystal. It is instructive to compare this value with that obtained when simply increasing the thickness of the silica layer (silica is a standard solid-state thermal insulator). In Ref. , some of us reported, with a similar Wollaston SThM probe, how Gprobe varies with SiO2 thickness (see Suppl. Sec. 5). Assuming similar thermal conductivity for the oxide in the SiO2/Si substrate here and that of Ref. , we find that the decrease of probe thermal conductance when locating the probe on MoS2 is the same as that while bringing it over an oxide layer thicker by 95 nm. This thickness is more than hundred times than that of MoS2, underlining the potential of the TMDC as thin but efficient heat barrier. arbitrary reference between the supported MoS2 and the silica- over-silicon wafer. (Down) Probe thermal conductance deduced from the temperature measurements (arbitrary reference). Left panels show rotated images with respect to Fig. 2, and right ones vertical averages in the square for each (horizontal) position. In the following, we aim at obtaining quantitative thermal data for the MoS2 monolayer (see Suppl. Sec. 3 for a graphical summary of the procedure). To determine these, one needs first to find an estimate of the thermal contact radius b, i.e. the size over which the SThM probe heats the sample. It is obtained by first comparing the probe thermal conductance with that obtained as a function of the silica thickness in Ref. . The effective thermal conductivity (that of a bulk leading to the same Gprobe) determined for a layer of 300 nm of SiO2 over Si is around λeff ≈ 2 W.m-2.K-1 (see Suppl. Sec. 6). The radius can then be obtained from a finite element (FE) simulation solving the steady-state heat equation, in the sample only. Indeed, the sample thermal conductance (conductance associated with heat dissipation in the sample from a hot isothermal disc on the sample surface) is 4λeffb and equal to that of the exact geometry (300 nm SiO2/Si) for an identical thermal contact radius. The radius determined from the FE simulation is around 4 μm (see Suppl. Sec. 7 for more details). This value underlines the well-known fact that heat spreads from the probe to the sample in the air, leading to a transfer over a much larger area than that of the mechanical contact25. Since heat is transferred mostly through air to the sample, the thermal boundary conductance at the mechanical contact is not a matter of concern. Note that the impact of the thermal contact conductance between the tip and the sample depends only on the effective (bulk) thermal conductivity felt by the probe for heat transfer through air32. This is in stark contrast to many works where heat transfer inside the whole system made of the SThM sensor and at the probe- sample contact is also required to be modelled. This simplification is possible because the current work builds on the previous calibration in Ref. . of depth below the heat source (FEM simulation). The upper region overlaid in green corresponds to the MoS2 monolayer, the lower blue region corresponds to SiO2, and, finally, the gray region corresponds to the contribution of the Si substrate. The final step is also performed with a FE simulation. The actual geometry, i.e. the stack shown in the inset of Fig. 1, is considered, with known thermal conductivity values for silicon and silica, and again with a disc of homogeneous temperature as heat input on the top (see Suppl. Sec. 8). The unknowns are the MoS2 thermal conductivity, supposed isotropic in the 0.7 nm thickness, and the TBC between MoS2 and silica. These two quantities are adjusted in the 2D cylindrical FE simulation to dissipate a power equivalent to that of a bulk with the effective thermal conductivity mentioned above (i.e. the bulk and MoS2/SiO2/Si sample thermal conductances are equal). It is found that the value of the thermal conductivity of MoS2 impacts very weakly the temperature distribution, which is driven only by the TBC. The temperature profile in the center of the structure is provided in Fig. 4 as a function of depth. Note that we verified that the MoS2 lateral size and shape do not matter provided that the size is larger than the thermal contact radius. The temperature profile is mostly flat in the thin TMDC layer (see Suppl. Fig. 8 for 3D temperature distribution), as a result of the insensitivity to thermal conductivity. Most importantly, there is a strong temperature discontinuity associated with the MoS2/SiO2 interface. Finally, one obtains a value of 4.6 ± 2 MW.m-2.K-1 for the thermal boundary conductance, which is close to the values found experimentally for flakes by Raman thermometry12,20 and of similar order of magnitude to a molecular dynamic study33. The value is intrinsically low as Van Der Waals bonding provides a much weaker connection between the monolayer and its support. It seems therefore that the quality of the material, being it an exfoliated flake or a CVD-grown crystal, is not key for heat conduction when it is supported. In summary, this works has showed that, with a proper calibration technique, SThM allows for quantitative determination of key parameters associated with heat dissipation in supported 2D materials. Thermal conductivity may not be the relevant parameter, while Van Der Waals bonding leads to weak thermal coupling with substrates. In the near future, it will be useful to analyze TMDCs with a better spatial resolution, either by studying the jump at contact in probe approach curves or by implementing vacuum conditions. Analyzing heat dissipation in TMDCs as a function of temperature may also enable to discriminate between the effect of thermal conductivity and thermal boundary conductance27. See the Supplementary Information for details on material, the temperature-probe thermal conductance connection, for details on the varying-thickness oxide calibration samples and on the simulations. We thank J.-M. Bluet for helping with the Raman characterization and A. Alkurdi for discussions. C.M.F.A. acknowledges a CONACYT scholarship funding. S.G. and P.-O.C. acknowledge support of project TIPTOP (ANR-16-CE09-0023) and A.D.L.B. the support of project UNAM-PAPIIT-A101822.