Suppression of nematicity by tensile strain in multilayer FeSe/SrTiO3 films Rui Lou,∗,†,‡,¶,§ Oleksandr Suvorov,‡,∥ Hans-Joachim Grafe,‡ Andrii Kuibarov,‡ Maxim Krivenkov,¶ Oliver Rader,¶ Bernd B ̈uchner,‡,⊥ Sergey Borisenko,∗,‡ and Alexander Fedorov∗,‡,¶,§ †School of Physical Science and Technology, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730000, China ‡Leibniz Institute for Solid State and Materials Research, IFW Dresden, 01069 Dresden, Germany ¶Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin f ̈ur Materialien und Energie, Albert-Einstein-Straße 15, 12489 Berlin, Germany §Joint Laboratory “Functional Quantum Materials” at BESSY II, 12489 Berlin, Germany ∥G. V. Kurdyumov Institute for Metal Physics of the N.A.S. of Ukraine, 03142 Kyiv, Ukraine ⊥Institute for Solid State and Materials Physics, TU Dresden, 01062 Dresden, Germany E-mail: lourui@lzu.edu.cn; s.borisenko@ifw-dresden.de; a.fedorov@ifw-dresden.de Abstract The nematicity in multilayer FeSe/SrTiO3 films has been previously suggested to be enhanced with decreasing film thickness. Motivated by this, there have been many discussions about the competing relation between nematicity and superconductivity. However, the criterion for determining the nematicity strength in FeSe remains highly debated. The understanding of nematicity and its relation to superconductivity in FeSe films is therefore still controversial. Here, we fabricate multilayer FeSe/SrTiO3 1 arXiv:2207.14416v3 [cond-mat.supr-con] 29 Jun 2023 films using molecular beam epitaxy and study the nematic properties by combining angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy, nuclear magnetic resonance, and scanning tunneling microscopy experiments. We unambiguously demonstrate that, near the interface, the nematicity is suppressed by the SrTiO3-induced tensile strain; in the bulk region further away from the interface, the strength of nematicity recovers to the bulk value. Our results not only solve the controversy about the nematicity in multilayer FeSe films, but also offer valuable insights into the relationship between nematicity and superconductivity. Introduction Electronic nematicity, which breaks rotational symmetry but preserves translational sym- metry of lattice1, has been widely observed in cuprates2–5 and iron-based superconduc- tors6–12. In iron-based superconductors, nematicity is usually accompanied by a tetragonal- to-orthorhombic structural transition13. Besides, the collinear antiferromagnetism sets in at or just below the nematic transition in iron pnictides14,15, the complicated coupling between lattice, spin, and orbital degrees of freedom10,16,17 renders the origin of nematicity controver- sial18–21. FeSe is an attractive system to explore the effect of nematicity disentangled from that of magnetic order, as it exhibits nematicity below Tnem ∼ 90 K without long-range mag- netic order at any temperature22–27. FeSe also provides a versatile platform for studying the interplay of nematicity and superconductivity since the superconductivity therein is highly tunable28–36. The relationship between nematicity and superconductivity is under hot debate in FeSe crystals. Their competition is proposed in an electron irradiation experiment, where the disorder enhances Tc while lowers Tnem 37, as hydrostatic pressure38 and uniaxial strain do39,40. Whereas, their cooperative effect is suggested by the sizeable enhancement of Tc with an enlarged orthorhombic distortion below Tc upon increasing sulfur doping in FeSe41. Contrary to a direct correlation, thermal-expansion measurements find a lack of coupling between 2 nematicity and superconductivity42. Thus the origin of nematicity in FeSe remains highly interesting, but its effect on the elec- tronic structure is controversial. In FeSe crystals, due to the complicated band structure and multiorbital character around Brillouin zone (BZ) corner, the energy scale of the zone-corner dxz/dyz splitting has been hotly debated. It was reported to be either ∼50 meV25,26,43–45 or degenerate46,47, questioning whether the bands at BZ corner are appropriate for understand- ing the nematicity. Instead, the relatively simple band structure around BZ center provides a remarkable platform, by which the nematic energy scale of ∼15-20 meV agrees with the Tnem scale26,46–48. In multilayer FeSe/SrTiO3 films, it has been previously suggested that the strength of nematicity in thinner FeSe films is stronger than that in FeSe crystals, and it further enhances with decreasing thickness34,49–52. However, in these studies, the nematicity strength was determined by the band splitting around BZ corner, the validity of this criterion has been questioned in FeSe crystals53. Therefore, whether the nematicity is enhanced in thinner FeSe films is still an open question. Herein we present combined angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES), 77Se nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), and scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) studies on multilayer FeSe/SrTiO3 films. NMR measurements show the coexistence of single-domain and twinned-domain structures in 210-monolayer (ML) film; as 15-ML film forms a single domain revealed by STM, we suggest that the former structure is near the interface and the latter one is from the bulk region further away from the interface under noticeable and negligible tensile strain, respectively. Consistently, in 15-ML film, the single circular hole Fermi surface (FS) and the temperature-independent dxz/dyz splitting around ̄Γ indicate the absence of nematicity; in 115-ML film, the splitting of outer hole band and the temperature evolutions of dxz and dyz orbitals at ̄Γ validate the emergence of bulk-like nematicity. 3 substrate and 15-ML film with incident beam along the directions, respectively. The RHEED intensity curve (red dashed curve) is taken along the red solid line. The single set of diffraction peaks reflect the high quality of FeSe film. (c) STM topographic image of 15-ML film (30 × 30 nm2, Vs = 50 mV, I = 50 pA). (d) Atomically resolved STM topography of 15-ML film (10 × 10 nm2, Vs = 50 mV, I = 100 pA). Blue dashed lines indicate the orientations of Fe vacancies. Inset: Fourier transform of the defect-free regions in (d). Results Multilayer FeSe films were fabricated on either Nb:SrTiO3(001) (for ARPES and STM) or SrTiO3(001) (for NMR) substrates. The surface and structural characterization of 15-ML film are presented in Fig. 1. Figures 1(a) and 1(b) show the reflection high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED) patterns of SrTiO3 substrate and 15-ML film at room temperature, respectively. A typical STM topographic image of 15-ML film at ∼4.5 K is displayed in Fig. 1(c), where the surface consists of a single crystallographic domain. The single-domain feature is observed in a number of scan areas over the sample surface, unlike the presence of twinned domains with twin boundaries previously reported in thicker FeSe films54 and FeSe crystals55. The atomic-resolution STM image and its Fourier transform in Fig. 1(d) reveal a square-like lattice of the topmost Se atoms. As in previous studies54–57, the Fe (dumbbell- like) and Se (cross-like) vacancies are observed. Recently, the appearance of stripe patterns 4 pinned around the Fe vacancies has been proposed as a signature of the nematicity-related orthorhombicity in FeSe films54; the interaction between the stripes and Fe vacancies has been suggested to induce strong distortions of the latter, that the directions of the dumbbell shapes show obvious deviation from that of the Se-Se lattice54. However, in 15-ML film [Fig. 1(d)], we do not observe such stripe patterns near the dumbbell-like impurities; as indicated by the blue dashed lines, the Fe vacancies are well aligned along the directions of the Se-Se lattice, showing no evident distortions. These facts indicate the absence of orthorhombicity in 15-ML film. To further clarify the domain structure of our films, we conduct NMR measurements on 210-ML film. Figure 2(a) shows the frequency-swept NMR spectra of the 77Se nuclei for a magnetic field of 13.977 T. At T = 40 K, a prominent line (∼113.85 MHz) and a much weaker signal (∼114.06 MHz) are revealed on the sample for H ∥ , which are attributed to the FeSe film and Se-etched SrTiO3 substrate, respectively [see Fig. S1 and Sec. 2 of Supporting Information for more discussion on the assignment]. Upon cooling, the spectra of FeSe film shift to lower frequencies with a decrease of the linewidth. But it is difficult to observe a signal below 30 K and above 40 K, this limited temperature range for a decent NMR signal is due to the longer spin-lattice relaxation time and smaller nuclear spin polarization at lower and higher temperatures, respectively (see more discussion in Sec. 3 of Supporting Information). By a closer look, we notice that several components are contained in the spectra of FeSe film, including a double-peak splitting and a shoulder. The quantitative fit of the spectra in Figs. 2(b) and S2 (see details of the fitting procedure in Sec. 4 of Supporting Information) validate that each line consists of three Lorentzian peaks with central frequencies f1, f2, and f3, unlike only two split peaks in the nematic phase of FeSe crystals (evidence for the twinned orthorhombic domains)24,58,59. In the inset of Fig. 2(b), we plot the nematicity-related frequency splitting of FeSe crystals at 40 K under different fields (blue triangle, adopted from Refs. ) together with |f1 – f2| (red star) and |f2 – f3| (black triangle) of FeSe film at 40 K. One obtains that |f1 – f2| of FeSe film follows 5 77Se NMR measurements. (a) 77Se NMR spectra of 210-ML film and Se- etched SrTiO3 substrate. (b) Multipeak fitting of the green curve in (a) by three Lorentzian peaks (dashed curves) with a linear background (dashed line). Inset: Frequency splitting between f1 and f2 at 40 K as a function of field. Blue triangles represent the values of undoped FeSe crystals, adopted from Refs. . Black triangle indicates the splitting between f2 and f3 of FeSe film at 40 K. Thick line is a guide to the eye. (c) Temperature dependent 77Se NMR Knight shift of 210-ML film and FeSe0.95S0.05 crystal (H ∥ ). Inset: Temperature dependence of Knight shift splittings between f1 and f2 lines in the film and crystal. Translucent blue curve is a guide to the eye. the linear field dependence of frequency splitting of FeSe crystals, while |f2 – f3| noticeably deviates from the trend. This implies that the f1-f2 splitting in FeSe film may arise from the twinned nematic domains like that in FeSe crystals. The f3 line could then be attributed to a single-domain structure. In Fig. 2(c), we present the temperature evolution of 77Se Knight shift of FeSe film and FeSe0.95S0.05 crystal60. The Knight shift is determined from K = (fres – γB)/γB, where 6 fres is the peak frequency of NMR spectrum, γ = 8.13 MHz/T is the nuclear gyromagnetic ratio for 77Se, and B is the external field. Although the Knight shifts in the film show much stronger temperature dependence than that in the crystal (see more discussion in Sec. 5 of Supporting Information), their Knight shift splittings between f1 and f2 lines at low temperatures, ∆K = K2 – K1 ∝ |f1 – f2|, are comparable and exhibit similar temperature behavior [inset of Fig. 2(c)]. This similarity between film and crystal further demonstrates that the f1-f2 splitting in FeSe film is the signature of twinned domains associated with nematicity. Therefore, the single-domain (f3) and twinned-domain (f1-f2) structures are revealed to coexist in 210-ML film. The former one is reminiscent of the single-domained 15-ML film (see Sec. 6 of Supporting Information for the challenge of detecting its single- domain structure by NMR), where the SrTiO3-induced tensile strain has been found to be sizeable and isotropic34. We thus suggest that the single domain is most likely confined to a region near the interface with noticeable strain effect; accordingly, the twinned domains come from the bulk region further away from the interface with negligible strain effect. This assignment is further validated by the intensity contrast between f3 and f2 peaks [Figs. 2(b) and S2], whose intensity ratio (Table S1) can be regarded as the volume proportion between these two regions. Given that the domain structure in FeSe film evolves with the thickness, we study the electronic structures of 15-ML and 115-ML films by ARPES measurements. It has been suggested that the vacuum-ultraviolet ARPES detects the signals of escaped photoelectrons mainly from the top two FeSe layers34. This ensures the differences between 15-ML and 115- ML films observed below to be essentially of tensile-strain-effect origin. The FS mapping [Fig. 3(a)] and band dispersions along the ̄Γ- ̄ M direction [Fig. 3(b)] of 15-ML film are analogous to previous results of multilayer FeSe films34,61. Due to the complicated band structure around ̄ M in FeSe, the orbital assignment of multiple 3d bands and the energy scale of dxz/dyz splitting at ̄ M are controversial25,26,43–48,53,62,63. Hereafter, we focus on the relatively simple band structure around ̄Γ. Although the 15-ML film and detwinned FeSe 7 [hν = 60 eV, linear horizontal (LH) polarization] of 15-ML film. (b) Intensity plot measured along the ̄Γ- ̄ M direction. The intensity is the sum of data acquired with linearly horizontal and vertical polarized photons. (c),(d) Intensity plots (hν = 37 eV, LH polarization, kz = 115-ML film. (j) Curvature intensity plot of (i). Red arrows indicate the splitting of α band. (k) Low-temperature band structure cartoons of 15-ML and 115-ML films along the ̄Γ- ̄ M directions. (l) Schematic low-temperature FS around ̄Γ of single-domained FeSe without Insets of (l) and (m) show the sketches of 15-ML and 115-ML films, respectively. 8 crystal share the similarity of single-domain structure, there is no preferred orientation for the film under SrTiO3-induced tensile strain, distinct from the uniaxial strain mechanically added to the crystal45,47,64,65. Thus, the former has tetragonal structure illustrated by STM while the latter shows orthorhombicity (see Sec. 7 of Supporting Information for discussion on the distinct NMR spectra caused by this structural difference). As a result, the ellipse- like hole pocket in Fig. 3(a) strongly contrasts with that in detwinned FeSe crystal below Tnem 45,47,64,65 reflected in their completely different photon polarization dependence (see Fig. S4 and Sec. 8 of Supporting Information for more discussion). We further measure the band structure along ̄Γ- ̄ M and ̄Γ- ̄X directions in kz = 0 [Figs. peaks in momentum distribution curves (MDCs) along the ̄Γ- ̄ M directions [blue curves in Figs. 3(e) and 3(h)], no splitting is observed on α band when crossing EF. The hole pocket is further revealed to be circular in shape by comparing the kF’s along ̄Γ- ̄ M and ̄Γ- ̄X directions. In light of this, the ellipse-like FSs in Figs. 3(a) and S4 are actually some segments of the circular pocket. In contrast, the FS of twinned FeSe crystals below Tnem consists of two crossed elliptical pockets at ̄Γ arising from the split α band26,48,66. The splitting is due to the dispersions of dxz/dyz bands being different for the two twinned domains, and has therefore been suggested as a direct evidence for nematicity26,46,48,66,67. In a previous study of FeSe1−xSx crystals66, as the reduction of Tnem by the increasing sulfur doping68, the degree of FS anisotropy at ̄Γ is lowered with reduced splitting of α band. It is expected that the outer hole pocket would evolve into an isotropic circular FS when nematicity is quenched in FeSe1−xSx. Therefore, we suggest that nematicity is absent in 15-ML film, consistent with the tetragonal lattice symmetry therein. As discussed above, the bulk region of thick FeSe films is composed of the nematicity- related twinned domains. In Fig. 3(i), we measure the near-EF band structure of 115-ML film under the same conditions as in Fig. 3(f). To facilitate the visualization of dispersive features, we present the two-dimensional curvature analysis69 of the raw ARPES intensity in Fig. 9 3(j). As indicated by the red arrows, the splitting of α band is clearly observed, its splitting energy scale of ∼20 meV (Fig. S5) is comparable with that in twinned FeSe crystals26. The presence of bulk-like nematicity in the bulk region of 115-ML film is compatible with the twinned domains therein. To illustrate the contrast between 15-ML and 115-ML films, we sketch their low-temperature band dispersions along the ̄Γ- ̄ M directions in Fig. 3(k), the corresponding FSs around ̄Γ are shown in Figs. 3(l) and 3(m). To further support the absence of nematicity in 15-ML film, we study the splitting of dxz and dyz orbitals at ̄Γ, the anisotropy between which has been suggested as a hallmark of nematicity20,21. As shown in Figs. 4 and S6, we record the band structure of 15-ML film around Z at different temperatures. Upon warming, the β band with band top at ∼–13 meV exhibits little change, as illustrated by the curvature intensity plots and energy distribution curves (EDCs) [Figs. 4(a), 4(b), S6]. The α band is also less temperature sensitive as evidenced by the nearly constant momentum values from the MDCs [Fig. 4(d)], which are taken at –40 meV to avoid the influence of thermal population effect. In Fig. 4(c), by parabolic fits to raw data at 30 and 150 K, we estimate the dxz/dyz splitting as ∼22 meV for both temperatures, which is comparable with the spin-orbit-coupling-induced gap (∼20 meV) determined in FeSe48,63. The temperature-independent splitting dominated by spin- orbit coupling effect in 15-ML film is distinct from the 115-ML film, where the temperature evolutions of the α and β bands are clearly revealed (Fig. S7). Discussion and conclusion Our observations clearly demonstrate the tensile-strain-induced no nematicity near the inter- face, solving the aforementioned controversy about the nematicity in multilayer FeSe/SrTiO3 films34,49–52. The strain effect has been found to exhibit the exponential-like relaxation with increasing FeSe thickness34. The nematicity strength is therefore expected to gradually re- cover towards the bulk value between the region without nematicity and the region with bulk-like nematicity, namely, an intermediate region probably exists. Overall, as illustrated 10 vature intensity plots (hν = 23 eV, LH polarization) taken on 15-ML film along the Z-A direction at 30 and 150 K. (b) Respective EDCs of raw data (–0.40 < k∥ < 0.40 ̊A−1). Dia- mond markers indicate the β bands. (c) Extracted dispersions of α and β bands at 30 and 150 K from EDCs and MDCs together. Solid curves are the parabolic fittings, which are also superimposed on (a). (d) Temperature-dependent MDCs taken at –40 meV. Triangle and diamond markers indicate the α and β bands, respectively. in Fig. S8 [also the insets of Figs. 3(l) and 3(m)], we suggest that there are likely three regions. In Sec. 12 of Supporting Information, we make an estimate on their spatial scales. Given that the volume of intermediate region is less than 10% of the bulk region, the NMR lines with tiny intensities from the intermediate region could be hidden by the intense f1-f2 line. Last but not least, we discuss the implications of our results for the relationship between nematicity and superconductivity. Extensive studies have been performed to uncover their interplay in FeSe crystals, but the findings are multifarious as described above, leaving it still rather mysterious. The absence of a superconducting gap for undoped multilayer (2– 20 MLs) FeSe/SrTiO3 films has been reported in previous STM studies33,70,71. Within this 11 thickness range, the nematicity is not present either based on our results. The simultaneous disappearance of nematicity and superconductivity in thinner FeSe films unambiguously suggests that the suppression of superconductivity therein is not directly related to the nematicity. In summary, we have provided compelling evidence for the suppression of nematicity near the interface of multilayer FeSe/SrTiO3 films. In the bulk region further away from the interface, where the SrTiO3-induced tensile strain is fully relaxed, the bulk-like nematicity is revealed. The present results facilitate further understanding the nematicity and its interplay with superconductivity in multilayer FeSe films. Methods The experimental methods and details of the film growth, ARPES measurements, STM measurements, and NMR measurements can be found in the Supporting Information. Data availability The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding authors upon reasonable request.