1 Wafer-scale epitaxial growth of the thickness-controllable van der Waals ferromagnet CrTe2 for reliable magnetic memory applications Xinqi Liu1,2, Yunyouyou Xia1,2, Lei Gao3, Puyang Huang4, Liyang Liao5, Baoshan Cui6, Dirk Backes7, Gerrit van der Laan7, Thorsten Hesjedal8, Yuchen Ji1,2, Peng Chen1,4, Fan Wu2, Meixiao Wang1,2, Junwei Zhang3, Guoqiang Yu6,9, Cheng Song5, Yulin Chen1,2,8, Zhongkai Liu1,2, Yumeng Yang4, Yong Peng3, Gang Li1,2, Qi Yao1,2*, and Xufeng Kou1,4* 1ShanghaiTech Laboratory for Topological Physics, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai 201210, China. 2School of Physical Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai 201210, China. 3School of Materials and Energy, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730000, China. 4School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai 201210, China. 5Key Lab Advanced Materials (MOE), School of Materials Science and Engineering, Beijing Innovation Center for Future Chips, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. 6Songshan Lake Materials Laboratory Dongguan, Guangdong 523808, China. 7Diamond Light Source, Harwell Science and Innovation Campus, Didcot, Oxfordshire OX11 0DE, United Kingdom. 8Department of Physics, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3PU, United Kingdom. 9Beijing National Laboratory for Condensed Matter Physics Institute of Physics Chinese Academy of Sciences Beijing 100190, China. *Correspondence to: yaoqi@shanghaitech.edu.cn; kouxf@shanghaitech.edu.cn. 2 To harness the intriguing properties of two-dimensional van der Waals (vdW) ferromagnets (FMs) for versatile applications, the key challenge lies in the reliable material synthesis for scalable device production. Here, we demonstrate the epitaxial growth of single- crystalline 1T-CrTe2 thin films on 2-inch sapphire substrates. Benefiting from the uniform surface energy of the dangling bond-free Al2O3(0001) surface, the layer-by-layer vdW growth mode is observed right from the initial growth stage, which warrants precise control of the sample thickness and atomically smooth surface morphology across the entire wafer. Moreover, the presence of the Coulomb interaction at the CrTe2/Al2O3 interface serves as an effective tuning parameter to tailor the anomalous Hall response, and the structural optimization of the CrTe2- based spin-orbit torque device leads to a substantial switching power reduction by 54%. Our results may lay out a general framework for the design of energy-efficient spintronics based on configurable vdW FMs. Featured by the inherent long-range magnetic order and a high-degree of magnetism tunability under external stimuli, the discovery of two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals (vdW) ferromagnets (FMs) has brought about a new platform for the advancement of energy-efficient non-volatile spintronics1, 2. In the meanwhile, the weak inter-layer vdW force would facilitate the hetero-integration between 2D FMs and other materials with different physical orders, hence greatly broadening the functionalities of the associated device applications3, 4. To obtain high-quality 2D FMs with aforementioned characteristics, the most frequently-adopted synthetic methods are the mechanical and electrochemical transfer techniques (i.e., the so-called top-down method), where a-few-layer flakes are exfoliated from their bulk crystals1, 2, 5. Although it seems to be cost-effective and straightforward, this approach inevitably suffers from low productivity, small sample size, and limited thickness/orientation controllability1, 5, 6. To 3 comply with the mass-production prerequisite, alternative bottom-up methods, such as the chemical vapor deposition (CVD)7, the seeded growth8 and dual-coupling-guided growth9, are developed to fabricate large-size vdW FMs. However, the 2D FMs grown via chemical reaction under the equilibrium condition would follow the Wulff construction which constantly leads to the edge-induced nucleation and the formation of self-limited triangular or hexagonal islands10-12. Even though dedicated surface treatments have recently been introduced to permit uniform nucleation8, 9, 11, 12, the high growth rate would make the film thickness control challenging. As a result, the layer-dependent electronic/magnetic properties of vdW FMs and the opportunities to implement their heterostructure/superlattice in spintronics remain elusive. In this work, we report the wafer-scale growth of uniform CrTe2 thin films and Bi2Te3/CrTe2 heterostructures by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). Owing to its low-energy physical deposition nature and non-equilibrium growth dynamics13-15, MBE ensures high homogeneity with atomic-scale surface roughness in the grown 2-inch samples, and the vdW layer-by-layer growth mode empowers us with the ability to finely tune the film thickness across the 2D-to-bulk regions. Together with the ab initio calculation of electronic band structure, we unveil that the quantum confinement and interfacial effects in the ultra-thin CrTe2 film would effectively modify its Berry curvature and magnetic order strength, triggering the polarity change of the resulting anomalous Hall signal. Furthermore, by combining the ferromagnetic CrTe2 with the topological insulators Bi2Te3, we realize the spin-orbit torque (SOT)- driven magnetization switching in the integrated vdW heterostructures with a high endurance of more than 5  104 read-write cycles, and the manageable thickness of the CrTe2 layer offers an additional degree of freedom for tailoring the performance of the SOT devices. 4 Wafer-scale epitaxial growth of vdW FM CrTe2 thin films. Experimentally, 2-inch Al2O3(0001) wafers were chosen as the substrate. The absence of dangling bonds at the substrate surface and the weak bonding energy between CrTe2 and Al2O3 guarantee a uniform surface energy distribution, which in turns promotes the van der Waals epitaxial growth of CrTe216, 17. Accordingly, a sharp reflection high- energy electron diffraction (RHEED) streaky pattern develops already for the first layer, and the spacing between the two first-order reciprocal lattice rods in Fig. 1a corresponds to an in-plane lattice constant of a = 3.84 Å, in agreement with expected 1T-CrTe2 data18. Further, high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (Fig. 1b) shows an intact, layered crystalline structure with abrupt van der Waals gaps, and within each constituent layer, the Cr (pink spheres) and Te (yellow spheres) atoms rigorously follow the Te-Cr-Te Z-shaped stacking configuration, validating the 1T phase of the as-grown CrTe2 sample7. Next, we conducted atomic force microscope (AFM) measurements in order to examine the conformity of the CrTe2 film, and Fig. 1c illustrates one dataset of the 9 monolayer (ML) sample with two noticeable features. First of all, in contrast to m-size triangular or hexagonal terraces (i.e., as they would stem from the island nucleation process) observed in conventional vdW 2D materials19, 20, the AFM mapping of the CrTe2 film shows quite uniform nucleation and homogeneous atomic-scale surface morphology (i.e., the root-mean-square roughness Rq = 3.68 Å is much less than the height of one CrTe2 ML), which may take advantages of both the surface energy reduction (i.e., owing to the vdW gap at the CrTe2/Al2O3 interface) and the long diffusion length of the adatoms11. Secondly, the histogram of Rq collected from 36 different areas exhibits a normal distribution with a narrow standard deviation of 3 = 0.28 Å, hence manifesting the high uniformity across the whole 2-inch wafer (Supplementary Section 1). In terms of film crystallinity, Fig. 1d displays the X-ray diffraction (XRD) results of five MBE- grown CrTe2 samples with thicknesses (d) ranging from 9 to 33 ML. It can be clearly seen that in 5 addition to the substrate signal, all spectra display only a series of CrTe2 (00n) diffraction peaks without any impurity phase within the instrument detection limit, and the extracted out-of-plane lattice parameter c = 6.10 Å is consistent with the 1T-CrTe2 structure as well. Strikingly, Fig. 1e reveals identical normalized CrTe2 (002) Ω-scan curves with negligible mosaicity broadening (i.e., no misorientation of crystallites) compared with the Al2O3 (0006) reference line-shape, and the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of 0.037°±0.001° is among the narrowest values reported for vdW films20-22. Besides, the pronounced Kiessig fringes observed in the X-ray reflection (XRR) data in Fig. 1f not only quantify the film thickness, but also attest the layer-by-layer epitaxial growth mode and low interlayer roughness of the CrTe2 samples. In conclusion, our comprehensive structural characterizations confirm the high quality and reproducibility of the wafer-scale 1T-CrTe2 thin films, therefore offering a solid foundation for reliable device applications. Tunable anomalous Hall response driven by temperature and dimensionality. To determine the magnetic properties of the epitaxial 1T-CrTe2 thin films, we fabricated mm-scale six-probe Hall bar devices on the 2-inch wafers (Fig. 2a), and performed magneto-transport measurements at low temperatures. Figure 2b exemplifies the characteristic anomalous Hall effect (AHE) on a 14 ML CrTe2 sample, where the nearly square-shaped Rxy hysteresis loop and a butterfly-type double-split magneto- resistance (MR) curve highlight the well-established spontaneous magnetization at T = 10 K. Likewise, the strong perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA) of the films is also verified by the element-specific X-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD) hysteresis loops recorded at the Cr L3 absorption edge, confirming that the magnetism originates from the Cr atoms (Supplementary Section 2). As visualized in Fig. 2c, the XMCD loop exhibits the same behavior as the AHE one as a function of the applied 6 magnetic field, which identifies that the ferromagnetism evolves together with the anisotropy of the orbital moment23. Given that the reduced dimensionality can help to modify the electronic band structure and magnetic properties of vdW 2D FMs1, 2, 5, 24, we subsequently conducted systematic magneto-electric transport measurements on three CrTe2 samples with d = 5, 9, and 14 MLs. Remarkably, the AHE results show a distinct thickness-dependent trait. As evidenced in Fig. 2d1-d3, the coercive field HC decreases from 1.17 T (14 ML) to 1.15 T (9 ML) and 0.98 T (5 ML) at T = 1.5 K, and this evolution trend suggests the weakening of the magnetism with reduced dimensionality. More importantly, the AHE hysteresis loop reverses its polarity from negative to positive when the thickness is reduced to 5 ML. Similarly, such a negative-to-positive transition behavior of the AHE polarity is also observed in the bulk-type 14 ML and 9 ML CrTe2 samples during the warming-up process, yet the corresponding transition temperature T∗ is reduced from 115 to 70 K (i.e., in contrast, the AHE sign remains to be positive in the 2D-limit 5 ML thin film regardless of the base temperature). To understand this dimensionality- and temperature-induced anomalous Hall response, we applied density-functional theory (DFT) calculations to elaborate the underlying physics25-28. In particular, by introducing the on-site Coulomb potential U correction to account for the correlation effects from the Cr d-orbitals29, 30, the theoretical derived Hall conductivity σxy is found to be positive in the monolayer CrTe2 system (Fig. 3a) and its sign changes to negative in the bulk case (Fig. 3b), reproducing the observed thickness-dependent AHE polarity-reversal. To quantify this low-dimensional effect, we conducted systematic investigations by varying the Coulomb potential amplitudes in both the monolayer and the bulk CrTe2 systems. As outlined in Fig. 3c, the negative σxy of the bulk form (i.e., with periodic boundary condition) shows little variation with respect to U. On the contrary, once the film thickness enters the 2D domain, the itinerant electrons in the few-layer channel are subject to a confined out-of- 7 plane degree of freedom, and they naturally possess lower kinetic energy than those in the bulk region. Under such circumstances, the potential energy U created by the Coulomb repulsion effectively increases, which thereafter modulates the Berry curvature near the Fermi level (Fig. 3a) and leads to a σxy sign-reversal. Along with the experimental observations (Figs. 2d1-d3), the DFT simulations elucidate critical influence of the interface-related effect on tailoring the electronic geometry and AHE response in the 2D CrTe2 system. Likewise, we can attribute the temperature-dependence of the anomalous Hall resistance in the thick CrTe2 samples (i.e., d  9 ML) to the modulation of Berry curvature associated with the magnetization change28, 31. Specifically, the diminished magnetic moment at elevated temperatures may bring about a re-distribution of electronic states and switch the AHE polarity below a critical value of MC (i.e., above a characteristic transition temperature T∗)31, given that the Berry curvature is highly sensitive to the occupied density of states near the Fermi level. Following the same scenario, as the overall magnetization is gradually suppressed in the thinner films, it is expected that the 9 ML CrTe2 sample would reach MC at a lower transition temperature T∗ compared to the 15 ML counterpart. In the ultra- thin film case (i.e., d = 5 ML) where the saturated magnetic moment is always smaller than MC, its temperature-invariant positive AHE response is therefore in line with that of the bulk-type CrTe2 system in the high-temperature region. Energy-Efficient SOT switching in Bi2Te3/CrTe2 heterostructures. Spin-orbit-torque (SOT) has been utilized for next-generation magnetic random-access memory (MRAM) technology, owing to its low power consumption and logic-programmable capability32, 33. Considering that the SOT-driven magnetization switching is determined by the charge-to-spin conversion efficiency, it has been discovered that topological quantum materials (e.g., topological insulators, Weyl/Dirac semimetals), in 8 which the intrinsic spin-orbit coupling (SOC) is strong enough to cause band inversion, can enable sufficient current-induced spin polarization along the surface/edge states through the spin-momentum locking mechanism34, 35. Apart from the spin current channel, the magnetic strength in the adjacent FM layer is another key factor to affect the switching current level. In this regard, the tunable magnetism identified in our low-dimensional CrTe2 samples, assuming that they can be incorporated into a SOT structure, could afford more flexibility for optimizing the device performance. Accordingly, to fully explore the potential of CrTe2 for SOT-MRAM applications, we adopted the same vdW growth procedure to prepare Bi2Te3/CrTe2 heterostructures by MBE (i.e., in order to make a fair comparison, the top Bi2Te3 layer thickness is fixed to 18 nm in all samples investigated in this work). As shown in Fig. 4a, the ultra-smooth CrTe2 surface and the in-situ integration process in the ultra-high vacuum environment result in the formation of a sharp hetero-interface, and the energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectroscopy images ascertain the uniform element distribution without observable inter-layer diffusion (Supplementary Section 3). After sample growth, standard 2D cross-bar device arrays were fabricated on the 2-inch Bi2Te3/CrTe2 wafers (Fig. 4b), and the relevant CrTe2-thickness-dependent current-driven magnetization switching results are presented in Fig. 4c. Guided by the schematic diagram in Fig. 4a, the presence of a constant in-plane field Bx = +0.09 T sets up the initial magnetization state of the sample in the (+x, +z) quadrant, and the applied DC current IDC along the x- direction dictates the effective spin-orbit field BSO = λSO ∙ ITI ∙ σ × M (where λSO is the coefficient characterizing the SOC strength, ITI is the charge current component conducting through the Bi2Te3 channel, and σ = ∓σy ∙ ŷ is the electron spin accumulated at the Bi2Te3/CrTe2 interface). Consequently, as the DC current is successively scanned from +25 to −25 mA, the measured Hall resistances Rxy (blue circles in Fig. 4c) all retain at constant values until the positive-to-negative transitions occur in the large negative IDC domains (i.e., the parallel (+Bx, +IDC) configuration stabilizes the magnetic moment Mz 9 along the +z-axis, whereas the negative DC bias could trigger the magnetization switching as long as the reversed BSO overcomes the intrinsic magnetic anisotropy field BK). On the other hand, the application of an opposite Bx = −0.09 T changes the initial condition of M, and the observation of the clockwise Rxy- IDC hysteresis loops (red triangles in Fig. 4c) are in accordance with the same damping-like SOT chirality, hence confirming the deterministic switching scenario. Most intriguingly, the (Bx-fixed, IDC-dependent) anomalous Hall data in Fig. 4c discloses a dramatic reduction of the threshold switching current level ISW when the top CrTe2 layer thickness d decreases from 21 ML (17.5 mA) to 5 ML (7.5 mA) at T = 120 K. Equivalently, it means that the dynamic power dissipation PSW can be reduced by up to 54% with appropriate bilayer structural engineering (Fig. 4d). To appreciate such a positive ISW-d correlation, it is recalled that the reduced dimensionality of the CrTe2 film would not only weaken its perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (Fig. 3), but also make the thinner FM layer more insulating so that a larger portion of charge current is regulated inside the Bi2Te3 channel. Governed by the SOT operational principle that the modulation of the CrTe2 FM order mainly relies on the competition/balancing between the torques exerted by the effective fields33, 36, it can therefore be concluded that a lower DC current can meet the magnetization switching requirement of |γ ∙ M × BSO| > τK (where  is the gyromagnetic ratio, and τK is the torque exerted by PMA) thanks to the attenuated BK and higher ITI/IDC ratio in the Bi2Te3/CrTe2 (5 ML)-based SOT device. By further subtracting the shunting current via the parallel two-channel model (see Supplementary Section 4), the critical current density available for the charge-to-spin conversion is found to stay at JTI, c = 2.64  106 Acm−2 as long as the bottom CrTe2 layer exceeds 9 ML, while it drops to 1.93  106 Acm−2 for the d = 5 ML case, again highlighting the unique advantage of vdW FMs in the 2D limit. Finally, we have evaluated the reliability of the SOT devices fabricated on the same Bi2Te3/CrTe2 (5 ML) wafer. As summarized in Fig. 4e, the current-induced Rxy loops for devices randomly picked from five different 10 regions essentially coincide with each other, and the device-to-device variation of ISW is no more than 2.5%. Furthermore, the transition between the high- and low-resistance states in response to the alternating positive/negative input current pulses always maintain the identical square-wave-like contour without any distortion after 5  104 writing cycles (Fig. 4f), thus implying a high endurance of the tested SOT device. Conclusion In conclusion, we have achieved the epitaxial growth of uniform 1T-CrTe2 films on a wafer-scale by MBE, and established a vdW integration strategy that allows for the in-situ construction of Bi2Te3/CrTe2 heterostructures. Endorsed by the co-existence of the intrinsic PMA, atomically-sharp interfaces, and strong SOC, we showcase the compelling SOT device performance of this simple bilayer stack with lower switching power than the heavy metal-based FM multi-layer systems (green bars in Fig. 4g37-40). Moreover, its tunable vdW ferromagnetism makes CrTe2 a competitive building block to directly pair with topological quantum materials without invoking an additional PMA-assisted layer (orange bars in Fig. 4g34, 35, 40-43). The design rule inaugurated in our work may expedite the search for new 2D vdW FMs-based heterostructures, which further enables large-scale vdW material synthesis and feasible spintronic device applications. Methods Sample Fabrication and Structural Characterizations: Wafer-scale CrTe2 thin films and Bi2Te3/CrTe2 heterostructures were grown on 2-inch Al2O3(0001) substrates by MBE in a vacuum of 1 × 10−10 mbar. Prior to the sample growth, the Al2O3 substrate was pre-annealed at 600 C in order to remove any absorbed contamination. During the MBE growth, the growth temperature for CrTe2 and Bi2Te3 was 11 kept at 200 C, and the sample manipulator was constantly rotated to ensure uniformity; high-purity Cr and Bi atoms were evaporated from standard Knudsen cells, while the Te atoms were evaporated by a thermal cracker cell. A beam flux monitor was used to measure the flux ratio, and RHEED was used to monitor the real-time growth process. After sample growth, slices of CrTe2 with different crystal orientations were milled out using the FIB technique (TESCAN LYRA3 FIB-SEM, TESCAN, Czech Republic), and a probe aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy (Cs-STEM, Themis Z G2 300, FEI, USA) was employed to resolve the crystal structure. The STEM was equipped with energy-dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX, Bruker Super-X, Bruker, USA), allowing for the determination of the Cr-to-Te stoichiometric ratio. Additionally, X-ray diffraction and reflectivity were used to confirm the lattice constant and to calibrate the thickness. Device Fabrication and Transport Measurements: The CrTe2 thin films were etched into a six-probe Hall bar geometry with typical channel size of 2 × 1 mm2. The electrodes were made by welding small pieces of indium onto the contact areas. The magneto-transport measurements were performed in a He4 refrigerator (Oxford Teslatron PT system). Multiple lock-in amplifiers and Keithley source meters (with an excitation AC current amplitude of I = 1 μA) were applied to the sample, and the temperature, magnetic field, and lock-in frequency served as the experimental variables. For the SOT-driven magnetization switching measurements, the cross-bar patterns of the CrTe2/Bi2Te3 heterostructures were prepared by a standard photo-lithography process, and the Ti (15 nm)/Au (150 nm) electrodes were defined by e-beam evaporation. After device fabrication, a 2-ms writing current pulse was applied by Keithley 6221 while another 2-ms reading current pulse was applied thereafter to measure the Rxy value by Keithley 2182. 12 XAS and XMCD measurements: Element-specific X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) and X-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD) measurements were performed on beamline I06 at the Diamond Light Source (Oxfordshire, UK), allowing for the probing of the magnetic ground state of the CrTe2 layers. The base temperature was 2 K and a magnetic field of ± 6 T was applied along the surface normal direction (out-of-plane). The spectroscopic data was acquired in total-electron-yield detection mode which has an 1/e sampling depth of ~5 nm44. The XAS spectra were recorded at the Cr L2,3 edges between 560 and 595 eV. The XMCD results were obtained by taking the difference between two XAS spectra with the helicity vector of the circularly polarized X-rays parallel and antiparallel to the magnetic field, respectively. Density Functional Theory Calculations: The ab initio calculations were performed within the framework of density functional theory (DFT) as implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP)45, with the exchange-correlation functional considered in the generalized gradient approximation of the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof46 method. A plane-wave basis set was used with a kinetic energy cutoff of 500 eV. The k-meshes of 11×11×1 for the monolayers and slabs (including 4, 5, 7, and 8 ML) and 11×11×7 for the bulk CrTe2 were applied. To account for the correlation effect of the transition metal element Cr, the GGA+U functional with varied U values for the d-orbitals of Cr were adopted. The spin-orbital coupling was considered self-consistently in this work. The intrinsic anomalous Hall conductivity were evaluated based on the maximally localized Wannier functions47 as obtained through the VASP2WANNIER9048 interfaces in a non-self-consistent calculation, and calculated on k-meshes of 1001×1001×1 for the monolayer, 601×601×1 for the slabs, and 301×301×301 for the bulk by the WannierTools package49. 13