1 Highly in-plane anisotropic optical properties of fullerene monolayers Danwen Yuan1,2#, Hanqi Pi3,4#, Yi Jiang3,4#, Yuefang Hu1,2, Liqin Zhou3,4, Yujin Jia3,4, Gang Su5, Zhong Fang3,4, Hongming Weng3,4,6*, Xinguo Ren3,4,6*, Wei Zhang1,2* 1 Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Quantum Manipulation and New Energy Materials, College of Physics and Energy, Fujian Normal University, Fuzhou 350117, China 2 Fujian Provincial Collaborative Innovation Center for Advanced High-Field Superconducting Materials and Engineering, Fuzhou 350117, China 3 Beijing National Laboratory for Condensed Matter Physics, Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China 4 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China 5 Kavli Institute for Theoretical Sciences and CAS Center for Excellence in Topological Quantum Computation, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China 6 Songshan Lake Materials Laboratory, Dongguan, Guangdong 523808, China #Danwen Yuan, Hanqi Pi, and Yi Jiang contributed equally. *Corresponding Author: Hongming Weng email: hmweng@iphy.ac.cn; Xinguo Ren email: renxg@iphy.ac.cn; Wei Zhang email: zhangw721@163.com. ABSTRACT: Both the intrinsic anisotropic optical materials and fullerene- assembled 2D materials have attracted a lot of interests in fundamental science and potential applications. The synthesis of a monolayer (ML) fullerene makes the combination of these two features plausible. In this work, using first-principles calculations, we systematically study the electronic structure, optical properties of quasi-hexagonal phase (qHP) ML and quasi-tetragonal phase (qTP) ML fullerenes. The calculations of qHP ML show that it is a semiconductor with small anisotropic optical 2 absorption, which agrees with the recent experimental measurements. However, the results for qTP ML reveal that it is a semimetal with highly in-plane anisotropic absorption. The dichroic ratio, namely the absorption ratio of x- and y-polarized light xx / yy α α , is around 12 at photon energy of 0.29 eV. This anisotropy is much more pronounced when the photon energy is between 0.7 and 1.4 eV, where xx α becomes nearly zero while yy α is more than two orders of magnitude larger. This indicates qTP ML as a candidate for long-pursuit lossless metal and a potential material for atomically thin polarizer. We hope this will stimulate further experimental efforts in the study of qTP ML and other fullerene-assembled 2D materials. INTRODUCTION Stimulated by the successful synthesis of a monolayer (ML) fullerene network very recently,1 there have been renewed and instant interests in the study of C60-based two-dimensional (2D) materials.2,3 Carbon allotropes constructed of sp, sp2, and sp3 hybrid bonds have remarkable structures of different dimension and rich properties in both physics and chemistry.4-10 Most famous examples include zero-dimensional (0D) carbon cluster fullerene,11,12 1D carbon nanotube,13,14 2D atom-thick graphene4,7 and 3D diamond.15-18 In addition to carbon atoms, clusters like C60 fullerene have also acted as a very promising building block, which can form novel nanocluster-assembled materials with controllable synthesis and tailorable characteristics.19-24 It is of significance to find more C60 assembled stable structures and investigate in detail their electronic structure and physical properties. This has been especially driven by the C60- based MLs discovered recently.1,25-27 These MLs are helpful to illustrate the mechanism of clusters evolving into crystals, and shed light on designing another new class of nanocluster-inspired materials with unusual properties.28-30 For example, the bands composed by molecular orbitals are remarkably narrow and the correlation effect in them is enhanced, which may lead to Mott insulator, superconductivity and nontrivial topological states.31-33 In this paper, we have calculated the electronic structure, optical properties and 3 scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) image for both quasi-hexagonal phase (qHP) and quasi-tetragonal phase (qTP) MLs reported in recent experimental work.1 For qHP ML, the theoretical calculations are consistent with the experimental reports. For the qTP ML, although it has not been finally identified in experiments, we predict that it might be a semimetal with significant in-plane anisotropic optical properties, being quite different from qHP ML. The real-space and momentum-space pictures for understanding these polarization-dependent optical properties have been established based on the elementary band representation (EBR) analysis34 and selection rules for electric dipole transition. These results may inspire the potential experimental realization of qTP ML, which is very promising for applications in 2D electronic and optical devices, such as the lossless metal35 and sub-nanometer coating material for polarizer. METHODS Using Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP),36 we perform the first- principles calculations within density functional theory (DFT). We use the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) in the form of the Perdew, Burke, and Ernzerhof to deal with the exchange-correlation functional.37 The kinetic energy cutoff for the plane wave expansion is set to be 500 eV. We use 7 × 13 × 7, 15 × 9 × 1, 9 × 9 × 9 and 9 × 9 × 1 k- point meshes in self-consistent electronic structure calculations for the 3D bulk of qHP, 2D ML of qHP, 3D qTP bulk, and qTP ML, respectively. The vacuum region is set to about 20 Å in the supercell of qHP ML and qTP ML to avoid the interaction among neighboring MLs. The crystal structures of the bulk qHP and qTP are taken from experimental reports. The MLs are directly exfoliated from their bulk phases thanks to the layered structure. To remedy the problem that the PBE functional generally underestimates the band gap, we also perform the HSE06 hybrid functional calculations38,39 using all-electron electronic-structure code FHI-aims.40-42 The FHI- aims-2020 numeric atom-centered orbitals with "tight" setting are used in all calculations. Moreover, the optical properties calculations are also executed using PBE 4 and HSE06 methods, respectively. Finally, the STM images are simulated in the constant height mode, according to the Tersoff-Hamann approximation.43 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Crystal structure. The qHP and qTP bulk single crystals of polymeric C60 have been synthesized in experiment.1 Figure 1 shows the crystal structures of these two materials. The Mg ions in bulk phases are not shown and have not been included in the calculations in this work. The ML phases have no Mg ions and can be neutralized according to the experimental description. The qHP bulk single crystal is in space group Pc (No. 7) and the lattice parameters from single-crystal x-ray diffraction (XRD) measurement are a = 17.570 Å, b = 9.169 Å, c = 16.001 Å. The C60 cages form a 2D periodic network stacking along the a-axis direction in ABAB... order, as shown in The crystal structure of qHP ML is displayed in Figure 1(c), and it maintains the same space group as the bulk one. As illustrated in Figure 1(c), each C60 is connected with six surrounding C60 fullerenes, which are approximately located at the hexagonal positions. Four adjacent C60 clusters are connected with the central C60 by four sp3-like C-C bonds along ±30° off the a-axis (x direction). The other two are connected by two neighboring sp3-like C-C bonds, which forms a square ring along the b-axis (y direction). Figure 1(b) depicts the crystal structure of the qTP bulk single crystal, whose space group is C2/m (No. 12) and the lattice constants observed in the experiment are a = 9.308 Å, b = 9.032 Å, c = 14.780 Å. Like the qHP bulk structure, the qTP bulk single crystal also has the layered structure, in which the polymeric C60 fullerene layers are stacking along the c-axis in ABAB...order. The possible exfoliated qTP ML structure is shown in Figure 1(d) and the space group becomes P2/m (No. 10). As exhibited in Figure 1(d), the adjacent C60 clusters forming a square lattice are connected by two C-C single bonds along the a-axis and two square rings along the b-axis. This asymmetric bond arrangement in qHP ML and qTP ML makes them inequivalent along a and b axes, resulting in the anisotropy of these two MLs. Charge difference density. To analyze the bonding properties, we perform the 5 charge difference density (CDD) around the C-C bridge bonds linking the C60 clusters in qHP ML and qTP ML. The calculated charge difference density is defined as: Δρ = ρ(total) – ρ(C), where the ρ(total) is the charge density of the whole system, and the ρ(C) represents the summation of charge density of individual C atoms. CDD distributions around the C-C bridge bonds in qHP ML are displayed in Figures 2(a) and (b). From the pictures, we can see that the central C atoms in the red circle form 4 bonds with adjacent C atoms, and yellow charge density means the electrons accumulate around C-C bond center. Thus, these 5 atoms construct a tetrahedron as in the case of diamond. This means that the C-C bridging bonds form very strong sp3-like covalent bonds, which may lead to the stable structure of qHP ML. However, bond angles related to the central fourfold-coordinated atoms are different from the perfect sp3 hybridization angle of 109.47°.25 The bond angles of sp3-like atoms here are 93.57°, 105.61°, 106.28°, 113.79°, 118.18°, and 118.39°. In addition, the length of the inter- cluster bond is 1.449 Å for bonds in square ring and 1.589 Å for the single bond, which are comparable to the bond length of ideal sp2 bond in graphene ~1.42 Å and sp3 bond in diamond ~1.548 Å.12 This also indicates the strength of C-C bridge bonds is very strong, which may help understand the stability of qHP ML synthesized in experiment. Such sp3-like fourfold-coordinated C atoms also appear in the bridging bonds in qTP ML, as shown in Figures 2(c) and (d), respectively. This may indicate the crystal structure of qTP ML is also very stable, and very promising for experimental synthesis and observation. Band structure. The band structures of qHP bulk, qTP bulk and related MLs using PBE exchange-correlation functional are calculated and presented in Figure 3. As shown in Figure 3(a), the valence band maximum (VBM) of the qHP bulk single crystal is at the Y2 point, and the conduction band minimum (CBM) is at the Γ point, forming an indirect energy gap of 0.20 eV. The direct band gap at Γ point is 0.20 eV, showing the semiconducting features. Accordingly, Figure 3(b) shows the band structure of the qHP ML. The VBM and CBM are at the Γ and Y points respectively, resulting in an indirect gap of 0.56 eV. The direct band gap at Γ point is 0.59 eV, which is larger than 6 that of the qHP bulk single crystal due to the missing of interlayer interactions. Like the qHP bulk single crystal, the qHP ML also shows semiconducting characteristic. The PBE band structures of the bulk and ML of qTP are also studied. It can be seen from suggesting that the qTP bulk exhibits metallicity. For the ML qTP, Figure 3(d) shows the typical semimetal feature with both electron and hole pockets. Since the PBE functional generally underestimates the band gap of semiconductor and to obtain the band gaps of these two MLs accurately, the hybrid functional HSE06 is employed. The results are shown in Figure 4. The indirect gap of qHP ML increases to 0.99 eV, and the direct gap at Γ point increases to 1.07 eV, which is smaller than that of experiment value ~1.6 eV estimated from optical measurements. As for the qTP ML, the band structure is altered by HSE06 and it is more like a narrow gap semiconductor. Although both qHP ML and qTP ML are C60-assembled ML and the adjacent C60 clusters are connected by similar sp3-like C-C bonds, they show quite different electronic band structure and optical properties. This indicates the design of various C60-assembled 2D materials could have plenty of properties and wide applications. Anisotropic optical property. To investigate the optical properties, we calculate the optical absorption spectra of qHP ML and qTP ML within both PBE and HSE06 functionals. As displayed in Figure 5(a), the absorption xx α and yy α curves of qHP ML display the transition threshold at about 0.4 eV. The xx α absorption spectrum has first two peaks at 0.81 eV and 1.17 eV for the incident light polarized along x direction. The yy α absorption has one main peak around 1.0 eV. The dichroic ratio, the ratio of the absorptions of lights with in-plane polarization at perpendicular directions, of qHP ML around this peak is estimated to be xx / yy α α = 0.43 or yy / xx α α = 2.35. This ratio is slightly larger than that estimated from conductivity measurement.1 The in-plane anisotropic optical absorption is consistent with the asymmetric lattice structure, in which the connectivity of C60 clusters along x and y is different. In contrast, the anisotropy in the absorption spectra of qTP ML is much larger than qHP ML, e. g., the dichroic ratio at the first absorption peak of 0.29 eV is xx / yy α α = 12. This is unexpected 7 since the difference in a- and b-lattice constant of qTP ML is less than that of qHP ML. Due to the semimetal feature and quite small electron and hole pockets, we ignore the Drude type intraband contribution to the absorption in photon energy higher than 0.2 eV. We mainly discuss two distinct features of the anisotropic absorption spectra in is in the region from 0.7 eV to 1.4 eV. xx α is much larger than yy α in the former region and nearly zero in the latter one. This nearly zero absorption of x-polarized light makes qTP ML a potential candidate for long pursuit lossless metal.35 Another possible application is to be used as a sub-nanometer coating material for polarizer of light in this energy region. We further compute the optical absorption spectra of qHP ML and qTP ML using the HSE06 functional to overcome the shortcomings of PBE functional. As shown in Figures 5 (c) and (d), the major correction of HSE06 to the absorption curves is to shift them to higher energy and this might be closer to the experimental measurements. For qTP ML, the nearly zero absorption region of xx α is shifted to 1.0 and 2.0 eV, which covers part of infrared and visible lights. To understand the mechanism underlying these intriguing optical properties in qTP ML, we have proposed the real space and momentum space pictures in the following. IRREP analysis of qTP ML. We analyze the irreducible representations (IRREPs) for the bands of qTP ML. The IRREPs46 at high-symmetry points (HSPs) and corresponding elementary band representations (EBRs)34,47 of the bands near the Fermi level in qTP ML are summarized in Table 2. Note that the (N − 4)-th to (N − 1)-th bands are entangled together and do not have a unique EBR decomposition. It can be seen that Wyckoff positions (0, 0.5) and (0.5, 0.5) must be occupied by electronic Wannier centers and there are no ionic occupations, which means qTP ML is an obstructed atomic insulator (OAI) with separated ion and electron charge center.44,45 These two Wyckoff positions are the center of C60 clusters and the center of the single bonds in qTP ML, respectively. The mismatch of Wannier centers and ionic positions at (0.5, 0.5) can be directly seen from the CDD in Figure 2(d). However, the Wannier center at the center of C60, as a result of charge averaging, cannot be seen directly from the charge 8 distribution. We use the IRREPs to analyse the absorption spectra of qTP ML. As illustrated in xx α and yy α both peak at 0.29 eV, but have strong anisotropy, i.e., the peak value of xx α is nearly twelve times of yy α . xx α is nearly zero in the range 0.7~1.4 eV, while yy α has finite value and several peaks in this energy range. To figure out the reason for the anisotropy, we first give a real-space picture based on EBRs, and then perform a detailed analysis of the electron transitions in the BZ, i.e., the momentum space. The anisotropic peaks at 0.29 eV can be understood from a simple real-space picture using EBRs. The N-th and the (N + 1)-th bands are the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO). From the EBR decomposition, they can be seen as the Bu and Ag orbitals at the same Wyckoff position (0.5, 0.5), respectively. From Table 1, the IRREPs Bu and Ag can be generated by px and s orbital, respectively. As a result, the HOMO and LUMO form isolated flat valence and conduction bands, respectively. The energy difference between them is about 0.29 eV and can be approximated as isolated px and s orbitals placed at the same Wyckoff position (0.5, 0.5), respectively. This leads to strong x-polarized optical absorption and much weak absorption for y-polarized light. We further analyze the electron transitions of qTP ML allowed by dipole radiation selection rules48 in the BZ. In Figure 3(d), we mark the energy bands at the HSPs with their IRREPs in C2h group. As the high-symmetry lines Γ-Y and X-M have the little group C2, the plus symbol (+) and the minus symbol (−) denote the energy bands belonging to the IRREPs A and B, respectively. Besides, a polar vector such as the momentum operator ˆp in C2 group transforms as A for component ˆ y p and as B for components ˆ x p and ˆ z p , as shown in Table 1. It implies that the selection rules are different for light polarized along and transverse to the two-fold rotation axis. The transitions between states| i〉 and| j〉 excited by light polarized in k direction are allowed if the representation of dipole transition matrix element | ˆ | ( , , ) k i j k x y z p 〈 〉 = contains 9 the identity representation. On high-symmetry lines, symmetries cast selection rules which may force transition momentum to be zero. However, for generic momentum, there is no symmetry constraint and the transition momentum is generally nonzero. Therefore, along Γ-Y and X-M paths, electron dipole transitions are allowed between bands with different representations for radiation polarized in x direction and bands with the same representations for polarization in y direction. Similarly, along Γ- X and Y-M paths belonging to the little group Cs, radiation in x direction connects bands with the same representation while radiation in y direction has the opposite selection rules. The red arrows in Figure 3(d) indicate the electron transitions excited by photon at 0.29 eV. According to the selection rules, all of them could be induced by radiation in x direction but only transitions in M-Γ path could be excited by radiation in y direction. This explains the strong anisotropy of the absorption spectrum and the higher intensity of xx α at 0.29 eV To understand the nearly zero xx α at the photon energy around 1.0 eV, we illustrate the distribution of dipole transition momentum strength 2 | | ˆ | ( , ) D k k i j k x y ≡ 〈 p 〉 | = in the BZ in Figure 6, in which the transition energy is sampled from 0.95 to 1.05 eV. It is obvious that Dy has a larger nonzero area and is averagely two orders of magnitude greater than Dx. The corresponding electron transitions on the high-symmetry lines are denoted in Figure 3(d) with blue (Dy) and green (Dx) arrows. Therefore, after integration of the dipole transition momentum strength over the whole BZ weighted by the joint density of states, the absorption of xx α is much smaller than yy α in this region. STM image. We perform the first-principles calculations to simulate the STM images of qHP ML and qTP ML to investigate their surface topography. The STM image of qHP ML is shown in Figure 7(a). The bright C atoms are arranged in an ordered structure, which looks like an ant. However, the upper side and lower side of the “ant” are not symmetric. Comparing the STM image with the crystal structure of 10 nanocluster. The STM image of qTP ML displayed in Figure 7(d) shows a relatively bright pattern according to its semi-metallic nature. The two brightest spots in the STM image correspond to the bond between 5-MR and 6-MR on the surface of C60 cluster, while two second-brightest spots relate to the bond between two 6-MRs, as shown in Figures 7(e) and (f). These theoretical STM images can provide fingerprints of two MLs for future experimental investigations. CONCLUSION In this paper, the electronic and optical properties of qHP ML and qTP ML are obtained with PBE exchange-correlation functional and HSE06 hybrid functional calculations. The calculated results show that qHP ML is a semiconductor and has marginal optical anisotropy with dichroic ratio around 2.34, being consistent with the experimental measurements. On the contrary, qTP ML is predicted to be a semimetal with strong anisotropic optical absorption. In the infrared and visible light region, the x-polarized light is nearly absorptionless while the absorption of y-polarized light is more than two orders of magnitude larger. The underlying physics for this anisotropy has been revealed in both real-space and momentum space pictures based on the elementary band representation analysis and selection rules constrained by symmetry in electronic dipole transition. Finally, the STM images are simulated to guide the experimental identification of both qHP and qTP MLs. We think the intrinsic high in- plane anisotropy makes the qTP ML very promising for optoelectronic devices, such as the candidate for lossless metal and sub-nanometer polarizer. Notes The authors declare no competing financial interest. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors thank the valuable discussion with Daoben Zhu, Ling Lu and Jian-Tao Wang. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China 11 Natural Science Foundation of Fujian Province (2021J02012), the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (2018YFA0305700), the Chinese Academy of Sciences (XDB33000000), and the Informatization Plan of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS-